Issue 581 

TU 
Bindu 

Bhakti and Renunciation 

E 

www.gopaljiu.org 

Y Sri Krithna Kathamrita 

Bindu 

Fortnightly email mini-magazine from Gopal Jiu Publications 

Issue No. 581 Sri Pārśva Ekadasi 14 September 2024 

* SANNYASA IN THE AGE OF KALI 

His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 

* LIEUTENANT FOR A Day 

A remembrance of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 

e Tur Livinc Mrpancas or Sri CHAITANYA MAHAPRABHU 
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur Prabhupada 

* SANNYASA IS Nor As IMPORTANT AS DEVOTION 

Srila Thakur Bhaktivinode 

e KARMA SANNYASA 

Highlights 

Unknown photographer 

Sri Srimad Gour Govinda Swami Maharaja 

SANNYASA IN THE 
Ace or Kau 

His Divine Grace 
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 

We pose certain commonly asked questions about 
sannyasa in the following article, with answers from the 
teachings of Srila A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. 

What is the proper etiquette of respect to 
be offered to a sannyasi? 

One who does not offer respect to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, to his deity in the temple, 
or to a tridandi sannyási must undergo prayascitta 
[atonement]. If one does not offer obeisances to such 
asannyási, the prescribed prayascitta is to fast for one 
day. (Purport to Cc. adi 17.265) 

Regarding your questions how to offer respects 
to sannydsis. Every sannyasi, even if you see a 
Mayavadi sannyaási, offer him your respects — 

Cover painting: Mother Sachi Cries Seeing her Son Nimai in Shantipur After he Takes Sannyasa. 
Painting by Kshitindranath Majumdar. West Bengal. Circa 1920s. 

Unknown photographer 

Unknown photographers 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu Iune Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 2 

Srila Prabhupada and some of his sannyasi disciples 

Unknown photographers 

Tame Five Hundred Eighty One, Page —3 

arporaarga fag 

Srila Prabhupada with some of his sannyasi disciples in Mayapur 

there will be no harm. As you have observed, we 
shall follow Lord Chaitanya’s instruction that we 
give all due respects to others regarding their 
position, but there is no need of associating with 
each of them. Even if one is vaisnava, but not of 
good character, we can give him the vaisnava 
respect, but we cannot associate with him. (Letter 
to Jayapataka, 30 April 1970) 

What is the definition of sannyasa? 

Sat nydsa, sannyása. This is the combination. "Sat" 
means the Supreme, the ever-existing, and "nyasa" 
means renunciation. That means one who has 
renounced everything for serving the Supreme, he 
is real sannydsa. He may take this dress or not, that 
doesn't matter. Anyone who has sacrificed his life 
for service of the Supreme Lord, he's a sannyasi. 
(Lecture in Los Angeles, 20 December 1968) 

What is Tridandi-sannyasa? 

There are four dandas. One danda symbolizes 
the self, and the other three dandas symbolize 

the body, mind, and words. ... So tridandi-sannyasi 
means one who has devoted his life, meaning his 
body, his activities, and his words. Anyone who 
has devoted his mind, body and words for the 
service of the Lord, he is a sannyasi. Sannyási does 
not mean simply changing the dress and thinking 
otherwise. No. It does not matter whether the 
dress is changed or not. If one is fully engaged 
with his body, mind and words, he is a sannyasi. 
(Lecture in Hawaii, 20 January 1974) 

What are the qualifications to take sannyasa? 

Who has no more material desires, he is fit for 
taking sannydsa. Sarvopadhi. Anyabhilasita-sünyarn. 
Sünyam means zero. All material desires made into 
zero. Then sannydsa. Sannyasi, anásakta. (Lecture in 
Melbourne, 29 June 1974) 

No more desire of material enjoyment — he is fit 
for sannyása. Anyone who sees: "Oh, this car is very 
nice, a beautiful woman is very nice," he should not 
think of taking sannydsa. (Morning walk conversation 
in Mayapur, 26 February 1976) 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu Tene Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 4 

Unknown photographer 

Photo from the morning of 17 September 1959 at the Keshavaji Gaudiya Math in Mathura. Left to right: 
Muni Maharaja, Srila Prabhupada's sannyasa guru Srila Bhakti Prajnan Keshava Maharaja, and Srila A. C. 
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada on the occasion of Muni Maharaja and Srila Prabhupada's taking sannyasa. 

Unknown photographer 

Tene Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — S 

Srila Prabhupada with some of his sannyasi disciples in Mayapur 

Is taking sannyasa required? 

Not everyone can [take sannyasa]. Especially in 
this age. Especially in your country, to take sannyása 
isa very difficult job. It should not be given; neither 
it should be taken. Actually, sannyasa is forbidden 
in this age. But if one is very strong, he can accept 
sannyasa. So better to remain a grhastha and cultivate 
Krishna consciousness. That is better. Don't accept 
whimsically sannyasa and then do all nonsense. No. 
It is better to remain grhastha. But not grhamedhi. 
Grhamedhi means that he does not know anything 
else than to support the wife and children and live 
very comfortably, well-dressed, and... That is called 
grhamedhi. His center is only that apartment. He 
does not know anything more than that apartment. 
That is called grhamedhi. And grhastha means 
that he knows many things, Krishna, beyond this 
apartment. (Lecture in Paris, 9 June 1974) 

Preach — that is sannydsa. What is the use 
of changing dress? Do, actually. (Letter to 
Bhaktijana, 25 September, 1976) 

One who has got a helpful wife at home does 
not require to accept sannyasa. (Letter to Krishna 
Devi, 29 October 1967) 

There is no need of taking sannyása. If you are sincere in 
preaching, you can do in this dress. Where is the harm? 
Simply by changing, taking a rod, you'll not become 
God immediately. You have to work, steadily. What is 
there in sannyasa? Do you mean to say that by taking a 
rod one becomes a sannyasi? Sannydsa means you must 
be sacrificing everything for Krishna. That is sannyasa. 
(Room Conversation in London, 15 August 1971) 

May one take sannyasa 
before being qualified? 

Don't cheat by accepting sannydsa and indulging 
in these things. Don't be a cheater. That is very bad. 
Sannyása means to take a vow. In other stations of 
life there may be fall down, but sannydsa means no 
fall down. Unless one is found completely competent 
to accept sannyasa, there is no more use of awarding 
sannyasa. (Lecture in Mayapur, 4 April 1975) 

What is the duty of one who has 
left sannyasa and married? 
Especially in this age, Kali-yuga, it is advised that 
no one take sannyása. 

asvamedham gavalambham sannyasam pala-paitrkam 

devarena sutotpattirn kalau pafica vivarjayet 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu 

Tene Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 6 

Srila Prabhupada with some of his sannyasi disciples in Mayapur 

[Brahma-vaivarta Puràna, krsna-janma-khanda 
185.180 quoted in Cc. adi 17.164] 

From this, we can understand that in this age 
the sannyása-àsrama is forbidden because people 
are not strong. Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
showed us an example in taking sannyasa at the 
age of twenty-four years, but even Sarvabhauma 
Bhattacharya advised Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
to be extremely careful because he had taken 
sannyasa at an early age. For preaching, we give 
young boys sannyása, but actually it is being 
experienced that they are not fit for sannydsa. 
There is no harm, however, if one thinks that he 
is unfit for sannyasa; if he is very much agitated 
sexually, he should go to the asrama where sex is 
allowed, namely the grhastha-àsrama. (Purport 
to Bhag. 8.2.30) 

You should not consider taking sannydsa again, 
but in your country it is not a great thing. Although 
officially it is a fall down from sannyasa, in your 
country no one understands sannydsa. The more 
important principle is that we should purify our 
thoughts and engage them in Krishna’s service. 
(Letter to Rupanuga, 8 June, 1974) 

What is the purpose of 
giving sannyasa in this age? 

Of course, because Lord Chaitanya accepted 
this sannyása, so we are maintaining that system. 
The actual point of sannydsa is not mukti, but is to 
satisfy Krishna. That is sannyasa — how will Krishna 
be satisfied, how will Krishna's representative be 
satisfied. (Lecture in Bombay, 9 April 1971) 

Following in his footsteps — we are preaching 
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's cult and giving sannydsa for 
preaching. That is not unauthorized. One who criticizes 
this action, he does not know the principle of Chaitanya 
Mahaprabhu. (Lecture in Vrindavan, 16 October 1972) 

Didn't Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
reject sannyasa in this age? 

Itissometimes said that Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
disapproved of the acceptance of the sannyasa order 
in this Kali-yuga, because in the sastra it is said: 

asvamedham gavalambham sannyasam pala-paitrkam 

devarena sutotpattiri kalau pañca vivarjayet 

In this Age of Kali, five acts are forbidden: the 
offering of a horse in sacrifice, the offering of a cow 

Unknown photographer 

Unknown photographer 

Inne Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 7 

Apna faq 

Srila Prabhupada walking with some of his sannyasi disciples 

in sacrifice, the acceptance of the order of sannyasa, 
the offering of oblations of flesh to the forefathers, 
and a man's begetting children in his brother’s wife. 

Nevertheless, we see that Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu 
himself accepted sannyása and approved of the sannyasa 
of his elder brother, Visvarup. It is clearly said here: 

bhala haila, —— visvarüpa sannyasa karila 
pitr-kula, matr-kula, — dui uddharila 

Therefore, should we think that Sri Chaitanya 
Mahaprabhu made contradictory statements? No, 
actually he did not. It is recommended that one accept 
sannydsa to dedicate his life for the service of the 
Lord. Everyone must take that kind of sannyasa, for by 
accepting such sannydsa one renders the best service 
to both his paternal and maternal families. But one 
should not accept the sannyasa order of the Mayavada 
school, which has practically no meaning. We find many 
Mayavadisannyasis simply loitering in the street thinking 
themselves Brahman or Narayan, and spending all day 
and night begging so they can fill their hungry bellies. 
Mayavadi sannyásis have become so degraded that there 
is a section of them who eat everything, just like hogs 
and dogs. This type of degraded sannyasa is what is 
prohibited in this age. Actually, Srila Sankaracharya’s 

principles for the acceptance of sannyasa were very 
strict, but later the Mayavadi so-called sannydsis became 
degraded because of their false philosophy, which 
propounds that by accepting sannyasa one becomes 
Narayan. Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu rejected that kind 
of sannyasa. (Purport to Cc. adi 15.14) 

Did Chaitanya Mahaprabhu take 
sannyasa from a Mayavadi sannyasi? 

Yes. That is a formality. It is not very important. 
Because Mayavadi sannyasis, they are also Vedic 
sannydsis. They are not outsiders. Their interpretation 
of Veda is different, but they follow the Vedic rules. 
Acceptance of sannyasa is following the Vedic rules. 
So you can accept sannydsa even from Mayavadi. It 
doesn't matter. But you have to transcend the limits 
of the Vedic rules. That is Krishna consciousness. 
Although Chaitanya Mahaprabhu took sannyasa, he did 
not assume the sannyasa title. His sannydsa guru was 
Keshava Bharati. So naturally he should have accepted 
the Bharati title. "Sri Krishna Bharati", or something 
like that. However, he remained as Sri Krishna 
Chaitanya. Chaitanya is the name of a brahmacari 
under the guidance of Bharati sannyasis. But even 
after his acceptance of sannydsa, he did not assume 

Unknown photographer 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu 

— s T 
1 4 7 d Li , 
1 ` à hs T 
« " 4 \ 

Srila Prabhupada with his sannyasa danda 

the title Bharati. That means that actually he did not 
take sannydsa. That was simply a formality. Mayavadi 
sannyasis think that they are God, But Chaitanya 
Mahaprabhu was preaching that we are servants of 
God. Therefore, he did not assume that title. 

Besides that, when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was 
going to Jagannath Puri, his rod was taken away by 
Nityananda, who broke it and threw it away. At that 
time he apparently became very angry, “You have 
broken my sannyasa rod. So I am not going with you.” 
And he separated from the party. 

In one sense, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not 
require to accept any sannydsa guru, but he accepted 
the formality that if one takes sannydsa, one has to 
take sannyása from another sannyasi. That is the 
system. Just like if you want to get married, you have 
to call fora priest. But it does not mean that you have 

Tene Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 8 

to agree with the priest’s personal opinion. (Lecture 
in Los Angeles, 27 November 1968) 

Why did Srila Bhaktisiddhanta 
introduce saffron cloth and sannyasa? 

Actually, a vaisnava is above varnasrama-dharma. 
But we don’t claim that we have become perfect 
vaisnavas. We are not so impudent. We want to remain 
under the vaisnavas. In Caitanya-caritamrta you'll 
find that vaisnava is paramahamsa. A vaisnava has no 
saffron cloth. A vaisnava wears white cloth because 
vaisnava is paramaharisa. We don't claim the position 
of vaisnava. We want to remain the servants of the 
vaisnavas. Therefore, this sannyása order is below the 
position of vaisnava. The order of sannyàásais a material 
classification, but vaisnava is paramo nirmatsaranam 
satam, a paramaharnsa free from envy [Bhag. 1.1.2], and, 
sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhüyaya kalpate, above 
the material modes of nature [Bg. 14.26]. 

DES 790. m di 
RENUNCIATION OF 
THE VRAJA Gopis 

Sri Srimad Gour Govinda Swami Maharaja 

Krishna is svayam-bhagavan, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, but gopi-tyaga, the 
renunciation of the gopis, is not based on this 
point. Their only focus is on Krishna, the son 
of Nanda Maharaja. He is Kanu of Vraja. He is 
ujjvala-nilamani $yama — an effulgent blackish 
jewel. He is their most beloved. He is their life. He 
is the object of their love. With that anuraga, the 
gopis have given up everything. No thought other 
than Krishna is in them. In the literature of the 
whole world, you will never find evidence of such 
renunciation. Theirs is the last limit of tyaga — for 
Krishna's pleasure, happiness. It is incomparable 
inthethree planetary systems. This is gopi-prema, 
the love of the gopis. 

— From a lecture on 18 April 1994 in Bhubaneswar. 

Tune Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 9 

Wik 
ACA 

WEAN 

NS ANN 

^ 

NA 

Y 

MSS 

NS 

oc Db 

RE 
o 
f=] 
fom 
S 
E 
bb 
Ó 
2 
T 
g 
z 
$ 
E 
AZ 
g 
=) 

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur Prabhupada after taking sannyasa 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu Iune Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 10 

f "m —" 

The position of being a vaisnava is not an easy thing. 
It is above all material qualities. Therefore, Srila y 
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur introduced sannyāsa | ae PEE 2s 
SANNYASA IS FOR PREACHING 

so as not to become imitators of Rupa, Sanatan, the 
Goswamis of Vrindavan — they are paramaharnsas. 

... The paramahamsa stage should not be imitated. To 
stop this imitation, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati 
Thakur introduced this system, sannyasa. He personally Vaisistya-astaka 1.8 
became a sannydsi, and he gave sannyasa to many of his 

His Divine Grace 
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 

T ara eka “So-batl” pracarera tare 
disciples. (Lecture in Mayapur, 21 October 1974) i prabhura sannyása yei mayavadi hare 

There is another type of "show-bottle" display, 

LIEUTENANT used solely for the purpose of preaching. That 

is Lord Chaitanya’s acceptance of the sannydsa 

asrama by which the Mayavadis are defeated. 

— From The Poetry of Srila Prabhupada. Translated by Dasarath 
Suta Das. Nectar Books. Union City, Georgia, USA. 1998. 

A 
j 
For a Day P4 $ 

A remembrance of His Divine Grace A. C. 
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 

Dhristadyumna Das recalls a conversation with Srila 
Prabhupada in New York City in 1976: 

Prabhupada said, “Actually, I have not given any 
of you sannyása. But I am in a war with Maya, the 

Unknown photographer 

Vintage Bengali painting by an unknown artist 

Tame Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 11 

The anquish of Sachimata at the house of Adwaita Acharya shortly after Mahaprabhu took sannyasa 

material energy, and I need leaders.” He said, “It is 
called in wartime, ‘battlefield commission’. There 
are no qualified leaders, but someone has to lead 
the charge. So you take every fifth man, ‘You are 
now lieutenant of the squad.’ He is really a private, 
but we make him lieutenant for the day, and he 
leads the charge.” Then Prabhupada said, “It is to be 
understood that you are not sufficiently equipped 
for this fight and most of you will go down.” I know 
what he means now that I’m older. We knew very 

little [then], but we were enthusiastic. rii 

— From, Following Srila Prabhupada — Remembrances. DVD 11. Courtesy 
of Yadubara Das. ISKCON Cinema. 

Tue Livinc 
MRDANGAS OF 

Sri CHAITANYA 
MAHAPRABHU 

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur Prabhupada 

All persons of this world are superior to us in every 
way as far as this world is concerned. Such material 
matters are not commodities that are to be coveted 

by us. We are merely beggars carrying the triple staff 
of renunciation and devoted to the chanting of the 
words of Sri Chaitanya. We have no more, nor any 
higher desirable object than the pleasure of serving 
Sri-hari-guru-vaisnavas. We are not the operators of the 
instruments; we are only the instruments. We must 
always bear this in mind. The triple bhiksus, tridandi 
sannyasis, are the living mrdanga drums of Sri Chaitanya. 
We must constantly give forth our music at the lotus 
feet of Sri Guru. We should practice the function of 
the peripatetic preacher, parivrajakacarya, of carrying 
aloft the victorious banner of the commands of the 
divine Sri Gaurasundar by constant submission to Sri 
Guru and the vaisnavas, fixing our eye on the polestar 
of the heard transcendental voice. We must always 
bear in mind that we have been initiated in the vow of 
a peripatetic [traveling] preacher for the sole purpose 
of promulgating the heart’s desire of Sri Guru and 
Gauranga. If we are constantly inspired with the duty 
of discoursing about the truth under the guidance of Sri 
Guru, then no hankering after traveling, nor any veiled 
form of desire other than the chanting of hari-nama will 

ever strike any terror in our hearts. i 

— Lecture given in Madras, 18 March 1933. From Shri Chaitanya’s 
Teachings, pages 383-384. Sree Gaudiya Math. Madras. 1989. 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu 

SANNYASA is Nor ~ 
As IMPORTANT AS 

DEVOTION 

Srila Bhaktivinode Thakur's 
Kalyana Kalpataru 1.13 
mana, tumi sannyasi sajite kena cao? 
bahirer saja yata, antarete phanki tata, 
dambha paji’ Sarira nācão 
My dear mind, why do you want to disguise 
yourself as a sannyási? As much as you decorate 
yourself externally with this garb, to that same 
degree you deceive yourself internally with this hoax. 
Worshiping your own false pride, you simply make a 
show of your material body by artificially accepting 
the dress of the renounced order. 

amara vacana dhara, antara visuddha kara, 
krsnamrta sada kara pana 
jivana sahaje yaya, bhakti-vadha nahi paya, 

tadupaya karaho sandhana 

Now please try to understand my advice on how to 
become a true sannyasi. Just make your heart completely 
pure, and constantly drink the nectar of Krishna 
consciousness. Search for that lifestyle in which your 
spiritual life can be executed easily and automatically, 
free from any distracting obstacles to pure devotion. 

anayase yaha pao, tahe tusta haye yao, 
adambare nà kara prayas 
pürna-vastra yadi nài, kaupina para he bhdi, 

Sita-vastra kantha bahirvasa 

Just be satisfied with whatever you get easily, and 
never endeavor for any type of artificial pomp and 
grandeur. Even if you do not have proper clothes to 
wear, just wear a loin-cloth, dear brother! And in 
cold weather you can simply wear an old torn quilt. 

aguru candana na-i, mrttika-tilaka bhdi, 
harer badale dhara mala 

ei-rüpe asa-pasa, sukhadira kubilasa, 
kharbi chada samsarera jvala 

There is no need for fancy sandalwood pulp scented 
with perfume, my dear brother; you can use some 
ordinary earth or clay to mark your forehead with 
tilaka. Your fancy necklaces can be exchanged for a nice 
tulasi-mala. Living like this in such a simple state of mind, 
all your nonsense external arrangements for so-called 
happiness will diminish, and you will thus be able to 
escapefromthe burning fever of materialistic existence. 

Zee Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 12 

oi d NUEDUNCDTG. HR QOIS 
e eL 

PROHIBITI 

Srimad Bhagavatam 7.13.8 and purport by 
His Divine Grace 
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 

na Sisyan anubadhnita granthan naivabhyased bahün 

na vyakhyam upayufijita narambhan arabhet kvacit 

A sannyasi must not present allurements of 
material benefits to gather many disciples, 
nor should he unnecessarily read many books 
or give discourses as a means of livelihood. 
He must never attempt to increase material 
opulences unnecessarily. 

Purport excerpt: A sannyási is prohibited 
from making disciples through such material 
allurements. Sannyasis sometimes indulge in 
material opulence by unnecessarily constructing 
many temples and monasteries, but actually 
such endeavors should be avoided. Temples 
and monasteries should be constructed for the 
preaching of spiritual consciousness or Krishna 
consciousness, not to provide free hotels for 
persons who are useful for neither material nor 
spiritual purposes. Temples and monasteries should 
be strictly off limits to worthless clubs of crazy 
men. In the Krishna consciousness movement we 
welcome everyone who agrees at leastto follow the 
movement's regulative principles—no illicit sex, 
no intoxication, no meat-eating and no gambling. 
In the temples and monasteries, gatherings of 
unnecessary, rejected, lazy fellows should be strictly 
disallowed. The temples and monasteries should be 
used exclusively by devotees who are serious about 
spiritual advancement in Krishna consciousness. 
Srila Vishwanath Chakravarti Thakur explains 
the word arambhan as meaning mathadi-vyaparan, 
which means "attempts to construct temples and 
monasteries.” The first business ofthe sannyasiis to 
preach Krishna consciousness, but if, by the grace 
of Krishna, facilities are available, then he may 
construct temples and monasteries to give shelter 
to the serious students of Krishna consciousness. 
Otherwise, temples and monasteries are not needed. 

Tame Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 13 
vale, fag Fi D 

» a L Tc» 
= Y LATAS. 

Vintage Bengali painting by an unknown artist 

Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu taking sannyasa in Katwa from Keshava Bharati 

sannydsa-vairagya-vidhi seha asramer nidhi, 
tāhe kabhu nā kara’ ādara 
se-saba ādare bhdi, samsare nistara ndi, 
dambhiker linga nirantara 
In reality it is complete renunciation that is the 
wealth of the sannydsa-asrama. By following this 
rule, one would certainly never look forward to 
receiving respect from others. Beware, dear brother! 
Deliverance from this material world is not possible 
for one who wants to get such respect by taking 
sannydsa. Instead, he gets ensnared in mundane 
existence due to constantly maintaining the conceited 
pride of subtle profit, adoration and distinction. 

tumi to’ caitanya-dasa, hari-bhakti taba asa, 
asramer linge kiba phala? 
pratistha karaha dura, vasa tava Santipura, 

sadhu-krpa tomara sambal 

You are actually an eternal servant of Lord 
Chaitanya, and your real interest as such is devotion 
to Sri Hari. What other wonderful thing could you 
get from the external form of the sannyasa-asrama? 

Casting all false prestige to a far distant place, make 
your residence in the transcendentally peaceful 
realm, far beyond the varnasrama-dharma system, and 
live on the mercy of the rüpanuga-vaisnavas as your 
only life-giving substance. 
vaisnavera paricaya, avasyaka nahi haya, 
adambare kabhu nahi yao 
vinodera nivedana, radha-krsna-guna-gana, 
phukari’ phukari’ sada gào 
It is not necessary to introduce oneself as a vaisnava, 
and one should never try to thereby make a show of 
external pomp and grandeur. Bhaktivinode’s humble 
submission to you is that you should constantly 
sing songs about the glorious qualities of Radha and 
Krishna at the top of your lungs. $^ 
Bibliography 

— Bhaktivinode Thakur. Sri Sri Bhaktivinoda Gita-sangraha o Mahajana 
Padavali. Fifth edition. Gaudiya Mission. Bag Bazar. Kolkata. 2008. 

— Bhaktivinode Thakur. Kalyana Kalpa-taru. English translation 
by Sri Dasarath Suta Das. Published by Nectar Books. Union City, 
Georgia, USA. 1988. 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu Iene Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 14 

Unknown artist. Painting from Haridas Thakur Samadhi in Jagannath Puri. 

Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is the mirror of emotions of Srimati Radharani 

Painting by the Bengali artist Kshitindranath Majumdar. Circa 1915 

Tene Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 15 

GLE Diel GELE pe 

Visnupriya-vilapa — the lament of Vishnupriya after Mahaprabhu left home and took sannyasa 

KARMA SANNYASA 

Sri Srimad Gour Govinda Swami Maharaja 

Devotee 1: Sometimes devotees have taken 
sannydsa in our movement because they have been 
frustrated in family life. Family life is troublesome. 
They don't want that trouble anymore, so they reject 
it and take sannyasa. 

Gour Govinda Swami: There is no such sannyasa 
in our line. That is karma-sannyasa, jfiána-sannyasa, 

Devotee 1: But devotees in ISKCON have taken 
sannyasa for that reason. 

Gour Govinda Swami: In our vaisnava line, no 
such sannyasa is there. There is only one sannyasa, 
complete surrender unto the lotus feet of Krishna. 

Therefore, you take up this tri-danda — kaya-danda, 
vak-danda, mano-danda — three staffs, indicating 
surrender of the body, the words, and the mind. 

Devotee 1: For instance, previously many people 
took sannyasa mainly because they were frustrated 
with family life. They weren't necessarily willing to 
serve Krishna. 

Gour Govinda Swami: That is all cheating. That 
is not sannyasa. 

Devotee 1: Can they make any advancement in 
that ashram? 

Gour Govinda Swami: What has Prabhupada said? 
If you are not completely free from sex desire, don't 
take sannydsa. What is this? It is only a farce. 

In your family life, if you find it difficult to render 
pleasing service to Krishna, then it is better to leave. 
If it is favorable, why should you leave? If the wife is 
devoted and all of the children are devoted, then why 
should you leave? If you find it not to be favorable, if 
you tried your best but you failed, then better to leave. 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu Jerne Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 16 

fy * Ned e mi 

PRINTED AT THE MÁNSAPIPARA ART STUDIO ICE TIE CENSLGITTER FEAT 26. KRISTO OAS PAL LANE, CALCI 

Gaurangera grha tyaga — Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu leaving home to take sannyasa 

Bengali print by an unkkown artist. Circa 1940s. 

Vintage Bengali painting by an unknown artist 

Jane Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 17 

The devotees in Katwa lament when the barber was going to shave Mahaprabhu's hair before his taking sannyasa 

Ramanuja Acharya did that. He played a trick on his wife 
and left. He tried his best. It is your duty; you should try 
your best to bring your wife on this path. But if you tried 
your best but failed, then make some trick and leave. 
Devotee 2: What if a sannyási is not Krishna conscious? 
Gour Govinda Swami: Then they will fall down. 
They cannot keep up sannyasa if they are not Krishna 
conscious. No. This is not a joke. It is very serious. 
It is the highest, topmost ashram. Is it child's play? 
Today you play with this thing and then, throwing 
it away, you take another toy and play with it? Is it 
child's play to carry a tri-danda? Today you hold the 
danda and tomorrow you throw it and catch another 

woman? What is this nonsense? t^ 
— From a darshan in New Mayapur, France. 29 July 1991. 

THe Purpose or 
Gaupiva VAISHNAVA //)/, | 

« 

SANNYASA 

Five thousand years ago, at the end of Dvàpara- 
yuga, Krishna spoke Bhagavad-gità for the upliftment 
of all mankind. In the last chapter of the Gita (18.66 

and 18.34), Krishna gave his most confidential 
instructions: sarva-dharman parityajya and man- 
mand bhava mad-bhaktah — one should surrender 
to Krishna and become his devotee. Yet, seeing the 
fallen condition of the people of Kali-yuga, Krishna 
thought that they were not capable of understanding 
the Gita. Theoretical instructions were not enough; 
they would need a practical example. Therefore, to 
personally show how to follow the Gita’s instruction 
to surrender, Krishna decided to conceal his divine 
powers and reappear in the guise of his own devotee. 
That incarnation is Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, 
famous as parama-karuna, the most merciful 
incarnation, because he is krsna-prema-pradata, the 
giver of ecstatic love for Krishna. But the Lord found 
that because he had come in disguise, some of the 
sinful living entities, not understanding his divine 
nature, were unwilling to accept his teachings. Some 
even criticized and offended him. Consequently, he 
was unable to give them the love of God that he had 
come to distribute. Thus, since the people of that time 
had great respect for sannyasis in the line of Sripad 
Shankaracharya, to deliver the fallen souls ofthis age 
the supremely merciful Lord accepted the order of 
sannyasa. His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami 
Prabhupada writes in his purport to Cc. adi 3.3.4: 

Sri Krishna Kathamrita Bindu 

Verne Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 18 

In Jagannath Puri when Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu heard a lady singing the Gita-govinda 
he ran to embrace her. At that time his servant Govinda ran after him and stopped him. 

During the time of Lord Chaitanya, the influence of 
Shankaracharya in society was very strong. People 
thought that one could accept sannydsa only in the 
disciplic succession of Shankaracharya. Lord Chaitanya 
could have performed his missionary activities as 
a householder, but he found householder life an 
obstruction to his mission. Therefore, he decided to 
accept the renounced order, sannyàsa. Since his 
acceptance of sannyasa was also designed to attract public 
attention, Lord Chaitanya, not wishing to disturb the 
social convention, took the renounced order of life from 
a sannyasiin the disciplic succession of Shankaracharya. 

But in the early twentieth century, the intellectuals 
of India were largely enamored of Western 
ideas. The Brahmo Samaj and other groups had 

experimented with combining Western concepts 
with Indian tradition and achieved some success. The 
Ramakrishna Mission, started in 1897, became very 
popular in Bengal using a system of monasteries and 
temples serving as bases for sannydsis and brahmacaris 
to study and preach. For the common pious people of 
the time, it was not important that the sannyasis of the 
Ramakrishna mission were wearing shoes, driving in 
cars, and so on. Just by seeing the sannyasa garb, the 
people respected those sannyasis as sadhus. 

Srila Thakur Bhaktivinode was the first prominent 
Gaudiya Vaishnava acarya to present the teachings of 
Mahaprabhu in a modern context. His desire was to 

Vintage Bengali painting by an unknown artist 

Isune Five Hundred Eighty One, Page — 19 

spread Mahaprabhu’s movement all over the world 
in a dynamic way. Under his direction, his fourth son, 
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur, also began 
preaching. Following in the mood of Sri Chaitanya 
Mahaprabhu, who accepted sannydsa so that the 
mass of people would accept his teachings, Srila 
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakur also introduced 
sannydsa and founded a formal institution of temples 
and preachers. In March of 1918, on the day of Gaura 
Purnima, at the age of 44, he took sannydsa from a 
picture of Srila Gaurakishore Das Babaji. Although 
certain persons sometimes criticize this act, considering 
it to be against scriptural injunctions and not authorized 
by Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, its sole purpose was to 
induce the conditioned souls to follow the instructions 
of Mahaprabhu and thus be delivered. Thus, Srila 
Saraswati Thakur accepted it and encouraged some 

leading disciples to accept sannyasa as well. $^ — MDas. 

CLosiNc Tuoucurs 

BHAKTI AND 
SANNYASA 

In honor of the upcoming observances of 
the anniversaries of the taking of sannydsa 
by Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's older brother 

Sri KRISHNA KATHAMRITA BINDU 

A free bi-monthly service provided by 
Gopal Jiu Publications 

Subscribe at our website: www.gopaljiu.org 

Gopal JiuPublicationsis a section ofthe International 
Society for Krishna Consciousness, Founder- 
Acharya: His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta 
Swami Prabhupada. 

Quotations from the books, letters, and lectures 
of His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami 
Prabhupada ©Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. All 
other materials, unless specified, © ISKCON 
Gopal Jiu Publications. All rights reserved. 
Blanket permission is given to redistribute 
Bindu in electronic or print form provided no 
changes are made to the contents. 

Temple wall mural of Radha Krishna on a swing 

Visvarup, and by Srila Prabhupada in 1959, this 
issue of Bindu has focused on Gaudiya sannyasa, 
or renunciation inspired by ecstatic devotion. 
It has explored the purposes of bhakti-sannyasa 
and the vast differences between it and karma- 
sannydsa. The renunciation of Gaudiya Vaishnavas 
is inspired by the renunciation of the gopis of 
Vraja. Their renunciation was not done to purify 
their existence, nor was it inspired by a desire 
for liberation. The renunciation of the gopis was 
not something they contemplated and decided 
to do. It was spontaneous, irresistible, and 
unstoppable — like the eruption of a volcano. The 
motivation for sannydsa of Gaudiya Vaishnava 
sadhus who follow the gopis is simply, wholly, 
and solely motivated by the desire to please guru 
and Krishna. Therefore, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta 
Saraswati Thakur calls Gaudiya sannyasis the 
“living mrdangas of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.” In 
this issue we have endeavored to examine sannyasa 
through the heart lens of our previous dcdaryas via 
the doorway of various questions such as, "What 
is the definition of sannyasa?" “Is it allowed in this 
age?" "Why did Srila Bhaktisiddhanta introduce 
it?" "Is it required for everyone to do, and why 
did Srila A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 
grant sannyása to relatively new devotees?” 

As always, we will consider our endeavor to be a 
success if this issue of Bindu brings some inspiration 
to the beloved followers of the son of mother Sachi. ^ 

Vaisnava-krpa-prarthi, 

Madhavananda Das, editor 

Unkown artist. Early 19th century. Maiyanatha temple in Amritsar.