UNIVERSITY 
OF FLORIDA 
LIBRARIES 

COLLEGE LIBRARY 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2011 with funding from 

Lyrasis Members and Sloan Foundation 

http://www.archive.org/details/instructionsforpOOwang 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR PRACTICAL LIVING 

AND OTHER NEO-CONFUCIAN WRITINGS 

BY WANG YANG-MING 

Number LXVIII of the Records of Civilization: Sources and Studies 

Edited under the auspices of the 

Department of History, Columbia University 

Prepared for the Columbia College Program of Translations from 

the Oriental Classics, 

Wm. Theodore de Bary, Editor 

WANG YANG-MING 

MING DYNASTY PORTRAIT IN THE COLLECTION 

OF HUANG CHIEH (1874-I935): PHOTOGRAPH BY 

PROFESSOR KUSUMOTO MASATSUGU 

INSTRUCTIONS 

FOR PRACTICAL LIVING 

AND OTHER 

NEO-CONFUCIAN 

WRITINGS 

BY WANG YANG-MING 

Translated, with Notes, by 
Wing-tsit Chan 

Columbia University Press 

NEW YORK AND LONDON 1963 

The addition to the "Records of Civilization: Sources and 
Studies" of a group of translations of Oriental historical 
materials, of which this volume is one, was made possible by 
funds granted by Carnegie Corporation of New York. That 
Corporation is not, however, the author, owner, publisher, or 
proprietor of this publication, and is not to be understood as 
approving by virtue of its grant any of the statements made or 
views expressed therein. 

UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS 
CHINESE SERIES 

This work has been accepted in the Chinese Translation Series 

of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 

Organization (UNESCO). 

PRINTED IN BELGIUM 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER*. 62-16688 
COPYRIGHT © 1963 COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS LTD. 

RECORDS OF CIVILIZATION 
SOURCES AND STUDIES 

EDITED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY 

GENERAL EDITOR 

W. T. H. Jackson, Professor of German and History 

PAST EDITORS 

1915-1926 
James T. Shotwell, Bryce Professor Emeritus of the History of International 
Relations 

1926-1953 
Austin P. Evans, Late Professor of History 

1953-1962 
Jacques Barzun, Seth Low Professor of History 

editors: oriental records 

Wm. Theodore de Bary, Professor of Chinese and Japanese 
C. Martin Wilbur, Professor of Chinese History 

consulting editors 

Salo W. Baron, Professor of Jewish History, Literature, and Institutions on 

the Miller Foundation 
Gilbert Highet, Anthon Professor of the Latin Language and Literature 
Donald Keene, Professor of Japanese 
Paul O. Kristeller, Professor of Philosophy 
Gerhart B. Ladner, Professor of History, University of California at Los 

Angeles 
John H. Mundy, Professor of History 
Ihor Sevcenko, Professor of History 

To 

Shao Chang Lee 

PIONEERING CHINESE PROFESSOR WHO HAS 
FOR FORTY YEARS INSTRUCTED AMERICAN STUDENTS 
IN CHINESE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

Foreword 

This volume containing the major works of Wang Yang-ming 
is one of a group of publications, the Translations from the Oriental 
Classics, through which the Committee on Oriental Studies has 
sought to transmit to Western readers representative works of 
the Oriental traditions in thought and literature. In its volumes of 
source readings forming the " Introduction to Oriental Civiliza- 
tions," the Committee has provided a broad selection of excerpts 
from influential thinkers in India, China, and Japan, discussing the 
great problems of their times in historical sequence. Insofar as a 
reading of what Asian peoples have written for their own delight 
and edification may give us a sympathetic insight into their alien 
traditions, the present series fulfills the same purpose. Where it 
differs from any survey, however — and differs also from drugstore 
anthologies which present the East always in aphorism or epigram — 
is that it makes major works or authors available in something more 
substantial than excerpts, and in accurate, readable translations 
prepared for the general reader as well as the scholar. 

There are good reasons why these writings have not been acces- 
sible before: they are often formidable works for both translator 
and reader. But if we have thought them worth presenting here in 
spite of such difficulties, it is because the admiration in which they 
have been held for centuries, by both popular and sophisticated 
audiences in the East, compels our own attention. It is time for more 
of us to learn why they should have enjoyed such esteem; it is time 
to face the challenge and gain the rewards of conquering — or being 
conquered by — these imposing masters. 

Wang Yang-ming, we must admit, is no popular writer nor has 
he been universally esteemed. He writes in the classical style, in a 
distinctive Confucian context. And the place he has won in the 
high tradition, instead of rendering him immune from attack, has 
ensured that he would be at the center of intellectual controversy 
ever since. Yet what he has to say — concerning man's moral sense, 
the inner springs of human motivation, the integrity of the individ- 
ual in thought and action, human nature and man's place in the 

x Foreword 

universe — has found a deep response in the lives of educated 
Japanese and Koreans as well as Chinese. Both samurai officers of 
Imperial Japan and Sun Yat-sen's republican revolutionaries, both 
Chiang Kai-shek and some of his severest intellectual critics, have 
acknowledged Wang Yang-ming as their chief philosophical 
inspiration. 

Now with the help of Professor Chan's faithful translation, 
Western readers may judge if they too would wish to acknowledge 
him, not as a Chinese sage, but as a teacher from whom they have 
learned something about themselves. 

Wm. Theodore de Bary 

Preface 

The Instructions for Practical hiving (Ch'uan-hsi hi) has been chosen 
for translation for the simple reason that no one can adequately 
understand Chinese thought without having read this work in its 
entirety. This embodiment of Wang Yang-ming's philosophy is 
indisputably the most important Chinese philosophical classic 
since the early thirteenth century. It has developed Confucian 
doctrines to new heights and has carried them to new frontiers. 
Like other Neo-Confucian works, it is by no means merely a 
de luxe edition of the Confucian Analects or the Book of Mencius, 
in spite of the fact that it quotes from them on almost every page 
and that its moral values are largely confined to ancient ideals. 

As every student of Chinese thought knows, Neo-Confucianism, 
which developed and transformed Confucianism under the in- 
fluence of Buddhism and Taoism, has dominated Chinese thought 
for some eight hundred years. The philosophy of Ch'eng I and 
Chu Hsi represents the rationalistic wing of that movement while 
that of Lu Hsiang-shan and Wang Yang-ming represents the 
idealistic wing. It is in the Instructions for Practical Living that the 
idealistic tendency has reached its full bloom. 

Since Chu Hsi's rationalistic philosophy ruled supreme in the 
Chinese intellectual scene for centuries and its influence continued 
to some degree until our own time, it is necessary to understand 
its idealistic counterpart. 

Wang's philosophy did not merely play the role of opposition, 
however. It overshadowed Chu Hsi's philosophy for over a hun- 
dred years and because of its emphasis on sincere purpose and 
concrete action, the need of which was keenly felt in China's 
troubled times, it has in recent decades exercised considerable 
influence on Chinese intellectuals and social and political leaders 
alike. In Japanese history it provided the leaders of the Meiji 
Restoration with inspiration and impetus and has thereby con- 
tributed substantially to the reawakening and revitalization of 
Japan. 

I have als6 translated here the Inquiry on the "Great Learning" 

Xll 

Preface 

which embodies the essential ideas of the Instructions for Practical 
Living in a somewhat systematic manner, and seven documents 
dealing with social and political problems which show to some 
extent the way in which Wang's doctrines were put into practice. 

A general introduction has been provided for Wang's philosophy. 
There are separate introductions for certain sections and essays. 

I wish to thank the Committee on Oriental Studies of Columbia 
University for the grant which provided me with time and assistance 
to undertake and complete this translation. I am particularly 
indebted to its Chairman, Professor Wm. Theodore de Bary, for 
his strong encouragement and support. As Editor of Translations 
from the Oriental Classics, he is doing much to further the spread 
of knowledge and increase in understanding of Asian thought. 
He has read through my manuscript and made many valuable sug- 
gestions for improvement. Miss Elisabeth L. Shoemaker, Editor, 
Columbia University Press, has given me tremendous help on the 
format and literary expression of the work. 

I wish also to thank the Harvard -Yenching Library and its 
Librarian, Dr. Kaiming A. Chiu; the East Asiatic Library of 
Columbia University and its Librarian Mr. Howard P. Linton; 
and the staff of Baker Library of Dartmouth College, especially the 
members of its Reference Division, for their generous assistance. 
Miss Naomi Fukuda, Librarian of the International House of 
Japan, has been ever ready to locate Japanese works for me and to 
secure microfilms of them. My colleague Professor Arthur Dewing 
has been most patient and sympathetic in helping me find suitable 
expressions and translations. Dartmouth College has given me 
financial aid in the preparation of the manuscript, and Mrs. Alice 
W. Weymouth has kindly typed it. I am grateful to all of them. 

Above all, I am indebted to my wife. This work has heen made 
possible only by her patience, understanding, and wholehearted 
support. 

Dartmouth College 

September, 1962 W.T.C. 

Translator's Note 

This is a new translation of the Ch'uan-bsi lu, plus a few short 
works which supplement it. A previous translation by Frederick 
Goodrich Henke (The Philosophy of Wang Yang-ming, 191 6) contains 
too many mistakes to be of any use. The translator rearranged the 
text and omitted many sections for no justifiable reason. 

The present translation is complete, except for passages from 
Chu Hsi's works which Wang selected and included in the Appendix 
and Yuan Ch'ing-lin's short postscript. The Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung 
ch'iian-shu (Complete works of Wang Yang-ming) of the Ssu-pu 
ts'ung-k'an edition is used. It is a photographic reproduction of the 
edition of 1572 which is the oldest and is considered the most 
authentic. I have not translated the title literally. The term 
"ch'uan-hsi" comes from the Analects 1:4 and means "what has 
been transmitted [from the teacher] and is to be learned well 
[and to be practiced]" or, according to another interpretation, "to 
transmit those doctrines which one has already learned well or put 
into practice himself." Wang's pupil Hsu Ai used the term as the 
title for his records of conversations with his teacher. Most anno- 
tators have emphasized the idea of learning, especially through 
recitation. But Wang denounced book learning and advocated 
practice instead. I believe that the title Instructions for Practical 'Living 
expresses better the meaning and the spirit of the original. The word 
lu (records) has been omitted. 

I have used the name Wang Yang-ming, an honorific, instead 
of the philosopher's private name Shou-jen or his courtesy name 
Po-an. Although in most cases I have used people's private names, 
I have not hesitated to make exceptions in cases where a courtesy 
name or an honorific is much better known, as in the case of Lu 
Hsiang-shan. Since the generally used names of ancient philosophers 
are mostly not private names, and Chinese abounds in such well- 
established names as Sun Yat-sen, absolute consistency is impossible 
anyway. Chinese and Japanese names are given in the Chinese 
order, that is, with the family name first, except for some con- 
temporaries who (like myself) follow the Western order. Birth and 

xiv Translator's Note 

death dates are provided, where known, in all cases except those of 
Western and contemporary Asian writers and of Confucius, 
Mencius, and the outstanding Neo-Confucians, whose dates, to 
avoid needless repetition, are given only in the Introduction. 

The Chinese calendar year has been equated with its corresponding 
year in the Western calendar, even though the two do not exactly 
coincide. I have made an exception in the case of Wang's death, how- 
ever. He died in the seventh year of Chia-ching. Ordinarily this 
would be equated with 1528. But since his death occurred on the 
twenty -ninth day of the eleventh month of the seventh year of 
Chia-ching, which happened to correspond to January 10, 1529, 
the year 1529 is used instead. In reference to age, when Wang is 
said to be fifty, for example, it means that he was in his fiftieth year. 

Almost every Chinese philosophical term is used in the In- 
structions for Practical Living. Insofar as possible, these terms have 
been translated consistently. Many sayings and phrases occur again 
and again. These, too, have been translated consistently except where 
slight adjustments are unavoidable. Sources of quotations, which 
are numerous, have been traced. This is not an easy task, especially 
in the case of quotations from Neo-Confucian sources, of which 
there are many. In the absence of indexes and concordances and 
often without any indication as to whose saying a quotation is, 
where it is from, or whether it is a quotation at all, it is sometimes 
necessary to go through a whole work to locate it. Japanese annota- 
tions are helpful but inadequate. Their references to Neo-Confucian 
works, by no means complete, are to an anthology instead of 
original works. The work of the two Chinese annotators is useless. 
(See Bibliographical and Historical Notes on the Ch'uan-hsi lu.) 
But the identification of sources enables the reader to see the 
historical and philosophical connections between Wang and his 
predecessors and to check the context of the quotations whenever 
desired. 

Wang quoted freely, often paraphrasing or changing a word or 
two. Most of these liberties have not been pointed out since they 
do not alter the original meanings. In a few cases where Wang did 
twist the meaning this fact is indicated in footnotes. 

There are many variations of individual words in different editions 
and selections. Except in a few cases, none affects the sense of the 
sentences involved. I have not deemed it necessary to note all these 
variations except where emendation is called for. Some anthologies 

Translator's Note 

xv 

contain additional conversations not included in the 1572 edition. 
These have not been translated because their authenticity is 
questionable. In any case they contain nothing of special significance. 
(See Bibliographical and Historical Notes on the Ch'mn-hsi hi.) 
Section numbers have been provided for convenient reference. 
All Chinese and Japanese titles have been translated in the List 
of Chinese and Japanese Works. English titles are given in full 
when first cited in each section of footnotes and thereafter are 
abbreviated. Specific editions referred to are given in the List 
of Chinese and Japanese Works. Transliterations follow the Wade- 
Giles system except for a few well-known geographical names. 
The glossary includes Chinese characters for all Chinese and 
Japanese words except well-known geographical names and names 
of dynasties. 

Abbrevations 

pnp Pai-na-pen (Choice works) edition 

sppy Ssu-pu pei-yao (Essentials of the four libraries) edition 

sptk Ssu-pu ts'ung-k'an (Four-library series) edition 

Contents 

foreword, by Wm. Theodore De Bary ix 

preface xi 

translator's note xiii 

ABBREVIATIONS Xvi 

INTRODUCTION xix 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR PRACTICAL LIVING I 

Part I : Conversations Recorded by Hsu Ai, 3; Conversa- 3 
tions Recorded by Lu Ch'eng, 2 5 ; Conversations Recorded 
by Hsiieh K'an, 5 8 

Part II: Letter in Reply to Ku Tung-ch'iao, 91; Pulling 88 
Up the Root and Stopping Up the Source, 117; Letter to 
Chou Tao-t'ung, 124; Letter in Reply to Lu Yiian-ching, 
131; Letter in Reply to Ou-yang Ch'ung-i, 150; Letter in 
Reply to Vice -Minister Lo Cheng -an, 157; Letter in Reply 
to Nieh Wen-yii, 165; Another Letter in Reply to Nieh 
Wen-yii, 172; Instructions for Liu Po-sung and Others on 
Fundamental Ideas on Elementary Education, 182 

Part III : Conversations Recorded by Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan, 187 
187; Conversations Recorded by Huang I-fang, 199; Con- 
versations Recorded by Huang Mien-shu, 206; Conversa- 
tions Recorded by Huang Mien-chih, 211; The Doctrine 
in Four Axioms, 241 ; Conversations Recorded by Huang 
I-fang, 246 ; Preface to Chu Hsi's Final Conclusions Arrived 
at Late in Life, 263 

inquiry on the Great Learning 269 

SOME SOCIAL AND POLITICAL MEASURES 28 1 

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND HISTORICAL NOTES ON THE Ch'uan-hsi lu 3 1 1 

A LIST OF CHINESE AND JAPANESE WORKS 3 1 7 

GLOSSARY 3 2 5 

INDEX 349 

Introduction 

The philosophy of Wang Yang-ming is a vigorous philosophy 
born of serious searching and bitter experience. It is no idle specula- 
tion or abstract theory developed for the sake of intellectual curiosity. 
Rather, it is intended to provide a fundamental solution to basic 
moral and social problems. It calls for firm purpose and earnest 
effort, and for the actual practice and concrete demonstration of 
values. The intellectual and political situations of the time demanded 
just such a system. 

Intellectually, the light of Neo-Confucianism, which arose in 
the eleventh century and gave Confucianism a new life, was in the 
fifteenth century dim if not extinguished. The rationalistic Neo- 
Confucianism of Ch'eng I (Ch'eng I-ch'uan, 103 3-1 107) and Chu Hsi 
(11 30-1 200) had dominated the Chinese intellectual world since 
the twelfth century. But its doctrine of the Principle of Nature, 
aimed at promoting good and removing evil, was overcome by 
selfish human desires. Its doctrine of humanity, advocating love 
for all, gave way to mutual jealousy and rivalry. And its doctrine 
of the investigation of things, intended as a means to a clear and 
penetrating understanding of the things investigated, was now 
replaced by memorization, recitation, philological and textual studies, 
and the writing of flowery compositions. The civil service examina- 
tion system, through which government officials were selected, and 
which had rendered remarkable service since its formal establish- 
ment almost a thousand years before, had become an avenue for 
personal fame and success. The Sung Neo-Confucians had honored 
the Confucian Classics with great authority, as an expression of 
natural law providing a set of standards for social life and moral 
action. But now the Classics were being used to restrict creativity 
and freedom of thought. In 1 3 1 3 Chu Hsi's and Ch'eng Fs interpreta- 
tions of the Classics were declared the official doctrines and in 141 5 
the Ssu-shu ta-ch'iian and the Wu-ching ta-ch'iian (Great collections of 
commentaries on the Four Books and Five Classics)1 were made the 

1 The Ssu-sbu ta-ch'iian and the Wu-ching ta-ch'iian, compiled by imperial decree, 
were completed in 141 5. The Four Books are the Analects, the Great Learning, the 

xx Introduction 

basis for the examinations. The domination of Chu's philosophy 
in the intellectual scene was now absolute. But it was a domination 
that at best encouraged a concern with fragmentary and isolated 
details and with nonessentials, and at worst led to the habits of 
memorization and recitation instead of the search for meanings and 
values. Thus the Ch'eng-Chu philosophy, losing the moral strength 
it originally had possessed, became pure scholasticism. With such 
a philosophy as the only channel to public service and personal 
success, critical spirit, creative thought, and moral purpose and 
vitality gradually disappeared. 

The government at this time was exceedingly corrupt and 
impotent. The Cheng-te emperor was a playboy who spent much 
time in horse riding and in dog chasing inside the palace. What was 
worse, he left the government to eight eunuchs, one of whom, 
Liu Chin (d. 1510), was particularly powerful and wicked. Liu 
prevented scholar officials who wanted to have him removed from 
having audience with the emperor; he intercepted memorials 
demanding his execution. As was often the case in China when 
eunuchs were in power, there was disorder in the government and 
chaos throughout the land. Hundreds of square miles of territory in 
many provinces, especially in Kiangsi, Fukien, Kwangtung, and 
Kwangsi in central and south China, were under the control of 
rebels and bandits. Many of them had held power for several 
decades, and even government officials had to take orders from them. 
The moral decay, political degeneration, and economic crisis were 
such that intellectual and social collapse was imminent. Nothing 
except a complete spiritual revolution could save the day. The 
Chu Hsi philosophy, now itself decadent, was in no position to 
offer a solution. 

Some scholar officials risked their lives in an attempt to remedy 
the situation. The number of brave souls who were willing to suffer 
beating and imprisonment, or even death for protesting against the 
evil-doing of the eunuchs and the emperor was impressive. But the 
source of the trouble lay in the fact that Confucianism, the very 
ideology of government and the basic philosophy of life, had now 
been so suffocated by traditional thought and the restrictive exami- 
nation system that it had become "dry wood and dead ashes." 

Doctrine of the Mean, and the Book ofMencius. The Five Classics are the books of History 
Odes, Changes, and Rites (since the tenth century replaced by the Rites of Chou), and 
the Spring and Autumn Annals. A sixth Classic, the Book of Music, is no longer extant. 

Introduction xxi 

Government corruption and social chaos were but symptoms of 
that disease. Clearly an injection of new vigor and fresh life into the 
Confucian system was necessary. The man who provided this was 
Wang Yang-ming. 

Wang's private name was Shou-jen and his courtesy name Po-an.2 
He was born on the thirtieth day of the ninth month in the eighth 
year of Ch'eng-hua (1472) in Yiieh, a place in the Yii-yao district 
southeast of Hangchow in modern Chekiang. His ancestry has been 
traced to the famous calligrapher Wang Hsi-chih (321-79). His 
father, Wang Hua, a "presented scholar" of 1481, was minister 
of civil personnel in Nanking. It is said that Wang Yang-ming 
could not talk until he was five. At eleven he joined his father 
in Peking and stayed there until he was sixteen. It was during this 
sojourn, when he was thirteen, that his mother Madame Cheng 
died. When he was fifteen, he visited the passes in the Chii-yung 
Mountain in the present Hopei Province in North China. Both the 
Nien-p'u (Chronological biography) and the Hsing-chuang (Biography) 
claim that he volunteered to fight against the rebellion of Liu 
Ch'ien-chin and others and withdrew only after a stern admonition 
by his father. But as Mao Ch'i-ling (1623-1716) has pointed out in 
his most authoritative Wang Wen-ch'eng chitan-pen (Basic materials 
for the biography of Wang Yang-ming),3 this rebellion occurred 
far away from the Chii-yung Mountain, six years before Wang's 

2 Sources for Wang's biography are: Nien-p'u, written by Wang's favorite and 
outstanding disciple Ch'ien Te-hung, and constituting ch. 32 of the Wang Wen-ch'eng 
Kung ch'iian-shu; Hsing-chuang, written by another disciple, Huang Wan, and included 
in ch. 37 of the Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'iian-shu; Ming shih, ch. 195 ; and Ming sbih kao, 
ch. 185, biography 80. The biography in Huang Tsung-hsi, Ming-ju hsiieh-an, contains 
an excellent account. Mao Ch'i-ling's Wang Wen-ch'eng chuan-pen is indispensable to 
any critical study. Yii Ch'ung-yao in his Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chuan-tsuan has made 
good use of Mao's work and has compared the above sources, examined their in- 
consistencies, and selected the most reliable facts, thus making his book the best full- 
length biography in Chinese. The best in Japanese is Takase Takejiro's Oyomei shoden. 
It offers nothing new and contains some mistakes (such as saying, on p. 54, that Wang 
visited Lou Liang in 1507 although Lou died in 1491) but is a systematic narrative 
and has helpful explanations. In English there is Frederick Goodrich Henke's biog- 
raphy in his The Philosophy of Wang Yang-ming, pp. 3-44. It is an uncritical and abridged 
translation of the Nien-p'u, which retains legendary materials such as the account of 
Wang's living in a grotto and escaping by boat (pp. 10-11), omits essential materials 
like the famous conversation on the "Doctrine in Four Axioms" (p. 36), and makes 
many mistakes in translation, such as calling the office to select and regulate govern- 
ment personnel the office "regarding letters received" (p. 15). 

3 Wang Wen-ch'eng chuan-pen, p. 2b. 

xxii Introduction 

birth. However, the visit did arouse the boy's interest in the fron- 
tiers, as his later activities were to show. At seventeen he went to 
Hung-tu4 to take a wife, a Miss Chu whose father was then a state 
counselor in the provincial government. On the evening of the 
wedding day, when he passed by a Taoist temple and saw a Taoist 
priest sitting cross-legged, he sat down with him to talk about 
nourishing everlasting life, and was so absorbed that he neglected 
to go home until he was fetched the next morning. In the following 
year, when he was on his way home to Yii-yao with his wife, 
he called on the prominent scholar Lou Liang (1422-91) who was 
then sixty-eight. Lou acquainted him with Chu Hsi's doctrine of 
the investigation of things and told him that sagehood could be 
attained through learning. Both the Nien-p'u and the Hsing-chuang 
say that he was strongly convinced by Lou.5 Whether this is true 
or not, evidently the conviction did not have any immediate effect, 
for in the following year, at nineteen, he became much interested in 
military tactics and archery. However, two years later (in 1492), 
after having received the "recommended person" degree in his 
native provincial examination, he studied Chu Hsi's doctrine of 
the investigation of things in real earnestness, searching widely for 
Chu Hsi's writings. One day while Wang was with his father in 
Peking he decided to investigate the principles of bamboos. Since 
Chu Hsi had taught that principles are inherent in things, Wang 
and a friend sat in front of bamboos and tried hard to investigate 
their principles. His friend gave up after three days and he after 
seven, both having become ill.6 Thoroughly disillusioned in the 
search, he devoted himself to the writing of flowery compositions, 
which, however, did not enable him to pass the national civil service 
examinations either in 1493 or in 1496. Now he turned his attention 
back, first to military crafts and not long afterwards to the Taoist 
techniques of nourishing everlasting life. He actually contemplated 
entering a Taoist retreat in some mountain to search for immortality. 

4 Now Nan-ch'ang in Kiangsi Province. 

5 Both the Ming shih and the Ming shih kao place this interview in his seventeenth 
year. 

6 See Instructions for Practical Living, sec. 319. All section numbers in the footnotes 
refer to this work. Some scholars argue that Wang's father could not have been in 
the capital in 1492 because he was at home mourning the death of Wang's grandfather, 
and that this episode therefore must have taken place when Wang was with his father 
in Peking before 1492. There is no reason, however, why he and his father could not 
have returned to Peking in the latter part of 1492 after having observed mourning. 

Introduction xxiii 

These must have been years of intense spiritual and intellectual 
struggle, for he was not able to make a definite choice between 
Taoism and Confucianism, or between flowery compositions and 
military arts. If anything, he was still traveling on the traditional 
path by taking civil service examinations leading to government 
service. In 1499, when he was twenty-eight, he passed the examina- 
tions for the "presented scholar" degree, ranking second. 

Immediately after that Wang was appointed a member of the 
department of public works. At that time China was invaded in the 
northwest by semi-nomadic tribes. He presented a memorial to the 
throne recommending eight measures for national defense and 
security.7 Although his recommendations were not accepted, his 
fame grew because of his brilliant ideas on strategy, finance, and 
morale, and in the following year he was made divisional executive 
assistant in the Yunnan division of the department of justice, quite 
a responsible position for a young man of twenty-nine. A year later 
he was ordered to check the records of prisoners. He reversed many 
convictions. Without doubt an active life and public responsibility 
helped him to realize the errors of Taoism and Buddhism. He also 
came to frown upon flowery compositions. Because his health 
became poor, he returned home to Yiieh for recuperation. He built 
a small house in Yang-ming-tung in the Hui-chi Mountain and 
called himself Yang-ming Tzu or Philosopher of Yang-ming, from 
which came the honorific Master Yang-ming.8 

After he recovered his health he went to Peking again in 1504 
and was, at thirty-three, appointed to conduct the provincial 
examinations in Shantung. The questions he asked revealed such 
profound knowledge of the evils of Buddhism and Taoism, the 
reasons for the decline of Confucianism, governmental and social 
systems, and civil personnel that his reputation soared.9 Later in 
the year, he was transferred to be divisional executive assistant of 
the military personnel division of the department of military affairs. 
A year later disciples first began to gather around him, thus giving 
him fresh interest and new enthusiasm and opening for him a broad 

7 This memorial is found below, pp. 284-92. 

8 As Mao Ch'i-ling has pointed out, there is no grotto in the Hui-chi Mountain. 
The stories about Wang's lecturing in a grotto, visiting the Yii cave (Yii-hsueh), 
receiving instructions from a Taoist hermit in a cave, etc., are products of the imagina- 
tion. See Wang Wen-cb'eng chuan-pen, p. 2a. 

9 For these documents see Wang Wen-cb'eng Kung ch'iian-sbu, ch. 31B. 

xxiv Introduction 

and clear horizon. He had found his direction and was moving 
forward with sure conviction and firm purpose. He lectured on the 
primary importance of making up one's mind to become a sage, 
and he severely attacked the habits of recitation and flowery com- 
position. This did not please the conservative scholars, who felt 
he was resorting to strange doctrines in order to fish for fame. 
One man, however, thought highly of Wang. This was Chan 
Jo-shui (1466-15 60), then an Honored Academician in the Han-lin 
Academy.10 They became fast friends and took it upon themselves 
to clarify and spread the true doctrines of Confucius. 

Wang's intellectual and spiritual progress now gained mo- 
mentum. Nevertheless, had his life been smooth and unevent- 
ful, he might have become a highly respected lecturer with 
many followers but with no important effect on Chinese 
history. Fortunately, an extremely significant although painful 
event now took place. The eunuch Liu Chin had usurped the 
power of the emperor. In 1506, when Policy Review Adviser 
Tai Hsien and others protested, Liu put them in prison. 
Wang immediately presented a memorial in their defense.11 
This angered the eunuch and Wang was ordered to be beaten 
forty strokes before the emperor. In addition, he was banished to 
Lung-ch'ang in modern Kuei-chou, which was then inhabited by 
the barbarian Miao tribes, to become an insignificant executive in 
a dispatch station, whose duty it was to provide horses for rapid 
transportation. He started the journey in the spring of 1507 and 
arrived a year later, stopping over on the way to visit his father. 
Liu's agents pursued him and he escaped assassination only by 
throwing his clothing away by the Ch'ien-t'ang River near Hang- 
chow, thus suggesting suicide. Some accounts, to make the event 
more dramatic, have him escape by sea from Hangchow to Fukien 
and thence to Kuei-chou. More reliable chronicles, however, have 
recorded his trip overland from Hangchow to Kuei-chou. In 
Kuei-chou he taught the Miao aboriginals to build houses and live 
in them.12 

10 See below, sec 201, n. 3. 

11 In Wang Wen-cb'eng Kung ch'iian-shu, ch. 9. 

12 These accounts are corroborated by the Nien-p'u, Hsing-chuang, Ming shih, and 
Ming shih kao. The Nien-p'u, however, has fantastic stories like that of the escape by 
boat, and the Hsing-chuang says that at first Wang lived in a cave and that later the 
Miaos, inspired by the gods, built several houses for him. 

Introduction xxv 

Life was rugged and difficult. At times Wang had to gather fuel, 
fetch water, and cook meals for his subordinates as well as for 
himself. But the trying situation turned out to be a blessing in dis- 
guise. Having to face in isolation all sorts of hardship — political, 
natural, and cultural — he was driven back to search within his own 
mind. One night in 1508, when he was thirty-seven, he suddenly 
understood the Confucian doctrines of the investigation of things 
and the extension of knowledge. After another year of thought he 
began in 1509 to pronounce the doctrine of the unity of knowledge 
and action. Wang had now come into his own. 

When his term at Kuei-chou was up in 15 10 he was promoted 
to be the magistrate of Lu-ling in modern Kiangsi, where he built 
up a remarkable record in seven months of service. After an 
audience with the emperor later in the year he was raised to be 
divisional executive assistant in the Szechuan division of the 
department of justice at Nanking. A number of promotions fol- 
lowed— to divisional executive assistant in the inspections division of 
the department of civil personnel, to assistant chief of the civil 
personnel division (both in 1 5 1 1), and to chief of the merits division, 
all in Peking, then to junior lord of the bureau of imperial stables 
(15 1 2) and to senior lord of the bureau of state ceremonies (15 14), 
both in Nanking. Before he assumed his new duties in Nanking 
he went home to Yueh for a visit. His disciple Hsu Ai (1487-15 17) 
rode in the same boat with him. It was here that the conversations 
which are recorded in Part I of the Instructions for Practical Living 
took place. In these Nanking days (15 14-16), his fame spread and 
many scholars, including one of his superior officials, became his 
followers. At the same time his radical doctrines, including his 
insistence on following the old text of the Great Learning instead 
of the one rearranged by Chu Hsi, attracted more and more criticism. 
Devotion to him as a great teacher and attacks on him as a heretic 
grew simultaneously. And even among his followers, there were 
some who violated his teachings and some who enjoyed irrespon- 
sible high-sounding talk. 

At this point another political event occurred that ultimately 
forced him to explore new intellectual frontiers and thus to add 
new dimensions to his philosophy. When in 1 5 1 6 repeated cam- 
paigns failed to suppress rebels and bandits in Kiangsi and Fukien, 
Wang was promoted, on the recommendation of Minister Wang 
Ch'iung (d. 153 z) to be senior censor in the censorate and also 

xxvi Introduction 

governor of an area bordering Kwangtung, Kiangsi, and Fukien, 
charged with the pacification of that area. He arrived in Kan-chou 
in southern Kiangsi early in 1 5 1 7 and immediately proceeded to 
recruit able-bodied fighters, reorganize the armed forces, institute 
the ten-family joint registration system,13 and restore social order.14 
The situation in Chang-chou, Fukien, suddenly became critical. 
He directed his forces there and succeeded in subduing the rebellion 
in two months. He took measures to rehabilitate "new citizens" 
or former bandits15 and petitioned for the establishment of a 
magistracy for better security and the reorganization of the salt 
gabelle for better economy. At the end of the year rebels in Heng- 
shui, T'ung-kang, Ta-mao, and Li-t'ou in southern Kiangsi were 
rampant. In five months' time Wang suppressed all of them, so that 
by the fourth month of 1 5 1 8 he was able to start reconstruction 
measures, such as establishing primary schools,16 and to petition 
for the establishment of a new county.17 Two months later, in 
recognition of his spectacular success, he was promoted to be the 
right assistant censor, and his son was appointed an imperial 
guard with the income of one hundred families which was to be 
hereditary.18 In the tenth month of the year he instituted the 
famous Community Compact.19 

In the summer of 15 19 Wang was ordered to go to suppress a 
rebellion in Fukien. While he was on the way, an emergency call came 
for him to subdue the rebellion of Chu Ch'en-hao, who was Prince 
Ning, in Kiangsi. Prince Ning, nephew of the emperor, had plotted 
rebellion for years. He had bribed the eunuch Liu Chin, who was 
executed in 15 10. Now he declared himself head of state, calling 
his orders sacred edicts. He intended to capture Nanking and 
establish a new dynasty. 

With Prince Ning strongly entrenched and supported by a huge 
army, Wang faced great odds. But through both political and 

13 For this system, see below, pp. 293-94; 306-9. 

14 See below, p. 295, for his moral teachings to the populace. 

15 For his instructions to them, see below, pp. 296-97. 

16 For his philosophy and program of primary education, see below, pp. 182-86. 

17 For this petition, see below, pp. 297-98. 

18 This was originally his cousin's son, whom his father had adopted for him in 
1 5 16 since neither he nor his brothers had any son. Wang's wife died in 1525. Three 
years later he married a Miss Chang and a son was born of this marriage. 

19 For this Compact, see below, pp. 298-306. 

Introduction xxvii 

military maneuvers he captured the prince after ten days of 
fighting. 

Toward the end of the year Wang was made governor of Kiangsi. 
In the following year, 1520, he carried out the various reforms 
once more. 

By all precedents Wang's brilliant success should have been an 
occasion for extensive celebration and generous rewards. Unfortu- 
nately several things prevented this. The emperor had been urged 
by his favorites to lead the expedition himself, obviously so that 
he could claim credit for himself and his close subordinates. Wang, 
however, had bluntly advised him not to come. Furthermore, his 
capture of the prince caught the emperor and his circle in embar- 
rassing surprise. In addition, in gratitude to the department of 
military affairs for the operation of the campaign, in his report 
Wang gave credit to its officials, especially Minister Wang Ch'iung, 
and ignored the inner circles of the court. Most damaging of all, 
prior to the prince's open rebellion, he and the prince had exchanged 
messengers. The prince had sent Liu Yang-cheng, a scholar with 
ardent admiration for Wang, to visit him and Wang had dispatched 
his disciple Chi Yiian-heng20 to the prince. Angered and jealous, 
Wang's political enemies now charged that he and the prince had 
conspired together and that he had turned against the prince only 
because circumstances had become unfavorable to him. Chi was 
tortured and imprisoned, and died only five days after he was 
cleared and released. In his defense of Chi, Wang said that Chi 
was sent to Prince Ning only to dissuade him from rebellion and, 
if that should fail, to spy on him.21 Nevertheless, some official 
documents actually state that Wang conspired with the prince 
through Liu. Mao Ch'i-ling, however, has authoritatively concluded 
that the whole charge is absurd.22 At any rate, Wang became 
virtually persona non grata to the court. It was not until the spring 
of 1 521, when the Chia-ching emperor ascended the throne, that 
rewards were recommended. Even then, because of the opposition 
of his enemies, he was only appointed minister of military affairs at 
Nanking, and then only in the capacity of adviser and planner. 
He was also awarded the title Earl of Hsin-chien with a salary of 

See below, sec. 118, n. 58. 

Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'iian-shu, 17:54b. 

Wang Wen-ch'eng chuan-pen, Supplement 4b-5b. 

xxviii Introduction 

1,000 piculs23 of rice for three generations and an imperial certificate 
exempting his descendants from criminal punishment. Neither the 
salary nor the certificate was issued, however. 

From 1 521 to 1527, when Wang was in virtual retirement in 
his native place Yiieh, hostility toward him became more and more 
intense. He was ridiculed and attacked. His teachings were some- 
times prohibited. Ironically, it was in this period that his following 
grew in numbers and in enthusiasm. Well-known scholars both in 
and out of government became his pupils. Whenever he lectured 
there were several hundred scholars from all parts of China to sit 
around him.24 His philosophy had attained maturity. Most of his 
important letters, including the one containing the famous essay 
"Pulling Up the Root and Stopping Up the Source," were written 
during this time. So were most of the conversations recorded 
in Part III of the Instructions for Practical Living. Most important of 
all, it was in 1 5 2 1 , when he was fifty, that he arrived at the doctrine 
of the extension of innate knowledge, which culminated his whole 
philosophy. This was a period of searching thought. During these 
six years he was never appointed to office. 

In 1527 rebellions spread in Ssu-en and T'ien-chou in Kwangsi. 
Wang, in the capacity of left censor, was called to suppress them. 
On the eve of his departure in the fall, he and his most outstanding 
disciples Wang Chi and Ch'ien Te-hung25 engaged in the famous 
conversation concerning the celebrated "Doctrine in Four 
Axioms."26 It was at about the same time that the Inquiry on the 
"Great Learning," which embodies his most essential ideas, was 
written down. He pacified Kwangsi early in 1528. As before he 
promoted education and restored social order. 

His coughing had bothered him for years, and now he was very ill. 
Part of the time during this campaign he had to handle military 
affairs while going about in carriages.27 On his way home he died in 
Nan -an in modern Kiangsi on the twenty -ninth day of the eleventh 
month in the seventh year of Chia-ching (January 10, 1529). 

Because the antagonism among government officials toward 
both Wang himself and his teachings was still very bitter, Minister 

23 One picul is 1332 pounds. 

24 See below, sec. 316. 

25 See below, preface to sec. 130, n. 1, and sec. 257, n. 15. 

26 See below, sec. 315. 

27 See below, sees. 184-85. 

Introduction xxix 

of Rites and Senior Academician Kuei O memorialized the throne 
and recommended that because Wang left his post without permis- 
sion, his earldom should be taken away. Kuei and his associates 
condemned Wang for not respecting ancient traditions, for propa- 
gating strange doctrines, and for opposing Chu Hsi's theory of 
the investigation of things, and also charged that his disciples were 
either reckless or irresponsible. The result was that all hereditary 
privileges were revoked. Those who protested were dismissed. 

However, in 1567, thirty -eight years after Wang's death, when a 
new emperor came to the throne, Wang was given the title of 
Marquis of Hsin-chien and honored with the posthumous title of 
Wen-ch'eng (Completion of Culture). In the following year his 
son was given the hereditary title of Earl of Hsin-chien. In 1 5 84 
an imperial decree was issued that Wang should be offered sacrifice 
in the Confucian temple, the highest honor a person could ever 
expect to receive. Only four scholars were so honored during the 
entire Ming period.28 

The honor was well deserved, not only because, after he sub- 
dued the rebels, the Ming dynasty enjoyed a century of peace, free 
of rebellions and banditry, but far more importantly as a recognition 
of the significance of his philosophy. Certainly he was, except for 
Chu Hsi, the most influential philosopher in China since the fifteenth 
century. His philosophy dominated the remainder of the Ming 
period and his influence was felt in Japan. 

According to Huang Tsung-hsi (1610-95), in his learning Wang 
went through three stages. First he indulged in flowery compositions. 
Then, after reading Chu Hsi's works and attempting to in- 
vestigate the principles of bamboos according to Chu Hsi's formula, 
which he found wanting, he went in and out of the Buddhist and 
Taoist schools for a long time.29 Finally, as the difficult life in 
Kuei-chou during banishment hardened his character and stimulated 
his mind, he suddenly awoke to the Confucian doctrines of the 
investigation of things and the extension of knowledge (1508). 
This keen observation shows clearly the stages of Wang's struggle. 
Huang added that in the development of his own philosophy 
Wang also went through three stages. In the first stage, before 

28 The others are Hsiieh Hsuan (1 392-1464) and Hu Chii-jen (1434-84), both leaders 
of the Ch'eng-Chu School, and Ch'en Hsien-chang (Ch'en Po-sha, 1428 -15 00), leader 
of the idealistic Neo-Confucian movement, teacher of Chan Jo-shui. 

29 According to Wang himself, it was some thirty years. See below, sec. 124. 

XXX 

Introduction 

the Kiangsi days, that is, before 15 17 (when Wang was forty-six), 
he aimed at acquiring a foundation through sitting in meditation 
and calming the mind in order to attain the equilibrium before the 
feelings are aroused which is prerequisite for the harmony after the 
feelings are aroused. After his Kiangsi days he concentrated on 
teaching the doctrine of the extension of innate knowledge (liang- 
chih), in which neither sitting in meditation nor calming the mind 
is necessary because, as innate knowledge is extended, there is 
neither a distinction between the equilibrium before the feelings 
are aroused and the harmony after the feelings are aroused nor a 
distinction between action and knowledge. Finally, after he returned 
to Yiieh in 1522 when he was fifty-one, at all times he knew the 
right to be right and the wrong to be wrong and whatever he said 
was dictated by the original nature of his mind.30 

These are eminently sound accounts of Wang's spiritual progress. 
It should be pointed out, however, that Wang had propounded 
the doctrine of unity of knowledge and action in 1 5 09 and not after 
1 5 1 7 as Huang seems to suggest. Huang also gives the impression 
that Wang's final stage of philosophical development was a matter 
of state of mind, above and beyond the extension of innate knowl- 
edge. The fact is that Wang's philosophy reached its 2enith in the 
doctrine of the extension of innate knowledge in 15 21 and that 
from then until his death it remained the foundation stone of his 
teachings. His emphasis was on extension, that is, action, and not 
merely on a state of mind. This spirit was clearly expressed by his 
disciple Ch'ien Te-hung. Actually Huang's accounts are a derivation 
and a modification of Ch'ien's, according to which Wang went 
through three stages in his learning. In his teachings, Ch'ien said, 
Wang also went through three stages. In his Kuei-chou days he 
taught his followers the doctrine of unity of knowledge and action. 
From 1 5 10 to 15 17 he often taught them sitting in meditation. In 
his Kiangsi days he concentrated on teaching the doctrine of the 
extension of innate knowledge.31 The important point here is that to 
the end Wang emphasized the act of extending innate knowledge. 
His own spiritual development may have culminated in a certain 
state of mind but in his teaching he stressed the extension of innate 
knowledge to the very end. 

80 Ming-ju hsiieh-an, io:3b-4a. 

31 Ch'ien's preface to the Yang-ming Hsien-sheng wen-lu, in the Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung 
ch'uan-shu, Introduction, p. 13a. 

Introduction xxxi 

As already noted, Wang was utterly disappointed in Chu Hsi's 
theory, and opposed him at almost every point. The central issue was 
the doctrine of investigation of things. This was the issue that led 
Wang to return to the old text of the Great Learning as it is found 
in the Book of Rites. In this old text, the chapter on the sincerity 
of the will comes first. Chu Hsi shifted certain chapters to precede 
this chapter, saying that they represented the idea of the investiga- 
tion of things and the extension of knowledge, an idea which was 
now lost, and he wrote a passage to "amend" the treatise. In 
other words, Chu Hsi put the investigation of things ahead of the 
sincerity of the will. Wang, however, claimed that the sincerity of 
the will was the necessary foundation on which investigation and 
extension must be based.32 According to Ch'eng I, every blade of 
grass and every tree possesses principle and therefore should be 
investigated.33 In his amendment of the Great "Learning, Chu Hsi 
said, "We must investigate the principles of all things we come into 
contact with, for the intelligent mind of man is certainly formed to 
know, and there is not a single thing in which its principles do not 
inhere.... For this reason, the first step in the education of the adult 
is to instruct the learner, in regard to all things in the world, to 
proceed from what knowledge he has of their principles, and 
investigate further until he reaches the limit. After exerting himself 
in this way for a long time, he will one day achieve a wide and far- 
reaching penetration." 

For more than two centuries this was accepted as an unalterable 
formula in the process of learning. Wang, however, rejected the 
investigation of all things as a hopeless task.34 Moreover, Chu Hsi's 
theory was that the mind should go to things to investigate 
principles. This is to consider principles as external, an idea entirely 
unacceptable to Wang.35 He stated that it is absurd to say that the 
principle of filial piety, for example, exists in the parents for, if that 
were true, that principle would cease to be as soon as the parents 
die.36 This doctrine is all the more objectionable because it separates 
the mind from principles. As Wang said, "To investigate the prin- 

32 See below, sec. 129. For Wang's other criticisms of Chu Hsi's rearrangement, 
see below, sec. 173, 
83 1-shu, 18:9a. 

34 See below, sec. 318. 

35 See below, sees. 173 and 201. 

36 See below, sec. 135. 

xxxii Introduction 

ciples in things to the utmost as we come into contact with them 
means to look in each individual thing for its so-called definite 
principles. This means to apply one's mind to each individual thing 
and look for principles in it. This is to divide the mind and 
principle into two."37 In Wang's view, this is absolutely contrary 
to the truth, for according to him mind and principle are one.38 
This theme, that mind is principle, recurs many times in the In- 
structions for Practical Living. Wang admitted that Chu Hsi also 
considered principle to be in the mind when he said, "Although 
principles are distributed throughout the ten thousand things . . . 
actually they are not outside one's mind." But Wang then pointed 
out that "these are but the two aspects of concentration and diversi- 
fication" and that Chu Hsi's interpretation inevitably "opened the 
way to the defect among scholars of regarding the mind and prin- 
ciples as two separate things."39 

Moreover, as there is no principle outside the mind, there is no 
thing outside it. To Wang a thing is nothing but the functioning 
of the will. "When the will functions in the service of parents, then 
serving parents is a thing (an actuality).... Wherever the will is 
applied, there cannot be nothing. Where there is a particular will, 
there is a particular thing corresponding to it, and where there is 
no particular will, there will be no particular thing corresponding 
to it."40 

We can readily see that Wang and Chu are diametrically opposed. 
To Chu there must be the principle of filial piety before there can be 
the mind to practice it. Wang, on the other hand, held that the 
principle of filial piety is nothing but the exercise of the mind and 
therefore there must be first of all the mind.41 Chu Hsi believed that 
principles exist independently of the mind, whereas Wang insisted 
that principles and the mind are identical. Actually, of course, Chu Hsi 
was talking about principles of natural objects as well as moral action, 
while Wang thought of moral actions alone. To Chu Hsi the 
investigation of things requires an objective method, including both 
induction and deduction, whereas Wang takes the investigation 
of things to mean moral awakening. This is the reason why he 

37 Ibid. 

38 See below, sees. 32 and 140. 

39 See below, sec. 133. 

40 See below, sec. 137; see also sec. 6. The word shih means both "thing" and "event," 
"affair," or "matter." 

41 See below, sees. 133 and 135. 

Introduction xxxiii 

interpreted the word ko in the phrase ko-wu (the investigation of 
things) not as study and inquiry as Chu Hsi understood it but as 
"rectification," that is, "to eliminate what is incorrect in the mind and 
to preserve the correctness of the original substance."42 In short, 
to investigate things is to do good and to remove evil.43 

Philosophically Wang's position is weak because it entirely 
neglects objective study and confuses reality with value. Readers 
of the Instructions for Practical Living will realize that Wang's idealism 
is very naive indeed. When he was asked, if nothing is external to 
the mind, what blossoming trees on the high mountains have to do 
with it, he merely said, "Before you look at these flowers, they and 
your mind are in the state of silent vacancy. As you come to look 
at them, their colors at once show up clearly."44 But if Wang's 
philosophy is short in logical acumen, it is long in moral insight. 
To him the separation of the mind and the principle of things was 
not only a fallacy in theory but a moral calamity, because it led to 
"the devotion to external things and the neglect of the internal." 
Scholars who followed that doctrine were concerned only with 
"fragmentary, isolated details and broken pieces." Although they 
might become broad, they certainly lacked the essentials. They 
trifled with things and lost their purpose in life. This, to him, was 
the reason for the decline of the Confucian doctrine, which in turn 
brought on intellectual, political, and moral decay.45 

These criticisms of Chu Hsi's system were not entirely new. 
They had been offered by Chu Hsi's own friend Lu Hsiang-shan 
(Lu Chiu-yuan, n 39-93). 46 The difference between Lu and Wang 
is that with Lu the dispute was chiefly academic, whereas with Wang 
it was an actual struggle to solve acute problems. This gives Wang's 
theory a vital and dynamic character which Lu's lacked. Lu and 
Wang are often spoken of together. The idealistic tendency in 
Neo-Confucianism which they present is often called the Lu-Wang 
School, in contrast to the rationalistic Neo-Confucianism of Ch'eng- 

42 See below, sees. 7, 85, and 174. 

43 See below, sec. 315. 

41 See below, sec. 275 ; see also sec. 337. 

45 See below, sees. 135 and 137. 

46 See Hsiang-shan ch'iian-chi, 2:7b-! ib; 34:4^-53, 24a-b. On the controversy between 
Chu and Lu, see Fung Yu-lan, A History of Chinese Philosophy, II, 5 8 5 -92 ; Carsun Chang, 
The Development of Neo-Confucian Thought (New York, Bookman Associates, 1957), 
pp. 296-301 ; Huang Siu-chi, L,u Hsiang-shan, a Twelfth Century Chinese Idealist Philos- 
opher (New Haven, American Oriental Society, 1944), pp. 75-86. 

xxxiv Introduction 

Chu. As a broad characterization this is correct. They both insisted 
that mind and principle are one, and they both emphasized knowing 
fundamentals as opposed to isolated details, it is true. Wang recog- 
nized that Lu taught that one should "devote one's effort to the 
area of human feelings and human affairs"47 When he was asked 
what he thought of Lu, he said that since the eleventh century 
"there has been only Lu Hsiang-shan. But he was still somewhat 
crude."48 He did not explain why Lu was crude, but the fact that 
he did not follow Lu blindly is quite clear. He almost never quoted 
Lu. However, he did publish Lu's works and, when he was a 
government official in Lu's native district, he ordered Lu's de- 
scendants exempt from conscript service and awarded them scholar- 
ships. This indicates that Wang held a great admiration for him. 
But where ideas were concerned, he told a friend that he both 
agreed and differed with Lu.49 When he was asked about the 
controversy between Chu and Lu, he replied that it was more 
important to discuss wherein oneself is right or wrong than wherein 
Chu or Lu was right or wrong.50 We cannot help but sense here 
Wang's spirit of independence. In fact, he once remarked that 
"the way of learning ... is the task of creating something from 
nothing."51 In a large measure he did just that, notably in his 
doctrines of the unity of knowledge and action and of the extension 
of innate knowledge. 

The relationship between knowledge and action had been a 
perennial topic for discussion in the Confucian tradition. In the 
hook of History it is said that "it is not difficult to know but difficult 
to act."52 Throughout his teachings Confucius (551-479 B.C.) had 
stressed the correspondence and equal importance of knowledge 
and action.53 Ch'eng I also said that the extension of knowledge and 
actual demonstration should proceed simultaneously.54 Chu Hsi, 
too, recognized the mutual dependence of knowledge and action. 
He said, "Knowledge and action always require each other. It is 
like a person who cannot walk without legs although he has eyes, 

47 See below, sec. 37. 

48 See below, sec. 205. 

49 Wang Wen-ch'engKungch'iian-shu, 6:13a. 

50 See below, sec. 149. 

51 See below, sec. 115. 

52 "The Charge to Yiieh," pt. 2. Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 258. 

53 Analects, 5:9; 13:4; 14:4; 15:5; 18:8. 
64 Ts'ui-jen, i:i6a-b; also I-shu, 18:4a. 

Introduction xxxv 

and who cannot see without eyes although he has legs."55 He also 
said, "The efforts of both knowledge and action must be exerted to 
the utmost. As one knows more clearly, he acts more earnestly, and 
as he acts more earnestly, he knows more clearly."56 But Wang 
struck a new note in declaring that they are not only closely related 
but are identical. He said, "Knowledge in its genuine and earnest 
aspect is action, and action in its intelligent and discriminating aspect 
is knowledge. At bottom the task of knowledge and action cannot be 
separated.... Knowledge is what constitutes action and unless it is 
acted on it cannot be called knowledge."57 For evidence to support 
his contentions, he refers to such experiences as not knowing pain 
unless one suffers it or not knowing the taste of food until one 
actually eats it. "As soon as one sees that beautiful color," he said, 
"he has already loved it. It is not that he sees it first and then makes 
up his mind to love it.... Suppose we say that so-and-so knows 
filial piety and so-and-so knows brotherly respect. They must have 
actually practiced filial piety and brotherly respect before they can 
be said to know them. It will not do to say that they know filial 
piety and brotherly respect simply because they show them in 
words."58 

The type of knowledge he referred to is clearly limited to personal 
experience and does not exhaust the whole realm of knowledge. 
But on his major premise that knowledge is a function of the will 
and that the will is action, the conclusion that knowledge is action 
is inevitable. As he said, "A man must have the desire for food 
before he knows the food. This desire to eat is the will; it is already 
the beginning of action."59 

The radical difference between Wang and his predecessors, then, 
is that while they considered knowledge and action to be two 
things, he identified them as one. Chu Hsi, for example, clearly said 
that in terms of time knowledge is prior to action although in terms 
of value action is more important.60 In contrast, Wang said, "I have 
said that knowledge is the direction for action and action the effort 
of knowledge, and that knowledge is the beginning of action and 

65 Chu T%u yii-lei, 9:1a. 

66 Ibid., 14:30a. 

67 See below, sec. 133. 

68 See below, sec. 5. 

69 See below, sec. 132. 
60 Chu T^u yii-lei, 9:3a. 

xxxvi Introduction 

action the completion of knowledge."61 The words "beginning" 
and "completion" may suggest a sequence in time, but Wang was 
careful to add that knowledge and action "should not be separated."62 
For as soon as there is the will, action has already begun, and if the 
will is sincere all that can be carried out is already contained in it. 
This is why the sincerity of the will is the foundation and must 
precede the investigation of things. If the will is sincere, the knowl- 
edge will naturally and easily be extended to the fullest extent. 
This is the doctrine of the extension of innate knowledge. 

This doctrine is Wang's supreme philosophical achievement. It 
was attained at the age of fifty after several years of fighting the 
rebels and facing his political enemies. It was a product of painful 
experience and thorough soul-searching. As he himself said, "It was 
achieved from a hundred deaths and a thousand sufferings."63 It 
is not merely a combination of the teaching of the extension of 
knowledge in the Great Learning and Mencius' (371-289 B.C.?) 
doctrine of innate knowledge.64 It is a new understanding that the 
extension of knowledge is the very nature of man. 

Wang describes innate knowledge in various terms. It is "the 
original substance of the mind," "the Principle of Nature," "the 
pure intelligence and clear consciousness of the mind," and the 
mind that is "always shining" and reflects things as things come 
without being stirred.65 It is "the equilibrium before the feelings are 
aroused," "the substance that is absolutely quiet and inactive," and 
"the state of being broad and extremely impartial."66 It is "where the 
Principle of Nature is clear and intelligent."67 It is "man's root which 
is intelligent and is grown by nature. It naturally grows and grows 
without cease."68 It is the "spirit of creation" and it "produces 
heaven and earth, spiritual beings, and the Lord."69 Since it perme- 
ates and penetrates all existence, even trees and grass possess it.70 

61 See below, sec. 5. 

62 See below, sec. 26, 

63 Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'iian-sku, Prefaces, p. 15 a. 

64 Great Learning, ch. 5 ; Book of Mencius, 7A:i5. 

65 See below, sees. 152, 135, 137, and 151, respectively. 

66 See below, sec. 155. 

67 See below, sec. 169. 
fi8 See below, sec. 244. 

69 See below, sec. 261. 

70 See below, sec. 274. 

Introduction xxxvii 

It depends on nothing outside71 and it "does not come from 
hearing and seeing."72 

While these descriptions do not define innate knowledge, it can 
simply be equated with the Principle of Nature. And the Principle 
of Nature, from the Sung Neo-Confucians down, simply means 
the principle of right and wrong. In the "Doctrine in Four Axioms" 
it is stated that "the faculty of innate knowledge is to know good 
and evil."73 To extend innate knowledge therefore means to be 
"completely identified with the Principle of Nature" so that without 
being in the least influenced by selfish desires one knows right to 
be right and wrong to be wrong instantly and spontaneously. 
When Wang was asked how to extend innate knowledge, he replied, 
"Your innate knowledge is your own standard. When you direct 
your thought your innate knowledge knows that it is right if it is 
right and wrong if it is wrong. You cannot keep anything from it. 
Just don't try to deceive it but sincerely and truly follow it in 
whatever you do. Then the good will be preserved and evil will be 
removed. What security and joy there is in this! This is the true 
secret of the investigation of things and the real effort of the exten- 
sion of knowledge."74 

The instantaneous realization may seem similar to the sudden 
enlightenment of Zen Buddhism. Wang once said that what the 
Buddhists call the original nature at the time when one thinks of 
neither good nor evil is what the Confucian school calls innate 
knowledge.75 In the "Doctrine in Four Axioms"76 he said that 
in the original substance of the mind there is no distinction of 
good and evil. Forty or more Buddhist expressions and stories 
appear in the Instructions for Practical Living. Moreover, at one stage 
in his teaching Wang advocated sitting in meditation, and later some 
of his followers drifted into Zen Buddhism. For these reasons Wang 
has been accused of being a Buddhist in Confucian disguise. Actually, 
although his attitude toward Buddhism was not as hostile as that of 
other Neo-Confucians, his criticism of it is nonetheless severe. He not 
only attacked the Buddhists for their escape from social responsi- 

71 See below, sec. 8. 

72 See below, sec. 168. 

73 See below, sec. 315. 

74 See below, sec. 206. 
76 See below, sec. 162. 
76 See below, sec. 315. 

xxxviii Introduction 

bilities, for their inability to handle human affairs, and for their 
selfishness;77 he also criticized their failure to handle the mind 
itself. In spite of all their protestations, Wang said, the Buddhists 
can never get away from attachment to phenomena. He said, "The 
Taoist talk about vacuity is motivated by a desire for nourishing 
everlasting life, and the Buddhist talk about non-being is motivated 
by the desire to escape from the sorrowful sea of life and death. 
In both cases certain selfish ideas have been added to the original 
substance [of the mind], which thereby loses the true character of 
vacuity and is obstructed."78 Thus he attacked the very foundation 
of Buddhism. 

The extension of innate knowledge is also different from the 
method of moral cultivation of the Sung Neo -Confucians. Their 
formula may be summed up by the dictum, "Seriousness is to 
straighten the internal life. Righteousness is to square the external 
life," which Ch'eng I used as the basis of his philosophy and which 
other Sung and Ming Neo -Confucians accepted as a sacred formula.79 
This is essentially a quietistic process. In fact, most Sung and Ming 
Neo-Confucians practiced sitting in meditation along with efforts 
at seriousness and righteousness. Quite aside from the separation 
of the internal and the external,80 a separation which Wang would 
never tolerate, its quietistic character makes the Sung Neo-Confu- 
cian effort quite different from Wang's. His extension of knowledge 
not only requires absolute sincerity of the will, which may be equated 
with seriousness, and the sense of right and wrong, which may be 
equated with righteousness; it also calls for vigorous and active 
effort. It requires self-mastery and self-examination. It requires 
making up the mind. Most important of all, it requires "polishing 
and training in the actual affairs of life." One must be alert and 
vigilant all the time, and there must be a sense of urgency and 
earnest exertion of effort at every instant. This is what is meant by 
seeing to it that "one must always be doing something."81 In this 
task, one should not lean forward or backward, or be perturbed or 

77 See below, sees. 101, 162, 236, and 270. 

78 See below, sec. 269. For a discussion of this question, see Wing-tsit Chan, "How 
Buddhistic Is Wang Yang-ming?", Philosophy East and West, XII (no. 2, 1962). 

79 Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 2. Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, 
p. 420. For Ch'eng, see I-shu, 1:1b, 2A:9a, 11:1a, 7b, etc. 

80 Ch'eng nevertheless claimed that they were combined. Ibid., 11:2a. 

81 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

Introduction xxxix 

hindered by an instant of evil thought. When the will is completely 
sincere and innate knowledge is fully extended, the moral and 
social life will be developed to its fullest extent. When this point 
is reached, one will become a sage, who "forms one body with 
all things." 

This idea of forming one body with all things is a continuation 
of a long Chinese tradition. Many ancient philosophers taught it and 
it became especially strong among the Sung Neo-Confucians. 
Chang Tsai (Chang Heng-ch'ii, 1020-77) in his Hsi-ming (Western 
inscription) calls Heaven and Earth father and mother and all men 
brothers.82 Ch'eng Hao (Ch'eng Ming-tao, 1032-85) said, "The man 
of humanity forms one body with all things without any differenti- 
ation."83 His brother Ch'eng I also said, "The man of humanity 
regards Heaven and Earth and all things as one body."84 From the 
time of Chang Tsai on, all Neo-Confucians have elaborated on or 
at least repeated the idea. But the strongest champion of the doctrine 
was Wang. He said, "The great man regards Heaven and Earth and 
the myriad things as one body. He regards the world as one family 
and the country as one person. As to those who make a cleavage 
between objects and distinguish between the self and others, they 
are small men. That the great man can regard Heaven, Earth, and 
the myriad things as one body is not because he deliberately wants to 
do so, but because it is natural to the humane nature of his mind 
that he does so."85 This is the opening passage of the Inquiry on the 
"Great Learning," which, along with the "Doctrine in Four Axioms" 
and the essay on "Pulling Up the Root and Stopping Up the 
Source,"86 constitutes one of the three important works which 
crown Wang's philosophy. The idea of forming one body with all 
things is equally central in the latter essay. In fact, this conception is 
even more vital and concrete here, for it concerns not only ethics, 
but government and history, as well. The difference between Wang's 
idea of forming one body and that of the Sung Neo-Confucians 
is that in his case the idea is tied up with the actual human situation 
and has a dynamic force behind it. 

82 Hsi-ming, in the Chang Heng-ch'ii chi, i:ia-b. 

83 I-shu, zK-.^a.. 

84 Ts'ui-yen, 1:7b. 

85 See below, "Inquiry on the Great Learning," second paragraph. 

86 See below, sees. 142-43, and 315, and "Inquiry on the Great Learning"; see also 
the special introductions to these sections and to the "Inquiry." 

xl Introduction 

What did Wang's philosophy accomplish? It presented the Chu 
Hsi philosophy with a strong challenge, which contributed not a 
little to its health. It set Chinese thought free. It created a new 
philosophy and it restored Confucianism to its central emphasis 
on purpose and action. Wang's followers spread over all parts of 
China and his system dominated China for some 150 years, to the 
end of Ming. 

Unfortunately the movement contained certain elements of weak- 
ness. There was never any unity among his followers. In his accounts 
of the Yang-ming school, Huang Tsung-hsi divided them into 
seven different branches.87 Diversity should lead to development, 
but among the Wang followers there was mostly confusion. Take 
the interpretation of innate knowledge, for example. Each follower 
understood it in his own way, so that the central basis of the Wang 
philosophy lacked unity and thereby strength. Furthermore, toward 
the end of the movement there were some who justified their irre- 
sponsibility as the extension of their innate knowledge. Since having 
the desire was considered action, the lazy defended themselves by 
saying that action was already complete in the mind. Instead of 
adhering to firm purpose and vigorous effort to do good, they gave 
free rein to their passions. Drunkards were considered sages. Thus 
forming one body with all things came to mean acceptance of every- 
thing without any standard. By the seventeenth century, when the 
empirical and critical philosophy emerged, the Yang-ming move- 
ment was eclipsed. 

However, Wang's philosophy was too dynamic and too challeng- 
ing to disappear from the scene completely. Its emphasis on sincere 
purpose and concrete action never ceased to inspire the Chinese, 
and in the twentieth century it has exerted considerable influence 
on such leaders as Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925) and such thinkers as 
Liang Ch'i-ch'ao (1873 -1929) and Hsiung Shih-li (1885- ).88 

Wang's philosophy was introduced into Japan by a Japanese 
monk, Keigo Ryoan (1425 -15 15), who visited Wang about 15 13. 

87 Ming-ju bsiieh-an, chs. 10-36. 

88 For Wang's influence on modern thinkers, see O. Briere, Fifty Years of Chinese 
Philosophy, iSpS-ipjo (London, Allen and Unwin, 1956) passim ; Chu Chi-hsien, A Study 
of the Development of Sun Yat-sen' s Philosophical Ideas (Ann Arbor, University Microfilms, 
1950), pp. 106-33; Clarence Burton Day, The Philosophers of China, Classical and 
Contemporary (New York, Philosophical Library, 1962), pp. 263-73, 323-30; and 
Wing-tsit Chan, Religious Trends in Modern China (New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1953), pp. 30-43. 

Introduction xli 

There it grew to be a prominent branch of Neo-Confucianism 
through the work of such great thinkers as Nakae Toju (1608-48), 
Kumazawa Banzan (1619-91), and Sakuma ShSzan (181 1-64). 89 
Although it never matched the prestige or influence of the Chu Hsi 
School (Shushigakn), nevertheless because of the simplicity and 
easiness of its philosophy, its emphasis on direct action and sharp- 
ness of mind, and its spirit of dedication, it had a special attraction 
for the Japanese, who admired these qualities because of their Zen 
Buddhist and military traditions. Furthermore, Wang's brilliant 
career was envied by those who had dedicated themselves to the 
building of a glorious and strong Japan. Consequently the school 
(Yomeigaku) attracted considerable following and produced such 
leaders as Saig5 Takamori (1827-77) an^ Okubo Toshimichi 
(1830-78),90 who transformed their country and laid the foundation 
for modern Japan. They are shining examples of how a dynamic 
philosophy could be translated into noble achievements when 
applied in the right way. 

All of Wang's fundamental doctrines are contained in the 
Instructions for Practical Living. This is a collection of conversations 
and letters in three parts compiled by Wang's disciples, Nan Ta-chi 
and Ch'ien Te-hung. Comments on its importance, its history, its 
title, and its text are given elsewhere,91 as are separate introductions 
to two of its sections, namely, "Pulling Up the Root and Stopping 
Up the Source" (sees. 142-43) and "Doctrine in Four Axioms" (sec. 
315). Suffice it to say that the conversations and letters are intimate 
and vital communications between teacher and disciple, between 
friend and friend. They are meant to be carried out in action. 

89 For the ideas of these men, see Ryusaku Tsunoda, Wm. Theodore de Bary, and 
Donald Keene, eds., Sources of Japanese Tradition (New York, Columbia University 
Press, 1958), pp. 378-92, 603-16. 

90 See ibid., pp. 654-62. 

91 See above, Preface, and Translator's Note; see below, Ch'ien Te-hung's preface 
preceding sec. 130, and postscript following sec. 343. See also, below, Bibliographical 
and Historical Note on the Ch'uan-hsi In. 

Instructions for Practical "Living 

Instructions for Practical hiving, Part I 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY HSU AI1 
(Sections 1-14) 

Introduction by Hsu At 

Concerning the doctrine of the investigation of things and so forth 
in the Great Learning,2 our Teacher has in all cases regarded what is 
set forth in the old text3 as correct, the text which former scholars4 
thought to be wrong.5 I was shocked when I first heard him, then 
became skeptical, then devoted all my energy and thought to it, 

1 His courtesy name was Yueh-jen and his literary name was Heng-shan. 
He was born in 1487 and died in 15 18 according to the chronology in the 
Wang Wen-cFeng Kung ch'iian-sbu, or in 15 17 according to the Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 
11:3a. He was the husband of Wang's sister. When Wang was released from 
prison and was about to leave for his post in primitive Kuei-chou in 1507, 
Hsu became his first pupil. He rose to be an assistant divisional chief 
in the department of public works. The following conversations took place 
in 1 5 12-13, when he accompanied Wang on his trip home for a visit before 
taking up new official duties at Nanking. In this period Wang's teaching aimed 
at restraint and discipline and therefore stressed sitting in meditation and calm 
thinking. Hsu faithfully put these doctrines into practice although he did not 
theorize about them. However, even though Wang had not yet preached his 
cardinal doctrine of "extending one's innate knowledge of the good to the 
utmost," Hsu mentioned the subject in sec. 8, thus indicating that he understood 
his master even before his thoughts were fully developed. No wonder he has 
often been compared with Yen Hui (521-490 B.C.), the most understanding pupil 
of Confucius. Yen Hui died at thirty-two; Hsu at thirty-one. For an account 
of Hsu, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 1 i:3a-4b. 

2 For English translations, see "The Great Learning," trans, by E. R. Hughes, 
in his The Great Learning and the Mean-in- Action (New York, Dutton, 1943), 
pp. 105-44; "The Great Learning," trans, by James Legge, in his The Chinese 
Classics, I, 355-81; or "The Great Learning," trans, by Lin Yutang, in his 
The Wisdom of Confucius (New York, The Modern Library, 1938), pp. 100-34. 

3 Traditionally constituting a chapter of the hook of Rites. Its chapter order 
was rearranged by Ch'eng I and Chu Hsi, the order followed in both Lin's and 
Legge's translations, while Hughes follows the chapter order of the old text, that 
is, ch. 42 of the Book of Rites. See below, sec. 129. 

4 Notably Ch'eng I (Ch'eng I-ch'uan, 1033-1107) and Chu Hsi (1 130-1200). 

5 And rearranged the order of its chapters. 

4 Instructions for "Practical hiving 

examining it with extensive reference and consultation and raising 
questions with our Teacher, and finally came to reali2e that the 
doctrines of our Teacher are as true as water is cold and as fire is 
hot, and can surely "wait a hundred generations for a sage to confirm 
them without a doubt."6 

Our Teacher is endowed with intelligence and wisdom. But he is 
at peace, happy, self-possessed, and simple, and pays no attention 
to his appearance. Because as a young man he was unrestrained and 
unconventional, drifted into the practice of writing flowery compo- 
sitions, and studied Buddhism and Taoism off and on, when people 
suddenly heard this theory of his, they all looked upon it as an 
attempt to be novel and different, without careful deliberation. They 
did not realize that after having been in a barbarous land for [nearly] 
three years,7 living in hardship and nourished by tranquillity, our 
Teacher has achieved a refinement and singleness of mind8 which 
has definitely penetrated the sphere of the sages and has arrived at 
the point of great perfection and absolute correctness. I have been 
exposed to his teachings day and night. I can only see that the way 
of our Teacher, in our immediate contact with it, seems to be easy, 
but the more we look up toward it, the higher it becomes. Look at 
it and it seems crude, but the more you go into it, the more refined 
it is. Approach it and it seems near, but the more you try to accom- 
plish it, the more inexhaustible it becomes. After more than ten 
years I have not been able to penetrate its depth. And yet many 
gentlemen of the day, who have had no more than a casual acquaint- 
ance with our Teacher, or who have not even heard his voice, or 
who have already made up their minds to belittle him and to be 
angry with him, imagine things and draw prejudiced conclusions 
on the basis of a chance conversation or hearsay. How will that do ? 
As to our Teacher's followers, when they heard his teachings, they 

6 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 29. For English translations, see "Central Harmony," 
trans, by Ku Hung-ming, in Lin Yutang, ed., The Wisdom of Confucius, pp. 104- 
34; "The Golden Mean of Tsesze," in Lin Yutang, ed., The Wisdom of China 
and India (New York, Random House, 1942), pp. 845-65; "The Doctrine of the 
Mean," trans, by James Legge, in his The Chinese Classics, I, 382-434; or "The 
Mean-in-Action," trans, by E. R. Hughes, in his The Great Learning and The 
Mean-in- Action, pp. 145-66. 

7 As a punishment Wang was banished to primitive Kuei-chou in remote 
southwest China to be a minor official from 1 508 to 1 5 10. 

8 Referring to the Book of History, "Counsels of the Great Yii." Cf. trans, by 
James Legge, The Shoo King, p. 61. 

Part I 5 

often got only a third of them and missed the rest, seeing, as it 
were, only the sex and color of the horse while overlooking its 
capacity of a thousand //.9 I have therefore recorded what I have 
heard from him over the years, to show privately to like-minded 
friends, to compare notes and to correct what I have taken down, 
so that, I believe, we shall not do injustice to our Teacher's 
teachings. 

Pupil Hsu Ai 

i. I asked: "Chu Hsi said that the phrase 'in loving the people' 
{ch'in-min) in the Great Learning should read 'in renovating the 
people' {hsin-miri). Since in a later section of the book it says, 'arouse 
the people to become new,'1 he seems to have some evidence for his 
contention. Do you also have evidence for believing that the phrase 
'in loving the people' in the old text should be followed ?" 

The Teacher said, "The word hsin in the phrase 'arouse the 
people to become new (Jbsinf means the people become new them- 
selves. It is different in meaning from the same word in the phrase 
'in renovating the people.' How can it be accepted as evidence? 
The term 'arouse the people to become' parallels the term 'love' but 
does not mean the same. The passages that follow in the text on 
bringing order to the state and peace to the world do not amplify 
the meaning of renovation. On the contrary, these passages in the 
text — 'Rulers deemed worthy what they deemed worthy and loved 
what they loved, while the common people enjoyed what they 
enjoyed and benefited from their beneficial arrangements', 'Act as 
if you were watching over an infant', and the ruler 'likes what 
people like and dislikes what the people dislike. That is what is 

9 A /*' is about one third of a mile. The story about the horse is found in the 
Huai-nan T%u, i2:9a-b. According to the account there, Duke Mu (r. 659-619 
B.C.) of Ch'in, on the recommendation of his minister, sent an expert in search 
of a steed. After three months the expert returned, saying that he had found a 
yellow male. When the horse came, it proved to be a black female. The duke 
was displeased and asked his minister about it. The minister replied, "What the 
expert saw was the secret of Nature. He grasped the essential factor and ignored 
the coarse element." The horse proved to be a horse of a thousand //. See Evan 
Morgan, trans. ,Tao,tbe Great Luminant (Shanghai, Kelly and Walsh, 1934), p. 119. 

1 Great Learning, ch. 2. Although it was opposed by Wang Yang-ming, 
Chu Hsi's chapter order instead of the order in the old text is used in these 
footnotes, because many of Chu Hsi's commentaries are referred to here. 

6 Instructions for Practical hiving 

meant by being a parent of the people'2 — all express the meaning 
of love. The meaning of 'loving the people' is the same as in Mencius' 
saying, 'The superior man is affectionate to his parents and humane 
to all people.'3 To love is the same as to be humane. Because the 
common people did not love one another, Emperor Shun4 appointed 
Hsieh to be minister of education and to institute with great serious- 
ness the five teachings.5 This was Emperor Shun's way to love 
the people. The sentence 'He was able to manifest his lofty 
character'6 means the same as 'manifesting the clear character,' 
and the statements there, 'to love the nine classes of his kindred,' 
'to have harmony,' and 'to have unity and accord,'7 mean the same 
as 'loving the people' and 'manifesting the clear character to the 
world.' Also, Confucius said, 'The superior man cultivates himself 
so as to give the common people security and peace.'8 Cultivating 
oneself means manifesting the clear character and giving the common 
people security and peace means loving the people. Reading the 
phrase as loving the people expresses both the ideas of educating 
and feeding the people. Reading it to mean renovating the people, 
however, seems to be one-sided." 

2. I said, "With reference to the sentence, 'Only after knowing 
what to abide in can one be calm' in the Great Learning, Chu Hsi 
considered that "all events and things possess in them a definite 
principle."9 This seems to contradict your theory." 

The Teacher said, "To seek the highest good [the abiding point] 
in individual events and things is to regard righteousness as external.10 

2 Ibid., chs. 3, 9, 10 respectively. 

3 Book of Mencius, jA:^. 

4 Legendary sage-emperor of the third millennium B.C. 

5 For the father to be righteous, the mother to be affectionate, the older 
brother to be friendly, the younger brother to be respectful, and the son to be 
filially pious. See Book of History, "Canon of Shun." Cf. trans by Legge, Shoo 
King, p. 44- 

6 Ibid., "Canon of Yao." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 17. 

7 Ibid. 

8 Analects, 14:45. 

9 The text of the Great 'Learning, and Chu Hsi's Ta-hstieh huo-rven, 1702 ed., 
p. 15a. 

10 Book of Mencius, 6A:4. Throughout the Instructions for Practical Living, Wang 
attacks again and again the doctrine that righteousness and other moral prin- 
ciples are to be found in external things, a doctrine advocated by Kao Tzu 
(c. 420-f. 350 b.c), whom Mencius vigorously denounced. 

Part I 7 

The highest good is the original substance of the mind. It is no other 
than manifesting one's clear character to the point of refinement and 
singleness of mind. And yet it is not separated from events and 
things. When Chu Hsi said in his commentary that [manifesting 
the clear character is] 'the realization of the Principle of Nature to the 
fullest extent without an iota of selfish human desire,'11 he got the 
point." 

3. I said, "If the highest good is to be sought only in the mind, I 
am afraid not all principles of things in the world will be covered." 

The Teacher said, "The mind is principle. Is there any affair in 
the world outside of the mind ? Is there any principle outside of the 
mind?" 

I said, "In filial piety in serving one's parents, in loyalty in serving 
one's ruler, in faithfulness in intercourse with friends, or in humanity 
in governing the people, there are many principles which I believe 
should not be left unexamined." 

The Teacher said with a sigh, "This idea has been obscuring 
the understanding of people for a long time. Can they be awakened 
by one word? However, I shall comment along the line of your 
question. For instance, in the matter of serving one's parents, one 
cannot seek for the principle of filial piety in the parent. In serving 
one's ruler, one cannot seek for the principle of loyalty in the ruler. 
In the intercourse with friends and in governing the people, one 
cannot seek for the principles of faithfulness and humanity in 
friends and the people. They are all in the mind, that is all, for the 
mind and principle are identical. When the mind is free from the 
obscuration of selfish desires, it is the embodiment of the Principle 
of Nature, which requires not an iota added from the outside. When 
this mind, which has become completely identical with the Principle 
of Nature, is applied and arises to serve parents, there is filial 
piety; when it arises to serve the ruler, there is loyalty; when it 
arises to deal with friends or to govern the people, there are faith- 
fulness and humanity. The main thing is for the mind to make an 
effort to get rid of selfish human desires and preserve the Principle 
of Nature." 

I said, "Having heard what you said, sir, I begin to understand. 

11 Chu Hsi, Ta-hsiieh chang-chii, commenting on the opening sentence of the 
text of the Great Learning. 

8 Instructions for Practical hiving 

However, the old theory still lingers in my mind, from which I 
cannot entirely get away. Take, for example, the matter of serving 
one's parents. The filial son is to care for their comfort both in winter 
and summer, and to inquire after their health every morning and 
evening.12 These things involve many actual details. Should we not 
endeavor to investigate them?" 

The Teacher said, "Why not endeavor to investigate them? 
The main thing is to have a basis. The main thing is to endeavor 
to investigate them by ridding the mind of selfish human desires 
and preserving the Principle of Nature. For instance, to investi- 
gate the provision of warmth for parents in the winter is none 
other than the extension of the filial piety of this mind to the utmost, 
for fear that a trifle of human selfish desires might creep in, and to 
investigate the provision of coolness for parents in the summer is 
none other than the extension of the filial piety of this mind to the 
utmost, for fear that a trifle of selfish human desires might creep in. 
It is merely to investigate this mind. If the mind is free from selfish 
human desires and has become completely identical with the 
Principle of Nature, and if it is the mind that is sincere in its filial 
piety to parents, then in the winter it will naturally think of the cold 
of parents and seek a way to provide warmth for them, and in the 
summer it will naturally think of the heat of parents and seek a way 
to provide coolness for them. These are all offshoots of the mind 
that is sincere in its filial piety. Nevertheless, there must first be 
such a mind before there can be these offshoots. Compared to the 
tree, the mind with sincere filial piety is the root, whereas the 
offshoots are the leaves and branches. There must first be roots 
before there can be leaves and branches. One does not seek to find 
leaves and branches and then cultivate the root. The Book of Rites 
says, 'A filial son who loves his parents deeply is sure to have a 
peaceful disposition. Having a peaceful disposition, he will surely 
have a happy expression. And having a happy expression, he will 
surely have a pleasant countenance.'13 There must be deep 
love as the root and then the rest will naturally follow like 
this." 

12 Quoting the Book of Kites, "Summary of Ceremonies." Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Li Ki, ch. i, p. 67. 

13 Book of Rites, "The Meaning of Sacrifices." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 
21, pp. 215-16. 

Part I 9 

4. Cheng Chao-shuo14 said, "In some cases the highest good must 
be sought in events and things." 

The Teacher said, "The highest good is none other than the mind 
which has completely identified with the Principle of Nature in its 
fullest extent. What is the need for seeking it in things and events ? 
Suppose you cite some instances." 

Chao-shuo said, "Take serving parents. What the details in 
providing warmth or coolness for them are and what the proper 
ways of supporting them are15 must be investigated and the correct 
answers found. Only then will the highest good be achieved. This 
is why the effort to study extensively, to inquire accurately, to think 
carefully, and to sift clearly is necessary."16 

The Teacher said, "If it were only the details of providing warmth 
or coolness or the proper way of support, they can be entirely 
discussed in a day or two. What is the need to study, inquire, think, 
and sift ? However, in order for the mind to be completely identified 
with the Principle of Nature in its fullest extent, when providing 
parents with warmth or coolness or when supporting them, there 
must be this effort to learn, ask, think, and sift. Otherwise, an 
infinitesimal mistake in the beginning will lead to an infinite error 
at the end. This is why even a sage needs the teachings of refinement 
and singleness of mind. If the highest good means no more than 
having the details correct, then dressing like an actor and acting 
out these details correctly on the stage would be called the highest 
good." 

I gained further understanding on that day. 

5. I did not understand the Teacher's doctrine of the unity of 
knowledge and action and debated it back and forth with Huang 
Tsung-hsien17 and Ku Wei-hsien18 without coming to any conclu- 

14 His name was I-ch'u. He obtained a "presented scholar" degree in 1505. 

15 Words of Ch'eng I quoted by Chu Hsi in his Ta-hsiieh huo-wen, p. 5oa-b. 

16 These steps are taught in the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. In these footnotes, 
Chu Hsi's chapter order is used. See n. 1, above. 

17 The courtesy name of Huang Wan (1477-15 51), whose literary name was 
Chiu-an. A grandson of a vice-minister, he obtained a "presented scholar" 
degree and later became minister of rites. His daughter was married to Wang 
Yang-ming's son. For an account of Huang Wan, see Ming-ju hsiieb-an, i3:5b-6b, 
where his courtesy name is given as Shu-hsien. 

18 The courtesy name of Ku Ying-hsiang (1483-1565), whose literary name 
was Lo-hsi. He obtained a "presented scholar" degree in 1505. Introduced by 

10 Instructions for Practical hiving 

sion. Therefore I took the matter to the Teacher. The Teacher said, 
"Give an example and let me see." I said, "For example, there are 
people who know that parents should be served with filial piety 
and elder brothers with respect but cannot put these things into 
practice. This shows that knowledge and action are clearly two 
different things." 

The Teacher said, "The knowledge and action you refer to are 
already separated by selfish desires and are no longer knowledge 
and action in their original substance. There have never been people 
who know but do not act. Those who are supposed to know but 
do not act simply do not yet know. When sages and worthies taught 
people about knowledge and action, it was precisely because they 
wanted them to restore the original substance, and not simply to do 
this or that and be satisfied. Therefore the Great Learning points to 
true knowledge and action for people to see, saying, they are 'like 
loving beautiful colors and hating bad odors.'19 Seeing beautiful 
colors appertains to knowledge, while loving beautiful colors 
appertains to action. However, as soon as one sees that beautiful 
color, he has already loved it. It is not that he sees it first and then 
makes up his mind to love it. Smelling a bad odor appertains to 
knowledge, while hating a bad odor appertains to action. However, 
as soon as one smells a bad odor, he has already hated it. It is not 
that he smells it first and then makes up his mind to hate it. A person 
with his nose stuffed up does not smell the bad odor even if he sees 
a malodorous object before him, and so he does not hate it. This 
amounts to not knowing bad odor. Suppose we say that so-and-so 
knows filial piety and so-and-so knows brotherly respect. They must 
have actually practiced filial piety and brotherly respect before they 
can be said to know them. It will not do to say that they know filial 
piety and brotherly respect simply because they show them in words. 
Or take one's knowledge of pain. Only after one has experienced 
pain can one know pain. The same is true of cold or hunger. How 
can knowledge and action be separated? This is the original sub- 

Huang Tsung-hsien, he visited and became a pupil of Wang Yang-ming. 
After the campaign to suppress a rebellion, he became minister of justice and 
was very famous. An expert in mathematics and astronomy, he died at the age 
of eighty-three. As Huang Tsung-hsi (1610-95) f*as remarked in his Ming-ju 
hsiieh-an, 14:4a, Ku Ying-hsiang departed from the teaching of Wang Yang- 
ming in holding that knowledge and action were not identical. 
19 Great Learning, ch. 6. 

Parti 11 

stance of knowledge and action, which have not been separated by 
selfish desires. In teaching people, the Sage insisted that only this 
can be called knowledge. Otherwise, this is not yet knowledge. 
This is serious and practical business. What is the objective of 
desperately insisting on knowledge and action being two different 
things ? And what is the objective of my insisting that they are one ? 
What is the use of insisting on their being one or two unless one 
knows the basic purpose of the doctrine ?" 

I said, "In saying that knowledge and action are two different 
things, the ancients intended to have people distinguish and under- 
stand them, so that on the one hand they make an effort to know and, 
on the other, make an effort to act, and only then can the effort find 
any solution." 

The Teacher said, "This is to lose sight of the basic purpose of the 
ancients. I have said that knowledge is the direction for action and 
action the effort of knowledge, and that knowledge is the beginning 
of action and action the completion of knowledge. If this is under- 
stood, then when only knowledge is mentioned, action is included, 
and when only action is mentioned, knowledge is included. The 
reason why the ancients talked about knowledge and action separate- 
ly is that there are people in the world who are confused and act 
on impulse without any sense of deliberation or self-examination, 
and who thus only behave blindly and erroneously. Therefore it is 
necessary to talk about knowledge to them before their action 
becomes correct. There are also those who are intellectually vague 
and undisciplined and think in a vacuum. They are not at all 
willing to make the effort of concrete practice. They only pursue 
shadows and echoes, as it were. It is therefore necessary to talk 
about action to them before their knowledge becomes true. The 
ancient teachers could not help talking this way in order to restore 
balance and avoid any defect. If we understand this motive, then a 
single word [either knowledge or action] will do. 

"But people today distinguish between knowledge and action 
and pursue them separately, believing that one must know before 
he can act. They will discuss and learn the business of knowledge 
first, they say, and wait till they truly know before they put their 
knowledge into practice. Consequently, to the last day of life, they 
will never act and also will never know. This doctrine of knowledge 
first and action later is not a minor disease and it did not come about 
only yesterday. My present advocacy of the unity of knowledge and 

12 Instructions for Practical hiving 

action is precisely the medicine for that disease. The doctrine is not 
my baseless imagination, for it is the original substance of knowledge 
and action that they are one. Now that we know this basic purpose, 
it will do no harm to talk about them separately, for they are only 
one. If the basic purpose is not understood, however, even if we say 
they are one, what is the use? It is just idle talk." 

6. I said, "Yesterday when I heard your teaching about abiding 
in the highest good, I realized I had some grasp of this task. But I 
still feel that your teaching does not agree with Chu Hsi's doctrine 
of the investigation of things." 

The Teacher said, "The investigation of things is the work of 
abiding in the highest good. Once we know what the highest good 
is, we know how to investigate things." 

I said, "Yesterday when I examined Chu Hsi's doctrine of the 
investigation of things in the light of your teaching, I seemed to 
understand it in general. But I am still not clear in my mind, because 
Chu Hsi's doctrine, after all, has the support of what is called 
'refinement and singleness of mind' in the Book of History, 'extensive 
study of literature and self-restraint by the rules of propriety' in the 
Analects, and 'exerting one's mind to the utmost and knowing 
one's nature' in the Book of Mencius."20 

The Teacher said, "Tzu-hsia [507-420 B.C.] had strong faith in 
the Sage whereas Tseng Tzu [505-^.436 B.C.] turned to seek the 
highest good in himself. It is good to have strong faith, of course, 
but it is not as real and concrete as seeking in oneself.21 Since you 
have not understood this idea, why should you cling to Chu Hsi's 
old tradition and not seek what is right ? Even with Chu Hsi, while 
he respected and believed in Master Ch'eng I, he would not care- 
lessly follow him whenever he came to something he could not 
understand.22 The teachings of refinement and singleness, extensive 
study and self-restraint, and exerting the mind to the utmost are 
basically harmonious with my doctrine. Only you have not thought 
about it. 

"Chu Hsi's teaching on the investigation of things is forced, 

20 Referring to the Book of History, "Counsels of the Great Yii." Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Shoo King, p. 61 ; Analects, 6:25, and Book of Mencius, -jA.:i respectively. 

21 Quoting Chu Hsi, Meng T%u chi-chu, ch. 3, comment on Book of Mencius, 

2A.-2. 

22 See, for example, Chu T^u yii-lei, 69:22a. 

Part I 13 

arbitrary, and far-fetched, and is not what the investigation of things 
originally meant. Refinement is the work of achieving singleness 
and extensive study the work of achieving restraint. Since you 
already understand the principle of the unity of knowledge and 
action, this can be explained in one word. As to exerting one's 
mind to the utmost, knowing one's nature, and knowing Heaven, 
these are the acts of those who are born with such knowledge and 
practice it naturally and easily. Preserving the mind, nourishing 
one's nature, and serving Heaven are the acts of those who learn 
them through study and practice them for their advantage. To 
maintain one's single-mindedness regardless of longevity or brevity 
of life, and to cultivate one's personal life while waiting for fate to 
take its own course, are the acts of those who learn through hard 
work and practice them with effort and difficulty.23 But Chu Hsi 
wrongly interpreted the doctrine of the investigation of things. 
Because he reversed the above order, and thought that the higher 
attainments of exerting one's mind to the utmost and knowing one's 
nature are equivalent to the investigation of things and the extension 
of knowledge, he required the beginner to perform the acts of those 
who are born to know and who practice naturally and easily. How 
can that be done?" 

I asked, "Why are exerting the mind to the utmost and knowing 
one's nature the acts of those who are born to know and who 
practice naturally and easily?" 

The Teacher said, "Our nature is the substance of the mind and 
Heaven is the source of our nature. To exert one's mind to the 
utmost is the same as fully developing one's nature. Only those who 
are absolutely sincere can fully develop their nature and 'know the 
transforming and nourishing process of Heaven and Earth.'24 
Those who merely preserve their minds, on the other hand, have not 
yet exerted them to the utmost. Knowing Heaven is the same as 
knowing the affairs of a district or a county, which is what the titles 
prefect and magistrate mean. It is a matter within one's own func- 
tion, and it means that one in his moral character has already become 
one with Heaven. Serving Heaven, on the other hand, is like the 
serving of the parents by the son and the serving of the ruler by the 
minister. It must be done seriously and reverently to please them if 

23 Quoting alternately from the Book of Mencius, jA:i, and the Doctrine of the 
Mean, ch. 20. 

24 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 22. 

14 Instructions for V radical Living 

it is to be perfect. Even then, one is still separated from Heaven. 
This is the difference between a sage [who exerts the mind to the 
utmost and knows Heaven] and the worthies [who preserve their 
minds and serve Heaven]. 

"As to allowing no double -mindedness regardless of longevity or 
brevity of life, it is to teach the student to do good with single - 
mindedness, and not to allow success or failure, longevity or 
brevity of life, to shake his determination to do good, but instead to 
cultivate his personal life and wait for fate to take its own course, 
realizing that success and failure, or longevity and brevity of life, 
are matters of fate and one need not unnecessarily allow them to 
disturb his mind. Although those who serve Heaven are separated 
from Heaven, they nevertheless already see Heaven right in front 
of them. Waiting for fate to take its own course, however, means 
that one has not yet seen Heaven but is still waiting for it, so to 
speak. It is the beginner's first step in making up his mind, involving 
a certain amount of effort and difficulty. But Chu Hsi reversed the 
order, so that the student has no place to start." 

I said, "Yesterday when I heard your teaching, I vaguely realized 
that one's effort must follow this procedure. Now that I have heard 
what you said, I have no further doubt. Last night I came to the 
conclusion that the word 'thing' {wii) in the phrase 'the investigation 
of things' {ko-wii) has the same meaning as the word 'event' (sbih), 
both referring to the mind." 

The Teacher said, "Correct. The master of the body is the mind. 
What emanates from the mind is the will. The original substance 
of the will is knowledge, and wherever the will is directed is a thing. 
For example, when the will is directed toward serving one's parents, 
then serving one's parents is a 'thing.' When the will is directed 
toward serving one's ruler, then serving one's ruler is a 'thing.' 
When the will is directed toward being humane to all people and 
feeling love toward things, then being humane to all people and 
feeling love toward things are 'things,' and when the will is directed 
toward seeing, hearing, speaking, and acting, then each of these is 
a 'thing.' Therefore I say that there are neither principles nor things 
outside the mind. The teaching in the Doctrine of the Mean that 
'Without sincerity there would be nothing,'25 and the effort to 
manifest one's clear character described in the Great Learning mean 

25 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 25. 

Part I 15 

nothing more than the effort to make the will sincere. And the work 
of making the will sincere is none other than the investigation of 
things." 

7. The Teacher further said, "The word ko in ko-wn is the same as 
the ko in Mencius' saying that 'A great man rectified (ko) the ruler's 
mind.'26 It means to eliminate what is incorrect in the mind so as to 
preserve the correctness of its original substance. Wherever the 
will is, the incorrectness must be eliminated so correctness may be 
preserved. In other words, in all places and at all times the Principle 
of Nature must be preserved. This is the investigation of principles 
to the utmost. The Principle of Nature is clear character, and to 
investigate the principle of things to the utmost is to manifest the 
clear character." 

8. He further said, "Knowledge is the original substance of the 
mind. The mind is naturally able to know. When it perceives the 
parents, it naturally knows that one should be filial. When it per- 
ceives the elder brother, it naturally knows that one should be 
respectful. And when it perceives a child fall into a well, it naturally 
knows that one should be commiserative.27 This is innate knowledge 
of good (liang-chih) and need not be sought outside. If what emanates 
from innate knowledge is not obstructed by selfish ideas, the result 
will be like the saying 'If a man gives full development to his feeling 
of commiseration, his humanity will be more than he can ever 
put into practice.'28 However, the ordinary man is not free from the 
obstruction of selfish ideas. He therefore requires the effort of the 
extension of knowledge and the investigation of things in order to 
overcome selfish ideas and restore principle. Then the mind's 
faculty of innate knowledge will no longer be obstructed but will 
be able to penetrate and operate everywhere. One's knowledge will 
then be extended. With knowledge extended, one's will becomes 
sincere." 

9. I said, "You regard the extensive study of literature (wen) as 
the work of restraining oneself with rules of propriety.29 I have 

26 Book of Mencius, ^K-.zo. Cf. sec. 85, below. 

27 Ibid., 2A:6. 

28 Ibid., 7B:5i. 

29 Referring to the Analects, 6:25. 

16 Instructions for Practical Living 

thought over the matter carefully and have not been able to under- 
stand. Kindly enlighten me." 

The Teacher said, "The word It (meaning propriety, ceremonies) 
means the same as It (meaning principle). When principles become 
manifested and can be seen, we call them patterns {wen, also meaning 
literature) and when patterns are hidden and abstruse and cannot 
be seen, we call them //' (principle). They are the same thing. Restrain- 
ing oneself with rules of propriety means that this mind must 
become completely identified with the Principle of Nature. In order 
to become completely identified with the Principle of Nature, one 
must direct one's effort to wherever principle is manifested. For 
example, if principle is manifested in the serving of one's parents, 
one should learn to preserve it in the very act of serving one's 
parents. If principle is manifested in the serving of one's ruler, one 
should learn to preserve it in the very act of serving one's ruler. If 
principle is manifested in one's living in riches or poverty or in 
noble or humble station, one should learn to preserve it in these 
situations. And if principle is manifested in one's being in difficulty 
and danger or being in the midst of barbarous tribes, one should 
learn to preserve it in these situations.30 And one should do the same 
whether working or resting, speaking or silent. No matter where 
principle may be manifested, one should learn right then and there 
to preserve it. This is what is meant by the extensive study of litera- 
ture. This is the work of restraining oneself with the rules of 
propriety. To study literature extensively means to be refined in one's 
mind and to restrain oneself with the rules of propriety means to 
have singleness in one's mind." 

10. I said, " 'The moral mind is always the master of the person, 
and the human mind always obeys the moral mind.'31 When exam- 
ined in the light of your teaching of refinement and singleness of 
mind, these words seem to be wrong." 

The Teacher said, "Right. There is only one mind. Before it is 
mixed with selfish human desires, it is called the moral mind, and 
after it is mixed with human desires contrary to its natural state, it 
is called the human mind.32 When the human mind is rectified it is 

30 Referring to the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 14. 

31 Chu Hsi, in Preface to the Chung-yung cbang-chu. 

32 See n. 20, above. 

Part I 17 

called the moral mind and when the moral mind loses its correctness, 
it is called the human mind. There were not two minds to start 
with. When Master Ch'eng I said that the human mind is due to 
selfish desires while the moral mind is due to the Principle of Nature,33 
it sounds like dividing the mind into two, but his idea is really 
correct. But to say that the moral mind is the master and the human 
mind obeys it is to say that there are two minds. The Principle of 
Nature and selfish human desires cannot coexist. How can there be 
the Principle of Nature as the master and at the same time selfish 
human desires to obey it ?" 

ii. I asked about Wang T'ung [Wen-chung Tzu, 584-617]34 and 
Han Yu [768 -8 24] ,35 

The Teacher said, "Han Yu was only a giant among literary men, 
whereas Wang T'ung was a worthy scholar. People have glorified 
Han Yu only because of his literary accomplishment, but he was 
really far, far inferior to Wang T'ung." 

I asked, "Why did Wang T'ung make the mistake of imitating 
the Classics ?"36 

The Teacher said, "I am afraid imitating the Classics should not 
be totally condemned. Suppose you state the difference in objectives 
between Wang T'ung's imitating the Classics and the writings of 
later scholars." 

I said, "There have been scholars who wrote with an eye on 
reputation, but their main purpose was to illuminate the doctrine, 
whereas imitating the Classics seems to be entirely for the sake of 
reputation." 

The Teacher said, "Whom have they followed in writing to 
illuminate the doctrine?" 

33 l-shu, 19:7a. 

34 Wang T'ung was probably the greatest Confucian between the third and 
the seventh centuries. He wrote treatises and supplements (now lost) to the 
Six Classics, considering himself comparable to Confucius. Later Confucians have 
never excused him for this presumptuousness. 

35 Han was an even greater Confucian than Wang T'ung, and he was regarded 
by Confucians as representing the direct transmission of Confucian orthodoxy 
from Mencius on. He attacked Buddhism and Taoism vigorously, advocating 
burning their books and making Buddhist monks "human beings once more." 
He is generally considered a forerunner of Neo-Confuciansim. As a writer, he 
ranks with China's best. 

36 By writing the Supplement to the hook of History, etc. 

18 Instructions for V radical Living 

I said, "Confucius abridged and transmitted the Six Classics 
for the purpose of illuminating the doctrine." 

The Teacher said, "Isn't imitating the Classics also following 
Confucius ?" 

I said, "The scholars' writings contributed something to illuminate 
the doctrine. But I am afraid Wang T'ung's imitation of the Classics 
merely seems to imitate the external manifestations without adding 
anything to the doctrine." 

The Teacher said, "By illuminating the doctrine, do you mean 
returning to simplicity and purity and revealing them in concrete 
practice, or writing flowery speeches aimed at making noise and 
creating argument ? The great disorder of the world is due to the 
popularity of conventional, meaningless literature and the decline 
of actual practice of moral values. If the doctrine had been illumi- 
nated throughout the world, there would have been no need to 
transmit the Six Classics. Confucius abridged and transmitted them 
only because he had to. From the time of Fu-hsi [legendary 
emperor of great antiquity] who devised the Eight Trigrams to the 
time of King Wen [1171-1122 B.C.] and Duke Chou [d. 1094 B.C.], 
a countless number of books such as the Uen-shan (Mountain range) 
and the Kuei-ts'ang (Reservoir)37 was written on the doctrine of 
Changes, and consequently the doctrine of Changes became highly 
confused. Believing that the atmosphere of superficial writing was 
becoming thicker and realizing there would be no end to theorizing, 
Confucius took hold of the doctrine of King Wen and Duke Chou 
and clarified it as the only way of getting at its foundation. As a 
result, the various theories were all overthrown and a unanimity 
of interpretation was reached among the expositors of the Book 
of Changes. 

"It was the same with the cases of the books of History, Odes, 
Rites, and Music, and the Spring and Autumn Annals. Following the 
first four chapters of the Book of History and the first two books of 
the Book of Odes, there had been thousands such as the Pa-su (Eight 
inquiries) and the Chiu-cFiu (Nine mounts) and all those licentious 
verses. Names, varieties, and systems of ceremonies and music, too, 
became innumerable. Confucius edited, made deletions, and put 
them all in order, and only then were the speculative theories 
overthrown. He did not add a word to the books of History, Odes, 

37 Two versions of the Book of Changes, according to the Chou-li, ch. 3 . 

Part I 19 

Rites, and Music. The various doctrines contained in the present 
Book of Rites all consist of far-fetched interpretations of later scholars 
and not of Confucius' original teachings. As to the Spring and 
Autumn Annals, although it is supposed to have been written by 
Confucius, actually it is the original text of the history of Lu. What 
is meant by Confucius' writing down is that he wrote down the 
original, and what is meant by his eliminating is that he eliminated 
the superfluous. Thus what he did was to reduce but not to add. 
When Confucius transmitted the Six Classics, he feared that super- 
fluous writing was creating a chaos in the world, and he lost no 
time in making the Classics simple so that people might avoid the 
superfluous words and find out the real meaning; he did not intend 
to teach through mere words. 

"After the Ch'un-ch'iu period [722-481 B.C.] superfluous writing 
became more abundant and the world became more chaotic. The 
First Emperor of Ch'in [r. 246 -2 10 b.c] burned the books and 
has been condemned because he did so from a selfish motive, 
and he should not have burned the Six Classics. Had his intention 
been to illuminate the doctrine, and to burn all those books opposed 
to the Classics and violating principle, it would have conformed, by 
implication, to Confucius' intention of editing and transmitting the 
Classics. From the time of Ch'in and Han [206 b.c.-a.d. 220], 
literary productions daily increased in number. It would be impos- 
sible to discard all of them even if we wanted to. One should only 
follow the example of Confucius, by recording those that are approxi- 
mately correct and making them known. The various perverse doc- 
trines will then gradually disappear by themselves. I do not know 
what Wang T'ung's purpose was when he imitated the Classics, 
but I rather strongly approve it, believing that if Confucius had 
lived again, he would not have done otherwise. 

"The reason the world is not in order is because superficial 
writing is growing and concrete practice is declining. People advance 
their own opinions, valuing what is novel and strange, in order to 
mislead the common folks and gain fame. They merely confuse 
people's intelligence and dull people's senses, so that people devote 
much of their time and energy to competing in conventional writing 
and flowery compositions in order to achieve fame ; they no longer 
remember that there are such deeds as honoring the fundamental, 
valuing truth, and returning to simplicity and purity. All this trouble 
was started by those who wrote [extensively and superficially]." 

20 Instructions for Practical hiving 

I said, "Some writing is perhaps indispensable. For example, in 
the case o£ the. Spring and Autumn Annals, if there were not the writing, 
the Tso chuan (Tso's commentary),38 1 am afraid it would be difficult 
to understand." 

The Teacher said, "To say that the Spring and Autumn Annals can 
only be illuminated with a commentary is to regard it as a puzzle 
with the last part left out. Why should Confucius write in such 
difficult and abstruse terms? Much of the Tso chuan is from the 
original text of the history of Lu. If the Spring and Autumn Annals 
depends on it to be understood, then why should Confucius have 
abridged it?" 

I said, "Ch'eng I said, 'The commentary contains cases. The 
Classic contains judgments.'39 For example, in the Spring and Autumn 
Annals it is recorded that so-and-so murdered his ruler or such- 
and-such a feudal lord invaded such-and-such a state. It would be 
difficult to judge unless the facts supplied by the commentary are 
known." 

The Teacher said, "I-ch'uan probably repeated what famous 
but mediocre scholars had said; he did not appreciate Confucius' 
purpose in writing the Spring and Autumn Annals. When he recorded 
that so-and-so murdered his ruler, the murder in itself was a crime. 
What is the need of inquiring into its details ? Military expeditions 
against the feudal state should proceed from the king. When he 
recorded that such-and-such a feudal lord invaded a state, the 
invasion in itself was a crime. What is the need of inquiring into its 
details? The primary purpose of Confucius' transmitting the Six 
Classics was purely to rectify people's minds, to preserve the 
Principle of Nature, and to eliminate selfish human desires. He did 
discuss these matters. Sometimes when people asked him, he would 
talk to them according to their capacity to understand. But even then 
he would not talk much, for he was afraid that people would try 
to seek truth in words only. This is why he said, T do not wish to 
say anything.'40 How could he be willing to tell people in detail all 
these things that would release selfish human desires and destroy the 
Principle of Nature ? That would be to promote disorder and induce 
wickedness. This is the reason Mencius said, 'None of Confucius' 

38 Attributed to Tso Ch'iu-ming, probably Confucius' contemporary. See 
trans, by Legge, The CVun Ts,ew, with the Tso Chuen. 

39 I-shu, 15:16b. 

40 Analects, 17:19. 

Part I 21 

pupils spoke about the affairs of the despots Duke Huan [r. 685-643 
B.C.] and Duke Wen [r. 636-628 B.C.], and therefore they have not 
been transmitted to posterity.'41 This is the special and private way 
of the Confucian school. Famous but mediocre scholars of today 
talk only about the type of learning suitable for a despot. Therefore 
they want to learn all kinds of secret and crafty schemes. Their 
objective is purely success and profit, an aim diametrically opposed 
to the Sage's purpose in writing the Classics. How can they under- 
stand?" 

Thereupon the Teacher sighed and added, "It is not easy to talk 
about this thing with people except those who understand the 
character of Heaven."42 

The Teacher further said, "Confucius said, 'When I was young, a 
historian would still leave something unsaid,'43 and Mencius said, 
'It would be better to have no Book of History than to believe all of 
it. In its "Completion of War" section,44 I accept only two or 
three passages.'45 In abridging the book Confucius retained only a 
few chapters to cover the four or five odd centuries of the T'ang, Yii, 
and Hsia periods. Weren't there any more events to record? The 
fact that he confined himself to what he did ought to show us his 
intention— he merely wanted to eliminate superfluous writing. On 
the contrary, later scholars have only wanted to add." 

I said, "When Confucius produced the Classics, he merely wanted 
to get rid of selfish human desires and preserve the Principle of 
Nature, and did not want to tell people in detail about affairs from 
the time of the Five Despots46 down. It is true enough. But why 
should he have been so brief about the events before Yao and Shun ?" 
[legendary emperors of the T'ang and Yii periods]. 

The Teacher said, "In the period of Fu-hsi and the Yellow 
Emperor [preceding Yao and Shun] events were few and far 
between. Few of them have been transmitted to us. Nevertheless 

41 Book of Mencius, \K:-/. 

42 Referring to the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 32. 

43 Analects, 15:25. 

44 See trans, by Legge, Shoo King, pp. 306-19. 

45 Book of Mencius, 76:3. 

46 These despots were: Duke Huan of Ch'i (r. 685-643 B.C.), Duke Wen of 
Chin (r. 636-628 B.C.), Duke Mu of Ch'in (r. 659-619 B.C.), King Chuang of 
Ch'u (r. 613-589 B.C.), and Duke Hsiang of Sung (r. 650-635 B.C.). See Book of 
Mencius, 6B:7. 

22 Instructions for Practical Living 

we can imagine that at that time life was perfectly pure, lofty, 
simple, and plain, without any air of being ornamental. This is the 
peace and order of great antiquity, not to be matched by later ages." 

I said, "Histories like those of Fu-hsi, Shen-nung, and the Yellow 
Emperor had been handed down. Why did Confucius discard them ?" 

The Teacher said, "Even if it was true that there were such 
histories, they would not be good for later ages which have gradually 
undergone change. As customs and manners became complicated, 
ornament and embellishment became more prevalent. Even by the 
end of the Chou [u 11-256 B.C.], it was impossible to reinstate the 
customs of Hsia [2183-1752 B.C.?] and Shang [1751-1112 B.C.] 
times, let alone the times of Yao and Shun and the times of Fu-hsi 
and the Yellow Emperor which were further back. However, while 
their governments were different, the principle is the same with 
them all. Consequently, Confucius transmitted the doctrines originally 
handed down by Yao and Shun and adopted and promoted as a model 
the social and religious laws of King Wen and King Wu [r. 1211-1116 
b.c.]. These regulations, in essence, were no different from the prin- 
ciples of Yao and Shun, but because government had to be adjusted to 
the times, governmental measures and institutions naturally were 
different. Even the undertakings of the Hsia and the Shang would 
not be applicable to the Chou. For this reason, 'Duke Chou,47 
wanting to combine the good works of the founders of the Hsia, 
the Shang, and the Chou, found certain things inapplicable and had 
to think hard day and night [to make the adjustment].'48 How much 
more difficult would it be to reinstate the governments of high 
antiquity! Naturally Confucius reduced its record to the minimum." 

The Teacher further said, "Merely to engage in taking no action, 
to be unable to adjust the government according to the time as did 
the three kings, and to insist on practicing the customs of high 
antiquity is the way of Buddhist and Taoist learning. To adjust the 
government according to the times but not to be able to base it on 
the principle [handed down by Yao and Shun] as the three kings 
did, and instead to exercise government with the motive of success 
and profit, is the enterprise of the despots and those since them. 
Later scholars have talked and talked and talked, but all they have 
talked about is the technique of despotism." 

47 Who established the social and governmental institutions of the Chou. 

48 See Book of Mencius, 46:20. 

Part I 23 

12. The Teacher further said, "The governmental systems before 
the times of Yao and Shun cannot be reinstated in later ages. They 
should be ignored. The government after the Three Dynasties 
[Hsia, Shang, and Chou] is not worth following. The records should 
be abridged. Only the governments of the Three Dynasties are 
practicable. Unfortunately people who discuss the Three Dynasties 
do not understand the fundamental and merely concern themselves 
with the secondary, and consequently that system cannot be restored 
either." 

13. I said, "Former scholars said that among the Six Classics the 
Spring and Autumn Annals is history. Since history is purely to record 
events, I am afraid that in the final analysis it is somewhat different 
in form and content from the other five Classics." 

The Teacher said, "A history deals with events while a classic 
deals with principles. However, events are really principles and 
principles are really events. Thus the Spring and Autumn Annals also 
is a classic, while the other five Classics are also histories. The Book 
of Changes is the history of Fu-hsi, the Book of History is the history 
of the period from the time of Yao and Shun on, and the books of 
Kites and Music are the histories of the Three Dynasties. Inasmuch as 
the events and principles discussed in these Classics are the same, is 
there anything wherein that can be said to be different?" 

14. The Teacher further said, "The Five Classics are also history, 
and no more. The principle of history is to distinguish good and 
evil and to give instructions to do good and warnings against evil. 
The Classics retain those facts that are good and useful for instruction 
in order to serve as models for us. As to the facts that are evil but 
can serve as warning, they retain the warning but eliminate the 
facts, so as to prevent wickedness." 

I said, "To retain the facts in order to show us the model is of 
course a way of preserving the Principle of Nature as it originally 
is. Is elimination of the facts to prevent wickedness likewise a way 
of suppressing selfish desires when they are about to be aroused ?" 

The Teacher said, "This is of course the purpose of the Sage in 
producing the Classics. However, one should not take the records 
too literally." 

I further asked, "If, in the case of those evil events that can be 
taken as warning, the Classics retain the warning but eliminate the 

24 Instructions for Practical Living 

facts in order to prevent wickedness, why in the case of the Book 
of Odes alone have the [licentious parts] of the odes of the states of 
Cheng and Wei not been expunged? A former scholar said, 'Evil 
can serve to correct one's indolence.'49 Is that correct?" 

The Teacher said, "The Book of Odes is not the original work of the 
Confucian school. Confucius said, 'Banish the songs of Cheng.... 
They are licentious,'50 and again said, T hate the way in which the 
songs of Cheng confound the classical songs.'51 'The songs of Cheng 
and Wei are songs of declining states.'52 This is the position of the 
Confucian school. The three hundred odes selected by Confucius 
were all classical. They were all qualified to be sung in sacrifices to 
Heaven and imperial ancestors as well as in community rites. They 
were all intended to promote peace and cultivate virtue. For the 
sake of social reform, should the songs of Cheng and Wei be 
tolerated? To tolerate them would be to promote lewdness and 
induce wickedness. Most certainly after the burning of books by the 
Ch'in53 famous but mediocre scholars arbitrarily added these songs of 
Cheng and Wei to the Classic in order to make up three hundred 
odes. For among the popular masses most people enjoy singing 
licentious songs. You can hear them in every alley. To say that evil 
can serve to correct one's indolence is to make an excuse after having 
failed to find a satisfactory explanation." 

Postscript. Because the original doctrine has disappeared, I was 
shocked and hesitant when I first heard our Teacher's instructions, 
and did not know where to begin. Later on as I heard him more and 
more, I gradually realized that his teachings are to be applied to 
one's life and to be concretely demonstrated, and then I came to 
believe that they represent the direct heritage of the Confucian 
school, and that all the rest is but byways, small paths, and dead 
ends. His theories that the investigation of things is the effort to 
make the will sincere, that manifesting goodness is the effort to 
make one's personal life sincere, that the investigation of the prin- 
ciples of things to the utmost is the effort to develop one's nature 

49 Chu Hsi, in his Lun-yii chi-chu, ch. i, commentary on Analects, 2:2. 

50 Analects, 15:10. 

51 Ibid., 17:18. 

52 Book of Rites, "The Record of Music." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 17, 
p. 94. 

53 In 213 B.C., when some of the odes Confucius had selected were lost. 

Part I 25 

completely, that the pursuit of study and inquiry is the effort to 
honor the moral nature, that to study literature extensively is the 
effort to restrain oneself with rules of propriety, and that to be 
refined in mind is the effort to achieve single -mindedness — these 
and others at first seemed hardly harmonious with one another. But 
after I thought them over long enough, I was so happy that I 
danced with my hands and feet. 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY LU CH'ENG1 
(Sections 15-94) 

15. I asked, "With reference to the effort of concentrating on 
one thing, suppose in reading books one's mind is concentrated on 
reading books, and in entertaining guests one's mind is concentrated 
on entertaining them. Can these be regarded as concentrating on 
one thing?" 

The Teacher said, "Suppose in loving sex one's mind is concen- 
trated on loving sex and in loving money one's mind is concentrated 
on loving money. Can these be regarded as concentrating on one 
thing? These are not concentrating on one thing; they are chasing 
after material things. Concentrating on one thing means the absolute 
concentration of the mind on the Principle of Nature." 

16. I asked about making up the mind. The Teacher said, "It is 
simply the resolution, in every thought, to preserve the Principle 
of Nature. If one does not neglect this, in due time it will crystallize 
in one's mind and become what the Taoists call 'the mystical 
conception of a sage.' If the thought of the Principle of Nature is 
always retained, then the gradual steps to the levels of the beautiful 
man, the great man, the sage, and the spirit man2 are all but the 
cultivation and extension of this one thought. 

1 His name was Yuan-ching. He obtained a "presented scholar" degree in 
1 5 17 and became a divisional executive assistant in the department of justice. 
When the emperor planned to confer the posthumous title "August Ancestor" 
on his father instead of his uncle, Yuan-ching criticized the emperor's decision, 
and was dismissed from office. Later he repented, but was not reinstated 
because the emperor charged that he lacked integrity. At a later date, when 
officials were about to suppress Wang Yang-ming's teachings, he memorialized 
the throne in their defense. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, i^a-b. 

2 Book of Mencius, 76:25. 

26 Instructions for Practical Living 

1 7. [The Teacher said,] "If during the day one feels work becoming 
annoying, one should sit in meditation. But if one feels lazy and not 
inclined to read, then he should go ahead and read. To do this is like 
applying medicine according to the disease." 

18. [The Teacher said,] "Friends, in dealing with each other, 
should try to be humble toward one another, for that will benefit 
them. If they try to be superior to each other, it will hurt them." 

19. Meng Yuan3 has the defects of regarding himself as always 
right and of loving fame. The Teacher has admonished him many 
times. One day just after such an admonition, a friend of his told 
the Teacher of his recent efforts and asked for correction. Standing 
by the side of the Teacher, Yuan said, "What he has found is my 
old stuff." 

The Teacher said, "Your defect comes up again." 

Yuan's face paled and he was about to argue. 

The Teacher said, "Your defect comes up again," and he went 
on to teach him, saying, "This is the root of the great trouble of your 
whole life. Suppose you plant this big tree in a square. The nutrition 
from rain and the energy from the soil are barely sufficient to support 
it. If you want to plant some good grains around it, they will be 
covered by its branches above and wrapped up by its roots below. 
How can they grow? The tree must be removed, leaving not even 
a tender root, before good grains can be planted. Otherwise, no 
matter how much you cultivate them and enrich the soil, all the 
nourishment will go to this tree." 

20. I said, "Scholars of later generations have written a great deal. 
I am afraid some of it has confounded correct learning." 

The Teacher said, "The human mind and the Principle of Nature 
are undifferentiated. Sages and worthies wrote about them very 
much like a portrait painter painting the true likeness and trans- 
mitting the spirit. He shows only an outline of the appearance to 
serve as the basis for people to seek and find the true personality. 
Among one's spirit, feelings, expressions, and behavior, there is 
that which cannot be transmitted. Later writers have imitated and 
copied what the sages have drawn. They have erroneously mutilated 

3 Little is known of him except that his courtesy name was Po-sheng. 

Part I 27 

it and have added to it in their own way in order to show off 
their own tricks. In this way the original is further and further 
lost." 

21. I asked, "A sage's response to changing conditions is unlimited. 
Does he have to study beforehand?" 

The Teacher said, "How can he study everything? The mind of 
the sage is like a clear mirror. Since it is all clarity, it responds to all 
stimuli as they come and reflects everything. There is no such case 
as a previous image still remaining in the present reflection or a 
yet-to-be-reflected image already existing there. Scholars of later 
generations propagate such a doctrine, and therefore they have 
greatly violated the teachings of the Sage. Duke Chou instituted 
ceremonies and established musical systems to provide the world 
with a culture. These are things that all sages are capable of doing. 
Why didn't Yao and Shun do all of them instead of leaving 
them to Duke Chou? Confucius edited and transmitted the Six 
Classics as guidance for ten thousand generations. This is also a 
thing that any sage can do. Why didn't Duke Chou do it instead of 
leaving it for Confucius ? From these we know that a sage does a 
thing when the time comes. The only fear is that the mirror is not 
clear, not that it is incapable of reflecting a thing as it comes. The 
study of changing conditions and events is to be done at the time of 
response. However, a student must be engaged in brightening up 
the mirror. He should worry only about his mind's not being 
clear, and not about the inability to respond to all changing 
conditions." 

I said, "If so, how about the saying, 'Empty, tranquil, and 
without any sign, and yet all things are luxuriantly present.' ?"4 

4 Ch'eng I, I-shu, 15:8a. Many Japanese historians of Chinese philosophy 
have asserted that this saying is of Buddhist origin but none has given any 
direct reference. Yamazaki Ansai (1618-82), in his essay on the saying (Zoku 
Yama'zaki Ansai %enshu, pt. 2, pp. 78-86), listed all quotations of this saying and 
discussions on it by Neo-Confucians but did not say a word about its Buddhist 
origin. The Daikamvajiten, the fullest dictionary of its kind so far, gives Ch'eng I, 
rather than any Buddhist, as its author. However, terms like "indefinite," 
"boundless," and "without any sign" are of Taoist origin, and as Ota Kinjo 
(1765-1825) has pointed out {Gimon roku, 1831 ed., pt. 1, p. 20b), the second 
half of the sentence is virtually the same as that in the Cheng-tao ko by Zen Master 
Chen-chiao (d. 712) of Yung-chia, in Ching-te ch'uan-teng In, 30:11a. 

28 Instructions for Practical Living 

The Teacher said, "This theory is fundamentally good. But if it 
is not understood correctly, there will be trouble." 

22. [The Teacher said,] "Moral principles exist in no fixed place and 
are not exhaustible. Please do not think that, when you have gotten 
something from conversations with me, that is all there is to it. 
There will be no end if we talk for ten, twenty, or fifty more years." 
Some days later, he said again, "Emperors Yao and Shun were the 
height of sageness and yet goodness goes beyond them indefinitely. 
Kings Chieh [r. 1802-1752 b.c. ?] and Chou [r. 1175-1112 B.C.]5 
represented the height of evil, and yet evil goes beyond them 
indefinitely. If Chieh and Chou had not died when they died, would 
their wickedness be limited to what it actually was ? If there is a limit 
to goodness, how is it that even Sage-king Wen looked for the 
Way as if he could not see it?"6 

23. I said, "One's feelings seem to be all right when one is quiet. 
However, when something happens, they become different. Why is 
it?" 

The Teacher said, "This is because one only knows how to culti- 
vate oneself in quietness and does not exert effort to master oneself. 
Consequently when something happens one turns topsy-turvy. 
One must be trained and polished in the actual affairs of life. Only 
then can one stand firm and remain calm whether in activity or in 
tranquillity."7 

24. I asked about the way of "penetrating on the higher [trans- 
cendental] level."8 The Teacher said, "In their way of teaching 
people, as soon as they get to anything refined or subtle, scholars 
of later generations say that it belongs to penetrating on the higher 
level and should not be pursued, and that it is better to turn to 
studies on the lower [empirical] level. This is to separate the two 
levels. Now what the eye can see, what the ear can hear, what the 
mouth can say, and what the mind can think of are all matters of 

5 Whose wickedness caused the downfall of the Hsia and Shang dynasties, 
respectively. 

6 Quoting the Book of Mencius, 4B-.20. Erb in the text is interchangeable with 
ju (as though). 

7 Quoting Ch'eng Hao's celebrated saying in the Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

8 Analects, 14:37. 

Part I 29 

learning on the lower level, whereas what the eye cannot see, what 
the ear cannot hear, what the mouth cannot say, and what the mind 
cannot think of are matters of penetration on the higher level. For 
example, providing a tree with care and water is learning on the 
lower level, whereas the activity of the vegetative life day and night 
and the tree's smooth and luxuriant growth are penetration on the 
higher level. How can human efforts have any part of it ? Therefore 
whatever human effort can do and whatever can be talked about 
represent learning on the lower level. But penetration on the higher 
level is implicit in learning on the lower level. All that the Sage said, 
although absolutely refined and subtle, is a matter of lower learning. 
A student should direct his effort to this, and penetration on the 
higher level will naturally follow. There is no need to seek a separate 
and distinct way of higher penetration." 

(To hold the will firm is like having a pain in the heart. As the 
whole mind is concentrated on the pain, how can there be time for 
idle talk or being a busybody?)9 

25. I asked what efforts are to be made in achieving refinement 
and singleness of mind. 

The Teacher said, "Singleness is the goal of refinement and 
refinement is the effort to achieve singleness. It is not that outside 
of refinement there is another thing called singleness. Since the 
word refinement (ching) has the radical meaning rice, let us take rice 
as an example. Singleness means having the rice absolutely pure and 
white. However, this state cannot be achieved without the work 
of refining, such as winnowing, sifting, and grinding. These are the 
work of refining, but their purpose is no more than to make rice 
absolutely pure and white, that is all. To study extensively, to inquire 
accurately, to think carefully, to sift clearly, and to practice earnestly10 
are all efforts of refinement for the sake of singleness of mind. As 
to the rest, to study literature extensively is the effort to be restrained 
by the rules of propriety, to investigate things and to extend knowl- 
edge are efforts to make the will sincere, to pursue study and 
inquiry is the effort to honor one's moral nature, and to manifest 

9 This whole passage is also found below in sec. 95. It is obviously an inter- 
polation here. 

10 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

30 Instructions for Practical Living 

goodness is the effort to make the personal life sincere. This is the 
only way to put it." 

26. [The Teacher said,] "Knowledge is the beginning of action 
and action is the completion of knowledge. Learning to be a sage 
involves only one effort. Knowledge and action should not be 
separated." 

27. [The Teacher said,] " [When Confucius advised Ch'i-tiao K'ai 
(540- £.450 B.C.) to become an official] the latter said, 'I do not yet 
have the confidence to do so.' Confucius was pleased.11 When Tzu-lu 
[542-480 B.C.] got Tzu-kao [b.521 B.C.] appointed governor of Pi, 
Confucius said, 'You are doing an injury to someone's son.'12 
When Tseng Tien [father of Tseng Tzu, 505-^.436 B.C.] expressed 
his wish,13 Confucius gave his approval. From these we can see 
what the Sage had in mind." 

28. I asked, "When one's mind is preserved in peace and tranquil- 
lity, can it be called the state of 'equilibrium before one's feelings 
are aroused'?"14 

The Teacher said, "Nowadays when people preserve their 
mind, only their vital force is calm. When they are peaceful 
and tranquil, it is only their vital force that is peaceful and 
tranquil. That cannot be considered as the state of equilibrium 
before feelings are aroused." 

"If it is not equilibrium, isn't it perhaps the way to achieve it?" 
"The only way is to get rid of selfish human desires and preserve 
the Principle of Nature. When tranquil, direct every thought to 
removing selfish human desires and preserving the Principle of 
Nature, and when active, direct every thought to doing the same. 
One should never mind whether or not one is at peace and tranquil. 
If he depends on that peace and tranquillity, not only will there be 
the fault of gradually becoming fond of quietness and tired of activ- 
ity, but there will be many defects latent in that state of mind. 
They cannot be eliminated but will grow as usual when something 
happens. If one regards following principle as fundamental, when is 

11 Analects, 5:5. 

12 Ibid., 11:24. 

13 Ibid., 11:25. See below, sees. 29 and 257. 

14 A quotation from Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1 . 

Part I 31 

it that one will not be peaceful and tranquil? But if one regards 
peace and tranquillity as fundamental, he is not necessarily able to 
follow principle." 

29. I asked, "When Confucius' disciples expressed their wishes, 
Tzu-lu and Jan Ch'iu [5 22- c. 462 B.C.] chose governmental positions 
and Kung-hsi Hua [b. 509 B.C.] chose ceremonies and music. How 
practical they were ! But when Tseng Tien expressed his wishes, they 
seemed to be frivolous. And yet Confucius approved of him.15 What 
does it mean?" 

"The three other disciples were opinionated and dogmatic.16 
When one is opinionated and dogmatic, one inevitably becomes 
one-sided. He may be able to do one thing but not the other. The 
attitude of Tseng Tien shows that he was neither opinionated nor 
dogmatic. It means that he 'does what is proper to his position 
and does not want to go beyond it. If he is in the midst of 
barbarous tribes, he does what is proper in the midst of barbarous 
tribes. In a position of difficulty and danger, he does what is 
proper in a position of difficulty and danger. He can find himself 
in no situation in which he is not at ease with himself.'17 The other 
three disciples may be described as utensils, that is, specific and 
therefore limited in their usefulness. Tseng Tien's indication was 
that he was not such a utensil. Nevertheless, the three disciples' 
talents were all outstanding and excellent; they were unlike people 
of today who lack substance but have only empty words. This is 
why Confucius approved of all of them." 

30. I asked, "What should one do when he finds no progress in 
knowledge ?" 

The Teacher said, "In study there must be a source. One must 
work from the source and gradually move forward. When the 
Taoist seekers after immortality talk about an infant18 it is a good 
analogy. When the baby is still in its mother's womb, it is only 
pure material force. What knowledge has it ? After its birth, at first 
it can cry, then it can laugh, then it can recognize its parents and 

15 Analects, 11:25. See below, sec. 257. 

16 Two great defects in the eye of Confucius. See Analects, 9:4. 

17 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 14. 

18 Meaning that spiritual training is similar to the growth of an infant. 

32 Instructions for Practical Living 

brothers, then it can stand, walk, hold things, and carry things on 
its back, and finally it can potentially do everything in the world. 
This is all due to the fact that as refined material force is increasingly 
sufficient, its strength and energy become increasingly strong and 
its intelligence becomes increasingly developed. All this is not to 
be found or accomplished on the day of birth. Therefore there must 
be a source. When the sage cultivates his moral qualities to such a 
point as to enable a happy order to prevail throughout heaven and 
earth and all things to flourish, his training begins with the state 
of equilibrium before the feelings of pleasure, anger, sorrow, and 
joy are aroused. Later scholars fail to understand the doctrine of the 
investigation of things. Seeing that the sage knows everything and 
can do everything, they forthwith want to study everything at the 
very beginning. How can that be done?" 

The Teacher again said, "To make up one's mind and to exert 
effort are like planting a tree. At first there are only roots and 
sprouts but not yet the trunk. When there is a trunk there are not 
yet branches. When there are branches then come the leaves and 
when there are leaves then come the flowers and fruits. When the 
root is first planted, one should only care for it and water it and 
should not think of branches, leaves, flowers, or fruits. What good 
is it to engage in fantasy? So long as one does not neglect the 
care of the plant, there is no fear that there will be no branches, 
leaves, flowers, or fruits." 

31. I asked, "I read books and do not understand. Why?" 

[The Teacher said,] "This is because you only seek the meaning 
through words. This is why you do not understand. This is not as 
good as to pursue old-style learning. People who pursue old-style 
learning read the texts over and over and understand them. Although 
they understand the text perfectly, however, to the end of their 
lives they achieve nothing. One's effort must be directed to the 
substance of the mind. Whenever one does not understand a thing 
or cannot put it into practice, one must return to oneself and in 
his own mind try to realize it personally. He will then surely under- 
stand. For what the Four Books and Five Classics19 talk about does 
not go beyond this substance of the mind. This substance of the 
mind is the Way. When the substance of the mind is understood, the 

19 See above, Introduction, n. 1. 

Part I 33 

Way is understood. They are not two different things. This is the 
basis of learning." 

32. The Teacher said, "The original mind is vacuous [devoid of 
selfish desires], intelligent, and not beclouded. All principles are 
contained therein and all events proceed from it.20 There is no 
principle outside the mind; there is no event outside the mind." 

33. Someone asked, "Master Hui-an said that 'man's object of 
learning is simply mind and principles.'21 What do you think of this 
saying?" 

The Teacher said, "The mind is the nature of man and things, and 
nature is principle. I am afraid the use of the word 'and' makes 
inevitable the interpretation of mind and principle as two different 
things. It is up to the student to use his good judgment." 

34. Someone said, "All people have this mind, and this mind is 
identical with principle. Why do some people do good and others 
do evil?" 

The Teacher said, "The mind of the evil man has lost its original 
substance." 

35. I asked, " 'Split it [principle] up and you will find it extremely 
refined and not confused; then put it together again and you will 
find it extremely great and all inclusive.'22 What do you think of this 
saying ?" 

The Teacher said, "I am afraid that is not entirely correct. Does 

20 The two sentences are paraphrases of Chu Hsi's Ta-hsileh chang-chii, com- 
mentary on the text. According to Ota Kinj5 (Gimon roku, p. 15a), the phrase 
"vacuous, intelligent, and not beclouded" comes from the Ta-chih-tu lun 
{Mahaprajiiapdramita s'dstrd), and was also used by Fa-tsang (643-712), but Ota 
gave no specific reference. The phrase is probably derived from the common 
Buddhist phrase "intelligent, knowing, and not beclouded," which was uttered 
by Zen Masters like Ch'eng-kuan {c. 760-838) (see Ching-te cWuan-teng lu, 30:8b). 
The terms "intelligent and knowing" and "not beclouded" were also used by 
Tsung-mi (780-841) in his Ch'an-jiian chu-ch'iian chi tu-hsii (Taisho dai^pkyo, 
48:404-5). Chu Hsi considered the Buddhist concept too abstract and added the 
second sentence. See Chu T^u yu-lei, 14:17a. 

21 This is a reference to Ta-hsiieh huo-wen, 6oa-b. Hui-an was Chu Hsi's 
literary name. 

22 Chu Hsi, ibid., p. 24b. 

34 Instructions for Practical Living 

principle permit any splitting up ? And what is the need of putting it 
together again ? What the Sage said about refinement and singleness 
of mind of course describes it completely." 

36. [The Teacher said,] "Self-examination is preserving the mind 
and nourishing the nature while engaged in activity. Preserving the 
mind and nourishing the nature are self-examination when one is 
not engaged in activity." 

37. I once asked about Lu Hsiang-shan's [Lu Chiu-yuan, 1 1 39-93] 
doctrine that one should devote one's effort to the area of human 
feelings and human affairs.23 

The Teacher said, "There is no event outside of human feelings 
and human affairs. Are pleasure, anger, sorrow, and joy not human 
feelings? Seeing, hearing, speaking, and acting, wealth and noble 
station, poverty and humble station, misfortune, calamity, death 
and life are all human affairs. Human affairs are within the realm of 
human feelings. The important point is to achieve the state of equilib- 
rium and harmony, and achieving equilibrium and harmony 
depends primarily on being watchful over oneself when alone." 

38. I said, "Humanity, righteousness, propriety, and wisdom are 
so called because they express the qualities of the mind after the 
feelings are aroused." 

The Teacher said, "Correct." 

On a later occasion I said, "Are the sense of commiseration, the 
sense of shame and dislike, the sense of deference and compliance, 
and the sense of right and wrong manifestations of man's nature ?" 

The Teacher said, "Humanity, righteousness, propriety, and 
wisdom are also manifestations. Nature is one. As physical 
form or body it is called nature. As master of the creative 
process it is called the Lord. In its universal operation it is called 
destiny. As endowment in man it is called man's nature. As master 
of man's body it is called the mind. When it emanates from the mind 
we have filial piety when it is applied to the father, loyalty when it is 
applied to the ruler, and so on to infinity. All this is only one nature. 
Similarly, man is only one. He is called the son with respect to the 
father, or the father with respect to the son, and so on to infinity. 

23 See Hsiang-shan ctiuan-chi, 34:5a. 

Part I 35 

Man is only one. We must direct our effort to our nature. If we 
distinctly understand what nature is, all the ten thousand principles 
will become crystal clear." 

39. One day the business of study was discussed. The Teacher said, 
"In teaching people, don't insist on a particular, one-sided way. In 
the beginning, one's mind is like a restless monkey and his feelings 
are like a galloping horse. They cannot be tied down. His thoughts 
and deliberations mostly tend to the side of selfish human desires. 
At that point, teach him to sit in meditation and to stop those thoughts 
and deliberations. Wait a long time till his mind becomes somewhat 
settled. If, however, at this time he merely remains quiet in a vacuum, 
like dry wood and dead ashes, it is also useless. Rather, he must be 
taught self-examination and self-mastery. There is no letup in this 
work. It is like getting rid of robbers and thieves. There must be the 
determination to wipe them out thoroughly and completely. Before 
things happen, each and every selfish desire for sex, wealth, and fame 
must be discovered. The root of the trouble must be pulled up and 
thrown away so that it will never sprout again. Only then can we 
feel fine. At all times be like a cat trying to catch a rat, with eyes 
single -mindedly watching and ears single-mindedly listening.24 As 
soon as an evil thought begins to arise, overcome it and cast it 
away. Be as decisive as in cutting a nail or slicing a piece of iron. Do 
not tolerate it or give it any consideration. Do not harbor it and do 
not allow it any way out. Only efforts such as these can be considered 
serious and concrete. Only then can selfish desires be thoroughly and 
completely wiped out. When there are no more evil desires to be 
overcome, one will then automatically arrive at the state of a king 
who merely folds his hands and sits erect.25 Although 'What is there 
to think about; what is there to deliberate about?'26 is not the 
business of a beginner, he must be thinking of self-examination 
and self-mastery, that is, of sincerity. One has only to think of the 

24 A Buddhist story referred to in Chu T^u wen-chi, sppy ed., entitled Chu T^u 
ta-cVUan, 71:6b. The words are by Zen Master Tsu-hsin(/?. 1060) of Huang-lung 
Mountain. See Wu-teng hut-yuan, ch. 17, in Zohi^pkyo, 1st collection, pt. 2, B, 
case 11, p. 335a; also Lien-teng hui-yao, ch. 15, in Zoku^pkyo, 1st coll., pt. 2, B, 
case 9, p. 339b. 

25 And all is well with his kingdom. 

26 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 5. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 389. 

36 Instructions for Practical hiving 

Principle of Nature. When the mind becomes completely identified 
with the Principle of Nature, that is the state of 'what is there to 
think about; what is there to deliberate about?'." 

40. I asked, "Someone is afraid of evil spirits at night. How about 
it?" 

The Teacher said, "This is because in his daily life he has not 
accumulated righteousness,27 and his mind is timid about something. 
That is why he is afraid. If his ordinary conduct is in harmony with 
the gods, what has he to fear?" 

Ma Tzu-hsin28 said, "One need not be afraid of upright spirits. I 
am afraid, however, that evil spirits pay no attention to whether a 
man has done right or wrong. Consequently one cannot but be 
afraid." 

The Teacher said, "Can an evil spirit delude an upright man? 
This fear itself shows that the mind is not upright. Therefore if 
anyone is deluded it is not any spirit that deludes him. He is deluded 
by his own mind. For example, if a man is fond of sex, it means that 
the spirit of lust has deluded him. If he is fond of money, it means 
that the spirit of money has deluded him. When he is angry at 
something at which he should not be angry, it means that the spirit 
of anger has deluded him. And when he is afraid of something of 
which he should not be afraid, it means the spirit of fear has deluded 
him." 

41. [The Teacher said,] "Calmness is the original substance of the 
mind. It is the Principle of Nature. It is the state in which activity 
and tranquillity are united." 

42. I asked about the similarity and difference between the Great 
Learning and the Doctrine of the Mean. The Teacher said, "Tzu-ssu 
[492-431 B.C.] incorporated the fundamental ideas of the Great 
'Learning in the first chapter of the Doctrine of the Mean." 

27 As taught in the Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

28 This was his courtesy name. His private name was Ming-heng. He obtained 
a "presented scholar" degree in 15 17 and became a censor in 1524. As he came 
from Fukien, he was instrumental in the spread of Wang's doctrines in that 
part of China. 

Part I 37 

43. I asked, "[When Tzu-lu asked Confucius what he would 
do first of all if he were to serve under the ruler of Wei, who was 
then actually hoping that Confucius would do so], Confucius replied 
that the first thing was the rectification of names (that is, a son should 
be a true son, etc.).29 A former scholar said that [since the heir- 
apparent of Wei, K'uei-wai, attempted matricide and had to flee and 
since his own son, Ch'e, who was eventually made the duke, opposed 
his return to Wei, both as sons were not true to the name of a son, 
and Confucius, being true to his doctrine of the rectification of 
names,] would report to the Son of Heaven above and inform the 
regional feudal lords below, remove Ch'e, and put the original 
ruler's younger son Ying in his place.30 What is the meaning of this ?" 
The Teacher said, "This, I am afraid, would be difficult to do. Is 
it correct that, when a ruler shows his respect and extends his 
courtesy to the utmost in waiting for a person to serve in his govern- 
ment, the first thing the person should do is to remove the ruler? 
Is this in conformity with human feelings and the Principle of 
Nature? Since Confucius was willing to serve under Ch'e, it must 
have been that Ch'e had wholeheartedly trusted Confucius with all 
the affairs of the state and listened to his advice, that the Sage, with 
his eminent virtue and perfect sincerity, had influenced and trans- 
formed him, making him realize that none could be counted a man 
who refused to recognize his father, and that Ch'e would surely 
cry bitterly and run to welcome his father back. Love of father and 
son is based on Heaven-endowed human nature. If Ch'e could truly 
repent like this, could K'uei-wai fail to be moved and delighted by 
a good deed ? When K'uei-wai had returned, Ch'e would forthwith 
entrust the state to him and beg to be punished by death. Since 
K'uei-wai would then have been influenced by his son, and further- 
more, since Grand Master Confucius, with his perfect sincerity, 
would have mediated, the father would surely decline to accept but 
would order Ch'e to continue to rule. All the ministers and the 
people would then surely want to have Ch'e as their ruler. Ch'e, 
on the other hand, would voluntarily reveal his own sin, petition the 
Son of Heaven and inform the feudal lords of regions and states, 
and insist on entrusting the state to his father. At the same time, 
K'uei-wai, all the ministers, and the people would also publicize the 

29 Analects, 13:3. 

30 This is the opinion of Hu Hung (1100-55), quoted by Chu Hsi in his 
commentary on the above passage of the Analects in his Lun-yu chi-chu, ch. 7. 

38 Instructions for Practical hiving 

excellence of Ch'e's repentance, humanity, and filial piety, petition 
the Son of Heaven and inform the feudal lords of regions and states, 
and insist on having Ch'e as their ruler. Consequently, the Mandate 
of Heaven to rule would center on Ch'e, ordering him to serve again 
as the ruler of the state of Wei. Ch'e would have no recourse except 
to do as the Grand Emperor of a later age [when the Emperor 
Kao-tsu honored his father with the title of Grand Emperor in 
20 1 b.c.],31 lead all the ministers and the people to honor K'uei-wai 
as the grand duke, make ample provision for his support, and then 
step back and resume his position. In that way, according to the 
Confucian doctrine that the ruler should be a true ruler, the minister 
a true minister, the father a true father, and the son a true son,32 the 
names would be correct and language would be in accord with the 
truth of things, and then in one stroke one would be able to govern 
the world. The meaning of Confucius' doctrine of the rectification 
of names is perhaps this." 

44. While I was living temporarily33 in the bureau of state cere- 
monials I unexpectedly received a letter saying that my son was 
seriously ill. My sorrow was unbearable. The Teacher said, "This 
is the time for you to exert effort. If you allow this occasion to go by, 
what is the use of studying when nothing is happening? People 
should train and polish themselves at just such a time as this. A 
father's love for his son is of course the noblest feeling. Nevertheless, 
in the operation of the Principle of Nature there is the proper degree 
of equilibrium and harmony. To be excessive means to give rein to 
selfish thoughts. On such an occasion most people feel that according 
to the Principle of Nature they should be sorrowful. Thus they keep 
on with sorrow and distress. They do not realize that they are 
already 'affected by worries and anxieties and their minds will not 
be correct.'34 

"Generally speaking, the influence of the seven emotions is in the 
majority of cases excessive, and only in the minority of cases insuffi- 
cient. As soon as it is excessive, it is not in accord with the original 
substance of the mind. It must be adjusted to reach the mean before 

31 Ch'ien-Han shu, ch. 1, 6th yr. See trans, by Homer H. Dubs, The History of 
the Former Han Dynasty (Baltimore, Waverly Press, 1948), II, 115. 

32 Analects, 12:11. 

33 Ts'ang-chil. Another interpretation is "Jiving in a granary." 

34 Great Teaming, ch. 7. 

Part I 39 

it becomes correct. Take the case of the death of parents. Is it not 
true that the son desires to mourn until death before he feels satisfied ? 
Nevertheless it is said, 'The self-inflicted suffering should not be 
carried out to such an extent as to destroy life.'35 It is not that the 
Sage tries to restrict or suppress it. It is because the original substance 
of the Principle of Nature has its proper limits that should not be 
exceeded. People need only to understand the substance of the mind 
and then automatically not an iota can be added to or subtracted 
from it." 

45. [The Teacher said,] "It should not be said that all ordinary 
persons have attained the state of equilibrium before the feelings 
are aroused. For 'substance and function come from one source.'36 
Given the substance, there is the function, and given the equilibrium 
before the feelings are aroused, there is the harmony in which the 
feelings are aroused and all attain due measure and degree.37 Since 
people of today do not possess this harmony, accordingly we should 
know that they have not completely attained equilibrium." 

46. [The Teacher said,] "The explanation of Change in the sentence 
'In the first nine [or the lowest line of the hexagram which is 
symbolic of the positive element yang, one sees its subject as] the 
dragon [which is also symbolic of yang] lying in the deep and there- 
fore [one should lie low and be on guard] for it is not the time for 
action.'38 The symbol is [not the dragon, as former theories have 
held, but] the lowest line. The operation of Change [is not to be 
found elsewhere but] right in the line itself in accordance with 
which changes take place. To tell fortune or misfortune according 
to the Change is [not to use the dragon as the symbol and merely 
the phrase 'not the time for action' as the explanation but] to use the 
whole sentence as explanation." 

47. [The Teacher said,] "The phrase 'the restorative power of the 
night'39 refers to ordinary peopie. If a student can apply his effort, 

35 Book of Kites, "The Four Principles Underlying the Dress of Mourning"; 
cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 46, p. 466. 

36 A famous saying by Ch'eng I, preface to the I cWuan. 

37 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

38 Bookof Changes, the text of hexagram no. 1 . Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 57. 

39 Book of Mencius, 6A:8. 

40 Instructions for Practical Living 

then whatever does or does not happen in the daytime is an occasion 
for this power to gather and to grow. As for the sage, it is unneces- 
sary to talk about the restorative power of the night." 

48. I asked about the chapter saying, "Hold it fast and you 
preserve it. Let it go and you lose it."40 

The Teacher said, "Although when the passage adds that 'it goes 
out and comes in at no definite time and without anyone's knowing 
its direction,' it refers to the mind of the common man, the student 
must realize that the original substance of the mind is basically like 
this. The effort of holding fast and preserving the mind is then free 
from any defects. One should not readily say that when the mind 
goes out it is lost and when it comes in it is preserved. If we talk 
about the original substance, in fact it neither goes out nor comes in. 
If we talk about going out and coming in, then the mind's thoughts, 
deliberations, and operations are the going out. However, the master 
is always obviously present. Where is there any going out ? And if 
there is no going out, where is there any coming in ? When Master 
Ch'eng Hao [Ch'eng Ming-tao, 1032-85] talked about 'the hollow 
place [that fills] the whole body,'41 he referred to nothing other 
than the Principle of Nature. Although one may be engaged in 
social intercourse all day long, if he is able not to depart from the 
Principle of Nature, it is tantamount to his remaining inside this 
body. Only when he departs from the Principle of Nature can he 
be said to have let the mind go or lost it." 

He again said, "To go out or come in is no more than activity and 
tranquillity. Neither activity nor tranquillity has any beginning. Do 
they have any direction?" 

49. Wang Chia-hsiu42 asked, "The Buddhists lure people into their 
way of life by the promise of escape from the cycle of life and death, 
and the Taoists who seek immortality do so with the promise of 
everlasting life. But in their hearts they do not wish people to do evil. 
In the final analysis, they also see the upper section of the Way of 

40 Ibid., where this saying is attributed to Confucius. 

41 I-shu, 3:3a. 

42 His courtesy name was Shih-fu. He became Wang's pupil after Wang 
returned from Kuei-chou. He was much interested in Buddhism and Taoism. 

Part I 41 

the Sage.43 But their paths to attainment are not correct. It is like 
the ways of becoming an official today. Some attain positions through 
civil service examinations, some through recommendations by local 
officials, and some through connections with palace officials. They 
all become high officials, but, after all, these are not the proper ways 
of becoming officials, and the superior man does not follow them. 
Reduced to fundamentals, the Buddhists and Taoists are somewhat 
similar to the Confucians. However, they have only the upper section 
and neglect the lower section,44 and in the end are not as perfect as 
the Sage. Nevertheless we cannot deny that they are similar in the 
upper section. 

"On the other hand, Confucians of later generations have only the 
lower section of the Sage's doctrine. They mutilated it and lost its 
true nature and degenerated into the four schools of recitation and 
memorization, the writing of flowery compositions, the pursuit of 
success and profit, and textual criticism, and thus at bottom are no 
different from the heterodox schools. People of these four 
schools work hard throughout their lives and benefit their bodies 
and minds not a bit. They seem to compare unfavorably with the 
Buddhists and Taoists, whose minds are pure, whose desires are few, 
and who are free from the worldly bondage of fame and profit. 
Nowadays students need not first of all attack Taoism and Buddhism. 
Rather, they should earnestly fix their determination on the doctrine 
of the Sage. As the doctrine of the Sage is made clear to the world, 
Buddhism and Taoism will disappear of themselves. Otherwise, I 
am afraid what we want to learn will not be considered worth while 
by Buddhists and Taoists. In that case would it not be difficult to 
expect them to condescend and come to our fold? This is my 
humble opinion. What do you think of it, sir ?" 

The Teacher said, "What you have said is essentially correct. As 
to what are called the upper section and the lower section, they are 
one-sided points of view. The way of the Sage is the great mean and 
perfect correctness, penetrating both the higher and the lower 
levels, being one thread that runs through all. What is there to be 
called the upper section or the lower section? "The successive 
movement of the active element yang and the passive element yin 

43 That is, matters of the mind and the nature ; the refined and subtle aspects 
of the Way. 

44 That is, matters of fact; the obvious and the immediate aspects of the Way. 

42 Instructions for Practical Living 

constitutes the Way.... The man of humanity sees it and calls it 
humanity. The man of wisdom sees it and calls it wisdom. And 
the common people act according to it daily without knowing it. 
In this way the Way of the superior man is fully realized."45 Should 
humanity or wisdom not be called the Way ? Only if one's view of 
it is one-sided will there be trouble." 

50. [The Teacher said,] "The use of stalks of plants for divination 
is of course a system of [finding out the operation of] the Change. 
But the use of tortoise shells is also a system of the Change."46 

51. I said, "Confucius said that King Wu was not perfectly 
good.47 It seems that Confucius was not satisfied with him." 

The Teacher said, "Under the circumstances, King Wu could not 
have been otherwise." 

I said, "If King Wen had not died, what would have hap- 
pened ?" 

The Teacher said, "Before King Wen died, the House of Chou had 
already possessed two thirds of the empire. If King Wen had been 
alive when King Wu sent a military expedition to punish King Chou 
of Shang, he probably would not have resorted to military force. 
Certainly the remaining third would have come and submitted to 
him. King Wen would have handled King Chou skillfully so that 
he would not have indulged in evil, that is all." 

52. I asked48 about Mencius' saying, "Holding the mean without 
allowing for special circumstances is like holding on to one particular 
thing."49 

The Teacher said, "The mean is nothing but the Principle of 
Nature; it is the Change. It changes according to the time. How can 

45 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 5. Cf trans, by Legge, Yi 
King, pp. 355-56. The Chinese character here translated as "fully" is hsien, which 
in this context should not be understood in its ordinary meaning of "few." 

46 The former system tells fortunes by counting the number of stalks, thus 
emphasizing number, while in the latter the shells are burned and fortunes are 
told by the pattern of their cracks, thus emphasizing form. 

47 Analects, 3:25. 

48 In Shih Pang-yao's (15 85-1644) Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chi-yao, this question 
is ascribed to Chi Wei-ch'ien (Chi Yiian-heng). 

49 Book of Mencius, 7 A: 26. 

Part I 43 

one hold it fast? One must act according to the circumstance. It is 
difficult to fix a pattern of action in advance. Later scholars insist on 
describing principles in their minute details, leaving out nothing, 
and prescribing a rigid pattern for action. This is the exact meaning 
of holding on to one particular thing." 

53. T'ang Hsii50 asked, "Does making up the mind mean retaining 
good thought at all times and wanting to do good and remove 
evil?" 

The Teacher said, "When a good thought is retained, there is the 
Principle of Nature. The thought itself is goodness. Is there another 
goodness to be thought about ? Since the thought is not evil, what 
evil is there to be removed ? This thought is comparable to the root 
of a tree. To make up one's mind means always to build up this good 
thought, that is all. To be able to follow what one's heart desires 
without transgressing moral principles51 merely means that one's 
mind has reached full maturity." 

54. [The Teacher said,] "Generally speaking, the fundamental 
principle should be that of collecting and concentrating one's spirit, 
moral character, speech, and action. Only under unavoidable circum- 
stances should they be allowed to be diffused. This is true of man, 
heaven, earth, and things." 

55. I asked what sort of a person Wen-chung Tzu was.52 The 
Teacher said, "He can just about be described as 'complete in all 
respects but not great.'53 It is regrettable that he died young." 

I asked, "Then why has he been criticized for imitating the 
Classics [by writing supplements to them] ?" 

The Teacher said, "It is not entirely wrong to imitate the Classics." 

"Please explain." 

After a long while the Teacher said, "I realize all the more that 
'the mind of an expert is singularly distressed.' "M 

50 Nothing is known of him. 

51 As Confucius said he was able to do at seventy. Analects, 2:4. 

52 See above, sec. 11. 

53 Quoting the Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

54 For he is likely to be misunderstood. From a poem by Tu Fu (712-70), 
Tu Kung-pu cbi, ch. 4. 

44 Instructions for Practical Living 

56. [The Teacher said,] "Hsu Lu-chai's [Hsu Heng, 1 209-8 1]55 
theory that the first thing a scholar should do is to secure a livelihood 
is harmful." 

57. I asked about the concepts of the prime force, the prime spirit, 
and the prime essence of those Taoists who seek after immortality. 
The Teacher said, "They are all one. In its universal operation it is 
force. In its condensation and concentration it is essence, and in its 
wonderful functioning it is spirit." 

58. [The Teacher said,] "The original substance of pleasure, 
anger, sorrow, and joy is naturally in the states of equilibrium and 
harmony. As soon as one attaches a bit of his own idea to them, they 
will become excessive or deficient; they will be selfish." 

59. I asked about Confucius' not singing on the day of mourning 
when he wept.56 The Teacher said, "Because of the substance of the 
Sage's mind he was naturally like this." 

60. [The Teacher said,] "In trying to master oneself, every selfish 
thought must be thoroughly and completely wiped out without 
leaving even an iota. If an iota remains, many evils will come one 
leading the other." 

61. I asked about the l^u-lii hsin-shu (New book on pitch pipes).57 
The Teacher said, "The student should be earnestly devoted to what 
is of the greatest importance. Even if one becomes thoroughly 
familiar with these calculations, they may not necessarily be of any 
use. It is necessary that the mind should first possess the fundamen- 
tals of ceremonies and music. For example, according to the book, 
usually a series of pitch pipes is used [for the twelve semitones, 

55 One of the most outstanding Confucians in the Yuan dynasty. While he 
adhered to the rationalistic Neo-Confucianism of Chu Hsi, he emphasized the 
practical need of economic security. See Hsu Lu-chai chi, 6:8b. For an account 
of him, see Sung-Yiian hsiieb-an, ch. 90. 

56 Analects, 7:9. 

57 The Lii-Iii hsin-shu, by Chu Hsi's pupil Ts'ai Yuan-ting (1135-98). It deals 
with musical pitch, weather, etc., and was highly praised by Chu Hsi. According 
to the Ssu-k'u ch'iian-shu tsung-mu t'i-yao, ch. 38, probably Chu Hsi and Ts'ai 
collaborated in writing it. 

Part I 45 

filled with reed ashes, buried in the ground in an enclosed room 
with one end of the pipes exposed] and we then wait for the response 
of material force to the weather [to determine the correct pitch. 
If the ashes in a tube fly off at the proper time of its corresponding 
month, it will show that material force responds to the proper 
weather and the pitch will therefore be correct. For example, when 
the ashes fly off during the first two -hour period of the winter 
solstice, the pitch for the fundamental tone, approximately 'F', is 
correct]. But at the winter solstice the ashes may fly off just a moment 
earlier or later. How can we know to what moment of the winter 
solstice the pipe should correspond? We must first understand in 
our mind what the exact moment of the winter solstice should be. 
This is where the book does not make sense. The student must first 
direct his effort to acquiring the fundamentals of ceremonies and 
music." 

62. Hsu Ai said, "The mind is like a mirror. The sage's mind is 
like a clear mirror, whereas that of the ordinary person is like a dull 
mirror. The theory of the investigation of things in recent times58 
says that it works like a mirror reflecting things and the effort is to 
be directed toward the [passive] role of reflecting. They don't 
realize that the mirror is still dull. How can it reflect ? The investi- 
gation of things in our Teacher's theory is like polishing the mirror 
to make it clear. The effort is to be directed toward the [active] role 
of polishing. When the mirror is clear, it does not cease to reflect."59 

63. I asked about the refinement or coarseness of the Way. The 
Teacher said, "The Way is neither refined nor coarse. It is so only 
from man's point of view. Take this room. When a person at first 
comes in, he sees only a large form. After some time he sees clearly 
the columns, the walls, and so forth, one by one. Still later he sees 
minute details such as ornaments on the columns if there are any. 
But the room is just a room." 

64. The Teacher said, "When we have seen each other in recent 
days, you gentlemen have not asked many questions. Why? If a 

58 In the Chu Hsi school. 

59 It is interesting to note that this is the only independent saying by a disciple 
of Wang's in the whole book. 

46 Instructions for Practical hiving 

person does not exert effort, he will think that he already knows the 
way of learning and that all he has to do is to follow it out in action. 
He does not realize that one's selfish desires grow day by day, like 
dirt piling up on the ground. If for one day it is not swept out, 
another layer will be accumulated. If one exerts serious and concrete 
effort, he will see that the Way is infinite. The more one reaches for 
it, the deeper it becomes. In pursuing the Way, one must be as 
thorough as in grinding rice until it is refined and white, without 
neglecting the least bit." 

65. I asked, "Only after knowledge has been extended to the 
utmost can we talk about the sincerity of the will. Now since we 
do not yet know all about the Principle of Nature and selfish human 
desires, how can we exert any effort on self-mastery?" 

The Teacher said, "If a person exerts effort with all seriousness 
and with personal concern, and does so without stop, he will 
gradually, day by day, see the refinement and subtlety of the Principle 
of Nature in his mind. He will also gradually, day by day, see the 
minuteness and subtlety of selfish desires in his mind. If he does not 
exert the effort of self-mastery, then all day long he does nothing 
but talk. The Principle of Nature never reveals itself. Nor do selfish 
desires. It is like walking on the road to go somewhere. As one 
walks one section of the road, he recognizes the next section. When 
he comes to a fork, and is in doubt, he will ask and then go on. 
Only then can he gradually reach his destination. People today are 
not willing to preserve as much of the Principle of Nature as they 
already know, nor to get rid of the selfish human desires they 
already know, but merely worry about not knowing all of them. 
They just talk idly. What good is this? Let one wait till he has 
mastered himself to the point of having no more selfish desires to 
overcome and then worry about not knowing all. It will still not be 
too late." 

66. I asked, "The Way is one.60 In discussing it the ancients often 
disagreed. Are there some essential points about searching for it?" 

The Teacher said, "The Way has neither spatial restriction nor 
physical form, and it cannot be pinned down to any particular. To 
seek it by confining ourselves to literal meanings would be far off 

60 A quotation from the Book of Mencins, $K:x. 

Part I 47 

the mark. Take those people today who talk about Heaven. Do they 
actually understand it ? It is incorrect to say that the sun, the moon, 
wind, and thunder constitute Heaven. It is also incorrect to say 
that man, animals, and plants do not constitute it. Heaven is the 
Way. If we realize this, where is the Way not to be found ? People 
merely look at it from one corner and conclude that the Way is 
nothing but this or that. Consequently they disagree. If one knows 
how to search for the Way inside the mind and to see the substance 
of one's own mind, then there is no place nor time where the Way 
is not to be found. It pervades the past and present and is without 
beginning or end. Where do similarity and difference come in ? The 
mind is the Way, and the Way is Heaven. If one knows the mind, 
he knows both the Way and Heaven." 

He again said, "If you gentlemen want to understand the Way 
definitely, you must personally realize it in your own minds, without 
depending on any search outside. Only then will it be all right." 

67. I asked, "Should names, varieties, and systems of things be 
investigated first of all ?" 

The Teacher said, "It is necessary only for a person fully to realize 
the substance of his own mind, and then its functions will be found 
right in its midst. If one should nourish the substance of his mind so 
that there is really equilibrium before the feelings are aroused, then 
naturally when they are aroused they will attain harmony in due 
measure and degree, and wherever it may be applied it will be 
correct. On the other hand, if there is no such mind, even if one 
may have gone into many names, varieties, and systems of things, 
they really have nothing to do with him but are merely ornaments. 
Naturally, when the time comes to use them they are of no use. 
I do not mean to neglect the names, varieties, and systems completely. 
I merely point out that if we know that first things must come 
first, then we can approach the Way." 

He again said, "One must accomplish according to his ability. 
Ability is what one can do, like the ability of K'uei, Emperor Shun's 
minister, to institute musical systems, and the ability of Shun's Minis- 
ter Chi to institute agriculture.61 These were the original endow- 
ments of their nature. Their accomplishment was due to the fact 

61 See Book of History, "Canon of Shun." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, 
PP- 44, 47- 

48 Instructions for Practical hiving 

that the substance of their minds became completely identified with 
the Principle of Nature, so that whatever its function might be it 
issued from the Principle of Nature. Only this can be called ability. 
When the point is reached that the mind becomes completely 
identified with the Principle of Nature, one's ability is not restricted 
to any particular thing. If K'uei and Chi had exchanged places, they 
would have been able to accomplish each other's tasks also." 

He again said, "Take for example the superior man. In a position 
of wealth and in noble station he does what is proper to a position 
of wealth and to noble station, and in a position of difficulty and 
danger he does what is proper to a position of difficulty and danger.62 
In all these he is not restricted to any particular thing. Only those 
who have correctly nourished the substance of their mind can do so." 

68. [The Teacher said,] "It is better to be a small body of water in 
a well which comes from a spring than a large body of water in a 
pond which comes from no source. The water in the well has the 
spirit of life that is inexhaustible." It is said that when the Teacher 
said so, he was sitting by a well next to a pond. Therefore he used 
this analogy to enlighten his students. 

69. I asked, "Civilization declines further and further. How can we 
see the condition of great antiquity again ?" 

The Teacher said, "A single day is no different from a period of 
129,600 years.63 When one gets up early in the morning and sits 
down, he has not yet come into contact with the influence of the 
material world. His mind is pure and clear, and this condition 
makes him feel as though he is living at the time of Fu-hsi of great 
antiquity." 

70. I asked, "When the mind is inclined to chase after material 
things, what can be done ?" 

The Teacher said, "When a ruler folds his arms, sits erect, and 
is at leisure and at peace, and each of his chief ministers64 attends to 

62 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 14. 

63 According to Shao Yung (1 101-77), ayiian is a period of 129,600 years, at 
the end of which heaven and earth perish and a new cycle begins. See his 
Huang-chi ching-shih shu, 6:14a. 

64 Of the six departments : personnel, population, rites, military affairs, 
justice, and public works. 

Part I 49 

his duties, the state will be in order. The mind should command the 
five sense organs in the same way. But if when the eye wants to see, 
the mind itself pursues the color, or when the ear wants to hear, the 
mind itself pursues the sound, it will be as though a ruler himself 
occupied the position of the minister of personnel when he wanted 
officials selected or the position of the minister of military affairs 
when he wanted an army transferred. When he does so not only 
is the true nature of a ruler gone; the six departments cannot 
function either." 

71. [The Teacher said,] "When a good thought arises, recognize 
it and develop it fully. When an evil thought arises, recognize it and 
stop it. It is the will that recognizes the thought and develops or 
stops it; it is intelligence (that is, innate knowledge of the good) en- 
dowed by Heaven. This is all a sage has. A student must preserve it." 

72. I said, "The love of sex, wealth, and fame is of course selfish 
desire. But why are idle and sundry thoughts also regarded as 
selfish desires ?" 

The Teacher said, "In the final analysis they grow from such 
roots as the love of sex, wealth, and fame. You will see if you get at 
the root. You surely know in your own mind that you have no 
thought of stealing. Why? Because at bottom you do not have 
such thought. If you eliminate all thoughts of sex, wealth, fame, and 
so forth, just as you have no thought of becoming a thief, there will 
be nothing but the original substance of the mind. What idle 
thoughts can there be ? This pure state is 'the state of absolute quiet 
and inactivity,'65 'the equilibrium before the feelings are aroused,'66 
and 'broad and extremely impartial.'67 The natural effect will be 
that 'when acted on, it immediately penetrates all things,'68 'when the 
feelings are aroused, each and all attain due measure and degree,'69 
and 'it responds spontaneously to all things as they come. 

> J5 

70 

65 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 10. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 370. 

66 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

67 Ch'eng Hao, Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

68 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 10. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 370. 

69 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

70 Ch'eng Hao. Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

50 Instructions for Practical Living 

73 . I asked about "The will is the highest and the vital force comes 
next."71 The Teacher said, "It means that wherever the will goes, so 
does the vital force. It does not mean that the will is the 
ultimate chief whereas the vital force is subordinate to it.72 If the will 
is held firm, the vital force will also be properly cultivated and 
nourished, and if no violence is done the vital force, the will will 
also be held firm. Mencius corrected Kao Tzu's mistake of being 
one-sided and therefore emphasized both the nature and the will 
equally." 

74. I asked, "A former scholar said, 'The sage necessarily takes his 
doctrine down to a low position [so people can approach it] while a 
worthy lifts his words to a higher position [so the doctrine of the 
sage may be respected].'73 What do you think of it?" 

The Teacher said, "It is wrong. To do so would be insincere. The 
sage is comparable to Heaven. It is everywhere. Up where the sun, 
moon, and stars are, it is Heaven, and deep down under ground it is 
also Heaven. When has Heaven descended to a lower position? A 
sage is one who is great and is completely transformed [to be good- 
ness itself].74 A worthy may be compared to a high mountain peak. 
He has only to maintain this lofty position. But a mountain of 1,000 
feet cannot stretch to become 10,000 feet, and a mountain of 10,000 
feet cannot stretch to become 100,000 feet. The worthy does not 
extend himself to achieve a lofty position. To do so would be 
insincere." 

75. I asked, "I-ch'uan [Ch'eng I] said that we should not seek 
equilibrium before the feelings of pleasure, anger, sorrow, and joy 
are aroused.75 Yen-p'ing [Li T'ung, 1088-1158], however, taught 
people to watch for the disposition before such feelings are aroused.76 
What do you say about them ?" 

71 Book of Mencius, 2 A: 2. 

72 This is Chu Hsi's commentary on the passage. See his Meng T^u cbi-chu, ch. 3. 

73 Ch'eng I, quoted by Chu Hsi in his Lun-yii chi-chu, ch. 5, comment on 
Analects, 9:7. 

74 As described in the Book of Mencius, 76:25. 
76 I-shu, 18:14b. 

76 Yen-p'ing was Li T'ung's honorific name. He was Chu Hsi's teacher. It 
was through him that the teachings of Ch'eng were transmitted to Chu Hsi. He 
emphasized sitting in meditation and tranquillity of mind. The teaching here 
referred to is found in the Li Yen-p'ing cbi, 2:i6a-b. See below, sec. 94. 

Part I 51 

The Teacher said, "They are both right. I-ch'uan was afraid lest 
people seek equilibrium before the feelings are aroused, regarding 
equilibrium as separate and distinct, like what I previously described 
as trying to attain equilibrium after one's vital force is calmed 
down.77 He therefore told people to make the effort of seeking 
equilibrium right in self-cultivation and self-examination. Yen-p'ing, 
on the other hand, was afraid lest people have no place to start. He 
therefore told them at all times to look for the disposition before the 
feelings are aroused. He wanted them to direct all attention to this 
condition when they open their eyes directly to look or turn their 
ears attentively to listen. This is the work of not waiting to see things 
before becoming cautious or to hear things before becoming appre- 
hensive.78 In both cases the teachers of the past could not help 
teaching people in the ways they did." 

76. I asked, "Ordinary people of course do not possess the 
totality of equilibrium before the feelings of pleasure, anger, sorrow, 
and joy are aroused and of harmony after they are aroused. But 
suppose there is a small matter that should arouse one's pleasure or 
anger. If ordinarily he does not have the mind of pleasure or anger, 
and when the matter occurs, he can also attain a due measure and 
degree of pleasure or anger, can that be called the state of equilibrium 
and harmony?" 

The Teacher said, "He may be said to attain equilibrium and 
harmony in connection with a particular affair or occasion, but 
cannot be said to have acquired the great foundation or to be 
following the universal way. The nature of all men is good. They 
all originally possess the qualities of equilibrium and harmony. How 
can we say that they are without them ? However, since the mind of 
the ordinary man is obscured and darkened to some extent, although 
its original substance reveals itself from time to time, nevertheless it 
appears one moment and disappears the next. It is not the mind in 
its total substance and great functioning. Only when the mind 
attains equilibrium at all times can it be said to have a great founda- 
tion, and only when it attains harmony at all times can it be said to 
be following the universal way. Only those who are perfectly sincere 
can establish the great foundation for humanity."79 

77 See above, sec. 28. 

78 Paraphrasing the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

79 Ibid., ch. 32. 

52 Instructions for Practical hiving 

I said, "I still do not understand the meaning of equilibrium." 

The Teacher said, "It must be personally realized in one's own 
mind. It cannot be explained in words. Equilibrium is nothing but 
the Principle of Nature." 

"What is the Principle of Nature?" 

"One recognizes it when he has gotten rid of selfish human 
desires." 

"Why is the Principle of Nature called equilibrium?" 

"Because it is balanced and impartial." 

"What is the condition of that?" 

"It is like a bright mirror. It is entirely clear, without a speck of 
dust attached to it." 

"To be partial is to be attached. When one is attached to the love 
of sex, wealth, fame, and so forth, it is clear that he is unbalanced. 
However, before the feelings are aroused, the mind is not yet 
attached to the love of sex, wealth, fame, and so forth. How can we 
know that it is unbalanced?" 

"Although there is not yet any attachment, nevertheless in one's 
everyday life one's mind is not entirely free from such love. Since it 
is not free from it, it means that it is present in the mind. This being 
so, it cannot be said that the mind is not partial. Take a person sick 
with intermittent fever. Although at times the illness does not 
appear, so long as the root of the disease has not been eliminated, 
the person cannot be said to be free from the disease. Only when all 
such selfish desires as the love for sex, wealth, fame, and so forth in 
one's daily life are completely wiped out and cleaned up, so that not 
the least bit is retained, and the mind becomes broad in its total 
substance and becomes completely identified with the Principle of 
Nature, can it be said to have attained the equilibrium before the 
feelings are aroused and to have acquired the great foundation of 
virtue." 

77. I asked, "You said that 'after Yen Hui [Confucius' favorite 
pupil] passed away, the doctrine of the Sage died out.'80 I cannot 
help being dubious about that." 

The Teacher said, "Yen Hui alone understood the Way of the 
Sage in its entirety. You can see that from the fact that he heaved a 
sigh.81 When he said, 'The Master, by good order, skillfully leads 

80 Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung cWuan-shu, 7:7a. 

81 In admiration of the master's doctrine. See Analects, 9:10. 

Part I 53 

a man along and teaches him. He taught me to broaden myself 
with literature and restrain myself with rules of propriety,'82 he said 
so after he had thoroughly understood the Way. How skillful it is 
in leading and teaching people to broaden them with literature and 
restrain them with rules of propriety! The student must think it 
over. It was difficult even for the Sage to tell people about the Way 
in its total reality. The student must study and come to understanding 
by himself. When Yen Hui wished to follow the Way but could 
not find it,83 he said so in the same spirit [of humility and devotion] 
as King Wen who looked for the Way as if he could not see it.84 I 
believe that to look for the Way as if one cannot see it is to see it 
perfectly. Since Yen Hui's death the orthodox doctrine of the 
Sage has not continued in its totality." 

78. I asked, "The mind is the master of the body. Knowledge is 
the intelligence of the mind. The will is knowledge in operation. 
And a thing is that to which the will is directed. Is this correct?" 

The Teacher said, "Generally correct." 

79. [The Teacher said,] "To preserve one's mind and see to it 
that it is always present is itself learning. What is the use of thinking 
of past and future events ? In doing so one merely loses his mind." 

80. [The Teacher said,] "When one speaks without proper order, 
we can see that his mind is not preserved." 

81. Hsiieh Shang-ch'ien85 asked, "Does the 'unperturbed mind' 
Mencius talked about differ from that of Kao Tzu?"86 

82 Ibid. 

83 Ibid. 

84 Book of Mencius, 46:20. 

85 His name wasK'an, and he died in 1545. A holder of the "presented scholar" 
degree of 15 17, he followed Wang for four years in Kiangsi. In 15 31 he aroused 
the anger of the emperor because of his memorial and was imprisoned. Later 
he lectured for many years in a Buddhist temple in a famous mountain some 
sixty miles from Canton, and was a staunch defender of Wang against critics. 
For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 30:33-80. For conversations recorded 
by him, see below, sees. 95-129. 

86 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

54 Instructions for V radical Living 

The Teacher said, "Kao Tzu forcefully controlled his mind and 
kept it from being perturbed. Mencius, on the other hand, accumu- 
lated righteousness to the point where the mind naturally is unper- 
turbed." The Teacher added, "In its original substance the mind is 
not perturbed. The original substance of the mind is one's nature, 
and one's nature is principle. Both human nature and principle are 
originally unperturbed. The accumulation of righteousness means 
returning to the original substance of the mind." 

82. [The Teacher said,] "At the time when all things are luxuri- 
antly present, reality is also empty, tranquil, and without any sign. 
And when reality is empty, tranquil, and without any sign, it is the 
same as when all things are luxuriantly present.87 The state of 
being empty, tranquil, and without any sign is the father of single- 
ness [for all things are produced from this state], and the state of all 
things' being luxuriantly present is the mother of refinement [since 
all things embrace principle]. Singleness involves refinement and 
refinement involves singleness." 

83. [The Teacher said,] "There is no thing [or event] outside the 
mind. For instance, when a thought rises in my mind to serve my 
parents filially, then serving my parents filially is a thing [or event]." 

84. The Teacher said, "Nowadays, people who pursue what I call 
the learning of the investigation of things still for the most part fall 
into mere talking and listening. How much less can those who 
pursue learning by talking and listening return to the investigation 
of things ? The refinement and subtlety of the Principle of Nature 
and selfish human desires are such that one must make a constant 
effort at self-examination and self-mastery before he can gradually 
see it. Now if one just talks, even though he talks only about the 
Principle of Nature, without his realizing it, there is already in his 
mind, even for a short moment, a certain amount of selfish desire, 
for it does secretly arise without our knowing it. It is not easy to 
discover even if one examines it with great effort. How can one 
expect to know all by merely talking ? Now if we merely talk about 
the Principle of Nature, leave it there and do not follow it, and 
talk about selfish human desires, leave them there and do not get 

87 Paraphrasing Ch'eng I, I-sbu, 15:8a. See above, n. 4. 

Part I 55 

rid of them, is that the learning of the investigation of things and the 
extension of knowledge? Even at its best, the learning of later 
generations has only reached its point of achievement through 
incidental acts of righteousness."88 

85. I asked about the investigation of things. The Teacher said, 
"To investigate (ko) is to rectify. It is to rectify that which is incorrect 
so it can return to its original correctness."89 

86. I said, "Abiding by the highest good means to know that the 
highest good is inherent in my mind and originally not outside. 
Only then can the will be calm." 

The Teacher said, "Right." 

87. I asked, "The time to exert effort to investigate things is the 
time when one is active. Is that correct?" 

The Teacher said, "It makes no difference whether one is active 
or tranquil. There are also things when one is tranquil. Mencius said, 
'Always be doing something.'90 Thus one is always doing some- 
thing whether one is active or tranquil." 

88. [The Teacher said,] "The difficult part of our effort lies 
entirely in the investigation of things and the extension of knowl- 
edge. This is precisely the matter of the sincerity of the will. If the 
will is sincere, then, to a large extent, the mind is naturally rectified, 
and the personal life is also naturally cultivated. However, effort is 
also required to rectify the mind and cultivate the personal life. The 
cultivation of the personal life is the part after the feelings are 
aroused, whereas the rectification of the mind is the part before the 
feelings are aroused. If the mind is rectified, there will be equilibrium. 
If the personal life is cultivated, there will be harmony." 

89. [The Teacher said,] "The various steps from the investigation of 
things and the extension of knowledge to the bringing of peace to the 
world91 are nothing but manifesting the clear character. Even loving 

88 A reference to the Book of Mencius, zA:z. 
88 Cf. sees. 7, above, and 137, below. 

90 Book of Mencius, 2 A: 2. 

91 As taught in the Great Learning, the text. 

56 Instructions for Practical Liping 

the people is also a matter of manifesting the clear character. The 
clear character is the character of the mind ; it is humanity. The man 
of humanity regards Heaven and Earth and all things as one body.92 
If a single thing is deprived of its place, it means that my humanity 
is not yet demonstrated to the fullest extent." 

90. [The Teacher said,] "Merely to talk about manifesting the clear 
character and not to talk about loving the people would be to 
behave like the Taoists and Buddhists." 

91. [The Teacher said,] "The highest good is the nature. Originally 
the nature has not the least evil. Therefore it is called the highest 
good. To abide by it is simply to recover the nature's original state." 

92. I asked, "If one knows that the highest good is his nature, that 
his nature is completely contained in his mind, and that his mind is 
where the highest good abides, then he will not seek it outside in a 
confused manner as in the past, and his will will be calm. Being 
calm, it will not be disturbed. Not being disturbed, it will be tranquil. 
Being tranquil, it will not act foolishly and will then be in peaceful 
repose. To be in peaceful repose is to concentrate the mind and 
the will right here. In all the thousands and thousands of thoughts, 
the desire is surely to achieve this highest good. This means he can 
deliberate and the end can be attained.93 Is this theory correct ?" 

The Teacher said, "It is generally correct." 

93. I said, "Master Ch'eng Hao said that 'the man of humanity 
regards Heaven, Earth, and all things as one body.'94 How is it that 
Mo Tzu's \fl. 479-438 b.c] doctrine of universal love95 is not 
considered one of humanity?" 

The Teacher said, "It is very difficult to say. You gentlemen must 
find it out through personal realization. Humanity is the principle of 
unceasing production and reproduction. Although it is prevalent 

92 A famous saying by Ch'eng Hao. See I-shu, zK:zz. 

93 Paraphrasing the Great Learning, ch. 1. 

94 I-shu, 2 A: 2a. 

95 Mo Tzu was strongly attacked by Mencius because he did not acknowl- 
edge the special affection due to a father. Book of Mencius, 36:9. For Mo Tzu's 
doctrine, see Mo T^u, chs. 14-16, English trans, by Y. P. Mei, The Works of 
Motse (London, Probsthain, 1928), pp. 78 ff. 

Part I 57 

and extensive and there is no place where it does not exist, never- 
theless there is an order in its operation and growth. That is why it is 
unceasing in production and reproduction. For example, at the 
winter solstice the first yang96 grows. There must be the growth 
of this first yang before all the six stages of yang97 gradually grow. If 
there were not the first yang, could there be all the six ? It is the same 
with the yin.98 Because there is order, so there is a starting point. 
Because there is a starting point, so there is growth. And because 
there is growth, it is unceasing. Take a tree, for example. When in 
the beginning it puts forth a shoot, there is the starting point of the 
tree's spirit of life. After the root appears, the trunk grows. After the 
trunk grows, branches and leaves come, and then the process of 
unceasing production and reproduction has begun. If there is no 
sprout, how can there be the trunk, branches, or leaves? The tree 
can sprout because there is the root beneath. With the root the plant 
will grow. Without it, the plant will die, for without the root, how 
can it sprout ? 

"The love between father and son and between elder and younger 
brothers is the starting point of the human mind's spirit of life, just 
like the sprout of the tree. From here it is extended to humaneness 
to all people and love to all things. It is just like the growth of the 
trunk, branches, and leaves. Mo Tzu's universal love makes no 
distinction in human relations and regards one's own father, son, 
elder brother, or younger brother as being the same as a passer-by. 
That means that Mo Tzu's universal love has no starting point. 
It does not sprout. We therefore know that it has no root and that 
it is not a process of unceasing production and reproduction. How 
can it be called humanity? Filial piety and brotherly respect are the 
root of humanity.99 This means that the principle of humanity grows 
from within." 

94. I asked, "Li Yen-p'ing said, 'Be in accord with principle and 
have no selfish mind.'100 What is the difference between being in 
accord with principle and having no selfish mind?" 

The Teacher said, "The mind is principle. To have no selfish mind 

96 The active cosmic force. 

97 The six months between December and June. 

98 The passive cosmic force. 

99 A saying in Analects, 1:2. 

100 Li Yen-p'ing chi, 2:24a. Also see above, sec. 76. 

58 Instructions for Practical Living 

is to be in accord with principle, and not to be in accord with 
principle is to have a selfish mind. I am afraid it is not good to speak 
of the mind and principle as separate." 

I asked further, "The Buddhists are [internally] free from all 
kinds of selfishness of lust in the world and thus appear not to have a 
selfish mind. But externally they discard human relations and thus 
do not appear to be in accord with principle." 

The Teacher said, "These are the same kind of thing, all building 
up a mind of selfishness." 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY HSUEH 
K'AN1 (Sections 95-129) 

95. I asked, "To hold the will firm is like having a pain in the 
heart. As the whole mind is concentrated on the pain, how can 
there be time for idle talk or being a busybody?"2 

The Teacher said, "This is good as an initial effort. But the student 
must be made to understand that the spiritual intelligence of the 
mind comes in and goes out at no definite time and without 
anyone's knowing its direction,3 and that it is originally this way. 
Only in this way can one's effort find a solution. If one merely holds 
his will rigidly, I am afraid his effort will encounter trouble." 

96. I asked, "If one confines his effort entirely to self-cultivation 
and does not devote himself to study, one is likely to mistake his 
desires for the Principle of Nature. What can be done?" 

The Teacher said, "One must understand the true meaning of 
learning. To study is nothing but self-cultivation. Not to study 
merely means that one's will to self-cultivation is not sufficiently 
serious or concrete." 

"What is meant by understanding the true meaning of learning?" 

"Suppose you tell me what learning is for, and what there is to 
learn." 

"I have heard you teach us saying that to learn is to learn to 
preserve the Principle of Nature, that the original substance of the 

1 See above, sec. 81, n. 85. 

2 This passage also appears between sees. 24 and 25. 

3 Book of Mencius, 6A:8, quoting Confucius. 

Part I 59 

mind is the Principle of Nature, and that in order personally to 
realize this, it is merely necessary to have no selfish wishes in one's 
mind." 

"Then it is only necessary to overcome and get rid of selfish 
wishes. Why worry about not understanding principle and desires ?" 
"I am simply afraid that the selfish wishes are not truly recognized." 
"It is all because the will is not yet serious or concrete. If it is, 
all the eye sees and the ear hears will be directed toward the selfish 
desires. How is it possible that they cannot be truly recognized ? All 
people have the sense of right and wrong. One need not seek it 
outside. To study merely means personally to realize what one's 
mind has seen. It is not to look for something to be seen outside the 
mind." 

97. The Teacher asked friends who were present about their 
recent progress in learning. One friend mentioned the idea of the 
mind's being clear, calm, and free from material desires. The 
Teacher said, "This refers to the condition of learning." 

Another friend spoke about the similarity and difference of past 
and present efforts in learning. The Teacher said, "This refers to the 
effect of learning." 

The two friends did not know what to say and asked for ex- 
planation. 

The Teacher said, "Our effort today consists in being genuine 
and concrete in our determination to do good. If our determination 
is genuine and concrete, we will immediately advance to do good 
whenever we see it and immediately correct ourselves whenever 
we make a mistake.4 Only in this way do we have genuine and 
concrete effort. Then selfish human desires will gradually decrease 
and the Principle of Nature will be increasingly understood. If we 
merely go after the condition or the effect of learning, we are not 
making a real effort but are committing the error of forcing the 
growth of the mind and pursuing external things." 

98. When friends studied, many selected Hui-an [Chu Hsi] for 
criticism. The Teacher said, "This is purposely to find disagreement. 
It is wrong. When at times my ideas are different from those of 

4 Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 42. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 319. 

60 Instructions for Practical Living 

Hui-an, it is because I had to argue for my position, so that the 
student may not make an infinitesimal mistake in the beginning 
and end up with an infinite error. But my ultimate purpose and 
that of Hui-an are not different. For the rest, where his statements 
and explanations are clear and appropriate, why does a single word 
of his need to be altered ?" 

99. Ts'ai Hsi-yiian5 asked, "Sagehood can be achieved through 
learning. But the abilities and efforts of sages Po-i and I-yin6 are 
after all different from those of Confucius. Why are they all called 
sages?" 

The Teacher said, "The reason the sage has become a sage is that 
his mind has become completely identified with the Principle of 
Nature and is no longer mixed with any impurity of selfish human 
desires. It is comparable to pure gold, which attains its purity because 
its golden quality is perfect and is no longer mixed with copper or 
lead. A man must have reached the state of being completely 
identified with the Principle of Nature before he becomes a sage, 
and gold must be perfect in quality before it becomes pure. 

"However, the abilities of sages differ in degree, just as the several 
pieces of gold quantitatively differ in weight. The sage -emperors 
Yao and Shun may be compared to 10,000 pounds; King Wen and 
Confucius to 9,000 pounds; Kings Yu [r. 2183-2175 B.C.?], T'ang, 
[r. 1751-1739 B.C. ?], Wen, and Wu, 7 or 8,000 pounds; and Po-i and 
I-yin, 4 or 5,000 pounds. Their abilities and efforts differ, but in 
being completely identified with the Principle of Nature they were 
the same and all may be called sages. It is just like the several pieces 
of pure gold, which may be so called because they are qualitatively 
perfect although quantitatively different. Mix a 5,000 pound piece 

5 His private name was Tsung-yen. Holder of a "presented scholar" degree, 
he was one of Wang's first disciples. He was secretary in the state department 
of education in Szechuan. For a brief account of him, see Ming-ju bsiieh-an, 
nija-b. 

6 According to tradition, when King Wen, founder of the Chou, launched 
an expedition against Shang, Po-i, out of loyalty to the Shang dynasty, pleaded 
with him not to do so. When King Wen finally conquered Shang, Po-i 
refused to eat the grains of Chou, lived on berries in the mountains, and 
eventually starved to death. I-yin, who was a minister of King T'ang, founder 
of the Shang, helped him to bring about peace and prosperity and later banished 
T'ang's successor who failed in his duties but restored him after he repented. 
See the Book of Mencius, jB:!. Also cf. sec. 286, below. 

Part I 61 

of gold with a 10,000 pound piece, and their quality remains the 
same. Put Po-i and I-yin beside Yao and Confucius, and their 
complete identification with the Principle of Nature is the same. For 
to be pure gold depends not on quantity but on perfection in quality, 
and to be a sage depends not on ability or effort but on being com- 
pletely identified with the Principle of Nature. Therefore even an 
ordinary person, if he is willing to learn so as to enable his mind to 
become completely identified with the Principle of Nature, can also 
become a sage, in the same way that although a one ounce piece, 
when compared with a 10,000 pound piece, is widely different in 
quantity, it is not deficient in perfection in quality. This is why it 
is said that 'every man can become Yao and Shun.'7 

"In learning to become a sage, the student needs only to get rid 
of selfish human desires and preserve the Principle of Nature, 
which is like refining gold and achieving perfection in quality. If 
the deficiency in purity is not substantial, the work of refining is 
simple and success is easily attained. The lower the proportion of 
purity is, the more difficult the work becomes. In the matter of 
purity and impurity of physical nature, some men are above average 
and some are below. With reference to the Sage's doctrines, some 
are born with the knowledge of them and can practice them naturally 
and easily, while others learn them through study and practice them 
for their advantage.8 Those below the average must make one 
hundred efforts where others make one, and one thousand efforts 
where others make ten.9 But the success of all of them is the same. 
Later generations do not realize that the foundation for becoming 
a sage is to be completely identified with the Principle of Nature, 
but instead seek sagehood only in knowledge and ability. They 
regard the sage as knowing all and being able to do all, and they 
feel they have to understand all the knowledge and ability of the 
sage before they can succeed. Consequently they do not direct their 
efforts toward the Principle of Nature but merely cripple their 
spirit and exhaust their energy in scrutinizing books, investigating 
the names and varieties of things, and imitating the forms and 
traces [of the acts of the ancients]. As their knowledge becomes 
more extensive, their selfish desires become more numerous, and 

7 Book of Mencius, 6B:2. 

8 Paraphrasing the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

9 Ibid., ch. 19. 

62 Instructions for Practical Living 

as their abilities become greater and greater, the Principle of 
Nature becomes increasingly obscured from them. Their case is 
just like that of a person who, seeing someone else with a piece of 
pure gold of 10,000 pounds, does not take steps to refine his own so 
that in the quality of purity his will not yield to that of the other 
person, but foolishly hopes to match the 10,000 pound piece in 
quantity. He throws in mixed elements of pewter, lead, brass, and 
iron with the result that the greater the quantity, the lower the 
degree of purity. In the end it is no longer gold at all." 

At that time Hsu Ai was by the side of the Teacher and remarked, 
"This analogy of yours will effectively destroy the delusions of 
famous but mediocre scholars who advocate the study of isolated 
details and is a great help to us students." 

The Teacher further said, "In making effort, we want to diminish 
every day rather than to increase every day. If we reduce our 
selfish human desire a little bit, to that extent we have restored the 
Principle of Nature. How enjoyable and how free! How simple and 
how easy!" 

100. Yang Shih-te10 asked, "The theory of the investigation of 
things as you taught it is clear, simple, and easy. Everyone can 
understand it. How is it that Wen Kung [Chu Hsi]11 failed to under- 
stand the theory although he was unsurpassed in intelligence?" 

The Teacher said, "Wen Kung's mental energy and vigor were 
great. Because from the beginning, when he was young, he had 
already made up his mind to continue the heritage of the past and 
to enlighten future generations, all along he directed his efforts 
only to intellectual investigation and writing. Naturally he would 
have had no time for these if he had given priority to self- 
cultivation with a sense of genuine and personal concern. After he 
had reached the state of eminent virtue, if he had really worried 
lest the doctrine not be made clear to the world, and, following 
the example of Confucius' retiring to edit the Six Classics, had 
eliminated superfluous works and confined himself to the simple and 
essential in order to enlighten later scholars, in general it would not 

10 His private name was Chi. He was at first a disciple of Chan Kan-ch'iian 
(see below, sec. 201, n. 3) but later followed Wang. 

11 Chu Hsi was honored with the posthumous title, Wen, meaning "cul- 
ture." 

Part I 63 

have required him to do much investigation. When he was young 
he wrote many books and then repented doing so in his old age. That 
was doing things upside down." 

Shih-te said, "He repented in his old age. For instance, he said 
that he realized the mistake of adhering to the traditionally accepted 
text of the Great Learning,12 that 'book reading did not help his 
task,'13 and that his task 'had nothing to do with holding on to books 
or adhering rigidly to words.'14 These statements show that when he 
reached old age he began to regret the mistakes of his previous 
effort and to direct his new effort toward self-cultivation in the 
spirit of genuine and personal concern." 

The Teacher said, "Correct. This is where we cannot match Wen 
Kung. His energy being great, once he regretted he immediately 
turned around. Unfortunately before long he passed away, not 
living long enough to correct the many mistakes he had made during 
his lifetime." 

101. I was pulling weeds out from among the flowers and there- 
upon said, "How difficult it is in the world to cultivate good and 
remove evil!" 

The Teacher said, "Only because no effort is made to do so." 
A little later, he said, "Such a view of good and evil is motivated 
by personal interest and is therefore easily wrong." I did not 
understand. The Teacher said, "The spirit of life of Heaven and 
Earth is the same in flowers and weeds. Where have they the 
distinction of good and evil? When you want to enjoy flowers, you 
will consider flowers good and weeds evil. But when you want to 
use weeds, you will then consider them good. Such good and evil 
are all products of the mind's likes and dislikes. Therefore I know 
you are wrong." 

I asked, "In that case, there is neither good nor evil, is that right ?" 

The Teacher said, "The state of having neither good nor evil is 

that of principle in tranquillity. Good and evil appear when the 

12 Letter in answer to Huang Chih-ch'ing, in Chu T%u wen-chi, 46 : 30b. Actually 
the phrase ting-pen [accepted edition] does not appear in the letter. At any rate, 
Chu's regret was over the rigid study of details and has nothing to do with the 
Great Learning. For "Chu Hsi's Final Conclusions Arrived at Late in Life," 
see below, pp. 263-67. 

13 Letter to Lu Tzu-yiieh, in ibid., 47:29a. 

14 Letter to Ho Shu-ching, in ibid., 40:27a. 

64 Instructions for Practical hiving 

vital force is perturbed. If the vital force is not perturbed, 
there is neither good nor evil, and this is called the highest 
good." 

I asked, "The Buddhists also deny the distinction between good 
and evil. Are they different from you?" 

The Teacher said, "Being attached to the non-distinction of good 
and evil, the Buddhists neglect everything and therefore are inca- 
pable of governing the world. The sage, on the other hand, in his 
non -distinction of good and evil, merely makes no special effort 
whatsoever to like or dislike, and is not perturbed in his vital 
force. As he pursues the kingly path and sees the perfect excel- 
lence,15 he of course completely follows the Principle of Nature 
and it becomes possible for him to assist in and complete the 
universal process of production and reproduction and apply it for 
the benefit of the people."16 

"If weeds are not evil, they should not be removed." 

"This, however, is the view of the Buddhists and Taoists. If they 
are harmful, what is the objection to your removing them?" 

"That would be a case of making a special effort to like or to 
dislike." 

"Not making a special effort to like or to dislike does not mean 
not to like or dislike at all. A person behaving so would be devoid 
of consciousness. To say 'not to make a special effort' merely means 
that one's likes and dislikes completely follow the Principle of 
Nature and that one does not go on to attach to that situation a 
bit of selfish thought. This amounts to having neither likes nor 
dislikes." 

"How can weeding be regarded as completely following the 
Principle of Nature without any attachment to selfish thought ?" 

"If weeds are harmful, according to principle they should be 
removed. Then remove them, that is all. If for a moment they are 
not removed, one should not be troubled by it. If one attaches 
to that situation a bit of selfish thought, it will be a burden on 
the substance of his mind, and his vital force will be much 
perturbed." 

15 Quoting the Book of History, "Great Norm." Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Shoo King, p. 331. 

16 Quoting the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 11. Cf. trans, 
by Legge, Yi King, p. 281. 

Part I 65 

"In that case, good and evil are not present in things at all." 

"They are only in your mind. Following the Principle of Nature 
is good, while perturbing the vital force is evil." 

"After all, then, things are devoid of good and evil ?" 

"This is true of the mind. It is also true of things. Famous but 
mediocre scholars fail to realize this. They neglect the mind and 
chase after material things, and consequently get a wrong view of 
the way to investigate things. All day long they restlessly seek 
principle in external things. They only succeed in getting at it by 
incidental deeds of righteousness. All their lives they act in this way 
without understanding it and do so habitually without examination."17 

"How about loving beautiful color and hating bad odor?" 

"This is all in accord with principle. We do so by the very nature 
of the Principle of Nature. From the beginning there is no selfish 
desire to make a special effort to like or dislike." 

"How can the love of beautiful color and the hatred of bad odor 
not be regarded as one's own will ?" 

"The will in this case is sincere, not selfish. A sincere will is in 
accord with the Principle of Nature. However, while it is in accord 
with the Principle of Nature, at the same time it is not attached in 
the least to selfish thought. Therefore when one is affected to any 
extent by wrath or fondness, the mind will not be correct.18 It must 
be broad and impartial. Only thus is it in its original substance. 
Knowing this, you know the state of equilibrium before feelings 
are aroused." 

Meng Po-sheng19 said, "You said that if weeds are harmful, 
according to principle they should be removed. Why should the 
desire to remove them be motivated by personal interest?" 

"You must find this out yourself through personal realization. 
What is your state of mind when you want to remove the weeds ? 
And what was the state of mind of Chou Mao-shu [Chou Tun-i, 1017- 
73] when he would not cut down the grass outside his window?"20 

17 A quotation from the Book of Mencius, fh.:^. 

18 According to the Great Learning, ch. 7. 

19 Nothing is known of him except that his name was Yuan. 

20 His courtesy name was Mao-shu and his honorific name Master 
Lien-hsi. He was generally considered the founder of Neo -Confucianism. 
Aside from his doctrine of the Great Ultimate which laid the foundation for 
Neo -Confucianism he was noted for his love of life. The fact that he would not 
even cut the grass is recorded in the I-shu, 3:2a. 

66 Instructions for Practical hiving 

1 02. The Teacher said to students, "When one devotes himself to 
study, he must have a basis. Only then can his effort lead to any 
solution. Even though his effort may not be uninterrupted, he will 
have a definite direction like a boat with a rudder. The mere mention 
of the subject will immediately wake him up. Otherwise, although 
he devotes himself to study, he can only accomplish something 
through the incidental accumulation of righteousness. He will only 
act without understanding and do so habitually without examina- 
tion.21 This is neither a great foundation nor the universal way of 
virtue." 

He again said, "If one understands, no matter how he says it, 
he is right. If what he says is right in one respect but not in another, 
it is because he has not understood." 

103. Someone said, "For the sake of parents, a student cannot 
avoid the burden of preparing for the civil service examination." 

The Teacher said, "If taking the examinations for the sake of 
parents is a burden to one's study, then is farming for the sake of 
parents also a burden to study ? A former elder said, 'The danger of 
the civil service examination lies in its destroying one's will to study.'22 
The only fear is that one's will to study may not be genuine." 

104. Ou-yang Ch'ung-i23 asked, "Ordinarily one's mind is much 
flustered. It is so whether we are occupied or not. Why?" 

The Teacher said, "In the dynamic operation of the material 
force of the universe there is from the beginning not a moment of 
rest. But there is the master. Consequently the operation has its 
regular order and it goes on neither too fast nor too slowly. The 
master [that is, the wonderful functioning of creation] is always 
calm in spite of hundreds of changes and thousands of transforma- 
tions. This process makes it possible for man to live. If, while the 

21 A quotation from the Book of Mencius, jA:^. 

22 Ch'eng I, Wai-shu 11:5a. The examination emphasized memorization and 
lacked stimulation. 

23 His name was Te and his courtesy name Nan-yeh (1495-15 54). Holder 
of a "presented scholar" degree of 1523, he became senior lord of the bureau of 
state ceremonies, vice-minister of the department of rites, etc. He was outspoken 
in opposing certain governmental measures. In 1543-44, he lectured by imperial 
decree on the doctrine of innate knowledge of the good. A thousand scholars 
gathered to listen to him, setting a record for such a gathering that stood for 
several hundred years. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, I7:ia-2b, 

Part I 67 

master remains calm, the mind is ceaseless as heavenly movements 
are ceaseless, it will always be at ease in spite of countless changes 
in its dealings with things. As it is said, 'The original mind remains 
calm and serene, and all parts of the body obey its command.'24 If 
there is no master, the vital force will simply run wild. How can 
the mind not be flustered?" 

105. The Teacher said, "The great trouble of students is to be 
found in the love of fame." 

I said, "A year or so ago, I thought this trouble of mine had 
decreased. Upon careful examination recently, I found that it has not 
done so at all. It is not necessarily striving for external things or 
acting to satisfy others. The mere fact that I am happy when I hear 
words of praise and depressed when I hear words of criticism shows 
that the trouble occurs." 

"Quite right. Name [fame] and actuality are opposed to each 
other. When devotion to actuality increases a little, to that extent 
the devotion to name decreases. If one devotes his mind entirely 
to actuality, he will have no mind to devote to name. If one is 
devoted to the search for actuality, just as one seeks food when 
hungry and drink when thirsty, how can he also have time to 
love fame?" 

He again said, " 'A superior man dislikes the thought of his 
name's not being mentioned after his death.'25 The word ch'eng 
(to mention) is read in the departing tone [thus meaning to weigh 
or balance]. It is the same idea as 'a superior man is ashamed of a 
reputation beyond his merits.'26 If in reality one is not equal to his 
fame, the situation can be remedied if he is still living. It will be too 
late, however, after death. In 'if one reaches the age of forty or 
fifty and nothing is heard of him'27 the phrase 'heard of means his 
hearing of the Way, not his being heard of. Confucius said, ' [To be 
heard of through the country] is merely to be known. It is different 
from being distinguished.'28 How could Confucius be satisfied with 
the hope of people merely to be known ?" 

24 In Chu Hsi's Meng T^u chi-chu, ch. n, comment on the Book of Mencius, 
6A:i5, where he quotes Fan Chun's (77.1146) Hsin-chen. 

25 Analects, 15:19. 

26 Book of Mencius, 4B:i8. 

27 Analects, 9:22. 

28 Ibid., 12:20. 

68 Instructions for Practical Liping 

106. I often have regrets. The Teacher said, "To have regrets and 
to realize one's mistakes is comparable to medicine. It gets rid of the 
disease. But it is better to correct one's mistake. If the mistake is 
allowed to remain, you have a condition in which disease arises 
because of the medicine." 

107. Te-chang29 said, "I hear that you compare pure gold to the 
sage, the quantity to the sage's ability, and the work of refining to 
the student's effort to learn.30 The comparison is most profound and 
keen. But I am afraid it is not quite satisfactory to say that Yao and 
Shun were, as it were, 10,000 pounds of gold whereas Confucius 
was only 9,000 pounds." 

The Teacher said, "Again this thought is occasioned by the 
viewing of a person in terms of the body, and therefore you contend 
about the quantity in behalf of the Sage. If you are not thinking of 
the body, then 10,000 pounds is not too much for Yao and 9,000 
pounds not too little for Confucius. The 10,000 pounds of Yao 
and Shun belong to Confucius and the 9,000 pounds of Confucius 
belong to Yao and Shun. There is really no difference as to whether 
it was his or theirs. What is called sagehood depends only on the 
refinement and singleness of mind and not on quantity. As long as 
people are equal in their complete identification with the Principle 
of Nature, they are equally sages. As to ability, power, and spiritual 
energy in handling affairs, how can all people be equal in them? 
Later scholars have confined their comparison to quantity and have 
therefore drifted into the doctrine of success and profit. If everybody 
gets rid of the idea of comparing quantity and devotes his energy 
and spirit entirely to the effort of becoming completely identified 
with the Principle of Nature, everyone will become self-contained 
and everyone will be perfectly realized.31 The great will become 

29 Nothing is known of this man. 

30 Cf. sec. 99, above. 

31 Miwa Shissai (1669-1744) in his commentary, Hyochii denshii roku, said that 
the saying is by Bodhidharma (fl. 460-534) and comes from the Liu-men chi. 
Other Japanese annotators have followed him. Quite aside from the fact that 
the authorship of the Liu-men chi is by no means certain, the saying is found 
neither in the complete text in the Taisho dai^pkyo 48:365-76, nor in its partial 
text in the Zoku^pkyo, 1st collection, pt. 2, case 8, vol. 5. In his Denshii roku kogi, 
Azuma Keiji said that the saying comes from the Liu-ming chi and that Bodhi- 
dharma's words were: "As everyone is self-sufficient and everyone will be 

Part I 69 

great and the small will become small, each being self-sufficient 
without depending on the pursuit of external things. This is the real 
and concrete task of manifesting the good and making the personal 
life sincere. Later scholars do not understand the doctrines of the 
Sage, they do not know how to realize their innate knowledge and 
innate ability directly through personal experience and extend them 
in their own minds, but instead seek to know what they cannot 
know and do what they cannot do. They hope single -mindedly 
only for exalted position and they admire greatness. They do not 
know they have the evil mind of the wicked kings Chieh and Chou 
and at every turn they attempt to undertake the task of the sage- 
emperors Yao and Shun. How could they succeed? They toil year 
in and year out until they die in old age, and I don't know what they 
will have accomplished. What a pity!" 

1 08. I asked, "A former scholar considered the mind in its tranquil 
state as substance and the mind in its active state as function.32 What 
about it?" 

The Teacher said, "The substance and function of the mind cannot 
be equated with its tranquil and active states. Tranquillity and 
activity are matters of time. When we speak of substance as 
substance, function is already involved in it, and when we speak of 
function as function, substance is already involved in it. This is 
what is called 'Substance and function coming from the same 
source.'33 However, there is no harm in saying that the substance of 

perfectly realized, there is inherent in everyone's mind a way to achieve perfec- 
tion." I suspect that ming is a misprint for men, for there is no work entitled 
Liu-ming cbi. The saying, "Everyone is self-sufficient and everyone will be 
perfectly realized," which is slightly different from that quoted by Wang but 
has essentially the same meaning, is found in the Cb'u-sbib Fan-cb'i Cb'an-sbib 
yu-luoi Zen Master Fan-ch'i, also called Ch'u-shih(i29o-i 370), ch.7,in Zokw^pkyo, 
1 st collection, pt. 2, case 29, 1:66b. (I owe this earliest reference to Professor 
Yanagida Seizan through the kind help of the Reverend Mrs. Ruth Sasaki 
of the First Zen Institute, Kyoto.) Fan-ch'i, however, was probably quoting 
an earlier source. In a personal letter, Dr. D. T. Suzuki doubts Bodhidharma's 
authorship of the Liu-men cbi, thinks that Bodhidharma was not the first one 
to use the saying, and says he can't remember who was the first one to use the 
dictum, which, according to him, is not confined to the Zen school. 

32 Ch'eng I, Wen-chi, 5:12a. Wang Yang-ming said the same thing in the 
Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'iian-shu, 5:6a. 

33 Ch'eng I, preface to his I chuan. See below, sec. 156, n. 11. 

70 Instructions for Practical hiving 

the mind is revealed through its tranquillity and its function through 
its activity." 

109. I asked, "Why can't the most intelligent and the most stupid 
be changed P"34 

The Teacher said, "It is not that they cannot be changed. It is 
merely that they are unwilling to change." 

1 10. I asked about the chapter in the Analects in which the pupils 
of Tzu-hsia asked Tzu-chang [503-^.450 B.C.] about the principles 
of friendship.35 

The Teacher said, "When Tzu-hsia said ['to associate with those 
who are fit for you and avoid those not fit for you'], he was talking 
about the friendship of young people. When Tzu-chang said that 
[the superior man honors the worthy and gets along with all and 
praises the good and pities the incompetent], he was talking about the 
friendship of adults. If followed carefully, both are correct." 

in. Tzu-jen36 asked, " 'Is it not a pleasure to learn and to repeat or 
practice from time to time what has been learned?'37 A former 
scholar regarded learning as following the conduct of those who 
are the first to be enlightened.38 What do you think?" 

The Teacher said, "To learn is to get rid of selfish human desires 
and to preserve the Principle of Nature. If we devote ourselves to 
getting rid of selfish human desires and preserving the Principle 
of Nature, we will naturally be as correct as those who are the first 
to be enlightened. When we go into the ancient meaning of the 
term 'learning,' in its derived meaning, it involves questioning, the 
sifting of ideas, thinking, deliberation, the preservation of the mind, 
self-examination, self-mastery, and other efforts. But all these are 
no more than the effort to get rid of selfish human desires from the 
mind and preserve the Principle of Nature in the mind. To say that 
it is to follow the conduct of those who are the first to be enlightened 
is to mention only one item of the process of learning, and one 

34 Analects, 17:3. 

35 Ibid., 19:3. 

36 It is not clear whether his family name was Liian and his private name Hui 
or his family name Lin and his private name Ch'un. 

37 Analects, 1:1. 

38 Chu Hsi, Lun-yu chi-chu, ch. 1, comment on Analects, 1:1. 

Part I 71 

seems to be seeking it entirely outside himself. To 'learn with a 
constant perseverance and application' does not mean, in the case 
of 'sitting like a boy impersonating an ancestor in a sacrifice,'39 
for example, merely to practice how to sit, but to practice the attitude 
of mind while sitting, and in the case of 'standing reverently as in 
sacrificing,'40 does not mean merely to practice standing, but to 
practice the attitude of mind while standing. The word pleasure 
is the same word as in Mencius' saying that 'moral principles please 
our minds.'41 The human mind by nature delights in moral prin- 
ciples very much as the eye delights in beauty and the ear in music. If 
they do not, it is only because they are blinded and spoiled by 
selfish human desires. Now as selfish human desires are gradually 
removed, the mind will be increasingly harmonious with moral 
principles. How can it help being delighted?" 

112. Kuo-ying42 said, "Although Tseng Tzu was genuine in daily 
examining himself on three points,43 I am afraid these examinations 
were undertaken because he had not heard of the doctrine of one 
thread {i-kuan) that runs through all the teachings of Confucius."44 
The Teacher said, "Confucius told Tseng Tzu about the one 
thread because he realized that Tseng Tzu had not found the 
essentials of moral cultivation. If the student can really devote 
himself to conscientiousness and altruism, are they not the one 
thread running through all? The 'one' is comparable to the roots 
of a tree and the 'thread' to its branches and leaves. If the roots 
have not been cultivated, how can there be branches and leaves? 
Substance and function come from the same source. If substance is 
not firmly established, how can function proceed ? When [Chu Hsi] 
said that 'Tseng Tzu had in the sphere of function carefully examined 
matters as they came along and practiced them vigorously, but had 

39 Book of Kites, "Summary of Ceremonies." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 
i, p. 62. 

40 Ibid. 

41 Book of Mencius, 6A:7. 

42 Nothing is known of him except that his family name was Ch'en. 

43 Whether in working for others he was loyal, whether in dealing with 
friends he was faithful, and whether in giving instructions to others he had 
practiced what he was taught. See Analects, 1:4. 

44 Ibid., 4:15. 

8 

72 Instructions for "Practical hiving 

not realized their substance as one,'45 I am afraid he was not in 
complete accord with truth." 

113. Huang Ch'eng-fu46 asked about the chapter in the Analects 
where Confucius asked Tzu-kung [520-^.450 B.C.], "Whom do you 
consider superior, yourself or Yen Hui?"47 

The Teacher said, "Tzu-kung learned much and was well in- 
formed. He devoted his efforts to what was to be seen and heard. Yen 
Hui, on the other hand, devoted his effort to the mind. Therefore 
Confucius enlightened Tzu-kung by asking him the question. But 
in his reply he confined himself only to matters of knowledge and 
observation. Therefore Confucius sighed. He did not approve 
of him." 

114. [The Teacher said,] "Yen Hui did not transfer his anger nor 
repeat his mistakes.48 He could behave as he did only because he 
possessed the equilibrium before the feelings are aroused." 

115. [The Teacher said,] "As he who grows a tree must nourish 
the roots, so he who cultivates virtue must nourish his mind. If the 
tree is to grow, the many branches must be trimmed when it is 
young. Likewise, if virtue is to become eminent, the love of external 
things must be eliminated when the student first begins to learn. If 
one loves such external things as poetry and flowery essays, his 
mental energy will gradually be dissipated in poetry and literary 
essays. The same is true of all love of external things." 

He further said, "The way of learning I am now talking about 
is the task of creating something from nothing. You gentlemen 

45 Lun-yii chi-chu, ch. 2, commenting on Analects, 4:15. 

46 His name was Tsung-ming (d. 1536). Holder of a "presented scholar" 
degree, he served in various official capacities, including that of vice-minister 
of the department of military affairs. He was dismissed from office because he 
dared urge the emperor to cancel his proposed pleasure -seeking tour. Later he 
was restored but was eventually banished to be an official in Fukien because he 
recommended the impeachment of an evil but powerful official. Ultimately he 
became a vice-minister of the department of rites. For an account of him, see 
Mtng-ju hsueh-an, i4:4a-b. 

47 Analects, 5:8. Tzu-kung's answer was that Yen Hui was superior because, 
while Yen Hui knew all about a subject upon hearing one part of it, he him- 
self knew only one fifth. 

48 Ibid., 6:2. 

Part I 73 

must believe me. All depends on making up the mind. If the student 
makes up his mind to have one thought to do good, his mind 
will be like the seed of a tree. If only he neither forces it to grow nor 
neglects it,49 but keeps on cultivating and nourishing it, it will 
naturally grow larger every day and night. Its vitality will be 
increasingly great and its branches and leaves more luxuriant. When 
the tree first begins to grow, it shoots forth many branches. These 
must be cut before the roots and trunk may grow large. This is also 
true when one begins to learn. Therefore in making up one's mind 
single -mindedness is highly valued." 

1 1 6. We happened to be talking about the followers of our 
Teacher, that so-and-so devotes his effort to self-cultivation, and 
so-and-so devotes his effort to knowledge. The Teacher said, 
"Those who concentrate on self-cultivation increasingly realize 
their insufficiency, while those who concentrate on knowledge 
increasingly believe that they have a superabundance. Actually 
the former increasingly have a superabundance whereas the latter 
increasingly have an insufficiency." 

117. Liang Jih-fu50 asked, "Dwelling in seriousness {ching) and the 
investigation of the principles of things to the utmost are two 
different things. You consider them as one. Why?" 

The Teacher said, "There is only this one thing in the world. 
Where do you find two ? If you are thinking of the ten thousand 
multiplicities, then there are three hundred rules of ceremony and 
three thousand rules of conduct.51 Are there only two ? Sir, suppose 
you tell me what dwelling in seriousness and investigating principle 
to the utmost are." 

"Dwelling in seriousness is the work of preserving and nour- 
ishing, while investigating principle to the utmost is investigating 
the principle of things and events to the utmost." 

"Preserving and nourishing what ?" 

49 Paraphrasing the Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

50 His name was Ch'o and he was a native of Canton and a "presented 
scholar" degree holder of 15 14. In 15 19, when he urged the emperor to cancel 
his pleasure -seeking tour, he was punished by beating. It was primarily because 
of him that Wang Yang-ming's teachings spread to the Canton area. 

61 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 27. 

74 Instructions for Practical hiving 

"Preserving and nourishing the Principle of Nature in the mind." 
"In that case, it is no more than the investigation of the prin- 
ciple of things to the utmost. Suppose you tell me how to investigate 
the principle of things to the utmost." 

"It means that in serving parents, for example, one must investi- 
gate the principle of filial piety to the utmost, and in serving 
the ruler one must investigate the principle of loyalty to the 
utmost." 

"Are the principles of filial piety and loyalty to be found in the 
person of the parents and the ruler or in one's own mind ? If they 
are to be found in one's own mind, it will also be no more than the 
investigation of the principles of the mind to the utmost. Please 
tell me what dwelling in seriousness is." 
"It is merely concentration on one thing." 
"What do you mean by concentration on one thing?" 
"It means, for example, to concentrate the mind on reading when 
one is reading, and to concentrate the mind on handling affairs when 
one is handling affairs." 

"In that case it would mean to concentrate on drinking when one 
is drinking and to concentrate on enjoying sex when one is enjoying 
sex. That would be chasing after material things. How can it amount 
to any effort to dwell in seriousness ?" 

Jih-fu asked for an explanation. The Teacher said, "By the one 
thing is meant the Principle of Nature, and by concentrating on 
one thing is meant to concentrate the mind on the Principle of 
Nature. If one only knows how to concentrate on one thing and 
does not know that the one thing is the same as the Principle of 
Nature, he will be chasing after material things when he is busy 
and his mind will become a blank when he is at leisure. Precisely 
because one's mind completely devotes its efforts to the Principle 
of Nature, whether one is busy or at leisure, the way to dwell in 
seriousness is no different from the investigation of principles to the 
utmost. Dwelling in seriousness is the investigation of principle 
in its aspect of concentration, and the investigation of principle is 
dwelling in seriousness in its aspect of thoroughness and care. It 
is not that after dwelling in seriousness there is another mind to 
investigate principle, nor that at the time of the investigation of 
principle there is another mind to dwell in seriousness. Although 
they differ in name, their task is one. Take the saying in the Book of 
Chan es, 'Seriousness is to straighten the internal life. Righteousness 

Part I 75 

is to square the external life.'52 Thus seriousness is righteousness 
when applied to the time of inactivity and righteousness is serious- 
ness when applied to the time of activity. The two sayings together 
refer to one thing. When Confucius mentioned 'cultivating oneself 
with seriousness,'53 for example, it was not necessary for him to 
mention righteousness, and when Mencius talked about accumu- 
lating righteousness,54 it was not necessary for him to talk about 
seriousness. If the fact that they are really one is understood, it 
does not matter how one talks about them, for their task is the same. 
If one is too rigidly literal and does not understand the fundamental 
principle, one will be occupied with fragmentary and isolated details 
and broken pieces and his task will have no solution." 

"Why is the investigation of principle the same as the full develop- 
ment of one's nature?" 

"The nature of man is the substance of his mind. It is the same as 
principle. In investigating the principle of humanity to the utmost, 
one must really extend the humanity [in one's action] to the ultimate 
of humanity, and in investigating the principle of righteousness to 
the utmost, one must really extend the righteousness [in one's 
action] to the ultimate of righteousness. Humanity and righteousness 
are inherent in one's nature. Therefore to investigate principle 
to the utmost is fully to develop one's nature. Mencius said that if a 
man gives full development to his feeling of commiseration, his 
humanity will be more than he can ever put into practice.55 This is 
the work of the investigation of principle to the utmost." 

Jih-fu said, "A former scholar said that 'Every blade of grass and 
every tree possesses principle and should be examined.'56 What do 
you say to that?" 

The Teacher said, "I have no time for that.57 You had better 
understand your own nature and feeling first. It is necessary to 
develop one's own nature to the fullest extent before one can fully 
develop the nature of things." 

Terrified, Jih-fu achieved some understanding. 

52 Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 2. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 420. 
63 Analects, 14:45. 
54 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 
65 Ibid., 7B:3i. 

56 Ch'eng I, I-shu, 18:9a. 

57 Quoting the Analects, 14:31. 

76 Instructions for Practical Living 

1 1 8. Chi Wei-ch'ien58 asked, "How is it that knowledge is in the 
original substance of the mind ?" 

The Teacher said, "Knowledge is principle made intelligent. 
In terms of its position as master [of the body], it is called the 
mind. In terms of its position as endowment, it is called our 
nature. All infants know how to love their parents and respect their 
elder brothers. The simple truth is that when the intelligent faculty 
is not obstructed by selfish desires, but is developed and extended 
to the limit, it is then completely the original substance of the 
mind and can identify its character with that of Heaven and Earth.59 
From the sage downward, none can be without obstruction. There- 
fore all need to investigate things so as to extend their knowledge." 

119. Shou-heng60 asked, "The task of the Great Learning consists 
only in making the will sincere and the task of making the will 
sincere consists only in the investigation of things. The cultivation 
of the personal life, the regulation of the family, the bringing of 
order to the state and peace to the world61 are all covered by the 
sincerity of the will. How is it that there is also the task of the 
rectification of the mind, in which one's mind will not be correct if 
one is affected to any extent by wrath and fondness?"62 

The Teacher said, "You have to think and find out for yourself. 
If you understand this, you will understand the equilibrium before 
the feelings are aroused." 

Shou-heng asked several times for an explanation. 

The Teacher said, "There are grades in the task of study. In the 
beginning, if one does not earnestly use his will to love good and 

58 This is the courtesy name of Chi Yuan-heng (d. 1521). As a "presented 
scholar" degree holder, he became the disciple of Wang Yang-ming when the 
latter was banished to become an official in Kuei-chou. He was sent by Wang 
to Prince Ning, who was plotting a revolt, ostensibly to lecture on Confucian 
doctrines but actually to spy on the prince. After the revolt had been suppressed, 
he was accused of conspiracy with the prince. Although he denied this even 
after torture, he was imprisoned together with his wife and daughter. When 
he was finally cleared and set free, he died five days afterward. For an account 
of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 28:6b-ya. 

59 Quoting the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 1. Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Yi King, p. 417. 

60 Nothing is known of him. 

61 Great Learning, the text. 

62 Ibid., ch. 7. 

Part I 11 

hate evil, how can he do good and remove evil ? This earnest use of 
the will is to make the will sincere. However, if one does not 
realize that the original substance of mind is devoid of all things 
[that is, completely pure and open], and attaches his mind solely 
to loving good and hating evil, he will merely add to his mind this 
much of his own will and therefore his mind will not be broad and 
impartial.63 Only when one does not make any special effort whatso- 
ever to like or dislike, as described in the Book of History, ,64 can the 
mind be in its original substance. It is therefore said that if one is 
affected to any extent by wrath and fondness, one's mind will not 
be correct. The rectification of the mind is merely the inside of the 
effort to make the will sincere. Realize the substance of the mind 
through personal experience at all times and see to it that it is as 
clear as a mirror and as even as a balance. Then you will find the 
equilibrium before the feelings are aroused." 

1 20. Huang Cheng -chih65 asked, "When one does not know a 
thing, his task is to be apprehensive. When one alone knows it, 
his task is to be watchful over himself.66 What do you think of this 
theory ?" 

The Teacher said, "Both are the same task. When nothing 
happens, of course [what is going on in one's mind] is privately 
known to him. But when things do happen, it is also privately 
known to him. If people do not exert effort toward what is privately 
known to them and exert it only toward what is publicly known, 
this is to act hypocritically and to 'disguise themselves when they see 
a superior man.'67 This condition of private knowledge is the root 
of sincerity. Hence all thoughts, whether good or evil, are genuine. 
If one step is correct here, all the following steps will be correct, but 
if one mistake is made here, a hundred mistakes will follow. It is the 
point of departure between the kingly way of moral principles and 
the despotic way of power, between righteousness and profit, 

63 Ch'eng Hao, Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

M Book of History, "Great Norm." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 331. 

65 He was Huang Hung-kang (1492-1 561), whose literary name was Lo-ts'un. 
A faithful disciple of Wang's, he did not serve in the government until several 
years after Wang's death. He became a divisional executive assistant in the 
department of justice. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsueh-an, I9:na-I3a. 

66 As set forth in Chu Hsi's Chung-yung chang-chii, ch. 1. 

67 Great Learning, ch. 6. 

78 Instructions for Practical hiving 

between sincerity and insincerity, and between good and evil. If 
at this point one makes a firm stand, then the foundation will be 
correct and the source will be pure. This means that sincerity has 
been established. Here lies all the spirit and life of many of the 
efforts of the ancients to make the personal life sincere. Truly, 
nothing is more visible than the hidden and more manifest than the 
subtle, and in all places and at all times and from the beginning to 
the end, this [making the personal life sincere] is the only task. Now 
if apprehension is taken separately as appertaining to a situation 
when things are not privately known, the task will be one of frag- 
mentary and isolated details, and will also be interrupted. To be 
apprehensive implies that one already knows the situation. If one 
does not know, who is it that is apprehensive? The view as you 
stated it inevitably leads to the Buddhist meditation that cuts off 
all events." 

"You said that all thoughts, whether good or evil, are genuine. 
In the area of private knowledge, aren't there moments without 
thought?" 

"To be apprehensive is also thought. The thought of apprehension 
never ceases. If it is not preserved in any way, it will become 
either dull and stupid or evil. From morning to evening, and from 
youth to old age, if one wants to be without thought, that is, not 
to know anything, he can't do so unless he is sound asleep or dead 
like dry wood or dead ashes."68 

121. Chih-tao69 asked, "Hsiin Tzu [fl. 298-238 B.C.] said that 'to 
nourish the mind there is nothing better than sincerity.'70 But a 
former scholar said he was wrong.71 Why?" 

The Teacher said, "He should not be regarded too lightly as 
wrong. Sincerity is sometimes interpreted as a task rather than as a 
state of mind. Sincerity is the original substance of the mind. To 
try to restore this original substance is the work of thinking how 
to be sincere. When Ch'eng Ming-tao said, 'to preserve it [humanity] 

68 See Chuang T^u, ch. 2, sptk ed., 1:1 8a. Cf. trans, by Herbert Giles, Chuang 
T%u (London, Allen and Unwin, 1961), p. 34. 

69 Nothing is known of him. 

70 Hsiin T-%u, ch. 3, sptk ed., 2:6a; not translated in Homer H. Dubs's 
Works of Hsiint^e (London, Probsthain, 1928). 

71 Ch'eng Hao, Wai-shu, 2:4b. 

Part I 79 

with sincerity and seriousness,'72 he meant this. The Great Learning 
says, 'Those who wished to rectify their minds would first make their 
wills sincere.'73 Though there are many defects in what Hsiin Tzu 
said, one should not seize upon one incident in order to find fault 
with him. Generally speaking, if in examining the sayings of anyone 
one has a preconceived opinion, he will be wrong. Though the 
saying, 'He who seeks to be rich will not be humane,'74 was uttered 
by the wicked official Yang Hu [fl. 505 B.C.], Mencius quoted it just 
the same. This shows how impartial sages and worthies are." 

122. Hsiao Hui75 asked, "It is difficult to overcome one's selfish 
desires. What can be done about them?" 

The Teacher said, "Give me your selfish desires. I shall overcome 
them for you." 

He continued, "Before one can master himself, he must first have 
the determination to do something for himself, and before one can 
fully realize himself, he must master himself." 

Hsiao Hui said, "To a certain extent, I, too, have the determination 
to do something for myself, but I don't know why I cannot master 
myself." 

The Teacher said, "Please tell me what you mean by having the 
determination to do something for yourself." 

After a long while, Hui said, "Having made up my mind to be a 
good man, I thought I had the determination to do something for 
myself. As I think of it, I realize that I merely wanted to do something 
for my bodily self, not for my true self." 

The Teacher said, "Has the true self ever been separated from the 
bodily self? I am afraid you have not even done anything for your 
bodily self. Tell me, is not what you call the bodily self ears, eyes, 
mouth, nose, and the four limbs?" 

Hui said, "Precisely, for the eye I desire color, for the ear, sound, 
for the mouth, taste, and for the four limbs, comfort. For these 
reasons I cannot master myself." 

72 1-shu, 2 A: 3a. 

73 Great Learning, the text. 

74 Book of Mencius, ^A:*,. 

75 Details about him are not known. It is interesting to note that in the 
conversations recorded by Hsiieh K'an, sees. 95-129, in the case of Hsiao alone 
he used his private name instead of his courtesy or literary name, perhaps 
because he was a very young man. 

80 Instructions for Practical hiving 

The Teacher said, "Beautiful color causes one's eyes to be blind. 
Beautiful sound causes one's ears to be deaf. Good taste causes one's 
palate to be spoiled, and racing and hunting cause one to be mad.76 
All these are harmful to your ears, eyes, mouth, nose, and four limbs. 
How can this be considered as doing something for them ? If you 
are really doing something for them, you must reflect upon the 
manner in which the ears listen, the eyes look, the mouth speaks, 
and the four limbs move. If it is not in accord with the rules of 
propriety, you must not look, listen, speak, or move. Only then can 
you fully realize the function of eyes, ears, mouth, nose, and the 
four limbs, and only in this way can you do something for them. 
Now all day long you chase after external things and direct yourself 
to fame and profit. All this is for things external to the body. When 
you want to do something for your ear, eye, mouth, nose, and four 
limbs, and will not look, listen, speak, move out of accord with the 
rules of propriety, are your ears, eyes, mouth, nose, and four limbs 
themselves capable of not doing so ? The ability must come from 
your mind. These activities of seeing, listening, speaking, and 
moving are all of your mind. The sight of your mind emanates 
through the channel of the eyes, the hearing of your mind through 
the channel of the ears, the speech of your mind through the channel 
of the mouth, and the movement of your mind through the channel 
of your four limbs. If there were no mind, there would be no ears, 
eyes, mouth, or nose. What is called your mind is not merely that 
lump of blood and flesh. If it were so, why is it that the dead man, 
whose lump of blood and flesh is still present, cannot see, listen, 
speak, or move? What is called your mind is that which makes 
seeing, listening, speaking, and moving possible. It is the nature of 
man and things ; it is the Principle of Nature. Only with this nature 
can there be the principle of regeneration, which is called jen 
(humanity, also meaning seed). When this creative principle of the 
nature of man and things emanates through the eye, the eye can 
see; through the ear, the ear can hear; through the mouth, the mouth 
can speak; and through the four limbs, they can move. All this is 
the growth and development of the Principle of Nature. In its 
capacity as the master of the body, it is called the mind. Basically 
the original substance of the mind is none other than the Principle 
of Nature, and is never out of accord with propriety. This is your 

Paraphrasing 'Lao T^u (Tao-te-ching), ch. 12. 

Part I 81 

true self. This true self is the master of the body. If there is no true 
self, there will be no body. Truly, with the true self, one lives; 
without it, one dies. If you really want to do something for your 
bodily self, you must make use of this true self, always preserve its 
original substance, and be cautious over things not yet seen and 
apprehensive over things not yet heard of,77 for fear that the true 
self be injured, even slightly. Then whenever the least desire to act 
out of accord with the rules of propriety germinates and becomes 
active, you will feel as though cut with a knife and stuck with a 
needle; the feeling will be unbearable, and will not stop until the 
knife and the needle are removed. Only then may you be said to have 
the determination to do something for yourself. Only then can you 
master yourself. But now when you treat a thief as a son78 why do 
you say that you cannot master yourself even though you have the 
determination to do something for yourself?" 

123. One student had eye trouble and was exceedingly worried. 
The Teacher said, "You have a high regard for your eye but a low 
regard for your mind." 

1 24. Hsiao Hui was fond of Buddhism and the Taoist search for 
immortality. The Teacher warned him and said, "From youth I was 
also earnestly devoted to the two systems. I thought I had learned 
something and thought the Confucian system was not worth 
studying. Later while I lived in barbarous territory for [nearly] three 
years, I reali2ed how simple, easy, extensive, and great the doctrines 
of the Sage are, and then I sighed and regretted having wasted my 
energy for thirty years. In general, the excellence of the two systems 
differs from that of the Sage only in an infinitesimal amount. But 
what you have learned from them is their dregs, and you are so 
self-confident and self-satisfied. You are really like an owl which 
has stolen the rotten carcass of a rat!"79 

Hui begged to ask about the excellence of the two systems. The 
Teacher said, "I have just mentioned how simple, easy, extensive, 

77 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

78 This parable comes from the L.eng-yen cbing (Surangama sutra), ch. 1, in 
Taisbo dai^pkyo, 19:108. The idea is that to treat beautiful colors, etc., as being 
for the sake of the eye, etc., is comparable to treating a thief as a son. 

79 A parable from the Chuang T^ut ch. 17, sptk ed., 6:28a. Cf. trans, by 
Giles, Chuang T^u, p. 171. 

82 Instructions for Practical hiving 

and great the doctrines of the Sage are. You choose not to ask me 
about what I have realized but only about what I have regretted!" 

Hui was ashamed, apologized, and begged to ask about the 
doctrines of the Sage. 

The Teacher said, "You only understand the pursuit after 
commonplace social affairs. Wait till you have acquired the real 
determination to become a sage and then I shall talk with you." 

Hui asked him again and again. The Teacher said, "I have told 
you all in one sentence and you still don't comprehend yourself." 

125. Liu Kuan-shih80 asked, "What is the equilibrium before the 
feelings are aroused?" 

The Teacher said, "You will naturally understand if you will only 
be cautious over things not yet seen and apprehensive over things 
not yet heard, and nourish the mind until it becomes completely 
identified with the Principle of Nature." 

Kuan-shih asked the Teacher to describe the condition of equi- 
librium somewhat. The Teacher said, "I cannot tell you any more 
than a dumb man can tell you about the bitterness of the bitter melon 
he has just eaten.81 If you want to know the bitterness, you have to 
eat a bitter melon yourself." 

At that time Hsu Ai was by the side of the Teacher. He said, "This 
is exactly a case where true knowledge and action are identical." 

All the friends present attained a certain enlightenment all at once. 

126. Hsiao Hui asked about the principle of life and death. The 
Teacher said, "If you understand day and night you will understand 
life and death." 

Hui asked about day and night. The Teacher said, "If you under- 
stand the day, you will understand the night." 

"Is there something about the day that we don't understand?" 
The Teacher said, "You understand the day! You rise up with all 
stupidity and eat with all foolishness. You act without understanding 
and do so habitually without examination.82 All day long it is dark 
to you. You merely dream about the day. Only when you can 
nourish something at every moment and preserve something in 

80 Liu came from the same district as Wang. Otherwise nothing is known 
of him. 

81 A parable from the Pi-yen lu, a collection of Zen stories, no. 3. 

82 Quoting the Book of Mencius, jA:$. 

Part I 83 

every instant83 and thus this mind is thoroughly awake and clear, 
so that the Principle of Nature is not interrupted for a moment, 
can you be said to understand the day. This is the character of 
Heaven. This is the knowledge that penetrates the course of day and 
night.84 Where does [the knowledge of] life and death come in?" 

127. Ma Tzu-hsin85 asked, "With regard to the doctrine that 
education consists in cultivating the Way [as set forth in the Doctrine 
of the Mean attributed to Tzu-ssu],86 the traditional interpretation 
has been that the Sage regulated and restricted the nature with 
which he was originally endowed so that he could be a model to the 
world, his regulations and restrictions resulting in things like 
ceremonies, music, laws, and governmental measures.87 What do 
you think of such an idea?" 

The Teacher said, "The Way is nature and is also destiny. It is 
complete in itself. Nothing can be added to or subtracted from it, 
and it requires no touching up. What need is there for the Sage to 
regulate and restrict? To do so would imply that nature is not 
perfect. Since ceremonies, music, laws, and governmental measures 
are means to govern the empire, they of course may be regarded as 
education, but the main objective of Tzu-ssu does not lie in these. 
If we accept the interpretation of the former scholar [Chu Hsi], how 
is it that in the passage following the statement that education 
consists in cultivating the Way, the Sage's methods of education 
through ceremonies, music, laws, and governmental measures are 
not mentioned but instead there is a whole section on the effort to 
be cautious and apprehensive ? [If Chu Hsi is correct] then the Sage's 
teaching [about being cautious and apprehensive] would have been 
devised in vain!" 

Tzu-hsin asked for an explanation. The Teacher said, "When 
Tzu-ssu talked about nature, the Way, and education, he did so 
from the point of view of their fundamental source. When Heaven 
has conferred something on man, that which is conferred is called 
man's nature. When man acts in accord with his nature, that nature 

83 A quotation from Chang Tsai (1020-77), Cheng-meng, ch. 12; Chang 
Heng-ch'u chi, 3:35 b. 

84 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 4. Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Yi King, p. 354. 

85 See above, sec. 40, n. 28. 

86 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

87 Chu Hsi, Chung-yung chang-chii, ch. 1. 

84 Instructions for Practical Living 

becomes the Way. And when man cultivates the Way and learns, the 
Way becomes education. To be in accord with his nature is the task 
of a sincere man. It is what is stated as 'It is due to our nature that 
enlightenment results from sincerity.'88 To cultivate the Way is the 
way of one who attains sincerity. It is what is stated as 'It is due 
to education that sincerity results from enlightenment.'89 As the 
sage acts in accord with his nature, the Way obtains. People below 
the sage in moral quality are not yet able to act in accord with the 
Way and at times deviate from the mean. Therefore they need to 
cultivate the Way. By cultivating the Way the worthy and wise will 
avoid going too far and the stupid and unworthy will avoid not 
going far enough. They all have to follow the Way and thus the 
Way is education. This word 'education' is the same as in the saying, 
'The way of Heaven is perfect education. All wind and rain, frost 
and dew are education.'90 The phrase 'cultivating the Way' is the 
same as in the saying, 'The cultivation of the Way is to be done 
through humanity.91 Only with the cultivation of the Way can one 
avoid violating the Way and restore the original substance of his 
nature. When that point is reached, his Way will be the same as 
that in accord with which the sage acts. Being cautious and being 
apprehensive, referred to in the later passage, are efforts to cultivate 
the Way. When the original substance of the nature is restored, there 
will be equilibrium and harmony. As the Book of Changes says, 
"Investigate principle to the utmost and fully develop one's nature 
until destiny is fulfilled.'92 When equilibrium and harmony exist in 
perfection, a proper order prevails in the universe and all things 
attain their full growth and development.93 That is the full develop- 
ment of the nature and the fulfillment of destiny." 

128. Huang Ch'eng-fu94 asked, "Confucius' answer to Yen 
Hui's question about government95 was regarded by a former 

88 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 21. 

89 Ibid. 

90 Book of Kites, "Confucius at Home at Leisure." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, 
ch. 26, p. 281. The first saying in the quotation is Wang's own. 

91 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

92 Book of Changes "Remarks on the Trigrams," ch. 1. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 422. 

93 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

94 See above, sec. 113, n. 46. 

95 To use the calendar of the Hsia dynasty, to ride in the state carriages of the 

Part I 85 

scholar96 as setting up the system for ten thousand generations to 
follow. What do you think of that ?" 

The Teacher said, "Yen Hui had all the qualities of a sage. In 
regard to the great foundation and fundamental source of running 
the government, he was perfect. Confucius knew that very well all 
along, and therefore he did not need to speak about them. He 
talked about social systems and moral conduct only to indicate that 
these things are not to be neglected, and that only in this way can 
things be perfect. Also, Confucius did not want him to be negligent 
about being on guard simply because his ability was sufficient, but 
wanted him to banish the songs of Cheng and keep away the petty 
flatterers. For Yen Hui was a man of self-mastery and one who 
devoted his heart to internal virtues. Confucius was afraid lest he 
might be negligent in minor details of external conduct. Therefore 
he helped Yen Hui where he was deficient. With others, it would be 
necessary to tell them that the conduct of government depends on 
man, that the right men are obtained by means of the ruler's personal 
character, that to cultivate his personal character the ruler must 
follow the Way, and that the cultivation of the Way is to be done 
through cherishing humanity. It is also necessary to tell them about 
the universal path of human relations and the nine universal 
standards97 and the many tasks of making the will sincere. Only then 
can this [the fundamental way of government] be achieved. And only 
then can we have the system to be followed for ten thousand 
generations. Otherwise, if the ruler merely proceeds to use the 
calendar of the Hsia, to ride in the state carriages of the Shang, to 
wear the ceremonial caps of the Chou, and to promote the dance 
music of shao, will the empire be well governed ? Because people of 
later generations knew only that Yen Hui was the best pupil in the 
Confucian school and that even he asked how to govern, they 
considered this as important a thing as Heaven." 

Shang, to wear the ceremonial caps of the Chou, to promote the dance music 
olshao, to banish the [licentious] songs of the state of Cheng, and to keep away 
the petty flatterers. See Analects, 15:10. 

96 Chu Hsi, Lun-jii cbi-chu, ch. 8, comment on Analects, 15:10. 

97 Namely, cultivating personal character, honoring worthy men, having 
affection toward relatives, having respect toward the high ministers, treating 
the whole body of public affairs kindly and considerately, treating the common 
people as their children, encouraging and attracting all classes of artisans, 
showing tenderness to men from afar, and taking interest in the welfare of the 
princes of the empires. See Doctrine of the Mean, ch.20. 

86 Instructions for Practical hiving 

129. Ts'ai Hsi-yuan98 said, "In Wen Kung's [Chu Hsi's] new- 
arrangement of the Great Learning," the section on the investigation 
of things precedes that on the sincerity of the will. It seems that such 
an order agrees with the main text [on which the sections that 
follow are commentaries and in which it is said that, wishing to 
make the will sincere, one must first extend his knowledge to the 
utmost]. According to your insistence on following the original 
arrangement, then the section on sincerity of the will would precede 
that on the investigation of things. This still bothers me." 

The Teacher said, "The task of the Great Learning consists in 
manifesting the clear character. To manifest the clear character is 
none other than to make the will sincere, and the task of making 
the will sincere is none other than the investigation of things and the 
extension of knowledge. If one regards the sincerity of the will as 
the basis and from there proceeds to the task of the investigation 
of things and the extension of knowledge, only then can the task 
have a solution. Even doing good and removing evil are nothing 
but the work of the sincerity of the will. But according to Chu Hsi's 
new arrangement the first step is to investigate the principles of 
things to the utmost. In that case one will be drifting and be at a 
loss and there will not be any solution at all. It will then be necessary 
to add the task of seriousness before the investigation of things can 
be related to one's person and mind. Even then there will be no 
foundation. If it is necessary to add the task of seriousness100 why 
did the Confucian school leave out a most important item and wait 
more than a thousand years for someone to make the correction? 
The fact is that if the sincerity of the will is taken as the basis, the 
addition of seriousness is unnecessary. The reason why the sincerity 
of the will is singled out for discussion is precisely because it is the 
basis of learning. If this is not understood, the result will be, as the 
saying goes, that an infinitesimal mistake in the beginning will lead 
to an infinite mistake at the end.101 Generally speaking, according 
to the Doctrine of the Mean the task consists purely in making the 
personal life sincere. When making the personal life sincere reaches 

98 See above, sec. 99, n. 5. 

99 See above, Introduction (to sees. 1-14) by Hsu Ai, n. 3. 

100 Ch'eng I said that self-cultivation requires seriousness and the pursuit 
of learning depends on the extension of knowledge. I-sbu, 18:5b. 

101 1-wei t'ung-kua-yen, pt. 1, 5b. 

Part I 87 

the highest degree, that is perfect sincerity. According to the Great 
Learning, however, the task consists purely in making the will 
sincere. When making the will sincere reaches the highest degree, 
there is the highest good. The two tasks are really the same. To add 
the word seriousness here and the word sincerity there is as super- 
fluous as to draw a snake and add feet." 

Instructions for Practical hiving, Part II 

Preface by Ch'ien Te-hung :x 

When Nan Yiian-shan2 published3 the Instructions for Practical 
Living in Yueh,4 it consisted of two stitched volumes, the second of 

1 His name was Hsu-shan, and his courtesy name Hung-fu (1496-1574). He 
was a native of the same district as Wang Yang-ming. As a young man he was 
attracted to Chu Hsi's philosophy and was skeptical when he read the Instructions 
for Practical Living. However, after Wang suppressed the rebellion of Prince 
Ning in 1520, Ch'ien Te-hung became Wang's disciple. He and Wang Chi were 
Wang's most outstanding disciples, and the hundreds of scholars who came to 
Wang from all parts of China were first instructed by these two star pupils and 
went to the Master only for his final conclusions. While Master Wang was 
away suppressing a rebellion in Kwangsi in 1527-28, Ch'ien and Wang Chi 
maintained his center of learning in Chekiang. While they were on their way to 
the capital to take the civil service examinations they heard of Wang's death 
and turned back. It was not until 1532 that the two friends went for the examina- 
tions and obtained the "presented scholar" degree. 

Occupying a series of official posts, Ch'ien reached the position of a divisional 
chief in the department of justice. Because he offended the emperor by memo- 
rializing the throne and criticizing a bad official, he was imprisoned. After he 
was freed, for some thirty years he taught and lectured on the Confucian 
doctrine, and institutes for him to lecture in were established throughout 
Central and South China. When a new emperor came to the throne in 1567, 
Ch'ien was appointed as a high official at court and in 1573, when another 
emperor ascended the throne, he was promoted. 

Although he and Wang Chi were Wang's two outstanding disciples, their 
philosophies were quite different. (See below, sec. 315, for their famous conver- 
sation with their Master.) As Huang Tsung-hsi has correctly pointed out in his 
Ming-ju hsueh-an, 11 :6a, while Wang Chi emphasized using the mind in its 
original nature as a source of intuition, Ch'ien stressed training and polishing 
in the actual affairs of life. Wang excelled in spiritual awakening, while Ch'ien 
excelled in moral cultivation. While at the end Wang drifted into Zen Buddhism, 
Ch'ien never departed from Confucian standards, although his contribution to 
Confucian thought was small. No wonder later Confucian scholars praised 
him but condemned Wang. 

2 His private name was Ta-chi and his literary name Jui-ch'iian (1487-1541). 
He was a native of Shensi. Holder of a "presented scholar" degree of 1 511, he 
became a divisional chief. As a prefect, he offended the authorities and was 
dismissed. He established an academy and propagated Master Wang's doctrines 
and was instrumental in their spread in Shensi. His own philosophy emphasized 
the doctrine of the extension of knowledge and being watchful over oneself 
when alone. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 29:1 ia-b. 

3 In 1524, according to Ch'ien Te-hung's Nien-p'u. Nan's preface gives the 
same date. 

4 A place in modern Chekiang. 

Part II 89 

which contained a selection of eight letters written by our late 
Teacher.5 Concerning the two letters in reply to Hsu Ch'eng-chih,6 
our Teacher felt that inasmuch as people had for a long time con- 
cluded that Chu Hsi was right and that Lu Hsiang-shan was wrong,7 
it was difficult to reverse the trend overnight. The two letters were 
meant as a compromise so that people can think for themselves and 
reach their own conclusions. I believe Yuan-shan had the same idea 
when he included them at the beginning of the second stitched 
volume. Now the debate between Chu Hsi and Lu Hsiang-shan has 
for a long time made clear to the world [that Chu Hsi was wrong]. 
When I published our Teacher's Wen-lu (Literary works)8 I placed 
the two letters among the additional works because they do not 
represent the complete views. I have therefore not included them 
here. 

Among the other six letters, the ideas on the original substance of 
knowledge and action are most fully expressed in the four letters in 
reply to someone about learning,9 to Chou Tao-t'ung,10 to Lu 
Yuan-ching,11 and to Ou-yang Ch'ung-i.12 The idea that in the 
investigation of things the effort of the student gradually shows 

6 The first part was the same as the present Part I. 

6 Probably a pupil of Wang's. The Wang Wen-cWeng Kung ch'iian-shu contains 
only one letter to him, in 4:2a-3a, dated 15 11. 

7 Chu Hsi and Lu Hsiang-shan were diametrically opposed in their philosophy 
and methodology. Chu Hsi claimed that principles are in things and emphasized 
study and inquiry. Lu Hsiang-shan claimed that principles are in the mind and 
emphasized honoring the moral nature. To Chu Hsi, the law of being, principle 
(//'), and the element, material force {ch'i), that gives being its substance and 
corporeal form are different. To Lu, they are the same. To Chu Hsi, mind is 
the function of human nature and human nature is identical with principle. To 
Lu, however, mind is principle. For Chu Hsi, the investigation of things means 
investigating the principle in things. For Lu, investigation means investigating 
the principle in the mind, for, according to him, all principles are inherent and 
complete in the mind. Chu advocated inquiry and study with full respect for 
details. Lu, on the contrary, advocated the simple, easy, and direct method of 
recovering one's originally good nature and coming to grips with fundamentals. 

8 This was Yang-ming wen-lu, published in 1536, consisting of letters, essays, 
memorials, other official documents, and poems. It now forms chs. 4-25 of the 
Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung cWiian-shu. 

9 See below, sees. 130-43. 

10 See below, sees. 144-50. 

11 See below, sees. 151 -67. 

12 See below, sees. 168-71. 

90 Instructions for Practical Living 

effect is most fully discussed in the letter in reply to Lo Cheng-an.13 
Throughout his life our Teacher was the object of attack and of 
attempts to destroy him. He had only one chance in ten thousand to 
live. Yet he always kept himself busy and never relaxed his effort 
to expound the doctrine lest we might fail to hear it and drift 
into the pursuit of success and profit and opportunistic cunning, 
and degenerate to the level of barbarians and criminals without 
realizing it. Because of his desire to form one body with all things, he 
talked and taught all his life and did not stop until death. This is the 
bitter decision of self-sacrifice on the part of all sages and worthies, 
from Confucius and Mencius on down, and not even his disciples 
have been able to console him. His feeling is most fully expressed 
in the first letter in reply to Nieh Wen-yii.14 

All these six letters are reproduced as Yuan-shan recorded them. I 
have added the second letter in reply to Wen-yii15 because it most 
fully elucidates the doctrine that always to be doing something is the 
task of extending the innate knowledge of the good t6 the utmost. 
It does so in such a clear, simple, and concrete manner that people 
are enabled to carry the doctrine into practice as soon as they hear it. 
Yuan-shan was at the time very busy and yet he was able person- 
ally to demonstrate the doctrine. When at last he encountered 
enemies and was attacked [as a member of the Wang school which 
was then severely condemned] he, with all gentleness and ease, 
regarded the opportunity to learn the doctrine as the greatest fortune 
in his life, and had not the least feeling of resentment or anger. 
People know that his publication of the letters was a great contribu- 
tion to like-minded friends but do not realize the extremely difficult 
situation he was in. In retaining six of the eight letters and omitting 
two, I do not mean to add or subtract anything from them without 
regret. In view of the new developments,16it is the proper thing to do. 

13 See below, sees. 172-77. 

14 See below, sees. 178-84. 

15 See below, sees. 185-94. 

16 Of the Teacher's doctrine, and the fact that the Teacher's attempt to 
compromise is now outdated. 

Part II 91 

LETTER IN REPLY TO KU TUNG-CH'IAO1 

130. Your letter says, "Recent scholars have devoted themselves 
to external things and neglected the internal. They become broad 
but lack essentials. For this reason, you, sir, have purposely advo- 
cated the idea of the sincerity of the will [to probe into the fundamen- 
tal]. You are punching the needle into the most vital part of the 
body, as it were. This is indeed a great benefit to us." 

In so saying you have clearly seen the defects of the present time. 
How shall we remedy them ? As a matter of fact, you have fully 
expressed in one sentence what I have in mind. What more shall I 
say ? What more shall I say ? As to the doctrine of the sincerity of the 
will, it is of course the first principle which the Confucian school 
teaches people so that they may know how to go about their task, 
but recent scholars have regarded it as of secondary importance. 
For this reason I have to some extent pointed out the importance of 
sincerity. It is not something I am propagating for my own purpose. 

131. Your letter says, "But I am afraid your doctrine is too ideal- 
istic and the task involved too abrupt. In studying and transmitting 
it, the younger generation will misunderstand and be mistaken and 
will not be able to help falling into the Buddhist method of under- 
standing the mind, seeing one's own nature, attaining calmness and 
wisdom, and achieving sudden enlightenment. No wonder those 
who hear your views are skeptical." 

My humble views on the investigation of things, the extension 
of knowledge, the sincerity of the will, and the rectification of the 
mind are directed toward the student's task of personal examination 
and actual demonstration in matters concerning his own mind and 
daily affairs. They involve many steps and much cumulative effort. 
They are directly opposed to the Buddhist doctrine of sudden 

1 Ku Lin (1476-1545). Holder of a "presented scholar" degree of 1496, he 
became a minister in the department of justice. He was also a renowned poet. 
Like many scholars of the time, he was imprisoned for his criticism of the 
government and was eventually dismissed from office. For a brief account of 
him, see the Mingshih, 286:1 8b-2oa. It is said thatKu was a close friend of Wang's 
when Wang was devoted to literary compositions in his younger days. Accord- 
ing to the Nien-p'u, this letter was written from Chekiang in 1525 when Wang 
was fifty-four, but since it was included in the Cffuan-hsi lu published by Nan 
Yuan-shan in 1524, the date must have been earlier. 

92 Instructions for Practical hiving 

enlightenment out of nothing. Those who hear my views originally 
have no intention of seeking to become sages and furthermore have 
not gone into my views thoroughly. It is not strange that they are 
skeptical. But with your brilliance you should have understood 
clearly at the very mention of the idea, and yet you say that it is too 
idealistic and the task involved too abrupt. Why? 

132. Your letter says, "You teach us that knowledge and action 
should proceed simultaneously, that no distinction should be made 
as to which one should precede the other, and that this is the task 
of 'honoring the moral nature and following the path of study and 
inquiry' as taught in the Doctrine of the Mean,2 in which the two 
nourish and develop each other and the internal and external, the 
fundamental and the secondary form one thread running through 
all. Nevertheless, in the performance of a task there must be a 
distinction between what is to be done first and what later. For 
example, one knows the food before he eats it, knows the soup 
before he drinks it, knows the clothes before he wears them, and 
knows the road before he travels on it. It is not true that one 
first performs an act without knowing the thing to be acted on. 
The difference is of course a matter of an instant. I do not mean 
to say that it is comparable to one's knowing today and then acting 
tomorrow." 

Since you have said that the two nourish and develop each other, 
and the internal and the external, the fundamental and the secondary 
form one thread running through all, the idea that knowledge and 
action proceed simultaneously should no longer be doubted. You 
also say that in the performance of a task there must3 be a distinction 
between what is to be done first and what later. Are you not self- 
contradictory ? This is particularly clear and can easily be seen in 
your theories that one knows the food before he eats, but your 
understanding is obscured by recent opinions4 and you do not 
realize that it is obscured. A man must have the desire for food 
before he knows the food. This desire to eat is the will ; it is already 
the beginning of action. Whether the taste of the food is good or 

2 Ch. 27. 

3 In the text the word pu (not) appears here. It is obviously a misprint and 
is therefore omitted from the transtation. 

4 Such as Chu Hsi's doctrine that knowledge precedes action. 

Part II 93 

bad cannot be known until the food enters the mouth. Is there 
anyone who knows the taste to be good or bad before the food 
enters his mouth ? A man must have the desire to travel before he 
knows the road. This desire to travel is the will; it is already the 
beginning of action. Whether the forks of the road are rough or 
smooth cannot be known until he himself has gone through them. 
Is there anyone who knows whether the forks of the road are rough 
or smooth before he has gone through them ? The same can be said 
without a doubt about the theories that one knows the soup before 
he drinks it and that one knows the clothes before he wears them. 
The examples you have given are exactly those which show, as you 
say, that one first performs an act without first knowing the 
thing to be acted on. You said also that the difference is of course a 
matter of an instant and that you do not mean to say that it is 
clearly comparable to one's knowing today and then acting tomor- 
row. This shows that you have not examined the matter thoroughly. 
But even as you say, the fact that knowledge and action form a 
unity and proceed simultaneously is as a matter of course absolutely 
beyond any doubt. 

133. Your letter says, "[You say that] true knowledge is what 
constitutes action, and unless it is acted on it cannot be called 
knowledge. This idea is all right as an urgent doctrine for the 
student, meant to enable him to put his learning into actual practice. 
But if you really mean that knowledge and action are identical, I 
am afraid a student will only seek his original mind and consequently 
neglect the principles of things, and there will be points at which his 
mind will be closed to the outside world and unable to penetrate it. 
Is this the established method of the Confucian school for the 
simultaneous advance of knowledge and action ?" 

Knowledge in its genuine and earnest aspect is action, and action 
in its intelligent and discriminating aspect is knowledge. At bottom 
the task of knowledge and action cannot be separated. Only because 
later scholars have broken their task into two sections and have lost 
sight of the original substance of knowledge and action have I 
advocated the idea of their unity and simultaneous advance. My 
idea that true knowledge is what constitutes action and that unless 
it is acted on it cannot be called knowledge can be seen in such 
ideas as those expressed in your letter that one knows the food 
before he eats it, and so forth. I have already stated this briefly. 

94 Instructions for "Practical Living 

Although my idea arose as an urgent remedial measure, nevertheless 
the substance of knowledge and action is originally like this. It is not 
that I have promoted or suppressed either of them according to my 
own wishes, and purposely propounded such a doctrine carelessly 
to effect a temporary remedy. He who only seeks his original mind 
and consequently neglects the principles of things is one who has 
lost his original mind. For the principles of things are not external 
to the mind. If one seeks the principles of things outside the mind, 
there will not be any to be found. And if one neglects the principles 
of things and only seeks his mind, what sort of a thing would the 
mind be? The substance of the mind is nature, and nature is 
identical with principle. Consequently, as there is the mind of filial 
piety toward parents, there is the principle of filial piety. If there is 
no mind of filial piety, there will be no principle of filial piety. As 
there is the mind of loyalty toward the ruler, there is the principle 
of loyalty. If there is no mind of loyalty, there will be no principle of 
loyalty. Are principles external to the mind ? Hui-an [Chu Hsi] said, 
"Man's object of learning is simply mind and principles. Although 
the mind is the master of the body... actually it controls all principles 
in the world. And although principles are distributed throughout 
the ten thousand things... actually they are not outside one's mind."5 
These are but the two aspects of concentration and diversification 
but [the way Chu Hsi put it] has inevitably opened the way to the 
defect among scholars of regarding the mind and principles as two 
separate things. This is the reason why later generations have the 
trouble of only seeking their original minds and consequently 
neglecting the principles of things. This is precisely because they do 
not realize that the mind is identical with principle. The idea that if 
one seeks the principles of things outside the mind there will be 
points at which the mind is closed to the outside world and cannot 
penetrate it is the same as Kao Tzu's doctrine that righteousness is 
external.6 This is the reason why Mencius said that he did not know 
the nature of righteousness. The mind is one, that is all. In terms 
of its total commiseration, it is called humanity. In terms of its 
attainment of what is proper, it is called righteousness. And in 
terms of its orderliness, it is called principle. If one should not seek 
humanity or righteousness outside the mind, should one make an 

6 Ta-hsiieh huo-wen, p. 6oa-b. 
6 See Book of Mencius, 6A:4. 

Part II 95 

exception and seek principles outside the mind? Knowledge and 
action have been separated because people seek principles outside the 
mind. The doctrine of the unity of knowledge and action of the 
Confucian school means seeking principles in the mind. Why do 
you doubt it ? 

134. Your letter says, "In explaining the original text of the Great 
Learning, you stressed 'the extension of the knowledge of the original 
substance [of the mind].'7 This is of course Mencius' principle of 
exerting the mind to the utmost. Chu Hsi also regarded 'pure intel- 
ligence and consciousness'8 as the 'test of the mind.'9 However, 
exerting the mind to the utmost follows from knowing one's nature, 
and the extension of knowledge lies in the investigation of things." 
You say that exerting the mind to the utmost follows from 
knowing one's nature and that the extension of knowledge lies in 
the investigation of things. This is correct. But if I understand your 
idea correctly, the reason why you have said what you have said is that 
you are still not clear about something. Chu Hsi considered that 
exerting the mind to the utmost, knowing one's nature, and knowing 
Heaven were equivalent to the investigation of things and the extension 
of knowledge; that preserving the mind, nourishing one's nature, and 
serving Heaven were equivalent to the sincerity of the will, the rectifi- 
cation of the mind, and the cultivation of the personal life; and that not 
allowing any double -mindedness regardless of the longevity or 
brevity of life but cultivating the personal life while waiting for fate 
to take its own course were the perfection of knowledge and the 
complete realization of humanity, all of which are matters pertaining 
to the sage.10 My humble views, however, are diametrically opposed 
to those of Chu Hsi. Exerting the mind to the utmost, knowing 
one's nature, and knowing Heaven are matters known from birth 
and are practiced naturally and easily. They are matters pertaining 
to the sage. Preserving the mind, nourishing one's nature, and 
serving Heaven are matters learned through study and practiced for 
their advantage. They are matters pertaining to the worthy. Not 
allowing any double-mindedness regardless of the longevity or 

7 Wang's preface to the original text of the Great Learning, in Wang Wen-cVeng 
Kung ch'uan-shu, 7:25b. 

8 A quotation from the preface to the Chung-jung chang-chu. 

9 Meng T^u chi-chu, 13:1, commenting on Book of Mencius, 7K.W. 

10 Ibid. 

96 Instructions for Practical hiving 

brevity of life but cultivating the personal life while waiting for fate 
to take its own course are learned through hard work and practiced 
with effort and difficulty. They are matters pertaining to the student.11 
How can one regard as knowledge only the exerting of the mind to 
the utmost and the knowing of one's nature as knowledge, while 
regarding the preserving of the mind and the nourishing of one's 
nature as action? As you suddenly hear this, you are undoub- 
tedly greatly shocked. But actually there is nothing doubtful about it. 
Let me explain it to you. 

The substance of the mind is the nature and the source of the 
nature is Heaven. This means that one who can exert his mind to 
the utmost can fully develop his nature. The Doctrine of the Mean 
says, "Only those who are absolutely sincere can fully develop 
their nature.12 It also says, "They can know the transforming and 
nourishing process of Heaven and Earth"13 and " [their principle] can 
be laid before spiritual beings without question or fear.... It shows 
that they know Heaven."14 Only a sage can do these things. For this 
reason I say that they are matters known from birth and can be 
practiced naturally and easily, matters pertaining to the sage. 

Those who preserve the mind are those who are not yet able to 
exert it to the utmost. Therefore they have to make the additional 
effort of preserving it. As the mind is preserved for a long time, it 
will be completely preserved without any effort to preserve it, and 
then one can go a step further and exert it to the utmost. For to know 
Heaven is the same as "to know the district" or "to know the county," 
which is what those titles for a prefect and a magistrate mean. If one 
is the official "to know the district," then all the affairs of the district 
are his own affairs. If one is the official "to know the county," then 
all the affairs of the county are his own affairs. This means becoming 
one with Heaven. To serve Heaven, however, is to act like a son 
serving his parents or a minister serving his ruler. In so doing, one 
and Heaven are still separated. My mind and nature are what Heaven 
has endowed in me. I merely preserve them and dare not lose them, 
nourish them and dare not injure them, as parents give the son his 
body in its completeness and the son returns it in its completeness.15 

11 See Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

12 Ibid., ch. 22. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid., ch. 29. 

15 As described in the Book of Rites, "The Meaning of Sacrifices." Cf. trans. 

Part II 97 

I therefore say that these are matters learned through study and 
practiced for their advantage, matters of the worthy. As to those who 
do not allow any double-mindedness regardless of longevity or 
brevity of life, they are different from those who preserve the mind. 
Although those who preserve the mind are not yet able to exert the 
mind to the utmost, they already have single -mindedly determined 
to do good. When at times the mind has not yet been preserved, they 
make an effort to preserve it. Even if students do not allow any 
double-mindedness regardless of longevity or brevity of life, they 
still allow longevity or brevity of life to divide their minds [since 
they make a special effort to ignore them], and this means that their 
determination to do good is not yet single-minded. They are not 
yet even able to preserve the mind. How can they be said to exert it 
to the utmost? 

Now even if they do not allow longevity or brevity of life to cause 
any double-mindedness in their desire to do good, but if they believe 
that life and death, longevity or brevity of life, all are predetermined 
and that what they should do is to have single-mindedness to do 
good and cultivate their personal life while waiting for the mandate 
of Heaven to take its own course, it means that in their daily life 
they have not realized that the mandate of Heaven already exists. 
Although those who serve Heaven are separated from Heaven, they 
truly know where the mandate of Heaven is to be found. They 
merely accept it with reverence and respect. Those who wait for it, 
however, evidently do not yet truly know where it is to be found and 
are still waiting for it to come. For this reason we say "establish 
destiny \ming, mandate]." The word establish means to found, to 
build up, as in establishing virtue, establishing words, establishing 
achievement, and establishing fame.16 Whenever we say "establish," 
it always means that such and such a thing is not there and is now to be 
built up from the beginning. This is what Confucius meant when he 
said, "Without knowing the mandate of Heaven, it is impossible to 
be a superior man."17 Therefore I say these things are matters 
learned through hard work and practiced with effort and difficulty, 
matters of the student. Now to regard exerting the mind to the 

by Legge, U Ki, ch. 21, p. 229. When a son died, it was understood that he was 
returning his body to his parents. 

18 According to ancient Confucian teaching, these constituted immortality. 
See Tso chuan, Duke Hsiang, 24th year. 

17 Analects, 20:3. 

98 Instructions for Practical hiving 

utmost, knowing one's nature, and knowing Heaven as the investi- 
gation of things and the extension of knowledge is suddenly to 
compel the beginning student who is not yet able to avoid double - 
mindedness to practice those things that pertain to the sage who is 
born to know and can practice naturally and easily. He will be 
seizing the wind and grasping at shadows, as it were, and will be 
at a loss and will not know what to do with his mind. How can such 
a doctrine help resulting in "making the whole empire run about on 
the road" ?18 Thus you can readily see the defects of present-day 
theories of the extension of knowledge and the investigation of 
things. Is not the defect of what you described as devoting oneself 
to external things and neglecting the internal, being broad but 
lacking essentials the same as this ? This is the most important point 
in one's learning. If a mistake is made here, then it will be made 
everywhere. This is the reason I have risked the reproach and 
ridicule of the world, ignored the personal suffering of punishment, 
and cannot help but keep on talking. 

135. Your letter says, "I have heard that you told students that 
following the theory of the investigation of the principles of all 
things that we come into contact with19 is to trifle with things and 
to lose one's purpose, and that you have also selected Chu Hsi's 
doctrines of rejecting the complex and preferring the simple,20 
cultivating the fundamental,21 and so forth, to show students, labeling 
them as Chu Hsi's final conclusions arrived at late in life.22 1 am afraid 
this is also wrong." 

What Chu Hsi meant by the investigation of things is "to inves- 
tigate the principle in things to the utmost as we come in contact 
with them."23 To investigate the principles in things to the utmost 
as we come in contact with them means to look in each individual 
thing for its so-called definite principles. This means to apply 
one's mind to each individual thing and look for principle in it. 
This is to divide the mind and principle into two. To seek for the 
principle in each individual thing is like looking for the principle 

18 A quotation from the Book of Mencius, 3 A:4. 

19 This is Chu Hsi's theory. See his Ta-hsueh chang-chii, ch. 5. 

20 Chu T^u wen-chi, 35:26b. 

21 Ibid., 47:31a. 

22 See below, pp. 263-67. 

23 Ta-hsueh chang-chii, ch. 5 . 

Part II 99 

of filial piety in parents. If the principle of filial piety is to be sought 
in parents, then is it actually in my own mind or is it in the person 
of my parents ? If it is actually in the person of my parents, is it true 
that as soon as the parents pass away the mind will lack the principle 
of filial piety ? When I see a child fall into a well [and have a feeling 
of commiseration], there must be the principle of commiseration. 
Is this principle of commiseration actually in the person of the child 
or is it in the innate knowledge of my mind ? Perhaps one cannot 
follow the child into the well to rescue it. Perhaps one can rescue it 
by seizing it with the hand. All this involves principle. Is it really 
in the person of the child or does it emanate from the innate knowl- 
edge of my mind ? What is true here is true of all things and events. 
From this we know the mistake of dividing the mind and principle 
into two. 

Such division is the doctrine of Kao Tzu who taught that right- 
eousness is external to the mind, a fallacy which Mencius strongly 
attacked.24 You know the defect of devoting oneself to external 
things and neglecting the internal, and becoming broad but lacking 
essentials. Why are these defects? Is it not permissible to say that 
to investigate the principle of all things as we come into contact 
with them, as Chu Hsi has taught, is trifling with things and losing 
one's purpose in life ? What I mean by the investigation of things and 
the extension of knowledge is to extend the innate knowledge of my 
mind to each and every thing. The innate knowledge of my mind is 
the same as the Principle of Nature. When the Principle of Nature 
in the innate knowledge of my mind is extended to all things, all 
things will attain their principle. To extend the innate knowledge of 
my mind is the matter of the extension of knowledge, and for all 
things to attain their principle is the matter of the investigation of 
things. In these the mind and principle are combined into one. As 
the mind and principle are combined into one, then all my humble 
opinions which I have just expressed and my theory that Chu Hsi 
arrived at his final conclusions late in life can be understood without 
discussion. 

136. Your letter says, "The substance of the human mind is com- 
pletely intelligent and penetrating. But because man's mind is restrict- 
ed by material force and obscured by external things, few minds 

24 Book of Mencius, 6A:4. 

100 Instructions for Practical hiving 

are not darkened. Unless one studies extensively, inquires accurately, 
thinks carefully, and sifts clearly25 so as to understand the principles 
of things, he cannot recognize the activating power of good and evil 
or the distinction between truth and falsehood. He will give free 
rein to his passions and indulge in his own will, and the harm 
resulting from them will be beyond words." 

This passage in general sounds correct but is wrong. It perpetu- 
ates the fallacy of traditional theories. I must refute them. 

Study, inquiry, thinking, sifting, and practice are all ways of 
learning. No one really learns anything without carrying it into 
action. Take the learning of filial piety. One must relieve his parents 
of the burden of toil, serve and care for them, and personally 
put the principle of filial piety into action before one can be said to 
be learning filial piety. Can merely talking about it in a vacuum be 
considered as learning ? To learn archery, one must hold out the bow, 
fix the arrow to the string, draw the bow, and take aim. To learn 
writing, one must lay out the paper, take the brush, hold the inkwell, 
and dip the brush into the ink. In all the world, nothing can be 
considered learning that does not involve action. Thus the very 
beginning of learning is already action. To be earnest in practice 
means to be genuine and sincere. That is already action. It is to 
make the action sincere and the effort continuous without stop. In 
learning, one cannot help having doubts. Therefore one inquires. 
To inquire is to learn; it is to act. As there is still doubt, one thinks. 
To think is to learn; it is to act. As there is still doubt, one sifts. To 
sift is to learn ; it is to act. As the sifting is clear, the thinking careful, 
the inquiry accurate, and the study competent, one goes further and 
continues his effort without stop. This is what is meant by earnest 
practice. It does not mean that after study, inquiry, thinking, and 
sifting one then takes steps to act. 

For this reason I hold that in seeking to acquire the ability to do 
things, we call the seeking study. In seeking to dispel doubts, we 
call it inquiry. In seeking to understand an idea of a doctrine, we call 
it thinking. In seeking to examine the idea carefully, we call it 
sifting. And in seeking to carry the idea out in actual practice, we 
call it action. Speaking from the point of view of separate efforts, 
they are five, but speaking from the point of view of a combined 

25 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

Part II 101 

affair, they are one. This is precisely where my humble views differ 
from those of later scholars, that in substance mind and principle 
are a unity and in our effort knowledge and action advance simul- 
taneously. 

You have mentioned only study, inquiry, thinking, and sifting 
as ways to investigate the principles of things to the utmost and have 
not included earnest action. This means that you regard study, 
inquiry, thinking, and sifting alone as knowledge and feel that the 
investigation of the principles of things to the utmost involves no 
action. Can anyone learn without action ? Can anyone be said to have 
investigated the principles of things to the utmost without having 
taken any action? Ch'eng Hao said, "By merely investigating the 
principles of things to the utmost one simultaneously fully develops 
one's nature to the point of fulfilling one's destiny."26 Therefore one 
must extend the humanity in one's action to the ultimate of human- 
ity, and only then can one be said to have investigated the principle 
of humanity to the utmost. One must extend the righteousness in 
one's action to the utmost of righteousness. Only then can one be 
said to have investigated the principle of righteousness to the utmost. 
When humanity is extended to its ultimate, the nature of humanity 
will be fully realized. When righteousness is extended to its ultimate, 
the nature of righteousness will be fully realized. Can there be such a 
thing as a person whose learning has reached the point of having 
completely investigated the principles of things to the utmost and 
yet has not proceeded to action? Therefore if we realize that no 
learning can be considered learning if it is not carried into action, 
we know that the investigation of the principles of things to the 
utmost cannot be so considered if it is not carried into action. If we 
realize that the investigation of the principles of things to the 
utmost cannot be so considered if it is not carried into action, we 
know that knowledge and action are a unity and advance simul- 
taneously, and cannot be separated. For the principle of each and 
every thing is not external to the mind. To insist on investigating 
all the principles in the world to the utmost is to regard the innate 
knowledge of the mind as inadequate and to feel that it is necessary 
to seek extensively throughout the world in order to supplement and 
enhance it. This amounts to dividing mind and principle into two. 

l-shu, 2A:2b; cf. 10:5a. 

102 Instructions for V radical Living 

Although in the task of study, inquiry, thinking, sifting, and 
earnest practice, those who learn through hard work and practice 
with effort and difficulty have to exert a hundred times as much 
effort as others, when the task is fully extended to the point of fully 
developing one's nature and knowing Heaven, it is no more than 
extending the innate knowledge of one's mind to the utmost. Is there 
anything, even an iota, to be added to innate knowledge ? Now if we 
insist on investigating all the principles in the world to the utmost 
and do not know how to return and seek within our mind, then, 
aside from the innate knowledge of our mind, what is there to carry 
out the examination of what you have called the activating power 
of good and evil and the discrimination of truth and falsehood? 
The restriction by material force and obscuration by external things 
that you have mentioned are but the restriction and obscuration of 
the mind. Now if we wish to get rid of the obscuration of the mind 
and do not know how to direct our effort to innate knowledge but 
seek remedy outside, we are comparable to a person whose vision 
is not clear and who, instead of taking medicine and nourishing his 
eyes in order to cure them, merely wanders despondently and seeks 
vision outside. Can vision be attained from the outside ? The harm 
of giving free rein to one's passions and indulging in one's own will 
is likewise due only to the failure to examine carefully the Principle 
of Nature in the innate knowledge of our mind. This is a matter in 
which if an infinitesimal mistake is made in the beginning it will 
lead to an infinite error at the end, and the statement should not be 
left unrefuted. Please do not say that I have been too harsh in my 
words. 

137. Your letter says, "You teach people to extend knowledge to 
the utmost and to manifest clear character, and warn them against 
investigating the principles of things to the utmost as we come in 
contact with them. Is it really possible that an unenlightened scholar, 
living in deep seclusion, sitting erect, and uninformed, can thus be 
able to achieve the extension of knowledge and the manifestation of 
clear character ? Even if he becomes tranquil and has some realization 
and to a certain degree intuits his own nature, what he gets is but 
useless views of calmness and wisdom. Can he really know past and 
present and understand the change of events, and apply his knowl- 
edge to concrete matters of the state and the world ? As to your 
contention that 'knowledge is the substance of the will and things 

Part II 103 

are functions of the will,'27 and that the word ko in the phrase 
ko-wu (investigation of things) means to rectify, as in the saying, 
'It is only the great man who can rectify (ko) what is wrong in the 
ruler's mind,'28 although your ideas are lofty and stimulating and 
are distinguished by not conforming to traditional interpretations, 
I am afraid they are nevertheless not in accord with truth." 

My humble views on the extension of knowledge and the investi- 
gation of things are precisely for the purpose of investigating the 
principles of things to the utmost. I have never warned people 
against investigating the principles of things to the utmost nor 
urged them to live in deep seclusion, sit erect, and do nothing. My 
idea is that it is incorrect to interpret the investigation of the prin- 
ciples of things to the utmost as we come into contact with them 
to mean what I have described before as devoting oneself to external 
things and neglecting the internal. If an unenlightened student can 
really carefully examine the Principle of Nature in the mind in 
connection with things and events as they come, and extend his 
innate or original knowledge of the good, then though stupid he 
will surely become intelligent and though weak he will surely 
become strong.29 The great foundation will be established and the 
universal way [in human relations] will be in operation. And the 
nine standards30 of ruling a state will be united by one thread that 
runs through them completely. Why still worry about his having 
no concrete application ? It is precisely people who are characterized 
by stubborn emptiness and abstract tranquillity who are incapable 
of carefully examining the Principle of Nature in the mind in con- 
nection with things and events as they come, and of extending their 
innate or original knowledge of the good. Instead they abandon 
human relations and get used to a life of silence, annihilation, 
emptiness, and nothingness.31 Thus essentially speaking their way 
cannot be used to govern the family, the state, and the world. Who 

27 Possibly a quotation from Wang's Ku-pen ta-hsiieh p'ang-shib, which is not 
included in the Wang Wen-clfeng Kung cb'uan-shu. The original Ku-pen ta-bsueh 
p'ang-shih has been lost. The present version, included in the Han-bat collection, 
is considered by scholars to be spurious, although the saying itself may well 
have come from the original. The same idea is expressed above in sec. 6. Cf. 
above, sec. 78, and below, sees. 174 and 201. 

28 Reference to Book of Mencius, 4A:20, in sec. 7, above. 

29 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

30 See above, sec. 128, n. 97, for these nine standards. 

31 Like the Buddhists and Taoists. 

10 

104 Instructions for V radical Living 

will say that the Sage's doctrine of investigating the principles of 
things to the utmost and fully developing one's nature also has this 
defect ? 

The mind is the master of the body, and the pure intelligence and 
clear consciousness of the mind are the innate or original knowledge. 
When this innate knowledge which is pure intelligence and clear 
consciousness is influenced by tilings and events and responds to 
them with activity, it is called the will. With knowledge, there will 
be the will. Without knowledge, there will be no will. Is knowledge 
not the substance of the will? For the will to function, there must be 
the thing in which it is to function, and the thing is an event. When 
the will functions in the service of parents, then serving parents is 
a thing. When the will functions in governing the people, then 
governing the people is a thing. When the will functions in study, 
then study is a thing. When the will functions in hearing a law 
suit, then hearing a law suit is a thing. Wherever the will is applied, 
there cannot be nothing. Where this is a particular will, there is a 
particular thing corresponding to it, and where there is no particular 
will, there will be no particular thing corresponding to it. Is a thing, 
then, not the function of the will ? 

The word ko has been interpreted by some as "to reach" (chih). It 
is so interpreted in such sayings as "Emperor Shun reached [ko] in 
the temple of illustrious ancestors"32 and "The prince of the Miao 
tribe has come and reached [/&?]. "33 But in reaching the illustrious 
ancestors there must first be pure filial piety and sincerity and rever- 
ence so that everything between the manifested mundane world and 
the hidden spiritual world is in accord with principle before the 
ancestors can be said to have been reached. The Miao tribe was 
obstinate. It was really after the Great Yu diffused culture and virtue 
among them that they were reached. In both cases the meaning of 
rectifying [cheng\ is also involved and the word "reach" alone does 
not tell all that it means. In such sayings as "rectifying the evil of his 
heart"34 and "A great minister rectifies what is wrong in the ruler's 
mind" the idea is that of rectifying what is incorrect so it can return 
to its original correctness, and cannot be interpreted to mean 
reach. 

Furthermore, who knows that the investigation of things in the 

32 Book of History, "Canon of Yao." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 41. 

33 Ibid., "Counsels of the Great Yu." Cf. trans, by Legge, p. 66. 

34 Ibid., "Charge to Ch'iung." Cf. trans, by Legge, p. 585. 

Part II 105 

Great Learning35 should not be interpreted in the sense of rectification 
but has to be interpreted in the sense of reaching ? If it must be 
interpreted in the sense of reaching, it would be necessary to say 
"investigating to the utmost until you reach the principle of all 
things," in order to make sense. In that case, the importance of the 
task lies completely in investigating to the utmost and the object 
of the task lies entirely in principles. If now the words "investigate to 
the utmost" and "principle" were to be omitted and we were really 
to say, "the extension of knowledge consists of reaching all things," 
does it make any sense ? The accepted teachings of Confucius on the 
investigation of the principles of things to the utmost and the full 
development of one's nature are found in the "Appended Remarks" 
of the Book of Changes.36 If the investigation of things really means the 
investigation of the principles of things to the utmost, why didn't 
Confucius directly say that the extension of knowledge consists in 
the investigation of things to the utmost instead of making such an 
indirect and incomplete remark to give later scholars trouble? 
Although the idea of the investigation of things in the Great Learning 
and that of the investigation of the principles of things to the utmost 
in the "Appended Remarks" are fundamentally in agreement, there 
are slight differences. By investigating the principles to the utmost is 
meant that the task includes the investigation of things, the extension 
of knowledge, the sincerity of the will, and the rectification of the 
mind. Therefore whenever we talk about the investigation of the 
principles of things to the utmost, we include in it the task of the 
investigation of things, the extension of knowledge, the sincerity of 
the will, and the rectification of the mind ; and whenever we talk 
about the investigation of things, we have to mention the extension 
of knowledge, the sincerity of the will, and the rectification of the 
mind at the same time. Only when it includes these can its task 
be complete and thorough. To mention only the investigation of 
things and dogmatically to say that that is the investigation of the 
principles of things to the utmost is to regard the latter as belonging 
entirely to the sphere of knowledge and the investigation of things 
as involving no action. This is not only to fail to understand the 

35 In the sentence "The extension of knowledge consists of the investigation 
of things." The text of the Great 'Learning. 

36 While the "Appended Remarks" of the Book of Changes may be said to contain 
these ideas, the actual terms as quoted here appear in "Remarks on the Trigrams," 
ch. i. 

106 Instructions for Practical Liping 

idea of the investigation of things but also to fail to grasp the 
meaning of the investigation of the principles of things to the 
utmost. This is the reason why later scholars have separated knowl- 
edge and action into two sections and have been daily involved in 
fragmentary and isolated details and broken pieces, and this is really 
why the doctrine of the Sage has been gradually declining and fading 
away. After all you are not free from following stereotyped views. 
It is to be expected that you will consider my views to be out of 
accord with truth. 

138. Your letter says, "You said that in the task of the extension of 
knowledge, to know how to care for the comfort of parents in both 
winter and summer and to know how to serve and support them is 
itself the sincerity of the will, and that there is no such separate 
thing as the investigation of things. I am afraid this is also wrong." 
You say so because you have projected your own views and 
suppose they are mine. They are not what I have told you. Does 
what you have said really make any sense? My view is that when 
the will desires to care for the comfort of parents in both winter and 
summer, and to serve and support them, the will exists but not yet 
the sincerity of the will. Before the will can be said to be sincere, there 
must be the actual practice of caring for their comfort and of serving 
and supporting them until one is satisfied and has no self-decep- 
tion. To know the regular details of caring for the comfort of 
parents and the proper ways of serving and supporting them is 
knowledge but not yet the extension of knowledge. The knowledge 
of the regular details of caring for parents must be extended to 
become the actual practice of caring, and the knowledge of the 
proper ways of serving and supporting them must be extended to 
become the actual practice of serving and supporting before there 
can be the extension of knowledge. The mere facts of caring for the 
parents' comfort and serving and supporting them are things and 
should not be regarded as the investigation of things. Caring for 
the comfort of parents must be carried out entirely according to 
what the innate faculty knows to be the regular details of caring for 
them, without the least bit left undone. Likewise serving and 
supporting them must be carried out entirely according to what the 
innate faculty knows to be the proper way of serving and 
supporting them, without the least bit left undone. Only then can 
things be said to have been investigated. Only after the things of 

Part II 107 

caring for parents' comfort are investigated can the innate knowl- 
edge that knows how to care for them be extended and only after 
the things of serving and supporting them are investigated can the 
innate knowledge that knows the proper ways of serving and 
supporting them be extended. Therefore it is said that "when things 
are investigated, knowledge is extended."37 Only after the innate 
knowledge that knows how to care for the parents' comfort is 
extended can the will to care for them be sincere, and only after the 
innate knowledge that knows how to serve and support them is 
extended can the will to serve and support them be sincere. Therefore 
it is said that "when knowledge is extended, the will becomes 
sincere."38 These are my humble views on the sincerity of the will, 
the extension of knowledge, and the investigation of things. If you 
think them over thoroughly, you will no longer have any doubt. 

139. Your letter says, "The foundations of truth are easy to under- 
stand. As it has been said, 'Innate knowledge of the good and innate 
ability to do good are possible even in men and women of simple 
intelligence.'39 As to the minute details and varying circumstances, 
in which an infinitesimal mistake in the beginning may lead to an 
infinite error at the end, they need to be studied before we know 
them. Who does not know that filial piety involves caring for the 
comfort of parents in both winter and summer and serving and 
supporting them? But in such cases as Emperor Shun's getting 
married without first telling his parents,40 King Wu's launching a 
military expedition before burying his father,41 Tseng Tzu's nour- 
ishing the will of his father while his son nourished his mouth and 
body,42 Tseng Tzu's bearing his father's heavy beating or light 
beating without complaint,43 a filial son's cutting his own thigh to 
make medicine for his sick parent,44 and the crown prince of T'eng's 

37 The text of the Great "Learning. 38 Ibid. 

39 Alluding to the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 12. 

40 Book of Mencius, jA:2. 

41 Shih chi, 61:7b. 

42 Book of Mencius, 4A:ic). 

43 K'ung T%u chia-yii, sec. 15, sptk ed., 4:5a-6a. 

44 Sung shih, 155:15a. Most annotators give this general reference. Professors 
Yang Lien-sheng of Harvard University and Fu Shang-ling of Bennet College 
have kindly informed me that in the Hsin T'ang shu, 195:2a, it is recorded 
that cases of filial sons' cutting their own thighs to make medicine for 
their sick parents are based on the words of Ch'en Ts'ang-ch'i {ft. 723-33), 

108 Instructions for V radical Living 

building by the grave a shed in which to mourn his father,45 the 
question of what to do under normal conditions or under an 
emergency, and what is too much or not enough, must be deliber- 
ated with reference to right and wrong so as to provide a basis for 
handling affairs in the proper way. Only then can the substance of the 
mind be free from obscuration and one's will not be at a loss when 
things happen." 

It is quite true, as you have said, that the foundations of truth are 
easy to understand. However, students of later generations neglect 
what is easy to understand and do not follow it but seek what is 
difficult to understand and make it their object of study. This is why 
"truth lies in what is near and men seek for it in what is remote and 
the work lies in what is easy and men seek for it in what is difficult."46 
Mencius said, "The way of truth is like a great road. Is it difficult 
to know? The trouble is that men do not follow it."47 

In innate knowledge and innate ability, men and women of simple 
intelligence and the sage are equal. Their difference lies in the fact 
that the sage alone can extend his innate knowledge while men and 
women of simple intelligence cannot. It is not that the sage does not 
know the minute details and varying circumstances. Rather he is not 
confined to them in his studies. What he studies is precisely the 
extension of innate knowledge in order carefully to examine the 
Principle of Nature in the mind. Herein lies the difference between 
his study [as taught by Confucius] and that taught by later genera- 
tions. You devote no time to extending innate knowledge but 

who in his Pen-ts'ao shih-i, which contained notes on medicine, said that human 
flesh could cure acute illness. Professor Jao Tsung-i of the University of Hong 
Kong, thanks to Dr. E. Sargent, has also kindly referred me to the Hsin 
T'ang shu, 196:4b, where it is recorded that Wang Yu-chen was commended 
by the emperor for having cured his mother's illness by feeding her with flesh 
from his thigh. I have not been able to trace the story to any earlier source than 
this. Azuma Keiji in his Densho-roku kdgi refers to the case of Chang Mi in the 
"Biography of a Filial Son" in the Wei shu of 554, but there is no such biography 
there. The name Chang Mi is not found in any biographical dictionary or in the 
Index of Personal Names in the Twenty-five Histories. In the Chuang T^u, ch. 29, 
sptk ed., 9:39a (Giles, trans., Chuang T%u, p. 286), there is the story of a minister 
cutting his own thigh to feed his king. But the moral there is loyalty and not 
filial piety. Chu Hsi mentioned the act of cutting the thigh in his Ta-hsiieh 
huo-wen, p. 26b, without mentioning the origin of the story. 

45 Book of Mencius, 3 A: 2. 

i6 Ibid., 4A-.11. 

47 Ibid., 6B:2. 

Part II 109 

unceasingly worry about details and circumstances. This is exactly 
the trouble of seeking what is difficult to understand and making it 
the object of study. 

Innate knowledge is to minute details and varying circumstances 
as compasses and measures are to areas and lengths. Details and 
circumstances cannot be predetermined, just as areas and lengths are 
infinite in number and cannot be entirely covered. If compasses and 
squares are truly set, there cannot be any deception regarding areas, 
and the possibility of correct areas in the world cannot be exhausted. 
If measures are well exhibited, there cannot be any deception 
regarding length, and the possibility of correct lengths in the 
world cannot be exhausted. If innate knowledge is truly extended, 
there cannot be any deception regarding minute details and varying 
circumstances, and the possibility of minute details and varying 
circumstances in the world cannot be exhausted. If one does not 
realize that in an instant of thought in his mind of innate knowledge 
an infinitesimal mistake in the beginning may lead to an infinite 
error at the end, what is the sense of study ? That would amount to 
hoping to determine squares and circles without compasses and 
squares, and to cover all lengths without measures. I can see that 
such a man is unreasonable, absurd, and is working day in and day 
out without success. 

You ask who does not know that filial piety involves caring for 
the comfort of parents in both winter and summer and serving and 
supporting them. But those who can extend and apply their knowl- 
edge are few. If one who roughly knows the details of caring for 
parents can be regarded as being able to extend his knowledge, then 
whoever knows that the ruler should be humane should be regarded 
as being able to extend his knowledge of humanity and whoever 
knows that the minister should be loyal should be regarded as being 
able to extend his knowledge of loyalty. In that case, who in the 
world does not extend his knowledge? Looking at it this way, we 
know that the extension of knowledge necessarily consists in action, 
and it is clear that without action there can be no extension of knowl- 
edge. Does not the substance of the unity of knowledge and action 
stand sharply in focus ? 

As for Shun's marrying without first telling his parents, was there 
someone before him who did the same thing and served as an 
example for him, which he could find out by looking into certain 
records and asking certain people, after which he did as he did? 

110 Instructions for 1? radical Living 

Or did he search into the innate knowledge in an instant of thought 
in his own mind and weigh all factors as to what was proper, after 
which he could not help doing what he did ? Similarly, in the case 
of King Wu's launching a military expedition before burying his 
father, was there someone before him who did the same thing and 
served as an example for him, which he could find out by looking into 
certain records or asking certain people, after which he did as he did ? 
Or did he search the innate knowledge in an instant of thought in 
his own mind and weigh all factors as to what was proper, after which 
he could not help doing what he did ? If Emperor Shun's mind was 
not sincere about having no posterity, and King Wu's mind 
was not sincere about saving the people, then the former's marrying 
without first telling his parents and the latter's expedition without 
first burying his father would be cases of the greatest filial impiety 
and disloyalty. People of later generations do not devote themselves 
to the extension of innate knowledge in order carefully to examine 
the moral principles in the mind's contact with, response to, and 
dealing with things, but want to discuss these unusual deeds in a 
vacuum, hold on to them as a basis for handling affairs, and hope 
not to be at a loss when things happen. They are far off the mark ! 
It can be shown through inference by analogy that the same is true 
of the other cases you have mentioned. From the above we can know 
the ancient doctrine of the extension of knowledge. 

140. Your letter says, "To say that the theory of the investigation 
of things in the Great Learning means to seek the original mind may 
be accepted as an arbitrary combination of the two ideas. But the 
Six Classics and the Four Books48 contain sayings that teach 'hearing 
and seeing much,'49 'remembering the words and deeds of former 
men,'50 'love of antiquity and earnestly seeking it there,'51 'learning 
extensively and inquiring accurately,'52 'reviewing the old so as to 
know the new,'53 'studying extensively and discussing thoroughly,'54 

48 See above, Introduction, n. i. 

49 Analects, 2:18. 

50 Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 26. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 300. 

51 Analects, 7:19. 

62 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

53 Analects, 2:11. 

64 Book of Mencius, 46:15. 

Part II 111 

and 'taking delight in questioning and examining.'55 All these clearly 
show a search within the realm of events and a reliance on delibera- 
tion and discussion. It is clear that no confusion should be allowed 
in the details to which one's effort is devoted." 

The meaning of the investigation of things has already been fully 
explained. I believe your suspicion of arbitrary combination requires 
no further answer. As to hearing and seeing much [Confucius told 
Tzu-chang, "Hear much and put aside what is doubtful while you 
speak cautiously of the rest. Then few will blame you. See much 
and put aside what seems perilous while you are cautious in carrying 
the rest into practice. Then you will have few occasions for regret"]. 
He said so because Tzu-chang sought external things and loved 
lofty position, wanted to regard merely hearing and seeing much as 
learning, and was unable to seek within his own mind in order to 
put aside what is doubtful and what is perilous. For this reason he 
was in his words and deeds unable to avoid blame by others and 
regret by himself. What is called hearing and seeing much merely 
became an aid to his search for external things and his love of lofty 
position. Thus Confucius meant to remedy Tzu-chang's defect of 
hearing and seeing much and did not mean to offer what he said as 
a [regular] way of learning. 

Confucius once said, "There are those who act without knowing 
[what is right]. But I am not one of them."56 This has the same idea 
as the saying of Mencius, "The feeling of right and wrong is found 
in all men."57 It was intended precisely to show that innate knowl- 
edge of our moral nature does not come from hearing and seeing. 
When Confucius continued to say, "Hear much and select what is 
good and follow it. See much and remember it," he referred to 
nothing but seeking solely after the secondary matters of seeing and 
hearing, thus already falling to the secondary level. This is why Con- 
fucius said [in conclusion], "This is secondary knowledge." Since 
he regarded knowledge from hearing and seeing as secondary, what 
then is higher knowledge? Here you can have a peep at the place 
where the Confucian school directs its effort at the extension of 
knowledge. 

Confucius said to Tzu-kung, "Tz'u, do you suppose that I am one 
who learns a great deal and remembers it ?... No, I have a thread that 

55 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 6. 

66 Analects, 7:27. 

57 Book of Mencius, 6A:6. 

112 Instructions for V radical Living 

runs through it all."58 If the emphasis really is laid on learning a 
great deal and remembering it, why did the Grand Master make such 
a false statement to cheat Tzu-kung ? What is the thread that runs 
through all if it is not the extension of innate knowledge ? The Book 
of Changes says, "The superior man remembers many words and deeds 
of former men in order to nourish his virtue." Since the motive is 
to nourish virtue, then remembering many words and deeds of 
former men is the work of nourishing virtue. This is precisely the 
task of both knowledge and action combined. To love antiquity 
and earnestly to seek means to love the learning of the ancients and 
earnestly to seek the principle of the mind. Mind is identical with 
principle. To learn means to learn this mind. To seek means to seek 
this mind. Mencius said, "The way of learning is none other than to 
find the lost mind."59 This way is different from the learning of later 
generations who consider the vast memorization and extensive 
recitation of the words of the ancients to be love of antiquity, and 
merely devote their unceasing efforts to the search for success, fame, 
and profit, which are external. I have already commented fully on 
extensive learning and accurate inquiry. As to reviewing the old so 
as to know the new, Chu Hsi also regarded reviewing the old as 
honoring our moral nature.60 Can moral nature be sought outside 
the mind? Since knowing the new must necessarily come from 
reviewing the old and since only through reviewing the old can the 
new be known, it proves that knowledge and action are not two 
separate sections. "Study extensively and discuss thoroughly. This 
is in order to go back and discuss the most restrained."61 If the words 
"to go back and discuss the most restrained" are omitted, then what 
is the objective of studying extensively and discussing thoroughly? 
The reason Emperor Shun took delight in questioning and examining 
was to put the mean into application and extend its refinement and 
singleness to the moral mind. By the moral mind is meant innate 
knowledge. When has the learning of the superior man departed from 
practical affairs and discarded discussions ? However, whenever he is 
engaged in practical affairs or discussion, he insists on the task of 
knowledge and action combined. The aim is precisely to extend the 
innate knowledge of his original mind. He is unlike those who devote 

58 Analects, 15:2. Tz'u was Tzu-kung's private name. 

59 Book of Mencius, 6A:i 1. 

60 Chu T^u yii-lei, 64:26b. 

61 Book of Mencius, 46:15. 

Part II 113 

themselves to merely talking and hearing as though that were knowl- 
edge, and divide knowledge and action into two separate things as 
though they really could be itemized and take place one after the other. 

141. Your letter says, "Yang Chu's [bet. 440 and 360 B.C.] practice 
of righteousness [ in terms of everyone for himself] and Mo Tzu's 
practice of humanity [in terms of mutual or universal love],62 
the goody-goody's violation of loyalty and faithfulness,63 the abdica- 
tion of the sage -emperors Yao and Shun in favor of virtuous 
ministers,64 the king of Yen's abdication in favor of the minister 
Tzu-chih,65 King T'ang's and King Wu's military expeditions 
against the wicked rulers,66 Hsiang Yii's [d. 202 B.C.] killing his 
king and seating himself on the throne,67 Duke Chou's assisting 
King Ch'eng [r.i 104-1068 B.C.],68 Wang Mang's [45 B.c-A.D.23] 
and Ts'ao Ts'ao's [a.d. 155-220] assistance in their government,69 
have been loosely judged to be right or wrong without any objective 
standard. What shall we follow ? Furthermore, if we do not investi- 
gate to find out about the changing events of past and present, and 
the names and varieties of ceremonies and music, in case the govern- 
ment wants to construct a Brilliant Hall or palace,70 build a national 
university, establish the system of calendar and musical scales, or draft 

62 Mencius criticized them as excessive. See Book of Mencius, -jK:z(>. 

63 Analects, 17:13. 

64 Book of Mencius, 5A:4. Yao abdicated in favor of Shun, and Shun abdicated 
in favor of the Great Yii. Their deeds have been highly praised. 

65 Book of Mencius, 2B:8. The king of Yen abdicated in favor of Tzu-chih and 
caused great disorder in the state. Consequently the abdication has been con- 
demned. 

66 Book of Mencius, iB:8. 

67 Shih chi, 7:2ob-2ia. See Burton Watson, trans., Records of the Grand Historian 
of China (New York, Columbia University Press, 1961), I, 59. Hsiang Yii has 
been condemned, while King Wu has been praised. 

68 Book of History, "The Great Announcement." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo 
King, p. 362. 

69 Cb'ien-Han shu, ch. 99B, and Hou-Han shu, ch. 9. Duke Chou has been 
regarded as a sage, whereas Wang and Ts'ao have been regarded as thieves. 

70 Ming-fang, literally "hall of light," is said by some to be the hall where 
government was conducted, education propagated, and sacrifices performed. 
The commentary on ch. 14 of the Book of Kites says that it was a place where the 
king held audiences to receive feudal lords. It was the practice of kings who 
were touring their kingdoms to build in famous mountains such "Brilliant 
Halls" for the purpose. The functions of these halls in the Chou times included 
banquets, education, the selection of officials, etc. 

114 Instructions for V radical "Living 

documents to sacrifice to Heaven, mountains, and rivers, how can 
we proceed? Therefore [a commentator on] the Analects said, 'What 
is known at birth is moral principle only. As to the changing events 
of past and present and the names and varieties of ceremonies and 
music, they surely require study before their validity can be verified 
in practice.'71 This conclusion seems to be definite and final." 

What you said about Yang, Mo, the goody-goody, Yao, Shun,Tzu- 
chih, T'ang, Wu, Hsiang Yii, Duke Chou, Wang Mang, and Ts'ao 
Ts'ao may be explained in the same way as I have done above regard- 
ing Emperor Shun's marrying without first reporting to his parents 
and King Wu's military expedition before burying his father. Concern- 
ing your doubts about the changing events of past and present, I have 
already given the analogy of compass, square, and measures when dis- 
cussing innate knowledge. There should be no need to say any more. 

As to matters like the Brilliant Hall and national university, it 
seems that I should not allow myself to be silent. These matters 
require a long explanation. But just let me take what you say and 
correct it, and then your doubt may to some extent be dispelled. 

The system of the Brilliant Hall and the national university first 
appeared in Lu Pu-wei's [d. 235 B.C.] "Monthly Orders"72 and the 
textual commentaries on the Confucian Classics by a scholar of the 
Han period.73 They are not discussed in the Six Classics or the Four 
Books in detail. Is the wisdom of Lii and the Han scholar superior 
to that of the sages and worthies of the Three Dynasties? Some 
Brilliant Halls were still in existence at the time of King Hsiian 
[r. 342-234 b.c] of Ch'i.74 It is clear that those of the Chou dynasty 
were all intact at the time of wicked Kings Yu [r. 781-771 B.C.] and 
Li [r. 878-842 b.c.]. Emperors Yao and Shun had palaces of thatched 
and untrimmed roofs and earthen steps. The system of Brilliant 
Halls was not necessarily complete. And yet that did not do any 
harm to their orderly government. The Brilliant Halls of Yu and Li 
surely followed the tradition of wise kings Wen, Wu, Ch'eng, and 

71 A saying by Yin T'un (1061-1 132) quoted by Chu Hsi in his Lun-yu chi-chu, 
ch. 4, comment on Analects 7:19. 

72 The first section of the twelve chapters on the twelve months in his Lii-sbib 
ch'un-cb'iu. These are combined to form the chapter "Yueh-ling" (monthly 
orders) of the Book of Kites. 

73 Notably Cheng Hsiian (127-200), in his commentary on ch. 14 of the 
Book of Rites. 

74 Book of Mencius, 16:5. 

Part II 115 

K'ang, and yet they did not help them to prevent disorder. Why ? If 
a government that cannot bear to see the suffering of the people is 
conducted from a mind that cannot bear to see the suffering of the 
people75 even a building with a thatched roof and earthen steps can 
be a Brilliant Hall, but if a wicked government like those of King 
Yu and King Li is conducted from a wicked mind like theirs, then 
even if the place is a Brilliant Hall, it is after all the place where 
tyrannical government originates. Is this not true ? During the Han 
dynasty [206 b.c.-a.d. 220], Emperor Wu [r. 140-87 b.c] was the 
first one to order lectures on the Brilliant Hall 76 and during the T'ang 
dynasty [618-907] Empress Wu [r. 6 84-70 5] gloriously built a 
Brilliant Hall77 and yet what was the condition in their days, order 
or disorder ? 

The national university at the national capital was called pi-yung 
(literally "surrounded jade").78 The college of feudal lords was called 
p'an-hing (literally "half palace").79 They were so named to indicate 
their geographical patterns. However, the education of the Three 
Dynasties was designed essentially to manifest human relations and 
its importance did not depend on whether or not the buildings were 
jade-like or half palaces. Confucius said, "If a man is not humane, 
what has he to do with ceremonies ? If he is not humane, what has 
he to do with music?"80 To institute ceremonies and great musical 
systems, one must possess the moral qualities of equilibrium [before 
the feeling are aroused] and harmony [after the feelings are aroused] 
and his voice must be equivalent to the musical notes and his person 
equivalent to standard measure.81 Only then can he be qualified. 
As to the subsidiary matters of articles and numbers, they are the 
concern of musicians and the duty of priests and clerks. Hence 
Tseng Tzu said, "There are three principles of conduct which the 
superior man considers especially important.... As to such matters 
as attending to the sacrificial vessels, there are the proper officers 
for them."82 

75 Ibid., zA:6. 

76 In 140 B.C., according to Chu Hsi's T 'ung-chien kang-mu, 4t49a-b. 

77 In a.d. 688, according to ibid., 41:94a. 

78 Alluding to a building surrounded by a moat. 

79 Only one side was surrounded by water. 

80 Analects, 3:3. 

81 These are qualities ascribed to the Great Yii in the Shih chi, 2:2a. 

82 Analects, 8:4. 

116 Instructions for V radical Liping 

Emperor Yao commended Hsi and Ho, "In reverent accord with 
the luminant heaven, calculate and delineate the movements of the 
sun, the moon, and the stars."83 The importance here lies in seriously 
providing the people with definite times to determine the seasons. 
Emperor Shun depended on gem-inlaid astronomical instruments.84 
The importance here lies in regulating the sun, moon, and five 
planets. They all unremittingly carried out the governmental 
measures to nourish the people, with the mind of being humane to 
all people. Here is the foundation of regulating the calendar and 
determining the seasons. The learning of Hsi and Ho may not have 
been matched by Kao and Hsieh or by Yu and Chi85 or even by 
Yao and Shun, whose wisdom did not extend to everything.86 
Nevertheless, up to the present time generations have followed the 
method of Hsi and Ho and practiced their art. Even men with 
limited knowledge and small wisdom, and shallow astrologists, can 
make astronomical calendars and foretell weather without error. 
Shall we say that the people of limited knowledge and small wisdom 
of later generations are superior to Yu, Chi, Yao, and Shun in virtue 
and wisdom? 

The theories of sacrificing to Heaven, mountains, and rivers are 
even more absurd. They are the products of later deceitful, flattering 
scholars who wanted to please their rulers. These scholars exagger- 
ated matters to confuse the rulers' minds and to waste national funds, 
and as such were outstanding cases of shamelessly cheating Heaven 
and entrapping the people, unworthy of being mentioned by a 
superior man. It is for this reason that Ssu-ma Hsiang-ju [179-117 
B.C.] was ridiculed by the world and later generations.87 You 
consider this [details, such as varieties of ceremonies and music] 
something a Confucian scholar should study, perhaps due to the 
fact that you have not seriously thought about it. 

A sage is a sage because he is born with knowledge. But a com- 
mentator on the Analects said, "What is known at birth is moral 
principle only. As to the changing events of past and present and the 
names and varieties of ceremonies and music, they surely require 

83 Book of History, "Canon of Yao." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 18. 

84 Ibid., "Canon of Shun." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 33. 

85 Kao, Hsieh, Yu, and Chi were, respectively, Shun's ministers of justice, 
education, public works, and agriculture. 

86 So said Mencius, Book of Mencius, 7A:46. 

87 T'ung-cbien kang-mu, 4:173b. 

Part II 117 

study before their validity can be verified in practice." If the names 
and varieties of ceremonies and music and the changing events of 
past and present really had anything to do with the effort to become 
a sage, and a sage had to depend on study to obtain knowledge, then 
a sage cannot be said to have been born with knowledge. When a 
sage is said to be born with knowledge, it means moral principles 
only and not such things as the names and varieties of ceremonies 
and music. It is clear that such things as the names and varieties of 
ceremonies and music have nothing to do with the effort to become 
a sage. Since by a sage's being born with knowledge is meant his 
possession of moral principles only and not such things as the names 
and varieties of ceremonies and music, then to know through study 
means to study and know these moral principles only, and learning 
through hard work also means learning through hard work these 
moral principles only. Nowadays students who study to become 
sages are not able to study and know what the sage is able to know, 
but unceasingly seek to know what the sage cannot know, as though 
it were learning. Don't they thereby lose the means by which they 
hope to become sages ? In what I have said above, I have taken the 
things you have in doubt and explained them to some extent, but 
have not touched upon the doctrine of "pulling up the root and 
stopping up the source." 

PULLING UP THE ROOT AND STOPPING UP 
THE SOURCE (Sections 142-143) 

These sections are so important and so outstanding that they have often 
been singled out as a separate essay. Just as the Inquiry on the "Great 
Learning"88 represents the essence of Wang's philosophy, so this essay 
represents the height of his ethics. It centers on his two basic doctrines 
of the extension of innate knowledge which is "common to the original 
minds of all men" and of "forming one body with Heaven and Earth 
and all things." In this latter doctrine, it ranks with China's most cele- 
brated essays on the theme, notably the "Evolution of Rites," which 
envisages a "great unity" or universal state in which all distinctions 
disappear,89 and Chang Tsai's Western Inscription in which Heaven and 
Earth are conceived of as one's parents and all men as brothers.90 

88 See below, "Inquiry on the Great Learning," pp. 271-80. 

89 Book of Rites, "The Evolution of Rites." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 7. 

90 "Hsi-ming," in the Chang Heng-cWii chi, ch. 1. 

118 Instructions for Practical hiving 

The special importance of the essay lies not only in these teachings 
themselves but also in their application to society and history. Elsewhere 
discussions on innate knowledge are by and large inclined to the individ- 
ual, to the human mind, to what is common to all men, and to ethical 
problems. Here, however, the emphasis is on its relation to society, to 
one's talents and ability, to individual differences, and to social and 
political problems. With innate knowledge as the central theme, Wang 
vigorously attacks the four tendencies that had dominated the social and 
political scene for many years, namely, the stress on "hearing and seeing," 
the habit of "memorization and recitation," "the indulgence in flowery 
compositions," and the philosophy of "success and profit." He condemns 
especially the last, for he considers utilitarianism the wicked way of 
despots, and responsible for China's decline. His analysis of history 
is of course quite subjective, but there can be no mistake as to where his 
attention is directed. Wang still looks upon the past as the golden age and 
is confined to traditional Confucian concepts of value. But his spirit of 
challenge and his sense of responsibility, together with his powerful, 
direct, and sincere manner of expression, make the essay an inspiration. 

142. If the doctrine of pulling up the root and stopping up the 
source does not clearly prevail in the world, people who study to be- 
come sages will be increasingly numerous and their task increasingly 
difficult. They will then degenerate into animals and barbarians and 
still think this degeneration is the way to study to become a sage. 
Though my doctrine may perhaps temporarily be made clear and 
prevail, the situation will ultimately be like that in which the cold 
abates in the west while the ice freezes in the east, and the fog 
dissipates in front while clouds rise in the rear. Though I keep 
on talking until I die in distress, I shall at the end not be the least 
help to the world. 

The mind of a sage regards Heaven, Earth, and all things as one 
body. He looks upon all people of the world, whether inside or 
outside his family, or whether far or near, but all with blood and 
breath, as his brothers and children. He wants to secure, preserve, 
educate, and nourish all of them, so as to fulfill his desire of forming 
one body with all things. Now the mind of everybody is at first not 
different from that of the sage. Only because it is obstructed by 
selfishness and blocked by material desires, what was originally 
great becomes small and what was originally penetrating becomes 
obstructed. Everyone has his own selfish view, to the point where 
some regard their fathers, sons, and brothers as enemies. The Sage 

Part II 119 

worried over this. He therefore extended his humanity which makes 
him form one body with Heaven, Earth, and all things, to teach the 
world, so as to enable the people to overcome their selfishness, 
remove their obstructions, and recover that which is common to 
the substance of the minds of all men. 

The essentials of this teaching are what was successively trans- 
mitted by Yao, Shun, and Yii, and what is summed up in the saying, 
"The human mind is precarious [liable to make mistakes], the moral 
mind is subtle [follows the moral law]. Have absolute refinement 
and single-mindedness and hold fast the mean."91 Its details were 
given by Emperor Shun to Hsieh, namely, "between father and son 
there should be affection, between ruler and minister there should be 
righteousness, between husband and wife there should be attention 
to their separate functions, between old and young there should be 
a proper order, and between friends there should be faithfulness, that 
is all."92 At the time of Yao, Shun, and the Three Dynasties, teachers 
taught and students studied only this. At that time people did not 
have different opinions, nor did families have different practices. 
Those who practiced the teaching naturally and easily were called 
sages, and those who practiced it with effort and difficulty were 
called worthies, but those who violated it were considered degenerate 
even though they were as intelligent as Tan-chu.93 People of low 
station — those in villages and rural districts, farmers, artisans, and 
merchants — all received this teaching, which was devoted only to 
the perfection of virtue and conduct. How could this have been the 
case ? Because there was no pursuit after the knowledge of seeing and 
hearing to confuse them, no memorization and recitation to hinder 
them, no writing of flowery compositions to indulge in, and no 
chasing after success and profit. They were taught only to be 
filially pious to their parents, brotherly to their elders, and faithful 
to their friends, so as to recover that which is common to the 
substance of the minds of all men. All this is inherent in our nature 
and does not depend on the outside. This being the case, who 
cannot do it ? 

The task of the school was solely to perfect virtue. However, 
people differed in capacity. Some excelled in ceremonies and music ; 
others in government and education ; and still others in public works 

91 Book of History,1 'Counsels of the Great Yii." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King,p.6 1 . 

92 Book of Mencius, 3 A: 4. 

93 The son of Yao. See ibid., 5A:6. 

120 Instructions for Practical hiving 

and agriculture. Therefore, in accordance with their moral achieve- 
ment, they were sent to school further to refine their abilities. 
When their virtue recommended them to government positions, 
they were enabled to serve in their positions throughout life without 
change. Those who employed them desired only to be united with 
them in one mind and one character to bring peace to the people. 
They considered whether the individual's ability was suitable, and 
did not regard a high or low position as important or unimportant, 
or a busy or leisurely job as good or bad. Those who served also 
desired only to be united with their superiors in one mind and one 
character to bring peace to the people. If their ability matched their 
positions, they served throughout life in busy and heavy work 
without regarding it as toilsome, and felt at ease with lowly work 
and odd jobs without regarding them as mean. At that time 
people were harmonious and contented. They regarded one another 
as belonging to one family. Those with inferior ability were con- 
tented with their positions as farmers, artisans, or merchants, all 
diligent in their various occupations, so as mutually to sustain and 
support the life of one another without any desire for exalted 
position or strife for external things. Those with special ability like 
Kao, K'uei,94 Chi,and Hsieh,came forward and served with their abil- 
ity, treating their work as their own family concern, some attending 
to the provision of clothing and food, some arranging for mutual 
help, and some providing utensils, planning and working together 
in order to fulfill their desires of serving their parents above and 
supporting their wives and children below. Their only concern was 
that those responsible for certain work might not be diligent in it 
and become a heavy burden to them. Therefore Chi worked hard in 
agriculture and did not feel ashamed that he was not a teacher but 
regarded Hsieh's expert teaching as his own. K'uei took charge 
of music and was not ashamed that he was not brilliant in ceremonies 
but regarded Po-i's understanding of ceremonies as his own.95 For 
the learning of their mind was pure and clear and had what was 
requisite to preserve the humanity that makes them and all things 
form one body. Consequently their spirit ran through and permeated 

94 Book of History, "Canon of Shun." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, pp. 47-48. 
K'uei was Emperor Shun's minister in charge of music. For Kao,Hsieh, and Chi, 
see above, n.85. 

95 Book of History, "Canon of Shun. "Cf. Legge, p. 47. By order of Emperor 
Shun, Po-i was in charge of ceremonies. 

Part II 121 

all and their will prevailed and reached everywhere. There was no 
distinction between the self and the other, or between the self and 
things. It is like the body of a person. The eyes see, the ears hear, the 
hands hold, and the feet walk, all fulfilling the function of the body. 
The eyes are not ashamed of their not being able to hear. When the 
ears hear something, the eyes will direct their attention to it. The 
feet are not ashamed that they are not able to grasp. When a hand 
feels for something, the feet will move forward. For the original 
material force feels and is present in the entire body, and the blood 
and veins function smoothly. Therefore in feeling itchy and in 
breathing, their influence and the speedy response to it possess a 
mystery that can be understood without words. This is why the 
doctrine of the Sage is the easiest, the simplest, easy to know and 
easy to follow. The reason why the learning can easily be achieved 
and the ability easily perfected is precisely because the fundamentals 
of the doctrine consist only in recovering that which is common 
to our original minds, and are not concerned with any specific 
knowledge or skill. 

143. As the Three Dynasties declined, the kingly way was stopped 
and the techniques of the despot flourished. After the passing of 
Confucius and Mencius, the doctrine of the Sage became obscure 
and perverse doctrines ran wild. Teachers no longer taught the 
doctrine of the Sage and students no longer studied it. Followers of 
despots stole and appropriated what seemed to be the teaching of 
ancient kings, and outwardly made a pretense of following it in 
order inwardly to satisfy their selfish desires. The whole world 
followed them in fashion. As a result the Way of the Sage was 
obstructed as though stopped by weeds. People imitated one another 
and every day searched for theories to acquire national wealth and 
power, for schemes to destroy and deceive, for plans to attack and 
invade, and for all sorts of tricks to cheat Heaven and entrap 
people and to get temporary advantages in order to reap fame or 
profit. There were numerous such people, like Kuan Chung [d. 645 
B.C.], Shang Yang [d. 338 B.C.], Su Ch'in [d. 317 B.C.], and Chang I 
[d. 309 B.C.].96 After a long time, the calamity of war and plundering 
became infinite. Thus people degenerated to the status of animals and 
barbarians, and even despotism itself could no longer operate. 

96 Economist, legalist, and experts on diplomacy, respectively. All of them 
stressed success as the central goal and have been condemned by Confucians 
as immoral. 

122 Instructions for Practical Living 

Confucian scholars of [Han] times were sad and distressed. They 
searched and collected the literature, documents, laws, and systems 
of ancient sage-kings and salvaged the remains left from the Burning 
of the Books97 and mended them. Their purpose was to restore the 
way of the ancient kings. 

Since Confucian doctrines were discarded and the tradition of the 
technique of despotism had become strongly entrenched, even the 
virtuous and wise could not help being influenced by it. The doc- 
trines elucidated and embellished in order to make them clear to 
the people, make them prevail, and restore them to the world, 
merely served to fortify the strongholds of despots. As a result, the 
door of Confucianism was blocked, and it was no longer to be seen. 
Therefore the learning of textual criticism developed and those 
perpetuating it were regarded as famous. The practice of memo- 
rization and recitation developed and those advocating it were 
regarded as extensively learned. The writing of flowery compositions 
developed and those indulging in it were regarded as elegant. 
Thus with great confusion and tremendous noise they set themselves 
up and competed with one another, and no one knew how many 
schools there were. Among tens of thousands of paths and thousands 
of tracks, none knew which to follow. Students of the world found 
themselves in a theater where a hundred plays were being presented, 
as it were. Actors cheered, jeered, hopped, and skipped. They 
emulated one another in novelty and in ingenuity. They forced 
smiles to please the audience and competed in appearing beautiful. 
All this rivalry appeared on all sides. The audience looked to the 
left and to the right and could not cope with the situation. Their 
ears and eyes became obscured and dizzy and their spirit dazed and 
confused. They drifted day and night and remained for a long time 
in this atmosphere as if they were insane and had lost their minds, 
and none had the self-realization to return to his family heritage 
[Confucianism] . Rulers of the time were also fooled and confounded 
by those doctrines and devoted their whole lives to useless super- 
ficialities without knowing what they meant. Occasionally some 
rulers realized the emptiness, falsehood, fragmentariness, and 
unnaturalness of their ways, and heroically roused themselves to 
great effort, which they wished to demonstrate in concrete action. 
But the most they could do was no more than to achieve national 

97 By the Ch'in in 213 B.C. 

Part II 123 

wealth, power, success, and profit, such as those of the Five Des- 
pots.98 Consequently the teachings of the Sage became more and 
more distant and obscured, while the current of success and profit 
ran deeper and deeper. Some students turned to Buddhism and 
Taoism and were deceived by them. But at bottom there was nothing 
in these systems that could overcome their desire for success and 
profit. Others sought to reconcile the conflicting doctrines within 
the Confucian school. But in the final analysis there was nothing 
in these doctrines that could destroy the view of success and profit. 
For up to the present time it has been several thousand years since 
the poison of the doctrine of success and profit has infected the 
innermost recesses of man's mind and has become his second nature. 
People have mutually boasted of their knowledge, crushed one 
another with power, rivaled each other for profit, mutually striven 
for superiority through skill, and attempted success through fame. 
When they came forward to serve in the government, those in 
charge of the treasury wanted also to control the departments of 
military affairs and justice. Those in charge of ceremonies and 
music wanted also to have one foot in the important office of civil 
appointments. Magistrates and prefects aspired to the high office 
of a regional governor. And censors looked forward to the key 
position of the prime minister. Of course one could not take a 
concurrent position unless he could do the work and one could not 
expect any praise unless theories were advanced to justify the 
practice. Extensive memorization and recitation merely served to 
increase their pride," substantial and abundant knowledge merely 
served to help them do evil, enormous information merely served 
to help them indulge in argumentation, and wealth in flowery 
compositions merely served to cover up their artificiality. Thus that 
which Kao, K'uei, Chi, and Hsieh could not manage on the side 
young students of today want to justify in doctrine and to master 
in technique. Using slogans and borrowing labels, they say they 
want to work together with others to complete the work of the 
empire. In reality their purpose lies in their belief that unless 
they do so they cannot satisfy their selfishness and fulfill their 
desires. 

Alas ! on top of such affectation and such a motive, they preach 

98 See above, sec. u, n. 46. 

99 Reading chiao [education] as ao [pride]. 

124 Instructions for Practical hiving 

such a doctrine ! No wonder that when they hear the teachings of our 
Sage they look upon them as useless and self-contradictory. It is 
inevitable that they consider innate knowledge as deficient and the 
doctrine of the Sage as useless. Alas ! how can scholars living in this 
age still seek the doctrine of the Sage ? How can they still discuss it ? 
Is it not toilsome and difficult, is it not rugged and hazardous for 
scholars living in this age to devote themselves to study? Alas! 
how lamentable! 

Fortunately, the Principle of Nature is inherent in the human mind 
and can never be destroyed and the intelligence of innate knowledge 
shines through eternity without variation. Therefore when they 
hear my doctrine of pulling up the root and stopping up the source, 
surely some will be pitifully distressed and compassionately pained, 
and will indignantly rise up, like a stream or a river which cannot 
be stopped, bursting its banks. To whom shall I look if not to heroic 
scholars who will rise up without further delay ? 

LETTER TO CHOU TAO-T'UNG1 

144. The students Wu and Tseng2 came and told me fully about 
your keen desire to cultivate the Way. It is most gratifying. A person 
like you, Tao-t'ung, may be said to be steadfast in belief and strong 
in the desire to learn. Being in the midst of mourning,3 I did4 not 
talk with them in detail. But they have determination and are willing 
to make effort. Each time I saw them it seemed they had made some 
progress. I humbly believe that I have not failed to fulfill the 
objectives of their long journey and, on their part, they also have not 
failed in their goal. Now that they are about to leave and have come 
to me with this folio and, expressing your wishes, have asked me to 
write a few words in it, I am too distressed and confused to say 

1 Chou Heng, literary name Ching-an. He was a disciple of Chan Jo-shui 
(see below, sec. 201) as well as of Wang. He obtained a "recommended person" 
degree in 15 10, served in various minor official capacities, and died in his forty- 
seventh year. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 25:4b-5b. This letter 
was written from Chekiang in 1524 when Wang was fifty-three. 

2 Nothing is known of them. 

3 Wang's father had died in 1522, two years before this letter was written. 
The customary mourning period was three years. 

4 Reading hui [able] as ts'eng [has, did]. 

Part II 125 

anything. In answer to their kind request I shall merely put down 
a few words in response to questions raised in your letter. Written 
hurriedly, my words will not be at all thorough. However, I am sure 
the two students can orally express all that I have in mind. 

Your letter says, "The task of daily application consists entirely 
in making up the mind. Of late I have often realized your teachings 
through personal experience and have understood them better and 
better. However, I have not been able to be away from friends for 
a moment. Only when there are friends around to discuss things 
with does my mind become strong and broad and full of the spirit 
of life. If for three or five days there are no friends to discuss things 
with, it seems to become weak. When things happen it is troubled 
and it often may forget. On days when there are no friends to talk 
with, I just sit in meditation or read, or pleasantly walk back and 
forth in a certain place. I utilize whatever I see or do to nourish 
my mind, and feel to some extent peaceful and at home. Nevertheless 
it is not as good as to be together with friends and to talk with 
them ; in which case, the mental energy is more active and the spirit 
of life greater. What can people living in isolation do to handle the 
situation ?" 

This paragraph testifies to your accomplishment in efforts of daily 
application. This is just about the way the effort should be applied. 
The main thing is to have no interruption. When the practice has 
become familiar and smooth one's feeling will be quite different. 
Generally speaking, the great basis in our task of learning consists 
only in making up the mind. What you say about its being troubled 
and forgetful is due purely to its lack of earnestness. People who love 
sex do not have trouble or forget, because their minds are earnest. 
Knowing his own itch, one must feel that he must scratch it. One 
must weigh and consider for himself what the Buddhists call the 
convenient way. Other people can hardly help. And there is no other 
way. 

145. Your letter says, "Shang-ts'ai [Hsieh Liang-tso, 1050-1103] 
once asked I -ch'uan [Ch'eng I], 'What is therein the world to think 
about or to deliberate about?'5 Ch'eng I answered, "There is such 
a principle, but you have discovered it too early."6 The task 
of a student consists of course in always doing something and 

5 Book of Changes, "Appended Remark," pt. 2, ch. 5. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 389. 6 Wai-shu, 12:5b. 

126 Instructions for ¥ radical hiving 

not forgetting his objectives.7 Nevertheless he must also recognize 
and at the same time take into consideration the condition in which 
there is nothing to think about or to deliberate about. If he does 
not recognize this situation, he will have the defect of making 
an artificial effort to help things grow.8 But if he realizes that there 
is nothing to think about or to deliberate about and forgets that 
one must always be doing something, he will be in danger of 
falling into nothingness. One must not be obstructed by what is 
and yet not fall into what is not. Is that correct or not?" 

What you have said is not far from the truth, except that you have 
not completely understood the matter. Shang-ts'ai's question and I- 
ch'uan's answer represent their own opinions. The original purpose of 
Confucius' saying in the "Appended Remarks" of the Book of Changes 
is somewhat different. The saying in the "Appended Remarks," "What 
is there to think about or to deliberate about?" means that what is 
to be thought about or deliberated about is only the Principle of 
Nature and that outside of it there should be no other thought or 
deliberation. It does not mean having no thought or deliberation at 
all. Hence he continues to say, "In the world there are many different 
roads but the destination is the same. There are a hundred delibera- 
tions but the result is one. What is there in the world to think about or 
to deliberate about?" Since it says "many roads" and "a hundred 
deliberations," does that mean having no thought or deliberation 
at all? 

The original substance of the mind is the Principle of Nature. The 
Principle of Nature is single and indivisible. How can it be brought 
about by thinking or deliberation ? In its own nature, it is in the state 
of absolute quiet and inactivity, and when acted on it immediately 
penetrates all things.9 Although in his task a student may engage in 
a thousand thoughts and ten thousand deliberations, they should be 
directed at nothing but restoring its original substance and function. 
This is not to be brought about by pondering or manipulation 
according to one's personal wishes. Therefore Ming-tao [Ch'eng 
Hao] said, "For the training of the superior man there is nothing 
better than to become broad and extremely impartial and to respond 

7 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

8 Ibid. 

9 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarke," pt. i, ch. io. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 370. 

Part II 127 

spontaneously to all things as they come."10 If one ponders and 
manipulates according to his personal wishes, that is "the exercise 
of cunning and selfishness."11 Having nothing to think about or 
to deliberate about is precisely the task. It is natural with a sage but 
requires an effort on the part of a student. However, I-ch'uan took it 
as an effect of the task and therefore said the discovery was too early. 
But the fact that he continued to say, "Better make an effort,"12 
shows that he realized what he had said was incomplete. This is also 
the meaning of Lien -hsi's [Chou Tun-i's]theory of regarding tranquil- 
lity as fundamental.13 What you have just said is not without insight, 
but you are not entirely free from regarding [thinking about the 
Principle of Nature and thinking about things] as two different 
things. 

146. Your letter says, "As soon as a student realizes that he should 
begin his task, he must recognize what the feelings and expressions 
of a sage are like.14 For having recognized the feelings and disposi- 
tions of the sage and having taken them as his goal, he can proceed 
in a concrete way. Then he will not make any mistake and the work 
will be that of becoming a sage. Is this true ?" 

It has been said, "First of all recognize the feelings and disposition 
of the sage,"15 it is true. But the idea misses the basis of the task. The 
feelings and dispositions of the sage are his own. How can one 
recognize them? If one does not personally realize truth through 
one's innate knowledge it would be like weighing things with an 
unmarked scale or looking at a face in a closed mirror. This is really 
what is called judging the mind of a superior man by that of an 
inferior man.16 How can the feelings and dispositions of a sage be 
recognized? One's innate knowledge is originally the same as that 
of the sage. If I personally realize my own innate knowledge with 
clarity, it means that the feelings and dispositions of the sage are not 
with the sage but with me. Master Ch'eng I-ch'uan once said, 
"Merely peep at Emperor Yao and imitate his action! Without his 

10 Ch'eng Hao, Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

11 Ibid. 

12 This is actually a paraphrase. 

18 See his T'ai-chi fu-shuo, in Chou ILien-bsi ehi, 1:2a. 

14 Quoting the I-shu, 22A:5b. 

15 Paraphrasing the preceding quotation. 

16 Quoting the Shih-shuo hsin-yii, sec. 6. 

128 Instructions for Practical hiving 

quickness of apprehension, intelligence, insight, and wisdom, how- 
can one always act and appear in the proper manner as he did ?"17 
He also said, "Only when the mind completely understands the 
Way can it distinguish right and wrong."18 Now, let me ask, 
"Wherein must we understand the Way? Where do quickness 
of apprehension, intelligence, insight, and wisdom come from?" 

147. Your letter says, " [You taught us] to be trained and polished 
in the actual affairs of life. During the day, whether anything happens 
or not, one should concentrate on cultivating and nourishing his 
original mind. If things occur and influence him, or if he himself 
feels something, we cannot say that nothing happens, since the mind 
is already conscious of something. However, because the mind is 
concentrated when things are quiet, one can feel in a large measure 
that the principles of things are as they are and handle things as 
though nothing had happened, thus extending his mind to the 
utmost. But why is the handling sometimes good and sometimes 
bad? Furthermore, sometimes perhaps many things happen and 
have to be handled in a certain order. But because of one's deficiency 
in talent and ability one suddenly gets exhausted. In spite of the 
greatest effort to rise up to the occasion, the spirit has already 
seemed weak. In that case one cannot help but withdraw 
completely to reflect. One would rather leave the work undone 
but the mind must be cultivated and nourished. What do you think 
of this ?" 

For you the effort as described is necessary but it is not entirely 
correct. Throughout his life, a man's effort to learn aims only at this 
one thing. From youth to old age and from morning to evening, 
whether anything happens or not, he works only at this one thing. 
And that is: "Always be doing something."19 To say that one would 
rather leave the work undone but the mind must be cultivated and 
nourished is to regard [things and the mind] as two different things. 
Always be doing something. Let the mind not forget its objective 
but let there be no artificial effort to help it grow.20 As things come, 
only extend the innate knowledge of one's mind to respond to them. 
Then one may be said to be practicing conscientiousness and altruism, 

17 l-shu, 18:5a. For the four qualities, see Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 31. 

18 Wen-chi, 5:7b. 

19 Book of Mencius, 2 A: 2. 

20 Quoting ibid. 

Part II 129 

and not far from the Way.21 Whenever the handling of affairs is 
sometimes good and sometimes bad, and whenever one has the 
trouble of getting exhausted or handling things out of order, it is 
because one is driven by the considerations of praise and criticism 
or loss and gain and cannot really extend his innate knowledge. 
If one can really extend his innate knowledge, he will then see that 
what is ordinarily called good is not necessarily good and what is 
called bad is, I am afraid, precisely the fact that one is being driven by 
these considerations to destroy his own innate knowledge. 

148. Your letter says, "Regarding the doctrine of the extension of 
knowledge, last spring I again received instructions from you. I 
have made further effort and feel that the task is simpler and easier 
than before. However, in my humble opinion, when we talk to a 
beginner, we should include the idea of the investigation of things 
so that he knows where to begin. At bottom the extension of knowl- 
edge and the investigation of things are to be done simultaneously. 
But as for the beginner, he does not know where to begin his effort, 
and it is necessary to mention the investigation of things so that he 
understands what the extension of knowledge is." 

The investigation of things is the effort to extend knowledge. 
As one knows how to extend his knowledge, he also knows how to 
investigate things. If he does not know how to investigate things, 
it means he does not yet know how to extend his knowledge. 
Recently I wrote a letter to a friend22 and discussed this fairly 
thoroughly. I am now sending you a copy. As you read it carefully, 
the matter should be self-evident. 

149. Your letter says, "At present the debate between those 
supporting Chu Hsi and those supporting Lu Hsiang-shan has not 
stopped. I have often said to friends that now that the correct 
learning has been obscured for a long time, we must not waste our 
time and energy engaging in the controversy between Chu and Lu,23 
but only enlighten people on the basis of your teaching of making 
up the mind. If they really understand what this mind is and are 

21 A quotation from the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 13. 

22 Probably "Letter in Reply to Ku Tung-ch'iao," above, especially sec. 134, 
or possibly "Letter in Reply to Lo Cheng-an," below, especially sees. 173-74. 

23 See above, Preface by Ch'ien to sees. 130-43, n. 7. 

130 Instructions for Practical Living 

determined to learn the correct doctrine, then by and large they have 
already understood the doctrine. Even though the opposite doctrines 
of Chu and Lu are not debated and made clear, they can find out the 
truth for themselves. I have noticed that among my friends some 
are quick to be perturbed when they hear people criticize your 
theories. The reason why Master Chu and Master Lu aroused 
criticism in later generations is, I believe, that their own efforts were 
not entirely thorough and were clearly not free from being perturbed. 
Ming-tao [Ch'eng Hao], however, was free from such defects. From 
his discussion with Wu She-li24 on the doctrine of Wang Chieh-fu 
[Wang An-shih, 1021-86], saying, 'Tell Chieh-fu all that I said about 
him. If it does him no good, it will do me good,'25 we know how 
much at ease his feelings and dispositions were. I have noticed that 
you quoted these works in a letter to someone.26 I hope all my 
friends are as much at ease as this. What do you think?" 

The ideas expressed in this paragraph are very, very sound. I 
hope you, Tao-t'ung, will tell all our friends to discuss wherein 
they themselves are right or wrong but not wherein Chu Hsi or Lu 
Hsiang-shan was right or wrong. To slander people with words is 
to slander lightly. But if one cannot personnally and sincerely practice 
their teachings and merely listens to them and talks about them all 
day without stop, that is to slander them with one's own person and 
to slander heavily. If I can learn from all those in the world who 
criticize me and thereby improve myself, they will all be polishing 
and correcting me. In that case, everywhere is the opportunity for 
me to be alert, to cultivate and examine myself, and to advance in 
virtue. An ancient philosopher said, "Those who attack my short- 
comings are my teachers."27 Should we dislike teachers? 

150. Your letter says, "Someone quoted Master Ch'eng Hao's 
saying, 'By nature man is tranquil at birth.28 The state preceding this 
cannot be discussed. As soon as we talk about human nature, we 
already go beyond it.'29 Asked why it cannot be discussed and 

24 I-shu, 1 :6a. Shih is here mistakenly written in the cursive as she. 

25 Ibid. 

26 Wang Wen-ch'eng Rung ch'Han-sbu, 4:6a. 

27 Paraphrasing Hsiln T%u, ch. 2, sptk ed., i:i6a-b. Cf. trans, by Homer 
H. Dubs, The Works of Hsiint^e (London, Probsthain, 1928), p. 43. 

28 This first sentence is a quotation from the Book of Kites, "Record of 
Music." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 17, p. 96. 

29 I-shu, 1:7b. 

Part II 131 

why it is already no longer human nature, Hui-an [Chu Hsi] replied 
that it cannot be discussed because in the state preceding birth there 
is no nature to speak of and it is no longer human nature because 
it is already mixed with physical nature.30 I do not understand the 
words of either of them. Whenever I come to this spot in my reading, 
I have doubts. Please explain." 

What is inborn is called the nature.31 The word "inborn" means 
physical nature. That is to say, physical nature is the same as the 
nature. As physical nature is the same as the nature, and since by 
nature man is tranquil at birth and the state preceding this cannot 
be discussed, as soon as we say that physical nature is the same as 
the nature, we fall on one side, and the nature will then cease to 
be the original nature. When Mencius talked about a man's nature 
being good, he spoke from the point of view of the original nature. 
However, the beginnings of goodness of human nature can be seen 
only in physical nature. Without physical nature the goodness of 
human nature cannot be revealed. The feelings of commiseration, of 
shame and dislike, of deference and compliance, and of right and 
wrong are all physical nature. Master Ch'eng I said, "It would be 
incomplete to talk about the nature of man and things without 
including material force, and unintelligible to talk about material 
force without including the nature."32 It was because students 
recognize only one side that he had to say this. If we clearly under- 
stand our nature, then we realize that physical nature is the same as 
the nature and the nature is the same as physical nature, and that 
at bottom they cannot be separated. 

LETTER IN REPLY TO LU YUAN-CHING1 

151. Your letter says, "As I engage in the task, I feel that my mind 
is not at any time peacefully tranquil. An erroneous mind is of course 
active. But the shining mind is also active. Since the mind is always 
active, it has not a moment of rest." 

30 Paraphrasing Chu T^u wen-chi, 61:22b. 

31 Quoting the Book of Mencius, 6A:3. 

32 I-sbu, 6:2a. Material force is the element in the nature that makes it 
physical nature. Both material force and physical nature are ch'i in Chinese. 

1 For Lu Yiian-ching, see above, sec. 15, n. 1. This letter was written from 
Chekiang in 1524 when Wang was fifty-three. 

132 Instructions for Practical Living 

It is because you consciously seek peaceful tranquillity that there 
is less and less of it. Now an erroneous mind is of course active, 
but a shining mind is not. If it is always shining, it will always be 
both active and tranquil. This is the way in which heaven and earth 
operate forever without cease. The shining mind will of course 
shine, but the erroneous mind will also shine. "Heaven and earth are 
without any doubleness [absolutely sincere], and so they produce 
things without cease."2 To have a moment of rest would mean to 
cease. That would not be the learning to achieve the state of absolute 
sincerity without cease. 

152. Your letter says, "Innate knowledge also arises from some- 
where...." 

Perhaps you did not get exactly what I said. Innate knowledge is 
the original substance of the mind. It is what I have just referred to 
as that which is always shining. The original substance of the mind 
neither rises nor does not rise. Even when erroneous thoughts arise, 
innate knowledge is present. Only because man does not know how to 
preserve it is the mind sometimes lost. Even when the mind is most 
darkened and obstructed, innate knowledge is clear. Only because 
man does not know how to examine it is the mind sometimes obscured. 
Although it is perhaps sometimes lost, its substance is always present. 
The thing to do is to preserve it. And although it is perhaps some- 
times obscured, its substance is always clear. The thing to do is to 
examine it. To say that innate knowledge arises from somewhere is 
to say that sometimes it is not present. That would not be the 
original substance of the mind. 

153. Your letter says, "Are refinement and singleness which you 
talked about the other day the task of becoming a sage ?"3 

The word cbing (refinement) in the phrase "refinement and single- 
ness" refers to the principle of man and things, while the word cbing 
in the phrase ching-shen (mental energy) refers to material force. 
Principle is the order according to which material force operates, 
whereas material force is the functioning of principle. Without 
order it cannot function, and without functioning there will be 
nothing to reveal what is called order. Refinement is refinement. If 

2 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 26. 

3 This sentence is not found in most editions. 

Part II 133 

one is refined, he will be intelligent, single-minded, spiritual, and 
sincere, and if he is single-minded, he will be refined, intelligent, 
spiritual, and sincere. They are not two different things. However, 
the doctrine as interpreted by the Confucians of later generations 
and by [Taoists who advocate] nourishing life has remained one- 
sided and consequently [refinement as emphasized by the Confucians 
and singleness as emphasized by the Taoists] do not reinforce each 
other. Although my discussion of refinement and singleness the 
other day was in response to your desire to nourish the spirit, 
nevertheless the task of becoming a sage is none other than this. 

154. Your letter says, "The prime spirit, prime force, and prime 
essence must each have its place of preservation and origination. 
There are also the essence of the true passive element yin and the 
force of the true active element yang...." 

Now, innate knowledge is one. In terms of its wonderful func- 
tioning, it is spirit; in terms of its universal operation, it is force; and 
in terms of its condensation and concentration, it is essence. How can 
it be understood in terms of shapes and locations ? The essence of 
true yin is the mother of the force of true yang, and the force of true 
yang is the father of the essence of true yin. Yin is the root of yang 
and yang is the root of yin.4 They are not two different things. If my 
theory of innate knowledge is clearly understood, then all such 
matters can be understood without any explanation. Otherwise 
there will be an infinite number of things in doubt, such as [the 
Taoist formulas to prolong life] called the "three gates," the "seven 
returns," and the "nine returns,"5 mentioned in your letter. 

4 According to Chou Tun-i's T'ai-chi fu-shuo, in Chou Lien-Asi-cbi, 1:2a. 
His theory is that when the activity of yang reaches its limit, it becomes tranquil. 
Through tranquillity, yin is generated. When tranquillity reaches its limit, 
yang begins again. Thus movement and tranquillity alternate and become the 
root of each other. 

5 The "three gates" were the mouth, hands, and feet, considered as the gates 
of heaven, man, and earth, respectively; the "seven returns" were the return 
of the soul after seven periods, and the "nine returns," the return of the soul 
after a complete cycle. 

134 Instructions for Practical hiving 

AGAIN6 

155. Your letter says, "Innate knowledge is the original substance 
of the mind. It is what is called the goodness of human nature, the 
equilibrium before the feelings are aroused, the substance that is 
absolutely quiet and inactive, and the state of being broad and 
extremely impartial. When were ordinary people incapable of it, so 
that they had to learn it ? Since equilibrium, absolute quiet, and 
impartiality are characteristics of the substance of the mind, then it 
must be innate knowledge. But as I examine the mind, I find that 
while knowledge is innate and good, it does not really have the 
characteristics of equilibrium, quiet, and impartiality. Can innate 
knowledge transcend substance and function ?" 

There is no human nature that is not good. Therefore there is no 
innate knowledge that is not good. Innate knowledge is the equilib- 
rium before the feelings are aroused. It is the state of broadness and 
extreme impartiality. It is the original substance that is absolutely 
quiet and inactive. And it is possessed by all men. However, people 
cannot help being darkened and obscured by material desires. Hence 
they must study in order to get rid of the darkness and obscuration. 
But to or from the original substance of innate knowledge they cannot 
add or subtract even an iota. Innate knowledge is good. The reason 
why equilibrium, absolute quiet, broadness, and impartiality are not 
complete in it is that darkness and obscuration have not been entirely 
eliminated and its state of preservation is not yet complete. The 
substance and function [you refer to] are the substance and function 
of innate knowledge. How can it transcend them ? 

156. Your letter says, "Master Chou Tun-i said, 'Regard tranquillity 
as fundamental.'7 Master Ch'eng Hao said, 'The nature is calm 
whether it is in a state of activity or in a state of tranquillity.'8 And 

6 Ordinarily this word means that what follows is a separate letter, but in 
Ch'ien Te-hung's preface preceding sec. 130 he definitely indicated that there 
was only one letter to Lu Yiian-ching. Quite correctly in the Wang Yang-ming 
chi, compiled by Wang's descendant Wang I-lo (fl. 1680), sees. 151-67 are com- 
bined as one letter. Azuma Keiji, in his Dens ho roku kogi, argues that sees. 1 5 5-67 
form a separate letter because in sec. 160 Ku quoted Wang's words, "A shining 
mind is not active," which appear in sec. 151. However, Ku was probably not 
quoting any particular letter. 

7 Chou Tun-i, T'ai-chi t'u-shuo, in Chou Lien-hsi chi, 1:2a. 

8 Wen -chi, 3:1a. 

Part II 135 

you said, 'Calmness is the original substance of the mind.'9 If so, it 
is calmness [when the mind is in a state of] tranquillity and is certainly 
not the state devoid of seeing, hearing, thoughts, and activity. It 
must mean always to know, always to preserve, and always to regard 
principle as fundamental. Now, always to know, always to preserve, 
and always to regard principle as fundamental are clearly activities 
and the state after the feelings are aroused. Why is it called tranquil- 
lity ? Why is it called original substance ? Can it be that in calmness 
[when the mind is in the state of] tranquillity there is something 
that pervades through the activity and tranquillity of the mind?" 
Principle involves no activity. Always to know, to preserve, and 
to regard principle as fundamental means not [deliberately] to see, 
hear, think, or act. Not to do these things does not mean to be like 
dry wood or dead ashes. When one sees, hears, thinks, and acts in 
complete accord with principle and makes no deliberate effort to do 
so, it means activity and at the same time no activity. This is what is 
meant by the saying, "The nature is calm whether it is in a state of 
activity or in a state of tranquillity,"10 and by the saying, "Substance 
and function come from the same source."11 

157. Your letter says, "Does the substance of the mind before the 
feelings are aroused exist before the state in which feelings are 
aroused? Or does it exist in the state while the feelings are being 
aroused and act as its master? Or is it neither before nor after any 
state and neither internal nor external but one substance without 
differentiation? When we talk about the activity and tranquillity 

9 See above, sec. 41. 

10 See above, n. 8. 

11 Ch'eng I, in his preface to the I chuan, says, "Substance and function come 
from the same source and there is no gap between the manifest and the hidden." 
Japanese sources (e.g., Daikanwa jiten) maintain that the first half of the saying 
originated with Ch'eng-kuan in his commentary on Hua-jen ching {Avatamsaka 
siitra),h\xt as OtaKinjo has pointed out (Gimoti roku, pt. i,p. 6b), it does not appear 
there or in any of Ch'eng-kuan's works. It is possible that it was in the portion of 
his commentary which is now lost, but if so, no one has given any specific source. 
However, Ch'eng-kuan said virtually the same thing rather extensively, though 
in slightly different words, in his commentary {Zoku^pkyo, 1st. collection, case 88, 
3:3 5a-b). By the eleventh century the saying was common among both Buddhists 
and Neo-Confucians. As T'ang Shun-chih (1507-60) said, "Both Buddhists 
and Confucians said the same thing and none could tell whose words they 
were" {T'ang Ching-cb 'uan chi, 6:2b). Ota said that the second half of the saying is 
Fa-tsang's (643-712) dictum, but he gave no specific reference. 

136 Instructions for Practical hiving 

of the mind, are we talking about the former's doing something and 
the latter's doing nothing, or the former's state of absolute quietness 
and the latter's being acted upon and penetrating all things, or the 
former's following principle and the latter's obeying selfish desires ? 
If we regard following principle as tranquillity and obeying desires 
as activity, then it is absurd to say that 'there is activity in tranquillity 
and tranquillity in activity,'12 and to say, 'When activity reaches its 
limit, it becomes tranquillity, and when tranquillity reaches its limit, 
it becomes activity.'13 If we regard the mind's doing something and 
being acted upon and penetrating things as activity, and its doing 
nothing but remaining in the state of absolute quietness as tranquil- 
lity, then it is absurd to say, 'It is active without activity and tranquil 
without tranquillity.'14 If it is said that the state before the feelings 
are aroused exists before the state in which the feelings are aroused, 
and that activity is engendered from tranquillity, then absolute 
sincerity must have moments of rest and the sage [must be one who 
is not at home with his nature] but has to recover [his lost nature].15 
This, likewise, will not do. If it is said that the state before the 
feelings are aroused exists in the state in which the feelings have been 
aroused, then should tranquillity be regarded as fundamental in 
both states, or should the former state be considered as that of 
tranquillity and the latter as that of activity, or should both states 
be regarded as having neither activity nor tranquillity, or having 
both activity and tranquillity ? Please enlighten me on these points." 
The equilibrium before the feelings are aroused is innate knowl- 
edge. It is neither before nor after any state and is neither internal 
nor external but is one substance without differentiation. Activity 
and tranquillity may refer to the mind's engaging in something or 
nothing, but innate knowledge makes no distinction between doing 
something and doing nothing. Activity or tranquillity may also refer 
to the state of being absolutely quiet and that of being acted upon 
and penetrating things, but innate knowledge does not make any 
distinction between such states. Activity and tranquillity appertain 
to the time when the mind comes into contact with things, whereas 
in the original substance of the mind there is no distinction between 
activity and tranquillity. Principle involves no activity. When the 

12 Ch'eng I, l-shu, 7:2b. 

13 Chou Tun-i, T'ai-chi fu-shuo. 

14 Chou Tun-i, T'ung-shu, ch. 16. 
16 Ibid., ch. 3. 

Part II 137 

mind is active [stirred, perturbed], this means that it has selfish desires. 
If it follows principle, it is not active [stirred] in spite of countless 
changes in its dealing with things. On the other hand, if it obeys 
selfish desires, then even if it is like dry wood and reduced to one 
single thought, it is not tranquil. Is there any doubt that there is 
activity in tranquillity and tranquillity in activity? 

When the mind engages in something and is thereby acted upon 
and penetrates things, it can of course be said to be active. But 
nothing has been added to the state of absolute quietness. When the 
mind engages in nothing and remains quiet, it can of course be said 
to be tranquil, but nothing has been subtracted from the state of 
being acted upon and penetrating. Is there any doubt that the mind 
is active without activity and tranquil without tranquillity? As the 
mind is neither before nor after any state, is neither internal nor 
external, but is one substance without differentiation, the question 
of absolute sincerity's having any moment of rest requires no answer. 
The state before the feelings are aroused exists in the state in which 
feelings have been aroused. But in this state there is not a separate 
state which is before the feelings are aroused. The state after the 
feelings are aroused exists in the state before the feelings are aroused. 
But in this state there is not a separate state in which the feelings have 
been aroused. Both are not without activity or tranquillity and cannot 
be separately characterized as active or tranquil. 

Whenever we read words of the past, we must try with our 
thoughts to meet what the writers had in mind and get their main 
idea. If we are bound by literal meanings, then when the Book of 
Odes says, " [Of the black -haired people of the remnant of the Chou], 
there is not half a one left,"16 it would really mean that not any 
individual of the people of Chou was left!17 Master Chou's theory 
that when tranquillity reaches its limit activity begins is not free from 
defects if one does not view it in the right way. His idea is derived 
from the theory that the Great Ultimate through activity generates 
the active element yang and through tranquillity generates the 
passive element yin. The principle of production and reproduction 
of the Great Ultimate is ceaseless in its wonderful functioning, but 
its eternal substance does not change. The production and reproduc- 
tion of the Great Ultimate are the same as those of yin and yang. 

16 Ode no. 258. 

17 A comment by Mencius, Book of Mencius, ^K:^. 

138 Instructions for Practical Living 

Referring to its processes of production and reproduction and 
pointing to the ceaselessness of their wonderful functioning, we 
say that there is activity and that yang is engendered, but do not say 
that there is first activity and then yang is engendered. Referring to 
its processes of production and reproduction and pointing to the 
unchanging aspect of their eternal substance, we say that there is 
tranquillity and that yin is engendered, but do not say that there is 
first tranquillity and then yin is engendered. If it is really true that yin 
is engendered after there is tranquillity and yang is engendered after 
there is activity, then yin and yang and activity and tranquillity are 
each a separate and distinct thing. Yin and yang are both the same 
material force. It becomes yin or yang as it contracts or expands. 
Activity or tranquillity are the same principle. It becomes activity 
or tranquillity as it is manifested or remains hidden. Spring and 
summer can be regarded as cases of yang and activity, but they are 
not without yin or tranquillity. Autumn and winter may be regarded 
as cases of yin and tranquillity, but they are not without yang or 
activity. Spring and summer are ceaseless in their course. So are 
autumn and winter. In this respect they may both be regarded as 
cases of yang and activity. The substance of spring and summer is 
eternal. So is that of autumn and winter. In this respect they may 
both be regarded as cases of yin and tranquillity. The same may 
be said of a cycle, an epoch, a revolution, a generation,18 a year, a 
month, a day, or a period down to a minute, a second, or an infini- 
tesimal duration. "Activity and tranquillity have no beginning, and 
yin and yang have no starting point."19 Those who know the Way 
will understand this in silence. This idea cannot be completely 
expressed in words. If one follows words and phrases rigidly, takes 
them literally, and imitates and copies, then it will be what is called 
the "mind being turned around by the Lotus Scripture and not 
turning the Lotus Scripture around."20 

158. Your letter says "I have tested my own mind and found that 
as pleasure, anger, worry, and fear are felt and aroused, although I 
am much perturbed, nevertheless as soon as the innate knowledge of 

18 According to Shao Yung, Huang-chi ching-shih shu, ch. 1, pt. 2, 70b, a genera- 
tion is a period of thirty years, a revolution is a period of twelve generations, 
an epoch is a period of thirty revolutions, and a cycle is a period of thirty epochs. 

19 Ch'eng I, Ching-shuo, 1:2a. 

20 Liu-tsu fan-ching, sec. 7, in Taisho dai^okyo, 48:355. 

Part II 139 

my mind realizes it, then without any resolution on my part the 
feelings disappear or are stopped. They may be checked at the 
beginning, or controlled while they are in progress, or changed at the 
end. It seems that innate knowledge of the good always exists in 
the condition of leisure and having no activity, serves as the master 
of the mind, and seems as though not involved in those feelings. 
Why?" 

Since you know this, you know that the equilibrium before the 
feelings are aroused involves the harmony after the feelings are 
aroused and each and all attain due measure and degree, and also that 
the substance that is quiet and inactive involves the wonder of being 
acted upon and penetrating things. But when you say that it seems 
that innate knowledge always exists in the condition of leisure 
and having no activity, your wording is still defective. For although 
innate knowledge is not impeded in pleasure, anger, worry, and fear, 
these feelings are after all not outside the realm of innate knowledge. 

159. Your letter says, "Sir, lately you have considered innate knowl- 
edge as the shining mind. I dare say that innate knowledge is the 
original substance of the mind, whereas the shining mind is the task 
of the individual. It is the mind of caution and apprehension, com- 
parable to thought. How is it that caution and apprehension are to 
be equated with innate knowledge?" 

It is innate knowledge that can be cautious and apprehensive. 

160. Your letter says, "Sir, you also said, 'A shining mind is not 
active.'21 Is it because it follows principle and therefore is considered 
tranquil? You also said, 'The erroneous mind also shines.' Is it 
because innate knowledge is always present in it and never ceases to 
shine in it and therefore all actions like seeing, hearing, speaking, and 
acting that do not exceed specific principles are all in accord with the 
Principle of Nature ? Furthermore, since you said, 'The erroneous 
mind [also shines],' then it can be said to shine and the shining mind 
can also be said to be erroneous. What is the difference between the 
mind being erroneous and [absolute sincerity] ceasing to function? 
Now to suppose that the erroneous mind also shines in order to 
enable the unceasing progress of absolute sincerity to go on is 
something I do not understand. Kindly enlighten me again." 

21 See above, sec. 151. 

140 Instructions for Practical hiving 

The shining mind is not active because it arises from the natural 
state of the original substance's clear consciousness and there is no 
effort to be active [to stir it]. To stir it would make the mind erro- 
neous. The erroneous mind also shines, because the natural state of 
the original substance's clear consciousness is always present in it, 
but it is in fact stirred. If not stirred, it will shine. To say that the 
mind is neither erroneous nor shining is not to say that the erroneous 
mind shines or that the shining mind is erroneous. To say that the 
shining mind shines [and does nothing else] and that the erroneous 
mind is erroneous [and is nothing else] is, after all, to separate the 
erroneous and shining mind. If they are so separated there will be 
doubleness. And if there is doubleness [absolute sincerity] will 
cease. If they are not separated as erroneous mind and shining mind, 
there will not be doubleness, and without doubleness [absolute 
sincerity] will not cease. 

161. Your letter says, "To nourish life it is important to have a 
pure heart and few desires. In having a pure heart and few desires, 
the task of becoming a sage is complete. However, if desires are few, 
the heart is naturally pure. Having a pure mind does not mean to 
cast aside human affairs, living a secluded life and seeking tranquillity. 
Rather it means to enable the mind to be completely identified with 
the Principle of Nature and to be rid of every iota of selfish desire. 
If, in wanting to accomplish this task, one subdues selfish desires 
after they have arisen, then the root of the trouble will always be 
there, and it will be a case of destroying them in the east while they 
grow in the west. But if one wishes to cut out, pull off, wash out, 
and dissipate all desires before they have sprouted, there is no way 
to begin, and one merely causes his heart to be impure. Moreover, 
if before desires are sprouted one searches and pokes for them in 
order to get rid of them, it is like leading a dog into the hall and then 
chasing it away.22 This is even more unfeasible." 

The determination to have the mind completely identified with 
the Principle of Nature and devoid of even an iota of selfish desire is 
the task of becoming a sage. But this is not possible unless selfish 
desires are prevented from sprouting and are subdued at the time of 
sprouting. To do this is the task of being cautious and apprehensive 
as taught in the Doctrine of the Mean23 and of the extension of knowl- 

22 I-shu, 2B:6b. 

23 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. i. 

Part II 141 

edge and the investigation of things as taught in the Great Learning.2* 
There is no other task outside of this. 

What is said about desires being destroyed in the east while they 
grow in the west, or leading a dog into a hall and then chasing it 
away, is said because of the troubles of selfishness, leaning forward 
or backward to accommodate things, arbitrariness of opinion, and 
dogmatism, not because of the difficulty of subduing desires or 
washing them out and dissipating them. Now you may say that for 
nourishing life it is important to have a pure heart and few desires. 
The very idea of nourishing life25 is the root of selfishness, leaning 
forward or backward to accommodate things, arbitrariness of 
opinion, dogmatism. With this root of trouble lying hidden in the 
mind, no wonder there is the trouble of destroying desires in the 
east while they grow in the west and of leading a dog into a hall 
and then chasing it away. 

162. Your letter says, "The Buddhists advocate recognizing one's 
original state at the time when one thinks of neither good nor evil.26 
It is different from our Confucian way of investigating things as 
they come. If I exert effort to extend knowledge at the time of 
thinking of neither good nor evil, I would already be involved in 
thinking of good. The only time when one thinks of neither good 
nor evil and his mind of innate knowledge is clear, tranquil, and at 
ease, is the period of transition from sleep to waking. This is precisely 
Mencius' theory of the restorative power of the night.27 But this 
condition does not last long. In an instant thought and deliberation 
have already arisen. I do not know whether he who has worked at 
the task for a long time can remain forever in the transition from 
sleep to waking when thought has not arisen. Now the more I seek 
peaceful tranquillity, the less I have it, and the more I want thoughts 
not to arise, the more they come. How can I easily wipe out earlier 
thoughts and prevent later ones from arising, and have the innate 
knowledge alone manifest so that I can roam the universe with the 
Creator ?28 

24 The text of the Great Learning. 

25 Advocated by the Taoists. 

26 L,iu-tsu fan-ching, sec. 1, in Taisho dai^pkyo, 48:349. 

27 Book of Mencius, 6 A: 8. 

28 Chuang T^u, ch. 33, sptk ed., 10:37b. Cf. trans, by Herbert A. Giles, 
Chuang T%u, p. 321. 

142 Instructions for Practical hiving 

To recognize one's original state at the time of thinking of neither 
good nor evil is the Buddhist expedient or convenient way intended 
for those who do not yet recognize their original state. The original 
state is what our Confucian school calls innate knowledge. If we 
already understand clearly what innate knowledge is, there is no 
longer any need of recognizing one's original state as the Buddhists 
have advocated. To investigate things as things come is the task 
of the extension of knowledge. It is what the Buddhists called "Be 
always alert,"29 that is, always preserve one's original state. In broad 
outline the two methods are about the same. However, the Buddhists 
are different from us because they have the mind that is motivated 
by selfishness. Now to wish to think of neither good nor evil and to 
want the mind of innate knowledge to be clear, tranquil, and at 
ease, means to have the mind of selfishness, leaning forward or 
backward, arbitrariness of opinion, and dogmatism. This is why if 
one exerts effort to extend knowledge at the time of thinking of 
neither good nor evil, one will have the trouble of already being 
involved in thinking of good. What Mencius said about the restor- 
ative power of the night was merely intended for those who have 
lost their originally good minds, pointing out where this good mind 
sprouts so that from here on it may be continually nourished and 
cultivated. Since you already know clearly what your faculty of 
innate knowledge is and always exert effort to extend it, there is no 
need of any restorative power. Otherwise, one is like the man who, 
having caught the hare [which runs into a tree trunk] and not kept 
it but instead continuously keeps vigil over the tree trunk [with the 
hope of another hare running into it],30 will lose the hare. To seek 
peaceful tranquillity and to want thoughts not to arise are precisely 
the trouble of selfishness, leaning forward or backward, arbitrariness 
of opinion, and dogmatism. Consequently more and more thoughts 
will arise and there will be less and less peaceful tranquillity. There is 
but one innate knowledge which by its own nature discriminates 
between good and evil. What good and evil are there for the mind 

29 Derived from a saying of Zen Master Jui -yen (^.850-^.910). See Wu-teng 
hui-yiian, ch. 7, in Zokwzpkyo, 1st collection, pt. 2, B, case 11, p. 120b. The 
saying is quoted in Ming-chiao Ch'an-shih yii-lu, ch. 3, Taisho dai^pkyo, 47:690. 
However, it is not found in the section on Jui -yen in Ching-te ch'iian-teng lu, 
I7:i7b-i8a. 

30 Han Fei T^u, ch. 49, sptk ed., 19:1a. Cf. trans, by W. K. Liao, The Complete 
Works of Han Fei T^u (London, Probsthain, 1959), II, 276. 

Part II 143 

to think about ? In its substance innate knowledge is in the state of 
peaceful tranquillity, and now you want to add the effort to seek 
peaceful tranquillity. Innate knowledge naturally brings forth 
thoughts, and now you want to add the wish that thoughts will not 
arise. Not only is the task of the extension of knowledge practiced in 
the Confucian school different from this. Even the learning of the 
Buddhists, I believe, does not go so far in leaning forward or back- 
ward, arbitrariness of opinion, and dogmatism. In the functioning 
of innate knowledge a single thought penetrates all. It has neither 
beginning nor end. This means that the earlier thoughts cannot be 
wiped out and later thoughts do not arise. Now to wish earlier 
thoughts to be easily wiped out and later thoughts not to arise 
amounts to what the Buddhists call "destroying the seed nature,"31 
and getting into the situation of what is called "dry wood and dead 
ashes."32 

163. Your letter says, "The Buddhists also have the saying, 
'Constantly bring your thoughts to the fore.'33 Is this the same as 
Mencius' saying, 'Always be doing something'34 and what you called 
the extension of the innate knowledge to the utmost ? Is it the same 
as constantly being alert, constantly remembering, constantly being 
aware, and constantly preserving the original state of the mind ? If 
one's thoughts are brought to the fore, when things occur, one can 
handle them in the proper way. What I am afraid is that more often 
than not one's thoughts are neglected rather than brought to the 
fore and one's task will be interrupted. Moreover, thoughts are 
neglected and lost chiefly because of selfish desires and the stirring 
of passions caused by external stimuli. As one is suddenly startled 
and awakened one then brings them to the fore. Between the time 
when thoughts are neglected and the time when they are brought 
to the fore, one's mind is confused and disorderly, in most cases 
without one's realizing it. Now I wish to be more and more refined 
and clear in thought, always to bring thoughts to the fore and not to 
neglect them. How can this be accomplished? Does the complete 
task consist only in thus always bringing them to the fore and not 

31 Hsiian-tsang (596-664), CWeng wei-shih lun (Vijnatimdtratdsiddhi), ch. 5, in 
Taisho dai^pkyo, 31:48. 

32 Chuang T%u, ch. 2, sptk ed., 1:18a. Cf. trans, by Giles, p. 34. 

33 A Zen saying the origin of which is not known. 
84 Book of Mencius, zh:z. 

144 Instructions for Practical Living 

neglecting them? Or in the midst of this shall I add the further 
effort of self-examination and self-mastery ? Even though I constantly 
bring thoughts to the fore and do not neglect them, if I do not 
supplement this with the effort of caution, apprehension, and self- 
mastery, I am afraid selfish desires cannot be eliminated. But if I 
supplement it with such effort, then I will be engaging in thinking 
of good and still keep myself a slight distance from the original 
state of the mind. What is the way out ?" 

Caution, apprehension, and self-mastery are the task of constantly 
bringing thoughts to the fore and not neglecting them. They are the 
same as always to be doing something. Are they two different things ? 
The first part of what you have asked in this question has already 
been clearly explained by yourself. In the latter part, however, you 
have deceived and confused yourself, you have gone into fragmen- 
tary and isolated details in your explanation, and you entertain 
worry about being distant from the original state. All this is 
because of the defects of selfishness, leaning forward or backward, 
arbitrariness of opinion, and dogmatism. Get rid of these defects 
and you will have no such doubts. 

164. Your letter says, " 'One whose physical nature is excellent will 
be perfectly intelligent, and the impure dregs in him will be com- 
pletely transformed.'35 What is meant by being perfectly intelligent? 
How can the dregs be completely transformed?" 

Innate knowledge is by nature intelligent. Those whose physical 
nature is not excellent have many impure dregs and heavy obscura- 
tion and are not easily enlightened. Those whose physical nature is 
excellent have originally few dregs and not much obscuration. With 
a little effort at the extension of knowledge, their innate knowledge 
will of itself become clear and transparent. How can a little dreg, like 
melting snow in hot water, be an obscuration? This is really not 
very difficult to understand. You, Yuan-ching, entertain some 
doubts because, I believe, you do not understand what intelligence 
means and also because you desire to advance somewhat too 
rapidly. Previously I discussed with you face to face the meaning 
of understanding the good. With understanding or intelligence, 
there will be sincerity. It is not as superficial as what later scholars 
called the understanding of the good. 

35 Ch'eng Hao, l-shu, 11:11b. 

Part II 145 

165. Your letter says, "Are quickness of apprehension, intelligence, 
insight, and wisdom36 really physical nature;37 humanity, righteous- 
ness, propriety, and wisdom really the nature; and pleasure, anger, 
sorrow, and joy really the feelings? Are selfish desires and passions 
caused by external stimuli the same or different ? The shining virtue 
and accomplishments of talented people like Chang Tzu-fang 
[d. 189 B.C.],38 Tung Chung-shu \c. 179-^.104 B.C.],39 Huang Shu-tu 
[fl. a.d. 120],40 Chu-ko K'ung-ming [181-234],41 Wen-chung Tzu,42 
Han Ch'i [fl. 103 1],43 and Fan Chung-yen [989-105 i]u all come from 
innate knowledge. And yet they cannot be characterized as 
having heard the Way. What is the reason ? If it is said that their 
achievements are merely the results of their excellent physical 
nature, are not those who are born with knowledge and can practice 
it naturally and easily superior to those who learn through study 
and hard work and practice with effort and difficulty ? In my humble 
opinion, it is all right to say that these grand gentlemen understand 
only part of the Way. But to say that they did not hear the Way at 
all is, I am afraid, a mistake, resulting from the emphasis of later 
scholars on recitation and textual criticism. Am I correct or not?" 
There is one nature, that is all. Humanity, righteousness, pro- 
priety, and wisdom are its basic nature. Quickness of apprehension, 
intelligence, insight, and wisdom are its physical nature. Pleasure, 
anger, sorrow, and joy are its feelings, and selfish desires and 
passions caused by external stimuli are its obscuration. Physical 
nature may be clear or turbid and therefore feelings are sometimes 
excessive or insufficient, and the obscuration heavy or light. Selfish 
desires and passions caused by external stimuli are the same disease 
with two different kinds of pain, and are not two different things. 
The grand gentlemen Chang, Huang, Chu-ko, Han, and Fan were 

36 The four qualities of the perfect sage. See Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 31. 

37 Chu Hsi, Chung-yung chang-chii, ch. 31. 

38 He assisted the founder of Han to establish the empire. 

39 He was instrumental in establishing the supremacy of Confucianism. 

40 He was the son of a veterinarian, and, while neither successful nor known 
as a writer, was respected and honored by all the famous men throughout 
the empire. 

41 Chu-ko Liang, the celebrated prime minister who heroically attempted to 
continue the Han dynasty against great odds. 

42 See above, sec. 11. 

43 A high official who did much to bring about peace in the empire. 

44 Another official who did the same. 

146 Instructions for Practical Living 

all excellent in their natural endowment and were in most cases 
unnoticeably in accord with the ultimate truth. Although they cannot 
be said to have completely understood the learning or to have 
heard the Way fully, nevertheless each had his own learning which 
did not depart very far from the Way. Had they fully heard the 
learning and understood the Way completely, they would have been 
equal to I-yin, Fu Yiieh,45 Duke Chou, and Duke Chao.46 As to 
Wen-chung Tzu, he cannot be said to be ignorant of the teachings 
of the Sage. Although his books are mostly the products of his 
pupils and there are many mistakes, their general outline can 
easily be seen. However, since we are far from his time and have no 
positive evidence, we cannot arbitrarily conclude from imagination 
just what he had attained. 

Innate knowledge is identical with the Way. That it is present in 
the mind is true not only in the cases of the sages and worthies but 
even in that of the common man. When one is free from the driving 
force and obscurations of material desires, and just follows innate 
knowledge and leaves it to continue to function and operate, every- 
thing will be in accord with the Way. In the case of ordinary men, 
most of them are driven and obscured by material desires and cannot 
follow innate knowledge. Since the natural endowment of the 
several grand gentlemen was by nature pure and clear and they of 
course were only slightly driven and obscured by material desires, 
the function and operation of their innate knowledge was naturally 
abundant, and they naturally did not depart from the Way very far. 

To learn simply means to learn to follow innate knowledge. When 
a person is said to understand the learning, it simply means that he 
knows how to devote his learning purely to following innate 
knowledge. Although the several grand gentlemen did not com- 
pletely devote their effort to innate knowledge, but in some cases 
drifted into many wrong ways and were confused and deceived by 
the apparent and therefore sometimes departed from and sometimes 
were in accord with the Way, so that their minds did not become 
completely identified with the Principle of Nature, if they had 
known [how to devote their learning purely to following innate 
knowledge], they would have been sages. Later scholars have 

45 He assisted Kings T'ai-chia (r. 1738-1727 b.c.) and Wu -ting (r. 13 39-1 281 
B.C.) in great achievements. 

46 Duke Chao (d. 1056 B.C.) assisted his brother King Wu in his great accom- 
plishments. 

Part II 147 

regarded them as having behaved on the basis of physical nature 
and therefore having acted without understanding and habitually 
without examination.47 This is not putting it too strongly. However, 
what later scholars called understanding and examination are, after 
all, confined to narrow information and obscured by wrong habits 
of thought. They follow, grope after, and imitate what is apparent 
or illusory. What they mean by understanding and examination is 
not what is understood in the Confucian school. How can they 
expect others to be enlightened by their own darkness?48 

The words "knowledge" and "practice" in the phrase "born 
with knowledge and practice it naturally and easily"49 refer to one's 
effort. If the original substance of any knowledge and practice 
were innate knowledge and innate ability, then it would be possible 
to say that those who learn through hard work and practice their 
learning with effort and difficulty could practice it naturally and 
easily. The two words "knowledge" and "practice" should be 
understood more thoroughly. 

1 66. Your letter says, "Chou Mao-shu [Chou Tun-i] often asked 
Po-ch'un [Ch'eng Hao] to find out wherein Confucius and his 
pupil Yen Hui found their joy.50 May I ask whether their joy is the 
same as the joy in the seven feelings.51 If it is, when any desire of an 
ordinary man is satisfied, he, like anyone else, can be joyful. Why 
should it be limited to sages and worthies ? If, aside from this, there 
is a true joy, then is it present when sages and worthies meet with 
great sorrow, great anger, great terror, and great fear ? Furthermore, 
since the mind of the superior man is constantly occupied with 
caution and apprehension, he is in sorrow throughout life. How can 
he have joy? I am often depressed and have not yet experienced true 
joy. I am eager to find it." 

Joy is characteristic of the original substance of the mind. Though 
it is not identical with the joy of the seven feelings, it is not outside 
of it. Sages and worthies have another true joy, it is true, but it is 
shared by ordinary people except that these people do not realize 
it though they have it. Instead they bring upon themselves a great 

47 A quotation from the Book of Mencius, ih.:<). 

48 Ibid., 7B:2o. 

49 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

50 I-shu, zK-.zb. 

61 Pleasure, anger, sorrow, joy, love, hate, and desire. 

148 Instructions for Practical Living 

deal of sorrow and grief and, in addition, confusion and self- 
abandonment. Even in the midst of all these, this joy is not absent. 
As soon as a single thought is enlightened, and one examines him- 
self and becomes sincere, the joy is present right there. I have often 
discussed with you, Yiian-ching, this same idea and you still ask in 
what way it can be found. This is a case of obscuration like one's 
looking for a donkey while riding it. 

167. Your letter says, "According to the Great Learning, when the 
mind is affected by fondness, anger, worries, and fear, it will not be 
correct.52 Master Ch'eng Hao also said, 'The feelings of the sage are 
in accord with all creation and yet he has no feeling of his own.'53 
The Instructions for Practical Living compares those who have [the 
love of sex, wealth, and fame] to people suffering from intermittent 
fever.54 The analogy is excellent and exact. According to Master 
Ch'eng, the feelings of the sage do not originate from his mind but 
from things. What does this mean ? Moreover, when things stimulate 
the mind and feelings respond, right and wrong can be corrected 
accordingly. Before things affect the mind, if we say that feelings 
are present, they are not yet formed, and if we say that they are not, 
the root of evil is already there. How can I extend my knowledge 
between their presence and their absence? If learning is to stress 
having no feelings, though the resulting trouble will be light, 
nevertheless it will cease to be Confucian and will become Buddhist. 
Is that all right ?" 

The sage's effort at extending knowledge is characterized by his 
absolute sincerity which never ceases. The substance of his innate 
knowledge is as clear as a bright mirror without any slight obscu- 
ration. Whether a beautiful or an ugly object appears, it reflects it 
as it comes, without anything being left behind on the bright 
mirror itself. This is what is meant by saying that the feelings of the 
sage are in accord with all things and yet of himself he has no feelings. 
The Buddhists have a saying, "One should have no attachment to 
anything and thus let the mind grow."55 This is not incorrect. In the 

52 Ch. 7. 

53 Wen-chi, $:ia. 

54 See above, sec. 76, At that time the Intrusions for Practical Living consisted 
of only the present Part I. 

55 The Diamond Scripture, sec. 10. Cf. trans, by Shao Chang Lee, in Popular 
Buddhism in China (Shanghai, Commercial Press, 1939), p. 35, or by Edward 
Conze, in Buddhist Wisdom Books (London, Allen and Unwin, 1958), p. 47. 

Part II 149 

bright mirror's response to things, what is beautiful appears beau- 
tiful and what is ugly appears ugly. In the same reflection all things 
are reflected and are true. This is like the mind growing. What is 
beautiful appears beautiful and what is ugly appears ugly. The 
things pass along without remaining in the mirror. This is where the 
mirror has no attachment. Since you have appreciated the excellence 
and exactness of the analogy of intermittent fever, you should be 
clear about what you have asked in this section. In the case of people 
with intermittent fever, although the fever has not yet occurred, the 
root of the disease is present. Why should the patient neglect 
medical treatment simply because the fever has not yet occurred ? If 
he insists on waiting for the fever to occur before taking medicine 
and receiving treatment, it will be too late. The task of the extension 
of knowledge should not be interrupted whether things happen or 
not. Has it anything to do with whether or not the disease has 
occurred ? Generally speaking, though the thing about which you are 
in doubt in this case seems to be different from those earlier cases, 
they are all caused by the evil influence of selfishness, leaning 
forward or backward, arbitrariness of opinion, and dogmatism. 
As soon as this root is removed, all present and earlier doubts will 
of themselves disappear like ice melting and fog disappearing and 
there will be no need of asking about them or arguing them out. 

Comments by Clfien Te-hung, compiler of Instructions for Practical 
Living 

When this reply to Lu Yuan-ching was published, readers were all 
overjoyed at Yiian-ching's skillful questions and the Teacher's 
skillful answers, and all now have heard what they never heard 
before. The Teacher said, "Yiian-ching's questions all revolve 
around book learning and textual understanding. I cannot help 
answering and explaining to him section by section. If one has faith 
in innate knowledge and makes effort only along the line of innate 
knowledge, one will find that the thousands and thousands of classics 
and canons will all conform to it and all heretical doctrines and 
narrow learnings will be destroyed when tested against it. What 
is the need of explaining section by section like this ? The Buddhists 
have the parable of a servant throwing a piece of food [at a dog 
and a lion. When the lion] sees the stuff but jumps at the man, 
it gets the man [who is its major objective]. [On the other hand, 
when the dog] sees the stuff [which does not amount to much], 

150 Instructions for Practical Living 

and chases after it, what does the dog really get?"56 When friends 
present in the hall heard him they all enjoyed a pleasant awakening. 
In the task of this learning, the important thing is self-examination, 
not book learning or textual explanation. 

LETTER IN REPLY TO OU-YANG CH'UNG-I1 

1 68. Your letter says, "You said, sir, 'The innate knowledge of our 
moral nature did not come from hearing and seeing. When Confucius 
said "Hear much and select what is good and follow it. See much and 
remember it,"2 he referred to nothing but seeking solely after the 
secondary matters of seeing and hearing, thus already falling to the 
secondary level.'3 In my humble opinion, although innate knowledge 
is not derived from hearing and seeing, the knowledge of the 
student is nevertheless developed from what he hears and sees. To 
be impeded by hearing and seeing is of course wrong. Yet they are 
that through which innate knowledge functions. Now you say that 
it has already fallen to the secondary level. I believe that is said for 
the benefit of those who regard learning as purely seeing and hearing. 
If one extends his innate knowledge and seeks knowledge from 
seeing and hearing, this too would be a united effort of knowledge 
and action. Is this correct?" 

Innate knowledge does not come from hearing and seeing, and 
yet all seeing and hearing are functions of innate knowledge. There- 
fore innate knowledge is not impeded by seeing and hearing. Nor 
is it separated from seeing and hearing. Confucius said, "Have I 
knowledge? I have not."4 So outside of innate knowledge there is 
no other knowledge. Therefore the extension of innate knowledge 
is the great basis of learning and the first principle of the teaching 
of the Sage. Now solely to seek in the subsidiary sources of seeing 
and hearing is to lose that basis, thus clearly falling to the secondary 
level. Of late, among like-minded friends there is none who does not 

56 A parable from the Mahdprajnaparamitd sdstra quoted in the Tsu-fing 
shih-yiian, 8:n6b. 

1 See above, sec. 104, n.23. According to the Nien-p'u, this letter was written 
from Chekiang in 1526 when Wang was fifty-five, but since it was included in 
the CFuan-hsi lu published by Nan Yuan-shan in 1524, the date must have been 
earlier. 

2 Analects, 7:27. 

3 See above, sec. 140. 

4 Analects, 9:7. 

Part II 151 

know the doctrine of the extension of innate knowledge. The 
reason why it is said that their effort is still very careless and desul- 
tory is just because they have neglected to ask the very question 
you have asked. 

Generally speaking, in the task of learning the most important 
thing is to be sure that the basic idea is correct. If the basic idea is 
solely to engage in the extension of innate knowledge, then, however 
much one may hear or see, all belongs to the task of the extension 
of innate knowledge. For in one's daily life, although there is an 
infinite variety of experience and dealings with others, there is 
nothing which is not the functioning and operation of innate 
knowledge. Without experience and dealings with others, there will 
be no innate knowledge to be extended. Therefore the task is 
single. If one speaks of extending innate knowledge and seeking 
knowledge in seeing and hearing, in his way of putting it he somehow 
makes them two things. Although this is somewhat different from 
seeking knowledge solely from the subsidiary seeing and hearing, 
its lack of refinement and singleness is the same. "Hear much and 
select what is good and follow it. See much and remember it." 
Since he says select and remember, innate knowledge is already 
operating in the process. But the purpose in the saying is solely 
to select and remember from much hearing and much seeing, thus 
losing sight of the basis. I believe you, Ch'ung-i, have understood 
these points clearly. Your question today is precisely for the purpose 
of elucidating this learning and is extremely beneficial to fellow 
students. However, the ideas of your statement are not clear. As an 
infinitesimal mistake in the beginning may lead to an infinite error 
at the end, they should not be allowed to go without careful exami- 
nation. 

169. Your letter says, "Sir, you said, 'The saying in the "Appended 
Remarks" of the Book of Changes, "What is there to think about 
or to deliberate about ?"5 means that what is to be thought about or 
deliberated about is only the Principle of Nature and that outside 
of it there should be no other thought or deliberation. It does not 
mean having no thought or deliberation at all.... The original 
substance of the mind is the Principle of Nature.... How can it be 

5 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 5. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 389. 

13 

152 Instructions for V radical hiving 

brought about by thinking or deliberation?... Although in his task 
a student may engage in a thousand thoughts and ten thousand 
deliberations, they should be directed at nothing but restoring its 
original substance [and function]. This is not to be brought about 
by pondering or manipulation according to one's personal wishes.... 
If one ponders and manipulates according to his personal wishes, 
that is "the exercise of cunning and selfishness." '6 Generally 
speaking, the trouble with students is either sinking into emptiness 
and maintaining silence or manipulating and pondering. In the bsitt 
andjen years [i 521-22] I was affected by the former trouble. Recently 
I have been affected by the latter. But pondering is also a function 
of innate knowledge. How can it be distinguished from manipulation 
according to one's personal wishes ? I am afraid I am taking a thief 
to be a son7 and am deluded without realizing it." 

"The virtue of thinking is penetration and profundity.... Penetra- 
tion and profundity lead to sageness."8 "The function of the mind 
is to think. If we think, we will get it."9 Can thinking be dispensed 
with ? To sink into emptiness and maintain silence and to manipulate 
and ponder are precisely selfishness and the exercise of cunning. 
In their loss of innate knowledge, they are the same. Innate knowl- 
edge is where the Principle of Nature is clear and intelligent. There- 
fore innate knowledge is identical with the Principle of Nature. 
Thinking is the emanation and functioning of innate knowledge. If 
one's thinking is the emanation and functioning of innate knowledge, 
whatever he thinks about is the Principle of Nature. Thoughts 
resulting from the emanation and functioning of innate knowledge 
are naturally clear, simple, and easy. The faculty of innate knowledge 
knows them as such. But thoughts issuing from manipulation 
according to one's personal wishes are naturally troublesome and 
disturbing, and the innate faculty is naturally able to distinguish 
them. For whether thoughts are right or wrong, correct or perverse, 
the faculty of innate knowledge itself knows them all. People 
take a thief to be their son precisely because they do not under- 
stand the learning of the extension of knowledge and do not 
know how to realize it genuinely and earnestly by means of innate 
knowledge. 

6 See above, sec. 145. 

7 See above, sec. 122, n.78. 

8 Book of History, "Great Norm." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 327. 

9 Book of Mencius, 6A:i5. 

Part II 

170. Your letter also says, "Sir, you said, 'Throughout his life, a 
man's effort to learn aims only at this one thing.... Whether anything 
happens or not, he works only at this one thing.... To say that one 
would rather leave the work undone but the mind must be cultivated 
and nourished is to regard [things and the mind] as two different 
things.'10 In my humble opinion, when one's spirit and energy 
are weak and not sufficient to complete the work, that is a matter 
of innate knowledge itself. Rather, leaving the work undone but 
cultivating and nourishing the mind are matters of the extension of 
knowledge. How is it that [things and the mind] are regarded as two 
different things? When an unexpected event arises and by circum- 
stance something has to be done but my spirit and energy are weak, 
if I rouse myself somewhat, I am able to hold on. In that case it is 
all right to 'hold the will firm and lead the vital force.'11 However, 
at the end I have no more energy to talk or move. When the work 
is done, I am completely exhausted. Is not this virtually 'doing 
violence to the vital force ?'12 Innate knowledge surely can weigh a 
situation — to decide which element is more important and urgent. 
Nevertheless, one may be forced by circumstances so that he cannot 
worry about his spirit and energy or he may be exhausted in spirit 
and energy so that he cannot worry about the circumstances. What 
can be done ?" 

The idea that one should rather leave the work undone than 
neglect cultivating and nourishing the mind is not without merit 
when told to the beginner. But if [things and the mind] are regarded 
as two things, it is a defect. Mencius said, "Always be doing some- 
thing."13 This means that throughout his life the learning of the 
superior man consists purely of accumulating righteousness.14 What 
is right means what is proper. When the mind attains what is proper, 
it is called righteousness. If innate knowledge can be extended, the 
mind will attain what is proper. Therefore accumulating righteous- 
ness is nothing other than the extension of innate knowledge. In the 
countless changes in his dealings with others, the superior man acts 
if it is proper to act, stops if it is proper to stop, lives if it is proper 
to live, and dies if it is proper to die. In all his considerations and 

10 See above, sec. 147. 

11 Book of Mencius, zA:z. 

12 Ibid. 

13 Ibid. 

14 Ibid. 

154 Instructions for Practical hiving 

adjustments he does nothing but extend his innate knowledge to 
the utmost so that he can satisfy himself. Therefore "The superior 
man does what is proper to his position,"15 and "in his thought he 
does not go out of his place."16 All those who "scheme to get what 
is beyond their strength and force their intellectual faculty to know 
what it is incapable of"17 cannot be considered as extending their 
innate knowledge. On the other hand, "subjecting one's sinews 
and bones to hard work, exposing one's body to hunger, putting 
oneself in poverty, placing obstacles in the path of one's deeds, so as 
to stimulate one's mind, harden one's nature, and improve oneself 
wherever one is incompetent"18 are all ways to extend innate 
knowledge. If one says that one should rather leave the work undone 
than neglect to cultivate and nourish the mind, it is first of all to have 
the idea of success and profit, to weigh matters in terms of success 
and failure, advantages and disadvantages, to decide to love or hate 
and to accept or reject. He therefore considers getting the work done 
as one thing and cultivating and nourishing the mind as quite 
another. This means he has the desire to consider what is within the 
mind to be right and what is outside to be wrong. This is selfishness 
and the exercise of cunning. This is regarding righteousness as 
external.19 This is the trouble with "What is not attained in the 
mind is not to be sought in the vital force [thus separating the mind 
and the vital force]."20 And this is not the effort to extend innate 
knowledge to satisfy yourself. You said that if you rouse yourself 
you can hold on but that when the work is done you are completely 
exhausted. You also mentioned being forced by circumstances and 
being exhausted in spirit and energy. This is the case because you 
proceed with the idea that [things and the mind] are two different 
things. In the task of learning, wherever there is singleness, 
sincerity will prevail, but whenever there is doubleness, there will 
be falsehood. All the above is due to the fact that in wanting to 
extend innate knowledge one lacks the true and earnest effort 

15 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 14. 

16 Analects, 14:28. 

17 Paraphrasing the Cb'iu-sheng fu by Ou-yang Hsiu (1007-72), in Ou-yang 
Wen-chung Kung wen-chi, 15:4a. 

18 Book of Mencsus, 6B: 1 5 . 

19 And, consequently, humanity as internal, as Kao Tzu did. See Book of 
Mencius, 6A:4- 

20 Kao Tzu. See ibid., zK:z. 

Part II 155 

toward sincerity and single-mindedness. Therefore the Great 
Learning says, "Making the will sincere [is allowing no self-decep- 
tion] as when we hate a bad odor or love a beautiful color. This is 
called satisfying oneself."21 Have you ever seen a person hating a bad 
odor or loving a beautiful color rouse himself in order to hold on, 
or getting completely exhausted when the work is done ? Or forced 
by circumstances and exhausted in spirit and energy ? From this you 
can know where the trouble comes from. 

171. Your letter also says, "In human affairs tricks and deceits 
manifest themselves in a hundred ways. If one handles them without 
suspicion, one often gets cheated, but if one knows [the intentions 
behind them] one puts himself in the position of anticipating deceit 
and predicting being distrusted. To anticipate deceit is itself 
deceit, and to predict being distrusted is itself distrust. At the same 
time to be cheated is not to know. Only with the crystal clarity of 
innate knowledge can one desist from anticipating deceit and 
predicting being distrusted but always know them readily.22 How- 
ever, one often deviates from the norm, in however small degree, 
betrays one's own knowledge, and falls into deceit." 

Confucius told people not to anticipate deceit or to predict being 
distrusted, but to know readily, because the people of his time 
wholly devoted their minds to anticipating deceit and predicting 
being distrusted and thereby fell into the vices of deceit and 
distrust themselves. There were also others who did not anticipate 
or predict but, because they did not know the task of extending 
innate knowledge, were repeatedly cheated and deceived by others. 
He therefore uttered these words. He did not teach people to harbor 
these thoughts and to want to know readily other people's 
deceit and distrust. To harbor such thoughts is the behavior of 
people of later generations who are suspicious, envious, treacherous, 
and mean. With this idea of harboring such thoughts alone they will 
be unable to enter into the Way of the sages, Yao and Shun. He who 
does not anticipate deceit or predict being distrusted, but is deceived 
by others, still cannot be said to have failed in doing good, but this 
is not as worthy as his being able to extend his innate knowledge 
and naturally know readily. In saying that innate knowledge is 

21 Ch. 6. 

22 That is, to know ahead of other. Analects, 14:33. 

156 Instructions for Practical hiving 

crystal clear, you, Ch'ung-i, already understand the fundamental 
point. However, you have arrived at this point probably through 
your intelligence and [your understanding], I am afraid, is not yet 
concrete. For the fact that innate knowledge is inherent in the 
human mind is the same throughout all generations and the entire 
universe. It is "the knowledge possessed by men without delibera- 
tion"23 which "always operates with ease and thus knows where 
danger is."24 It is "the ability possessed by men without having been 
acquired by learning"25 which "always operates with simplicity and 
thus knows what obstructions are."26 "It may precede Heaven and 
Heaven does not act in opposition to it.... If even Heaven does not 
oppose it, how much less will man and how much less will spiritual 
beings ?"27 

Although what you say about betraying one's own knowledge 
and falling into deceit is not to anticipate deceit by others, it is, I 
believe, not free from self-deception. Although it is not to predict 
being distrusted by others, it is, I believe, not a firm trust in oneself. 
It is perhaps a case of always having the mind to seek to know 
readily but not always being able to know by oneself. He who 
always has the mind to seek to know readily has already drifted 
into anticipating and predicting sufficiently to obscure his innate 
knowledge. This is why betraying one's own knowledge and falling 
into deceit cannot be avoided. 

A superior man studies for his own sake.28 He does not worry 
about being deceived by others but will not deceive his own innate 
knowledge at any time. He does not worry about being distrusted 
by others but will trust in his own innate knowledge at all times. He 
does not seek to know readily people's deceit and distrust, but 
always makes an effort to realize himself his innate knowledge. 
Therefore, if one does not deceive himself, his innate knowledge 
will have no falsehood but will be sincere. Given sincerity, there will 
be enlightenment.29 If one trusts himself, his innate knowledge will 

23 Book of Mencius, ih.:i<y. 

24 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 12. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 404. 

25 Book of Mencius, -jK:i^. 

26 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 12. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 404. 

27 Ibid., commentary on hexagram no. 1. Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 417. 

28 Analects, 14:25. 

29 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 21. 

Part II 157 

have no doubt and will be intelligent. Being intelligent, it will be 
sincere.30 Thus intelligence and sincerity produce each other. 
Consequently, innate knowledge always knows and always shines. 
Always knowing and shining, it is like a suspended brilliant mirror. 
As things appear before it, none can conceal its beauty or ugliness. 
Why? Not deceiving but sincere, it leaves no room for any decep- 
tion. If there is any deception, it is already known. Trusting itself 
and being intelligent, it leaves no room for any distrust. If there is 
any distrust, it is already known. This means that innate knowledge 
operates easily and knows where danger is, and operates simply 
and knows what obstructions are. This is what Tzu-ssu meant when 
he said, "He who has absolute sincerity is like a spirit" and "[It is 
characteristic of those with absolute sincerity] to be able to fore- 
know."31 However, T2u-ssu said, "like a spirit" and "able to fore- 
know." Thus he was still thinking in terms of two levels. These 
phrases describe by inference the effect of thinking how to be sincere 
and are meant for those who are not able to know readily. When 
we come to those with absolute sincerity, the wonderful operation 
of absolute sincerity itself is called spirit, not just like a spirit. Those 
with absolute sincerity have no knowledge and yet know all, and 
need not be described as being; able to foreknow. 

LETTER IN REPLY TO VICE-MINISTER LO 
CHENG-AN1 

172. I beg respectfully to address you. Yesterday I received your 
instructive letter regarding the Great Learning, but since I was in a 

30 Ibid. 

31 Ibid., ch. 24. 

1 Lo Ch'in-shun (1465-1547), one of the most outstanding Neo -Confucians 
of the Ch'eng-Chu school in the Ming dynasty. He was strongly opposed to the 
idealistic wing of Neo -Confucianism. First in the state civil service examination 
of 1492, he obtained a "presented scholar" degree the next year. He then held 
successively a number of high posts, including that of minister of the department 
of civil personnel. This letter in reply to him was written from Kiangsi in 1520 
on Wang's return from the successful suppression of the rebellion there. Wang 
was then forty-nine. At that time Lo was vice-minister of the department of 
civil personnel. For an account of Lo, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, ch. 47 ; and for the 
complete text of his letter, see Lo Cheng-an chi, i:5b-iob. 

158 Instructions for ~P radical "Living 

hurry, as the boat was leaving, I was not able to answer it. This 
morning, as the boat proceeds along the Yangtze River, I am 
somewhat at leisure and so took your letter to read again. Fearing 
that after arriving at Kan-chou2 I shall be kept occupied with 
business, I shall now write briefly to you. 

Your letter says, "To see the Way is of course difficult, but 
personally to demonstrate it is even more so. Truly the Way is not 
easy to apprehend, but surely its study should not be neglected. I 
am afraid you should not be satisfied with your own view and 
without any hesitation regard it as the ultimate principle." 

How fortunate am I that I should hear such words ! How dare I 
regard my view as the ultimate principle and how dare I be satisfied 
with it ? I merely wanted to make it clear to those in the world who 
are in accord with the Way. In the past several years there have been 
those who heard my theory and ridiculed it. There have been those 
who cursed it. And there have been those who put it aside as 
unworthy of deliberation or debate. Would they be willing to 
instruct me ? Would they be willing to instruct me and explain again 
and again and compassionately feel that it might be too late for them 
to save and correct me? Therefore among those in the world who 
regard me deeply, none does so as deeply and as perfectly as Your 
Honor. How grateful I should be! 

Confucius regarded as causes for concern not cultivating virtue 
and not discussing thoroughly what is learned.3 But scholars of 
today all regard themselves as learned as soon as they have acquired 
some instruction and have reviewed it, or have gained some knowl- 
edge of textual criticism, and proceed no further to seek learning. 
How pitiable ! To say that the Way must be personally demonstrated 
before it can be revealed does not mean that one first sees it and then 
proceeds to apply the effort of personal demonstration, and to say 
that the Way must be learned before it can be understood does not 
mean that outside of pursuing learning there is another undertaking 
called understanding the Way. 

There are two ways to pursue learning. Some pursue it with 
their bodies and minds and some with their mouths and ears. Those 
who pursue it with their mouths and ears grope and imagine ; they 
seek after what is apparent. Those who pursue it with their bodies 

2 A place in Kiangsi Province. 

3 Analects, 7:3. 

Part II 159 

and minds act with understanding and do so habitually with exami- 
nation ;4 they sincerely and concretely realize the Way in themselves. 
He who knows this [the difference of these ways] knows the learning 
of the Confucian school. 

173. Your letter says that I revived the old text of the Great 
Learning5 because I believe that in the task of learning people should 
seek learning only from within, whereas according to the doctrine 
of the investigation of things of Ch'eng I and Chu Hsi, they should 
seek it in external things, and that I therefore omitted Master Chu's 
division into chapters and deleted his commentary which was 
intended to supplement the text. I dare not do so. Is there any 
distinction between the internal and the external in the matter of 
learning? The old text of the Great Learning is the original text 
transmitted from generation to generation in the Confucian school. 
Master Chu, suspecting that parts have been lost and errors have 
crept in, corrected and mended it. To me, there has been neither loss 
nor error. I follow the old text entirely, as it originally was, that is 
all. It is possible that I am wrong in believing too much in Confucius, 
but I did not purposely omit Master Chu's chapter divisions or 
delete his commentary. 

The important thing in learning is to acquire learning through the 
exercise of the mind. If words are examined in the mind and found to 
be wrong, although they have come from the mouth of Confucius, 
I dare not accept them as correct. How much less those from people 
inferior to Confucius ! If words are examined in the mind and found 
to be correct, although they have come from the mouth of ordinary 
people, I dare not regard them as wrong. How much less those of 
Confucius ! 

Moreover, the old text has been handed down for several thousand 
years. As we read its words, we find them to be clear and consistent, 
and as we view its method of moral cultivation, we find it to be easy, 
simple, and workable. On what evidence did Chu Hsi decide that 
this paragraph must be here and that one there, and that this was 
lost and that must be mended, and forthwith correct it and mend 
it ? Are you not taking my opposition to Chu Hsi too seriously but 
taking his rebellion against Confucius too lightly ? 

4 Book of Mencius, ~i&:). 

6 See above, introduction to sec. 1, n. 3. 

160 Instructions for Practical Living 

1J4. Your letter says, "If it is insisted upon that in learning one 
should not depend on seeking knowledge in external things but 
should only devote one's effort to introspection and self-examina- 
tion, then [in the procedure of the investigation of things, the 
extension of knowledge, the sincerity of the will, the rectification 
of the mind, and the cultivation of the personal life as prescribed in 
the text of the Great Learning] why is not the work of the rectification 
of the mind and the sincerity of the will completely sufficient and 
why is it necessary to burden the student with the investigation of 
things in the very beginning ?" 

You are quite right. You are quite right. If we talk about the 
fundamentals it is even sufficient to mention only the cultivation of 
the personal life. Why speak in addition of the rectification of the 
mind ? It is even sufficient to mention only the rectification of the 
mind. Why speak in addition of the sincerity of the will ? It is even 
sufficient to mention only the sincerity of the will. Why speak in 
addition of the extension of knowledge and also the investigation of 
things ?6 [All these steps are necessary] so the task will be thorough 
and careful. Essentially speaking, they are all one and the same. 
This is what is meant by the learning of refinement and single- 
mindedness. This should be borne in mind. 

Since there is no distinction between the internal and the external 
in principle and there is no such distinction in human nature, there- 
fore there is no such distinction in learning. Explanation, study, and 
discussion are also internal, and introspection and self-examination 
do not neglect the external. To say that learning must depend on the 
external is to regard one's own nature as having an external aspect, 
to consider righteousness as external, and to exercise cunning. 
And to say that introspection and self-examination are seeking 
learning from within is to regard one's own nature as having an 
internal aspect, to be egoistic, and to be selfish. In both cases there 
is evident ignorance of the fact that in the nature there is no distinc- 
tion between the internal and the external. Therefore it is said, 
"Investigate the principles of things with care and refinement until 
we enter into their spirit, for then their application can be extended ; 
and utilize that application and secure personal peace, for then our 
virtue will be exalted."7 As it is said, " [Humanity and wisdom] 

6 This is the procedure taught in the text of the Great Learning. 

7 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 5. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 389. 

Part II 161 

are the character of the nature, and they are the way in which the 
internal and the external are united."8 From these we may know the 
learning of the investigation of things. In the Great Learning, the 
investigation of things is the concrete starting point. From the 
beginning to the end, from the start of learning to the achievement 
of sagehood, there is but this one task. It is not a separate section for 
the beginning of the task. The rectification of the mind, the sincerity 
of the will, the extension of knowledge, and the investigation of 
things are all means of cultivating the personal life. But it is in the 
investigation of things that the effort to cultivate the personal life 
can be seen in one's daily conduct. Therefore the investigation of 
things is investigating the things of the mind, the things of the 
will, and the things of knowledge. To rectify the mind is to 
rectify the mind of things, to make the will sincere is to make 
the will of things sincere, and to extend knowledge is to extend 
the knowledge of things. Is there any distinction between the inter- 
nal and external or between this or that ? 

Principle is one and no more. In terms of its condensation and 
concentration in the individual it is called the nature. In terms of 
the master of this accumulation it is called mind. In terms of its 
emanation and operation under the master, it is called the will. In 
terms of the clear consciousness of the emanation and operation, it 
is called knowledge. And in terms of the stimuli and responses of 
this clear consciousness, it is called things. Therefore when it 
pertains to things it is called investigation, when it pertains to 
knowledge it is called extension, when it pertains to the will it 
is called sincerity, and when it pertains to the mind it is called 
rectification. To rectify is to rectify this [principle], to be sincere is 
to be sincere about this, to extend is to extend this, and to investigate 
is to investigate this. These are all means of investigating the principle 
of things to the utmost so as to develop the nature fully. There is no 
principle in the world outside nature, and there is no thing 
outside nature. The reason why the Confucian doctrine is not made 
clear and does not prevail is because scholars of today consider 
principle as external and things as external. They do not realize that 
the doctrine that righteousness is external has been attacked by 
Mencius9 and they blindly follow that doctrine and stick to it without 

8 Doctrine of the Mean, eh. 25. 

9 Book of Mencius, 6A:4. 

162 Instructions for Practical Living 

knowing it. Isn't there something seemingly true and yet difficult to 
apprehend? We must examine the matter carefully. 

175. Your Honor is skeptical about my theory of the investigation 
of things because you undoubtedly believe that it affirms the internal 
and rejects the external; that it is entirely devoted to self-examination 
and introspection and neglects the work of explanation, study, and 
discussion; that it concentrates on the over-simplified fundamental 
principles and leaves out the full details; that it submerges itself in the 
extremes of Buddhist and Taoist lifeless contemplation, emptiness 
and silence,10 and fails to take full account of the changing conditions 
of human affairs and the principles of things. If that were really the 
case, it would not only be a crime against the Confucian school and 
Master Chu Hsi; it would be a perverse doctrine to delude the 
people and a rebellious teaching to violate truth, and I should be 
punishable by death from all. How much more from a person of 
your integrity ! If that were really the case, anyone who understands 
textual criticism to a slight degree and has heard the introductory 
remarks of former wise men would know its incorrectness. How 
much more such an eminent scholar as Your Honor! Whenever I 
talk about the investigation of things, I always include all the nine 
items enumerated by Master Chu.11 But in their application there 
is a relative degree of importance, differing, as we say, by a fraction 
of a fraction. However, an infinitesimal mistake in the beginning 
may lead to an infinite error at the end. This should be clearly 
understood. 

10 Especially of Zen Buddhism, popular at Wang's time. 

11 Namely (1) to read books, discuss doctrines, and elucidate principles, to 
deliberate on people and events of the past and the present and distinguish their 
right and wrong, to handle affairs and to settle them in the proper way, and to 
investigate a thing one day and another the next day; (2) to investigate the 
principles in all things, from one's own person to the ten thousand things; 
(3) not to investigate extensively all the principles in the world nor to investigate 
intensively the principle of only one thing but to investigate more and more and 
thus to accumulate; (4) to investigate either the easy or the difficult according 
to one's capacity 5(5) to realize that every thing has its principle and should be 
investigated ; (6) to know that the investigation of the principle of filial piety 
means to practice it ; (7) to realize that every blade of grass and every tree has 
its principle and should be investigated ; (8) to know where the highest good is 
to be found ; and (9) to examine principle in one's own person. Chu Hsi, Ta-hsueb 
huo-wen, pp. 463-5 2a. Actually these are all quotations or paraphrases of Ch'eng 
I's sayings. 

Part II 163 

1 76. Mencius exposed the fallacies of Yang Chu and Mo Tzu to the 
point of condemning them for not recognizing the father or the 
ruler.12 After all, the two philosophers were worthies of their times. 
Had they lived at the same time as Mencius, it is quite possible that 
he would have regarded them as such. Mo Tzu's doctrine of uni- 
versal love went too far in the practice of humanity, and Yang Chu's 
doctrine of egoism went too far in the practice of righteousness, that 
is all. Did these doctrines destroy truth and violate moral standards 
to such a high degree as to be capable of deceiving the whole world ? 
And yet their harmful effect that had developed was such that 
Mencius compared these men to beasts and barbarians. It was 
because they did what is called "destroying later generations by 
means of learning."13 

Shall we say that the harmful effect of present-day learning lies in 
its going too far in teaching humanity or in its going too far in 
teaching righteousness ? Or in its going too far in teaching neither 
humanity nor righteousness? I do not know how present-day 
learning compares with a great flood or ferocious beasts. Mencius 
said, "Do I like to argue? I can't help it."14 The doctrines of Yang 
and Mo pervaded the empire. People in Mencius' time who honored 
and believed them must have been no fewer than those who exalt 
Chu Hsi's doctrine today. And yet Mencius alone kept on talking 
against them. Alas, how pitiable! 

Han Yii said, "The harm of the Buddhists and Taoists greatly 
exceeds that of Yang and Mo, and Han Yii's virtue is not equal to 
that of Mencius. Mencius was not able to save his age before it had 
been injured, but Han Yii hopes to recover his age after it has been 
damaged. He fails to realize the limitations of his own duty. It is 
clear that he will place himself in danger and will perish without 
anyone's saving him."15 Alas ! I have failed even more to realize the 
limitation of my ability. It is definitely clear that I shall place myself 
in danger and shall perish without anyone's saving me. When all 
people are in the depths of merriment, I alone weep and lament, and 
when the whole world happily runs [after erroneous doctrines], I 
alone worry with an aching heart and a knit brow. Either I have lost 

12 Book of Mencius, 36:9. 

13 A saying by Lu Hsiang-shan, Hsiang-shan ctfiian-chi, 1:3a. 

14 Book of Mencius, 38:9. 

15 Han Ctfang-li cb'iian-chi, i8:9a-b. 

164 Instructions for V radical Living 

my mind or there must surely be a great grief hidden away in the 
situation. Who except the most humane in the world can under- 
stand it ? 

I wrote "Chu Hsi's Final Conclusions Arrived at Late in Life"16 
because I could not help it. It is true that I have neglected to ascer- 
tain whether certain passages were written earlier or later in life. 
However, although not all of them were written late in his life, most 
of them were. At any rate, my chief idea was that it was important 
to compromise as much as possible so as to clarify this doctrine of 
the investigation of things. All my life Chu Hsi's doctrine has been 
a revelation to me, as though from the gods. In my heart I cannot 
bear suddenly to oppose him. Therefore it was because I could not 
help it that I did it. Those who know me say that my heart is grieved 
but those who do not know me say that I am after something.17 The 
fact is that in my own heart I cannot bear to contradict Master Chu 
but I cannot help contradicting him because the Way is what it is 
and the Way will not be fully evident if I do not correct him.18 As to 
Your Honor's contention that I purposely differ from Master Chu, 
do I dare deceive my own mind ? 

The Way is public and belongs to the whole world, and the 
doctrine is also public and belongs to the whole world. They are not 
the private properties of Master Chu or even Confucius. They are 
open to all and the only proper way to discuss them is to do so 
openly. If what is said is right, it will be beneficial to one though 
it may differ from his opinion. If it is wrong, it will be harmful to 
him even if he may agree with it. One surely rejoices in what is 
beneficial to him and dislikes what is harmful to him. Thus, even if 
my present opinion possibly differs from that of Master Chu's, it is 
not unlikely that he would rejoice in it. The faults of the superior 
man are like eclipses of the sun and moon. When he corrects them, 
all men look up to him.19 But the inferior man is sure to gloss over his 
faults.20 Although I am unworthy, I surely dare not treat Chu Hsi 
with the mind of an inferior man. 

16 See below, pp. 263-67. 

17 Quoting the Book of Odes, no. 65. 

18 Quoting the Book of Mencius, 3A:j. 

19 Analects, 19:21. 

20 Ibid., 19:8. 

Part II 165 

177. Your Honor has instructed me earnestly in several hundred 
words all because you have not fully understood my theory of the 
investigation of things. As soon as my humble theory is understood, 
these several hundred words will require no explanation and will be 
clarified without any difficulty. Therefore I do not venture into 
details to increase your annoyance with trifles. However, unless my 
humble views are explained face to face, they definitely cannot be 
fully presented in writing. Ah! the way in which Your Honor 
enlightens me and directs me may be said to be extremely earnest 
and thorough. Among those who regard me dearly, who can match 
Your Honor? Although I am simple-minded, can I fail to be appre- 
ciative and thankful? But I cannot cast away the sincerity of my 
mind and merely accept what you say because I dare not fail in your 
high esteem of me but instead want to requite it. When I return east 
at the end of autumn, I shall certainly try to see you so all my 
requests to you may be fulfilled. Please instruct me to the end under 
all circumstances. 

LETTER IN REPLY TO NIEH WEN-YU1 

178. Last spring2 you took a long and weary journey to come to 
see me. Your regard and concern were most earnest and kind. How 
can I deserve such fond feeling ? Originally I had hoped to get you 

1 Nieh Pao (1487-1563), whose literary name was Shuang-chiang. A 
"presented scholar" of 1 5 17, he eventually became a prefect and in that capacity 
enabled some 3,000 families to regain employment by carrying out irrigation 
projects. An honest and outspoken critic of bad government officials, he was 
imprisoned for over a year and finally dismissed from office. Later, however, he 
became minister of the department of military affairs and tutor to the crown 
prince. 

He held Wang in great admiration. After Wang died, he deeply regretted 
that he had not become Wang's disciple. Consequently he formally became one 
by bowing to Wang's tablet with Ch'ien Te-hung as witness. In his doctrines 
he differed from Wang and emphasized tranquillity of mind and sitting in 
meditation, holding that the state of equilibrium before the feelings are aroused 
is that of innate knowledge. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 17:8b- 
17a. According to the Nien-p'u, Wang's letter in reply to him was written from 
Chekiang in 1526 when Wang was fifty -five. On his way to Fukien as censor, 
Nieh had visited Wang and he wrote to him afterward. But since the letter was 
included in the CVuan-hsi lu, which Nan Yuan-shan published in 1524, the date 
must have been earlier. 

2 According to other editions which agree with the Nien-p'u it was the summer 
rather than the spring. 

166 Instructions for V radical Living 

and several other like-minded friends to go to a quiet place and stay 
for ten days or so so that I might present some of my humble views 
and reap the benefit of your polishing and refining. Unfortunately 
both public and private business were so onerous that it was impos- 
sible for me to do so. As we separated, I felt dispirited as though I 
had suffered a loss. Then suddenly your kind letter arrived with 
an earnest discussion of over a thousand words. As I read it I feel my 
mind cleansed and my heart comforted. In your letter you praise me 
exceedingly, no doubt with the generous purpose of encouraging 
me and leading me forward. Sincerely giving me advice and encour- 
agement, you want to take me into the company of sages and worthies. 
Moreover, you asked Ch'ung-i3 to give me your keenest regards. 
How could you have done so much unless you had deep friendship 
and great love for me ? I am grateful and yet ashamed, and fear that 
I do not deserve all this. However, how dare I merely engage in 
expressions of gratitude and compliance and fail to rouse myself 
to effort ? 

You said that in me you unexpectedly found Tzu-ssu, Mencius, 
Chou Tun-i, and Ch'eng I in this late generation, that rather than 
have the doctrine believed by the whole world, it is better to have it 
believed truly by one single person, that the Way is self-evident and 
the Confucian learning is also self-evident, and that they are not 
augmented because the whole world believes in them nor diminished 
because only one person believes in them.4 This is indeed the mind 
of the superior man who can face disapproval without being 
troubled.5 Can people of superficial views understand it? And yet 
in the way I feel there is something that cannot be helped at all, and 
I do not mind whether people believe me or not. 

179. Man is the mind of the universe. At bottom Heaven and 
Earth and all things are my body. Is there any suffering or bitterness 
of the great masses that is not disease or pain in my own body? 
Those who are not aware of the disease and pain in their own body 
are people without the sense of right and wrong. The sense of right 
and wrong is knowledge possessed by men without deliberation and 

3 See above, sec. 104, n. 23. 

4 Nieh's letter is not in the Nieh Shuang-chiang wen-chi, and this passage does 
not appear anywhere else in the collection. 

5 A quotation from the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. I. 
Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 409. 

Part II 167 

ability possessed by them without their having acquired it by 
learning.6 It is what we call innate knowledge. This knowledge is 
inherent in the human mind whether that of the sage or of the stupid 
person, for it is the same for the whole world and for all ages. If 
gentlemen of the world merely devote their effort to extending 
their innate knowledge they will naturally share with all a universal 
sense of right and wrong, share their likes and dislikes, regard 
other people as their own persons, regard the people of other 
countries as their own family, and look upon Heaven, Earth, and all 
things as one body. When this is done, even if we wanted the world 
to be without order, it would not be possible. When the ancients 
felt that the good seemed to come from themselves when they saw 
others do good, when they felt that they had fallen into evil when 
they saw others do evil, when they regarded other people's hunger 
and drowning as their own, and when they felt that if one person's 
condition was not well adjusted it was as if they had pushed him 
into a ditch,7 they did not purposely do so in order to seek people's 
belief in them. They merely devoted their effort to extending their 
innate knowledge and sought to satisfy themselves. The Sage- 
emperors Yao and Shun and the Three Kings8 spoke and all people 
believed them, because in speaking they extended their innate 
knowledge. They acted and all people were pleased with them,9 
because in acting they extended their innate knowledge. Therefore 
their people moved around and were contented. Though these 
rulers punished the people by death, the people did not complain, 
and when the rulers benefited the people, the people did not think 
of the rulers' merit.10 Their fame extended to all the barbarous 
tribes and all who had blood and breath honored and loved them.11 
Why? Because all people have the same innate knowledge. Alas, 
how simple and easy was the way of sages to govern the empire ! 

1 80. In later generations, the doctrine of innate knowledge has not 
clearly prevailed. People have used their selfishness and cunning 

6 A quotation from the Book of Mencius, ~iK:i$. 

7 Quoting the Book, of History, "The Charge to Yiieh," pt 2. Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Shoo King, p. 262. 

8 T'ang, Wen, and Wu. 

9 A saying from the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 31. 

10 According to the Book of Mencius, ~i&.:\$. 

11 According to the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 31. 

14 

168 Instructions for Practical Living 

to compete with and rival one another. Consequently each one has 
his own opinion, and one-sided, trivial, perverse, and narrow views 
as well as dishonest, crafty, underhanded, and evil tricks have 
become innumerable. Outwardly people make pretenses in the name 
of humanity and righteousness. At heart their real aim is to act for 
their own benefit. They lie in order to please the vulgar people and 
affect a certain conduct in order to obtain fame. They cover up other 
people's good deeds or appropriate them as their own, and they 
expose other people's selfishness and take advantage of the oppor- 
tunity to show that they are honest. They overcome one another 
with anger and yet claim to be seeking ardently for righteousness, 
and destroy one another with wickedness and yet claim to hate evil. 
They are jealous of the worthy and envious of the talented, and yet 
consider themselves to have a universal sense of right and wrong. 
They indulge in passions and give free rein to selfish desires, and yet 
regard themselves as sharing the same likes and dislikes with the rest 
of mankind. They oppose and injure one another. Even among blood 
relatives, they cannot get rid of the feeling of mutual separation and 
rivalry or the evidence of mutual antagonism and obstruction. How 
much more will this be true in regard to the great multitude and the 
myriad things ? How can they regard them as one body ? No wonder 
the world is confused and calamity and disorder endlessly succeed 
each other. 

1 8 1 . Thanks to divine guidance I happen to entertain certain views 
on innate knowledge, believing that only through it can order be 
brought to the world. Therefore whenever I think of people's 
degeneration and difficulties I feel pitiful and have a pain in my 
heart. I overlook the fact that I am unworthy and wish to save them 
by this doctrine. And I do not know the limits of my ability. When 
people see me trying to do this, they join one another in critici2ing, 
ridiculing, insulting, and cursing me, regarding me as insane. Alas ! 
Is this to be pitied ? Just at the time when I feel the disease and pain 
in my own body, do I have leisure to pay attention to other people's 
denunciation and ridicule? 

Of course there are cases when people see their fathers, sons, or 
brothers falling into a deep abyss and getting drowned. They cry, 
crawl, go naked and barefooted, stumble and fall. They hang onto 
dangerous cliffs and go down to save them. Some gentlemen who see 
them behave like this talk, laugh, and bow ceremoniously to one 

Part II 169 

another by their side. They consider them to be insane because they 
have discarded etiquette and taken off their clothing, and because 
they cry, stumble, andfallasthey do. Now to stand beside those drow- 
ing and make no attempt to save them but to bow, talk, and laugh 
is possible only for strangers who have no feelings natural to blood 
relatives. Even then, they will be considered to have no sense of pity 
and to be no longer human beings. In the case of fathers, sons, and 
brothers, because of love one will surely feel an ache in his head and 
a pain in his heart, run desperately until he has lost his breath, and 
crawl to save them. He even ignores the danger of drowning him- 
self. How much more will he ignore being ridiculed as insane ! And 
how much more will he fail to worry about whether people believe 
him or not! Alas! It is all right if people say that I am insane. The 
minds of all people are the same as mine. There are people who are 
insane. How can I not be so ? There are people who have lost their 
minds. How can I not lose mine ? 

182. When Confucius was alive, some criticized him as a flatterer,12 
some ridiculed him as an insinuating talker, 13 some slandered him 
as unworthy,14 some denounced him as ignorant of the rules of 
propriety,15 some insulted him by calling him merely "someone" 
from the east village, 16 some were jealous of him and stopped him 
from carrying out political reforms,17 and some hated him and 
wanted to kill him.18 People like the gateman and the carrier of a 
straw basket were virtuous in his time, and even they said that 

12 Analects, 3:18. 

13 Ibid., 14:34. 

14 Ibid., 19:24. 

15 Ibid., 3:15. 

16 Dictionaries and commentators (including Miwa Shissai, 1 669-1 744, in 
his Hyoebu denshii roku) all said that the story came from the K'ung T%u chia-yu. If 
so, it must have been in the earlier version which has been lost, for it is not 
found in the existing version. Miwa's pupil, Kawada Kinkyd (1684-1760), 
noted in his Denshii roku bikki that the story is not found in the K'ung T%u 
chia-yu but comes from the Shuo-yiian. But I have not been able to find it there. 
Professor William Hung of Harvard-Yenching Institute has kindly provided 
me with several references to the story in later works, for which I am grateful. 
Of these the earliest is Shen Yiieh (441-513), Ying Hou chi 1:83b. It is said here 
that some of his contemporaries called Confucius "someone from the east 
village." 

17 Analects, 18:4. 

18 Ibid., 7:22. 

170 Instructions for Practical hiving 

"he knows that a thing cannot be done and still wants to do it,"19 
and that "he is contemptible and obstinate and should stop seeking 
public service since people take no notice of him."20 Even Tzu-lu, 
who ranked among those who had ascended the hall21 still was not 
free from doubts about what he saw22 and was displeased over his 
intended visit,23 and, moreover, regarded him as aiming wide of the 
mark.24 This being the case at the time, were there only two or three 
out of ten who refused to believe in the Grand Master ? And yet the 
Grand Master was extremely busy and anxious, as though he were 
searching for a lost son on the highways, and never sat down long 
enough to warm his mat. Was he only trying to get people to know 
him and believe him? It was rather because his humanity, which 
regarded Heaven and Earth and all things as one body, was so 
compassionate, keen, and sincere that he could not stop doing so 
even if he wanted to. This is why he said, "If I do not associate with 
mankind, with whom shall I associate ?"25 This is why [Tzu-lu, com- 
menting on the hermit who criticized Confucius,] said, "Wishing to 
maintain his personal purity he allows the great human relations 
to come to confusion."26 And this is why Confucius said, "How 
determined is the basket carrier ! It is not difficult [not to seek public 
service]."27 Alas! Aside from those who truly form one body with 
Heaven and Earth and the myriad things, who can understand the 
Grand Master's intention ? As to those who escape from the world 
without being troubled and are happy with their nature and know 
their destiny, they can be at ease with themselves wherever they 
may be, and see no contradiction between parallel courses of action 
[those of the hermit and the social reformer]. 

19 Ibid., 14:41. The gateman was keeper of the Stone Gate through which 
Confucius once passed. 

20 Ibid., 14:42. 

21 Meaning pupils who learned much. 

22 Ibid., 6:26. Confucius went to see Nan-tzu, consort of a duke, in an effort 
to sell his political ideas. Tzu-lu thought Confucius should not have gone to 
see such a woman, whose reputation was not too good. 

23 Ibid., 17:5. An official who was in revolt asked Confucius to go and assist 
him. Confucius wanted to go, but Tzu-lu objected. 

2iIbid., 13:3. 

25 Ibid., 18:6. 

26 Ibid., 18:7. 

27 Ibid., 14:42. 

Part II 171 

183. How dare such an unworthy person as I take the course of 
Confucius as my own responsibility ? However, to some extent I do 
realize in my mind that the disease and pain are in my own body and 
therefore desperately search in all directions for those who can be of 
help to discuss ways and means of removing the disease and pain. 
Now if I can really find help and assistance from eminent men and 
like -minded friends and together with them make the doctrine of 
innate knowledge clearly prevail in the world, so that all people can 
know how to extend their own innate knowledge, give security and 
support to one another, eliminate their obscuration and selfishness, 
wipe out their habits of slander, jealousy, rivalry, and anger, and 
bring about the world of great unity, then my insanity will be cured 
in a sudden release and I can finally avoid the disaster of losing my 
mind. Will that not be a joy! 

Alas! If I am truly to look for eminent men and like-minded 
friends, to whom can I turn if not to people like Wen-yii ? Your 
talents and desire are already sufficient to save those who are drown- 
ing. In addition, you know that all that is needed exists sufficiently 
in the self and does not need to be sought outside. If this desire is 
followed and carried out to the fullest extent, it will be like a river 
bursting its banks and flowing to the sea. Who can stop it? You 
said that even if only one person believes in the doctrine of innate 
knowledge this is not too few. Can you yield this to someone else ? 

184. Hui-chi28 has always been known as an area of beautiful 
scenery. With every step one takes, one sees thick groves and deep 
valleys. It is just right at all times, whether in winter or summer, 
and whether in morning or evening. One lives comfortably and eats 
fully, and is not bothered by bustle or dust. As good friends gather 
from all directions, one's moral life is daily renewed. What a free and 
easy life ! Can one be happier anywhere else in the world ? Confucius 
said, "I do not complain against Heaven. I do not blame men. I 
study things on the lower level but my understanding penetrates the 
higher level."29 Two or three like-minded friends and I are about to 
try to put this saying into practice. Where do I have time to seek 
external glory ? It is only because the pain is very personal to me that 

28 A place in Chekiang Province, where Wang Yang-ming founded an 
academy. 

29 Analects, 14:37. 

172 Instructions for Practical hiving 

I cannot ignore it. That is why I have continued to express myself 
as I have done. As my cough is very severe, I have been extremely 
lazy in writing. Your honorable messenger came from afar. I have 
detained him for a month. As he departs and I pick up my pen, I 
do not realize that page after page has been written. Since we know 
each other well, though I have gone into details to this extent, I feel 
especially that I have not said what I wanted to say. 

ANOTHER LETTER IN REPLY TO NIEH 
WEN-YU1 

185. Having received your letter, I know of the recent rapid 
progress in your study. I am happy and gratified beyond words. I 
have carefully read your letter several times. That there are never- 
theless one or two points not crystal clear to you is because you are 
not yet completely at home with the task of extending innate knowl- 
edge. When you have become familiar with it, the lack of clarity 
will vanish of itself. It may be compared to driving a vehicle. You 
are driving it on a broad highway. But sometimes it goes obliquely 
or zigzags, because the horse is not yet well trained and the bit and 
bridle are not even. However, you are already on the broad highway 
itself and will certainly not mistakenly go into sidetracks or crooked 
paths. Of late, only a few of our like-minded friends in the country 
have reached this stage of progress. I am happy and gratified beyond 
words that you have. This is good fortune for the Confucian 
doctrine. 

Previously my humble body was afflicted with a cough and the 
fear of heat. Since my recent arrival in this hot region,2 these have 
suddenly reoccurred to a high degree. His Majesty, possessing 
sagely intelligence and great understanding, has given me great 
responsibility which I dare not abruptly decline. Local military 
affairs have been heavy and busy. I have handled all of them while 
going about in carriages in spite of illness. Fortunately the region is 
now pacified. I have presented a memorial seeking permission to 
return home for treatment of my disease. If I can rest in a grove and 

1 This letter was written in 1528 from Kwangsi, to which Wang had gone 
to suppress a rebellion, a month before Wang died. Nieh's letter to which this 
is a reply is found in the Shuang-chiang wen-chi, 8:ia-6b. 

2 Kwangsi. 

Part II 173 

enjoy to some extent the clear and cool air, perhaps I can recover. As 
your messenger is about to return, I have hastily written while 
resting on my pillow, but I cannot fully express my regard for you. 
In addition I am sending a letter to Wei-chiin.3 Please deliver 
it to him. 

1 86. Let me roughly answer one or two questions you put forth in 
your letter. In the last year or two, those who came to the mountains 
to study with me have repeatedly said that the task of not forgetting 
one's objective and not making any artificial effort to help the mind 
grow4 is most difficult. When asked for an explanation, they said, 
"As soon as one fixes his attention, he is helping, and as soon as he 
pays no attention, he forgets. Therefore it is most difficult." I then 
asked them, "What is it that you forget and what is it that you help ?" 
They remained silent and made no reply, and then asked me for my 
opinion. Whereupon I explained to them as follows: 

In my discussions here I talk only about the point that "One 
must always be doing something"5 and not about forgetting or 
not helping. "One must always be doing something" means that 
one should accumulate righteous deeds at all times. If one devotes 
all his time to the task of seeing to it that he must always be doing 
something and yet he is interrupted at times, it means he forgets. 
The immediate task here is not to forget. If one devotes all his time 
to the task of always doing something and is impatient and seeks 
quick results, it means he helps. The immediate task here is not to 
help. The task lies wholly in the practice of the teaching that one 
must always be doing something. In this situation the injunctions 
not to forget and not to help are meant only to hold the individual's 
attention and make him alert. If from the start the task is not inter- 
rupted, there is no further need of talking about not forgetting, and 
if from the start one is not impatient and does not seek quick results, 
there is no further need of talking about not helping. How clear, 
simple, and easy is this task, and how free and natural ! 

Now if one does not devote himself to the task of always doing 
something and clings in a vacuum to not forgetting or helping, it is 
just like heating the skillet to cook rice without first putting in 

3 See below, sec. 201, n. 1. This letter, dated 1527, is found in the Wang 
Wen-cWeng Kung cb'iian-shu, 6:3 ib-3 3a. 

4 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

5 Ibid. 

174 Instructions for V radical Living 

water and rice but only adding fuel and starting the fire. I don't know 
what stuff can in the end be cooked by this. I am afraid that before 
the intensity of the fire can be adjusted the skillet will already be 
cracked. Nowadays, the trouble of those who devote their efforts 
only to not forgetting and not helping is precisely like this. All day 
long they attempt to practice not forgetting in a vacuum and also 
attempt to practice not helping in a vacuum. Pushing and rushing, 
they completely lack a concrete starting point. In the end their task 
will result only in their sinking into emptiness and maintaining 
quietness6 and learning to be stupid fools. As soon as anything 
happens to them, they are handicapped and confused and cannot 
manage or control it. These are all gentlemen with ambition, and 
now they must toil, be bound, and waste all their lives. It is all 
because of the fact that an over-emphasis on intellectual learning 
spoils them. What a great pity! 

187. "One must always be doing something" means merely the 
accumulation of righteous deeds, and the accumulation of righteous 
deeds means merely the extension of innate knowledge. To talk 
about accumulating righteous deeds does not immediately reveal the 
basis, but as soon as we talk about the extension of innate knowledge 
there is right away a concrete basis on which to engage in the task. 
I therefore advocate solely the extension of innate knowledge. To 
extend innate knowledge in daily affairs as they occur is to investigate 
things. To extend innate knowledge in a genuine and earnest way 
is to make the will sincere. To extend innate knowledge in a genuine 
and earnest way without the least arbitrariness of opinion, dogma- 
tism, obstinacy, or egotism7 is to rectify the mind. If one extends 
innate knowledge genuinely and earnestly, there will naturally be no 
defect of forgetting, and if one has not the least arbitrariness of 
opinion, dogmatism, obstinacy, or egotism, there will naturally be 
no defect of helping. Therefore if we advocate the investigation of 
things, the extension of knowledge, the sincerity of the will, and the 
rectification of the mind, there will be no need of any further talk 
of forgetting or helping. Mencius talked of them in order to prescribe 
a formula for remedying the defects of Kao Tzu. Kao Tzu's control 
of the mind is the defect of helping the mind to grow. Therefore 

6 Like the Buddhists and Taoists. 

7 Analects, 9:4. 

Part II 175 

Mencius only talked about the harm of helping. Kao Tzu advocated 
helping the mind to grow because he regarded righteousness as 
external to the mind and failed to realize that righteousness should be 
accumulated in and through one's own mind and that one should 
devote his effort to the task of always doing something. This is why 
he had this defect. If one accumulates righteousness in and through 
his own mind every hour and every minute, the substance of innate 
knowledge will be absolutely clear and it will spontaneously see 
right as right and wrong as wrong, neither of which can escape from 
it in the least. How, then, can there be the trouble that "What is not 
attained in words is not to be sought in the mind, and what is not 
attained in the mind is not to be sought in the vital force" ?8 Mencius' 
doctrine of accumulating righteousness and nourishing the vital 
force is of course a great help to students. Nevertheless, it is but a 
prescription for a particular ailment expounded at length. It is not 
as good as the task of the investigation of things, the extension of 
knowledge, the sincerity of the will, and the rectification of the 
mind taught in the Great 'Learning, which is much more refined, 
unified, simple, and easy. It penetrates both the higher and the lower 
levels and is good for ten thousand generations. 

1 88. In discussing learning, sages and worthies mostly do so in 
accordance with the times and with events. They seem to differ from 
one another in what they say, but essentially they are in complete 
harmony on the basis of the task. The reason for this is that in the 
universe there is only this one nature, this one principle, this one 
innate knowledge, and this one endeavor. Therefore, whenever we 
discuss our task on the basis of the doctrines of the ancients, we 
should not force extraneous ideas upon them or mix them with 
such ideas. Then they will naturally blend together and penetrate 
one another. As soon as one feels the necessity of forcing extraneous 
ideas upon them or mixing them with such ideas, it is apparent that 
one's own task is not yet clearly understood. 

In recent days it is said that the task of accumulating righteousness 
must be combined with the extension of innate knowledge before 
it can be complete. Such a contention shows that the task of accumu- 
lating righteousness is not yet thoroughly understood. If the task of 
accumulating righteousness is not thoroughly understood, the exten- 

8 Kao Tzu, in Book of Mencius, 2 A: 2. 

176 Instructions for Practical Living 

sion of innate knowledge will suffer. To say that the task of the 
extension of innate knowledge must be combined with the effort 
not to forget or to help before it becomes clear means that the task 
of the extension of innate knowledge is not yet thoroughly under- 
stood. If the task of the extension of innate knowledge is not yet 
thoroughly understood, the effort not to forget or help will suffer. 
AH such contentions are the results of literal interpretations and 
far-fetched explanations for the purpose of combining together or 
mixing various elements and not the results of personal realization 
obtained in one's own concrete task. Consequently, the more refined 
one's discussion becomes, the farther he is away from the truth. In 
your deliberation, Wen-yii, it is abundantly clear that you are free 
from doubt so far as the great foundation and universal way of 
virtue are concerned. As to the doctrines of the extension of knowl- 
edge and the investigation of the principles of things to the utmost, 
not forgetting, not helping, and so forth, at times you have forced 
extraneous ideas upon them or mixed them with other elements. 
This is why I have said that in riding along the broad highway one 
sometimes goes obliquely or zigzags, and that after one masters the 
task everything will be clear to him. 

189. You said, Wen-yii, that when the doctrine of the extension of 
knowledge is sought in serving one's parents and obeying one's 
elder brother, it will be felt that there is something concrete to grasp 
and to follow. This section shows best the result of your recent 
genuine and concrete effort. However, if from this you think that if 
you follow this procedure yourself, it will be effective, and forthwith 
teach it to others as an established doctrine, you will not be free 
from the defect of incurring disease because of the application of 
medicine. This matter should not be passed over without comment. 
Innate knowledge is nothing other than the Principle of Nature 
where the natural clear consciousness reveals itself. Its original 
substance is merely true sincerity and commiseration. Therefore, 
when the true sincerity and commiseration of this innate knowledge 
is extended to serve one's parents, it becomes filial piety. When the 
true sincerity and commiseration of this innate knowledge is 
extended to obey one's elder brother, it becomes brotherly respect. 
And when the true sincerity and commiseration of this innate knowl- 
edge is extended to serve one's ruler, it becomes loyalty. There is 
but one innate knowledge, one true sincerity and commiseration. If 

Part II 177 

in obeying one's elder brother the true sincerity and commiseration 
of innate knowledge cannot be extended, they cannot be extended 
in serving one's parents. If they cannot be extended in serving one's 
ruler, they cannot be extended in obeying one's elder brother. There- 
fore, to have extended the innate knowledge that serves the ruler 
is to have extended the innate knowledge that obeys one's elder 
brother. To have extended the innate knowledge that obeys 
one's elder brother is to have extended the innate knowledge that 
serves one's parents. This does not mean that if the innate knowledge 
that serves one's ruler cannot be extended one has to develop the 
innate knowledge that serves one's parents. That would be departing 
from the root and looking for it in twigs and branches. There is 
only one innate knowledge. In its manifestation and universal 
operation, it is then and there self-sufficient. It comes from nowhere 
and goes nowhere. It depends on nothing. However, in its manifesta- 
tion and universal operation, there are degrees of importance and 
intensity to and from which not the slightest amount can be added 
or subtracted. This is what is called "the equilibrium that is self- 
existent in everything."9 Although there are degrees of importance 
and intensity to and from which not the slightest amount can be 
added or substracted, at bottom it is only one. And although it is 
only one, its degrees of importance and intensity cannot be altered 
in the least. If it can be altered or if it depends on anything, it will no 
longer be the original substance of true sincerity and commiseration. 
This is why the wonderful functioning of innate knowledge has 
neither spatial restriction nor physical form and is unlimited. If 
one speaks of its greatness, nothing in the world can contain it, and 
if one speaks of its smallness, nothing in the world can split it.10 

190. Mencius said, "The Way of Yao and Shun was simply that 
of filial piety and brotherly respect."11 He said so because he wanted 
to call people's attention to the point where the manifestation of 
innate knowledge is the most genuine and earnest and in which no 
obscuration can be allowed, so that in their serving the ruler, living 
with friends, being humane to all people and kind to creatures, 
and in all their activities and tranquillity, and speech and silence, 

9 Ch'eng I, quoted by Chu Hsi in his Ta-hsiieh buo-wen, p. 56b. 

10 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 12. 

11 Book of Mencius, 6B:2. 

178 Instructions for V radical Living 

they will only extend the truly sincere and commiserate innate 
knowledge which is expressed in the single desire to serve one's 
parents and obey one's elder brother. Then everything will naturally 
be in accord with the Way. 

Although there is an infinite amount of change and variety in the 
world, so much so that it is impossible to investigate all of them, if 
one responds to them by merely extending this truly sincere and 
commiserate innate knowledge expressed in the single desire to serve 
one's parents and obey one's elder brother, nothing will be left out 
of its operation. This is because there is only one innate knowledge. 
Outside of this innate knowledge expressed in the single desire to 
serve one's parents and to obey one's elder brother, there is no 
other innate knowledge that can be extended. Therefore Mencius 
said, "The Way of Yao and Shun was simply that of filial piety and 
brotherly respect." This is why it is the learning of refinement and 
single -mindedness, and will be correct when expanding in all four 
directions and timeless when applied to later generations.12 

You say that you desire to seek the learning of innate knowledge 
in serving your parents and obeying your elder brother. From the 
point of view of efficiency in your own effort, it is not wrong to say 
so. It is also all right if you say that one extends the true sincerity and 
commiseration of innate knowledge in order to practice the way of 
serving one's parents and obeying one's elder brother to the fullest. 
Ch'eng Ming-tao [Ch'eng Hao] said, "The practice of humanity 
begins with filial piety and brotherly respect. Filial piety and 
brotherly respect are items in the practice of humanity. It is all right 
to say that they are the root of the practice of humanity but not all 
right to say that they are the root of humanity itself."13 What is 
said is correct. 

191. Regarding anticipating someone's attempt to deceive and 
predicting someone's distrust and knowing them readily,14 you 
say that if one is sincere, then taking special means and doing the 
best thing under the circumstances in order to protect oneself is also 
an application of innate knowledge. This is very, very well said. As 
I have said before, you are not entirely free from forcing extraneous 

12 Paraphrasing the Book of Rites, "The Meaning of Sacrifices." Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Li Ki, ch. 21, p. 227. 

13 1-shu, 1 8: ib. Actually this is not a saying of Ch'eng Hao but one of Ch'eng I. 

14 Analects, 14:33. 

Part II 179 

ideas upon things or mixing them with other elements. What 
Wei-chiin said is not wrong.15 On your part, you need to take in his 
words before yours can be fully stated, and on his part he needs to 
take in your words before his can be made clear. Otherwise, each of 
you will have the defect of relying on and clinging to your own 
viewpoint. Emperor Shun examined the simple words of others16 and 
asked questions of grass and reed cutters.17 He did not do so because 
simple words should be examined and grass and reed cutters should 
be questioned. Rather, his behavior was the manifestation and 
universal operation of his innate knowledge which was clear and 
perfect, without any obstruction or obscuration. This is why it is 
called great knowledge. As soon as there is any clinging to arbitrari- 
ness of opinion or dogmatism, knowledge becomes small. Naturally, 
in the course of discussion, distinctions and adjustments will be 
made. However, for the mind to be engaged in a genuine and earnest 
task, one must proceed in this manner. 

192. With reference to the three sections on exerting one's mind to 
the utmost [preserving one's mind, and not allowing any double - 
mindedness], I have elaborated on the ideas that some people are 
born with knowledge [and can exert their minds to the utmost], some 
learn through study [ and can preserve their minds], and some learn 
through hard work [and can allow no double -mindedness].18 My 
exposition was quite clear and should not be questioned. For one 
who exerts his mind to the utmost, knows his nature, and knows 
Heaven, there is no need to talk about preserving the mind, nour- 
ishing the nature, and serving Heaven, or about not allowing any 
double -mindedness regardless of longevity or brevity of life and 
about cultivating one's personal life while waiting for the mandate 
of Heaven to take its own course,19 for what he does already involves 
these efforts. Although he who preserves his mind, nourishes his 
nature, and serves Heaven has not attained the position of exerting 
the mind to the utmost and knowing Heaven, yet in so doing he has 
already found the task of exerting the mind to the utmost and of 
knowing Heaven. There is no need to talk about having no double - 

15 See below, sec. 201, n. 1. What he said is no longer known. 

16 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 6. 

17 Book of Odes, no. 254. 

18 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. See above, sec. 6. 

19 Book of Mencius, 7A:i. 

180 Instructions for Practical Living 

mindedness regardless of longevity or brevity of life and about 
cultivating the personal life while waiting for the mandate of Heaven 
to take its own course, for what he does already involves these 
efforts. 

This may be compared to walking. He who exerts his mind to the 
utmost and knows Heaven is like a strong adult who is able to run 
back and forth for thousands of //.20 He who preserves his mind and 
serves Heaven is like a child who is being taught to walk and stride 
in the vestibule. He who does not allow any double -mindedness 
regardless of longevity or brevity of life, but cultivates his personal 
life while waiting for the mandate of Heaven to take its own course, 
is like an infant who has just been allowed to support himself against 
the wall and gradually is learning to stand and to take a step. Since 
an individual is already able to run back and forth for several 
thousand //, it is unnecessary to have him learn to walk or stride in 
the vestibule, for he is already able to do so. If he is able to walk 
and stride in the vestibule, there is no need to have him support 
himself against the wall and learn to stand or to take a step, for he is 
already able to do so. But learning to stand and to take a step is the 
beginning of learning to walk and to stride in the vestibule, and 
learning to walk and stride in the vestibule is the foundation of 
running back and forth for several thousand //. They are surely not 
two different things, but the difference in the difficulty or easiness 
in the task is very, very wide. 

Mind, the nature, and Heaven are one. Therefore when people 
finally come to know this, their success is the same. But for the three 
types of people there are naturally different steps according to their 
capability or ability, which should not be skipped over. In carefully 
examining your ideas, Wen-yii, it seems to me that you are afraid 
that he who exerts his mind to the utmost and knows Heaven 
neglects the effort of preserving the mind and cultivating the per- 
sonal life, and thus creates trouble for the task of exerting the mind 
and knowing Heaven. This is to worry for the sage lest his task 
might be interrupted without knowing how to worry for yourself 
lest your effort is not yet genuine and concrete. In making efforts, 
we should have a concentrated mind and a fixed purpose and devote 
ourselves to the task of not allowing any double -mindedness but 
cultivating our personal lives while waiting for the mandate to 

20 A li is about one third of a mile. 

Part II 181 

take its own course. This is the beginning of the effort to exert the 
mind and to know Heaven, just as learning to stand and to take a 
step is the beginning of learning to run for a thousand li. We should 
worry lest we cannot stand or take a step. Why should we worry about 
not being able to run a thousand li ? How much less should we worry 
for those who can run for a thousand li lest perchance they forget 
how to stand or to take a step ! 

Wen-yu, basically your knowledge is advancing vigorously. The 
way you deliberate, however, shows that you have not been able to 
rid yourself of the old habit of textual explanation and literal inter- 
pretation. Thus you have written these three sections, separating, 
analyzing, comparing, and combining [the three different steps of 
exerting the mind, preserving the mind, and not allowing any 
double-mindedness] with the hope of blending the steps together 
and harmonizing them. However, you have added many compli- 
cating ideas of your own which prevent you from concentrating 
your effort. This is precisely the defect of the view of recent scholars 
who try in a vacuum not to forget their objective or to help their 
mind grow. It is a most serious handicap and most harmful and 
should be gotten rid of. 

193. In the section on honoring the moral nature and following 
the path of study and inquiry,21 what you said is without any doubt 
all perfectly correct and reverts to one truth. You can say what you 
have said only because you have made genuine and sincere effort. 
Basically this is not an obscure truth or difficult to understand. 
People hold on to their different opinions because there is still some 
little obscuration latent in their innate knowledge. If this little 
obscuration is removed, it will be perfectly clear. 

194. After I had finished my letter to you, my bed was moved 
under the eaves of the house. Since I do not happen to have anything 
to do, I have written here some more in answer to your letter. In 
your learning you have already grasped the fundamentals. The points 
bothering you should of themselves be clear to you in time, and it 
should not have been necessary for me to examine them one by one 
like this. But your regard for me is profound so that you have sent 
a man a thousand // to me and have made most earnest inquiry. 
Should I disappoint you in your kind intention ? I therefore cannot 

21 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 27. 

182 Instructions for Practical hiving 

help expressing myself. However, I have spoken too frankly and 
have bored you with too many details. Counting on your trust and 
affection for me, I hope you will excuse me. Please make copies and 
send one each to Wei-chun, Ch'ien-chih,22 and Ch'ung-i.23 I shall 
then be all the more benefited by the good will of all you gentlemen. 
The above letters were recorded by Nan Ta-chi.24 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR LIU PO-SUNG AND 
OTHERS ON FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS ON 
ELEMENTARY EDUCATION (Sections 
195 -200) 

In April, 1 5 1 8, after the rebellion in southern Kiangsi was subdued, Wang 
established community schools and issued the following instructions 
and school regulations to teachers. Instead of makeshift measures for 
expedient rehabilitation, he insisted on the fundamentals of moral training. 
This is of course entirely consonant with his own philosophy of training 
the will and emphasizing the essentials. What is more significant in his 
instructions, however, is the spirit of revolt against the formalistic 
education prevalent at his time, which consisted of memorization, recita- 
tion, and the writing of flowery compositions on the side of learning, 
and restraint, suppression, and formality on the side of discipline. The 
spirit of freedom and spontaneity must have been shocking in the early 
sixteenth century, especially to the orthodox Confucians of the Chu Hsi 
school. Because of this, the following two short pieces are not included 
in the sections of official documents (chs. 16-18 of the Wang Wen-ch'eng 
Kung ctfuan-shu) but here in the Instructions for Practical Living. 

195. In education the ancients taught the fundamental principles 
of human relations. As the habits of memorization, recitation, and 
the writing of flowery compositions of later generations arose, the 
teachings of ancient kings disappeared. In educating young boys 
today, the sole task should be to teach filial piety, brotherly respect, 
loyalty, faithfulness, propriety, righteousness, integrity, and the 
sense of shame. The ways to raise and cultivate them are to lure them 

82 See below, sec. 314, n. 99. 

23 See above, sec. 104, n. 23. 

24 The second letter to Nieh Wen-yii (sees. 185 ff.) was recorded by Ch'ien 
Te-hung, not by Nan Ta-chi. This attribution was intended as an expression 
of respect. 

Part II 183 

to singing so their will will be roused, to direct them to practice 
etiquette so their demeanor will be dignified, and to urge them to 
read so their intellectual horizon will be widened. Today singing 
songs and practicing etiquette are often regarded as unrelated to 
present needs. This is the view of small and vulgar people of this 
degenerate modern age. How can they know the purpose of the 
ancients in instituting education ? 

Generally speaking, it is the nature of young boys to love to play 
and to dislike restriction. Like plants beginning to sprout, if they 
are allowed to grow freely, they will develop smoothly. If twisted 
and interfered with, they will wither and decline. In teaching young 
boys today, we must make them lean toward rousing themselves 
so that they will be happy and cheerful at heart, and then nothing 
can check their development. As in the case of plants, if nourished 
by timely rain and spring wind, they will all sprout, shoot up, and 
nourish, and will naturally grow by sunlight and develop under the 
moon. If ice and frost strip them of leaves, their spirit of life will be 
dissipated and they will gradually dry up. Therefore, to teach young 
boys to sing is not merely to rouse their will. It is also to release 
through singing their [energy as expressed in] jumping around 
and shouting, and to free them through rhythm from depression 
and repression. To lead them to practice etiquette is not only to 
make their demeanor dignified. It is also to exhilarate their blood 
circulation through such activities as bowing and walking politely, 
and to strengthen their tendons and bones through kneeling, rising, 
and extending and contracting their limbs. To urge them to read is 
not only to widen their intellectual horizon. It is also to preserve 
their minds through absorption in repeating passages and to express 
their will through recitation, now loudly and now softly. All this 
is smoothly to direct their will, adjust and regulate their nature and 
feelings, quietly to get rid of their meanness and stinginess, and 
silently to transform their crudeness and mischievousness, so that 
they will gradually approach propriety and righteousness without 
feeling that it is difficult to do so and will steep themselves in 
equilibrium and harmony without knowing why. This is the subtle 
purpose of the ancient kings in instituting education. 

However, in recent generations the teachers of youngsters merely 
supervise them every day as they recite phrases and sentences and 
imitate civil service examination papers. They stress restraint and 
discipline instead of directing their pupils in the practice of propriety. 

15 

184 Instructions for Practical Living 

They emphasize intelligence instead of nourishing goodness. They 
beat the pupils with a whip and tie them with ropes, treating them 
like prisoners. The youngsters look upon their school as a prison 
and refuse to enter. They regard their teachers as enemies and do 
not want to see them. They avoid this and conceal that in order to 
satisfy their desire for play and fun. They pretend, deceive, and cheat 
in order to indulge in mischief and meanness. They become negligent 
and inferior, and daily degenerate. Such education drives them to 
do evil. How can they be expected to do good ? 

In truth the following is my idea of education. I fear that 
ordinary folk do not understand it and look upon it as being wide 
of the mark, and moreover, since I am about to leave, I therefore 
earnestly say to all you teachers: Please understand and follow my 
idea and forever take it as a counsel to you. Never alter or give up 
your standard just because ordinary folk may say something against 
it. Then your effort to cultivate correctness in youngsters will 
succeed. Please bear this in mind. 

School Regulations 

196. Every day, early in the morning, after the pupils have 
assembled and bowed, the teachers should ask all of them one by one 
whether at home they have been negligent and lacked sincerity and 
earnestness in their desire to love their parents and to respect their 
elders, whether they have overlooked or failed to carry out any 
details in caring for their parents in the summer or the winter, 
whether in walking along the streets their movements and etiquette 
have been disorderly or careless, and whether in all their words, 
acts, and thoughts they have been deceitful or depraved, and not 
loyal, faithful, sincere, and respectful. All boys must answer honestly. 
If they have made any mistake, they should correct it. If not, they 
should devote themselves to greater effort. In addition, the teachers 
should at all times, and in connection with anything that may occur, 
use special means to explain and teach them. After that, each pupil 
should withdraw to his seat and attend to his lessons. 

197. In singing, let the pupils be tidy in appearance and calm in 
expression. Let their voices be clear and distinct. Let their rhythm 
be even and exact. Let them not be hasty or hurried. Let them not be 
reckless or disorderly. And let them not sound feeble or timid. In 

Part II 185 

time their spirits will be free and their minds will be peaceful. 
Depending on the number of pupils, each school should be divided 
into four classes. In rotation each class sings on one day, while the 
others sit down to listen respectfully with a serious expression. 
Every five days all the four classes will sing one after another in 
their own school assembly. On the first and the fifteenth day of 
every month the several schools will assemble to sing together in 
the academy. 

198. In the practice of etiquette, let the pupils be clear in their 
minds and serious in their thoughts. Let them be careful with details 
and correct in demeanor. Let them not be negligent or lazy. Let 
them not be low-spirited or disconcerted. And let them not be 
uncontrolled or rough. Let them be leisurely but not to the point of 
being dilatory and be serious but not to the point of being rigid. In 
time their appearance and behavior will be natural and their moral 
nature will be firmly established. The order for the pupils to follow 
should be the same as that in singing. Every other day it will be the 
turn of one class to practice etiquette, while others are seated to 
observe respectfully with a serious expression. On the day of 
etiquette practice, the pupils will be excused from composition. 
Every ten days all four classes will assemble in their own schools 
and practice in rotation. On the first and fifteenth day of every 
month, all schools will assemble and jointly practice in the academy. 

199. In reading, the value does not lie in the amount but in learning 
the material well. Reckoning the pupils' natural endowments, if one 
can handle two hundred words, teach him only one hundred so that 
he always has surplus energy and strength and then he will not 
suffer or feel tired but will have the beauty of being at ease with 
himself. While reciting the pupils must be concentrated in mind and 
united in purpose. As they recite with their mouths, let them ponder 
with their minds. Every word and every phrase should be investi- 
gated and gone over again and again. The voice and rhythm should 
go up and down and their thoughts should be relaxed and empty. In 
time they will be in harmony with propriety and righteousness and 
their intelligence will gradually unfold. 

200. In the daily work first examine the pupils' moral conduct. 
Next let them repeat their old lessons and recite new ones. Then 

186 Instructions for Practical Living 

comes the practice of etiquette or composition, then repeating and 
recitation again, and finally singing. The practice of etiquette, 
singing, and so forth is intended to preserve the boys' minds so 
that they enjoy their study without getting tired and have no time 
for bad conduct. If teachers know this principle, they will know 
what to do. However, these are the essentials. "To see the spirit 
[of changes and transformations] and manifest them depends on the 
proper men."1 

1 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. i, ch. 12. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 378. 

Instructions for Practical Living, Part III 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY CH'EN 
CHIU-CH'UAN1 (Sections 201-221) 

201. In the tenth year of Cheng-te [1515]! first saw our Teacher in 
Lung-chiang.2 He was then discussing with Master Kan-ch'iian3 the 
doctrine of the investigation of things. Kan-ch'iian held the old 
theory.4 The Teacher said, "That is to seek principles in external 
things." 

Kan-ch'iian said, "If you consider the investigation of the prin- 
ciples of things as external, you are belittling your mind." 

I was much delighted to hear that the old theory was correct. 
Then our Teacher discoursed on the chapter on exerting the mind to 
the utmost.5 As soon as I heard that, I no longer doubted that the 
old theory was wrong. 

Later, when I was staying home, I further inquired of our Teacher 
by letter on the doctrine of the investigation of things. He replied, 

1 Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan (1495-1562), whose courtesy name was Wei-chun 
and literary name Ming-shui. A "presented scholar" of 15 14, he was appointed 
erudite scholar in the board of imperial sacrifices. Because he urged the emperor 
to cancel a projected pleasure -seeking tour, he was beaten with fifty strokes and 
was dismissed. Later he became a division chief of the department of rites. 
Because he opposed waste in expenditure, he was hated by wicked officials who 
brought about his imprisonment. However, eventually he was reinstated. For 
an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, \<):i^h-\C)h. 

2 Now Nanking. 

3 The literary name of Chan Jo-shui (1471-15 5 5), a native of Kwangtung. 
Holder of a "presented scholar" degree of 1505, he rose to be minister of the 
departments of rites, civil personnel, and military affairs successively. As an 
outstanding Neo-Confucian of his time, he had followers from all parts of China. 
He advocated the doctrine that "the Principle of Nature should be genuinely 
and earnestly realized wherever one may be." Wang criticized this doctrine as 
seeking principles externally. Chan replied that to realize the principle wherever 
one may be means to do so whether in connection with the self, the family, or 
the state and in the condition either before or after the feelings are aroused, and 
charged that Wang taught investigating things in the mind. For an account of 
him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, ch. 37. 

4 That of Chu Hsi that principles are to be sought in things and not in the 
mind. 

6 Book of Mencius, -]K\i. 

188 Instructions for Practical hiving 

"If you can only make earnest and sincere effort, in time you will 
understand."6 There in the mountains I myself copied the old text 
of the Great Learning and studied it. I felt that Chu Hsi's doctrine 
of the investigation of things was wrong. However, I also felt that 
our Teacher's theory that wherever the will is directed it is a thing7 
did not make clear what a thing was. 

In the fourteenth year of Cheng -te [1519], I was returning from 
the capital and saw our Teacher again in Hung-tu.8 He was extremely 
busy with military affairs. Whenever he had a moment of leisure, he 
discussed things with me and instructed me. First of all he asked 
about my efforts in recent years. I said, "In recent years I have 
realized through personal experience that the task of manifesting 
the clear character consists only in making the will sincere. I believed 
that if one pushed step by step from manifesting the clear character 
to the world back to the source, then one would arrive at the task 
of making the will sincere. One cannot go any further. I wondered 
why it was that before making the will sincere there had to be the 
two further steps of extending knowledge and investigating things. 
Later I again personally realized that one must first be aware whether 
his will is sincere or not. I used as proof the fact that whenever Yen 
Hui [Confucius' most virtuous pupil] did anything wrong, he never 
failed to realize it and, having realized it, never did it again.9 I felt 
completely clear as though without a doubt. However, I still felt the 
task of the investigation of things (ko-wu) to be superfluous. Then 
upon further thinking, I realized that the human mind is intelligent 
and cannot fail to know whether one's will is good or evil. However, 
because it is obscured by material (wii) desires [selfish desires for 
external things, it sometimes does not function freely]. Therefore it 
is necessary to purge (ko) the mind of material (wu) desire before one 
can resemble Yen Hui in never failing to realize the wrong things 
one does. But then I suspected that [in thus making efforts to inves- 
tigate things and extend knowledge before making the will sincere] 
the procedure was upside down and that these efforts did not form 

6 This correspondence is no longer extant. 

7 See above, sec. 6. 

8 Now Nan-ch'ang. 

9 According to the Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 5. Cf. 
trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 392. 

Part III 189 

a unity with making the will sincere. Later I asked Hsi-yen10 about 
it. He said, 'According to our Teacher, the investigation of things 
and the extension of knowledge are tasks to make the will sincere. 
This teaching is excellent.' I said, 'What is the task of making the 
will sincere ?' He told me to think again and personally realize and 
then see. But to the end I did not understand. Please explain 
to me." 

The Teacher said, "How pitiable! This can be understood in one 
utterance, namely, the story you told about Yen Hui. The important 
thing to know is that the personal life, the mind, the will, knowledge, 
and things are one." 

I was doubtful and said, "A thing is external. How can it be the 
same as the personal life, the mind, the will, and knowledge ?" 

The Teacher said, "The ears, the eyes, the mouth, the nose, and 
the four limbs are parts of the body. But how can they see, hear, 
speak, or act without the mind? On the other hand, without the 
ears, the eyes, the mouth, the nose, and the four limbs, the mind 
cannot see, hear, speak, or act when it wants to. Therefore if there is 
no mind, there will be no body, and if there is no body, there will 
be no mind. As something occupying space, it is called the body. 
As the master, it is called the mind. As the operation of the mind, 
it is called the will. As the intelligence and clear consciousness of the 
will, it is called knowledge. And as the object to which the will is 
attached, it is called a thing. They are all one piece. The will never 
exists in a vacuum. It is always connected with some thing or event. 
Therefore if one wants to make his will sincere, he should rectify 
{ko) it right in the thing or event to which the will is directed, get 
rid of selfish human desires, and return to the Principle of Nature. 
Then in connection with this thing or event the innate knowledge 
will be free from obscuration and can be fully extended. This is the 
task of making the will sincere." Thereupon my doubts of several 
years were completely dispelled. 

I inquired further and said, "Recently Kan-ch'iian also accepted 
the old text of the Great 'Learning. He declares that the investigation of 
things is like arriving at a road. He also declares that the investigation 
of the principles of things to the utmost is like going to the innermost 
part of a den. It means that one must arrive at the destination 
personally. Therefore he contends that the investigation of things is 

10 Nothing is known of him. 

190 Instructions for Practical hiving 

nothing but 'personally realizing the Principle of Nature wherever 
one may be.' It seems that his theory is getting to be like yours." 

The Teacher said, "Kan-ch'iian has made some effort and there- 
fore has been able to change his position. At the time when I 
remarked to him that the word ch'in need not be changed,11 he 
would not believe me. His present view on the investigation of things 
is, generally speaking, nearer to the truth, but it is not necessary for 
him to substitute the word 'principle' for the word 'thing'. Let 
the word 'thing' be restored and his doctrine will be correct." 

Later someone asked me, "Why is no question raised on the word 
'thing' ?" 

I said, "In the Doctrine of the Mean it is said, 'Without sincerity 
there will be nothing.'12 Master Ch'eng Hao said, 'Respond spon- 
taneously to all things as they come.'13 Also 'Leave things as they 
are,'14 'Harbor nothing in the mind,'15 and so forth. The word 
'thing' has often been used by scholars of the past." On another 
day, the Teacher also agreed. 

202. I said, "In recent years I have gotten tired of extensive but 
cursory learning and have often wanted to sit quietly and stop all 
thoughts and deliberations. Not only was I unable to do so; I was 
troubled all the more. Why ?" 

The Teacher said, "How can thoughts be stopped? They should 
only be corrected." 

"Should there be times when thoughts are absent?" 
The Teacher said, "There is really no time when thoughts are 
absent." 

"In that case, how can one speak of tranquillity ?" 
"Tranquillity is not without activity and activity is not without 
tranquillity. Caution and apprehension are all thoughts. Is there any 
distinction between activity and tranquillity in them?" 

"Why did Master Chou Tun-i say, 'The sage settles {ting, calms) 

11 See above, sec. 1. Ch'eng I and Chu Hsi had advocated that the word 
elfin, in the sentence from the Great Learning, "The way to manifest the clear 
character consists in loving the people (cWin-miri)" should be changed to hsin 
[to renovate the people]. 

12 Ch. 25. 

13 Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

14 Ch'eng I, l-sbu, 18:15b. 

15 This is a general paraphrase, rather than a quotation of any definite saying. 

Part III 191 

human affairs by the principles of the mean, correctness, humanity, 
and righteousness, and regards tranquillity as fundamental' ?"16 

"One is tranquil because one has no desires.17 The word 
ting is the same one used in Ch'eng Hao's saying that 'the nature is 
calm whether it is in a state of activity or in a state of tranquillity.'18 
To regard it as fundamental means to regard one's original substance 
as fundamental. The thoughts of caution and apprehension are 
lively ones. This is where the secret way of nature never ceases. 
'The mandate of Heaven is profound and unceasing.'19 If the 
thoughts stop for a single moment, they will be dead. They will 
not be the thoughts of one's original substance but selfish thoughts." 

203. I further said, "When in devoting oneself to one's task one 
gathers his mind and there are music and women in front of him, if 
he notices them as usual, I am afraid his mind is not concentrated." 

"How can one expect not to hear or see them unless he is dry wood 
or dead ashes, or deaf and blind ? The right thing to do is to hear and 
see them but not to be driven by them." 

"Formerly someone was engaged in sitting in meditation. His son 
was studying in the next room and he did not know whether the 
boy was diligent or lazy. Master Ch'eng I praised him as being very 
serious and reverential.20 What do you think?" 

"I-ch'uan [Ch'eng I] was probably ridiculing him." 

204. I further said, "In devoting myself to sitting in meditation, I 
feel to some extent that my mind is collected and concentrated. As 
some affair occurs, however, the concentration is interrupted. Then 
I make up my mind to examine [principles] in that affair. When that 
is over, I return to the former task of sitting in meditation. Still I 
feel that the internal and external aspects of the mind are not blended 
into one." 

The Teacher said, "This shows you have not thoroughly under- 
stood the doctrine of the investigation of things. The mind has 
neither internal nor external aspects. For instance, you are now 
having a discussion with me. Is there a mind within you to take care 

16 Chou L.ien-hsi chi, 1:2a. 

17 Ibid. 

18 Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

19 Book of Odes, no. 267. 

20 I-shu, 3:5a. 

192 Instructions for Practical hiving 

of this discussion ? When you are talking and your mind concentrates 
on being serious, it is the same mind as when you are engaged in 
sitting in meditation. The task is a continuous and unified one. What 
is the need of making up the mind on top of it ? One must be trained 
and polished in the actual affairs of life. Only when the effort is made 
that way will it be beneficial. If one merely likes tranquillity, he will 
get confused whenever anything happens and will never progress. 
The effort made during sitting in meditation will also be ineffec- 
tive. The mind will seem to be collected and concentrated but 
in reality will be scattered and lost." 

Later in Hung-tu I again discussed the theory of the internal and 
the external with Wang Yu-chung21 and Shu Kuo-shang.22 Both of 
them said that things naturally have their internal and external 
aspects, but that one's effort should be directed to both of them 
without making any distinction between them. I asked the Teacher 
about this and he said, "The task should never depart from the 
original substance, and the original substance from the beginning 
makes no distinction between the internal and the external. Only 
because in their devotion to the task people of later generations make 
such a distinction do they lose their original substance. It is now 
necessary to explain that only that kind of task which makes no 
distinction between the internal and the external can be the task 
devoted to the original substance." On that day all of us realized 
some new truth. 

205 . I further asked, "What do you think of the teachings of Master 
Lu Hsiang-shan ?" 

The Teacher said, "Since the time of Lien-hsi [Chou Tun-i] and 
Ming-tao [Ch'eng Hao], there has been only Lu Hsiang-shan. But 
he was still somewhat crude." 

I said, "In his elucidations, every chapter reveals the innermost 

21 We have no more information about him. 

22 Shu Fen (1 484-1 527), holder of a "presented scholar" degree of 15 17. He 
was appointed an official historian. Because he urged the emperor not to make 
a proposed pleasure-seeking tour, he was punished by being made to kneel for 
three days and being beaten thirty strokes and then banished to an inferior posi- 
tion in Fukien. Reinstated later, he was imprisoned because he opposed the 
emperor's plan to confer on the emperor's father the posthumous title "August 
Ancestor" which Shu Fen felt should go to the emperor's uncle. For an account 
of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 5 3:1 3b-i6a. 

Part III 193 

fundamentals [of what is right] and every sentence seems to attack 
the underlying causes [of what is wrong]. He does not seem to be 
crude." 

The Teacher said, "He had made some effort in his mind and was 
of course different from those who imitated others, depended on 
others, or sought only literal meanings. However, if you scrutinize 
his doctrines carefully, you will find there are crude spots. You will 
see if you continue your effort long enough." 

206. In the fifteenth year of Cheng-te [1520], I went to Ch'ien- 
chou23 and saw our Teacher again. I said, "In my recent efforts, 
although I seem to know the basis somewhat, I have found it difficult 
to have any sense of security or joy." 

The Teacher said, "But you go to your mind to seek the Principle 
of Nature. This is what the Buddhists call 'obscuration by principle.'24 
There is a secret in this matter." 

"What is it, please?" 

"It is nothing but the extension of knowledge." 

"How does one extend knowledge?" 

"Your innate knowledge is your own standard. When you direct 
your thought your innate knowledge knows that it is right if it is 
right and wrong if it is wrong. You cannot keep anything from it. 
Just don't try to deceive it but sincerely and truly follow it in 
whatever you do. Then the good will be preserved and evil will be 
removed. What security and joy there is in this! This is the true 
secret of the investigation of things and the real effort of the exten- 
sion of knowledge. If you do not rely on this true secret, how can 
you proceed to investigate things? I have only in recent years 
realized this through personal experience and become so clear about 
it. At first I was still suspicious that relying on it alone would not be 
sufficient. But after I had examined it carefully I found nothing 
wanting in it." 

207. Wang Yii-chung, Tsou Ch'ien-chih,25 and I were in attendance 
together in Ch'ien-chou. The Teacher said, "There is the sage in 

23 In southern Kiangsi. 

24 That is, not knowing that the mind itself is principle but seeking it in the 
mind so that principle itself becomes an obstacle. Yiian-chiao ching, in the 
Taisho dai^pkyo, 17:16. 

25 See below, sec. 314, n. 99. 

194 Instructions for Practical hiving 

everyone. Only one has not enough self-confidence and buries his 
own chance." Thereupon he looked at Yu-chung and said, "From 
the beginning there is the sage in you." Yu-chung rose and said that 
he did not deserve it. 

The Teacher said, "This potentiality originally belongs to you. 
Why decline?" 

Yu-chung said again, "I do not deserve it." 

The Teacher said, "Everyone has this potentiality. How much 
more is that true of you, Yu-chung ! Why be so modest ? It won't 
do even if you are modest." Whereupon Yu-chung smiled and 
accepted the compliment. 

The Teacher further discoursed, "No matter what man does, 
innate knowledge is in him and cannot be destroyed. Even a thief 
realizes in himself that he should not be a thief. If you call him a 
thief, he will still blush." 

Yu-chung said, "One's innate knowledge can only be obscured 
by material desires. It is within him and can never be lost. Similarly 
clouds may of course obscure the sun but the sun is never lost." 

The Teacher said, "How brilliant is Yu-chung ! Others do not see 
it so clearly." 

208. The Teacher said, "If you see this little thing [innate knowl- 
edge] clearly, no matter how much and how eloquently one may 
talk, all right and wrong, sincerity and insincerity in what he says are 
manifested right in front of it. What is in accord with it is right and 
what is not in accord with it is wrong. It is like what the Buddhists 
call the 'spiritual seal.'26It is truly a gold-testing stone and a compass." 

209. The Teacher said, "If people know the true secret of this 
innate knowledge, no matter how many evil thoughts and wrong 
desires there may be, as soon as it realizes them they will all disappear 
of themselves. It is truly a highly effective medicine, one touch of 
which will turn iron into gold."27 

210. Ou-yang Ch'ung-i28 said, "Sir, your principle of the extension 
of knowledge expresses all that is excellent and deep. As we see it, 
one cannot go any further." 

26 The Buddha-mind in all men which can seal or assure the truth, or the 
intuitive mind independent of any spoken or written word. 

27 A Taoist expression. 

28 See above, sec. 104, n. 23. 

Part III 195 

The Teacher said, "Why speak of it so lightly? Make a further 
effort for another half year and see how it is. Then make an effort 
for another year and see how it is. The longer one makes an effort, 
the more different it will become. This is something difficult to 
explain in words." 

211. The Teacher asked me about my progress in personally 
realizing the doctrine of the extension of knowledge. I said, "I feel 
that there has been a difference. Formerly when I tried to practice 
moral principles, I was never able to do just as I wanted. Now I 
can do so." 

The Teacher said, "From this we can know that knowledge 
acquired through personal realization is different from that acquired 
through listening to discussions. When I first lectured on the subject, 
I knew you took it lightly and were not interested. However, when 
one goes further and realizes this essential and wonderful thing 
personally to its very depth, he will see that it becomes different 
every day and is inexhaustible." He further said, "This phrase, 'the 
extension of knowledge,' is truly a secret transmitted from the sages 
of thousands of years ago. If we realize this, [we know that] it can 
wait a hundred generations for a sage to confirm it without a 
doubt."29 

212. I asked, "When I-ch'uan [Ch'eng I] reached the point of 
saying that 'substance and function come from the same source' and 
'there is no gap between the manifest and the hidden,'30 his students 
said that he divulged the secret of nature.31 Doesn't your doctrine of 
the extension of knowledge, sir, also go too far in divulging the 
secret of nature ?" 

The Teacher said, "The Sage has already shown it to people. Only 
it has been hidden by later generations and I now bring it to light. 
Why speak of divulging any secret? This [innate knowledge] is 
everybody's natural possession. When one realizes it it seems to be 
nothing extraordinary. If one talks about it with those who do not 
exert any real and genuine effort, they will take it most lightly, and, 
to our regret, it will do neither party any good. But to talk to those 

29 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 29. 

30 Preface to the I chuan. See above, sec. 156, n. 11. 

31 Wai-sbu, 12:8a 

196 Instructions for Practical hiving 

who have made real and genuine effort but have not found the essen- 
tials, and to help them bring themselves forward, is vastly effective." 

213. The Teacher further said, "In reality knowledge and realiza- 
tion come without our knowing or realizing. However, if we don't 
know this, we will be lost."32 

214. The Teacher said, "In general, among friends there should be 
little admonishing and fault-finding, but much directing and 
encouraging." Later he further cautioned me, saying, "In discussing 
learning with friends, one should be accommodating, be humble, 
and dwell broad-mindedly in what one has learned."33 

215. I was sick in bed in Ch'ien-chou. The Teacher said, "This 
thing, sickness, is also difficult to rectify (ko). How do you feel?" 

I replied, "The task is very difficult." 

The Teacher said, "Always be cheerful. That is the task." 

216. I said, "In my self-examination and deliberations, I sometimes 
drift into depraved and erroneous thoughts and sometimes imagine 
various ways and means of managing the affairs of the world. When 
these thoughts reach the highest point, they come in orderly succes- 
sion and are most absorbing, and then I am bound by them and 
cannot get rid of them. If I realize the situation early, it is easy to 
dispel them, but if I realize it late, it is difficult. The more I apply my 
strength to overcoming them, the greater the obstacles seem to be. 
But to some extent if I shift my thoughts to other things, then both 
[those erroneous thoughts and my effort to overcome them] will be 
forgotten. It seems to me that to purge my mind completely in this 
way will do no harm." 

The Teacher said, "What is the necessity for this ? You need only 
direct your effort to innate knowledge." 

I said, "The trouble is that just at those moments I fail to know 
how to direct the effort." 

The Teacher said, "If one makes effort in his own mind, how can 

32 That is, one should be spontaneous in knowledge but not unconscious like 
the Buddhists. 

33 Quoting the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 1. Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Yi King, p. 416. 

Part III 197 

that happen ? It is only because your effort is interrupted that innate 
knowledge is obscured. If the effort is interrupted, the thing to do is 
to continue the former effort [to extend innate knowledge]. What is 
the necessity for this [trying to overcome erroneous thoughts or 
shifting to other things] ?" 

I said, "It is simply difficult to fight them. Although I know they 
should be discarded, I can't do it." 

The Teacher said, "It is necessary to have courage. If you exert 
effort long enough, you will have it. It is therefore said, 'The vital 
force is produced by the accumulation of righteous deeds.'34 Those 
who succeed easily are men of great virtue." 

217. I said, "This task can be clearly understood in my mind 
through personal realization, but it does not make sense according 
to books." 

The Teacher said, "It is only necessary for it to make sense to the 
mind. If the mind understands it, books will surely come along. If 
it does not make sense to the mind but only does so according to a 
literal interpretation of books, then one will have all kinds of subjec- 
tive ideas." 

218. A certain subordinate official, having heard for a long time 
our Teacher's exposition on learning, said, "This learning is very 
good. Unfortunately, my duties of keeping records and presiding 
over litigations are so heavy that I cannot pursue it." 

When the Teacher heard this he said, "When did I teach you to 
drop your work of keeping records and presiding over litigations 
and then to pursue learning in a vacuum? Since you have your 
official duties, you should pursue learning right in those official 
duties. Only then will you be truly investigating things. For instance, 
when you interrogate a litigant, do not become angry because his 
replies are impolite or become glad because his words are smooth; 
do not purposely punish him because you hate his effort to solicit 
help from your superiors; do not bend your will and yield to him 
because of his pleading; do not decide the case carelessly on the 
spur of the moment because you are too busy with your own 
trifling affairs ; and do not settle it according to the opinions of others 
because people on the side praise you, criticize you, or are building 

34 Book of Mencius, zA:z. 

198 Instructions for Practical hiving 

up a case against you. To do any of these is selfish. You need only 
follow what you know yourself. You must carefully examine 
yourself and control yourself, lest your mind become in the least 
prejudiced and destroy the truth as to who is right and who is wrong. 
This is the investigation of things and the extension of knowledge. 
Among the duties of keeping records and presiding over litigations, 
there is none that is not concrete learning. If learning has to be 
done outside of things and events, it will be something in a 
vacuum." 

219. As I was leaving Ch'ien-chou to go home, I wrote a poem 
to bid our Teacher farewell, which read: 

Innate knowledge has nothing to do with hearing much. 
At the time of mysterious union [of the active element 

yang and the passive element yin and the five agents 

of metal, wood, water, fire, and earth] the root was 

already planted. 
If we follow it in our likes and dislikes, that is the 

learning of the Sage. 
When we do not lean forward or backward to accommodate things, 

there is the Principle of Heaven [foundation of truth]. 

The Teacher said, "Before you came here to discuss this learning 
[innate knowledge], I don't know what you might have meant if 
you said, 'Follow it in our likes and dislikes.' " 

Fu-ying,35 who was in attendance, said, "How true! I used to 
read your preface to the old text of the Great Learning,36 sir, and did 
not know what you were talking about. After I came to listen to your 
lectures for some time, I began to have some general idea." 

220. Wang Yii-chung and Shu Kuo-shang were accompanying 
the Teacher at dinner. He said, "The use of all food is solely to 
nourish the body. After it is eaten, it must be digested. If it accumu- 
lates in the stomach, it will cause constipation. How can it build up 
muscles ? Scholars of later generations acquire extensive information 
and much knowledge, and keep them in their stomachs undigested. 
All this is a disease resulting from harmful eating." 

35 We have no more information on this man. 

36 This preface is found in Wang Wen-cb'eng Rung ch'iian-sbu, 7:253.-163.. 

Part III 199 

221. The Teacher said, "The sage also learns through study. 
Ordinary people are also born with knowledge." 

I asked, "How is that?" 

He said, "All people have this innate knowledge. Only the sage 
preserves it completely and keeps it free from the least obscuration. 
He is cautious, careful, tirelessly diligent, and of course never stops 
in these efforts. This is already study. Only because with him the 
product of inborn knowledge is greater, he is therefore said to be 
born with knowledge and to practice it naturally and easily. Ordinary 
people possess this innate knowledge in total from infancy, except 
that it is much obscured. But the knowledge of the original substance 
[of the mind] cannot be obliterated. Even study and self-control 
depend on it. Because with ordinary people the proportion of 
knowledge acquired through study is greater, they are therefore 
said to learn through study and to practice it for its advantage."37 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY HUANG 
I-FANG1 (Sections 222-236) 

222. I asked, "Sir, according to your doctrine of the investigation 
of things and the extension of knowledge, one should investigate 
things at any time in order to extend knowledge. If so, the knowledge 
extended is only a part and not the entirety. How can it reach the 
state described as 'all embracing and extensive as heaven and deep 
and unceasingly springing as an abyss' ?"2 

The Teacher said, "The human mind is heaven and it is the abyss. 
The original substance of the mind contains everything. In reality 
it is the whole heaven. Only because it is hidden by selfish desires is 
the original substance of heaven lost. The principle of the mind is 
infinite. In reality it is the whole abyss. Only because it is obstructed 
by selfish desires is the original substance of the abyss lost. Now if 

37 See Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

1 His private name was Chih. Otherwise, nothing is known of him. The 
general practice was to use one's private name instead of saying "I." In sec. 222, 
however, his courtesy name is used, contrary to general practice. Most probably 
the courtesy name was substituted for the private name when Ch'ien Te-hung 
edited the book. 

2 As described in the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 3 1 . 

16 

200 Instructions for Practical hiving 

one extends the innate knowledge in every thought and removes all 
these hindrances and obstacles, its original substance will be recov- 
ered and right then it will become both heaven and abyss." There- 
upon he pointed to heaven, saying, "For instance, we see heaven 
in front of us. It is bright and clear heaven. If we see heaven outside 
the house, it is the same bright and clear heaven. Only because it is 
obscured by these many walls of the building do we not see heaven 
in its entirety. If we tear down the walls, we will see only one heaven. 
We should not say that what is in front of us is the bright and clear 
heaven but what is outside the house is not. From this we know 
that the knowledge of a part is the same as the knowledge of the 
whole, and the knowledge of the whole is the same as the knowledge 
of a part. All is but one original substance." 

223. The Teacher said, "Sages and worthies are not without 
achievements or moral integrity. But since they are in accord with 
the Principle of Nature, they represent the Way itself. Therefore 
their fame does not rest merely in achievements or moral integrity." 

224. [The Teacher said,] "Confucius 'forgot his food when 
engaged in vigorous pursuit of something' because his purpose was 
like this and he really had no time to lose. He was so 'happy as to 
forget his worries,'3 because his Way was like this and he was really 
without a moment of sorrow. It is not necessary to say whether he 
succeeded or not."4 

225. The Teacher said, "In the extension of knowledge, we should 
do so according to our capacity. Here is our innate knowledge 
today. We should extend it to the utmost according to what we 
know today. As our innate knowledge is further developed tomor- 
row, we should extend it to the utmost according to what we know 
then. Only this can be said to be the task of refinement and single- 
mindedness. In discussing learning with others we should also do so 
according to their capacity. For instance, when the tree has sprouted 
only a little, give it a little water. As the sprout grows, give it more 
water. From the time that the tree stem can be encircled by the fingers 

3 Analects, 7:18. 

4 Chu Hsi had contended that the Sage made vigorous pursuit before success 
was achieved and was happy afterwards. Lun-yzi chi-chu, ch. 4, comment on 
Analects, 7:18. 

Part III 201 

of one hand and then by those of two hands to the time when it can 
be encircled by both arms, the watering should be done according 
to its capacity to absorb. Suppose there is but a small sprout and here 
is a pail of water. If all the water is poured over it, it will be drenched 
to death." 

226. I asked about the unity of knowledge and action. The Teacher 
said, "You need to understand the basic purpose of my doctrine. In 
their learning people of today separate knowledge and action into 
two different things. Therefore when a thought is aroused, although 
it is evil, they do not stop it because it has not been translated into 
action. I advocate the unity of knowledge and action precisely 
because I want people to understand that when a thought is aroused 
it is already action. If there is anything evil when the thought is 
aroused, one must overcome the evil thought. One must go to the 
root and go to the bottom and not allow that evil thought to lie 
latent in his mind. This is the basic purpose of my doctrine." 

227. [The Teacher said,] "That the sage is omniscient merely 
means that he knows the Principle of Nature and that he is omnipo- 
tent merely means that he is able to practice the Principle of 
Nature. The original substance of the mind of the sage is clear and 
therefore in all things he knows where the Principle of Nature lies 
and forthwith carries it out to the utmost. It is not that after the 
original substance of his mind becomes clear he then knows all the 
things in the world and is able to carry all of them out. Things in 
the world, such as the names, varieties, and systems, and plants and 
animals, are innumerable. Although the original substance of the 
sage is very clear, how can he know everything?5 What is not 
necessary to know, he does not have to seek to know. What he 
should know, he naturally asks others, like Confucius, who, when 
he entered the grand temple, asked about everything.6 A former 
scholar said that the fact that although Confucius knew he still 
asked shows he was perfectly serious and careful.7 Such an inter- 
pretation is absurd. A sage does not have to know all the names 
and varieties of ceremonies and music. But since he knows the 

6 Reading hsii [must] as sui [although]. 

6 Analects, 3:15. 

7 Yin T'un (1061-1132,) quoted by Chu Hsi in his -Lun-yii chi-chu, ch. 2, 
comment on Analects, 3:15. 

202 Instructions for Practical hiving 

Principle of Nature, all measures, regulations, and details can be 
deduced from it. The fact that when he did not know he asked 
shows how the measure and pattern of the Principle of Nature 
operates." 

228. I asked, "Sir, you once said that good and evil are one thing.8 
But good and evil are opposed to each other like ice and burning 
coals. How can they be said to be only one ?" 

The Teacher said, "The highest good is the original substance of 
the mind. When one deviates a little from this original substance, 
there is evil. It is not that there is a good and there is also an evil to 
oppose it. Therefore good and evil are one thing." 

Having heard our Teacher's explanation, I know that we can no 
longer doubt Master Ch'eng Hao's sayings, "Man's nature is of course 
good, but it cannot be said that evil is not his nature"9 and "Good and 
evil in the world are both the Principle of Nature. What is called 
evil is not originally evil. It becomes evil only because of deviation 
from the mean."10 

229. The Teacher once said that to be a sage one simply has to love 
good as he loves beautiful colors and hate evil as he hates a bad 
smell.11 When I first heard it, I felt it was very easy. But as I proceeded 
to realize it through personal experience, I found this task to be 
really difficult. For instance, although in an instant of thought I know 
that I should love good and hate evil, yet unconsciously the thought 
gets mixed and impure. As soon as it is mixed and impure, the mind 
is no longer that which loves good as it loves beautiful colors and 
hates evil as it hates a bad smell. If one really and earnestly loves 
good, then all his thoughts will be good, and if one really and 
earnestly hates evil, then none of his thoughts will approach evil. 
Why should such a man not be be a sage? Therefore to learn to 
become a sage requires sincerity and sincerity only. 

230. I said, "Sir, in your 'Essay on Cultivating the Way'12 you say 
in effect that 'To follow our nature is called the Way' refers to the 

8 Cf. above, sec. 101. 

9 I-shu, 1:7b. 

10 Ibid., 2A:ib. 

11 Cf. above, sec. 5 . 

12 "Hsiu-tao lun," in Wang Wen-cVeng Kungch'iian-shu, 7:6oa-b. 

Part III 203 

function of the sage, while the saying 'Cultivating the Way is called 
education'13 refers to the function of the worthy. [Please explain.]" 
The Teacher said, "Ordinary people also fulfill their nature. But 
fulfilling nature is more the function of a sage. Therefore 'To fulfill 
our nature is called the Way' refers to the function of the sage. The 
sage also cultivates the Way. But cultivating the Way is more the 
function of the worthy. Therefore 'The cultivation of the Way is 
called education' refers to the function of the worthy." He further 
said, "Generally speaking, the entire Doctrine of the Mean talks about 
the cultivation of the Way. Therefore when it later talks about the 
superior man, about Yen Hui, and about Tzu-lu, it deals with those 
who could cultivate the Way. When it talks about the inferior man, 
about those who are wise or stupid, worthy or unworthy, and about 
the common folk, it deals with those who are unable to cultivate the 
Way. And aside from these, when it talks about Emperor Shun, 
King Wen, Duke Chou, Confucius, and those who are perfectly 
sincere and perfectly sagely, it deals with sages who can naturally 
cultivate the Way." 

231. I asked, "When midnight comes and a Confucian wipes out 
all thoughts and deliberations from his mind, there will be only 
emptiness and tranquillity, which is no different from the tranquillity 
of the Buddhists. If at this moment he entertains neither thoughts 
and deliberations nor emptiness and tranquillity, what is the differ- 
ence between the Confucian and the Buddhist ?" 

The Teacher said, "Activity and tranquillity are one. If it is in 
accord with the Principle of Nature, the mind that is empty and 
tranquil at midnight will be the same mind that responds to events 
and deals with affairs now. If it is in accord with the Principle of 
Nature, the mind that responds to events and deals with affairs now 
is the same mind that is empty and tranquil at midnight. Therefore 
activity and tranquillity are one and cannot be separated. If we know 
that activity and tranquillity form a unity, the fact that the Buddhist's 
infinitesimal mistake at the beginning leads to an infinite error in 
the end cannot be concealed." 

232. Among the followers in attendance one was exceedingly 
serious in his disposition. The Teacher said, "If one goes too far in 

18 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

204 Instructions for Practical hiving 

being serious, it will be a defect in the end." I said, "Why is excessive 
seriousness a defect?" 

The Teacher said, "Man's mental energy is limited. If one is 
devoted solely to his appearance, there will be many occasions when 
he neglects his mind." 

One follower was too straightforward. The Teacher said, "As we 
are engaged in this discussion on learning, you are not attentive to 
your appearance at all. Thus you have separated the mind and 
events." 

233. A student wrote an essay to bid farewell to a friend. He said 
to the Teacher, "Composition requires much thought. After it is 
finished, it lingers in the memory for a day or two." 

The Teacher said, "It does no harm to think when writing. But 
if after it is finished it is always kept in mind, then writing will be 
a hindrance to you. There will be something in your mind and that 
won't do." 

The student further wrote a poem of farewell. After reading the 
poem, the Teacher said, "Whenever one writes, one should do so 
within the limit of his capacity. If one is too excessive in expression, 
then one will not be carefully employing his words or establishing 
his sincerity."14 

234. [The Teacher said,] "In his doctrine of the investigation of 
things, Wen Kung [Chu Hsi] lacked a basis. For instance, he said 
[that among the methods of investigating things] is 'the examination 
of one's subtle thoughts and deliberations.' [Being the most funda- 
mental,] this should not be grouped together with 'searching for 
the principles of tilings in books,' 'testing them in one's conspicuous 
activities,' and 'finding them out in discussion.'15 He lacked a sense 
of relative importance." 

235. I asked about the statement, "Whenever one is affected by 
wrath to any extent [his mind will not be correct]."16 

The Teacher said, "How can the human mind be free from anger, 

14 Quoting the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 1. Cf. trans, 
by Legge, Yi King, p. 410. 

15 Ta-hsiieh huo-wen, pp. 5 8b -5 9a. 

16 Great Learning, ch. 7. 

Part III 205 

and so forth ? But it should not have them. When one shows even 
a little bit of feeling of wrath, his anger is excessive and his mind 
is no longer the original substance that is broad and extremely 
impartial.17 Therefore, whenever one is affected by wrath to any 
extent, his mind will not be correct. Now with regard to wrath and 
so forth, if one can only respond to all things spontaneously as they 
come18 and show not a bit of subjective feeling, the nature of his 
mind will be broad and extremely impartial and will naturally attain 
the correctness characteristic of its original substance. Suppose we 
go outside and find some people fighting. We all feel angry in our 
minds at the party who is wrong. However, although we are angry, 
our minds are broad and our vital force is not perturbed in the least. 
This is the way to be angry at people. Only in this way can we be 
correct." 

236. The Teacher once said, "Buddhism claims to be free from 
attachment to phenomenal things but actually the opposite is the 
case. We Confucians seem to be attached to phenomenal things but 
in reality the opposite is true." I asked him for an explanation. He 
said, "The Buddhists are afraid of the burden in the relationship 
between father and son and therefore escape from it. They are afraid 
of the burden in the relationship between ruler and minister and 
therefore escape from it. They are afraid of the burden in the relation- 
ship between husband and wife and therefore escape from it. In all 
cases, because the relationships between ruler and minister, father 
and son, and husband and wife involve attachment to phenomena, 
they have to escape from them. We Confucians accept the relation- 
ship between father and son and fulfill it with the humanity it 
deserves. We accept the relationship between ruler and minister and 
fulfill it with the righteousness it deserves. We accept the relationship 
between husband and wife and fulfill it with the attention to their 
separate functions it deserves. When have we been attached to 
these relations?" 

17 Quoting Ch'eng Hao, Wen-chi, 3:1a. 

18 Ibid. 

206 Instructions for Practical hiving 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY HUANG 
MIEN-SHU1 (Sections 237-247) 

237. I asked, "When the mind is free from evil thoughts, it is 
empty and vast. Should we then harbor a good thought ?" 

The Teacher said, "As evil thoughts are eliminated, the good 
thought is already there and the original substance of the mind is 
already restored. It is like the sunlight which is obscured by clouds. 
When the clouds are gone, the sunlight appears again. If after evil 
thoughts are gone one then harbors a good thought, it would be like 
adding a lamp to sunlight." 

238. I said, "In my recent efforts, I seem to feel that erroneous 
thoughts no longer arise. But within me there is still something 
pitch-dark. What can be done to turn it into light ?" 

The Teacher said, "In the first stage of the task how can one 
expect to be clear within ? Take for example some turbid water from 
a rapid current. When it has just been stored in a jar, although at 
this beginning state it is settled, it is still murky and turbid. We must 
wait till it has been still for a long time and then the dregs will 
naturally all be gone and the water will be all clear once more. You 
have only to exert effort in your innate knowledge. As innate 
knowledge is preserved for a long time, the pitch-darkness will 
naturally become clear. If you demanded results right away, you 
would be making an artificial effort to help it grow.2 And the task 
would be no good." 

239. The Teacher said, "I teach people to devote their efforts to 
the investigation of things in extending their innate knowledge. It 
is learning with a foundation. The longer one engages in the task, 
advancing every day, the more intelligent he will be. Famous but medi- 
ocre scholars, on the other hand, teach people to search for the princi- 
ples of each and every thing. Their learning is entirely without foun- 
dation. When one is young one can temporarily put up a good front 
and does not seem to be mistaken. But when he gets old his mental 
energy will decline and he will ultimately collapse. It is like a tree 
without a root. When it is transplanted to a place near water, 

1 His courtesy name was Hsiu-i. Otherwise, nothing is known of him. 

2 Quoting the Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

Part III 207 

although temporarily it looks fresh and beautiful, in time it will 
finally wither." 

240. I inquired about the chapter in the Analects on "Setting your 
will on the Way."3 

The Teacher said, "This expression alone involves the forms 
of efforts that follow in the chapter.4 One cannot just stop here. 

"Take for instance building this house. Setting your will on the 
Way means setting the mind constantly on selecting the plot, 
collecting the material, planning and completing this small house. 
Having a firm grasp on virtue means that the completed plan can 
firmly be grasped. Relying on humanity means always to live in 
this small house without leaving, and finding recreation in the arts 
means to add decorations to the house to beautify it. By arts (/) is 
meant righteousness (/,), what is proper according to principle. 
Activities like reciting poems, reading books, playing the lute, and 
practicing archery are all intended to regulate the mind so that it 
will be at home with the Way. If one finds recreation in the arts 
without first setting the will on the Way, he will be like a worthless 
fellow who does not first build a house but attends only to buying 
pictures to hang up for show. I don't know where he is going to 
hang them." 

241. I said, "Reading is indispensable to the recuperation and 
refreshment of the mind. However, while I read, certain ideas 
associated with questions in civil service examinations keep on 
coming up. How can I avoid that?" 

The Teacher said, "So long as your innate knowledge is genuine 
and earnest, even if you engage in preparing for civil service 
examinations, it will not be a source of trouble for your mind. Or, 
even if it is, it will be easy to realize and overcome it. Take this 
matter of reading. Innate knowledge knows that it is wrong to try 
to force oneself to memorize, and when there is such an intention 
it immediately overcomes it and gets rid of it. It knows that impa- 
tience is wrong, and if there is such an intention it immediately 
overcomes it and gets rid of it. It knows that to strive for plenty and 
to boast about excess is wrong, and if there is such an intention 

3 Analects, 7:6. 

4 Namely, having a firm grasp on virtue, relying on humanity, and finding 
recreation in the arts. 

208 Instructions for Practical hiving 

it immediately overcomes it and gets rid of it. Thus one is in perfect 
accord with sages and worthies at all times, and his mind becomes 
completely identified with the Principle of Nature. Let him read, 
and he will be doing nothing but giving recuperation and refresh- 
ment to his mind. What trouble is there ?" 

I said, "Although you have enlightened me, unfortunately my 
capacity is low and I really can hardly avoid such trouble. I have 
heard that prominence in public life or obscurity depend on fate. 
People with the highest intelligence probably do not care for civil 
service examinations. But I, unworthy one, am a slave to fame and 
profit and am willing to do this. I only bring sorrow to myself. I 
wish to abandon the attempt but cannot give up because I am bound 
by my duty to support my parents. What can I do ?" 

The Teacher said, "In this matter many have made their parents 
the excuse. Actually the reason is the lack of a purpose. If one's 
purpose is established, so far as innate knowledge is concerned, one's 
thousand acts and tens of thousands of deeds are only one. How 
can reading and writing be a trouble to a person ? The person only 
gives himself trouble in worrying about success and failure." There- 
upon he sighed and said, "This doctrine of innate knowledge is not 
well understood. I do not know how many brilliant people have 
been hindered at this point." 

242. I asked, "In saying that 'what is inborn is called the nature,'5 
Kao Tzu was, after all, right. Why did Mencius criticize him?" 

The Teacher said, "What is inborn is of course nature. But Kao 
Tzu recognized only one side and failed to understand the basis. 
If he had understood the basis, what he said would have been correct. 
Mencius also said, 'Form and color [our body] are nature endowed 
by Heaven.'6 This also refers to material force." 

The Teacher further said, "Whenever people talk at random and 
act by impulse, they always say that they do so according to their 
mind and their nature. This is what is meant by 'what is inborn is 
called the nature.' But doing thus necessarily involves mistakes. If, 
however, one understands the basis and follows innate knowledge, 
then whatever he says or does is naturally all right. But innate 
knowledge speaks through the same mouth and acts through the 

5 Book of Mencius, 6A:3. 

6 Ibid., 7A:38. 

Part III 209 

same body. How can it get outside material force and have another 
organ with which to speak or act ? Therefore it has been said, 'It 
would be incomplete to talk about the nature of man and things 
without including material force and unintelligible to talk about 
material force without including the nature.'7 Material force is also 
nature and nature is also material force. If we realize the basis, it 
will be all right." 

243. The Teacher further said, "Gentlemen, in your task the worst 
thing to do is to make an artificial effort to help the mind grow.8 
There are extremely few people of the highest intelligence. A student 
cannot jump into the rank of a sage. Rising, falling, advancing, and 
receding are the natural order of the task. If one had some success 
in his effort yesterday but fails today, he should not pretend that 
nothing has gone wrong. That would be making an artificial effort 
to help the mind grow, and any success previously achieved would 
be spoiled. This is not a small mistake. For example, when a person 
who walks on the road happens to stumble, he should get up and 
keep on walking, and should not deceive others by acting as though 
he had not fallen. You gentlemen should always cherish the mind 
that can retreat from the world without being troubled and can face 
disapproval without being troubled.9 Follow the dictate of innate 
knowledge and proceed patiently and pay no attention to people's 
ridicule, slander, praise, or humiliation. Whether the task advances 
or recedes, remain the master that extends the innate knowledge. 
Act like this without cease, and in time the effort will be effective 
and no external things can disturb you." 

He again said, "If one is genuinely and earnestly devoted to his 
task, let people slander him and let them insult him. He will gain in 
everything and everything will become for him material for the 
advancement of virtue. If he does not exert effort, everything will 
have an evil effect on him and he will ultimately be ruined." 

244. One day the Teacher went to visit Yu-hsiieh.10 He looked at 
the rice in the field and said, "How long has it been that it has grown 

7 I-shu, 6:2a. 

8 Quoting the Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

9 As described in the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 1. Cf. 
trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 409. 

10 A peak in Chekiang, not a cave where Emperor Yii was buried, as is 
sometimes believed. The word yii has nothing to do with the legendary emperor. 

210 Instructions for Practical hiving 

like this!" Fan Chao-ch'i,11 who was beside him, said, "This is 
because it has roots. If in our learning we can grow roots, we don't 
have to worry about its growth either." 

The Teacher said, "Who has no roots ? Innate knowledge is man's 
root which is intelligent and is grown by nature. It naturally grows 
and grows without cease. It is only because some people are afflicted 
by the trouble of selfishness and injure and obstruct it that it cannot 
grow." 

245. A friend of ours very often became angry easily and 
proceeded to criticize other people. The Teacher admonished him, 
saying, "In the matter of learning, one must examine oneself. If 
one merely criticizes others, one sees only their faults and not his 
own. If he can examine himself he will see that there are many 
places where he is wrong. Where has he the leisure to criticize 
others? Emperor Shun was able to change his brother Hsiang's 
arrogance. His secret merely lay in not noticing Hsiang's mistakes. 
If Shun had only wished to correct Hsiang's wickedness, he would 
have seen his mistakes. Since Hsiang was arrogant and would not 
yield, how could he have influenced him ?"12 

The friend was moved and repented. The Teacher said, "From 
now on, never talk about the right or wrong of others. Whenever 
someone should be criticized or refuted, you should immediately 
take that situation as your selfish desire to become a big fellow and 
overcome it." 

246. The Teacher said, "When friends question or challenge you, 
even if sometimes they are shallow and rude or boasting and showing 
off, it is because their disease is growing. You should prescribe 
medicine according to the disease. Do not just for that reason harbor 
any feeling of spite. If you do, your mind will not be that of a 
superior man who helps others to do good." 

247. I asked, "Chu Hsi considers divination by means of tortoise 
shells and stalks of plants as fundamental,13 while Ch'eng I, in his com- 
mentary, considers principle as fundamental.14 What do you think ?" 

11 We know nothing about him. 

12 See below, sec. 296. 

13 In interpreting the Book of Changes. Chu T^uyii-lei, 66:1 a ff. 

14 Preface to the J chuan, and also the Wen-chi, 5:16a. 

Part III 211 

The Teacher said, "Divination involves principle and principle 
is [a form of] divination. Among the principles in the world, is there 
any greater than that of divination ? Because later generations regard 
divination as fundamentally fortune telling, they look upon it as a 
petty craft. They don't know that questions and answers between 
teachers and friends, such as we are engaging in today, and studying 
extensively, inquiring accurately, thinking carefully, sifting clearly, 
practicing earnestly,15 and the like are all forms of divination. 
Divination is no more than to remove doubt and to give the mind 
divine intelligence. The Book of Changes seeks answers from Heaven. 
Man has doubts and does not have sufficient self-confidence. He 
therefore seeks answers from Heaven by use of the Book of Changes. 
The idea is that the human mind involves some [selfish desires]. 
Heaven alone leaves no room for falsehood." 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY HUANG 
MIEN-CHIH1 (Sections 248-316) 

248. I asked, "[Confucius said, 'A superior man, in dealing with 
the world,] is not for or against anything. He follows righteousness, 
as the standard.'2 Should one act like this in everything ?" 

The Teacher said, "Of course one must act like this in everything. 
Nevertheless, one needs to know the basis. Righteousness is identical 
with innate knowledge. Only when one realizes that innate knowl- 
edge is the basis can one be free from bias. Take the acceptance of 
gifts. Some should be accepted now but declined at other times. 

16 Steps outlined in the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

1 This disciple's name was Hsing-tseng. A literary and carefree man, he had 
no distinguished public career. According to Huang Tsung-hsi, he did not 
quite grasp the true meaning of the Master's teachings. See Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 
25:4b. 

Although the text indicates that sees. 248-316 were recorded by Huang Mien- 
chih, sees. 260, 297, 313, 315, 338, 339, and 343 were almost surely recorded by 
Ch'ien Te-hung. Here Huang does not seem to be involved and Ch'ien's per- 
sonal name is used, a practice followed only by the person doing the writing. 
And Ch'ien definitely said in the Postscript that he had incorporated some of his 
own records. It is most probable that sees. 260-316 were recorded by Ch'ien. 
For this reason, in certain Japanese editions Ch'ien's Postscript is put at the end 
of sec. 316 instead of at the end of sec. 343. 

2 Analects, 4:10. 

212 Instructions for Practical hiving 

Others should be declined now but accepted at other times.3 If you 
are biased toward what you should accept now and go right on to 
accept everything or if you are biased against what you decline now 
and go right on to decline everything, this is setting the mind for or 
against things. That is not the original substance of innate knowl- 
edge. How can it be called righteousness ?" 

249. I asked, "How can the one sentence, 'Have no depraved 
thought,'4 cover the meaning of three hundred poems in the Book 
of Odes}" 

The Teacher said, "It covers and runs through not only the three 
hundred odes but also the Six Classics5 and all the sayings of sages 
and worthies of the whole world, past and present. What more can 
be said ? This is the type of thing that, once it is done, settles every- 
thing." 

250. I asked about the human mind [which is precarious and liable 
to make mistakes] and the moral mind [which is subtle and follows 
moral principles].6 The Teacher said, " 'To follow our nature is 
called the Way.'7 This refers to the moral mind. Because it involves 
some selfish ideas, it becomes the human mind. The moral mind in 
its true nature has neither sound nor smell. Therefore it is described 
as subtle. When it obeys the human mind in its action, there will 
be many places where it is insecure. Therefore it is described as 
precarious." 

251. I asked, " 'One may not talk of the higher things to those 
who are below average.'8 Even when we talk of the higher things 
to the stupid person, he will not advance. How much less will he 
do so if we do not talk to him!" 

The Teacher said, "It is not that the Sage did not want to talk to 
him at all. The Sage was anxious to have everyone become a sage. 
But people vary in endowment. In giving them education, there 

3 A matter discussed in the Book of Mencius, 26:3. 

4 Analects, 2:2. 

6 See above, Introduction, n. 1. 

6 So described in the Book of History, "Counsels of the Great Yii." Cf. trans, 
by Legge, Shoo King, p. 61. 

7 A quotation from the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

8 Confucius, Analects, 6:19. 

Part III 213 

should be an order. If you talk of the nature and destiny of man and 
things to people below average, they do not understand. It is neces- 
sary to polish them slowly." 

252. A friend asked, "Why is it that I do not remember the words 
I read?" 

The Teacher said, "You need only understand the meaning of the 
words. Why should you need to remember the words? Even 
understanding the meaning of the words is to fall down to the level 
of subsidiary things. The important thing is to realize clearly the 
original substance of one's own mind. If one merely remembers, he 
will not understand. And if he merely understands what he reads, 
he will not clearly realize his own original substance." 

253. I asked, "[When Confucius stood by the stream and said,] 
'It passes on like this'9 was he talking about his own mind and 
nature as being extremely lively and dynamic?" 

The Teacher said, "Yes. However, one must exert the effort to 
extend innate knowledge at all times before one can be extremely 
lively and dynamic like that stream of water. If there is a moment of 
interruption, one will not be as extremely lively as Heaven and 
Earth. This is the height of learning. Even a sage can do no more." 

254. I asked about the chapter "A resolute scholar and a man 
of humanity will never seek to live at the expense of injuring 
humanity."10 

The Teacher said, " [Confucius said this] because people of the 
world all think too highly of their bodies and lives. They do not 
ask whether they should die or not but resort to any special means 
or accommodation to preserve their lives. For this reason they 
cast aside the Principle of Nature, harden their conscience and 
destroy principle, and will do anything conceivable. Since they 
have violated the Principle of Nature, they are no different from 
beasts. Even if they could cheat their fate so as to live in the world 
for a hundred or a thousand years, they would be existing as beasts 
for a hundred or a thousand years. The student should have a clear 

Ibid., 9:16. 
0 Ibid., 15:8. 

214 Instructions for Practical hiving 

understanding in these matters. Because Pi-kan and Lung-p'eng saw- 
clearly, they could fulfill their humanity."11 

255. I asked, "Shu-sun Wu-shu slandered Confucius.12 Why is it 
that even a great sage cannot avoid being slandered ?" 

The Teacher said, "Slander comes from the outside. Even a sage 
cannot avoid it. The important thing is for a man to cultivate his own 
virtue. If one is truly and definitely a sage or a worthy, even if people 
slander him, it will not affect him. It is like floating clouds obscuring 
the sun. How can they hurt its brilliance ? If one is respectful only 
on the surface, is serious only in appearance, and is neither firm nor 
resolute, even though no one speaks unfavorably of him, his 
concealed wickedness will inevitably be exposed one day. Therefore 
Mencius said, 'There are cases of reproach by perfectionists and 
of unexpected praise.'13 Praise and condemnation come from the 
outside. How can one escape from them ? The important thing is 
how he cultivates himself." 

256. Liu Chun-liang14 wanted to engage in sitting in meditation 
in the mountains. The Teacher said, "If you seek tranquillity because 
you feel disgusted with external things, you will only build up an 
air of arrogance and laziness. But if you are not disgusted with 
external things, it will be good for you to cultivate yourself in a 
quiet place." 

257. Wang Ju-chung15 and I were in attendance. The Teacher 

11 By sacrificing their lives to admonish their wicked rulers, King Chieh and 
King Chou, respectively. Readingy>« [man] as Jen [humanity]. 

12 Analects, 19:23. 

13 Book of Mencius, <\h:z\. 

14 His courtesy name was Yiian-tao. See Wang's letter to him in Wang 
Wen-eft eng KungcFiian-shu, 5:i9a-b. He was not the Liu Chiin-liang of the Wang 
school to whom part of the Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 19^-70, is devoted. 

15 Wang Chi (1498-1583). His literary name was Lung-hsi. When he failed 
in the civil service examination in 1523 he became a follower of Wang, although 
he was still a very young man and in spite of the fact that Wang's radical 
doctrine of the extension of innate knowledge frightened scholars away from him. 
Later Wang Chi and Ch'ien Te-hung were urged to take and pass the examina- 
tions, which they did primarily to gain an advantageous position from which 
to defend the Master's doctrine. Although he served as a division chief in the 
department of military personnel, his life was primarily private, and for forty 

Part III 215 

held a fan and commanded us, saying, "You use it." I rose and 
replied, "I dare not." 

The Teacher said, "The teachings of the Sage are not so restrictive 
or difficult to endure, and do not mean that people should assume the 
appearance of a rigid, strict schoolman." 

Ju-chung commented, "This can be seen somewhat in the chap- 
ter about Confucius and Tseng Tien telling their wishes."16 

The Teacher said, "Right. From this chapter we can see how 
broad, great, and all-embracing the disposition of the Sage was. 
Furthermore, when the Master asked his pupils about their wishes, 
the other three answered seriously. Tseng Tien, however, was quite 
carefree, ignored the other three, and went so far as to play the lute ! 
What an unrestrained attitude ! When it came to telling his wishes, 
Tseng Tien did not answer the Master's particular question. What 
he said were words of unrestraint. I-ch'uan17 would have scolded 
Tseng Tien. But instead the Sage praised him. What a disposition ! 
In the Sage's way of teaching people, he did not restrict them or treat 
them all alike. If a pupil was unrestrained, he brought him to 
perfection through his unrestraint. If he was restrained, he brought 
him to perfection through his restraint. How can people's abilities 
be the same?" 

258. The Teacher said to Lu Yuan-ching,18 "When you were 
young, Yuan-ching, you also wanted to understand the Five 
Classics.19 You also had the ambition for extensive learning. But in 
teaching people the Sage only worried about their not following 
what is simple and easy. All that he said establishes the standard for 
simplicity and easiness. From the point of view of people today who 
are fond of extensive learning, it would seem that the Sage had 
taught in the wrong way." 

years he taught and elucidated the doctrine. Lecture halls were established in 
the two capitals as well as in south and central China, especially in Kiangsi 
and Chekiang. For other important facts about him, see preface by Ch'ien 
Te-hung preceding sec. 130 above, and for an account of him, see Ming-ju 
hsiieh-an, ch. 12. 

16 Analects, 11:25. See above, sees. 27 and 29. 

17 Ch'eng I, who was well known for his strictness. 

18 See above, sec. 15, n.i. 

19 See above, Introduction, n. 1. 

17 

216 Instructions for Practical Living 

259. The Teacher said, "Confucius never acted without knowing 
why20 and whenever Yen Hui did anything wrong he never failed 
to realize it.21 This is the real essence of the doctrine of the Sage." 

260. Ho T'ing-jen,22 Huang Cheng-chih,23 Li Hou-pi,24 Wang 
Ju-chuang,25 and I [Ch'ien Te-hung]26 were in attendance. The 
Teacher turned to us and said, "You have not made progress in your 
learning because you have not made up your minds." Hou-pi rose 
and responded, "Like others I also want to make up my mind." 

The Teacher said, "Shall I say that you have not made up your 
mind? I say only that it is not the mind determined to become 
a sage." 

Hou-pi replied, "I want my mind to be determined to become 
a sage." 

The Teacher said, "If you really have the mind to become a sage, 
your innate knowledge should be extended to the utmost in every- 
thing. If in your innate knowledge you retain the least trace of alien 
thought, that is not the mind determined to become a sage." 

When I first heard the conversation, I was not satisfied. At this 
point, however, I was frightened and sweated. 

261. The Teacher said, "Innate knowledge is the spirit of creation. 
This spirit produces heaven and earth, spiritual beings, and the 
Lord. They all come from it. Truly nothing can be equal to this.27 If 
people can recover it in its totality without the least deficiency, they 
will surely be gesticulating with hands and feet. I don't know if 
there is anything in the world happier than this." 

262. A friend who was engaging in sitting in meditation attained 
some insight. He ran to make an inquiry of the Teacher. The 

20 According to Analects, 7:27. 

21 According to the Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 5. Cf. 
trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 392. 

22 His courtesy name was Shan-shan (1486-15 51). He was an assistant to a 
division chief in the department of public works, and one of the most outstanding 
of Wang's disciples. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 19:133-15^ 

23 See above, sec. 120, n. 65. 

24 Nothing is known of him except that his name was Kung. 
26 See above, n. 15. 

26 See above, preface to sec. 130, n. 1 ; also see above, sec. 248, n. 1. 

27 Quoting Ch'eng Hao, I-shu, 2A:3b. 

Part III 217 

Teacher said, "Formerly, when I stayed in Ch'u-chou,28 seeing that 
students were mostly occupied with intellectual explanations and 
debates on similarities and differences, which did them no good, I 
therefore taught them sitting in meditation. For a time they realized 
the situation a little bit [they saw the true Way] and achieved some 
immediate results. In time, however, they gradually developed the 
defect of fondness for tranquillity and disgust with activity and 
degenerated into lifelessness like dry wood. Others purposely 
advocated abstruse and subtle theories to startle people. For this 
reason I have recently expounded only the doctrine of the extension 
of innate knowledge. If one's innate knowledge is clear, it will be 
all right either to try to obtain truth through personal realization in 
a quiet place or to discover it through training and polishing in the 
actual affairs of life. The original substance of innate knowledge is 
neither tranquil nor active. Recognition of this fact is the basis of 
learning. From the time of Ch'u-chou until now, I have tested what 
I said several times. The point is that the phrase 'the extension of 
innate knowledge' is free from any defect. Only a physician who has 
broken his own arm can understand the causes of human disease."29 

263. A friend asked, "In our task, if we want to have this innate 
knowledge continue at all times, we shall not be able to deal with all 
the influences of external things and respond to them. On the other 
hand, if we go to things and deal with them, innate knowledge seems 
to disappear. What is the solution?" 

The Teacher said, "This is simply because your recognition of 
innate knowledge is not yet genuine, and you still separate the 
internal and the external. In this task of mine, impatience won't do. 
If you realize that innate knowledge is the foundation and is correct, 
and go ahead to make a real and concrete effort, you will understand 
it thoroughly. When this point is reached, the separation of the 
internal and the external will be forgotten. Wherein can the mind 
and things fail to be united as one ?" 

264. The Teacher further said, "If in the task one does not pene- 
trate the true secret, how can innate knowledge be abundant and 
brilliantly displayed? If you want to penetrate it, you cannot do so 

28 In modern Anhui Province, near Nan-ch'ang. Wang was there in 15 10 
when he was thrity-nine. 

29 Quoting the Tso chuan, Duke Ting, 13th year. 

218 Instructions for Practical Livings 

through intelligence or intellectual understanding. You must 
transform all the impurities in the mind so that not the slightest 
selfish attachment will be retained." 

265. I asked, "You said that the sentence 'What Heaven imparts 
to man (mng, destiny) is called his nature' means that man's destiny 
is identical with his nature, that the sentence 'To fulfill our nature 
is called the Way' means that man's nature is identical with the Way, 
and that the sentence 'Cultivating the Way is called education' 
means that the Way is identical with education.30 Why is the Way 
identical with education?" 

"The Way is innate knowledge. From the beginning it is perfect. 
It regards what is right as right and what is wrong as wrong. If we 
only rely on it with regard to what is right and what is wrong, 
everything will be correct. This innate knowledge is, after all, your 
wise teacher." 

266. I asked, " 'What is not seen' and 'what is not heard' refer to 
original substance, and 'cautions' and 'apprehensions'31 refer to 
effort. Is this correct ?" 

The Teacher said, "Here you must believe that while original 
substance is neither seen nor heard, it is also cautious and appre- 
hensive. Caution and apprehension are not anything to be added to 
what is not seen or heard. If original substance is truly understood, it 
will be all right to say that caution and apprehension refer to 
original substance and that what is not seen or what is not heard 
refer to effort." 

267. I asked about the sentence about 'penetrating to a knowledge 
of the course of the day and night.'32 The Teacher said, "From the 
beginning innate knowledge knows the course of day and night." 

I said, "When a person sleeps soundly, even innate knowledge is 
unconscious." 

"If it is unconscious, how is it that as soon as he is called he 
answers ?" 

30 Quotations from the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. For Wang's comments, 
see above, sec. 127. 

31 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

32 hook of Changes ; "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 1, ch. 4. Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Yi King, p. 354. 

Part III 219 

"If innate knowledge is always conscious, why is there the state 
of sound sleep ?" 

"It is a general law in the universe that when it gets dark, things 
rest. As night falls, heaven and earth become an undifferentiated 
state. Forms and colors all disappear. With man also, the ears hear 
nothing, the eyes see nothing, and all the apertures are closed. This 
is the time when innate knowledge is collected and concentrated. 
As heaven and earth open up again, all the myriad things reveal 
themselves and grow. With man also, the ears and eyes now see 
and hear, and all apertures are open. This is the time when the 
wonderful functioning of innate knowledge starts. From this we 
can see that the human mind and heaven and earth form one body. 
Therefore 'It forms the same current above and below with that of 
heaven and earth.'33 People today do not know how to rest. At 
night, if they are not in dull slumber, they are occupied with erro- 
neous thoughts and nightmares." 

"How can we exert effort during sleep?" 

"To know day is to know night. In the daytime, innate knowledge 
responds smoothly without any impediment. Although at night, 
innate knowledge is collected and concentrated, when there is a 
dream, it already shows some sign of things to come." 

268. The Teacher further said, "Only when innate knowledge 
operates with the restorative power of the night34 is it in its original 
substance, because then it is free from the impurity of material 
desires. The student must see to it that when he is busy with or 
disturbed by things, he always remains as if he is under the restorative 
power of the night. If so, then he penetrates to a knowledge of the 
course of day and night." 

269. The Teacher said, "Taoist seekers of immortality have reached 
the conclusion of the vacuity [of the mind]. Is the sage able to add 
an iota of reality to that vacuity ? The Buddhists have reached the 
conclusion of non-being [of the mind]. Is the sage able to add an 
iota of being to that non-being ? But the Taoist talk about vacuity 
is motivated by a desire for nourishing everlasting life, and the 
Buddhist talk about non-being is motivated by the desire to escape 

33 Book of Mencius, iA:i 3. 

34 Mencius' phrase, ibid., 6A:8. 

220 Instructions for Practical Living 

from the sorrowful sea of life and death. In both cases, certain 
selfish ideas have been added to the original substance [of the mind], 
which thereby loses the true character of vacuity and is obstructed. 
The sage merely returns to the true condition of innate knowledge 
and does not attach to it any selfish idea. The vacuity of innate 
knowledge is the Great Vacuity35 of nature. The non -being of innate 
knowledge is the formlessness of the Great Vacuity. Sun, moon, 
wind, thunder, mountains, rivers, people, and things, and all things 
that have figure, form, or color, all function and operate within this 
formlessness of the Great Vacuity. None of them has become an 
obstacle to nature. The sage merely follows the functioning of his 
innate knowledge and Heaven, Earth, and all things are contained 
in its functioning and operation. How can there be anything to 
transcend innate knowledge and become its obstacle?" 

270. Someone said, "The Buddhists also devote themselves to the 
nourishing of the mind, but fundamentally they are incapable of 
governing the world. Why?" 

The Teacher said, "In nourishing the mind, we Confucians have 
never departed from things and events. By merely following the 
natural principles of things we accomplish our task. On the other 
hand, the Buddhists insist on getting away from things and events 
completely and viewing the mind as an illusion, gradually entering 
into a life of emptiness and silence, and seeming to have nothing 
to do with the world at all. This is why they are incapable of govern- 
ing the world." 

271. Someone asked about heresy. The Teacher said, "What can 
be understood and practiced by men and women of simple intelli- 
gence is called universal virtue. What cannot be understood and 
practiced by men and women of simple intelligence is called a 
heresy." 

272. The Teacher said, "The difference between Mencius' idea of 
the unperturbed mind and that of Kao Tzu is exceedingly small.36 
Kao T2U directed his effort only to keeping the mind from being 
perturbed. Mencius, on the other hand, went right on to the under- 

35 This concept is expounded in Chang Tsai, Cheng-meng, ch. 1. 

36 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

Part III 221 

standing that the mind is originally not perturbed. The mind is not 
perturbed in its original substance. It is perturbed only because one's 
action is not in accord with righteousness. Mencius did not discuss 
whether the mind is perturbed or not. He talked only about the 
accumulation of righteous deeds. If every action is right, there will 
naturally be nothing to perturb the mind. As Kao Tzu only wanted 
the mind not to be perturbed, his effort amounts to holding on to 
the mind and bending and breaking its root that by nature grows 
and grows without cease. This not only does no good ; it is harmful. 
Mencius' task of accumulating righteous deeds, on the other hand, 
can naturally be cultivated to the full without any deficiency. It is 
naturally free and at ease, and is extremely lively and dynamic. This 
is 'strong moving power.' "37 

273. The Teacher further said, "The source of Kao Tzu's trouble 
can be seen in his doctrine that the nature is neither good nor evil. 
Since the nature is neither good nor evil, it is not a great mistake to 
say so. But Kao Tzu looked at the matter too rigidly. Therefore to 
him internally there is the nature which is neither good nor evil. He 
saw good and evil in things and the stimulation they give. Therefore 
externally there is the thing. In this way he looked at the nature 
from two sides and hence he was mistaken. The nature in its original 
state is neither good nor evil. If we understand it adequately this 
one sentence covers all, and there is no separation of the internal and 
the external. Kao Tzu saw the nature as internal and things as 
external. From this we can see that he had not understood the nature 
thoroughly." 

274. Chu Pen-ssu38 asked, "Man has innate knowledge because 
he possesses pure intelligence. Have such things as plants and trees, 
tiles and stones innate knowledge also ?" 

The Teacher said, "The innate knowledge of man is the same as 
that of plants and trees, tiles and stones. Without the innate knowl- 
edge inherent in man, there cannot be plants and trees, tiles and 
stones. This is not true of them only. Even Heaven and Earth 
cannot exist without the innate knowledge that is inherent in man. 
For at bottom Heaven, Earth, the myriad things, and man form one 

37 Ibid. 

38 His name was Te-chih. He was a minor official and was inclined to Bud- 
dhism and Taoism. See Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 2j:5b-8b. 

222 Instructions for Practical hiving 

body. The point at which this unity is manifested in its most refined 
and excellent form is the clear intelligence of the human mind. Wind, 
rain, dew, thunder, sun and moon, stars, animals and plants, moun- 
tains and rivers, earth and stones are essentially of one body with 
man. It is for this reason that such things as the grains and animals can 
nourish man and that such things as medicine and minerals can heal 
diseases. Since they share the same material force, they enter into one 
another." 

275. The Teacher was roaming in Nan-chen.39 A friend pointed 
to flowering trees on a cliff and said, " [You say] there is nothing 
under heaven external to the mind.40 These flowering trees on the 
high mountain blossom and drop their blossoms of themselves. 
What have they to do with my mind?" 

The Teacher said, "Before you look at these flowers, they and 
your mind are in the state of silent vacancy. As you come to look 
at them, their colors at once show up clearly. From this you can know 
that these flowers are not external to your mind." 

276. I said, "The great man and things form one body. Why does 
the Great Learning say that there is a relative importance among 
things ?"41 

The Teacher said, "It is because of principles that there necessarily 
is relative importance. Take for example the body, which is one. If 
we use the hands and the feet to protect the head, does that mean 
that we especially treat them as less important? Because of their 
principles this is what should be done. We love both plants and 
animals, and yet we can tolerate feeding animals with plants. We 
love both animals and men, and yet we can tolerate butchering 
animals to feed our parents, provide for religious sacrifices, and 
entertain guests. We love both parents and strangers. But suppose 
here are a small basket of rice and a platter of soup. With them one 
will survive and without them one will die. Since not both our 
parents and the stranger can be saved by this meager food, we will 
prefer to save our parents instead of the stranger. This we can 
tolerate. We can tolerate all these because by principle these should 
be done. As to the relationship between ourselves and our parents 

39 The Hui-chi Mountain in present Chekiang. 

40 See above, sec. 6. 

41 The text of the Great Learning. 

Part III 223 

there cannot be any distinction of this or that or of greater or lesser 
importance. For being humane to all people and feeling love for all 
comes from this affection toward parents.42 If in this relationship 
we can tolerate any relative importance, then anything can be toler- 
ated. What the Great Learning calls relative importance means that 
according to innate knowledge there is a natural order which should 
not be skipped over. This is called righteousness. To follow this 
order is called propriety. To understand this order is called wisdom. 
And to follow this order from beginning to end is called faith- 
fulness." 

277. The Teacher said, "The eye has no substance of its own. Its 
substance consists of the colors of all things. The ear has no sub- 
stance of its own. Its substance consists of the sounds of all things. 
The nose has no substance of its own. Its substance consists of the 
smells of all things. The mouth has no substance of its own. Its 
substance consists of the tastes of all things. The mind has no 
substance of its own. Its substance consists of the right or wrong of 
the influences and responses of Heaven, Earth, and all things." 

278. I asked about "not allowing any double-mindedness regard- 
less of longevity or brevity of life."43 

The Teacher said, "In the task of learning, if one is able to get rid 
of all desires for fame and profit and other interests but still has the 
least bit of concern over life and death, it means that his mind in 
its totality is not harmonious or at ease. Ideas of life and death come 
with life itself and cannot easily be gotten rid of. If one sees through 
life and death, then the mind in its totality will be able to operate 
everywhere without obstacle. Only then can learning become the 
full development of one's nature and the fulfillment of one's destiny." 

279. A friend asked, "If during meditation one searches one by one 
for the roots of the love for fame, sex, profit, and so forth, and wipes 
them out completely, is that not comparable to cutting out flesh to 
patch up a sore ?" 

The Teacher looked very serious and said, "This is my formula 
to cure people. It can surely remove the cause of diseases. Is there 

42 Book of Mencius, -/A.:^. On meager food, see ibid., 6A: 10. 

43 Ibid., 7 An. 

224 Instructions for Practical Living 

anything better? Even after a decade or more people still find it 
useful. If you do not use it, leave it alone, but don't spoil this formula 
of mine." 

The friend was very much ashamed. 

A little later, the Teacher added, "I believe this is not your doing. 
It must be someone within our school who knows my formula only 
superficially and expressed such an opinion to give you trouble." 
All those present were so deeply affected as to be frightened. 

280. A friend asked why one's effort is not earnest. The Teacher 
said, "I have already covered everything about the task of learning 
in one sentence. How is it that the more you talk about it, the more 
you are off the mark, and none of what you say touches the root of 
the matter?" 

The friend replied, "I have heard your instructions on the exten- 
sion of innate knowledge. But it requires elucidation." 

The Teacher said, "If you already know what the extension of 
innate knowledge is, how can it be elucidated ? From the beginning 
innate knowledge is clear. The thing to do is to exert effort 
earnestly and concretely. Otherwise, the more one talks about it, the 
more muddled it will become." 

"My request is precisely on the elucidation of the effort to extend 
innate knowledge." 

The Teacher said, "You have to find the way yourself. I have no 
other method to offer. Once there was a Zen master. When someone 
came to him to ask about the Law of the Buddha, he merely raised 
a dust whisk. One day his followers hid his dust whisk to see what 
other schemes he would resort to. [When someone asked him about 
the Law] he looked for the dust whisk but could not find it, and 
merely raised his empty hand.44 This innate knowledge of mine is the 
dust whisk of my scheme. Aside from it, what can I raise ?" 

A little later, another friend asked about essentials of the task 
The Teacher looked to the side and asked, "Where is my dust 
whisk?" 

Those present were excited and happy. 

281. Someone asked about the idea that absolute sincerity is able 
to foreknow.45 

44 A well-known Buddhist story, the source of which is unidentified. 

45 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 24. 

Part III 225 

The Teacher said, "Sincerity is a true principle. It is only 
innate knowledge. The true principle in its wonderful func- 
tioning and universal operation is spirit. The point at which it 
emerges and begins to act is incipient activating force. The sage is 
the one who is in the state of sincerity, spirit, and incipient activating 
force.46 The sage does not value foreknowledge. When blessings 
and calamities come, even a sage cannot avoid them. He only knows 
the incipient activating force of things and handles it in accordance 
with the circumstance. To innate knowledge there is neither the past 
nor the future. It knows only the incipient activating force of the 
present moment, and once this succeeds everything else will succeed. 
If one has the desire to foreknow, it means selfishness and the 
intention to go after advantage and avoid disadvantage. Master 
Shao Yung insisted on foreknowledge.47 In the final analysis, he was 
not entirely free from the consideration of advantages and disad- 
vantages." 

282. The Teacher said, "The original substance [of the mind] 
knows nothing and yet knows everything. From the beginning it 
is like this. For example, the sun does not purposely shine on 
anything and yet there is nothing it does not shine on. Not [pur- 
posely to] shine and yet shining on everything is characteristic of the 
original substance of the sun. Innate knowledge originally knows 
nothing and now we want it to know. Originally it knows everything 
and now we suspect that there is something it does not know. This 
is because we have not sufficient confidence in it." 

283. The Teacher said, "Only the perfect sage in the world has 
quickness of apprehension, intelligence, insight, and wisdom.48 How 
deep and mysterious this formerly seemed! But as we look at it 
today, we realize that these qualities are common to all men. Man's 
ears are by nature quick of apprehension, his eyes intelligent, and 
his mind and thought have insight and wisdom. The sage is the only 
one who can demonstrate them with one effort. What enables him to 
do so is his innate knowledge, and the reason ordinary people cannot 

46 According to Chou Tun-i, T'ung-shu, ch. 4. 

47 This is merely a general characterization of Shao Yung's philosophy, 
not a specific reference. 

48 As described in the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 31. 

226 Instructions for Practical hiving 

do so is that they do not extend their knowledge. How clear ! How 
simple! And how easy!" 

284. I asked, "What Confucius called 'thinking far ahead'49 and 
Duke Chou's thinking about a thing from daytime into the night50 
are different from leaning forward or backward to accommodate 
things. Why?" 

The Teacher said, "To think far ahead does not mean to think 
and deliberate vaguely and recklessly. It means only to preserve this 
Principle of Nature. The Principle of Nature is present in the human 
mind at all times, past and present, and has neither beginning nor 
end. It is identical with innate knowledge. In our thousands of 
thoughts and tens of thousands of deliberations, we must only 
extend innate knowledge. The more innate knowledge thinks, the 
more refined and clear it becomes. If it does not think carefully but 
vaguely responds to things as they come, it will become crude. If, 
in connection with a thing, one merely thinks vaguely and recklessly, 
and considers that to be thinking far ahead, then concern about 
praise or criticism and about gain or loss and other selfish human 
desires will inevitably enter into his mind and become mixed with 
it. This is leaning forward or backward to accommodate things. 
Duke Chou's thinking about a thing from daytime into the night 
merely means the effort to be cautious with what is not seen and 
apprehensive of what is not heard.51 If we understand this, we will 
realize that his disposition is quite different from leaning forward 
or backward." 

285. I said, " 'If a man can for one day master himself and return 
to propriety, all under heaven will return to humanity.'52 In his 
commentary, Chu Hsi interpreted it from the point of effect.53 What 
do you think of that ?" 

The Teacher said, "The learning of the sage and the worthy is 
for themselves. Its emphasis is on effort and not on effect. The man 
of humanity regards all things as one body. If one fails to achieve 

49 Analects, 15:11. 

50 Book of Mencius, 46:20. 

51 Quoting the Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 
62 Analects, 12:1. 

53 That its effect is so great that all people in the world will share his humanity. 
Lun-jii chi-chu, ch. 6, comment on Analects, 12:1. 

Part III 227 

this unity, it is because his selfishness has not been eliminated. If the 
true nature of humanity is preserved, then all under heaven will 
come under this humanity, or 'The whole universe is inside my 
room!'54 [What Chu Hsi understood as] the entire world sharing 
one's humanity is included in it. Take for instance [the Confucian 
saying, 'Behave in such a way that] there will be no complaint against 
you in the state or in the family.55 This means that one does not 
complain himself, that is, does not complain against Heaven or 
blame man.56 Nevertheless the idea that none in the country or the 
family will complain against him is included in it. But the emphasis 
does not lie here." 

286. I said, "Mencius [considered Po-i as a sage who is pure, 
I-yin as a sage who has a great sense of responsibility, Liu-hsia Hui 
as a sage who was in harmony with all, and Confucius as a sage who 
acted according to the need of the time, that is, he could be pure, 
responsible, harmonious, and so forth. Mencius also] said that 
wisdom is comparable to skill and sageness to strength.57 Chu Hsi 
said that the first three gentlemen were excessive in strength and 
deficient in skill [and that only Confucius possessed all wisdom, 
skill, sageness, and strength].58 Is he correct?" 

The Teacher said, "The three gentlemen, of course, had strength. 
But they also had skill. Strength and skill are not two different 
things. Skill is found only in the application of strength and strength 
without skill will be in vain. The three gentlemen may be compared 
to archers. One can shoot while walking, one on horseback, and one 
from a great distance. If they all reach the mark, they may be said 
to have strength, and if they hit the mark, they may be said to have 
skill. But the one able to shoot while walking may not be able to do 
so on horseback and the one able to do so on horseback may not 
be able to do so from a great distance. Each has his own proficiency. 
This is where they differ in the amount and limit of their ability. 
Confucius, on the other hand, was expert in all three. However, 
Confucius' harmony with all only reached the maximum attained 

54 A quotation from Lii Ta-lin (1044-90), K'o-cbi ming. See Sung-Yuan hsiieh-an, 
31:8a; also Hsing-li ta-cWiian, 70: 5 6b- 5 7a. 

55 Analects ; 12:2. 

56 Ibid., 14:37. 

57 Book of Mencius, $B:i. 

58 Meng T^u chi-chu, ch. 10, comment on Book of Mencius, 5B:i. 

228 Instructions for Practical hiving 

by Liu-hsia Hui, his purity only reached the maximum attained 
by Po-i, and his great sense of responsibility only reached the 
maximum attained by I-yin. When did he add an iota to them? If we 
say that the three gentlemen were excessive in strength but deficient 
in skill, it would mean that they surpassed Confucius in strength. 
Skill and strength are useful only in making clear the meaning of 
sageness and wisdom. If we understand what the original substance 
of sageness and wisdom is, the meaning will be quite clear."59 

287. The Teacher said, "The statement, 'The superior man may 
precede Heaven and Heaven will not act in opposition to him,' 
means that Heaven is the same as innate knowledge. The statement, 
'He may follow Heaven but will act only as Heaven at the time would 
do,'60 means that innate knowledge is the same as Heaven." 

288. [The Teacher said,] "Innate knowledge is nothing but the 
sense of right and wrong, and the sense of right and wrong is nothing 
but to love [the right] and to hate [the wrong]. To love [the right] 
and to hate [the wrong] cover all senses of right and wrong and the 
sense of right and wrong covers all affairs and their variations." 

He further said, "The two words 'right' and 'wrong' are general 
standards. How to deal with them skillfully depends on the man." 

289. [The Teacher said,] "The knowledge of the sage is comparable 
to the sun in the clear sky, that of the worthy to the sun in the sky 
with floating clouds, and that of the stupid person to the sun on a 
dark, dismal day. Although the three kinds of knowledge differ in 
darkness or clearness, they are the same in the fact that they can 
distinguish between black and white. Even in a dark night one can 
tell black and white in a ha2y way, which shows that sunlight has 
not entirely disappeared. The task of learning through study or 
hard work is nothing other than examining things carefully with 
this trace of light as the starting point." 

290. I said "Knowledge may be compared to the sun and desire 
to the clouds. Though the clouds can obscure the sun, they are 

69 Cf. above, sec. 99. 

60 Statements from the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 
Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 417. 

Part III 229 

natural to heaven as part of the same atmosphere. Are desires also 
natural to the human mind?" 

The Teacher said, "Pleasure, anger, sorrow, fear,61 love, hate, and 
desire are the seven feelings. These seven are also natural to the 
mind. But you should understand innate knowledge clearly. Take, 
for example, sunlight. We cannot pin it down to any definite direc- 
tion or place. When even a small crack is penetrated by the bright- 
ness of the sun, sunlight is located there. Although clouds and fog 
fill all space, color and form in the Great Vacuity can still be distin- 
guished. This also shows that sunlight cannot be obliterated. Simply 
because clouds can obscure the sun, we should not on that account 
tell heaven not to produce any cloud. When the seven feelings 
follow their natural courses of operation, they are all functions of 
innate knowledge, and cannot be distinguished as good or evil. 
However, we should not have any selfish attachment to them. When 
there is such an attachment, they become selfish desires and obscura- 
tions to innate knowledge. Nevertheless, as soon as there is any 
attachment, innate knowledge is naturally aware of it. As it is aware 
of it, the obscuration will be gone and its substance will be restored. 
It is only when one can penetrate this point that his task becomes 
simple, easy, and thorough." 

291. I asked, "It is by nature that the sage is born with knowledge 
and can practice it naturally and easily.62 What is the need of any 
effort?" 

The Teacher said, "Knowledge and action are effort. The differ- 
ence lies in whether it is thorough or shallow and hard or easy. 
Innate knowledge is by nature refined and clear. In the wish to be 
filial toward parents, for example, those born with the knowledge 
of filial piety can practice filial piety naturally and easily, merely 
follow the innate knowledge, and sincerely and earnestly practice 
filial piety to the utmost. Those who learn filial piety through study 
and practice it for its advantage must merely be alert at all times and 
be determined to follow the innate knowledge and practice filial 
piety to the utmost, that is all. As to those who learn filial piety 
through hard work and practice it with effort and difficulty, their 
obscuration and impediments are already quite great. Although they 

61 Ordinarily joy is mentioned instead of fear. 

62 The references in this section to learning and practice are to the Doctrine 
of the Mean, ch. 20. 

230 Instructions for Practical hiving 

are determined to follow this innate knowledge and practice filial 
piety, they cannot do so because they are hindered by selfish desires. 
They must apply a hundred efforts where others can succeed by only 
one, and a thousand efforts where others can succeed by ten. Only then 
can they follow this innate knowledge and practice filial piety to the 
utmost. Although the sage is born with knowledge and can practice 
his learning naturally and easily, he is not overly self-confident 
and is willing to make the same effort as those who learn through 
hard work and practice their learning with effort and difficulty. But 
when those who learn through hard work and practice their learning 
with effort and difficulty try to do the same as those who are born 
with knowledge and practice naturally and easily, how can they 
succeed ?" 

292. I said, "You said that 'joy is characteristic of the original 
substance of the mind.'63 When one's parent dies and one cries 
sorrowfully, is this joy still present?" 

The Teacher said, "There is real joy only if the son has cried 
bitterly. If not, there won't be any joy. Joy means that in spite of 
crying, one's mind is at peace. The original substance of the mind 
has not been perturbed." 

293. I said, "Innate knowledge is one. King Wen wrote the 
explanations of hexagrams in the Book of Changes, Duke Chou wrote 
the explanation of the lines of the hexagrams, and Confucius wrote 
the commentaries and 'Appended Remarks.' Why did each view 
principle differently?" 

The Teacher said, "How could these sages be confined to a rigid 
pattern ? So long as they all sincerely proceeded from innate knowl- 
edge, what harm is there in each one's explaining in his own way? 
Take for example a garden of bamboos. So long as they all have 
branches and joints, they are similar in general. If it were rigidly 
insisted upon that each and every branch or joint had to be of the 
same size or height, that would not be the wonderful handiwork 
of creation. You people should just go ahead and cultivate innate 
knowledge. If all have the same innate knowledge, there is no 
harm in their being different here and there. But if you are not 
willing to exert effort, you don't even sprout. What branches or 
joints are there to talk about?" 

63 See above, sec. 166. 

Part III 231 

294. Among the village people a father and son engaged in litiga- 
tion, and each asked to plead his case before our Teacher. His 
attendant wanted to stop them but the Teacher heard them. Before 
he had finished talking, father and son, having been greatly moved, 
embraced each other and left weeping.64 Ch'ai Ming-chih65 entered 
and asked, "What did you say, sir, that affected them and caused 
them to repent so quickly ?" 

The Teacher said, "I said that Emperor Shun was the most 
unfilial son in the world and Ku-sou the most affectionate father in 
the world." 

Ming-chih was startled and asked for an explanation. The Teacher 
said, "Shun always viewed himself as most unfilial and therefore he 
was able to be filial. Ku-sou always viewed himself as most affec- 
tionate and therefore he was unable to be affectionate. He only 
remembered that Shun was a child he had reared, and wondered why 
Shun had not appeared delighted to please him.66 He did not realize 
that his own mind had been changed by the influence of his second 
wife, and he still claimed to be affectionate. This is why he was all 
the more unable to be affectionate. On the other hand, Shun only 
thought of how his father had loved him when he reared him and 
felt that his father did not love him now only because he himself 
had failed to practice filial piety to the utmost. Therefore every day 
he thought of where and how he had failed in filial piety. For this 
reason he was all the more able to be filial. When finally Ku-sou 
was delighted in his son, he did no more than recover the affection 
which was native to the original substance of his mind. For 
this reason, later generations have praised Shun as the most filial 
son of all time, and Ku-sou also became an affectionate father." 

295. The Teacher said, "When a simple and rustic person came 
to ask Confucius a question, he did not have the answer ready for 
him. His mind was wide open. He merely asked the man about the 
two sides of right and wrong which the man had already known 
himself, and made a decision with him, and the mind of the simple 
and rustic man would become perfectly clear. The right and wrong 
that the simple and rustic person had already known himself was the 

64 This instance occurred in 15 10 when Wang was magistrate of Lu-ling 
County in modern Kiangsi. He was then thirty-nine. 

65 Nothing is known of him. 

66 Book of Mencius, 5 A: 5, 4A:28. 

18 

232 Instructions for Practical hiving 

natural standard original with him. Even a sage, who is quick of 
apprehension and intelligent, could not add or subtract the least 
bit to or from it. That man merely lacked self-confidence. As soon 
as the Grand Master made the decision with him, [his innate knowl- 
edge was extended] to the utmost without any reservation. If while 
talking to him the Grand Master had withheld anything he knew, 
he would not have been able to help him to extend his innate knowl- 
edge to the utmost, and then there would have been two substances 
of the Way."67 

296. The Teacher said, "[According to the Book of History, a high 
official of Emperor Yao's said of Shun that] he led [his parents and 
brother] gradually to self-discipline, so that they no longer proceeded 
to great mischiefs.68 A commentary said that Hsiang, Shun's 
brother, had already been gradually approaching righteousness and 
could not have been liable to commit great mischiefs.69 After Shun 
was appointed to office by Emperor Yao, Hsiang still sought daily 
to kill him.70 What greater evil can there be ? Shun merely improved 
himself in self-discipline so that this discipline would influence his 
brother instead of trying to correct his brother's evil. It is the 
normal behavior of a wicked person to gloss over his mistakes and 
conceal his shame. If one insisted on criticizing his mistakes, it 
would aggravate his evil nature. At first Shun brought about the 
condition in which Hsiang desired to kill him because he was too 
anxious for Hsiang to become good. This was where he was mis- 
taken. After some experience he then realized that the task merely 
consisted of disciplining himself and not of admonishing others. 
Consequently harmony was achieved. This was where Shun could 
stimulate his mind, harden his nature, and improve his incompetence.71 
The words of the ancients are all the results of personal experience. 
Therefore they uttered them intimately and to the point, and have 
transmitted them to later generations so that human feelings can 
be fully satisfied. Unless they had gone through much, how could 
they have taken so much pains to say so?" 

67 That is, one to be realized through innate knowledge and the other through 
ordinary knowledge. 

68 Book of History, "Canon of Yao." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 26. 

69 Ts'ai Ch'en (1 167-1230), Shu chi-chuan, ch. 1. 

70 According to the Book of Mencius, ^A-.z. 
n Ibid., 6B:i5. 

Part III 233 

297. The Teacher said, "Ancient music has not been played for a 
longtime. However, present-day theatrical music is still close to it." 
I [Ch'ien Te-hung]72 did not understand and asked for an explanation. 

The Teacher said, "The nine movements of shao were a piece of 
Emperor Shun's theatrical music and the nine variations of wu were 
a piece of King Wu's theatrical music. The actual facts in the lives 
of these sages were brilliantly exhibited in the music. Therefore when 
a person of virtue [Confucius] heard it, he knew wherein shao was 
perfectly good and perfectly beautiful and wherein wu was perfectly 
beautiful but not perfectly good.73 However, when later generations 
composed music they merely wrote some verses for certain tunes 
without any relation to social mores or customs at all. How could 
they influence people and improve customs ? If we want to return 
people's customs to simplicity and purity, we must take the theatrical 
music of today, eliminate all the depraved and licentious words and 
tunes, and keep only the stories about loyal ministers and filial 
sons, so that everyone among the simple folk can easily understand, 
and their innate knowledge can unconsciously be stimulated into 
operation. Then it will do some good to mores and ancient music 
can gradually be restored." 

I said, "I cannot even find the pure original tones. I am afraid it 
is difficult to restore ancient music." 

The Teacher said, "Tell me. Where do you look for the pure 
original tones ?" 

I replied, "The ancients made pitch pipes74 and waited for the 
response of material force to the weather. Perhaps this was the way 
to find the pure original tones." 

The Teacher said, "To seek the pure original tones in reed ashes 
or millet grains is like dredging up the moon from the bottom of the 
water. How can that be possible ? The pure original tones can be 
sought only in your own mind." 

"How can one seek them in the mind?" 

The Teacher said, "In government, the ancients first nourished 

72 See above, preface to sees. 130 ft"., n. 1. 

13 Analects, 3:25. 

74 There were twelve pipes, one for each of the twelve semi-tones, which 
were filled with reed ashes and buried, with one end exposed, in the ground, in 
an enclosed room. If the ashes in the tube flew off at the proper time of the 
corresponding month, this indicated that the material force responded to the 
proper weather, and therefore the pitch would be correct. See above, sec. 61. 

234 Instructions for Practical Living 

the people's minds to the point of peace and harmony and then 
instituted musical systems. Suppose we sing songs in this place. If 
your mind and disposition are harmonious and peaceful, the listeners 
are naturally pleased, happy, and aroused. This is the beginning of 
the pure original tones. The Book of History says, 'Poetry is the 
expression of the will.' The will is the foundation of music. It 
further says, 'Singing is the prolongation of that expression.' 
Singing is the foundation of instituting musical systems. And it 
goes on to say, 'The notes accompany that prolongation and they 
are harmonized by the pitch pipes.'75 The purpose of pitch pipes is 
simply to harmonize the notes. To harmonize the notes is the 
foundation of making pitch pipes. When did the ancients seek 
[the pure original notes] outside?" 

"What was the purpose of the ancients in devising the method of 
waiting for material force to respond to weather?" 

The Teacher said, "In instituting musical systems, the ancients 
possessed in themselves the substance of equilibrium and harmony. 
In reality one's equilibrium and harmony correspond to the material 
force of heaven and earth. To wait for the response of material force 
to weather or to harmonize tones with those uttered by the male and 
female phoenix is no more than to test whether one's material force 
is harmonious or not. This is done after the pitch pipes are made; 
we do not test first and then make them. Now if we have to wait 
for the ashes in the tubes for the fundamental notes to respond, we 
must first determine the time of the winter solstice. But the first 
two-hour period of the solstice may not be exact. Where, then, can 
exactness be found ?" 

298. The Teacher said, "In learning it is necessary to have teachers 
and friends to point out and explain things. But it is not as good as 
to find out and understand them oneself, for then if one succeeds 
in one case, one will succeed in all cases. Otherwise, there will be no 
end to other people's helping." 

299. [The Teacher said,] "Confucius' spiritual energy and ability 
to handle things were extremely great. He understood the principles 
of all the undertakings and achievements of ancient emperors and 
kings. This all comes from the mind. For example, a big tree has 

75 Book of History, "Canon of Shun." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 48. 

Part III 235 

many branches and leaves. This is so because the root has been 
effectively nourished and cultivated. It is not that the effort is first 
directed to the branches and leaves and that then the root grows. 
If a student who wants to model himself after Confucius does not 
devote his efforts to the mind but anxiously tries to imitate Confu- 
cius' spiritual energy and ability, he is putting the cart before the 
horse." 

300. [The Teacher said,] "People who have faults generally try to 
do something about them. This is like mending a cracked boiler. 
The upshot will be an effort to cover up the faults." 

301. [The Teacher said,] "While the people of today are eating, 
their minds are always occupied and are not in repose, although 
nothing is happening before them. Purely because their minds are 
used to being busy, they cannot be collected and firmly controlled." 

302. [The Teacher said,] "The student should not ignore music 
and books. If he occupies his sphere of activity [with sincerity],76 
his mind will not be lost." 

303. The Teacher said with a sigh, "People who know how to 
pursue learning have only this little trouble which they cannot 
remove, and that is that they do not share the good with others." 

Ou-yang Ch'ung-i77 said, "This trouble is primarily the love for 
exalted positions and the inability to forget oneself." 

304. I asked, "Innate knowledge is in fact characterized by 
equilibrium and harmony. Why does it have excess or deficiency?" 

The Teacher said, "To realize wherein one is excessive or deficient 
means equilibrium and harmony." 

305. [The Teacher said,] " 'What a man dislikes in his superior 
let him not display in his own dealings with his inferior.'78 The 
first part of the sentence refers to innate knowledge and the second 
part to the extension of knowledge." 

76 A quotation from the Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. 1. 
Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 410. 

77 See above, sec. 104, n. 23. 

78 Great Learning, ch. 10. 

236 Instructions for Practical hiving 

306. The Teacher said, "The wisdom possessed by Su Ch'in and 
Chang I79 can also [be used as] an aid to a sage. In later generations 
many eminent men of literature and famous men of accomplish- 
ments merely followed the old wisdom of Su and Chang. In their 
learning Su and Chang were skillful in estimating and gauging the 
feelings of people and therefore they never failed to hit the central 
spot. Consequently, their doctrines are always effective. They can 
be said to have understood to a small extent the wonderful func- 
tioning of innate knowledge, but they did not use it in the right way." 

307. Someone asked about the states before and after the feelings 
are aroused. The Teacher said, "[These are considered as two 
contrasting states] purely because later scholars talked about them 
separately. The thing to do is to say from the very start that there are 
no such contrasting states, so that people can think for themselves 
and arrive at the truth. If we say that there are states before and after 
the feelings are aroused, the listener will still be bound by the views 
of these later scholars. However, if one really understands that 
there are no such contrasting states, there is indeed no harm in 
saying that there are these states, for in fact there are." 

" [According to the Doctrine of the Mean,so the state before the 
feelings are aroused is characterized by equilibrium and the state 
after the feelings are aroused is characterized by harmony.] But the 
state before is not devoid of harmony and the state after is not 
devoid of equilibrium. Take the sound of the bell. We cannot say that 
there is no sound before the bell is struck or that there is sound after 
it is struck. Nevertheless there is the difference between its having 
been struck and not having been struck. How do you explain it ?" 

The Teacher said, "Before the bell is struck [the sound], essen- 
tially speaking, startles the universe. [Reality is then as active as it 
has always been.] After the bell is struck, it only keeps the universe 
silent. [Reality is then as tranquil as it ever was before.]" 

308. I asked, "In the discussion on the nature of man and things, 
the ancients agreed in certain respects but differed in others. Which 
is the final and accepted conclusion ?" 

The Teacher said, "One's nature has no definite form. The discus - 

79 Famous experts on diplomacy, who died in 317 and 309 B.C., respectively. 

80 See ch. 1. 

Part III 237 

sion of nature also has no definite form. Some discussed it from the 
point of view of its original substance, some from the point of view 
of its emanation and functioning, some from the point of view of 
its source, and some from the point of view of the defects that may 
develop in the course of its operation. Collectively, they all talked 
about this one nature, but their depth of understanding it varied, 
that is all. If one held rigidly to one aspect as they did it would be a 
mistake. In its original substance, nature is in fact neither good nor 
evil. In its function it can indeed be made to be good or evil, and in 
its defects it is indeed definitely good or evil. It may be compared 
to the eyes. There are eyes when one is joyous and there are eyes 
when one is angry. When one looks straight ahead, the eyes see 
openly. When one looks stealthily, the eyes peep. Collectively 
speaking, they are all eyes. If one sees a person with angry eyes and 
forthwith declares that he has no joyous eyes, or if one sees a person 
with peeping eyes and forthwith declares that he has no openly 
seeing eyes, one is holding onto a fixed viewpoint and from this we 
know that one is making a mistake. When Mencius talked about 
nature, he discussed it directly from the point of view of its source 
and said only that generally speaking [nature is originally good].81 
Hsiin Tzu's doctrine that nature is originally evil82 was arrived at 
from the point of view of its defects and we should not say that he 
was entirely wrong, only that he did not understand the matter 
perfectly. As to ordinary people, they have lost the original substance 
of the mind." 

"In discussing nature from the point of view of its source, Mencius 
wanted people to achieve in their task a thorough understanding at 
the source. In discussing nature from the point of view of its defects, 
Hsiin Tzu merely wanted people to save and correct themselves in 
their task at the last stage. This would be a waste of effort." 

The Teacher said, "You are right." 

309. The Teacher said, "As one's effort reaches the point of greatest 
refinement, it will be increasingly difficult to express it in words 
or to discuss it. If one attaches any personal ideas to what is refined 
and subtle, the entire effort will be obstructed." 

81 Book of Mencius, zh:6. 

82 Hsiin Tz», ch. 17. See trans, by Homer H. Dubs, The Works of Hsunt^e 
(London, Probsthain, 1928). 

238 Instructions for Practical hiving 

310. [The Teacher said,] "Yang Tz'u-hu83 was not without 
insight. But his insight was derived from an attachment to that which 
is without sound or smell." 

311. [The Teacher said,] "In a single day a person experiences 
the entire course of history. Only he does not realize it. At night 
when the air is pure and clear, with nothing to be seen or heard, and 
without any thought or activity, one's spirit is calm and his heart at 
peace. This is the world of Fu-hsi.84 At dawn one's spirit is bright 
and his vital power clear, and he is in harmony and at peace. This is 
the world of Emperors Yao and Shun. In the morning one meets 
people according to ceremonies, and one's disposition is in proper 
order. This is the world of the Three Dynasties.85 In the afternoon 
one's spirit and power gradually become dull and one is confused 
and troubled by things coming and going. This is the world of the 
Spring and Autumn and the Warring States periods.86 As it gradually 
gets dark, all things go to rest and sleep. The atmosphere becomes 
silent and desolate. This is the world in which all people disappear 
and all things come to an end. If a student has confidence in his 
innate knowledge and is not disturbed by the vital force, he can 
always remain a person in the world of Fu-hsi or even better." 

312. Hsueh Shang-ch'ien,87 Tsou Ch'ien-chih,88 Ma Tzu-hsin,89 
and Wang Ju-chih90 were in attendance.91 In the course of the con- 

83 Yang Chien (1140-1226), a disciple of Lu Hsiang-shan, whose idealistic 
Neo-Confucianism was even more influenced than Lu's by Zen Buddhism. 
For an account of him, see Sung-Yiian hsiieb-an, ch. 74. 

84 Legendary emperor of great antiquity. 

85 Hsia, 2183-1752 b.c; Shang, 1751-1112 B.C.; and Western Chou, im-770 

B.C. 

86 722-222 B.C. 

87 See above, sec. 81, n. 85. 

88 See below, sec. 314, n. 99. 

89 See above, sec. 40, n. 28. 

90 Wang Ken, whose literary name was Hsin-chai (1483-1540). Born in a 
poor family, he did business and practiced medicine but did not do so for long. 
At twenty-five, when he passed by the native place of Confucius, he made up 
his mind to study the Confucian Classics. Eventually he developed his own 
doctrine of the realization of one's own nature and returning to the self. Wang 
Yang-ming had been lecturing on innate knowledge and was well known, but 
Ken, living in an interior area, did not hear of him. When he finally did, he was 
surprised at the similarity of his and Wang's beliefs. He went to visit Wang 

Part III 239 

versation, they sighed over the fact that since our Teacher had 
subdued the rebellion of Prince Ning he had been slandered and 
critici2ed by more and more people. Each asked the others to give 
their versions of the reason. One said that as the Teacher's achieve- 
ments, power, and position became more prominent, more and more 
people became jealous of him. One said that as the Teacher's 
doctrines became more manifest, there have been more and more 
scholars to defend the Sung Neo -Confucianism. And one said that 
since our Teacher was at Nanking the number of like-minded 
friends who believe him and follow him has increased every day 
and those in all parts of the country who attack them and prevent 
them from coming have become more vigorous every day. 

The Teacher said, "What you have said, gentlemen, is all true. 
However, there is one point I have realized myself, which you 
gentlemen have not mentioned." 

The several friends asked him what it was. The Teacher said, 
"Before I went to Nanking I still harbored a few ideas of the 
goody-goody villager.82 Now I believe in innate knowledge. To me 
what is right is right and what is wrong is wrong. I act freely without 
any effort to cover up or to conceal. Only now have I come to have 
the mind of the unrestrained.93 Let all the people in the world say 
that my deeds do not fulfill my words. It is all right with me." 

Shang-ch'ien went out and said, "Only such a belief can be the 
true essence of being a sage." 

313. The way our Teacher trains and disciplines people is one in 
which a single word often influences people most deeply. One day 
Wang Ju-chih returned from a leisurely walk. The Teacher asked 
him, "What did you see in your walk?" Ju-chih answered, "I saw 
that the people filling the street were all sages." 

Yang-ming, debated with him, and finally, at thirty-eight, became his disciple. 
He was, however, much inclined to Buddhism and Taoism, and was an eccentric. 
Wang Yang-ming once refused to see him for three days. In spite of the fact 
that he was never a government official, his fame spread far and wide. He and 
Wang Chi (see above, sec. 257, n. 15) were known as the Two Wangs of the 
Wang Yang-ming school. See below, sec. 313. For an account of him, see 
Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 32:6a-nb. 

91 In the second month of the second year of Chia-ching (1523). 

92 Who is pleasant but not always honest. See Analects, 17:12; Book of Mencius, 

7B:37. 

98 Book of Mencius, 76:37. 

240 Instructions for Practical hiving 

The Teacher said, "In your view the people filling the street are 
all sages, but in their view, you are a sage." 

On another day, Tung Lo-shih94 returned from a leisurely walk, 
and went to the Teacher, and told him, "I saw a strange thing today." 

The Teacher said, "What is strange?" 

"I saw that all the people filling the street were sages." 

The Teacher said, "This is after all a common thing. Why should 
it be strange ?" 

Because Ju-chih was not quite adjusted to the ordinary people 
[and deep in his mind did not consider them sages] and because Lo- 
shih's realization [that sagehood for all was a surprise] was dim, the 
Teacher responded differently to the same statement, but in each 
case he took the opposite position in order to help them advance. 

Huang Cheng-chih,95 Chang Shu-ch'ien,96 Wang Ju-chung,97 and 
I [Ch'ien Te-hung]98 returned from the civil service examinations in 
the fifth year of Chia-ching [1526]. We told our Teacher that as we 
lectured on the doctrine in our travels some believed in us and others 
did not. The Teacher said, "You assumed the bearing of a sage to 
lecture to people on learning. When they saw a sage coming they 
were all scared away. How could you succeed in lecturing to 
them? You must become one of the people of simple intelligence 
and then you can discuss learning with them." 

To which I added, "If one wishes to see the level of anyone's 
character today, it is very easy." 

The Teacher said, "How do you know that ?" 

I replied, "You, sir, are comparable to Mount T'ai standing right 
before us. He who does not look up with respect must be blind." 

The Teacher said, "Mount T'ai is not as large as the level ground. 
What is there to look up to on the level ground?" 

A single word of our Teacher's cuts off and wipes out our peren- 
nial defects of desiring exalted positions and striving for external 

94 His name was Yiin (1457-1533). A poet without any civil service examina- 
tion degree or any official position, he heard Wang's lectures at sixty-eight and 
became his disciple. 

95 See above, sec. 120, n. 65. 

96 His name was Yiian-ch'ung, and he was known for his courage in giving 
unpleasant advice to the emperor. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, 
i4:5b-6a. 

97 See above, sec. 257, n. 15. 

98 See above, preface to sees. 130 fF., n. 1. 

Part III 241 

things. All present in the hall were struck with fear and were 
trembling. 

314. In the spring of the second year of Chia-ching [1523] Tsou 
Ch'ien-chih" came to Yiieh100 to make an inquiry about learning of 
our Teacher. He stayed for several days. Our Teacher saw him off 
at Fou-feng. That evening he, Ts'ai Hsi-yiian,101 and other friends 
sailed to spend the night in the Yen-shou Temple. At night, as we 
were holding candles in our hands and sitting down, the Teacher 
remained melancholy. He said, "Over the waves of the river and 
through the fog that hid the willows, in an instant an old friend has 
gone for over one hundred //."102 

A friend asked, "Sir, why do you think of Ch'ien-chih so much?" 
The Teacher said, "Tseng-tzu said, 'Gifted with ability and yet 
asking those without ability; possessing much and yet asking those 
who possess little; having and yet seeming not to have; full, and yet 
seeming vacuous; offended, and yet not contesting.'103 A person 
like Ch'ien-chih is truly near to this description." 

THE DOCTRINE IN FOUR AXIOMS 

Few conversations have led to such divergent viewpoints and have 
aroused such bitter criticisms as the famous "doctrine in four axioms" 

99 Courtesy name of Tsou Shou-i, whose literary name was Tung-kuo 
(1491-1562). A "presented scholar" of 151 1, he was appointed official historian. 
Because he criticized a proposed title for the emperor's father, he was banished 
to be a prefect. As a prefect he abolished excessive temples, established schools, 
promoted learning, and improved morals. His influence was such that people 
built a temple to honor him during his lifetime. Eventually he was promoted 
to be junior lord of the board of religious rites and later director of education 
at the national university, but was ultimately dismissed because of his admoni- 
tion to the emperor. For the next twenty years he lectured on the doctrine of 
innate knowledge and attracted a large number of followers. Among Wang's 
disciples he probably best understood the essential meanings of the Master's 
doctrines. He also assisted Wang in his military operations. In so doing he 
exemplified more than any other disciple the traditional Confucian ideal of both 
ability and scholarship. For an account of him, see Ming-ju hsueh-an, ch. 16. 

100 In what is now Chekiang Province. 

101 See above, sec. 99, n. 5. 

102 A li is about a third of a mile. 

103 Analects, 8:5. 

242 Instructions for "Practical hiving 

recorded in this section. Wang's two star disciples differed radically in 
their views concerning the way to become a sage. To Wang Chi104 the 
mind in its original state transcends good and evil and consequently any 
distinction of good and evil also disappears in the will, in knowledge, and 
in things which emanate from it. He believes that reality is to be intuited 
directly and totally through the spontaneous awakening of the mind 
itself. (This is called the doctrine of "four non-beings.") Ch'ien Te- 
hung,105 on the other hand, held that while the original mind is above 
good and evil, the human mind is dominated by habits and is therefore 
not free from such distinctions and consequently the will, knowledge, 
and things are all characterized by the distinction between good and evil. 
He believed that sagehood is to be achieved through the concrete and 
earnest effort of moral cultivation. (This is called the doctrine of "four 
beings.") As Wang Chi noted, his own view may be compared to the 
sudden enlightenment of Buddhism.106 Actually Wang Yang-ming 
approved of both. This is clearly recorded in both the following section 
and the account given in the Nien-p'u.107 Wang Chi in his own account, 
however, added that the Teacher held the doctrine of four non-beings as 
a secret and was reluctant to tell people about it, thus implying that it 
was his final doctrine.108 Wang Chi's account, which presents the Teacher's 
doctrine as one of nondistinction between good and evil, is of course a 
distortion. Unfortunately, this distortion came to be accepted as the 
Teacher's correct teaching and as such was attacked vigorously for a 
hundred years.109 Critics attacked Wang the Teacher for falling into 
Buddhism. Such a criticism may justifiably be applied to Wang the pupil, 
whose ideas approximate those of Buddhism very closely, but not to 
Wang the Teacher. The Teacher definitely stated, "The original substance 
of the mind is characterized by the highest good."110 This idea underlies 

104 See above, sec. 257, n. 15. 

105 See above, preface to sees. 130 ff., n. 1. 

106 Wang Lung-bsi Hsien-sheng cb'uan-cbi, i:ia-3a. 

107 Wang Wen-eft eng Kung ch'uan-sbu, 34: 3 93-41 b. There is an important 
variation in the account by Tsou Tung-kuo, in the Tsou Tung-kuo chi, 3:47a, 
where Ch'ien is quoted as saying, "The mind is characterized by perfect goodness 
but not evil." But Tsou's record is a secondary source, whereas Ch'ien recorded 
or at least edited this section and compiled the Nien-p'u. 

108 Wang Lung-bsi Hsien-sheng ch'iian-cbi. For discussions of the doctrine among 
Wang's followers, see Ming-ju hsiieh-an, chs. 12, 18, 32, and 62. 

109 The most severe criticisms are found in Ku Hsien-ch'eng (15 50-1612), 
Hsiao-bsin-cbai cha-chi, n:7b-8a, i6:8a-b, i8:ib-3b; and in Kao P'an-lung 
(1562-1626), Kao T%u i-shu, i:i5a-b. Criticisms in Liu Tsung-chou (1 578-1645), 
Liu T^u ctfuan-shu, 8:24a-26a, and in Huang Tsung-hsi, Shih-shuo, in Ming-ju 
hsiieh-an, p. 5a-b, are more correctly directed against Wang Chi. 

110 See below, sec. 318. See also above, sees. 3, 4, 91, and 92. 

Part III 243 

practically all of his teachings. When he said that "in the original substance 
of the mind there is no distinction of good and evil," he did not mean 
there is no moral distinction but that the mind does not make a special 
effort to desire good or evil. This has been pointed out by Huang Tsung- 
hsi, who presented a strong defense and counterattack.111 It was unfor- 
tunate that the Teacher passed away in the year following the conversation 
before he had an opportunity to clarify his position. The whole critical 
reception of his doctrine in four axioms was really part of a violent 
reaction against the entire Wang school rather than against this particular 
teaching. Unfair as the attack was, however, it did check what the Confu- 
cians considered to be a possible deterioration into Buddhist neutraliza- 
tion of good and evil. 

315. In the ninth month of the sixth year of Chia-ching [1527] our 
Teacher had been called from retirement and appointed to subdue 
once more the rebellion in Ssu-en and T'ien-chou112 [when the earlier 
expedition under another official had failed]. As he was about to 
start, Ju-chung [Wang Chi] and I [Ch'ien Te-hung] discussed learn- 
ing. He repeated the words of the Teacher's instructions as follows: 

"In the original substance of the mind there is no distinction of good and 

evil. 
When the will becomes active, however, such distinction exists. 
The faculty of innate knowledge is to know good and evil. 
The investigation of things is to do good and remove evil." 

I asked, "What do you think this means ?" 

Ju-chung said, "This is perhaps not the final conclusion. If we 
say that in the original substance of the mind there is no distinction 
between good and evil, then there must be no such distinction in the 
will, in knowledge, and in things. If we say that there is a distinction 
between good and evil in the will, then in the final analysis there 
must also be such a distinction in the substance of the mind." 

I said, "The substance of the mind is the nature endowed in us 
by Heaven, and is originally neither good nor evil. But because we 
have a mind dominated by habits, we see in our thoughts a distinc- 
tion between good and evil. The work of the investigation of 
things, the extension of knowledge, the sincerity of the will, the 
rectification of the mind, and the cultivation of the personal life is 
aimed precisely at recovering that original nature and substance. If 

111 Ming-ju hsileh-an, 10:1b, 16:4a. 

112 Both were counties in Kwangsi. 

244 Instructions for Practical hiving 

there were no good or evil to start with, what would be the necessity 
of such effort ?" 

That evening we sat down beside the Teacher at the T'ien-ch'iian 
Bridge. Each stated his view and asked to be corrected. The Teacher 
said, "I am going to leave now. I wanted to have you come and talk 
this matter through. You two gentlemen complement each other 
very well, and should not hold on to one side. Here I deal with two 
types of people. The man of sharp intelligence apprehends straight 
from the source. The original substance of the human mind is in 
fact crystal-clear without any impediment and is the equilibrium 
before the feelings are aroused. The man of sharp intelligence has 
accomplished his task as soon as he has apprehended the original 
substance, penetrating the self, other people, and things internal and 
things external all at the same time. On the other hand, there are 
inevitably those whose minds are dominated by habits so that the 
original substance of the mind is obstructed. I therefore teach them 
definitely and sincerely to do good and remove evil in their will and 
thoughts. When they become expert at the task and the impurities 
of the mind are completely eliminated, the original substance of the 
mind will become wholly clear. Ju-chung's view is the one I use in 
dealing with the man of sharp intelligence. Te-hung's view is for 
the second type. If you two gentlemen use your views interchange- 
ably, you will be able to lead all people — of the highest, average, 
and lowest intelligence — to the truth. If each of you holds on to 
one side, right here you will err in handling properly the different 
types of man and each in his own way will fail to understand fully 
the substance of the Way." 

After a while he said again, "From now on whenever you discuss 
learning with friends be sure not to lose sight of my basic purpose. 

In the original substance of the mind there is no distinction of good and 

evil. 
When the will becomes active, however, such distinction exists. 
The faculty of innate knowledge is to know good and evil. 
The investigation of things is to do good and remove evil. 

Just keep to these words of mine and instruct people according to 
their types, and there will not be any defect. This is indeed a task that 
penetrates both the higher and the lower levels. It is not easy to 
find people of sharp intelligence in the world. Even Yen Hui and 
Ming-tao [Ch'eng Hao] dared not assume that they could fully 

Part III 245 

realize the original substance of the mind as soon as they apprehended 
the task. How can we lightly expect this from people? People's 
minds are dominated by habits. If we do not teach them concretely 
and sincerely to devote themselves to the task of doing good and 
removing evil right in their innate knowledge rather than merely 
imagining an original substance in a vacuum, all that they do will 
not be genuine and they will do no more than cultivate a mind of 
vacuity and quietness.113 This defect is not a small matter and must 
be exposed as early as possible." On that day both Ju-chung and I 
attained some enlightenment. 

316. When the Teacher first returned to Yiieh,114 very few friends 
came to visit him. Later more and more came from all parts of the 
country. From the second year of Chia-ching [1523] the people who 
surrounded him were so many that they sat shoulder to shoulder. 
Take Buddhist temples like the Kuang-hsiang and the T'ien-fei in 
the city. Often several tens of people were housed in one room where 
they ate together. At night there was no room for them to sleep. They 
took turns at sitting, and the singing lasted until dawn. Temples 
far and near in mountains like Nan-chen, Yii-hsueh, and Yang- 
ming-tung115 were all places where like-minded friends visited and 
stayed. Whenever our Teacher took his chair to lecture, there were 
always several hundred people sitting around him to listen. There 
was not a single day in any month in which we did not send off ot 
welcome someone. The point was reached when there were some who 
attended the Teacher for over a year and yet their names were not 
known. Whenever some left, the Teacher always sighed and said, 
"Although you gentlemen are leaving, you do not go outside heaven 
and earth. So long as you share this feeling of mine I can forget my 
own seeming physical existence." When the students left the room 
after listening to his lectures, all leaped for joy. I have heard seniors 
of the school say that, although before the Nanking days [1 5 14-16] the 
followers were many, they had never been as numerous as in Yiieh. 
Although this was because the more he lectured the more extensive 

113 Like that of the Taoists and Buddhists. 

114 Wang returned to Yiieh from the successful suppression of Prince 
Ning's revolt in 1521. 

115 Neither Yu-hsiieh nor Yang-ming-tung was a cave, as the words hsiieb 
and tung have misled many people into believing. See Mao Ch'i-ling (1623- 
1716), Wang Wen-ctfeng chuan-pen, pp. ib-2a. 

246 Instructions for Practical Living 

the belief and confidence in him became, essentially it was because 
our Teacher's learning increasingly advanced so that the subtlety of 
his influence and attraction was like ever-changing spirit116 that 
cannot be localized in any particular place or direction. It was this, of 
course, that made the difference. 

CONVERSATIONS RECORDED BY HUANG 
I-FANG1 (Sections 317-343) 

317. "According to you,2 'Extensive study of literature,'3 means 
that in whatever thing one may be doing, one should learn to 
preserve this Principle of Nature. If this is so, it does not seem to 
agree with the Confucian saying, 'When a student has any energy 
to spare after the performance of moral duties, he should use it to 
study literature and the arts.' "4 

The Teacher said, "The Six Arts, like the Book of Odes and the 
Book of History,5 are manifestations of the Principle of Nature. Litera- 
ture is included in them. Investigation shows that the Six Arts, like 
the Book of Odes and the Book of History, are all ways of learning to 
preserve this Principle of Nature. Literature is not restricted to what 
has taken place in human affairs. To devote extra energy to studying 
literature means merely to study extensively the human affairs 
recorded in literature." 

Someone asked about the saying, "He who learns but does not 
think [is lost. He who thinks but does not learn is in danger]."6 

The Teacher said, "This was also said for a particular reason. 
Actually thinking is no different from learning. When doubt arises 
in one's learning, he must think it over. There are, of course, the 
kind of people who think but do not learn. They only think in a 
vacuum, hoping to evolve truth through imagination. They do not 
definitely and concretely devote their efforts to their bodies and 

116 Reading shen [to expand] as shen [spirit]. 

1 See above, sec. 222, n. 1. 

2 See above, sec. 9. 

3 Analects, 6:25. 

4 Ibid., 1:6. 

5 Another interpretation: "The two Classics and the Six Arts [of ceremonies, 
music, archery, carriage-driving,writing, and mathematics"]. Since the topic 
under discussion is literature, the interpretation adopted is more appropriate. 

6 Analects, 2:15. 

Part III 247 

minds so as to learn to preserve the Principle of Nature. They look 
upon thinking and learning as two different things and therefore 
have the troubles of being lost and being in danger. Actually thinking 
is thinking about one's learning. Thinking and learning are in fact 
not two different things." 

318. The Teacher said, "Former scholars7 interpreted the investiga- 
tion of things as investigating all the things in the world. How can 
all things in the world be investigated ? [Ch'eng I] even said 'Every 
blade of grass and every tree possesses principle.'8 How can we 
investigate ? Even if we could succeed in investigating every blade of 
grass and every tree, how can we return to ourselves and make the 
will sincere ? I interpret the word ko9 to mean rectifying and wu to 
mean affairs or events. By personal life the Great Learning means the 
ears, the eyes, the mouth, the nose, and the four limbs. To cultivate 
the personal life means for the eyes not to see what is contrary to 
propriety, the ears not to hear what is contrary to propriety, the 
mouth not to say what is contrary to propriety, and the four limbs 
not to do what is contrary to propriety. But if we want to cultivate 
the personal life, how can we do so by applying the effort to the 
body ? The mind is the master of the body. Although the eye sees, 
what makes it see is the mind. Although the ear hears, what makes it 
hear is the mind. And although the mouth and the four limbs speak 
and move, what makes them speak and move is the mind. Therefore 
to cultivate the personal life lies in realizing through personal 
experience the true substance of one's mind and always making it 
broad and extremely impartial without the slightest incorrectness. 
Once the master is correct, then, as it operates through the channel 
of the eye, it will naturally see nothing which is contrary to pro- 
priety. As it operates through the channel of the ear, it will naturally 
hear nothing which is contrary to propriety. And as it operates 
through the channels of the mouth and the four limbs, it will 
naturally say or do nothing which is contrary to propriety. This 
means that the cultivation of the personal life consists in rectifying 
the mind.10 

7 Like Ch'eng I and Chu Hsi. 

8 I-shu, 18:9a. 

9 In the phrase ko-wu [investigation of things]. 

10 The text of the Great Learning. 

19 

248 Instructions for Practical Living 

"But the original substance of the mind is characterized by the 
highest good. Is there anything in the original substance of the mind 
that is not good ? Now that we want to rectify the mind, where in 
this original substance must we direct our effort ? We must direct it 
where the mind operates and then the effort can be earnest and 
concrete. In the mind's operation, it is impossible for it to be entirely 
free from evil. Therefore it must be here that we make earnest and 
concrete effort. This means to make the will sincere. For instance, 
when a thought to love the good arises, right then and there make 
an earnest and concrete effort to love the good. When a thought to 
hate evil arises, right then and there make an earnest and concrete 
effort to hate evil. If whenever the will operates it is sincere, how 
can the original substance of the mind help being correct ? Therefore 
if one wishes to rectify the mind, he must first make his will sincere. 
Only when the effort reaches this point of sincerity of the will will 
it find a solution. 

"However, the foundation of the sincerity of the will lies in the 
extension of knowledge. What has been described as 'what people 
do not know but I alone know'11 is exactly the innate knowledge in 
our mind. If one knows what good is but does not do it right then 
and there according to this innate knowledge, or knows what evil 
is but does not get rid of it according to this innate knowledge, this 
innate knowledge will be obscured. This means that knowledge 
cannot be extended. If the innate knowledge of our mind cannot be 
extended to the utmost, then although we know that we should love 
the good, we cannot earnestly and concretely love it and although 
we know that we should hate evil, we cannot earnestly and concretely 
hate it. How can the will be sincere? Therefore the extension of 
knowledge is the foundation of the sincerity of the will. But this 
extension of knowledge is not something to be done in a vacuum. 
It is to rectify [what is wrong in the mind] in whatever actual things 
one is doing. For instance, if one has the will to do good, then he 
should do it right in the things he happens to be doing. If one has the 
will to get rid of evil, he should resist evil right in the things he is 
doing. Getting rid of evil is, of course, to rectify what is incor- 
rect in the mind and return to the original state of correctness. When 
good is done, evil is corrected. Hence, doing good is also to rectify 
what is incorrect in the mind and return to the original state of 

11 Chu Hsi, Ta-hsiieh chang-chii, ch. 6, and Ta-hsiieh huo-wen, pt. z, p. 28b. 

Part III 249 

correctness. In this way the innate knowledge of our mind will not 
be obscured by selfish desires and can then be extended to the utmost, 
and whenever the will operates, its desire to love good and to get 
rid of evil will always be sincere. Thus the concrete starting point of 
the effort to make the will sincere lies in the investigation of things. 
If the investigation of things is to be done in this way, everyone can 
do it. This is why 'Every man can become Yao and Shun.' "12 

319. The Teacher said, "People merely say that in the investigation 
of things we must follow Chu Hsi, but when have they carried it out 
in practice? I have carried it out earnestly and definitely. In my 
earlier years13 my friend Ch'ien14 and I discussed the idea that to 
become a sage or a worthy one must investigate all the things in the 
world. But how can a person have such tremendous energy? I 
therefore pointed to the bamboos in front of the pavilion and told 
him to investigate them and see. Day and night Mr. Ch'ien went 
ahead trving to investigate to the utmost the principles in the bam- 
boos. He exhausted his mind and thoughts and on the third day he 
was tired out and took sick. At first I said that it was because his 
energy and strength were insufficient. Therefore I myself went to 
try to investigate to the utmost. From morning till night, I was 
unable to find the principles of the bamboos. On the seventh day I 
also became sick because I thought too hard. In consequence we 
sighed to each other and said that it was impossible to be a sage or 
a worthy, for we do not have the tremendous energy to investigate 
things that they have. After I had lived among the barbarians for 
[almost] three years,15 I understood what all this meant and realized 
that there is really nothing in the things in the world to investigate, 
that the effort to investigate things is only to be carried out in and 
with reference to one's body and mind, and that if one firmly 
believes that everyone can become a sage, one will naturally be able 
to take up the task of investigating things. This idea, gentlemen, 
I must convey to you." 

12 Book of Mencius, 6B:2. 

13 According to the Nien-p'u, the following incident took place in 1492. 

14 This friend was not Ch'ien Te-hung (see above, preface to sees. 130 ff.), 
since he did not meet Wang until 15 21. 

16 When he was banished to become an official in Kuei-chou between 1506 
and 1508. 

250 Instructions for Practical Living 

320. One of the disciples said that Shao Tuan-feng16 maintained 
that boys are not able to investigate things and therefore they should 
only be taught to sprinkle and sweep the floor and to answer 
questions. 

The Teacher said, "Sprinkling and sweeping the floor and 
answering questions are also things. Since the innate knowledge of 
a boy can only reach this level, to teach him to sprinkle and sweep 
the floor and to answer questions is to extend his innate knowledge. 
Again, if a boy knows enough to stand in awe of a teacher or an 
elder, this is also due to his innate knowledge. Therefore, although 
he may be playing, if he sees a teacher or an elder, he will bow and 
show his respect right away. This shows that he is able to investigate 
things and extend his innate knowledge of revering teachers and 
elders. A boy naturally has a boy's way of investigating things and 
extending knowledge." 

He further said, "In this investigation of things that I am talking 
about here, from the boy to the sage, all require the same kind of 
effort, with the exception that the sage is more expert in investigating 
things and therefore does not need to spend any energy. Even a 
vendor of fuel wood can investigate things in this way. From nobilities 
and high officials to the emperor, all investigate in this way." 

321. Someone suspected that knowledge and action do not form 
a unity and asked about the saying, "It is not difficult to know."17 
The Teacher said, "The innate faculty naturally knows, which is in 
fact quite easy. But often one cannot extend his innate knowledge 
to the utmost. This shows that it is not difficult to know but difficult 
to act." 

322. A disciple asked, "How can knowledge and action form a 
unity ? The Doctrine of the Mean, for example, talks about learning 
extensively and also practicing earnestly.18 This would clearly 
distinguish knowledge and action as two different things." 

The Teacher said, "To study extensively is nothing but to learn 
to preserve the Principle of Nature in everything one does, and to 
practice earnestly is nothing but to study incessantly." 

16 Nothing is known of him. 

17 But difficult to act. Book of History, "Charge to Yu," pt. 2. Cf. trans, by 
Legge, Shoo King, p. 258. 

18 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 20. 

Part III 251 

The disciple again asked, "The Book of Changes says, '[The 
superior man] studies to accumulate it' and then also says, 'He 
practices it with humanity.'19 How is this?" 

The Teacher said, "It is the same. If in everything one learns to 
preserve this Principle of Nature, then the mind will never be lost. 
Hence it is said, '[The superior man] studies to accumulate it.' If 
one learns always to preserve this Principle of Nature without 
allowing any selfish desire to interrupt the effort, it means that this 
mind never ceases working. Hence it is said, 'He practices it with 
humanity.' " 

The disciple again asked, "Confucius said, 'When a man's knowl- 
edge is sufficient to attain but his humanity is not sufficient for him 
to hold [what he may have gained, he will lose it again].'20 Here 
knowledge and action are two." 

The Teacher said, "To say 'sufficient to attain' already implies 
action. Because one cannot practice all the time and his effort is 
already interrupted by selfish desires, his humanity is not sufficient 
for him to hold it." 

The disciple further asked about the theory that the mind is 
identical with principle and said, "Master Ch'eng I said, 'What is 
inherent in a thing is principle.'21 How can it be said that the mind 
is identical with principle?" 

The Teacher said, "The word 'mind' should be added to the saying 
to mean that when the mind is engaged in a thing, there is principle. 
For example, when the mind is engaged in serving one's father, there 
is the principle of filial piety, and when the mind is engaged in serving 
the ruler, there is the principle of loyalty, and so forth." 

Thereupon the Teacher said to the disciples, "You gentlemen 
must understand the basic purpose of my founding this doctrine. 
Why should I now declare that the mind is identical with principle ? 
Simply because people of the world divide the mind and principle 
into two, thus giving rise to many defects and evils. For instance, 
the five powerful despots22 drove out the barbarians and honored 
the House of Chou all because of their selfishness, and therefore 
they were not in accord with principle. Some people say that they 

19 Book of Changes, commentary on hexagram no. i. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 416. 

20 Analects, 15:32. 

21 1 cbuan, 4:20b. Cf. I-sbu 18:17a. 
22 See above, sec. 11, n. 46. 

252 Instructions for Practical hiving 

acted in accord with principle, but their minds did not completely 
become identified with the Principle of Nature. These people always 
admire the deeds of the powerful despots. They just want their 
deeds to look good on the outside and completely ignore the 
relationship to the mind. They divide the mind and principle into 
two and unwittingly drift into the insincerity which is characteristic 
of the way of despots. Therefore I talk about the identification of the 
mind and principle so people will know that mind and principle are 
one and devote their efforts to the mind instead of accumulating 
individual acts of righteousness externally.23 This is the essence of 
the kingly way of moral principles. This is the basic purpose of my 
founding the doctrine." 

The disciple asked, "There are many sayings of sages and worthies. 
Why should they be lumped together as one?" 

The Teacher said, "I do not lump them together as one. It has 
been said, 'The Way is one and only one.'24 It is also said, ' [Heaven 
and earth] are without any doubleness and so they produce things in 
an unfathomable way.'25 Heaven, Earth, and the sage are all one. 
How can they be separated ?" 

323. [The Teacher said,] "The mind is not a piece of flesh with 
blood. It is wherever consciousness is. For example, the ears and the 
eyes know to see and hear and the hands and feet know the feeling 
of itches and pain. All this consciousness is the mind." 

324. I said, "According to your doctrine of the investigation of 
things, when the Doctrine of the Mean teaches people to be watchful 
over themselves when alone,26 when [Mencius taught people to] 
accumulate righteous deeds,27 and when [Confucius taught] the 
extensive study of literature and restraining oneself with the rules 
of propriety,28 they are each teaching different ways of investigating 
things." 

The Teacher said, "This is not true. The investigation of things 
is the same as being watchful over oneself when alone. It is the same 

23 Reading i [righteousness] as wai [external]. 

24 Book of Mencius, $K:\. 

25 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 26. 
28 Ibid., ch. 1. 

27 Book of Mencius, zK:z. 

28 Analects, 6:25. 

Part III 253 

as being cautious and apprehensive.29 From these efforts to the 
accumulation of righteous deeds, the extensive study of literature, 
and restraining oneself with the rules of propriety, the task is the 
same. They are not to be considered as several and separate ways of 
investigating things." 

325. I asked about the saying in the Doctrine of the Mean, "The 
superior man honors the moral nature [and follows the path of 
study and inquiry]."30 The Teacher said, "To follow the path of 
study and inquiry is the way to honor one's moral nature. Hui-weng 
[Chu Hsi] said that Tzu-ching [Lu Hsiang-shan] had taught people 
about honoring the moral nature but that he himself emphasized more 
strongly following the path of study and inquiry.31 This is to separate 
honoring the moral nature from following the path of study and 
inquiry. Take our studies and discussions now. We devote much 
work to them for no other reason than to preserve this mind and not 
to lose its moral nature. Is there such a thing as honoring the moral 
nature in a vacuum without also pursuing study and inquiry or pur- 
suing study and inquiry in a vacuum without any relation to the 
moral nature ? If so, I don't know what there is to learn in all our 
present studies and discussions." 

I asked about the next two sentences: "He achieves breadth and 
greatness and pursues the refined and subtle to the limit. He seeks 
to reach the greatest height and brilliancy and follows the path of 
the mean."32 

The Teacher said, "Pursuing the refined and subtle to the limit 
is the way to achieve breadth and greatness, and following the path 
of the mean is the way to reach the greatest height and brilliancy. 
For the original substance of the mind is broad and great. If one 
cannot pursue the refined and subtle to the limit, his mind will be 
obscured by selfish desires and it will become exceedingly small. 
If he scrutinizes even the most minute points or angles in every 
possible way, selfish desires will not be able to obscure his mind, and 
thus naturally there will not be many opportunities for these 

29 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 1. 

30 Ibid., ch. 27. 

31 Chu T%u wen-chi, 54:5b. Hui-weng was Chu Hsi's literary name and Tzu- 
ching was Lu Hsiang-shan's courtesy name. 

32 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 27. 

254 Instructions for 'Practical Living 

obscurations and obstructions. How can he then fail to extend to the 
height of breadth and greatness ?" 

I further asked, "Do the refined and subtle refer to thoughts or to 
principle?" 

The Teacher said, "The refinement and subtlety of thought are 
the same as the refinement and subtlety of the principles of things." 

326. The Teacher said, "People who discuss the nature of man and 
things today agree and differ in many ways. But they are all talking 
about nature and not realizing it. Among those who realize nature, 
there is neither similarity nor difference to talk about." 

3 27. I asked, "I am afraid innate knowledge cannot be free from the 
desires for music, sex, wealth, or profit." 

The Teacher said, "Of course not. But in his effort the beginner 
must wipe the desires all out and clean them up and not allow any 
to stay or accumulate. Then as they occur and as he encounters them, 
they will not be a cause for trouble, and he will naturally respond 
to them and handle them smoothly. Innate knowledge operates only 
in [human experience with things such as] music, sex, wealth, and 
profit. If one can extend his innate knowledge in a most refined and 
clear way without the least obscuration, then all his dealings with 
music, sex, wealth, and profit will be instances of the operation of the 
natural principle." 

328. The Teacher said, "You gentlemen and I have been discussing 
the extension of knowledge and the investigation of things every 
day. For one or two decades it has been the same. If after hearing 
what I say you gentlemen earnestly and definitely proceed to devote 
yourselves to the task, you will realize that with each talk of mine 
you will have made some progress. Otherwise, each session will 
be just so much talk. What is the use even if you listen to it?" 

329. The Teacher said, "The original substance of the human 
mind is always in the state of absolute quiet and inactivity, and when 
acted on will immediately penetrate all things.33 The state before 
there is any response to it is not an earlier one, and the state after 
there has been response to it is not a later one."34 

33 Quoting the Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 10. Cf. 
trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 370. 

34 A quotation from Ch'eng I, I-sbu, 15:8a. 

Part III 255 

330. A friend related a Buddhist story saying, "A Buddhist pointed 
his finger and asked, 'Have you seen this ?' 'Yes,' replied the monks. 
He then put his finger in his sleeve and asked, 'Do you still see it ?' 
The monks said, 'No.'35 According to the Buddhist interpretation, 
this means that they had not seen the Buddha-nature. I do not under- 
stand this." 

The Teacher said, "Fingers may or may not be seen. Your way 
of seeing nature is always directed to the human mind, only to its 
active occupation with what can be seen or heard and not to its con- 
crete effort concerning what is not seen or heard. But the original 
substance of innate knowledge consists in what is not seen or heard 
and the effort to extend innate knowledge consists in the mind's being 
cautious [over things one does not see] and apprehensive [over things 
one does not hear]. The student must at all times and at every moment 
see what he does not see and hear what he does not hear and then 
his effort can be concrete and sincere. When after a long time he has 
mastered the task, he does not need to exert energy, and without 
any caution or control the true nature will naturally operate without 
cease. How can seeing or hearing external things be any trouble?" 

331. I said, "A former scholar said that the flying of the hawk, the 
leaping of fishes,36 and the feeling that one must always be doing 
something37 are all very lively and dynamic in the same way."38 

The Teacher said, "Correct. The whole universe is very lively and 
dynamic because of the same principle. It is the unceasing universal 
operation of one's innate knowledge. To extend innate knowledge 
is the task of always doing something. Not only should this principle 
not be departed from, in reality it cannot be. The Way is everywhere, 
and so is our task." 

332. The Teacher said, "Here, gentlemen, all of you must have 
your minds determined to become sages. At all times and at every 
moment, your effort must be so earnest and strong that 'Every 
beating on the body will leave a scar and every slap on the face will 
fill the palm with blood.39 Only then can every sentence of mine be 

35 The origin of this story is not known. 

36 Ch'eng Hao, quoting Book of Odes, ode no. 239. 

37 Mencius' saying, in Book of Mencius, 2 A: 2. 

38 Ch'eng Hao, l-sbu, 3:1a. 

39 A tenth-century saying often quoted by the Zen Buddhists. 

256 Instructions for Practical hiving 

effective as you listen to me. If you while away your time aimlessly, 
you will be like a piece of dead flesh which feels no pain even if it 
struck. In this way you will never amount to anything. When you 
go home, you will find only your old cunning way of doing things. 
Will that not be a pity?" 

333. I said, "Recently I seem to have few erroneous thoughts and 
not any attachment in my thoughts as to any particular way of 
making an effort. Is this the right way to pursue the task ?" 

The Teacher said, "Go ahead and make earnest and sincere effort. 
It will do no harm even if you have little bit of attachment in your 
thoughts. In time you will naturally be at ease and calm. If, on the 
other hand, after you have made only a little effort, you think there 
is already a result, how can that be reliable ?" 

334. A friend sighed and said, "When a selfish desire begins to 
emerge, one clearly knows it in his own mind but cannot immedi- 
ately get rid of it." 

The Teacher said, "As the desire emerges, your knowledge of it 
is your very life. Right then and there go ahead and erase the desire. 
That is the task of establishing one's destiny." 

335. [The Teacher said,] "Confucius' doctrine, 'By nature men 
are alike [but through practice they have become far apart],'40 is the 
same as Mencius' doctrine that human nature is originally good,41 
and should not be understood solely in terms of physical nature. If 
we speak in terms of physical nature, then the strong and the weak 
are opposed to each other, for instance. How can they be alike? 
Only in their original goodness are people the same. When people 
are born, they are the same in original goodness. When those who 
are strong practice the good, they become strength that is good, and 
when they practice evil, they become strength that is evil. When 
those who are weak practice good, they become weakness that is 
good, and when they practice evil, they become weakness that is 
evil.42 Consequently, they become farther and farther apart." 

336. The Teacher once told the students, "Not a single idea should 
be allowed to attach to the original substance of the mind, just 

40 Analects, 17:2. 

41 Book of Mencius, zA.:G, 6A:i-6. 

42 These ideas are derived from Chou Tun-i, T'ung-shu, ch. 7. 

Part III 257 

as not the least dirt should be allowed to stick to the eye. It does not 
take much dirt for the whole eye to see nothing but complete 
darkness." 

He further said, "This idea need not be a selfish idea. Even if it 
is good, it should not be attached to the mind. If you put some gold 
or jade dust in the eye, just the same it cannot open." 

337. I said, "The human mind and things form the same body.43 
In the case of one's body, blood and the vital force in fact circulate 
through it and therefore we can say they form the same body. In the 
case of men, their bodies are different and differ even more from those 
of animals and plants. How can they be said to form the same 
body?" 

The Teacher said, "Just look at the matter from the point of 
view of the subtle incipient activating force of their mutual influence 
and response. Not only animals and plants, but heaven and earth 
also, form the same body with me. Spiritual beings also form the 
same body with me." 

I asked the Teacher kindly to explain. 

The Teacher said, "Among the things under heaven and on 
earth, which do you consider to be the mind of Heaven and Earth ?" 

"I have heard that 'Man is the mind of Heaven and Earth.' "u 

"How does man become mind?" 

"Clear intelligence and clear intelligence alone." 

"We know, then, in all that fills heaven and earth there is but this 
clear intelligence. It is only because of their physical forms and bodies 
that men are separated. My clear intelligence is the master of heaven 
and earth and spiritual beings. If heaven is deprived of my clear 
intelligence, who is going to look into its height ? If earth is deprived 
of my clear intelligence, who is going to look into its depth? If 
spiritual beings are deprived of my clear intelligence, who is going 
to distinguish their good and evil fortune or the calamities and 
blessings that they will bring ? Separated from my clear intelligence, 
there will be no heaven, earth, spiritual beings, or myriad things, and 
separated from these, there will not be my clear intelligence. Thus 

43 Undoubtedly a quotation of Wang's, although it cannot be located. The 
idea is quite obvious in sec. 267. 

44 Book of Rites, "The Evolution of Rites." Cf. trans, by Legge, Li Ki, ch. 7, 
p. 382. 

258 Instructions for Practical Living 

they are all permeated with one material force. How can they be 
separated ?" 

I asked further, "Heaven, earth, spiritual beings, and the myriad 
things have existed from great antiquity. Why should it be that if my 
clear intelligence is gone, they will all cease to exist ?" 

"Consider the dead man. His spirit has drifted away and dispersed. 
Where are his heaven and earth and myriad things ?" 

338. Our Teacher began his journey to Ssu-en and T'ien-chou45 to 
subdue the rebellion. Wang Ju-chung46 and I [Ch'ien Te-hung]47 
followed after him and saw him off at Yen-t'an.48 Ju-chung raised 
the question of the Buddhist doctrine of the true state of dharmas 
[elements of existence] and illusory state of dharmas.49 

The Teacher said, "Wherever the [original] mind is, there is the 
true state. Wherever the [original] mind is not, there is the illusory 
state. At the same time, wherever the [subjective] mind is not, there 
is the true state, and wherever the [subjective] mind is, there is 
the illusory state." 

Ju-chung said, "When you say 'Wherever the mind is, there is the 
true state and wherever the mind is not, there is the illusory state/ 
you are talking about the task from the point of view of the original 
substance of the mind, and when you say, 'Wherever the mind is 
not, there is the true state, and wherever the mind is, there is the 
illusory state,' you are talking about the original substance from 
the point of view of the task." 

The Teacher approved his interpretation. At that time I was not 
quite clear. After several years of effort, I began to believe that the 
original substance and the task are one. Our Teacher uttered those 
words at that time incidentally in answer to a question. In teaching 
others we Confucians should not rely on Buddhist ideas to formulate 
our doctrines. 

339. I once saw our Teacher bid farewell to two or three elderly 
gentlemen at the gate. He withdrew and sat in the vestibule and 

45 In 1527. 

46 See above, sec. 257, n. 15. 

47 See above, preface to sees. 130 ff., n. 1. 

48 In modern Chekiang Province. 

49 The doctrine that the elements of existence are real is taught in the Lotus 
Scripture, ch. 1 ; the doctrine that the elements of existence are illusory is taught 
in the Pdrinirvdna Scripture, chs. 2 and 1 2. 

Part III 259 

appeared to be sad. I50 walked quickly forward to ask what the matter 
was. 

The Teacher said, "I have just discussed learning with these elders. 
Like trying to put a square into a circle, I got nowhere with them. 
This Way of ours is like a level road. Unfortunately, famous but 
mediocre scholars often block their own way and consequently fall 
into a field of obstacles for their whole lives without repentance. I 
don't know what they are talking about." 

I withdrew and told friends, "In teaching people our Teacher 
does not prefer others to the senile. His is the mind of a humane man 
with compassion toward things." 

340. The Teacher said, "A great defect in life is pride. The proud 
son is sure not to be filial, nor the proud minister loyal, nor the proud 
father affectionate, nor the proud friend faithful. Thus Hsiang and 
Tan-chu,51 both being unworthy, wasted their whole lives simply 
because of their pride. You gentlemen should always realize this 
personally: the human mind is in fact the natural principle. It is 
refined and clear without an iota of defilement or selfish attachment. 
It is just a non-ego. One must not harbor any egoism in the mind. 
To do so means to have pride. The many good points about ancient 
sages are but selflessness. Being selfless, one is naturally humble. 
Humility is the foundation of all virtues, while pride is the chief of 
all vices." 

341. The Teacher further said, "The Way is most simple and easy. 
It is also most refined and subtle. Confucius said, 'It is as easy as 
to look at one's palm.'52 Who does not see his palm every day? But 
when you ask him how the various lines and patterns in his palm 
look, he does not know. It is the same with the innate knowledge 
that I am talking about. It is immediately clear as soon as it is men- 
tioned. Who does not know it ? But if one purposely wants to see 
it, who can do so?" 

I said, "This innate knowledge probably has neither spatial 
restriction nor physical form.53 It is most difficult to grasp." 

50 See above, preface to sees. 130 ff., n. 1. 

81 See above, sees. 142, 245, 296, and see Book of Mencius, jA:2. 

52 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 19. 

53 Book of Changes, "Appended Remarks," pt. 1, ch. 4. Cf. trans, by Legge, 
Yi King, p. 354. 

260 Instructions for Practical Living 

The Teacher said, "Innate knowledge is the same as changes. 'As 
the Way, it changes frequently. It changes and moves without 
staying in one place, flowing about into any one of the six places of 
the hexagram. It ascends and descends without any constancy, and 
its elements of strength (yang) and weakness (yin) interchange. It 
cannot be considered as an invariable standard. It changes to suit 
the circumstances.'54 How can this innate knowledge be grasped? 
When one understands it thoroughly, he is a sage." 

342. I asked, "Confucius said, 'Hui is not any assistance to me. 
[Nothing that I say does not please him].'55 Does this mean that the 
Sage really expected assistance from his disciples ?" 

The Teacher said, "This is also true. The Way is indeed inexhaust- 
ible. The more people ask and argue about it, the more manifest will 
its refinement and subtlety become. The words of the Sage naturally 
cover all. But some questioners are obstructed in their minds. As they 
pressed a question on the Sage, he expounded all the more energeti- 
cally. But when Yen Hui heard one part, he knew all. He was very 
clear in his mind. Why did he need to ask or argue ? Consequently, 
the Sage remained in the state of absolute quiet and inactivity and 
did not expound anything. Hence Yen Hui was no assistance to him." 

343. Tsou Ch'ien-chih56 once told me [Ch'ien Te-hung],57 "Shu 
Kuo-shang58 once took a sheet of paper and asked the Teacher to 
write the following passage: 'Anybody who wishes to cultivate the 
fung and t^u trees, which may be grasped by one or both hands, 
knows how to nourish them. In the case of their own persons, men 
do not know how to nourish them.'59 The Teacher wrote, suspend- 
ing the brush in his hand. When he came to the last sentence, he 
looked around and said smilingly, 'Kuo-shang studied and succeeded 
in obtaining the highest degree in civil service examination. Can it 
really be that he does not know to nourish the person60 and still 

54 Ibid., "Appended Remarks," pt. 2, ch. 8. Cf. Legge, p. 399. 

65 Analects, 11:3. 

66 See above, sec. 314, n. 99. 

67 See above, preface to sees. 130 ff., n. 1. 
58 See above, sec. 204, n. 22. 

69 Book of Mencius, 6 A: 1 3 . 

60 Through civil service degrees and official positions according to the general 
philosophy of life at the time. 

Part III 261 

needs to recite this passage in order to warn himself?' For a time 
all friends in attendance were awed." 

Postscript by Ctiien Te-hung1 

In the winter of the seventh year of Chia-ching [1528-29], Wang 
Ju-chung2 and I were rushing to the funeral of our Teacher. When 
we reached Kuang-hsin3 we sent obituary notices to all fellow 
disciples and invited them to collect and record within three years 
our Teacher's sayings. Subsequently some fellow disciples sent me 
individually what they could remember.4 I selected those that had 
to do with questions presented to our Teacher for correction, and 
combined them with what I had recorded, and got a certain number 
of items. When I stayed at Wu [in 153 5],5 I was about to publish 
them together with the Wen-lu (Literary works).6 I left Wu because 
of a death in the family and therefore did not succeed in publishing 
them. 

At that time more and more followers lectured on our Teacher's 
doctrines in all parts of the country, the fundamental doctrines of 
our school had been clarified, and it appeared that any publication 
would be superfluous. I therefore no longer thought of it. Last year 
a fellow disciple, Mr. Tseng Ts'ai-han,7 got hold of my manuscript, 
collected more sayings on the side, and published it in Ching-chou8 
under the title I-yen (Surviving words). I read it and felt that the 
selection was not refined. I therefore eliminated the repetitions and 
discarded the unimportant, kept a third of it, and published it at the 
Shui-hsi Academy in Ning-kuo9 under the title Ch'uan-hsi hsil-lu 
(Supplement to the instructions on practical living).10 In the summer 

1 See above, preface to sees. 130 ff., n. 1. 

2 See above, sec. 257, n. 15. 

3 A prefecture in modern Kiangsi. 

4 These are not to be confused with sees. 1-129, which had been published 
in 1 5 18. 

5 In Kiangsu Province. 

6 See above, preface to sees. 130 ff., n. 8. 

7 Nothing is known of him. 

8 In modern Hupei Province. 

9 Capital of a prefecture in modern Anhui Province. 

10 Meaning the supplement to the present Parts I and II. 

262 Instructions for Practical Living 

of this year I came here to Ch'i-chou.11 Mr. Shen Ssu-wei12 said to me, 
"The teachings of our Teacher's school have for a long time prevailed 
in all parts of the country except in Ch'i-chou. Those scholars of 
Ch'i-chou who have been able to read the I -yen of the Teacher felt 
as if they had received instructions from him personally, which 
pointed the way to them and led them to see innate knowledge 
as though seeing the light of the sun and moon once more. However, 
I am afraid that the transmission and practice of the doctrine have 
not been extensive, and I do not believe it is troublesome to republish 
them. Why not collect the missing sayings and publish an enlarged 
edition ?" 

I said, "You are right." The tenets of the extension of knowledge 
and the investigation of things of our school were to enlighten those 
who came to learn. Students practiced personally and came to 
reali2e silently. They dared not seek understanding through intellec- 
tion but only tried to attain concrete, personal realization. This was 
why our Teacher spoke all day without feeling troubled and the 
students listened all day without getting tired of the repetition. For 
as his instructions were concentrated, the students' personal realiza- 
tion became increasingly refined. Before he spoke we understood 
his subtle meaning. After he spoke the spirit manifested itself far 
beyond his words. This was all due to the sincerity of our gratitude 
for his influence. Now it has not been three decades since the death 
of our Teacher and it seems that his wise sayings and profound 
tenets are gradually fading away. Has this bad effect not come about 
because our group has not practiced them personally with sufficient 
effort but has talked too much instead ? As the tendencies of followers 
have become diverse, the doctrines of our school have not spread. 
I therefore took the unpublished material, selected those sayings 
that are not contradictory, and succeeded in putting them together 
as one part. Those remaining that do not reflect the true teachings 
of our Teacher and those already contained in the Wen-lu are all 
omitted. I also changed the middle part [of the I-Yen] into question 
and answer form.13 I sent them to Mr. Chang, magistrate of Huang - 
mei,14 to be published in an enlarged version so that the reader will 

11 A county in present Hupei. 

12 Disciple of Ou-yang Ch'ung-i (see above, sec. 104) and Wang Chi (see 
above, sec. 257). 

13 Referring to sees. 260-317. 

14 A county in present Hupei. 

Part III 263 

not seek understanding through intellection but only through 
concrete, personal realization and that he will have no more doubt 
about what is contained in this work. 

Respectfully written by disciple Ch'ien Te-hung 

at the Ch'ung-cheng Institute, Ch'i-chou, in the 

fourth month of the thirty-fifth year of Chia-ching [1556] 

PREFACE TO CHU HSI'S FINAL CONCLU- 
SIONS ARRIVED AT LATE IN LIFE 

The following "Preface" was written in 1 5 1 5 when Wang was forty- 
four, three years before the "Final Conclusions" was published. Ever 
since he had gone to Nanking in 15 14, he had aroused tremendous 
criticism because of his own critical spirit and because of his opposition 
to the Chu Hsi philosophy which had controlled the civil service examina- 
tions for over a century. Wang's situation must have been very desperate. 
Partly to lessen the animosity and partly to put his own theories into the 
mouth of Chu Hsi with the hope of wider acceptance of his own views, 
he selected a passage each from thirty-four letters written by Chu to 
twenty-four people, as well as a passage from Wu Ch'eng (1 249-1 3 3 3),1 
and published them under the above title in 1 5 1 8 in an attempt to show 
that Chu Hsi had changed his position in late life and adopted the views 
now advocated by Wang. These selections are arbitrary and mostly out of 
context. In the end Wang had to confess to Lo Ch'in-shun(i465-i 547)2 that 
his "chief idea was that it was important to accommodate and compro- 
mise." The matter created one of the most violent intellectual storms in 
Chinese history. Throughout the Ming and Ch'ing dynasties, Wang was 
severely criticized for intellectual dishonesty and for trying to deceive 
students by utilizing Chu Hsi's name and influence to promote his own 
doctrine.3 These are harsh criticisms, mostly made by Chu Hsi's followers. 
Others tended to sympathize with Wang and said that he did no more than 
early Confucians who put their doctrines into the mouths of ancient 
sages. One thing is certain: Wang's intent was not to compromise but to 

1 He was honored as Master Ts'ao-lu. The greatest Neo -Confucian of the 
Yuan dynasty, he attempted to synthesize the rationalistic Neo -Confucianism 
of Chu Hsi and the idealistic Neo-Confucianism of Lu Hsiang-shan. 

2 His literary name was Cheng-an. See above, sec. 176. 

3 The most severe criticisms are found in: Lo Cheng-an chi, ch. 1 ; Ch'en Chien 
(Ch'en Ch'ing-lan, 1497-1567), Hr#^-p# fung-pien, I, B; Feng K'o (fl. 1562), 
CViu-shih pien, ch. 4; Lu Lung-ch'i (1630-92), San-yii-fang wen-cbi, ch. 2; 
and Juan Yuan (1 764-1 849), Yen-ching-shih hsii-chi, ch. 3. 

264 Instructions for Practical Living 

apply the Taoist tactics of withdrawing in order to advance. It is not 
necessary to include here the passages selected by Wang. The significance 
of the whole episode is sufficiently clear from the following "Introduction" 
by Ch'ien Te-hung and Wang's own "Preface." 

Introduction by Ch'ien Te-hung: The "Final Conclusions" was at first 
published in southern Kiangsi [in 1 5 18].4 During his long period of 
rest because of an eye ailment, Master Chu suddenly realized 
the depth and subtlety of the doctrine of the Sage. Consequently, he 
regretted that his commentaries and writings during middle age 
had done damage to himself as well as others. He wrote to many of 
his like-minded friends about it. 

In reading these letters, our Teacher was glad that his own convic- 
tions agreed with those of Chu Hsi. He personally copied passages 
from them to make up an article. His pupil published and circulated 
it. From then on few people engaged any further in the controversy 
on the question of whether our Teacher differed from or agreed 
with Master Chu. Our Teacher said, "This is an unexpected help 
I get." 

In the sixth year of Lung-ch'ing [1572], Mr. Hsieh T'ing-chieh 
published our Teacher's Complete Works. He told me to include this 
article at the end of the recorded sayings [Instructions on Practical 
Living] so as to show that our Teacher's teachings and those of 
Master Chu do not conflict and that all correct doctrines throughout 
the ages have come from the same source. This article consists 
of a number of items, including our Teacher's own "Preface" and 
the "Postscript" by Yuan Ch'ing-lin.5 Violating modesty, I have 
written this introduction. 

The Preface 

As an introduction, Wang Yang-ming says: The transmission of the 
teachings of Confucius terminated with Mencius. It was not until 
one thousand and five hundred years later that Lien-hsi [Chou Tun-i] 
and Ming-tao [Ch'eng Hao] began to search again for its clues. From 
then on the system was developed [by Chu Hsi and his followers] and 

4 According to the Nien-p'u. 

5 He followed Chu Hsi's doctrines for some thirty years. Finally he heard 
Wang's teachings and found them to be very simple and easy and turned away 
from Chu in favor of Wang. The "Postscript" was written in 15 18. 

Part III 265 

branched off more and more, at the same time gradually tending 
to become fragmented and torn apart, and finally was altogether 
dissipated. I have gone deeply into the reasons for this, and believe 
that for the most part the whole situation has been confused by the 
fact that famous but mediocre scholars talk too much. 

Since in my youth I was devoted to preparation for obtaining a 
civil service degree, my ambition was completely submerged in 
writing flowery compositions. Later I knew to a small extent how 
to engage in correct learning. However, I faced the difficulty that 
the various theories and interpretations were confusing and worri- 
some, and I was at a loss and did not know where to begin. Conse- 
quently, I sought answers in Taoism and Buddhism. I was happy 
to find something after my heart and felt that here lay the teachings 
of the Sage. But their teachings are sometimes at odds with those 
of Confucius, and when applied to the ordinary affairs of life they were 
often inadequate and had no solution to offer. I half followed them 
and half rejected them. I half tended toward them and half tended 
away from them. I believed in them and yet I doubted them. 

Later when I was banished to become an official in Lung-ch'ang,6 
I lived among the barbarians [1508-9] and in the midst of great 
difficulties. As a consequence of stimulating my mind and hardening 
my nature, I seemed to have rapidly awakened. I searched and made an 
effort at personal realization for another year, and looked for 
confirmation in the Five Classics7 and the Four Masters.8 It was like 
a torrent bursting the river bank and rushing to the sea. Then I 
realized, alas, that the path of the Sage is as level as a broad way. But 
scholars of today have erroneously opened a hole here and a crack 
there, have trod over obstacles and have fallen into ditches. In the 
final analysis their doctrines are inferior even to those of Buddhism 
and Taoism. No wonder the best scholars of the world have gotten 
tired of Confucianism and rushed to the other two systems. Shall 
we blame Buddhism and Taoism for this ? 

I have occasionally talked to like-minded friends about this. 
However, those who heard me lost no time in disapproving and 
criticizing me. They considered me as setting up strange doctrines and 
looking for novelty. Although I earnestly searched within myself 

8 In modern Kuei-chou. 

7 See above, Introduction, n. 1. 

8 Meaning the Four Books. See above, Introduction, n. 1. 

266 Instructions for Practical Living 

and tried hard to be humble and made sure to detect and remove 
any flaw there might be, my thoughts turned out to be more refined, 
clearer, and surer, and there was absolutely no more doubt left in my 
mind. Only in Master Chu's doctrines did I find some disagreement, 
for which I felt sorry for a long time. I was wondering whether, 
with his wisdom and virtue, Master Chu could still have failed to 
understand. When I was an official in Nanking [15 14] I got hold 
of his works and searched through them. Only then did I find that 
in his later years he clearly realized the mistakes of his earlier doc- 
trines. He regretted them so deeply as to say that he "cannot be 
redeemed from the sin of having deceived others as well as himself."9 
His Chi-chu (Collected commentaries)10 and Huo-wen (Questions and 
answers)11 that have been transmitted from generation to generation 
represent the tentative conclusions of his middle age. He blamed 
himself for not having been able to correct the mistakes of the old 
text of the Great Learning, much as he had wanted to. As to his 
Yii-lei (Classified conversations)12 and the like, since his disciples, 
each with the spirit of rivalry, had injected into them their subjec- 
tive viewpoints, they contradict even more his usual doctrines. 
Because of their limited information, scholars of today have followed 
and studied only these works. They have heard nothing about 
Chu Hsi's ideas after his awakening. Is it any wonder, then, that my 
words are not accepted and that what Master Chu had in mind has 
not been able to reveal itself to later generations ? 

As I feel fortunate that my ideas are not in conflict with those of 
Master Chu, and also am happy that he apprehended before me what 
our minds have in common, and furthermore, as I am sorry that 
scholars of today have only adhered to the tentative doctrine of 
Master Chu's middle age and do not know how to find what he taught 
after his awakening late in life, but compete with one another in 
making endless noise to confuse the correct learning without 
realizing that they themselves have joined the camps of heretics, I 
have selected and gathered passages privately to show like -minded 

9 A quotation from one of Chu Hsi's letters in Chu T^u wen-chi, 40:27a. 

10 These are the Ta-hsikh chang-chii, the Chung-yung cbang-chii, the Lun-yii 
chi-chu, and the Meng T^u chi-chu. 

11 These are the Ta-hsueh huo-wen, the Chung-yung huo-wen, the Lun-yii 
huo-wen, and the Meng T%u huo-wen. 

12 Chu Tvyt yii-lei. 

Part III 267 

friends so that they will no longer doubt my position and that we 
may hope that the doctrine of the Sage will be made clear to the 
world. 

Written by humble student Wang Shou-jen 
of Yu-yao13 on the first day of the 
eleventh month in the winter of the 
tenth year of Cheng-te 

18 Wang's native place in what is now Chekiang. 

Inquiry on the Great Learning 

Inquiry on the Great Learning 

{Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'iian-shu, 26:ib-5a) 

This is Wang Yang-ming's most important writing, for it embodies his 
basic teachings and represents his final conclusions. As his outstanding 
disciple Ch'ien Te-hung noted, Wang always discussed with the beginners 
the first chapter of the Great Learning and that of the Doctrine of the Mean, 
which he believed taught the complete task of Confucian learning.1 When 
his disciples requested him to write down his ideas, he refused, for he 
distrusted the written word and preferred oral transmission, and, further- 
more, he did not want to aggravate with his unorthodox ideas the already 
bitter controversy between his school and its opponents. It was not until 
1527, a little over a year before he died, when he was about to leave on 
a campaign to suppress a rebellion in South China, that he finally 
wrote this down.2 

Of greater significance is the fact that this essay contains all of Wang's 
fundamental doctrines: that the man of humanity forms one body with 
all things and extends his love to all, that the mind is principle, that the 
highest good is inherent in the mind, that to investigate things is to 
rectify the mind, and that the extension of the innate knowledge of the 
good is the beginning and end of a moral life. The theory of the unity of 
knowledge and action is not explicitly stated but is implied throughout, 
for in insisting that manifesting the clear character and loving the people 
are identical, he refused to separate the internal and the external fife. 
Indeed he stressed the point that, from the investigation of things to 
bringing peace to the world, all steps form one single task. In this he 
clearly departed from the Great Learning, which definitely says there is 
an order of first and last. Actually Wang merely used the Great Learning 
as a vehicle to express his own ideas. In this sense he was quite different 
from Chu Hsi, who only elaborated the teachings of the Great Learning. 
However, he still adhered to this ancient Classic and followed its old 
text.3 In spite of his direct opposition to Chu Hsi in the interpretation of 
the Great Learning, he did not, after all, go beyond Chu Hsi's position, 
that the Great Learning is the "gate to virtue."4 

1 Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu, 26:2a. 

2 Ibid., 26:10b. 

8 See above, sees. 1, 2, 129, and 173. 

* Chu Hsi's introduction to the Great Learning. Chu here is quoting Ch'eng I, 
Ts'ui-yen, 1:25a. 

272 Inquiry on the great learning 

Question: The Great Learning was considered by a former scholar 
as the learning of the great man.5 I venture to ask why the learning 
of the great man should consist in "manifesting the clear character."6 

Master Wang said: The great man regards Heaven, Earth, and 
the myriad things as one body. He regards the world as one family 
and the country as one person. As to those who make a cleavage 
between objects and distinguish between the self and others, they 
are small men. That the great man can regard Heaven, Earth, and 
the myriad things as one body is not because he deliberately wants 
to do so, but because it is natural to the humane nature of his mind 
that he do so. Forming one body with Heaven, Earth, and the 
myriad things is not only true of the great man. Even the mind of 
the small man is no different. Only he himself makes it small. There- 
fore when he sees a child about to fall into a well, he cannot help a 
feeling of alarm and commiseration.7 This shows that his humanity 
forms one body with the child. It may be objected that the child 
belongs to the same species. Again, when he observes the pitiful 
cries and frightened appearance of birds and animals about to be 
slaughtered, he cannot help feeling an "inability to bear" their 
suffering.8 This shows that his humanity forms one body with birds 
and animals. It may be objected that birds and animals are sentient 
beings as he is. But when he sees plants broken and destroyed, he 
cannot help a feeling of pity. This shows that his humanity forms one 
body with plants. It may be said that plants are living things as he 
is. Yet, even when he sees tiles and stones shattered and crushed, he 
cannot help a feeling of regret. This shows that his humanity forms 
one body with tiles and stones. This means that even the mind of the 
small man necessarily has the humanity that forms one body with 
all. Such a mind is rooted in his Heaven-endowed nature, and is 
naturally intelligent, clear, and not beclouded. For this reason it 
is called the "clear character." Although the mind of the small man 
is divided and narrow, yet his humanity that forms one body can 
remain free from darkness to this degree. This is due to the fact that 

5 Chu Hsi, Ta-hsiieh chang-chii, commentary on the text. Actually, by "great 
learning" (ta-hsiieh) Chu Hsi meant "education for the adult," but the Chinese 
phrase can also mean the learning of the great man. Wang used the latter inter- 
pretation. 

6 The text of the Great Learning. 

7 Book of Mencius, zK:G. 

8 Ibid. 

Inquiry on the great learning 273 

his mind has not yet been aroused by desires and obscured by 
selfishness. When it is aroused by desires and obscured by selfishness, 
compelled by greed for gain and fear of harm, and stirred by anger, 
he will destroy things, kill members of his own species, and will 
do everything. In extreme cases he will even slaughter his own 
brothers, and the humanity that forms one body will disappear 
completely. Hence, if it is not obscured by selfish desires, even the 
mind of the small man has the humanity that forms one body with 
all as does the mind of the great man. As soon as it is obscured by 
selfish desires, even the mind of the great man will be divided and 
narrow like that of the small man. Thus the learning of the great 
man consists entirely in getting rid of the obscuration of selfish 
desires in order by his own efforts to make manifest his clear char- 
acter, so as to restore the condition of forming one body with 
Heaven, Earth, and the myriad things, a condition that is originally 
so, that is all. It is not that outside of the original substance some- 
thing can be added. 

Question: Why, then, does the learning of the great man consist in 
loving the people? 

Answer: To manifest the clear character is to bring about the 
substance of the state of forming one body with Heaven, Earth, and 
the myriad things, whereas loving the people is to put into universal 
operation the function of the state of forming one body. Hence 
manifesting the clear character consists in loving the people, and 
loving the people is the way to manifest the clear character. There- 
fore, only when I love my father, the fathers of others, and the 
fathers of all men can my humanity really form one body with my 
father, the fathers of others, and the fathers of all men. When it 
truly forms one body with them, then the clear character of filial 
piety will be manifested. Only when I love my brother, the brothers 
of others, and the brothers of all men can my humanity really form 
one body with my brother, the brothers of others, and the brothers 
of all men. When it truly forms one body with them, then the clear 
character of brotherly respect will be manifested. Everything from 
ruler, minister, husband, wife, and friends to mountains, rivers, 
spiritual beings, birds, animals, and plants should be truly loved in 
order to realize my humanity that forms one body with them, and 
then my clear character will be completely manifested, and I will 
really form one body with Heaven, Earth, and the myriad things. 
This is what is meant by "manifesting the clear character throughout 

274 Inquiry on the great learning 

the world."9 This is what is meant by "regulation of the family," 
"ordering the state," and "bringing peace to the world."10 This is 
what is meant by "full development of one's nature."11 

Question: Then why does the learning of the great man consist 
in "abiding in the highest good" ?12 

Answer: The highest good is the ultimate principle of manifesting 
character and loving people. The nature endowed in us by Heaven 
is pure and perfect. The fact that it is intelligent, clear, and not 
beclouded is evidence of the emanation and revelation of the 
highest good. It is the original substance of the clear character which 
is called innate knowledge of the good. As the highest good emanates 
and reveals itself, we will consider right as right and wrong as 
wrong. Things of greater or less importance and situations of grave 
or light character will be responded to as they act upon us. In all 
our changes and movements, we will stick to no particular point, 
but possess in ourselves the mean that is perfectly natural. This is the 
ultimate of the normal nature of man and the principle of things. 
There can be no consideration of adding or subtracting anything 
to or from it. Such a suggestion reveals selfish ideas and shallow 
cunning, and cannot be said to be the highest good. Naturally, 
how can anyone who does not watch over himself carefully when 
alone, and who has no refinement and singleness of mind, attain to 
such a state of perfection ? Later generations fail to realize that the 
highest good is inherent in their own minds, but exercise their 
selfish ideas and cunning and grope for it outside their minds, 
believing that every event and every object has its own peculiar 
definite principle. For this reason the law of right and wrong is 
obscured; the mind becomes concerned with fragmentary and 
isolated details and broken pieces ; the selfish desires of man become 
rampant and the Principle of Nature is at an end. And thus the 
learning of manifesting character and loving people is everywhere 
thrown into confusion. In the past there have, of course, been 
people who wanted to manifest their clear character. But simply 
because they did not know how to abide in the highest good, but 
instead drove their own minds toward something too lofty, they 
thereby lost them in illusions, emptiness, and quietness, having 

9 The text of the Great Learning. 

10 Ibid. 

11 Doctrine of the Mean, ch. 22. 

18 The text of the Great Learning. 

Inquiry on the great learning 275 

nothing to do with the work of the family, the state, and the world. 
Such are the followers of Buddhism and Taoism. There have, of 
course, been those who wanted to love their people. Yet simply 
because they did not know how to abide in the highest good, but 
instead sank their own minds in base and trifling things, they thereby 
lost them in scheming strategy and cunning techniques, having 
neither the sincerity of humanity nor that of commiseration. Such 
are the followers of the Five Despots13 and the pursuers of success 
and profit. All of these defects are due to a failure to know how to 
abide in the highest good. Therefore abiding in the highest good is 
to manifesting character and loving people as the carpenter's square 
and compass are to the square and the circle, or rule and measure 
to length, or balances and scales to weight. If the square and the 
circle do not abide by the compass and the carpenter's square, their 
standard will be wrong; if length does not abide by the rule and 
measure, its adjustment will be lost; if weight does not abide by 
the balances, its exactness will be gone; and if manifesting clear 
character and loving people do not abide by the highest good, 
their foundation will disappear. Therefore, abiding in the highest 
good so as to love people and manifest the clear character is what 
is meant by the learning of the great man. 

Question: "Only after knowing what to abide in can one be calm. 
Only after having been calm can one be tranquil. Only after having 
achieved tranquillity can one have peaceful repose. Only after having 
peaceful repose can one begin to deliberate. Only after deliberation 
can the end be attained."14 How do you explain this ? 

Answer: People fail to realize that the highest good is in their 
minds and seek it outside. As they believe that everything or every 
event has its own definite principle, they search for the highest good 
in individual things. Consequently, the mind becomes fragmentary, 
isolated, broken into pieces ; mixed and confused, it has no definite 
direction. Once it is realized that the highest good is in the mind and 
does not depend on any search outside, then the mind will have 
definite direction and there will be no danger of its becoming 
fragmentary, isolated, broken into pieces, mixed, or confused. When 
there is no such danger, the mind will not be erroneously perturbed 
but will be tranquil. Not being erroneously perturbed but being 

13 See above, sec. n, n. 46. 

14 The text of the Great Learning. 

276 Inquiry on the great learning 

tranquil, it will be leisurely and at ease in its daily functioning and 
will attain peaceful repose. Being in peaceful repose, whenever a 
thought arises or an event acts upon it, the mind with its innate 
knowledge will thoroughly sift and carefully examine whether or 
not the thought or event is in accord with the highest good, and 
thus the mind can deliberate. With deliberation, every decision will 
be excellent and every act will be proper, and in this way the highest 
good will be attained. 

Question: "Things have their roots and their branches."15 A former 
scholar considered manifesting the clear character as the root (or fun- 
damental) and renovating the people as the branch (or secondary), and 
thought that they are two things opposing each other as internal and 
external.16 "Affairs have their beginnings and their ends."17 The 
former scholar considered knowing what to abide in as the beginning 
and the attainment of the highest good as the end, both being one 
thing in harmonious continuity. According to you, "renovating the 
people" {hsin-miri) should be read as "loving the people" {cWin-miri). 
If so, isn't the theory of root and branches in some respect incorrect? 

Answer: The theory of beginnings and ends is in general right. 
Even if we read "renovating the people" as "loving the people" 
and say that manifesting the character is the root and loving the 
people is the branches, it is not incorrect. The main tiling is that 
root and branches should not be distinguished as two different 
things. The trunk of the tree is called the root, and the twigs are 
called the branches. It is precisely because the tree is one that its 
parts can be called root and branches. If they are said to be two 
different things, then since they are two distinct objects, how can we 
speak of them as root and branches of the same thing ? Since the 
idea of renovating the people is different from that of loving the 
people, obviously the task of manifesting the character and that of 
loving the people are two different things. If it is realized that 
manifesting the clear character is to love the people and loving the 
people is to manifest the clear character, how can they be split in 
two? What the former scholar said is due to his failure to realize 
that manifesting the character and loving the people are basically 
one thing. Instead, he believed them to be two different things and 

16 Ibid. 

16 Chu Hsi, Ta-hsueh chang-chil, commentary on the text. 

17 The text of the Great Learning. 

Inquiry on the great learning 277 

consequently, although he knew that root and branches should be 
one, yet he could not help splitting them in two. 

Question: The passage from the phrase, "The ancients who 
wished to manifest their clear character throughout the world" 
to the clause, "first [order their state... regulate their families...] 
cultivate their personal lives,"18 can be understood by your theory 
of manifesting the character and loving the people. May I ask what 
task, what procedure, and what effort are involved in the passage 
from "Those who wished to cultivate their personal lives would 
[first rectify their minds... make their will sincere... extend their 
knowledge]" to the clause, "the extension of knowledge consists 
in the investigation of things" ?19 

Answer: This passage fully explains the task of manifesting the 
character, loving the people, and abiding in the highest good. The 
person, the mind, the will, knowledge, and things constitute the 
order followed in the task. While each of them has its own place, 
they are really one thing. Investigating, extending, being sincere, 
rectifying, and cultivating are the task performed in the procedure. 
Although each has its own name, they are really one affair. What is 
it that is called the person ? It is the physical functioning of the mind. 
What is it that is called the mind? It is the clear and intelligent 
master of the person. What is meant by cultivating the personal 
life ? It means to do good and get rid of evil. Can the body by itself 
do good and get rid of evil ? The clear and intelligent master must 
desire to do good and get rid of evil before the body that functions 
physically can do so. Therefore he who wishes to cultivate his per- 
sonal life must first rectify his mind. 

Now the original substance of the mind is man's nature. Human 
nature being universally good, the original substance of the mind is 
correct. How is it that any effort is required to rectify the mind ? The 
reason is that, while the original substance of the mind is originally 
correct, incorrectness enters when one's thoughts and will are in 
operation. Therefore he who wishes to rectify his mind must rectify 
it in connection with the operation of his thoughts and will. If, 
whenever a good thought arises, he really loves it as he loves 
beautiful colors, and whenever an evil thought arises, he really hates 
it as he hates bad odors, then his will will always be sincere and his 
mind can be rectified. 

18 Ibid. 

19 Ibid. 

278 Inquiry on the great learning 

However, what arises from the will may be good or evil, and unless 
there is a way to make clear the distinction between good and evil, 
there will be a confusion of truth and untruth. In that case, even if 
one wants to make his will sincere, he cannot do so. Therefore he 
who wishes to make his will sincere must extend his knowledge. 
By extension is meant to reach the limit. The word "extension" is 
the same as that used in the saying, "Mourning is to be carried to 
the utmost degree of grief."20 In the Book of Changes it is said: 
"Knowing the utmost, one should reach it."21 "Knowing the 
utmost" means knowledge and "reaching it" means extension. The 
extension of knowledge is not what later scholars understand as 
enriching and widening knowledge.22 It is simply extending one's 
innate knowledge of the good to the utmost. This innate knowl- 
edge of the good is what Mencius meant when he said, "The 
sense of right and wrong is common to all men."23 The sense of 
right and wrong requires no deliberation to know, nor does it 
depend on learning to function.24 This is why it is called innate 
knowledge. It is my nature endowed by Heaven, the original sub- 
stance of my mind, naturally intelligent, shining, clear, and understand- 
ing. 

Whenever a thought or a wish arises, my mind's faculty of innate 
knowledge itself is always conscious of it. Whether it is good or evil, 
my mind's innate knowing faculty itself also knows it. It has nothing 
to do with others. Therefore, although an inferior man may have 
done all manner of evil, when he sees a superior man he will surely 
try to disguise this fact, concealing what is evil and displaying what 
is good in himself.25 This shows that innate knowledge of the good 
does not permit any self-deception. Now the only way to distinguish 
good and evil in order to make the will sincere is to extend to the 
utmost the knowledge of the innate faculty. Why is this? When 
[a good] thought or wish arises, the innate faculty of my mind 
already knows it to be good. Suppose I do not sincerely love it but 
instead turn away from it. I would then be regarding good as evil 
and obscuring my innate faculty which knows the good. When 

80 Analects, 19:14. 

21 Commentary on hexagram no. 1. Cf. trans, by Legge, Yi King, p. 410. 

22 Chu Hsi, Ta-hsiieh chang-chii, commentary on the text. 

23 Book of Mencius, 2 A:6, 6 A:6. 

24 Quoting Book of Mencius, 7 A: 1 5 . 

25 Paraphrasing the Great Learning, ch. 6. 

Inquiry on the great learning 279 

[an evil] thought or wish arises, the innate faculty of my mind 
already knows it to be evil. If I did not sincerely hate it but instead 
carried it out, I would be regarding evil as good and obscuring my 
innate faculty which knows evil. In such cases what is supposed to 
be knowledge is really ignorance. How then can the will be made 
sincere? If what the innate faculty knows to be good or evil is 
sincerely loved or hated, one's innate knowing faculty is not deceived 
and the will can be made sincere. 

Now, when one sets out to extend his innate knowledge to the 
utmost, does this mean something illusory, hazy, in a vacuum, and 
unreal? No, it means something real. Therefore, the extension 
of knowledge must consist in the investigation of things. A 
thing is an event. For every emanation of the will there 
must be an event corresponding to it. The event to which the 
will is directed is a thing. To investigate is to rectify. It is to rectify 
that which is incorrect so it can return to its original correctness. 
To rectify that which is not correct is to get rid of evil, and to 
return to correctness is to do good. This is what is meant by investi- 
gation. The Book of History says, "He [Emperor Yao] investigated 
(ko) heaven above and earth below" ;26 " [Emperor Shun] investigated 
(ko) in the temple of illustrious ancestors";27 and "[The ruler] 
rectifies (ko) the evil of his heart."28 The word "investigation" (ko) 
in the phrase "the investigation of things" combines the two 
meanings. 

If one sincerely loves the good known by the innate faculty but 
does not in reality do the good as he comes into contact with the 
thing to which the will is directed, it means that the thing has not 
been investigated and that the will to love the good is not yet 
sincere. If one sincerely hates the evil known by the innate faculty 
but does not in reality get rid of the evil as he comes into contact 
with the thing to which the will is directed, it means that the thing 
has not been investigated and that the will to hate evil is not sincere. 
If as we come into contact with the thing to which the will is 
directed, we really do the good and get rid of the evil to the utmost 
which is known by the innate faculty, then everything will be 
investigated and what is known by our innate faculty will not be 

26 Book of History, "Canon of Yao." Cf. trans, by Legge, Shoo King, p. 15. 

27 Ibid., "Canon of Shun." Cf. Legge, Shoo King, p. 41. 

28 Ibid., "The Charge to Ch'iung." Cf. Legge, Shoo King p. 585. 

280 Inquiry on the great learning 

deficient or obscured but will be extended to the utmost. Then the 
mind will be joyous in itself, happy and without regret, the func- 
tioning of the will will carry with it no self-deception, and sincerity 
may be said to have been attained. Therefore it is said, "When 
things are investigated, knowledge is extended; when knowledge 
is extended, the will becomes sincere; when the will is sincere, the 
mind is rectified ; and when the mind is rectified, the personal life is 
cultivated."29 While the order of the tasks involves a sequence of 
first and last, in substance they are one and cannot be so separated. 
At the same time, while the order and the tasks cannot be separated 
into first and last, their function must be so refined as not to be 
wanting in the slightest degree. This is why the doctrine of investiga- 
tion, extension, being sincere, and rectification is a correct exposition 
of the true heritage of Sage-Emperors Yao and Shun and why it 
coincides with Confucius' own ideas. 

29 The text of the Great Learning. 

Some Social and Political Measures 

Some Social and Political Measures 

In both his career and his teachings, Wang aimed at concrete and earnest 
practice rather than words. Consequently, although he gave attention to 
social and political matters, he did not discuss them systematically in 
writing, Rather, he believed that once the fundamentals are realized and 
adhered to, details will naturally follow. What he had to say on these 
matters is found only in incidental remarks or short passages in his letters, 
official documents, and the like. It is therefore not easy to select from his 
works passages that will represent his over-all social and political views. 

Several documents that do suggest some of his fundamental beliefs 
are translated below. They happen to represent his programs 
for both external security (no. i) and internal peace (nos.2-7). It is 
true that they deal with specific and abnormal situations of an emer- 
gency nature, since his policies for the frontier (no. i)were intended to 
resist foreign invasion in the northwest and his domestic measures 
(nos. 2-7) were designed to pacify areas in southern Kiangsi and Fukien 
where banditry and rebellions had just been suppressed. It is also true 
that these documents deal with the years 1499 and 1517-20 and there- 
fore antedate his doctrine of the extension of innate knowledge in 
1 5 21. Nevertheless one can see how comprehensive his programs were 
and how even under emergency conditions he insisted on the ethical 
essentials. 

The memorial on policies for the frontier (no. 1) covers military, 
economic, personnel, and psychological matters. As a youth he visited 
frontiers. Two years before the memorial he had studied military tech- 
niques and earlier in the year he had earned his "presented scholar" 
degree in the national civil service examination. His loyalty was therefore 
solidly supported with knowledge. Although his recommendations for 
frontier policy were not accepted and enforced, his fame rose as a result 
of them. In the case of southern Kiangsi and Fukien where he had 
suppressed several large groups of bandits and rebels, some of whom 
declared themselves kings, instead of showing bitterness toward the 
former outlaws and advocating revenge or punishment, he stressed the 
need for "new citizens" to reform (no. 4), an adequate food supply, the 
dual application of the power of law and the kindness of the government, 
security (no. 5), and the institution of schools and moral training (nos. 
3 and 6). In all these his earnestness and sincerity are obvious and are 
undoubtedly the natural expression of his own philosophy that the man 
of humanity forms one body with all things. Even in the joint system 
of family responsibility he proposes (nos. 2 and 7), the idea of moral 
persuasion is a central one. 

284 Social and Political Measures 

Actually none of the measures recommended or applied was new. Both 
the joint responsibility system and the community compact had a long 
tradition behind them. And the moral and social ideals advocated in these 
documents are no more than orthodox Confucian values. So far as Wang's 
own teachings are concerned, these documents are not nearly as important 
as his essay "Pulling Up the Root and Stopping Up the Source," "The 
Doctrine in Four Axioms," or the "Inquiry on the Great Learning."1 
However, they are significant because they express the spirit of "forming 
one body with all things" even under emergency conditions. The appeal 
to moral sense and "innate knowledge" is unmistakable. It was under 
such critical situations as the ones that produced these documents that 
Wang "polished and trained" himself; out of such situations he eventually 
developed his central doctrine of "the extension of innate knowledge." 

i. Memorial Outlining Policies for the Frontier (1499) 
{Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu, 9:2a-ioa) 

Wang was serving in the department of public works in Peking in the fall of 1499 
when the imperial government made a public request for recommendations concerning 
the alleviation of the critical condition of the state. The following memorial was 
Wang's response. Although his recommendations were not implemented, his fame 
spread as a result of them. 

I respectfully submit eight emergency measures for your considera- 
tion, namely: building up a reservoir of personnel for emergency 
use, overlooking defects and utilizing excellences, reducing the 
army to save expenses, carrying on military farming to provide 
sufficient food, enforcing the law to inspire awe toward the govern- 
ment, showing imperial kindness to arouse indignation against 
the enemy, sacrificing the small in order to preserve the great, and 
using a strong defense in order to take advantage of the enemy's 
defects. 

What is meant by building up a reservoir of personnel for emer- 
gency use ? In my opinion, the operation of an army depends on 
this. If it has the proper personnel, it will overcome the enemy and 
win. If it does not have the proper personnel, it will be defeated and 
perish. Should we not build up a reservoir ? At present the insignif- 
icant bandits along the frontier are not even capable of humiliating 
a lieutenant general, and yet in its discussions and recommendations 

1 See above, pp. 117-24, 241-45, and 272-80, respectively. 

Social and Political Measures 285 

the court is already disturbed and does not know what to do. 
Reluctantly it thinks of people of secondary quality, but even here, 
outside of one or two people, there is none to continue the leader- 
ship. How can this be relied upon to overcome the enemy and win 
victory?...2 In my stupid opinion, the military examinations of today 
can merely produce horsemen, archers, and boxers, but are not 
capable of attracting the talents of policy-making and leadership. 
At present, although noble families have schools to educate their 
children, these merely fulfill the need of old customs and have in 
reality not done any good. Let the sons of nobles be ordered to gather 
in one place, and select a man with the ability to handle both civil and 
military affairs, in a position like that of the present superintendent 
of education, to teach them. Let them practice writing, history, 
horse riding, and archery, and instruct them in military strategy and 
planning. In addition, among military students promote the out- 
standing ones every year and send them to join this group so that 
they can refine and polish one another and study and investigate at 
all times. Distinguish the superior and inferior in ability, examine 
them every year, and award degrees every three years. As to the 
department of military affairs, let officials from the minister down 
to the two vice-ministers take turns in inspecting the frontier every 
year, and select two or three persons from the personnel of the 
department who are adaptable and outstanding to accompany them 
so that these persons may be enabled to know the geography of the 
areas, the important and strategic points of passes on the frontier, 
the real strength of the enemy, and whether the situation is critical 
or not. As they would already have gone deeply into these matters 
and understood them well, in case an emergency arose, there would 
be no fear of lacking a qualified person to send from a great 
distance to handle them. Mencius said, 'If a thing has not been 
kept in store, one may not get it all his life."3 I hope from now 
on we can build up a reservoir. 

What is meant by overlooking defects and utilizing excellences ? 
In my opinion, in abilities and capacities we are not all sages or 
worthies. As we have certain excellences, so we necessarily have 
certain defects. As we are enlightened in certain things, so we are 

2 These and the following ellipses are mine. In all cases the omissions are 
historical incidents which Wang cited to support his views. 

3 Book of Mencius, ^A-.g. 

286 Social and Political Measures 

necessarily beclouded in others. And it is a common characteristic 
of man to have learned a lesson only after he has been punished.... 
I have heard the rumor that in the past officers of passes on the 
frontier who were known to be brave, daring, and fierce, have been 
in many cases dismissed and cast aside under the charge of having 
made certain mistakes, so that now they are idle. Of course in 
times of peace people who have been punished for mistakes certainly 
should not be placed in the position of command. However, in 
times of many troubles, like today, those who are brave, daring, 
and fierce can surely be utilized. Furthermore, people who have been 
cast aside for a long time surely repent their former mistakes and 
wish to show their enthusiasm and effort. Now if a few thousand 
troops are entrusted to their leadership so that they may establish 
their merits to redeem themselves, since they are very familiar with 
the affairs of the frontiers and are used to [fighting], their achieve- 
ments should be far, far above those of men who are not familiar 
with the various favorable geographical factors and who aim only 
at defense. The ancients had a saying, "To utilize people's merits 
is not as good as to utilize their mistakes." What I have sug- 
gested is to utilize people's mistakes. 

What is meant by reducing the army to save expenses ? I have heard 
that the Art of War says that "it costs a thousand pieces of silver a 
day to operate an army of ten thousand men."4 Ancient experts 
in army operation "acquired weapons in their own countries but 
depended on obtaining food supplies in the enemy states."5 But 
even they had to spend a thousand pieces of silver every day. Now, 
in defending China against the barbarian enemies, there can be no 
food without a system of transportation, and there can be no money 
without a system of taxation. Consequently, it should not be said 
that the enemy can be depended on to supply food. This being the 
case, should an expedition be undertaken lightly today? I was 
away because of public duties and returned home only about ten 
days ago. When I heard while away that an expedition had been 
undertaken, I humbly considered that to be a mistake. Why? It is 
very cold in the north.6 Now the severe heat is increasingly intense. 
By nature the enemy cannot endure it, whereas the climate is 

4 Sun Tzu (fl. 513-494 B.C.?), Sun T^u ping-fa, ch. 2. Cf. trans, by Cheng Lin, 
The Art of War: A Military Manual (Shanghai, World Book Co., 1946). 
6 Ibid. 
8 Where the invaders came form. 

Social and Political Measures 287 

agreeable to us. This is the first reason. The enemy depends on 
bows and arrows. Now is the season for frequent heavy rains, 
which will make the bow strings sticky and loose. This is the 
second reason. The enemy are nomads whose habitation follows 
rivers and swamps and who depend on hunting for food. Now they 
have already been stationed on the frontier for two months. The 
vegetation along the frontier is almost entirely exhausted and there 
are no more animals for them to hunt. This is the third reason. As 
I figure it, they will flee as soon as our army approaches. Of course, 
in conducting a campaign, there are cases where an onslaught on 
nerves must precede real strength. Now that our imperial army has 
already been dispatched, it is too late to stop it. The only thing to 
do is to reduce it, which can still save unnecessary expenses and 
achieve concrete results. The value of an army is its excellence and 
not its large size. I beg you to issue an edict immediately and order 
the generals secretly to select and retain a third of the ten thousand 
men who are excellent and strong and can be relied on, and send the 
rest back to the capital. Since the news of the dispatch often thousand 
men has already spread, the secret return of the troops to the capital 
will not be known on the frontier. The effect of the force of ten 
thousand men still exists. At the same time, an infinite amount of 
expense can in fact be saved. Are these not double advantages? 
Furthermore, when the imperial troops get to the frontier, in case 
of a reverse, they will retreat to the rear, but in case of any success, 
they will compete for the first place. This will not please the officers 
of the frontier troops. They asked for reinforcement simply so that 
in case the situation cannot be saved someone will share their 
responsibility. Now if these frontier troops are truly to be fed as the 
imperial troops are fed and rewarded as they are rewarded, several 
tens of thousands of recruits can be found locally and gathered to 
the tents in ten days or so. What is the need of sending imperial 
troops from the capital? 

What is meant by using military farming to provide sufficient 
food? In my opinion, food is fundamental to an army. Without 
food there will be no army. Transportation by water or over land to 
passes on the frontier extends to a thousand It? Ten percent of the 
items transported goes to waste. Therefore the Art of War says, 
"An army causes a country to be poor when it transports things 

7 About a third of a mile. 

288 Social and Political Measures 

over a long distance, for such distant transportation makes the 
people poor. As an army gets to a place, its proximity causes prices 
to rise, and the rise of prices exhausts the people's financial re- 
sources."8 This is what I mean. Now since the imperial troops are not 
capable of fighting and, in addition, are permitted to sit idle and 
consume food and thus to aggravate the economic difficulties of the 
frontier, this is tantamount to helping the enemy. Because of 
fighting and defense, the frontier guards have no time to farm. Let 
the imperial troops be separately stationed and divided into units 
and let them farm their land and supply them with seeds and imple- 
ments. Wait till the autumn harvest and let them obtain their food 
from their own labor. When the enemy comes, give them military 
weapons and let them return to their army posts to stage a show of 
power at a distance and to form two wings. When the enemy 
withdraws, let them return to their farming once more. Taking 
advantage of their leisure, let them repair those parts of the Great 
Wall and its towers that have been destroyed by the enemy, to prevent 
his sudden penetration. In this way, although they cannot supply 
all the people in the military outposts, they can relieve to some extent 
the pressure on the local population to pay taxes and to make 
contributions. This is truly the way to hold on and to wait for 
opportunity, and is the long range policy for the imperial army's 
safety. 

What is meant by enforcing the law to inspire awe toward the 
government?... At present officials on the frontier who have 
blundered in their strategy have often escaped from punishment by 
resorting to tricks. In the morning they lost their armies on the 
eastern frontier. In the evening they were transferred to the western 
border. Because punishment had not been meted out to them, their 
soldiers became uncontrolled. This being the case, Your Majesty 
has not only committed the sin of ignoring their crimes but has, in 
addition, gone to great lengths to accommodate them. What do 
they fear and why should they fight until death? Laws cannot be 
enforced because those on high violate them. At present there are 
at any time one or two hundred military officers. Had they been 
selected honestly for their strength and courage, what would be 
wrong with it? However, they are either younger members of 
powerful families or their favorites recommended by them, and in 

8 Sun T^u ping-fa, ch. 2. 

Social and Political Measures 289 

all cases their appointments have been forced upon the government 
because of their power. Their concern is to demand and squeeze, to 
disturb the communities on their routes, grasp other people's 
merits as their own on the strength of their power, and accept 
rewards through forgery without having done the work. They 
discourage soldiers and arouse the hatred of the frontier people. 
Generals commanding them depend on their power to help each 
other. Do they dare decline whatever these officers send them as 
bribes ? Do they dare expose whatever they themselves have given the 
officers ? If these officers violate any law, do they dare execute them 
to warn the rest ? Thus the prestige and power of the generals are 
lost because of the officers. How can the generals handle the troops 
and satisfy the people ? I beg Your Majesty to issue an edict written 
in your own hand to the provincial commander in chief to the effect 
that, beginning with the date of the order, those who are the first 
to lose their armies will be executed at the gate of the headquarters 
so that military discipline can be rectified. The so-called headmen 
and the like shall all be forbidden to commit further crimes and 
returned to the interior so they will no longer disturb or oppress 
the people and usurp the authority of the generals. Then all fighting 
men will be roused to effort and the prestige of the army will become 
prominent and be respected. This is the foundation on which to 
overcome the enemy and to achieve victory. Otherwise, even if we 
have a million troops, they will only deplete the country and over- 
work the people, and will be of no use. 

What is meant by showing imperial kindness to arouse indignation 
against the enemy ? I have heard that "the thing that kills the enemy 
is indignation."9 At present our armies are losing advantageous 
positions. Soldiers' morale is low. With regard to frontier guards, 
many people who have been killed were their fellow clansmen or 
relatives, if not their parents or sons or younger brothers. If Your 
Majesty can soothe their pains, inquire into their suffering, give 
relief to the orphaned and the widowed, and lift up the destitute 
and the poor, then the dead will have nothing to complain of and the 
living will naturally be moved. Then select the healthy and the 
strong, show them imperial kindness, explain to them the enmity 
of the invaders, make them understand the natural principle of 
human relations, and rouse them with the great principle of right- 

0 Ibid. 

290 Social and Political Measures 

eousness. Also post awards to promote their courage, and expose 
the evils of the enemy so as to heighten their indignation. Let them 
have a pain in their hearts and an ache in their heads and train and 
polish themselves day and night so as to make sure that together they 
will kill the enemy of their fathers and elder brothers and requite 
the kindness of the court. As a result, the power of our army will 
gradually expand, the morale of the soldiers will gradually be 
strengthened, and it will be nothing to destroy the little enemy. 

What is meant by sacrificing the small in order to preserve the 
great ? I have heard that the Art of War says, "In order to take a 
thing away, it is necessary first to give it."10 It also says, "Do not 
pursue the enemy who simulate retreat. Do not swallow the bait 
offered by the enemy."11 All these are instances of sacrificing the 
small in order to preserve the great. Now that the strength of the 
enemy is increasing, if we hold back our army and do not advance, 
the enemy will dispatch his crack troops to challenge us. Not only 
that, he will set traps to entice our army, perhaps by deserting oxen 
and horses and feigning retreat, perhaps by hiding his excellent and 
ruthless fighters to suggest weakness, perhaps by staging a mock 
defeat and preparing for an ambush, and perhaps by hiding his 
troops and suing for peace. All these are tricks to entice us. If we 
believe him and act accordingly, we will fall into his traps. At present 
commanders guarding passes on the frontier all have their own 
ideas. Furthermore, it is difficult to decide whether the enemy is 
weak or strong. If he challenges and entices them and the imperial 
troops hold back and do not respond, it is not impossible that they 
will be crushed. One general believes that efforts should be made to 
save them. Another believes that the enemy can be intercepted. To 
believe the generals will surely place the army in a fatal position. Not 
to believe them, it is feared, may result in punishment by death for 
sitting down and merely looking on. This is the reason why the 
imperial troops have been tired out by being rushed here and rushed 
there, why their losses have been severe and heavy, and why the 
ugly enemy has been able to fulfill his wishes. If now the control 
over them is relaxed and permission is given them to act according 
to circumstances, and if they are not accused of sitting down and 

10 This saying, with slight variations, is found in several ancient classics, 
including Lao T%u, ch. 36. It is not found in the Sun T%u ping-fa, however, 
though the latter expresses the same spirit. 

11 Sun T^u ping-fa, ch. 8. 

Social and Political Measures 291 

looking on when they allow the enemy the chance to play his trick 
and not regarded as having made a strategic mistake when they give 
up a chance to fight, and if we nourish their power and turn it into 
indignation against the enemy, and if we only expect them to achieve 
great success, whereas small setbacks will be ignored, then our impe- 
rial troops will always be rested and the prestige of the army will 
not suffer any loss. This is truly the critical turning point that will 
determine whether we shall win or lose, and whether we shall live 
or perish. 

What is meant by a strong defense in order to take advantage of the 
enemy's defects ? I have heard that "the ancient expert of war would 
first of all secure himself against defeat in order to wait for the 
opportunity to defeat his enemy."12 For China is skillful in self- 
defense, whereas the barbarian enemy is superior in irregular, open 
fighting. Now that the frontier troops have just been broken up and 
the enemy's position of power is extremely strong, if we engage 
him in fighting again, it will be to submit to his superiority and 
present him with victory. The policy now should be to close the 
city for a strong defense, send scouts far out to prevent the enemy 
from playing any tricks on us, dispatch spies with all diligence to 
plot against the enemy, train troops well so as to utilize their best 
ability, and be strict with orders in order to eliminate any laxity in 
effort. In addition, feast the men often so they can all nourish their 
strength and cultivate their ardent spirit. It is like accumulating 
water. Wait till the water reaches the spilling point and then let it 
break loose, utilizing, in the case of troops, their anger at the enemy. 
Their power will then be doubled and their strength violent, and 
they will not stop at crashing mountains and sending rocks rolling.... 
Now that our food supply is adequate, our power great, our indigna- 
tion deep, our armies rested, our defense strong, and our spirit 
ardent, our safety is perfect, and it is entirely within our power to 
be undefeated. The result will be that as our food is adequate, that 
of the enemy will gradually be deficient ; as our power is great, that 
of the enemy will gradually be weak ; as our indignation is deep, the 
enemy will feel more and more guilty; as we are rested, the enemy- 
will be more and more fatigued ; as we are strong, the enemy will be 
more and more depleted ; and as our morale is high, the enemy will 
be more and more dispirited. As he compares the situations and 

12 Ibid., ch. 4. 

292 Social and Political Measures 

calculates the relative strengths, he will realize that he is exhausted 
and will retreat at high speed. We shall then use novel tactics and 
lay an ambush. We shall mobilize the entire army. We shall go to 
places to which he does not go and rush to places where he does 
not expect us to go. We shall move forward and backward and 
attack him from the front and from behind. We shall approach him 
from this and that direction and attack him from the sides. This is to 
face deficiency with adequacy, to oppose weakness with strength, to 
increase the sense of guilt with indignation, to hit exhaustion with 
ease, to destroy depletion with strength, and to attack dispiritedness 
with high morale. This is what is called victory resulting from 
complete safety. "Stand in the position where defeat is impossible 
and do not miss any opportunity to defeat the enemy."13 

What I have presented above is nothing unusual or different from 
the viewpoints of other people. These recommendations are common 
sayings among military specialists and common viewpoints of gen- 
erals today. However, although generals and commanders at the 
passes on the frontier know these recommendations, they may not 
be able to follow them. They all regard them as merely common 
sayings and do not examine their validity at all. When they suffer 
losses, they blame it on what they consider to be an inevitable 
outcome. If there are complications, they dally and muddle through. 
This is why discipline has broken down and the habit of carelessness 
has been carried to its present length. If Your Majesty does not 
overlook the subtle situation, I beg you to order the department of 
military affairs to discuss thoroughly the recommendations of this 
memorial and see if they are acceptable. If so, let them in turn order 
the provincial commanders and other officials concerned immediately 
to consider the recommendations carefully and to carry them out; 
let them not look upon the orders as routine and conventional 
documents, but instead demand of the officials concrete results. 
Then I am sure their efforts will be of some help to our military 
strategy. 

I submit this with unlimited loyalty and devotion to the country. 

13 Ibid. 

Social and Political Measures 293 

2. Instruction to the Old and the Young in the Several Prefectures Concerning 
the System of the Ten-Family Joint Registration Board (15 17) 

(Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu, i6:6a-8a) 

When Wang arrived at Kan-chou in southern Kiangsi in the first month of 15 17 
to suppress rebels and bandits, he found that the natives provided information to the 
outlaws and often hid them in their homes. Wang therefore instituted the ten-family 
joint registration system first in the city and later in the prefecture. His campaign 
succeeded in several months ; however, it is difficult to determine how far the system 
contributed to its success. Wang used the system again in Kiangsi in 15 19 and 1520 
and in Kwangsi in 1528. 

In touring and comforting this area by imperial order, I simply hope 
to eliminate bandits and to give security and a livelihood to the 
citizens. I regret that my abilities are limited and my wisdom 
deficient. Although I have the mind to love the people I do not as 
yet have the governmental measures to implement it. If any of you, 
old or young, has measures to help me in my shortcomings and to 
be of benefit to the people, please let me know. I shall consider their 
feasibility and carry them out one after another. 

This registration board seems to be a burden. There are many in 
your midst who belong to families with a tradition of classical litera- 
ture and social and moral principles. How can I bear to treat you good 
citizens with cunning and deceit ? But in order to prevent wickedness 
and to correct defects so that you good citizens can have security and 
peace, it is impossible not to have the registration. I hope all of you, 
both old and young, will appreciate this motive. From now on in 
every family the father should be affectionate; the son, filial; the 
elder brother, loving ; the younger brother, respectful ; the husband, 
obliging; the wife, obedient; the old, kind; and the young, com- 
pliant. All of you shall be meticulous in following the laws of the 
government and be diligent and serious in paying national taxes. 
You should be respectful and thrifty in maintaining your family 
heritage, and humble and peaceful in dealing with fellow villagers. 
Your minds should be fair and forgiving and you should not 
lightly show wrath or engage in a fight. In handling affairs, you 
should be tolerant and patient, and should not readily engage in 
litigation. When you see a good deed, you should exhort and 
encourage one another to do it, and when you see an evil deed, 
you should warn and restrain one another. Devote your efforts to 
promoting the custom of propriety and compliance so as to produce 

294 Social and Political Measures 

the custom of honesty and generous earnestness. I regret that I have 
not extended any benevolent governmental measures and that I 
merely instruct you with words. But I hope you, both old and 
young, will make a special effort to understand my intention. Do not 
forget. 

Each day the one in charge of the registration board should 
explain these instructions to every family. 

The form of the registration board: 

Name of the country: Name of the village: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 

Name of person: Native of: 
Name of the head of the first family : 
Name of the head of the last family : 

The above board is to be circulated daily among the ten families for 
whom this board is issued. The family in charge of the board for the 
day shall go to each family with the board from 5 to 7 p.m. and 
investigate according to the standard board and record that in such 
and such family so-and-so is absent, that he has gone to such and 
such place for such and such business, and that he will return on 
such and such day, or that in such and such family there is such and 
such additional person whose name is so-and-so and who has come 
from such and such place for such and such business. The inquiry 
must be accurate and the findings will then be made known to all 
families of the tithing so they will be informed. If there is anything 
suspicious, it must be reported to the government immediately. If 
anything is concealed, upon exposure all the ten families will be 
jointly punished....14 

14 What follows is the form of registration for the individual family. It is 
omitted from the translation. 

Social and Political Measures 295 

3 . Instruction to Both the Old and the Young in the Several Prefectures (15 17) 
{Wang Wen-ch'eng Rung ch'uan-shu, i6:iob-na) 

After southern Kiangsi had been pacified in the spring of 1 5 1 7, the following positive 
and encouraging announcement was made in Kan-chou. 

This is to instruct both the old and the young. Now, in the aftermath 
of the devastation of war, suffering and difficulties have certainly 
reached a very high degree. All of you must recuperate and be 
rehabilitated, and you should exhort one another to do good. The 
father should be affectionate; the son, filial; the elder brother, 
friendly ; the younger brother, respectful ; the husband, obliging ; the 
wife, obedient; the elder person, kind; and the younger person, 
compliant. Be diligent and thrifty so as to maintain the family 
heritage, and be humble and peaceful in dealing with fellow mem- 
bers of your community. In your heart you should be impartial and 
forgiving, and never harbor any treacherous or deceptive thoughts. 
In your handling of affairs, you should be patient and never quarrel 
lightly. Have you, both the old and the young, ever seen any person 
who is amiable and complaisant, honoring others and humbling 
himself, not loved and respected by others? Have you seen any 
person who is violent, greedy, aggressive, and who encroaches upon 
others for his own selfish benefit, not detested and hated by others ? 
The aim of those who stupidly resort to litigation is to struggle 
for benefits, but they do not necessarily obtain them. They aim to 
expose justice but justice is not necessarily exposed. Externally they 
arouse the hatred of government officials and internally they destroy 
their own family heritage. They bring disgrace to their ancestors 
above and give trouble to their offspring below. Why take so much 
trouble to engage in litigation ? Because it is a common practice in 
this part of the country to struggle for benefits and vigorously to 
pursue litigation, I have therefore sincerely and earnestly spoken as 
I have. I am ashamed that I am unable to rule by virtue and merely 
instruct you with words. Elders, please make a special effort to follow 
my words and each and all admonish the young. Don't forget. 

296 Social and Political Measures 

4. Instructions to New Citizens15 (15 17) 
{Wang Wen-ctfeng Kung ch'uan-shu, i6:2oa-2ia) 

Like the preceding document, this proclamation was issued in the spring of 15 17 
in Kiangsi after Wang had subdued the rebels and bandits. Similar instructions were 
given out in Kiangsi in 1 5 1 8 and in Kwangsi in 1 5 20. 

All of you should feel secure and contented in your occupations. All 
elders should teach the young. Leaders on all levels should bring 
those below them into peace. And every one of you should be diligent 
in your farm duties, protect your home, value your own life, provide 
security for your family, be filial and obedient to your parents, and 
tenderly rear your offspring. There has been none who has done good 
and has not been blessed with happiness. And there has been none 
who has done evil and has not been visited by misfortune. Do not 
be aggressive to the few because you are many, and do not oppress 
the weak because you are strong. You must promote the customs 
of propriety and righteousness and forever be good citizens. In 
case some among the young people disobey your instructions and 
set out to create trouble and do wrong, elders and leaders must 
immediately apprehend them and deliver them to the government 
so that the law can be openly and correctly applied to them. On the 
one hand, this is to display your sincerity to do good and to remove 
evil. On the other, it is to eliminate undesirable elements so that they 
will not spread and cause trouble to those of you who are good. 
I am now touring and comforting this area by imperial order. I only 
hope all of you are secure in your homes and happy in your work, 
and enjoy peace together. I regret that my ability and knowledge 
are limited and that although I have the mind to love the people I 
do not as yet have the governmental measures to implement it. 
Because after my personal supervision of the attacks on the bandit 
strongholds in Hsiang-hu, K'o-t'ang,16 and other places, the bandits 
have been totally wiped out through capture or killing, my troops 
are now stationed here. At this time of spring farming, I want very 
much to come personally to the villages where you live, and inquire 
face to face about your suffering. However, I am afraid my many 
attendants may disturb you. I am therefore sending this instruction 

15 Former outlaws now pardoned. 
36 In modern Southern Kiangsi. 

Social and Political Measures 297 

through government officials and village elders and am also sending 
rolls of cloth as gifts to elders and leaders to show my earnest desire 
to pacify and comfort you. I am sorry I cannot send gifts to everyone, 
as there are so many of you. However, I hope all of you will under- 
stand the purpose for which this instruction is issued. 

5 . Memorial Petitioning for the Additional Establishment of Ho-p'ing 
County (15 1 8) 

{Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu, 11:250-310) 

Having eliminated the bandits and rebels on the Kiangsi-Kuangtung border early 
in 1 5 18, Wang petitioned on the first day of the fifth month for the establishment of 
a new county as a means of furthering rapid economic reconstruction and effective 
military control. The request was granted. 

The southeastern territory has been the stronghold of bandits. It 
is an area of great mountains and deep valleys as isolated as they 
are dangerous. Consequently, after the expedition to exterminate 
the bandits, the citizens there all want the place to be made a county 
so that it will be possible to control the strategic points, to propagate 
education and carry out governmental measures, and gradually to 
influence and transform the former bandits. Therefore, to stop 
banditry in the southeast and to give the people security, it is a good 
policy to establish a county....17 As to where cities and moats are to 
be built, where additional patrol units should be set up, what 
subdivisions from what neighboring counties can be appropriated, 
what population from which adjacent villages can be shifted, what 
patrol headquarters can be transferred, what male members from 
what community can be grouped together, what population can be 
moved to suit the land, what groups of soldiers can be transferred 
to defend a strategic post — all the labor necessary and the areas 
involved have to be investigated, and records have to be looked 
into, and elders have to be consulted, so that all that is correct will 
revert to one truth.... 

As to the land, aside from the properties of good citizens which 
have been seized by bandits to farm and which should be returned 

17 Long passages on various official actions taken and the transmission of 
various official documents are omitted here and below, since they add little 
to Wang's ideas and policies. 

298 Social and Political Measures 

to their owners in exact amount, there are among them some lands 
that have been leased to new citizens. Half the amount of the lease 
money must be turned over to the government and the land 
returned to the owners. As to the rest, all land belonging to the chief 
bandits of the area shall be confiscated and sold, with the proceeds 
to be used for the construction or repair of cities, moats, and 
government buildings... . 

The administrative personnel should be few in order to save ex- 
penses ; the land should be evenly distributed in order to make con- 
script labor service fair. Patrols should be shifted to control dangerous 
and important points, and taxation and conscript labor should be 
liberalized in order to relieve the distress of the masses. If this is done, 
danger will be transformed into security and bandits will be made 
into good citizens, and the result can be achieved in a matter of days. 

6. The Community Compact for Southern Kan-chou (151 8) 
{Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu, 17:42^490) 

Among the reconstructionary measures Wang introduced following the pacification 
of the southern Kiangsi area in 15 18, the most famous is the Community Compact, 
said by some to be Wang's own invention. Although the specific organization here is 
new, the idea of a community pact for moral and social advancement is old.18 

Ah, you citizens! There is an ancient saying that "when raspberry 
grows in the midst of hemp, it is straight without the need of any 
support, and when white sand is in the midst of mud, it becomes 
black without the need of any dyeing."19 Have not the customs of the 
people become good or bad because of accumulated behavior which 
makes them so ? In the past, new citizens have often deserted their 
own clans, rebelled against their own community, and gone in all 
directions to do violence. Was this merely because their nature was 
different and they were criminals ? It was also because, on our part, 
the government did not govern them properly or teach them in the 

18 The only mention in the Nien-p'u of a community compact is in the entry 
for the tenth month of 1 5 1 8. Most scholars have dated the Community Compact 
in this year. However, the document is included in the Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung 
ch'uan-shu, ch. 17, as a document of the first month of 1520, The first and most 
renowned community pact is that of Lii Ta-lin (1044-90) and his brothers, 
revised by Chu Hsi, which consists of a series of moral injunctions. 

19 A saying quoted in several ancient works, including the Hsiin T%u, ch. 1, 
sptk ed., i:8b-9a, and the Ta-Tai li cbi, sec. 54, sptk; ed., 5:2a. 

Social and Political Measures 299 

right way, and on your part, all of you, both old and young, did not 
teach and regulate your families early enough or exert good influence 
on your fellow villagers regularly enough. You did not put induce- 
ment and encouragement into practice and had no sufficient arrange- 
ments for cooperation and coordination. In addition, perhaps you 
roused the resentment of the new citizens or harmed one another 
with deceit and insincerity. Consequently new citizens have been 
allowed gradually to degenerate into wickedness as though follow- 
ing a fashion. The responsibility for all this should be shared by us 
government officials and all of you, old and young. 

Alas ! Nothing can be done to change what has already gone by, 
but something can still be done in the future. Therefore a community 
compact is now specially prepared to unite and harmonize all of you. 
From now on, all of you who enter into this compact should be 
filial to your parents and respectful to your elders, teach your 
children, live in harmony with your fellow villagers, help one 
another when there is death in the family and assist one another in 
times of difficulty, encourage one another to do good and warn one 
another not to do evil, stop litigations and rivalry, cultivate faith- 
fulness and promote harmony, and be sure to be good citizens so that 
together you may establish the custom of humanity and kindness. 
Alas! although a man is most stupid, when it comes to criticizing 
others his mind is quite clear, and although a person is intelligent, 
when it comes to criticizing himself his mind is beclouded. All of 
you, both old and young, do not remember the former evil deeds of 
the new citizens and ignore their good deeds. As long as they have 
a single thought to do good, they are already good people. Do not 
be proud that you are good citizens and neglect to cultivate your 
personal life. As long as you have a single thought to do evil, you 
are already evil people. Whether people are good or evil depends on 
a single instant of thought. You should think over my words 
carefully. Don't forget. 

Item : Elect from the compact membership an elderly and virtuous 
person respected by all to be the compact chief and two persons to be 
assistant chiefs, four persons who are impartial, just, and firm in 
judgment to be compact directors, four persons who are under- 
standing and discriminating to be compact recorders, four persons 
who are energetic and scrupulous to be compact executives, and 
two persons who are well versed in ceremonies to be compact 
masters of ceremonies. Have three record books. One of these is 

300 Social and Political Measures 

to record the names of compact members and their daily move- 
ments and activities, and is to be in charge of the compact execu- 
tives. Of the remaining record books, one is for the purpose of 
displaying good deeds and the other for the purpose of reporting 
evil deeds, both to be in charge of the compact chief. 

Item: Each member shall contribute three fen20 at each banquet 
meeting to the compact executives who will provide the food. Do 
not be extravagant. The point is that there shall be no thirst or 
hunger, that is all. 

Item : The time of meeting shall be the fifteenth of each month. 
Those who because of illness or other business are unable to attend 
may send a messenger to inform a compact executive ahead of time. 
Those who fail to attend without reason will be recorded as having 
committed an evil deed and, in addition, fined one Hang21 for the use 
of the group. 

Item: Build a compact hall on level ground. Choose a spacious 
temple compound and build it there. 

Item : To display good deeds, the language used must be clear and 
decisive, but in reporting mistakes, the language must be obscure and 
gentle. This is after all the way of liberality and loyalty. If someone 
has been disrespectful toward his elder brother, do not say so 
directly, but say that you have heard that he has not done his best in 
observing the etiquette of serving the elder brother and respecting 
the elders, that you dare not believe in the report, but that you will 
tentatively record it and see. This should be the example for all 
cases of reporting mistakes. In case of an evil deed that is difficult 
to correct, do not report it and make the situation unbearable for the 
guilty person, for it may rouse him and cause him finally to give free 
rein to his wickedness. The chief, assistant chiefs, etc. should talk to 
him privately beforehand and advise him to confess, and members 
should together induce him, encourage him, and rouse his desire to do 
good. Record the case tentatively and let him reform. If he does 
not reform, then report it and record it. If he still does not reform, 
report it to the government. If he still fails to reform, then members 
of the compact should seize him and deliver him to the government 
so that he may be openly punished. If the situation is such that it is 
impossible to seize him, make a special effort and cooperate with the 
government to send troops to destroy him. 

20 A small unit of money. 

21 i oo fens. 

Social and Political Measures 301 

Item: In case of anything dangerous, doubtful, or difficult to 
settle, members of the compact must ask the chief, together with 
compact members, to deliberate and make arrangements and not to 
stop until a solution is found which is in accord with moral prin- 
ciples and is effective. You must not sit idle, pass the responsibility 
to others, or make excuses, and thus cause people to fall into evil 
deeds and crime and get the compact chief, compact directors, etc. 
into trouble. 

Item: Many nonnative residents have sneaked back to their 
native places when taxes or military conscription are due and have 
often gotten their fellow members of the tithing into trouble. 
Hereafter the compact chief, etc. should admonish them to pay their 
full tax on time and to answer conscription. If they repeat their 
former delinquencies, report them to the government for punish- 
ment and cancel their nonnative resident status. 

Item : People of prominent local families who are doing business 
in a distant place and loan money for interest22 must follow the 
usual practice and cannot compound the interest. In case the debtor 
is too poor to repay, he should be treated liberally according to 
what is right. There have been inhumane people who would imme- 
diately seize the debtor, put him in chains, and demand the accumu- 
lated amount or force him to mortgage his land, so that the poor 
people have no way out but to run away to become bandits. Here- 
after, if there is any such case, inform the compact chief, etc. so they 
can explain to the creditor. In case the payment is insufficient, they 
will urge the creditor to forgive it, and if he is overpaid, they will 
force him to return the excessive amount. If he refuses to listen, 
thinking that he can rely on his own power, let them lead members 
of the compact to report to the government. 

Item: Among relatives and neighbors, there have often been 
cases where, because of some minor resentment, people would join 
bandits in order to get revenge, thus doing great harm to good 
people and causing great calamity. From now on all cases of injus- 
tice or quarrels must be reported to the compact chief, etc. so that 
they can hold a public discussion on who is right and who is wrong. 
Or in case the compact chief hears about any injustice or quarrel, 
he should immediately enlighten and explain to the parties concerned. 

22 And are therefore not present to collect debts when they are due. 

302 Social and Political Measures 

If they still act erroneously as before, let him lead members of the 
compact to petition the government for their punishment. 

Item: If any soldier or civilian outwardly behaves well but 
secretly is in communication with bandits, sells animals to them, 
or speedily provides them with information, in order to benefit 
himself and harm tens of thousands of citizens, let the compact 
chief, etc., lead members of the compact to point out the concrete 
evidence and admonish him. If he does not reform, they should 
petition the government to investigate and punish him. 

Item : If any government clerk, bad official,23 warden of a tithing, 
village elder, captain of troops, bowman, or shooter induces any 
government servant to descend on the community to demand gifts, 
the compact chief shall lead the members of the compact to petition 
the government to investigate and punish him. 

Item : New citizens used to do a great deal of harm to residents of 
various military outposts, which we really cannot bear to describe. 
Now that they are permitted to reform, they have been ordered to 
return the properties which they have appropriated. Former owners 
must no longer harbor any old grievances which would create 
disturbances in the locality. The compact chief, etc. should frequently 
instruct the people and tell them to abide by their own stations and 
attend to their own duties. If anyone disobeys, petition the govern- 
ment to punish him for his crime. 

Item : New citizens who have answered the call ! Because you 
had a single thought to do good, you have been pardoned. 
You should take special pains to master yourselves and reform, 
correct your mistakes and become new persons. Farm and weave 
diligently. Buy and sell reasonably. Aspire to be the same as the 
good citizens. Do not be satisfied with being in a low class 
because of your former label and invite your own destruction. 
You, the compact chief, etc. should teach and instruct new citizens 
at all times. If they repeat their former mistakes, petition the govern- 
ment to punish them. 

Item : When boys and girls are grown up, they should be married 
at the proper age. Often the girl's family has complained that the 
money presented by the boy's family at betrothal was insufficient 
and the boy's family has complained that the dowry was not rich 

23 The term i-min ordinarily means a righteous citizen, but here means a 
depraved person, more especially a bad official. 

Social and Political Measures 303 

enough, with the consequence that the marriage was postponed. 
The compact chief, etc. should teach and explain to these people. 
From now on, marriage should take place at the proper age and the 
provision of the betrothal gifts or dowry should be in accord with 
the economic conditions of the families. 

Item : In the case of a parent's funeral, the clothing and the inner 
and outer coffins should be in accord with the economic condition 
of the family, the purpose being merely to exert filial piety and 
sincerity to the utmost. Aside from these, things like elaborate 
Buddhist rites or extravagant feasts merely waste money and lead 
to bankruptcy and do no good to the dead at all. The compact 
chief, etc. should teach members of the compact to follow the 
correct system of ceremonies. If they still fall into former mistakes, 
they should be recorded as unfllial in the book devoted to reporting 
evil deeds. 

Item : The day before the compact meeting, the compact executive 
shall clean up the compact hall and arrange proper furniture in the 
central room. He shall set up an announcement board and incense 
stands, facing south. On the day of the meeting, all members shall 
come. As the compact master of ceremonies strikes the drum three 
times, all shall stand in front of the incense stands, then kneel down, 
facing north, and listen to the instructions of a compact director. 
Then the compact chief and members shall all say out loud, "From 
now on, all of us compact members will reverently obey warnings 
and instructions. We will unite as one mind and join together in 
virtue, and will arrive at goodness together. If anyone should have 
any double -mindedness, outwardly doing good but secretly doing 
evil, let the gods and spirits destroy him." All members shall say 
again, "If anyone should have any double -mindedness, outwardly 
doing good but secretly doing evil, let the gods and spirits destroy 
him." After bowing twice, all shall rise and go to the meeting room 
and line up on the east and the west. A compact director then reads 
the community compact. Having done so, he shall say with a loud 
voice, "All of us in this alliance must follow the community com- 
pact." The members shall say, "Yes." Then people standing in the 
east and west shall bow to each other, and according to proper 
order, move to take their seats. Junior members shall pour wine 
three times for senior members. 

The compact executive shall now rise to set up seats for displaying 
good deeds in the central hall, facing south. On the table shall be 

304 Social and Political Measures 

laid writing brushes and ink, and the record to display good deeds 
shall be displayed there. After the compact master of ceremonies 
has struck the drum three times, all shall rise. The compact master 
of ceremonies shall then request the members in a chanting voice 
to announce the good deeds. All members shall say, "This is the 
function of the compact recorder." The compact recorder shall then 
take a seat for displaying good deeds, and say out loud, "So-and-so 
has done such and such good deed and so-and-so has been able to 
correct such and such mistake. May I request that they be recorded 
in order to encourage all of us." The compact director shall ask all 
members, "What do you think?" All shall answer, "The compact 
recorder's announcement is quite right." The compact director shall 
then bow and invite all doers of good deeds to come before the 
seats for displaying good deeds, standing in the east and in the west. 
The compact recorder shall again say to the members, "I have only 
announced these. Please announce any others that you know." If 
the members know of any, they should announce them right away. If 
not, they should say, "What is announced by the compact recorder 
is correct." Thereupon, the compact chief, assistant chiefs, and 
directors all take their seats for displaying good deeds. When the 
compact recorder finishes his recording, the compact chief shall 
raise his cup and say loudly, "So-and-so has done such and such 
good deed and so-and-so has been able to correct such and such 
mistake. This means that they can cultivate their personal lives. 
So-and-so has enabled his fellow clansmen to do such and such 
good deed or correct such and such mistake. This means they can 
regulate their families. If everyone does this, how can our customs 
not be sound ? All of us in this compact should take them as models." 
Thereupon, he shall offer the cups to those doers of good deeds. In 
return they shall also offer wine to the compact chief, saying, "Ours 
is not worthy of being called good. And yet you, venerable sir, have 
taken the trouble to overpraise us. We truly feel alarmed and 
ashamed. How can we not make further effort so that we may not 
fail your instructions ?" All now shall drink and bow twice to thank 
the compact chief. The compact chief shall bow and rise. Everyone 
now shall return to his seat, and the compact executive shall remove 
the seats for displaying good deeds. 

After three rounds of wine, the compact executive shall rise and 
set up seats for reporting evil deeds at the bottom of the steps, 
facing north. On the table shall be laid writing brushes and ink, and 

Social and Political Measures 305 

the record to report evil deeds shall be displayed there. After the 
compact master of ceremonies has struck the drum three times, all 
shall rise. The compact master of ceremonies shall then request the 
members in a chanting voice to report the evil deeds. All members 
shall say, "This is the function of the compact recorder." The 
compact recorder shall then take a seat for reporting evil deeds, and 
say out loud, "I have heard that so-and-so has done such and such 
evil deed, but I am not sure. How about recording it and waiting 
until later to decide what to do ?" The compact director shall ask 
all members, "What do you think?" All shall answer, "The compact 
recorder must have some evidence." The compact director shall 
then bow and ask all doers of evil deeds to come before the seat 
for reporting evil deeds, standing and facing north. The compact 
recorder shall again say to the members, "I have heard only this 
much. Please say what you have heard." If the members have heard 
anything, they should say so right away. If not, they should say, 
"What has been heard by the compact recorder is correct." There- 
upon, the compact chief, assistant chiefs, and directors all come before 
the seat for reporting evil deeds, standing in the east and in the west. 
When the compact recorder finishes his recording, the compact 
chief shall say to the guilty, "However, we are not interested in 
punishment but in your early reform." The guilty one shall kneel 
down and plead, "How dare I not yield to punishment?" Having 
said so, he shall rise, pour wine, kneel down again and drink, and 
shall say, "How dare I not reform quickly but instead cause my 
elders to worry for me again ?" The compact chief, assistant chiefs, 
and compact recorder all shall say, "We have not been able to advise 
and instruct you in time so that you have fallen into this trouble. 
How can we be free from guilt?" They shall now all drink to 
punish themselves. The guilty one shall kneel again to plead, "As 
I already know my own guilt and as you, venerable sirs, take this 
to be your own guilt, how dare I not submit to the most severe 
punishment right away ? If you permit me to reform, please do not 
drink and that would be my good fortune." He shall then quickly 
withdraw to the rear and drink to punish himself. The compact 
chief and assistant chiefs shall all say, "As you are so courageous as 
to accept punishment like this, it means you can reform to do good, 
and we may be free from guilt." Having said so, they shall all lay 
down their wine cups. The guilty party shall now bow twice and the 
compact chief shall bend down in response. They shall all rise and 

306 Social and Political Measures 

return to their seats. The compact executive shall remove the seats 
for reporting evil deeds. After two rounds of wine, rice shall be 
served. 

After the meal, the compact master of ceremonies shall sound the 
drum three times, and in a chanting voice announce the issuance of 
warning. All shall rise. The compact directors shall stand in the 
middle of the hall and say in a loud voice, "Alas! All members of the 
compact please listen distinctly to this warning. Who among men 
has no good in him, and who has no evil in him ? Although our good 
deeds are not known to others, as they accumulate, in time this 
accumulation of good will no longer remain hidden. If we do evil 
deeds and do not reform, in time they will accumulate and reach the 
point where they can no longer be pardoned. Now we have done 
some good deeds and they have been displayed by others. This is 
of course a joyful thing. However, if just because of this we feel that 
we are good people and become proud, we shall gradually degenerate 
into evil. We have done some evil deeds and they have been reported 
by others. This is of course a shameful thing. But if we can repent 
and change our ways, we shall gradually advance to be good. There- 
fore, those who are good today should not be proud and be satisfied 
and consider themselves as good. And who can be sure that those 
who are evil today will finally end up in evil ? All members of this 
compact must encourage each other in their effort." All members 
shall then say, "How dare we not make the effort?" Thereupon all 
shall leave their tables, line up in the east and west, bow to each 
other, arise, and withdraw. 

7. Instruction on the Ten-Family Joint Registration System (1520) 
{Wang Wen-cFeng Kung ch'uan-shu, 17: 5 6b- 5 8b) 

Having put down the rebellion of Prince Ning, Wang returned to Kiangsi toward 
the end of 1 5 1 9 as governor. He reached Kan-chou in the middle of 1 5 20. The following 
order for a ten-family joint registration system, which was issued at this time, suggests 
that the system set up two years before had not been very effective. This time Wang 
emphasized reform and persuasion rather than restriction and control. 

With regard to the order concerning the ten-family joint registration 
regulations enacted by this censorate, recently it has been found that 
officials in various localities have all looked upon it as a routine and 
conventional document and are unwilling to carry the investigation 

Social and 'Political Measures 307 

out definitely and concretely. According to law, this violation 
should be punished immediately. However, for fear that the idea 
behind the regulations adopted by this censorate is not yet clearly 
understood, the reasons for it are now especially recited and instruc- 
tions are given once more. 

Whenever a ten-family joint registration board is set up, first of 
all the data contained in the individual boards in front of each 
household must be examined for their accuracy. For example, if 
according to the data there are so many males in the household, it 
must be investigated whether such and such male member is such 
and such government official, or is a first-degree licentiate, or is 
serving as a servant of officials, or is practcing such and such 
craft or is doing such and such business, or has been taken into such 
and such clan as a son-in-law, or has such and such disease or 
deformity. All these and the population record under which the 
household is registered, the amount of land tax the household has 
been paying, and so forth, must be carefully investigated item by 
item as to fact. When the data from all the ten families have been 
arranged systematically, make a copy of the record and leave it with 
the county office for reference. In cases of absence from home on 
official business or transfer and so forth, the data should be revised 
according to the record. Nothing can be concealed or overlooked, 
and then the affairs of the whole county can be looked up as easily 
as one looks at his palm. Every one of the ten families is required 
to report according to order the names of those in the tithing who 
have such habits as stealing, swindling, or blackmailing, and 
together they will sign a bond pledging not to hide any such crime, 
omit it from the record, or repeat it. The government will provide 
facilities to keep these new and old records where their names are 
recorded. Former evil deeds will be forgotten, and the culprits will 
be given the opportunity to reform from now on. If one can really 
change his ways, his name will be taken off the record. In case there 
are thieves within the territory, these reformed people will be 
ordered to search their houses and seize them. If there is any evasion 
or omission in the tithing report, all families of the tithing will be 
jointly punished as usual. 

Furthermore, according to the order in the registration board 
one family each day will take turns to explain to the other families 
and investigate. In this way no wicked persons can be concealed and 
thieves and bandits can be stopped. If there is anything like litigation 

308 Social and Political Measures 

among the ten families, fellow families of the tithing should explain 
and arbitrate immediately. If anyone refuses to listen but oppresses 
the weak on account of his strength or falsely accuses others, 
members of the tithing should join together and report him to the 
government, and government officials should immediately consider 
the case, mete out punishment, and dispatch him to the place where 
the sentence is to be carried out; they need not retain him in jail and 
slow up the case. If in the process of interrogation or examining a 
written charge it is discovered that there is a false accusation, it is 
still necessary to investigate and punish fellow members of the 
tithing for having failed to exhort the parties to make peace or to 
report the false accusation. Also, according to the order in the 
registration board, one family each day will exhort and instruct the 
others, and urge them to cherish faithfulness and cultivate harmony, 
stop litigation and quarrels, and gradually be enlightened. In this 
way, citizens will increasingly realize the mistake of quarrels, and 
litigation can be reduced. 

The system of the ten-family joint registration is very simple and 
its ability to bring order is very great. If officials can really carry 
it out concretely and definitely, not only can thieves and bandits be 
stopped and litigation be reduced. If this system is put into practice, 
whatever imbalance or defect there may be in the taxation and 
conscription for government service will be corrected and those 
requirements will become equalized. If this system is put into prac- 
tice, small groups will be lined up and large groups will be coor- 
dinated, and aggression from outside can be checked. If this system 
is put into practice, members will be warned against the nonessential 
and exhorted to make effort toward the essential, and social customs 
will become pure. If this system is put into practice, members will 
be led to virtue and instructed in learning and the instructions of 
propriety and music will flourish. For those officials with great 
ability and extensive knowledge, there is no need to make any 
further regulations. When they find any imperfection in local 
customs or in people's sentiment, they can just follow this system 
and embellish or modify it. Then order and peace in the county can 
really be achieved without effort. 

I am now taking the special opportunity to explain briefly once 
more the purpose of this regulation. Where my words cannot 
express everything, please think carefully and consider thoroughly 
on my behalf and earnestly put these instructions into practice. Do 

Social and Political Measures 309 

not consider this instruction as empty words, obstruct it, or let it 
be a conventional piece of writing to be hung on the wall. If you 
follow this instruction, everything will be all right. 

Bibliographical and Historical Notes 
on the Ch'uan-hsi lu 

There are only two books and a booklet in Western languages which are 
completely devoted to Wang Yang-ming. The first book is Tch'ang-tche 
Wang's Ea philosophie morale de Wang Yang-ming (Shanghai, T'ou-Se- We 
Press, 1936), which concentrates on Wang's doctrine of innate knowledge. 
It is fairly thorough but there is neither a comparison of this doctrine 
with earlier or later theories nor an explanation of what the doctrine 
has meant to Chinese philosophy and to Chinese and Japanese history. 
The second is a translation by Frederick Goodrich Henke, The Philosophy 
of Wang Yang-Ming (Chicago, Open Court, 1916). In addition to a slightly 
abridged translation of the Ch'uan-hsi lu, there is a sizable selection from 
Wang's letters. The selection of material is not bad but the translation 
is very faulty and lacks the support of modern critical scholarship. (See 
above, Introduction, n. 2, on Henke's work.) The best studies in English 
are: Fung Yu-lan, A History of Chinese Philosophy, translated by Derk 
Bodde (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1953), II, 596-620; his A 
Short History of Chinese Philosophy (New York, Macmillan, 1 948), pp. 308-1 8 ; 
Carsun Chang, "Wang Yang-Ming's Philosophy," in Philosophy East and 
West, V(i955), 3-18, and the booklet referred to above, Wang Yang-ming: 
Idealist Philosopher of Sixteenth-Century China (New York, St. John's 
University Press, 1962), an elaboration of the article just cited, with some 
new material on Wang's position in Neo -Confucianism and on Chinese 
intuitionism. Wing-tsit Chan's article "Wang Yang-ming", in the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (i960), his "How Buddhistic Is Wang Yang- 
ming?", in Philosophy East and West, XI (nos. 3-4, 1961-62), and Hiroyuki 
Iki's "Wang Yang-ming's Doctrine of Innate Knowledge," in Philosophy 
East and West, XI (1961-62), 27-44, may be helpful. Selections with an 
introduction may be found in Chan's A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy 
(Princeton, Princeton University Press, in press), ch. 35, and in 
Wm. Theodore de Bary, Wing-tsit Chan, and Burton Watson, eds., 
Sources of Chinese Tradition (New York, Columbia University Press, i960), 
pp. 569-81. For short accounts and general surveys, see Chan's An 
Outline and An Annotated Bibliography of Chinese Philosophy (New Haven, 
Far Eastern Publications, 1961), pp. 55-57. 

The most authentic edition of Wang's complete works is the Wang 
Wen-cFeng Kung ch'iian-shu (Complete works of Wang Yang-ming), 
Ssu-pu ts'ung-k'an (Four Libraries series) edition. It is a photographic 
reproduction of the edition of 1572 compiled by Hsieh T'ing-chieh. The 

23 

312 The Ch'uan-hsi lu 

Ssu-pu pei-jao (Essentials of the Four Libraries) edition, entitled Yang- 
ming chuan-shu (Complete works of Wang Yang-ming), is collated but 
contains many misprints. Well-known selections from the Ch'uan-hsi lu 
(Records of instructions for practical living) are found in Chou Ju-teng 
(i 547-1629), Wang-men tsung-chih (Fundamental doctrines of the Wang 
Yang-ming school) (1609), ch. 1; Ch'en Lung-cheng (1585- ?), Yang- 
ming Hsien-shengjao-shu (Important works of Master Wang Yang-ming) 
(1632), ch. 1; Shih Pang-yao (15 85 -1644), Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chi-jao 
(Collection of important works by Master Wang Yang-ming), published 
c. 1636, passim. All of these works were of the Ming period, appearing 
not long after Wang's death. Chou Ju-teng also has a selection in 
his Sheng-hsiieh tsung-chuan (Orthodox transmission of the doctrine 
of the Sage) (1606), ch. 13, which was made from the point of view 
of the idealistic wing of Neo-Confucianism. On the other hand, the 
selection by Sun Ch'i-feng (15 84-1675), in his Li-hsueh tsung-ch' uan 
(Orthodox transmission of Neo-Confucianism) (1666), ch. 9, is from 
the point of view of the rationalistic wing of Neo-Confucianism. 
This work is far superior to Chou's and contains a lengthy biography 
of Wang, although Chou's has a long dissertation on Wang's philosophy. 
By far the best selection not only from the Ch'uan-hsi lu but from Wang's 
work in general is Liu Tsung-chou's (1 578-1645) Yang-ming chuan-hsin lu 
(Records of Wang Yang-ming's transmission of truth), which constitutes 
chs. 1 1 -1 3 of the Liu T^u chiian-shu i-pien (Supplement to the complete 
works of Master Liu) (1850). Ch. 13, which consists of selections from 
the Ch'uan-hsi lu, has been reproduced with minor omissions in Huang 
Tsung-hsi's (1610-95) Ming-ju hsiieh-an (Anthology and critical accounts 
of Neo -Confucians of the Ming dynasty) (1693), ch. 10, which also 
contains Huang's own excellent account of Wang's life and thought. 
It is indispensable to any study of Wang. For commentaries, the most 
extensive, though not the most outstanding, is Wang Ying-ch'ang 
(fl. 1573), Wang Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chuan-hsi lu lun (On Master Wang 
Yang-ming's Instructions for Practical Living) (1646). It includes comments 
by T'ang Chiu-ching, which are often expressed in Buddhist terminology. 
Sun Ch'iang's Chuan-hsi lu chi-p'ing (Collected comments on the Instructions 
for Practical Living) (Shanghai, 191 5), conveniently puts in one place 
remarks from six works, including those of Shih, Sun, and Huang. A 
recent commentary is Tan Heng-chin's Wang Yang-ming chuan-hsi lu 
cha-chi (Notes on Wang Yang-ming's Instructions for Practical Living) 
(Taipei, 1957), which has philosophical comments on about half of the 
book. 

For critical studies of Wang's philosophy, the standard works are: 
Chan Jo-shui (1471-1 5 5 5), Chan Kan-chiian wen-chi (Collection of literary 
works of Chan Jo-shui) (1579), cn- 7> Lo Ch'in-shun (1465-1547), Lo 

The Ch'uan-hsi lu 313 

cheng-an ^/(Collected works of Lo Ch'in-shun) (1534), I, B; Ch'enChien 
(1497-1567), Hsueh-pu fung-pien (General critique of obscurations 
of learning) (1548), bk. 4, pt. 3; Feng K'o (/?. 1562), Ch'iu-shih pien 
(An essay in search of the right), ch. 4; Lu Lung-ch'i (1630-92), 
San-yii-fang wen-chi (Collection of literary works of the hall dedicated 
to three fish) (1701), ch. 2; and Chang Lieh (1622-85), Wang-hsiieh 
chih-i (Questions on Wang Yang-ming's philosophy) (1681), 
passim. The latter work is entirely devoted to a vehement and 
reckless attack and does not recommend itself. For critical studies 
on the "Doctrine in Four Axioms," see above, introduction to 
sec. 315, n. 109. 

As to modern studies, the best are: Ch'ien Mu, Yang-ming hsiieh shu-yao 
(Essentials of Wang Yang-ming's philosophy) (1955); Fung Yu-lan 
(referred to above) ; and Jung Chao-tsu, Ming-tai ssu-hsiang shih (History 
of thought during the Ming dynasty) (1941), pp. 71-109. They are all 
first-rate studies. Two in Japanese are highly recommended. They are: 
Yamada Jun, Yomeigaku seigi (Essentials of Wang Yang-ming's philo- 
sophy) (Tokyo, 1926), and Mishima Fuku, Oyomei no tetsugaku (Philosophy 
of Wang Yang-ming) (Tokyo, 1934). 

For sources on Wang's biography, see Ch'ien Te-hung, Nien-p'u 
(Chronological biography), in the Complete Works, ch. 23; Huang Wan, 
Hsing-cbuang (Biography), in ibid., ch. 37; Chang T'ing-yii (1672-175 5) 
et al., Ming shih (History of the Ming dynasty) (1739), cn- J95 5 Wang 
Hung-hsii (1645-1723), Mingshih kao (Draft history of the Ming dynasty) 
(171 4), biography 80; Huang Tsung-hsi et al., Ming-ju hsueh-an, ch. 10; Mao 
Ch'i-ling (1623-1716), Wang Wen-ch'eng chuan-pen (Basic materials for the 
biography of Wang Yang-ming); Yii Ch'ung-yao, Yang-ming Hsien-sheng 
chuan-tsuan (Collated biography of Master Wang Yang-ming) (Shanghai, 
1923); Takase Takejiro, Oyomei shoden (Detailed biography of Wang 
Yang-ming) (Tokyo, 191 5); Frederick Goodrich Henke, The Philosophy 
of Wang Yang-ming, pp. 3-44. For comments on these works, see above, 
Introduction, n. 2. 

The best annotations on the CFuan-hsi lu are in Japanese, notably: 
Miwa Shissai (1 669-1 744), Hyochu denshu roku (The Instructions for Practical 
Living punctuated and annotated) (1712); Kawada Kinkyo (1684-1760), 
Denshu roku hikki (Notes on [Shissai's edition of] the Instructions for 
Practical Living) (undated manuscript); Sat5 Issai (1772-18 5 9), Denshu roku 
rangai sho (Notes and comments on the Instructions for Practical Living) 
(1830); Azuma Keiji, Denshu roku kogi (Elucidations on the Instructions 
for Practical Living) (Tokyo, 1907); Yamada Jun and Suzuki Naoji, 
Denshii roku {Instructions for Practical Living) (Tokyo, 1936). Of the two 
Chinese annotations, Yeh Shao-chun, Ch'uan-hsi lu tien-chu (The Instruc- 
tions for Practical Living punctuated and annotated) (Shanghai, 1927), 

314 The Ch'uan-hsi lu 

leaves much work undone, and Ni Hsi-en, Hsiang-chu Wang Yang-ming 
ch'iian-chi (Complete works of Wang Yang-ming fully annotated) 
(Shanghai, 1928), is practically useless. 

Turning to the history of the Ch'uan-hsi lu itself, we find that it goes 
back to Wang's lifetime. According to Wang's pupil Hsu Ai, when 
Wang heard that some of his disciples privately recorded his sayings, he 
disapproved, saying that he taught as a physician prescribed medicine, 
varying from time to time according to the case, and that his sayings were 
not to be followed rigidly. But Hsu had recorded some himself, and in 
spite of his teacher's injunctions he wrote a preface to the collection (which 
is included among the prefaces in the Complete Works, pp. ia-2a) and 
justified his collection by saying that the sayings would serve as excellent 
guidance while followers were away from the teacher. 

Hsu died in 1 5 18. In August of that year (when Wang was forty-seven), 
another pupil, Hsiieh K'an, collected what was left of Hsu Ai's records 
(sees. 1 -14), conversations recorded by Lu Ch'eng (sees. 15-94), and 
those recorded by himself (sees. 95-129) and published them in Ch'ien- 
chou, Kiangsi, under the title Ch'uan-hsi lu, in three chapters, later 
known as the Ch'u-k'o ch'uan-hsi lu (Original edition of the Instructions 
for Practical Living). This is Part I (sees. 1 -1 29) of the present Ch'uan-hsi lu. 

In 1 5 24, when Wang was fifty -three, Wang's pupil Nan Ta-chi supple- 
mented the Original Edition with eight of Wang's letters and published 
them in Yiieh (in modern Chekiang) under the title Ch'uan-hsi lu, in two 
volumes, vol. 1 consisting of theOriginal Edition in three chapters and vol. 2 
consisting of the letters in five chapters. In his preface to the anthology 
his brother Nan Feng-chi noted that some of Hsu Ai's records had been 
lost. This work later came to be known as the Hsu-k'o ch'uan-hsi lu (Supple- 
mentary edition of the Instructions for Practical Living). Vol. 2 is now 
Part II (sees. 130-200) of the present Ch'uan-hsi lu. 

In 1535, when Wang's pupil Ch'ien Te-hung published Wang's Wen-lu 
(Literary works), he took Wang's two letters to Hsu Ch'eng-chih out of 
the Supplementary Edition and put them in the "Additional Works" 
section of the Wen-lu (in present Complete Works, 21:9a-! 7b) and added 
Wang's second letter to Nieh Wen-yii (sees. 185-94). Ch'ien's reason 
for doing so is given in his introduction to Part II preceding sec. 130. 
He also added the two short pieces on education (sees. 195-200). 

In 1556 Ch'ien edited the additional sayings that others had collected, 
specifically, sees. 201-21 by Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan, 222-36 by Huang I-fang, 
237-47 by Huang Mien-shu, 248-316 by Huang Mien-chih, and 317-43 
by Huang I-fang. (For details see his Postscript following sec. 343.) 
Ch'ien incorporated into them some sayings recorded by himself, notably 
sees. 260, 297, 313, 315, 338, 339, and 343. Probably sees. 260-316 had 
all been recorded by himself. He published these sayings in Ch'i-chou 

The Ch'uan-hsi lu 315 

in present Hupeh under the title Ch'uan-hsi hsii-lu (Supplement to the 
Instructions for Practical Living). In 1572, when Hsieh T'ing-chieh com- 
piled the Complete Works of Wang, he asked Ch'ien to add Wang's "Chu 
Hsi's Final Conclusions Arrived at Late in Life." This is the present 
Part III (sees. 201-343). 

These three parts, collectively called the Ch'uan-hsi lu, were placed by 
Hsieh at the head of the Complete Works as chs. 1-3 under the heading 
Yii-lu (Recorded sayings). Hsieh's is the oldest and best edition of 
Wang's complete works and has remained standard ever since its publi- 
cation. It is included in both the Ssu-pu ts'ung-k'an series where it 
is entitled Wang Wen-ch'eng Rung ch'uan-shu, and in the Ssu-pu pei-yao 
series where it is entitled Yang-ming ch'uan-shu. 

There have been many editions of the Ch'uan-hsi lu, including some in 
Japan, issued either independently or as part of a collection of works. 
Some of these editions have included one or more additional essays, 
notably those on making up the mind {Complete Works, 7:51 a- 5 4b) and 
on cultivating the Way {ibid., 7:59b-6ob), following the recorded sayings 
in Part II. These essays add little to Wang's fundamental philosophy. 

The number of conversations varies with different editions. Sec. 95 is 
omitted from Nan's CUu-Mo ch'uan-hsi lu and from Sung I-wang {fl. 1 547), 
Yang-ming wen-ts'ui (Collection of literary works of Wang Yang-ming) 
(1553). Shih Pang-yao, Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chi-yao, Nan, and Yii Lin 
(1814-73), Wang Yang-ming Hsien-sheng ch'uan-chi (Complete works of 
Master Wang Yang-ming) (1673), have added one conversation after 
sec. 24. It is the same conversation in all three works. In Yii, sees. 209, 
216, 262, and 300 are put at the end. Following sec. 241, the Lii- 
tung edition of the Original Hdition has added two conversations. 
Following sec. 312, Yii and Wang I-lo {fl. 1680), Wang Yang-ming chi 
(Collected works of Wang Yang-ming) (1680), have added one conversa- 
tion, which is the same in the two works. Following sec. 316, the Lii-tung 
edition has added one and following sec. 336, Chang Wen-ta {fl. 1621), 
Yang-ming wen-eft ao (Selections from Wang Yang-ming's works) (1689), 
has added two. After sec. 343, Shih and Yii have added six conver- 
sations, which are the same in both, Wang six different conversations, and 
Chang twenty-eight conversations, six of which are the same as in Wang, 
two the same as in Shih and Yii, and one the same as the first conversation 
added in the Lii-tung edition after sec. 241, thus making nineteen addi- 
tional and different conversations in Chang. All these additions are found 
in Sat5 Issai's Denshu roku rangai sho, already cited. Their sources and 
authenticity are not clear, except for the one added after sec. 312, which 
is recorded in the Chronological Biography, Chia-ching, second year, as part 
of the same conversation as sec. 312. None of these additional sections 
alters Wang's teachings in any significant way. 

316 The Ch'uan-hi lu 

Variations of individual words or short phrases appear in various 
editions. They are noted in several Japanese annotated editions, especially 
in Sato Issai, Denshu roku rangai sho, and in Miwa Shissai, Hydchii denshii 
roku, cited above. These variations are minor or obvious misprints and 
present no problem of textual or philosophical interpretation of Hsieh's 
edition. 

A List of Chinese and Japanese Works 

Works generally referred to by their titles are listed under title with 
cross reference to author. Editions indicated are those used in this book. 

Azuma Keiji. Denshu rokukogi (Elucidations on the Instructions for Practical 

Living). 
Bodhidharma, see under Eiu-men chi. 
Chan Jo-shui (1471-1555). Chan Kan-chiian wen-chi (Collection of literary 

works of Chan Jo-shui). 
Chang Lieh (1622-85). Wang-hsiieh chih-i (Questions on Wang Yang- 

ming's philosophy). 
Chang Po-hsing, see under Cheng-i-fang chiian-shu. 
Chang T'ing-yii, see under Ming shih. 
Chang Tsai (1020-77). Chang Heng-chii chi (Collected works of Chang 

Tsai), Cheng-i-fang chiian-shu edition. 
Cheng-meng (Correcting youthful ignorance). In Chang Heng-ch'u 

chi. 

Hsi-ming (Western inscription). In Chang Heng-ch'u chi. 

Chang Wen-ta, see under Wang Yang-ming. 

Chen-chiao (d. 712). Cheng-tao ko (Ode to the understanding of the way). 

In Ching-te chuan-teng lu. 
Ch'en Chien (1497-1 5 67). Hsueh-pu fung-pien (General critique of obscura- 
tions of learning). 
Ch'en Lung-cheng, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Ch'en Ts'ang-ch'i (fl. 723-33). Pen-ts'ao shih-i (Supplementary notes on 

medicine). 
Cheng-i-fang chiian-shu (Complete library of the hall of rectifying the way), 

comp. by Chang Po-hsing (165 1 -1725). 
Ch'eng Hao (1032-85). Wen-chi (Collection of literary works). In 

Erh-Cheng chiian-shu. 
, and Ch'eng 1(1035-1 107). Erh-Cheng chiian-shu (Complete works 

of the two Ch'engs), sppy edition. 

I-shu (Surviving works). In Erh-Cheng chiian-shu. 

Ts'ui-jen (Pure words). In Erh-Cheng chiian-shu. 

Wai-shu (Additional works). In Erh-Cheng chiian-shu. 

318 List of Chinese and Japanese Works 

Ch'eng I. Ching-shuo (Explanations of the Classics). In Erh-Ch' eng ch'uan-shu. 
I chuan (Commentary on the Book of Changes). In Erh-Ch'eng 

ch'uan-shu. 
Chi Chun, see under Ssu-k'u ch'uan-shu tsung-mu fi-yao. 
Ch'ien-Han shu (History of the Former Han dynasty), by Pan Ku (32-92), 

pnp edition. 
Ch'ien Mu. Yang-ming hsiieh shu-yao (Essentials of Wang Yang-ming's 

philosophy). 
Ch'ien Te-hung (1496-15 74). Nien-p'u (Chronological biography). In 

Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu. See under Wang Yang-ming. 
Ching-te ch'uan-teng lu (Records of the transmission of the lamp compiled 

during the Ching-te period), by Tao-yiian (fl. 1004), sptk edition. 
Chiu-ch'iu (Nine mounts). 
Chou Ju-teng (1 547-1629). Sheng-hsiieh tsung-ch'uan (Orthodox transmission 

of the doctrine of the Sage). 
Wang-men tsung-chih (Fundamental doctrines of the Wang Yang- 
ming school). 
Chou-li (The rites of Chou). 
Chou Tun-i (1017-73). Chou Lien-hsi chi (Collected works of Chou Tun-i), 

Cheng-i-fang ch'uan-shu edition. 
T'ai-chi t'u-shuo (Explanation of the diagram of the Great 

Ultimate). In Chou Lien-hsi chi. 

T'ung-shu (Penetrating the Book of Changes). 

Chu Hsi (11 30-1 200). Chu T^u ch'tian-shu (Complete works of Chu Hsi), 

comp. by Li Kuang-ti (1642-1718) et a/., 171 3 edition. 
Chu t%u wen-chiifZoVitciion of literary works of Chu Hsi), also called 

Chu T^u ta-ch'iian (Complete literary works of Chu Hsi), sppy edition. 
Chu T^uju-lei (Classified conversations of Chu Hsi), comp. by 

Li Ching-te (fl. 1263), 1880 edition. 

Chung-jung chang-chu (Commentary on the Doctrine of the Mean). 

Chung-jung huo-wen (Questions and answers on the Doctrine of the 

Mean). 

Lun-ju chi-chu (Collected commentaries on the Analects). 

Lun-ju huo-wen (Questions and answers on the Analects). 

Meng T^u chi-chu (Collected commentaries on the Book of 

Mencius). 
Meng T^u huo-wen (Questions and answers on the Book of 

Mencius). 

Ta-hsu'eh chang-chu (Commentary on the Great Learning). 

Ta-hsu'eh huo-wen (Questions and answers on the Great Learning). 

List of Chinese and Japanese Works 319 

T'ung-chien kang-mu (Outline of the Comprehensive Mirror for 

the Aid of Government), 1804 edition. 
Ch'u-shih (1290-1370). Ch'u-shih Fan-ch'i Ch'an-shih yu-lu (Recorded 

sayings of Zen Master Fan-ch'i). In Zoku^pkyo. 
Chuang T%u, by Chuang Chou (bet. 399 and 295 B.C.). See under Nan-hua 

chen-ching. 
Ch'un-ch'iu (Spring and Autumn Annals). 
Chung-yung {Doctrine of the Mean). 
Daikanwajiten (Great Chinese-Japanese dictionary), comp. by Morohashi 

Tetsuji. 
Fan Chun (fl. 11 34). Hsin-chen (An admonition on the mind). 
Fan Yeh, see under Hou-Han shu. 

Feng K'o (fl. 1562). Ch'iu-shih pien (An essay in search of the right). 
Han Fei T%u, sptk edition. 

Han-hai (Sea of cases of books), comp. by Li Tiao-yuan (1734- 1803). 
Han Yii (768-824). Han Ch'ang-li ch'uan-chi (Complete works of Han Yii), 

sppy edition. 
Hou-Han shu (History of the Later Han dynasty), by Fan Yeh (398- 

445), pnp edition. 
Hsieh T'ing-chieh, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Hsin T'ang shu (New history of the T'ang dynasty), by Ou-yang Hsiu 

(1007-72), et a/., pnp edition. 
Hsing-li ta-ch'iian (Great collection of Neo-Confucianism), comp. by 

Hu Kuang (1370-1418) et a/., 141 5 edition. 
Hsu Heng (1209-81). Hsu Lu-chai chi (Collected Works of Hsu Heng), 

Cheng-i-f ang ch'uan-shu edition. 
Hsiian-tsang (596-664). Ch'eng wei-shih lun (The establishment of the 

doctrine of idealism). In Taisho dai^okyo. 
Hsiieh K'an, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Hsun T%u, by Hsun Ch'ing(/?. 298-238 B.C.), sptk edition. 
Hu Kuang, see under Hsing-li ta-ch'iian, Ssu-shu ta-ch'iian, and Wu-ching 

ta-ch'iian. 
Hua-yen ching (Flower splendor scripture). 
Huai-nan T^u, by Liu An (d. 122 B.C.), sppy edition. 
Huang Tsung-hsi (1610-95). Shih-shuo (My teacher's interpretations). In 

Ming-ju hsiieh -an. 

, also see under Ming-ju hsiieh-an; Sung-Yuan hsiieh-an. 

Huang Wan. Hsing-chuang (Biography). In Wang Yang-ming, Wang 

Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu. 
Hui-neng, see under Liu-tsu fan-ching. 

320 List of Chinese and Japanese Works 

I ching (Book of Changes). 

I-wei t'ung-kua-jen (Apocryphal treatise on the Book of Changes : on 

understanding the verification of divination). 
Juan Yuan (1764- 1849). Yen-ching-shih hsu-chi (Supplementary collected 

works of the room for the study of Classics), 1874 edition. 
Jung Chao-tsu. Ming-tai ssu-hsiang shih (History of thought during the 

Ming dynasty). 
Kao P'an-lung (1 562-1626). Kao Tt(u i-shu (Surviving works of Kao 

P'an-lung). 
Kawada Kinkyo (1684-1760). Denshu roku hikki (Notes on the Instructions 

for Practical Living). 
Ku Hsien-ch'eng (15 50-1612). Hsiao-hsin-chai cha-chi (Notes from the 

studio of care). 
Kuei-ts'ang (Reservoir). 

K'ung T%u chia-yu (School sayings of Confucius), sptk edition. 
Lao T%u. 

Leng-j/en ching (Strong character scripture). 
Li chi (Book of Rites). 
Li Ching -te, see under Chu Hsi. 
Li Kuang-ti, see under Chu Hsi. 
Li Tiao-yiian, see under Han-hai. 
Li T'ung (1088-1158). Li Yen-p'ing chi (Collected works of Li T'ung), 

Cheng-i-f ang ch'uan-shu edition. 
Lien-shan (Mountain range). 
Lien-teng hui-jao (Essentials of the several lamps combined), comp. by 

Wu-ming (fl. 11 89). In Zoku^okyo. 
Liu An, see under Huai-nan T%u. 

Liu Hsiang (77-6 B.C.). Shuo-yuan (Collection of discourses). 
Liu I-ch'ing, see under Shih-shuo hsin-yu. 
Liu-men chi (Six-gate collection), attributed to Bodhidharma (fl. 460-534). 

In Taisho dai^okyo. 
Liu-tsu fan-ching (Platform scripture of the Sixth Patriarch), ascribed to 

Hui-neng (638-713). In Taisho daiffpkyo. 
Liu Tsung-chou (1 578-1645). Liu T%u ch'uan-shu (Complete works of Liu 

Tsung-chou). 
Yang-ming ch'uan-hsin lu (Records of Wang Yang-ming's trans- 
mission of truth). In Liu T%u ch'uan-shu i-pien (Supplement to the 

complete works of Master Liu), 1850 edition. 
Lo Ch'in-shun (1465 -1547). Lo Cheng-an chi (Collected works of Lo 

Ch'in-shun), Cheng-i-f ang ch'uan-shu edition. 

hist of Chinese and Japanese Works 321 

Lu Hsiang-shan (1139-93). Hsiang-shan ch'uan-chi (Complete works of Lu 

Hsiang-shan), sppy edition. 
Lu Lung-ch'i (1630-92). San-jii-fang wen-chi (Collection of literary 

works of the hall dedicated to three fish). 
Lii Pu-wei (d. 235 B.C.). Lii Shih ch>un-ch,iu (Mr. Lii's spring and autumn 

annals). 
Lii Ta-lin (1044-90). K'o-chi ming (Inscription on self-mastery). In Sung- 

Yiian hsiieh-an and Hsing-li ta-cFuan. 
Lun-ju (Analects). 
Mao Ch'i-ling (1623-1716). Wang Wen-eft eng chuan-pen (Basic materials 

for the biography of Wang Yang -ming). 
Meng T%u (Book of Mencius). 
Ming-chiao (980-1052). Ming-chiao Cti 'an-shih yii-lu (Recorded sayings of 

Zen Master Ming-chiao). In Taisho dai^okyo. 
Ming-ju hsiieh-an (Anthology and critical accounts of Neo -Confucians 

of the Ming dynasty), comp. by Huang Tsung-hsi (1610-95) et a/., 

sppy edition. 
Ming shih (History of the Ming dynasty), comp. by Chang T'ing-yii 

(1672-175 5) et a/., pnp edition. 
Ming shih kao (Draft history of the Ming dynasty), comp. by Wang Hung- 

shii (1645 -1723). 
Mishima Fuku. Oyomei no tetsugaku (Philosophy of Wang Yang-ming). 
Miwa Shissai (1 669-1 744). Hyochu denshu roku (The Instructions for Prac- 
tical Living punctuated and annotated). 
Morohashi Tetsuji, see under Daikaniva jiten. 
Mu-an, see under Tsu-fing shih-yuan. 
Nan-hua chen-ching (Pure classic of Nan-hua), sptk edition. Same as 

Chuang T%u. 
Nan Ta-chi, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Ni Hsi-en. Hsiang-chu Wang Yang-ming ch'uan-chi (Complete works of 

Wang Yang-ming fully annotated). 
Nieh Pao (1487-15 63). Shuang-chiang wen-chi (Collection of literary works 

ofNiehPao). 
Ota Kinjo (1765-1825). Gi mon roku (Records of questioning), 1831 edition. 
Ou-yang Hsiu (1007-72). Ch'iu-shengfu (Prose-poem on the sound of the 

autumn wind). In Ou-yang Wen-chung Kung wen-chi (Collection of literary 

works of Ou-yang Hsiu), sppy edition. 

, also see under Hsin T'ang shu. 

Pa-su (Eight inquiries). 

Pan Ku, see under Ch'ien-Han shu. 

322 hist of Chinese and Japanese Works 

Pi-yen lu (Records of the green cave), by Yiian-wu (d. 113 5). 

Po-na pen (Choice works). 

P'u-chi, see under Wu-teng hui-jiian. 

Sat5 Issai (1772-18 5 9). Denshu roku rangai sho (Notes and comments on 

the Instructions for Practical Living). 
Shao Yung (1 101-77). Huang-chi ching-shih shu (Supreme principles 

governing the world), sppy edition. 
Shen Yiieh (441-513). Yin Hou chi (Collected works of Shen Yiieh). In 

Han Wei Liu-ch'ao i-po-san chia chi (Collection of works of 103 writers 

from 206 B.C. to a.d. 589). 
Shih chi (Records of the historian), by Ssu-ma Ch'ien (145-86 B.C.), pnp 

edition. 
Shih ching (Book of Odes). 
Shih Pang-yao, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Shih-shuo hsin-yu (New discourses on the talk of the times), by Liu I-ch'ing 

(fl. 421). ' 
Shu ching (Book of History). 
Ssu-k'u ch'uan-shu tsung-mu t'i-yao (Essential points about the books in the 

Four Libraries), comp. by Chi Chun (1 724-1 805) et a/. 
Ssu-ma Ch'ien, see under Shih chi. 
Ssu-pu pei-jao (Essentials of the Four Libraries). 
Ssu-pu ts'ung-k'an (Four Libraries series). 
Ssu-shu ta-ch'uan (Great collection of commentaries on the Four Books), 

comp. by Hu Kuang (1 370-141 8) et al. 
Sun Ch'i-feng (15 84-1675). Li-hsueh tsung-ch'uan (Orthodox transmission 

of Neo-Confucianism). 
Sun Ch'iang. Ch'uan-hsi lu chi-p'ing (Collected comments on the Instructions 

for Practical Living). 
Sun Tzu (fl. 513-494 B.C.?). Sun T^u ping-fa (Art of war). 
Sung I-wang, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Sung shih (History of the Sung dynasty), by T'o[q]t'o (d. 1328), pnp 

edition. 
Sung-Yiian hsueh-an (Anthology and critical accounts of Neo -Confucians 

of the Sung and Yuan dynasties), comp. by Huang Tsung-hsi (1610-95) 

et al., sppy edition. 
Ta-chih-tu lun (Treatise on great wisdom), by Nagarjuna (ca. 100- 

200). 
Ta-hsueh (Great Learning). 
Ta-Tai li chi (Book of rites of the Elder Tai), comp. by Tai Te (fl. 60 

B.C.). 

hist of Chinese and Japanese Works 323 

Taisho dai^pkyo (Taisho edition of the Buddhist Canon). 

Takase TakejirS. Oyomei shoden (Detailed biography of Wang Yang-ming). 

Tan Heng-chin. Wang Yang-ming ch'uan-hsi lu cha-chi (Notes on Wang 

Yang-ming's Instructions for Practical Living). 
T'ang Shun-chih (1507-60). Tang Ching-ch'uan chi (Collected works of 

T'ang Shun-chih), 1553 edition. 
Tao-te ching. Same as Lao Tt{u. 
Tao-yiian, see under Ching-te ch'uan-teng lu. 
To[q]to, see under Sung shih. 
Ts'ai Ch'en (1 167-1230). Shu chi-chuan (Collected commentaries on the 

Book of History). 
Ts'ai Yuan -ting (1138-98). Lii-lii hsin-shu (New book on pitch pipes). 
Tsochuan (Tso's commentary), ascribed to TsoCh'iu-ming (6th century B.C.). 
Tsou Shou-i (149 1 -1 562). Tsou Tung-kuo chi (Collected works of Tsou 

Shou-i). 
Tsu-fing shih-yuan (Sayings and anecdotes of patriarchs), comp. by Mu-an 

(J. 1 108). 
Tsung-mi (780-841), Ch'an-juan chu-ch'iian chi tu-hsii (General preface to 

the Collection of source material of the Zen school). In Taisho dai^okyo. 
Tu Fu (712-70). Tu Kung-pu chi (Collected poems by Tu Fu). 
Wang Chi (149 8-1583). Wang Lung-hsi Hsien-sheng ch'uan-chi (Complete 

works of Master Wang Chi). 
Wang Hung-hsu, see under Ming shih kao. 
Wang I-lo, see under Wang Yang-ming. 
Wang Yang-ming (1472-15 29). Ch'u-k'o ch'uan-hsi lu (Original edition 

of the Instructions for Practical Living), comp. by Hsiieh K'an (d. 1545). 
Ch'uan-hsi hsii-lu (Supplement to the Instructions for Practical 

Living), comp. by Ch'ien Te-hung (1496-1574). 
"Hsiu-tao lun" (An essay on the cultivation of the Way). In 

Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu. 
Hsii-k'o ch'uan-hsi lu (Supplementary edition of the Instructions for 

Practical Living), comp. by Nan Ta-chi (1487-1541). 
Ku-pen ta-hsueh p'ang-shih (Commentary on the original text of the 

Great Learning). 
Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung ch'uan-shu (Complete works of Wang 

Yang-ming), comp. by Hsieh T'ing-chieh (/7. 1572), sptk edition. 
Wang Yang-ming chi (Collected works of Wang Yang-ming), 

comp. by Wang I-lo (fl. 1680). 
Wang Yang-ming Hsien-sheng ch'iian-chi (Complete works of Master 

Wang Yang-ming), comp. by Yii Lin (1814-75). 

324 "List of Chinese and Japanese Works 

— ■ Yang-ming ch'iian-shu (Complete works of Wang Yang-ming). 

Same as Wang Wen-ch'eng Kung cFuan-shu. 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chi-jao (Collection of important works by- 
Master Wang Yang-ming), comp. by Shih Pang-yao (1585 -1644). 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng yao-shu (Important works of Master Wang 

Yang-ming), comp. by Ch'en Lung-cheng (1585-?). 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng wen-lu (Literary works of Master Wang 

Yang-ming). 

Yang-ming wen-cttao (Selections from Wang Yang-ming's works), 

comp. by Chang Wen-ta (/?. 1621). 

Yang-ming wen-lu (Literary works of Wang Yang-ming), comp. 

by Ch'ien Te-hung (1496-15 74). 

Yang-ming wen-ts'ui (Collection of literary works of Wang Yang- 
ming), comp. by Sung I-wang (fl. 1547). 

Wang Ying-ch'ang (/?. 1 5 73). Wang Yang-ming Hsien-sheng ch'uan-hsi lu lun 
(On Master Wang Yang-ming's Instructions for Practical Living). 

Wei Shou, see under Wei shu. 

Wei shu (History of the Later Wei dynasty), by Wei Shou (506-72), pnp 
edition. 

Wu-ching ta-ch'uan (Great collection of commentaries on the Five Classics), 
comp. by Hu Kuang (1 370-141 8) et al. 

Wu-ming, see under Lien-teng hui-yao. 

Wu-teng hui-yiian (Five lamps combined), comp. by P'u-chi (fl. 1228-33). 
In Zoku-^okyo. 

Yamada Jun. Yomeigaku seigi (Essentials of Wang Yang-ming's philos- 
ophy). 

, and Suzuki Naoji. Denshu roku (Instructions for Practical Living). 

Yamazaki Ansai (1618-82). Zoku Yama^aki Ansai %enshu (Supplement to 
the Complete Works of Yamazaki Ansai). 

Yeh Shao-chun. Clfuan-hsi lu tien-chu (The Instructions for Practical Living 
punctuated and annotated). 

Yii Ch'ung-yao. Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chuan-tsuan (Collated biography of 
Master Wang Yang-ming). 

Yii Lin, see under Wang Yang-ming. 

Yiian-chiao ching (Scripture of perfect enlightenment), in Taisho dai^okyo. 

Yiian-wu, see under Pi -yen lu. 

Zengaku jiten (Dictionary of Zen). 

Zoku^okyo (Supplement to the Buddhist Canon). 

Glossary 

Ao 

m. 

Azuma Keiji 

i & 58 

Bodhidharma 

~*& \ <9 sit v5fe 

Ch'ai Ming-chih 

££ ^9 >3 

Chan Jo-shui 

^ j| *> 

Chan Kan-ch'iian 

Jjl ^ *. 

Chan Kan-ch'iian wen-chi 

2* * & it 

Chan, Wing-tsit 

*fc * it 

Ch'an 

#?■ 

Cb'an-kuan ts'e-chin 

**«#*. 

CFan-yiian cbu-ch'iian chi tu-hsii 

If 58 & t£ 

Chang 

& 

Chang, Carsun 

3k % Vj 

Chang -chou 

1% A- 

Chang Heng-ch'u 

*J** 

Chang Heng-ch'u chi 

ife *£ * A 

Chang I 

&«6 

Chang Liang 

* fe 

Chang Lieh 

if. #. 

Chang Mi 

Chang Po-hsing 

m <fe ^T 

Chang Shu-ch'ien 

34 ^ *j 

Chang T'ing-yii 

5& 5* 1- 

Chang Tsai 

i^ic 

Chang Tzu-fang 

%. -$ h 

Chang Wen-ta 

* *9 ft. 

^p tf- 

326 Glossary 

Chang Yiian-ch'ung 

% \j ^ 

Chao 

£ 

Ch'e 

Jfc&L 

Chen-chiao 

i % 

Ch'en Chien 

?£ 5| 

Ch'en Ch'ing-lan 

? * 5* m 

Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan 

?i -tb «<| 

Ch'en Hsien-chang 

* 4k f 

Ch'en Kuo-ying 

\f H ^ 

Ch'en Lung-cheng 

4 % 3: 

Ch'en Ming-shui 

& ^ * 

Ch'en Po-sha 
Ch'en Ts'ang-ch'i 
Ch'en Wei-chiin 
Cheng (state) 

& fe ty 

k Mi %r 
v% ^ ^ 
-If 

Cheng (to rectify) 

2i 

Cheng Chao-shuo 

% ^ 3D 

Cheng Hsiian 

3. r 4- 

Cheng I-ch'u 

|ty» - *Q 

Cheng-i-fang cWuan-shu 

-v -?-- .*^ />-^ i 

Cheng-meng 

1 % 

Cheng-tao ko 

tf it 3fc 

Cheng-te 

TV * 

Ch'eng (king) 

» 

Ch'eng (to mention) 

i4 

Ch'eng Hao 

H * 

Ch'eng-hua 

&i ^c 

Ch'eng I 

ft ^ 

Ch'eng I-ch'uan 

SI t? "] 

Glossary 327 

Ch'eng-kuan *2- ft 

Ch'eng Ming-tao M ^ SS. 

Ch'eng Po-ch'un #* ^ 4 

Ch'eng wei-shth lun »6 *S «o& It 

Chi #«. 

Chi Chun fo 3£) 

Chi Wei-ch'ien ^ *\t #L 

Chi Yuan-heng ^ ^J ^ 

Ch'i (state) ^ 

C&V (material force) jj[(^ 

Ch'i-chou f^ -^ 

Ch'i-tiao K'ai ifc^fc $£] 

Chia-ching -jfe ^ 

Chiao ^ 

Chieh -|^ 

Ch'ien %\ 

Ch'ien-chou ^-v^- 

Ch'ien-Han shu 

V) *& 

Ch'ien Hsu-shan p^. V^ o > 

Ch'ien Hung-fu |^- >^ ^)* 

Ch'ien Mu $£ ^ 

Ch'ien-t'ang |% ^ 

Ch'ien Te-hung S%^-^ 

CM jg. 

Chih-tao *L ^ 

Chin -p 

Ch'in 4^ 

CVin-min J^ ^ 

C5/«g (refined) iHpfj 

24 

328 Glossary 

Ching (serious) 

Ching-chou 

Ching-shen 

Ching-shuo 

Ching-te ch'uan-teng lu 

Chiu-ch'iu 

Ch'iu-shengfu 

CFiu-shih pien 

Ch'iung 

Chou (duke) 

Chou (king) 

Chou (compromise) 

Chou Ching -an 

Chou Heng 

Chou Ju-teng 

Chou-li 

Chou Lien-hsi 

Chou L.ien-hsi chi 

Chou Mao-shu 

Chou Tao-t'ung 

Chou Tun-i 

Chu 

Chu Ch'en-hao 

Chu Hsi 

Chu Hui-an 

Chu Hui-weng 

Chu-ko K'ung-ming 

Chu-ko Liang 

Chu Pen-ssu 

Sx 

&] 4- 

ft*+ 

\-i- v\_± 

**i|tt*k 

-^&- 

Ar^lk 

£ Ml. % 

*\ 

w 

«r 

^ 

$if % 

«% 

if) ^^ 

>D*t 

si*** 

>I]**4fe 

if) l^^k 

J^iliE 

^!<^ 

H . 

^ t >i 

**. 

i ^4r 

i>& I 

» 1) *L ^ 

~£% S> -il. 

^* -4^ Mr 

Glossary 329 

Chu Te-chih % J{| ^_ 
Ciw T^« cWiian-shu /^ h ^ * 

Chu T%u ta-ch'iian % X X. "%" 

C&« T^» tven-chi 5, A. ^_ j£ 

Chu Wen Kung ^ -^ -^ 

Chu-yung J^ jj| 

Ch'u ^ 

Ch'u-chou 5f$ -*> 

Ch'u-k'o cFuan-hsi lu "fcr? "£.] ^ 3| J|. 

Ch'u-shih j| ^ 

OWM F*«-a&V CFan-shihyu-lu ^7? fc ^ *$-&}> f£ J& 

CWuan-hsi hsti-lu 4*§ *H &§ $|< 

CWuan-hsi lu chi-fing i% % ^ -J, tf- 

Ch'uan-hsi lu tien-chu 1^ e |g<. $?, *\ 

Chuang 35: 

Chuang Chou rfct **J 

Chuang T%u ;fcL 3~ 

Ch'un-ch'lu % ^K. 

Ch'un-ch'iufan-lu %- :&. ^ 'Jf, 

Chung-shuo -r &■£> 

Chung-yung "t # 

Chung-yung chang-chii VT ^ ^ ^> 

Chung-yung chi-liieh \ % ^%- 

Chung-yung huo-wen 'T % ^ ^ 

Ch'ung-cheng j^L i 

Daikanwa jtten K ^ fc* ^ *l 

Denshu roku [% 3g |^ 

Denshu roku hikki ^ 3g )^4l |£, 

330 Glossary 

Denshii roku kogi \^ % %.%■ I& 

Denshu roku rangai sho ^fL ^ til W\ A ^ 

Erh-Ch'eng cWtian-shu — ^* ^ ^ 

Fa-tsans & ^ 

FanChao-ch'i *MlS>-^ 

Fan Chiin ^ ^ 

Fan Chung-yen & ^ >fe 

FanYeh ^^ 

F*« >£• 

Feng K'o ag ^ 

Fou-feng Jg. :&. 

Fu-hsi 4V X 

Fu Shang-Hng 4|> ^ -j^ 

Fu-ying $L$L 

FuYiieh ^1^ 

Fung Yu-lan >l? k f| 

Gimon roku ^ 3>) f^ 

H«« CVang-li ch'uan-chi jfe ^> ^- "^ 3- 

Han Ch'i j^. ^ 

Han Fei T%u J^. ^|l ^- 

Han-hai Jfc, ^- 

Han-lin Jfrjs -Tjv 

Han T'ui-chih |# ^ ^ 

Ha« IF« Liu-cb'ao i-po-san chia chi 5^ Jl^, ^ ^ — <§) — 3^ 

HanYii |$ ^ 

Heng-shui 7?>. tK- 

Ho *fc> 

Ho-p'ing *° f 

Glossary 331 

Ho Shan-shan 

fy -4 ±> 

Ho Shu-ching 

*% $%.%* 

Ho T'ing-jen 

^a&*= 

Hou-Han shu 

Mt 

Hsi 

Jk 

Hsi-ming 

ig>l^ 

Hsi -yen 

4 %% 

Hsiang (duke) 

% 

Hsiang (name) 

k 

Hsiang-chu Wang Yang-ming ch'u'an- 

t% a £ & sg ± 

chi 

A 

Hsiang -hu 

&*8 

Hsiang-shan ch'uan-chi 

%^> £4 

Hsiang Yu 

*^i 

Hsiao-hsin-chai cha-chi 

-> ^- f- K it 

Hsiao Hui 

H Mr 

Hsieh 

is> 

~fc 

Hsieh Liang -tso 

me*- 

Hsieh Shang-ts'ai 

%x & 

Hsieh T'ing-chieh 

^^f* 

Hsien 

^ 

Hsin 

5Z 

•f ( 

Hsin-chen 

-fcr jfe 

Hsin-chien 

&f-3fe 

Hsin -m in 

*f ^ 

Hsin T'ang shu 

*t* 1 

Hsing-chuang 

ft*C 

Hsing-li ta-cb'iian 

« 3f k£r 

Hsiu-tao lun 

f£ dL ** 

332 Glossary 

Hsiung Shih-li 
Hsu 

Hsu Ai 

&SL 

Hsii Ch'eng-chih 
Hsu Heng 
Hsii Heng-shan 

it- >* * 

Hsii-k'o ch'uan-hsi lu 

***•} 1|%*J 

Hsii Lu-cbai chi 
Hsu Yiieh-jen 

Vf * % & 

Hsiian 

Hsiian-tsang 

~£ *&> 

Hsiieh Hsiian 

%*i 

Hsiieh K'an 

Hsiieh -pu fung-pien 
Hsiieh Shang-ch'ien 

Hsiin Ch'ing 
Hsiin T%u 

Hu Chii-jen 

4 ft *=■ 

Hu Hung 

-kfl & 

Hu Kuang 

W & 

Hua-yen ching 
Huai-nan T%u 

Huan 

te 

Huang Cheng -chih 
Huang Ch'eng-fu 
Huang-chi ching-shih shu 

* at ^ 
■ft &i ft 

Huang Chieh 
Huang Chih 

Huang Chih-ch'ing 

* A w 

Glossary 333 

Huang Chiu-an 

"K? ^ Mb 

Huang Hsing-tseng 

A % f 

Huang Hsiu-i 

% fy % 

Huang Hung-kang 

-% J^ ^ 

Huang I -fang 

■* *X% 

Huang Lo-ts'un 

* Jfc-H 

Huang-lung 

"* H> 

Huang -mei 

■* U 

Huang Mien-chih 

* fe^ 

Huang Mien-shu 

%&>2K 

Huang Shu-hsien 

-k^KJt 

Huang Shu-tu 

-4 ^k. 

Huang Tsung-hsi 

% ^- Ik 

Huang Tsung-hsien 

**-% 

Huang Tsung-ming 

* i *8 

Huang Wan 

+ K 

Hui (name) 

CD 

Hut (able) 

♦ 

Hui-chi 

**fi 

Hui-neng 

4 St 

Hung, William 

** 

Hung-tu 

5**f 

Hyochii denshii roku 

>S * 4 

I (arts) 

% 

J (measure) 

SfL 

I (righteousness) 

^ 

I ching 

4> te 

I chuan 

h% 

I-kuan 

-\ 

334 Glossary 

I-min 

I-shu 

l-wei f ung-kua-yen 

I-yen 

Hi 

it 

I-yin 

Iki Hiroyuki 

•& ^ it ^ 

Jan Ch'iu 

**. 

Jao Tsung-i 

Jen (humanity, seed) 

Jen (man) 

K 

Jen (name of year) 

:4 

> 

Up 

Juan Yuan 

}%j 7L> 

Jui-yen 

Jung Chao-tsu 

■fc-'f'ifl. 

Kan-chou 

**-*. 

K'ang 

& 

Kao 

4 

Kao P'an-lung 

!j#-$i 

Kao Tsu 

fe*a. 

Kao Tzu 

4 * 

Kao T%u i-shu 

fe -* si. t 

Kawada Kinkyo 

iq € ^ #f> 

Keigo Ryoan 

& « 1 % 

Ko-wu 

tete 

K'o-cbi ming 

ten, 

K'o-t'ang 

^ it 

Ku Hsien-ch'eng 

% t- ^ 

Ku Jo-hsi 

% * * 

Glossary 335 

Ku Lin 

W*f 

Ku-pen ta-hsiieh p'ang-shih 

iikf | 

Ku-sou 

*SL 

Ku Tung-ch'iao 

to fc *% 

Ku Wei-hsien 

fe'te^ 

Ku Ying-hsiang 

mfe*f 

Kuan Chung 

f ^ 

Kuang-hsiang 

^ 

Kuang-hsin 

^ f! 

Kuei O 

Kuei-ts' 'ang 

J? ft 

K'uei 

K'uei-wai 

ftj*t 

Kumazawa Banzan 

s. 4l^ 

Kung-hsi Hua 

>£ a> ^ 

K'ung T%u chia-yii 

3l 3- Ictfc 

Kuo Hsiang 

fp & 

Kusumoto Masatsugu 

Jfc As a 'ifc 

Kyushu 

-h.->4- 

Lao Tt(u 

* * 

Lee, Shao Chang 

4-4te s 

Leng-jen ching 

ft & ft. 

Li (king) 

1> 

Li (distance) 

£ 

Li (principle) 

"*£ 

Li (propriety) 

41 

Li chi 

A it 

Li Ching -te 

&*fe& 

Li Hou-pi 

£** 

Li-hsiieh tsung-ctfuan 

It % #■ 11 

Li Kuang-ti 

i *,*. 

Li Kung 

i* 

Li Tiao-yuan 

% ^7U 

Li-t'ou 

m s% 

Li T'ung 

i n 

Li Yen-p'ing 

i& f 

Li Yen-p'ing chi 

£» f 4. 

Liang 

^ 

Liang Ch'i-ch'ao 

* j&te 

Liang-chih 

% z* 

Liang Ch'o 

% ^ 

Liang Jih-fu 

* 3 3r 

Li en -sh an 

ik^ 

Lien-teng hui-jao 

«>£^^ 

Lin Ch'un 

*k*- 

Liu An 

*j 4- 

Liu Ch'ien-chin 

*j-f * 

Liu Chin 

*jii 

Liu Chun-liang 

u « -i 

Liu-hsia Hui 

% T jSr 

Liu Hsiang 

*] fc 

Liu I-ch'ing 

I-) Is ll 

Liu Kuan-shih 

H *i4 

Liu-men chi 

- ^ 4 

Liu-ming chi 

* ^ i 

Liu Pang-ts'ai 

&)*? & 

Liu Po-sung 

Hi <ti s& 

Liu-tsu fan-ching 

* u *t te 

Glossary 337 

Liu Tsung-chou 

*i i- W 

Liu T%u ch'iian-shu 

«J *"£ 1 

Liu T^u cWuan-shu i-pien 

&) lr ± | A & 

Liu Yang-cheng 

Uti 

Liu Yiian-tao 

%■] i^ii. 

Lo Cheng -an 

»** 

Lo Cheng-an chi 

at^4 

Lo Ch'in-shun 

a **. ■$ 

Lou Liang 

4*4 

Lu 

Lu Ch'eng 

t4« 

Lu Chiu-yuan 

ft-h,*! 

Lu Hsiang-shan 

fi |t «s* 

Lu-ling 

lit 

Lu Lung-ch'i 

K%. %>% 

Lu Tzu-ching 

A h *? 

Lu Yuan-ching 

A *-fcf 

Lii-lii hsin-shu 

& $*f*t 

Lii Pu-jvei 

s *% 

Lii Shih ch'un-cb'iu 

& \Kj ^ ^x 

Lii Ta-lin 

% k l$> 

Lii-tung 

ti k 

Lii Tzu-yiieh 

§ 3- i& 

Liian Hui 

#fe 

Lun-yii 

Lun-yii chi-chu 

5® oo -g-- ^5- 

Lun-yii huo-wen 

teife & PD 

Lung-ch'ang 

n>*i 

Lung-chiang 

ff,i4- 

338 Glossary 

Lung-ch'ing 

ft A 

Lung-p'eng 

%& 

Ma Ming-heng 

%n^ 

Ma Tzu-hsin 

%** 

Mao Ch'i-ling 

t% m 

Meiji 

^ i% 

Meng Chien 

A % 

Meng Po-shang 

A te k. 

Meng T^u 

A3- 

Meng T%u chi-chu 

J, 3- $■ tl 

Meng T%u huo-tven 

13-ft« 

Meng Yuan 

A* 

Miao 

« 

Ming 

* 

Ming-chiao 

«*, 

Ming-chiao Ch'an-shihyii-lu 

^ $ ^ ^ }$ 

Ming-ju hsueh-an 

*s « 9 i 

Ming shih 

^ ^ 

Ming shih kao 

^ it i 

Ming-tai ssu-hsiang shih 

•a ^ & fe £, 

Ming-fang 

^ f 

Mishima Fuku 

- k m. 

Miwa Shissai 

* 4^lfe% 

Mo T%u 

** 

Morohashi Tetsuji 

H^I^'X 

Mu 

n 

Mu-an 

^h. 

Nakae Toju 

4> w ft ^ 

Nan -an 

\fe 4- 

Glossary 339 

Nan-ch'ang W \1> 

Nan-chen fa t& 

Nan Feng-chi fa *fc % 

Nan-hua chen-ching V3} ^ J^ &§L 

Nan Jui-ch'iian £0 3fr ^ 

Nan Ta-chi % ^- o 

Nan-tzu #) -^ 

Nan Yiian-shan fiQ ?[_,-%■ 

Ni Hsi-en <t^>Mr 

Nieh Pao ^ |£ 

Nieh Shuang-chiang JE, ^ "j^ 

Nieh Wen-yii ^ ^ gj. 

Nien-p'u F_ •*& 

Ning $- 

Ning-kuo j£ l]£) 

Okubo Toshimichi X £ ^T- JF%] ^i> 

Ota Kinjo k ^ 1$ ^ 

Ou-yang Ch'ung-i ^ ^ & — 

Ou-yang Hsiu <jf^ ,»|, ^ 

Ou-yang Nan-yeh ^ \% v% f-^ 

Ou-yang Te ty. ^ jjb. 

Ou-yang Wen-chung Kung wen-chi §^ $5k y^ j? ^ SC. _4. 

Oyomei no tetsugaku S f| ^ 3 W S& 

Oyomei shoden i f-IL gQ -^ 4|fc 

Pan Ku m. (?) 

P'an-kung >^p % 

Pen-ts'ao shih-i ^ j| fe ^| 
Pi 

340 Glossary 

Pi-kan 
Pi-yen lu 

3e> jjk. ^ 

Pi-yung 

Po-i 

Po-na pen 

Pu 

P'u-chi 

Saigo Takamori 

Sakuma Shozan 

~£> $3 ^ 

San-yii-fang wen-chi 
Sasaki 

2 fc !i* 

Sato Issai 

& fiK - f 

Shang Yang 

i s*. 

Shao 

PT3 

Shao Tuan-feng 

£p*&<^- 

Shao Yung 

spite 

Shen (spirit) 

$ 

Shen (to expand) 

♦ 

Shen-nung 
Shen Ssu-wei 

Shen Yiieh 

SLte 

Sheng-hsiieh tsung-ch' 'uan 
Shih 

-% IF -3=- If- 

Shih chi 

k IL 

Shih ching 

t§ *i 

Shih Pang-yao 

%$?$*% 

Shih-shuo 

*ML 

Shih-shuo hsin-yti 

^ %L $s\ ** 

Shou-heng 

? ^T 

Glossary 

341 

Shu chi-chuan 

Shu ching 

Shu Fen 

Shu Kuo-shang 

Shu -sun Wu-shu 

Shuang-chiang wen-chi 

Shui-hsi 

Shun 

Shuo-juan 

Shushigaku 

Ssu-en 

Ssu-k'u ch'uan-shu tsung-mu fi-jao 

Ssu-ma Ch'ien 

Ssu-ma Hsiang-ju 

Ssu-pu pei-jao 

Ssu-pu ts'ung-k'an 

Ssu-shu chang-chu chi-chu 

Ssu-shu huo-wen 

Ssu-shu ta-ctfiian 

Su Ch'in 

Sui 

Sun Ch'i-feng 

Sun Ch'iang 

Sun Tzu 

Sun T^u ping-fa 

Sun Yat-sen 

Sung 

Sung I-wang 

Sung shih 

ve> (fa. 

$sl 3& i\j ^ 

a * * * 

Ay. -tf- 

«t) % \§ 4m 
^ 4? i% & 

^ %f %L t'] 

ft. 3 at a*. 

5 '3 

* l£ 

342 Glossary 

Sung-Yiian hsiieh-an 

$ i, t * 

Su2uki Daisetz Teitaro 

Vk iU* S-^sSf 

Suzuki Naoji 

{Hi* 

Ta-chih-tu lun 

k *S & *& 

Ta-hsiieh 

\% 

Ta-hsiieh chang-chii 

k%%^ 

Ta-hsiieh huo-wen 

kfk n 

Ta-mao 

k\% 

Ta-Tai li chi 

k %W *L 

Tai Hsien 

&% 

Tai Te 

#i* 

T'ai 

* 

T'ai-chi fu-shuo 

X fe iD ii 

T'ai-chia 

>v f 

Taisho daii(5kyo 

k & k^ fe 

Takase Takejiro 

| i\% ^ * Ff 

Tan-chu 

^^ 

Tan Heng-chin 

& m^ 

Tang 

'2? 

T'ang Ching-ch'uan chi 

% &) *) $. 

T'ang Chiu-ching 

S -n. fe 

T'ang Hsu 

%*£ 

T'ang Shun-chih 

^ »«H ^ 

Tao-te ching 

& % & 

Tao-yiian 

ii ft 

Te-chang 

*%% 

T'eng 

& 

T'ien-chou 

j© 4^- 

T'ien-ch'uan 

X #. 

Glossary 343 

T'ien-fei ^ #L 

*\ 

Ting -^ 

Ting-pen £- *4^ 

To[q]to ^ ^ Jt, 

Ts'ai Ch'en J^ 'Aj 

Ts'ai Hsi-yiian f: % $t] 

Ts'ai Tsung-yen ^ •?- ^L 

Ts'ai Yuan -ting j|£ ^ J^ 

Ts'ang-chu Jj£ R 

Ts'ao Ts'ao % ^ 

Tseng «^j 

Tseng Tien >|| ^J»^ 

Tseng Ts'ai-han »?' 4- ^JL 

Tseng Tzu % J- 

Tso Ch'iu-ming 72 ££ B-j^ 

Tsou Ch'ien-chih gp %% ^ 

Tsou Shou-i 5^ "^ Jk 

Tsou Tung-kuo |te ^ jfy 

Tjy?# Tung-kuo chi j|p> ^ Up $ 

Tsu-hsin ^£_ 0> 

Tsu-fingshih-yuan ■%& fe |, ^ 

Tsung-mi 1^. *g 

Tsunoda Ryusaku fe ;g -ko ^t- 

TuFu it £ 

T# Kung-pu chi ^ x ^5 5i 

Tung Chung-shu i| <^> §-r* 

25 

344 

Glossary 

Tung Lo-shih 

Tung Yun 

T'ung 

T'ung-cbien kang-mu 

T'ung -kang 

T'ung-shu 

T%u 

Tzu-chang 

Tzu-chih 

Tzu-hsia 

Tzu-jen 

Tzu-kao 

Tzu-kung 

Tzu-lu 

Tzu-ssu 

Tz'u 

Wat 

Wai-shu 

Wang An-shih 

Wang Chi 

Wang Chia-hsiu 

Wang Chieh-fu 

Wang Ch'iung 

Wang Hsi-chih 

Wang Hsin-chai 

Wang-hsiieh chih-i 

Wang Hua 

Wang Hung-hsii 

Wang I-lo 

lb 

*>f 

4 %. &® 3 

at 

3 J& 

5- ^ 

3-i 

5- t= 

a- Jk 

^t 

3- ^ 

^ & 

A 

4 

£ % 

5 £ % 

2 ^ "fc" 

1 3j 

5 *i" % 

i * 1 fit 

4 f 

S i%*Z 

^ n ^ 

Glossary 345 

Wang Ju-chih 

I >>jt 

Wang Ju-chung 

X iW-4 

Wang Ken 

i & 

Wang Lung-hsi 

* H>*& 

Wang Lung-hsi Hsien-sheng ch'uan-chi 

* %^k & fc ^* 

Wang Mang 

3 #• 

Wang-men tsung-chih 

3 ?1 * * 

Wang Po-an 

i <fe> ^ 

Wang Shih-fu 

* f X 

Wang Shou -j en 

X f i~ 

Wang Su 

X 1 

Wang Tchang-tche 

1 I 7'it. 

Wang T'ung 

Wang Wen-ch'eng chuan-pen 

1 J®. 

X 3L K % ^v 

Wang Wen-cti 'eng Kung ch'uan-shu 
Wang Yang-ming 
Wang Yang-ming chi 
Wang Yang-ming cb'uan-hsi lu cha-chi 
Wang Yang-ming Hsien-sheng ch'uan- 
chi 

£ & 0£ & 

x i4 *8 # V tf^Ut, 

1 \% Bfi 4. £ £ 

Wang Yang-ming Hsien-sheng ch'uan- 
hsi lu lun 

x & m x i i| 

Wang Ying-ch'ang 

5 ft S 

Wang Yu-chen 

5 & 1 

Wang Yii-chung 

1 T ^ 

Wei 

Wei Shou 
Wei shu 
Wen (duke) 

"5C 

346 Glossary 

Wen (king) 51 

Wen (literature) % 

Wen-ch'eng 3t "K 

Wen-chi 3C % 

Wen-chung Tzu i f ^ 

Wen-lu t ^ 

Wu (king) ^ 

Wu (state) jg. 

Wu (surname) & 

Wu (music) 3^1 

WuCh'eng £ £f 

Wu-ching ta-ch'uan 3l %x. ^ ^ 

Wu-ming ^ 3§ 

Wu She-li 

* *¥ 

Wu Shih-li ^ ^ }| 

Wu-teng hui-jiian -i ^ #" 5 

WuTi ^ 

Wu-ting ^ T 

Wu Ts'ao-lu £ £ j| 

Yamada Jun j_> %-p jft 

Yamazaki Ansai £ » ^1 If] W 

Yanagida Seizan ^ 3) ?£ ii-) 

Yang f-4 

Yang Chi Jt| |,| 

Yang Chien ^4 ft,6) 

Yang Chu $| ^ 

Yang Hu & ^ 

Yang Lien-sheng }§, |^ f£ 

Yang-ming ch'uan-hsin lu ^ ■$£ 5% tsT 

Glossary 341 

Yang-ming ctfiian-shu $) tf^ & % 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chi-jao f§, "3^ \j \ & Ifc 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng chuan-tsuan f§> 1^ j^ •£ ^M. fl£ 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng wen-lu ^%~^ \i \. 'SC £jU 

Yang-ming Hsien-sheng jao-shu ^ 9S ^ + ^& 4j 

Yang-ming hsiieh shu-jao f^ 9® ^ Uj * 

Yang-ming-tung j% ^ ?^j 

Yang-ming Tzu j>§, B^J 3. 

Yang-ming wen-ch'ao l^ ^@ 3C $>? 

Yang-ming wen-lu y*) 9^ ^C £|<; 

Yang-ming wen-ts,ui X% BJ3 "5C ^p- 

Yang Shih-te ^ ± ^ 

Yang Tz'u-hu Jl, f| ^ 

Yao ^ 

Yeh Shao-chun S ^o % 

Yen $* 

Yen-ching-shih hsii-chi ~^S $£ % ^|> %. 

Yen Hui f;| ^ 

Yen-shou ^ ^ 

Yen-t'an iMfe 

Yin f& 

Yaw Hw aW J 4 ^ H 

Yin T'un j3 *§. 

Ying ff> 

Yomeigaku seigi \% "5^ *§: ;£ r Jb^ 

Yoshida ShSin -^ 3 Jtfc J£ 

Yu ^ 

Yu 4 

Yii Ch'ung-yao & % M 

348 

Glossary 

Yii-hang 

Yu-hsueh 

YiiLin 

Yti-lu 

Yii-yao 

Yuan 

Yuan-chiao ching 

Yiian Ch'ing-lin 

Yiian -wu 

Yiieh (city) 

Yiieh (name) 

Yiieh-ling 

Yung-chia 

Zen 

Zengaku jiten 

Zoku Yama^aki Ansai ^enshii 

Zoku^pkyo 

a** 
aft 

1 

Ht *^ fe 

^r 

Index 

Abide, knowing where to, 6, 55, 275; see 

also Abiding in the highest good 
Abiding in the highest good, 274-75, 277 
Ability, 47-48 
Action, and knowledge, see Knowledge; 

Innate knowledge 
Activity, and tranquility, 28, 36, 40, 55, 

63-64, 69-70, 131-32, 134-38, 190-91, 

203, 216-17 
Affairs: human, 34; actual, 128-29 
Alertness, Buddhist, 142 
"Always doing something," xxxviii, 55 

125-27, 128-29, 143-44, 153-55, 173- 

175, 175-76, 255 
Analects (Lun-yu), see Confucius; see also 

Classics 
Antiquity, see History 
Apprehension, 51, 77, 82, 83, 139-40, 

144,. 226, 330 
Army, reduction of, 286-87 
Art of War, see Sun Tzu 
Attachment, 52, 205, 256-57 
Azuma Keiji, 68«, io8« 

Baker Library, Dartmouth College, xii 

Bell, sound of, 236 

Benevolence, see Humanity 

Bodhidharma, quoted, 68-69/: 

Book of Changes, 18, 23, 39, 211, 230; 
quoted, 35-36, 39, 41-42, 49, 59, 64, 74, 
75, 76, 83, 84, 105, 112, 125-26, 151, 
156, 160, 166, 186, 196, 204, 209, 218, 
228, 235, 251, 254, 259, 260, 278; see 
also Classics 

Book of History, 18, 23; quoted, xxxiv, 12, 
64, 104, 116, 119, 152, 212, 234, 250, 
279 ; see also Classics 

Book of Mencius, see Mencius; see also 
Classics 

Book of Music, 18, 23; see also Classics 

Book of Odes, 18 24, 212; quoted, 137, 164, 
191; see also Classics 

Book of Kites, 18-19, 23j quoted or para- 
phrased, 8, 39, 71, 84, 130, 178, 257; 
see also Classics; Wreat Learning 

Books, 197, 235 

Brilliant Hall, 113, 11 4- 15 

Buddha-mind, 194s 

Buddha-nature, 255 

Buddhism, xxiii, xxxvii, 78, 91-92, 103, 
123, 148, 162, 193, i96«, 258; criti- 
cized, 22, 40-42, 56, 58, 275; Zen 
sources used by Wang Yang-ming, 27, 
33, 35> 68, 81-82, 135, 138, 141-43, 148, 
150, 152, 194, 224-25; compared with 
Confucianism, 64-65, 81-82, 141-43, 
203, 205, 219-20 

Calendar, Chinese, and Western, xiv 
Calmness, 36, 55-56, 134-38, 190-91, 275 
Carefulness, when alone, 34, 77, 274; 

see also Apprehension 
Caution, see Apprehension 
Cave, xxiii«, 209/; 
Centrality, see Equilibrium 
Ceremonies, see Propriety, rules of 
Ch'ai Ming-chih, 231 
Chan Jo-shui (Chan Kan-ch'iian), xxiv, 

i87«, 189-90 
Chan Kan-ch'iian, see Chan Jo-shui 
Chang, Miss (second wife of Wang 

Yang-ming), xxvi« 
Chang, Mr. (magistrate of Huang-mei), 

262 
Chang Heng-ch'ii, see Chang Tsai 
Chang I, 121, 236 
Chang Mi, io8« 
Chang Shu-ch'ien (Chang Yiian-ch'ung), 

240 
Chang Tsai (Chang Heng-ch'ii), xxxix; 

cited or quoted, 82-83, TI7 
Chang Tzu -fang, 145 
Chang Yiian-ch'ung, see Chang Shu-ch'ien 
Change, system of, 42, 211 -12 
Change, unwillingness to, 70 
Chao, Duke, 146 
Character, clear, manifesting the, 6, 14, 

15, 55-56, 86, 188, 272-76 
Ch'e, 37-38 
Cheerfulness, 196 
Chen-chiao, 27« 
Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan (Ch'en Wei-chun, 

Ch'en Ming-shui), i87«, 198 
Ch'en Hsien-chang (Ch'en Po-sha), xxix 
Ch'en Kuo-ying, 71 
Ch'en Ming-shui, see Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan 

350 

Index 

Ch'en Po-sha, see Ch'en Hsien-chang 

Ch'en Ts'ang-ch'i, io7« 

Ch'en Wei-chiin, see Ch'en Chiu-ch'uan 

Cheng, Madame (mother of Wang 
Yang-ming), xxi 

Cheng (retifying), 104 

Cheng Chao-shuo (I-ch'u), 

Cheng I-ch'u, see Cheng Chao-shuo 

Cheng-te emperor, xx 

Ch'eng, King, 113 

Ch'eng-Chu school, xxxiii-xxxiv 

Ch'eng Hao (Ch'eng Ming-tao, Ch'eng 
Po-ch'un), 130, 147; quoted, xxxix, 
40, 49, 56, 78-79, 101, 126-27, 127-28, 

130, 134, 135, 144, 148, 178, 190, 191, 
202, 205, 209, 216, 255 

Ch'eng I (Ch'eng I-ch'uan), xi, xix, xx, 
3«, 12, 17, 51, 86, 125-26, 130-31, 159, 
i62«, 191, 195, 210, 215; quoted or 
paraphrased, xxxviii, xxxix, 9, 17, 20, 
27> 39> 5°. 54> 66, 69, 75, 86, 125, 127, 

131, 135, 136, 177, 190, 195, 247, 251, 

254 
Ch'eng I-ch'uan, see Ch'eng I 
Ch'eng-kuan, 33« 
Ch'eng Ming-tao, see Ch'eng Hao 
Ch'eng Po-ch'un, see Ch'eng Hao 
Chi (minister of Emperor Shun), 47-48, 

116, 120 
Chi Wei-ch'ien (Chi Yiian-heng), xxvii, 

76 
Chi Yiian-heng, see Chi Wei-ch'ien 
Ch'i-tiao K'ai, 30 
Chia-ching emperor, xxvii 
Chiang Kai-shek, x 
Chieh, King, 28 

Ch'ien (friend of Wang Yang-ming), 249 
Ch'ien Hsu-shan, see Ch'ien Te-hung 
Ch'ien Hung-fu, see Ch'ien Te-hung 
Ch'ien Te-hung (Ch'ien Hsu-shan, Ch'ien 

Hung-fu), 88«, i65«, 2ii«, 2147*, 242, 

243, 261-63 
Chih (to reach), 104 
Chih-tao, 78 

Ch'in, First Emperor of, 19 
Ch'in-min (loving the people), 5, i90«; 

see also Loving the people 
Ching (refinement), 29-30, 132; see also 

Refinement 
Ching (seriousness), 73-75 
Ching-shen (mental energy), 132 
Ch'iu, K'ai-ming A., xii 
Chou, King, 28, 42 
Chou, Duke, 22, 27, 113, 226 

Chou Ching-an, see Chou Tao-t'ung 
Chou Heng, see Chou Tao-t'ung 
Chou lien-hsi, see Chou Tun-i 
Chou Mao-shu, see Chou Tun-i 
Chou Tao-t'ung (Chou Heng, Chou 

Ching-an), i24« 
Chou Tun-i (Chou Lien-hsi), 65, 127, 
137-38, 147; quoted, 134, 136, 190-91 
Chu, Miss (first wife of Wang Yang- 
ming), xxii 

Chu Ch'en-hao (Prince Ning), xxvi-xxvii, 
76K 

Chu Hsi (Chu Hui-an, Chu Hui-weng, 
Wen Kung), xi, xix-xx, 16-17, 253J 
and the investigation of things, xxxi- 
xxxii, 12-14, 62-63, 86, 95-99, 129, 159, 
162, 187-90, 204, 249, see also Investiga- 
tion of things; criticized, xxii, 59-60, 
83, 112, 163-64, 20o«, 226; and the 
Great Learning, 3, 5-6, 57, 62, 86, 95, 
159, 187-89, 276; and principle, 5-7, 
33-34; and Ch'eng I, 12, 50/z, 159, 
i62«, 210-11; and Lu Hsiang-shan, 
89, 129-30; "Final Conclusions Arrived 
at Late in Life," 63, 99, 164, 263-67; 
and nature, 131 ; and humanity, 226-27; 

, quoted or paraphrased, xxxi, 

xxxiv-xxxv, 6-7, 16, 24, 33, 50, 63, 70, 
71-72, 94, 95, 131, 204, 226, 227, 248, 
266, 271 

Chu Hui-an, see Chu Hsi 

Chu-ko K'ung-ming, 145 

Chu Pen-ssu (Chu Te-chih), 221 

Chu Te-chih, see Chu Pen-ssu 

Chii-yung Mountain, xxi 

Ch'uan-hsi lu (Instructions for practical 
living), xiii, xxv -xxvii; annotations, 
xiy> 335-36; editions of, 333-35 ; history 
of, 336-38 

Chuang T%u, cited or quoted, 81, 141, 143 

Civil service examinations, see Examina- 
tions 

Classics, xix-xx, 17-24, 32, 212; imitation 
of, 17 ff., 43 

Cold, 10 

Commiseration, 15, 272, 275 

Committee on Oriental Studies of Colum- 
bia University, xii 

Community pact for southern Kan-chou, 
298-306 

Composition, flowery, see Literature 

Concentration, 25, 73-74; see also Refine- 
ment and singleness 

Confucianism, 41-42, 219-20, see also 

Index 

351 

Learning, of the sage; decline of, 
xx-xxi 

Confucius, 158-59; as teacher, 72, 83-85, 
118-19, 155, 231-32; personality, 43/z, 
44, 147, 200-2, 215-16, 227-28, 234-35; 
doctrines of, 105, 126; ridiculed, 169- 
170, 214; quoted, 6, 12, 20, 21, 24, 28, 
3°, 37. 4o, 52-53, 57, 58, 67, 70, 72, 75, 
97, no, 111-12, 115, 150, 154, 156, 
164, 170, 171, 211, 212, 213, 226, 227, 
246, 251, 256, 259, 260 

Criticism: textual, 41, 122, 145; of others, 
210 

Cycle, 1387; 

Dartmouth College, xii 

Day: and night, 82-83; as recapitulation 
of history, 238 

Death, 213; and life, 82-83 

De Bary, Wm, T leodore, xii 

Deceit, 155-57, ll% 

Defects, overlooking, 285-86 

Defense, military, 291-92 

Departments, of government, 48;/ 

Desires, 10, 15, 35, 46, 79, 140-41, 145- 
46, 188, 194, 199, 219; described, 49, 
145-46, 257; — , human, versus the 
Principle of Nature, 7-8, 20-21, 23, 30, 
38, 46, 52, 54, 57-58, 60-62, 65, 70-71, 
140-41, 189 

Despotism, 21-22, 77, 121-23, 250-52 

Destiny, 13-14, 34, 83, 96-97, 80, 218, 223 

Determination (to do something for 
oneself), 79-81 

Dewing, Arthur, xii 

Dharmas, 258 

Diamond Scripture, quoted, 148 

Disposition, 50, 127, 215, 226 

Distrust, 155-57, J78 

Divination, 42; and principle, 2 10- n 

Doctrine in Four Axioms, xxi«, xxviii, 
xxxix, 243-45 

Doctrine of the Mean, 36, 86-87, 203 ; quoted 
or paraphrase, 4, 13, 14, 29, 30, 31, 39, 
49, 51, 61, 73, 84, 92, 96, 103, 107, no, 
in, 128-29, 132, 147, 154, 156, 160-61, 
167, 177, 190, 195, 199, 203, 212, 218, 
226, 253, 274 

Dog, and lion, 149-50 

Double-mindedness, 179, 223 

Dust whisk 242, 

Dwelling in seriousness (ching), 73-75; 
see also Seriousness 

Dynamic spirit, see Life 

East Asiatic Library, Columbia Univer- 
sity, xii 

Education, 84, 115, 212-13, 218, 285; 
methods of, 182-86 

Effect, 59, 127, 226 

Emergency measures, for the frontier 
284-92 

Emotion, 38-39; see also Feelings 

Emptiness, 162, 186, 203, 245 

Enlightenment, 70-71 

Epoch, 1387? 

Equilibrium (before the feelings are 
aroused), described, 34-37, 42-43; 72, 
77, 82; and tranquillity, 30, 49-50, 72; 
and harmony, 34, 38-39, 44, 47, 51, 

55, 84, 139, 235-36 

Essence, prime, 44 

Etiquette, teaching of, 183, 185 

Evil, and good, see Good 

"Evolution of Rites," 117 

Examinations, xix, 40, 66, 207-8 

Extension of knowledge, xxxi, 194-95; 
and the investigation of things and the 
sincerity of the will, 14-15, 24, 29, 46, 
5 5, 86, 95, 99, 103-7, I29, 140-42, 160- 
61, 174-75, 188-89, l9%> 248, 279-80; 
and innate knowledge, 144, 148, 193, 
199-200, 225-26, 235, see also Innate 
knowledge 

Eye trouble, 81 

Fa-tsang, 33;/ 

Fame, love of, 26, 67 

Fan Chao-ch'i, 210 

Fan-ch'i, quoted, 69H 

Fan Chun, quoted, 67 

Fan Chung-yen, 145 

Farming, military, 287-88 

Fate, see Destiny 

Faults, 235 

Fear, 36 

Feelings, 34, 138-39, 148-49, 204-5, 2295 
see also Emotion; Equilibrium (before 
the feelings are aroused); Harmony 
(after the feelings are aroused) 

Filial piety, see Piety, filial 

Five Classics, see Classics 

Five Despots, 2i«, 275 

Five teachings, 6 

Flesh, human, as medicine, 107-8/z 

Flowering trees, 222 

Food, knowledge as, 198 

Force : material, see material force ; prime, 
44, 133 

352 

Index 

Foreknowledge, 157, 224-25 

Forming one body with all things, xxxix, 

56, 118-21, 166-67, 170, 219, 221-22, 

223, 226-27, 257-58, 272-73 
Four Axioms, see Doctrine in Four 

Axioms 
Four Books, xix«, xx 
Fragmentary learning, 78, 106, 122, 274 
Friends, attitude of, 26 
Friendship, 70, 196, 210 
Frontier policies, 284-92 
Fu-hsi, 21-22 
Fu Shang-ling, lofn 
Fu-ying, 198 
Fu Yiieh, 146 
Fukuda, Naomi, xii 
Function, see Substance, and function 
Fundamentals, the, 9-22, 32, 44-45, 51- 

52, 61, 118-21, 150-51, 201-2, 208-9, 

217 

Generation, 1387/ 

Ghosts, see Spirits, evil 

Gifts, 211-12 

Gold, sage compared with, 60-61, 68 

Good: and evil, described, 33, 63-65, 
141-43, 202, 205-6, 221, 229, 237, 243- 
245, 247-48, 256; doing, and remo- 
ving evil, 33, 43, 193, 277; loving, 

and hating evil, 76-77, 202; , 

highest, 6-9, 12-15, 56, 247-49, 274" 
276 ; see also Abiding in the highest good 

Government, 84-85 ; departments of, 48/* 

Granary, 387? 

Grass, see Weeds 

Great Learning, 3, 55, 76-77, 104, no, 148, 
222-23; differing texts and interpre- 
tations of Chu Hsi and Wang Yang- 
ming, xxv, xxxi f., 3, 5-6, 86, 95, 159- 
161; Wang Yang-ming's inquiry on, 
xxviii, 272-80; see also Chu Hsi; — , 
quoted, 5-6, 10, 38, 76, 77, 79, 105, 107, 
155, 204, 235, 272-80 passim 

Great man, learning of, 272-73 

Great Ultimate, 65« 

Great unity, 117 

Great Vacuity, 220 

Han Ch'i, 145 

Han Yii, 17; quoted, 163 

Harmony (after the feelings are aroused), 
44, 51-52, 55, 139, 236; and equili- 
brium, see Equilibrium 

Harvard -Yenching Library, xii 

Haste, 206 

Heaven, 13, 34, 47, 83-84, 96-98, 179-81, 
228; — , Earth, and all things as one 
body, see Forming one body with all 
things 

Helping the mind to grow, 59, 73, 209 

Heresy, 220 

History, 19-23, 48, 118, 238; recapitu- 
lated in each day, 238 

Ho, 116 

Ho-p'ing County, petition for establish- 
ment of, 297-98 

Ho Shan-shan, see Ho T'ing-jen 

Ho T'ing-jen (Ho Shan-shan), 2i6« 

Holding the will firm, 29, 58 

Hsi, 116 

Hsi-yen, 189 

Hsia, 22 

Hsiang (brother of Emperor Shun), 210, 
232, 259 

Hsiang Yii, 113 

Hsiao Hui, 79, 81-82, 82-83 

Hsieh, 6, 116, 120 

Hsieh Liang-tso (Hsieh Shang-ts'ai), 125- 
126 

Hsieh Shang-ts'ai, see Hsieh Liang-tso 

Hsieh T'ing-chieh, 264 

Hsin, see Hsin-min 

Hsin-min (renovating the people), 5-6, 
190/2, 276 

Hsiung Shih-li, xl 

Hsu Ai (Hsu Heng-shan, Hsu Yiieh-jen), 
xiii, xxv, 3-5, 24-25, 45, 62, 82, 336 

Hsu Ch'eng-chih, 89 

Hsu Heng, see Hsu Lu-chai 

Hsu Heng-shan, see Hsu Ai 

Hsu Lu-chai (Hsu Heng), 44 

Hsu Yiieh-jen, see Hsu Ai 

Hsiian-tsang, quoted, 143 

Hsiieh Hsiian, xxix# 

Hsiieh K'an, see Hsiieh Shang-ch'ien 

Hsiieh Shang-ch'ien (Hsiieh K'an), 53, 

58, 239 
Hsiin Tzu, 237; quoted or paraphrased, 

78, 130 
Hu Chii-jen, xxix« 
Hu Hung, 37« 
Huai-nan T^u, 5« 
Huang Cheng-chih (Huang Hung-kang, 

Huang Lo-ts'un), 77-78 
Huang Ch'eng-fu (Huang Tsung-ming), 

72 
Huang Chih, see Huang I-fang 
Huang Chiu-an, see Huang Tsung-hsien 
Huang Hsing-tseng, see Huang Mien-chih 

Index 

353 

Huang Hsiu-i, see Huang Mien-shu 
Huang Hung-kang, see Huang Cheng- 

chih 
Huang I-fang (Huang Chin), i99« 
Huang Lo-ts'un, see Huang Cheng-chih 
Huang Mien-chih (Huang Hsing-tseng), 

2II« 

Huang Mien-shu (Huang Hsiu-i), 2o6« 

Huang Shu-tu, 145 

Huang Tsung-hsi, xxbi, xxix, xi, 243, 334 

Huang Tsung-hsien (Huang Chiu-an, 
Huang Wan), xxi«, 9 

Huang Wan, see Huang Tsung-hsien 

Hui-chi, 171 

Humanity (jen), 42, 178, 213-14, 251; 
and righteousness, 34, 75, 94, 101, 
205 ; man of, forming one body with 
all things, 56, 119-20, 170, 226-27, 
272-73 ; as production and reproduc- 
tion, 57, 80 

Humility, 259 

Hung, William, 169^ 

Hung-tu, xxii 

Hunger, 10 

I-ch'u, see Cheng Chao-shuo 

l-kuan (one thread), see One thread 

I-yin, 60, 227 

Impartiality, 79 

Importance, relative, of things, 222-23 

Infant, Taoist analogy of, 31-32 

Innate knowledge, xix, xxii, xxxi, xxxii, 
124, 139, 141-43, 153, 168, 171, 193, 
207-9, 2I6-i7, 229, 236, 238-39, 244, 
248, 278-80, see also Extension of 
knowledge; Knowledge; Principle of 
Nature; realization of, 69, 127, 149, 
196, 206, 217; and principle, 99, 152, 
176; extension of, 102, 128-29, T43, 
151, 153-55, 172, 174, 176-77, 200, 206, 
213, 217, 224, 226, 254-55, 278-80; 
described, 133-34, 136, 139, 144, 146- 
148, 152, 177, 210-11, 216, 218-20, 228, 
235, 259, 274; and other kinds of 
knowledge, 150-51, 198, 218-19; 243~ 
245, 276; in all people and things, 156, 
167, 194, 199, 221, 225, 230, 250 

Intelligence, 33, 53, 76, 95, 104, 152, 156- 
57> 257-58, see also Mind; — ■ — , high, 
70, 212, 227 

Internal, the, and the external, 91-92, 94, 
103, 119, 154, 159, 191, 217, 221; see 
also Righteousness 

International House of Japan, xii 

Intuitive knowledge, see Innate knowledge 
Investigation of things, xix, xxii, xxxi- 
xxxii, 32, 91, 103, 119, 193, 196, 206, 
221, 249, 254; in Chu Hsi, xxxi -xxxii, 
12, 62, 86, 98, 187; in the Great Learn- 
ing, 3, 104; explained, 15, 55, 104, in, 
161, 243-44, 247, 279; described, 45, 
54-55, 197, 199, 250, 252; see also Chu 
Hsi; Extension of knowledge; Sin- 
cerity 

Jan Ch'iu, 31 

Jao Tsung-i, io8« 

Jen (humanity), see Humanity 

Joy, 147-48, 193, 230 

Jui-yen, cited, 142 

Kan-chou: announcement to citizens of, 
295; community compact for, 298-306 

Kao, 116, 120 

Kao-tsu, 38 

Kao Tzu, 50, 53-54, 94, 99, 174-75, 22°- 
221; quoted, 154, 175, 208 

Kawada Kinkyo, 1697/ 

Keigo Ryoan, xl 

Kindness, imperial, 289-90 

Knowledge, xxxiv ff., 7 ff., 53, 73, 76, 77- 
78, 198, 228; and action, 9-14, 30, 82, 
92-95, 99-102, 107-13, 145-47, 201, 
229-30, 250-52, see also Innate know- 
ledge; inborn, 13, 61, 95, 117, 147; 
detailed, 18, 47, 61, 109, in, 115-16, 
201; progress in, 31-32; sense, 72, 111, 
119, 123, 147, 150-51; spontaneous, 
196; of day and night, 218-19 

Ko (to investigate), 55; see also Investiga- 
tion of things 

Ko (to reach), 104 

Ko (to rectify), ly, see also mind, rectifica- 
tion of 

Ko-wu (investigation of things), 14, 15, 
188; see also Investigation of things 

Ku Lin, see Ku Tung-ch'iao 

Ku Lo-hsi, see Ku Wei-hsien 

Ku-sou (father of Emperor Shun), 231 

Ku Tung-ch'iao (Ku Lin), 91// 

Ku Wei-hsien (Ku Lo-hsi, Ku Ying- 
hsiang), 9 

Ku Ying-hsiang, see Ku Wei-hsien 

Kuan Chung, 121 

Kuei-chou, xxiv, 4«, 2 56« 

Kuei O, xxix 

K'uei (minister of Emperor Shun), 47- 
48, 120 

354 

Index 

K'uei-wai, 37-38 
Kumazawa Banzan, xli 
Kung-hsi Hua, 21 

Lao Tsu, paraphrased, 80; see also 
Taoism 

Law, enforcement of, 288-89 

Learning: of the sage, 27-28, 52-53, 199, 
215-16; two levels of, 28; objectives of, 
28-29, 47-48, 60, 70-72, 146-47; 
methods of, 29, 33, 35, 45-46, 53, 72, 
98, 100, iio-ii, 158-59, see also Study; 
book-, 33, 197, 207-8; and moral 
training, 53, 58-59, 70-71, 73, 92, 
146-47, 158-59, 234, 253-54; basis of, 
66, 151, 158-59, 206, 217; extensive, 
1 10-12, 198, see also Literature 

Li (principle), 16; see also Principle 

Li (propriety, ceremonies), 16; see also 
Propriety, rules of 

Li Hou-pi (Li Kung), 2i6« 

Li Kung, see Li Hou-pi 

Li T'ung, see Li Yen-p'ing 

Li Yen-p'ing (Li T'ung), 50-51, 57 

Liang Ch'i-ch'ao, xl 

Liang Ch'o, see Liang Jih-fu 

Liang Jih-fu (Liang Ch'o), 73 

Lien-hsi, Master, see Chou Tun-i 

Life: and death, 82-83; spirit of, 48, 56- 
57, 63-65, 213, 220-21, 255, 272 

Lin Ch'un, see Tzu-jen 

Linton, Howard P., xii 

Lion, and dog, 149-50 

Literary compositions, see Literature 

Literature, 17-22, 23-24, 26, 36, 41, 119, 
122-23, 203-4; extensive study of, 
12-14, I5-I6, 25, 28, 52-53, 246; see 
also Books; Classics; Learning; Read- 
ing; Study 

Litigation, of father and son, 231 

Liu Ch'ien-chin, xxi 

Liu Chin, xx, xxiv, xxvi 

Liu Chun-liang (Liu Yiian-tao), 214/? 

Liu-hsia Hui, 227 

Liu Kuan-shih, 82 

Liu-tsu t'an-cbing, quoted, 138 

Liu Yang-cheng, xxvii 

Liu Yiian-tao, see Liu Chun-liang 

Livelihood, 44 

Lo Cheng-an (Lo Ch'in-shun), 157/7, 263 

Lo Ch'in-shun, see Lo Cheng-an 

Lou Liang, xxi«, xxii 

Love: of kin, 57; of people and things, 
273-74 

Love, universal, see Universal love 
Loving the people, 5, 55-56, i90«, 273, 

275-76; see also Ch'in-min 
Loyalty and altruism, 71 
Lu Ch'eng (Lu Yuan-ching), 25/;, 215 
Lu Chiu-yuan, see Lu Hsiang-shan 
Lu Hsiang-shan (Lu Chiu-yuan, Lu Tzu- 

ching), xi, xxxiii-xxxiv, 34, 89K, 129-30, 

192-93, 253; quoted, 163 
Lu Tzu-ching, see Lu Hsiang-shan 
Lu-Wang school, xxxiii-xxxiv 
Lu Yuan-ching, see Lu Ch'eng 
Lu Ta-lin, quoted, 227 
Luan Hui, see Tzu-jen 
Lung-ch'ang, xxiv 
Lung-p'eng, 214 

Ma Ming-heng, see Ma Tzu-hsin 

Ma Tzu-hsin (Ma Ming-heng), 36, 83 

Mahaprajnaparamita 'astra, cited, 149-50 

Making up the mind, 25, 32, 43, 73, 125, 
130, 207-8, 216 

Man, unity of, 34-35 

Material force, 131-33, 208-9 

Mao Ch'i-ling, xxi-xxiii« 

Mean, the, 42; see also Equilibrium 

Meditation, see Sitting in meditation 

Melon, bitter, 82 

Memorization and recitation, 41, 112, 
119, 122 

Memory, 213 

Mencius, 53-54, 79, 94, 95, 220-21, 237; 
quoted or paraphrased, 6, 12, 13, 15, 
20-21, 22, 25, 28, 39, 40, 42, 43, 46, 50, 
55, 56«, 61, 65, 66, 67, 71, 73, 75, 82, 
98, 108, no, in, 112, 119, 128, 131, 
143, 147, 152, 153, 154, 156, 158-59, 
163, 164, 167, 173, 177, 178, 197, 208, 
209, 219, 221, 223, 226, 227, 249, 252, 
255, 256, 260, 278, 285 

Meng Po-sheng, see Meng Yuan 

Meng Yuan (Meng Po-sheng), 26, 65 

Miao tribes, xxiv 

Mind: as principle, xxxi f., 7, 14, 33, 54, 
56-58, 76, 80, 94-95, 98-100, 112, 251; 
and principle, xxxi f., 7, 74, 98-99, 103, 
251 ; characteristics of, 6, 15, 36, 38, 49, 

65, 69, 78, 99, 134-45, 147, *99> 2°2> 
230, 247-48, 277; exertion and preser- 
vation of, 12, 53, 73-74, 95-98, 179-81, 
235; and nature, 13, 33-34, 54, 56, 
75-76, 80-81, 94, 96, 161, 277-78; as 
master, 14, 16, 53, 67, 76, 80, 161, 189; 
nature of, 14, 53-54, 76, 134, 161, 223, 

Index 

355 

237, 243, 253, 258, 278; as things, 14, 
54, 189, 204, 222, 275; rectification of, 
15, 20, 55, 160, 205, 277, 280; moral, 
versus human, 16-17, 32> llz> 212; 
cultivation of, 40, 47, 48-49, 52, 58-59, 
78-79, 206; of the sage, 45, 60-62, 68- 
69; disturbed or activated, 53-54, 64- 
65, 220, 275; shining, 131-32, 139-40, 
149, 225 ; unity of, in Heaven and man, 
219, 257; see also Intelligence; Helping 
the mind to grow 

Ming (destiny), 218; see also Destiny 

Ming-t'ang (hall of light), 113//; see also 
Brilliant Hall 

Mirror, 27, 45, 52 

Miwa Shissai, 69/2, 169;/ 

Mo Tzu, 56-57, 113, 163 

Moral nature, honoring of, 25, 92, 112, 
181, 253 

Moral principles, 27-28, 117 

Mount T'ai, 240 

Mourning, 44 

Mu, duke of Ch'in, 5« 

Music, 235; ancient, 233-34 

Nakae Toju, xli 

Names, varieties, and systems of things, 
see Knowledge, detailed 

Nan -an, xxviii 

Nan-chen, 222 

Nan Jui-ch'uan, see Nan Yuan-shan 

Nan Ta-chi, see Nan Yuan-shan 

Nan Yuan-shan (Nan Jui-ch'iian, Nan 
Ta-chi), 88«, 90 

Nature, Principle of, see Principle of 
Nature 

Nature, secret of, 66, 191, 195 

Nature of man: fulfilling and nourishing, 
12-13, 24> 75-76, 83-84, 95-97, 161, 
223, 274; as principle, 33, 54, 75, 81, 94, 
161; described, 34, 84, 145, 160-61, 
237, 272, 278; goodness of, 51, 56, 134, 
221, 274; as material force, 131, 208; 
theories of, 131, 208, 221, 236-37, 254; 
as mind, see Mind 

Neo-Confucianism, xi, xix-xxi, xxix-xli, 
65/2; see also Ch'eng-Chu school; Con- 
fucianism; Lu-Wang school 

New citizens, instructions to, 296-97 

Nieh Pao, see Nieh Wen-yii 

Nieh Shuang-chiang, see Nieh Wen-yii 

Nieh Wen-yii (Nieh Pao, Nieh Shuang- 
chiang), 165// 

Night: restorative power of, 39-40, 141- 

42, 219; 238; and day, 82-83 
Nine returns, 133 
Nine universal standards, 85/2 
Ning, Prince (Chu Ch'en-hao), xxvi- 

xxvii, 76« 

Obscuration by principle, 193 

Okubo Toshimichi, xli 

One thread that runs through all, 41-42, 

71-72, 111-12; see also Penetration on 

the higher and lower levels 
Original state, recognition of, 141-43 
Ota Kinjo, 27», 33«. 
Ou-yang Ch'ung-i (Ou-yang Nan-yeh, 

Ou-yang Te), 66» 
Ou-yang Hsiu, paraphrased, 154 
Ou-yang Nan-yeh, see Ou-yang Ch'ung-i 
Ou-yang Te, see Ou-yang Ch'ung-i 
Outlaws, former, see New citizens 

Pain, 10 

P'an-knng (half palace), 115 

Parents, care of, 106-7 

Peace, 30-31; bringing of, to the world, 

55-56 

Penetration on the higher and lower 
levels, 41, 244; see also One thread that 
runs through all 

Personal realization, see Realization 

Personnel, reservoir of, for emergency 
use, 284-85 

Pi-kan, 214 

Pi-yung (surrounded jade), 115 

Piety, filial, 7-10, 13-14, 16, 34, 37-38, 54, 
66, 109-10, 231, 273 

Pitch pipes, 44-45, 233-34 

Po-i, 60, 120, 227 

Polishing and training oneself, xxxviii, 
128, 192, 217 

Pride, 259 

Principle: in all things, 6, 34, 99, 275; 
investigation of, to the utmost, 15-24, 
73-75, 84, 98, 101-5 ; as propriety, rules 
of, 16; described, 28, 64, 94, 132, 135; 
and desire, 58; and divination, 210-11; 
as mind, see Mind ; as nature, see Nature 
of man ; see also Principle of Nature 

Principle of Nature, xix, 58, 64, 108, 126, 
193, 200-1; versus human desire, 7, 17, 
20-23, 3°> 46» 52, 54, 60, 70, 161, 189; 
complete identification with, 8-9, 16, 
36, 48, 60, 68, 82, 140, 208; preserva- 
tion of, 15-16, 25, 43, 58, 73, 203, 213, 

356 

Index 

226, 246, 250; concentration on, 25, 
74; as mind and innate knowledge, 26, 
36, 40, 48, 80, 99, 103, 152, 189; 
described, 38-39, 42, 52, 83, 246 

Profit, see Success and profit 

Propriety, rules of, 7, 15-16, 25, 27, 29, 
45, 80, 83 

Pulling up the root and stopping up the 
source, xxviii, xxxix, 117-24 

Quotations, used by Wang Yang-ming, 
xiv-xv 

Reading, 207-8, 213; see also Books; 
Literature; — , teaching of, 183-85 

Realization, personal, 56, 58, 77, 158, 
188, 193, 195, 202, 217; in one's own 
mind, 32, 47, 52, 65, 176, 197, 247; in 
one's innate knowledge, 69, 127, 152 

Recitation, see Memorization and recitation 

Rectification of names, 37-38 

Refinement and singleness, 68, 151, 178, 
253; described, 7, 16, 54, 112, 132-33; 
teaching of, 9, 12, 16, 33; effort at, 
25, 29, 160, 200, 237, 275 

Regrets, 68 

Renovation of the people, see Hsin-min 

Reverence, see Seriousness 

Revolution, 138/z 

Righteousness, 73-75, 94, IOI, 113, 205, 
211-12, 223; accumulation of, 36, 54, 
55, 65, 173, 175, 197, 221, 252; exter- 
nal, 6, 94, 99 

Sacrifice: in Confucian temple, as honor, 
xxix; theories of, 116; of the small, 
to preserve the great, 290-91 

Sage: and changing conditions, 27; mind 
of, 27, 44, 45, 118 f., 200, 212; know- 
ledge and ability of, 32, 95-96, 116, 148, 
199, 201, 225, 228-30; and ordinary 
people, 40, 45, 68, 108, 193, 202, 212, 
225-26, 239-40; characteristics and dis- 
position of, 40, 50, 95-96, 127; becom- 
ing a, 60, 209, 213, 216, 236, 239-40, 
255-56; Confucius as a, 68; moral 
endeavor of, 83-84, 108, 148, 202-3, 
2 1 3 ; see also Gold ; Knowledge, inborn ; 
Learning 

Sageness, 227-28 

Saigo Takamori, xli 

Sakuma Shozan, xli 

Sargent, E., io8« 

Sasaki, Ruth, 69*/ 

Scholarship, defects of, 91 

Security, 193 

Self-control, 48-49 

Self-cultivation, 58-59, 73 

Self-examination, 34-35, 54, 70 

Selfishness, 167-68, 235; see also Desires; 
Feelings 

Self-mastery, 35, 43-44, 46, 55, 70, 79, 
85, 144, 207 

Seriousness, 73-75, 86, 203-4 

Seven feelings, 147 

Seven returns, 133 

Shang, 22 

Shang Yang, 121 

Shao Tuan-feng, 250 

Shao Yung, 48«, 1 38^, 225 

Shen-nung, 22 

Shen Ssu-wei, 262 

Shen Yueh, 169K 

Shih (event), 14 

Shou-heng, 76 

Shu Fen, see Shu Kuo-shang 

Shu Kuo-shang (Shu Fen), 192/?, 260-61 

Shu-sun Wu-shu, 214 

Shun, Emperor, 6, 21-22, 28, 107, 109- 
10, 1 1 2-16 passim, 119, 167, 178, 210, 
231, 232 

Shushigaku, xli 

Sickness, 196 

Sincerity: and the investigation of things, 
14-15, 55, 86, 160, 189; thinking of, 
35, 157; perfect, 51, 86, 96, 132, 148, 
157, 224; described, 65, 77-78, 87, 
106-7, J6i, 190; and man's nature and 
character, 83-84, 86, 156, 188; in the 
Great Learning, 86-87, x57! in the 
Doctrine of the Mean, 96, 190; see also 
Extension of knowledge 

Singing, teaching of, 183, 184-85 

Singleness, see Refinement and singleness 

Sitting in meditation, xxx, xxxiii-xxxix, 
26, 35, 190-92, 214, 217, 223-24 

Six Arts, 246 

Six Classics, see Classics 

Skill, 227-28 

Slander, 214 

Society, 118 

Spirit, prime, 44 

Spirits, evil, 36 

Spiritual seal, 194 

Spring, 38, 48 

Spring and Autumn Annals, 18-19, 20> 23 '■> 
see also Classics 

Ssu-ma Hsiang-ju, 116 

Ssu-shu ta-ch'uan, xix-xx 

Index 

357 

Stopping up the source, see Pulling up 
the root and stopping up the source 

Strength, 227-28 

Study, 66, 76-77; see also Books; Educa- 
tion; Learning; Literature; , 

methods of, 35-36 

Stupid person, 228 

Su Ch'in, 121, 236 

Substance, and function, 39, 69-70, 71- 
72, 126-27, 134-35, i95> 273 

Subtlety, 253 

Success and profit, 22, 41, 68, 112, 119- 

23, J54, 275 
Sun Tzu, quoted, 286-91 passim 
Sun Yat-sen, x, xl 
Suzuki, D. T., 69« 

Ta-hsueh (great learning, education for the 

adult, learning of the great man), 272 ; 

see also Great Learning 
Tai Hsien, xxiv 
Takase Takejiro, xxi« 
Tan-chu, 119, 259 
T'ang, King, 6o«, 113, 167 
T'ang Hsu, 43 
Tao, see Way 
Taoism: criticized, 22, 35, 40-42, 56, 

81-82, 103, 123, 141, 162, 219, 275; 

described, 25, 31-32, 44, 133 
Taoist writings, quoted or paraphrased, 

80, I94«; see also Cbuang T\u 
Te-chang, 68 
Ten-family joint registration system, 293- 

94, 3o6"9 

Ten thousand multiplicities, 73 

T'eng, crown prince of, 107-8 

Thief, treated as a son, 81, 152 

Thigh-cutting, 107 

Thing, 53 

Thought, 77-78, 125-27, 135, 143-44, 
151-52, 203, 246; good or evil, 49, 
141-42, 206; selfish, 44, 64-65, see also 
Desires, selfish; absence of, 121, 226 

Three gates, 133 

Three Dynasties, 23, 120-21 

T'ien-ch'iian Bridge, 244 

Ting (calm), 190-91; see also Calmness 

Tranquillity, 30-31, 92, 203, 216-17, 275; 
see also Activity, and tranquillity 

Ts'ai Hsi-yuan (Ts'ai Tsung-yen), 60 

Ts'ai Tsung-yen, see Ts'ai Hsi-yuan 

Ts'ai Yuan-ting, 44« 

Tseng (student), 124 

Tseng Tien, 30, 31, 215 

Tseng Ts'ai-han, 261 

Tseng Tzu, 12, 71, 107; quoted, 115, 241 

Tso chuan (Tso's commentary), 20; 

quoted, 217 
Tsou Ch'ien-chih (Tsou Shou-i, Tsou 

Tung-kuo), 241 
Tsou Shou-i, see Tsou Ch'ien-chih 
Tsou Tung-kuo, see Tsou Ch'ien-chih 
Tsu-hsin, quoted, 35 
Tsung-mi, 33« 
Tu Fu, quoted, 43 
Tung Chung-shu, 145 
Tung Lo-shih (Tung Yiin), 240 
Tung Yiin, see Tung Lo-shih 
Tzu-chang, 1 1 1 ; quoted, 70 
Tzu-chih, 113 
Tzu-hsia, 12; quoted, 70 
Tzu-jen (Liian Hui?, Lin Ch'un?). 70 
Tzu-kao, 30 
Tzu-kung, 72, 111-12 
Tzu-lu, 30, 31, 37; quoted, 170 
Tzu-ssu, 36, 83-84; quoted, 157 

Understanding, achievement of, 32-33 
Unity of all things, see Forming one body 

with all things 
Universal love, Mo Tzu's doctrine of, 

56-57 

Vital force, 50 

Wang An-shih, see Wang Chieh-fu 
Wang Chi (Wang Ju-chung, Wang 

Lung-hsi), 88k, 214-15, 242, 243, 261 
Wang Chia-hsiu (Wang Shih-fu), 40-41 
Wang Chieh-fu (Wang An-shih), 130 
Wang Ch'iung, xxv, xxvii 
Wang Hsi-chih, xxi 
Wang Hsin-chai, see Wang Ju-chih 
Wang Hua (father of Wang Yang-ming), 

xxi, xxii 
Wang Ju-chih (Wang Hsin-chai, Wang 

Ken), 238-39«, 239-40 
Wang Ju-chung, see Wang Chi 
Wang Ken, see Wang Ju-chih 
Wang Lung-hsi, see Wang Chi 
Wang Mang, 113 

Wang Po-an, see Wang Yang-ming 
Wang Shih-fu, see Wang Chia-hsiu 
Wang Shou-jen, see Wang Yang-ming 
Wang T'ung (Wen-chung Tzu), 17, 19, 

43, 145-46 
Wang Yang-ming: ancestry, xxi; birth, 
xxi; boyhood, xxi; education, 265; 

358 

Index 

first marriage, xxii; visit to Lou 
Liang, xxii; "recommended person" 
degree, xxii ; investigation of principles 
of bamboos, xxii, 249 ; study of Taoism, 
xxii; "presented scholar" degree, xxiii; 
official positions, xxiii; first disciples, 
xxiii-xiv; in disfavor with government, 
xxiv; exile, xxiv-xxv, 265 ; development 
of philosophy, xxv, xxviii, xix-xli ; pro- 
motions by the emperor, xxv; conver- 
sation at the T'ien-ch'iian Bridge, 243 ; 
suppression of rebels and bandits in 
Kiangsi and Fukien, xxv-xxvi; social 
and political measures, 283 ff. ; honors, 
xxvi; and Prince Ning, xxvi; becomes 
Earl of Hsin-chien, xxvii-xxvii ; second 
marriage, xxvi«; birth of son, xxvi«; 
growth of following, xxvii; suppres- 
sion of rebellions in Kwangsi, xxviii; 
death, xiv, xxvii; posthumous attacks 
on, xxix; posthumous honors, xxix 
— — : philosophy in general, xix, xxix- 
xli, 91-92; sources for biography of, 
xxi«; doctrine of the unity of know- 
ledge and action, xxv, xxx, xxxiv- 
xxxvi; learning summarized by Huang 
Tsung-hsi, xxix; philosophical deve- 
lopment summarized by Huang Tsung- 
hsi, xxix -xxx; teaching of meditation, 
xxx; teachings summarized by Ch'ien 
Te-hung, xxx; doctrine of the exten- 
sion of innate knowledge, xxx, xxxvii; 
doctrine of the investigation of things, 
xxxi-xxxii; doctrine of mind as prin- 
ciple, xxxii; contrasted with Chu Hsi, 
xxxii ff. ; idealism of, criticized, xxxiii; 
compared with Lu Hsiang-shan, xxxiii- 
xxxiv; philosophy of compared with 
Zen Buddhism, xxxvii; doctrine of 
forming one body with all things, 
xxxix; achievements, xl; influence in 
China and Japan, xl-xli; character, 
4, 239; criticisms of, 90, 132, 158, 168, 
239, 263; self -appraisal, 239; followers 
of, 245-46 

Wang Yu-chen, io8« 

Wang Yu-chung, 192, 193-94 

Watchfulness, when alone, see Carefulness, 
when alone 

Way, the: achievement and cultivation of, 
40-42, 83-85, 145, 158, 202-3, 207> 2I^; 
characterized, 41, 45-46, 85, 146, 164, 
212, 218; of the sage, 52-53, 121, 177, 
200; everywhere, 178, 255 

Weeds, 63-65 

Well, 48 

Wen (extensive study of literature), 15-16; 
see also Literature 

Wen (patterns, literature), 16 

Wen, posthumous title of Chu Hsi, 62« 

Wen, King, 22, 28, 42, 53, 6o«, 167 

Wen-chung Tzu, see Wang T'ung 

Wen Kung, see Chu Hsi 

Western Inscription, 117 

Weymouth, Mrs. Alice M., xii 

Wickedness, 167-68 

Will, 14-15, 29, 53, 58, 248; see also Sin- 
cerity of the will 

Wisdom, 227-28 

Worthy, 95-97, 228; compared to moun- 
tain peak, 50 

Wu (student), 124 

Wu (thing), 14 

Wu, King, 22, 42, 107, no, 113, 167 

Wu Ch'eng, 263 

Wu-ching ta-ch'uan, xix-xx 

Wu She-li, 130 

Yamazaki Ansai, 27;; 

Yanagida Seizan, 69/2 

Yang, 57, 133, 137-38, 260; see also Yin 

Yang Chi, see Yang Shih-te 

Yang Chien, see Yang Tz'u-hu 

Yang Chu, 113, 163 

Yang Hu, quoted, 79 

Yang Lien-sheng, io7« 

Yang Shih-te (Yang Chi), 62-63 

Yang Tz'u-hu (Yang Chien), 238 

Yao, Emperor, 21-22, 28, 113-16 passim) 

119, 127-28, 167, 232 
Yellow Emperor, 21-22 
Yen, king of, 113 
Yen Hui, 3«, 52-53, 72, 84-85, 147, 188, 

216, 260 
Yin, 57, 133, 137-38, 260; see also Yang 
Yin T'un, quoted, 201 
Ying, 37 
Yomeigakit, xli 
Yii, 116, 119 
Yii Ch'ung-yao, xxi«, 335 
Yu-hstieh, 209/; 
Yuan, 48« 

Yiian-chiao ching, quoted, 193 
Yuan-ching, see Lu Ch'eng 
Yuan Ch'ing-lin, xiii, 264 
Yiieh, xxi, xxv, xxviii 

Zen Buddhism, see Buddhism 

PRINTED IN BELGIUM BY THE ST CATHERINE PRESS, LTD., BRUGES 

: I f-(,^ 

Due 

Date Due 
COLLEGE LIBRARY 
Returned Due 

Returned 

FEB 2 3 W 

■ 

MAR 1 n V 

T? 

J t 

APR 0 1 1! 

187 

r*PR 2 2 

9ft? 

1 

• 

3 1 262 00067 2716 

/, // 

: