: 

a aed 

i: " > b4 aiastce % 

pererere™ Pet TS Bee te th 

(oeqeing ® itithee seo 

+ *) ryt 

He ih} AT 

yb z4ep ips 

weds eee ‘ 

se 

© 

a 

ie Rand wlie he 
Re ITER NGS 
ME ey tek! RR NERY SH 4 os. 
Prey - 
I Porat elon tshiaceins : 
af 
tte 

BE 

4 
a 

+ 
“A aaa -” 

~e any) te 

ue 

* 
” ni6a f mare sh rite i 
Heetere Ante tet) 

da Weel te Bie sere ine Maack at Heats 
Vee tie honey ny cats "by Patan ' 
4444, Yeanls 

is Savery 
a deeantaet itaenetaste ie 
hebyer bey mabaieys roar: 

Meahege 
cant ea iicevt ae 
EAA Eb? santeteti st Seth 

rent 
Bie Feet eats 
nite 

HER OE ait Low 
ree 

ie 

oie 
on en: ate sh et 
a, {atte Mee a4 , 

seats ras 

P: hae sea’ . 

Sein 

ra 1s88 ut 

¥ 
At 

3 1?bl O4Sb9b4e Y 

hareedowt HTH ay 
sqaeey ner hs 4 ava \eett 

+h ey Pot cornea nts pe tstah trees ane . 

Sei an y MN as witless Bisctiet pbtcerer'y 

+) i i ve MA 4 s pam eres S * ‘a4 AL toe 
‘ : ty ‘ Chg) Wai taw ‘ 
ye. ope y “ rbids eee [us pra habe pF 
Ayes! ; Be itouch tewtaaien gen 
h oo neh spon patty 

a eing hes cha hs “ 
peerome tear re tired 

era. FeNs 

Aaah 

Sy " 
* Pre nats Tate bre drtaes 
ey, 4 aii { 4 pee) sient aie 
wt a) qebe ote ae he 
oie 

aah @ 

ac. 

oo ve, 

be 

aa 

Sere 
z styl aeen¥ 
4 

neum Yeas Vike * 
MR Eder ire rest 40% 
ety eae 
eae x 
bepsererie Meer 
peat br beep 
Rood 9 

aah Pa 
Ngbehay 
Seti 2 
“hy 
ined bey: ag ine tthe 
dae secseat rey sae ets 
fag Dae ATS irik. 2 
ues * a WA 
ae 

es 
= 
sa 

san 
Rat 

th 

Mak Fab Fe 
ARS 

~ et 
esenpcieaniceteet 
oft AS Shaner 

ery c : ‘ 4 t Rett dba CRANES 
; ; oa $ t rie eyay ‘ jiecitiets eet Sp sb al ATE VIEL Sa AE Leas 
, : 4 ) , ; y Pt bait) i y ee aa sh yay padi ob yi peas ahiaes ahgtmet setts COU ee Sraee 
: th, “aay aientd ap iinet ; ; LF ap ke da anee rs : “ dean eee 
, x x ) OS haat i at ae F 

344g ‘ x 4 | toh 4 “ty r Ly - 4 : Bante SU mace 4 

i: “44 wrt Ss $f tel: 

mer. 

fe 
Prey etee ied 
wind 

oa 

py uae 
nee nh Par te dee nes 
i ton ghee epee rs 

eos eeee Ge Dine ee: 7 
4 i LET RE: 

ee eielatebaeats epee 

+ r \ abt wy bt 4 
arty tt PPO SS fase 
rat, # eae £07 Cie v4 dee e 
4 } ae Aiea 

pes a 

f Hs 
Sy tet j 
‘ ne ney ee hie 
é ak ee ae Pa Ta 
ra “e erreur 
Lind ae weet “ preegtehe 
neta soc 
bene Lisagetp e 
Rene, 
Eee Pheer #48 icheereeert 
Sp icasrecac corn ns bet 

“ye ret PASE AY are 8 an er 
ieee part let fen eae a eee et uty 
oe 

4 ¢ 
sea + er 

* a 
Pa peer tt of fis Hitt pe NE Tait isos 

Papp RE fi 
ae ae 

‘ ue ist 
iy OEE ha denna dt tb 

bef ve Ry sya ad 2 id huis thers VAR . 

, f f 

ropes ernretry st ian jeken: patra ’ wits 

ct y ai tanh, Pea hate eke at P+ A ieee IF, 
nit ee eit ste 
‘ ait Yo 
iis 

ah 
iad 4 
inte 

ey ete 
lara 

Be 
are 
ae 

oe 

ine 
ees 

HE 
SP eCHrEeTIiCAL. Lect uURes 

OF 

=, OU ere es 

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM, 
WITH A REVISED TRANSLATION, INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND INDICES, 

BY 

EDWIN HAMILTON GIFFORD, D.D., 

FORMERLY ARCHDEACON OF LONDON, AND CANON OF S. PAUL’S. 

V.iOies Ville a 

oan 
- 

ee 
eo 
ee 

= 
5 ee we 

et 

_ os 
pei 
e : 

eee Lally in 

NIGENM AND Poo) NICENE FATIEKS 

Joo Uohist iin: CHURCH. 

Second Series. 

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES 
UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF 

Pree eee Le) AND PILI SCHAPE, D1). LE 

Principal of King’s College, 
London, 

’ 
New York. 

IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OP PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE AND AMERICA. 

Professor of Church History in the Union Theological Seminary, 

SEEN BY | 

PRES: : ‘ i rf * ; 

VOLUME VII. Dough 
~ ¢ ¢ — 

Se ee pare ope. 4- gy 
OF JERUSALEM: GEE SERA ORC ACORN 

CATECHETICAL LECTURES. 

S EREGORY FOR USE 
OF NAZIANZUM: AV ALY 
SELECT ORATIONS, AND LETTERS. LIBRARY Gi. | 

OXFORD: 
JAMES PARKER AND COMPANY. 

NEW YORK: 
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY. U 

Me DCCC: 

ENTERED AT STATIONERS’ HALL. 

PRINTED BY MEssrs. JAMES PARKER & Co. AT THEIR 

PRINTING OFFICE, CROWN YARD, CORNMARKET-STREET, OXFORD. 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME: Vit. 

S. CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM: CATECHETICAL LECTURES 

By Epwarp HAMILTON GiFrForD, D.D., FORMERLY ARCHDEACON OF LONDON, AND CANON 
OF S. PAUL’s. 

S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN, ArcuBIsHorp OF CONSTANTINOPLE: 

SELECT ORATIONS.. .. 
Peers poss ce 

ee ey ess hee 

By CHARLES GORDON Browne, M.A., RECTOR OF LyMPSTONE, DEVON ; AND JAMES EDWARD 
SWALLOW, M.A., CHAPLAIN OF THE HousE oF Mercy, Horsury, 

203 
437 

NOoTE.—S. Cyril is issued under the Editorial supervision of Dr, Wace, and S. Gregory Nazianzen under 

that of the translators. 

eee, 
hae, 
i : 

* —] a 

ae 

ee 
ai 
4 

im 
ae a 
oy 

Peer aE 

THE present translation of the Catechetical Lectures of S. Cyril of Jerusalem is based 
on a careful revision of the English translation published in the “ Library of the Fathers 
of the Holy Catholic Church,” with a most interesting Preface by John Henry Newman, 
dated from Oxford, Z%e Feast of St. Matthew, 1838. 

In his Preface Mr. Newman stated with respect to the translation ‘ that for almost the 
whole of it the Editors were indebted to Mr. Church, Fellow of Oriel College.” Mr. Church 
was at that time a very young man, having taken his First Class in Michaelmas Term, 1836 ; 
and this his first published work gave abundant promise of that peculiar felicity of expression, 
which made him in maturer life one of the most perfect masters of the English tongue. 
Having received full liberty to make such use of his translation as I might deem most 
desirable for the purpose of the present Edition, I have been obliged to exercise my own 
judgment both in preserving much of Dean Church’s work unaltered, and in revising it 
wherever the meaning of the original appeared to be less perfectly expressed. 

In this constant study and use of Dean Church's earliest work I have had always before 
my mind a grateful and inspiring remembrance of one whose friendship it was my great 
privilege to enjoy during the few last saddened years of his saintly and noble life. 

In the notes of this Edition one of my chief objects has been to illustrate S. Cyril’s 
teaching by comparing it with the works of earlier Fathers to whom he may have been 
indebted, and with the writings of his contemporaries. 

In the chapters of the Introduction which touch on S. Cyril’s doctrines of Baptism, 
Chrism, and the Holy Eucharist, I have not attempted either to criticise or to defend his 
teaching, but simply to give as faithful a representation as I could of his actual meaning. 
The Eastern Church had long before S. Cyril’s day, and still has its own peculiar Sacramental 
doctrines, which, notwithstanding the efforts of rival theologians, can never be reduced to 
exact conformity with the tenets of our own or other Western Churches. 

The Indices have been revised, and large additions made to the lists of Greek words, 
and of texts of Scripture. | OS io Wa 

OXFORD, 
26 May, 1898. 

CONTENTS OF THe INTRODUL Te 

CHArTEs L Lise or 5. Cr... piety idsanisi thin oes Lo a eee as 

CHAPTER II. CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION, 

Ns SS as ec in hes eva cgi nuccche oes ibe ¥us Gesaw weasels vyauseula eget os 
BS BE 2 SSE RENEE epee RTS ear em RN aye Tor Pee Mae ere cay eab'ee 6 0Geb uv ess b pel Neue Lowel te oe ger re 
5.3. Citlecheiniens : ..i..; Las see mdgb GLaCs dvs decon deny 96 kbcncee bok abs 040 ¥s bus eeceuaT nel gio 
© Ac CPUC ONE! FOP EGE oe ccc Soaskbds hain ace cnseviceaneun sin opaanent ican eae RPC eyem Syl cP a 
ee Pe MOEN STE OTERO acs cy cies v'bss Kes 0; av boy pa das 4d eed oe eee hee pnaee Re he PA eee 

CHAPTER III. SpeECIAL PREPARATION FOR BAPTISM. 

ee ED iced serch kere Lea rivy diye neice ons coun en edeNaesaj ash bere epee Aid tovevansetunesepegany pene 
he CO MEI isos evil not ies dik views taxsuecins vas iguntus ceuebves ivi anh Ginn elanae ee sneupecbust osip mea tdan sees pega 

Fk LO RUP TIONG 6 aii sens cub ctu ee va Sen dan das bed ine uuddudcvabsewenekeases due Shek byed 5 igeetO nan tag eer i 

CHAPTER IV. CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM. 
SES FEMME REIOIE oc Fo cice rks cxwaes ced dg ads cc dpear scene dial tees scsi apa bau Geeeee aeee Nh yn ths+ ee eee are ates 
AG ds Lg ROME ee, Eee OTT RETET Ce Re Pecan oe 
© BaP SE LION: 5 oi coon sy haut ins cas yun dices pow Chosen ses skciete hunted ots can ek hens apie iss 
BAe PBUESIE oe cnscsk cusscsscnsbusisgutastoasasncss guns cheb seths'cene ssa ypeneeluss Guahe Vane miami ease es ge A ene 
De, SPIE LIIEEI SION isi ca ntsvicod ences ads bases CohE es asd ope remus tetband He remeueaeee saeeuntlle sade omaw use aan 

a PMI acc sca soau svn pak baa Cees sat dA sets tates eee eT Eee ee eda OeKe ue ee aves 

CHAPTER V. EUCHARISTIC RITES. 
D5 Peek COMMUMIOR ici cc. savin. cacaeaswsares peseeccs Pieceu ney ek econ lias Ty oe et 

Be: FRE LBL. coe Av nai ci aahesi ves aers eee ores pene shies Cintas wey re er cae Po vs een i 
CHAPTER VI. EFFECTS OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM, 

BE A MEME i aie cca so'5e Oa casas SUSEI Ss ara tue ds vere Te oT eee 

RP EISORS ik cs ond sodpug nda sack Gack ion Pov sCasobw aT tei nie eas acdsee kia sins diuidie pice aoe ict wes heals 

RJA eV ALA: SPO CHARIOTIC JOC TRING © 055,45 000 coun: dotsedetpi oe een aoe ee a 
CuArTER Vill, -PUACE Or: S: CVRiIt's Lecruers:. iA ict ce eee ee ey 
CHAPTER IX. TIME AND ARRANGEMENT OF S. CyRIL’S LECTURES. 
Bi DRE VOR ie lak iv cosa gcceioti ens co bddcese ll akckne 0b eae eR eee 
he AE IIE, Fina sis vas vk sh eseedapoesncteieuhisssuscoeceeahisetn ene ee 

§ 3. Arrangement ..... ceeaa ovees eaten eon ee ct bsdesys Seek es sag oVeen CakL eee ia ea ee Bee re _ 

CHAPTER X. THE CREED OF JERUSALEM: DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY TRINITY. 
SX. Lhe. Creeds. vf Ferasaleit OHA NGA... 55 atasap as han te jissa<deveates leis weme ings eee eeeies eee douse 
Sa. P70cere OF TNE S100) TVIRD is ai sic dances te eo ion cue venlinecssaeeusoe es suv esa citar Oa eae 

CHAPTER XI. S. CyrRIL’s WRITINGS. 

O Si Ley JOOPRS i. 5. ab Mewhcpwkaie pec anescekiens bets aes a aden dies ae sev euwev glen wvecs Rpt iscsy rae wees 
§ 2. Authenticity of the Lectures.......... estas iaduCamunae cine eae ee iaswe acne pecan y Caen ae 
SS Oley TAMMY) i eS SWa's Suda a AG Maha Lis 6 Lee eo ea eee 
SA, Ee CUORe oye ss Wise ise aks ek fda WnGl os Gud dd cess eu Nopidee uae pan eee camer eee Pe gore reeg 
6 5. Mannicrigte 666k, vhaens pan spbaueucessuaiu vies. <cdvsibbway se 400 pMRK Ceagawe cs Clb venta As ee Aen ea 

SG VErSIOmS 05% Lae Crehuadd sede chee Whiaesthahes }yceeg ous sil eRe eee ed CAPR Tue Ree orrer in 

XXX 
bee ctor 

XXXV 

Por Od) © PE LON: 

CeaAPITER. I 

Lir—E or S. Cyrtt. 

THE works of S. Cyril of Jerusalem owe much of their peculiar interest and value to 
the character of the times in which he wrote. Born a few years before the outbreak of 
Arianism in a.p. 318, he lived to see its suppression by the Edict of Theodosius, 380, 
and to take part in its condemnation by the Council of Constantinople in the following year, 

The story of Cyril’s life is not told in detail by any contemporary author; in his 
own writings there is little mention of himself; and the Church historians refer only to 
the events of his manhood and old age. We have thus no direct knowledge of his early 
years, and can only infer from the later circumstances of his life what may probably have 
been the nature of his previous training. The names of his parents are quite unknown ; 
but in the Greek Menaea, or monthly catalogues of Saints, and in the Roman Martyrology 
for the 18th day of March, Cyril is said to have been “born of plous parents, professing 
the orthodox Faith, and to have been bred up in the same, in the reign of Constantine.” 

This account of his parentage and education derives some probability from the fact 
that Cyril nowhere speaks as one who had been converted from paganism or from any 
heretical sect. His language at the close of the viit® Lecture seems rather to be inspired 
by gratitude to his own parents for a Christian education: “The first virtuous observance in 
a Christian is to honour his parents, to requite their trouble, and to provide with all his 
power for their comfort: for however much we may repay them, yet we can never be 
to them what they as parents have been to us. Let them enjoy the comfort we can give, and 
strengthen us with blessings.” 

One member only of Cyril’s family is mentioned by name, his sister’s son Gelasius, 
who was appointed by Cyril to be Bishop of Czesarea on the death of Acacius, A.D. 366 circ. 

Cyril himself was probably born, or at least brought up, in or near Jerusalem, for it 
was usual to choose a Bishop from among the Clergy over whom he was to preside, 
a preference being given to such as were best known to the people generally. 

That Cyril, whether a native of Jerusalem or not, had passed a portion of his childhood 
there, is rendered probable by his allusions to the condition of the Holy Places before they 
were cleared and adorned by Constantine and Helena. He seems to speak as an eye-witness 
of their former state, when he says that a few years before the place of the Nativity at 
Bethlehem had been wooded2, that the place where Christ was crucified and buried was 
a garden, of which traces were still remaining3, that the wood of the Cross had been 
distributed to all nations4, and that before the decoration of the Holy Sepulchre by 
Constantine, there was a cleft or cave before the door of the Sepulchre, hewn out of the 

t Bingham, 7he Antiquities of the Christian Church, Book II. c. 10, § 2. 2 Cat. xii. 20. The wood had been cleared 
away about sixteen years before this Lecture was delivered. 3 Cat. xiii. 32; xiv. s. 

4 Cat. iv. 10; x. 19: xiii. 4. Gregor. Nyss. Baptism of Christ, p. 520, in this Series: “The wood of the Cross is of saving 
efficacy for all men, though it is, as I am informed, a piece of a poor tree, less valuable than most trees are, 

VOL. VII. b 

il TN eO WE Coin, 

rock itself, but now no longer to be seen, because the outer cave had been cut away for 
the sake of the recent adornments >. 

This work was undertaken by Constantine after the ycar 326 A.Dres onde yell 
spoke from remembrance of what he had himself seen, he could hardly have been less 
than ten or twelve years old, and so must have been born not later, perhaps a few years 
earlier, than 315 A.D. 

The tradition that Cyril had been a monk and an ascetic was probably founded upon 
the passages in which he seems to speak as one who had himself belonged to the order 
of Solitaries, and shared the glory of chastity7. We need not, however, suppose that the 
* Solitaries ” (wovdgovres) of whom he speaks were either hermits living in remote and desert 
places, or monks secluded in a monastery : they commonly lived in cities, only in separate 
houses, and frequented the same Churches with ordinary Christians. ‘To such a life 
of perpetual chastity, strict asceticism, and works of charity, Cyril may probably, in accord- 
ance with the custom of the age, have been devoted from early youth. 

A more important question is that which relates to the time and circumstances of his 
ordination as Deacon, and as Priest, matters closely connected with some of the chief troubles 
of his later life. 

That he was ordained Deacon by Macarius, Bishop of Jerusalem, who died in 334 
or 335, may be safely inferred from the unfriendly notice of S. Jerome, Chron. ann. 349 
(350 a.p.): “Cyril having been ordained Priest by Maximus, and after his death permitted 
by Acacius, Bishop of Caesarea, and the other Arian Bishops, to be made Bishop on 
condition of repudiating his ordination by Maximus, served in the Church as a Deacon: and 
after he had been paid for this impiety by the reward of the Episcopate (Sacerdotit), he by 
various plots harassed Heraclius, whom Maximus when dying had substituted in his own 
place, and degraded him from Bishop to Priest.” 

From this account, incredible as it is in the main, and strongly marked by personal 
prejudice, we may conclude that Cyril had been ordained Deacon not by Maximus, but by 
his predecessor Macarius; for otherwise he would have been compelled to renounce his 
Deacon’s Orders, as well as his Priesthood. 

Macarius died in or before the year 335; for at the Council of Tyre, assembled in that 
year to condemn Athanasius, Maximus sat as successor to Macarius in the See of Jerusalem °. 
This date is confirmed by the fact that after the accession of Maximus, a great assembly of 
Bishops was held at Jerusalem in the year 335, for the dedication of the Church of the Holy 
Resurrection % 

It thus appears that Cyril’s ordination as Deacon cannot be put later than 334 or the 
beginning of 335. 

‘Towards the close of the latter year the Bishops who had deposed Athanasius at the 
Council of Tyre proceeded to Jerusalem “to celebrate the Zyicennalia of Constantine's 
reign by consecrating his grand Church on Mount Calvary?.” On that occasion “ Jerusalem 
became the gathering point for distinguished prelates from every province, and the whole 
city was thronged by a vast assemblage of the servants of God...... In short, the whole of 
Syria and Mesopotamia, Pheenicia and Arabia, Palestine, Egypt, and Libya, with the dwellers 
in the Thebaid, all contributed to swell the mighty concourse of God’s ministers, followed as 
they were by vast numbers from every province. They were attended by an imperial escort, 
and officers of trust had also been sent from the palace itself, with instructions to heighten 
the splendour of the festival at the Emperor’s expense*.” Eusebius proceeds to describe 

5 Cat. xiv. 9. 6 Eusebius, | V/a Const. ii. 29 ff. 7 Cat, xii, x, 933.34-- Compare av. 24, notes 
Hefele, /Zistory of Councils, ii. 173 Sozom. //.F. il. 25. 9 Kuseb. Vita Const. iv. 43. 
1 Robertson, Prolegomena to Athanasius, p. XXXix * Euseb. V.C. iv.43: 

1) Oy OAS Se OA ARS I Bs Wi 

the splendid banquets, the lavish distributi ies to the naked and 
destitute, the offerings of imperial magnificence, the “intellectual feast ” of the many Bishops’ 
discourses, and last, not least, his own “ various public orations pronounced in honour of 
this solemnity.” Among the Clergy taking part in this gorgeous ceremony, the newly 
ordained Deacon of the Church of Jerusalem would naturally have his place. It was 
a scene which could not fail to leave a deep impression on his mind, and to influence 
his attitude towards the contending parties in the great controversy by which the Church 
was at this time distracted. Ile knew that Athanasius had just been deposed, he had seen 
Arius triumphantly restored to communion in that august assembly of Bishops “ from every 
province,” with his own Bishop Maximus, and Eusebius of Cresarea, the Metropolitan, at 
their head. It is much to the praise of his wisdom and steadfastness that he was not 
misled by the notable triumph of the Arians to join their faction or adopt their tenets. 

In September, 346, Athanasius returning from his second exile at Tréves passed through 
Jerusalem. The aged Bishop Maximus, who had been induced to acquiesce in the con- 
demnation of Athanasius at Tyre, and in the solemn recognition of Arius at Jerusalem, had 
afterwards refused to join the Eusebians at Antioch in 341, for the purpose of confirming the 
sentence passed at Tyre, and now gave a cordial welcome to Athanasius, who thus describes 
his reception3; “As I passed through Syria, I met with the Bishops of Palestine, who, when 
they had called a Council at Jcrusalem, received me cordially, and themselves also sent me 
on my way in peace, and addressed the following letter to the Church and the Bishops 4.” 
The letter congratulating the Egyptian Bishops and the Clergy and people of Alexandria on 
the restoration of their Bishop is signed first by Maximus, who seems to have acted without 
reference to the Metropolitan Acacius, successor of Eusebius as Bishop of Caesarea, and 
a leader of the Arians, a bitter enemy of Athanasius. Though Cyril in his writings never 
mentions Athanasius or Arius by name, we can hardly doubt that, as Touttée suggests 5, 
he must at this time have had an opportunity of learning the true character of the questions 
in dispute between the parties of the great heresiarch and his greater adversary. 

We have already learned from Jerome that Cyril was admitted to the Priesthood by 
Maximus. There is no evidence of the exact date of his ordination: but we may safely 
assume that he was a Priest of some years’ standing, when the important duty of preparing 
the candidates for Baptism was intrusted to him in or about the year 348° There appears 
to be no authority for the statement (Dict. Chr. Antiq. “* Catechumens,” Pp. 319 a), that 
“the Catecheses of Cyril of Jerusalem were delivered by him partly as a Deacon, partly as 
a Presbyter?.” 

At the very time of delivering the lectures, Cyril was also in the habit of preaching 
to the general congregation on the Lord’s day ®, when the candidates for Baptism were 
especially required to be present9. In the Church of Jerusalem it was still the custom 
for sermons to be preached by several Presbyters in succession, the Bishop preaching last. 
From Cyril's Homily on the Paralytic (§ 20) we learn that he preached immediately before the 
Bishop, and so must have held a distinguished position among the Priests. This is also 
implied in the fact, that within three or four years after delivering his Catechetical Lectures 
to the candidates for Baptism, he was chosen to succeed Maximus in the See of Jerusalem, 

The date of his consecration is approximately determined by his own letter to Constantius 
concerning the appearance of a luminous cross in the sky at Jerusalem. ‘The letter was 
written on the 7th of May, 351, and is described by Cyril as the first-fruit of his Episcopate. 
He must therefore have been consecrated in 359, or early in 351. 

3 Apology. contra Arian, § 57. 4 Cf. Athan. /7/st. Arian. § 25. 
5 Introductory note to Cyril’s Letter to Constantius, § x. 6 On the exact date of the Lectures, see below, ch. ix. 
7 See more below on the office of “ Catcchist,” ch. it. $2. 2 Cat ee rte oC rts Gh 

2 

INTRODUCTION. 

Socrates and Sozomen agree in the assertion that Acacius, Patrophilus the Anan Bishop 
of Scythopolis, and their adherents ejected Maximus and put Cyril in his place, But ac- 
cording to the statement of Jerome already quoted“ Maximus, when dying, had not only 
nominated Heraclius to be his successor, which, with the consent of the Clergy and people, 
was not unusual, but had actually established him as Bishop in his stead (zw suum locum 
sudstituerat). ‘The two accounts are irreconcileable, and both improbable. ‘Touttée argucs 
not without reason, that the consecration of Heraclius, which Jerome attributes to Maximus, 
would have been opposed to the right of the people and Clergy to nominate their own 
Lishop, and to the authority of the Metropolitan and other Bishops of the province, by 
whom the choice was to be confirmed and the consecration performed, and that it had 
moreover been expressly forbidden seven years before by the 23rd Canon of the Council of 
Antioch, . 

Still more improbable is the charge that Cyril had renounced the priesthood conferred 
on him by Maximus, and after serving in the Church as a Deacon, had been rewarded by 
the Episcopate, and then himself degraded Heraclius from Bishop to Priest. As a solution 
of these difficulties, it is suggested by Reischl 9 that Cyril had been designated in the lifetime 
of Maximus as his successor, and after his decease had been duly and canonically consecrated, 
but had incurred the calumnious charges of the party opposed to Acacius and the Kusebians, 
because he was supposed to have bound himself to them by accepting consecration at their 
hands, ‘This view is in some measure confirmed by the fact that “in the great controversy 
of the day Cyril belonged to the Asiatic party, Jerome to that of Rome. In the Meletian 
schism also they took opposite sides, Cyril supporting Meletius, Jerome being a warm 
adherent of Paulinus',” by whom he had been recently ordained Priest. It is also worthy 
of notice that Jerome’s continuation of the Chronicle of Eusebius was written at Con- 
stantinople in 380—381, the very time when the many injurious charges fabricated by 
Cyril’s bitter enemies were most industriously circulated in popular rumour on the eve of 
a judicial inquiry by the second general Council which met there in 381, under the presidency 
of Meletius, Cyril, and Gregory of Nazianzum?, Had Jerome written of Cynl a year or two 
later, he must have known that these calumnies had been emphatically rejected by the Synod 
of Constantinople (382) consisting of nearly the same Bishops who had been present at the 
Council of the preceding year. In their Synodical letter 3 to Pope Damasus they wrote: “And 
of the Church in Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all the Churches, we notify that the most 
reverend and godly Cyril is Bishop : who was long ago canonically appointed by the Bishops 
of the Province, and had many conflicts in various places against the Arians.” 

The beginning of Cyril’s Episcopate was marked by the appearance of a bright Cross in 
the sky, about nine o’clock in the morning of Whitsunday, the wth of May, 351 A.D. 
Brighter than the sun, it hung over the hill of Golgotha, and extended to Mount Olivet, being 
visible for many hours. The whole population of Jerusalem, citizens and foreigners, Chris- 
tians and Pagans, young and old, flocked to the Church, singing the praises of Christ, and 
hailing the phenomenon as a sign from heaven confirming the truth of the Christian religion. 

Cyril regarded the occasion as favourable for announcing to the Emperor Constantius the 
commencement of his Episcopate ; and in his extant letter described the sign as a proof of 
God's favour towards the Empire and its Christian ruler. The piety of his father Constantine 
had been rewarded by the discovery of the true Cross and the Holy places: and now the 
greater devotion of the Son had won a more signal manifestation of Divine approval. 

oa Socr. ALE. ii. 38; Soz. iv. 20. The Bishops of Palestine, except two or three, had received Athanasius most cordially a few 
years before (Athan. //7st. Arian. § 25). ohh! i. a2 Vols lap. xiv ote: 

1 Dict. Chr. Biogr. Cyrvillus,” p. 7612 and for the Meletian Schism, see “ Meletius,” “ Paulinus,” Vitalius.” 

ah eteles ii. 944) 3: Theodoret, 777%. ect V0. 

ve 

ears aie weg Cee Oe v 

The letter ends with a prayer that God may grant to the Emperor long to reign as the 
protector of the Church and of the Empire, “ever glorifying the Holy and Consubstantial 
Trinity, our true God.” The word épootatoy, it is alleged, had not at this time been 
accepted by Cyril, and its use has therefore been thought to cast doubt upon the genuineness 
of this final prayer, which is nevertheless maintained by the Benedictine Kditor4. The letter 
as a whole is certainly genuine, and the phenomenon is too strongly attested by the historians 
of the period to be called in question. While, therefore, we must reject Cyril’s explanation, 
we have no reason to suspect him of intentional misrepresentation. A parhclion, or other 
remarkable phenomenon, of which the natural cause was at that time unknown, might well 
appear “to minds excited by the struggle between the Christian Faith and a fast-declining 
heathenism to be a miraculous manifestation of the symbol of Redemption, intended to 
establish the Faith and to confute its gainsayers 5,” 

The first few years of Cyril’s episcopate fell within that so-called “Golden Decade,” 
346—355, which is otherwise described as “an uneasy interval of suspense rather than of 
peace °.” Though soon to be engaged in a dispute with Acacius concerning the privileges of 
their respective Sees, Cyril seems to have been in the interval zealous and successful in 
promoting the peace and prosperity of his own Diocese. 

We learn from a letter of Basil the Great that he had visited Jerusalem about the year 
357, when he had been recently baptized, and was preparing to adopt a life of strict asceticism. 
Ie speaks of the many saints whom he had there embraced, and of the many who had fallen 
on their knees before him, and touched his hands as holy 7,—signs, as Touttée suggests, of a 
flourishing state of religion and piety. Cyril’s care for the poor, and his personal poverty, 
were manifested by an incident, of which the substantial truth is proved by the malicious use 
to which it was afterwards perverted. “Jerusalem and the neighbouring region being visited 
with a famine, the poor in great multitudes, being destitute of necessary food, turned their 
eyes upon Cyril as their Bishop. As he had no money to succour them in their need, he sold 
the treasures and sacred veils of the Church. It is said, therefore, that some one recognised 
an offering of his own as worn by an actress on the stage, and made it his business to inquire 
whence she had it, and found that it had been sold to her by a merchant, and to the merchant 
by the Bishop 8.” 

This was one of the charges brought against Cyril in the course of the disputes between 
himself and Acacius, which had commenced soon after he had been installed in the Bishopric 
of Jerusalem. As Bishop of Cesarea, Acacius exercised Metropolitan jurisdiction over the 
Bishops of Palestine. But Cyril, as presiding over an Apostolic See, “the Mother of all the 
Churches,” claimed exemption from the jurisdiction of Casarea, and higher rank than its 
Bishop. It is not alleged, nor is it in any way probable, that Cyril claimed also the juris- 
diction over other Bishops. The rights and privileges of his See had been clearly defined 
many years before by the 7th Canon of the Council of Nicwa: “As custom and ancient 
tradition shew that the Bishop of Aelia ought to be honoured, let him have precedence in 
honour, without prejudice to the proper dignity of the Metropolitical Sce.” Eusebius, in 
reference to a Synod concerning the time of Laster, says: “ There is still extant a writing of 
those who were then assembled in Palestine (about 2co0 a.p.), over whom Theophilus, Bishop 
of Cexsarea, and Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, presided.” If one Synod only is here meant, 
it would appear that the Bishop of Cwsarea took precedence of the Bishop of Jerusalem, 
which would be the natural order in a Synod held at Cesarea. Bishop Hefele, however, takes 
a different view": “ According to the Syodicon, two Synods were held in Palestine on the 

4 Efist. ad Constantiui—Monitum, § x. 5 Dict. Chr. Biegr. p. 761. 6 Gwatkin, p. 74. FP eyiste tv, Pe Te, 
S Sozom. 722... iVn 25% P LHists ECOU. Ne 23, t Llistory of the Christian Councils, Book I. Sec. ii. c. 

if IN TROD TRO. 

Srdpites and Sozomen acree invthe assertion that Acacius, Patrophilus the Arian Bishop 
of Seythopolis, and their adherents ejected Maximus and put Cyril in his places. But ac- 
cording to the statement of Jerome already quoted“ Maximus, when dying, had not only 
nominated Heraclius to be his successor, which, with the consent of the Clergy and people, 
was not unusual, but had actually established him as Bishop in his stead (dv seam locum 
swdstituerat). ‘The two accounts are irreconcilable, and both improbable. Touttée argues 
not without reason, that the consecration of Heraclius, which Jerome attributes to Maximus, 
would have been opposed to the right of the people and Clergy to nominate their own 
Bishop, and to the authority of the Mctropolitan and other Bishops of the province, by 
whom the choice was to be confirmed and the consecration performed, and that it had 
moreover been expressly forbidden seven years before by the 23rd Canon of the Council of 
Antioch. 

Still more improbable is the charge that Cyril had renounced the priesthood conferred 
on him by Maximus, and after serving in the Church as a Deacon, had been rewarded by 
the Episcopate, and then himself degraded Heraclius from Bishop to Priest. As a solution 
of these difficulties, it is suggested by Reischl»* that Cyril had been designated in the lifetime 
of Maximus as his successor, and after his decease had been duly and canonically consecrated, 
but had incurred the ealumnious charges of the party opposed to Acacius and the Eusebians, 
because he was supposed to have bound himself to them by accepting consecration at their 
hands. This view is in some measure confirmed by the fact that “in the great controversy 
of the day Cyril belonged to the Asiatic party, Jerome to that of Rome. In the Mcletian 
schism also they took opposite sides, Cyril supporting Meletius, Jerome being a warm 
adherent of Paulinus,” by whom he had been recently ordained Priest. It is also worthy 
of notice that Jerome’s continuation of the Chronicle of Eusebius was written at Con- 
stantinople in 380-381, the very time when the many injurious charges fabricated by 
Cyril’s bitter enemies were most industriously circulated in popular rumour on the eve of 
a judicial inquiry by the second general Council which met there in 381, under the presidency 
of Meletius, Cyril, and Gregory of Nazianzum?. Had Jerome written of Cyril a year or two 
later, he must have known that these calumnies had been emphatically rejected by the Synod 
of Constantinople (382) consisting of nearly the same Bishops who had been present at the 
Council of the preceding year. In their Synodical letter 3 to Pope Damasus they wrote: “And 
of the Church in Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all the Churches, we notify that the most 
reverend and godly Cyril is Bishop : who was long ago canonically appointed by the Bishops 
of the Province, and had many conflicts in various places against the Arians.” 

The beginning of Cyril’s Episcopate was marked by the appearance of a bright Cross in 
the sky, about nine o’clock in the morning of Whitsunday, the 7th of May, 351 A.D. 
Brighter than the sun, it hung over the hill of Golgotha, and extended to Mount Olivet, being 
visible for many hours. The whole population of Jerusalem, citizens and forcigners, Chris- 
tians and Pagans, young and old, flocked to the Church, singing the praises of Christ, and 
hailing the phenomenon as a sign from heaven confirming the truth of the Christian religion. 

Cyril regarded the occasion as favourable for announcing to the Emperor Constantius the 
commencement of his Episcopate ; and in his extant letter described the sign as a proof of 
God's favour towards the Empire and its Christian ruler. The piety of his father Constantine 
had been rewarded by the discovery of the true Cross and the Holy places: and now the 
ereater devotion of the Son had won a more signal manifestation of Divine approval. 

oa Socr. JE. ti. 38; Soz. iv. 20. The Bishops of Palestine, except two or threc, had received Athanasius most cordially a few 
years before (Athan. ///st. ed ofan. § 25). ob p, il. 9¢ Vol. I. p. xiv note. 

1 Dict. Chr. Biogr. “ Cyrillus,” p. 761: and for the Meletian Schism, see “ Meletius,” ‘ Paulinus,” “ Vitalius.” 

> Picteleci.ea4 4. 3° Theodoret, 7/1st.£ecleve 9: 

Dah Ge. 6S) Gye, v 

God may grant to the Emperor long to reign as the 
protector of the Church and of the Empire, “ever glorifying the Holy and Consubstantial 
I'rinity, our true God.” The word époovotor, it is alleged, had not at this time been 

The letter ends with a prayer that 

accepted by Cyril, and its use has therefore been thought to cast doubt upon the genuineness 
of this final prayer, which is nevertheless maintained by the Benedictine Editor4, The letter 
as a whole is certainly genuine, and the phenomenon is too strongly attested by the historians 
of the period to be called in question. While, therefore, we must reject Cyril’s explanation, 
we have no reason to suspect him of intentional misrepresentation. A pathelion, or other 
remarkable phenomenon, of which the natural cause was at that time unknown, might well 
appear “to minds excited by the struggle between the Christian Faith and a fast-declining 
heathenism to be a miraculous manifestation of the symbol of Redemption, intended to 
establish the Faith and to confute its gainsayers 3,” 

The first few years of Cyril’s episcopate fell within that so-called “Golden Decadé,” 
346—355, which is otherwise described as “an uneasy interval of suspense rather than of 
peace ®.” Though soon to be engaged in a dispute with Acacius concerning the privileges of 
their respective Sees, Cyril seems to have been in the interval zealous and successful in 
promoting the peace and prosperity of his own Diocese. 

We learn from a letter of Basil the Great that he had visited Jerusalem about the year 
357, when he had been recently baptized, and was preparing to adopt a life of strict asceticism. 
He speaks of the many saints whom he had there embraced, and of the many who had fallen 
on their knees before him, and touched his hands as holy 7,—signs, as Touttée suggests, of a 
flourishing state of religion and piety. Cyril’s care for the poor, and his personal poverty, 
were manifested by an incident, of which the substantial truth is proved by the malicious use 
to which it was afterwards perverted. “Jerusalem and the neighbouring region being visited 
with a famine, the poor in great multitudes, being destitute of necessary food, turned their 
eyes upon Cyril as their Bishop. As he had no money to succour them in their need, he sold 
the treasures and sacred veils of the Church. It is said, therefore, that some one recognised 
an offering of his own as worn by an actress on the stage, and made it his business to inquire 
whence she had it, and found that it had been sold to her by a merchant, and to the merchant 
by the Bishop °.” 

This was one of the charges brought against Cyril in the course of the disputes between 
himself and Acacius, which had commenced soon after he had been installed in the Bishopric 
of Jerusalem, As Bishop of Cisarea, Acacius exercised Metropolitan jurisdiction over the 
Bishops of Palestine. But Cyril, as presiding over an Apostolic See, “the Mother of all the 
Churches,” claimed exemption from the jurisdiction of Caesarea, and higher rank than its 
Bishop. It is not alleged, nor is it in any way probable, that Cyril claimed also the juris- 
diction over other Bishops. The rights and privileges of his See had been clearly defined 
many years before by the 7th Canon of the Council of Nicwa: “As custom and ancient 
tradition shew that the Bishop of Aelia ought to be honoured, let him have precedence in 
honour, without prejudice to the proper dignity of the Metropolitical See.” Eusebius9, in 
reference to a Synod concerning the time of Laster, says: “ There is still extant a writing of 
those who were then assembled in Palestine (about 200 A.p.), over whom Theophilus, Bishop 
of Cwsarea, and Narcissus, Bishop of Jerusalem, presided.” If one Synod only is here meant, 
it would appear that the Bishop of Caesarea took precedence of the Bishop of Jerusalem, 
which would be the natural order in a Synod held at Cesarea. Bishop Hefele, however, takes 
a different view": “According to the Sjvodicon, two Synods were held in Palestine on the 

4 Lfist. ad Coustantiune—Monitum, § x. 5 Dict. Chr. Biegr. p. 761. 6 Gwatkin, p. 74. 7 Tapteivs p: pe: 
8 Sozom. /7.£. iv. 25. > Hast. L56cl. V. 23. t LWistory of the Christian Councils, Book I. Sec. ii. c. 

vi STRODE TIC 

subject of the Easter controversy : the one at Jerusalem presided over hy Narcissus, and 
composed of fourteen Bishops 5 and the other at Cisarea, comprising twelve Bishops, and 
presided over by Theophilus.” In confirmation of this view we may observe that when 
next Eusebius mentions Narcissus and ‘Theophilus, he reverses the previous order, and names 
the Bishop of Jerusalem first. 

However this may have been, Acacius, who as an Arian was likely to have little respect 
for the Council of Niewa, scems to have claimed both precedence and jurisdiction over 
Cyril. From? Socrates we Iearn that Cyril was frequently summoned to submit to the 
judgment of Acacius, but for two whole years refused to appear. He was therefore 
deposed by Acacius and the other Arian Bishops of Palestine on the charge of having 
sold the property of the Church, as before mentioned. Socrates, who confesses that he 
does not know for what Cyril was accused, yet suggests that he was afraid to meet the accu- 
cations 3. But Theodoret, a more impartial witness, says *# that Acacius took advantage 
of some slight occasion (dapoppds) and deposed him. Sozomen$ also describes the accu- 
sation as a pretext (ex) mpopdoet rotdde), and the deposition as hastily decreed, to forestall 
any countercharge of heresy by Cyril (pOdver kabeddv), The deposition was quickly followed 
by Cyril’s expulsion from Jerusalem, and a certain Eutychius was appointed to succeed him °. 
Passing by Antioch, which at this time, 357—358, was left without a Bishop by the recent 
decease of the aged Arian Leontius Castratus7, Cyril took refuge in Tarsus with its Bishop 
the “admirable Silvanus,” “one of the Semi-Arians, who, as Athanasius testifies, agreed 
almost entirely with the Nicene doctrine, only taking offence at the expression dépoovcws, 
because in their opinion it contained latent Sabellianism®.” Cyril now sent to the Bishops who 
had deposed him a formal notice that he appealed to a higher Court (peigov émexadecaro 
dicaorhptov), and his appeal was approved by the Emperor Constantius9. Acacius, on learn- 
ing the place of Cyril’s retreat, wrote to Silvanus announcing his deposition. But Silvanus 
out of respect both to Cyril, and to the people, who were delighted with his teaching, still 
permitted him to exercise his ministry in the Church. Socrates finds fault with Cyril for his 
appeal: “In this,” he says, ‘he was the first and only one who acted contrary to the custom 
of the Ecclesiastical Canon, by having recourse to appeals as in a civil court.” The reproach 
implied in this statement is altogether undeserved. The question, as Touttée argues, is not 
whether others had done the like before or after, but whether Cyril’s appeal was in accord- 
ance with natural justice, and the custom of the Church. On the latter point he refers to the 
yarious appeals of the Donatists, of Marcellus of Ancyra, and Asclepas of Gaza, and to the 
case of the notorious heretic Photinus, who after being condemned in many Councils appealed 
to the Emperor, and was allowed to dispute in his presence with Basil the Great as his 
opponent. Athanasius himself, in circumstances very similar to Cyril’s, declined to appear 
before Eusebius and a Synod of Arian Bishops at Cwsarea, by whom he was condemned 
A.D. 334, and appealed in person to Constantine, requesting cither that a lawful Council of 
Bishops might be assembled, or that the Emperor would himself receive his defence ?.” 

In justification of Cyril’s appeal it is enough to say that it was impossible for him to 
submit to the judgment of Acacius and his Arian colleagues, They could not be impartial 
in a matter where the jurisdiction of Acacius their president, and his unsoundness in the 
Faith, were as much in question as any of the charges brought against Cyril. He took the 
only course open to him in requesting the Emperor to remit his case to the higher juris- 

S Pfiet. Meek Ab. ads 3 Ib. 4 Tb, of, 20. communicated at Seleucia (Dict. Chr. Brogr. Eutychius 13). The 

S AE. i. 25, | subject is discussed at length by Touttée (Déss. I. vil): 

6 There is much uncertainty and confusion in the names of the 7 See the account of his remarkable career in the Dict. Chr. 
Dishops who succeeded Cyril on the three occasions of his being | Biegr. 8 Athan. De Synodis, c. xii.; Hefcle, ii. 262. 
deposed. His successor in 357 is said by Jerome to have been | 9 Socrates, //.E. ii. 40. 

a certain Eutychius, probably the same who was afterwards ex. | 1 Athan. contr. Avianos Apol. c. 36: He'ele, ii. p. 27, note. 

Lik. OF SU C¥RIT, Vil 

diction of a greater Council, and in giving formal notice of this appeal to the Bishops who 
had expelled him. 

While the appeal was pending, Cyril became acquainted with “the learned Bishop, Basil 
of Ancyra” (Hefele), with Eustathius of Sebaste in Armenia, and George of Laodicea, the 
chicf leaders of the party “usually (since Epiphanius), but with some injustice, designated 
Semi-Arian 2.” One of the charges brought against Cyril in the Council of Constantinople 
(360, A.D.) was, as we shall see, that he held communion with these Bishops. 

Cyril had not long to wait for the hearing of his appeal. In the year 359 the Eastern 
Bishops met at Seleucia in Isauria, and the Western at Ariminum. Constantius had at 
first wished to convene a general Council of all the Bishops of the Empire, but this 
intention he was induced to abandon by representations of the long journeys and expense, 
and he therefore directed the two Synods then assembled at Ariminum and at Seleucia ‘“ the 
Rugged” to investigate first the disputes concerning the Faith, and then to turn their 
attention to the complaints of Cyril, and other Bishops against unjust decrees of deposition 
and banishment 3. This order of proceeding was discussed, and after much controversy 
adopted on the first day of meeting, the 27th of September 4, On the second day Acacius 
and his friends refused to remain unless the Bishops already deposed, or under accusation, 
were excluded. Theodoret relates that “several friends of peace tried to persuade Cyril 
of Jerusalem to withdraw, but that, as he would not comply, Acacius left the assembly 5.” 
Three days afterwards, according to Sozomen, a third meeting was held at which the demand 
of Acacius was complied with; “for the Bishops of the opposite party were determined that 
he should have no pretext for dissolving the Council, which was evidently his object in order 
to prevent the impending examination of the heresy of Aetius and of the accusations which 
had been brought against him and his partisans ®” A creed put forward by Acacius having 
been rejected, he refused to attend any further meetings, though repeatedly summoned to 
be present at an investigation of his own charges against Cyril. 

In the end Acacius and many of his friends were deposed or excommunicated. Some of 
these, however, in defiance of the sentence of the Council, returned to their dioceses, as did 
also the majority who had deposed them. 

It is not expressly stated whether any formal decision on the case of Cyril was adopted by 
the Council: but as his name does not appear in the lists of those who were deposed or ex- 
communicated, it is certain that he was not condemned. It is most probable that the charges 
against him were disregarded after his accuser Acacius had refused to appear, and that he re. 
turned, like the others, to his diocese. But he was not to be left long in peace. Acacius and 
some of his party had hastened to Constantinople, where they gained over to their cause the 
chief men attached to the palace, and through their influence secured the favour of Con- 
stanuius, and roused his anger against the majority of the Council. But what especially stirred 
the Emperor’s wrath were the charges which Acacius concocted against Cyril: “For,” he said 
that “the holy robe which the Emperor Constantine of blessed memory, in his desire to 
honour the Church of Jerusalem, had presented to Macarius, the Bishop of that city, to be 
worn when he administered the rite of Holy Baptism, all fashioned as it was with golden 
threads, had been sold by Cyril, and bought by one of the dancers at the theatre, who had put 
it on, and while dancing had fallen, and injured himself, and died. With such an 
ally as this Cyril,” he said, “ they undertake to judge and pass sentence upon the rest of the 
world 7.” 

Ten deputies who at the close of the Council of Seleucia had been appointed to report its 

* Robertson, Prolegomena ad Athanas. ii. § 8 (2) G CEG saueg . 4 Socrat. il. 39. 5 7.2). 11, 265 
6 Sozem. iy. 22. Theodoret, 7.£. ii. 23. 

ii INTRODUCTION. oo 

proceedings to the Minperor, “amet, on their arrival at the Court, the deputies of the Council 
of <riminen and likewise the partisans of Acacius’. After much controversy and many 
adopted at Ariminum in which the époovcuos of 

t mutilated and ambiguous Creed eae : 
Him according to the Scriptures, 

intrigues, : 
Moen was replaced by “like to the Father that begat 
| Segsence ” (oteta) or “ subsistence ” (ixdatacts) condemned 9, was 

‘ 

and the mention of either : \ Bi 
proved by the Emperor. “After having, on the last day of the 

brought forward and ap . 
| far into the night", he at length extorted 

vear 350, discussed the matter with the Bishops tl : 
th. ir signatures -... It is in this connexion that Jerome says + Lagemuet totus orbis, et Aria- 

‘) $e. esse miratus este. ¥arly in the following year, 360 A.D. through the influence of 
\cacius a new Synod was held at Constantinople, in which, among other Semi-Arian Bishops, 
Cyril also was deposed on the charge of having held communion with Eustathius of Scbaste, 
Cyril, as we have seen, had become acquainted 

Basil of Ancyra, and George of Laodicea, 
with these Bishops during his residence at ‘Tarsus in 358, at which time they were all zealous 
opponents of Acacius and his party, but differed widely in other respects. - 

George of Laodicea was a profligate in morals, and an Arian at heart, whose opposition 
to Acacius and Eudoxius was prompted by self-interest rather than by sincere conviction. 
He had been deposed from the priesthood by Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, both on the 
eround of false doctrine, and of the open and habitual irregularities of his life. Athanasius 
styles him “the most wicked of all the Arians,” reprobated even by his own party for his grossly 
dissolute conduct 3. 

Basil of Ancyra was aman of high moral character, great learning, and powerful intellect, 
a consistent opponent both of the Sabellianism of Marcellus, and of every form of Arian 
and Anoman heresy, a chief among those of whom Athanasius wrote 4, “We discuss the 
matter with them as brothers with brothers, who mean what we mean, and dispute only about 
the word (spootaws). .. . Now such is Basil who wrote from Ancyra concerning the Faith” 
(358 a.p., the same year in which Cyril met him at Tarsus). 

Eustathius is described as a man unstable in doctrine, vacillating from party to party, 
subscribing readily to Creeds of various tendency, yet commanding the respect even of his 
enemies by a life of extraordinary holiness, in which active benevolence was combined with 
extreme austerity. ‘He was a man,” says Mr, Gwatkin5, “too active to be ignored, too 
unstable to be trusted, too famous for ascetic piety to be lightly made an open enemy.” 

S. Basil the Great, when travelling from place to place, to observe the highest forms of 
ascetic life, had met with Eustathius at Tarsus, and formed a lasting friendship with a man 
whom he describes as “ exhibiting something above human excellence,” and of whom, after 
the painful dissensions which embittered Basil’s later life, that great saint could say, that 
from childhood to extreme old age he (Eustathius) had watched over himself with the greatest 
care, the result of his self-discipline being seen in his life and character °. 

Of any intimate friendship between Cyril and these Semi-Arian leaders, we have no 
evidence in the vague charges of Acacius: their common fault was that they condemned him 
in the Synod of Seleucia. The true reason of Cyril’s deposition, barely concealed by the 
frivolous charges laid against him, was the hatred of Acacius, incurred by the refusal to ac- 
knowledge the Metropolitan jurisdiction of the See of Caesarea. The deposition was confirmed 
by Constantius, and followed by a sentence of banishment. The place of Cyril’s exile is not 
mentioned, nor is it known whether he joined in the protest of the other deposed Bishops, 
described by S. Basil, Z fist. 75. His banishment was not of longer continuance than two 
years. Constantius died on the 3rd of November, 361, and the accession of Julian was soon 

he 1 9 Athan. de Soa. § 30, where this Creed is given in full. 1S, Hilar. ii. Num. 703. 
A leeks B ich Che: Dioes. 4 De Synodts, § 41. 5 The Arian Controversy, p. 135. 

wil, AAvst. 244. Compare Newman, P70 ace to Catechetical Lectures, p. iv. 

BIE Ol os CENT, 1X 
followed by the recall of all the exiled Bishops, orthodox and heretical, and the restoration 
of their confiscated estates7. Julian’s object, according to Socrates, was “to brand the 
memory of Constantius by making him appear to have been cruel towards his subjects.” An 
equally amiable motive imputed to him is mentioned by Sozomen: “It is said that he issued 
this order in their behalf not out of mercy, but that through contention among themselves 
the Church might be involved in fraternal strife ®.” Cyril, returning with the other Bishops, 
seems to have passed through Antioch on his way home, and to have been well received by 
the excellent Bishop Meletius. 

It happened that the son of a heathen priest attached to the Emperor’s Court, having 
been instructed in his youth by a Deaconess whom he visited with his mother, had secretly 
become a Christian. On discovering this, his father had cruelly scourged and burnt him with 
hot spits on his hands, and feet, and back. He contrived to escape, and took refuge with 
his friend the Deaconess. “She dressed me in women’s garments, and took me in her 
covered carriage to the divine Meletius. He handed me over to the Bishop of Jerusalem, 
at that time Cyril, and we started by night for Palestine.’ After the death of Julian, this 
young man led his father also into the way of truth. This act he told me with the rest 9.” 

The next incident recorded in the life of S. Cyril is his alleged prediction of the failure of 
Julian’s attempt to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem. “The vain and ambitious mind of 
Julian,” says Gibbon, “might aspire to restore the ancient glory of the Temple of Jerusalem. 
As the Christians were firmly persuaded that a sentence of everlasting destruction had been 
pronounced against the whole fabric of the Mosaic law, the Imperial sophist would have 
converted the success of his undertaking into a specious argument against the faith of 
prophecy and the truth of revelation.” Again he writes: “The Christians entertained 
a natural and pious expectation, that in this memorable contest, the honour of religion 
would be vindicated by some signal miracle.” That such an expectation may have been 
shared by Cyril is not impossible : but there is no satisfactory evidence that he ventured to 
foretell any miraculous interposition. According to the account of Rufinus’, “lime and 
cement had been brought, and all was ready for destroying the old foundations and laying 
new on the next day. But Cyril remained undismayed, and after careful consideration either 
of what he had read in Daniel’s prophecy concerning the ‘times,’ or of our Lord’s predictions 
in the Gospels, persisted that it was impossible that one stone should ever there be laid upon 
another by the Jews.” This account of Cyril’s expectation, though probable enough in itself, 
seems to be little more than a conjecture founded on his statement (Cat. xv. 15), that 
“ Antichrist will come at the time when there shall not be left one stone upon another 
in the Temple of the Jews.” That doom was not completed in Cyril’s time, nor did 
he expect it to be fulfilled until the coming of the Jewish Antichrist, who was to restore 
the Temple shortly before the end of the world. It was impossible for Cyril to see in Julian 
such an Antichrist as he has described; and therefore, without any gift or pretence of 
prophecy, he might very well express a firm conviction that the attempted restoration at that 
time must fail, ‘Though Gibbon is even more cynical and contemptuous than usual in his 
examination of the alleged miracles, he does not attempt to deny the main facts of the storys: 
with their miraculous character we are not here concerned, but only with Cyril’s conduct 
on so remarkable an occasion, 

In the same year, A.D. 363, Julian was killed in his Persian campaign on the 26th of 
June, and was succeeded by Jovian, whose universal tolerance, and personal profession 
of the Nicene faith, though discredited by the looseness of his morals, gave an interval 

7 SoC LA a tile Le 8 Sozom. //.Z. v. c. 5. Compare Gibbon, Ch. xxiii. ‘Phe impartial Ammianus has ascribed this 
affected clemency to the desire of fomenting the intestine divisions of the Church.” 9 Theodoret, //./. ili. 10. 
1 Gibbon, c. xxiii. 2 LL istele 37 3 See Gibbon’s remarks on the testimony of Ammianus, ‘a contemporary and 

a Pagan,’ and on the explanation from natural causes suggested by Michaelis. 

¥ INTRODUCTION. 
of comparative ret to the Church. In his reign Athanasius was recalled, and Acacius 
and his friends subseribed the Nicene Creed, with an explanation of the sense in which 
they accepted the word djeotowr4, As Cyril’s name is not mentioned in any of the records 
of Jovian’s short reign of seven months, we may infer that he dwelt in peace at Jerusalem. 

Jovian died on the 17th of February, 364, and was succeeded by Valentinian, who in the 
following March gave over the Eastern provinces of the Empire to his brother Valens. 
During the first two years of the new reign we hear nothing of Cyril: but at the beginning of 
the year 366, on the death of his old enemy Acacius, Cyril assumed the right to nominate his 
successor in the See of Czasarea, and appointed a certain Philumenus 5 Whether this 
assumption of authority was in accordance with the 7th Canon of Niczea may be doubted: 
Cyril's choice of his nephew was, however, in after times abundantly justified by the conduct 
and character of Gelasius, who is described by Theodoret as a man ‘distinguished by the 
purity of his doctrine, and the sanctity of his life,” and is quoted by the same historian as 
“the admirable,” and “the blessed Gelasius °.” 

Epiphanius relates7 that “after these three had been set up, and could do nothing on 
account of mutual contentions,” Euzeius was appointed by the Arians, and held the See until 
the accession of Theodosius in A.p. 379, when he was deposed, and Gelasius restored. In the 
meantime Cyril had been a third time deposed and driven from Jerusalem, probably in the 
year 367. For at that time Valens, who had fallen under the influence of Eudoxius, the Arian 
Bishop of Constantinople, by whom he was baptized, “wrote to the Governors of the provinces, 
commanding that all Bishops who had been banished by Constantius, and had again assumed 
their sacerdotal offices under the Emperor Julian, should be ejected from their Churches *.” 
Of this third and longest banishment we have no particulars, but we may safely apply to it the 
words of the Synod at Constantinople, 382, that Cyril “had passed through very many contests 
with the Arians in various places.” 

The terrible defeat and miserable death of Valens in the great battle against the Goths at 
Adrianople (A.b. 378) brought a respite to the defenders of the Nicene doctrine. For Gratian 
‘disapproved of the late persecution that had been carried on for the purpose of checking the 
diversities in religious Creeds, and recalled all those who had been banished on account of 
their religion 9.” Gratian associated Theodosius with himself in the Empire on the roth of 
January, 3793; and ‘at this period,” says Sozomen’, “all the Churches of the East, with 
the exception of that of Jerusalem, were in the hands of the Arians.” Cyril, therefore, had 
been one of the first to return to his own See. During his long absence the Church of 
Jerusalem had been the prey both of Arianism and of the new heresy of Apollinarius, which 
had spread among the monks who were settled on Mount Olivet. Egyptian Bishops, banished 
for their orthodoxy, having taken refuge in Palestine, there found themselves excluded from 
communion, Jerusalem was given over to heresy and schism, to the violent strife of rival 
factions, and to extreme licentiousness of morals. 

Gregory of Nyssa, who had been commissioned by a Council held at Antioch in 378 to 
visit the Churches in Arabia and Palestine, “ because matters with them were in confusion, and 
needed an arbiter,” gives a mournful account both of the distracted state of the Church, and 
of the prevailing corruption. “If the Divine grace were more abundant about Jerusalem 
than elsewhere, sin would not be so much the fashion among those who live there ; but as it 
is, there is no form of uncleanness that is not perpetrated among them ; rascality, adultery, 
theft, idolatry, poisoning, quarrelling, murder, are rife.” In a letter? written after his return 

4 Sdcr. i. 25 * Sea. 4. 5 Lyaiphanius, 77eco. oe SF. S. JT iste Teel Nao Davee enile 

¥ J1Bres. INR. & 47. ® Sozom. vie rz. Cf, Tillemont, Alémoéres, Tom. viii. p. 357: ‘‘As Cyril was, no doubt, then per- 
secuted only on account of his firmness in the true Faith, the title of Confessor cannot be refused to him.” 

7 Sox Mileds Pb, 2 Greg. Nyss. E/is¢. xvii. in this Series. 

ee Oa Sy) SG ees, xi 

to Cxsarea in Cappadocia he asks, “ What means this opposing array of new Altars? Do we 
announce another Jesus? Do we produce other Scriptures? Have any of ourselves dared 
to say “ Mother of Man” of the Holy Virgin, the Mother of God? 

In the year a.p. 381 Theodosius summoned the Bishops of his division of the Empire to 
meet in Council at Constantinople, in order to settle the disputes by which the [astern 
Church had been so long distracted, and to secure the triumph of the Nicene Faith over the 
various forms of heresy which had arisen in the half-century which had elapsed since the first 
General Council. Among the Bishops present were Cyril of Jerusalem, and his nephew 
Gelasius, who on the death of Valens had regained possession of the See of Cesarea from the 
Arian intruder Euzoius. Cyril is described by Sozomen3 as one of three recognised 
leaders of the orthodox party, and, according to Bishop Hefele+, as sharing the presidency 
with the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch. ‘This latter point, however, is not clearly 
expressed in the statement of Sozomen. Socrates writes that Cyril at this time recognised the 
doctrine of épno0vev0r, having retracted his former opinion: and Sozomen says that he had at 
this period renounced the tenets of the Macedonians which he previously held’. ‘Touttcée 
rightly rejects these reproaches as unfounded: they are certainly opposed to all his teaching 
in the Catechetical Lectures, where the doctrine of Christ’s unity of essence with the Father 
is fully and frequently asserted, though the term dépoovcvos is not used, and the co-equal Deity 
of the Holy Ghost is everywhere maintained. 

We find no further mention of Cyril in the proceedings of the Council itself. As 
consisting of Eastern Bishops only, its authority was not at first acknowledged, nor its 
acts approved in the Western Church. The two Synods held later in the same year 
at Aquileia and at Milan, sent formal protests to Theodosius, and urged him to summon 
a General Council at Alexandria or at Rome. But instead of complying with this request, 
the Emperor summoned the Bishops of his Empire to a fresh Synod at Constantinople ; and 
there in the summer of 382 very nearly the same Bishops were assembled who had been 
present at the Council of the preceding year. Their Synodical letter addressed to the Bishops 
assembled at Rome is preserved by Theodoret®, and in it we read as follows: “Of the 
Church in Jerusalem, the Mother of all the Churches, we make known that Cyril the most 
reverend and most beloved of God is Bishop; and that he was canonically ordained long 
ago by the Bishops of the province, and that he has very often fought a good fight in various 
places against the Arians.” ‘Thus justice was done at last to one whose prudence, modera- 
tion, and love of peace, had exposed him in those days of bitter controversy to undeserved 
suspicion and relentless persecution. His justification by the Council is the last recorded 
incident in Cyril’s life. We are told by Jerome that he held undisturbed possession of his 
See for eight years under ‘Theodosius. ‘The eighth year of Theodosius was A.D. 386, and 
in the Roman Martyrology, the 18th of March in that year is marked as “ ‘The birthday 
(‘Natalis,’ ie. of his heavenly life) of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, who after suffering many 
wrongs from the Arians for the sake of the Faith, and having been several times driven 
from his See, became at length renowned for the glory of sanctity, and rested in peace: 
an Ecumenical Council in a letter to Damasus gave a noble testimony to his untarnished 
faith.” 

CHAPTER II. 
CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION. 

§ 1. Catechesis. The term “Catechesis” in its widest sense includes instruction by word 
of mouth on any subject sacred or profane ?, but is especially applied to Christian teaching, 

Se LLeLe eT 4 Councils, ii. 344. 5/Socnnt: v.83 Sogn Vik 7. eat say See Amo 
t Acts xviii. 253 xxi. 21, 243 Rom. ii. 18; Gal. vi. 6. Cf. Clem. Alex. Prag. § 28: ovK Come morevoa AVEV KATNXNTEWS. 

si INTRODUCTION. 

whether 6f an elementary hind appropriate to new Converts, 0%; a5 in the famous Catechetical 
School of Alexandria, extending to the higher interpretation of Moly Scripture, and the 
exposition of Christian philosophy. 

The earliest known example of a Catechetical work is the “ Teaching of the Twelve 
Aposiies,” which Athanasius names among the “books not included in the Canon, but 
appointed by the Fathers to be read by those who are just recently coming to us, and 
wish to be instructed in the word of godliness (KarnyetoOae Tor ris evtaeBelas Adyor) 7.” This 
ase of the Didache for the instruction of recent converts from Paganism agrees with 
its original purpose as stated in the longer title, “ Zeaching of the Lord through the Tree’ 
Apostles for the Gentiles.” The first six chapters are evidently adapted for those who need 
elementary instruction, more particularly for Catechumens of Gentile descent, as distinct 
from Jewish candidates for Baptism’. The remaining chapters of the Didaché relate 
chicily to the administration of Baptism, to Prayer, Fasting, and the services of the Lord’s 
Day, and to the celebration of the Agape and Eucharist +. This same division of subjects 
‘s observed in the two classes of S. Cyril’s Catechetical Lectures: the first class, including 
the Procatechesis, consists of NIX Lectures addressed to candidates for Baptism, and these 

iwouic” Lectures, so called as being explanations of the Sacra- 
mental Mysteries to the newly-baptized. 

The Didaché was taken as the basis of other manuals of instruction, as is evident from 
the fact that the greater part of the first six chapters is imbedded in “The Apostolical 
Church Order,” supposed to date from Egypt in the third century. The Greek text, with an 
English translation, of the part corresponding with the Didaché, is given in “The oldest 

are followed by five ‘ Myst 

Church Manual” as Document V. 

A further development of the Didaché, “adapted to the state of the Eastern Church in 
the first half of the fourth century,” is contained in the Seventh Book of the Apostolical 
Constitutions of Pseudo-Clement of Rome, chs. i.-xxxii. “ Here the Didaché is embodied 
almost word for word, but with significant omissions, alterations, and additions, which betray 
a later age.... The Didaché was thus superseded by a more complete and timely Church 
Manual, and disappeared.” Dr. Schaff has appended this document also to his edition of the 
Didaché, noting the borrowed passages on the margin, and distinguishing them by spaced 
type in the Greek text, and by italics in the English translation. 

In this work the directions concerning the instruction of Catechumens and their Baptism 
are addressed to the Catechist and the Minister of Baptism, They contain only a short out- 
line (c. xxxix.) of the subjects in which the Catechumens are to be instructed, most if not all 
of which are explained at large in Cyril’s Lectures : and in the directions concerning Baptism, 
Chrism, and the Eucharist, the similarity is so close, that in many passages of the Constitu- 
tions the author seems to be referring especially to the use of the Church of Jerusalem. 

From this close affinity with earlier works we may be assured that in the Catecheses of 
Cyril we have trustworthy evidence of the great care which the Church had from the, 
le inning bestowed on the instruction and training of converts, before admitting them to the 
privilege of Baptism ; but beyond this, Cyril’s own work has a peculiar value as the earliest 
extant example of a full, systematic, and continuous course of such instruction. 

$2. Catechist. ‘The duty of catechizing was not limited to a class of persons permanently 
set apart for that purpose, but all orders of the Clergy were accustomed to take part in the 
work. Even laymen were encouraged to teach children or new converts the first elements of 
religion, as we learn from Cyril’s exhortation: ‘‘If thou hast a child according to the flesh, 
admonish him of this now; and if thou hast begotten one through catechising, put him also on 

t Hifist, soe 0 are Clem. Alex. Strom. Vic. x. $67. Vadu per ) Katy W775 OLOVEL TPWTH PuXYs TpoPy voyOyaerat, 
3 Schaff, Oldest Church Manual, p. 15. 4 Ib. p. 26, 

ane Aste he eho. bss y Rote PCN: Nill 

his guards.” That this remark was addressed not to the Catechumens, but to such of the 
Faithful as happened to be present among his audience, appears from what he says elsewhere, 
“So thou likewise, though not daring before thy Baptism to wrestle with the adversaries, yet 
after thou hast received the grace, and art henceforth confident in ¢e armour of righteousness, 
must then do battle, and preach the Gospel, if thou wilt °” 

The more systematic instruction of those who had been already admitted to the order of 
Catechumens was entrusted to persons appointed to this special duty. ‘Thus Origen “ was in 
his eighteenth year when he took charge of the Catechetical School at Alexandria,” which 
“was entrusted to him alone by Demetrius, who presided over the Church7:” and S, Au- 
custine’s Treatise, De Catechisandis Rudibus, was addressed to Deogratias, who being a Deacon 
at Carthage, and highly esteemed for his skill and success as a Catechist, felt so strongly the 
importance of the work and his own insufficiency, that he wrote to Augustine for advice as to 
the best method of instructing those who were brought to him to be taught the first elements 
of the Christian Faith. 

The final training of the dorcgsuevor, or candidates for Baptism, was undertaken in part by 
the Bishop himself, but chiefly by a Priest specially appointed by him. Of the part taken by 
the Bishop mention is made by S. Ambrose in a letter to his sister Marcellina (Z7f. xx.) : “*On 
the following day, which was the Lord’s day, after the Lessons and Sermon, the Catechumens 
had been dismissed, and I was delivering the Creed to some candidates (Competentes) in the 
Baptistery of the Basilica.” 

Of this “ delivery of the Creed,” which was usually done by a Presbyter, we have examples 
in S. Augustine’s Sermons Zn ¢raditione Symbolt, ccxii.—ccxiv., each of which contains a brief 
recapitulation and explanation of the several articles of belief. In Serm. ccxiv., after a short 
introduction, we find the following note inserted by the preacher himself. [After this preface the 
whole Creed ts to be rectted, without tnterposing any discussion. ‘I BELIEVE IN GOD THE FATHER 
Aruicury, and the rest that follows. Which Creed, thou knowest, is not wont to be written: 
after it has been said, the following discussion (ds/utatio) is to be added.” | 

From the opening words of Sermon ccxiv., and of ccxvi., “ad Competentes,” it is evident 
that these were delivered by S. Augustine as the first-fruits of his ministry very soon after he 
had been reluctantly ordained Priest (A.D. 391). ‘Two other examples of addresses to Can- 
didates for Baptism are the Cuvecheses I., I1., apis rods péddorras poritera, delivered at Antioch 
by 8S. Chrysostom while a Presbyter. 

Another duty often undertaken by the Bishop was to hear each Candidate separately 
recite the Creed, and then to expound to them all the Lord’s Prayer ®. 

§ 3. Catechumens. ‘The term Catechumen denoted a person who was receiving in- 
struction in the Christian religion with a view to being in due time baptized. Such persons 
were either converts from Paganism and Judaism, or children of Christian parents whose 
Baptism had been deferred. For though the practice of Infant-Baptism was certainly common 
in the Early Church’, it was not compulsory nor invariable. “In many cases Christian 
parents may have shared and acted on the opinion expressed by Tertullian in the second 
century, and by Gregory Nazianzen in the fourth, and thought it well to defer the Baptism of 
children, cases of grave sickness excepted, till they were able to make answer in their own 

27) 

name to the interrogations of the baptismal rite *. 

SC. Mv. Bet § Catvart. x33 # Wisebi ZL Ni. ae | 2 Dict. Chr. Antig. “ Paptism,” § ror. Tertull. De Paplisiz, 
8S, August. Servz. lviii. et cexv. c. xviii. “And so, according to the circumstances, and disposi- 
x Cf, Tren. IL. c. xxii. § 4: ‘*Omnes enim venit per semet | tion, and even age of cach individual, the delay of Baptism is 
ipsum salvare ; omnes, inquam, qui per eum vexascunturin Deum, | preferable; principally, however, in the case of little children.’ 
infantes, et parvulos, et pucros, et juvenes, et seniores. Cf. Concil. | Cf. Gregor. Naz. Orat. 4o De Baftismo, quoted by Bingham, 
Carthag. ili. Epist, Synod. (Cypriani ZZ. lix. vel Ixiv. Routh. | xi. c. 4, § 13. 
Tass Wile p..08y) 

TN ICC eas, 

It is stated by Binghain3, but without any reference to ancient ease that “the children 
of beleving parents, as they were baptized in ie EE were sean Catechumens as soon as 
they were capable of learning.” ‘Though the title ‘ Catechumen | was not usually applied to 
those who had been already baptized, it is probable that such children were admitted to the 
Lectures addressed to Catechumens both in the carler and later stage of their preparation : 
for it seems to be implied in the passage quoted above from Caé, xv. 18, that admission was 

} 

not limited to the candidates for Baptism. - 

To believe and to be baptized are the two essential conditions of membership in Christ’s 
Church 4: but for the admission of new converts to the class of Catechumens nothing more 
could be required than evidence of a sincere desire to understand, to believe, and ultimately 
to be baptized. ; 

We know that unbelievers, Jews, and Heathens were allowed in the Apostolic age to be 
present at times in the Christian assemblies 5 ; and in Cyril's days wey stood in the lower 
part of the Church (vdpéné) to hear the Psalms, Lessons, and Sermon °. 

Any persons who by thus hearing the word, or by other means, were brought to believe mn 
the truth of Christianity, and to wish for further instruction, were strictly examined as to thcir 
character, belief, and sincerity of purpose. ‘The care with which such examinations were con- 
ducted is thus described by Origen: “'The Christians, however, having previously, so far as 
possible, tested the souls of those who wish to become their hearers, and having previously 
admonished them in private, when they seem, before entering the community, to have made 
sufficient progress in the desire to Icad a virtuous life, they then introduce them, having 
privately formed one class of those who are just beginners, and are being introduced, and 
have not yet received the mark of complete purification; and another of those who have 
manifested to the best of their ability the purpose of desiring no other things than are approved 
by Christians 7.” Such as were thus found worthy of admission were brought to the Bishop or 
Presbyter, and received by the sign of the Cross *, with prayer and imposition of hands, to the 
status of Catechumens. 

We have a description by Eusebius 9 of some of these ceremonies in the case of Con- 
stantine: When the Emperor felt his life to be drawing to a close, “he poured forth his 
supplications and confessions to God, knecling on the pavement in the Church itself, in 
which he also now for the first time received the imposition of hands with prayer.” Soon 
after this the Bishops whom he had summoned to Nicomedia to give him Baptism, “ performed 
the sacred ceremonies in the usual manner, and having given him the necessary instructions 
made him a partaker of the mystic ordinances.” 

Another ceremony used in the admission of Catechumens, at least in some Churches, is 
mentioned by S. Augustine’: Sanctification is not of one kind only: for I suppose that 
Catechumens also are sanctified in a certain way of their own by the sign of Christ’s Cross, 
and the Prayer of the Imposition of Hands; and that which they receive, though it be not 
the Body of Christ, is yet an holy thing, and more holy than the common food which sustains 
us, because it 1s a sacrament.” From this passage it has been inferred that consecrated bread 

a Anity. Xi 84. 

4 Murk xvi. 26; Acts xviii. 8, $4 Vor =v, aa. 

them be examined as to the causes wherefore they come to the 
word of the Lord, and let those who bring them inquire exactly 
I postolie Constitutions, VIII. i. § 5: “ And after the reading | about their character, and give them their testimony. Let their 
of the Law and the Prophets, and our Epistles, and Acts, and | manners and their life be inquired into, and whether they be slaves 
Gospels, let him that is ordained... speak to the people the | or free,’ &c. 

word of exhortation, and when he has ended his discourse of 8S. Aug. De Symbolo, Serm, ad Catechumenos, § 1: “Ye 
doctrine, all standing up, let the Deacon ascend upon some high , have not yet been born again by holy Baptism, but by the sign of 
seat, and preclaim, Let none of the hearers, let none of the zz. ! 

G6 

the Cross ye have been already conceived in the womb of your 
Cclievers stay: and silence being made, let hin say, Ye Caze-) mother the Church.” 
chumens, pray, and let all the “artiful pray for them.” | D Firm Cate. iV. C, G0, 

7 Contra Celsum, ili. c. 51. Cf. Const. clfost. vii. 32: “Let | 1 De Peccatorim meritis, ii, 42. 

eRe ep hve PN eh EON, XV 

(evroylar, Pants benedictus), taken out of the oblations provided for the Eucharist, was given to 
the Catechumens,—an opinion which seemed to have some support in the comparison between 
“that which the Catechumens receive,” and “the food which sustains us.” But Bingham 
maintains ? that S. Augustine here refers only to the symbolical use of salt, of which he says in 
his Confessions, I, xi., that while yet a boy he “used to be marked with the sign of His Cross, 
and seasoned with His salt.” ‘The meaning of this so-called “Sacrament of the Catechumens” 
was that by the symbol of salt “they might learn to purge and cleanse their souls from 
cing 

In the African Church in the time of S. Augustine it was customary to anoint the new 
convert with exorcised oil at the time of his admission, but in the Eastern Church there seems 
to have been no such anointing until immediately before Baptism. 

Persons who had been thus admitted to the class of Catechumens were usually regarded as 
Christians, but only in a lower degree, being still clearly distinguished from the [aithful. 
* Ask a man, Art thou a Christian ? If he is a Pagan ora Jew, he answers, Iam not. But if 
he say, Iam, you ask him further, Catechumen or Faithful? If he answer, Catechumen, he 
has been anointed, but not yet baptized 3.” Augustine, like Tertullian, complains that among 
heretics there was no sure distinction between the Catechumen and the Faithful+: and 
according to the second General Council, Cavon 7, converts from certain heresies to the 
orthodox Faith were to be received only as heathen: ‘On the first day we make them 
Christians, on the second Catechumens, on the third we exorcise them by three times breath- 
ing on them on the face and on the ears; and so we instruct them (xarnyodper), and make 
them frequent the Church for a long time, and listen to the Holy Scriptures, and then we 
baptize them.” 

Whether Cyril calls his hearers Christians before they had been baptized is not very clear : 
in Cat. x. $16, he seems to include them among those who are called by the “new name ;” 
but in § 20 of the same Lecture he assumes that there may be present some one who “ was 
before a believer (morés),” and to him he says “‘ Thou wert called a Christian ; be tender of 
the name;” and in Lect. xxi. 1, speaking to those who had now been baptized, he says, 
“Having therefore become partakers of Christ, ye are properly called Christs. Now ye have 
been made Christs by receiving the antitype of the Holy Ghost,” that is, Chrism. 

§ 4. Candidates for Baptism. Bingham, who himself makes four classes or degrees of 
Catechumens, acknowledges that “the Greek expositors of the ancient Canons,” and other 
writers, ‘‘ usually make but two sorts %.” These were (1) the ¢mperfect (dredéarepor), Called also 
hearers (axpodpevot, audientes), because in Church they were only allowed to remain till the 
Holy Scriptures had been read, the Sermon preached, the special prayers of the Cate- 
chumens said, and the blessing given to each by the Bishop in the words of the ‘prayer of 
the imposition of hands °” After this the Deacon says, ‘‘ Go out, ye Catechumens, in peace.” 
(2) After the Energumens also have been dismissed, the more perfect (redevdrepot, Poresspevor) remain 
on their knees in prayer (yovushivovtes, edxépevor). Then the Deacon is to cry aloud, “ Ye that 
are to be illuminated, pray. Let us the faithful all pray for them, And being sealed to God 
through His Christ, let them bow down their heads, and receive the blessing from the 
Bishop.” The “ Prayer of the Imposition of hands” is then pronounced over them by the 
Bishop. 

The period of probation and instruction varied at different times and places: according to 
Canon 42 of the Synod of Elvira, 305, it was to be two years: “ He who has a good name, 

2 Antig. X. il. § 16. 3S. August. Jz Joh. Evang. Tract. xliv. § 2. 
4 Sern. xlvi. de Pastoribus, c. 131 Tertull. de Prescriptione Maret. c. 40: “Imprimis quis Catechumenus, quis Fidelis, in 
certum est.” 5 Ant, X. il. 1—3. The Council of Nicza, Canon xiv., seems to speak only of two classes, 

© Const. Apost. viii. § 6. 

NVI INTROS TION 

and wishes to become a bneein. must os a Saiechigven two years: Mee ee may be 
baptized 7.” After this probation had been satisfactorily passed, the Catechumens were 
invited to give in their names as Candidates for Baptism. This invitation, described by 
Cyril as a call to military service (KAjots otparelas) °, appears to have been often repeated on 
the approach of Lent. ‘Thus S. Ambrose, in his Commentary on S. Luke, v. 53; We have 
toiled all night and have taken nothing, complains, “1 too, Lord, know that for me it is night, 
when T have not Thy command. No one yet has given his name: with my voice I have cast 
the net throughout Id pe any, and as yet I have taken nothing.” 

This preliminary “call to service” must be distinguished from the actual enlistment in 
the Christian army at Baptism, in anticipation of which Cyril prays for his hearers that God 
“may enlist them in His service, and put on them the armour of righteousness 2.” The same 
metaphorical language in reference to the Christian warfare recurs in many passages *. 

The next step for those who responded to the call was the registration of names 
(Svoparoypapia)?. It appears from passages of Dionysius Pseudo-Areopagites, quoted by 
Bingham 3, that the Bishop, after laying his hand on each Catechumen’s head, commanded 
his Presbyters and Deacons to register his name, together with that of his sponsor (dvadSoxos) 
in the Diptychs of the living. This ceremony took place at Jerusalem at the beginning 
of Lent, as we learn from /vocat.§ 1: ‘Thou hast entered, been approved; thy name 
inscribed. . . . A long notice is allowed thee; thou hast forty days for repentance.” 
Those who had been admitted as candidates for Baptism were in most Churches still 
reckoned among the Catechumens, being distinguished as ovvarroivres, “ competentes.” But 
from Cyril’s language in several passages it appears that in the Church of Jerusalem 
they ceased to be regarded as Catechumens, and were reckoned among the Faithful. “Thou 
wert called a Catechumen, while the word echoed round thee from without. Think not that 
thou receivest a small thing: though a miserable man, thou receivest one of God’s titles. 
Hear S. Paul saying, God is faithful. But beware, lest thou have the title of ‘fazthfil,’ but 
the will of the faithless4.” “Thou receivest a new name which thou hadst not before. 
Heretofore thou wast a Catechumen, but now thou wilt be called a Believer (Morés) 5.” 

Again, “ How great a dignity the Lord bestows on you in transferring you from the order 
of Catechumens to that of the Faithful, the Apostle Paul shews, when he affirms, God 7s 
Jaithful®” 

Two passages in S. Cyril have been thought to imply that the newly-admitted Candidates 
for Baptism carried lighted torches in procession, perhaps on the first Sunday after the 
registration. He speaks of their having received ‘torches of the bridal procession? ;” 
and on this expression the Benedictine Editor observes that ‘‘Wax tapers” were perhaps 
given to the “/wninandi to carry, a custom which may also be indicated in the words, 
“Ve who have lately lighted the torches of faith, guard them carefully in your hands 
unquenched 8,” 

Others are of opinion that the custom of carrying torches or tapers was observed only 
in the procession of the newly-baptized from the Baptistery to the Church 9, and that here 
Cyril means by the “bridal lamps,” those motions of the Holy Ghost, and spiritual instruc- 
tions, which had lighted their way to Christ, and to the entrance to His Kingdom’, This 
latter interpretation is rather vague and far-fetched, and it is evident that the words, “ Ye who 
have lately lighted the torches of faith,” gain much in clearness and force, if suggested by the 
visible symbolism of a ceremony in which the Z/wminandi had just borne their part. ‘The 

7 Hefele, Councils, i. p. 155. Const. Afost. viii. 32: ‘ Let him that is to be instructed be a catechumen three years.” 

©. Pyésat: $1. Obs 5 29s h See Cats 1. Soi Spa Te eo) eevalacgoe Bo, a. 2 Procat. § 1. 3717705 OX..11219-0, 
4 Procat. § 6. 8 Cat. dad: © iy We Bh 7 Aapr ides vunpaywylas, Procat, § 1. 3. Catan Sins 
9 Bingham, An?. X. it. § 15. 10° Dich. GUPNIT. N Ol, Tis hogs, aietes 

CATECHETICAL INSTRUCTION. XVil 

lighted torches would be a significant symbol both of the marriage of the soul with Christ, 
and of its enlightenment by faith. 

$5. Paricénevo. In the first words of his Introductory Lecture Cyril addresses his 
hearers as of hortspevor, “Ye who are being enlightened,” and from the Titles of the 
Catechetical Lectures i.-xvili., we see that this name was constantly used to distinguish 
the candidates preparing for immediate Baptism. 

The Verb darite is frequently used by the ILXX., both in a physical and in a spiritual 
sense. In the New Testament it is found but rarely in the physical sense ', being gencrally 
applied to the light of spiritual truth, and to Christ as its source 2. 

In two passages of the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Aorist (pori@évras) marks “the decisive 
moment when the light was apprehended in its glory 3,” from which the thought easily passes 
on to the public profession of the truth thus received, that is, to Baptism. 

That the word began very carly to be used in this new sense, is evident from Justin 
Martyr’s explanation of it in his Ars¢ Apology, c. 61; where, after speaking of instruction in 
Christian doctrine, of the profession of faith, and the promise of repentance and holy living, 
as the necessary preparations for Baptism, he thus proceeds: “ And this washing is called 
Mlumination (deriepds), because they who learn these things are illuminated in their under. 
standing 4.” The same transition of the meaning from instruction to Baptism is clearly 
implied by Clement of Alexandria: “ Among the barbarian philosophers also to instruct and 
to enlighten is called to regenerate5;” and again: ‘‘ For this reason the teaching, which 
made manifest the hidden things, has been called illumination (partiopds) °.” 

That this is the sense in which Cyril uses the word is placed beyond doubt by a passage 
of the Lecture delivered immediately before the administration of Baptism: ‘“ that your soul 
being previously tluminated (zpoportConérns) by the word of doctrine, ye may in each particular 
discover the greatness of the gifts bestowed on you by God?.,” 

We thus see that the Present Participle (horifdpnevor) describes a process of gradual illumi- 
nation during the course of instruction, to be completed in Baptism, a sense which is well 
expressed in the Latin Gerundive “ Illuminandi.” And as we have seen that the candidates 
are addressed as of poriféuevoe even before the course of instruction has commenced, the quasi- 
Future sense “ follows necessarily from the context 8.” 

The spiritual “ Hlumination,” of which Baptism was to be the completion and the seal, 
thus became by a natural development one of the recognised names of Baptism itself. On 
the contrary, the inverse process assumed by the Benedictine Editor is entirely unnatural. 
Starting from the later ecclesiastical use of porifo and deriopds as connoting Baptism, he 
supposes that this was the first application of those terms, and that they were transferred 
to the previous illumination acquired by instruction in Christian truth, only because this was 
@ necessary preparation for Baptism. He therefore maintains that deoritspevor throughout the 
Catechetical Lectures is another term for Barri¢suevoe: and as a decisive proof of this he refers 
to Cat. xvi. 26: péddee b€ kai ert o€ rap Banregopevoy POavey 7 xapts, NOt Observing that the grace 
is to come upon “the person being baptized” at a time still future. This meaning of 
the passage is made absolutely certain by the words which immediately follow,—“ But 
in what manner I say not, for I will not anticipate the proper season.” We may conclude, 
therefore, that in Cyril’s Lectures the term of foriCspevoe refers to the preparatory course 
of enlightenment rather than to Baptism. At the same time we must remember that in Cyril’s 
day, and long before, dorigo, Potions, and foricpa were constantly used to denote Baptism 

tT Luke xi. 36; Apoc. xviii. r. 2 Joh. i. 93 1 Cor. iv. 5; 2 Cor. iv. 4,6; Eph. i. 18; iii. g ; 2 Tim. i. 103 Apoc. xxi. 233 xxii. 5. 
3 Westcott, “‘ /7ebrews,” vi. 43 x. 32. 4 ws hutigounevar riv Sidvoiay Tay TavTa pavOavovtTwr. De 7OU te NCoa,, § 758 
TO KATHXHTaL Te Kai hwriga avayevvHoat AE €TAL, CW ertii Wee tS Ose. Ge Vird: WilacS 40, 7 Cat. xviii. § 32, 
nXn 94 ui Y 305 y 46 a 

8 Cf. Winer, Grammar of N.T. Greek, Sect xl. 22, note 3. 

MAG) Br Dad OE Cc 

er Aa INTRODUCTION. 

itself, as being the time of special iWumination by the grace of the Holy Spint then given. 
‘Thus Clement of Alexandtia awites: “tn Baptism we are illuminated. .. . This work 1s 
variously called grace, and Humination (dérecpay, and perfection, and washing: . . . illumi 
nation, by which that holy light of salvation is beheld, that is, by which we see God clearly?” 
Gregory Nazianzen speaks in the same way: “We call it gift, grace, baptism, chrism, 
‘tunination, garment of incorruption, washing of regeneration, sca, all that is precious 7°.” 

CHAPTER IIL 
Sprcrat PREPARATION FOR BAPTISM. 

§ 1. Penitence. The candidate for Baptism, having been duly admitted and registered, was 
required not only to be diligent in attending the course of Catechetical instruction ', but also 
to enter at once upon a course of strict devotion and penitential discipline. “ Those who are 
coming to Baptism,” says Tertullian, “must be constantly engaged in prayers, fastings, knecl- 
ings, and watchings, together with confession of all past faults *.” 

On these subjects Cyril’s teaching is earnest, wise, and sympathetic : he secks to lead to 
repentance by gentle persuasion, and pleads for self-discipline as needful for the good of the 
soul3. One whole Lecture is devoted to the necessity of thorough repentance for all past 
sins, and forgiveness of all offences#; another to the sure efficacy of repentance for the 
remission of sins 5. 
$2. Confession. ?E€opoddynats. Great stress is laid by Cyril on the necessity not only of 
sincere inward repentance, but also of open confession. ‘The words efoporoyeto@at, €Eopoddynocs 
have a twofold meaning and a wide application. 

(1.) In the Septuagint they occur very frequently, especially in the Psalms, in the sense of 
“ olying thanks or praise” (Heb, M77) %, a meaning which is also found in the New Testa- 
ment7, Perhaps the earliest instance in an Ecclesiastical writer is in Hermas, AZandat. X. 
iil, 2: eopoNoyotpevos TG OG. IT have not found any instance of this meaning in Cyril. 

S. Chrysostom, commenting on the words, “J will give thanks unto Thee, O Lord®,” says, 
“There are two kinds of exomologesis ; for it is either a condemnation of our own sins, or 
a giving of thanks to God.” The link between these two ideas is seen in Joshua’s exhortation 
to Achan, JZ son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lory, the God of Israel, and make confession 9 
unto Him. R.V. Margin. Or, gzve praise. 

(2.) In the sense of “confessing” sins, the Verb is not uncommon in the N. T,*, and in 
the early Fathers ?. Tertullian adopts the Greek word, and calls exomologests “the handmaid 
of repentance 3,” adding that it will extinguish the fire of Gehenna in the heart, being a second 
remedy for sin, after Baptism. 

Again, speaking of the outward act of repentance, he says: “This act, which is more usually 
expressed and commonly spoken of under a Greek name, is ¢£ouoddynats, whereby we confess our 
cins to the Lord, not indeed as if He were ignorant of them, but inasmuch as by confession 
satisfaction is appointed, and of confession repentance is born, and God appeared by repent- 
ance. Accordingly exomologests is a discipline for man’s prostration and humiliation, enjoining 
a demeanour calculated to move mercy. With regard also to the very dress and food, it 
commands (the penitent) to He in sackcloth and ashes . . . to know no food and drink but such 

9 Pada, 1. vi. $25. (Syllb. 47), 10 Ovat. xl. § 4. | 6 Ps. xiii. 53 xiii. 4, 5 (€£ouodoyjoopat) ; andeabss GaarGey 
1 Procat. $9: ‘Let thy fect haste to the Catechisings,” § 10: €fou0d0yyoet). 7 Matt. xi. 25; Phil. ii. 11. 
‘ Abide thou in the Catechisings: though our discourse be Jong,) © Ps. ix. 1 Efopodoynoomat gor, Kupee. 
Jet not thy mind be wearied out.” Cf. Cat. i. 5. | 9 Joshua vii. 19, Sept. €oporoynor. 
2 De Papin, c 20. CL Just MM, Apot 1. Cy. G1: Come | 1 Matt. ili. 6; Marki. 5; James iii. 16. 
A fost. vii. 22. is ane F an 
Fr; ; ; Wil. 22 i ” : 2 Trenceus, I. xiii. § 5; Il]. iv. § 3; Clem. Alex. Profrepé. 1. 
3 Compare his teaching ray z : oer sé D i dai ; ( nv avT@ 
1 lis teaching on Prayer, Procat. § 16; Cat. ix. 7: | § 41: efopodoyodrrar of daimoves THY yaTTPLMapYLay THY GUTMY. 

and on Fasting Cat. iv. 27, 37 3 xvill. 17- | 3 De Panitentia, c. xil- 
4 Cat ig & Cate a. 

SPECIAL PREPARATION FOR BAPTISM. Dab 
as is plain,—to feed prayers on fastings, to groan, to weep and roar (mugire) unto the Lord 
God ; to roll before the feet of the presbyters, and kneel to God's dear ones, to enjoin on all 
the brethren embassies of intercession on his behalf All this exomologests docs, that it may 
enhance repentance 4, &c.” 

In this highly rhetorical description of the ecclesiastical discipline so dear to Tertullian 
there are many features of extreme severity to which Cyril makes no allusion; yet he 
frequently and very earnestly insists on the necessity and the efficacy of confession. “The 
present is the season of confession: confess what thou hast done in word or in deed, by nicht 
or by day; confess 77 an acceplable time, and tn the aay of salvation receive the heavenly 
treasure $8.” Tell the Physician thine ailment : say thou also, like David, L sand, Tivill confess 
me my sin unto the LORD; and the same shall be done in thy case, which he says forthwith, 
and Thou forgavest the wickedness of my heart®.” “ Seest thou the humility of the king? Seest 
thou his confession ?.... The deed was quickly done, and straightway the Prophet appeared 
as accuser, and the offender confessed his fault; and because he candidly confessed, he 
received a most speedy cure 7.” 

“ Vzekias prevailed to the cancelling of God’s decree, and cannot Jesus grant remission of 
sins? Turn and _ bewail thyself, shut thy door, and pray to be forgiven, pray that He may 
remove from thee the burning flames. For confession has power to quench even fire, power 
to tame even lions 8.” 

The confession to which Cyril attaches so high a value, whether made in the privacy of 
solitude, or openly before the Ministers of the Church and the Congregation, is a confession 
to God, and not to man. “ Having therefore, brethren, many examples of those who have 
sinned and repented and been saved, do ye also heartily make confession unto the Lord 9.” 
Elsewhere he expressly disclaims the necessity of private confession to man: “ Not that thou 
shouldest shew thy conscience to me, for thou art not to be judged of man’s Judgment » but 
that thou shew the sincerity of thy faith to God, who ¢rteth the reins and hearts, and knoweth 
the thoughts of men*.” He also limits the season of confession and repentance to this pre- 
sent life: ‘Therefore the just shall then offer praise ; but they who have died in sins haye no 
further season for confession 2.” 

S 3. L£xorcism. One of the earliest ceremonies, after the registration of names, was 
Exorcism, which seems to have been often repeated during the Candidate’s course of prepar- 
ation. “ Receive with earnestness the exorcisms: whether thou be breathed upon or exorcised, 
the act is to thee salvation 3.” 

The power of casting out devils, promised by our Lord 4, and exercised by Apostles 5, and 
by Philip the Deacon and Evangelist 6 was long regarded in the early Church as a direct gift 
still bestowed by the .Holy Ghost, apart from any human ordinance. Justin Martyr 7, Ter- 
tullian °, Origen 9, all speak of exorcism as being practised by laymen, even by soldiers, and 
women, by means of prayer and invocation of the name of Jesus. Accordingly “an Exorcist 
is not ordained, for it is a gift of the spontaneous benevolence and grace of God through 
Christ by visitation of the Holy Ghost. For he who has received the gift of healing is 
declared by revelation from God, the grace which is in him being manifest to all 1.” When 
the extraordinary gift was found to have been withdrawn, exorcists are mentioned among the 
inferior officers of the Church, after readers and subdeacons?. From an early period certain 
set formule, such as the Divine names, “The God of Abraham, and God of Tsaac, and God 

4 De Panitentia, c. ix. S, Cate, Sie, 6 Ib. § 6. | 7 Apologia I. 8§ 6,8; Tryph. Ixxxv. 

7-VitwsS. or, 8 Cat. ii. rs. For similar statements, sce | «102. Adatgol: 6. xiv? de Carona Gil. <i. 3 ae Anima, Wii, 
Cat. i. 25 ii. 19, 20, &e. | de Shectac. xxvi. 3 ae Prescript. Meret. xii. 

9 Cat. ii. § 20. Elia S35 2 Ebex witha: | 9 Contra Celsum. vii. c. 57. t Const. A fost. viii. 26. 

3 Procat. $9. 4 Mark xvi. 173 Luke ix. 1: x, 17. 2 Euseb. HE. vi. 43; Syn. Antioch. in Enesniis, Can, ro - 

5 ActSv 165 Xvinte™ Nine ze, ® Acts viii. 7. Syn. Laod. Can. 24, 

(ney 

oN : ‘ eata? - fae 

INTRODUCTION, 

of lacoh” “The tod of Tsracl,” “The God who drowned the king of Egypt and the 
were frequently invoked against demons and certain wicked 

Eeyptians in the Red Sea,” 

versons ° 

| Tedd, when an exorcist was ordained the sishop was directed to give him the book 
in. which he exorcisms wore written, with the words, “ Receive thou these, and commit them 
to memory, and have thoi power to lay hands upon the Energumens, whether they be 
baptized or only Catccuuimens 4 ‘Though this Canon speaks only of exorcising FEncr- 
eumens, or such persons as were supposed to be possessed by evil spirits, we must remember 
that the power of such spirits was believed to extend to the whole world outside the 
Christian Church. ‘Thus all converts from Paganism and Judaism, and eyen the children of 
Christian parents were exorcised before being baptized. The practice was closcly connected 
with the doctrine of original sin, as we sce In Many passages of S. Augustine, and is declared 
by him to be very ancient and universal’. In expounding the Creed to candidates for 
Japtism, he says . “Therefore, as you have seen this day, and as you know, even little 
children are breathed on and exorcised, that the hostile power of the devil may be driven 
out of them, which deceived one man “1 order that he might get possession of all men °.” 

We find accordingly that Cyril enforces the duty of attending the Exorcisms on all 
the candidates alike, and from his use of the Plural (xorcisms) we see that the ceremony 
was often repeated for each person. Thus in the Clementine Homilies Peter 1s represented 
as saying, “ Whoever of you wish to be baptized, begin from to-morrow to fast, and each day 
have hands laid upon you?,” the imposition of hands being one of the ceremonies used 
sn exorcism’. From expressions in the Introductory Lecture, ‘‘ When ye have come in before 
the hour of the exorcisms 9%,” and again, ‘when your exorcism has been done, until the 
others who are to be exorcised have come 1” it seems that before each Catechizing the 
candidates were all exorcised, one by one ?, and that the earlicr, after returning from their own 
exorcism, had to wait for those who came later. The catechizing was thus frequently 
delayed till late in the day, and Cyril often complains of the shortness of the time left at 
his disposal 3. 

At Antioch, the Catechizing preceded the Exorcism, as we learn from S. Chrysostom: 
“ After you have heard our instruction, they take off your sandals, and unclothe you, and send 
you on naked and barefoot, with your tunic only, to the utterances of the Exorcists +.” Cyril 
says nothing of this unclothing, but mentions another ceremony as practised at Jerusalem : 
“Thy face has been veiled, that thy mind may henceforward be free, lest the eye by roving 
make the heart rove also. But when thine eyes are veiled, thine ears are not hindered from 
receiving the means of salvation s.” The veil may also have been a symbol of the slavery 
and darkness of sin, as S. Augustine regards the removal of the veil on the octave of Haster 
as symbolising the spiritual liberty of the baptized ® Of this meaning Cyril makes no express 
mention. 

In the Greek Euchologion, as quoted by Kleopas, the act of the Exorcist is thus described : 
“And the Priest breathes upon his mouth, his forehead, and his breast, saying, Drive forth 
from him every evil and unclean spirit, hidden and lurking in his heart, the spirit of error, the 
spirit of wickedness 7, &c.” 

3 Origen. Contra Cels. iv. c. 34 (p- 184). produceremini.” ‘This may possibly refer only to the final ex- 
4 Fourth Council of Carthage, Caz. 7 (A-D. 398). | orcism immediately before Baptism. 
5 De Nupt. et Concup. V1. § 33: de Pece. Orig. 8453 contra $ Catexill, 8 skvis3 } xvi 2G, Gre. 

anlian Pelag. V1. § 1135 Of. Litperf. ¢. futwen. In % 50; 111. 4 Ad Iluminandos, Cat. i. § 2. 15 Procat. § 9. 

b t44, Cs 6 De Syinbolo, § 2. Cf. Cat. xx. (.JZyst. il.) § 2. 6S. Aug. Sere. 376. ‘Hodie octave dicuntur Infantium ; 

¢ om .. ee revelanda sunt capita eorum, quod est indicium libertatis. Habet 
. ig. in Josu. xxiv. § 1: “ exorcistarum manus impositione, bey libertatem ista spiritualis nativitas, propria autem carnis 
S Proce. § 13. rT Sera nativitas servitutem.” 

Aug. Ser Ze S a <” _ Se: aot .| 

Aug. Sermo de Symboiie § 1: ut ex locis secretis singuli | 1 Procat, $14. 

ae eee Ode uate ea CHRISM. xi 

ese Rane invocations of he. names of God, as we have mentioned aitaye the Lxorcist 
used set forms of prayer “collected out of the Holy Scriptures.” heir effect, as described 
by Cyril, is to “set the soul, as it were, on fire,” and scare the evil spirit away; and his 
meaning may be illustrated by a passage of Tertullian, who says: “All the authority and 
power we have over them is from naming the name of Christ, and recalling to their memory 
the woes with which God threatens them at the hands of Christ as JOBE. ne SO. Bt OE 
touch and breathing, overwhelmed by the thought of those judgment-fires, they leave 
the bodies they have entered, at our command, unwilling and distressed, and before 
your very eyes put to an open shame.” 

The Exorcisms were performed in the Church; where also the Lectures were delivered, 
Catechumens of the lower order being excluded, ‘and the doors looking towards the city 
closed9, while those which looked towards the Holy Sepulchre, from which the ruins of 
the ancient ‘lemple, Golgotha, and the old city could be seen, were left open ©.” 

Cte ke. bv, 
CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM. 

S1. Renunciation. We have seen that Cyril’s last Catechetical Lecture was delivered 
in the early dawn of the Great Sabbath, Easter Eve. The additional instructions then 
promised? concerning the behaviour of the Candidates were given on the same day, pro- 
bably in the evening, when they were all assembled immediately before the administration 
of Baptism. The most important parts of the Baptismal ceremony are described by Cyril 
in the first Mystagogic Lecture, delivered on the Monday of Easter weck. Thus in § 1 he 
says, “Let us now teach you these things exactly, that ye may know the significance of the 
tuings done to you on that evening of your Baptism.” 

The first act was the renunciation of the Devil and all his works. This, as described by 
Tertullian, was done first in the Church “under the hand of the Bishop,” and again iImme- 
diately before entering the water™, Cyril speaks of the latter occasion only. “ First ye 
entered into the outer chamber of the Baptistery, and there facing towards the West (as the 
region of darkness) ye heard the command to stretch forth your hand, and as in the presence 
of Satan to renounce him’.” Tor the formula of renunciation in the Apostolical Constitu- 
tions, see note 2 on AZjsfag. i. § 8; it corresponds closely with Cyril’s, except that this is 
addressed to Satan as if personally present: “I renounce thee, Satan 3, and all thy works 4, 
and all thy pomp 5, and all thy worship °%” 

§ 2. Profession of Faith, After the renunciation of Satan the Candidate immediately turned 
to de East and said, “ And I associate myself (ovyracaopae) with Christ.” Cyril does not give 
the words, but seems to allude to the custom, when he speaks of the Candidates “turning 
from the West to the East, the place of light 7.” 

Then, still facing the East, the Candidate was bidden to say, “I believe in the Father, 
and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance ®.”” We have 
seen that in Cat. xvill. 22, 32, Cyril intimated to his Candidates that they would be required 
to profess publicly the Creed which he had delivered to them and which they had repeated 
aiter him. This public profession of faith (‘Opodoyia, “ Redditio Symboli”) was in some 
Churches made on Holy Thursday, according to Canon 46 of the Synod of Laodicea: 
“Those to be baptized must learn the Creed by heart, and recite it to the Bishop or 

8 Apologel. C. 23. 9 Procar. § 9. to Cat. xili. 23: ‘* Thou seest this spot of Golgotha? ‘Thou answerest with a shout of 
praise, as if assenting.” t Cat. xviily § 32. tm De Gory kite © 
Sp st 1. Be oF Ses 4 $5. 5: $6. 6 § 8, 7 $9, note 3. 

& Compare ee 22: ‘One Baptism of pent ince for the remission of sins.” 

Si 

Presbvters on the filth day of the week.” But in the Afostolte Constitutions, 
Candidate is required to recite the whole Creed immediately after the Renunciation: ‘ And 
after his renunciation let him in his consociation (avvracatpevos) Say? ‘And I associate myself 
to Christ, and believe and am baptized ‘to One Unbegotten Being, the Only True God 
Almighty, the Father of Christ, .... and into the Lord Jesus Christ.... and Iam baptized 
into the H ly Ghost, .... into the resurrection of the flesh, and into the remission of sins, 
and into the kingdom of heaven, and into the life of the world to come.’ And after this vow, 

0,8 Sie te 

he comes in order to the anointing with oil.” 

Such appears to have been the custom of the Eastern Churches in general and of Jerusalem 
in Cyril’s time, although he mentions only those articles of the Creed which were commonly 
held to be indispensable to a valid profession of Christian belief. 

Dr. Swainson? represents the matter somewhat differently: ‘When we come to the 
profession of his own personal faith which was made at Jerusalem by the Candidate for 
Baptism, we find that this was far briefer not only than the collection of ‘necessary things’ 
(Cat. iv.), but also than the Creed of the Church of Jerusalem.” Then after quoting the 
short form in Cyril, AZpst. i. § 9, “I believe in the Father, and in the Son, and in the IIoly 
Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance,” Dr. Swainson adds: “The words are clear and 
definite. In these words each answered the question of which we read elsewhere, ‘ Did he 
believe in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit?’ In this his reply the 
Candidate ‘confessed’ what Cyril called ‘the saving confession.’ ” 

It is evident that two separate parts of the Baptismal Service are here confused: the 
question to which Dr. Swainson alludes, and “the saving confession” of which Cyril speaks 
in J/ystag. li. $ 4, belong, as we shall presently see, to a later stage of the ceremony. 

§ 3. First Unction, On passing from the outer to the inner chamber of the Baptistery, the 
Candidate who had made his renunciation and profession barefoot and wearing his tunic 
(Xerév)* only, now put off this inner garment also, as an emblem of putting off the old 
man with his deeds®. A further significance is ascribed by Cyril to this unclothing of the 
Candidate, as being an imitation both of Christ, who hung naked 3 on the Cross, and by His 
nakedness put off from ITimself the principalities and the powers, and “of the first-formed 
Adam, who was naked in the garden, and was not ashamed.” 

“Then, when ye were stripped, ye were anointed with exorcised oil, from the very hairs of 
your head to your feet” ‘The consecration of the “ exorcised oil” is thus described *: “ Now 
this is blessed by the chief-priest for the remission of sins, and the first preparation for 
Baptism. For he calls thus upon the Unbegotten God, the Father of Christ, the King of all 
sensible and intelligent natures, that He would sanctify the oil in the name of the Lord Jesus, 
and impart to it spiritual grace and efficacious strength, the remission of sins, and the first 
preparation for the confession of Baptism, that so the Candidate for Baptism, when he is 
anointed may be freed from all ungodliness, and may become worthy of initiation, according 
to the command of the Only-begotten.” 

Bingham’s observation, that Cyril describes this first unction as used “between the re- 
nunciation and the confessions” is not quite accurate: in fact it came between two con- 
fessions, the one made, as we have seen, immediately after the renunciation in the outer 

9 Creads if faz Crrih, pu 17. | 

¥ Pseuto-Dionysius Arcopas. Mel. Mierarch, iit. | 
2. Di rsias. it. § 2. 

ness seems to be implicd; for though women sometimes wore 
a under-tunic (yerérov), men had nothing beneath the tunic 
This passage has recently (x$y1) acquired a special inter Headstone anprtalece tng ste be pe a ee = 
irate ete ae) SNe 2 Eee interest) Theophylact, on Matt. v. 40, the chiton was properly 70 map’ Nev 
m the controversy concerning Mr. Calderon's picture, repre- | Aeyowerov Umoxdwiaoe. See Dictionary of Riblical Antiquities 
senting St. Elisabeth of Hungary as knecling naked before the ey taptism,” § 48. | 
altar. The word “naked” (yvaros, nudus) is not in itself de- 3° Ib. § - 4 Conse alpids tec 
cisive, but here in St. Cyril's account of Baptism absolute naked- | 5 ie Se Go, Sa, amen t 

ir 

CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM. AND CHRISAT. XXii 

chamber, the other at the very time of immersion, Chrysostom” clearly distinguishes two 
Confessions, but places one before Baptism, and the other after: “What can be more beautiful 
than the words by which we renounce the devil? Or those by which we associate ourselves 
with Christ? Than that confession which comes before the washing ? Or that which comes 
after the washing ?” 

This first unction is not mentioned by Tertullian, nor in any genuine work of Justin 
Martyr, but in the Lesponsiones ad Orthodoxos, a work which though still earl y is regarded as 
certainly spurious, we find the question put, ‘ Why are we first anointed with oil, and then, 
having performed the before-mentioned symbolic acts in the Laver, are afterwards sealed with 
the ointment, and do not regard this as done in opposition to what took place in our Lord’s 
case, who was first anointed with ointment and then suffered72” And in the answer it is stated 
that “We are anointed with the simple oil that we may be made Christs (Xproroé), but with 
the ointment in remembrance of our Saviour Christ, who regarded the anointing with ointment 
as His burial, and called us to the fellowship of His own sufferings and glory, typically in’ the 
present life but truly in the life to come.” 

Cyril attributes to this “ exorcised oil” the same power as to Exorcism itself, ‘not only to 
burn and cleanse away the traces of sin, but also to chase away all the invisible powers of the 
evil one 8,” 

According to the directions concerning this first unction in the 4 [postolical Constitutions 9, 
the Bishop was first to anoint the head only, the anointing of the whole body being then 
completed by the Deacon or Deaconess. 

$4. Baptism. After this anointing the Candidates were “led by the hand to the sacred 
pool of Holy Baptism.” This pool (coAupz87Opa) was supplied with water raised from the 
reservoirs, Of which, as we shall see, the Bordeaux Pilgrim speaks in his description of the 
Basilica. 

As great multitudes both of men and women were baptized at the special seasons, the 
Baptisteries were large buildings outside the Church, such as the Baptistery of the Lateran, 
said to have been originally built by Constantine. The font itsclf also was large enough for 
several persons to be baptized at the same time. In some places the men were baptized first, 
and then the women: in others different parts of the Baptistery were assigned to them, and 
curtains were hung across the Font itself 2. 

The consecration of the water is not mentioned in the Didache or Justin Martyr; but 
Tertullian thus describes its effect: “The waters after invocation of God acquire the 
sacramental power of sanctification; for immediately the Spirit comes down from heayen 
upon the waters, and rests upon them, sanctifying them from Himself, and they being thus 
sanctified imbibe a power of sanctifying 3.” 

In the prayer of consecration given in the Apostolic Constitutions the Bishop is directed 
first to offer adoration and thanksgiving to the Father and Son, and then to call upon 
the Lather and say: “Look down from heaven, and sanctify this water, and give it 
grace and power, that so he that is to be baptized, according to the command of Thy 
Christ, may be crucified with Him, and imay die with Him, and may be buried with Him, 
and may rise with Him to the adoption which is in Him, that he may be dead to sin, 
and live to righteousness 4.” 

Cyril ascribes the like effect to the consecration of the water, as imparting to it a new 
power of holiness by “ the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ, and of the Father 5.” 

While standing in the water the Candidate made what Cyril calls “the saving con- 

6 Lphes.i. Hom, i. § 3. 7 Questio 137. o Miystde, We 835 9 Lib. tis G. 55 
I Mystag. ii. § 4. 2 Bingham, Az. VIII. c. 7, § 2; XI.c. 11, § 3. 3 De Laptismo, civ. 
Ae Nellie Gano 5 Cat. ili. § 3. See also Introduction, ch. vi. § 2. 

INTRODUGIION, 

focsion®.” ‘The whole Creed having been already recited (Redditio Symboll) in the outer 
chamber immediately after the Renunciation, a short form was Now employed iui 
only the necessary declaration of faith in the Holy ‘Trinity, and in the Baptism of Repentance 
for the remission of sins. 

&s5. /rine Immersion. This short confession appears to have been made by way of 
question and answer thrice repeated. Thou wast asked, Dost thou believe in God the 
Father mighty? Thou saidst, I believe, and dippedst thyself, that 1s, wast buried. Again 
thou wast asked, Dost thou believe in our Lord Jesus Christ and in His Cross? ‘Thou 
caidst, I believe, and dippedst thyself; therefore thou wast buried with Christ also: for 
he who is buried with Christ, rises again with Christ. A third time thou wast asked, 
Dost thou believe also in the Holy Ghost? Thou saidst, I believe, a third time thou 
dippedst thyself; that the threefold confession might absolve the manifold fault of thy 
former life7.” But Cyril of Alexandria, as quoted by Bingham 8 “makes these answers 
not only to be a confession of the three Persons of the Trinity, but a triple confession 
of Christ ; which implies a repetition of the Creed (the shortened form ?) three times over.” 

In which of these ways the threefold interrogation (‘“usitata et legitima verba in- 

terrogationis ”) was made at Jerusalem, is not quite certain from Cyril’s words : “ Kach 
was ‘asked, Dost thou believe in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost, and ye made that saving confession, and went down thrice into the water?” 
The Didaché! enjoins baptism simply ‘nto the names of the Three Persons of the Holy 
Trinity. Justin Martyr * adds a few words only to the names “of God the Father and 
Lord of the universe, and of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit ;” and 
Tertullian 3 observes that ‘‘ Wherever there are three, that is, the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit, there is the Church, which is a body of three.” The trine immersion 
had reference not only to the ‘lrinity, but was also a symbol of the three days of our 
Sayiour’s burial4. The use of the three Holy Names was made more strictly indispensable 
as heresies were multiplied: thus the 49th Apostolic Canon, which, Hefele says, ‘‘must 
be reckoned among the most ancient Canons of the Church,” orders that ‘‘If any Bishop 
or Presbyter does not baptize, according to the Lord’s command, into the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, but into three Beings without beginning, or into three Sons, or three 
Comforters, he shall be deprived.” 

We see here that the power of administering Baptism was not restricted to the Bishop: 
and Cyril speaks of it as possessed by “ Bishops, or Presbyters, or Deacons,” assigning as the 
reason the great increase of believers, “for the grace 1s everywhere, in villages and in 
cities, on them of low as on them of high degree, on bondsmen and on freemen 5.” 

Thus the rule of Ignatius ®, that “it is not lawful either to baptize or to hold a love-feast 
apart from the Bishop (yepis rod énisxémov),” must be understood to mean “ without the 
authority and permission of the Bishop.” 

Of certain minor ceremonies connected with Baptism, such as the ‘Kiss of peace,” 
and the taste of milk and honey administered to the neophyte 7, no mention is made by Cyril. 

$6. Chrism. Vhe custom of anointing the baptized with consecrated ointment is 
regarded by Cyril as a sacramental act representing the anointing of Jesus by the Spirit 

“ As the Holy Ghost in substance lighted on Him, like resting upon hike, 
come up from the pool of the sacred waters, there was given to you an 
unction the counterpart (rd dvrirumov) of that wherewith He was anointed, and this is the Holy 
Ghost®.” As “ He was anointed with a spiritual oil of gladness, that is with the Holy Ghost, 

at His Baptism. 
so, after you had 

§ Bie os 9 Iysiag. ill. § 4. 
4 Alystag. ii. § 4, note 3. 5- Cat.soval, os: 6 Ad Smyri. c. Vil 
8 Afystag. iil. § 1. 

Diserhag, U.S 4, 7 Pseudu-Ambros. de Sacramentis, U1. c. 7. ©: 0S, Gn 5 doce 
a Cap, Vii. 2 Apology. 1. c. 3 De Baptismo, c, Vi. 
+ Bingham,-s4get. S11, cx Ay 835590; 

al be 

CEREMONIES OF BAPTISM AND CHRISM. XXV 

called oil of gladness, because He is the author of spiritual gladness, so ye were anointed with 
ointment, and made partakers and fellows of the Christ 9.” ‘The ceremony was very ancient : 
there is probably a reference to it in the words of Theophilus of Antioch? (¢ A.D. 170) : 
‘We are called Christians, because we are anointed with the oil of God.” Tertullian, a little 
later, after speaking of Baptism, says: “ Immediately on coming out of the Laver we are 
thoroughly anointed with a consecrated unction? ;” and again, “ After that, the hand is laid 
upon us in benediction, invoking and inviting the Holy Ghosts.” In another passage 4 
he mentions also the sign of the Cross: ‘*’The flesh is washed, that the soul may be cleansed ; 
the flesh is anointed that the soul may be consecrated ; the flesh is signed [with the Cross | 
that the soul also may be guarded ; the flesh is overshadowed by imposition of the hand, that 
the soul also may be illuminated by the Spirit.” 

The consecration of the ointment is compared by Cyril to the consecration of the 
Eucharist ; after the invocation of the Holy Ghost it is no longer simple or common ointment, 
but a gift (Xdpopa) of Christ, and by the presence of the Holy Ghost is able to impart 
of His Divine Nature. And this ointment is symbolically applied to thy forehead, and thy 
other organs of sense 5.” 

The ears, nostrils, and breast were each to be anointed, and Cyril explains the symbolical 
meaning in each case by appropriate passages of Scripture °. 

The consecration of the chrism could be performed by none but the Bishop, and he 
alone could anoint the forehead?, Presbyters being allowed to anoint the breast, but only 
with chrism received from the Bishop®. The several ceremonies are thus explained in the 
Apostolical Constitutions? : “This baptism is given into the death of Jesus: the water is 
instead of the burial, and the oil instead of the Holy Ghost; the seal instead of the Cross ; 
the ointment is the confirmation of the Confession *.” 

In like manner the chrism is explained again, “The ointment is the seal of the 
covenants 2,” that is, both of God’s promises, and of the Baptismal vows. 

The members to be anointed were not the same in all Churches, but everywhere the 
chief ceremony was the anointing of the forehead with the sign of the Cross. This is what 
Cyril calls ‘the Royal Sign 3,” and “the Royal Seal to be borne upon the forehead of Christ’s 
soldiers 4,” and again, ‘‘ The Seal of the fellowship of the Holy Ghost 5.” 

These last were probably the very words pronounced by the Bishop in making the sign 
of the Cross on the forehead; for by Canon 7 of the Second General Council at Antioch 
(38r), converts from heretical sects were to be “sealed or anointed with the holy ointment 
on the forehead, eyes, nostrils, mouth, and ears. And in sealing them we say, ‘The seal 
of the gift of the Holy Ghost.’” 

An additional prayer to be said by the Bishop is given in the Apostolical Constitutions ©: 
“O Lord God, the Unbegotten, who hast no Lord, who art Lord of all, who madest the odour 
of the knowledge of the Gospel to go forth among all nations, grant also now that this 
ointment may be efficacious upon him that is baptized (Samrigouev@), that the sweet odour of 
thy Christ may remain firm and stable in him, and that having died with Him, he may arise 
and live with Him.” 

The whole ceremony was called by the Greeks ‘‘ Chrism,” the “* Unction ” being regarded 
by them as the chief part. In the Latin Church the name Confirmation is of later date, and 
indicates that greater importance was then attached to the ‘ Laying on of Hands” with 
prayer. 

9 Alystag. iil. § 2. t Ad Autolycum, i. 2 De Bape. c: 7. Sh. Cu 8s 4 De Resurr. Carnis, c. 8. 5 1b. $3. 
6 ALyst. ili. § 4. 7 Afost. Const. iii. § 16: “ Let the Bishop anoint those that are baptized with ointment (wvpe).” 
8 See the authorities in Bingham, Avzé. xii. c. 2, §$ 1, 2. 9 ili. 17. t Const: Apast, Vil. C. 226 2 be Vile Caton 

GE Caty nie17. Bi CatiiveS tae 4 Vbe xi. § 8: 5 Ib. xviii. 33. OVite Cr 44s 

nee EX TROD 

Another ceremony, not alluded to by Cyril, was the saying of the Lord’s Prayer by the 
neophyte, standing up, and facing towards the East 7, after which he was also to pray, ‘fO 
God Alinizhty, the Father of Thy Christ, ‘Thine Only-begotten Son, give me a body undefiled, 
a clean heart, a watchful mind, an unerring knowledge, the influence (eupoirnow) of the Holy 
Ghost for attainment and full assurance of the truth, through Thy Christ, by whom be glory 
to Thee in the Holy Ghost for ever. Amen.” 

CHAPTER V. 
Eucnaristic Rires. Liturey. 

4. Lirst Communion. When the rites of Baptism and Chrism were completed, the new- 
made Christians, clothed in white robes (A/ys¢. iv. 8), and bearing each a lighted taper in his 
hand, passed in procession from the Baptistery into the great “Church of the Resurrection,’ 
‘The time was still night, as we gather from the allusion in Procat, § 15: ‘ May God at length 
shew you that night, that darkness which shines like the day, concerning which it is said, Ze 
Barhiers shall not be hidden from thee, and the night shall be light as the day.” As the newly- 
baptized entered the church, they were welcomed in the words of the 32nd Psalm, “ Fyen 
now,” says Cyril (Proca’., $15), “let your ears ring, as it were, with that glorious sound, 
when over your salvation the Angels shall chant, Béessed are they whose iniguities are forgiven, 
and whose sins are covered ; when like stars of the Church you shall enter in, bright in the 
body and radiant in the soul.” During the chanting of the Psalm the neophytes seem to 
have stood in frent of the raised ‘bema’ or sanctuary, as we learn from Cyril’s eloquent con- 
temporary, Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. XL. $46: “The station in which presently after Baptism 
thou wilt stand before the great sanctuary prefigures the glory from yonder heaven; the 
psalmody, with which thou wilt be welcomed, is a prelude of those heavenly hymns; the 
lamps, which thou wilt light, are a mystic sign of the procession of lights, with which bright 
and virgin souls shall go forth to meet the Bridegroom, with the lamps of faith burning 
brightly.” 

From the Syriac “Treatise of Severus, formerly Patriarch of Alexandria (Antioch), con- 
cerning the rites of Baptism and of Holy Communion (Synaxis) as received among the 
Syrian Christians” (Resch, Agrvafha, § 12, p. 361), we learn that it was the custom “to lift up 
the newly-baptized to the altar, and after giving them the mysteries the Bishop (Sacerdos) 
crowned them with garlands.” 

The white garments (7eca?., § 2: ALystag., iv. 88) were worn until the Octave of Easter, 
Low Sunday, Dominica in Albis (Bingham, XII. c. iv. § 3). 

$2. THe Lirurcy. In Cyril’s last Lecture, AZ stagogic V., he reminds his hearers of 
what they had witnessed at their first Communion on Easter-day, and thus gives a most 
valuable testimony to the prescribed form of administering the Holy Eucharist in the Eastern 
Church in the middle of the fourth century, 

Passing over all the preparatory portion of the Liturgy, he tells us first that the Deacon 
brings water to the Bishop or Priest (76 fepet) and to the Presbyters who stand round the 
altar, that they may wash their hands in token of the need of purification from sin ; a cere- 
mony which evidently had reference to the words of the Psalmist, “I will wash mine hands 
in innocency ; so will 1 compass Thine altar, O Lord!” In some Churches, perhaps also at 
Jerusalem, the words were actually chanted during the ablution 2, 

“Then the Deacon cries aloud, Receive ye one another: and let us salute (domatepeda) 
one another,” In the Clementine Liturgy 5 the “ Kiss of Peace” precedes the “ Ablution.” 

? Consl, Apost. Thy Cc aa, Y Afystag. v. § 2. ett ele, ** Dn bos’ Bie cst eus se, NOI. Cy Te 

BUCH Rts i Riles) LT oRGey 

XXvii 

Sometimes these two sentences are combined: “Salute ye one another with the holy 
kiss4.” In the Liturgy of S. James there are two separate rubrics, one immediately after the 
dismissal of the Catechumens, “Take knowledge one of another,” and a second after the 
Creed, “ Let us embrace (déyamjoopev) one another with a holy kiss.” 

“After this the Priest (iepevs) cries aloud, Lift up your hearts. Then ye answer, We lift 
them up unto the Lord 5.” 

The meaning of this Preface, as explained by Cyril, is an exhortation by the Priest, or 
Bishop when present, and a promise by the people, to raise all their thoughts to God on 
high, in preparation for the great Thanksgiving to which they were further invited: ‘“ Let 
us give thanks unto the Lord,’—“ It is meet and night °.” 

Then follows a very brief summary of the Eucharistic Preface, and after that the Trisagion 7, 
corresponding in part to the long Thanksgiving in the Apostolic Constitutions for all God’s 
mercies in creation, providence, and redemption ® 

It is important to observe how S. Cyril in this and the following sections associates the 
people with the Priest, using throughout the Plural “ We.” ‘That this is intentional and 
significant, we may learn from a passage of S. Chrysostom9 which is so interesting that we 
may be allowed to translate it at length: “Sometimes moreover no difference is made 
between the Priest and those over whom he presides, as for example when we are to partake 
of the awful mysteries ; for we are all alike deemed worthy of the same privileges: not as in 
the Old Covenant some parts were eaten by the Priest, and others by the governed (6 dpxdpevos), 
and it was not lawful for the people to share in what the Priest partook of. It is not so now: 
but one Body is set before all, and one Cup. And in the prayers also one may see the laity 
contributing much. For the prayers on behalf of the Energumens, and on behalf of those in 
Penitence are offered in common both by the Priest and by themselves; and all say one 
prayer, a prayer that is full of compassion. Again, after we have excluded from the sacred 
precincts those who are unable to partake of the Holy Table, there is another prayer to be 
made, and we all alike lie prostrate on the floor, and all alike rise up. When again we are to 
receive and give a kiss of peace, we all alike embrace each other. Again even amid the 
most tremendous Mysteries the Priest prays over the people, and the people over 
the Priest: for the formula, “ With Thy Spirit,” is nothing else than this. The words of 
the Thanksgiving again are common: for he does not give thanks alone, but also the whole 
people. For having first got their answer, and they agreeing that ‘It is meet and right so to 
do,’ he then begins the thanksgiving, And why wonder that the people sometimes speak 
with the Priest, when even with the very Cherubim and the Powers on high they send up 
those sacred hymns in common. Now all this I have said in order that each of the common 
people (ray dpxopévev) also may be vigilant, that we may learn that we are all one Body, 
having only as much difference between one and another, as between members and members, 
and may not cast the whole work upon the Priests, but ourselves also care for the whole Church 
even as for a common Body.” 

It is remarkable that in Cyril’s account of the Eucharistic rites in this Lecture there 
the slightest reference to the words of Institution, though these hold so prominent a place 
before the Invocation both in the Clementine Liturgy and in the Liturgy of S. James. But 
we cannot justly assume, from a mere omission in so brief a summary, that the Commem- 
oration of the Institution had no place in the Liturgy then in use at Jerusalem. It seems 
more probable that Cyril did not think it necessary, after his repeated references to the Insti- 
tution in the preceding Lecture, to make further mention of a custom so well known as the 
recitation of Christ’s own words in the course of the Prayer preceding the Invocation. On 

1s not 

4 Afost. Const. viil. c. 11. Compare Justin M. Afolog. I. c. 65. SALA thea OS 5 7.50 & Avast. Gast. wally Ge De. 
See the LXucharistic Preface of the Liturgy of S. James in note 4 on AZystag. v. § 6. 9 Ln Lpist. If, ad Cor, Homil, xvii. § 3. 

NNVII INTRODUCTION. 
the previous cay he had quoted S. Paul's account of the Institution, with the remark, ‘Since 
then He Himself has declared and said of the Bread, Z//s 7s AZy Body, who shall dare doubt 
any longer? And since he has Ilimself affirmed and said, Z%zs 7s ALy Llood, who shall ever 
hesitate, saying that it is not Tis Blood 12” The like efficacy he again ascribes to “ the Lord’s 
declaration” concerning both the Bread and the Wine, that they are “ the Body and Blood of 
Christ *.” 

In the Didaché, which gives the oldest elements of an Eucharistic Service, there is neither 
the Commemoration nor the Invocation, but only two short and simple forms of ‘Thanksgiving 
“for the Holy Vine of David,” and “ for the broken Bread 3.” 

Tustin Martyr seems to imply that the consecration is effected by the Commemoration of 
Christ’s own words in the Institution : “We have been taught,” he says, ‘ that the food which 
is blessed by the prayer of the word which comes from Him (rjy dv’ exis Adyou Tob map’ avTou 
elyapotybeioay tpopyy), and by which our blood and flesh are by transmutation nourished, is the 
Flesh and Blood of that Jesus who was made Flesh.” He gives no separate Invocation of the 
Holy Ghost, but this may have been supplied in the “praise and glory” or in the ‘‘ prayers 
and thanksgivings ” sent up ‘to the Father of all through the name of the Son and of the Holy 
Ghost 4.” 

Ireneeus is apparently the earliest writer who represents the Invocation of the Holy Ghost 
as the immediate act of consecration: “ We make an oblation to God of the bread and 
the cup of blessing, giving Him thanks for that He has commanded the earth to bring forth 
these fruits for our nourishment. And then, having completed the oblation, we call forth 
(ekxadotwev) the Holy Spirit, that He may exhibit this sacrifice, both the bread the Body of 
Christ, and the cup the Blood of Christ, in order that the partakers of these antitypes may 
obtain the remission of sins and life eternal 5.” 

Mr. Hammond writes that, “ By the Oriental Churches an Invocation of the Holy Spirit is 
considered necessary to complete the consecration. In the three Oriental Families of Litur- 
gies such an Invocation is invariably found shortly after the Words of Institution °.” 

It is in accordance with this statement that, we find Cyril so frequently declaring that the 
elements which before the Invocation are simple bread and wine, become after the 
Invocation the Body and Blood of Christ7. In the first of the passages referred to below 
he speaks of “ the Holy Invocation of the Adorable Trinity,” in the others of the Holy Spirit only. 

Cyril next describes the Invocation as “ completing the Spiritual Sacrifice, the bloodless 
Service,” and then gives a summary of the “Great Intercession” as made “over that 
Sacrifice of the Propitiation.” The Intercession, as represented by Cyril, is not simply 
a prayer, but an offering of the Sacrifice §, and this is in accordance with the usual language 
of the Liturgies. “We offer to Thee, O Lord, on behalf also of Thy holy places, which 
Thou hast glorified by the Theophany of Thy+Christ, and by the visitation of Thine 
All-Holy Spirit: especially on behalf of glorious Sion, the Mother of all the Churches, 
and on behalf of Thy Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church throughout the whole world '.” 
In the Liturgy of §, Chrysostom, as now commonly used in the Orthodex Eastern Church, 
we find the fuller phrase, ‘We offer unto Thee “dis reasonable Service on behalf of the 
world, on behalf of the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church ?.” 

In some particulars Cyril’s summary agrees most nearly with the Clementine Liturgy, 
as, for example, in the prayer “for the King and those in authority, and for the whole 

army, that they may be at peace with us%” In others he follows the Liturgy of S. James, 
ef BY We S Xs ® Th. 8 6: see ales 3 ¥: a Chan, is.) 4 A hat, 1 c.165—67- 
5 Frag. XXxviil. 6 Jitures, p 382; 7. Alystag.'%, 1s 89S Ti, 83 3 8: 
Mystay. v. § 8: tavtyy sporPeponey THY Ovoian. I Hammond, Leteyvazy of S. Janes. p. 4 

ig (se ofan stv BS ath, trae 

POC r Skis PEC REPS. EA PURGY . XXIX 
as in the intercession for ‘‘ every Christian soul afflicted and distressed, that stands in 
need of Thy pity and succour 4.” 

Cyril next describes the commemoration of departed Saints, and ‘of all who in 
past years have fallen asleep among us,” that is, in the bosom of the Church, and states 
his belief ‘that it will be a very great benefit to the souls, for whom the supplication is 
put up while that holy and most awful Sacrifice is presented 5.” He refers to objections 
against this belief, and brings forward in defence of it a reason applicable only to sinners : 
“When we offer,” he says, ‘our supplications for those who have fallen asleep, though 
they be sinners, we offer up Christ sacrificed for our sins, propitiating our merciful God 
for them as well as for ourselves *®.” His language on this subject seems in fact to shew 
an advance in doctrine beyond the earliest Liturgies. In those of S. James and S. Basil 
we find prayers that the offering may be acceptable as a propitiation ‘for the rest of the 
souls that have fallen asleep aforetime ;” and again, “‘that we may find mercy and grace 
with all the Saints who have ever been pleasing in Thy sight from generation to generation, 
forefathers, fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Teachers, holy 
men, and every righteous spirit made perfect in the faith of Thy Christ.” 

There is nothing here, nor in the Clementine Liturgy, nor in that of S. Mark, cor- 
responding to the purpose which Cyril ascribes to the commemoration, “that at their 
prayers and intereessions God would receive our petition.” In the Anaphora of S. Chrysos- 
tom contained in the later form of the Liturgy of Constantinople we find, apparently for 
the first time, this prayer added to the commemoration of all Saints, “at whose supplications 
look upon us, O God.” 

There was much controversy on the subject of prayers for the dead in Cyril’s time, 
and the objections which he notices were brought into prominence by Aerius, and rebuked 
by Epiphanius 7. 

From the commemoration of the departed Cyril passes at once to the Lord’s Prayer §, 
omitting the Preface which is found in the Liturgies of S. James and S. Mark. In the 
Clementine Liturgy, contrary to general use, the Lord’s Prayer is not said at all. Cyril adds 
an exposition of each petition, and gives an unusual explanation of émovavos, for which see the 
footnote: he also explains rod wornpod as referring to ‘the wicked one,” following in this the 
Embolismus of S. James, “ deliver us from the wicked one and from his works.” 

“ After this the Bishop says, Holy things for holy men?” Chrysostom explains this as 
being both an invitation to the Faithful in general to communicate, and a warning to the 
unholy to withdraw. “The Bishop, with loud voice and awe-inspiring cry, raising high his arm 
like a herald, and standing on high in sight of all, above that awful silence cries aloud, inviting 
some and repelling others, and doing this not with his hand, but with his tongue more clearly 
than with the hand..... For when he says, Holy things for the holy, he means this : Who- 
soever is not holy, let him not draw near?” E 

In regard to the doctrinal significance of the formula, Dr. Waterland’s remarks should be 
consulted 2. 

The response of the people to the “Sancta Sanctis” is given by Cyril3 in accordance with 
the Liturgy of S. James and the Clementine: “One is Holy, One is the Lord, Jesus Christ :” 
but he does not mention the “ Gloria in excelsis” nor the ‘‘ Hosanna,” both of which follow 
here in the Ciensentine. 

* After this,” says Cyril, “ye hear the chanter inviting you with a sacred melody to the 
Communion of the Holy Mysteries, and saying, O fase and see that the Lord ts good+. This 

4 Hammond, Liturey of S. James, p. 44. 5 os 6 $ 10. G ards: ex S7.> (Ch bingh, zien sevice & 
8165 Dict. Cie, Broow “Nerius, 8 Alystag. V.§& 11. 9 Ib. § 19. t Hom. voli. in Hebr. These Homilies were 
edited after Chrysostom’s death. 2A Review of the Doctrine of the Eucharist, Cox. 3. & rg; 4 § 20. 

IS TROD ian: 

aurees with the Clementine rubric: “Det the 33rd Psalm be sung while all the rest are ‘par 
ee In the Liturey of S. James, while the Bishop is breaking the Bread and dipping it 
in the Wine, the “ Agnus Ici” and several Psalms were sung: but of these there is no 
mention in the Clementine Liturgy cr in Cyril. 

On Cyril's directions for receiving the Bread and the Cup with duc reverence, see the foot- 
notes on the passaes >. 

lis final injunction to remain for the prayer and thanksgiving is taken from that in the 
Clementine Liturey: “Tlaving partaken of the precious Body and the precious Blood of 
Christ, let us give thanks to Him who hath counted us worthy to partake of llis holy Mys- 
teries ” The thanksgiving, benediction, concluding prayers, and dismissal, vary much in the 

different Liturgies. 

CHAPTER “VI, 
Errrers or BAPTISM AND OF CHRISM. 

€ 4, Paftism. When we try to ascertain the exact relation between Baptism and the 
Unetion or Chrism which immediately followed, we find that Cyril’s teaching on the subject 
has been understood in very different senses. By some he is thought to regard the Unction 
as being merely an accessory rite of the one great Sacrament of Baptism; to others he seems 
to draw a clear distinction between them, assigning to each its proper grace and efficacy. 

The former view is stated by the Oxford editor, Milles, in his note on the words: “ And in 
like manner to you also, after you had come up from the pool of the sacred waters, there was 
eiven an unction, a figure (dyrirymov) of that with which Christ was anointed; and that is the 
Holy Ghost 1." “It is evident,” says Milles, “ from his words here, that the Chrism of which 
Cyril treats in this Lecture is not to be referred to the Unction which is administered by the 
Romanists in Confirmation. For every one sees that by Unction in this passage a ceremony 
of Baptism is indicated. The ancients employed two Unctions in Baptism, the first before 
the immersion in the water, of which he spoke in the preceding Lecture; the second imme- 
diately upon ascending from the water, of which he speaks in this Lecture.” 

‘This opinion is claborately discussed by the Benedictine editor, Touttée, Déssertatio iii. 
c. 7, who argues that the Unction described by Cyril is a Sacrament distinct from Baptism, 
that it has for its proper grace the gift of the Holy Spirit, and further that this gift is not 
conferred in Baptism. Of these assertions the first and second appear to represent Cyril’s 
view correctly: the last is an exaggeration and a mistake, the tendency of which is to identify 
the Chrism of the Eastern Church with that which is used in Confirmation by the Roman 
Church, and to exalt the rite of Confirmation as a proper Sacrament distinct from Baptism, 
and even superior to it. A view differing in some respects from both of these has been 
recently put forward by a learned and devout writer of our own Church, who has fully dis- 
cussed the teaching of Cyril and other Eastern Fathers, and gives the result of his investigation 
in the following “Summary?:” ‘For very many centuries the Christians of the East have 
never been forced to define to themselves at all clearly the position of a person baptized but 
unconfirmed. Their mode of administering Confirmatton (Chrism?) by the hands of the 
baptizing Presbyter—though among the Greeks and some others with chrism prepared by the 
Bishop—-relieves them from the necessity which weighs upon us Westerns, of teaching 
Christian children what their status is between the two rites. Confirmation (Chrism ?) is for 
them, far more than it has been for a long while in the West, a factor in Baptism. Only 

5 $$ 21, 22. a a) setae, Tis & ds 

2 A. J. Mason, D.D., Zhe Relation of Confirntation to Baptism, p. 389. Though I find myself compelled to differ widely from 
my friend Canon Mason in the interpretation of Cyril’s teaching on this subject, I cannot refrain from expressing my sincere 
admiration of the tone and purpose of his treatise, and of the learning and research which it exhibits. 

EPPECTS OL BAP LESN AN OF CHRIS VE OG | 

a more or less conscious desire not to fall behind Western teachers in honouring the per- 
fecting Unction can have led their later authorities to treat that Unction as a sacrament 
numerically distinct from Baptism. To all the early doctors of the East the two things are 
one, and Baptism culminates in the Unction. The tendency among Oriental Christians was, 
not to attribute to Baptism in our modern sense the gift of the Holy Ghost, but rather to 
consider Baptism by itself as a bare rite, benefiting the body alone, and dependent for its 
spiritual efficacy upon other actions, after and before. Not that this tendency has its full Way. 
The Greck Fathers may be said certainly on the whole to trace the forgiveness of sins, the 
preparatory cleansing, to the baptismal Laver; the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the ordinary 
purposes of Christian living, they trace, like S. Chrysostom, to that act which comes “im- 
mediately after Baptism, and before the Mysteries.” 

When we come to inquire how far these several theories agree with the teaching of Cyril 
himself, we must in the outset put aside altogether the name Confirmation: for as applied to 
the Unction used in the Eastern Church it is only confusing and misleading. In the early 
ages of the Church Confirmation was not known even by name. In the Latin Church “ neither 
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, nor any of the Latin Fathers, makes mention 
of Confirmation in this sense. Nor have the Greeks any word to answer to this Latin term 3.” 
So far, therefore, Milles appears to be perfectly right in refusing to connect the Chrism of 
which Cyril treats with the Unction used in Confirmation by the Roman Church. 

We may add that in Cyril’s account of Chrism it is wholly unconnected with Confirmation, 
both in its symbolic reference and in its outward form. Chrism, he says, is the antitype of 
the Unction of Christ by the Holy Ghost at His Baptism: Confirmation is universally ad- 
mitted to have been a following of the Apostles in their laying on of hands. But in that 
Apostolic rite there was no unction, and in Chrism there was no such laying on of hands. 

In several passages Cyril clearly distinguishes the outward form of Baptism from the 
spiritual grace. 

“Tf thy body be here, but not thy mind, it profiteth thee nothing. Even Simon Magus 
once came to the Laver: he was baptized, but was not enlightened; and though he dipped 
his body in water, he enlightened not his heart with the Spirit: his body went down and came 
up, but his soul was not buried with Christ, nor raised with Him +4.” 

It is impossible here to regard “the Spirit” as referring to the grace of Unction: for 
(1) Baptism was not accompanied by Unction in the time of the Apostles, and (2) we should 
thus make a false antithesis between the ouéward part of the one rite (“he dipped his body in 
water”), and the zzward part of the other. Here, therefore, Cyril attributes enlightenment of 
the heart by the Spirit to Baptism apart from Unction, and at the same time lays stress upon 
the difference between the worthy and unworthy recipient of the outward form. 

The importance of this difference is further enforced throughout the next two sections, and 
at the close of § 4 the distinction between the outward sign and inward grace of Baptism, 
strictly so called, is again asserted, “though the water will receive thee, the Spirit will not 
accept thec.” 

“Some might suppose,” it is said, “from these words that Cyril thought of water and the 
Spirit as the sign and the thing signified in Baptism respectively, and a passage in a later 
Lecture upon the subject of the Sacrament (of Baptism) at first confirms that impression 5.” 

To suppose that Cyril had any other thought in the former passage, seems to me 
impossible for any ordinary reader; and the later passage, not only at first, but more fully 
the longer it is considered, confirms that impression beyond all doubt. ‘The whole quotation, 
including Cat. iii. $$ 3, 4, is too long to repeat here, but may be read in its proper place. 

( ~ a c Peery ae a 
3 Suicer, 7iesaurus, Xptoua, 4 Procat. § 2, 5 Maso, wer sei, p..337- 

NNN INTRODUCTION. 
It will be sufficient to give the passages W 
us, according to Canon Mason’s translation. 
Cat. iii, § 3. “Do not attend to the laver as mere water, but to the spiritual grace given 
along with the water”... © the mere water, receiving the invocation of the Holy Ghost, and 
of the Father, acquires a power of sanctity. Jor since man is a two-fold being 
e incorporeal for the 

hich are of chief importance in the question before 

of Christ, and 
composed of soul and body, the cleansing clement also is two-fold, th 
incorporeal, the bodily for the body. And the water cleanses the body, but the Spirit seals 
the soul, in order that having our hearts sprinkled by the Spirit, and our bodies washed with 
pure water, we may draw nigh to God. When, therefore, you are about to go down into the 
water do not pay attention to the mere nature of the water, but expect salvation by the 
operation of the Holy Ghost, or without both it is impossible for thee to be perfected.” 

No words could state more clearly the distinction between the outward sign and the 
inward grace of Baptism, and the absolute necessity for both. There is no posssible reference 
to Unction, but “the operation of the Holy Ghost” in cleansing and sealing the soul is 
unmistakably connected with Baptism as “the grace given with the water’? (werd rod Varos), 
and below, as “the seal by water” (riy dv wdaros opayida), the latter phrase shewing that 
Baptism by water is the signum efficax of the grace in question. 

Cyril then quotes our Lord’s words, Zxcept a man be born of water and the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and explains them thus: “On the one hand he who is 
being baptized (Sarregipevos) with the water, but has not had the Spirit vouchsafed to him 
(caragabels), has not the grace in perfection: on the other hand, even if a man be dis- 
tinguished for virtue in his deeds, but does not receive the seal bestowed by means of water 
(riv Sv datos appayisa), he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.” Canon Mason, 
whose translation I have followed, finds here a reference both to Baptism and to Unction as 
“the first baptismal act and the second,” and in support of this interpretation gives a second 
and more emphatic version : ‘He who is in course of being baptized with the water, but has 
not yet had the Spirit vouchsafed to him, has not the grace in perfection.” This introduction 

of the word “ye/,” in order to represent a distinction between two separate acts, is not 
justified either by the reading of the older editions (oid€ rO vdaTe BarriCopevos pay Katagiwbcts 
8€ rod Tvetparos), nor by that of Codices Monac. Roe, Casaub. adopted by. Reischl (otre 
6 PeBartitpévos x.7-d.), Nor by the Benedictine text (otre 6 Bamrigopevos k.td.). The obvious 
meaning of the passage, with cither reading, is that “the man who in Baptism did not receive 
the Holy Spirit, has not the grace (of Baptism) complete.” The Benedictine Editor in his 
elaborate argument for regarding Chrism as a distinct sacrament **, does not even refer to 
this passage. 

A statement which is important in this connexion is found in AZystag. 1. § 6: “Let no 
one then suppose that Baptism is the grace of remission of sins only, or further of adoption, 
as the Baptism of John conferred only remission of sins; but as we know full well that 
it cleanses from sins and procures a gift of the Holy Spirit, so also it is a counterpart 
(dvrirurov) of the sufferings of Christ.” 

Here besides “the remission of sins, which no man receiyeth without the Holy Spirit 2" 
we find “a gift of the Holy Ghost,” and the fellowship of Christ’s Passion distinctly attributed 
to Baptism. 

If the “adoption” mentioned at the beginning of this passage were identical (as Touttée 
thinks) with the “ gift of the Holy Ghost,” it would by no means follow that Cyril here means 
to include Unction in Baptism. For the grace which beyond all others is exclusively attached 
to Baptism, and not to Unction, is the new birth, and this is the new birth into freedom 

58 Dissert. ili. ce 8, 6 Tooker, Z.P. V. Ixvi. § 6. 

HPP EGCILSSOE. BAPTISM AND. OF CHRISW. sei 

and adoption?.” In fact Cyril’s teaching on this point is in strict accordance with that 
of St. Paul in Gal. iv. 4-6, that we first receive the adoption of sons (viobeciar), and then 
“because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of Mis Son into our hearts, crying, Abda, 
Lather” So again in Rom. viii. 1s, 16, he says, “ Ye received the Spirit of adoption, whereby 
we ery, Abba, Lather. The Spirit Himself beareth witness with our ¢ rit that we are 
the children of God.” In both passages St. Paul clearly distinguishes two things, “the 
adoption” itself, and the witness of it by “the Spirit of adoption.” Cf. Bengel on 7. 4: 
“Prius advptionem, deinde Spiritim adoptionis accepimus ;” and on v. 6: “ Filforum statin 
sequitur inhabitatio Spiritus Sancti, non hanc ille”” The adoption itself belongs to Baptism 
strictly so called, in which we are made children of God and joint heirs with Christ (cf. 
Cat. ill. 15): the witness of the indwelling Spirit of adoption is the special grace ascribed 
to Chrism in the Eastern Church, and to Confirmation in the Western. There are many 
other passages in which Cyril ascribes to Baptism itself, as distinct from Chrism, a gift 
of the Spirit, such as the following: “But He trieth the soul: He casteth not His pearls 
before the swine : if thou dissemble, men will baptize thee now, but the Spirit will not 
baptize thee 8.” 

“The Lord, preventing us according to His loving-kindness, has granted repentance 
at Baptism, in order that we may cast off the chief—nay, rather the whole burden of 
_ our sins, and having received the seal by the Holy Ghost, may be made heirs of eternal life 9.” 

Again, after speaking of “the invocation of grace having sealed the soul,” he adds: 
“faving gone down dead in sins, thou comest up quickened in righteousness. For if 
thou hast been waited with the likeness of the Saviour’s death, thou shalt also be deemed 
worthy of His Resurrection®.” The benefits ascribed to Baptism in these several passages 
without any allusion to Chrism, are brought together with rhetorical effect in the Introductory 
Lecture, § 16: “Great is the Baptism that lies before you ; a ransom to captives, a remission 
of offences, a death of sin, a new birth of the soul, a garment of light, a holy indissoluble 
seal, a chariot to heaven, the delight of Paradise, a welcome into the kingdom, the gift of 
adoption.” 

From such language it is clear beyond question that in Cyril of Jerusalem, not to speak 
of other Oriental Fathers, the tendency is not “to consider Baptism by itself as a bare 
rite, benefiting the body alone, and dependent for its spiritual efficacy upon other actions 
after and before,” but as depending on the power of the Holy Ghost, and the sincerity 
of repentance and faith in man. 

If further proof were needed, a glance at the Index under the word ‘ Baptism” will 
shew the extraordinary richness, variety, and precision of Cyril’s teaching, as to the gifts 
of the Holy Ghost conferred thercin. 

§ 2. Chrism. When spiritual blessings so many and so great have been ascribed to 
Baptism, in what light, it may be asked, does Cyril regard the Unction which follows? Does 
he treat it as being merely an additional ceremony subordinate to Baptism, or as having for 
its own proper grace some special gift of the Holy Ghost? We find no answer to this ques- 
tion in the earlier course of Lectures. But that Chrism was not regarded by Cyril as a mere 
accessory to Baptism, as Milles thought 3, may be safely inferred from the fact that in announc- 
ing the subjects of his Mystagogic Lectures, he mentions first Baptism, then “the scal of the 
fellowship of the Holy Ghost,” and then “the Mysteries at the altar of the New Covenant 4:” 
and this inference is fully confirmed by his language elsewhere: “Ye have heard enough 
of Baptism, and Chrism, and partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ 5.” A mere additional 

Pe Gat ave ot 8 Ib. xvii. § 36. O UDiitv “a7. 1 Ib. iii. § x2. 2 Upon the supposed allusion to Chrism 
in Cat. xvi. § 26, see below, p. xxxiv. 3 Note on ALystag. iii. § 1, 4 Cate svitty § 33: 5 Mysiag. v. § 1. 

VO Vell d 

INTRODUCTION. 

SWRA 

It will be sufficient to give the passages which are of chief importance in the question before 
us, according to Canon Mason’s translation. 

Cat. iii. § 3.“ Do not attend to the laver as mere water, but to the spiritual grace given 
he invocation of the Holy Ghost, and 

alone with the water”... “the mere water, receiving t 
For since man is a two-fold being 

Father, acquires a power of sanctity. 
composed of soul and body, the cleansing clement also is two-fold, the incorporeal for the 
incorporeal, the bodily for the body. And the water cleanses the body, but the Spirit seals 
kled by the Spirit, and our bodies washed with 
herefore, you are about to go down into the 

of Christ, and of the 

the soul, in order that having our hearts sprin 
water do not pay attention to the mere nature of the water, but expect salvation by the 
operation of the Holy Ghost. For without both it is impossible for thee to be perfected.” 
No words could state more clearly the distinction between the outward sign and the 
inward grace of Baptism, and the absolute necessity for both. There is no posssible reference 
to Unction, but “the operation of the Holy Ghost” in cleansing and sealing the soul is 
unmistakably connected with Baptism as “ the grace given with the water” (wert rod Uéaros), 
and below, as “the seal by water” (ry de vdaros oppayida), the latter phrase shewing that 

pure water, we may draw nich to God. When, t 

Baptism by water is the szgvzn cficax of the grace in question. 

Cyril then quotes our Lord’s words, Zvcepf a man be born of water and the Spirit, he 
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, and explains them thus: “ On the one hand he who 1s 
being baptized (Sarre¢spevos) with the water, but has not had the Spirit vouchsafed to him 
(karafvwOels), has not the grace in perfection: on the other hand, even if a man be dis- 
tinguished for virtue in his deeds, but does not receive the seal bestowed by means of water 
(riv b0 tdaros oppayida), he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.” Canon Mason, 
whose translation I have followed, finds here a reference both to Baptism and to Unction as 
“the first baptismal act and the second,” and in support of this interpretation gives a second 
and more emphatic version : ‘* He who is in course of being baptized with the water, but has 
not yet had the Spirit vouchsafed to him, has not the grace in perfection.” This introduction 
of the word “yet,” in order to represent a distinction between two separate acts, is not 
justified either by the reading of the older editions (ovdé r@ vdate BarriCdpevos pay Katagi@bcis 
Se rod THvetparos), nor by that of Codices Monac. Roe, Casaub. adopted by. Reischl (oi're 
6 BeBantispévos x.7.d.), nor by the Benedictine text (otre 6 Barrigipevos kd.) The obvious 
meaning of the passage, with cither reading, ss that “the man who in Baptism did not receive 
the Holy Spirit, has not the grace (of Baptism) complete.” The Benedictine Editor in his 
elaborate argument for regarding Chrism as a distinct sacrament 5*, does not even refer to 
this passage. 

A statement which is important in this connexion is found in Jfystag. ii. § 6: “Let no 
one then suppose that Baptism is the grace of remission of sins only, or further of adoption, 
as the Baptism of John conferred only remission of sins; but as we know full well that 
it cleanses from sins and procures a gift of the Holy Spirit, so also it is a counterpart 
(dvrirurov) of the sufferings of Christ.” 

Here besides “the remission of sins, which no man receiveth without the Holy Spirit °,” 
we find “a gift of the Holy Ghost,” and the fellowship of Christ’s Passion distinctly attributed 
to Baptism. 

If the “adoption ” mentioned at the beginning of this passage were identical (as Touttée 
thinks) with the “ gift of the Holy Ghost,” it would by no means follow that Cyril here means 
to include Unction in Baptism. For the grace which beyond all others is exclusively attached 
to Baptism, and not to Unction, is the new birth, and this is ‘the new birth into freedom 

Be Preeti. Cs. 6 locker, Z.P. V. Ixvi. § 6. 

EPPPEC TS OF BAPTIGN: AND OF CHRISVE Sein 

and adoption?.” In fact Cyril’s teaching on. this point is in strict accordance with that 
of St. Paul in Gal. iv. 4-6, that we first receive the adoption of sons (vtobectav), and then 
“ because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, 
Lather.” So again in Rom. viii. 15, 16, he says, “ Ve vecetved the Spirit of adoption, whereby 
we cry, Abba, Lather. The Spirit Llimself beareth witness with our spirit that we are 
the children of God.” In both passages St. Paul clearly distinguishes two things, ‘the 
adoption” itself, and the witness of it by “the Spirit of adoption.” Cf. Bengel on 7. 4: 
“Prius adoptionem, deinde Spiritum adoptionis accepimus ;” and on v. 6: “ Filiorum statu 
sequitur inhabitatio Spiritus Sancti, non hance ille.” The adoption itself belongs to Baptism 
strictly so called, in which we are made children of God and joint heirs with Christ (ef. 
Cat. ili. 15): the witness of the indwelling Spirit of adoption is the special grace ascribed 
to Chrism in the Eastern Church, and to Confirmation in the Western, There are many 
other passages in which Cyril ascribes to Baptism itself, as distinct from Chrism, a gift 
of the Spirit, such as the following: “But He trieth the soul: He casteth not His pearls 
before the swine : if thou dissemble, men will baptize thee now, but the Spirit will not 
baptize thee 8,” 

“The Lord, preventing us according to His loving-kindness, has granted repentance 
at Baptism, in order that we may cast off the chief nay, rather the whole burden of 
_ our sins, and having received the seal by the Holy Ghost, may be made heirs of eternal life 9.” 

Again, after speaking of “the invocation of grace having sealed the soul,” he adds: 
“Having gone down dead in sins, thou comest up quickened in righteousness. For if 
thou hast been wxdtted with the likeness of the Saviour’s death, thou shalt also be deemed 
worthy of His Resurrection®.” The benefits ascribed to Baptism in these several passages 
without any allusion to Chrism, are brought together with rhetorical effect in the Introductory 
Lecture, § 16: “Great is the Baptism that lies before you ; a ransom to captives, a remission 
of offences, a death of sin, a new birth of the soul, a garment of light, a holy indissoluble 
seal, a chariot to heaven, the delight of Paradise, a welcome into the kingdom, the gift of 
adoption.” 

From such language it is clear beyond question that in Cyril of Jerusalem, not to speak 
of other Oriental Fathers, the tendency is not “to consider Baptism by itself as a bare 
rite, benefiting the body alone, and dependent for its spiritual efficacy upon other actions 
after and before,” but as depending on the power of the Holy Ghost, and the sincerity 
of repentance and faith in man. 

If further proof were needed, a glance at the Index under the word “Baptism” will 
shew the extraordinary richness, variety, and precision of Cyril’s teaching, as to the gifts 
of the Holy Ghost conferred therein. 

§ 2. Chrism. When spiritual blessings so many and so great have been ascribed to 
Baptism, in what light, it may be asked, does Cyril regard the Unction which follows? Does 
he treat it as being merely an additional cercmony subordinate to Baptism, or as having for 
its own proper grace some special gift of the Holy Ghost? We find no answer to this ques- 
tion in the earlier course of Lectures 2. But that Chrism was not regarded by Cyril as a mere 
accessory to Baptism, as Milles thought 3, may be safely inferred from the fact that in announc- 
ing the subjects of his Mystagogic Lectures, he mentions first Baptism, then “the scal of the 
fellowship of the Holy Ghost,” and then “the Mysteries at the altar of the New Covenant 4:” 
and this inference is fully confirmed by his language elsewhere: “Ye have heard enough 
of Baptism, and Chrism, and partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ 5.” A mere additional 

HACE Rime 8 Ib. xvii. § 36. 9 Ib. iv 37. t Tb, ili. § 12. 2 Upon the supposed allusion to Chrism 
in Cat. xvi. § 26, see below, De XOKLVe 3 Note on AZystag. iii. § 1, 4 Cat. xviii. § 33. 5 Mysiag. v. § 1. 
VOL, VIL. d 

ae INTRODUCTION. 

ceremony of Baptism could not have been so independently placed between the two great 
Sacraments, and, as It were, in the same rank with them. 

The importance thus attached to Chrism is further shewn in the fact that Cyril uses the 
very same Janguage in reference to the consecration of the ointment of Chrism, and of the 
wasnt of Baptism, and of the Eucharistic elements. ‘Phe bread and wine of the Mucharist 
before the Invocation of the Ifoly and Adorable ‘Trinity are simple (Adds) bread and wine, but 
after the Invocation the Bread becomes the Body and the Wine the Blood of Christ.” 
“Regard not the Laver as simple (urd) water, but rather regard the spiritual grace that is given 
with ‘the water?” ‘The simple water having received the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, and 
of Christ, and of the lather, acquires a new power of holiness °.” 

« But see thou suppose not this to be plain (WaAdy) ointment. For as the Bread of the 
Fucharist, after the Invocation of the Holy Ghost is no longer simple (\urdés) bread, but the 
Body of Christ; so also this holy ointment is no longer plain (WeAcy) ointment, nor, as one 
might say, common, after Invocation, but Christ’s gift of grace (xdpwyta), and is made effectual 
to impart the Holy Ghost by the presence of His own Godhead 9.” 

The spiritual benefits which Cyril ascribes to the Unction are set forth in the same 
Lecture. ‘This holy thing is a spiritual safeguard of the body, and salvation of the soul” 
($7): it sanctifies all the organs of sense: “the body is anointed with the visible ointment, 
and the soul is sanctified by the Holy and Life-giving Spirit” (§ 3). After being anointed the 
Christian is now entitled to that name in its fullest sense‘; he is clothed with the whole 
armour of the Holy Ghost, that he may stand against the power of the adversary : he may say, 
“ Tcan do all things tn Christ tho strengtheneth me” (§ 4). 

In regard to the supposed identity of Chrism and Confirmation, it is important to notice 
carefully how Cyril speaks of the laying on of hands in the only passage where he men- 
tions it ?. 

Ue first illustrates the freedom of the Spirit, and His independence of human agency, by 
the gift of prophecy to the seventy elders, including Eldad and Medad: he then refers to the 
gift of the spirit of wisdom to Joshua by the laying on of Moses’ hands 3, and adds, “Thou 
seest everywhere the figure (rvmov) in the Old Testament, and in the New the same. In Moses’ 
time the Spirit was given by laying on of hands (yetpodeaia), and Peter gives the Spirit by laying 
on of hands+: and upon thee also, who art to be baptized, the grace is about to come ; but 
the manner (76 was) I tell thee not, for I do not forestall the time.” 

From this passage it has been inferred (1) that Cyril alludes to a gift of the Spirit by laying 
on of hands in immediate connexion with Baptism and Unction 5, and (2) that he refers this 
eift of the Spirit not to Baptism itself, but to the laying on of hands, or to the Unction 
as a figure that answers to it® 

(1) The first of these inferences is opposed to the fact that Cyril neither mentions the 
laying on of hands as part of the actual ceremonial in Baptism or Unction, nor as the analogous 
rite in the old Testament, but on the contrary expressly says? that the symbol (1d otpBoror) of 
this holy Chrism in the Old ‘Testament lies in the consecration of Aaron to be High Priest, 
when Moses, “after the washing in water anointed him, and he was called ‘anointed, evidently 
from this figurative unction (rod xpicparos dyhady Tov rumtkod).” 

(2) In support of the second inference the argument offered is as follows: “That the Spirit 
was to come upon them in the course of their Baptism is here again clearly stated ; but that 
Cyril did not intend them to suppose that Baptism itself would convey the gift is equally clear. 
Again and again in earlier Lectures, as well as in the words actually before us, Cyril has taught 
them to expect the gift in Baptism ; if therefore the immersion itself were to be the means of 

O Di ylaee nS J PCa Ss: 8 Tides. 9 Alystag. iii. 3. poh Pes vestsur as 2 Cate xvi h $25, 26; 

3 Deut. xxxiv. 9 4 Acte vill. 17. 5 ‘Touttée 6 Mason, p. 341, with note 7 Mystag. iii. 6. 

EPEECTS OF BAPFISM AND OF CHRICW XXXV 

receiving it, ke has already told them hts secret. Yet now he says that he will not tell them 
‘how’ they are to receive it. That remains for a future occasion ®.” The mistake, as 
I venture to consider it, lies in the words which T have marked with italics. For of the 
mysteries which were to be concealed from the unbaptized (dutyroe) the first was the manner 
of administering Baptism itself, and the second, the unction of Chrism; and in the preceding 
Lectures Cyril has no more told the secret of the one than of the other. “ Baptism, the 
Eucharist, and the oil of Chrism, were things that the uninitiated (duinror) were not allowed 
to look upon 9.” 

“We bless,” says S. Basil , “both the water of Baptism and the oil of the Chrism, and 
moreover the baptized (Samri¢spevoy) himself. From what written commands? Is it not from 
a secret (cwwrepérns) and mystical tradition ? Again, the very anointing with the oil, what 
word of Scripture taught that? And the dipping the man thrice, whence came it? And all 
the other accompaniments of Baptism, the renunciation of Satan and his angels, from what 
Scripture came they? Come they not from this unpublished and secret teaching, which our 
fathers guarded in a silence with which no prying curiosity might meddle, having been well 
taught to preserve the sanctity of the mysteries by silence? For how could it have been right 
to publish in writing the doctrine of these mysteries, which the unbaptized are not even 
allowed to look upon ?” 

As these secret ceremonies of Baptism and Unction are revealed by Cyril only in the 
Mystagogic Lectures, the supposed reason for saying, that in Cat. xvi. 26, the promised gift of 
the Spirit refers not to Baptism but only to Unction, at once falls to the ground. 

The true state of the case is well expressed by Bingham 2, “ Though the ancients acquainted 
the Catechumens with the doctrine of Baptism so far as to make them understand the spiritual 
nature and design of it, yet they never admitted them to the sight of the actual ceremony, nor 
so much as to hear any plain discourse about the manner of its administration, till they were 
fitted and prepared for the actual reception of it,”—or rather, till they actually received it. 

There is in fact no reason to exalt the benefits of Unction, or Confirmation, by robbing 
Baptism of its proper grace. “It was this Unction, as the completion of Baptism, to which 
they ascribed the power of making every Christian in some sense partaker of a royal priesthood. 
To it they also ascribed the noble effects of confirming the soul with the strength of all spiritual 
graces on God’s part, as well as the confirmation of the profession and covenant made on 
man’s part 3.” We may well be satisfied that the doctrine of the early Church has been so 
fully retained in essential points in our own Office of Confirmation, recalling as it does by the 
ratification of the baptismal vows the immediate connexion of the ancient Unction with 
Baptism, and in its Prayers invoking the same gifts of the Holy Spirit,—“ Strengthen them, we 
beseech Thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily increase in them Thy 
manifold gifts of grace; the spirit of wisdom and understanding; the spirit of counsel and 
ghostly strength ; the spirit of knowledge and true godliness ; and fill them, O Lord, with the 
spirit of ‘Thy holy fear, now and for ever. Amen.” 

CHAPTER - Vit, 
EUCHARISTIC DOCTRINE. 

We have seen that Cyril makes the consecration of sacramental elements in every case 
consist in the Invocation of the Holy Ghost, after which the water of Baptism is no longer 

8 Mason, p. 34r. 9 Basil, apud Bingham, X. 5, § 4. GAS POF 186 5. Ce REVAL 2 Ant. X.v. § 4. 

3 Bingh. XII. iii. § 3. Cf. Afost. Const. WN. c. 17. ‘ This 3aptism therefore is into the death of Jesus: the water is instead 
of the burial, and the oil instead of the Holy Ghost; the seal instead of the Cross 3 the ointment is the confirmation of the Coi- 
Session.” VII, 22: “that the anointing with oil may be the participation of the Holy Spirit, and the water the symbol of the death, 
and the ointment the seal of the covenants,” 

d 2 

SoaeN INTRODUCTION. 

roere simple water‘, the ointment no longer plain ointment 2, the bread and the wine no longer 
plain bread and wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ 3. 

Upon these statements an argument against Transubstantiation has been founded by Bishop 
Cosin +, and adopted both by Dr. Pusey ® and Dean Goode®. It being universally admitted 
that the substance of the water and of the ointment remains unchanged, it is argued from the 
identity of the language employed in each case that, according to Cyril, no substantial change 
takes place in the Bread and Wine. — Bishop Cosin quotes the following passage, of which the 
original is given below: ‘Take heed thou dost not think that this is a mere ointment only. 
For as the bread of the Eucharist after the ‘nyocation of the Holy Ghost is no longer ordinary 
bread, but is the body of Christ ; so this holy ointment is no longer a bare common ointment 
after it is consecrated, but is the gift or grace of Christ, which, by His Divine Nature, and 
the coming of the Holy Ghost, is made efficacious ; so that the body is anointed with the 
ointment, but the soul is sanctified by the holy and vivifying Spirit 7.” 

Bishop Cosin proceeds to argue thus: Can anything more clear be said? Either the 
ointment 1s transubstantiated by consecration into the spirit and grace of Christ, or the bread 
and wine are not transubstantiated by consecration into the Body and Blood of Christ. 
Therefore as the ointment retains still its substance, and yet is not called a mere or common 
ointment, but the Chrism or grace of Christ: so the bread and wine remaining so, as to their 
substance, yet are not said to be only bread and wine common and ordinary, but also the Body 
and Blood of Christ.” 

Notwithstanding the great authority of Bishop Cosin, and the assent of Theologians of such 
opposite schools as_ Dr. Pusey and Dean Goode, +t must be admitted that the argument, even 
as against Transubstantiation, is pressed beyond its just limits. ‘The identity of language 
extends only to two points, (1) the mode of consecration by Invocation, (2) the effect 
negatively stated, that the material element in each case is no longer simply a material element. 
A change, therefore, of some kind has taken place, and we have still to inquire how the change 
in each case is described by Cyril. ‘The water acquires a power of sanctity,” otherwise 
described as “ the spiritual grace given with the water *," 

“The ointment is Christ’s gift of grace (Xdpipa), and becomes effectual to impart by the 
presence of the Holy Ghost His Divine Nature9.” “The Bread becomes the Body and 
the Wine the Blood of Christ i 

There is here no such identity of language as would justify the assertion that the change 
described is of the same nature in each case, that because it leaves the substance of the water 
and the ointment untouched, therefore the substance of the Bread also must, according to 
Cyril, remain unchanged: this must be proved by other arguments. We must also remember 
that if this argument based upon the identity of the language used on the two sides of a com- 
parison is trustworthy, there is another passage in Cyril to which it may be applied: “ He 
once, in Cana of Galilee, changed the water into wine akin to blood (oixciov aipart) *, and is it 
sncredible that He changed wine into blood?” The change of the water into wine was 
a change of substance: are we then prepared to agree with the Roman Church that the change 
of the bread also is a change of substance? Nay further, would the Roman Church itself 
accept the principle of the argument? For observe that in fact Bishop Cosin himself, when he 
comes to deal with this passage, gives up his former argument, and distinctly rejects it. 

t Cnt. iH. & 2 Mystag. iii. § 3. b apros THS EVXapLOTias peta THY EmikAnoLV Tov aytou Tlvevpartos 
3 Mystag. iii. § 3. In the same Lecture, § 7, the consecration | obk ére dpros AtTOs, GAAA THpa Xpratod, ovTw Kat TO ayLov TOTO 
of the bread and wine is said to follow “the Invocation of the | piipov ovK ete Wedor, ovs’ ds dv etou TUS KOLVOY per emikAnour, 
Holy and Adorable Trinity.” | GAAa Nptotov xapiopa, Kat Mvevpatos aylov mapovaig 77S avrov 

4 The History of Popish Transubstantiation, Ch. v. $ 14. OedryTos EvepyntiKoY yLvopeEvor. SeOate ait 23, 
8 The Doctrine of the Real Presence, pp. 277—231- 9 Afystag. iii. 3. On the translation see note on the passage. 
6 The Nature of Christ's Presence in the Lucharist, p. 483. t Th anS gy 

> TAA Opa wy UrovOnaNS EKELVO TO LUPOV WiAdp etvat, WaoTEp yap 2 On this reading, see Afjstag. iv. § 2, note 4. 

RUGCIAKIS TIC: DOCTRINE. XXXVII 
‘* Protestants,” he says, “do freely grant and firmly believe that the wine, in the sense already 
often mentioned, is changed into the Blood of Christ; but every change is not a transubstan- 
tiation; neither doth Cyril say that this change (Ze. of the wine) is like that of the water, for 
then it would appear to our senses; but that He who changed the water sensibly can also 
change the wine sacramentally, will not be doubted by any 3.” Again, in describing the act 
of consecration, Cyril says: “We beseech the merciful God to send forth His Holy Spirit 
upon the gifts lying before Him, that He may make the bread the Body of Christ, and the 
wine the Blood of Christ, for certainly whatsoever the Holy Ghost has touched, is sanctified 
and changed (jyiaorat kai peraZéBryrar) +.” Here again, as in the passage quoted from JZps¢. 
lil. $ 3, a sacramental change of some sort is asserted, but its specific character is not defined. 

There is, however, a passage which throws some light on Cyril’s conception of the change in 
Jfyst. iv. § 3: “In the figure of Bread is given to thee His Body, and in the figure of Wine 
His Blood; that thou by partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ mightest be made of the 
same body and the same blood with Him. For thus we come to bear Christ in us, His Body 
and His Blood being distributed to our members (cis ru Huérepa dvadiSopévov pédy).” Several 
good MSS. read dvadedeypévor, which would give the meaning, “ having received of His Body 
and of His blood into our members.” This does not alter the general sense of the passage ; 
but the reading dvadsopevov is supported by another passage, JQs4. v.§ 15: “ Our common 
bread is not substantial (stoves): but this Holy Bread is substantial, that is, appointed for 
the substance of the soul. This Bread gocth not into the belly and ts not cast out into the 
draught, but is distributed (dva5iSora:) into thy whole system for the benefit of body and soul.” 

In order to accommodate these passages to the Roman doctrine of Transubstantiation 
the Benedictine Editor here introduces the idea of sfecies, the outward forms or accidents of 
the bread. “We must not suppose,” he says, “‘that Cyril thought the Body of Christ to be 
divided and digested (¢geré) into our body ; but by a customary way of speaking he attributes 
to the Holy Body what is suitable only to the species which conceal it. And he does not 
deny that the species pass into the draught, but only that the Body of Christ does so.” 

But Cyril draws no such distinction between the sfecies and the Body of Christ: to him the 
Bread and Wine after consecration are the Body and the Blood of Christ. For how could it 
be said that the sfecées, which in Transubstantiation are the mere outward accidents of bread 
and wine, are distributed into the whole system for the benefit of body and soul ? 

In whatever sense the bread and wine become by consecration the Body and Blood of 
Christ, in that same sense the Body and Blood of Christ are, according to Cyril, distributed to 
our whole system. 

This was no new doctrine: Ignatius, Zphes. xxi., speaks of Christians as “breaking one 
Bread, which is the medicine of immortality, and the antidote that we should not die, but live 
for ever in Jesus Christ.” ‘This is perhaps the earliest expression of the belief that the resur- 
rection of the body is secured by ¢he communion of the Body of Christ in the Eucharist. The 
manner in which this communion is effected is described by Justin Martyr (4folog. I. § 66) in 
language which shews clearly what Cyril meant: “ We do not receive these things as common 
bread and common drink: but in the same way as Jesus Christ our Saviour was made flesh by 
the Word of God, and took both flesh and blood for our salvation, so we have been taught 
that the food over which thanksgiving has been made by prayer in the word received from 
Him (rv 60 edyis Adyou rod map’ aitod etyapictnbeioay tpopny), from which (food) our blood and 
flesh are by transmutation (xara peraBodjy) nourished, is both the Flesh and Blood of Him the 
Incarnate Jesus.” 

Here it is plainly taught that by consecration the Bread and Wine have become the 
Flesh and Blood of Christ, and that as such they nourish our “ blood and flesh” (observe the 

3 Of Lrainsucsiantiation, Ch. vi. § 14. 

XXXVI i 

NTRODUCTION. 

‘averted order) by undergoing a change: in other words, the Eucharistic Body and Blood of 
Christ are changed into nourishment of our blood and flesh, by being distributed (as Cyril 
says) to all our members, that is by being subjected to the natural processes of digestion and 
assimilation. ‘Phe unusual order of the words “ our blood and flesh” is not accidental, but 
answers to the process of assimilation, in which the digested food first nourishes the blood, 
and then the blood nourishes the flesh. 

‘The meaning is, as Otto says in his note, “that the divine food passes away into our 
bodies entire, so that nothing remains :” and Dr. Pusey seems to take the same view, in his 
note on the words, “from which (food) through transmutation our blood and flesh are 
nourished :” “7.e. the material parts are changed into the substance of the human body $.” 

Thus then, according to Cyril, the Fucharistic Body and Blood of Christ are distributed to 
all our members; His Flesh and Blood pass by a change into our blood and flesh, and we 
thereby become “of the same body and the same blood with Him®:” and “this Bread does 
not pass into the belly, and is not cast out into the draught 7,” but wastes away as the body 
itself wastes % 

However much this view of the Sacramental mystery may differ from later theories, 1t was 
certainly held by many of the Creck Fathers. JIreneus, for example, in addition to those 
already mentioned, thus writes: “ When therefore both the mingled cup and the created bread 
receive the Word of God, and the Eucharist becomes the Body of Christ, and from these the 
substance of our flesh increaseth and consisteth, how say they that the flesh is incapable of the 
eift of God which is eternal life, that flesh which is nourished from the Body and Blood of 
the Lord, and is already (indpyovca) a member of Him 2?—even as the blessed Paul saith, that 
we are members of His Body, of His Flesh, and of His Bones *.” 

That this was also the teaching of Cyril’s contemporaries is clear from the famous passage 
of Gregory of Nyssa, in which this doctrine is fully developed. It will be sufficient to 
quote here the latter part of the passage, in which Gregory is speaking of the Wine. ‘Since 
then that God-containing flesh partook for ‘ts substance and support of this particular 
nourishment also, and since the God who was manifested infuscd Himself into perishable 
humanity for this purpose, viz. that by this communion with Deity mankind might at the same 
time be deified, for this end it is that, by dispensation of His grace, He disseminates Himself 
in every believer through that flesh whose substance comes from bread and wine, blending 
Himself with the bodies of believers, to secure that, by this union with the immortal, man too 
may be a sharer in incorruption. He gives these gifts by virtue of the benediction through 
which He transelements the natural quality of these visible things to that immortal thing 9.” 

In another remarkable passage’ Cyril gives a further explanation of the effect of conse- 
cration: ‘In the New Testament there is heavenly Bread and a Cup of salvation, sanctifying 
soul and body: for as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word (6 Aédyos) 1s 
appropriate to the soul.” With this language of Cyril we may compare further what is said by 
Gregory of Nyssa in the context of the passage already quoted: “ Just then, as in the case of 
ourselves, as has been repeatedly said already, if a person sces bread he also in a kind of way 
looks on a human body, for by being within this it becomes this, so in that other case the Body 
into which God entered (rd cevdéxov capa), by partaking of the nourishment of bread was in 
a certain sense the same with it, since that nourishment, as we have said, is changed into the 
nature of the body: for that which is proper to all men is acknowledged also in the case of 

A Vae sey . pe = r | a? ae 4 

5 Real Presence, p. 144. See note &, below. inot thrown off like ordinary food, but that they become blended 
i Heieotee a, Cone tee . ae 

DEehRe IN SS Ts Se ih S 7s; lor assimilated to the body, and waste away as the body wastes 

§ Gea Pusey ‘g » 2 $ ee - ae en aad , +2 ce 4 ~ as 
See Pusey, &. P. p. 151, note 3: “Dr. Gaisford, on my |away. Mr. Field gives the same meaning.” ues DN 

applying to him, kindly answered me,—‘ ovvar: AtoxetOar. It 9 Oratio Catechetica, ¢. xxxvii. The whole chapter should 
appears to me that this word can only be explained by a peri- be read with the Rey. W. Moore’s notes in this Series, Violas 

phrasis, ‘The writer appears to me to mean that the clements are’ pp. 504506. I ALystag. iv. § 5. 

PeCieobey LC DOC TR ENE, FOES 

That Vlesh, namely, that That Body too was maintained by bread ; which Body also by the 
indwelling of God the Word was changed into the dignity of Godhead. Rightly then do we 
believe that now also the bread which is sanctified by the Word of God is changed into the 
Body of God the Word. For even that Body was once virtually (79 durdwec) bread, but has 
been sanctified by the inhabitation of the Word that tabernacled in the flesh.” 

In this passage we have the full explanation of what Irenxus meant when he said that the 
elements “by receiving the Word of God become the Eucharist,” and what Cyril meant by 
saying that “as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word is appropriate to the 
soul.” Their common doctrine is, that besides the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, His 
Humanity offered upon the Cross for our redemption, His Divine Nature, the Word, is also 
present, and that it is by receiving the Divine Word that the Bread is made the Body of 
Christ. ‘The fathers,” says Touttée, “ often play upon the ambiguity of the term, saying at 
one time that the Divine Word, at another that the word and oracles of God nourish our soul. 
Both are true. Tor the whole life-giving power of the Eucharist is derived from the Divine 
Word united with the flesh which He assumed: and the whole benefit (fructus) of Eucharistic 
eating consists in the union of our soul with the Word, by meditation on His mysteries and 
words, and conformation thereto?.” O s¢ stc omnia! 

In this view the Bread and Wine are signs or figures of the natural Body of Christ 
crucified ; but they are also much more, they are endued éy the Divine Word, and through 
the operation of the Holy Ghost, with the life-giving power of the same Body and Blood of 
Christ,—a power which being imparted to the faithful recipient makes him to be “of the same 
body and the same blood with Christ,” thereby assuring him of the resurrection of the body to 
eternal life, and at the same time strengthening and refreshing the soul by its being united 
through faith with the Word, and being thus made “ partaker of the Divine nature.” 

This is not the language of the Western Church, whether Roman, Lutheran, or Anglican, 
but it is the language of the earliest Greek Fathers, and of Cyril, as is partly and reluctantly 
admitted by so cautious a writer as Dr. Waterland. After referring to the passage quoted 
above from Justin Martyr (4fo/. i. 66) he proceeds: ‘ There is another the like obscure hint 
in Irenzeus, which may probably be best interpreted after the same way. He supposes the 
elements to become Crrist’s body by receiving the word (Word). He throws two considerations 
into one, and does not distinguish so accurately as Origen afterwards did between the 
symbolical food and the ¢rue food.” The elements, Waterland adds, “are made the repre- 
sentative body of Christ; but they are at the same time, Zo worthy recelvers, rnade the means 
of their spiritual union with Christ Himself; which Trencus points at in what he says 
of the dread’s receiving the Logos, but should rather have said it of the communicants them- 
selves, as receiving the spiritual presence of Christ, in the worthy wse of the sacred symbols 3.” 

Again, in c. vii., he says more explicitly of Ireneus, what is equally true of Cyril; “ Least 
of all does he favour the figurists or memorialists ; for his doctrine runs directly counter to 
them almost in every line: he asserts over and over, that Christ’s do¢y and élood are eaten 
and drunk in the Eucharist, and our bodies thereby fed ; and not only so, but zvsured thereby 
for a happy vesurrection: and the reason he gives is, that our ded/es are thereby made or 
continued members of Christ's body, flesh, and bones.” 

From this view of Cyril’s doctrine concerning the Sacramental elements we can easily 
understand in what sense he applies the terms “type” and “antiiype” to the Eucharistic 
elements. “The Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist having two parts, an outward and an 
inward, and the outward part having been instituted by our Blessed Lord with a certain 
relation to the inward, and gifted with a certain significance of it, nothing is more natural than 
that the titles, type, antitype, symbol, figure, image, should be given to the outward part 4.” 

2 WZystag. iv, note 4, 3 Review of the Docirine of the Eucharist, c. V. 4 Pusey, A. 2s ps gi 

XXXVI INTRODUG TION. 

‘averted order) by undergoing a change: in other words, the Eucharistic Body and Blood of 
Christ are changed into nourishment of our blood and flesh, by being distributed (as Cyril 
says) to all our members, that is by being subjected to the natural processes of digestion and 
assimilation. ‘The unusual order of the words “ our blood and flesh” is not accidental, but 
answers to the process of assimilation, 1n which the digested food first nourishes the blood, 
and then the blood nourishes the flesh. 

‘The meaning is, as Otto says in his note, “that the divine food passes away into our 
bodies entire, so that nothing remains :” and Dr. Pusey seems to take the same view, in his 
note on the words, “from which (food) through transmutation our blood and flesh are 
nourished :” “¢.e. the material parts are changed into the substance of the human body %.” 

Thus then, according to Cyril, the Fucharistic Body and Blood of Christ are distributed to 
all our members; His Flesh and Blood pass by a change into our blood and flesh, and we 
thereby become “ of the same body and the same blood with Him®:” and “ this Bread does 
not pass into the belly, and is not cast out into the draught 7,” but wastes away as the body 
itself wastes %. 

However much this view of the Sacramental mystery may differ from later theories, it was 
certainly held by many of the Greck Fathers. JIreneus, for example, in addition to those 
already mentioned, thus writes: “When therefore both the mingled cup and the created bread 
receive the Word of God, and the Eucharist becomes the Body of Christ, and from these the 
cubstance of our flesh increaseth and consisteth, how say they that the flesh is incapable of the 
gift of God which is eternal life, that flesh which is nourished from the Body and Blood of 
the Lord, and is already (&mdpxovea) a member of Him ?—even as the blessed Paul saith, that 
we are members of His Body, of His Flesh, and of His Bones *.” 

That this was also the teaching of Cyril’s contemporaries is clear from the famous passage 
of Gregory of Nyssa, in which this doctrine is fully developed. It will be sufficient to 
quote here the latter part of the passage, in which Gregory is speaking of the Wine. ‘Since 
then that God-containing flesh partook for its substance and support of this particular 
nourishment also, and since the God who was manifested infused Himself into perishable 
humanity for this purpose, viz. that by this communion with Deity mankind might at the same 
time be deified, for this end it is that, by dispensation of His grace, He disseminates Himself 
in every believer through that flesh whose substance comes from bread and wine, blending 
Himself with the bodies of believers, to secure that, by this union with the immortal, man too 
may be a sharer in incorruption. He gives these gifts by virtue of the benediction through 
which He transelements the natural quality of these visible things to that immortal thing 9.” 

In another remarkable passaget Cyril gives a further explanation of the effect of conse- 
cration: ‘In the New Testament there is heavenly Bread and a Cup of salvation, sanctifying 
soul and body: for as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word (6 Adyos) 1s 
appropriate to the soul.” With this language of Cyril we may compare further what is said by 
Gregory of Nyssa in the context of the passage already quoted: “ Just then, as in the case of 
ourselves, as has been repeatedly said already, if a person sees bread he also in a kind of way 
looks on a human body, for by being within this it becomes this, so in that other case the Body 
into which God entered (rd Ocevdéxov copa), by partaking of the nourishment of bread was in 
a certain sense the same with it, since that nourishment, as we have said, is changed into the 
nature of the body: for that which is proper to all men is acknowledged also in the case of 

Th Din alat on, tae red " : Sie Ps 
5 Real Presence, p. 144. See note &, below. not thrown off like ordinary food, but that they become blended 
6 Westar. iv. &8§ ‘3 ee! or ae 

My stig. WSS Ty 3+ Zh: ve § 15. jor assimilated to the body, and waste away as the body wastes 
8 San Pires > > = ” r ie Bi, , ’ es ie A ne 

See Posey, Ao. ps roa, note ge: Te. Guisford, on my jaway.’ Mr. Field gives the same meaning.” Sa Vale aS 

5. 

ann eit f iy og —. were 4 # % Pappeas _ es ‘3 a _ 
applying to him, kindly answered me,—‘ ovvareAioxesOar. It 9 Oratio Catechetica, ¢. xxxvii. The whole chapter should 
appears to me that this word can only be explained by a peri-) be read with the Rey. W. Moore’s notes in this Series, Vol. V. 

phrasis. ‘The writer appears to me to mean that the clements are Pp. 504-506. I Mystag. iv. § 5 
ssp 

POC ShS fC] DOC CERIN E. SEK 

That Vlesh, namely, that That Body too was maintained by bread ; which Body also by the 
indwelling of God the Word was changed into the dignity of Godhead. Rightly then do we 
believe that now also the bread which is sanctified by the Word of God is changed into the 
Body of God the Word. For even that Body was once virtually (7 durduec) bread, bui has 
been sanctified by the inhabitation of the Word that tabernacled in the flesh.” 

In this passage we have the full explanation of what Ireneeus meant when he said that the 
elements “by receiving the Word of God become the Eucharist,” and what Cyril meant by 
saying that “as the Bread corresponds to the body, so also the Word is appropriate to the 
soul.” ‘Their common doctrine is, that besides the Body and Blood of Christ, that is, His 
Humanity offered upon the Cross for our redemption, His Divine Nature, the Word, is also 
present, and that it is by receiving the Divine Word that the Bread is made the Body of 
Christ. ‘The fathers,” says Touttée, “ often play upon the ambiguity of the term, saying at 
one time that the Divine Word, at another that the word and oracles of God nourish our soul. 
Both are true. For the whole life-giving power of the Eucharist is derived from the Divine 
Word united with the flesh which He assumed: and the whole benefit (fructus) of Eucharistic 
eating consists in the union of our soul with the Word, by meditation on His mysteries and 
words, and conformation thereto®.” O s¢ stc omnta/ 

In this view the Bread and Wine are signs or figures of the natural Body of Christ 
crucified ; but they are also much more, they are endued éy the Divine Word, and through 
the operation of the Holy Ghost, with the life-giving power of the same Body and Blood of 
Christ,—a power which being imparted to the faithful recipient makes him to be “of the same 
body and the same blood with Christ,” thereby assuring him of the resurrection of the body to 
eternal life, and at the same time strengthening and refreshing the soul by its being united 
through faith with the Word, and being thus made “ partaker of the Divine nature.” 

This is not the language of the Western Church, whether Roman, Lutheran, or Anglican, 
but it is the language of the earliest Greek Fathers, and of Cyril, as is partly and reluctantly 
admitted by so cautious a writer as Dr. Waterland. After referring to the passage quoted 
aboye from Justin Martyr (4fo/. i. 66) he proceeds: “ There is another the like obscure hint 
in Ireneeus, which may probably be best interpreted after the same way. He supposes the 
elements to become Crrist’s body by receiving the word (Word). He throws two considerations 
into one, and does not distinguish so accurately as Origen afterwards did between the 
symbolical food and the ¢rue food.” The elements, Waterland adds, “are made the repre- 
sentative body of Christ; but they are at the same time, Zo worthy receivers, rade the means 
of their spiritual union with Christ Himself; which Irenzeus points at in what he says 
of the dread's receiving the Logos, but should rather have said it of the communicants them- 
selves, as receiving the spéré¢ual presence of Christ, in the worthy wse of the sacred symbols 3.” 

Again, in c. vii., he says more explicitly of Ireneus, what is equally true of Cyril; ‘“ Least 
of all does he favour the figwrists or memorialists ; for his doctrine runs directly counter to 
them almost in every line: he asserts over and over, that Christ’s do¢y and élood are eaten 
and drunk in the Eucharist, and our bodies thereby fed ; and not only so, but zvswred thereby 
for a happy vesurrection: and the reason he gives is, that our ded/es are thereby made or 
continued members of Christ's body, flesh, and bones.” 

From this view of Cyril’s doctrine concerning the Sacramental elements we can easily 
understand in what sense he applies the terms “type” and “antiiype” to the Eucharistic 
elements. “The Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist having two parts, an outward and an 
inward, and the outward part having been instituted by our Blessed Lord with a certain 
relation to the inward, and gifted with a certain significance of it, nothing is more natural than 
that the titles, type, antitype, symbol, figure, image, should be given to the outward part 4.” 

2 Jystag. iv. note 4. 3 Review of the Docirine of the Eucharist, c. V. 4 Pusey, &. P. p. 94. 

xl INTROBUGCTION, 

Add to this that, according to Cyril’s doctrine as already explained, the bread after the 
Invocation, without ceasing to be bread, not only signifies but also zs the Body, and we sce 
how natural it was for him to say in one passage that * His Body bore the figure of bread 5,” and 
‘1 another that “in the figure of bread the Body 1s viven®” The Body which “is given” 
cannot be an aéser? Body of our Lord, but must be that Sacramental Body, of which Cynil 
woes on to say in the same sentence that it is “ distributed to our members.” ‘Thus the Bread 
broken is a type or figure of Christ’s Body as crucified for us; and by virtue of its union with 
the Divine Word it becomes the life-giving Body, which makes the faithful recipient to be, in 
Cyril's words, “ of the same body and same blood with Christ.” : 

Another term applied by Cyril and other Greek Fathers to the sacramental elements is 
“ antitype.” 

In Jystay. ii. § 6, where Baptism is called “ the counterpart (dvrirumor) of Christ’s suffer- 
ings,” the meaning is clearly explained by the context: for in § 5 the reality of Christ’s 
sufferings is emphatically and repeatedly contrasted with the figurative representation of the 
same ; and this figurative representation no less emphatically contrasted with the real and 
actual bestowal of the grace of salvation: év eixéve 7 pipyots, ey GAnOeia b€ t) gwTnpia, . . . . Wath 
pujajoce Tay TaOnparay avlTov Kowornoavtes, GAnOeia THY TwoTNplay KEepOrT@Ler. 

We have thus a clear distinction of (1) the ‘res sacramenti,’ Christ’s Death and Resurrec- 
tion, (2) the ‘sacramentum’ or ‘sign,’ the outward form of Baptism, and (3) the ‘virtus sacra- 
menti,’ our real participation in the benefits of Christ’s Passion, ‘fa death unto sin, and a new 
birth unto righteousness.” Thus, as Cyril adds at the end of the section, Baptism “‘has the 
fellowship by representation of Christ’s true sufferings,” it is the spiritual counterpart in us of 
that which was actual in Him. 

In Afstag. iii. $1, speaking of the Chrism, Cyril says, “Now ye have been made Christs 
(Xpeoot) by receiving the antitype of the Holy Ghost, and all things have been wrought in you 
by imitation, because ye are images of Christ :” and again, “there was given to you an 
Unction, the antitype of that wherewith Christ was anointed, and this is the Holy Ghost.” 

Here again we have (1) the ‘res sacramenti,’ the anointing of Christ with the Holy Ghost 
at Ilis Baptism, (2) the sacramental sign or figure, the anointing of the baptized, and (3) the 
spiritual benefit received in the gift of the Holy Ghost, for, as Cyril adds at the end of § 3, 
“while Thy body is anointed with the visible ointment, thy soul is sanctified by the Holy and 
Life-giving Spirit.” In these passages we see a distinction between rozos and avtitumes. ‘The 
former is simply the outward sign or figure; the latter includes with the sign the spiritual 
counterpart in us of the thing signified, the benefits of Christ’s Passion in the one case, the gift 
of the Holy Ghost in the other. 

It only remains to inquire whether there is the same distinction in the meaning of the words 
as applied to the Holy Eucharist. 

In Ays/ag. v. § 20, Cyril informs us that during the Administration the words, “O taste 
and see that the Lord is good,” were sung: and in reference to that passage he adds, “ In 
tasting we are bidden to taste not bread and wine, but the antitypical Body and Blood of 
Christ.” To taste “the antitypical Body” is therefore to taste “that the Lord is good,” whence 
it clearly follows that “the antitypical Body” is not the mere sign or figure of Christ’s own 
natural Body, but the sacramental and spiritual counterpart of it, by which those who faithfully 
receive it are so united to Him, that their sf77i/, and soul, and body, are to be preserved entire 

without blame at His coming ®% 

gi 70 OMPA AUTOV KUTA 70 EvayyEALoV TUTOY EpepEV apToV. 6 dystag. iv. $3: cv 7UTw yap apTov Si607al gor 70 Topo 
: : Fei, a i 
7 1 Thess, v. 23, quoted at the end of A/ystag. v. § 23. 

PUACE Obs, CY Riis ERGTU Es. xh 

CHAPTER. VEE 
REACE On ou CvRiL’s breruris: 

We have seen in a passage already quoted! that at Milan S. Ambrose expounded the 
Creed to Catechumens in the Baptistery. But whatever may have been the custom in other 
places, it is certain from numerous passages in Cyril’s Lectures that they were delivered 
in the great Basilica, or Church of the Resurrection, built by Constantine on the site of the 
Ifoly Sepulchre, and consecrated, as we have seen, with great splendour in the year 3352 
In a passage3 where Cyril is speaking of the descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of 
Pentecost, he says, “as we discourse on Christ and Golgotha here in Golgotha, so it were 
most fitting that we should also speak concerning the Holy Ghost in the Upper Church ; 
yet since He who descended there jointly partakes of the glory of Him who was crucified 
here, we here speak concerning Him also who descended there.” It appears from a passage 
in the Introductory Lecture+ that it was delivered in the Church itself before the whole 
congregation, after that portion of the daily Service to which Catechumens were usually 
admitted: ‘Dost thou behold this venerable constitution of the Church? Dost thou view 
her order and discipline, the reading of Scripture, the presence of the Ordained, the course 
of instruction?” The same custom was retained in Jerusalem in the time of John, Cyril’s 
successor in the Bishopric, who in writing to Jerome says, ‘‘The custom with us is that 
we deliver the doctrine of the Holy Trinity publicly during forty days to those who are to be 
baptized 5,” 

The Mystagogic Lectures were delivered not in the Church, but after the conclusion 
of the public Service ‘in the Holy Place of the Resurrection itself®,” that is, in the small 
Chapel which contained the Holy Sepulchre, and to which the name “ Anastasis” more 
properly belonged. Happily we are not required by the purpose of this work to enter into 
the disputed questions concerning the Holy Places. Whether the cave re-fashioned and 
adorned by Constantine was the actual sepulchre in which our Lord’s body was laid, and 
whether the present Churches occupy the same site as the Basilica and Anastasis of 
Constantine, are matters still under discussion, and awaiting the result of further researches. 
What more properly concerns us is to collect the chief passages in which Cyril refers to 
these localities, and to try to give a fair representation of his testimony, comparing it with 
that of earlier or contemporary writers. 

Next to Eusebius, and the Bordeaux Pilgrim who visited Jerusalem in 333, Cyril is the 
carliest and most important witness as to the site of Constantine’s Churches. 

In Cat. xiv. § 5, he says, “It was a garden where He was crucified. For though it has 
now been most highly adorned with royal gifts, yet formerly it was a garden, and the signs 
and the remnants of this remain.” From this it is evident that the traces of a garden close 
to the Church were still visible both to Cyril and his hearers. Twice again in § ir he 
mentions the garden, which he had most probably himself seen in its former state, before 
the ground was cleared at the time of the recovery of the Holy Sepulchre in 326. 

On this point it may be well to quote the words of Mr. Walter Besant, Honorary Secretary 
of the Palestine Exploration Fund, who, in an article on “The Holy Sepulchre” in the 
Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, writes as follows: ‘While the temple of Venus with its 
foundations was being cleared away, there might have been, and most probably was present, 
a Christian lad, native of Jerusalem, eleven years of age, watching the discovery, which 
did as much as the great luminous cross which appeared in the sky four (? twenty-four) ycars 
later to confirm the doubtful and strengthen the faithful, that of the rock containing the 

ad ON oa eae 2 See above, Chr Expson. Ch Catiivi16s x 19% Silke 4,29, 903 XIV. Of td) a2, Sos SOatieavincs. 4, 
4 Procat. § 4. 5 Hicron. £4, 61 (al. 38). The passage is quoted more fully below on p. xliy. 6 Cat. xviii. § 33. 

xiii INTRODUCTION. 

‘al tah. Tt wes Crt, alerwards iishop of Jerusalem. One must not forget that he 
L eye-witness who speaks of these things ; that though he was a boy at the time of 
the discovery, he lived in Jerusalem, and must have watched, step by step, the progress of 
Basilica; that he was ordained before the completion and dedication of the 

) 

is the thir 

the great 
buildings, and that many, if not all, of his lectures were delivered in the Church of the 
Anastasis itself” 

‘That Cyril's testimony concerning the Holy Places was in full accordance with the general 
lclief of his contemporaries is clear from the fact that he so frequently points to the traditional 
sites as bearing witness to the truth of the Crucifixion and Resurrection. He speaks of 
Golgotha in eight separate passages, sometimes as near to the Church in which he and his 
hearers are assembled ?, and sometimes as standing up above in their sight®. In one place 
he asks, “Scest thou this spot of Golgotha?” and the hearers answer with a shout of 
approval’. In other passages he speaks as if the Church itself was zz or rather v7 Golgotha’, 
the same Preposition (ev) being repeated when he mentions “Him who was crucified 
thereon.” 

In explanation of these different modes of speaking, the Benedictine Editor comments 
thus?: “The Church of the Resurrection was built on part of the hill Golgotha (svfra 
mortem G.): but the actual rock on which our Lord was crucified was not within the 
limits of the Church, yet not far off, namely about “a stone’s throw,” as the author of the 
Jerusalem Itinerary says. Yor the Church had been built on the site of the Sepulchre. 
Some think that the place of Crucifixion was included in the vast area which was enclosed 
with colonnades between the Sepulchre and the Basilica, ... that Golgotha was midway 
between the Basilica of the Crucifixion, and the Anastasis or Sepulchre. But the area 
in question Constantine paved with stones, and it must therefore have been flat, as we learn 
from Eusebius; Golgotha, on the contrary, stood up high4, and moreover shewed a cleft 
made there at Christ’s deaths, which would either have been a hindrance to the paving 
or covered up by it. In addition to this, from the doors of the Basilica there seems to have 
been a view of the Sacred 'Tomb®, This would have been obstructed if Golgotha had been 
between them.” 

The cleft in the rock of Golgotha is mentioned in a fragment of the defence made before 
Maximinus in 311 or 312 by Lucian the Martyr of Antioch7: “If yet you believe not, I will 
also offer you the testimony of the very spot on which the thing was done. The place 1iself 
in Jerusalem vouches for these facts, and the rock of Golgotha broken asunder under the 
weight of the Cross: that cave also, which when the gates of hell were burst, gave back the 
Body in newness of life.” On this passage Dr. Routh remarks that Maundrell, Journey from 
Alepjo to Jerusalem, at Laster, 1697, “ shews that the rock had been rent not by any instru- 
ment, but by the force of an earthquake. Also it is related by Eusebius in his Theophania, 
a book now recovered, that there was one cave only in this cleft of the rock.” 

According to Eusebius in the passages of the Life of Constantine already referred to, 
the Emperor first beautified the monument or sepulchre with rare columns, then paved 
with finely polished stone a large area open to the sky, and enclosed on three sides with 
long colonnades, and lastly erected the Church itself “at the side opposite to the cave, 
which was the Eastern side.” 

7 xili. § 4: ovTos O VoAyobas ov wAjGloY viv navies Tapcome’. | 2 Cah, xic8 a, note 1 3. Come, 6:35; 
§$ 1g: OT. 0 ay.os ob70S O UTEparcaTyKwS mapTUpPEL paLVo- 4 Catoac 8 265 xii, § ag: 5 xili. § 39- 
pores: CL Nan. £5, |. of Tous. Pee Comer, Am.-c, 36. 
9 xili, § 23: ‘Opas Tod TodAyo@a tov Tomoy; “EmiPoas eratyw ws | 7 The fragment is added by Rufinus to his Latin translation 
Curlew rosy of Eusebius, Z/¢s¢. £ccé. ix. 6, and is also given in Routh, Aedé, 

E e nS Pye eee ae ae ee : ‘ , 
IV. § 10: 0 paxaptos otTos T. ev w vuv dca zov ev avtw | Sac. iv. p. 6 
orevpwOcvra ovyKexpoTnucOa. Cf. § 14: 6 €v tH VT. Tov7@ oTav- | 

a aE Ee a I ee ; 
pods. xi. $222 xvi 4s ev Tw] TovtTw Acyouer, 

THE-TEE AND ARRANGEMENT: OF S. CYRIL LECTURES, xiii 

The following is the statement of the Bordeaux Pilgrim: “rom thence (the Palace 
of David) as you go out of the wall of Sion walking towards the gute of Neapolis, on the 
right side below in the valley are walls where the house or Pretorium of Pontius Pilate was: 
here our Lord was tried before His Passion. On the left hand is the little hill (wondsculs) 
of Golgotha, where the Lord was crucified. About a stone’s throw from thence is a vault 
(crvpta) wherein His body was laid, and rose again on the third day. There by command 
of the Emperor Constantine has now been built a Basilica, that is to say, a Church of 
wondrous beauty, having at the side reservoirs (evcepforia) from which water is raised, 
and a bath behind in which infants are washed (baptized).” Neapolis was the name given 
by Vespasian to the ancient city of Shechem, now Nabulus: the “ porta Neapolitana” 
therefore was in the North wall of Sion. 

In reference to the passage quoted above, Mr. Aubrey Stewart says: “The narrative 
is clear and connected, and it is hardly possible, for any one who knows the ground, to read 
it without feeling that the Pilgrim from Bordeaux actually saw Constantine’s buildings 
standing on the site now occupied by the Church of the Holy Sepulchre °.” 

From these earlier testimonies, compared with the several passages already quoted from 
Cyril, we may safely draw the following inferences. (1) The Anastasis properly so called, 
or Church of the Holy Sepulchre, in which the five Mystagogic Lectures were delivered, 
was built by Constantine over the cave which, according to the evidence then existing, was 
fully believed to be the Burial-place of our Lord. (2) The Great Basilica, called also 
the Church of the Holy Cross, in which the Catechetical Lectures were delivered, was 
erected on the East of the Anastasis, and separated from it by a large open area. (3) The 
hill of Golgotha (on which at a later period there was built a third Church, called the Church 
of Golgotha, of Holy Calvary, or of Cranium) stood about a stone’s throw on the North side 
of Constantine’s two Churches, and about equidistant from them. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Tue Time AND ARRANGEMENT OF S. CyRri’s LECTURES. 

81. Zhe Year. The incidental notes of time in the Catechetical Lectures are sufficient 
to determine with considerable probability the exact year in which they were delivered. 

In Cat. xiv. r4, Cyril speaks in the Plural of the Emperors then reigning (of viv Bacideis) 
as having completed the building (eéepydéoavro) and embellishment of the great Church 
of the Resurrection. This can only apply to the sons of Constantine, Constans and 
Constantius; and as Constans died early in 350, the Lectures must have been delivered 
before that year. 

In Cat. xv. § 6, Cyril asks, “Is there at this time war between Persians and Romans, 
or no?” The time thus indicated was apparently that of the campaign which ended in 
the disastrous defeat of Constantius at Singara, 348, the battle being soon followed by 
a suspension of hostilities '. 

The Benedictine Editor tries to find another proof of the date of the Lectures in Cyril’s 
description of the state of the Church in Cat. xv. $7: “If thou hear that Bishops advance 
against Bishops, and clergy against clergy, and laity against laity, even unto blood, be not 
troubled.” Touttée refers this account to the fierce dissensions which followed the Synod of 
Sardica, where Athanasius and Marcellus were declared innocent and received into com- 
munion, while the Encyclical of the dissentient Bishops, who had withdrawn to Philippopolis, 
condemned them both. But it is now ascertained that the Synod of Sardica was held not in 
347, as Touttée supposed, but in 3447: and Cyril’s description may unhappily be applied to 

8 The Bordeaue Pilgrint, Introd. p. ix. 1 Sce Gibbon, c. xviil. vol. il. p. 370. 2 Dict. Chr, Biogr. “ Athanasius, 
p. 190, note; Heiele, Cownczls, 88 58. 60, 67. 

xliv INTRODUCTION. 

the state of the Church at almost any time from the Council of Tyre, by which Athanasius 
had been deposed in 335, until long after any date which can possibly be assigned to 
Cyril’s Lectures. 

There js a much more definite note of time in Cat. vi. § 20, where speaking of Manes 
Cyril says: “The delusion began full seventy years ago.” If we may assume that the 
outbreak of this heresy is to be dated from the famous disputation between Archelaus 
and Manes in 2773, it follows that Cyril must have made this statement in 347 or 348. 
And further, if Dr. Routh+ is correct in fixing the date of the Disputation between July 
and December 277, the Lent in which the Lectures were delivered must have been, as 
Touttée decides, that of 348, not of 347, as Tillemont had supposed. 

$2. The days, It is expressly stated by Sozomen> that “the interval called Quadra- 
eesima” was made to consist of six weeks in Palestine, “ whereas it comprised seven weeks 
in Constantinople and the neighbouring provinces.” 

It is certain the Catechetical Lectures i-xviii. were all delivered in these six weeks, being 
preceded by the Procatechesis, which was addressed to the candidates before the whole 
congregation at the public Service on Sunday (§ 4). Inthe same context Cyril says, “Thou 
hast forty days for repentance,” and again in Cat. 1. $ 5, “ Hast thou not forty days to be free 
for thine own soul’s sake?” It thus appears probable that the first of the eighteen Cate- 
chetical Lectures was delivered on the Monday of the first week of the Fast, the forty days 
being completed on the night preceding the Great Sabbath, that is to say, the night of Good 
Friday, when the fast was brought to an end at a late hour. 

With regard to the date of Cat. iv., which contains a brief preliminary statement of 
all the articles of the Creed, we may obtain some evidence from an incident recorded 
in a letter of Jerome® to Pammachius. John, who had then succeeded Cyril as Bishop 
of Jerusalem, had on a certain occasion discoursed on the Creed and all the doctrines 
of the Church in the presence of Epiphanius and the whole congregation. Jerome, being 
ignorant of the peculiar custom of the Church of Jerusalem, rebukes the supposed pre- 
sumption of the Bishop, “that a man deficient in eloquence should in one discourse in 
Church discuss all the doctrines concerning the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Crucifixion, 
the descent into hell, the nature of angels, the state of departed souls, the Resurrection 
of Christ, and of ourselves, and other subjects.” The rebuke calls out a statement from John: 
“ The custom among us is that for forty days we publicly deliver the doctrine of the Holy and 
Adarable Trinity to those who are to be baptized.” This being the custom at Jertisalem 
in Cyril’s time, we may conjecture that Cat. iv., which corresponds closely to the descrip- 
tion of John’s discourse, was delivered, like that, on a Sunday before the whole congregation : 
and this is in fact suggested by Cyril’s own words in § 3: “ Let those here present, whose 
habit of mind is mature, and who fave their senses already exercised to discern good and evil, 
endure patiently to listen to things fitted rather for children.” That this could not have been 
later than the Sunday following that on which the Procatechesis was delivered, is shewn by 
the mention in the same section of “the long interval of the days of all this holy Quadra- 
gesima,” an expression which could not well have been used later than the second Sunday 
in Lent. 

In Cat. iv. $ 32, Cyril speaks of having discoursed on Baptism “the day before yesterday,” 
that is, on the Friday. 

In Cat. v. we have first a discourse on the nature of faith, and then towards the end, 
between § 12 and § 13, the actual words of the Creed are for the first time recited by Cyril 
to the candidates alone. In the next four Lectures there are no marks of time, except that 

e Gat. vi, § 33. * Rees Sad, Vep. Fes 5. List LeCles; NI G19 6 BP, 61 (al. 38), ‘Ch. Ben. Ed. Praclog. ad 
Cat. ie pp. 9, 56. 

THE TIME AND ARRANGEMENT OF S. CYRIL'S LECTURES. xlv 

vi., vii, viii, were delivered on successive days, as is proved by the word “ yesterday” 
(75 xOes uepa) in vii. $1, and vill. $1. It thus appears probable that the five Lectures, v.—ix,, 
belong to the five days, Monday to Friday inclusive, of the second or third week. 

In Cat. x. § 14 Cyril reminds his hearers that he had preached on the words after the order 
of Melchisedek at the public Service on the Lord’s day. As he does not here employ his 
usual phrase “yesterday,” we may infer that Cat. x. was delivered not earlier than the 
Tuesday following the 4th Sunday in Lent, the Epistle for that Sunday in the Eastern 
Church being Heb. vi. 13—20, which ends with the words on which Cyril had preached. 
The next two Lectures followed Cat. x. immediately on successive days, Wednesday and 
Thursday, the word “ yesterday ” recurring in xi. § 1, and xii. § 4. 

Cat. xiii., which is occupied with the Crucifixion and Burial, seems to have followed them 
immediately on the Friday: it certainly came a few days only before Cat. xiv. § 1. For 
speaking there of the preceding Lecture, Cyril says, “I know the sorrow of Christ’s friends 
in these past days; because, as our discourse stopped short at the Death and the Burial, and 
did not tell the good tidings of the Resurrection, your mind was in suspense to hear what you 
were loxging for.” Now we know that Cat. xiv. was delivered on the Monday after Passion 
Sunday: for the Epistle for that 5th Sunday in Lent was Heb. vi. r1—14, referring to the 
Ascension7: and in § 24 Cyril says, “The grace of God so ordered it, that thou heardest 
most fully concerning it, so far as our weakness allowed, yesterday on the Lord’s day, since 
by the providence of divine grace the course of the Readings (dvayrwop~dray) in Church 
included the account of our Saviour’s going up into the heavens.” 

In Cat. xv. there is no note of time to determine on what day it was spoken; but 
in § 33 Cyril speaks as if his course of teaching was to be interrupted for a little while : 
“If the grace of God should permit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith shall be in 
good time (xara xarpsv) declared to you.” We may therefore assign Cat. xv. to the early part of 
Passion week, and the three remaining Catechetical Lectures to the week before Easter. This 
arrangement seems to be confirmed by Cat. xvil. 34, where Cyril speaks of the two Lectures 
on the Holy Spirit, xvi. and xvii., as ‘‘these present Lectures,” distinguishing them from “ our 
previous discourses.” In the same section he refers to “ the fewness of the days,” and in § 20 
speaks of “the holy festival of the Passover” as being close at hand. We may therefore 
probably assign xvi. and xvii, to two consecutive days in the earlier part of the week 
before Easter. 

Cat. xviii. contains many indications from which we may conclude with certainty that it 
was delivered either on the night of Good Friday, or in the early hours of the morning of the 
“Great Sabbath.” Thus in § 17 he speaks of “the weariness caused by the prolongation 
(irepOécews) of the fast of the Preparation (Friday), and the watching.” In § 21 he calls upon 
the Candidates to recite the Creed, which he had dictated to them, and which they would 
be required to repeat more publicly immediately before their Baptism, as we learn from § 32: 
“Concerning the holy Apostolic Faith which has been delivered to you to profess (els émay- 
yediav), we have spoken through the grace of the Lord as many Lectures as was possible in 
these past days of Lent... . But now the holy day of the Passover is at hand, and ye, beloved 
in Christ, are to be enlightened dy the washing of regeneration. Ye shall therefore again be 
taught what is requisite if God so will; with how great devotion and order you must enter in 
when summoned, for what purpose each of the holy mysteries of Baptism is performed, and 
with what reverence and order you must go from Baptism to the holy altar of God, and enjoy 
its spiritual and heavenly mysteries.” The additional instructions here promised were to be 
given on the same day as the last Lecture, Cat. xviil., that is on Faster Eve immediately 
before Baptism. For it was forbidden to reveal the mysteries of Baptism, Chrism, and the 

7 Dict. Chr. Antig. “ Lectionary,” p. 958 b. 

xivi TRO ee 

Holy Eucharist to the uninitiated, and yet it was necessary elsat the Gapdidaies should 
not come wholly unprepared to perform what w ould be required of them. The full 
explanation of the various ceremonies and ot the doctrines imped in them was re- 
served for the Mystagogie Lectures, which were to be delivered on Easter Monday and 
the four following days, after the public Service, not in the great Basilica, but in the 
Holy Sepulchre itself. 

6a, Arrancement. The Lectures of S. Cyril have a peculiar value as being the first and 

caly pauls example of the course of instruction given in the early cent uries to Candidates 
ecking admission to the full privileges of the Cl yistian Church. ‘The Great Catechetical 
Oration” of Gregory of Nyssa is addressed not to the learner but to the teacher, in accordance 
with the opening statement of the Prologue, that “The presiding ministers of the mystery of 
cadjivess have need of a system in their instructions, in order that the Church may be 
replenished by the accession of such as should be saved, hassihdes the teaching of the word of 
Faith being brought home to the hearing of unbelievers.” As an instruction to the Catechist 
how he should refute the opponents of Christianity, it is an apologetic work rather than 
a Catechism. §. Augustine's treatise De catechisandis rudibus is also addressed to the teacher, 
being an answer to Deogratias, a Deacon of Carthage, who on being appointed Catechist had 
written to Augustine for advice as to the best method of discharging the office. S. Augustine’s 
Sermons De fraditione Symboli, and De redditione Symbol’, are not a connected series, but 
single addresses to Catechumens consisting of brief comments ona few chief articles of the 
Creed. Cyril’s Lectures thus remain unique in character. 

After the Procatechesis, which is simply an introductory exhortation to the newly admitted 
Candidates, he devotes three Lectures to the need ofa sincere purpose of mind, the efficacy 
of repentance, and the general nature and importance of Baptism. The fourth Lecture gives 
“4 short summary of necessary doctrines,” stating with admirable clearness and brevity ten 
chief points of the Faith, and the arguments on each point, which are to be developed in the 
remaining Catechetical Lectures v.—xviii. He thus traverses the whole ground of Theology 
as expressed in the Creed of Jerusalem, of which the exact language is given in the titles 
of the successive Lectures. These instructions to the ‘ Illuminandi’ (porigoperov) were followed 
on Easter-day by the administration of Baptism, Chrism, and Holy Communion: and on the 
following days of Easter-week the ceremonies and doctrines proper to each of these Sacraments 
were explained in the five Lectures on the Mysteries (Mvaraywyia) to the newly-baptized (mpos 
rols Neopatiotous). ‘These Mystagogic Lectures thus form a most important record of the 
Sacramental Rites and Doctrines of the Eastern Church in the fourth Century, the most critical 
period of Ecclesiastical History. 

CHAPTER X. 

Tue Crerp oF JERUSALEM: DocTRINE OF Tur Hoty Trinity. 

$1. Zhe Creed. The ancient Creed which was used by the Church of Jerusalem in the 

middle of the fourth Century, and which Cyril expounded in his Catechetical Lectures, was 
recited by him to the Catechumens at the end of the fifth Lecture, to be committed to memory, 
but not to be written out on paper (§ 12). Accordingly it is not found in any of the MSS., but 
instead of it the Nicene Creed with the Anathema is there inserted in Codd. Roe, Casaub. 
This could only have been added after Cyril’s time, when the motives for secrecy had ceased. 

The Creed which Cyril really taught and expounded may be gathered from various passages 
in the Lectures themselves, and especially from the Titles prefixed to them. 

With the Creed of Jerusalem thus ascertained, it will be instructive to compare the Nicene 
formula, and for this purpose we print them in parallel columns. 

fie GR Ewes On LRU SAL ISN NE NTC ZEA xlvil 

> ist x) 71> Fru TT} TTCt . | aw — ~ 
CREED OF S. CYRIL OF JERUSALEM. | CREED Co NIC AX. 
| 
From S. Arnanasius, De Decretis Fiver 
: = NICENE, 

S La ae | o , 

TTeorevojev ers eva Oceov *y Tlurrevopey eis va Ocuy, 
, 2 : , sale cf , 

Ilarepa Tlavrokpuropa . Ilatepa TAVTOKPATOPA, 

\ + ct ¥ Ss 
Tlownrny ovpavov Kat vis TUVT@Y OpaT@v TE 
« a“ Ud ‘ ’ , 
Opata@v TE TUVTOY KQL MOPUToV 4. Kal dopurov TOUjTHY, 
K \ Sie oth, Ku | 2 a ne ) , 5 iy J ied yt 2 A , 
Sat ets eva Kuptoyv Inoouv Nptotoy », kal els eva Kuptoy Ijoovy Xplotop, 

eN re ys A ~ 
tov Yidov Tov Oeovu Tov Yisy Tov Ocod, 
; " ; 3 ye a 
tov Movroyevi}, yevinOevra ex Tov Tarpos povoyery, 

\ ’ a ‘ , ~ n 
rov ex Tov Iarpos yevrnOerra, Tovréatuy €k THS oOvalas TOV Hatpus, 
N > ss \ 2 a a ~ - 
Ocdy adylurdov Ocdy gk Ocod, Pas ek Paros, Oedv adynOwdy ek Ocod 
- kd ~ 

mpo TAYT@Y TOY ai@vey, adnbwvod, 
§ ’ e \ , ye ‘ 6 , > , e U a , 
Ot’ ov Ta wWavTa EYEVETO ”, yevvnbevra od Trombévta, Gpoovotoy Ta Marpt, 

s] ka \ , ae 
\ , ae , 7 Se OU Ta TAVYTaA ey EVETO, 
TOV caps@levta Kat evavOparyoarra , 

, \ , Q 
atavpwbevra Kat Tapevta °, 
‘ > , > a an J e , 
kal dvacTavTa €K VEeKP@Y TH TPITN NMEPA, 

, > a a ‘ Cae | a a 
TA TE EV TH) ovpave Kal Ta ent Ts V"S5 

‘ 5 : pees AE \ > 6 , ‘ ‘ ‘ € , 
TOV 6 yas Tous av PeTovs Kal Oude TV NMETEN AY 

, 
\ > , > ves , gwTnpliav * 
Kat avedOcyra eis TOUS OVpAavuS, 

, 
: : é * paelpas ; kateOdvta kal capkobdvra, tvavOpamqoavra, mabsvra 
kar Kabioavra ek SeEvav Tod UWartpos 9, ) 

3 , a € 
Kal GVAOTAYTQ T)) Tpit} H/LEPAy 

> , J > A 
kal dd épyopevoy ev ddEy dvehOdvta els ovpavors, 
o na dh | > , 
kpivat Cavras Kal veKpous, kal epxomevov 
ae 2 , - a \ , 
ob THs BagwNelas od« Carat TEAOS * Kpwat C@vras Kat vexpovs, 

Kat els év dytov IIvevpa 
‘ , ee 
tov lapakAnroy, kal els TO dyvoy Tvedpa. 
a 2 a x 
TO Nadjoay gv Tols mpopyrats 7 

i a 
kai eis év Bdrricpa petavoias eis deo dpaptiar 5, 

\ A 4 > e > , 4" 
ir Sire cae ee Se, Tods dé Néyovras: Hv wore Cre ovK HY, Kat Tply 
kal eis play dylay KaGudtkyy eKkKAnolay, es ee Coe : age a 

<5 ey yevnOjvar otk Hv, Kal Ore €€ otk OvT@Y eyeveETo, 
kal els apkos avaoTagW, als dhe hag : P pie ; 
etc \ ” 4 Ui] e& eTepas UTOTTAGEWS 1) ovolas backovras eval 
Kal els Cory aioveop +. x re a ae re es Pp a 
i) KTUOTOY i) TpeTTOV 7) GAOLwTOY TOY YoY TOU Oeov, 

avabeparicer KaOodtKy exKANo ta. 
1 Cat. vi-tit, 2 vii tit.; §4- 3 viii. tit, 4 ix. tit, 5 $4. 

6 tibet Vids Aes O Sle thts 5 oF ah 7 xii. tit. 8 xiii. tit. —_ 
9 xiv. tit., cf. § 27; XV.3. xv. tit; §2. 2 xvi. tit; XVI 3; : 
3 XVIIl. 22. 4 xviii. tit. 3 § 22, % Cyril, Cat. iv. 9; xii. 33 AZystag. il. 7. 

8 2, Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. The doctrinal position of S. Cyril is admirably described, 
and his orthodoxy vindicated by Cardinal Newman in the following passage of his Preface to 
the Lectures in the Library of the Fathers. “There is something very remarkable and even 
startling to the reader of S. Cyril, to find in a divine of his school such a perfect agreement, 
for instance as regards the doctrine of the Trinity, with those Fathers who in his age were 
more famous as champions of it. Here is a writer, separated by whatsoever cause from what, 
speaking historically, may be called the Athanasian School, suspicious of its adherents, and 
suspected by them; yet he, when he comes to explain himself, expresses precisely the same 
doctrine as that of Athanasius or Gregory, while he merely abstains from the particular 
theological term in which the latter Fathers agreeably to the Nicene Council conveyed it. 
Can we have a clearer proof that the difference of opinion between them was not one of 
ecclesiastical and traditionary doctrine, but of practical judgment? that the Fathers at Niczea 
wisely considered that, under the circumstances, the word in question was the only symbol 
which would secure the Church against the insidious heresy which was assailing it, while 
S. Cyril, with Eusebius of Ceesarea, Meletius and others shrank from it, at least for a while, 

xlviit INTRODUCTION. 

as if an addition to the Crecd, or a word already taken into the service of an opposite heresy, 
and likely to introduce into the Church heretical notions? Their judgment, which was 
erroneous. was their own; their faith was not theirs only, but shared with them by the 
whole Christian world '.” 

In regard to the doctrine of the Trinity in general the two great heresies which distracted 
the Church in S. Cyril’s day were Sabellianism and Arianism, the one “confounding the Per- 
sons,” the other “ dividing the substance ” of the indivisible Unity of the Godhead. Both these 
opposite errors Cyril condemns with equal energy: “Do thou neither separate the Son from 
the Father, nor by making a confusion believe in a Son-Fatherhood*.” Again he says: ‘* Our 
hope is in Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. We preach not three Gods; let the Marcionites 
be silenced; but with the Holy Ghost through One Son we preach One God. The Faith 
is indivisible; the worship inseparable. We neither separate the Holy Trinity, like some 
(that is the Arians) ; nor do we, as Sabellius, work confusion3.” “He says not, I am the 
Father, but she Jirther is tn Ale, and Iam in the Father. And again He said not, Z and the 
Father am one, but, 7 and the Lather are One, that we should neither separate them, nor make 
a confusion of Son-Father 4.” 

In the sequel of this last passage Cyril proceeds to argue that this unity of the Father and 
the Son lies in their Nature, ‘since God begat God,” in their Kingdom, in their Will®, and 
in their joint Creation 7, thus at each step rejecting some prominent heretical tenet. 

The question, however, of Cyril’s orthodoxy depends especially upon his supposed oppo- 
sition to the Creed of Niceea, of which no evidence is alleged except his attendance at the 
Council of Seleucia, and the absence from his Lectures of the word 6poovatov. 

The purpose of Cyril’s attendance at Seleucia was to appeal against his deposition by 
Acacius, and there is apparently no evidence of his having taken part in the doctrinal 
discussions, or signed the Creed of Antioch 8. What is certain is that Cyril’s bitterest enemies 
who refused to sit with him in the Council were Acacius and his Arian allies, who expressly 
rejected both dpootcws and dpototcios and “altogether denied the Nicene formula and censured 
the Council, while the others, who were the majority, accepted the whole proceedings of the 
Council, except that they complained of the word ‘Co-essential,’ as obscure, and so open to 
suspicion °.” It thus appears that Cyril’s friends at Seleucia were partly those who approved 
the word “Co-essential,” and partly those of whom Athanasius speaks as “brothers, who 
mean what we mean, and dispute only about the word.” It needed in fact the profound 
insight of an Athanasius to foresee that in the end that word must triumph over all opposition, 
and be accepted by the Universal Church as the one true safeguard of the Christian Faith. 
Meanwhile it was the standard round which debate, and strife, and hatred, and persecution, 
were to rage for fifty years with unexampled fury. 

Was Cyril to be blamed, ought he not rather to be commended, for not introducing such 
a war-cry into the exposition of an ancient Creed, in which it had no place, the Creed of his 
own Church, the Mother of all the Churches, whose Faith he as a youthful Presbyter was 
commissioned to teach to the young Candidates for Baptism ? | 

But if we compare his doctrine with that of the Nicene formula, we shall find that, 
as Dr. Newman says, ‘His own writings are most exactly orthodox, though he does not in 
the Catechetical Lectures use the word éuootetov?.” 

The first point to be noticed in the comparison is the use of the title “Son of God.” 

: Pee 4s oe m me , 
ee : phe) * Cat. iv. § 8. 7 Ib. Or. iii, $11, 3: ‘Such then being the Son, therefore 
Cat. xvi. § 4. See the notes on this and the preecding | when the Son works, the Father is the Worker.” 
mISSage. ae Ges Jat. XV. 3 ee ks i ; i 
I £ Cat, 2.§ x6, ¢ Cat. xv. § 27, note 3. & There is, I believe, no extant list of signatures: ‘Whether 

, : mee Contra Arian, Or. ii. § 31,1: “For the Word of|the few Homoiisians and Hilary were among those who signed 
7od is Framer and Maker, and He is the Father’s Will. ae not said” (Hefele, Councils, I. p. 264) 
: #8, 1p: 264). 

Or. iii i 
r. Ml, § 63 fin, 9 Athan. De Syvod.c. 12. Tbs c.4a, 2: Preface, p. TA. 

THE CREED S OF JERUSALEM ANE NOAA, Se 

For this Eusebius in his Creed had substituted “Word of God.” Athanasius explains 
the significance of the change: ‘‘ Uniting the two titles, Scripture speaks of ‘Son’ 
in order to herald the natural and true offspring of His essence (ovclas); and on the 
other hand that none may think of the offspring as human, in again indicating His essence 
it calls Him Word, and Wisdom, and Radiance; for from this we infer that the gencration 
was impassible (dra@és), and eternal, and becoming to God 3.” 

Cyril is here in full accord with Athanasius: in his Creed he found “Son of God,” and 
in his exposition he states that the Father is ‘by nature and in truth Father of One only, 
the Only-begotten Son+:” ‘One they are because of the dignity pertaining to the Godhead, 
since God begat God5:” “The Son then is Very Gop, having. the Father in Himself, not 
changed into the Father®.” When he says that the Son is in all things like (Gpotos ev magww) 
to Him who begat Him; begotten Life of Life, and Light of Light, Power of Power, God 
of God, and the characteristics of the Godhead are unchangeable (dapdddakrot) in the Son Life 
he is using in all good faith the very words of the orthodox Bishops at Nicaea, “ épowy re kal 
amapidXaktoy adrov Kata Tavta TO Tarpi®.” 

The further significance which Athanasius ascribes to the title “ Logos,” is also expressed 
fully and repeatedly by Cyril: “ Whenever thou hearest of God begetting, sink not down in 
thought to bodily things, nor think of a corruptible generation, lest thou be guilty of 
impiety 9.” 

The “ passionless generation,” to which so much importance was attached at Nicma and 
by Athanasius, is also asserted by Cyril when he says that God “became a Father not 
by passion (ob maOes Marip yevrsuevos) *.” The eternal generation is most emphatically declared 
again and again: the Son, he says, “began not His existence in time, but was before 
all ages eternally and incomprehensibly begotten of the Father; the Wisdom, and the Power 
of God, and His Righteousness personally subsisting?:” “Throughout His being (cé ofmep jv), 
a being by eternal generation, He holds His royal dignity, and shares His Father’s seat 3.” 
“ Believe that of One God there is One Only-begotten Son, who is before all ages God the 
Word ; not the uttered word diffused into the air, nor to be likened to impersonal words ; 
but the Word, the Son, Maker of all who partake of reason, the Word who heareth the 
Father, and Himself speaketh 4.” 

‘The importance of such language is better understood when we remember that Marcellus, 
“another head of the dragon, lately sprung up in Galatia,” entirely rejected the word 
‘ Begotten,” as implying a beginning, and ‘contradicting the eternity of the Logos, so 
distinctly proclaimed by S. John.” An eternal generation, as stated by Athanasius and others, 
was to him unimaginable. ‘The Logos in His pre-existence was unbegotten, and could not 
be called Son, but only the Logos invested with human nature was Son of God and be- 
gotten®.” ‘These heretical opinions of Marcellus had been condemned in several Councils 
within a few years preceding Cyril’s Lectures. 

The next supposed proof of Cyril’s opposition to the Nicene doctrine is that he has not 
adopted in his Lectures the phrases “of the essence (otolas) of the Father,” and “of one 
essence (dpoova.or) with the Father.” This omission is the chief ground of the reproaches 
cast upon the memory of Cyril by the writers of Ecclesiastical History; for this he was 
described by Jerome as an Arian, and by Rufinus as a waverer, while his formal acceptance 
of the terms used at Nicza is called by Socrates and Sozomen an act of repentance. By 
others he was denounced as ’Apetavdppov because he had addressed his letter to Constantius 
as “the most religious king,” and never used the word épootctor in his Lectures. 

3 Contra Arianos, Or. i. 28. 4iGat. vilie8) se Sabb xy, SerG. © Ib: § 17. fed Noe as ass 8 Athan. De Decretis, c. co. 
Ga@atsta Size 1 Ib. vil. 5 : see note there. 2 Ib. iv. 7. sh) Abe 4 Ib. iv, § 8. DS lbaxve S275 
© Zahn, Alarcellus of Ancyra, as quoted by Hefele, Cowzcé/s, I. p. 31, slightly abridged. See also Hefele, p. 186, 

VOB Vis c 

l INTROS te. 

We shall be better able to estimate the justice of these reproaches, if we consider first the 
history of these words otota and épootcus, and the reasons which Cyril may have had for not 
employing them in the instruction of youthful Candidates for Baptism. 

It is strange to find that seven hundred years before the great controversy at Nica on 
the Hstrodiection of the word Otela into the Creed, it had been the war-cry of almost as fierce 
a conflict between rival schools of philosophy. 

“There appears,” says Plato in the person of the Eleatic stranger, “to be a sort of war 
of the giants going on between them because of the dispute concerning odela. Some of them 
are drawing all things down from heaven and from the invisible to earth, grasping rocks and 
oaks in their hands . for of all such things they lay hold, in obstinately maintaining that what 
can be touched and handled alone has being (civ), because they define ‘being’ and ‘body’ 
as one; and if any one else says that what is not a body has being, they altogether despise 
him, and will hear of nothing but body. ... Therefore their opponents cautiously defend 
themselves from above out of some invisible world, mightily contending that certain in- 
tellizible and incorporeal ideas are the true essence (odatav) 7.” 

It is apparently to this passage of Plato that Aristotle refers in describing the ambiguity of 
the word otvia® : “ Now Oteia seems to belong most manifestly to bodies: wherefore animals 
and plants and their parts we say are viaia, also natural bodies as fire and water and earth and 
all such things, and all either parts of these, or products either of parts or the whole, as the 
heaven and its parts, stars, moon, and sun. But whether these are the only otota or there are 
others also, or none of these but others of a different kind, is a matter for inquiry. Some think 
that the boundaries of bodies, as a surface, and a line and a point and a unit (uovds), are ovata, 
even more so than body and solid. Further, one class of persons thinks that besides things 
sensible there is no oteia, and another that there are many things, and these more enduring 
(dida), as Plato thinks that the ideas (eiS,) and the mathematical elements are two kinds 
of odgia, and that the oteia of sensible bodies is a third.” 

In proceeding to define the term, Aristotle says that otoia is used in four senses if not 
more: the essential nature (ré ré jy etvar), the universal (ro xa9ddov) the genus, and a fourth 
the subject (rd troxeipevoy). Under this fourth sense he proceeds to discuss the application 
of the term ods to the matter, the form, and the resulting whole. Without going further 
we may see that the use of the word in philosophy was full of difficulty and ambiguity. 

The ambiguity is thus expressed by Mr. Robertson?: “ We may look at a concrete term 
as denoting either this or that individual simply (ré3e rx), or as expressing its nature, and so 
as common to more individuals than one. Now properly (apéres) oteia is only appropriate 
to the former purpose. But it may be employed in a secondary sense to designate the latter, 
in this sense species and genera are devrepae obgiat, the wider class being less truly odota than 
the former.” Perhaps the earliest use of oteéa in Christian writings is in Justin M.*, where he 
describes the Logos as “having been begotten from the Father, by His power and will, 
but not by abscission (droropjv), as if the otaia of the Father were divided, as all other things 
when divided and cut are no longer the same as before.” His example was fire, from which 
other fires are kindled, while it remains undiminished and unchanged. According to 
Dr. Newman ?, ovoia here means “ substance, or being.” 

In Clement of Alexandria 3, ot¢ia means a “nature” common to many, for he speaks 
of the Gnostic Demiurge as creating an irrational soul ézooéerov with the soul of the beasts ;” 
and again as implanting in man “something co-essential (épootvc.r) with himself, inasmuch 
as he As invisible and incorporeal; his essence (ovoiav) he called “the breath of life,” but 
the thing formed (poppodr) became “a living soul,” which in the prophetic Scriptures he 

7 Plato, Sophist. § 246. ‘The passage is quoted by Theodoret, Grecarum affectionem Curatio, ii. p. 732.” (Heindorf.) 

8 Metaph, vi.§2. 9 Athanasius, Profeg. p.xxxi., in this Series. ° 77h. c. 128% 2? Arians, p.186. 3 Fragm. $50, Sylb. 341. 

ACh Gea) 

FF JERUSALEM AND NICZ2A, li 

confesses himself to be. Again in § 42 of the same ragment, according to the Valentinians, 
“the body of Jesus is co-essential (6zootevv) with the Church.” 

So Hippolytus 4 speaks of the Son Incarnate as being “at one and the same time Infinite 
God and finite Man, having the nature (ovo/av) of each in perfection:” and again, “ There 
has been effected a certain inexpressible and irefragable union of the two (the Godhead and 
the Manhood) into one subsistence (tzrécracw).” 

In Origen we find the two words odcta (essence, or substance) and sméeracis (individual 
subsistence) accurately distinguished. Quoting the description of Wisdom, as being the 
breath (aris) of the power of God, and pure effluence (améppoia) from the glory of the 
Almighty, and radiance (dratyacpa) of the Eternal Light 5,” he says that “ Wisdom proceeding 
from Him is generated of the very substance of God,” and adds that “these comparisons 
most manifestly shew that there is community of substance between Father and Son. For 
m efiluence appears to be duoodaros, that is, of one substance with that body from which it is 
an eflluence or vapour.” 

On the other hand he writes, “We worship the Father of the Truth, and the Son who is 
the ‘Truth, being in subsistence (rj imogriae) two®.” On this passage Bishop Bull remarks : 
“The words tmdoracts and otela in ancient times were variously used, at least by the 
Christians. That is to say, sometimes iméoracis was taken by them for what we call otcia, 
and vice versa, otota for what we call iréoraccs : sometimes the ancients even before the 
Council of Nicwa used indoracis for what we now call ‘person’ or ‘subsistence?.’” This 
Bishop Bull presently explains again as “an individual thing subsisting by itself, which 
in rational beings is the same as person.” 

I’or examples of these interchanges of meaning, we may notice that the Synod of Antioch 
(A.D, 269), in the Epistle addressed to Paul of Samosata before his deposition, speaking 
of the unity of Christ’s Person, says that “He is one and the same in His otoia’.” On this 
passage Routh remarks that “The words otela and gvovs are sometimes employed by the 
ancients for a personal subsistence (persona subsistente), as is plainly testified by Photius.” 

In the earlier part 9 of the same Epistle the Son is described as “ being before all ages, 
not in foreknowledge, but in essence and subsistence (é oval Kai Sroordvet).” 

The confusion arising from the uncertainty in the use of these two words is well illustrated 
in the account which Athanasius? himself gives of this same Synod of Antioch; “They who 
deposed the Samosatene, took Co-essential (suoovows) in a bodily sense, because Paul had 
attempted sophistry and said, ‘ Unless Christ has of man become God, it follows that He is 
Co-essential with the Father ; and if so, of necessity there are three essences (ovcia), one the 
previous essence, and the other two from it;’ and therefore guarding against this they said 
with good reason, that Christ was not Co-essential (spooterov).” Athanasius then explains on 
what grounds the Bishops at Nicwa “ reasonably asserted on their part, that the Son was Co- 
essential” Athanasius himself states that, in giving this explanation of the rejection of GpLo- 
ovatov by the Bishops who condemned the Samosatene, he had not their Epistle before him?; 
and his statement, that Paul used the term not to express his own view, but to refute that of 
the Lishops, is thought to be opposed to what Hilary says 3, “ Male énootvcwv Samosatenus 
confessus est : sed numquid melius Ariani negaverunt 2?” 

That the statement of Athanasius himself is not free from difficulty is clear from the way 
in which so great a ‘Theologian as Bishop Hefele endeavours to explain it: “ Athanasius says 
that Paul argued in this way; If Christ is ‘Opoovuws with the Father, then three subsistences 
(obotue) must be admitted—one first substance (the Father), and two more recent (the Son and 

4 Adv. Leron, et Hel. Fragm. i. 5 Wisdom of Solomon, vii. 25, quoted by Origen, vague, in Epist. ad Hebreos, Lommatzsch, 

V, p. 300. © Contra Celsum, vili. p. 386, 7 Def ita. Vics 1. c.g, § 17, ® Routh, Red. Sacr., III. p. 299 
9 Ib. p. 290, t De Syuodis,-cy 45; P. 474, in this Series, 2a) De 23. 3 Liber de Synodis, 513. 

lii INTRODUCTION. 

the Spirit): that is to say, that the Divine Substance is separated into three paris +.” The 
logical subtlety of Paul was better understood by Basil the Greats: “ For in truth they who 
met together about Paul of Samosata found fault with the phrase, as not being distinct ; for 
they said that the word époovows gave the idea of an eteia and of those derived from it, 
so that the title dpoovcwy assigned the ovcia separately to the subjects to which it was 
distributed: and this notion has some reason in the case of copper and the coins made 
from it; but in the case of God the Father, and God the Son, there is no substance 
conceived to be antecedent and superior to both: for to say and to think this surpasses 
all bounds of impiety.” 

‘The confusion arising from the uncertainty in the use of these words had been the cause 
of strife throughout the Christian Church for more than twenty years before the date of Cyril’s 
Lectures; and though it was declared at the Council of Alexandria (362) to be but a con- 
troversy about words 5*, it had long been and long afterwards continued to be a fruitful cause 
of dissension between men who, when forced to explain their meaning, were found to be in 
substantial agreement. ‘That Cyril abstained from introducing into his elementary teaching 
terms so provocative of dangerous controversy, ss a reason for commendation, not for censure. 
But if it is alleged that he denied or doubted or failed to assert the essential Godhead of 
the Son, the suspicion is unfounded and easily refuted. ‘To the many passages already 
quoted concerning the eternal generation of the Son, it will be enough to add one single 
sentence which ought to dispel all doubt of his orthodoxy. The Only-begotten Son, 
together with the Holy Ghost, is partaker of the Godhead of the Father (ris @edrntos tis 
Uarpixjs xowords).” ‘The word chosen by Cyril to express the Divine Essence (éeérys) 
common to the three Persons of the Godhead is at least as appropriate as oveta. 

If we now look at the particular errors mentioned in the Anathema of the Nicene 
Council, we shall find that every one of them is earnestly condemned by Cyril. 

“ Once He was not CHv more ére ov« jv). This famous Arian formula is expressly rejected 
in Cat. xi. § 17: “ Neither let us say, There was a time when the Son was not.” The 
eternity of the Son is asserted again and again, in reference, for instance, to His generation °, 
His Priesthood 7, and His throne ®. 

“ Before His generation He was nol” (mp yevvnOivat ovk fy). Compare with this Cyril’s 
repeated assertions that “the Son is eternally begotten, by an inscrutable and incom- 
prehensible generation °,” “the Son of God BEFORE ALL AGES, without beginning,” that 
“time intervenes not in the generation of the Son from the Father 2.” 

“He came to be from nothing” (2 ovK ovrav éyévero). Cyril’s language is emphatic: + 56 
I have often said, He did not bring forth the Son from non-existence (ek rod px) évros) into 
being, nor take the non-existent into Sonship 3.” 

“ That He is of other subsistence or essence ” (e& éxépas trourdcews } ovaias). It is certain 
that Cyril has given no countenance to the error or errors condemned in this clause, but is 
in entire agreement with the Council. 

On the question whether ixdoracts and otoia have in this passage the same or different 
meanings, see Bull, Def. Lid. Nic. II. 9, 11, p. 314 (Oxf Za). Athanasius expressly states 
that they are perfectly equivalent: “ Subsistence (imderags) is essence (odcia), and means 
nothing else but very being, which Jeremiah calls existence (Srapés).” Basil distinguishes 
them, and is followed by Bishop Bull, whose opinion is controverted by Mr. Robertson 
in an Excursus on the meaning of the phrase, on p. 77 of his edition of Athanasius in this 
Series. ‘The student who desires to pursue the subject may consult in addition to the works 

4 Councils, I. p. 124. 8 Efist. 300 (al. 52), quoted by Wan llscaye eee Vas a) Deke 5a Athan. Zomus ad Antiochenos, 
Bat 6 Catoiv soe 7 Mies ede Boys RIVES 27 o-Catunts Sas 1 §s. 2§7. 

3 §14. Cf. S. Alex. Epist. apud Theodoret, § 4: ‘That the Son of God was not made ‘from things which are not,’ and that 
‘there was no time when He was not,’ the Evangelist John sufficiently shews”’ (Ante-Nic. Library). 

wR 

§ 

SCV RIL S -WREEINGS. liii 

just named, and the authorities therein mentioned, Dr. Newman’s dvvans of the Lourth 
Century, especially chap. v. sect. i. 3, and Appendix, note iv., on “the terms oveia and 
ixdoraots as used in the early Church ;” Mr. Robertson’s Prolegomena, ch. ii. § 3 (2) (b); and 
the Rev. H. A. Wilson’s Prolegomena to Gregory of Nyssa, ch, iv., in this Series, 

CHAPTER XI. 
S. Cyriu’s WRITINGS. 

&1. List of Works. Besides the Catechetical and Mystagogic Lectures translated in this 
volume, the extant works of S. Cyril include (1) the “ Letter to the Emperor Constantius 
concerning the appearance at Jerusalem of a luminous Cross in the sky:” (2) “The 
Homily on the Paralytic at the Pool of Bethesda:” and (3) Fragments of Sermons on 
the Miracle of the water changed into wine, and on Joh. xvi. 28, “I go to My Father.” 

Another work attributed by some authorities to Cyril of Jerusalem and by others to Cyril 
of Alexandria is a Homily De Occursu Domini, that is, On the Presentation of Christ in the 
Temple, and the meeting with Symeon, called in the Greek Church 4 ‘Yrazavr7. 

‘The other Fragments and Letters mentioned in the Benedictine Edition have no claim to 
be considered genuine. 

§ 2, Authenticity of the Lectures. The internal evidence of the time and place at which the 
Lectures were delivered has been already discussed in chapters vill. and ix., and proves beyond 
doubt that they must have been composed at Jerusalem in the middle of the fourth century. 
At that date Cyril was the only person living in Jerusalem who is mentioned by the Ecclesi- 
astical Historians as an author of Catechetical Lectures: and S. Jerome, a younger contem- 
porary of Cyril, expressly mentions the Lectures which Cyril had written in his youth. 
In fact their authenticity seems never to have been doubted before the seventeenth century, 
when it was attacked with more zeal than success by two French Protestant Theologians 
of strongly Calvinistic opinions, Andrew Rivet (Créfic. Sacr. Lib. 1. cap. 8, Genev. 1640), and 
Edmund Aubertin (De Sacramento Eucharistia, Lab. ii. p. 422, Ed. Davent., 1654). Their 
objections, which were reprinted at full length by Milles at the end of his Edition, were 
directed chiefly against the Mystagogic Lectures, and rested on dogmatic rather than on 
critical grounds. The argument most worthy of notice was that in a MS. of the Library of 
Augsburg the Mystagogic Lectures were attributed to John, Bishop of Jerusalem. ‘This 
is admitted by Milles, who gives the title thus: Muoraywy:cat katnynoets mévte ‘Iwavvov 
’Emorxdrov ‘lepocodvpar, wept Banticpatos, xplopatos, Twparos, Kal aipatos Xpiorod. 

I do not find this Codex Augustinus mentioned elsewhere by any of the Editors under 
that name: but the Augsburg MSS. were removed to Munich in 1806, and in the older 
Munich MS. (Cod. Monac. 1), the title of the first Mystagogic Lecture is Muorayeyia mparn 
Iadvvov éemurkérov ‘Iepocodtpor. Also in Codd. Monac. 2, Ottobon. there is added at the 
end of the Title, rod atrod KupidXov kat "Iodvvov énxtoxdrov. ‘That John, Cyril’s successor, did 
deliver Catechetical Lectures, we know from his own correspondence with Jerome: and this 
very circumstance may account for his name having been associated with, or substituted for 
that of Cyril. 

To Rivet’s objection Milles makes answer that if the mistakes of a transcriber or the 
stumbling of an ignorant Librarian (¢mpertt! Librarit cespitationes) have in one or two MSS. 
ascribed the Lectures to John or any one else, this cannot be set against the testimony of 
those who lived nearest to the time when the Lectures were composed, as Jerome and 
Theodoret. Also the internal evidence proves that the Lectures could not have been delivered 
later than the middle of the fourth century, whereas John succeeded Cyril about 386. 

Moreover it is quite impossible to assign the two sets of Lectures to different authors. 

liv INTRODUCTION. 

In Cat. xviii. § 33 the author promises, as we have seen, that he will fully explain the 
Sacramental Mysteries in other Lectures to be given in Easter week, in the Holy Sepulchre 
itself, and Aaaeribes the subject of cach Lecture; to which description the Mystagogic 
Lectures correspond in all particulars. Other promises of future explanations are given in 
Cat. xiii. $ 19, and xvi. § 26, and fulfilled in Afyst. iv. § 3, and ii. § 6, and in. $1. On the 
other hand the author of .JZys/, i. $ 9, after quoting the words, “I believe in the Father, and 
+) the Son, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one Baptism of repentance,” adds, ‘* Of which 
things I spoke to thee at length in the former Lectures.” 

By these and many other arguments drawn from internal evidence Touttée has shewn 
convincingly that all the Lectures must have had the same author, and that he could be 
no other than Cyril. 

$3. Larly Testimony. Under the title “ Veterum Testimonia de S. Cyrillo Hicrosolymi- 
tano ejusque Seriptis,” Milles collected a large number of passages bearing on the life and 
writings of S. Cyril, of which it will be sufficient to quote a few which refer expressly to his 
Lectures. 

S. Jerome, in his Pook of Mlustrious Men, or Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, composed 
at Bethlehem about six years after Cyril’s death, writes in Chapter 112: “ Cyril, Bishop of 
Jerusalem, having been often driven out from the Church, afterwards in the reign of 
Theodosius held his Bishopric uudisturbed for eight years: by whom there are Catechetical 
Lectures, which he composed in his youth.” 

Theodoret, born six or seven years after the death of Cyril, in his Déalogues (p. 211 
in this Series) gives the “ Testimony of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, from his fourth Catechetical 
Oration concerning the ten dogmas. Of the birth from a virgin, “ Believe thou this, &c.” 

Theophanes (575 ive.) Chronographia, p. 34, Ed. Paris, 1655, defends the orthodoxy of 
Cyril, as follows: “It was right to avoid the word épootvews, which at that time offended 
most persons, and through the objections of the adversaries deterred those who were to be 
baptized, and to explain clearly the co-essential doctrine by words of equivalent meaning : 
which also the blessed Cyril has done, by expounding the Creed of Nicaea word for word, and 
proclaiming Him Very Gop or Very Gop.” 

Gelasius, Pope 492, De duabus in Christo naturis, quotes as from Gregory Nazianzen the 
words of Cyril, Cat. iv. $9: AuAods Hy 6 Xpiatds, K.TA. 

Leontius Byzantinus (610 ¢ve.), Contra Nestor. et Eutychem, Lib. I. quotes the same 
passage expressly as taken “From the 4th Catechetical Oration of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem.” 

Many other references to the Catecheses as the work of Cyril are given by Touttée, 
pp. 306—315. 

¢ 4. Editions. 1. Our earliest information concerning the Greck text and translations of 
S. Cyril’s Lectures is derived from John Grodecq, Dean of Glogau in Bohemia. 

From his statement it appears that Jacob Uchanski, Archbishop of Gnessen and Primate 
of Poland, had obtained from Macedonia a version of the Catecheses in the Slavonic dialect, 
and had translated it into the Polish language some years before 1560. 

2. In that year Grodecq himself published at Vienna an edition of the Mystagogic 
Lectures, thus described in the catalogue of the Imperial Library :— 

“S, Cyrils Mystagogic Lectures to the newly baptized, which now for the first time are 
edited in Greek and Latin together, that he who doubts the Latin may have recourse to the 
Greck, and he who does not understand Greek well may read the Latin, translated by John 
Grodecq.” 

Nothing more is known of this edition: Fabricius, Milles, Touttée, and Reischl, all say 
that they have been unable to find any trace of it. Uchanski about this time sent to 
Grodecy his Slavonic and Polish versions, in order that they might be compared with the 

SC VRE & WRITINGS, lv 

Greek original. The result according to Grodecq was that the fidelity of both versions was 
clearly shewn, and “there could not possibly remain any doubt that these Lectures of Cyril 
are perfectly genuine.” 

Whether Uchanski’s book was written or printed is unknown, as no trace of it has 
hitherto been found. 

3. S. Cyrilli Mier. Catecheses ad Illuminandos et Mystagogice. Interpretatus est Joannes 
Grodecius. Rome 1564. 8°. 

Grodecq had come to Rome in the suite of Stanislaus Hosius, Cardinal Legate at the 
Council of ‘Trent, who in the year 1562 had published in the Confession of Petricow the 
4th and part of the 3rd Mystagogic Lectures from a Greek MS. belonging to Cardinal Sirlet. 
Vrom this MS. Grodecq made his Latin translation, using also the work of Uchanski before 
mentioned. The preface is dated from ‘Trent, on the gth of July, 1563. The translation 
was published in the following year at Rome, Cologne, Antwerp, and Paris, and often 
elsewhere until superseded by the new Latin Version of ‘Vouttée in the Benedictine Edition. 

4. In the same year, 1564, the Mystagogic Lectures and Catecheses iv., vi., viii. —xX., XV., 
xvii. were published at Paris by William Morel, the King’s Printer, under the following tile: —~ 

“S. Cyrilli Hier. Catecheses, id est institutiones ad res sacras, Greece editee, ex bibliotheca 
Tfenrict, Memmii, cum versione Latina. Cura Guil. Morellii. Paris. G. Morel., 1564. 
4° min,” 

The Greek text depending on de Mesme’s one MS., and that mutilated and faulty, is 
said by ‘Touttée to have many faults and omissions, but to have been nevertheless very uscful 
to him in correcting the text. The MS. itself had entirely disappeared. The Latin version, 
appended to the copy in the Royal (National) Library at Paris, but not always attached to 
the Greek, is said by Touttée to be a careful and elegant version, independent of Grodecq’s. 

A copy of Morel’s Edition which formerly belonged to Du T'resne, containing various 
readings in the margin from two other MSS., was lent to Touttée from the Library of 
S. Genevieve (Genovef.). 

Reischl describes the MS. as “Cod. Mesmianus (Montf. I. 185). Sec. xi.” 

5. “S. Cyrilli H. Catecheses Greece et Latine ex interpretatione Joan. Grodecii nunc 
primum edite, ex variis bibliothecis, praecipue Vaticana, studio et opera Joan. Prevotii. Paris. 
(Claude Morellus), 1608.” This was the first complete edition of the Greek text. Prevot, 
a native of Bordeaux, states in the Dedication to Pope Paul V., that by the help of MSS. 

“melhoris note” found in the Vatican, he had both Suarected the text of the Lectures 
previously published by Morel, and carefully transcribed the rest. He made, according 
to ‘Touttée, many useful emendations, but did not mention the number, age, nor various 
readings of the MSS. employed. 

“S. Cyrilli Hier. Arch, opera que supersunt omnia; quorum quedam nunc primum 
ex Codd. MSS. edidit, reliqua cum Codd. MSS. contulit, plurimis in locis emendavit, Notis- 
que illustravit Tho. Milles S.T.B. ex ide Christi, Oxoniw, e Theatro Sheldoniano, Impensis 
Richardi Sare Bibliopol. Zond. mpccu.” 

The author of this fine Edition gives us in his Preface the following description of his work :— 

“In the first place I wished to amend more thoroughly the text of J. Prevot, which, 
as I said, he himself largely corrected and supplied from MSS. in the Vatican, and spite 
I have printed in this Edition: I have therefore compared it with all the other Editions that 
I could collect, and in this manner have easily removed many errors both of the printers and 
of Prevot himself. Afterwards I carefully compared all the Catecheses and the Epistle to 
Constantinus with two MSS. and some with three, namely iv., vi., Vili—x., Xv., XVI, xviii. The 
first Codex, written on parchment apparently six hundred years ago, I found among those 
MSS. which Sir Tho. Roe, our first Ambassador from King James I. to the Great Mogul, 
brought from the Last, and presented to the Bodleian Library. ‘The second we owe to the 

lvi iINTRORET TO”: 

dilizence of Isaac Casaubon, who collated the Catecheses and Epistle to Constantius with 
4 MS. which he chanced to find, I think, in some Library in France, and carefully noted 
all the various readings in the margin. This copy of Casaubon’s the Right Reverend 
Father in Christ, John Bishop of Norwich, very kindly lent to me out of his well-furnished 
Library, and of his ereat love for learning did not disdain to shew the highest favour to 
my slight endeavours.” 

“Touttée thinks that the MS. from which Casaubon drew his various readings was 
C. Roe itself, or that one of the two MSS. had been copied from the other, or both from 
the same. ; 

7S. Cyrilli Arch. Hier, opera que exstant omnia et ejus nomine circumferuntur, ad 
MSS. codices necnon ad superiores Editiones castigata, Dissertationibus et Notis illustrata, 
cum nova interpretatione et coplosis ‘adicibus. Cura et studio Domni Antonii-Augustini 
Touttéi, Presbyteri et Monachi Benedictini e Congregatione S. Mauri. Paris. Typis Jac. 
Vincent. 1720, fol. (Recusa Venet. 1763). 

Of the Greek text the Editor says, “I have collated it as carefully as I could with 
Grodecq’s translation, Morel’s and Prevot’s Editions, and with MSS. to be found in this City. 
The various readings of the Roman MSS. I have obtained by the help of friends : those which 
Milles had collected from the English Codices I have adopted for my own use.” 

§ “S Cyrilli Hier. Arch. opp. qua supersunt omnia ad libros MSS. et impressos 
recensult Notis criticis commentariis indicibusque locupletissimis illustravit Gulielm. Car. 
Reischl §. Th. D. et Reg. Lycei Ambergensis Professor. Vol. I. Monac. M pccc XLViII.” 

The Editor says in his Preface that he has altered the Benedictine text only when the 
evidence was very weighty, and has then given all the various readings in the critical notes. 
The exegetical commentary was to be reserved for the znd Volume, but this Dr. Reischl did 
not live to complete. 

The Prolegomena contain (1) Touttée’s inordinately long “Life of Cyril,” (2) a Disser- 
tation on the general character and authenticity of the Catecheses, and (3) an *‘ Apparatus 
Litterarius,” to which I have been indebted. 

Vol. ii., containing Catecheses xil.—xvili., AZyst. i-v., and the other works, genuine and 
spurious, attributed to Cyril, was published by J. Rupp at Munich, 1860. 

The MSS. used in revising the text of this, the best critical edition, will be noticed below. 

9. An Edition of the Catecheses only was published at Jerusalem in 1867, having been 
commenced in 1849 at the request of the Archbishop, Cyril II., by Dionysius Kleopas, 
Principal of the Theological School of Jerusalem, and, after his death in 1861, continued 
by his successor Photius Alexandrides, ‘‘ Archdeacon of the Apostolic and Patriarchal See 
of Jerusalem, and Principal of the ‘Theological School.” 

The Editor gives in the Preface an interesting account of the life of Kleopas, and of 
the work which he left unfinished. 

gs, Manuscriprs. From the preceding account of the various Editions of S. Cyril we 
may obtain the following list of authorities which have been hitherto used in revising the Text. 

1. Codex Sirletianus, known only by Grodecq’s Latin version, Rome, 1564. Cf. $1. 3. 

2. C. Mesmianus, known only in Morel’s edition, Paris, 1564. Cf $i. 4. 

3. Vatican MSS. used by Prevot, 1608, but not identified. Cf.$1. 5. 

4. C. Roe, Bibl. Bodleian. Oxon. ‘Codex membranaceus in folio, ff. 223, sec. xi., binis 
columnis bene exaratus ;” [ol. 271]. 

5. C. Casaubon. On this and the preceding MS. see Milles as quoted above, § 1. 6. 

6. C. Ottobonianus (1) ol. Rom. iv. membran. sec. xi. “Continet Catecheses omnes 
et Epist. ad Constantium. Multas habet insignes ab editis varietates.” 

C. Ottob. (2), ‘“Chartaceus et recens est, nihil fere ab editis discrepans.” 

These are the Roman MSS. mentioned by Touttée: see above, § 1. 7. 

SCY RILS WRITINGS: Ivii 

7. C. Coislin. 227 (ol. ror). Membran. Sec. xi. circ. “From this came many 
important emendations” (Touttée, Wotitia Codicum MSS. ). 

In the descriptions of the following MSS. of the National Library at Paris there is so 
much discrepancy between Touttée and Reischl, that it is better to quote both. 

8. “Catecheses xil., xili., Xiv., XV., Comparavi cum Codice Reg. bibliothecs num. BRO, 
Scriptus est in bombycina charta an. 1231, quam anni notam apposuit calligraphus” (Touttée, 
Not. Codd. MSS.). 

Reischl has no notice of a MS. at all answering to this description. 

g. Cod. Reg. alter, “ol. 1260, nunc 1824, qui S. Basilii opera complectitur, sub ejus 
nomine Procatechesin continet ” (Touttée, Wor. Codd. MSS.) : aliter, “Cod. Reg. ol, 260, nunc 
1284, pag. 254, qui duodecimi circiter est seculi, in quo habetur Procatechesis hee sub 
nomine S. Basilii” (Id. AZontt. in Procatechesin). 

“Cod. Reg. 467 (apud Touttéum, 1824) Fonteblandensis, chartac. fol. sec. x. Continet 
sub S. Basilii nomine Orationem de Baptismo, que est S. Cyrilli Hier. Procatechesis. 
C. Reg. Touttdéi ” (Reischl). 

to. “Cod. Reg. 969 (ol. Mazarin.) Epistolarum S. Basilii. 4°. Sec. xiv. Exhibet sub n. 7 
Basilii homiliam gwo (sic) ostenditur Deum esse incomprehensibilem, que non S. Basilii, sed 
Cyrilli est Procatechesis” (Reischl). 

This description agrees in substance with Touttée’s. 

11. C. Colbert. ‘‘ Catecheses iv., vi., viil., ix., x., xv., xviii, contuli cum cod. Colbert. 
Biblioth. chartaceo et recenti 4863 notato ... In omnibus pene cum Morelliana editione 
consentit ” (Touttée, Wotitia Codd. MSS.). 

Reischl makes no mention of this MS. 

12. C. Colbert. alter. “membran. sign. 1717, Sec. xiii. diversas Patrum homilias continet, 
et Cat. xili, exhibet sub nomine Cyrilliane in Crucem et Porasceven homiliz ” (Touttée, 
LNotitia). 

This is described by Reischl as “Cod. Reg. 771 (ol. 1717) Colbertinus. Membran. fol. 
secull xill.—xiv.” 

The following MSS. have been used in Editions later than the Benedictine. 

13. “C. Monacensis I. 394 membran, fol., titulis et initialibus miniatis, f. 26r nitidissime 
uncialibus minutis circiter seculo decimo in Oriente scriptus.” 

This was regarded both by Reischl and by Rupp as the most important authority for the 
text: it is much older than Codd. Roe, Casaub., and seems to be related to Codd. Ottobon. 
Coislin. 

C. Mon. 2 of the 16th Century is of little value. 

14. “C. Vindobonensis, 55, membran. fol. antiquissimus, sed incerto szeculo ” 

A full account is given by Rupp in the Preface to Vol. ii. It was collated by Joseph 
Miller, 1848, and contains all Cyril’s Lectures, except the Procatechesis. 

15. Codex A, found by Kleopas in the Library of the Archbishop of Cyprus, and used 
as the basis of his text, sometimes stands alone in preserving the true reading. 

§ 6. Versions. Besides the Latin Translations published with the Greek text, as 
mentioned above, Reischl mentions the first three of the following :— 

(a) Les catéchéses de Sainct Cyrille. Traduit par Louis Ganey. Paris, 1564. 

(6) Cyrill’s Schriften tibersetzt und mit Anmerkungen versehen von J. Mich. Feder. 
Bamberg, 1786. 

(c) Cyrilli Hier. Catecheses in Armen. Linguam verse. Vienne, 1832. 

(Z) The Catechetical Lectures of S. Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem, Translated, 
with Notes and Indices (Library of Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church.) 
Parker, Oxford, 1838. See Preface. 

VOL. Vit: £ 

Wviti INTRODUCTION. 

(e) S. Cyril on the Mysteries. (‘The five Mystagogic Lectures.) H. de Romestin. 
Parker, Oxford, 1887. 

(f) On Faith and the Creed. C. A. Heurtley, D.D., Margaret Professor of 
Divinity, and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. Parker, 3rd Ed., 1889. 
Contains, with other Treatises, the Fourth Catechetical Lecture of S. Cyril. 

In the present volume the translation given in the Oxford “ Library of Fathers” has 
been carefully revised throughout. Where it has been found necessary to depart from the 
Benedictine text, the Editor has consulted the readings and critical notes of Milles, Reischl, 
and Rupp, and the Jerusalem edition of Kleopas and Anaxandrides. 

A few additions have been made to the Index of Subjects: the Indices of Greek Words 
and of Scripture Texts have been much enlarged, and carefully revised. For any errors which 
may have escaped observation the indulgence of the critical reader will not, it is hoped, 
be asked in vain. | a» Fe © 

Loe 

Ci TECHMEIICAL EECTURES 

OF 

Do Ooi, 

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM. 

CUAL EN TS. 

PAGE 
PROCATECHESIS, 
Or, Prologue to the Catechetical Lectures of our Holy Father, Cyril, Archbishop of Jerusalem 1... sc. sees I 
First CATECHETICAL LECTURE :— 
To those who are to be enlightened: with a Reading from Isaiah i, 16 .oe..cccceecsscccceccecsecccsceececcceceeee. 6 
LEcTuURE II. 
On Repentance and Remission of Sins, and Concerning the Adversary : Ezekiel xviii. SO it le ens is et 8 
Lecture III. 
eee iS Mi isi einer oy hod rd ec eevee son 14 
LECTURE IV 
aoe Peet Dale oe Rrccnririey Cpe oe cick iccaes senders cunceccrvnersensvus heel 19 
LECTURE V. 
aida iN ta Sl ot, ae SI a Pe pune eo Par Ns 7 By Ok Hs ae aero Cc RG A Cae ae ee 29 
LEcTURE VI. 
Concerning the Unity of God. On the words, I BELIEVE IN ONE Gop. Also concerning Heresies : 
Pee ae OME righ Freniess otis die eG ue ee ee ae 35 
LECTURE VII. 
ee ee OIG PE iyi is ge ince ai Perdis eh a ee 44 
LeEcTur_E VIII. 
eee Pe ee Be FO Bieter ie alas ke 48 
LEcTuRE IX. 
On the words, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH, AND OF ALL THINGS VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE: 

[ODS NN ny tree eee yb BAe Toei on ae dee rey ae eCPestediivenir Cou oce tte. erie le 51 
Appendix to Lecture Eee Behe eh ta cae eee ITC uC UCU Sui eee puis Tat ee rarer a anaes 55 
LECTURE X. 

On the Words, AND IN ONE LorpD Jesus Curis? : 1 Corinthians viii. FeO sty ite vate ee 57 

LECTURE XI. 
On the words, THE ONLY-BEGOTTEN SON OF Gop, BEGOTTEN OF THE FATHER VERY GOD BEFORE 
ALL AGES, BY WHOM ALL THINGS WERE MADE: Hebrews i. 1, 2 

Ix CONTENTS. 

PAGE 
LECTIES ALG: 
On the words, INCARNATE, AND MADE MAN : Isaiah Vil. LO14 cesseseeeeeeteseeeeceeeeeeeeen ees nnecnes Rae ee 
Lecrure AIL 
On the words, CRUCIFIED AND BuRIED: Isaiah lilt, I—7 «0... eee iia es ee ere 82 
Lecture XIV. 
On the words, AND ROSE AGAIN FROM THE DEAD ON THE THIRD DAY, AND ASCENDED INTO THE 
HAVENS, AND SAT ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER: I Corinthians xv. I—4 ....... ete, 94 
LECTURE XV. 
On the words, AND SHALL COME IN GLORY TO JUDGE THE QUICK AND THE DEAD; OF WHOSE 
KINGDOM THERE SHALL BE NO END: Daniel Vil. 9O—I14 ....:0sccsceveecssseenes ba vaneseciest. Parcuues tie nee ee bel) 
LECTURE XVI. 
On the words, AND IN ONE HoLy GuHost, THE COMFORTER, WHICH SPAKE IN THE PROPHETS: 
© COnemt APS SE. EA occ ssc na nae Sxcie cas gu aps bones) sie ve sanepwnensaas win beneweds oi dsp ee venae tice esas er ere i ae 

LECTURE XVII. 
Continuation of the Discourse on the Holy Ghost : 1 Corinthians xil. 8 .........ccecseceeeeceeeee cee eees Be be) 
LECTURE XVIII. 
On the words, AND IN ONE HoLy CATHOLIC CHURCH, AND IN THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH, 
AND THE Lirk EVERLASTING : Fozekiel- xxavil; Eos. .ccsivcces~secesvevecsssuventuumugs es eueen aeeeee eee 134 

FIVE CATECHETICAL LECTURES TO THE NEWLY BAPTIZED :— 
LECTURE XIX. 

First Lecture on the Mysteries. With a Lesson from the First General Epistie of Peter v. 8—14 ...... er 144 
LECTURE XX. 

On Baptism y Romans vis 3—-1AS iiss eres cep tasse saps eee es speds itn cepe setae tn esd ce shies aa wee ki meee 147 
LECTURE XXI. 

On Chrism: 1 John ii. 20—28 ........ Soael Gas vasa cns a aeeca ag ee ee PEPE PT PRS ROR ay oe TUG Br oe A 149 
LECTURE XXII. 

On the Body and Blood of Christ: § Comintitans i. 95 eo jini ised oie caon ch anv ovshs peaag eo eonaneneenel I51 
LECTURE XXIII. 

On the Sacred Liturgy and Communion 2° 2 Peter fi. S205 i. .0cs; is cisineneinanas vsstuusqusenesnnce un vevenctert es assaes 153 

RRPDICIS 5 eR FCCES ons an 5s Lass vn cck yen cen say seesl < coveke 8 ey stops Sa wee oben uate Wa sa Se eee se 161 

Greeks Words. Gis hear es BE ee ee igs 

Texts Of CEDLUle 25 eeciary as ates Se eceeen anes ein as asieeeice re eT TER (oer S eerepicees 178 

Pin Bers, 

O} 

~ 

PROLOGUE TO THE CATECHETICAL LECTURES OF OUR HOLY FATHER, 

CYRIL, ARCHBISHOP OF 

JERUSALEM. 

r. ALREADY there is an odour of blessedness 
upon you, O ye who are soon to be enlight- 
ened': already ye are gathering the spiritual 2 
flowers, to weave heavenly crowns: already the 
fragrance of the Holy Spirit has breathed upon 
you: already ye have gathered round the 
vestibule of the King’s palace 3; may ye be led 
in also by the King! For blossoms now have 
appeared upon the trees+; may the fruit also be 
found perfect! ‘Thus far there has been an 
inscription of your names5, and a call to 
service, and torches ® of the bridal train, and a 
longing for heavenly citizenship, and a good 
purpose, and hope attendant thereon. For 
he lieth not who said, that fo them that love 
God all things work together for good. God 
is lavish in beneficence, yet He waits for each 
man’s genuine will: therefore the Apostle 
added and said, fo them that are called ac- 
cording to a purpose7?. ‘The honesty of purpose 
makes thee called: for if thy body be here 
but not thy mind, it profiteth thee nothing. 

2. Even Simon Magus once came to the 
Laver®: he was baptized, but was not enlight- 
ened ; and though he dipped his body in water, 
he enlightened not his heart with the Spirit : his 

1 The ‘‘blessedness” is the grace of Baptism, the hope of 
which is as a fragrant odour already borne towards the Candi- 
dates. These were called no longer Catechumens, but ¢wri¢o- 
pevot, as already on the way “to be enli ghtened.” Compare xvi. 
26, the last sentence, and see Index, ‘enlighten.’ 

2 yonta. ‘The word is much used by Plato to distinguish 
things which can be discerned only by the mind from the objects 
of sight and sense. Here ‘‘the spiritual (or, mental) flowers” are 
the Divine truths in which ‘‘the fragrance of the Holy Spirit” 
breathes, 

3 a 
tistery” 

’ 

is meant ‘‘the outer hall of the Bap- 
Gik.a. and by “the King’s Palace” the Baptistery 
itself, which Cyril calls ‘‘the inner chamber” (<x. 2)j ands? the 
bride-chamber ” (iii. 2; xxii. 2). Index, ‘‘ Baptistery.” Here 
the local terms have also an allegorical sense, Baptism being 
regarded as the marriage of the Soul to Christ. 

4 Another allegory, from the season of Spring, when the Lec- 
tures were delivered. 

5 ovopatoypadia. See Index. 

6 That the Candidates on their first admission carried torches 
or lighted tapers in procession is a conjecture founded on this 
passage and Lect. I. 1: ‘‘Ye who have just lighted the torches 
of faith, preserve them in your hands unquenched.” 
Index, ‘‘ Lig gehts. 

7 Rom. viii. 28. In S. Paul’s argument the ‘purpose ” is 
God’s eternal purpose of salvation through Christ (Eph. i. rr; 
iil. 11): but Cyril applies it, here to sincerity of purpose in coming 
to Baptism. 8 Acts vill. 13. 

VOL, VII. I 

‘the vestibule’ 

3ut see 

y 
’ 

body went down and came up, but his soul was 
not buried with Christ, nor raised with Him 9. 
Now I mention the statements * of (men’s) falls, 
that thou mayest not fall: for these things 
happened to them by way of example, anzd 
they are written for the admonition? of those 
who to this day draw near. Let none of you 
be found tempting His grace, Zest any root of 
bitterness spring up and th rouble jyou3, Let none 
of you enter saying, Let us see what the faith- 
ful+ are doing: let me go in and see, that I 
may learn what is being done. Dost thou 
expect to see, and not expect to be seen? 
And thinkest thou, that whilst thou art search- 
ing out what is going on, God is not searching 
thy heart ? 

3. A certain man in the Gospels once pried 
into the marriage feasts, and took an unbe- 
coming garment, and came in, sat down, and 
ate: for the bridegroom permitted it. But 
when he saw them all clad in white ®, he ought 
to have assumed a garment of the same kind 
himself: whereas he partook of the like food, 
but was unlike them in fashion and in purpose. 
The bridegroom, however, though bountiful, 
was not undiscerning: and in going round to 
each of the guests and observing them (for his 
care was not for their eating, but for their 
seemly behaviour), he saw a stranger zot 
having on a wedding garment, and said to him, 
friend, how camest thou in hither? In what 
acolour7! With what a conscience! What 
though the door-keeper forbade thee not, be- 
cause of the bountifulness of the entertainer ? 
what though thou wert ignorant in what fashion 
thou shouldest come in to the banquet ?—thou 

9 Rome vi 44. Cole. it. x12. 

I Greck, tmoypady, meaning either an ‘‘indictment,” or a de- 
scriptive ‘‘sketch.” For the former meaning, sce Plato, Theact. 
172, Kk. broypapyy... qv avtTwpootav Kadovaw. 

2 Otc Ses Es a eb. wil £5. 

4 ‘The faithful” are those who have been already baptized, 
and instructed in those mysteries of the Christian F: uth which 
were reserv ed for the initic ited. See Index, “ Faithful.’ 

5 Matt. xxii. t2, ‘he same pas sage is app slied to Baptism in 
rome lil. 2. 6 See Cat. xxii. 8, and Index, ‘‘ White.’ 

7 The Greek word (yppua) is used by Ignatius in the begin- 
ning of his Lpistle fo the Romans ot a dis colouring stain. 

“cc 

2 

PROCA TECH ESS, 

didst come in, and didst see the glittering 
fashions of the guests; shouldest thou not have 
been taught even by what was before thine 
eyes? Shouldest thou not have retired in 
eood season, that thou mightest enter in good 
season again? 
eg pO to be unseasonably cast out. 

» he commands the servants, Pivd his feet, 
hie h daringly intruded : dzvd Ais hands, which 
knew not how to put a bright garment around 
him: avd cast him into the cuter darkness ; + for 
he is unworthy of the wedding torches ®. ‘Thou 
seest what happened to that man; make thine 
own condition safe. 

4. For we, the ministers of Christ, have 
admitted every one, and occupying, as it 
were, the place of door-keepers we left the 
door open: and possibly thou didst enter 
with thy soul bemired with sins, and with a 
will defiled. Enter thou didst, and wast 
allowed: thy name was inscribed. Tell me, 
dost thou behold this venerable constitution of 
the Church? Dost thou view her order and 
discipline 9, the reading of Scriptures *, the pre- 
sence of the ordained ®, the course of instruc- 
tion 3? Be abashed at the place, and be taught 
by what thou seest4 Go out opportunely 
now, and enter most opportunely to-morrow. 

If the fashion of thy soul is avarice, put 
on another fashion and come in. Put off thy 
former fashion, cloke it not up. Put off, I 
pray thee, fornication and uncleanness, and 
put on the brightest robe of chastity. This 
charge I give > thee , before Jesus the Bridegroom 
of souls come in and see their fashions. A 
long notice 5 is allowed thee; thou hast forty ° 
days for repentance: thou hast full oppor- 
tunity both to put off, and wash, and to put 
on and enter. But if thou persist in an evil 
purpose, the speaker is blameless, but thou 
must not look for the grace: for the water 
will receive, but the Spirit will not accept thee 7 
If any one is conscious of his wound, let 

® Compare § 1, note 6. 

9 The Greek word (émeatyyy) Which commonly means ‘‘know- 
ledge” or “understanding,” is applied here and in vi. 35 to the 
intelligence and skill displayed in the arrangement of the public 
services of the Church, Compare 4 fostolic Constitutions, Me 575 
where the Bishop is exhorted to have the assemblies arranged 
PETA TATHS ETLOTHUNS. 

a In the same passage of the Apostolic Constitutions precise 
directions are given for reading a Lesson from the Old Testament, 
singing the Psalms, and reading g the Epistle and Gospel. 

2 By ‘the ordained” (xavovexdv) are meant all whose names 
were registered as bearing office in the Church, Priests, Deacons, 
Deaconesses, Monks, Virgins, Widows, all having their appointed 
places and proper duties. Afost. Canon. 79, €l TLS EmlaKOTOS. 7H 
mpeaBurepos, 7 diakovos, 7) CAWS TOV KaTadcyou TOV KAypLKaY, 
KAA. 

3 Compare Afost. Const. as above: ‘Let the Presbyters one 
by one, not all together, exhort the people; and the Bishop last, 
as being the commander.” 

4&3. “Aug. de Civit, Dei, ii. 28: “‘ Though some come to mock 
at such admonitions, all their insolence is cither humbled by a 
sudden conversion (immutatio) or suppressed by fear or shame. 

5 Greek, mpofeopia. Compare Gal. iv. 2: ‘the time appointed 
of the father. ” At Athens it meant a ‘‘limitation,” or fixed period 
within which a debt must be claimed or paid, or an action com- 
menced. © Index, ‘‘ Lent.” 7 Compare xvii. 36. 

But now thou hast come In) 

him take the salve; if any has fallen, let him 
arise. Let there be no Simon among you, 
no hypocrisy, no idie curiosity about the 
matter. 

5. Possibly too thou art come on another 
pretext. It is possible that a man is wishing 
to pay court to a woman, and came nishuer 
on that account’ The remark applies in 
like manner to women also in their turn, A 
slave also perhaps wishes to please his master, 
and a friend his friend. I accept this bait for 
the hook, and welcome thee, though thou 
camest with an evil purpose, yet as one to be 
saved by a good hope. Perhaps thou knewest 
not whither thou wert coming, nor in what kind 
of net thou art taken. Thou art come within 
the Church’s nets?: be taken alive, flee hot? 
for Jesus is angling for thee, not in order to 
kill, but by kil ling to make alive: for thou 
must die and rise again. Tor thou hast heard 
the Apostle say, Dead indeed unto sin, but living 
unto rightcousness*, Wie to thy sins, and live to 
righteousness, live from this very day. 

“6, See, I pray thee, how great a dignity Jesus 
bestows on thee. ‘Thou wert called a Cate- 
chumen, while the word echoed? round thee 
from without ; hearing of hope, and knowing 
it not ; hearing mysteries, and not understand. 
ing them ; hearing Scriptures, and not knowing 
their depth. The echo is no longer around 
thee, but within thee; for te indwelling Spirits 
henceforth makes thy mind a house of God. 
When thou shalt have heard what is written 
concerning the mysteries, then wilt thou 
understand things which thou knewest not. 
And think not that thou receivest a small 
thing: though a miserable man, thou receivest 
one of God's titles. Hear St. Paul saying, 
God ts faithful+, Hear another Scripture say- 
ing, God is faithful and just. Voreseeing this, 
the Psalmist, because men are to receive a title 
of God, spake thus in the person of God: 
I said, Ye are Gods, and are all sons of the 
Most High®, But beware lest thou have the 
title of “ faithful,” but the will of the faithless. 
Thou hast entered into a contest, toil on 
through the race: another such opportunity 
thou canst not have7.. Were it thy wedding- 
day before thee, wouldest thou not have dis- 
regarded all clse, and set about the prepara- 
tion for the feast? And on the eve of con- 
secrating thy soul to the heavenly Bridegroom, 

wilt thou not cease from carnal things, that 
thou mayest win spiritual ? 
8S. Ambrose on the rrgth Psalm, Sev. xx. § 48, speaks 

of some who pretended to be Christians in order to marry one 

whose parents would not give her in marriage to a heathen. 
Mai. Seite. ee TOROMy Viney, Ld 
2 §. Cyril plays upon the word “ Catechumen,” 

the same root as ‘‘ echo.” 
3: Ronn vill. .0, 2.7: 

which has 

A<1Cor, 1:-9 Sore yolme: a: 

Ps UINses. “6. 7 Compare x-ii. 36. 

7. We may not receive Baptism twice or 
thrice ; else it might be said, Though I have. 
failed once, I shall set it right a second time :, 
Whereas if thou fail once, the thing cannot be. 
set right ; for there is ove Lord, and one faith, 
and one baplism® : for only the heretics are re- 
baptized 9, because the former was no baptism. 

8. For God seeks nothing else from us, save 
a good purpose. Say not, How are my sins 
blotted out? I tell thee, By willing, by 
beheving '. What can be shorter than this ? 
But if, while thy lips declare thee willing, thy 
heart be silent, He knoweth the heart, who 
judgeth thee. Cease from this day from every 
evil deed. Let not thy tongue speak unseemly 
words, let thine eye abstain from sin, and from 
roving * after things unprofitable. 

g. Let thy feet hasten to the catechisings; re- 
ceivewith earnestness the exorcisms 3: whether. 
thou be breathed upon or exorcised, the act) 
is to thee salvation. Suppose thou hast gold 
unwrought and alloyed, mixed with various | 
substances, copper, and tin, and iron, and | 
lead : we seek to have the gold alone; can 
gold be purified from the foreign substances 
without fire? Even so without exorcisms the 
soul cannot be purified ; and these exorcisms 
are divine, having been collected out of the 
divine Scriptures. Thy face has been veiled 4, 
that thy mind may henceforward be free, lest 
the eye by roving make the heart rove also. 
But when thine eyes are veiled, thine ears are 
not hindered from receiving the means of 
salvation. Tor in like manner as those who. 
are skilled in the goldsmith’s craft throw in 
their breath upon the fire through certain 
delicate instruments, and blowing up the gold 
which is hidden in the crucible stir the flame 
which surrounds it, and so find what they are 
seeking ; even so when the exorcists inspire 
terror by the Spirit of God, and set the soul, 
as it were, on fire in the crucible of the 
body, the hostile demon flees away, and there 
abide salvation and the hope of eternal life, 
and the soul henceforth is cleansed from. 
its sins and hath salvation. Let us then, 
brethren, abide in hope, and surrender our- 
selves, and hope, in order that the God of 
all may see our purpose, and cleanse us from 

o Tapwave 5. 

9 ‘his sentence is omitted in one MS. (Paris, 1824), but pro- 
bably only through the repetition of the word * baptism.” On the 
laws of the Church against the repetition of Baptism, and con- 
cerning the re-baptisin of heretics, see Tertull. de Baftismo, c. xv. : 
Afost. Const. xv.: Bingham, xii. 5: Hefele, Councils, Lib. I.c. 2: 
Dictionary Christian Antiq. I. p. 167 a. 

' Rufinus, in the L£fosition of the Creed, on the Re- 
mission of sins: “The Pagans are wont to say in derision of us, 
that we deceive ourselves in thinking that crimes which have been 
committed in deed can be washed out by words.” 

* The reading in the Benedictine Edition, bende 6 vots cov 
petBéoOw, has little authority, and is quite unsuitable. See below, 
TO BArcupa peuBowevov. 3 Index, ‘ Exorcism.” 

4 Index, ‘ Veiling” 

PROCATECHESIS. 3 

our sins, and impart to us good hopes of our 
estate, and grant us repentance that bringeth 
salvation. God hath called, and His call is 
to thee. 

10. Attend closely to the catechisings, 
and though we should prolong our discourse, 
let not thy mind be wearicd out. Vor thou art 
receiving armour against the adverse power, 
armour against heresies, against Jews, and 
Samaritans 5, and Gentiles. ‘Thou hast many 
enemies ; take to thee many darts, for thou 
hast many to hurl them at: and thou hast 
necd to learn how to strike down the Greek, 
how to contend against heretic, against Jew 
and Samaritan, And the armour is ready, and 
most ready the sword of the Spirit® ; but thou 
also must stretch forth thy right hand with 
good resolution, that thou mayest war the Lord’s 
warfare, and overcome adverse powers, and 
become invincible against every heretical at- 
tempt. 

rt. Let me give thee this charge also. Study 
our teachings and keep them for ever. ‘Think 
not that they are the ordinary homilies7; for 
though they also are good and trustworthy, yet 
if we should neglect them to-day we may study 
them to-morrow. But if the teaching concern- 
ing the laver of regeneration delivered in a 
consecutive course be neglected to-day, when 
shall it be made right? Suppose it is the 
season for planting trees: if we do not dig, and 
dig deep, when else can that be planted 
rightly which has once been planted _ ill? 
Suppose, pray, that the Catechising is a kind 
of building: if we do not bind the house 
together by regular bgnds in the building, 
lest some gap be found, and the building 
become unsound, even our former labour is of 
no use. But stone must follow stone by 
course, and corner match with corner, and by 
our smoothing off inequalities the building 
must thus rise evenly. In like manner we are 
bringing to thee stones, as it were, of know- 
ledge. Thou must hear concerning the living 
God, thou must hear of Judgment, must hear 
of Christ, and of the Resurrection. And many 
things there are to be discussed in successicn, 
which though now dropped one by one are 

_afterwards to be presented in harmonious con- 

nexion. But unless thou fit them together in 
the one whole, and remember what is first, and 
what is second, the builder may build, but thou 
wilt find the building unsound. 

12. When, therefore, the lecture is delivered, 

5 The Samaritans are frequently mentioned by Mpiphani:s and 
other writers of the 4th century among the chicf adversaries 
of Christianity, ‘In their humble synagogue, at the foot of the 
mountain (Gerizim), the Samaritans still worship, the oldest and 
the smallest sect in the world.” (Stanley, Sizai and Palestine, 
p- 240.) 

SC Ephy vie 17. 7 See above, § 4, note 3. 

Bs 2 

fa Catechumen ask thee what the teachers have 
cad. tell nothing to him that i without. Jer 
we deliver to thee a mystery, and a hope of 
the live to come. Guar d the mystery for Him 
who wives the reward, Let none ever say) 

to thee, What harm to thee, if I also know) 
‘12? So too the sick ask for wine ; but if it be | 
ciyven at a wrong time it causes delirium, and | 
two evils arise ; the sick man dies, and the 

‘Thus is it also with the | 
Catechumen, if he hear anything from the, 
li i ver: both the Catechumen becomes | 
delirious (for he understands not what he Bae | 
heard, and tinds fault with the thing, and scolls | 
at what is said), and the believer is condemned be 

a traitor. But thou sen now standing on 
the border: take heed, pray, to tell nothing 
out : not that the things spoken are not worthy 
to be told, but because his ear is unworthy to 
receive. ‘Chou wast once thyself a Catechu- 
men, and I described not what lay before thee. 
When by experience thou hast leaned how 
high are the inatters of our teaching, then thou. 
wilt know that the Catechumens are not worthy 
to hear them. 

13. Ye who have been enrolled are become 
sons and daughters of one Mother. When ye 
have come in before the hour of the exorcisms, 
let each one of you speak things tending to 
godliness : and if any of your number be not 
present, seek for him. If thou wert called to 
a banquet, wouldest thou not wait for thy 
fellow guest? Ifthou hadst a brother, wouldest 
thou not seek thy brother’s good ? 

Afterwards busy not thy self about unprofit- 
able matters: neither, what the city has done, 
nor the village, nor the King», nor the Bishop, 
nor the Presbyter. Look upward; that is what 
thy present hourneedeth. #e still, and know 
that [am God. If thou seest the believers 
ministering, and shewing no care, they enjoy 
security, they know what they have received, 
at are In possession of grace. But thou 

physician is blamed. 

as 

standest just now in the turn of the scale, 
to be received or not: copy not those who 
have freedom from anxiety, but cherish fear. | 

14. And when the Exorcism has been done, 
until the others who are being exorcised have | 
comet, let men be with men, and women with 
women, For now I need the example of 
Noah’s ark: in which were Noah and his tie 

8 On the Disc ea abeoak: or rule against publishing the 
Christi mn Creed and Mysteries to Catechumens and Gentiles, see 
Index, “Mysteries. ic 

9 ‘The title '* Kin x" (BagwAcvs) is used in the Greek Liturgies 
and Fathers of the Rom: in_ Emperor, as in the Clementine Liturgy: 
imp Tov Bagtdéws, Kat Tw ev UTepoxy, Where it is taken from 
é Timm ii a “Conrpare Cate 219. nay ane Kowroraytivoy tov 
Baoidrews. 

1) Ps. xlvi. ro. Sept. exoAdoare, ‘‘giveattention freely.” 

tm From 8S. Augustine, de Syazdolo, i. 1 (Migne T. vi. p. 930), 
we learn that the Candidates were brought in before the Con- 
sregation one by one for exorcism; and so, as Cyril here shews, 

oS 

6“ 

they had to wait outside till the others returned. 

PROCATEHG Ta: 

and his wife and his sons’ wives. For though 
the ark was one, and the door was shut, yet 
‘had things been suitably arranged. If the 
Church is shut, and you are all inside, yet let 
there be a separation, men with men, and 
women with woment: lest the pretext of 
salvation become an occasion of destruction, 
sven if there be a fair pretext for sitting near 
each other, let passions be put away. Tur- 
ther, let the men when sitting have a useful 
baci = and let one read, and “another listen: 
and if there be no book, let one pray, and 
another speak something useful. And again 
let the party of young women sit together in 
like manner, cither singing or reading quictly, 
so that their lips speak, but others’ cars catch 
not the sound: fer L suffer nol a woman to 
speak in the Church®, And let the married 
woman also follow the same ee and 
pray ; and let her lips move, but her voice be 
unheard, that a Samuel 3 may come, and_ thy 
barren soul give birth to the salvation of 
“God who hath heard thy prayer ;” for this 
is the interpretation of the name Samucl. 

aS: I shall observe each man’s earnestness, 
each woman’s reverence. Let your mind be 
refined as by fire unto reverence ; let your soul 
be forged as metal: let the stubbornness of 
unbelief be hammered out : let the superfluous 
scales of the iron drop off, and what is pure 
remain ; let the rust of the iron be rubbed off, 
and the true metal remain. May God some- 
time shew you that night, the darkness which 
shines like the day, concerning which it 1s 
said, Zhe darkness shall not be hidhili on from thee, 
and the night shall shine as the day+ ‘Vhen 
may the gate of Paradise be opened to every 
man and every woman among you. ‘Then may 
you enjoy the Christ-bearing waters in_ their 
fragrance 5. Then may you receive the name 
of Christ®, and the power of things divine. 
Kyen now, I beseech you, lift up the eye of the 

t Chrys. zz Matt. Fou. \xxiv. § 3: ‘You ought to have 
within you the wall that separates you from the women: but 
since ye will not, our fathers have thought it necessary to separate 
you at least by "these boards; for I have heard from my elders 
that there were not these walls in old times.” These barriers had 
not yet been introduced at Jerusalem, or Cyril’s rey ee w ae 
have been needless. Compare A fostolic Constitutions, Il. 

to Coe ite Sad a Vie, Tes 

i 5am, 1. 73,-20. On the various interpretations of the name 
Snel see Dict, Bib, “Samuel,” and Driver on the passage. 
Cyril adopts the meaning “heard of God.’ 

4 Ps. exxxix. 12. On Eas ter Eve the Church was full of lights 
which were kept burning all night, and the newly-baptized carried 
torches. Gregory of Nyssa, preaching on the Resurrection 
(Orat. iv.), describes the scene: “This brilliant night, by ming- 
ling the flames of torches with the morning rays of the sun, has 
made one continuous day, not divided by the interposition of 
darkness.’ 

5 Or, as the Benedictine Editor conjectures, waters 
which have a Christ-be: aring (xpiatodbdpor) fragrance.” On the 
epithet xpratopdpos, see Bishop Lightfoot’s note on Ignat. ad 
Eph, § 1 and § 9. lis meaning, as well_as that of Ocopopos is 
defined in the answer of Ignatius to ‘Trajan, ‘O Xproroy éywr 
év arepvots (Jar tyr. fen. Ant. § 2). 

Se OIC Se “made partakers therefore of Christ, ye are 
rightly called Christs.’ 

“the 

PROGA PEC Eh Sio 

mind: even now imagine the choirs of Angels, 
Only-begotten Son sitting with Him on His 
right hand, and the Spirit present with them ; 
and ‘Thrones and Dominions doing service, 
and every man of you and every woman 
receiving salvation, Even now let your ears 
ring, as it were, with that glorious sound, when 
over your salvation the angels shall chant, 
Blessed are they whose iniguities are forgiven, 
and whose sins are covered? s when like stars 
of the Church you shall enter in, bright in the 
body and radiant in the soul. 

16. Great is the Baptism that lies before 
you’: a ransom to captives; a remission of 
offences ; a death of sin; a new-birth of the 
soul; a garment of light; a holy indissoluble 
seal; a chariot to heaven; the delight of 
Paradise ; a welcome into the kingdom; the 
zift of adoption! But there is a serpent by 
the wayside watching those who pass by: 
beware lest he bite thee with unbclief. He 
sees SO Many receiving salvation, and is seeking 
whom he may devour? ‘Thou art coming in 
unto the father of Spirits, but thou art going 
past that serpent. How then mayest thou 
pass him? Have “hy feel shod with the pre- 
paration of the gospel of peace* , that even if he 
bite, he may not hurt thee. Have faith in- 
dwelling, stedfast hope, a strong sandal, that 
thou mayest pass the enemy, and enter the 
presence of thy Lord. Prepare thine own 
heart for reception of doctrine, for fellowship 
in holy mysteries. Pray more frequently, that 
God may make thee worthy of the heavenly 
and immortal mysteries. Cease not day nor 
night: but when sleep is banished from thine 
eyes, then let thy mind be free for prayer. 
And if thou find any shameful thought rise up 
in thy mind, turn to meditation upon Judgment 
to remind thee of Salvation. Give thy mind 
wholly to study, that it may forget base things. 
If thou find any one saying to thee, Art thou 
then going in, to descend into the water? 
Has the city just now no baths? take notice 
that it is ¢he dragon of the sea* who is laying 

7 Ps. xxxii. 1, which verse is sete chanted in the Greck Church 
as soon as the Bz aptism is com} Tetes 
5S, Basil has a passage in praise of Baptism almost the same, 
wo “a for word, with this. It is more likely to have been borrowed 
from Cyril by Basil and other Fathers, than to be a later interpo- 
lation here. 
7 Pet. Veo! 

z Ephivi, 15. 2 1S. Revie Ts 

Pihesé plots a: 
and God the Lord of all there sitting, and His | lips of the talker, but 

are already baptized, to read, but give 

ut 

inst thee. Attend not to the 
to God who worketh in 
thee. Guard thine own soul, that thou be not 
ensnared, to the end that abiding in hope thou 
mayest become an heir of everlasting salvation. 

17. We for our part as men charge and 
teach you thus: but make not ye our build- 
ing hay and stubble and chaff, lest we suffer 
Joss, from our work being burnt up: Wut 
make ye our work gold, and silver, and pre- 
cious stones 3! Vor it lies in me to speak, but 
in thee to set thy mind ¢# upon it, and in God to 
make perfect. Let us nerve our minds, and 
brace up our souls, and prepare our hearts. 
The race is for our soul: our hope is of things 
eternal: and God, who knoweth your hearts, 
and observeth who is sincere, and who a 
hypocrite, is able both to guard the sincere, 
and to give faith to the hypocrite : for even to 
the unbeliever, if only he give his heart, God 1s 
able to give faith, So may He dot out the 
handwriting that ts against you 5, and grant you 
forgiveness of your former trespasses ; may He 
plant you into His Church, and enlist you in 
His own service, and put on you ¢he armour of 
righteousness®; may He fill you with the 
heavenly things of the New Covenant, and 
give you the seal of the Holy Spirit indelible 
throughout all ages, in Christ Jesus Our Lord : 
to whom be the glory for ever and ever! 
Amen. 

(Zo the Reader 7.) 

These Catechetical Lectures for those who 
are to be enlightened thou mayest lend to 
candidates for Baptism, and to believers who 
not at 
all °, neither to Catechumens, nor to any others 
who are not Christians, as thou shalt answer to 
the Lord. And if thou make a copy, write 
this in the beginning, as in the sight of the 
Lord. 

Sr Ox. By eee ER 

4 Greek mpoobcatut, Septy ett. stil. 4, ‘cleave unto Him.” 
Compare shy xxii. 125 Ps, Init. ro, ‘Set not your heart upon 
them.” 201, ity Tbs 6 2 Cor. vi. 7; Rom. vi. 13 

(ap (at: doubeful whether this caution proceded from cy ril him- 
self when issuing a written copy of his Lectures, or from some 
later editor, Eusebius (4.17, v. 20) has preserved an adjuration 
by Irenzus at the end of his treatise, On the Ogdoad: I adjure 
thee, who mayest transcribe this book, by Our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and by His glorious advent, when He cometh to judge the quick 
and the dead, to compare what thou hast written and correct it 
carefully by this copy, from which thou hast transcribed it ; this 
adjuration also thou shalt write in like manner, and set it in the 
copy. 

8 Gr. ro avvodov. 

ve 

Plat. Leg. 654 3; Soph. 220 8. 

FIRST CATECHETICAL 134s 

Or 

QUR HOLY FATHER Cla 

ARCHBISHOP OF JERUSALEM, 

TO THOSE WHO ARE TO BE ENLIGHTENED, 

DELIVERED EXTEMPORE AT JERUSALEM, aS 

AN INTRODUCTORY LECTURE TO THOSE WHO HAD COME FORWARD FOR BAPTISM’: 

WITH A READING FROM ISATAH, 

Wash you, make you clean ; put away your miquittes from your souls, from before 

mine eyes, and the rest®. 

1. Discretes of the New Testament and| 
partakers of the mysteries of Christ, as yet by) 
calling only, but ere long by grace also, make 
you a new heart and a new spirit, that there 
may be gladness among the inhabitants of 
heaven: for if over one sinner that repenteth 
‘here ts joy, according to the Gospel 4, how much 
snore shall the salvation of so many souls move 
the inhabitants of heaven to gladness. As ye 
have entered upon a good and most glorious 
path, run with reverence the race of godliness. 
For the Only-begotten Son of God is present 
here most ready to redeem you, saying, Come 
unto Me all that labour and are heavy laden, and 
Liwill give vou rests, Ye that are clothed with 
the rough garment® of your offences, who are 
holden with the cords of your own sins, hear 
the voice of the Prophet saying, Mash you, 
make you clean, put away your tniguities from 
before Aline eves7: that the choir of Angels 
may chant over you, Blessed are they whose 
iniguities are forgiven, and whose sins are 
covered ®, Ye who have just lighted the torches 
of faith, guard them carefully in your hands 
unquenched ; that He, who erewhile on this 
all-holy Golgotha opened Paradise to the 
robber on account of his faith, may grant 
to you to sing the bridal song. 

2. If any here is a slave of sin, let him 
promptly prepare himself through faith for the 
new birth into freedom and adoption; and 
having put off the miserable bondage of his 

sins, and taken on him the most blessed 

t The title prefixed to this Lecture is given in fuil. In the 
following Lectures the form will be abbreviated. Sce Index, 
avayradcs and axeSivagderoa. | 

AS. ie te. 

Tihs ot. 4 Lake's 9: 5 Matt, oi. 28. | 
& Ps, SNA To toe 

Procat. 15. 9 Procat.ia, notero. 

bondage of the Lord, so may he be counted 
worthy to inherit the kingdom of heaven. 
Put off, by confession*, the old man, which 
zrveth corrupt after the lusts of deceit, that ye 
may put on the new man, which ts renewed 
according to knowledge of Him that created 
him?. Get you the carnest of the LHoly Spirits 
through faith, that ye may be able to be 
received auto the everlasting habitations 4. 
Come for the mystical Seal, that ye may be 
easily recognised by the Master; be ye num- 
bered among the holy and spiritual flock of 
Christ, to be set apart on His right hand, and 
inherit the life prepared for you. For they to 
whom the rough garments of their sins still 
clings are found on the left hand, because 
they came not to the grace of God which 
is given through Christ at the new birth of 
Baptism: new birth I mean not of bodies, 
but the spiritual new birth of the soul. For 
our bodies are begotten by parents who are 
seen, but our souls are begotten anew through 
faith: for the Spirit bloweth where it listeth®: 
and then, if thou be found worthy, thou 
mayest hear, Well done, good and faithful 
servant7, when thou art found to have no de- 
filement of hypocrisy in thy conscience. 

3. For if any of those who are present 
should think to tempt God’s grace, he de- 
ceives himsclf, and knows not its power. 
Keep thy soul free from hypocrisy, O man, 
because of Him who searcheth hearts and 
reins®, For as those who are going to make 

-alevy for war examine the ages and the bodies 

3 op Cli. 2 os 

2 4 Luke xvi. 9. 
6 John iii. 8. 

7 Matt. xxv. 21. 

munn eH 

ie Of Oat BD 

of those who are taking service, so also the 
Lord in enlisting souls examines their pur- 
pose: and if any has a secret hypocrisy, He 
rejects the man as unfit for His true service ; 
but if He finds one worthy, to him He readily 
gives Ilis grace. Ile gives not holy things to 
the dogs? ; but where He discerns the good 
conscience, there 
tion, that wondrous Seal, which devils tremble | 
at, and Angels recognise ; that the one may 
be driven to flight, and the others may watch 
around it as kindred to themselves. Those. 
therefore who receive this spiritual and saving 
Seal, have need also of the disposition akin 
to it. For as a writing-reed or a dart has 
need of one to use it, so grace also has need 
of beheving minds, 

Thou art receiving not a perishable but | 
a spiritual shield. Henceforth thou art planted | 
in the invisible! Paradise. Thou receivest a 
new name, which thou hadst not before. Here- 
tofore thou wast a Catechumen, but now thou 
wilt be called a Believer. Thou art trans- 
planted henceforth among the spiritual? olive- 
trees, being grafted from the wild into the 
good olive-tree 3, from sins into righteousness, 
from pollutions into purity. Thou art made 
partaker of the Holy Vine‘. Well then, if 
thou abide in the Vine, thou growest as a 
rruitful branch; but if thou abide not, thou 
wilt be consumed by the fire. Let us therefore 
bear fruit worthily. God forbid that in us 
should be done what befell that barren fig- 
tree 5, that Jesus come not even now and curse 
us for our barrenness. But may all be able to 
use that other saying, But Lam like a fruitful 
olive-tree in the house of God: LI have trusted 
wn the mercy of God for ever®,—an olive-tree 
not to be perceived by sense, but by the mind, 
and full of light. As then it is His part to 
plant and to water °, so it is thine to bear fruit : 
it is God’s to grant grace, but thine to receive 
and guard it. Despise not the grace because 
it is frecly given, but reccive and treasure it 
devoutly. 

5. The present is the season of confession : 
confess what thou hast done in word or in 
deed, by night or by day; confess 7 an 
acceptable time, and in the day of salvation 
receive the heavenly treasure. Devote thy 
time to the Exorcisms: be assiduous at the 
Catechisings, and remember the things that 
shall be spoken, for they are spoken not for 
thine cars only, but that by faith thou mayest 

He gives the Seal of salva-_ /many circles of the 

Scripture. 

I. 4 

seal them up in the memory. Blot out from 
thy mind all earthly * care: for thou art running 
for thy soul. Thou art utterly forsaking the 
things of the world: little are the things which 
thou art forsaking, great what the Lord is 
giving. Forsake things present, and put thy 
‘trust in things to come. Hast thou run so 
e ycars busied in vain about 
the world, and hast thou not forty days to be 
free (for prayer), for thine own soul’s sake? 
Be still3, and know that Tam God, saith the 
excuse thyself from talking many 
idle words: neither backbite, nor lend a willing 
ear to backbiters; but rather be prompt to 
prayer. Shew in ascetic exercise that thy 
heart is nerved4, Cleanse thy vessel, that thou 
mayest receive grace more abundantly. lor 
though remission of sins is given equally to 
all, the communion of the Holy Ghost is 
bestowed in proportion to each man’s faith. 
If thou hast laboured little, thou receivest 
little; but if thou hast wrought much, the 
reward is great. ‘Thou art running for thyself, 
see to thine own interest. 

6. If thou hast aught against any man, 
forgive it: thou comest here to reccive for- 
giveness of sins, and thou also must forgive 
him that hath sinned against thee. Ilse with 
what face wilt thou say to the Lord, Forgive 
me my many sins, if thou hast not thyself 
forgiven thy fellow-servant even his little sins. 
Attend diligently the Church assemblies 5; not 
only now when diligent attendance is required 
of thee by the Clerg gy, but also after thou hast 
received the grace. Tor if, before thou hast 
received it, the practice is good, is it not also 
good after the bestowal? If before thou be 
grafted in, it is a safe course to be watered 
and tended, is it not far better after the 
planting? Wrestle for thine own soul, espe- 
cially in such days as these, Nourish thy soul 
with sacred readings; for the Lord hath pre- 
pared for thee a spiritual table; therefore say 
thou also after the Psalmist, Ze Lord ts my 
shepherd, and I shall lack nothing: in a place 
of grass, there hath Fe made me rest ; He hath 
fed me beside the waters of com orl, fle hath 

converted my soul®:—that Angels also may 

share your joy, and Christ Himself the great 
High Priest, having accepted your resolve, 
may present you all to the Father, saying, 
Behold, I and the children whom God hath 
gtven Mfe7, May He keep you all well-pleasing 
in His sight! Yo whom be the glory, and 

9 Matt. vii. 6. 

1 Gr. voqréy, i.e. the true Paradise, to be seen by the mind, 
not by the eye. Apoc. xii. 7, 17. 2 See preceding note. 

3 Rom. xi. 24. 4 John Ror AE Ags iy: > Matt. BOX, IQ 
ChPS iis ros 7 vonry, see note 1, above. 

8 1 Cor. ili. 6. When Paul plants and Apollos waters, it is God 
Himself who works through His ministers. 9 2 Cor. Vi. 2. 

ithe power unto the endless ages of eternity. 
Amen. 

Pina oe Seer 

Some MSS. omit 77 mpogevyy after cyoAdgers. 

Ps. xlvi. 10: ayoAagare. Compare Procat. 13. 

Compare Procat. 17: xviii. 1. Sse Index, avvagis. 
Ps. xxili, 1—3. ? Is;-vin, x8, Heb: 113) 

Ak®WNH 

LECTURE 4h 

On REPENTANCE 

np REMISSION OF SINS, AND CONCERNING THE ADVERSARY. 

EZEKIEL Xvill. 20-—23. 

7 "Fond eres > apn pe 
The riehteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked 
shall be upon him, But if the wicked will turn from all his sins, &¢. 

1. \ rearetr. thing is sin, and the sorest dis- 
ease of the soul is transgression, 
ting its sinews, and becoming also the cause 

our own free will the Prophet says plainly in 
a certain place: Yet 7 planted thee a fruitful 

vine, wholly true: how art thou turned to bit-| ment, 

terness, (and become) the strange vine? ? The 

planting was good, the fruit coming from the} 

will is evil; and therefore the planter is blame- 
less, but the vine shall be burnt with fire ; 
since it was planted for good, and bore fruit 
unto evil of its own will. Zor God, according 
to the Preacher, made man upright, and they 
have themselves sought out many inventions >. 
For we are His workmanship, says the Apostle, 
created unto good works, which God afore pre- 
pared, that we should walk in them+. So then 
the Creator, being good, created for good 
works; but the creature turned of its own 
free will to wickedness. Sin then is, as we 
have said, a fearful evil, but not incurable ; 
fearful for him who clings to it, but easy of 
cure for him who by repentance puts it from him. 
For suppose that a man is holding fire in his 
hand; aslong as he holds fast the live coal he is 
sure to be burned, but should he put away the 
coal, he would havecast away the flame also with 
it. If however any one thinks that he is not being 
burned when sinning, to him the Scripture 
saith, Stall a man wrap up fire in his bosom, 
and not burn his clothes’? Yor sin burns the 
sinews of the soul, [and breaks the spiritual 
bones of the mind, and darkens the light of 
the heart ©]. 

2. But some one will say, What can sin 
be? Is it a living thing? Is it an angel? 

1 Por references to Cyril's doctrine of Free will 
"S . # jer. i 8%. 3 Eecelés. vin. 20. 
5 Pros: xi. 27, 

6 Miles and the Benedictine Editor omit these clauses, but the 
more recent editions of Reischl and Alexandrides insert them 
on the authority of the Munich, Jerusalem, and other good MSs. 

, see Tnées, 

yal 
4 Eph. ii. 10. 

secretly cut-| within 
‘assails thee from without, but 
growing up out of thyself, Zook right on with 
thine eyes7, and there is no lust. 
own, and 8| seize not the things of others, and 
‘robbery has ceased. Remember the Judg- 

; : | 
of eternal fire; an evil of a mans own choos: | 

ing, an offspring of the will’, Tor that we sin se 

| Is it a demon? What is this which works 

us? It is not an enemy, O man, that 
‘an evil shoot 

[Keep thine 

and neither fornication, nor adultery, 
nor murder, nor any transgression of the law 
shall prevail with thee. But whenever thou 
forgettest God, forthwith thou beginnest to 
devise wickedness and to commit iniquity, 

3. Yet thou art not the sole author of the 
evil, but there is also another most wicked 
prompter, the devil. He indeed suggests, but 
does not get the mastery by force over those 
who do not consent. Therefore saith the 
Preacher, Jf the spirit of him that hath power 
rise up against thee, quit not thy place*. Shut 
thy door, and put him far from thee, and he 
shall not hurt thee. But if thou indifferently 
admit the thought of lust, it strikes root in 
thee by its suggestions, and enthrals thy mind, 
and drags thee down into a pit of evils. 

But perhaps thou sayest, I am a believer, 
and lust does not gain the ascendant over me, 
even if I think upon it frequently. Knowest 
thou not that a root breaks even a rock by 
long persistence? Admit not the seed, since 
it will rend thy faith asunder: tear out the 
evil by the root before it blossom, lest from 
being careless at the beginning thou have 
afterwards to seek for axes and fire. When 
thine eyes begin to be diseased, get them 
cured in good time, lest thou become blind, 
and then have to seek the physician. 

4. The devil then is the first author of sin, 
and the father of the wicked: and this is the 
Lord’s saying, not mine, ¢Aat the devil stnneth 

i Piri, 25. 
best MSS. 

* Wecles. x4. 
the devil.” 

8 Omitted Ly recent editors with the 
9 Gr. Kexot(unrat, “has fallen asleep.” 
Compare Eph. iv. 27: ‘‘ Neither give place to 

Jrom the begtnning® : none sinned before him. | 
But he sinned, not as having received neces- 
sarily from nature the propensity to sin, since 
then the cause of sin is traced back again to 
Him that made him so; but having been 
created good, he has of his own free will 
become a devil, and received that name from 
his action. For being an Archangel 3 he was 
afterwards called a devil from his slandering : 
from being a good servant of God he has be- 
come rightly named Satan; for ‘‘Satan” is 
interpreted the adversary+. And this is not my 
teaching, but that of the inspired prophet 
Kzekiel: for he takes up a lamentation over 
him and says, Zhou wasé a seal of likeness, and 
a crown of beauty; in the Paradise of God wast 
thou borns: and soon after, Zhou wast born 
blameless tn thy days, from the day in which 
thou wast created, until thine iniquities were 
found in thee. Very rightly hath he said, weve 
Jound tn thee; for they were not brought in 
from without, but thou didst thyself beget the 
evil. ‘The cause also he mentions forthwith: 
Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty: 
Jor the multitude of thy sins wast thou wounded, 
and I dia cast thee to the ground. In agree- 
ment with this the Lord says again in the Gos- 
pels: L£ beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven®, ‘Thou seest the harmony of the Old 
Testament with the New. He when cast out 
drew many away with him. It is he that puts 
lusts into them that listen to him: from him 
come adultery, fornication, and every kind of 
evil. Through him our forefather Adam was 
cast out for disobedience, and exchanged a 
Paradise bringing forth wondrous fruits of its 
own accord for the ground which bringeth 
forth thorns. 

5. What then? some one will say. We 
have been beguiled and are lost. Is there 
then no salvation left? We have fallen: Is it 
not possible to rise again? We have been 
blinded: May we not recover our sight? We 
have become crippled : Can we never walk up- 
right? In a word, we are dead: May we not 
rise again? He that woke Lazarus who was 
four days dead and already stank, shall He 
not, O man, much more easily raise thee who 
art alive? He who shed His precious blood 
for us, shall Himself deliver us from sin. Let 
us not despair of ourselves, brethren; let us 
not abandon ourselves to a hopeless condition. 

1 John iii. 83 John viii. 44. 
On Cyril's gE of the Angels, see Index, ‘‘ Angels.” 
1 Kings v. 4, 8 

5 Ezek. xxviii. ace an obscure passage, addressed to the 
Prince of ‘Tyre, and meaning that he was ‘‘the perfect pattern” 
of earthly glory, set in a condition like that of Adam in Par adise, 
and, seemingly, blameless as Adam before his fall. Cyril secms 
to regard the Prince of Tyre as an embodiment of Satan, because 
he was deified as the object of national Worship ; Vee tae) Ubot 
ha ast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God.” 
6 Luke x. 18. 

-whn 

an ws i. Y 

FE or it is a fearful thing not to believe ina hope 
of repentance. For he that looks not for s ale 
vation spares not to add evil to evil: but to 
him that hopes for cure, it is henceforth casy 
to be careful over himself. ‘The robber who 
looks not for pardon grows desperate; but, 
if he hopes for forgiveness, often Comes to 1c- 
pentance. What then, does the serpent cast 
its slough7, and shall not we cast off our sin ? 
Thorny ground also, if cultivated well, is 
turned into fruitful ; and is salvation to us ir- 
recoverable ? Nay rather, our nature admits of 
salvation, but the will also is required. 

6. God is loving to man, and loving in no 
small measure. Tor say not, I have com- 
mitted fornication and adultery: I have done 
dreadful things, and not once only, but often : 
will He forgive? Will He grant pardon ? 
Hear what the Psalmist says: /ow grect 
is the multitude of Thy goodness, O Lord? / 
Thine accumulated offences surpass not the 
multitude of God’s mercies: thy wounds sur- 
pass not the great Physician’s skill. Only 
give thyself up in faith: tell the Physician 
thine ailment: say thou also, like David: 7 
said, I will confess me my sin unto the Lord: 
and the same shall be done in thy case, which 
he says forthwith: And thou Jorvavest the 
wickedness of my heart. 

7. Wouldest thou see the loving-kindness of 
God, O thou that art lately come to the 
catechising ? Wouldest thou see the loving- 
kindness of God, and the abundance of His 
long-suffering ? Hear about Adam. Adam, 
God’s first-formed man, transgressed: could 
He not at once have brought death upon 
him? But see what the Lord does, in His 
great love towards man. He casts him out 
from Paradise, for because of sin he was 
unworthy to live there; but He puts him to 
dwell over against Pi rradise*: that seeing 
whence he had fallen, and from what and into 
what a state he was brought down, he might 
afterwards be saved by repentance. Cain the 
first-born man became his brother’s murderer, 
the inventor of evils, the first author of 
murders, and the first envious man. Yet 
after slaying his brother to what is he con- 
demned? Gvroaning and trembling shalt thou 
be upon the carth?, How great the offence, the 
sentence how light! 

8. Even this then was truly loving-kindness 
in God, but little as yet in comparison with 
what follows. For consider what happened 
in the days of Noe. ‘The giants sinned, and 

7 Literally, “its old age’’ (76 yjpas) Compare iii, 7, and 
a Chr. Biogr., AZacarius, p.770 a. 
8 Ps. xxx. 20. Ta Sy RTGS, 
1 This is the reading of the cade instead of—“ He placed 
at the east of the gi arden of Kc 
S-Genwiv., res * A its scree mitt a vagabond shalt thou be upon 
the earth, 

i) 

much wickedness was then spread over the 
earth, and because of this the flood was to 
come upon them: 
year God utters His threatening ; 
six hundredth He brought the flood upon the 
earth, Seest thou the breadth of God’s loving- 
kindness extending to a hundred years? Could 
He not have done immediately what He did 
then after the hundred years? But He ex- 
tended (the time) on purpose, granting a 
respite for repentance. Scest thou God’s 
soodness 2? And if the men of that time had 
repented, they would not have missed the 
loving-kindness of God, 

9g. Come with me now to the other class, 
those who were saved by repentance. But 
perhaps even among women some one will 
say, | have committed fornication, and adul- 
tery, I have defiled my body by excesses of all 
kinds: is there salvation for me? ‘Turn thine 
eyes, O woman, upon Rahab, and look thou 
also for salvation ; for if she who had been 
openly and publicly a harlot was saved by 

repentance, is not she who on some one 
occasion before receiving grace committed 

fornication to be saved by repentance and 
fasting ? For inquire how she was saved: this 
only she said: for your God ts God in heaven 
and upon earth3. Your God, for her own she 
did not dare to say, because of her wanton 
life. And if you wish to receive Scriptural 
testimony of her having been saved, you have 
it written in the Psalms: f wll make mention 
of Rahab and Pabylon among them that know 
me+, QO the greatness of God’s loving-kindness, 
making mention even of harlots in the Scrip- 
tures: nay, not simply 7 wd make mention of 
Rahab and Pabylon, but with the addition, 
amony them that know me. There is then in 
the case both of men and of women alike 
the salvation which is ushered in by repent- 
auce, 

10. Nay more, if a whole people sin, this 
surpasses not the loving-kindness of God. 
The people made a calf, yet God ceased not 
from [iis loving-kindness. Men denied God, 
but God denied not Himselfs. Zhese be thy 

gods, O Ssracl®, they said: yet again, as He 
was wont, the God of Israel became their 
Saviour, And not only the people sinned, 

but also Aaron 
Moses that says: 

the High Priest. For it is 
And the anger of the Lord 
came upon Aaron: and f prayed for him, saith 
he, avd God forgave hin7, What then, did 
Moses praying for a High Priest that sinned 

a Josh. i ax. 

4 Ps. Ixxxvil. 4. “ Rahab” is there a poetical name of Egypt, 
and the passage has nothing to do with Rahab the harlot. the 
Benedictine Editor rightly disregards S. Jerome’s suggestion, that 
Rahab ts, like Egypt, a ps of the Gentile Church. 

5 2 Tim. Dis. Ca OTe RAR, 7 Weuts txu 20, 

CATECHETIGCAL 

and in the five hundredth | 
but in the) 

LECTURES: 

prevail with God, and shall not Jesus, His 
Only-begotten, prevail with God when He 
prays for us? And if He did not hinder 
Aaron, because of his offence, from entering 
upon the High Priesthood, will He hinder 
thee, who art come out from the Gentiles, 
from entering into salvation? Only, O man, 
repent thou also in like manner, and grace is 
not forbidden thee. Render thy way of life 
henceforth unblameable; for God is_ truly 
loving unto man, nor can all tune® worthily 
tell out His loving-kindness; nay, not if all 
the tongues of men unite together will they be 
able even so to declare any considerable part 
of His loving-kindness. lor we tell some 
part of what is written concerning His loving- 
kindness to men, but how much He forgave 
the Angels we know not: for them also He 
forgives, since One alone is without sin, even 
Jesus who purgeth our sins. And of them 
we have said enough. 

But if concerning us men thou wilt have 
other examples also set before thee 2, come on 
to the blessed David, and take him for an ex- 
ample of repentance. Great as he was, he 
fell: after his sleep, walking in the eventide 
on the housetop, he cast a careless look, and 
felt a human passion. His sin was completed, 
but there died not with it his candour con- 
cerning the confession of his fault. Nathan 
the Prophet came, a swift accuser, and a 
healer of the wound. Zhe Lord ts wroth, he 
says, and thou hast sinned", So spake the sub- 
ject to the reigning king. But David the king ? 
was not indignant, for he regarded not the 
speaker, but God who had sent him. He was 
not puffed up 3 by the array of soldiers standing 
round: for he had seen in thought the angel-host 
of the Lord, and he trembled as seeing Lim who 
is invistble +; and to the messenger, or rather 
by him in answer to God who sent him, he said, 
LT have sinned against the Lords, Seest thou the 
humility of the king? Scest thou his confession ? 
For had he been convicted by any one? Were 
many privy to the matter? The deed was 
quickly done, and straightway the Prophet 
appeared as accuser, and the offender con- 
fesses the fault. And because he candidly 
confessed, he received a most speedy cure. 
For Nathan the Prophet who had uttered the 
threat, said immediately, Zze Lord also hath 
put away thy sin. ‘Thou seest the swift re- 
lenting of a merciful God. He says, however, 
Zhou hast greatly provoked the enemies of the 

8 For “alitime,” the rez ading of the best MSS., the Benedic- 
tine text has “all mankind.’ 

9 The Benedictine has, “ But if thou wilt I will set before 
thee other examples also of our stat:? Come on to the blessed 
David.’ 2 SAMs ite 

2 Bened. ‘‘The king, the wearer of the purple.” 
3 Bened. “tinded.”” Boel xine. 

Sees Sails Kile te) 

LECTURE 

Lord. Though thou hadst many enemies 
because of thy righteousness, thy self-control 
protected thee ; but now that thou hast surren- 
dered thy strongest armour, thine enemies are 
risen up, and stand ready against thee. 

12. Thus then did the Prophet comfort him, 
but the blessed David, for all he heard it said, 
The LORD hath put away thy sin, did not cease 
from repentance, king though he was, but put 
on sackcloth instead of purple, and instead of 
a golden throne, he sat, a king, in ashes on 
the ground; nay, not only sat in ashes, but 
also had ashes for his food, even as he saith 
himself, Z Have eaten ashes as it were bread®. 
His lustful eye he wasted away with tears, 
saying, Lvery night will L wash my couch, and 
water my bed with my tears7, When his officers 

besought him to eat bread he would not 
listen. He prolonged his fast unto seven 

whole days. Ifa king thus made confession, 
oughtest not thou, a private person, to confess ? 
Again, after Absalom’s insurrection, though 
there were many roads for him to escape, he 
chose to flee by the Mount of Olives, in 
thought, as it were, invoking the Redeemer 
who was to go up thence into the heavens ® 
And when Shimei cursed him bitterly, he said, 
Let him alone, for he knew that ‘‘to him that 
forgiveth it shall be forgiven 9.” 

13. ‘Thou seest that it is good to make 
confession. Thou seest that there is salva- 
tion for them that repent. Solomon also fell: 
but what saith he? Afterwards L repented ©. 
Ahab, too, the King of Samaria, became a 
most wicked idolater, an outrageous man, the 
murderer of the Prophets *, a stranger to godli- 
ness, a coveter of other men’s fields and vine- 
yards. Yet when by Jezebel’s means he had 
slain Naboth, and the Prophet Elias came and 
merely threatened him, he rent his garments, 
and put on sackcloth. And what saith the 
merciful God to Elias? Hast thou seen hoz 
Ahab ts pricked in the heart before Me? ? as if 
almost He would persuade the fiery zeal of the 
Prophet to condescend to the penitent. For 
He saith, 2 wll not bring the evil in his days. 
And though after this forgiveness he was sure 
not to depart from his wickedness, neverthe- 
less the forgiving God forgave him, not as 
being ignorant of the future, but as granting 
a forgiveness corresponding to his present 

6 Pes Gn. 20, 7 Lh, Vin 9, 8 2 Sam. xvi. 10, 11. 

9 Resch. (-lyrapha, . 157) quotes various forms of this saying 
from early writers, and regards it as a fragment of an extra- 
canonical Gospel. But see Lig ghtfoot, Clerz, Kon. Ce egies 

10 Prov. xxiv. 32, Sept. Heb. ‘Set my heart.” The passage 
has no reference to repentance : it means, “T considered the 
field of the slothful.” Hilary, Ps. hii. ; Ambrose, Afoloe. 1, Pro- 
phete David, c ii. and other fathers affirm the repentance of 
Solomon. Augustine (c. “austum, Lib. xxii. c. $8) maintains 
that Scripture says nothing of his repentance or forgiveness. See 
Dante, ?aradiso, Canto x. 109. 

1 1 Kings xviil. 4. 2 Ib. xxi. 29. 

‘bed ie: 

season of repentance. Tor it is the part of a 
righteous judge to give sentence according to 
each case that has occurred. 

14. Again, Jeroboam was standing at the 
altar sacrificing to the idols: his hand became 
withered, because he commanded the Prophet 
who reproved him to be seized: but having 
by experience learned the power of the man 
before him, he says, Lxtreat the face of the 
Lord thy God3; and because of this saying his 
hand was restored again. If the Prophet 
healed Jeroboam, is Christ not able to heal 
and deliver thee from thy sins? Manasses 
also was utterly wicked, who sawed Isaiah 
asunder4, and was defiled with all kinds of 
idolatries, and filled Jerusalem with tnnocent 
bloods ; but having been led captive to Babylon 
he used his experience of misfortune for a 
healing course of repentance : for the Scripture 
saith that Manasses humbled himself before the 
Lord, and prayed, and the Lord heard him, and 
brought him back to his kingdom, If He who 
sawed the Prophet asunder was saved by re- 
pentance, shalt not thou then, having done no 
such great wickedness, be saved ? 

15. Take heed lest without reason thou 
mistrust the power of repentance. Wouldst 
thou know what power repentance has? 
Wouldst thou know the strong weapon of 
salvation, and learn what the force of contes- 
sion is? Hezekiah by means of confession 
routed a hundred and fourscore and _ five 
thousand of his enemies. A great thing verily 
was this, but still small in comparison with 
what remains to be told: the same king by 
repentance obtained the recall of a divine 
sentence which had already gone forth. lor 
when he had fallen sick, Esaias said to hin, 
Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die, and 
not live ®. What expectation remained, what 
hope of recovery, when the Prophet said, jor 
thou shalt die? Yet Hezekiah did not desist 
from repentance; but remembering what is 
written, Ven thou shalt turn and lament, then 
shalt thou be saved7, he turned to the wall, and 
from his bed lifting his mind to heaven (for 
thickness of walls is no hindrance to prayers 
sent up with devotion), he said, ‘“ Remember 
me, O Lord, for it is sufficient for my healing 
that Thou remember me. ‘Thou art not sub- 
ject to times, but art Thyself the giver of the 
law of life. For our life depends not on a 

3.1 Kings xiii. 6. 

4 Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho, § 120, charges the 
Jews with having cut out a passage referring to the death of 
[saiah. Theophylact commenting on Heb. xi. 37, says: ‘‘ They 
were sawn asunder, as Isaiah by Manasses : and they say that he 
was sawn with a wooden s: wv, that his punishment might be the 
more painful to him from being prolonged.” Jerome on Is. i. 10, 
says that he was slain because of his calling the Jews | ** princes o f 
Sodom and people of Gomorra,” and becz ause he said, “I saw the 
Lord sitting upon a throne, high Batic lifted up.” 

5 2 Chron. xxxiii. 127 25. 2 Kings xx. 1. Tos erewxe Ls. 

2. 

CALTECH ERT TA aoe ro 

lens 
Saas 
Frcks 

nativity, nor on a conjunetion of stars, as some 
idly talk: but both of life and its duration, 
Thou art ‘Phyself the Lawsiver according to 
Thy Wilk” And he, who could not hope to 
live because of the prophetic sentence, had 
fifteen years added to his life, and for the sign 
the sun ran backward in his course Well 
then, for Ezekias’ sake the sun turned back, 
but for Christ the sun was eclipsed, not re- 
tracing lus steps, but suffering eclipse ®, and 
therefore shewing the difference between them, 
T mean between Ezekias and Jesus. ‘The 
former prevailed to the cancelling of God’s 
decree, and cannot Jesus grant remission of 
sins? Turn and bewail thyself, shut thy door, 
and pray to be forgiven, pray that He may 
remove from thee the burning flames. For 
confession has power to quench eyen fire, 
power to tame even lions % 

16, But if thou disbelieve, consider what 
befel Ananias and his companions. What 
streams did they pour out'? How many 
vessels ? of water could quench the flame that 
rose up forty-nine cubits high3? Nay, but 
where the flame mounted up a little + too high, 
faith was there poured out as a river, and there 
spake they the spell against all ills5: Righteous 
art Lhou, O Lord, in all the things that Thou 
hast done tous. for we have sinned, and trans- 
sressed Thy law®. And their repentance quelled 
theflames?, Ifthou believest notthatrepentance 
is able to quench the fire of hell, learn it from 
what happened in regard to Ananias®. But 
some keen hearer will say, Those men God 
rescued justly in that case: because they 
refused to commit idolatry, God gave them 
that power. And since this thought has 

| 

occurred, I come next to a different example. 

of penitence 
17. What thinkest thou of Nabuchodonosor ? 

8 Isaiah xxxviil. 8. 

9 Trom this point the MSS. differ so widely that the Bene- | 

dictine lditor gives two complete recensions of the whole Lecture. 
The Codd. Coislin, Ottob. 2, and Grodec, with the editions of 
Prevot and Milles, forming as it were one family of MSS., con- 
stitute the received text. On the other hand the older Munich 
Codex, with Codd. Roe and Casaubon, exhibit a recension of 
the Lecture differing from the editions. Reischl wishing to retain 
the received text unaltered, though preferring the other in par- 
ticular passages, intended to append the other recension complete, 
but having leit his work half finished, failed to do so. The chief 
Variations are given in the following notes. 

t Roe and Casaubon (R.C.) add: ‘‘into the furnace of fire.” 
R. C. “* What measure.” 3 Song of the Three Children, 
44 4 TR ** March.” 

R.C. “A great stream of repentance was poured forth, when 
they said, For Vhou art righteous,” &c. 

© Song of the Three Children, v. ae 

7 R.C, © Did then repentance quench the fla 
and dost thoa disbelieve that it is able 
ot Tell 2”? 

® ‘The Gospel only says, ‘There was darkness over all the 
land.” An eclipse of the sun was impossible at the time of the 
Paschal full moon, 

9 R.C. That the narrative is not appropriate to those who 
are here present. For it was because Ananias and his companions 
refused to worship the idol, that God gave them that marvellous 
power. Adapting myself, therefore, to such a hearer, and looking 
to the profusion of instances, I come next to a different example of 
repentance,” 

¥.. 

2 

2 

mes of the furnace, 
also to quench the fire 

Hast thou not heard out of the Scriptures that 

he was bloodthirsty, fierce’, lion-like in dis- 
position? Hast thou not heard that he 
brought out the bones of the kings from their 
graves into the ight? ? Hast thou not heard 3 
‘that he carried the people away captive? 
‘Hast thou not heard that he put out the eves 
of the king, after he had already seen his 
children slain +? Hast thou not heard that he 
“brake in piecess the Cherubim? I do not 
mean the invisible ® beings ;—away with such a 
thought, O man 7,—but the sculptured images, 
and the mercy-seat, in the midst of which God 
spake with His voice®. ‘The veil of the Sanc- 
tuary? he trampled under foot: the altar of 
incense he took and carried away to an idol- 
temple ': all the offerings he took away: the 
‘Temple he burned from the foundations?.. How 
great punishments did he deserve, for slaying 
| kings, for setting fire to the Sanctuary, for 
taking the people captive, for setting the 
sacred vessels in the house of idols? Did he 
not deserve ten thousand deaths ? 

18. ‘Thou hast seen the greatness of his evil 
deeds: come now to God’s loving-kindness. 
He was turned into a wild beast 3, he abode in 
the wilderness, he was scourged, that he might 
be saved. He had claws as a liont; for he was 
a ravager of the Sanctuary. He had a lion’s 
mane: for he was a ravening and a roaring 
lion. He ate grass like an ox: for a brute 
beast he was, not knowing Him who had given 
him the kingdom. His body was wet from the 
dew ; because after seeing the fire quenched by 
the dew he believed nots. Andwhat happened®? 
After this, saith he, Z, Nabuchodonesor, lifted up 

R.C. ‘‘ most impious, and most fie sf 
Jer. viii. 1; Baruch ii. 25, 3 “ Knowest thou not 
2 Kings xxv. 7. SR. C. “carried off.* 

% RK. C. add ‘and heavenly.” 7 Omitted by R.C. 
»C. “ But those which had been constructed in the Temple, 
which were over the mercy-seat of the Ark.” Besides the two 
Cherubim of solid gold which Moses placed on the two ends of the 
Mercy-seat (Ex. xxxvii. 7 ff.), Solomon set “within the oracle” 
two Cherubim of olive wood overlaid with gold, ten ieet high, 
with outstretched wings overshadowing the Ark (1 Kings vi. 23— 
26; vili. 6, 7), these were either carried off or destroyed, 
when Nebuchadnezzar took away ‘‘all the treasures of the house 
of the Lord,” and ‘‘cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which 
Solomon, King of Israel, had made in the Temple of the Lord” 
(2 Kings xxiv. 13; 1 Esdras i. 54; 2 Esdras x. 22). The Benc- 
dictine editor is concerned because Cyril has paid no attention 
to the strange fiction in 2 Maccabees il. 4, that Jeremy the Prophet 
“commanded the Tabernacle and the Ark to go with him” to 
Mount Horeb, and there hid them, with the Altar of Incense, 
in a hollow cave, to remain *Sunknown until the time that God 
gathers His people again together.” 

9 The Greek word rendered 
literally ‘‘ the holiness.” 

= 2 Chron: xxxvi. 7. 

2 R.C. “The veil of the Sanctuary he tore down, he overturned 
the altar, and took all the vessels and carried them away to an 
idol temple. he ‘Temple itself he burned.” 

3. R. C. Afterwards he was turned into a wild beast: “he 
who was like a wild beast and most cruel in disposition ;— but 
he was turned into a wild beast, not that he might perish, but that 
by repentance he might be saved.”’ 

4h. C. “of birds.” See Dan. iv. 33. 

5 R. C. “after the midst of the furnace had become to Ananias 
and his companions as the tinkling breath of rain, he saw and 
believed not.” 

© R.C.** But afterwards he came to his senses an 
as he says himself.” 

rce in temper. 
2 4 ” 

Arn 

“Sanctuary” is 7 aywwovvn, 

=) 

d repented, 

mine eves unto heaven, and I blessed the Most | 

Llish, and to Him that liveth for ever I gave 
praise and glory7, When, therefore, he recog- 
nised the Most High®, and sent up these words 
of thankfulness to God, and repented himself for 
what he had done, and recognised his own 
weakness, then God gave back to him the 
honour of the kingdom, 

rg. What then9? When Nabuchodonosor, 
after having done such decds, had made con- 
fession, did God give him pardon and _ the 
kingdom, and when thou repentest shall He 

2 oat. 10a she 

8 R. C. ‘And after he had been scourged many years, he gave 
praise to Him that liveth for ever, and acknowledged Him that had 
given him the kingdom, and recognised the King of kings. And 
though he had often sinned in deeds, on making confession only in 
words, he received the benefit of God’s unspeakable loving-kindness. 
He who was of all men most wicked, by the Divine judgment and 
loving-kindness of God who chastised him, crowned himself again 
with the royal diadem, and recovered his imperial throne.” 

9 R.C. ** Ifthen there is present among you any from among the 
Heathen who has ever spoken evil against Christians, or in times 
of persecution plotted against the Holy Churches, let him take 
Nabuchodonosor as an example of salvation: let him confess in 
like manner, that he may also find the like forgiveness. If any 
has been defiled by lust and passions, let him take up the repent- 
ance of the blessed David: if any has denied like Peter, let him 
dic like him for the sake of the Lord Jesus. For He who to 
his tears begrudged not the Apostleship, will not refuse thee 
the gospel mysteries. And for women let Rahab be a pattern 
unto salvation, and for men the manifold examples mentioned 
of the men of old times. 

| om Ad Ba Se aie 

13 

not give thee the remission of sins, and the 
kingdom of heaven, if thou live a worthy life ? 
The Lorp is loving unto man, and swift to 
pardon, but slow to punish. Let no man 
therefore despair of his own salvation. Peter, 
the chicefest and foremost of the Apostles, 
denied the Lord thrice before a little maid: 
but he repented himself, and wept. bitterly. 
Now weeping shews the repentance of the 
heart: and therefore he not only received 
forgiveness for his denial, but also held his 
Apostolic dignity unforfeited. 

20. Having therefore, brethren, many ex- 
amples of those who have sinned and repented 
and been saved, do ye also heartily make con- 
fession unto the Lord, that ye may both 
receive the forgiveness of your former sins, and 
be counted worthy of the heavenly gift, and 
inherit the heavenly kingdom with all the 
saints In Christ Jesus ; to Whom is the glory 
for ever and ever. Amen’. 

t RC. ‘fAnd be ye all of good hope, having regard to the loving- 
kindness of God; not that we may fall back into the same sins, 
but that having had the benefit of redemption, and lived in a 
manner worthy of His grace, we may be able to blot out the hand- 
writing that is against us by good works; in the power of the 
Only-begotten, the Son of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, with 
whom be glory to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, both now and 
ever, and unto all the ages of eternity. Amen,” 

LEC T Ua ae 

On JBaprtisM. 

RoMANS 

Or knew ye not that all we who were baptised 

Wie! A 

into Christ Jesus were baptized into [lis death? 

were buried therefore with Him by our baptism into death, &e. 

. Rejoice, ve heavens and let the earth be glad’, 
for hee who are to be sprinkled with hyssop, 
and cleansed with the spiritual? hyssop, the | « 
power of Him to whom at His Passion drink 
was offered on hyssop and a reeds, And while 
the Ileavenly Powers rejoice, let the souls that 
are to be united to the spiritual Bridegroom 
make themselves ready. For ¢e voice is heard 
of one crying tn the wilderness, Prepare ye the 
way of the Lor’d+, Yor this is no hight matter, 
no ordinary and indiscriminate union accord- 
ing to the fleshs, but the All-searching Spirit’s 
election according to faith, For the inter- 
marriages and contracts of the world are not 
made altogether with judgment: but wherever 
there is wealth or beauty, there the bridegroom 
speedily approves: but here it is not beauty of 
person, but the soul’s clear conscience; not 
the condemned Mammon, but the wealth of the 
soul in godliness. 

Jasten then, O ye children of righteous- 
ness, to John’s exhortation when he says, JZake 
straight the way of the Lord. Take away all 
obstacles and stumbling-blocks, that ye may 
walk straight onward to eternal life. Make 
ready the vessels® of the soul, cleansed by un- 
feigned faith, for reception of the Holy Ghost. 
Begin at once to wash your robes in repentance, 
that when called to the bride-chamber ye may 
be found clean. For the Bridegroom invites 
all without distinction, because His grace is 
bounteous ; and the cry of loud-voiced heralds 
assembles them all: but the same Bridegroom 
afterwards separates those who have come 
in to the figurative marriage. O may none 
of those whose names have now been en- 
rolled hear the words, /7Zend, how camest 
thou in hither, not having a wedding gar- 

Ps SOvis 3t, 
The invisible or spiritual (vonzds) hyssop is the cleansing 

power of the Holy Ghostin Baptism, Compare Ds. Ji. 7. 

3S. Cyril here, and still more emphatically in xin. 39, dis: 
ting guishes the shyss p John xix. 20) from the reed (Matt. xxvii. 48), 
implying that the sponge filled with vinegar was bound round 
with hyssop, and then fixed on a reed. Another opinion is that 
the reed itself was that of hyssop: Sce Dictionary of the Bivle, 

“Hyssop.” Ue 5 gwhatwr. 

4 Soin § 15, the soul is ete das avessel for receiving grace. 

jment7? But may you all hear, [Ved done, good 
ar faithful servant; thou wast faithful over 

Sew things, I wilt ‘sel thee over many things: 
aS fe thou tnto the joy of thy lord ®, 

For now meanwhile thou standest outside 
the door: but God grant that you all may say, 
The King hath brought me tito 1's chamber 9, 
Let my soul rejoice in the Lord: for Ile hath 
othe’ me with « garment of salvation, and 
a robe of gladness: He hath crowned me with 
a garland as a bridegroom", and decked me with 
ornaments as a bride: that the soul of every one 
of you may be found sot having spot or wrinkle 
or any such thing? ; IT do not mean before you 
have received the grace, for how could that be ? 
since it 1s for remission of sins that ye have 
been called; but that, when the grace is to be 
given, your conscience being found uncondemned 
may concur with the grace. 

‘This is in truth a serious matter, brethren, 
and you must approach it with good heed. Each 
one of you is about to be presented to God be- 
fore tens of thousands of the Angelic Hosts : 
the Holy Ghost is about to seal3 your souls: ye 

are to be enrolled in the army of the Great 
King. ‘Therefere make you ready, and equip 

yourselves, by putting on I mean, not bright 
apparel+, but picty of soul with a good 
conscience. Regard not the Laver as simple 
water, but rather regard the spiritual grace 
that is given with the water. lor just as 
the offerings brought to the heathen altars 5, 
though simple in their nature, become cetiled 
by the invocation of the idols °, so contrariwise 

7 Matt. xxii. 12. 8 Matt, xxv. 12. > Cant. 1 qs 

t Is..ba. co. Campare Cant iit: 12 Go ord, OS dee hlers 
of Zion, and behold Ning Solomon, coith the crown where ith his 
mother hath crowned him iin the day of his espousals, In the 
psssage of Isaiah the bridegioom’s crow n is likened to the priestly 
mitre. = Woneve gs 

& See Index, Seal.” 4 Index, ‘* White.” 

5 Bwmois used of he: ithen altars only, in Septuagint and N.T. 

6 Doth here and in xix. 7, Cyril speaks of things offered to 
idols just as S. Paul in 1 Cor, x. 20, The Benediction of the water 
of Baptism is found in the I fostolic Constitutions, vit. 431“ Look 
down from heaven, and sanctify this water, and give it grace and 
power, that so he that is to be baptized according to the command 
of Vhy Christ, may be crucified with Him, and may cie with Him, 
and be buried with Him, and may rise with Him to the adoption 
which is in Him, that he may be dead to sin and live to righteous- 
ness, 

L ECT URE 

the simple water having received the Keres | 

tion of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ, and of 
the Father, acquires a new power of holiness. 
4. Tor since man is of twofold nature, 
soul and body, the purification also is two- 
fold, the one incorporeal for the incorporeal 
part, and the other bodily for the body: the 
water cleanses the body, and the Spirit seals 
the soul; that we may draw near unto God, 
having our heart sprinkled by the Spirit, and our 
body washed with pure water?, When going 
down, therefore, into the water, think not of the 
bare element, but look for salvation by the 
power of the Holy Ghost: for without both 
thou canst not possibly be made perfect % It 
is not I that say this, but the Lord fave 
Christ, who has the power in this matter 
for He saith, Hacept a man be born anew (and 
He adds the words) of water and of the mse rit, 
he cannot enter tuto the kingdom of God. Neither 
doth he that is baptized with water, but not 
found worthy of the Spirit, receive the grace in 
perfection; nor if a man be virtuous in his 
deeds, but receive not the seal by water, shall 
he enter into the kingdom of heaven. A bold 
saying, but not mine, for it is Jesus who hath 
declared it : and here is the proof of the state- 
ment from Holy Scripture. Cornelius was 
a just man, who was honoured with a vision of 
Angels, and had set up his prayers and alms- 
deeds as a good memorial? before God in 
heaven. Peter came, and the Spirit was 
poured out upon them that believed, and they 
spake with other tongues, and prophesied: and 
alter the grace of the Spirit the Scripture saith 
that Peter commanded them to be baptised tn the 
name of Jesus Christ?: in order that, the soul 
having been born again by faith 3, the body 
also might by the water partake of the grace 
5. But if any one wishes to know why the 
grace is given by water and not by a different 
clement, ‘let him take up the Divine Scriptures 
and he shalllearn. For water is a grand thing, 
and the noblest of the four visible elements of 
the world. Heaven is the dwelling-place of 
Angels, but the heavens are from the waters 4: 
the carth is the place of men, but the earth 1 18 
from the waters: and before the whole six days’ 
formation of the things that were made, ¢he 
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, 
The water was the beginning of the world, 

7 tlebeX. Be. 

& Sce the note on ‘the twofold grace perfected by w ater and 
the Spirit,” at the end of this Lecture. 9 Joni iti. 

I orydy}, Sept. A pillar of stone, bearing an inscription, was 
a common form of memorial among the Israelites and other ancient 
mations, oce dictionary ofthe Bible; Pillars’ 

2 Acts x. 48. 

3S. Cyril considers that Cornelius and his friends were regene- 
rated, as the Apostles were, apart from Daptism; as August. 
Sern. 269, a. 2, and Chrysost. tn Act. A post. Hom. 25, scem to 
COs > sREAY, 

Rese: Si 5 Grenson 

EEE 1% 

and Hoel the beginning of the Gospel tid- 
ings: for Israel deliverance from Pharaoh was 
through the sea, and for the world deliverance 
from sins dy the washing of mater with the word ® 
of God. Where a covenant is made with any, 
there is water also. After the flood, a cove- 
hant was made with Noah: a covenant for 
Israel from Mount Sinai, but wth water, and 
scarlet wool, and hyssop?. ¥lias is taken up, 
but not apart from water: for first he crosses 
the Jordan, then in a chariot mounts the 
heaven. The high-priest is first washed, 
then offers incense; for Aaron first washed, 

then was made high-priest: for how could 
one who had not yet been purified by water 
pray for the rest? Also as a symbol of Bap- 
tism there was a laver set apart within the 
Tabernacle. 

6. Baptismis the end of the Old Testament, 
and beginning of the New. For its author 
was John, than whom was zone greater amon 
them that are born of women, ‘The end he was 
of the Prophets: jor all the Prophets and the 
law were until fohn®: ut of the Gospel history 

he was the first-fruit. For it saith, Zhe degin- 
ning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, &c.: 
John came baptising tn the wilderness? You 

may mention Ehias the ‘Tishbite who was taken 
up into heaven, yet he is not greater than 
John: Enoch was translated, but he is not 
greater than John: Moses was a very great 
lawgiver, and all the Prophets were admirable, 
but not greater than John. It is not I that 
dare to compare Prophets with Prophets: but 
their Master and ours, the Lord Jesus, declared 
t: Among them that are born of women there 
hath not risen a greater than John*: He saith 
not “‘among them that are born of virgins,” but 
of women?. ‘Vhe comparison is between the 
great servant and his fellow-servants : but the 
pre-eminence and the grace of the Son 1s 
beyond comparison with servants. Seest thou 

how great a man God chose as the first 
minister of this grace?—a man_ possessing 

nothing, and a lover of the desert, yet no 
hater of mankind: who ate locusts, and winged 
his soul for heavens: feeding upon honey, and 
speaking things both sweeter and more salutary 
than honey: clothed with a garment of camel’s 
hair, and shewing in himself the pattern of 
the ascetic life; who also was sanctified by 
the Holy Ghost while yet he was carried in his 
mother’s womb. Jeremiah was sanctified, but 

6 Yephes. v. 26, 7 Heb. ix. 19. Se Matty eis 1a. 

? Marl: nyt. Talat. 214 te 

2 Trom the Clementine Recognitions, I. 54 and 60, we learn 

iat there were some who asserted that John was the Christ, and 
not Jesus, inasmuch as Jesus Himself declared that John was 
greater than all men, and all Prophets. The answer is there given, 
that John was greater than all who are born of women, yet hot 
greater than the Son of Man. 

3 The locust being winged suggests the idea of growing wing 
for the soul. Is. xl. 31: mrepopuntovaw ws deol. 

10 

did not prophesy, in the womb *: John alone 
while carried in the womb Icaped for joy 5, and 
thouch he saw not with the cyes of flesh, knew 
his Master by the Spirit: for since the grace 
of Baptism was great, it required greatness mn 
its founder also. 

7. ‘This man was baptizing in Jordan, and 
there went out unto him all Jerusalem ©, to enjoy 
the firstfruits of baptisms: for in Jerusalem 
is the prerogative of all things good. But 
learn, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, how they 
that came out were baptized by him : cvt/ess- 
ine their sins, it is said7. Virst they shewed 
their wounds, then he applied the remedies, 
and to them that believed gave redemption 
from eternal fire. And if thou wilt be con- 
vinced of this very point, that the baptism of 
John is a redemption from the threat of the 
fire, hear how he says, O generation of vipers, 
who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to 
come®? Be not then henceforth a viper, but as 
thou hast been formerly a viper’s brood, put 
off, saith he, the slough? of thy former sinful 
lite. For every serpent creeps into a hole and 
casts its old slough, and having rubbed off the 
old skin, grows young again in body. In like 
manner exter thou also through the strait and 
narrow gate*: rub off thy former self by fasting, 
and drive out that which is destroying thee. 
Put off the old man with his doings *?, and quote 
that saying in the Canticles, 2 ave put off my 
coat, how shall [ putit on3? 

But there is perhaps among you some hypo- 
crite, a man-pleaser, and one who makes a 
pretence of piety, but believes not from the 
heart ; having the hypocrisy of Simon Magus ; 
one who has come hither not in order to 
receive of the grace, but to spy out what is 
given: let him also learn from John: <Azd 
now also the axe ts laid unto the root of the trees, 
Every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good 
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fires. 
The Judge is inexorable; put away thine 
hypocrisy. 

8. What then must you do? And what are 
the fruits of repentance? Let him that hath 
two coats give to him that hath nones; the 
teacher was worthy of credit, since he was also 
the first to practise what he taught: he was 
not ashamed to speak, for conscience hindered 
not his tongue: avd he that hath meat, let 
him to likewise. Wouldst thou enjoy the grace 
of the Holy Spirit, yet judgest the poor not 

4 jer, is 5S. 

7 Matt ic G. b. dil. 7. 

9 The Greek word (éréa7aats) is used by Polybius (xxxiv. 9) 
for the deposit of silver from crushed ore, and by Hippocrates for 
any sediment or deposit. Here it means, as the context clearly 
shews, the old skin cast by a snake. Compare ii. 5. 

tPLtt. Vine 23) ea. 2 CO).Aits @. 

+ Cant. -v. In the Song, this saying is an excuse for not 
1 S. Cyril applies it in a different way. 

5: Bukean. 21. 

§ Lukei. 4 i. 6 Matt, ii, 5. 

3s 
rising from bed. 

4 Matt. ili. to. 

CATECHEIICARL Cr Uices 

worthy of bodily food? Seckest thou the 
ereat gifts, and impartest not of the small? 
Though thou be a publican, or a fornicator, 
have hope of salvation: the pudlicans and 
the harlots go into the kingdom of God bcfore 
you®, Paul also is witness, saying, Werther 
fornicators, nor adulterers, nor the rest, shall 
inhertt the kingdom of God. And such were 
some of you; but ye were svashed, but ye 
were sanctified’, He said not, such are some of 
you, but such were some of you. Sin committed 
in the state of ignorance is pardoned, but 
“persistent wickedness is condemned. 

|g, ‘Thou hast as the glory of Baptism the 

Son Himself, the Only-begotten of God. lor 
why should I speak any more of man? John 
was great, but what is he to the Lord? His 

was a loud-sounding voice, but what in com- 
parison with the Word? Very noble was the 
herald, but what in comparison with the 
King? Noble was he that baptized with 
water, but what to Him that baptizeth ath 
the Holy Ghost and with fire’? ‘The Saviour 
baptized the Apostles with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire, when svddenly there came a sound 
from heaven as of the rushing of a mighty wind, 
and tt filled all the house where they were 
sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven 
tongues like as of fire: and tt sat upon cach one 
of them, and they were all filled with the Holy 
Ghost 9. 

ro. If any man receive not Baptism, he hath 
not salvation ; except only Martyrs, who even 
without the water receive the kingdom. lor 
when the Saviour, in redeeming the world by 
His Cross, was pierced in the side, He shed 
forth blood and water; that men, living in 
times of peace, might be baptized in water, 
and, in times of persecution, in their own 
‘blood. For martyrdom also the Saviour is 
‘wont to call a baptism, saying, Can ye drink 
the cup which I drink, and be baptized with the 
baptism that I am baptized with*? And the 
Martyrs confess, by beng made a spectacle unto 
the world, and to Angels, and to men?; and thou 
wilt soon confess :—but it is not yet the time 
for thee to hear of this. 

rr. Jesus sanctified Baptism by being Him- 
self baptized. If the Son of God was baptized, 
|what godly man is he that despiseth Baptism ? 
/But He was baptized not that He might 
receive remission of sins, for He was sinless ; 
but being sinless, He was baptized, that He 
might give to them that are baptized a divine 
and excellent grace. For stnce the children are 
partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself 
likewise partook of the same3, that having been 

6 Matt. xxi. 31. 
9 Acts 112 

~ Cor. -vil.9; 10. 
Mark x. 38. 
3.Heb..11. ra: 

BN atts: ite tre 

7 
1 2° Cor. 1v.:9: 

LE oe 

made partakers of His presence in the flesh, | 
we might be made partakers also of His Divine 
CENCC. 
we again by 
both salvation and honour. According 
Job, there was in tne waters the dragon that 
draweth up Jordan into his mouth+. Since, 
therefore, 
the dragon tn pieces 5, He went down and bound 
the strong one in the waters, that we might 
receive power to “ead upon serpents and 
scorprons®, The beast was great and terrible. 
No jishing-vessel was able to carry one scale of 
hits tail? : destruction ran before him ®, ravaging 
all that met him. ‘The Life encountered him, 
that the mouth of Death might henceforth be 
stopped, and all we that are saved might say, O 
death, where ts thy sting ? O grai ey where zs thy 
victory9 @ ‘The sting of death is drawn by 
Baptism. 

12. For thou goest down into the water, 
bearing thy sins, but the invocation of grace! 
having sealed thy soul, suffereth thee not after- 
wards to be swallowed up by the terrible 
dragon. Having gone down dead in sins, thou 
comest up quickened in righteousness. For if 
thou hast been wzzted with the likeness of the 
Saviour’s death ?, thou shalt also be deemed 
worthy of His Resurrection. For as Jesus 
took upon Him the sins of the world, and died, 
that by putting sin to death He might rise 
again in righteousness; so thou by going 
down into the water, and being in a manner 
buried in the waters, as He was in the rock, 
art raised again walking in newiess of life 3, 

Moreover, when thou hast been deemed 
worthy of the grace, He then giveth thee 
strength to wrestle against the adverse powers. 
Vor as after His Baptism He was tempted forty 
days (not that He was unable to gain the 
victory before, but because He wished to do 
all things in due order and_ succession), 
thou likewise, though not daring before thy 
baptism to wrestle with the adversaries, yet 
after thou hast received the grace and art 
henceforth confident in ‘Ae armour of righteous- 
ness +4, must then do battle, and preach the 
Gospel, if thou wilt. 

14. Jesus Christ was the Son of God, yet, 

He preached not the Gospel before His Bap- 
tism. If the Master Himself followed the right 

time in due order, ought we, His servants, to 

4 Job xl. 23. a Bs, Ixxiv. 14. 6 Luke x. 19. 

7 Job xl. 26, in the Sept. in place of xli. 7: Canst thou fill his 
skin with barbed irons, or his head with fish spears? (A.V. and 
TeV.) 

2 Jobe xi. 44 ise xli. 22: 
before him. Dey, 

t Compare IIT. 3, and sce Index, * Baptism, 

3 Rom. vi. 4. Instead of ‘‘ might rise again’ 

And terror danceth 
Gori. 55; 
e 2 Rom. vi. 5. 
” (Roe, Casauh. 

pe. but m- Rav, 

Mon.), the older I ditions have “might raise thee up,” which 
is less appropri: ute in this part of the sentence, 

426 GOrn Migegs 

VOL. Ville 

thus Jesus was baptized, that thereby | 
our participation might receive | 
to | 

it was necessary to drveak the heads of 

0 | the Prince of Life ?. 

Bike 

17 
‘venture out of order? /vom that tine Jesus 
began to preach’, when the [loly Spirit had de- 
SC ode Lupon Ilimina bodily shape, like a dove® y 
not that Jesus mivht see Him first, for He 
knew Him even before He came in a bodily 
shape, but that John, who was baptizing Him, 
might behold Him. For JZ oat he, knew 
Hin not: but [le that sent me to baptize we 
water, He said unto me, Upon whomsoever thou 
shalt ‘S08 the Spirit descending and abiding on 
flim, that ts He7, If thou too hast unfeigned 
piety, the Holy Ghost cometh down on thee 
also, and a Father’s voice sounds over thee 
from on high—not, “ Zhzs 7s AZy Son,” but, 
“This has now been made My son ;” for the 
‘7s” belongs to Him alone, because /x the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and He Word was God*. To Him 
* since He is always the Son 

‘belongs the “7 
of God: but Be thee “has now been made :” 
since thou hast not the sonship by nature, but 
receivest it by adoption. He eternally ‘7s ,;” 
but thou receivest the grace by advancement. 

15. Make ready then the vessel of thy soul, 
that thou mayest become a son of God, and 
an heir of God, and joint-hetr with Christ 9, if, 
indeed, thou art preparing thyself that thou 
mayest receive; if thou art drawing nigh in 
faith that thou mayest be made faithful; if of 
set purpose thou art putting off the old man. 
For all things whatsoever thou hast done shall 
be forgiven thee, whether it be fornication, or 
adultery, or any other such form of licentious- 
ness. What can be a greater sin than to 
crucify Christ? Yet even of this Baptism can 
purify. For so spake Peter to the three thou- 
sand who came to him, to those who had 
crucified the Lord, when they asked hin, say- 
ing, Aten and bre thr en, what shall we do? 
For the wound is great. ‘Thou hast made us 
think of our fall, O Peter, by saying, Ye k7dled 
What salve is there for so 
great a wound? What cleansing for such 
foulness ? What is the salvation for such per- 
dition? Repent, saith he, and be baptized every 
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, 
wer the remtssion of sins, and ye shall receive the 
gift of the Holy Ghost>. O unspeakable 
loving-kindness of God! They have no hope 
of being saved, and yet they are thought worthy 
of the Holy Ghost. ‘Thou seest the power of 
Baptism! If any of you has crucified the 
Christ by blasphemous words ; if any of you 
in ignorance has denied Him before men ; if 
any by wicked works has caused the doctrine 
to be blasphemed; let him repent and be of 
good hope, for the same grace is present even 
now. 

Selb. i. Ty 
Si Riril, 50s 

7 Johni. 
Sn eatiie 

6 Luke iii, 22. 
Biss ie 37h 

Sel iates 1.17. 3: 

9 Rom. vill. 17. 

C 

2 
a 

18 CATECHETICNE PECIURE.. 

16. Be of seed courage, O Jerusalem; the\that which is perfected of water and of the 
Tard wiih take away all thine iniguitics 4, The | Spirit 9, or that which 1s announced by the Old 
lord will wash away the filth of His sons and and by the New ‘Testament. And God grant 

ot His dauchters by the Spirtt of judgment, and that all of you when you have finished the 
hy the Spivti of burnings, He will sprinkle clean course of the fast, may remember what I say, 
cuter upon vou, and ve shall be cleansed from all\and bringing forth fruit in good works, may 
vursin?. Angels shall dance around you, and | stand blamcless beside the Spiritual Bride- 
‘cay. HL ho ts this that cometh up tr white array, | room, and obtain the remission of your sins 
leaning upon her beloved? ¢ Vor the soul that | from God; to whom with the Son and Toly 
was formerly a slave has now adopted her) Spirit be the glory for ever. Amen. 

Mester Himself as her kinsman: and He ac-| -— a eee DSA ENR 

Ce] tine the unfeigned purpose will answer: 9 The Fathers sometimes speak as if Baptism was primarily de 
7” | oe a a eS j ay Fy Pee | Sacrament of remission of sins, and wfox that came the gift oi the 
vay hold, thou art Ja » Low E b MOLL, thou art Spirit, which notwithstanding was but begun in Baptism and com- 
jar - thy tecth are like flocks of sheep new shorn, pleted in Confirmation. Vid. Tertullian. de Baft. 7, 8, suproi. 5 

: io i ‘ fa” rn as ; | | yin. Wence, as in the text, Baptism may be said to be mace up OF 
(| wecause of the confession of a YOOU CON- zu gifts, Water, which is Christ’s blood, and the Spait. < Chere is 
science: and further) which have all of fhem | no real difference between this and the ordinary way of speaking 

ratte ‘ i ¥ on the subject ;—Water, which conveys both gifts, is considered as 
fins ® « because of the twofold grace, mean 

a type of one especially,—conveys both remission of sins through 
re — | Christ's blood and the grace of the Spirit, but is the #y/e of one, 
o;F zis. the blood of Christ, as the Oil in Confirmation is of the other. 
man.” And again, remission of sins is a complete gift given at once, sanc- 

> 

* 
2 
UW 

d ph. iii, 14, 15. Is. iv. 4. 
7 Cant. vill. s, Gr. ddeAdiddr, ‘ brother,” © kir 
Ib, iv: 4, 2. tification an increasing one, (R. W.C.) See Index, * Baptism.’ 

fa Tie 

Ey: 

ON THE TEN! POINTS OF DOocTrRine. 

COLOSSIANS il. 8, 

Leware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain decett, after the tradition of 

men, after the rudiments of the world, Ee. 

1, VICE mimics virtue, and the tares strive 
to be thought wheat, growing like the wheat 
in appearance, but being detected by good 
judges from the taste. Zhe devil also trans- 
Figures himself into an angel of light? » not that 
he may reascend to where he was, for having 
made Ais heart hard as an anvil 3, he has 
henceforth a will that cannot repent; but in 
order that he may envelope those who are 
living an Angelic life in a mist of blindness, 
andga pestilent condition of unbelief. Many 
wolves are going about 7 sheeps’ clothine +, 
their clothing being that of sheep, not so their 
claws and teeth: but clad in their soft skin, 
and deceiving the innocent by their appear- 
ance, they shed upon them from their fangs 
the destructive poison of ungodliness. We 
have need therefore of divine grace, and of a 
sober mind, and of eyes that see, lest from eat- 
ing tares as wheat we suffer harm from ignor- 
ance, and lest from taking the wolf to be 
a sheep we become his prey, and from suppos- 
ing the destroying Devil to be a beneficent 
Angel we be devoured: for, as the Scripture 
saith, Ae goeth about as a roaring lon, seeking 
whom he may devours. This is the cause of 
the Church’s admonitions, the cause of the 
present instructions, and of the lessons which 
are read. 

2. For the method of godliness consists of 
these two things, pious doctrines, and virtuous 
practice : and neither are the doctrines accept- 
able to God apart from good works, nor does 

© The number “ten’’ is confirmed by Theodoret, who quotes 
the article on Christ’s ‘* Birth of the Virgin” as from Cyril’s fourth 
Catechetical Lecture “‘On the ten Doctrines.” The MSS. vary 
between ‘ften” and ‘‘eleven,” and differ also in the special titles 
and numeration of the separate Articles. 
uC Oi. col, Tate : ; An” te : 2 
3. JOD Mity 24, Sept. }. NHL. woe. yeRapora durov. .., €OTNKEV WaoTeEp 
akuwy avydatos. ‘hese statements concerning the Devil seem to 
e cirected against Origen’s opinion (De Principiis I. 2), that the 
€ alrected ag sn I : c 
Angels ‘who have been removed from their primal state of blessed- 
£ : : ; 
ness have not been removed irrecoverably.’” The question is 
discussed, and the opinions of several Fathers quoted, by Huet, 
Orizentana, II. c. 25. ; 
‘ae Matt oMils woe abhe Same text is Apol 
Ignatius, PArlade/ph. ii., and by Irenxus, L. I. c. i, § 

STG tr ave os 

ied to Heretics by 

2 

GC 

God accept the works which are not perfected 
with pious doctrines. For what profit is it, 
to know well the doctrines concerning God, 
and yet to be a vile fornicator? And again, 
|} what profit is it, to be nobly temperate, and 
an impious blasphemer? A most precious 
possession therefore is the knowledge of doc- 
trines: also there is need of a wakeful soul, 
since there are many thet make Spoil through 
Philosophy and vain decett®, The Greeks on 
the one hand draw men away by their smooth 
tongue, for honey droppeth from a harlot’s lips? ; 
whereas they of the Circumcision deceive those 
who come to them by means of the Divine 
Scriptures, which they miserably misinterpret 
though studying them from childhood to old age 8, 
and growing old in ignorance. But the chil- 
dren of heretics, by their good words and 
smooth tongue, deceive the hearts of the innocent a) 
disguising with the name of Christ as it were 
with honey the poisoned arrows" of their im- 
pious doctrines: concerning all of whom to- 
gether the Lord saith, Zuhe heed lest any 
man mistad yout, This is the reason for the 
teaching of the Creed and for expositions 
upon it. 

3- But before delivering you over to the 
Creed’, I think it is well to make use at present 
of a short summary of necessary doctrines ; 
that the multitude of things to be spoken, and 
the long interval of the days of all this holy 
Lent, may not cause forgetfulness in the mind 
of the more simple among you; but. that, 
having strewn some seeds now in a summary 
way, we may not forget the same when after- 
wards more widely tilled. But let those here 
present whose habit of mind is mature, and 

OF oly din os CTS re. 5 ‘ 

8 Is. xlvi. 3. Sept. macSevdmevor éx Tardiov ews Yijpws. 

o Rott xvin age ~ Gytilhas evyAwrrtas in place of evAoytas. 

POMC Onipaneriminietiits, Lori Vis t Matt. xxiv. 4. : 

2 Compare Rom. vi. 17: ‘that fort of teaching ‘vhereunto 

ye were delivercd.” TVhe instruction of Catechumens in the Arti. 

; cles of the Faith was commonly called the ‘ Traditio Symboli, 
1 or “* Delivery of the Creed.” 

2 

a6 CATECHE TICAL ELECTUS: 

who dave ieir senses alreday exercised to discern equal to Tim: for Ile who at first formed the 
wood and evil’, endure patiently to listen to sun must needs be incomparably greater and 
things fitted rather for children, and to an in-) brighter. He forcknoweth the things that shall 
troductory course, as it were, of milk: that at) be, and is mightier than all, knowing all things 
the same time both those who have need of the} and doing as He will; not being subject to any 
‘astruction may be benefited, and those who. necessary sequence of events, nor to nativity, 
have the knowledge may rekindle the remem. nor chance, nor fate; in all things perfect, and 

brance of things which they already know. equally possessing everyabsolute form? of virtue, 
: | neither diminishing nor increasing, but in mode 
I. Or Gop. hand conditions ever the same; who hath 

4. First then let there be laid as a founda-) prepared punishment for sinners, and a crown 
tion in your soul the doctrine concerning God;, for the righteous. 
that God is One, alone unbegotten, without be-| 6. Seeing then that many have gone astray 
ginning, change, or yariation4; neither begotten in divers ways from the One God, some having 
of another, nor having another to succeed Him deified the sun, that when the sun sets they 
wn His life: who neither began to live in time, may abide in the night season without God ; 
nor endeth ever: and that He is both good and others the moon, to have no God by day3; 
just; that if ever thou hear a heretic say, that others the other parts of the world +; others the 
there is one God who is just, and another who) arts; others their various kinds of food®; others 
is good 5, thou mayest immediately remember, their pleasures? ; while some, mad after women, 
and discern the poisoned arrow of heresy. Vor have set up on high an image of a naked wo- 
some have impiously dared to divide the One| man, and called it Aphrodite *, and worshipped 
God in their teaching; and some have said their own lust in a visible form; and others daz- 
that one is the Creator and Lord of the soul, | zled by the brightness of gold have deified it? and 
and another of the body®; a doctrine at once | the other kinds of matter ;—whereas if one lay as 
absurd and impious. For how can a man a first foundation in his heart the doctrine of the 
become the one servant of two masters, when unity’? of God, and trust to Him, he roots out 
our Lord says in the Gospels, Wo man can “at once the whole crop! of the evils of idotatry, 
serve two masters7? There is then One Only and of the error of the heretics : lay thou, there- 
God, the Maker both of souls and bodies :| fore, this first doctrine of religion as a founda- 
One the Creator of heaven and earth, the! tion in thy soul by faith. 

* i} 
Maker of Angels and Archangeis; of many, Orc 
the Creator, but of One only the Father before | Een 
all ages,—of One only, His Only-begotten, _ 7. Believe also in the Son of God, One and 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom He Only, our Lord Jesus Christ, Who was be- 
made all things visible and invisible ®. anes 

5 This Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is 2 i8éar. Cyril uses the word in the Platonic sense, as in the 

ie é Pa ri : ae : >| next sentence he adopts the formula, which Plato commonly uses 
not circumscribed in any place 2, nor 1s He less. in describing the ‘idea:” dei kara 7a adTa Kai woatTws EXELW. 
e*haed. 78 c. 
than the heaven ; but the Acavens are the qworks | ars Ae 26, 27. The worship of Sun and Moon under 
of His fingers ae. and the whole earth ts held in various names was almost universal. : ‘ 

. : 6 : 4 Gaea or Tellus, the earth; Zeus or Jupiter, the sky 5 rivers, 
His crasp™ +: Heis in all things and around all. | fountains, &e. 

Think not that the sun is brighter than Het, or| 5 Music, Medicine, Hunting, War, Agriculture, Metallurgy, 
i 5 ? &c., represented ly Apollo, Aesculapius, Diana, Mars, Ceres, 
ae , Vulcan. 

3 Hebv. re | 6 Herodotus, Book II., describes the Egyptian worship of 

4 Compare Hermas, Mandat.i. Athan. Efist. de Decretis | various birds, fishes, and quadrupeds. Le and onions also 
Nic. Sy. xxiiet ovTw Kat TO atpemtorv Kat avaddotwTov avrov | were held sacred: Porrum ct caepe nefas violare, Juv. Sat. xv. 9. 
elvat gwOnoerar. So Aristotle (Metaphys. XI. ¢. iv. 13) de-| Compare Clement of Alexandria, Protreft. c. il, § 39, Klotz. 
scribes the First Cause as aradés kat avaddotwtov. 7 Eros, Dionysus. : : 

5 Trenvus, I. c. xxvii. says that Cerdo taught that the God | 8 Clement of Alexandria (Protreft. c. iv. § 53, Klotz) states 
of the Law and the Prophets was not the Father of our Lord | that the courtesan Phryne was taken as a model for Aphrodite. 
Jesus Christ : for that He is known, but the other unknown, and | ‘* Praxiteles when fashioning the statue of Aphrodite of Cnidus 
the one is just, but the other good. Also III. c. 25, $3: ' Marcion | made it like the form of Cratine his paramour.” /dc¢. 
himself, therefore, by dividing God into two, and calling the one 9 Plutus. 
good, and the other judicial, on both sides puts an end to Deity.’ | 10 7s movapxias TOV Beov. See note on the title of Cat. VI. 
Compare Tertullian, c. Marcion. 1. 2, and 6; Origen, c. Ceés. | Praxeas made use of the term ‘‘ Monarchy” to exclude the Son 
Tite “(and the Spirit) from the Godhead. ‘Tertullian in his treatise 
6 This tenet was held by the Manichzeans and other heretics, | against Praxeas maintains the true dectrine that the Son is no 
and is traced back to the Apostolic age by Bishop Pearson (/22- | obstacle to the “ Monarchy,” because He is of the substance of 
position of the Creed, Art. 1. p. 79, note c). Compare Athanasius | the Father, does nothing without the Father's will, and has re- 
(c. Afollinarium, 1, 203 II. 8; c. Gentes, § 6; de Incarnatione, ceived all power from the Father, to Whom He will in the end 
§ 2, in this series, and Augustine (c. Faustum, Xx. 15, 21, and deliver up the kingdom. In this sense Dionysius, Bishop of Rome, 
Sat. Ads speaks of the Divine Monarchy as “‘that most sacred doctrine of 

9 Matt. vis e473 Luke viet. 8 “Tobn 1, 3.4, Caled: -G: the Church of God.” Compare Athanas. de Decretis, Nic. Syn. 

9S. Aug. it Ps. xxv. 61 Sin aliqno loco esset, non esset Deus. | c. vi. § 3, and Dr. Newman’s note. In Ovat. iv. c. Avian. p. 606 
Sermo 342: Deus habitandco continet non continetur. Origen, | (617), Athanasius derives the term from apxy, in the sense of 
c. Cels. vii. 342° God is of too excellent a nature for any place: | ‘beginning :” oUTws pra apxn OedryT0s Kat ob SVo apxat, obev 
He holds all things in His power, and is Himself not contined by | Kvptws Kat movapxia €otiv, See the full discussion of Monar- 
anything whatever.” Compare the quotation from Sir Tsaac New- chianism in Adhawasis, poxxii. fi. in this series, and Newman’s 
ton’s Principi/a, in the note on Cat. Mis) Bs wy Ps. viii. 3. | Introduction to sl than. Or. iv. 

ro T5, oles 1 See Cat. xv. 3, and note there. For dopav (Bened.) many MSS. read Oopayv, corruption.” 

BECIURE 

gotten God of God, begotten Life of Life 

, be- of reason, 
gotten Light of Light2, Who is in all things like3) and aeeys 

EV 21 

the Word who heareth the lather, 
f speaketh. And on these points, 

to Him that begat, Who received not His be- should God permit, we will speak more at 

ing in time, but was before all ages eternally 
and incomprehensibly begotten of the Father: 
The Wisdom and the Power of God, and His 
Righteousness personally subsisting 4: Who sit- 
teth on the right hand of the Father before all 
ages. 

lor the throne at God’s right hand He re- 
ceived not, as some have thought, because of 
His patient endurance, being crowned as it 
were by God atter His Passion ; but through- 

mut His being,—a being by eternal genera- 
on 5,—He holds His royal dignity, and. shares 
the Father’s seat, being God and Wisdom and 
Power, as hath been said; reigning together 
with the Father, and creating all things for the 
Father, yet lacking nothing in the dignity of 
Godhead, and knowing Him that hath’ be- |} 
gotten Him, even as He is known of Him 
that hath begotten ; and to speak briefly, re- 
member thou what is written in tt 
that none knoweth the Son but the Father, neither 
knoweth any the Father save the Son ®, 

8. T*urther, do thou neither separate7 the 
Son from the Father, nor by making a con- 
fusion believe in a Son-Fatherhood® ; but 

believe that of One God there is One Only- 
begotten Son, who is before all ages God the 
Word ; not the uttered 9 word diffused into the 
ar, nor to be likened to impersonal words! ; 
but ae Word the Son, Maker Saba who partake 

= Compare xi. 4, 9; 18. 

3 Tov opovov kara wavta Te yevyyoavTe. On the meaning and 
history of this phrase, proposed by the Semi-Arians at the Council 
of Ariminum as a substitute for dsoovavov, see Athan, de Syn. § 8, 
599. 

4 évvmootatos. Cf. xi. 103 Athan. c. Afollinar. I. 20, 21. 

5 The MSS. vary much, but 1 have followed the Benedictine 
text. 6 Matt. xi. 275. John x. 15 3 xvii. 25. 

7 This was a point earnestly maintained by the orthodox Di- 

shops at Nica, that the Son begotten of the substance of the 
Father is ever inseparably in the Father. Athan. de Decretis 
Syn. c Yertullic mc. ere IV. CO -Ch Tenat- ad Trail; vis 

Tov fev yap Nprarov adAotprovat Tov Ilarpos. 
8 viowatopta. A term of derision applied to the doctrine of 
Sabellius. Compare Atlanis. La/ositio Fidet, c. 2: “ neither 
do we imagine a Son-l’ather, as the Sabellians.” See Index, 
Yroratwp. 
9 Aoyos mpodoptkos, the term rhe by Paul of Samosata, implied 
that the Word was impersonal, being conceived as a partic ular 
activity of God. See Dorner, Person of Christ, Div. I. vol. ii, 
p. 436 ep nglish Shara) Sch compare Athanasius, lL wfositio hide, 
C. 1s vioyv €K TOU llartpos avapyos Kat ats 
S52 ob mpodopikdv, GvK acing Cardinal Newman (than, 
ce. Arianos, 1.7, note) observes that some Christian writers of the 

end century “seem to speak of the Divine generation as taking 
place immediately before the creation of the world, that is, as 
if not eternal, though at the same time they teach that our Lord 
existed before that generation. [n other words they scem to teach 
that He was the Word from eternity, and became the Son at the 
beginning of all things; some of them expressly considering Him, 
first as the Aoyos evd.aBeTos, or Reason, in the Father, or (as may 
be speciously repres sented) a mere attribute; next, as the Adyos 
tmpodopikas, or Word.”’ 

The terms Adyos evdra0eTos, or 
and Adyos zpoopieds, or “word expre essed’ (emeissuin, or ae uae 
¢ivunz), were in use amon the Gnostics (Jen, Piseirey © 5). 
As applied to the Son both terms, though sometimes us sed in 
a rig sht sense, were condemned as inadequate. Compare xi. 10, 

iy avuTorTaros Adyots. Ath an. ¢. sl yianos OF GDEMAVA ICL Ore 
mad ol _A€yovtes | HOvoy Ovop.a etvat vlod, avovatoy Sé Kal avuTc- 
oratoy civat TOY Viov TOV Ocor, fe 

(Long Reesakion’: 

‘word conceived in the mind,’ 

KVT.A. 

Los yovyevinwevor, Aoyou | 

large in due season; for we do not forget our 

present purpose to give a summary intro- 
duction to the Faith. 
CONCERNING His BIRTH OF TIIE VIRGIN. 

9. Believe then that this Only-begotten Son 
of God for our sins came down from heaven 
upon earth, and took upon Him this human 
nature of lke passions? with us, and was be- 
gotten of the Holy Virgin and of the Holy 
Ghost, and was made Man, not in seeming 
and mere show 3, but in truth; nor yet by pas- 
sing through the Vi Irgin as through a channel ¢ ; 
but. was of her made truly flesh, [and truly 
nourished with milk 5], and did truly eat as 

do, and truly drink as we do. For if the 
Incarnation was a phantom, salvation is a 
anaes also. ‘The Christ was of two natures, 
an in what was seen, but God in what was 
not seen ; as Man truly eating like us, for He 
had the like feeling of the flesh with us ; but 

‘as God feeding the five thousand from five 

loaves; as Man truly dying, but as God 
raising him that had been dead four days ; 
truly sleeping in the ship as Man, and walking 
upon the waters as God. 

OF THE CROSS. 

10. He was truly crucified for our. sins. 
lor if thou wouldest deny it, the place refutes 

thee visibly, this blessed Golgotha®, in which 

we are now assembled for the sake of Him 
who was here crucified ; and the whole world 
has since been filled with pieces of the wood of 
the Cross7.. But He was crucified not for sins 
of His own, but that we might be delivered 
from our sins. And though as Man He was 
at that time despised of wicn, and was buffeted, 
yet He was acknowledged by the Creation as 

God: for when the sun saw his Lord dis- 
honoured, he grew dim and trembled, not 

enduring the sight. 

2 opovoTaéy. Compare INS Sie Tey sasev) 195 
3 On the origin of the Docetic heresy, see vi. 14. 

Valentinus the Gnostic taught that God produced a Son of 
an animal nature who “ passed through Mary just as water throug sh 
a tube, and that on him the Saviour descend led at his Baptism.” 
Irenaeus, 1. Vil. 2. : 

5 The words which the Benedictine Editor introduces in 
feral: wire SG in Theodoret, and adopted by recent Editors, 
with Codd. 

6 recthic MT ife of Constantine, iii. 28. 

7 The discovery of the ‘*‘frue Cross’’ is related with many 

varvellous particulars by Socrates, Lecles. //ist. i. 27 ; 2nd S070- 
wen, £4.11. 1. A portion was said to have been left by Helena 

1: Jerusalem, enclosed in a silver case; and another portion sent 
v Constantinople, where Constantine privately enclosed it in his 
-wn statue, to be a safeguard to the city. It usebius, Life of 
Constantine, iii. 30, gives a long account of the discovery 

25— 
of the Holy Sepulchre, but makes no mention of the Cross. Cyril 
seoms to have been the first to record it, 25 years after. Cf. Greg. 

| Nyssa ft. GHiaser Qya5 19): 

ts CATECTIET Ta. Lec Us. 

power extinguished with their life: but Christ 

His Buriat. crucified is worshipped by the whole world. 

rr. He was truly laid as Man in a tomb We proclaim The Crucified, and the devils 
of rock : but rocks were rent asunder by terror’ tremble now. Many have been crucified at 

because of Him. He went down into the various times; bat of what other who was 
resons bencaih the earth, that thence also crucified did the invocation ever drive the 
He might redeem the righteous*® For, tell devils away ? 

me, couldst thou wish the living only to rg. Let us, therefore, not be ashamed of 

enjoy His grace, and that, though most of the Cross of Christ ; but though anotner hide 
them are unholy; and not wish those who it, do thou openly seal it upon thy forehead, 
from Adam had for a long while been im- ‘that the devils may behold the royal sign and 
prisoned to have now gained their liberty? flee trembling far away*, Make then this sign 
Esaias the Prophet proclaimed with loud at eating and drinking, at siting, at lying 
voice so many things concerning Him; down, at rising up, at speaking, at walking : 
wouldst thou not wish that the King should in a word, at every acts. JI’or He who was 
go down and redeem His herald ? David was here crucified is in heaven above. Ii after 
there, and S Samuel, and all the Prophets , John. being crucified and buried He had remained 
himself also, who by his messengers said, Art. in the tomb, we should have had cuuse to be 

thou te that sheuld come, or look we for ashamed ; but, i in fact, He who was crucitied 
another ©? Wouldst thou not wish that He on Golgotha here, has ascended into heaven 
should descend and redeem such as these ? ‘from the Mount of Olives on the Last. Vor 
after having gone down hence into Hades, and 
/come up again to us, He ascended agzin from 
‘us into heaven, His Father addressing Him, 
beneath earth came up again ; and Jesus, | gi saying, Sit Zhou on My hse hand, until 
who was buried, truly rose again the third make Thine enemies Thy footsteot. 

day. And if the shes ever worry thee, meet Or JUDGMENT 10 COME. 
hem ¢ ‘e by asking es é 
fnem. : ea by - son rag ms Dae | 15. This Jesus Christ who is gone up shall 
come’ for 7 eohale 

1. bes ‘ ae ne pong i. " ce or: pron come again, not from earth but from heaven : 
day, and hath not Christ then risen irom the ang | say, “not from earth,” because there 
earth on the third ied ! Isa dead man raised 

‘are many Antichrists to come at this time 

> lite ¢ th f Elisha, and 1s | ; 
eee touching the bones of E » and 1 |from earth. For already, as thou hast seen, 
it not much easier for the Maker of man- 

Rete daha at ak he the vane ak fen tater 'many have begun to say, fam the Christ : and 
Well then, ec fee and after He had the abomination of desolation’ sett Amal ngie 
Gai: Wek Been again of the dicrinkes: and | *ssumung to himself the false title of Christ 
kt ge aA eitniha sat iti tine Lut look thou for the true Christ, the Only- 

: L ; ee ; begotten Son of God, coming henceforth no 
rection, who bare witness not in pleasing words, : 

o 
more from earth, but from heaven, appearing to 
but contended even unto torture and death » API sar 
for the truth of the Resurrection. What then, 

all more bright than any lightning and _ bril- 
: Agega jliancy of light, with angel guards attended 
shall every word be established at the mouth of % eee re Pe eas ‘ 
: : that He may judge both quick and dead, 
a or three witilesses*, shea to the Scrip- ae F i ; sll 
and reign in a heavenly, eternal kingdom, 
ture, and, though twelve bear witness to the! 4; 5 : ia eRe 
: which shall have no end. For on this point 
Resurrection of Christ, art thou still incredu- 
lous in regard to His Resurrection ? 

Or THE RESURRECTION. 
12. But He who descended into the regions | 

also, I pray thee, make thyself sure, since there 
are many who say that Christ’s Kingdom 
CONCERNING 'THE ASCENSION. hath an end ?, 

. But when Jesus had finished His course | - ——- — 
of atten endurance, and had redeemed man-! justin Me. Dialaruc with Fontes eo. Se ele 

kind irom. their sins, He ascended again into Helper and Redeemer. the power of whose Name even demons 
5 ee ere : ape mere. + * do fear; and at this day, when exorcised in the name of Jesus 
the heave Ns, a cloud receiv my Him up: and | Christ, crucified under Pontius Pil: ite, Governor of Judwa, they 

as He went up Angels were beside Him, and 10 a 

\ Beno ‘ 1A? ‘ f Pertullian, de Corond, 3: At every forward step and move- 
A. POSUCS.~ Were beholding. Pst <3t any Man | ment, at every g going in and out, when we put on our clothes and 
dishbcheves the words which I speak, let him 

shoes, when we bathe, when We sit at table, when we light the 

_ : lamps, on couch, on seat, in all the ordinary actions of daily life, 
beheve the actual power ot the things now | we trace upon the forehead the Sign. If for these, and other such 
ie rules, you insist upon having positive Scripture injunction, you 

og ts 1 All kings when they dic have their | with lind. none. ‘Cravition wall Wecheldetomiato Soul eisethe ion. 
_ foals /ainator of them, custom as their strengthener, and faith as their 
. on . OUSerVeEr. 
* Compare siv. 18, 179, on the Descent into Hades. ee eer me iS Natta i vease 
9 The same Old ‘Testuinent saints are named in xiv. 19, as O- Date! secre ers: Compare Cataxv. 9;.15- 
receemed by Christ in Hades. ae Tatts 51.3 | 7 Compare xv. 27, where the followers of Marcellus of Ancyra 

I 
Deut. xix. 15. are indicated as iv ting this opinion. 

DEC TUR sv 

Or THE Hoty Guost, 

16. Believe thou also in the Holy Ghost, 
and hold the same opinion concerning Him, 
which thou hast rece’zed to hold concerning the 
Father and the Son, and follow not those who 
teach blasphemous thins of Him’. But learn 
thou that this Holy Spirit is One, indivisible, 
of manifold power; having many operations, 
yet not Himself divided; Who knoweth the 
inysteries, Who searcheth all things, even the deep 
Mitiss of God9: Who descended upon the Lord 
Jesus Christ in form of a dove; Who wrought 
in the Law and in the Prophets; Who now 
also at the season of Baptism sealeth thy soul; 
of Whose holiness also every intellectual 
nature hath need: against Whom ¢ any dare 
to blaspheme, he hath no forgiveness, neither in 
this world, nor in that which ts to come: “Who 
with the Father and the Son together?” is 
honoured with the glory of the Godhead : of 
Whom also ¢hrones, and dominions, princi- 
falities, and powers have need3, For there is 
One God, the Father of Christ; and One 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten Son of 
the Only God; and One Holy Ghost, the 
sanctifier and deifier of all4, Who spake in the 
Law and in the Prophets, in the Old and in 
the New Testament. 

17. Have thou ever in thy mind this seals, 
which for the present has been lightly touched 
in my discourse, by way of summary, but shall 
be stated, should the Lord permit, to the best 
of my power with the proof from the Scriptures. 
Vor concerning the divine and holy mysteries 
of the Taith, not even a casual statement must 
be delivered without the Holy Scriptures ; 
hor must we be drawn aside by mere plausi- 
bility and artifices of speech. Even to me, 
who tell thee these things, give not absolute 
credence, unless thou receive the proof of the 
things which I announce from the Divine 
Scriptures. lor this salvation which we believe 
depends not on ingenious reasoning 6 but on 
demonstration of the Holy Scriptures. 

OF THE SOUL. 

18. Next to the knowledge of this vener- 
able and glorious and all-holy Faith, learn 

& In xvi. 6—10, Cyril gives a long list of heresies concerning 
the Holy Ghost. 

9.1 Cor, i, 20, © Matt: 10 3a: 

2 This clause is not in the Creed of Nicwa, but is added in the 
Creed of Constantinople, a.p. 381, SCO): te: 16; 

4 Oeorovdy is omitted in Codd. Roe, Casaubon, and A. 

5 ‘The Benedictine Editor argues from Cat. i. 5, ‘that thou 
mayest by faith seal up the things that are spoken 3” and xxiii. 18 : 
“sealing up the Prayer by the Amen,” that Cyril means by ‘this 
seal” the firm belief of Christian doctrine. Compare John iii. 33. 
But Milles understands by the ‘‘seal” the Creed itself, which 
agrees better with the following context. 

1 ournpla yap airy THs TicTews Hav, which might be ren- 
dered, ‘‘ this our salvation by faith,’? or, with Milles, *‘this safety 
of our Faith.’ For the rendering in the text, compare Heb. iii. 1: 
apxiepéa THS Smodoylas Hu@y. On evpeadoyta, see Polybius xviii. 
29, § 3: dia THs mpos GAAHAOUS EtipertAoyCas. 

4) > 
vtiee 

‘further what thou thyselfart : that as man thou 
part of a two-fold nature, consisting of soul and 
| body; and that, as was said a short time ago, 
the same God is the Creator both of soul and 
body?. Know also that thou hast a soul self- 
governed, the noblest work of God, made 
after the image of its Creator’: immortal be- 
cause of God that gives it immortality; a living 
being, rational, imperishable, because of Him 
that bestowed these gifts: having free power 
to do what it willeth For it is not according 
to thy nativity that thou sinnest, nor is it by 
the power of chance that thou committest 
fornication, nor, as some idly talk, do the 
conjunctions of the stars compel thee to give 
thyself to wantonness!, Why dost thou shrink 
from confessing thine own evil deeds, and 
ascribe the blame to the innocent stars? Give 
no more heed, pray, to astrologers; for of 
these the divine Scripture saith, Let the star- 
sazers of the heaven stand up and save thee, 
and what follows: Behold, they all shail be 
consumed as stubble on the fire, and shall not 
deliver their soul from the flame ®. 

1g. And learn this also, that the soul, before 
it came into this world, had committed no sin 3, 
but having come in sinless, we now sin of our 
free-will, Listen not, I pray thee, to any one 
perversely interpreting the words, Bus if 7 do 
that which T would not+: but remember Him 
who saith, Z/ ye be wiling, and hearken unto 
Me, ye shall cat the good things of the land: 
but of ye be not willing, neither hearken unto 
Me, the sword shall devour you, &e3: and 
again, As ye presented your members as servants 
to uncleanness and to iniguity unto inigitity, even 
SO now present your members as servants to 
righteousness unto sanctification®, Remember 
also the Scripture, which saith, vex as they 
did not like to retain God in their knowledset : 
and, That which may be known of God ts mani- 

viae tar # 

8 In the Clementine Homily xvi. 16, the soul having come forth 
from God, clothed with His breath, is said to be of the same sub- 
stance, and yet not God. In ‘Vertull. c. J/Zarxezon. IL. ce. g, the soul 
is the affatus (zvoy not mvevpa) of God, ie. the image of the 
Spirit, and inferior to it, though possessing the true lineaments 
of divinity, immortality, freedom, its own mastery over itself. 

9 Tertull. c. Marc. IL. 6: It was proper that he who is the 
image and likeness of God should be formed with a free will, and 
a mastery of himself, so that this very thing, namely freedom 
of will and self-command, might be reckoned as the image and 
likeness of God in him. 

t Compare Aug. de Civ. Ded. v. 1, where he says that the 
astrologers (Mathematici) say, not merely such or such a position 
of Mars signifies that a man will be a murderer, but makes him 
a murderer. See Dict. of Christian Antiq., ‘ Astrology.” 
Ise-xlviiy 43, 

3 “Phe Orphie poets were under the impression that the soul 

is suffering the punishment of sin, and that the body is an ce: 
closure or prison in which the soul is incarcerated and kept 
(v@cerer) as the name copa implies, until the penalty is paid.” 
Plato, Cratyl. 400. Clement of Alexandria (S¢ror. TLL. iii. 17), 
after referring to this passage of Plato, quotes Philolaus the Pytha- 
gorean, as saying : “Phe ancient theologians and soothsayers also 
testify that the soul bas been chained to the body for a kind of 
punishment, and is buried in it as in a tomb.” 4 Rom. vil. 16, 

Se Siar Tenens Cap RUS) | acd aang 7 Rom. i. 28, 

a 

fert in them®; and again, their eyes they have 
‘elosed?. Also remember how God again ac- 
cuseth them, and saith, Yet 7 planted ise 
a fruitful vine, wholly irie: how art thou | 
turned to bitterness, thou the strange vine* t 

x0. The soul is immortal, and all souls are) 
alike both of men and women; for only the’ 
members of the body are distinguished*, There) 
is not a class of souls sinning by nature, and | 
a class of souls practising righteousness by. 
natures: but both act from choice, the sub- 
stance of their souls being of one kind only, | 
and alike in all. I know, however, that I am) 
talking much, and that the time 1s already | 
long: but what is more precious than salva- 
tion? Art thou not willing to take trouble in 
vetting provisions for the way against the 
heretics? And wilt thou not learn the bye- 
paths of the road, lest from ignorance thou 
fall down a precipice? If thy teachers think 
it no small gain for thee to learn these things, 
shouldest not thou the learner gladly receive 
the multitude of things told thee ? 

21. The soul is self-governed: and though 
the devil can suggest, he has not the power to 
compel against the will. He pictures to thee 
the thought of fornication: if thou wilt, thou 
acceptest it; if thou wilt not, thou rejectest. 
For if thou wert a fornicator by necessity, then 
for what cause did God prepare hell? If thou 
wert a doer of righteousness by nature and 
not by will, wherefore did God prepare crowns 
of ineffable glory? The sheep is gentle, but 
never was it crowned for its gentleness: since 
its gentle quality belongs to it not from choice 
but by nature. 

Or THE Bopy. 

22. Thou hast learned, beloved, the nature 
of the soul, as far as there is time at present: 
now do thy best to receive the doctrine of the 
body also. Suffer none of those who say that 
this body is no work of God*: for they who 
believe that the body is independent of God, 
and that the soul dwells in it as in a strange 
vessel, readily abuse it to fornication 5, And 
yet what fault have they found in this wonder- 
ful body? For what is lacking in comeliness ? 

8 Rom. i. 19. § Matt) xii. 5. ¥ Jer. A. BE: 

CATHCHETICAL 

Tertall. O the Soul, c. Xxxvi. 

See iv. 18. | 
5 On the impure practices of the Manichees, see vi. 33, 34 

Bes es WEP Ta Doce 

| And what in its structure is not full of skill? 

Ought they not to have observed the luminous 
construction of the eyes? And how the ears 
being set obliquely receive the sound unhin- 
dered? And how the smell is able to distin- 
euish scents, and to perceive exhalations ? 
And how the tongue ministers to two purposes, 
the sense of taste, and the power of speech ? 
How the lungs placed out of sight are un- 
ceasing in their respiration of the air? Who 
imparted the incessant pulsation of the heart ? 
Who made the distribution into so many veins 
and arteries? Who skilfully knitted together 
the bones with the sinews? Who assigned 
a part of the food to our substance, and 
separated a part for decent secretion, and hid 
away the unseemly members in more seemly 
places? Who when the human race must 
have died out, rendered it by a simple inter- 
course perpetual ? 

23. Tell me not that the body is a cause of 
sin®, For if the body is a cause of sin, why 
does not a dead body sin? Put a sword in 
the right hand of one just dead, and no 
murder takes place. Let beauties of every 
kind pass before a youth just dead, and no 
impure desire arises. Why? Because the 
body sins not of itself, but the soul through 
the body. ‘The body is an instrument, and, as 
it were, a garment and robe of the soul: and if 
by this latter it be given over to fornication, it 
becomes defiled: but if it dwell with a holy 
soul, it becomes a temple of the Holy Ghost. 
It is not I that say this, but the Apostle Paul 
hath said, Avozw ye not, that your bodies are the 
temple of ihe Holy Ghost which is in you? ? Be 
tender, therefore, of thy body as being a 
temple of the Holy Ghost. Pollute not thy 
flesh in fornication : defile not this thy fairest 
robe: and if ever thou hast defiled it, now 
cleanse it by repentance : get thyself washed, 
while time permits. 

24. And to the doctrine of chastity let the 
first to give heed be the order of Solitaries Sand 
of Virgins, who maintain the angelic life in 
the world ; and let the rest of the Church’s 
people follow them, lor you, brethren, a 
great crown is laid up: barter not away a great 
dignity for a petty pleasure: listen to the 
Apostle speaking: Zest there be any forntcator 
or profane person, as Esau, who for one mess of 

6 Fortunatus, the Manichee, in August. Disfud. ll. 20, contra 
Hortunat, is represented as saying, What we assert is this, that 
the soul is compelled to sin by a substance of contrary nature. 

but only ascetics in the Church; from that time to the reign of 

Soles 

nlead sold hits oien birtaright 9, unrolled hence- 
forth in the Angelic books for thy profession 
of chastity, see that thou be not blotted out 
again for thy practice of fornication. 

25. Nor again, on the other hand, in 
muntaining thy chastity be thou puffed up 
against those who walk in the humbler path of 
matrimony. Tor as the Apostle saith, Ze/ 
marriage be had in honour among all, and let the 
bed be undefiled*, Thou too who retainest thy 
chastity, wast thou not begotten of those who 
had married? Because thou hast a posses- 
sion of gold, do not on that account reprobate 
the silver. But let those also be of good 
cheer, who being married use marriage law- 
fully; who make a marriage according to 
God’s ordinance, and not of wantonness for 
the sake of unbounded license; who recog- 
nise seasons of abstinence, that they may give 
themselves unte prayer? ; who in our assem- 
blies bring clean bodies as well as clean 
garments into the Church ; who have en- 
tered upon matrimony for the procreation of 
children, but not for indulgence. 

26. Let those also who marry but once 
not reprobate those who have consented 
to a second marriage3: for though con- 
tinence is a noble and admirable thing, yet it 
is also permissible to enter upon a “second 

marriage, that the weak may not fall into 
fornication. For zt 7s good for them, saith the 

Apostle, ¢f they abide even as I. But if they 
have not continency, let them marry: for it ts 
better to marry than to burn4. But let all the 
other practices be banished afar, fornication, 
adultery, and every kind of licentiousness : and 
let the body be kept pure for the Lord, that 
the Lord also may have respect unto the body. 
And let the body be nourished with food, that 
it may live, and serve without hindrance ; not, 
however, that it may be given up to luxuries. 

9 Heb. xii. 16. © Eheb. Sil. 4y 2 + Cot vile 8, 

3 The condemnation of a second marriage, which the Bene- 
dictine Editor and others import into this passage, is not to be 
found in it. rovs devrépw yauw oupmeprevexBevras neither means 

“qui ad secundas nupuas ultro se dejecere,” nor even ‘‘ who 
have Pisoseeal thems elves’ * (R.W.C.), but simply ‘who have 
consented to,’—or, ‘‘consented together in—a_ second mar- 
riage,”? without any intimation of censure. eer nO say les ee 
RCGlisn. sky. a aye Kae ainp éauTots ovprepipepsucror) ; ; 
S MACE, Akt. 277 Buselss Pa dh. bee Oy 274 aveetkKakws Kat Up me- 
Tpws cuuTepipepowvto avtots; Zeno, af. Diog. Laert, vii. 18 ; 
TO ae alm tae rots pido. Dog. Laert. Vii. Tt . ete 
oupmepipopos. Polyb. 1V. 35, § 7, and II. 17, § 12. The gentle- 
ness with which Cyril here speaks of second marriages is in 
striking contrast with the passionate vehemence of ‘Tertullian in 
the treatise de Monogania, and elsewhere. Aug. de Hevesibus, 
cc. 26, 38, reckons the condemnation of second - marriage among 
the heretical doctrines of the Montanists and Cathar, In the 
treatise de Bono Viduitatis, c. 6, he argues that a second marriage 
is not to be condemned, but is ‘less honourable than widowhood, 
and severely rebukes the heretical te aching on this point of 
‘Tertullian, the Montanists, and the Novatians. De Bono Con- 
Jugali, Cc. 213 Sacramentum nuptiarum temporis nostri sic ad 
unum virum et unam uxorem redactum est, ut E cclesiz dispen- 
satorem non liceat ordinare nisi unius uxoris virum. On the 
practice of the Church at various times see Bingham, 1V. v. 
1—4; Suicer, Thesaur. Acyapia. 

4 Gor vile8, Os 

i 

he) 
ur 

NEE ATS 

27. And concerning food let these be your 
ordinances, since in re evard to meats also many 
stumble. For some “deal indifferently with 
things offered to idols 5, while others discipline 
themsely es, but condemn those that eat : and 
in different ways men’s souls are defiled in the 
matter of meats, from ignorance of the useful 
reasons for eating and not eating. Ior we 
fast by abstaining from wine and flesh, not 
because we abhor them as abominations, but 
because we look for our reward ; that having 
scorned things sensible, we may enjoy a 
spiritual and intellectual feast; and th - 
having now sown in tears we may ‘reap mm joy® 
in the world to come. Despise not therefore 
them that eat, and because of the weakness of 
their bodies partake of food: nor yet blame 
those who wse a@ little wine for thetr stomach’s 
sake and thetr often infirmities? : and neither 
condemn the men as sinners, nor abhor the flesh 
as strange food ; for the Apostle knows some of 
this sort, when he says: forbidding to marry, 
and commanding to abstain from meats, which 
God created to be received with thanksgiving by 
them that believe®. In abstaining then from 
these things, abstain not as from things 
abominable 9, else thou hast no reward: but 
as being good things disregard them for the 
sake of the better spiritual things set before 
thee. 

28. Guard thy soul safely, lest at any time 
thou eat of things offered to idols: for con- 
cerning meats of this kind, not only I at 
this time, but ere now Apostles also, and James 
the bishop of this Church, have had earnest 
care: and the Apostles and Elders write a 
Catholic epistle to all the Gentiles, that they 
should abstain first from things offered to tdols, 
and then from blood also and from things 
strangsled*. For many men being of savage 

CONCERNING 

nature, and living like dogs, both lap up 
blood’, in imitation of the manner of the 

5 The Nicolaitans (4 focad. il. 14, 20) $ aig the Valentinians, 
of whom Irenaus (II. xiv. 5), says that they derived their « opinion 
as to the inc Perence of meats from the Cynics. See also Irenzus 

eves sad XXV1. 
6 Ps, cxxvi. 5. or Link yoo 8 x Tim. iv. 
9 The various sects of Gnostics, and the M: unichees, 

meats and drinks, as flesh and wine, to 
Trews fer, 1-280" Clem. Peds th) 2. p. 186. 
Epiph. /fe7. xlvi. 2, xlvii. 1, &e., &es August. Her. 46, vid. 
Canon. fost. 43. aati any Bishop, &c., abstain from m: arriage, 
flesh, and wine, not for discipline (dc aoxnow) but as abhorring 
them, forgetting that they. arevall very 200d, d&c.,.and speaking 
bk: wsphemy against the creation, let him amend or be deposed,” &c. 
Re bed: (Ge 

considered certain 

be polluting. Vid. 

1 Acts xv. 20, 29. The prohibition of blood and things stran- 
gled has continued to the present d: ay in the Eastern Church, 
though already disregarded by the Latins in the time of S. Augus- 
tine «. FGHSLUUIE NX 13). 

Tertullian (4 fologeticus, c. 9) speaks of those ‘who at the 
eladi: itor shows, for the cure of epilepsy, quaft with greedy thirst 
the blood of criminals slain in the arena,” and of others ‘‘who 
make meals on the flesh of wild beasts at the place of combat :” 
and contrasts the habits of Christians, who abstain from things 
strangled, to avoid pollution by the blood. 

26 CALE rian iss A By ta 

fiercest. beasts, and greedily devour things the Choirs of Angels; but the sinners, that 

strangled. But do thou, the servant of they may endure for ever the torment of their 
Christ, in eating observe to eat with rever- sins. 
| 
ence. And so enough concerning meats. | Or tur LAVER. 
Or APPAREL, / 32. For this cause the Lord, preventing us 

according to His loving-kindness, has granted 
repentance at Baptism 9, in order that we may 
cast off the chief—nay rather the whole burden 
of our sins, and having received the scal 

29. But let thine apparel be plain, not for 
adornment, but for necessary covering: not. 
to minister to thy vanity, but to keep thee 
warm in winter, and to hide the unseem-_ 
liness of the body: lest under pretence of | 
hiding the unsee miliness, thou fall into another 

kind of unseemliness by thy extravagant dress. 

eternal life. But as we have spoken. sufii- 
ciently concerning the Laver the day before 
yesterday, let us now return to the remaiming 

Or THE RESURRECTION. subjects of our introductory teaching. 

30. Be tender, I beseech thee, of this 
body, and eiulesetand that thou wilt be raised 
from the dead, to be judged with this) 33. Now these the divinely-inspired Scrip- 
body. But if there steal into thy mind any tures of both the Old and the New ‘Tes- 
thought of unbelief, as though the thing were tament teach us. For the God of the two 
impossible, judge of the things unseen by what | Testaments is One, Who in the Old Tes- 
happens to thyself For tell me; a hundred | tament foretold the Christ Who appeared in 
years ago or more, think where wast thou) the New; Who by the Law and the Prophets 
thyself: and from what a most minute and led us to Christ’s school. Lor before faith came, 

Or THE DIVINE SCRIPTURES. 

mean substance thou art come to so great we were kept tu ward under the law, and, the 

a stature, and so much dignity of beauty 3.|Zazw hath been our tutor to bring us uato 
What then? Cannot He who brought the| CZ77st*. And if ever thou hear any of the 
non-existent into being, raise up again that heretics speaking evil of the Law or the 
which already exists and has decayed+? He} Prophets, answer in the sound of the Saviour’s 
who raises the corn, which is sown for our voice, saying, Jesus came not to destroy the 
sakes, as year by year it dies,—will He Law, dut to fulfl it?, Vearn also diligently, 

have difficulty in raising us up, for whose ‘and from the Church, what are the books of 

sakes that corn also has been raised5? the Old Testament, and what those of the 
Seest thou how the trees stand now for many New. And, pray, read none of the apocry- 
months without either fruit or leaves: but) phal writings 3: for why dost thou, who knowest 
when the winter is past they spring up whole not those which are acknowledged among all, 
into life again as if from the dead®: shall not trouble thyself in vain about those which are 
we much rather and more easily return to) disputed? Read the Divine Scriptures, the 
life? The rod of Moses was transformed twenty-two books of the Old Testament, these 
by the will of God into the unfamiliar nature | that have been translated by the Seventy-two 
of a serpent: and cannot a man, who has| Interpreters 4. 

fallen into death, be restored to himself}-———————————— + - 

again ? 9 Gr, Aourpod peravorar. Other readings are AvTpov peTavotas, 

31. Heed not those who say that this body septteeoiaares oo and Aovzpor jetavotas “a laver 

is not raised; for it is raised: and [saias is pe ae er : The mr paee hy is described by Clement of 
a poe cig i ag ae : ug » | | Alexandria (Pardag. i. 7) as one who both conducts a boy to 
witness, W hen he says : The dead shall AFIS, | school, and helps to teach him,—an usher: ‘‘under-master ” 

and they that are in the tombs shall awake? ¢| Wit). ® Matt. v.17. 
3 7av amokptdov, The sense in which Cyril uses this term 

and according to Daniel, J/any of them that: may ve learned ‘from Rufinus (E-xpositio Syitoli, § 38), who 

sleep t - L " a pit gah . distinguishes three classes of books: (1) The Canorie al Books 
sleep in the dust f the earth shall arise, Some lo of the Old and New siya con gh. alone are to be used 
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame ®, 

om proof of ¢ a ail fz, i as ssiastical, which may be read in 
Churches, including Wisdom, Eevlesiasticus, Tobit, Judith, and 
But though to rise again is common to all | the Books of the Macc: tbees, in the Old Testament, and Ze 
men, yet the resurrection is not alike to all: 5% pherd of Hermas, and 7he 7wo lays in the New ‘Testament. 
5 ? 5 J Rew “The other writing gs they called *t Apocryphal,’? which they 
for the bodies received by us all are eternal, would not have readin Churches. The distinction is useful, 
4, Bria ley a Sled, wie eo ee One ne second class is not complete. 

but not like bodies by all me for the Just datecte ace 9 4 The original source of this account of the Septuagint version 
them, that through eternity they may join i a letter purporting to have been written by Aristeas, or Aris- 
“tens, a_confidéntial minister of Ptolemy Phil: idelphus, to his 

- ~ . brother Philocrates. Though the letter is not regarded as genuine 

its statements are in part admitted to be true, being confirmed 

Rte rs by a fragment, preserved by Eusebius (Prefparatio Lvangeltc a 
4 Co; nag xviii. 6, 9; Athenagoras, On the Resurrection of \ix. 6), of a work of Aristobulus, a Jewish philosopher who Wrote in 
the Dead, c. 3. | the reign of Ptolemy Philometor, 181—146, B.c. Upon these 
Ss Vd Ts v4 John xii. 24; 1 Cor. xv. 36. 6 XVIII. 7, | testimonies it is generally admitted ‘that ‘the whole Law,’ i.e. the 

7 be. SRMiety. 8 Dan. xi‘. 2. Pentateuch was translated into Greek at Alexandria in the reizn 

by the Holy Ghost, may be made heirs of 

ee A IR SSE 

Lr. URE 

34. For after the death of Alexander, 

the Church 

rv. 

ears 
a 

who handed down these books. 

kine of the Macedonians, and the division of) Being theretore a chiid of the Church, trench ° 

his kingdom into ‘ne principalities, into Baby- thou not tipon its statutes. 
and Ibgypt, | Testament, 

lonia, and Macedonia, and Asia, 
one of those who reigned over Egypt, Ptolemy 
Philadelphus, being a king very fond of learn- 
ing, while collecting the books that were in 
every place, heard from Demetrius Phalereus, 
the curator of his library, of the Divine Scrip- 
tures of the Law and the Prophets, and judged 
it much nobler, not to get the books from the 
possessors by force against their will, but 
rather to propitate them by gilts and friend- 
ship; and knowing that what is extorted is 
often adulterated, being given unwillingly, 
while that which is willing ly supplied is freely 
given with all sincerity, he sent to Eleazar, who 
was then High Priest, a great many gilts for the 
Temple here at Jerusalem, and caused him to 
send him six interpreters from each of the 
twelve tribes of Israel for the translation 5, 
Then, further, to make experiment whether 
the books were Divine or not, he took precau- 
tion that those who had been sent should 
not combine among themselves, by assign- 
ing to each of the interpreters who had | 

5 . 
come his separate chamber in the island called | then Ezekiel, 

Pharos, which lies over against Alexandria, 
and committed to each the whole Sc riptures to 
translate. And when they had _ fulf filled the 
task in seventy-two days, he brought together | 
all their translations, wl 

ditterent chambers without sending them once | which 
agreed not | the evangelic title corrupts the 
For the | simple sort. Receive 

to another, and found that the 
only in the sense but even in words. 
process was no word-cra{t, nor contrivance of 
human devices: but the translation of the 
Divine Scriptures, spoken by the Holy Ghost, 
was of the Holy Ghost accomplished. 

35. Of these read the two and twenty books, 
but have nothing to do with the apocryphal 
writings. Study earnestly these only which we 
read openly in the Church. Var wiser and 
more pious than thyself were the Apostles, and 

| 
| 

| 

ich they ha xd m: ade in also wrote a Gospel according 

| of the Books of the Old 

the nin of old time, the eee ae of the 

either of Ptolemy Soter (323—205, B.c.), or of his son Ptolemy 
Piiladelphus (2 247, 
Phaicreus, curats fl of the King’ 

5 Up to this point Cyril’s account is be ised upon the statements 
of the Psenudo-Aristeas. The fabulous ine idents which follow, 
concerning the separate cells, the completion of the whole version 
by cach translator, the miraculous agreement in the very words, 

s library. 

proving a Divine inspiration, are found in Pi < Judzeus, Live of 
doses, 11. 7. Josep nus, . lntigutites, NUT. c. li. 3—T4, SoHowing 
the Jetter of Aristeas, gives long descriptions of the magniiicent 

presents sent by Phitade ly hus to Jerus: ilem, 
hospitality to the 
cells or miraculous 

the 72 Interpreters as 

agreement, On the contre Lt y he repre sCMLUS 
m cting toz vether for Cons ultation, : agreeing 
on the text to be adopted, and completing their joint labours in 

» days. The slightest comparison oe the Version with the 
orig 311 val nazi brew must convince any reasonable person that the idea 
of divine inspiration supernatural assistance, borrowed by 
Justin Mz ieee irenzeus, and other Fathers, apparently from Philo, 
Is a mere inventi m_of the Imagination, disproved by the tacts. 
Compare the article Septuagint” in Murray's Dictionary of the 
bible. 

or 

Ie Ds. under ‘the direction of Demetrius | 

and of his sj lendid | 
translators, but makes no allusion to the separate | 

_slastes, 

And of the Oid 

as we have said, study the two 

_ twenty books, which, if thou art desirous 
F learning, strive to remember by name, as 

I recite them. For of the Law the books of 
Moses are the first five, Genesis, Exodus, 
Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. And nest, 
Joshua the son of Nave7, and the book of 
Judges, including Ruth, counted as seventh. 
And of the other historical books, the first 

and second books of the Kings ® are among the 
Hebrews one book ; also the third and fourth 
one book. And in like manner, the first and 

second of Chronicles are with them = one 
book ; and the first and second of Esdras are 

counted one. Esther is the twelfth book ; and 
these are the Historical writings. But those 
which are written in verses are fiye, Job, and 
the book of Psalms, and Proverbs, and Eccle- 
and the Song of Songs, which is the 
sev enteenth book. And after these come the five 
ia mes books: of the ‘Twelve Prophets one 
book, of Isaiah one, of Jeremiah one, including 
Baruch and Lamentations and the E pistle? ; 

and the Book of Daniel, the 

twenty- -second of the Old ‘Vesiament. 
36. Then of the New ‘Testament there are 
the four Gespels only, for the rest have false 

The Manichaeans 
to ‘Phomas, 
being tinctured with the fragrance of 
souls of the 
also the Acts of the ‘Twelve 
Apostles ; and in addition to these the seven 

titles! and are mischievous. 

6 The rendering ‘‘trench not” (R.W.C.) agrees well with th 
etymology ot the Verb (wapay apao oe). he more usual sienili: 
tion seems to be ‘ countericit,” ‘ forge.’ 
here, apart from any mets iphor, is ** trans 

7 ‘Lhe name ** Nun” is represented “tng. 
gint, which Cyril used. 

> ‘The two books of Samucl, 

9 "Phe pistle of Jeremy, which now appears in the Apocryp! 
as’ the- last. ch: ipter of Baruch, On the number and arran 
and New Testaments the stud 
consult an interesting Essay by Professor Sanday (S¢v 
vk iii.), who traces the introduction of a fixed order to the time 
When papyrus ve/és were superseded by cow in which the 
sheets of skin were folded and bound together, as in printed books. 
Vhis change had commenced before the Diocletian persecution, 
A.D. 393, when am: me the sacred books taken from the Cc hristians 

sense required 
gress * (Teuriley). 
* Nave” in the Septua- 

Phe 

gement 

ices, 

| codices were much more numerous than vo//s. On the contents 
of Pa Jewish Canon, sce Diction ary ot the Bible oN an p." 
ee ** Josephu s enumerates 20 books ‘which are justly believed 

to bet d livine.’ One ot the earliest attempts by a Christian to 

ascertain correctly the number and order of the Books of the O.'T. 

was made by Melito, Bis shop of Sardis, who travelled tor this 
| purpose to Palestine, in the latter part of the end Century. His 
list is as follows :—* Of Moses five seein Cent x exodus, 
Numbers, Leviticus; Deuteronomy, Jesus son of Nave, Judges, 
Ruth, four Rooks of Kings, two of ¢ ‘hr micles, Duals. of David, 
Solomon's Proverbs, which is also called Wis dom, Ecclesiastes, 
song of Songs, Job, Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, the ‘Twelve 
in one Book, Danicl, Mzekiel, Msdras. ” (Eusebius, //./5. I1h. 
cap. ro, note 1, in this series.) Cyril’s List agrees with that of 
Athanasius (/es/ad “pistle, 373 AD.), except that Jo! dis placed 
by Ath. after Canticles instead of betore Psalms. 
Cr. Wevder mypuba, Por an account of ths many Apocr 

Gospels, see the artic le by Lipsius inthe *t Décvvonary of Ch ‘ 
Biography,” Smith and Wace, and the english translations 11 

Clark’s Ante-Nicene Libri wy. 

28 CATECHETICNL PEC Vis, 

Catholic Epistles of James, Peter, John, and 
Tue and as a seal upon them all, and the 

last work of the disciples, the fourteen Mpisties 
But let all the rest be put aside in 
And whatever books are} 

of Paul? 
a secondary rank, 
not read in Churches, 
thyself, as thou hast heard me 
much of these subjects. 

37. But shun thou every diabolical opera- 
tion, and believe not the apostate Serpent, 
whose transformation from a good nature 

say. ‘Thus 

was of his own free choice: who can over-| 

persuade the willing, but can compel no 
one. Also give heed neither to observa- 
tions of the stars nor augurics, nor omens, 
nor to the fabulous divinations of the Grecks 5. 

Witcheraft, and enchantment, and the wicked 
practices id necromancy, admit not even to 
a hearing. From every kind of intemper- 
ance head aloof, giving 

2 Cyril Seite in this list all the books w hich we reccive, 
except the Apocalypse. po Bishop Westcott’s Article, ‘Canon, 
in the Dict. ion ary of the Bible, and Origen’s Cati slog zue in I useb. 
Mist, vi. 25 Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers. vol. i.). 

2 Compare xix. 8. where all such acts of divination are said to 

be ace of the poe 

these read not even by | 

thyself neither to, 

gluttony nor licentiousness, rising superior to 
all covetousness and usury. Neither venture 
thyself at heathen assemblies for public spec- 
tacles, nor cver use amulets in_ sicknesses ; 
shun also all the vulgarity of tavern- haunting. 
Fall not away either into the sect of the 
“Samaritans, or into Judaism: for Jesus Christ 
henceforth hath ransomed thee. Stand aloof 
from all observance of Sabbaths 4, and from 
calling any indifferent meats common er un- 
dean. But especially abhor all the assem- 
blies of wicked heretics ; and in every way 
make thine own soul safe, by fastings, prayers, 
almsgivings, and reading the oracles of God ; 
‘that having lived the rest of thy life in the 
flesh in soberness and godly doctrine, thou 
mayest enjoy the one salvation which flows 
from Baptism ; and thus enrolled in the armies 
of heaven by God and the Father, mayest also 
be deemed worthy of the heavenly crowns, 1n 
Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom be the glory 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

4 Compare Gal. iv. ro, * Ye ubseive days.” 

Oe a a ae ee 

Or 

HEBREWS XI. 

FAITH, 

9 

T, 

ow faith ts the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, 
for by tt the elders obtained a good report. 

1. How great a dignity the Lord bestows on 
you in transferring you from the order of Cate- 
chumens to that of the Faithful, the Apostle 
Paul shews, when he affirms, God ts faithful, 
by IVhom ye were called into the fellowship of 
flis Son Jesus Christ*. Yor since God is called 

Faithful, thou also in receiving this title 
recelvest a great dignity. For as God is 

called Good, and Just, and Almighty, and 
Maker of the Universe, so is He also called 

Faithful. Consider therefore to what a dignity 
thou art rising, seeing thou art to become 

partaker of a title of God ?. 

2. Here then it is further required, that 
each of you be found faithful in his con- 
science: for @ faithful man it ts hard to 
finds; not that thou shouldest shew thy 
conscience to me, for thou art not to de 
Judsed of mans judgment+; Dut that thou 
shew the sincerity of thy faith to God, who 
tricth the retns and hearts5, and kuoweth the 
thoughts of men®, A great thing is a faithful 
man, being richest of all rich men. For /o 
the faithful man belongs the whole world of 
qwealth7,in that he disdains and tramples on it. 
For they who in appearance are rich, and have 
many possessions, are poor in soul: since the 
more they gather, the more they pine with 
longing for what is still lacking. But the 
faithful man, most strange paradox, in poverty 
is rich: for knowing that we need only to have 
food and raiment, and being therewith content ®, 
he has trodden riches under foot. 

3. Nor is it only among us, who bear the 
name of Christ, that the dignity of faith is 
great 9: but likewise all things that are accom- 

2 See Procatechesis 6, and Index, Marthful. 
TOV oe Gy 41 Cor. iv. 3. See Index, Confession. 
Sienee GPs. Serve tae 

‘This sentence is a spurious addition to the text of the Septua- 

ty Car. 3-0. 

sly 
3D: 

Nat, variously placed after Prov. xvii. 4, and xvii. 6. The thought | 
is there completed. by the antithesis, ut to the faithless not even | 
an obol. ‘The origin of the interpolation is unknown. 
8 y Tim. vi. 8. | 
9 It was a common objection of Pagan philosophers that the | 
Christian religion was not founded upon reason but only on faith, | 
Cyril’s answer that faith is necessary in the ordinary affairs 

|plished in the world, even by those who are 

aliens? from the Church, are accomplished by 
faith. 

By faith the laws of marriage yoke together 
those.who have lived as strangers : and because 
of the faith in marriage contracts a stranger is 
made partner of a stranger’s person and 
possessions. By faith husbandry also is sus- 
tained, for he who believes not that he shall 
receive a harvest endures not the toils. By 
faith sea-faring men, trusting to the thinnest 
plank, exchange that most solid element, the 
land, for the restless motion of the waves, 
committing themselves to uncertain hopes, and 

carrying with them a faith more sure than any 

anchor. By faith therefore most of men’s 
affairs are held together: and not among us 
only has there been this belief, but also, as I 
have said, among those who are without’. 
For if they receive not the Scriptures, but 
bring forward certain doctrines of their own, 
even these they accept by faith. 

4. ‘The lesson also which was read _ to-day 
invites you to the true faith, by setting before 
you the way in which you also must please God : 
for it affirms that wethout faith tt ts impossible to 
please Him? For when will a man resolve to 
serve God, unless he believes that //e 7s 
a giver of reward 2? Whenwill a young woman 
choose a virgin life, or a young man live 
soberly, if they believe not that for chastity 
there is a crown that fadeth not away3? Faithis 
an eye that enlightens every conscience, and 

of life is the same which Origen had employed against Celsus 
(I. 11): ‘f Why should it not be more reason able, since all human 
affairs are dependent upon faith, to believe God rather than men? 
For who takes a voyage, or marries, or begets children, or casts 
seeds into the ground, without believing that better things will 
result, although the contr ary might and sometimes does h appen?” 
See also Arnobius, adversus Gentes, 11. 83 and Hooker's allusion 
to the scornful reproach of Julian the Apost ate, “ Che highest 
point of your wisdom is be/feve” (Eccle s. Pol. V. Isiii. 1. as 

t By ‘aliens from the Church,” and ‘‘ those who are without,’ 
RSs Cyril here means Pagans: so Tertullian, de Idololatria, c. xiv. 
But the latter term is applied to a C atechumen in Procatechesis " 
c. 12, and was also a common description of heretics: see Ter- 
‘atilene de Baptisimo, c. xv. Heb. xi. 6. 

Bat Ret. Ve 4. 

30 
imparts understanding ; for the Prophet saith, | 
And tf ve believe not, ve shall not understand +, | 

Faith sfoppeth the mouths of fions5, as in| 
Danicl’s case: for the Scripture saith concern- 
ine him, that Davie? was brought up out of the 
Fetand no manner of hurt wes found upon hin, | 
because he believed tn his God®. 
thing more fearful than the devil ? 
against him we have no other shield than faith 7, 
an impalpable buckler against an unseen foe. 
Fer he sends forth divers arrrows, and s/oots: 
don in the dark night® those that watch not 5) 
but, since the enemy is unseen, we have faith | 
as our strong armour, according to the saying 
of the Apostle, 77 ad/ things taking the shicld of 
faith, wherewith ve shall be able to quench all the 
fiery darts of the wicked one. A fiery dart of 
desire of base indulgence is often cast forth 
from the devil: but faith, suggesting a picture 
of the judgment, cools down the mind, and 
quenches the dart. 

5. ‘There is much to tell of faith, and the 
whole day would not be time sufficient for 
us to describe it fully. At present let us be 
content with Abraham only, as one of the 
examples from the Old Testament, seeing that 
we have been made his sons through faith, 
He was justified not only by works, but also 
by faith ?: for though he did many things well, 
yet he was never called the friend of God?, 
except when he believed. Moreover, his every 
work was performed in faith, Through faith 
he left his parents ; left country, and place, and 
home through faith3. In like manner, there- 
fore, as he was justified be thou justified also. 
In his body he was already dead in regard to 
offspring, and Sarah his wife was now old, and 
there was no hope left of having children. 
God promises the old man a child, and 
Abraham without being weakened in faith, 
though he considered his own body now as good 
as dead +, heeded not the weakness of his body, 
but the power of Him who promised, because 
he counted Him faithful who had promised >, and 
so beyond all expectation gained the child 
from bodies as it were already dead. And 
when, after he had gained his son, he was com- 

4 Is. vii.o, according tothe Septuagint. But A.V. and R.V. both 
render: //ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. 

5 Heb. xi. 34. > Dan, +i. 33. 

71 Pet. v.g: MW hom resist, stedfast in the faith, 

8 Ps, xi. 2, that they may shoot in darkness at the upright 
in heart (R.V.). The Hebrew word boy, signifying deep dark- 

ness (Job iii. 6; x. 22) is vigorously rendered by the Seventy 
oxoronyvn, Which is explained by the Scholiast on Homer (Od. 
xiv. 4572 NvEé 6 dp’ emndrGe Kany okoTopnveos) to be the deep dark- 
ness of the night preceding the new moon. 

9 Eph, vi, 16. Pie 

t James ii. 21. Casaubon omitted povor, which is found in 
every MS., thus making the meaning to. be, “He was justified 
not by works but by faith,” which directly contradicts the state- 
inent of S. James, and is inconsistent with the following context in 
> rial 

Is there any-- 
Yet even’ to him a lamb instead of his child, he received 

+" James ii. 233 2 Chron. xx. 7; Is. ali, 8; Gen. xv. 6. 
> Heb. xi, 8—ro. Seow ee. 5 “Eheby ‘kty rry Te. 

CATHCHE Titus ieee. 

manded to offer him up, although he had 
heard the word, Za Zsaac shall thy seed be called ®, 
he procecded to offer up his son, his only son, to 

10d, believing “hat God ts able to vatse up even 

( 
ities the dead?,, And having bound his son, and 

laid him on the wood, he did in purpose ofter 
him, but by the goodness of God in delivering 

his son alive. Being faithful in these things, 
he was sealed for righteousness, avd received 
circumetston as a seal of the faith which he had 
while he was in unctrcumeision ®, having received 
a promise that he should be the father of many 
nations 9, 

6. Let us see, then, how Abraham is the 
father of many nations. Of Jews he is con- 
fessedly the father, through succession accord- 
ing to the flesh. But if we hold to the suc- 
cession according to the flesh, we shall be 
compelled to say that the oracle was false. 
Tor according to the flesh he is no longer 
father of us all: but the example of his faith 
makes us all sons of Abraham. How? and 
in what manner? With men it is incredible 
that one should rise from the dead ; as in like 
manner it is incredible also that there should 
be offspring from aged persons as good as 
dead. But when Christ is preached as having 
been crucified on the tree, and as having died 
and risen again, we believe it. By the like- 
ness therefore of our faith we are adopted into 
the sonship of Abraham. And then, following 
upon our faith, we receive like him the spiritual 
seal, being circumcised by the Holy Spint 
through Baptism, not in the foreskin of the 
body, but in the heart, according to Jeremiah, 
saying, And ye shall be circumcised unto God in 
the foreskin of your heart? and according to 
the Apostle, 7 the circumcision of Christ, 
having been buried with Him in baptism, and 
the rest 3. 

7. This faith if we keep we shall be free 
from condemnation, and shall be adorned with 
all kinds of virtues. For so great is the 
strength of faith, as even to buoy men up in 
walking on the sea. Peter was a man like 
ourselves, made up of flesh and blood, and 
living upon like food. But when Jesus said, 
Come+, he believed, and walked upon the 
waters, and found his faith safer upon the 
waters than any ground; and his heavy body 
was upheld by the buoyancy of his faith. 
But though he had safe footing over the 
water as long as he believed, yet when he 
doubted, at once he began to sink: for as 

C.Gen: Seite: Sa e, 7 Heb. xi. 19. 

8 Rom. iv. rr. 9 Gen, Xvil- 5: Tt Rom.aiv. 17318: 

2 Jer. iv. 4: Circumeise yourselics to the Lord, and take away 
the foreskins of your heart. The Septuagint agrees closely with 
the Hebrew, but Cyril quotes freely from memory. 

eae ll, Tiere, 4 Matt. xiv. 29. 

i eg Oa a 

his faith gradually 
drawn down with it. And when He saw 
his distress, Jesus who remedies the distresses 
of our souls, said, O thou of little faith, where- 
Jove didst thou doubts?) And being nerved again 
by Him who grasped his right hand, he had 
no sooner recovered his faith, than, led by the 
hand of the Master, he resumed the same 
walking upon the waters: for this the Gospel 
indirectly mentioned, saying, when they were 
gone up into the ship®, Vor it says not that 
Peter swam across and went up, but gives us 
to understand that, after returning the same 
distance that he went to meet Jesus, he went 
up again into the ship. 

8. Yea, so much power hath faith, that not 
the believer only is saved, but some have been 
saved by others believing. The paralytic 
in Capernaum was not a believer, but they 
believed who brought him, and let him down 
through the tiles7: for the sick man’s soul 
shared the sickness of his body. And think 
not that I accuse him without cause: the 
Gospel itself says, when Jesus saz, not his 
faith, but their faith, He saith to the sick of the 
palsy, Arise’ { The bearers believed, and the 
sick of the palsy enjoyed the blessing of the 
cure, 

9. Wouldest thou see yet more surely that 
some are saved by others’ faith? Lazarus 
died 9: one day had passed, and a second, and 
a third ; his sinewst were decayed, and cor- 
ruption was preying already upon his body. 
How could one four days dead believe, and 
entreat the Redeemer on his own behalf? 
But what the dead man lacked was supplied 
by his true sisters. For when the Lord was 
come, the sister fell down before Him, and 
when He said, Where have ye laid him? and 
she had made answer, Lord, by this time he 
stinketh » for he hath been four days dead, the 
Lord said, Zf thou belicve, thou shalt see the 
glory of God; as much as saying, Supply thou 
the dead man’s lack of faith: and the sisters’ 
faith had so much power, that it recalled the 
dead from the gates of hell. Have then 
men by believing, the one on behalf of the 
other, been able Ao raise ® the dead, and shalt 
not thou, if thou believe sincerely on thine 
own behalf, be much rather profited? Nay, 
even if thou be faithless, or of litle faith, the 
Lord is loving unto man; He condescends 
to thee on thy repentance: only on thy part 
say with honest mind, Lord, 7 belicve, help thou 
mine unbelicf3, But if thou thinkest that thou, 

5 Nark xiv. 34. Golly ae 

7 Mark ii. oh t Natie 1 2; Gs 9 John xi. 14—44. 

I yevpa. ‘Sine eat is the original meaning, the application 
to “ner Ves ag distinct organs of sensation, being later. 

2 For AvaATTHVAL, retained by the Benedictine E ditor and 
Reischl, read avagrqoat, with Roe, Casaubon, and Alexandrides. 
Mark ix. 2A 

a 31 

relaxed, his body also was) really art faithful, but hast not yet the fulness 

of faith, thou too hast need to acd like the 
Apostles, Lord, gacrease our faith+: for some 
part thou hast of thyself, but the greater part 
thou receivest from Him. 

to. lor the name of Faith is in the form of 
speech 5 one, but has two distinct senses. For 
there is one kind of faith, the dogmatic, in- 
volving an assent of the soul on some particular 
point: and it is profitable to the soul, as the 
Lord saith: fle that heareth Aly words, and 
believeth Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life, 
and cometh not into judgment®: and again, [fe 
that believeth tn the Son is not judzed, bui hath 
passed from death unto life7, Oh the great loving- 
kindness of God! For the righteous were 
many years in pleasing Hin: but what they 
succeeded in gaining by many years of well- 
pleasing ®, this Jesus now bestows on thee in 
a single hour. For if thou shalt believe that 
Jesus Christ is Lord, and that God raised Him 
from the dead, thou shalt be saved, and shalt 
be transported into Paradise by Him who 
brought in thither the robber. And doubt not 
whether it is possible; for He who on this 
sacred Golgotha saved the robber after one 
single hour of belief, the same shall save thee 
also on thy believing 9. 

But there 1s a second kind of faith, 
which is bestowed by Christ as a gift of grace. 
Lor to one ts given through the Spirit the word 
of wisdom, and to another the word of know- 
ledge according to the same Spirit: to another 
faith, by the same Spirit, and to another gifts 
of healing’, ‘Vhis faith then which is given of 
grace from the Spirit is not merely doctrinal, 
but also worketh things above iman’s power. 
For whosoever hath this faith, shall say fo 
this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, 
and tt shall remove. Yor whenever any one 
shall say this in faith, delieving that it cometh 
to pass, and shall not doubt in his heart, 
then receiveth he the grace. 

And of this faith it is said, Z/ ye haze faith 
as a grain of mustard seed3, For just as the 
grain of mustard seed is small in size, but 
fiery in its operation, and though sown in a 
small space has a circle of great branches, 
and when grown up 1s able even to shelter 
the fowls4; so, likewise, faith in the swiftest 
moment works the greatest effects in iy 

A Touke: xvii. 5? 

5 Kata THY Tpogyyoptay. Compare Aristotle, Categories, V. 
TO TXHMaTL THS Tpognyoplas. Cyril's descripti mn of. faith as a 
fold, and of dogmatic faith as an assent (cvyxaradeas) of the soul 
| to something as te scems to be derived from Clement of 
Alexandria, Strom. II. c. 12. Compare by all means Pearson 
on the Creed, Art JF. ery his Notes a, b, c. 

6 John v. 24. eb ite 18; 24. 

8 evapeotngews, Bened. and Reischl, with best MSS. 
and the earlier editions have €pevryjaews, “‘ searching.’ 

Milles 

9 Luke xnitt. ; the argument is used again in Cat. xiii. cas 
> Gor, xii. 8, a Narkgcns 23. 3 Matt. xvil. 20. 
4. Natt. -xiit. 32, 

to 

Oo 

CATECHE TICA 

| 
| 
i 

soul. For, when enlightened by faith, the soul 
hath visions of God, and as far as is possible 
beholds God, and ranges round the bounds of 
the universe, and before the end of this world 
already beholds the Judgment, and the payment 
of the promised rewards. Have thou therefore 
that faith in Him which cometh from thine own 
self, that thou mayest also receive from Him 
that faith which worketh things above man. 
12. But in learning the Faith and in profess- 
ine it, acquire and keep that only, which is 
now delivered® to thee by the Church, and 
which has been built up strongly out of all the 
Scriptures. For since all cannot read the Scrip- 
tures, some being hindered as to the knowledge 
of them by want of learning, and others by 
a want of leisure, in order that the soul may 
not perish from ignorance, we comprise the 
whole doctrine of the Faith in a few lnes. 
This summary I wish you both to commit to 
memory when I recite it7, and to rehearse 
it with all diligence among yourselves, not 
writing it out on paper’, but engraving it by 
the memory upon your heart9, taking care 
while you rehearse it that no Catechumen 
chance to overhear the things which have 
been delivered to you. I wish you also to 
keep this as a provision? through the whole 
course of your life, and beside this to receive 
no other, neither if we ourselves should change 
and contradict our present teaching, nor if an 

5S. Chrysostom (Hom. xxix. in 1 Cor xil. 9, zo) in like 
manner distinguishes dogmatic faith from the faith which is “the 
mother of miracles.” ‘Che former S. Cyril calls our own, not 
meaning that God’s help is not needed for it, but because, as he 
has shewn in § ro, it consists in the mind’s assent, and voluntary 
approval of the doctrines set before it: but the latter is a pure 
gift of grace working in man without his own help. Compare 
Apostolic Constitutions, VIN. c. 1 

6 This Lecture was to be immediately followed by a first reci- 
tation of the Creed. See Index, Creed. 

7 én’ auras THs Aéfews. ‘in ipsa lectione” (Milles): ‘‘ipsis 
verbis” (Bened.): ‘fin the very phrase” (R. W. C.). See below, 
note 4. 

8 Compare S. August. Serm. cexii., ‘At the delivery of the 
Creed,” and Index, Creed. 

9 Compare Aeschylus, Prometheus V. 7892 jv eyypahov av 
pejpoour O€ATOLs Ppsvar. 

1 édddiov, Viaticun, i.e. provision for a journey, and here for 
the journey through this life. It is applied metaphorically by 
other Fathers (a) in this general sense, to the reading of Holy 
Scripture, Prayer, and Baptism, and (b) in a special sense to the 
Holy Eucharist when administered to the sick and dying, as 
a preparation for departure to the life after death. Council of 
Nicawa (A.p. 325), Canon xiii, ‘* With respect to the dying, the 
old rule of the Church should continue to be observed, which 
forbids that any one who is on the point of death should be 
deprived of the last and most necessary vfaticume (epodior).” | 

LEC rR S. 

adverse angel, transformed info an angel of light?, 
should wish to lead you astray. or though 
zw or an aneel from heaven preach to you any 
other gospel than thal ye have rec Me a gi 0273 
be to you anathema 3, So for the present listen 
while [ simply say the Creed 4, and commit it 
to memory ; but at the proper season Creel 
the confirmation out of Holy Scripture of each 

part of the contents. Jl’or the articles of the 
Faith were not composed as seemed good to 

men; but the most important points collected 
out of all the Scripture make up one complete 
teaching of the Faith. And just as the mus- 
tard seed in one small grain contains many 
branches, so also this Faith has embraced in 
few words all the knowledge of godliness in 
the Old and New ‘Testaments. ‘Take heed 
then, brethren, and fold fast the traditions 5 
which ye now receive, and wrife them on the 
table of your heart. 

3. Guard them with reverence, lest per 
chance the enemy despoil any who have 
grown slack ; or lest some heretic pervert any 
of the truths delivered to you. For faith is 
like putting money into the bank7, even as 
we have now done ; but from you God requires 
the accounts of the deposit. JZ charge yout, as 
the Apostle saith, defore God, aho guickeneth 
all things, and Christ Jesus, who before Pontius 
Pilate witnessed the good confession, that ye keep 
this faith which is committed to you, w7t/out 
spot, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ®, A treasure of life has now been com- 
mitted to thee, and the Master demandeth the 
deposit at His appearing, wich mm Lis ow 
times He shall shew, Who is the blessed and only 
Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords ; 
Who only hath immortality, dwelling in light 
which no man can opproach unto; Whom no 
man hath seen nor can see. To Whom be 
glory, honour, and poiver? for ever and ever, 
Amen. 

2 

2 Cor, xi. 14- 3, Gal. 1-3, os, 
4 én auras THs Aégews. (Bened. Reischl. with best MSS.} 
ravrns THS A€gews, ‘this my recitation, ’ (Milles). 
5 2 Thess. it. x3. Compare Cat. xxiil. 23. 
6 Prov. vii. 3. Note 9, above. 
7 Matt. xxv. 27; Luke xix. 2 
Be thou a good banker.” 
Ss Din, Sexy SL oes 

os 

3. See note on Catech. vi. 36: 

6c 

9a Cris 98, 8S: 

Pe ink 

On THE Artic, I BeLieve IN ONE 
ALSO CONCERNING HERESIES. 

CONCERNING tHE Unrry or Gop’, 
Gop. 

ISAIAH xly. 

Srnctify yourselves unto Me, O islands. Israel is saved by the Lord with an ev 

VI. 

16, 17. (Sept) 

erlasting 

salvation ; they shall not be ashamed, neither shall they be confounded for ever, Exe. 

1. Dilessed be the God and Father of our Lora 
fesus Christ?. Blessed also be His Only-begot- 
ten Son’. For with the thought of God let 
the thought of Zzther at once be joined, that 
the ascription of glory to the Father and the 
Son may be made indivisible For the Father 
hath not one glory, and the Son another, but 
one and the same, since He is the I’ather’s 
Only-begotten Son ; and when the Vather is 
glorified, the Son also shares the glory with 
Him, because the glory of the Son flows from 
His Father’s honour: and again, when the Son 
is glorified, the Father of so great a bless- 
ing is highly honoured. 

2. Now though the mind is most rapid in its 
thoughts, yet the tongue needs words, and a 
long recital of intermediary speech. For the 
eye cmbraces at once a multitude of the 

T Iepi @cod Movapylas. The word 
(Polit. 291 Cc), Aristotle CPott.- Vite ivi’ tr. ‘et66¢ pmovapylas 
Bagtdcxys); Philo Judaus (de Circumcisione, 823 de Monarchia, 
‘Titul.), means ‘‘sole government,” Compare ‘Tertullian (adv. 
Praxean. c. ili.): ‘If L have gained any knowledge of either 
language, I am sure that Movapx(a has no other meaning than 
‘single and individual rule.” Athanasius (de Decretis Nicene 
Synodt, § 26) has preserved part of an Epistle of Dionysius, Bishop 
of Rome (259—269, a.p.), against the Sabellians: * It will be 
natural for me now to speak against those who divide, and cut into 
pieces, and destroy that most sacred doctrine of the Church of God, 
the Monarchia, making it, as it were, three powers and divided 
hypostases, and three Godheads ;" (ééd.): “It is the doctrine ofthe 
presumptuous Marcion to sever and divide the Monarchia into 
three origins (apxds).’? We see here the sense which Morapxta 
had acquired in Christian Theology : it meant the “ Unity of God,”’ 
as the one principle and origin of all things. ‘By the Monarchy 
is meant the doctrine that the Second and Third Persons in the 
Kver-blessed Trinity are ever to be referred in our thoughts to the 
First, as the Fountain of Godhead” (Newman, Athanas. de De- 
crvetis Nic. Syn. § 26, note h). Justin Martyr (Euseb. 47.4. IV. 
18), and Trenwus (2béd¢. V. 20), had each written a treatise mept 
Movapxtas. On the history of Monarchianism see, in this Series, 
Athanasius, Pyolegomena, p. xxiii. 599. ae OO ay 

3 This clause is omitted in some MSS. Various forms of the 
Doxology were adopted in Cyril’s time by various parties in the 
Church. Thus Theodoret (//ist. Eccles. Wc. 19) relates that 
Leontius, Bishop of Antioch, a.p. 348—357, observing that the 
Clergy and the Congregation were divided into two parties, the 
one using the form ‘and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,” the 
other *‘ through the Son, in the Holy Ghost,” used to repeat the 
Doxology silently, so that those who were near could hear only 
“world without end.” 

The form which was regarded as the most orthodox, and adopted 
in the Liturgies, ran thus: ‘*Glory to the Father, and to the Son, 
and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to the ages of the ages.” 
See Suicer’s Thesaurus, Aofodoyla. 

VOU V ile 

HMovapxta, as used by Plato 

|‘starry quire ;’ but when any one wishes to 

describe them one by one, which is the Morn- 
jing-star, and which, the Evening-star, and 
which each one of them, he has need of many 
words, In like manner again the mind in the 
briefest moment compasses earth and sea and 
all the bounds of the universe ; but what it 
conceives in an instant, it uses many words to 
describe +. Yet forcible as is the example I 
have mentioned, still it is after all weak and 
inadequate. For of God we speak not all we 
ought (for that is known to Him only), but so 
much as the capacity of human nature has 
received, and so much as our weakness can 
bear. For we explain not what God js 
but candidly confess that we have not exact 
knowledge concerning Him. For in what 
concerns God to confess our ignorance is 
the best knowledges. ‘Therefore masiify the 
Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name 
together °,—all of us in common, for one alone is 
powerless ; nay rather, even if we be all united 
together, we shall yet not do it as we ought. 
[ mean not you only who are here present, 
but even if all the nurslings of the whole 
Church throughout the world, both that which 
now is and that which shall be, should meet 
together, they would not be able worthily to 
| sing the praises of their Shepherd. 

3. A great and honourable man was Abra- 

4 Irenzus II. xxviii. 4: “But since God is all mind, all reason, 
all active Spirit, all light, and always exists as one and the same, 
such conditions and divisions (of Operation) cannot fittingly be as- 
cribed to Him. For our tongue, as being made of flesh, is not 
able to minister to the rapidity of man’s sense, because that is 
of a spiritual nature; for which reason our speech is restrained 
(s¢ffocatur) within us, and is not at once expressed as it has been 
conceived in the mind, but is uttered by successive efforts, just as 
the tongue is able to serve it.” 

5 Tertullian, Afologeticus, § 17: ‘That which is infinite is 
known only to itself. “his it is which gives some notion of God, 
while yet beyond all our conceptions—our very incapacity of fully 
grasping Him affords us the idea of what He really is. Cae 
presented to our minds in His transcendent greatness, as at once 
known and unknown.” Cf. Phil. Jud. de Monarch. 1. 4; Hooker, 
Fccles. Pol, 1. ii. 3 : “Whom although to know be life, and joy 
to make mention of His name; yet our soundest knowledge is to 
know that we know Him not as He is, neither can know Him.” 

OOPSOXXNIV 3s 

D 

CATHUCHETICS 

4 

1 

ham, but only great in comparison with men 3 
and when he came 
the truth eandidly he saith, 2 am carl and 
ashes 7, : 
cease, lest he should call himself by the name | 
of that great clement; but he added ‘Sand | 
ashes, that he might represent his perishable | 
and frail nature. Is there anything, he saith, 
smaller or lighter than ashes? Jor take, saith | 
he, the comparison of ashes to a house, of 
a house to a city, a city to a province, a pro-| 
vince to the Roman Empire, and the Roman | 
Empire to the whole earth and all its bounds, | 
and the whole earth to the heaven in which it} 
is ermbosomed ;—the earth, which bears the 
same proportion to the heaven as the centre 
to the whole circumference of a wheel, for the 
earth is no more than this in comparison with 
the heaven®: consider then that this first 
heaven which is seen is less than the second, 
and the second than the third, for so far 
Seripture has named them, not that they are 
only so many, but because it was expedicnt 
for us to know so many only. And when in 
thought thou hast surveyed all the heavens, 
not yet will even the heavens be able to 
praise God as He is, nay, not if they should 
resound with a voice louder than thunder. 
But if these great vaults of the heavens can- 
not worthily sing God’s praise, when shall 
‘earth and ashes, the smallest and least of 
things existing, be able to send up a worthy 
hymn of praise to God, or worthily to speak 
of God, that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, 
and holdeth the inhabitants thereof as grass- 
hoppers %, 

4. Tfany man attempt to speak of God, let 
him first describe the bounds of the earth. 
Thou dwellest on the earth, and the limit of 
this earth which is thy dwelling thou knowest 
not: how then shalt thou be able to form 
a worthy thought of its Creator? Thou be- 
holdest the stars, but their Maker thou be- 
holdest not: count these which are visible, 
and then describe Him who is invisible, H/o 
telleth the number of the stars, and calleth 
them all by their names*, Violent rains lately 
came pouring down upon us, and nearly 

before God, then speaking | been pourec 
now but in all time. 
He did not say ‘earth? and then | God, 

destroyed us: number the drops in this city 
alone: nay, I say not in the city, but number 
the drops on thine own house for one single 
hour, if thou canst: but thou canst not. 
Learn then thine own weakness ; learn from 
this instance the mightiness of God: for //e 

7 Geng Xvill.-27: 

8 ‘The opinion of Aristarchus of Samos, asstated by Archimedes , 
(Arenarius, p. 320, Oxon), was that the sphere of the fixed stars | 

was su large, that it bore to the earth’s orbit the same proportion 
as a sphere to its centre, or more correctly (as Archimedes cx- 
plains) the same proportion as the earth’s orbit round the sii tu 
the carth itself. Compare Cat. xv. 24. 

[aa el, eee ts sexlea. 4. 

(Pee 8 A Goe Sa eer 

hath numbered the drops of rain*, which have 

1 down on all the earth, not only 

The sun is a work of 
which, great though it be, is but a spot 
in comparison with the whole heaven ; first 
gaze stedtastly upon the sun, and then curiously 
scan the Lord of the sun. Seek not the Hines 

‘that are too deep for thee, neither search out the 

thines that are above thy strength : what is com- 
manided thee, think thereupon >. 

5. But some one will say, If the Divine 
substance is incomprehensible, why then dost 
thou discourse of these things? So then, 
because I cannot drink up all the river, am 
I not even to take in moderation what 1s 
expedient for me? Because with ¢yes 30 

constituted as mine I cannot take in all the 

sun, am I not even to look upon him enough 
to satisfy my wants? Or again, because I 
have entered into a great garden, and cannot 
eat all the supply of fruits, wouldst thou have 
me go away altogether hungry? I praise and 
glorify Him that made us; for it is a divine 
command which saith, Let every breath praise 
the Lord+. Tam attempting now to glorily 
the Lord, but not to describe Him, know- 
ing nevertheless that I shall fall short of 
glorifying Him worthily, yet decming it a work 
of piety even to attempt itat all. For the Lord 
Jesus encourageth my weakness, by saying, 
No man hath secn God at any tite >. 

6. What then, some man will say, is it 
not written, Ze ttle ones’ Angels de always 
behold the face of My Father which is in heaven” } 
Yes, but the Angels see God not as He is, but 
as far as they themselves are capable. For it 
is Jesus Himself who saith, Nol that any man 
hath seen the Father, save Ile which is ef Ged, 
Tle hath seen the Father7, The Angels therefore 
behold as much as they can bear, and Arch- 
angels as much as they are able; and Thrones 
and Dominions more than the former, but yet 
less than His worthiness: for with the Son 
the Holy Ghost alone can rightly behold Him: 
for He searcheth all thines, and knoweth even the 
deep things of God *®: as indeed the Only-begotten 
Son also, with the Holy Ghost, knoweth the 
Father fully: For nether, saith He, knowielh 
any man the Lather, save the Son, and he to 
zhom the Son will reveal Him. Yor He 
fully beholdeth, and, according as each can 
bear, revealeth God through the Spirit: since 
the Only-begotten Son together with the Holy 

Ghost is a partaker of the Father's Godhead. 

2 Job xxxvi. 27: dpiOunrai 62 ab7@ orayoves verov. R.V. For 
| Hedraweth up the drops of water. 
| S$ Bedlite: ily ox; 22.5 ace lisc: 

5 Johni.18, ‘hey are the Evangelist’s own words, 

6 Matt. xvill. ro. 7 lchnya 46: Yep Corl, 108 

Se, Fy 

13 Ae ah Bi 

Me, whot was begotten knoweth Him who 
begat; and He Who begat knoweth Him who 
is begotten, Since Angels then are ignorant 
(tur to each according to his own capacity 
doth the Only-begotten reveal Him through 
the Holy Ghost, as we have said), let no 
man be ashamed to confess his ignorance. 
I am speaking now, as all do on occasion: 
but how we speak, we cannot tell: how then 
can I declare Him who hath given us speech ? 
I who have a soul, and cannot tell its distinc. 
tive properties, how shall I be able to de- 
scribe its Giver ? 

7. For devotion it suffices us simply to 
know that we have a God; a God who is 
One, a living’, an everliving God; always 
like unto Himself3 ; who has no Father, none 
mightier than Himsclf, no successor to thrust 
Him out from His kingdom: Who in name 
is manifold, in power infinite, in substance 
uniform + For though He is called Good, 
and Just, and Almighty and Sabaoths, He 
is not on that account diverse and various ; 
but being one and the same, He sends forth 
countless operations of His Godhead, not 
excecding here and deficient there, but being 
in al things like unto Himself. Not ereat 
in loving-kindness only, and little in wisdom, 
but with wisdom and loving-kindness in 
equal power: not seeing in part, and in part 
devoid of sight; but being all eye, and all 
car, and all mind ®: not like us perceiving in 
part and in part not knowing; for such a 
statement were blasphemous, and unworthy 
of the Divine substance. He foreknoweth 
the things that be; He is Holy, and Almighty, 
and excelleth all in goodness, and majesty, 
and wisdom: of Whom we can declare neither 
beginning, nor form, nor shape. Vor ye have 
neither heard His voice at any time, nor seen 
f1is shape7, saith Holy Scripture. Wherefore 
Moses saith also to the Israelites: And take 
Je good heed to your own souls, for ye saw no 
sumilitude®, or if it is wholly impossible to 

sae 
ele) 

[sa par | 
[imagine His likeness, how shall thought come 
inear Tis substance ? 

| 8. There have been many imavinations by 
Many persons, and all have failed. Some 
ine thought that God is fire; others that He 
(Is, as it were, a man with wings, because of a 
true text ql understood, Zhou shalt hide me 
under the shadow of Thy wings They forgot 
that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten, 
speaks in like manner concerning Himself to 
Jerusalem, fou often would T have gathered 
thy children together, even as a hen doth gather 
her chickens under her wings, and ye would 
not*®. For whereas God’s protecting power was 
conceived as wings, they failing to understand 
this sank down to the level of things human, 
and supposed that the Unsearchable exists in 
the likeness of man. Some again dared to say 
that He has seven eyes, because it is written, 
seven eyes of the Lord looking upon the whole 
earth", Wor if He has but seven eyes surround- 
ing Him in part, His seeing is therefore partial 
and not perfect: but to say this of God is 
blasphemous; for we must believe that God 
is in all things perfect, according to our 
Saviour’s word, which saith, Your Father tn 
heaven ts perfect? : perfect in sight, perfect in 
power, perfect in greatness, perfect in fore- 
knowledge, perfect in goodness, perfect in 

justice, perfect in loving-kindness : not circum- 
scribed in any space, but the Creator of all 
space, existing in all, and circumscribed by 
none3. Lfeaven is His throne, but higher is He 
that sitteth thereon : and earth is His footstool 4, 
but His power reacheth unto things under the 
earth, 

g. One He is, everywhere present, beholding 
all things, perceiving all things, creating all 
things through Christ: for all things were 
made by Lim, and without Him was not 
anything mades. A fountain of every good, 
abundant and unfailing, a river of blessings, an 
eternal light of never-failing splendour, an 
insuperable power condescending to our in- 
firmitics : whose very Name we dare not hear ©. 
IVilt thou find a footstep of the Lord? saith 

1 The Benedictine and earlier printed texts read 6 yerrvipbeis 
[ara0os mpo tov xpdver atwviwr}: but the words in brackets are 
not found inthe best MSS. ‘The false grammar betrays a spurious 
insertion, which also interrupts the sense. On the meaning of the 
phrase 0 yervyOets ama@as, see note on vii. 5: ob madec Tarhp 
yevomevos. 2 Gr. ov7a, det Ova, 

Tren. If. xiii. 3: “ He is altogether like and equal to Him- 
self ; since He is all sense, and all spirit, and all feeling, and all 
thought, and all reason, and all hearing, and all ear, and all eye, 
and all light, and all a fount of every good,-—even as the religious 
and pious are wont to speak of God.” 

4 povoedy. A Platonic word, Phedo, 801n: 76 pév Belo Kai 
abavatrw Kat vonTo Kat povoedet Kai adiadvta Kal Gel woravtws 
KaTa Ta AVTA EXOVTL CAYTH OMOLOTATOV Eivar WuyA. See Index, 
** Hypostasis.” 

5 Tren. I]. xxxv. 3: “If any object that in the Hebrew lan- 
guage different expressions occur, such as Sabaoth, Klée, Adonai, 
and all other such terms, striving to prove from these that there 
are cifferent powers and Gods, let them learn that all expressions 
of this kind are tithes and announcements of one and the same 
Being.” 

© See the passages of Irenaeus quoted above, § 2 note 4, and § 7 
note 3. 7 Jonn v. 37. ® Deut. iv. rs, 

i=) 

Job, ev hast thou attained unto the least things 
which (he Almighty hath made7? Vf the least of 

| His works are incomprehensible, shall He be 

o-Pa. xvii. 8, He TL AGty eel a, 

E Leen AV. TO. 2 Niatticyy 46. k 

3 Philo Judaus (Leg. Adleg. 1. 14, p. 52). @eod yap ose O 
agvpmas KOTMOS alloy av ein xYwplov Kat évdcairnua, €met avros 
€avT@ THTOs. So Sir Isaac Newton, at the end of the Principia, 
asserts that God by His eternal and infinite existence constitutes 
Time and Space: ** Non est duratio vel spatium, sed durat et 
adest, et existendo semper et ubique spatium et durationem con- 
stituit.” Selvi. 1 > Jonny. s: ; 

6 ‘The sacred name (F]}FT) was not pronounced, but Adonai 
was substituted. t : 

7 Job xi. 7(R.V.): Canst thou by searching find out God? 
Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? Cyril seems 
to have understood ra €oyara as ‘the least,” not as ‘* the utmost. 

= 

36 CATECHLTECA 

| 
comprehended who made them all? Jive hath | 
wot seer, and car hath nel heard, neither have| 
entered tnle the heart ef man, the things whitch | 
God huh prepared for them that love Fig? Tt 
the things which God hath prepared are 
incomprehensible to our thoughts, how can we 
comprehend with our mind Himself who hath 
prepared them? O the depth of the riches, and 
crstom, and knowledse of God! How un- 
searchable are His judgments, and Lis ways 
past finding oul?! saith the Apostle. If His 
judgments and [lis ways are incomprehensible, 
can He Himself be comprehended ? 

ro. God then being thus great, and yct) 

ereater, (for even were I to change my whole 
substance into tongue, 
excellence : nay more, not even if all Angels 
should assemble, could they ever speak His 

worth), God being therefore so great In good-|that He might 

ness and majesty, man hath yet dared to say to 
astone that he hath graven, //ou art my God *°! 
O monstrous blindness, that from majesty 
so great came down so low! ‘The tree which 
was planted by God, and nourished by the 
rain, and afterwards burnt and turned into 
ashes by the fire,—this is addressed as God, 
and the true God is despised. But the 
wickedness of idolatry grew yet more prodigal, 
and cat, and dog, and wolf! were worshipped 
instead of God: the man-eating lion * also was 
worshipped instead of God, the most loving 
friend of man. ‘The snake and the serpent, 
counterfeit. of him who thrust us out of 
Paradise, were worshipped, and He who 
planted Paradise was despised. And I am 
ashamed to say, and yet do say it, even onions 4 
were worshipped among some. Wine was given 
to make glad the heart of mans: and Dionysus 
(Bacchus) was worshipped instead of God. 
God made corn by saying, Let the earth bring 
forth grass, yielding seed after his kind and after 
his likeness, that bread may strengthen man’s 
heart7?: why then was Demeter (Ceres) wor- 

8 x Cor. ii. 9. 9 Rom xi. 33. 10 Ts, xliv: 17. 

1 The cat was sacred to the goddess Pasht, called by the 
Greeks Bubastis, and identified by Herodotus (ii. 137) with Ar- 
temis or Diana. Cats were embalmed after death, and their 
mummies are found at various places, but especially at Bubastis 
(Herod. il 67 . 

“The Dogs are interred in the cities to which they belong, 
in sacred burial-places”? (//eved. ii. 67), but chiefly at Cynopolis 
(‘* City of Dogs’’?) where the dog-headed deity Anubis was wor- 
shipped. 

Mummies of wolves are found in chambers excavated in the 
rocks at Lycopolis, where Osiris was worshipped under the symbol 
ofa wolf. P 

2 ‘The lion was held sacred at I.eontopolis (Strabo, xvii. p. 812). 
3 “In the neighbourhood of Thebes there are sacred serpents 

perfectly barmiess to man. ‘These they bury in the temple of 

Zeus, the god to whom they are sacred.” (//erod. il. 74.) 

At Epidaurus in Argolis. the serpent was held sacred as the | With his enormous brood” (/a7. Dosts de .sie): 
Clement of Alexandria (/2-rhort. c. il.) 

symbol of Aesculapius. 
gives a fuller list of animals worshipped by various nations. Com- 
pare also Clement. Recogn. V. 20. 
4 Juvenal Sat. xv. 7- 
Illic aeluros, hic piscem fluminis, illic 
-Oppida tota canem venerantur, nemo Dianam. 
Possum et caepe nefas violare et franzere morsu, 
S: Ps.cine a2 Gen. i. 11. 7 BS. Cyst 

| 
| 
| 
| 

LC LECT URS. 

tozether even to this day: how then was 
LIcphaestus (Vulcan) the creator of fire 2 

it. Whence came the polythcistic error of 
the Grecks °? God has no body: whence then 
the adulterics alleged among those who are by 
them called gods? I say nothing of the trans- 
formations of Zeus into a swan: Tam ashamed 
to speak of his transformations into a bull: for 
bellowings are unworthy of a god. The god 
of the Greeks has been found an adulterer, yet 
are they not ashamed: for if he is an adul- 
terer let him not be called a god. ‘They tell 
also of deaths2, and falls', and thunder- 

strokes? of their gods. Scest thou from how 

shipped ? Fire cometh forth from striking stones 

I could not speak His) great a height and how low they have fallen ? 
] cores wae ’ iS 

‘Was it without reason then that the Son of 

|God came down from heaven? or was. it 

heal so great a wound? 
Was it without reason that the Son came? 
or was it in order that the Father might 
be acknowledged? Thou hast learned what 
moved the Only-begotten to come down 
from the throne at God’s right hand. ‘The 
Father was despised, the Son must needs 
correct the error: for He THROUGH 
WHOM ALL THINGS WERE MADE 
must bring them all as offerings to the Lord 
of all. The wound must be healed: for what 
could be worse than this disease, that a stone 
should be worshipped instead of God? 

| 
| 

OF HeErESIES. 

12, And not among the heathen only did 
‘the devil make these assaults; for many of 
those who are falsely called Christians, and 
wrongfully addressed by the sweet name of 
Christ, have ere now impiously dared to 
banish God from His own creation. J mean 
the brood of heretics, those most ungodly men 

8 The early Creeds of the astern Churches, like that which 
Eusebius of Czesarea proposed at Nicwa, expressly declare the 
unity of God, in opposition both to the heathen Polytheism, and to 
the various heresies which introduced two or more Gods. Sce 
below in this Lecture, §§ 12—18; and compare Athan. (contra 
Gentes, § 6, s7q.)- 

9 Clement of Alexandria (Z.vhort. cap. ii. § 37), quotes a pas- 
sage from a hymn of Callimachus, implying the death of Zeus: 
© For even thy tomb, O king, 

The Cretans fashioned.” 
Adonis, or ‘‘'Thammuz yearly wounded,’? was said to live and 
die in alternate years. 

1 By the word ‘falls’ (amorrmaets) Cyril evidently refers to 
the story of Hephaestus, or Vulcan, to which Miltoa alludes 
(Paradise Lest, 1. 740):— 

“Men call’d him Mulciber, and how he fell 
From heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove 
Sheer o'er the crystal battlements from morn 
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve, 
| A summer's day.” 
| 2 The ‘thunder-strokes” refer to ‘ Titan heaven's first-born, 
Che Naineis 

| 

len. 3, '580:2— 
| “Hic genus antiquum Terre, Titania pubes, 
Fulmine dejecti fundo volvuntur in imo.” 
Ibid. wv. 585 mad 
“ Vidi et crudeles dantem Salmonea penas, 
Dum flammas Jovis et sonitus imitatur Olympi.” 
Clem. Alex. (Zvhort. LH. § 37):-~** Aesculapius lies struck with 
lining in the regions cf Cynosuris.” Cf. Virg. Ae. vil. 770 SS- 

RB RT RE 
aT 

of evil name, pretending to be friends. of, 
Christ but utterly hating Him. For he who| 
blasphemes the Father of the Christ is an 
enemy of the Son. ‘These men have dared to 
speak of two Godheads, one good and one 
evil3! O monstrous blindness! If a Godhead, 
then assuredly good. But if not good, why 
called a Godhead? For if goodness is an attri- 
bute of God; if loving-kindness, beneficence, 
almighty power, are proper to God, then of 
two things one, either in calling Him God let 
the name and operation be united ; or if they 
would rob Him of His operations, let them 
not give Him the bare name. 

13. Heretics have dared to say that there 
are two Gods, and of good and evil two 
sources, and these unbegotten. If both are! 
unbegotten it is certain that they are also 
equal, and both mighty. How then doth 
the light destroy the darkness? And do| 
they ever exist together, or are they separ-| 
ated? ‘Together they cannot be; for wéat| 
Kllowship hath light with darkness? saith! 
the Apostle+, But if they are far from each 
other, it is certain that they hold also each his 
own place; and if they hold their own separate 
places, we are certainly in the realm of one 
God, and certainly worship one God. For 
thus we must conclude, even if we assent 
to their folly, that we must worship one 
God. Let us examine also what they say 
of the good God. Hath He power or no| 
power? If He hath power, how did evil arise, 
against His will? And how doth the evil! 
substance intrude, if He be not willing? For'| 
if He knows but cannot hinder it, they charge | 
Him with want of power; but if He has the. 
power, yet hinders not, they accuse Him of, 
treachery. Mark too their want of sense. At) 
one time they say that the Evil One hath no 
communion with the good God in the creation 
of the world; but at another time they say 
that he hath the fourth part only. Also they 
say that the good God is the Father of Christ ; 
but Christ they call this sun. If, therefore, 
according to them, the world was made by the 
Evil One, and the sun is in the world, how is 
the Son of the Good an unwilling slave in the. 
kingdom of the Evil? We bemire ourselves | 
in speaking of these things, but we do it lest | 
any of those present should from ignorance | 
fall into the mire of the herctics. I know | 
that I have defiled my own mouth and the 

| 

3 The theory of two Geds, one good and the other evil, was 
held by Cerdo, and Marcion (Hippslytus, Refee. omninin Heer. 
VII. cap. 17: Irenzeus, III. xxv. 3, quoted in note on Cat, iv. 4). 
The Manichees also held that the Creator of the world was dis- 
tinct from the Supreme God (Alexander Lycop. de Manicheorinin 
Sententits, cap. ili.). 

42C 1 
heresy of Manes. See § 36, note 3, at the end of this Lecture ; 
also Cat, xi. 21. and Cat. xv. 3. 

Teen che bee ye 3 

Cor. vi. 14. Cyril's description applies especially to the | 

it is expedient. 
hear absurdities 

ears of my listeners: yet 
lor it is much better to 
charged against others, than to fall into them 
from ignorance: far better that thou know 
the mire and hate it, than unawares fall into it. 
For the godless system of the heresies is a 
road with many branches, and whenevera man 
has strayed from the one straight way, then he 
falls down precipices again and again, 

14. The inventor of all heresy was Simon 
Magus 5: that Simon, who in the Acts of the 
Apostles thought to purchase with money the 
unsaleable grace of the Spirit, and heard the 
words, Zhou hast neither part nor lot in this 
matter °, and the rest: concerning whom also it 
is written, Zhey went out from us, but they were 
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would 
have remained with us7, This man, after he 
had been cast out by the Apostles, came to 
Rome, and gaining over one Helena a harlot %, 
vas the first that dared with blasphemous 
mouth to say that it was himself who appeared 
on Mount Sinai as the lather, and afterwards 
appeared among the Jews, not in real flesh 
but in seeming9, as Christ Jesus, and afterwards 
as the Holy Spirit whom Christ promised to 
send as the Paraclete*. And he so deceived 
the City of Rome that Claudius set up his 
statue, and wrote beneath it, in the language 
of the Romans, “ Simoni Deo Sancto,” which 
being interpreted signifies, “‘I'o Simon the 
Tioly God *.” 

5 So Irenzeus (I. xxiii. 2) says that “fron this Simon of Samaria 

all kinds of heresies derive their origin.’ 

© Acts viii. 18—2r. 7 1 John ii. 19. 
8 Trenzus (I. xxiii. 2): ‘ Having purchased irom Tyre, a city 
of Phoenicia, a certain harlot named Helena, he used to carry her 

about with him, declaring that this woman was the first conception 

of his mind, the mother of all, by whom in the beginning he 
conceived in his mind the creation of Angels and Archangels.’’ 

9 Cf. Epiphan. (//eves. p. 55, B): ‘He said that he was the 
Son, and had not really suffered, but only in appearance (Soxyjer).” 

t0 Trenaeus (1. xxiii. 1): ‘‘ He taught that it was himself who 
appeared among the Jews as the Son, and descended in Samaria 
as the Father, but came to other nations as the Holy Spirit.’’ 

Cyril here departs from his authority by substituting Mount 
Sinai for Samaria, and thereby falls into error. Simon had first 
appeared in Samaria, being a native of Gitton: moreover in claim- 
ing to be the Father he meant to set himself far above the inferior 
Deity who had given the Law on Sinai, saying that he was “the 
highest of all Powers, that is the Father who is over all.” 

1 “Justin Martyr in his first Apology, addressed to Antoninus 
Pius, writes thus (c. 26): ‘‘There was one Simon a Samaritan, 
of the village called Gitton, who in the reign of Claudius Cesar, 
and in your royal city of Rome, did mighty feats of magic by the 
art of demons working in him. He was considered a god, and 
as a god was honoured among you with a statue, which statue 
was set up in the river Tiber between the two bridges, and bears 
this inscription in Latin: 

Stioné Deo Sancto; 
which is, 
To Simon the holy God. 

“The substance of this story is repeated by Irenzus (adv. 
Her, 1. xxii. 1), and by Vertullian (10d. c. 13), who reproaches 
the Romans for installing Simon Magus in their Pantheon, and 
giving him a statue and the title ‘ Holy God.’ 

“In A.D. 1574, a stone, which had formed the base of a statue, 
was dug up on the site described by Justin, the Island in the Tiber, 
bearing an inscription—‘Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrum, @&e:? 
Hence it has been supposed that Justin mistook a statue of the 
Sabine God, ‘Semo Sancus,’ for one of Simon Magus. See the 

notes in Otto’s Justin Martyr, and Stieren’s Irenzus. 

“On the other hand Tillemont (JZesodvres, t. ii. p. 482) maintains 
that Justin in an Apology addressed to the emperor and written 

| in Rome itself cannot reasonably be supposed to have fallen into 

ie) 
8) 

CATECHETICAL- 201 URES, 
is, As the delusion was extending, Bred ferther3, And he who says again that the 
and Paul, a noble pair, chief rulers of the| Father is one, and the maker of the world 
Church, arrived and sct the error right? ; andjanother, Opposes the Son when He says, // 
when the supposed god Simon wished to shew | Hex Ged so clothes the grass of the field which 
himself off, they straightway shewed him as a|foday és, aad to-morrow ts cast into the furnace 
corpse. For Simon promised to rise aloft to}of fire+; and, Il’he maketh Eis sun to vise on 
heaven, and came riding in a daemons’ chariot | he evil amd on the good, and sendeth rain on the 
on the air; but the servants of God fell on) just and on the unjust. Here again is a second 
their knees, and having shewn that agreement ‘inventor of more mischief, this Marcion. 
of which Jesus spake, that Zf fio of you shall For being confuted by the testimonies from 
agree concerning anytiting that they shall ash. the Old ‘Testament which are quoted in the 
it shall be done unto them, they launched the) New, he was the first who dared to cut those 
weapon of their concord in- prayer auainst testimonies out®, and leave the preaching of 
Magus, and struck him down to the earth. | the word of faith without witness, thus effacing 
And marvellous though it was, yet no marvel. | the true God: and sought to undermine the 
For Peter was there, who carricth the keys of |Church’s faith, as if there were no heralds 
heaven +: and nothing wonderful, for Paul was) of it. 
theres, who was caugAt up to the third heaven, 17. He again was succeeded by another, 
and into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, | Basilides, of evil name, and dangerous cha- 
which it is not lawful for a man to utter”. | racter, a preacher of impurities 7. “Phe contest 
These brought the supposed God down from | of wickedness was aided also by Valentinus °, a 
the sky to earth, thence to be taken down to) preacher of thirty gods. ‘The Greeks tell of but 
the regions below the earth, In this man first! few: and the man who was called—but more 
the serpent of wickedness appeared; but when | truly was not—a Christian extended the delu- 
one head had been cut off, the root of wicked-| sion to full thirty. He says, too, that Bythus the 
ness was found again with many heads, Abyss (for it became him as being an abyss of 

16. For Cerinthus? made havoc of the Church, | wickedness to begin his teaching from the 
and Menander 8, and Carpocrates®, Ebionites'| Abyss) begat Silence, and of Silence begat 
also, and Marcion 2, that mouthpiece of ungod-| the Word. This Bythus was worse than the 
liness. For he who proclaimed different] Zeus of the Greeks, who was united to his 
gods, one the Good, the other the Just, | sister ; for Silence was said to be the child of 
contradicts the Son when He says, O righteous| Bythus. Dost thou see the absurdity invested 

tl | ith a show of Chiistanity? Wait a jit 
80 manifest alt CrFOr, | Whichever view we take of Justin's accuracy and thou wilt be shocked at his impicty ; for 
concerning the inscription and the statue, there is nothing im- ‘ : 
prpbable im his statement that Simon Magus — at pe oe he asserts that of this Bythus were begotten 
ign of Caine.” (Faced Ly perm sim fram the Speke’ | ciaht Acons ; and of them, ten ; and of them, 

2 ‘Justin says not one word about St. Peter's alleged visit} other twelve, male and female. But whence 
to Rome, and his encounter with Simon Magus.’ But “‘ Eusebius | - : a> ' era 4 : pa 
in his Ecclesiastical History c. AD. 325), quotes Justin Martyr's is the proot of these things? See their silli- 
sory about Simon Magus (7-3 6-43) and Hew without te ness from their fabrications. Whence hast 
ately in the same reign of Claudius divine Providence led Peter the thou the proof of the thirty Aeons ? Because, 
great Apostle to Rome to eter ihe Gospel fromane Kast to | Saith he, it is written, that Jesus was baplised, 
the West ? (cade). | 

Eusebius probably borrowed this story “from the strange fictions | ~~ Seemann weet lake “ ao 
of the Clementine Recognitions and LHontilies, and lpostolic Con- 

stitutions.” See Recogn. U1. 63-65; Lfom. 1. 153 Ill. 583 3 John xvii. 25. 4 Luke xii. 28. S Alattan ae, 

A post. Constit. Vi. 7, 8, 9. Cyril’s account of Simon's death 6 Marcion accepted only St. Luke's Gospel, and mutilated that 

is taken from the same untrustworthy sources. (Tertullian, dav. Jercion. iv. 2). He thus got rid of the testi- 
3 Matt. xviii. 19. 4 Ib. xvi. 19. mony of the Apostles and eye-witnesses, Matthew and John, and 

5 It is certain that S. Paul was not at Rome at this time. This | represented the Law and the Gospel as contradictory revelations 
story of Simon Magus and his ‘fiery car’ is told, with variations, | of two different Gods. For this Cyril calls him ‘a second inventor 
by Arnobius (adv. Gentes, 11. 12), and in «I fost. Coustit. V1. 9. of mischief,’ Simon Magus ($ 14) being the first. 

6 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4. | 7 Basilides was earlier than Marcion, being the founder of 

7 Cerinthus taught that the world was not made by the supreme | a Gnostic sect at Alexandria in the reign of Hadrian (a.b. 117— 
God, but by a separate Power ignorant of Him. See Irenwus, 138). His doctrines are described by Lrenwus (I. xxvii. 3—7), 
Her. 1. xxvi., Euseb. £.//. iii. 28, with the notes in this Series. and very fully by Hippolytus (Aefut. omn, Her. VIN. 2—15). 
8 Menanderis first mentioned by Justin M. (1fodog. I. cap. 26): | Che charge of teaching licentiousness attaches rather to the later 
“ Menander, also a Samaritan, of the town Capparetza, a disciple | followers of Basilides than to himse!f or his sun Isidorus (Clem. 
of Simon, and inspired by devils, we know to have deceived many Alex. Sévomat. IL]. cap. 1). Vasilides wrote a Commentary on 
while he was in Antioch by his magical art. He persuaded those | the Gospel in 24 books (/.rege/éea), of which the 23rd is quoted 
who adhered to him that they should never die.” Irenaus | by Clement of Alexandria (S¢vomeat. 1V. cap. 12), and against 
(I. xxiii. 5) adds that Menander announced himself as the Saviour | which Agrippa Castor wrote a refutation. Origen (//om. i. in 
sent by the Invisibles, and taught that the world was created by Lucam.) says that Basilides wrote a Gospel bearing his own 

Angels. See also Tertullian (de Anima, cap. 50.) name, ‘See Routh, Red: Saen el. ps-8537 Voep. 100, Westcott, 
9 Carpocrates, a Platonic philosopher, who taught at Alexandria | Alistory of Canon of N.T. wv. § 3. 

(125 A.D. ci7c.), held that the world and all things in it were made 8 ‘©The doctrines of Valentinus are described fully by Trenzeus 

by Angels far inferior to the unbegotten (unknown) Father (fren. | (1. cap. i.), from whom S. Cyril takes this account. * Valentinus, 

I. xxv. 1; Tertullian, Adv. Her. cap. 3). and Basilides, and Bardesanes, and Harmonius, and those of their 

1 Irenaeus, 1. 26: ‘Those who are called Ebionites agree that | company admit Christ's conception and birth of the Virgin, but 
the world was made by God; but their opinions with respect | say that God the Word received no addition from the Virgin, but 
to the Lord are like those of Cerinthus and Carpocrates.” | made. a sort of passage through her, as through a tube, and made 

2 On Marcion, see note 5, on Cat. iv. 4. | use of a phantom in appearing to men.” (Theodoret, Fpest. 145.) 

1a Ga at 

being thirty years old9 But even if He was 
baptized when thirty years old, what sort of 
demonstration is this from the thirty years? 
Are there then five gods, because He brake | 
five loaves among five thousand? Or because | 
he had twelve Disciples, must there also be! 
twelve gods? | 

18, And even this is still little compared with | 
the impieties which follow. For the last of the 
deities being, as he dares to speak, both male | 
and female, this, he says, is Wisdom*. What | 
impiety! For ¢he IVisdom of God? is Christ His 
Only-begotten Son: and he by his doctrine de- 
graded the Wisdom of God into a female ele- 
ment, and one of thirty, and the last fabrication. 
He also says that Wisdom attempted to behold 
the first God, and not bearing His brightness 
fell from heaven, and was cast out of her thirtieth 
place. Then she groaned, and of her groans | 
begat the Devils, and as she wept over her fall | 
made of her tears the sea. Mark the impiety. | 
Tor of Wisdom how is the Devil begotten, and 
of prudence wickedness, or of light darkness ? 
He says too that the Devil begat others, some 
ot whom created the world: and that the 
Christ came down in order to make mankind 
revolt from the Maker of the world. 

19. But hear whom they say Christ Jesus to 
be, that thou mayest detest them yet more. 
Vor they say that after Wisdom had been cast 
down, in order that the number of the thirty 
might not be incomplete, the nine and twenty 
Acons contributed each a little part, and 
formed the Christ +: and they say that He also 
is both male and females. Can anything be 
more impious than this? Anything more 
wretched? I am describing their delusion to 
thee, in order that thou mayest hate them the 
more. Shun, therefore, their impicty, and a 
nol even give greeting to® aman of this kind, 

9 Luke iii. 23. t Trenaus I. ii. 2. =) Or 
3 Irencus, 1. c., and Hippolytus, who gives an clabo =| 
count of the doctrines of Valentinus (L. VI. capp. XVi.—xxnii.), | 
both represent Sophia, ‘* Wisdom,” as giving birth not to Satan, 
but to a shapeless abortion, which was the origin of matter. 
According to Lreniweus (I. iv. 2), Achamoth, the enthymesis of 
Sophia, gave birth to the Demiurge, and “from her tears all that 
is of a liquid nature was formed.” 
In Tertullian’s Treatise against the Valentinians chap. xxii., 
Achamoth is said as by Cyril to have given birth to Satan: but 
in chap. xxiii. Satan seems to be identified (or interchanged) with 
the Demiurege. 
4 ‘The account in Irenzus (I. ii. 6) is rather different: “The 
whole Plcroma of the Acons, with one design and desire, and with 
the concurrence of the Christ and the Holy Spirit, their Father 
also setting the seal of His approval on their conduct, brought 
together whatever cach one had in himself of the greatest beauty 
and preciousness; and uniting all these contributions so as skil- 
fully to blend the whole, they produced, to the honour and glory of 
Bythus, a being of most perfect beauty, the very star of the 
Pleroma, and its perfect fruit, namely Jesus.” 
Tertullian, Agedest the Valentinians, chap. 12, gives a sar- 
castic description of this strange doctrine, deriving his facts 
(chap. 5) from Justin, Miltiades, “Irenaus, that very exact 
inquirer into all doctrines,” and Proculus. 
5 This statement does not agree with Irenaeus (I. vii. 1), who 
says that the Valentinians represented the Saviour, that is Jesus, 
as becoming the bridegroom of Achamoth or Sophia. | 

“ Neither bid him God speed” (A.V.); ‘sive | 
TRV) 5 

2 John 10, 11: 
him no greeting ” ( 

cg Dame 2h 

lest thou have fellowship with the unfruitful 
works of darkness? : neither make curious in- 
quiries, nor be willing to enter into conversa- 
tion with them. 

20. Hate all heretics, but especially him 
Who is rightly named after mania’, who arose 
not long ago in the reign of Probus9 For the 
delusion began full seventy years ago', and 
there are men still living who saw him with 
their very eyes. But hate him not for this, 
that he lived a short time avo; but because of 
his impious doctrines hate thou the worker 
of wickedness, the receptacle of all filth, who 
gathered up the mire of every heresy *, - hice 
aspiring to become pre-eminent among wicked 
men, he took the doctrines of all, and having 
combined them into one heresy filled with blas- 
phemies and all iniquity, he makes havoc of 
the Church, or rather of those outside the 
Church, roaming about like a lion and deyour- 
ing. Heed not their fair speech, nor their 
supposed humility: for they are serpents, 
a generation of vipcrs3. Judas too said Hail! 
Master +, even while he was betraying Him. 
Heed not their kisses, but beware of their 
venom. 

21. Now, lest I seem to accuse him without 
reason, Iet me make a digression to tell who 
this Manes is, and in part what he teaches: for 
ul time would fail to describe adequately the 
whole of his foul teaching. But for help in 
time of nced 5, store up in thy memory what I 
have said to former hearers, and will repeat to 
those now present, that they who know not 
may learn, and they who know may be 
reminded. Manes is not of Christian origin, 
God forbid! nor was he like Simon cast out of 
the Church, neither himself nor the teachers 
who were before him. Tor he steals other 
men’s wickedness, and makes their wickedness 
his own: but how and in what manner thou 

‘must hear. 

22. ‘here was in Egypt one Scythianus §, a 

7? Ephes. v. rr. 

® Husebius in his brief notice of the Manichean heresy (/l¢s#, 
Eccles. vii. 31) plays, like S. Cyril, upon the name Manes as well 
suited toa madman. 

9 Marcus Aurelius Probus, Emperor a.p. 276—282, from being 
an obscure Illyrian soldier came to be universally esteemed the 
best and noblest of the Roman Emperors, 

t Routh (2. S. V. p. 12) comes to the conclusion that the 
famous disputation between Manes and Archelaus took place 
between July and December, a.p. 277. Accordingly these Lec- 
tures, being *‘ full 70 years” later, could not have been delivered 
before the Spring of A.p. 348. 

2 Leo the Great (Ser. xv. cap. 4) speaks of the madness of 
the later Manichees as including all errors and impieties: ‘‘all 
profanity of Paganism, all blindness of the carnal Jews, the illicit 
secrets of the magic art, the sacrilege and blasphemy of all 
heresies, flowed together in that sect as into a sort of cess-pool 
of all filth.” Leo summoned those whom they called the elect,” 

‘both men and women, before an assembly of Bishops and Pres- 

byters, and obtained from these witnesses a full account of the 
execrable practices of the sect, in which, as he declares, “ their law 
is lying, their religion the devil, their sacrifice obscenity.” 

3 Matt. iit. 7. 4 Ib. xxvi. 40. o ELeOr Vv. 1 Ge 

6 Cyril takes his account of Manes from the ‘Acta Archelai 

'et Manetis Disputationis,” of which Routh has edited the Latin 

40 
Saracen? by birth. having notuing in common 
either with ] udaism or with Christianity. ‘This 
man, who dwelt at 
the life of Aristotle 5, composed four books °, 
one called a Gospel which had not the acts of 
Christ, but the mere name only, and one other 
cal'ed the book of Chapters, and a third of 
Mysteries, and a fourth, which they circulate 
now, the Treasure. This man had a disciple, 
Terebinthus by name. But when Seythianus 
purposed to come into Judwa, and make havoc 
of the land, the Lord smote him with a deadly 
disease, and stayed the pestilence *. 
3. But Tercbinthus, his disciple in this 
wicked error, inherited his money and books 
and heresy 3, and came to Palestine, and be- 
coming known and condemned 1n Juda + he 
resolved to pass into Persia: but lest he 
should be recognised there also by his name, 
he changed it and called himself Buddas 5. 
However, he found adversaries there also in 
the priests of Mithras®: and being confuted in 
the discussion of many arguments and con- 
troversies, and at last hard pressed, he took 
refuge with a certain widow. Then having 
gone up on the housetop, and summoned the 
demons of the air, whom the Manichees to 
this day invoke over their abominable cere- 
mony of the fig7, he was smitten of God, and 
cast down from the housetop, and expired: 
and so the second beast was cut off. 
24. The books, however, which 
records of his impiety, remained ; 
these and his money the widow 
And having neither kinsman nor 

i 
“ 
“ 

were the 
and both 
inherited. 
any other 

translation, together with the Fragments of the Greck preserved 
by Cyril in this Lecture and by Epiphanius. There is an English 
translation of the whole in Clark’s ‘‘Ante-Nicene Christian Li- 
brary.” 

7° The Saracens are mentioned by both 
See Dict. of Greek and Roman Geography. 

8 [There is no mention of Aristotle in the Acta Archela/, but 
Scythianus is stated (cap. li.) to have founded the sect in the 
time of the Apostles, and to have derived his duality of Gods 
from Pythagoras, and to have learned the wisdom of the Egyp- 
tlans. 

9 These four books are stated by Archelaus (-lefa, cap. lii.), 
to have been written for Manes by his disciple ‘Percbinthus. 

1 In allusion to this name the history of the Disputation is 
called (-Icfa, cap. i.) “The true ‘Treasure.” 

2 The true reading of this sentence, mpoatpovpevov Tov Skv- 
@avev, instead of tov mpdetpyuerov X«., has been restored by 
Cleopas from the MS. in the Archicpiscopal library at Jerusalem, 
This reading agrees with the statement in -Icta lycfed. cap. coe 
“ Scythianus thought of making an excursion into Juda, with 
the purpose of meeting all those who had a reputation there as 
teachers; but it came to pass that he suddenly departed this life, 
without having been able to make any progress.” 

3 This statement agrees with the reading of the Vatican MS. 
of the Acta Archelai, “ omnibus quecunque ejus fuerunt congre- 
gatis. 

4 Inthe Acta there is no mention of Palestine, but only that 
he “set out for Babylonia, a province which is now held by the 
Persians.” 

5 Clem. Alex. (Séfvom. i. 15): ‘Some also of the Indians obey 
the precepts of Boutta, and honour him as a god for his extra- 
ordinary sanctity.” 

6 Cf Acta sirch. cap. lii.: **A certain Parcus, however, 
a prophet, and Labdacus, son of Mithras, charged him with 
falsehood.” On the names Parcus and Labdacus, sce et, Cir. 

Pliny and Ptolemy. 

Biogr., * Barcabbas,” and on the Magian worship of the Sun-god 

Mithras, see Rawlinson (//evodot. Vol. 1. p. 426). 
7 ocebelow, & ss, 

CATECHET CAL C7 

Alexandria and imitated | 

friend, she determined to buy with the moncy 
a boy named Cubricus*: him she adopted 
and ‘educated as a son in the learning 
of the Persians, and thus sharpened an evil 
weapon against mankind. So Cubricus, the 
vile slave, grew up in the midst of philo- 
sophers, and on the death of the widow 
inherited both the books and the money. 
Then, lest the name of slavery might be a 
reproach, instead of Cubricus he called him- 
self Manes, which in the language of the 
Persians signifies discourse?. For as he thought 
himself something of a disputant, he surnamed 
himself Manes, as it were an excellent master 
of discourse. But though he contrived for 
himself an honourable title according to the 
language of the Persians, yet the providence of 
God caused him to become a self-accuser even 
against his will, that through thinking to 
honour himself in Persia, he might proclaim 
himself among the Greeks by name a maniac. 

25. He dared too to say that he was the 
Paraclete, though it is written, But wroso- 
ever shall blaspheme agatnst the Holy Ghost, 
hath no forgiveness*. He committed blas- 
phemy therefore by saying that he was the 
Holy Ghost: let him that communicates 
with those heretics see with whom he is en- 
rolling himself. ‘The slave shook the world, 
since by three things the earth is shaken, and 
the fourth it cannot bear,—if a slave become a 
hing®. Having come into public he now began 
to promise things above man’s power. ‘The 
son of the King of the Persians was sick, and 
a multitude of physicians were in attendance : 
but Manes promised, as if he were a godly 
man, to cure him by prayer. With the de- 
parture of the physicians, the life of the child 
departed: and the man’s impiety was detected. 
So the would-be philosopher was a prisoncr, 
being cast into prison not for reproving the 
king in the cause of truth, not for destroying 
the idols, but for promising to save and lying, 
or rather, if the truth must be told, for com- 
mitting murder. For the child who might 
have been saved by medical treatment, was 
murdered by this man’s driving away the 
physicians, and killing him by want of treat- 
ment. 

26. Now as there are very many wicked 
things which I tell thee of him, remember first 
his blasphemy, secondly his slavery (not that 
slavery is a disgrace, but that his pretending 
to be free-born, when he was a slave, was 
wicked), thirdly, the falsehood of his promise, 
‘fourthly, the murder of the child, and fifihty, 

8 Cf. eleta Arch. cap. Mi, “A boy about seven years old, 
named Corbicius.” 

| 9 Seea different account in Dect. 
| 1 Mark ill. 29. a 

Chr. Biogr., * Manes.” 
BrOMN Na Is, 22 

PG ie Te NG, At 

the Ciserace of the imprisonment. And there] sort of God causes blindness? Vor it is Paul 
was not only the disgrace of the prison, but| who saith, Za whom the God of this world hath 
also the flight from prison. Lor he who called | bd¢aded the miids of them that believe not, lest 
himself the Paraclete and champion of the | Che light of the Gospel should shine unto them +.” 

truth, ran away: he was no successor of Jesus, 
who readily went to the Cross, but this man 
was the reverse, a runaway. 
King of the Persians ordered the keepers of 
the prison to be executed: so Manes was the 
cause of the child’s death through his vain 
boasting, and of the gaolers’ death through his 
flight. Ought then he, who shared the guilt 
of murder, to be worshipped? Ought he not 
to have followed the example of Jesus, and 
said, Zf ye seek Me, let these go thetr way 3? 
Ought he not to have said, like Jonas, Zuke 
me, and cast me into the sea: for this storm ts 
because of mer? 

8%. 
into Mesopotamia: but there Bishop Archelaus, 
a shield of righteousness, encounters him 5: 
and having accused him before philosophers as 
judges, and having assembled an audience 
ot Gentiles, lest if Christians gave judgment, 
the judges might be thought to shew favour,— 
Tell us what thou preachest, said Archelaus 
to Manes. And he, whose mouth was as an 
open sepulchre®, began first with blasphemy 
against the Maker of all things, saying, The God 
cf the Old Testament is the author of evils, 
ase says of Himself, Zam a consuming fire’. 
But the wise Archelaus undermined his blas- 
phemous argument by saying, “If the God of 
the Old Testament, as thou sayest, calls Him- 
self a fire, whose Son is He who saith, 7 came 
to send fire on the earth®? Vf thou findest fault 
with Him who saith, 7/e Lord hilleth, and 
maketh alive 9, why dost thou honour Peter, who 
raised up ‘Tabitha, but struck Sapphira dead ? 
If again thou findest fault, because He pre- 
pared fire, wherefore dost thou not find fault 
with Him who saith, Depart from Ale into 
everlasting fire’ ? Tf thou tindest fault with Him 

who saith, Zam God that make peace, and create 

evil?, explain how Jesus saith, 7 came not to 
send peace but a swords, Simce both speak 
alike, of two things one, either both are good, 
because of thcir agreement, or if Jesus is 
blameless in so speaking, why blamest thou 
Him that saith the lke in the Old Testa- 
ment?” 

28. Then Manes answers him: “ And what 

8 4 Jonalea. pe, 

3 John xviii. 8 
chapters is not now found in the Latin Version of the ‘* Dis- 
putation,” but is regarded by Dr. Routh as having been derived 
by Cyril from some different copies of the Greek, ‘The last para- 
graph of § 29, ‘‘ These mysteries, &c.,” is evidently a caution 
addressed to the hearers by Cyril himself (Routh, Wedd. Sac. V. 
199). 

On PSe Vas 

O Salis 11a Os 

5 Niatirexe sat 

8 Luke xii. 49. 

7. Deut: iv, 24. 
cg) Ua Wy 

r Matt. xxv. 41 

Moreover, the! 

He escapes from the prison, and comes: 

5 The account of the discussion in this and the two following | 

/But Archclaus made a good retort, saying, 
“Read a little before: Lut tf our Gospel is 
welled, it ty veiled in them that are pertshing >, 
Seest thou that in them that are perishing it 
is veiled? For it is not right 4 gzve the things 
which are holy unto the dogs®. Again, Is it 
only the God of the Old ‘Testament that hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not? 
Hath not Jesus Himsclf said, /or ¢hzs cause 
speak L unto them ti parables, that seetig 
they may not see7? Was it from hating them 
that He wished them not to see? Or because 
of their unworthiness, since ¢Aczr eves (hey had 
closed®, ‘or where there is wilful wickedness, 
there is also a withholding of grace: for to him 
that hath shall be given, but from him that 
hath not shall be taken even that which he 
seemeth to have 9. 

29. “ But if some are right in their interpre- 
tation, we must say as follows? (for it is no 
unworthy expression)—If indeed He blinded 
the thoughts of them that believe not, he 
blinded them for a good purpose, that they 
might look with new sight on what is good, 
For he said not, He blinded their soul, but, 
the thoughts of them that belicve not®. And the 
meaning is something of this kind: ‘ Blind the 
lewd thoughts of the lewd, and the man is 
saved: blind the grasping and rapacious 
thought of the robber, and the man is saved.’ 
But wilt thou not understand it thus? ‘Then 
there is yet another interpretation. The sun 
also blinds those whose sight is dim : and they 
whose eyes are diseased are hurt by the light 
and blinded. Not that the sun’s nature is to 
blind, but that the substance of the eyes is 
incapable of seeing. In like manner un- 
believers being diseased in their heart cannot 
look upon the radiance of the Godhead. Nor 
hath he said, ‘/7e hath blinded their thoughts, 
that they should not hear the Gospel:’ but, 
that the light of the glory of the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ should not shine unio them. 
For to hear the Gospel is permitted to all: but 
‘the glory of the Gospel is reserved for Christ’s 

4» Cor. iv. 4, vorjmara, thoughts.” 5 -Or. dvd. 
| O Matte wih Os : 
| 7 Matt. xili.13. Both A.V. and R.V. follow the better reading: 
| because seeing they see not, &c.” 
So Miratte Sit £50 o Lb xxv. 20} 
Instead of the reading of the Benedict! 
ct 66 be Kal WS TLVES EENYOUYTAL TOVTO CITELY, 
Casaubon combine dee Kat ws into the one word dieaces 
| probably the right reading. Something, however, 1s still wanted 
| to complete the construction, an:} Petrus Siculus (cére. A.D. 870) 
| who quotes the passage in his //éstory of the Manichees, boldly 
| conjectures €o7Te Kat ovTws eiwetr, A simpler emendation woul | 

be—et 6& Sccalws tives E€nyorvTat, det TOUTO elmety—which both 
| completes the construction and explains the reading det Kat ws. 

2 yoyjpata, 2 Cor. iv. 4. 

Luke viii. 18. F 

ne and earlier editions, 
ty, the MSS. Roe and 
, which is 

true children only. ‘Therefore the Lord spake 
in parables to those who could not hears: but 
to the Disciples he explained the parables in 
private+: for the brizhtness of the glory is for 
those who have been entightened, the blinding 
for them that believe not.” ‘Vhese mysteries, 
which the Church now explains to thee who 
art passing out of the class of Catechtmens, it 
is not the custom to explam to heathen, Vor 
to a heathen we do not explain the mysteries 
concerning lather, Son, and Holy Ghost, nor 
before Catechumens do we speak plainly of 
the mysteries : but many things we often speak 
in a veiled way, that the believers who know 
may understand, and they who know not may 
vet no hurt 6. 

30. By such and many other arguments the 
serpent was overthrown: thus did Archelaus 
wrestle with Manes and threw him. Again, 
he who had fled from prison flees from this 
place also: and having run away from_ his 
antagonist, he comes to a very poor village, 
like the serpent in Paradise when he left Adam 
and came to Eve. But the good shepherd 
Archelaus taking forethought for his sheep, 

CATECH ET RIAL LECT. 

of one of the three wicked disciples of Manes. 
“Let none associate with the soul-destroying 
| Manicheans, who by decoctions of chaff coun- 
‘terfeit the sad look of fasting, who speak evil 
fof the Creator of meats, and greedily devour 
ithe daintiest, who teach that the man who 
plucks up this or that herb is changed into it. 
Biss if he who crops herbs or any vegetable is 
changed into the same, into how many will 
chusbandmen and the tribe of gardeners be 
changed ®?) The gardener, as we see, has used 
his sickle against so many: into which then is 
he changed? Verily their doctrines are 
ridiculous, and fraught with their own con- 
demnation and shame! ‘The same man, being 
the shepherd of a flock, both sacritices a sheep 
and kills a wolf. Into what then is he 
ichanged? Many men both net fishes and 
lime birds: into which then are they trans- 
formed ? 

| 2. Let those children of sloth, the Mani- 
cheans, make answer; who without labouring 
‘themselves eat up the labourers’ fruits: who 
welcome with smiling faces those who bring 
them their food, and return curses instead of 

2 
ro) 

when he heard of his flight, straightway hast- blessings. For when a simple person brings 
ened with all speed in search of the wolf. them anything, “Stand outside a while,” saith 
And when Manes suddenly saw his adversary, he, “and I will bless thee.’ Then having 
he rushed out and fled: it was however his taken the bread into his hands (as those who 
last flight. For the officers of the King of have repented and left them have confessed), 
Persia searched everywhere, and caught the “I did not make thee,” says the Manichee-to 

fugitive: and the sentence, which he ought to 
have received in the presence of Archelaus, 
is passed upon him by the king’s officers. ‘This 
Manes, whom his own disciples worship, is ar- 
rested and brought before the king. The king 
reproached him with his falsehood and his flight: 
poured scorn upon his slavish condition, 
avenged the murder of his child, and con- 
demned him also for the murder of the 
gaolers: he commands him to be flayed after 
the Persian fashion. And while the rest 
of his body was given over for food of wild 
beasts, his skin, the receptacle of his vile 
mind, was hung up before the gates like a 
sack®. He that called himscif the Paraclete 
and professed to know the future, knew not his 
own flight and capture. 

31. ‘This man has had three disciples, 
Thomas, and Baddas, and Hermas. Let none 
read the Gospel according to ‘Vhomas 7: for it is 
the work not of one of the twelve Apostles, but 

a Dtatt.. 2. ra, 4 Mark im 34 

5 See the note at the end of the Procateche«is. 

6 Disput. $55. Compare the account of Manes in Socrates, 
Eccles. Hist. [. 22, in this series. 

7 The Gospel of Thomas, an account of the Childhood of Jesus, 
is extant in three forms, two in Greek and one in Latin: these are 
all translated in Clark's Ante-Nicene Library. ‘The work is 
wrongly attributed by Cyril to a disciple of Manes, being men- 
troned iong before by Hippolytus (Ae/utalion ofall Heresies, V. 2) 
and by Origen (//em. 7. tn Lucan): ‘There is extant also the 
Gospel according to Thomas.” 

the bread: and sends up curses against the 
“Most High; and curses him that made it, and 
so eats what was made% If thou hatest the 
food, why didst thou look with smiling 
“countenance on him that brought it to thee ? 
If thou art thankful to the bringer, why dost 
thou utter thy blasphemy to God, who created 
and made it? So again he says, “I sowed 
thee not: may he be sown who sowed thee! 
(I reaped thee not with a sickle: may he be 
reaped who reaped thee! I baked thee not 
with fire : may he be baked who baked thee!” 
A fine return for the kindness ! 

33. These are great faults, but still small in 
comparison with the rest. Their Baptism I 
dare not describe before men and women’, 
I dare not say what they distribute to their 
wretched communicants *.... Truly we pollute 

| 8 In the Disputation, $9, Turbo describes these transforma- 
tions: ‘Reapers must be transformed into hay, or beans, or 

barley, or corn, or vegetables, that they may be reaped and cut. 

| Again if any one eats bread, he must become bread, and be eaten. 

| If one kills a chicken, he will be a chicken himself. If one kills 

!a mouse, he also will be a mouse.” 

| 9 See Turbo's confession, Disput. § 9: ‘ And when they are 

| soing to eat bread. they first pray, speaking thus to the bread: 
‘I nether reaped thee, nor ground thee, nor kneaded thee, nor 
cast thee into the oven: but another did these things, and brought 
thee to me, and I am not to blame for eating thee.’ And when he 
has said this to himself, he says to the Catechumen, ‘1 have 
prayed for thee,’ and so he goes away.” 

1 On the rites of Baptism and Eucharist employed by the 
| Manichees, see Dict. Chr. Biogr., Alanicheans. 
! * The original runs: OU ToAua eimety, The eBamrortes Tay 

Le COR VE: 

our mouth in speaking of these things. 

4 

43 

Are) Manichees ? Here is order, here is discipline 7, 

the heathen more detestable than these 2? Are) here is majesty, here is purity: here even fv look 
the Samaritans more wretched? Are Jews | upon a woman to lust after her ® 1s condem- 

more impious ? Are fornicators more impure 3? | nation. 

Tere is marriage with sanctity %, here 

But the Manichce sets these offerings in the) stedfast continence, here virginity in honour 

midst of the altar as he considers it4, And 
dost thou, O man, receive instruction from 
such a mouth? On meeting this man dost thou 
greet him at all with a kiss? To say nothing 
of his other impiety, dost thou not flee from 
the defilement, and from men worse than. pro- 
fligates, more detestable than any prostitute ? 
34. Of these things the Church admonishes 
and teaches thee, and touches mire, that thou 
mayest not be bemired: she tells of the 
wounds, that thou mayest not be wounded. 
But for thee it is enough merely to know 
them: abstain from learning by experience. 
God thunders, and we all tremble; and they 
blaspheme. God lightens, and we all bow 
down to the earth; and they have their 
blasphemous sayings about the heavens 5, 
These things are written in the books of the 
Manichees. These things we ourselves have 
read, because we could not believe those who 
told of them: yes, for the sake of your salvation 
we have closely inquired into their perdition. 
35. But may the Lord deliver us from such 
delusion: and may there be given to you a 
hatred against the serpent, that as they lie in 
wait for the heel, so you may trample on their 
head. Remember ye what I say. What 
agreement can there be between our state 
and theirs? WVhat communion hath light with 
darkness®? What hath the majesty of the 
Church to do with the abomination of the 

toxada, Siddacr Tots dOACors. Sia TvTohpwy Se pdvoy SnAovaOw. 
avdpes yap Ta EV TOLs évuTILATmoLS evdumEloOwaLy, Kat yuvatKes TA 
ev adpedpors, Meatvonerv adqOas To ota K.T.A. 

3 'O pév yap mopvevaas, mpos play Mpav & ériMupiav redrer THY 
Tpagiv' Kataywwrkwov 6€ THS Tpd&ews ws pavOers olde AovTPOD 
emdedpevos, Kal ywvdoKer THS mpacews To pvoapdy. ‘O & Mam- 
xXaios Ovovagrnpley mégov, oF vomiser, TIbNOL TadTa, Kai peacver 
Kal TO OTOma Kal THY YAWTTaY. Tapa TOLOVTOY TTOMaTOS, dVOpwreE 
KTAS 

4 00 voutger. Vhe Manichees boasted of their superiority to 
the Pagans in not worshipping God with altars, temples, images, 
victims, or incense (August. contra Maustunt XX. cap. 1s). Vet 
they used the names, as Augustine affirms (2c. cap. 18): ** Never- 
theless I wish you would tell me why you call all those things 
which you approve in your own case by these names, temple, altar, 
sacrifice.” 

5 Kdxetvoe mept ovpavav tas Svaqyjpous éyovar yAwooas. 
*Inaovs Acyeu wept Tov marpds abtov, “Ooms Tov jAvov avtou 
avaTeAAer et dixatovs Kai adtkous, Kat Bpéyer emt rovnpods Kar 
ayatous. Kaketvoe A€yovaw, OTL ol Veto €€ epwriKis pavias ye- 
VOVTAL, KAL TOAWMOL AEyELY, OTLETTL TLS TApOEVOS eV ovpave evedis 
Mera veaviokou evedovs, Kal KaTa THY TOV KapLyA@Y 3) AUKWOY KaLpor, 
TOUS THS GLaXpas ETLOUpLas KaLpOS EXELY, Kal KATA THY TOU XELpw- 
vos Kalpov, paviwiws avTov EemiTpeXELY TH Tapevea, Kat THY Bev 
hevyciv pact, tov 6€ émetpéyew, iva emiTpexorvta iSpodv, amo 
6€ tov Wpwrwv adtod eiva, tov veTov. Tatra yéypantar €v Tots 
Tov Mavixatwy BiBdcos* TadTa iucts aveyvaer, K.T.AK 

Cray COrs vile 1, 

like unto the Angels: here partaking of food 
with thanksgiving, here gratitude to the Creator 
of the world. Here the Father of Christ is 
worshipped: here are taught fear and trem- 
bling before Him who sends the rain: here we 
ascribe glory to Him who makes the thunder 
and the lightning, 

36. Make thou thy fold with the sheep : flee 
from the wolves: depart not from the Church. 
Hate those also who have ever been suspected 
in such matters: and unless in time thou 
perceive their repentance, do not rashly trust 
thyself among them. The truth of the Unity 
of God has been delivered to thee: learn 
to distinguish the pastures of doctrine. Be an 
approved banker', holding fast that which ts 
Soot, abstaining from every fori of evil®, Or if 
thou hast ever been such as they, recognise 
and hate thy delusion. For there is a way of 
salvation, if thou reject the vomit, if thou from 
thy heart detest it, if thou depart from them, 
not with thy lips only, but with thy soul also : 
if thou worship the I’ather of Christ, the God 
of the Law and the Prophets, if thou acknow- 
ledge the Good and the Just to be one and the 
same God3. And may He preserve you all, 
guarding you from falling or stumbling, stab- 
lished in the Faith, in Christ Jesus our Lord, 
to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

7 Gr. émearipuyn. See note on Introductory Lect. $ 4. 

8 Matt. v. 28. d 

9 acuvoraros is the reading of the chief MSS. Dut the printed 
editions have vexvdrntos, comparing it with such phrases as o76pa. 
adedrntos (vi. 15), and peravora THS TwTyplas (xiv. 17). : 

1 ‘This saying is quoted three times in the Clementine Homilies 
as spoken by our Lord. See Hom. II. § 51; If]. §50; XVIII. 
§ 20: ‘f Every man who wishes to be saved must become, as the 
Teacher said, a judge of the books written to try us. Tor thus He 
spake : Become experienced bankers. Now the need of bankers 
arises from the circumstance that the spurious is mixed up with 
the genuine.” ‘ 

On the same saying, quoted as Scripture in the Apostolic Con- 
stitutions (II. § 36), Cotelerius suggests that in oral tradition, 
or in some Apocryphal book, the proverb was said to come from 
the Old ‘Testament, and was added by some transcriber as a gloss 
in the margin of Matt. xxv. 27, or Luke xix. 23. Dionysius of 
Alexandria, Epist. VII., speaks of ‘‘the Apostolic word, which 
thus urges all who are endowed with greater virtuc, ‘Be ye skiliul 
money-changers,’” referring apparently as here to 1 Thess. v. 21, 
‘try all things, &c.” (See Euseb. &.//. VII. ch. 6 in this 
series: Suicer. 7hesaurus, Tpamegizns: and Resch. (dA grvafha, 

3 Compare § 13 of this Lecture, where Cyril seems to refer 
especially to the heresy of Manes, as described in the Disputatio 
Archelai, cap. 6: “If you are desirous of being instructed in the 
faith of Manes, hear it briefly from me. ‘That man worships sh oO 
gods, unbegotten, selt-originate, eternal, opposed one to the other, 
The one he represents as good, and the other as evil, naming the 

b me 
one Light, and the other Darkness, 

LECT UR 

"THE 

EPHESIANS 

For this caise T bow ny knees unto the Lather, ... of whom all fatherhood in heat 

VIL. 

FATHER. 

ili, 14,-%5 

‘cn and 

carth ts named, &e. 

1. Or God as the sole Principle we have! 
said enough to you yesterday! by “enough | 
i mean, not what is worti iy of the subject, (for | | 
to reach that is utterly impossible to ae 
nature), but as much as was granted to our 

in segue I traversed also the bye-paths of 
the manifold error of the godless heretics : 
ee now let us shake off their foul and soul-| 0 
poisoning doctrine, and remembering what 

relates to them, not to our own hurt, but to 
our creater detestation of them, let us come 
back to oursely es, and receive the saving doc- 
trines of the true Faith, connecting the dignity 
of Fatherhood with that of the Unity, and be- 
lieving IN ONE Gop THE Farner: for we must 
not only beheve in one God ; but this also Ict 
us devoutly receive, that He is the Father 
of the Only-begotten, our Lord Jesus Christ. 
2. lor thus shall we raise our thoughts 
higher than the Jews’, who admit indeed by 
their doctrines that there is One God, (for 
what if they often denied even this by their 
idolatries ?) ; but that He is also the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, they admit not; being 
of a contrary mind to their own Prophets, w ho 
in the Divine Scriptures affirm, Zhe Lord said 
unto ine, Lhou art My Son, this day have L be- 

wien thees, And to this day they rage and 
gather then: ig logether against the Lord, 
and against Lis Anointed 4, thin! sing that it is 

possible to be made friends of the. Father 
apart from devotion towards the Son, being ig- 
nerant that vo man cometh unto the Father but 
éy3 the Son, who saith, Z am the Door, and| 
fam lie Way®. He therefore that refuseth | 
the Way which leadeth to the Father, and he 
that denicth the Door, how shall he be deemed 

T Dee. Lectore Vika, sds. 

me : 

i In rine ae Ouestioi. ad Anticchume rt mi TL. p. apr, 
Monarchia is opposed to Poixen ein? *Liwesvership One Gad, it 

nifest ghee: AWW aio rac 

is Mma 
archia : 

> with the Jews in believing in a AMON ¢ 
a: but if we w orship three gods, it is evident that we follow 
reeks. by introducing s Polytheism, instead of piously wor- 
ny One Only God (Suicer, 7hesaurus, Movapxta.) 

Sie Be re rey 5 John xiv. ise Cote etre) 

6. 

| Father also 2. 

dew of thy i: 

worthy of entrance unto God? They contra- 

dict also what is written in the eighty-cighth 

Psalm, 7/e shall call Me, Thou art my Father, 
Wy God, and the helper of my salvation, And 
L will make kim my first-born, high among the 
kings of the carth7?, Yor if they should insist 
that these things are said of David or Solomon 
or any of their successors, let them shew how 
the throne of him, who is in their judgment 
described in the prophecy, is as the days of 
heaven, and as the sun before God, and as the 
moon established for ever®. And how is it also 
that they are not abashed at that which is 
written, Zrom the womb before the morning-slar 
have I begotten thee: also this, fle shall endure 
zeith the sun, and before the moon, from genera- 
tion to sencraiton *, "To refer these passages to 
a man is a proof of utter and extreme insen- 
sibility. 

3. Let the Jews, however, since they so 
will, suffer their usual disorder of unbelief, both 
in these and the lke statements. But let us 
adopt the godly doctrine of our Faith, worship- 
ping one God the Father of the Christ, (for to 
deprive Him, who grants to all the giit of gene- 
ration, of the like dignity would be impious) : 
and let us BELIEVE IN ONE Gop THE FATHER, 
in order that, before we touch upon our teach- 
ing concerning Christ, the faith concerning the 
Only-begotten may be implanted in the soul 
of the hearers, without being at all interrupted 
by the intervening doctrines concerning the 
Father. 

4. For the name of the Father, with the 
very utterance of the title, Suegésts tle 
thought of the Son: as in like manner one 
who names the Son thinks straightway of the 
For if a Mather, Me is cerry 

a7, 

arte 

& Pecos 

no ey Pais 
“Prom the womb of the morning thou hast the 
GR Vag) 1 Ps, Ixyii, 5. 

2 Compare Athanasius (de Sententid Dioiysii, $17): Each 
of the names I have mentioned is inseparable and indivisible from 
that next toit. I spoke of the Father, and before bringing in the 

LECTURE 

the Pather of a Son; and af a Gon, cettaitily 
the Son of a Father. Test therefore from our 
speaking thus, IN ONE Gon, THE FATHER AL- 
MIGHTY, Maxn R OF HEAVEN AND EARTH, AND 
OF ALL THINGS VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE. cand from 
our then adding this also, AND IN OnE Lor» 
Jesus Curis, any one should irreverently sup- 
pose that the Only-begotten is second in rank 
to heaven and earth,—for this reason before 
naming them we named Gop THE FATHER, 
that in thinking of the Father we might at the 
same time think also of the Son: for between 
the Son and the Father no being whatever 
comes. 

5. God then is in an improper sense} the 
Tather of many, but by nature and in truth 
of One only, the Only-begotten Son, our Lord 
Jesus Christ; not having attained in course 
of time to being a Father, but being ever the 
Tather of the Only-begotten4. Not that being 
without a Son before, He has since by change 
of purpose become a Tather : but before every 
substance and every intelligence, before times 
and all ages, God hath the dignity of Father, 
magnifying Himself in this more than in His 
other dignities ; and having become a Father, 
not by passion 5, or union, not in ignorance, not 
by efiluence ®, not by diminution, not by altera- 
tion, for every good gift and every perfect gift is 
Jrom above, coming down from the Father of 
fiehts, with whom can be no variation, neither 
shadow of turning? Perfect Father, He begat 
a pertect Son, and delivered all things to Him 
who is begotten: (for a// ¢iings, He saith, are 
delivered unto Me of My Lather® :) and is 
honoured by the Only-begotten: for, Z honour 
My Father 9, saith the Son; and again, Avex as 

L have kept My Father's commandments, and | 

Son, I designated Him also in the Father. I brought in the Son, 
and’ even if I had not previously mentioned the ath ather, in any 
wise He would have been presupposed in the Son.’ 

3 Karaxpqatixws. A technical term in Grammar, applied to 
the use of a word in a derived or metaphorical sense. See Aris- 
totle’s dese ription of the various kinds of metaphor, Poet. § xxi. 
7-1 ‘he opposite to KataxypynoTiK@s 1s Kupios; as used in 
i paralle 1 passage by Athanasius, Oratio i. contra Arianos, § at 
Tey, a ee belongs. to the Godhead alone, that the Father is properly 
eerae) 1 ather, and the Son properly Son.” 

“And in ‘Them, and ‘Them only, 
EF ist ose is ever F. athe ory and the Son ever Son. 

5. Compared vi. 6: 6 yeovendets anadws. The importance at- 
tached to the assertion of a ‘‘ passionless generation” arose from 
the objections offered by Eusebius of Nicomedia and others to 
the word opoovcvos When proposed by Constantine at Nica. 
We learn from Eusebius of Cusarea (“2fist. ad sue parecta | 
homines, § 
was used “not in the sense of the affections (way) of bodies,” 
because ‘the immaterial, 
could not be the subject of any corporeal affection.” 
CB, ef usebius admits that § “there are grounds for saying the ut the 
Son is ‘one in essence’ with the F ather, not in the way “of bodies, 
nor like mortal beings, for He is not such by division of essence, 
or by severance, no, nor by any affection, or alteration, or chang: 
ing i the F ather’ s essence and power.” (Sec the next note.) 

6 Athanasius (afpos. fade’, $1): “Word not pronounced nor 
mental, nor an citiucnce of the Perfect, nor a dividing of the 
passionless nature Also (cle Decretis, ec) kay God being 
without parts is F ‘ather of the Son without partition or passion ; 
for there is neither efilucnce of the Immaterial, nor influx from 
wi ‘thout, as among Le 

7 Nein Subeet 7: 

does it hold, that the 
” (Athan., as above.) 

Misti xi 278 9 John viii. 49. 

4) that the Emperor himself explained that the word 

and intellectual, and i incorpores al nz ture | 
Again, in | 

ACRE i 
i? Lfty fove*, ‘Therefore we also say like 
ithe Apostle, essed be the Ged and Luther of 
our Lord Sesus Christ, the Father of mercies, ana 
Go d of all consolation ® and, We bo our bree J 
unto the Lather, from whom all fatherhood tn 
heaven and on earth is named3: glorifying Him 
vith the Only-begotten: for Ze that denieth the 
Luther, denieth the Son aiso4: and again, //e 
that confesseth the Son, hath the futher alsos ; 
knowing that Jesus Christ ts Lord to the glory 
of God the Lather ®, 

6. We worship, therefore, as the Father of 
Christ, the Maker of heaven and earth, “Ae 
God of Abraham, Lsaac, and Jacob? » to whose 
honour the former temple also, over against us 
here, was built. For we shall not tolerate the 
heretics who sever the Old Testament from 
the New®8, but shall belicve Christ, who says 
concerning the temple, [Vist ye not that J must 
be in My Fathers housed? and again, Take 
these things hence, and make not my Father's 
house a house of merchanidise': whereby He most 
clearly confessed that the former temple in 
Jerusalem was His own Father’s house. But 
if any one from unbclief wishes to receive yet 
more proofs as to the Father of Christ being 
the same as the Maker of the world, let him 
hear Him say again, Are not fa10 sparrows sold 
Jor a farthing, and not one of them shall fall on 
the ground without My Father which ts in 
heaven’, this also, Behold the fowls of the heaven 
that they sow not, neither do they reap, nor 
gather into barus; and your heavenly Lather 
feedeth them3; and this, Wy Father worketh 
hitherto, and [work 4, 

7. But lest any one from simplicity or per- 
verse ingenuity should suppose that Christ is 
but equal in honour to righteous men, from 
| His saying, L ascend to My father, and yours 
Father, it is well to make this distinction 
beforehand, that the name of the I’ather is one, 
but the power of His operation® manifold. 
And Christ Himself knowing this has spoken 
| unerringly, Z go fo ATy Father, and your Father : 
“not saying “to our Father,’ but distinguishing, 
and saying first what was proper to Himself, 0 
My Father, which was by nature ; then adding, 
and your Father, which was ‘by adoption. 
for however hich the privilege we have re- 
ceived of bad ing in our se ers, Our Father, 

pee 
Wee 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

a 

vee 3 3 Eph. iii. r4, 15. 
sy ees even he that denieth 
ye 

I aes eve hd, 2 Co Yr. 
4 reTobst theses." This i is Ul 

the Father and the Son”’ (R.\ : : 

| 5 7. 23, bracketed in the A. Vi as spurious, but rightly restored 

in R.V ; ; 
fo OSD huea. tr 7 Vix. iit..6: 8 Compare Lect. iv. 33. 

9 Luke il. 49. r John ii. 16. = 

2 Matt. x. 29. S. Cyril instead of ‘ your Father” writes *‘ my 

Father which is in heaven :’’ so Origen a Athanasius. 
3 Matt. vi. 26. 4 John v. 17. 2 
5 John xx.17. On this text, quoted again in Cat. xi, 19, see 
the three Sermons of Bishop Andrewes On the Resurrection. 
évepycia, meaning here, the oper: ution of God, by nature in 

“ begetting His Son, by adoption in making many sons. 

40 

which art in heaven, yet the gift is of loving: | 
iciadee ss. Por we call Him I ‘ather, not as having 
been by nature begotten of Our Father which 
isin heaven; but having been transferred from 
servitude to sonship by the grace . the Father, 
through the Son and Holy Spirit, we are permit: 
ted so to speak by ineffable cate nae ss. 

S. But if any one wishes to learn how we 
call God © Father,” lect him hear Moses, the 
excellent schoolmaster, saying, Did not this 
thy Father Hinself buy thee, and make thee, and 
create thee7? Also Vsaias the Prophet, Ard 
now, O Lord, Thou art our Father: and we 
all are clay, the works ef Thine hands*. Yor 
most clearly has the prophetic gift declared 
that not according to nature, but according to 
God's grace, and by adoption, we call Him 
Father. 

And that thou mayest learn more exactly 
that in the Divine Scriptures it is not by any 
means the natural father only that is called fa- 
ther, hear what Paul says:—/or though ye should 
have ten thousand tutors tn Christ, yel have ye 
not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus L begat 
you through the Gospel, Yor Paul was father 
of the Corinthians, not by having begotten 
them after the flesh, but by having taught and 
begotten them again after the Spint. Hear 
Job also saying, 7 was a father of the needy" : 
for he called himself a father, not as having 
begotten them all, but as caring for them. 
And God’s Only-begotten Son Himself, when 
nailed in His flesh to the tree at the time of 
crucifixion, on seeing Mary, His own Mother 
according to the flesh, and John, the most 
beloved of His disciples, said to him, Behold / 
thy mother, and to her, Behold! thy Son?: 
teaching her the parental affection due to him 3, 
and indirectly explaining that which is said in 
Luke, and Hrs father and Ilis mother marvel- 
led at Him+: words which the tribe of heretics 
snatch up, saying that He was begotten of a 
man and a woman. Tor like as Mary was 
called the mother of John, because of her 
parental affection, not from having given him 
birth, so Joseph also was called the father of 
Christ, not from having begotten Him (for Ae 
knew her not, as the Gospel says, wvtil she had 
brought forth her first-born Sons), but because 
of the c care bestowed on His nurture. 

10 ‘Thus much then at present, in the way 
of a digression, to put you in remembrance. 
Let me, howev er, add yet another testimony in 
proof that God is called the Father of men in 
an improper sense. lor when in Esaias God 

7 Deut, xo001.-6. 8 Is. xiv. or Cor 14 15, 

tT Job xxix. 16, le MERI. 26, 27% 

3 diAooropyta might be ap iahine to the mutual affection of 
mother and son, but the context shews that it refers here to 
igen love only; 2, See: Polybius,.V. § 74 5; Xenoph. Cyvof. 1. 

AY Trieste 3. SV site toee. 

CATECHIFICAL 

LEC 1S 

is addressed He For Thou art our Father, 
though Abraham be ignorant of us®, and Sarah 

ravatled not with us7, need we inquire further 
‘on this point ? 
them be troubled from Hts countenance, the ‘Father 

And if the Psalmist says, Ze¢ 

of the fathertess, and Judge of the widors®, is it 
not manifest to all, that when God 1s cailed 
the Father of orphans who have lately lost 
their own fathers, He is so named not as 
begetting them of Himself, but as caring for 
them and shiclding them, But whercas God, 
as we have said,is in an improper sense the 
Irather of men, of Christ alone He is the Father 
by nature, not by adoption: and the Father 
of men in time, but of Christ before all time, 
as He saith, And now, O Lather, glorify Thou 
Me with Thine own self, with the glory which 
Lhad with Thee before the world was 9 

11. We believe then IN ONE GoD THE I‘a- 
THER the Unsearchable and Inefftable, [Vom no 
man hath seen*, but the Only-begotlen alone hath 
declared Him?, For He which ts of God, He 
hath seen God3: whose face the Angels do 
alway behold in heaven4, behold, however, 
each according to the measure of his own rank. 
But the undimmed vision of the Tather is 
reserved in its purity for the Son with the 
Holy Ghost. 

12. Having reached this point of my dis- 
course, and being reminded of the passages 
just before mentioned, in which God was ad- 
dressed as the Father of men, I am greatly 
amazed at men’s insensibility. lor God with 
unspeakable loving-kindness deigned to be 
called the Father of men,— He in heaven, they 
on earth,—and He the Maker of Eternity, they 
made in time,—He w/o jhelieth the earth 
tn the hollow of His hand, they upon the 
earth as grasshopperss, Yet man forsook 
his heavenly Father, and said to the stock, 
Thou art my father, and to the stone, Thou hast 
begotten me. And for this reason, methinks, 
the Psalmist says to mankind, /orget also thine 
own people, and thy father’s house7, whom thou 
hast chosen for a father, whom thou hast 
drawn upon thyself to thy destruction. 

13. And not only stocks and stones, but even 
Satan himself, the destroyer of souls, have 
some ere now chosen for a father; to whom 
the Lord said as a rebuke, Ye do the deeds of 
your father *, that is of the devil, he being the 
father of men not by nature, but by fraud. 

€ Js. Ixiii, 16. 7. Lb, lie 2s 

& Ps, Ixviti. 5. “Cyril.quotes as: usual from the Septuagint 
(Ps. Ixvii. 6), where the clause TapaxOyjcovTat ard TpoTwTOV aiTod, 
answering to nothing in the Hebrew, is evidently an interpolation, 
and may have _crept in from a marginal quotation of Is. Ixiv, 2. 

9 John xvii. 5. Se oad Birr hla Coy 2 John i. 18. 

3 John vi. 46: //e hath seen the Father, The weight of 
ae t ity is against the saa Bs (rov Oeov) which Cyril follows. 

Matt. xviii. ro, Sis) xi. pesand,o2', OS crselteors 
; Ps, XIN TO. 8 John vill. 41. 

Be hE yh 47 

For like as Paul by his godly teaching came to| 15. But while honouring our heavenly 
be called the father of the Corinthians, so the, Father let us honour also the fathers of eur 
devil is called the father of those who of their #es#'; since the Lord Himself hath evidently 

own will consent unto Artin 9, 
lor we shall not tolerate those who give a 

Wrong meaning to that saying, //erchy knew 

we the children of God, and the children of the 
devil', as if there were by nature some men to 
be saved, and some to be lost. Whereas we 
come into such holy sonship not of necessity 
but by choice: nor was the traitor Judas 
by nature a son of the devil and of perdition ; 
for certainly he would never have cast out devils 
atallin the name of Christ: for Satan casteth not 
out Satan?, Nor on the other hand would Paul 
have turned from persecuting to preaching. 
But the adoption is in our own power, as 
John saith, Bud as many as received Lim, to 
them gave Lle power to become the children of 
God, even to them that believe in His names, 
l‘or not before their believing, but from their 
believing they were counted worthy to become 
of their own choice the children of God. 

14. Knowing this, therefore, let us walk 
spiritually, that we may be counted worthy of 
God’s adoption. for as many as are led by 
the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God 4. 
Tor it profiteth us nothing to have gained the 
title of Christians, unless the works also fol- 
low ; lest to us also it be said, 7/ ye were Abra- 
hams children, ye would do the works of Abra- 
hams, Lor if we call on Him as Lather, who 
wihout respect of persons gudgeth according to 

every man's work, let us pass the tine of our 

sojourning here in fear®, loving not the worlt, 

(so appointed in the Law and the Prophets, 
saying, Zlonour thy father and thy mother, that 
wz may be well with thee, and thy days shall be 
long tn the land?, And let this commandment 
be especially observed by those here present 
ewho have fathers and mothers. C///dren, vbcy 
your parents in all things: for thts is well 
Pleasing to the Lords, Vor the Lord said not, 
Tle that loveth father or mother ts not worthy 
of Ale, lest thou from ignorance shouldest 
perversely mistake what was rightly written, 
but He added, more than Ale. For when our 
fathers on earth are of a contrary mind to our 
Iather in heaven, then we must obey Christ’s 
word. But when they put no obstacle to god- 
liness in our way, 1f we are ever carried away 
by ingratitude, and, forgetting their benefits to 
us, hold them in contempt, then the oracle 
will have place which says, /7e that curseth 
Sather or mother, let him die the death 5, 

16. The first virtue of godliness in Chris- 
tians is to honour their parents, to requite the 
troubles of those who begat them ®, and with all 
their might to confer on them what tends to 
their comfort (for if we should repay them 
ever so much, yet we shall never be able to 
return their gift of life7), that they also may 
enjoy the comfort provided by us, and may 
confirm us in those blessings which Jacob the 
supplanter shrewdly seized; and that our 
Father in heaven may accept® our good pur- 
pose, and judge us worthy 40 shine amid the 

neither the things that are in the world: for if righteous as the sun tn the kingdom of our 

any man love the world, the love of the Father is 
not in him7, NWherefore,my beloved children, 
let us by our works offer glory to our Lather 
qwhich ts in heaven, that they may sce our good 
works, and glorify our Lather which is in 
heaven ®, Let us cast all our care upon ffi, 
Jor our Lather knoweth what things we have 

2 PSoly £8: t x John iii. ro. 2 Mark ili. 23. 
a Jotitivs 12 4 Rom. viii. rq. 5 John viil. 39. 
Oe Pata As Oe 7 xX Jen ie tee & Matt. v. 16. 

9-7 Pet, v.73 Matt vi. 8 

Father: To whom be the glory, with the 
Only-begotten our Saviour Jesus Christ, and 
with the Holy and Life-giving Spirit, now and 
ever, to all eternity. Amen. 

t Heb. xii. 9. 2 Deut. v. 16. 3° Col, iit. 20. 

4 Natt. x. 37. 5 Ek Mi, ys evs xx, O + Matt, xv a. 

© Compare tor the thought Euripides, J/edéea, 1o2g—1035. 

7 avteyvvqga. Jeremy ‘Taylor (Ductor Dudbitantiun, Book 
LI]. cap. ii. $17) mentions several stories in which a parent is 
nourished from a daughter's breast, who thus ‘saves the lite she 
cannot give.’ 

8 On the change of Moods, see Jelf, Greek Grammar, § 809. 
The second verb (karaftwoetev) expresses a wish and a consequence 
which wight follow, if the first (arnptgwotv) wish be realized, 
as it probably may be. Cf. Herod. ix. 51. 5 Nath, wil, 44. 

LECTURT -yaiy, 

ALMIGHTY. 

JEREMIAH xxxix. 18, 19 (Septuagint). 

The Great, the strong God, Lord of great Counsel, and mighty in Fis works, the Great God. 
the Lord Almighty and of great name* 

1. By believing in ONE Gop we cut off all, 

misbelief in many gods, using this as a shield 
against Greeks, and every opposing power of 
heretics ; and by adding, IN ONE GoD THE 
FATHER, we contend against those of the cir- 
cumcision, who deny the Only-begotten Son 
of God. For, as was said yesterday, even 
before explaining the truths concerning our 
Lord Jesus Christ, we made it manifest at 
once, by saying ‘* The Father,” that He is the 
Father of a Son: that as we understand that 
God is, so we may understand that He has 
aSon. But to those titles we add that He is 

also ‘ALMIGHTY ;” and this we affirm because 

of Greeks and Jews? together, and all heretics. 

2. For of the Greeks some have said that 
God is the soul of the world3: and others that 
His power reaches only to heaven, and not to 
earth as well. Some also sharing their error, 
and misusing the text which says, “dnd Thy 
truth unto the clouds 4,” have dared to circum- 
scribe God’s providence by the clouds and the 
heaven, and to alienate from God the things 
on earth; having forgotten the Psalm which 
says, Jf I go up into heaven, Thou art there: 
YL go down into hell, Thou art presents, For if 

1 The text is translated from the Septuagint, in which S, Cyril 
found the title ALMIGHTY (Ilavtoxpatwp), one of the usual equiva- 
lents in the Septuagint for Lord of Hosts (Sabaoth). In the 
English A.V. and R.V. the passage stands thus: Jer. eeRi. 35, 
19: The Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of Hosts, is His 
name, Great tn counsel, and nig hty wn work. 

2“ For even the Jewish nation had wicked heresies: for of 
them were... the Pharisees, who ascribe the practice of sinners 
to fortune and fate; and the Basmotheans, who deny prov idence 
and say that the world is made by and motion” (A gos? 
Const, V1.6). Compare Euseb.( 2.77. IV. 

3 Cicero, De Natura Deorum, Vab. rh bys “* Pythagoras 
thought that God was the soul pervading all nature.”? The doc- 
trine was accepted both by Stoics and P latonists, and became very 

veneral. Cf. Virg. Georg. iv. 221: 

Deum namque ire per omnis 

‘Terrasque, tractusque maris, calumque profundum, 
Ac. vi, 726: 

Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus 

Meus agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscct. 

4 Ps. xxxvie 5. Cyril appears to have borrowed this statement 
from Clement of Alexandria, who states (Stromat., V. xiv. 
that eh m this Psalm the thought occurred to Aristotle to let 
be OViC lence come down as far as to the Moon. 

Pa NGy xin Sy 

and 2 

§ 91) | 

there is nothing higher than heaven, and if 
hell is deeper than the earth, He who rules 
the lower regions reaches the earth also. 

Dut heretics again, as I have said before, 
know not One Almighty God. Tor He is 
Almighty who rules all things, who has power 
over all things. But they who say that one 
God is Lord of the soul, and some other of 
the body, make neither of them perfect, be- 
cause either is wanting to the other®. For how 
is he almighty, who has power over the soul, 
but not over the body? And how is he al- 
mighty who has dominion over bodies, but no 
power over spirits? But these men the Lord 
confutes, saying on the contrary, Rather fear 
ge Him which ts able to destroy both soul and 
body in hell7. For unless the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ has the power over both, 
how does He subject both to punishment ? 
For how shall He be able to take the body 
which is another’s and cast it into hell, evce/¢ 
fle first bind the strong man, and spoil his 
goods ® 7 

4. But the Divine Scripture and the doc- 
trines of the truth know but One God, who 
rules all things by His power, but endures 
many things of His will, For He rules even 
over the idolaters, but endures them of His 
forbearance: He rules also over the heretics 
who set Him at nought, but bears with them 
because of His long-suffering: He rules even 
over the devil, but bears with him of His 
long-suffering, not from want of power, as if 
defeated. For he ts the beginning of the Lou's 
creation, made to be mocked®, not by Himself, 

7 NUAC RAS: 

- see note on Lect. IV. 4. 
8 Ib. xii. 29. 

2 ee TOUT éoriv &px7 TACT BATOS Kuptov, memoinucvor 

eyxkaTarat¢erOar VTd THY ayyédwy avrov. In this description of 

| Behemoth the Septuagint differs much from the Hebrew, which 
| is thus rendered in our English Versions, xl. 19: 

He as the hitcf, 
v8 the ways of God: he (only, Ree) that made him can make 
his sword to approach unto him, Compare Job xli. 5: Walt thou 
play with him as with a bird? and Ps. civ. 26: There rs that 
Leviathan whom thou hast formed to ple y therein (Sept. to take 
thy pastime with him). See Baruch ui. 17, with the note in the 
Speal:er’s Commentary. 

age ou 

for that were unworthy of Him, but dy the 
Angels whom He hath made. But He suffered 
him to lve, for two purposes, that he might 

diserace himself the more in his defeat, and. 

that mankind might be crowned with victory. 
O all wise providence of God! which takes 
the wicked purpose for a groundwork of sal- 
vation for the faithful. For as He took the 
unbrotherly purpose of Joseph’s brethren for 
a groundwork of His own dispensation, and, 
by permitting them to sell their brother from 
hatred, took occasion to make him king 
whom He would; so he permitted the devil 
to wrestle, that the victors might be crowned ; 
and that when victory was gained, he might 
be the more disgraced as being conquered 
by the weaker, and men be greatly honoured 
as having conquered him who was once an 
Archangel. 

5. Nothing then is withdrawn from the power 
of God; for the Scripture says of Him, /ov 
all things are Thy servants, AY things alike 
are His servants, but from all these One, His 
only Son, and One, His Holy Spirit, are ex- 
cepted; and all the things which are His 
servants serve the Lord through the One Son 
and in the Holy Spirit. God then rules all, 
and of His long-suffering endures even mur- 
derers and robbers and fornicators, ha ing 
appointed a set time for recompensing every 
one, that if they who have had long warning 
are still impenitent in heart, they may re- 
ceive the greater condemnation. They are 
kings of men, who reign upon earth, but not 
without the power from above: and_ this 
Nebuchadnezzar once learned by experience, 
when he said; Sor His kingdom ts an ever- 
lasting kingdom, and His power from generation 
fo gencration®, 

6. Riches, and gold, and silver are not, as 

some think, the devil’s? : for ¢he whole world of 

riches ts for the faithful man, but for the Sitthless 
not even a fenny 3. Now nothing is more faith- 
less than the devil; and God says plainly by 
the Prophet, Zhe gold ts Mine, and the silver is 
Mine, and to whomsoever I will I gtve tts, 
Do thou but use it well, and there is no fault 
to be found with money: but whenever thou 

10). Pb. CRI ete I 

2On 

Dan. iv. 34. 
this doctrine of the Manicheans see 
putatio, cap. 42), Epiphanius (//eves. Ixvi. 
Clement. Hom. xv. cap. 9: ‘To all of us possessions are sins.” 
Plato (Laws, V. 743): ‘I can never agree with them that the 
rich man will be really happy, unless he is also good: 
who is eminently good to be also extremel 

3 Prov. xvii. 6, according to the Septuagint. See note on 
Cat. V. 2, where the same passage is quoted. Clement of Alex- 
andria (Stromart. 11. 5) refers to it in connexion with the passage 
of Plato quoted in the preceding note. S. Augustine also quotes 
and explains it in A 4/4. 153, § 26. 

4° The former clause is trom Haggai ii. 8; the latter, taken 
from the words of the Tempter in Luke iv. 6, is quoted both 
by Cyril and by other Fathers as if from Haggai. Chrysostom 
(4fom. xxxiv. $s, in 1 Cor. xiii.) treats the use which some made 
of the misquotation as ridiculous. 

VOLES Vibis 

Archelaus (Dés- 
§ 81). Compare 

y rich is impossible.” 

but for one | 

Ris Vid AO 

hast made a bad use of that which is cood, 
then being unwilling to blame thine own 
management, thou impiously throwest back 
the blame upon the Creator. A man may 
even be justiticd by money: Z was hungry, 
aid ye save Ae meats; that certainly was 
from money. L was naked, and ye clothed Me: 
)that certainly was by money. And wouldest 
thou learn that money may become a door 
of the kingdom of heaven? S¢//, saith He, 
that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou 
shalt have treasure in heaven ®, 

7- NowI have made these remarks because 
of those heretics who count possessions, and 
‘money, and men’s bodies accursed 7. For I nei- 
ther wish thee to be a slave of money, nor to 
treat as enemies the things which God has given 
thee for use. Never say then that riches are 
the devil’s: for though he say, A// these will [ 
give thee, for they are delivered unto me 8 one 
may indeed even reject his assertion ; for we 
need not believe the liar: and yet perhaps 
he spake the truth, being compelled by the 
power of His presence: for he said not, 4// 
these «itll L sive thee, for they are mine, but, for 
they are delivered unto me. Ue grasped not 
the dominion of them, but confessed that he 
had been entrusted 9 with them, and was for 
(atime dispensing them. But at a proper time 
interpreters should inquire whether his state- 
ment is false or true%. 

8. God then is One, the Father, the Almighty, 
‘whom the brood of heretics have dared to 
| blaspheme. Yea, they have dared to blaspheme 
the Lord of Sabaoth?, who sitteth above the 
| Cherubim 3: they have dared to blaspheme the 
Lord Adonai‘: they have dared to blaspheme 
Him who is in the Prophets the Almighty 

5 Matt. xxv. 35, 36. 6 Ib. xix. az. 

| 7 The connexion of owpara with money and possessions sug- 
gests the not uncommon meaning ‘‘slaves.” See Poly, xviii. 18, 
$6: Kat thy evdovytar amédovro Kat ra Twpata, Kal adv TOVTOLS 
ete Twas TOV KTHTEwWV, ‘* household furniture, and slaves, and 
besides these some also of their lands.” See Dictionary of 
Christian Antiquities, “ Slavery,” where it is shewn that Chris 
tians generally and even Bishops still possessed slaves throughout 
the 4th Century. 

But here it is perhaps more probable that Cyril refers, as before, 
Cat. iv. § 23, to the Manichean doctrine of the body as the root of 
sin. 

8 Matt. iv. 93 Luke iv. 6, 

9 Por ¢yxexetpyoéa, the reading of all the printed Editions, 
which hardly yields a suitable sense, we should probably sub- 
stitute éyxeyerpta@ar. A similar confusion of the two verbs occurs 
in Polybius (A/zs¢. VIII. xviii. 6); the proper use of the latter 
is seen in Joh. Damase. (De Ive Orthod. I. 4, quoted by 
| Cleopas), who speaks of Satan as being ‘fof these Angelic powers 
| the chief of the earthly order, and entrusted by God with the 
| guardianship of the earth” (rs yis rh gvrakny eyxerprabeis 
Tapa @cov). 

© On this point compare Iveneus (Ter. 
Gregory of Nyssa (Orat. Caiech. § 5). 

2 ‘The reference is to Manes, of whom his disciple Turbo says 
(Archelat Disput. § 10), The name Sabaoth. which is h mnourable 
and mighty with you, he declares to be the nature of man, and the 
| parent of lust: for which reason the simple, he says, worship 
lust, and think it to be a god.” 

BPS lexwe ay 

4 "Adwrvat, Heb. sy oyy, ‘the Lord,” an old form of the 

V. xxi.—xxiv.), and 

Tr : 
Plural of majesty, used of God only, 

10: 

i 

Al- 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Flee trom oe error of many gods, flee also 
from every heresy, and say like Job, But L will 
call upon the Alinishty Lord, zehich docth great 

Gods, But worship thou One God the 
mighty, the 

things and unsearchable, glorious things and 
5 ravtoxpatopa, Heb. sy bug, El-Shaddai, ‘*God_ A\l- 
mighty.” 

O CATECHETICAL 

A ee. 

marvellous without number ®, and, For all soe 
things there tis honour from the Almighty? : 
Whom be the es for ever and evcr. re 

6 Job v. 8,g. Cyril's quotation agrees with the Codex Alex- 
andrinus of the Septuagint, which has TavToKpaTopa, ‘* Almighty,” 
while the Vatican and other MSS. read tov ravrwy eaTvorny. 

7 Job xxxvii. 23: God hath upon Him terrible majesty (RK. y ). 
The Vatican and Alexandrine MSs. of the Septuagint read émt 
Tovrots mEYaAn 7 ddfa Kut TULA MavTOKparopos. (for these e things 
great is the glory and honour of the Alinighty.) But Cyril's text 
is the same as the Aldine and Complutensian, 

bee T URE 

ON THE WORDs, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND PARTE AND OF ALL: THINGS Visi Bille 

IX. 

JAD EN VISEBIon: 

JOB xxxviil, 2—3, 

Wo ts this that hideth counsel from 

Me, and keepeth words tn his heart, 

and thinketh to hide them from AMfe*? 

t. To look upon God with eyes of flesh is 
Impossible: for the incorporeal cannot be 
subject to bodily sight : and the Only-begotten 
Son of God Himself hath testified, saying, JVo 
man hath seen God at any time? Vor if accord- 
ing to that which is written in Ezekiel any one 
should understand that Ezekiel saw Him, yet 
what saith the Scripture ? Ze saw the likeness of 
the glory of the Lord} ; not the Lord Himself, 
but “he tikeness of His slory, not the glory 
itself, as it really is, And when he saw mercly 

the lekeness of the glory, and not the clory 
itself, he fell to the earth from fear. Now 
if the sight of the likeness of the glory 

brought fear and distress upon the prophets, 
any one who should attempt to behold God 
Himself would to a certainty lose his life, 
according to the saying, Wo man shall see Aty 
Jace and livet, For this cause God of His 
great loving-kindness spread out the heaven 
as a veil of His proper Godhead, that we 
should not perish. The word is not mine, but 
the Prophet’s - 4 Zhou shalt rend the heavens, 
trembling will take hold of the mountatns at 
sight of hee, and they will flow downs, 
And why dost thou wonder that Ezckiel fell 
down on seeing the likeness of the glory ? 
when Danicl at the sight of Gabriel, though 
but a servant of God, straightway shuddered 
and fell on his face, and, prophet as he 
was, dared not answer him, until the Angel 
transformed himself into the likeness of a son 
of man®. Now if the appearing of Gabriel 
wrought trembling in the Prophets, had God 
Himself been seen as Ie is, would not all have 
perished ? 

2. The Divine Nature then it is impossible 
to see with cyes of flesh: but from the works, 

t The Septuagint, from which Cyril quotes the text, differs much 
from the Hebrew, and from the Inglish Versions: Ji’ho zs this 
that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? Gird up 
nov thy loins like a man: for L will demand of thee, and an- 
swer thou Me. 

A Volsin sy, aes 3 Ezekiel i, 28, 4 Exod. xxxili. 20. 

5 Is. Ixiv. 1, Septuagint. R.V. Of that Thou wouldest rend 
the heavens, that Thou wouldest come down, that the mountains 
micht flow down, o Want xf, 16, 18. 

E 

which are Divine, it is possible to attain to 
some conception of His power, according to 
Solomon, who says, Zor by the greatness and 
beauty of the crealures. proportionally the Maker 
of them is seen?7. We said not that from 
the creatures the Maker is seen, but added 
Propertionabh. Vor God appears the ereater 
to every man in proportion as he has grasped 
a larger survey of the creatures : and when his 
heart is uplifted by that larger survey, he gains 
withal a greater conception of God. 

3. Wouldest thou learn that to comprehend 
the nature of God is impossible? The Three 
Children in the furnace of fire, as they hymn the 
praises of God, say Blessed art thou that behold- 
est the depths, and sitiest upon the Cherubim®, 
Tell me what is the nature of the Cherubim, 
and then look upon Him who sitteth upon 
them, And yet Ezekiel the Prophet even made 
a description of them, as far as was possible, 
saying that every one has four faces, one of 
a man, another of a lion, another of an eagle, 
and another of a calf; and that each one had 
six wings 9, and they had eyes on all sides ; and 
that under each one was a wheel of four sides. 
Nevertheless though the Prophet makes the ex- 
planation, we cannot yet understand it even as 
weread, Butif we cannotunderstand the throne, 
which he has described, how shall we be able 
to comprehend Him wi 9 sitteth thereon, the 
Invisible and Ineffable God? ‘To scrutinise 
then the nature of God is impossible : but it is 
in our power to send up praises of His glory 
for His works that are seen. 

4. These things I say to you because of the 

7 Wisdom xiii. 5. Compare Theophilus of Antioch Zo Aluto- 
dycus, 1.5, 6: “ God cannot indeed be seen by human eyes, but is 
beheld and perceived through His providence and works. ... He 
is not visible to eyes of flesh, since He is incomprehensible. 

8 Song of the Three Children, 22. 

9 In Ezekiel i. 6—11, the four living creatures have each four 
wings, as also in x. 21 according to the Hebrew. Butin the latter 
passage, according to the Vatican text of the Septuagint. each 
has eighf wings, as Codd. R. and Casaub., read here. Cyril seems 
to have confused the number in Kzekicl with that in Is. vi. 2: 
each one had six wings. By ‘a wheel of four sides” Cyril ex 
plains Ez. i. 16: a wheel in the midst of a whee/, as meaning two 
circles set at right angles to each other, like the equator and 
meridian on a globe. 

Z 

5 

13 

following context of the Creed. and because we 

Soe Wat PEEAKVE Th ONG Op; THe FATHER 
ALMIGHTY, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH, 
AND OF ALL THINGS VISIBLE AND INVISIBLE} 

in order that we may remember that the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ is the same as He 
that made the heaven and the earth ', and that 
we may make ourselves safe against the wrong 
paths of the godless heretics, who have dared 
to speak evil of the Allwise Artificer all 
this world 2, men who see with eyes of flesh, but 
have the eyes of their understanding blinded. 

s. lor what fault have they to find with the 
vast creation of God >—they, who ought to | 
have been struck with amazement on beholding 
the vaultings of the heavens: they, who ought 
to have worshipped Him who reared the sky 
as a dome, who out of the fluid nature of the 
waters formed the stable substance of the 
heaven. For God said, Let there be a firma- 
ment in the midst of the water 3, God spake once 
for all, and it stands fast, and falls not. The 
heaven is water, and the orbs therein, sun, 
moon, and stars are of fire: and how do the 
orbs of fire run their course in the water? But 
if any one disputes this because of the opposite 
natures of fire and water, let him remember the 
fire which in the time of Moses in Egypt 
flamed amid the hail, and observe the all-wise 
workmanship of God. For since there was 
need of water, because the earth was to be 
tilled, He made the heaven above of water, 
that when the region of the earth should need 
watering by showers, the heaven might from its 
nature be ready for this purpose. 

6. But what? Is there not cause to wonder 
when one looks at the constitution of the sun 
For being to the sight as it were a small body 
he contains a mighty power ; appearing from 
the East, and sending forth his light unto the 
West : whose rising at dawn the Psalmist de- 
scribed, saying: And he cometh forth out of 
his chamber as a bridegroom4, He was de- 
scribing the brightness and moderation of his 
state on first becoming visible unto men: for 
when he rides at high noon, we often flee 
from his blaze: but at his rising he is wel- 
come to all as a bridegroom to look on. 

Observe also his arrangement (or rather not 
his, but the arrangement of Him who by an- 
ordinance determined his course), how in| 
summer he rises higher and makes the days’ 
son ger giving men good time for their works : 

I PES Cette 10s hh. - Abveniectis (1. at... a) Lave Choe: 
though dispersed throughout the whole world, even to the ends 
of the earth, yet received from the Apostles and their disciples 
the Faith in One God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven, and 
earth, and the sea and all that therein is.” Tertullian (de Pre- 
se riptione Meret. cap. xiii.) ** The rule of faith is that whereby 
we believe that there is One God only, and none other than the 
Creator of the world, who brought forth all thing gs out of nothing 
through His own Word first of all sent forth.’ 

ATE G Shae ne ae 

nights 

2 Compare Cat. vi. 13, 27. 3GEn; 1.76, 4 Ds, <xix, 53 

LCT tea 

but in winter contracts his course, that the 
period of cold may be increased, and that the 
becoining longer may contribute to 
men’s rest, and contribute also to the fruitful- 
ness of the products of the earths. See also 
how the days alternately respond each to other 

in duc order, in summer increasing, and in 
vinter diminishing ; but in spring and autumn 

granting equal intervals one to another. And 
the nights again complete the lke courses ; so 
that the Psalmist also says of them, Day wiio 
day uttercth sfecch, and nicht unto ni Al pio- 
claimeth knowledw®. Yor to the heretic s who 
have no ears, sey all but ery aloud, and by 
their good order say, that there is none other 
God save the Creator who hath set them their 
bounds, and laid out the order of the Universe ?. 

7. But let no one tolerate any who say that 
one is the Creator of the light, and another of 
darkness®: for let him remember how Isaiah 
says, Lam the God who made the light, and 
created darkness9, Why, Oman, art thou vexed 
thereat? Why art thou offended at the time 
that is given thee for rest'? A servant would 
have had no rest from his masters, had not the 
darkness necessarily brought a respite. And 
often after weary Ing ourselves in the day, how 
are we refreshed in the night, and he who 
was yesterday worn with toils, rises vigorous in 
the morning because of the night’s rest? ? And 
what more helpful to wisdom than the night 3? 
Yor herein oftentimes we set before our minds 
the things of God; and herein we read and 
contemplate the Divine Oracles. And when 
is our mind most attuned to Psalmody and 

5 The common ‘reading z Wa py Tou Wvyous ’ Stipa yevntar oO 
Xpovos, GAA’ tva at VvKTES, K.7.A. gives a meaning contrary to 
the facts. The translation follows - the MSS. Roe, Casaubon, 
which omit #2) and for aAAa read cat. Compare Whewell’s 
Astronornty, p. 22: “Vhe length of the year is so determined 
as to be adapted to the constitution of most vegetables: or 
the construction of vegetables is so adjusted as to be suited 
to the length which the year really has, and unsuited to a 
duration longer or shorter by any considerable Portion. The 
vegetable clock-work is So St as ‘to po fora year.” ~sezedy gay 
“The terrestrial day, and consequently the length of the cycle 
of light and darkness, being w hat it is, we find various parts of 
the constitution both of animals and vegetables, which have a 
periodical character in their functions, corresponding to the diurnal 
succession of external conditions, and we find that the length 
of the period, as it exists in their constitution, coincides with the 
length of the natural day.” 

€ Ps. xix. 2. Compare a beautiful passage of Theophilus of An- 
tioch (Yo Aztolycus, vi.). 

7 Lucretius, V. 1182: 

‘* They saw the skies in constant order run, 
The varied seasons and the circling sun, 
Apparent rule, with unapparent cause, 
And thus they. sought in gods the source of laws.” 

8 See note 3 on Cat. iii. 33. 

9 Is. xlv.7. Compare the Homily of Chrysostom on this text. 

t Whewell, Astronomy. p. 38: ‘Animals also have a period in 
their functions and habits; as in the habits of waking, sleeping, 
eating, &c., and their well-being appears to depend on the coin- 
cidence of this period with the length of the natural day.” 

2 Chrysostom, VI. p. 1971: “ONS the day brings man out to his 
work, so the night succeeding releases him from his countless toils 
and thoughts, and lulling his w eary eyes to sleep, and closing their 
lids, prepares him to welcome the sunbeam again with his force 
in full vigour.’ 

3 Clement of Alexandria (Stvomat. IN.1221s Pr.) 3" And an 
this way they seem to have called the night Euphrone, since then 
the sou! released from the perceptions of sense turns in on itself, 
and has a truer hold of intelligence (hpévynats).” 

Priore" eere nota night? And when have 
we often called our own sins to remembrance ? 
Ts ic not at night+? Let us not then admit 
the evil thought, that another is the maker of 
darkness: for experience shews that this also 
is good and useful. 

8. They ought to have felt astonishment 
and admiration not only at the arrangement 
of sun and moon, but also at the well-ordered 
choirs of the stars, their unimpeded courses, 
and their risings in the seasons due to each: 
and how some are signs of summer, and 
others of winter; and how some mark the 
season for sowing, and others shew the com- 
mencement of navigation 5, And a man sitting 
in his ship, and sailing amid the boundless 
Waves, steers his ship by looking at the stars. 

For of these matters the Scripture says well, | 

[nd let them be for signs, and for Seasons, and 

Jor years®, not for fables of astrology and 
nativities. But observe how He has also 

graciously given us the light of day by gradual 
increase: for we do not see the sun at once 
arise ; but just a little light runs on before, in 
order that the pupil of the eye may be enabled 
by previous trial to look upon his stronger 
beam : see also how He has relieved the dark- 
ness of the night by rays of moonlight. 

9. Who ts the father of the rain? And who 
hath begotten the drops of adew7?? Who con- 
densed the air into clouds, and bade them 
carry the waters of the rain’, now dringing 
golden-tinted clouds from the north, now chang- 
ing these into one uniform appearance, and 
again transforming them into manifold circles 
and other shapes? IVho can number the clouds 
in wisdom*? Whereof in Job it saith, Ava He 
knowetlh the separations of the clouds?, and hath 

4 Chrysostom (Tom. II. p. 793): “We usually take the reckon- 
ig of our money early in the morning, but of our actions, of all 
that we have said and done by day, let us demand of ourselves the 
account after supper, and even after nightfall, as we lie upon our 
bed, with none to trouble, none to disturb us. Aud if we see 
anything done amiss, let us chastise our conscience, Ict us rebuke 
our mind, let us so vehemently impugn our account, that we may 
no more dare to rise up and bring ourselves to the same pit of sin, 
being mindful of the scourging at night.” 

5 Clein. Alex. (Stvomat. VI. 11): ‘The same is true also of 
Astronomy, for being engaged in the investigation of the heavenly 
bodies, as to the form of the universe, and the revolution of the 
heaven, and the motion of the stars, it brings the soul nearer 
to the Creative Power, and teaches it to be quick in perceiving 
the seasons of the year, the changes of the atmosphere, and the 
risings of the stars; since navigation also and husbandry are full 
of benefit from this science.” 
cap. xili-). Ge Genet. ide 7 Job xxxviii. 28. 

® Whewell, Astronomy, p. 88: “Clouds are produced by 
aqttcous vapour when it returns to the state of water.” p. 89: 
“Clouds produce vain. In the formation of a cloud the pre- 
cipitation of moisture probably forms a fine watery Jowder, which 
remains suspended in the air in consequence of the minuteness 
of its particles: but if from any cause the precipitation is collected 
in larger portions, and becomes drops, these descend by their 
weight and produce a shower.” Compare Aristotle, Meteorologica, 
I. ix. 3; Ansted, Physical Geography, p. 210. 

9 Job xxxvii. 22: ‘* Out of the north cometh golden splendour” 
CROVO): I Job xxxviii. 37. 

2 Job xxxvii. 16: “Dost thou know the balancings of the 
clouds?” In the Septuagint dcacprow vedov may mean “the 
separate path of the clouds” (Vulg. 

bE TG 

Compare Lactantius (De /ré Ded, | 

““semitas nubium,”) or ‘the’ 
dissolving,” as in Aristotle (A/edeorvol. I. vii. 10: Suaxpiver Oar Kai | 

a 
J 

on 

ies Eos: 

bent down the heaven to the earth}; and, He who 
aumbereth the clouds tn wisdom: and, the cloud 
ts not rent under Him, Vor so many measures 
of waters lic upon the clouds, yet they are not 
‘rent : but come down with all good order upon 
the earth. Who bringeth the winds out of thetr 
| dreasuries 8? And w/o, as we said before, zs he 
that hath begotten the drops of dew? And 
are of whose comb cometh the ice®? For its 
| 

substance is like water, and its strength like 
stone. And at one time the water becomes 
snow like wool, at another it ministers to Him 
‘who scattereth the mist like ashes 7, and at 
another it is changed into a stony substance ; 
since fle governs the waters as He will’, Its 
nature is uniform, and its action manifold in 
force. Water becomes in vines wine that 
maketh glad the heart of man: and in olives 
oll that maket man’s face to shine: and is 
transformed also into dread that strenglheneth 
man’s heart9, and into fruits of all kinds which 
He hath created ?. 

10. What should have been the effect of 
these wonders? Should the Creator have been 
blasphemed? Or worshipped rather? And 
so far [ have said nothing of the unseen works 
of His wisdom. Observe, I pray you, the 
spring, and the flowers of every kind in all 
their likeness still diverse one from another ; 
the deepest crimson of the rose, and the purest 
whiteness of the lily : for these spring fro the 
same rain and the same earth, and who makes 
them to differ? Who fashions them? Observe, 
pray, the exact care: from the one substance 
(of the tree there is part for shelter, and part 
for divers fruits: and the Artificer is One. 
Of the same vine part is for burning ?, and part 
for shoots, and part for leaves, and part for ten- 
drils, and part for clusters. 

Admire also the great thickness of the knots 
which run round the reed, as the Artificer hath 

| Stadver@ar To Starucgov vypov bd TOV TAPS THs OEpuAs avabv- 
(MLagems, BITE fn TUYlaTaTbar padiws cis Vdwp. “The moist 
| vapour is separated and dissolved by the great heat of the evapor- 
| ation, so that it does not easily condense into water.” Cf. Plate; 
Sophistes 243 B: dtaxploes Kai guyKpioecs. 
3 Job xxxviil. 37 (according to the Septuagint): ‘‘ And who is 
he that numbereth the clouds by wisdom, and bent down the 
j heaven to the earth?” A.V., R.V. “Or who can pour out the 
| bottles of heaven?” 
| + Job xxvi. 8: “He bindeth up the waters in His thick clouds : 
| and the cloud is not rent under them.” 
| § Pe, - Coty 7 6 Job xxxviil. 28. 
| 7 Ps. exlvii. 16: ‘He scattereth the hoar frost like ashes.” 
| The Hebrew JYDD is rendered by mayvy, ‘hoar frost,” in Job 

| XXXVill. 29, but here by omcyAn, “mist.” 

| & Job xxxvii. 10: ‘the breadth of the waters is straitened” 
| (Marg. R.V. “ congealed”). The word oiaxtgec in the Septuagint 
| means to “‘ steer,” Lat. ‘ gubernare” to ‘‘turn as by a helm.” 

Sosy GLY. hy 

| t There is a similar passage on the various efilects of water iu 

| Cat. xvi. re. Chrysostom (de Status, Hom. xii. 2), Epiphanius 

| (cLacoratus, p. 69), and other Fathers, appear to reproduce both 
the thoughts and words of Cyril. : : 

2 For kava, “‘ burning,” Morel and Milles, with Cod. Coisl., 
read kavoruy, a rare word explained by Hesychius as the “ growth ” 
or “foliage” of the vine: but this is fully expressed in what 
follows, and the reading kavowy is confirmed by Virgil (Georg. ii. 
403): ‘* Primus devecta cremato sarmenta”’ (Reischl). 

54 CATRCHI THe: sae Tie, 

made them. From one and the same earth 
come forth creeping things, aid wiltt beasts, 
and cattle, and trees, and tood ; and gold, and 
silver, and brass, and iron, and stone. ‘Phe 
nature of the waters is but one, yet from it 
comes the substance of fishes and of birds ;, 
whereby as the foriner swim in the waters, | 
so the birds fly in the air. 

11. Zhis great and wide sea, therein are’ 
things creeping innumerable+, Who can describe | 
the beauty of the fishes that are therein?) 
Who can describe th. greatness of the whales, | 
and the nature § of its amphibious animals, how | 
they live both on dry land and in the waters ?) 
Who can tell the depth and the breadth of the | 
sea, or the force of its enormous waves? Yet) 
it stays at its bounds, because of Him who, 
said, //itherto shalt thou come, and no further, 
but within thyself shall thy wares be broken”. 
Which sea also clearly shews the word of the! 
command imposed upon it, since after it has | 

the neighing horse the wantonness of young 
men 2, and the laborious ant, to arouse the 
sluguish and the dull; for when a man passes 
his youth in idleness, then he is instructed by 
the irrational animals, being reproved by the 
divine Scripture saying, Go to the ant, thou 
slugvard, see and emulate her tways, and become 
wiser than shes, Yor when thou seest her 
treasuring up her food in good season, imitate 
her, and treasure up for thyself fruits of good 
works for the world to come. And again, Go 
to the bee, and learn how industrious she iss: 
how, hovering round all kinds of tlowers, she 
collects her honey for thy benefit: that thou 
also, by ranging over the Holy Seriptures, 
mayest lay hold of salvation for thyself, and 
being filled with them mayest say, ow sacet 
are thy words unto my throat, yea sweeter than 
honey and the honeycomb unto ny mouth >. 

14. Is not then the Artificer worthy the 
rather to be glorified? For what? If thou 

run up, it leaves upon the beach a visible} knowest not the nature of all things, do the 
line made by the waves, shewing, as it were,|things that have been made forthwith become 
to those who see it, that it has not passed’ useless? Canst thou know the efficacy of all 
its appointed bounds. herbs? Or canst thou learn all the benefit 

12. Who can discern the nature of the which proceeds from every animal? Ere now 
birds of the air? How some carry with them! even from venomous adders have come anti- 
a voice of melody, and others are variegated | dotes for the preservation of men® But thou 

with all manner of painting on their wings, and 
others fly up into mid air and float motion- 
less, as the hawk: for by the Divine com: 
mand the hawk spreadeth out his wings and 
froateth motionless, looking towards the south?. 
What man can behold the eagle’s loity flight ? 
lf then thou canst not discern the soaring of 
the most senseless of the birds, how wouldest 
thou understand the Maker of all? | 

13. Who among men knows even the names | 
of all wild beasts? Or who can accurately | 
discern the physiology of each? But if 
of the wild beasts we know not even the) 
mere names, how shall we comprehend the 
Maker of them? God’s command was but. 
one, which said, Let the earth bring forth wild 
beasts, and catile, and creeping things, afler their | 
kinds®: and from one earth 9, by one command, | 
have sprung diverse natures, the gentle sheep | 
and the carnivorous lion, and various instincts | 
of irrational animals, bearing resemblance to 
the various characters of men; the fox to! 
manifest the craft that is in men, and the) 
snake the venomous treachery of friends, and_ 

3 For the construction of twa with the Indicative tararrac, 
see Bernhardy, Syataz, p. get. WinereGrvam. NOT. IIL. sect, 
xtc). of Ps. ie, ee. 

5 Gr. Uréaracwy, literally * substance.” 

6 Job xxxviil. rr. 7 Th, site. 26. e'Gen, 1. Sy, 

9 Instead of dwrys (Milles), or myyis (Bened. Roe, Casaub.) | 
the recent Editors have restored tys yas with the Jerusalem and 
Munich MSS., and Basil. | 

Gr. xevnoecs movements,” “impulses.” Aristotle (//és ‘ora | 
Animalinm, 1X. vii. 1) remarks that many imitations of man's | 
mode of life nay be observed in the habits of other animals. | 

wilt say to me, “ The snake is terrible.” Fear 
thou the Lord, and it shall not be able to 
hurt thee. ‘A scorpion stings.” Fear the 
Lord, and it shall not sting thee. ‘ A lion is 
bloodthirsty.’ Fear thou the Lord, and he 
shall lie down beside thee, as by Daniel. But 
truly wonderful also is the action of the 
animals: how some, as the scorpion, have the 
sharpness in a sting; and others have their 
power in their teeth; and others do battle 
with their claws; while the basilisk’s power is 
his gaze7, So then from this varied work- 
manship understand the Creator’s power. 

2 Jer. ¥. 8. 

3 Prov. vi. 6. Instead of the epithet ‘‘laborious” (yewpyd- 
raros). some MSS. have ‘‘agile” or ‘‘ restless” (yopyorazos). 

4 After the description of the ant, Prov. vi. 6—8, there follows 
in the Septuagint a similar refererce to the bee: ‘‘Or go to the 

ee, and learn how industrious she is, and how comely she makes 
her work, and the produce of her labours kings and commons 
adopt for health, and she is desired and esteemed by all, and 
though feeble in strength has been exalted by her regard for 
wisdom.” The interpolation is supposed to be of Greek origin, as 
containing ‘‘ idiomatic Greek expressions which would not occur 
to a translator from the Hebrew ” (Delitzsch). 

5 Ps: crix 103, 

6 Compare Bacon (Nalurval Hist. 965): ‘I would have trial 
made of two other kinds of bracelets, for comforting the heart and 
spirits! one of the trochisch of vipers, made into little pieces of 
beads; for since they do great geod inwards (especially for 
pestilent agues), it is like they will be effectual outwards, where 
they may be applied in greater quantity. There would be trochisch 

| likewise made of snakes; whose flesh dried is thought to have 

avery good opening and cordial virtue.” 7d. 969: ‘* The writers 
of natural magic commend the wearing of the spoil of a snake, 
for preserving of health.” ‘Thomas Jackson (Om the Creed, VIII. 
8, § 4): ‘The poisonous bitings of the scorpion are usually cured 
by the oil of scorpions.” 

7 Shakespeare (Richard ITT. Act. 1. Se. ii.) . 

Glo. ‘* Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.” 
Anne. ‘*’ Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.” 

ja oR ea 55 
15. But these things perhaps thou knowest the fence of the eyclids9? Tor ag to the com- 
not: thou wouldest have nothing in common plicated and wonderful contrivance of the eyds, 
with the creatures which are without thee. En- the voluminous books of the physicians hardly 
ter now into thyself, and from thine own nature give us explanation. Who distributes the 
consider its Artificer. What is there to find fault one breath to the whole body? ‘Thou seest, 
with in the framing of thy body? Be master of O man, the Artificer, thou seest the wise 
thyself, and nothing evil shail proceed from Creator, 
any of thy members. Adam was at first with-| 16. ‘These points my discourse has now 
out clothing in Paradise with Eve, but it was treated at large, having left out many, yea, ten 
not because of his members that he deserved thousand other things, and especially things 
to be cast out. The members then are not incorporeal and invisible, that thou mayest 
the cause of sin, but they who use their mem- abhor those who blaspheme the wise and 
bers amiss; and the Maker thereof is wise. good Artificer, and from what is spoken and 
Who prepared the recesses of the womb for read, and whatever thou canst thyself discover 
child-bearing? Who gave life to the lifeless or conceive, from the greatness and beauty of 
thing within it? Who dvitted us with sinews the creatures mayest proporticnably see the maker 
and bones, and clothed us with skin and flesh lof them*, and bending the knee with sodly 
and, as soon as the child was born, brought reverence to the Maker of the worlds, the 
streams of milk out of the breasts ? How worlds, I mean, of sense and thought, both 
grows the babe into a boy, and the boy into |visible and invisible, thou. mayest with a 
a youth, and then into a man; and, still the grateful and holy tongue, with unwearied lips 
same, passes again into an old man, while no and heart, praise God and say, How wonderful 
one notices the exact change from day to day? |are Thy works, O Lord; in wisdom hast Thou 
Of the food, how is one part changed into |mwade them all?.. For to Thee belongeth honour, 
blood, and another separated for excretion, and glory, and majesty, both now and through- 
and another part changed into flesh? Who lout all ages. Amen. 
gives to the heart its unceasing motion? Who 
wiscly guarded the tenderness of the eyes with 

| 9 Xenophon Cllemor. Socratis, I. cap. iv.): “And moreover 
;does not this also seem to thee like a work of providence, that, 
Compare Bacon (De A ugimentis, VII. cap. ii.): “The fable goes | whereas the sight is weak, the Creator furnished it with eyelids 
of the basilisk, that if he see you first, you die for it, but if you /for doors, which are opened whenever there is need to use the 
see him first, he dies.” Bacon refers to Pliny (Wat. Hésé. viii. 33). | sight, but are closed in sleep.” 
8 Job x. 11 1 Wisdom xiii. 5. 2° Ps, Civ; 24. 

Peer ees erie ee) LR 

Nore.—In the manuscripts which contain | strange loves, committest io fornication, covetest 
this discourse under the name of “A Homily not thy neighbour’s wife. Drive out wicked 
of S. Basil oz God as Lncomprehenstile,” some thoughts from thine heart, be as God mace 
portions are changed to suit that subject: but) thee, and thou wilt rather give thanks to thy 
the conclusion especially is marked by great | Creator. 
addition and variation, which it is well to re-| Adam at first was without clothing, faring 
produce here. Accordingly in place of the | daintily in Paradise ; and after he had received 
words in $15: rd peunrdy, ‘What is there to’ the commandment, but failed to keep it, and 
find fault with?” and the following, the manu- iwickedly stretched forth his hand (not because 
scripts before mentioned have it thus: the hand wished this, but because his will 

“What is there to find fault with in the fram- | stretched forth his hand to that which was for- 
ing of the body? Come forth into the midst | bidden), because of his disobedience he lost 
and speak. Control thine own will, and nothing | also the good things he had received. ‘hus 
evil shall proceed from any of thy members. }the members are not the cause of sin to those 
lor every one of these has of necessity been) who use them, but the wicked mind, as the 
made for our use. Chasten thy reasoning unto Lordsays, for outof theheart proceed evilthoiehts, 
picty, submit to God’s commandments, and JSornications, adulteries, envyings, and such like. 
none of these members sin in working and sery-| In what things thou choosest, therein thy limbs 
ing in the uses for which they were made. If| serve thee ; they are excellently made for the 
thou be not willing, the eye sees not amiss, the | service of the soul: they are provided as ser- 
ear hears nothing which it ought not, the hand | vants to thy reason. Guide them well by the 
is not stretched out for wicked greed, the foot! motion of piety; bridle them by the fear of 
walketh not towards injustice, thou hast no | God ; bring them into subjection to the desire 

CATECHET1Ge les Tac. 

is better for thee to keep silence, and in faith 
adore, according to the divine Word, than dar- 
ingly to search after things which neither thou 
canst reach, nor Holy Scripture hath delivered 
to thee. ‘These points my discourse has now 
treated at large, that thou mayest abhor those 
the chambers of the womb? Who, &c.” who blaspheme the wise and good Artiticer, 

At the end of the same section, after the and rather mayest thyself also say, //ozw awon- 
words “ Wise Creator,” this is found: “Glorify erful are Thy works O Lord ; in wisdom hart 
Him in His unsearchable works,and concerning | Zou made them all, To Thee be the glory, 
Him whom thou art not capable of knowing and power, and worship, with the Holy Spirit, 
inquire not curiously what His essence is. It now and ever, and throughout ailages. Amen.” 

of temperance and abstinence, and they will 
never rise up against thee to tyrannise over 
thee ; but rather they will guard thee, and help 
thee more mightily in thy victory over the 
devil, while expecting also the incorruptible and 
everlasting crown of the victory. — Who openeth 

i 

Peer ei xX, 

On THE CLAUSF, 

AND IN ONE Lorp Jrsus Curist, 

WITH A READING FROM 

THE Frrsr EpisrLe TO ‘THE CORINTHIANS. 

Lior though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or on earth? ; 
God, the Lather, of whom are all things, and we in Him; 

yet to us there ts One 
and One Lord Jesus Christ, 

through whom are all things, and we through Him, 

THEY who have been taught to believe 
‘IN ONE Gob THE FATHER ALMIGHTY,” ought 
also to believe in His Only-begotten Son. 
Vor he that denieth the Son, the same hath not 
the Lather®. Lam the Doors, saith Jesus; 10 one 
cometh unto the Father but throuch Ale+. Yor 
if thou deny the Door, the knowledge concern- 
ing the Father is shut off from thee. Vo man 
knowelh the Luther, save the Son, and he to 
whomsoever the Soi shall reveal Him. Yor if 
thou deny Him who reveals, thou remainest in 

ignorance. ‘There is a sentence in the 
Gospels, saying, fle that believeth not on the 

Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God 
abideth on him® For the Father hath indig- 
nation when the Only-begotten Son is set at 
nought. For it 1s grievous to a king that 
merely his soldier should be dishonoured; and 
when one of his nobler officers or friends is 
dishonoured, then his anger is greatly increased: 
but if any should do despite to the king’s only- 
begotten son himself, who shall appease the 
father’s indignation on behalf of his only- 
begotten son ? 

2. If, therefore, any one wishes to shew 
piety towards God, let him worship the Son, 
since otherwise the Father accepts not his 
service. The Father spake with a loud voice 
from heaven, sayine, 7A7s 7s ALy beloved Son, in 
whom Lam well piersed?, ‘Vhe Father was 
well picased ; untess thou also be well pleased 
in Him, thou hast not life. Le not thou 
carried away with the Jews when they craftily 
say, There is one God alone; but with the 
knowlcdze that God is One, know that there 
is also an Only begotten Son of God. Jam not. 
the first to sav this, but the Psalmist in the 
oe of the Son saith, Ze Lord said unto 

as fies ie gods 
3 Ib. Xx. 
6 John iii. a 

Z, (Cordevilleersy Os 
wtany and lords many. 

AT salve Os 

TNEACU un ge 

Cyril omits the clause: 
=>» Joh 11.33, 
5 Matt. x1. 27. 

Me, Thou art AMTy Son®. Heed not therefore 
what the Jews say, but what the Prophets say. 
Dost thou wonder that they who stoned and 
slew the Prophets, set at nought the Prophets’ 
ates ? 
. Believe thou iy ONE Lorp Jesus Curist, 

Tie ONLY-BEGOTTEN SON OF Gop. For we 
say “One Lord Jesus Christ,” that His Son- 
ship may be ‘‘ Only-begotten:” we say ‘‘ One,” 
that thou mayest not suppose another: we 
say “One,” that thou mayest not profanely 
diffuse the many names? of His action amon 
many sons. Vor He is called a Doort; but 
take not the name literally for a thing of wood, 
but a spiritual, a living Door, discriminating 
those who enter in. He is called a Way ?, not 
one trodden by feet, but leading to the Father 
in heaven ; He is called a Sheep 3, not an irra- 
tional one, but the one which through its 
precious blood cleanses the world from its 
sins, which is led before the shearers, and 
knows when to be silent. This Sheep again is 
called a Shepherd, who says, J am the Good 
Shepherd +: a Sheep because of His manhood, 
a Shepherd because of the loving-kindness of 
His Godhead. And wouldst thou know that 

there are rational sheep? the Saviour says to 

the Apostles, Behold, L send you as sheep in the 
midst of wolves 5, Again, He is called a Lion ®, 
not as a devourer of men, but indicating as it 
were by the title His kingly, and_ stedfast, 
and confident nature: a Lion He is also 
called in opposition to the lion our adver- 

Srl S17 

9 To TOAVHOVYMOY, a Word used by the Greek Poets of their gor 
as by Homer (//y 22 to Demeter, 18, 32) of Zeus, Kpovov woAvw- 
vupos vids. Cf. Soph. dat. 11153 Aeschyl. Prom. ve 210. 

t John x. 7,9. Cyril calls Christ a ‘spiritual,’ or ‘rational 
(AoyvikH) door,’ and applies the same term to His sheep, below. 
Origen (Jz Evang. Joh, Tom. i. cap. 29): Ovpa 6 Ywrnp avaye- 
ypanrat, thi. $ddvOpwmos SF ov... Toran ad €TOL. 

2 John xiv. 6. Siwy coy Telitis 75 8 ees Vil 32% 

4° Oni. 12 5 NTAte. X..t0;, 16. CoG enexlineig 5 
Apoc. v. 5+ 

3s Cate 

who roars and devours those who have 
been deceived 7. For the Saviour came, not as 
having changed the gentleness of His own 
nature, but as the strong Léon ef the tribe 
Judéah®, saving them that believe, but treading 
down the adversary, IIe is called a Stone, 
not a liteless stone, cut out by men’s hands, 
but a oe f cornerx-stone®, on whom 
beltevctt shall not be put to shame. 

4. He is called Sacee not as having 
anointed by men’s hands, but eternally 
ointed by 
on behalf of ment. He is called Dead, not 
as having abode among the dead, as all in 
Hades, but as being alone free among the dead ®. 
He is called Son of Man, not as having had | 
His generation from earth, as each of us, 
but as coming upon the clouds To JUDGE 
BOI QuICK AND Drapn3s, He is. called 
LORD, not improperly as those who are so 
called among men, but as having a natural 
and eternal Lordship 4 He is called Jesus by 
a fitting name, as having the appellation from 
His salutary healing. He is called Son, not as 
advanced by adoption, but as naturally be- 
gotten. And many are the titles 
Saviour: lest, therefore, His manifold appel- 
lations should make thee think of many sons, 
and because of the errors of the heretics, who 
say that Christ is one, and Jesus another, and 
the Door another, and so on 5, the Faith secures 
thee beforehand, saying well, IN Onr Lorp 
Jesus Curist: for though the titles are many, 
yet their subject is one. 

5. But the Saviour comes in various forms 
to each man for his profit®. For to those who 
have need of gladness He becomes a Vine; 
and to those who want to enter in He stands 
as a Door; and to those who need to offer 
up their prayers He stands a mediating High 

Sary, 

- been | 

: 8 Ps. exvili. 22. 9 Is. xxviii, 16; 
4—6. 
"The reading of the earlier Editions drép arOpw7wy is free 
from all ciffie alty, and so the more likely to have been substituted 
tor what is at first sight more difficult biép avOpwror, the reading 
4 Cod. Cuislin. adopted by the Benedictine and subsequent 

Editors. ‘Vhe idea of a super-human Priesthood to which the 
Son in His Divine nature was anointed by the Father from. 
eternity is repeated by Cyril in 814 of this Lecture, and in Cat. xi. 
1,14. See Index, “ P riesthood,” and the reference there given to 
a fuller consid eration of the subject i in the Introduction. 

10, we sce ims to ex cpl: 
the “Son of Man” wh ren ** ile cometh avain cl aa iven,” yh 

“no more from earth.” The preceding clause refers to His first 
coming in the flesh, as differing in the manner of His conception 
and birth from other men. 

4 Cf. Athanas. (c. Avian. II. xv. 14), “ That very Word who 
was by nature Lord, and was then made man, ha ith by means 
of a servant's form been made Lord of all and Christ.’ 

SCY, brensetis (111. 21; 8)x “wl therefore are “omtside ‘the 
Dispensation, who under pretence of knowledge understand that 
Jesus was one, and Christ another, and the Only-begotten another 
(from whom again is the Word), and the Saviour another.” The 
Cerinthians, Iebionites, Ophites, and Valentinians are mentioned 
by Trenieus as thus separating the Christ trom Jesus. 

6-Cb.. Athatias. CA cpist. bes ): “Since He is rich and manifold, 

Ile Varies Himself according to the individual capacity of each : 

soul.” 

of 

ZNOSOCUL 

ane, 
the Father to His High-Priesthood | 

of our, 

Cee ois! ee a URES 

| 

Priest. Again, to those who have sins He 
becomes a Shee cp, that He may be sacrificed 
for them. He is made all things to ee men 7, 
remaining in His own nature what He lor 
so remaining, and holding the ena or His 

re) 
Sonship in reality unchangeable, He adapts 

Himself to our infirmities, just as some cx- 
cellent physician or compassionate teacher 3 
‘though He is Very Lord, and received not thy 
Lordship by advancement 8, but has the dignity 
f His Lordship from nature, and is pot called 
ee improperly 9, as we are, but is so in verity, 
since by the Father’s biddingt He is Lord of His 
own works, — lor our lordship is over men of 
equal rights and like passions, nay often over 
our elders, and often a young master rules over 
aged servants. But in the case of our J.ord 
Jesus Christ the Lordship is not so; but He is 
first Maker, then Lord?: first Ile made al! 
things by the Father’s will, then, He is Lord of 
the things which were made by Him. 
6. Christ the Lord is He who was born tn 
the city Ratha And wouldest thou know 

ee Cor. ix. 22. 

8 é« mpoxomyns. We learn from Ath: ananes (c. Avian. 1, 37; 38; 
40), that from St. Paul's language PAslisp~. ii. gi * ie! herefure 
also God highly exalted Him, &c., * end be Pg, xly. ‘Thou 
hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity : cheieteel: God, thy 
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gl: idness above’ thy 
fellows,” the Arians argued that Christ first received Divine 
honour as Son and Lord as the reward of His obedience as Man. 
Athanasius replies (c. 40): ‘‘ He was not froma lower state pro- 
moted ; but rather, existing as God, He took the form of a ser- 
vant, and in taking it was not promoted, but humbled Himself. 
Where then is there here any reward of virtue, or what advance- 
ment (mpokomy) and promotion in humiliation?” 

The same doctrine had been previously held by the disciples 
of Paul of Samosata, who said that Christ was not originally God, 
but after His Incarnation was by advance (ék mpoxorys) made 
God, from being made by nz ahare a mere man: see Athanas. 
(de Decretis, § 24, ¢. Avian.i. 38). S. Cyril refers to the error, 
and uses the same word, in Mh. Bf, 23, 15, 17, and xiv. 27. 

9 kataxpnariKes, i.e. in a secondary or metaphorical sense. 
Cf. vii. 5. 

T yevpate, 
the head. 

2 Origen (De Principiis, 1. ii, 10) had argued that ‘even 
God cannot be called Setamee unless there exist se over 
whom He may exercise His power,” and therefore creation must 
have been eternal, or God could not have been eternally Omni- 
potent, In other passages Origen declares it an — ety to hold 
that matter is co-eternal with God (De Princip. 11. i. 4), and yet 
maintains that there were other worlds before this, ‘and that there 
was never a me when there was no world existing. 

Methodius, in a fragment of his work On thing vs Create: ?, pre- 
served by P hotius, and quoted by Bishop Bull (Des. Peds Nae. Ali 
xili. 9), argues against these theories of Origen. that in John i. 2 
the words ‘* The same was in the beginning with God” indicate 
the authority (70 e€ovctadrixor) of the Word which He had with 
the Father betore the world came into existence; since from all 
eternity God the Father, together with His Word, possessed the 
Almighty power whereby whenever He would He could create 
worlds to rule over. 

Dean Church remarks that ‘On the other hand Tertullian, 
contra [Hermog. 3, considering the attributes in question to be- 
long not to the Divine Nature, but Office, denies that God was 
Almighty (Lord?) from eternity ; while the Greeks affirmed this 
(vid. Cyril Alex. ¢2 Joann. xvii. 8. p. 963; Athan. Ovat. ii. 12—14), 
as understanding by the term the inherent but latent attribute 
of doing what He had not yet done, 70 éf0varcagrikor. 

Cleop: is, the Jerusalem Editor, regards the! passage as directed 
against Paul of Samosata, who asserted that Christ had become 
God, and received His kingdom and Eat eae only after His In- 
carnation, and remarks :—‘'S, Cyril evidently regards the Lordship 
of Jesus ‘Christ. as twofold: one that which from cternity oa 
longed to Him as God, which he calls natural, according to which 
“He was ever both Lord and King, as being by nature God’ 
(Cyril Alex. 7 Johann. cap. xvii. ); and the other the Lordship 
| in time relative to the creatures, by which He exercises domi- 
nion over the works created by Him, as being their Maker,” 

3 Luke. 11; 

“command” or “bidding,” as expressed by nodding 

that Christ is Lord with the Father even before 

His Incarnation +, that thou mayest not only) 
accept the statement by faith, but mayest also. 

receive proof from the Old ‘Testament? Go 
to the first book, Genesis: God saith, Let ws 
make man, not ‘in My image,’ but, zz Our 
mages, And after Adam was made, the sacred 
writer says, Aud God created man; in the 
ange of God created He him’. Yor he did not 

limit the dignity of the Godhead to the Father | 

alone, but included the Son also: that it might 
be shewn that man is not only the work of 
God, but also of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is 
Himself also Very God. This Lord, who 
works together with the Father, wrought with 
Him also in the case of Sodom, according 
to the Scripture: And the Lord rained upon 
Sodom and Gomorrah fire and brimstone from 
the Lord out of heaven7. This Lord is He who 
afterwards was seen of Moses, as much as he 
was able to see. Tor the Lord is loving unto 
man, ever condescending to our infirmities. 

7. Moreover, that you may be sure that this 
is Ile who was seen of Moses, hear Paul’s testi- 
mony, when he says, fur they all drank of a 
spirttual rock that followed them; and the rock 
was Christ®, And again: Ly faith Moses forsook 
Leypt?, and shortly after he says, accounting 
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the 
treasures in Leypt*. ‘This Moses says to Him, 
Shew me Thyself. ‘Vhou seest that the 
Prophets also in those times saw the Christ, 
that is, as far as each was able. Skew me Thy- 
self, that I nay see Thee with understanding? 
But He saith, Zhere shall no man see My face, 
and live3, For this reason then, because no 
man could see the face of the Godhead and 
live, He took on Him the face of human 
nature, that we might see this and live. And 
yet when He wished to shew even that with a 
little majesty, when As face did shine as the 
suz4, the disciples fell down affrighted. If 
then His bodily countenance, shining not in 
the full power of Him that wrought, but 
according to the capacity of the Disciples, 
affrighted them, so that even thus they could 
not bear it, how could any man gaze upon the 
majesty of the Godhead? ‘A great thing,’ 
saith the Lord, ‘thou desirest, O Moses: and I 
approve thine insatiable desire, and J will do 

4 Among those who denied the Divine pra-existence of Christ 
Cleopas enumerates Ebion, Carpocrates, ‘Vheodotus, Artemon, 
Paul of Samosata, Marcellsis, and Photinus. 

5 Gen. as 26; bs he 27. 

Dinh O Ma shes 9 Heb. xi 27. 

1 Heb. xi. 26. Quoting from memory Cyril mistakes the order 
of the two sentences. 

2 Iex, xxxili, 13. Cyril means that even before His Incarna- 
tion Christ was scen as far as was possible by Prophets such as 
Moses. ‘Uhis view was held by many of the Fathers before Cyril. 
See Justin M. (79/4. § 56 ff.); Tertull. (adv. Praxean, § 16); 
Ieuseb. (Demoustr. Evang. V. 13—16) 

BEX ERS MLO: 4 Matt. xvii. 2. 

7. bg Xive. 2ae 

59 
‘his things for thee, but according as thou art 
able. Behold, [will put thee in the clift of the 
rock®+ for as being little, thou shalt lodge in a 
little space.’ 

8 Now here I wish you to make safe what 
fam going to say, because of the Jews. For 
our object is to prove that the Lord Jesus Christ 
was with the Father. The Lorp then says to 
Moses, 7 well pass by before thee with My glory, 
and will proclaim the name of the LorD before 
thee7. Being Himself the Lorp, what Lorp 
doth He proclaim? ‘Thou seest how He was co- 
vertly teaching the godly doctrine of the Father 
and the Son. And again, in what follows it is 
written word for word : Avd the Lorv descended 
in the cloud, and stood with him there, and pro- 
claimed the name of the Lorp. And the Lorv 
passed by before him, and proclaimed, The LoL, 
the LORD God, merciful and gracious, long- 
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, 
both keeping righteousness and shewtiig mercy 
unto thousands, taking away tniguities, and 
transgressions, and sins *®, ‘Then in what follows, 
Moses bowed his head and worshipped before 
the Lord who proclaimed the Father, and said : 
Go Thou then, O Lord, in the midst of us*. 

g. This is the first proof: receive now a 
second plain one. Zhe Lory satd unto my 
Lord, sit Thou on My right hand?. The Lorp 
says this to the Lord, not to a servant, but to 
the Lord of all, and His own Son, to whom 
He put all things in subjection. But when He 
saith that all things are put under Him, tt ts 
manifest that He is excepied, which did put all 
things under Him, and what follows ; that God 
may be allin all3, The Only-begotten Son is 
Lord of all, but the obedient Son of the 
Father, for He grasped not the Lordship 4, 
but received it by nature of the Tather’s 
own will. For neither did the Son grasp it, 
nor the Father grudge to impart it. He it is 
who saith, 4d/¢hings are delivered unto Me of My 
Lather 5; “delivered unto Me, not as though 

5 Tex, xxxili. 17. Gr. Adyov, “word,” in imitation o1 the 
Hebrew idiom. 

© Ex, XXxill. 22, 

7 Wx. xxxiil. 1g. Literally *‘ will call in the name of the Lorp 

(Jehovah) :’” compare Gen. iv. 26. 

8 ex, xxxiv. 5—7. For ‘‘ keeping righteousness and shewing 
mercy,” the Hebrew has only ‘‘ keeping mercy.” 

o Rx Rex, 8, EL hy eee. Oe 

2 Ps. ex, t Heb, “An oracle of Jehovah wnto my lord.” 
Cyril’s argument is based upon the common mistake of supposing 
that Kvpios represents the same Hebrew word in both parts 
of the sentence. Pat Cor. JV." 85, Be) oo 

4 Cyril evidently alludes to Philipp. ii. 6, ‘* Who being in the 
form of God thought it not a prize to be on an equality with 
God:” for the right interpretation of which passage, see Dean 
Gwynn’s notes in the Sfeaker's Commentary. ; 

5 Matt. xi. 27; Luke x. 22. On this text Athanasius wrote 
a special treatise (/m ¢dded ‘ Omnia, &c.), against the arguments 
of Arius, Eusebius, and their fellows, who said,—“ If all things 
were delivered (meaning by ‘all’ the Lordship of Creation), there 
was once a time when He had them not. But if He had them 
not, He is not of the Father, for it He were, He would on that 
account have had them always.” : 

Again (contr. Arian. Orat. III. cap. xxvil. § 36), Athanasius 
argues: ‘Lest a man, perceiving that the Son has all that the 
Father hath, from the exact likeness and identity of what He 

eee en 

€O 

Thad them not before; and [keep them well, 
not robbing Him who hath given them.” 
10. The Son of God then is Lord: 
Lord, who was born in Bethlehem of Judea, | 

according to the Angel who said to the. 
shepherds, 7 Orie vou good ti. ~~ of great Joy, | 
that unto vou ts bern eae diy tn the city of | 

> Lord” hp an Apostle. 
word which Ged sent unto | 
the children of Lsract, preaching the gospel of 
poace by Jesus Christ: Lets Lord of all7, But 
when he says, ef a//, do thou except nothing 
from His Lordship: for whether Angels, or 

David Christ the 
sAVS Oe Ise where, The 

Archanyels, er principalities, or powers, or) 
any created thing named by the Apostles, | 
all are under the Lordship of the Son. Of, 

Angels He is Lord, as thou hasi it in the 
Gospels, Zhen the Devil departed from Him, | 
and the Aneels came and ministered unto Him») 
for the Scripture saith not, they succoured | 
Him, but they wntstered unto Him, that is, 
like servants. When He was about to be 
born of a Virgin, Gabriel was then His servant, 
having received His service as a_ peculiar 
dignity. When He was about to go into 
Igypt, that He might overthrow the gods of 
Egypt made with hands9, again ax Angel 
appearctlh to Joseph ina dream*, After He had 
been crucified, and had risen again, an Angel 
brought the good tidings, and as a trustworthy 
servant said to the women, Go, ¢el/ Hrs disciples 
that [le is risen, and goeth before you tito Galt- 
lee; lo, I have told you? : almost as if he had 
said, “ I have not neglected my command, I 
protest that I have told you; that if ye dis- 
regard it, the blame may not be on me, but on 
those who disregard it.” This then is the One 
lord Jesus Christ, of whom the lesson just 
now read speaks: Lor though there be many 
that are called gcds, whether in heaven or in 
earth, and so on, vet fo us there ts One God, the 

ayo er eae 

He 18 | on two incn distinguished above 

LTE ee, 

cause Heisa Priest 4. And knowing this the in- 
| sp et Prophet Moses conferred these two titles 
alls: his own 
ssuccessor in the government, Auses °, he re- 
named Jesus ; and his own brother - \aron he 
surnamed Christ7, that by two well-approved 
men he might represent at once both the High 
s riesthood, and the Ningship of the One Jesus 
Christ who was to come. For Christ is a High 
Priest like Aaron ; since He glorified not Llim- 
self to be made a High Priest, but [Le that spake 
uato Lim, Thou arta Priest for ever after the 

order of Alelchisedch®. And Jesus the son of 
Nave was in many things a type of Him. For 

when he began to rule over the people, he 

began from Jordan 9, whence Christ also, after 
He was baptized, began to preach the gospel. 
And the son of Nave appoints twelve to divide 
the inheritance'; and twelve Apostles Jesus 
sends forth, as heralds of the truth, into all the 
world. ‘The typical Jesus saved Rahab the 
harlot when she believed: and the true Jesus 
says, Behold, the publicans and the harlots go 
before vou into the kingdom of God?. \Vith only 
a shout the walls of Jericho fell down in the 
time of the type: and because Jesus said, 7herve 
shall not be left here one stone upon another 3, he 
‘Temple of the Jews opposite to us is failen, the 
cause of its fall not being the denunciation 
but the sin of the transgressors. 

There is One Lord Jesus Christ, a won- 
drous name, indirectly announced beforehand 
by the Prophets. For Esaias the Prophet says, 
Behold, thy Saviour cometh, having His own re- 
ward +, Now Jesus in Hebrew is by interpreta- 
tion Saviour. For the Prophetic gift, foreseeing 
the murderous spirit of the Jews against their 
Lord 5, veiled His name, lest from knowing it 
plainly beforehand they might plot against 
Him readily. But He was openly called Jesus 
not by men, but by an Angel, who came not 

Lather, of whom are all things, and we in Him ; 

by his own sayin but was sent by the power 

and One Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are of God, and said to Joseph, fear not to take 

"9 

all thiiss, and we through Lim 3. 
II. And He is called by two names, 
Christ ; Jesus, because He saves,—Christ, be- 

! 

hath, should wander into the imp! ty of Sal 
Him to be the Father, therefore He has said, 
and / received, and Were delivered to Ae, 
is not the Father, but the Father's Word, 
who, because of His likeness 
He has from Him, and, 
i ne what eternally He hath.’ 
6 Luke ii. 10, 11. 7 Acts. 36; ® Matt. iv. 11 

9 Isa. six, * Behold, the Loxp ridcth upon a swift cloud, 
and cometh unto Egypt: 
at His presence.” The prophecy was 
Fathers to have been fulfilled by the thigist into: Egypt. 
Athanas. (ZA. LXI. ad Mavimune, § 4): 
down to Egypt, and brought ton git its idols made with hands :" 
and (de /ucarn. § 36): “ Which of the righteous men or kings 
went down into Ic aypi, so that at his coming the idols of E gypt 
fell’’’ On the passage of Isaiah see Delitzsch, and Kay (Sfeaker's 
Commentary). 

a Diatt, dr. 

rcHius, considering 
Was given unto Me, > 
only to shew that He 

to the Father, 

wa 

20h; &x Vitis gs 8. (Or. Villers. Oc 

Jesus 

and the Eternal Son, | 
has eternally what | 
bec ause He is the Son, has from the | 

and the idols of Egypt shall be moved | 
supp sed by many of the | 
| so far as that was possible, and him he called Christ.” 
“Asa child He canie | 

unto thee Mary thy wife» for that which ts con- 

4 Compare Eucebius (Aec/. /7isé. 1. cap. iii.), a passage which 
Cyril sceins to have followed in his explanation of the names 
7 Jesus "and ‘ Christ.’ 

5 For the common reading é€yxpitors mavtwy Cod. Mon. I. has 
éxeptrows m. which is required both by the construction and the 
sense. The change may have been caused by the occurrence 
of € 2 hand just below. 

© Eusebius (z.s.): §* His successor, therefore, who had not 
hitherto borne the name Jesus, but had been called by another 
name, Auses, which had been given him by his parents, he now 
/ called Jesus, bestowing the name upon him as a gift of honour 
| far greater than any kingly diadem.” Auses is a common cor- 
| ruption of the mame Oshea, See the note on the passage of 
Eusebius in this series. 

7 Kusebius: ‘ He consecrated a man high- “priest of God, in 
CiVevany: 

165 wi eet O tepevs 0 Xproros, 

© Teh: 45a. 6, iG. Ay omits from his quotation the reference 
to Ps. al. Zo) Loti sees * Son: this day have I begotten Thee.’ 
Tesh. Wien. Ub av Be. 2) Natt. x1. 31. 

3-ATath, “xiv, 
+ Tsai iid. r = 

reward is with him.” 

“Behold, thy salvation cometh; benold, his 

5S TO KUpLOKTOVOY Twr "Toveuiwr. 

te OMB oes 

cericd in her ts of the [foly Ghost. And she shal the phrase, 4 

bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name 
Jesus’. And immediately he renders the reason 
of this name, saying, 
People from their sins, 

was not yet born could have 
He 

Consider how He who 
a people, unless 
was in being before He was born?, This 

also the Prophet says in His person, vom the! 
bowels of my mother hath He made mention of | repent*. 

Aly name® ; because the Angel foretold that He 
should be called Jesus. And again concerning 
Herod’s plot again he says, And under the 
shadow of [T's hand hath [le hid Ale9 

13. Jesus then means according to the) 
Hebrew “Saviour,” but in the Greck tongue) 

“The Dealer: ". smce He “is physician of 
souls and bodies, curer of spirits, curing the 
blind in body +, and leading minds into light, 
healing the visibly lame, and guiding sinners’ 

steps to repentance, saying to the palsied, STH 
no more, and, Take up thy bed and watlk?, For 
the body was palsied for the sin of 

since 
the soul, He ministered first to the soul that 
He mizht extend the healing to the body. If, 
therefore, any one Is suffering in soul from sins, 
there is the Physician for him: and if any one 
here is of little faith, let him say to Him, 
flelp Thou mine unbelief3, If any is encom- 
passed also with bodily ailments, let him not be 
faithless, but let him draw nigh; for to such 
diseases also Jesus ministers 4, and let him learn 
that Jesus is the Christ. 

14. For that He is Jesus the Jews allow, but 
not further that He is Christ. ‘Therefore saith 
the Apostle, Iho ts the liar, but he that denteth 
that Jesus ts the Christs? But Christis a High 
Priest, wose priesthood passes not to another 6, 
neither having begun His Priesthood in time 7 
nor having any successor in His High-Priest- 
hood: as thou heardest on the Lord’s day, when 
we were discoursing 1 in the: con: gregation® ou 

6 Matt. i. 20. 

7 The Anathema appended to the Creed of Niczea condemns 
those who said mpty yevy nOnvar ovk av. On this Eusebius of 
Ceesarea (fist. § 9) remarks: * Moreover to anathematize ‘ Be- 
fore Ilis generation He was not,’ did not seem preposterous, in 

that it is confessed by all, that the Son of God was before the | 

generation according to the flesh.’ 

oS Ste ist a > Tbs xix. -2. 

= FOI My tac 3 Me ark i ite 24, 

4 Compare the fragment of the Apology of Quadratus pre- 
sented to Hadrian 127 A.p., preserved by E usebius (//. Me EV iit.) 

‘But the works of our Saviour w ere always present, for they were 
genuine :—those that were healed, and those that arose from the 
dead, who were seen not only w hen they were healed and when 
they were raised, but were also always present; and not merely 
while the Saviour was on earth, but also after His death they 
were alive for a long while, so that some of them survived even to 
our times.” See the notes on the passage of Eusebius, in this 
series. 

Sete fon i. -234 6 Heb. vii. 24. 

7 On the opinion that Christ was from all eternity the true 
High Priest of the Creation, see Index, Priesthood, and_ the 
reterence there given to the Introduction. Cf x. 4: xier. Athan. 
(ciAtian. Oyen, a, J. H.WN.). 

8 ‘The word ‘synaxis’ was used by the early Christians to 
distinguish their assemblies from the Jewish ‘sy nagogue,’ a word 
formed from the same root and more regularly. ‘Synaxis’ came 
to be used more especially of a celebration ane Eucharist. See 
Suicer, Thesaurus, Sbvakws. 

I rudda@v aigOnrav. 

jor LHe shall save His 

xr 
N 

Ot 

Ges the Order of Melchizcdck. Ve 
received not the High-Priesthood from bodily 
hsuccession, nor was He anointed with oil 
prepared by man9%, but before all ages by the 
| Father; and He so far excels the others as 
with an oath Heis made Priest: or they are 
priests without an oath, but Ile with an oath by 
flim that said, The Lord sware, and will not 
The mere purpose of the lather was 
sufficient for surety: but the mode of assur 
/ance is twofold, namely that with the purpose 
there follows the oath also, hat dy fzvo ¢mmu- 
lable things, in which it was impossible Jor God 
fo Le, we micht dee e strong encouragement? for our 
faith, who receive Christ Jesus as the Son of 
God. 

15. This Christ, when He was come, the 
Jews denied, but the devils confessed. But 
His forefather David was not ignorant of Him, 
when he said, 7 haze ordained a lainp for 
mine Anointed 3 which lamp some have inter- 
preted to be the brightness of Prophecy 4, others 
the flesh which He took upon Him from the 
Virgin, according to the Apostle’s word, But 
we have this treasure tn earthen vessels 5, The 
Prophet was not ignorant of Him, when He 
said, and announceth unto men LHis Christ, 
Moses also knew Him, Isaiah knew Him, and 
Jeremiah; not one of the Prophets was ig- 
norant of Him. Even devils recognised Him, 
for He rebuked them, and the Scripture says, 
because they knew that He was Christ7, The 
Chief-priests knew Him not, and the devils 
confessed Him: the Chief Priests knew Him 
not, and a woman of Samaria proclaimed Him, 
saying, Come, see a man which told me all things 
that ever I did. Ls not this the Christ® ? 

16. This is Jesus Christ who came a //igh- 
Priest of the good things to come%,; who for the 
bountifulness of His Godhead imparted His 
own title to us all. For kings among men 
have their royal style which others may not 
share: but Jesus Christ being the Son of God 
gave us the dignity of being ‘called Christians. 
But some one will say, The name of “ Chris- 
tians”” is new, and was not in use aforetime! : 
and new-fashioned phrases are often objected to 

9 oxeveotw, Ex, xxx. 22—25: ‘fa perfume compounded (jvpe- 
WeKor) after the art of the perfumer” (R.V.). 
t Heb. vii. 2r. 2 Ib. vi. 18. 
3 Ps. exxxii. 17. The ‘‘lamp for the Anointed” was commonly 
sori by the Fathers to John the Baptist. Compare John v. 
and Bishep Westcott’s note there. 

355 

| 4 2 Pet. i. 19. The supposed reference in the Psalm to the 
lamp of prophecy is mentioned by Eusebius (Desmonusty. Evang. 
Bye cay, 16): 

5 2Cor.iv. 7. Thereference of the ‘lamp’ to Christ’s Incarna- 
tion is mentioned by. Eusebius (7.s.) and other Iathers. 
Amos. iv. 13: ‘Sand declareth unto man what 1s his thought.” 

ee Sm ‘what is his thought,’ the LXX, read Tews, 

‘His Anointed,’ 
7 Luke tv. 42. 
I ovK émoAtTevETo, 
Cl Suetons Wero: cap. 16° 
stitionis novae et maleficae.’ 

Tov Xptarov avrov. : 

8 John iv. 29. 9 Hebe ix. om 
“(was not in citizenship,” ‘‘not naturalised.” 
*Christiani, genus hominum supcr- 

62? 

~ 

re ig id 

on the score of strangeness?.. ‘The prophet made 
this point sate beforehand, saying, Lut upon 
My servants shall anew nane be called, which 
shall be blesscad uUPon the carth 3, 

the Jews: Are ye servants of the Lord, or 
not? Shew then your new name. Kor ye| 
were called Jews and Israelites in the time of 

Moses, and the other propheis, and alter the! 
return from Babylon, and up to the present 
time: where then is your new name? But 
we, since we are servants of the Lord, have 
that new name: ez indeed, but the xeze 
name, which shall be blessed upon the earth. 
This name caught the world in its grasp: for 
Jews are only in a certain region, but Chris- 
tians reach to the ends of the world: for it is 

the name of the Only-begotten Son of God, 

that is proclaimed. 

17. But wouldest thou know that the 
Apostles knew and preached the name of 
Christ, or rather had Christ Himself within 
them? Paul says to his hearers, Or seek ye a 
proof of Christ that speaketh inme+? Paul pro- 
claims Christ, saying, For we preach not our- 
selves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves 
vour servants for Jesus sakes, Who then is this ? 
The former persecutor. O mighty wonder! 
‘he former persecutor himself preaches Christ. 
But wherefore? Was he bribed? Nay there 
was none to use this mode of persuasion. 
But was it that he saw Him present on earth, 
and was abashed? He had already been 
taken up into heaven. He went forth to per- 
secute, and after three days the persecutor is a 
preacher in Damascus. By what power? 
Others call friends as witnesses for friends : 
but I have presented to you as a witness the 
former enemy: and dost thou still doubt? 
The testimony of Peter and John, though 
Weighty, was yet of a kind open to suspicion : 
for they were His friends. But of one who 
was formerly his enemy, and afterwards dies 
for His sake, who can any longer doubt the 
truth P 

18. At this point of my discourse I am 
truly filled with wonder at the wise dispen- 
sation of the Holy Spirit; how He confined 
the Epistles of the rest to a small number, but 
to Paul the former persecutor gave the pri 
vilege of writing fourteen. For it was not 
because Peter or John was less that He re- 
strained the gift; God forbid! But in order 
that the doctrine might be beyond question, 
He granted to the “former enemy and _per- 
secutor the privilege of ARS more, in order 

acy 
on 

3 Ixv. 15,16. The LXX. here depart from the meaning 
of the a veh “ He shall call Its servants by another name: 
su that he who blesseth himself ix the earth shall bless himse Wein 

the God of truth” (RV.). 

A 2 Gay with. a: A Dative 

’ 

ce 

ee CAT. 

et us question: 

Lee Ee ea 

that we all might thus be made believers. For 
all were amused at Paul, and said, Ls not this he 
that was formerly a persecutor®? Did he not 
come hither, that he might lead us away bound 
to Jerusalem ? Be not amazed, said Paul, I 
iknow that 77s hard for me to hich a gainst the 
fi pricks: I know that Lam not worthy to be called 
an Apostle, because f persecuted the Church of 
God7, but I did it wv ¢ynorance® + for I thought 
that the e preaching of Christ was destruction of 
the Law, and knew not that He came Himself 
to fulfil the Law and not to destroy it. Aut the 
grace of God was exceeding abundant in me*. 

19. Many, my beloved, are the true testimonies 
concerning Christ. ‘The Father bears witness 
from heaven of His Son: the Holy Ghost 
bears witness, descending bodily in likeness 
of a dove: the Archangel Gabriel bears wit- 

ness, bringing good tidings to Mary: the 
Virgin Mother of God? bears witness: the 

blessed place of the manger bears witness. 
Egypt bears witness, which received the Lord 
while yet young in the body3: Symeon bears 
witness, who received Him in his arms, and 
said, Vow, Lord, lettest Thou Thy servant de- 
part in peace, according to Thy word; for mine 
eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast 
prepared before the face of all peoples. Anna 
also, the prophetess, a most devout widow, of 
austere life, bears witness of Him. John 
the Baptist bears witness, the greatest among 
the Prophets, and leader of the New Cove- 
nant, who in a manner united both Cove- 
nants in Himself, the Old and the New. 
Jordan is His witness among rivers; the sea 
of Tiberias among seas: blind and lame bear 
witness, and dead men raised to life, and 
devils saying, What have we to do with Thee, 
Jesus? we know Thee, who Thou art, the fHoly 
One of Gods, Winds bear witness, silenced at 
His bidding: five loaves multiplied into five 

7 2-COn. Sv. B, Br Tim, 1, ma 

9 Math.v x7. & 5 Ltn Ne Te 

2 » OeotoKos—Detpara. Gibbon (Chap. xlvii. 34) says, ‘It is 
not easy to fix the invention of this word, which La Croze (Cirés- 
tianisnte des Indes, tom. i. p.16) ascribes to Musebius of Cxesarea 
and the Arians. The orthodox testimonies are produced by Cyril 
(of Alexandria) and Petavius (Degmat. Theolog. tom. v. L. v. 
cap. 15, p. 254, &c.), but the veracity of the Saint is question: able, 
and the epithet of @eo7d«os so easily slides from the margin to 
the text of a Catholic MS.” This passage is justly described 
as ‘*Gibbon’s calumny”? by Dr. Newman: see his notes on the 
title @eordxos (Athan. c. Arian. Or. ii. cap. 12, n. 7. Als 
capp. 14, 29, 33). The word is certainly used by Driven (Deut, 
xxii, 13, Lommatzsch. Tom. x. p. 378): ‘‘She that is already 
betrothed is called a wife, as also in the case of Joseph and 
the Theotokos.” Cf. Archelaus (Disfut. cum Alane, cap. xxxiv. 
“qui de Maria Dei Genetrice natus est”); Eusebius (de I] 7ta 
Constantint, III. cap. 43: ‘*The pious Empress adorned with 
rare memorials the nf en of the travail of the Theotokos”), For 
other examples see Suicer’s 7hesaurus, Oeor6Kxos, Pearson, Creed, 
~~ iii. notes 1, m,n, 0, and Routh, Relig. Saar: 11.8 pion 2: 

ae Chrysostom describing the flourishing state of the Church 
in Egypt in those times, says: ‘Egypt welcomes and saves Him 
when a fugitive and plotted against, and receives a beginning as 
it were of its appropriation to Him, in order that when it shall 
hear Him proclaimed by the Apostles, it may in their day also 
be honoured as having been first to welcome Him’ ” (Cleopas), 

4 Luke ii. 29, 30. SoMark-t:2'4. 

6 Acts ix. 21. 

| 
thousand bear Him witness. The holy wood | 

of the Cross bears witness, seen among us to 
this day, and from this place now almost 
filling the whole world, by means of those who 
in faith take portions from it®. The palm-tree7 
on the ravine bears witness, having supplied 
the palm-branches to the children who then 
hailed Him. Gethsemane ® bears witness, still 
to the thoughtiul almost shewing Judas. Gol- 
gotha9, the holy hill standing above us here, 
bears witness to our sight: the Holy Sepulchre 
bears witness, and the stone which Hes there! 
to this day. The sun now shining is His 
witness, which then at the time of His saving 
Passion was eclipsed?: the darkness is His 
witness, which was then from the sixth hour 
to the ninth: the light bears witness, which 
shone forth from the ninth hour until evening. 
The Mount of Olives bears witness, that holy 
mount from which He ascended to the Father : 
the rain-bearing clouds are His witnesses, 
having received their Lord: yea, and the 
gates of heaven bear witness [having received 
their Lords], concerning which the Psalmist 
sad, Lift up vour doors, O ye Princes, and be 

© See Cat. iv. 10, note 7. 

7 ‘The Bordeaux Pilgrim, who visited the Holy Places of Jeru- 
salem, A.D. 333, ¢. speaks of this palm-tree as still existing. The 
longevity of the palm was proverbial: cf. Aristot. (De Longitu- 
dine Vitae, c. iv. 2). 

8 The same Pilgrim (as quoted by the Benedictine Editor) 
says, ‘‘ There is also the rock where Judas Iscariot betrayed 
Christ.” Compare Cat. xiii. 38. 9 See Index, Golgotha. 

t See the passage of the Introduction referred to in Index, 
Sepulchre. 

2 See Cat. il. 15, note 8, and xiii. 25, 34, 38. On the super- 
natural character of the darkness mentioned in the Gospels see 
Meyer, Commentary, Matt. xxvii. 45. An eclipse of the sun 
was of course impossible, as the moon was full. Mr. J. R. Hind 
(/istovical Eclipses, ‘‘ Times,” 19th July, 1872) states that the 
solar eclipse, mentioned by Phlegon the freedman of Hadrian, 
which occurred on Nov. 24, A.D. 29, and was partial at Jerusalem, 
is “the only sglar eclipse that could have been visible at Jerusalem 
during the period usually fixed for the ministry of Christ.” He 
adds, “The Moon was eclipsed on the generally received date 
of the Crucifixion, 3 April, a.p. 33. I find she had emerged from 
the earth’s dark shadow a quarter of an hour before she rose at 
Jerusalem (6.36 p.m.), but the penumbra continued upon her disc 
for an hour afterwards.” hus the ‘‘ darkness from the sixth hour 
unto the ninth” cannot be explained as the natural effect of an 
eclipse either solar or Junar. 

3 This clause is omitted in Codd. Mon. 1, 2, Roe, Casaub., and 
is probably repeated from the preceding line: such repetitions, 
however, are not uncommon in Cyril’s style. 

DEC TR xs ok 

ve lift up, ve everlasting doors; and the King of 

Glory shall come ins, His former enemies bear 
witness, of whom the blessed Paul is one, 
having been a little while His enemy, but for 
a long time His servant: the Twelve Apostles 
are His witnesses, having preached the truth 
not only in words, but also by their own 
torments and deaths: the shadow of Peters 
bears witness, having healed the sick in the 
name of Christ. ‘The handkerchiefs and aprons 
bear witness, as in like manner by Christ’s 
power they wrought cures of old through Paul © 
Persians7 and Goths 8, and all the Gentile con- 
verts bear witness, by dying for His sake, 
whom they never saw with eyes of flesh: the 
devils, who to this day? are driven out by the 
faithful, bear witness to Him, 

20. So many and diverse, yea and more 
than these, are His witnesses: is then the 
Christ thus witnessed any longer disbelieved ? 
Nay rather if there is any one who formerly 
believed not, let him now believe: and if any 
was before a believer, let him receive a greater 
increase of faith, by believing in our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and let him understand whose 
name he bears. Thou art called a Christian : 
be tender of the name; let not our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, be blasphemed through 
thee: but rather /e¢ your good works shine be- 
fore men* that they who see them may in Christ 
Jesus our Lord glorify the Father which is in 
heaven: To whom be the glory, both now and 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

4 Ps. xxiv. 7. The first clause is mistranslated by the LXX. 
from whom Cyril quotes. 

5 Acts v. 15. CT; Kixs x2, 

7 ‘The persecution of the Christians in Persia by Sapor IT. 
is described at length by Sozomen (2.H. II. cc. ix.—xv., in this 
Series). It commenced in a.p, 343, and was going on at the date 
of these Lectures and long after. ‘‘ During fifty years the Cross 
lay prostrate in blood and ashes” (Dict. Bid. ‘ Sassanida’). Com- 
pare Neander. Church History, Tom. III. p. 148, Bohn.) : 

8 The Goths here mentioned are the Gothi minores dwelling 
on the north of the Danube, where Ulfilas, ‘the Apostle of the 
Goths” (311—381), converted many of his countrymen to Chris- 
tianity. After suffering severe persecution, he was allowed by 
Constantius to take refuge with his Arian converts in Moesia and 
Thrace. This migration took place in 348 A.D., the same year 
in which Cyril's Lectures were delivered. 

9 See Index, Exorcism. t Matt, v. 16, 

i Oe ke 8 

ON THE worps, Tur ONLY-BEGOTTEN SON 

Gop BEFORE ALL AGES, By W 

RESALE 

or Gop, BEGOTTEN OF THE FaTuErR VERY 
HOM ALL THINGS WERE MADE. 

HEBREWS 1. T. 

God. who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in times past unto the Fathers 
by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son. 

1. Tat we have hope in Jesus Christ has | 
been sufficiently shewn, according to our 
ability, in what we delivered to you yesterday. 
But we must not simply believe in Christ 
Jesus nor receive Him as one of the many 
who are improperly called Christs*, For they 
were figurative Christs, but He is the true 
Christ; not having risen by advancement ? from 
among men to the Priesthood, but ever having 
the dignity of the Pnesthood from the Father 3, 
And for this cause the Faith, guarding us be- 
forehand lest we should suppose Him to be 
one of the ordinary Christs, adds to the pro- 
fession of the Faith, that we believe IN ONE 
Lorp Jesus Curist, THE ONLY-BEGOTTEN | 
SON OF Gop, 

2. And again on hearing of a “Son,” think | 
not of an adopted son but a Son by nature 4, 
an Only-begotten Son, having no_ brother. 
For this is the reason why He is called 

Man, but by the many He was unknown. 
Wishing, therefore, to teach that which was not 
known, He called together His disciples, and 
asked them, [Vom do men say that L, the Son of 
Man, am® ?—-not from vain-glory, but wishing 
to shew them the truth, lest dwelling with 
God, the Only-begotten of God9, they should 
think lightly of Him as if He were some mere 
man. And when they answered that some 
said Elias, and some Jeremias, He said to 
them, They may be excused for not knowing, 
but ye, My Apostles, who in My name cleanse 
lepers, and cast out devils, and raise the 
dead, ought not to be ignorant of Him, 
through whom ye do these wondrous works. 
And when they all became silent (for the 
matter was too high for man to learn), Peter, 
the foremost of the Apostles and chief herald * 
of the Church, neither aided by cunning in- 
vention, nor persuaded by human reasoning, 

“Only-begotten,” because in the dignity of but enlightened in his mind from the Father, 
the Godhcad, and His generation from the says to Him, Zhou art the Christ, not only so, 
Father, He has no brother. But we call Him but ¢/e Son of the living God. And there fol- 
the Son of God, not of ourselves, but because lows a blessing upon his speech (for in truth 
the Father Himself named Christ 5 His Son®: it was above man), and as a seal upon what 
and a true name is that which is set by he had said, that it was the Father who had 
fathers upon their children 7. revealed it to him. For the Saviour says, 
3. Our Lord Jesus Christ erewhile became Péessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and 
: — — blood hath not revealed tt to thee, but My Father 
which tsin heaven®. He therefore who acknow- 
ledges our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, 
partakes of this blessedness ; but he who de- 
nies the Son of God is a poor and miserable 
man. 
4. Again, I say, on hearing of a Son, under- 

«Compare x,-a2) 25.3 RVL 343: i. x. 

2 eK TpOKOTNS. Sez x. 5, note 8. 

3 Compare x. 14, note o. 

4 @erov. Athanasius (de Seatentii ONSSTIE, resents 
Arius as saying th: ; ee \y dogg rigs —— sit, § 23), ar ge Wier 
Arius as saying that the Word “is not by nature (kara vcr) | 
andin truth Son of God, but is called Son, He too, by adoption 
(KaTa Beowv), as a creature.’ Again (c. Arian. Orat. iii. 19) 
he YS; This is the true God and the Life eternal, and we are 
made sons through Him by adoption and grace (@€oee Kui Xapere).” 
Cf. vit. 10, and § 4. below. : 

5 ‘The MSS. all read atrov Xptorov which might mean “Christ | 

7 es 4 7 ag >. ‘ 
and no other.” But Xpegzév is probably a gloss introduced from 
the margin, 

_ © Compare the passages in which Cyril quotes Ps, ii. 7; ae 
Cate Mik 2 5X, 228 2e xu aR, 

| 8 Matt. xiii. 16. 
9 Compare iv97'} “Gad oiGad Vbebotten 2 xiily3) and aoe 

ss 

7 “It was one of the especial rights of a father to choose the 
names for his children, and to alter them if he pleased” (Dive. 
Greek and Roman Antiqg. “ Nomen. 1 Greck.”) The right to the | 
name given by the father is the subject of one of the Priyate | 
Orations of Demosthenes (pas Botwrov rept tov ovouaros). 

“God the Son of God.” Here, however, the MSS. vary, and the 
reading of Cod. Coisl. Yi@ @eov povoyevet is approved by the 
Benedictine Editor, though not adopted. The confusion of Yio 
and @e@ is like that in John i, 18. 

_ 1 0 mpwrograrns Tov AmogToAwy Kai THs "ExxAnolas Kopupatos 
mpve., 2Chnalte to, i 

2 Matt. xvi. 1g 

LECTURE 

stand it not merely in an improper sense, Basle 
as a Son in truth, a Son by nature, without | 
>; notas having come out of bondage | 

> 

beginning: 

into a higher state of adoption 4, but a Son | 
eternally begotten by an inscrutable and 
incomprehensible gencration. And in like 

manner on hearing of the First-borns, think 
not that this is after the manner of men; for 
the first-born among men have other brothers 
also. And it is somewhere written, /svaed 7s 
ATy son, My first-born®. But Israelis, as Reuben 
was, a first-born son rejected: for Reuben went 
up to his father’s couch; and Israel cast his 
Tfather’s Son out of the vineyard, and crucified 
Him. 

To others also the Scripture says, Ve ave the | 
sons of the Lord your God7: and in another 
place, Z have said, Ye are gods, and ye are all 
sons of the Most High®, I have satd, not, “1 
have begotten.” ‘They, when God so said, 
received the sonship, which before they had 
not: but He was not begotten to be other 
than He was before; but was begotten from 
the beginning Son of the Father, being above 
all beginning and all ages, Son of the Father, 
in all things like? to Him who begat Him, 

3 Athanasius (de Synodis, § 15) quotes a passage from the 
oe r/va of Arius, in which he says: ‘‘ We praise Him as without 
ginning, because of Him who has a beginning: and adore Him 
as betechal, because of Him who in time has come to be. He who 
is w ithout beginning made the Son a beginning of things created.” 
It is important, therefore, to notice the sense in which Cyril 
here calls the Son avepxos. The word has two meanings, which 
should be clearly distinguished, (i) 207 iginate, (il) without begin- 
ning tn time. The former referring to origin, or cause, can 
properly be applied to the One true “God, or to God the Father 
only, as it is used by Clement of Alex: andria (Protrept. cap. v. 
§ 65: Tov mav7wy eek Aig an ore ayvoourTes, TOV avapxov Ocorv. 
[Stron. IV. cap, xxv. $164: 6 @eds b& avapxos apxn TOV odwy 
TravTEAys apxns pines Wi [S¢ronat. V. cap. xiv. § 142: €& apyns 
avapxov]. Methodius (ed, 312 a.bd. circ.) in a fragment (Ox 
things created, § 8, English Prati. Clark’s Ante-Nic. Libr. ) com- 
ments thus on Joh. i. 1—3: ‘And so after the peculiar unbegin- 
ning beginning, w ho is the Father, He (the W ord)i is the beginning 
of other thir; gs, ‘by whom all things are made.’ 

In this sense Cy ril has said (iv. 4) that God alone is ‘ ‘unbegotten, 
unoriginate:” and in xi. 20 he explains this more fully,—“ “Suffer 
none to speak of a be; ginning of the Son in time (xpovixhy apxyv), 
but as a timeless beginning acknowledge the Father. Tor the 
Father is the be; ginning r of the Son, timeless, incomprehensible, 
without beginning.” From a confusion of the two meanings the 
word came to be improperly applied in the sense of unoriginate ” 
to the Son, and to the Spirit; and this improper usage is con- 
demned in the 49th <I postolic Canon, which Hefele regards as 
amongst the most ancient Canons, and taken from the Apostolic 
Constitutions, Vi. 11: “Ifany Bishop or Presbyter shall baptize 
nov according. to our Lord’s ordinance into the Father, and Son, 
and Spirit, but into ¢hree Unoriginates, or three Sons, or three 
Paracletes, let him be deposed.” (ii.) Athanasius frequently calls 
the Son avapxos in the sense of ‘ timeless,’ as being the co-eternal 
brightness (aravyacpa) of the Eternal Light : see de Sent. Dionys. 
§§ 15, 16, 22; ‘* God is the Eternal Light, Swhich never either began 
or shall cease : accordingly the Brightness is ever before Him, 
and co-exists with Him, without beginning and ever- begotten 
(av apxev Kat aevyev 9 Pe 

4 eis mpoxomny vioberias, Cf. § 2, note 4. 

5 Hpwroroxov. ‘Lhe word occurs in Heb. i. 6, which had been 
read in the Lesson before this Lecture. The exact dogmatic 
sense of the word is carefully explained by Athanasius (c. Axvan. 
Or. ii. 62): “The same cannot be both Only-begotten and First- 
born, except in different relations ;—that is, Only- -begotten, be- 
cause of His generation from the Father, as has been said; and 
Virst-born, because of His condescension to the creation, and 
His making the many His brethren.” See Mr, Robertson’s dis- 
cussion of the word TPwWTOTOKOS (Athan. p. 344, in this series), and 

ae Bull (Def. Lid. Nic. iii. 5—8). 

Ex. 1V. 22. 7 Deut. xiv. 1. 8 Ps. Ixxxii. 6. 

9 €v TagLy OmoLOS. See the note on iv. 7. That the phrase 

was not equivalent to o“oovavos, and did not adequately express 

VOT OVI 

F 

AL 

~ 

65 

eternal of a Father eternal, Life of Life be- 

gotten, and Light of Light, and Truth of 
Truth, and Wisdom of the Wise, and King of 
King, and God of God, and Power of Power? : 

5. If then thou hear the Gospel saying, The 
book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of 
David, the Son of Abrahant?, understanc “ace 
cording to the flesh.” lor He is the Son of 
David “at the end of the ages3, but the Son of 
God BEFORE ALL AGES, w ithout beginning 4, 
The one, which before He had not, He re- 
ceived ; but the other, which He hath, He 
hath eternally as begotten of the Father. 
Two fathers He hath: one, David, according 
to the flesh, and one, God, His Father in 
a Divine manner 5, As the Son of David, 
He is subject to time, and to handling, 
and to genealogical descent: but as Son ac- 
cording to the Godhe ead °, He is subject neither 
to time nor to place, nor to genealogical 
descent: for Hs generation who shall declare? ? 
God 7s a Spirit? He who is a Spirit hath 
spiritually begotten, as being incorporeal, an 
inscrutable and incomprehensible generation. 
The Son Himself says of the Father, The Lora 
said unto Me, Thou art My Son, to- day have L 
begotten Thee. Now this /o- day i 1s not recent, 
but eternal: a timeless /o-day, before all ages. 
from the womb, before the morning star, have 
L begotten Thee'. 

6. Believe thou therefore on Jesus Curist, 
Son or the living Gop, and a Son OnLy. 
BEGOTTEN, according to the Gospel which 

the relation of the Son to the Father is sai shewn by Athana- 
sius (de Sywodis, cap. ili. § 53). 

t The additions which the Benedictine Editor has here made 
to the earlier text, as represented by Milles, may be conveniently 
shewn in brackets. adda Yios {rov Iarpos] * €§ apxis eyevv7 On, 
[Umepave Taons apxns Kat aiwrey Tuyxaven] *, *, Ytos zod Harpis 
fev mac} OmOLOS TH yeyevynKOTe* [atdios eé atdiov Iarpos,]® 
Swi €K Suns yeyevynsevos see Kal Meds ex Ocov, [kat Svvapyis 
ex duvapews] t. 

* Codd. Coisl. Ottob. Mon. 2. + Coisl. Ottob. Roe, Casaub. 

Mois Tye ¢ Coisl. Ottob. Mon. 1, 2. 
2 MATE, 1, ty 3 Heb. ix. 26. 4 See § 4, note 3. 
5 Oetkws. 
6 70 wéev kata Toy AaBid.... 7d S& Kara Thy @edryTa, 
7 Isa. liii. 8. Compare § § 7, below. 8 John iv. 24. 
9. Ps... 7. 
© Pare, “From the womb of the morning thou hast the 

dew of thy youth” BEA yA by here is a remarkable various reading 
in Codd. Roe, Casaub. To ef ov, axpovov kai aidiov’ 70 bé a7 - 
HEpov mpoabarov, adr’ ovK aiSior, OlKELOUMEVOU | TOU Tarpos Kat 
™m kaTw yevenow. Kat mad Aéyet *Ex yaorpos mpd éwodopov 
yeyevvynxa oe TOUTO MOvoY TS, Ocorntos: Uitorevoov, x.t.A. The 
words ‘' Thou art My Son,” are thus referred to the eternal 
generation, and “‘ 74/s day” to the birth in time: whereas in the 
received text, followed in our translation, ovjmepov refers to the 
timeless and ‘eternal generation of the Son. ‘The former inter- 
pretation of Ps. ii. 7 is found in many Fathers, as for example 
in ‘Tertullian (adv, Prax. vil. xi.), and Methodius (Conwuiv. 
Vere... VAL. cap. 1x: ): ‘He says § Thou art,’ and not § Thou hast 
become,’ shewing that He had not recently attained to the position 
of Son.... But the expression, ‘This day have I begotten ‘Thee,’ 
signifies that He willed that existing already before the ages 
in heaven He should also be begotten for the world, that is that 
He who was before unknown should be made known.” ‘The same 
interpretation was held by many Fathers, some referring ojepov 
to the Nativity, as Cyprian (adv. Judeos Testim. \i. 8), others to 
the Baptism (Justin M. Dialog. cap. Ixxxvili. ; Aa as adv. 
Marcion. iv. 22). Athanasius (c. Arian, iv. § 27), has ea long 
discussion on the question whether Ps. cx. 3, €k yaorpos mpo 
éwopdpov yeyevynka oe, refers to the eternal generation of the 
Son, or to His Nativity. 

66 

| 
cays, Jor Ged so loved the werld, that fle: Sage | 
This Ontyv-bevotten Son, that whosocter belicreth | 
on Him should not perish, but have cverlasting | 
ifr, And avain, Le that belicveth on the Son | 
ty not judced, bul hath passed out ef death into | 
Tif. But he that believeth not the Son shall not 
coo Life, but the wrath eof God abideth on him 4, 
And John testified coneerning Him, saying, 
Amd wee beheld Mis glory, glory as of the onty- 
beeotten from the Lather,—full of grace and 
Pruth >< at whom the devils trembled and said, 
Ah! what have we to do with Thee, Jesus, Thou 
Son of th: living God”. 

+. Ile is then the Son of God by nature 
and not by adoption?, begotten of the Father. 
And he that loveth Him that begat, loveth Him 
also that ts begotten of Him®; but he that 
despiseth Him that is begotten casts back the 
insult upon Him who begat. And whenever 
thou hear of God begetting, sink not down in 
thought to bodily things, nor think of a cor- 
ruptible generation, lest thou be guilty of 
impiety. God zs a Spirit9, His generation is 
spiritual: for bodies beget bodies, and for the 
veneration of bodies time needs must inter- 
yene ; but time intervenes not in the genera- 
tion of the Son from the Father. And in our 
case what is begotten is begotten imperfect : 
but the Son of God was begotten perfect ; for 
what He is now, that is He also from the 
beginning #, begotten without beginning. We 
are begotten so as to pass from infantine 
ignorance to a state of reason: thy generation, 
© man, is imperfect, for thy growth is pro- 
gressive. But think not that it is thus in His 
case, nor impute infirmity to Him who hath 
begotten. For if that which He begat was 
imperfect, and acquired its perfection in time, 
thou art imputing infirmity to Him who hath 
begotten ; if so be, the Father did not bestow 
from the beginning that which, as thou sayest, 
time bestowed afterwards ?. 

S. Think not therefore that this generation 
is human, nor as Abraham begat Isaac. For 
in begetting Isaac, Abraham begat not what 
he would, but what another granted. But in 
God the Father’s begetting there is neither 

CATECHETICAL ECT URIS. 

ignorance nor intermediate deliberation 3, For 

John iii, 16. 
ho: i tt: 
dvage Katov beoer. Cf. $2, note 4. 
2 Jon, x. 9 Johniv. 24. 
yeyerrnmevos avapxws. Cf. § 5, note 4. 

2 6 ypovos. LBened. c. Codd. Roe, Casaub. Coisl. & xpovoes 
Ottob. Mon. x. 2. A. With the latter reading, the meaning will 
be—“if He did not bestow from the beginning, as thou sayest, 
what He bestowed in after times.’ Cyril does not here address 
his auditor, but an imaginary opponent,—‘‘O man.” 

Compare Athan. (de Sa vodis, § 26). 

3 The Arians appear to have made use of a dilemma: If God 
Vegat with will and purpose, these preceded the begetting, and so 
iv more ore ove Hv, there was a time when the Son was not: if 

3 0h, i, <8 * yy ous 
© Luke iv. 34. 

4 Ib. iii. 36. 

5 
8 Cieh sy, 

4 

without will and purpose, then He begat in ignorance and _ of 
necessity. The answer is fully given by Athanasius (c. Avian. ili. 
53—67. pp. 425—431 in this Series). 

to say that He knew not what He was be- 
vetting is the greatest impiety; and it is no 
less impious to say, that after deliberation in 
time He then became a Father. Lor God 
was not previously without a Son, and after- 
wards in time became a Father; but hath the 
Son eternally, having begotten Him not as 
men beget men, but as Himself only knoweth, 
who begat Him before all ages Very Gop. 

9. For the Father being Very God begat 
the Son like unto Himself, Very God 4; not as 
teachers beget disciples, not as Paul says to 
some, Zor in Christ Jesus I begat you through 
the Gosfe/3, Yor in this case he who was not 
a son by nature became a son by discipleship, 
but in the former case He was a Son by 
nature, a true Son. Not as ye, who are to he 
iNuminated, are now becoming sons of God: 
for ye also become sons, but by adoption of 

grace, as it is written, But as many as received 

Ilim, to them gave He the right to become 
children of God, even to them that believe on 
His name: which were begotten not of blood, 
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of 
man, butof God®. And we indeed are begotten 
of water and of the Spirit, but not thus was 
Christ begotten of the Father. For at the 
time of His Baptism addressing Him, and 
saying, Zhis 7s My Son7, He did not say, “ This 
has now become My Son,” but, Z%7s zs ALy 
Son, that He might make manifest, that even 
before the operation of Baptism He was a 
Son. 

10. The Father begat the Son, not as among 
men mind begets word. For the mind is sub- 
stantially existent in us; but the word when 
spoken is dispersed into the air and comes to 
an end’. But we know Christ to have been 
begotten not as a word pronounced 9, but as a 
Word substantially existingt and living ; not 
spoken by the lips, and dispersed, but be- 
gotten of the Father eternally and ineffably, in 
substance. For, Jn the beginning was the 
Word, and the Word was with God, and 
the Word was God3, sitting at God's right 

4 Athanasius (ad Efiscopos Fgypti, § 13), referring to r John 
v. 20, This is the true (adnOivos) God, writes: ‘‘ But these men 
(the Arians), as if in contradiction to this, allege that Christ is not 
the true God, but that He is only called God, as are other 
creatures, in regard of His participation in the Divine nature.” 
Again (c. Avian. iii. 9), ‘He gave us to know that of the true 
Father He is the true Liepring (aAnOcvov yévynpea). 

St ACOr a 0G John 1. 12, 13. 7 Natt-111. 17. 

_® Compare Athanasius (de Sententia Diony siz, & 23)8, hthe 
mind creates the word, being manifested in it, and the word 
shews the mind, having originated therein.” Tertulhan (adv. 
Prax. vii.): ‘ You will say what is a word but a voice and sound 
of the mouth, and (as the Grammarians teach) air when struck 
against, intelligible to the ear, but for the rest a sort of void, 
empty, and incorporeal thing.” Cf. Athan. (de Synodis, § 12): 
avuTogTaror. 

9 mpopopixorv. See Cat. iv. 8, note 9. 

It évundgraror. ibid. So the Spirit is described in Cat. xvii. 5 
“not uttered or breathed by the mouth and lips of the Father and 
the Son, nor dispersed into the air, but personally subsisting 
(evuToarartoy).” 

2 €y UTogTace. 3 Johni. tr. 

BBC ly 

hand ;—the Word understanding the Father's, 
will, and creating all things at His bidding: | 
the Word, which came down and went up; 
for the word of utterance when spoken comes 
not down, nor goes up; the Word speaking 
and saying, Zhe thines which T have seen zeuth | 
My bather, these I speak +: the Word possessed 
of power, and reigning over all things : for //e| 
Lather hath committed all things unto the Sons, | 
tr. ‘The Father then begat Him not in such | 
Wise as any man could understand, but. as 
Himself only knoweth. For we profess not to} 
tell in what manner He begat Him, but we 
insist that it was not in this manner. And not. 
we only are ignorant of the generation of the 
Son from the Father, but so is every created 
nature, Sfeak to the earth, if perchance tt May | 
feach thee’ and though thou inquire of all | 
things which are upon the earth, they shall | 
not be able to tell thee. For the earth cannot | 
tell the substance of Him who is its own, 
potter and fashioner. Nor is the earth alone) 
ignorant, but the sun also7: for the sun was 
created on the fourth day, without knowing 
what had been made in the three days before 
him; and he who knows not the things made 
in the three days before him, cannot tell forth 
the Maker Himself. Heaven will not declare 
this: for at the Father’s bidding ¢he heaven 
also was like smoke established® by Christ. Nor 
shall the heaven of heavens declare this, nor the 
waters which are above the heavens®. Why then 
art thou cast down, O man, at being ignorant 
of that which even the heavens know not?) 
Nay, not only are the heavens ignorant of this 
generation, but also every angelic nature. For 
if any one should ascend, were it possible, into 
the first heaven, and perceiving the ranks of 
the Angels there should approach and_ ask 
them how God begat His own Son, they would 
say perhaps, “We have above us beings greater 
and higher; ask them.” Go up to the second 
heaven and the third ; attain, if thou canst, to 
Thrones, and Dominions, and Principalities, 
and Powers: and even if any one should reach 
them, which is impossible, they also would 
decline the explanation, for they know it not. 
12, l’or my part, I have ever wondered at 
the curiosity of the bold men, who by their 
imagined reverence fall into impiety. or 
though they know nothing of Thrones, and 
Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers, 
the workmanship of Christ, they attempt to 

4 John viii. 38. 5 Matt. xi. 27; John v. 22. 

6 Job xii. 8. 

7 In saying that the earth, the sun, and the heavens know not 
their Maker, Cyril is simply using figurative language like that of 
the passage of Job just quoted. There is no reason to suppose 
that he accepted Origen’s theory (de Principiis, 11. cap. 7), that 
the heavenly bodies are living and rational beings, capable of 
sin. 

8 Isa. li. 6: the heavens shall vanish away like smoke. 

O7 

Ni ook 

scrutinise their Creator Himself Tel 
O most daring man, wherein does Throne 
differ from Dominion, and then scrutinise what 
pertains to Christ. ‘Tell me what is a Prin- 
cipality, and what a Power, and what a Virtue, 
and what an Angel: and then search out their 
Creator, for a// things were made by Him, But 
thou wilt not, or thou canst not ask Thrones 
or Dominions, What else is there that £vozec/h 
the deep things of God?, save only the Holy 
Ghost, who spake the Divine Scriptures? But 
not even the Holy Ghost Himself has spoken 
in the Scriptures concerning the generation of 
the Son from the Father. Why then dost thou 
busy thyself about things which not even the 
Holy Ghost has written in the Scriptures ? 
Thou that knowest not the things which are 
written, busiest thou thyself about the things 
which are not written? There are many 
questions in the Divine Scriptures ; what is 
written we comprehend not, why do we busy 
ourselves about what is not written? It is 
sufficient for us to know that God hath be- 
gotten One Only Son, 

13. Be not ashamed to confess thine ig- 
norance, since thou sharest ignorance with 
Angels. Only He who begat knoweth Him 
who was begotten, and He who js begotten of 
Him knoweth Him who begat. He who 
begat knoweth what He begat: and the 
Scriptures also testify that He who was be- 
gotten is God. For as the Father hath Life in 
Llimself, so also hath He given to the Son to 
have life in Himself* , and, that all men should 

Ime first, 

Honour the Son, even as they honour the Father’ F 

and, as the Lather quickeneth whom He will, 
even so the Son guickeneth whom He will, 
Neither He who begat suffered any loss, nor 
is anything lacking to Him who was begotten 
(I know that I have said these things many 
times, but it is for your safety that they are 
said so often): neither has He who begat, 
a Father, nor He who was begotten, a brother. 
Neither was He who begat changed into the 
Son7, nor did He who was begotten become 
the Father’, Of One Only Father there is One 

. = _ 

S yobrrta: 2 (ori, TOE 
3 I have followed the reading of Codd. Coisl. Roe, Casaub. 
Mon. A., which is approved though not adopted by the Bene- 
dictine Editor. ‘(he common text is manifestly interpolated : 
‘And the Holy Spirit of God testifies in the Scriptures, that He 
who was begotten without beginning is God. /or what man 
Anoweth, &c.” This insertion of 1 Cor. ii. 11 interrupts the 
argument, and is a useless repetition of the allusion to the same 
passage in § 12, 

4 John v. 26. 5 Th... a9, o Sheen. 

7 See iv. 8, note 8, on the Sabellian doctrine, and Athanas. 
Syxodis, § 16, note ro in this series). ‘ 

8 The doctrine of Sabellius might be expressed in two forms, 
either the Father became the Son, or the Son became the Father. 
Both forms are here denied. The Jerusalem Editor thinks there 
is an allusion to the Arian argument mentioned by Athanasius 
(c. Avian. Or. I. cap. vi. 22): ‘If the Son is the Father's off- 
spring and Image, and is like in all things to the Father, then 
it necessarily holds that as He is begotten so He begets, and He 
too becomes father of a son.” But the close connexion of the two 

(de 

9 OPS.Gulvilis. 4, 
r 

clauses is in fayour of the reference to the Sabellian vloTraTop(a. 

5 

68 CATECHETICALZ 2 ECT, 

| 
Only begotten Son: neither two Unbegotten 9, 
nor two Only-begetten ; but One Father, Un-| 
bevotten (for He is Unhbegotten who hath 
no father); and One Son, eternally begotten | 
of the Father; begotten not in time, but) 
before all ages: not inercased by advance- 
ment, but begotten that which He now is. 

14. We believe then In THe ONLY-BEecor- 
TEN Sow OF GOD, WHO WAS BEGOTTEN OF THE 
Farner Very Gop, For the ‘True God be- 
cetteth not a false god, as we have said, nor 
did Ile deliberate and afterwards beget'; but 
He begat eternally, and much more swiitly 
than our words or thoughts; for we speaking 
in time, consume time ; but in the case of the 
Divine Power, the generation is timeless. And 
as I have often said, He did not bring forth 
the Son from non-existence into being, nor 
take the non-existent into sonship*: but the 
Father, being Eternal, eternally and ineffably 
begat One Only Son, who has no brother. 
Nor are there two first principles; but the 
Father is the head of the Son, the beginning is 
One. For the Father begat the Son VERY 
Gop, called Emmanuel ; and Emmanuel éerny 
interpreted ts, God with us 4. 

15. And wouldest thou know that He who 
was begotten of the Father, and afterwards 
became man, is God? Hear the Prophet 
saying, Zhis is our God, none other shall be 
accounted of in comparison with Him. Le hath 
found out every way of knowledge, and given tt to 
Jacob Lis servant, and to Tsracl Elis beloved. 
Afterwards Ile was seen on earth, and conversed 
among mens. Seest thou herein God become 
man, after the giving of the law by Moses? 
Hear also a second testimony to Christ's Deity, 
that which has just now been read, 72 throne, 
O God, is for ever and ever®. For lest, because 
of His presence here in the flesh, He should 
be thought to have been advanced after this to 
the Godhead, the Scripture says plainly, Z/ere- 
pore God, COON Thy God, hath anointed Thee 
with the oil of gladness above Thy fellows. 
Seest thou Christ as God anointed by God 

the lather ? | 
16. Wouldest thou receive yet a third tes- 

| 
| 
| 
| 

9 ayevintor. The context shews that this, not a@ycrnrot, is 

here the right form. Athanasius seems to have used ayérrazos 
in both senses ** Un-begutten,’ as here, and “unoriginate.” Thus 

(c. Avian. Or i. cap. ix. $30) he says of the Anians: “* Their 
further question ‘whether the Unorigimate be one or two,’ shews 
how false are their views.” Compare Bp. Lightfoot's Excursus on 
Ignatius, Liphes. § 7, and Mr. Robertson's ‘notes on Athanasius 
in this Series. t See above, § 8, note 3. 
; 2 Athan. (c. Arian. I. ix. 31) ‘speaking against the Lord, 
He is of nothing,’ and ‘ He was not before His generation.’”’ 

o°x Ger Shs. ae Cie Oe 

5 Baruch iii. 3537. The last verse was understood by Cyril 
as by many of the Greek and Latin Fathers, to be a prophecy 
of the Incarnation: but in reality it refers to ‘‘ knowledge” 
(¢moriun, 7. 39), and should be translated ‘she was seen upon 
earth.” See notes on the passage in the Speaker's Comitentary. 

& direct 8, i lb dita: d SCC ay wigs STOLE Os 

saying, evpt hath laboured, and tre mei chan- 

dise of Ethiopia; and soon after, La Tice shall 
they make supplication, because God ts in Thee, 
and there ts ito God save Thee. lor Thou art 
God, and we knew tt rot, the God of Lsraet, the 
Saviour’, Thou seest that the Son is Ged, 
having in Himself God the Father: saying 
almost the very same which He has said in 
the Gospels: Zhe Luther ts in Me, and Lan 
in the Father 9. Ve says not, Iam the Father, 
but the Luther is in Me,and Iam in the Lather. 
And again He said not, Land the father am" 
one, but, J and the Lather are one, that we 
should neither separate them, nor make a con- 
fusion of Son-Father*. One they are because 
of the dignity pertaining to the Godhead, 
since God begat God. One in respect of their 
kingdom; for the Father reigns not over these, 
and the Son over those, lifting Himself up 
against His Father like Absalom: but the 
kingdom of the Father is likewise the kingdom 
of the Son. One they are, because there is 
no discord nor division between them: for 
what things the Father willcth, the Son willeth 
the same. One, because the creative works of 
Christ are no other than the Father's ; for the 
creation of all things is one, the Father having 
made them through the Son: fur /le spake, 
and they were made ; He commanied, and they 
were created, saith the Psalmist’. Tor He 
who speaks, speaks to one who hears; and 
He who commands, gives His commandment 
to one who is present with Him. 

17. The Son then is Very Gop, having the 
Father in Himself, not changed into the 
Father; for the Father was not made man, 
but the Son. For let the truth be freely 
spoken+. ‘The Father suffered not for us, but 
the Father sent Him who suffered. Neither 
let us say, There was a time when the Son 
was not; nor let us admit a Son who is the 
Father 5: but let us walk in the king’s highway ; 
let us turn aside neither on the left hand nor 
on the right. Neither from thinking to honour 
the Son, let us call Him the Father ; nor from 

8 Isa. xlv. 14,152 * They shall mike supplication unto thee, 
saying, surely God is in thee.” The words are addressed to 
Jerusalem as the city of God, Cyril applies them to the Son, 
misled by the Septuagint. 9 John xiv, 11. 

1 Athanasius (c. «lian. Or. iv. § 9), arguing for the Guoovaror 
says: ‘There are two, because there is Father and Sep, that 
is the Word ; and one, because one God. For if this is not so, 
He would have said, | am the Father, or, I and the Father Suits 

2 See iv. 8, notes 7 and 8. 

3 Pss. xxiii. 93 exlviii. 5. S. Cyril explains the creative 
“ Fiat” in Gen. i. as addressed by the Father to the Son. 

4 We learn from Socrates (Accel. //ist. I. 24), that after 
the Niccne Council ‘those who objected to the word omoovacos 
conceived that those who approved it favoured the opinion of 
Sabellius.” Marcellus of Ancyra, who was deposed on a charge 
of Sabellianism, and who did not in fact make clear the distinct 
personality of the Son, had been warmly supported by the friends 
of Athanasius. Cyril apparently fears to incur their censure, if 
he too strongly condemned the Sabellian view. 

5 Cyril here rejects Loth the opposite errors, Arianism, ‘‘ There 
was a time when the Son was not,” and Sabellianism, ‘a Son 
who is the Father.” 

Pe ne ada a ee 

Pie TOs 

thinking to honour the Father, 
Son to be some one of the creatures. 
One Father be worshipped through One rea; 
and let not their eure bag Be parated, let 
One Son be aay sitting at the right 
hand of the Father before all aves: sharing 
His throne not by advancement in time after 
His Passion, but by eternal possession. 

18, Sle who hath seen the Son, hath seen the 
futher®: for in all things the Son is like to 
Him who begat Him7; begotten Life of Life, 
and Light of Light, Po ower of Power, God of 
God; and the characteristics of the Godhead 
are unchangeable ® in the Son; and he who is 
counted worthy to behold Godhead in the 
Son, attains to the fruition of the Father. 
This is not my word, but that of the Only- 
begotten: S/Zave Fibeen so long time with voit, 
and hast thou not known Me, Philip? He that 
hath seen MMe, hath seen the Father®. And to 
be brief, let us neither separate them, nor 
make a confusion!:; neither say thou ever that 
the Son is foreizn to the Father, nor admit! ¢ 
those who say that the Father is at one time 
Iather, and at another Son: for these are 
strange and impious statements, and not the 
doctrines of the Church. But the Father, 
having begotten the Son, remained the Father, 
and is not changed. He begat Wisdom, yet 
lost not wisdom Himself; and begat Power, 
yet became not weak He begat. God, but 
lost not His own Godhead : and neither did 
He lose anything Himself by diminution or 
change ; nor has He who was begotten any 
thing wanting. Perfect is He who begat, Per- 
fect “that which was begotten: God was He 
who begat, God Hew ho was begotten ; God of 
all Himself, yet entitling the Father His own 
God, For He is not ashamed to say, Z ascend 
unto Afy father and your Lather, and to iy 
God and your God *. 

19. But lest thou shouldest think that He 
is in a like sense Father of the Son and of the 

creatures, oe By a distinction in what | 

“T ascend to our| 
be made 

follows. Ifor He said not, 
Pather,” Test an creatures should 
feilows of the Only-begotten; but He said, 
Aty Lather and your father; in one way 
Mine, by nature; in another yours, by adop- 
tion. And again, /o wy God and your God, in 
one way Sling, as His true and Only-bevotten 
Son, and in another way yours, as His work- 
manship 3 ‘Lhe Son of God then is Very Gop, 

7 See above, § 4, note o. 

© amwapaddakrot. The word was used byt the Orthodox Bishops 
at Nicawa, who said that “the Word must be described as the 
True power and Imave of the F: ther, 1 in all things like the Father 
and Himself incapable of change. See the notes of Dr. New- 
man and Mr. Robertson on Atl tmasiis (cle DICETBTTS)§ 26); 

© John xiv. 9. 

‘ ; Pt fe ; 
Imagine the) ineffably begotten before all ages 
But let} the same things often to you, that it may |) 

Ay ere) 

(for I say 

graven upon your mind). ‘This also belies 
that God has a Sen: but about the manner be 
not curious, for by searching thou wilt not 
find Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall: “hint 
ufon those things only which have been com- 
manted thee+. ‘Vell me first what He is who 
begat, and then learn that which He begat; 
but if thou canst not conccive the nature of 
Him who hath begotten, search not curiously 
into the manner of that which is begotten. 

20. lor godliness it sufliceth thee to know, as 
we have said, that God hath One Only Son, One 
naturally begotten ; who began not His being 
when He was born i in Bethlehem, but Brrore 
ALY AGES. Fey lear the Prophet Micah 
saying, dad thou, Bethlehem, house of Ephrata, 
art Mittle to be among the thousands of Judah, 
Out x4 thee shall come forth unto Mea Ruler, 
who shail feed My people Israel: and [His goings 
for th are from the beestining, Srort days of 

elernity 5. Vhink not then of Him who is now 
come forth out of Bethlebem®, but worship 
Him who was eternally begotten of the Father. 
Suffer none to speak of a be eginning of the Sen 
in time, but as a timeless Beginning acknow- 
ledge the Father. For the Father is the Be- 
ginning of the Son, timeless, incomprehensible, 
without beginning7. ‘The fountain of the river 
of righteousness, even of the Only-begotten, is 
the Father, who begat Him as Himself only 
knoweth. And wouldest thou know that our 
Lord Jesus Christ is King Eternal? Hear 
Him again saying, Your futher Abraham rejoiced 
to see AL 'y day, and he saw it, and was glad®, 
And then, when the Jews received this hardly, 
He says what to them was still harder, Before 
Abraham was, Lams, And again He saith to 
the Father, And now, Lather, glorify Thou Ae 
with Thine own self, with the glory which [had 
wth Thee before the world wast. He says 
plainly, “before the hits was, L- shal the 
glory which is with Thee And again when 

the expression ‘f My God” is understood by the Fathers generally 
as spoken by Christ in reference to His human nature, but Cyril 

ihe s this, as well as the other expression “* My r ather,” to the 
Divine nature, So Hilary (de Vrinrt. Iv. Se ‘idcirco Deus 
ejus est, quia ex co natus in Deum est.” Compare Epiphanius 
(Mer. Its 555). 4 Eecclus ili. 22. 

A Mics th v. 2; on the various readings dAyrogros et, By OX, Ob, 
ovK OA, ef, found in the MSS. of Cyril, see the Commentaries on the 
quotation "of the passage in Matt, ii. 6. 

6 Codd. Roe, Casaub. have a different reading—‘* Think aot 
then of Flis he win; «now been born in Bethlehem, and (nor) su ppose 
Him as the Son of Man to be altogether recent, but idan nuren 
This is rightly regarded by the Benedictine and other [Mditors 
as an interpolation intended to avoid the apparent tel dency of 
Cyril’s language in the reccived text to separate the Virgin’s Ss: my 
from the Eternal Word. Had Cyril so written after the Nest orian 
controversy arose phe would have appeared to favour the Nestorian 
formula that ‘ °M: ary did not give birth to the Deity.” Compare 

Swainson (Nicene Creed, Ch. ix. $7.) What Cyril really means is 
that we are not to think of Christ simply as man, but to worsiip 

9 John xiv. 9. HS eeiivae.d, WOUGNO? Him as God. , ee si aN 
Jeo lies see 7 ears Son ote 3 & Joln vii. 56. 5 livayitn sen 
3 Compare Cat. vil. 7. The Jerusalem Editor observes that | 1 Ib. ms: 

70 

He save. Lior Thou dovedst Me bcfore the founda- 
fin af the worid®, He plainly declares, “The 
elory which PE have with thee is from eternity.” 

ot, We believe then IN Oxt Lorp Juss 
Curist, THE, ONLY-BEGOTTEN 
Broorren oF Tis Farier Very Gop BEFORE 
ALL WORLDS, BY WHOM ALL ‘THINGS WERE MADE, 
Por whether they be thrones, or dominions, er 
principalities, oF POUT S, all things were made 
through Mims, nd of things created none 1S 
exempted from Tis authority. Silenced be 
every heresy which brings in different creators 
and makers of the world; silenced the tongue 
which blasphemes the Christ the Son of God ; 
let them be silenced who say that the sun is 
the Christ, for He is the sun’s Creator, not the 
sun which we see+# Silenced be they who say 
that the world is the workmanship of Angels 5, 
who wish to steal away the dignity of the Only- 
begotten. For whether visible or invisible, 
whether thrones or dominions, or anything 
that is named, all things were made by Christ. 
He reigns over the things which have been 
made by Him, not having seized another's 
spoils, but reigning over His own workman- 
ship. even as the Evangelist John has said, 
All things were made by Lim, and without Llim 
cers not anything made®, All things were made 
by Him, the Father working by the Son. 

22. I wish to give also a certain illustration 
of what I am saying, but I know that it is 
feeble; for of things visible what can be 
an exact illustration of the Divine Power ? 
But nevertheless as feeble be it spoken by the 
feeble to the feeble. For just as any king, 
whose son was a king, if he wished to form 
a city, might suggest to his son, lis partner in 
the kingdom, the form of the city, and he 
having received the pattern, brings the design 
to completion ; so, when the Father wished to 
form all things, the Son created all things at 
the Father's bidding, that the act of bidding 
might secure to the Father His absolute 
authority7, and yet the Son in turn might have 
authority over His own workmanship, and 
neither the Father be separated from the 
lordship over His own works, nor the Son rule 
over things created by others, but by Himself. 
Vor, as I have said, Angels did not create the 
world, but the Only-begotten Son, begotten, as 
I have said, before all ages, By wuom ALL 

& John xvii. 24. b. ols 4s Gs 
4 Compare Cat. vi. 13, and xv. 3: ‘* Here let converts from the 
Manichees gain instruction, and no longer make those lights their 
gods; nor impiously think that this sun which shall be darkened 
1m Chien” 
_ 5 The creation of the world was ascribed to Angels by the 
Gnostics generally. e.g. by Simon Magus (Irenaus, ade. //@res. 1. 

CATECHMTICAL Lie rie: 

Son or Gon, 

CPHINGS WERE MADE, nothing having been 
eesxcepted from THis creation. And let. this 
‘suffice to have been spoken by us so far, by 
the grace of Christ. 

it 24, Bat let us now recur to our profession 
of the Faith, and so for the present finish our 
discourse. Christ made all things, whether 
‘thou speak of Angels, or Archangels, of Do- 
‘minions, or ‘Thrones. Not that the lather 
wanted strength to create the works Himsclf, 
but because He willed that the Son should 
reign over His own workmanship, God Him- 
self giving Him the design of the things to be 
‘made. For honouring His own Father the 
—Only-begotten saith, Zhe Sow can do nothing of 
LHinself, but what Le seeth the Lather do; for 
what thines soever He doeth, these also doeth the 
Son likewise’, And again, Wy Lather worketh 
“hitherto, and I work, there being no opposition 
bos those who work. for all Mine are Thine, 
and Thine are Aline, saith the Lord in the 
Gospels. And this we may certainly know 
from the Old and New Testaments. Tor He 
who said, Let as make man in our image and 
after our likeness?, was certainly speaking to 
some one present. But clearest of all are the 
Psalmist’s words, Ze spake and they were made; 
He commanided, and they were created 3, as if the 
Father commanded and spake, and the Son 
made all things at the Father's bidding. And 
this Job said mystically, I Aich alone spread 
out the heaven, and walketh upon the sca as on 
firm ground +; signifying to those who under- 
stand that He who when present here walked 
upon the sea is also He who aforetime made 
the heavens. And again the Lord saith, Or 
didst Thou take carth, and fashion clay txto 
a living being 5? then afterwards, Are the gates 
of death opened to Thee through fear, and did the 
| door-keepers of hell shudder at sight of Thee°? 
thus signifying that He who through loving- 
kindness descended into hell, also in the begin- 
ning made man out of clay. 

24. Christ then is the Only-begotten Son of 
God, and Maker of the world. Vor //e was aL 
the world, and the world was made by Him ; 
and He came unto His own, as the Gospel 
teaches us7. And not only of the things which 
are scen, but also of the things which are not 
seen, is Christ the Maker at the Father’s bid- 
ding. Vor 7 //7m, according to the Apostle, 
‘were all things created that are in the heavens, 
and that are upon the carth, things visible and 
invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or prin- 
cipalities, or powers. all things have been created 

by Him and for Llim ; and Le is before all, and 

xxiil. § 2), Menander (¢dzd. § 5), Saturninus (247d. xxiv. 1), Basi- | 

lides (7d. § 3), Carpocrates (¢o7d. xxv. 1). O Oui ths 
7 On the doctrine of Creation by the Son as held by Cy1il, see 
the reference to the Introduction in the Index, Creatizn, 

TOE. XWil-sLO. 
4 Job ix. 8. 
7 Johni. 10, 115 

8 Jalin vere: 
2 Gen. 1. 26. 
5. Ub. SNAVIM oT 4s 

Refi COV dete 
3 Ps. exlviil. 5. 
6 1b. xxxviil. 17. 

A So Oa es vi 

mw Lim all thines consist®. Even if thou speak | Lle appointed heir of all things, by whom also 
of the worlds, of these also Jesus Christ is the] Z/e made the worlds®. 'To whom be the glory, 
Maker by the I’ather’s bidding. Vor ¢z ¢hese| honour, might, now and ever, and world with- 
last days God spake unto us by Llis Son, whom out end. Amen. 

o 

e Coll 16 7% \ Tish. 1, me 

“— oh Me > is 

4 

LECTURS 

ON THE WORDS INCARNATE, AND MADE WLAN; 

“tnd the Lerd spake again unto Ahas, saving, Ask thee a sigh, LS 

ond. 

ISAIAH Vi. to—i4 

and sis Behold! 

acvirgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call His name Emmanuel, ea ad 

rt. Nerstincs of purity and disciples of chas- 
tity, raise we our hymn to the Virgin-born God * 
with lips full of purity. Deemed? worthy to 
partake of the flesh of the Spiritual Lamb 3, let 
us take the head together with the feet 4, the 
Deity being understood as the head, and the 
Manhood taken as the feet. Hearers of the 
Holy Gospels, let us listen to John the Divine +. 
For he who said, Zz the begining was the 
Iord, and the \ord was with Ged, and the 
IVord was God, went on to say, and the 
Word was made flesh?. Yor neither is it 
holy to worship the mere man, nor religious 
to say that He is God only without the 
Manhood. For if Christ is God, as indeed 
He is, but took not human nature upon Him, 
we are strangers to salvation, Let us then 
worship Him as God, but believe that He 
also was made Man. For neither is there any 
profit in calling Him man without Godhead, 
nor any salvation in refusing to confess the 
Manhood together with the Godhead. Let us 

confess the presence of Him who is both, 

King and Physician, For Jesus the King 
when about to become our Physician, girded 
Himsetf with the linen of humanity Sand healed 
that which was sick. The perfect Teacher 

> This passage supplies a complete answer to the suspicion 
ofa quasi- Nestorian tendency referred to in note 6, On XI, 20. 
See x. 19, note 2, on the title OeoToKos. 

2 The Present Participle (karagcovpevor) means that the Can- | 

didates for Baptism were already on the way to be admitted to 
Holy Communion. Compare Cat. i. 1, Where the same Candidates 
are addressed as “‘partakers of the mysteries of Christ, as yet 
by calling only, but ere long by grace also.” 

3 Aubertin remarks on this passage that ‘‘ this spiritual Lamb, 
consisting of head and feet, can be received only by the spiritual 
mouth.” ‘This explanation, however true in itself, cannot fairly 
be held to express fully the meaning of Cyril. See the section 
of the Introduction referred to in the Index, “* Eucharist.” 

4 Ex. xii. g: the head qwith the feet. The same figurative 
interpretation 1s given by Eusebius (Zccé. Pigst. 1s th. & 
Christ there is a twofold nature ; and the one—in so far as He is 
thought of as God—resembles the head of the body, while the 
other may be compared with the feet,—in so far as He, for the 
sake of our salvation, put on human nature with the same passions 
as our own.” 

5 Iwavrn TO Ocodrtdyo. The title is given to Moses by Philo 
Judaus (Jrta Afos, IL. § 11), to Prophets by Eusebius (Demos tr. 
Fvang. ii. 9), to Apostles by Athanasius (de /ucarn. $10: Ter 
aprov TOU SwTHpos Bcodrdywr avdpov), and especially to St. John, 
because the chief purpose of his Gospel was to set forth the Deity 
of Christ, See note on Revel. 4-2, 1 Speaker's Commentary, 
and Suicer, 7/esaurus, Qeodoyos. 

‘ig t 

6 John ta b, teeTds cap ome tnr os 

| 
| 
| 

of babes? became a babe among babes, 
that He might give wisdom to the foolish. 
The Bread of heaven came down on earth ' 
that He might feed the hungry. 

>. But the sons of the Jews by setting at 
nought Him that came, and Jooking for him 
who cometh in wickedness, rejected the true 
Messiah, and wait for the deceiver, themselves 
deceived ; herein also the Saviour being found 
true, who said, £ am come ta My Lather's 
name, and ye receive Me not: but if another 
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive *. 
It is well also to put a question to the Jews. 
Is the Prophet Esaias, who saith that Lm- 
manuel shall be born of a virgin, true or false 5? 
For if they charge him with falsehood, no 
wonder: for their custom is not only to charge 
with falsehood, but also to stone the Prophets. 
sut if the Prophet is true, point to the Em- 
manuel, and say, Whether is He who is to 
come, for whom ye are looking, to be born of 
a virgin or not? For if He is not to be born of 
a virgin, ye accuse the Prophet of falsehood : 
but if in Him that is to come ye expect this, 
why do ye reject that which has come to pass 
already ? 

3. Let the Jews, then, be led astray, since 
they so will: but let the Church of God be 
glorified. Tor we receive God the Word made 
Man in truth, not, as heretics say 4, of the will 
of man and woman, but OF THE VIRGIN 
AND tHE Hoty Guosrs according to the 

9 Rom. il. 20. t John vi. 32, 33) 5% a I>, 32. a; 
Cf. 2 John 7. 3 Isa: Vil. 24 

+ Carpocrates, Cerinthus, the Ebionites, &c. See Ireneus 
(ear: 1.30. § rs SR BD 15 2). 

5 Dr. Swainson (Crceds, Chap. vii. § 7), speaking of the Creed 
of Cyril of Jerusalem, says that ‘‘the words capkw@er7a Kat evar- 
Opwrmjoavra are found in it, but no reference whatever Te ogre 
to the birth from the Virgin.” The present passace, and that 
in Cat. iv. $9, ‘ begotten of the Holy Virgin and the Holy Ghost.” 
scem to shew that such a clause formed part of the Creed which Cyril 
was expounding. ‘The genuineness of both passages is attested 
by all the MSS., and Dr. Swainson was mistaken in charging the 
Editors of the Oxford ‘Translation with having omitted to ‘* men- 
tion that Touttce was himself doubtful as to the words within the 
brackets’ [éx Hap@cvov kat Hvevparos ‘Aydov]. ‘he brackets are 
added by Dr. Swainson himself, and Touttée had no doubt of the 
genuineness of the words ; on the contrary he believed them to be 
part of the Creed itself. Wis note iscas follows. <(Dhe wvoucs 
of the Virgin and [oly Ghost I have caused to be printed in 
larger letters as if taken from the Symbol: although they are 

Gospel, MADE MAN ®, not in seeming but 
in truth. And that He was truly Man made} 
of the Virgin, wait for the proper time of 
instruction in this Lecture, and thou. shalt! 
receive the proofs7: for the error of the 
heretics is manifold. And some have said | 
that He has not been born at all of a virgin ®: | 
others that He has been born, not of a virgin, 
bat of a wife dwelling with a husband. Others 
say that the Christ is not God made Man, 
but a man made God. For they dared to say 
that not He—the pre-existent Word—was made 
Man; but a certain man was by advancement 
crowned. 

4. But remember thou what was said yester- 
day concerning His Godhead. Believe that 
He the Only-begotten Son of God—He Him- 
self was again begotten of a Virgin. Believe 
the Evangelist John when he says, Azad the 
ford was made flesh,and dwelt amongus*. Yor 
the Word is eternal, BEGOTTEN OF THE FATHER 
PEFORE ALL WORLDS: but the flesh He took on 
Him recently for our sake. Many contradict 
this, and say: “ What cause was there so great, 
for God to come down into humanity? And, 
is it at all God’s nature to hold intercourse 
with men? And, is it possible for a virgin to 
bear, without man?” Since then there is much 
controversy, and the battle has many forms, 
come, let us by the grace of Christ, and the 
prayers of those who are present, resolve each 
question. 

s. And first let us inquire for what cause 
Jesus came down. Now mind not my argu- 
mentations, for perhaps thou mayest be misled : 
but unless thou receive testimony of the Pro- 
phets on each matter, believe not what I say: 

wanting in the Title of this Lecture and in § 13, where the third 
Article of the Creed is referred to. But they are read in nearly all 
the Latin and Greek Symbols, and are referred to in Cat. iv. $9.” 

6 évavOpwricavta. ‘The word occurs in the true Nicene for- 
mula, where, as Dr. Swainson thinks, it is “scarcely ambiguous,” 
“it is defective.” Both the Verb and the Substantive évavOpw- 
ryots are constantly used by Athanasius to dencte the Incarnation 
in a perfectly general way, without any indication of ambiguity or 
defect. In the Creed proposed by Eusebius of Casarea instead 
of evavOpwmicavra we lind év avOpdmors woAcTevodpevov 5 and in 
the Lxfesitio Midei ascribed to Athanasius, but of somewhat 
doubtful authenticity, the Incarnation is described thus ex ris 
Gxpavtov mapOévov Maptas tov nuérepov avetAnper avOpwrov 
Xpcoror “Inoovv. In the Apollinarian controversy the attempt 
was made to interpret évnvOpemyjoev as meaning not that “He 
became Man,” bnt that ‘‘ He assumed a man,” Ze. that ** the man 
was first formed and then assumed” (Gregory, Zpist. ad Cledon. 
quoted by Swainson, p. $3), or else merely that ** He dwelt among 
men.” But the context of the passages in which Cyril uses the 
word (iv. 93 Nil. 3) clearly shews that he employed it in the 
peifectly orthodox sense which it has in the Nicene Formula and 
in Athanasius. 

7 See below, § 21 ff. Cyril means that the direct proof cannot 
be given at once, because there are many errors to be set aside 
first. Compare the end of § 4. 

w See Cat: 1v- 0, notes sy 4. 

9 Athanasius (contra Arfan. Or. 1.89) quotes as from Arius, 
Thalia, **Christ is not Very God, but He, as others, was made 
Ged (€@coraty9y) by participation.” The Eusebians in the Con- 
© ssion of Faith called Macrostichos (A.p. 344) condemned this 
view as being held by the disciples of Paul of Samosata, ‘‘ who 
say that after the incarnation He was by advance made God, 
from being made by nature a mere man.” ‘The orthodox use of 
the word Ocomworeto@ae is seen in Athan. de Lacarnat. § 54: abtos 
EvaVOpwTNTEV, Lva HES OeoTOLOO HEV. Ty Jolie 

Be Sen 

ya 

unless thou learn from the Holy Scriptures 
concerning the Virgin, and the place, the time, 
and the manner, veee’ve not lestimony from man®, 
For one who at present thus teaches may 
possibly be suspected: but what man of 
sense will suspect one that prophesied a thou- 
sand and more years beforehand? If then 
thou seekest the cause of Christ’s coming, go 
back to the first book of the Scriptures. In 
six days God made the world: but the world 
was for man. ‘The sun however resplendent 
with bright beams, yet was made to give light 
to man, yea, and all living creatures were 
formed to serve us: herbs and trees were 
created for our enjoyment. All the works of 
creation were good, but none of these was 
an image of God, save man only. ‘The sun 
was formed by a mere command, but man 
by God’s hands: Let us make man after our 
image, and after our likeness 3, A wooden image 
of an earthly king is held in honour; how 
much more a rational image of God ? 

But when this the greatest of the works of 
creation was disporting himself in Paradise, 
the envy of the Devil cast him out. The 
enemy was rejoicing over the fall of him whom 
he had envied: wouldest thou have had the 
enemy continue to rejoice? Not daring to 
accost the man because of his strength, he 
accosted as being weaker the woman, stil 
a virgin: for it was after the expulsion from 
Paradise that ddam knew Eve his wife +. 

6. Cain and Abel succeeded in the second 
generation of mankind: and Cain was the first 
murderer. Afterwards a deluge was poured 
abroad because of the great wickedness of 
men: fire came down from heaven upon the 
people of Sodom because of their transgression. 
After a time God chose cut Israel: but Israel 
also turned aside, and the chosen race was 
wounded. Tor while Moses stood before God 
in the mount, the people were worshipping 
a calf instead of God. In the lifetime of 
Moses, the law-giver who had said, Zzouw shalt 
not commit adultery, 2 man dared to enter 
a place of harlotry and transgress5. After 
Moses, Prophets were sent to cure Israel: 
but in their healing office they lamented that 
they were not able to overcome the disease, so 
that one of them says, [ve is me! for the godly 
man ts perished out of the earth, and there ts 
none that doeth right among men®: and again, 
They are all gone out of the way, they are together 
become unprofitable; there ts none that doeth 
good, no, not one7: and again, Cursing and stec/- 
ing, and adultery, and murder are poured out 
upon the land’, Their sons and their daughters 

cS Ft eas Bod 
A. lagen 3 

3 Gen. i. 26. 
© Nicaly vata: 
8 Hosea iv. i 

JoOun, ¥.345 
Numb. xxv. 6, 
Romy ite £2: 

ix 
a 

7m 

Thev used augurees, 

they sacrificed! unto deols 
And again, 

and enchantinents, and Menations * 

they fastened their garments with cords, and | 

made hangtiies attached to the altar ?, 

Very great was the wound -of man's 

nature: from the fet to the head ‘here was no 
soundicss ta ifs none could apply melding 
otntment, neither ott, nor bandages 3, Vhen be- 
wailing and wearying themselves, the Prophets | 
said, Hho shall give salvation out of Sion 4? 
And again, Le¢ Thy hand be upon the man 
of Thy right hand, and upon the son of man | 
whont Thou madest strong for Thrself: so will | 
not we go back from Thee >. And another ofthe 
Prophets entreated, saying, Bow the heavens, | 
O Lord, and come down’. ‘VYhe wounds of man’s 
nature pass our healing. Zhev slew Thy LPro- 
phets, and cast down Thine altars?. ‘The evil 
is irretrievable by us, and needs thee to re- 
tricve it. 

8. The Lord heard the prayer of the Pro- 
phets. The Father disregarded not the 
perishing of our race; He sent forth His 
Son, the Lord from heaven, as healer: and 
one of the Prophets saith, Ze Lord whom ye 
seck, cometh, and shall suddenly come’, Whither ? 
The Lord shall come to S/7s own temple, where 
ye stoned Him, ‘Then another of the Pro- 
phets, on hearing this, saith to him: In 
speaking of the salvation of God, speakest 
thou quietly? In preaching the good tidings of 
God’s coming for salvation, speakest thou in 
secret? O thou that bringest good tidings to 
Zion, get thee up into the high mountain, Speak 
to the cities of Judah. What am I to speak P 
Behold our God! Behold! the Lord cometh 
with strength? / Again the Lord Himself saith, 
Behold! T come, and Iwill dwell in the midst 
of thee, satth the Lord. And many Rarer 
shall flee unio the Lord*, ne Israelites re] 
salvation through Me: 
nations and fongite 82. For He came to His ow Un, 
and £1rs own recelt ed ffi nots, ‘Thou comest, 
and what dost ‘Thou bestow on the nations ? 
L come to gather all nations, and Lanutll leave on 
them a sign+. For from My conflict upon the 
Cross I give to each of My soldiers a royal 
seal to bear upon his forehead. Another also 
of the Prophets said, He dozwed the heavens also, 
and came down, and darkness was under His 

: Ps. evi. 37. 1 2 Chron. xxiii. 6. 
Amos ii. 8: they day themselves down beside every altar 
upon clothes taken in pledge (R.V.) 

oe Re eo 4 Ps. sav. 9. §: Tbvdexxiay, 2a 
6 Ds exliv. Si 7 1 Kings xix. 10, 8 Mal. iii. 1. 
® Tea. a. Go, 00s * ZeChe tle TO, TEs 2 Isa. Ixvi. 28. 

9, 

3 big n oa 

4 Isa. Ixvi. 10, a passage interpreted by the Fathers of the sign | 

of the Cross. I usebius (Demonstr. Evang. vi. 25): ‘* Who, on 
seeing that all who have believed in Christ use as a seal the 
sy inbol of salv ation, would not rec usonably he astonished at hearing 
the Lord’s saying of old time, Aud they shall come, i se see My 
glory, and I will leave @ sign upon them?” Cf, Cat iv. 143 
Potteacer 

{ CATECHETitaee 

L come to vather ae 

as jenecey 
i 

PA Paes, 

frets. Vor His coming down from heaven was 
not known by men. 
—g. Afterwards Solomon hearing his father 
‘David speak these things, built a wondrous 
house, and toresecing Him who was to come 
into it, said in astonishment, J}? God in very 
deed dwell with men on the earth®? Yea, saith 
paeyie by anticipation in the Psalm inscribed 
Tor Solomon, wherein is this, fle shall come 
down like rain into a fleece?: rain, because of 
His heavenly nature, and z/o a fleece, because 
of His humanity. For rain, coming down into 
a fleece, comes down noisclessly : so that the 
Magi, not knowing the mystery of the Nativity, 
say, IVhere is He that is born Alng of the Jews® ? 
and Herod being troubled inquired concerning 
Him who was born, and said, Ilhere és the 
Christ to be born? 

ro. But who is this that cometh down? He 
says in what follows, dvd with the sun Le en- 
dureth, and before the moon generations of Sere- 
vations. And again another of the Prophets 
saith, Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Ston, shout, 
O daughter of Jerusalem. Behold! thy King 
cometh unto thee, just and havlig salvation ®. 
Kings are many: of which speakest thou, O 
Prophet 2? Give us a sign which other Kings 
have not. If thou say, A king clad in purple, 
the dignity of the apparel has been anticipated. 
Ifthou say, Guarded by spear-men, and sitting 
in a golden chariot, this also has been anti- 
cipated by others. Give us a sign peculiar to 
the King whose coming thou announcest. And 
the Prophet maketh answer and saith, Pehold / 
thy King cometh unto thee, just, and having 
salvation: He is meck, and riding upon an ass 
and a young foal, not on a chariot. Thou hast 
a unique sign of the King who came. Jesus 
|alone of kings sat upon an unyoked 3 foal, 
ito "Jerusalem with acclamations as 
a iia And when this King is come, what 
doth He? Zhou also by the tit of the covenant 
hast sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit 
wherein ts no water 4, 

But He might perchance even sit upon a 
foal: give us rather a sign, where the King 
that entereth shall stand. And give the sign 
not far from the city, that it may not be 
unknown to us: and give us the sign plain 
before our eyes, that even when in the city we 
may behold the place. And the Prophet 
again makes answer, saying: And Fis feet shall 
stand tn that day upon the Mount of Olives 
which is before Jerusalem on the east’. Does 

- 

S: Ps, xvinis 0.2 Lhe “teete: interpreted allegorically, mean the 
Humanity, and the “darkness” the mystery of the Incarnation, 
| See Euseb. Demonstr. Evang. vis Tio 

Shy cade “c 27; 2 Chron. vi 18. 70 Psvlxxit ite, 
and Zh, So Matt, tho: Sen be ile TPG e Toc Se 

ses 1S: 3 agayn, a rare as ord, formed from gayn, 
4 Leche ixeat 
5 Zech. xiv. 4. ‘There is an excellent view from the city 

Be COURE CE. 

7 

f etize 

any one standing within the city fail to behold legions of angels; nevertheless the Prophet 

the place ? 

fell down. And the Angel cometh unto him, 

12, We have two signs, and we desire to; saying, Lear not, Daniel, stand upright: be of 

leanne AY thie, 
when He is come. Another Prophet. saith, | 
Lehold ! our God, and afterwards, /le zl come | 
and save us. Then the eves of the blind shall be 
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear: then 
shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the 

Vell us what the Lord doth) goed courage, thy words are heard+. And Daniel 

says, L stvod up trembling >: and not even so 
did he make answer, until the likeness of a 
man’s hand touched him, And when he that 
appeared was changed into the appearance of 
aman, then Danicl spake: and what saith he? 

tongue of the stammerers shall be distinct”. But O my Lord, at the vision of Thee my inward 

let yet another testimony be told us, 
sayest, O Prophet, that the Lord cometh, and 
docth signs such as never were: what other) 
clear sign tellest thou? Z%e Lord Simself’ 
entercth into gudgment with the elders of fis 
Leople and with the princes thereof?. S notable 
sign! ‘The Master judged by His servants, 
the elders, and submitting to it. 

13. These things the Jews read, but hear 
not: for they have stopped the ears of their 
heart, that they may not hear. But let us believe 
in Jesus Christ, as having come in the flesh and 
been made Man, because we could not receive 
Him otherwise. For since we could not look 
upon or enjoy Him as He was, He became what 
we are, that so we might be permitted to enjoy 
Him. For if we cannot look full on the sun, 
which was made on the fourth day, could we 
behold God its Creator$?) The Lord came 
down in fire on Mount Sinai, and the people 
could not bear it, but said to Moses, Speak 
thou with us, and we wtll hear; and let not 
God speak to us, lest we die9: and again, Lor 
who ts there of all flesh that hath heard the voice 
of the living God speaking out of the midst of 
the fire, and shall live? If to hear the voice of 
God speaking is a cause of death, how shall not 
the sight of God Himself bring death? And 
what wonder? Even Moses himself saith, Z 
exceedingly fear and quake. 

14. What wouldest thou then? That He 
who came for our salvation should become a 
minister of destruction because men could not 
bear Him ? or that He should suit His grace 
to our measure? Daniel could not bear the 
vision of an Angel, and wert thou capable of 
the sight of the Lord of Angels? Gabriel 
appeared, and Daniel fell down: and of what 
nature or in what guise was he that appeared ? 
flis countenance was like lightning 3; not like 
the sun: and his eves as lamps of fire, not asa 
furnace of fire: and the voice of his words as the 
voice of a multitude, not as the voice of twelve 

of the Mount of Olives which stands up over against it, especially 
from the height of Golgotha where Cyril was delivering his Lec- 
tures” (Cleopas). © Isa, xxxv. 4—6, 7 Ib. iit. 14. 

8 Cf. Epist. Barnab. § 13: ‘* For had He not come in flesh, 
how could we men have been safe in beholding Him? For in 
beholding the Sun, which being the work of His hands shall cease 
to be, men have no strength to fix their eyes upon him.” 

9 Exod. xx. 19. t Deut. v. 26. * Heb. xi. 21. 

SeDanexs0e \ 

Thou farts were turned within me, and no strength 

rematneth in me, neither ts there breath left 
m me. If an Angel appearing took away the 
Prophet’s voice and strength, would the ap- 
pearance of God have allowed him to breathe ? 
And until there louched me as tt were a vision 
of a man7, saith the Scripture, Daniel took 
not courage. So then after trial shewn of our 
weakness, the Lord assumed that which man 
required: for since man required to hear from 
one of like countenance, the Saviour took on 
Him the nature of like affections, that men 
might be the more easily instructed. 

15. Learn also another cause. Christ came 
that He might be baptized, and might sanctify 
Baptism: He came that He might work won- 
ders, walking upon the waters of the sea. 
Since then before His appearance in flesh, ‘Ze 
sea saw Him and fled, and Jordan was turned 
éack *, the Lord took to Himself His body, that 
the sea might endure the sight, and Jordan re- 
ceive Himwithout fear. This then is one cause ; 
but there is also a second. Through Eve yet 
virgin came death; through a virgin, or rather 
from a virgin, must the Life appear: that as 
the serpent beguiled the one, so to the other 
Gabriel might bring good tidings®, Men for- 
sook God, and made carved images of men. 
Since therefore an image of man was falsely 
worshipped as God, God became truly Man, 
that the falsehood might be done away. The 
Devil had used the flesh as an instrument 
against us ; and Paul knowing this, saith, Bu 
L see another law in my members warring agaist 
the law of my mind, and bringing me into capttv- 
yt, and the rest. By the very same weapons, 
therefore, wherewith the Devil used to van- 
quish us, have we been saved. The Lord 
took on Him from us our likeness, that He 
might save man’s nature: He took our like- 
ness, that He might give greater grace to 
that which lacked; that sinful humanity 
might become partaker of God. Lor where 
sin abounded, grace did muck more abound?. It 

ALVA ae Se <1 & bene can 

Cub xt, TO, 19s me Lie: a8, eb SeCnl i 8 

9 Justin M. (77yAh. § 100): ‘f Eve, when she was a virgin and 
undehled, having conceived the word of the serpent, brought forth 
disobedience and death: but the Virgin Mary received taith and 
joy, when the Angel Gabriel announced the gcod tidings to her,” 

t Rom. vii. 23. 2 ‘1b. Ve20) 

yas CATECHETICAL “Lr Ute. 
a : se 

bchoved the Lord to suffer for us; but if the | prophet, saith, «1 Prophet shall the Lord your 
Devil had known Him, he would not have | God raise up unto you of veur brethren, like 
dared to approach Him. Zor had they known tt, unio me: but let that “Whe unto me” de re- 
they could net have crucified the Lord of Glory >. served awhile to be examined in its proper 
[lis body therefore was made a bait to death, | place 8. But when cometh this Prophet that is 
that the dragon4, hoping to devour it, might | expected? Recur, he says, to what has been 
disecree those also who had been already | written by me: examine carefully Jacob's pro- 
devoured. For Death prevailed and devoured ;\ phecy addressed to Judah: Judah, thee may thy 
and again, God wiped away every tear from off brethren praise, and afterwards, not to quote 
every face ®. ithe whole, 4 prince shall not fail out of Judah, 

16. Was it without reason that Christ was! ver a ruler from his loins, until He come, for 
made Man? Are our teachings ingenious | wom tf ts reserved; and fle ts the expectation, 
phrases and human subtleties? Are not the | not of the Jews but of He Gentiles? He gave, 
Holy Scriptures our salvation? Are not the therefore, as a sign of Christ’s advent the ces- 
predictions of the Prophets? Keep then, I) sation of the Jewish rule. If they are not now 
pray thee, this deposit? undisturbed, and let under the Romans, the Christ 1s not yet come: 
none remove thee: believe that God became |if they still have a prince of the race of Judah 
Man. But though it has been proved possible |and of David?, he is not yet come that was 
for Him to be made Man, yet if the Jews still expected. Tor I am ashamed to tell of their 
disbelieve, let us hold this forth to them :) recent doings concerning those who are now 
What strange thing do we announce in saying called Patriarchs * among them, and what their 
that God was made Man, when yourselves say descent is, and who their mother: but I leave 
that Abraham received the Lord as a guest ®?|it to those who know. But He that cometh 
Whatstrange thing do we announce, when Jacob | @s the expectation of the Gentiles, what further 
says, Lor [have seen God face to face, and my \ Sign then hath He? He says next, Binding 
life is preserved9? The Lord, who ate with | 0s foal unto the vines. Thou sceest that foal 
Abraham, ate also with us. What strange thing | Which was clearly announced by Zachariah 4. 
then do we announce? Nay more, we produce} 18. But again thou askest yet another testl- 
two witnesses, those who stood before the ; mony of the time. Zhe Lory said unto Me, 
Lord on Mount Sinai: Moses was in a lift of Thou art My Son; this day have I begotten 
the rock*, and Elias was once in a clilt of the Thee» and a few words further on, Zhou shalt 
rock?: they being present with Him at His | 7“ them with a rod of rons. Thave said before 
Transfiguration on Mount Tabor, spake to the that the kingdom of the Romans is clearly 
Disciples of 7s decease which He should ac- called a@ rod of tron + but what 1s wanting con- 
complish at Jeritsalem 3. But, as T said before, it cerning this let us further call to mind out of 
has been proved possible for Him to be made | Daniel. For in relating and interpreting to Ne- 
man: and the rest of the proofs may be left buchadnezzar the image of the statue, he tells 
for the studious to collect. also his whole vision concerning it: and that 

17. My statement, however, promised to de-| a stone cut out of a mountain without hands, 
clare4 also the time of the Saviour’s advent, |that is, not set up by human contrivance, 
and the place: and I must not go away con- should overpower the whole world: and he 
victed of falsehood, but rather send away the speaks most clearly thus; dad in the days of 
Church’s novices > well assured. Let us there- MOMENI es ScLS PSV EN ts Pe 
fore Inquire the ume when our Lord CAME * | ty the Incarnation. one founded on the lateness of Christ’s coming, 
because His comms: 1s TeCcent, and 1s disputed 3 | the other on the Divine immutability. But the meaning of the 
and because Christ Jesus ts the ben! si ~ | passage is not clear, and the construction of the second sentence 
and because Christ Jesus ts the sane yesterday, | is incomplete. h 
and to-day, and for ever®. Moses then, the 7 Deut, xvii. 15; Acts vil. 37. : : ; 

7 8 é£eragomevor, a clear instance of the Gerundive, or quasi 

JAE See aed ; -, Future, sense of the Present Participle, common in Cyril. “ This 
* | intention is not fulfilled in the sequel of these Lectures ” (R.W.C.). 

3 1 Cor. it. 8. t ’ ; 9 Gen, xlix: 8, ro, : 

4 Death is here called “the dragon,” as in xiv. 17 he is called 1 According to Cyril (§ 19, below) and other Fathers, the 
“the invisible whale, in allusion to the case of Jonah. continuance of Jewish rulers ceased on the accession of Herod 
_ 5 On Christ’s descent into Hades compare iv. 113 xiv. 193 and | an Idumean, Compare Justin M. (Zs pion. $852, 120); Eusebius 
Pusebius (Dem. Lvang. X. 50). and Athanasius (¢. slydan. Or. iii. | (Denonstr. Evang. VIII. 1). On modern interpretations of the 
56): © The Lord, at Whom the keepers of hell's gates shuddered | passaze see Delitzsch (New Cosmimentery on Genesis), Drigss 
and set open hell. ‘I he Lord, Whom death as a dragon ilces.” (Messianic Prophecy, p. 93), Cheyne (/saiah, Vol. Il. p. 189), 

Isa. xxv. 8. ‘The first clause, //e hath swallowed up death | Driver ( Journal of Philology, No. 27, 1885). 

Jer ever (RV.), is mistranslated in the Septuagint, 2 A fall and interesting account of the Jewish Patriarchs of 
7 TavtTyY THY TapaKaTadyKyy. 1 ‘Pim v4, 20-§ S Ti 1. te. the West established at Tiberias from the time of Antoninus Pius 
8 Gen. xviii. 1 ff. o 1b. Ney BOF till the close of the 4th century is contained in Dean Milman’s 
t Ex, suk. 22. 2 7 Kites SiG History of the Jews, Vol. LI. Compare Epiphanius (//@7¢s. xxx. 
3 luuke ix. 96;.9%. “On. the traditien that D1t. “Tahor was the |. 3 4.), 6 Gen ane tre 

place of the ‘Transfiguration, accepted by S. Jerome and other “4 Zechar. ix. 9, quoted above, § to. 

l'athers, compare Lightfoot | //o. Hebr. in Mare. ix. 2). 5 Ps. ii. 7, 9. ‘Ihe passage is interpreted by GyrilisGa 5) 
4 Cat. xii. 5. For edpety the recent Editors with MSS. A.R.C. | of the eternal generation of the Son: here it refers to His Incar- 

aad Grodecq. have €pecr. 5 veyAvéas* nation, or perhaps is meant only to identify the Son of God with 

© Heb. xiii. 8. Cyril is supposed to refer to two objections | him who “ shall rule with a rod of ircn. 

Pec PURE 

ZL ip 

those kingdoms the God of heaven shall set up 
a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and | 

Slis kingdom shalt not be left to another people”. 

Lg: but we seck 
of the time of His coming. 
hard to persuade, 

years for a clear calculation, ‘does not. be- 
lieve what is stated. What then is the season, 
and what the manner of the time? 

when, on the failure of the kings descended 
from Judah, Herod a foreigner succeeds to 
the kingdom? ‘The Angel, therefore, who 
converses with Daniel says, and do thou now 
mark the words, And thou shalt know and un- 
derstand: Irom the going forth of the word for 
making answerl, and for the building of Jerusa- 

fem, watt! Messiah the Prince are seven weeks 
and three score and two weeks®, Now three 
score and nine weeks of years contain four 

hundred and eighty-three years. He said, 
therefore, that after the building of Jerusaiem, 
four hundred and eighty-three years having 
passed, and the rulers having failed, then 
cometh a certain king of another race, in whose 
time the Christ is to be born. Now Darius 
the Mede? built the city in the sixth year of 
his own reign, and first year of the 66th Olym- 
piad according to the Greeks. Olympiad is 
the name among the Greeks of the games cele- 
brated after four years, because of the day 
which in every four years of the sun’s courses 
is made up of the three* (supernumerary) hours 
in each year. And Herod is king in the 186th 
Olympiad, in the 4th year thereof. Now from 
the 66th to the 186th Olympiad there are 120 
Olympiads intervening, and a little over. So 
then the 120 Olympiads make up 480 years: 
for the other three years remaining are perhaps 
taken up in the interval between the first and 
fourth years. And there thou hast the proof 
according to the Scripture which saith, £7om 
the going forth of the word that Jerusalem be 
restored ‘and burlt until Messiah the Prince are 
seven weeks and sixty-two weeks. Of the times, 
therefore, thou hast for the present this proof, 
although there are also other different inter- 

6 Dan. ii. 44. 
7 Sept. tov droxpOjvat, a frequent meaning of the Hebrew 

SIT?» by which the Greek Translators understood the answer 
seD oun to the letter of Tatnai and his companions. Both A.V, 
and R.V. render the word “ to restore.’ 

8 Dan. ix. 25. 

9 Darius tie Mede 
king in Babylon r.c. 

Chettiar?) succeeded Belsh: azzar as 
the date assigned in Dan. ix. 1 to the 
prophecy of the 70 ye ars. But ‘Darius the king” in whose 
6th year (p.c. 516) the Temple was finished (Ezra Vicsrg) was 
Darius Hystaspis, king of Persia, whom Cyril here confounds with 
“Darius the Mede.” He also fails to distinguish the rebuilding 
of the ‘lemple, B.c. 516, from the rebuilding “of the City by per- 
mission of Artaxerxes Longimanus, .c. 444 (Veena, ii. 1). 

t In speaking of three supernumerary hours in the year instead 
of nearly six, Cyril seems to follow the division of the diurnal 
period into twelve parts, not twenty-four, The Jews had derived 
this division either from the Mzyptians, or more probably from the 
Babylonians: see Herodotus, II. rog. 

5 8, 

still more clearly the proof as 
Tor man being | Tivaiiahe art thoit little to be among the thou- 
unless he gets the very sands of Judah? 
forth unto Mea 

It is from the days of eternity? 

pretations concerning the aforesaid wecks of 
years in Danicl. 
20. But now hear the place of the promise, 

Micah says, And thou, Bethlehem, house of 

Jor out of thee shall come 
ruler, to be governor in Israel: 
orth are from the beginning, 
Sut assuredly as to 

land His 

LON LS 

‘the places, thou being an inhabitant of Jeru- 

salem, knowest also beforehand what is written 
in the hundred and thirty-first psalm. Lo/ 
we heard of it at Ephrathah, we found it in the 
plains of the woods. For a few years ago the 
place was woody4. Again thou hast heard 
Habakkuk say to the Lord, Vier the years draw 
nigh, thou shalt be made known, when the time 
ts come, thou shalt be shewns. And what is the 
sign, O Prophet, of the Lord’s coming? And 
presently he saith, Zz the midst of two lives shalt 
thou be known, plainly saying this to the Lord, 
‘Having come in the flesh thou livest and 
diest, and after rising from the dead thou livest 
again.” Further, from what part of the region 
round Jerusalem cometh He? From east, or 
west, or north, or south? Tell us exactly. 
And he makes answer most plainly and says, 
God shall come from Teman7 (now ‘Teman is by 
interpretation ‘south’) avd the Holy One from 
Mount Paran®, shady, woody: what the Psalinist 

2 Micah v. 2, quoted also in Cat. xi. 20, where sce note. 

3 Ps, cxxxii. 6. The Psalmist refers to the recov ery of the 
Ark, but Cyril interprets the passage mystically of Christ, and the 
pl ace of His Nativity. 

4 The Benedictine Editor thinks that in calling the place 

‘woody” Cyril refers to a grove planted by Hadrian in honour of 
Pipa which had been destroyed about sixteen y beste Seay w ioe 
Helena built the Church at Bethlehem: see Eusebius, Life of 
Constantine, II. 43. But Cyril evidently means that the wood 
of which the Psalmist speaks had remained till a few years before. 
Ephrathah is the ancient name of Bethlehem (Gen. xxx. 10% 
xlviii. 7), and by “the fields of the wood” is probably meant 
Kirjath-Jearim, ‘the city of woods,” where the Ark was found by 
David (2 Sam. vi. 2; 1 as xill. 6). 

5 Hab. iii. 2: (R.V.) O Lord, revive Thy work in the midst 
of the years, in the midst of the years make it kuown. ‘Vhe 
Septuagint gives a different sense: /2 the midst of two lives 
(or, living be ings) shalt Thou be known: when the years draw 
nich Thou shalt be recognised: when the time ts come, Thou 
shalt be shewn. The two latter clauses seem to be different 
renderings of | the same Hebrew words. 

6 éfjs. This clause comes before the preceding quotation: 
Cyril misplaces them, In the Vatican and other MSs. of the 
Sept. and in some Fathers Gowy (“living creatures”) is found in 
place of ¢way “lives ;” but the latter reading is evidently required 
by the interpretation which follows in Cyril. Origen (de Prin- 
ciptis, 1, 4), who recognises both readings (*f In medio vel duo- 
rum animalium, vel duaraum vitarum, cognosceris,”’) interprets the 

‘two living beings’ of the Son and the Spirit. E usebius 
(Demonstr. “Evang. VI. 15) observes that gwwy is to be read 
as perispomenon from the Singular Go, and interprets it of Christ’s 
life with God, and life on earth. Theodoret says, in commenting 
on the passage, “To me it seems that the Prophet means not 
‘‘living beings” (goa) but “lives” (¢was), the present life, and 
that which is to come, between which is the appearance of the 

Righteous Judge.” 
Tan) 

2 hee, tiled: 

as a common Noun meaning “South,” and the Vulgate ty here 
“ab Austro veniet.” The prophecy i is thus referred to Bethlehem, 

as lying to the South of Jerusalem. Kusebius (Dem, Evang. V1. 
15) mentions this as the rendering of ‘heodotion in his Greek 
Version, about 180 A.p. As a proper name ‘feman denotes a dis- 
trict and town in the southern part of Idumea, so called from 
a grandson of Esau (Gen. xxxvi. ae Lay ae Jer. selixee 73: Dos: 
Eze! ke xxv. 13 3 Amos 1. 12 ; Obad. 

® The following note is slightly “abridged from the Edition 

Cyril interprets the word Oaimav (Heb. 

78 CATECHETICGAS fori. 
of Ahaz, was twenty-five years old when he 
of the wood, began to reign: for as the prophecy is con- 
2r. We ask further, of whom cometh He fined within sixteen years, he must have been 
and how? And this Esaias tells us: Behold !\ begotten of Ahaz full nine years before the 
the virgin shall concetve tn her womb, and shall prophecy. What need then was there to utter 
bring forth a Son, and they shall call (1's name, the prophecy concerning one who had been 
Emmanul?, ‘Vhis the Jews contradict, for of already begotten even before the reign of his 
old it is their wont wickedly to oppose the| father Ahaz4? For he said not, hath conceived, 
truth: and they say that it is not wntten “ the| but “ the wirgin shall conceive,” speaking as with 
virgin,” but “the damsel.” But though I as-| foreknowledge 5. 
sent to what they say, even so I find the truth.| 23. We know then for certain that the 
lor we must ask them, If a virgin be forced,} Lord was to be born of a Virgin, but we 
when does she cry out and call for helpers,;}have to shew of what family the Virgin 
after or before the outrage? If, therefore, the} was. Zhe Lord sware tn truth unto David, 
Scripture elsewhere says, Zhe betrothed damsel\ and will not set tt aside. Of the fruit of thy 
cried, and there was none to save her', doth it) body willl set upon thy throne® : and again, f/7s 
not speak of a virgin? seed will I establish for ever, and his throne as 
But that you may learn more plainly that) ‘Ae davs of heaven?. And afterwards, Oxce have 
even a virgin is called in Holy Scripture a} JZ szworn by ALy holiness that L will not lie unto 
“damsel,” hear the Book of the Kings, speak-; David. Hrs seed shall endure for ever, and his 
ing of Abishag the Shunamite, And ‘he damsel throne as the sun before Me, and as the moon 
was very fair? +s for that as a virgin she was) established for ever’, ‘Thou seest that the dis- 
chosen and brought to David is admitted. course is of Christ, not of Solomon. For Solo- 
22. But the Jews say again, This was said} mon’s throne endured not asthe sun. Butifany 
to Ahaz in reference to Hezekiah. Well, then, | deny this, because Christ sat not on David’s 
let us read the Scripture: Ask thee a sign of the| throne of wood, we will bring forward that say- 
Lord thy God, in the depth or tn the height3, And\ing, The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ 
the sign certainly must be something astonishing. | sea/#9.- for it signifies not his wooden seat, but 
Tor the water from the rock was a sign, the sea) the authority of his teaching. In like manner 
divided, the sun turning back, and the like. | then I would have you seek for David’s throne 
Sut in what I am going to mention there is’ not the throne of wood, but the kingdom itself. 
still more manifest refutation of the Jews.) Take, too, as my witnesses the children who 
(I know that I am speaking at much length,;}cried aloud, //osanna to the Son of David’, 
and that my hearers are wearied: but bear) d/essed is the King of Israe/?. And the blind 
with the fulness of my statements, because it} men also say, Sov of Dazid, have mercy on us 3, 
is for Christ’s sake these questions are moved, | Gabriel too testifies plainly to Mary, saying, 
and they concern no ordinary matters.) Now) And the Lord God shall give unto Him the 
as Isaiah spake this in the reign of Ahaz, and| throne of His father David+. Paul also saith, 
Ahaz reigned only sixteen years, and the pro-| Remember Jesus Christ raised from the dead, of 
phecy was spoken to him within these years, | ‘Ae seed of David, according to my Gospels: and 
the objection of the Jews is refuted by the} in the beginning of the Epistle to the Romans 
fact that the succeeding king, Hezekiah, son he saith, IAich was made of the seed of David 
according to the flesh®, Receive thou therefore 
of Alexandrides of Jerusalem. ‘‘ Previous Editions read é€& dpous Him that iad born of David, believing the 
Papav xatazkiov dugéos. ‘This reading is found in, Cod, Vat.; prophecy which saith, And tx that day there 
and other MSS. of the Septuagint, but Papdy is omitted in the shall be a root of Jesse, and Fe that shall rise 

Aldine and many other copies, nor was it read in the MSS. of the : : ; 
Sept. in Jerome's time, as is clear from his comments on the} /g 77/e over the Gentiles: in Flim shall the Gen- 
passage. In the MSS. of Cyril, Ottob, R.C. V. Monac. J. and II. f 
in . aeons, Earns is the a of the desert rere the . tiles trust?, 
of Palestine lying between it and Egypt (Gen. xxi. 21; Num.i, 12). : , - - 
‘There was also a Mount Paran iver Xxxlil. 2). But since 24. But the Jews ats much troubled at 
Cyril applies the prophecy to Bethlehem, and the “ shady thickly- | these things. This also Isaiah foreknew, Says 
wooded mountain” of Habakkuk is identified with ‘the plains | . . hey Tr f 
of the wood” of David, we may safely conclude that Cyril did not | INQ, And they shall wish that t¢ ee) had been 
read @apay in his copies of the Septuagint, nor write it in his | burnt with fire . jor unto usa child ts born (not 
Lecture; but the reading crept in from the later copyists, accus- ? Ee 8 
tomed to the reading @apar in the Septuagint. ° unto them), wzto ws a Son fs given’, Mark thou 
9 Isa. vil. 14. The objection of the Jews that the Hebrew 
word **Almah” means ‘fa young woman,” whether married or 

not, is mentioned by Justin M. (/7 744. 43, 67, 71), and by Euse- 4 Compare Justin M. (77yp%. $77), Euseb. (Demonsir. Evang. 
bius (Dem, Evang. VIL. i. 415). vie TOMS BL ca, ty Vile Ct. sre). 
21 Kings i. 4. Cyril's argument is fully justified by the 5 Inthe Hebrew the word used is a Participle, and describes 

actual usage of ““Almah,” which certainly refers to unmarried | what Isaiah sees in a prophetic vision; “ Behold, the damsel— 
Women, In Ce, XV. 435 2a. il, SoaGawi. a. Whe same, 41 eurt/echedd.” 

probably the meaning in Ps. Ixviii. 25: ‘fin the midst were the 6 Ps. COMI) GIs 7 beixxxtxi2a. 8 oy. 35—37. 
damsels playing with the timbrels.” There is no passage in which 9: Matti xxii. 2. TT. xxi: 2 Vole silat 3. 
the word can be shewn to mean a married woman, 3 Matta oexgo: 4: uke 32°. Shai (inneslience 

Tsai vil; Pre | 6 Rom: 1293. FNSeeNi TOM ROM Xa 1a Sosa ikess 

L BO TURE Dios 

79 

that at first He was the Son of God, then was 
given to us. And a little after he says, And 
of His peace there ts no bound? The Romans 
have bounds: of the kingdom of the Son of 
God there is no bound. ‘lhe Persians and 
the Medes have bounds, but the Son has no 
bound. ‘Then next, «for the throne of David, 
and upon fits kingdom to order tt, Vie Moly 
Virgin, therefore, is from David. 

25. For it became Him who is most pure, 
and a teacher of purity, to have come forth 
from a pure bride-chamber. For if he who 
well fulfils the office of a priest of Jesus ab- 
stains from a wife, how should Jesus Himself 
be born of man and woman? 4o0r thou, saith 
He inthe Psalms, art Sle that took Me out of the 
womb*, Mark that carefully, Me that took Me out 
of the womb, signifying that He was begotten 
without man, being taken from a virgin’s womb 
and flesh. For the manner is different with 
those who are begotten according to the course 
of marriage. 

26. And from such members He is not 
ashamed to assume flesh, who is the framer 
of those very members. But then who telleth 
us this? The Lord saith unto Jeremiah: Ae- 
Sore I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee: and 
before thou camest forth out of the womb, I sance- 
tified thee*. Tf, then, in fashioning man He was 
not ashamed of the contact, was He ashamed 
in fashioning for His own sake the holy Flesh, 
the veil of His Godhead? It is God who 
even now creates the children in the womb, 
as it is written in Job, Hast thou not poured 
me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese? 
Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and 
hast knit me together with bones and sinews 3. 
There is nothing polluted in the human frame, 
except a man defile this with fornication and 
adultery. He who formed Adam formed Eve 
also, and male and female were formed by 
God’s hands. None of the members of the 
body as formed from the beginning is polluted. 
let the mouths of all heretics be stopped who 
slander their bodies, or rather Him who 
formed them. But let us remember Paul’s say- 
ing, Anozw ye not that your bodies are the te mples 
of the Holy Ghost which ts in you4? Andagain 
the Prophet hath spoken before in the person 

of Jesus, AZy flesh ts from them 5» and in another 
place it is written, Zherefore will He give them 
up, until the tine that she bringeth for the. And 
what is the sign? He tells us in what follows, 

She shall bring forth, and the remnant of their 

EPs; Sei. 2 VOR os 
4 COX. ViLeig. 
R.V. Ii0e also to them, when I depart from 
The Seventy mistook sw, “at my departure,” for 

Snipa, ‘my flesh.’ 6 Mic. v. 3 

cen gy 
SeaOliaes ey AT Ts 
S Hos. ix. 12, 

them, 

brethren shall return. And what are the nup- 
tial pledges of the Virgin, the holy bride? And 
Till betroth thee unto Me in faithfulness?, And 
Elizabeth, talking with Mary, speaks in like 
manner ee, Besse is she that believed; for 
there shall be a performance of those things which 
were told her from the Lord®. 

27. But both Greeks and Jews harass us 
and say that it was impossible for the Christ 
to be born of a virgin. As for the Greeks we 
will stop their mouths from their own fables. 
For ye who say that stones being thrown were 
changed into men 9, how say ye that it is im- 
posssible for a virgin to bring forth? Ye who 
fable that a daughter was born from the brain‘, 
how say ye that it is impossible for a son to 
have been born from a virgin’s womb? Ye 
who falsely say that Dionysus was born from 
the thigh of your Zeus?, how set ye at nought 
our truth? I know that I am speaking of 
things unworthy of the present audience: but 
in order that thou in due season mayest rebuke 
the Greeks, we have brought these things 
forward answering them from their own fables. 

28. But those of the circumcision meet thou 
with this question: Whether is harder, for an 
aged woman, barren and past age, to bear, 
or for a virgin in the prime of youth to con- 
ceive? Sarah was barren, and though it had 
ceased to be with her after the manner of 
women, yet, contrary to nature, she bore a 
child. If, then, it is against nature for a barren 
woman to conceive, and also for a virgin, 
either, therefore, reject both, or accept both. 
For it is the same God 3 who both wrought the 
one and appointed the other. For thou wilt 
not dare to say that it was possible for God in 
that former case, and impossible in this latter. 
And again: how is it natural for a man’s hand 
to be changed in a single hour into a different 
appearance and restored again? How then 
was the hand of Moses made white as snow, 
and at once restored again? But thou sayest 
that God’s will made the change. In that 
case God’s will has the power, and has it then 
no power in this case? ‘That moreover was a 
sign concerning the Egyptians only, but this 
was a sign given to the whole world. But 
whether is the more difficult, O ye Jews? For 
a virgin to bear, or for a rod to be quickened 
into a living creature? Ye confess that in the 
case of Moses a perfectly straight rod became 

7 Hos. ii. 20. 8 Luke was 

9 See the story of Pyrrha and Deuc: dion in Pindar, OZ. ix. 69: 
arep & ebvas Krncdc9av AQwvov yovov, and in Ovid. Aletam. i. 
250 ff. 

t Athena was said to have sprung armed from the head of 
Zeus: Pindar, OZ. vii. 65: Kopudav Kat’ axpay avopovaaa’ add- 
Aatey Umepaker Boa. Cf. Hes. Theos. 924. 

2 Eurip. Bacchae. 295 3 ; Ovid, Me tan. iv. 

3 Codd. Mon. i, A: 0 yap avtos Ocds, 
avros, 

pom 
Bened, 0 yap Ocd¢ 

89 

CATECHE TiGwdh abt Uikiss. 

like a serpent, and was ternble to him who 
cast it down, and he who before held the rod 

into an eye, and cannot a virgin bear a son. 
Does that which for men is more impossible 

fast, fled from it as from a serpent; for a ser-| take place, and is that which is possible never 

pent in truth it was: but he fled not because 
he feared that which he held, but because he 
dreaded Him that had changed it. A rod had 
teeth and eyes like a serpent: do then seeing 
eyes grow out of a rod, and cannot a child be 
born of a virgin’s womb, if God wills? For I 
say nothing of the fact that Aaron’s rod also 
produced in a single night what other trees 
produce in several years. For who knows not 
that a rod, after losing its bark, will never 
sprout, not even if it be planted in the midst 
of rivers? But since God is not dependent on 
the nature of trees, but is the Creator of their 
natures, the unfruitful, and dry, and barkless 
rod budded, and blossomed, and bare almonds. 
IIe, then, who for the sake of the typical high- 
priest gave fruit supernaturally to the rod, 
would He not for the sake of the true High- 
Priest grant to the Virgin to bear a child? 

29. ‘These are excellent suggestions of the 
narratives: but the Jews still contradict, and 
do not yield to the statements concerning the 
rod, unless they may be persuaded by similar 
strange and supernatural births. Question them, 
therefore, in this way : of whom in the begin- 
ning was Eve begotten? What mother con- 
ceived her the motherless? But the Scripture 
saith that she was born out of Adam’s side. 
Is Eve then born out of a man’s side without a 
mother, and is a child not to be born without 
a father, of a virgin’s womb? This debt of 
gratitude was due to men from womankind: for 
Eve was begotten of Adam, and not conceived 
of a mother, but as it were brought forth of man 
alone. Mary, therefore, paid the debt of grati- 
tude, when not by man but of herself alone in 
an immaculate way she conceived of the Holy 
Ghost by the power of God. 

30. But let us take what is yet a greater 
wonder than this. For that of bodies bodies 
should be conceived, even if wonderful, is never- 
theless possible: but that the dust of the 
earth should become a man, this is more won- 
derful. That clay moulded together should 
assume the coats and splendours of the eyes, 
this is more wonderful. ‘That out of dust of 
uniform appearance should be produced both 
the firmness of bones, and the softness of lungs, 
and other different kinds of members, this is 
wonderful. ‘That clay should be animated and 
travel round the world selfmoved, and should 
build houses, this is wonderful. ‘That clay 
should teach, and talk, and act as carpenter, 
and as king, this is wonderful. Whence, then, 
O ye most ignorant Jews, was Adam made? Did 
not God take dust from the earth, and fashion 
this wonderful frame? Is then clay changed 

to occur ? 

31. Let us remember these things, brethren: 
Ict us use these weapons in our defence. Let 
-us not endure those heretics who teach Christ’s 
‘coming as a phantom. Let us abhor those 
also who say that the Saviour’s birth was of 
husband and wife; who have dared to say 
that He was the child of Joseph and Mary, 
because it is written, Avd he took unto him his 
zefe+, For let us remember Jacob, who before 
he received Rachel, said to Laban, Give me 
my wifes. Vor as she before the wedded state, 
merely because there was a promise, was called 
the wife of Jacob, so also Mary, because she 
had been betrothed, was called the wife of 
Joseph. Mark also the accuracy of the Gospel, 
saying, And in the sixth month the Angel 
Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Gattle, 
named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man 
whose name was Joseph®, and so forth. And 
again when the census took place, and Joseph 
went up to enrol himself, what saith the Scrip- 
ture? And Joseph also went up from Galilee, 
to enrol himself with Mary who was espoused 
to him, being great with child7, Forthough she 
was with child, yet it said not “ with his wife,” 
but with her zo was espoused to him. Vor God 
sent forth His Son, says Paul, not made of 
aman and a woman, but made of a woman® 
only, that is of a virgin. For that the virgin 
also is called a woman, we shewed before 9. 
For He who makes souls virgin, was born 
of a Virgin. 

32. But thou wonderest at the event: even 
she herself who bare him wondered at this. 
Tor she saith to Gabriel, How shall this be to 
me, since I know not a man? But he says, 
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the 
power of the FHighest shall overshadow thee: 
wherefore also the holy thing which ts to be born 
shall be called the Son of God. Immaculate 
and undefiled was His generation: for where 
the Holy Spirit breathes, there all pollution is 
taken away: undefiled from the Virgin was the 
incarnate generation of the Only-begotten. And 
if the heretics gainsay the truth, the Holy Ghost 
shall convict them: that overshadowing power 
of the Highest shall wax wroth: Gabriel shall 
stand face to face against them in the day of 
judgment: the place of the manger, which 
received the Lord, shall put them to shame. 
The shepherds, who then received the good 
tidings, shall bear witness ; and the host of the 
Angels who sang praises and hymns, and said, 

4 Natta. oa. 
ity Shot eGe 
eeu oes Sa 

6 [unke 1.26, 27. 
9 See above, § 21. 

5 Gen. xxix, 21, 
S2Galviy.c4: 

HN 

PEC TUR LF. 

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace 
among men of His good pleasure? : the Temple 
into which He was then carried up on the 
fortieth day: the pairs of turtle-doves, which 
were offered on His behalf3: and Symeon who 
then took Him up in his arms, and Anna the. 
prophetess who was present. 

33. Since God then beareth witness, and 
the Holy Ghost joins in the witness, and 
Christ says, Ili) do ye seek to kill me, a man 
who has told you the truth+? let the heretics 
be silenced who speak against His humanity, 
for they speak against Him, who saith, //and/e 
me,and see; fora spirit hath notflesh and bones, 
as ye see me haves. Adored be the Lord the 
Virgin-born, and let Virgins acknowledge the 

crown of their own state: let the order also 
of Solitaries acknowledge the glory of chastity ; 
for we men are not deprived of the dignity of 
chastity. In the Virgin’s womb the Saviour’s 
period of nine months was passed: but the 
Lord was for thirty and three years a man: 
so that if a virgin glories® because of the 

2 Luke ii. 14, 

3 Ib, ii. 24. In Lev. xii. 8 one pair only of turtles is pre- 
scribed, to be offered for the mother, not for the child. But the 
reading ta Cevyn in Cyril is confirmed by that in St. Luke, roo 
kabapiomov avtwy. See the authorities in Tischendorf, 

4 John vii. 19 3 viii. 4o. 5 Luke xxiv. 39. 

6 cepviveror. Rivet, misled by a double error in the old Latin 
version, “ veneratur,” accused Cyril of approving the worship | 
of the Virgin Mary, | 

VOL. VII. 

SI 

nine months, much more we because of the 
many years. 

34 But let us all by God’s grace run the 
race of chastity, young men and maidens, old 

Men and children7, not going after wantonness, 

but praising the name of Christ. Let us not 
be ignorant of the glory of chastity: for its 
crown is angelic, and its excellence above man. 
Let us be chary of our bodies which are to 
shine as the sun: let us not for short pleasure 
defile so great, so noble a body: for short and 
momentary is the sin, but the shame for many 
years and for ever. Angels walking upon earth 
are they who practise chastity : the Virgins have 
their portion with Mary the Virgin. Let all 
vain ornament be banished, and every hurtful 
glance, and all wanton gait, and every flowing 
robe, and perfume enticing to pleasure. But in 
all for perfume let there be the prayer of sweet 
odour, and the practice ® of good works, and 
the sanctification of our bodies: that the Virgin- 
born Lord may say even of us, both men who 

live in chastity and women who wear the crown, 

L will dwell in them ; and walk in them, and 
Liwillbe thetr God, aid they shall be My people 9. 
To whom be the glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

7 Ps. exlviii. 12. 8 3) Tov ayadar mpagis, Cod. A, 

9 2 Cor. vi. 16, 

LECTURE Agee 

ON THE WoRDs, 

ISAIAH lili. 

Who hath belived our report? and to whom 
brought as a lamb tk 

deed of Christ is a cause of 
elorying to the Catholic Church, but her 
greatest of all glorying is in the Cross ; and 
knowing this, San Says, But God forbid that 
T should wry, save tn the Cross of Christ*.| 
For aS ir indeed it was, that one who 
was blind from his birth should receive, 
sight in Siloam?; but what is this compared 
with the blind of the whole world? A great 
thing it was, and passing nature, for Lazarus 
to rise again on the fourth day ; but the grace 
extended to him alone, and what was it com- 
pared with the dead in sins throughout the 
world? Marvellous it was, that five loaves 
should pour forth food for the five thou- 
sand; but what is that to those who are 
famishing in ignorance through all the world 
It was marvellous that she should have been 
loosed who had been bound by Satan eighteen 
years: yet what is this to all of us, who were 
fast bound in the chains of our sins? But the 
glory of the Cross led those who were blind 
through ignorance into light, loosed all who 
were held fast by sin, and ransomed the whole 
world of mankind. 

2. And wonder not that the whole world 
was ransomed ; for it was no mere man, but 
the only-begotten Son of God, who died on its 
beha!'f. Moreover one man’s sin, even Adam’s, 
had power to bring death to the world; but 7 
by the trespass of the one death reigned over the 
world, how shall not life much rather reign éy 
the righteousness of the Ones? And if because 
of the tree of food they were then cast out of 
paradise, shall not believers now more easily 
enter into paradise because of the ‘Tree of 
Jesus? If the first man formed out of the 
earth brought in universal death, shall not He 
who formed him out of the earth bring in 

1, EVERY 

| 

| 

eternal life, being Himself the Life? If 
Foal, Fier, 2 Cf, Athanas, (de 7rcarie, § 18, 40). 

3 LOM Vy ig ass 

Cru 

CIFIED AND Burien. 

t, 
ts the arm of the Lord revealed? 
» the slauchter, &¢. 

. £t648 

Phinees, when he waxed zealous and slew the 
evil-doer, stayed the wrath of God, shall not 
Jesus, who slew not another, but guze up 
LTinself for a ransom, put away the wrath 
W sas is against man kind: ? 

. Let us then not be ashamed of the Cross 
of our Saviour, but rather glory in it. Lox the 
word of the Cross ts unto Jews a stumbling-block, 

and unto Gentiles foolishness, but to us salva- 

tion: and ¢o them that are perishing tt ts fool- 
ishness, but unto us which are betne saved tt ts 
the power of Gods. For it was not a mere man 
who died for us, as I said before, but the Son 
of God, God made man. Further; if the 
lamb under Moses drove the destroyer ® far 
away, did not much rather the Zamd of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world7, deliver 
us from our sins? The blood of a silly sheep 
gave salvation ; and shall not the Blood of the 
Only-begotten much rather save? If any dis- 
believe the e power of the Crucified, let him ask 
the devils ; if any believe not words, let him 
believe what he sees. Many have been cru- 
cified throughout the world, but by none of 
these are the devils scared ; but when they see 
even the Sign of the Cross of Christ, who was 
crucified for us, they shudder ®. For those men 
died for their own sins, but Christ for the sins 
of others ; for He ad no sin, neither was guile 
found in Lis mouth>, It is not Peter who says 
this, for then we might suspect that he was 
partial to his Teacher ; but it is Esaias who 
says it, who was not indeed present with Him 
in the flesh, but in the Spirit foresaw His 
coming in the flesh. Yet why now bring the 
Prophet only as a witness? take for a wit- 
ness Pilate himself, who gave sentence upon 
Him, saying, £fvd no fault in this Man*: and 
when he gave Him up, and had washed his 

41 Tim. ii. 6. 
7 John i. 29. 
9.7 Pét,41.22)-q usted fron: dsas i120. 

5 1 Cor. i. 18, 23. Oa eciicr 3 
Bal OFAC ty cee SV Ores Om 
t Luke xxiii. 14. 

ProLine it. 

hands, he said 
Just person ?, 

Tam Tnocent of the blood of Mhls 
’ : 

fellow, and said, “ IVe receive the due reward of 
our aecdsys but this man hath done nothin 
amtss3, for we were present, both thou and 
I, at Ilis judement.” 

4. Jesus then really suffered for all men ; 
for the Cross was no illusion 4, otherwise our 
redemption is an illusion also. His death was 
not a mere shows, for then is our salvation 
also fabulous. If Lis death was but a show, 
they were true who said, Ile remember that 
that decetver sat, while He was Jet alive, Afler 
three days L rise again®. Wis Passion then 
was real: for He was really crucified, and we 
are not ashamed thereat; He was crucified, 

Weer threatened not, 
‘There is yet another witness of | sion, 
the sinlessness of Jesus,—the robber, the first }any d 
man admitted into Paradise ; who rebuked his | 

83 
who came to His pas- 
not unwillingly, but willingly ; Vea, "if 
issuading Him say even now, Le zt far 
Jrom Thee, Lord, We will say again, Get thee 
behind Ale, Satan’. 

6. And wouldest thou be persuaded that 
He came to His passion willingly? others, 
who forcknow it not, dic unwillingly ; but He 
spake before of His passion: Behold, the Son 
of man ts betrayed to be cructicd?, But knowest 
thou wherefore this Friend of man shunned 
not death? It was lest the whole world should 
perisn in its sins. Behold, we go up to Jeru- 
salem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed, 
and shall be crucified 3» and again, Fe stedfastly 
set Llis face to go to Jerusalem 4. And wouldest 
thou know certainly, that the Cross is a glory 
to Jesus? Hear His own words, not mine. 

and we deny it not, nay, I rather glory to 
speak of it. For though I should now deny 
it, here is Golgotha to confute ne, near 
which we are now asseml led; the wood of 
the Cross confutes me, which was afterwards 
distributed piecemeal from hence to all the 
world7, I confess the Cross, because I know 
of the Resurrection; for if, after being cruci- 
fied, He had remained as He was, I had not 
perchance confessed it, for I might have con- 
cealed both it and my Master; but now that 
the Resurrection has followed the Gross,' 4 am 
not ashamed to declare it. 

5. Being then in the flesh like others, He 
was crucified, but not for the like sins. For 

He was not led to death for coyctousness, 
since He was a Teacher of poverty ; nor was 
He condemned for concupiscence, for He 
Himself says plainly, IT Zosvever shall look upon 
a woman to lust after her, hath committed 
adultery with her already § ; 
striking hastily, for He turned the other cheek 
also to the smiter ; not for despising the Law, 
for Ile was the fulfiller of the Law; not for 
reviling a prophet, for it was Himself who was 
proclaimed by the Prophets ; not for defrauding 
any of their hire, for He ministered without 
reward and freely ; not for sinning in words, or 
deeds, or thoughts, He wo did no Sin, neither 
was guile found in [His mouth» who wher He 
was reviled, reviled nol again, when He Sey 

2 Matt. xxvii. 24. 

3 Luke xxiii 4 Cf Cate xiii. 30, 305 
Editor remarks, ‘‘ We know 
that the two robbers were pres 
have inferred from the words é 
of crucifixion was pronounce 
Jesus, 

4 So«nows. Cf. Tgnat. Swzyrn. 8 2: 
also He raised Iimself truly ; 
that He suffered in semb] 
§ 37, below. 

5 pavragisSiys. Athanas. c. A pollinar. Sg 
exhibition and the endurance of th: 
(pavrociar),.” 

The Benedictine 
not whence Cyril took the notion 
ent at the trial of Jesus.” He may 
vT~ AUTO Kpiware that the sentence 
d on them at the same time as on 

“He suffered truly, as 
not as certain unbelievers say, 
ance (70 dokety avroy memovOevat).”’ See 

‘* Supposing the 
e Passion to be a mere show 

fied 2 

not for smiting or Soundalion of the world, 

Judas had become ungrateful to the Master of 
the house, and was about to betray Him. 
Having but just now gone forth from the 
table, and drunk His cup of blessing, in return 
for that draught of salvation he sought to shed 
righteous blood. Le who did eat of Ltis bread, 
was lifting up his heel against Him » his hands 
were but lately receiving the blessed gifts 6, and 
presently for the wages of betrayal he was 
plotting His death. And being reproved, and 
having heard that word, Zhou hast said7, he 
again went out: then said Jesus, Zhe hour 
ts come, that the Son of man should be Slort- 
Seest thou how He knew the Cross to 
be His proper glory? What then, is Esaias 
not ashamed of being sawn asunder 9, and 
shall Christ be ashamed of dying for the 
world? Now ts the Son of man glorified*. Not 
that He was without glory before: for He was 
Slorified with the glory which was before the 
He was ever glorified 
as God; but now He was to be glorified in 
wearing the Crown of His patience. He gave 
hot up His life by compulsion, nor was He 
put to death by murderous violence, but of 
His own accord. Hear what He says: L have 
power to lay down My life, and I have power to 
fake it again3. I yield it of My own choice to 
My enemies; for unless I chose, this could 

oh Pete ee 2 

Sula te. 28, 

6 “rag evAoylas. 
and Cyril of Alexand 
secrated bread, distinct from that of the Eucharist. 
ham, Antig. xv. 4, § 3.” (R. W.C.) 

The custom of sending the bread of the Eucharist was for- 
bidden in the latter part of the 4th century by the Synod of 
Laodicea, Canon 14: ‘At Easter the Host shall no more be sent 
into foreign dioceses as eulogiae.” Bp. Hefele (Councils 11. 
p. 308) says—‘‘ It was a custom in the ancient Church, not indeed 
to consecrate, but to bless those of the several breads of the same 
form laid on the altar which were not needed for the Communion, 
and to employ them partly for the maintenance of the Clergy, 
and partly for distributing them to those of the faithful who did 
not communicate at the Mass.’ See Eusebius (//ist. Eccles. V. 
24), with the note thereon in this Series. 

¥ Matt. xvi. 22, 23. 2 Ib. xxvi. 2. 

4 Lukeix. s. S Psa. Xt. Gs 
The word has this meaning in Chrysostom 
ria also; afterwards it came to signify con- 

Vid. Bing- 

Fe 

Matt. xxvii. 63. Wie Gate ges thoy ca, 14a 8 Matt. v. 28, 

G 

Me Mat xkvie ss. John xii. 23. S See Ontc ty tas 
note 4. t John xiii. 31. Se RNR 3. Lei, te, 

iy 

< 

84 
not be. He came therefore of Ilis own set 
purpose to His passion, rejoicing in His noble 
deed, smiling at the crown, cheered by the 
salvation of mankind; not ashamed of the 
Cross, for it was to save the world. Vor it 
was no common man who suffered, but God in 
man’s nature, striving for the prize of His 
patience. 

7. But the Jews contradict this 4, ever ready, 
as they are, to cavil, and backward to believe ; 
so that for this cause the Prophet just now 
read says, Lord, who hath believed our report > ? 
Persians believe ®, and Hebrews believe not; 
they shall see, to whon He was not spoken of, 
and they that have not heard shall understand 7, 
while they who study these things shall set at 
nought what they study. ‘They speak against 
us, and say, “Does the Lord then sutfer? 
What 2 Had men’s hands power over His soye- 
reignty ?” Read the Lamentations; for in 
those Lamentations, Jeremias, lamenting you, 
wrote what is worthy of lamentations. He saw 
your destruction, he beheld your downfall, he 
bewailed Jerusalem which then was; for that 
which now is® shall not be bewailed ; for that 
Jerusalem crucified the Christ, but that zehich 
now ix worships Him. Lamenting then he 
says, The breath of our countenance, Christ the 
Lord was taken in our corruptions®. Am 1 then 
stating views of my own? Behold he testifies 
of the Lord Christ seized by men. And what 
is to follow from this? Tell me, O Prophet. 
He says, Of whom wwe said, Under His shadow 
we shall live among the nations*. For he signi- 
fies that the grace of life is no longer to dwell 
in Israel, but among the Gentiles. 

8. But since there has been much gainsaying 
by them, come, let me, with the help of your 
prayers, (as the shortness of the time may 
allow,) set forth by the grace of the Lord some 
few testimonies concerning the Passion. For 
the things concerning Christ are all put into 
writing, and nothing is doubtful, for nothing 
is without a text. All are inscribed on the 
monuments of the Prophets ; clearly written, 
not on tablets of stone, but by the Holy Ghost. 
Since then thou hast heard the Gospel speak- 
ing concerning Judas, oughtest thou not to 

4 There is so close a resemblance between the remainder of 
this Lecture and the explanation of the same Article of the Creed 
by Rufinus, that “ [ have no doubt,” says the Benedictine Editor, 

“that Rufinus drew from: Cyril's fountains.” Cf. Rutin. de Syax- 
bolo, § 19, $99. 5 Isa. lit.a5. 

© Ct. Acts ii. g: Parthians and Medes and Elamites. ‘These 
Jewish converts of the day of Pentecost would naturally be the 
first heralds of the Gospel in their respective countries. On the 
dispersion of the Apostles, ‘‘ Parthia, according to tradition, was 
allotted to Thomas as his field of labour’ (Euseb. //ist. Eccé. 
Ill.1; cf. I. 13). An earlier notice of the tradition is found in 
the Clementine Recognitions, L. 1X. c. 29, where the Pseudo- 
Clement professes to have received a letter from «Thomas, who is 
preaching the Gospel among them.” 

7 Rom. xv. 21, quoted from Isaiah, z.s. 8 Gal. iv. 25. 

9 Lam. iv. 20: The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the 
Lord, was tuken in thetr pits. r Thid. 

CATERCHET ICAL Piel Uae, 

y toit? Thou hast heard 
that He was pierced in the side by a spear ; 
ouzhtest thou not to see whether this also is 
iat Thou hast heard that He was cruci- 
| 

reecive the testimon 

fied in a garden; oughtest thou not to see 
whether this also is written? Thou hast heard 
‘that He was sold for thirty pieces of silver ; 
oughtest thou not to learn what prophet spake 
this? ‘Thou hast heard that He was given 
vinegar to drink; learn where this also is 
written. ‘Thou hast heard that His body was 
laid in a rock, and that a stone was sect over 
it ; oughtest thou not to receive this testimony 
also from the prophet ? Thou hast heard that 
He was crucified with robbers ; oughtest thou 
not to see whether this also is written? Thou 
hast heard that He was buried; oughtest thou 
not to see whether the circumstances of His 
burial are anywhere accurately written? Thou 
hast heard that He rose again ; oughtest thou 
not to sce whether we mock thee in teaching 
these things? Vor ovr speech and our preaching 
is not in persuasive words of man’s wisdom, We 
stir now no sophistical contrivances ; for these 
‘become exposed; we do not conquer words 
with words 3, for these come to an end; but we 
preach Christ Crucified +, who has already been 
preached aforetime by the Prophets. But do 
thou, I pray, receive the testimonies, and seal 
them in thine heart. And, since they are 
many, and the rest of our time is narrowed 
into a short space, listen now to a few of the 
more important as time permits ; and having 
received these beginnings, be diligent and seek 
out the remainder. Let not thine hand be 
only stretched out to receive, but let it be also 
ready to work 5, God gives all things freely. 
For if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of 
God who giveth (*), and he shall receive. May 
He through your prayer giant utterance to us 
who speak, and faith to you who hear. 

9. Let us then seek the testimonies to the 
Passion of Christ: for we are met together, 
not now to make a speculative exposition of 
the Scriptures, but rather to be certified of the 
things which we already believe. Now thou 
hast received from me first the testimonies 
concerning the coming of Jesus ; and concern- 
ing His walking on the sea, for it is written, 
Thy way is in the sea®. Also concerning divers 

21 Cor. ii. 4. The simple style of the New Testament is 
defended by Origen, c. Cedsum, ui. 68, and in many other pas- 
sages. 

8S Cyril alludes to the same proverb in the Homily on the 
Paralytic, c. 14 ‘‘ Word resists word, but a deed is irresistible.” 
The Jerusalem Editor refers to Gregory Nazianzen (Tom. LI. 
p. 590): Aoyw madater mas Aoyos. 

4g Cor. 18.23% 

5 Ecclus. iv. 31: Let not thine hand be stretched out to 
receive, and shut when thou shouldest repay. The passage is 
quoted in the Didaché, c. iv., Barnab. fist. c. xix., and Constit. 
s(bis) James 1. 5. 

Aposts Wale: . f : é 
e Ps, Ixxvii. 19. ‘The Benedictine Editor, with no authority 

LECT Ul 

cures thou hast on another occasion received 
testimony. Now therefore I begin from whence 
the Passion began. Judas was the traitor, 
and he came against Him, and stood, speaking 
words of peace, but plotting war. Concerning 
him, therefore, the Psalmist says, 47) friends 
and Ay netghbours drew near against Ale, and 
stood?, And again, Their words were sofier than 
atl, yet be they spears®, TLfail, Master? ; yet he 
was betraying his Master to death ; he was not 
abashed at His warning, when He said, /vdas, 
bzlravest thou the Son of Man with a kiss* ? for 
what He said to him was just this, Recollect 
thine own name; Judas means coxfessvon’?, thou 
hast covenanted, thou hast received the money, 
make confession quickly. O God, pass not 
over Aly pratse in silence, for the mouth of the 
wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful, are 
opened against Ale, thev have spoken against 
Me with a treacherous tongue, they have com- 
passed Mle about also with words of hatreds. 
But that some of the chief-priests also were 
present, and that He was put in bonds before 
the gates of the city, thou hast heard before, 
if thou rememberest the exposition of the 
Psalm, which has told the time and the place ; 
how they returned at evening, and hungered like 
dogs, and encompassed the citys, 

10. Listen also for the thirty pieces of 
silver. And I will say to them, Lf it be good 
i your sight, give me ny price, or refuses, and 
the rest. One price is owing to Me from you 
for My healing the blind and lame, and I 
receive another; for thanksgiving, dishonour, 
and for worship, insult. Seest thou how the 
Scripture foresaw these things? And they 
weishcd for My price thirty pieces of silver. 
How exact the prophecy! how great and un- 
erring the wisdom of the Holy Ghost! For 
he said, not ten, nor twenty, but thirty, exactly 
as many as there were. Tell also what be- 
comes of this price, O Prophet! Does he who 
received it keep it? or does he give it back ? 
and after he has given it back, what becomes 
of it? ‘The Prophet says then, Axd L took 
the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them tnto the 
house of the Lord, into the foundry7. Compare 
the Gospel with the Prophecy : /wdas, it says, 
repented himself, and cast down the pieces of silver 
in the temple, and departed ®, 

but the Latin version by Grodecq, inserts a quotation of Jobix. 8: 
Who walketh on the sea, as ona pavement, Cf. xi. 23. 

7 ols MENVI. Tes SED. beers 

9: Matt. xxvi. 49: t Luke xxii. 48. 

2 Cf. Phil. Jud. de Plantatione Noé, Il 834" And his 
name was called Judah, which being interpreted is ‘confession 
tothe Lord.” In Gen. xlix. 6 the name is differently interpreted : 

‘Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise.” ‘he root 
has both senses ‘to confess,” and ‘‘to praise,” which are closely 
allied, since to “confess’”’ is to “give God the glory” (Josh. 
Vii. 19). 3: Ps. Cix. 132 

4 Ps. lix. 6. The exposition was probably given in a sermon 
preached to the whole congregation, not in these Lectures, 

5 Zech. xi. 12. 6 Ib. 7ADEXK Ig. 

S Nattxxvilvusy Ss, 

3) 

he a ay ‘ 

rr. But now I have to seek the exact solu- 
tion of this seeming discrepancy. Vor they 
who make light of the prophets, allege that the 
Prophet says on the one hand, And LZ cast them 
tuto the house of the Lord, into the Joundry, but 
the Gospel on the other hand, 47d they gave 
them for the potter's field. Hear then how they 
are both true. For those conscientious Jews 
forsooth, the high-priests of that time, when 
they saw that Judas repented and said, 7 have 
sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent blood, 
reply, IVhat rs that to us, see thou to that*. Is 
it then nothing to you, the crucifiers? but 
shall he who received and restored the price 
of murder see to it, and shall ye the murderers 
not see to it? Then they say among them- 
selves, // ts not lawful to cast them into the 
treasury, because tt ts the price of blood?. Out 
of your own mouths is your condemnation ; 
if the price is polluted, the deed is polluted 
also ; but if thou art fulfilling righteousness in 
crucifying Christ, why receivest thou not the 
price of it? But the point of inquiry is this: 
how is there no disagreement, if the Gospel 
says, the potter's field, and the Prophet, she 
Joundry ? Nay, but not only people who are 
goldsmiths, or brass-founders, have a foundry, 
but potters also have foundries for their clay. 
lor they sift off the fine and rich and useful earth 
from the gravel, and separate from it the mass 
(of the refuse matter, and temper the clay first 
with water, that they may work it with ease 
into the forms intended. Why then wonderest 
thou that the Gospel says plainly ‘he potter's 
field, whereas the Prophet spoke his prophecy 
like an enigma, since prophecy is in many 
places enigmatical ? 

12. They bound Jesus, and brought Him 
into the hall of the High-priest. And wouldest 
thou learn and know that this also is written ? 
Esaias says, Woe unto their soul, for they have 
taken evil counsel against themselves, saying, Let 
us bind the Just, for He ts troublesome to us 3. 
And truly, IVoe unto their soul! Let us see 
how. Esaias was sawn asunder, yet after 
this the people was restored. Jeremias was 
cast into the mire of the cistern, yet was 
the wound of the Jews healed; for the sin 
was less, since it was against man. But 
when the Jews sinned, not against man, but 
against God in man’s nature, Ive unto their 
soul!—Let us bind the Just; could He not 
then set Himself free, some one will say ; 
He, who freed Lazarus from the bonds of 
death on the fourth day, and loosed Peter 

Oe Naktis o,f i Eb ces = Drank 
3 Isa. iii. go: (R.V.) they have rewarded evil unto themselves. 
Say ge of the righteous, that tt shall be well with Aium. Inthe 
Septuagint, from which Cyril quotes, there is an evident inter- 
| polation of Wisdom ii. 12: Let us die in wait for the righteous; 
because he ts not for our turn (Svoxpnatos, as in Cyril), 

ies 
« 

6 
from the iron bands of a prison? Angels 
stood ready at hand, saying, Let ws burst (heir 
hoods in sua tert: Wut they hold back, because 
their Lord willed to undergo it. Again, He 
was led to the judgment-seat before the 
Elders: thou hast already the testimony to! 
this, Zhe Lord LLinself will come into judgment 
cith the ancients of Lis people, and with the 
princes thereaf® | 

13. But the High-priest having questioned | 
Him, and heard the truth, is wroth ; and the 
wicked officer of wicked men smites Him :' 
and the countenance, which had shone 
the sun, endured to be smitten by lawless, 
hands. Others also come and spit on the 
fice of Him, who by spittle had healed the 
man who was blind from his birth. Do je 
thus reguite the Lord? This people ts foolish 
and unwise’, And the Prophet greatly won- 
dering, says, Lord, who hath believed our 
report? ? for the thing is incredible, that God, | 
the Son of God, and the Arm of the Lord’, 
should suffer such things. But that they who 
are being saved may not disbelieve, the Holy 
Ghost writes before, in the person of Christ. 
who says, (for He who then spake these things, 
was afterward Himself an actor in them,) / 
vave My back to the scourges ; (for Pilate, when 
he had scoursed Fim, delivered Him to be 
crucified 9;) and ALy cheeks to smitings ; and ALy 
face I turned not away from the shame of 
spittings ; saying, as it were, ‘Though knowing 
before that they will smite Me, I did not even 
turn My cheek aside ; for how should I have 
nerved My disciples against death for truth’s 
sake, had I Myself dreaded this?” I said, 
Fle that loveth his life shall lose it*: if I had 

O7L 

as 

| 

Ch Peo ea LES fORIvS: 

sharp hearer will object, “ Pilate was not a king,” 
(to leave for a while the main parts of the 
question,) “how then having bound Him, led 
they Ilim as a present to the king?” But 
read thou the Gospel; IlAen Pilate heard (hat 
Tle was of Galilee, he sent Lim to Herod} ; for 
Herod was then king, and was present at Jeru- 
salem. And now observe the exactness of the 
Prophet ; for he says, that He was sent as 
a present; for the same day Pilate and Lcrod 
anvre made friends together, for before they were 
at enmity. Forit became Him who was on the 
eve of making peace between earth and heaven, 
to make the very men who condemned Him 
the first to be at peace; for the Lord Himself 
was there present, wo reconciles 5 the hearts of 
the princes of the earth. Mark the exactness 
of the Prophets, and their true testimony. 

15. Look with awe then at the Lord who was 
judeed. He suffcred Himself to be led and car- 
ricd by soldiers. Pilate sat in judgment, and 
He who sitteth on the right hand of the Father, 
stood and was judged®. ‘The people whom He 
had redeemed from the land of Egypt, and 
ofitimes from other places, shouted against 
Him, Away with Him, away with Him, crucify 
Him. Wherefore, O ye Jews? because He 
healed your blind? or because He made your 
lame to walk, and bestowed His other benctits ? 
So that the Prophet in amazement speaks of 
this too, Against whom have ye opened your 
mouth, and against whom have ye let loose your 
tongue’? and the Lord Himself says in the 
Prophets, Je heritage became unto Ale as 
a lion in the forest, tt gave tts voice against 
Me, therefore have I hated tt9, JT have not 
refused them, but they have refused Me; in 

loved My life, how was I to teach without, 
practising what I taught? First then, being: 
Himself God, He endured to suffer these) 
things at the hands of men; that after this, | 
we men, when we suffer such things at the 
hands of men for His sake, might not be 
ashamed. ‘Thou seest that of these things 
also the prophets have clearly written before- 
hand. Many, however, of the Scripture testi- 
monies I pass by for want of time, as I said 
before ; for if one should exactly search out all, 
not one of the things concerning Christ would 
be left without witness. 

14. Having been bound, He came from. 
Caiaphas to Pilate,—is this too written? yes; 
And having bound Hin, they led Him away as’ 
a present to the king of Jarim?, But here some | 

| 

£ Psat. at 

% Pepi -ty 

t John xu. 25 

2 Hosea x. 6: (R.V.) 74 alsa shall be carried unto Assyria 
for a present taking Jareb. ‘Yhis passage is applied in the same 

6. Dewt, syniies, 

5 Jehs ins ag: 
Lid G Tsacl. 62 Raate. axyil. eG; 

8 Lhid; 

manner to Luke xaiii. 7 by Justin M. (79sA%. § 103), ‘Tertullian | 

(ec. Afarcion. iv. 42), and Rufinus (de Syaztolo, § 21), who adds,— 
‘And rightly does the Prophet add the name ‘Jarim,’ which 

consequence thereof I say, L have forsaken Jy 
house. 

16. When He was judged, He held Mis 
peace; so that Pilate was moved for Hin, 
and said, //earest Thou not what these witness 
against Thee?? Not that He knew Him who 
was judged, but he feared his own wife’s dream 
which had been reported to him. And Jesus 
held His peace. ‘The Psalmist says, And L 
became as a man that hearcth not; and in 
zhose mouth are no reproofss, and again, Put 
LZ was asa deaf man and heard not; and as 
a dumb man that opencth not his mouth+, Thou 

2 

means ‘a wild vine,’ for Herod was...a wild vine, i.e. of an 
alien stock.” For the various interpretations of the name see the 
Commentaries on Hosea v.13, and x. 63 Schrader, Cunegorit 
rhe dea II. § 439, Driver, Juztroduction to O.7. Literature, 
p. 283. 

8 Lake Buin, 6,7; 4 Ibid. xxiii. 12. 

5 Job xii. og: (R.V.) fe taketh away the heari of the chicfs 
of the people of the carth, ‘Yhe rendering ‘who reconciles” 
(0 &adAAadoowr. Sept.) is forbidden by the context. 

© Some MSS. have qréexero or jvetxero, ‘ He submitted to 
stand.” 

7 Josh. xix. 15. 

O Jere Mee 

fa icra een g tt tog 

& Usa. dare 
2 [bid wce7. SU Nateinns iets 
4 Thid. eo 13. 

| 

hast before heard concerning this 5, if thou re- 
memberest. 

17. but the soldiers who crowd around 
mock Him, and their Lord becomes a 
sport to them, and upon their Master they 
make jests. Wnea they loked en Ale, they 
shiked thetr heads®, Vet the figure of kingly 
state appears ; for though in mockery, yet they 
bend the knee. And the soldiers before they 
crucify [lim, put on Ilim a purple robe, and 
set a crown on His head; for what though 
it he of thorns? Every king is proclaimed by 
soldiers ; and Jesus also must in a figure be 
crowned by soldiers; so that for this cause 
the Scripture says in the Canticles, Go forth, 
O ye daughters of Jerusalem, and look upon 
King Solomon tn the crown wherewith His 
mother crowned Him? And the crown itself 
was a mystery; for it was a remission of sins, 
a release from the curse. 

18, Adam received the sentence, Cussed zs 
the ground in thy labours » thorns and thistles 
shall tt bring forth to thee’. Yor this cause 
Jesus assumes the thorns, that He may cancel 
the sentence; for this cause also was He 
buried in the earth, that the earth which had 
been cursed might receive the blessing instead 
of a curse. At the time of the sin, they 
clothed themselves with fig-leaves ; for this 
cause Jesus also made the fig-tree the last of 
Ilis signs. Lor when about to go to His 
passion, Ife curses the fig-tree, not every fig- 
tree, but that one alone, for the sake of the 
figure ; saying, Vo more let any man eat fruit of 
thee; letthe doom be cancelled. And because 
they aforetime clothed themselves with fig- 
leaves, He came at a season when food was 
not wont to be found on the fig-tree. Who 
knows not that in winter-time the fig-tree bears 
no fruit, but is clothed with leaves only? Was 
Jesus ignorant of this, which all knew? No, 
but though He knew, yet He came as if seek- 
ing; not ignorant that He should not find, 
but shewing that the emblematical curse ex- 
tended to the leaves only. 

19. And since we have touched on things 
connected with Paradise, I am truly astonished 
at the truth of the types. In Paradise was 
the all, and in a Garden was our Salvation. 
rom the ‘Tree came sin, and until the Tree 
sin lasted. Lu the evening, when the Lord 
walked in the Garden, they hid themselves * ,; 
and in the evening the robber is brought by 
the Lord into Paradise. But some one will 
say to me, “hou art inventing subtleties ; 

3 ** Perhaps in some Homily ” (Ben. Ed.) o Ps..cike ds: 
7 GACT lierakil : F 
8 Gen. il. 17,18. By mistaking one letter in the Ichrew, the 
Seventy give the meaning “in thy labours” instead of “ror thy 
a et 9 Mark xi. 1 I Gen. iii. & 

Sinai -. Oo 

Reed 2 et 

I. 87 
shew me from some prophet the Wood of the 
Cross; except thou give me a testimony from 
a prophet, L will not be persuaded. Hear then 
from Jeremias, and assure thyself; Z zeas like 
a harintess lamb led to be slaughtered ; did I not 
| Anow it? ? (for in this manner read it asa qucs- 
tion, as I have read it; for He who said, Ye 
know that after feo days comes the Lassover, 
and the Son of Man ts betrayed to be crucified *, 
did He not know?) Lwas like a harmless lamb 
Led to be slaughtered ; did IT not know it? (but 
what sort of lamb? let John the Baptist inter- 
pret it, when he says, Behold the Lamb of Gol, 
that taketh away the stn of the worlds.) TLhey 
@evlsed against Ale a wicked evice, say tite 8,— 
(Te who knows the devices, knew He not the 
result of them? And what. said they ?)— 
Come, and let us place a beam upon Lis bread’— 
(and if the Lord reckon thee worthy, thou 
shalt hereafter learn, that His body according 
to the Gospel bore the figure of bread ;)— 
Come then, and let us place a beam upon His 
bread, and cut Lim off out of the land of the 
living ;—(life is not cut off, why labour ye for 
nought ?)—And //is name shall be remembered 

no more. Vain is your counsel ; for before the 
sun Fis Name? abideth in the Church. And 
that it was Life, which hung on the Cross, 
Moses says, weeping, And thy life shall be 
hanging before thine eves; and thou shalt be 
Yraid day and night, and thou shalt not trust 
thy life®, And so too, what was just now read 
as the text, Zord, who hath belicved our report ? 

20, ‘This was the figure which Moses com- 
pleted by fixing the serpent to a cross, that 
whoso had been bitten by the living ser- 
pent, and looked to the brasen serpent, 
might be saved by believing? Does then 
the brazen serpent save when crucified, and 
shall not the Son of God incarnate save 
when crucified also? On each occasion life 
comes by means of wood. Tor in the time 

2 

Jer. xi.19: 1 was like a tame (RV. gentle) lan that is 
led to the slaughter; and tl knew not that they had devised 
devces against me, Cyril's interrogative rendering is not ad- 
missible. 

+ Matt... ¥8vi, 2; 4 John i. 29. & fer, st xo: 

© Ibid. R.V. Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof. 
The word rendered /ruié is literally dread. Vhe phrase is evi- 
dently proverbial. The Hebrew word which means “ destroy ” is 
misinterpreted by é4Badwmer in the Greek. Hence arose the 
fanciful application of the passage to the Cross laid on the body of 
Christ to be borne by Him. Justin M. (Tryph. Ixsii.) charges 
the Jews with having recently cut out the passage because of the 
supposed reference to Christ. ‘Tertullian (ads. Judeos, C. 10) 
writes: “Of course on His body that ‘wood’ was put; for so 
Christ. has revealed, calling His body ‘bread.’” He gives the 
same interpretation elsewhere (ads. Warcrou. 11. to 7 EVi-i40), 
Cf. Cyprian. (7estémonia ad Quirinum, Lib. I. 15); Athanas. 
(de Lncarn. § 33). 

* Peles 171 8 Deut. xxviii. 66. 

9 Num. xxi. g3 John iti. rq. The Jerusalun Vditor asks, 
‘How did Moses complete the figure by fixing the serpent to 
across? First he set up the wood and fixed it in the earth cs 
a post: then by putting the brazen serpent athwart (wAaylwr, 
he formed a figure of the Cross.” Cf Barnab, Zfésé. c. xii, 3 

Justin M, (.4fod, i, c. 60); Iren. (¢Zceres, LV. c. 2); Tertull. (a co, 
| Judes, c. Io). 

of Noe the preservation of life was by an ark 
of wood. In the time of Moses the sea, on 
beholding the emblematical rod, was abashed at 
him who smote it ; is then Moses’ rod mighty, 
and is the Cross of the Saviour powerless ? 
But I pass by the greater part of the types, to 
keep within measure. The wood in Moses’ 
case sweetened the water; and from the side 
of Tesus the water flowed upon the wood. 

sr. The beginning of signs under Moses 
was blood and water ; and the last of ail Jesus’ 
signs was the same. First, Moses changed the 
river into blood; and Jesus at the last gave 
forth from His side water with blood. ‘This 
was perhaps on account of the two speeches, 
his who judged Him, and theirs who cried out 
against Him ; or because of the believers and 
the unbelievers. For Pilate said, Zam znnocent, 
and washed his hands in water; they who 
cried out against Him said, ///s blood be upon 
there came therefore these two out of His 
side; the water, perhaps, for him who judged 
Him ; but for them that shouted against Him, 
the blood. And again it is to be understood 
in another way; the blood for the Jews, and 
the water for the Christians: for upon them as 
plotters came the condemnation from the blood; 
but to thee who now believest, the salvation 
which is by water. For nothing has been done 
without a meaning. Our fathers who have 
written comments have given another reason 
of this matter. For since in the Gospels the 
power of salutary Baptism is twofold, one 
which is granted by means of water to the 
illuminated, and a second to holy martyrs, in 
persecutions, through their own blood, there 
came out of that saving Side biood and water’, 
to confirm the grace of the confession made 
for Christ, whether in baptism, or on occasions 
of martyrdom. ‘There is another reason also 
for mentioning the Side. The woman, who 
was formed from the side, led the way to sin ; 

“uss 

CATECHETICAL LECTURES. 

and least of all in this most holy Golgotha, 
For others only hear, but we both sce and 
handle. Let none be weary ; take thine armour 
against the adversaries in the cause of the Cross 
itself; set up the faith of the Cross as a trophy 
against the gainsayers. For when thou art 
going to dispute with unbelievers concerning 
‘the Cross of Christ, first make with thy hand 
the sign of Christ’s Cross, and the gainsayer 
will be silenced. Be not ashamed to confess 
the Cross ; for Angels glory in it, saying, Ie 
know whom ye seek, Jesus the Crucified 3. Maght- 
est thou not say, O Angel, “1 know whom ye 
iseek, my Master?’ But, 7” he says with 
boldness, “I know the Crucified.” For the 
Cross is a Crown, not a dishonour. 
| 23. Now let us recur to the proof out of 
Ithe Prophets which I spoke of. The Lord 
was crucified ; thou hast received the testi- 
1 Thou seest this spot of Golgotha! 

monies. 
Thou answerest with a shout of praise, as if 
assenting. See that thou recant not in time 
of persecution. Rejoice not in the Cross in 
time of peace only, but hold fast the same 
faith in time of persecution also; be not in 
‘time of peace a friend of Jesus, and His foe in 
‘time of wars. ‘Chou receivest now remission 
lof thy sins, and the gifts of the King’s spiritual 
bounty; when war shall come, strive thou 
nobly for thy King. Jesus, the Sinless, was 
| crucified for thee ; and wilt not thou be crucified 
for Him who was crucified for thee ? Thou 
art not bestowing a favour, for thou hast first 
received ; but thou art returning a favour, re- 
paying thy debt to Him who was crucified for 
‘thee in Golgotha. Now Golgotha is interpreted, 
“the place of a skull.” Who were they then, 
who prophetically named this spot Golgotha, 
in which Christ the true Head endured the 
‘Cross? Asthe Apostle says, Io ts the Lage 
of the Invisible God » anda little after, and LLe ts 
the Head of the body, the Churchs, And again, 

but Jesus who came to bestow the grace of; Ze Head of every man ts Christ5 ; and again, 

pardon on men and women alike, was pierced 
in the side tor women, that He might undo 
tne sin. 

22. And whoever will inquire, will find other 
reasons also ; but what has been said is enough, 
because of the shortness of the time, and that 
the attention of my hearers may not become 
sated. 
hearing concerning the crowning of our Lord, 

t Matt. xxvii. 24, 25. 

@ Tokg xix, a2... Gh Cat. iis re; Oren’ (a) Lid. feater, 
Tlom. vii. § 2): © It is the Baptism of blood alone that can render 
us purer than the Baptism of water has done.” Cf. Origen (¢ 
Ev. Matt.'Tom. xvi. 6): ‘‘1f Baptism promises remission of sins, 
as we have received concerning Baptism in water and the Spirit, 
and if one who has endured the Baptism of Martyrdom receives 
remission of sins, then with good reason martyrdom may be called 
a Baptism” For a summary of the ‘‘ Patristic Interpretation” 
of the passage, see Bp. Westcott, Sfcaker's Commentary.) 

Who ts the Head of all principality and power ®. 
“The Head suffered in “the place of the skull.” 
O wondrous prophetic appellation! The very 
‘name also reminds thee, saying, ‘‘ Think not 
of the Crucified as of a mere man; He 1s “Ae 
Head of all principality and power. That Head 
which was crucified 1s the Head of all power, 

And yet we never can be tired of and has for His Head the Father ; for the Head 

‘of the man ts Christ, and the Head of Christ ts 
| God7.” 

| 24. Christ then was crucified for us, who 
was judged in the night, when it was cold, and 
therefore a fire of coals® was laid. He was 
‘crucified at the third hour; avd from the sixth 

4) COli.1s. 155) 00s 
te COrpxi. 3. 

5 ariCgrexi., 4. 

3 Matt. NXVILL. 5. E 8 Jol ies 
8 John xviii. 18. 

6Cyl, lis. to; 7 

LECTURE 

alee 80 

hour there was darkness until the ninth hour , 
ies from the ninth hour there was light again. 
Are these things also written ? Let us inquire. 
Now the Prophet Zacharias says, Avd tt shall 
come to pass tn that day, that there shall not be 
light, and there shall be coid and frost one day 
(the cold on account of which Peter warmed 
himself ;) stad that day shall be known unto the 
Lordé*; (what, knew He not the other days? 
days are many, but ¢h7s ¢s ‘he day of the Lord’s 
patience, which the Lord made? ;)—And that 
day shall be known unto the Lord, not day, and 
noé night: what is this dark saying which the 
Prophet speaks? ‘That day is neither day nor 

night? what then shall we name it? The 
Gospel interprets it, by relating the event. 

It was not day; for the sun shone not uni- 
formly from his rising to his setting, but from 
the sixth hour till the ninth hour, there was 
darkness at mid-day. ‘the darkness therefore 
was interposed ; but God called the darkness 
nicht3, Wherefore it was neither day nor night : 
for neither was it all light, that it should be 
called day; nor was it all darkness, that it 
should be called night; but after the ninth 
hour the sun shone forth. This also the 
Prophet foretels ; for after saying, Wot day, nor 

night, he added, Avd at evening time it shall be 
Zight+, Seest thou the exactness of the prophets? 

Seest thou the truth of the things which were 
written aforetime ? 

25. But dost thou ask exactly at what hour 
the sun failed5? was it the fifth hour, or 
the eighth, or the tenth? ‘Tell, O Prophet, 
the exact time thereof to the Jews, who are 
unwilling to hear ; when shall the sun go down ? 
The Prophet Amos answers, And it shall come 
to pass in that day, saith the Lord God, that 
the sun shall go down at noon (for there was 
darkness from the sixth hour;) azd the Light 
shall grow dark over the earth tn the day”. 
What sort of season is this, O Prophet, and 
what sort of day 2? And L well turn your feasts 
tuto mourning » tor this was done in the days 
of unleavened bread, and at the 
Passover : then afterwards he says, And L will 
make [im as the mourning of an Only Son, and 
those with Him asa diy of anguish? ; for in the 
day of unleavened bread, and at the feast, 
their women were wailing and weeping, and 
the Apostles had hidden themselves and were 
in anguish. Wonderful then is this pro- 
phecy. 

26. But, some one will say, ‘‘Give me yet 

S Matty Sxviie 43: ¥ Zech, Rv. 637% 2 Ps. cxvili. 24. 

3 Gen. i, 5 
4 Zech. xiv. 7. Ch Euseb. (Dew Beane, x 7) me he wae not 
day, because of the nvon- -tide darkness: and again it was not 

nig ht, because of the day which followed upon as “which he repre- 
sente: d by a sign in saying, at evening tine there shall be light. 
: efédumev. See Cat. x. 19,note2. Acta Pilati, c. xi. 

© Amos viii. Qe Gh, wiseb. COA 72 Ev. x. 6). 7 Amos viii, ro. 

feast of the! 

another sien; what other exact sign is there 
of that which has come to pass? Jesus was 
crucified ; and He wore but one coat, and one 
cloak: now His cloak the soldiers shared 
among themselves, having rent it into four; 
but His coat was not rent, for when rent it 
would have been no longer of any use; 
about this lots are cast by the soldiers; thus 
the one they divide, but for the other they 
cast lots. ‘s then this also written? They 
know, the diligent chanters® of the Church, 
who imitate the Angel hosts, and continually 
sing praises to God: who are thought worthy 
to chant Psalms in this Golgotna, and to say, 
They parted My garments among them, and upon 
Aly vesture they did cast lois, ‘The “lots” were 
what the soldiers cast %. 

27. Again, when He had been judged before 
Pilate, He was clothed in red ; for there they 
put. on Him 2° purple robe. Is this algo 
written ? Esaias saith, [Vo 7s this that cometh 
Jrom Edom? the rediess of His garments ts 
from Bosor? ; (who is this who in adshonour 
weareth purple? I’or Bosor has some such 
meaning in Hebrew3.) Way are Thy garments 
red, and Thy raiment as from a trodden wine- 
press? But He answers and says, 4/7 day long 
have I stretched forth Mine hands unto a ais- 
obedient and gatisaying people +. 

28. He stretched out His hands on the 
Cross, that He might embrace the ends of 
the world ; for this Golgotha is the very centre 
of the earth. It is not my word, but it is 
a prophet who hath said, Zhou hast wrought 
salvation tn the midst of the carths. He 
stretched forth human hands, who by His 
spiritual hands had established the heaven ; 
and they were fastened with nails, that His 
manhood, which bore the sins of men, having 
been nailed to the tree, and having died, sin 
might die with it, and we might rise again in 
righteousness. for since by one man case 
death, by One Alan came also life®; by One 
Man, the Saviour, dying of His own accord: 
for remember what He said, LT have Lower to 

te 
hoa 

8 Synod of Laodicea, c Bile Ser.-kS 
singers, Who mount the ambo and sing from the book, others shall 
not sing in the Church.’”’ Hefele thinks that this was not intend ed 
to forbid the laity to take any part in the Church music, but only 
to forbid those who were sh cantors to take the lead. See Bing- 
hain, Antiquities, DEL Gers 2s cer 

9’ Ps. xxii. 18, quote li é ‘John Signed 

I xAjpos 6é iv 0 Aaypos. Bishop in all, Conte atplatio ns, Book 

“ Resides the appoi: 7 

IV. 32, spe uks of the soldiers’ “barbarous sortitions.” ‘The tech- 
nical term is “‘ sortilege.” Cf. Evang. Pet. $4; Justin M. Diad. 97. 

Soa Le inic a oe 
3 Bozrah means a “sheepfold,”’ and is the name of a city in 
Idumea. Cyril's interpret: ation rests on a false derivation. 

4 Isa. Ixv. It is a commonplace in al tic literature 
that the Crucifixion was pretigured by Isa. Ixv. (Dr Cg lory 
Hermas and the Lour Gospels, Pp. 4 Cf. Batu: nab. Ejpist. coreg thar 
Didache xvi. ; Justin M, (lfolog. I. c. a5 3. Tryph. cc. 97, 114); 
Vertull. (contra Jud. xii.); Trenc. Wy. ceed bes 

S Ps. ixxivs The passage does not refer to Palestine es Sse 
cially: ‘in the midst of ve le € arth” ds equiva lent to “in the sight 
of all nations.” Cf. Orac. nydd. Vib. 302: ‘He shall sprea rout 
His hands, and span the ie world,” quoted by Dr. ‘Taylor, 

eae 

To 

“ The Teaching,” p. 103. o Roig Ve eeuzs 

OO Cae Ee OC a ee ele 

| 
lay don My life, and T have power lo take i} other rebuked the reviler: and it wes to him 

aeons 7. the end of life and the beginning of restoraticn ; 
29. But thouch The endured these things, | the surrender of his soul a first share in salva- 

having come for the salvation of all, yet the|tion. And _ after rebuking the other, he says, 
people returnel Tim an eyil recompense. | Lord, remember mer; for with Thee is my 
Fesus saith, Z d7s/°,—TTe who had brought account. Tleed not this man, for the eves of 
forth the waters for them out of the cravgy | his understanding are blinded; but remember 

rock; and Tle asked fruit of the Vine which}me. I say not, remember my works, for of 
He had planted. But what does the Vine?| these IT am afraid. Mvery man has a feeling 
This Vine, which was by nature of the holy) for his fellow-traveller; I am travelling with 
fathers, but of Sodom by purpose of heart:—]'Thee towards death; remember me, Thy 
(for ¢heir Vine ts of Sodom, and thetr tendrils of fellow-wayfarer. I say not, Remember me 

Gomorrah? :)—this Vine, when the Lord was | now, but, zezen Dhow comest in Thy kinsdon. 
athirst, having filled a sponge and put it on} 31, What power, O robber, led thee to the 

a reed, offers Him vinegar. 7hey gare Afe\light? Who taught thee to worship that de- 
also gall for My next, and tn Aly thirst, they spised Man, thy companion on the Cross? 
gave Je vinegar to drink*, Thou seest the; O Light Ieternal, which gives light to them 
clearness of the Trophets’ description. But ‘that are in darkness! ‘Vherefore also he justly 
What sort of gall put they into My mouth?! heard the words, Le of good cheer? ; not that 
Lhey gave Fim, it says, wine mingled with | thy deeds are worthy of good cheer; but that 
myrrh, Now myrrh is in taste like gall, and | the Ning is here, dispensing favours. ‘The 
very bitter. Are these things what ye recom- request reached unto a distant time; but the 
pense unto the Lord? Are these thy offerings, | grace was very speedy. Verily L say unto thee, 
O Vine, unto thy Master? Rightly did the | Z2és Gay shalt thou be with Me in Paradise ; 
Prophet Esaias aforetime bewail you, saying, because /o-day thou hast /eard AL) voice, and 
My wellbeloved had a vineyard in a hill in a\hast not hardened thine heart?. Very speedily 
Jruitful place; and (not to recite the whole)|I passed sentence upon Adam, very speedily 
L watied, he says, that tt should bring forth|1 pardon thee. ‘To him it was sad, Lie (he day 
svapes; I thirsted that it should give wine ;| wherein ye eat, ve shall surely dies, Dat thou 
but tt brought forth thorns3 ; for thou seest the to-day hast obeyed the faith, to-day is thy 
crown, wherewith Iam adorned. What then! salvation. Adam by the Tree fell away ; thou 
shall I now decree? Z will command the clouds| by the Tree art brought into Paradise. Fear 
that they rain no rain uponit+. Vor the clouds| not the serpent; he shall not cast thee out; 
which are the Prophets were removed from|for he is fallen from heaven 4, And 1 say not 
them, and are for the future in the Church: as| unto thee, This day shalt thou depart, Lut, 
Paul says, Let the Prophets speak two or three,| This day shalt thou be with Me. Be of good 
and let the others judges; and again, Ged gave | courage: thou shalt not be cast out. Fear not 
ti the Church, some, Apostles, and some, Pro-|the flaming sword; it shrinks from its Lord 5, 
Piets®. Agabus, who bound his own feet and | O mighty and ineffable grace! The faithful 
hands, was a prophet. “Abraham had not yet entered, but the robber 
30. Concerning the robbers who were cru-| enters®! Moses and the Prophets had not yet 
cified with Him, it is written, And Ze was entered, and the robber enters though a breaker 
numbered wih the transgressors7,. Both of them of the law. Paul also wondered at this before 
were before this transgressors, but one was so thee, saying, Mere sin abounded, there grace 
no longer. For the one was a transgressor to| did much more abound?. They who had borne 
the end, stubborn against salvation; who,| the heat of the day had not yet entered ; and 
though his hands were fastened, smote with he of the eleventh hour entered. Let none 
blasphemy by his tongue. When the Jews | murmur against the goodman of the house, for 
passing by waged their heads, mocking he says, A7vend, [ do thee no wroiy s ts it not 
the Crucified, and fulfilling what was written, | tai te oi i als ta ihacas 
When they looked on Me, they shaked their 

9 Luke xxit. 4o ff, 
" @apoer. An addition to the text of Luke xsiil. 43 in Codex 
ae. 

heads*®, he also reviled with them. But the. Ber 
de 
Pr Se ee Rhee ee ae Shy Serer Pa ee One a a oo | 2 Ps. xcv. 7, 8. 8 Geen ese 4, Luke X28; 
: 2 \ 5 Gen, iii. 24. S. Ambrose (/’s. exix. Serm. xx. § 7) SS 
7? John x, 28, © Ib. 1x. 28, 9 Deut: axe. 9%. | who desire to return to Paradise must be tricd by fire: for not in 
t-PS. Rik: 2 2 Mark Xvi33. 3 Isa, ¥: 35.2. j Vain the Scripture saith, that when Adam and Eve were driven 

4Ibe ew. 6... Ch Tertull. ade. Afarcion. AIL. c. 233 contra | out of their abode in Paradise, God placed at the gate of Eden 
Jud. ¢ 13: The clouds being celestial benefits which were com- | a flaming sword which turned every way.” 

manded not to be forthcoming to the house of Israel; for it ‘had © Cf. Iren. V..c. 5, § 15 Athan. (2rxfos. 7d. c. 7.) : He 
borne ¢forns,’ whereof that house of Israel had wrought a crown shewed us.... an entrance into Paradise from which Adam was 

for Christ.” Constitt. A fost. VI. $5: ‘He has taken away from cast out, and into which he entered again by means of the thicf.” 
them the Holy Spirit, and the prophetic rain, and has replenished S. Leo (de Pass. Dom. Serm. Il. c. rs“ dexcedit humanam 
His Church with spiritual grace.” conditionein ista promissio; nec tam de ligno Crucis, quam de 
S Loti RI. 0, 6 Jeph, 1V.tt, 7 Isa, lili. 12, tlirono editur potestatis,” 
e SoG. 25) : 7 Om Vs 20), 

livfuljor §e todo what I willwith Mine own ® ? 

The robber has a will to work righteousness, | 

but death prevents him; I wait not exclusively 
for the work, but faith also I accept. I am 
come who feed My sheep among the Lilies 9, Tam 
come to feed them in the gardens. I have 
Sound a shecp that was lost®, but I lay it on My 

IC PORE EEE 

OI 
ate to sin, and live unto rivhteousness*, Of no 
small account was He who died for us; THe 

}Was not a literal sheep; He was not a mere 
man; He was more than an Angel; He was 
God made man. ‘The transeression of sinners 
}was not so ereat as the righteousness of Him 
who died for them ; the sin which we commit- 

shoulders ; for he believes, since he himself, ted was not so great as the righteousness which 

has said, L have gone astray like a lost sheep*; 

Lord, remember nie when Thou comest in Thy 
kingdom, 

32. Of this garden I sang of old to My spouse 
in the Canticles, and spake to her thus. Zam 
come into My gariten, Aly sister, Alv SAouse? ; 
(now tn the place where He was crucified was a 
garden3;) and what takest Thou thence? J have 
gathered My myrrh; having drunk wine mingled 
with myrrh, and vinegar, after receiving which, 
He said, Zé ts finished +, Vor the mystery has 
been fulfilled ; the things that are written have 
been accomplished ; sins are forgiven. For 
Christ being come an Hish-Priest Of the good 
things to come, by the greater and more perfect 
tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to Sa), 
not of this creation, nor yet by the blood of goats 
and calves, but by His own blood, entered tn once 
Jor all tuto the holy place, having obtained eternal 
redemption ; for tf the blood of bulls and o goats, 
and the ashes of an hetfer, sprinkling the defiled, 
sanclipieth to the purifying of the flesh, how much 
more the blood of Christ3? And again, Having 
therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the 
hottest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living 
way, which Ie hath consecrated for us, through 
the well, that ts to say, His flesh®, And because 
His flesh, this veil, was dishonoured, there- 
fore the typical veil of the temple was rent 
asunder, as it is written, Avd, behold, the veil 
of the temple was rent in twain from the lop to 
the botiem? » for not a particle of it was left ; for 
since the Master said, Behold, your house ts 
“eft unto you desolate®, the house brake all in 
pieces. 

33. These things the Saviour endured, and 
made peace through the Blood of Fis Cross, jor 
things tt heaven, and things in earth. 
were enemies of God through sin, and God 
had appointed the sinner to die. There must 
needs therefore have happened one of two 
things ; either that God, in His truth, should 
destroy all men, or that in His loving-kindness 
He should cancel the sentence. But behold 
the wisdom of God; He preserved both the 
truth of His sentence, and the exercise of His 
loving-kindness. Christ took our sins ¢ //1s 
body on the tree, that we by His death might 

Se Matty we re th, 
< PS, GNIS s £70. 

4 Ub. 30: 

7 Matt, xxvii. 51. 

2 Cant. eit 3: 

2 Crit Ts, 
S Hebe is.29, 

io Te Xie Bee 

70 Luke xv. 5, 6. 
3 Joln xix. qt. 
OL Dates 10. 

9 Col. i. 20, 

He wrought who laid down His life for us,— 
who laid it down when He pleased, and took it 
pagain when He pleased. And wouldest thou 
know that He laid not down His life by 
violence, nor yielded up the ghost against His 
will? He cried to the Father, saying, Lather, 
into Thy hands [commend By spirit? ; Tv com- 
‘mend it, that I may take it again. And having 
said these things, //e gave up the ghost3; but 
not for any long time, for He quickly rose 
again from the dead. 

34. The Sun was darkened, because of ¢/e 
Sun of Righteousness +, Rocks were rent, be- 
cause of the spiritual Rock. ‘Tombs were 
opened, and the dead arose, because of Him 
who was free aviong the deads » [le sent forth His 
prisoners out of the pit wherein ts no water ®, Be 
not then ashamed of the Crucified, but be thou 
also bold to say, Z/e beareth our sins, and endureth 
gricf for us, and with [is stripes we are healed ?, 
Let us not be unthankful to our Benefactor. 
And again ; for the transgression of my people 
was LHe led to death ; and will sive the wicked 
Jor [Tis burial, and the rich for Ilis death, 
Therefore Paul says plainly, het Christ dicd 
Jor our sins according to the Scriptures, and that 
fle was buried, and that He hath risen again the 
third day according to the Scriptures 9. 

35. But we seek to know clearly where 
He has been buried. Is His tomb made 
with hands? Is it, like the tombs of kings, 
raised above the ground? Is the Sepulchre 
made of stones joined together? And what is 

lor we | 

laid upon it? ‘Tell us,O Prophets, the exact truth 
;concerning His tomb also, where He is laid, 
and where we shall seek Him? And they say, 
‘Look into the solid rock which ye have hewn*. 
Look in and behold. ‘Thou hast in the Gospels 
Lh a scpulchre hewn tn stone, which was hewn 
out of a rock?, And what happens next ? What 
kind of door has the sepulchre? Again another 
Prophet says, 7hey cut off My life in a dungeon 3, 
and cast a store upon Ale. I,whoam the Chic/ 
corier-stone, the elect, the precious 4, lie tor a little 
time within a stone—I who am a stone of 
stumbling to the Jews, and of salvation to 

Pee ei aay 2 Juke xxiii. fs, 

Mutt. xxvii. 50, 4 Mal. iv. 2. S Ps Ikwxviie S 
4ecly ik. tr. 7 Isa. lili. 4, 5. ES: Geto 
t Corky. 3, 4: Telsault. i 

Matt, sxviin66; Matk xv. 465. Luke xxiii. go. ; 
Lam. iii, 53: €v Adxxw, ‘fin a pit,” or “well.” C.. J: 
XXXVI. 16, 4 1 Pet. ii. 6. 

wOhrioaw wm 

ove? 

them who bei The Tree of lifes, there- 
fore. was planted in the earth, that the earth 
which had been cursed might enjoy the bless- 
ing, and that the dead might be released. 

36, Tet us not then be ashamed to confess 
the Crucified. Be the Cross our seal made 
with boldness by our fingers on our brow, and 
on everything; over the bread we eat, and 
the eups we drink ; in our comings in, and 
woings out; before our sleep, when we lie 
down and when we rise up; when we are in 
the way, and when we are still®, Great is that 
preservative ; it is without price, for the sake 
of the poor; without toil, for the sick ; since 
also its grace is from God. It is the Sign of 
the faithful, and the dread of devils: for He 
triumphed ever ‘hein in tt, having made a shew 
of them operb7 » tor when they see the Cross, 
they are reminded of the Crucified ; they are 
afraid of Him, who e¢ruzsed the heads of the 
dragon ®, Despise not the Seal, because of the 
feeeness of the gift; but for this the rather 
honour thy Benefactor. 

37- And if thou ever fall into disputation, 
and hast not the grounds of proof, vet let Faith 
remain firm in thee e; or rather, become thou 
well learned, and then silence the Jews out of 
the prophets, and the Greeks out of their own 
fables. They themselves worship men who have 
been thunderstricken?: but the thunder when 
it comes from heaven, comes not at random. 
If they are not ashamed to worship men thun- 
derstricken and abhorred of God, art thou 
ashamed to worship the beloved Son of God, 
who was crucified for thee? Iam ashamed to 
tell the tales about their so-called Gods, and I 
leave them because of time; let those who 
know, speak. And let all heretics also be 
silenced. If any say that the Cross is an illu- 
sion, turn away from him. Abhor those who 
say that Christ was crucified to our fancy? only; 
for if so, and if salvation is from the Cross, 
then is salvation a fancy also. If the Cross is 
fancy, the Resurrection is fancy also; but 7 
Christ be not risen, we are vet tn our sins? It 
the Cross is fancy, the Ascension also is fancy ; 
and if the Ascension is fancy, then is the 
second coming also fancy, and everything is | 
henceforth unsubstantial. 

38. Take therefore first, as an indestructible 
foundation, the Cross, and build upon it the)! 
other articles of the faith, Deny not the |; 
Crucified ; 

so 

Cr View baie 

for, if thou deny Him, thou hast! 

LEC EER iS: 

many to arraign thee. Judas the traitor will 
arraign thee first; for he who betrayed Him 
knows that He was condemned to death by the 
chief-priests and elders. The thirty pieces of 
silver bear witness ; Gethsemane bears witness, 
where the betrayal occurred; I speak not yet 
of the Mount of Olives, on which they were 
with Him at night, praying. The moon in the 
night bears witness; the day bears witness, 
and the sun which was darkened; for it en- 
dured not to look on the crime of the con- 
spirators. The fire will arraign thee, by which 
Peter stood and warmed himself: if thou deny 
the Cross, the eternal fire awaits thee. I speak 
hard words, that thou may not experience 
hard pains. Remember the swords that came 
against Him in Gethsemane, that thou feel not 
the eternal sword. The house of Caiaphas 3 
will arraign thee, shewing by its present deso- 
lation the power of Him who was erewhile 
judged there. Yea, Caiaphas himself will rise up 
against thee in the day of judgment ; the very 
servant will rise up against thee, who smote 
Jesus with the palm of his hand; they also 
who bound Him, and they who led Him away. 
Even Herod shall rise up against thee ; 
and Pilate; as if saying, Why deniest thou 
Him who was slandered before us by the Jews, 
and whom we knew to have done no wrong ? 
For I Pilate then washed my hands. The false 
witnesses shall rise up against thee, and the 
soldiers who arrayed Him in the purple robe, 
and set on Him the crown of thorns, and cruci- 
fied Him in Golgotha, and cast lots for His 
coat. Simon the Cyrenian will cry out upon 
thee, who bore the Cross after Jesus. 

39. From among the stars there will cry out 

upon thee, the darkened Sun; among the 
things upon earth, the Wine mingled with 

myrrh ; among reeds, the Reed ; among herbs, 
the Hyssop ; among the things of the sea, the 
Sponge ; among trees, the Wood of the Cross ; 
—the soldiers, too, as I have said, who nailed 
Him, and cast lots for His vesture ; the soldier 
who pierced His side with the spear; the 
women who then were present ; the veil of the 

3 The house of Cataphas and Pilate’s Pretorium ($ 41}, and 
Mount Zion itself (Cat. xvi. 18), on w hich they both stood. are 
cescribed by ep a as being in his time ruined and desolate. 

vusebius (Dev. VIII. 406), referring to the prophecy of 

Mie ah (iii. 12), ( sted by Jeremiah (xxvi. 18), that Zzo2 shall 
be plowed asa field, and Jerusalem shall beconte he aps, testifies 
that he had seen with his own eyes the place being ploughed and 
sown by strangers, and adds that in his own time the stones for 

| both public and private buildings were taken from the ruins. 

ae { 

| 

Mie Ss {Senate Tx. Oh ee 

Sh te Go ie 2 hod ix 
that hath not believed in Christ, nor hath understood that He is 
the first principle and the Tree of Life, &c.” 
ie 

Cat. iv. 14, ee Euseb. (Dem. Eu. ix. 14). 

Pol. Tiss Ps. 1 kk a: $ SeeCat. +1. tty] 
note 2 | 
I Kara davraciav. Cf. Ignat. Tvall. 9, 10; Cat. iv. 93 xiii. 4. | 
2 3 Goran ag. y 

| 

The Bordeaux Pilgrim (333. A-D.) Says, “Tt is evident where the 
pe Fe | ? 

| house of Calaphas the Pricst was; and there is still the pillar at 
se W. 

hich Christ was scourged:”’ this pillar is described by Jerome 
(/£/. 86) as supporting the portico of the Church which by his 
time had been built on the spot. Prudentius (¢77¢. 400 A.D.) i— 
‘*Impia blasphemi cecidit domus alta Caiphae . 

Vinctus in his Dominus stetit adibus, atque columnae 

Annexus tergum dedit ut servile flagellis. 

Perstat adhuc, templumque gerit veneranda columna.’ 

(Benedictine Editor. ) 

PleG, EU es la 

2S 

temple then rent asunder; the hall of Pilate, 
now laid waste by the power of Ilim who was 
then crucified; this holy Golgotha, 

day, and displays even yet how because of 
Christ the rocks were then riven4; the sepulchre 
nigh at hand where He was laid; and the 
stone which was laid on the door, which lies to 
this day by the tomb; the Angels who were 
then present; the women who worshipped 
Him after His resurrection; Peter and John, 
who ran to the sepulchre ; and ‘Thomas, who 
thrust his hand into His side, and his fingers 
into the prints of the nails. Tor it was for our 
sakes that he so carefully handled Him; and 
what thou, who wert not there present, wouldest 
have sought, he being present, by God’s Provi- 
dence, did seek. 

40. Thou hast Twelve Apostles, witnesses 
of the Cross; and the whole earth, and the 
world of men who believe on Him who hung 
thereon. Let thy very presence here now per- 
suade thee of the power of the Crucified. For 

4 Cf. Lucian. Antioch. ap. Rufin. //is/, Lec. ix, c. 6; ‘ Gol- 
gothana rupes sub patibuli onere disrupta.’ 

! 

ae 
which 
stands high above us, and shews itself to this 

who now brought thee to this assembly? what 
soldicrs? With what bonds wast thou con- 
siraincd ? What sentence held thee fast here 
now? Nay, it was the Trophy of salvation, 
the Cross of Jesus that brought you all 
together. It was this that enslaved the Per- 
sians, and tamed the Scythians ; this that gave 
to the Egyptians, for cats and dogs and their 
manifold errors, the knowledge of God; this, 
that to this day heals diseases; that to this 
day drives away devils, and overthrows the jug- 
gleries of drugs and charms. 

4t. This shall appear again with Jesus from 
heaven 5; for the trophy shall precede the king: 
thatseeing //im whom they pierced”, and knowing 
by the Cross Hii who was dishonoured, the Jews 
may repent and mourn ; (but ¢hey shall mourn 
tribe by tribe7,for they shall repent, when there 
shall be no more time for repentance ;) and 
that we may glory, exulting in the Cross, wor- 
shipping the Lord who was sent, and crucified 
for us, and worshipping also God His Father 
who sent Him, with the Holy Ghost : To whom 
be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

5On Caty sve 22) 6 Zech. xii. 10. 

LECTURE. a %, 

(OW THE “WORDS, AND ROSE AGAIN FROM THE DEAD ON THE THIRD DAY, ARI £5CEN VED 

INTO THE ILEAVENS, AND SAT ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE IATHER, 

1 COR, xv. I—4, 

sow L make known unto you, brethren, the gospel which I preached unto you... . that 
Lle hath becn ratsed on the third day according to the Scriptures, &¢. 

Rejotee, O Jerusalem, and keep high festival, Saviour has risen, and what has been an- 
all ve that love Jesus; for He is risen. e- nounced in the admirable Prophets as the 
jorce, AM ye that mourned beforet, when ye name of the place of the Resurrection, and 
heard of the daring and wicked deeds of whether the women, who sought and found 
the Jews: for He who was spitefully en-| Him not, afterwards rejoice at finding Him; 
treated of them in this place is risen again, in order that when the Gospels are read, the 
And as the discourse concerning the Cross) narratives of these holy Scriptures may not be 

was a sorrowful one, so let the good tid-| thought fables nor rhapsodies. 

ings of the Resurrection bring joy to the | 
hearers. Let mourning be turned into glad-| 
ness, and lamentation to joy: and let our 
mouth be filled with joy and gladness, because | 
of Him, who after His resurrection, said, 
Rejoice®. For I know the sorrow of Christ’s| 
friends in these past days; because, as our, 

discourse stopped short at the Death and the. 

Burial, and did not tell the good tidings of the | 
Resurrection, your mind was in suspense, to! 
hear what you were longing for. 

Now, therefore, the Dead is risen, He who 
was Jree among the dead3, and the deliverer of 
the dead. He who in dishonour wore patiently 
the crown of thorns, even He arose, and 
crowned Himself with the diadem of His 
victory over death. 

2. As then we set forth the testimonies con- 
cerning His Cross, so come let us now verify 
the proofs of His Resurrection also: since the 
Apostle before us¢ affirms, //e was buried, and 
has been raised on the third day according to the 
Scriptures. As an Apostle, therefore, has sent 
us back to the testimonies of the Scriptures, 
it is good that we should get full knowledge 

| Peace >: 

of the hope of our salvation; and that we 
should learn first whether the divine Scriptures 
tell us the season of His resurrection, whether. 
it comes in summer or in autumn, or after | 
winter; and from what kind of place the 

| 
21s. evi: to. 
2 Matt. xxviii. 9, ‘All hail.” The usual greeting, Xatperte, 
A Rejoice.” 
2 Ps. Ter viik 
(Margin), 
+ 0 wapwr, i.e. in the text. 

> Cast of among the dead (R.V.)3 Cast away 

1 Cor ay, 4: | 

3. That the Saviour then was buried, ye 
have heard distinctly in the preceding dis- 
course, as Isaiah saith, 777s burial shall be tn 
for in His burial He made peace be- 
tween heaven and earth, bringing sinners unto 
God: and, ‘hat the righteous ts taken out of the 
way of wnrighteousness®: and, ffs burial shall 
be in peace: and, L will give the wicked for [His 
burial7, There is also the prophecy of Jacob 
saying in the Scriptures, He Jay down and 
couched as ation, andas a lions whelp: who shall 
rouse Him up’? And the similar passage in 
Numbers, /7e couched, He lay down as a lion, 
and as a lion's whelp9. The Psalm also ye have 
often heard, which says, 42d Thou hast brought 
me down tnto the dust of death*, Moreover we 
took note of the spot, when we quoted the 
words, Look unto the rock, which ye have hewn *. 
But now let the testimonies concerning His 
resurrection itself go with us on our way. 

4. Virst, then, in the 1tth Psalm He says, 
For the misery of the poor, and the sighing of the 
necay', now will IT arise, saith the Lord3. But 
this passage still remains doubtful with some: 
for He often rises up also in anger#, to take 
vengeance upon His enemies. 

Come then to the 15th Psalm, which says 
distinctly: Preserve Ale, O Lord, for tn Thee 

S Is. Ivii. 2: He entereth into fcace (R.V.). 

6 Is. lvii. 13 that the righteous is taken away from the evil to 
cone (R.V.). 

7: Is. lili. 9: they made His grave with the wicked (R.V.). 

8 Gen, xlix. 9. 9 Num. xxiv. 9 oe Tiss 

2 éreonpermoapeda, ‘noted for ourselves ;”’ Middle Voice. Is, 

quoted in Cat. xiii. 35. 

Peat) s. 4 Ib. vii. 6; “ Arise, O Lorn, in Thine anger, 

— 
= 

A 
3 

LECTURE 

Del Vis 65 

have I put iy trust5: and after this, eir as-;15 the fountain that is sealed, or who is inter- 
semecs of blood watt J Hol joln, Nor iidke men-| preted as being a well-spring of lving water? 
tint of their names befeween my lips; since they| It is the Saviour Himself, concerning whom 
have refused me, and chosen Cesar as their! it is written, Jur wilh Thee is the fountain of 
king?: and also the next words, J foresaw the | Life +. 

LORD alway before Me, because [ets at Aly vieht 

6. But what says Zephaniah in the person 

hand, that £ may not be meved’ and soon after, | of Christ to the disciples? Prepare “hjself, be 

Jea and even until night my retis chastened nie. 
And afier this He says most plainly, or Zou 
audt nol leave ALy soul tn hell* » neither wilt Thou 
suffer Thine floly One to see corruption. 
said not, neither wilt ‘Thou suffer ‘Vhine Holy 
One to see death, since then He would not 
have died ; but corrifiion, saith He, I see not, 
and shall not abide in death. Zhou hast made 
krown lo Ale the ways of life*, Behold here is 
plainly preached a life afier death. Come 
also to the 29th Psalm, Z cll extol Thee, 
O Lord, for Thou hast lified MMe i, and hast 
not made Aly foes to rejoice over Ales. What is 
it that took place? Wert thou rescued from 
enemies, or wert thou released when about 
to be smitten? Ile says himself most plainly, 
O Lorp, Thou hast brought up My soul froin 
hells, Vhere he says, Zhou weit not leave, pro- 
pretically : and here he speaks of that which is 
to take place as having taken place, Zhou hast 
brought up. Thou hast saved Me from them 
thal go down tito the pits. At what time shall 
the event occur? [Veeping shall continue for 
the evening, and joy cometh tn the morning®; for 
in the evening was the sorrow of the disciples, 
and in the morning the joy of the resurrection. 

5. But wouldst thou know the place also? 
Again He saith in Canticles, Z wert down into 
the garden of nits? ; for it was a garden where 
He was crucified’. For though it has now 
been most highly adorned with royal gifts, 
yet formerly it was a garden, and the signs 
and the remnants of this remain. A garden 
enclosed, a fountain sealked9, by the Jews who 
said, Ile remember that that deceiver said while 
fle was yet alive, After three days, Twill rise: 
command, therefore, that the sepulchre be made 
sure, and further on, So s¢hey went, and made 
the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone with the 
guard*, And aiming well at these, one saith, 
and in rest Thou shalt judge then?. But who 

5 Paetyly hy 

6 Ib. xvi. 4: “their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer.” 
The Psalmist abhors the bloody rites, and the very names of the 
false gods. 

7 John xix. rs. Cyril applies to the Jews what the Psalmist 
says concerning those that hasten after another god. 

B Peeve oe 
Quoting from memory, Cyril transposes these sen- 

9 ALD 
tences. 
th. toy. RV ..72 Sead, Sept. 2 Adages. 
2 Jb. 13. a7 Lixos. 1 
41Ib.3. R.V. from Sheol, Sept. from Hades. 
5 Lb. ae Gehbe By 7 Canty viv 1 
8 John xix. 41. See Index, Golgotha. Do Cait. 1% 12, 
t Matt. xxvii. 63) 65. 
2 Jobvinr).. 4 07p- Arie cuery qnonient, Heb, ng Renae: 

| 
| 

| 

Iie. 

rising at the dawn: all their leaning ty de- 
sévoyed >: the gleaning, that is, of the Jews, with 
whom there is not a cluster, nay not even 
a gleaning of salvation left; for their vine is 
cut down. Sce how Ie says to the disciples, 

vepare thyself, rise up at dawn: at dawn 
expect the Resurrection. 

And farther on in the same context of Scrip- 

jture He says, Zherefore watt thou for Me, saith 

the Lord, until the day of Aly Resurrection at 
the Lestimony®. Vhou seest that the Prophet 
foresaw the place also of the Resurrection, 
which was to be surnamed “the Testimony.” 
I’or what is the reason that this spot of Gol- 

gotha and of the Resurrection is not called, 

\the Lord under one yoke8, 

like the rest of the Churches, a Church, but 
a ‘Testimony? Why, perhaps, it was because 
of the Prophet, who had said, wet/? the day of 
My Resurrection at the Testimony. 

7, And who then is this, and what is the 
sign of Him that rises? In the words of the 
Prophet that follow in the same context, He 
says plainly, for ther wll [turn to the peoples 
a@ language7: since, after the Resurrection, 
when the Holy Ghost was sent forth the gift 
of tongues was granted, shat they might serve 
And what other 
token is set forth in the same Prophet, that 
they should serve “he Lorp under one yoke? 
fiom beyond the rivers of Ethiopia they shall 
bring me offerings®. Vhou knowest what. is 
written in the Acts, when the Ethiopian 
eunuch came from beyond the rivers of Ethio- 
piat, When therefore the Scriptures tell both 
the time and the peculiarity of the place, when 
they tell also the signs which followed the 
Resurrection, have thou henceforward a firm 
faith in the Resurrection, and let no one stir 
thee from confessing Christ risen from the 
dead *. 

8. Now take also another testimony in the 

wink,” as in Job xxi. 13, misinterpreted in both passages by the 
LXX. as meaning ‘‘ rest.” 

3 Cant. iv. 15. 4 Ps. =xxvi...9. 

5 Zeph. iil. 7: they rose carly and corrupted all their ceings. 
The passage is wholly misunderstood by the Seventy, whom 
S. Cyril follows. 

© Zeph. iii. 8: wnutil the day that I rise up tothe prey. For 
sy, to the prey, the LXX. seem to have read Ty, to the 

testimony. About ten years before these Lectures were de- 
livered, Eusebius (Life of Constantine, IIL. c. xxvili.), speak- 
ing of the discovery of the Holy Sepulchre, a.p. 326, calls it 
‘a testimony to the Resurrection of the Saviour clearer than any 
voice could give.” 
7 Zeph. itt. 9: a pire language 
8 Ib. to serve hine wrth ore ci 

nt (Marg. 
9 be 2h 00, 1 ANGUS Vil 37. 

shoulder). 
SP ee Theo 

99 

87th Psalm, where Christ speaks in the Pro- not pruning the 
ecame afterwards }said also that the winter 
ef My salvation, Z\when this month 

abeis: (for Ile who then spak 
among us): O Lox, 
ha mand aight before Thee, and a little 
farther on, Z éecante as it were a man without 
help, free the dewd@3. We said not, I 
became a man without help; but, as ¢ were 
a man without help For indeed He was 
crucified not from weakness, but willingly: 
and His Death was not from involuntary 
weakness. J zs counted with them that go 
down tnto the pits. And what is the token ? 
Thou hast put away Mine acquaintance far from 
Mes (for the disciples have fled). W7/t Zhou 
shew wonders to the dead®? Then a little while 
afterwards: And unio Thee have I cried, O 
Lorv, and tn the morning shall my prayer come 
before Thee?. Seest thou how they shew the 
exact point of the Hour, and of the Passion, 
and of the Resurrection ? 

9. And whence hath the Saviour risen? He 
says in the Song of Songs: Rise up, come, ALy 
netghbour® : and in what follows, 7 @ cave of the 
vock9! A cave of the rock He called the cave 
which was erewhile before the door of the 
Saviour’s sepulchre, and had been hewn out 
of the rock itself, as is wont to be done here 
in front of the sepulchres. For now it is not 
to be seen, since the outer cave was cut away 
at that time for the sake of the present adorn- 
ment. For before the decoration of the sepul- 
chre by the royal munificence, there was a cave 
in the front of the rock. But where is the 
rock that had in it the cave? Does it lie near 
the middle of the city, or near the walls and 
the outskirts? And whether is it within the 
ewes walls, or within the outer walls which 
were built afterwards? He says then in the 

Ged 

oy 

wet ania 7 fa 

ype 
TMONS 

] 

i 

wall? 

At what season does the Saviour rise ? 
Is it the season of summer, or some other? 
In the same Canticles immediately before the 
words quoted He says, Zhe winter is past, the 
rain ts past and gones; the flowers appear on the 
earth ; the tine of the pruning 1s come+. Is not 
then the earth full of flowers now, and are they 

a Pe. leave, 7, 445. 5 Ib. 
6 Ib. 2, xo. Meroe 5. 
8 Cant. ii. 10: Ase up, my love, my fair one, and come away. 
9.14: in the clefts of the rock. 1 See Index, Sepulchre. 
2 Cant. ii. 14: 22 the clefts of the rock, in the secret places 
of the stairs. The Revised Version reads, éz the covert of the 
steep place. 

2°Cants ils. 22. 

uv. 8 

In rapyAGev, eropevOn éavtw the LXX. have 
imitated the pleonastic use of 9° after verbs of motion, cor- 
responding to our idiom ‘‘ Go away with you,” and to the Dat/rus 
Ethicus in Greek and Latin. See Gesenius Lexicon on this use 

of oh and Ewald, /utroductory Grammar, § 217, |. 2. 

4- Cont, ‘ai, “124 the singing of birds. The Hebrew word 
(a3) means either ‘‘cutting,” as in the LXX. ro~ys, Sym- 

mac deh Kh adevoews, and R.V Or asd AY, 

. dns rine” 
* sing ee 

Beat month with the 

seed after his kind and after his likeness ®, 

CATECHETICAL LECTURES 

Thou seest how he 
is now past. For 
Xanthicus 5 is come, it is 

And this is the. sesou,; tite 

Hebrews, in which occurs 

the festival of the Passover, the typical formerly, 

‘but now the true. ‘This is the season of the 
creation of the world: for then God said, Let 
the earth bring forth herbage of grass, vtelding 
And 
now, as thou seest, already every herb is yield- 
ing seed. And as at that time God made the 
sun and moon and gave them courses of equal 
day (and night), so “also a few days since was 
the season of the equinox. 

At that time God said, Zet us make man 
after our tmage and afier our likeness?. And 
the zmage he received, but the /’hevess through — 
his disobedience he obscured. At the same 
season then in which he lost this the restor- 
ation also took place. At the same season as 
the created man through disobedience was 
cast out of Paradise, he who believed was 
through obedience brought in. Our Salvation 
then took place at the same season as the Fall: 
when ¢he flowers appeared, and the pruning was 
come. 

rr. A garden was the place of His Burial, 
and a vine that which was planted there: and 
He hath said, Z am the vine® / He was planted 
therefore in the earth in order that the curse 
which came because of Adam might be rooted 
out. The earth was condemned to thorns and 
thistes: the true Vine sprang up out of the 
earth, that the saying might be fulfilled, Z7wt/ 
sprang up out of the earth, and righteousness 

vines? 

‘already spring. 

5 Xanthicus is the name of the sixth month in the Macedonian 

| Calendar, corresponding nearly to the Jewish Nisan (Josephus, 
& ities: in a cave of the rock, close to the ouler 

Antig. IL. xiv. 6), and to the latter part of Lent and Easter. 
On the tradition that the Creation took place at this season, sce 
S. Ambrose, Heremeron, 1. c. 4, $13 

6 Gen, 4, 132 erase, the herb yielding seed. 

The LXX. give an irre; gular construction, 
Botarny ySpTou ometpov omeppa. 

7 Gen. i, 26. ‘*The ancient Church very accurately distin- 
guished between eikor (cag re) and opotwars (likeness), and the 
Greek Church | does the same in its Confession. ‘The latter phrase 
expresses man’s destination, which is not to be regarded as carried 
out at the moment of creation. (Dorner, System of Christian 
Doctrine, £.Tr. IN, p. 78). Vhe émage lies in the permanent 
capacities of man’s nature (Gen, ix.6; 2 Cor. xi. 7: Jas..1ii. 9), 
the 2ékeness in their realisation in moral conformity with God 
(oponbecav Oeov, Nate Magnes vi). ‘The image of God isa 
comprehensive thing... . ‘l'o this belon; gs man 's intellective pow er, 
his liberty of will, his dominion over the other creatures flowing 
from the two former. These make up the 70 ovorwdes, that part 
of that divine image which is natural and essential to man, and 
consequently can never be wholly blotted out, defaced, or ex- 
tinguished, but still remains even in man fallen. But beside these 
the Church of God hath ever acknowledged, in the first man, 
certain additional ornaments, and as it were complements of the 
divine image, such as immortality, grace, holiness, righteousness, 
whereby man approached more nearly to the similitude and like: 
ness of God. ‘These were (if I may so speak) the lively colours 
wherein the grace, the beauty, and lustre of the divine image 
principally consisted ; these colours faded, yea, were defaced 
and blotted out by man’s transgression. (Bull, The State of 
Man before the Fall, Vole po reiO7 a - CF UmensGs visa 
xvi. § 2); Tertullian (de he las Gys)ie Clem. alex. «(2-2 ronrs 
, 36)> Origen (c. Cele. TV 230). 

s John XV. 1, The Benedictine Editor has a different punc- 
tuation: ‘and the vine which was planted there hath said, 
L Ayn 1 age femme. 

| Ose Bt Ba 

Looked’ down from heaven®. And what will He 
thatis buried in the garden say ? Lhave gathered 
My myrrh with My spices: and again, WWyrrk 
and «aloes, with all chief spices*. Now these are 
the symbols of the burying ; and in the Gospels 
It is said, Zhe women cane unto the Sepulchre 
bringing the spices which they had prepared® : 
Necodemus also bringing a mixture Of nvrrh and 
aloes 3. And farther on it is written, Zaid eat 
Aly bread with My honey ++ the bitter before the | 
Passion, and the sweet after the Resurrection. | 
Then after He had risen He entered through | 
closed doors: but they believed not that it was | 
He: for “hey supposed that they beheld a spirits, | 
But He said, Handle Ale and see. Put your 
fingers into the print of the nails, as Thomas. 
required, And while they vet believed not jor 
joy, and wondered, He said unto them, Have ye 
here anvihing to eat? And they gave Min 
a piece of a broiled fish and honeycomb®, Seest | 
thou how that is fulfilled, Z dd eat My bread 
wth My honey. 

12. But before He entered through the 
closed doors, the Bridegroom and Suitor7 of 
souls was sought by those noble and brave 
women. They came, those blessed ones, to 
the sepulchre, and sought Him Who had been 
raised, and the tears were still dropping from 
their eyes, when they ought rather to have been 
dancing with joy for Him that had risen. Mary 

came seeking Him, according to the Gospel, | come hither 

and found Him not: and presently she heard 
from the Angels, and afterwards saw the Christ. 
Are then these things also written? He says 
in the Song of Songs, On my bed I sought Flim 
whom my soul loved. At what season ? By 
night on my bed I sought Him Whom my soul 
lowed: Mary, it says, came while it was yer 
dark. On my bed I sought Him by night, I 
sousht Him, and L found Lim not’, And inthe 
Gospels Mary says, They have taken awey my 
Lord, and 1 know not where they have laid Him. 
But the Angcls being then present cure their 
want of knowledge; for they said, IV’7/1 seek 
ge the living among the dead*? He not only | 
rose, but had also the dead with Him when 
Herose* But she knew not, and in her person 
the Song of Songs said to the Angels, Saze ie 
Slim Who my soul loved? It was but a little 
that I passed from them (that is, from the two 

Angels), watt? I found Hin Whom my soul persuade hin®. Vea, thougl 

loved. L held Hin, and would not let Him go. 
13. For after the vision of the Angels, Jesus 

FS: | eNtve-vr. 

x Cant. v. 1; iv. 14. Compare Cat. xiii. 

2VLUKE RK. Fe 3 John xix. 39. 

4 Cant. vert ry honeycomb with my honey. 

5 Luke xxiv. 37. De Th, dae 

7 0 Oepameviys. Inconnexion with ‘ Bridegroom,” and “ Him 
whom my soul loveth ” the meaning “ Suitor”” is more appropriate 
than ‘§ Physician.” Camb iis ek ole sas 

9 Joni xemnp. t Luke xxiv, 5. 2 Matt. xxvii. 52. 

3 Cant ties ae 

VOL, VII. 

- 
32. 

XIV. 97 
came as His own Herald; and the Gospel 
says, stud behold Jesus met them, sayiner, All 
hail! and they cane and took hold of [ts fect 4. 
They took hold of Him, that it might be ful- 
fled, Sav hold Him, and will not let Him £0. 
Though the woman was weak in hody, her 
spirit was manfal. Jan waters quench not 
love, neither do rivers drown its; Ye was dead 
whom they sought, yet was not the hope of the 
Resurrection quenched. And the Anvel Says 
to them again, Zear wolf ves I say not to the 
soldiers, fray xot, but to you”; as for them, let 
them be afraid, that, taught by experience, 
they may bear witness and say, Lruly tis cas 
the Son of Ged7; but you ought not to be 
afraid, for perfect love casteth out fear ®. Go, tell 
Llis disciples that Ile is risen ®: and the rest. 
And they depart with joy, yet full of fear: is 
this also written? yes, the second Psalm, 
which relates the Passion of Christ, says, Sez 
the Lord with fear, and rejpotce unto Him with 
trembling *;-—vrejvice, because of the risen Lord 4 
but zh trembling, because of the earthquake, 
and the Angel who appeared as lightning. 

14. Though, therefore, Chief Priests and 
Pharisees through Pilate’s means sealed the 
tomb ; yet the women beheld Him who was 
risen, And Esaias knowing the feebleness of 
the Chief Priests, and the women’s strength of 
faith, says, Ve women, who come from beholding, 
s for the people hath no understand- 
ing ,—the Chief Priests want understanding, 
while women are eye-witnesses. And when 
the soldiers came into the city to them, and 
told them all that had come to pass, they said 
to them, Sav ye, His disciples came by night, 
and stole Him away while we slept3? Well 
therefore did Esaias foretell this also, as in 
their persons, But fell us, and relate to us 
another deceit+, He who rose again, is up, and 
for a gift of money they persuade the soldiers ; 
but they persuade not the kings of our time. 
The soldiers then surrendered the truth for 
silver ; but the kings of this day have, in their 
piety, built this holy Church of the Resurrec- 
tion of God our Saviour, inlaid with silver and 
wrought with gold, in which we are assem- 
bled 5; and embellished it with the treasures of 
silver and gold and precious stones. Aid if 
thts come to the governor's ears, they say, we rll 
1 ye persuade the 
soldiers, yet ye will not persuade the world; 
for why, as Peter’s guards were condemned 
when he escaped out of the prison, were not 

2 

4 Matt. xxviii. 9. 5 Cant. viii. 7 

6 Matt. xxviii. 5. The emphatic dpeis is rightly interpreted 
by Cyril as distinguishing the women from the frightened sen- 
tinels. Ze NCATE NV! ote 

8 y John iv. 18. & Matt. xxviih 7. Est teint 

2 Isa. xxvii. tr: The women shall come, and set them on fire. 

S NiatteeNyiin 13: 4 SA, SEN. Ls 

5 Chdusel. (Lz/e ef Cans. 11, 36) © Matt. xxxvill. 14, 

1 

98 CATECMV TCR. 1. ie 

| 

they also who watched Jesus Christ con-) and is Christ not risen? But inthat case, 
demned? Upon the former, sentence was, the dead man who touched Eliseus, arose, yet 
pronounced by Herod, for they were ignorant he who raised him continued nevertheless 
and had nothing to say for themsclves ; while | dead : but in this case both the Dead of whom 
the latter, who had seen the truth, and con-) We speak Himsclf arose, and many dead were 
ccaled it for money, were protected by the raised without having even touched Him, For 
Chict Priests. Nevertheless, though but a few many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and 
of the Jews were persuaded at the time, the hey came out of the graves after /lis Resurrec- 
world became obedient. They who hid the | He, avd went tito the Holy City*, (evidently 
truth were themselves hidden; but they who, this city, in which we now are 3,) and appeared 
received it were made manifest by the power} w/o many. Eliseus then raised a dead man, 
of the Saviour, who not only rose from the| but he conquered not the world; Elias raised 
dead, but also raised the dead with Himself.) a dead man, but devils are not driven away in 
And in the person of these the Prophet Osce| the name of Elias. We are not speaking evil 
says plainly, 4/ler tevo days will He revive us,\ of the Prophets, but we are celebrating their 
and in the third dav we shall rise again, and, Master more highly ; for we do not exalt our 
shall live in Hes sight, own wonders by disparaging theirs; for theirs 
1s. But since the disobedient Jews will not also are ours; but by what happened among 
be persuaded by the Divine Scriptures, but) them, we win credence for our own. 
forgetting all that is written gainsay the Resur-} 17. But again they say, “ A corpse then 
rection of Jesus, it were good to answer them) lately dead was raised by the living ; but shew 
thus: On what ground, while you say that/us that one three days dead can possibly arise, 
Eliseus and Elias raised the dead, do you/and that a man should be buried, and rise after 
gainsay the Resurrection of our Saviour? Is} three days.” If we seek for Scripture testi- 
it that we have no living witnesses now out of| mony in proof of such facts, the Lord Jesus 
that gencration to what we say? Well, do you| Christ Himself supplies it in the Gospels, 
also bring forward witnesses of the history of| saying, Aur as Jonas was three days and three 
that time. But that is written ;—so is this also| zégh¢s in the whales belly; so shall the Son 
written; why then do ye receive the one, and} of man be three days and three nights mn the 
reject the other? They were Hebrews who | heart of the earth*. And when we examine the 
wrote that history; so were all the Apostles] story of Jonas, great is the force 5 of the resem- 
Hebrews: why then do ye disbelieve the|blance. Jesus was sent to preach repentance ; 
Jews®? Matthew who wrote the Gospel wrote | Jonas also was sent: but whereas the one fled, 
it in the Hebrew tongue?; and Paul the|not knowing what should come to pass ; the 
preacher was a Hebrew of the Hebrews; and] other came willingly, to give repentance unto 
the twelve Apostles were all of Hebrew race :| salvation. Jonas was asleep in the ship, and 
then fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem were ap-|snoring amidst the stormy sea; while Jesus 
pointed in succession from among the He-|also slept, the sea, accorling to God's provi- 
brews = What then is your reason for allowing | dence §, began to rise, to shew in the sequel the 
your own accounts, and rejecting ours, though | might of Him who slept. To the one they 
these also are written by Hebrews from among} said, Why art thou snoring? Arise, call upon 
yourselves, thy God, that God may save us7; but in the 
16. But it is impossible, some one will say,| other case they say unto the Master, Lod, save 
that the dead should rise; and yet Eliseus| ws’, Then they said, Cad/ upon thy God , here 
twice raised the dead,—when he was alive,|they say, save Zhou. But the one says, Zake 
and also when dead. Do we then believe,| me, and cast me into the sea, so shall the sea be 
that when Eliseus was dead, a dead man who} calm unto you ; the other, Himself rebuked the 
was cast upon him and touched him, arose ;| zedvds and the sea, and there was a great calin e 
altel RECRTRA RAR The one was cast into a whale’s belly: but the 
4 meat ab rots ‘IovSators the Jerusalem Editor adopts from other of His 5 dimer accord went down thither, 
Cod. A. rots idio:s, ‘ Your own countrymen,” a better reading in where the invisible whale of death 1s. And 
GF ee oe eee et ee ene Owe Or ee eee accord, that death 
9 The statements of Papias, Irenzus, Origen, Euscbius, Epi- 
phanius, and Jerome, concerning a Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew WMiethh. awa, So) 59: 
are ably discussed by Dr. Salmon(Zxfv0duction to NV. 7. Lect. X.), The Archdeacon of Jerusalem, Photius Alexandrides, ob- 

who comes to the conclusion that the Canonical Gospel was not | serves that ‘ by this parenthetic explanation Cyril perhaps wished 
translated from Hebrew (Aramaic), but originally written in | to refute the opinion which some favoured that these saints which 

2 
S 

Greck. slept and were raised entered into the heavenly Jerusalem.” Sez 
' 'This statement may have been derived cither from Eusebius | Huscb. Dem. Avang, VV. 12. 4 Matt, xi. go. 
(ist. Eccl. WV. c. 5), or from the “ written records ” (€yypaper), 5 **évépyeca [Forte évdpyeca, Edit.].” This conjecture of the 

from which he had learned that ‘until the siege of the Jews | Bencdictine Editor is recommended by the very appropriate sense 
which took place under Adrian (135 A.b.), there were fifteen | ‘distinctness of the resemblance,” but seems to have no Ms. 
bishops in succession there, all of whom are said to have been | authority. 

of Hebrew descent.’ See the list of names, and the notes on the | © Kar olKovopiay, 7 Jonah i. 6. 8 Matt. vill. 25, 26. 
passage in this Series, : 9 Junahor, ae: 

a 

Ee POE STN, 

might cast up those whom he had devoured, 
according to that which is written, / ze7// 
ransom them from the powcr of the grave; and 
from the hand of death Twill redeem them*. 

Cy 
Sipe 

| 20. Of this our Saviour the Prophet Jonas 
| formed the type, when he prayed out of the belly 
of the whale, and said, 2 cried in my affliction, 
and so on; out of the belly of hell7, and yet he 

18. At this point of our discourse, let us con-) was in the whale ; but though in the whale, he 
sider whether is harder, for a man after havine| says that he is in THf[ades; for he was a type 
been buried to rise again from the earth, or for} of Christ, who was to descend into Hades, 
a man in the belly of a whale, having come} And after a few words, he says, in the person of 
into the great heat of a living creature, to) Christ, prophesying most clearly, J/v head cent 
escape corruption, lor what man knows not,! down to the chasms of the mouitains® Paes sats 
that the heat of the belly is so great, that even yet he was in the belly of the whale. What 
bones which have been swallowed moulder, mountains then encompass thee? 1] know, he 
away? Tow then did Jonas, who was three says, that I am a type of Him, who is to 
days and three nights in the whale’s belly, be laid in the Sepulchre hewn out of the rock. 

escape corruption? And, seeing that the And though he was in the sea, Jonas says, J 
nature of all men is such that we cannot | zeit down to the earth, since he was a type of 

live without breathing, as we do, in air, how, Christ, who went down into the heart of the 

did he live without a breath of this air for 
three days? But the Jews make answer and 
say, The power of God descended with Jonas 
when he was tossed about in hell. Does then 
the Lord grant life to His own servant, by 
sending His power with him, and can He not 
grant it to Himself as well? If that is credible, 
this is credible also; if this is incredible, that. 
also is incredible. For to me both are alike 
worthy of credence. I believe that Jonas 
was preserved, for a// things are possible with 

earth. And foresceing the deeds of the Jews 
who persuaded the soldiers to lic, and told 
them, Say ¢hat they stole Him away, he says, By 
regarding lying vanities they forsook their own 
mercy. For He who had mercy on them came, 
and was crucified, and rose again, giving His 
own precious blood both for Jews and Gen- 

tiles; yet say they, Say that they stole Hin 

away, having regard to Aying vanities*. But 
concerning His Resurrection, Esaias also says, 
Lle who brought up from the earth the great 

God? ; I believe that Christ also was raised 

Shepherd of the sheep? ; he added the word, 

from the dead; for I have many testimonies gvea¢, lest He should be thought on a level 
of this, both from the Divine Scriptures, and with the shepherds who had gone before Him. 
from the operative power even at this day3 of 21. Since then we have the prophecies, let 
Him who arose,—who descended into hell faith abide with us. Let them fall who fall 
alone, but ascended thence with a great through unbelief, since they so will; but thou 
company ; for He went down to death, avd hast taken thy stand on the rock of the faith in 

many bodies of the saints which slept arose+ 
through Him. 

19. Death was struck with dismay on behold- 
ing anew visitant descend into Hades, notbound 
by the chains of that place. Wherefore, O por- 
ters of Hades, were ye scared at sight of Him? 
What was the unwonted fear that possessed 
you? Death fled, and his flight betrayed his 
cowardice. ‘The holy prophets ran unto Him, 
and Moses the Lawgiver, and Abraham, and 
Isaac, and Jacob; David also, and Samuel, 
and Esaias, and John the Baptist, who bore 
witness when he asked, Art Thou He that 
should come, or look we for another 5? All the 
Just were ransomed, whom death had _ swal- 
lowed ; for it behoved the King whom they 
had proclaimed, to become the redeemer of 
His noble heralds. ‘Then each of the Just 
said, O death, where is thy victory? O grave, 
where ts thy sting®? For the Conqueror hath 
redeemed us 

= 

t Hosea sili. 14, Matty sien 26. 3 Cf. Cat. iv. 135 
xiii, 3. AN Midtte SEV il, 52. oe Tiweselacay 

the Resurrection. Let no heretic ever per- 

-suade thee to speak evil of the Resurrection. 

For to this day the Manichees say, that the 
resurrection of the Saviour was phantom-wise, 
and not real, not heeding Paul who says, IVho 
was made of the seed of David according to the 
fleshy and again, By the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ our Lord from the dead3. And again he 
aims at them, and speaks thus, Say not tn 

Irenaeus (/7@r. 1. xxvii. $3; IV. xxvii. $2), Clem. Alex. (Stromat. 
vi. c. 6), Origen (4 Genes, Hom. xv. § 5). 

7 Jonahii. 2 

Sib. v6: (R.V.)Z went down to the bottoms of the moun- 
tains: the earth with her bars closed upon me for ever. 

Bee 

t By lying vanities are meant in the original * vain idols.” 

2 Isa. xii rr 3 (R.V.), here ts He that brought them up out of 
the sea with the shepherds (Marg. shepherd) of His flock ? Cyril's 
reading, €« THs yys instead of é« THs OaAaoons is found in the 
Alexandrine MS. of the Septuagint. Athanasius (4d Serapion, 
Ip. i, 12) has the same reading and interpretation as Cyril. By 
‘* the shepherds” are probably meant Moses and Aaron: cf. Ps. 
Ixxvil. 20: Who leddest Thy people like sheep by the hand of 
Moses and Aaron. 

Heb. xiii. 20: Now the God of peace, that brought again 
Srom the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep, 
&c, The word ‘ great” is added by the Author of the Epistle to 
the Hebrews not by Isaiah. 

3 Rom. i. 3, 4. Cyril in his incomplete quotation of 7. 4 
makes ’Incov Xptarod rod K. Wu. depend on dvacragews. The 
right order and construction is given in R.V., who was declared 

6 : Cor. xv. 55. On the opinion that the Patriarchs, Prophets, 
and Righteous men were redeemed by Christ in Hades, compare 

to be the Son of God .... by the resurrection of the dead; even 
Sesus Christ our Lord. 

EL 

TOO CATECIE Tie: 

thine kewl, who shall ascend tuto heaven; or, 
coho shall descend into the deep? that ts, to 
bring up Christ from the dead? ¢ and in like 
manner warning as he has elsewhere written 
awain, Memeniler Jesus Christ raised from the 
dead >, and again, ld if Christ be not risen, 
dhen ts our preaching vain, and your fatth is 
also vain. Yea, and we are found false wit- 
WMCSSCS of God; CeCauSC WE testificd of God that 
He raised up Christ, whom LHe raised not up”. 
But in what follows he says, But nozw ts Christ 
risen from the dead, the first fruits of them thal 
are asleep? -—And He was seen of Cephas, then 
of the twelve. (for if thou believe not the one 
witness, thou hast twelve witnesses ;) “ex Le 
ces seen of above five hundred brethren at once® ; 

io Cia Ge be ae i A Ses 

/too were witnesses, who took hold of His fee, 
-and who beheld the mighty earthquake, and 
the radiance of the Angel who stood by: the 
‘linen clothes also which were wrapped about 
| Him, and which He left when He rose ;—the 
isoldiers, and the money given to them; the 
spot itself also, yet to be seen ;—and this 
‘house of the holy Church, which out of the 
loving affection to Christ of the Emperor 
Constantine of blessed memory, was both 
built and beautifie] as thou seest. 

| 23. A witness to the resurrection of Jesus 
is ‘Tabitha also, who was in His name raised 
from the dead®; for how shall we disbcheve 
‘that Christ is risen, when even His Name 
vraised the dead? ‘The sea also bears withess 

(if they disbelieve the twelve, let them admit to the resurrection of Jesus, as thou hast heard 
the five hundred ;) after that He was seen of Yefore7, The draught of fishes also testifics, 

James %, His own brother, and first Bishop of 
this diocese. Seeing then that such a Bishop 
originally ! saw Christ Jesus when risen, do not 
thou, his disciple, disbelieve him. But thou 
sayest that His brother James was a partial 

witness; afterwards He was seen also of me* 

Paul, His enemy; and what testimony 1s 
doubted, when an enemy proclaims it? “TJ, 
who was before a persecutor3, now preach the 
elad tidings of the Resurrection.” 

22. Many witnesses there are of the Saviour’s 
resurrection.—The night, and the lght of the 
full moon ; (for that night was the sixteenth ¢ ;) 
the rock of the sepulchre which received Him; 
the stone also shall rise up against the face of 
the Jews, for it saw the Lord; even the stone 
which was then rolled away, itself bears witness 
to the Resurrection, lying there to this day. 
Angels of God who were present testified of 
the Resurrection of the Only-begotten : Peter 
and John, and Thomas, and all the rest of the 
Apostles ; some of whom ran to the sepulchre, 
and saw the burial-clothes, in which He was 
wrapped before, lying there after the Resur- 
rection; and others handled His hands and 
His feet, and beheld the prints of the nails ; 
and all enjoyed together that Breath of the 
Saviour, and were counted worthy to forgive 
sins in the power of the Holy Ghost. Women 

4 Rom. x. 6, 7- Sadun, i, S, 

7 Ib. v. 20. © Tb, 6) 0s 

9 1b. 7. This appearance of Christ to James is not men- 
tioned in the Gospels. Jerome (Catalog. Script. Eccles. p. 170 D) 
mentions a tradition that James had taken an cath that he would 
eat no bread from the hour in which he had drunk the Cup of the 
Lord, until he should see Him rising from the dead. Wherefore 
the Saviour immediately after He had risen appeared to James 
and commanded him to eat. 

1 For rowovtov toivuy émioKdmov mpwrotvmws iddvtos Codd. 
Roe, Casaub. have rov tolvuy mpwrotvmov éemaxdmov iSovtos, 
which gives the better sense—‘ since therefore the primary 
Bishop saw, &c.” On the meaning of mapockia, and the extent 
of a primitive Diocese, see Bingham, IX. c. 2. 

2 «Cor. xvi 8: $0 Dim.As 13. 

_ 4 Ifthe Crucifixion took place on the 14th of Nisan, the follow- 
ing night would begin the 15th, and the next night the 1th. 

5 Ot Cat. sin ap, 

G+ Cor, xy, 24,45) 

‘and the fire of coals there, and the fish laid 
‘thereon. Peter also bears witness, who had 
‘erst denied Him thrice, and who then thrice 
confessed Him; and was commanded to feed 
His spiritual ® sheep. To this day stands Mount 
Olivet, still to the eyes of the faithful all but 
displaying Him Who ascended on a cloud, 
and the heavenly gate of His ascension. lor 
from heaven He descended to Bethlehem, but 
to heaven He ascended from the Mount of 
Olives?; at the former place beginning His 
conflicts among men, but in the latter, crowned 
after them. Thou hast therefore many wit- 
nesses ; thou hast this very place of the Resur- 
rection; thou hast also the place of the As- 
cension towards the east; thou hast also for 
witnesses the Angels which there bore tes- 
timony ; and the cloud on which He went up, 
and the disciples who came down from that 
place. 

24. The course of instruction in the Faith 
would lead me to speak of the Ascension also; 
but the grace of God so ordered ' it, that 
thou heardest most fully concerning it, as far 
‘as our weakness allowed, yesterday, on the 

6 Acts ix. 47. 7 See § 17, above. : 8 vonrd. 

9 St. Luke (xxiv. 50) describes the Ascension as taking place 
| at Bethany, but the tradition, which Cyril follows, had long since 
‘fixed the scene on the summit of the Mount of Olives, a mile 
nearer to Jerusalem 5 and here the Empress Helena had built the 
| Church of the Ascension (Eusebius, Z7/e of Constantine, III. 433 
Demonstr. Evang. VI. xviii. 26). ‘There is nothing in, Cyrils 
language to warrant the Benedictine Editor s suggestion that he 
alludes to the legend, according to which the marks of Christ's feet 
were indelibly impressed on the spot from which He ascended. 
In the next generation St. Augustine seems to countenance the 
miraculous story (/2 Joh. Evang. Tract xine) “a here-are Lis 
footsteps, now adored, where last He stood, and whence He 
ascended into heaven.” The supposed trace of one foot is still 
shewn on Mount Olivet; ‘‘ the other having been removed by the 
‘Turks is naw to. be found an-the Chapel ofS, Dlicelayayhich is 
in the Patriarch’s Palace” (Jerusalem Id.) Compare Stanley, 
Sint ond. Palesiiie, G- ian Dictionawy OF Bible, Odzzes, 
Mount of. 

1 oxordunoe. In this word, as also in the phrase below, Kar’ 
olkoroptay THS Oclas xdpeTos, Cyril refers to the order of reading 
‘the Scriptures as part of a dispensation established by Divine 

grace. 

A Ro 

————_—_—_—_$_—_—$—_—_—$———— 

eet penne 

= 

pee 

Lie nurs 

Lord’s day ; since, by the providence of divine 
grace, the course of the Lessons? in Church 
included the account of our Saviour’s going up 
Into the heavens3; and what was then said was 
spoken principally for the sake of all, and for the 
assembled body of the faithful, yet especially 
fur thy sake, But the question is, didst thou 
attend to what was said? For thou knowest that 
the words which come next in the Creed teach 
thee to believe in Ilim “Who rose AGAIN 
THE THIRD DAY, AND ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN, 
AND SAT DOWN ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE 
Faruer.” I suppose then certainly that thou 
rememberest the exposition; yet I will now 
again cursorily put thee in mind of what was 

sud. Remember what distinctly 

syyy0 
DiSky 

then is 
written in the Psalms, God ts gone wp wih 
a shout>; remember that the divine powers 
also said to one another, Lift wp vour gates, ye 
Princes, and the rest ; remember also the Psalm 
which says, L/e ascended on high, He led cap- 
holy capitee7 » remember the Prophet who said, 
Iho buildeth Ils ascension unto heaven 8 Fae anvas 
all the other particulars mentioned yesterday 
because of the gainsaying of the Jews. 

25. For when they speak against the ascension 
of the Saviour, as being impossible, remember 
the account of the carrying away of Habakkuk : 
for if Habakkuk was transported by an Angel, 
being carried by the hair of his head, much 
rather was the Lord of both Prophets and 
Angels, able by His own power to make His 
ascent into the Iicavens on a cloud from the 
Mount of Olives. Wonders like this thou 
mayest call to mind, but reserve the pre-emi- 
hence for the Lord, the Worker of wonders ; 

for the others were borne up, but He bears | 

up all things. Remember that Enoch was 
translated? ; but Jesus ascended: remember 
what was said yesterday concerning Elias, that 
Tiias was taken up in a chariot of fire*; but 
that the chariots of Christ are ten thousandfold 
con thousands upon thousands3 + and that Elias 

was taken up, towards the east of Jordan; but | 

2 evoyvegnazorv, a term including the portions of Seripture 

wepexorut) appointed for the Epistle and Gospel. as well as the 
daily lessons trom the Old and New ‘Testaments. 

3 Phe section Luke xxiv. 36—53, which in the Eastern Church | 

is the Guspel for Ascension Day, is also one of the “eleven 
morning Gospels of the Resurrection (ebayyéAta avaerracipa 
éw%vd), Which were read in turn, one every Sunday at Matins.” 
Dictionary of Chr. Antig. “ Lectionary.” his Lecture being 
delivered on Monday, the Section in question had been read on 
the preceding day. 

4 podcora wev... CEatpéras be. 

6 Ps. xxiv. 7: Lift up, O gates, your heads, 
Icbrew words mi-led the Greek Translators. 

7 Ps. Ixvili. 18. On the reading avéBy, found in a few MSS. 
of the Septuagint, see Tischendorf’s note on Eph. iv. 8 

So Bay Nie oe: 

‘The order of the 

8. 

2 Amasine 65 CRSV ay iss. He thtae Gisele Vice whens i: 
the heaven. (A.V.) Lis stories. Mare. ascensions, ov spheres. 
Sept. THy avaBaguv avtov, 

I Beland the Dragon, 7. 33: Compare Ezck. viii. Be 

Te GUE ness 2 a Sine ie 1. 

3 Ps. Ixvili. 172 yedcdédes ebOqrovvtwv. The Hebrew means 
lite-ally ** thousands of repetition,” ic. many thousands : evdrve, 
“to abound,” 

AEN: TOl 

rae 

| that Christ ascended the cast of the brook 
|Cedron: and that Klas went as glo heaven 4 % 
‘but Jesus, inte heaven: and that Elias said 
‘that a double portion in the Holy Spirit should 
be given to his holy disciple; but that Christ 
granted to His own disciples so great enjoy- 
ment of the grace of the Holy Ghost, as not 
only to have It in themselves, but also, by the 
laying on of their hands, to impart the fellow- 
ship of It to them who believed. 

26. And when thou hast thus wrestled against 
the Jews,—when thou hast worsted them by 
parallel instances, then come further to the 
pre-eminence of the Saviour’s glory ; namely, 
that they were the servants, but He the Son of 
God. And thus thou wilt be reminded of His 
pre-eminence, by the thought that a servant of 
Christ was caught up to the third heaven. For 
if Elias attained as far as the first heaven, but 
Paul as faras the third, the latter, therefore, 
has obtained a more honourable dignity. Be 
not ashamed of thine Apostles; they are not 
inferior to Moses, nor second to the Prophets ; 
but they are noble among the noble, yea, 
nobler still. Vor Elias truly was taken up 
into heaven; but Peter has the keys of the 
kingdom of heaven, having received the words, 
Whatsocver thou shalt loose on earth shall 
be loosed in heavens, lias was taken up only 
to heaven; but Paul both into Acaven, and 
into paradise ® (for it behoved the disciples 
of Jesus to receive more manifold grace), and 
heard unspeakable words, which tt is not lazful 
Jor man to utter, But Paul came down again 
from above, not because he was unworthy to 
abide in the third heaven, but in order that 
after haying enjoyed things above man’s reach, 
and descended in honour, and haying preached 
Christ, and died for His sake, he might re- 
ceive also the crown of martyrdom. But I 
|pass over the other parts of this argument, 
of which I spoke yesterday in the Lord’s-day 
|congregation ; for with understanding hearers, 
a mere reminder is sufficient for instruction. 

27. But remember also what I have often 
said? concerning the Son’s sitting at the right 

4 Sept. @s ets vey ovparcv. Int Mace. ii. 58 the MSS. vary 
between ews and ws, but the latter (says Fritzsche) ‘tis an altera- 
tion made to agree with 2 Kings ii. rx. But there the reference is 
to the “feuded exaltation of Iclijah into heaven, and theretore ws 
is rightly used (Kithner, Grawere. $ 604, note; Jelf, § 626, Obs. 1), 
while here the thing is referred to as an acconplished historical 
fact.” The distinction here drawn by Cyril is therefore hyper- 
critical, as is seen below in § 26, where he writes, "HAdas Mev yap 
avery pOy els odpavor. . - 

S Watt? tien, oe i COP Rar By : . 

hee Oat iv 7 ¢ 3,195, Phe clansey. eat KatioarTa ex delta 
tov Harpds, does not occur in the original form of the Nicene 
Creed, but is found in the Confession of Maith contained in Const, 
Alpfost. c. 41, in the four Musebian Confessions of Antioch (341, 2 
A.D.), and in the Macrostichos (344 A.p.)* An equivalent clause 
is found in the brief Confession of Hippolytus (circ. 220 A.D.) 
Contra Heres. Nocti, c. 1: ‘Kat ovta ev Se€ia Tou Marpos,” anc 
in Tertullian, De Virgin. Veland. co: ‘* Regula quidem Fidei 

una omnino est, sola immobilis et irreformabilis,.... sedentem 
A ; . : x2 ee ee , 
‘nunc ad dextram Patris:” de Prescriptione,c. 13: ‘* Regula c-t 

LO? 

hand of the Father; because of the next sen- 
tence in the Creed, which says, “AND As- 
CENDED INTO HEAVEN, AND SAT DOWN AT THE 
RIGHE HAND OF THE Farner.” Let us not 
curiously pry into what is properly meant by 
the throne: for it is incomprehensible: but 
neither let us endure those who falsely say, 
that it was after Ifis Cross and Resurrection 
and Ascension into heaven, that the Son began 
to sit on the right hand of the Father. For 
the Son gained not Histhrone by advancement? ; 
but throughout His being (and His being is by 
an eternal generation’) He also sitteth together 
with the Father. And this throne the Prophet 
Ksaias having beheld before the incarnate 
coming of the Saviour, says, Z sez te Lord 
sitting on a throne, high and lifted up", and the 

lor the Father vo man hath seen at any 
time ?, and He who then appeared to the Prophet 
was the Son. The Psalmist also says, 7/y 
throne is prepared of old; Thou art from ever- 
lasting 3. ‘Though then the testimonies on this 
point are many, yet because of the lateness of 
the time, we will content ourselves even with 
these. 

28. But now I must remind you of a few 
things out of many which are spoken concern- 
ing the Son’s sitting at the right hand of the 
Father. For the hundred and ninth Psalm 
says plainly, 74e Loxp said unto my Lord, Sit 
Thou on My right hand, until I make Thine 
enemtes Thy footstool+, And the Saviour, con- 
firming this saying in the Gospels, says that 
David spake not these things of himself, but 
from the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, saying, 
Flow then doth David in the Spirit calt Him 
Lord, saying, The Loxv said unio my Lord, Sit 
Thou on My right hands? and the rest. And 
in the Acts of the Apostles, Peter on the day 
of Pentecost standing with the Eleven®, and 
discoursing to the Israelites, has in very words 
cited this testimony from the hundred and 
ninth Psalin. 

2g. But 1 must remind you also of a few 
other testimonies in like manner concerning 
the Son’s sitting at the right hand of the Fa- 
ther. For in the Gospel according to Matthew 
itis written, Wevertheless, J say unto vou, Heince- 
forth ye shall see the Son of Man siting on the 
rreht hand of power7, and the rest: in accord- 
ance with which the Apostle Peter also writes, 
By the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, who ts on 
the right hand of God, having gone tito heaven ®, 

rest. 

autem fidei.... sedisse ad dexteram Patris :” 
c. 2: ‘sedere ad dexteram Patris.” 

* Gx mpokunns, Gh. Cates, 6 pote 8. 
9 ah obrep Cotuv, (Core b¢ det yevirnDets). 
is emphatic, 

© ee Mie Ee 

ce Ok i oe 

7 Natt. Rev. Gas 

adversus Praxcan, 

In both clauses €o7ev 

2 Joli i, POs 
S Matt. scan ae. 
5 ¢ Pet: 111, 

SPs oetae 
6 Acts iin 34s 

CATECHICEC Al: 

Pee Eis. 

And the Aposile Paul, writing to the Romans, 
says, Jt ts Christ that died, vea rather, that 
is risen again, who ts even at the right hand of 
God? And charging the Ephesians, he thus 
speaks, clecording to the working of His mighty 

power, which Ie wrought in Christ when fe 
ratsed Him from the dead, and set Him at Its 
own right hand*; and the rest. And the 
Colossians he taught thus, Zf ve then be ris.n 
wth Christ, seck the things above, where Christ 
lis seated at the right hand of God*. And in the 
Epistle to the Hebrews he says, [hen Sle 
had made purification of our sins, le sat down 
on the right hand of the Majesty on highs, 
And again, But unte which of the Angels hath 
Ile said at any time, Sit thou at My right hand, 
until I make thine enenies thy footstool+? And 
again, But He, when He had offered one sacrifice 
Jor all men, for ever sat down on the rieht hand 
of God: from henceforth expecting tld Les ene- 
mies be made Fis footstools. And again, Looking 
unto Jesus, the author and perfecter of our fatth ; 
IVho for the joy that was set before Him endured 
the Cross, despising shame, and ts set down en 
the right hand of the throne of Ged®. 

30, And though there are many other texts 
concerning the session of the Only-begotten 
on the right hand of God, yet these may sutfice 
us at present; with a repetiticn of my remark, 
that it was not after His coming in the flesh? 
that He obtained the dignity of this seat; no, 
for even before all ages, the Only-begottcn 
Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, ever 
possesses the throne on the right hand of the 
Father. Now may He Himself, the God of 
all, who is Father of the Christ, and our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who came down, and ascended, 
and sitteth together with the Lather, watch 
over your souls ; keep unshaken and unchanged 
your hope in Him who rose again ; raise you 
together with lim from your dead sins unto His 
heavenly gift; count you worthy to be caught 
up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the atr®, 
in His fitting time; and, until that time arrive 
of His glorious second advent, write all your 
names in the Book of the living, and having 
written them, never blot them out (for the 
names of many, who fall away, are blotted out); 
and may He grant to all of you to believe 
on Him who rose again, and to look for Him 
who is gone up, and is to come again, (to 
come, but not from the earth; for be on your 
guard, O man, because of the deceivers who 
are to come;) Who sitteth on high, and is 
here present together with us, Jeholding the 

9 Rom, viil. 
ge elovee eg 
OTe RM, 
cott and Hort. 

orm Riel here wy eh Psoy 2: Gale ii, a, 
: Ate tomenn: 5 Ib. x. 12. 
On Cyril's omission cf Mark xvi. 19. sce West- 

3. 

7 tTnv évoapxov mapovatar. Cf. § 27. Sar hess ave tz. 

order of cath, and the steadfastness of his faith. 
Tor think not that because He is now absent 
in the flesh, He is therefore absent also in the 
Spirit. He is here present in the midst of us, 
listening to what is said of Him, and beholding 
thine inward thoughts, and ¢rying the refus and 

Poche EVs 

fo 

hearts ;,—who also is now ready to present 
those who are coming to baptism, and all of 
you, in the Holy Ghost to the Father, and to 
say, Behold, Land the children whom God hath 
given Me?:—TYo whom be glory for ever 
Amen. 

O Colts. Be 

© PSs Vil, Os @ Teas Vile 20 s7 ber the 23, 

ee rs 

jas Sie ge 

ON THE CLAUSE, AND SHALL COME IN GLORY TO JUDGE THE QUICK AND THE DEAD; OF 
WHOSE KINGDOM THERE SHALL BE NO END. 
DANIEL vil. 9-14. 

Lebvheld 

Hill thrones were placed, aiid vite thal twas 

anctenl of days did sit, and then, L saw tn a vision 

of the night, and behold ene like unto the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, &e. 

1. WE preach not one advent only of Christ, 
but a second also, far more glorious than the 

former. For the former gave a view of His, 
patience; but the latter brings with it the 
erown of a divine kingdom. For all things, 

for the most part, are twofold in our Lord 
Jesus Christ: a twofold generation ; one, of 
God, before the ages; and one, of a Virgin, 

at the close of the ages: His descents two- 

fold; one, the unobserved, (Ze vai on a 
flecee®s anda second His open coming, which 
is to be. In His former advent, He was 

wrapped in swaddling clothes in the man- 
eer; in His second, He cwzereth S1imself 
with light as with a garment?, In His first 
coming, L/e endured the Cross, despising shames ; 
in His second, He comes attended by a host 
of Angels, receiving glory+. We rest not then 
upon His first advent only, but look also for 
His second. And as at His first coming we 
said, Plessed is He that cometh in the Name of 
the Lord’, so will we repeat the same at His 
second coming; that when with Angels we 
meet our Master, we may worship Him and 
say, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of 
the Lord. The Saviour comes, not to be 
judged again, but to judge them who judged 
Him; He who before held His peace when 
judged ®, shall remind the transgressors who did 
those daring deeds at the Cross, and shall say, 
These things hast thou adore, and / kept silence 7. 
Then, He came because of a divine 
tion, teaching men with persuasion ; 
time they will of necessity have Him for their 
King, even though they wish it not. 

2. And concerning these two comings, 

Malachi the Prophet says, And the Lord whom | 

ve seek shall suddenly come to LHts temple® ; be-| 
hold one coming. And again of the second 

ii, 6. 

2 

‘ Ps. ae See xii. o 3 and § 10, below. 
Poo, bo PL ety, 2000, 3s 
+ Cyril's contrast of the two Advents seems to Le partly borrowed 
un Justin M. (fod i. 52; Zeyh. 110). See also ‘Tertullian | 
c lado. Judacos, C.14)3 Hippolytus (De Antichristo, 44). 
5 Natt. sXe > RK SO, 

© Tb. xxvi. 63. 9 Ds. aie 8 Mal. iti, x—3. 

dispensa- 
but this | 

/coming 

he says, And the Messenger of the 
covenant whom ye delight in, Behold, Le cometh, 
satlh? the Lord Alinighty, But weho shall abide 
the dav of His coming? or who shall stand when 
Tle appearcth ? Because He cometh tn like a re- 

frner’s fire, and like fullers herb; and [te shall 
sitas a refiner and purifier. And immediately 
after the Saviour Hlimself says, Aud L wr// 
draw near to you tn Judgment, and L will be a 
swift citress against the sorcerers, and agaist 
the adulteresses, and agatist those who swear 

falsely in My Name*, and the rest. Tor this 
cause Paul warning us beforehand says, // avy 
man buildeth on the foundation gold, and silver, 
and prectous stones, wood, hay, stubble: every 
man’s coork shall be made mantfest ; for the day 
shall deceare tt, because tt shall be revealed tn fire*. 
Paul also knew these two comings, when writing 
to Titus and saying, Zhe grace of God hath 
appeared which br jngeth salvation unto all men, 
instructing wus that, denving wngodliness and 
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and godly, 
and righteously in this present world» looking for 
the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the 
great God and our Saviour Jesits Christ3, Thou 
seest how he spoke of a first, for which he 
gives thanks; and of a second, to which we 
look forward. ‘Therefore the words also of the 
Faith which we are announcing were just now 
delivered thus4; that we believe in Him, who 
also ASCENDED INTO THE HEAVENS, AND SAT 

i 

| 9 The Benedic (ine Editor by omitting Acyet, obti uns the sense, 

fle cometh, even the Lord Alnts ohty, “But A€yee is supported by 

the MSS. of, Cyril, as well as by the Septuagint and Hebrew. 
t Mal. iit. 5. * eOR Tem 
3 Titus ii, 11. The Benedictine Editor adopts tov Xwrjpos 

instead of owryjptos, against the authority of the best MSs. 
of Cyril. 

4 yov mapedd0q. Cyril means that at the beginning of this 
present Lecture he had delivered to the Catechumens those ar- 
ticles of the Creed w hich he was going to explain. Compare Cat. 

xviil. 21, Where we see tliat Cyril first announces (erayyéAdw) 
the words which the learners repeat after him (amayyéAdw). 

The clause, Wiosk KiInGpoM SHALL HAVE NO END, was not 
contained in the original form of the Creed of Niczwa, A.v. 325, but 
Fits substance is found i in many earlier writings. peice Justin M. 

i (7 ryph. § 46: Kat aUTOU EOTLY 7) ALWYLOS BactActa) ; onst. fl post, 

‘vil. gi 3 the Eusebian Confessions rst and 4th SE AnTOER, and the 

| Macrostich, a.p. 341, 342, 344. Bp. Bull asserts that the Creed of 
| Jerusalem, containing this clause, was no other than the ancient 
Eastern Creed, first directed against the Gnostics of the Sub- 
Apostolic age (Judicium Eccl. Cathol. vi. ro)s 

joe Os Bae he 

DOWN ON THE RIGHT HAND OF THE PATHER, 
ANDY SEALE ¢GOMin IN .GLORY 10" 7WDGre -OWwick 
AND DEAD; WHOSE KINGDOM SHALL HAVE NO 

END, 

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ, then, comes from 
heaven; and He comes with glory at the end 
of this world, in the last day. Vor of this 
world there is to be an end, and this created 
world is to be re-made anew 5. Tor since cor- 
ruption, avd theft, and adultery, and every 
sort of sins ave been poured forth over the 
earth, and blood has been mingled with blood® 
that this wondrous 

in the world, therefore, 
dwelling-place may not remain filled with 
iniquity, this world passeth away, that the 

fairer world may be made manifest. And 
wouldest thou receive the proof of this out of 
the words of Scripture? Listen to Esaias, 
saving, And the heaven shall be rolled to- 
gether as a scroll, and all the stars shall fall, 
as leaves from a vine, and as leaves fall from a 
jis-tree7. Vhe Gospel also says, Zhe sun shall 
be darkened, and the moon shall not give her 
Licht, and the stars shall fall from heaven®. Let 
us not sorrow, as if we alone died; the stars 
also shall die ; but perhaps rise again. And 
the Lord rolleth up the heavens, not that He 
may destroy them, but that He may raise them 
up again more beautiful. Hear David the 
Prophet saying, Zhou, Lord, in the beginning 
didst lay the foundations of the earth, and the 
heavens are the work of Thy hands; they shall 
perish, but Thou remainest 9. But some one will 
say, Behold, he says plainly that they shall 
pertsh. Hear in what sense he says, they shall 
perish ; it is plain from what follows; And 
they all shall wax old as doth a garment, and 
as a vesture shalt Thou fold them up, and they 
shall be changed. Yor as a man is said to 
“perish,” according to that which is written, 
Behold, how the righteous perisheth, and ro man 
layeth it to heart*, and this, though the resur- 
rection is looked for; so we e look for a resur- 
rection, as it were, of the heavens also. Zhe 
sun shall be turned tnio darkness, and the moon 
tito blood®. Here let converts from the Mani- 

chees gain instruction, and no longer make 
those lights their gods; nor impiously think, 

that this sun which shall be darkened is 
Christ 3. And again hear the Lord saying, 
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but Aly 

5 The Benedictine Editor suggests that Cyril “is refuting 
those who said that the Universe was to perish utterly, an opinion 
which seems to be somehow imputed to Origen by Methodius, 
or Proclus, in Epiphanius (Hares Tkive3h, '32).” On Origen’s 
much controverted opinions concerning the beginning and end 
of the world, see Huet. Ovigentana, Il. 4—6: and Bp. Westcott, 
Dictionary of Christian Biography, AOuieern Pp4r37, 138: 

6 Hos. iv. 2. 

Fa Se ecelraedis 

9 Ps. cil: 257.26 $ Heb. if ro—12. 

2 Joel iis sr. 

8 Matt. xxiv. 29. 
Te otal viet 
B2 Cal, Vie “ee asl er. 

Rie XV 105 

words shall not pass ateay', for the creatures 
are not as precious as a ie s words, 

4. The things then: which are seen 
pass away, and there 

shall 
shall ome the: theres 
which are looked for, things fairer than the 
present; but as to the time let no one be 
curious, Por “is not for you Ele says, 7 
know times or seasons, which the hather hath 
put in [lis own powers. And venture not thou 
to declare when these things shall be, nor on 
the other hand supinely slumber. Tor he 
saith, TVatch, for ta such an hour as ye expect 
not the Son of Man cometh®, But since it was 
needful for us to know the signs of the end, 
and since we are looking for Christ, there- 
fore, that we may not die deceived and 
be led astray by that false Antichrist, the 
Apostles, moved by the divine will, address 
themselves by a providential arrangement to 
the True Teacher, and say, Zell us, when shall 
these things be, and what shall be the sign of Thy 
coming, and of the end of the world7? We look 

for Thee to come again, but Salan trans- 
Jorms hiniself trto an ¥ ngel of light; put us 

therefore on our guard, that we may not wor- 
ship another instead of Thee. And He, 
opening His divine and blessed mouth, says, 

Take heed that no man mislead you. Wo you 
also, my hearers, as seeing Him now with 

the eyes of your mind, hear Him saying the 
same things to you; Zake heed that no man 
mislead you. And this word exhorts you 
all to give heed to what is spoken ; for it is 
not a history of things gone by, but a pro- 
phecy of things future, and which will surely 
come. Not that we prophesy, for we are un- 
worthy ; but that the things which are written 
will be set before you, and the signs declared. 
Observe thou, which of them have already 
come to pass, and which yet remain; and 
make thyself safe. 

5. Lake heed that no man mislead you: for 
many shall come in Aly nanie, saying, L am 
Christ, and shall mislead many. ‘Vhis has 
happened in part: for already Simon Magus 
has said this, and Menander®’, and some others 
of the godless leaders of heresy; and others 
will say it in our days, or after us. 

6. A second sign. And ye shall hear of 
wars and rumours of wars? Is there then at 
this time war between Persians and Romans 
for Mesopotamia, or no? Does nation rise up 
against nation and kingdom against kinedont, 

or no? And there shall be famines and pesti- 
4 Matt. xxiv. 3h Se assis Fs Gis WEE, ORL Sather 
Ib. Ib.we 3 and 4 Se Cale Vintdy TOF 

9 MM. att, xxiv. <6. The war oan Sapam Lie Ring- ot Persia, 
ahich broke out immediately on the death of. Constantine, and 
continued throughout the rein of Constantius, was raging fiercely 
at the date of these Lectures, the great battle of Singara being 

fought in the year 348 A.D. 

inar6) 

lences and earthquakes in divers places. ‘These 
things have already come to pass; and again, 
And fearful sights from heaven, and mighty 
slorms', Watch therefore, We says 3 Jor ye know 
not al what four your Lord doth conte? 

7. But we seek our own sign of His coming ; 
we Churchmen seek a sign proper to the 
Church. And the Saviour says, 42d then shall 
many be offended, and shall betray one another, 
and Shall hate ote another * Tf thou hear that 
bishops advance against bishops, and clergy 
against clergy, and laity against laity even unto 
blood, be not troubled 5; for it has been written 
before. Ifecd not the things now happening, 
but the things which are written; and even 
though I who teach thee perish, thou. shalt 
not also perish with me; nay, even a hearer 
may become better than his teacher, and 
he who came last may be first, since even 
those about the eleventh hour the Master re- 

ceives. If among Apostles there was found 
treason, dost thou wonder that hatred of 

brethren is found among bishops? But the 
sign concerns not only rulers, but the people 
also; for Ile says, Avd because triguity shall 

t Luke xxi. rr. Jerome in the Chrouicon mentions a great 
earthquake in 346 A.b., by which Dyrrachium was destroyed, and 
Rome and other cities of Italy greatly injured (Ben. Ed.). 

Cyril substitutes yewuaves for onueca, the better reading in 
Luke xxi. 11. 2 Matt. xxiv. 42. 

3 exkAngagtikos, When applied to persons, means either, as 
here, an orthodox member of the Church in contrast to a heretic, 
pagan, or Jew (Origen. 72 Job xx. 6), or more particularly a Cleric 
as opposed to a layman (Cat. xvii. 10). 4 Matt. xxiv. ro. 

5 *€S. Cyril here describes the state of the Church, when ortho- 
doxy was for a while trodden under foot, its maintainers per- 
secuted, and the varieties of Arianism, which took its place, were 
quatrelling for the ascendancy. Gibbon quotes two passages, one 
from a pagan historian of the day, another from a Father of the 
Church, which fully bear out S. Cyril’s words. What made the 
state of things still more deplorable, was the defection of some 
of the orthodox party, as Marcellus, into opposite errors ; while 
the subsequent secessions of Apollinaris and Lucifer show what 
lurking disorders there were within it at the time when S. Cyril 
wrote. (Vid. 2/7. 9.) ‘The passages referred to are as fellows: 
‘The Christian Religion,’ says Ammianus, ‘in itself plain and 
simple, he (Constantius) confounded by the dotage of superstition. 
Instead of reconciling the parties by the weight of his authority, 
he cherished and propagated, by vain disputes. the differences 
which his vain curiosity had excited. The highways were covered 
with troops of Bishops, galloping from every side to the assem- 
blies, which they called synods; and while they laboured to 
reduce the whole sect to their own particular opinions, the public 
establishment of the posts was almost ruined by their hasty and 
repeated journeys.’ //ést, xxi. 16. S. Hilary of Poictiers thus 
speaks of Asia Minor, the chief seat of the Arian troubles: 
‘It is a thing equally deplorable and dangerous, that there 
are as many creeds as opinions among men, as many doc- 
trines as inclinations, and as many sources of blasphemy as 
there are faults among us3 because we make creeds arbitrarily, 
and explain them as arbitrarily. The Homoousion is rejected 
and received and explained away by successive synods. The 
partial or total resemblance of the Father and of the Son is 
a subject of dispute for these unhappy divines. Every year, nay, 
every moon, we make new creeds to describe invisible mysteries. 
We repent of what we have done, we defend those who repent, we 
anathematize those whoin we defended. We condemn either the 
doctrine of others in ourselves, or our own in that of others; 
and reciprocally tearing one another to pieces, we have been the 
cause of each other’s ruin,’ ad Constant. ii. 4, 5. Gibbon’s trans- 
lations are used, which, though diffuse, are faithful in their 
matter. What a contrast do these descriptions present to Athana- 
sius’ uniform declaration, that the whole question was really 
settled at Nicaa, and no other synod or debate was necessary !"’ 
—(R.W.C.). Compare, for example, the account of the seditions 
in Antioch and in Constantinople, in Socrates, Hccles. Hist. i, 24 5 
i., 12—14, and Athanas. (ist. Ardanorum, passim. 

6 Matt. xxiv, r2, 

CA TEC ae, eae, 

Will any then among those present boast 
that he entertains friendship unfeigned to- 
wards his neighbour? Do not the lips often 
kiss, and the countenance smile, and the eyes 
brighten forsooth, while the heart is planniny 
guile, and the man is plotting mischief with 
words of peace ? 

8. Thou hast this sign also: And this Gospel 
of the kingdom shall be preached in all the ivorld 
Jor a witness unto all vations, and then shall the 
end cone? And as we see, nearly the whole 
world is now filled with the doctrine of Christ. 

g. And what comes to pass after this? 
He says next, liven therefore ve see the abom- 
mation of desolation, which was spoken of by 

Daniel the Prophet, standing in the TStoly 
Place, let him that veadeth understand °. And 

again, Zhen tf anv man shall say unto you, 
Lo, here ts the Christ, or, Lo, there; believe 
it not». Hatred of the brethren makes room 
next for Antichrist; for the devil prepares 
beforchand the divisions among the pcople, 
that he who is to come may be acceptable to 
them. But God forbid that any of Christ’s 
servants here, or elsewhere, should run over to 
the encmy! Writing concerning this matter, the 
Apostle Paul gave a manifest sign, saying, Jor 
that dav shalt not come, except there come first the 
Salling away, and the man of sin be revealed, the 
son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth hini- 
self against all that ts called God, or that ts wor- 
shipped ; so that he sitteth tn the temple of God, 
shewing himself that he ts God. Remeniber ye 
not that when Lwas yet with you, L told you these 
things? And now ye know that which restraincth, 
to the end that he maybe revealed in his own season. 
Lor the mystery of tnigurtly doth already work, 
only there ts one that resiraineth now, until he be 
taken out of theway. And then shall the lawless 
one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay 
with the breath of [rs mouth, and shall destroy 
with the brightness of His coming. Leven him, 
whose coming ts after the working of Satan, 
with all power and signs and lying wonders, 
and with all deceit of unrighteousness for them 
that are perishing*. Vhus wrote Paul, and 
now is the faléing away. For men have 
fallen away from the right faith? ; and some 
preach the identity of the Son with the 
Tather 3, and others dare to say that Christ 

7 Matt. xxiv. 74, S Thi ge ve. 

t 2 Thess. ii. 3—10. 

2 The prediction was supposed by earlier Fathers to refer to 
a personal Antichrist, whom they expected to come speedily. Sce 
Justin M. (773'f4. § 110: 6 Tis amocracias avOpwros ; 74. § 32: 
‘“He who is to speak blasphemous and daring things against the 
Most High is already at the doors.” Iren, /fe@r. V. 25. Cyril in 
this passage regards the heresies of his time as the apostasy in 
general, but looks also for a personal Antichrist : ($$ 11, 12). 
3 viomatopta, On this contemptuous name for Sabellianism, 
see Cat. iv. $3 xi. 16. The Third (Eusebian) Confession, or ‘Third 
of Antioch, A.D. 341, anathematizes any who hold the doctrines of 

D hb erage, 

Marcellus of Ancyra or Sabellius, or Paul of Samosata (Athan, 
de Synodis, § 24, note 10, p. 462, in this Series, and Mr. Robers- 

LECTURE 

was brought into being out of nothing+, And 
formerly the heretics were manifest ; but now 
the Church is filled with heretics in disguises. 
Tor men have fallen away from the truth, and 
have ttching ears®. Is it a plausible discourse ? 
all listen to it gladly. Is ita word of correction ? 
all turn away from it. Most have departed from 
right words, and rather choose the evil, than 
desire the good? ‘This therefore is Me falling 
away, and the enemy is soon to be looked for: 
and meanwhile he has in part begun to send 
forth his own forerunners °, that he may then 
come prepared upon the prey. Look therefore 
to thyself, O aan, and make safe thy soul. The 
Church now charges thee before the Living 
God; she declares to thee the things concern- 
ing Antichrist before they arrive. Whether 
they will happen in thy time we know not, or 
whether they will happen after thee we know 
not; but it is well that, knowing these things, 
thou shouldest make thyself secure beforehand. 

10. ‘Vhe true Christ, the Only-begotten Son 
of God, comes no more from the earth. If any 
come making false shows? in the wilderness, go 
not forth; if they say, Lo, here ts the Christ, Lo, 
there, believe tt not*. ook no longer down- 
wards and to the earth ; for the Lord descends 
from heaven’; not alone as before, but with 
many, escorted by tens of thousands of Angels ; 

nor secretly as the dew on the fleece?; but 
shining forth openly as the lightning. For He 

hath said Himself, As the Aightning cometh out 
of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so 
shall also the coming of the Son of Man bes; 
and again, Axd they shall see the Son of Man 
coming upon the clouds with power and great 

son's Prolegomena, p. xliv.). dn the Ecthesis, or Statement of 
faith, § 2, Athanasius writes: ‘‘ Neither do we hold a Son-Father, 
as do the Sabellians, calling Him of one but (a sole and ?) not the 
same essence, and thus destr oying the existence of the Son.” As 
to Marce ‘lus, see Athanasius, //isé. Arian. § 6 (p. 271), and the 
letter of Julius in the Apologia c. Avian. § 32 (p. 116): also notes 
3, 4 on § a7 below. 

4 Sce Athanasius, De Synod. $15: ‘fArius and those with him 
thought and professed thus: ‘God made the Son out of nothing, 
aridtealled-Flim HisSon:”” and: 2egos. Fide, So: 8 We-do-not 
regard asa creature, or thing made, or as made out of nothing, 
God the Creator of all, the Son of God, the true Being from the 
true Being, the Alone from the Alone, inasmuch as the like glory 
and power was eternally and conjointly begotten of the lather.” 
The 4th (Eusebian) Confession, or 4th of Antioch, a.p. 342, ends 
thus: ‘‘Those who say that the Son was from nothing,....the 
Ge utl 1olic Church regards as aliens.” 

5 Athan, slaversus Alrianos, Or. i. 1: “One heresy and that 
hie, last which has now risen as forerunner of Antichrist, the 
Arian as it is called, considering that other heresies, her elder 
sisters, have been openly proscribed, in her craft and cunning 
affects to array herself in Scripture language, like her father the 
devil, and is forcing her way back into the Church’, s paradise, &c.’ 
The supposed date of this Oration is 8 or ro years later than that 
of Cyril’s Lectures. SLAM EY «3 

7 A reading supported by the best M3s, and approved by the 

Chace Lditor gives a different sense, ‘and rather choose 
to scem than resolve to be,” inverting the proverb ‘fesse quam 
i 

8 In the passage quoted above in note 5 the Arian heresy is 
eee a ‘forerunner ” (mpodspopxos) of Antichrist. 

9 pavTacvoKxoT wy, a rare word, rendered ‘‘ frantic’ in Ecclus. 
iv. 30: its more precise meaning seems to be “ making a false 
show,”’ which is here applied to a “false Christ, and again in § 14 

icthe father of lies who bse at a vain show of false miracles, 

T Niattexing oe 2-P Sy Text 36, «Ches note 1. 

SONATE: Rea 27 

XV. Tee 

glory, and [le shall send forth [lis Angels with a 
ye, fricmpet* » and the rest. 

rr. Dut as, when formerly Ife was to take 
man’s nature, and God was expected to be 
born of a Virgin, the devil created prejudice 
against this, by craftily preparing among idol- 

worshippers 5 fables of false gods, bevetting 
and begotten of women, that, the falsehood 

having come first, the truth, as he supposed, 
might be disbelieved ; so now, since the true 
Christ is to come a second time, the adver- 
sary, taking occasion by® the expectation 
of the simp sle, and especially of them of the 
circumcision, brings in a certain man who 
is a magician 7, and most expert in sorcerics 
and enchantments of beguiling craftiness ; who 
shall seize for himself the power of the Roman 
empire, and shall falsely style himself Christ ; 
by this name of Christ deceiving the Jews, who 
are looking for the Anointed’, and seducing 
those of the Gentiles by his magical illusions. 
12. But this aforesaid Antichrist is to come 
when the times of the Roman empire shall have 
been fulfilled, and the end of the world is now 
drawing near, There shall rise up together 
ten kings of the Romans, reigning in different 
parts perhaps, but all about the same time; 
and after these an eleventh, the Antichrist, 
who by his magical craft shall seize upon 
the Roman power; and of the kings who 
reigned before him, “Arce he shall humble’, 
and the remaining seven he shall keep in sub- 
jection to himself. At first indeed he will put 
on a show of mildness (as though he were 
a learned and discreet person), and of sober- 
ness and benevolence?: and by the lying 

4 M att. xxiv. @. 30. 

5 ép cidmdodarpcta may mean either “in idol-w orship,”” or 

‘among idolaters,”’ the abstract being wa for the concrete, as in 
Rom, lly 30° Suxasree TEpLTOLAY. 

6 epddvor, ‘ provision for. a journey, A 
meaning to aopmn, a starting point,” or favourable occasion. 

7 Antichrist is desc ribed by Hippolytus (Ve Christo et lati 
nek the Oy ete ae son of the devil, and a vessel of Satan,” w a 
will rule and govern ‘‘after the manner of the law of Augustus, by 
whom the Roman empire was established, sanctioning everything 
thereby." -Ctlreny-2feees Ve a6, $3 4 Dictionary of Christian Dio- 
graphy, Avtichrist : “ The sharp precision with which St. Paul had 
pointed to ‘¢/e man of sin,’ ‘¢/e lawless one,’ ‘ ¢e adversary,’ 
‘¢he son of perdition,’ led men to dwell on that thought rather 
than on the many wWevSoxpearoe of whom Christ Himself had 
spoken.” 

8 tov ’HAecuuévor, Aquila’s rendering of FP, adopted by 
the Jews in preference to roy Xperrév, from hi tured of the name 
Christ or Christian. Hippolytus, #42 supra, $6: ‘ The Saviour 
came into the world in tlie Circumcision, and he (Antichrist) will 
come in the same manner:” ib. $14: **As Christ springs from 
the tribe of Judah, so Antic hrist is to spring from the tribe of 
Dan.” This expectation was grounded by Hippolytus on Gen. 
bali 

9 The fourth kingdom in the prophecy of Daniel (vi il. 7, 23) was 
generally understood by early Christian writers to be the Roman 
Kmpire 3 and its dissolution was to be speedily followed by tne 
end of the world. See § 13 below; Irenwus, V. 26; and Hip- 
polytus, de supra, $$ 10, ae, 

t Dan. vil. 24: and he shall put down three kings (R.V.). 

The Jerusalem Iditor quotes as from Hip; solytus a similar 
caver ts of Antichrist ($ 23): ‘In his first steps he will be 
gentle, loveable, quiet, pious, pacific, hating injustice, detesting 
gifts, not allowing idolatry, &c.’? But the “treatise is a for: gery 
of unknown date, | apparently much later than Cyril, 

is here equivalent in 

v9 

AS 35 SG bE ee. 

siens and wonders of his magical deceit 2 
ing becuiled the Jews, as though he were the 
expeeted Christ, he shall afterwards be charac- 
sibente by all kinds of crimes of inhumanity 
and lawlessness, So as to outdo all unrighteous 
and un: co men who have gone before him ; 
displaving against all men, but especially against 
us ¢ aa istians, & spir it murderous cig most crucl, 
merciless and crafty + And aiter 
uch things for three years and six pti only, 
he shall be destroyed by the glorious second 
advent from heaven of the only-begotien Son 
of God, our Lord and Saviour Jesus, the true 
Christ, who shall slay Antichrist zv/“ (Ze breath 
of Lis mouth 3, and shall deliver him over to 
the fire of hell. 
13. Now these things we teach, notofour own 
im¥ention, but having “learned them out of the 
Civine Seriptures use din the Church, and chiely 
from the propheey of Daniel just now read ; as 
Gabriel also the Archangel interpreted it, speak- 
ing thus: Ze Jourth beast shall be a fourth 
Aingidom upon carth, which shall surpass all hins- 
G@OUS And that this kingdom is that of the 
B suuke has been the tradition of the Church's 
interpreters. Tor as the first kingdom which 
became renowned was that of the Assyrians, 
and the second, that of the Medes and Persians 
together, and after these, that of the Macedon- 
lans was the third, so the fourth kingdom now 
is that of the Romans ® Then Gabriel goes on 
to interpret, saying, 777s fen heris are ten hiss 
that shall arise ; and another hing shall rise up 
aficr them, who shail surpass tir wickedness all 
wha were before hrm, (he says, not only the 
ten, but also all who have been before him ;) 
and he shall suidue three kings » manifestly out 
of the ten former kings: but it is plain that 
by subduing three of these ten, he will be 
come the eighth king; ard he shall speak words 
agaist the Most f1igh*, A blasphemer the 

3 Iren. V. 28, $2: ene e the demons and apostate spirits are 
at its service, he through their means p forms wonders, by which 
he leads the inhabitants of the earth astray. 

4 Iren.V. 25,$ 4: ‘S He shall remove his kingdom into that city 
(Jerusalem), and shall sit in the Temple of God, leading astray 
those who worship him as if he were Christ. 

According to the genuine treatise of Hippoly us Antichrist was 
a, restore the kingdom of the Jews (De slirtichristo, § 2 to 

Nect the Jews out of every country of the Dispersion, m aed 
thers his own, as though they were his own children, and pro- 
mising to restore their ce ountry, and establish again their kingdom 
and nati: ~ in order that he may be worshi ipped i by them as God 
($ 54), and he will lead them on to persecute the saints, i.e. the 
Christians ($ 56). Compare the elaborate description of Anti- 
christ and his cruelty in Lactantius, Dee, Just. vil. eZ “pit. § 71. 

5.2 Thess, 1.8. Ch Tren, Vs 2s, § a2 Hippel. § 63. 

6 éxxAjoragonevey. Ct. Cat. iv. 35, $6, W here Cyril distin- 
iM guishes the ery ipiu res as kat ev ExK Ayre her & TALLNGLAGS cvaye- 
POTKO[BLEY from oga ey “ExxaAngtlats py avayuwoKerat. 

7 Dan. vii. 23: (R.V.) shall be diverse frou all the hing donis. 
3 Irenzeus (V. 26) identifies the fourth kingdom with ‘the 
empire which now rules.”” Hippolytus, @e sladichristo, $25: Al 

Jourth beast dreadful and terrible: it had tren teeth and claws 
of brass. And who are these but the Romans?” 
> Vani ao, 
i Da. A. 25. 
beast that was, ard is not, 
seven, and goeth into perdttion. 

Dean Church compares Rev. 
even te ts the cigh: 
See also Iren, V. 26, § 1. 

hav- } 

erpetrating | 

tudes may think 
who 1s not raised, and lame men walking, and 

: And the 
te cin ad ts of the 

ML. LECTUR 

inl 

man is and lawless, not having received the 
Ferrin from his fathers, but having usurped 
the power by means of sorcery. 

14. And who 1s this, and from what sort of 

working ? Interpret to us, O Paul. I Aose 
coming, he says, is after the working of Satan, 

| cet saa ins wer and stgas and lying wonders 1M- 
/ plying, that Satan has used him as an instrument, 
working in his own person through him ; for 
knowing that his judgment shall now no longer 
have respite, he wages war no more by his min- 
isters, as is his wont, but henceforth by himself 
more openly® And avthallsigns and (viiiy won- 
ders ; for the father of falsehood will make a 
show 3 of the works of falschood, that the multi- 
hat they seca dead man raised, 

lind men secing, when the cure has not been 

|wrought, 

5. And again he says, I} Zo opfoseth and 
evaliclh hinsel) against adl that ts sail d God, or 
that ts worshipped ; (agatist every God; Anti- 
christ forsooth will abhor the idols,) so ¢Aa/ he 
seateth hinself in the temple of God+. What 
temple then? He means, the Temple of the 
Jews which has been destroyed. For God for- 
bid that it should be the one in which we are! 
Why say we this? That we may nof be supposed 
to favour ourselves. lor if he comes to the 
‘ph as Christ, and desires to be worshipped 
by the Jews, he will make great account of the 
‘Vemple, that he may more completely beguile 
them ; making it supposed that he is the man 
of the race of David, who shall build up the 
Temple which was erected by Solomon 5. And 
Antichrist will come at the time when there 
shall not be left one stone upon another in the 
Temple of the Jews, according to the doom 
pronounced by our Saviour®; for when, cither 

i 2 Thess. il. 9. Lactantius (A.b. 300 e77¢.), Diz. Just. vii. 17: 
‘That king. ... will also be a prophet of lies; and he will con- 
stitute and call himself God, and will order himself to be wor- 
pped as the Son of God; and power will be given him to do 
A nt and w onders, by the sight of which he may entice men to 
adore bien. ef. org Ixxi. 

2 Sid. Tren. fer. ¥. aby a (R.W.C.). The passage is 
quoted by Eusebius (Zee fist, iv. 18), from a lost work of 
Justin M. Against pease ‘Justin well said that before th 
coming of the Lord Satan never dared to blas pheine God, as ni t 
yet knowing his own condemnation, because it was stated by the 
prophets in “parables and allegories, But after our L ord” s advent 
having learnt plainly from His words and those of the Apostles 
that everlasting fire is prepared for him, . he by means of such 
men as these blasphemes the Lord w ho brings the judgment upon 
him, as being already condemned.” 

S. Cyril seems to expect that Antichrist will be an incarnation 
of Satan, as did Hippolytus (de Autichr. § 6): “ The Saviour 
appeared in the form of man, and he too will come in the furm of 
4 ania,” 

3 pavramoKomel. See aboy -e, § 10, note 9, and the equivalent 
phrase in $17: onuetwy Kat TEepatwv pavragias cdctkvvov. 

42 Diess. i. 4, 

5 See § 12, notes 3, 4, and Hippolytus, 2b2 supra: “The 
Saviour raised up and skewed His holy flesh like a temple ; and 
he will raise a temple of stone in Jerus: nlems le eGyesl awe testis 
neers Julian’s attempt to rebuild the Jewish Temple” (R.W.C.). 

Matt. xxiv. 2. Cyril refers the whole prophecy to the tim 
of C ee s second coming at the end of the world, not regarding 
the destruction of Jerus: uem and its Temple by ‘Titus as face 
filling any part of the prediction. 

shi 

2 
23. 

uh: 

deeay of time, or demolition ensuing on pretence 
of new buildings, or from any other causes, shall 
have overthrown all the stones, I mean not 

merely of the outer circuit, but ofthe innershrinc, 

also, where the Cherubim were, then shall he 

come with all sfens and ing wonders, exalting | 
himself against all idols ; at first indeed making tee and Gea Mays 7, 

Se aes 10g 
by Him that liveth for ever that tt shall be for 
a time, and times, and half a tines. And some 
peradventure have referred what follows also to 
this; namely, @ ¢housand two hundred and ninety 
days®,; and this, Blessed ts he that endurcth 
and cometh to the thousand three hundred and 
For this cause we must 

a pretence of benevolence, but afterwards dis-, hide ourselves and flee ; for perhaps we shall 
playing his relentless temper, and that chiefly ee have gone or er the etties of Isract, till the Son 

against the Saints of God. lor he says, 
beheld, and the same horn made war with the 
saints7 ; and again elsewhere, ‘here shall be a 
time of trouble, such as never was since there was 
a nation upon earth, even to that same time®, 
Dreadful is that beast, a mighty dragon, un- 
conquerable by man, ready to devour; con- 
cerning whom though we have more things to 
speak out of the divine Scriptures, yet we will 
content ourselves at present with thus much, in 
order to keep within compass. 

16. Vor this cause the Lord knowing the great- 
ness of the adversary grants indulgence to the 
godly, saying, Zhen let them which be in Judwa 
fice to the mountains ?, But if any man is con- 
scious that he is very stout-hearted, to en- 
counter Satan, let him stand (for I do not 
despair of the Church’s nerves), and let him 
say, IVho shall separate us from the love of 
Christ and the rest*? But, let those of us 
who are fearful provide for our own safety ; 
and those who are of a good courage, stand 
fast: for then shall be great tribulation, such as 
hath not been from the beginning of the world 
wnitl now, no, nor ever shallbe?. But thanks be 
to God who hath confined the greatness of 
that tribulation to a few days; for He says, 
But for the elec?s sake those days shall be 
shortened 3; and Antichrist shall reign for three 
years and a half only. We speak not from 
apocryphal books, but from Daniel; for he 
says, And they shall be given tnto his hand until 
a time and times and half a time+. A tine 
is the one year in which his coming shall for 
a while have increase ; and ¢Ae “mes are the 
remaining two years of iniquity, making up 
the sum of the three years; and ¢le half a 
time is the six months, And again in another 
place Daniel says the same thing, And he sware 

7 Dan. vii. 21. Here again Cyril follows Hippolytus, § 25: 

ee under this (horn) was si; gniticd none other than Antichrist. 
el Dis, Sabha ole 9 Matt. xxiv. 16. t Rom. viil. 35. 
2 Matt. xxiv. 21. 3 ID, ooo, 

4 Dan. vil. 25. By “apocryphal” books Cyril probably means 
all suchas were not allowed to be read in the public services 
of the Church: see Cat. iv. 33. note 3; and Bp. Westcott’s note 
on the various meanings of “the word amdéxpudos, Hist. of the 
Gao ie Po tL, 6. ts That the Apocalypse of St. John is included 
under this term by Cyril, appears probable from the following 
reasons suggested by the Benedictine Editor. (a) Tt is not men- 
tioned in the lst of the Canonical Scriptures in iv. 36. (2) The 
earlier writers whom Cyril follows in this Lecture, Irenaeus, fler. 
V., 26, §1, and Hippolytus, De Alxtichristo, § 34, combine the 
testimony of the Apocalypse with that of Daniel. ‘The omission 
in Cyril therefore cannot have been accidental. 

L of Dan be come 

17. Who rae is the blessed man, that shall 
at that time devoutly witness for Christ? Tor 
I say that the Martyrs of that time excel all 
martyrs. For the Martyrs hitherto have 
wrestled with men only; but in the time of 
Antichrist they shall do battle with Satan in 
his own person®. And former persecuting kings 
only put to death; they did not pretend to 
raise the dead, nor did they make false shows ' 
of signs and wonders. But in his time there 
shall be the evil inducement both of fear and 
of deceit, so that if it be possible the very 
elect shall be deceived". Vet it never enter 
into the heart of any then alive to ask, “ What 
did Christ more? For by what power does 
this man work these things? Were it not 
God's will, He would not have allowed 
them.” The Apostle warns thee, and says 
beforehand, And for this cause God shall 
send them a working of error ; (send, that 1s, 
shall allow to happens) not that they might 
make excuse, but ‘hat they might be condemned *. 
Wherefore? Zzey, he says, who belreved not 
the truth, that is, the true Christ, év/ had 
pleasure tn unrighteousness, that is,in Antichrist. 
But as in the persecutions which happen from 
time to time, so also then God will permit 
these things, not because He wants power to 
hinder them, but because according to His 
wont He will through patience crown [lis 
own champions like as He did His Prophets 
and Apostles; to the end that having toiled 
for a little while they may inherit the eternal 
kingdom of heaven, according to that which 
Daniel says, And at that time thy people shall 
be delivered, every one that shall be found written 
in the book (manifestly, the book of life); avd 
many of them that sleep tn the dist of the carth 
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to 
shame and everlasting contempt, and they that 
be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firma- 
ment; and of the many righteous, as the stars 
Sor ever and ever. 

Satie x11. 7. Cul ba ge Tr, pag Orig eee 
Ss Mattamieg, i, 
9 avtompotwrws. See above, $14, note 2. Some MSS. read 
avrTurpocwnws, ‘face to face,” as in xil. 32, ar TUTpOTwTOS. 

10 See above, § r4, note a Natt eh ea 

bee Diresstetiwn thre tC iS That they all might be Judged. 
Gyrilthas Kataxpbact. 

3 Dan. xii. 1, 2: (R.V.) they that turn many to righteousne yp 
Cyril follows the rendering of the Septuagint, amo tay Ecace: 

Tov ToAA@Y, Which gives no proper construction, 

1 Ke) 

18. Guard thyself then, O man; thou hast 
the signs of Antichrist ; and remember them 
not only thyself, but impart them also frecly 
to all. If thou hast a child according to the 
flesh, admonish him of this now ; 1f thou hast 
begotten one through catechizing 4, put him 
also on his guard, lest he receive the false one 
as the True. For the warstery of tniguily doth 
already works, | fear these wars of the nations”; 
I fear the schisms of the Churches; 1 fear the 
mutual hatred of the brethren. But enough on 
this subject ; only God forbid that it should be 
fulfilled in our days; nevertheless, Iet us be 
on our guard, And thus much concerning 
Antichrist, 

19. But let us wait and look for the Lord’s 
coming upon the clouds from heaven. ‘Then 
shall Angelic trumpets sound; ¢he dead tn 
Christ shall rise first7,—-the godly persons who 
are alive shall be caught up in the clouds, re- 
eciving as the reward of their labours more than 
human honour, inasmuch as theirs was a more 
than human strife ; according as the Apostle 
Paul writes, saying, Zor the Lord [Himself shall 
descend from heaven with a shout, with the votce 
of the Archangel, and with the trump of God: 
and the dead tn Christ shall rise first. Then 
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord 
in the air; and so shall we ever be with the 
Lora®, 

20. This coming of the Lord, and the end 
of the world, were known to the Preacher; 
who says, Rejoice, O young man, tn thy youth, 
and the rest9; Zherefore remove anger from 
thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh ; 
.. . and remember thy Creator... or ever the 
evil days come?,.... or ever the sun, and the 
light, and the moon, and the stars be darkened 3, 

.. and they that look out of the windows be 
darkened’+; (signifying the faculty of sight;) 
or ever the silver cord be loosed ; (meaning the 
assemblage of the stars, for their appearance 
is like silver ;) and the flower of sold be broken ; 
(thus veiling the mention of the golden sun ; 
for the camomile is a well-known plant, having 
many ray-like leaves shooting out round it ;) 

4 Compare 1 Cor, iv. 15: / degat you through the gospel. Clem. 
Alex. Strom. il. Co 153 T@ bta THS GANOods KaTnXNTEWS YerYATaYTL 
KetTat Tes pL Os. 5-2 ‘Chess. it. 9. 

© See above, §§ 6, 7. 7 « Chess, iv. 16. 8 Ib. wu. 16, 17. 

9 Eccles. xi. 9. The Preacher's description of old age and 
death is interpreted by Cyril of the end of the world, as it had 
been a century before by Gregory ‘Thaumaturgus, in his para- 
phrase of the book. 

t Ib, vw 10: (R.V.) sorrow. Marg. Or, vevation, Or, Arovo- 
i 3 

cation. S Thy Sit, a ees, 
4 Tho mi: 3. 
5 Ib. v.6. According to the usual interpretation death is here 

represented by the breaking of a chain and the lamp which hangs 
from it. Cf. Delitzsch, and Speaker's Commentary, in loc. for 
other interpretations. 

70 avOén.ov Tov xpvorov (Sept.), by which Cyril understood 
‘camomile’ (av@eucs), mere probably meant a pattern of flowers 
embossed on the vessel of gold: wd. Xenoph. Anal, V. 4, § 32: 
catrypcvous avOcuca, damasked with /ewers.” 

row, yea, they shall look away from the height, and 
terrors shall be in the way’. What shall they 
see? Then shall they sce the Son of man coming 
on the clouds of heaven ; and they shall mourn 
tribe by tribe7?, And what shall come to pass 
when the Lord is come?) Zhe almond tree shalt 
blossom, and the grasshopper shall grow heavy, 
and the caper-berry shall be scattered abroad ., 
And as the interpreters say, the blossoming 
almond signifies the departure of winter ; and 
our bodies shall then after the winter blossom 
with a heavenly flower9, And the grasshopper 
shall vrow in substance (that means the winged 
soul clothing itself with the body?,) and /He 
caper-berry shall be scattered abroad (that is, 
the transeressors who are like thorns shall 
be scattered *). 

21. Thou seest how they all foretell the 
coming of the Lord. Thou seest how they 
know ¢he wotce of the sparrow. Vetus know what 
sort of voice this is. Jur the Lord Himself 
shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of 
God 3. The Archangel shall make proclamation 
and say toall, Arise to meet the Lord +. And fear- 
ful will be that descent of our Master. David 
says, God shall manifestly come, even our God, 
and shall not keep silence; afire shall burn before 
Him,and a fierce tempest round about Lim, and 
the restS. ‘The Son of Man shall come to the 
Father, according to the Scripture which was 
just now read, ox the clouds of heaven, drawn 
by a stream of fire®, which is to make trial of 
men. ‘Then if any man’s works are of gold, 
he shall be made brighter ; if any man’s course 
of life be like stubble, and unsubstantial, it 
shall be burnt up by the fire”, And the Father 
shall sit, having His garment while as snow, 
and the hair of His head like pure wool*. But 
this is spoken after the manner of men; where- 
fore? Because He is the King of those who 

Cyril means rightly that the aged shrink from 

6 Eccles. xii. 5. I 
For the 

a giddy height, and from imaginary dangers of the road. 
voice of the sparrow, sec below, § 21, note 4. 
7 Matt. xxiv. 30? Zech. xil. 12% 8 Eccles. xii. 5. 

9 Dr. Thomson (7he Land and the Book, p. 319,) says 
of the almond tree, “It is the type of old age, whose hair is 
white” (Speaker's Commentary). 

1 The step, once as active as a grasshopper, or locust, shall 
grow heavy and slow. For other interpretations see Delitzsch. 

2 Thecaper-berry (xanmapts) shall fail, i.e. no longer stimulate 
appetite. But dcacxedacOyoerar (Sept. Cyril) means that the old 
man shall be like a caper-berry which when fully ripe bursts 
its husks and scatters its seeds: so R.V. (Margin); 7he cafer- 
berry shall burst. Greg. ‘Thaumat. Metaphr. Eccles. ‘The 
transgressors are cast out of the way, like a black and despicable 
caper-plant.”” 3 r Thess, ii. 26; 

4 Compare the spurious Afocalypse of John: “And at the 
voice of the bird every plant shall arise; that is, At the voice 
of the Archangel all the human race shall arise’”’ (English Trs. 
Ante-Nic. Libr. p. 496). According to the Talmud the meaning 
is, * Even a bird awakes him ” (Delitzsch). 

S Peels a Dan. vii. 13, 10. 

7 1 Cor. iii. 12, 13. On avumoararor, see Index. On Soxtnac- 
rekov, compare The Teaching of the Apostles, $16: ‘* Vhen all 
created mankind shall come to the fire of testing (Soxtactas), and 
many shall be offended and perish.” & Dan. vii. 9. 

pee ke 

have not been defiled with sins ; 
L will make your sins 
cvoul 9, 
sins, or of sinlessness. itself. 
who shall come from heaven on the clouds, 1s 
Ile who ascended on the clouds; for 
Himself hath said, 
Man coming on the clouds of heaven, 
and greal glory', 

22, But what is the sign of His coming? 
lest a hostile power dare to counterfeit it. 
And then shall appear, He says, the sign of the 
Son of Man in heaven ?. Now Christ’s own true 
sign 1s the Cross ; a sign of a luminous Cross 
shall go before the King 3, plainly declaring 
Him who was formerly crucified: that the Jews 
who before pierced fim and plotted against 
Him, when they see it, may mourn tribe by 
tribe +, saying, This is He who was buffeted, 
this is He whose face they spat on, this is 
He whom oe bound with chains, this is He 
whom of old they crucified, and set at nought 5. 
Whither, they will say, s shall we flee from the 
face of ‘Thy wrath?” But the Angel hosts 
shall encompass them, so that they shall not 
be able to flee anywhere. The sign of the 
Cross shall be a terror to His foes; but joy to 
His friends who have believed in Him, or 
preached Him, or suffered for His sake. Who 
then is the happy man, who shall then be 
found a friend of Christ? That King, so great 
and glorious, attended by the Angel-guards, 
the partner of the Father’s throne, will not 
despise His own servants. For that His Elect 
may not be confused with His foes, /7e shall send 
forth His Angels with a great trumpet, and they 
shallgather together Fis elect from the fourwinds®. 
Ife despised not Lot, who was but one; how 
then shall He despise many righteous? Come, 
ye blessed of My Father7, will He say to them 
who shall then ride on chariots of clouds, and 
be assembled by Angels. 

23. But some one present will say, I am 
a poor man,” or again, ‘I shall perhaps be 
foutid at. that time sick in-bed;” or, “I 
am but a woman, and I shall be taken at 
the mill: shall we then be despised?” Be of 

Do Tee 12 3s t Matt. xxiv. go. 2 Ib. 

3 Cat. xili. 41. In the letter to Constantius, three or four years 
later than this Lecture, Cyril treats the appearance at that time of 
a luminous Cross in the sky as a fulfilment of Matt. xxiv. 30: but 
he there adds (4p. ad Constantium, § 6) that our Lord’s pre- 
diction ‘was both fulfil led at that present time, and shall again 
be fulfilled more largely.” On the opinion that ‘the sign of 
the Son of Man in heaven” should be the Cross, see Suicer, 
Thesaurus, Sravpos. It is not improbable that the “earliest trace 
of this interpretation is found in 7he Yveaching of the Apostles, 
S62 shen she all appear the signs of the ‘Truth: the first the 
sign of a (cross) spreading out (exmerdorees) i in heaven.’ 

Me TCE. soll, ED 

5 Cf. Barnab. Zfist. c. vii.: “For they shall see Him in that 
day wearing the long searlet robe about His flesh, and shall say, 
Is not this He, whem once we crucified, and set at nought, and 
spat upon (a. and pierced, and mocked)?’ 

© Matt. xxiv. 31, FLORES, 

jor, He says, | good courage, 
while as snow, aud as) specter of persons ; Fle will not Judge according 
which is an emblem of forgiveness of /0 @ man’s 
But the Lord) Ais speech ®, 

Hey’ 
And they shall see the Son of, 

is written, 
lone shall be taken, and the other left, 

RIE EVs 

ualeall 

O man; the Judge is no re- 

appearance, nor reprove according to 

Ie honours not the learned before 
the simple, nor the rich before the needy. 
hough thou be in the field, the Angels shall 
take thee; think not that He will take the 

wilh power landowners, and Ivave thee the husbandman. 

Vhough thou be a slave, ee thou be poor, 
be not any whit distressed ; He who took the 
Jorm of a servant? es not servants. 
Though thou be lying sick in bed, yet it 
Then shall tivo be tn one bed; the 
‘Though 
thou be of compulsion put to grind, whether 
thou be man or woman?; though thou be in 
fettcrs 3, and sit beside the mill, yet He zo 
by Elis might bringeth out them that are bound, 
will not overlook thee. He who brought forth 
Joseph out of slavery and prison to a kingdom, 
shall redeem thee also from thy afflictions into 
the kingdom ofheaven. Only be of good cheer, 
only work, only strive earnestly; for nothing 
shall be lost. Every prayer of thine, every Psalm 
thou singest is recorded; every alms-deed, 
every fast is recorded; every marriage duly 
observed is recorded; continence’ kept for 
God’s sake is recorded; but the first crowns 
in the records are those of virginity and purity; 
and thou shalt shine as an Angel. But as 
thou hast gladly listened to the good things, so 
listen again without shrinking to the contrary. 
Iivery covetous deed of thine is recorded ; 
thine every act of fornication is recorded, 
thine every false oath is recorded, every blas- 
phemy, and sorcery, and theft, and murder. 
All these things are henceforth to be recorded, 
if thou do the same now after having been 
baptized ; for thy former deeds are blotted out. 

24. Ivhen the Son of Man, He says, shall 
come in Sis glory, and all the Angels with 
Llim®, Behold, O man, before what multitudes 
thou shalt come to judgment, Every race of 
mankind will then be present. Reckon, there- 
fore, how many are the Roman nation; reckon 
how many the barbarian tribes now living, 
and how many have diced within the last 
hundred years; reckon how many nations 
have been buried during the last thousand 
years; reckon all from Adam to this day. 
Great indeed is the multitude; but yet it is 

8 Is. xi. 3: (R.V.) He shall not judge after the sight of his 
eyes, nor reprove After the hearing of lis ears. 

9 Trdevaeene ya! t Luke xvil. 34. % Thetges 

The Jerusalem MS, (A) alone has the true reading médas, 
Miaes is confirmed by memednuwévovs in the quotation following 
instead of watéas, which is quite inz appropriate, and evidently 
an itacism, 4 TEx, xi. 

5 ’Eyxpatea. “Id est viduitas”’ (Ben. Ed.). This special 
reference of the word to w ridowhood i is to some extent confirmed hy 
1 Cor. vil. gi et 68 ovK éyxparevorTat, and is rendered highly 
probable by Cyril's separate mention of marriage and virginity. 

NEAtty SVG SE 

112 CATRCH REG A Ts shat Gia, 

little. for the Angels are many more. “They are 
the ninety and ntie sheep, but mankind is the 
sinvle eve7, Vor according to the extent of uni- 
versal space, must we reckon the number of its 

inhabitants. ‘The whole earth is but as a point | 

in the midst of the one heaven, and yet contains 
so great a multitude: what a multitude must 
the heaven which encircles it contain? And 
must not the heaven of heavens contain un- 
imaginable numbers ®? And it is written, 7/ov- 
sand thousands ministered unto Hin, and ten 
thousand times ten thousand stood before fim; 
not that the multitude is only so great, but be- 
cause the Prophet could not express more than 
these. So there will be present at the judg- 
ment in that dav, God, the lather of all, Jesus 
Christ being seated with Him, and the Holy 
Ghost present with Them; and an angcl’s 
trumpet shall summon us all to bring our deeds 
with us. Ought we not then from this time 
forth to be sore troubled? ‘Think it not a 
slight doom, O man, even apart from punish- 
ment, to be condemned in the presence of so 
many. Shall we not choose rather to die 
many deaths, than be condemned by friends ? 
25. Let us dread then, brethren, lest God 
condemn us; who necds not examination or 
proofs, to condemn. Say not, In the night I 
committed fornication, or wrought sorcery, or 
did any other thing, and there was no man by. 
Out of thine own conscience shalt thou be 
judged, thy shoughis the meanwhile accusing or 

| 

and Fle shall separate them one from another, as 
ithe shepherd divideih his sheep from the goats. 
‘How does the shepherd make the separation ? 
'Does he examine out of a book which is a 
sheep and which a goat? or does he distinguish 
| by their evident marks? Does not the wool show 
‘the sheep, and the hairy and rough skin the 
goat? In like manner, if thou hast been just 
snow cleansed from thy sins, thy deeds shall be 
henceforth as pure wool; and thy robe shall 
remain unstained, and thou shalt ever say, Z 
have put off my coat, how shall [ put iten®? By 
‘thy vesture shalt thou be known for a sheep. 
But if thou be found hairy, hke Esau, who was 
rough with hair, and wicked in mind, who for 
food lost his birthright and sold his privilege, 
thou shalt be one of those on the left hand. 
But God forbid that any here present shonld 
be cast out from grace, or for evil deeds be 
found among the ranks of the sinners on the 
left hand! 

26. Terrible in good truth is the judgment, 
and terrible the things announced. ‘The king- 
dom of heaven is set before us, and everlasting 
fire is prepared. How then, some one will say, 
are we to escape the fire? And how to enter 
into the kingdom ? Jwas an hungred, He says, 
and ye gave Me meat. Learn hence the way; 
there is here no need of allegory, but to fulfil 
what is said. Zzasan hungred, and ye gave Me 
meat; Iwas thirsty,and ye gave Me drink; L 
was a stranger, and ye took Me in; naked, and 

else excustag, tn the day when God shall judge the Je clothed Me; I was sick, and ye visited Mey L 

secrets of mien*, 
the Judge will force thee to speak the truth ; 
or rather, even though thou speak not, it will 
convict thee. For thou shalt rise clothed with 
thine own sins, or else with thy righteous deeds, 
And this has the Judge Himself declared, 
—for it is Christ who judges—/or neither doth 
the fisther judge any man, but he hath given 
all judgement unto the Son?, not divesting Him- 
self of His power, but judging through the Son; 
the Son therefore judgeth by the will3 of the 
Tather ; for the wills of the Father and of the 
Son are not different, but one and the same. 
What then says the Judge, as to whether thou 
shalt bear thy works, or no? Axd before Lim 
shall they gather all nations+ ; (for in the presence 
of Christ every hnee must bow, of things in heaven, 
and things tn earth, and things under the earth 5 -) 

7 Matty xvii. sot Like xv. 4. -Ambrose, Zapas, mt Dac. VII; 
210: ‘Rich is that shepherd of whose flock we are but the 
one hundredth part. Of Angels and Archangels, of Dominions, 
Powers, Thrones, and others He hath countless flocks, whom He 
hath left upon the mountains.” Cf. Gregor. Nyss. Contra Eunon. 
7. ate 

® There is much variation in the reading and punctuation 
of this passage. I have fullowed the text adopted by the Jeru- 
salem IE:ditor with Codd. A. Roe. Casaub. and Grodecgq, in pre- 

ference to the Benedictine text, with which the Editor himself 

9 Dan=-v11. 20: 
2 John v, 22. 
4 Natt. sexveg 25 

is dissatisfied. 
RPO, srs hee oO. 

3 wevpar.. “Gate xi, 22: gd) GA LGN Eie b Plas oth 

The terrible countenance of was tz prison, and ye cane unto die 7, “chese 

‘things if thou do, thou shalt reign together 
with Him; but if thou do them not, thou shalt 
‘be condemned. At once then begin to do 
these works, and abide in the faith; lest, hke 
the foolish virgins, tarrying to buy oil, thou be 
shut out. Be not confident because thou merely 
possessest the lamp, but constantly keep it 
burning. Let the light of thy good works 
shine before men 8, and let not Christ be blas- 
-phemed on thy account. Wear thou a gar- 
‘ment of incorruption9, resplendent in good 
works; and whatever matter thou receivest 
from God to administer as a steward, administer 
profitably. Hast thou been put in trust with 
riches ? Dispense them well. Hast thou been 
entrusted with the word of teaching? Bea 
good steward thereof. Canst thou attach the 
souls of the hearerst'? Do this diligently. 

6 Cant. V. 3. Compare Cat. iii. 73 xx. (Mystag. ii.) 2. 

7 Matt. xxve 36. 8 Matt. v. 16. 

9 The prayer for the Catechumens in the Afostolic Consti- 
fudions, viii. 6, contains a petition that God would ‘‘ vouchsafe 
to them the laver of regeneration, and the garment of incorruption, 
| Which is the true life.” : : 
| ! rpooOctvar. Cf. Acts ii. 412 mpoceréOnoav. According to 
;some MSS. the sentence would run thus: ‘‘Hast thou been 
entrusted with the word of teaching? Bea good steward of thy 
hearers’ souls. Hast thou power to rule (rpoorqvac)? Do this 
diligently.” 

ie 

PCR Te 

are many doors of good stewardship. 
let none of us be condemned and cast 
out; that we may with boldness meet Christ 
the Everlasting King, who reigns for ever. 
For He doth reign for ever, who shall be| 
judee of quick and dead, because for quick and | 
dead THe died. And as Paul says, Zor to /his 
ead Christ both died and lived again, that [le 
aa be Lord both of the dead alt living : 

And shouldest thou ever hear any say 
a the kingdom of Christ shall have an end, 
abhor the heresy; it is another head of the 
dragen, lately sprung up in Galatia. A certain 
one has dared to affirm, that after the end of 
the world Christ shall rcign no longer; he has 
also dared to say, that the Word having come 
forth from the Father shall be again a bsorbed 
into the lather, and shall be no more +; utter- 
ing such blasphemies to his own perdition. 
lor he has not listened to the Lord, saying, 
The Soi abideth for ever 5. He has not listened 
to Gabriel, saying, And He shall reign over 
the house of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom 
there shall be no end®, Consider this text. 
Heretics of this day teach in disparagement of 
Christ, while Gabriel the Archangel taught the 
eternal abiding of the Saviour; whom then 
wilt thou rather beheve ? wilt thou not rather 
give credence to Gabriel? Listen to the testi- 
mony of Daniel in the text? ; Zsaw ca a viston 
of the night, and behold, one like the Son of Man 
came with the clouds of heaven, and canie to the 
Ancient of days .. And to Him was given 
the honour, and the king- 

‘There 
Only 

° 

and the dominion, 

2 Rom. xiv. 

3 Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyra, and his pupil Photinus, are 
anathematized in the Creed called Maxpdéartyos as holding that 
Christ first became ** Son of God when He took our flesh from the 
Virgin. . For they will have it that then Christ began His 
Kins gdom, and that it will have an end after the consummation 
of ail and the judgment. Such are the disciples of Marcellus and 
Scotinus of Galatian Ancyra, &c.” See New man on Athanasius, 
de Synodis, § 26, (5), notes @ and & Compare the description 
of Marcellus in the Letter of the Oriental B ache who had with- 
drawn from the Council of Sardica to Philippopolis (a.p. 344). 
‘There has arisen in our days a certain Marcellus of Galatia, 
the most execrable pest of all heretics, who with sacrilegious mind, 
and impious mouth, and wicked argument seeks to set bounds to 
the perpetual, etern: al, and timcless kingdom of our Lord Christ, 
saying that He began to reign four hundred years since, and 
shall end at the dissolution of the present world” (Hilar. Pictav. 
Ex Opere JTist. Fragm. 1. ), 

4 “The person meant by Cyril, though he withholds the name, 
is Marcellus of Ancyra; who having written a book against the 
Arian Sophist Asterius to explain the Apostle’s statement concern- 
ing the subjection of the Son to the Father, was thought to be 
renewing the heresy of Paul of Samosata. On this account he was 
reproved by the Bishops at the. Council of Jertsalem, a.p,-995, for 
holding false opinions, and being ordered to recant his OpEDIOnS 
promised to burn his book. Afterwards he applied to Constantine, 
by whom he was remitted to the Council ot Constantinople, a.p. 
336, and deposed by the Bishops. As however he was acquitted by 

the Councils of Rome, A.D. 342, and of Sardica, A.D. 347, it became 
a matter of di pute w hether he was really hetetios als . From the 
fragments of his bocks transcribed by Eusebius, you. may possibly 
acquit him cf the Sabellian heresy and the confusion of ie 
Father and the Son, but certainly not of the heresy concerning 
the end of Christ’s kingdom, and the abandonment by the Word 
of the human nature which He assumed for our sake ; so express 
are his words recorded by Eusebius in the bezinning of the 2nd 

Book Contra Marcellum, pp. 50, ji (Ben. Ed.) Gh, ihe 
Chr. Biogr. “ Wusebius of Caesarea,” p. 3413 and note 3 on § 9 

5 John Vile 25: 

above. * 
7 THY Tapougar. 

GoTukents 283 

VOL, Vali 

XV. es 
| 
idom: and all peoples, tribes, and languages shall 
serve Flim, SFlis dominion 1s an denies tine 

| dominion, which shall not fass axay, and Lfts 
kingdom shall not be destroyed*®. These things 
rather hold fast these things believe, and cast 
away from thee the words of heresy ; for thou 
hast heard most plainly of the endless king- 
dom of Christ. 

The like doctrine thou has also in the 
interpretation of the Stove, which «a> cut cut of 
a mountain without hands, which is Christ 
according to the fresh? ; And Ilis kingdom shalt 
not be left to another pe ople. David also says in 
one place, Zhy throne, O God, ts for ever and 
ever? ; and in another place, Zou, Lord, in 
the begtnning hast laid the foundations of tie 

earth, &c, they shall perish, but Thou re- 
matnest, es but Thou art the same, and 

Thy years shall not fail? > words which Paul 
has interpreted of the Son 3 

29. And wouldest thou know how they who 
teach the contrary ran into such madness? 
They read wrongly that good word of the 
Apostle, For Fle must reign, UM Fe hath put all 
enemies under [fis feet+, and they say, when 
His enemies shall have been put under His 
feet, He shall cease to reign, wrongly and 
foolishly alleging this. Tor He who is king 
before He has subdued His enemies, how shall 
He not the rather be king, after He has gotten 
the mastery over them. 

30. ‘They have also dared to say that the 
Scripture, [Phen all things shall be subjected 
unio Flim, then shall the Son also Flimself be 
subjected unto [lim that subjected all things unto 
/fim 5,—that this Scripture shews that the Son 
also shall be absorbed into the Father. Shall 
ye then, O most impious of all men, ye the 
creatures of Christ, continue ? and sh ral Christ 
perish, by whom both you and all things were 
made? Such a word is blasphemous. But 
further, how shall all things be made subject 
unto Him? By perishing, or by abiding? 
Shall then the other things, when subject to 
the Son, abide, and shall the Son, when sub- 
ject to the Father, not abide? For He shall 
be subjected, not because He shall then begin 
to do the Father’s will (for from eternity He 
doth always those things that please Flim), but 
because, then as before, He obeys the lather, 
yielding, not a forced obedience, but a seif- 
chosen accordance; for He is not a servant, 
that He should be subjected by force, but a 

Son, that He should comply of His free choice 
and natural love 

8 8 Dan. walls BS PA. 9 Ib. 453 Ree its 5 taP stn lye 6 

3 Fabs 1, 1O— 12, Ae Core xVes 28. 

Theodoret. Cosme mat tie LOPTSI A ha Or 
al cee cee This pass: Wwe the followers of Arius and unomius carry 
semen on their tongue, think ing in this” way to disparage the 

| dignity of the Only-begotten, “SLO TWA, 30.5 

I 

ur 

114 Cui eA ee ee 
31. But let us examine them ; 

meaning of “until” or “as longas?” For with 
the very phrase will I close with 

try to overthrow their error. 
S1is enemies under This feel, 

set bounds to the eternal kingdoin of Christ, 
and to bring to an end, as far as words go, 
His never-ending sovereignty, come then, 
us read the like expressions in the Apostle : 
Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam tll 
Afoses7, Did men then die up to that time, 
and did none die any more after Moses, or 
after the Law has there been no more death 
among men? Well then, thou seest that the 
word *funto” is not to limit time; but that 
Paul rather signified this,—*‘* And yet, though 
Moses was a righteous and wonderful man, 
nevertheless the doom of death, which was ut- 
tered against Adam, reached even unto him, and 
them that came after him; and this, though 
they had not committed the like sins as Adam, 
by his disobedience in eating of the tree.” 

32. ‘Take again another similar text. Aor wi- 
fil this day... when Moses ts read, a vail lieth 
upon thelr heart®, Does until this day mean 
only “until Paul?” Is it not wnt? this day 
present, and even to the end? And if Paul 
say to the Corinthians, /or we came even 
as far as unio you tr preaching the Gospel of 
Christ, having hope when your faith increases 
to preach the Gospel in the regions beyond you 9, 
thou seest manifestly that as far as implies not 
the end, but has something following it. In 

7 Rom. v. 14. “aype from 
pakpos” (LL. and Sc +). It is not 
distinction in translation: cf, Lobeck. 
De ldiot. Gr. p. 419. 

8. 2Cor. iii. 14, 15. 

akpos, as péype from LAKOS, 

Phrynichus, p. 14; Viger, 

9 Tb, x. 14, 38, x6. 

shew that He Him- ;we inay Aap speak 
self shall have an end, A have presumed to, 

let | 

Lae Pel. 

what is the, what sense then shouldest thou remember that 

/Seripture, “ill Ile hath put all enemies under 

them, and) //is eee? @ According as Paul says in another 
Since they have] place, Ard exhort each other daily, while it ts 
dared to say that the ee til fle hath pit called to- “ity * 

PF] 

- meaning, “continually.” Foras 
of the “bevinning of the 
days” of Christ, so neither suffer thou that 
any s nould ever speak of the end of His 
kingdom. For it is written, /Z’s Adnedom ty an 
everlasting kingdoms, 

33. And though I have many more testimonies 
out of the divine Scriptures, concerning the king- 
dom of Christ which has no end for ever, I will be 
content at present with those above mentioned, 
because the day is far spent. But thou,O hearer, 
worship only Him as thy King, and flee all 
heretical error, And if the grace of God per- 
mit us, the remaining Articles also of the Faith 
shall be in good time declared to you. And 
may the God of the whole world keep you allin 
safety, bearing in mind the signs of the end, 
and remaining unsubdued by Antichrist. Thou 
hast received the tokens of the Deceiver who 
is to come; thou hast received the proofs of 
the true Christ, who shall openly come down 
from heaven. Flee therefore the one, the I’alse 
one; and look for the other, the True. Thou 
hast learnt the way, how in the judgment thou 
mayest be found among those on the right 
hand; guard ¢hat which ts committed to thee 
concerning Christ, and be conspicuous in good 
works, that thou mayest stand with a good 
‘confidence before the Judge, and inherit the 
kingdom of heaven:—Through whom, and 
with whom, be glory to God ‘with the Holy 
Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen. 

always possible to mark this | 

2 Heb, tit,.73. 3 Dan Vs 5 

4 1 ‘Lim. vi. 20, 

t x Cor, 2v.-25. 45 27% 

Ce LUA AV I, 

Ox THE ArTIcLE, AND IN ONE Horny Gniosr, THE COMFORTER, WITCH SPAKE 

IN THE PROPHETS. 

t CORINTHIANS Xli. 

Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, [would not have you tenorant. .., 

Ly au 

Now there 

are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, Ce. 

I, SPIRITUAL in truth is the grace we need, in 
order to discourse concerning the Holy Spirit ; 
not that we may speak what is worthy of Him, 
for this is impossible, but that by speaking the 
words of the divine Scriptures, we may run our 
course without danger. Fora truly fearful thing 
is written in the Gospels,where Christ has plainly 
said, I] hosoever shall speak a word against the 
Lloly Ghost, tt shall not be forgiven him, neither 
tn thts world, nor tn that which is to come. 
And there is often fear, lest a man should 
receive this condemnation, through speaking 
what he ought not concerning Him, either from 
ignorance, or from supposed reverence. ‘The 
Judge of quick and dead, Jesus Christ, de- 
clared that he hath no forgiveness ; if therefore 
any man offend, what hope has he? 

2. It must therefore belong to Jesus Christ’s 
grace itself to grant both to us to speak 
without deficiency, and to you to hear with 
discretion ; for discretion is needful not to 
them only who speak, but also to them that 
hear, lest they hear one thing, and misconceive 
another in their mind. Let us then speak 
concerning the Holy Ghost nothing but what 
is written; and whatsoever is not written, let 
us not busy ourselves about it. The Holy 
Ghost Himself spake the Scriptures; He has 
also spoken concerning Himself as much as 
He pleased, or as much as we could reccive. 
I.et us therefore speak those things which He 
has said; for whatsoever He has not said, we 
dare not say. 

3. ‘There is One Only Holy Ghost, the 
Comforter; and as there is One God the 
Father, and no second Father ;—and as there 
is One Only-begotten Son and Word of God, 
who hath no brother ;—so is there One Only 

PMAtt. Rig 2s 
I 

Holy Ghost, and no second spirit equal in 
jhonour to Him. Now the Holy Ghost is a 
Power most mighty, a Being divine and 
unsearchable; for He is living and_ in- 
telligent, a sanctifying principle of all things 
made by God through Christ. He it is 
who illuminates the souls of the just; He was 
in the Prophets, He was also in the Apostles 
aa the New Testament. Abhorred be they 
who dare to separate the operation of the 
Holy Ghost! ‘There is One God, the Fa- 
ther, Lord of the Old and of the New Tes- 
tament: and One Lord, Jesus Christ, who 
was prophesied of in the Old Testament, 
and came in the New; and One IToly Ghost, 
who through the Prophets preached of Christ, 
and when Christ was come, descended, and 
manifested Him 2, 

2 At the end of this section there follows in the Coislin MS. 
a long interpolation consisting of two parts. Vhe former is an 
extract taken word for word from Gregory of Nyssa, Oradio 
Catechctica, i, c, Which may be read in this series: AAA’ ds @cov 
Aoyov dkovoarvtes . . . . oVvpopov eyoveay tH Bovaroer TiV 
dvvapev. Of the second passage the Benedictine Editor says: 
**T have not been able to discover who is the author. No éne 
can assign it to our Cyril, although the doctrine it contains is 
in full agreement with his: but he explains all the same points 
more at large in his two Lectures (xvi. xvii.). The passage is very 
ancient and undoubtedly older than the eleventh century, which is 
the date of the Cod. Coislin. Therefore in the controversy of the 
Latins against the Greeks concerning the Procession of the Holy 
Ghost itis important to notice what is taught in this passage, and 
also brought forward as a testimony by S$. Thomas (Aquinas), 
that ‘The Holy Ghost is of the Godhead of the Father and the 
Son (ex Patris et Pilii divinitate existere).” To me indeed these 
words seem to savour altogether not of the later but of the more 
ancient theology of the Greeks, and to be earlier than the con- 
troversies of the Greeks against the Latins.” 

This second passage is as follows :— 

“For the Spirit of God is good. Alnd Thy good Spirit, says 
David, shall lead me in the land of rivhteousness. his then is 
the Spirit of God in which we belicve: the blessed Spirit, the 
eternal, immutable, unchangeable, ineffable: which rules and 
reigns over all productive being, both visible and invisible natures : 
which is Lord both of Angels and Archangels, Powers, Prin- 
cipalities, Dominions, Thrones: the Creator of all being, en- 
throned with the glory of the Father and the Son, reigning without 
beginning and without end with the Father and the Son, before 
the created substances: Who sanctifies the wintstering spirtis 

sent forth jor the sake of those who are to inherit satvation: 
Who came down upon the holy and blessed Virgin Mary, of whom 

3: 
< 

116 

4. Letno one therefore separate the Old from 
the New ‘Testament +; let no one say that the | 
Spirit in the former is one, and in the latter 
another: since thus he offends against the 
Holy Ghost Himself, who with the Father. 
and the Son together is honoured, and at the 
time of Holy Baptism is included with them 
in the Holy ‘Trinity. For the Only-begotten 
Son of God said plainly to the Apostles, Go ve, 
and make disciples of all the nations, baplising 
them trto the name of the Kather, and of the 
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Our hope is in 
Vather, and Son, and Holy Ghost. We 
preach not three Gods5; let the Marcionites 
be silenced ; but with the Holy Ghost through 
One Son, we preach One God. The Faith is 
indivisible; the worship inseparable. We 
neither separate the Holy ‘Trinity, like some ; 
nor do we as Sabellius work confusion”, 
3ut_ we know according to godliness One 
Father, who sent His Son to be our Saviour ; 
we know One Son, who promised that He) 
would send the Comforter from the lather ; 
we know the Holy Ghost, who spake in the 
Prophets, and who on the day of Pentecost. 
descended on the Apostles in the form of fiery | 
tongues, here, in Jerusalem, in the Upper 
Church of the Apostles7; for in all things the 
choicest privileges are with us. Here Christ 
came down from heaven; here the Holy Ghost 
came down from heaven. And in truth it 
were most fitting, that as we discourse con- 
cerning Christ and Golgotha here in Golgotha, 
so also we should speak concerning the Holy 
Ghost in the Upper Church; yet since He 
who descended there jointly partakes of the 
glory of Him who was crucitied here, we here 

was born Christ according to the flesh ; came down also upon the 
Lord Himself in bodily form of a dove in the river Jordan: Who 
came upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost in form of fiery 
tongues ; Who gives and supplies all spiritual gifts in the Church, 
WHO PROCEEDETH FROM THE FatuHEeR: Who is of the Godhead 
of the Father and the Son; Who is of one substance with the 
Father and the Son, inseparable and indivisible.” 

_ 3 Cf. Cat. iv, 333 vil. 6 Ireneus, Heres. ETL ee 
ix. 1. In Eusebius, £.//. V. 13, Rhodon says that Apelles attri- 
buted the prophecies to an adverse spirit, and rejected them as 
false and self-contradictory. Similar blasphemies against the holy 
Prophets are imputed to Manes by Epiphanius (/7e7es. Ixvi. 30). 

4 Matt. xxvii. 19. The same text is used with much force by 
S. Basil (De Spi7. S. cap. xxiv.). 

5 Cat. xi. 4, note 3. See Newman's notes on Athanasius, 
Conted Arian; Or.I, witi.t; (Tb. Or, LH. meg 1b. xxv, 3. 
Marcion’s doctrine of three first principles (rpt@v apxev Adyos) 
is discussed by Epiphanius (//e7es. xlil. 6, 7). See also Tertull. 
Contra Marcion. 1.153; Kuseb. Hist. Eccles. V. 13. 

© guvadorpijy, iv. 8 3 x1. 163 Xv. 9 

7 Cat. xvii. 13. Epiphanius (De A7ensuris et Ponder. c. 14): 
“And he (Hadrian) found the city all tevelled to the ground, except 
a few houses, and the Church of God which was small: where the 
Disciples, on their return after the Saviour was taken up from the 
Mount of Olives, went up into the upper chamber: for there it 
had been built, that is on Sion.” Cf. Stanley, Svat and Pales- 
tine, c. xiv. 3: ‘‘ Within the precincts of that Mosque (of the 
Tomb of David) is a vaulted Gothic chamber, which contains 
within its four walls a greater confluence of traditions than any | 
other place of like dimensions in Palestine. It is startling to hear 
that this is the scene of the Last Supper, of the meeting after the | 
Resurrection, of the miracle of Pentecost, of the residence and | 
death of the Virgin, of the burial of Stephen.” 

CATECHR TCA tia ies 

| 
speak concerning Him also 

who descended 
there: for their worship is indivisible. 

5. We would now say somewhat concerning 
the Holy Ghost; not to declare His substance 
with exactness, for this were impossible ; but 
to speak of the diverse mistakes of some con- 
cerning him, lest from ignorance we should 

fall into them ; and to block up the paths of 
error, that we may journey on the Kinw’s one 

highway. And if we now for caution’s sake 
repeat any statement of the heretics, let it 
recoil on their heads, and may we be guilt- 
less, both we who speak, and ye who hear. 

6. For the heretics, who are most profane 
in all things, have sharpened their longue® against 
the Holy Ghost also, and have dared to utter 
impious things ; as Ireneus the interpreter has 
written in his injunctions against heresies, lor 

‘some of them have dared to say that they 

were themselves the Holy Ghost ;—of whom 
the first was Simon ?, the sorcerer spoken of in 
the Acts of the Apostles; for when he was 
cast out, he presumed to teach such doctrines : 
and they who are called Gnostics, impious 
men, have spoken other things against the 
Spirit?, and the wicked Valentimans 3 again 
something else; and the profane Manes dared 
to call himself the Paraclete sent by Christ +. 
Others again have taught that the Spirit is 
different in the Prophets and in the New 
Testament 5, Yea, and great is their error, or 
rather their blasphemy. Such therefore abhor, 
and flee from them who blaspheme the Holy 
Ghost, and have no forgiveness. For what 
fellowship hast thou with the desperate, thou, 
who art now to be baptized, into the Holy 
Ghost also®? If he who attaches himself to a 
thief, and consenteth with him, is subject to 
punishment, what hope shall he have, who 
offends against the Holy Ghost? 

7, Let the Marcionists also be abhorred, 
who tear away from the New Testament the 
sayings of the Old7. Tor Marcion first, that 
most impious of men, who first asserted three 
Gods 8, knowing that in the New Testament are 

A fe oo PB 

9 Irenzeus is called ‘‘the interpreter’? in the same general 
sense as other ecclesiastical authors (Cat. xill. 273; XV. 20), 
on account of his frequent comments upon the Scriptures. The 
full title of his work was A Refu‘ation and Subversion of 
Knowledge falsely so called (Euseb. Hist. Eccles. a ger come) 
Cyril’s expression (év rots mpooraypacr) is sufficiently appropriate 
to the hortatory purpose professed by Irenaus in his preface. 
But the Benedictine Editor thinks that the word zpearaypace 
may be an interpolation arising from the following words pes 
ras.... The meaning would then be ‘‘in his writings Against 
Heresies,” the usual short title of the work. 

2 (Cat, vin 24, aot 2702 2 Trenaus (I. xxix. § 4; xxx. § 1). 
Whe 1. 2, eS 55 Oe A Gate ¥i.eese 
Cat.iv. 33. See § 3, note 3; above. 
i.e. as well as into the Father and the Son. 
See Dict. Christ. Biography, Marcion, p. 283; and Ter- 
tullian (A4dv. Marcio. 1V. 6): ‘His whole aim centres in this 
that he may establish a diversity betwecn the Old and New 
‘Testaments, so that his own Christ may be separate from the 
Creator, as belonging to the rival god, and as alien from the Law 
and the Prophets. & Ghee notes, «beNe- 

NAWNW 

= 

ieky 

cA Ete YT, 

to. Wherefore was Simon the sorcerer con- 
demned? Was it not that he came to the 
Aposiles, and said, Give me also this porer, 
hat on whomsecver L lay hands, he may receive 
the Holy Ghost? Vor he said not, “Give me 
also the fellowship of the Holy Ghost,” but 
“Give me the power ;” 

contained testumonies of the Prophets concern- | 
ing Christ, cut out the testimonies taken from 
the Old Testament, that the King might be left 
without witness. Abhor those above-mentioned 
Gnostics, men of knowledge by name, but 
fraught with ignorance; who have dared to 
say such things of the Holy Ghost as I dare’ 
NOLTEPEAt. 

8. Let the Cataphrygians ° also be thy abhor- , 
rence, and Montanus, their ringleader in evil, money also to them who had no possessions 5; 
and his two so-called prophetesses, Maximilla and this, though he saw men bringing the prices 
and Priscilla, Vor this Montanus, who was! of the things sold, and laying them at the 
out of his mind and really mad (for he would | Apostles’ fect. And he considered not. that 
not have said such things, had he not been | they who trod under foot the wealth which 
mad), dared to say that he was himself the was brought for the maintenance of the poor, 
Holy Ghost,—he, miserable man, and filled) were not likely to give the power of the Holy 
with all uncleanness and lasciviousness; for Ghost for a bribe. But what say they to 
it suffices but to hint at this, out of respect for Simon? Ty money perish with thee, because 
the women who are present. And having taken | ¢how hast thought to purchase the gift of God 
possession of Pepuza, a very small hamlet of wth money®, for thou art a second Judas, for 
Phrygia, he falsely named it Jerusalem ; and cut- expecting to buy the grace of the Spirit with 
ting the throats of wretched little children, and money. If then Simon, for wishing to get 
chopping them up into unholy food, for the this power for a price, is to feris/, how great 
purpose of their so-called mysteries ':—(where- | is the impiety of Manes, who said that he was 
fore ull but lately in the time of persecution, the Holy Ghost? Let us hate them who are 
we were suspected of doing this, because these | worthy of hatred; let us turn away from them 
Montanists were called, falsely indeed, by the from whom God turns away; let us also our- 
common name of Christians ;)—yet he dared | selves say unto God with all boldness conceri- 
to call himself the Holy Ghost, filled as he ing all heretics, Do not L hate them, O Lord, 
was with all impiety and inhuman cruelty, and | “at hate Thee, and am not I grieved with 
condemned by an irrevocable sentence. Thine enemies?? Vor there is also an enmity 

g. And he was seconded, as was said before, / which is right, according as it is written, 
by that most impious Manes also, who com-|Z zwéll put enmity between thee and her seed? : 
bined what was bad in every heresy*; who for friendship with the serpent works enmity 
being the very lowest pit of destruction, col-| with God, and death. 
lected the doctrines of all the heretics, and| rz. Let then thus much suffice concerning 
wrought out and taught a yet more novel those outcasts; and now let us return to the 
error, and dared to say that he himself was | divine Scriptures, and let us drink waters out 
the Comforter, whom Christ promised to send. | ef our own cisterns [that is, the holy Fathers ar 
But the Saviour when He promised Him, said | and out of our own springing wells*, Drink 
to the Apostles, But tarry ye in the city of; we of living water, springing up into ever- 
Serusalem, unit ye be enkucd with power from on lasting life? ; but this spake the Saviour of the 
high 3, What then? did the Apostles who had | Spirit, which they that belive on Him should 
been dead two hundred years, wait for Manes, vece’ve3. For observe what He says, He that 
watil they should be endued with the power, and | believeth on Ale (not simply this, but), as the 
will any dare to say, that they were not forth- | Serifture hath satd (thus He hath sent thee 
with full of the Holy Ghost? Moreover it is back to the Old Testament), out of his belly 
written, Zheu they laid their hands on them, | shall flow rivers of living water, not rivers 
and they received the Holy Ghost + ; was not this | perceived by sense, and merely watering the 
before Manes, yea, many years before, when carth with its thorns and trees, but bringing 
the Holy Ghost descended on the day of souls to the light. And in another place He 
Pentecost ? says, But the water that I shall give him, shall 
(be in him a well of living water springiig up 

Tle offered 

9 Parygians, or Cataphrygians (ot cara @pvyas) was the name 
given to the followers of the Phrygian Montanus. See the ac- 
count of Montanism in Eusebius, A/7s¢. Lccé. V. xvi., and the note 
there in this Series. 

x The charges of lust and cruelty brought against the Mont- 
anists by Cyril and Epiphanius (//@7. 48) seem to rest on no trust- 
worthy evidence, and are not mentioned by Eusebius, a bitter foe 
to the sect. 

2 On Manes, see Cat. vi. 20 ff. 

3 Luke xxiv. 49. 4 Acts yill. 27, 

| AXTIPLOTUIV. 

i. “deritort. Cl Srey dempeatotds, nie & oee 
“S.Ibi@ 20; -7° Pscexxgix. ox, S-Cretinlite Tay 

9 The words aylwv rarépwy are not found in the MSS. Mon. 1. 
Mon. 2. Vind. Roe. Casaub. nor in Grodecq. Whether meant to 
refer, as the Benedictine Editor thinks, to the writers of the Old 
‘lestament, or to Christian authors, they are an evident gloss. 

JOP LOW Ve. TS , 

2 John iv. 14, quoted more fully at the end of the section. 

Su EDs Vii S85 SO: 

Sete NT. 

tio 

into everlasting lije,—a new kind of water, 
living and springing up, springing up unto them 
who are worthy, 

12, And why did He call the grace of the 
Spirit water? Because by water all things 
subsist; because water brings forth grass and 

living things; because the water of the showers 
comes down from heaven; because it comes 
down one in form, but works in- many 
forms. For one fountain watereth the whole 

of Paradise, and one and the same rain comes 
down upon all the world, yet it becomes white 
in the lily, and red in the rose, and purple in 
violets and hyacinths, and different and varied 
in cach several kind: so it is one in the palm- 
tree, and another in the vine, and all in all 
things; and yet is one in nature, not diverse 
from itself; for the rain does not change itself, 
and come down first as one thing, then as an- 
other, but adapting itself to the constitution of 
each thing which receives it, it becomes to each 
what is suitable+. ‘Thus also the Holy Ghost, 
being one, and of one nature, and indivisible, 
divides to cach His grace, according as He 
woiils: and as the dry tree, after partaking of 
water, puts forth shoots, so also the soul in 
sin, when it has been through repentance 
made worthy of the Holy Ghost, brings forth 
clusters of righteousness. And though He is 
One in nature, yet many are the virtues which 
by the will of God and in the Name of Christ 
He works. For He employs the tongue of one 
man for wisdom ; the soul of another He en- 
lightens by Prophecy; to another He gives 
power to drive away devils; to another He 

gives to interpret the divine Scriptures. He 
strengthens one man’s selfcommand; He 

teaches another the way to give alms; another 
He teaches to fast and discipline himself; 
another He teaches to despise the things of 
the body ; another He trains for martyrdom : 
diverse in different men, yet not diverse from 
Himself, ag it is written, But the manifestation 
of the Spirit ts given to every man to profit 
withal. For to one is given through the Spirit 
the word of wisdom; and to another the word 
of knowledge according to the same Spirit » to 
another faith, in the same Spirit, and to an- 
other gifts of healing, in the same Spirit ; and to 
another workings of miracles ; and to another 

prophecy ; and to another discernings of spirits ;' 

and to another divers kinds of tongues ; and to 
another the interpretation of tongues: but all 
these worketh that one and the sane Spirit, 
dividing to every man severally as He will ©, 

13. But since concerning spirit in general 
many diverse things are written in the divine 
Scriptures, and there is fear lest some out 

4 Compare a similar passage on rain in Cat. 1x, O5720; 
6 

% a Cor oils 2, SIM Ae oe! © 

CATECHETiCa® tere Fuki. 

of ignorance fall into contusion, not know- 
ing to what sort of spirit the writing refers ; 
it will be well now to certify you, of what kind 
(the Scripture declares the Holy Spirit to he. 
For as Aaron is called Christ, and David and 
Saul and others are calied Christs 7, but there is 
only one true Christ, so likewise since the 
name of spirit is given to different things, it 1s 
right to see what is that which is distinctively 
called the Holy Spirit. For many things are 
‘called spirits. ‘Thus an Angel is called 
spirit, our soul is called spirit, and this 
wind which is blowing is called spirit; great 
virtue also is spoken of as spirit; and im- 
“pure practice is called spirit ; and a devil our 
adversary is called spirit. Beware thercfore 
when thou hearest these things, lest from their 
having a common name thou mistake one for 
another. For concerning our soul the Serip- 
ture says, //is spirit shall go forth, and he shall 
return to his earth®: and of the same soul it 
says again, IVhich formeth the spirit of man 
within hims. And of the Angels it is said in 
the Psalms, Vo maketh His Angels spirits, 
and His ministers a flame of fret. And of the 
wind it saith, Zou shalt break the ships of 
Tarshish with a violent spirit? ; and, As the 
tree in the wood is shaken by the spirit3; and, 
Fire, hail, snow, ice, spirit of storm. And of 
good doctrine the Lord Himself says, Ze 
words that I have spoken unio you, they are 
spirits, and they are life; instead of, “are 
spiritual.” But the Holy Spirit 1s not pro- 
nounced by the tongue; but He is a Living 
Spirit, who gives wisdom of speech, Himself 
speaking and discoursing. 

14. And wouldest thou know that He dis- 
courses and speaks? Philip by revelation of 
an Angel went down to the way which leads 
to Gaza, when the Eunuch was coming; and 
the Spirit said to Philip, Go zea, and join 
thyself to this chariot®, Seest thou the Spirit 
talking to one who hears Him? Kzekiel 
also speaks thus, Zze Spirit of the Lord came 
upon me, and said unto me, This saith the 
Lord?. And again, Zhe Holy Ghost said’, 
unto the Apostles who were in Antioch, Sefa- 
rate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work 
zehereunto Ihave called them. Beholdest thou 
the Spirit living, separating, calling, and with 
authority sending forth ? Paul also said, Save 
that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every cily, 
saving that bonds and aflictions await me 
For this good Sanctifier of the Church, and 
her Helper, and ‘Teacher, the Holy Ghost, the 
Comforter, of whom the Saviour said, LHe shall 

7 SeesCatyse aa SoMa SPs, cx ivi. 4° 9 Zech. xii. 1 

%: Ds, apie: Poe lvall: 97 Sols) ae 
[As Sexy. 5 John vi. 63. 6 Acts viil. 29. 
Loot Bzek ees: 8 Acts xill. 2. o Tbixx23; 

PARE LEN Te © Sever 

teach you all things (and He said not only, 7Ze 
shall teach, but also, Le shall bring fo Vour Ve- 
menibrance whatever L have said urto vous 
for the teachings of Christ and of the Holy 
Ghost are not different, but the same) He, I 
say, testified before to Paul what things should 

Ss 

befall him, that he might be the more stout-, 

hearted, from knowing them beforehand. 
Now I have spoken these things unto you 

because of the text, Ze words which J 
have spoken unto you, they are spirit; that 
thou mayest understand this, not of the utter- 

ance of the lips ?, but of the good doctrine in 
this passage. 

15. But sin also is called spirit, as I have 
already said; only in another 
sense, as when it is said, Zhe spirit of whore- 
dom caused them to err3, The name “ spirit” 
is given also to the wzelean spirit, the devil; 
but with the addition of, “the unclean ;” 
for to each is joined its distinguishing name, 
to mark its proper nature. If the Scrip- 
ture speak of the soul of man, it says she 
spirit with the addition, of the man; if it 
mean the wind, it says, spirit of storm ; 
if sin, it says, spirit of whoredom,; if the 
devil, it says, an unclean spirit: that we 
may know which particular thing is spoken 
of, and thou mayest not suppose that it means 
the Holy Ghost ; God forbid! For this name 
of spirit is common to many things; and 
every thing which has not a solid body is 
In agencral way called spirit4. Since, there- 
fore, the devils have not such bodies, they 
are called spirits: but there is a great dif- 
ference ; for the unclean devil, when he comes 
upon a man’s soul (may the Lord deliver from 
him every soul of those who hear me, and 
of those who are not present), he comes 
like a wolf upon a sheep, ravening for blood, 
and ready to devour. His coming is most 
fierce; the sense of it most oppressive; the 
mind becomes darkened; his attack is an in- 
justice also, and so is his usurpation of an- 
other’s possession. Tor he makes forcible use 
ofanother’s body, and another's instruments, as 
if they were his own; he throws down him who 
stands upright (for he is akin to him who 
jell from heavens) ; he twists the tongue and 
distorts the lips; foam comes 
words ; the man is filled with darkness ; his 
eye is open, yet the soul sees not through it ; 
and the miserable man gasps convulsively 
at the point of death. ‘The devils are verily 

and opposite | 

instead of 

Il 

foes of 
lessly, 
16. Such is not the Ifoly Ghost; God for- 
bid! For His doings tend the contrary way, 
towards what is good and salutary. lirst, His 
coming is gentle; the perception of Him is 
fragrant; His burden most heht; beams of 
light and knowledge gleam forth before tis 
coming ® He comes with the bowels of a true 
guardian ; for He comes to save, and to heal, 
to teach, to admonish, to strengthen, to exhort, 
_to enlighten the mind, first of him who receives 
Him, and afterwards of others also, through 
shim. And as a man, who being previously in 
darkness then suddenly beholds the sun, 1s 
enlightened in his bodily sight, and sees plainly 
| things which he saw not, so likewise he to whom 
the Holy Ghost is vouchsafed, is enlightened 
in his soul, and sees things beyond man’s sight, 
| which he knew not; his body is on earth, yet 
his soul mirrors forth the heavens. He sees, 
like Esaias, the Lord sitting upon a throne hich 
and tified up7 ; he sees, like lizekiel, Alem who 
ws above the Cherubim® ; he sees like Daniel, Zex 
thousand times ten thousand, and thousani's of 
thousands 9 ; and the man, who is so little, be- 
holds the beginning of the world, and knows 
the end of the world, and the times intervening, 
and the successions of kings,—-things which he 
never learned: for the ‘True Enlightener is 
present with him. ‘The man is within the walls 
of a house; yet the power of his knowledge 
‘reaches far and wide, and he sees even what 
other men are doing. 

| 17. Peter was not with Ananias and Sapphira 
when they sold their possessions, but he was 
present by the Spirit; IA), he says, hath 
Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost*? 
There was no accuser; there was no witness : 
whence knew he what had happened? 1 AiZes 
wt remained was tt nol thine own? and after tt 
was sold, was it not in thine own power ? why 
hast thou concetved this thing in thine heart} 
The wnlettered 3 Peter, through the grace of the 
Spirit, learnt what not even the wise men of 
the Greeks had known. Thou hast the like 
in the case also of Elisseus. For when he 
had freely healed the leprosy of Naaman, 
Gehazi received the reward, the reward of 
another's achievement ; and he took the money 
from Naaman, and bestowed it in a dark place. 
But the darkness 7s not hidden from the Saints +. 
And when he came, EFlisscus asked him ; and 
like Peter, when he said, 20 me whether ye 

men, using them foully and merci- 

26 

The Hol 

1 Jolin xiv. 

SL benete G32 y Spirit is more than words pronounced 
by the tongue, even than our Lord's own words, which he cailed 
spirit. 3. Flaséaiv. 12. 

4 Origen, de Principiis, i. $2: “It is the custom of Holy 
Scripture, when it would designate anything contrary to this 
more dense and solid body, to call it spirit.” 5 Luke x. 18. 

| 

| 2 Hoees ; 

6 Tn this contrast between the evil spirit and the Spirit of God 
Cyril's language rises to true cloquence, tar surpassing a somewhat 
similar deseription, which may have been known to him, in 

Kuseb. Dem. Evang. V. 132. 
71S. Vi. Sw Sivek. Nets 9 Dan. vii. 10, 
t Acts v. 3. 2c. Ghi4s OLD Ty eth 

| 4: PS. Cxxxix. 12. 

pes te) 

sold the land for so sutch>? Ne also enquires, 
[ivence comest hon, Gehast ©? Not in ignorance, 
Lut in sorrow ask L chkence contest (eu? brom 
Carkness art thou come, and to darkness shalt 
thou go; thou hast sold the cure of the leper, 
and the leprosy is thy heritage. I, he says, 
have fulfilled the bidding of Him who said 
to me, Freely ye have received, freely give? - 
but thou hast sold this grace; receive now 
the condition of the sale. But what says 
Lilisseus to him? = [ext not mine heart with 
thee? Lwas here shut in by the body, but the 
spirit which has been given me of God saw 
even the things afar off, and shewed me plainly 
what was doing elsewhere. Seest thou how 
the Holy Ghost not only rids of ignorance, 
but invests with knowledge? Seest thou how 
He enlightens men’s souls ? 

18. Esaias lived nearly a thousand years 
ago; and he beheld Zion as a booth. The 
city was. still standing, and beautified with 
public places, and robed in majesty; yet he 
says, Zion shall be ploughed asa field®, foretelling 
what is now fulfilled in our days. And ob- 
serve the exactness of the prophecy; for 
he said, And the daughter of Zon shall be left 
as a booth ina vineyard, as a lodge tn a garden 
of cucumbers *. And now the place is filled with 
cardens of cucumbers. Seest thou how the 
Holy Spirit enlightens the saints? Be not 
therefore carried away to other things, by the 
force of a common term, but keep fast the 
exact meaning. 

19. And if ever, while thou hast been sitting 
here, a thought concerning chastity or vir- 
einity has come into thy mind, it has been His 
teaching. Has not often a maiden, already at 
the bridal threshold 2, fled away, He teaching 
her the doctrine of virginity? Has not often 
aman distinguished at court 3, scorned wealth 
and rank, under the teaching of the Holy Ghost ? 

AY 

Has not often a young man, at the sight of | shai? be revealed in us % 

beauty, closed his eyes, and fled from the sight, 

5 Acts v. &. 6 2 Kings v. 25. 
7? Matt. x: 8. ® Micah iii. 123 ascribed by Cyril to Isaiah. 

9 Cf Euseb. Dem. Evang. vi. 13: *' In our own time we have 
seen with our eyes the Sion of old renown being ploughed by 
Romans with yokes of oxen, and Jerusalem in a state of utter 
desolation, as the oracle itself says, like a lodge in a garden of 
cucumbers. As Cyril at that time saw the Prophet’s prediction 
fulfilled, so we also to the present day sce most plainly the fulfil- 
ment of the divine oracle, and Sion ploughed before our eyes: for 
except the Church of the Apostles, with the houses lying around 
it. and the house of Caiaphas and the cemeteries, all the remaining 
space of this hill, lying without the city, is under plough.” 
(Jerusalem Editor). 

I Tsai. 8. OmwpodvdAdkcoy is the hut of the watchman who 
guarded the crop when ripening for harvest. XexvijAarov is 
explained by Basil in his comment on the passage of Isaiah as 
“A place that produces quick-growing and perishable fruits.” 
‘his agrees with the etymological sense of the word as “4 forcing- 
bed for cucumbers” (Hippoci sapud Fritzsche, “‘ Der Lricf des 
ferentia,’ v.70). On the form oixunpate, sce the notes on the 
Epistle of Jeremy in the Speaker's Commentary. 

2 -agrasas. On the meaning of macras see the notes. on 
Herodotus, II. 148, 169 in Bahr, and Rawlinson. Here it appears 
to mean the cloister er cclonnade which gave access to the bridal 
chamber, @aAapos. 3 €v TadaTtlos 

CATERCT Tie er Es, 

| 
rand escaped the dehlement ? Askest thou 
“whence this has come to pass ?: The Holy Ghost 
taught the soul of the young man. Many ways 
of covetousness are there in the world; yet 
Christians refuse possessions : wherefore ? be- 
cause of the teaching of the Holy Ghost. Worthy 
of honour is in truth that Spirit, holy and good ; 
‘and fittingly are we baptized into Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost. A man, still clothed with a 
body, wrestles with many fiercest demons; and 
often the demon, whom many men could not 
master with iron bands, has been mastered by 
the man himself with words of prayer, through 
the power which is in him of the Holy Ghost ; 
and the mere breathing of the Exorcist + be- 
comes as fire to that unseen foe. A mighty ally 
and protector, therefore, have we from God; a 
‘great Teacher of the Church, a mighty Cham- 
“pion on our behalf. Let us not be afraid of 
ithe demons, nor of the devil ; for mightier is He 
who fighteth for us. Only Iet us open to Hin 
our doors ; for/Te gocth about secking such as are 
worthy 5, and searching on whom He may con- 
fer His gifts. 

20. And He is called the Comforter, because 
He comforts and encourages us, and helpeth 
our infirmities ; for we know not what should 
pray for as we ought; but the Spirit Himself 
maketh intercession for us, with groanings which 
cannot be uttered ®, that is, makes intercession 
to God. Oftentimes a man for Christ’s sake 
has been outraged and dishonoured un- 
justly ; martyrdom is at hand; tortures on 
every side, and fire, and sword, and savage 
beasts, and the pit. But the Holy Ghost 
‘softly whispers to him, “ [ait thou on the 
| Lord 7, O man; what is now befalling thee ts a 
small matter, the reward will be great, Suffer 
‘a little while, and thou shalt be with Angels 
‘forever. Zhe sufferings of this present time are 
not worthy to be compared with the glory which 
” He portrays to the 
man the kingdom of heaven; He gives him 
‘a glimpse of the paradise of delight ; and the 
‘martyrs, whose bodily countenances are of 
necessity turned to their judges, but who in 
| spirit are already in Paradise, despise those 
hardships which are seen. 
21. And wouldest thou be sure that by 
‘the power of the Holy Ghost the Martyrs 
‘bear their witness? ‘The Saviour says to 
His disciples, And when they bring you unto 

sp 

aere 

4 Compare Procat. §9; Cat. xx. 3. 

5 Wiscom vi. 16. Compare the saying in Clem. Alex. Outs 
Uoes salueiur? $311 abrov Gyrety Tovs €9 TELToMLE VOUS afious Te 
0 5 Swrijpos padnrds. The Jerusalem Editor quotes from 

) a passage which may have been 

orTas TOU 

Origen (Prolog. tn Cantic. 

known to Cyril: © This Comforter therefore goeth about seeking 
if He may discover any worthy and receptive souls, to whom He 
may reveal the greatness of the love whica isin God.” 

| 6 Rom. viil. 26. 7 ES. XNNIL T45 SNe 34s 

LS Romevin gas, 

the synagusues, and the Se s, and author | 
ilies, be rol anelous how ye shall anster, or 
what ve shall say; for va ey Ghost shall | Sanctifier. 

leach you in that ars" Maury, what ye ought to 
say, For itis impossible to testify as a martyr 
for Christ’s sake, except a man testify by the 
Holy Ghost ; for if vo man can say that Jesus 
Christ ts the Lord, but by the [oly Ghost*, how 
shall any man give his own life for Jesus’ sake, 
but by the Holy Ghost ? 

22. Great indeed, and all-powerful in gifts, 
and wonderful, is the Holy Ghost. Consider, 
how many of you are now sitting here, how 
many souls of us are present. He is working 
suitably for each, and being present in the 
midst, beholds the temper of each, beholds 
also his reasoning and his conscience, and 
what we say, and think, and believe?. Great 
indeed is what I have now said, and yet is it 
small. Tor consider, I pray, with mind en- 
lightened by Him, how many Christians there 
are in all this diocese, and how many in the 
whole province 3 of Palestine, and carry forward 
thy mind from this province, to the whole 
oman [Empire ; and after this, consider the 
whole world; races of Persians, and nations 
of Indians, Goths and Sarmatians, Gauls and 
Spaniards, and Moors, Libyans and Ethiopians, 
and the rest for whom we have no names ; for 

of many of the nations not even the names, 
Consider, I pray, of each na-_ 

have reached us. 
tion, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Solitaries, 
Virgins, and laity besides ; and then behold their 
great Protector, and the Dispenser of their gifts ; 
—how throughout the world He gives to one 
chastity, to another perpetual virginity, to 
another almsgiving, to another voluntary 
poverty, to another power of repelling hostile 
spirits. And as the light, with one touch of 
its radiance sheds brightness on all things, so 
also the Holy Ghost enlightens those who have 
eyes ; for if any from blindness is not vouch- 
safed His grace, let him not blame the Spirit, 
but his own unbelief, 

23. ‘hou hast seen His power, which is 
in all the world; tarry now no_ longer 
upon earth, but ascend on high. Ascend, I 
say, In imagination even unto the first heaven, 
and behold there so many countless myriads 
of Angels. Mount up in thy thoughts, if thou 
canst, yet higher; consider, I pray thee, the 
Archangels, consider also the Spirits; consider 
the Virtues, consider the Principalities, consider 
the Powers, consider the ‘Thrones, consider 

DUAR west ce gs Oa ro 

1 Cor. xii. 3. Meprupyoae, ‘to bear witness by death.” 

2 Codd. Monac. Vind. Roe. Casaub. add cat té merrevomer. 

3 The terms wapouxta, the See of a Bishop, and ézapyca, the 
Province of a Metropolitan, were both adopted from the cor- 
responding popes ofthe Roman Empire. See Bingham, slu¢t. 
Book IX. 1. §£ 2—6. 

) 
26 

AVI, 121 
the Dominions 4 ;—of all these the Comforter ts 
ithe Ruler from God, ahi the Peacher, ard the 
Of Him Elias has need, and Elis- 
seus, and Esaias, among men ; of Him Michacl 
and Gabriel have need among Angels. Nought 
of things created is equal in honour to Him: 
for the families of the Angels, and all their 
hosts assembled together, have no equality 
with the Holy Ghost. All these the all-excel- 
lent power of the Comforter overshadows. 
And they indeed are seut forth to ministers, 
but He searches even the deep things of God, 
according as the Apostle says, Zur the Spirté 
searcheth all things, yea, the decp things of God. 
Lor what wan knoweth the things of a man, 
save the spirit of the man which ts in him? even 
so the thtigs of God knoweth no man, but the 
Spirtt of God ®., 

Christ in the 

24. He preached concerning 
Prophets ; He wrought in the Apostles ; He 
to this day seals the souls in Baptism. And 

the Father indeed gives to the Son; and the 
Son shares with the Holy Ghost. For it is 
‘Jesus Himseli, not I, who says, 4M things are 
delivered unto Me of My Father7,; and of the 
Holy Ghost He says, [Vien Le, the Spirit of 
Truth, shall come,and the rest fle shall 
glorify Me, for He shall receive of Mine, and 
shall shew it unto you®, ‘Vhe Father through 
the Son, with the Holy Ghost, is the giver of 
all grace; the gifts of the Ifather are none 
‘other than those of the Son, and those of the 
Holy Ghost; for there 1s one Salvation, one 
Power, one Faith; One God, the Father; One 
Lord, His only-begotten Son ; One Holy Ghost, 
the Comforter. And it is enough for us to 
know these things; but inquire not curiously 
into His nature or substance 9: for had it been 
written, we would have spoken of it; what is 
not written, let us not venture on; it is 
sufficient for our salvation to know, that there 
is Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. 

25. This Spirit descended upon the seventy 
Elders in the days of Moses. (Now let not the 
length of the discourse, beloved, produce weari- 
ness in you: but may He the very subject of 
our discourse grant strength to every one, both 
to us who speak, and to you who listen !) 
This Spirit, as I was saying, came down upon 
the seventy Elders in the time of Moses; and 
this I say to thee, that I may now prove, that 
He knoweth all things, and worketh as L/e all". 

4°S. Basil ae Spirit S. c. xvi. § 38), after quoting ane 

passage, Colts 16, proceeds—eire KUPLOTYTES, KGL €L TLVES EtoLY 
cTepa AoyiKat aie axatovonadro.. ‘Lhe last word shews that 

Basil had in mind this passage of Cyril, who after the names of 
nations in § 22, adds Kat rovs AotTous AKATOVOLGACT ous LCI. 

Sock Le vals Tq. oe Cole lL, Beye nk, Natt: ei te7: 

® John xvi. 13, 14. 

9 In regard to the caution with which St. Cyril here speaks, we 
must remember that the heresy of Mi acedonius had not yet giv en 
oceasion to the formal discussion and deterniination of the ** nature 
and substance” of the Holy Ghost. ) GOR, eile ate, 

the sx 

i223 Co LHe 
The Seventy Eiders were chosen ;‘2iged 727 
Lord came dewn ina cloud, and took of the | 
Spirit that was upon Moses, and put it upon the | 
seventy Liters * ¢ not that the Spirit was divided, 
but that Ils grace was distributed in propor- 
tion to the vessels, and the capacity of the re-| 
cipicnts. Now there were present sixty and 
eight, and they prophesied; but Eldad and 
Modad were not present : therefore that it might 
be shewn that it was not Moses who bestowed 
the gift, but the Spirit who wrought, Eldad and 
Modad, who though called, had not as yet pre- 
sented themselves, did also prophesy 3. 

26. Jesus the Son of Nun, the successor of 
Moses, was amazed ; and came to him and said, 
** Hast thou heard that Eldad and Modad are 

prophesying? They were called, and they came | 
not ; my lord Moses, forbid them4.’ 1 cannot | 
forbid them,” he says, “for this grace is from 

Heaven; nay, so far am I from forbidding! 
them, that I myself am thankful for it. I think 
not, however, that thou hast said this in envy ; 
art thou jealous for ny sake, because that they 
prophesy, and thou prophesiest not yet? Wait 
for the proper season ; and oh that all the Lori's 
People may be prophets, whenever the Lord shall 
give [lis Spirit upon thems!” saying this also 
prophetically, whenever the Lord shall give ; 
“For as yet then He has not given it; so thou 
hast it not yet.’—Had not then Abraham 
this, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph? And 
they of old, had they it not? Nay, but the 
words, “ whenever the Lord shall give” evidently 
inean “ give it upon all ; as yet indeed the grace 
is partial, then it shall be given lavishly.” And he 
secretly alluded to what was to happen among 
us on the day of Pentecost; for He Himself came 
down among us. He had however also come 
down upon many before. For itis written, 47d 
Jesus the son of Nun was filled with a spirit of 
wisdom; for Moses had laid hits hands upon him®, 
Thou seest the figure everywhere the same 
in the Old and New Testament ;—in the days 
of Moses, the Spirit was given by laying on 
of hands; and by laying on of hands Peter? 
also gives the Spirit. And on thee also, 
who art about to be baptized, shall His grace 
come ; yet in what manner I say not, for I will 
not anticipate the proper season. 

27. He also came down upon all righteous 
men and Prophets; Enos, I mean, and Ienoch, 
and Noah, and the rest ; upon Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob ; foras regards Joseph, even Pharaoh 

2 Num. xi. 24,25. ‘‘Modad” is the form of the name in the 
| 
3 The apocryphal book of Eldad and Modad is mentioned by 
Hermas, Siefpherd, Vis. ii. § 3. S. Basil, Lider de Spir. S. cap. | 
61, referring to Num. xi. 26, says that the Spirit rested permanently 
only upon Eldad and Modad. G ISA, Beas, 
5 Num. xi..26, 6 Deut. xxxiv. g 
7 Acts vill, 18. On this passage of Cyril, see the section on | 
 Chrtsne” in the Introduction, | 

Pe we Oe OG BB Ce oe 

perceived that he had the Spirit of Ged within 
him’, As to Moses, and the wonderful works 
wrought by the Spirit in his days, thou hast 
heard often. This Spirit Job also had, that 
most enduring man, and all the saints, though 
we repeat not all their names. He also was 
sent forth when the Tabernacle was in making, 
and filled with wisdom the wise-hearted men 
who were with Bezaleel 9. 

28. In the might of this Spirit, as we have it 
in the Book of Judges, Othniel judged '; 
Gideon ? waxed strong ; Jephtha conquered 5; 
Deborah, a woman, waged war; and Samson, 
so long as he did righteously, and gricved 
Him not, wrought deeds above man’s power. 
And as for Samuel and David, we have it 
plainly in the Books of the Kingdoms, 
how by the Holy Ghost they prophesied 
themselves, and were rulers of the pro- 
phets ;—and Samuel was called the Secr4 : 
and David says distinctly, 7he Spirit of the Lord 
spake by me 5, and in the Psalms, And take not 
thy [foly Spirit from me ®, and again, Thy good 
Spirit shall lead me tn the land of right- 
cousness7, And as we have it in Chronicles, 
Azariah ®, in the time of King Asa, and Jahazicl? 
in the time of King Jehoshaphat, partook of the 
Holy Ghost; and again, another Azariah, he 
who was stoned. And Ezra says, Zou gazest 
also Thy good Spirit to instruct then ?. But as 
touching Elias who was taken up, and Elisseus, 
those inspired 3 and wonder-working men, it 
is manifest, without our saying so, that they 
were full of the Holy Ghost. 

29. And if further a man peruse all the 
books of the Prophets, both of the Twelve, 
and of the others, he will find many tes- 
timonies concerning the Holy Ghost; as 
when Micah says in the person of God, 
surely L will perfect power by the Spirit of 
the Lord+,; and Joel cries, And it shall come 
to pass afterwards, saith God, that 7 will 
Lour out My Sprit upon all fleshs, and the rest ; 
and Hageal, Because I an with vou, saith the 
Lord of [losts ©; and Aly Spirit remaineth in the 
midst of you7; and in like manner Zechariah, 
Lut receive My words and My statutes which L 
command by My Spirit, to Aly servants the Pro- 
phets®; and other passages. 

30. Esaias too, with his majestic voice, 
says, And the Spirit of God shall rest upon Him, 

&-Gen, xB." 38. 
I Judges iti. 10. 
4 2 Dam, 1X, 9. 

oh Tips Reeds pe ean re 
= Ly, svi.-34. S di, M1, ao. 
5. Seana Be 6 Peli. as 

7 Pee Cx: 10k 8 2 Chron. xy. 1. o Tie was. 

tbs, by 

2 Neh. ix. co. Lzra and Nehemiah form one Look * Evra” in 
the ILebrew Canon. 

3 mvevpatopspwr, used only twice in the Sept. (Hosea ix. 7; 
Zeph. il. 4), and in an unfavourable sense. With Cyril's use of it 
compare Theophilus, 4d Aufodyc. ii, gt Ocod dvOpwrovs mrev- 
pazoopous Mveiparos Gylov. 

4 Mic. iii. 8, 5 Joel ii. 28. 

6 Haggaiii. 4. 
7 1b.v. 5, 8 Zech. hs 6. at) 

ia Ee 

the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit 
of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and 
godliness ; andthe Spirit of the fear of God shall 
Atl (lim), signifying that the Spirit is one and 
undivided, but Fis operations various. So 
OUR veer 2 sere a Pee 
put My Spirit upon Him*, And again, 7 zwidl| 
pour My Spirit upon thy seed? ; and again, And 
now the Lord Alnighty and His Spirit hath sent 
Mes. and again, Ziis 7s ALy covenant with them, 
saih the Lord, My Spirit which is upon theet ; 
and again, Zhe Spirit of the Lord ts upon Me, 
because Le hath anointed Mes,and the rest; and 
again in his charge against the Jews, Lut they 
rebelled and vexed His Holy Spirit’, and, Where 
ws He that put His Holy Spirit within them? ? 
Also thou hast in Ezekiel (if thou be not now 
weary of listening), what hasalready been quoted, 
And the Spirit fell upon me, and said unto me, 
Speak » Thus saith the Lord’, But the words, 
Jill upon me we rust understand in a good sense, 
that is ‘lovingly ;” and as Jacob, when he had 
found Joseph, fell upon his neck ; as also in the 
Gospels, the loving father, on seeing his son 
who had returned from his wandering, “ad com- 
passion, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed 
Aim9. And again in Ezekiel, And he brought 
me tn aviston by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, 
to them of the captivity*. And other texts thou 
heardest before, in what was said about Bap- 
tism; Zhen will I sprinkle clean water upon 
you, and the rest ; @ new heart also will I give 
you, and a new spirit will L put within you3 ; 
and then immediately, Aud J well put My Spirit 
within yout. And again, Zhe hand of the Lord 
was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit 
Of the Lords, 

31. He endued with wisdom the soul of 
Daniel, that young as he was he should become 
a judge of Elders. ‘The chaste Susanna was 

® 1s¢ 21, a, ST Rive th his; ts 2 Tb. xiv 3y 
3 Lh. xlvili. 16, 4 Is. lix. 21. = & ots.. Teg, 
6 Ib, Ixiii. ro. 7 oe ST, 8 Bek. xi 5s 

t Ezek. xi. 24. 

9 Gen. xlvi. 293 Luke xv. 20. 
3 Ib; 26. 

2 The xexyi, a5} Catt. 26, 

LE 

AEs Oe 27% 5 Ezek, xxxvii. 1: 

RV ih x 
condemned as a wanton; there was none to 
plead her cause; for who was to deliver her 
from the rulers? She was led away to death, 
she was now in the hands of the executioners. 
But her Helper was at hand, the Comforter, 
the Spirit who sanctifies every rational nature. 
Come hither to me, He says to Daniel ; young 
though thou be, convict old men infected 
with the sins of youth; for it is written, God 
ratsed up the [oly Spirit upon a young stripliny °, 
and nevertheless, (to pass on quickly,) by the 
sentence of Danicl that chaste lady was saved. 
We bring this forward as a testimony ; for this 
is not the season for expounding. Nebuchad- 
nezzar also knew that the Holy Spirit was in 
Daniel; for he says to him, O /elteshazzar, 
master of the magicians, of whom L know, that the 
floly Spirit of God ts in thee7, One thing he 
said truly, and one falsely ; for that he had the 
Holy Spirit was true, but he was not the master 
of the magicians, for he was no magician, but 
was wise through the Holy Ghost. And before 
this also, he interpreted to him the vision of the 
Image, which he who had seen it himself knew 
not; for he says, Tell me the vision, which I 
who saw it know not ®. ‘Thou seest the power 
of the Holy Ghost ; that which they who saw 
it, know not, they who saw it not, know and 1n- 
terpret. 

32. And indeed it were easy to collect very 
many texts out of the Old ‘Testament, and to 
discourse more largely concerning the Holy 
Ghost. But the time is short; and we must be 
careful of the proper length of the lecture. 
Wherefore, being for the present content awhile 
with passages from the Old Testament, we will, if 
it be God’s pleasure, proceed in the next [.ec- 
ture to the remaining texts out of the New 
Testament. And may the God ot peace, 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and through 
the love of the Spirit, count all of you worthy 
of His spiritualand heavenly gifts :—'To whom 
be glory and power for ever and ever. Amen. 

© Susanna, v 45> 7 Dan. iv. g & Th. ate Gy at. 

LECT Re via. 

CONTINUATION OF 

1 CORINTHIANS ‘X11, 

Tor to one ts given by the Spirit the word of i 

1. IN the preceding Lecture, according 
our ability we set before you, our beloved 
hearers 1, some small portion of the testimonies 
concerning the Holy Ghost; and on the 
present occasion, we will, if it be God's plea- 
sure, proceed to treat, as far as may be, 
those which remain out of the New Testament: 
and as then to keep within due limit of your 
attention we restrained our eagerness (for 
there is no satiety in discoursing concerning 
the Holy Ghost), so now again we must say 
but a small part of what remains. For now, 
as well as then, we candidly own that our weak- 
ness is overwhelmed by the multitude of things 
written. Neither to-day will we use the subtle- 
ties of men, for that is unprofitable ; but merely 
call to mind what comes from the divine Scrip- 
tures; for this is the safest course, according 
to the blessed Apostle Paul, who says, Il ich 
things also we speak, not in words which man’s 
wesdoin teacheth, but which the Lloly Ghost 
teacheth, comparing spiritual things with spirt- 
fual*, ‘Vhus we act like travellers or voyagers, 
who having one goal to a very long journey, 
though hastening on with eagerness, yet by 
reason of human weakness are wont to touch 
in their way at divers cities or harbours. 

2. Therefore though our discourses con- 
cerning the Holy Ghost are divided, yet He 
Himself is undivided, being one and the same. 
For as in speaking concerning the Father, at 

one time we taught how He is the one 
only Causes; and at another, how He is 

called Father+, or Almighty5; and at an- 
other, how He is the Creator ° of the universe ; 
and yet the division of the Lectures made no 
division of the Faith, in that He, the Object 
of devotion, both was and is One ;—and 

U O4ts, Conn es $ Ms 1 es 
Lt LET lenat. Pi if edfie, 
ome eas bo ong baer a Panes ypapeu TH afvobew aren ULOV. 
“Caritas is constantly used in the same manner. 
2 1 Cor. i te. 8 aty Mas 4 Ib. vii. 
ds ae 

Cpas ay LT I)Ss 

5 Ib, viii. 

DISCOURSE 

of Jesus Christ, 

ON THE HoLy GHOST, 

8. 

rar Saye a inate 
NSGOTH, (F"¢t. 

gain, as in discoursing concerning the Only- 
beg vtten Son of God we taught at one time 
“concerning His Godhead 7, and at another con- 
cerning His Manhood®, dividing into many dis- 
courses the doctrines concerning our Lord 
yet preaching undivided faith 
‘towards Him ;—so now also though the Lec- 
tures concerning the Holy Spirit are divided, 
yet we preach faith undivided towards Him. 
For it is one and the Self-same Spirit who 
divides His gifts to every man severally as He 
wild 9, Himself the while remaining undivided. 
Tor the Comforter is not different from the 
Holy Ghost, but one and the selfsame, called 
by various names; who lives and subsists, and 
speaks, and works ; and ofall rational natures 
made by God through Christ, both of Angels 
and of men, He is the Sanctifier*. 

3. But lest any from lack of learning, should 
suppose from the different titles of the Holy 
Ghost that these are divers spirits, and not one 
and the self-same, which alone there is, there- 
fore the Catholic Church guarding thee before- 
hand hath delivered to thee in the. profession of 
the faith, that thou “BELIEVE IN ONE HoLy 

GHOST THE COMFORTER, WHO SPAKE BY THE 
PROPHETS ;” that thou mightest know, that 

though His names be many, the Holy Spirit is 
but one ;—of which names, we will now re- 
hearse to you a few out of many. 

4. He is called the Spirit, according to the 
Scripture just now read, /ur to one ts given by 
the Spirtt the word of wisdom?. He is called 
the Spirit of Truth, as the Saviour says, [Vez 
fle, the Spirtt of Truth, ts comes. He is called 
also the Comforter, as He said, Zur ¢f 7 go not 
away, the Comforter will not come unto yous, 

7 Cet ei, S Tia 9 ia Pie sure 
* Compare Basil. de Sp. Sancto, c. 33: “ By ae Pactuaer’s will 
the ministering spirits subsist, and by an operation of the Son 
they are brought into existence, and by the presence of the Holy 
Ghost are perfected : and the perfection of Angels is sanctification 
| and continuance therein.” 
4 Ib. z 

Sor Core iis ee 

SuJohn xvit 13. 

But that He is one and the same, though called 
by different titles, is shewn plainly from the 
following. For that the Holy Spirit and the 
Comforter are the same, is declared in those | 
words, But the Comforter, which is the Holy’ 
Ghosts; and that the Comforter Is the same as 
the Spirit of Truth, is declared, when it is said, 
And [will give you another Comforter, that He! 
may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of | 
Truth® ; and again, But when the Comforter is 
come whom L will send unto you from the Father, | 
even the Spirit of Truth?, And He is called 
the Spirit of God, according as it is written, 
And L saw the Spirit of God descending ® » and 
again, Zor as many as are led by the Spirit of 
God, they are the sons of God? He is called 
also the Spirit of the Father, as the Saviour 
says, Lor it ts not ye that speak, but the Spirit 
of your Lather which speaketh tn you*; and 
again Paul saith, Aor ‘his cause I bow my knees 
wnio the Father, and the rest; . that Fle 
would grant you to be strengthened by Fis 
Spirit?, He is also called the Spirit of the Lord, 
according to that which Peter spake, [Vy ¢s 
it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit 
of the Lord}? He is called also the Spirit of 
God and Christ, as Paul writes, But ye are not 
in the flesh, but in the Spirit, of so be that the 
Spirit of God dwell in you. But tf any man 
have not the Spirit of Christ, he ts none of Lis +. 
He is called also the Spirit of the Son of God, 
as it is said, And because ye are sons, God hath 
sent forth the Spirit of His Son 5, He is called 
also the Spirit of Christ, as it is written, 
Searching what or what manner of time the 
Spirtt of Christ which was in them did signifv® ; 
and again, Zhrough your prayer, and the supply 
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ 7, 

5. Thou wilt find many other titles of the 
Holy Ghost besides. ‘Thus He is called the 
Spirit of Holiness, as it is written, According 
to the Spirit of Foliness®. He is also called the 
Spirit of adoption, as Paul saith, for ye recerved 
not the spirit of bondage again unto fear, but ye 
recelved the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, 
Abba, Father9. We is also called the Spirit of 
revelation, as it is written, J/Zay give you the 
Spirit of wisdom and revelation tn the know- 
ledve of Him*. He is also called the Spirit of 
promise, as the same Paul says, Zz whom ye 
also after that ye belteved, were sealed with the 
Holy Spirit of promise’. He is also called the 
Spirit of grace, as when he says again, dvd 
hath done despite to the Spirit of grace3. And 
by many other such-like titles is He named. 

7 De SVe 20s 

jig) OM ial S90 aD, GF 

,;And thou heard 

fear of Godt®, 

5 John xiv. 26. 6 Ib. vv. 16, £7. 

Solid. 32. 9 Rom. viii. 14. I Matt. x. 20. 
2 Vph. ili. 14—16. 3 AGES vO, 4 Rom. viii. 9. 
5 Gal. iv. 6. & 7 Pet nh 2 7 Elieatato: 
& Rom. i. 4. 9 Ib. viii. 15. PS ply Ws 17s 

bosecen se Be ERE sesame 

125 

est plainly in the foregoing 
Lecture, that in the Psalms He is called at one 
time the good Spivit+, and at another the prenceZ;' 
Spirits; and in Esaias He was styled the Spiri 
of wisdom and understanding, of counsel, and 
micht, of knowledse, and of godliness, and of the 
By all which Scriptures both 
those before and those now alleged, it 1s estab- 
lished, that though the titles of the Holy Ghost 
be different, He is one and the same; living 
and subsisting, and always present together 
with the Father and the Son7; not uttered or 
breathed from the mouth and lips of the Father 
or the Son, nor dispersed into the air, but 
having a real substance °, Himself speaking, and 
working, and dispensing, and sanctifying ; even 
as the Economy of salvation which is to usward 
from the Father and the Son and the Holy 
Ghost, is inseparable and harmonious and one, 
as we have also said before. For I wish you 
to keepin mind those things which were lately 
spoken, and to know clearly that there is not 
one Spirit in the Law and the Prophets, and 
another in the Gospels and Apostles ; but that 
it is One and the Selfsame Holy Spirit, which 
both in the Old and in the New ‘Testament, 
spake the divine Scriptures 9. 

6. This is the Holy Ghost, who came upon 
the Holy Virgin Mary; for since He who was 
conceived was Christ the Only-begotten, the 
power of the Highest overshadowed her, and 
the Holy Ghost came upon her*, and sanctified 
her, that she might be able to receive Him, dy 
whom all things were made*. But 1 have no 
need of many words to teach thee that that 
generation was without defilement or taint, for 
thou hast learned it. It is Gabriel who says 
to her, I am the herald of what shall be done, 
but have no part inthe work. ‘Though an Arch- 
angel, I know my place; and though I joyfully 
bid thee All hail, yet how thou shalt bring forth, 
is not of any grace of mine. Zhe Holy Ghost 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore atso 
that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall 
be called the Son of God 3. 

7. This Holy Spirit wrought in Elisabeth ; 
for He recognises net virgins only, but matrons 
also, so that their marriage be lawful. And 

4 Cte 40, 28'S PScexlin. toy 

5 nyemovex@, Sept. Ps. li, 12: 
spirtt. . & Ts: xii2. 
7 Origen, in the Catena on St. John iii. 8: ‘‘ This also shews 
that the Spirit is a Being (ovoiav): for He is not, as some suppose 
an energy of God, having according to them no individuality 
of subsistence. And the Apostle also, after enumerating the gifts 
of the Spirit, immediately added, But add these worketh the one 
and the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally as fle will. 
Now if He willeth and worketh and divideth, He is surely an 
energizing Being, but not an energy” (Suicer, Thesaurus, 

R.V. Uphold me with a free 

Hvevpa). F : 
8 évurdatratov. Cf. Cat. x1. 103 XVI. 13, note 5. : 
Ce Abert Ors Savile 4% I Luke i. 35. 2 eT Bee 

3 Luke i. 35. 

gs 
Ta 

Lelisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghosts, and 
prophesied ; and that noble hand-maiden says 
of her own Lord, «Lod cehence 7s this to me, that 
the Mother of mv Lord should come to mes? Yor 
Elisabeth counted herself blessed. Filled with 
this Tloly Spirit, Zacharias also, the father of 
John, prophesied’, telling how many good things 
the Only-begotten should procure, and that 
Jobn should be lis harbinger? through baptism. 
By this Iloly Ghost also it was revealed to just 
Symeon, “at he should not sce death, till he had 
seen the Lord’s Christ® » and he received Him 
in his arms, and bore clear testimony in the 
Temple concerning Him. 

8. And John also, who had been filled with 
the Holy Ghost from his mother’s womb 9, was 
for this cause sanctified, that he might baptize 
the Lord; not giving the Spirit himself, but 
preaching glad tidings of Him who gives the 
Spirit. For he says, f ¢éxdeed baptize you with 
cater unto repentance, but Fe that cometh after 
me, and the rest; He shall baptize you with the 
Holy Ghost and with fire. But wherefore with 
fire? Because the descent of the Holy Ghost 
was in fiery tongues; concerning which the 
Lord says joyfully, Zam come lo send fire on the 
earth: and what will L, tf it be already kindled? ? 

9. This Holy Ghost came down when the 
Lord was baptized, that the dignity of Him 
who was baptized might not be hidden; as 
John says, But He which sent me to baptize with 
water, the same said unto me, Upon whomsoever 
thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remain- 
ing upon Him, the same ts He which baptizeth 
with the Holy Ghost 3, But see what saith the 
Gospel; the heavens were opened; they were 
opened because of the dignity of Him who 
descended; for, Zo, he says, the heavens were 
opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending 
as a dove, and lighting upon Lim: that 
is, with voluntary motion in His descent. 
Tor it was fit, as some have interpreted, 
that the primacy and first-fruitss of the 
Holy Spirit promised to the baptized should 
be conferred upon the manhood of the 
Saviour, who is the giver of such grace. But 
perhaps He came down in the form of a dove, 
as some say, to exhibit a figure of that dove 
who is pure and innocent and undefiled, and 
also helps the prayers for the children she has 
begotten, and for forgiveness of sins ®; even as 

S Pure. 49. 6 Ib. uw. 67. 

& Luke ii. 26—35. 9 Cat) ai.-6. 

2 Luke xii. 49. 3 Johni. 33. 4 Matt. ii, 26: 

5 Tas amapyas Kal Ta Tpwreca. ‘The order is inverted in the 
translation. Cf. Hermas, St. vill. 7 €xovtes CyAov tiva év 
adAnAOLS TEPL TOWTELWY. 

6 The Benedictine Editor adds the two ast words t¥mov mapa- 
&Aovv from MSS. Roe. Casaub. as necessary to the construction, 
and adds the following note. ‘* The text thus emended is capable 
of two senses. ‘The first, that the Holy Spirit came down in the 
form of a dove, a pure and harmless bird, to shew that He 1s 
Tlimself as it were a mystic dove in His simplicity and love of 
children, for whose new birth and remission of sins at Baptism Tle 

4 Luke i. 41. 7 Th. w. 76. 

I Matt. iii. az. 

CATECH TP Fie Sia 1 i ee, 

| 

it was emblematically foretold that Christ 
should be thus manifested in the appearance 
of His eyes; for in the Canticles she cries 
concerning the Bridegroom, and says, 7zine 
eyes are as doves by the rivers of water 7, 

10. Of this dove, the dove of Noe, according 
to some, was in part a figure*. lor as in his 
time by means of wood and of water there 
came salvation to themselves, and the begin- 
ning of a new generation, and the dove returned 
to him towards evening with an olive branch ; 
thus, say they, the Holy Ghost also descended 
upon the true Noe, the Author of the second 
birth, who draws together into one the wills of 
all nations, of whom the various dispositions 
of the animals in the ark were a figure :—Him 
at whose coming the spiritual wolves feed with 
the lambs, in whose Church the calf, and the 
lion, and the ox, feed in the same pasture, as 
we behold to this day the rulers of the world 
cuided and taught by Churchmen. ‘The spiri- 
tual dove therefore, as some interpret, came 
down at the season of His baptism, that 
He might shew that it is He who by the 
wood of the Cross saves them who believe, 
He who at eventide should grant salvation 
through His death. 

11, And these things perhaps should be 
otherwise explained ; but now again we must 

‘hear the words of the Saviour Himself con- 

cerning the Holy Ghost. Tor He says, Lvceft 
a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he 
cannot enter tnto the kingdom of God, And that 
this grace is from the Father, He thus states, 
Flow much more shall your heavenly Lather give 
the Holy Spirit to them that ask him’, And 
that we ought to worship God in the Spirit, 
He shews thus, But the hour cometh and now 
ts, when the true worshippers shall worship the 
Lather in Spirit and in truth ; for the Father 
also secketh such to worship LLim. God ts a Spirit ; 
and they that worship Him must worship Him tn 
spirit and in truth?, Andagain, But if Lf by the 

unites His prayers with Christ’s, as Cyril teaches in Cat. xvi. 20: 
and that Christ was for the like cause mystically foreshown in 
Canticles as having eyes like a dove’s. The other sense is, that 
the Spirit descended in the form of a dove on Christ’s Humanity 
in order to shew this to be as it were a dove in innocence, holiness, 
love of children, and concurrence with the Holy Spirit in their 
regeneration... . Either sense is admissible, and maintained by 
many of the Fathers: but I prefer the former.” This inter- 
pretation is confirmed by Tertullian (de Baptism, c. vili.), who 
says that the Holy Spirit glided down on the Lord ‘‘in the shape 
of a dove” in order that the nature of the Holy Spirit might 
be declared by means of a creature of simplicity and innocence.” 

7 Cant. v. 12, éxt wAypdpara vSérwv (Sept.). The usual 
meaning of df8aduoparas is ‘‘ manifestly to the eyes,” Esther 
Vili. 13: 

8 Tertullian, 747@ ‘Just as after the waters of the deluge, 
by which the old iniquity was purged—after the baptism, so to 
say, of the world—a dove was the herald which announced to the 
earth the assuagement of celestial wrath,. .. . so to our flesh, 
as it emerges from the font after its old sins, flies the dove of the 
Holy Spirit, bringing us the peace of God, sent out from heaven 
where the Church is, the typified ark.” Compare also Hippolytus. 
The Holy Theophany, §§8, 9, a treatise with which Cyril has 
much in common. 

9 John iii. 5. 

ST pulsewnieetas 2 John iv. 23. 

Spirit of God cast out devils 3; and immediately 

jhe oN. 

127 

Be eye 

afliction*, But whenee went He up? From 

afterwards, Zherefore LT say unto you, ALM man-) Wades ; for thus the Gospel relates, that then 
ner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto aficr His resurrection He breathed on them. 

men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost | 
shall not be forgiven. And whosoever shall 
speak a word against the Son of man, tt shall 
be forgiven him; but wioscever shall speak a 
word against the [oly Ghost, it shall not be for-| 
‘6 

ten him, neither in this world, neither tn the 

oy 
world to come 4, 

another Comforter, that Le may be with you 
Jor ever, the Spirit of Truth » whom the world | 
cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither | 
knoweth Him, but ye know Lim, for He 
abiteth with you, and shall be in yous, And 
again He says, Zhese things have I spoken unto 
you being yet present with you. But the Com- 
porter, which ts the Holy Ghost, whom the 
Lather will send in My name, He shall teach 
jou all things, and bring to your remembrance 
all things that f said unto you®, And again He 
says, Lut when the Comforter ts come, whom I 
wil send unto you from the Father, even the 
Spirit of Lruth, which proceedeth from the 
Lather, He shall testify of Afe7, And again the 
Saviour says, Lor if [ go not away, the Com- 
Sorter will not come unto you’... .. And when 
Lle ts come, He will convince the world of sin, of 
rishteousiess, and of judgment), and afterwards 
again, J have yet many things to say unto Jou, 
but ye cannot bear them now, LHowwbett, when 
fle the Spirit of Truth ts come, He will declare 
unto you ali the truth, for [Le shall not speak from 
flimself but whatsoever He shall hear that 
shall He speak, and LHe shall announce unto you 
the things to come. He shall glorify Me, for He 
shall take of Mine, and shall announce tt unto 
jouw. Al things that the Father hath are mine ; 
thercfore said L, That He shall take of Mine,and 
shall announce it unto you". Thave read to thee 
now the utterances of the Only-begotten Him- 
self, that thou mayest not give heed to men’s 
words, 

r2. The fellowship of this Holy Spirit He 
bestowed on the Apostles; for it is written, 
And when LHe had said this, He breathed on 
then, and saith unto them, Reecive ye the Holy 
Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are re- 
mitted unto them; and iwhose soever sins ye 
retain, they are relained®, Vhis was the second 
time He breathed on man (His first breath 3 
having been stifled through wilful sins); that 
the Seripture might be fulfilled, He went ip 
breathing upon thy face, and delivering thee from 

Ae Ula Sh aire 
PLD eos 
1 Ib. v. r2—15. 2] 

2 Matt. x1. 28: 
Ca DD woes 
OP iciaioe 

But though He bestowed His grace then, He 
was to lavish it yet more bountifully ; and He 
says to them, “Iam ready to give it even now, 
but the vessel cannot yet hold it; for a while 
therefore receive ye as much grace as ye can 
bear ; and look forward for yetinore ; dul Larry 

. ; | 
And again He says, dnd I ye in the city of Jerusalem, unlil ye be clothed 
aul pray the Lather, and He shall vive you 

with power from on highs, Receive it in part 
now ; then, ye shall wear it in its fulness. Tor 
he who receives, often possesses the gift but in 
part; but he who is clothed, is completely 
enfolded by his robe. “Icar not,” He says, 
“the weapons and darts of the devil; for ye 
shall bear with you the power of the Holy 
Ghost.” But remember what was lately said, 
that the Holy Ghost is not divided, but only 
the grace which is given by Him. 

13. Jesus therefore went up into heaven, and 
fulfilled the promise. For He said to them, 
L will pray the Father, and He shall give you 
another Coniforter®, So they were sitting, look- 
ing for the coming of the Holy Ghost ; and when 
the day of Pentecost was fully come, here, in this 
city of Jerusalem,—(for this honour also belongs 
to us7; and we speak not of the good things 
which have happened among others, but of 
those which have been vouchsafed among our- 
selves,)—on the day of Pentecost, I say, they 
were sitting, and the Comforter came down from 
heaven, the Guardian and Sanctifier of the 
Church, the Ruler of souls, the Pilot of the 
tempest-tossed, who leads the wanderers to the 
light, and presides over the combatants, and 
crowns the victors. 

14. But He came down to clothe the Apos- 
tles with power, and to baptize them; for the 
Lord says, ye shall be baptized with the Holy 
Ghost not many days hence®, This grace was not 
in part, but His power was in full perfection ; for 
as he who plunges into the waters and is bap- 
tized is encompassed on all sides by the waters, 
so were they also baptized completely by the 
Holy Ghost. ‘The water however flows round the 
outside only, but the Spirit baptizes also the soul 
within, and that completely. And wherefore 
wonderest thou? ‘Take an example from mat- 
ter; poor indeed and common, yet useful for 
the simpler sort. If the fire passing in through 
the mass of the iron makes the whole of it 

4 Nahum ii. rt. The Septuagint, followed by Cyril, differs 
widely from the Hebrew: (R.V.) //e that dasheth in pieces is 
conte up before thy face. 

5 Luke xxiv. 39. 6 John xiv. 16. 

7 Cat. iii. 7; xvi. 5. Bp. Pearson (Lectrones in Acta A post. I. 
§ 18): ‘Rightly said Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, ‘All prero- 
gatives are with us.’ And the Emperor Justin called her ‘Mother 
of the Christian name? Jerome also (2%. 17; 3);'said 7 “Lhe 

whole mystery of our Faith is native of that province and city.’”’ 
aie bearer? 

ony 

128 

fire, so that what was cold becomes burning 
and what was black is made bright,—if fire 
which is a body thus penetrates and works 
without hindrance in iron which is also a body, 
why wonder that the Holy Ghost enters into 
the very inmost recesses of the soul ? 

t5. .And lest men should be ignorant of the 
vreatness of themighty giftcoming down to them. 
there sounded as it were a heavenly trumpet, 
For suddenly there came from heaven a sound as of 
the rushing ofa mivhty wind 9, signuilying the pre- 
sence of Him who was to grant power unto men 
to seize with violence the kingdom of God ; that 
both their eyes might see the fiery tongues, 
and their ears hear the sound. And tt filled all 
the house where they were sitting ; for the house 
became the vessel of the spiritual water; as 
the disciples sat within, the whole house was 
filled. 

body with a divine garment of salvation, 
there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of 

fire, and tt sat upon each of them; and they, 

were all filled with the Floly Ghost. ‘Vhey 
partook of fire, not of burning but of saving 
fire ; of fire which consumes the thorns of sins, 
but gives lustre to the soul, ‘This is now 
coming upon you also, and that to strip away 
and consume your sins which are like thorns, 
and to brighten yet more that precious posses- 
sion of your souls, and to give you grace ; for 
He gave it then to the Apostles. And He sat 
upon them in the form of fiery tongues, that 
they might crown themselves with new and 
spiritual diadems by fiery tongues upon their 
heads. A fiery sword barred of old the gates of 
Paradise ; a fiery tongue which brought salva- 
tion restored the gift. 

16. And they began to speak with other tongues 
as the Spirit gave them utterancet. The Gali- 
lean Peter or Andrew spoke Persian or Median. 
John and the rest of the Apostles spake every 
tongue to those of Gentile extraction ; for not 
in our time have multitudes of strangers first 
begun to assemble here from all quarters, but 
they have done so since that time. What 
teacher can be found so great as to teach men 
all at once things which they have not learned ? 
So many years are they in learning by gram- 
mar and other arts to speak only Greek well ; 
nor yet do all speak this equally well; the 
Rhetorician perhaps succeeds in speaking well, 
and the Grammarian sometimes not well, and 
the skilful Grammarian is ignorant of the sub- 
jects of philosophy. But the Holy Spirit 
taught them many languages at once, lan- 
guages which in all their life they never 
knew. ‘This is in truth vast wisdom, this is 

> RCTS ay Se © bea, 

CATs hl eee ie, 

Thus they were entirely baptized ac- | 
cording to the promise, and invested soul and | 
And | 

i} 

_power divine. What a contrast of their long 
ignorance in time past to their sudden, com- 
plete and varied and unaccustomed exercise of 
‘these lanzuages ! 

| 17. The multitude of the hearers was con- 
‘founded ;—it was a secord confusion, in the 
room of that first evil one at Babylon. Tor in 
that confusion of tongues there was division 
of purpose, because their thought was at 
enmity with God; but here minds were re- 
stored and united, because the object of interest 
was godly. The means of falling were the 
/means of recovery. Wherefore they maryelled, 
saying ?, Z/ow hear we them speaking ? No mar- 
vel if ye be ignorant ; for even Nicodemus 
was ignorant of the coming of the Spirit, and 
| to himit was said, Zhe Spirit breatheth where it 
listeth, and thou hearest the voice thereof, but 
canst not tell zwhence tt cometh, and whither tt 
goeth 3; but if, even though I hear His voice, I 
know not whence he cometh, how can I 
explain, what He is Himself in substance ? 

18. But others mocking satd, They are full 
of new wine+, and they spoke truly though 
in mockery. For in truth the wine was new, 
even the grace of the New Testament; but 
this new wine was from a spiritual Vine, 
which had oftentimes ere this borne fruit in 
Prophets, and had budded in the New Testa- 
ment. For as in things sensible, the vine 
ever remains the same, but bears new fruits 
in its seasons, so also the self-same Spirit 
continuing what He is, as He had often wrought 
in Prophets, now manifested a new and mar- 
vellous work. For though His grace had come 
before to the Fathers also, yet here it came 
exuberantly ; for formerly men only partook of 
the Holy Ghost, but now they were baptized 
completely. 

1g. But Peter who had the Holy Ghost, 
and who knew what he possessed, says, ‘ JZe7 
of Israel, ye who preach Joel, but know not 
the things which are written, ‘/ese men are not 
drunken as ye supposes, Vrunken they are, not 
however as ye suppose, but according to that 
which is written, Zhey shall be drunken with 
the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make 
them drink of the torrents of thy pleasure®, 
They are drunken, with a sober drunkenness, 
deadly to sin and life-giving to the heart, 
a drunkenness contrary to that of the body; 
for this last causes forgetfulness even of what 
was known, but that bestows the knowledge 
even of what was not known. ‘They are 
drunken, for they have drunk the wine of the 
spiritual vine, which says, Zam the vine and ye 

2 Nets als eee 
3 John ili. 8: (R.V.) The wind bloweth: (Marg.) Or, The 
Spirit breatheth. It is impossible to preserve the double meaning 
'in English. 4 Acts il. 13. 
! ig) Goan CPs XAOS IL 8. 

15. 

1 es 

are the branches?, But if ye are not persuaded 
by me, understand what [ tcll you from the 
very time of the day ; 
of the day®. For He who, as Mark relates, 
Was crucified at the third hour, now at the| 
third hour sent down His grace. Vor His. 
grace is: not other than the Spirit’s grace, 

but He who was then crucified, who also 
gave the promise, made good that which | 
We promised. And if ye “would 

testimony also, Listen, he says: “ But this | 
as that which was spoken by the prophet Joel ; 
fue it shall come to pass after this, saith God, 

L will pour forth of My Spirits” 
word, L well pour forth, implied a rich gift; 

for @s the third hour crucifiers of Chi 

reccive a|healed 

—(and this | Zarr®, 

AW: T29 
was the grace which wrought in all the 
Apostles together, that, out of the Jews, those 
t, this great number believed, 
rand age baptized in the Name of Christ, and 
(CONLIN / steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and 
in the prayers+. And again in the same power 
of the Holy Ghost, fer and Sohn went up 
into the Temple at the hour of priver, which 
was the ninth hours, and in the Name of Jesus 
the man at the Beautiful gate, who had 
been Jame from his mother’s womb for forty 
years; that it ight be fulfilled which was 
spoken, Zhen shall the lame man leap as an 
| And thus, as they captured in the 
. | spiritual net of their doctrine five thousand 

for God giveth not the Spirit by measure, for| believers at once, so they confuted the mis- 
the Father loveth the Son, and hath given ail guided rulers of the people and chief priests, 
things into His hand* ; and Hehas given Him and that, not through their own wisdom, for 
the power also of bestowing the grace of the (they were unlearned and ignorant men 73. get 
All-holy Spirit on whomsoever He will) ;— through the mighty power of the Holy G host ; 
L will pour forth of Aly Spirit upon all flesh, | for it is written, Then Peter filled with the Holy 
and your sons and your daughters shall pro-| Ghost said to them ®, So great also was the 
phesy s and afterwards, Yea, avd on Aly ser-| grace of the Holy Ghost, “which wrought by 
vants and on Aly handmaidens [will pour out means of the Twelve Apostles in them who 
mm those aavs of Aly Spirit, and they shall believed, that they were of one heart and of one 

prophesy?” The Holy Ghost is no respecter. 
of persons; for He seeks not dignities, 
piety of soul. 
up, nor the poor dejected, but only let each 

prepare himself for reception of the Heavenly 

gift. 

20. We have said much to-day, and _ per- 
chance you are weary of listening ; 
still remains. 
of the Holy Ghost there were 
Makeat and of many besides. But we must 
have your indulgence on both points. Tor as | 
the Holy Festival of Easter is now at hand, 
we have this day lengthened our discourse ; 
and yet we had not room to bring before you 

need of a third | 

oll the testimonies from the New ‘Testament | 

which we ought. lor many passages are still 

to come from the Acts of the Apostles in| 

which the grace of the Holy Ghost wrought 
mightily in Peter and in all the Apostles to- 
gether ; many also from the Catholic Epistles, 
and the fourteen Epistles of Paul; out of all 
which we will now endeavour to gather a few, 
like flowers from a large meadow, merely by 
way of remembrance. 

For in the power of the Holy Ghost, 
by the will of Father and Son, Peter stood 
with the Eleven, and lifting up his voice, 
(according to the text, Left up thy voice with 
strength, thou that bringest good tidings to Jerit- 
salem 3), ¢ captured in the spiritual net of his 
words, about three thousand souls, So great 

25 
ao 

9 Joel ii. 22. 
3. DSi] cee 

8 Acts ii. and 15. 

7 John-xvi5. 
Joel 1, 29. 

1 John ili. 34, 35. 2 

VO. ViDis 

yet more 
And in truth for the doctrine | people *. 

soul, and their enjoyment of their goods was 

but common, the possessors piously offerin g the 
Let neither the rich be puffed | “prices of their possessions, and no one amony 

‘them wanting aught; while Ananias and 
| Sapphira, who attempted to lie to the Holy 
Ghost, underwent their befitting punishment. 
22. And by the hands of the Apostles were 
many signs and wonders wrought among the 
And so great was the ‘spiritual grace 
gentle as “they 

shed around the Apostles, that ¢ 
were, they were the objects of dread ; for of 
the rest durst no man join hinself to them; but 
the people magnified them » and multitudes were 
added of those who belived on the Lord, both of 
men and women, and the streets were filled 
'with the sick on their beds and couches, ¢ha¢ 
cas Peter passed by, at least his shadow micht 
overshador some of them. And the multitude 
also of the citics round about came unto this 
holy Jerusalem, érivging sick folk, ana then 
that were vexed with unclean spirits, and they 
were healed every one in this power of the Holy 
Ghost *. 

ae Again, after the Twelve Apostles had 
been cast into prison by the chief priests for 
preaching Christ, and had been marvellousiy 
delivered from it at night by an Angel, and 
were brought before them in the judement 
hall from the Temple, they fearlessly rebuked 
them in their discourse to them concerning 
Christ, and added this, that God hath also given 
flis Holy Spirit to them that obey Flim 3, "And 

y 

4 Acts il. 42. 
TONGS AV JL 
t Acts v.te, 

5S ALy Bin es Gals. See: 
SE ly eio Ss 9° LD. ce Se 
2 Ib. wv. 13—16. 

4 

T3 

O CATECRIies 

| 
when they had been scourged, they went their 
way rejoicing, and ceased not to teach and 
preach Jesus as the Christs. | 

24. And it was not in the Twelve Apostl 
only that the grace of the Holy Spirit wrought, 
but also in the first-born children of this once | 
barren Church, IT mean the seven Deacons 3) 
for these also were chosen, as it is written, | 
being full of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom. | 
Qf whom Stephen, rightly so named ", the first | 
fruits of the Martyrs, aman /ad/ of faith and of | 
the Moly Ghost, wrought great wonders and | 
miracks among the people, and vanquished 
those who disputed with him; for ¢hey cere 
not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by 
which he spake?, But when he was maliciously 
accused and brought to the judgment hall, he} 
was radiant with angelic brightness; for a// 
they who sat in the counctl, looking steadfastly | 
on him, saw his face, as tt had becn the face of 
an Angel’, And having by his wise defence 
confuted the Jews, those sé¢ffnecked men, uneti- 
cunmised in heart and ears, ever resisting the | 
Holy Ghost, he beheld the heavens opened, and | 
saw the Son of Man standing on the right hand 
of God. We saw Him, not by his own power, 
but, as the Divine Scripture says, Jedig full of 
the Floly Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into 
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus 
standing on the right hand of God*. 

25. In this power of the Holy Ghost, 
Philip also in the Name of Christ at one 
time in the city of Samaria drove away the 
unclean spirits, eying out with a loud voice; 
and healed the palsied and the lame, and 
brought to Christ great multitudes of them 
that believe. To whom Peter and John came 
down, and with prayer, and the laying on of 
hands, imparted the fellowship of the Holy 
Ghost, from which Simon Magus alone was 
declared an alien, and that justly. And at 
another time Philip was called by the Angel 
of the Lord in the way, for the sake of that 
most godly Ethiopian, the Eunuch, and heard 
distinctly the Spirit Himself saying, Go zear, 
and join thyself to this chariot?. We instructed 
the Eunuch, and baptized him, and so having 
sent into Ethiopia a herald of Christ, according 
as it is written, L¢hiopia shall soon stretch out 
her hand unto God3, he was caught away by 
the Angel, and preached the Gospel in the 
citles In succession. 

26. With this Holy Spirit Paul also had been 
filled after his calling by our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Let godly Ananias come as a witness to what 
we say, he who in Damascus said to him, 7%e 
Lori, even Jesus who appeared to thee in the way 

CS | 

see ee BS Ds 

ss 4 Acts v. 42. f Tb.Vip 6 Ib. wv. 8. Sréhaves, 
* dr orton” id Oper ais coy ce Wee a ae 2 lly vat, 
t Thode Ss, 2 Ih. viii. 5. 3 Ps. eisai; 

sedis ——————_—$ —___——~ 

which thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mayest 
receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy 
Gost4, And straightway the Spirit’s mighty 
working changed the blindness of Paul's eyes 
into newness of sight; and having vouchsated 
[lis scal unto his soul,made hima e/esen vessel to 
bear the Name of the Lord who had appeared to 
him, dcfore kings and the children of Lsrael, and 
rendered the former persecutor an ambassador 
and good scervant,—one, who /vom ferusalem, 
and even unto IMlyricum, fully preached the 
Gospel, and instructed even imperial Rome, 
and carried the earnestness of his preaching as 
far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable, 
and performing signs and wonders. Of hin 
for the present enough. ai 

27. In the power of the same Holy Spint 
Peter also, the chief of the Apostles and the 
bearer of the keys" of the kingdom of heaven, 
healed Aineas the paralytic in the Name of 
Christ at Lydda, which is now Diospolis, and at 
Joppa raised from the dead ‘Tabitha rich in vood 
works. And being on the housctop in a trance, 
he saw heaven opened, and by means of the 
vessel let down as it were a sheet full of beasts 
of every shape and sort, he learnt plainly to 
call no man common or unclean, though he 
should be of the Greeks? And when he was 
sent for by Cornelius, he heard clearly the 
Holy Ghost Himself saying, Behold, men seck 
thee,» but arise and get thee down, and go with 
them, nothing doubting ; for I have sent them 
And that it might be plainly shewn that those 
of the Gentiles also who believe are made par- 
takers of the grace of the Holy Ghost, when 
Peter was come to Cesarea, and was teaching 
the things concerning Christ, the Scripture says 
concerning Cornelius and them who were with 
him; IWVhile Peter yet spake these words, the 
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the 
word ; so that they of the circumcision also which 
came with Peter were astonished, and when they 
understood tt satd that on the Gentiles also was 
poured out the gijt of the Holy Ghost, 

28. And in Antioch also, a most renowned 
city of Syria, when the preaching of Christ 
took effect, Barnabas was sent hence as far as 
Antioch to help on the good work, being a good 
man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith* ; 
who seeing a great harvest of believers in Christ, 
brought Paul from ‘Tarsus to Antioch, as his 
fellow-combatant. And when crowds had been 
instructed by them and assembled in the 
Church, ¢¢ came to pass that the disciples were 
called Christians first in Antioch?; the Holy 
Ghost, methinks, bestowing on the believers 
that new Name, which had been promised be- 

4 Acts ix. a7. 5 ASOnis veerO- © kAeSovxos. Cf. Matt. 
WuLAtOn. Cabeail.onot stags 7 Acts x. r1r--16, 8 Tb. v.19 
> Jibs sciyaae 1 Ib. xi. 24. 2b acidoOus ef isialxanens: 

fore by the Lord. And the grace of the Spirit | 
being shed forth by God more abundantly in| 
Antioc h, there were there prophets and teachers | 
of whom Agabus was one 3, And as ¢hey mints-\i 
teretlo the Lord and fasted, the [oly Ghost said, 
Scdarate Ale Barnabas and Saul for the work 
whereunto T have called them. Andafier hands 
had been laid on them, Chey were sent forth by | 
the Lloly Ghost+, Now it is manifest, that the | 
Spirit which speaks and sends, is a living Spirit, 
subsis ting, and operating, as we have said. 

20, This Holy Spirit, who in unison with 
Tfather and Son has established the New Coy- 
enant in the Church Catholic, has set us free 
from the burdens of the law grievous to be borne, 
—those I mean, concerning things common 
and unclean, and meats, and sabbaths, and 
new moons, and circumcision, and sprinklings, | 
and sacrifices ; which were given for a season, 
and Aad a shadow of the good things to comes, 
but which, when the truth had come, were 
nichtly withdrawn. For when Paul and Bar- 
nabas were sent to the Apostles, because of 
the question moved at Antioch by them who 
said that it was necessary to be circumcised 
and to keep the customs of Moses, the Apos- 
tles who were here at Jerusalem by a written 
injunction set free the whole world from all the 
legal and typical observances; yet they attri- 
buted not to themselves the full authority in 
so great a matter, but send an injunction in 
writing, and acknowledge this: Lor tt hath 
seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and to us, to 
fav upon you no greater burden than these neces- 
sary things ; that ye abstain from things sacri- 
ficed to idols, and from blood, and from things 
strangled, and from fornication © » shewing evi- 
dently by what they wrote, that though the 
writing was by the hands of human Apostles, 
yet the decree is universal from the Holy 
Ghost: which decree Paul and Barnabas took 
and confirmed unto all the world. 

30. And now, having proceeded thus far in 
my discourse, I ask indulgence from your love 7, 
or rather from the Spirit who dwelt in Paul, if 
I should not be able to rehearse everything, by 
reason of my own weakness, and your weariness 
who listen. For when shall I in terms worthy of 
Himself declare the marvellous deeds wrought 
by the operation of the Holy Ghost in the 
Name of Christ? Those wrought in Cyprus 
upon Elymas the sorcerer, and in Lystra at the 
healing of the cripple, and in Cilicia and 
Phrygia and Galatia and Mysia and Macedonia? 
or those at Philippi (the preaching, I mean, 
and the driving out of the spirit of divination 
in the Name of Christ ; and the salvation by 

: Acts x1. 28. 
Acts xv. 28, 29. 
ee 1er verbal or written. 

4 Ib, xiii, 2—4. SHELeh, 6.2, 
émcoToAy) Means a message or injunction 
7 See note x on § r, above. 

iN 

r 

baptism of the jailer with his eae house at 
night after the earthquake); or the events at 
Thessalonica ; and the ad fe at Arcopagus 
in the midst of the Athenians ; or ithe instruc- 
tions at Corinth, and in all Achaia? How shall 
I worthily recount the mighty deeds which were 
; wrought at Ephesus throug hh Paul I, by the Holy 
Ghost®? W hom they of that Cit ty knew not be- 
fore, but came to know Him by the doctrine of 
Paul; and when Paul had laid his hands on 
them, and the Holy Ghost had come upon 

them, “icy spake wth tongues, and prophe- 
sied, And so great spirit tual grace was upon 
him, that not only his touch wrought cures, 

but even the Zandherchiefs and napkins’, broucht 
from his body, healed discases, iuie seared away 
the evil spirits ; and at last “hey also whe prac- 
lised curious arts brought their books together, 
and buricd them before all men, 

31. I pass by the work wrought at Troas on 
Eutychus, who being borne down by his steep fell 
down from the third loft, and was taken up dead y 
yet was saved alive by Paul?. I also pass by 
the prophecies addressed to the Elders of 
Kphesus whom he called to him in Miletus, 
to whom he openly said, Zhat the Holy Ghost 
witnesseth in every city, saying 3,—and the rest ; 
for by saying, 7 every ci/y, Paul made manifest 
that the marvellous works done by him in each 
city, were from the operative power of the Holy 
Ghost, by the will of God, and in the Name of 
Christ who spake in him. By the power of this 
Holy Ghost, the same Paul was hastening to 
this holy city Jerusalem, and_ this, though 
Agabus by the Spirit foretold what should 
befall him ; and yet he spoke to the people 
with confidence, declaring the things concern- 
ing Christ. And when br ought to Cesarea, 
and set amid tribunals of justice, at one time 
before Felix, and at another before Testus the 
governor and King Agrippa, Paul obtained of 
the Holy Ghost grace so great, and triumphant 
in wisdom, that at last Agrippa himself the king 
of the Jews said, Almost thou persuadest me to be 
a Christian +. This Holy Spirit granted to Paul, 
when he was in the island of Melita also, 
to receive no harm when bitten by the viper, 
and to effect divers cures on the diseased. 
This Holy Spirit guided him, the persecutor 
of old, as a herald of Christ, even as far as 
imperial ikome, and there he persuaded many 
of the Jews to believe in Christ, and to them 
who gainsaid he said plainly, I/ cl? spake the 
floly Ghost by Lsaias the Prophet, saying unto 
your fathers, and the rest 5, 

8 Acts xix. 1—6. o Thea. ree re Ty. 19 
2 Ib, xx. g—12. si been Zoe nh 
4 1b. xxvi. 28. Cyril evidently understood ¢y 6A \ry@ to mean 

“ almost” (A.V.): but the more correct rend ring is, **In brief 
thou wouldest persuade me to become a Christian.’ 

5 [b, xxviii. 25, 

> 

wd 

24, And that Paul. was full wef the fioy 
Ghost, and all his fellow Apostles, and they, 
who after them believed in Father, Son, and. 
Holy Ghost, hear from himself as he writes | 
plainly in his Epistles ; And my speech, he says, | 
and my preaching was not in persuasive words 
of mans wisdom, but in demonstration of the 
Spirtt and of power®. And again, But He cho 
sealed us for this very purpose ts God, who gave | 
ws the earnest of the Spirit?, Andagain, Lle that) 
raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken 
your mortal bodies by His Spirit which diuclleth 
in you’, And again, writing to ‘Timothy, Z/at 
good thing which was committed to thee guard 
through the Holy Ghost which twas given to us| 

33. And that the Holy Ghost subsists, and 
lives, and speaks, and foretells, I have often said 
in what goes before, and Paul writes it plainly to 
Timothy: ow the Spirit speaketh expressly, 
that in later times some shall depart from the 
faith *,— which we see in the divisions not only 
of former times but also of our own ; so motley 
and diversified are the errors of the heretics. 
And again the same Paul says, IVAich in other 
generations was not made known unto the sons 
of men, as it hath now been revealed unto His 
Floly Apostles and Prophets tn the Spirit?, And 
again, Il herefore, as saith the Holy Ghost}, and 
again, Zhe F[oly Ghost also witnesseth to us. 
And again he calls unto the soldiers of right- 
eousness, saying, And take the helmet of salva- 
rion, and the sword of the Spirit, which ts the 
Word of God, with all prayer and supplication 5, 
And again, Pe not drunk with wine, wherein ts 
excess ; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to 
yourselves tn psalms, and hymns, and spiritual 
songs®, Andagain, Zhe grace of the Lord Jesus, 
and the love of God, and the communion of the 
fToly Ghost be with vou alt’. 

34. By all these proofs, and by more which 
have been passed over, is the personal,and sanc- 
tifying, and effectual powcr of the Holy Ghost 
established for those who can understand ; 
for the time would fail me in my discourse if 
I wished to quote what yet remains concerning 
the Holy Ghost from the fourteen Epistles of 
Paul, wherein he has taught with such variety, 
completeness, and reverence. And to the 
power of the Holy Ghost Himself it must 
belong, to grant to us forgiveness for what 
we have omitted because the days are few, 
and upon you the hearers to impress more 
perfectly the knowledge of what yet remains ; 
while from the frequent reading of the sa- 
cred Scriptures those of you who are diligent 

CATCH Tale Tee ee ee 

© 2 Coa a. te (COr: ty Be: 8 Rom. vili. x1. 

92'Tim. i. 14: (R.V.) dy the Loly Ghost which dwelleth 
7% GAS... 

he EL Sh Ae 2 Eph. ili. 5. 3 Heb. iii. 7. 

4 Ib. x. TS. 5 Eph. vi. 17. © A. 18, TO: 

7 oe Cor, nl. Ta, 

come to understand these things, and by this 
time, both from these present Lectures, and 
from what has before been told you, hold more 
Ssteadiustly ‘the ‘Faith mm “Onk (68> Te 
Fatrver ALMIGHTY ; AND IN OUR LORD JrESUS 
Curist, His ONLY-BEGOTTEN SON; AND IN 
THE Hoty Guostr tik Comrorrer.” Though 
the word itself and title of Spirit is ap- 
plied to Them in common in_ the sacred 
Seriptures,—for it is said of the Father, God 
is a Spirit’, as it is written in the Gospel 
according to John; and of the Son, 4 Sfirit 
before our face, Christ the Lord9, as Jeremias 
the prophet says; and of the Holy Ghost, 
the Comforter, the Holy Ghost*, as was said ; 
—yct the arrangement of articles in_ the 
Faith, if religiously understood, disproves 
the error of Sabellius also?, Return we there- 
fore in our discourse to the point which now 
presses and is profitable to you. 

35. Beware lest ever like Simon thou come 
to the dispensers of Baptism in hypocrisy, 
thy heart the while not seeking the truth.. It 
is ours to protest, but it is thine to secure thyself. 
If thou standest in faith3, blessed art thou; if 
thou hast fallen in unbelief, from this day 
forward cast away thine unbelief, and receive 
full assurance. For, at the season of baptism, 
when thou art come before the Bishops, or 
Presbyters, or Deacons 4+, —(for its grace is every- 
where, in villages and in cities, on them of low 
as on them of high degree, on bondsmen and 
on freemen, for this grace is not of men, but 
the gift is from God through men,)—approach 
the Minister of Baptism, but approaching, think 
not of the face of him thou seest, but remember 
this Holy Ghost of whom we are now speaking. 
For He is present in readiness to seal thy soul, 
and He shall give thee that Seal at which evil 
spirits tremble, a heavenly and sacred seal, as 
also it is written, Zz zehom also ye believed, and 
were scaled with the Holy Spirit of promises. 

36. Yet Hetries the soul. He casts not His 
pearls before swine ; if thou play the hypocrite, 
though men baptize thee now, the Holy Spirit 
will not baptize thee® But if thou approach 
with faith, though men minister in what is 
seen, the Holy Ghost bestows that which is 
unseen. Thou art coming to a great trial, 

8 John iv. 24. 

9 Lam. iv. 20. The breath of cur nostrils, the anointed of the 
Lord: referring to the captive king. t John xiv. 25. 

2 The distinct mention in the Creed of three Persons excludes 
the error of Sabellius in confusing them. Cf. Cat. iv. $3 xvi. 14. 

3 Rom: xt. 20, 

4 Cf. Bingham, Aatiguities, II. xx. ‘“When Cyril directs 
his Catechumens how they should behave themselves at the time 
of Baptism, when they came either before a bishop, or presbyter, 
or deacon, in city or village,—this may be presumed a fair intima- 
tion that then deacons were ordinarily allowed to minister Baptism 
in country places.” See further ‘Of the power granted anciently 
to deacons to baptize,’ Bingham, Lay Baftisi, 1.1. 5. 

& Eph, a, 9. “rt Carawesc: 

© Cf. Procat. § 4: “ ‘The water will reccive, but the Spirit will 
not accept thee.” 

is Osh Bekah 

to a great muster7, in that one hour, which if 

thou throw away, thy disaster is irretrievable ; 
but if thou be counted worthy of the grace, 
thy soul will be enlightened, thou. wilt re- 
ceive a power which thou hadst not, thou 
wilt receive weapons terrible to the evil spirits ; 
and if thou cast not away thine arms, but keep 
the Seal upon thy soul, no evil spirit will ap- 
proach thee ; for he will be cowed ; for verily 
by the Spirit of God are the evil spirits cast 
out. 

37. If thou believe, thou shalt not only re- 
ceive reinission of sins, but also do things 
Which pass man’s power ®. And mayest thou 
be worthy of the gift of prophecy also! For 
thou shalt receive grace according to the 
measure of thy capacity and not of my words ; 
for I may possibly speak of but small things, 
yet thou mayest receive greater; since faith 
is a large affair9, All thy life long will thy 

7 atpatodAoyta. Cf. Cat. ili. 3, wéAAere oTparodoyciaba. 

® The same twofold grace is ascribed to Baptism in Cat. xiii. 
aa: 
the Ning’s spiritual bounty.’ 

9 mpaypareta, Cf. 2 ‘Vim. ij, 
(mpaypateverde) 0700 L come, 

4; and Luke xix. 13: Zrade 

: **'Phou receivest now remission of thy sins, and the gifts of 
, 

AV Ld. ee 
guardian the Comforter abide with thee; He 
will care for thee, as for his own soldier ; for 
thy goings out, and thy comings in, and thy plot- 
ng foes. And He will give thee gifts of grace 
of every kind, if thou grieve Him not by sin; 
for it is written, And erieve not the Lfoly Spirit 
(Of God, whereby ye were scaled unto the day of 
redentption *, What then, beloved, is it to pre- 
| serve grace? Be ye ready to receive grace, 
and when ye have received it, cast it not 
away, 

35. And may the very God of All, who spake 
by the Holy Ghost through the prophets, who 
sent Him forth upon the Apostles on the day 
of Pentecost in this place, Himself send Him 
forth at this time also upon you; and by Him 
keep us also, imparting His benefit in common 
to us all, that we may ever render up the fruits 
of the Holy Ghost, ove, or, peace, long-suffer- 
ing, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem- 
ferance *,in Christ Jesus our Lord :—By whom 
and with whom, together with the Holy Ghost, 
be glory to the Father, both now, and ever, and 
for ever and ever. Amen. 

I Eph. iv. 30. 2 Gal..v. 22, 23. 

LECTURE 3yviie 

ON THE 

ONE 
THE IFLESH, 

\ eee 
Ol AND 

» co 
UD, 

Or AND 

EZEKIEL 

Horny CaTuoLic CHURCH, 
THE Lire 

AND - I8 THE RESURRECTION 

EVERLASTING. 

XXXVI. I. 

The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried ue out in the Spirit of the Lord, 
and set me down in the midst of the valley which was Sull of bones. 

Tur root of all good works is the hope, 
of the Resurrection ; for the expectation of 
the recompense nerves the soul to good works 
Vor every labourer is ready to endure the toils 
he sees their reward in prospect : but when m en 
weary themsclyes for nought, their heart soon 
sinks as well as their body. A soldier wl 
expects a prize is ready for war, but no one Is 
forward to die for a king whic is indificrent | 
about those who serve under him, and bestows 
no honours on their toils. In lke manner 
every soul believing in a Resurrection is 

raturally careful of itself; but, disbelieving it, 
abandons itself to perdition. He who believes 
that his body shall remain to rise again, 1s 
careful of his robe, and defiles it not with 
fornication ; but he who disbelieves the Resur- 
rection, gives himself to fornication, and mis- 
uses his own body, as though it were not his 
own. Faith therefore in the Resurrection of 
the dead, is a great commandment and doctrine 
of the Holy Catholic Church ; great and most 
neessary, though gainsaid by many, yet surely 
Ww arranted by the truth. Greeks contradict it’, 
Samaritans ® disbelieve it, heretics 3 mutilate it: 

oT 

the contradiction is manifold, but the truth is 
uniform. 
Now Grecks and Samaritans together ar- 

eue against us thus. ‘The dead man has fallen, 
and mouldered away, and is all turned into 
worms ; and the worms have died also; such is 
the decay and destruction which has ovcr- 
taken the body ; how then is it to be raised ? 
‘The shipwrecked have been devoured by fishes, 
which are themselves devoured. Of them who 
ficht with wild beasts the very bones are ground 
to powder, and consumed by bears and lions. 

Vultures aud ravens feed on the flesh of the | 

t Agts evo. = sree 2. 2 Cf Sa re : Ww, 
> Tertull. De Nesure. carats, cap. They acknowledge 
a half-resurrection, to wit of the ‘soul only. ..Ce iapare: Iren. 1. 
xxiii s, on Menander's assertion that his disciples attain to the 
resurrection by being baptized into him, and can die no more, hy 
retain immortal you vib: ib, xxiv. 5: Vasilides taught that ‘‘sal- 
ation belongs to the soul alone.” On other forms of eeu: iv 

concerning the Resurrection, see Suicer, Thesaurus, Avagtaccs. 

unburied dead, and then fly away over all the 
world ; vyhence then is the body to be col- 
rp lected : > Yor of the fowls who have devoured 
it some may serait to dic in India, some in 
mg fet sia, some in the land of the Goths. Other 
;men again are pes by fire, and. their 
10| very asl ashes scattered by rain or wind; whence 
is sd body to be brought together again +z 
| To thee, poor little feeble man, India is far 
from the land of the Goths, and Spain from 
Persia; but to God, who holds the whole earth 
a the hollow of Lis hands, all things are near 
pat hand. Impute not then weakness to God, 
fr oma comparison of thy feebleness, but rather 
dwell on His power® Docs then the sun, a 
small work of God, by one glance of his 
beams give warmth to the whole world; does 
the atmosphere, which Goc d has made, encom- 
pass all things in the world ; and is God, who 
‘is the Creator both of the sun, and of the 
atmosphere, far off from the world? Imagine 
a mixture of seeds of different plants (for as 
thou art weak concerning the faith, the ex- 
amples which I allege are weak also), and 
that these different seeds are contained in thy 
single hand; is it then to thee, who art a man, 
a cifficult or an easy matter to separate 
what is in thine hand, and to collect each 
seed according to its nature, and restore it 
‘to its own kind? Canst thou then separate 
the things in thine hand, and cannot God 
separate the things contained in His hand, 
and restore them to their proper place? Con- 
‘sider what I say, whether it is not impious to 
deny it? 
| 4. But further, attend, I. pray, to the 
very principle of poe ge and come to thine 
own case. ‘Thou hast different sorts of ser- 

vats: and some are Sg and some bad ; 

| 

| The objections noticed in § 2 are Gissiissedk by Athenagoras, 
| 4 1% mi surr. Capp. il, iv.—vill. 3 Vatian, Or. ad Graecos, cap. Soins 
| ‘Tertull. De Resurr. Carn. cap. 6 UT GS he ee: go 

6 On the argument from God's power scien: Athenag 

| De Resurr. c. ix; Justin. M. De fesusr. c. Theophil. we 
lwadohiexc. 2a. 3 lren.. Vong) 

PCG TR ey Ei. 135 

thou honourest therefore the good, and smitest | analogy of nature consider these matters, and 
the bad. And if thou art a judge, to the good| understand them from what is seen to. this 

thou awardest praise, and to the transgressors, 
punishment. Is then justice observed by 
thee a mortal man; and with God, the ever 
chanzeless Ning of all, is there no retributive 
justice 7? Nay, to deny it is impious. For 
consider what I say. Many murderers have 
died in their beds unpunished ; where then is 
the righteousness of God? Yea, ofttimes a 
murderer guilty of fifty murders is behcaded 
once ; where then shall he suffer punishment 
for the forty and nine? Unless there is a 
judgment and a retribution after this world, 
thou chargest God with unrighteousness. 
Marvel not, however, because of the delay of 
the judgment; no combatant is crowned or 
disgraced, till the contest is over; and no 
president of the games ever crowns men while 
yet striving, but he waits till all the combatants | 
are finished, that then deciding between them 
he may dispense the prizes and the chaplets ®. 
Even thus God also, so long as the strife 
in this world lasts, succours the just but 
partially, but afterwards He renders to them 
their rewards fully. 

5. But if according to thee there is no 
resurrection of the dead, wherefore condemnest 
thou the robbers of graves? Tor if the body 
perishes, and there is no resurrection to be 
hoped for, why does the violator of the tomb 
undergo punishment? ‘Thou seest that though 
thou deny it with thy lips, there yet abides 
with thee an indestructible instinct of the 
resurrection. 

6. l'urther, does a tree after it has been 
cut down blossom again, and shall man after. 
being cut down blossom no more? And does 
the corn sown and reaped remain for the) 
threshing floor, and shall man when reaped | 
from this world not remain for the threshing 2: 
And do shoots of vine or other trees, when! 
clean cut off and transplanted, come to life. 
and bear fruit; and shall man, for whose | 
sake all these exist, fall into the earth and not) 
rise again ? Comparing efforts, which is greater, 
to mould from the beginning a statue which | 
did not exist, or to recast in the same shape | 
that which had fallen? Is God then, who | 
created us out of nothing, unable to 

ge, raise | 
again those who exist and are fallen9? But 
thou believest not what is writtcn of the 
resurrection, being a Greek: then trom the’ 

7 The argument from God’s justice is treated by Athenagor. 
Re Restry, 6. xX. wid sxX.—sei..3 Justin Ma De Lesnar. c. vir. 
earner ear ypoptaw leoe, Cas. Ae Ch Vind. OZ) vill, 134 

Eurip. Alectr. 862. 

9 Athenag. De Resurr.c. iit So 1f, when they did not exist, 
He made at their first formation the bodies of men, and their 
original elements, He will, when they are dissolved, in whatever 
manner that may tale place, raise them again with equal e.tse.” 
Lactait..cscd, Vile as fies ol poste Const. Ve 7. 

day. Wheat, it may be, or some other kind 
of grain, is sown; and when the seed has 
fallen, it dies and rots, and is henceforth 
useless for food. But that which has rotted, 
springs up in verdure; and though small when 
sown, springs up most beautiful. Now wheat 
was made for us; for wheat and all seeds were 
created not for themselves, but for our use; 
are then the things which were made for 
us quickencd when they dic, and do we for 
whom they were made, not rise again after 
our death !? : 

7. The season is winter 2, as thou seest ; the 
trees now stand as if they were dead: for 
where are the leaves of the fig-tree? where 
are the clusters of the vine? ‘These in winter 
time are dead, but green in spring; and when 
the season is come, there is restored to them 
a quickening as it were from a state of death. 
lor God, knowing thine unbelief, works a resur- 
rection year by year in these visible things; 
that, beholding what happens to things inani- 
mate, thou mayest believe concerning things 
animate and rational. Further, flies and bees 
are often drowned in water, yet after a while 
revive 3 ; and species of dormice 4, after remain- 
ing motionless during the winter, are restored 
in the summer (for to thy slight thoughts like 
examples are offered); and shall He who to 
irrational and despised creatures grants life 

supernaturally, not bestow it upon us, for 
whose sake He made them ? 

8. But the Greeks ask for a resurrection of 
the dead still manifest ; and say that, even if 
these creatures are raised, yet they had not 
utterly mouldered away; and they require 
to see distinctly some creature rise again after 
complete decay. God knew men’s unbelicf, 
and provided tor this purpose a bird, called 
a Pheenixs, This bird, as Clement writes, and 

r An eloquent statement of the argument for the resurrection 
from the analogies of nature occurs in ‘Tertull. De Aesurr. c. xiie 
‘That it was not unknown to Cyril, seems probable from the con- 
cluding sentence: ‘* And surely if all things rise again for man, 
for whom they have been provided—but not for man unless for 
his flesh also—how can the flesh itself perish utterly, for the sake 
and service of which nothing is allowed to perish.” Tertullian 
himself was probably indebted, as Bp. Lightfoot suggests, to 
Clemens. Rom. “fist. ad Corinth. xxiv. Cf. Lactant. Diz. Just. 
Vite ds 

2 Cf. Cat. iv. 30. These passages shew that the Lectures were 
delivered in a year when Faster feil early, as was the case in 
340 Ai Ts 

3 In such cases there is, of course, no actual death. 

4 ‘The pvoéds is supposed by the Benedictine Editor to be the 
toad (‘‘ Inventusque cavis bufo,” Virg. Georg. 1. 185), by others the 
marmot (mus Alpinus), More probably it is the dormouse (myonis 
glis), which stores up provisions for the winter, though it sleeps 
through much of that season. 4 

5 The story of the Pha:nix as told by Herodotus, IT. 73, is.as 
follows: ‘Phey have also another sacred bird called the phe nix, 
which I myself have never scen, except in pictures. Indeed it is 
a great rarity even in Hgypt, only coming there (according to the 
accounts of the people of Helopolis) once in five hundred years, 

| when the old pha:nix dies... . They tella story of what this bird 
| does, which does not seem to me to be credible; that he comes all 

6 

©) 

CAT EC eee a dade as, 

as many more reiaie, being the only one of ils 
kind", arrives in the land of the Meyptians at 
periods of five hundred years, shewing forth 
the resurrection, not in desert places, lest the 

occurrence of the mystery should remain un- 
known, but appearing in a notable eity 7, that | 
men might even handle what would otherwise 

be disbelieved, For it makes itself a coffin ° of 
frankincense and myrrh and other spices, and 
entering into this when its years are fulfilled, 
it evidently dies and moulders away, ‘Then 
from the decayed flesh of the dead bird a worm 
is engendered, and this worm when grown large 
is transformed into a bird ;—and do not dis- 
believe this, for thou seest the offspring of 

bees also fashioned thus out of worms 9, and | 

from eges which are quite fluid thou hast scen 
wings and bones and sinews of birds issue. 
Afterwards the aforesaid Pheenix, becoming 
fledged and a full-grown Phoenix, like the 
former one, soars up into the air such as it 
had died, shewing forth to men a most evident 
resurrection of the dead. The Phoenix indeed 
is a wondrous bird, yet it is irrational, nor 
ever sang praise to God; it flies abroad 
through the sky, but it knows not who is the 
Only-begotten Son of God. 
rection from the dead been given to this ir- 
rational creature which knows not its Maker, 
and to us who ascribe glory to God and keep 
His commandments, shall there no resurrection 
be granted ? 

9. But since the sign of the Phoenix is re- 
mote and uncommon, and men still disbelieve 
our resurrection, take again the proof of this 
from what thou seest every day. A hundred 
or two hundred years ago, we all, speakers and 

rent bird, all plastered 
and there buries the 

the way from Arabia, and brin 
over with myrrh, to the temple of the 
body.” 

The many variations and fabulous accretions of the story are 
detailed by Suicer, Z/esaurus, Potrié, and by Bp. Lightfoot in 
a long and interesting note on Clemens Rom. Lepist. ad Cor. XXv- 
Cyril borrows the story from Clement almost verbally, yet not 
without some variations, which will be noticed below. ‘he legend 
with all its miraculous features is told by Ovid, A/efamorph. xv. 
3o2, by Claudian, Phenix, and by the Pseudo-Lactantius in an 
Elegiac poem, Phavix, included in Weber's Corpus Poetarum 
Latinorwmn, and literally translated in Clark’s | A nte-Nicene 
Library. See also Tertull. De Resurr. Carn, c. xii. 

6 poroyerts Urapxov, Clem. Rom. ade supra, Cf. Origen. 
contra Celsum, iv. 98; Afost. Const. V. 7: ‘a bird single in its 
kind, which they say is without a mate, and the only one in the 
creation.” Pseudo-Lactant. 7. 30. 

“ Hoc nemus hos lucos avis incolit unica, phaenix, 
Unica, sed vivit morte refecta sua.” 

7 “Py day, in the sight of all” (Clem. R.) The city was 
Heliopolis, according to Herodotus and the other ancient authors, 
But Milton, ** Pavezdise Lost, V. 272— 

“A phrenix gaz'd by all, as that sole bird, 

When to enshrine his reliques in the Sun’s 

Bright temple to A2gyptian ‘Thebes he flies.’ 
Why does Milton despatch his bird to Thebes rather than IIclio- 
polis?” (Lightfoot). 

& Ovid, AZet. xv. 4055 
que sepulcrum.” See the Commentaries on Job xxix, 
die in my nest, and I shall multifly my days as the sand. 
Margin R.V. Or, the phanix. 

9 The mode of reproduction in bees was regarded by Aristotle 
a3 mysterious, having in it something supernatural (@etor) > De 
Generatione Animal. U1. 10. 1,27. In the story of the phoenix 
Merodotus makes no mention of the ‘ worm,” 

“ Fertque pius cunasque suas patrium- 

Has then a resur- | 

82 7 Saki 

hearers, where were we? Know we not tae 
groundwork of the substance of our bodies ? 
—Knowest thou not how from weak and shape- 
less and simple? elements we are engendered, 
and out of what is simple and weak a living 
man is formed ? and how that weak element 
being made flesh is changed into strong sinews, 
cand bright eyes, and sensitive nose, and hear- 
jing ears, and speaking tongue, and beating 
heart, and busy hands, and swift fect, and into 
‘members of all kinds?? and how that once 
Iweak element becomes a shipwright, and a 
builder, and an architect, and a craftsman of 
various arts, and a soldier, and a ruler, and 
a lawgiver, anda king? Cannot God then, who 
has made us out of imperfect materials, raise 
us up when we have fallen into decay? He 
who thus frames a body out of what is vile, 
cannot He raise the fallen body again? And 
He who fashions that which is not, shall He 
not raise up that which is and is fallen ? 

ro. ‘Take further a manifest proof of the re- 
surrection of the dead, witnessed month by 
month in the sky and its luminaries. The body 
of the moon vanishes completely, so that no 
part of it is any more scen, yet it fills again, 
and is restored to its former state +; and for the 
perfect demonstration of the matter, the moon 
at certain revolutions of years suffering eclipse 
and becoming manifestly changed into blood, 
yet recovers its luminous body: God having 
provided this, that thou also, the man who art 
formed of blood, mightest not refuse credence 
to the resurrection of the dead, but mightest 
believe concerning thyself also what thou seest 
in respect of the moon. These therefore use 
thou as arguments against the Grecks; for 
with them who receive not what is written 
fight thou with unwritten weapons, by reason- 
ings only and demonstrations ; for these men 
know not who Moses is, nor Esaias, nor the 
Gospels, nor Paul. 

ri. Turn now to the Samaritans, who, re- 
ceiving the Law only, allow_not the Prophets. 
To them the text just now read from Ezekiel 
appears of no force, for, as I said, they admit 
no Prophets ; whence then shall we persuade 
the Samaritans also? Let us go to the writ- 
ings of the Law. Now God says to Moses, rs 
am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of 
Jacobs ; this must mean of those who have be- 
ing and subsistence. For if Abraham has 

I povocioys. 

2 Fora similar argument, sce Lactant. De Resiry. ¢. xvi. 

3 Clem. Rom. fist. ad Cor. xxiv ** Day and night shew 
unto us the resurrection. The night falleth asleep, and day ariseth 5 
the day departeth, and night cometh ons 

4 'Fertull. de Resurr. Carnis, xii.: “ Readorned also are the 
mirrors of the moon, which her monthly course had worn aye: Neamonge es 
“The whole of this revolving order of things bears witness to the 
resurrection of the dead.” 
| 5 Ex. ii. 6. Cf. Matt. xxii. 32: “He ts not the God of the dead, 
' but of the living. 

LeCTuUREe Xx Vik 

come to an end, and Isaac and Jacob, then He 
is the God of those who have no being. When 
did a king ever say, I am the king of sol- 
diers, whom he had not? When did any 
display wealth which he possessed not? There- 
fore Abraham and Isaac and Jacob must 
subsist, that God may be the God of those 
who have being ; for He said not, “ Iwas their 
God,” but Zaz. And that there isa judgment, 
Abraham shews in saying to the Lord, //e who 
judseth all the carth, shall [He not execute puds- 
ment ® ? 

12. But to this the foolish Samaritans ob- 
ject again, and say that the souls possibly 
of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob continue, 
but that their bodies cannot possibly rise 
again. Was it then possible that the rod 
ef righteous Moses should become a_ ser- 
pent, and is it impossible that the bodies of 
the righteous should live and rise again? And 
was that done contrary to nature, and shall 
they not be restored according to nature ? 
Again, the rod of Aaron, though cut off and 
dead, budded, without the scent of waters, 
and though under a roof, sprouted forth into 
blossoms as in the fields; and though set in 
dry places, yielded in one night the flowers 
and fruit of plants watered for many years. 
Did Aaron’s rod rise, as it were, from the dead, 
and shall not Aaron himself be raised? And 
did God work wonders in wood, to secure to 
him the high-priesthood, and will He not vouch- 
safe a resurrection to Aaron himself? A 
woman also was made salt contrary to nature ; 
and flesh was turned into salt ; and shall not 
flesh be restored to flesh ? Was Lot’s wife made 
a pillar of salt, and shall not Abraham's wife be 
raised again? By what power was Moses’ hand 
changed, which even within one hour became 
as snow, and was restored again? Certainly 
by God’s command. Was then His command 
of force then, and has it no force now ? 

And whence in the beginning came 
man into being at all, O ye Samaritans, 
most senseless of all men? Go to the first 
book of the Scripture, which even you re- 
ceive; And God formed man of the aust 
of the ground’. Is dust transformed into 
flesh, and shall not flesh be again restored 
to flesh? You must be asked too, whence 

<3 

the heavens had their being, and_ earth, 
and seas? Whence sun, and moon, and 

stars? How from the waters were made the 
things which fly and swim? And how from 
earth all its living things? Were so many 
myriads brought from nothing into being, and 
shall we men, who bear God’s image, not be 
raised up? ‘Truly this course is full of un- 

—_— 

6 Gen. xviil. 25. P Joly Save gs © Gorn, te 

avs 
belicf, and the unbelievers are much to be 
condemned; when Abraham = addresses the 
Lord as the Judge of all the earth, and the 
learners of the Law disbelieve; when it is 
written that man is of the earth, and the readers 
disbelieve it % 

14. These questions, therefore, are for them, 
the unbelievers ; but the words of the Prophets 
hare for us who believe. But since some who 
have also used the Prophets believe not what is 
written, and allege against us that passage, 7Ze 
ungodly shall not rise up in judgment *, and, For 
ifman go down to the grave he shall come up no 
more?, and, The dead shall not praise Thee, O 
Lord 3,—for of what is well written, they have 
made ill use—it will be well in a cursory 
manner, and as far as is now possible, to 
meet them. For if it is said, that ¢he wn- 
godly shall not rise up in judgment, this shews 
that they shall rise, not in judgment, but 
in condemnation; for God needs not long 
scrutiny, but close on the resurrection of the 
ungodly follows also their punishment. And 
if it is said, Zhe dead shall not praise Thee, O 
Lord, this shews, that since in this life only is 
the appointed time for repentance and pardon, 
for which they who enjoy it shall prazse ‘he 
Lord, it remains not after death for them who 
have died in sins to give praise as the receivers 
of a blessing, but to bewail themselves ; for 
praise belongs to them who give thanks, but 
to them who are under the scourge, lamenta- 
tion. Therefore the just then offer praise ; but 
they who have diced in sins have no further 
season for confession 4. 

ts. And respecting that passage, /f @ man 
go down to the grave, he shall come up NO itor, 
observe what follows, for it is written, /7e shalt 
come up no more, neither shall he return to hts 
own house. For since the whole world shall 
pass away, and every house shall be destroyed, 
how shall he return to his own house, there 
being henceforth a new and different earth ? 
But they ought to have heard Job, saying, /or 
there ts hope of a tree; for if tt be cut down, it ale 
sprout again, and the tender branch thereof cull 
not cease. For though the root thereof wax oid 
in the carth, and the stock thereof die in the rocky 
ground, yet from the scent of water it wll 
bud, and bring forth a crop lke a new plant. 
But man when ke dies, ts gone; and when mortal 
man falls, is he no mores? As it were remon- 
stratirg and reproving (for thus ought we to 

9 The anomalous construction ora yeypamTat s+. Kat anloe 
zoo may be explained by the consideration, that the uncertamnty 
expressed in 6tay attaches only to the latter Verb. See Winer's 
Grammar of N. T. Greek, P. IIT. sect. sl tals ot toe bates 

I Py.i.5: Phe wicked ‘shadl not stand inthe sudgment CReV i) 

2 Job vil. 9. SP SORy. 27. ; 

4 Asto the bearing of this passage on the doctrine of Purgatory 
! and prayer for the dead see note on XXII, To. 
| § Job xiv. 7—10. 

=) 

read the words ¢s ze more with an interroga- 
tion"); he says since a tree falls and revives, 
shall not man, for whom all trees were made, 
himself revive? And that thou mayest not 
suppose that I am forcing the words, read 
whan follows 5 for after saving by way of ques- 
tion, Hen mortal man falls, ray he no more ? he 
says, or ifa man die, he shall live « reain7 » and 
nnmediately he adds, 7 vl watt di T be made 
@eatr® ; and again elsewhere, ho shall raise 
up on the carth my skin, which endures these 
things, And Esaias the P rophet says, Zhe dead 
mon shall rise again, and tev that are in the 
tombs shall awake*, And the Prophet Ezekiel, 
now before us, says most plainly, Behold L ail 
open your graves, and bring you up out of your 
graves ?, And Daniel says, “Many of them thet 
sleep it ‘he dust of the carth shall arise, some to 
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame 3. 
16. And many Ser:ptures there are which 
testify of the Resurrection of the dead ; for 
there are many other sayings on this matter. 
But now, by way of remembrance ouly, we will 
make a passing mention of the raising of 
Lazarus on the fourth day; and just allude 
because of the shortness of the time, 
to the widow’s son also who was raised, 
and merely for the sake of reminding you, let 
me mention the ruler of the synagogue’s 
daughter, and the rending of the rocks, and 
how there arose many bodies of the saints 
which slept, their graves having been opened. 
But sacle be it remembered that Christ 
has been ratsed from the dead’. 1 speak but 
in passing of Elias, and the widow’s son whom 
he raised ; of Elisseus also, who raised the 
dead twice; once in his lifetime, and once 
after his death. For when alive he wrought 
the resurrection by means of his own soul ©; 
but that not the souls only of the just might be 
honoured, but that it might be believed that in 
the bodies also of the just there lies a power, 
the corpse which was cast into the sepulchre of 
Klisseus, when it touched the dead body of the 
prophet, was quickened, and the dead body of 
the prophet did the work of the soul, and that 
which was dead and buried gave life to the 
dead, and though it gave life. yet continued 
itself among the dead. Wherefore? Lest if 
Klisseus should rise again, the work should be 

6 There is no indication of a question in the Septuagint version 
of the passage, which means in the Hebrew, and where ts he ? 
(Ai ig and R.V.): Vulg. #7, gu@so, est ? 

Job xiv. 143.2 or ie man adie, shall he live again? (AV; 
a R.V.). By omitting the interrogation here, and inserting it 
above in 7. = oy ril exactly inverts the meaning. 
8 Ae (A.V.) All the days of my app ointed time 
- of my pes fare) will [ wait, till my change (R.V. release) 

a, 

COME. 
9 Jab sci, 26: (R.V.) aud that he shall stand up at the last 
upon the carth: and imp x my skin hath been thus destroyed, &c 

Cyril, as usual, follows the Septuagint. © Te Nv TOs 
2 Byek. SXavil- te, 3 Dan. ot 2. 4 Matty xxvil. se, 
> 5 Con xv 20, © 2 Kings iv. 34. 

meat edcincos TICAL 5 i CTURE ee 

ascribed to his soul alone ; and to shew, that 
even though the soui is not present, a virtue 
resides in the body of the saints, because of 
the righteous soul which has for so many years 
dw elt in it, and used it as its minister 7. And 
let us not foolishly disbelieve, as though this 
thing had not happened: for if handkerchiefs 
and aprons, which are from without, touching 
the bodies of the diseased, raised up the sick, 
how much more should the very body of the 
Prophet raise the dead ? 

17. And with respect to these instances we 
might say much, rehearsing in detail the mar- 
vellous circumstances of each event ; but as you 
have been already wearied both by the super: 
posed fast of the Preparation®, and by the watch- 
ings 9, let what has been cursorily spoken con- 
cerning them suffice for a while; these words 
having been as it were sown thinly, that you, 
receiving the seed like richest ground, may in 
bearing fruit increase them. But be it remem- 
bered, that the Apostles also raised the dead ; 
Peter raised Tabitha in Joppa, and Paul raised 
Eutychus in Troas ; and thus did all the other 
Apostles, even though the wonders wrought by 
each have not all been written. Further, 
remember all the sayings in the first Epistle to 
the Corinthians, which Paul wrote against them 
who said, ZZow are the dead raised, and with 

7 “The worship of relics, and the belief i in them as remedies 
and a protection against evil, originated in the qth century. 
They first (2) appear in writings, none of which are earlier than 
the year 370: but they prev ailed rapidly when they had once 
taken root” (Scudamore, os Chr. Antiq. ‘ Relics,” p. 1770). 
Bingham (474. xxiii. 4, § 7) quotes a law of Theodosius, ‘that 
no one should remove any dead body that was buried, from one 
place to another; that no one should sell or buy the relics of 
Martyrs: but if any one was minded to build over the grave, 
where a ma irtyr was buried. a church to be called a mar Ly ITU, 
in respect to him, he should have liberty to do it.” The law 
wholly failed to suppress a superstition which was sanctioned 
by such men as Cyril, Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Augustine. 

8 éx THs Urephérews THS VNTTELAS THS TapagKerys, Ed. “ened. 
“The ecclesiastical term ts vrep$écews we have rendered, 
cording to the interpretation received among the Latins, by the 
word ‘superpositio.” The ancients meant by it a fast continued for 
two or three days without food. Moreover, since the great weck 
was observed with severer fastings, there were many who passed 
either the whole week or four, three, or two d: ays, namely the 
Preparation and the Holy Sabbath Easter Eve), entirely fasting 
as is testified by S. Ivenceus (Euseb. A’ést. V. 24) and others. 
The continuance of the fast throughout the Friday and Saturday 
was highly approv' ed, as may be seen from the fostolical Con- 
stitutions, V. 18. The passage referred to is as follows: ‘fDo 
you therefore fast on the days of the Passover, beginning from the 
second day of the week until the Preparation and the Sal »bath, 
six days, making use only of bread, and salt, and herbs, and water 
for your drink: “but abstain on these d: vys from wine and flesh, for 
they are days of lamentation and not of fasting. Do yewhoare able 
fast throughout the Preparation and the Sabbath entirely, tasting 
nothing till the cockcrowing at night 3 but if any one is not able 
to combine them both, let the Sabbath at least be observed.” 

9 The fast of the Great Sabbath was to be oe through 
the night, as prescribed in the fost. Const. V. “Continue 
until cock-crow ing and break off your fast at dawn - the first day 
of the week, whic his the Lord’s day, keeping awake from evening 
until cock-crowing; and assembling together in the Church, 
watch and pray and beseech God, in your night- long vigil, reading 
the Law, the Prophets, and the Psaims, until the crowing of the 
cocks: and after baptizing your Catechumens, and reading the 
Gospel in fear and trembling, and speaking to the people the 
things pertaining to salvation, so cease from your mourning.” 
A chief reason for the w atching was that Christ was expected 
to return at the same hour in which He rose. On the meaning of 

‘*superposition”? see Routh’s note on oa Synodical Epistle of 
Irenaus to Victor of Rome (Rel/, Sac. P- 45, ss.), and the 
passage of Dionysius of Alexandria there Bee 

LECTURE 

what manier of body do they come’? And how | 
he says, For if the dead rise not, then is not) 
Christ raised?, and how he called them /ce?s 3, 
who believed not ; and remember the whole of 
his teaching there concerning the resurrection 
of the dead, and how he wrote to the ‘Thessa- 
lonians, But wre would not have you to be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning them which are astecp, that 
ye sorrow not, cven as the rest which have no 
hopes, and all that follows : but chicfly that, dad 
the dead in Christ shalt rise firsts, 

18. But especially mark this, how very 
pointedly ® Paul says, Zor this corruplible must 
put on tneorruption, and this mortal must put 
on immortality?, Vor this body shall be raised, 
hot remaining weak as now ; but raised the very 
same body, though by putting on incorruption it 
shall be fashionedanew°,—as iron blending with 
fire becomes fire, or rather as He knows how, the 
Lord who raises us. ‘This body therefore shall 
be raised, but it shall abide not such as it now 
is, but an eternal body ; no longer needing for 
its life such nourishment as now, nor stairs for 
its ascent, for 1t shall be made sféritua/, a mar- 
vellous thing, such as we cannot worthily speak 
of. Zhen, it is said, shall the righteous shine 
forth as the sun, and the moon, avd as the 
brightness of the firmament®, And God, fore- 
knowing men’s unbelief, has given to little 
worms in the summer to dart ‘beams of light 
from their body?, that from what is seen, that 
which is locked for might be believed ; for He 
who gives in part is able to give the whole 
also, and He who made the worm radiant with 
light, will much more illuminate a righteous 
man. 

1g. We shall be raised therefore, all with 
our bodies eternal, but not all with bodies 
alike: for if a man is righteous, he will receive 
a heavenly body, that he may be able worthily 
to hold converse with Angels ; but 1f a man is 
a sinner, he shall receive an eternal body, fitted 
to endure the penalties of sins, that he may 
burn eternally in fire, nor ever be consumed *. 
And righteously will God assign this portion to 
either company; for we do nothing without 
the body. We blaspheme with the mouth, 
and with the mouth we pray. With the body 
we commit fornication, and with the body we 
keep chastity. With the hand we rob, and by 
the hand we bestow alms; and the rest in like 

2 Ib. uw 16. 3 1h. 2-36; 

5 Ib. wv. 16. 

7 Coy, Ses 
41 Thess. iv. 13. 
© povovovxt SaxtTvdAosecxTa@y, 

7 1 Cor. xv. 53. 

8 petarovetrac. The meaning of this word as applied to the 
Fucharistic elements is fully discussed, and illustrated from its 
use by “Cyril and: otler Pathers,. by Dr. Pus sey (Neal Presence, 
p. 189). 

Oivtts Sins, 16 Dany ceils Se 

1 Cyril refers to the glow-worm (wuyoAaumis, Aristot. 7/isé. 
Animal. V. 19. 14), or some other species of L ampyris (Arist. 
ade Partilus Animal. I. 2 CE CAE. iv, 

3/s St \ 

xX VITE, 129 
Mamie, Since-ihon the body bas been, dar 
minister in all things, it shall also share with 
us In the future the fruits of the past 5. 

20. ‘Therefore, brethren, let us be careful of 

our bodies, nor misuse them as though not our 

own. Ict us not say like the heretics, that 
this vesture of the body belongs not to us, but 
let us be careful of it as our own; for we must 
give account to the Lord of all things done 
through the body. Say not, none secth me ; 
think not, that there is no witness of the deed. 
Human witness oftentimes there is not; but 
He who fashioned us, an unerring zw7fvess, 
abides fatthful in heaven 4, and beholds what 
thou doest. And the stains of sin also remain 
in the body; for as when a wound has gone 
deep into the body, even if there has been 
a healing, the scar remains, so sin wounds soul 
and body, and the marks of its scars remain in 
all; and they are removed only from those who 
receive the washing of Baptism. ‘The past 
wounds therefore of soul and body God heals 
by Baptism; against future ones let us one 
and all jointly guard ourselves, that we may 
keep this vestment of the body pure, and 
may not for practising fornication and sensual 
indulgence or any other sin for a short season, 
lose the salvation of heaven, but may inherit 
the eternal kingdom of God; of which may 
God, of His own grace, deem all of you 
worthy. 

Thus much in proof of the Resurrection 
of the dead; and now, let me again recite to 
you the profession of the faith, and do you 
with all diligence pronounce it while I speak 5, 
and remember it. 

The Faith which we rehearse contains 
in order the following, “AND IN ONE BaprisM 

OF REPENTANCE FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS; 
AND IN ONE HOLY CATHOLIC CHURCH 3 AND 
IN THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESII; AND 

IN ETERNAL LIFE.” Now of Baptism and 
repentance I have spoken in the earliest Lec- 
tures; and my present remarks concerning 
the resurrection of the dead have been made 
with reference to the Article ‘In the resur- 
rection of the flesh.” Now then let me finish 
what still remains to be said for the Article, 
“In one Holy Catholic Church,” on which, 
though one might say many things, we will 
speak but briefly. 

23. It is called Catholic then because it 

With th re TEA ling yevouevor (Codd. Monn, 

share with us in the future what 
On the argument of this section com- 
§ 4, note 7, 

3 TOY yevopecvar. 
Vind.), the meaning will be 
shall happen to us then,” 
pare the passages quoted on 

Bb Biers Es ek vs, Se 

4 MA are cor 
ExaaTys AcSews, | 

Tetes -7.-antl op Ch 
Feaclr tine we spethk. 

Plat. Theaet. zoyc: €p" 

TA:0 

extends over all the world, from one end of. 
tne earth to the other ; and because it teaches 

universally and completely one and all the: 
doctrines which ought to come to men’s know- | 
ledge, concerning things both visible and in-, 
visible, heavenly and earthly ®: and because it | 
brings into subjection to odline ess the whole 

‘Ss ba ieetianeeoes ACL 

Pelee ee 

the second which is built up he says in the 
same Psalm, Lord, J have loved the beauty of 
Thine house >; and immediately afterwards. Z 
the Congregations will L bless thee,O Lord’, For 
now that the one Church in Judea is cast 
off, the Churches of Christ are increased over 
all the world ; and of them it is said in the 

race of mankind, fovermnors and governed, | Psalms, Sig ante the Lord a new song, Ills 
learned and unle arned ; and because it uni- pratse tn the Congregation of Saints7, Ngroe- 
versally treats and heals the whole class of ably to which the prophet also said to the 
sins, which are comnutted by soul or body, Jews, Z have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord 

and possesses in itself every form of virtue 
which is named, both in deeds and words, and | 
in every kind of spiritual giits. 

24. Anditis rightly named (Ecclesia) because 
it calls forth 7 and assembles together all men : | 
according as the Lord says in Leviticus, And, 
make an “assembly Jor all the congregation at the 

Cover of the takern: rele of witless ®, And it is to be. 
aan that the word assewle, is used for the 
first time in the Scriptures here, at the time 
when the Lord puts Aaron into the High- 
priesthood. And in Deuteronomy also the 
Lord says to Moses, Assemble the people unto 
Ale, and let them hear Aly words, that they may 
learn to fear Me, And he again mentions the 
name of the Church, when he says concerning 
the Tables, And on them were written all the 
words «hich the Lord spake with you in the 
mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of 
the Assembly *° ; as if he had said more plainly, 
in the day in which ye were called and 
gathered together by God. The Psalmist also 
says, L will glue thanks unto Thee, O Lord, tn 
the great Congre gations Lill praise Thee among 
much people * 

25. Of old the Psalmist sang, Bless ye God 
in the congregations, even the Lord, (ye that are) 
Srom the fountains of Lsracl?, But after the 
Jews for the ne which they made against 
the Saviour were -cast away from His grace, 
the Saviour build out of the Gentiles a second 
Holy Church, the Church of us Christians, 
con Wcerning which he said to Peter, Aud upon 
this rock I will build Aly Church, and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against its. 
And David prophesying of both these, said 
plainly of the first which was rejected, J have 
hated the Congregation of evil dcers+; but of 

6 Bishop Lightfost (/enativs, ad Smyrnc Ds, viii.) traces the 
original and oe senses of the word ‘Catholic’ very fully. 
“Tn its earliest usages, therefore, as a rare iting epithet of 
CKKANT EA, “Ce itholic’ means ‘univ ersal,’ as opposed to * individual,’ 
‘particular.’ In its later sense, as a fixed attribute, it implies 
orthodoxy as opposed to heresy, confor mity as opposed to dissent.” 
Commenting on this passage of Cyril, the Bishop adds that ‘‘ these 
two latter reasons, that it (the Church) is comprehensive in doc- 
trine, and that it is univ ersal in application, can only be regarded 
as secondary glosses.” 
7 exxcdetcodan. Cf. Hebi xii. 2 

ies) 

' Church Paul writes to Timothy, 
vest know how thou eughtest to behave thyself tit 

loving-kindness, 

® Tev. vill. 3: €xxAnotocor. 
9 Deut. iv. 10. I Th. ix. 10! é€xKAnalas. 
Ps. soney, wer eb, it. ro, 2 Ps. Ixvitl. 26: év éxxAjaotats. | 

Matt. xvi. 18. a: is. V8. 

Almighty’; and immediately 

afterwards, or 

Srom the rising of the sun even unto the going 

gown of the same, Aly name ts glorified among 

: ) i t oS ~ eB ” 
Me Geitiles ®, Concerning this Holy Catholic 
That thoi may- 

the House of Goi, which ts the Church of the 
Living God, the piller and ground of the truih', 

26. But since the werd Ecclesia is applied 
to different things (as also it is written of 
the multitude in the theatre of the Ephe- 
sians, dad when he had thus spoken, he dis- 
missed the Assembly*), and since one might 
properly and truly say that there isa Church 
of evil doers, T mean the meetings of the here- 
tics, the Marcionists and Manichees, and the 
rest, for this cause the Faith has securely 
delivered to thee now the Article, ‘And in one 
Holy Catholic Church ;” that thou mayest 
avoid their wretched meetings, and ever abide 
with the Holy Church Catholic in which thou 
wast regenerated. And if ever thou art sojourn- 
ing in Cities, inquire not simply where the Lord’s 
tlouse is (for the other sects of the profane 
uso attempt to call their own dens houses 
of the Lord), nor merely where the Church is, 
but where 1s the Catholic Church. For this 
is the peculiar name of this Holy Church, the 
mother of us all, which is the spouse of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten Son of 
God (for it is written, 4s Christ also loved the 
Church and save [Ttmself for it3, and all the 
rest,) and is a figure and copy of Jerusalem 
which is above, which ts free, and the mother 
of us all+; which before was barren, but now 
has many children. 

27. For when the first Church was cast oft, 
in the second, which is the Catholic Church, 
God fAath set, as Paul says, frst Apostles, 
secondly P. vophets, thirdly teachers, then mir- 
aces, then gifts of healings, helps, goveru- 
ments, divers kinds of tonguess, and every 
sort of virtue, I mean wisdom and_ under- 
standing, temperance and justice, mercy and 
and patience unconquerable 

and A.V. ‘habitation.’ 
NY Ga Pes tee coe 
2 GES NIX. Tats 
2 We Coraaiti25- 

eumpemetar, R.V. 
7 Ps: CMe 1. 
fo Tinie ns: 

4 Gal. iv, 26. 

S Ps Sang8: ¢ Sept. 
& Theo 26, 

9 bh. ay tas 

de pli wores 

in persecutions. She, dy te armour of right- 
cousness on the right hand and on the left, 
by honour and dishonour °, in former days amid 
persecutions and tribulations crowned the holy 
martyrs with the varied and blooming chaplets 
of patience, and now in times of peace by 
God’s grace receives her due honours from 
kings and those who are th high place7, and 
from every sort and kindred of men. And 
while the kings of particular nations have 
bounds set to their authority, the Holy Church 
Catholic alone extends her power without 
limit over the whole world; for God, as it 
is written, Aath made her border peace®, But 
I should need many more hours for my dis- 
course, if I wished to speak of all things which 
concern her, 

28. In this Holy Catholic Church receiving 
instruction and behaving ourselves virtuously, 
ve shall attain the kingdom cf heaven, and 
inherit ETERNAL LIFE; for which also we 
endure all toils, that we may be made par- 
takers thereof from the Lord. For ours is no 
trifling aim, but our endeavour is for eternal life. 
Wherefore in the profession, of the Faith, after 
the words, “AND IN THE RESURRECTION OF 
THE FLESH,” that is, of the dead (of which 
we have discoursed), we are taught to believe 
also “IN THE LIFE ErrRNAL,” for which as 
Christians we are striving. 

29. The real and true life then is the 
Father, who through the Son in the Holy 
Spirit pours forth as from a fountain His 
heavenly gifts to all; and through His love to 
man, the blessings of the life eternal are pro- 
mised without fail to us men also. 

1) Gi Ci 9 Ky Ea S78 Fi 

141 

They declare at one time that it 1s by faith; 
for it is written, Ze that believeth on the Son 
hath eternal lifes, and what follows; and 
again He says Himself, Verily, verily, Z say 
tuto you, tle that hearcth My word, and be- 
liveth Him that sent Ale, hath eternal lifes, 
and the rest. At another time, it is by the 
preaching of the Gospel ; for He says, that 7/e 
that reapeth recetocth wages, and gathereth fruit 
unto life eternal’, At another time, by martyr- 
dom and confession in Christ’s name; for He 
says, Aud he that hateth his life in this world, 
shall keep tt unto life efernal®, And again, by 
preferring Christ to riches or kindred; And 
every one that hath forsaken brethren, or sisters 7, 
and the rest, shall ‘nherit eternal life. More- 
over it is by keeping the commandments, 
Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not 
hit/®, and the rest which follow; as He answered 
to him that came to Him, and said, Good 
Alaster, what shall [ do that £ may have eternal 
fife? ? But further, it is by departing from evil 
works, and henceforth serving God; for Paul 
says, Dut now being made free from sin, and 
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unio 
sanctification, and the end eternal life *. 

31. And the ways of finding eternal life are 
many, though I have passed over them by 
reason of their number. For the Lord in His 
loving-kindness has opened, not one or two 
only, but many doors, by which to enter into 
the life eternal, that. as far as lay in Him, 
all might enjoy it without hindrance. Thus 
much have we for the present spoken within 
compass concerning THE LIFE ETERNAL, which 
is the last doctrine of those professed in the 
Faith, and its termination ; which life may we 

We must ‘all, both teachers and hearers, by God's grace 

not disbcheve the possibility of this, but | enjoy! 

having an eye not to our own weakness but 
to His power, we must believe ; for with God 
all things are possible. And that this 1s pos- 
sible, and that we may look for eternal life, 
Daniel declares, And of the many righteous 
shall they shine as the stars for ever and ever 9. 
And Paul says, And so shall we be ever with 
the Lord*: for the being for ever with the Lord 
implies the life eternal. But most plainly 
of all the Saviour Himself says in the Gospel, 
And these shall go away tnto eternal punish- 
ment, but the righteous into life eternal?, 

30. And many are the proofs concerning 
the life eternal. And when we desire to 
gain this eternal life, the sacred Scriptures 
suggest to us the ways of gaining it; of which, 
because of the length of our discourse, the 
texts we now set before you shall be but few, 
the rest being left to the search of the diligent. 

7. Tyletiie il, 22% 
rer hess 17 

SVs.-Cxlvits 14. 
2 Matt. xxv. 46. 

Gs. Coin Wit ga, 
Oo ainenlis 3, Sept. 

32. And now, brethren beloved, the word 
of instruction exhorts you all, to prepare your 
souls for the reception of the heavenly gifis. 
As regards the Holy and Aposiolic Faith de- 
livered to you to profess, we have spoken 
through the grace of the Lordas many Lectures, 
as was possible, in these past days of Lent ; not 
that this is all we ought to have said, for many 
are the points omitted ; and these perchance are 
thought out better by more excellent teachers. 
But now the holy day of the Passover is at 
hand, and ye, beloved? in Christ, are to be 
enlightened dy the Laver of regeneration. Ve 
shall therefore again be taught what is requi- 

4 Tb vi 24s Bl ivy 86: 
7 Matt. xix. 29. SL bs aes 
OoMar ke, iz, 1 Rom, vi. 22. 
2 77s buetépas ev Xptot@ aydinys. Cf. Cat. xvii. 1, note r, 
Athan. 2pist. ad /pict.§ 2: mapa ty oy GcoteBela. ad Serap.iv.1! 
Tapa THS ONS EVAGBctus. 

3 John. 1ii.. 30: 
© Eby octet 

16—18. 

14? CA TROT iC ee rere, 

site, 1f God so will; with how great devotion Weht fs come®, Of this Jerusalem the prophet 
and order you must enter in when summoned, |hath said, dvd afterwards thou shalt be called 
for what purpose cach of the holy mysteries of the aty of righteousness, Zion, the faithful 
Baptism is performed, and with what reverence | mother of cities*; because of the law which 
and order you must go from Baptism to the! went forth out of Zion, and the word of the 
Holy Altar of God, and enjoy its spiritual Lord fron Srusalem?, which word has from 
and heavenly mysteries ; that your souls being henee been showered forth on the whole world, 
previously enlightened by the word of doc- To her the Prophct also says concerning you, 
trine, ye may discover in each particular the! Lit wp thine eves round about, and behold thy 
greatness of the gifts bestowed on you by! children eathercd tozscther3 ; and she answers, 
(rod, “saying, Iho are these that tly as a cloud, 

33. And after Kaster’s Holy Day of sal-!and as doves with their youn ones to mer? 
vation, ye shall come on each successive day, (clouds, because of their spiritual nature, and 
beginning from the second day of the week, dozes, from their purity). And again, she says, 
after the assembly into the Holy Place) [Who knoweth such thines? or who hath seen it 
of the Resurrection 3, and there, if God! thus? did ever a land bring forth in one dav? or 
permit, ye shall hear other Lectures ; in which gas ever a nation born all at once? for as 

ye shall again be taught the reasons of 
every thing which has been done, and shali 
receive the proofs thereof from the Old and 
New ‘Testaments,—-first, of the things done 
just before Baptism,—next, how ye were 
cleansed from your sins by the Lord, dy /he 
wurshine of water with the word +,—and how like 
Priests ye have become partakers of the Name 
of Christ,-—and how the Seal of the fellowship 
of the Holy Ghost was given to you,—and 
concerning the mysteries at the Altar of the New 
Testament, which have taken their beginning 
from this place, both what the Divine Scriptures 
have delivered to us, and what is the power of 
these mysteries, and how ye must approach 
them, and when and how receive them ;—and 
at the end of all, how for the time to come 
ye must behave yourselves worthily of this 
grace both in words and deeds, that you may 
all be enabled to enjoy the life everlasting. 
And these things shall be spoken, if it be 
God’s pleasure. 

34. finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord 
alway ; again L will sav, Rejoice: for your re- 
demption hath drawn nighs, and the heavenly 
host of the Angels is waiting for your. sal- 
vation. And there is now ¢he woice of one 
cryin tn the wilderness, Prepare ye the wav of 
the Lord®; and the Prophet cries, Ho, ve that 
thirst, cone ye to the water7 » and immediately 
afterwards, /Zearken unto me, and ve shall cat 
that which ts good, and your soul shall delicht 
itself in good things ®, And within a little while 
ye shall hear that excellent lesson which says, 
Shine, shine, O thou new Jerusalem; for thy 

| 

3. The place meant is not the Church of the Resurrection 
in which the Service had been held, but the Anastasis or actual 
cave of the Resurrection, which Constantine had so enlarged 
by additional works. that a discourse to the people could be held 
there: for Jerome (/2f7st, 61) relates that Epiphanius had preached 
in that place in front of the Lord’s sepulchre to clergy and people 
in the hearing of John the Bishop (Ben. Ed.). 

soon as Lion travatled, she brought forth her 
children 5, And all things shall be filled with 
joy unspeakable because of the Lord who said, 
Behold, L create Jerusalem a rejoteing, and her 
people a jor, 

35. And may these words be spoken now 
again over you also, S/ry, O heavens, and be 
joyful, O carth, and then; for the Lord hath 
had mercy on Fis people, and comforted the 
lowly of His people?, And this shall come 
to pass through the loving-kindness of God, 
who says to you, Behol?, I will blot out as 
a@ cloud thy transgressions, and as a thick 
cloud thy sins®, But ye who have been 
counted worthy of the name of Faithful (of 
whom it is written, Upon ALy servants shall 
be called a new name which shall be blessed 
on the earth%,) ye shall say with gladness, 
Blessed be the God and Father of cur Lord 
Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with every 
spirttial blessing in the heavenly places tn 
Christ*:s in whom we have our redemption 
through Lis blood, the forgiveness of our sins, 
according to the riches of His grace, wherein 
fle abounded towards us?, and what follows ; 
and again, But God being rich tin mercy, for 
fis great love wherewith Fe loved us, when 
we were Mead through our trespasses, guickened 
us togcther with Christ3, and the rest. And 
again in like manner praise ye the Lord of 
all good things, saying, But when the kind- 
ness of God our Saviour, and Hts love to- 
wards man appeared, not by works of right. 
cousness which we had done, but according 
to His mercy Fle saved us, through the wash- 
ine of regencration, and renewing of the LHoly 
Ghost, which Le shed on us abundantly 
hrough Jesus Christ our Saviour, that being 

3 Ib. xlix: 18, 
Gleb, vs sage: 
Se Ub salX ys 15, 

O Te: 1 a. 
4 beds. 
ie ds xlix. LB. 

<1. 4. 26; 2). barr, 3: 
S Tbs levie8. 
8 Is. xliv. 22. 

4 ph. v. 26. 
S Phil iit.n3 and iveqy Lake Sxi. 28) OTS) he: 
7 Abe Tia 8 Lh. z. 2. 

t [eph. i. 3. 2Ibw. 7. Boccia. as 

ee 

grace, we misht be 
hetrs, according to hope, of eternal life 

may God Himself the Father of our Lord | 
Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto 
you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in| 
the knowledse of Llimsclf, the of your: 
understanding betng enlightened 5, and may He 
ever keep you in good works, and words, and 
thoughts; to Whom be glory, honour, and 
power, through our Lord Jesus Christ, with 

justified Ui irs 

Cres 

iia Of osm are 

made'the Holy Ghost, 
And_ the endless ALCS ‘of eternity. 

| there is the following addition: 

Ee 
Jd 

XV ET, 

14 
now and ever, and unto all 
Zuoes 

in the older of the Munich MSS. 
Many other Le ectiires were de 
Baptism aud after the neophytes 

6 ** At the end of this Lecture 

livered year by year, both before 

had been baptized. aut these alone were ta ke nn down w ‘hen 
spoken and written by some of the carnest students in ae year 
352 of the advent of our Lord and Saviour oie sus Christ. Andin 

these you will find partly discussions of all the nece sary doctrines 
of the Faith which ought to be kno: wn tu men, and answers to the 
Grecks, and to those oi the Circumcision, and to the Heresics, and 
the moral precepts of Christians of all kinds, by the grace of God. 
‘The year 352 according to the computation of the Greeks i is the 
360 af the Christian era 

year * (Rupp). 
‘The date at which the Lectures were delivered cannot possibly 
be so late as is here stated. See the section of the Introduction 

on the “ Date. 

CATECHE TiAl 131 

SAME 

Five, 

a bees 

THE 

Oe ee GB. e = 

ON 

FIRST LECTURE 

NEWLY 

AUTIIOR, 

JAPTIZED!, 

ATA. 

THE MYSTERIES. 

Witn A LrEsson FROM THE First Generat Epistle oF PETER, BEGINNING AT 

Le sober, be vigilant, to the end of the Epistle. 

tr. IT wave long been wishing, O true-born 
and dearly beloved children of the Church, to 
discourse to you concerning these spiritualand 
heavenly Mysteries ; but since I well knew that 
seeing is far more persuasive than hearing, I 
waited for the present season ; that finding you 
more open to the influence of my words from 
your present experience, I might lead you by 
the hand into the brighter and more fragrant 
meadow of the Paradise before us ; especially 
as ye have been made fit to receive the 
more sacred Mysteries, after having been found 
worthy of divine and life-giving Baptism ?. 
Since therefore it remains to set before you 
a table of the more perfect instructions, let us 
now teach you these things exactly, that ye may 
know the effect3 wrought upon you on that 

evening of your baptism. 
Tirst ye entered into the vestibule 4 of the 

t This general title of the five following Lectures is omitted in 
many MSS. “In Cod. Ottob. at the end of the special title of this 
first Mystagogic Lecture, after the words ‘‘to the end of the 
Epistle,” there follows the statement ‘Of the same author Cyril, 
and of John the Bishop” (Bened. Ed.). See Index, Authenticity. 

This Lecture was delivered on the Monday after Easter 
in the Holy habe tenes see Cat. xvill. 33. 

3 thy euhage THY. ... yeyernuevny, is found in all the MSS. 
“* Nevertheless it would seem that we ought to read twy . 
yeyernuévwrv, which Grodecq either read o rstibstituted ’ men en. Ed. >. 
With the proposed reading the meaning would be—‘‘the signi- 
ficance of the things done to you,’ which a; grees better with “the 
meaning of €udaces. 

4 tov mpoavacov, called below in § 11 ‘the outer chamber.” 
Cf. Procat. § 1, note 3. It appears from Tertullian, De Corona, 
§ 3, that the renunciation was made first in the Church, and after- 
wards in the Baptistery : ‘‘ When we are going to enter the water, 
at that moment as well as just before in the Church under the 

hand of the President, we solemnly profess that we disown the | 

devil, and his pomp, and his angels; 

Baptistery, and there facing towards the West 

listened to the command to stretch forth 
your hand, and as in the presence of Satan ye 
renounced him. Now ye must know that this 
figure is found in ancient history. l*or when 
Pharaoh, that most bitter and cruel tyrant, 
was oppressing the free and high-born people of 
the Hebrews, God sent Moses to bring them 
out of the evil bondage of the Egyptians. ‘Then 
the door-posts were anointed with the blood 
of a lamb, that the destroyer might flee from 
the houses which had the sign of the blood ; 
and the Hebrew people was marvycllously 
delivered. The enemy, however, after their 
rescue, pursued after thems,and saw the sea 
wondrously parted for them ; nevertheless he 
went on, following close in their footsteps, and 
was all at once overwhelmed and engulphed in 
the Red Sea. 

3. Now turn from the old to the new, 
from the figure to the reality. ‘There we have 
Moses sent from God to Egypt; here, Christ, 
sent forth from His Father into the world: 
there, that Moses might lead forth an afflicted 
people out of Egypt; here, that Christ might 
rescue those who are oppressed in the world 
under sin: there, the blood of a lamb was the 
spell against © the destroyer ; here, the blood of 
the Lamb without blemish Jesus Christ is made 
the charm to scare? evil spirits : there, the tyrant 

6 amotpomaor. 

5 Ex, xiv. 9, 23. : 
7 the word commonly used in the 

huyadevTi peor, Septuagint 

14 

eo PURE ER 

{ice 

1 

| + > ’ 
such vanity : fron wi hes 

Was pursuing that ancient people even to the ee is Hehe Att # Man pray- 
sea; and here the daring and shameless spirit, mg to be delivered oe unto God, ids 
the author of evil, was following thee even to aba ac neon Sion behoiding vanity 3. Bye not 
the very streams of salvation. ‘The tyrant of old | interested in the madness of the theatre, where 
was drowned in the sea: and this present one | (nou wilt behold the wanton gestures of the 
ra is . th 4h << EFL o Pp . rt ' 
disappears in the water of salvation, }players +, carried on with mockeries and all 
4. But nevertheless thou art bidden to say, unseeimliness, and the frantic dancing of cffem- 
with arm outstretched towards him as though ee men tes the sepium of them Wao 
eth A m te ane mg aeleac 4 F anote lWyot 
he were present, “I renounce thee, Satan.” |! hunts “expose themselves to wild beasts, that 

I wish also to say wherefore ye stand facing 
to the West; for it is necessary. Since the 
West is the region of sensible darkness, and 
he being darkness has his dominion also in 
darkness, therefore, looking with a symbolhical 
meaning towards the West, ye renounce that 
dark and gloomy potentate. What then did 
cach of you stand up and say? “I renounce 
thee, Satan,”—thou wicked and most. crucl 
tyrant! meaning, “TI fear thy might no longer ; 
for that Christ hath overthrown, having par- 
taken with me of flesh and blood, that through 
these He might by death destroy death 8, that I 
might not be made swd/ect to bondage for ever.” 
“TL renounce thee,’—thou crafty and most 
subtle serpent. “I renounce thee,”—plotter as 
thou art, who under the guise of friendship 
didst contrive all disobedience, and work Apos- 
tasy In our first parents. “I renounce thee, 
satan,”—the artificer and abettor of all wicked- 
Ness. 

5. Then in a second sentence thou art 
taught to say, “and all thy works.” Now the 
works of Satan are all sin; which also thou 
must renounce ;—just as one who has escaped 
a tyrant has surely escaped his weapons also, 
All sin therefore, of every kind, is included 
in the works of the devil. Only know this ; 
that all that thou sayest, especially at that most 
thrillmg hour, is written in God’s books ; 
when therefore thou doest any thing contrary 
to these promises, thou shalt be judged as a 
transgressor 9. "Vhou renouncest therefore the 
works of Satan; I mean, all deeds and 
thoughts which are contrary to reason. 

6. ‘Then thou sayesi, “ And all his pomp ?.” 
Now the pomp of the devil is the madness of 
theatres *, and horse-races, and hunting, and all 

for ‘a city of refuve.” But the Verb buy Sevw is Transitive 
in 2 Mace. ix. 4, as well as in Xenophon and Demosthenes, The 
application of the blood of Christ in Baptism is represented by 
marking the sign of the Cross on the forehead. Compare the lines 
cf Prudentius quoted by the Benedictine Editor: 
** Passio qua nostram defendit sanguine frontem, 
Corporeamque domum signato collinit ore.” 

a, GEeDi tietay Te. Oral ih to. 

t Herod. Il. 58: ‘*The Egyptians were the first to introduce 
solemn assemblies (wavnyvpis) and processions (moumds).” At 
Kome the term ‘* pompa” was applied especially to the procession 
with which the Ludi Circenses were opened, and also to any 
grand ceremony or pageant. 

2 Ocatpomavia. Cf. Tertull. Afsologet. 38; ‘* We renounce all 
your spectacles. ... Among us nothing is ever said, or seen, or 
heard, which has anything in common with the madness of the 
Circus, the immodesty of the theatre, the atrocities of the RECA, 
the useless exercises of the wrestling-ground.” He calls the theatre 

VOL. VIL, 

they may pamper their miserable appetites 
who, to serve their belly with meats, become 
themselves in reality meat for the belly of 
untamed beasts; and to speak justly, for the 
sake of their own god, their belly, they cast 
away their life headlons in singie combats 7, 
Shun also horse-races that frantic and soul- 
subverting spectacle ®, Tor all these are the 
pomp of the devil. 

7. Moreover, the things which are hung up at 
idol festivals9, either meat or bread, orother such 
things polluted by the invocation of the unclean 
spirits, are reckoned in the pomp of the devil. 
Vor as the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist 

‘that citadel of all impurities,” De S bectachls, ¢. 10,°.°* ime 
modesty’s peculiar abode,” ce. 17, and gives a vivid description 
of the rage and fury of the Circus inc. 16. 3 Ps-exix, 37, 

4 wiwwv, the name either of a species of low comedy, “ con- 
sisting more of gestures and mimicry than of spoken dialogue,” 
or of the persons who acted in them. Cyril's description of the 
coarse and indecent character of the mimes is more than justhicd 
by the impartial testimony of Ovid, 77st. ii. 497: 

* Quid si scripsissem mimos obsccena jocantes, 
Qui semper vetiti crimen amoris habent 5 
In quibus assidue cultus procedit adulter, 
Verbaque dat stulto callida nupta viro. 

Nubilis hos virgo, matronaque, Viryue, puergque 
Spectat, et e magna parte Senatus adest. 
Nec satis incestis temerari vocibus aures ; 
Assucscunt oculi multa pudenda pati.” 
A theatre is mentioned as one of the buildings erected by Hadrian 
in his new city Aelia Capitolina built on the site of Jerusalem ; 
and that theatrical performances were continued in the time of 
Cyril we know from the accusation that in a time of famine he 
had sold one of the Church vestments, which was afterwards used 
upon the stage, 

5 Lactantius, ZAffome, § 63: “ Histrionici etiam impudici 
gestus, quibus infames feminas lmiitantur, libidines, quze saltando 
exprimunt, docent.” 

Kuinyeotars, the so-called ‘‘venationes” of the Circus in 
which the ‘ bestiarii” fought with wild be: 

7 The ‘‘bestiarii” were feasted in public on the day before 

| their encounter with the beasts. See Tertull. «I pologed. § 42: 
) ‘I do not recline in public at the feast of Bacchus, after the 
| manner of the beast-fighters at their last banquet.” Ib. § o: 
“*'Those also who dine on the flesh of wild beasts from the arena, 
who have keen appetites for bear and stag.” ‘These latter, how- 
ever, were chiefly the poor, to whom flesh was a rarity: Apulcius 
AMetame. iv. t4, quoted by Oehler. 

8 Wuyxas éxtpayyjAcgov, an allusion to the risk of a broken neck 
in the chariot-race. ‘Tertull. ve Sfectaculis, $9: “ Maquestriarism 
was formerly practised in a simple way on horseback, and cer tiadaly 

| its ordinary use was innocent: but when it was dragged into the 
| games, it passed from a gift of God into the service of demons.” 
The presiding deity of the chariot-race was Poseidon (Hom, /2. 
xxiii, 307; Pind. O27. i. 63; Pyth. vi. 50; Soph. CEdip. Col. 712), 
and both this and the other shows of the Circus, and of the theatre, 
were connected with the worship of the gods of Greece and Rome, 
and therefore forbidden as idilatcous: “What high religiots 
rites, what sacrifices precede, intervene, and follow, how many 
guilds, how many priesthoods, how many services are set asiir 
(Vert. de Speet. § 7). : ; *y ’ 

9 wavnyvpert. Vhe Panegyris was strictly a religious festival, 
but was commonly accompanied by a great fair or market, in which 
were sold not only such things as the worshippers might need for 
their offerings, e.g. frankincense, but also the flesh of the animals 
which had been sacrificed. Cf. Dictionary of Greek and hozit. 
Antiq. ‘* Panegyris.” ‘Tertull. -1folog. § 42: “We do not go to 
your spectacles: yet the articles that are sold there, if I need them, 
T shall obtain more readily at their proper places. We certuinly 

buy no frankincense.” 

L 

145 CATECHEVICAL A CTUREs: 

Hefore the invocation of the Holy and Adora 
ble Trinity were simple bread and wine, while 
after the invocation the Bread becomes the 
Body of Christ, and the Wine the Blood of 
Christ ', so in ike manner such meats bclong- 
ine to the pomp of Satan, though in their own 
nature simple, become profane by the inyo- 
cation of the evil spirit. 

8. After this thou sayest, ‘and all thy ser- 
vice.” Now the service of the devil is prayer 
in idol temples; things done in honour of 
lifeless idols; the lighting of lamps 3, or burning 
of incense by fountains or rivers+#, as some 
persons cheated by dreams or by evil spirits 
do [resort to this 5], thinking to find a cure even 
for their bodily ailments. Go not after such 
thines. The watching of birds, divination, 

oO 

omens, or amulets, or charms written on leaves, | 
sorceries, or other evil arts®, and all such | 

things, are services of the devil; therefore 
shun them. For if after renouncing Satan 
and associating thyself with Christ7, thou fall 

under their influence, thou shalt find® the ty-' 

rant more bitter; perchance, because he 
treated thee of old as his own, and relieved 
thee from his hard bondage, but has now been 
ereatly exasperated by thee ; so thou wilt be 
bereaved of Christ, and have experience of the 
other. Hast thou not heard the old history 
which tells us of Lot and his daughters ? Was 
not he himself saved with his daughters, when 
he had gained the mountain, while his wife 
became a pillar of salt, set up as a monu- 
ment for ever, in remembrance of her depraved 
will and her turning back. ‘Take heed there- 
fore to thyself, and turn not again to whatis 

t Compare St. Paul’s argument against meats offered to idols, 
1 Cor. x. 1421: and on Cyril's Eucharistic doctrine, see notes on 
Cat. xxil. 

“ The form of renunciation before Baptism is given in the 
Apostolic Constitutions, VII, 41: 1 renounce Satan, and his 
works, and his pomps, and his services, and his angels, and his 
inventions, and all things that are under him.” Cf. ‘Tertull. De 
Spectaculis, § 4: ‘* When on entering the water, we make profes- 
sion of the Christian faith in the words of its rule, we bear public 
testimony that we have renounced the devil, his pomp, and his 
angels.” 

> Herod. ii. 62: “At Sais, when the assembly takes place for 
the sacrifices (to Minerva, or Neith), there is one night on which 
the inhabitants all burn a multitude of lights in the open air round 
their houses... . hese burn the whole night, and give to the 
festival the name of the Feast ef Lamps (Avxvoxaty).” 

4 Wountains and rivers had each its own deity or nymph, to 
whom sacrifices were offered, and incense burned. 

5 és ovr SueBysay. ‘These words are omitted in many MSS., 
and regarded by the Benedictine Editor as a spurious addition 
made to complete the construction. The words 7 rocavra at the 
end of the sentence are better omitted, as in several good MSS. 

© Cat. iv. 373 «Ifost. Const. vi. ‘De not a civiner, for that 
leads to idolatry... . ‘Vhou shalt not use enchantments or pur- 
‘rations forthy child. Thou shalt not be a soothsayer nor a diviner 
by great or little birds. Nor shalt thou learn wicked arts ; for all 
these things has the Law forbidden.” Deut. xviii. ro, 11. 

7 post. Const. vii. gt? ‘And after his renunciation let him in 
his association (evvracadpevos) say, 1 associate myself with 
Christ.” 

3 retpadiay (Cod. Mon.1) isa better reading than wetpag Ojon. 
Cr. Plat. Lackes, 183 Es tov (pywr ererpadyy. 

seeking whom he may devour s, 

behing, having put thine hand to the plough, 
and then turning back to the salt savour of 
this life’s doings ; but escape to the mountain, 
to Jesus Christ, that stove hewn without hands’, 
which has filled the world. 

9. When therefore thou renouncest Satan; 
utterly breaking all thy covenant with him, that 
ancient Zeague with hell?, there is opened to 
thee the paradise of God, which He planted 
towards the East, whence for his transgression 
our first father was banished ; and a symbol of 
this was thy turning from West to last, 
the place of lights, Then thou wert told 
to say, “I believe in the Mather, and in the 
Soa, and in the Holy Ghost, and in one 

3aptism of repentance +.” Of which things we 
svoke to thee at length in the former Lectures, 
as God’s grace al'owed us. 

ro. Guarded therefore by these discourses, 
be sober. For our adversary the devil, as was 
just now read, as a rearing Mon, qalketh about, 
But though in 
former times death was mighty and devoured, 
at the holy Laver of regeneration God has 
wiped away every tear from off all faces 6 OR 
thou shalt no more mourn, now that thou hast 
put off the old man; but thou shalt keep holy- 
day 7, clothed in the garment of salvation *, even 
Jesus Christ. 

rr. And these things were done in the 
outer chamber. But if God will, when in the 
succeeding lectures on the Mysteries we have 
entered into the Holy of Holies 9, we shall there 
know the symbolical meaning of the things 
which are there performed. Now to God the 
Father, with the Son and the Holy Ghost, be 
glory, and power, and majesty, for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

9 Phil. iii, 13. On the pillar of salt, see If #sd.x. 72 © Of whos2 
wickedness even to this day the waste land that smoketh is a 
testimony, ... anda standing pillar of salt is a monument of an 
unbelieving soul.” Joseph. Awd. I. xi. ** Moreover [ have seen 
it, for it remains even unto this day.” Bp. Lightfoot, Clem, Nove. 
Ep. ad Cor. xi. remarks that the region abounds in pillars of salt, 
and “ Medieval and even modern travellers have delighted to 
identify one or other of these with Lot's wite.”” 

+ Dan, dt, 28,45: © As; servi. 49. 

3 Cf. S. Ambros. De Alystertis, c. ii. 7: ‘Ad orientem 
converteris } quienim renunciat diabolo ad Christum convertitur:” 
“Where he plainly intimates. ... that turning to the Hast was 
a symbol of their aversion from Satan and conversion unto Chr: 
that is, from darkness to light, from serving idols, to serve Him, 
who is the Sun of Rightcousness and Fountain of Light” (Dingh. 
Ant. xi. vil. 7). 

4 Cf, Didaché, vii. 1; Justin M. Afolog. Tc. 61 A; Swainson, 
Creeds, c. iii. on the short Baptismal Professions. "Phe writtigs 
of S. Cyprian distinctly tell us, that in his day the form of in- 
terrogation at Baptism was fixed and definite. He speaks of the 
“usitata et legitima verba interrogationis,’—and we know as 
distinctly that the interrogation included the words, ‘* Dost thou 
believe in God the Father, in His Son Christ, in the Holy Spirit? 
Dost thou believe in remission of sins and eternal life through the 
Church?” 

5 1 Pet, veo 6-Te-xwy. 83 Reve. 

7 mavnyuploes. Seve. 

9 These words seem to imply that the Lectures on the Eucharist 
were to be delivered in the Holy Sepulchre, though the My-teries 

tt 
’ 

| themselves may be called metaphorically ‘the Holy of Holics.” 

Peer a 

(ON THE MYSTERIES, 

pO. 

IL.) 

Romans ‘vi. 3-14. 

Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptised into Jesus Christ, were baptised into Fis 

Qeat? i? C657) Par 

1. Titrse daily introductions into the Mys- 
teries', and new instructions, which are the 
announcements of new truths, 
to us ; and most of all to you, who have been 
renewed from an old state to a new. There- 
fore, I shall necessarily lay before you the 
sequel of yesterday’s Lecture, that ye may 
learn of what those things, which were done 
by you in the inner chamber ®, were symbolical. 
As soon, then, as ye entered, ye put off 
your tunic ; and this was an image of putting 
off the old man with his deeds, Having 
stripped yourselves, ye were naked; in this 
also imitating Christ, who was stripped naked 
on the Cross, and by His nakedness put off 
from LHimself the principalities and powers, 
and openly triumphed over them on the trees. 
lor since the adverse powers made their lair 
in your members, ye may no longer wear that 
old garment ; I do not at all mean this visible 
one, but the eld man, which waxeth corrupt 
in the lusts of deceit3, May the soul which 
has once put him off, never again put him on, 
but say with the Spouse of Christ in the Song 
of Songs, J have put off my garment, how 
shall I put it on®? O wondrous thing! ye 
were naked in the sight of all, and were not 
ashamed 7 ; for truly ye bore the likeness of the 
first-ftormed Adam, who was naked in the 
garden, and was not ashamed. 

°o 

<e 

ae Us raywy lit, 

2 ‘The renunciation and the profession of faith were made in 
the outer chamber or vestibule of the Baptistery, 

a Cooly Tho, 

41). ii. 15. Cyril’s use of this passage agrees best with the | 
Interpretation that Christ, having been clothed with the likeness | 

of sinful flesh during His life on earth, submitted therein to the 
assaults of the powers of evil, but on the Cross threw off from 
Himself both it and them. 

5 Eph. iv. 22. © Cant. %, 3, 

7 See Dict. Christ, Antiq. Baptism,” § 48: The Unclothing 
of the Catechumens: Bingh, Ant. XI. xi. 1: All “persons were 
baptized naked, cither in imitation of Adam in Paradise, or our 
Saviour upon the Cross, or to signify their putting off the body of 
sin, and the old man with his deeds,” 

Jor ye are not under the Law, but under grace. 

3. Then, when ye were stripped, ye were 
anointed with exorcised oil*, from the very 

are profitable | hairs of your head to your feet, and were 

made partakers of the good olive-tree, Jesus 
Christ. Tor ye were cut off from the wild 
olive-tree 9, and grafted into the good one, and 
were made to share the fatness of the true 
olive-tree. The exorcised oil therefore was 
a symbol of the participation of the fatness of 
Christ, being a charm to drive away every 
trace of hostile influence. For as the breathing 
of the saints, and the invocation of the Name 
of God, like fiercest flame, scorch and drive 
out evil spirits’, so also this exorcised oil 
receives such virtue by the invocation of 
God and by prayer, as not only to burn and 
cleanse away the traces of sins, but also to 
chase away all the invisible powers of the evil 
one. 

4. After these things, ye were led to the 

holy pool? of Divine Baptism, as Christ was 
carricd from the Cross to the Sepulchre which 
is before our eyes. And each of you was 
asked, whether he believed in the name of 
the T’ather, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost, and ye made that saving confession, 

® Apost. Const. vii. 22: ‘ But thou shalt beforeh ind anoint the 
person with holy oil (éAad@), and afterward baptize him with water, 
and in the conclusion shalt seal him with the ointment (uvpw), 
that the anointing (yptoua) may be a participation of the Holy 
Spirit, and the water a symbol of the death, and the ointment the 
seal of the Covenants. But if there be neither oil nor ointment, 
water suffices both for anointing, and for a seal, and for a confes- 
sion of Him who died, or indeed is dying with us.” The previous 
anointing ‘*with oil sanctified by prayer” is mentioned in the 
Clementine Recognitions, 1. c. 67, and in the Pseudo-Justin, 
Questiones ad Orthodoxos, Qu. 137. It was not however universal, 
and seems to have been unknown in Africa, not being mentioned by 
Clement of Alexandria (Ped. II. c. vill. On the use of ointments), 
nor ‘Yertullian, nor Augustine. E 

9 On the significance of the wild olive-tree, see Irenceus, V. ro. 

1 See Index, ‘‘ Exorcisin.” 
KoAvpByOpav. ‘Lhe pool or piscina was deep enough ior total 
immersion, and large enough for many to be baptized atonce. Ci. 
| Dingh. Ant. VIII. vii.2; XI. xi. 2, 3. For engravings of the very 
| ancient Baptisteries at Aquileia and Ravenna, shewing the form 
| of the font or piscina, see Dict. Chaistian Ant, “aptstery 

2 

2 

148 

CATECTID EPICA i Ce iS. 

and descended three times into the water, and so also it is the counterpart 7 of the sufferings of 
ascended again; here also hinting by a oar Christ. For this cause Paul just now cried 
bol at the three-days burial of Christ. Foras) aloud and said, Or are ye tgnuerant that all 
our Saviour passed three days and three nights lee who were baplised tnto Christ Jesus, Were 
in the heart of the earth, so you also in your] baplised into His death? Ile were buried 
first ascent out of the water, represented the | erefore with [im by baplism into Fis death ®, 
first day of Christ in the earth, and by your) 'Phese words he spake to some who were 
descent, the night; for as he who is in the disposed to think that Baptism ministers to 
night, no longer sees, but he who is in the us the remission of sins, and adoption, but 
day, remains in the light, so in the descent, | has not further the fellowship also, by repre- 
as in the night, ye saw nothing, but in ascend-_ sentation, of Christ's true sufferings. 

ing again ye were as inthe day. And atthe) 7. In order therefore that we might Icarn, 
selfsame moment ye were both dying and that whatsoever things Christ endured, ror Us 
being born; and that Water of salvation was) AND FOR OUR SALVATION? He suffered them in 

at once your grave and your mother. And 
what Solomon spoke of others will suit you. 
also; for he said, in that case, Zhere ts a tine 

to bear and a time to diets but to you, in the 

reverse order, there was a time to die and a time’ 
to be born; and one and the same time effected | 

both of these, and your birth went hand in| plented tosether™. 
“was planted in this place, we also by partaking 

in hand with your death. 

5. O strange and inconceivable thing! we. 
did not really die, we were not really buried, 
we were not really crucified and raised again ; 
but our imitation was in a figure, and our 
salyation in reality. Christ was actually cruci- 
fied, and actually buried, and truly rose again ; 
and all these things He has freely bestowed 
upon us, that we, sharing His sufferings 
by imitation, might gain salvation in reality. 
O surpassing loving-kindness! Christ received 
nails in His undefiled hands and feet, and 
suffered anguish: while on me without pain 
or toil by the fellowship of His suffering 
He freely bestows salvation. 

6. Lect no one then suppose that Baptism 
is merely the grace of remission of sins, or 
further, that of adoption; as John’s was a bap- 
tism5 conferring only remission of sins: whereas 
we know full well, that as it purges our sins, 
and ministers © to us the gift of the Holy Ghost, 

3 ‘The same significance is attributed to the trine immersion by 
many Fathers, but a different explanation is given by Tertullian 
(ddv. Praxean, c. xxvi.): ‘Not once only, but three times, we 
are immersed into the several Persons at the mention of their 
several names.” Gregory of Nyssa (Ox the Baptist of Christ, 
p- 520 in this Series) joins both reasons together: ‘‘ By doing this 
thrice we represent for ourselves that grace of the Resurrection 
which was wrought in three days: and this we do, not receiving 
the Sacrament in silence, but while there are spoken over us the 
Names of the Three Sacred Persons on whom we believed, &c.” 
Compare p. 529. Cf. Afost. Const. WII. § 47, Can. 50: “Ifany 

sishop or Presbyter does not perform the three immersions of one 
initiation, but one immersion made into the death of Christ, let 
him be deprived.” 

Milles in his note on this passage mentions that “this form of 
Baptism is still used in the Greek Church, See Eucholog. p. 355. 
Ed. Jac. Goar. and his notes p. 365.” 

4 Eccles. iii. 2. 

5 Tertullian (De Baftisnto, c. 10) denies that John’s Baptism 
availed for the remission of sins: ‘‘ Ifrepentance is a thing human, 
its baptism must necessarily be of the same nature: else if it had 
been celestial, it would have given both the Holy Spirit and the 

remi:sion of sins.’”’ Cyril’s doctrine is more in accordance with 

the language of the Fathers generally, and of St. Mark i. 4, Luke 
14. mpukevor. 

reality and not in appearance, and that we 
also are made partakers of His sufferings, 
Paul cried with all exactness of truth, /07 
if we have been planted together with the like- 
ness of Llis death, we shall be also with the 
likeness of His resurrection. Well has he said, 
For since the true Vine 

in the Baptism of death have been planted 
fosether with Him. And fix thy mind with 
much attention on the words of the Apostle. 
He said not, “For if we have been planted 
together with His death,” but, th the Likeness 
of Llis death, Yor in Christ’s case there was 
death in reality, for His soul was really 
separated from His body, and real burial, for 
His holy body was wrapt in pure linen ; and 
everything happened really to Him; but in 
your case there was only a likeness of death 
and sufferings, whereas of salvation there was 
not a likeness but a reality. 

8. Having been sufficiently instructed in 
these things, keep them, I beseech you, in 
your remembrance; that I also, unworthy 
though I be, may say of you, Vow Z love you’, 
because ye always remember me, and hold fast 
the traditions, which I delivered unto you. 
And God, who has presented you as é were 
alive from the dead*,is able to grant unto you 

to walk in newness of lifes: because His is the 

glory and the power, now and for ever. Amen, 

oS 

7 évritvmov. The “ Antitype” is here the sign cr memorial 
of that which is past, and no longer actually present: See note 6 
On xed... Ch Tlebaix, ex; 

8 Rom. vi. 3. In the following sentence several MSS. have 
a different reading: ‘These things perhaps he said to some who 
were disposed to think that Baptism ministers remission of sins 
only, and not adoption, and that further it has not the fellowship, 
&c.’ Against this reading, approved by Milles, the Benedictine 
Editor argues that in Rom. vi. 3, 4,, there is no reference to 
adoption, but only to the fellowship of Christ’s Passion, and that 
Cyril quotes the passage only to prove the latter, the gift of 
adoption being generally admitted, and therefore not in question. 

9 This clause is contained in the Nicene Creed, and in that 
which was offered to the Council by Eusebius as the ancient 
Creed of Cawsarea. It probably formed part of the Creed of 
Jerusalem, though it is not found in the titles of the Lectures, 
nor specially explained. 

1 Tb. vi. 5. Cyril gives the phrase ‘‘Alanted together” 
a special application to those who had been baptized in the same 
place where Christ had been buried. 

t 1 Cor. xi. 2: Now / praise you, & ec. 

2 Rom. vi. 23. 3 TDett4: 

Pee ee ile 

SIVYSITERIE 

(ON THE 

ON CHRISM. 

XXI. 

oy: £1E 9 

de 

t JOHN i. 
But ye have an unction from the Holy One, &e. . 

20—2§; 

.. that, when Te shall appear, we may 

have confidence, and not be ashamed before Him at His coming. 

t. HavinGc been baptised into Christ, and 
put on Christ*, ye have been made conform- 
able to the Son of God; for God having 
Joreordained us unto adoption as sons?, made 
us fo be conformed to the body of Christ's glory 3. 
Having therefore become fartakers of Christ 4, 
ye are properly called Christs, and of you God 
sud, Zouch not Aly Christss, or anointed. 
Now ye have been made Christs, by receiv- 
ing the antitype® of the Holy Ghost ; and all 
things have been wrought in you by imita- 
tion?7, because ye are images of Christ. He 
washed in the river Jordan, and having im- 
parted of the fragrance® of His Godhead to 
the waters, He came up from them ; and the 
Holy Ghost in the fulness of His being 9 lighted 

3 Phil. iii. 21. 

2 Eph. i. 5. 

SPs; cv: 15, 

¥ Gal. ii; 27 

4 Heb. iting. 

© avritumov. Cat. xx. 63 xxiii, 20, “Twice in this section, 
asin Heb. ix. 24 (avtituma tov aAndwor), avrizuTov is the copy 
or figure representing the original pattern (TUT mos, ef, Acts vil. 44). 
Otherwise (as in Cat. x. 115 Nill, 19 5 xxii. 3) rUmos is the figure 
to be subsequently realised in the antitype. 

7 €lKOVUKS .. cikoves Tou Xpiorov. 

8 xpwrwr, literally “tinctures.” The Ben. Ed. writes: ‘* For 
dorev we have written xpotwv with Codd. Coisl. Ottob. Roe, 
Casaub., &c... But we must write Xpwrov from xp@ra, not ypoTwr 
from ypwres. Authors use the word xpara to signify the eftluence 
of an odour. So Gregory of Nyssa takes it in his 3rd /fomdily on 
the Song of Songs, p. 512; and S. Maximus in Question 37 on 
Se ripture: ‘\ypwra we say is the godliness abel iret w ae ny 
S. Paul was to the one a@ savour of life unto life.’...In the 
Procatechesis, § 13, Cyril calls the waters of Baptism véaTwv 
AptaTopopay exovtwy evodtar. If however any one prefers the 
reading @a7ov, he may defend himsclf by the ‘authority of Epi- 
phanius, who in the £afos/tion of the Faith, c. 15, Says that 
Christ descending into the water gave rather than received, ... 
illuminating them, and empow ering x them for a type of what was 
to be accomplished i in Him.” Ac cording to the Ehionite Gospel of 
St. Matthew in Epiphanius (//e. xxx. “bfonite c. 13), when 
Jesus came up out of the water a great light shone prea th the 
place: a tradition to which the Benedictine Editor thinks the 
reading @wrwy may refer. Justin M. (Dialog. cy Ixxxviii.): 
““When Jesus had stepped into the water, a fire was kindled in the 
Jordan.” Otto quotes the legend, as found in Orac. Srbyld. vii. 
81—83 :— 

"Os ce Adyov yevvyge llatijp TIvedp.’ opr w abner, 

Ody arayyeATn pa Aoywv, Adyov voagiy ayvors 

“Patvwr, cov Bantiopa., dv ov mupos eLehaavOns. 

9 ee emupocnars € eyevero. The Benedictine Editor under- 
stands this phrase as an allusion to the descent of the Holy Ghost 
on Jesus in a substantial bodily form. So Gregory Nazianzen 
(Orat. xliv. 17), says that the Holy Ghost descended on the 
Apostles ovoiwdws Kat gwopatikos. But Anastasius Sinaita inter- 
prets ovotwdas in this latter passage as meaning ‘‘in the essence 
and reality of His (Divine) Person :” and this latter sense agree- 
ing with ‘the frequent use of odoiwdys by Athanasius is “well 

on Him, like resting upon like '. And to you in 
like manner, after you had come up from the 
pool of the sacred streams, there was given an 
Unction’, the anti-type of that wherewith Christ 
was anointed; and this is the Holy Ghost ; 
of whom also the blessed Esaias, in his pro- 
phecy respecting Him, said in the person of 
the Lord, Zhe Spirit of the Lord is upon Me. 
because He hath anointed Me: He hath sent 
Me to preach glad tidings to the poor? 

2. For Christ was not anointed by men 
with oil or material ointment, but the Father 
having before appointed Him to be _ the 
Saviour of the whole world, anointed Him 
with the Holy Ghost, as Peter says, Jesus of 
Nazareth, whom God anointed with the Floly 
Ghosts. David also the Prophet cried, saying, 
Thy throne, O God, ts for ever and ever ; 
a sceptre of righteousness ts the sceptre of 
Thy kingdom; Thou hast loved righteousness 
and hated iniquity; therefore God even Thy 
God hath anointed Thee with the oil of glad- 
ness above Thy fellows+. And as Christ was 
in reality crucified, and buried, and raised, 
and you are in Baptism accounted worthy of 
being crucified, buried, and raised together 
with Him in a likeness, so is it with the 
unction also. As He was anointed with an 
ideals oil of gladness, that is, with the 
el Ghost, called oil of gladness, because 
He is the author of spiritual gladness, so ye 
were anointed with ointment, having been 
made partakers and “Vows of Christ. 

rendered by Canon Mason (7%e Relation of Confirmation to 
Baptism, p. 343, ‘in the fulness of His being.” 

10 Cf, Gree. Naz; Orat. xaxixs “The Spirit also bears witness 
to His Godhead, for He comes to that which is like Himself.” 

» Ch Tertullian, De Baptismo, c. *«Exinde egressi de 
lavacro perungimur, benedicta unetione.” It is cléar that the 
Unction mentioned in these passages was 1 Ba at the same 
time and place as Baptism. Whether it formed part of that 
Sacrament, or was regarded by Cyril as a separate and indepen- 
dent rite, has been made a matter of controversy. See Index, 
“Obst 

2 TS e leis Ie S AGts. 2-38) PS 

5 vont cannot here he translated ‘spiritual’ : 
mvevparix«ns immediately following. Cf. i. 4, note. 

» XIV Ge Fee 
because ot 

ere. 

3. But beware of supposing this to be plain 
ointinent. 
after the invocation of the Hely Ghost, is 
mere bread no longer %, but the Body of Christ, 
so also this holy ointment is no more simple 
ointment, nor (so to say) common, after invo- 
eation, but it is Christ’s gift of grace, and, by 
the advent of the Holy Ghost, is made fit to 
impart His Divine Nature 7, Which ointment is 
symbolically applied to thy forchead and thy 
other senses ®; and while thy body is anointed 
with the visible ointment, thy soul is sanctified 
by the Holy and life-giving Spirit. 

4. And ye were first anointed on the fore- 
head, that ye might be delivered from the 
shame, which the first man who transgressed 
bore about with him everywhere; and that 
with unvetled face ye might reflect as a mirror 
the glory of the Lord’, Then on your ears ; 

that ye might receive the ears which are 

quick to hear the Divine Mysteries, of which 
Esaias said, Zhe Lord gave me also an car 
to hear* ; and the Lord Jesus in the Gospel, 
He that hath ears to hear let him hear?. TYhen 
on the nostrils; that receiving the sacred 
ointment ye may say, Ile are to God a sweet 
savour of Christ, in them that are saved s. 
Afterwards on your breast; that having put 
on the dreast-plate of righteousness, ye may 
stand against the wiles of the devil4, Vor as 
Christ after His Baptism, and the visitation of 
the Holy Ghost, went forth and vanquished 
the adversary, so likewise ye, after Holy Bap- 
tism and the Mystical Chrism, having put on 
the whole armour of the Holy Ghost, are to 

6 Compare xix. 73 xxiii. 7, 19; and the section on “ /'v- 
charist” in the Introduction. 

7 Xpiotod xapiopa Kai Uvevpartos aylov mapovata TAs avTov 
O@edtyt0s éevepyyntixoy yivopevov. The meaning of this passage 
seems to have been obscured by divergent views of the order and 
construction of the words. In the Oxford translation, followed 
by Dr. Pusey (Real Presence, p. 357), the Chrism is ‘the gift of 
Christ, and by the presence of His Godhead it causes in us the 
Holy Ghost.” The order of the operations proper to the two 
Divine Persons scems thus to be inverted. 

According to the Benedictine Editor, and Canon Mason (Re/a- 
tion of Confirmation to Baptism, p. 344), it is‘ Christ's gracious 
gift, and is made effectual to convey the Holy Ghost by the 
presence of His own Godhead,”—i.e. apparently, the Godhead 
of the Holy Ghost conveys the Holy Ghost. 

But according to the context ‘‘the presence” must be that of 
the Divine Person who has been invoked, namely the Holy Ghost : 
and this is clearly expressed in the order of the words Ilvevparos 
aylov Tapovala THS avToOv OedTyTOS EvepyntiKov. The connexion 
of the words Iv, ay. wapovola is put beyond doubt by the Invo- 
cation in the Liturgy of S. James quoted in JA/yst. V. 7, note 8. 
The true meaning thus seems to be that the Chrism is Christ’s 
gift of grace, and imparts His Divine nature by the presence 
of the Holy Ghostafterthe Invocation. ‘This meaning is confirmed 
by the formula given in dA fost. Const. vii. 44, for the consecration 
of the Chrism: ‘Grant also now that this ointment may be made 
effectual in the baptized, that the sweet savour of Thy Christ may 
remain firm and stable in him, and that, having died with Him 
he may rise again and live with Him.” The Chrism is thus re- 
garded as “‘the Seal” which confirms the proper benefits of 
Baptism. 

8 ért meTwrov Kat TOV dAAwY Gov aidOyTyPl(wv. The forehead 
may be regarded as representing the sense of touch ; or we may 
translate, according to the idiomatic use of aAdos, ‘thy forehead 
and thine organs ot sense besides.”? See Winer. Grantmar of N. 
T. Greek, P. III. Sect. lix. 7: Riddell, Digest of Platonic 
Ldioms, & 46. 9 2 Cor. iti. 18. ae Cia een 

% Mat, Xi, 25s SiOen a Lay 4 Eh, TG and 12. 

CATRCHETIC AA sie CY ii: 

For as the Bread of the Eucharist, | 

| 

| stand against the power of the adversary, and 

vanquish it, saying, / caw do all things through 
Christ which strengtheneth me >. 

5. Having been counted worthy of this 
Holy Chrism, ye are called Christians, veri- 
fying the name also by your new birth. For 
before you were deemed worthy of this grace, 
ye had properly no right to this tithe, but were 
advancing on your way towards being Chris- 
tians. 

6. Moreover, you should know that in the 
old Scripture there lies the symbol of this 
Chrism. Yor what time Moses imparted to 
his brother the command of God, and made 
him High-priest, after bathing in water, he 
anointed him; and Aaron was called Christ 
or Anointed, evidently from the typical Chrism. 
So also the High-priest, in advancing Solomon 
to the kingdom, anointed him after he had 
bathed in Gihon® ‘To them however these 
things happened in a figure, but to you not 
in a figure, but in truth; because ye were 
truly anointed by the Holy Ghost. Christ 
is the beginning of your salvation; for He 
is truly the First-fruit, and ye the mass7; but 
if the First-fruit be holy, it is manifest that 
Its holiness will pass to the mass also. 

7. Keep This unspotted: for it shall teach 
you all things, if it abide in you, as you have 
just heard declared by the blessed John, dis- 
coursing much concerning this Unction®. kor 
this holy thing is a spiritual safeguard of the 
body, and salvation of the soul. Of this the 

blessed Esaias prophesying of old time said, 
And on this mountain,—(now he calls the 
Church a mountain elsewhere also, as when 
he says, Zz the last days the mountain of thé 
Lord’s house shall be manifest? ;)\—on this 
mountain shall the Lord make unto all nations 
a feast; they shall drink wine, they shall drink 
gladiess, they shall anoint themselves with 
ointment?, And that he may make thee sure, 
hear what he says of this ointment as being 
mystical; Deliver all these things to ihe na- 
tions, for the counsel of the Lord is unto all 
nations ?. Having been anointed, therefore, 
with this holy ointment, keep it unspotted 
and unblemished in you, pressing forward by 
good works, and being made well-pleasing to 
the Captain of your salvation, Christ Jesus, to 
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

S Pin iv38. 6 i Kings i. 39. 7 Rom. xi. 16. 
8 y John ii. 20: But ye have an unction (xptopa) front the 

both here and in the following verse. R.V. ‘* And in this moun- 
tain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all peoples a feast of tat 
things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of 
wines on the lees well refined.’’ 
2Ibu.7. R.V.‘*And He will destroy in this mountain the 
| face of the covering that is cast over all peoples, and the veil that 
| is spread over all nations.” 

ee alk Gee aos ae ae 
(ON THE MYSTERIES, 

OG be 

IV.) 

ON: THe BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST. 

L.COR, Fh 25, 

L received of the Lord that which also T delivered unio Vou, how that the Lord Jesus, 
in the niyht in which [He was betrayed, tovk bread, &c. 

1. Even ofitself? the teaching of the Blessed 
Paul is sufficient to give you a full assurance 
concerning those Divine Mysteries, of which 
having been deemed worthy, ye are become 
of the same body? and blood with Christ. 
Vor you have just heard him say distinctly, 
Liat our Lord Jesus Christ in the night 
in which He was betrayed, took bread, and 
when LHe had given thanks He brake it, and 
gave to Hrs disciples, saving, Take, eat, this 
is My Body: and having taken the cup and 
given thanks, He said, Take, drink, this is My 
Bloods, Since then He Himself declared 
and said of the Bread, 7%¢s 7s AZy Body, who 
shall dare to doubt any longer? And since 
He has Himself affirmed and said, 77s és AZ) 
Llood, who shall ever hesitate, saying, that it 
is not His blood ? 

2. He once in Cana of Galilee, turned the 
water into wine, akin to blood +4, and is it 
incredible that He should have turned wine 
into blood? When called to a bodily mar- 
riage, He miraculously wrought 5 that wonder- 

t avzy found in all MSS. is changed for the worse into airy by 
the Benedictine Editor. 

2 Introduction, *‘ Kvcharvist.” The word avoowpor has a dif- 
ferent sense in Iph. iii, 6, where it is applied to the Gentiles 
as having been made members of Christ’s body the Church. 

3.x Cor. xi, 23. The clause ‘and gave to His disciples” is an 
addition taken from Matt. xxvi. 26. The part relating to the cup 
docs not correspond exactly cither with St. Paul’s language or 
with the Evangelists’. 

4+ oixetoy atwate. Cod. Svirlet. (Grodecq), Meeni. (Morel), 
Vindob. ; Ben. Ed. oikelo vevmart, Codd. Monac. 1, 2, Genovef. 
Vatt. (Prevot.).. Rupp. The whole passage is ornitted in Codd. 
Coisl. R. Casaub, owing to the repetition of ata. 

The reading otkelw vetuart, *S by His own will,” introduces 
a superfluous thought, and destroys the very point of Cyril's 
argument, In which the previous change of water into an clement 
so different as wine is regarded as giving an a fortion. probability 
to the change of that which is already ‘akin to blood” into blood 
itself. 

If Cyril thus seems to teach a physical change of the wine, 
it must be remem! cred that we are not bound to accept his view, 
but only to state it accurately. See however the section of the 
Introduction on his Hucharistic doctrine. 

5 eOavparovpynoe thy wupadofomotar. Cf. Chiysost. Zpist. i. 
ad Olyneplad, de Deo, £1, 6. + TOTE Oavpatoupyct Kat mapadokorotet, 

‘ful work; and on the children of the bride- 
chamber, shall He not much rather be ac- 
knowledged to have bestowed the fruition of 
His Body and Blood 7 ? 

3. Wherefore with full assurance let us par- 
take as of the Body and Blcod of Christ: for 
in the figure’ of Bread is given to thee His 
Body, and in the figure of Wine His Blood; 
that thou by partaking of the Body and Blood 
of Christ, mayest be made of the same body 
and the same blood with Him. For thus we 
coine to bear Christ? in us, because His Body 
and Blood are distributed? through our men:- 
bers; thus it is that, according to the blessed 
Peter, we become partakers of the divine na- 
ture ®, 

4. Christ on a certain occasion discoursing 
with the Jews said, Lacept ye eat Aly flesh 
aid drink Aly blood, ye have no life tn yous, 
They not having heard His saying in a spiritual 

& Matt.cix. ts. 

7 Ben, Ed.: ‘That the force of Cyril’s argument may be the 
better understood, we must observe that in Baptism is celebrated 
the marriage of Christ with the Christian soul; and that the 
consumination of this marriage is perfected through the union of 
bodies in the mystery of the Eucharist. Read Chrysostom’s 
Tom xx. in Lephes.’ Chrysostom’s words are: “In like manner 
therefore we become one flesh with Christ by participation 
(weTovaotas).” But the participation expressed by petovala does 
not necessarily refer to the Mucharist. From the use of the word 
in Cat. xxiii. 11, and in Athanasius (Con/ra Arianos, Or. icy de 
Synodts, 19, 5) the meaning rather seems to be that we are 
one flesh with Christ not by nature but by His gift. 

® See Index, Tuzos, and the references there, and Waterland, 
On the hucharisé, c. Vii. 

9 Xproropdpoe yuvopu.eOa. Procat. 15. 

1 Ben, Md. ‘’Avodidopevov. ‘The Codices Coisl. Roe, Casaul. 
Scirlet. Ottob. 2. Genovef. have avadedeymévor, which dees not 
agree well with the Genitives tod gépartos and tod atwatos. It is 
evident that it was an ill-contrived emendation of dvadtéouevov, 
the transcribers being offended at the distribution of Chrisi’s Body 
among our members. Dut Cyril uses even the same word in Cat. 
XNill, 9: Obtos 0 dp7os. ... eis magdv gov Thy cbaTaow avadi- 
Sorat, els OPcrAELav TUpaTOS Kat Wuyis, “This Bread is distributed 
into thy whole system, to the benetit of body and soul.’” ?Ava- 
d:dopcvou is the reading of Milles and Rupp. For similar language 
see Justin M. sifod. i. 66; Iren. V. il. 2. 

oo 

22, 2 

ci all alot a «3 Joh vi-53- 

1 ele a ae aX Oi gO 

5 

LO 

sense were offended, 
posing that Tle was inviting them to eat flesh. 

5. In the Old 

shew-bread : but this, as it belonged to the} 
OLL ‘Testament, has come to an end; but) 
in the New Testament there is Bread of 

heaven, and a Cup of salvation, sanctifying 
soal and body; for as the Bread corresponds 
to our body, so is the Word+ appropriate to 
sai soul. 

. Consider therefore the Bread and the Wine 
om as bare elements, for they are, according 
to the Lord’s declaration, the Body and Blood 
of Christ ; for even though sense suggests this 
to thee, yet let faith establish thee. Judge! 
not the matter from the taste, but from faith | 
be fully assured without misgiving, that the, 
Body and Blood of Christ have been vouch- 
sated to thee. 

7. Also the blessed David shall advise thee 
the meaning of this, saying, 
pared a table before me tn the presence of 
them that afflict mes, What he says, is to this 
effect: Before Thy coming, the evil spirits 
prepared a table for men®, polluted and de- 
filed and full of devilish influence? ; but since 
Thy coming, O Lord, Zhow hast prepared 
a table before me. When the man says to 
God, Zhou hast prepared before me a table, 
what other does he indicate but that mystical 
and spiritual Table, which God hath prepared 
for us over against, that is, contrary and in 
opposition to the evil spirits? And very truly; 
for that had communion with devils, but this, 
with God. Zhou hast anointed my head with 
oil§, With oil He anointed thine head upon 
thy forehead, for the seal which thou hast of 

la 

ic 

4 Ben. Ed.: “Here we are to understand (by 6 Adyos) the 
Divine Word, not the bare discourse of God, but the second pate 
of the Holy ‘Trinity, Christ Hiinself, the Bread of Heaven, as 
testifies of Himsel f, John vi. 51: Him Cyril contrasts with the | 
earthly shew-bread in the O. T.; otherwise he could not rightly 
from this sentence infer, by the particle oby, ‘‘ therefore,” that the 
Eucharist is truly the Body and net of Christ. And since he 
says, in Cat. xxiil, 15, that the Eucharistic food is ‘appointed for 
the substance of the soul,” for its benefit, that cannot be said of 
Christ’s body cr of His soul, but only of the Word which is con- 
joined with both. Moreover that the Divine Word is the food of 
“Angels and of the soul, isa common mode of speaking with all the 
Fathers. They often play on the ambiguity of this word (Adyos), 
saying sometimes that the Divine Word, sometimes the word and 
oracles of God, are the food of our souls: both statements are 
true. For the whole life-giving power of the Eucharist is derived 
from the Word of God united to the flesh which He assumed: 
and the whole benefit of Eucharistic eating consists in the union 
of our soul with the Word, in meditation on His mysteries and 

sayings, and conformity thereto.” 

ie. BH, 

6 jAcoynwerny, a go. od restoration by Milles, with Codd. Roe, 

Casaub. Coislin. ‘he earlier printed texts had HAvYLoELyY, 

*fovershadowed.” Cf. Mal. i, 7: dprous qAtcoynuevous,... « 
Tpamega Kuptouv nArryninern €or. 

7 Cyril refers to the idolatrous feasts, which St. Paul calls ‘* 
table of devils, coe MARYS SS 

3 Poe SHiM.-Se 

ce 

the 

Ie ule 

Testament also there was | ep intoxicateth me, AS Tery 

Thou hast pre-| 

[Pi Grr RGA Sloe 

and went back, wt FS God; that thou mayest be made “he engraving 

lof the stenet, Tloliness unto God 9, i thy 
siroe Aon, 
scest that cup here spoken of, which Jesus 
took in His hands, and gave thanks, and said, 
Tits ts Aly blood, which is shed for many for 
the reitission of sins? 

8. Therefore Solomon also, hinting at this 
grace, says in Jécclesiastes, Come Aitier, eat 
thy bread with joy (that is, the spiritual 
bread ; Come hither, he cails with the call to 
salvation and blessing), avd drink thy wine 
coth a merry heart (that is, the spiritual 
wine); avd let otf be poured out upon thy 
Acad (thou seest he alludes even to the mystic 
|Chrism); avd ket thy garments be alwars 
white, for the Lord ts well aides with thy 
works: for before thou camest to Baptism, 
thy works were vaziZy oe 4, But now, 
jhaving put off thy old garments, and put on 
those which are spiritually white, thou must 
be continually robed in white: of course we 
mean not this, that thou art always to wear 
white raiment; but thou must be clad in the 
garments that are truly white and shining and 
spiritual, that thou mayest say with the blessed 
Esaias, AZy soul shall be joyful in my God ; 
Jor Le hath clothed me with a garment of 
salvation, and put a robe of gladness around mes, 

9g. Having learnt these things, and been 
fully assured that the seeming bread is not 
bread, though sensible to taste, but the Body 
of Christ; and that the seeming wine is not 
wine, though the taste will have it so, but the 
Blood of Christ®; and that of this David sung 
of old, saying, And bread strengtheneth man’s 
heart, to make his face to shine with of17, 
“strengthen thou thine heart,” by partaking 
'thereof as spiritual, and ‘‘make the face of 
And so having it unveiled 

thy soul to shine.” 

‘with a pure conscience, mayest thou reflect as 
me mirror the glory of the Lord®, and proceed 
from glory zo glory, in Christ Jesus our Lord:— 
To whom be honour, and might, and glory, for 
ever and ever. Amen. 

9 Ex. xxviil. 36; Ecclus. xlv. 12. The plate of pure gold 
on the forefront of Aaron’s mitre was engraved with the motto, 
Holy unto the Lord, ‘Yhis symbolism Cyril transfers to the 
sacramental Chrism, in which the forehead is signed with ointment, 
and the soul with the seal of God. 

t Ps. xxiii. 5: ALy cup runneth over. Fusebius (Dem. Evang. 
tk C. 10, § 28) applies the Psalin, as Cy ril does, to the Eucharist. 

2 Matt. xxvi. 28. 3 Eccles. ix. 7, 8. 

4 For zpocéA9ns (Bened.) we eitsae read mpoonAGes, or, with 
Monae. 1, mpooedvetv. 

tes Ixi. 10. 

6 On this passage sce the section of the Introduction referred 
to inthe Inde ex, Legacy este t 
7 Ps: ret. 

15. 8 2 Cor. iii, 18. 

Pee Ci Xe ATE 

(ON THE MYSTERIES. 

V.) 

ON THE 

SACRED LITURGY 

AND COMMUNION, 

+ Pek a. t: 
Wherefore putting away all filthiness, and ail guile, and evil speaking *, Se. 

By the loving-kindness of God ye have 
heard sufficiently at our former meetings con- 
cerning Baptism, and Chrism, and partaking 
of the Body and Blood of Christ ; and now it 
is nec essary to pass on to what is next in 
order, meaning to-day to set the crown on the 
spiritual builkc ling of your edification. 

2. Ye have seen then the Deacon who gives 
to the Priest water to wash 3, and to the Presby- 
ters who stand round God’s altar. He gave it 
not at all because of bodily defilement ; it 1s 
not that; for we did not enter the Church at 
first 4 with defiled bodies. But the washing of 
hands is a symbol that ye ought to be pure 
from all sinful and unlawful deeds ; for since 
the hands are a symbol of action, by washing 5 
them, it is evident, we represent the purity and 
blamelessness of our conduct. Didst thou not 
hear the blessed David opening this very 
inystery, and saying, J cdl wash my hands in 
innocency, and so will I compass Thine Altar, 
O Lord®? Vhe washing therefore of hands is 
a symbol of immunity 7 from sin. 

t This title is added by the Benedictine Editor. There is 

nothing corresponding to it in the Greek. 

2 The text is made up from memory, of James i. 21: dd 
Gro OE pEvoL Tacay puraptar, and 1 Pet. il. a2 aoe mevor otv 
wagav Kakiay Kat wavTa SdAov Kal UmoKplaeEls Kal TagasS KaTa- 
AaACas. 

3 Inthe Afostolic Constitutions, VIII, xi. this duty is assigned 
to a sub-deacon: “Let one of the sub-deacons bring water to 
wash the hands of the Priests, which is a symbol of the purity 
of those souls that are devoted to God.” See Dictionary of 
Christian Antiquities, *‘Lavabo.” The Priest who celebrates 
the Kucharist is here distinguished by the title tepevs from the 
other Presbyters who stood round the altar. 

4 Cyril evidently refers to the custom of placing vessels of 
water outside the entrance of the Church. Bingham, Antiquities, 
VIII. iii. 6. Chrysost. /2 Johannem ffont. Daserhiy ot o we 
then wash our hi inds w hen going into Church, and shall we not 
wash our hearts also?” That the same custom was observed i in 
heathen Temples appears from Herod. I. 51: wepippavrjpra dv0 
avédyxe (Sce be ihr’s note). Compare also Joseph. Aut. Jud, III. 
vi. 2. 

5 [rd] veaoOa. Rupp: “To ex conjectura addidi.” Possibly 
the ori; ginal reading was veWwaper ot, which would easily become 
altered “through the presence of vifac@ae in the preceding line. 
Ths washing i is not mentioned in the Liturgy of St. James. 

6 Ps. xxvi. 6. In the Liturgy of Constantinople this Psalm 
was chanted by the Priest and Deacon while washing their hands 
at the Prothesis or Credence. 

7 avuTevOuvos. 

Then the Deacon cries aloud, ‘ Receive 
ye one another ; and let us kiss one another °.” 
‘Think not that this kiss is of the same char- 
acter with those given in public by common 
friends, It is not such: but this kiss blends 
souls one with another, and courts entire for- 
giveness for them. ‘The kiss therefore is the 
sign that our souls are mingled together, and 
banish all remembrance of wrongs. For this 
cause Christ said, thou ari offering thy gift at 
the altar, and there rememberest thal thy brother 
hath aught against thee, leave there thy gift 
upon the altar , and go thy way; first be re- 
conciled to thy brother, and then come end offer 
thy gtft9. ‘Vhe kiss therefore is reconciliation, 
and for this reason holy: as the blessed 
Paul somewhere cried, saying, Greet ye one 
another with a holy kiss* ; and Peter, with a 
hiss of charity *. 

4. After this the Priest cries aloud, ‘‘ Lift up 
your hearts 3.” For truly ought we in that most 
awful hour to have our heart on high with 
God, and not below, thinking of earth and 
earthly things. In effect therefore the Priest 
bids all in that hour to dismiss all cares of this 
life, or household anxieties, and to have 

8 These two directions by the Deacon are separated in the 
Liturgy of St. James: after the dismissal of the Catechumens, the 
Deacon says, ‘Take note one of another ;” and after the Incense, 
Cherubic Hymn, Oblation, Creed, and a short prayer “‘that we 
may be united one to another in the bond of peace and charity,” 
the Deacon says, ‘Let us salute (ayav@pev) one another with 
a holy kiss.’ In the Afostolic Constitutions, VIII. 11, there 
is but one such direction, and this comes before the w ashing of 
hands and the dismissal of the C: atechumens, * "Salute (acracacdc) 
ye one another with a holy kiss.’ 

9 Matt. v. 23. From Cyril’s reference to this passage ee: 
may be inferred that the kiss of peace had been given before 
the gifts were brought to the altar, according to ancient custom 
attested. by Justin M. Afolog. i. c. 65: ‘Having ended the 
prayers’ (for the newly bi yptized) ‘we salute one another with 
a kiss. Then there is brought to the President of the brethren 
bread, anda cup of wine mixed with water’” (Ben, Ed.). ‘There 
is the same order in the - A post. Const. VIII. 12, and in the rgth 
Canon of the Synod of Laodicea ; but in the Liturgy of S. James 
the gifts are oficred before the kiss of peace. 

ie COre eis 20) 2 a4 P Obs iil, 25+ 

3 The words are slightly varied in the Liturgies: 
Li eurey. of St. James, ‘‘ Let us lift up our mind and hearts ; 
A fost. Const. viii. 12, Lift up your mind.’ 

thus in the 
7 in the 

isd CA, ted eee ear esl 
thelr heart in heaven with the merciful God. | to send forth His Holy Spint upon the gitts 
Then ye answer, We lift them up unto the lying before Him, that Ile may make the 
Lord :” assenting to it, by your avowal. But Bread the Body of Christ, and the Wine the 
let no one come here, who could say with Blood of Christ®; for whatsoever the Holy 
his mouth, “We lift up our hearts unto) Ghost has touched, is surely sanctified and 
the Lord,” but in his thoughts have his mind) ch: tacon 
concerned with the cares of this life At all Then, after the spiritual sacrifice, the 
times, rather, God should be in our memory ; blo eee service, is completed, over that 
but if this Is 14 iossible by reason of f human’! sacrifice of propitiation 2 we entreat God for 
infirmity, in that hour above all this should |} the common peace of the Churches, for the 
be our earnest endeavour. welders of the world'; for kings; for sol- 
‘Then the Priest says, Letus give thanks diers and allies ; for the sick ; for the afilicted ; 
ae the Lord.” Vor verily we are bound to | and, in a word, for all who stand in need of suc- 
vive thanks, that He called us, unworthy as cour we all pray and offer this sacrifice. 
we were, to so great grace; that He recon-| 9. Then we commemorate also those who 
ciled us when we were His foes; that He vouch- have failen asleep before us, first Patriarchs, 
safed to us the Spirit of adoption. Then ye| Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, that at their 
say, “It is meet and right:”? for in giving) prayers and intercessions God would receive 
thanks we do a meet thing and a right ; but | our petition ?, Then on behalf also of the Holy 
Ile did not right, but more than right, in doing | Fathers and Bishops who have fallen asleep 
us good, and counting us meet tor such great! before us, and in a word of all who in past 
benefits. years have fallen asleep among us, believing 
6. After this. we make mention of heaven,|that it will be a very great benefit to the 
and earth, and seat; of sun and moon; of) souls3, for whom the supplication is put up, 
stars and all the creation, rational and irra-|while that holy and most awful sacrifice is 
tional, visible and invisible; of Angels, Arch-/| set forth. 
angels, Virtues, Dominions, Principalities,| ro. And I wish to persuade you by an 
Powers, Thrones ; of the Cherubim with manyjilustration. Tor I know that many say, what 
faces: in effect repeating that call of David’s,}is a soul profited, which departs from this 
Magnify the Lord with mes, We make men-| world either with sins, or without sins, if it be 
tion also of the Seraphim, whom Esaias in the}commemorated in the prayer? Vor if a king 
Holy Spirit saw standing around the throne|were to banish certain who had given him ot- 
of God, and with two of their wings veiling] fence, and then those who belong to them 4 
their face, and with twain their feet, while with 
twain they did fly, crying /Zo/y, Holy, Holy, 7 

the Lord of Sabaoth®. For the reason of our 8 In the Liturgy of St. James the Triumphal Hymn i is followed 
ae i a ; a . by the © Recital of the work of Redemption,’ and of ‘the Thsti, 
reciting this confession of God is delivered | tation. * by the ‘Great Oblation,’ and then by the ‘Invocation,’ 
down to us from the Seraphim is this. that so|*® follows: ‘f Have mercy upon us, O God, after Thy great meicy, 
if ? ? and send forth on us, and on these gifts here set before Thee, 
we may be partakers with the hosts of the | Vhine all- Holy. Spirits. 4 -.% that Ets omy come, and by His holy, 
vee peed: a, MOM eae a, et Bs good, and glorious advent (mapovoeta) may sanctity this Bread and 
W orld abor c In thei Ty mB of praise, make it the holy Body of Thy Ch rist (Laven ), and this Cup the 
Then having sanctified ourselves by these | precious Llood of Thy Christ” @lazex), In Cat. xix. 7, Cyril 
ee Gate : : a é calls this prayer ‘‘the holy Invocation of the Adoral ble Trinity,” 
spiritual Hymns, we beseech the merciful God | and in xxi. 3, “ the Invocation of the Holy Ghost.’ 
9 See Index, ‘“ Sacrifice,” and the reference there to the 
a ee eee ee art sieleeAAE En ae acne: Compare Athenagoras (4fo/. c. xill.): ‘What have 
I to do with burnt-offerings, of which God has noneed? ‘Though 
4 Compare the nolle Eucharistic Preface in the Liturgy of | indeed it be hoy es us to bring a bloodless sacrifice, and the reason 
. James: ‘It is verily meet, right, pret tn and our bounden | eéée service. 
n ty to praise Thee, to sing of I! hee, to bless Thee, to worship 1 Cyril here givesa brief summary of the “ Great Intercession, 
Thee, to glorify Thee, to give thanks to Thee the Maker of every | in which, according to the common text of the Liturgy o! St, 
creature, visivle and invisi! le. the Treasure of eternal blessings ;| James, there is a suffrage ‘for the peace and welfare (etaz a- 
the Fount of life and immortality, the God and Lord of all, whom | Gera) of the whote we rld, and of the holy Che rches of God.’ 
the heavens of heavens do praise, and all the powers thereof, sun | Mr. Hammond thinks that it has been taken from the Deacon's 
and moon and all the choir of the stars, earth, sea, and all that Litany, and repeated by mistake in the Great Intercession, But 
in them is, Terusale 2m the heavenly as: sembly, Church of the first- | from Chrysostom’s language (Zn Ep. ad Phil. Hom. iil. p, 2285 
born that are written in the heavens, spirits of righteous men and Gaume, T. xi. o 251)s we must infer that the Drayer umep eepy wns 
prophets, souls of martyrs and Ap stles, Angels, Archangels, | kat evoTabelas Tov pcan formed part of the ‘ Great Intercession’ 
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Authorities, and Powers | in his Liturgy, as it does in the Clementine (4 fost. Const7t. VIII. 
dread, also the many-eyed Cherubim, and the six-winged Sera- | § 10). 
phim, which with twain ‘of their wings c wer their faces, and with 2 In the Liturgies of St. James and St. Mark, and in the 
twain their fect, and witn twain do fly, crying one to another with | Clem entine, there are similar commemorations of dep varted saints, 
unresting lips, in unceasing praises, singing with loud voice the | espectally ‘ acta wehs, prop shets, apostles, martyrs,” but nothing 
triumphant hymn of Thy maj jestic glory, ‘shouting, and glorifying, | corresponding to the words, ‘that at their pray ersand i intercessions 
and crying aloud, and saying,—Holy, Holy, Holy, O Lord of | God would receive our petition.” See Index, Prayer and. Lzter- 
Hosts, heaven and earth are full of Thy glory. Hosanna in the | cesséon. 

hig chest $ blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord; 3 So Chrysostom (/2z 1 Cor. Hom.2 41, p. 457 4): “Not in 

Hosanna i in the highest.” vain was this rule ordained by the’ Aposiles, that in the 
6 Pa. seer, a S Ts,.3,. 4, 3 dread Mysteries remembrance should be made of the departed: 
7 Gcodoytav, ‘the doctrine of the Godhead,” either of the Son ! for they knew that it is a great gain to them, and a great benctit. 

in 9 $a or, as here, of the whole Trinity: cf. Athanas. 4 ot tovrots drape por Tes ee Hesychius, Avageper, ara eee 

06. 

contra elrianos, Or. i. § 18: vow ev rptade 7 Oeodoyta TeActa | Ubi eae ait, IH Kel, id. cSt, “SHeyirnet, velo“ atiine: 
COT. Routh, Seriptor, Eccles. Cfuscula, p. 447). "Dr. Routh’s nete 

Je ON re Bao 

should weave a crown and offer it to him on 
behalf of those under punishment, would he 
not evrant a remission of their penaliics? In 
the same way we, when we offer to Him our 
supplications for those who have fallen asleep, 
though they be sinners, weave no crown, but 
oficr up Christ sacrificed for our sins 5, propitia- 
ting our merciful God for them as well as for 
ourselves. 

tt. Then, after these things, we say that 
Prayer which the Saviour delivered to His own 
disciples, with a pure conscience enutling God 
our lather, and saying, Our Lather, which art 
tn heaven, O most surpassing loving-kindness 
of God! On them who revolted from Him 
and were in the very extreme of misery has IIe 
bestowed such a complete forgiveness of evil 
deeds, and so great participation of grace, as 
that they should even call Him Father. Our 
Lather, which art tn heaven ; and they also 
are a heaven who bear the image of the 
heavenly ®, in whom is God, dweiling and 
walking in them 7, 

flallowed be Thy Name. 'The Name 
of God is in its nature holy, whether we say 
so or not; but since it is sometimes profaned 
among sinners, according to the words, ZZrough 
yeu My Neme ts continually blasphemed among 
the Gentiles*®, we pray that in us God’s Name 
may be hallowed ; not that it comes to be holy 
from not being holy, but because it becomes 
holy in us, when we are made holy, and 
do things worthy of holiness. 

13. Zhy kingdom come. SM pure soul can 
say with boldness, Zhy kingdom come; for 
he who has heard Paul saying, Let not there- 
Jore sin reign tn your mortal body9, and has 
cleansed himself in deed, and thought, and 
word, will say to God, 7zy Aingdom come. 

14. Thy will be done as in heaven so on 
earth, God’s divine and blessed Angels do 
the will of God, as David said in the I’salm, 
Bless the Lord, all ye Angels of Llis, mighty 
in strength, that do Lis pleasure*, So then 
in effect thou meanest this by thy prayer, 

“as in the Angels ‘Thy will is done, so like-' 

wise be it done on earth in me, O Lord.” 

rh: 
This common bread is not substantial bread, 
but this Holy Bread is substantial, that 
is, appointed for the substance of the soul’. 

refers to Nicwui Conc. Can. xvi.: vdapracat tov To éTépw Srade- 
povra, Cf. Synodi Nic. ad Ale van drinos Epist.: Siadépovta 
mn AlyunT@ Kat Ty ayiwratn Adefavepewy exkrnolq. 

5 According to the Ben. Ed. the meaning isnot ‘We -ofrer 
Christ, who was sacrificed for our sins, ” but we We offer for our 
sins Christ sacrificed.” ie ‘Christ lying on the altarasa victim 
sacrificed,” in eae to Apoc. V. 6,12. See Index, “ Sacrifice.” 

© x Cor. AO 7 2 Cor. vi. 16. 

eal sy lat ~ Rom. ii. 24. 9 Rom. vi. 12. 

t Ds, Clits 20. 

2 “Tt is manifest that the author derives the word émovotos 
from the two words ém¢ and ovata, as do many others; although 

SSE. 155 
Ieor this Bread goeth not frtlo the belly and 
20 GAS One ito Tie. dradid =, bith 165 s- 

tributed into thy whole system for the benefit 
of body and soul4. But by ¢2/s day, he neans, 
‘each day,” as also Paul said, IVrile it is 
called to-day 5 

16. And forgive us our debts as we also 
forgive cur debtors, Vor we have many sins. 
l’or we offend both in word and in thought, 
and very inany things we do worthy of con- 
demnation ; and ¢/ we sav thal we have no sin, 
we lie, as John says® And we make a cove- 
nant with God, entreating Him to forgive us 
our sins, as we also forgive our neighbours 
their debts. Considering then what we reccive 
and in return for what, let us not put off nor 
delay to forgive one another. ‘The offences 
committed against us are slight and _ trivial, 
and easily settled ; but those which we have 
committed against God are great, and need 
such mercy as His only Take heed 
therefore, lest for the slight and trivial sins 
against thee thou shut out for thyself for- 
giveness from God for thy very gricvous sins. 

17. And lead us not into templation, O 
Lord. Is this then what the Lord teaches us 
to pray, that we may not be tempted at all? 
How then is it said elsewhere, ‘a man un- 
tempted, isa man unproved 7;” and again, J/y 
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into 
divers temptations® 2? But does perchance the 
entering into temptation mean the being over- 
whelmed by the temptation? Tor tempta- 
tion is, as it were, like a winter torrent 
difficult to cross. ‘hose therefore who are 
not overwhelmed in temptations, pass through, 
shewing themselves excellent swimmers, and 
not being swept away by them at all; while 
those who are not such, enter into them and 
are overwhelmed. As for example, Judas 
having entered into the temptation of the love 
of money, swam not through it, but was over- 
whelmed and was strangled? both in body 
and spirit. Peter entered into the temptation of 
the denial; but having entered, he was not over- 

13; 

| the explanation which derives it from ¢mtovon a€p@ is more 

Give us this day our substantial bread. 

probable. We render it “substantial” in accordance with Cyril's 
meaning, with which the word ‘‘ super-substantial does not agree” 
(Bens. Ed.), S Waitt. xe 29. 

4-Cat; we. $ a, note cr - Ben. Bd. “We are not, to: think 
that Cyril supposed the Body of Christ to be distributed and 
digested into our body; but in the usual way of speaking he 
attributes to the Holy Body that which belongs only to the species 
under which It is hidden.” Nor does he deny that those species 
pass into the draught, but only the Body of Christ.” Cf, Tren. 
Vedic ay 2, and’ ‘Eucharistic Doctrine” in the Introduction. 

S: Erebed i, ns. 1 Johni. 8 We deceive ourselves. 

7 Tertull. De Baft. c. 20: ‘* For the word had gone before 
‘that no one untempted should attain to the celesti: ul kingdoms.’ 
Afost. Const. Il. viii: ‘‘The Scripture says, ‘A man that is 

4, alg (addKe Los) is not tried (direipaaos) by Gods 
Resch, Agrapha, Logion 26, p. 188, quotes allusions to the 
saying in Jas. 1012) 13% 2 Cor: Sihics Raye and concludes that 
it was recorded as a saying of our Lord in one of the un-canonical 
gospels (L uke i. 1), where it occurred in the context of the incident 
ni at ited in Matt. XV ty M: irk xiv. 38. 

a FR ee 9 amemveyn. Matt. xxvil.e 55 amyyfaro. 

16 
whelmed by it, but manfully swam through 
it. and was delivered from the temptation‘. 
listen again, in another place, to a com- 
pany of unscathed saints, giving thanks for 
deliverance from temptation, Zou, O God, 
hast proved us; Thou hast tried us by fire 

fixe as silver ts tried. Thou broughtest us 
into the nets Thou layedst afflictions upon our 
loins. Thou hast caused men to ride over 

cur heads; we went through fire and water ; 
and thou broughtest us out into a place of 
rest?, ‘Thou seest them speaking — boldly 
in regard to their having passed through and 
not been pierced’, Lut Thou broughtest us 
out into a place of rest; now their coming 
into a place of rest is their being delivered 
irom temptation. 

18. But deliver us from the evil. Vf Lead 
us not into temptilion implied the not being 

tempted at all, He would not have said, Bud) 

deliver us from the evil, Now evilis our adver- 
sary the devil, from whom we pray to be 
delivered+, Then after completing the prayer 
thou sayest, mens; by this Amen, which 
means “So be it,” setting thy seal to the 

petitions of the divinely-taught prayer. 

1g. After this the Priest says, “ Holy things 
to holy men.” Holy are the gifts presented, 
having received the visitation of the Holy 
Ghost ; holy are ye also, having been deemed 
worthy of the Holy Ghost; the holy things 
therefore correspond to the holy persons ®. 
‘Then ye say, “ One is Holy, One is the Lord, 
Jesus Christ7.” For One is truly holy, by 
nature holy; we too are holy, but not by 
nature, only by participation, and discipline, 
and prayer. 

20. After this ye hear the chanter inviting 
you with a sacred melody to the communion 
of the Holy Mysteries, and saying,O ¢aste and 
see that the Lord is good®, ‘Yrust not the 
judgment to thy bodily palate 9; no, but to faith 

. 

) 

1 Compare the description of Peter's repentance in Cat. ii. 19. 

2 Ps. Ixvi, to—12. 

3 For ¢umapyvac the Ben. Ed. conjectures ¢umayqvae “to have 
been stuck fast.” 

4 Cyril is here a clear witness for the reference of tod wovnpov 
to ‘the wicked one.” 

5 From § 14, evyomevos TotTo A€yets, it seems probable that 
the whole Prayer was said by the people as well as by the Priest. 
See Introduction, ** Eucharistic Rites.” 

6 Compare Waterland on this passage, c. X. p. 688. 

7 Apost. Const. VIII. c. xiii: ‘Let the Bishop speak thus 
to the people: Holy things for holy persons. And let the people 
answer: There is One that is holy; there is one Lord, one Jesus 
Christ, blessed for ever, to the glory of God the Father.” ‘The 
Liturgies of St. James and of Constantinople have nearly the 
same words: in the Liturgy of St. Mark the answer of the people 
is: One Father holy, one Son holy, one Spirit holy, in the unity 
of the Holy Spirit. 

8 Ps. xxxiv. 9. In the Afostolic Constitutions the “Sancta 
Sanctis ? and its response are immediately followed by the ‘Gloria 
in. excelsis,”. and the “‘Hosanna.”’ ‘Then the Clergy partake, 
and there follows a direction that this Psalm xxxiy. is to be said 
while all the rest are partaking. In the Liturgy of Constan- 
tinople there is the direction: ‘* The Choir sings the communion- 
antiphon (70 Kotywycxov) of the day or the saint.” 

9 For py émerpémyze, probably an itacism, we should read 

CATICHET IA aie PU 

unfaltering ; for they who taste are bidden 
to taste, not bread and wine, but the anti- 
typical? Body and Blood of Christ. 

21. In approaching? therefore, come not with 
thy wrists extended, or thy fingers spread ; but 
make thy left hand a throne for the right, 

as for that which is to receive a Kings. And 
having hollowed thy palm, receive the Body of 

Christ, saying over it, men. So then after 
having carefully hallowed thine eyes by the 
touch of the Holy Body, partake of it; giving 
heed lest thou lose any portion thereof; for 
whatever thou losest, is evidently a loss to thee 

as it were from one of thingown members, For 
tell me, if any one gave thee grains of gold, 
wouldest thou not hold them with all careful- 
ness, being on thy guard against losing any 
of them, and suffering loss? Wilt thou not 
then much more carefully keep watch, that 
not a crumb fall from thee of what is more 
| precious than gold and precious stones ? 

22. ‘Then atter thou hast partaken of the 
Body of Christ, draw near also to the Cup of 
His Blood; not stretching forth thine hands, 
but bending’, and saying with an air of wor- 
ship and reverence, 4men®, hallow thyself by 
partaking also of the Blood of Christ. And 
while the moisture is still upon thy lips, touch 
it with thine hands, and hallow thine eyes 
and brow and the other organs of sense’. 
Then wait for the prayer, and give thanks unto 
God, who hath accounted thee worthy of so 
ereat mysteries * 

uy éemitpérerac, as a question, the propriety of the change being 
indicated by the answer ovyxt. ‘Is the judgment of this entrusted 
to the bodily palate? No, but, &c.” 

I aytitvTov cwpmaros, ‘the antitypical Body,’’ not 
type of the Body,” which would require tov gwparos. 
xxi. § 1, note 6. 

2 Cat. xviii. 32: “with what reverence and order you must go 
from Baptism to the Holy Altar of God.” 

3 Cyril appears to be the earliest authority for thus placing the 
| hands in the form of a Cross. A similar direction is given in the 
' rorst Canon of the ‘Trullan Council (692), and by Joh. Damasc. 

(De Fid. Orthod. iv. 14). Dict. Chr. Ant. “ Communion.” Vhat 

“the communicant was to receive the Bread in his own hands is 
clear from the language of Cyril and other Fathers. Cf. Clem. 
Alex. Strom. I, °c. ts § “Some after dividing the Eucharist 
according to custom allow each of the laity himsclf to take his 
part.” See the passage of Origen quoted in the next note, and 
‘Tertull. Cor. Ali. c. iii. “The Sacrament of the Eucharist, 
which the Lord commanded both (to be taken) at meal-times and 
by all, we take even in assemblies before dawn, and from the hand 
of none but the presidents.” 

4 Origen, Hom. xiii. in Exod. § 3: “I wish to admonish you 
by examples from your own religion: ye, who have been accus- 
tomed to attend the Sacred Mysteries, know how, when you receive 
the Body of the Lord, you guard it with all care and reverence, 
that no little part of it fall down, no portion of the consecrated gift 
slip away. For you believe yourselves guilty, and rightly so 
believe, if any part thereof fall through carelessness.” 

3 xvstwy, not kneeling, but standing in a bowing posture. 
Cf Bingham; XV... 5;-5.3- E 

6 Apost. Const. VIII. c. 13: “Let the Bishop give the 
Oblation (rpoodopav) saying, The Bedy of Christ. And let him 
that receiveth say, Asen. And let the Deacon hold the Cup, 
and when he delivers it say, 72e Blood of Christ, the Cup Liye, 
And let him that drinketh say, Asen.” 

7 (Cat, Seles mole oF : 

8 In the Liturgy of St. James, after all have communicated, 
“The Deacons and the People say: Fill our mouths with Thy 
praise, O Lord, and fill our lips with joy, that we may sing of Thy 
| glory, of Thy greatness, all the day. And again; We render 

sf “the anti- 

Ci Cat. 

De | 

( 

PEG PORIC Aaelh. ks 

23. Ifold fast these traditions undefiled and, ; Ged of feace sanctify you wholly; and may 
keep yourselves free from offence. Sever not your spirit, and soul, and body be preserved 
yourselves from the Communion ; deprive not extre without blame at the coming of our Lord 
ution of sins, of | fesws Christ?:—~“Powhom be glory and honour 
and might, with the Father and the Holy 
a Spirit, now and ever, and world without end. 

eas Sy Ue Ge | Amen, 
} 

yourselves, through the poll 
these Holy and Spiritual Mysteries. And the 

thanks to Thee, Christ our God, that Thou hast accounted us 

worthy to partake of Thy Body and Blood, \c.” cE ress, wos, 

S 
mk 
peli 
tk okie 
cea 

Bre 

7 

ners 

PNT EES. 

£5 
ae 
paar 
S 

a 

oes 

aa 
pete. Ve 
eas 
eget Ta 

oS 

is 
me Oana ies 

tes 
aa 
eee 
ery | 

ie 
pees 
7 
e 

aae 

EA OP SUBIECTES, 

The References are to the Lectures and numbered Sections of each Lecture. 

AARON called Christ, xvi. 13, type 
of Chiists: jtiesthood, x. ri, 
xii. 28, his rod blossoming as 
strange as Chirist’s birth, xii. 28, 
and suggests our resurrection, 
xvill. 12, his forgiveness and 
encouragement to the penitent, 
li, 10. 

Abomination of desolation, iv. 15, 
XV. 9. 

Aliaham justified not by works only 
but by faith, v. 5, perfected by 
faith, ib. Father of Christians, 
v. 6, his faith a type of ours, 
ib. example of reverence to 
God, vi. 3, beheld: the Lord, 
Sty EOL 

Adam, his creation as strange as 
Christ’s birth, xii. 30, first and 
second Adam, xili. 2, instance 
of the efficacy of repentance, 
ii. 7, represented in his in- 
nocence by the Baptized, xx. 2. 

Adoption of men to be sons of God, 
vii. 7, by the Father's grace, 
through the Son and Spirit, ib. 
in Baptism, Proc. 16, i. 2, iii. 14, 
xx. 6, not of necessity, but our 
iOe= Choe, Vike 13. | Christ’s 
Sonship not by adoption, x. 4, 
xi. 7 (vide Sow), Spirit of 
Adoption, xvii. 5. 

Advent of Christ twofold, xv. 1. 
First in humiliation, ib. 

Second in glory from heaven, 
xv. I, 3, foretold by Malachi, 
xv. 2. Ecclesiastes, xv. 20, 
St. Paul, xv. 2, time unknown, 
yet to be expected, xv. 4, signs 
of it given us by Christ, ib. 

Ubyect-of our hope, xv..15.2, 
33, not from the Earth, xv. 10, 
shall destroy Antichrist, xv. 9, 
12, changes accompanying it, 
xy. 3, shall bring in a new world, 
XV. 4. 

Zions of Valentinus, vi. 17, why said 
to be thirty, ib. 

Agabus, xiii. 29, xvii. 28. 

Agrapha (Resch), vi. 36, xxiii. 17. 

Ahab, instance of the efficacy of 
repentance, ii. 13. 

Almighty, denied of God by Grecks, 
vil. I, 2, and Heretics, viii. 3, 
blasphemies against Him, viii. 8. 

Almsdeeds, fruits of repentance, and 
preparation for Baptism, iii. 8, 
iv. 37, taught by the Holy 
Ghost... xvii, 

Altar of God, xxiii. 2, of the New 
Testament, xvili. 33. 
Ambition conquered through 
Ifoly Ghost, xvi. 19, 
Angels made by God, iv. 4, made by 
Christ; xj. 29,their orders, iv, 

TO, xiv. ¥2, have no equality 

with the Iloly Ghost, xvi. 23, 

governed and sanctified by Him, 

iv. 16, xvi 23, forgiven by God, 
VOL. VIT. 

the 

ii, 10, fearful to behold, ix. 4, | 
xii. 14, but little known of them 
Dyas; XtP 12: 

Christ their Lord, x. 10, xii. 
14, not the makers of the world, 
Et. Sy 22y “know not. God: -as 
bbe iS, vie Os. Vile LI, NOt Out 
Lord’s generation, xi. 11, 12. 

Ministered to Christ, x. Io, 
present. at..- Baptism. i, .: 3 
Terie bneke, re. FS. Uist, 25 
16, know its Seal, i. 3 (vide 
Seal), glory in the cross, xiii. 
22, minister at the judgment, 
xv. 19, 22, 28, innumerable 
there present, xv. 24. 

Anointing of Christ, x. 4, 14, eter- 
nally from the Father, ib. as 
God, xu 15. with. the: Toly 
Ghost at His Baptism, xxi. 1, 2, 
vide Chrism. 

Antediluvians, instance of God's 
long-suffering, ii. 8. 

Anthropomorphism, vi. 8, ix. 1. 

Antichrist, iv. 15. Christ’s counter- 
feit, xv. 33, raised up by Satan 
to discredit, truth, sve Tiga 
sorcerer, ib. Satan shall be in 
him. personally, xv. 14): 47; 
expected: By: tite. fews,; mii 2, 
foretold by our Lord, xv. 9, 
Noy ented Weniele sve. 25. 
signs of him, xv. 9, 18, by 
sorcery shall gain the Roman 
Empire, and deceive the Gen- 
tiles, xv. 11, 12, the Eleventh | 
King, xv. 12, 13, for three years | 
and a half, xv. 12, 16, shall be 
received by the Jews as Christ, 
Ys, Ids Te TG, -reburkd:” the 
temple, xv. 15, abhor idols, ib, 
first mild, then persecuting, xv. 
12, 15, especially to the Saints, 
ib. shall pretend to miracles, 
xv. 13, shall be destroyed by 
Christ’s Advent, xv. 9, 12. 

Martyrs under him most 
glorious, xv. 17, we must watch | 
against him, xy. 18, 33. | 

Antitype, Baptism, xx. 6, Chrism, | 
xxi. I, Eucharistic Elements, 
SH, Ss ft. Pps EL 

Apelles, his heresy, iv. 20, note 2, 
xvi. 4, note 3. 

Apocalypse, not reckoned in the 
Canon by S. Cyril, iv. 36, per- 
linps referred! ton x35. coy. or 
vide note xv. 16. 

Apocryphal or doubtful books not | 
to be studied, iv. 33, 35, proofs 

not drawn from them, xv. 16. 

Apostasy foretold by S. Paul, in S. 
Cyril’s day, xv. 9. 

Apostles correspond to the Prophets, 
xiv. 26, Xvi. 4, 24, more favoured 
than they, xiv. 26. 

Holy Ghost in them, xvi. 3, 
4, 9, 24, partially before Pen- 

M 

tecost, xvii. 12, 13, baptized fully | 

at Pentecost, xvii. 14, 18, super- 
naturally enlightened, xvi. 17. 
Witnesses of the Cross, xiii. 

40, and Resirrdction, xiv. 2e, 

hid themselves, xiii. 25 (v. 
’ i. 

Cogpel: Lob. rarer oes 7 tay 

received power to forgive sins 

in the Holy Ghost, xiv. 22, their 

deeds by Him, xvii. 21, &c. 

Send us to the Old Testament 

for proofs of. ‘Christ; xiv. : 2 

handed down the Scriptures 

LO US,:1¥,. 35. 

Typified by Joshua’s twelve 
officers, x. Tif 

Apparel, to be simple, iv. 29. 

Archelaus, a Bishop of Mesopotamia, 
disputes with Manes, vi. 27—3o. 

Aridnism, iv: 7, x.'5, 6, 0, 14, xt 
14, and Sabellianism alike to be 
shined; iv. 8, xb, 73; 165-47. 
the ‘‘ falling away ” spoken of 
by S. Paul, xv. 9. 

Arius, Zz¢r., pp. ii., ili., xlvili. 

As far as, vide C72/7/. 

Ascension of Christ, iv. 13, 14, fore- 
told by the Prophets, xiv. 24, 
compared with the translation 
of Iknoch and Elias, xiv. 25, 
preceded the full gift of the 
Spirit, xvi) 12, £3, 

Astrologers, iv. 18. 

Athanasius, ir, p. iii. 

Authenticity, Inti, p. Mii. 

Azariah, xvi. 28. 

Babel, its confusion contrasted with 
the gift of tongues at Pentecost, 
SVE 07; 

Banker, ‘‘be thou a faithivl banker,” 
vi. 36. 

Baptism, end of the Old Testament, 
beginning of the New, iii. 6, of 
John, gave remission cf. sin, 
ili, 7, xx. 6, preceded by con- 
fession, ib. inferior to Christian 
Baptism, iii. 9. 

Of our Lord, sanctified ours, 
ill, II, xil. 15, [oly Ghost de- 
scended on Him after it, xvii. 
9, Xxl. I, in it He vanquished 
the Dragon in the waters, iii. 11, 
preparatory to His Temptation, 
and Ministry, iii. 13, 14, xxi. 4. 

Christian, offered to all, Proc. 
Say IR Ty 2a trie, sy 30) 
xvii. 36, not to be approached 
lightly, or hypocritically, Proc. 
2-4, 1. 3 (vide Fatth, Hyfo- 
crisy, Purpose), to the faithless 
a Oise, Proc, 3549, ke, the 
parable of the Marriage Feast, 
Proc. 3, iil. 2, the impenitent 
though washed, not accepted, 
ib. 2, 4, xvii. 36, case of Simon 
Magus, Proc. 2, xvii. 35, pre- 
paration for 1 PioG.. 16,1. @, 
LV; 33750 Curie cent, Protea, 
1p Have: By Gateelinaine. and 

162 

Eexorciams, “Pret. 9-14, 1.5; 
Repentance, Proc. 4, il. 5, Xe. 
iil. 2,4, 8: Confessiim, 1. 2; 55 
men must bring Faith, and look 
to God for more, Proce. 17, ¥79, 

: | 
not the purpose of Baptism, but 

evil motives to be laid aside, 
Proce. Ay 5» 

Given in the name 
Waters of Baptism, Proc. 16, 
iii. 3, 4, contain Christ, Proc. 
15, why by water, iil. 5. One, 
iv. 37, but once to be received, 
Proc. 7, xvii. 36, by Heretics not 
Baptism, ib. Sanctified by our 
Lord’s Baptism, ii. 9, II, Xl. 
15, no salvation without it, 
iil. 4, 10, except to Martyrs, ib. 

Freely given to faith only, 
Pitot, 8, is ud, (1G), conveys 
remission of sins, Proc. 8, 15, 
16, iii. 15, to all equally, i. 5, 

xvii. 37, xviii. 20, the gift of 

the Ifoly Ghost, ili. 2, 4, 14, 
16, iy. 16, but not equally to all, 
1, RXV. 3% 

? , ; | 
Glory and blessing of Baptism, 
y E H 

Proc. 6, 15, 16, though despised 
by the world, ib. Regenera- 
TON, ibe. 2) Ul. 4p 1 87, Rk a 
Illumination, xiii. 21. Adoption, 
Proc. 16, iii. 14, xi. 9, titles of, 
Proc. 16, called “Seal indel- 
ible,” Proc: 17 (vide. Sead), 
transplants into spiritual Para- 
dise, grafts in the Holy Vine, 
i. By XIxy OPXX:. 7. ImMparts supers 
natural gifts, ili, 13, xvil. 37. 
Death of sin, new life, Proc. 5, 
16, iil. 12, xx.°%, Makes.ts 
members of Christ, xxi. I, pre- 
pares for the resurrection, iv. 
32, destroys the sting of death, 
iii. 11. Fellowship with Christ’s 
sufferings, ili, 12, xx. 5-7, called 
the * Gilt,” i, 6, 11. Osis 2) As5; 
13, &c. of God, through men, 
xvii, 35, 36. Its twofold grace 
of Water and the Spirit, iii. 4, 
16, inseparable, ib. typified by 
Circumcision, v. 6, to be dili- 
gently cherished, i. 4, xv. 26, 
xvii. 37, works after it recorded, 
a¥ 23, 

Names of Candidates enrolled, 
Proc. i, 4, i. 5, of the Baptized 
written in the book of the living, 
xiv. 30, many who fall away 
blotted out, ib, sins after it re- 
corded against the Judgment, 
xv. 23, xviii, 20, scoffing at, 
Pisce. 16; 

Baptism of Martyrs in blood, 
iii. 10, xiii, 21, typified by the 
blood from our Lord’s side, ib. 
water of Baptism, by the water, 
ib. 

Baptism of fire, xvii. 8, of the 
Holy Ghost, xv. 12, 14. 

Administered by Bishops, 
Priests, or Deacons, xvil. 35. 

Rites previous to, xix. 2, Kc. 
Renunciation of Satan and his 

of the | 
VWoly Trinity, lil. 3, xvi. 4, 19. | 

CATECHETICAL LECTURES (rot ie. 

works, 1h, 2-97 —“Prafession 
Faith, xix. 9, symbolical putting 
off of garments, xx. 2, Anointing 
with exorcised -oil; xx. 3, Con- 
fession of the. Taimity, 2s. 4. 
Trine immersion, ib. symbolical 
of Christ’s three-days’ burial, ib. 
our death and birth, ib. repre- 
sentation of Christ’s sufferings, 
xx. 5-7, followed by the Chrism, 
xxi. (vide Zui”. Ch. iii.-v.). 
Baptism of the Manichees, vi. 

33. 

Baptistery, xix. 2. 

Barnabas, his preaching in the Holy 
Ghost, xvii. 28. 

Baruch, accounted in the Canon, iv. 
35, quoted xi. 15. 

Basil, the Great, Zt. p. viii. 

Basilides, his heresy, vi. 17. 

Basilisk, ix. 14. 

Bath, of Baptism, not 
water, Proc. 16, lil. 2. 

Beasts, witnesses of God’s power 
and glory, ix. 13, emblems of 
human tempers, ib. in the Ark, 

common 

KVL, 20; 
Bees, display God’s power and 
wisdom, ix. 13, emblematical 

lessons to man, 1b. 

Beginning (apx7), only One the 
Father, xi, 14,20, 22. 

Believer (vide Lazth/u?). 

Bishops, ministers of Baptism, xvii. 
35, order of, xvi. 22, xvii. 35, 
reverence due to them, iv. 35, 
first Bishop of Jerusalem, 
S. James, iv. 28, xiv. 21, first 
fifteen of Jerusalem Iebrews, 
xiv. 15. Ancient Bishops 
settled and handed down the 
Canon, iv. 35, strife among 
them a sign of Antichrist, xv. 9. 

Birds show forth God’s glory, ix. 12. 

Birth, New, Christ its author, xvii. 
10, the gift of Baptism (vide 
Baptism, Regeneration). 

Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, 
danger of it, iv. 16, xvi. I. 

Blood and water from Christ’s side, 
typical, iii, 10, xili, 21, Bap- 
tism of Blood, iii, 10, river 
changed into it by Moses cor- 
responds with the Passion, xiii. 
21, blood of the Paschal Lamb, 
xix. 2, 3, blood not to be eaten, 
iv. 28, vide xvii. 29, Blood of 
Christ (vide Eucharist). 

Body, work of God, not of the evil 
One, iv. 4, 22, Viiy? Ss iy 20, 
vilified by Heretics, ib. instru- 
ment not cause of sin, iv. 23, 
true part of man, iv. 18, 22, 
xvili, 20, its excellence shows 
God’s ‘glory. ixin sy, sto, pe 
cleansed by penitence, iv. 23, 
cleansed by the water of Bap- 
tism, ili. 4, yet may be washed 
without the soul being enlight- 
ened, Proc. 2, of Christians, 
temple of the Holy Ghost, iv. 
23, to be kept pure for its resur- 
rection, iv. 26, i320; xvill. 20, 

resurrection of, encouragement 

i 
of 

to holiness, xvill. 1, shown from 
analogies of nature, Xc., iv. 30, 
Sasi, 6. Ott, ACs Aly ane 
soul, as its deeds, so its reward, 
XVI. 19 (vide Reswrveetion), 

Chiist’s (vide Zacarnation, 
Manhood,) a bait to Death, xii. 
To, wel -of His Godhead e117 
26, typified by bread, xiii. 19, 
received under the figure of 
breatl,: kx. 29, daly received. 
in the Eucharist, xxii, I1—6. 
Christians made one with Ilis 
body, and blood, xxii. I—3, 
(vide Lucharist, Llesh), 

Book of life, names of the Baptized 
written in, xiv. 30, book of the 
Angels, iv. 24, our renunciation 
of sin recorded in God’s Look, 
Sixes) 

Bread, a prophetic symbol of Christ’s 
body, xiii. 19, of the Eucharist, 
Christ’s body, xxii. 1—6, 9, 
xxiii. 7, signified by the show- 
bread, xxii. 5, Substantial bread, 
xxiii, 15, the Bread has respect 
to the body, the Word to the 
soul, xxii. 5 (v. Zaz. Ch. vii.). 

Breath of Christ gave power to for- 
give sin, xiv. 22, xvil, 12, and 
the Iloly Ghost pariially, xvil. 
12. Breathing on Candidates 
for Baptism, Proc. 9, of Exor- 
Cis; 6V1 1, Sees. 

Burial of Christ, iv. 11, in the Earth 
to bless the Earth, xiii. 18, 35, 
xiv. 11, foretold by the Prophets, 
xiil, 34, Rive By Ina gatden, 
xiv. Ir, with Christ in Baptism, 
Proo, 2, ii; 12; 2x4, 5. 

Caiaphas, his desolate house a wit- 
ness to the Cross, xii. 38. 
Cain, an instance of God’s mercy, 

Thee B 
Candidates for Baptism, pwrifduevor, 

Proc, 1, xi. 9, distinct from 
Catechunens, and from Be- 
lievers, Proc, 12; ..,.43;- must 

bring a true heart, Proc. 1-4, 
the careless or hypocritical must 
not forego Baptism but their 
sin, ib. 4, seriousness becoming 
their awful situation, ib. 13-15 
(venir. Che Iii): 

Canon of Scripture settled and 
handed down by Apostles and 
Ancient Bishops, iv. 35, to be 
received from the Church, iv.33- 

Carpocrates, his heresy, vi. 16. 

Cataphrygians or Montanists, xvi. 8. 

Catechizings previous to Baptism, to 
be diligently attended, Proc. 9, 
Ic, i, 5, their importance, ib. 
guard against error, ib. iv. I, 
planting, or building up of the 
Faith, Proc. 11. Creed their 
subject, ib. iv. 2, 3, not to be 
revealed to Catechumens or 
Gentiles, Proc. 12, (v. end of 
Proc. and Zur. Ch. IL. § 1). 

Catechumen, meaning of the name, 
Proc. 6, distinct from the Faith- 

ful, ib, i. 4, v. 1, not to be 

informed of mysteries, Proc. 12, 
nor of the Creed, v. 12, vi. 29 
(Viaje Gla Mle Sri): 
atholic Church, vi. 2, 

20; SVinle Ty 

Meaning of the word, xviii. 
23. The name a mark of the 
tre Give Swe 20." tO: -clis= 

tinguish it from Iferetical as- | 

semblies, ib. 
Ceremonies of the Law abolished in 
the Church, xvii. 29. 
Cerinthus, his heresy, vi. 16. 
Chaff mingled with water by the 
Manichees, vi. 31. 
Chanting of Psalms, xiii. 26, xxiii. 
20, imitation of Angels, xiii. 26. 
Charms forbidden, iv. 37. 
Chastity, iv. 24, taught by the [oly 
Ghost, xvi. 19, 22. 
Cheribimn pi ry i, a. 
Children, Song of the Three Children 
—ainstance of Confession, ii. 16. 
Chrism, or Holy Ointment, typical 
of Christ’s unction by the Holy 
Ghost, xxi. 1, 2, after the invo- 
cation of Christ’s name, by the 
piesence of His Godhead, con- 
Veye the: Floly Gitosth -xxh.2, 
the gift of Christ, ib. sym- 
bolically applied to the different 
parts: of the body, xxi, 3, 4, 
gives the name of Christians, 
Xx. I, 5, types of it in the Old 
Testament, xxi. 6, 7, to be kept 
unspotted, xxi. 7, prepares us 
for our conflict, xxi. 4, Zretr. 
he Vs Bk, 
Christ, meaning of the word, x. 4, 
II, 14, many so called typically, 
ol, vhs eels Ty 2, 
Maton, STi Kv 19.-onutand 
David, xvi: 13, Christians, xxi. 1. 
Name shared by the Baptized, 
Proc. 35. ex. 1, 
Christ Jesus the true Christ, 
Sty Se Ty 
One, x. 3, 4, though with 
many titles, ib. lis name 
separated by the Valentinians, 
bg ies iy ae Wo 
Ilis twofold Nature in One 
PersGn.- iO, Sas Ts Re TP; 
Son of God, and Son of David, 
Rig 8 
rtd ive very, Gad... «x, <6, 
xi. 9, 14, proved from the Pro- 
phets, xi. 15, &c. God of God, 
bes oteny tte. Rian lO; 18, 
sou Ob God, ive 7, vi. Bvt. 14 
&ec. xii, 24, (v. Sov), only-be- 
gotten, iv. 7, vil. 4, (v. Ovly- 
begotten), sternally, xi. 4, 7, 
5, 13, 17, 20, without beginning, 
Me te 5). Fo Parbaker: of tlie 
Father’s Godhead, together 
With the “Toky “Ghost. v1} 6y 
(v. Zrzn7ty), of the Father, xi. 
Id 20; ells. THe “Hegotten nest 
TMA ern Mla Pgh PTY 0, BO OT, 
(v. Arius). Like in all things 
Os Clyet seatliehs Mv. 7 le AO, 
18, not the same as the Father, 
xi. 17, 18, (v. Sarellizs), how 

KV Soe} 

INDEX OF SUBIECTS, 

how one with the Father, xi. TO, 

with the Father before Lis In- 

carnation, x. 6; 8; 

Word Personal of the Father, 
iv. 8, xi. 10. Wisdom 
Power of the Father, xi. 4. 
Maker of all things, by the will 
of the Father, iv. 7, x.6, xi. 11, 
12, 21-24, and thew Lert, ib, 
(v. Lo). lis Vhrone Eternal, 
IV. 7,.X1. 17, (V¥. Session, Throne). 
Anointed Priest before all ages, 
pcp. gn ls Ane 

As Creator so restorer of the 
world, vi. 11, only way to the 
Tather, x. 1, 2, God made man, 
xil, 3, 15, xiii. 33, truly mate 
man, iv. 9. God dwelling with 
man, xi. 3. Emmanuel, xi. 14, 

Son of David, xi. 5, xii. 23. 
Ifis incarnation, its reasons, 
xii. I, &c. xiii. 33, (v. Zecarna- 
tion), not a deified man, xii. 3, 
vas with the old Fathers, x. 7, 
xii. 16. Ged seen in Him, xiv. 
27. His various names, express 
Tlis various offices, x. 3, 4, 11, 
Ls... 

Every thing concerning Him 
written in the Prophets, xii. 16, 
xiii. 8, v. Lect. x.-xv. passim 
(v. Prophets). Witnesses of Him, 
X, 17-20, xili. 38-40, xiv. 22, 23. 

The glory of Baptism, iii. 9, 
II, sanctified it, ib. xii, 15, 
preached not till Baptized, iii. 
14, the Holy Ghost came upon 
Him, xvii. 9, xxi. 2, 3, like but 
far higher than the Prophets, 
xiv. 26, alone sinless, ii. 10, 
ill. II, xiii. 3, 5. His righteous- 
ness greater than our sin, xiii. 33. 

Died for us, xiii. 2, (v. Cruci- 
fixion, Death), truly, xiii. 4, 37, 
voluntarily, xiii. 3, 5, 6, 33. 

Delivered the old Fathers 
from Hades, iv. 11, (v. flades), 

His appearance after the Re- 
surrection, xiv. II, 12, (v. “e- 
surrection). 

His Ascension, xiv. 24. 

Sits at God’s right hand, xiv. 
27, present in the Church, xiv. 
30. 

IIis second coming in glory, 
as Ilis first in humiliation, 
xv. I, (v. Advent), warned us 
against being deceived about it, 
xv. 4, comes no more from the 
Karth, xv. 10, our Judge, xv. 25. 
ILis Kingdom shall have no end, 
x. BOp 7, 

We are made partakers of 
Him by the Holy Chrism, xxi. 
14.0, ane the Bucharist, xxii. 1, 
(v. Lather, God, Fesus, Son, 
Trinity, Word). 

Christians so called by the Toly 
Ghosh sui 228, partikers:- of 
GIS Series en Ty texts Tx 
honour of this, x. 20, the new 
name spoken of by the Pro- 
phets, x. 16. 

M 2 

subordinate to the Father, x. 9, 

and | 

Spread over the world, x. 16, 
xvi. 22, slandered through the 
crmes of heretics, xvi. 8, who 
falsely share their name, ib. 
vi. 12, to be especially perse- 
cuted by Antichrist, xv. 12, 15, 
figures of Christ, xxi. 1. 

Church Catholic throughout the 
WOT 7 SVE 220" SV Bay Oy, 

Aingdom), governed and sancti- 
fied by the Comforter, xvi. 14, 
19, 22, xvil. 13. Christ present 
in her assemblies, xiv. 30, ever 
present witness of Christ, xiii. 
40, (v. Creed, Faith). New 
Covenant established in her by 
the blessed Trinity, xvii. 29. 
Raptism plants in her, Proc. 17, 
xviii. 26, witness and keeper of 
Holy Writ, iv. 33, 35, avers, 
(v. Sevisture), her teaching 
guard from error, iv. I, 2, Xi. 
£5 ei. 7, MV S: 

Fler order, “P60, 4,-5.3, con- 
trasted with heresy, vi. 35, 36, 
reverence in Church, Proc. 14, 
15, due to her ancient Bishops 
from her children, iv. 35, to be 
diligently attended before and 
after Baptism, i. 6, xviii. 28. 

Meaning of the word ékranole, 
xviii, 24, 25. Christian has 
succeeded the Jewish, ib. why 
called Catholic, ib, 23, 26, her 
glories, xviii. 28. 

Falling away in it a sign of 
Christ’s coming, xv. 7, makes 
way for Antichrist, xv. 9, 18, 
existed in. 8, Cyril's’ day.- ib. 
lurking heretics in it, ib. 

Church, of the Apostles, xvi. 4, of 
Golgotha, xiv. 6, (v. Golgvhu), 
of the Resurrection, ib. adorned 
by Kings, xiv. 9, 14. Constan- 
tine, ib. 22. Witness of the 
Resurrection of the Lord, ib 
the last five Lectures delivered 
there, xviii. 33, Z¢r. p. xli. 

Circumcision, a seal—type of the 
seal of the Spirit in Baptism, v. 
5, 6, of the Spirit, v. 6. 

Clement of Rome, quoted, xviii. 8. 

Clouds show God’s glory, ix. 9. 

Comforter, not diverse from the 
Holy Gost) ctvite 2, sevi: - Sens 
why so called, xvi. 20, governs 
and sanctifies the Church, xvi. 
22, Angels and Prophets, xvi. 
23, abides for ever with the 
Faithful after Baptism, xvii. 37, 
(v. Spirit), Manes called him- 
self the Comforter, vi. 25, xvi. 
6,9, and Montanus, xvi. 8. 

Ccmmunion in Christ’s mysteries, 
i. I, in the Holy Ghost given 
according to each man’s faith, 
i. 5, Communion Service, xiii. 
1 ei, Jie. Chi Vi VU 

Confession, eEowordynaots, v. il. 15, 
of sins, before Baptism, i. 2, 5, 
takes away sin, as in Davids 
ise il. TT, 12. > Hezekialys;, 1b. 
15, can quench fire, and tame 
lions, ib, 16, made before John’s 

r 
as 

164 CATE 
Baptism, iii. 7, by Martyrs, 
qi, (80, 7aer. Ch, tke See. 

Of the Trinity in Baptism, 
oe a, eee, Cy Le: Tt 
Of the seraphim; @eodro0yla, 
xxiii. 6. 
Confessors comforted by the Holy 
(host, xv1, 20, 2% 

Consecration of the Bread and Wine, | 

xxiii. 7, Zé. pp. XXVU., XXNV. 

Constantine, xiv. 22. 

Continence, or widowhood, ¢eyKpé- 
Teta, iv. 26, x. 19, XV. 23. 

Controversy, an evil, though neces- 
sary, Vi. 13, how to be engaged 
in, xiii. 22, 37, (v. Z/evesy). 

Corncliusthough regenerated, yet bap- 
tized with water, iii. 4, xvi. 27- 

Covenant New in the Church, xvil. 
29, of Noah and Moses not 
made without water, iil. 5. 

Covetousness conquered through the 
Iloly Ghost, xvi. 19. 

Creation, how to be ascribed to the 
Father and Son, vi. 9, Xi. 21, 
22, of all things by God denied 
by Heretics, iv. 4, of the world 
in spring-time answered by the 
Resurrection at the same time, 
xiv. 10, material creation, good 
in itself, marred by the creature, 
ii. 1, blasphemed by Manichees, 
vi. 31. God seen in it. is. 2, 
glorifies Tinh, 1k. 5 ees ee 
know but little of it, ix. 13, 14, 
should teach us reverence to 
Him, ix. 16. 

Creator of all things God, iv. 4, vi. 
7, not the author of evil, ii. 1, 4, 
blasphemed by Heretics, 1x. 4, 
Creator of the world its Restorer, 
“i, Ti. 

Creed, miorts, (v. Faith), to be re- 
ceived from the Church, v. 12, 
collected and proved from Scrip- 
ture, ib. iv. 17, epitome of ne- 
cessary doctrine for the weak, 
ib. provision for our way, ib. 
safeguard against error, lv. 2, 
vii. I, 4, Vill. I, ix. 4, x. 4, Xi. 
1, xv. 2, 27, xvii. 3, xvili. 1, 
confutes Sabellius, xvii. 34, not 
to be written down, or divulged 
to Catechumens, v. 12, its Ar- 
ticles briefly expounded, iv., of 
Jerusalem, Zé. p. xlvii. 

Cross, chief boast of the Church 
Catholic, xiii. 1, 22, redeemed 
and enlightened the world, ib. 
we must not be ashamed of it, 
xiii. 3, 36, 37, glorified by the 
Resurrection, xiii. 4, glory to 
Christ, xiii. 6, foretold by Jere- 
miah, xiii. 19, and Moses, ib. 
if an illusion, so is our salvation, 
xiii. 37, foundation of the Iaith, 
pattem to 

Sign of it to be used on all 
OCCASIONS, Iva TA, “Ril, 122, 136, 
scares devils, iv. .£3, xiii. 3; 36, 
its power and virtue, xiii, 40, 
Christ’s royal sign, iv. 14, xii. 
8, trophy, xiii. 40, ‘‘ Sign of the 
Son.of Man,” xiii. 43, xv. 22. 

CHETICAL: LEG) iE. Or 

oe ee CG Wor 

Cross, wood of it dispersed through 
the avorld,-ave mo; mole, x 10, 
xiii, 4, witness of Christ through 
the world, x. 19, of Ilis real 
Passion, San 7. 
| Cross, Basilica of the IIoly Cross, 
| Intr. p. xiii. (v. Golgotha). 

| Crown of thorns, signified the can- 
celling of Adam’s curse, xi. 17, 
18. 

Crucifixion not in appearance, but 
real, iv. 10, xiii. 4, if an illusion, 
so is Salvation, xiii. 37, for our 
sins, iv: 10, xuL 3, 5. 33- 1% 
time the same as that of the 
descent of the Spirit, xvii. 19, 
this and its other circumstances 
foretold, xiii. 24, &c. its wit- 
nesses, xiii. 38-40. 

The Crucified, xiii. 3, 22, 23, 36, 40. 

Curiosity, about mysteries of Bap- 
tism fearful, Proc. 2, 4, iil. 7. 

To be limited by what is 
written, xi. 12, xvi. I, 2, to give 

| place to faith, xi. 19, 20. 

| Cyril of Jerusalem, his carly years, 

Intr. p.i., ordained Deacon by 

Macarius, p. ii., Priest by Maxi- 

mus, p. iii, Preacher and Cate- 

chist, ib. his Consecration as 

Bishop, p.iv., letter to Con- 

stantius on the luminous Cross, 

ib. dispute with Acacius, ib. 

deposition and appeal, p. vi, 

welcomed at Tarsus by Sylvanus, 

and meets with Semi-Arian Bi- 
shops, p. vii., confronts Acacius 
at Synod of Seleucia, ib., de- 
posed again by a Synod at 

Constantinople, p. vill., returns 

from exile on accession of Julian, 

p-ix., Julian’s attempt to rebuild 

the Temple, ib. appoints his 

nephew Gelasius successor to 

Acacius at Cmsarea, p. X., 

banished a third time, ib. re- 

turns after death of Valens, ib. 
finds Jerusalem full of heresy 
and licentiousness, ib. present 
at the znd General Council, 

p. xi., justified and commended 

by Synod of the following year, 

382, ib. died 386, ib. lis doc- 

trine of Baptism, p. xxx. of 

Chrism, p. xxxiii., of Eucharist, 

p- xxxv., of the Holy Trinity, 

p. xlvii., his writings, p. lili. 

Daniel, his power in the Holy Ghost, 
xvi. 31, prophesied of the Ro- 
MAUS, ; XN TS, xvi Aes OF the 
time of the Messiah, xii. 19, of 
Antichrist, xv. 9-16, explana- 
tion of his prophecy, 1b. en- 
dured not the sight of the Angel, 
xii. 14 (v. Covt/ession). 

Darkness made by the author of 
Light, ix. 7, denied by heretics, 
ib. (v. Migh?), of the Crucifixion 
foretold, xiil. 24. 

David (v. Christ, Spirit), spake of 
Christ by the Holy Ghost, x. 15, 
xiv. «20. <-Christ: his Son;eand 
Weir of his throne, xii. 23, not 

LD. vite. 2. 

pavecl by Confession, ii. 10, 
yet refused not penitence, though 
forever, ty 11, 

Deacons the first seven, firsthorn 
children of the Church of Jeru- 
salem, xvii. 24, may administer 
Baptism, xvil. 35. 

Dead, how Christ so called, x. 4, 
raised by Elijah and Elisha, xiv. 
15, 16, by Christ without touch- 
ing them, xiv. 16, in ITis name, 
witness Ilis resurrection, xiv. 
23 (v. Resurrection, Fudynent). 

Death, invisible whale of death, xiv. 
17, brought by the First man, 
as Life by the Second, xill. 2, 
v. xii. 15, doom of sins, Nill. 33, 
vanquished by Christ’s death, 
xii. 15, xiv. 19, sting destroyed 
in Baptism, i. II, death in 
Baptism, Proc. 5, iil. 12, Xx. 4. 

Of Christ real not illusory, 
xiii. 4, not for His sin, but ours, 
xiii, 5, 33, voluntary, ib. 6, 28, 
foretold) by Himself, xi. 6. 
God’s sentence, and This merey 
reconciled in it, xiii. 33. 
| Demetrius of Phalerum, iv. 34. 
Descent into ITell, iv. 11, xiv. 19. 
Of the Spirit on Christ, how 
explained, xvii. 9. 

Despair, its evils, ll. 5. 

Devil, meaning of the word, i. 2, 
the dragon, Proc. 16, apostate 
Serpent, iv. 37, first work of 
God, viii. 4, fallen Archangel, 
ii, 4, viii. 4, impenitent, iv. I, 
author of evil by this free choice, 
ii. 14, not the Lord of the world, 
viii. 6, 7, his envy against man, 
xii. 5, xix. 4, prompts not forces 
to Sin, iis 3, 4, Ive 20y-375 eo 
have freely chosen him_ their 
Father, vii. 13, knew not Christ, 
xii. 15, tries to prejudice truth 
by his counterfeits in idolatry, 
xy. 14, shall work personally in 
Antichrist, xv. 14, and war with 
the Martyrs, xv. 17, vanquished 
and cast out through the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 19, endured by God 
that man may conquer him, viil. 
4, watches the Candidates for 
Baptism, Proc. 16, renounced 
with his works in Baptism, xix. 
2-0 ty, tute. Oh. TV. § 2p 
what his works are, ib., pursues 
us to Baptism, xix. 2, 3. 

Devils tremble at the seal of Bap- 
tism, i. 3, x¥il. 35, 36, aid. the 
sign of the Cross, xilil, 3, pos- 
session by them fearful, xvi. 15, 
power against them given by 
the Holy Ghost, xvi. 12, 22, 
acknowledge Christ, while Jews 
knew Him not, x. 15, lurked in 
our members till Baptism, xx. 
2, driven away by the Exorcised 
Chiles 8% 

Devotion, end of religious knowledge, 
Vl. 7, Xl. 12, 20, XVI. I, 2. 

Diocese, xiv. 21, xvi. 22, (Vv. mapoixia), 

| 
| theexclusive object of the Psalins, 

Dispensation, from the Father and 
the Son one, xvii. 5 (Vv. olko- 
vou a). 

Divination, to be shunned by Chris- 
tians, iv. 37. 

Divisions in the Church make way 
for Antichrist, xv. 7, 9, 18. 

Wocetor tv, vis Bag xi 3: 

Doctrines to he withheld from Cate- 
chuncns, Proc. 12, true, equally 
necessary with good works, iv. 
.10 OC Drove ILOm) Serririne, 
IVs 27 Nhe 5 MNS Oy (va Lees, 
Serislure), not fully compre- 
Trencted "iy usjxt. 12, 10, Xvi..1, 
fondness for ingenious rather 
than practical ones, an evil sign, 
 alaaier 

WOOr, Crist, Xe 1.2 

Dove, why a symbol of the Holy 
Spirit, xvii. 9, of Noah, xvii. 10. 

Dragon, xii. 15, head of the Dragon, 
heresy; Xv.27. 

In the waters, Proc. 16, iii, 11. 

Earth freed from Adam’s curse by 
Christ’s burial, xiii, 18, 35, 
“iV: U1: 

Last, symbolical turning towards it 
in Baptism, xix. 9. 

Easter, xviie 20, xviii. 33, season of 
Baptism, ib. 

Ebionites, vi. 16. 

Leeypt, Christ went there to destroy 
its idols, x. 10, His witiness, x. 
19, deliverance from, typical of 
Baptism, xix. 3, 4. 

Elder, seventy Elders had the Holy 
Spirit, Xvi. 25. 

Elijah full of the Holy Spirit, xvi. 
28, saw CHrist in “Simar and 
Tabor, xii. 16, his raising the 
dead answers objections against 
Christ’s resurrection, xiv. 15, 
compared with it, ib. 16, his 
translation compared — with 
Christ’s ascension, xiv. 25, not 
so favoured as the Apostles, 
xiv. 26, typical passing of Jor- 
dary, ire 5: 

Klisha full of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
25, supernaturally enlightened, 
ib. 17, his raising the dead, xiv. 
15,16,compared with Christ’s,ib. 

Elizabeth full of the Holy Ghost, 
Vis 72 

Emmanuel v. Immanuel. 

End of the world not end of Christ’s 
kingdom or person, Xv. 27-32. 

Enlighten, said of Baptism, Proc. 1, 
xiii. 21, Simon Magus not en- 
lightened though baptized, Proc. 

2, the Holy Ghost enlightens, 
xvi, E6-IS, xvii. 13 (v. L¢lu- 
minate), 

Enmity, there is a righteous enmity, 
vi. 35, Xvi. I0, against blas- 
phemers of God, taught by the 
world’s wonders, ix. 16 

Epistles of St. Paul final seal of the 
Scripture, iv. 36, why most 
numerous, x. 18, their com- 
pleteness and variety of tcaching 
about the Ifoly Ghost, xvii. 34. 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

Ipistle of the Apostles on the ob- 
servance of the Jewish Law by 
Grenhies, Av. 25; vil. 20. Wine 
versal, ib. 

Eiemity of the Son of God, xii 20; 
of Ilis generation, iv. 7, of Ilis 
Priesthood, x. 14, of His throne, 
Wives 27) 077 Chhs X, 

Einiopia, Churehthéere, xvi. 22; 
taught by the Eunuch, xvii. 25, 
Svie TA; 

Eucharist, Christ’s blessed gift, xiii. 
6, The Body and Blood of the 
Lord truly there, xxii. 1, 2, under 

the figure of Bread and Wine, 
xxi. 3, The Bread and Wine 

after invocation not simple ele- 
ments, but the Body and Blood 
OF COrMsh ce Fe Retr sy Oy OQ, 
xxill, 7, not bread and wine, 
but the sign of Christ’s Body 
and Blood, xxiii. 20, analogy of 
Idol-sacrifices, xix, 7, of the 
Holy Chrism, xxi. 3, we must 
not judge by sense of this mys- 
tery, xxii. 6,9, but believe that 
we have received Christ’s Body 
and Blood, ib, 1-6, xxiii. 20, a 
spiritual mystery, xxii. 4, 8. 

The Bread and Wine after the 
invocation of the Holy Trinity, 
xix. 7, made the Body and 
Blood of Christ, xxiil. 7, sanc- 
tified and changed by the Holy 
Ghost, ib. gifts hallowed by 
the Holy Ghost, xxiii. 19. 

Spiritual Sacrifice of Propitia- 
tion, xxiii. 8, 9, supplications 
after it for the living, ib. 8, and 
the Dead, xxiii. 9. 

The Substantial Bread, xxili. 
15, nourishment of Soul and 
Body, ib., xxit. 5. 

Typified by the Show-Bread, 
xxii. 5, foretold by David, ib. 7, 
and Ecclesiastes, ib. 8. 

By it we bear Christ in us, 
xxii. 3, Mode of Communicating 
in Christ’s Body, xxiii. 21, and 
Blood, xxiii. 22, ‘‘ Eucharistic 
Doctrine,” /zér. Ch. VII. 

Eve a virgin in Paradise, xii. 5, death 
through her, as through Mary, 
life, xii. 15, her birth as strange 
as our Lord’s, ib. 29. 

Evil the creature’s work, not the 
Creator’s, ii. 1, evil God be- 
lieved by the Manichees and 
Guosties; -Vi.~ 12,..13)° physical 
evil, ix. 14. 

Exercise, &cxnais, previous to Bap- 

tists Te pike Ze 

Exorcisms previous to Baptism, 
Proce -O.. expel.-ével spirits, 1b: 
cleanse the soul, ib. collected 
from, the Scriptures, ib. to be 
diligently attended, i. 5, power 
through the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
10). 25), 17100. Ds, RIX. 

JES Orciscdl Oily exe 2% 

K:zekiel saw but the likenesss of 
God’s glory, ix. 1, his vision, 
ix. 3, prophecy of Baptism, iit. 
LO), SV. 90. 

Faith, ground and bond of human 
Acton, Vi. 3, piutel ple oF -holi- 
NESS), Ver4, oe Exemiplitied: in 
Abraham, v. 5, power of faith, 
ie TO, Maye tu Ome. fal for 
another, v. 8,9, partly our own, 
but chicly God’s gift to those 
who ask, v. 9, two kinds of 
faith ; one, our assent to doc- 
tries; saves: at “oliee,. v 10, 
another, a gift of the Spirit ; 
reward of the former, working 
miracles, v. 11; 

Alone wanted to cure our 
Worst sins, ii. 6, in Baptism, i. 
Ey, Vi: 2; Vile 35, Hecessary fo 
our New Birth, t, 2) St 8,. en. 
ables us to receive the gift of 
Baptism, v. 6, purifies the soul, 
ili, 2, makes sons of God, vii. 
13, without works saved the 
robber, -v; 10, Xi. 34, ‘God -cam 
give faith to the faithless if he 
But-asks, Proc.<T 3; vi. O;-te be 
tried by false miracles as well as 
persecution, xv. 17, and by false 
docthine; xii -37. 

Faith, aioris, i.e. the Creed—one, 
Proc. 7, xvi. 4, 24, delivered by 
the Church and proved from 
Scripture, iv. 17, v. 12, guard 
against error, iv. 2, outline of 
teaching, iv. 3, v. I, note xiv. 
24, 27, a deposit, and treasure, 
bce os (v. Creed). 

Faithful, i.e. Baptized Christians, 
Proc. 13, dignity of the title, 
Proc. 6, v. I, 2, new name given 
in Baptism, i. 4, must not pre- 
sume, 11. "3; £727 p. XVs 

Fall of Adam corresponded to in its 
circumstances by the Tassion, 
its kOe 

Fasting taught by the Iloly Ghost, 
XVl. 12, means towards salva- 
tion, il. 9, preparatory to Bap- 
lism, lili. 7, part of repentance, 
tbe TO} tve.375 Dawid sy ue. 1o: 
reason of fasting, iv. 27, those 
who cannot not to be despised, 
ib. fast of the Preparation, xviii. 
17 (v. AZeats). 

Fatalism of heretics, iv. 18-20, vii. 
13. 

Fate not cause of sin, iv. 18-21, vii. 
13, nor of our Sonship to God, 
vil. 13, God not subject to it, 

Iv. 5. 

Father, One God the Father, vii. 1, 
xi. 13, to be included in our 
notion of God, vi. 1, Father, by 
the Son, with the Iloly Ghost 
bestows all things, xvi. 4, 24, 
xviii, 28 (v. Zrizity), One in 
glory with the Son and Holy 
Ghost, vi. 1, the God of the Old 
Testament, vii. 6, Maker of the 
World, ib., through the Son, 
Vie Oy Xe Pt, 12y 21-20: 

The Father in respect of the 
Son, vil. 1-5, vili. I, as opposed 
to Jewish unbelief, vil. 2, pro- 
perly and by nature the Father 
ORs Cisthatve Ae vl. Ty Ve 5 a7, 

169 

10, how He begat the Son, Te, 
vith the Son and Ifoly Ghost, 
alone knows, xi. 8, 11, we know 
but negatively, ib. heresies as 
to hey God is Fathers x1, <6; 
Wis 55.3 hy PPOs. Tes 18, not 
changed into the Son, xi. 13; 
17, 18, “distinct, yet not to be 
separated from the Son, iv. 3 
(v. Avrizs, Satbellius), suffered 
not for us, xi. 17, Father from 
Eternity, vii. 5, xi. 4, 8, never 
not the Father, iv. 5, vil. 5, IT, 
The beginning (axh &rapxos) 
of the Son, xi. 4, note 3, 14, 20, 
xii, 23, apart from time, xi. 20, 
in the Son, xi. 17, one with the 
Son, xi. 16, called by the Son lis 
God, xi. 18, fountain of life, and 
good, vi. J, xi. 18, 20, XVill. 29, 
worshipped through, xi. 17, iL, 
15, and with the Son, x. I, 2, 
only known to the Son and 
Iloly Ghost, vi. 6, vii. II, ix. 1, 
2, xi. 12, revealed by the Son, 

vat 
through and with the Iloly 
Ghost, vi. 6, x. I, seen only in 
the Son, x. 7, 8, xi. 18, xiv. 27 
(v. Angels). 

How called “ My Father” by 
Christ. ¥il.' 7, x1. 15, 19; 

Father of men by adoption, 
vii. 8, by faith, and their own 
choice, vil. 13, in baptism, xi. 
9, inconceivable honour for man 
to have God for his I’ather, vil. 
(Ora ech Ome & 

Other metaphorical senses of 
the word, vil. 8-10. 

Satan chosen by men for their 
father, vii. 13. 

Father, earthly Fathers receive their 
prerogative from the Ileavenly 
Father, vii. 3, to be honoured 
by the sons of God, vil. 15, 
duty to them, the first Christian 
duty, vii. 15, 10. 

Fathers of the Old Testament de- 
livered by Christ from Tfades, 
xiv. 19, fountains of truth to us, 
xvi. II, 

Fig-tree cursed for the sake of the 
type, xiii. 18. 

Figure, témos, Bread and Wine of 
Christ’s Body and Blood, xxiii. 
3, (nti. Pp. XXXix. 

Figure, avritvroy, Baptism, of Christ’s 
sufferings, xx. 0 (/i¢i. p. x1.), 
Chrism, of the Anointing of the 
Holy Ghost, xxi. 1, Bread and 
Wine, xxill. 20. 

Fire, Exorcism compared 
Proc. 9, Baptism of, xvii. 8, of 
the Holy Ghost like it, xvii. 12, 
14, fiery tongues at Pentecost, 

egies bm 

the fiery sword had guarded, ib. 
First-born, Christ in.an exclusive 
sense, xi. 4, Isracl so called, ib. 
Fishes show God’s glory, ix. 11. 
Flesh framed by God, xii. 26, not 
unholy as heretics say, 
Christ not ashamed of it, ib. 
hallowed by our Lord’s incarna- | 

CATECHE TICAL Ee ann 

| 
xvii. 15, opened Paradise, which | 

TD 

| 

| 

| oie AM" Ls. Ilis weapon to 
conquer the devil, and death, 
ib; dle Aled the ayer on is 
Godbaad, xi1.26, si B2, eat: 
ing the flesh of Christ,” not un- 
derstood spiritually by the Jews, 
cic, 2s 
Flowers, their varied beauty show 
forth God’s ¢lory, ix. 10. 
Forgiveness of sins, Christ’s free gift, 
ii. 15, power of conferring it 
granted to the Apostles, xiv. 22, 
xvii. 12, how typified, xv. 21. 
Of injuries required in Bap- 
tism, i. 6, case of David and 
Shimei, ii. II. 
Even Angels forgiven, il. 10. 
Forgiveness of injuries —re- 
quired from sinners in the Holy 
Communion, xxiii. 16 (v. Ae- 
mission, Sti). 
Fornication defiles the temple of the 
Iloly Ghost, iv. 23. 
Freedom of the soul, il. 1, 2,iv. 18, 21. 

Gabriel, his appearance too bright 
for Daniel, xii. 14, Messenger 
to the blessed Virgin, xvii. 6, 
witnessed of the endless king- 
dom of Christ, xv. 27. 

Galatia, heresy of Marcellus arose 
there, xv. 27. 

Garment of incorruption, xv. 26, of 
Salvation, xix. 10, putting off of 
garments in Baptism, xx. 2. 

Gaul, the Church there, xvi. 22. 

Generation of Christ twofold, xi. 5, 
xy. I, Ilis Divine generation 
spiritual, xi. 5, 7, 8, mysterious, 
xi. 7, 8, not metaphorical, xi. 9, 
not as mind begets thought, xi. 

10, incomprehensible, iv. 7, 
passionless, vi. 6, vil. 5, 
known to no creature, xi. II, 

13, only to the Iloly Ghost, xi. 
12, declared only negatively by 
the Church, xi. 11, not to be 
examined but believed, xi. 19, 
20,—eternal, iv. 7, without be- 
ginning, vii. 4, Xl. 4, 5, 7, 19, 
timeless, xi. 7, 8, 14, 17, 20, (Vv, 
Father, Sor). 

Gethsemane, x. 19. 

Ghost, Iloly (v. SAzvit). 

Gift, name of Baptism, i. 6, heavenly 
eift, ii, 20, Gifts of the Iather, 
Son, and Holy Ghost, same, 
xvi. 24 (v. Baptism). 

Chrism, gift of Christ, xxi. 3. 
Gifts of the Eucharist, hallow- 
ed by the Holy Ghost, xxiii. 19. 

Glory of Christ, eternal, as God, in 
time, as crucified, xiii. 6. 

Gnosties, iv..8, 4. Te ff,; ther here- 

sies, XVi. 7, against the Holy 

Ghost, xvi. 4, 7, separated the 

two Testaments, xvi. 4, ab- 

horred flesh and wines, iv. 27, 

NOLeO;. IV 20, 22% 

(v. Creator, Father, Trinity), 
knowledge of Him foundation of 
religion, iv. 4, ignorance about 
Him source of heresy and idol- 
atry, iv. 6, viii. 1. 

| (sod 

fo Oe 

copy On Sie Be 

One, iv. 4, vi. passim, vill. 1, 
8, xi. 17, unoriginate, unchange- 
able; iv, 4, 5, vie Joe. Inst 

principle, vi. 12, 13, 36, xi. 28, 
incorporeal, vi. 7, 8, 1x. I, uni- 
form in substance, vi. 7, like to 
Himself, vi. 7, infinite, iv. 5, vi. 
8, viii. 2, incomprehensible, vi. 
2, 4,7, even to angels, vi. 0, tO 
all but the Son and Spirit, ib. 
x. I, unspeakable in beginning, 
forin; nature; vi: 75 yet we muse, 
not indeed declare, but glorify 
Ilim, as far as we know, vi. 5, 
ix. 3, 16, our best knowledge to 
know our ignorance of Him, vi. 
2, invisible, ix. 1, 2, seen pars 
tially by angels, vil. 11, to man 
in Christ, x.6, 73 0; xls BO, Biv 
27, dimly in His works, ix. 2, &c. 
Both Just and Good, iv. 4, vi. 
4, and full of all perfection, vi. 
7,8, 9, Father of Christ, vil. 5, 
Maker of all things, iv. 4, ix. 1, 
&c. of darkness as well as light, 
ix. 7, Almighty, and Sovereign 
over all things, though long-sui- 
fering, vill. 1, &c. isin all things, 
vi. 8, 9, all things serve Him 
save the Son and Spirit, vill. 5. 
Forsaken by idolaters, vi. Io, 
II, xii. 5, &c., His great mercy, 
ii. 7, 10, pardons worst of sin- 
ners who believe, ii. 5, 6. 
Present in Baptism, Proc. 15. 
Lord both of soul and body, 
vs Ay 22, Villy 3s 
Blasphemed by heretics, vi. 
12, viil. 8, ix. 16, not two Gods, 
vi. 13, viii. 3, not the soul oi 
the world, viii. 2, various here- 
sies concerning Him, iv. 4, 5, 
Viz Td Ore. 
‘*God of Abraham, Isaac, and Ja- 
Cob; ¥viit,. 125. 14; 
God of God (v. Carist), made man, 
Mii20G; Mil, By KU Bo 
* God of this world,” the words per- 
verted by Manes, vi. 28, how 
explained by Archelaus, and 5. 
Cyril, vi. 28, 29. 
God the Son, the Word, xii. 3. Zatz. 
p- xlix. (v. Christ, Sev), 
God, the Iloly Ghost (v. S777). 
Golgotha, St. Cyril’s first xviii. Lec- 
tures spoken in the Church 
there, iv. 10, xiii. 22, vide xviil. 
33, name typically prophetic of 
Christ, xiii. 23, witness of the 
Crucifixion, iv. 10, 14, x. 19, xill. 
Bs BO. Peels. Ts 
Gospel, only four genuine, iv. 36, 
forged ones, ib. Manichwan 
Gospel according to Thomas, iv. 
36, vi. 31, our Gospels attested 
by the Old Testament, xiv. 2, 
that according to St. Matthew 
written in Hebrew, xiv. 15. 
All may hear but not under- 
stand the Gospel, Proc. 6, vi. 29. 
Phrase ‘tin the Gospel,” év 
evayyeriots, Vi. 4, 7, Sill. 21, 35, 
‘*Gospel of Teter,” xii. 26, 
note I, 

Grace, God's to give, ours to use, i. 
4, necessary that we may re- 
ceive the truth. xvi. 2, requires 
honesty and faith, i. 3. to be re- 
ceived and cherished, xvii. 37, 
given through Christ at the New 
Sanibhinet 2. 

Gilt-of atace, i -O. 
Spirit of grace, xvii. 5. 

Greeks, dangerous because of their 
plausible words, iv. 2, deny the 
resurrection, xvill. 1, limit God’s 
power, vill. 2, believe things as 
hard as Christ’s birth, xii. 27, to 
be silenced out of their own 
fables, xiii. 37, to be answered 
by reasoning, as the Jews by 
Scripture, xviii, 10, their shame- 
ful idolatry, iv. 6, vi 11. 

Mabakkuk, carried by the angel to 
Danicl, xiv. 25, compared with 
Christ, ib. 

Ilades (v. //¢?/). 

Ifands of Christ stretched on the 
Cross typical, xiii. 27, 28, laying 
on of, conveys the Spirit in 
Loth ‘Lestaments, xvi. 26. 

Tead, v. xiii 
iTeathenism counterfeits truth to dis- 
credit it, xv. 11 (v. Adolatry). 
IIearers, danger lest they receive 

false impressions of truth, xvi. 2. 

ITeavens, vi. 3, the abode of angels, 
iii. 5, made of water, ib. ix, oe 
Ifcaven distinguished from the 
Third Heaven, xiv. 26, its won- 
ders shew God’s glory, ix. Bp 
shall perish but be renewed, xv. 
3, Christians, a heaven, xxiii. 11, 

Hfell, Christ descended thither to 
redeem the just, iv. 11, xiv, 10. 

Herbs, men changed into them, who 
plucked them, according to 
Manes, vi. 31. 

fleresy manifold, iv. 2, vi. 13, xvii. 
33, XVill. I, contrasted with the 
Church, vi. 35,a knowledge of 
It necessary, vi. 34, xvi. 5. yet 
an evil, vi, 13, 33, arising from 
presumption, xi. 12, from a mis- 
taken thought of honouring the 
Father or the Son, xi. 17, v. x. 
2, not to be curiously inquired 
into, vis 19. 

ITeresies alluded to by $. Cyril :— 
cate Apelles ; Arius ; Basilides; 
Carpocrates ; Cataphrygians ; 
Cerinthus ; Docetze ; Ebionites ; 
Gnostics ; Manes; Marcellus ; 
Marcion; Menander; = Mon- 
tanus ; Paul of Samosata; Sa- 
bellius ; Simon Magus: Valen- 
tinus. 

Iferetics perverted Holy Seripture, 
iv. 19, vi. 27, their asseniblics 
to be shunned, iv. 37, how to be 
treated, vi. 36, to be avoided, 
xvi. 6, why they should be 
ited = vis 21; falsely called 
Christians, vi. 12, on whom 
they brought discredit, xvi. 8, 
blasphemous to God, xi. 16, 
a sign of Christ’s coming, xv. 

‘ei? 

PND OF SUM ICTS, 

5, formerly manifest, now lurk- 
ing in the Church, xv. 9, di- 
vided attributes into persons, iv. 
Aes oul yr Sev ae 

| Hermas a disciple of Manes, vi. 3 

| Hezekiah shewed the efficacy of 
Confession, 11.15, not the object 
of Isaiah’s prophecy of Imman- 
UGls Stl, 2T,' 22. 

| High Priest, reason of his bathing, 
i. 5, Christ our Ifigh Priest, x. 
We holy Cae ON. 

Tloliness, all through the Holy Ghost, 
iv. 16, Faith its ground, v. 4, 
Spirit of, xvii. 5 (v. Sauclifica- 
tivit). 

Tfope support to Candidates for Bap- 
tism, Proc. 9, 10. 

Hour, third, that of the Crucifixion, 
and of the descent of the Spirit 
at Pentecost, xvii. 19, of the 
Crucifixion foretold, xiii, 24, 25. 

I{uman conceptions not to be in- 
truded into the mysteries of the 
Gospel,.x.27, 8, 

carnation). 
Ilyssop, symbolical, iii. 1. 

Idols, offerings to, become polluted 
by the invocation of the idol’s 
name, lil. 3, xix. 7, not to be 
touched, iv. 28. 

Idolatry, worship of God’s gifts, vi. 
10, its madness, iv. 6, and de- 
gradation, vi. 10, 11, will be 
abhorred by Antichrist, xv. 15. 

Ignorance of all creatures concerning 
God, vi. 2-6, xi. 11, check to 
presumption, not to praise, vi. 
5, should repress our curiosity, 
xi. II, knowledge of it our 
highest wisdom, vi. 2, of what 
is written should make us silent 
about what is not written, xi. 
12, xvi. I, and guarded in speak- 
ing, Xvi. I. 

Illuminated, Proc. 1, 2, xviii. oo. 
alone know the glory of the 
Gospel, vi. 29, Zatr. p. xvii. 

lumination of the just by the Holy 
Ghost). vie. 35 ar ite power, 
xvi. 10-18, same as Baptism, 
pwtigua, xiii, 21, 

Image, Christ the true Image of God 

to subvert the false one, xii. rs. 
man, God’s image, xii. 5, soul, 
made in God’s image, iv. 1S, 
meaning of the ‘Image of 
God,” xiv. 1o, “our Image,” 
argument from the words, x. 6. 

Immortality of the soul, God's gift, 
iv. 18. 

Immanuel, prophecy of, xii. 3; 
21, note 9, meaning of the word, 
Mi 14, 

Impersonal, (avutéoraros,) words, iv. 

Incarnation of our Lord, real not 
illusory, iv. 9, xii, 3, salvation 
depends on its WEAIGY,« iile 
denied by Simon Magus, vi. 14s 

Must be believed as well as 

Christ’s Godhead, xii. 1, herctical | 

Tfuman nature of our Lord (v. Zy- 

167 

and infidel objections & priori, 
from its needlessness, Nii. 4, rea- 
sons forth Sih Ih, -Cremor-of 
the world its Restorer, vi. 11, to 
restore man, xiii. §, proved from 
the prophets, xii. 8, &c. that 
man might see God, x. 7, xii. 
13, 14, to sanctify the waters 5- 
that God might be worshipped ; 
—that man might be made par- 
taker of God ;—that the Lord 
might suffer for us, xii. 15, ob- 
jection to its possibility, xii. 4. 
answered, xii, 27-30. 

Christ Lord and God before 
10), 20; 12. eh SG. Ofas Virgin, 
iy. 9, xii. 2, §, 21, why, xii. ay, 
33; 34, blasphemies of heretics 
respecting it, ib. xii. 31, without 
taint because of the Holy Ghost, 
Xl, 29, 32, xvii. 6, signs of its 
time, place and manner given 
by the Prophets, xii. 5, 10-12, 
17-24, implied in the histories 
of Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and 
Ilias, xii. 16, witnesses of it, 
Ri), tae ea 

Satan's counterfeits among 
idolaters to discredit it, xv. 11. 

Indians, converts to the Church, 
AVE Se. 

Inspiration contrasted with possession 
by devils, xvi. 15, 16. 

Interpretation of Scripture, xiii. 9, 
gift of the Spirit, xvi. 12 (v. 
Scripture). 

Interpreter, viii. 7, xiii, 21, xvi. 6, 
vide xv. 13. 

Invocation of the ILoly Trinity gives 
a sanctifying power to the water 
of Baptism, iii. 3, to the exorcised 
oil, xx. 3, analogy of the invoca- 
tion of the idols’ name on offer- 
ings to them, iii, 3, xix. 7, of 
Christ on the Holy Ointment, 
causes it to convey the Ifoly 
Ghost, xxi. 3, of the most Holy 
Trinity on the Bread and Wing, 
xix. 7, makes them the Body 
and Blood of Christ, xxiii. 7, 
fntr, pp. xxiii., xxviii., xxxv. 

Trerwus quoted, xvi. 6. 

Isaiah prophesied of Christ, xii. 2, 
of Lis birth of a virgin, xii. 2, 

this explained, ib, 21, 22, be- 

held Christ, xiv. 27, and in the 

Spirit foresaw His coming, xiii. 

3, Witness of Ilis innocence, ib. 

foreknowledge given Him by 

the Holy Ghost, xvi. 18. 

Sawn asunder, ii. 14, xiii. 6, 

Jacob saw the Lord, xii. 16, prophe- 
sicd of the time of His coming, 
Tel 7, 

Jeremiah, his prophecy of the Lord’s 
sufferings, xiii, 7, of gentile 
faith, ib. 

pencho, x. rr. 

Jerusalem, its Ifoly Places, Zntr. 
p. xl., its exciusive privileges, 
Pile fy MN ese VES Ae Nn 13, 
Christian opposed to Jewish, 
Mil, 7, St. James its first Bishop, 

oo 

iM U2hy “NIMs. 27, 
Bishops Hebrews, KV. 15¢ 

ests, so namel because He saves, 
<1, 12; 13, and heals 05,2. 5 
13, meaning in Hebrew, and 
Greek, x. 12, 13, Joshua a type 
of [lim in Ilis kingly office, x. 
11. (y. Chris. Was) name 
hinted at by the Prophets, x. 12, 
net more distinctly because of 
the Jews, x, 12. 

Jews study and know the Scriptures 
without understanding them, 
iv. 2, xii. 13, to be silenced 
from the Prophets, xi. 375 
xviii. 10, despise the testimony 
of the Prophets in rejecting the 
Lord).-vil, 2; x. 2, Xi. 2, XIV. 15; 

deny that Jesus is Christ, x. 14, 

while devils acknowledge Him, 

x0. 
Misinterpret the Prophets, 
xii. 21, 22, infidel objections to 

the Incarnation, xii. 4, 27, ab- 
surdly apply the prophecies of 
Christ’s eternal kingdom to men, 
xii. 2, gainsay our Lord’s suffer- 
ings, xii. 7, their subjection to 
Rome a_ proof that Christ is 
come, xii. 17, vain attempt to 
discredit the Resurrection, Xiv. 
14, their objections confuted by 
the examples of Elijah and 
Elisha, xiv. 15. 
Their Patriarchs, xii. 17. 
Are looking for Antichrist, 
xii. 2, will receive him, xv. II, 
12, 15, will be favoured by him, 
xv. 15, their observances and 
sabbaths to be shunned, iv. 37. 
Job had the Holy Ghost, er hee 
St. John Baptist—his high office, 
baptism, and character, iii. 6 
(v. Baptism), link between the 
two covenants, x. 19, delivered 
from Hades and death by Christ, 
Pv.ct i, Hit. 10, 
Sanctified by the Holy Ghost 
to baptize Christ, xvil. 8. 
St. John the Divine, Kits: 2s 
Jonah a type and proof of Christ’s 
resurrection, xiv. 17, compared 
with Chiist, xiv. 17, 18, in the 
whale, a type of Christ in ITades, 
xiv. 20, his prayer fulilled only 
in Christ, ib. 
Jordan, typical, il. 5, x. II, xiv. 

Joseph, his ill-treatment turned to 
good by God’s providence, vill. 
4, full of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
27 

Joseph, how cailed the Father of | 

Christ, vii. 9, not really so, xii. 

35 31. 

Judas, xii. 6, his treason foretold, 
xiii. 9, meaning of the name, ib. 
explanation of Zechariah’s pro- 
phecy relating to him, ib, Io, 

rid 
Judge, Christ, of quick and dead, 
xv. 26. 

Judgment, day of, xv. 21, ils 
and terrors, xv. 2 

glories 
2.26, ‘Wopercr 

first fifteen 

| error, 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| of our 
| 

the poor and desolate, xv. 23, 
God and all Angels present, xv. 
24. How Christ bids us pre- 
pare for it, xv. 26. 
Judement of our Lord by Tis 
eople, a sign foretold, xii. 12, 
Mids A 
| Just, “the Just” delivered by Christ 
from Hades (v. ZZe//), 
Iliuminated by the 
Ghost, xvas 3, 27 
The Just God 
heretics, iv. 4. 
Justification given in Baptism, Proc. 
16, i. 4, of Abraham by faith, 
Wi. Gi 
Even by riches, viii. 6. 
Justin, M., xiii. 26, note I. 

Holy 

Dblasphemed by 

Keys of heaven given to St. Peter, 

xiv, 26. 
Kings reign through God, vill. 5, 
the latter days honour the 

Gospel, xiv. 14, taught by the 
Church xvii. lo. 

Kingdom of Christ, universal: fore- 
told by Daniel, xii. 18, without 
bound, xii, 24, unwittingly ac- 
knowledged in the 
mockery, xiil. 17, never to end, 
iv. 15, xv. 27, heresy of Mar- 
cellus regarding it, ib. &c. 

God’s kingdom, in the Lord’s 
Prayer, xxiil. 13. 

Four great kingdoms, xv. 13, 
kingdom of Antichrist, xv. 12, 13. 

Kiss of Peace, xxilil. 3. 

Knowledge not for curiosity but 
devotion, vi. 5, 7, supernaturally 
given by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
16, in the Apostles and Pro- 
phets, ib. 17, 15. 

Lamentations of Jeremiah refer to 
the second captivity of the Jews, 
xiii. 7, ‘* Lamp,” meaning of in 
Psalm 132; Ks 35; 

Laver of Baptism (Aoutpdv), Proc. 
2, 9, 31,1. 2 Mh 3s br 1% 3% 
v. 6, &c., one salvation of the 
Laver, iv. 37, of Regeneration, 
xix. 10, repentance of the Laver, 
iv. 32, Laver (Aouvrfp), in the 
‘Tabernacle an emblem of Bap- 
tism, iil. 5. 

Law, inspired by the Holy Ghost, 

| iv. 16, blasphemed by heretics, 

| iv. 33, fulfilled in Christ, iv. 33, 
xiii. 5, its ceremonies now abro- 
gated by thé Holy Trinity in 
the Church, xvii. 29, our school- 
master, Iv. 33. 

Lazarus, his resurrection an earnest 

deliverance from 

sin, 
ii. 5, and resurrection, xviil. 16, 
raised through the faith of 

others, v. 9. 
Lent, preparation for Baptism during 
it, iv. 3, xvill. 32 (v. Baptism). 
Lessons from Scripture, Proc. 4, iv. 
I, xiv. 24, &c. guard against 
iv: 15 thark canonical 

| toe ls.1y. 33526; 

Libyans in the Church, xvi, 22. 

soldiers’ 

CATECHETICA EC Te ee OL 

| 

| 

S CR 

Life, the Father is true life, xviil. 
29, given us in Baptism by [im 
who is Life, iii. 41,42. Christ, 
who is life, brought Life, as 
Adam Death, xiii. 2 (v. Eve, 
Tree). Eternal Life God's cift, 
xviii. 28, 29, ways of entering 
into it, ib. 30, 31. 

“ Life of Life begotten,” lv. 7, Kody 
18. 

Light made by Him who made 
Darkness, ix. 7. 

The Father is Light eternal, 
vi. 9, light given to souls by 
the Cross, xiii. 1, by the Holy 
Ghost, xvi. 3, 11 (v. Baplism, 
Enlighten, Illuminate). 

“TLieht of Light begotten,” iv. 7, 
xa, AO : 

Lights, Proc. I, 3, i. I; Titi, cD. 

g 

‘Like in all things to the Father,” 
iv. 7, xi. 4,9, 18, Vv. xi. 19. 

“Like to Ilimself,” vi. 7. 

** Likeness of God,” xiv. Io. 

Lion of the tribe of Judah, x. 3. 

Living Spirit (v. 5/7777). 

Living Word (v. Hor). 

Lord, Christ Lord of all because 
Maker ‘of ally x5, 6, %1-21, 
&c., not by advancement, but 
by nature, x. 5, before His In- 
carnation, x. 6, from eternity, 
x. 9, note 2, by the will of the 
Father, x. 9, illustration of this, 
xi. 22, Lord of Angels, x. 10. 

Lotaax: o. 

i 

Macedonian empire, iv. 34. 

Magic to be shunned by Christians, 
iv. 37, service of the devil, 
XIX. O, 

Maker of all things, iv. 4, visible 
and invisible, Christ, xi. 21-24 
(v. Creator). 

Man, work of Christ as well as of the 
Father, x. 6, of God’s own 
hands, xii. 5, 26, in God’s Imaze, 
xii. §, retained God’s Image but 
lost His Likeness, xiv. 10, his 

twofold nature, ili. 4, iv. 18, 
world made for him, xil. 5. 
First man brought death, 

xiii. 2, his fall, xii. 5, man’s 
miserable condition before the 
Incarnation, xii. 6, 7, forsook 
God, for the devil, ii. I, vi. 10, 
vii. 13. 

Christ came to restore him, 
xii. 5, &c. by Christ hallowed, 
and made partaker of God, xi. 
15, allowed to call God, Father, 
vii. 7, 12, partaker of His name, 
Proc. 6, and of Christ’s, x. 16. 

Power of man in faith, v. II, 
by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 16, can 
wrestle with the Devil through 
the Holy Ghost, viii. 4, Xvi. 19. 

His wants met by Christ’s 
various offices, x. 3-5 (Vv. Zica7- 
nation). 

His ministry used to convey 
God’s gifts, xvii. 35, 30. 

Manasseh, saved through repentance, 
bea ale 

Manes blended all previous heresies, 
vi. 20, xvi. g. History, vi. 24, 
&c., a slave, vi. 24, changed his 
name, ib. did not arise from 
among Christians, vi. 21, con- 
nection with the Greek philo- 
sophy, of Alexandria, vi- 22-24, 
and with Persian, vi. 24, his 
disputatious spirit, vi. 24, claims 
to be the Paraclete, vi. 25, xvi. 
6,9, fails to cure miraculously 
the Persian king’s son, vi. 25. 
Flics from prison, vi. 26, dis- 
putes with Archelaus before 
heathen judges, vi. 27, seized 
and put to death by the Persian 
king, vi. 30. 

Ilis influence, vi. 25, his dis- 
ciples; v1. 31. 

Manichean doctrine of two 
principles, iv. 4, note 6, vi. 
£2, $3, 27, 25; perversion, of 
Scripture for this doctrine, vi. 
28, they blaspheme the God 
of the Old Testament, vi. 27, 
xvi. 4, call the Sun Christ, vi. 13, 
xi. 21, abhorrence of the ma- 
terial world; ‘tvs°22. 27, - vi. St; 
32, 34, deny the reality of Christ’s 
Resurrection, xiv. 21, fatalism, 
iv. 18-21, baptism and offering, 
vi. 33, forged gospels, iv. 36, vi. 
31, pollutions and blasphemy, 
vi. 30-32, 

Manes worse than Simon 
Magus, xvi. 10, his followers 
to be carefully shunned, vi. 36, 
knowledge of their doctrines 
almost pollution, vi. 13, 34; 
carefully enquired into by 
De Cyril Vi. 34. 

Marcellus, his heresy about Christ’s 
kingdom, iv. 15, xv. 27, com- 
bated, xv. 29-32, a Sabellian, 
x1. 17, note 4. 

Marcion, his heresy, iv. 4, vi. 16, 
divided the Justice and Good- 
ness of God, ib. held three 
(TOdss “XV. 45. Jo xemoved: att 
texts of the Old Testament from 
the New, vi. 16, xvi. 7. 

Marriage though inferior to Virginity 
yet honourable, iv. 25, not to 
be despised by the unmarried, 
ib. acknowledged by the Holy 
Ghost, xvii. 7, second marriage 
permitted to the weak, iv. 26, 
note 3. 

Martyrs alone saved without Bap- 
tism of water, being baptized 
with blood, “tiie To; “xii. 25, 
make confession, iii. 10, trained 
by the Holy Ghost, xvi. 12, 
strengthened by the Comforter, 
xvi. 20, 21, only by Him can 
they suffer, ib, under Antichrist, 
Xl. 17. 

Mary the Virgin-Mother of God, 
x. 19, V. Xil. 33, 34, how called 
the wife of Joseph, xil. 31, 
sanctified by the Iloly Ghost, 
xii. 29, 32, xvii. 6, sprung from 

INDEX OF SUBIECTS, 

David, xii. 24, the witness of 
Christ, x) 19, type of Vireins, 
Xl. 33, repaired the loss caused 
by Eve, xii. 29, Christ truly 
Dorn of hem iv, oO, xit. 4. 

Mary Magdalene, her visit to the 
Sepulchre foretold, xiv. 12, her 
noble love, xiv. 13. 

Matthew wrote in Hebrew, xiv. 15. 

Meats abstained from, not as un- 
clean, but for self-denial, iv. 27, 
37, vi. 35, Jewish distinctions 
hot. to. bé: observed, ivi: 37, of- 
fered to idols forbidden, iv. 28, 
vide xvii. 29. 

Meckness of Christ in judgment 
foretold, xiii. 16. 

Menander, his heresy, vi. 16. 

Mercy of God to sinners, ii. 5, 6, 
Io, even to Angels, ii. 10. 

Miracles: of Clirist: as God, iv. 9, 
claimed by Antichrist, xv. 14, 
false ones permitted trial of 
Christian faith, stumbling-blocks 
of the unfaithful, xv. 17. 

Mithras, worshipped in Persia, vi. 

3, his ministers oppose Tere- 
binthus and Manes, ib. 24. 

Montanus condemned second mar- 
riage, iv. 26, note 3, called him- 
selt the Holy Ghost, xvi. 8, 
charged by S$. Cyril with prof- 
ligacy, and with horrid my- 
steries, ib. note I. 

Moon, her changes an intimation of 
the Resurrection, xviii. 10. 

Moors in the Church, xvi. 22. 

Moses the good schoolmaster, vii. 8, 
had the Holy Ghost, xvi. 27, 
Heheld Christ x:-6, 75 -xiv16, 
intercession for the people and 
Aaron an encouragement to 
penitents, ii. 10, change of his 
rod as hard as Christ’s birth, 
xii. 28, his rod, type of the 
wood of the Cross, xiii. 20, 
sweetening the water by trees, 
a type of the Passion, ib. river 
changed into blood by him 
corresponds with Christ’s water 
and blood, xili. 21. 

Mysteries of Christ, i. 1, of Baptism 
and the Eucharist, of the Altar, 
XVills 32,95, Nike Dy noe ton be 
pied: into,: Proc, 2ei45 Mie 7, 
nor divulged to Catechumens or 
strangers, Proc, 12, vi. 29, glory 
of the Church. vi. 29, our 
account of them negative not 
positive, vi. 2, xi. II, xvi. 5, 
not to be interpreted by human 
conceptions, xi. 7, 8, for praise 
not curiosity, vi. 5, we must not 
be silent about them, ib. Ziv. 
De eR 

‘« Mystery of iniquity,” xv. 18, 

Name of God, vi. 9, xxiii. 12, many 
names of Ham, vi..7, of our 
Lord) x.53, Maite of Jesus, its 
meaning, x. 4, II, 13, of Christ, 
Xe 45 14, vattue.ot the name of 
Christ, ive, 13;. nates of the 

Holy Gihost,. xVit.. 025-4; 5; 

1€9 
various names of God, Christ, 
and the Iloly Ghost, not to be 
profancly distinguished into per- 
SOUS; Vigne ter Oy. ey oy 
Christians partakers of Gorl’s 
name Proc GO; ve1, Or Guirisics, 
x. 16, new name of Christians, 
is, Ay TO. 

Typical names given to 
Joshua and Aaron, x. IT, signi- 
ficant names of Judas, xiii. 9, 
Samuel, Proc. 14. 

Name of Manes, vi. 20, 24, of the 
Gnostics, xvi. 7. 

Napkin with which Christ girded 
Himself symbolical of Ilis 
human nature, xii. I. 

Nathan, ii. 14. 

Nations all subject to Christ, xvi. 
22; Vile: EO. 

Nativities, iv. 5, ix. 8. 

Nature not cause of righteousness or 
sin, iv. 18-21, nor of salvation 
OF Fulny Vil.” FS, 

Nature of God, vi. 7, God by 
nature lather of Christ, vii. 4. 

Natural world, its wonders witness 
for God, ix. 2, &c. 

Nebuchadnezzar an instance of the 
efiicacy of repentance, ii. 17, 18. 

Necessity, none with God, iv. 5, nor 
upon man, iv. 18-21, not the 
reason of men’s salvation or 
Tiny Vib. Ea, 

Night, its religious uses, ix. 7. 

Noah, his ark of wood type of the 
Church, xxvii. 10, of the wood 
of the Cross, xili. 20. Example 
of decent order in the Church, 
Proc. 14, his dove a type of the 
dove of the Holy Ghost, xvii. 
Io, 

Himself a type of Christ, as 
author of a new birth, xvii. ro. 

Obedience of Christ, xiii, 5, as 
a Son, not “a servant, to the 
Pather, x. '9;, XV. 30. 

Offering of Christ sacrificed for us 
in the Eucharist, xxiii. 10. 

Oil, exorcised of Baptism, xx. 3, 

symbolical, and powerful to 

drive away devils, ib. 

Old Fathers delivered by Christ 
from Ilades, iv. II, xiv. 19. 
Old Testament, its books, iv. 35, 
document of appeal for Chris- 
tian truth, xiv. 2 (v. Father, 
Prophet, Scripture, Testament), 
blasphemed by heretics, iv. 33, 
impiously separated by them 

from the New, xvi. 4. 

Old man put off by Confession and 
Baprisine. we Sy AIK Oy XN, 2. 
Olives, the spiritual olive-trees, i. 4, 

Veo ee3s 

Olives, mount of, xii. 11, witness of 
the Resurrection, xiv. 23, scene 
of the Ascension, xiv. 25, why 
passed by David, when flying 
from Absalom, ii. II. 

One, how Christ is one with the 
Wathen, 31. 10s 

170 

Only- en, meaning of the word, 
igs dea ee perce cage ac a 
Order commended by our Lord’s 

example, ii. 11, 13, 14, of the 
Church, Proc. 4, 13, vie 35, 39- 
Orders of the ministry, xvi 

recvott 

ry 
I 
1 
Bs Be, 

35: 

Parable of the marriage garment 
applicd to Baptism, Proc. 3, i). 
2, of the wise and foolish 
Virgins, xv. 26, of the Labourers, 
xiii. 31, of the Lost Sheep, xv. 
Ad 

Paradise, Adam in Paradise, xii. 
his fall, ii. 4, v. xiii. 19, placed 
in Adam’s view when fallen, 
ii. 7, Invisible Paradise opened 
in Baptism, Proc. 15, 16, i. 4, 
Mix. 0,5 0, by “adh 0, 
distinguished from heaven, xiv. 
26, restored by the Cross, xiii. 
30. ‘The penitent thief the first 
to enter it, ib 

Parent (v. Lather). 

Vassion of Christ real, xii. 4, 
witnesses of it, ib. 38, 395 gain, 
said by the Jews, xi. 7, 
witnessed by the Prophets, xii. 
8, 9, &e., even in its details, ib. 
answers circumstantially to the 
Fall, xiii. 18, 19, its:place, time, 
&c.,. prophesied, sit: 23; ec., 
represented in Baptism, xx. 5, 
fellowship with it therein, ib. 5, 
0, Fe 

Passion, ‘* without passion,” a7a0es, 
Christ’s generation, vi. 6, note I, 
vii. 5, note 5. 

Passover, the eating of the Paschal 
Lamb a type of Christ’s twofold 
nature, xi. I. 

Patience of Christ foretold, xiii. 6, 
13, gives force to Ilis teaching, 
ib. His Divine glory not the 
reward of it, iv, 7. ° God’s 
appointed way to glory for 
man, xv. 17. 

Patriarchs, Jewish,ofthe West. xii.17. 

S. Paul, ruler and chief of the Church, 
vi. 15, with S. Peter laid Simon 
Magus dead, ib. Lhe former 
persecutor a witness of Christ, 
x. 17, why his Epistles most 
numerous x. 18, witness of the 
Resurrection, xiv. 21, descended 
from the third heaven that he 
might receive martyrdom, xiv. 
26, his labours in the Moly 
Ghost, xvili. 26-31, complete- 
ness and variety of his teaching 
concerning the Holy Ghost, 
XVil. 34. 

Paul of Samosata denied the eternity 
ef Christ's: Deity,’ x-5, note 8, 
Xi, 4,. note 9. 

Peace made by Christ first among 
His foes, xiii. 14, by His death, 
Nill. 33. 

Penitence of forty days before Bap- 
tism, Proc. 4, i. 5, gift of God, 
Proc. 9, preparatory to Baptism, 
hy. SpNSai ane ae co on 
declined by David after forgive- 

& 

” 

hes Vi CTE Ts ‘E LECTURE ko eae ©) 

ess, Ui. 12, cleansme 
Meri Vol sia Pea ea vine 

Penitents must not despair, il. 5. 

Pentecost, xvi. 4, 9. Spirit descended 
not fully till then, xvi. 26, xvil. 
12, 13. His desea tien. aye 
¥ 

Perfections of God, vi. 7, 8, of the 
Father and the Sons's. 16. 

Persecution, xii. 235 the Baptism of 
lade: ai 2, a a eT 
under Antichrist, the fiercest, 
yet short, xv. 16. 

Persia, converts there witnesses of 
Christ, x. 19, worship of Mithras, 
vi. 23, origin of Manichcism, 
vi. 24, wars with Rome, xv. 6. 

Person, distinction of, not implied 
in various names (Vv. oe? 

Personality of the Word, 
10, of the Hloly G Ghast, XVI. 
Vil. 2, hy Oy 29) 

S. Peter chief ruler of the Church, 
it; 49; 91 45, Stag, KV 27. 
Chief of the Apostles, il. 19, 
xvii. 27. His inspired con- 
fession of Christ, xi. 3, has the 
keys of Ifeaven to which Elias 
but; went, - xiv: (26, xvi. 927; 
speech at Pentecost, xvii. 19, 
supernatural knowledge, xvi. 17, 
his works in the Holy Ghost, 
xvii. 20, 27, an example of the 
power of repentance, ii. 19, and 
of. faith, Ww. 9 cw Se, Pak 
puni ishes Simon Magus, vi. 15. 

Pharaoh, Israel rescued from hin, 
as we from Satan, by water, 
iii. 4, emblem of Satan, xix. 
2%. 

Philip the Deacon, xvi. 14, xvii. 25. 

Phineas, his zeal, xiii. 2. 

Pheenix, analogy of it, a proof of the 
resurrection, xvili. 8. 

Physician, Christ, Physician of 
soul; il; 6, %. 4) 25,2. ¥, 

Place of Christ’s birth foretold, 
20, of His crucifixion, xii. 23, 
28, of his burial, xiii. 35, resur- 
rection, Xiv. 2, 5-11, 

Pomps of the Devil, xix. 6, note I. 

Pontius Pilate, his treatment of 
Christ, xi. 15, 16, reconciled 
through Ilim to Herod, xiil. 14, 
witness of Christ’s sinlessness, 
mab eee PRR for 

Possession by Devils — contrasted 
with Inspiration, xvi. 15. 

Potter’s field, xiii. 10, 11. 

Poverty of Chnstans: v.22, avi, 1.0; 
gift of the Iloly Ghost, xvi. 22 
taught by Christ, xiii. 5. 

Power, the Father is Power, vi. 0, 
Christ, God’s Power personally 
subsisting, iv. 7, of the God- 
head one; xvi. Bai 

Prayer, preparatory to Baptism, 
PioG. 06; i. 5, Avy 37) recorded, 
ee OS) ok Item, i 7, tor. all 
men in the Communion Service, 
xxiii, 8, of the Saints departed 
fOr - MS; XX. 9, for the dead, 
xxie tO. “JLord’s:- prayei sex- 
pounded, xxili. 11, Ke. 

of peni- 

Q 
Fe 

the 

xi 

8; Kis | 

S CY hal 

| 
| Preaching not to be attempted before 
Baptism, i. ee 
Preparation necessary for Baptism, 
Piwe. ( be roes dist a ON 
behave during it, Proc. 13, for 
| forty days, ib. 4, i. 5, complete 
abstraction from the world, 
Proce6, 12.16; 4:6. 
Fast of the Preparation, xviil. 
| 17. 
| Presumption may be indulged under 
secming reverence, xi. 12, Xvi. I. 
Priesthood of Christ eternal, x. 14, 
mi ty Lae os ih. (ye ee Pee, 
Christ, Anointing). 
Order of, xvii. 
fulfils it well 
marriage, Xl. 25. 
| Principles, not two, xi. 
ginning, Father). 
Promise, Spiri tt, see, 
Prophecy, gift of the Ioly Ghost, 
Vv. X, 12, xvi, 12, given in Bap- 
tism, xvii. 37, every thing con- 
cerning Christ the subject of it, 

a5, he aig 
abstains from 

T4 iy. Be- 

xiii. 8, 9, often enigmatical, 
Et. he 

Gives the signs of [lis coming, 
xli, 10-12 (v. Psalms, Scrip- 

dure, Testament), prophecies of 

the time of Ilis coming, xii. 

17-19, of Daniel, ib. the “place, 

xii. 20, whence ib. of His birth 

of a Virgin, xii. 21-23, of the 

Virgin’s race, xii. 23, 24,..0f the 
sufferings of the Christ, xii. 7, 
of Judas, ib. 9, of the thirty 
pieces of silver, ib, 10, and the 
potter’s field, ib. 11, of Chiisi’s 
judgement, ib, 12, 14, 16, of Ilis 
mockery, ib. 13, 15, 17, of the 
crown of thorns, ib. 17, anc 
nes of the Cross, xill. 19, of 

thé place, xiii, 23, 28, 32, and 
time of the Crucifixion, ib. 24, 
of the darkness, ib. 25, of 
Christ’s vesture, ib, 26, 27, of 
llis thirst, ib. 29, of the robbers, 
ib. 30, of the tomb, ib. 35, xiv. 
3s 11, of the Resurrection, xiv. 
2, 4; 8, t4, 17,-20, 21,168 a 
ib. we 8, and place, ib. 5, 0,0; 
13, of the signs following, ib. 7: 
of our Lord’s appearances, ib. 
11, 12,.0f Tis ascension, 1b. 24, 
and sitting at the Father's right 
Hand, 3b.:28, 20; .at the end ot 
the world, xv. 3, of Antichrist, 
ib: “oO; 13,.°><Chiists “Pro pheay 
concerning His second coming, 
KV. 3; 4; &¢. of Malachi cons 
cerning it, xv. 2. 

Prophets enlightened by the Uoly 
Ghost, xvi. 17, 18, Holy Ghost 
in them, 13525. Dit ait be 
xvil. 18, correspond to, but aie 
inferior to the Apostles, xvi. 4, 
24, xiv. 26, witness all things 
concemune. -Chiristsoe2) xis, 
9, 13, xiv. 19, nothing to be 
received without their testimony, 
Mila tG:, Ose Mlle NINE 2eeOUl 
faith rests on them, xiv. 21, 
xviii, 14, own the Father and 

the Son, vil. 2, teachers of the 

Faith in the Old Testament, vii. 

1G, at. 6-0, 26, owned 
Cineisevas adie sae 7, Os testi 
fictl of ilis Godhead, xi. 15,.16, 
of the name Jesus, but covertly, 
x, m2, loneed for Ghis“eonine, 
xil. 7, &c. testified of the Loly 
Ghost, xvi. 28, 29, 

Are ours as well as the Jews’, 

iii, 6, xiv. 16, removed from 
the Jews to the Church, xiii. 
29, slighted by the Jews; % 2 

Providence of God, (olovouta) in- 
stances of, Joseph, viii. 4, 
Petcr’s confession, xi. 3, Christ’s 
prophecy of Ilis coming, xv. 4, 
Thomas, xiii. 39. 

Province, émapxia, xvi. 22, note 3. 

Psalms, chanted in Divine Service, 
xili, 26, xxiii, 20, at night, ix. 7. 
Psalms prophetical of Christ 
cannot be applied to David or 
Solomon, vii, 2, xii, 23 (v. 
Lrophecy). 

Ptolemy, Philadelphus, iv. 34. 

Punishment of the wicked, after the 
Kesurrection, iv. 31, xvili. 19, 20. 

$ 
Cry 

Quick and dead to be judged by 
Christ, xv. 26. 

Race of Christ according to the 
flesh, xi. 5, foretold, xii 23. 
Rahab, instance of power of repent- 
ance, il. 9, type of the freeness 

of Gospel grace, x. II. 

Reatiwoe roc. = tase, 6. OF “the 
Scriptures recommended, iv. 37, 
Iss sD tne the: Church: 
mark of a. canonical book, iv. 
35, 36. 

Rebaptize, Heretics to be rebaptized, 
Froc.-% 

Red Sea typical of Baptism, iii. 5, 
tik. 2; 3, 

Rediditio Symbolt, Intr. p. xxi. 

Redemption of the world by the 
Cross, xiii, I, 4, wrought not 
by a mere man, but the Son 
of God, ib. 2, 33, by its Creator, 
Vb th 

Regeneration, avayévynots, of souls 
inthe Laver of Baptism through 
Faith, i. 2, iii. 4, in the case of 
Cornclius before Baptism, iii. 4, 
Death and Birth, xx. 4, in the 
Catholic Church, xviii. 26, 7a- 
Aryyevecia, Baptism so called, 
Hie, bos Laver Of, roe. In, 
RVI? Ca. BG kiN. LO: 

Religion consists of true doctrines 
and good works, iv. 2, founded 
on belief in one God, iv. 4, 6, 
false views of it leading to pre- 
SUINPHON 1, Sy ey ts awe 
requisite in speaking of its doc- 
trines, xvi. I, its worship indi- 
visible; xvi. 4, 

Remission of sins in Baptism, xx. 6, 
freely given to all who believe, 
Taj Lig 2s NV: 37, 

Renunciation of Satan and his works 
in Baptism, xix. 2-9, Zi/7. p. xxi. 

INDIES Ol SULT IC dS, 

Repentance, its efficacy 
Vy SU lly i iv 
beyond its power, ii. 
of, il, 7, &e. its temporal bene- 
TURP aie got exemplified in Ahab, 
ib. and Jeroboam, ib. 14, of the 
Laver, iv. 32, Baptism of, xix. 9, 
its fruits, mercy, and almsdecds, 
Wuinaeay 

Resurrection of Christ, iv. 12, answer 
to objectors from the cases of 
Elisha, iv. 12, xiv. 16, Jonah, 
ie baa SVs D7 ley ln, xiv: 
16, witnessed by the Old Scrip- 
RULCS) MV ey TS eT, All Its: Cie 
cumstances written in the Psalms 
and Prophets, xiv. 2, &c. (vide 
Prophecy), not discredited by 
the soldiers’ tale, xiv. 14, Rock 
of our faith, xiv. 7, 21, glorifies 
the Cross, xiii, 4, denied by the 
Manichees, xiv. 21. 

Its former witnesses, iv. 12 
(vide Church), the dead who 
rose with Ilim, xiv. 16, 18, 20, 
its present witnesses, xiv. 22, Kc. 

Baptism a representation of it, 
Ld Te BA 

Resurrection of the body; analogies 
for it in nature, iv. 30, xviii. 6, 
faith in it the principle of holi- 
ness, 1%, 30).xil..34, xVvill, Tj 20, 
prominence given to it by the 
Church, ib. and opposition of 
heresy, ib. objections to its pos- 
sibility, xvili, 2, answered by 
God’s power, ib. 3, justice, 
ibd, Mates. Instinct, 1b.+ 5; 
analogies of nature, ib. 6, 7, 
the Phoenix, ib. 8, man’s origin, 
ib. 9, God’s ordering of the 
heavenly bodies an intimation 
@f it, 1b, To; proved: -avainst 
Samaritans, ib. II-13, objec- 
tions from the Prophets an- 
swered, 6c. ib. 14, 15, its -fit- 
ness proved from the Old and 
New Testaments, 15-18, xviii, 
19, 

Revelation, Spirit of, xvii. 5. 

Reverence to parents, vii. 16, to 
God, taught by Tlis works, 
ix, 16, in the Church, Proc, 
13, 15, vi. 35, to the ancient 
Dishdps,y 1s 855, Rive: Sly in- re. 
ligious discourse, vi. 3, &c. 
xvi, I, seeming, may cloak 
Impretys sth “12,17, 

Reward given according to men’s 
laboursy 2. Give 24 02"., 

Riches, not as heretics thought, the 
devil’s but God’s, viii. 6, 7, 
evil only in their abuse, vii. 7, 
we may even be justified by 
them, viii. 6, belong to the 
faithful man, v. 2, viii. 6, who 
despises them, v. 2. 

Righteous, ‘the Righteous,” v. ro. 

Righteousness of Christ greater than 
our sin, xiii, 33, we gain right- 
eousness in Baptism, i. 4, Christ 
God’s Righteousness personally 
subsisting, iv. 7. 

Rock, riven for Christ the Rock, 

in putting 

23, NO Stil 

5, 1astances | 

| 

171 

XU, 34 Stl geen 10.40," tliat 
follower TeraGl, x) 2, 

Rod of Aaron, xii, 28, of Moses, ib. 
(vide ALoses). 

Ronians, conquest of Judea by them 
PRoot oF Christi xth m7 ioe ait 
pire succeeded by Antichrist, 
XV IT, Day Wars. willy Persia; 

NV. Gi 

Sabbaths, Jewish not to be ob- 
Served, bys: 3%) 

Sabaoth, a name of Cod, vi. By 

vill. 8, 

Sabcellius, v. iv. xi. 10, confounds 
the Holy Trinity, xvi. 4, con- 
futed by the very arrangement 
of the Creed, xvii. 34, his heresy 
and Arianism alike to be avoided, 
iv. 8, xi.13, note 8, 16, 17, 18, are 
marks of the falling away, xv. 9. 

erifice of Christ, x. 3, 5. Sacri- 
fice of the Eucharist, xxiii. 8, 9, 
Christ sacriliced offered in the 
Eucharist, xxiii. 10, Z7zr. p: 
Xxvili, 

Saints of the Old Testament delivered 
by Christ from Ilades, iv. 11, 
xiv. 19, rose with Him, xiv. 16, 
18, according to Prophecy, xiv. 
7. 

Salvation depends on the truth of 
Christ’s manhood, iv. 9, xiii. 37, 
one, xvi. 24, of the Laver, iv. 
37, XIx. 10, given to none with- 
out Baptism, iii. 10, to be de- 
spaired of by none, ii. 5 (vide 
Christ, Baptism, Alan). 

Samaritans, iv. 37, vi. 33, xviii. 3. 

Samuel, meaning of the name, 
Proc. 14, note 3. 

Sanctification of all things by the 

Da 

Holy Ghost, iv. 16, xvi. 3, of 
the Church, xvi. t4, 22, of 

Angels and Prophets, xvi. 23 
(vide Sfz7z/). 

Sarah, her bearing a son as hard as 
the Virgin’s, xii. 28. 

Sarmatians, xvi. 22. 

Satan, meaning of the word, ii. 4. 

Scripture, ils canon to be received 
from the Church, iv. 33, as read 
in the Church, iv. Oo: XY. 135 
and settled and handed down 
by Apostles and ancient Bishops, 
iv. 35, consists of Old and New 
Testaments, iv. 33 (vide Zesta- 
ment), number and names of 
its books, ib. 35, 36, history of 
the Septuagint version, iv. 34, 
note 5, mutilated by Marcion, 
xvi. 7, adulterated with forgeries 
by the Manichees, iv. 36, vi. 31, 
spoken by the Lloly Ghost, xi. 
hij ae 

Nothing to be received as of 

the Faith unless proved by it, 
iv. 17, its teaching embodied in 
ee Cree TM ats Vea cate «ULE 
grounded on it, xii. 16, 17, xiii. 
5, 9, xiv. 2, reveals all we know, 
or may speak of the generation 
of the Son, xi. 12, of the nature 
of the IHloly Ghost, xvi. 1, 2, 

24, we may not speak beyond | 

it; $5, variously interpreted, | 
e.g. iit, 16, vi. 20, 20, x, 15, 
xil. 19, XVii. Q-II, perveried 

by heretics, eg. iv. 19, Vie 17; 

Bo 2b, 20, Ti. O, 13; Be 

danger of alleging it wrongly 

should teach us reverence and 
fear, xvi. I, we know not all its 

meaning, ib, xi, 12. 

Its abundance, xv. 15, xvi. 

32, Xvil. I, 20, 34, Kc. witnesses 
every thing concerning Christ, 
xiii, $, 13. 

‘To be diligently searched, iv. 
37, ix. 7, xiil. 8 

Scythianus the Saracen, forerunner 
of Manes, vi. 22. 

Sea, witness of God’s glory, ix. II, 
of Christ’s coming, x. 19, pas- 
sion, Nill. 39, resurrection, xiv. 
17-20, 23. 

Seal, the Faith so called, iv. 17. 

Baptism, seal indissoluble, 
Proc. 16, marks us for Christ’s, 
i. 2, through water, iil. 4, Seal 
of Salvation, i. 3. 

Of the Iloly Ghost given in 
Baptism, iii. 3, 4, 12, iv. 16, v. 
G, SVL 24, xvii. 35, 35, xxi.’ 7. 

Of Circumcision, v. 5. 

Of the Cross, xiii. 36. 

Seasons, their order glorifies God, 
ix. 6, of the Resurrection, that 
of Creation, xiv. 10, foretold, 
xiv. 2, 10, 

Semiarians, v. note 3, to iv. 7, Lud. 
pp. Vi. vill. 

Septuagint version, its history, iv. 34, 
held inspired, ib. note. 

Sepulchre of Christ prophesied of, 
xiii. 35, xiv. 9, his witness, x. 
19, account of, xiv. 9. 

Serpent, the devil, watches candi- 
dates for Baptism, Proc. 16, 
apostate Serpent, iv. 37, brazen 
a type of the Crucifixion, xiii. 
20. 

Session of Christ at God’s right hand, 
xiv. 27, proved from Scripture, 
ib. 28, eternal, iv. 7, xiv. 27, 30. 

Sheep, Christ both Sheep and Shep- 
herd; x: 3,'5. 

Shew-bread, a type of the Eucharist, 
XXH. 5. 

Sick even yet healed by Christ, x. 
13, must not have recourse to 
amulets or sorcery, iv. 37, xix. 8. 

Side of Christ typically pierced, xiii. 
21, in respect of Baptism, iii. Io. 

Signs of Christ given by the Pro- 
phets, xiii. 10 (vide Prophecy), 
given to Ahaz explained, xii. 22, 
signs of Moses correspond to 
Christ’s acts, xiii. 20, 21, ofgthe 
Son of Man, the Cross, xiii. 41, 
of the Second Advent given by 
Christ Himself, xv. 4, &c., lying 
signs of Antichrist, xv. II-15, 
a. trial -of faith, xv. 17; of the 
Cross (vide Cross). God’s free 

__ but great gift, xiii. 36. 

Simon Magus, was baptized but not 

enlightened, -Proc, 2, avil. 35; 

CAT ECE 

ieee (irae onl she Occ ay 

father of all heresy, vi. 14. His 
blasphemices agains the lather 
and: Toly Ghost, ‘tb. vi. 0: 
Ilis fate, vi. 15, compared with 
Manes, xvi. 10. 

Sin, silment of the soul, ii, 1, man’s 
choice, not God’s syork, 1 4, 
not of necessity, iv. 18-21, not 
a thing external but from within, 
ii. 2, prompted not forced by the 
Devil who is its chief author, 
ii. 3, 4, iv. 21, death by sin, 
xiii. 2, makes us enemies to God, 
and slays us, xiii. 33, leagues us 
with Satan, xix. 9, marred God’s 
world, xii. 5, and ruined man, 
xii. 6, &c. all men bound by it, 
xii. “I; 2, dead: anit, nL “12, 
Christ came to destroy it, xii. 8, 
died for our sins and purged 
them, ii. 10, iii. 12, x11. I, 2, 4, 
6, 23, 33, being Ilimself sinless, 
li. 10, iii, 42, Xi. 3; 5, 235 Sm 
came by one man, died with one 
man, Xili. 2, 28, iil. 12. 

Fearful yet not incurable to 
the penitent, ii, 1-5, readiness 
of God to forgive the believing, 
ii. 6, efficacy of repentance, il. 
7, &c. Instances, ib. collective 
sin pardoned, ii. 10, obstinate 
sin alone not pardoned, iii. 8. 

Completely and freely remit- 
ted to all in Baptism by faith, 
Proc. $4125, ii. 1, ae, T5480 
22. xvil. 47, SVE. 20, ak. O, 
Baptism its remedy, iv. 32, re- 
mitted even in John’s Baptism, 
iii. 7, Baptism, a death to sin, 
Proc. 5, sin cleansed by Exor- 
cisms, Proc. 9, and the exorcised 
oil, xx. 3, by the power of the 
Holy Ghost, xvil. 15. 

Overcome by Faith, v. 4, 
steals on us, ii. 3, after Baptism 
recorded against the Judgment, 
ey. +23, its. Scais - prema, 
XViil. 20. 

Sin against the Holy Ghost, xvi. 1. 

Sion, its desolation revealed by the 
Spirit to Isaiah, xvi. 18. 

Sodom, Christ wrought with the 
Father in its destruction, x. 6. 

Soldiers, their tale about the sepul- 
chre presignified by Isaiah and 
Jonah, xiv. 14, 20, its vanity, 
xiv. 14. 

Solitaries, order of, iv. 24, xii. 33, 
xvi, 22, Christ their example, 
Sis 33. 

Solomon, instance of the efficacy of 
repentance, i, 13, 

Son, Christ the Son of God, with the 
Father and the Holy Ghost, 
Proc. 15 (vide 77cnzty). 

Implied in the mention of the 
Father, vii. 4, glorified and 
worshipped with Him, and the 
Holy “Ghost, si oe. 22th 
the Ifoly Ghost partaker of His 
Godhead, vi. 6 (vide Christ). 

In a singular sense, only- 
besotten, Vil. §.510,) aso ce, 
4; so called by the Mather, xi.2; 

he fae On ele Ge 

not adoption, vil. 

advancement, Xi. 4, 
P12 5. ee MOL after the 
manner of human generation, 
x: 4, 6; nor as Cinisuans are 
Goue sons, 1: Tay Meee. Sie, 
19, nor as mind begets thought, 
xi. 10, begotten not MACE; NT. 4 
TA, Kv 0s God, st. 13). Urconts 
prehensibly, iv. 7, xt. 4, 5, 11, 
as God only knoweth, xi. 11, 12, 
13, from eternity, iv. 7, Vil. 5; 
XL. A, 9). 13, 14, 17, 19,20, apart 
from time, xi. 5, 7, 14, spirit- 
ually, xi. 5, 7, without begin- 
Winey, A Pe, Tie: Bol, ewer 
was not, xi. $, 14, 17: 

Like in all things to the 
Father, iv; 7, xb ay 9, 19579, 
of the Father as His beginning, 
Ki “4,020; xii. 23, arantine 
nothing to the glory of the 
Godhead, “iv, %, ‘xie 3, was 
with the Father, x. 6-8. One 
with the Father, xi. 16, neither 
to be separated from nor con- 
founded with the Vather, iv. 7, 
<i,-16,° 97, -18,°20, Tick net per 
come the Father, xi. 13, abides 
for ever, not absorbed into the 
Father, xv. 27, 30, how subject 
to the Father, x. 9, xv. 30, not 
numbered among the servants 
of the Father, vili. 5, glorified 
with the Father, vi. 13. the 
Father’s Word, and Wisdom, 
and Power, and Righteousness, 
iv. 7, 8, Maker of all things at 
the Father’s will, xi. 22, Lord 
over them, ib. &c.; alone with 
the Holy Ghost, knows and 
sees the Father, vi. 6, vil. I1, xi. 
ra, 13; 

Makes known the Father, 
vii. 11, only way to the Father, 
Vil. BoM, I, By eeaTBaLe ho 
restore the Father’s worship, vi. 
II, xii. 15, and save the world, 
xii. 4, 5, Xc., Father seen only 
in: Elim,’ +6; 75h gs ee 
before born in Bethlehem, xi. 
20, became Son of Man, x. 4, 
Son of David, xi. 5, xii. 23. 

Sons of God, Christians by adoption, 
iil, 14, vii. 7, xi. 9, 19, by Water 
and the Spirit, ib. not of neces- 
sity, but of faith, vil. 13, works 
meet for them; vii. 14. 

Soul. free, ii. 1, iv. 18. God's fairest 
work, immortal by God's will, 
made in His image, ib. diseased 
and destroyed by its own sin, 
ii, 1, originally sinless, wilfully 
sinned, iv. 19, did not sin in 

by nature, 
MOS As Oe 

another state, ib. purified by 
penitence; alms, reading of 

Scripture, iv. 37, cleansed by 
exorcism, Proc. 9, sealed, 11. 
3, 4, baptized, xvil. 14, and 
brightened by the Holy Ghost, 
xvii. 16, its illumination by faith, 
y. 11, possession by devils, xvi. 
15, contrasted with the influence 
of the Ilely Ghost, xvi, 10. 

Soul of the world, viii. 2. 

Spaniards mi tle-Gliurclyy xvi. 22; 

Spectacles of the heathen to be 
shunned, iv. 37. 

Speculation taking the place of sober- 
ess Wi oe Cyril's tine, «yo, 
not to intrude beyond what is 
Writely sh IZ; Xulek, 23 

Spirit, the word variously used, xvi. 
13,15, yet with a distinguishing 
Lenin SVs 15. 

Iloly Spirit, various names, 

MyM 2. 9 4,. Vat one-orily,” iv. 

LO, SVE 72) -XVii. 2; 3, siichuded 

to Cee ly ss L vihitye. . <Win Al, 
wide 1% TO; Vi, 1,°6, XV1. 19, in 

the form of Baptism, xix. 9, xx. 4. 

a iiyiia: Person, iv. 1; xvi, 

3, 13, 14, xvii. 2, 5, 28, 29, 33, 

incomprehensible, xvi. I, 2, 

alone with the Son, beholds, 

and reveals the Father, vi. 6, 

vii. IJ, xi. 12, not numbered 

among the Father’s servants, 

vill. 5, partaker of the Father's 

Godhead, vi. 6, far above all 

creatures, xvi. 23, shares the 

Father’s glory, vi.1, and Christ’s, 

Xvi. 4, sanctifies and deifies all 

intelligent beings, iv. 16, xvi. 3, 

the Church, Xvi. 14, 22, xvii. 14, 

Angels, xvi. 23, xvii. 2, Pro- 

phets, xvi. 23. 
Tndivisible yet manifold in 
working, iv. 16, xvi. 12, xvii. 2, 

PB. 

IIe was in the Law and the 
Prophets, iv. 16, dictated the 
MOP Nese Pe. Oe Bot, chal, 
XVI. Ty 23 35) 4, 24, Same Spit 
witnessed of Christ in the Old 
Testament, manifested Him in 
thesNew; xvi. 3, 10; 24, spake 
by the Prophets, iv. 16, was in 
the Old Testament Saints, xvi. 
26-28, on the seventy Elders, 
xvi. 25, 26, illuminated the Pro- 
phets, xvi. 17, 18, witnessed of 
by them, xvi. 28, 29, given par- 
tially before Pentecost, xvi. 26, 
MVile tay bay Lo. 

Descended visibly on our 
EAU: Mite Bais WOM, BVI Oy NKR T 
‘The Comforter, xvi. 20, xvii. 4, 
given partially to the Apostles 
before the Ascension, xvii. 12, 
fully at Pentecost, xvi. 26, xvii. 
£24) EMS Dapusin, xvi: Ta. ES, 
given to us in Baptism, ili. 5, 8, 
14,16 (wade note),-1v...16, xxv 6, 
proportionably to each man’s 
faith) ies, Hie ly 2, more, than 
the remission of sins, iii. 7, 15, 
NIE 375 UimiMAtEs, “Pre, 2, 
seals the souls in Baptism, iil. 4, 
IV. PO, XVI 25.5 36)” perrects 
Baptism, yet requires water, iii, 
4. 10, not given to hypocrites, 
BLOC. 2, Ay Mi Tyee ye OOns 
veyed symbolically in the Chrism 
after the Washing, xxi. I-5, ob- 
literates sin and brightens the 
SOUl, XVIle: L5,> trains ante com= 
forts the Martyrs, xvi. 12, 20, 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

Oty cives all oraces, eva 12, llts 
inspiration, xvi. 16, and illumi- 
nation, ib., gives power over 
the flesh, world, and the Devil, 
xVl. 19, gives grace to all who 
believe, xvi. 22, sanctifies anne 
changes the Bread and Wine, 
MEL, 75 LO: 

Teaching concerning Him in 
the New Testament, xvii. 1, of 
our Lord, xvii. rr, in the Epistles 
of St. Paul, xvii. 33. 

His teaching one with Christ’s, 
xvi. 14, His operations by the 
will of the Father recorded in 
the Acts, xvii. 21, 31, with the 
Father and the Son has estab- 
lished the New Covenant in the 
Church, xvii. 29. 

Danger of speaking amiss 
concemming hin xVvis'*.1, 2; 6; 
blasphemies against him of the 
Gnostics, xvi. 6, 7, Manes, vi. 
25, xvi. 04.9, Marcion, xvi. 9; 
Montanus, xvi. 8, Sabellius, xvi. 
4, xvil. 34, Simon Magus, vi. 
14, Valentinus, xvi. 6. 

Stars have no influence, iv. 18, not 
to be heeded by Christians, iv. 
37, ix. 8, glorify God, ix. 5, 6, 
their uses to man, ix. 8, shall 
perchance have a resurrection, 
RV. 3 

Stephen, xvii. 3, 4. 

Stone of the Sepulchre, xiii, 39, 
xiv. 22. 

“*Stone cut out without hands,” xii. 
18, xv. 23. 

Strangled things forbidden, iv. 28. 

Subjection of the Son to the Father, 
X: 9, XV. 30. 

Susannah, xvi. 31. 

Table, spiritual Table of the Lord, 
Pelipe VICE DOr 

Taverns to be shunned by Christ- 
1anS, 1V. 37: 

Temple of Jerusalem, vii. 6, to be 
rebuilt by Antichrist, xv. 15, 
failure of Julian’s attempt to re- 
build it, declared by S. Cyril, 
Lite: Be UX 

Temptation, reason of our Lord, iii. 
13). 3X1... 45 Ineaning of ** Lead 
us not into temptation,” xxiii. 
17. 

Terebinthus, successor of Scythia- 
nus, and forerunner of Manes, 
Vix 23h 

Testaments, the two Testaments 
make up the Scripture, iv. 33, 
impiously separated by heretics, 
vii. 5, xvi. 4, Christ the object 
of Prophecy in the Old, of His- 
tory in the New, xvi. 3, same 
Spirit in both (vide S/z7i2), iv. 
TO, Svea. Of xviie'S oth. ane 
nounce the gift of Baptism, iii. 
16, harmony of their doctrine, 
TAs 

Old Testament necessary as a 

witness to Christ, xvi. 7, God of 

it the Father of Christ, vii. 5 

(vide Prophecy).—Christ, xvi. 11, 

| 

173 
and Ilis Apostles refer us to it, 
xiv. 2, blasphemed by heretics, 
Iie 33; ies Ne. Vie 7, bers 
of it erased by Marcion from 
the News Wie iG, Seek Fe ils Wee 
ness to: the Spirit, xvi 25-32, to 
the Resurrection of the Body, 
Xvlil. 10, &c., History of its 
translation into Greek, iv. 34. 

Old ‘Testament or Covenant 
ended, New began in the Bap- 
tism of John, iii. 6, Old abol- 
ished, New established in the 
Catholic Church by the Iloly 
Trinity, xvil. 29. 

Thief on the cross first-fruits of 
Christ’s death, and first to enter 
Paradise, xiii. 30, 31, saved by 
faith, without works, ib. v. 10, 
witness of Christ’s sinlessness, 
Dab ae 

Thirty pieces of silver, prophecy of 
them, xiii. 10, thirty AZons of 
Valentinus, his argument for the 
number, vi. 17. 

Thomas doubted for our sakes 

through God’s providence, xiii. 

39- 

Thomas the disciple of Manes, his 
forged Gospel, iv. 36, vi. 31. 
Thorns, crown of, cancelled Adam’s 
curse of thorns, xiii. 17, 18. 
Throne of Christ eternal, not by ad- 
Vancement.. 1% Ff. e ae, ee 
had it before His suffering, ib, 
at the Father’s right hand, xiv. 
27, 30, not to be curiously dis- 
puted of, ib. has no end, xv. 27, 

—of David, xii. 23. 

Till (vide Univ). 

Time has no place as regards God 
anc ‘Christ, tv 45) as. ee, or 
Christ’s coming, &c., prophesied 
of (vide Prophecy), of Christ’s 
second coming unknown, and 
not to be curiously examined 
into, xv. 4. 

‘*Time’’ means a year in the 
Prophets, xv. 16. 

“To-day,” meaning of, in Ps. r1o, 
xi. §, timeless and eternal, ib., 
in the Lord’s Prayer, xxiii. 15. 

Tongues, fiery tongues, xvii. 15, gift 
of Pentecost, xvii. 16, instead of 
the confusion of Babel, xvii. 17, 
a Sign foretold of Christ’s Re- 
surrection, xiv. 7. 

Tradition of the Creed, v. 12, 13, 
Intr. Pp. XXi. 

Tradition of interpretations, xiii, 21, 
SV Ts, 

Transfiguration of the Lord, xii. 16, a 
glimpse of His awful glory, x. 7. 

Tree of the Cross corresponds to the 
‘Tree of knowledge, xili. 19, 
planted in the earth, to bless it, 
and release the dead, xiii. 26. 

Trinity, iv. 16, xvii. 34, doctrine of, 
acknowledged in Baptism, xvi. 4, 
19, xx. 4, profession of Faith in, 
xix. 9, not to be revealed ‘to 
Catechumens or Gentiles, vi. 29, 
Heretics divide or conluse it, 
xvi. 4 (vide Arius, Sabcliius), 

174. 

not Tritheism, ib., not a matter 
for curious speculation, xvi. 24. 

Holy Trinity present in Bap- 
tism, Proc. 15, have estab] ( 
the New Covenant in the Chureh, 
xvii. 20, Adoption given us by 
the Father’s grace, through the 
Son and Holy Ghost, vil. 7, the 
Son with the Toly Ghost, sces 
the Father, vi. 6, vil, 11, with 

and through the Holy Ghost | 

reveals Ifim, vi. 6, all things 
serve the Father save the Son 
and Spirit, vill, 5, the Iather 
through the Son, with the Holy 
Ghost, bestows all things, xvi. 
24, the saving Dispensation to 
usward from the lather, Son, 
and oly Ghost, xvii. 5, Father 
spake by the Holy Ghost, xvii. 
38, the Father through the Son 
in the Holy Ghost gives all 
thines, xviil. 29, Glory to be 
ascribed indivisibly to Father 

and Son with the IToly Ghost, | 
of the | 

the power 

by the will of 

i ee Ceih « 
Holy Ghost, 

Father and Son,” xvii. 21, v. | 

eyli. Bx. 
Tritheism, xvi. 4, note 5, xi. 4, note 3. 
Truth counterfeited by Satan, that 
it may be disbelieved, xv. 11, 
grace necessary lest it be re- 
ceived falsely, xvi. 2, Hatred of 
it cause of error, xv. 17. 
LYS” Att PD. REFIK. | RI. 
Types, their wonderful truth, xiii. 
19, instances, ib. 17-23, differ- 
ent persons, types of different 
offices in the One Antitype; 
e.g. Joshua and Aaron of Jesus 
Christ, x. 1%, joshua how a 
type, ib. type of Moses’ rod 
(vide Afoses) ; of Aaron, xii. 28, 
types of Baptism, iii. 5, xix, 
£; 4. 

Jonah, xiv. 17-20. 

John the Baptist a type of the 
ascetic life, ili. 6, the dove, 
XVI. G, 10. 

Typical exposition of Eccles. 
12; 1-6, xv, 20, 

Unbeginning (&vapyos), said of the 
DON, Xs a (adte’ 3), 5. 13; 

Unbegotten, said of God, iv. 4, vi. 7, 
> 

Unbelief, mars the power of Bap- 
tism, Proc. 2 (vide /a7/h), only 
reason why men are not en. 
lightened by the Holy Ghost, 
SVL 22; 

Unity of God (vide Go). 

Untamed; the Creed. a help t 
them, v.12: 

Unoriginate (dpxn avapyos), said of 
the Father only, iv. 4 (note 3). 

“Una: Uinta,” lees aot® lint, 
KV. 20; 21, note 7, 32 (vide 
Tooker, F..P.V. 48, § 2). 

Usury forbidden, iv. 37. 

CATECHE CAL (hCG Tui is 4s 

Valentinus, vi. 17-19, argues from 
the number of our Saviour’s 
years that there are-thinty ons, 
ib, his blasphemies against the 
IToly Ghost, xvi. 6. 

' Veil of Christ’s flesh, xiii, 32. 

| Veiling of the face in Exorcisms, 

| Prog, 26; 27, ie sae 

|. ** Very God,” Christ besotten, i: -6. 

oo Oe” ge baie 

| Vesture of Christ parted, a sign fore- 

| told, ai. 26. 

Vine of fudah, xiii. 29, Christ the true 
Vine, xy. 8, xvi TI savin, PO; ath 
which we have communion in 
Baptism, 1. 4, the ILloly Spirit so 
called, xvii. 18. 

| Virgin, meaning of the word in Is. 

Vil. 14, gainsaid by the Jews, xii. 

21, prophecy that Christ should 

be born of one, xii. 2, objec- 

tions, xii. 4, not harder than 
things believed by Jews and 

Pagans, xii, 27-30, God born 

of a Virgin, xii. 1, x. 19, to do 

honour to purity, xii. 25, to re- 
pair the loss of the virgin Eve, 

xl, 15, 29 (vide Afary the Vir- 

gin). 

Christ makes souls virgins, xii. 
31, Order of Virgins, dvi. 24, 
xil.. 33, xvi. 22, have their part 

with Mary, xii. 34, must not 
despise married persons, iv. 25. 

Parable of the ten virgins, 
XV, 20; 

Virginity, its excellence, and glory, 
xli. 33, XV. 23, an angel life on 
earth, iv. 24, vi. 35, xii. 34, gift 
of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 19. 

Wars, signs of Christ’s coming, xv. 6. 

Washing of hands before the Com- 
munion, xxiil. I. 

Watchfulness against first approaches 
of sin, ii. 3, against deceivers 
and Antichrist, xv. 4, 18, for 
Christ’s coming, xv. 4. 

Watching, preparatory to Baptism, 
MV. 27s 

Water, one in nature and manifold 
in operation, shews forth God’s 
glory,’ 1X..°Q, 16, “and i¢--a ait 
emblem of the Holy Ghost, xvi. 
IJ, 12, principle of plants, things 
flying and creeping, ix. 10, 
heavens are of water, ili. 5, ix. 

5, why chosen as the instrument 

of Baptism, iii. 5, its uses in the 

Old covenant, ib. means of 

rescue to Israel, ib. xix. 3, sanc- 

tified by Christ’s Baptism and 
minacles, dtp", ie, 

Waters of Baptism gain a 
sauctifying power by the invo- 
cation of the Holy Ghost, iii. 3, 
though despised by the world, 
Proc. 16, Water and the Spirit 
answer to Man’s double nature, 
iii, 4, vide iil, 16, inseparable, 

rome! Oe ial 

iii. 4, Waters of Baptism have 
Christ in them, Xpioropdga, 
Pro, 155"? thie crane “ac tive 
mother ” of the Baptized, xx. 4. 

Water and blood from Christ’s 
side, its symbolical meaning, 
Mit. OTs 

Waters of Life avi. 1, 

War Crist dae Woe, 30 3, 

West, the region of darkness, xix. 4, 
symbolical meaning of facing it, 
when renouncing Satan, ib. 

White raiment, v. xxii. 8, 

Widowhood, 1%, 26... 10. xv. 23, 

Wife, meaning of the word in Matt. 
ety Se SL, 

Will, (9éAnua, vetua,) of Gol the 
Iather, Christ made all things 
Dy Tk, Rs Sy Oy eG. he ee 
RviL 2i, 3%; 

Wine, new, the grace of the Ifoly 
Ghost, xvii. 18, water turned 
into it, compared with the Lu- 
charist, xxii. 2, Spiritual Wine, 
xxii. 8, becomes Christ’s blood, 
xxii. 1-6, xxil. 7. 

Wisdom, Christ God’s Wisdom per- 
sonally subsisting, iv. 7. 

Witchcraft, forbidden, iv. 37. 

Witnesses to Christ, x. 17-20, of 
the Crucifixion, xii. 38, of the 
Resurrection, xiv. 22, to be 
sought for in the Prophets, xiii. 
ae qo nay pe 

Woman, life, as death, through a 
woman, xii. 15, 29, piercing of 
Christ’s side has reference to 
woman, xiii, 21, conduct of the 
women who sought Christ, xiv. 
12-14. 

Works, good works and true doc- 
trines make up religion, iv. 2, 
without Baptism of no avail, iii. 
4, after Baptism, our works re- 
corded against the Judgment, 
ek 295 SV. 20," ids aoe 
good works must follow Bap- 
tism, xvii. 37, 38, Vil. 14, a pre- 
paration for Judgment, xv. 25, 
oa; 

Of Satan, xix. 5. 

Word, Christ the Personal Word of 
God, iv. 8, xi. 10, Tlimself God, 
xi, 3, 16, in all reasonable crea- 
tures, iv. 8, not like human 
words conceived in the mind or 
spoken, iv. 8, xi. 10, 77/7, p. xix. 

World, the work of God, iv. 4, made 
by the evil God according to the 
Manichces, vi. 13, made by the 
Son, AL 21 22,40r Mai, ans, 
mirrors forth God’s glory, ix. 2, 
&c. its lessons, ix. 16, marred by 
man’s sin, xv. 3, shall perhaps 
be renewed at the last day, ib. 
“* God of this world,” vi. 28, 29. 

Soul of the world, viii. 2. 

Xanthicus, the month, season of the 
Creation, Passover, Resurrec- 
tion, xiv. 10. 

aBrevla, 

eyann, xvil. 1* 

INDEX OF GREEK WORDS, 

An asterisk marks a reference to a note : for other passages refer to the Greck Text. 

LECT. AND Cll. 
LV I 
ESV. 32" 

’ 
ayevntos, aPELVNTOS, 

, 
ayiwovvn”, 
FKLOTPEVO, 
ayvwnosvri, 
aywvidw, 
3 ; 
ayavobeTns, 
aeApibd, 
adEAPOKTULOS, 
apey: 
adiadoxos, 
a> / 
addpOwtos, 
ane 
GSSKLUOS, 
GSUTOTNTIS, 
ANTTHTOS, 
GLOLOS, 

/ 
aiuoBopos, 

/ 
aicOnrnpia, 

x. 13° 
tis 37 
Pre. 5 
Vil, 2; 12 
Sle 23 
xviii. 4 
ss a oy Gad 
ie Fe 
xvii. 4 
Proc. 7 
<uite £7" 
ill. 7 
Pree. 10 
<4 

ce Oy 
ty AP 

eae 
aic@yrds, X. 13* 3 Xill. 335 
x0: TT» Mik. 25 RNG 

aicavOopdpos, Ts 4. 
AKATAYVUTTOS, v7 
GaKATAAUTOS, Proc. 16 
&icatdpOwrtos, xVil. 36 
axarovouactos, Xvi. 22* 
dccpis, akaplaos, Vi. 2 
UKUWY, ae Ta 
AKpApy Hs, Vil. II 
&epiros, L70c. 35 WT 
xviii. I 

akpdacts, XVi. 32 
aKpospuor, vi. § 
apobryas, iv. 17 
aKpodivea, XVil. 24 
AK POTOMOS, xiii. 29 
akTNUoovn, xiii. 53 
xvi 22 

kethuwy, iil. 65 xvi. 10* 
arelpa, xv. II 
GAnOWOS, xi. 9* 
aALTY Ew, xxii. 7* 
auaprupos, XV1. 7 
auB\uwrey Wis. 20 
Aun, Sell. 25" 
durnoucarlay, pa 41 an 
auynotia, 17 FA 
ava Bsols, xIv..24* 
avai, iv. 20 
avayevvnots, P06, 16 : 
vii. 9 

AVAyEVV@Ual, Lisa. 
avayivarkay, L¥.. 334 
a gin rear ee US, 

avayvwopa, iV. 13; xX. 10; 
Kiy.24" 

AVAYVWOLS, Titles 
avaypantos, il. 9 

LECT. AND CH, 

GiradiSduevos, 50.84 es aa 
Sx. TS” 

| dvaOuulacis, iv. 22 
avurynri boa 
GvadrrAolwToSy Lvs 4 
avardyas, 1b A 
avarverbat, XVi 275 30 
dvauapTyoic, xiii. 3 
dvamapTytos, i 19 
avamwAews Wil. 2 
dramoAdynros, VIS 
uvapros, Rares) eh 
Hote. 5 4 e120 

GVapYes, Cay Di 
avatpexw Ly di 
avapalperos, in 9 
avadurdu, Proce. 9 
avaWuyn, Sn 17 
aver diyyntos, LViees 
vii. II 

aveAAtT hs, iW Y 
AVEUTOOLTTOS, iv; 22 
aveveolacvos, xxii. 6 
aveecremTTOS, P¥ots TF 
avetinakta, vill. 4 
aveétyviactus, viii. 8 
AVETOS, Proc. 4 
aviiKO0S, xiil. 25 
aviAdatos, iv I 
avbéutov, xv, 20° 
avOpwroBipas, eS 
avOpwroTns, iv. 9 
volKelos, iv. 30 
AUTLYEVYIT al, Vik. £67 
GyTIANMTLUKOS, iv. 12 
avTimimos, vi. IO 
avr imapadi dwt, ix, 6 
avtippyots, XU 7s 9 
Gyriaunds, 3%..67 3 x51" 4 
Mclil, BO™ 

avumevbuvus, Kitt, 2 
avuTdKp.Tos, li. 2 
avuTOoTaros, iv, SO": 
Sy ay See 

atlwua, xvii. 13* 
amayyéAAw, V. 123 xv. 2” 
aradavatiCw iv. 18 
arades, Vis.O" 
amadAoTtpivw, lv. O° 
amavOiCouat, xvii. 20 
amakaTAas, iv. 14 
GraparAAaKTos, Stele 
amapeutodiotws, xXVil. 14 
amapriCopat, xxiii. 8 
amelpattos, Bo. Fa Ye 
amreATiCw, tshO 
aTEplopLaTos, i. 3 
amosew, lick 

LECT. AND CH, 
amodivalva, mits LY 
arosoKinace, lv. 26 
amoOnpioda Out, 11.18 
amorar€w, aren D | 
aroxpiOnvat, xe 19% 
amdxpupe, Wa95y-35 4 

xv. 16* 
amovnri, ax, 5 
émokevotcbar, v3 
amogew, Pig cae 
amdmetoa, iv. 34 
aroppetoas, Vil. 5 
aroppnyvuse, SKlity 24 
amooracla, SiG” 
amooTariys, iv. 3 
aTorppary ic La, ll. 4 
amoorxowiCe, Viv 23's 
Vis 
OToTaToTOuaL, xi. 2 
arortelva, Mie 5, 22 
amdToTos, Xiv. 15 
arotpdmaos, RIM, 3 
amotuyx ave, vi. 8 
ardpacts, Rid 7s 
xxii. 6 
ampoaipeTws, iv... 34 
aTTWTOS, 5 
apyupéevsuTos, xlv. 14 
apdela, Lite 
apudd.os, 0a) Oa 
appayns, xiii. 38 
apx7, xi, 14, 20 
UPXEKAKOS, ime 
APXLATPLIKOS, li. 6 
acayns, xi 16" 
aonnats, ie ee AVES Te 
xxiil. 19 
aomaCouat, Sao" 
&ortatos, vig 
a&otponaoyla, iv. 373; ix. 8 
aovyKpiTos, ili. 6 
douuparis, age} 
adgxyardw, im. 
adgtxXnuove, vili. 4 
atidacos, sie 0 
auTpenTOos, ived> 
a’tetovows, ii, 13 iv. 18; 
Vii. 13 
abtodetel, Sa 
avtompoalpertos, ai 
AUTOTPOAIPETWS, xtieoe 
AVTOTPOTMTWS, Ve 
apereia, vil. 7 
aperrns, 1 2 
aX pavToS, X20) 
ax pl, XV. a 
&NXpovos, xi. 14 
axtpwrv Sata, Vie ge 

LECT. AND CH. 

BactaAetov POE; I 
Buodayas, Xill. 6, Ee 
Bouds, 3 
yenroveiclat, Hite ty 
yéveo0at, mph Tod 
yevecOa Hy, Sy 120 
yevetioupyos, 1X, 2 

yevects, Pe ES te BS 
yewpyos (al. yopyds), ix. 13 

P 
a 
5 
ae ae 

yipas, li, 
Sacrurodenctery, xviii. 8* 
Sapirgs, Loc. 3; iil. 2; 
Vin LO 
Secmortikds, xxii. 6 
deuTepevy, Vil. 4 
diaiwvicw, ; iv. 31 
SiarcorvuBaw, ata? 
did«piots, ix > 
Sianpiticss, NG ha 2 
biadrAaoow, xiii. 14* 
dudwrupos, Ih th gep vs et 
Siacvpy, iv. 12 
diadépa, Xxint. 16° 
Sidarkadetor, iv. I 

dicaiws (var. lect.), vi. 29* 
Soymartiucdy, ¥; 10 

ddKqots, LY} Why Daas 

xiii. 4, 37 
SoximacTikds, Da Pa? eg 
ddxtuos Tpamelitys, vi. 36% 
dofoAovia, Vik” 
dopupopera bat, iv. 15 
dpaé, Wir 5s XVI B 
duvawes, XV. 20 
dvoxpnortos, Bill. 12 
Suréyuuos, Vie F2 
Suvowréw, 1 a 
Swpnuatos, SLs 37 

éauT@ (pleonastic), 

pa al 
eyypapos, il. 9 
eyratamaifer@at, viii. 4* 

eyKoAmiComat, V. 123 Vi. 3 
eyxpitos (exupitos), xX. 11* 
eyupdrem, X. 193 xv. 23* 
eyxepiCa, Vile 7" 
eyxwpet, Proc. 5 ef passin. 

ences | IV TO, pee 
elALKPLVaS, NASD OD: 
eiuapuern, iv. 5 
> / s 

eloaywyi), Lv. 6 
eloaywylkos iv. 32 

2 

exdecuerv (var. lect:), ii, 3 
exkAnala; MV 24 5 25 
exkKAnTiAco, XVllL. 24 

a 
Bie, 
LECT. AND CH. 
> ao 5 a 
EKMKANTLACGO MEL, 2 li i 
; eset dt 
EKEANTLATT COS, Pree, 2 

4 134 Suk TO” 

erAauPLra, x 2 
exAcira, 1k 5 
eKALUTALO, iv. TO 
CxTEDNAUTUEDOS, xix. 6 
ext pay arts ab ape 
Zreyyos (ee homiite) uo I 
CuBCAwWUE, xii. 19* 
CUTEIpa, xNill. 17% 
CUTLTTEVO, Vi, 26 
€uTAATTpOS, rors as 
1 15 
éudacis, xix," 
e€udopetaOct, ill. 6 
€udpores, vil. 16 
euducacbat, Lroe. 9 
evaBpirouct, xili. 41 
evayKadtCount, xi. 32 
evavIPOnTTs, iv. 9 
evarlpwrei”, =a te 
EvavTloAoyety, vi 
evarer iow, Vi. 4 
evdii0eros, iv, 8 
evSialryua, iil. 53 vi. S* 
évdokos, xiv. 3 
evdoors, i. 8 
évépyera, iv. G3 Vil. 7” 5 
kivs 17” 
evepyntinds, V. TO; Xxi. 3% 
évoapxos, ill, II 3 xil. 15, 
323. S1¥..:27,. 30° 
(yTEXVOS, iv, 22 
€vuTOTTGTOS, hae alee 
“, 30°3 xv. 5 
ef od bvrer, XV. 9 
éfaiuatovo dat, 2% 
éfaipetas Se, xiv. 24* 
eZaiowos, lis 13 3 vii. 8 
efeTaCouevory = dag 
eihynats, xiii. 9 
eintnris, xvi. 6 
ekiXeota Pct, iv. 34 
éEouotorvgbct, iv. I 
efouo\aynols, 154 

xviii. 14 
efopriruds, Lnirod. p. 5 

étouria, xh 22 
exayyedio, V. 123 xvi. 19 
emary7/EARG, Av 27 
éray wriComaty xvi. 9 
ET AVUYKES, Hi. 4: 
erakiws, li. 19 
em dobar, iv. 37 
> , 
ETEXELY, Proc. 4 
emvyaula, iii. I 
emiypaped bat, Sigil, aoe 
emiSayirevetoat, vi. 10 
emidecuata, Vs 39 
emTiKANTLS, iv. 12 
émiveuer Oat, v. 8 
emivevo, okies | 
€RLOVTLOS, ete 
emionuelouuat, iv; 
"7 , a % : 
éxiotHun, Proc. 4* 5 vi. 353 
pate tke 
emioToAn, SE, BO" 
> t oe 
emitndes, ii. 8 
emipultncis, oe pale Sage be 
XXill. 19 
, : 
emipvadrls, xiv. 6 
ETLXPOVVUL, iv. 36 

XViii. 

tacts, 

pars 

iiéa, 

rot, 

riage 
iSiaCovTas, 
iSiwrela, 
lepeus, 

e t 
LAAT NPLOVs 
ioBdAos, 
inmnratciry 
igxas, 

2 

immevos, 
KabiCw, 

, 
KabLKETEVH, 
KQKEVT PEXELO 

KGAaKoS (ypapikds), 

iis ATE CHET CECT 

LECT. AaSD CH, 
eropKiguds, Prt: @;, 14 
epevynges, ee coke 
Epunverto, Lh 
evayyeAta, Vc lalgs 4 

ars a 
evapeoTnrt’y ve TO” 
evyAwttic, ivi 
EV VMOMIVOS, ¥v. 9 
EVYVWMOTU }, ie TA 
elAnverv, Kies 2h” 
evOumepety, iil. 2 
edAoyia, xii, 6" 
EVIEPPNTUGTWS, xv, 33 
evrcions, xi Os a. 30 
eiperiAoyer’, iv. 17, 343 

xlii. 19 
etpemiroyta, iv, 397 ,,°S4. 
evoe Beta, xvl. 4 
eioTavera, xxiii. 8* 
EUTXNMOVER, frac. 3 
€pusioy, VW. 323 XV, At" 
éws (cs), xivs 25" 
Edo popos Wi. 2 t x5" 
| Cetyos, xii. ga, 
Ciyor, Lyr0e. 13 
Cworrutss, pa en 
Cwav (Cdwr), xii. 20* 
NYEMOVLK OS, xvii. 5* 
"HAE eros, oar ag 
jv bre ok Hv, xi. 7*, 17* 
Oamdy, x11, 20" 
dadratTevw, Wins 
Odpoet (var. lect.), xiii. 31° 
Oauuaroupyety Pgh ey hg 
OcaTponavia, xix, O° 
Oeikas, eS 
déAnua, > ie 
Oeoyvwaota, xiii. 40 
dendidaKxTos, xxiii. 18 
deodoyia, xxiii. .6* 
OeoAdyes, pA ae: 
OedmvevaTos, iv. 33 
Ocorareta at, od Oa ad 
Oeorotds, iv. 16 
OedTNS, > 4 Al alee <P a 
OcoTdKus, eg 
GepaneuTifs, Riv, 12" 
Oéoet, xi 7 
Oerés, 
Oumiathpioy, tee 3 
Ovotact pio, Mi. 35% 

205 Nii 

x4 
Eee te 
xivey 
Xvi. 13 
chs 
poe, 
1 TY 
ive 
a 
Mi; 39 
ms 2 

i 
Des ela 5 
Vil 7 

rs 

LEC De guide onus 
KOAAWT LTS, i 2D 
KaUdpa, i. 5 
KAaWLVOS, su. 6 
KAVOVLKOS, PU A” 
Kam nOOUTELY, iy, 34 
KATTAPLS, ar. 20" 
KATAAANAOS, ii. 14 
KaTavUcow, 42 
KaTaglovser ot, 0 
KATAMOVTOULELOS, ma Ba! 
KatapTiCa, vil. 2 
KATATKEUN, iv. 17, 343 
xiv. 26 
KATATTACLS, Vi. 5 
KATATTNMA, Proc. 4 
Kataotpe, iv. 23 Xi. 17 
KaTaxOovios, Wo it, 12 
vi. 15 
KoaTaxpnsTiK@s, Vil. 5” 5 
> ae ay 
KaTAXNTLS Titles; xv, 18* 
KaTOmTEvElV, ¥, 1% 
katomrpiver bat, xvi. 16 
KADOTLS, 1x; TOF 
KEPAVYWTES, vi. 10 
Kndeuovila, vii. 9 
KLUNTLS, it. 14" 
KAELdodXOS, xvii, 27, 
KAndoVICLOS, pe bemes) 
KAnday, iv. 37 
Kora bat, ie" 
KOLTACU MEL, iv. 14 
Kopupatos, x45” 
Kvopopelr, ill. 6 
KUTT OY, xl; 22" 
KUPLOKTOVOS, x, Te 
KUTOS, 5b fae 
ie@uvoplov xvi. 8 
Aaumndiov, a¥..15 
Aaxuds, til, 20° 
netis, +. 12? Feet or” 
AcovTwd7s, nt bep er 
AevxeLsovery, Fryer. 23 
xxii. § 
Alla@ooa, 
Autos, xe. to 
xh 2 
Aoyikds, 1%: Seta 
xvi, 2 
Adytov, IY: 37 
Ao1uwdn sy iv. I 
MALT TO Mer, Riv oaan 
uaptipioy, xiv. 6 
MapTupely, <M. 21% 
far avodoryeiy, repr 
éAn, ix/-IR = Rhy 26 
beaéuBodos, xlil. 2 
meTaueAela, ii. 18 
eTougia, XXlil. II 
expt, RViex OT 
pacdedos, viii. 4 
fucavOpwirosy iii. 6 
MiodxXpiaTos, is Ta 
Levnortevouet, RAS 
povdfovres iv. 24 
povapxia, iv. 6*; vi. 1*, 36; 
Mi hy 2 fae 
povoyerns, ups (Ola 
xviii, 8* 
povoedis, vi. 7*, xvi. 12 
Movomaxely, xix. 6 

oe a, aa ue 

LECT, AND CH. 
pivotos, xviil. 7* 
hugTuy wyla, 
vénarvs, 5 hay 7 
vekvomavTela, iv. 57 
pia, x 5" > ERE 25 oe, 
vevpov, aloe 
veupow, D ys) ae fet ees 
Pog UES | 
VNtGALDS, yea 
vibacbat, Xxiil 
vOnua, yi. 2Q° 
vontos, Proc. 1*; i. 4” 
(Ri igs Gagkeses hes ay fue 5 38 6 
<u See Rist 
vlaki Ca, ix. O° 
oikecos, rei ae 
| olKovomety, xiv. 247 
oikovoula, Vill. ee xX. 1S; 
BI, 3O4 NIN, TP ed 
xy. i Ay iC. 
olkounericds, XV1i. 29 
OA€OpoTOwwWs, oa 
duotomabys, iv. 9* 5 Nii. 15 
buolompsgwnos, xi. 14 
duos EavT@, a ale 
xl. Q 
év mac, xi. 4*, 9, 18 
Kata wav7a, iv. 7* 
buolwots, xiv TO" 
duoovatos, L717. p. xlix. 5 
Vie 5" 5 Ae ae 
dvomatoypaperv, lil. 2 
dvomarory papa, intr. 

p- xvi* So g/t 
smwpopurdicwoy, xiv, 18 
dpyeorKoria, iv. 37 
ovata, xvii 5” 
ovaiwdns, > 6. Pk Nag 
OpbarLodavas, xvil. 9* 
oxvpovatat, i 2 
wabet, nity. Ux. Gat. 

¥i.6"'5 Vid 5 

/ . 
Tadaywy Os, va S3 

TAloes, Vis. 12% WilleO% 

Kh, 2: ett 
Mardis edplov, il. 19 
TaAGTIA, xvi, 19" 
Tartvbpo3s, the ec 
TAAMOS, i 
mavnyupivo, 

Tavyyupts, 
mavtoxpatep, Vill 

TmapaBadrAw, 
mapadnAcwy, xvii. 9” 
mapadokomotla, Sei, 
mapadoats, 3 
mapaitios, li. 1; NV 13 
TapakaTadynkn, gees 2 
Ries 
Tapackeun, XVO.cl7 
TApATypHTs, IV 37 
TAPAXAPATC Wy iv. 35 
mapedpevr, 15 
TAPERKTLKOS, xx. 6 
TapekT pot, ly. 20 
mapeEnyeia Oat iv. 2 
mapevetw, ve4 
maplevorros TAY yuxer, 
xe aI 
map0evos, xii. 1*, 2* 

mapotkla, xiv, 21* ; xvi. 22* 

LECTs /AND: GH. 
mapovoia, ili. IT i abies 959 
NIWy 275 Oe Ns 
mwaporv, xiv. 2” 4 Vag 
TacTas SV c1O> 
medar (vite lect.), Xv, 23° 
meOapxeir, XV. 30 
TEIPAW, sip rice 
meprypapy, vial 
mepopacoer Oat, iG 
TeEpiepyos, 1¥i20 
TEPLEXEL, em 
mepiopica, vine 
TEplTATO’, v.77 
TE PLTOAELYy 53 
myyacey, A, 
miOaveTns, iv. 17 
TLOTOMOLEL, 1G aes yar 
Mitek s Ried 
mirT Os, Lntr, ps Xv. 
TAGTOS, Vi EZ 
TAOK), it. 15 
TVEVMATIKOS, Xx. 8 
TVEUMATOPOpIS, 1 Yer 
x¥L 25° 
moAtTevouat, pgs Td 
TOAAGKIS, aie 
ToAvdUvaLos, iv. 16 
moAuTpayyworeiv, Proc. 23 
Hj 35 &e. 
TOAUTPOTWwTOS, XXill. 6 
ToAvo x157}5, xiii, 40 
moAvovumos, Vie 75 X. 3% 
Tour, xix, OF 
mpaymareta, XVil. 37" 
mpais, Mit. 34° 
mply yevynOfvar od 7”, 
> es 
mpd aiovey, Me tS 

mpoapobjmevos (var. 
lect.), vi. 22* 
Tpoaiperrs, P0CiLS Vico. 

IX EBs STs -Oy- 29.3, KV 
30; xvil. 10; xix. 8 
mpoavtAtos, Proc. 13 xix. 2* 
twpoylveus Oat, li. 19 
TpodiadT €AAET at, vil. 7 
mpdbects, Prot. J 
mpodecuia, Was aN 
XV1ll, 14 
mpokelueva, XXill. 7 
aporomhy %. 5* ¢ xT, 3*, 
7, 13, 15, 175 xiv. 27 
mpokowas, <1. 3 
mpdéevos PPC; 16% 
Sie Tic RKO 
Tpokevntixds, 6 
tmpotevetabar, ll. 9 
TpoTayayn, ERIS 
mporypapew iv. 18 
Tougepxouat, iv: 27; 
XVIl. 35 

VOU. Valbe 

INDEX OF GREEK WORDS. 

Cue AND. CRs 

LECT. AND CH. 
| TWAYWYLITHS, XVii. 28 
| obras, Seed 
guvarorpn, iv. S3 xvi. 4* 
auvakis, Te Oe, DAC 
xiv. 26 
ouvaroa Bevyiw, iv. 13 
ouvdvatw, iv. 34 
ouvndns, XXiil. 3 
avvodor, LPO 
ouvrTedei, 9 ee 
ourtéretc, na oe 
OUVTPEXELY, Tis 2 
oloonua, VEL SOE MyinS 
oVToMmOs, Suber 
avaTasis, Vor 
oplyyw ea 
oppryicu, Ds 3%, 4 
ogppayis, Proc. 17; i. 2, 
‘ 2 300b 4 

oxedidCoua, Titles 
oxoAdfw, Proc. 13* ; i. 5* 

mpoonyopia, V. 10% ; xVil, 2 
TpoaKopiys, Sil, 22 
mpocox ili. 3 
TpoTT ay [La, xvi. 6* 
Tpoorarys, iv. 35; vi. 15 
mpoot lOeaOxt, bees Ly 
mpoabetvar, =¥5 20" 
TpoaXew, ; ; iv. I 
TpogwvuLs, lv. 36 
Tpdcwroy, x7 
TpOTaols, iv. 8 
TpoTpoTn, Do re 7 
mpogopikds, iv, 8* 3 xi. 10* 
TpOXwvEevar, xiii. IT 
TpoXapnsis, 1 dilg Bi 
TpwTeta, XVil,.9* 
mpwrdTrAATTOS, Be 
TPWTOTTEATNS, rife ote 
TpwrTdoToKos, pa ee 
TpwTOTUTHS iW Oa 
TTEpyiaT hs, vil. 16 
WT Epopver, 1, 6” 
pabuuery, it 
beuBeaOu, LEP OF 
pomn, Vi tie VRo 
caynvi, Proc. 5 
Sauapeitiomos. Iv. 37 
capKopayia, XXll. 4 
oéLacna, exh. 22 
onWEpor, x 5 
ceuvorns, vi. 35” 
Tenvivoucs, po ane 
onTeday, YS 
oikuNAaTOY, Kv. 15" 
oKevacrtds, Se bar 
oKOTOMTYA ae aN 
oK@dor, iii. 2 
oreparnpopla, XVill. i 
oTnNAn, ri ew 
oT NALTEvW Mit, 
TTn\uypapey, Vi. 12 
oTLXNPOS, iv, 35 
otixos, v.12 
OTpare.a, Pree. 
oTpxzTevely, PH AF 
oTrpatodoyety, is 
orTparodoyia, XVI. 36" 
CvyKkaTapaivey, th De 
ovykatabeois, vo 
ovyKaratibeuas, xxiii. 4 
ouyKporteco Cat, iv. IO 
ovyxopevery, Ty, 3 
TVYXpOMat, il. 14 
ovAaywyerr, iv. 2 
ovumophos, ST 
TumtTepipepes Bat, 2075. 
Me, Ol 5 VIN. 5, SV Be 
| ouMTAOKT, Vi 54 

> 
e 
ae 

177 
LECT. AND CII, 
pewduevot, ra as 
pavtavouat, aii 
Vie 745 
gavracla, xii. ao xii. aT 
pavtTactokometyv, xv. 10* BD ia 
povtaciwdns, Sih ae 
bavracua, iv. 9 
bapay, Mil ee 
papuaretor, sa eaey, 
peidoua, iv. 23, 30 
| Pepenv eee, 4s XVIIL. 24 
peoporotds, iV, I 
pir€pnuos, ill, 6 
piAnduvery, 1¥..:25 
piAdtova bat, Nin 2 
pirdroyos, 1y.34 
dbirAogropyi7, Vil, QO? ¢ 
xv. 30 
piroxpnuatix, aoa Ey Ay 
pirdxpiortos, Us ee 
popa, iv; 6° 
wppvattecba, Vil. 2 
pryadeutiipioy, bb, geet 
xii 3 
pve, bh 
puolkas, a o 
gpuotoroyla, x 24 
pwtaywyetv, x. 133 xvi. II 
pwriCouevor, ‘Titles, Zvér. 
xvii* 
peTioua, Xili. 21 3 
Lriti. Xvii. 
PwTLaTIKdS, Vv. 4 
Xapirua, p64 Pa 
xXauviw, TY): 20 3 y, 33 
xXElpaywyery, Va7 
xepobecla, XVI. 26 
XPNTiDMEvw, Xill. 26 
xXpiorol, Sic ks tv £4 
xpiatopdpos, Proc. 15*; 
pO.3| Pee Aid 
xpovinds, pa oe ad 
NPUTOKCAANTOS, 15 ea 2 
Xputoxvos, XUll. TI 
Xpoma, Pree. 3 
XPa@TOV, XXi, i* 
Xvsai0Tn;, Ly 37 
XWVEUTIPLOVy Se ee 
xavn, Une) 
Wevderlypapa, TVs 36 
Wirds, xii, 15 xiii. 2, 24, 

{ 

TWCOMEVOL, EPG TS 
| xiii. 
owrny, lv. 9 
Touata, vo. 7 
TwTTpLos A Se 
TEKVOVOVEI, Wn25 
Texvoyovia, Vio 
TeAeLovo Oat, ili. 4 
TeTpahuepos, il. 5; iv. 9 
Tis (TovdE TLVOs), ae 2, 
TOL, XiVs>.10- 
Tpameca, v.13 
TpameCitys, vi. 36* 
TuuBapuxos, XVill. 5 
TUTIKOS, Xi 25> xxi. 6 
TUTLKOS, iO 
TUTOS, Ml. 185. 79,520:3 
Xiv. 203 xix. 2, 3; 
0, at ae 
viobecia, yaa 
viomatopia, iv. 8*; xi. 16, 
tS 0° 
viraKovey, XV. 30 
Umer epxouat, iv. 30 
brépbects, RV. 29 
bmepKdomios, xe. 6 
brepTided bat, XXlil. 16 
bmoBorevs, i. 3 
broypapev, iv. 213 v. 4 
broypapn, Proc. 
bmdects, nde, fo : 
vill, 43 xvi. 17 
broKkpotw, vi. 28 
brouvnotikds, xii. 29 
tmdoragis, ill. 7*53 vi. 7; 
We § ie Oy TE Fe 
Riese TONS) woth «By, otis 
es Le 
jpectas, XVEs 245,298 
Nt 

Sor Sa RO 

IND EA UP errand 

The references are to the pages, 

~ 
> 
a 
ie] 

PAGE PAGE 

TAGE 
eC fs 4 He eee RT es | Josh. Nil; 10 yg 0 OG) ON ee oe 
Rint + vy. ve ee We. 10. ee oe MEA ee vO, Bi a ee 
hcp a ne oe ae WMT Se oR | Rikay ee BO Vil Qa ee ss ee 
ttt ae 0 RUVit, 205 a Sad Ne ee 8 Was IS ss Q5 
tls 4 it ge MAN 295254. s. OF 1S Bay lg ee ee 
Licks he hoe ¥ XXXL 1-6. . 122 | Judges iii, Io. . 122 et eevee me bat cas «| 
a) rane pea 54 BEWIs Ass 10 | Vi, 34 oa: Ge ee x10; 31 79 
hes cick SRO Sa, E35 SOF Xl. 26 ‘ 122 a Rarer ne ee * 
i, 26 De ery f° Besa T9 n a | SiR ay ae eae 
Ee 6 Oey ere 3 PKS TO a 50 Pe ie BOS 80s oe 5) Fo oa 
as a er i OO 2S ¢ sis Ope oper ee aime, 3 a US Meters See ce M8 ee 
Hy ee eae eet" XEXI2O “c29.- 50 iG yes es AS Sl, 24) se es ee 
Oy Mercian meant §. Xxxill, 22 6 2 59 | | SV FIO. yak Bay 
a decir ter age eee RERIL.22 » « 76) a Sen.g2 =... A ie eee es | 
ee ee ee XXXIV. 5-7 s28 59 ae: ee” xiv. 14 ES ) age 138 
Ay. 8s xxxiv.8 . . 59 <a Se Sie, 26 os ee ae 
Wii, 8... - 87 mee ee ¥vh 16, 1%* 5 45 XX.6 4 + 4 . 106 
By ADs 2S 117 XXXVI. T 0. . 122 xxiii. 2.0.0. «122 XXL 13. ee eat eek 
Tee a pe (ee meee een Fie 52 ie SEVIs Ba cy ae 
Hii, 22. . 2 | Lev. iv. 5,16 . 60, 96) Kingsi.4 . . . 78 xxix. 16. . . 46 
lil, 24 4 « + 90 Vi 98 3s eR i. 39 ge xxix. 3... 136 
fet as en eee 3 Vill, 304. « 140 v4 ees "9 xxxi. 26,27 . . 20 
10, 4S pe 9 MiG. ge OI vi. 23-26. . 12 SESVis BF. ge 

2 es xe) eee AF vil. 6, 84.5 44 XXXVI1. 1s eee 
im Oo 5 4 6 GOT : viii. 27... 74 XXxVil. TO. 6 6 53 
xv.6 . . «. go|Numi.t2 . . . 7 we xxxvii, 22.0. 4 53 
BV. 5 os 6 30 Xl. 24. 6 «© IJ22 Pee aaa Rees 4 XXXVI. 23. 4 + 50 
SVL a ys see xi. 26 Se eine fe - ‘is Gis, 4 96 XXXVIL 2-30. 4 51 
XVII, 25006 37 xX1.25.. 0. . 122 <x: XXXVHL.IT 0. 6 54 
XVI. 27 6 34 Ely 204 ae 122 “xi2p 403 18 XXXVI. T4 0. . 70 
rab a7, es cae aoa | 9.3 ye a ee pee FA ye @ 5 ATS Oe Wy Bee cea (0 
eet tS 4S 0 RXiv, 9. 4. 4. Ok a a WARY es ee 
Seatee sa. | 9e xxy.6. . « 73|2Kingsii-tr . . . ror SSVI aD ee 
ae era: ii. 11 (42s). TOT Xxxviii. 37 (475). 53 
eyiv. 4a; < . . 961 Dott Wiae’s 6c 1 iv. 34+ + . 138 etbis Gos 5 55 ee 
SiS. O17, 80 Wolk 4 ee v.25 + « « 120 xl. 14 (Seft.), 19 48 
Kxxii, 30 ss 76 ie Cee Sy ee pd oe 

eau. 9 4 8 ewe xxiv.I3. . 12] xl. 26 (Sept. 
MOEVIL 11, 15; 42°77 Vi20 ity eS BEV fi ee ae MS eS 

~— 
_ 
N 

mies -4: 3. w' tee INNO. cesta ae ae ES ne ee ay 
xlvii 29. . 6 12 de bo os 4 a on a mii, 12 Glee) 4 7 
MING sg es se Sih Aa a 5 : ee Phe oe re RO cc 
Mit. B22 4 OS xiv. fs 5 65) S CRO ite cs 7a a, er ee 
ohh ae Pe hee pe gee Le Xvill. 10, Ir. 146 st ee Pee Si 2a gs oe 
UN eg a ek Sy VINE TEs 5-90 RE te 
abe (he ReManeres Reggie, & Si ao ee KR UH ce ee Pee ye ee eee 
diy oa @ deere eae Me a SMe O72 98 KKIV.' 20, 21 19> Vy ase a ia oe ee 
Rt Na ee POF MOVIN og 207 Xxxill.60 0. 74 i. Fe ae a Oe 
SERN; he ae SeSnIL IS, 19 14 Ths fs Mea ie) eee 
ee es ne ve. 600m © et eM eet IC) Se a ge sey MP sty <5 572 
it eg ss eS Pees Se cy OU tay eee 5 5 (80. 
TOM ee) aD Bete Pig GO a a ee oe li? cos 2 ees 104 
Py ee oy a te Te rae Se OS 
Se Se kp Nehenlieel acne yy Liye ete 0S 
PAG) peg iy pal etn ae ee es 120 sees eo) Le eO te ee O 
2s eA oe ee Vie a Sete SOG 1ISe Tel oied a hices a arm Oy, 
RIV: Oy 25. og Wieigje20 22 hy oe OO lester villi cae aloo OE Wetman ee oath 

SH Giey scans 

Wiig tl ss es ee 

Milo e wie vo, 
Vil, 10 ‘ 
Vill. 3 

ig 
ae 5 

SIV. 93 

NIV. 7 

SVEOT ALT 

xvil. 8 a 
XVill. 9 aay 
Ss Pe es 
bo camo: ; 
Re eg 

eS Ths 
eet a 
XXL. 5 (47) 
2.2.0 ee oR ee ie 
be. Ser Lae area 
Bevin Ss Gy 12s 
ps aia 6 9 dare 
Beye, Fae Ge 
p00. foal Cot 
MSR 20 
se ee 
es Be gs 
AMR ee 
ees 
p33. A Sern 
203) Pe ee 
Sev, Os 
PaNy Ge 
52.) 7 
RSV, Os os 
pO. 5 Se aa 
ER a 
SEXY, EX 
REX Vid. 13, 14 
le ie ae 
28 eee ee 
Mees al 
BOs ha os : 
Re sop 

Re chip oar 0 ee ee 

Sisit teste 
RAE dete 
Sa spoon 
io eee 
DNs 54 eo 
be ack 
iy a em anes 

Se ih aia Reeere 
ey ae oer ies 
ot. BAe eee 
1 8 a ogee 
Lien aa 
1b ai ca ae ae 
lev, 70203. 
Ixvil. 6 (Sefé. 

—— 

|is-oyai0 hea an ae 
LM Oo a 
Tvith Te bos 5 
Evi ey. ee 
ICUs Ot ae 
| bao anes) Seared Ps 
Ist 2a eee 

Io ohiees ea ea 
Lon ats i 
Iexie, bathe, 

Ni Ona 3 us 
ISS Oe atear2 

0 

by ULI Go 

“Ut SG £2 SST ST 5-5 

Cro 
NTO BO 

— 
° 
_ 

2) 
wm 

PACH 

Se Ueaeteet gee, 107 
[RS fee, $7 
De ee ga a 80) 
ISS -r 3 rage? 
Pewite Tesh ge oF 

Se oN? eae at 
Ieee OO. OO 
| oc een 
exces Dory hey 

ea Ge ee 

Peis eee i OS 
Reet oe ae 
PON ee 10 

y: 

Ixxxvili. 1,4 (b/s), 5 
Ixxxviii. 5 . 58, OT, 94 
DOSeVill S, tO, 74 

Dei, 22 rn, Mine 
lo oe ab ees yey ie retarted €) 
Ixxxix. Be ROSE 44 
tb O05 Ha ieee y Aaa reey f 
Ixxxix. ge led 
WOM 4 102 

Mave ee Ge ae 
pA ay oe: ee ° (8) 
xCvin 17 7 ae 

Cie tO 4. ae oe Ll 
Cl 25,20... 105 
Ci Ber Oe ne TTS 
Cte ye eS 
NV ee ee ce, 
Civ. 4 eg ses 
Civ. 15, 30(d/s), 53 152 

OF one a ee 
Cie, SR i breed th 
Cys Bie Gere ee 
ee cet De ah eerie 
ch 4 Cake} Jaa aang ae 
Claes Beg elie ey 
Vik. Cay Se ae ay ae 
Ces eee, 
[oe ie eee ete aad 
3 5 ee a ye 
Cet ora 
Lo oe a mn ee 
Os (a 6S 
OMe ie Sa 
wae a 
CAV oe ee 
CXViil. 22 (des). 
PENT Og a 
oe as Cage dee 
ron a8 ae ee 
Cxix. 102 

Cx. 176 

vie er eS 
Og es 
Pees, PRC ea 

/ 
CXNMy 27 or 
CXIKV« 7 53 

Coreen. et ak 

Cee ee 
Cr ae 119 
(2b, 0 te a ed a Gy 
Re ee TO 
Ce heros 
Chu. TO. ees 
te i ee a 
OG 2. 4s IS 

(ooo ae aia eine te ge | 
Sate Ti oe ae fh 
(cox) A a0 (Oommen per 
coed hts Sig lager Fath 
Coli Gea 

WV Oi aes. 

Pee Cine 
exivitt. 5 
oxivin. 12 

Ve ao 
XVil. 6 

5, Ot, 

eer oo 
ie, Ci, 2e 

BlCLOS Whe as, 

Vile 2 4 

sb ay ans mea 

pie. rane 

Mi Oy TO: 

pram xe Peg 
110 

xl. 5 (ds) 

Genii ay eee 

ieee 
ii. 10-14 

Title. tp 3. aes 
bans Bi ’ 
iV Eee 
ges a 
Vs TH as 
Ve Dy 

Vu 2 (is} 
beet ee 10, 
Ve-L2 Fi . 
Vie gor 
i i 
viii. 5 

viii, 7. 

ee ea 
Bees ia a 

be TO 
z 16 if iy) 
oe 2 eee 
1, 20s 20°; 
i326; 
Visee-y 4 
a 
ili. 9 

Th ba 

Tike tales = 
a er ee 
Ma Dg ya 

5 Set ine 

Vist 
Vie i ces 
ie hae 

i Pa rs ae 
Oo eee 
0 00 a aa 
wie 
Vill. 18 
ee 
1. Ae ana 
MeO ys 
go a 
Slee on 

area 8. 
; 115 
eae seet 
5 149 
ae eee 22 

. 32 
F 29 
ee 
. 2 

. Lt 

ee Y's) 
8 

pe 5". 
; $ 
110 

POE 

£X2, 147 
deg) 
jo Oe 
ee 

; 2020 
pea 
; 6 
seed 
Les 
-- ia2 
rae oe, 

go 

a Tee 
hero 
; a 
154 
Fees i E: 
Marne, 
‘ 78 
yaw he: 
7 295 
: 7s | 
Fay 0, 

Esa. 

ae 6 ee eee 
Sie 
RV Oe, 
XXYV. 
xxv, 
Dae : 
SEN ee 
Sey te 
po i Ga 
REVI ITE. 
TEV. 2S 
EVN. 16 
BER ITO ; 
XXX. 15. 
XXXIV. 4. 
XXXV. 4-6 
RERV.O 
KXXVH § 
wig ee 

won 

Savi Pet 
elV¥il; TO. 5, 
pA EB raph Quis nema 
Sl ess TR 
se i eee | 
Le payee 

Pei Peas 
Ixiil. 10 
164 ies i Pa 
Psi TO 
abt ea ee alee 
En Seana oP 

Banya 

EN se ta! 2 
Tye oe, 16: 
1a ogee eee 

| ate) eee te 

PAGE 
120 

' 60 
A we, 
aoe eS, 
76 

~ oe hao 
‘ 20 
eng es, 
‘ 5 
ei 

‘ EL 
go TOs 
ead. 
< 2e0 
. 12 
Petco 7 
» '4e 

129 

74+ 
20, 134 

Y re 
142 
41, 

An YN OH Qu 
an 

m2 G2 Uo 

eee 
Peer ciS. 

CATECHE TICAL 2eCiURES Ol > Cy RI. 

180 
PAG 
Vege, yon ie 
shies ss Oe 0 > gee O4 
levis 18,49 Soe Fe} 
JE AES eee ne ee” see i 
it eae 5. 
i oy ae ge es 
Wik a ana eed 
i ee ee 54 
Mick poss ee 
re ge Coa Cet ee = 
Bs ee S6 
S15 4s 2 
SEK. RENIKE (eee), 
bog Ades 49 
SPRVILe LO ya) ee OE 
nai Uy Pao ater Gane: vei 
ate Eh. Saw! osc woe oe 
iy, 204 o4, 132 
rek i, 0-1 £, 10, 26. +51 
WitistS <P 4 IOI 
ee eh eee RO 
teh Gk eee te Ok 
Kiko a ee as 
ae 7. a ee eae a Xe 
Xviil, 20-23. 8 
VIL. I ke os 6 
> o ie & ae ee ‘gi 
KXVilly 12-17 . 9 | 
REEV1 25. 1B; 323 
MeRVIL E28 34 
ReEVIL IS sy 0s 
Dan. ii. 26, 31. 6 123 
O25 AG lal v3 ee 
A AR ea a PF 
Tis Ah ae ge ees 
oO as 6 ie a 
Me BY: ue es ee 
M34 5 se aD 
oe ee ee | 
vy. 31 iy ee ae 
Wie 254 eis SO 
Wik, 7i024- 6) 5. 207 
My ei ine ww SaO 
wi Oka eo Oe 
Waly DO te Pie gs ee 
Vile 10. <6 119 
Wits Pe 0 ae ey eo 
¥i0-13; 14s; =.) 113 
zat ee OO y eee © 9 
Viiv Shy 25: 109 
Mien oe axa OO 
Wile OA. 52 107s: 108 
Tike 77 
> a ea tary s 
Ds Py tO 8 51 
> ep veg! toe arena 5 
mi. £ (ony, 2. 169 
ee ot 4 BOP age 
= ee See 139, 141 
Mil 9, ices 2 FOO 
Ilos. il. BO ee ee ID 
‘ie ae sgt ar 73.105 
ii ie te TED 
VP Oe ee AG ae 1, 
Wl We ee 
il eee Sah oan oe 
Oe goer ae 
oO (O28) i 56 
0 ie Cee eee cls, 

| 
| 

PAGE | 

poue tor the ixree 

Children v. 4, 24 
Mees 

Susanna 

| 

a 

§1 

a ae 

_ Beland the Dragon 33 Io! 

PAGI 
TOer Wie acy? we ee eee 
1 20, 20 ee ee 
lina oo os oho 
AgmOet. 12 a, a7 
Ter a ee 
ee i ae 
Wg; WO 2 aot 
ite ah ee non 
COS N se oh ee 
jonah f 6.6 ss 98] 
iva 4 a cee 
| We 20. Os 2 Oe 
1 G Cong th A: ae 122 
Vite SB ato ee 
a a ree Grae 2 rage 
Mc 3s 4. a) 3-79 
Wil:2: 525 8 3 
P NANUM. Te Ls 3 Se 
| Hab. le 253 e- 6 (3277 
POpNs Sik xk ng os Bee 
Hie 710°. s - OS 
i. 4a th eS 
| Waggaiii.4,5 . . 122 
Heo aS kD 
[ ZeCh, 120 gh ee eee 
he cower § aera See ey! 
EVs LO; ce ee se 
1X.9. «6 + 74, 70 
hy Se 4 es 
112; 23a eS 
Riek. cen ee. Ae 
| wit, 10, 23.202 
| Mile tO, - a Oy; PEt 
| pa ae: Ha eta Gece 
| xiv. 6,7 (dis) 89 
i Mal ae ce ee Ge 
| 4: FO PE 5 AO 
Ribat OF ete wae fb 
Lie 3-355 «a. , 20H 
| i; 24s) hee oF 
| APOCRYPHA, 
| t Medias ktee os 8 
|2Usdrasx.22 2 - 12 
| Wisdom ii.12 . . 85 
Viet oe eee 
eo es ee 

Mills Sc 

| nie tee 
Pip Oforel tiscvan 6b eae ie 2 
| ie 2S 5 
a9. S0- ive 
| in 3h 4 

5 eae Gee 
| =O ae aie» 
| Baruch ii. 25. . 

VOTED Wy Aer 

ML 35-37 
| Nl estes 

aes, 
fe 18) 
Pane Co) 
es 
ses 
ese 
ee 
Fe a 
ea os) 

fa ine: aie Be 2% 
; 2 ee, Ate. ss 
ee Sea 
aie yy ae 
Se Uichn see eae Septzmer eee 
ey 
Sg eee 
5, eer ome 
eae ae 
oo, Ae 
Mit ys 
ies eee 
Vie 5-7 3 
Te re aes 
Vee ho ae os a 
Hh 1%, 105 
Vb Sy ers 
ith iy Ae eae 
iv. 9 . » 
Wott yaw. 
ha oy Seen 
ee oS oy 
a oe ft ee ee 
Or 
Moa wr 
dh Sy 
Vi sos 
Vi oo 
Wi. 2A a i 
Wieeo ety 
Yi 0 
IVA a oe 
vii. 13, 14 
Wie ah ans 
viii. 25, 26 
Fb ee 2 ae 
5 we 
2 Se ans Pe 
0, 101 « 
Rigo es es 
x ost 
Sires ae 
di) ae 
boa eee 
2 OR Se 
Rie ies 
St Oe 
xi. tt » 
Bre ee ee 
pape ever § 
xi: 2 21 
57) 59s 
ts Bahn 
Sis Poa 
Kile SOs en 
Si. Bets 
Kil AO\-e, = 
Deb Fg Re eae 
Ri Le cae 
Sc: co . 
Se ee 
abate ice oF 
Sages 
BV 20 

Aa tell 
. ie 
« 245 
oes 
haa) 
Ae ch 
ts) 
; 89 | 
7 40 
’ 74 
; 69 
ee 8%, 
16 
298 
ee §, 
,3 eo 
‘Cre 
. 65 
« 49 
. 60 
aes: 
63112 
26, 62 
es 
43.53 
cee 
Pes 
a ee 
ee 
eae 
‘ 7 
Mme 6 
Fs 16 
ye 
Pao fe. 
eee 
ake a 
Ope Ue) 
one 
pr aek 
fier: co.) 
Sac ee 
> 45 
ae 
ag. 
ey. 
ae 
’ 15 
are 
; RESO 
345 45> 
67, ran 
. 12 
Ame: 
oom S 
gape 
41, 42 
24, 41 
nee eek 
ae peo 
47, 159 
: 2 
Real ete) 

12 | 

hbeth, 0,4 ee 
aK ke 

Svc. Lares. 
a ag) 
pei Come 
Beta I eee 
eee 8 
RTI A og ag 
BS eo 
avs TOs i 
Vid. ety 
XVI. 19 . 
Dg be a 
act, OF to 

ie Te Ay 
Wedo e 
Se SO 4 

in. ay 

xMi. 1s 

cet 207 

ret Cee ee eae 
a 

m8 0 eer yA 
. MRT OAS se 
xxlil. ae . 
pe aut new Asc 
pie the ea tee 
REI, 4G. 
RK 25 
xxiv. 3 (73), 
Sev es | s 
Re Sa oe 
Rs Op 
xxiv. 10-12, 
Kxay.-E5 <8 
xaits tO) 5 
po es hee een 
ssa. 21, 22 

Rxeg 24s 
68 Sees eee 
xKiys 30° 44 
REV. 30 
KXLY; Shy Ae, 
Sev. 22: 
Xxv..1I2 . 
mc ce 
XXV. 27 . 
axe200> 
Five gi a4 
X&v..32, 35 
XXV. 35, 30 
i a 
XkVs 20 ce 
eee 
XXV1. a | 
ESVies - 3 
MeV 2ey 4 
SOV Sas om 
pee cen ieee 
Sx AG 
xev1-028 2. 
Xeyle OS es 
XXVi OA 5 

XV. i910 
SOL G. Sy ue 
MV 8 a 
XXVll. 24°. 
XXVlle24 56 25 
Ve 20) 
XXVH.45 . 
XKVlle AO 
XXVll. 50, 51 

xix. 16-18, 29 

Siva: ey yo 

rAGE 

er ay) 
64, 155 
eb Aale: 
ac 
SOL 
He eyo) 
. 3 
pte 
oa 
34, 49 
ee eo 
S eGo 
2 49 
Rica ae 
I4l 

rates Si 
Pee =) 
es - 
79s 1O4 
. ‘i 
16, Go 
Be oe ed 
< 530 
e “A090 
. "8 
. oe 
ote 
ecto! 8 
60, 105 
4 105 
eet) 
Me ee 
i108 
I4 105 
22, 100 
~ 109 
<i: 300 
5c ALO 
30 107 
sr FAO 
(L4aos 
10, III 
ee ee 
44 105 
eg cess 
’ I4 
: 6 
32, 43 
oe 
pore 
Rae te 
ee AD 
coe 
ete 
S4 

$3, $7 
» 83 
ee cee 
. 152 
ees 
39, 95 
$9 
Peo): 
+ Oz 
SAeS 
885 
BOS 7016) 
= 85 
«790 
i eo) 
A 58) 
Sela 

Matt. 

Mark 

PAGE 
XXVIl. §2 97, 99, 138 
NV 52, 53s OS. 
MMVOe-s fae 
TAVIS 
Savile OO a) « 
Revie Oo 
Sole, 08, 05.4 
SSM. 5 
SeeVEny 
SO NLS a 
MNVile BS, TH, 
Seve 1" Gs 

a Ole ee 1 
ie ss 4 a8 
Bae cee nese Oe 
EM io oso. RE 
i ate? te OAT 
See Gee ds 40 
Wet 2-06. Ae 
Pedi Pe ee bt 
ps ae a tee | 
Seago wae 16 
fee Re Gia. oy 89 
Sek, et 
MVE ST; Bee. aT 
Ri¥> SS. «5° 15% 
By Oe se Lo 
RVEAO sk) oe, OE 
ile BOE ok EO 

Pe a eee 
ete Od. 28 BG 
Sees ee eas 
Ct ee 113 
B35 Ms) a. cee 

eee yas ceia 

ll. 

230-4 4 62 
TS e ee ee 
is Ao igh be te 45 

pee oka eee eae ys! 
Hiss EE coeeh ge LO 
bay er a ey 

10 eh ae ee 

iv. 6 (bis). 

BY, 24s tarde 3 } 
Puree ee ee Or 
Wi SO ewer at 
Ae ete haa tae es 
bp teael Oy ca Marte 7 
Sole feet Ua blo 
Me EO ge gee ke, 
Saas eer 59 
Sindee ee ee 
SU UE ee ET 
pinipesee3: ee ae 
Riledg.. 3 Ay 126 

XV Lie 
Sa ye as OI 
alt eer ae ee 6 
ye fhe 
po Suc) ae ae ere 6 
2 Ce Sane a 20 
pavilions pave. oo yan OL 

| 

| Luke 

poe . y £7; OG, 92 

_— 

PAGI 
Ve dan OG A TEE 
Sy ee ere 
Sig S40 da 
MeL Dee. LOG 
ie 20 ee eae 
as ae he 

Se On 7 rol Te, 
$6 

SOU ey 32 

Set Os co OO 

Ste i a ect GO 

MAC Al gy 33 

53101 oe 2 ae 
MSIE SC 

Moly. Tome 4 

aw 30-59 a IO) 
XLV. SF ee 
Siete BOs orks ee 

RIVA ee TET 
MELV..50< «5 ° 100 

a 

eee ee pes Os 
1. 3. 20, 35, 67, 70, 
125 

th ER ce a 
fe Pl a eg ee. 
1 re ae 
i Es, 39 eS 06 
16... 66,92, 53 
Ei. «. 38.46, $1; 
64, 102 
se 40 gn he ae eee 
Ho? er ay ae eae 5 
Ae fs ee 
a. ee es 
ies oe 
Me ee tee cs 8 
eM id an ee 
Bye ig eee 15 
es ee eee oS 
bi soegs a he Ot os 
Bite: oly 4 es 
Se See emer, 
Wat Bed ees a OO 
eS. Seer Oe ae 
Die ae a erg 
inde ssa et ee 
Be RAG BR st Apa 
Bl 86) 2500, fag 
he © Fae ey 
Se x cen Mere | 
iNew, OF DO. B42 | 
iv. 29 ‘ . ‘- GI | 
ee: re 2% 
ee lip Og 5p OF 
Va 7 Ts 455 70) 
Ne wae ie a 7O 
Vat. 29 67 
WeOaiiiy are hee 
V. 24... (41 (ais), ‘66, 
I4I 

Ree ire eS Fa 
ey eg ee ee XS, 
ee es eee 
Re gee AE 
fee ee eee eee 
be eee er 
ycas Be SCis 2 
MM od Se 
Ties waa 4, gee 
Oe Sena 52 

Ne OE PEs, 

John vi. 63 

Mike io 

Wil So, 30 
viii. 25, 29 
Vili. 38 
Vendors 
Wilts: 40. « 
Vlil. 41. 
vill. 44. 
vill. 49 . 

viii. 56, 58 

ix: 3S 

Ro Ts elk ee BF 
Pa! Mea ae 44 
x. TS i ene 21 
ie iy Aes $3 
eh fy a OD 
i 30 1 oe On 
eat re 2E 
ERE US gg ee oor 
ME SROSS Fae eC RS 
Re Gs we 5 BO 
Sieh Bh Or Fak 
Biles, 5) eras 
RUE te eg! BTR 
RLV Or tg | AA 7 
SEVEOr ue ats 32 
Hive GO: (btS ce 69 
BV SER yee oes 

xiv. 16 (4/5) 

ive 00: F7, & 

SiV2S 
xiv, 20..% 
De | . 
xv. I . 
XV. 1, 4,5 - 
xv. F 
= anna ge He 
XV. 2 F 
evo. 

oad Bae A 

xvi. 7, 8, 12-15 

Vi. PS, Py, 
Vile 5 
xvii. 10, 24 
SVL. 25" 
RV Snr 

« 40,09; $3 

| 

lak $9 og 
Tio, Lie 
oe Sot] 
eke | 
Pa 

Paes &-2; 
025 
12 
oS 
1I9, 125 
2 Se 
sh oge 
: vi 
« £29 
© 45 
so FEO 
125, 127 
ee 

a Lee 

ot 70 
21, 35 
» 4 

. 
Rico ta we SS 
pee Me ge: aig 20) 
pee can oe OS 
>a hy Gane ane ues 5. 
SI OA us 5 SO 
pa AeA 9 Pepe Career ae ey’ Yo 
airs tenis I4 
KIX Oy AT Aa | 
Mike Gane bs lee 
XIX. 37 6 6 6 03 
Mee 4 OF 
FIR AE Cie se 2208 
xXx. 1,130. 97 
an Oy Se ame S318) 
Do ea ‘eae 
miciey et te nai, eee TO 

Hh ae ek Soe ay 
tee oe PLO To7 ten 
eh Or arene RS 
Py oes ys 4. 
ME Ry Eo ig 
I eae Gtr ede 64 
Digeir )f a). DOS 
eee a 

noe Abe a cs 
Bo a aos 
il. 55 on meee 
iN eh pare ae 
1 8 ee 
IVge. ae bee 
1 Fae eG 
Vea ete 
Wawa xx 
Wo a 
Wie oy ea 
ge eer ees oe oe > 
Ve 12,3510, 33 
Weds a oe, 
vi. 3, 8,10, 15. 
Vi ae ‘ 
VS 55 Sg. 3s 
Vill. 5 Pa ae ee 
Vita gee vee 
Wiis Davee ee 
Wilk: LG-2%r 7 
Vill. 17, 19, 20 
Vito ee reo ae 
Mike Ge yr, 
Wile att ge 

1 .@y 4 Be pager 
= PT, fo 
Xe 36 Set 
0: 50. SIs Oe tea 

Se pie oe 
a hs ay ong 
RE ay 26-0 1, 
pi One ts Seer 

Sar a oe 
Wale So 
SIV EG or) 
RVi2O, OG 4 
SV 20, 26 2a: 
VIG, Be cee teal 
Rie 1-6, 12, 19 
SiS Reece. eins 
Mine tay. tees 
Son 0-9 5 
D9. Gi aaa 

Sve a es 
XXvil. 25, 
ARV E Oe aes 4 

FNOMADS: 1493 ss 
13,4 - - 

Po eo 
TOD. he 
ioe oa 
BPs ESS Bae 
Gee. 54 
(Sk 27 eae te 
pla oe ge 
ili. Bence 3 
BY EE) ORY; 
i tO. 
Wicieuls 
ai es 
Torus, % 

We oe as 
Se Pe ee 
Vi. 3-14: 4 

— 
— 

oO 

ice 
Ne} 

182 CATECHETICAL LeCTUi Ss OF SCY r. 

PAGE PACE PAG 

Romans vi. 12 185 fo Cot am a a es Eee a oe 612. Tom 3) 20% 79, 
71,44 5 Pag ac meee go Tha ae meme lh ga of 7 
vi, 13 145 ai Se 4 ae Cy ea 5 | i 
wWieady eee te Td ae. ea: ye ae Ls ON 4 Foe O08, 
wh t9 x Or Ras na ee ae Gee | Vv. 7 » 4 a 15 , 
Vi. 22 . ral on 4 ee Be (aap pene" Ml, 7 > : 

il. 10 23 xy, 5-9, 6 100 | v.18, 19. 132) eo ee 
23 a] iyo re ee 25 CS ee ae 
1.9 125 Ky. 14,95 9004 oleh tg? PO TE eS 
Wi ne P| 2 wy Ee 139 i 7,20. 15 re ee ee | 
vil. 1. 132 Sy ee 92 i aes a . A] : 
vill. TE. 47, 125 xv. 20 > 00, 138 Wie 14, 1% T5047 Leh, Lt ot ee 
vill. 15. 125 6 Ae) Fie Toe *14ts 5 1.2 . 
Vil. 17. 17 | XV. 27, 28 59 | i. 10. 30 | Ll 3 Ree ale 
vill. 16, 20 i120 | xv. 25 (02s) 113 | wi 47: cages ee «eae 
vill. 28 . a xv. 35 139 se Bas & 3 | 1 Oe is 
Vill, 34. 102 xv. 30. 26, 139 | LL TO4S a 3 ea, 
Vill. 35 + 109 | xv. 49 155 Philipp. 1. 19 5) 125) yD 
IN. 5 IT} | SVs F320 | li. © se 5D | ee eae. 
x. 0,7 . 100 | SPE 17, Q ii. ey: ne {2 vay 
xi. $0 150 | Bae . 153 | ii. 9 eel ii, 13 : 
mis 87, 24-5 347 S| iw. 4m ii, 14 . 
6 Pe ee 133 | Gon s 33,45 Te ei ear 6 Ree eB 6 ‘ 
xi. 24 ; 7 | i 22 6;-132 tig se, Saas iii. I ach 
xi. 33 30 | irs 150 iii. 13 146 | They a 
xiv. 9 113 | iii. 14, 15 II4 iti ot. 149 iii, 13 ne 
KY. 12 ney li, 18 150, 152 iv. 4 142 ili, 14 eos 
av. 00°50 4° 220 iv. 3, 4 (dz) 4I | oe free lil, 15 a 
<7. 23 x ee, Woy as 62 | iv. 16 . 
> af eS ieee 19 wo ss ee OP Ga Ce We a et 45, : 
Nike 945s Zz 16. . (20, 23,70 v. If . 
US reg Ree Baeee 2, 29 a 3 5,17 ic FO. Sy og vi. 1S . 
36: ae" 4. Be Vi. 7, 5 141 Gey ok gI Vil. 21, 24 . 
i. 23 ras vi. 14 37, 43 ies 4 103 ix. II 61, 
i. 24 Seis 39 vi. 16 » 81, 155 | Wi a6 ste eo 1x. 19 ra 
Tie Ga apes. X. 14, 15,16. 14) io: eae 88 ix. 24 - 145, 
ca 2. pe Oey Fam 19, 32 TBR © Ga @- lara gle <8. A Or ae 
1: 8 hae 76 X11. 2, 4 ; 101 ll. 12 ae T | ee fe 
ii. 9 ore 36 Xl. 2,4 ‘ 3 ee tae 5 | » eee ie Yass 
ti, TO 5 23, 34 Nill, os ee 62 il. 15 ta OO, tay | xX. I5 >: ee 
il, 10, 12. OF; 12 xlil, 5,6, 7 - 155 Bi ee, ae Oe eS 
ee) ee Bi, a 5a 838 in. O.- 1a 46, T4974 > ee ae 
ee eee 2” | ia 20 2. as 6) X29 « > 
eee oo a 4) Gal B69. a Re 11, 20. sare = ATS xi. 1,2,6. . 
Tie ¢ eee CT C40. chs 145 | | ee 
is; 12,935 5 310 Hi, 24-5 + = 201 § Thess. 8.16... 410) xi. S-12, 19 
a. 24,85 4 5 | ie fae 149 iy.'06,10.. (136 Xi. 26-29 
3s 5. w 0Y MF ¢=5 is 2) iv. 16 (d7s), 3 Oe ae aT, 
PD) ae 10 Wt a Oe So | 17, IIO Si Se ee 
iv. 15 . 46,66, 110 iv, 62.8 ee eS iv. 27" .t02, 141 XI. 37 
vi. 9, IO era Ve pat ic eee es meg 25 are ha i? ane xl 2 . » 102, 
vi. 19 24290 WW et ce ae ee Ae x ie ee Sed SLD. a Oe 
vil. 5,8, 9 25 We BOer ce oe 140 sa Oe ee 
WC a a a Vs 22,23 o 933 (a Disease. ie eI 200 xiao. = aoe, 
vill. 5,6 . 57, 60 vi. I ree. Mike, co. ow aoe Mik, BL in 
i Saag) | i Fig ee MIE 2S 4 es 
Kis gs aD | See -34e4 ii. 8,9. . 108 xii. 4 a, 
oe) ae a ee = is . 149 | a, 14,32 4 309 xiii, S 6 we 
ey aser dO T oe | sip hae gas oe oe ee Me: ZO ws 
oe ae ce 6 Pee 6 ee I | 
xX. 21. 6 « 152 ee eae | TORS fa ie . 106 |S; James d. 2; 12, 25 
ri. 2 aoe 145 as 132 | idee tao, ase be Oo. 
xi. 3 6S, SS (42s) 1.17, 18. 143 | a1. 2 By tet ee Oe 
= es ener apie aa Lg oes oe il. 6 eae ees a 
XI. 23 (475) 151 lis 4 age Lip We ag 4 1. 2a 25 
RU Te ea pe bie fe) 8 | ii ee ll. 9 
mis = piel ele fa ae 1. RG go) ee a Fee er 
mi Feat ee es no = 251) iv. I ee ge 
xi. S (bes) r2 swe aes % t 4 i joc Thane AP Bo} To. bec iat 
sh. 0; OD) 31 Mis T4, 15 44, 254 Va 21 22 it 3G) 
xl, 9, 10 32 Wl. T4-16 0, 125 WV. 23 eae 745 eo) 
ei 1h ie, Tek, a Daal tlt at Nea see ue ee O) she a CK ee 
i. Sore ate ee a ies Shot ON Vie igs) gore 22 Me 4-0. 

_ 
wonTInb ten b 

Oo 

Qin O Gt tn i» 

I 

an) 
mnipPAR DN 
Cue TUL 

TaxG 

Es, Peterit 6 oe OT 
1 22 ; $2 

ricgey 2 se NS 

Lie ak Ol 

Ne eae m ed 

Tie Oo 102 

Vv. 4 29 

we ee 47 

Mi Oe 5,10 ae 

De bcler Ved 
Vid 

S beter 4 
sg 8 

SOD i 
129) 

bi deter 

TAG 

30, 14 
15 

1S. 
6 
: 
o 

PN OES Ds, 

Too John 25 

ie eee) va ane 
eT 
2S. jon 7 
S 
Poe ote 
ve 5 
Vii. 17 
Su ey 7 
Ser et 

QO 

lo 

: SU) 
Fe ps 

ni) 
«= 146 
: 7 
ley (>, 

ee ee 
oe 
ae ee 
ee 

Moe a 
oe 
: eS 

oe 

SeLEC TL ORATIONS 

OF 

SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

SOMETIME ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE. 

TRANSLATED BY 

CHARLES GORDON BROWNE, M.A., 
Recror or Lympsrone, DEvon; 

AND 

JAMES EDWARD SWALLOW, Ni, 

CHAPLAIN OF THE House or Mercy, Hoxpury. 

VOW gach 

ry 
pay 

ie 

2 

3. 
7: 
3. 

72. 

202. ‘To Nectarius, Bishop of © onstantinople aes 
tor. To Cledonius the Priest against Apollinarius. . 
102, Against Apollinarius ; the second letter to Cle- 
PORINS 2 F545 es= rr eee eens ys oes 
125. To Oly mpius Skis geet wO0a a Bs was Rees 
DIVISION Il.—CORRESPONDENCE WITH SAINT 
BASIL THE GREAT, ARCHBISHOP OF C-ESAREA 
x. “Tvs Basil his Comrade o, 6..c0s%<45es jetue Sua 
m To the SAMC 1. ics np noc kn be sv aten oy 5 o8 ees 
4. In answer to Epistle xiv., ‘of Basil, about 361.. 
5. Circa A.D. 361... 2... cece eee e pe eeees vases 
6. Written about the same time, in amore serious 
WORE sab oa Sane a haw oe ee ae lkt ten 
8. To S. Basil after his ordination as ariest. cis . 
19. To Eusebius of Ceesarea....... eee eee eee e eee 
WG. “J THE SANG, oc. csc be claie wad coe nea gn ah ods os . 
17. To Eusebius, Archbishop of Ceesarea.......-- 
78. ‘To ousebius of Ceesaréae. oc .6s sess i ewe wee . 
40. To the Great Basil ........ 2.00 eee ee eee 
41. To the people of Casarea, in his Father's name 
a6;“To the Bishops. «2.4 5. sss ~ ses geen ne ay 
42. To Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.......+ vot 
Ae. LO Bast. occas oo Lae essed éepie be sess pea ees 
BD. LO CHE SAMS. cna wits eh s5 some Cidaeet ee ‘ 
47. To the same bak bon ae et ce ia sce ea ae ; 
80 To The SAMEC, oo inn tanta ene se deed Ss Keres ees 
49. To the same, the praises of quict........+... r 
oO, LO {he SAM Cis oss, 2 ocess sy eves a Re erere® 
BG; Fo thé same@s. 2.124. ev ies'es senses Past. eure 
&o, “Lo the same.ce ss sees o3 +8 jd ata s © Maneatis Gone 4 
OO OTE SSG. Sik swells a eeg stv eee « Ceeaee ees 
DIiviston II].—MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS......- 
9, To-his brother Geesarius... 6. f.+<<caseces ooo 
x, To S.Greéegoty of Nyssay i+ caves ce see's 58 bine 
fe CLS SOUS: 9 rs ww ide os aS ae eye PA 6 aah eh 
es, LO THOS BANC 5055 05 ees Eos Sao 4 Sh Gee eee eons 
oe, 1 CO ROINE a5 dy ed eens wa Dey idveates 
Ge AA Ae BAIS yesh nsees oem es ie eahd Ge tten a 
Sear Oe Te ne as SV nee eee ud Pettis 35 Fs 
Tee, LTS BRIG gh x cute tee eG Vek hes ar tees 
197. A letter of condolence on the death of his sister 
TRROSCDI Rds seed secen a ba Cg eee et 
42, To Eusebius, B ishop Ot DATIOEEIOS 55 akan axa 
44/0 LG. (he SOE a caidas OOS Senae soos ene y enon eee 
Od, LO CES SAme aie. s Bee oe eer Ss at hyd cle at ace tonya 
bs; “Lo thie some wa, ile gee ewe Stal gate Ghee ws 
66, “Toe Sara ere tae te ee 
2t. To Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople .... 
oa! GO Ute cee Be ee er Poe ee 
2. TO EE SAIC ay «pesos tee tutors She tee ee ron giiieice® 

CORA ae: 

PROLEGOMENA: 

eto To=~ 1 ie Liles awaenape ees aise eee oe 
rerON [lhj— Tbe Wines. ,<.0% 5 nue cane Vee 
On Easter and his reluctance...... 

In defence of his flight to Pontus, and his re- 
turn, after his ordination to the priesthood, 
with an exposition of the character of the 

priestly OMe .. i. scan eaten se nea steele as 
To those who had invited him, “and not come 

to receive him..... Dem AN ree eee 
Panegyric on his brother, 4. Coesarius.. wots 
On his sister GOTZONA.. 6. cece ee eee eee eeeee 

Yo his father, when he had entrusted to him 

the care of the church of Nazianzus.... ..-- 

5. On his father’s silence, because of the plague 

OE FIAT yaad ove sk oe awe tei ase este wes 

On the death of his father .... 00.40.05. -<963 

. On the great Athan asius, Bishop of Alexan- 
CP os es A a on oe ceo 4 

The first theological oration—a preliminary 

discourse against the Eunomians.......-- +s 

ISION I,—LETTERS ON THE APOLLINARIAN 

CLONTROVERSY pice cepiwa ates eaewe ease ee yas ee 

Division III.—Literature...... 

2% aes oe 3 23 2 ee a8 

The second theological oration. 

ae aces 

PAGE 
187 
200 
ORATIONS. 
203 28. 
29. 

204 Sema tie fifth theological oration—on the Holy 
Dil Vy s.sie a sinc do ev camp Se on eS ce ae See 
227 | 33. Against the Arians, and concerning himself.. 
229 | 34. On the arrival-of the Eeyptians:.. ... .a.ivs-> 
238 37. On the words of the gospel, ‘““When Jesus 
| had finished these sayings,” etc.—S. Matt. 
245 | SM Si ae Be we kv wens nee eed ae ee eee 
{ 38. Onthe Theophany, or birthd: ry of Christ... 
247 | 39. Oration on the Holy Lights.........-..-.-++- 
254 4o. The oration on Holy Baptism.........---- < 
At, Ko Pentecost. av fives seer ek cree b wetes ee 
269 Aas The -Liast Bavewel cssa7ceee cates oe ines 
43. The Panegyric on S, Basil......-...+0-e eee 
284 45. The second oration on laster........ manees 
LETTERS, 
975 "TO the SAM. ncn 4s danee we cwetinsn eh oe 
437 39, To thé same. PPO ee rte oe eee 
428 1 93 Tb the same (oc sya ne wee rs ate ee 
439 | 195. Do sthe same ooo. ose use crteat se asgme ene erase? 
|g. To Amphilochius the Younger Pes alt hee tule 
445° | > 43.0 FO thie SAME 56 keke ede vee ceed cases 
Aas | Bh. - 10 The SEM6 foc encase eset eee baghatd icon 
| OTe SAO 2 eas Settee eagle teehee 
446) 27, “TO the Same .o0s 53 b6 5 sane ns Oso epee Fae ee 
446 | a8, To the same .... 2s civ es pe oe ae oer é 
446) 62. “10 tO GaiMe sccvkea co visp ents teens oe 
446 | 63. To Amphilochius the Elder . jot waoee bad or 
447 | 171. To Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconium Jieesek« x 
b 84. “LG thé SAMCuS ole tha eds coy seiee er secre ee S¥ 4% 
447 | 88. To Nectarius, Archbishop of Constantinople. . 
440 4 -Ote Po the same. 4s ae ete cere Cease e P 
4481 T6r, TO tne same iad es fui. agate nea 
448 | 185. To the same iv..<.ee ore std ser scin st pee -20 4 
449 | 186. To the same—A letter of introduction for a 
449 | FOISUVE ok panies ead ae kveenuks Pe ee Pe 
449 | 6s the selena ncn ds cs ee ee ose 
450 | ma To Theodore, Bishop of AGRO 64 calor eis . 
450) 425. V0 the Same oe ees eT Stee 
451 | I2I. "To the same eink. Pr ee pe Sue eae ae 
4s2'|.t22, “To. the same’... is lak ee eed ieee ‘ 
452. |: 129. Lo the same .ic.<eess raises asthe eek ees 
4sa°| 724. "To the same... asacshw tien doves nase es hee 
453 | 152. To the Same .....ssceeeseeeeere ere rtereccces 
453 | 153. To Bosporius, Bishop of CGIOUNG: ice Bieta 
454 | 157. To Theodore, Archbishop of Dyses. sou a 
454 | Tq: Pe Ae Same... ia echt eee eee a +> ide blesses woke 
456 | 183. To Theodore of Mopsuestia. ee ee 
456 THO LREGU ONE ea ne oe we a Caatetare a es 
457 2a i OO Sas 5 us rn ne ee 
457 &t. Po the. same. ce. rr aoe ree Renin: aad 
459 Ge, LO: Ge SAM Cnc slow nse sls eich trillent om te eae 
460 BS. LG Me Same iA vista ea aes once weenie s 
460 = To the same;.0n aconicism...<35% Per ee ee 
460 | . To the same, an invitation....... nes eee é 
460 | ae Phe Olhigericittt emer re te vets 
AGT 4 TOR 4g LO ADE Same a te me ee Sipere mene oon 
460 |} YOO: Towne same is. : lose te chee ere eee ee 
( TeBe Di tte SAe ine. sia. occ abeys eather eta 
Aol) | tai oe Sere ee ciian Be Rarer nt ee 
462 | 480, “Lortine same 2. on Bia Reg Giclakd olen par euneeele 
463) qAzte ee Te se aap =e eieentaure: ws jak ees Z 
469 |r rae, “Ve. the same 7 oss alse Ss Lecce citreus 
460 |-143,. Po the Samet.< soe. agiokla Atanas ealewoks fo toke tatoo ever 
464.) ‘Tah. “Wo tie. See. so. nae er oe < Sa oe suane. 
464 | tase, Dos Vananuis. pi peice Sava cea Retreat a tiren Eee 
Psy ie eo ertovems Beli@)hiscpellien ne ye es ood oaro0 oA a cone Oot 
AG4 Asap. hovthessame-. isn. Avda: Soe 5 

The third theological oration—on ‘the Son. 
The fourth theol ogical oration, which is the 
second concerning the Son 

PAGE 
201 

PROLEGOMENA. 

Saat, LO Ly 
THE LIFE. 

S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN, called by the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus ‘The Great,’’ 
and universally known as ‘‘ The Theologian ’’ or « The Divine,” a title which he shares with 
S. John the Evangelist alone among the Fathers of the Church, was, like the great Basil of 
Cwsarea and his brother Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, by birth a Cappadocian. He was born at 
Arianzus, a country estate belonging to his father, in the neighbourhood of Nazianzus. 

This latter, sometimes called Nazianzum, is a place quite unknown to early writers, and de- 
rives all its importance from its connection with our Saint. The Romans seem to have 
called it Dioczsarea. This would place it in the south-western portion of the district called 
Cappadocia Secunda, a sub-division of the Province, which had previously included the 
whole country of Cappadocia under the Prefect of Czesarea. The Emperor Valens made the 
division for financial purposes about A.p. 371, and assigned Tyana as its civil Metropolis, 
and, as we shall see, thereby caused an ecclesiastical quarrel which had considerable effect on 
the life of S. Gregory. Tyana was situated at no great distance south and east of Nazianzus, 
which place is usually identified with some interesting ruins about eighteen miles south-east of 
Ak Serai, on a rocky platform at the foot of the mountains called Hassan Dagh. Amongst other 
ruined buildings here are the remains of three Byzantine churches of great age, but more re- 
cent than the rest of the town. 

His father, who bore the same name with himself, had originally belonged to an obscure 
sect called Hypsistarians or Hypsistians, of whom we know little except what we learn from 
Gregory of Nazianzus and his namesake of Nyssa. They seem to have held a sort of syncre- 
tist doctrine, containing elements derived from heathen, Christian, and Jewish sources. They 
were very strict monotheists, rejecting both polytheism and the doctrine of the Trinity, and 
worshipping the One Supreme Being under the names of The Most High and The Almighty, 
and the emblems of Fire and Light, but with no external cultus; for they rejected sacrifice 
and every outward form of worship, holding adoration to be an exclusively interior and spir- 
itual act. With singular inconsistency, however, they adopted the observance of the Jewish 
Sabbath, and the Levitical prohibition of certain kinds of food. They were but few in num- 
ber, and their influence was insignificant even in Cappadocia, which was the headquarters of 
the sect.'| From this form of error the elder Gregory was converted by the influence of his 
wife, Nonna; and soon after his conversion was consecrated to the bishopric of Nazianzus. 

Nonna, the mother of our Saint, was the daughter of Christian parents, and had been 
very carefully brought up. Like S. John Chrysostom and S. Augustine, Gregory had the in- 
estimable advantage of being reared at the knee of a mother of conspicuous holiness. There 

‘ex Svow évavtwrtatow cvycexpaevys, EAAnVEKAS TE Kal vomiKns Tepateias: Sv audorépwv Ta mépy buy, ex wépwv auvetédn. Tis 
év yap Ta eldwra Kal Tas Ovoias amoTEUTOMEVOL, TLL@TL TO TOP Kal Ta AVYVA* THs 5€ 7d gdBBarov aidovmevot Kal TA TEpt TA Bowuara 
Mev yap xXva* TH 
€ativ & wixpodoyiay, Thy mEpLTOMAY aTindagovatv.—Or. xviii. 5. 

188 PROLEGOMENA. 

were three children of the marriage-—a sister, Gorgonia, probably somewhat older than Greg- 
ory, who was devotedly fond of her ; and a brother, Ceesarius, perhaps younger, who was a dis- 
tinguished physician, and occupied a post of confidence at the Court of Constantinople. Greg- 
ory was certainly born at a late period of the life of his mother. He tells us that, like so many 
other holy men of whom we read both in the Bible and outside its pages, he was consecrated 
to God by his mother even before his birth. The precise date is uncertain. ‘There are two 
lines in his poem on his own life which seem to indicate clearly that it took place after his 
father’s elevation to the Episcopate, or at any rate after his ordination to the Priesthood. 
Speaking of the great desire of the elder Gregory to see his son ordained to the Priesthood, in 
order that he might have him as a coadjutor and aid to his own declining years and failing 
strength, he gives the arguments by which the old man sought to persuade him to take upon 
himself a burden which he dreaded; and among them we find the father saying to the son: * 
‘«‘ You have not been yet so long in life as I have spent in sacrifice.’’ And though the Roman 
Catholic writers on the subject strain every nerve to get rid of the obvious meaning, by inge- 
nious manipulation of the text or by far-fetched interpretations, yet the conclusion remains 
unshaken, and is supported also by another passage, to be cited presently, that he was at any 
rate born during the Priesthood of his father. He tells us that he left Athens in or about his 
thirtieth year,’ and also that the Emperor Julian was his contemporary there. Now Julian 
was at Athens in 3553; so that we must place Gregory’s birth not earlier than 325; and if 
we give its natural meaning to the first passage quoted, not earlier than 330, the latest date 
available for his father’s consecration as Bishop. This is not inconsistent with the Athenian 
chronology of his life, as he certainly spent many years there, and probably did not leave the 
place till 357. 

As soon as the children’s age permitted, Gregory and his brother Cesarius were sent to 
school at Czesarea, under the care of a good man named Carterius, who as long as he lived re- 
tained a great influence over the mind of his elder pupil. This is perhaps the same Carterius 
who afterwards presided over the monasteries of Antioch in Syria, and was one of the in- 
structors of S. John Chrysostom. The following is a free rendering of one of four funeral epi- 
grams written in later years by our Saint in honour of his old friend and tutor : 

‘Whither, Carterius, best beloved of friends, 
O whither hast thou gone, and left me here 
Alone amid the many toils of earth ? 
Thou who didst hold the rudder of my youth, 
When in another land I learned to weigh 
The words and stories of a learned age ; 
Thou who didst bind me to the uncarnal life. 
Truly the Christ, whom thou possessest now, 
Took thee unto Himself, the King thou lov’st. 
O thou bright lightning of most glorious Christ, 
‘Thou best protection of my early days, 
Thou charioteer of all my younger life ; 
Remember now the Gregory whom erst 
Thou trainedst in the ways of virtuous life, 
Carterius, master of the life of grace.”’ 

It was probably at Ceesarea that the acquaintance between Gregory and S. Basil the Great 
began, which was afterwards to ripen into a lifelong friendship. But their association did 

2 Carm. de vita sua, 511. 3b. 339- 

THE LIFE. 189 

not last long at this period, for Basil soon went to Constantinople to continue his education, 
while Gregory and his brother removed to the Palestinian Cesarea ; probably as much for the 
sake of making a pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulchre, as for the advantage of the schools of that 
learned resort. Cccsarius soon went on to Alexandria; Dut Gregory was tempted by the 
flourishing Palestinian school of rhetoric to remain a while and study that art. One of his 
fellow-students here was Euzoius, the future heresiarch. rom Palestine he too went on to 
Alexandria, where he found his brother enjoying an excellent character, and highly distin- 
guished among the students of the University. §S. Athanasius was at this time the Bishop, 
and Didymus head of the famous Catechetical School; but. as Gregory, though one of his 
orations is a panegyric on S. Athanasius, does not mention having ever met cither of these 
two great men, we must suppose that the former was at this time suffering one of his many 
periods of exile—his second banishment lasted from 340 to 347. Gregory does not seem to 
have remained very long at Alexandria; the fascination exercised on his mind by a yet more 
famous seat of learning—Athens—soon drew him thither. He could not even wait fora 
favourable time of year, but must start at once. He took passage in the month of November 
in a ship bound for Aigina, with some of whose crew he was acquainted. ‘They had a pros- 
perous voyage until they were in sight of Cyprus, when they were assailed by a tremendous 
storm, and the ship, swept by the heavy seas, became waterlogged, and would not answer her 
helm. At the same time the violence of the sea burst the water-tanks, and the ship’s company 
were left in dire distress. Gregory, who was not yet baptized, was thrown into terrible dis- 
tress at thus finding himself in peril of death while yet outside the Covenant of God. In 
earnest prayer he renewed his self-dedication, and vowed to give himself wholly to the service 
of God, if his life might be spared to receive Holy Baptism. He tells the story at some 
length and with great graphic power in his long poem on his own life, from which we subjoin 
a cento,! and also in his oration spoken at his father’s funeral (Orat. (VIE G. 38, py. Ree 
wd. Ben.). It is, however, uncertain whether he was baptized immediately after this deliver- 
ance, or whether he waited till his return to Nazianzus. At any rate he reached Athens in 
safety, and shortly afterwards was joined there by Basil; when the early acquaintance which 
was now renewed soon deepened into an intimacy of brotherly affection, which, though often 
sorely tried, never grew cold in Gregory’s heart. In the funeral oration which he pronounced 

4 What time I parted from igyptian shores, And cried above the noise of surging waves, 

Whence [ had somewhat culled of ancient lore, 
We weighed, and under Cyprus cut the waves 
In a straight course for Hellas, when there rose 
A mighty strife of wiads, and shook the ship: 
And all was night; earth, seas, and darkened skies } 
And thunders echoed to the lightning’s shock, 
Whistled the rigging of the swelling sails, 

And bent the mast; the helm had lost its power, 
Yor none could hold it in the raging seas. 

The ship was filled with overwhelming waves ; 
Mingled the shout of sailor, and the cries 

Of helmsman, captain, and of passenger, 

And those who till that fearful hour had been 
Unconscious of a God; for fear can teach. 

And, worst of all our dread impending woes, 
No water had we, for the ship began 

Yo labour, and the beakers soon were broke 
Which held our treasure of sweet water scant : 
And famine fought with surging and with storm 
‘Yo slayus. But God sent a swift release. 

lor Punic sailors suddenly appeared, 

Who in their own sore terror soon perceived 

Ly our sad cries our danger, and with oars 
(For they were strong) came up and saved cur barque 
And us, who now all but sea-corpses were i 

Like fish forsaken of their native wave, 

Or lamp that dies for want of nourishment. 

3ut while we all were fearing sudden death, 
Mine was a worse, because a secret, fear. 

‘The cleansing waters ne’er had passed on me, 
‘That slay our foe and join us to our God. 

This was my lamentation, this my dread, 

For this I stretched my hands and cried to God, 

MOB. br. 

And rent my clothes, and lay in misery. 

But, though ye scarce believe it, yet ’tis true, 

All those on whom our common danger pressed 
Forgot themselves, and came and prayed with me, 
And ‘Thou wast then, O Christ, my great defence, 
Who now deliverest from the storm of life. 

For when no good hope dawned upon our eyes, 
Nor isle, nor continent, nor mountain top, 

Nor torch, nor star to light the mariners, 

Nor small nor great of earthly things appeared, 
What port was left for troubled sailor-follk ? 
Despairing of all else, [ look to thee ; 

Life, breath, salvation, light, and strength to men, 
Who frightest, smitest, smilest, healest all, 

And ever weavest good from human ill. 

I call to mind Thy wonders of old time, 

By which we recognize Thy mighty hand ; 

The sea divided—Israel’s host brought through— 
Their foes defeated by Thy lifted hand— 

And Egypt crushed by scourges, chiefs and a'l— 
Nature subdued, and walls thrown down by sheut, 
And, adding mine to those old famous acts. 
‘Yhine own, I said, am [, both erst and now; 
‘Twice shalt Thou take me for Thine own, a gift 

Of earth and sea, a doubly hallowed gift, 

By prayers of mother and by fateful sea. 

To Thee I live, if I escape the waves, 

And gain baptismal dews ; and ‘Thou wilt lose 

A faithful servant if ‘hou cast me off, 

E’en now Thine own disciple, in the deep ; 

Shake off for me Thy slumber, and arise, 7 
And stay my fear. So prayed I—and the noice 
Of winds grew still, the surges ceased, the ship 
Held straight upon her course; my prayer was heard. 

190 PROLEGOMENA. 

over his friend, Gregory has left us a most interesting account of University life in the middle 
of the fourth century, of which we give a summary here, referring the reader for details to the 
oration itself, which will be found in the present volume. sasil’s reputation, he says, pre- 
ceded him to Athens, where he was received with much enthusiasm. Many of the silliest 
students there are mad upon Sophists, and are divided upon the respective merits of their 
teachers with as much excitement as is shown by the partisans of the various chariots in the 
Hippodromes. And so a new-comer is laid hold of by them in this fashion. First of all, he 
is entertained by the first who can get hold of him—cither a relation or a friend or a fellow- 
countryman, or a leading Sophister, who is in favour with his master, and touts for him. 
There he is unmercifully chaffed, and with more or less of rough horseplay, by everybody, to 
ake down his pride; and is then escorted processionally through the streets to the Baths ; 
after which process he is regarded as free of the students’ guild. Basil, however, through the 
good offices of his friend Gregory, was spared this trial of his nerves, out of respect for his 
great attainments; and this kind action was the beginning of their long and affectionate in- 
timacy. Among the students, however, were a number of young Armenians, some of whom 
had been at school with Basil, and were very jealous of him. These young men, with the 
object of destroying his reputation if possible, were continually harassing him with disputa- 
tions upon hard and sophistical questions. Basil was quite able to hold his own against them ; 
but Gregory, jealous for the honour of his University, and not at first perceiving the malice 
of these young men, sided with them and made the conflict more equal. As soon, however, 
as he began to see their real purpose, he forsook them and took his stand by his friend, whose 
victory was thus made not only assured but easy. The young gentlemen naturally did not 
like this, and Gregory became, much to Basil’s distress, very unpopular among them, as they 
chose to regard his conduct in the matter as treason against his University, and especially 
against the students of his own year. 

The city of Athens at this time was full of dangerous distractions for young men; feasts, 
theatres, assemblies, wine parties, etc. Gregory and his friend resolved to renounce all these, 
and to allow themselves to know only two roads—one, that which led to the Church and its 
holy teachers; the other, that which took them to their University lectures.> Amongst 
other famous students of Gregory’s day was Prince Julian, afterwards the Emperor who apos- 
tatized and endeayoured to restore the ancient heathenism, and galvanize it into something 
like a new life. Gregory claims even at this early period to have foreseen and dreaded 
the result of Julian’s accession. ‘I had long foreseen,’’ he says, ‘* how matters would be, 
from the time that I was with him at Athens. He had come there shortly after the violent 
measures against his brother, having asked permission of the Emperor to do so, He had two 
reasons for this sojourn—the one more honest, namely, to visit Greece and its schools; the 
other more secret and known only to a few persons, namely, to consult with the heathen 
priests and charlatans about his plans; because his wickedness was not as yet declared. ven 
then I made no bad guess about the man, although I am not one of those skilled in such mat- 
ters; but I was made a prophet by the unevenness of his disposition and the very unsettlec 
condition of his mind. I used these very words about him: ‘ What an evil the Roman State 
is nourishing,’ though I prefaced them with a wish that I might prove a false prophet.” 

6 Of this early friendship with Basil, Gregory speaks thus: 

For God had given me yet one priceless gift Allthings we shared in common, and one soul 
Uniting me with Wisdom’s wisest son, Linked us together, though in body twain. 
Himself alone above all life and word ; One thing there was which joined us most of all, 
Who this could be, ye soon shall know full well; ‘The love of God and of the highest good. 

Basil his name, our age’s great support. Vor, soon as courage came to us to speak 

He was the comrade of my words and roof, Each to the other of that we had at heart, 

And of my thoughts, if I may boast so much. More closely were our spirits knit in love, 

A pair were we not all unknown in Greece ; For fellow fecling makes us wondrous kind. 

(Carm. de Vita Sua. 1. 222.) 

ee Las Ig! 

(Orat. V. 23, 24.) Gregory must have been a long time at Athens. He seems to have gone 
there at about the age of eighteen, and not to have left till he was past thirty. Basil left 
hefore him and returned to Cappadocia ; and as soon as he could follow he went to Constan- 
tinople, where he met his brother,* who had just come there to practice as a Court Physician, 
bat resolved to throw up his practice and return with his brother to Nazianzns. They found 
their parents still living and their father occupying the piscopal ‘Throne. From this time on- 
ward Gregory divided his time between his parents and his friend ; living partly at Arianzus, 
and partly with Basil in Pontus, in monastic seclusion. At his Baptism, which it seems most 
probable took place at this period, he made a solemn vow never to swear, and to devote his 
whole energies and powers solely to the glory of God, and the defence and spreading of the 
faith. Ceesarius did not remain long in the retirement of home, but soon returned to. the 
Capital, where a brilliant career seemed opening before him. Gregory, whose mind was 
strongly impressed with the dangers and temptations of a life at Court, did not altogether ap- 
prove of this step, yet he does not very severely blame it. He himself, however, felt very 
strongly drawn to the monastic life; but as retirement from the world did not seem to him to 
be his vocation, he resolved to continue to live in the world, and to be a help and support to 
his now aged parents, and especially to his father in the duties of his Episcopate, but at the 
same time to live under the strictest ascetic rule. He had, however, always a secret hankering 
after the Solitary life, which he had once (Ep. i.) promised Basil to share with him ; and he 
did find himself able for some years to spend part of his time with his friend in his retirement 
in the wilds of Pontus. They portioned out their days very carefully between prayer, medita- 
tion and study, and manual labour, on the principles laid down by Basil in a letter to his 
friend, which afterwards were developed into the celebrated Rule still observed by the entire 
body of the Religious of the Eastern Church.? Retirement, he says, does not consist in the 
act of removal from the world in bodily presence, but in this, that we tear away the soul from 
those bodily influences which stir up the passions ; that we give up our parental city and our 
father’s house, our possessions and goods, friendship and wedlock, business and profession, 
art and science, and everything, and are quite ready to take into our hearts nothing but the 
impressions of the divine teaching. 

In solitude, Basil thinks, it is possible altogether to tame the passions, like wild beasts, by 
gentle treatment ; to lull them to sleep, to disarm them. By turning away the soul from the 
enticements of sense, and withdrawing into one’s self for the contemplation of God and of 
Eternal Beauty, it is possible to raise man to a forgetfulness of natural wants, and to a spiritual 
freedom from care. The means to this spiritual elevation are in his view the reading of Holy 
Scripture, which sets before us rules of life—but especially the pictures of the lives of godly 
men ; Prayer which draws down the Godhead to us, and makes our mind a pure abode for It; 
and an earnest silence, more inclined to learn than to teach, but by no means morose or 
unfriendly. At the same time Basil desires that the outward appearance of one who thus 
practises solitude shall be in keeping with his inner life; with humble downcast eye, and 
dishevelled hair, in dirty untidy clothes he must go about, neither lazily loitering nor passion- 
ately quick, but quietly. His garment, girt upon his loins with a belt, is to be coarse, not of 
a bright colour, suited for both summer and winter, close enough to keep the body warm with- 
out additional clothing ; and his shoes adapted to their purpose, but without ornament. For 
food, let him use only the most necessary, chiefly vegetables; for drink, water—at least in 
health. For mealtime, which begins and ends with prayer, one hour is to be fixed. Sleep is 
to be short, light, and never so dead as to let the soul be open to the impressions of corrupt- 
ing dreams.°8 

On Vil 86 7 Ullmann G. v. N. Sbas.dipeu- Uiinameu.s, 
I 

ye 

192 PROLEGOMENA. 

They gave themselves especially to the study of Holy Scripture, and to the practice of 
devotional exercises. In their study their great principle was to interpret the holy writings 
not by their own individual judgment, but on the lines laid down for them by the authority 
of ancient interpreters.? Of uninspired commentators they had the greatest respect for Origen, 
whose errors, however, they happily avoided. From his exegetical writings they compiled a 
book of Extracts, which they published in twenty-seven books, to which they gave the name 
of Philocalia, ¢.c., what in modern language is called a Christology. This is happily still 
extant, and is valuable as preserving for us many passages otherwise lost, or existing only in a 
Latin translation. Gregory sent a copy of this work to his friend and subsequent com- 
panion at Constantinople, Theodore, Bishop of ‘Tyana, as an Easter gift many years after- 
wards, and accompanied it witha letter,” in which he speaks of the work as a memorial of him- 
self and Basil, and as intended for an aid toscholars ; and begs that his friend will give a proof 
of its usefulness, with the help of diligence and the Holy Spirit. Socrates"! says that this care- 
ful study of Origen was of the greatest service to the two friends in their subsequent con- 
troversies with the Arians ; for these heretics quoted him in support of their errors, but the 
two Fathers were enabled to confute them readily, by shewing that they were completely 
ignorant of the meaning of Origen’s argument. 

But Gregory does not appear to have stayed long in Basil’s Monastery; although Ruffinus 
speaks of a sojourn of thirteen years. This cannot for chronological reasons have been a con- 
tinuous stay, although it is true that Basil’s monastic life in Pontus, and Gregory’s various visits 
to him there extended over a period of about that length, from his first retirement in 357 to 
his consecration to the Episcopate in 370. It was after about three years that Gregory 
returned to Nazianzus (360), possibly, as Ullmann suggests, because of circumstances which 
had arisen at his home, which seemed to call imperatively for his presence in the interests of 
the peace of the Diocese, and for the assistance which he might, though a layman, be able 
to give to his aged Father, who had got into trouble through a piece of imprudent con- 
duct. 

The Emperor Constantius, who was an Arian, had in 359 assembled at Ariminum (the 
modern Rimini) a Council of 4oo Western Bishops, and these, partly duped, partly compelled 
by the Imperial Officers, had put out a Creed, which, while acknowledging the proper Deity of 
the Son, and confessing Him to be Like the Father, omitted to say Like IN ALL Points, and 
refused the word ConsupsTANTIAL ; thus, while condemning the extreme followers of Arius, 
favouring the views of the Semi-Arian party. At the same time another Synod, of 150 
Eastern Bishops, was assembled under Court influence at Seleucia, and promulgated a similar 
formula. The Bishop of Nazianzus, though still as always a staunch upholder of Nicene or- 
thodoxy, was in some way induced to attach his signature to this compromising Creed ; and 
this action led to most important consequences. ‘The Monks of his Diocese took the matter 
up with the usual earnestness of Religious, and, with several also of the Bishops, withdrew 
from Communion with their own Bishop. This may have been the reason for his son’s return. 
He induced his Father to apologize for his involuntary error and to put out an orthodox Con- 
fession, and so he healed the schism. To this period belongs his first Oration on Peace; in 
which, after an eloquent encomium on the Religious life, he sets forth the blessings of peace 
and concord, and contrasts them with the misery of discord ; begging the people to be very 
slow indeed on this account to sever themselves from the Communion of those whom they 
think to be erring brethren ; and thanking God for the restoration of peace. He concludes 

2 Brev. Rom. May 9. WO: Oxy. WE LV... 2ocvl 

12 The reign of Constantius was, says Dr. Ullmann, in a very special way the age of Synods. By his endless summoning of Synods 
he not only furthered doctrinal disputes, but also injured the finances of the State, destroyed the cxistence of the Posts, and brought 
everything into confusion. 

DEES Tec, 193 

the whole with a splendid setting forth of the Catholic doctrine concerning the ‘Trinity, in 
the following terms :— 

“ Would to God that none of us may perish, but that we may all abide in one spirit, with 
one soul labouring together for the faith of the Gospel, of one mind, minding the same thing, 
armed with the shield of faith, girt about the loins with truth; knowing only the one war 
against the Evil One, and those who fight under his orders ; not fearing them that kill the body 
but cannot lay hold of the soul; but fearing Him Who is the Lord both of soul and body ; 
guarding the good deposit which we have received from our fathers ; adoring Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost ; knowing the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Holy Ghost—into which 
Names we were baptized, in Which we have believed ; under Whose banner we have been en- 
listed ; dividing Them before we combine Them, and combining before we divide ; not recciv- 
ing the Three as one Person (for They are not impersonal, or names of one Person, as though 
our wealth lay in Names alone and not in facts), but the Three as one Thing. For They are 
One, not in Person, but in Godhead, Unity adored in Trinity, and Trinity summed up in 
Unity ; all adorable, all royal, of one throne and one glory ; above the world, above time, un- 
created, invisible, impalpable, uncircumscript ; in Its relation to Itself known only to Itself; but 
to us equally venerable and adorable ; Alone dwelling in the Holiest, and leaving all creatures 
outside and shut off, partly by the First Veil, and partly also by the Second ;—by the first, the 
heavenly and angelic host, parted from Godhead ; and by the second, we men, severed from 
the Angels. This let us do; let this be our mind, Brethren ; and those that are otherwise 
minded let us look upon as diseased in regard to the truth, and as far as may be, let us take 
and cure them; but if they be incurable let us withdraw from them, lest we share their disease 
before we impart to them our own health. And the God of Peace that passeth all understand- 
ing shall be with you in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.8?? 

Gregory the Elder was now aged and infirm, and began to feel his need of a Coadjutor in 
his pastoral duties. So, by the great desire of the people of Nazianzus, he ordained his son 
to the Priesthood, much against the will of the said son. ‘This Ordination took place at some 
great Festival, probably at Christmas of the year 361. Gregory the Younger was much ag- 
grieved at this gentle violence, which even in after years he describes as an act of tyranny," and 
says he cannot bring himself to speak of it in other terms, though he asks pardon of the Holy 
Spirit for his language. Immediately after his Ordination he made his escape to Pontus, ap- 
parently reaching Basil about Epiphany, 362. Here he had time for reflection on the obedi- 
ence he now owed to his father, not only as son to father, but as Priest to Bishop; and with 
a truer view of his duty he returned to Nazianzus, where he was present in the Church on 
Easter day 362, and preached his first Sermon as a Priest, in apology for his reluctance, 
Strange to say, though it was so great a Festival, and though the preacher was so well known 
and so much beloved in Nazianzus, the congregation was very small 3—probably many refrained 
from going to Church in order to mark their feeling about Gregory’s flight to Pontus. Any- 
how he felt the discourtesy keenly, and in his next sermon took occasion to reprove them 
severely for their inconsistency in receiving him so badly after having compelled him for their 
sakes to finally renounce the solitude he loved so well. Of this discourse the Abbé Benoit 
speaks as follows :— 

‘* [t is not very long, and it seems to us a model of the tact and art which a Minister of the 
Gospel ought to use in his speech when just grievances compel him to address deserved re- 
proaches to the faithful. It would be impossible to blame with greater force, to complain with 

13 J have followed Ullmann and Nirschl in placing this occurrence here. The Benedictine Editors, apparently in order to add priestly 
authority to this Oration (VI.), have put it four years later, on what [ cannot but think to be insufficient grounds, Their date would 
bring it to the close of the reign of Julian or the beginning of that of Jovian, neither of which periods would offer any inducement to 

Arianizing, 1# Carm,, dé vita, li, 345 

194 PROLEGOMENA. 

more frankness, and yet to do it in a way less offensive to the hearers. Traise, indeed, is so 
mingled with blame in this discourse, and there is in its tone something so carnest and aflec- 
tionate, that the audience, though sharply reprimanded, not only could not take offence, but 
was compelled to conceive a yet greater affection and admiration for him who so reproved 
them.’ 

Gregory took the opportunity to write another very long Oration as his apology tor 
his flight. In it he sets forth at great length his conception of the nature and responsibilities 
of the Priestly Office, and justifies himself both for having shrunk from such a char, 

rae 

e, and for 
having so soon returned to take it up. It is very improbable that this Oration, numbered HH. 
in the Benedictine Edition, was ever delivered aad voce, but it was published, and is a com- 
plete ‘Treatise on the Priesthood, used both by 8. John Chrysostom as the foundation of his Six 
Books on the Priesthood, and by S$. Gregory the Great as the basis of his Treatise on the 
Pastoral Rule. It has also furnished material to many of the best Ecclesiastical writers of all 
ages. 

Julian had now succeeded to the Empire, and had entered Constantinople in 36%. . He 
had by this time completely broken with the Church, and renounced even the outward sem- 
blance of Christianity. He persuaded Cvesarius, however, to retain his position at Court ; 
hoping perhaps that he might succeed in perverting him. ‘This was a matter of deep regret 
to his father and brother, and they felt, the latter says, obliged to keep the fact from the 
knowledge of his mother. Gregory wrote his brother a letter of most affectionate though 
earnest remonstrance ; with the result that Casarius soon made up his mind to retire; and 
put his resolution in practice on the opportunity afforded by the departure of the I:mpcror 
from Constantinople to assume the direction of his campaign against the Persians. Nazianzus 
was not allowed to remain without attempts being made against its Christianity, for the Pre- 
fect of the Province was sent with an armed escort of considerable strength to demand posses- 
sion of the Church. But the aged Bishop, supported by his son and by his people, boldly 
refused to comply with the Imperial commands, and there seemed such a probability of 
powerful resistance that the Prefect felt compelled to withdraw his force, and never came 
to Nazianzus again on such an errand, ‘The Gregorys, father and son, frequently came into 
collision with Julian during his stay in Cappadocia on his way to Persia; and indeed it is not 
too much to say that the firm stand which they made on behalf of the right was, under God, 
the means of diverting the Emperor from his purpose of making a vehement assault upon the 
faith and rights of the Church in that Province. As the Abbé Benoit ® remarks, Julian saw 
that he must be careful in dealing with a province where Christian faith was such a living 
power, and where a simple village Bishop could dare to make so stout a stand against Im- 
perial Authority ; but he declared his intention of avenging himself upon his opponents on his 
return from his expedition. The Providence of God, however, interfered, and he never did 
return, but was defeated and killed. 

In 363 or 364 Basil, like Gregory, was ordained Priest much against his will. ‘The 
Bishop of Ceesarea, Metropolitan of Cappadocia, was Eusebius. He had been elected in 362 
by a popular clamour, while yet only a Catechumen, and was very unwillingly consecrated by 
the Bishops of the Province. He felt it necessary to have at hand a Priest who by his skill 
in Theology would be a help to him in the controversies of the times, and he selected Basil. 
But for some unknown reason, possibly no more than a certain jealousy of Basil’s superior 
reputation and influence, within a very short time Eusebius quarrelled with him, and 
endeavoured to deprive him. This might easily have led to a serious schism, had Basil been 
a self-seeking man, but as it was, he quietly retired to his Community in Pontus, accompanied 

—— a eR I = 

15S, G, de N, 

a eee 

MEE? deers om 

by his friend Gregory, who, however, was not able to remain long in that conyenial society, 
as his presence was still much needed by his father. On the succession of Valens, an Arian, 
to the ‘Yhrone of the Empire, Lusebius wrote to Gregory, entreating him to come to 
Cysarea and give him the benefit of his advice. Gregory, however, respectfully declined the 
invitation on the grounds of his sense of the wrong which his friend had suffered ; and after 
some correspondence he succeeded in effecting a reconciliation between the latter and his 
Metropolitan, in the year 365. 

Cesarius meantime had returned to the Court and had received from Valens a valuable 
piece of preferment in Bithynia; but in the end of 368 or beginning of 369, having been 
terrified by a great earthquake, during which he had been in considerable danger, he was 
arranging matters for his final retirement, when he was seized with illness, and very soon 
died, leaving all his property, which must have amounted to a considerable sum, to his 
brother in trust for the poor. He was buried at Nazianzus, and on the occasion of his 
funeral his brother preached the Sermon which is numbered VIII. in the Benedictine Edition. 
About the same time, but a little later, Gorgonia also departed, and he preached a funeral 
sermon on her too. Eusebius of Ceesarea died in 370, and Basil at once wrote an urgent 
letter to Gregory, begging him to come to Czesarea, probably in order to get him electe 
Archbishop. Gregory, however, declined to go, and he and his father exerted themselves to 
the utmost of their power to procure the election of Basil; the elder Gregory writing through 
his son two letters, one addressed to the people of Caesarea, the other to the Provincial 

Synod, urging Basil’s claims very strongly. ‘Though ill at the time, he managed to convey 
himself to the Metropolis in time for the meeting of the Synod; and Basil was elected 
and consecrated. Gregory wrote him a letter of congratulation ; not, however, a very warm 
one; but when troubles began to arise he spoke out with all the fervour of their early 
friendship in support of the Archbishop. About this time Valens divided the civil 
Province of Cappadocia into two, one of which had Cesarea, the other Tyana, for its 
Metropclis. Anthimus, Bishop of the latter See, thereupon claimed to be é/se fucto Metro- 
politan of the new Province ; a claim which Basil strenuously resisted, as savouring of what 
we call Erastianism. A long dispute followed, in the course of which Basil, to assert his 
rights as Metropolitan, and to strengthen his own hands, erected several new Bishoprics in the 
disputed Province ; and to one of these, Sasima, a miserable little village ! he consecrated his 
friend Gregory, almost by force. Gregory was, not unnaturally, indignant at this treatment ; 
while Basil, whose great object had been to strengthen himself against Anthimus, took it as 
unkind of Gregory to be so reluctant to comply with his friend’s wishes. So the two were for 
a long time in very strained relations to one another. Although, however, Gregory ultimately 
yielded to the earnest wish of his father, and submitted to the authority of the Archbishop, 
yet he did not disguise his reluctance ; and in the Sermons which he preached on the occasion 
(Or. ix. x.) he spoke very strongly on the point. Anthimus, however, occupied the village 
of Sasima with troops, and prevented Gregory from taking peaceable possession of his See, 
which it is probable he never actually administered, for his father begged him to remain at 
Nazianzus and continue his services as coadjutor Bishop. The contest about the Metropoli- 
tanate of T'yana went on for some time, but in the end, mainly by Gregory’s mediation, it 
was amicably settled. In 374 Gregory the elder died, and his wife also, and thus our Saint 
was set free from the charge of the diocese. He spoke a panegyric at his father’s funeral, and 
wrote a number of little “In Memoriam ’’ poems to his mother’s memory ; and out of respect 

16 The following is Gregory's own description cf his new diocese (Carm. de vita sta, 4390): 

“There is a little station ona high road in Cappadocia, situated where the road is divided into three} wrthout water, without grass 
with nothing of freedom about it; a frightfully horrible and narrow little village ; everywhere dust and noise and carts, weeping an 
shouting, lictors and chains, The people are all foreigners and vagabonds, Such is my Church of Sasima, to which I was presented 
by a man who is not content with fifty chorepiscopi, What munificence |” 

190 PROLEGOSRENS. 

for his father continucd to administer the See of Nazianzus for about a year, making great 
efforts meanwhile to secure the appointment of a Bishop. But, perceiving that his efforts 
would be fruitless, because of the devotion of the people to himself, he at length withdrew, 
after a very serious illness, to Seleucia in Isauria (375,) where he lived three or four years, 
attached to the famous Church of S. Thecla. Very little is known of his lite there ; but it 
must have been at this period that he heard of the death of Basil, upon whom two years later 
in the Cathedral of Cesarea he pronounced a splendid panegyric. 

In 379 the Church at Constantinople, which for forty years had been oppressed by a suc- 
cession of Arian Archbishops, and was well nigh crushed out of existence by the multitude of 
other heresies, Eunomian, Macedonian, Novatian, Apollinarian, etc., which Arian rule had 
fostered, besought the great Theologian to come to their aid. Theodosius the new Emperor, 
who was a fervent Catholic, backed their entreaty, as did also numcrous Bishops. Gregory 
resisted the call for a long time; but at last he came to see that it was the will of God that 
he should accept the Mission, and he consented to go and fill the gap, until such time as the 
Catholics of the Capital might be able to elect an Archbishop. 

The following account of the religious condition of Constantinople at this time is con- 
densed from Ullmann :— 

« Religious feeling like everything else had become to the idle and empty mind a subject ~ 
of joke and amusement. What belonged to the theatre was brought into the Church, and what 
belonged to the Church into the theatre. The better Christian feelings were not seldom held 
up in comedies to the sneer of the multitude. Everything was so changed by the Constan- 
tinopolitans into light jesting, that earnestness was stripped of its worth by wit, and that 
which is holy became a subject for banter and scoffing in the refined conversation of worldly 
people. Yet worse was it that the unbridled delight of these men in dissipating cnjoyments 
threatened to turn the Church into a theatre, and the Preacher into a play actor. If he 
would please the multitude, he must adapt himself to their taste, and entertain them amusingly 
in the Church. They demanded also in the preaching something that should please the ear, 
glittering declamation with theatrical gesticulation ; and they clapped with the same pleasure 
the comedian in the holy place and him on the stage. And alas there were found at that 
period too many preachers who preferred the applause of men to their souls’ health. At this 
period the objects of the faith excited, particularly in Constantinople, a very universal and 
lively interest, which was entertained from the Court downwards, though not always in the 
most creditable manner; but it was in great part not the interest of the heart, but that of a 
hypercritical and disputatious intellect, where it was not something far lower, to which the 
dispute about matters of faith served only as a pretext for attaining the exterior aims of 
ayarice or ambition. While the sanctifying and beatifying doctrines of the Gospel, which are 
directed to the conversion of the whole inner man were let lie quiet, everyone from the 
Emperor to the beggar busied himself with incredible interest about a few questions con- 
cerning which the Gospel communicates only just so much as is beneficial to the human spirit 
and necessary to salvation, and whose fuller expression at any rate belongs rather to the 
school than to practical life. But the more violently these doctrinal disputes were kindled, 
disturbing and dividing States, cities, and families, so much the more people lost sight of the 
practical essentials of Christianity ; it seemed more important to maintain the Tri-unity of God 
than to love God with all the heart ; to acknowledge the Consubstantiality of the Son, than 
to follow Him in humility and selfdenial ; to defend the Personality of the Holy Spirit, than 
to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, love, peace, righteousness. . . . In addition to these 
religious disputes came also political struggles, namely, the hard-fought wars of the Roman 
Empire with the Goths ; so that the Empire at large presented the picture ‘of a sea, tossed by 

Cre Lae 197 

violent storms. But the unhappy schisms which at this time were severing Christians every- 
where, shewed themselves in a particularly discouraging form in the Capital. Under the late 
reigns several parties had been favoured ; but especially those which, though again divided 
among themselves by differences of opinion, yet agreed in this that they all rejected the 
Nicene system of doctrine. Constantius had bestowed his favour on the Arians; Julian 
during his short reign on all parties, at least in appearance,—to crush them all. After Jovian’s 
early death Valens succeeded to power in the Kast, and with him, even more than with 
Constantius, Arianism, which he not oniy protected, but also sought to make predominant by 
horrible atrocities against the friends of the Nicene Decrees. ‘These had now been forbidden 
the use of all Churches and Church property ; and the Arians had been put in possession of 
them. But Constantinople still remained the scene of ecclesiastical strifes and partizanships. 
Ifere where with a little good so much evil flowed from all three parts of the world, all opin- 
ions had their adherents ; but the following parties in particular shewed themselves :—The 
Eunomians, professing an intellectual theology, which claimed to be able completely to 
explore the Being of God by logical definitions, and maintained in strict Arian fashion the 
Unlikeness of the Son to the Father, were very numerous in Constantinople (as is shewn by 
the fact that most of Gregory’s polemical utterances were directed against them), and injured 
earnest religious thought principally by this, that they used the doctrines of the faith exclu- 
sively as subjects for an argumentative dialectic. The Macedonians, addicted to the Semi- 
Arian dogma of the Like Substance, and thereby somewhat more nearly approaching the 
Orthodox, and distinguished besides by an estimable earnestness of demeanour, and a monk- 
like strictness of manner, were indeed themselves excluded by the pure Arians from the 
property of the Church, but were ever being abundantly multiplied, partly in Constantinople 
itself, partly in the neighbouring regions of the Hellespont, Thrace, Bithynia, and Phrygia. 
The Novatians, who even overstepped the Macedonians in the strictness of their practical 
principles, had somewhat earlier been on the point of uniting themselves with the Orthodox, 
from whom they did not differ on the chief doctrine in dispute, and with whom they found 
themselves under like oppression from the Arians; but the malevolent disposition of a few 
of the party leaders had stood in the way, and so they remained separate, and swelled the 
number of the opponents of Orthodoxy. Lastly the Apollinarians too began to establish 
themselves there. Their teaching was opposed to the acknowledgment of true and perfect 
Manhood in Jesus (for true Manhood les in the reason especially); and there was at that 
time, as Gregory informs us, a report that an assembly of Apollinarian bishops was to be held 
at Constantinople, with a view of raising their teaching as to Christ into general notice, and 
forcing it upon the Churches. 

In such a crisis Gregory came most unwillingly to the Capital. At first he lodged in 
the house of a relation of his own, part of which he arranged as a Chapel, and dedicated under 
the title Anastasia, as the place where the Catholic faith was to rise again. There he began 
at once to carry out the rule of the Church as to daily service, to which he added his own 
splendid preaching. 

His constant theme was the worship of the Trinity. After two Sermons in deprecation 
of religious contentiousness, he preached those famous Five Orations which have won for him 
the title of the Theologian. To analyse these belongs to another portion of this work; it 
will be enough in this place to say, that after warning his audience against the frivolity with 
which the Arians were dragging religious subjects of the most solemn kind into the most 
unsuitable places and occasions, he proceeds in four magnificent discourses to set forth the 
Catholic doctrine of the Trinity, shewing carefully the difference between Sabellian confusion 
of Persons and Tritheistic division of Substance. The Arians, however, persecuted him 

198 PROLEGOMENA. 

bitterly ; even, on one occasion at least, hiring an assassin to murder him ; and their persecu- 
tion was all the more bitter because of the wonderful success which attended Gregory’s 
preaching. $, Jerome, who came to Constantinople at this time, has left on record the 
pleasure with which he listened to and conversed with the great Defender of the Faith. 
Uniortunately Gregory now let himself be taken in by a plausible adventurer named 
Maximus, who had come to Constantinople in the hope of obtaining the Bishopric for himself. 
Ife attached himself to Gregory and won his confidence, the latter even going so far as to 
deliver a panegyric upon him as a sufferer for the Faith. After a short time, however, 
Maximus managed to procure his own consecration secretly from some Egyptian Bishops, who 
during an illness of Gregory enthroned him at night in the Church. In the morning, when 
the people discovered what had been done, they were very indignant, and Maximus and his 
friends were driven out of the Church and forced to leave the City. Meanwhile the rank and 
fashion of Constantinople began to dislike Gregory, who would not condescend to the arts of 
the popular preacher, and whose simple retiring life and gentle demeanour were made matter 
of reproach to him. Gregory was quite willing to retire, and was only prevented from doing 

so by the earnest remonstrances of his friends, who solemnly assured him that if he went away 
the Faith would depart with him; so he consented to remain till a fitter man could be found. 
Late in 380 Theodosius came to Constantinople, where almost his first act was to deprive the 
Arians of the Churches, and to put Gregory in possession of the Cathedral of S. Sophia. ‘The 
next year the great Council of Eastern Bishops, which ranks as the Second Ecumenical 
Council, met at the Capital, under the presidency of Mcletius of Antioch. Its first care was 
to sanction the translation of Gregory from the See of Sasima to that of the Metropolis of 
the Empire, and to enthrone him in S. Sophia, and thus he became the recognised Archbishop 
of the Imperial City. Meletius shortly afterwards died, and Gregory assumed the Presidency 
of the Council. He failed in his endeavours to heal the schism which was troubling the 
Church of Antioch; and when the Egyptian Bishops on their arrival shewed a disposition to 
take up the case of Maximus, and were determined at any rate to oust Gregory from the 
Patriarchal Throne on the ground of a Nicene canon forbidding translations, which had 
virtually been rescinded by the act of the Council, he made up his mind to resign. He 
obtained a reluctant assent to this course from the Emperor, and then took leave of the Synod 
in one of the most magnificent of all his Orations, in which he gives a graphic account of his 
work in the Metropolis. Nectarius, Prefect of the City, who was only a catechumen, was 
elected in his place, and Gregory went home to Nazianzus. He administered the affairs of the 
Church there for a little while, and then, having procured the election of Eulalius as Bishop, he 
retired to Arianzus, where he passed the few remaining years of his life in seclusion, but still 
continued to take an active interest in the affairs of the Church. His own city was greatly 
disturbed by Apollinarian teachers, whose efforts to establish themselves within the Church 
were very persevering. Apollinarius, or as he is frequently called in the West, Apollinaris, 
was a Bishop of Laodicea in the latter half of the Fourth Century, and was at one time greatly 
respected for his learning and orthodoxy by S. Athanasius and 5S. Basil. He was even an 
instructor of S. Jerome in 37.4, but he seceded from the Church in the next year, owing to 
views which he had come to hold about the nature of our Lord; these really prepared the 
way for various forms of the Monophysite heresy. He fell into the error of a partial denial 
of our Lord’s true Humanity, attributing to Christ a human body and a human soul, but not 
a reasoning spirit, whose place, according to him, was supplied by the Divine Logos. ‘This 
view had first appeared in 362, when it’came before a Council at Alexandria. Those whe 
were accused of holding it denied it, and expressed their sense of the absurdity of such a 
yiew, pointing out that our Lord could not be said to be really incarnate if He had no 

TH Lae, 199 

human mind ; but about 369 it assumed a definite form (though even then it was not known 
to be the teaching of Apollinarius). Arguing from the Divinity of Christ that He cannot 
have had a human mind, for if he had He would have had sinful inclinations, and the one 
Christ would have been two persons, Apollinarius and his followers went on to maintain that 
the Incarnation only meant a certain converse between God and Man; and that Christ’s 
Body was not really born of Mary, but was a part of the Godhead converted into flesh. — S. 
Athanasius wrote two Books against these two propositions, but did not name Apollinarius, 
most probably because he did not believe him to be committed to them. The fundamental 
error of the system was the idea that the Incarnation was, not the Union of the two Natures, 
bat only a d/endiung so close, that in the mind of these teachers all the Divine Attributes were 
transferred to the human nature, and all the human ones to the Divine, and the two were 
merged in one compound being. 

In 377 a Roman Synod excommunicated Apollinarius and his adherents, and S. Damasus 
wrote a letter containing twenty-five anathemas, which he sent to Paulinus of Antioch and 
others. This condemnation is in almost the identical words used by S. Gregory in the first 
of two letters on the question which he wrote to Cledonius, a Priest of Nazianzus, and which 
were adopted as symbolic at the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon. Of these letters Canon 
Bright “ says that they belong to that class of documents of the Fourth Century which refuted 
by anticipation the heresies of the Fifth. Gregory affirmed True Godhead and True Man- 
hood to be combined in the One Person of the Crucified, Who was the adorable Son, Whose 
Mother was the Mother of God, and Who assumed, in order to redeem i t, the entire nature 
that fellin Adam. In his seclusion, says Mr. Crake, his sole luxuries were a garden and a 
fountain. He spent his last days in continual devotion. His knees were worn with kneeling, 
and his whole thoughts and aspirations had gone before to the long home to which he was 
hastening. After the manner of the Saints, he was very rigorous in his self-denial. His bed 
was of straw with a covering of sackcloth, and a single tunic was all the outward clothing of 
him who had been Bishop of Constantinople. Vet his glory was only in the Lord. «Asa 
fish cannot swim without water, and a bird cannot fly without air, he said, soa Christian 
cannot advance a single step without Christ.’’ He died in 391, and in the same year that 
he passed from the roll of the earthly episcopate Augustine was ordained Priest at Hippo 
Regius in Africa. 

Ullmann gives the following description of his character and personal appearance : 

‘* Gregory was of middle height and somewhat pale ; but his pallor became him. His hair 
was thick and blanched by age, his short beard and conspicuous eyebrows were thicker. On 
his right eye he had a scar. His manner was friendly and attractive; his conduct simple. 
The keynote of his inner being was piety; his soul was full of fiery strength of faith, turned 
to God and Christ ; a lofty zeal for divine things led him all his life. This zeal manifested 
itself above all in a steadfast adherence to and defence of certain dogmas which that age held 
to be specially important; as well as in lively conflicts, not always free from partisanship, 
with opposing convictions; but not less in a hearty and living apprehension of practical 
Christianity, the establishment and enlargement of which in men’s minds was to him all 
important. His asceticism was overdone; it injured his health ; yet it did not degenerate 
into hypocrisy ; it was to him the means for elevating and liberating the mind, but not in 
and for its own sake a higher virtue. An inborn and inbred love of solitude hindered him 
from turning all his powers to a publicly useful activity. His seclusion did not allow him to 
become familiar with the knowledge of men and of the world ; lacking in knowledge of men, 
carelessly confident, sometimes distrustful and bitter in his judgment of others, he demanded 

17 Ch. Hist., 131, 

200 PROLEGOMENA. 

from others much, but from himself most. Susceptible of great resolves, and full of fiery zeal 
for all good, he was not always steadfast and persevering in carrying them out. In endurance 
and conflict he was noble and high-minded ; in victory moderate ; in prosperity humble ; 
never ilattering the great, but an ever ready helper to the oppressed and persecuted, and 
to the poor a loving father. The most excellent qualities were in Gregory mingled with 
faults ; he was not quite free from vanity ; he was very irritable and sensitive, but also readily 
forgave and cherished no grudges. He was a man feeling after holiness, and striving after 
the highest good, but not perfect, as no man upon earth is.”’ 

Before leaving Constantinople he made his will, in which he bequeathed all his property 
tu the Deacon Gregory for life, with reversion to the poor of Nazianzus. 

DIVISION II. 

THE WRITINGS. 

I. Tue Orarions.—These—forty-five in number—raise him to equality with the best 
Orators of antiquity. 

a. Lhe Live Theological Orations.—These won him the title of The Theologian. They 
were delivered in Constantinople, in defence of the Church’s faith in the Trinity, against 
Eunomians and Macedonians. In the First and Second he treats of the existence, nature, 
being, and attributes of God, so far as man’s finite intellect can comprehend them. In the 
Third and Fourth the subject is the Godhead of the Son, which he establishes by exposition of 
Scripture, and by refutation of the specious arguments brought forward by the heretics. In 
the Fifth he similarly maintains the Deity and Personality of the Holy Ghost. 

b. The Two Lnvectives against Julian.—Vhese were delivered at Nazianzus after the death 
of the Emperor, and present us with a very dark picture of his character. The orator dwells 
upon his attempt to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem, and its failure, and his overthrow in the 
campaign against Persia. From these facts he demonstrates the power of God’s Justice, and 
sets forth the Christian doctrine of the Divine Providence inculcating a lesson of trust in 
God. 

c. Moral Orations.—(1) The Apology for his flight. As was said above, it is most 
probable that this discourse was never actually spoken ; if it was, it certainly must have been 
considerably enlarged afterwards. In it Gregory dwells on the motive of his flight and his 
return after his forced ordination ; he speaks of his love of retirement, but most of all lays 
stress upon the difficulty of the Priestly Office, its heavy responsibilities and grave dangers, 
and upon his own sense of unworthiness. His return, he says, was prompted by respect for 
his hearers and by care for his aged parents; by the fear of losing his father’s blessing ; 
and by the recollection of what befel the Prophet Jonas on account of his resistance to the 
will of God. The remainder of the Oration is practically a treatise on the Priesthood, and 
was made use of by S. Chrysostom and S. Gregory the Great in their books on the subject. 

(2) The Farewell Oration at Constantinople, containing an account of his work there. 

(3) On Love of the Poor. 

(4) On the Indissolubility of Marriage, the only Sermon of S. Gregory on a definite text 
which has come down to us. 

(5) ‘Three Orations on Peace. 

(6) One on Moderation in theological discussion. 

= me ey 

1 Tn the narrower sense of ‘* Defender of the Godhead of the Word.” 

LITERATURE, 201 

d. Zhe Festal Orations.—On Christmas, Epiphany (on the Baptism of Christ in the river 
Jordan, followed up next day by a long one on Holy Baptism), two on Easter (one of these 
his first sermon, the other almost if not quite his last). On Low Sunday, and on Pentecost. 

e. Panegyrics on Satnts.—The Maccabee Brothers and their Mother; S. Cyprian of 
Carthage (in which there is evidence of the cultus of the Blessed Virgin Mary and of the 
practice of invocation of the Saints) ; and on S. Athanasius. 

f. Funeral Orations on Eminent People.—On his Father, preached before his Mother and 
S. Basil. On Cesarius, in presence of his parents, consoling them by the picture of his 
brother’s virtue, especially in having withstood Julian’s efforts to pervert him, and in resign- 
ing his post at Court and leaving the Capital. On Gorgonia, whom he praises as a model 
Christian Matron, and whose wonderful cure before the Altar he relates. On S. Basil. 

g. Occastonal Orations, of which we mention three: (1) Ona plague of hail. (2) On 
the consecration of Eulalius of Doara. (3) On his own consecration to Sasima. 

II. THE Lerrers, of which two hundred and forty-three are extant, are characterised by 
a clear, concise, and pleasant style and spirit. Some of them treat of the theological questions 
of the day, as for example the two to Cledonius, and one to Nectarius his Successor in the See 
of Constantinople; these deal with the Apollinarian errors. Most of them however are 
letters to private friends ; sometimes of condolence or congratulation, sometimes of recom- 
mendation, sometimes on mere general subjects of interest. To this section must be ascribed 
his Will, which is probably genuine. 

III. ‘THE Poems, five hundred and seven in number, are in various metres. While leaving 
much to be desired, these verses shew much real poetic feeling, and at times rise to genuine 
beauty. Thirty-eight are dogmatic, on the Trinity, on the works of God in Creation, on 
Providence, on Angels and Men, on the Fall, on the Decalogue, on the Prophets Elias and 
[lissceus, on the Incarnation, the Miracles and Parables of our Lord, and the canonical Books 
of the Bible. Forty are Moral; two hundred and six Historical and Autobiographical ; 
one hundred and twenty-nine are Epitaphs, or rather funeral Epigrams; ninety-four are 
Epigrams. 

There is also a long Tragedy, called Christus Patiens which is the first known attempt at 
a Christian drama; the parts are sustained by Christ, The Blessed Virgin, S. Joseph, S. Mary 
Magdalene, Nicodemus, Pontius Pilate, Theologus, Nuntius, and others. The Benedictine 
Editors however doubt the genuineness of this Tragedy and Caz//au, who published the 
second volume of this Edition after the troubles of the French Revolution, thinks it is to be 
ascribed to another Gregory, Bishop of Antioch in the Sixth Century, and relegates it to an 
Appendix. None of The Theologian’s Odes or Hymns have, however, found a place in the 
liturgical poetry of the Church. 

DIVISION: ITI. 
LITERATURE. 

There are perhaps more MSS. of the works of Gregory than of any other Father. The 
great Benedictine Edition of his works contains long lists of MSS., and of Versions, and pre- 
vious Editions. The most famous of these is that of the Abbat Jacobus Billins in 1589, 
which was accompanied by the Scholia of Nicctas, ete. In 1571 Leuvenklavius published an 
edition at Basle containing the Scholia of Elias Cretensis and others. In 1778 appeared the 
first volume of the great Edition of the Benedictine Fathers of the Abbey of S. Maur near 
Paris, which had been in preparation ever since 1708. But the Monks were driven away by 

aon PROLEGOMENA. 

oes = atta, 

the French Revolution, and the second volume did not appear till 1842. It has been re- 
printed in Migne’s ‘ Patrologia Graeca 5’? vols. 35-38. Of modern works on the life and 
writings of our Saint, the best are those of Dr. Ullmann, and that of the Abbé Benoit. A 
valuable comparison of Gregory and Basil is to be found in Newman’s «¢ Church of the Fathers,”’ 
and last. but not least in value, may be mentioned the long biographical article by Professor 
Watkins in Smith’s ‘* Dictionary of Christian Diography,’’ and a useful short summary in 
Schaff’s Church History (311-600, vol. i.). 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

ORATION 1, 

On EASTER AND His RELUCTANCE. 

To-day we have clean escaped from Egypt and 
from Pharaoh; and there is none to hinder us 

| from keeping a Feast to the Lord our God— 

I. It is the Day of the Resurrection, and my | 

Beginning has good auspices. 
keep the lestival with splendour, and let us 
embrace one another. Let us say Brethren, 

even to those who hate us; much more to | 

Let us then | 

the Feast of our Departure; or from celebrat- 
ing that Feast, not in the old leaven of malice 
and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread 

_ of sincerity and truth,* carrying with us noth- 

those who have done or suffered aught out of | 

Jove for us. Let us forgive all offences for the 
Kesurrection’s sake: let us give one another 
pardon, I for the noble tyranny which I have 
suffered (for I can now call it noble) ; and you 
who exercised it, if you had cause to blame my 
tardiness ; for perhaps this tardiness may be 
more precious in God’s sight than the haste of 
others. For it is a good thing even to hold 
back from God for a little while, as did the 
great Moses of old, and Jeremiah later on ; 
and then to run readily to Him when He calls, 
as did Aaron® and Isaiah,* so only both be 
done in a dutiful spirit ;—the former because 
of his own want of strength; the latter be- 
cause of the Might of Him That calleth. 

Il. A Mystery’ anointed me; I withdrew a 
little while at a Mystery, as much as was need- 
ful to examine myself; now I come in with a 
Mystery, bringing with me the Day as a good 
defender of my cowardice and weakness; that 
He Who to-day rose again from the dead may 
renew me also by His Spirit; and, clothing 
me with the new Man, may give me to His 

New Creation, to those who are begotten after 

God, as a good modeller and teacher for 
Christ, willingly both dying with Him and 
rising again with Him. 

Ifl. Yesterday the Lamb was slain and the 
door-posts were anointed,” and Egypt bewailed 
her Firstborn, 
over, and the Seal was dreadful and reverend, 
and we were walled in with the Precious Blood. 

adsasIuyis's. 
elisa. i, 6: 
¢ALystery, according to Nicrras, is frequently used by S. 
GreGorY in the sense of Festival, fe also explains the 
Anointing as meaning the Imposition of hands at Ordination. 
ylix. xu, A fine piece of mystical interpretation. 

BUX ee a0; y Jer 4. 6, 6 ox. iv. 27. 

Himself us, who were lying low 
and the Destroyer passed us_ 

sake, since He for ours became Man. 

ing of ungodly and Egyptian leaven. 

IV. Yesterday I was crucified with Him ; to- 
day Iam glorified with Him; yesterday I died 
with Him; to-day I am quickened with Him ; 
yesterday I was buried with Him ; to-day [rise 
with Him. But let us offer to Him Who suf- 
fered and rose again for us—you will think 
perhaps that I am going to say gold, or silver, 
or woven work or transparent and costly stones, 
the mere passing material of earth, that re- 
mains here below, and is for the most part al- 
ways possessed by bad men, slaves of the world 
and of the Prince of the world. Let us offer 
ourselves, the possession most preciou 1s to God, 
and most fitting; let us give back to the 
Image what is made after the Image. Let us 
recognize our Dignity; let us honour our 
Archetype ; let us know the power of the Mys- 
tery, and for what Christ died. 

V. Let us become like Christ, since Christ 
became like us. Let us become God’s for His 
He 
assumed the worse that He might give us 
the better; He became poor that we through 
His poverty might be rich;® He took upon 
Him the form of a servant that we might 
receive back our liberty ; He came down that 
we might be exalted ; He was tempted that we 
might conquer ; He was dishonoured that He 
might glorify us; He died that He might 
save us; He ascended that He might draw to 
in the Fail 
of sin. Let us give a@//, offer a//, to Him 
Who gave Himself a erence and a Reconcili- 
ation for us. * But one can give nothing like 
oneself, understanding the Niven and be- 
coming for His sake all that He became for 
ours. 

@ Or: Vek B2.Coz villi g} 

204 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

VI. As you see, He offers you a Shepherd ; 
for this is what your Good Shepherd,* who lays 
down his lite for his sheep, is hoping and pray- 
ing for, and he asks from you his subjects ; 
and he gives you himself double instead of 
single, and makes the staff of his old age a staff 
for your spirit. And he adds to the inanimate 
temple a living oie; to that exceedingly 
beautiful and heavenly : shrine, this poor and 
small one,? yet to him of great value, and 
built too with much sweat and many labours. 
Would that I could say it is worthy of his 
labours. 
that belongs to him (O great generosity !—or 
it would be truer to say, O fatherly love !) his 
hoar hairs, his youth, the temple, the high 
priest, the testator, the heir, the discourses 
which you were longing for; and of these not 
such as are vain and poured out into the air, 
and which reach no further than the outward 
ear; but those which the Spirit writes and 
engraves on tables of stone, or of flesh, not 
merely superficially graven, nor easily to be 
rubbed off, but marked very deep, not with 
ink, but with grace. 

VII. These are the gifts given you by this 
august Abraham, this honourable and reverend 
Head, this Patriarch, this Restingplace of all 
good, this Standard of virtue, this Perfection of 
the Priesthood, who to-day is bringing to the 
Lord his willing Sacrifice, his only Son,Y him 
of the promise. Do you on your side offer to 
God and to us obedience to your Pastors, 

And he places at your disposal all | 

deceitful and corrupt words would tear them 
from their true Shepherd. From which may 
we all be kept, Shepherd and flock, as from 
a poisoned and deadly pasture ; guiding and 
being guided far away from it, that we may all 
be one in Christ Jesus our Lord, now and unto 
the heavenly rest. To Whom be the glory 
and the might for ever and ever. Amen, 

NTRODUCTION TO ORATION IL 

It is generally agreed that this Oration was 
not intended for oral delivery. Its object was 
to explain and defend S$. Gregory’s recent con- 
duct, which had been severely criticised by his 
friends at Nazianzus. He had been recalled by 
his father probably during the year A.p. 36 
from Pontus, where he had spent several years 
in monastic seclusion with his friend S. Basil. 
His father, not content with his son’s presence 
at home as a support for his declining years, 
and feeling assured of his fitness for the sacred 
office, had proceeded, with the loudly expressed 

_ approval of the congregation, in spite of Greg- 

ory’s reluctance, to ordain him to the priest- 
hood on Christmas Day a.p. 361. S. Gregory, 

even after the lapse of many years, speaks of his 

_ ordination as an act of tyranny, and at the time, 

dwelling in a place of herbage, and being fed | 

by water of refreshment;® knowing your 
Shepherd well, and being known by him; ¢ 
and following when he calls you as a Shepherd 
frankly through the door; but not following a 
stranger climbing up into the fold like a robber 
and a traitor; nor listening to a strange voice 
when such would take you away by stealth and 
scatter you from the truth on mountains,$ and 
in deserts, and pitfalls, and places which the 
Lord does not visit ; and would lead you away 
from the sound Faith in the Father, the Son, 
and the Holy Ghost, the One Power and God- 
head, Whose Voice my sheep always heard 
(and may they always hear it), but with 

aNIceETAS says that this refers to S. GrEGory’s Father, who 
had ordained him Priest, to assist him in the Cure of Souls, and 
whose one desire was that his Son might succeed him in the 
Bishopric. 

B S. Grecory’s father had, according to the same authority. re- 
built the Church at Nazianus with great splendour. He thinks 
that the expression “heavenly ” may refer to the great dome. ‘The 
“living temple” is of course S, Gregory himself. 

y S. Grecory had an elder sister GoRGONIA, and a younger 
brother CArsarivs, so that this expression must not be taken too 
literally, but is rather to be read in connection with the ‘* promise,’ 
his Mother having looked upon his birth as a special answer to 
prayer, and Tet mee dedicated him to God from his infancy. 

Oar xxl, € Johnex.. 14. ¢ Ezek, xxxiv. 6, 

stung almost to madness, as an ox by a gadfly, 
rushed away again to Pontus, to bury in its con- 
genial solitude, consoled by an intimate friend’s 
deep sympathy, his wounded feelings. Before 
long the sense of duty reasserted itself, and he 
returned to his post at his father’s side before 
Easter A.D. 362. On Easter Day he delivered 
his first Oration before a congregation whose 
scantiness marked the displeasure with which the 
people of Nazianzus had viewed his conduct. 
Accordingly he set himself to supply them in 

this Oration with a full explanation of the mo- 
tives which had led to his retirement. At the 
same time, as the secondary title of the Oration 
shows, he has supphed an exposition of the obli- 
gations and dignity of the Priestly Office which 
has been drawn upon by all later writers on the 
subject. S. Chrysostom in his well-known trea- 
tise, 5. Gregory the Great in his Pastoral Care, 
and Bossuet in his panegyric on S. Paul, have 
done little more than summarise the material 
or develop the considerations contained in this 
eloquent and elaborate dissertation. 

ORATION II 
In DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS, AND 
HIS RETURN, AFTER HIS ORDINATION TO 
THE PRIESTHOOD, WITH AN EXPOSITION OF 
THE CHARACTER OF THE PRIESTLY OFFICE. 
1. I have been defeated, and own my de- 
feat. I subjected myself to the Lord, and 

prayed unto Him.* Let the most blessed 
David supply my exordium, or rather let 
Him Who spoke in David, and even now yet 
speaks through him. For indeed the very 
best order of beginning every speech and ac- 
tion, is to begin from God,® and to end in 

God. As to the cause, either of my original 
revolt and cowardice, in which I got me 

away far off, and remained?’ away from you 
for a time, which perhaps seemed long to 
those who missed me; or of the present gen- 
tleness and change of mind, in which I have 
given myself up again to you, men may think 
and speak in different ways, according to the 
hatred or love they bear me, on the one side 
refusing to acquit me of the charges alleged, 
on the other giving me a hearty welcome. 
Vor nothing is so pleasant to men as talking 
of other people’s business, especially under the 
influence of affection or hatred, which often 
almost entirely blinds us to the truth. I will, 
however, myself, unabasl ed, set forth the 
truth, and arbitrate with justice between the 
two parties, which accuse or gallantly defend 
tis, by, on the one side, accusing myself, on 
the other, undertaking my own defence. 

2. Accordingly, that my speech may pro- 
ceed in due order, I apply myself to the ques- 
tion which arose first, that of cowardice. For 
IT cannot endure that any of those who watch 
with interest the success, or the contrary, of 
my efforts, should be put to confusion on 
my account, since it has pleased God that our 
affairs should be of some consequence to 
Christians, so I will by my defence relieve, 
if there be any such, those who have already 
suffered ; for it is well, as far as possible, and 
as reason allows, to shrink from causins, 
through our sin or suspicion, any offence or 
stumbling-block to the community : inasmuch 
as we know how inevitably even those who 
offend one of the little ones® will incur the se- 
verest punishment at the hands of Him who 
cannot lie. 

3. lor my present position is due, my good 
people, not to inexperience and ignorance, 
nay indeed, that I may boast myself a little, 
neither is it due to contempt for the divine 
Jaws and ordinances. Now, just as in the 
body there is$ one member” which rules and 

’ 

iN DEEENGE. OF TIS KEIGH TO PONTUS. 

205 

so to say, presides, while another is ruled over 
and subject; so too in the churches, God hag 
ordained, according either to a law of equal- 
ity, which admits of an order of merit, or to 
one of providence, by which He has knit all 
together, that those for whom such treatment is 
beneficial, should be subject to pastoral care 
and rule, and be guided by word and deed in 
the path of duty ; while others should be pastors. 
and teachers,* for the perfecting of the church, 
those, I mean, who surpass the majority in vir- 
tue and nearness to God, performing the func- 
tions of the soul in the body, and of the intel- 
lect in the soul; in order that both may be so 
united and compacted together, that, although 
one is lacking and another is pre-eminent, they 
may, like the members of our bodies, be so 
combined and knit together by the harmony 
of the Spirit, as to form one perfect body,# 
really worthy of Christ Himself, our Head.¥ 

4. Tam aware then that anarchy ® and disor- 
der cannot be more advantageous than order and 
rule, either to other creatures or to men ; nay, 
this is true of men in the highest possible degree, 
because the interests at stake in their case are 
greater ; since it is a great thing ¢ for them, even 
if they fail of their highest purpose—to be free 
from sin—to attain at least to that which is sec- 
ond best, restoration from sin. Since this seems 
right and just, it is, I take it, equally wrong 
and disorderly that all should wish to rule, 
and that no one should accept$ it. For if all 
men were to shirk this office, whether it must 
be called a ministry or a leadership, the fair 
fulness” of the Church would be halting in the 
highest degree, and in fact cease to be fair. 
And further, where, and by whom would 
God be worshipped among us in those mys- 
tic and elevating rites which are our great- 
est and most precious privilege, if there were 
neither king, nor governor, nor priesthood, 
hor sacrifice,? nor all those highest offices to 
the loss of which, for their great sins, men 
were of old condemned in consequence of 
their disobedience ? 

5. Nor indeed is it strange or inconsistent for 
the majority of those who are devoted to the 
study of divine things, to ascend to rule from 
being ruled, nor does it overstep the limits 
laid down by philosophy, or involve disgrace ; 

a Ps) xxxvil. 7 (L3CX). 
BPeein from God. Possibly an adaptation of the exordium of 
Theocr, Idyll, xvii, 1. ée Atds dpydmecrba, Kat dus Ala AnyeTeE, pL0l~ 

gat, “Tet Zeus inspire our opening strain, And, Muses, cnd 
your song in Zeus again.” Cf. Demosth. Epist. 1. 
ys: eas 6S. Matt. xviii. 6. ©2 Cor. xi. 16: 

SOne member. The Ben. editors object to this translation 
(which is that of Rufinus, Billius and Gabriel) as inconsistent with 
the following allusion to the relation of the sox to the body. It 
scems, however, more in harmony with the figure of S. Paul, 
who compares the arrangement of the senders of the body to 
the hierarchy of the Church, 9 Rom. xii. 4 3 1 Cor. xii. 12, 

VOL, Vil 

Q 

Bx Cor. xii. 20; Eph. iv. 16, +) Tophy Wyse 15. 
Comp. Plato Lege. XIf. 2. 

The Ben. editors note the obscurity of the 
y 

a ‘ph. iv. rr. 

Suluarchy, Ec. 

evl creat thing. 
original here. 

SAlccept, Séxec@ar, Many MSS. have dpxerOat, preserving the 
play upon the word dpyew. “The latter reading, the Ben. editors 
suggest, way have an active sense, as Hom. Il. II. Sales 

Ripe 1 23, 6 Hos. iit. 4. 

tPhilosopiy. irocopia is used by S. Greg. and other Fathers 
in various senses, not always clearly distinguishable. Sometimes 
it refers to the ancient philosophical teachers and schools : some- 
times to the Christian philosophy, which inculcates Divine truth, 

206 

any more than for an excellent sailor to become 
4 lookout-man, and for a lookout-man, who 
has successfully kept watch over the winds, to 
be entrusted with the helm; or, if you will, 
for a brave soldier to be made a captain, and 
a good captain to become a gencral, and have 
committed to him the conduct of the whole 
campaign. Nor again, as perhaps some of 
those absurd and tiresome people may suppose, 
who judge of others’ feelings by their own, was 
I ashamed of the rank of this grade from my 
desire for a higher. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

ee 

ing in myself the divine impressions pure and 
unmixed with the erring tokens of this lower 
world, and both being, and constantly growing 
more and more to be, a real unspotted mirror of 
God and divine things, as light is added to 
light, and what was still dark grew clearer, Gii- 

joying already by hope the blessings of the 

world to come, roaming about with the angels, 

even now being above the earth by having for- 

1 was not so ignorant | 

either of its divine greatness or human low 

estate, as to think it no great thing for a created 
nature, to approach in however slight degree to 
God, Who alone is most glorious and_illus- 
trious, and surpasses in purity every nature, 
material and immaterial alike. 

was the reason of my disobedience? For to 

saken it, and stationed on high by the Spirit. 
If any of you has been possessed by this long- 
ing, he knows what I mean and will sym- 
pathise with my feelings at that time. Yor, 
perhaps, I ought not to expect to persuade 
most people by what I say, since they are un- 

happily disposed to laugh at such things, either 
from their own thoughtlessness, or from the in- 
' fuence of men unworthy of the promise, who 
6. What then were my feelings, and what | 

most men I did not at the time seem consistent | 

with myself, or to be such as they had known 
me, but to have undergone some deterioration, 
and to exhibit greater resistance and self-will 
than was right. And the causes of this you 
have long been desirous to hear. 
most important, I was astounded at the unex- 
pectedness of what had occurred, as people are 
terrified by sudden noises; and, losing the 
control of my reasoning faculties, my self- 
respect, which had hitherto controlled me, 
gave way. In the next place, there came over 
me an eager longing* for the blessings of calm 
and retirement, of which I had from the first 
been enamoured to a higher degree, I imagine, 
than any other student of letters, and which 
amidst the greatest and most threatening 
dangers I had promised to God, and of which 
I had also had so much experience, that I was 
then upon its threshold, my longing having 
in consequence been greatly kindled, so that I 
could not submit to be thrust into the midst of 
a life of turmoil by an arbitrary act of oppres- 
sion, and to be torn away by force from the 
holy sanctuary of such a life as this. 

have bestowed upon that which is good an evil 
name, calling philosophy nonsense, aided by 
envy and the evil tendencies of the mob, who 
are ever inclined to grow worse: so that they 

are constantly occupied with one of two sins, 

First, and | 

7. For nothing seemed to me so desirable — 

as to close the 
ing from the 
within myself, having no further connection 
than was absolutely necessary with human af- 
fairs, and speaking to myself and to God,? 
to live superior to visible things, ever preserv- 

doors of my senses, and, escap- 

and teaches the principles of a good, and holy life : sometimes to 
the practice of these principles, either in regard to some special vir- 
tue, e.g. patience, or, in general, in the lives of individual Chris- 
tians, and further, as involving the most careful and extensive 
reduction of these principles to practice—the discipline of the mo- 
nastic life. Cf. Suicer. in verb. 

a Lager longing. Nearly all MSS. read “ pity "—which would 
have to be understood in the sensc of “ regretful affection.”’ 

Br1Con, ON 285 

the promise says, 
flesh and the world, collected — 

but I will speak out to you all my secrets. 

either the commission of evil, or the discredit- 
ing of good. 

8. LT was influenced besides by another feel- 
ing, whether base or noble I do not know, 
I 
was ashamed of all those others, who, without 

being better than ordinary people, nay, it is 

a great thing if they be not worse, with un- 
washen hands,* as the saying runs, and unini- 
tiated souls, intrude into the most sacred 
offices; and, before becoming worthy to ap- 

proach the temples, they lay claim to the 

sanctuary, and they push and thrust around 
the holy table, as if they thought this order to 
be a means of livelihood, instead of a pattern 
of virtue, or an absolute authority, instead of 
a ministry of which we must give account. In 
fact they are almost more in number than 
those whom they govern; pitiable as regards 
piety,’ and unfortunate in their dignity; so 
that, it seems to me, they will not, as time 

_and this evil alike progress, have any one leit 

to rule, when all are teachers, instead of, as 
taught of God,® and all 

prophesy,* so that even «¢Saul is among the 
prophets,’’ $ according to the ancient history 

For at no time, either now or 

and proverb. 
in former days, amid the rise and fall of vari- 

ous developments, has there ever been such 

“4 : De eee AS ae 

a S. Mark vii. s- 
The sanctuary. 

the sanctuary,—the priesthood. 

episcopate. ha 

Piety—for it is a mere external pretence, deceiving themselves 

as well as others. etoéBava here has the double sense of piety and 

orthodoxy—the former being the more prominent. 

8 Is. liv. 13; S. John vi. 45- 

e Numb. xi. 29; 1 Cor, xiv. 24- 

i.e. That which gave the right toa place in 
Billius wrongly takes it of the 

21 Sam, x. 11; xix. 24. 

IN Di ENCE OR iS 
an abundance, as now exists among Christians, 
of diserace and abuses of this land. . And, if 
to stay this current is beyond our powers, at 
any rate it is not the least important duty of 

religion to testify the hatred and shame we | 

ftel for tt. 

9. Lastly, there is a matter more serious 
than any which I have mentioned, for I am 
now coming to the finale* of the question: 
and I will not deceive you; for that would not 
be lawful in regard to topics of such moment. 
T did not, nor do I now, think myself qualified 

to rule a flock or herd, or to have authority | 

over the souls of men. Tor in their case it is 
sufficient to render the herd or flock as stout 

and fat as possible; and with this object the | 

neatherd and shepherd will look for well wa- 
tered and rich pastures, and will drive his 
charge from pasture to pasture, and allow them 
to rest, or arouse, or recall them, sometimes 
with his staff, most often with his pipe; and 
with the exception of occasional struggles with 
wolves, or attention to the sickly, most of his 

time will be devoted to the oak and the shade | 

and his pipes, while he reclines on the beauti- 
ful grass, and beside the cool water, and shakes 

down his couch in a breezy spot, and ever and | 

anon sings a love ditty, with his cup by his 
side, and talks to his bullocks or his flock, the 
fattest of which supply his banquets or his pay. 
But no one ever has thought of the virtue of 
flocks or herds ; for indeed of what virtue are 
they capable? Or who has regarded their 

advantage as more important than his own. 

pleasure ? 
ro. But in the case of man, hard as it is for 
him to learn how to submit to rule, it seems 

far harder to know how to rule over men, and | 

hardest of all, with this rule of ours, which 

leads them by the divine law, and to God, for | 

its risk is, in the eyes ofa thoughtful man, 
proportionate to its height and dignity. For, 
first of all, he must, like silver or gold, though 

in general circulation in all kinds of seasons | 

and affairs, never ring false or alloyed, or give 

token of any inferior matter, needing further | 

refinement in the fire ;® or else, the wider his 
rule, the greater evil he will be. Since the 
injury which extends to many is greater than 
that which is confined to a single individual. 
11. For it is not so easy to dye deeply a 
piece of cloth, or to impregnate with odours, 

foul or the reverse, whatever comes near to— 

them ; nor is it so easy for the fatal vapour, 

which is rightly called a pestilence, to infect | 

a The finale of the question, or ** the main conclusion of my 
subject,” lit. ‘*the colophon of my reason.” Adyos cannot here 
mean “ of my speech,” for it has only just begun. 

E:Ctex, Comiim 22) 

Q 

07 

PLIGHT LO PON fUS. 

the air, and through the air to gain access to 
living beings, as it is for the vice ofa supe- 
rior to take most speedy possession of his sub- 
jects, and that with far greater facility than 
virtue its opposite. For it is in this that 
wickedness especially has the advantage over 
goodness, and most distressing it is to me to 

perceive it, that vice is something attractive 

and ready at hand, and that nothing is so easy 
as to become evil, even without any one to 
lead us on to it; while the attainment of virtue 
is rare and difficult, even where there is much 
to attract and encourage us. And it is this, 
I think, which the most blessed Haggai had 
before his eyes, in his wonderful and most true 
figure : *—‘ Ask the priests concerning the law, 
saying : If holy flesh borne in a garment touch 
meat or drink or vessel, will it sanctify what 
is in contact with it? And when they said 
No; ask again if any of these things touch 
what is unclean, does it not at once partake of 
the pollution? For they will surely tell you 
that it does partake of it, and does not con- 
tinue clean in spite of the contact.’’ 

12. What does he mean by this? As I take 
it, that goodness can with difficulty gain a hold 
upon human nature, like fire upon green wood ; 
while most men are ready and disposed to join 
in evil, like stubble,® I mean, ready fora spark 
and a wind, which is easily kindled and con- 
sumed from its dryness. For more quickly 
would any one take part in evil with slight in- 
ducement to its fullextent, than in good which 
is fully set before him to a slight degree. For 
indeed a little wormwood most quickly im- 
parts its bitterness to honey; while not even 
| double the quantity of honey can impart its 

sweetness to wormwood: and the withdrawal 
of a small pebble would draw headlong a whole 
river, though it would be difficult for the 
strongest dam to restrain or stay its course. 
| 13. ‘This then is the first point in what we 
| have said, which it is right for us to guard 

against, viz.: being found to be bad painters ¥ 
of the charms of virtue, and still more, if not, 
perhaps, models for poor painters, poor models 
for the people, or barely escaping the proverb, 
that we undertake to heal others® while our- 
selves are full of sores. 

14. In the second place, although a man 
has kept himself pure from sin, even in a very 
high degree; I do not know that even this is 
sufficient for one who is to instruct others in 
virtue. For he who has received this charge, 
not only needs to be free from evil, for evil is, 

Gage, 12 of seg. : ‘ 

B Job xxi. 18; Ps. Ixxxiil. 13 ; Isai. v. 24 ; Joel Tis, 5 

y Painters, i.e, in our discourses ; s0cdels by our lives and ex- 
' amples. S. Luke tv. 23. 

2 

208 

in the eyes of most of those under his care, 
most disgraceful, but also to be eminent in 
good, according to the command, ‘* Depart 
trom evil and do good.’’?* — And he must not 
only wipe out the traces of vice from his soul, 
but also inscribe better ones, so as to outstrip 

GREGORY. NAZTANZEN. 

~ Any one may recognize this, by comparing the 

men further in virtue than he is superior to 

them in dignity. 

He should know no limits — 

in goodness or spiritual progress, and should — 

dwell upon the loss of what is still beyond him, 
rather than the gain of what he has attained, 
and consider that which is beneath his feet a 

step to that which comes next: and not think | 

it a great gain to excel ordinary people, but a 
loss to fall short of what we ought to be: and 
to measure his success by the commandment 
and not by his neighbours, whether they be 
evil, or to some extent proficient in virtue: 
and to weigh virtue in no small scales, inas- 
much as it is due to the Most High, ‘ from 
Whom are all things, and to Whom are all 
things.’’ 8 

work of the physician of souls with the treat- 
ment of the body ; and noticing that, labori- 
ous as the latter is, ours is more laborious, and 
of more consequence, from the nature of its 
subject matter, the power of its science, and 
the object of its exercise. The one labours 
about bodies, and perishable failing matter, 
which absolutely must be dissolved and under- 
go its fate,* even if upon this occasion by the aid 
of art it can surmount the disturbance within 
itself, being dissolved by disease or time in 
submission to the law of nature, since it can- 

- not rise above its own limitations. 

15. Nor must he suppose that the same | 
two: one, that it may inherit the glory above 

things are suitable to all, just as all have not 
the same stature, nor are the features of the face, 
nor the nature of animals, nor the qualities of 
soil, nor the beauty and size of the stars, in 
all cases the same: but he must consider base 
conduct a fault ina private individual, and 
deserving of chastisement under the hard rule 
of the law; while in the case of a ruler or 
leader it isa fault not to attain to the highest 
possible excellence, and always make progress 
in goodness, if indeed he is, by his high degree 
of virtue, to draw his people to an ordinary 

degree, not by the force of authority, but by — 

the influence of persuasion. For what is invol- 
untary apart from its being the result of oppres- 
sion, is neither meritorious nor durable. For 
what is forced, like a plant ¥ violently drawn 
aside by our hands, when set free, returns to 
what it was before, but that which is the result 
of choice is both most legitimate and enduring, 
for it is preserved by the bond of good will. 
And so our law and our lawgiver enjoin upon 
us most strictly that we should ‘‘ tend the 
flock not by constraint but willingly.’’ > 
16. But granted that aman is free from vice, 
and has reached the greatest heights of virtue : 
I do not see what knowledge or power would 
justify him in venturing upon this office. For 
the guiding of man, the most variable and man- 
ifold of creatures, seems to me in very deed 
to be the art of arts® and science of sciences. 
PS, XXRMily 27s B Rom. xi. 35. 
yl plant. Cf. Orat, vi. 8, xxiii. 1. A favourite figure of S. 
Gregory. rPeter 42. 
e The art of arts. This is the original of the frequently 

quoted commonplace, which in S. Gregory the Great's Pastoral 
Care, i. 1, takes the form ‘ars artium est regimen animarum.’’ 

17. The other is concerned with the soul, 
which comes from God and is divine, and par- 
takes of the heavenly nobility, and presses on 
to it, even if it be bound to an inferior nature. 
Perhaps indeed there are other reasons also 
for this, which only God, Who bound them to- 
gether, and those who are instructed by God 
in such mysteries, can know, but as far as I, 
and men like myself can perceive, there are 

by means of a struggle and wrestling® with 
things below, being tried as gold in the fire ¥ 
by things here, and gain the objects of our hope 
as a prize of virtue, and not merely as the gilt 
of God. This, indeed, was the will of Supreme 
Goodness, to make the good even our own, 
not only because sown in our nature, but be- 
cause cultivated by our own choice, and by the 
motions of our will,® free to act in either di- 
rection. The second reason is, that it may 
draw to itself and raise to heaven the lower nat- 
ure, by gradually freeing it from its grossness, 

in order that the soul may be to the body what 

God is to the soul, itself leading on the matter 
which ministers to it, and uniting it, as its fel- 
low-servant, to God. 

18. Place and time and age and season and 
the like are the subjects of a physician’s scru- 
tiny ; he will prescribe medicines and diet, and 
guard against things injurious, that the desires 
of the sick may not be a hindrance to his art. 

Sometimes, and in certain cases, he will make 

use of the cautery or the knife or the severer 
remedies; but none of these, laborious and 
hard as they may seem, is so difficult as the dia- 
gnosis and cure of our habits, passions, lives, 
wills, and whatever else is within us, by ban- 
ishing from our compound nature everything 
brutal and fierce, and introducing and estab- 

_ lishing in their stead what is gentle and dear 

a Gen. iii. 19. B Eph, vi. 12. ayer, Retin <7 

8 Our will, Clémencet compares S. Bernard, de Gratia et Li- 
bero Arbitrio, xiv. 47 (tom. i. 1397, Gaume). Petavius, de Incarn., 
tom. v., p. 416, lib, IX., iii, rr, comments on this passage in treat- 

| ing of free will. 

IN 

and 
to be over- 

to God, and arbitrating fairly between soul 
body; not allowiny the superior 

i 
| 

, consuming the flesh of 

powered by the inferior, which would be the | 
greatest Injustice; but subjecting to the ruling | 

and leading power that which naturally takes 
the second place: as indeed the divine law 

enjoins, which is most excellently imposed on 

Tis whole creation, whether visible or beyond 
our ken. 

1g. This further point does not escape me, 
that the nature of all these objects of the watch- 
fulness of the physician remains the same, and 
does not evolve out of itself any crafty opposi- 
tion, or contrivance hostile to the appliances of 
his art, nay, it is rather the treatment which 
modifies its subject matter 
slight insubordination occurs on the part of the 
patient, which it is not difficult to prevent or 
restrain. But in our case, human prudence and 
selfishness, and the want of training and _incli- 
nation to yield ready submission are a very 
great obstacle to advance in virtue, amounting 
umost to an armed resistance to those who are 
Wishful to help us. And the very eagerness 
with which we should lay bare our sickness to 
our spiritual physicians, we employ in avoiding 
this treatment,6 and shew our bravery by 
struggling against what is for our own interest, 
our skill in shunning what is for our health. 

20. lor we either hide away our sin, cloak- 
ing it over in the depth of our soul, like some 
festering and malignant disease, as if by escap- 
ing the notice of men we could escape the 
mighty eye of God and justice. Or else we 
allege excuses in our sins,y by devising pleas 
in defence of our falls, or tightly closing our 
ears, like the deaf adder that stoppeth her 
ears, Wwe are obstinate in refusing to hea 
the voice of the charmer, and be treated with 
the medicines of wisdom,é by which spirit:ial 
sickness is healed. Or, lastly, those of us who 
are most daring and_self-willed shamelessly 
brazen out our sin before those who would 

heal it, marching with bared head, as the say- 
ing is, into all kinds of transgression. O what 

madness, if there be no term more 
this state of mind! Those whom we ought to 
love as our benefactors we keep off, as if they 
were our enemies, hating those who reprove in 
the gates, and abhorring the righteous word — 
and we think that we shall succeed in the war 
that we are Waging against those who are 
well disposed to us by doing ourselves all the 
harm we can, like men who imagine they are 

fitting for 

alts subject matter, icc. the affection of the sick body, which 
it is the object of medicine to change to its opposite. So Combefis. 

B This treaturent: the treatment of the spiritual physician, 

Y Sacxhineae(laXcXe), 5 Ps. lviti. 5, 6 (LXX.). 

t e Amos vy. 10, 

| 

»* except where some | 

DEFENCE OF HIS FLIGHT A BONUS: 209 

others when they are 
readily fastening upon their own. 

21. lor these reasons I allege that our of- 
fice as physicians far exceeds in toilsomeness, 
and consequently in worth, that which is con- 
fined to the body ; and further, because the lat- 
ter is mainly concerned with the surface, and 
only in a slight degree investigates the causes 
Which are deeply hidden. But the whole of 
our treatment and exertion is concerned with 
the hidden man of the heart,* and our warfare 
is directed against that adversary and foe with- 
in us, who uses ourselves as his Weapons against 
ourselves, and, most. fearful of all, hands us 
over to the death of sin. In opposition then, 
to these foes we are in need of great and_ per- 
fect faith, and of still greater co-operation on 
the part of God, and, as IT am persuaded, of no 
slight countermanceuvring on our own part, 
which must manifest itself both in word and 
deed, if ourselves, the most precious possession 
we have, are to be duly tended and cleansed 
and made as deserving as possible. 

22. ‘To turn however to the ends in view in 
each of these forms of healing, for this point is 
still left to be considered, the one preserves, if 
it already exists, the health and good habit of 
the flesh, or if absent, recalls it ; though it is 
not yet clear whether or not these will be for 
the advantage of those who possess them, since 
their opposites very often confer a greater 
benefit on those who have them, just as poverty 
and wealth, renown or disgrace, a low or 
brilliant position, and all other circumstances, 
which are naturally indifferent, and do not in- 
cline in one direction more than in another, 

| produce a good or bad effect according to the 
_ will of, and the manner in which they are used 

} 

by the persons who experience them. But the 
scope of our art is to provide the soul with 
Wings, to rescue it from the world and give it 
to God, and to watch over that which is in 
His image,? if it abides, to take it by the hand, 
if it is in danger, or restore it, if ruined, to 
make Christ to dwell in the hearty by the Spirit : 
and, in short, to deify, and bestow heavenly 
bliss upon, one who belongs to the heavenly 
host. 

23. This is the wish of our schoolmaster 
the law, of the prophets who intervened be- 
tween Christ and the law, of Christ who is the 
fulfiller and end € of the spiritual law ; of the 
emptied Godhead,§ of the assumed flesh,” of 
the novel union between God and man, one 
consisting ® of two, and both in one. This is 

B Gen. i. 26. y Eph, iti. 17. 
§ Gal. iii. 24. e€ Heb, xii. 2. ¢ Phil. ii. 7. 9 Heb. ii. ry. 
9 One consisting, &c. “These words” says Gabriel, ‘are in- 
deed a two-edged sword against the heretics, for one clause 

ar Retain, 4: 

ie 

why God was united * to the flesh by means 
of the soul, & and natures so separate were knit 
together by the aflinity to cach of the element 
which mediated between them: so all became 
one for the sake of all, and tor the sake of one, 
our progenitor, the soul because of the soul 
which was disobedient, the flesh because of the 
flesh which co-operated with it and shared 
in its condemnation, Christ, Who was superior 
to, and beyond the reach of, sin, because of 
Adam, who became subject to sin, 

24. ‘This is why the new was substituted for 
the old,y why He Who suffered was for suffering 
recalled to life, why each property of His, Who 
was above us, was interchanged with each of ours, 
why the new mystery took place of the dispen- 
sation, due to loving kindness which deals with 
him who fell through disobedience. ‘This is 
the reason for the generation and the virgin, 
for the manger and Bethlehem ; the generation 
on behalf of the creation,® the virgin on behalt 
of the woman,€ Bethlehem because of Eden, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

crown for the dominion of evil, and of death 
for death, and of darkness for the sake of light, 
and of burial for the return to the ground, and 
of resurrection for the sake of resurrection. 
All these are a training from God for us, and 
a healing for our weakness, restoring the old 
Adam to the place whence he fell, and con- 
ducting us to the tree of life,® from which tlie 
tree of knowledge estranged us, when par- 
taken of unseasonably, and improperly. 

26. Of this healing we, who are set over 
others, are the ministers and fellow-labourers ; ¥ 
for whom it isa great thing to recognise and 
heal their own passions and sicknesses: or 
rather, not really a great thing, only the vi- 
ciousness of most of those who belong to this 
order has made me say so: but a much greater 
thing is the power to heal and skilfully cleanse 
those of others, to the advantage both of those 

~ who are in want of healing and of those whose 

the manger because of the garden, small and vis- 

ible things on behalf of great and hidden things. 
This is why the angels” glorified first the 

heavenly, then the earthly,? why the shepherds | 

saw the glory over the Lamb and the Shepherd, 
why the star led the Magi to worship and offer 
gifts,« in order that idolatry might be destroyed. 
‘This is why Jesus was baptized,* and received 
testimony from above, and fasted,* and was 
tempted, and overcame him who had overcome. 
This is why devils were cast out,“ and diseases 
healed, and the mighty preaching was entrusted 
to, and successfully proclaimed by men of low 
estate. 

25. This is why the heathen rage and the 
peoples imagine vain things ;” why tree# is set 

charge it is to heal. 

27. Again, the healers of our bodies will 
have their labours and vigils and cares, of 
which we are aware; and will reap a harvest 
of pain for themselves from the distresscs of 
others, as one of their wise men® said; and 
will provide for the use of those who need 

them, both the results of their own labours and 

investigations, and what they have been able 
to borrow from others: and they consider 
none, even of the minutest details, which they 

~ discover, or which elude their search, as having 

other than an important influence upon health 
or danger. And what is the object ofall this? 

- That a man may live some days longer on the 
earth, though he is possibly not a good man, 
but one of the most depraved, for whom it had 

over against tree,? hands against hand, the one | 

stretched out in self indulgence,” the others in 
generosity ; the one unrestrained, the others 
fixed by nails,¢ the one expelling Adam, the oth- 
er reconciling the ends of the earth. 
the reason of the lifting up to atone for the fall, 

and of the gall for the tasting, and of the thorny — 

mortally wounds Nestorius who separates the Divine from the 
Human Nature—the other Eutyches, who empties the human into 
the Divine.” 

a Was united, avexpady, lit., was blended” —cf. Orat. xxxviit. 
13. This and similar terms used by Gregory and his contempo- 
rarics in an orthodox sense were Iaidaside by later Fathers, in 
consequence of their having been perverted in favor of the Eu- 
tychian heresy. 

B By means of the soul, Cf. Orat. xxix. 19; xxxviil. 13 ; Epist. 
ror (tom. 2, p. go A.) ; Poem. Dogmat., x., 55-61 (tom. 2, p. 256) ; 
Petavius de Incarn., IV., xiii. 2. Heb. vii, 8-13. 

6 Lit. ‘of the formation ”--the substantive here corresponds 
to the verb in Gen. ii. 7 (ILXX.). € Gen, il. 7. 

¢ Se Lake a. 3 nec Ls Ms THe 0: Car. 37.40. 

tS. Nath dieo, ce: k Sx Mattwitn 13,47. Nee hate. 

Med DLO beens Bs Paes i, 

€Gen. iii. 3. IWV/y tree, &c. Astriking contrast of the means of 
Redemption by the Cross of Christ with the circumstances of the 
Fall. oS. John xix.17, mGen.ili,6-23. p S. Matt. xxvii. 35. 

perhaps been better, because of his badness, to 
have died long ago, in order to be set free from 
vice, the most serious of sicknesses. But, sup- 

pose he is a good man, how long will he be 

This is | 

able to live? For ever? Or what will he gain 
from life here, from which it is the greatest 

of blessings, if a man be sane and sensible, to 

seek to be set free? 
28. But we, upon whose efforts is staked 
the salvation of a soul, a being blessed and im- 

mortal, and destined for undying chastisement 
_ or praise, for its vice or virtue, —what a strug- 
gle ought ours to be, and how great skill do we 

_to the spirit. 

require to treat, or get men treated properly, 
and to change their life, and give up the clay 
For men and women, young 

One translator carries on the 

a For the sake of resurrection. 
sc. of Adam, 

contrast, and renders ‘‘ to atone for the insurrection,” 
‘The preposition Uwep seems decisive against this. : 
BoRev.ati7G xxi. 14: ye @or tusOn 1veety 2h Ole Millets 
8 One of their wise men, the author of the treatise mept ovowr, 
ascribed to Hippocrates, 

IN, PlPENeh OF AIS FLICHT TO: PONT. 

and old, rich and poor, the sanguine and des- 

pondent, the sick and whole, rulers and ruled, 
the wise and ignorant, the cowardly and cour- 
ageous, the wrathful and meek, the successful 
and failing, do not require the same instruction 
and encouragement. 

29. And if you examine more closely, how 
gicat is the distinction between the married 
and the unmarried, and among the latter be- 
tween hermits and those who live together in 

ibs | 

some are wont to despise private admonitions, 
but are recalled to their senses by the condem- 
nation of a number of people, while others, 

~who would grow reckless under reproof openly 

community, between those who are proficient | 

and advanced in contemplation and those who 
barely hold on the straight course, between 
townsfolk again and rustics, between the sim- 
ple and the designing, between men of busi-_ 
ness and men of leisure, between those who 
have met with reverses and those who are pros- | 
perous and ignorant of misfortune. For these | 
classes differ sometimes more widely from each 
other in their desires and passions than in their 
physical characteristics ; or, if you will, in the 
mixtures and blendings of the elements of 
which we are composed, and, therefore, to reg- | 
ulate them is no easy task. 
30. «As then the same medicine and the | 
same food are not in every case administered 
to men’s bodies, but a difference is made ac- 
cording to their degree of health or infirmity ; 
so also are souls treated with varying instruc- 
tion and guidance. ‘To this treatment witness 

| 
| 
| 

is borne by those who have had experience of | 

it. Some are led by doctrine, others trained 
by example ; some need the spur, others the 
curb; some are sluggish and hard to rouse 
to the geod, and must be stirred up by being 
smitten with the word; others are immoder- 
ately fervent in spirit, with impulses difficult 
to restrain, like thoroughbred colts, who run 

wide of the turning post, and to improve them | 
the word must have a restraining and checking | 

influence. 

31. Some are benefited by praise, others by 
blame, both being applied in season; while if 
out of season, or unreasonable, they are inju- 
rious ; some are set right by encouragement, 
others by rebuke; some, when taken to task in 
public, others, when privately corrected. For 

a Those who, &c. pryddas, cf. xxi., 10, where povaderot and ot 
THs Epycas are distinguished from Meyades and ot THs émiutéas. 
Clemencet here holds that ot rs €pyutas are hermits as distin- 
guished from ccenobites, but does not hint at any further sub- 
division between the corwytxot and the peyades. Cf. also xliii. 
62; xxi. 19. Montaut, “Revue Critique, &c.” (pp. 48-52) at- 
tempts to distinguish between the peyades and the kowwvekot. But 
although he confirms the overthrow by Clémencet of the views of 
previous translators, he leaves Clémencet’s own position really un- 
weakened. S. Gregory uses the two terms as practically convert- 
ible. In xxi. §19, (which Montaut misinterprets) he explains 
that the life of the canobite is a hermit-life in its relation to the 
world which he has forsaken, i 

while 1f has opportunities in com- 
munity-life for the rowth of those v 
ity g 

irtues which are required by the 
relation of man to man. Cf, Bened. edition (Clémencet), Prat, 
Gener., Pars. IL., § iii, sub finem, 

given, accept rebuke because it is in secret, 
and yield obedience in return for sympathy. 

32. Upon some it is needful to keep a close 
watch, even in the minutest details, because 
if they think they are unperceived (as they 
would contrive to be), they are puffed up 
with the idea of their own wisdom. Of others 
it is better to take no notice, but seeing not to 
e, and hearing not to hear them, according 
to the proverb, that we may not drive them 
to despair, under the depressing influence of 
repeated reproofs, and at last to utter reckless- 
ness, when they have lost the sense of self-re- 
spect, the source of persuasiveness.¢ In some 
cases we must even be angry, without feeling 
angry, or treat them with a disdain we do not 
feel, or manifest despair, though we do not really 
despair of them, according to the needs of 
their nature. Others again we must treat with 
condescension® and lowliness, aiding them 
readily to conceive a hope of better things. 
Some it is often more advantageous to conquer 
—by others to be overcome, and to praise or 
deprecate, in one case wealth and power, in 
another poverty and failure. 

33- For our treatment does not correspond 
with virtue and vice, one of which is most ex- 
cellent and beneficial at all times and in all 
cases, and the other most evil and harmful; 
and, instead of one and the same of our medi- 
cines invariably proving either most wholesome 
or most dangerous in the same cases—he it sever- 
ity or gentleness, or any of the others which we 
have enumerated—in some cases it proves good 
and useful, in others again it has the contrary 
effect, according, I suppose, as time and cir- 
cumstance and the disposition of the patient 
admit. Now to set before you the distinction 
between all these things, and give you a per- 
fectly exact view of them, so that you may in 
brief comprehend the medical art, is quite 1m- 
possible, even for one in the highest degree 
qualified by care and skill: but actual ex perl- 
ence and practice are requisite to formyY a 
medical system and a medical man. 

34. This, however, I take to be generally 
admitted—that just as it is not safe for those 
who walk on a lofty tight rope to lean to 
either side, for even though the inclination 
seems slight, it has no slight consequences, but 

ey 
SC 

aThe source of persuasiveness, lit, 
suasion,”’ 

B condescension, lit, equity, dealing cently with their weakness, 
not exacting the literal fulfilment of the law. 

y <dre requisite to form, lit, by ‘actual... they become clear tu,’ 

the medicine of per- 

212 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

their safety depends upon their perfect balance : 
so in the case of one of us, if he leans to either 
side, whether from vice or ignorance, no slight 
danger of a fall into sin is incurred, both for 
himself and those who are led by him. But 
we must really walk in the King’s highway, 
and take care not to turn aside from it either 
to the right hand or to the left,? as the Proverbs 
say. For such is the case with our passions, 
and such in this matter is the task of the good 
shepherd, if he is to know properly the souls 
of his flock, and to guide them according to 
the methods of a pastoral care which is right 
and just, and worthy of our true Shepherd. 

35. In regard to the distribution of the word, 
to mention last the first of our duties, of that 
divine and exalted word, which everyone now 
is ready to discourse upon; if anyone else 
boldly undertakes it and supposes it within the 
power of every man’s intellect, I am amazed 
at his intelligence, not to say his folly. ‘To 
me indeed it seems no slight task, and one 
requiring no little spiritual power, to give in 
due season? to each his portion of the word, and 
to regulate with judgment the truth of our 
opinions, which are concerned with such sub- 
jects as the world or worlds,? matter, soul, 
mind, intelligent natures, better or worse, pro- 
vidence which holds together and guides the 
universe, and seems in our experience of it to 
be governed according to some principle, but 
one which is at variance with those of earth and 
of men. 

36. Again, they are concerned with our ori- 
ginal constitution, and final restoration, the 
types of the truth, the covenants, the first and 
second coming of Christ, His incarnation, 
sufferings and dissolution,* with the resurrec- 
tion, the last day, the judgment and recom- 
pense, whether sad or glorious ; I, to crown all, 
with what we are to think of the original$ and 
blessed ‘Trinity. Now this involves a very 
great tisk to those who are charged with the 
illumination” of others, if they are to avoid 
contracting ® their doctrine to a single Person, 
from fear of polytheism, and so leave us empty 
terms, if we suppose the Father and the Son and 
the Holy Spirit to be one and the same Person 
only: or, on the other hand, severing It into 
three, either foreign and diverse, or disordered 

a Numb. xx. 17. B Prov. iv. 27. ¥ S. Take xi. 42. 

& HWordds, i.e. the invisible and visible, of which S. Greg. held 
that the former was created before the latter. cf. Orat. xviil. 3 ; 
XXVIl. 103 XXVill. 313 XXXVill. 10; xl. 45. 

¢ Dissolution ; some translate ‘return’—i.e. of the Ascension ; 
referring the ‘resurrection, &c.’ to mankind in general. 

§ Original. Perhaps better ‘supreme.’ 

n Ulumination, Some apply this to Holy Baptism, with its 
preliminary instruction. 

0 Contracting, i.e. by the Sabcllian heresy. 

‘ é A parallel pas- 
sage in almost identical terms is Orat. xx. 6. 

and unprincipled, and, so to say, opposed divin- 
ities, thus falling from the opposite side into 
an equally dangerous error: like some distorted 
plant if bent far back in the opposite direction. 

37. For, amid the three infirmities in regard 
to theology, atheism, Judaism, and polytheism, 
one of which is patronised by Sabellius the 
Libyan, another by Arius of Alexandria, and 
the third by some of the ultra-orthodox amony 
us, What is my position, can I avoid what- 
ever in these three is noxious, and remain 
within the limits of piety ; neither being Jed 
astray by the new analysis and synthesis into 
the atheism* of Sabellius, to assert not so much 
that all are one as that each is nothing, for 
things which are transferred and pass into cach 
other cease to be that which cach one of them 
is, or that we have an unnaturally compound 
deity, like those mythical creatures, the subject 
of a picturesque imagination: nor again, by 
alleging a plurality of severed natures, accord- 
ing to the well named madness? of Arius, be- 
coming involved in a Jewish poverty, and in- 

/troducing envy into the divine nature, by 

limiting the Godhead to the Unbegotten One 
alone, as if afraid that our God would perish, 
if He were the Father of a real God of equal 
nature: nor again, by arraying three principles 
in opposition to, or in alliance with, each 
other, introducing the Gentile plurality of 
principles from which we have escaped ? 

38. It is necessary neither to be so devoted 
to the Father, as to rob Him of His lather- 
hood, for whose Father would He be, if the 
Son were separated and estranged frem Him, 
by being ranked with the creation, (for an 
alien being, or one which is combined and 
confounded with his father, and, for the sense 
is the same, throws him into confusion, is not 
ason); nor to be so devoted to Christ, as to 
neglect to preserve both His Sonship, (for 
whose son would He be, if His origin were not 
referred to the Father? ) and the rank of the 
Father as origin, inasmuch as He is the Father 
and Generator; for He would be the origin of 
petty and unworthy beings, or rather the teri 
would be used in a petty and unworthy sense, 
if He were not the origin of Godhead and 
goodness, which are contemplated in the Son 
and the Spirit: the former being the Son and 
the Word, the latter the proceeding and in- 
dissoluble Spirit. For both the Unity of the 
Godhead must be preserved, and the Trinity 

aAtheism. ‘This term is used of Sabcllianism xviil. 16. xx. 6. 
xxi. 13. xlili, 30, in the sense in which it is here explained. Cf. 
Petay. de Trin. I. vi. 3, sqq. 

B Madness of Arianism, xxi. 13. xxxiv. 8. xhii. 30. This term 
is applied in a letter of Constantine after the Council of Nica. It 
is called Judaism also Orat. xx. 6 as frequently by S, Athanasius, 
Cf, Petay. de Trin. I. ix. 8, 

IN DEFENCE OF 

of Persons confessed, each with His own prop- 
CLL. 

39. A suitable and worthy comprehension 
and exposition of this subject demands a discus- 
sion of greater length than the present occasion, 
or even our life, as I suppose, allows, and, 
what is more, both now and at all times, the 
aid of the Spirit, by Whom alone we are able 
to perceive, to expound, or to embrace, the 
truth in regard to God. Tor the pure alone 

PriS FLIGHT 10) LON TUS, 2 | 

| 

7 
2 
beaten with many stripes,* because it is not 
through vice or depravity that they have failed 
to do the will of their Lord; and these per- 

~ chance would be persuaded and forsake the 

can grasp Him Who is pure and of the same | 

disposition as himself; and I have now briefly 

dwelt upon the subject, to show how difficult it | 

is to discuss such important questions, especially 
before a large audience, composed of every age 
and condition, and needing like an instrument 
of many strings, to be played upon in various 
ways; or to find any form of words able to 
edify them all, and illuminate them with the 
light of knowledge. For it is not only that 
there are three sources from which danger 
springs, understanding, speech, and hearing, 

so that failure in one, if not in all, is infallibly | 

certain ; for either the mind is not illuminated, 
or the language is feeble, or the hearing, not 
having been cleansed, fails to comprehend, and 
accordingly, in one or all respects, the truth 
must be maimed: but further, what makes the 
instruction of those who profess to teach any 
other subject so easy and acceptable—viz. the 
piety* of the audience—on this subject involves 
difficulty and danger. 

40. For having undertaken to contend on 
behalf of God, the Supreme Being, and of 
salvation, and of the primary hope? of us all, 
the more fervent they are in the faith, the more 
hostile are they to what is said, supposing that 
a submissive spirit indicates, not piety, but 
treason to the truth, and therefore they would 
sacrifice anything rather than their private con- 
victions, and the accustomed doctrines in which 
they have been educated. I am now referring 
to those who are moderate and not utterly de- 
praved in disposition, who, if they have erred 
in regard to the truth, have erred from piety, 
who have zeal, though not according to know- 
ledge, ¥ who will possibly be of the “number of 
those not excessively condemned, and not 

a Piety, evAdBera. i, e. The pious readily and attentively reccive 
instruction in morality or generally received truth, but are more 
suspicious and intolerant than ordinary people, if, at a time when 

any theological question is hotly debated, a prez icher touches 1: pon: 

any point connected with it, and so stirs party feeling or personal 
prejudice. 

B The primary hope. This term is used of the full knowledge 
and confession of the doctrine of the Holy rinity,: Orat. socks, 33 9 
where its necessary connection with Christianity and the life of the 
soul is insisted on. Vorits vital importance cf. Liddon, Bamp. Lcct. 
pp. 435, 6, and its bearing on the Mediatorial Work of Christ, and so 
on our salvation. Ibid. Lect, VILE, €sp. pp: 472-0(sth ed.). 9. Cyr. 
Hier. Catech. 13.2. S. Cyr. Alex, de S. Trin. dial. 4. tom v. pp. 
5O8ssS00/ «156 Proclus Hom. in Incarn. 5. 6; 9. Bright. Hist. of 
the Church, p 149. y Rom. x. 2, 

| 
| 

pious opinion which is the cause of their hostil- 
ity, if some reason either from their own minds, 
or from others, were to take hold of them, and 
at acritical moment, like iron from flint, strike 
fire from a mind which is pregnant and worthy 
of the light, for thus a little spark would quickly 
kindle the torch of truth within it. 

41. But what is to be said of those who, from 
vain glory or arrogance, speak unrighteousness 
against the most High,® arming themselves 
with the insolence of Jannes and Jambres,¥ noi 
against Moses, but against the truth, and rising 
in opposition to sound doctrine? Or of the 
third class, who through ignorance and, its 
consequence, temerity, rush headlong against 
every form of doctrine in swinish fashion, and 
trample under foot the fair pearls® of the 
truth ? 

42. What again of those who come with no 
private idea, or form of words, better or 
worse, in regard to God, but listen to all kinds 
of doctrines and teachers, with the intention of 
selecting from all what is best and _ safest, in 
reliance upon no better judges of the truth than 
themselves? They are, in consequence, borne 
and turned about hither and thither by one 
plausible idea after another, and, after being 
deluged and trodden down by all kinds of doc- 
trine, € and having rung the changes on a long 
succession of teachers and formule, which they 
throw to the winds as readily as dust, their cars 
and minds at last are wearied out, and, O what 
folly ! they become equally disgusted “with al 
forms of doctrine, and assume the wretched 
character of deriding and despising our faith as 
unstable and unsound; passing in their igno- 
rance from the teachers to the doctrine: as if 
anyone whose eyes were diseased, or whose 
ears had been injured, were to complain of the 
sun for being dim and not shining, or of sounds 
for being inharmonious and feeble. 

43. Accordingly, to impress the truth upon 
a soul when it is still fresh, like wax not yet 
subjected to the seal, is an easier task than in- 
scribing pious doctrine on the top of inscrip- 
tions—I mean wrong doctrines and dogmas $ — 
with the result that the former are confused and 
thrown into disorder by the latter. It is bet- 
ter indeed to tread a road which is smooth and 
well trodden than one which is untrodden and 
rough, or to plough land w ‘hich has often been 

vi tile Xi. 47- B Ps. inate 83, (bX Xa) 

Ops aicm, Cig: vitle go: e ph. ae 14. 

6 Doctrines and dogmas. lias takes the former to refer to mo- 
rality and the latter to belief, 

2 ‘Lim. iu. 8 

214 

cleft and broken up by the plough: but a soul 
to be written upon should be free from the in- 
seription of harmful doctrines, or the deeply 
cut marks of vice: otherwise the pious inscri- 

ber would have a twofold task, the erasure of 
the former impressions and the substitution of | 
others which are more excellent, and more | 

worthy to abide. 
wickedness is shown, not only by yielding to 
their passions, but even by their utterances, 

and so numerous the forms and. characters 

So numerous are they whose — 

of wickedness, and so considerable the task of | 

one who has been intrusted with this office of 
educating and taking charge of souls. 
I have omitted the majority of the details, lest 
my speech should be unnecessarily burden- 
some. 

44. Tf anyone were to undertake to tame and 
train an animal of many forms and shapes, 
compounded of many animals of various sizes 
and degrees of tameness and wildness, his 
principal task, involving a considerable strug- 
gle, would be the government of so extraor- 
dinary and heterogeneous a nature, since each 
of the animals of which it is compounded 

would, according to its nature or habit, be | 

differently affected with joy, pleasure or dis- 
like, by the same words, or food, or stroking 
with the hand, or whistling, or other modes of 
treatment. And what must the master ofsuch 
an animal do, but show himself manifold and 

Indeed © 

various in his knowledge, and apply to each a_ 

treatment suitable for it, so as successfully to 
lead and preserve the beast ? 
common body of the church is composed of 

And since the > 

many different characters and minds, like a | 

single animal compounded of discordant parts. 

it is absolutely necessary that its ruler should © 
be at once simple in his uprightness in all re-_ 

spects, and as far as possible manifold and 
varied in his treatment of individuals, and in 
dealing with all in an appropriate and suitable 
manner. 

45. lor some need to be fed with the milk + 
of the most simple and elementary doctrines, 
viz., those who are in habit babes and, so to 
say, new-made, and unable to bear the manly 
food of the word: nay, if it were presented to 
them beyond their strength, they would 
probably be overwhelmed and_ oppressed, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN: 

tie 

the pertect, © ane higher and more solic 
food, since their senses have been sufficiently 
exercised to discern? truth and falsehood, and 
if they were made to drink milk, and fed on 
the vegetable dict of invalids,” they would le 
annoyed. And with good reason, for the; 
would not be. strengthencd® according to 
Christ, nor make that laudable increase, which 
the Word produces in one who is rightly fed, 
by making him a perfect man, and bringing 
him to the measure of spiritual stature. ¢ 

46. And who is sufficient for these things ? 
For we are not as the many, able to corrupts 
the word of truth, and mix the wine,” which 
maketh glad the heart of man, ® with water, 
mix, that is, our doctrine with what is com- 
mon and cheap, and debased, and stale, and 
tasteless, in order to turn the adulteration to 
our profit, and accommodate ourselves to those 
who meet us, and curry favor with everyone, 
becoming ventriloquists* and chatterers, who 
serve their own pleasures by words uttered 
from the earth, and sinking into the earth, and, 
to gain the special good will of the multitude, 
injuring in the highest degree, nay, ruining our- 
selves, and shedding the innocent blood of sim- 
pler souls, which will be required at our hands. * 

47. Besides, we are aware that it is better 
to offer our own reins to others more skilful 
than ourselves, than, while inexperienced, to 
guide the course of others, and rather to give 
a kindly hearing than stir an untrained tongue ; 
and after a discussion of these points with ad- 
visers who are, I fancy, of no mean worth, 
and, at any rate, wish us well, we preferred to 
learn those canons of speech and action which 
we did not know, rather than undertake to teach 
them in our ignorance. For it is delightful to 
have the reasoning’ of the aged come to one 
even until the depth of old age, able, as it is, 
to aid a soul new to piety. Accordingly, to 
undertake the training of others before being 
sufficiently trained oneself, and to learn, as 
men say, the potter’s art on a wine-jar, that is, 

to practise ourselves in piety at the expense of 
others’ souls, seems to me to be excessive folly 

owing to the inability of their mind, as 

is the case with our material bodies, to di- 

gest and appropriate what is offered to it, and 

so would lose even their original power. Oth- 
ers require the wisdom which is spoken among 

an, Cow ie 1,2 ebe ye mete 

B Our material: dodics. lite “matter” 
“dust.” “mire” or clay” and other similar terms, is often used 
by S. Gregory as a synonym of ‘‘ the body.” 

This, together with | 

or excessive rashness—folly, if we are not even 
aware of our own ignorance; rashness, if in 
spite of this knowledge we venture on the task, 

48. Nay, the wiser of the Hebrews tell us 
that there was of old among the Hebrews a most 

excellent and praiseworthy law,# that every 

Btleb. ve as. y Rom. xiv. 2. 
eephisiv 5 13. 

i. 1, 22. Geks civ.ers. 

tP\Waizards. 2 

Clee Oo mn jee 

6 Coll i ay aa: 

CoM or, Al, 16; 173 y Isa 

tl entriloguists. Tsai. viil. 19, 

« Ezek. ili, 203 xxxii. 8. 

A Le., venerable for wisdom due to experience. 

uw Law, Not definitely cuacted, but a custom coe ob- 
served. It applied to the earlier and later chapters of Ezekiel and 
the Song of Solomon, 

DNS DPIC: “Or 

ave was not entrusted with the whole of Seine 

Ais es ee Te ee 

ture, inasmuch as this would not be the more | 
profitable course, since the whole of it is not. 

at once intelligible to everyone, and its more 
recondite parts would, by their apparent mean- 
ing, do a very great injury to most people. 

Some portions therefore, whose exterior? is. 

unexceptionable, are from the first permitted 
and common to all; 

while others are only en- | 

trusted to those who have attained their twenty- — 

fifth year, viz., such as hide their mystical 
beauty under a mean-looking cloak, to be the 
reward of diligence and an illustrious life ; flash- 

ing forth and presenting itself only to those | 

whose mind has been purified, on the ground 

that this age alone® can be superior to the | 

body, and properly rise from the letter to the 
spirit. 

49. Among us, however, there 1s no bound- 
ary line between giving and receiving instruc- 
tion, like the stones of old between the tribes 
within and beyond the Jordan: nor is a cer- 
tain part entrusted tosome, another to others ; 
nor any rule for degrees’ of experience; but 
the matter has been so disturbed and thrown 
into confusion, that most of us, not to say 
all, almost before we have lost our childish 
curls and lisp, before we have entered the 
house of God, before we know even the 
names of the Sacred Books, before we have 
learnt the character and authors of the Old 
and New ‘Testaments: (for my present point 
not our want of cleansing from the mire 
and marks of spiritual shame which our 
viciousness has contracted) if, I say, we have 
furnished ourselves with two or three expres- 
sions of pious authors, and that by hearsay, 
not by study ; ifwe have had a brief experience 
of David, or clad ourselves properly in a cloak- 

is 

| 

let, or are wearing at least a philosopher’s gir- | 
dle, or have girt about us some form and ap- | 

pearance of piety—phew! how we take the 
chair and show our spirit! Samuel was holy 
even in his swaddiing-clothes : ® we are at once 
wise teachers, of high estimation in Divine 

things, the first of scribes and lawyers ; we or- | 

dain ourselves men of heaven and seek to be 
called Rabbi by men; the letter is nowhere, 
everything is to be understood spiritually, and 

our dreams are utter drivel, and we should be 
annoyed if we were not lauded to excess. 
This is the case with the better and more sim- 

a Mvterior, Origen, Hom. 5, in Levit., 
soul, and spirit of Scripture.’ 

B Alone. Jf,as many MSS. we read pdats, § 
This is preferred by the Bened. note. 

y Degrees, etc. Heb. v. 14 V. ‘tuse” (in the singular), the 
sense is ‘*anyrule for confining the use of difficult passages of 
Holy Scripture to those whose ral e a guarantee against 
their abuse.” Onaga . Matt. xxiii. ve 

speaks of the ‘body, 

‘with difficulty.” 

215 

Ee of us: what of those who are more spiritual 
and noble?¢ After frequently condemning 
us, as men of no account, they have forsaken 
us, and abhor fellowship with impious people 
such as we are. 

50. Now, if we were to speak gently to one of 
them, advancing, as follows, step by step in 
argument: ‘Tell me, my good sir, do you 
call dancing anything, and flute-playing ?’”’ 
‘¢ Certainly,’’ they would say. ‘What then 
of wisdom and being wise, which we venture 
to define as a knowledge of things divine and 
human?’’ ‘This also they will admit. Are 
then these accomplishments better than and su- 
perior to wisdom, or wisdom by far better than 
these?’’ ‘* Better even than all things,’’ I 
know well that they will say. Up to this point 
they are judicious. ‘* Well, dancing and flute- 
playing require to be taught and learnt, a pro- 
cess which takes time, and much toil in the 
sweat of the brow, and sometimes the payment 
of fees, and entreaties for inititation, and long 
absence from home, and all else which must be 
done and borne for the acquisition of expe- 
rience: but as for wisdom, which is chief of all 
things, and holds in her embrace everything 

_ which is good, so that even God himself prefers 

this title to all the names by which He is 
called ; are we to suppose that it is a matter of 
such slight consequence, and so accessible, that 
we need but wish, and we would be wise?’’ 
‘©Tt would be utter folly to do so.’’ If we, or 
any learned and prudent man, were to say this 
to them, and try by degrees to cleanse them 
from their error, it would be sowing upon 
rocks,®& and speaking to ears of men who will 
not hear: % so far are they from being even 
wise enough to perceive their own ignorance. 
And we may rightly, in my opinion, apply to 
them the saying of Solomon: ‘There is an 
evil which I have seen under the sun, ® a man 
wise in his own conceit; ¢€ and a still greater 
evil is to charge with the instruction of others 
aman who is not even aware of his own ignor- 
ance. 

51. This is a state of mind which demands, 
in special degree, our tears and groans, and has 

_ often stirred my pity, from the conviction that 

imagination robs us in great measure of reality, 
and that vain glory is a great hindrance to 
men’s attainment of virtue. ‘To heal and stay 

this disease needs a Peter or Paul, those great 

disciples of Christ, who in addition to guidance 
in word and deed, received their grace,$ and 

*— This is ironical. 

¥ eehise xxv s 9; 

e Prov, XXvi. 12 
Elias takes this of the por wer to 
Perhaps better 

“More spiritual and noble.’ 
3 S. Luke viii. 6. 
6 Isccles. x. 5. 
6 lheir grace, 7) Xapiona. 
heal diseases, ‘lillemont of miracles in general, 

216 GREGORY 
became all things to all men, that they might 
gain all.@ But for other men like ourselves, it 
Isa great thing to be rightly guided and led 
by those who have been charged with the cor- 
rection and setting right of things such as these 
52. Since, however, I have mentioned Paul, 
and men like him, I will, with your permission, 
pass by all others who have been foremost as 
lawgivers, prophets, or leaders, or in any 
similar office—for instance, Moses, Aaron, 
Joshua, Elijah, Elisha, the Judges, Samuel, 
David, 

| 

_ others he charges with folly.é 

| Wrong. 

the company of Prophets, John, the | 

‘Pwelve Apostles, and their successors, who with | 

many toils and labors exercised their ‘authority, 
each in his own time ; all these I pass by, to set 

forth Paul as the witness to my assertions, and | 
for us to consider by his example how im- | 

portant a matter is the care of souls, and whether 
it requires slight attention and little judgment. 
But that we may recognize and perceive this, 
Jet us hear what Paul himself says of Paul. 

53- I say nothing of his labours, his watch- 
ings, his sufferings in hunger and thirst, in cold 
and nakedness, his assailants from without, his 
adversaries within. ® [ pass over the persecu- 
tions, councils, prisons, bonds, accusers, tribu- 
nals, the daily and hourly deaths, the basket, 
the stonings, beatings with rods, the travelling 
about, the perils by ‘land and sea, the deep, th 
shipwrecks, the perils of rivers, perils of ro- 

lowly. 

Nae acne N. 

parents and children ,¢ marriage and celibacy, e 
sclf-dise ipline and indulgence,Y wisdom and ig- 

; NOTA. ae ircumcision and uncircumce Isilon, 

Christ and the world, the flesh and the spirit.$ 
On behalf of some he gives thanks, others hie 
upbraids. Some he names his joy and crown.” 
some who hold 
a straight course he accompanies, sharing in 
their zeal ; others he checks, who are going 
At one time he excommunicates,! at 
another he confirms his love ;* at one time he 
grieves, at another rejoices; at one time he 

feeds with milk, at another he handles mys- 
teries ;4 at one time he condescends, at another 
he raises to his own level; at one time he 
threatens a rod, at another he offers the spirit 
of meckness ; at one time he is haughty to- 
ward the lofty, at another lowly toward the 
Now he is least of the apostles, ¥ he 

he offers a proof of Christ speaking in him ; 

now he longs for departure and is on 

poured forth as a libation,* now he thinks it 

bers, perils from his countrymen, perils among | 

false brethren, the living by his own hands, the 
gospel without charge,” the being a spectacle to 
both angels and men,’ set in the midst between 
God and men to champion His cause,* and to 
unite them to Him, 

and make them His own | 

peculiar people, beside those things that are | 
_ struction he would thus impress upon us? Not 

without.” For who could worthily detail these 
matters, the daily pressure,® the individual so- 
licitude, the care of all the churches, the 
universal sympathy, and brotherly love? Did 
anyone stumble, Paul also was weak ; did an- 
other suffer scandal, 
fire. 

54. What of the laboriousness of his teach- 
ing? 
His loving kindness? And on the other haid 
his strictness ?. And the combination and blen |- 
ing of the two; in such wise that his gentie- 
ness should not enervate, nor his wapiihe OX: 
asperate? He gives laws for slaves and mas- 
ters,¢ rulers and ruled,* husbands and wives, 

of the special position as Apostles to the Jews and to the Gen- 
tiles (Gal. i. 8, 9), where the term used is xXapes. 

a0 oO 
Te Dy 

ar ar, 1x22, 2 Cor. xi, 23 et seq. Aictyen iv. ae. oe 
6 ib. iv, 9. e His cause reading Tov: vy. 1. vv. 
($5 Staats or 9 2 Cor, x1. 28, 

0 Pressure émuazaciav, 2 Cor. xi.-28, émiagzacw. 
pe ph. Wi,.559; « Rom. xiii. 1-3. Aleph. v.25; 22: 

it was Paul who was on | 

i 
| 

The manifold character of his ministry ? | 

nore necessary for their sakes to abide in the 
flesh. For he seeks not his own interests, but 
those of his children,™ whom he has begotten 
in Christ by the gospel. ep This is the aim of 
all his spiritual authority, in everything to 
neglect his own in comparison with the a 
vantage of others. 

55. He glories in his infirmities and dis- 
tresses. He takes pleasure in the dying of 
Jesus,” as if it were a kind of ornament. He 
is lofty in carnal things,” he rejoices in things 
spiritual; he is not rude in knowledge, ¥ and 
claims to see in a mirror, darkly.¢ He is bold 
in spirit, and buffets his ‘body ,X throwing it as 
an antagonist. What is the lesson and_ in- 

to be proud of earthly things, or puffed up by 
knowledge, or excite the flesh against the 
spirit. He fights for all, prays for all, is jeal- 
ous for all, is kindled on behalf of all, whether 
without law, or under the law; a preacher of 
the Gentiles,¥ a patron of the Jews. He even 
was exceedingly bold on behalf of his brethren 
according to the flesh,’ if I may myself be bold 
enough to say so, in his loving prayer that 

_ they might in his stead be brought to Christ. 

What magnanimity ! what fervor of spirit! He 
imitates Christ, who became a curse for us, #4 
who took our infirmities and bore our sick- 
nesses ; 88 or, to use more measured terms, he is 

a Veph, vi. 1-4. B 1 Corn. yssesen y Rom. xiv. 3, 6. 

Of Conv ie7 seals eloIne ts 25 522.0) $ Gal. v. 16. 
9 Phil. iv. 4, 0G: i jit t1 Cor, v. 5. x2 Cor. it. 8. 
AT GOT edlca7 i al tle an mw Ib. iv, 21. Peli exvno: 
GeO, xiiiaegt hil. i, 23; il. 27. pp el Ceeatoed = 
plib:-ive 1st. o> Cor. Ww. ros -xti. oy ro, tT Rom. v. 3 Phil. Itt 

v 2 Cor, xi. 6 ¢$ 1 Cor. xiii, 12. Mb sixs274 
Y2Tim. i. 11. Rom, ix. 3. aa Gal, ili. 13. BBS, Matt. viii. 17, 

ready, next to Christ, to suffer anything, even 
as one of the ungodly, for them, if only they 
be saved. 

56. Why should I enter into detail? He 
lived not to himself, but to Christ and his | 
preaching. He crucified the world to himself,¢ 
and being crucified to the world and _ the 
things which are seen, he thought all things 
little,? and too small to be desired; even 
though from Jerusalem and round about unto | 
Ilyricum ¥ he had fully preached the Gospel, 
even though he had been prematurely caught 
up to the third heaven, and had had a vision 
of Paradise, and had heard unspeakable words.? | 
Such was Paul, and everyone of like spirit | 
with him, But we fear that, in comparison 
with them, we may be foolish princes of Zoan,* 
or extortioners, who exact the fruits of the 
ground, or falsely bless the people: $ and fur- 
ther make themselves happy, and confuse the | 
way of your feet,” or mockers ruling over you, 
or children in authority,® immature in mind, 

| 
not even having bread and clothing enough to | 
be rulers over any ; ¢ or prophets teaching lies,* | 
or rebellious princes,* deserving to share the | 
reproach of their elders for the straitness of the | 
famine, or priests very far from speaking com- 
fortably” to Jerusalem, according to the re- 
proaches and protests urged by Isaiah, who 
was purged by the Seraphim with a live coal.é — 

57. Is the undertaking then so serious and | 
laborious to a sensitive and sad heart—a very 
rottenness to the bones® of a sensible man: | 
while the danger is slight, and a fall not worth 
consideration? Nay the blessed Hosea inspires 
me with serious alarm, where he says that to | 
us priests and rulers pertaineth the judgment,” | 
because we have been a snare to the watch- 
tower ; and as a net spread upon Tabor, which 
has been firmly fixed by the hunters of men’s 
souls, and he threatens to cut off the wicked 
prophets,e and devour their judges with fire, 
and to cease for a while from anointing a king 
and princes,? because they ruled for themselves, 
and not by Him.7 

58. Hence again the divine Micah, unable 
to brook the building of Zion with blood, 
however you interpret the phrase, and of Jeru- 
salem with iniquity, while the heads thereof 
judge for reward, and the priests teach for hire, 
and the prophets divine for money—what does 
he say will be the result of this? Zion shall 
be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem be as a 

B Philsin. 8% 
elsa. xix. rr. ¢Ib 
Ov bets 

y Rom. xv. 19. 
IEO- Oy lbs tile 12: 
Relais 
w Ib. viii. 21. Vth: Xe: é Ib. vi. 6, 7. 
fiz XIV 30s mw Hos. v. 1, 2. PaLbs Vie 5s 
o Ib, vii. 7. Tbe Villeay 

acGaly viaxas 
6 2 Cor, xii. 2, 4. 

DING Dee BNC Oe Tis “FLIGHT TO PONtTus. 

217 

lodge in a garden, and the mountain of the 
house be reckoned as a glade in a thicket. He 

_ bewails also the scarcity of the upright, there 

being scarcely a stalk or a gleaning grape left, 
since both the prince asketh, and the judge 
curries favour,® so that his language is almost 
the same as the mighty David’s: Save me, O 
Lord, for the godly man ceascth:¥ and says 
that therefore their blessings shall fail them, 
as if wasted by the moth. 

59. Jocl again summons us to wailing, and 
will have the ministers of the altar lament 
under the presence of famine: so far is he 
from allowing us to revel in the misfortunes 
of others: and, after sanctifying a fast, calling 
a solemn assembly, and gathering the old men, 
the children, and those of tender age,® we our- 
selves must further haunt the temple in sack- 
cloth and ashes,* prostrated right humbly on 
the ground, because the field is wasted, and 
the meat-offering and the drink-offering is cut 

_ off from the house of the Lord, till we draw 

down mercy by our humiliation. 

60. What of Habakkuk? He utters more 
heated words, and is impatient with God 
Himself, and cries down, as it were our good 
Lord, because of the injustice of the judges. 
O Lord, how long shall I cry and Thou wilt 
not hear? Shall I cry out unto Thee of vio- 
lence, and ‘Thou wilt not save? Why dost 
Thou show me toil and labour, causing me to 
look upon perverseness and impiety? Judg- 
ment has been given against me, and the 
judge is aspoiler. Therefore the law is slacked, 
and judgment doth never go forth. Then 
comes the denunciation, and what follows 
upon it. Behold, ye despisers, and regard, 
and wonder marvellously, and vanish away, 
for I work a work. But why need I quote 
the whole of the denunciation? A little fur- 
ther on, however, for I think it best to add 
this to what has been said, after upbraiding 
and lamenting many of those who are in some 
respect unjust or depraved, he upbraids the 
leaders and teachers of wickedness, stigmatising 
vice as a foul disorder, and an intoxication and 
aberration of mind; charging them with giv- 
ing their neighbours drink in order to look 
upon the darkness of their soul,” and the dens 
of creeping things and wild beasts, viz.: the 
dwelling places of wicked thoughts. Such 
indeed they are, and such teachings do they 
discuss with us. 

61. How can it be right to pass by Malachi, 
who at one time brings bitter charges against 
the priests, and reproaches them with despising 

VeRS axe 
Glialiei.c.etscq.< clo. tiverse 

@ Mic. ili, ro—12. B Ib. vit. 1-4. 
Ojiceli. 13)seq. ~eTsa. 1 vit, 3 

218 

the name of the Lord,# and explains wherein 
they did this, by offering polluted bread upon 
the altar, and meat which is not firstfruits, 
which they would not have offered to one of 
their governors, or, if they had offered it, 
they would have been dishonoured ; yet offer- 
ing these in fulfilment of a vow to the King 
of the universe, to wit, the lame and the sick, 
and the deformed, which are utterly profane 
and loathsome.® Again he reminds them of 
the covenant of God, a covenant of life and 
peace, with the sons of Levi, and that they 
should serve Him in fear, and stand in awe of 
the manifestation of His Name. The law of 
truth, he says, was in his mouth, and unright- 
cousness was not found in his lips; he walked 
with me uprightly in peace, and turned away 
many from iniquity: for the priest’s lips shall 
keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law 
at his mouth. And how honourable and at 
the same time how fearful is the cause! for he 
is the messenger of the Lord Almighty.y Al- 
though | pass over the following imprecations, 
as strongly worded,® yet I am afraid of their 
truth. ‘Vhis however may be cited without 
offence, to our profit. Is it right, he says, to 
regard your sacrifice, and receive it with good 
will at your hands,® as if he were most highly 
incensed, and rejecting their ministrations ow- 
ing to their wickedness. 

62. Whenever I remember Zechariah, I 

with the afflicted. 

shudder at the reaping-hook,$ and likewise | 

at his testimony against the priests, his hints 
in reference to the celebrated Joshua, the high 
priest, whom he represents as stripped of filthy 

and unbecoming garments and then clothed in | 

rich priestly apparel.” As for the words and 

charges to Joshua which he puts into the an- | 
gel’s mouth, let them be treated with silent | 

respect, as referring perhaps to a greater @ and 
higher object than those who are many priests : ¢ 
but even at his right hand stood the devil, to 
resist him. <A fact, in my eyes, of no slight 
significance, and demanding no slight fear and 
watch fulness. 

63. Who is so bold:and adamantine of soul 
as not to tremble and be abashed at the charges 
and reproaches deliberately urged against the rest 
of the shepherds. A voice, he says, of the howl- 
ing of the shepherds, for their glory is spoiled. 
A voice of the roaring of lions,* for this hath 
befallen them. 
wailing as if close at hand, and himself wail 

oe Waly 6. BT. Fs y Ub. ii. 5=7: 

6 Strongly worded, BAaopnuov, perh. ‘ill omened.” 

€ 15, jh. Ae: 6 20th: vse CLOCKS) y Ib. in. 1 et seq. 

O41 greater, &c., ic. they refer to the Person of Jesus Christ 
Himself. 

CHIC ai, 2a, he ZeG eae, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

A little further is a more 
striking and impassioned strain. Feed, he 
says, the flock of slaughter, whose possessors 
slay them without repentance, and they that 
sell them say, ** Blessed be the Lord, for we 
are rich: and their own shepherds are with- 
out fecling for them. ‘Therefore, I will no 
more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith 
the Lord Almighty. And again: Awake, O 
sword, against the shepherds, and smite the 
shepherds, and scatter the sheep, and IL will 
turn My Hand upon the shepherds ; & and, Mine 
anger Is kindled against the shepherds, and I 
will visit the lambs : ¥ adding to the threat those 
who rule over the people. So industriously 
does he apply himseif to his task that he can- 
not easily free himself from denunciations, and 
I am atraid that, did I refer to the whole 
series, [ should exhaust your patience. ‘This 
must then suffice for Zechariah. 

64. Passing by the elders in the book of 
Daniel; ° for it is better to pass them by, to- 
gether with the Lord’s righteous sentence and 
declaration concerning them, that wickedness 
came from Babylon from ancient judges, who 
seemed to govern the people; how are we 
aflected by lzekiel, the beholder and expositor 
of the mighty mysteries and visions? By his 
injunction to the watchmen © not to keep silence 
concerning vice and the sword impending over 
it, a course which would profit neither them- 
selves nor the sinners; but rather to keep 
watch and forewarn, and thus benefit, at any 
rate those who gave warning, if not both those 
who spoke and those who heard ? 

65. What of his further invective against 
the shepherds, Woe shall come upon woe, 
and rumour upon rumour, then shall they 
seek a vision of the prophet, but the law shall 
perish from the priest, and counsel irom the 
ancients,$ and again, in these terms, Son of 
man, say unto her, thou art a land that is not 
watered, nor hath rain come upon thee in the 
day of indignation: whose princes in the midst 
of her are like roaring lions, ravening the prey, 
devouring souls in their might.” And a little 
further on: Her priests have violated My laws 

~and profaned My holy things, they have put no 

difference between the holy and profane, but 

_all things were alike to them, and they hid 

Does he not all but hear the | 

their eyes from My Sabbaths, and I was pro- 
faned among them.® He threatens that He 
will consume both the wall and them that 
daubed it,! that is, those who sin and those 
who throw a cloak over them; as the evil 

B been 7: 
e Ezek. xxxiil. 2. 
Ob exxite 20; 

ay elo = a Beye oe 
6 Hist. Susann,, 5, 
9 Ib, xxii, 24 seq. 

Vole xn3 - 
Cale vit26> 
(0b: xii 

TN: EN Gis Oe TES 

rulers and priests have done, who caused the 

house of Israel to err according to their own 
hearts which are estranged in their lusts.¢ 

66. L also refrain from entering into his dis- 
cussion of those who feed themselves, devour 
the milk, clothe themselves with the wool, kill 
them that are fat, but feed not the flock, 
strengthen not the diseased, nor bind up that 
which is broken, nor bring again that which is 
driven away, nor seek that which is lost, nor 
keep watch over that which is strong, but 
oppress them with rigour, and destroy them 
with their pressure;® so that, because there 
was no shepherd, the sheep were scattered 
over every plain and mountain, and became 
meat for all the fowls and beasts,Y because there 
was no one to seek for them and bring them 
back. What is the consequence? As I live, 

saith the Lord, because these things are so, and | 
My flock became a prey,® behold I am against | 

the shepherds, and I will require My flock at 
their hands, and will gather them and make 
them My own: but the shepherds shall suffer 
such and such things, as bad shepherds ought. 

67. However, to avoid unreasonably pro- 
longing my discourse, by an enumeration of 
all the prophets, and of the words of them all, 
I will mention but one more, who was known 
before he was formed, and sanctified from the 
womb,¢ Jeremiah: and will pass over the rest. 
He longs for water over his head, and a foun- 
tain of tears for his eyes, that he may ade- 
quately weep for Israel; and no less does he 
bewail the depravity of its rulers. 

68. God speaks to him in reproof of the 
priests: ‘The priests said not, Where is the 
Lord, and they that handled the law knew 
Me not; the pastors also transgressed against 
Me.” Again He saysto him: The pastors are 
become brutish, and have not sought the Lord, 
and therefore all their flock did not understand, 
and was scattered. Again, Many pastors have 
destroyed My vineyard, and have polluted My 
pleasant portion, till it was reduced to a track- 
less wilderness. He further inveighs against 
the pastors again: Woe be to the pastors 
that destroy and scatter the sheep of My pas- 
ture! Therefore thus saith the Lord against 

Pia ho fe Wer, 

cient days? Who can test himself by the rules 
and standards which Paul laid down for bishops 
and presbyters, that they are to be temperate, 
soberminded, not given to wine, no strikers, 
apt to teach, blameless in all things, and be- 
yond the reach of the wicked,* without finding 
considerable deflection from the straight line 
of the rules? What of the regulations of Jesus 
for his disciples, when He sends them to 
preach? ‘The main object of these is—not to 
enter into particulars—that they should be of 
such virtue, so simple and modest, and’in a 
word, so heavenly, that the gospel should make 
its way, no less by their character than by 
their preaching. 

7o. Iam alarmed by the reproaches of the 
Pharisees, the conviction of the Scribes. For 
it is disgraceful for us, who ought greatly sur- 
pass them, as we are bidden, if we desire the 
kingdom of heaven, to be found more deeply 
sunk in vice: so that we deserve to be called 
serpents, a generation of vipers, and blind 
guides, who strain out a gnat and swallow a 

~ camel, or sepulchres foul within, in spite of 

our external comeliness, or platters outwardly 

_ clean, and everything else, which they are, or 

which is laid to their charge.¥ 

71. With these thoughts I am occupied 
night and day: they waste my marrow, and 
feed upon my flesh, and will not allow me to 
be confident or to look up. They depress my 
soul, and abase my mind, and fetter my tongue, 

and make me consider, not theposition of a 

them that feed My people: Ye have scattered | 
My flock, and driven them away, and have | 

not visited them: behold I will visit upon you 
the evil of your doings.* Moreover he bids 
the shepherds to howl, and the rams of the 
flock to lament, because the days of their 
slaughter are accomplished. 

a Ezek. xiv. 5. B Ib. xxxiv. 2 et seq. [Nbr so soab spaces 

6 Ib. xxxiv. 8. é Jer. deg. La Peer, 
Ib. ii. 8. oS UAL ewer ClDe Xi x0; 
KR UbaXNilly byes A TDEXXV, 345 

prelate, or the guidance and direction of others, 
which is far beyond my powers; but how I 
myself am to escape the wrath to come, and to 
scrape off from myself somewhat of the rust of 
vice. A man must himself be cleansed, before 
cleansing others: himself become wise, that 
he may make others wise; become light, and 
then give light: draw near to God, and so 
bring others near; be hallowed, then hallow 
them; be possessed of hands to lead others 
by the hand, of wisdom to give advice. 

72. When will this be, say they who are 
swift but not sure in every thing, readily build- 
ing up, readily throwing down. When will the 
lamp be upon its stand,§ and where is the 
talent?¢ For so they call the grace.¢ Those 

_who speak thus are more fervent in friendship 

than in reverence. You ask me, you men of ex- 
ceeding courage, when these things shall be, 
and what account I give of them? Not even 
extreme old age would be too long a limit to 

qui bint,tir2) 9 Dit. 1eq BS: Matt. xs oy. S. Ioikeax,9 
y 5. Matt. xxiii. 13 et seq. ora are jeans e Ibo xxvecrss 
¢“ The grace” i,e. the grace of the priesthood, 

226) 

assign. For hoary hairs combined with pru- 
ence are better than inexperienced youth, well- 
reasoned hesitation than inconsiderate haste, 
and a brief reign than a long tyranny: just 
as a small portion honourably won is better 
than considerable possessions which are dis- 
honourable and uncertain, a little gold than a 
great weight of lead, a little light than much 
darkness. 

and excessive haste, is in danger of being like 
the seeds which fell upon the rock,# and, be- 

once, but could not bear even the first heat of 
the sun; or like the foundation laid upon the 
sand,” which could not even make a slight re- 
sistance to the rain and the winds. Woe to 
thee, O city, whose king is a child,® says Solo- 
mon. Be not hasty of speech,® says Solomon 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN., 

animal visible and invisible, temporal and im- 
mortal, earthly and heavenly, able to attain to 
God but not to comprehend Him, drawing 
near and yet afar off. I said, I will be wise, 

says Solomon, but she (i.e. Wisdom) was far 

from me beyond what is: and, Verily, he that 
increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.? — For 
the joy of what we have discovered is no 

greater than the pain of what escapes us; a 
73. But this speed, in its untrustworthiness — 

pain, I imagine, like that felt by those who are 
dragged, while yet thirsty, from the water, or 

are unable to retain what they think they hold, 
cause they had no depth of earth,® sprang up at | 

again, asserting that hastiness of speech is less | 

serious than heated action. 
of all this, demands haste rather than security 
and utility? Who can mould, as clay-figures 

And who, in spite © 

are modelled in a single day, the defender of | 
_ beyond the universe ; Who is all goodness, and 

the truth, who is to take his stand with Angels, 
and give glory with Archangels, and cause the 
sacrifice to ascend to the altar on high, and 
share the priesthood of Christ, and renew the 
creature, and set forth the image, and create 
inhabitants for the world above, aye and, great- 
est of all, be God, and make others to be God ? 

74. I know Whose ministers we are, and 
where we are placed, and whither we are 
guides. I know the height of God, and the 
weakness of man, and, on the contrary, his 
power. Heaven is high, and the earth deep ; $ 
and who of those who have been cast down by 
sin shall ascend ?7 Who that is as yet surrounded 
by the gloom here below, and by the grossness 
of the flesh can purely gaze with his whole 
mind upon that whole mind, and amid unstable 
and visible things hold intercourse with the 
stable and invisible? For hardly may one of 
those who have been most specially purged, be- 
hold here even an image of the Good, as men 
see the sun in the water. Who hath measured 
the water with his hand, and the heaven with 
a span, and the whole earth in a measure ? 
Who hath weighed the mountains in scales, and 
the hills in a balance? ? 
his rest ?* and to whom shall he be likened ?* 

75. Who is it, Who made all things by His 
Word,’ and formed man by His Wisdom, and 
gathered into one things scattered abroad, and 
mingled dust with spirit, and compounded an 

Teasers OU sc outa Bae oY 

6 Keclés. x. 16, © Prov, XIX, 20; 

We Ss, RIV: Be Osa. xh 12, 
full pelea ees? 

Bao. NIBEE write. y Ib. vii. 26. 
G Ibxxy 3: 
eb. Ixvi. 1. 
APs, xxi. 6; 

What is the place of 

or are suddenly left in the dark by a flash of 
lightning. 

76. ‘This depressed and kept me humble, 
and persuaded me that it was better to hear 
the voice of praise ¥ than to be an expounder 
of truths beyond my power ; the majesty, and 
the height, and the dignity, and the pure 
natures scarce able to contain the bright- 
ness of God, Whom the deep covers, Whose 
secret place is darkness,® since He is the purest 
light,é which most men cannot approach unto; 
Who is in all this universe, and again is 

beyond all goodness ; Who enlightens the mind, 
and escapes the quickness and height of the 
mind, ever retiring as much as He is appre- 
hended, and by His flight and _ stealing away 
when grasped, withdrawing to the things above 
one who is enamoured of Him. 

77. Such and so great is the object of our 
longing zeal, and such a man should he be, 
who prepares and conducts souls to their es- 
pousals. For myself, I feared to be cast, 
bound hand and foot,” from the bride-chamber, 
for not having on a wedding-garment, and for 
having rashly intruded among those who there 
sit at meat. And yet I had been invited from 
my youth, if I may speak of what most men 
know not, and had been cast upon Him from 
the womb,® and presented by the promise of my 
mother, afterwards confirmed in the hour of 
danger: and my longing grew up with it, and 
my reason agreed to it, and I gave as an offer- 
ing my all to Him Who had won me and 
saved me, my property, my fame, my health, 
my very words, from which I only gained the 
advantage of being able to despise them, and 
of having something in comparison of which I 
preferred Christ. And the words of God were 
made sweet as honeycombs* to me, and I cried 
after knowledge and lifted up my voice for 
wisdom.* ‘There was moreover the moderation 
of anger, the curbing of the tongue, the re- 

Vest xcs 7a Glo 0): 

GSxods XX xia, 
O-PS. NXilerd, 
TON, site 3: 

@ Weeles. vile 2a", Pellet erss. 
Ob oaiie r2ercive 6. 9 e. relinie\is 16; 
Nise DALE. Sxl, 

CiAlbiextixy 105 26x1x. 303% 

iN DEEN GE. OF Ais PLIGHl TO. PONTUs, 

221 

straint of the eyes, the discipline of the belly, 
and the trampling under foot of the glory 
which clings to the earth. 

I speak foolishly,* | 

but it shall be said, in these pursuits I was , 

perhaps not inferior to many. 

78. One branch of philosophy is, however, 
too high for me, the commission to guide and 
govern souls—and before I have rightly learned 
to submit to a shepherd, or have had my soul 
duly cleansed, the charge of caring for a flock : 
especially in times like these, when a man, 
seeing everyone else rushing hither and thither 
in confusion, is content to flee from the mélée 
and escape, in sheltered retirement, from the 
storm and gloom of the wicked one: when 
the members are at war with one another, and 
the slight remains of love, which once ex- 
isted, have departed, and priest isa mere empty 
name, since, as it is said, contempt ® has been 
poured upon princes. 

79. Would that it were merely empty! And 
now may their blasphemy fall upon the head of 
the ungodly! All fear has been banished from 
souls, shamelessness has taken its place, and 
knowledge® and the deep thin 

gs of the Spirit ¢ | 

are at the disposal of anyone who will; and we 

all become pious by simply condemning the 
impiety of others ; and we claim the services of 
ungodly judges,$ and fling that which is holy to 
the dogs, and cast pearls before swine,” by pub- 
lishing divine things in the hearing of profane 
souls, and, wretches that we are, carefully ful- 
fil the prayers of our enemies, and are not 
ashamed to go a whoring with our own inven- 
tions.? Moabites and Ammonites, who were 
not permitted even to enter the Church of the 
Lord,* frequent our most holy rites. We have 
opened to all not the gates of righteousness,* 
but, doors of railing and partizan arrogance ; 
and the first place among usis given, not to 
one who in the fear of God refrains from even 
an idle word, but to him who can revile his 
neighbour most fluently, whether explicitly, or 
by covert allusion; who rolls beneath his 
tongue mischief and iniquity, or to speak more 
accurately, the poison of asps.* 

S80. We observe each other’s sins, not to 
bewail them, but to make them subjects of 
reproach, not to heal them, but to aggravate 
them, and excuse our own evil deeds by the 
wounds of our neighbours. Bad and good men 
are distinguished not according to personal 

a 2 Cor. xi. 23. B Ps. evils do, 

y Princes, @pxovtas. i.e. The office of the priesthood, which is 
one of dignity, has been brought into contempt by the unworthiness 
of those ordained to it, who have, by their want of the virtues re- 
quisite for their office, made it an empty name—and, not only so, 
but have been actively vicious. 

6 Knowledge, &c. cf. the ironical passage, §§ 49, 50. 

e1Cor. ii. 10, ¢ Ib. vie 1.7, 9S. Matt. vii. 6. 8 Ps. evi. 39. 

t Deut. xxiii. 3. « Ps. cxviii. 19, ds Sea Kodk cf 

VOL. VIE 

R 

character, but by their disagreement or friend- 
ship with ourselves. We praise one day what 
we revile the next, denunciation at the hands 
of others is a passport to our admiration ; so 
magnanimous are we in our viciousness, that 
everything is frankly forgiven to impiety. 

Sr. Everything has reverted to the origi- 
nal state of things* before the world, with its 
present fair order and form, came into being. 
The general confusion and irregularity cry for 
some organising hand and power. Or, if you 
will, it is like a battle at night by the faint 
light of the moon, when none can discern the 
faces of friends or foes; or like a sea fight on 
the surge, with the driving winds, and boiling 
foam, and dashing waves, and crashing vessels, 
with the thrusts of poles, the pipes of boat- 
swains, the groans of the fallen, while we make 
our voices heard above the din, and not know- 
ing what to do, and having, alas! no oppor- 
tunity for showing our valour, assail one an- 
other, and fall by one another’s hands. 

82. Nor indeed is there any distinction be- 
tween the state of the people and that of the 
priesthood : but it seems to me to be a simple 
fulfilment of the ancient curse, ‘‘As with the 
people so with the priest.’’ & Nor again are the 
great and eminent men affected otherwise than 
the majority ; nay, they are openly at war with 
the priests, and their piety is an aid to their 
powers of persuasion. And indeed, provided 
that it be on behalf of the faith, and of the 
highest and most important questions, let them 
be thus disposed, and I blame them not ; nay, 
to say the truth, I go so far as to praise and 
congratulate them. Yea! would that I were 
one of those who contend and incur hatred for 
the truth’s sake: or rather, I can boast of being 
one of them. For better is a laudable war 
than a peace which severs a man from God: 
and therefore it is that the Spirit arms the 
gentle warrior, as one who is able to wage war 
in a good cause. 

83. But at the present time there are some 
who go to war even about small matters and to 
no purpose, and, with great ignorance and auda- 
city, accept, as an associate in their ill-doing, 
anyone whoever he may be. ‘Then every- 
one makes the faith his pretext, and this ven- 
erable name is dragged into their private quar- 
rels. Consequently, as was probable, we are 
hated, even among the Gentiles, and, what is 
harder still, we cannot say that this is with- 
out just cause. Nay, even the best of our 
own people are scandalized, while this result 
is not surprising in the case of the multitude, 

a Gens i. 2, B Isai. xxiv. 2; Hos. iv. 9. 

222 

who are ill-disposed to accept anything that 
is good. 

84. Sinners are planning upon our backs ; * 
and what we devise against each other, they 
turn against us all: and we have become a new 
spectacle, not to angels and men,? as says Pant, 
that bravest of athletes, in his contest with prin- 
cipalities and powers,? but to almost all wicked 
men, and at every time and place, in the pub- 
lic squares, at carousals, at festivities, and times 
of sorrow. Nay, we have already—I can 
scarcely speak of it without tears—been repre- 
sented on the stage, amid the laughter of the 
most licentious, and the most popular of all 
dialogues and scenes is the caricature ofa Chris- 
tian. 

85. These are the results of our intestine 
warlare, and our extreme readiness to strive 
about goodness and gentleness, and our inex- 
pedient excess of love for God. Wrestling, 
or any other athletic contest, is only permitted 
according to fixed laws, and the man will be 
shouted down and disgraced, and lose the vic- 
tory, who breaks the laws of wrestling, or acts 
unfairly in any other contest, contrary to the 
rules laid down for the contest, however able 
and skilful he may be ; and shall anyone con- 

tend for Christ in an unchristlike manner, and | 

yet be pleasing to peace for having fought un- 
lawfully in her name. 

86. Yea, even now, when Christ is invoked, 
the devils tremble,® and not even by our ill- 
doing has the power of this Name been ex- 
tinguished, while we are not ashamed to insult 
a cause and name so vencrable; shouting it, 
and haying it shouted in return, almost in 
public, and every day; for My Name is blas- 
phemed among the Gentiles because of you.* 

87. Of external warfare I am not afraid, 
nor of that wild beast, and fulness of evil, 
who has now arisen against the churches, 
though he may threaten fire, sword, wild 
beasts, precipices, chasms; though he may 
show himself more inhuman than all previous 
madmen, and discover fresh tortures of greater 
severity. I have one remedy for them all, 
one road to victory ; I will glory in Christ $— 
namely, death for Christ’s sake. 

88. For my own warfare, however, I am at 
a loss what course to pursue, what alliance, 
what word of wisdom, what grace to devise, 
with what panoply to arm myself, against the 
wiles of the wicked one... What Moses is to 
conquer him by stretching out his hands upon 
the mount,® in order that the cross, thus typi- 

Br Coravcee 
eeaaliss 
yW Eph. vi, 1. 

a Paroxsax 3 GL) 
6 S,, James i. 19. 
¢ Pil, 1,3, 

y Eph. vi. 12. 
Rom. u. 24. 
@ Exod. xvil. U1. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN., 

fied and prefigured, may prevail? What 
Joshua, as his successor, arrayed alongside the 
Captain of the Lord’s hosts?¢ What David, 
either by harping, or fighting with his sling,8 
and girded by God with strength unto the 
battle.y and with his fingers trained to war ?® 
What Samuel, praying ® and sacrificing for the 
people, and anointing as king one who can 
gain the victory? What Jeremiah, by writ- 
ing lamentations for Israel, is fitly to lament 
these things P 

89. Who will cry aloud, Spare Thy People, 
O Lord, and give not ‘Thine heritage to re- 
proach, that the nations should rule over 
them?$ What Noah, and Job,” and Daniel, 
who are reckoned together as men of prayer, 
will pray for us, that we may have a slight res- 
pite from warfare, and recover ourselves, and 
recognize one another for a while, and no 
longer, instead of united Israel, be Judah? and 
Israel, Rehoboam and Jeroboam, Jerusalem 
and Samaria, in turn delivered up because of 
our sins, and in turn lamented. 

90. For I own that I am too weak for this 
warfare, and therefore turned my back, hiding 
my face in the rout, and sat solitary,’ because 
I was filled with bitterness* and sought to be 
silent, understanding that it is an evil time,’ 
that the beloved had kicked,“ that we were 
become backsliding children,” who are the 
luxuriant vine,é the true vine, all fruitful, all 
beautiful,° springing up splendidly with show- 
ers from on high. For the diadem of beauty,? 
the signet of glory,” the crown of magnili- 
cence? has been changed for me into shame ; 
and if anyone, in face of these things, is daring 
and courageous, he has my blessing on his dar- 
ing and courage. 

gt. I have said nothing yet of the internal 
warfare within ourselves, and in our passions, 
in which we are engaged night and day against 
the body of our humiliation,” either secretly 
or openly, and against the tide which tosses and 
whirls us hither and thither, by the aid of our 
senses and other sources of the pleasures of this 
life; and against the miry clay? in which we 
have been fixed; and against the law of sin,x 
which wars against the law of the spirit, and 
strives to destroy the royal image in us, and 
all the divine emanation which has been be- 
stowed upon us; so that it is difficult for any- 
one, either by a long course of philosophic 

a. Josh. v. 14. 
6 Ib. cxliv. 1. 
y Ezek. xiv. 14, 20. 
tLarm.ai28- «Ib 
pw Deut. xxxil. 15. v Jer. ili, 14. 

Jen aiee ieee x. 107 w Ps. Ixy. 10. 
o Ezek. xxviil. 12. a Ib. xxill. 42. 

@ Ps. xl. 2 ; Ixix. 2. 

y Ps. xviii. 39. 
¢ Joel u. 17... 

1, iO. AM 
£H10S,.x% 1. 
prlsai. 1xii <3), 
Uv Phil. asa 

x Rom. vi. 23. 

EDV .Eer eee: Care 

training, and gradual separation of the noble 
and enlightened part of the soul from that 
which is debased and yoked with darkness, or 
by the merey of God, or by both together, and 
by a constant practice of looking upward, to 
overcome the depressing power of matter, 
And before a man has, as far as possible, 
gained this superiority, and sufficiently puri- 
fied his mind, and far surpassed his fellows in 
nearness to God, I do not think it safe for 
him to be entrusted with the rule over souls, 

or the office of mediator (for such, 1 take it, a— 

priest is) between God and man. 

g2. What is it that has induced this fear 
in me, that, instead of supposing me to be 
needlessly afraid, you may highly commend 
my foresight? IL hear from Moses himself, 
when God spake to him, that, although many 

were bidden to come to the mount, one of | 
. . | 
whom was even Aaron, with his two sons who | 

Were priests, and seventy elders of the senate, 
the rest were ordered to worship afar off, and 

Moses alone to draw near, and the people 

were not to go up with him.¢ For it is not 
everyone who may draw near to God, but 
only one who, like Moses, can bear the glory 
of God. Moreover, before this, when the law 
was first given, the trumpet-blasts, and light- 
nings, and thunders, and darkness, and the 
smoke of the whole mountain,8 and the terrible 
threats that if even a beast touched the moun- 
tain it should be stoned,” and other like alarms, 
kept back the rest of the people, for whom it 
was a great privilege, after careful purification, 
merely to hear the voice of God. But Moses 
actually went up and entered into the cloud,é 
and was charged with the law, and received 
the tables, which belong, for the multitude, to 
the letter, but, for those who are above the 
multitude, to the spirit.¢ 

93. I hear again that Nadab and Abihu, 
for having merely offered incense with strange 
fire, were with strange fire destroyed, the in- 
strument of their impiety being used for their 
punishment, and their destruction following 
at the very time and place of their sacrilege ; 
and not even their father Aaron, who was 
next to Moses in the favor of God, could save 
them. I know also of Eli the priest, and a 
little later of Uzzah, the former made to pay 
the penalty for his sons’ transgression, in dar- 

ing to violate the sacrifices by an untimely — 

exaction of the first fruits of the cauldrons, al- 
though he did not condone their impiety, but 
frequently rebuked them ;7 the other, because 

CUM SAV: hs Bs ei, Sis xh. 
y Heb. xii. 18. 6 Exod, xxiv. 15, 18. oe Cord. 6% 
GY tues PX Seth dh Wa, P5293, 

wis FLIGHT TO PONTIUS. 223 

he only touched the ark, which was being 
thrown off the cart by the ox,* and though he 
saved it, was himself destroyed, in God’s 
jealousy for the reverence due to the ark. 
94- 1 know also that not even bodily blem- 
-ishes in. either priests® or victimsY passed 
without notice, but that it was required by the 
law that: perfect sacrifices must be offered by 
perfect men—a symbol, | take it, of integrity 
of soul. It was not lawful for everyone to 
touch the priestly vesture, or any of the holy 
vessels ; nor might the sacrifices themselves be 
— consumed except by the proper persons, and 
at the proper time and place ;® nor might the 
) anointing oil nor the compounded incense & be 
| imitated ; nor might anyone enter the temple 

who was not in the most minute particular 
pure in both soul and body ; so far was the 
Holy of holies removed from presumptuous 
access, that it might be entered by one man 
only once a year; so far were the veil, and 
the mercy-seat, and the ark, and the Cheru- 
bim, from the general gaze and touch. 

95. Since then I knew these things, and that 
no one is worthy of the mightiness of God, 
and the sacrifice, and priesthood, who has 
not first presented himself to God, a living, 
holy sacrifice, and set forth the reasonable, 

well-pleasing service,” and sacrificed to God 
the sacrifice of praise and the contrite spirit,? 
which is the only sacrifice required of us by 
the Giver of all ; how could I dare to offer to 
Him the external sacrifice, the antitype of the 
great mysteries, or clothe myself with the 
garb and name of priest, before my hands 
~had been consecrated by holy works; before 
my eyes had been accustomed to gaze safely 
upon created things, with wonder only for the 
Creator, and without injury to the creature ; 
before my ear had been sufficiently opened to 
the instruction of the Lord, and He had opened 
mine ear to hear* without heaviness, and had 
set a golden earring with precious sardius, that 
is, awise man’s word in an obedient ear ;4 be- 
fore my mouth had been opened to draw in 
the Spirit,“ and opened wide to be filled ¥ with 
the spirit of speaking mysteries and doctrines ; & 
and my lips bound,® to use the words of wis- 
dom, by divine knowledge, and, as I would 
add, loosed in due season: before my tongue 
had been filled with exultation, and become 
an instrument of Divine melody, awaking 

B Leg, oxi. 37, ¥ Th, sexi tp, 
6 Ib. viii. 31. ¢ Exod. xxx. 33, 38. 
G ley. -xvic 944 Heb. ix, 7, » Roni. xii, x, Pst, ths 
t The great mystertes, ¢¢., the Sacrificial Death of Christ upon 
the Cross. 
me beats, 4% ‘vi. to. 
Tb leet. ‘tos 

a2Sam. vi. 6. 

A Prov, xxv: 319; jp PS, Oxi. 3875 

§.1 Cory xiv.-2. oO Prove xv¥.'9{( Loe). 

224 

with glory, awaking right early,* and labor- 
ing till it cleave to my jaws: 8 before my feet 
had been set upon the rock,Y made like hart’s 
feet, and my footsteps directed in a_ godly 
fashion so that they should not well-nigh slip,® 
nor slip at all; before all my members had 

become instruments of righteousness,€ and all | 

mortality had been put off, and swallowed up 
of life, and had yielded to the Spirit ? 

96. Who is the man, whose heart has never 
been made to burn,” as the Scriptures have 
been opened to him, with the pure words of 
God which have been tried in a furnace ; § who 
has not, by a triplet inscription * of them upon 
the breadth of his heart, attained the mind of 
Christ ;* nor been admitted to the treasures 
which to most men remain hidden, secret, and 
dark, to gaze upon the riches therein,“ and 
become able to enrich others, comparing spir- 
itual things with spiritual.” 

97- Whois the man who has never beheld, as 
our duty is to behold it, the fair beauty of the 
Lord, nor has visited His temple, or rather, 

become the temple of God,® and the habitation | 

of Christ in the Spirit? *™ Who is the man who | 
has never recognized the correlation and dis- | 

tinction between figures and the truth, so that 
by withdrawing from the former and cleaving 
to the latter, and by thus escaping from the 
oldness of the letter and serving the newness 
of the spirit, he may clean pass over to grace 

from the law, which finds its spiritual fulfil- , 

ment in the dissolution of the body. 

98. Who is the man who has never, by ex- 
perience and contemplation, traversed the en- 
tire series of the titles™ and powers of Christ, 

were His, and those more lowly ones which 
He later assumed for our sake—viz.: God, the 
Son, the Image, the Word, the Wisdom, the 
Truth, the Light, the Life, the Power, the Va- 
pour, the Emanation, the Effulgence, the Mak- 
er, the King, the Head, the Law, the Way, 
the Door, the Foundation, the Rock, the 
Pearl, the Peace, the Righteousness, the Sanc- 
tification, the Redemption, the Man, the Ser- 
vant, the Shepherd, the Lamb, the High Priest, 
the Victim, the Firstborn before creation, the 
Firstborn from the dead, the Resurrection: 
who is the man who hearkens, but pays no 

a. Ps, lit. 6, B Ib. cxxxvii. 6. y Tbe seviliy 99°> Sd s-3.. 
6-1. docxin, 2, e Rom. vi. 13. 2 Core vids 
no. Luke wxive.32. GJ, sie 

t Tripée, a quotation from Prov. xxii. 20, ‘The meaning of the 
Hebrew is doubtful. Clémencet, not noticing this, suggests that 
the allusion is to the law being twice inscribed on tables of stone, 
once on the heart by the Spirit. 

« Prov, xxii, 20 (LXX.). Aer, Corsi, 16, a 

vy a Gorat: 13: € Ps. Xexyit. 4: oe. Cor SueitG: 

ar Mis bly. ine 22: p Ib. vii. 6. o Rom. vi. 6, 

7 Zitles. ‘These are more fully dealt with Orat. xxx, 17-21. 

ed ora ux es 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN, 

heed, to these names so pregnant with reality, 
and has never yet held communion with, nor 
been made partaker of, the Word, in any of 
the real relations signified by each of these 
names which He bears ? 

99. Who, in fine, is the man who, although 
he has never applied himself to, nor learnt to 
speak, the hidden wisdom of God ina mys- 
tery,* although he is still a babe, still fed with 
milk,® still of those who are not numbered in 
Israel,¥ nor enrolled in the army of God, al- 
though he is not yet able to take up the Cross 

_of Christ like a man, although he is possibly 
not yet one of the more honorable members, 

yet will joyfully and eagerly accept his appoint- 
ment as head of the fulness of Christ ?& No one, 
if he will listen to my judgment and accept 
my advice! ‘This is of all things most to be 
feared, this is the extremest of dangers in the 
eyes of everyone who understands the mayni- 
tude of success, the utter ruin of failure. 

100. Let others sail for merchandise, I used 
to say, and cross the wide oceans, and constantly 
contend with winds and waves, to gain great 
wealth, if so it should chance, and run great 
risks in their eagerness for sailing and mer- 
chandise ; but, for my part, I greatly prefer 
to stay ashore and plough a short but pleasant 
furrow, saluting at a respectful distance the sea 
and its gains, to live as best I can upon a poor 
and scanty store of barley-bread, and drag my 
life along in safety and calm, rather than ex- 
pose myself to so long and great a risk for the 
sake of great gains. 

ror. For one in high estate, if he fail to 

_ make further progress and to disseminate virtue 
both those more lofty ones which originally | 

still more widely, and contents himself with 

slight results, incurs punishment, as having 

spent a great light upon the illumination of a 
little house, or girt round the limbs of a boy 
the full armor of aman. On the contrary, a 
man of low estate may with safety assume a 
light burden, and escape the risk of the ridi- 
cule and increased danger which would attend 
him if he attempted a task beyond his powers. 
For, as we have heard, it is not seemly for a 
man to build a tower, unless he has sufficient 
to finish it.¢ 

102. Such is the defence which I have been 
able to make, perhaps at immoderate length, 
for my flight. Such are the reasons which, to 
my pain and possibly to yours, carried me 
away from you, my friends and brothers; yet, 
as it seemed to me at the time, with irresistible 
force. My longing after you, and the sense 
of your longing for me, have, more than any- 

a. Corsi a7: 
Ep nad23 

B Ib. iii. 2. y Numb, i. 3. 
eo, cvuke xiv, .28; 

thing else, led to my return, for nothing in- 
clines us so strongly to love as mutual affec- 
tion. 

103. In the next place there was my care, my 
duty, the hoar hairs and weakness of my holy 
parents, who were more greatly distressed on 
my account than by their advanced age—of 
this Patriarch Abraham whose person is hon- 
ored by me, and numbered among the angels, 
and of Sarah, who travailed in my spiritual 
Hirth by instructing me in the truth. Now, I 
had specially pledged myself to become the 
stay of their old age and the support of their 
weakness, a pledge which, to the best of my 
power, I have fulfilled, even at the expense of 
philosophy itself, the most precious of posses- 
sions and titles to me ; or, to speak more truly, 
although I made it the first object of my phil- 
osophy to appear to be no philosopher, I could 
not bear that my labor in consequence of a 
single purpose should be wasted, nor yet that 
that blessing should be lost, which one of the 
saints of old is said to have stolen from his 
father, whom he deceived by the food which 
he offered to him, and the hairy appearance 
he assumed, thus attaining a good object by 
disgraceful trickery.* ‘These are the two causes 
of my submission and tractability. Nor is it, 
perchance, unreasonable that my arguments 
should yield and submit to them both, for 

IN DEPRNCE OF HIS FLIGHT TO PONTUS. 

| 

i 
<~-)5 

day: on the contrary, their purpose has been 
to supply memorials and instructions for our 
consideration under similar circumstances, 
should such befall us, and that the examples 
of the past might serve as rules and models, 
for Our warning and imitation. 

106. What then is the story, and wherein lies 
its application? For, perhaps, it would not 
be amiss to relate it, for the general security. 
Jonah also was flecing from the face of God,« 
or rather, thought that he was fleeing : but he 
was overtaken by the sea, and the storm, and 
the lot, and the whale’s belly, and the three 
days’ entombment, the type of a greater mys- 
tery. He fled from having to announce the 
dread and awful message to the Ninevites, 
and from being subsequently, if the city was 

_ saved by repentance, convicted of falsehood : 

not that he was displeased at the salvation of 
the wicked, but he was ashamed of being 
made an instrument of falschood, and exceed- 
ingly zealous for the credit of prophecy, which 
was in danger of being destroyed in his per- 
son, since most men are unable to penetrate 
the depth of the Divine dispensation in such 
cases. 

107. But, as I have learned from a man & 

_ skilled in these subjects, and able to grasp the 

there is a time to be conquered, as I also think — 

there is for every purpose,® and it is better to 
be honorably overcome than to win a danger- 
us and lawless victory. 

to4. ‘There is a third reason of the highest — 

importance which I will further mention, and 
then dismiss the rest. I remembered the days 

histories, drew counsel for myself therefrom as 

depth of the prophet, by means of a reasonable 
explanation of what seems unreasonable in the 
history, it was not this which caused Jonah 
to flee, and carried him to Joppa and again 
from Joppa to Tarshish, when he entrusted his 
stolen self to the sea: ¥ for it was not likely 
that such a prophet should be ignorant of the 
design of God, viz., to bring about, by means 

_ of the threat, the escape of the Ninevites from 
of old,¥ and, recurring to one of the ancient. 

to my present conduct; for let us not suppose | 

these events to have been recorded without a 
purpose, nor that they are a mere assemblage 

of words and deeds gathered together for the | 
pastime of those who listen to them, as a kind | 
of bait for the ears, for the sole purpose of | 

giving pleasure. 
the legends and the Greeks, who think but 
litile of the truth, and enchant ear and mind 
by the charm of their fictions and the dainti- 
ness of their style. 

105. We however, who extend the accuracy 

Let us leave such jesting to | 

of the Spirit to the merest stroke and tittle,é will 

never admit the impious assertion that even 
the smallest matters were dealt with haphazard 
by those who have recorded them, and have 
thus been borne in mind down to the present 

B ¥ccles. iit. 1. 
0 SruVlatts yo 10, 

@. Gen, xxvii. 21, sq. 
7 Se GHliliye 5, 

the threatened doom, according to His great 
wisdom, and unsearchable judgments, and ac- 
cording to His ways which are beyond our 
tracing and finding out ;§ nor that, if he knew 
this he would refuse to co-operate with God 
in the use of the means which He designed 
for their salvation. Besides, to imagine that 
Jonah hoped to hide himself at sea, and escape 
by his flight the great eye of God, is surely 
utterly absurd and stupid, and unworthy of 
credit, not only in the case of a prophet, but 

@ jonah ays 

BA man. A Greck scholiast says that this was Origen (ob. 
A.D. 235), who gives this interpretation in his commentary on the 
prophecy of Jonah. Elias says thathe had read it in the commen- 
tary of Methodius (fl. A.p. 3co), who usually combats Origen’s in- 
terpretations. We know that Origen did comment on the book of 
Job, and that Methodius wrote on one at least of the Minor Proph- 
ets: but both these works have been lost, so that we cannot 
absolutely decide the question, though the assurance with which 
both the notes are written makes us hesitate to consider cither of 
them merely a happy guess. Combefis thinks that S. Greg. 
alludes to one of his own instructors : the gen. with axdvw (cf. 
Plato, Gorg., 503, c.) favours this view, but the interpretation may 
well have Leen derived from one cf the earlier writers. 

y Jonah i. 3. Rom. xi. 33. 

220 

even in the case of any sensible man, who has 
only aslight perception of God, Whose power 
is over all. 

108. On the contrary, as my instructor said, 
and as | am myself convinced, Jonah knew 
better than any one the purpose of his message 
to the Ninevites, and that, in planning his 
flight, although he changed his place, he did 
not escape from God. Nor is this possible 
for any one else, either by concealing himselt 
in the bosom of the earth, or in the depths of 
the sea, or by soaring on wings, if there be 
any means of doing so, and rising into the 
air, or by abiding in the lowest depths of hell,* 
or by enveloping himself in a thick cloud, 
or by any other of the many devices for en- 
suring escape. For God alone of all things 
cannot be escaped from or contended with ; 
if He wills to seize and bring them under His 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

hand, He outstrips the swift, He outwits the 

wise, He overthrows the strong, He abases 
the lofty, He subdues rashness, He represses 
power. 

tog. Jonah then was not ignorant of the | 

mighty hand of God, with which he threatened 
other men, nor did he imagine that he could 

utterly escape the Divine power; this we are | 

not to believe; but when he saw the falling 

away of Israel, and perceived the passing over of | 

the grace of prophecy to the Gentiles—this was 
the cause of his retirement from preaching and 
of his delay in fulfilling the command ; accord- 
ingly he left the watchtower of joy, for this Is 
the meaning of Joppa in Hebrew, I mean his 
former dignity and reputation, and flung him- 

self into the deep of sorrow: and hence he is | 

tempest-tossed, and falls asleep, and is wrecked, 
and aroused from sleep, and taken by lot, and 

confesses his flight, and is cast into sea, and | 

swallowed, but not destroyed, by the whale ; 
but there he calls upon God, and, marvellous 
as it is, on the third day he, like Christ, is 
delivered ; but my treatment of this topic must 
stand over, and shall shortly, if God permit, 
be more deliberately worked out.? 

| 

t10. Now however, to return to my original — 

point, the thought and question occurred to 
me, that although he might possibly meet with 
some indulgence, if reluctant to prophesy, for 
the cause which I mentioned—yet, in my own 
case, what could be said, what defence could 
be made, if I longer remained restive, and re- 
jected the yoke of ministry, which, though I 
know not whether to call it light or heavy, 
had at any rate been laid upon me. 

a Ps. oxen. 5 Ot Seu: 

B Shall be worked out. This promise, as Elias tells us, was 
fulfilled by S. Gregory in his Histury of Ezekiel the Prophet, a 
work no longer extant, 

rit. For if it be granted, and this alone can 
be strongly asserted in such matters, that we 
are far too low to perform the priest’s office 
before God, and that we can only be worthy 
of the sanctuary after we have become worthy 
of the Church,? and worthy of the post of pre- 
sident, after being worthy of the sanctuary, yet 
some one else may perhaps refuse to acquit Us 
on the charge of disobedience. Now terrible 
are the threatenings against disobedience, and 
terrible are the penalties which ensue upon 
it; as indeed are those on the other side, if, 
instead of being reluctant, and shrinking back, 
and concealing ourselves as Saul did among 
his father’s stuff* —although called to rule but 
for a short time—if, I say, we come forward 
readily, as though to a slight and most easy 
task, whereas it is not safe even to resign it, 
nor to amend by second thoughts our first. 

112. On thisaccount [had much toilsome 
consideration to discover my duty, being set 
in the midst betwixt two fears, of which the 
one held me back, the other urged me on. 
For a long while I was at a loss between them, 
and after wavering from side to side, and, likea 
current driven by inconstant winds, inclining 
first in this direction, then in that, I at last 
yielded to the stronger, and the fear of diso- 
bedience overcame me, and has carried me off. 
Pray, mark how accurately and justly I hold 
the balance between the fears, neither desiring 
an office not given to me, nor rejecting it when 
given. ‘The one course marks the rash, the 
other the disobedient, both the undisciplined. 
My position lies between those who are too 
bold, or too timid ; more timid than those who 
rush at every position, more bold than those 
who avoid themall. This is my judgment on 
the matter. 

113. Moreover, to distinguish still more 
clearly between them, we have, against the fear 
of office, a possible help in the law of obedience, 
inasmuch as God in His goodness rewards our 
faith, and makes a perfect ruler of the man 

-who has confidence in Him, and places all 

his hopes in Him; but against the danger 
of disobedience I know of nothing which 
can help us, and of no ground to en- 
courage our confidence. — For it is to be feared 
that we shall have to hear these words con- 

cerning those who have been entrusted to us: 
~[ will require their souls at your hands; ¥ 

a Of the Church. S, Gregory seems to describe a series of 
three steps. (1) the Church, of which all should be worthy mem- 
bers, (2) the Sanctuary, reserved for the Priests, (3). the ‘Throne 
of the Bishop. Clemencet refers both x and 2 to the ministry. 
If we suppose S. Gregory’s own position to be referred to, the 
third would be applicable to his office under his father, which 
is held by Thomassin to have been that of Vicar-General (Disc. 
Kccles., L., i, 7 §$ 2,3). A similar post was offered to him by 5, 
Basil (Orat., sli, 39), = BI Sams x, 22, y Ezek, ii, 18, 

Tey Aa LED 

sid, Hecause Wye. Ae “Tees hot 
been leaders and rulers of my people, L ate 
will reject you, that I should not be king over 
yous > aud, 
voice, aud turned a stubborn back, and were 

disobedient, so shall it be when ye call upon 

HAD 

establish me with your spirit. 
As ye refused to hearken to My 

Me, and I will not regard nor give ear to your 

God forbid that these words should 
ive, for when we 

prayer.8 
come to us from the just Jud 

sing of His mercy we must also by all means | 

sing of His judgment. 

114. I resort once again to history, and on | 

considering the men of best repute in ancient 

days, who were ever preferred by grace to the 
@ , tap} 

office of ruler or prophet, I discover that some 
readily complied with the call, others depre- 

cated the gift, and that neither those who drew | 
back were blamed for timidity, nor those who — 

came forward for eagerness. 
in awe of the greatness of the ministry, the 
latter trustfully obeyed Him Who called them. 
Aaron was eager, but Moses resisted,® Isaiah 
readily si abmitted, but Jeremiah was afraid of 
his youth,¢ and did not venture to prophesy 

‘The former stood © 

until he had received from God a promise and | 

power beyond his years.$ 

115. By these arguments I charmed myself, 
and by degrees my soul relaxed and became 
ductile, like iron, and time came to the aid of 
my arsuments, and the testimonies of Ged, to 

counscllors.” ‘Cherefore I was not rebellious, 
neither turned away back,® saith my Lord, 
when, 
led, as asheep to the slaughter ; ‘ but I fil down 
and humbled myself under the mighty hand of 

instead of being called to rule, He was | 

PV a? DEAE, Say 
CLO, TGR AE way gees sae boll Ss 
with your prayers, eile me with your words, 
The blessing 
of the father establisheth the houses of chil- 
dren,® and would that both I and this spiritual 
house may be established, the house which I 
have longed for, which I pray may be my rest 
for ever, 8 When I have been passed on from 

the church here to the church yonder, the 
general assembly of the firstborn, who are 

written In heaven. 
117. Suchis my deience : 
I have set forth 

its reasonableness 
and may the God of peace,é 
Who made both one,€ and has restored us to 
each other, Who setteth kings upon thrones, 
and raiset h up the poor out of the dust and 
lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill,¢ Who 
chose David His servant and took him away 
from the sheepfolds,7 though he was the least 
and youngest of the sons of Jesse,? Who gave 
the word + to those who preach the gospel with 
great power for the perfection of the gospel, 
—may He Himself hold me by my right 
hand, and guide me with His counsel, and 
receive me with glory, Who is a Shepherd 4 
to shepherds and a Guide to guides: that we 
may feed His flock with knowledge,“ not with 
the instruments of a foolish shepherd,” accord- 
ing to the blessing, and not according to the 

curse pronounced against the men of former 
which I had entrusted my whole life, were my | 

God,* and asked pardon for my former idle- | 

ness and disobedience, if this is at all laid to 
my charge. I held my peace,’ but I will not 
hold my peace for ever: I withdrew for a 
little while,” till I had considered myself and 
consoled my grief: but now I am commis- 
sioned to exalt Him in the congregation of 
the people, and praise Him in the seat of 
the elders.” If my former conduct deserved 
blame, my present action merits pardon. 

116. What further need is there cf words. 

Here am I, my pastors and fellow-pastors, here | 

am I, thou holy flock, worthy of Christ, the 
Chicf Shepherd, here am I, my father, ut- 
terly vanquished, and your subject accord- 
ing to the laws of Christ rather than accord- 
ing to those of me: pe :° here is my obedi- 

@ 1 Sam. xv, 36 B Ace. wat. Bh t3e 

WP RCs P. eee © Tsai. Wir R. 
Glare 1,6, 8 Pat he ge 
eb. lui. 7. A Isai. sli. 14. 
pels XXVIL BO. & x Peét..via 

0 Of the land, lit.. “ external,” ie.. the Roman laws, which gave 
absolute power to a ae over his children, 

days: no He give strength and power unto 
his people, and Himself present to Himself ¢ 

His flock resplendent and spotless and worthy 
of the fold on high, in the habitation of them 
that rejoice,* in the splendour of the saints,? so 
that in His temple everyone, both flock and 
shepherds together may say, Glory,” in Christ 
Jesus our Lord, to Whom be all glory for ever 

and ever. Amen. 
ORATION ITf. 
To THose Wito Hap Ixvirep Tlim, ANp 
Nor Come to Receive Hina. 

(About Easter A.b. 362.) 

I. How slow you are, my friends and breth- 
ren, to come io listen to my words, though 
you were so swilt in tyrannizing over me, and 
tearing me from my Citadel Solitude, which 
I had embraced in preference to everything 

ae a ee NI23, 

ANAS fe Oey 

t Pp oes Ixviii. tt 
i: ne ifteen5e 

Eph. v. 27. 
ee XXIX. g, 

age XVili, 

@ Pseexicg aa Xx. . 

v Wecie XI, DS. € Ps. 
w Ps, Ixxxvii. 7 (LXX,) 

22S 

else, and as coadjutress and mother of the di- 
vine ascent, and as deifying man,* I had es- 

pecially admired, and had set before me as | 

the guide of my whole life.@ How is it that, 
now you have got it, you thus despise what 
you so greatly desired to obtain, and seem 
to be better able to desire the absent than to 
enjoy the present; as though you preferred 
to possess my teaching rather than to profit 
by it? Yes, I may even say this to you: * I 
became a surfeit unto you before you tasted 
of me, or gave me a trial’? ¥—which is most 
strange, 

If. And neither did you entertain me as a 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 
\ 

val for fear of bad omen—but, to speak 
gently, He filleth the Banquet with others. 
God forbid that this should be your case ; 

but yet you have treated me (how shall J put 

guest, nor, if | may make a remark of a more — 
compassionate kind, did you allow yourselves | 
trifling matter ; you were all scattered and dis- 

to be entertained by me, reverencing this com- 
mand if nothing else; nor did you take me 

} 

by the hand, as beginning a new task ; nor | 

encourage me in my timidity, nor console me — 

for the violence I had suffered ; but—I shrink 
from saying it, though say it I must—you 
made my festival no festival, and received 

me with no happy introduction ; and you | 
mingled the solemn festival with sorrow, be- | 
cause it lacked that which most of all would | 
have contributed to its happiness, the presence — 
of you my conquerors, for it would not be true» 

to call you people who love me. So easily is 
anything despised which is easily conquered, 

it gently ?) with as much haughtiness or bold- 
ness as they who after being called to a feast 
rise up against it, and insult their host ; for 
you, though you are not of the number of 
those who are without, or are invited to the 
marriage, but are yourselves those who invited 
me, and bound me to the Holy Table, and 
shewed me the glory of the Bridal Chamber, 
then deserted me (this is the most splendid 
thing about you)—one to his field, another to 
his newly bought yoke of oxen, another to 
his just-married wife, another to some other 

persed, caring little for the Bridechamber and 
the Bridegroom.* 

V. On this account I was filled with des- 
pondency and perplexity—for I will not keep 
silence about what I have suffered—and I was 
very near withholding the discourse which I 
was minded to bestow as a Marriage-gift, the 
most beautiful and precious of all I had ; and 
I very nearly let it loose upon you, whom, 
now that the violence had once been done to 
me, I greatly longed for: for I thought I 
could get from this a splendid theme, and be- 

~ cause my love sharpened my tongue—love 

and the proud receives attention, while he - 

who is humble before God is slighted. 

III. What will ye? Shall I be judged by 
you, or shall I be your judge? — Shall I pass a 
verdict, or receive one, for I hope to be ac- 
quitted if I be judged, and if I give sentence, 
to give it against you justly? 

which is very hot and ready for accusation 
when it is stirred to jealousy by grief which it 
conceives from some unexpected neglect. If 
any of you has been pierced with love’s sting, 
and has felt himself neglected, he knows the 

feeling, and will pardon one who so suffers, 

The charge 

against you is that you do not answer my 
love with equal measure, nor do you repay | 

my obedience with honour, nor do you pledge 
the future to me by your present alacrity— 
though even if you had, I could hardly have 
believed it. But cach of you has something 
which he prefers to both the old and the new 
Pastor, neither reverencing the grey hairs of 
the one, nor calling out the youthful spirit of 
the other. 

IV. There is a Banquet in the Gospels,® and 
a hospitable Host and friends; and the Ban- 
quet is most pleasant, for it is the marriage of 
His Son. He calleth them, but they come 
not: He is angry, and—I pass over the inter- 

aS. Gregory very frequently, uses this very strong expres- 
sion to bring out the reality and intimacy of the Christian’s Union 
with Christ as the result of the sanctifying grace by which all the 
Baptized are made ‘partakers of the Divine Nature” (2 Pet. 
ti 4) 

8 The passage might also be rendered “had preferred to 
every other kind of life. 

y Isa. i. 14. 6S, Luke xiy. 16, 

because he himself has been near the same 
frenzy. 

VI. But it is not permitted to me at the 
present time to say to you anything upbraid- 
ing; and God forbid I ever should. And 
even now perhaps I have reproached you 
more than in due measure, the Sacred Flock, 
the praise-worthy nurselings of Christ, the 
Divine inheritance ; by which, O God, Thou 
art rich, even wert Thou poor in all other 
respects. To Thee, I think, are fitting those 
words, ‘* The lot is fallen unto Thee in a fair 
ground: yea Thou hast the goodliest heri- 
tage.’?® Nor will I allow that the most popu- 
lous cities or the broadest flocks have any ad- 
vantage over us, the little ones of the smallest 
of all the tribes of Israel, of the least of the 
thousands of Judah,Y of the little Bethlehem 
among cities,6 where Christ was born and 
is from the beginning well-known and wor- 

B Ps. xvi. 6. 

a S. Matt. xxii. ro, S 
i 6 Mic. v. 2. 

y1 Sam, xxiii. 23. 

shipped ; amongst those whom the Father is 
exalted, and the Son is held to be equal to 
lim, and the Holy Ghost is glorified with 
Them: we who are of one soul, who mind 
the same thing, who in nothing injure the 
Trinity, neither by preferring One Person 
above another, nor by cutting off any: as 
those bad umpires and measurers of the God- 
head do, who by magnifying One Person more 
than is fit, diminish and insult the whole. 

VII. But do ye also, if you bear me any good 
will—ye who are my husbandry, my vine- 
yard, my own bowels, or rather His Who is 
our common Father, for in Christ he hath 
begotten you through the Gospels *—shew to us 
also some respect. It is only fair, since we 
haye honoured you above all else: ye are my 
witnesses, ye, and they who have placed in 
our hands this—shall I say Avthority, or Sev- 
cice 2 And if to him that loveth most most is 
due, how shall I measure the love, for which I 
have made you my debtors by my own love? 
Rather, shew respect for yourselves, and the 
Image committed to your care,® and Him Who 
committed it, and the Sufferings of Christ, 
and your hopes therefrom, holding fast the 
faith which ye have received, and in which 
ye were brought up, by which also ye are be- 
ing saved, and trust to save others (for not 
many, be well assured, can boast of what you 
can), and reckoning piety to consist, not in 
often speaking about God, but in silence for 
the most part, for the tongue is a dangerous 
thing to men, if it be not governed by reason. 
selieve that listening is always less dangerous 
than talking, just as learning about God is 
more pleasant than teaching. Leave the 
inore accurate search into these questions to 
those who are the Stewards of the Word ; 
and for yourselves, worship a little in words, 
but more by your actions, and rather by keep- 
ing the Law than by admiring the Lawgiver ; 
shew your love for Him by fleeing from 
wickedness, pursuing after virtue, living in 
the Spirit, walking in the Spirit, drawing 
your knowledge from Him, building upon the 
foundation of the faith, not wood or hay or 
stubble,y weak materials and easily spent when 
the fire shall try our works or destroy them ; 
but gold, silver, precious stones, which re- 
main and stand. 

VIII. So may ye act, and so may ye honour 
us, whether present or absent, whether taking 
your part in our sermons, or preferring to do 
something else: and may ye be the children of 

L.e., the Elder Gregory. 

Ct (Glopmutta! wy 
y 1 Cor, i. 72. 

fGen. 1.27. 

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. CAESARIUS. 

229 

God, pure and unblamable, in the midst of a 
crooked and perverse generation :* and may 
ye never be entangled in the snares of the 
wicked that go round about, or bound with 
the chain of your sins. May the Word in 
you never be smothered with cares of this 
life and so ye become untruitful: but may 
ye walk in the King’s Highway, turning aside 
neither to the right hand nor to the left,? but 
led by the Spirit through the strait gate. 
Then all our affairs shall prosper, both now 
and at the inquest ‘There, in Christ Jesus our 
Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever. Amen. 

ORATION VII. 

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. CSARIUS. 

The date of this Oration is probably the 
spring of A.b. 369. It is placed by S. Jerome 
first among S. Gregory’s Orations. Cesarius, 
the Saint’s younger brother, was born probably 
about A.D. 330. Educated in his early years 
at home, he studied later in the schools of 
Alexandria, where he attained great profi- 
ciency in mathematics, astronomy, and, espe- 
cially, in medicine. On his return from 
Alexandria, he was offered by the Emperor 
Constantius, in response to a public petition, an 
honourable and lucrative post at Byzantium, 
but was prevailed upon by Gregory to return 
with him to Nazianzus. After a while he 
went back to Byzantium, and, on the accession 
of Julian, was pressed to retain his appointment 
at court, and did so, in spite of Gregory’s 
reproaches, until Julian, who had long been 
trying to win him from Christianity, at last 
invited him to a public discussion. Ceesarius, 
in spite of the specious arguments of the Ikm- 
peror, gained the day, but, having now dis- 
tinctly declared himself a Christian, could no 
longer remain at court. On the death of 
Julian, he was esteemed and promoted by suc- 
cessive Emperors, until he received from Valens 
the office of treasurer of Bithynia. The exact 
character of this office and its rank are still 
undecided by historical writers, some of whom 
attribute to him other offices not mentioned 
by S. Gregory, which most probably were 
filled by anamesake. On the r1th of October 
A.D. 368 the city of Nicaea was almost entire- 
ly destroyed by an earthquake and Cvesarius 
miraculously escaped with his life. Impressed 
by his escape, he received Holy Baptism, and 
formed plans for retiring from office and (as 

Oo EMileitet5. 6 Num: xx0..22 9 sae xl. 3: 

230 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

it seems) devoting himself to a lite of ascetic | 

discipline, which were dissipated by his early 
and sudden death. 

tr. It may be, my friends, my brethren, my — 

fathers (ye who are dear to me in reality as 
well as in name) that you think that I, who 
am about to pay the sad tribute of lamenta- 
tion to him who has departed, am eager to 
undertake the task, and shall, as most men 
delight to do, speak at great length and in 
eloquent style. And so some of you, who 
have had like sorrows to bear, are prepared to 
join. in my mourning and lamentation, in 
order to bewail your own griefS in mine, and 
learn to feel pain at the afflictions of a friend, 
while others are looking to feast their ears in 
the enjoyment of my words. For they sup- 
pose that I must needs make my misfortune 
an occasion for display—as was once my wont, 
when possessed of a superabundance of earthly 
things, and ambitious, above all, of oratorical 
renown—bDefore I looked up to Him Who is 
the true and highest Word, and gave all up to 
God, from Whom all things come, and took 
God for all in all. Now pray do not think 
this of me, if you wish to think of me aright. 
For I am neither going to lament for him who 
is gone more than is good—as | should not 
approve of such conduct even in others—nor 
am I going to praise him beyond due measure. 
Albeit that language is a dear and especially 
proper tribute to one gifted with it, and eulo- 

gy to one who was exceedingly fond of my — 

words—aye, not only a tribute, but a debt, the 
most just of all debts. But even in my tears 
and admiration I must respect the law which 
regards such matters: nor is this alien to our 
philosophy ; for he says The memory of the 
just is accompanied with eulogies,* and also, 
Let tears fall down over the dead, and begin 
to lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm 
thyself: ® removing us equally from insensi- 
bility and immoderation. I shall proceed 
then, not only to exhibit the weakness of 
human nature, but also to put you in mind 

of the dignity of the soul, and, giving such © 

consolation as is due to those who are in sor- 
sow, transfer our grief, from that which con- 
cerns the flesh and temporal things, to those 
things which are spiritual and eternal. 

2. The parents of Czesarius, to take first the 
point which best becomes me, are known to 
you all. Their excellence you are eager to 
notice, and hear of with admiration, and share 
in the task of setting it forth to any, if there 

6 Prov. %& SULA.) PB Exclus, xxxvin. 16, 

be such, who know it not: for no single man 
is able to do so entirely, and the task Is one 
beyond the powers of a single tongue, however 
laborious. however zealous. Among the many 
and great points for which they are to be cele- 
brated (L trust I may not seem extravagant in 
praising my own family) the greatest of all, 
which more than any other stamps their char- 
acter, is piety. By their hoar hairs they lay 
claim to reverence, but they are no Jess vener- 
able for their virtue than for their age; for 
while their bodies are bent beneath the bur- 
den of their years, their souls renew their 
youth in God. 

3. His father* was well grafted out of the 
wild olive tree into the good one, and so 
far partook of iis fatness as to be entrusted 
with the engrafting of others, and charged with 
the culture of souls, presiding in a manner Le- 
coming his high office over this people, like a 
second Aaron or Moses, bidden himself to draw 
near to God, and to convey the Divine Voice 
to the others who stand afar off; ¥ gentle, meck, 
calm in mien,® fervent in spirit, a fine man in 
external appearance, but richer still in that 
which is out of sight. But why should I ce- 
scribe him whom you know? For I could not 
even by speaking at great length say as much 
as he deserves, or as much as each of you knows 
and expects to be said of him. It is then bet- 
ter to leave your own fancy to picture hiin, 
than mutilate by my words the object of your 
admiration. 

4. His mother£ was consecrated to God by 
virtue of her descent from a saintly family, 
and was possessed of picty as a necessary in- 
heritance, not only for herself, but also for her 
children—being indeed a holy lump from a 
holy firstfruits.¢ And this she so far in- 
creased and amplified that some, (bold though 
the statement be, I will utter it,) have both 
believed and said that even her husband’s per- 
fection has been the work of none other than 
herself; and, oh how wonderful! she herself, 
as the reward of her piety, has received a 
greater and more perfect piety. Lovers of 
their children and of Christ as they both were, 
what is most extraordinary, they were far 
greater lovers of Christ than of their children : 
yea, even their one enjoyment of their children 
was that they should be acknowledged and 
named by Christ, and their one measure of 
their blessedness in their children was their 

Ch Orat. xviii, 5, 6 

77-20, 2 Rid eek 2373 4, 20 
ValeXOd.ak1O: LUCULEN aa. 

6 J miten. v. 1, ‘in disposition.” 

e /lis mother, S, Nonna, Cie Orat, cree 80:91, 4 

Also viii. 4, 5. Rom, xi, 16, 

-ANEGYRIC ON 

His, BROTHER 

virtue and close association with the Chief , 

Good.+ 
ing many a treasure from moths and robbers, 
and from the prince of this world,” to transfer 

Compassionate, sympathetic, snatch- | 

| 

| 

it from their sojourn here to the [true] hab- | 
itation, laying up in store® for their children 

the heavenly splendour as their greatest inher- 
itance. ‘Thus have they reached a fair old age, 
equally reverend both for virtue and for years, 
and full of days, alike of those which abide 

and those which pass away; each one failing | 

to secure the first prize here below only so far 
as equalled by the other; yea, they have ful- 
filled the measure of every happiness with the 

oe 

CAESA uae 

learning. Which of his care shall [ place 
first and foremost, or which can [I omit with 
least injury to my description? Who was more 
faithful to his teacher than he? Who more 
kindly to his classmates ? Who more carefully 
avoided the society and companionship of the 
depraved? Who attached himself more closely 
to that of the most excellent, and among 

| others, of the most esteemed and illustrious of 

exception of this last trial, or discipline, which- | 

ever anyone may think we ought to call it; 1 
mean their having to send before them the 
child who was, owing to his age, in greater 
danger of falling, and so to close their life in 

safety, and be translated with all their family , 

to the realms above. 

5. [ have entered into these details, not 
from a desire to eulogize them, for this, I know 
well, it would be difficult worthily to do, if I 
made their praise the subject of my whole ora- 
tion, but to set forth the excellence inherited 
from his parents by Ceesarius, and so prevent 
you from being surprised or incredulous, that 
one sprung from such progenitors, should have 
deserved such praises himself; nay, strange 
indeed would it have been, had he looked to 

others and disregarded the examples of his kins- | 

folk at home. His early life was such as becomes 
those really well born and destined for a good 
life. Tsay little of his qualities evident to all, 

his beauty, his stature, his manifold graceful- | 

ness, and harmonious disposition, as shown in 

_ what is injurious ; 

the tones of his voice—for it is not my office | 

to laud qualities of this kind, however impor- 
tant they may seem to others—and_ proceed 
with what I have to say of the points which, 
even if I wished, I could with difficulty pass by. 

6. Bred and reared under such influences, 

| God. 

we were fully trained in the education afforded | 

here,* in which none could say how far he ex- 
celled most of us from the quickness and extent 

-y° eae { 
of his abilities—and how can I recall those days | 
without my tears showing that, contrary to my | 
promises, my feelings have overcome my philo- | 

sophic restraint ? 
decided that we should leave home, and then 
for the first time we were separated, for I 
studied rhetoric in the then flourishing schools 
of Palestine ; he went to Alexandria, esteemed 
both then and now the home of every branch of 

‘that which ts better 
y 5. John xiv. ue 
€ flere, at Naziauzus. 

a The Chicf Good. 70 KpétTo%", lit. ‘ 
8S. Matt. vi. 19; S. Jolin x. 1. 
61 Lim, vi. 19. 

‘The time came when it was | 

| 

his countrymen? lor he knew that we are 
strongly influenced to virtue or vice by our 
companions. And in consequence of all this, 
who was more honoured by the authorities than 
he, and whom did the whole city (though ¢ all 
individuals are concealed in it, because of its 
size), esteem more highly for his discretion, or 
deem more illustrious for his intelligence ? 

7. What branch of learning did he not 
master, or rather, in what branch of study did 
he not surpass those who had made it their 
sole study 2? Whom did he allow even to ap- 
proach him, not only of his own time and age, 
but even of his elders, who had devoted many 
more years to study? All subjects he studied 
as one, and each as thoroughly as if he knew 
no other. The brilliant in intellect, he sur- 
passed in industry, the devoted students in 
quickness of perception; nay, rather he out- 
stripped in rapidity those who were rapid, 
application those who were laborious, and 
both respects those who were distinguished in 
both. From geometry and astronomy, that 
science so dangerous® to anyone else, he gath- 
ered all that was helpful (1 mean that he was 
led by the harmony and order of the heavenly 
bodies to reverence their Maker), and avoided 
not attributing all things 
that are or happen to the influence of the stars, 
like those who raise their own fellow-servant, 
the creation, in rebellion against the Creator, 
but referring, as is reasonable, the motion of 
these bodies, and all other things besides, to 
In arithmetic and mathematics, and in 
the wonderful art of medicine, in so far as it 
treats of physiolog ry and temperament, and the 
causes of disease, in order to remove the roots 
and so destroy their offspring with them, who 
is there so ignorant or contentious as to think 
him inferior to himself, and not to be glad 
to be reckoned next to him, and carry off the 
second prize? ‘This indeed is no unsupport- 
ed assertion, but East and West? alike, and 
every place which he afterward visited, are as 

Ithough his tcach- 

The Gen. ed. translates “ / 
ing was EXC > sublime and abstruse.’ 
B Dangerous, : being « so closcly connec ted with astrolog Vy, 
ye rast and IW ‘st, €24 TE OMOU Ajgts Kal €07 TEPLOS 5 — ARES sie 
nificat regione, Locum: culinen item, seu fastiy Tune, CLS. ies 

Naz. Orat, xxv. 19..pri40d Ss Chrys. Hom. LVI. in Ioan. p. 7504 

| 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

pillars inscribed with the record of his Jearn- _ honours I have mentioned, and declared that it 

ing, 

‘8. But when, after gathering into his single 
soul every kind of excellence and knowledge, 
as a mighty merchantman gathers every sort of 
ware, he was voyaging to his own city, in order 

to communicate to others the fair cargo of his | 

culture, there befell a wondrous thing, which 
I must, as its mention is most cheering to me 
and may delight you, briefly set forth. Our 
mother,® in her motherly love for her children, 
had offered up a prayer that, as she had sent us 
forth together, she might see us together return 
home. For we seemed, to our mother at least, 
if not to others, to form a pair worthy of her 
prayers and glances, if seen together, though 
now, alas, our connection has been severed. 
And God, Who hears a righteous prayer, and 
honours the love of parents for well-disposed 
children, so ordered that, without any design 
or agreement on our part, the one from Alex- 
andria, the other from Greece, the one by sea, 
the other by land, we arrived at the same city 
at the same time. This city was Byzantium, 
which now presides over Europe, in which 
Cvesarius, after the lapse of a short time, gained 

with an illustrious family, and a seat in the 
council of state were offered him; and a mission 
vas despatched to the Emperor by public de- 
cision, to beg that the first of cities be adorned 
and honoured by the first of scholars (if he 
cared at all for its being indeed the first, and 
worthy of its name); and that to all its other 
titles to distinction this further one be added, 
that it was embellished by having Ceesarius as its 
physician and its inhabitant, although its bril- 
liancy was already assured by its throngs of 
great men both in philosophy and_ other 
branches of learning. But enough of this. 
At this time there happened what seemed to 
others a chance without reason or cause, such 
as frequently occurs of its own accord in our 
day, but was more than sufficiently manifest to 
cevout minds as the result of the prayers to 
god-fearing parents, which were answered by 
the united arrival of their sons by land and sea. 

g. Well, among the noble traits of Cesarius’ 
character, we must not fail to note one, which 
perhaps is in others’ eyes slight and unworthy 
of mention, but seemed to me, both at the time 
and since, of the highest import, if indeed 
brotherly love be a praiseworthy quality ; nor 
shall I ever cease to place it in the first rank, 
in relating the story of his life. Although 

the metropolis strove to retain him by the | 

a Our mother, Yor further detail cf. Orat, xviii. 31. 

would under no circumstances let him go, my 
influence, which he valued most highly on all 
occasions, prevailed upon him to listen to the 
prayer of his parents, to supply his country’s 
need, and to grant me my own desire. And 
when he thus returned home in my company, 
he preferred me not only to cities and peoples, 
not only to honours and revenues, which had 
in part already flowed to him in abundance 
from many sources and in part were within his 
reach, but even to the Emperor himself and his 
imperial commands. From this time, then, 
having shaken off all ambition, as a hard mas- 
ter and a painful disorder, I resolved to prac- 
tise philosophy and adapt myself to the higher 
life: or rather the desire was earlier born, the 
life came later. But my brother, who had 
dedicated to his country the firstfruits of his 
learning, and gained an admiration worthy of 
his efforts, was afterwards led by the desire of 
fame, and, as he persuaded me, of being the 
guardian of the city, to betake himself to court, 
not indeed according to my own wishes or 
judgment; for I will confess to you that I 

think it a better and grander thing to be in 
such a repute, that public honours, an alliance | 

the lowest rank with God than to win the first 
place with an earthly king. Nevertheless I 
cannot blame him, for inasmuch as philoso- 
phy is the greatest, so is it the most difficult, 
of professions, which can be taken in hand by 
but few, and only by those who have been 

| called forth by the Divine magnanimity, which 

gives its hand to those who are honoured by its 
preference. Yet it is no small thing if one, 
who has chosen the lower form of life, follows 
after goodness, and sets greater store on God 
and his own salvation than on earthly lustre ; 
using it as a stage, or a manifold ephemeral 
mask while playing in the drama of this world, 
but himself living unto God with that image 
which he knows that he has received from 
Him, and must render to Him Who gave it. 
That this was certainly the purpose of Cxsarius, 
we know full well. 

ro. Among physicians he gained the fore- 
most place with no great trouble, by merely 
exhibiting his capacity, or rather some slight 
specimen of his capacity, and was forthwith 
numbered among the friends of the Emperor, 
and enjoyed the highest honours. But he 
placed the humane functions of his art at the 
disposal of the authorities free of cost, knowing 
that nothing leads to further advancement than 
virtue and renown for honourable deeds ; so 
that he far surpassed in fame those to whom 
he was inferior in rank. By his modesty he 
so won the love of all that they entrusted their 

PANEGY RIG cON Tis BROTHER &..CASARTUS: 

precious charges to his care, without requiring 
him to be sworn by Hippocrates, since the sim- 
plicity of Crates was nothing to his own: win- 
ning in general a respect beyond his rank ; for 
besides the present repute he was ever thought 
to have justly won, a still greater one was antici- 
pated for him, both by the Emperors* them- 
selves and by all who occupied the nearest po- 
sitions tothem. But, most important, neither 
by his fame, nor by the luxury which sur- 
rounded him, was his nobility ofsoul corrrupt- 
ed; for amidst his many claims to honour, he 
himself cared most for being, and being known 
to be, a Christian, and, compared with this, 
all other things were to him but trifling toys. 
For they belong to the part we play before 
others on a stage which is very quickly set 
up and taken down again—perhaps indeed 
more quickly destroyed than put together, as 
we may see from the manifold changes of life, 
and fluctuations of prosperity ; while the only 
real and securely abiding good thing is godli- 
ness. 
tr. Such was the philosophy of Ceesarius, 
ven at court: these were the ideas amidst 
which he lived and died, discovering and pre- 
senting to God, in the hidden man, a still 
deeper godliness than was publicly visible. 
And if I must pass by all else, his protection 
of his kinsmen in distress, his contempt for ar- 
rogance, his freedom from assumption towards 
friends, his boldness towards men in power, 
the numerous contests and arguments in which 
he engaged with many on behalf of the truth, 
not merely for the sake of argument, but with 
deep piety and fervour, I must speak of one 
point at least as especially worthy of note. 
‘The Emperor® of unhappy memory was raging 
against us, whose madness in rejecting Christ, 
after making himself its first victim, had now 
rendered him intolerable to others ; though he 
did not, like other fighters against Christ, 
grandly enlist himself on the side of impiety, 
but veiled his persecution under the form of 
equity; and, ruled by the crooked serpent 
which possessed his soul, dragged down into 
his own pit his wretched victims by manifold 
devices. His first artifice and contrivance 
was, to deprive us of the honour of our conflicts 
(for, noble man as he was, he grudged this to 
Christians), by causing us, who suffered for 
being Christians, to be punished as evil doers : 
the second was, to call this process persuasion, 
and not tyranny, so that the disgrace of those 
who chose to side with impiety might be 

( Constantius-TL., Avps337-361.-- whan, Avp. 
a The Leuiperors,~ 361-363. 
Jovian, A.b. 363-4. Valens, A.b. 364-378. 
B The Linperor, te., Julian the Apostate. 

233 

greater than their danger. Some he won over 
by money, some by dignities, some by 
promises, some by various honours, which he 
bestowed, not royally but in right servile style, 
in the sight of all, while everyone was influ- 
enced by the witchery of his words, and his 
own example. <At last he assailed Ceesarius. 
How utter was the derangement and __ folly 
which could hope to take for his prey a man 
like Ceesarius, my brother, the son of parents 
like ours ! 

12. However, that I may dwell awhile up- 
on this point, and luxuriate in my story as 
men do who are eyewitnesses in some marvel- 
lous event,* that noble man, fortified with the 
sign of Christ, and defending himself with His 
Mighty Word, entered the lists against an ad- 
versary experienced in arms and strong in his 
skill in argument. In no wise abashed at the 
sight, nor shrinking at all from his high pur- 
pose through flattery, he was an athlete ready, 
both in word and deed, to meet a rival of 
equal power. Such then was the arena, and 
so equipped the champion of godliness. ‘The 
judge on one side was Christ, arming the 
athlete with His own sufferings: and on the 
other a dreadful tyrant,® persuasive by his skill 
in argument, and overawing him by the weight 
of his authority ; and as spectators, on either 
hand, both those who were still left on the 
side of godliness and those who had been 
snatched away by him, watching whether vic- 
tory inclined to their own side or to the other, 
and more anxious as to which would gain the 
day than the combatants themselves. 

13. Didst thou not fear for Ceesarius, lest 
aught unworthy of his zeal should befall him ? 
Nay, be ye of good courage. For the victory is 
with Christ, Who overcame the world.” Now for 
my part, be wellassured, Ishould be highly in- 
terested in setting forth the details of the argu- 
ments and allegations used on that occasion, 
for indeed the discussion contains certain feats 
and elegances, which I dwell on with noslight 
pleasure ; but this would be quite foreign to 
an occasion and discourse like the present. 
And when, after having torn to shreds all his 
opponent’s sophistries, and thrust aside as mere 
child’s play every assault, veiled or open, 
Ceesarius in a loud clear voice declared that 
he was and remained a Christian—not even 
thus was he finally dismissed. T’or indeed, the 
Emperor was possessed by an eager desire to 
enjoy and be distinguished by his culture, 

aSome edd. read “in the spectacle,” which would make better 
sense, but has not MS. authority. 

BA dreadful tyrant. Vhe Evil One: with Billius and Clémen- 
cet. Julian was antagonist, not Judge—unless we consider that 
he combined unfairly the two offices, y S. John xvi. 33. 

{ GR 

a 
“~ 

and then uttered in the hearing of all his 
famous saying—O happy father, O unhappy 
sons ! thus deigning to honour me, whose cul- 
ture and vodliness® he had known at Athens, 
with a share in the dishonour of Ceesarius, who 
was remanded for a further trial? (since Justice 
was fitly arming the I:mperor against the 
Persians),.¥ and welcomed by us after his 
happy escape and bloodless victory, as more 
illustrious tor his dishonour than for his ce- 
lebrity. 

14. This victory I esteem far more sub- 
lime and honourable than the Emperor’s 
mighty power and splendid purple and costly 
diadem. Iam more elated in describing it 
than if he had won from him the half of his 
Empire. During the evil days he lived in 
retirement, obedient herein to our Christian 
law, which bids us, when occasion offers, to 
make ventures on behalf of the truth, and 
not be traitors to our religion from coward- 
ice; yet refrain, as long as may be, from rush- 
ing into danger, either in fear for our own 
souls, or to spare those who bring the danger 
upon us. But when the gloom had been dis- 
persed, and the righteous sentence had been 
pronounced in a foreign land, and_ the glitter- 
ing sword had struck down the ungodly, and 
power had returned to the hands of Christians, 
what boots it to say with what glory and 
honour, with how many and _ great testi- 
monies, as if bestowing rather than receiv- 
ing a favour, he was welcomed again at the 
Court ; his new honour succeeding to that of 
former days; while time changed its Emper- 
ors, the repute and commanding influence of 
Cesarius with them was undisturbed, nay, 
they vied with each other in striving to attach 
him most closely to themselves, and be known 
as his special friends and acquaintances. 
was the godliness of Czesarius, such its results. 
Let all men, young and old, 
press on through the same virtue to the same 
distinction, for glorious is the fruit of good 
labours,€ if they suppose this to be worth striv- 
ing after, and a part of true happiness. 

15. Again another wonder concerning him 
is a strong argument for his parents’ piety 
and his own. He was living in Bithynia, 
holding an office of no small importance from 
the Emperor, viz., the stewardship of his 
revenue, and care of the exchequer: 
this had been sesigned to him by the Eeapesee 

a Godliness, Cae here, as often, used in the sense of 
orthodoxy.” 
BA further trial, W hich. Julian did not survive to carry out. 
S. Greg. may allude to Caesarius’ later return to Court. 

¥ Persians, Vhe expedition in which he met his death, Am- 
mian. Marcellin. xxV.. 3, 7: Soz. vi. 2. SOc. iil. 21. 

Matt. x, 23% e Wisd. ili, 15. 

“a 

for | 

—. ery Pe eee 

as a Sistas to. the-b ere offices. © Zin 
when, a short time ago, the earthquake® in 
Nicea occurred, which is said to have been 
the most serious within the memory of man, 
overwhelming in a common destruction almost 
all the inh abitants and the beauty of the city, 
he alone, or with very few of the men of rank, 
survived the danger, being shielded by the very 

falling ruins in his incredible escape, and 
bearing slight traces of the peril; yet he 

Such 

allowed fear to lead him to a more important 
salvation, for he dedicated himself entirely to 

the Supreme Providence ; he renounced the 
service of transitory things, and attached 
himself to another court. This he both 

purposed himself, and made the object of 
the united earnest prayers to which he invited 
me by letter, when I seized this opportunity 
to give him warning,® as I never ceased to 
do when pained that his great nature should 
be occupied in affairs beneath it, and that a 
soul so fitted for philosophy should, like the 
sun behind a cloud, be obscured amid the 
whirl of public life. Unscathed though he 
had been by the earthquake, he was not proof 
against disease, since he was but human. 
His escape was peculiar to himself; his death 
common to all mankind; the one the token 
of his piety, the other the result of his 
nature. The former, for our consolation, pre- 
ceded his fate, so that, though shaken by his 
death, we might exult in the extraordinary 
character of his preservation. And now our 
illustrious Ceesarius has been restored to us, 
when his honoured dust and celebrated corse, 
after being escorted home amidst a succession 
of hymns and public orations, has been 
honoured by the holy hands of his parents ; 
while his mother, substituting the festal gar- 
ments of religion for the trappings of woe, 

_has overcome her tears by her philosophy, 

give ear, and > 

and lulled to sleep lamentations by psalmody, 
as her son enjoys honours worthy of his newly 
regenerate soul, which has been, through 
water, transformed by the Spirit. 

16. This, Cesarius, is my funeral offer- 
ing to thee, this the firstfruits of my words, 
which thou hast often blamed me for with- 
holding, yet wouldst have stripped off, had 
they been bestowed on thee; with this orna- 
ment I adorn thee, an ornament, I know well, 
far dearer to thee than all others, though it be 
not of the soft flowing tissues of silk, in 
which while living, with virtue for thy sole 
adorning, thou didst not, like the many, 
eee nor texture of transparent linen, nor 

a The earthquake, described by Theodoret, H, E. Tee obs 
BS. Greg: Epist..xx- 

ON 

PANEG RTC 

of costly unguents, which thou 
hadst long resigned to the boudoirs of the 
fair, with their sweet savours lasting but 
a single day; nor any other small thing 
valued by small minds, which would have all 
been hidden to-day with thy fair form = by 
this bitter stone. Far hence be games and 
stories of the Greeks, the honours of ill-fated 
youths, with their petty prizes for petty con- 
tests; and all the libations and firstfruits or 
garlands and newly plucked flowers, where- 
with men honour the departed, in obedience 
to ancient custom and unreasoning grief, 
rather than reason. My gift is an oration, 
which perhaps succeeding time will receive 
at my hand and ever keep in motion, that 
it may not suffer him who has left us to he 
utterly lost to earth, but may ever keep him 
whom we honour in men’s ears and minds, as 
it sets before them, more clearly than a por- 
trait, the image of him for whom we mourn. 

17. Such is my offering; if it be slight 
and inferior to his merit, God loveth that 
which is according to our power.* Part of 
our gift is now complete, the remainder we 
will now pay by offering (those of us who 
still survive) every year our honours and me- 
morials. And now for thee, sacred and holy 
soul, we pray for an entrance into heaven ; 
mayest thou enjoy such repose as the bosom 
of Abraham affords, mayest thou behold the 
choir of Angels, and the glories and_ splen- 
dours of sainted men; aye, mayest thou be 
united to that choir and share in their joy, 

outpouring 

looking down from on high on all things here, | 

on what men call wealth, and despicable dig- 
nities, and deceitful honours, and the errors 
of our senses, and the tangle of this life, and 
its confusion and ignorance, as if we were 
fighting inthe dark ; whilst thou art in attend- 
ance upon the Great King and filled with 
the light which streams forth from Him: and 
may it be ours hereafter, receiving therefrom 
no such slender rivulet, as is the object of our 
fancy in this day of mirrors and enigmas, to 
attain to the fount of good itself, gazing with 
pure mind upon the truth in its purity, and 
finding a reward for our eager toil here below 
on behalf of the good, in our more perfect 
possession and vision of the good on high: 
the end to which our sacred books and_ teach- 
ers foretell that our course of divine mysteries 
shall lead us. 

18. What now remains? To bring the 
healing of the Word to those in sorrow. And 
a powerful remedy for mourners is sympathy, 

IIIS BROTHER S, C/ESARIUS, 235 

for sufferers are best consoled by those who 
hayvé to bear a ke suffering. -1o- sueh, 
then, I specially address myself, of whom I 
should be ashamed, if, with all other virtucs, 
they do not show the clements of patience. 
tor even if they surpass all others in love of 
their children, let them equally surpass them 
in love of wisdom and love of Christ, and in 
the special practice of meditation on our de- 
parture hence, impressing it likewise on their 
children, making even their whole life a prep- 
aration for death. But if your misfortune 
still clouds your reason and, like the moisture 
which dims our eyes, hides from you the clear 
view of your duty, come, ye elders, receive the 
consolation of a young man, ye fathers, that 
of a child, who ought to be admonished by 
men as old as you, who have admonished 
many and gathered experience from your 
many years. Yet wonder not, if in my youth 
IT admonish the aged; and if in aught I can 
see better than the hoary, I offer it to you. 
How much longer have we to live, ye men of 
honoured eld, so near to God? How long 
are we to suffer here? Not even man’s whole 
life is long, compared with the Eternity of 
the Divine Nature, still less the remains of 
life, and what I may call the parting of our 
human breath, the close of our frail existence. 
How much has Cesarius outstripped us ? How 
long shall we be left to mourn his departure ? 
Are we not hastening to the same abode ? 
Shall we not soon be covered by the same 
stone? Shall we not shortly be reduced to 
the same dust? And what in these short 
days will be our gain, save that after it has 
been ours to see, or suffer, or perchance even 
to do, more ill, we must discharge the com- 
mon and inexorable tribute to the law of na- 
ture, by following some, preceding others, to 
the tomb, mourning these, being lamented by 
those, and receiving from some that meed of 
tears which we ourselves had paid to others ? 
rg. Such, my brethren, is our existence, 
who live this transient life, such our pastime 
upon earth: we come into existence out of 
non-existence, and after existing are dissolved. 
We are unsubstantial dreams, impalpable vis- 
ions,* like the flight of a passing bird, like a 
ship leaving no track upon the sea,® a speck 
of dust, a vapour, an early dew, a flower 
that quickly blooms, and quickly fades. As 
for man his days are as grass, as a flower of 
the field, so he flourisheth.y Well hath in- 
spired David discoursed of our frailty, and 
again in these words, ‘Let me know the short- 

a Cor, Vill 3% 1x0. 74 

a Job xx, 8. B Wisd. v. ro et seq. ¥ Ps. -ciierbe 

236 

ness of my days;’’ and he defines the days of 

man as **ofaspan long.’’* And what wouldst | pain at the misfortunes of others. 

thou say to Jeremiah, who complains of his 
mother in sorrow for his birth,® and that on 
account of others’ faults? [ have seen all 
things,Y says the preacher, [ have reviewed in 
thought all human things, wealth, pleasure, 
power, unstable glory, wisdom which evades 
us rather than is won; then pleasure again, 
wisdom again, often revolving the same ob- 
jects, the pleasures of appetite, orchards, num- 
bers of slaves, store of wealth, serving men 
and serving maids, singing men and singing 
women, arms, spearmen, subject nations, col- 
lected tributes, the pride of kings, all the 
necessaries and superfluities of life, in which I 
surpassed all the kings that were before me. 
And what does he say after all these things? 
Vanity of yanities,® all is vanity and vexation 
of spirit, possibly meaning some unreasoning 
longing of the soul, and distraction of man 
condemned to this from the original fall: but 

hear, he says, the conclusion of the whole | 

matter, Fear God.¢ ‘This is his stay in his 
perplexity, and this is thy only gain from life 
here below, to be guided through the disorder 
of the things which are seen$ and shaken, to 
the things which stand firm and are not 
moved.” 

20. Let us not then mourn Ceesarius but 
ourselves, knowing what evils he has escaped 
to which we are left behind, and what treasure 
we shall lay up, unless, earnestly cleaving unto 
God and outstripping transitory things, we 
press towards the life above, deserting the 
earth while we are still upon the earth, and 
earnestly following the spirit which bears us 
upward. Painful as this is to the faint- 
hearted, it is as nothing to men of brave mind. 
And let us consider it thus. Ceesarius will 
not reign, but rather will he be reigned over 
by others. He will strike terror into no one, 
but he will be free from fear of any harsh 
master, often himself unworthy even of a sub- 
ject’s position. He will not amass wealth, 
but neither will he be liable to envy, or be 
pained at lack of success, or be ever seeking 
to add to his gains as much again. For such 
is the disease of wealth, which knows no limit 
to its desire of more, and continues to make 
drinking the medicine for thirst. He will 
make no display of his power of speaking, yet 
for his speaking will he be admired. 
not discourse upon the dicta of Hippocrates 
and Galen, and their adversaries, but neither 

Bijén xv.-r0: ¥ Eccles. i. 14. 
el bax 
» Heb. xii. 27. 

a Pav Rexx cmap 
6 Ib. xu. 8. 
G2 Cor, iviers; 

He will | 

men. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

will he be troubled by diseases, and suffer 
He will 
not set forth the principles of Tucleides, 
Ptolemeus, and Heron, but neither will he 
be pained by the tumid vaunts of uncultured 
He will make no display of the doc- 
trines of Plato, and Aristotle, and Pyrrho, and 
the names of any Democritus, and Heracleitus, 
Anaxagoras, Cleanthes and Epicurus, and all 
the members of the venerable Porch and 
Academy : but neither will he trouble himself 
with the solution of their cunning syllogisms. 
What need of further details? Yet here are 
some which all men honour or desire. Nor 
wife nor child will he have beside him, but he 
will escape mourning for, or being mourned 
by them, or leaving them to others, or being 
left behind himself as a memorial of misfor- 
tune. He will inherit no property: but he 
will have such heirs® as are of the greatest ser- 
vice, such as he himself wished, so that he 
departed hence a rich man, bearing with him 
all that was his. What anambition! What a 
new consolation! What magnanimity in his 
executors! A proclamation has been heard, 
worthy of the ears of all, and a mother’s grief 
has been made void by a fair and holy pro- 
mise, to give entirely to her son his wealth asa 
funeral offering on his behalf, leaving nothing 
to those who expected it. 

21. Is this inadequate for our consolation ? 
I willadd amore potent remedy. I believe the 
words of the wise, that every fair and God-be- 
loved soul, when, set free from the bonds of the 
body, it departs hence, at once enjoys a sense 
and perception of the blessings which await it, 
inasmuch as that which darkened it has been 
purged away, or laid aside—I know not how 
else to term it—and feels a wondrous pleasure 
and exultation, and goes rejoicing to meet its 
Lord, having escaped as it were from the 
grievous poison of life here, and shaken off the 
fetters which bound it and held down the 
wings of the mind, and so enters on the en- 
joyment of the bliss laid up for it, of which it 
has even now some conception. Then, a 
little later, it receives its kindred flesh, which 
once shared in its pursuits of things above, 
from the earth which both gave and had been 
entrusted with it, and in some way known to 
God, who knit them together and dissolved 
them, enters with it upon the inheritance of 
the glory there. And, as it shared, through 
their close union, in its hardships, so also it 

a Heirs, Cf. S. Basil Ep. 26 (32). Casarius left all his property 

' to the poor. This passage shows that his own family welcomed 

and approved the bequest, which S. Gregory was at much pains 
to carry out, but was greatly embarrassed by the rapacity of his 
brother’s servants. 

bestows upon it a portion of its joys, gathering 
it up entirely into itself, and becoming with 
it one in spirit and in mind and in God, the 
mortal and mutable being swallowed up of 
life. Hear at least how the inspired Ezekiel 
discourses of the knitting together of bones 
and sinews,* how after him Saint Paul speaks 
of the earthly tabernacle, and the house not 
made with hands, the one to be dissolved, the 
other laid up in heaven, alleging absence 
from the body to be presence with the Lord,8 
and bewailing his life in it as an exile, and 
therefore longing for and hastening to his re- 
lease. Why am I faint-hearted in my hopes ? 
Why behave like a mere creature of a day? I 
await the voice of the Archangel, the last 
trumpet,® the transformation of the heavens, 
the transfiguration of the earth, the liberation 
of the elements, the renovation of the universe.¢ 
Then shall I see Cesarius himself, no longer 
in exile, no longer laid upon a bier, no longer 
the object of mourning and pity, but brilliant, 
glorious, heavenly, such as in my dreams | 
have often beheld thee, dearest and most lov- 
ing of brothers, pictured thus by my desire, if 
not by the very truth. 

22. But now, laying aside lamentation, I 
will look at myself, and examine my feelings, 
that I may not unconsciously have in myself 
anything to be lamented. O- ye sons of 
men, for the words apply to you, how long 
will ye be hard-hearted and gross in mind ? 
Why do ye love vanity and seek after leas- 
ing,§ supposing life here to be a great thing 
and these few days many, and shrinking 
from this separation, welcome and_pleas- 
ant as it is, as if it were really grievous and 

awful? Are we not to know ourselves? Are 
we not to cast away visible things? Are we 
not to look to the things unseen? Are we 

not, even if we are somewhat grieved, to be 
on the contrary distressed at our lengthened 
sojourn,” like holy David, who calls things 
here the tents of darkness, and the place of 
affliction, and the deep mire,® and the shadow 
of death ; * because we linger in the tombs we 
bear about with us, because, though we are 
gods, we die like men * the death of sin? This 
is my fear, this day and night acconrpanies 
me, and will not let me breathe, on one side 
the glory, on the other the place of correction : 
the former I long for till I can say, «« My soul 
fainteth for Thy salvation ;’’ 4 from the latter I 
shrink back shuddering ; yet Iam not afraid 

a Ezek. xxxvii. 3 et seq. 
yt Thess. iv. 16. 

Galesevasd. n Ib. cxx. 4. 

eb. xliv. 20. « Ib. Ixxii. 6, 7. 

VOL, VII. 

B 2 Cor. v. 1. 6; Phil, i. 23. 
61 Cor. xv. 52. €2 Pet. iii. 10. 
@ Ib. xliv. 19 (LXX.) ; Ixix. 2. 
ACL; <Cxix. 81. 

PANEGYRIC ON HIS BROTHER S. 

CARS ARALUS. 237 

that this body of mine should utterly perish in 
dissolution and corruption ; but that the glori- 
ous creature of God (for glorious it is if up- 
right, just as it is dishonourable if sinful) in 
which is reason, morality, and hope, should be 
condemned to the same dishonour as the 
brutes, and be no better after death; a fate to 
be desired for the wicked, who are worthy of 
the fire yonder. 

23. Would that I might mortify my mem- 
bers that are upon the earth, would that I 
might spend my all upon the spirit, walking 
in the way that is narrow and trodden by few, 
not that which is broad and easy.6 For glori- 
ous and great are its consequences, and our 
hope is greater than our desert. What is 
man, that Thou art mindful of him?Y What 
is this new mystery which concerns me? I 
am small and great, lowly and exalted, mortal 
and immortal, earthly and heavenly. I share 
one condition with the lower world, the other 
with God ; one with the flesh, the other with 
the spirit. I must be buried with Christ, arise 
with Christ, be joint heir with Christ, become 
the son of God, yea, God Himself. See whither 
our argument has carried us in its progress. 
T almost own myself indebted to the disaster 
which has inspired me with such thoughts, 
and made me more enamoured of my depart- 
ure hence. ‘This is the purpose of the great 
mystery for us. ‘This is the purpose for us 

_of God, Who for us was made man and be- 

came poor,® to raise our flesh,¢ and recover His 
image,$ and remodel man,” that we might all 
be made one in Christ, who was perfectly 
made in all of us all that He Himself is,t that 
we might no longer be male and female, bar- 
barian, Scythian, bond or free* (which are 
badges of the flesh), but might bear in our- 
selves only the stamp of God, by Whom and 
for Whom we were made,’ and have so far re- 
ceived our form and model from Him, that 
we are recognized by it alone. 

24. Yea, would that what we hope for 
might be, according to the great kindness of 
our bountiful God, Who asks for little and be- 
stows great things, both in the present and in 
the future, upon those who truly love Him ; # 
bearing all things, enduring all things ” for their 
love and hope of Him, giving thanks for all 
things® favourable and unfavourable alike: I 
mean pleasant and painful, for reason knows 
that even these are often instruments of salva- 
tion ; commending to Him our own souls ® and 

BS.Mattivin ry: Ps.evitre ist 
eNom Wits tr.e2'G9.. lbNke xvroe & GOnxva 4g: 
OG. ii -38- ur Cor xVve28. 

A Rom. xi. 36. wr Cor. i. 9. 

1 Thess, v. 18, o 1 Pet. iv. 19. 

a Col. iii. 5. 
§ 2 Cor. viii. 9. 
7" Col; 111. 10, 
MOCO. rr. 
y Ib, xiite7. 

the 
ing 
Tb. 

souls of those fellow wayfarers who, be- 
more ready. have gained their rest before 

And. now that we have done this, let us 
cease from our discourse, and you too from your 
tears, hastening, as you now arc, to your tomb, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

which as asad abiding gift you have given to | 

Cresarius, seasonably prepared as it was for his 
parents in their old age, and now unexpect- 
edly bestowed on their son in his youth, 
though not without reason in His eyes Who 
disposes our affairs. O Lord and Maker of all 
things, and specially of this our frame | O God 
and Father and Pilot of men who are Thine! 
© Lord of life and death ! O Judge and Bene- 
factor of our souls! O Maker and ‘Transfor- 
mer in due time of all things * by ‘Thy design- 
ing Word,® according to the knowledge of the 
depth of Thy wisdom and providence! do 
Thou now receive Cesarius, the firstfruits of 
our pilgrimage; and if he who was last is 
first, we bow before Thy Word, by which the 
universe is ruled; yet do Thou receive us 
also afterwards, in a time when ‘Thou mayest 
be found,” having ordered us in the flesh as long 
as is for our profit ; yea, receive us, prepared 
and not troubled® by Thy fear, not departing 
from Thee in our last day, nor violently borne 
away from things here, like souls fond of the 
world and the flesh, but filled with eagerness 
for that blessed and enduring life which is in 
Christ Jesus, our Lord, to whom be glory, 
world without end. Amen. 

ORATION VIII. 
On HIS SISTER GORGONIA. 

Tue exact date of this Oration is uncertain. 
It is certainly (§ 23) later than the death of 
Ceesarius, A.D. 369, and previous to the death 
of their father, A.D. 374. So much we 
gather from the Oration itself, and the referen- 
ces made by some authors to a poem of S. 
Gregory do not add anything certain to our 
knowledge (Poem. Hist. I. 1. v.v. 108, 227), 
‘The place in which it was delivered is, almost 
without doubt, the city in which her married 
life had been spent. The public details of 
that life are familiar to the audience. Gor- 
gonia’s parents, and the speaker himself, 
although known to them, are not spoken of 
interms implying intimacy such as we find 
in Orations known to have been delivered at 
Nazianzus. The spiritual father and confi- 
dant of Gorgonia is present, certainly in a 

aiimos v8 (bX). 
*y Ly ASCK1i. 10; 

B Ps. xxxiii. 6. 

6 Ib. cxix. 60 flex 2 )e 

| of Gorgenia’s two sons are unknown. 

| 
| 

| 

\ 

position of authority, probably seated in the 
[Episcopal throne. The husband of Gorgonia 
(Epitaph. 24) was named Alypius. His home, 
as Clémencet and Benoit agree, on the authori- 
ty of Elias, was at Iconium, of which city, at 
the time, Faustinus was bishop. ‘Phe names 
Lehas 
states that they both became bishops. 5. 
Gregory mentions her three daughters, Alypi- 
ana, Eugenia, and Nonna, in his will. “ihe 
oration is marked by an eloquence, piety, and 
tender feeling which make it a worthy com- 
panion of that on Ceesarius. 

FUNERAL ORATION ON HIS SISTER Gor- 

GONIA. 

1. In praising my sister, I shall pay honour 
to one of my own family ; yet. my praise will 
not be false, because it is given to a relation, 
but, because it is true, will be worthy of com- 
mendation, and its truth is based not only 
upon its justice, but upon well-known facts. 
For, even if I wished, I should not be per- 
mitted to be partial; since everyone who 
hears me stands, like a skilful critic, between 
my oration and the truth, to discountenance 
exaggeration, yet, ifhe be a man of justice, 
demanding what is really due. So that my 
fear is not of outrunning the truth, but, on 
the contrary, of falling short of it, and lessen- 
ing her just repute by the extreme inadequacy 
of my panegyric; for it is a hard task to 
match her excellences with suitable action and 
words. Let us not then be so unjust as to 
praise every characteristic of other folk, and 
disparage really valuable qualities because 
they are our own, SO as to make some men 
‘ain by their absence of kindred with us, 
while others suffer for their relationship. For 
justice would be violated alike by the praise of 
the one and the neglect of the other, whereas 
if we make the truth our standard and rule, 
and look to her alone, disregarding all the ob- 
jects of the vulgar and the mean, we shall 
praise or pass over everything according to its 
merits. 

>. Yet it would be most unreasonable of all, 
if, while we refuse to regard it as a righteous 
thing to defraud, insult, accuse, or treat un- 
justly in any way, great or small, those who 
are our kindred, and consider wrong done to 
those nearest to us the worst of all ; we were 
yet to imagine that it would be an act of jus- 

tice to deprive them of such an oration as is 

due most of all to the good, and spend more 

words upon those who are evil, and beg for 

indulgent treatment, than on those who are 
excellent and merely claim their due. For if 
we are not prevented, as would be far more 
just, from praising men who have lived out- 

ON HIS SISTER GORGONIA. 

side our own circle, because we do not know | 

and cannot personally testify to their merits, 

shall we be prevented from praising those | 

whom we do know, because of our friendship, 
or the envy of the multitude, and especially 
those who have departed hence, whom it is 
too late to ingratiate ourselves with, since they 
have escaped, amongst all other things, from 
the reach of praise or blame. 

3. Having now made a sufficient defence 
on these points, and shown how necessary it 
is for me to be the speaker, come, let me pro- 
ceed with my eulogy, rejecting all daintiness 
and elegance of style (for she whom we are 
praising was unadorned and the absence of 
ornament was to her, beauty), and yet perform- 
ing, as a most indispensable debt, all those 
funeral rites which are her due, and further 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

instructing everyone in a zealous imitation of | 

the same virtue, since it is my object in every 
word and action to promote the perfection of 
those committed to my charge. ‘The task of 
praising the country and family ofour departed 
one I leave to another, more scrupulous in ad- 
hering to the rules of eulogy ; nor will he 
lack many fair topics, if he wish to deck her 
with external ornaments, as men deck a splen- 
did and beautiful form with gold and precious 
stones, and the artistic devices of the crafts- 
man; which, while they accentuate ugliness 
by their contrast, can add no attractiveness to 
the beauty which surpasses them. For my 
part, I will only conform to such rules so far 
as to allude to our common parents, for it 
would not be reverent to pass unnoticed the 
great blessing of having such parents and 
teachers, and then speedily direct my attention 
to herself, without further taxing the patience 
of those who are eager to learn what manner 
of woman she was. 

4. Who is there who knows not the Abra- 
ham and Sarah of these our latter days, Greg- 
ory and Nonna his wife? For it is not well 
to omit the incitement to virtue of mention- 
ing their names. He has been justified by 
faith, she has dwelt with him who is faithful ; 
he beyond all hope has been the father of many 
nations,® she has spiritually travailed in their 
birth ; he escaped from the bondage of his 
father’s gods,® she is the daughter as well as 

a Rom. iv. 18. 

B Hits father's gods. These words, together with the reference 
to idols and idolators in § sand the lines (Poem, Hist. [. i. 123-4, 
tome 2, p. 636.) Um’ etSuiAors mapos Hev Gwwv have led some writers 
(esp. Ullmann and Clericus) to attribute the worship of idols to the 

S 

| 

239 

the mother of the free ; he went out from kin- 
dred and home for the sake of the land of 
promise,* she was the occasion of his exile ; 
for on this head alone I venture to claim for 
her an honour higher than that of Sarah ; he 
set forth on so noble a pilgrimage, she readily 
shared with himin its toils; he gave himself 
to the Lord, she both called her husband lord 
and regarded him as such, and in part was 
thereby justified ; whose was the promise, from 
whom, as far as in them lay, was born Isaac, 
and whose was the gift. 

5. ‘his good shepherd was the result of his 
wife’s prayers and guidance, and it was from 
her that he learned his ideal of a good shep- 
herd’s life. He generously fled from his idols, 
and afterwards even put demons to flight ; he 
never consented to eat salt with idolators : 
united together with a bond of one honour, of 
one mind, of one soul, concerned as much 
with virtue and fellowship with God as with 
the flesh ; equal in length of life and hoary 
hairs, equal in prudence and brilliancy, rivals 
of each other, soaring beyond all the rest, pos- 
sessed in few respects by the flesh, and trans- 
lated in spirit, even before dissolution ; pos- 
sessing not the world, and yet possessing it, 
by at once despising and rightly valuing it: 
forsaking riches and yet being rich through 
their noble pursuits ; rejecting things here, and 
purchasing instead the things yonder: pos- 
sessed of a scanty remnant of this life, left over 
from their piety, but of an abundant and long 
life for which they have laboured. I will say 
but one word more about them: they have 
been rightly and fairly assigned, each to either 
sex; he is the ornament of men, she of 
women, and not only the ornament but the 
pattern of virtue. 

6. From them Gorgonia derived both her 
existence and her reputation; they sowed in 
her the seeds of piety, they were the source of 
her fair life, and of her happy departure with 
better hopes. Fair privileges these, and such as 
are not easily attained by many of those who 
plume themselves highly upon their noble 
birth, and are proud of their ancestry. But, 
if I must treat of her case in a more philo- 
sophic and lofty strain, Gorgonia’s native land 
was Jerusalem above,® the object, not of sight 
but of contemplation, wherein is our common- 
wealth, and whereto we are pressing on: whose 

Hypsistarii, and Clémencet points out that géev is only the Ep. 
and Ton. partic. of ¢éw, and does not mean “of animals.” ‘The 
weakness of a_ reliance on a poetical expression is shown in Dict. 
Christ. Biog. Here the words are the mystical application of the 
actual experience of Abraham, and ééSwAov does not necessarily 
connote material idols. It is applied by S. Greg. Nyssen. Orat. 
funcbr. de Placilla, p. 965. B (ed. 1615) to the worship of Jesus 
Christ by the Arians. Cf. Introd. to Orat. xviii. 
@ Gene sity Hch, 249; B Heb. xii. 22, 23. 

oJ 
< 

240 

citizen Christ is, and whose fellow-citizens are 
the assembly and church of the first born who 
are written in heaven, and feast around its 
great Founder in contemplation of His glory, 
and take part in the endless festival ; her nobil- 
ity consisted in the preservation of the Image, 
and the perfect likeness to the Archetype, 
which is produced by reason and virtue and 
pure desire, ever more and more conform- 
ing, in things pertaining to God, to those truly 
initiated into the heavenly mysteries ; and in 
knowing whence, and of what character, and 
for what end we came into being. 

7. ‘This is what I know upon these points : 
and therefore it is that I both am aware 
and assert that her soul was more noble than 
those of the East,* according to a better 
than the ordinary rule of noble or ignoble 
birth, whose distinctions depend not on 
blood but on character; nor does it classify 
those whom it praises or blames according to 
their families, but as individuals. But speak- 
ing as I do of her excellences among those 
who know her, let each one join in contribu- 
ting some particular and aid me in my speech : 
for it is impossible for one man to take in 
every point, however gifted with observation 
and intelligence. 

8. In modesty she so greatly excelled, 
and so far surpassed, those of her own day, to 
say nothing of those of old time who have 
been illustrious for modesty, that, in regard 
to the two divisions of the life of all, that is, 
the married and the unmarried state, the lat- 
ter being higher and more divine, though 
more difficult and dangerous, while the former 
is more humble and more safe, she was able 
to avoid the disadvantages of each, and to 
select and combine all that is best in both, 
namely, the elevation of the one and the 
security of the other, thus becoming modest 
without pride, blending the excellence of the 
married with that of the unmarried state, and 
proving that neither of them absolutely binds 
us to, or separates us from, God or the world 
(so that the one from its own nature must be 
uttely avoided, and the other altogether 
praised): but that it is mind which nobly pre- 
sides over wedlock and maidenhood, and 
arranges and works upon them as the raw 
material of virtue under the master-hand of 
reason. For though she had entered upon a 
carnal union, she was not therefore separated 
from the spirit, nor, because her husband was 
her head, did she ignore her first Head: but, 
performing those few ministrations due to the 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

world and nature, according to the will of 
the law of the flesh, or rather of Him who 
gaye to the flesh these laws, she consecrated 
herself entirely to God. But what is most ex- 
cellent and honourable, she also won over her 
husband to her side, and made of him a good 

| fellow-servant, instead of an unreasonable mas- 

ter. And not only so, but she further made 
the fruit of her body, her children and her 
children’s children, to be the fruit of her spirit, 
dedicating to God not her single soul, but 
the whole family and household, and making 
wedlock illustrious through her own accepta- 
bility in wedlock, and the fair harvest she 

had reaped thereby; presenting herself, as 
long as she lived, as an example to her off- 
spring of all that was good, and when sum- 
moned hence, leaving her will behind her, as 
a silent exhortation to her house. 

g. The divine Solomon, in his instructive 
wisdom, I mean his Proverbs, praises the 
woman who looks to her household and loves 
her husband, contrasting her with one who 
roams abroad, and is uncontrolled and dis- 
honourable, and hunts for precious souls with 
wanton words and ways, while she manages 
well at home and bravely sets about her 
woman’s duties, as her hands hold the dis- 
taff, and she prepares two coats for her hus- 
band, buying a field in due season, and makes 
good provision for the food of her servants, 
and welcomes her friends at a liberal table ; 
with all the other details in which he sings 
the praises of the modest and industrious 
woman. Now, to praise my sister in these 
points would be to praise a statue for its 
shadow, or a lion for its claws, without 
allusion to its greatest perfections. Who 
was more deserving of renown, and yet 
who avoided it so much and made herself 
inaccessible to the eyes of man? Who knew 
better the due proportions of sobriety and 
cheerfulness, so that her sobriety should not 
seem inhuman, nor her tenderness immodest, 
but prudent in one, gentle in the other, her 
discretion was marked by a combination of 
sympathy and dignity? Listen, ye women 
addicted to ease and display, who despise the 
veil of shamefastness. Who ever so kept her 
eyes under control? Who so derided laughter, 
that the ripple of a smile seemed a great thing 
to her? Who more steadfastly closed her 
ears? And who opened them more to the Di- 
vine words, or rather, who installed the mind 
as ruler of the tongue in uttering the judgments 
of God? Who, as she, regulated her lips ? 

a Jobi. 3. 

a Prov, xxxi. 10, 

10. Here, if you will, is another point of 
her excellence: one of which neither she nor 
any truly modest and decorous woman thinks 
anything: but which we have been made to 
think much of, by those who are too fond of 
ornament and display, and refuse to listen to 
instruction on such matters. She was never 
adorned with gold wrought into artistic forms 
of surpassing beauty, nor flaxen tresses, fully 
or partially displayed, nor spiral curls, nor dis- 
honouring designs of men who construct erec- 
tions on the honourable head, nor costly folds 
of flowing and transparent robes, nor graces of 
brilliant stones, which color the neighbouring 
air, and cast a glow upon the form; nor the 
arts and witcheries of the painter, nor that 
cheap beauty of the infernal creator who works 
against the Divine, hiding with his treacherous 
pigments the creation of God, and putting it 
to shame with his honour, and setting before 
eager eyes the imitation of an harlot instead 
of the form of God, so that this bastard beauty 
may steal away that image which should be 
kept for God and for the world tocome. But 
though she was aware of the many and various 
external ornaments of women, yet none of them 
was more precious to her than her own char- 
acter, and the brilliancy stored up within. 
One red tint was dear to her, the blush of 
modesty ; one white one, the sign of temper- 
ance: but pigments and pencillings, and living 
pictures, and flowing lines of beauty, she left 
to women of the stage and of the streets, and 
to all who think it a shame and a reproach to 
be ashamed. 

tr. Enough of such topics. Of her prud- 
ence and piety no adequate account can be 
given, nor many examples found besides those 
of her natural and spiritual parents, who were 
her only models, and of whose virtue she in 
ho wise fell short, with this single exception 
most readily admitted, that they, as she both 
knew and acknowledged, were the source of 
her goodness, and the root of her own illum- 
ination. What could be keener than the in- 
tellect of her who was recognized as a common 
adviser not only by those of her family, those 
of the same people and of the one fold, but 
even by all men round about, who treated her 
counsels and advice as a law not to be broken ? 
What more sagacious than her words? What 
more prudent than her silence? Having men- 
tioned silence, I will proceed to that which 
was most characteristic of her, most becoming 
to women, and most serviceable to these times. 
Who had a fuller knowledge of the things of 
God, both from the Divine oracles, and from 
her own understanding? But who was less 

ON His SISTER GORGONER: 

241 

| ready to speak, confining herself within the due 
_ limits of women? Moreover, as was the boun- 
den duty of a woman who has learned true 
piety, and that which is the only honourable 
object of insatiate desire, who, as she, adorned 
; temples with offerings, both others and_ this 
one, which will hardly, now she is gone, be 
so adorned again? Or rather, who so pre- 
sented herself to God as a living temple ? 
Who again paid such honor to Priests, espe- 
cially to him who was her fellow soldier and 
teacher of piety, whose are the good seeds, 
and the pair of children consecrated to God. 
12. Who opened her house to tnose who 
live according to God with a more graceful 
and bountiful welcome ? And, which is greater 
than this, who bade them welcome with such 
modesty and godly greetings? Further, who 
showed a mind more unmoved in sufferings ? 
Whose soul was more sympathetic to those in 
trouble? Whose hand more liberal to those in 
want? Ishould not hesitate to honour her with 
the words of Job: Her door was opened to 

all comers ; the stranger did not lodge in the 
street. She was eyes to the blind, feet to the 
lame, a mother to the orphan.@ Why should 
I say more of her compassion to widows, than 
that its fruit which she obtained was, never to 
be called a widow herself? Her house was a 
common abode to all the needy of her family ; 
and her goods no less common to all in need 
than their own belonged to each. She hath 
dispersed abroad and given to the poor,® and 
according to the infallible truth of the Gospel, 
she laid up much store in the wine-presses 
aboye, and oftentimes entertained Christ. in 
the person of those whose benefactress she was. 
And, best of all, there was in her no unreal 
profession, but in secret she cultivated piety 
before Him who seeth secret things. Every- 
thing she rescued from the ruler of this world, 
everything she transferred to the safe garners. 
Nothing did she leave behind to earth, save 
her body. She bartered everything for the 
hopes above: the sole wealth she left to her 
children was the imitation of her example, and 
emulation of her merits. 

13. But amid these tokens of incredible 
magnanimity, she did not surrender her body 
to luxury, and unrestrained pleasures of the 

appetite, that raging and_ tearing dog, as 
though presuming upon her acts of benevo- 
lence, as most men do, who redeem their lux- 
ury by compassion to the poor, and instead of 
healing evil with good, receive evil as a recom- 
pense for their good deeds. Nor did she, while 

he JODERNING TICES ANAT, 32, Beseexites. 

“~+F~— 

subduing her dust * by fasting, leave to another 
the medicine of hard lying; nor, while she 
found this of spiritual service, was she less re- 
strained in sleep than anyone else ; nor, while 
regulating her life on this point as if freed from 
the body, did she lie upon the ground, when 
others were passing the night erect, as the most 
mortified men struggle to do. Nay in this 
respect she was seen to surpass not only women, 
but the most devoted of men, by her intelli- 
gent chanting of the psalter, her converse with, 
and unfolding and apposite recollection of, 
the Divine oracles, her bending of her knees 
which had grown hard and almost taken root 

with contrite heart and spirit of lowliness, her 
prayer rising heavenward, her mind freed from 
vandering in rapture ; in all these, or in any 
one of them, is there man or woman who can 
boast of having surpassed her? Besides, it is 
a great thing to say, but it is true, that while 
she was zealous in her endeavour atter some 
points of excellence, of others she was the par- 
agon : of some she was the discoverer, in others 
she excelled. And if in some single particular 
she was rivalled, her superiority consists in her 
complete grasp of all. Such was her success 
in all points, as none else attained even in a 
moderate degree in one; to such perfection did 
she attain in each particular, that any one might 
of itself have supplied the place of all. 

14. O untended body, and squalid garments, 
whose only flower is virtue ! 
to the body, when reduced almost to an im- 
material state through lack of food ; or rather, 
when the body had been mortified by force, 
even before dissolution, that the soul might at- 
tain to freedom, and escape the entanglements 
of the senses! O nights of vigil, and psal- 
mody, and standing which lasts from one day 
to another! O David, whose strains never 
seem tedious to faithful souls! O tender 
limbs, flung upon the earth and, contrary to 
nature, growing hard! O fountains of tears, 
sowing in affliction that they might reap in 
joy. O cry in the night, piercing the clouds 
and reaching unto Him that dwelleth in the 
heavens! O fervour of spirit, waxing bold in 
prayerful longings against the dogs of night, 
and frosts and rain, and thunders, and hail, 
and darkness! O nature of woman oyercom- 
ing that of man in the common struggle for 
salvation, and demonstrating that the distinc- 
tion between male and female is one of body 
not of soul! O Baptismal purity, O soul, in 
the pure chamber of thy body, the bride of 

' Christ ! 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

O bitter eating! O Eve mother of 
our race and of our sin! O subtle serpent, 
and death, overcome by her self-discipline ! 
O self-emptying of Christ, and form of a ser- 
vant, and sufferings, honoured by her morti- 
fication ! 

15. Oh! how am I to count up all her 
traits, or pass over most of them without in- 
jury to those who know them not? Here 
however it is right to subjoin the rewards of her 
piety, for indeed I take it that you, who knew 

her life well, have long been eager and desir- 

ous to find in my speech not only things 

present, or her joys yonder, beyond the con- 
in the ground, her tears to cleanse her stains — 

belief was corrected : 
O soul, clinging 

~upon her here: 

ception and hearing and sight of man, but also 
those which the righteous Rewarder bestowed 
a matter which often tends 
to the edification of unbelievers, who from small 

things attain to faith in those which are great, 

and from things which are seen to those which 
are not seen. I will mention then some facts 
which are generally notorious, others which 
have been from most men kept secret ; and 
that because her Christian principle made a 
point of not making a display of her [Divine] 
favours. You know how her maddened mules 
ran away with her carriage, and unfortunately 
overturned it, how horribly she was dragged 
along, and seriously injured, to the scandal of 
unbelievers at the permission of such accidents 
to the righteous, and how quickly their un- 
for, all crushed and 
bruised as she was, in bones and limbs, alike 
in those exposed and in those out of sight, she 
would have none of any physician, except 
Him Who had permitted it; both because she 
shrunk from the inspection and the hands of 
men, preserving, even in suffering, her mod- 
esty, and also awaiting her justification from 
Him Who allowed this to happen, so that she 
owed her preservation to none other than to 
Him: with the result that men were no less 
struck by her unhoped-for recovery than by 
her misfortune, and concluded that the tragedy 
had happened for her glorification through 
sufferings, the suffering being human, the re- 
covery superhuman, and giving a lesson to 
those who come after, exhibiting in a high 
degree faith in the midst of suffering, and 
patience under calamity, but in a still higher 
degree the kindness of God to them that are 
such as she. For to the beautiful promise to 
the righteous ‘ though he fall, he shall not be 
utterly broken,’’? has been added one more 
recent, ‘* though he be utterly broken, he shall 
speedily be raised up and glorified.’?® — For if 

a /ler dust, icc. her body. B Ps. cxxvi, 5. 

a Ps, xxxvii. 24. B Ib. exlvi. 8 (LXX.), 

her misfortune was unreasonable, her recov- 

ery was extraordinary, so that health soon 
stole away the injury, and the cure became 
more celebrated than the blow. 

16, O remarkable and wonderful disaster ! 
© injury more noble than security! O 
prophecy, ‘‘He hath smitten, and He will 

Uy thio oto lik GORGONT A. a 

bind us up, and revive us, and after three | 

days He will raise us up,’’ * portending indeed, 
as it did, a greater and more sublime event, 
yet no less applicable to Gorgonia’s sufferings ! 
‘This then, notorious to all, even to those afar 

off, jor the wonder spread to all, and the les-— 
son was stored up in the tongues and ears 

of all, with the other wonderful works and 
powers of God. But the following incident, 
hitherto unknown and concealed from most 

| 

men by the Christian principle I spoke of, and _ 

her pious shrinking from vanity and display, 
dost thou bid me tell, O best ® and most per- 
fect of shepherds, pastor of this holy sheep, 
and dost thou further give thy assent to it, 
since to us alone has this secret been entrusted, 
and we were mutual witnesses of the marvel, 
or are we still to keep our faith to her who is 
gone ? 

ual strength. 

Yet Ido think, that as that was the | 

time to be silent, this is the time to manifest | 
it, not only for the glory of God, but also | 

for the consolation of those in affliction. 

17. She was sick in body, and dangerously 
ill of an extraordinary and malignant disease, 
her whole frame was incessantly fevered, her 
blood at one time agitated and boiling, then 
curdling with coma, incredible pallor, and 

paralysis of mind and limbs: and this not at | 

long intervals, but sometimes very frequently. 
Its virulence seemed beyond human aid; the 
skill of physicians, who carefully examined 
the case, both singly and in consultation, was 
of no avail; nor the tears of her parents, 
which often have great power, nor public sup- 
plications and intercessions, in which all the 
people joined as earnestly as if for their own 
preservation: for her safety was the safety of 
all, as, on the contrary, her suffering and sick- 
ness was a common misfortune. 

18. What then did this great soul, worthy _ 

offspring of the greatest, and what was the med- 

icine for her disorder, for we have now come | 

to the great secret? 
aid, she betook herself to the Physician of all, 
and awaiting the silent hours of night, during 
a slight intermission of the disease, she ap- 
proached the altar with faith, and, calling 

a Hos. vi. 1, 2. 

B O best, Ec, Vaustinus, bishop of Tconitum, must have been 
present, and S. Gregory, having asked his permission to relate 
the incident, looks towards him awaiting some sign of his assent. 

Despairing of all other | 

: i 
TJ 

upon Him Who is honoured thereon, with a 
mighty cry, and every kind of invocation, 
calling to mind all His former works of power, 
and well she knew those both of ancient and 
of later days, at last she ventured on an act 
of pious and splendid effrontery ; she imitated 
the woman whose fountain of blood was dried 
up by the hem of Christ’s garment. What 
did she do? Resting her head with another 
cry upon the altar, and with a wealth of tears, 
as she who once bedewed the feet of Christ, 6 
and declaring that she would not loose her 
hold until she was made whole, she then ap- 
plied her medicine to her whole body, viz., 
such a portion of the antitypes? of the Precious 
Body and Blood as she treasured in her hand, 
mingling therewith her tears, and, O the won- 
der, she went away feeling at once that she 
was saved, and with the lightness of health in 
body, soul, and mind, having received, as the 
reward of her hope, that which she hoped for, 
and having gained bodily by means of spirit- 
Great though these things be, 
they are not untrue. Believe them all of you, 
whether sick or sound, that ye may cither 
keep or regain your health. And that my 
story is no mere boastfulness is plain from the 
silence in which she kept, while alive, what I 
have revealed. Nor should I now have pub- 
lished it, be well assured, had I not feared 
that so great a marvel would have been utter- 
ly hidden from the faithful and unbelieving 

| of these and later days. 

tg. Such was her life. Most of its details 
I have left untold, lest my speech should grow 
to undue proportions, and lest I should seem 
to be too greedy for her fair fame: but perhaps 
we should be wronging her holy and _illus- 
trious death, did we not mention some of its 
excellences ; especially as she so longed for 
and desired it. Iwill do so therefore, as con- 
cisely as I can. She longed for her dissolu- 
tion, for indeed she had great boldness to- 
wards Him who called her, and preferred to be 
with Christ, beyond all things on earth.6 And 
there is none of the most amorous and unre- 
strained, who has such love for his body, as 
she had to fling away these fetters, and escape 
from the mire in which we spend our lives, 
and to associate in purity with Him Who is 
Fair, and entirely to hold her Beloved, Who is 
J will even say it, her Lover, by Whose rays, 
feeble though they now are, we are enlight- 
ened, and Whom, though separated from 
Him, we are able to know. Nor did she 
fail even of this desire, divine and sublime 

8 S. Luke vil. 38. 
6 Phil. i. 23, 

aS. Matt. ix. 20. f 
y Antityf~es, ie. the reserved Sacrament, 

244 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

though it was, and, what is still greater, 
she had a foretaste of His Beauty through 
her forecast and constant watching. Her 
only sleep transferred her to exceeding joys, 
and her one vision embraced her departure at 
the foreappoinied time, having been made 
aware of this day, so that according to the de- 
cision of God she might be prepared and yet 
not disturbed. 

20. She had recently obtained the blessing 
of cleansing and perfection, which we have all 
received from God as a common gift and 
foundation of our vez life. Or rather all her 
life was acleansing and perfecting: and while 
she received regeneration from the Holy 
Spirit, its security was hers by virtue of her for- 
mer life. And in her case almost alone, I will 
yenture to say, the mystery was a seal rather 
than a gift of grace. And when her husband’s 
perfection was her one remaining desire (and 
if you wish me briefly to describe the man, 
I do not know what more to say of him than 
that he was her husband) in order that she 
might be consecrated to God in her whole 
body, and not depart half-perfected, or leave 
behind her imperfect anything that was hers ; 
she did not even fail of this petition, from 
Him Who fulfils the desire of them that fear 
Him,® and accomplishes their requests. 

21. And now when she had all things to 
her mind, and nothing was lacking of her de- 
sires, and the appointed time drew nigh, be- 
ing thus prepared for death and departure, 
she fulfilled the law which prevails in such 
matters, and took to her bed. After many 
injunctions to her husband, her children, and 
her friends, as was to be expected from one 
who was full of conjugal, maternal, and broth- 
erly love, and after making her last day a day 
of solemn festival with brilliant discourse 
upon the things above, she fell asleep, full 
not of the days of man, for which she had no 
desire, knowing them to be evil for her, and 
mainly occupied with our dust and wander- 
ings, but more exceedingly full of the days of 
God, than I imagine any one even of those 
who have departed in a wealth of hoary hairs, 
and have numbered many terms of years. 
‘Thus she was set free, or, it is better to say, 
taken to God, or flew away, or changed her 
abode, or anticipated by a little the departure 
of her body. 

22. Yet what was I on the point of omit- 
ting? But perhaps thou, who art her spirit- 
ual father, wouldst not have allowed me, and 
hast carefully concealed the wonder, and 

a devrépor, lit. ‘ second.” Bes cxly.10, 

made it known to me. It is a great point for 
her distinction, and in our memory of her 
virtue, and regret for her departure. But 
trembling and tears have seized upon me, at 
the recollection of the wonder. She was just 
passing away, and at her last breath, sur- 
rounded by a group of relatives and friends 
performing the last offices of kindness, while 
her aged mother bent over her, with her soul 
conyulsed with envy of her departure, anguish 
and affection being blended in the minds of 
all. Some longed to hear some burning word 
to be branded in their recollection ; others 
were eager to speak, yet no one dared ; for 
tears were mute and the pangs of grief uncon- 
soled, since it seemed sacrilegious, to think 
that mourning could be an honour to one who 
was thus passing away. So there was solemn 
silence, as if her death had been a religious 
ceremony. ‘There she lay, to all appearance, 
breathless, motionless, speechless ; the stillness 
of her body seemed paralysis, as though the 
organs of speech were dead, after that which 
could move them was gone. But as her pas- 
tor, who in this wonderful scene, was carefully 
watching her, perceived that her lips were 
gently moving, and placed his ear to them, 
which his disposition and sympathy embold- 
ened him to do,—but do you expound the 
meaning of this mysterious calm, for no one 
can disbelieve it on your word! Under her 
breath she was repeating a psalm—the last 
words of a psalm—to say the truth, a testi- 
mony to the boldness with which she was de- 
parting, and blessed is he who can fall asleep 
with these words, ‘‘I will lay me down in 
peace, and take my rest.’”’?* ‘Thus wert thou 
singing, fairest of women, and thus it fell out 
unto thee; and the song became a reality, 
and attended on thy departure as a memorial 
of thee, who hast entered upon sweet peace 
after suffering, and received (over and above 
the rest which comes to all), that sleep which 
is due to the beloved,® as befitted one who 
lived and died amid the words of piety. 

23. Better, I know well, and far more 
precious than eye can see, is thy present lot, 
the song of them that keep holy-day,y the 
throng of angels, the heavenly host, the vision 
of glory, and that splendour, pure and perfect 
beyond all other, of the Trinity Most High, 
no longer beyond the ken of the captive mind, 
dissipated by the senses, but entirely contem- 
plated and possessed by the undivided mind, 
and flashing upon our souls with the whole 
light of Godhead: Mayest thou enjoy to the 

a Ps, iv. 8 Bib, cxxvil. 2 y Ib, xlii. 4. 

2 ee 

248 

full all those things whose crumbs thou didst, 
while still upon earth, possess through the 
reality of thine inclination towards them. 
And if thou takest any account of our affairs, 
and holy souls receive from God this privi- 
Iege, do thou accept these words of mine, in 
place of, and in preference to many panegy- 
rics, which I have bestowed upon Cesarius be- 
fore thee, and upon thee after him—since I 
have been preserved to pronounce panegyrics 
uponimy brethren. If any one will, after you, 
pay me the like honour, I cannot say. Yet 
may my only honour be that which is in God, 
and may my pilgrimage and my home be in 
Christ Jesus our Lord, to Whom, with the 
Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever. 
Amen. 

ORATION XII. 

To wis FATHER, WHEN HE HAD ENTRUSTED 
ro Him THE CARE OF THE CHURCH OF 
NAZIANZUS. 

Tus Oration was delivered A.D. 372. 
‘lwo years earlier Valens had divided Cappado- 
cia into two provinces. Anthimus, Bishop 
of ‘Tyana, asserting that the ecclesiastical 
provinces were regulated by those of the em- 
pire, claimed metropolitical rights over the 
churches of Cappadocia Secunda, in opposi- 
tion to S. Basil, who had hitherto been met- 
ropolitan of the undivided province. S. Basil, 
with the intention of vindicating the perma- 
nence of his former rights, created a new see at 
Sasima, on the borders of the two provinces, 
and with great difficulty prevailed upon S. 
Gregory to receive consecration as its first 
Bishop. S$. Gregory, who had ‘ bent his 
neck, but not his will,’’? * was for a long time 
reluctant to enter upon his Episcopal duties, 
and at last was prevailed upon by 5. Gregory 
of Nyssa, S. Basil’s brother, to make an at- 
tempt to do so. When, however, he found 
that Anthimus was prepared to bar his en- 
trance by force of arms, he returned home, 
definitely resigned his see, and once more 
betook himself to the life of solitude which he 
so dearly loved. Recalled hence, he con- 
sented,® at his father’s earnest entreaty, to un- 
dertake provisionally the duties of Bishop- 
coadjutor of Nazianzus: and pronounced this 
short discourse on the occasion of his installa- 
tion. 

t. 1 opened my mouth, and drew in the 
Spirit,Y and I give myself and my all to the 

a Carmina Hist., xi., 487. : 
B Ib., 492-525. yy. BS:-CXIx, Tks 

Spirit, my action and speech, my inaction and 
silence, only let Him hold me and guide me, 
and move both hand and mind and tongue 
whither it isright, and He wills: and restrain 
them as it is right and expedient. [am an 
instrument of God, arational instrument, an 
instrument tuned and struck by that skilful 
artist, the Spirit. Yesterday His work in me 
was silence. I mused on abstinence from 
speech. Does He strike upon my mind to- 
day 2? My speech shall be heard, and I will 
muse on utterance. I am neither so talkative, 
as to desire to speak, when He is bent on si- 
lence; nor so reserved and ignorant as to 
set a watch before my lips* when it is the time 
to speak: but I open and close my door at 
the will of that Mind and Word and Spirit, 
Who is One kindred Deity. 

2. I will speak then, since Iam so bidden. 
And I will speak both to the good shepherd 
here, and to you, his holy flock, as I think is 
best both for me to speak, and for you to hear 
to-day. Why is it that you have begged for 
one to share your shepherd’s toil? For my 
speech shall begin with you, O dear and hon- 
oured head, worthy of that of Aaron, down 
which runs that spiritual and priestly oint- 
ment upon his beard and clothing.6 Why is it 
that, while yet able to stablish and guide 
many, and actually guiding them in the power 
of the Spirit, you support yourself with a staff 
and prop in your spiritual works? Is it be- 
cause you have heard and know that even 
with the illustrious Azron were anointed Ele- 
azar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron ?Y For I 
pass over Nadab and Abihu,® lest the allusion 
be ill-omened: and Moses during his lifetime 
appoints Joshua in his stead, as lawgiver and 
general over those who were pressing on to 
the land of promise? ‘The office of Aaron 
and Hur, supporting the hands of Moses on 
the mount where Amalek was warred down ¢ by 
the Cross, prefigured and typified long before, 
I feel willing to pass by, as not very suitable 
or applicable to us: for Moses did not choose 
them to share his work as lawgiver, but as 
helpers in his prayer and supports for the 
weariness of his hands. 

3. What is it then that ails you? What is 
your weakness ? Is it physical? Iam ready 
to sustain you, yea I have sustained, and been 
sustained, like Jacob of old, by your fatherly 
blessings.7 Is it spiritual? Who is stronger, 
and more fervent, especially now, when the 

fia) loferoo Sahil pom y Lev. viii. 2. 
€ Exod. xvits 12. 
6 The Cross. Thestretching out of Moses’ hands was a type of 
the outstretched hands of our Lord Jesus, and His ‘tintercession 
for the transgressors,”’ upon the Cross. n Gen, xxvii. 28, 

(iPad APT op 4 be 
Olbax: 1. 

so many barriers which interfere with, and 
dim the brilliancy of a light? For these 
powers are wont, for the most part, to wage 
war upon and oppose one another, while the 
body’s health is purchased by the sickness of 

ward when pleasures are stilled and fade away 
along with the body. But, wonderful as your 
simplicity and nobility have seemed to me be- 

cially in times like these, that your spirit will 
be considered a pretext, and that most men 
will suppose, in spite of our spiritual profes- 
sions, that we are undertaking this from car- 
nal motives. 
office to be looked upon as great and princely, 
and accompanied with considerable enjoy- 
ment, even though a man have the charge and 
rule over a more slender flock than this, and 
one which affords more troubles than pleas- 
ures. ‘Thus far of your simplicity, or parental 
preference, if it be so, which makes you 
neither admit yourself, nor readily suspect 
in others anything disgraceful; for a mind 
hardly roused to evil, is slow to suspect evil. 
My second duty is briefly to address this 
people of yours, or now even of mine. 

4. I have been overpowered, my friends 
and brethren, for I will now, though I did 
not at the time, ask for your aid. I have 
been overpowered by the old age of my father, 

my friend. So, help me, each of you who 
can, and stretch out a hand to me who am 
pressed down and torn asunder by regret and 
enthusiasm. ‘The one suggests flights, moun- 
tains and deserts, and calm of soul and body, 
and that the mind should retire into itself, 
and recall its powers from sensible things, in 
order to hold pure communion with God, and 
be clearly illumined by the flashing rays of 
the Spirit, with no admixture or disturbance 
of the divine light by anything earthly or 
clouded, until we come to the source of the 

Tor most men have made® the | 

| 

of a whole church preferable to the progress 

_ of a single soul: and therefore, I ought not to 
look only on my own interest, but also on that 
' of others.¢ 
the soul, and the soul flourishes and looks up- | 

For Christ also likewise, when it 
was possible for him to abide in His own 
honour and deity, not only so far emptied 

| Himself as to take the form of a slave,® but 
_also endured the cross, despising the shame,y 
fore, how is it that you have no fear, espe- | 

_sin, and by death slay death.é 

that he might by His own sufferings destroy 
The former 

| . . . ~ . 
are the imaginings of desire, the latter the 

| e eS ae 
| teachings of the Spirit. 

close to a mighty and high soaring eagle. 

And I, standing imid- 
way between the desire and the Spirit, and 
not knowing to which of the two I should 
rather yield, will impart to you what secms 
to me the best and safest course, that you may 
test it with me and take part in my design. 
5. It seemed to me to be best and least 
dangerous to take a middle course between de- 
sire and fear, and to yield in part to desire, in 
part to the Spirit: and that this would be the 
case, if I neither altogether evaded the office, 
and so refused the grace, which would be dan- 
gerous, nor yet assumed a burden beyond my 
powers, for it is a heavy one. The former in- 
deed is suited to the person of another, the lat- 
ter to another’s power, or rather to undertake 
both would be madness. But piety and safety 
would alike advise me to proportion the office 

_ to my power, and as is the case with food, to 
and, to use moderate terms, the kindliness of 

accept that which is within my power and re- 
fuse what is beyond it, for health is gained for 
the body, and tranquillity for the soul, by such 
a course of moderation. Therefore I now 
consent to share in the cares of my excellent 
father, like an eaglet, not quite vainly flying 
But 

_ hereafter I will offer my wing to the Spirit to 
| be borne whither, and as, He wills: no one 

effulgence which we enjoy here, and regret | 
and desire are alike stayed, when our mirrors 8 © 

pass away in the light of truth. 
wills that I should come forward, and bear 
fruit for the common good, and be helped by 
helping others, and publish the Divine light, 
and bring to God a people for His own pos- 
session, a holy nation, a royal priesthood,” and 
His image cleansed in many souls. And this, 

The other | 

shall force or drag me in any direction, con- 
trary to His counsel. For sweet it is to inherit 
a father’s toils, and this flock is more familiar 
than a strange and foreign one; I would even 
add, more precious in the sight of God, unless 
the spell of affection deceives me, and the force 
of habit robs me of perception: nor is there 
any more useful or safer course than that will- 

} os “a1° . . 
ing rulers should rule willing subjects: since 
it is our practice not to lead by force, or by 

because, as a park is better than and _ prefera- | 

ble to a tree, the whole heaven with its orna- 

@ Aide, by the manner in which they have sought for and ex- 
ercised it, Ba-Cor, xvi. 12. 97 8 fol Toy 

compulsion, but by good will. For this would 
not hold together even another form of goy- 
ernment, since that which is held in by force 
is wont, when opportunity offers, to strike 
for freedom: but freedom of will more than 

a Phil, ii, 4. B Ib. ii. 7. y Heb, xii, 2, 6 Ib. ii t4, 

GON EES 

iy ewN SD 

ite gets Old TON Oe 247 

anything else it is, which holds together our— 
I will not call it rule, but—tutorship. 
the mystery 
are willing, not to those who are overpowered. 

6. ‘This is my speech to you, my good men, 

Kor | 
of godliness * belongs to those who © 
-aspeech which is in subjection to the Spir- 

| 

| it? 

uttered in simplicity and with all good will, and | 

this is the secret of my mind. 
victory rest with that which will be for the prof- 
it of both you and me, under the Spirit’s guid- 
ance of our affairs, (for our discourse comes 
back again to the same point,)® to Whom we 
have given ourselves, and the head anointed 
with the oil of perfection, in the Almighty 
Father, and the Only-begotten Son, and the 
Holy Spirit, Who is God. For how long 
shall we hide Y the lamp under the bushel,® and 
withhold from others the full knowledge of the 
Godhead, when it ought to be now put upon 
the lampstand and give light to all churches 
and souls and to the whole fulness of the world, 
no longer by means of metaphors, or intellect- 
ual sketches, but by distinct declaration ? 
And this indeed is a most perfect setting forth 
of Theology to those who have been deemed 
worthy of this grace in Christ Jesus Himself, 

our Lord, to Whom be glory, honour, and 
power for ever. Amen. 

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XVI. 

On uls FATHER’S SILENCE, BECAUSE OF THE 
PLAGUE OF HAIL. 

THis Oration belongs to the year A.D. 373. 
A series of disasters had befallen the people of 
Nazianzus. A deadly cattle plague, which had 
devastated their herds, had been followed by a 
prolonged drought, and now their just ripened 
crops had been ruined by a storm of rain and 
hail. ‘The people flocked to the church, and 
finding S. Gregory the elder so overwhelmed 
by his sense of these terrible misfortunes that 
he was unable to address them, implored 
his coadjutor to enter the pulpit. The occa- 
sion gave no time for preparation, so 5. Greg- 
ory poured out his feelings in a discourse which 
was in the fullest sense of the words cx ¢empore. 
Its present form, however, as Benoit suggests, 
may be due to a later polishing of notes taken 
down at the time of delivery. 

1. Why do you infringe upon the ap- 
ai Tim. iii. 16. 
B Lhe same porut, i.e., from which it started, § 1. 
y 7/rde, etc. S. Gregory here alludes to the economy ” which 

refrained from distinctly declaring the Divinity of the Lloly Ghost. 
Cf. Or. xliii., 68. This declaration of his was afterwards com- 
mented on by his audience and others, cf. Epist. 58, in which his 
mode of teaching is contrasted with that of S. Basil. 

Crom Mattoveshss 

And may the , 

_dier to the spiritual combat. 

_ sinks into the mind, 

proved order of things? Why would you 
do violence to a tongue which is under obli- 
gation to the law? Why do you challenge 

Why, when you have excused the 
head, have you hastened to the feet? Why 
do you pass by Aaron® and urge forward 
Eleazar ? I cannot allow the fountain to be 
dammed up, while the rivulet runs its course ; 
the sun to be hidden, while the star shines 
forth ; hoar hairs to be in retirement, while 
youth lays down the law; wisdom to be si- 
lent, while inexperience speaks with assur- 
ance. A heavy rain is not always more usc- 
ful than a gentle shower. Nay, indeed, if it 
be too violent, it sweeps away the earth, and 
increases the proportion of the farmer’s loss: 
while a gentle fall, which sinks deep, en- 
riches the soil, benefits the tiller and makes 
the corn grow toa fine crop. So the fluent 
speech is not more profitable than the wise. 
For the one, though it perhaps gave a slight 
pleasure, passes away, and is dispersed as 
soon, and with as little effect, as the air on 
which it struck, though it charms with its 
eloquence the greedy ear. But the other 
and opening wide its 
mouth, fills it® with the Spirit, and, showing 
itself nobler than its origin, produces a rich 
harvest by a few syllables. 

2. [have not yet alluded to the true and 
first wisdom, for which our wonderful hus- 
bandman and shepherd is conspicuous. ‘The 
first wisdom is a life worthy of praise, and 
kept pure for God, or being purified for Him 
Who is all-pure and all-luminous, Who de- 
mands of us, as His only sacrifice, purifica- 
tion—that is, a contrite heart and the sacri- 
fice of praise,y and a new creation in Christ,é 
and the new man,* and the like, as the Scrip- 
ture loves to call it. The first wisdom is to 
despise that wisdom which consists of language 
and figures of speech, and spurious and un- 
necessary embellishments. Be it mine to 
speak five words with my understanding in 
the church, rather than ten thousand words 
in a tongue, and with the unmeaning voice 
of a trumpet,” which docs not rouse my sol- 
This is the wis- 
dom which [ praise, which I welcome. By 
this the ignoble have won renown, and the 
despised have attained the highest honours. 
By this acrew of fishermen have taken the 
whole world in the meshes of the Gospel-net, 

a Aaron, S. Gregory the elder. Lleazar, S, Gregory Na- 
zianzen. 

B Ps, Ixxxi. 11. y Ib. 1. 23: Li. 19. Nica ee at be 

¢ Eph, iv, 24. ¢ x Cor, xiv. 10, y lb. xiv. & 

and overcome by a word finished and cut 
short ¢ the wisdom that comes to naught.& I 

count. not wise the man who is “clever in 
words, nor him who is of a ready tongue, but 

unstable and undisciplined in soul, like the 
tombs which, fair and beautiful as they are 
outwardly, are fetid with corpses within,Y and 
full of manifold ill-savours ;) but him who 
speaks Dut little of virtue, yet gives many 
examples of it in his practice, and proves 
the trustworthiness of his language by his 
life. 

3. Fairer inmy eyes, is the beauty which 
we can gaze upon than that which is painted 
in words: of more value the wealth which 
our hands can hold, than that which is imag- 
ined in our dreams ; and more real the wis- 
dom of which we are convinced by deeds, 
than that which is set forth in splendid lan- 
guage. Tor ‘*a good understanding,’’ he 
saith, ‘* have all they that do thereafter,’’ § not 
they who proclaimit. Time is the best touch- 
stone of this wisdom, and ‘the hoary head 
is a crown of glory.’’€ For if, as it seems to 
me as well as to Solomon, we must ‘ judge 
none blessed before his death,’’ § and it is un- 
certain ‘* what a day may bring forth,’’ 7 since 
our life here below has many turnings, and the 
body of our humiliation ® is ever rising, falling 
and changing; surely he, who without fault 
has almost drained the cup of life, and nearly 
reached the haven of the common sea of ex- 
istence is more secure, and therefore more en- 
viable, than one who has yet a long voyage 
before him. 

4. Do not thou, therefore, restrain a tongue 
whose noble utterances and fruits have been 
many, which has begotten many children of 
righteousness—yea, lift up thine eyes round 
about and see,t how many are its sons, and 
what are its treasures; even this whole peo- 
ple, whom thou hast begotten in Christ 
through the Gospel.* Grudge not to us those 
words which are excellent rather than many, 
and do not yet give us a foretaste of our im- 
pending loss.4 Speak in words which, if few, 
are dear and most sweet to me, which, if 
scarcely audible, are perceived from their 
spiritual cry, as God heard the silence of 
Moses, and said to him when interceding 
mentally, ‘Why criest thou unto Me?’ 4 
Comfort this people, I pray thee, I, who 
vas thy nursling, and have since been made 

Rom. ix. 28. 
y S. Matt. xxiii. 
GS Becles. Xi. 28, 
hh ¢1saiy Slixcers. 

A 1 OSHA. , the death of his father, 
not be : long delayed, 

o saints, o (LR 3 

6 air ii, 6. 

yn © 
N 

6 Ps. exi. 10. 

4 Prov, scevn. &. 
Ka-COK. A. 15s 
which, from his age, could 
p Exod, xiv. 15. 

danse: NAZIANZEN 

bee, and now even Chief Pastor. Give a 
lesson, to me in the Pastor’s art, to this pco- 
ple of obedience. — Discourse awhile on our 
present heavy blow, about the just judgments 

of God, whether we grasp their meaning, or 
are ignorant of their great ree ad How 
again ** mercy is put in the balance,’’ # as holy 

Isaiah declares, for goodness is not without 
discernment, as the first labourers in the 
vineyard Y fancied, because they could not 
perceive any distinction between those who 
were paid alike: and how anger, which is 
called ** the cup in the hand of the sen FE ° 
and ‘** the cup of falling which is drained,”’ 
is In proportion to transgressions, even com 
He abates to all somewhat of what is their 
due, and dilutes with compassion the un- 
mixed draught of His wrath. For He in- 
clines from severity to indulgence towards 
those who accept chastisement with fear, and 
who after a slight affliction conceive and are 
in pain with conversion, and bring forth $ the 
perfect spirit of salvation ; but nevertheless he 
reserves the dregs,” the last drop of His anger, 
that He may pour it out entire upon those 
who, instead of being healed by His kind- 
ness, grow obdurate, like the hard-hearted 
Pharaoh,® that bitter taskmaster, who is set 
forth as an example of the power‘ of God 
over the ungodly. 

5. Tell us whence come such blows and 
scourges, and what account we can give of 
them. Is it some disordered and irregular 
motion or some unguided current, some un- 
reason of the universe, as though there were no 
Ruler of the world, which is therefore borne 
along by chance, as is the doctrine of the fool- 
ishly wise, who are themselves borne along at 
random by the disorderly spirit of darkness ? 
Or are the disturbances and changes of the 
universe, (which was originally constituted, 
blended, bound together, and set in motion in 
aharmony known only to Him Who gave it 
motion, ) directed by reason and order under 
the guidance of the reins of Providence ? 
Whence come famines and tornadoes and hail- 
storms, our present warning blow? Whence 
pestilences, diseases, earthquakes, tidal waves, 
and fearful things in the heavens? And how 
is the creation, once ordered for the enjoy- 
ment of men, their common and equal de- 
light, changed for the punishment of the un- 
godly, in order that we may be chastised 
through that for which, when honoured with 
it, we did not give thanks, and recognise in 

hss Koel. Os 
6 Ps. Ixxv. 9. 
n-Psi xxv 10: 

Bus axxvallvdgen one). 
evlsar.hi- 17, (EXKoX.), 
@ Exod, v. 6.; vil. 22. 

yo Matt xxe 12, 
¢ Ib. xxvi. 18, 
CROM, ix. 17, 

our sufferings that power which we did not 
recognise in our benefits? How is it that 
some receive at the Lord’s hand double for 
their sins,t and the measure of their wicked- 
ness is doubly filled up, as in the correction 
of Israel, while the sins of others are done 
away by a sevenfold) recompense into their 
bosom ?8 What is the measure of the Am- 
orites that is not yet full?y And _ how is 
the sinner either let go, or chastised again, 
let go perhaps, because reserved for the other 
world, chastised, because healed thereby in 
this? Under what circumstances again is the 
righteous, when unfortunate, possibly being 
put to the test, or, when prosperous, being 
observed, to see if he be poor in mind or 
not very far superior to visible things, as 
indeed conscience, our interior and unerring 
tribunal, tells us. What is our calamity, 
and what its cause? Is it a test of virtue, 
or a touchstone of wickedness? And is it 
better to bow beneath it as a chastisement, 
even though it be not so, and humble our- 
selves under the mighty hand of God,® or, 
considering it as a trial, to rise superior to it ? 
On these points give us instruction and warn- 
ing, lest we be too much discouraged by our 
present calamity, or fall into the gulf of evil 
and despise it ; for some such feeling is very 
general; but rather that we may bear our ad- 
monition quietly, and not provoke one more 
severe by our insensibility to this. 

6. ‘Terrible is an unfruitful season, and the 
loss of the crops. It could not be otherwise, 
when men are already rejoicing in their hopes, 
and counting on their all but harvested stores. 
Terrible again is an unseasonable harvest, 
when the farmers labour with heavy hearts, 
sitting as it were beside the grave of their 
crops, which the gentle rain nourished, but 
the wild storm has rooted up, whereof the 
mower filleth not his hand, neither he that 
bindeth up the sheaves his bosom,€ nor have 
they obtained the blessing which passers-by 
bestow upon the farmers. Wretched indeed is 
the sight of the ground devastated, cleared, 
and shorn of its ornaments, over which the 
blessed Joel wails in his most tragic picture of 
the desolation of the land, and the scourge of 
famine ; $ while another” prophet wails, as he 
contrasts with its former beauty its final disor- 
der, and thus discourses on the anger of the 
Lord when He smites the land: before him 
is the garden of Eden, behind Him a desolate 

ON. Tis BATHER'S SILENCE. 

249 

wilderness. ‘Terrible indeed these things 
are, and more than terrible, when we are 
grieved only at what is present, and are not 
yet distressed by the feeling of a severer blow : 
since, as in sickness, the suffering which pains 
us from time to time is more distressing than 
that which is not present. But more terrible 
still are those which the treasures? of God’s 
wrath contain, of which God forbid that you 
should make trial ; nor will you, if you fly for 
refuge to the mercies of God, and win over by 
your tears Him Who will have mercy,” and 
avert by your conversion what remains of His 
wrath. As yet, this is gentleness and loving- 
kindness and gentle reproof, and the first ele- 
ments of a scourge to train our tender years : 
as yet, the smoke® of His anger, the prelude of 
His torments; not yet has fallen the flaming 
fire,* the climax of His being moved; not yet 
the kindled coals,$ the final scourge, part of 
which He threatened, when He lifted up the 
other over us, part He held back by force, 
when He brought the other upon us; 
using the threat and the blow alike for our 
instruction, and making a way for His indig- 
nation, in the excess of His goodness ;_ begin- 
ning with what is slight, so that the more 
severe may not be needed; but ready to in- 
struct us by what is greater, if He be forced 
so to do. 

7. I know the glittering sword,” and the 
blade made drunk in heaven, bidden to slay, 
to bring to naught, to make childless, and to 
spare neither flesh, nor marrow, nor bones. I 
know Him, Who, though free from passion, 
meets us like a bear robbed of her whelps, like 
a leopard in the way of the Assyrians,® not only 
those of that day, but if anyone now is an As- 
syrian in wickedness: nor is it possible to 
escape the might and speed of His wrath when 
He watches over our impieties, and His jeal- 
ousy,t which knoweth to devour His adver- 
saries, pursues His enemies to the death. I 
know the emptying, the making void, the 
making waste, the melting of the heart, and 
knocking of the knees together,* such are the 
punishments of the ungodly. I do not dwell 
on the judgments to come, to which indul- 
gence in this world delivers us, as it is better 
to be punished and cleansed now than to be 
transmitted to the torment to come, when it is 
the time of chastisement, not of cleansing. 
For as he who remembers God here is con- 
queror of death (as David # has most excellently 

ican e ak es B Ps. Ixexaxe 125 y Gen. xv. 16. 
Ore et. Ve Os eyRS.-Grxis7s ¢ Joel i. ro. 
9 Another. Father this is a wrong reading, or S. Gregory’s 
memory fails him. ‘The second quotation is also from Joel. 

a Joel ii. 3. BePeutweexcxi 94 5< er lat5 y Hos. vi. 6. 
6 Ps. xviii. 8. e Ib. cv. 32. Ib, Ixxvill. 50. 
y Ezek. xxi. 9. Gigs. Nill. 7,8 ¢ Isai. xxvi. 11 (ILXX.), 
« Hos. viii. 3. A Nahum ui, 10. (eS yic 25 ClO Ow). 

280 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

: | 
sung) so the departed have not in the grave | 
i § 

contession and restoration ; for God has con- 
fined lite and action to this world, and to the 
fture the scrutiny of what has been done. 

S. What shall we do in the day of visita- 
tion.* with which one of the Prophets terrifies 
me, Whether that of the righteous sentence of 
(cod against us, or that upon the mountains 

and hills, of which we have heard, or what- 

ever and whenever it may be, when He will | 

reason with us, and oppose us, and set before | 

us® those bitter accusers, our sins, comparing 
our wrongdoings with our benefits, and strik- 
ing thought with thought, and scrutinising 
action with action, and calling us to account 
for the image’ which has been blurred and 
spoilt by wickedness, till at last He leads us 

upon them with greater brilliancy and purity 
and unites Itself wholly to the whole soul, in 
which solely and beyond all else I take it that 
the kingdom of heaven consists. The others 
among other torments, but above and before 
them all must endure the being outcast from 
God, and the shame of conscience which has 
no limit. But of these anon. 

1o. What are we to do now, my brethren, 
when crushed, cast down, and drunken but 
not with strong drink nor with wine,* which 

excites and obfuscates but for a while, but 
_ with the blow which the Lord has inflicted 

upon us, Who says, And thou, O heart, be 
stirred and shaken, and gives to the despisers 

_ the spirit of sorrow and deep sleep to drink : ¥ 

away self-convicted and self-condemned, no 
longer able to say that we are being unjustly | 

treated 

those who are suffering. 

g. But then what advocate shall we have? 
What pretext? What false excuse? What 
plausible artifice? What device contrary to 

a thought which is able even here | 
sometimes to console in their condemnation | 

the truth will impose upon the court, and rob — 
it of its right judgment, which places in the | 

balance for us all, our entire life, action, word, 
and thought, and weighs against the evil that 
which is better, until that which preponder- 
ates wins the day, and the decision is given in 

favour of the main tendency ; after which there | 
is no appeal, no higher court, no defence on > 

the ground of subsequent conduct, no oil ob- 
tained from the wise virgins, or from them 

that sell, for the lamps going out,® no repent- | 
ance of the rich man wasting away in the | 

flame,€ and begging for repentance for his 
friends, no statute of limitations; but only 
that final and fearful judgment-seat, more just 
even than fearful; or rather more fearful be- 
cause it 1s also just; when the thrones are set 
and the Ancient of days takes His seat,$ and 
the books are opened, and the fiery stream 
comes forth, and the light before Him, and 
the darkness prepared; and they that have 
done good shall go into the resurrection of 
life? now hid in Christ® and to be mani- 
fested hereafter with Him, and they that have 
done evil, into the resurrection of judgment,' 

to which they who have not believed have | 

been condemned already by the word which 
judges them.* Some will be welcomed by 
the unspeakable light and the vision of the 
holy and royal ‘Trinity, Which now shines 

180, so. (Babess a. 
eS. Luk. .xvi. 24. 
O-Col iis 3. 

4 -Gen. 1:20, 49-0 S2 Matt. xxv. 8. 
¢ Dam. Vii.o: 7S. John vy. 20. 
5). John v29. KOON Iles; NIM 48, 

to whom He also says, See, ye despisers, be- 
hold, and wonder and perish?® How shall 
we bear His convictions ; or what reply snall 
we make, when He reproaches us not only with 
the multitude of the benefits for which we 
have continued ungrateful, but also with His 
chastisements, aud reckons up the remedies 
with which we have refused to be healed ? 
Calling us His children ¢ indeed, but unworthy 
children, and His sons, but strange sons $ who 
have stumbled from lameness out of their 
paths, in the trackless and rough ground. 
How and by what means could I have in- 
structed you, and I have not done so? by 
gentler measures? I have applied them. I 
passed by the blood drunk in Egypt from the 
wells and rivers and all reservoirs of water” in 
the first plague: I passed over the next scourg- 
es, the frogs, lice, and flies. I began with the 
flocks and the cattle and the sheep, the fifth 
plague, and, sparing as yet the rational creat- 
ures, I struck the animals. You made light 
of the stroke, and treated me with less reason 
and attention than the beasts who were struck. 
I withheld from you the rain; one piece 
was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it 
rained not withered,® and ye said ‘“ We will 
brave it.’’* I brought the hail upon you, 
chastising you with the opposite kind of blow, 
I uprooted your vineyards and shrubberies, 
and crops, but I failed to shatter your wicked- 
ness. 

11. Perchance He will say to me, who am 
not reformed even by blows, I know that thou 
art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew,* 
the heedless is heedless and the lawless man 
acts lawlessly,4 naught is the heavenly correc- 
tion, naught the scourges. The bellows are 

B Hab. ii. 16. 
$6 Hab. i. 5; Acts xill. 41. 
¢ Ps. xviii. 46. 
t Jer. xviii. 12 (LXX.). 
Alb. xxi, 2 (LXX.). 

@. Tsaicxxix,/0, 
yoPS. Ix. 26 3.5 —-Isnte xix. 10: 
e Deut. xxxil. 5. 
9 Exod. vii. 19. 0 Amos iv. 7. 
« Isai, xviii. 4. 

burnt, the lead is consumed,* as I once re- 
proached you by the mouth of Jeremiah, 
the founder melted the silver in vain, your 
wickednesses are not melted away. 
abide my wrath, saith the Lord. 
My hand the power to inflict 
other plagues also ? 

upon you 

ON? HIS PATHER'S SILENCE. 

Can ye | 
Has not | 

Thy beloved, priest and people, we have erred 
together, we have all gone out of the way, 
we have together become unprofitable, there 
is none that doeth judgment and justice, no 
not one. We have cut short ‘Thy mercies and 

_kindness and the bowels and compassion of 

There are still at My | 

command the blains breaking forth from the — 
ashes of the furnace,* by sprinkling which to- | 

ward heaven, Moses, or any other minister of 
God’s action, may chastise Egypt with dis- 
ease. ‘There remain also the locusts, the dark- 
ness that may be felt, and the plague which, 
last in order, was first in suffering and power, 
the destruction and death of the firstborn, and, 
to escape this, and to turn aside the destroyer, 
it were better to sprinkle the doorposts of 
our mind, contemplation and action, with the 
great and saving token, with the blood of the 
new covenant, by being crucified and dying 
with Christ, that we may both rise and be 
glorified and reign with Him both now and 
at His final appearing, and not be broken and 
crushed, and made to lament, when the griev- 
ous destroyer smites us all too late in this life 
of darkness, and destroys our firstborn, the 
offspring and results of our life which we had 
dedicated to God. 

r2. Far be it from me that I should ever, 
among other chastisements, be thus re- 
proached by Him Who is good, but walks 
contrary to me in furyY because of my own 
contrariness: I have smitten you with blast- 
ing and mildew, and blight ;® without result. 
‘The sword from without * made you childless, 
yet have ye not returned unto Me, saith the 
Lord. May I not become the vine of the 
beloved, which after being planted and en- 
trenched, and made sure with a fence and 
tower and every means which was possible, 
when it ran wild and bore thorns, was conse- 
quently despised, and had its tower broken 
down and its fence taken away, and was not 
pruned nor digged, but was devoured and 
laid waste and trodden down by all !$ This is 
what I feel I must say as to my fears, thus 
have I been pained by this blow, and this, I 
will further tell you, is my prayer. We have 
sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt 
wickedly,” for we have forgotten ‘Thy com- 
mandments and walked after our own evil 
thought,® for we have behaved ourselves un- 
worthily of the calling and gospel of Thy 
Christ, and of His holy sufferings and humili- 
ation for us; we have become a reproach to 

a Jer. vi. 29. B Exod. ix, ro. 
6 Lev. xxvi. 1 (LXX.); Amos iv, 9. 
¢ Isai. v. 1, Wy Dani 1x,-5: 

Lev. xxvi. 27, 28. 
e Deut. xxxil. 25. 
6 Isai. Ixv, 2. 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i 

our God, by our wickedness und the perversity 
of our doings, in which we have turned away. 
Thou art good, but we have done amiss; 
Thou art long-suffering, but we are worthy 
of stripes; we acknowledge ‘Thy goodness, 
though we are without understanding, we 
have been scourged for but few of our faults ; 
Thou art terrible, and who will resist Thee ?8 
the mountains will tremble before ‘Thee; 
and who will strive against the might of 
Thine arm? If Thou shut the heaven, who 
will open it? And if Thou let loose ‘Thy tor- 
rents, who will restrain them? It is a light 
thing in ‘Thine eyes to make poor and to 
make rich, to make alive and to kill, to strike 
and to heal, and Thy will is perfect action. 
Thou art angry, and we have sinned,’ says 
one of old, making confession ; and it is now 
time for me to say the opposite, ‘‘ We have 
sinned, and Thou art angry :’’ therefore have 
we become a reproach to our neighbours.§ 

| Thou didst turn ‘Thy face from us, and we 

were filled with dishonour. 

i 

But stay, Lord, 
cease, Lord, forgive, Lord, deliver us not up 
for ever because of our iniquities, and let not 
our chastisements be a warning for others, 
when we might learn wisdom from the trials 
of others. Of whom? Of the nations which 
know Thee not, and kingdoms which have 
not been subject to Thy power. But we are 
Thy people,¢ O Lord, the rod of Thine in- 
heritance ; therefore correct us, but in good- 
ness and not in Thine anger, lest Thou bring 
us to nothingness$ and contempt among all 
that dwell on the earth. 

13. With these words I invoke mercy: and 
if it were possible to propitiate His wrath with 
whole burnt offerings or sacrifices, I would 
not even have spared these. Do you also 
yourselves imitate your trembling priest, you, 
my beloved children, sharers with me alike 
of the Divine correction and loving-kindness. 
Possess your souls in tears, and stay His 
wrath by amending your way of life. Sanc- 
tify a fast, call a solemn assembly,” as blessed 
Joel with us charges you: gather the elders, 
and the babes that suck the breasts, whose 
tender age wins our pity, and is specially 
worthy of the loving-kindness of God. I 
know also what he enjoins both upon me, the 

“y lsat. Ixiv..c. 
4. JOchite 15. 

B Ib. Ixxvi. 7. 

GIPSeXxive 3. 
i e lb, 6, 13. (an 

Os bSeelsexloce4 = 

minister of God, and upon you, who have 
been thought worthy of the same honour, 
that we should enter His house in sackcloth, 
and lament night and day between the porch 
and the altar, in pitcous array, and with more 
piteous voices, crying aloud without ceasing 
on behalf of ourselves and the people, spar- 
ing nothing, either toil or word, which may 
propitiate God: saying ‘Spare, O Lord, Thy 
people, and give not Thine heritage to re- 
proach,’’ * and the rest of the prayer ; surpass- 
ing the people in our sense of the affliction as 
much as in our rank, instructing them in our 
own persons in compunction and correction of 
wickedness, and in the consequent long-suffer- 
ing of God, and cessation of the scourge. 

14. Come then, all of you, my brethren, 
let us worship and fall down, and weep before 
the Lord our Maker ; 8 let us appoint a public 
mourning, in our various ages and families, 
let us raise the voice of supplication ; and let 
this, instead of the cry which He hates, enter 
into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth. Let us 
anticipate His anger by confession ; ¥ let us de- 
sire to see Him appeased, after He was wroth. 
Who knoweth, he says, if He will turn and 
repent, and leave a blessing behind Him? & 
This I know certainly, I the sponsor of the 
loving-kindness of God. And when He has 
laid aside that which is unnatural to Him, 
His anger, He will betake Himself to that 
which is natural, His mercy. To the one He 
is forced by us, to the other He is inclined. 
And if He is forced to strike, surely He will 
refrain, according to His Nature. Only let us 
have mercy on ourselves, and open a road for 
our Father’s righteous affections. Let us 
sow in tears, that we may reap in joy,® let 
us show ourselves men of Nineveh, not of 
Sodom.¢ Let us amend our wickedness, lest 
we be consumed with it ; let us listen to the 
preaching of Jonah, lest we be overwhelmed 
by fire and brimstone, and if we have de- 
parted from Sodom let us escape to the moun- 
tain, let us flee to Zoar, let us enter it as the 
sun rises ; let us not stay in all the plain, let 
us not look around us, lest we be frozen into 
a pillar of salt, a really immortal pillar, to ac- 
cuse the soul which returns to wickedness. 

15. Let us be assured that to do no wrong” 
is really superhuman, and belongs to God 
alone. Isay nothing about the Angels, that 
we may give no room for wrong feelings, nor 
opportunity for harmful altercations. Our 
unhealed condition arises from our evil and 

unsubdued nature, and from the exercise of its 
powers. Our repentance when we sin, is a 
human action, but an action which bespeaks a 
good man, belonging to that portion which is 
in the way of salvation. Tor if even our dust 
contracts somewhat of wickedness, and the 
earthly tabernacle presseth down the upward 
flight of the soul,* which at least was created 
to fly upward, yet let the image be cleansed 
from filth, and raise aloft the flesh, its yoke- 
fellow, lifting it on the wings of reason; and, 
what is better, let us neither need this cleans- 
ing, nor have to be cleansed, by preserving our 
original dignity, to which we are hastening 
through our training here, and let us not by 
the bitter taste of sin be banished from the 
tree of life: though it is better to turn again 
when we err, than to be free from correction 
when we stumble. For whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth,?’ and a rebuke is a 
fatherly action ; while every soul which is un- 
chastised, is unhealed. Is not then freedom 
from chastisement a hard thing? But to fail to 
be corrected by the chastisement is still harder. 
One of the prophets, speaking of Israel, whose 
heart was hard and uncircumcised, says, 
Lord, ‘Thou hast stricken them, but they have 
not grieved, Thou hast consumed them but 
they have refused to receive correction ;¥ and 
again, The people turned not to Him that 
smiteth them ;® and Why is my people slid- 
den back by a perpetual backsliding,® because 
of which it will be utterly crushed and de- 
stroyed ? 

16. It is a fearful thing, my brethren, to 
fall into the hands of a living God,$ and _fear- 
ful is the face of the Lord against them that 
do evil,” and abolishing wickedness with utter 
destruction. Fearful is the ear of God, listen- 
ing even to the voice of Abel speaking through 
his silent blood. Fearful His feet, which over- 
take evildoing. Fearful also His filling of the 
universe, so that it is impossible anywhere to 
escape the action of God,® not even by flying 
up to heaven, or entering Hades, or by escap- 
ing to the far East, or concealing ourselves in 
the depths and ends of the sea.t Nahum the 
Elkoshite was afraid before me, when he pro- 
claimed the burden of Nineveh, God is jealous, 
and the Lord takes vengeance in wrath upon 
His adversaries,“ and uses such abundance of 
severity that no room is left for further ven- 
geance upon the wicked. For whenever I 
hear Isaiah threaten the people of Sodom 
and rulers of Gomorrah,’ and say Why will 

BPs... XCv 66) Lbixcy;-2 (LXX.)« 8 Joel 14s 
besarte “ 4 

Renter pote Onan ithe sy 

Clemencet quotes this as an aphorism 

@ Joeli. 17, 

CPS eNKVI By 

n 10 do no wrong, etc. 
from Demosth. de Cor. 

yee vas 

CIIeb. xX 431. 

CPS EXKIXe 7 5os 
A Isai. 1. x0. 

a. Wisd. ix. 15. B Brow aie te. 

6 Isat. 1x-013. e Jer. vili. 5. 

My Si XXXIV-E1O! @ Jer. xxiii. 24. 
« Nahum i, 7, 2. 

ON HIS FATHER’S SILENCE. 

253 

ye be smitten any more, adding sin to sin ?4 
Iam almost filled with horror, and melted to 
tears. It is impossible, he says, to find any 
blow to add to those which are past, because 
of your newly added sins ; so completely have 
you run through the whole, and exhausted 

every form of chastisement, ever calling upon | 

yourselves some new one by your wickedness. 
There is not a wound, nor bruise, nor putrefy- 
ing sore ;® the plague affects the whole body 
and is incurable: for it is impossible to apply 
a plaster, or ointment or bandages. I pass 
over the rest of the threatenings, that I may 
not press upon you more heavily than your 
present plague. 

17. Only let us recognise the purpose of 
the evil. Why have the crops withered, our 
storehouses been emptied, the pastures of our 
flocks failed, the fruits of the earth been with- 
held, and the plains been filled with shame 
instead of with fatness: why have valleys la- 
mented and not abounded in corn, the moun- 
tains not dropped sweetness, as they shall do 
hereafter to the righteous, but been stript 
and dishonoured, and received on the contrary 
the curse of Gilboa?y The whole earth has 
become as it was in the beginning, before it 
was adorned with its beauties. ‘Thou visit- 
edst the earth, and madest it to drink ®@~—but 
the visitation has been for evil, and the draught 
destructive. Alas! what a spectacle! Our 
prolific crops reduced to stubble, the seed we 
sowed is recognised by scanty remains, and our 
harvest, the approach of which we reckon from 
the number of the months, instead of from 
the ripening corn, scarcely bears the firstfruits 
for the Lord. Such is the wealth of the un- 
godly, such the harvest of the careless sower ; 
as the ancient curse runs, to look for much, 
and bring in little,* to sow and not reap, to 
plant and not press,$ ten acres of vineyard to 
yield one bath : 7 and to hear of fertile harvests 
in other lands, and be ourselves pressed by 
famine. Why is this, and what is the cause 
of the breach? Let us not wait to be con- 
victed by others, let us be our own examiners. 
An important medicine for evil is confession, 
and care to avoid stumbling. I will be first 
to do so, as I have made my report to my peo- 
ple from on high, and performed the duty of a 
watcher.® For I did not conceal the coming 
of the sword that I might save my own soul 
and those of my hearers. So will I now an- 
nounce the disobedience of my people, making 

@ Isai... 5 (EXX). 
6 Ps. Ixv. 9. 

7 Isai. v. 10. 

t Kezek. xxxili. 3. 

V.OIGS Valls 

iB lbe12-6; 2.5aM ie 21s 
eHag.i.9. | eect: XXVlll. 39. 
6 Ib, xxi. 6; Ixii, 6; Habak. ii, 1. 

| what is theirs my own, if I may perchance 

thus obtain some tenderness and relief. 

18. One of us has oppressed the poor, and 
wrested from him his portion of land, and | 
wrongly encroached upon his landmark by 
fraud or violence, and joined house to house, 
and field to field, to rob his neighbour of 
something, and been eager to have no neigh- 
bour, so as to dwell alone on the earth. 
Another has defiled the land with usury and 
interest, both gathering where he had not 
sowed and reaping where he had not strawed,é 
farming, not the land, but the necessity of the 
needy. Another has robbed God,7 the giver 
of all, of the firstfruits of the barnfloor and 
winepress, showing himself at once thankless 
and senseless, in neither giving thanks for what 
he has had, nor prudently providing, at least, 
for the future. Another has had no pity on 
the widow and orphan, and not imparted his 
bread and meagre nourishment to the needy, 
or rather to Christ, Who is nourished in the 
persons of those who are nourished even in a 
slight degree ; a man perhaps of much proper- 
ty unexpectedly gained, for this is the most 
unjust of all, who finds his many barns too 
narrow for him, filling some and emptying 
others, to build greater® ones for future crops, 
not knowing that he is being snatched away 
with hopes unrealised, to give an account of 
his riches and fancies, and proved to have 
been a bad steward of another’s goods. An- 
other has turned aside the way of the meek,¢ 
and turned aside the just among the unjust ; 
another has hated him that reproveth in the 
gates, and abhorred him that speaketh up- 
rightly ;% another has sacrificed to his net 
which catches much,® and keeping the spoil of 
the poor in his house,‘ has either remembered 
not God, or remembered Him ill—by saying 
‘Blessed be the Lord, for we are rich,’’ * and 
wickedly supposed that he received these 
things from Him by Whom he will be pun- 
ished. For because of these things cometh 
the wrath of God upon the children of disobe- 
dience.* Because of these things the heaven 
is shut, or opened for our punishment ; and 
much more, if we do not repent, even when 
smitten, and draw near to Him, Who ap- 
proaches us through the powers of nature. 

1g. What shall be said to this by those of 
us who are buyers and sellers of corn, and 
watch the hardships of the seasons, in order to 
grow prosperous, and luxuriate in the misfor- 

y Mal. ii. 8. 
¢ Isai. xxix. 21. 
v sat, a 4s 

A Isphe v.56, 

BS. Matt. xxv. 26. 
¢ Amos ii. 7. 

@ Habak, i, 16. 

a Isai, v. 8. 

6S. Luke xii. 18. 

n Amos v. 10. 
K-ZECH.X1s5< 

254 

tunes of others, and acquire, not, like Joseph, 
the property of the Eeyptians,* as a part of a 
wide policy, (for he could both collect and 
supply corn duly, as he also could foresee the 
funine, and provide against it afar off, ) but the 
property of their fellow countrymen in an il- 
legal manner, for they say, * When will the 
new moon be gone, that we may sell, and the 

sabbaths, that we may open our stores ??” 8 And | 

they corrupt justice with divers measures and 
balances, and draw upon themselves the ephah 
of lead.6 What shall we say to these things who 
know no limit to our getting, who worship gold 
and silver, as those of old worshipped Baal, 
and Astarte and the abomination Chemosh ? § 
Who give heed to the brilliance of costly 
stones, and soft flowing garments, the prey of 
moths, and the plunder of robbers and_ty- 
rants and thieves; who are proud of their 
multitude of slaves and animals, and spread 
themselves over plains and mountains, with 
their possessions and gains and schemes, like 
Solomon’s horseleach$ which cannot be satis- 
fied, any more than the grave, and the earth, 
and fire, and water ; who seck for another world 
for their possession, and find fault with the 
bounds of God, as too small for their insatiable 
cupidity ? What of those who sit on lofty 
thrones and raise the stage of government, with 
a brow loftier than that of the theatre, tak- 
ing no account of the God over all, and the 
height of the true kingdom that none can ap- 
proach unto, so as to rule their subjects as fellow- 
servants, as needing themselves no less loving- 
kindness? Look also, I pray you, at those 
who stretch themselves upon beds of ivory, 
whom the divine Amos fitly upbraids, who 
anoint themselves with the chief ointments, 
and chant to the sound of instruments of music, 
and attach themselves to transitory things as 
though they were stable, but have not grieved 
nor had compassion for the affliction of Jo- 
seph ;7 though they ought to have been kind to 
those who had met with disaster before them, 
and by mercy have obtained mercy 3 as the fir- 
tree should howl, because the cedar had fallen,® 
and be instructed by their neighbours’ chas- 
tisement, and be led by others’ ills to regulate 
their own lives, having the advantage of being 
saved by their predecessors’ fate, instead of 
being themselves a warning to others. 

20. Join with us, thou divine and sacred 
person, in considering these questions, with 
the store of experience, that source of wisdom, 
which thou hast gathered in thy long life. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Herewith instruct thy people. ‘Teach them to 
break their bread to the hungry, to gather 
together the poor that have no shelter, to cover 
their nakedness and not neglect those of the 
same blood.* and now especially that we may 
gain a benefit from our necd instead of from 
abundance, a result which pleases God more 
than plentiful offerings and large gifts. After 
this, nay before it, show thyself, I pray, a 
Moses,® or PhinchasY to day. Stand on our 
behalf and make atonement, and let the plague 
be stayed, either by the spiritual sacrilice,® or 
by prayer and reasonable intercession.€ Res- 
train the anger of the Lord by thy mediation : 
avert any succeeding blows of the scourge. 
He knoweth to respect the hoar hairs of a 
father interceding for his children. Intreat 
for our past wickedness: be our surety for the 
future. Present a people purified by suffering 
and fear. Beg for bodily sustenance, but beg 
rather for the angels’ food that cometh down 
from heaven. So doing, thou wilt make God 
to be our God, wilt conciliate heaven, wilt 
restore the former and latter rain: $ the Lord 
shall show loving-kindness 7 and our land shall 
yield her fruit ;@ our earthly land its fruit 
which lasts for the day, and our frame, which 
is but dust, the fruit which is eternal, which 
we shall store up in the heavenly winepresses 
by thy hands, who presentest both us and 
ours in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be 
glory for evermore. Amen. 

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XVIII. 
On THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER. 

THis Oration was delivered A. D. 374. 5. 
Gregory the elder died early in that year, 
according to the Greek Menaea on the rst of 
January, though Clemencet and some others 
place his death a few months later. His wife, 
S. Nonna, survived him, and was present to 
hear the Oration, as was also S. Basil, who 
desired to honour one who had consecrated 
him to the Episcopate. ‘The aged Saint, who 
died in his hundredth year, had originally 
belonged to a sect called Hypsistarii. Our 
knowledge of the existence and_ tenets of this 
sect is due to this Orationt and to a few sen- 
tences in that of S. Greg. Nyssen. (c. Eunom, 
I. ed. 1615, p. 12), by whom they are called 
Hypsistians. He was converted by the prayers, 
influence and example of his wife, 5. Nonna, 

B Amos viii. 5. + Prov; SKY 10, 
e 1 Kings x1. 33. 
yn Amos vi. 4-6, Or Zechs xi0°2. 

a Gen. xli. 39. 
Zech, Vs. 8s 
Gal’ rove ae Ba 

B Exod. xxxii, 11. Ps. cvi. 23, 30 
e Ron. xii. 1. § Joel i. 23. 
OL, Axvile Oy uCf. Orat, vill, § 4, note. 

a Isai. Ivili. 7. 
81 Pet. it. 5. 
n Ps, Ixxxv. 13+ 

ON THE DEATH 

and, soon after his baptism, consecrated Bishop 
of Nazianzus. He was eminent as an able 
administrator, a devout Christian, an orthodox 
teacher, a steadfast Confessor of the faith, a 
sympathetic Pastor, an affectionate father. In 
his life and work he was seconded by his wife, 
and followed by his three children, Gregory, 
Gorgonia, and Cesarius, whose names are all 
to be found upon the roll of the Saints. 

FUNERAL ORATION ON IIS FATHER, IN THE 
PRESENCE OF S. BAsIL. 

tr. O man of God, and faithful servant,8 
and steward of the mysteries of God,” and 
man of desires > of the Spirit : © for thus Script- 
ure speaks of men advanced and lofty, superior 
to visible things. I will call you also a God 
to Pharaoh $ and all the Egyptian and hostile 

power, and pillar and ground of the Church ? | 

and will of God® and light in the world, 
holding forth the word of life,« and prop of 
the faith and resting place of the Spirit. But 

why should I enumerate all the titles which 
your virtue, in its varied forms, has won 

for and applied to you as your own ? 

2. ‘Tell me, however, whence do you come, 
what is your business, and what favour do 
you bring us? Since I know that you are 
entirely moved with and by God, and for 
the benefit of those who receive you. Are 
you come to inspect us, or to seek for the 
pastor, or to take the oversight of the flock ? 
You find us no longer in existence, but for 
the most part having passed away with him, 
unable to bear with the place of our afflic- 
tion, especially now that we have lost our 

sxilful steersman, our light of life, to whom | 

we looked to direct our course as the blazing 
beacon of salvation above us: he has departed 
with all his excellence, and all the power of 
pastoral organization, which he had gathered 
in a long time, full of days and wisdom, and 

crowned, to use the words of Solomon, with | 

the hoary head of glory.* His flock is desolate 
and downcast, filled, as you see, with despond- 

ency and dejection, no longer reposing in 
the green pasture,* and reared up by the water | 

of comfort, but seeking precipices, deserts 
and pits,in which it will be scattered and 

verish 3" in despair of ever obtaining another 
| : S 

Wise pastor, absolutely persuaded that it can- 

B Numb, xii. 7. 
O*Dan,1x.-23 (IXGX.). 
words are addressed to S. Basil, who was present. 
nr. ‘Lim. vii. 15. 0 Isai. Ixii. 4. GIGXEXS 9): 

« Prov. xvi. 31. 
Mm Ezek, xxxiv. 14, 

a Josh. xiv. 6, 
Viele Oke lvaane 
é€ The first 
¢ Exod. vii. 1. 
Gini. 16s 
APS. exxeos 

O° File #70 Pe: 255 
; not find such an one as he, content if it 
| be one who will not be far inferior. 

| 3. There are, as 1 said, three causes to ne- 
cessitate your presence, all of equal weight, 
ourselves, the pastor, and the flock : come then, 
and according to the spirit of nuinistry which 
is IN you, assign to each its due, and guide 
your words in judgment, so that we may 

more than ever marvel at your wisdom, 
And how will you guide them? First by 

bestowing seemly praise upon his virtue, 
not only as a pure sepulchral tribute of speech 
to him who was pure, but also to set forth 
to others his conduct and example as a mark 
of true piety. Then bestow upon us some 
brief counsels concerning life and death, and 
the union and severance of body and soul, 
/and the two worlds, the one present but 
transitory, the other spiritually perceived 
_and abiding; and persuade us to despise 
that which is deceitful and disordered and 
uneven, carrying us and being carried, like 
the waves, now up, now down ; but to cling 
_to that which is firm and stable and divine 
and constant, free from all disturbance and 
confusion. For this would lessen our pain 
because of friends departed before us, nay we 
should rejoice if your words should carry 
us hence and set us on high, and hide distress 
of the present in the future, and persuade 
us that we also are pressing on to‘a good 
Master, and that our home is better than our 
pilgrimage ; and that translation and removal 
thither is to us who are tempest-tost here like 
/a calm haven to men at sea; or 2s ease and 
relief from toil come to men who, at the close 
_ of a long journey, escape the troubles of the 
| Wayfarer, so to those who attain to the hostel 
| yonder comes a better and more tolerable ex- 
istence than that of those who still tread the 
| crooked and precipitous path of this life. 

| 4. Thus might you console us; but what 
| of the flock? Would you first promise the 
| oversight and leadership of yourself, a man 
| 
| 

under whose wings we all would gladly repose, 
and for whose words we thirst more eagerly 
_ than men suffering from thirst for the purest 
— fountain ? Secondly, persuade us that the 
good shepherd who laid down his life for the 
sheep* has not even now left us; but is 
| present, and tends and guides, and knows his 
own, and is known of his own, and, though 
| bodily invisible, is spiritually recognized, and 
| defends his flock against the wolves, and al- 
lows no one to climb over into the fold as a 
| robber and traitor ; to pervert and steal away, 

aS. John x. rr, 

bo 

a) 

< 

56 

by the voice of strangers, souls under the fair 
guidance of the truth. Aye, IT am well as- 
sured that his intercession is of more avail now 
than was his instruction in former days, since 
he is closer to God, now that he has shaken 
off his bodily fetters, and freed his mind from 
the clay which obscured it, and holds inter- 
course naked with the nakedness of the prime 
and purest Mind ; being promoted, if it be not 
rash to say so, to the rank and confidence of 
an angel. ‘This, with your power of speech 
and spirit, you will set forth and discuss bet- 
ter than I can sketch it. But in order that, 
through ignorance of his excellences, your lan- 
guage may not fall very far short of his deserts, 
I will, from my own knowledge of the departed, 
briefly draw an outline, and preliminary plan 
of an eulogy to be handed to you, the illus- 
trious artist of such subjects, for the details of 
the beauty of his virtue to be filled in and 
transmitted to the ears and minds of all. 

5. Leaving to the laws of panegyric the 
description of his country, his family, his 
nobility of figure, his external magnificence, 
and the other subjects of human pride, I 
begin with what is of most consequence and 
comes closest to ourselves. He sprang from a 
stock unrenowned, and not well suited for 
piety, for I am not ashamed of his origin, in 
my confidence in the close of his life, one 
that was not planted in the house of God,* 
but far removed and estranged, the combined 
product of two of the greatest opposites— 
Greek error and legal imposture, some parts of 
each of which it escaped, of others it was 
compounded. For, on the one side, they re- 
ject idols and sacrifices, but reverence fire 
and lights; on the other, they observe the 
Sabbath and petty regulations as to certain 
meats, but despise circumcision. These lowly 
men call themselves Hypsistarii, and the Al- 
mighty is, so they say, the only object of 
their worship. What was the result of this 
double tendency to impiety? I know not 
whether to praise more highly the grace which 
called him, or his own purpose. However, he 
so purged the eye of his mind from the hu- 
mours & which obscured it, and ran towards 
the truth with such speed that he endured the 
loss of his mother and his property for a while, 
for the sake of his heavenly Father and the 
true inheritance: and submitted more readily 
to this dishonour, than others to the greatest 
honours, and, most wonderful as this is, I won- 
der at it but little. Why? Because this 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 
| 
| 
| 

| 
| 
| 

glory is common to him with many others, 
and all must come into the great net‘of God, 
and be caught by the words of the fishers, al- 
though some are earlier, some later, enclosed 
by the Gospel. But what does especially in 
his life move my wonder, it is needful for me 
to mention. 

6. Even before he was of our fold, he was 
ours. His character made him one of us. 
For, as many of our own are not with us, whose 
life alienates them from the common body, so, 
many of those without are on our side, whose 
character anticipates their faith, and need 
only the name of that which indeed they pos- 
sess. My father was one of these, an alien 
shoot, but inclined by his life towards us. 
He was so far advanced in self control, that 
he became at once most beloved and most 
modest, two qualities difficult to combine. 
What greater and more splendid testimony 
can there be to his justice than his exercise of 
a position second to none in the state, with- 
out enriching himself by a single farthing, 
although he saw everyone else casting the 
hands of Briareus upon the public funds, and 
swollen with ill-gotten gain? For thus do I 
term unrighteous wealth. Of his prudence 
this also is no slight proof, but in the course 
of my speech further details will be given. It 
was as areward® for such conduct, I think, 
that he attained to the faith. How this came 
about, a matter too important to be passed 
over, I would now set forth. 

7. I have heard the Scripture say: Who 
can find a valiant woman? and declare that 
she is a divine gift, and that a good marriage 
is brought about by the Lord. Even those 
without are of the same mind; if they say 
that a man can win no fairer prize than a 
good wife, nor a worse one than her opposite.” 
But we can mention none who has been in 
this respect more fortunate than he. For | 
think that, had anyone from the ends of the 
earth and from every race of men attempted 
to bring about the best of marriages, he could 
not have found a better or more harmonious 
one than this. For the most excellent of men 
and of women were so united that their mar- 
riage was a union of virtue rather than of 
bodies ; since, while they excelled all others, 
they could not excel each other, because in 
virtue they were quite equally matched. 

8. She indeed who was given to Adam as 
a help meet for him, because it was not good 
for man to be alone,® instead of an assistant 

as. XC I9% 
B Humours. This word is used Aristoph. Plut. 581, of the ob- 
scuring effect of old prejudices. 

a Reward. Faith is, as Clémencet remarks, “the gift of God” 
bite hsor onnevat tia B Rrovexxxi210, 7-5 
y Hesiod: Works and Days, 700. Gen, ii. 18. 

became an enemy, and instead of a yoke- 
fellow, an opponent, and beguiling the man 

by means of pleasure, estranged him through | 

the tree of knowledge from the tree of life. 
But she who was given by God to my father 
became not only, as is less wonderful, his as- 
sistant, but even his leader, drawing him on 
by her influence in deed and word to the 
highest excellence ; judging it best in all 

other respects to be overruled by her husband | 

according to the law of marriage, but not. be- 
ing ashamed, in regard of piety, even to offer 
herself as his teacher. Admirable indeed as 
was this conduct of hers, it was still more ad- 
mirable that he should readily acquiesce in it. 
She is a woman who while others have been 
honoured and extolled for natural and arti- 
ficial beauty, has acknowledged but one kind 
of beauty, that of the soul, and the preserva- 
tion, or the restoration as far as possible, of 
the Divine image. 
adornment she has rejected as worthy of wo- 
men on the stage. 
noble birth she recognized is piety, and the 
knowledge of whence we are sprung and 
whither we are tending. The only safe and 
inviolable form of wealth is, she considered, 

to strip oneself of wealth for God and the | 

poor, and especially for those of our own kin 
who are unfortunate ; and such help only as is 
necessary, she held to be rather a reminder, than 
a relief of their distress, while a more liberal 
beneficence brings stable honour and most 
perfect consolation. Some women have ex- 
celled in thrifty management, others in piety, 
while she, difficult as it is to unite the two 
virtues, has surpassed all in both of them, 
both by her eminence in each, and by 
the fact that she alone has combined them 
together. To as great a degree has she, by 
her care and skill, secured the prosperity of her 
household, according to the injunctions and 
laws of Solomon as to the valiant woman, as if 
she had had no knowledge of piety ; and she 

applied herself to God and Divine things as | 

closely as if absolutely released from household 
cares, allowing neither branch of her duty to 

interfere with the other, but rather making | 

each of them support the other. 

g. What time or place for prayer ever cs- 
caped her? To this she was drawn before all 
other things in the day; or rather, who had 
sich hope of receiving an immediate answer 
to her requests? Who paid such reverence 
to the hand and countenance of the priests ? 
Or honoured all kinds of philosophy? Who 

reduced the flesh by more constant fast and 
vigil? Or stood like a pillar at the night | 

ON THE DEATH OF HIS FATHER: 

Pigments and devices for 

The only genuine form of | 

257 

! long and daily psalmody? Who had a 
greater love for virginity, though patient of 
the marriage bond herself? Who was a bet- 
ter patron of the orphan and the widow ? 
Who aided as much in the alleviation of 
_the misfortunes of the mourner? ‘These 
things, small as they are, and perhaps con- 
temptible in the eyes of some, because not 
easily attainable by most people (for that 
which is unattainable comes, through envy, to 
be thought not even credible), are in my eyes 
most honourable, since they were the discov- 
eries of her faith and the undertakings of her 
| spiritual fervour. So also in the holy assem- 
| blies, or places, her voice was never to be heard 
| ¢xcept * in the necessary responses of the ser- 
| MIC: 

| 

to. And if it was a great thing for the altar 
never to have had an iron tool lifted upon it,8 
and that no chisel should be seen or heard, 
with greater reason, since everything dedi- 
| cated to God ought to be natural and free 
from artificiality, it was also surely a great 
thing that she reverenced the sanctuary by her 
silence ; that she never turned her back to the 
venerable table, nor spat upon the divine pave- 
ment ; that she never grasped the hand or kissed 
the lips of any heathen woman, however hon- 
ourable in other respects, or closely related 
she might be; nor would she ever share the 
| salt, I say not willingly but even under com- 
pulsion, of those who came from the profane 
and unholy table ; nor could she bear, against 
the law of conscience, to pass by or look upon 
a polluted house; nor to have her ears or 
tongue, which had received and uttered divine 
things, defiled by Grecian tales or theatrical 
songs, on the ground that what is unholy is 
unbecoming to holy things ; and what is still 
more wonderful, she never so far yielded to the 
external signs of grief, although greatly moved 
even by the misfortunes of strangers, as to 
allow a sound of woe to burst forth before the 
‘ucharist, or a tear to fall from the eye mys- 
tically sealed, or any trace of mourning to be 
left on the occasion of a festival, however fre- 
quent her own sorrows might be ; inasmuch as 
the God-loving soul should subject every hu- 
man experience to the things of God. 
| 1. I pass by in silence what is still more 
eee : x : , 
| ineffable, of which God is witness, and those 
of the faithful handmaidens to whom she has 
confided such things. That which concerns 
myself is perhaps undeserving of mention, 
since I have proved unworthy of the hope 

_% Hexcept, ete. Tit, “except the necessary and mystical (i. e., 
liturgical) [words].” 

Deut. xxvii. 5. 

258 

cherished in regard to me; yet it was on her 
part a great undertaking to promise me to 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

God before my birth, with no fear of the- 
and along with its words the desire came to 

future, and to dedicate me immediately after 
IT was born. 
been that she has not utterly failed inher 

Through God’s goodness has it | 

prayer, and that the auspicious sacrifice was | 

not rejected. 
already in existence, others were in the future, 
growing up by means of gradual additions. 
And as the sun which most pleasantly casts 

Some of these things were | 
fulfilment, and, manifesting by her joy the 

of holy David: I was glad when they said 
unto me, we will go into the house of the 
Lord.¢ The psalm was a strange one to him, 

him. As soon as she heard it, having thus 
obtained her prayer, she seized the oppor- 
tunity, replying that the vision would bring 
the greatest pleasure, if accompanicd by its 

_ greatness of the benefit, she urged forward his 

its morning rays, becomes at midday hotter — 

and more brilliant, so also did she, who from 
the first gave no slight evidence of piety, 
shine forth at last with fuller light. ‘Then in- 
deed he, who had established her in his house, 
had at home no slight spur to piety, possessed, 
by her origin and descent, of the love of God 
and Christ, and having received virtue as her 
patrimony ; not, as he had been, cut out of 
the wild olive and grafted into the good olive, 
yet unable to bear, in the excess of her 
faith, to be unequally yoked ; for, though sur- 
passing all others in endurance and fortitude, 

| 

she could not brook this, the being but half | 
united to God, because of the estrangement 

of him who was a part of herself, and the fail- 
ure to add to the bodily union, a close con- 
nexion in the spirit: on this account, she fell 
before God night and day, entreating for the 
salvation of her head with many fastings and 

salvation, before anything could intervene to 
hinder the call, and dissipate the object of her 
longing. At that very time it happened that 
a number of Bishops were hastening to Nicwa, 
to oppose the madness of Arius, since the 
wickedness of dividing the Godhead had just 
arisen ; so my father yielded himself to God 
and to the heralds of the truth, and confessed his 
desire, and requested from them the common 
salvation, one of them being the celebrated 
Leontius, at that time our own metropolitan. 
It would be a great wrong to grace, were I 
to pass by in silence the wonder which then 
was bestowed upon him by grace. ‘The 
witnesses of the wonder® are not few. ‘The 
teachers of accuracy were spiritually at fault, 
and the grace was a forecast of the future, and 

the formula of the priesthood was mingled 

with the admission of the catechumen. 

tears, and assiduously devoting herself to her 
only of the highest, but even of the lowest, in- 
- tellect, prophesied the future, being assured by 

husband, and influencing him in many ways, 
by means of reproaches, admonitions, atten- 
tions, estrangements, and above all by her 
own character with its fervour for piety, by 
which the soul is specially prevailed upon and 

softened, and willingly submits to virtuous | 

pressure. The drop* of water constantly 
striking the rock was destined to hollow it, 

and at length attain its longing, as the sequel — 
God the formation and completion of the 

shows. 

12. ‘These were the objects of her prayers 
and hopes, in the fervour of faith rather than 
of youth. Indeed, none was as confident of 
things present as she of things hoped for, from 
her experience of the generosity of God. For 
the salvation ef my father there was a concur- 
rence of the gradual conviction 8 of his reason, 
and the vision of dreams which God often be- 
stows upon a soul worthy of salvation. What 
was the vision? ‘This is to me the most 
pleasing part of the story. He thought that 
he was singing, as he had never done before, 
though his wife was frequent in her supplica- 
tions and prayers, this verse from the psalms 

a The drop. A familiar proverb. Choerilus, 9. 
B Conviction. Lit., ‘‘ healing.” 

O 
involuntary initiation ! bending his knee, he 
received the form of admission to the state 
of a catechumen in such wise, that many, not 

no indistinct signs of what was to be. 

13. After ashort interval, wonder succeeded 
wonder. I will commend the account of it 
to the ears of the faithful, for to profane 
minds nothing that is good is trustworthy. 
He was approaching that regeneration by 
yater and the Spirit, by which we confess to 

Christlike man, and the transformation and 
reformation from the earthy to the Spirit. 
He was approaching the laver with warm ce- 
sire and bright hope, after all the purgation 
possible, and a far greater purification of soul 
and body than that of the men who were to 
receive the tables from Moses. Their purifi- 

cation extended only to their dress, and a 

slight restriction of the belly, and a temporary 
continence.Y ‘The whole of his past life had 
been a preparation for the enlightenment, and 

GBS aCxxilaale 

B The wonder, S. Gregory the elder ought, according to the 
rite of admission to the ranks of the Catechumens, to have re- 
mained standing, and in that position have had his ears anointed. 
He fell upon his knees and the Bishop, in forgetfulness, pro- 

nounced over him the form of ordination to the Priesthood, 

y Exod, xix, 10, 15. 

ON THE 

a preliminary purification making sure the 
gift, in order that perfection might be en- 

trusted to purity} and that the blessing might | 

incur no risk in a soul which was confident in 
its possession of the grace. And as he was 
ascending out of the water, there flashed 
around him a light and a glory worthy of the 
disposition with which he approached — the 
gilt of faith ;* this was manifest even to some 
others, who for the time concealed the wonder, 
from fear of speaking ofa sight which each one 
thought had been only his own, but shortly 
afterwards communicated it to one another. 
To the baptiser® and initiator, however, it 
was so clear and visible, that he could not 
even hold back the mystery, but publicly cried 
out that he was anointing with the Spirit his 
OWN successor. 

14. Nor indeed would anyone disbelieve 
this who has heard and knows that Moses, 
When little in the eyes of men, and not yet of 
any account, was called from the bush which 
burned but was not consumed, or rather by 
Him who appeared in the bush,Y and was en- 
couraged by that first wonder : Moses, I say, for 
whom the sea was divided,® and manna rained 
down, and the rock poured out a fountain,$ 
and the pillar of fire and cloud led the Way in 
turn, and the stretching out of his hands gained 
a victory, and the representation of the cross 
overcame tens of thousands. Isaiah, again, 
who beheld the glory of the Seraphim,” and 
after him Jeremiah, who was entrusted with 

great power against nations and kings ;® the 

one heard the divine voice and was cleansed 
by a live coal for his prophetic office, and the 
other was known before his formation and 
sanctified before his birth. Paul, also, while 
yet a persecutor, who became the great herald 
of the truth and teacher of the Gentiles in 
faith,* was surrounded by a light* and ac- 
knowledged Him whom he was persecuting, 
and was entrusted with his great ministry, 
and filled every ear and mind with the gospel. 

15. Why need I count up all those who 

have been called to Himself by God and associ- | 

ated with such wonders as confirmed him in 
his piety? Nor was it the case that after such 
and so incredible and startling 
of the former things w 
subsequent conduct, as happens with those 

aThe tft of faith. f 
rites of administering Holy Baptism was, ** What seekest thou of 
the Church?” 

Casarea, who had much to do with Gregory’s instruction and had, 
mitted him to the order of Catechumens. 
i 6 Ib. xiv. 22, 

9 Isai, vi. 1 et seq. 
ay lime Warts 

¥ Tixodsan. 4. 
¢ Ib. xvii. 6. 
t1 Tim. 1.7; 

allt. ceva 
O Jers 1. 20, 
k Acts ix, 3, 

beginnings, any | 
as put to shame by his — 

DEATH OF HIS FATHER. 

Nazianzus—not TLeontius of | 

259 

who very soon acquire a distaste for what IS 
good, and so neglect all further progress, if 
they do not utterly relapse into vice. ‘This 
cannot be said of him, for he was most con- 
sistent with himself and_ his early days, and 
kept in harmony his life before the priest- 
hood with its excellence, and his life after it 
with what had gone before, since it would 
have been unbecoming to begin in one way 
and end in another, or to advance to a differ- 
ent end from that which he had in view at 
first. He was next entrusted with the priest- 
hood, not with the facility and disorder of 
the present day, but after a brief interval, in 
order to add to his own cleansing the skill and 
power to cleanse others ; for this is the law of 
spiritual sequence. And when he had been 
entrusted with it, the grace was the more 
glorified, being really the grace of God, and 
not of men, and not, as the preacher ¢ says, an 
independent impulse and purpose ® of spirit. 
16. He received a woodland and rustic 
church, the pastoral care and oversight of which 
had not been bestowed from a distance, but it 
had been cared for by one of his predecessors of 
admirable and angelic disposition, and a more 
simple man than our present rulers. of the 
people ; but, after he had been speedily taken 
to God, it had, in consequence of the loss of 
its leader, for the most part grown careless and 
run wild; accordingly, he at first strove with- 
out harshness to soften the habits of the 
people, both by words of pastoral knowledge, 
and by setting himself before them as an CX- 
ample, like a spiritual statue, polished into 
the beauty of all excellent conduct. He next, 
by constant meditation on the divine words, 
though a late student ofsuch matters, gathered 
together so much wisdom within a short time 
that he was in no wise excelled by those who 
had spent the greatest toil upon them, and re- 
ceived this special grace from God, that he 
became the father and teacher of orthodoxy 
—not, like our modern wise men, yielding to 
the spirit of the age, nor defending our faith 
by indefinite and sophistical language, as if 
they had no fixity of faith, or were adulterat- 
ing the truth; but, he was more pious than 
those who possessed rhetorical power, more 
skilled in rhetoric than those who were up- 
right in mind: or rather, while he took the 
second place as an orator, he surpassed all in 
piety. He acknowledged One God worshipped 
in Trinity, and Three, Who are united in Onc 
Godhead ; neither SabellianisingY as to the 

Oalvecless 1. 17 1c, a : aoe 
B Purpose, etc. A. vee Vexation of Spirit.” R, Nees Striving 
after wind,” 7 Sabellianising, etc. Cf. UL. 30: 37 (notes), 

260 

One, nor Arianising as to the Three; either 
by contracting and so atheistically annihilat- 
ing the Godhead, or by tearing It asunder by 
distinctions of unequal greatness or nature. 
For, seeing that Its every quality is Incompre- 
hensible and beyond the power of our intellect, 
how can we either perceive or express by defi- 
nition on such a subject, that which is beyond 
our ken? How can the immeasurable be 
measured, and the Godhead be reduced to the 
condition of finite things, and measured by 
degrees * of greater or less ? 

17. What else must we say of this great man 
of God, the true Divine, under the influence, in 
regard to these subjects, of the Holy Ghost, but 
that through his perception of these points, he, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

companying and running beside him, and 
being permitted on this occasion to contribute 
avery great share of the toil. Here my ac- 
count of these matters, which is a little prema- 
ture, must come to an end. 

19. Who could enumerate the full tale of 
his excellences, or, if he wished to pass by 
most of them, discover without difficulty what 
can be omitted? For each trait, as it occurs 

—to the mind, seems superior to what has gone 

like the great Noah, the father of this second | 
world, made this church to be called the new — 

Jerusalem, and a second ark borne up upon 
the waters; since it both surmounted the 
deluge of souls, and the insults of the heretics, 
and excelled all others in reputation no less 
than it fell behind them in numbers ; and has 
had the same fortune as the sacred Bethlehem, 
which can without contradiction be at once 
said to be a little city and the metropolis of 
the world, since it is the nurse and mother of 
Christ, Who both made and overcame the 
world. 

18. To give a proof of what I say. When 
a tumult of the over-zealous part of the Church 
was raised against us, and we had been de- 
coyed by a document and artful terms into 
association with evil, he alone was believed to 
have an unwounded mind, and a soul unstained 
by ink, even when he had been imposed upon 
in his simplicity, and failed from his guileless- 
ness of soul to be on his guard against guile. 
He it was alone, or rather first of all, who by 
his zeal for piety reconciled to himself and the 
rest of the church the faction opposed to us, 
which was the last to leave us, the first to re- 
turn, owing to both their reverence for the 
man and the purity of his doctrine, so that the 
serious storm in the churches was allayed, and 
the hurricane reduced to a breeze under the 
influence of his prayers and admonitions ; 
while, if I may make a boastful remark, I was 
his partner Y in piety and activity, aiding him 

\ 

in every effort on behalf of what is good, ac- | 

a Degrees. The heretics asserted that the Father, Son and Holy 
Ghost were arranged in this order according to a real difference in 
rank. 

BA document. YVenoit (I. p. 179) gives reasons for believing 
that this was the creed of the council of Antioch, A.D. 363—which 
accepted the Creed of Nicwa, but explained it in terms capable of 
© semiarian construction. ‘The ‘‘over zealous part”? were the 
monks. : : 

y Partner. S. Gregory had a considerable share in the ex- 
planations which made clear his father’s real orthodoxy, and re-cs- 
tablished peace. Orat. vi. was pronounced by him on the occa- 
sion, 

before ; it takes possession of me, and I feel 
more at a loss to know what I ought to pass 
by, than other panegyrists are as to what they 
ought to say. So that the abundance of ma- 
terial is to some extent a hindrance to me, and 
my mind is itself put to the test in its efforts 
to test his qualities, and its inability, where 
all are equal, to find one which surpasses the 
rest. So that, just as when we see a pebble 
falling into still water, it becomes the centre 
and starting-point of circle after circle, each 
by its continuous agitation breaking up that 
which lies outside of it ; this is exactly the case 
with myself. For as soon as one thing enters 
my mind, another follows and displaces it ; 
and I am wearied out in making a choice, as 
what I have already grasped is ever retiring in 
favour of that which follows in its train. 

20. Who was more anxious than he for the 
common weal? Who more wise in domestic 
affairs, since God, who orders all things in due 
variation, assigned to him a house and _ suita- 
ble fortune? Who was more sympathetic in 
mind, more bounteous in hand, towards the 
poor, that most dishonoured portion of the 
nature to which equal honour is due? For he 
actually treated his own property as if it were 
another’s, of which he was but the steward, re- 
lieving poverty as far as he could, and expend- 

ing not only his superfluities but his necessi- 

ties—a manifest proof of love for the poor, 
giving a portion, not only to seven, accord- 
ing to the injunction of Solomon,* but if an 
eighth came forward, not even in his case be- 
ing niggardly, but more pleased to dispose of 
his wealth than we know others are to acquire 
it; taking away the yoke and election (which 
means, as I think, all meanness in testing as to 
whether the recipient is worthy or not) and 
word of murmuring ® in benevolence. This 
is what most men do: they give indeed, but 
without that readiness, which is a greater and 
more perfect thing than the mere offering. 
For he thought it much better Y to be gener- 
ous even to the undeserving for the sake of the 
deserving, than from fear of the undeserving 

B Isai. lviii. 9 (LXX.). 
Clémencet compares Dem, De Corona, 

a Eccles. xi. 2. 
y Better, 

Oh Ere DEATH OF 

to deprive those who were ae And 
this seems to be the duty of casting our 

bread upon the waters,* since it will not be 
swept away or perish in the eyes of the just 
Investigator, but will arrive yonder where all 
that is ours is laid up, and will meet with us 
in due time, even though we think it not. 

21. But what is best and greatest of all, his 
magnanimity was accompanied by freedom 
from ambition. 
proceed to show. In considering their wealth 
to be common to all, and in liberality in bestow- 
ing it, he and his consort rivalled each other 
in their struggles after excellence ; but he in- 
trusted the greater part of this bounty to her 
hand, as being a most excellent and trusty 
steward of such matters. What awoman she 
is? Not even the Atlantic Ocean, or if there be 
a greater one, could meet her drafts upon it. 
So great and so boundless is her love of liber- 
ality. In the contrary sense she has rivalled 
the horse-leech ® of Solomon, by her insatia- 
ble longing for progress, overcoming the ten- 
dency to backsliding, and unable to satisfy 
her zeal for benevolence. She not only con- 
sidered all the property which they originally 
possessed, and what accrued to them later, as 
unable to suffice her own longing, but she 
would, as I have often heard her say, have 
gladly sold herself and her children into slavery, 
had there been any means of doing so, to ex- 
pend the proceeds upon the poor. ‘Thus en- 
tirely did she give the rein to her generosity. 
This is, I imagine, far more convincing than 
any instance of it could be. Magnanimity in 
regard to money may be found without diffi- 
culty in the case of others, whether it be dis- 
sipated in the public rivalries of the state, or 
lent to God through the poor, the only mode 
of treasuring it up for those who spend it: but 
it is not easy to discover a man who has re- 
nounced the consequent reputation. For it is 
desire for reputation which supplies to most 
men their readiness to spend. And where the 
bounty must be secret, there the disposition to 
it is less keen. 

22. So bounteous was his hand—further de- 
tails I leave to those who knew him, so that 
if anything of the kind is borne witness to in 
regard to myself, it proceeds from that foun- 
tain, and is a portion of that stream. Who 
was more under the Divine guidance in ad- 
mitting men to the sanctuary,” or in resenting 
dishonour done to it, or in cleansing the holy | 

table with awe from the unholy ? Who with 
such ue ea judgment, and with a scales 

Its extent and character I will | 

Fie Fe PEC 261 

pyro either decided a suit, or hated vice, 
or honoured virtue, or promoted the most ex- 
cellent? Who was so compassionate for the 
sinner, or sympathetic towards those who were 
running well? Who better knew the right 
time for using the rod and the staff,* yet 
relied most upon the staff? Whose eyes were 
more upon the faithful in the land,® espec- 
ially upon those who, in the monastic and un- 
wedded life, have despised the earth and the 
things of earth ? 

23. Who did more to rebuke pride and fos- 
ter lowliness? And that in no assumed or 
external way, as most of those who now make 
profession of virtue, and are in appearance as 
elegant as the most mindless women, who, for 
lack of beauty of their own, take refuge in pig- 
ments, and are, if I may say so, splendidly 
made up, uncomely in their comeliness, and 

more ugly than they originally were. For 
his lowliness was no matter of dress, but of 

spiritual disposition : nor was it expressed by 
a bent neck, or lowered voice, or downcast 
look, or length of beard, or close-shaven head, 
or measured gait, which can be adopted for a 
while, but are very quickly exposed, for noth- 
ing which is affected can be permanent. No! 
he was ever most lofty in life, most lowly in 
mind ; inaccessible in virtue, most accessible 
in intercourse. His dress had in it nothing 
remarkable, avoiding equally magnificence and 
sordidness, while his internal brilliancy was 
supereminent. ‘The disease and insatiability 
of the belly, he, if anyone, held in check, but 
without ostentation ; so that he might be kept 
down without being puffed up, from having 
encouraged a new vice by his pursuit of repu- 
tation. For he held that doing and saying 
everything by which fame among externs might 
be won, is the characteristic of the politician, 
whose chief happiness is found in the present 
life: but that the spiritual and Christian man 
should look to one object alone, his salvation, 
and think much of what may contribute to this, 
but detest as of no value what does not ; and 
accordingly despise what is visible, but be 
occupied with interior perfection alone, and 

estimate most highly whatever promotes his 

own improvement, and attracts others through 
himself to that which is supremely good. 
24. But what was most excellent and most 

characteristic, though least generally recog- 
nized, was his simplicity, and freedom from 

guile and resentment. For among men of 
ancient and modern days, each is supposed to 
have had some special cer a each ee 

Opicel eam x tats B Baw XXX. 15, 
y lo the Sanctuary, i.¢., Vo the Priesthood, 

| 
| 

aPs. xxii, 5. Nod and Stag, i.c., Pumaren and support, 
B de 

SeOle Oe 

262 

to have received from God some particular 
virtue; Job unconquered patience in misfort- 
une,* Moses® and David’ meekness, Samuel 
prophecy, seeing into the future,® Phineas 
zeal,© for which he has a name, Peter and Paul 
eagerness In preaching,$ the sons of Zebedee 
magniloquence, whence also they were entitled 
Sons of thunder.” But why should I enumerate 
them all, speaking as 1 do among those who 
know this? 
mark of Stephen and of my father was the ab- 
sence of malice. For not even when in peril 
did Stephen hate his assailants, but was stoned 
while praying for those who were stoning him 8 
as a disciple of Christ, on Whose behalf he was 
allowed to suffer, and so, in his long-suffering, 
bearing for God a nobler fruit than his death ; 
my father, in allowing no interval between 
assault and forgiveness, so that he was almost 
robbed of pain itself by the speed of pardon. 
25. We both believe in and hear of the 

His dealings with those who deserve it: For 
the Lord is a God of vengeance.‘ For al- 

though Heis disposed by His kindness to gen- 
tleness rather than severity, yet He does not 
absolutely pardon sinners, lest they should be 
made worse by His goodness. Yet my father 
kept no grudge against those who provoked 
him, indeed he was absolutely uninfluenced 
by anger, although in spiritual things exceed- 
ingly overcome by zeal: except when he had 
been prepared and armed and set in hostile 
array against that which was advancing to in- 
jure him. So that this sweet disposition of 
his would not, as the saying goes, have been 
stirred by tens of thousands. For the wrath 
which he had was not like that of the serpent,’ 
smouldering within, ready to defend itself, 
eager to burst forth, and longing to strike 
back at once on being disturbed ; but like the 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

| 

of being himself roused, he made excuses for 
the man who assailed him, blushing for his 
faults as if they had been his own, 

26. The dew would more easily resist the 

~morning rays of the sun, than any remains of 

Now the specially distinguishing | 

anger continue in him; but as soon as he 
had spoken, his indignation departed with his 
words, leaving behind only his love for what 
is good, and never outlasting the sun; nor 
did he cherish anger which destroys even the 

prudent, or show any bodily trace of vice 

within, nay, even when roused, he preserved 
calmness. ‘The result of this was most un- 
usual, not that he was the only one to give 
rebuke, but the only one to be both loved and 
admired by those whom he reproved, from the 
victory which his goodness gained over warmth 
of feeling; and it was felt to be more ser- 
viceable to be punished by a just man than 

_ besmeared by a bad one, for in one case the 
severity becomes pleasant for its utility, in 
dregs‘ of the anger of God, the residuum of | 

of 

the other the kindliness is suspected because 
the evil of the man’s character. But 
though his soul and character were so simple 

_and divine, his piety nevertheless inspired the 

insolent with awe: or rather, the cause of 
their respect was the simplicity which they 
despised. For it was impossible to him to 
utter either prayer or curse without the im- 
mediate bestowal of permanent Dlessing or 
transient pain. ‘The one proceeded from his 
inmost soul, the other merely rested upon his 
lips as a paternal reproof. Many indeed of 
those who had injured him incurred neither 
lingering requital nor, as the poet ¢ says, ‘* ven- 
geance which dogs men’s steps;’’ but at the 
very moment of their passion they were struck 
and converted, came forward, knelt before 
him, and were pardoned, going away glo- 

_riously vanquished, and amended both by the 

sting of the bee, which does not bring death — 
with its stroke ; while his kindness was super- 

human. 

The wheel and scourge were often | 

threatened, and those who could apply them | 

stood near; and the danger ended in being 
pinched on the ear, patted on the face, or 
buffeted on the temple: thus he mitigated the 
threat. His dress and sandals were dragged 
off, and the scoundrel was felled to the ground : 
then his anger was directed not against his 
assailant, but against his eager succourer, as a 
minister of evil. How could anyone be more 

the yoke, which 

conclusively proved to be good, and worthy | 

to offer the gifts to God? For often, instead 

a Job i. ar. B Numb. xii. 3. 4 Wes cxxxne 7 CNX, ), 
oT Samat. oO: e Numb, xxxv. 7. Gali. 
9S. Mark iii. 17. 6 Acts vii. 59. t Dregs. Cf. Orat. xvi. 4, 
KS Ixxy 8S2y xCly, 92), A Ib. viii. 4 (LXX). 

| 

chastisement and the forgiveness. Indeed, a 
forgiving spirit often has great saving power, 
checking the wrongdoer by the sense of shame, 
and bringing him back from fear to love, a 
far more secure state of mind. In chastise- 
ment some were tossed by oxen oppressed by 
suddenly attacked them, 
though they had never done anything of the 
kind before ; others were thrown and trampled 
upon by most obedient and quiet horses ; 
others seized by intolerable fevers, and appar- 
itions of their daring deeds; others being 
punished in different ways, and learning obe- 
dience from the things which they suffered. 
27. Such and so remarkable being his 
gentleness, did he yield the palm to others in 

adhe poet, Pindar, 

industry and practical virtue? By no means. 
Gentle as he was, he possessed, if any one did, 
an energy corresponding to his gentleness. 
For although, for the most part, the two virtues 
of benevolence and severity are at variance and 
opposed to each other, the one being gentle 
but without practical qualities, the other prac- 
tical but unsympathetic, in his case there was 
a wonderful combination of the two, his action 
being as energetic as that of a severe man, but 
combined with gentleness; while his readiness 
to yield seemed unpractical but was accom- 
panied with energy, in his patronage, his free- 
dom of speech, and every kind of official duty. 
He united the wisdom of the serpent, in regard 
to evil, with the harmlessness of the dove, in 
regard to good, neither allowing the wisdom 
to degenerate into knavery, nor the simplic- 
ity into silliness, but as far as in him lay, he 
combined the two in one perfect form of vir- 
tue. Such being his birth, such his exercise 
of the priestly office, such the reputation which 
he won at the hands of all, what wonder if he 
was thought worthy of the miracles by which 
God establishes true religion ? 

28. One of the wonders which concern him | 

was that he suffered from sickness and _ bodily 
pun. But what wonder is it for even holy 
men to be distressed, either for the cleansing 
of their clay, slight though it may be, or a 
touchstone of virtue and test of philosophy, 
or for the education of the weaker, who learn 
from their example to be patient instead of 
giving way under their misfortunes? Well, 
he was sick, the time was the holy and illus- 
trious Easter, the queen of days, the brilliant 
night which dissipates the darkness of sin, 
upon which with abundant light we keep the 
feast of our salvation, putting ourselves to 
death along with the Light once put to death 
for us, and rising again with Him who rose. 
This was the time of his sufferings. Of what 
kind they were, I will briefly explain. His 
whole frame was on fire with an excessive, 
burning fever, his strength had failed, he was 
unable to take food, his sleep had departed 
from him, he was in the greatest distress, and 
agitated by palpitations. Within his month, 
the palate and the whole of the upper surface 
was so completely and painfully ulcerated, 
that it was difficult and dangerous to swallow 
even water. The skill of physicians, the 
prayers, most earnest though they were, of his 
friends, and every possible attentfon were alike 
of no avail. 
condition, while his breath came short and 
fast, had no perception of present things, but 

ON TH DEATH OF HIS PATHER, 

| 

He himself in this desperate | 

263 

he had long desired, now made ready for him. 
We were in the temple, mingling supplications 
with the sacred rites, for, in despair of all 
others, we had betaken ourselves to the Great 
Physician, to the power of that night, and_ to 
the last succour, with the intention, shall I 
say, of keeping a feast, or of mourning ; of 
holding festival, or paying funeral honours to 
one no longer here? O those tears! which 
were shed at that time by all the people. O 
voices, and cries, and hymns blended with the 
psalmody! From the temple they sought the 
priest, from the sacred rite the celebrant, from 
God their worthy ruler, with my Miriam? to 
lead them and strike the timbrel? not of tri- 
umph, but of supplication ; learning then for 
the first time to be put to shame by misfortune, 
and calling at once upon the people and upon 
God ; upon the former to sympathize with her 
distress, and to be lavish of their tears, upon 
the latter, to listen to her petitions, as, with 
the inventive genius of suffering, she rehearsed 
before Him all His wonders of old time. 

29. What then was the response of Him who 
was the God of that night and of the sick 
man? <A shudder comes over me as I proceed 
with my story. And though you, my hearers, 
may shudder, do not disbelieve: for that 
would be impious, when I am the speaker, 
and in reference to him. ‘The time of the 
mystery was come, and the reverend station 
and order, when silence is kept for the solemn 
rites ; and then he was raised up by Him who 
quickeneth the dead, and by the holy night. 
At first he moved slightly, then more decid- 
edly ; then in a feeble and indistinct voice he 
called by name one of the servants who was 
in attendance upon him, and bade him come, 
and bring his clothes, and support him with 
his hand. He came in alarm, and gladly 
waited upon him, while he, leaning upon his 
hand as upon a staff, imitates Moses upon the 
mount, arranges his feeble hands in prayer, 
and in union with, or on behalf of,Y his people 
eagerly celebrates the mysteries, in such few 
words as his strength allowed, but, as it seems 
to me, with a most perfect intention. —§ What 
amiracle! In the sanctuary without a sanc- 
tuary, sacrificing without an altar, a priest far 
from the sacred rites: yet all these were pres- 
ent to him in the power of the spirit, recog- 
nised by him, though unseen by those who 
were there. Then, after adding the customary 

(ie peer Tee is 

a My Miriam. S. Nonna. B Exod. xv. 20. 

y On behalfof, or perhaps “at the head of.” The passage 
does not mean that he actually celebrated the Ifoly Mysteries, 
but that he used some of the prayers of the service, and united 
himself in intention with the service being at the time performed 

| in the church, and invoked the Divine blessing upon his people in 

was entirely absent, immersed in the objects | 

his absence, 

204 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

: ie ‘ : | 
words of thanksgiving, and after blessing the | 

people, he retired again to his bed, and _ after 
taking a little food, and enjoying a sleep, he 
recalled his spirit, and, his health being grad- 
ually recovered, on the new day ¢ of the feast, 
as we call the first Sunday after the festival of 
the Resurrection, he entered the temple and 
inaugurated his life which had been preserved, 
with the full complement of clergy, and offered 
the sacrifice of thanksgiving. ‘To me. this 
seems no less remarkable than the miracle in 
the case of Hezekiah,® who was glorified by 
God in his sickness and prayers with an ex- 
tension of life, and this was signified by the 
return of the shadow of the degrees,Y accord- 
ing to the request of the king who was re- 
stored, whom God honoured at once by the 
favour and the sign, assuring him of the ex- 
tension of his days by the extension of the 
day. 

30. The same miracle occurred in the case 
of my mother not long afterwards. I do not 
think it would be proper to pass by this 
either: for we shall both pay the mced of 
honour which is due to her, if to anyone at 
all, and gratify him, by her being associated 
with him in our recital. She, who had always 
been strong and vigorous and free from dis- 

ease all her life, was herself attacked by sick- 

ness. In consequence of much distress, not 
to prolong my story, caused above all by in- 
ability to eat, her life was for many days in 
danger, and no remedy for the disease could 
be found. How did God sustain her? Not 
by raining down manna, as for Israel of old,é 
or opening the rock, in order to give drink 
to His thirsting people,* or feasting her by 
means of ravens, as Elijah,$ or feeding her by 
a prophet carried through the air, as He did 
to Daniel when a-hungered in the den.” But 
how? She thought she saw me, who was 
her favourite, for not even in her dreams did 
she prefer any other of us, coming up to her 
suddenly at night, with a basket of pure 
white loaves, which I blessed and crossed as I 
was wont to do, and then fed and strength- 
ened her, and she became stronger. ‘The 
nocturnal vision was a real action. For, in 
consequence, she became more herself and of 
better hope, as is manifest by a clear and 
evident token. Next morning, when I paid 
her an early visit, I saw at once that she was 
brighter, and when I asked, as usual, what 
kind of a night she had passed, and if she 

ade new day, On this feast (in another year) Orat. xliy. 
was preached, B 2 Kings xx, 1 et seq. y Isai. xxxvili. 8, 
Exod: avi. Wat vals 6, ¢ Ps. Ixxvitt. 24; 15. 
¢ 1 Kings xvii. 6, 9 Dan. xiv. 33 (sc. Hist. of Bel. v. 33). 

wished for anything, she replied, «My child, 
you most readily and kindly fed me, and 
then you ask how Iam. Tam very well and 
at ease.’? Her maids too made signs to me to 
offer no resistance, and to accept her answer 
at once, lest she should be thrown back into 
despondency, if the truth were laid bare. I 
will add one more instance common to them 
both. 

31. I was on a voyage from Alexandria to 
Greece over the Parthenian Sea. The voyage 
was quite unseasonable, undertaken in an 
Avginetan vessel, under the impulse of eager 
desire ; for what specially induced me was that 
I had fallen in with a crew who were well 
known to me. After making some way on 
the voyage, a terrible storm came upon us, and 
such an one as my shipmates said they had 
but seldom seen before. While we were all 
in fear of a common death, spiritual death 
was what I was most afraid of; for I was in 
danger of departing in misery, being un- 
baptised, and I longed for the spiritual water 
among the waters of death. On this account 
I cried and begged and besought a slight re- 
spite. My shipmates, even in their common 
danger, joined in my cries, as not even my 
own relatives would have done, kindly souls 
as they were, having learned sympathy from 
their dangers. In this my condition, my 
parents felt for me, my danger having been 
communicated to them by a nightly vision, 
and they aided me from the land, soothing 
the waves by prayer, as I afterwards learned 
by calculating the time, after I had landed. 
This was also shown me in a wholesome sleep, 
of which I had experience during a slight 
lull of the tempest. I seemed to be holding a 
Fury, of fearful aspect, boding danger ; for 
the night presented her clearly to my eyes. 
Another of my shipmates, a boy most kindly 
disposed and dear to me, and exceedingly 
anxious on my behalf, in my then present 
condition, thought he saw my mother walk 
upon the sea, and seize and drag the ship to 
land with no great exertion. | We had confi- 
dence in the vision, for the sea began to grow 
calm, and we soon reached Rhodes after the 
intervention of no great discomfort. We our- 
selves became an offering in consequence of 
that peril ; for we promised ourselves if we were 
saved, to God, and, when we had been saved, 
gave ourselves to Him. 

32. Such were their common experiences. 
sut I imagine that some of those who have 
had an accurate knowledge of his life must 
have been for a long while wondering why we 
have dwelt upon these points, as if we thought 

them his only title to renown, and postponed 
the mention of the difficulties of his times, 

ON: thi DEAE OF fils ALTE, 

| 

the same courage. ‘The city of Casarea was 

| in an uproar about the election of a bishop ; 

against which he conspicuously arrayed him- | 
self, as though we were either ignorant of | 
them, or thought them to be of no great con- | 

sequence. Come, then, we will proceed to 
speak upon this topic. ‘The first, and I think 
the last, evil of our day, was the [Emperor 
who apostatised from God and from reason, 
and thought it a small matter to conquer the 
Persians, but a great one to subject to himself 

the Christians; and so, together with the | 
demons who led and prevailed upon him, he | 
failed in no form of impiety, but by means | 

of persuasions, threats, and sophistries, strove 
to draw men to him, and even added to his 
various artifices the use of force. His design, 
however, was exposed, whether he strove to 
conceal persecution under sophistical devices, 
or manifestly made use of his authority— 
namely by one means or the other—either by 
cozening or by violence, to get us into his 
power. Who can be found who more utterly 
despised or defeated him? One sign, among 
many others, of his contempt, is the mission 
to our sacred buildings of the police and their 
commissary, with the intention of taking 
either voluntary or forcible possession of them : 
he had attacked many others, and came hither 
with like intent, demanding the surrender of 
the temple according to the Imperial decree, 
but was so far from succeeding in any of his 
wishes that, had he not speedily given way 
before my father, either from his own good 
sense or according to some advice given to 
him, he would have had to retire with his 
feet mangled, with such wrath and zeal did 
the priest boil against him in defence of his 
shrine. And who had a manifestly greater 
share in bringing about his end, both in pub- 
lic, by the prayers and united supplications 
which he directed against the accursed one, 
without regard to the [dangers of ] the time ; 
and in private, arraying against him his 
nightly armoury, of sleeping on the ground, 
by which he wore away his aged and tender 
frame, and of tears, with whose fountains he 
watered the ground for almost a whole year, 
directing these practices to the Searcher of 
hearts alone, while he tried to escape our no- 
tice, in his retiring piety of which I have 
spoken. And he would have been utterly un- 
observed, had I not once suddenly rushed in- 
to his room, and noticing the tokens of his 
lying upon the ground, inquired of his atten- 
dants what they meant, and so learned the 
mystery of the night. 

33. A further story of the same period and 

for one® had just departed, and another 
must be found, amidst heated partisanship 
not casily to be soothed. For the city was 
naturally exposed to party spirit, owing to 
the fervour of its faith, and the rivalry was 
increased by the illustrious position of the 
see. Such was the state of affairs; several 
Bishops had arrived to consecrate the Bishop ; 
the populace was divided into several par- 
ties, each with its own candidate, as is usual 
in such cases, owing to the influences of pri- 
vate friendship or devotion to God; but at 
last the whole people came to an agreement, 
and, with the aid of aband of soldiers at that 
time quartered there, seized one of? their lead- 
ing citizens, a man of excellent life, but not 
yet sealed with the divine baptism, brought 
him against his will to the sanctuary, and set- 
ting him before the Bishops, begged, with 
entreaties mingled with violence, that he might 
be consecrated and proclaimed, not in the 
best of order, but with all sincerity and ar- 
dour. Nor is it possible to say whom time 
pointed out as more illustrious and religious 
than he was. What then took place, as the 
result of the uproar? ‘TheirY resistance was 
overcome, they purified him, they proclaimed 
him, they enthroned him, by external action, 
rather than by spiritual judgment and dispo- 
sition, as the sequel shows. ‘They were glad 
to retire and regain freedom of judgment, and 
agreed upon a plan—I do not know that it was 
inspired by the Spirit—to hold nothing which 
had been done to be valid, and the institution 
to have been void, pleading violence on the 
part of him who had had no less violence done 
to himself, and laying hold of certain words 
which had been uttered on the occasion with 
greater vigour than wisdom. But the great 
high-priest and just examiner of actions was 
not carried away by this plan of theirs, and did 
not approve of their judgment, but remained 
as uninfluenced and unmoved as if no pressure 
at all had been put upon him. For he saw that, 
the violence having been common, if they 
brought any charge against him, they were 
themselves liable to a counter-charge, or, if 
they acquitted him, they themselves might be 
acquitted, or rather with still more justice, they 
were unable to secure their own acquittal, even 
by acquitting him: for if they were deserving 
of excuse, so assuredly was he, and if he was 
not, much less were they: for it would have 
been far better to have at the time run the risk 

a One, ive. Dianius. ; B One of, etc,, Eusebius. 
y Their, i.e., of the Bishops. 

260 
of resistance to the last extremity, than after- 
wards to enter into designs against him, espe- 

cially at such a juncture, when it was better to , 
put an end to existing enmities than to devise | 

new ones. For the state of affairs was as fol- 

lows. 

34. The Kmperor* had come, raging 

against the Christians; he was angry at the — 

election and threatened the elect, and the city 

stood in imminent peril® as to whether, after | 

that day it should cease to exist, or escape and 
be treated with some degree of mercy. 

‘The | 

innovation in regard to the election was a new | 

ground of exasperation, in addition to the | 

destruction of the temple of Fortune in a time 
of prosperity, and was looked upon as an in- 
vasion of his rights. ‘The governor of the 
province also was eager to turn the opportun- 

ity to his own account, and was ill disposed | 

to the new bishop, with whom he had never 
had friendly relations, in consequence of their 
different political views. Accordingly he sent 
letters to summon the consecrators to invali- 
date the election, and in no gentle terms, for 
they were threatened as if by command of the 
Ikmperor. Hereupon, when the letter reached 
him, without fear or delay, he replied—con- 
sider the courage and spirit of his answer— 
‘« Most excellent governor, we have one Cen- 
sor of all our actions, and one Emperor, 
against whom his enemies are in arms. He 
will review the present consecration, which we 
have legitimately performed according to His 
will. In regard to any other matter, you 
may, if you will, use violence with the great- 
est ease against us. But no one can prevent 
us from vindicating the legitimacy and justice 
of our action in this case; unless you should 
make a law on this point, you, who have no 
right to interfere in our affairs.’? This let- 
ter excited the admiration of its recipient, 
although he was for a while annoyed at it, as 
we have been told by many who know the 
facts well. It also stayed the action of the 
I’mperor, and delivered the city from peril, 
and ourselves, it is not amiss to add, from 
disgrace. ‘This was the work of the occupant 
of an unimportant and suffragan see. Is not 
a presidency of this kind far preferable to a 
title derived from a superior see, and a power 
which is based upon action rather than upon 
a name. 

35. Who is so distant from this world of 
ours, as to be ignorant of what is last in order, 

but the first and greatest proof of his power? | 

The same city was again in an uproar for the 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

same reason, in consequenee of the sudden re- 
moval of the Bishop chosen with such honour- 
able violence, who had now departed to God, 
on Whose behalf he had nobly and bravely 
contended in the persecutions. The heat of 

the disturbance was in proportion to its un- 

reasonableness. ‘The man of eminence was 
not unknown, but was more conspicuous than 
the sun amidst the stars, in the eyes not only 
of all others, but especially of that select and 
most pure portion of the people, whose busi- 
ness 1s in the sanctuary, and the Nazarites¢ 
amongst us, to whom such appointments should, 
ifnot entirely, as much as possible belong, 
and so the church would be free from harm, 
instead of to the most opulent and powerful, 
or the violent and unreasonable portion of the 
people, and especially the most corrupt of 
them. Indeed, Iam almost inclined to believe 
that the civil government is more orderly than 
ours, to which divine grace is attributed, and 
that such matters are better regulated by fear 
than by reason. For what man in his senses 
could ever have approached another, to the 
neglect of your divine® and sacred person, 
who have been beautified by the hands of the 
Lord, the unwedded, the destitute of property 
and almost of flesh and blood, who in your 
words come next to the Word Himself, who 

are wise among philosophers, superior to the 

_ of my life and education. 

world among worldlings, my companion and 
workfellow, and to speak more daringly, the 
sharer with me of a common soul, the partaker 
Would that I could 
speak at liberty and describe you before others 
without being obliged by your presence, in 
dwelling upon such topics, to pass over the 
greater part of them, lest I should incur the 
suspicion of flattery. But, as I began by 
saying, the Spirit must needs have known him 
as His own; yet he was the mark of envy, at 
the hands of those whom I am ashamed to 
mention, and would that it were not possible 
to hear their names from others who studiously 
ridicule our affairs. Let us pass this by like 
a rock in the midstream of a river, and treat 
with respectful silence a subject which ought 
to be forgotten, as we pass on to the remainder 
of our subject. 

36. The things of the Spirit were exactly 
known to the man of the Spirit, and he felt 
that he must take up no submissive posi- 
tion, nor side with factions and_ prejudices 
which depend upon favour rather than upon 
God, but must make the advantage of the 
Church and the common salvation his sole ob- 

a The /inpervor, Julian. 
Blu wuminent peril, lit, ona razor’s edge,” Homer Il, x. 173. 

a Nazarites, 1.e., ‘the monks,” F 
B Your divine, etc., addressed to S. Basil, 

ject. Accordingly he wrote, gave advice, strove 
to unite the people and the clergy, whether 
ministering in the sanctuary or not, gave his 
testimony, his decision and his vote, even in 
his absence, and assumed, in virtue of his gray 

Wide DE Ol AS bek FR 

267 
the evils of life, and longing, if anyone of our 
day has longed, for solitude, and eager, as 
speedily as possible, to escape to some haven of 

| safety, from the surge and dust of public life, 
it was you who, somchow or other seized and 

hairs, the exercise of authority among strangers | 
hood to this base and treacherous mart of 

no less than among his own flock. At last, 
since it was necessary that the consecration 
should be canonical, and there was® lacking 
one of the proper number of Bishops for the 
proclamation, he tore himself from his couch, 
exhausted as he was by age and disease, and 
manfully went to the city, or rather was borne, 
with his body dead though just breathing, per- 
suaded that, if anything were to happen to 
him, this devotion would be a noble winding- 
sheet. Hereupon once more there was a 
prodigy, not unworthy of credit. He re- 
ceived strength from his toil, new life from his 
zeal, presided at the function, took his place 
in the conflict, enthroned the Bishop, and 
was conducted home, no longer borne upon a 
bier, but in a divine ark. His long-suffering, 
over whose praises I have already lingered, 
was in this case further exhibited. For his 
colleagues were annoyed at the shame of being 

gave me up by the noble title of the priest- 

souls. In consequence, evils have already be- 

fallen me, and others are yet to be antici- 

pated. 

lor past experience renders a man 
somewhat distrustful of the future, in spite of 
the better suggestions of reason to the con- 
trary. 

38. Another of his excellences I must not 
leave unnoticed. In general, he was a man of 
great endurance, and superior to his robe of 
flesh ; but during the pain of his last sickness, a 

_ serious addition to the risks and burdens of old 
_age, his weakness was common to him and all 

overcome, and at the public influence of the | 

old man, and allowed their annoyance to 
show itself in abuse of him; but such was the 
strength of his endurance that he was superior 
even to this, finding in modesty a most pow- 
erful ally, and refusing to bandy abuse with 
them. For he felt that it would be a terrible 
thing, after really gaining the victory, to be 
vanquished by the tongue. In consequence, 
he so won upon them by his long-suffering, 
that, when time had lent its aid to his judg- 
ment, they exchanged their annoyance for ad- 
miration, and knelt before him to ask _ his 
pardon, in shame for their previous conduct, 
and flinging away their hatred, submitted to 
him as their patriarch, lawgiver, and judge. 
37. From the same zeal proceeded his op- 

position to the heretics, when, with the aid of | 

the Emperor’s impiety, they made their expe- 
dition, in the hope of overpowering us also, 
and adding us to the number of the others 
whom they had, in almost all cases, succeeded 
in enslaving. For in this he afforded us no 
slight assistance, both in himself, and by 

hounding us on like well-bred dogs against | 

these most savage beasts, through his training | 

in piety. On one point I blame you both, 

| 

and pray do not take amiss my plainspeak- | 
ing, if T should annoy you by expressing the — 
cause of my pain. When I was disgusted at | 

a There was lacking, ‘The Council of Nica ordered that a 
Bishop should be consecrated by at least three Bishops, + 

other men ; but this fitting sequel to the other 
marvels, so far from being common, was pe- 
culiarly his own. He was at no time free 
from the anguish of pain, but often in the day, 
sometimes in the hour, his only relief was the 
liturgy, to which the pain yielded, as if to an 
edict of banishment. At last, after a life of 
almost a hundred years, exceeding David's 
limit of our age,* forty-five of these, the aver- 
age life of man, having been spent in the 
priesthood, he brought it to a close in a good 
old age. And in what manner? With the 
words and forms of prayer, leaving behind no 
trace of vice, and many recollections of virtue. 
The reverence felt for him was thus greater 

_ than falls to the lot of man, both on the lips 

and in the hearts of all. Nor is it easy to find 
anyone who recollects him, and does not, as 
the Scripture says, lay his hand upon his 
mouth 8 and salute hismemory. Such was his 
life, and such its completion and perfection. 
39. And since some living memorial of his 
munificence ought to be left behind, what 
other is required than this temple, which he 
reared for God and for us, with very little con- 
tribution from the people in addition to the 
expenditure of his private fortune? An ex- 
ploit which should not be buried in silence, 
since in size it is superior to most others, in 
beauty absolutely to all. It surrounds itself 
with eight regular equilaterals, and is raised 
aloft by the beauty of two stories of pillars 
and porticos, while the statues placed upon 

| them are true to the life; its vault flashes down 

upon us from above, and it dazzles our eyes 
with abundant sources of light on every side, 
being indeed the dwelling-place of light. It 

B Job xl. 4. 

268 

is surrounded by excrescent equiangular am- 
bulatories of most splendid material, with a 
wide area in the midst, while its doors and 
vestibules shed around it the lustre of their 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

gracetulness, and offer from a distance their | 
welcome to those who are drawing nigh. I | 

have not yet mentioned the external ornament, 
the beauty and size of the squared and dove- 
tuled stonework, whether it be of marble in 
the bases and capitals, which divide the angles, 

or from our own quarries, which are in no | 

wise inferior to those abroad ; nor of the belts 

of many shapes and colours, projecting or in- 

laid from the foundation to the roof-tree, which | 

robs the spectator by limiting his view. How 
could anyone with due brevity describe a work 
which cost so much time and toil and skill: 
or will it suffice to say that amid all the works, 
private and public, which adorn other cities, 
this has of itself been able to secure us celebrity 
among the majority of mankind ? 
such a temple a priest was needed, he also 
at his own expense provided one, whether 
worthy of the temple or no, it is not for me 
to say. And when sacrifices were required, 
he supplied them also, in the misfortunes of 
his son, and his patience under trials, that God 
might receive at his hands a reasonable whole 
burnt offering and spiritual priesthood, to be 
honourably consumed, instead of the sacrifice 
of the Law. 

40. What sayest thou, my father? Is this 
sufficient, and dost thou find an ample recom- 
pense for all thy toils, which thou didst under- 
go for my learning, in this eulogy of farewell 
or of entombment? And dost thou, as of old, 

When for — 

whole flock and all the clergy, whose father 
thou art said to be, but especially him who 
was overpowered by thy paternal and spiritual 
coercion, so that he may not entirely consider 
that act of tyranny obnoxious to blame. 

41. And what do you think of us, O judge 
of my words and motions? If we have spoken 
adequately, and to the satisfaction of your 
desire, confirm it by your decision, and we 
accept it: for your decision is entirely the de- 
cision of God. But if it falls far short of his 
glory and of your hope, my ally is not far to 
seek, Let fall thy voice, which is awaited by 
his merits like a seasonable shower. And in- 
deed he has upon you the highest claims, those 
of a pastor upon a pastor and of a father upon 
his son in grace. What wonder if he, who 
has¢ through your voice thundered throughout 
the world, should himself have some enjoy- 
ment of it? What more is needed? Only to 
unite with our spiritual Sarah, the consort and 

_ fellow-traveller through life of our great father 

Abraham, in the last Christian offices. 
4 
42. ‘The nature of God, my mother, is not 

_ the same as that of men ; indeed, to speak gener- 

impose silence on my tongue, and bid me stop — 

in due time, and so avoid excess ? 
thou require some addition? I know thou 
bidst me cease, for I have said enough. Yet 
suffer me to add this. Make known to us 
where thou art in glory, and the light which 
encircles thee, and receive into the same abode 
thy partner soon to follow thee, and the chil- 
dren whom thou hadst laid to rest before 
thee, and me also, after no further, or but a 
slight addition to the ills of this life: and be- 
fore reaching that abode receive me in this 
sweet stone,* which thou didst erect for both 
of us, to the honour even here of thy conse- 
crated namesake, and excuse me from the care 

Or dost | 

both of the people which I have already re- | 

signed,® and of that which for thy sake I have 

since accepted: and mayest thou guide and | 
free from peril, as I earnestly entreat, the 
_we find in being transferred hence to the true 

ite 

a Stone, i.e., the tomb in which his father was buried. 
BWhich L have resigned, i.e., Sasima. Accepted, i.e., Nazian- 
zus. 

ally, the nature of divine things is not the same 
as that of earthly things. ‘They possess un- 
changeableness and immortality, and absolute 
being with its consequences, for sure are the 
properties of things sure. But how is it with 
what is ours? It is in a state of flux and cor- 
ruption, constantly undergoing some _ fresh 
change. Life and death, as they are called, 
apparently so different, are in a sense resolved 
into, and successive to, each other. For the 
one takes its rise from the corruption which is 
our mother, runs its course through the corrup- 
tion which is the displacement of all that is 
present, and comes to an end in the corruption 
which is the dissolution of this life; while the 
other, which is able to set us free from the ills 
of this life, and oftentimes translates us to the 
life above, is not in my opinion accurately 
called death, and is more dreadful in name 
than in reality ; so that we are in danger of 
irrationally being afraid of what is not fearful, 
and courting as preferable what we really ought 
to fear. ‘There is one life, to look to life. 
‘There is one death, sin, for it is the destruc- 
tion of the soul. But all else, of which some 
are proud, is a dream-vision, making sport of 
realities, and a series of phantasms which lead 
the soul astray. If this be our condition, 
mother, we shall neither be proud of life, nor 
greatly hurt by death. What grievance can 

a /le who has. S. Gregory the elder was the principal mover 
in S, Basil’s election and consecration, 

lite? In being freed from the vicissitudes, the | 
agitation, the disgust, and all the vile tribute 
we must pay to this life, to find ourselves, amid 
stable things, which know no flux, while as 
lesser lights, we circle round the great light ? 
43. Does the sense of separation cause you 
pain? Let hope cheer you. Is widowhood | 
grievous to you? Yet it is not so to him. 
And what is the good of love, if it gives itself 
easy things, and assigns the more difficult to its 
neighbour? And why should it be grievous at 
all, to one who is soon to pass away? The ap- | 
pointed day is at hand, the pain will not last 
long. Let us not, by ignoble reasonings, make | 
a burden of things which are really light. | 
| 
| 
| 

We have endured a great loss—because the | 
privilege we enjoyed was great. Loss is com- 
mon to all, such a privilege to few. Let us. 
rise superior to the one thought by the con- | 
solation of the other. For it is more reason- 
able, that that which is better should win 
the day. You have borne, in a most brave, 
Christian spirit, the loss of children, who were 
still in their prime and qualified for life; bear 
also the laying aside of his aged body by one 
who was weary of life, although his vigor of 
mind preserved for him his senses unimpaired. 
Do you want some one to care for you? Where | 
is your Isaac, whom he left behind for you, to 
take his place in all respects? Ask of him small 
things, the support of his hand and service, 
and requite him with greater things, a mother’s 
blessing and prayers, and the consequent free- 
dom. Are you vexed at being admonished ? 
I praise you for it. For you have admonished 
many whom your long life has brought under 
your notice. What I have said can have no 
application to you, who are so truly wise ; but 
let it be a general medicine of consolation for 
mourners, so that they may know that they 
are mortals following mortals to the grave. 

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XXI. 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS, BISHOP OF 
ALEXANDRIA. 

The reference in § 22 to ‘the Council 
which sat first at Seleucia . . . and afterwards 
at this mighty city,’’ leaves no room for doubt- 
ing that the Oration was delivered at Constan- 
tinople. Further local colour is found in the 
allusions of § 5. We are assured by the pane- 
gyric on S. Cyprian (Orat. xxiy. 1) that it 
was already the custom of the Church of Con- 
stantinople to observe annual festivals in hon- 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS. 

Gy Gelioiinlos 
VOL. VII, 

269 

our of the Saints: and at present two days are 
kept by the Eastern Church, viz., Jan. 18th, 
as the day of the actual death of S. Athana- 
sius, and May 2d, in memory of the translation 
of his remains to the church of S. Sophia 
at Constantinople. Probably, therefore, this 
Oration was delivered on the former day, on 
which Assemani holds that S. Athanasius died. 
Papebroke and (with some hesitation) Dr. 
Bright pronounce in favour of May 2d. Tille- 
mont supposes that A.D. 379 is the year of its 
delivery ; in which case it must have been very 
shortly after S. Gregory’s arrival in the city. 
Since, however, no allusion is made to this, it 
seems, on the whole, more likely that it should 
be assigned to a.p. 380. ‘The sermon takes 
high rank, even among S. Gregory’s discourses, 
as the model of an ecclesiastical panegyric. 
It lacks, however, the charm of personal affec- 
tion and intimate acquaintance with the inner 
life, which is characteristic of the orations con- 
cerned with his own relatives and friends. 

ORATION. 

1. In praising Athanasius, I shall be prais- 
ing virtue. To speak of him and to praise 
virtue are identical, because he had, or, to 
speak more truly, has embraced virtue in its 
entirety. For all who have lived according 
to God still live unto God, though they have 
departed hence. For this reason, God is 
called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, 
since He is the God, not of the dead, but of 
the living. Again, in praising virtue, I shall 
be praising God, who gives virtue to men 
and lifts them up, or lifts them up again, to 
Himself by the enlightenment which is akin to 
Himself.6 For many and great as are our bless- 
ings—none can say how many and how great 
—which we have and shall have from God, 
this is the greatest and kindliest of all, our in- 
clination and relationship to Him. For God 
is to intelligible things what the sun is to the 
things of sense. ‘The one lightens the visible, 
the other the invisible, world. The one makes 
our bodily eyes to see the sun, the other makes 
our intellectual natures to see God. And, as 
that, which bestows on the things which see 
and are seen the power of seeing and being 
seen, is itself the most beautiful of visible 
things ; so God, who creates, for those who 
think, and that which is thought of, the power 
of thinking and being thought of, is Him- 
self the highest of the objects of thought, in 
Whom every desire finds its bourne, beyond 

iG eMatt. xxl. 32% Bx Johni. 5. 

270 

Whom it can no further go. lor not even 
the most philosophic, the most piercing, the 
most curious intellect has, or can ever have, 
a more exalted object. For this is the utmost 
of things desirable, and they who arrive at 
it find an entire rest from speculation, 

2, Whoever has been permitted to escape 
by reason and contemplation from matter and 
this fleshly cloud or veil (whichever it should 
be called) and to hold communion with God, 
and be associated, as far as man’s nature can 
attain, with the purest Light, blessed is he, 
both from his ascent from hence, and for his 
deification there, which is conferred by true 
philosophy, and by rising superior to the dual- 
ism of matter, through the unity which is per- 
ceived in the Trinity. And whosoever has 
been depraved by being knit to the flesh, and 
so far oppressed by the clay that he cannot 
look at the rays of truth, nor rise above things 
below, though he is born from above, and 
called to things above, I hold him to be mis- 
erable in his blindness, even though he may 
abound in things of this world ; and all the 
more, because he is the sport of his abundance, 
and is persuaded by it that something else is 
beautiful instead of that which is really beauti- 
ful, reaping, as the poor fruit of his poor opin- 
ion, the sentence of darkness, or the seeing 
Him to be fire, Whom he did not recognize 
as light. 

3. Such has been the philosophy of few, 
both nowadays and of old—for few are the men 
of God, though all are His handiwork, —among 
lawgivers, generals, priests, Prophets, Evange- 
lists, Apostles, shepherds, teachers, and all the 
spiritual host and band—and, among them all, 
of him whom now we praise. And whom do 
I mean by these? Men like Enoch, Noah, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve Patriarchs, 
Moses, Aaron, Joshua, the Judges, Samuel, 
David, to some extent Solomon, Elijah, Elisha, 
the Prophets before the captivity, those after 
the captivity, and, though last in order, first 
in truth, those who were concerned with Christ’s 
Incarnation or taking of our nature, the lamp * 
before the Light, the voice before the Word, 
the mediator before the Mediator, the mediator 
between the old covenant and the new, the 
famous John, the disciples of Christ, those after 
Christ, who were set over the people, or illus- 
trious in word, or conspicuous for miracles, or 
made perfect through their blood. 

4. With some of these Athanasius vied, by 
some he was slightly excelled, and others, if it is 
not bold to say so, he surpassed : some he made 

aS. John: x, 235 Vv. 35+ 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

his models in mental power, others in activity, 
others in meekness, others in zeal, others in 
dangers, others in most respects, others in all, 
gathering from one and another various forms 
of beauty (like men who paint figures of ideal 
excellence), and combining them in his single 
soul, he made one perfect form of virtue out of 
all, excelling in action men of intellectual ca- 
pacity, in intellect men of action; or, if you 
will, surpassing in intellect men renowned for 
intellect, in action those of the greatest active 
power; outstripping those who had moderate 
reputation in both respects, by his eminence in 
either, and those who stood highest in one or 
other, by his powers in both; and, if it isa great 
thing for those who have received an example, 
so to use it as to attach themselves to virtue, 
he has no inferior title to fame, who for our 
advantage has set an example to those who 
come after him. 

5. To speak of and admire him fully, would 
perhaps be too long a task for the present pur- 
pose of my discourse, and would take the form 
ofa history rather than of a panegyric: a history 
which it has been the object of my desires to 
commit to writing for the pleasure and instruc- 
tion of posterity, as he himself wrote the life of 
the divine Antony,@ and set forth, in the form 
of a narrative, the laws of the monastic life. 
Accordingly, after entering into a few of the 
many details of his history, such as memory 
suggests at the moment as most noteworthy, in 
order both to satisfy my own longing and ful- 
fil the duty which befits the festival, we will 
leave the many others to those who know them. 
For indeed, it is neither pious nor safe, while 
the lives of the ungodly are honoured by recol- 
lection, to pass by in silence those who have 
lived piously, especially in a city which could 
hardly be saved by many examples of virtue, 
making sport, as it does, of Divine things, no 
less than of the horse-race and the theatre. 

6. He was brought up, from the first, in re- 
ligious habits and practices, after a brief study 
of literature and philosophy, so that he might 
not be utterly unskilled in such subjects, or ig- 
norant of matters which he had determined to 
despise. For his generous and eager soul 
could not brook being occupied in vanities, 
like unskilled athletes, who beat the air in- 
stead of their antagonists and lose the prize. 
From meditating on every book of the Old 
and New Testament, with a depth such as none 
else has applied even to one of them, he grew 

a Antony, ‘*the founder of asceticism.” the most celebrated of 
the monks and hermits of the Thebaid desert. His life by S. 
Athanasius is certainly genuine, and cven if, as some suspect, In- 
terpolations have been inserted, its substantial integrity 1s un- 

doubted. (Newman, Ch. of the Fathers, p. 176.) 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS, 

ich in contemplation, rich in splendour of 
life, combining them in wondrous sort by that 
gol 

13 the guide of contemplation, contemplation 
as the seal of life. 
the beginning of wisdom, and, so to say, its 
first swathing band; but, when wisdom has 
burst the bonds of fear and risen up to love, it 
makes us friends of God, and sons instead of 
bondsmen. 

7. Thus brought up and trained, as even 
now those should be who are to preside over 
the people, and take the direction of the 
mighty body of Christ, according to the will 
and foreknowledge of God, which lays long 
before the foundations of great deeds, he was 
invested with this important ministry, and 
made one of those who draw near to the God 
Who draws near to us, and deemed worthy of 
the holy office and rank, and, after passing 
through the entire series of orders, he was (to 
make my story short) entrusted with the chief 
rule over the people, in other words, the charge 
of the whole world: nor can I say whether he 
received the priesthood as the reward of virtue, 
or to be the fountain and life of the Church. 
For she, like Ishmael,® fainting from her thirst 
for the truth, needed to be given to drink, or, 
like Elijah,¥ to be refreshed from the brook, 
when the land was parched by drought; and, 
when but faintly breathing, to be restored to 
life and left as a seed to Israel,® that we might 
not become like Sodom and Gomorrah, ¢ 
whose destruction by the rain of fire and 
brimstone is only more notorious than their 
wickedness. Therefore, when we were cast 
down, a horn of salvation was raised up for us,$ 
and a chief corner stone,” knitting us to itself 
and to one another, was laid in due season, or 
a fire® to purify our base and evil matter,‘ or a 
farmer’s fan* to winnow the light from the 
weighty in doctrine, or a sword to cut out the 
roots of wickedness; and so the Word finds 
him as his own ally, and the Spirit takes pos- 
session of one who will breathe on His behalf. 

8. Thus, and for these reasons, by the vote 
of the whole people, not in the evil fashion 
which has since prevailed, nor by means of 
bloodshed and oppression, but in an apostolic 
and spiritual manner, he is led up to the throne 
of Saint Mark, to succeed him in piety, no 
less than in office; in the latter indeed ata 
great distance from him, in the former, which 

he 
} 
| 

a Rody of Christ, t.e., the Church, His mystical body. 

B Gen, xxi, 19. y 1 Kings xvii. 4, 8 Isai. i. 9. 

e Gen, xix. 24. ¢ S. Luke i. 69. n Isai. xxviii. 16. 

@ Mal. iii. 2, 3. tr Cor. 10; 135 15. « S. Matt. iii, 12. 

The throne, etc., as Patriarch of Alexandria. The date of 
his consecration is A.D. 326. 

golden bond which few can weave ; using life | 

| 

| 
| 

For the fear of the Lord is | 

any 

is the genuine right of succession, following 
him closely. For unity in doctrine deserves 
unity in office ; and a rival teacher sets up a 
rival throne ; the one is a successor in reality, 
the ether but in name. For it is not the in- 
truder, but he whose rights are intruded upon, 
who is the successor, not the lawbreaker, but 
the lawfully appointed, not the man of con- 
trary opinions, but the man of the same faith ; 
if this is not what we mean by successor, he 
succeeds in the same sense as disease to health, 
darkness to light, storm to calm, and frenzy 
to sound sense. 

9. The duties of his office he discharged in 
the same spirit as that in which he had been 
preferred to it. For he did not at once, after 
taking possession of his throne, like men who 
have unexpectedly seized upon some soverei enty 
or inheritance, grow insolent from intoxication. 
This is the conduct of illegitimate and intru- 
sive priests, who are unworthy of their voca- 
tion; whose preparation for the priesthood 
has cost them nothing, who have endured no 
inconvenience for the sake of virtue, who only 
begin to study religion when appointed to 
teach it, and undertake the cleansing of others 
before being cleansed themselves ; yesterday 
sacrilegious, to-day sacerdotal; yesterday ex- 
cluded from the sanctuary,* to-day its offici- 
ants ; proficient in vice, novices in piety ; the 
product of the favour of man, not of the grace of 
the Spirit ; who, having run through the whole 
gamut of violence, at last tyrannize over even 
piety ; who, instead of gaining credit for their 
office by their character, need for their char- 
acter the credit of their office, thus subverting 
the due relation between them ; who ought to 
offer more sacrifices® for themselves than for 
the ignorances of the people ; ¥ who inevitably 
fall into one of two errors, either, from their 
own need of indulgence, being excessively in- 
dulgent, and so even teaching, instead of 
checking, vice, or cloaking their own sins un- 
der the harshness of their rule. Both these 
extremes he avoided ; he was sublime in action, 
lowly in mind; inaccessible in virtue, most 
accessible in intercourse; gentle, free from 
anger, sympathetic, sweet in words, sweeter in 
disposition ; angelic in appearance, more an- 
gelic in mind; calm in rebuke, persuasive in 
praise, without spoiling the good effect of 
either by excess, but rebuking with the tender- 
ness of a father, praising with the dignity of a 

a The Sanctuary, or “the Sacraments.” Exod. xxvi. 33. 

B To offer more sacrifices, t.e., Vhese priests are not ondy ‘men 
which have infirmity,” who need to offer for their own’sins, as 
well as for those of the people; but because they are even more 
sinful than their flocks, they need a greater and more frequent 
atonement, y Heb. vil. 27; ix. 7. 

Ue2 

272 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

ruler, his tenderness was not dissipated, nor 
his severity sour; for the one was reasonable, 
the other prudent, and both truly wise; his 
disposition sufficed for the training of his 
spiritual children, with very little need of 
words ; his words with very little need of the 
rod,* and his moderate use of the rod with still 
less for the knife. 

1o. But why should I paint for you the por- 
trait of the man? St. Paul® has sketched him 
by anticipation. 
the praises of the great High-priest, who hath 
passed through the heavens ¥ (for I will venture 
to say even this, since Scripture ® can call those 
who live according to Christ by the name of 
Christs) ; € and again when by the rules in his 
letter to Timothy,’ he gives a model for future 

This he does, when he sings — 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

Bishops: for if you will apply the law as a test | 

to him who deserves these praises, you will 
clearly perceive his perfect exactness. Come 
then to aid me in my panegyric; for I am 
labouring heavily in my speech, and though I 
desire to pass by point after point, they seize 
upon me one after another, and I can find no 
surpassing excellence in a form which is in all 
respects well proportioned and beautiful; for 
each as it occurs to me seems fairer than the rest 
and so takes by storm my speech. Come then, 
I pray, you who have been his admirers and 
witnesses, divide among yourselves his excel- 
lences, contend bravely with one another, men 
and women alike, young men and maidens, 
old men and children, priests and people, 
solitaries and cenobites,7 men of simple or 
of exact life, contemplatives or practically 
minded. Let one praise him in his fastings 
and prayers as if he had been disembodied 
and immaterial, another his unweariedness 
and zeal for vigils and psalmody, another his 
patronage of the needy, another his daunt- 
lessness towards the powerful, or his conde- 
scension to the lowly. Let the virgins cele- 
brate the friend of the Bridegroom ;® those 
under the yoke‘ their restrainer, hermits him 
who lent wings to their course, cenobites their 
lawgiver, simple folk their guide, contem- 
platives the divine, the joyous their bridle, 
the unfortunate their consolation, the hoary- 
headed their staff, youths their instructor, the 
poor their resource, the wealthy their steward. 
Even the widows will, methinks, praise their 
protector, even the orphans their father, even 

ar Con. Ivers 

B St. Paul. To whom here the Ep. to the 

y Heb. iv, 14. r) 

e Christs. i.e. Ps. cv. 15. ‘‘Touch not Mine anointed.” 
(LXX.) and Vulg. ‘*my Christs.”” Gx Timiui.-27etiseq: 

n Cenobites pryddes. Cf. Orat. ii. 29 ; xliil. 62. 

@S, John iii. 29. 

+ Under the yoke, i.e. “Married.” Cf. Orat. 

Hebrews is assigned. 
BS ccvii 1s. 

xi az. 

the poor their benefactor, strangers their en- 
tertainer, brethren the man of brotherly love, 
the sick their physician, in whatever sickness 
or treatment you will, the healthy the guard of 
health, yea all men him who made himself 
all things to all men that he might gain al- 
most, if not quite, all. 

11. On these grounds, as I have Gait: 4) 
leave others, who have leisure to admire the 
minor details of his character, to admire and 
extol him. I call them minor details only in 
comparing him and his character with his own 
standard, for that which hath been made 
glorious hath not been made glorious, even 
though it be exceeding splendid by reason of 
the glory that surpasseth,* as we are told ; for 
indeed the minor points of his excellence 
would suffice to win celebrity for others. But 
since it would be intolerable for me to leave 
the word and serve less important details, I 
must turn to that which is his chief character- 
istic; and God alone, on Whose behalf I am 
speaking, can enable me to say anything worthy 
of a soul so noble and so mighty in the word. 

12. In the palmy days of the Church, when 
all was well, the present elaborate, far-fetched 
and artificial treatment of Theology had not 
made its way into the schools of divinity, 

| but playing with pebbles which deceive the 

eye by the quickness of their changes, or 
dancing before an audience with varied and 
effeminate contortions, were looked upon as all 
one with speaking or hearing of God in a way 
unusual or frivolous. But since the Sex- 
tusesY and Pyrrhos, and the antithetic style, 
like a dire and malignant disease, have infected 
our churches, and babbling is reputed cul- 
ture, and, as the book of the Acts® says of the 
Athenians, we spend our time in nothing else 
but either to tell or to hear some new thing. 
O what Jeremiah¢ will bewail our confusion 
and blind madness; he alone could utter 
lamentations befitting our misfortunes. 

13. The beginning of this madness was 
Arius (whose name is derived from frenzy $), 
who paid the penalty of his unbridled tongue 
by his death in a profane spot,” brought 
about by prayer not by disease, when he like 
Judas ® burst asunder for his similar treachery 

a 2 Cor. ili. 10. BActsivie 2: 

y Sextuses. Sextus Empiricus (cent. 3 A.D.) a leader of the 
later Sceptic school, Pyrrho of Elis (cent. 4 B.G) «sas the 
founder of the earlier. 6 Acts xvii. 21. esvamiwet cre 

¢ Frenzy. Cf. Orat, ii. 373 xxxiv. 8. 

n A profane spot, lit ** profane places”’—plural_as contrasted 
with the év rémw ayiy, Lev. vi. 16. etc., etc. : in which the priests 
must eat of the sacrifices. ‘The meaning of the phrase is ‘‘ Arius 
died excommunicated "—indeed on the eve of the day on which 
the Emperor Constantine had ordered him to be restored to com- 
munion. < i 

0 Like Zudas. Cf, Epiph. Haer, 68.7; Soer. i. 38. _Theodoret 
14s t Acts i, 18. 

to the Word. Then others, catching the in- 
fection, organized an art of impiety, and, con- 
fining Deity to the Unbegotten, expelled from 
Deity not only the Begotten, but also the Pro- 
ceeding one, and honoured the Trinity with 
communion in name® alone, or even refused 
to retain this for it. Not so that blessed one, 
who was indeed a man of God and a mighty 
trumpet of truth: but being aware that to 
contract 8 the Three Persons to a numerical 
Unity is heretical, and the innovation of 
Sabellius, who first devised a contraction of 
Deity ; and that to sever the Three Persons by 
a distinction of nature, is an unnatural muti- 
lation of Deity ; he both happily preserved the 
Unity, which belongs to the Godhead, and 
religiously taught the Trinity, which refers ¥ 
to Personality, neither confounding the Three 
Persons in the Unity, nor dividing the Sub- 
stance among the Three Persons, but abiding 
within the bounds of piety, by avoiding ex- 
cessive inclination or opposition to either 
side. 

14. And therefore, first in the holy Synod 
of Nicwa,® the gathering of the three ‘hun- 
dred and eighteen chosen men, united by the 
Holy Ghost, as far as in him lay, he stayed 
the disease. Though not yet ranked among 
the Bishops, he held the first rank among the 
members of the Council, for preference was 
given to virtue just as much as to office. 
Afterwards, when the flame had been fanned 
by the blasts of the evil one, and had spread 
very widely (hence came the tragedies of 
Which almost the whole earth and sea are full), 
the fight raged fiercely around him who was 
the noble champion of the Word. For the 
assault is hottest upon the point of resistance, 
while various dangers surround it on every 
side: for impiety is skilful in designing evils, 
and excessively daring in taking them in 
hand: and how would they spare men, who 
had not spared the Godhead ? Yet one of the 
assaults was the most dangerous of all: and I 
myself contribute somewhat to this scene ; 
yea, let me plead for the innocence of my dear 
fatherland, for the wickedness was not due to 
the land that bore them, but to the men who 
undertook it. For holy indeed is that land, 
and everywhere noted for its piety, but these 
men are unworthy of the Church which bore 

al nante, etc., i.c., They used the name Trinity, although it 
was rendered meaningless by their false doctrine as to the in- 
equality of the Three Blessed Persons. 

B 70 contract, etc. On this whole passage cf. Orat. ii. 36, 37, 
notes, 

y Which refers, etc., or “ which consists in personal relations.” 
Cf. on t6eé7y%5. Orat. xliii. 30, note. 

6 Nicea, a.v. 325. Athanasius was present as theological 
assistant to Alexander of Alexandria, 

| 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS. 273 

them, and ye have heard of a briar growing 
in a vine ;* and the traitor ® was Judas, one of 
the disciples. 

15. There are some who do not excuse even 
my namesake ¥ from blame; who, living at 
Alexandria at the time for the sake of culture, 
although he had been most kindly treated by 
him, as if the dearest of his children, and _ re- 
ceived his special confidence, yet joined in the 
revolutionary plot against his father and patron : 
for, though others took the active part in it, 
the hand of Absalom® was with them, as the 
Saying goes. If any of you had heard of the 
hand which was produced by fraud against the 
Saint, and the corpse ¢ of the living man, and 
the unjust banishment, he knows what I mean. 
But this I will gladly forget. For on doubtful 
points, I am disposed to think we ought to in- 
cline to the charitable side, and acquit rather 
than condemn the accused. For a bad man 
would speedily condemn even a good man, 
while a good man would not be ready to con- 
demn even a bad one. For one who is not 
ready to do ill, is not inclined even to suspect 
it. I come now to what is matter of fact, not 
of report, what is vouched for as truth instead 
of unverified suspicion. 

16. There was a monster $ from Cappadocia, 
born on our farthest confines, of low birth, 
and lower mind, whose blood was not per- 
fectly free, but mongrel, as we know that of 
mules to be ; at first, dependent on the table of 
others, whose price was a barley-cake, who had 
learnt to say and do everything with an eye to 
his stomach, and, at last, after sneaking into 
public life, and filling its lowest offices, such 
as that of contractor for swine’s flesh, the sol- 
diers’ rations, and then having proved himself 
a scoundrel for the sake of greed in this public 
trust, and been stripped to the skin, contrived 
to escape, and after passing, as exiles do, from 
country to country and city to city, last of 
all, in an evil hour for the Christian commun- 
ity, like one of the plagues of Egypt, he 
reached Alexandria. ‘There, his wanderings 
being stayed, he began his villany. Good 
for nothing in all other respects, without cul- 
ture, without fluency in conversation, withe’; 
even the form and pretence of reverence, his 

a Isai. v. 2 (LXX.) ; vii. 23, v. L “ina vineyard,” 
S. Luke vi. 16. 

y Namesake. Gregory, a Cappadocian, nominated to the see 
of Alexandria, by the Arian Bishops at Antioch, after the banish- 
ment of Athanasius, A.D. 340. ; 

5) xétp "ABeooaddn * The hand of Absalom,” prob. a mis- 
quotation of 2 Sam. xiv. 19. ‘The hand of Jab.” ~2-Sam,. xv. 53 

€ Corpse, etc. Athanasius was charged with having murdered 
Arsenius, and his enemies produced a hand which, they said, had 
belonged to the dead man. 

$ Monster, George of Cappadocia, Arian intruder into the see 
of Alexandria, A.p. 356-361, 

274 

skill in working villany and confusion was un- 
equalled. 

17. His acts of insolence towards the saint 
you all know in full detail. Often were the 
righteous given into the hands of the wick- 
ed,* not that the latter might be honoured, 
but that the former might be tested: and 
though the wicked come, as it is written, 
to an awful death,® nevertheless for the pres- 
ent the godly are a laughing stock, while 
the goodness of God and the great treas- 
uries of what is in store for each of them here- 
after are concealed. Then indeed word and 
deed and thought will be weighed in the just 
balances of God, as He arises to judge the 
earth,” gathering together counsel and works, 
and revealing what He had kept sealed up.® 
Of this let the words and sufferings of Job 
convince thee, who was a truthful, blameless, 
just, godfearing man, with all those other 
qualities which are testified of him, and yet was 
smitten with such a succession of remarkable 
visitations, at the hands of him who begged 
for power over him, that, although many 
have often suffered in the whole course of 
time, and some even haye, as is probable, been 
grievously afflicted, yet none can be compared 
with him in misfortunes. For he not only 
suffered, without being allowed space to mourn 
for his losses in their rapid succession, the loss 
of his money, his possessions, his large and 
fair family, blessings for which all men care ; 
but was at last smitten with an incurable dis- 
ease horrible to look upon, and, to crown his 
misfortunes, had a wife whose only comfort 
was evil counsel. For his surpassing troubles 
were those of his soul added to those of the 
body.¢ He had also among his friends truly 
miserable comforters,§ as he calls them, who 
could not help him. For when they saw his 
suffering, in ignorance of its hidden meaning, 
they supposed his disaster to be the punish- 
ment of vice and not the touchstone of virtue. 
And they not only thought this, but were not 
even ashamed to reproach him with his lot,” 
at a time when, even if he had been suffering 
for vice, they ought to have treated his grief 
with words of consolation. 

18. Such was the lot of Job: such at first 
sight his history. In reality it was a contest 
between virtue and envy: ® the one straining 
every nerve to overcome the good, the other 
enduring everything, that it might abide un- 

a Job. ix. 24. Belbri%23; Ps, Ixxxii. 8. 

© Dang xis 0s e Job ii. 7 et seq. Ib. xvi. 2, 
dees fae, lit, the dreadful (thing) ” i.e. ‘reproach him, as hav- 
ing brought his sufferings upon himself ’—or * reproach him with 
impiety ’"—the cause of his sufferings. 
F @ Envy, ies, of the devil, Wisdom ii, 24. Cf. § 32 of this Ora- 
ion, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN, 

subdued ; the one striving to smooth the way 
for vice, by means of the chastisement of the 
upright, the other to retain its hold upon the 
good, even if they do exceed others in misior- 
tunes. What then of Him who answered Job 
out of the whirlwind and cloud,* Who is slow 
to chastise and swift to help, Who suffers not 
utterly the rod of the wicked to come into tic 
lot of the righteous, lest the righteous shoul 
learn iniquity ?? At the end of the contests 
He declares the victory of the athlete in a 
splendid proclamation and lays bare the secre 
of his calamities, saying: ‘‘ Thinkest thou 
that I have dealt with thee for any other pur- 
pose than the manifestation of thy rightcous- 
ness ?’’ ¥ This is the balm for his wounds, this 
is the crown of the contest, this the reward for 
his patience. For perhaps his subsequent 
prosperity was small, great as it may sec to 
some, and ordained for the sake of smail 
minds, even though he received again twice 
as much as he had lost. 

19. In this case then it is not wonderful, if 
George had the advantage of Athanasius ; nay it 
would be more wonderful, if the righteous were 
not tried in the fire of contumely; nor is 
this very wonderful, as it would have been had 
the flames availed for more than this. Then 
he was in retirement, and arranged his exile 
most excellently, for he betook himself to the 
holy and divine homes® of contemplation in 
Egypt, where, secluding themselves from the 
world, and welcoming the desert, men live to 
God more than all who exist in the body. 
Some struggle on in an utterly monastic and 
solitary life, speaking to themselves alone and 
to God,€ and all the world they know is what 
meets their eyes in the desert. Others, cher- 
ishing the law of love in community, are at 
once Solitaries and Ccenobites, dead to all 
other men and to the eddies of public affairs 
which whirl us and are whirled about them- 
selves and make sport of us in their sudden 
changes, being the world to one another and 
whetting the edge of their love in emulation. 
During his intercourse with them, the great 
Athanasius, who was always the mediator and 
reconciler of all other men, like Him Who 
made peace through His blood’ between 
things which were at variance, reconciled the 
solitary with the community life: by showing 
that the Priesthood is capable of contempla- 
tion, and that contemplation is in need ofa 
spiritual guide. 

20. Thus he combined the two, and so 

Ge Jeb) NNeel te Bs oxy, a: y Job x1. 3 (LXX.). 
& Homes, etc. ‘Vhe monasteries of lower Egypt and the T hebaid, 
This was a.b, 356. ¢1Cor, xiv. 28, § Col. 1, 20, 

of active calm, as to convince them that the 
monastic life is characterised by steadfastness 
of disposition rather than by bodily retire- 
ment. Accordingly the great David was a 
man of at once the most active and most soli- 
tary life, if any one thinks the vere, J 
am in solitude, till I pass away, of value and 
authority in the exposition of this subject. 
Therefore, though they surpass all others in 
virtue, they fell further short of his mind than 
others fell short of their own, and while con- 
tributing little to the perfection of his priest- 
hood, they gained in return greater assistance 
in contemplation. Whatever he thought, was a 
law for them, whatever on the contrary he dis- 
approved, they abjured : his decisions were to 
them the tables of Moses,® and they paid him 
more reverence than is due from men to the 
Saints. Aye, and when men came to hunt the 
Saint like a wild beast, and, after searching 
for him everywhere, failed to find him, they 
vouchsafed these emissaries not a single word, 
and offered their necks to the sword, as risk- 
ing their lives for Christ's sake, and consid- 
ering the most cruel sufferings on behalf of 
Athanasius to be an important step to contem- 
plation, and far more divine and sublime than 
the long fasts and hard lying and mortifications 
in which they constantly revel. 

21. Such were his surroundings when he 
approved the wise counsel of Solomon that 
their is a time to every purpose: ¥ so he hid 
himself for a while, escaping during the time 
of war, to show himself when the time of 
peace came, as it did soon afterwards. Mean- 
while George, there being absolutely no one to 
resist him, overran Egypt, and desolated Syria, 
in the might of ungodliness. He seized upon 
the Kast also as far as he could, ever attracting 
the weak, as torrents roll down objects in their 
course, and assailing the unstable or faint- 
hearted. He won over also the simplicity of 
the Emperor, for thus I must term his instabil- 
ity, though I respect his pious motives. Tor, 
to say the truth, he had zeal, but not accord- 
ing to knowledge.@ He purchased those in 
authority who were lovers of money rather than 
lovers of Christ—for he was well supplied with 
the funds for the poor, which he embezzled—- 
especially the effeminate and unmanly men,é 
of doubtful sex, but of manifest impiety ; to 
whom, I know not how or why, Emperors 
of the Romans entrusted authority over men, 
though their proper function was the charge of 
: @.Ps. cxliz 16 (LXX.). B Reais XXX) 15 XXXL a 

Welccles., ii, re 6 Rom. x. 2. 

© Uninanty inten, the Eunuchs, the chamberlains of Constan- 
fius, 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS. 

united the partisans of both calm action and | women. 

In this lay the power of that servant 4 
of the wicked one, that sower of tares, that 
forerunner of Antichrist ; foremost in speech 
of the orators of his time among the Lishops ; 
if any one likes to call him an orator who was 
not so much an impious, as he was a hostile 
and contentious reasoner,—his name [ wil] 
gladly pass by: he was the hand of his party, 
perverting the truth by the gold subscribed 
for pious uses, which the wicked made an 
instrument of their impiety. 

22. ‘The crowning feat of this faction was 
the council which sat first at Seleucia, the city 
of the holy and illustrious virgin Vhekla, and 
afterwards at this mighty city, thus connecting 
their names, no longer with noble associations, 
but with these of deepest disgrace ; whether we 
must call that council, which subverted and 
disturbed everything, a tower of Chalane,é 
which deservedly confounded the tongues— 
would that theirs had been confounded for 
their harmony in evil!—or a Sanhedrim of 
Caiaphas where Christ was condemned, orsome 
other like name. The ancient and pious doc- 
trine which defended the Trinity was abolished, 
by setting up a® palisade and battering down 
the Consubstantial: opening the door to im- 
piety by means of what is written, using as their 
pretext, their reverence for Scripture and for the 
use of approved terms, but really introduci ng 
unscriptural Arianism. or the phrase ‘like, 
according to the Scriptures,’’ was a bait to the 
simple, concealing the hook of impiety, a figure 
seeming to look in the direction of all who 
passed by, a boot fitting either foot, a win- 
howing with every wind,¢ gaining authority 
from the newly written villany and device 
against the truth. Vor they were wise to do 
evil, but to do good they had no knowledge.$ 

23. Hence came their pretended condemna- 
tion” of the heretics, whom they renounced in 
words, in order to gain plausibility for their et- 
forts, but in reality furthered ; charging them 
not with unbounded impiety, but with exagger- 
ated language. Hence came the profane judges 
of the Saints, and the new combination, and 
public view and discussion of mysterious ques- 
tions, and the illegal enquiry into the actions 
of life, and the hired informers, and the pur- 

a Servant, etc., probably, Acacius, 6 Get xt dy 
S. John xi, 47 e¢ seg. : 

Ridin lit. ‘*a pale ’—one of the many which formed the pali- 
sade. Perhaps there is a play on the word Xapaxtypa ‘a letter” 
in reference to the insertion eine letter iota in the Nicene formula 
—which then became Homoiousion, i.e., Like in substance.” 
This action on the part of the Semi-Arians (who formed. the ma- 
jority of the Council of Seleucia A.p. 359), Was the first step to the 
Homoion of the Acacian party, who prevailed at the council of 
Constantinople, ..pD. 360, and professed great devotion to the use 
of Scriptural terms. e Kccles, v. ¢ Jer. iv. 22. 

1 Condemnation, i.e, of Aetis, who was banished by Constan- 
\ tius after the Council, 

276 

chased sentences. Some were unjustly de- 
posed® from their sees, others intruded, and 
among other necessary qualifications, made to 
sign the bonds of iniquity: the ink was ready, 
the informer at hand. ‘This the majority even 
of us, who were not overcome, had to endure, 
not falling in mind, though prevailed upon to 
sign,® and so uniting with men who were in 
both respects wicked, and involving ourselves 
in the smoke,¥ if not in the flame. Over this 
I have often wept, when contemplating the con- 
fusion of impiety at that time, and the perse- 
cution of the orthodox teaching which now 
arose at the hands of the patrons of the Word. 

24. For in reality, as the Scripture says, 
the shepherds became brutish,? and many 
shepherds destroyed My vineyard, and defiled 
my pleasant portion,* I mean the Church of 
God, which has been gathered together by 
the sweat and blood of many toilers and vic- 
tims both before and after Christ, aye, even 
the great sufferings of God for us. For with 
very few exceptions, and these either men who 
from their insignificance were disregarded, or 
from their virtue manfully resisted, being left 
unto Israel,$ as was ordained, for a seed and 
root,” to blossom and come to life again amid 
the streams of the Spirit, everyone ® yielded to 
the influences of the time, distinguished only 
by the fact that some did so earlier, some later, 
that some became the champions and leaders 
of impiety, while such others were assigned a 
lower rank, as had been shaken by fear, en- 
slaved by need, fascinated by flattery, or be- 
guiled in ignorance; the last being the least 
guilty, if indeed we can allow even this to be 
a valid excuse for men entrusted with the lea- 
dership of the people. For just as the force of 
lions and other animals, or of men and of 
women, or of old and of young men is not the 
same, but there is a considerable difference 
due to age or species—so it is also with rulers 
and their subjects. For while we might par- 
don laymen in such a case, and often they 
escape, because not put to the test, yet how can 
we excuse a teacher, whose duty it is, unless 
he is falsely so-called, to correct the igno- 
rance of others. For is it not absurd, while 
no one, however great his boorishness and 
want of education, is allowed to be ignorant 
of the Roman law, and while there is no law 
in favour of sins of ignorance, that the teachers 

a Defosed. Cyril of Jerusalem, Eustathius of Sebaste, Basil of 
Ancyra and others. 
Toston, vic, Cf, Orat xy 26, 
x The smoke, etc. Cf. Orat. xvi. 6; Ps. xvii. 9, cv. 32. 
Jer, cer, Call opes beae cop 
G Usat, 3,20. WUXI oT Gee): 
6 Kveryone. This was the time of which S. Jerome wrote 
‘* Ingemuit totus orbis, et miratus est se Arianum csse,”’ 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

of the mysteries of salyation should be igno- 
rant of the first principles of salvation, however 
simple and shallow their minds may be in 
regard to other subjects. But, even granting 
indulgence to them who erred in ignorance, 
what can be said for the rest, who lay claim to 
subtlety of intellect, and yet yielded to the 
court-party for the reasons I have mentioned, 
and after playing the part of piety for a long 
while, failed in the hour of trial. 

25. ‘* Yet once more,’’ # I hear the Scripture 
say that the heaven and the earth shall be 
shaken, inasmuch as this has befallen them 
before, signifying, as I suppose, a manifest re- 
novation of all things. And we must believe 
S. Paul when he says? that this last shaking is 
none other than the second coming of Christ, 
and the transformation and changing of the 
universe to a condition of stability which can- 
not be shaken. And I imagine that this pres- 
ent shaking, in which the contemplatives and 
lovers of God, who before the time exercise 
their heavenly citizenship, are shaken from us, is 
of no less consequence than any of former days. 
For, however peaceful and moderate in other 
respects these men are, yet they cannot bear to 
carry their reasonableness so far as to be trai- 
tors to the cause of God for quietness’ sake : 
nay on this point they are excessively warlike 
and sturdy in fight; such is the heat of their 
zeal, that they would sooner proceed to excess 
in disturbance, than fail to notice anything 
that is amiss. And no small portion of the 
people is breaking away with them, flying 
away, as a flock of birds does, with those who 
lead the flight, and even now does not cease 
to fly with them. 

26. Such was Athanasius to us, when pres- 
ent, the pillar of the Church; and such, even 
when he retired before the insults of the 
wicked. For those who have plotted the 
capture of some strong fort, when they see no 
other easy means of approaching or taking it, 
betake themselves to arts, and then, after se- 
ducing the commander by money or guile, 
without any effort possess themselves of the 
stronghold, or, if you will, as those who 
plotted against Samson first cut off his hair,? 
in which his strength lay, and then seized 
upon the judge, and made sport of him at 
will, to requite him for his former power: so 
did our foreign foes, after getting rid of our 
source of strength, and shearing off the glory 
of the Church, revel in like manner in utter- 
ances and deeds of impiety. ‘Then the sup- 

a Hagg. ii. 7; Heb. xii. 26. B Heb. xii. 27. 
y In which, etc. This sentence probably alludes to the exces- 
sive zeal of the monks of Nazianzus, 6 Judges xvi. 19. 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS. a | 

cia 

porter * and patron of the hostile shepherd 8 
died, crowning’ his reign, which had _ not 
been evil, with an evil close, and unprofitably 
repenting, as they say, with his last breath, 
when each man, in view of the higher judge- 
ment seat, is a prudent judge of his own con- 
duct. For of these three evils, which were 
unworthy of his reign, he said that he was 
conscious, the murder of his kinsmen, the 
proclamation of the Apostate, and the inno- 
vation upon the faith ; and with these words 
he is said to have departed. ‘Thus there was 
once more authority to teach the word of 
truth, and those who had suffered violence 
had now undisturbed freedom of speech, 
while jealousy was whetting the weapons of 
its wrath. Thus it was with the people of 
Alexandria, who, with their usual impatience 
of the insolent, could not brook the excesses 
of the man, and therefore marked his wicked- 
ness by an unusual death, and his death by 
an unusual ignominy. For you know that 
camel,® and its strange burden, and the new 
form of elevation, and the first and, I think, 
the only procession, with which to this day 
the insolent are threatened. 

27. But when from this hurricane of un- 
righteousness, this corrupter of godliness, this 
precursor of the wicked one, such satisfaction 
had been exacted, in a way I cannot praise, 
for we must consider not what he ought to 
have suffered, but what we ought* to do: 
exacted however it was, as the result of the 
public anger and excitement: and thereupon, 
our champion was restored from his illustrious 
banishment, for so I term his exile on behalf 
of, and under the blessing of, the Trinity, 
amid such delight of the people of the city 
and of almost all Egypt, that they ran to- 
gether from every side, from the furthest limits 
of the country, simply to hear the voice of 
Athanasius, or feast their eyes upon the sight 
of him, nay even, as we are told of the Apos- 
tles, that they might be hallowed by the 
shadow $ and unsubstantial image of his body : 
so that, many as are the honours, and wel- 
comes bestowed on frequent occasions in the 
course of time upon various individuals, not 
only upon public rulers and bishops, but also 
upon the most illustrious of private citizens, 

a The Supporter, Constantius, who died A, D. 3606 

B The hostile shepherd, George. 

y Crowning, Clémencet renders “Appointing an evil head over 
an empire which was not evil,” sc. Julian the Apostate. 

6 Camel. On the death of Constantius, the pagans of Alexan- 
dria murdered George, and carried his mangled body through 
the streets on the back of a camel. 

e We ought, etc. S. Gregory seems to imply that the deed had 
been done by Christians, Historical writers and Julian’s letter to 
the people make it clear that this was not really the case. 

¢ Acts v. 15. 

not one has been recorded more numerously 
attended or more brilliant than this. And 
only one honour can be compared with it by 
Athanasius himself, which had been conferred 
upon him on his former entrance into the 
city, when returning from the same exile for 
the same reasons. 

28. With reference to this honour there was 
also current some such report as the following ; 
for I will take leave to mention it, even though 
it be superfluous, as a kind of flavouring to my 
speech, or a flower scattered in honour of his 
entry. After that entry, a certain officer, 
who had been twice Consul, was riding into 
the city; he was one of us, among the most 
noted of Cappadocians. Jam sure that you 
know that I mean Philagrius, who won upon 
our affections far beyond any one else, and 
was honoured as much as he was loved, if I 
may thus briefly set forth all his distinctions: 
who had been for a second time entrusted 
with the government of the city, at the re- 
quest of the citizens, by the decision of the 
Emperor. Then one of the common people 
present, thinking the crowd enormous, like 
an ocean whose bound no eye can see, is 
reported to have said to one of his comrades 
and friends—as often happens in such a case— 
“Tell me, my good fellow, have you ever 
before seen the people pour out in such num- 
bers and so enthusiastically to do honour to 
any one man?’’ ‘No!’ said the young 
man, ‘‘and I fancy that not even Constantius 
himself would be so treated ; ’’ indicating, by 
the mention of the Emperor, the climax of 
possible honour. ‘*Do you speak of that,’’ 
said the other with a sweet and merry laugh, 
‘as something wonderfully great? I can 
scarcely believe that even the great Athana- 
sius would be welcomed like this,’’ adding at 
the same time one of our native oaths in con- 
firmation of his words. Now the point of 
what he said, as I suppose you also plainly 
see, is this, that he set the subject of our 
eulogy before the Emperor himself. 

29. So great was the reverence of all for 
the man, and so amazing even now seems the 
reception which I have described. For if 
divided according to birth, age and_profes- 
sion, (and the city is most usually arranged 
in this way, when a public honour is bestowed 
on anyone) how can I set forth in words that 
mighty spectacle? They formed one river, 
and it were indeed a poet’s task to describe 
that Nile, of really golden stream and rich 
in crops, flowing back again from the city to 
the Chaereum, a day’s journey, I take it, and 
more. Permit me to revel a while longer in 

278 

my description: for I am going there, and it 
is not easy to bring back even my words 
from that ceremony. He rode upon a colt, 
almost, blame me not for folly, as my Jesus 
did upon that other colt,* whether it were the 

people of the Gentiles, whom He mounts in | 
kindness, by setting it free from the bonds of 

ignorance, or something else, which the Scrip- 
ture sets forth. He was welcomed 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

with | 

branches of trees, and garments with many | 

flowers and of varied hue were torn off and 
strewn before him and under his fect: there 

alone was all that was glorious and costly and | 

peerless treated with dishonour. Like, once 
more, to the entry of Christ were those that 
went before with shouts and followed with 
dances; only the crowd which sung his 

praises was not of children only, but every | 

tongue was harmonious, as men contended only 
to outdo one another. I pass by the univer- 
sal cheers, and the pouring forth of unguents, 
and the nightlong festivities, and the whole 
city gleaming with light, and the feasting in 
public and at home, and all the means of 
testifying to a city’s joy, which were then in 
lavish and incredible profusion bestowed upon 
him. Thus did this marvellous man, with 
such a concourse, regain his own city. 

30. He lived then as becomes the rulers of 
such a people, but did he fail to teach as he 
lived? Were his contests out of harmony 
with his teaching? Were his dangers less 
than those of men who have contended for 
any truth? Were his honours inferior to the 
objects for which he contended? Did he 
after his reception in any way disgrace that 
reception? By no means. Everything was 
harmonious, as an air upon a single lyre, and 
in the same key; his life, his teaching, his 
struggles, his dangers, his return, and his con- 
duct after his return. For immediately on 
his restoration to his Church, he was not like 
those who are blinded by unrestrained passion, 
who, under the dominion of their anger, thrust 
away or strike at once whatever comes in their 
Way, even though it might well be spared. 
But, thinking this to bea special time for him 
to consult his reputation, since one who is ill- 
treated is usually restrained, and one who has 
the power to requite a wrong is ungoverned, 
he treated so mildly and gently those who had 
injured him, that even they themselves, if I 
may say so, did not find his restoration dis- 
tasteful. 

31. He cleansed the temple of those who 
made merchandise of God, and trafficked in 
the things of Christ, imitating Christ # in this 

aS. Luke xix, 356 BS. John i. 15. 

also; only it was with persuasive words, not 
with a twisted scourge that this was wrought. 
He reconciled also those who were at variance, 
both with one another and with him, without 
the aid of any coadjutor. ‘Those who had 
been wronged he set free from oppression, 
making no distinction as to whether they were 
of his own or of the opposite party. He re- 
stored too the teaching which had been over- 
thrown: the Trinity was once more boldly 
spoken of, and set upon the lampstand, flash- 

| ing with the brilliant light of the One Godhead 

if 
| 
H 

into the souls of all. He legislated again for 
the whole world, and brought all minds under 
his influence, by letters to some, by invitations 
to others, instructing some, who visited him 
uninvited, and proposing as the single law to 
all— Good will. Vor this alone was able 
to conduct them to the true issue. In brief, 
he exemplified the virtues of two celebrated 
stones—for to those who assailed him he was 
adamant, and to those at variance a magnet, 
which by some secret natural power draws iron 
to itself, and influences the hardest of sub- 
stances. 

32. But yet it was not likely that envy 
could brook all this, or see the Church restored 
again to the same glory and health as in former 
days, by the speedy healing over, as in the 
body, of the wounds ofseparation. Therefore 
it was, that he raised up against Athanasius the 
Emperor, a rebel like himself,? and his peer 
in villany, inferior to him only from lack of 
time, the first of Christian Emperors to rage 
against Christ, bringing forth all at once the 
basilisk of impiety with which he had long 
been in labour, when he obtained an oppor- 
tunity, and shewing himself, at the time when 
he was proclaimed Emperor, to be a traitor to 
the Emperor who had entrusted him with the 
empire, and a traitor double dyed to the God 
who had saved him. He devised the most in- 
human of ail the persecutions by blending 
speciousness with cruelty, in his envy of the 
honour won by the martyrs in their struggles ; 
and so he called in question their repute for 
courage, by making verbal twists and quibbles 
a part of his character, or to speak the real 
truth, devoting himself to them with an eager- 
ness born of his natural disposition, and imi- 
tating in varied craft the Evil one who dwelt 
within him. The subjugation of the whole 
race of Christians he thought a simple task ; 
but found it a great one to overcome Atha- 

ard BovaAeaOar, lit. to will ’—i.e. be willing to listen to, and un- 
derstand the interests for which others were contending, in a concili- 
atory spirit—for the sake of truth, not of victory. ; 
Bile... a rebel like himself. Envy, personifying the Evil 

one, Cf. supra §18, 

ON THE GREAT ATHANASIUS, 

nasius and the power of his teaching over us. For he 
saw that no success could be gained in the plot against 
us, because of this man’s resistance and opposition ; 
the places of the Christians cut down being at once 
filled up, surprising though it seems, by the accession 
of Gentiles and the prudence of Athanasius. In full 
view therefore of this, the crafty perverter and perse- 
cutor, clinging no longer to his cloak of illiberal sophis- 
try, laid bare his wickedness and openly banished the 
Bishop from the city, T*or the illustrious warrior must 
needs conquer in three struggles @ and thus make good 
his perfect title to fame. 

33. Bricf was the interval before Justice pronounced 
sentence, and handed over the offenderf to the Per- 
sians : sending him forth an ambitious monarch—and 
bringing him back a corpse for which no one even felt 
pity ; which, as I have heard, was not allowed to rest 
in the grave, but was shaken out and thrown up by 
the earth which he had shaken: a prelude—I take it 
—to his future chastisement. Then another king 
arose,§ not shameless in countenance like the former, 
nor an oppressor of Israel with crucl tasks and task- 
masters, but most pious and gentle. In order to lay 
the best of foundations for his empire, and begin, as 
is right, by an act of justice, he recalled from exile all 
the Bishops, but in the first place him who stood first 
in virtue and had conspicuously championed the cause 
of piety. Further, he inquired into the truth of our 
faith which had been torn asunder, confused, and 
parcelled out into various opinions and portions by 
many ; with the intention, if it were possible, of re- 
ducing the whole world to harmony and union by the 
co-operation of the Spirit: and, should he fail in this, 
of attaching himself to the best party, so as to aid and 
be aided by it, thus giving token of the exceeding 
loftiness and magnificence of his ideas on questions of 
the greatest moment. Here too was shown in a very 
high degree the simple-mindedness of Athanasius, and 
the steadfastness of his faith in Christ. For, when all 
the rest who sympathised with us were divided into 
three parties, and many were faltering in their concep- 
tion of the Son, and still more in that of the Holy 
Ghost, (a point on which to be only slightly in error 
was to be orthodox) and few indeed were sound upon 
both points, he was the first and only one, or with the 
concurrence of but a few, to venture to confess in 
writing, with entire clearness and distinctness, the 
Unity of Godhead and Essence of the Three Persons, 
and thus to attain in later days, under the influence of 
inspiration, to the same faith in regard to the Holy 
Ghost, as had been bestowed at an earlier time on 
most of the Fathers in regard to the Son, This con- 
fession, a truly royal and magnificent gift, he presented 
to the Emperor, opposing to the unwritten innovation, 
a written account® of the orthodox faith, so that an 
emperor might be overcome by an emperor, reason by 
reason, treatise by treatise. 

34. This confession was, it seems, greeted with re- 
spect by all, both in West and East, who were capable 
of life ; some cherishing piety within their own bo- 
soms, if we may credit what they say, but advancing 
no further, like a still-born child which dies within its 
mother’s womb ; others kindling to some extent, as it 
were, sparks, so far as to escape the difficulties of the 
time, arising either from the more fervent of the ortho- 
cox, or the devotion of the people ; while others spoke 

279 

the truth with boldness, on whose side I would be, fur 
I dare make no further boast ; no longer consulting 
my own fcarfulness—in other words, the views of men 
more unsound than myself (for this we have done 
enough and to spare, without cither gaining anything 
from others, or guarding from injury that which was 
our own, just as bad stewards do) but bringing forth 
to light my offspring, nourishing it with eagerness, and 
exposing it, in its constant growth, to the eyes of all, 

35. This, however, is less admirable than his con- 
duct. What wonder that he, who had already made 
actual ventures on behalf of the truth, should confess 
it in writing? Yet this point I will add to what has 
been said, as it seems to me especially wonderful, and 
cannot with impunity be passed over ina time so fer- 
tile in disagreements as this. For his action, if we 
take note of him, will afford instruction even to the 
men of this day. For as, in the case of one and the 
same quantity of water, there is separated from it, not 
only the residue which is left behind by the hand when 
drawing it, but also those drops, once contained in the 
hand, which trickle out through the fingers; so also 
there is a separation between us and, not only those 
who hold aloof in their impiety, but also those who 
are most pious, and that both in regard to such doe- 
trines as are of small consequence (a matter of less 
moment) and also in regard to expressions intended to 
bear the same meaning. We use in an orthodox 
sense the terms one Essence and three Hypostases, 
the one to denote the nature of the Godhead, the 
other the properties® of the Three; the Italians 8 
mean the same, but, owing to the scantiness of their 
vocabulary, and its poverty of terms, they are unable 
to distinguish between Essence and Hypostases, and 
therefore introduce the term Persons, to avoid being 
understood to assert three Essences, The result, 
were it not piteous, would be laughable. This slight 
difference of sound was taken to indicate a difference 
of faith, Then, Sabellianism was suspected in the 
doctrine of Three Persons, Arianism in that of Three 
Hypostases, both being the offspring of a contentious 
spirit, And then, from the gradual but constant 
growth of irritation (the unfailing result of contentious- 
ness) there was a danger of the whole world being 
torn asunder in the strife about syllables, Secing and 
hearing this, our blessed one, true man of God and 
great steward of souls as he was, felt it inconsistent 
with his duty to overlook so absurd and unreasonable 
a rending of the word, and applied his medicine to 
the disease. In what manner? He conferred in his 
gentle and sympathetic way with both parties, and 
after he had carefully weighed the meaning of their 
expressions, and found that they had the same sense, 
and were in nowise different in doctrine, by permit- 
ting each party to use its own terms, he bound them y 
together in unity of action. 

36. This in itself was more profitable than the long 
course of labours and teaching on which all writers en- 
large, for in it somewhat of ambition mingled, and 
consequently, perhaps, somewhat of novelty in expres- 
sions. This again was of more value than his many 
vigils and acts of discipline, § the advantage of which 
is limited to those who perform them. This was 
worthy of our hero’s famous banishments and flights ; 
for the object, in view of which he chose to endure 
such sufferings, he still pursued when the sufferings 

aln three struggles. We was thrice banished. a.p. 336 by 
Constantine, A.p. 356 under Constantius, and A.p. 362 by Julian. 

B 1he offender, Julian. 

y Another king—the Mmperor Jovian. 6 Exod. i. 8. 

€ A written account, A synodal letter drawn up in council, 
probably at Alexandria, and conveyed and presented to Jovian at 
Antioch by S, Athanasius, 

a Properties, Cf,-Orat,, li, 90, note. 

B The Italians, etc. Cf. Newman’s Arians, pp. 376-384. S. 
Athanasius’ Orations against the Arians, Ed. Bright, p. Ixxxi, 
Pelav. de ‘Trin, IV. ii, 5-10 and iv. 

y Bound them, etc. At the Council of Alexandria, A.D. 36a, 
Newman’s Arians, pp. 364, sqq- : 

Sets of discipline, xawmevvior, ‘lying on the ground,” 

280 

were past. Nor did he cease to cherish the same are 
dour in others, praising some, gently rebuking others ; 
rousing the sluggishness of these, restraining the pas- 
sion of those ; In some cases eager to prevent a fall, 
in others devising means of recovery after a fall ; sim- 
ple in disposition, manifold in the arts of government ; 
clever in argument, more clever still in mind ; conde- 
scending to the more lowly, outsoaring the more lofty ; 
hospitable, protector of suppliants, averter of evils, 
really combining in himself alone the whole of the at- 
tributes parcelled out by the sons of Greece among 
their deities, Further he was the patron of the 
wedded and virgin state alike, both peaceable and a 
peacemaker, and attendant upon those who are passing 
from hence. Oh, how many a title does his virtue af- 
ford me, if I would detail its many-sided excellence, 

37. After such a course, as taught and teacher, that 
his life and habits form the ideal of an Episcopate, 
and his teaching the law of orthodoxy, what reward 
does he win for his piety? It is not indeed right to 
pass this by. Ina good old age he closed his life,B 
and was gathered to his fathers, the Patriarchs, and 
Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, who contended 
for the truth. To be brief in my epitaph, the hon- 
ours at his departure surpassed even those of his re- 
turn from exile ; the object of many tears, his glory, 
stored up in the minds of all, outshines all its visible 
tokens. Yet, O thou dear and holy one, who didst 
thyself, with all thy fair renown, so especially illus- 
trate the due proportions of speech and of silence, do 
thou stay here my words, falling short as they do of 
thy true meed of praise, though they have claimed the 
full exercise of all my powers. And mayest thou cast 
upon us from above a propitious glance, and conduct 
this people in its perfect worship of the perfect Trin- 
ity, which, as Father, Son, Holy Ghost, we contem- 
plate and adore. And mayest thou, if my lot be 
peaceful, possess and aid me in my pastoral charge, or 
if it pass through struggles, uphold me, or take me to 
thee, and set me with thyself and those like thee 
(though I have asked a great thing) in Christ Himself, 
our Lord, to whom be all glory, honour, and power 
for evermore. Amen. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE ‘* THEOLOGICAL”? 
ORATIONS. 

“It has been said with truth,’’ says the 
writer of the Article on Gregory of Nazianzus 
in the Dictionary of Christian Biography, 
‘* that these discourses would lose their chief 
charm inatranslation. . . Critics have 
rivalled each other in the praises they have 
heaped upon them, but no praise is so high as 
that of the many Theologians who have found 
in them their own best thoughts. A Critic 
who cannot be accused of partiality towards 
Gregory has given in a few words perhaps the 
truest estimate of them : ¢ A solidity of thought, 
the concentration of all that is spread through 
the writings of*Hilary, Basil, and Athanasius, 
a flow of softened eloquence which does not 
halt or lose itself for a moment, an argument 
nervous without dryness on the one hand, and 

a /ospitatle, etc., titles given to Zeus, and other Greek gods. 
B Closed his life A.D. 373. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

without useless ornament on the other, give 
these five Discourses a place to themselves 
among the monuments of this fine Genius, 
who was not always in the same degree free 
from grandiloquence and affectation. In a 
few pages, and in a few hours, Gregory has 
summed up and closed the controversy of a 
whole Century.’’’* They were preached in the 
Church called Anastasia,? at Constantinople, 
between 379 and 381, and have gained for 
their author the title of The Theologian, 
which he shares with S. John the Evangelist 
alone. It should perhaps, however, be noted 
that the word is not here used in the wide and 
general sense in which we employ it, but ina 
narrower and more specific way, denoting em- 
phatically the Defender of the Deity of the 
Logos. His principal opponents were the fol- 
lowers of Eunomius and Macedonius, and it 
is almost entirely against them that these Ora- 
tions on Theology, or the Godhead of the 
Word and the Holy Ghost, are directed. The 
chief object of the Preacher in these and most 
other of his public utterances, is to maintain 
the Nicene Faith of the Trinity or Tri-unity of 
God ; that is, the Doctrine that while there is 
but One Substance or Essence’ in the God- 
head, and by consequence God is in the most 

a De Broglie, L’Eglise et ? Empire,” v. 385.—‘* Ce sont autant 
de modéles dans l'art délicat @imprimer la’ forme oratoire aux de- 
veloppements philosophiques. Une pensée substantielle, formée 
de tous les sucs répandus dans les écrits d’Hilaire, de Basile et 
d@’Athanase; un courant d’éloquence temptrée qui ne se ralentit, 
nine s’égare en aucun moment; une argumentation nerveuse sans 
stcheresse, mais sans vaine parure d’ornements, font a ces cing 
discours une place a part parmi les monuments de ce beau genie, 
auquel lemphase et l’affectation ne furent pas toujours aussi 
étrangers. En quelques pages, et en quelques heures, Grégoire 
avait résumé et clos la controverse de tout un siécle.” 

B See Prolegomena p. 171. 

y ‘There is but one divine Essence or Substance : Father, Son, 
and Spirit, are one in essence, or consubstantial. They are in one 
another, inseparable, and cannot be conceived without each other. 
In this point the Nicene doctrine is thoroughly monotheistic, or 
monarchian, in distinction from tritheism, which is but a new form 
of the polytheism of the pagans. 

‘The terms Essence (ovata) and Nature (vars), in the philosoph- 
ical sense, denote not an_ individual, a personality, but the Genus 
or Species; not Unum in Numero, but Ens Unum in Multis. All 
men are of the same substance, partake of the same human nature; 
though as persons and individuals they are very different. The 
term Homo-ousion, in its strict grammatical sense, differs from 
Mono-ousion or Touto-ousion, as well as from Hetero-ousion, and 
signifies not numerical identity, but equality of essence or com- 
munity of nature among several beings. It is clearly thus used in 
the Chalcedonian Symbol, where it is said that Christ is ‘consub- 
stantial (Homo-ousios) with the Father as touching the Godhead, 
and consubstantial with us (and yet individually distinct from us) 
as touching the Manhood? Butin the Divine Trinity consub- 
stantiality denotes not only sameness of kind, but at the same time 
Numerical unity; not merely the Unum in Specie, but also the 
Unumin Numero. The three Persons are related to the Divine 
Substance not as three individuals to their species, as Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, or Peter, John, and Paul, to human nature; they 
are only one God. ‘The divine Substance is absolutely indivisible 
by reason of its simplicity, and absolutely inextensible and un- 
transferable by reason of its infinity; whereas a corporeal substance 
can be divided, and the human nature can be multiplied by gener- 
ation. Three Divine substances would limit and exclude each 
other, and therefore could not be infinite or absolute. The whole 
fulness of the one undivided Essence of God, with all its attributes, 
is in all the Persons of the Trinity, though in cach in His own way; 
in the Father as Original Principle, in the Son by eternal Gener- 
ation, inthe Spirit by eternal Procession. ‘The Church teaches 
not One Divine Essence avd Three Persons, but One Essence /7 
Three Persons. Father, Son, and Spirit cannot be conceived ag 

x 

absolute sense One, yet God is not Uniper- 
sonal, but within this Undivided Unity there 
are three Self-determining Subjects or Persons, 
distinguished from one another by special 
characteristics (idvoryTes) or personal proper- 
ties—Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. With 

IN ROD Cerro ro Tih “THROUOGICAL: ORAIIONS.. 2S: 

this object he entered into conflict with the , 

heretics named above, who denied either the 
Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, 
or the perfect Godhead and Personality of the 
Holy Ghost. 

Kunomius, whom Ullmann calls one of the 
most interesting heretics of the Fourth Cen- 
tury, was by birth a Cappadocian, and slightly 
older than Gregory. As a young man he was 
a pupil and amanuensis of Aétius, by whom 
the Arian heresy was developed to its extreme 
results. ‘The disciple never shrank from draw- 
ing the furthest logical conclusions from his 
master’s premises, or from stating them with 
a frankness, which to those who regarded the 
premises themselves from which he reasoned 
as horrible blasphemies, seemed nothing less 
than diabolical in its impiety. So precisely 
did he complete and formulate his teacher’s 
heretical tenets, that the Anomcean Arians 
were ever afterwards called Eunomians, rather 
than Aétians. They asserted the absolute 
Onlikeness of the Being of the Father and 
of the Son. Starting with the conception of 
God as Absolute Being, of Whom no Genera- 
tion can be predicated, Unbegotten and in- 
capable of Begetting, they went on to say that 
an Eternal Generation is inconceivable, and 
that the Generation of the Son of God must 
have had a beginning. Of course, therefore, 
the Arian conclusion followed, namely, that 
there was a time when the Son did not exist 
(jv Tore Ore od« Hv), and His Essence is alto- 
gether unlike that of the Unbegotten Father. 
Equality of essence and Similarity of essence, 
are alike untenable, from the mere fact that 
the one Essence is Unbegotten, and the other 
is Begotten. The Son, they said, is the First 
Creation of the Divine Energy, and is the In- 
strument by whom God created the world, 
and in this sense, as the Organ of creative 
power, may be said to be the Express Image 
and Likeness of the Energy of the Father. 

As they viewed the Holy Ghost as shar- 
ing the Divine Nature in an even remoter de- 
gree, as being only the noblest production of 

Three separate individuals, but are in one another, and form a 
solidaric Unity.”? (Schaff, History of the Church, Nic. & Post- 
Nic. Period, Div. it, p. 672.) 

a@ Two terms borrowed from Holy Scripture (Heb. i. 3). But 
observe, borrowed with a difference—not ‘‘ the Image of His Sub- 
stance,” which they would not admit, but of His ‘* Energy,” which 
is a very different conception. 

the Only-begotten Son, Eunomius was the 
first person heretically to discontinue the prac- 

_ tice of threefold immersion in Holy Baptism. 

He also corrupted the Form of that Sacra- 
ment, by setting aside the use of the Name of 
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and baptiz- 
ing people “‘in the name of the Creator, and 
into the death of Christ.’’ ‘lherefore the 
Council of Constantinople ordered that con- 
verts from Eunomianism should be dafdized, 
although those from other forms of Arianism 
were admitted into the Catholic Church by 
simple imposition of hands. ‘Through the in- 
fluence of the followers of Aétius, Eunomius 
became, in 360, Bishop of Cyzicus in Mysia, 
but he does not appear to have occupied the 
See very long. At any rate when Gregory 
came, in 379, to Constantinople, he was liv- 
ing in retirement near Chalcedon. All parties 
concur in representing him as a consummate 
Dialectician, but the Orthodox declared that 
he had turned Theology into a mere Tech- 
nology. Readiness of Dialectic was the great 
characteristic of his Sect, and it was they who 
introduced into the Capital that bad spirit of 
theological disputatiousness which Gregory 
deplores in the first of these famous Orations. 
He also differed entirely from Gregory, not 
merely in the conclusions at which he arrived, 
but in the method by which he reached them ; 
following the system of Aristotle, rather than 
of Plato, and using an exclusively intellectual 
method, while Gregory treated Religion as 
belonging to the entire man. The point at 
issue between them, besides this of the Interior 
relations of the Three Blessed Persons within 
the Godhead, was mainly the question as to 
the complete comprehensibility of the Divine 
Nature, which the Eunomians maintained, and 
Gregory denied. The latter argued that, 
while we have a sure conviction that God is, 
we have not a full understanding of What He 
is. He would not, however, exclude us from 
all knowledge of God’s Nature, only he limits 
our capacity to so much as God has been 
pleased to reveal to us of Himself. «In my 
opinion,’’ he says (Or. xxiv. 4), ‘it is im- 
possible to express God, and yet more impos- 
sible to conceive Him—seeing that the thick 
covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the full 
understanding of the truth.’’ Similarly in 
the Fourth of these Orations (Or. xxx. 17) 
he says, ‘‘'The Deity cannot be expressed in 
words. And this is proved to us, not only by 
arguments, but by the wisest and most ancient 
of the Hebrews, so far as they have given us 
reason for conjecture. For they appropriated 
certain characters to the honour of the Deity, 

and would not even allow the name of any- 
thing inferior to God to be written with the 
same letters as that of God, because to their 
mind it was improper that the Deity should 
even to that extent admit any of His creatures 
to a share with Himself How then could 
they have admitted that the indivisible and 
separate Nature can be explained by divisible 
words 2”? 

In the mind of Gregory, the Orthodox 
doctrine of the Blessed ‘Trinity is the funda- 
mental dogma of Christianity, in contrast 
with all other religions, and with all heretical 
systems. ‘* Remember your confession,’’ he 
says to his hearers in an Oration against the 
Arians ; ‘‘ Into what were you baptized? ‘The 
Father? Good, but still Jewish. ‘The Son? 
Good ; no longer Jewish, but not yet perfect. 
The Holy Ghost? Very good ; this is perfect. 
Was it then simply into these, or was there 
some one common Name of these? Yes, there 
was, and it is God.’’ And in the same ora- 
tion he calls Arianism a new Judaism, because 
it ascribes full Deity only to the Father ; and 
he speaks of One Nature in Three Individual- 
ities, intelligent, perfect, self-existent, distinct 
numerically, but one in Gedhead. ‘In 
created things,’’ says Ullmann, ‘‘ the several 
individuals are embraced in a common con- 
ception, though in themselves only connected 
together in thought, while in fact they are not 
one. Manhood is only an intellectual concep- 
tion; in fact there exist only Men. But in 
the Godhead the Three Persons are not only 
in conception, but in fact, One; and this 
Unity is not only a relative but an absolute 
Unity, because the Divine Being is perfect in 
all ‘Three Persons, and in all in a perfect 
equality. In this sense therefore Gregory and 
all orthodox ‘Trinitarians maintain the Unity 
of God. But within this Unity there isa 
true Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a 
‘Trinity of Persons in a Unity of Nature.’’ 
We worship, he says (Or. xxxili. 16), the 
Tather, Son, and Holy Ghost, One Nature in 
Three Individualities. So that, as he says 
elsewhere (Or. in laud. Athanasii, xxi. 10), 
the ‘Trinity is a true Trinity ; not a number- 
ing of unlike things, but a binding together of 
equals. Each of the Persons is God in the 
fullest sense. The Son and the Holy Ghost 
have their Source of Being in the Father, but 
in such sense that They are fully consubstan- 
tial with Him, and that neither of Them dif- 
fers from Him in any particular of Essence. 
The points of difference lie in the Person- 
al Attributes ; the Father Unoriginate, and 
Source of Deity ; the Son deriving His Being 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

eternally from the Father, and Himself the 
Source of all created existence; the Holy 
Ghost proceeding eternally from God, and 
sent into the world. 

In the first of these five discourses the 
Preacher sets himself to clear the ground for 
the fitting presentation of his great theme. 
He endeavours to lay down the principles on 
which ‘Theologians should proceed in such 
discussions, and very earnestly deprecates the 
habit of promiscuous argument in all sorts of 
places, upon all sorts of occasions, and before 
all sorts of hearers, of the deepest and most 
sacred truths and mysteries of the Faith. 
‘They only should be allowed to engage in such 
conversation who are fitted for it by the prac- 
tice of Christian virtue. For others there are 
many other subjects upon which they can ex- 
ercise their dialectical attainments, without 
doing or incurring any injury. 

In the second oration Gregory lays down 
the position referred to above, that it is im- 
possible for even the most exalted human reason 
fully to grasp the Nature of God, though His 
Existence is patent to all. We can only, he 
says, predicate negatives concerning Him. He 
gives three reasons for this incapacity. First 
to enhance our estimation of this knowledge, 
when attained hereafter ; secondly to save us 
from the danger of falling through pride, like 
Lucifer, if we attained it prematurely ; and 
thirdly, to support and sustain us in the trials 
and conflicts of this life, by the certainty that 
its attainment hereafter will be the reward of 
faithful service in them. ‘The cause of our 
present inability is the body with which our 
soul is united, the grossness of whose present 
condition hinders us from rising to the com- 
plete apprehension of the invisible and im- 
material. God, out of compassion for our 
weakness, has been pleased to designate Him- 
self in Holy Scripture by various names taken 
from material objects, or from moral virtues ; 
but these are only stepping-stones to the truth, 
and have indeed been sometimes perverted, 
and made a basis for polytheism. It is, how- 
ever, only natural that the Divine Essence 
should be shrouded in Mystery, for the same 
is the case with the created essences also. 

In the Third and Fourth he deals with the 
question of the Son. His position may be 
summed up as follows: The Son is absolutely 
of One Substance with the Father, and shares 
with Him all the Attributes of Godhead. Yet 
He is a distinct Person, marked off by the 
fact that He is begotten of the Father. But 
we must be careful not to allow this term 
‘‘ Begotten’? to suggest to us any analogy 

INTRODUCTION TO THE “THEOLOGICAL” ORATIONS, 283 

with created things. It is wholly indepen- 
dent of time and space and sense. 

This position he had to defend against many 
assailants, and especially against the Euno- 
mans, 
use of this tern necessarily implicd a begin- 
ning of the l’ssence of the Son, and they asked 
the orthodox to tell them when that begin- 
ning took place. Gregory replies that the 
Generation of God the Son is beyond all 
time; pointing out that Paternity is an Es- 
sential attribute of God the Father, and there- 
fore is as eternal as His Essence, so that there 
never was a time when He was not the Father, 
and consequently never a time when the Gen- 
eration of the Son began. He admits that 
there is a sense in which it is possible to say 
that the Son and the Spirit are not unorigin- 
ate, but then you must be careful not to use 
the word Origin in the sense of Beginning, 
but in that of Cause. They derive Their Be- 
ing eternally from the Father, and all Three 
Persons are coeternal together. In_ respect 
of Cause ‘They are not unoriginate, but the 
cause is not necessarily prior in time to its 
effect, just as the Sun is not prior to its own 
light. In respect of “#e, then, They may be 
said to be unoriginate, for the Sources of time 
cannot be subject to time. ‘If the Father 
has not ceased to beget, His Generation is 
an imperfect one; and if He has ceased, He 
must have begun, for an end implies a be- 
ginning.’’ ‘* Not so,’’ says Gregory, “unless 
you are prepared to admit that what has no 
end has necessarily no beginning ; and in that 
case what will you say about the Angels, or 
the human soul? These will have no end; 
had either of them therefore no beginning ?”’ 
By a similar process of Reductio ad absur- 
dum Ne dissipates all the quibbles of Euno- 
mian sophistry, and lays down the orthodox 
Faith of the Church. Then in the remainder 
of the Third and Fourth Orations he goes on 
to examine the Scriptural testimony adduced 
by his opponents, and to shew by a similar 
catena on the other side that the overwhelm- 
ing preponderance of the authority of the 
Bible is clearly against them. In connection 
with this point he lays down the canon that 
in the interpretation of Scripture in regard to 
our Lord, all expressions savouring of humil- 
ity or weakness are to be referred to that pure 
Humanity which He assumed for our sake ; 
while all that speaks of Majesty and Power 
belongs to His Godhead. 

In the l’ifth he deals with the doctrine of 
the Holy Ghost. The heresy of Arius was at 
first directly concerned only with the Person 

These heretics maintained that the > 

_ of our Lord, though not without a side-glance 
| at that also of the Holy Ghost. ‘The Council 
| of Nicwa had confined itself to the first ques- 
_ tion, and its Creed ended with, “* We believe 

in the Holy Ghost.’? ‘This, it was afterwards 

argued, was enough to proclaim His Divinity, 

and so Gregory argues in this Oration, “If 
| die be only a creature, how do we believe on 
Him, how are we made perfect in Him, for 
the first of these belongs to Deity, the second 
may be said of anything’? (c. vi.). The rea- 
son, however, that the Great Synod made no 
express definition on the point seems to have 
been that the controversy had not yet been 
carried so far in direct terms (cf. S. Basil, Epp. 
Ixxviii. ccclxxxvii.). But fifty years later the 
growth of the heresy rendered a definition of 
the Church’s faith on this point needful; and 
in 363, on his return from his fourth period 
of exile, S. Athanasius held a provincial Synod 
at Alexandria, in whose Synodical Letter to 
the Emperor Jovian the Godhead of the Holy 
Ghost is maintained in terms which, as Canon 
Bright says, partly anticipate the language of 
the Creed of Constantinople (Dict. Biog. Art. 
ATHANASIUS). The new development of the 
heresy had begun to appear at Constantinople 
as well as in Thrace and Asia Minor. Mace- 
donius, a Semi-Arian, had been elected Bishop 
of Constantinople in 341, and in spite of vio- 
lent opposition, which he met by still more 
violent measures, had maintained his position 
till 360, when he was deposed and driven out 
by the Anomeean Arians. He then in his 
retirement became the leader of the Semi- 
Arian party. Accepting the statement that 
the Son was Like in Essence to the Father, he 
would not concede even this to the Holy 
Ghost, but declared Him to be a mere creat- 
ure (Thdt. Hist. Eccl. ii. 6), and the servant 
or minister of the Son; applying to Him terms 
which without error could only be used of the 
Angels (Sozomen. H. E. iv. 27). His follow- 
ers were known as Macedonians, or sometimes 
Marathonians, from a certain Marathonius, 
formerly a Paymaster of the Preetorian Guards, 
who had become a Deacon of Constantinople, 
and, having done much in the way of found- 
ing and maintaining Monastic Houses and 
Houses of Charity in the City, was conse- 
crated by Macedonius as Bishop of Nicomedia. 
They were also known as Pneumatomachi, 
from the nature of their Heresy. A contro- 
versy had now begun to arise as to the precise 
position which the true faith was to assign to 
the Holy Spirit. There were those who left 
it doubtful whether He had indeed a separate 
Personality, or whether He were not rather a 

284 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

mere Influence or Activity of the Father and 
the Son. Gregory tells us how, when he 
came to the Metropolis, he found the wildest 
confusion prevalent. Some, he says, conceived 
of the Holy Ghost as a mere Energy of God, 
others thought Him a Creature, others believed 
Him to be God; while many out of an alleged 
reverence for Holy Scripture, hesitated to give 
Him the Name of God. ‘lo this last class 
belonged, according to Socrates (H. E. ii. 45), 

Bishopric of Sebasteia in Pontus. He refused 
to admit that the Holy Spirit is God, while 
yet He did not dare to affirm that He is a 
mere creature. When Gregory proceeded to 
preach the Deity of the Spirit, he was accused 
of introducing a strange and unscriptural god, 
because, as he acknowledges, the letter of the 
Bible is not so clear on the doctrine of the 
Spirit as it is on that of the Son. But he 
points out that it is possible to be superstitious 
in one’s reverence for the get.er of the Bible, 
and that such superstition leads directly to 
heresy. He explains the reticence of the New 
Testament on this point by shewing (in this 
Oration, cc. 26, 27) how God’s Self-Revela- 
tion to man has always been a gradual one ; how 
the Old Testament revealed the Father clearly, 
with obscure hints about the Son; and the 
New Testament manifested the Son, but only 
hinted at the Godhead of the Spirit ; but now, 
he says, the Spirit dwells among us, and allows 
us to recognize Him more clearly. For it 
would not have been advisable, as long as the 
Godhead of the Father was not acknowledged, 
to proclaim that of the Son; and while the 
Deity of the Son was not yet accepted, to add 
another burden in that of the Holy Spirit. 
Recognizing thus a Divine economy in the 
Self-Revelations of God, he was not averse to 
using a similar caution in his own dealings 
with weak or ill-instructed minds.* But yet 
when real necessity arose, he could speak out 
with perfect plainness on this subject ; and he 
even incurred danger to life and limb from the 
violence of the opposing party. He met their 
opposition by the clearest statements of the 
Catholic Dogma. ‘Is the Spirit God?’’ he 
asks. ‘*Yes.’’ ‘ But is He consubstantial ? ’”’ 
aon, if Me ie Aapd,’7.- (Orat: Stina ge) 
He appeals both to the Bible, and to the ex- 
perience of the Christian life. If the Spirit is 
not to be adored, how can He deify me in 
Baptism? From the Spirit comes our new 
Birth; from the new Birth our new Life ; and 

a.n his Fifty-third Epistle, addressed to S. Basil, there is an 
amusing instance of his defence of this tolerant disposition, which 
5. Basil also displayed in dealing with minds of this class, 

from the new Life our knowledge of the Dig- 
nity of Him from Whom it is derived (Ibid. 
c. 29). He is, however, milder in his treat- 
ment of these heretics than of the strict Arians, 
both, as he says, because they approached more 
nearly to the Orthodox belief on the subject 

of the Son, and because their conspicuous 

piety of life shewed that their error was not 
altogether wilful. In this Oration he shews 

that though the Name of God may not actu- 
Eustathius, who had been ejected from the — 

ally be given in the New ‘Testament to the 
Holy Ghost, yet all the attributes of God are 
ascribed to Him, and that therefore the use of 
the Name is a matter of legitimate inference. 
He carries on the argument in the Oration on 
Pentecost (No. XLI. See the Introduction to 
that Oration in the present Volume). 

With regard to the doctrine of the Proces- 
sion, Gregory gives us no clear information. 
He is silent as to the Procession from the Son. 
It is enough for him that the Spirit is not Be- 
gotten but Proceeding (in 5S. Lumina, c. 12), 

and that Procession is His distinctive Prop- 

erty, which involves at once His Personality 
and His Essential Deity. 

At length in 381 the work of local Synods 
and episcopal conferences was completed and 
clinched by the Ruling of a Second Icumeni- 
cal Council. It is true that the Council which 
Theodosius summoned to meet at Constanti- 
nople could scarcely have regarded itself as 
possessing Ecumenical authority ; whilst in the 
West it certainly was not regarded in this light 
before the Sixth Century. Nevertheless the 
honours of Ecumenicity were ultimately award- 
ed to it by the whole Church, because it com- 
pletes the series of Great Councils by which 
the Doctrine of the Deity of the Holy Spirit 
was affirmed ; and in fact it expressed the final 
judgment of the Catholic Church upon the 
Macedonian controversy. Its first Canon 
anathematises the Semiarians or Pneumato- 
machi by name as well as the Eunomians or 
Anomeean Arians (cf. Dict. Biog. Art. Greg- 
ory of Nazianzus, by Dr. H. B. Swete). 

XX VIL. FEE. ORIRS TS “Te OL Ghos 
ORATION. 

A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE AGAINST THE 
EUNOMIANS. 

I. I am to speak against persons who pride ° 
themselves on their eloquence; so, to begin 
with a text of Scripture, ‘‘ Behold, I am 
against thee, O thou proud one,’’ ¢ not only in 

Jer, 133, 

thy system of teaching, but also in thy hear- 
ing, and in thy tone of mind. For there are 
certain persons who have not only their ears 4 
and their tongues, but even, as I now perceive, 
their hands too, itching for our words; who 
delight in profane babblings, and oppositions 
of science falsely so called,® and strifes about 
words, which tend to no profit ; for so Paul, 
the Preacher and Establisher of the «Word 
cut short,’’¥ the disciple and teacher of the 
Fishermen, calls all that is excessive or super- 
fluous in discourse. But as to those to whom 
we refer, would that they, whose tongue is so 
voluble and clever in applying itself to noble 
and approved language, would likewise pay 
some attention to actions. 

sophistical, and less absurd and strange acro- 
bats of words, if I may use a ridiculous expres- 
sion about a ridiculous subject. 

If. But since they neglect every path of 
righteousness, and look only to this one point, 
namely, which of the propositions submitted 
to them they shall bind or loose, (like those 

For then perhaps | 
in a little while they would become less 

persons who in the theatres perform wrestling | 

matches in public, but not that kind of wrest- 
ling in which the victory is won according to 
the rules of the sport, but a kind to deceive 
the eyes of those who are ignorant in such 
matters, and to catch applause), and every 
marketplace must buzz with their talking ; 
and every dinner party be worried to death 
with silly talk and boredom; and every fes- 
tival be made unfestive and full of dejection, 
and every occasion of mourning be consoled 
by a greater calamity ‘—their questions—and 

all the women’s apartments accustomed to | 

simplicity be thrown into confusion and be 
robbed of its flower of modesty by the torrent 
of their words since, I say this is 
so, the evil is intolerable and not to be borne, 
and our Great Mystery is in danger of being 
made a thing of little moment. Well then, 
let these spies $ bear with us, moved as we are 
with fatherly compassion, and as holy Jere- 
miah says, torn in our hearts; let them bear 
with us so far as not to givea savage reception 
to our discourse upon this subject; and let 
them, if indeed they can, restrain their 
tongues for a short while and lend us their 
ears. However that may be, you shall at any 
rate suffer no loss. For either we shall have 

a Tim. iv. iB Lbenieros y Rom, ix. 28. 

5S. Paul is called a drsciple of the fishermen, as having been 
in some sense their follower (though in fact he was never a literal 
disciple of any of them); and their seacher as having taught such 
Successors of the Apostles as SS. ‘Timothy and Titus. 

e1.c. be thrown into the shade by something more serious which 
caused them by comparison to be scarcely felt any longer, 

¢ KatdoKoToe quasi Wevderioxorot, n Jer, iv. 19, 

VOLaVIT: 

3. 

x 

AGAINST THE EUNOMIANS. 28 

ae 

spoken in the ears of them that will hear,¢ and 
our words will bear some fruit, namely an 
advantage to you (since the Sower soweth the 
Word? upon every kind of mind; and the 
good and fertile bears fruit), or else you will 
depart despising this discourse of ours as you 
have despised others, and having drawn from 
it further material for gainsaying and railing at 
us, upon which to feast yourselves yet more. 

And you must not be astonished if I speak 
a language which is strange to you and con- 
trary to your custom, who profess to know 
everything and to teach everything in a too 
impetuous and generous manner not 
to pain you by saying ignorant and rash. 

III. Not to every one, my friends, does it 
belong to philosophize about God; not to 
every one; the Subject is not so cheap and 
low; and I will add, not before every audi- 
ence, nor at all times, nor on all points ; but 
on certain occasions, and before certain per- 
sons, and within certain limits. 

Not to all men, because it is permitted only 
to those who have been examined, and are 
passed masters in meditation, and who have 
been previously purified in soul and body, or 
at the very least are being purified. Tor the 
impure to touch the pure is, we may safely 
Say, not safe, just as it is unsafe to fix weak 
eyes upon the sun’s rays. And what is the 
permitted occasion? It is when we are free 
from all external defilement or disturbance, 
and when that which rules within us is not 
confused with vexatious or erring images ; like 
persons mixing up good writing with bad, or 
filth with the sweet odours of unguents. For 
it is necessary to be truly at leisure to know 
God; and when we can get a convenient 
season, to discern the straight road of the 
things divine. And who are the permitted 
persons? They to whom the subject is of 
real concern, and not they who make it a 
matter of pleasant gossip, like any other thi ng, 
after the races, or the theatre, or a concert, 
or a dinner, or still lower employments. ‘To 
such men as these, idle jests and pretty con- 
tradictions about these subjects are a part of 
their amusement. 

IV. Next, on what subjects and to what ex- 
tent may we philosophize? On matters within 
our reach, and to such an extent as the mental 
power and grasp of our audience may extend. 
No further, lest, as excessively loud sounds 
injure the hearing, or excess of food the body, 
or, if you will, as excessive burdens beyond 

a Kcclus. xxv. g. 

BS. Markiv. 3 and 14. ‘*He that soweth the Word soweth 
upon,” etc. So Billius and the Benedictines, but the rendering in 
the text seems preferable. 

286 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

the strength injure those who bear them, or 

excessive rains the earth ; so these too, being 

pressed down and overweighted by the stiff- 

ness. if | may use the expression, of the argu- 

ments should suffer loss even in respect of the | 
! 

strength they originally possessed.% 

\V. Now, Lam not saying that it 1s not need- 
ful to remember God at all times; . . I 
must not be misunderstood, or I shall be having 

these nimble and quick people down upon me — 

again. Lor we ought to think of God even 
more often than we draw our breath ; and if 

the expression is permissible, we ought to do 
nothing else. Yea, I am one of those who 
entirely approve that Word which bids us 
meditate day and night,® and tell at eventide 
and morning and noon day,¥ and praise the 
Lord at every time ;° or, to use Moses’ words, 

whether a man lie down, or rise up, or walk | 
‘ing hostility, let us at least agree upon this, 

by the way, or whatever else he be doing «— 
and by this recollection we are to be moulded 
to purity. So that it is not the continual re- 
membrance of God that I would hinder, but 
only the talking about God ; nor even that as 
in itself wrong, but only when unseasonable ; 
nor all teaching, but only want of moderation. 
‘As of even honey repletion and satiety, though 
it be of honey, produce vomiting ;$ and, as 
Solomon says and I think, there is a time for 
every thing, 7 and that which is good ceases to 
be good if it be not done in a good way ; just 
as a flower is quite out of season in winter, 
and just as a man’s dress does not become a 
woman, nor a woman’s a man; and as geo- 
metry is out of place in mourning, or tears at 
a carousal; shall we in this instance alone 
disregard the proper time, in a matter in 
which most of all due season should be 
respected? Surely not, my friends and breth- 
ren (for I will still call you Brethren, though 
you do not behave like brothers). Let us not 
think so nor yet, like hot tempered and hard 
mouthed horses, throwing off our rider Rea- 
son, and casting away Reverence, that keeps 
us within due limits, run far away from the 
turning point,® but let us philosophize within 
our proper bounds, and not be carried away 

ai.e. Shouid not only fail to be strengthened thereby, but be 
actually weakened, through their inability to understand the argu- 
ment. A bad defence weakens a good cause. 

BPS. 4, 2: Ps. ly. 17. 

e Deut. vi. 7. ¢ Prov. xxv. 16. 7 Eccles. i. 1. 

@ The course of the chariot races in the Greek Games was round 
the Hippodrome a certain number of times. 
arrangement, 

Ps Hexic: 

a party wall was built down the middle, and at either 

round which the cars were toturn, The object of the charioteers 
was to turn round these as close as possible, to save distance ; and 
to do this well it was necessary to have the horses under perfect 
control, as well as perfectly trained, to make the semicircle at full 
gallop almost on the axis of the car. ‘The horses that got out of 
hand and_ galloped wildly round a large circle would almost cer- 
tainly lose distance enough to lose the race, while the driver would 
be laughed at for his unskilfulness. 

into Egypt, nor be swept down into Assyria,* 
nor sing the Lord’s song in a strange land, by 
which 1 mean before any kind of audience, 
strangers or kindred, hostile or friendly, 
kindly or the reverse, who watch what we do 
with over great care, and would like the spark 
of what is wrong in us to become a flame, 
and secretly kindle and fan it and raise it to 
heaven with their breath and make it higher 
than the Babylonian flame which burnt up 
every thing around it. For since their 
strength lies not in their own dogmas, they 
hunt for it in our weak points. And there- 
fore they apply themselves to our—shall I 
say ‘misfortunes’? or “ failings’’ ?—like flies 
to wounds. But let us at least be no longer 
ignorant of ourselves, or pay too little atten- 
tion to the due order in these matters. And 
if it be impossible to put an end to the exist- 

that we will utter Mysteries under our breath, 
and holy things in a holy manner, and we 
will not cast to ears profane that which may 
not be uttered, nor give evidence that we os. 
sess less gravity than those who worship 

demons, and serve shameful fables and deeds ; 

| 

To facilitate this | 
_ignorantly, 

end of it certain posts were set up called vigaat, or in Latin Aleta, ; 

for they would sooner give their blood to the 
uninitiated than certain words. But let us 
recognize that as in dress and diet and laugh- 
ter and demeanour there is a certain decorum, 
so there is also in speech and silence ; since 
among so many titles and powers of God, we 
pay the highest honour to The Word. Let 
eyen our disputings then be kept within 
bounds. 

VI. Why should a man who is a hostile 
listener to such words be allowed to hear about 
the Generation of God, or his creation, or how 
God was made out of things which had no 
existence, or of section and analysis and 
division?& Why do we make our accusers 
judges? Why do we put swords into the 
hands of our enemies? How, thinkest thou, 
or with what temper, will the arguments 
about such subjects be received by one who 
approves of adulteries, and corruption of 
children, and who worships the passions and 
cannot conceive of aught higher than the 
body 25 who till very lately set up 
gods for himself, and gods too who were noted 
for the vilest deeds? Will it not first be 
from a material standpoint, shamefully and 
and in the sense to which he has 
been accustomed? Will he not make thy 
Theology a defence for his own gods and pas- 

a Dan. iii. 12. | 
B The allusion 1s to the . 
about the most sacred subjects 

Arian and Eunomian habit of gossiping 
in every sort of place or company 

. or time, in order to promote their heresy. 

A PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE 
sions? For if we ourselves wantonly misuse 

these words, it will be along time before we 
shall persuade them to accept our philosophy. 

And if they are in their own persons inventors | 

of evil things, how should they refrain from 
grasping at such things when offered to them ? 
Such results come to us from mutual contest. 

- tlons.& 

Such results follow to those who fight for the 
Word beyond what the Word approves ; they | 
are behaving like mad people, who set. their 

own house on fire, or tear their own children, 
or disavow their own parents, taking them 
for strangers. 

VII. But when we have put away from the 
conversation those who are strangers to it, and 

/ ho purpose ? 

sent the great legion & on its way to the abyss © 

into the herd of swine, the next thing is to 
look to ourselves, 
self to beatity like a statue. The first point to 
be considered is—What is this great rivalry 
of speech and endless talking? What is this 
new disease of insatiability ? Why have we 

and polish our theological | 

tied our hands and armed our tonguesP We 
do not praise either hospitality, or brotherly © 

love, or conjugal affection, or virginity ; nor 
do we admire liberality to the poor, or the 

chanting of Psalms, or nightlong vigils,y or 
we, then, travel all, or some of these Ways 

tears. We do not keep under the body by 
fasting, or go forth to God by prayer; nor 
do we subject the worse to the better—I mean 
the dust to the spirit—as they would do who 
form a just judgment of our composite nature ; 
we do not make our life a preparation for 
death ; nor do we make ourselves masters of 
our passions, mindful of our heavenly nobility ; 
hor tame our anger when it swells and rages, 
nor our pride that bringeth to a fall, nor un- 
reasonable grief, nor unchastened pleasure, 
hor meretricious laughter, nor undisciplined 
eyes, nor insatiable ears, nor excessive talk, 
nor absurd thoughts, nor aught of the occa- 
sions which the Evil One gets against us from 
sources within ourselves ; bringing upon us the 

| 
i 
| 

it be split into many parts. 

AGAINST THE EUNOMIANS. ay 

them an evil reward for a thing which is not 
good, license of tongue for their impiety. 
VIII. And yet, O talkative Dialectician, I 
will ask thee one small question,« and answer 
thou me, as He saith to Job, Who through 
Whirlwind and cloud giveth Divine admoni- 
Are there many mansions in God’s 
House, as thou hast heard, or only one? Of 
course you will admit that there are many, and 
not only one. Now, are they all to be filled, 
or only some, and others not ; so that some will] 
be left empty, and will have been prepared to 
Of course all will be filled, for — 
nothing can be in vain which has been done 
by God. And can you tell me what you will 
consider this Mansion to be? Is it the rest 
and glory which is in store There for the 
Blessed, or something else?—No, not any - 
thing else. Since then we are agreed upon 
this point, let us further examine another also. 
Is there any thing that procures these Man- 
sions, as I think there is; or is there nothing ? 
—Certainly there is—What is it? Is it not 
that there are various modes of conduct, 
and various purposes, one leading one way, 
another another way, according to the propor- 
tion of faith, and these we call Ways? Must 

» the same individual along them all, 
if that be possible; or, if not, along as 
many as may be; or else along some of them ? 
And even if this may not be, it would still be 
a great thing, at least as it appears to me, to 
travel excellently along even one.— You are 

right in your conception.’’—What then when 

you hear there is but One way, and that a 
narrow one,Y does the word seem to you to 
shew? ‘That there is but one on account of 
its excellence. For it is but one, even though 
And_ narrow be- 

cause of its ditficulties, and because it js 

death that comes through the windows,® as. 

Holy Scripture saith; that is, through the | 

senses. Nay we do the very opposite, and 
have given liberty to the passions of others, as 
kings give releases from service in honour of a 

victory, only on condition that they incline to | 

our side, and make their assault upon God 
more boldly, or more impiously. And we give 

@ Such expressions as Generation and the like would certainly 
be understood in a material sense by the heathen; and so would 
place an unnecessary stumbling-block in the way of their conver- 
sion. 

B Luke viii. 31. 

y S. John Chrysostom, consecrated Archbishop of Constan- 
tinople in 397, incurred much unpopularity among his clergy by 
insisting on the revival of the Night Hours of prayer. 

Onleruixaar: 

trodden by few in comparison with the multi- 
tude of the adversaries, and of those who 
travel along the road of wickedness. «So | 
think too.’’ Well, then, my good friend, since 
this is so, why do you, as though condemning 
our doctrine for a certain poverty, rush head- 
long down that one which leads through what 
you call arguments and speculations, but I 
frivolities and quackeries? Let Paul reprove 
you with those bitter reproaches, in which, 
after his list of the Gifts of Grace, he says, 
Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets ? etc.$ 

IX. But, beit so. Lofty thou art, even be- 
yond the lofty, even above the clouds, if thou 
wilt, a spectator of things invisible, a hearer 

B Job xxxviii. x, 

@ Job xxxvili. 3. P 
ii 1 Cor, xii. 29, 

y Matt. vii. 14. 

2.2 

288 

of things unspeakable ; one who hast ascended | 
after Elias, and who after Moses hast been | 
deemed worthy of the Vision of God, and 
after Paul hast been taken up into heaven ; 
why dost thou mould the rest of thy fellows in 
one day into Saints, and ordain them ‘Vheo- 
logians, and as it were breathe into them 
instruction, and make them many councils of 
ignorant oracles? Why dost thou entangle 
those who are weaker in thy spider’s web, as 
+f it were something great and wise? Why 
dost thou stir up wasps’ nests against the 
Faith? Why dost thou suddenly spring a 
flood of dialectics upon us, as the fables of old 
did the Giants? Why hast thou collected all 
that is frivolous and unmanly among men, 
like a rabble, into one torrent, and having 
made them more effeminate by flattery, 
fashioned a new workshop, cleverly making a 
harvest for thyself out of their want of under- 
standing? Dost thou deny that this is so, 
and are the other matters of no account to 
thee? Must thy tongue rule at any cost, and 
canst thou not restrain the birthpang of thy 
speech? ‘Thou mayest find many other 
honourable subjects for discussion. To these 
turn this disease of thine with some advantage. 
Attack the silence of Pythagoras,* and the 
Orphic beans, and the novel brag about “‘ The 
Master said.’? Attack the ideas of Plato,® 
and the transmigrations and courses of our 
souls, and the reminiscences, and the unlovely 
loves of the soul for lovely bodies. Attack 
the atheism of Epicurus,Y and his atoms, and 
his unphilosophic pleasure; or Aristotle’s 
petty Providence, and his artificial system, 
and his discourses about the mortality of the 
soul, and the humanitarianism of his doctrine. 
Attack the superciliousness of the Stoa,® or 
the greed and vulgarity of the Cynic.¢ 
Attack the “Void and Full’’ Qvhat non- 

a The disciples of Pythagoras were made to keep silence ab- 
solutely for five years as a qualification for initiation into the 
mysteries of his order. Further, they were bidden to abstain 
from eating beans, as these were said to be one receptacle of 
human souls in the course of their peregrinations ; and when 
asked for proof of their peculiar doctrines, contented themselves 
with the reply, “‘avros €0a”? “the master said so.” 

B Plato taught that all things that exist are copies of certain 
objective archetypal Forms, emanations from the Mind of God, 
which God copied in creation. He also taught a doctrine of trans- 
migration of souls. 

y Epicurus, an Athenian philosopher, of a materialistic type, 
taught that God had no existence, and that the world was made 
by a fortuitous concourse of innumerable atoms of matter, which 
are self-existent; and he placed the highest good in pleasure, 
which he defined as the absence of pain. 

8 The Stoa, a school of philosophers opposed to the Epicu- 
reans, took their name from a certain Colonnade at Athens, in 
which Zeno, their founder, used to teach. Their highest good 
consisted in the complete subdual of all feeling ; and so they were 
not unnaturally characterized by a haughty affectation of indiffer- 
ence. 

e The Cynics, so called from their snarling way, were a school 

GREGORY N 

founded by Antisthenes. 

h They professed to despise everything 
uman. 

AZIANZEN. 

sense), and all the details about the gods 
and the sacrifices and the idols and demons, 
whether beneficent or malignant, and all the 
tricks that people play with divination, evok- 
ing of gods, or of souls, and the power of the 
stars. And if these things seem to thee un- 
worthy of discussion as petty and already 
often confuted, and thou wilt keep to thy line, 
and seek the satisfaction of thy ambition in 
it; then here too I will provide thee with 
broad paths. Philosophize about the world 
or worlds; about matter; about soul; about 
natures endowed with reason, good or bad ; 
about resurrection, about judgment, about 
reward, or the Sufferings of Christ. For in 
these subjects to hit the mark is not useless, 
and to miss it is not dangerous. But with 
God we shall have converse, in this life only in 
a small degree; but a little later, it may be, 
more perfectly, in the Same, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to Whom be glory for ever. Amen. 

ORATION XXVIII. 
Tue SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION. 

I. In the former Discourse we laid down 
clearly with respect to the Theologian, both 
what sort of character he ought to bear, and on 
what kind of subject he may philosophize, and 
when, and to what extent. We saw that he 
ought to be, as far as may be, pure, in order that 
light may be apprehended by light ; and that 
he ought to consort with serious men, in order 
that his word be not fruitless through falling 
on an unfruitful soil; and that the suitable 
season is when we have a calm within from 
the whirl of outward things; so as not like 
madmen ¢ to lose our breath; and that the ex- 
tent to which we may go is that to which 
we have ourselves advanced, or to which we 
are advancing. Since then these things are 
so, and we have broken up for ourselves the 
fallows of Divinity,® so as not to sow upon 
thorns,y and have made plain the face of the 
ground,® being moulded and moulding others 
by Holy Scripture . . - let us now enter 
upon Theological questions, setting at the head 
thereof the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost, of Whom we are to treat; that the 
Father may be well pleased, and the Son may 
help us, and the Holy Ghost may inspire us ; 
or rather that one illumination may come 
upon us from the One God, One in diversity, 
diverse in Unity, wherein is a marvel. 

a A marginal reading noted by the Benedictines gives “* sobe 
bing” or “panting,” which is a better sense. a‘ 
B Jerem. iv. 3. y Matt. xili. 7. 6 Isa. xxvill. 25. 

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION, 

II. Now when I go up eagerly into the 
Mount *—or, to use a truer expression, when I 

both eagerly long, and at the same time am | 

atraid (the one through my hope and the other 
through my weakness) to enter within. the 
Cloud, and hold converse with God, for so 
God commands ; if any be an Aaron, let him 
go up with me, and let him stand near, 
being ready, if it must be so, to remain out- 
side the Cloud. But if any be a Nadad or an 
Abihu, or of the Order of the Ilders, let him 
go up indeed, but let him stand afar off, ac- 
cording to the value of his purification. But 
if any be of the multitude, who are unworthy 
of this height of contemplation, if he be al- 
together impure let him not approach at all,6 
for it would be dangerous to him; but if he 
be at least temporarily purified, let him re- 
main below and listen to the Voice alone, and 
the trumpet,’ the bare words of piety, and 
let him see the Mountain smoking and lighten- 
ing, a terror at once and a marvel to those 
who cannot get up. But if any is an evil 
and savage beast, and altogether incapable of 
taking in the subject matter of Contempla- 
tion and Theology, let him not hurtfully and 
malignantly lurk in his den among the woods, 
to catch hold of some dogma or saying by a 
sudden spring, and to tear sound doctrine to 
pieces by his misrepresentations, but let him 
stand yet afar off and withdraw from the 
Mount, or he shall be stoned and crushed, and 
shall perish miserably in his wickedness. For 
to those who are like wild beasts true and 
sound discourses are stones. If he bea leopard 
let him die with his spots.6 If a ravening and 
roaring lion, seeking what he may devour€ of 
our souls or of our words; or a wild boar, 
trampling under foot the precious and trans- 
lucent pearls of the Truth ;%or an Arabian” 
and alien wolf, or one keener even than these 
in tricks of argument; or a fox, that is a 
treacherous and faithless soul, changing its 
shape according to circumstances or neces- 

sities, feeding on dead or putrid bodies, or on | 

little vineyards ® when the large ones have 
escaped them ; or any other carnivorous beast, 
rejected by the Law as unclean for food or 
enjoyment ; our discourse must withdraw from 
such and be engraved on solid tables of 
stone, and that on both sides because the Law 
is partly visible, and partly hidden ; the one 
part belonging to the mass who remain below, 

a Exod. xxiv. 1, Balby xix x4, 
§ Jer. xin, 23. eT. Petry. 13. 
yn elrabtan: So the LXX. 

y Ib. xix. 16-18. 
¢ Matt. vii. 6. 
renders the word which in A. V. ver: 

v. 6, 1s translated ‘0f the evening,” and in the Vulg. “at egen- | 

ing.” R. V. gives as an alternative, ‘* of the deserts.” 
8 The LXX. in Cant. xi. 15, admits of this translation as well as 
of that followed by A. V, 

| 

| the other to the few who press upward into 
the Mount. 

Ill. What is this that has happened to me, 
O friends, and initiates, and fellow-lovers of the 
truth ? I was running to lay hold on God, 
and thus I went up into the Mount, and drew 
aside the curtain of the Cloud, and entered 
away from matter and material things, and as 
far as I could I withdrew within myself. And 
then when I looked up, I scarce saw the back 
parts of God ;* although I was sheltered by 
the Rock, the Word that was made flesh for 
us. And when I looked a little closer, I saw, 
not the First and unmingled Nature, known 
to Itself—to the Trinity, I mean; not ‘That 
which abideth within the first é veil, and is 
hidden by the Cherubim ; but only that Nat- 
ure, which at last even reaches to us. And 
that is, as far as I can learn, the Majesty, or 
as holy David calls it, the Glory ¥ which is 
manifested among the creatures, which It has 
produced and governs. For these are the 
3ack Parts of God, which He leaves behind 
Him, as tokens of Himself® like the shadows 
and reflection of the sun in the water, which 
shew the sun to our weak eyes, because we 
cannot look at the sun himself, for by his un- 
mixed light he is too strong for our power of 
perception. In this way then shalt thou dis- 
course of God; even wert thou a Moses and 
a god to Pharaoh ; © even wert thou caught up 
like Paul to the Third Heaven,$ and hadst 
heard unspeakable words; even wert thou 
raised above them both, and exalted to Angelic 
or Archangelic place and dignity. For though 
a thing be all heavenly, or above heaven, 
and far higher in nature and nearer to God 

| than we, yet it is farther distant from God, 

and from the complete comprehension of His 
Nature, than it is lifted above our complex 
and lowly and earthward-sinking composition. 

IV. Therefore we must begin again thus. 
It is difficult to conceive God but to define 
Him in words is an impossibility, as one of the 
Greek teachers of Divinity» taught, not unskil- 
fully, as it appears to me; with the intention 
that he might be thought to have apprehended 
Him ; in that he Says it is a hard thing to do; 
and yet may escape being convicted of ignor- 
ance because of the impossibility of giving 
expression to the apprehension. But in my 
opinion it is impossible to express Him, and 

@ Exod. xxxiii. 23. ‘ 

BThis veil of the Mercy Seat, spoken of in Exod. xxvi. Sty 
signifies in Gregory’s sense the denial of contemplation of that 
Highest Nature. PS.*vili, 2, 

6 The Face of God signifies His Essence and Deity, which were 
| before all worlds: His back parts are Creation and Providence, by 

which He reveals Himself. 

e Exod. iv, 2. ¢ 2 Cor, xii, 2, 9 Plato, Tim., 28 E, 

290 GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 
: cake | ee sok 
yet more impossible to conceive Him, For ure teach us that God exists and that He is the 

that which may be conceived may perhaps be 
made clear by language, if not fairly well, at 
any rate imperfectly, to any one who is not 
quite deprived of his hearing, or slothful of 
understanding. But to comprehend the whole 
of so great a Subject as this is quite impossible 
and impracticable, not merely to the utterly 
careless and ignorant, but even to those who 
are highly exalted, and who love God, and in 
like manner to every created nature ; seeing 
that the darkness of this world and the thick 
covering of the flesh is an obstacle to the full 
understanding of the truth. I do not know 
whether it is the same with the higher natures 
and purer Intelligences* which because of their 
nearness to God, and because they are illum- 
ined with all His Light, may possibly sce, if 
not the whole, at any rate more perfectly and 
distinctly than we do; some perhaps more, 
some less than others, in proportion to their 
rank. 

V. But enough has been said on this point. 

of God® which passeth all understanding and 
knowledge, nor only the things which God 
hath stored up in promise for the righteous, 
which ‘‘ eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor 
mind conceived ’’Y except in a very small de- 
gree, nor the accurate knowledge of the Crea- 
tion. For even of this I would have you 
know that you have only a shadow when you 
hear the words, ‘‘ I will consider the heavens, 
the work of Thy fingers, the moon and_ the 

Efficient and Maintaining Cause of all things : 
our eyes, because they fall on visible objects, 
and see them in beautiful stability and pro- 
gress, immovably moving and revolving if | 
may so say; natural Law, because through 
these visible things and their order, it reasons 
back to their Author. For how could this Uni- 
verse have come into being or been put to- 
gether, unless God had called it into existence, 
and held it together? Tor every one who secs 
a beautifully made lute, and considers the skill 
with which it has been fitted together and ar- 
ranged, or who hears its melody, would think 
of none but the lutemaker, or the luteplayer, 
and would recur to him in mind, though he 
might not know him by sight. And thus to us 
also is manifested That which made and moves 
and preserves all created things, even though 
He be not comprehended by the mind. And 
very wanting in sense is he who will not will- 
ingly go thus far in following natural proots ; 

_ but not even this which we have fancied or 
As to what concerns us, it isnot only the Peace | 

formed, or which reason has sketched for us, 
proves the existence of a God. But if any 
one has got even to some extent a comprehen- 
sion of this, how is God’s Being to bedemon- 

strated? Who ever reached this extremity of 
~ wisdom? Who was ever deemed worthy of 

stars,’’ ® and the settled order therein; not as | 

if he were considering them now, but as des- 
tined to do so hereafter. But far before them 
is That nature Which is above them, and out 
of which they spring, the Incomprehensible 

and Illimitable—not, I mean, as to the fact of — 

His being, but as to Its nature. For our 
preaching is not empty, nor our Faith vain,‘ 
nor is this the doctrine we proclaim ; for we 
would not have you take our candid statement 

as a starting point for aquibbling denial of 

God, or of arrogance on account of our con- 
fession of ignorance. 
be persuaded of the existence of a thing, and 
quite another to know what it is. 

VI. Now our very eyes and the Law of Nat- 

a No one doubts, say the Benedictine Hditors, that the Angels 
do see God, and that men, too, will sce Him, when they attain to 
Eternal Bliss. S.'Thomas (Summa I. qu. xii. 4) argues that the 
Angels have cognition of God’s Essence not by nature but by 
grace: but yet (Ib. qu. lvi. 3) that they have by nature a certain 
cognition of Him, as represented and as it were mirrored in 
their ownessence; though not the actual vision of His Essence. 
‘The Angel, he says again (Ib. qu. Ixiv. 1) has a higher cognition of 
God than man has, on account of the perfection of his intellect; 
and this cognition remains even in the fallen Angels. 

Babhil iye7: y Isa. Ixiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 9. 

6 Ps; viii. 3. e1 Cor, xv. 19. 

attributes of a body? 
For it is one thing to_ 

so great a gift? Who has opened the mouth 
of his mind and drawn in the Spirit.* so as by 
Him that searcheth all things, yea the deep 
things of God,® to take in God, and no 
longer to need progress, since he already pos- 
sesses the Extreme Object of desire, and That 
to which all the social life and all the intelli- 
gence of the best men press forward ? 

VII. For what will you conceive the Deity 
to be, if you rely upon all the approximations 
of reason? Or to what will reason carry you, 
O most philosophic of men and best of Theolo- 
gians, who boast of your familiarity with the 
Unlimited? Is Hea body? How then is 
He the Infinite and Limitless, and formless, 
and intangible, and invisible? or are these 
What arrogance for 
such is not the nature of a body! Or will 
you say that He has a body, but not these at- 
tributes? O stupidity, that a Deity should 
possess nothing more than we do. For how 
is He an object of worship if He be circum- 
scribed? Or how shall He escape being made 
of elements, and therefore subject to be re- 
solved into them again, or even altogether dis- 
solved? For every compound is a starting 
point of strife, and strife of separation, and 

a Ps. Cxix, 2%. Bx Cor. ii. 19, 

separation of dissolution. 
altogether foreign to God and to the First Nat- 
ure. ‘Therefore there can be no separation, 
that there may be no dissolution, and no strife 
that there may be no separation, and no com- 
position that there may be no strife. Thus 
also there must be no body, that there may be 
no composition, and so the argument is estab- 
lished by going back from last to first. 

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION, 

VIII. And how shall we preserve the truth | 

that God pervades all things and fills all, as it 
is written ‘Do not I fill heaven and earth ? 
saith the Lord,’’ * and ‘The Spirit of the Lord 

filleth the world,’’ 8 if God partly contains and | 

partly is contained? For either He will 
occupy an empty Universe, and so all things 
will have vanished for us, with this result, 
that we shall have insulted God by making 
Him a body, and by robbing Him of all 
things which He has made; or else He will 
be a body contained in other bodies, which is 
impossible ; or He will be enfolded in them, 
or contrasted with them, as liquids are mixed, 
and one divides and is divided by another ;— 
a view which is more absurd and anile than 
even the atoms of Epicurus?¥ and so this argu- 
ment concerning the body will fall through, 
and have no body and no solid basis at all. 
But if we are to assert that He is immaterial (as 
for example that Fifth Element which some é 
have imagined), and that He is carried round 
inthe circular movement . . . let us assume 
that He isimmaterial, and that He is the Fifth 
Element ; and, if they please, let Him be also 
bodiless in accordance with the independent 
drift and arrangement of their argument 3 for 
T will not at present differ with them on this 
point ; in what respect then will He be one of 
those things which are in movement and _agi- 
tation, to say nothing of the insult involved in 
making the Creator subject to the same move- 
ment as the creatures, and Him That. carrics 
all Gf they will allow even this) one with 
those whom He carries. Again, what is the 
force that moves your Fifth Element, and 
what is it that moves all things, and what 
moves that, and what is the force that moves 
that ? And so on ad:tnfinitum. And how can 
He help being altogether contained in space 
if He be subject to motion? But if they as- 
sert that He is something other than this Fifth 
Element ; suppose it is an angelic nature that 

a Jer, xxii. 24, B Wisd. i. 7. 

y Epicurus taught that Matter is eternal, and consists of an in- 
detinite number of Atoms or indivisible units, floating about fa 
space, and mutually attracting and repelling each other; and 
that all that exists is due to some chance meeting and coalition of 
these atoms. 

6 This is a speculation of Aristotle, who imagined a Fifth Ele- 
ment, consisting of formless matter, 

291 

But dissolution is | they attribute to Him, how will they shew 

that Angels are corporeal, or what sort of 
bodies they have ? And how far in that case 
could God, to Whom the Angels minister, be 
superior to the Angels? Andif He is above 
them, there is again brought in an irrational 
swarm of bodies, and a depth of nonsense, that 
has no possible basis to stand upon. 

IX. And thus wesce that God is not a body. 
Tor no inspired teacher has yet asserted or 
admitted such a notion, nor has the sentence 
of our own Court allowed it. Nothing then 
remains but to conceive of Him as incorporeal. 
But this term Incorporeal, though granted, 
does not yet set before us—or contain within 
itself His Essence, any more than Unbegot- 
ten, or Unoriginate, or Unchanging, or Incor- 
ruptible, or any other predicate which is used 
concerning God or in reference to Him. For 
what effect is produced upon His Being or 
Substance * by His having no beginning, and 
being incapable of change or limitation? Nay, 
the whole question of His Being is still left 
for the further consideration and exposition of 
him who truly has the mind of God and is 
advanced in contemplation. For just as to say 
“Tt is a body,”’ or * It was begotten,’’ is not 
sufficient to present clearly to the mind the 
various objects of which these predicates are 
used, but you must also express the subject of 
which you use them, if you would present the 
object of your thought clearly and adequately 
(for every one of these predicates, corporeal, 
begotten, mortal, may be used of a man, or a 
cow, or a horse). Just so he who is eagerly 
pursuing the nature of the Self-existent will 
not stop at saying what He is wo/, but must 
goon beyond what He is not, and say what 
He ?¢s ¢ inasmuch as it is easier to take in some 
single point than to go on disowning point 
after point in endless detail, in order, both by 
the elimination of negatives and the assertion 
of positives to arrive at a comprehension of 
this subject. 

But a man who states what God is not with- 
out going on to say what He is, acts much in 
the same way as one would who when asked 
how many twice five make, should answer, 
‘*Not two, nor three, nor four, nor five, nor 
twenty, nor thirty, nor in short any number 
below ten, nor any multiple of tens’? but 
would not answer ‘ten,’’ nor settle the mind 
of his questioner upon the firm ground of the 
answer. lor it is much easier, and more con- 
cise to shew what a thing is not from what it 

@ Petavius (De Trin. IV. ii. 7) notes that bméoracts secins used 
here of the Essence and Nature eammon to the Three Persons of 
the Blessed Trinity, 

292 

is, than to demonstrate what it is by stripping 
it of what it is not. And this surely is evi- 
dent to every one. 

X. Now since we have ascertained that God 
is incorporeal, let us proceed a little further 
with our examination. Is He Nowhere or 
Somewhere. For if He is Nowhere,* then some 
person of a very inquiring turn of mind might 
ask, How is it then that He can even exist ? 
For if the non-existent is nowhere, then that 
which is nowhere is also perhaps non-existent. 
But if He is Somewhere, He must be either 
in the Universe, or above the Universe. 
And if He is zz the Universe, then He must 
be either in some part or in the whole. If in 
some part, then He will be circumscribed by 
that part which is less than Himself; but if 
everywhere, then by one which is further and 
greater—I mean the Universal, which con- 
tains the Particular ; if the Universe is to be 
contained by the Universe, and no place is to 
be free from circumscription. This follows if 
He is contained in the Universe. And_be- 
sides, where was He before the Universe was 
created, for thisis a point of no little diffi- 
culty. But if He is aéove the Universe, is 
there nothing to distinguish this from the 
Universe, and where is this aéozve situated ? 
And how could this Transcendence and that 
which is transcended be distinguished in 
thought, if there is not a limit to divide and 
define them? Is it not necessary that there 
shall be some mean to mark off the Universe 
from that which is above the Universe? And 
what could this be but Place, which we have 
already rejected ? For I have not yet brought 
forward the point that God would be alto- 
gether circumscript, if He were even compre- 
hensible in thought: for comprehension is 
one form of circumscription. 

XI. Now, why have I gone into all this, per- 
haps too minutely for most people to listen to, 
and in accordance with the present manner of 
discourse, which despises noble simplicity, and 
has introduced a crooked and intricate ® style? 
That the tree may be known by its fruits;7 I 
mean, that the darkness which is at work in 
such teaching may be known by the obscu- 
rity of the arguments. For my purpose in do- 
ing so was, not to get credit for myself for 
astonishing utterances, or excessive wisdom, 
through tying knots and solving difficulties 

a Nowhere is in this passage used in an ambiguous sense. As 
asserted of God, it means that His Being is in no way limited by 
place ; not that He has no existence in place, for He is everywhere, 
and He transcends all place. Before the creation of the Universe 
He existed, and He created Place, which therefore cannot be the 
seat of His Being. 

By. 1. Affected. The allusion is especially to the ostentatious 
dialectics and tedious arguments of Aétius and his followers, Eu- 
npomius and others. y Luke vi. 44. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

(this was the great miraculous gift of Daniel),* 
but to make clear the point at which my argu- 
ment has aimed from the first. And what 
was this? ‘That the Divine Nature cannot be 
apprehended by human reason, and that we 
cannot even represent to ourselves all its great- 
ness. And this not out of envy, for envy is 
far from the Divine Nature, which is passion- 
less, and only good and Lord of all ;® espe- 
cially envy of that which is the most honoura- 
bley of all His creatures. For what does 
the Word prefer to the rational and speaking 
creatures? Why, even their very existence is 
a proof of His supreme goodness. Nor yet is 
this incomprehensibility for the sake of His 
own glory and honour, Who is full,® as if His 
possession of His glory and majesty depended 
upon the impossibility of approaching Him. 
For it is utterly sophistical and foreign to the 
character, I will not say of God, but of any 
moderately good man, who has any right 
ideas about himself, to seek his own suprem- 
acy by throwing a hindrance in the way of 
another. 

XII. But whether there be other causes for 
it also, let them see who are nearer God, and 
are eyewitnesses and spectators of His unsearch- 
able judgments ; € if there are any who are so 
eminent in virtue, and who walk in the paths 
of the Infinite, as the saying is. As far, how- 
ever, as we have attained, who measure with 
our little measure things hard to be under- 
stood, perhaps one reason is to prevent us from 
too readily throwing away the possession be- 
cause it was so easily come by. For people 
cling tightly to that which they acquire with 
labour ; but that which they acquire easily 
they quickly throw away, because it can be 
easily recovered. And so it is turned into a 
blessing, at least to all men who are sensible, 
that this blessing is not too easy. Or perhaps 
it is in order that we may not share the fate 
of Lucifer, who fell, and in consequence of 
receiving the full light make our necks stiff 
against the Lord Almighty, and suffer a fall, 
of all things most pitiable, from the height we 
had attained. Or perhaps it may be to givea 
greater reward hereafter for their labour and 
glorious life to those who have here been puri- 
fied, and have exercised long patience in re- 

spect of that which they desired. 

‘Therefore this darkness of the body has been 
placed between us and God, like the cloud of 
old between the Egyptians and the Hebrews ; $ 

and this is perhaps what is meant by ‘* He 

acf. Dan. v. 12. B Plato, Tim., 10. 
yv. 1. Most Akin to Himself. Combefis., 
6 Isa. i: rt. e Rom, xi. 33- ¢ Exod, xiv. 20, 

THE SECOND THEOLOGICAL ORATION. 293 

| 
made darkness His secret place,’’? * namely our | 
dulness, through which few can see even a_ 

little. But as to this point, let those discuss 
it whose business it is; and let them ascend 
as far as possible in the examination. ‘To us 
who are (as Jeremiah saith), ‘‘ prisoners of the 
earth,’’ & and covered with the denseness of 
carnal nature, this at all events is known, that 
as it is impossible for a man to step over his 
own shadow, however fast he may move (for 
the shadow will always move on as fast as it is 
being overtaken) or, as it is impossible for the 
eye to draw near to visible objects apart from 
the intervening air and light, or for a fish to 
glide about outside of the waters; so it is 
quite impracticable for those who are in the 
body to be conversant with objects of pure 
thought apart altogether from bodily objects. 
lor something in our own environment is 
ever creeping in, even when the mind_ has 
most fully detached itself from the visible, 
and collected itself, and is attempting to apply 
itself to those invisible things which are akin 
to itself. 

XIII. This will be made clear to you as fol- 
lows :—Are not Spirit, and Fire, and Light, 
Love, and Wisdom, and Righteousness, and 
Mind and Reason, and the like, the names of 
the First Nature? What then? Can you 
conceive of Spirit apart from motion and diffu- 
sion; or of Fire without its fuel and its up- 
ward motion, and its proper colour and form ? 
Or of Light unmingled with air, and loosed 
from that which is as it were its father and 
source? And how do you conceive of a 
mind ? Is it not that which is inherent in some 
person not itself, and are not its movements 
thoughts, silent or uttered? And Reason 
what else can you think it than that 
which is either silent within ourselves, or else 
outpoured (for I shrink from saying loosed) ? 
And if you conceive of Wisdom, what is it 
but the habit of mind which you know as such, 
and which is concerned with contemplations 
either divine or human? And Justice and 
Love, are they not praiseworthy dispositions, 
the one opposed to injustice, the other to hate, 
and at one time intensifying themselves, at 
another relaxed, now taking possession of us, 
now leaving us alone, and ina word, making 
us what we are, and changing us as colours do 
bodies? Or are we rather to leave all these 
things, and to look at the Deity absolutely, as 
best we can, collecting a fragmentary percep- 
tion of It from Its images? What then is this 
subtile thing, which is of these, and yet is not 

@ Ps. xviii, 11, B Lam. iii. 34. 

these, or how can that Unity which is in its 
Nature uncomposite and incomparable, still be 
all of these, and each one of them perfectly ? 
Thus our mind faints to transcend corporeal 
things, and to consort with the Incorporeal, 
stripped of all clothing of corporeal ideas, as 
long as it has to look with its inherent weak- 
ness at things above its strength. For every 
rational nature longs for God and for the First 
Cause, but is unable to grasp Him, for the 
reasons I have mentioned. Faint therefore 
with the desire, and as it were restive and 
impatient of the disability, it tries a second 
course, either to look at visible things, and 
out of some of them to make a god . .. 
(a poor contrivance, for in what respect and to 
what extent can that which is seen be higher 
and more godlike than that which sees, that 
this should worship that?) or else through the 
beauty and order of visible things to attain to 
that which is above sight ; but not to suffer 
the loss of God through the magnificence of 
visible things. 

XIV. From this cause some have made a god 
of the Sun, others of the Moon, others of the 
host of Stars, others of heaven itself with all its 
hosts, to which they have attributed the guid- 
ing of the Universe, according to the quality 
or quantity of their movement. Others again 
of the Elements, earth, air, water, fire, be- 
cause of their useful nature, since without 
them human life cannot possibly exist. Others 
again have worshipped any chance visible ob- 
jects, setting up the most beautiful of what 
they saw as their gods. And there are those 
who worship pictures and images, at first in- 
deed of their own ancestors—at least, this is 
the case with the more affectionate and sen- 
sual—and honour the departed with memo- 
rials; and afterwards even those of strangers 
are worshipped by men of a later genera- 
tion separated from them by a long interval ; 
through ignorance of the First Nature, and 
following the traditional honour as lawful and 
necessary ; for usage when confirmed by time 
was held to be Law. And I think that some 
who were courtiers of arbitrary power and 
extolled bodily strength and admired beauty, 
made a god in time out of him whom they 
honoured, perhaps getting hold of some fable 
_ to help on their imposture. 
| XV. And those of them who were most sub- 

ject to passion deified their passions, or hon- 
oured them among their gods; Anger and 
Blood-thirstiness, Lust and Drunkenness, and 
every similar wickedness ; and made out of this 
' anignoble and unjust excuse for their own sins. 
, And some they left on earth, and some they 

204 

hid beneath the earth (this being the only 
sign of wisdom about them), and some they 
raised to heaven.* O ridiculous distribution 
of inheritance! ‘Then they gave to each of 
these concepts the name of some god or de- 
mon, by the authority and private judgment of 
their error, and set up statues whose costliness 
is asnare, and thought to honour them with 
blood and the steam of sacrifices, and somc- 
times even by most shameful actions, frenzies 
and manslaughter. For such honours were the 
fitting due of such gods. And before now 
men haye insulted themselves by worshipping 
monsters, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping 
things,® and of the very vilest and most absurd, 
and have made an offering to them of the 
glory of God; so that it is not easy to decide 
whether we ought most to despise the worship- 
pers or the objects of their worship. Prob- 
ably the worshippers are far the most con- 
temptible, for though they are of a rational 
nature, and have received grace from God, 
they have set up the worse as the better. And 
this was the trick of the Evil One, who abused 
good to an evil purpose, as in most of his evil 
deeds. For he laid hold of their desire in its 
wandering in search of God, in order to dis- 
tort to himselfY the power, and steal the de- 
sire, leading it by the hand, like a blind man 
asking a road; and he hurled down and scat- 
tered some in one direction and some in an- 
other, into one pit of death and destruction. 
XVI. ‘This was their course. But reason re- 
ceiving us in our desire for God, and in our 
sense of the impossibility of being without a 
leader and guide, and then making us apply 
ourselves to things visible and meeting with the 
things which have been since the beginning, 
doth not stay its course even here. For it 
was not the part of Wisdom to grant the soy- 
ereignty to things which are, as observation 
tells us, of equal rank. By these then it leads 
to that which is above these, and by which 
being is given to these. For what is it which 
ordered things in heaven and things in earth, 
and those which pass through air, and those 
which live in water; or rather the things 
which were before these, heaven and earth, 
air and water? Who mingled these, and who 
distributed them? What is it that each has 
in common with the other, and their mutual 
dependence and agreement? lor I commend 
the man, though he was a heathen, who said, 

a Referring to the mythical partition of the Universe, which 
gave heaven to Zeus, the sea to Poseidon, and the infernal regions 
to Aidoneus, Rom. i. 23. 

y It was a very general belief in the early Church that the gods 
whom the heathen worshipped were in reality actual evil spirits; 
and this belief is certainly supported by S, Paul’s argument about 
eidwAddurov in 1 Cor, x, 19-21 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

What gave movement to these, and drives 
their ceaseless and unhindered motion? — Is it 
not the Artificer of them Who implanted 
reason in them all, in accordance with which 
the Universe is moved and controlled? Is it 
not He who made them and brought them 
into being? For we cannot attribute such a 
power to the Accidental. For, suppose that 
its existence is accidental, to what will you 
let us ascribe its order? And if you like we 
will grant you this: to what then will you 
ascribe its preservation and protection in ac- 
cordance with the terms of its first creation. 
Do these belong to the Accidental, or to some- 
thing else? Surely not to the Accidental. 
And what can this Something Else be but 
God? ‘Thus reason that proceeds from God, 
that is implanted in all from the beginning 
and is the first law in us, and is bound up in 
all, leads us up to Ged through visible things. 
Let us begin again, and reason this out. 

XVI. What God is in nature and essence, 
no man ever yet has discovered or can discover. 
Whether it will ever be discovered is a ques- 
tion which he who will may examine and de- 
cide. In my opinion it will be discovered 
when that within us which is godlike and 
divine, I mean our mind and reason, shall 
have mingled with its Like, and the image 
shall have ascended to the Archetype, of which 
it has now the desire. And this I think is 
the solution of that vexed problem as to ‘* We 
shall know even as we are known.’’@ But in 
our present life all that comes to us is but a 
little effluence, and as it were a small efful- 
gence from a great Light. So that if anyone 
has known God, or has had the testimony of 
Scripture to his knowledge of God, we are to 
understand such an one to have possessed a 
degree of knowledge which gave him the ap- 
pearance of being more fully enlightened than 
another who did not enjoy the same degree of 
illumination ; and this relative superiority is 
spoken of as if it were absolute knowledge, 
not because it is really such, but by compari- 
son with the power of that other. 

XVIII. Thus Enos ‘ hoped to call upon the 
Name of the Lord.’’& Hope was that for 
which he is commended ; and that, not that 
he should voz God, but that he should ca// 
upon him. And Enoch was translated,” but it 
is not yet clear whether it was because he al- 
ready comprehended the Divine Nature, or in 
order that he might comprehend it. And 

a1 Cor. xiii. 12, but with a reading émeyveaeobe, which is not in 
the New Testament. : 

B Gen. iv. 26. The verb has by some been taken as passive, 
and not middle, ‘hoped that the Name of the Lord would bg 
called upon.” y Ib. v. 24, Ecclus, xlix. 14. 

THE 

Noah's * glory was that he was ene to God ; 
he who was entrusted with the saving of the 
whole world from the waters, or rather of the 
Seeds of the world, escaped the Deluge in 
asmall Ark. And Abraham, great Patriarch 
though he was, was justified by faith,® and 
offered a strange victim,” the type of the Great 
Sacrifice. Yet he saw not God as God, but 
gave Him food as a man.6 He was approved 
because he worshipped as far as he compre- 
hended.¢ And Jacob dreamed of a lofty lad- 
der and stair of Angels, and in a mystery 
anointed a pillar $—perhaps to signify the Rock 
that was anointed for our sake—and gave to a 
place the name of The House of God” in 
honour of Him whom he saw; and wrestled 
with God in human form; whatever this 
wrestling of God with man maymean . ... 
possibly it refers to the comparison of man’s 
virtue with God’s; and he bore on his body 
the marks of the wrestling, setting forth the 
defeat of the created nature; and for a reward 
of his reverence he received a change of his 
name; being named, instead of Jacob, Israel 
—that great and honourable name. Yet 
neither he nor any one on his behalf, unto this 
day, of all the Twelve Tribes who where his 
children, could boast that he comprehended 
the whole nature or the pure sight of God. 
XIX. To Elias neither the strong wind, nor 
the fire, nor the earthquake, as you learn from 
the story,® but a light breeze adumbrated the 
Presence of God, and not even this His Nature. 
And who was this Elias? The man whom a 
chariot of fire took up to heaven, signifying 
the superhuman excellency of the righteous 
man. And are you not amazed at Manoah 
the Judge of yore, and at Peter the disciple in 
later days; the one being unable to endure 
the sight even of one in whom was a repres- 
entation of God; and saying, ‘§ We are un- 
done, O wife, we have seen God ;’’* speaking 
as though even a vision of God ‘could not be 
grasped by human beings, let alone the Nature 
of God ; and the other unable to endure the 
Presence of Christ in his boat and therefore 
bidding Him depart ;* and this though Peter 

SECOND decease 

RATION, 205 

was more zealous than the others for the 
knowledge of Christ, and received a blessing 
for this,¢ and was entrusted with the great- 
est gifts. What would you say of Isaiah or 
Ezekiel, who was an eyewitness of very 
great mysteries, and of the other Prophets ; 
for one of these saw the Lord of Sabaoth sit- 
ting on the Throne of glory,® and encircled 
and praised and hidden by the sixwinged 
Seraphim, and was himself purged by the live 
coal, and equipped for his prophetic office 
And the other describes the Cherubic Chariot ¥ 
of God, and the ‘Throne upon them, and the 
Firmament over it, and Him that shewed 
Himself in the Firmament, and Voices, and 
Forces, and Deeds.6 And whether this was 
an appearance by day, only visible to Saints, 
or an unerring vision of the night, or an im- 
pression on the mind holding converse with 
the future as if it were the present ; or some 
other ineffable form of prophecy, I cannot 
say ; the God of the Prophets knoweth, and 
they know who are thus inspired. But 
neither these of whom I am speaking, nor any 
of their fellows ever stood before the Council ¢ 
and Essence of God, as it is written, or saw, 
or proclaimed the Nature of God. 

XX. If it had been permitted to Paul to 
utter what the Third Heaven$ contained, and 
his own advance, or ascension, or assumption 
thither, perhaps we should know something 
more about God’s Nature, if this was the 
mystery of the rapture. But since it was in- 
effable, we too will honour it by silence. 
Thus much we will hear Paul say about it, 
that we know in part and we prophesy in 
part.” This and the like to this are the con- 
fessions of one who is not rude in knowledge, ° 
who threatens to give proof of Christ speaking 
in him, the great doctor and champion of the 
truth. Wherefore he estimates all knowledge 
on earth only as through a glass darkly,* as 
taking its stand upon little images of the 
truth. Now, unless I appear to anyone too 
careful, and over anxious about the examina- 
tion of this matter, perhaps it was of this and 
nothing else that the Word Himself intimated 

a Gen, vi. 8. B Ib. xviii. 18. y Ib. xxviti. 2. 

6 Gen. xviil. 2, Elias Cretensis sees in this occurrence a fore- 
shadowing of the Incarnation ; and also with many others, a rev- 
elation of the ee in that Abraham saw Three and conversed 
with One. en. xxxii, 28. ¢ Ib. ver. 28. 

nv. l. The Forue e God, which would refer to the occasion cited 
below. ‘The reading is grammatically easier, as an accusative is 
required ; but in that case we might have expected the wrestling 
with the Angel to have been mentioned first, as the name Penuel 
was given by Jacob on the day following the night in which he 
wrestle -d, and reccived his own change of name. ‘The Benedic- 
tines, while retaining //owse in text and version, express a prefer- 
ence for Form, because the subject of the argument is the Vision of 
God. 

61 Kgs. xix. 11,12, LXX. has a Sound “i a Light breeze. 

« Judg, xiil. 22. A Luke y. 

a Matt. xvi. 16, 17. B fsa. vi. x sqq. y Ezek. i. 4-28. 

dv. 1. Orders, ie. of angels. 

e This is a quotation from, the LXX. of Jer. xxiii. 18, where 
for vrootjmart Aquila has amoppyze, and Symmachus OmtALa, 
(according to T'rommius). UrdéaTnwa properly means a Station of 

troops, and such is the meaning in the other two places where the 
word occurs in the ILXX., viz. :—2 Sam. xxiii. 14, and rx Chron. Mt 
16. ‘The Hebrew word which it represents in this passage is one 
of frequent use, and means ‘¢a Council,” or, in a sense derived 
from this, F amiliar Intercourse. In Job xv. 8 it is rendered in A. 
V. The Secret of God, where the LXX. has ovvtaypa. The 
Vulgate in both cases has Concilium Dei: the Poa 
however render it Substance. A. V. has Counsel, and in marg 
Secret; while R. V. reads Council, with no marginal alternativ “a 
2 Cor, xii. 2. 4x Cor. xii. g. 
G2: Cor.sxl, 6; K 1 \Cor. xiii, 12, 

< 

96 

that there were things which could not now be 
borne, but which should be borne and cleared 
up hereafter,* and which John the Forerunner 
of the Word and great Voice of the Truth de- 
clared even the whole world could not contain.6 

NNT. ‘The truth then, and the whole Word 
is full of difficulty and obscurity ; and as it were 
with a small instrument we are undertaking a 
great work, when with merely human wisdom 
we pursue the knowledge of the Self-existent, 
and in company with, or not apart from, the 
senses, by which we are borne hither and 
thither, and led into error, we apply ourselves 
to the search after things which are only to 
be grasped by the mind, and we are unable 
by meeting bare realities with bare intellect 
to approximate somewhat more closely to the 
truth, and to mould the mind by its concepts. 

Now the subject of God is more hard to 
come at,Y in proportion as it is more perfect 
than any other, and is open to more objections, 
and the solutions of them are more laborious, 
For every objection, however small, stops and 
hinders the course of our argument, and cuts 
off its further advance, just like men who sud- 
denly check with the rein the horses in full 
career, and turn them right round by the un- 
expected shock. ‘Thus Solomon, who was the 
wisest of all men,’ whether before him or in 
his own time, to whom God gave breadth of 
heart, and a flood of contemplation, more 
abundant than the sand, even he, the more 
he entered into the depth, the more dizzy he 
became, and declared the furthest point of 
wisdom to be the discovery of how very far off 
she was from him.* Paul also tries to arriye 
at, I will not say the nature of God, for this 
he knew was utterly impossible, but only the 
judgments of God; and since he finds no way 
out, and no halting place in the ascent, and 
morcoyer, since the earnest searching of his 
mind after knowledge does not end in any 
definite conclusion, because some fresh unat- 
tained point is being continually disclosed to 
him (O marvel, that I have a like experience), 
he closes his discourse with astonishment, and 
calls this the riches of God,§ and the depth, 
and confesses the unsearchableness of the judg- 
ments of God, in almost the very words of 
David, who at one time calls God’s judg- 
ments the great deep whose foundations can- 
not be reached by measure or sense ;7 and at 
another says that His knowledge of him and of 
his own constitution was marvellous,® and had 

a John xvi. 12, 

BS. John xxi. 25. By a curious slip of the tongue S. Gregory 
here attributes to the Baptist words of the Evangelist. 

qc. Pets. -dé Deo mi, 0.9: > Oa Kee iikeas, = .cRGal ei, 3. 

§ Rom, xi. 23. WES J, @ Ib, cxxxix, 6, 

GREGORY N 

AZIANZEN., 

attained greater strength than was in his own 
Romer or gTas}). 

NXU. Vor if, he says, I leave everything clse 
alone, and consider myself and the whole nat- 
ure and constitution of man, and how we are 
mingled, and what is our movement, and how 
the mortal was compounded with the immortal, 
and how it is that I flow downwards, and yet 
am borne upwards, and how the soul is circum- 
scribed ; * and how it gives life and shares in 
feclings ; and how the mind is at once circum- 
scribed and unlimited, & abiding in us and yet 
travelling over the Universe in swift motion 
and flow ; how it is both received and imparted 
by word, and passes through air, and enters 
with all things ; how it shares in sense, and en- 
shrouds itself away from sense. And even before 
these questions—what was our first moulding 
and composition in the workshop of nature, 
and what is our last formation and completion ? 
What is the desire for and imparting of nour- 
ishment, and who brought us spontaneously 
to those first springs and sources of life 2? How 
is the body nourished by food, and the soul 
by reason? What is the drawing of nature, 
and the mutual relation between parents and 
children, that it should be held together by a 
spell of love? How is it that species are per- 
manent, and are different in their characteris- 
tics, although there are so many that their indi- 
vidual marks cannot be described ? How is it 
that the same animal is both mortal and im- 
mortal,Y the one by decease, the other by 
coming into being? For one departs, and 
another takes its place, just like the flow of a 
river, which is never still, yet ever constant. 
And you might discuss many more points con- 
cerning men’s members and parts, and their 
mutual adaptation both for use and beauty, 
and how some are connected and others dis- 
joined, some are more excellent and others 
less comely, some are united and_ others 
divided, some contain and others are con- 
tained, according to the law and reason of 
Nature. Much too might be said about voices 
and ears. How is it that the voice is carried 
by the vocal organs, and received by the ears, 
and both are joined by the smiting and re- 
sounding of the medium of the air? Much 
too of the eyes, which have an indescribable 
communion with visible objects, and which 
are moved by the will alone, and that to- 
gether, and are affected exactly as is the mind. 
For with equal speed the mind is joined to 

ay. 1, And how the soul is carried round, 

B v. 1. Invisible. ; . 

y, Gregory is not here speaking of the immortality of the in- 
dividual soul, but of that of the Race, which it shares with other 
animals, and which is effected by continual succession, 

THE. seGONTDD FHROCOGICAL ORATION, 297 

the objects of thought, the eye to those of 
sight. Much too concerning the other senses, 
not objects of the research of reason. And 
much concerning our rest in sleep, and the 
figments of dreams, and of memory and_re- 
membrance; of calculation, and anger, and 
desire ; and in a word, all by which this little 
world called Man is swayed. 

XXII. Shall I reckon up for you the differ- 
ences of the other animals, both from us and 
from each other,—differences of nature, and of 
production, and of nourishment, and of region, 
and of temper, and as it were of social life ? 
How is it that some are gregarious and others 
solitary, some herbivorous and others carnivor- 
ous, some fierce and others tame, some fond of 
man and domesticated, others untamable and 
free? And some we might call bordering on 
reason and power of learning, while others are 
altogether destitute of reason, and incapable of 
being taught. Some with fuller senses, others 
with less ; some immovable, and some with the 
power of walking, and some very swift, and 
some very slow; some surpassing in size or 
beauty, or in one or other of these respects ; 
others very small or very ugly, or both ; some 
strong, others weak, some apt at self-defence, 
others timid and crafty * and others again are 
unguarded. Some are laborious and thrifty, 
others altogether idle and improvident. And 
before we come to such points as these, how is 
it that some are crawling things, and others 
upright ; some attached to one spot, some 
amphibious ; some delight in beauty and others 
are unadorned ; some are married and some 
single ; some temperate and others intemper- 
ate ; some have numerous offspring and others 
not ; some are long-lived and others have but 
short lives? It would be a weary discourse to 
go through all the details. 

XXIV. Look also at the fishy tribe gliding 
through the waters, and as it were flying 
through the liquid element, and breathing its 
own air, but in danger when in contact with 
ours, as we are in the waters; and mark their 
habits and dispositions, their intercourse and 
their births, their size and their beauty, and 
their affection for places, and their wanderings, 
and their assemblings and departings, and their 
properties which so nearly resemble those of the 
animals that dwell on land ; in some cases com- 
munity, in others contrast of properties, both 
in name and shape. And consider the tribes 
of birds, and their varieties of form and colour, 
both of those which are voiceless and of song- 
birds. What is the reason of their melody, and 

a The Benedictines here insert Some well protected ; but it is 
their own conjecture, and is not found in the Manuscripts. 

from whom came it 2? Who gave to the grass- 
hopper the lute in his breast, and the songs and 
chirruping on the branches, when they are 
moved by the sun to make their midday music, 
and sing among the groves, and escort the way- 
farer with their voices? Who wove the song 
for the swan when he spreads his wings to the 
breezes, and makes melody of their rustling ? 
For I will not speak of the forced voices, and 
all the rest that art contrives against the truth. 
Whence does the peacock, that boastful bird 
of Media, get his love of beauty and of praise 
(for he is fully conscious of his own beauty), 
so that when he sees any one approaching, or 
when, as they say, he would make a show be- 
fore his hens, raising his neck and spreading 
his tail in circle around him, glittering like 
gold and studded with stars, he makes a spec- 
tacle of his beauty to his lovers with pompous 
strides? Now Holy Scripture admires the 
cleverness in weaving even of women, saying, 
Who gave to woman skill in weaving and 
cleverness in the art of embroidery 2% ‘This be- 
longeth to a living creature that hath reason, 
and exceedeth in wisdom and maketh way even 
as far as the things of heaven. 

XXV. But I would have you marvel at the 
natural knowledge even of irrational creatures, 
and if you can, explain its cause. How is it 
that birds have for nests rocks and trees and 
roofs, and adapt them both for safety and 
beauty, and suitably for the comfort of their 
nurslings? Whence do bees and spiders get 
their love of work and art, by which the for- 
mer plan their honeycombs, and join them to- 
gether by hexagonal and co-ordinate tubes, and 
construct the foundation by means of a parti- 
tion and an alternation of the angles with 
straight lines ; and this, as is the case, in such 
dusky hives and dark combs; and the latter 
weave their intricate webs by such light and 
almost airy threads stretched in divers ways, 
and this from almost invisible beginnings, to be 
at once a precious dwelling, and a trap for 
weaker creatures with a view to enjoyment of 
food? What Euclid ever imitated these, while 
pursuing philosophical enquiries with lines that 
have no real existence, and wearying himself 
with demonstrations 2? From what Palamedes 
came the tactics, and, as the saying is, the 
movements and configurations of cranes, and 
the systems of their movement in ranks and 
their complicated flight? Who were their 
Phidie and Zeuxides, and who were the Par- 
rhasii and Aglaophons who knew how to draw 
and mould excessively beautiful things ? What 

@ Job xxxvill, 36. LXX. 

298 

harmonious Gnossian chorus of Daedalus, 
wrought for a girl* to the highest pitch of 
beauty? What Cretan Labyrinth, hard to 
cet through, hard to unravel, as the poets say, 
and continually crossing itself through the 
tricks of its construction? [ will not speak 
of the ants’ storehouses and storekeepers, and 
of their treasurings of wood in quantities cor- 
responding to the time for which it is wanted, 
and all the other details which we know are 
told of their marches and leaders and _ their 
good order in their works. 

NXXVI. If this knowledge has come within 
your reach and you are familiar with these 
branches of science, look at the differences of 
plants also, up to the artistic fashion of the 
leaves, which is adapted both to give the utmost 
pleasure to the eye, and to be of the greatest 
advantage to the fruit. Look too at the variety 
and lavish abundance of fruits, and most of all 
at the wondrous beauty of such as are most 
necessary. And consider the power of roots, 
and juices, and flowers, and odours, not only 
so very sweet, but also serviceable as medi- 
cines ; and the graces and qualities of colours ; 
and again the costly value, and the brilliant 
transparency of precious stones. Since nature 
has set before you all things as in an abundant 

| praise the Power that is in both. 

~ bour earth ? 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN., 

unswerving 2? On what is it supported? What 
is it that props it up, and on what does that 
rest 2 T’or indeed even reason has nothing to 
lean upon, but only the Will of God. And 
how is it that part of itis drawn up into moun- 
tain summits, and part laid down in plains, 
and this in various and differing ways?) And 
because the variations are indiyv idually small, it 
both supplies our needs more liberally, and is 
more beautiful by its variety ; part being dis- 
tributed into habitations, and part left unin- 
habited, namely all the great height of Moun- 
tains, and the various clefts of its coast line 
cut off from it. Is not this the clearest proof 
of the majestic working of God ? 

XXVIII. And with respect to the Sea even 
if did not marvel at its greatness, yet I should 
have marvelled at its gentleness, in that al- 
though loose it stands within its boundaries ; 
and if not at its gentleness, yet surely at its 
greatness ; but since I maryel at both, I will 
What col- 
lected it? What bounded it ? How is it raised 
and lulled to rest, as though respecting its neigh- 
How, moreover, does it receive 
all the rivers, and yet remain the same, through 

_ the very superabundance of its immensity, if 

banquet free to all, both the necessaries and | 

the luxuries of life, in order that, if nothing 
else, you may at any rate know God by His 
benefits, and by your own sense of want be 
made wiser than you were. Next, I pray you, 
traverse the length and breadth of earth, the 
common mother of all, and the gulfs of the 
sea bound together with one another and with 
the land, and the beautiful forests, and the 
rivers and springs abundant and perennial, not 
only of waters cold and fit for drinking, and 
on the surface of the earth ; but also such as 
running beneath the earth, and flowing under 
caverns, are then forced out by a violent blast, 
and repelled, and then filled with heat by this 

that term be permissible? How is the boun- 
dary of it, though it be an element of such 
magnitude, only sand? Have your natural 
philosophers with their knowledge of useless 
details anything to tell us, those men I mean 

' who are really endeavouring to measure the 
_ sea with a wineglass, and such mighty works 

violence of strife and repulsion, burst out by | 
_ thy mind astonished ?), that earth and sea may 

little and little wherever they get a chance, 
and hence supply our need of hot baths in 
many parts of the earth, and in conjunction 
with the cold give us a healing which is with- 
out cost and spontaneous. ‘Tell me how and 
whence are these things? What is this great 
web unwrought by art? 
no less worthy of admiration, in respect of 
their mutual relations than when considered 
separately. 

How is it that the earth stands solid and 

by their own conceptions? Or shall I give 
the really scientific explanation of it from 
Scripture concisely, and yet more satisfactorily 
and truly than by the longest arguments ? 
‘* He hath fenced the face of the water with 
His command.’’# This is the chain of fluid 
nature. And how doth He bring upon it the 

Nautilus that inhabits the dry land (i.e., man) 
in a little vessel, and with a little breeze (dost 
thou not marvel at the sight of this,—is not 

be bound together by needs and commerce, 

_and that things so widely separated by nature 

These things are | 

a The allusion is toa group made by Dedalus for Ariadne, repre- | 

senting a chorus of youths and maidens, which seemed to be mov- 
ing in musical rhythm. It is described by Homer (Il., xviii., 592 
qq-). 

should be thus brought together into one for 
man? What are the first fountains of springs? 
Seek, O man, if you can trace out or find any 
of these things. And who was it who cleft 
the plains and the mountains for the rivers, 
and gave them an unhindered course? And 
how comes the marvel on the other side, that 
the Sea never overflows, nor the Rivers cease 
to flow? And what is the nourishing power 

a Job xxvi, ro. LXX, 

Piha oweCNdIy LE OLOGIC AIL. OAT LON. 

of water, and what the difference therein ; for | 

some things are irrigated from above, and 
others drink from their roots, if | may luxuri- 
ate a little in my language when speaking of 
the luxuriant gifts of God. 

XXVIII. And now, leaving the earth and 
the things of earth, soar into the air on the wings 

299 

earth will you attribute the creation of cloud, 
or is it due to some thickening of the air, or 
pressure or crash of clouds of excessive rarity, 
so as to make you think the pressure the cause 

| of the lightning, and the crash that which 

of thought, that our argument may advance in | 

due path; and thence I will take you up to 

heavenly things, and to heaven itself, and | 
things which are above heaven; for to that | 
which is beyond my dscourse hesitates to— 
ascend, but still it shall ascend as far as may | 

be. Who poured forth the air, that great and 
abundant wealth, not measured to men by 
their rank or fortunes; not restrained by 
boundaries ; not divided out according to 
people’s ages; but like the distribution of the 
Manna,* received in sufficiency, and valued 
for its equality of distribution ; the chariot of 
the winged creation; the seat of the winds ; 
the moderator of the seasons; the quickener 
of living things, or rather the preserver of 
natural life in the body; in which bodies 
have their being, and by which we speak ; in 
which is the light and all that it shines upon, 

and the sight which flows through it? And 
mark, if you please, what follows. I cannot 

give to the air the whole empire of all that is | 

thought to belong to the air. What are the 
storehouses of the winds?® What are the 
treasuries of the snow? Who, as Scripture 
hath said, hath begotten the drops of dew ? 
Out of Whose womb came the ice? and Who 
bindeth the waters in the clouds, and, fixing 
part in the clouds (O marvel!) held by His 
Word though its nature is to flow, poureth 
out the rest upon the face of the whole earth, 
and scattereth it abroad in due season, and in 
just proportions, and neither suffereth the 
whole substance of moisture to go out free and 
uncontrolled (for sufficient was the cleansing 
in the days of Noah; and He who cannot lie 
is not forgetful of His own covenant); . . . 
nor yet restraineth it entirely that we should 
not again stand in need of an Elias ¥ to bring 
the drought to an end. If He shall shut up 
heaven, it saith, who shall open it? If He 
open the floodgates, who shall shut them up ?é 
Who can bring an excess or withhold a suffi- 
ciency of rain, unless he govern the Universe 

| 

by his own measures and balances ? What sci- | 
ceived that they rose simultaneously with 

entific laws, pray, can you lay down concern- 
ing thunder and lightning, O you who thun- 
der from the earth, and cannot shine with even 
little sparks of truth ? ‘To what vapours from 

@ Exod. xvi. 18. 

B Job xxxvii, 9, 10. 
y 1 Kgs. xvill. 44. il 

6, Jobexi. 14 

makes the thunder 2 Or what compression of 
wind having no outlet will account to you 
for the lightning by its compression, and for 
the thunder by its bursting out ? 

Now if you have in your thought passed 
through the air and all the things of air, reach 
with me to heaven and the things of heaven. 
And let faith lead us rather than reason, if at 
least you have learnt the feebleness of the 
latter in matters nearer to you, and have 
known reason by knowing the things that are 
beyond reason, so as not to be altogether on the 
earth or of the earth, because you are ignorant 
even of your ignorance. 

XXIX. Who spread the sky around us, and 
set the stars in order? Or rather, first, can you 
tell me, of your own knowledge of the things in 
heaven, what ave the sky and the stars; you 
who know not what lies at your very feet, and 
cannot even take the measure of yourself, and 
yet must busy yourself about what is above 
your nature, and gape at the illimitable ? 
For, granted that you understand orbits and 
periods, and waxings and wanings, and set- 
tings and risings, and some degrees and min- 
utes, and all the other things which make you 
so proud of your wonderful knowledge ; you 
have not arrived at comprehension of the 
realities themselves, but only at an observa- 
tion ofsome movement, which, when con- 
firmed by longer practice, and drawing the 
observations of many individuals into one 
generalization, and thence deducing a law, 
has acquired the name of Science (just as 
the lunar phenomena have become generally 
known to our sight), being the basis of this 
knowledge. But if you are very scientific on 
this subject, and have a just claim to admira- 
tion, tell me what is the cause of this order 
and this movement. How came the sun to 
be a beacon-fire to the whole world, and to 
all eyes like the leader of some chorus, con- 
cealing all the rest of the stars by his bright- 
ness, more completely than some of them 
conceal others. ‘The proof of this is that 
they shine against him, but he outshines 
them and does not even allow it to be per- 

him, fair as a bridegroom, swift and great 
as a giant @—for I will not let his praises be 
sung from any other source than my own 

300 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Scriptures—so mighty in strength that from 
one end to the other of the world he embraces 
all things in his heat, and there is nothing hid 
from the feeling thereof, but it fills both every 
eye with light, and every embodied creature 
with heat; warming, yet not burning, by the 
gentleness of its temper, and the order of its 

movement, present to all, and equally embrac- — 

ing all. 

XXX. Have you considered the importance 
of the fact that a heathen writer * speaks of the 
sun as holding the same position among material 
objects as God does among objects of thought ? 
For the one gives light to the eyes, as the 
Other does to the mind ; and is the most beau- 
tiful of the objects of sight, as God is of those 
of thought. But who gave him motion at 
first ? 
in his circuit, though in his nature stable and 
immoyable, truly unwearied, and the giver 
and sustainer of life, and all the rest of the titles 
which the poets justly sing of him, and never 
resting in his course or his benefits? How 

And what is it which ever moves him | 

comes he to be the creator of day when aboye — 

the earth, and of night when below it? or 
whatever may be the right expression when 
one contemplates the sun? What are the 
mutual aggressions and concessions of day and 
night, and their regular irregularities—to use a 
somewhat strange expression? How comes he 
to be the maker and divider of the seasons, that 
come and depart in regular order, and as in a 
dance interweave with each other, or stand 
apart by a law of love on the one hand, and of 
order on the other, and mingle little by little, 
and steal on their neighbour, just as nights and 
days do, so as not to give us pain by their sud- 
denness. ‘This will be enough about the sun. 

Do you know the nature and phenomena of 
the Moon, and the measures and courses of 
light, and how it is that the sun bears rule over 
the day, and the moon presides over the night ; 
and while She gives confidence to wild beasts, 
He stirs Man up to work, raising or lowering 
himself as may be most serviceable ? Know you 
the bond of Pleiades, or the fence of Orion,# as 
He who counteth the number of the stars and 
calleth them all by their names?” Know you 
the differences of the glory® of each, and the 
order of their movement, that I should trust 
you, when by them you weave the web of hu- 
man concerns, and arm the creature against the 
Creator ? 

XXXI. What say you? Shall we pause here, 
after discussing nothing further than matter and 
visible things, or, since the Word knows the 

B Job xxxvill. 31. 
0.1 Cote Xv.) 47; 

a Plato: 
Ps, sex Mil. vas 

Tabernacle of Moses to be a figure of the whole 
creation—I mean the entire system of things 
visible and invisible—shall we pass the first veil, 
and stepping beyond the realm of sense, shall 
we look into the Holy Place, the Intellectual 
and Celestial creation? But not even this can we 
see 1n an incorporeal way, though it is incorpo- 
real, since it is called—or is—Fire and Spirit. 
For He is said to make His Angels spirits, and 
His Ministers a flame of fire* .. . though 
perhaps this ‘making’? means preserving by 
that Word by which they came into existence. 
The Angel then is called spirit and fire ; Spirit, 
as being a creature of the intellectual sphere ; 
Fire, as being of a purifying nature ; for I know 
that the same names belong to the First Nature, 
But, relatively to us at least, we must reckon 
the Angelic Nature incorporeal, or at any rate 
as nearly so as possible. Do you see how we 
get dizzy over this subject, and cannot ad- 
vance to any point, unless it be as far as this, 
that we know there are Angels and Archan- 
gels, ‘Thrones, Dominions, Princedoms, Pow- 
ers, Splendours, Ascents, Intelligent Powers 
or Intelligencies, pure natures and unalloyed, 
immovable to evil, or scarcely movable ; ever 
circling in chorus round the First Cause (or 
how should wesing their praises ?) illuminated 
thence with the purest Illumination, or one in 
one degree and one in another, proportionally 
to their natureandrank . . . so conformed to 
beauty and moulded that they become second- 
ary Lights, and can enlighten others by the 
overflowings and largesses of the First Light ? 
Ministrants of God’s Will, strong with both 
inborn and imparted strength, traversing all 
space, readily present to all at any place through 
their zeal for ministry and the agility of their 
nature . . . different individuals of them 
embracing different parts of the world, or ap- 
pointed over different districts of the Universe, 
as He knoweth who ordered and distributed it 
all. Combining all things in one, solely with 
a view to the consent of the Creator of all 
things; Hymners of the Majesty of the Godhead, 
eternally contemplating the Eternal Glory, not 
that God may thereby gain an increase of glory, 
for nothing can be added to that which is full 
—to Him, who supplies good to all outside 
Himself—but that there may never be a ces- 
sation of blessings to these first natures after 
yod. If we have told these things as they 
deserve, it is by the grace of the Trinity, and 
of the one Godhead in Three Persons ; but if 
less perfectly than we have desired, yet even 
so our discourse has gained its purpose. For 

GPS: Civ.-4; 

this is what we were labouring to shew, that 
even the secondary natures surpass the power 
of our intellect ; much more then the First and 
(for I fear to say merely That which is above 
all), the only Nature. 

Sax. THE THIRD -THEOLOGICAL 

ORATION, 
ON THE SON. 

I. This then is what might be said to cut 
short our opponents’ readiness to argue and 
their hastiness with its consequent insecurity in 
all matters, but above all in those discussions 
which relate to God. But since to rebuke 
others is a matter of no difficulty whatever, 
but a very easy thing, which any one who 
likes can do; whereas to substitute one’s own 
belief for theirs is the part of a pious and intel- 
ligent man ; let us, relying on the Holy Ghost, 
Who among them is dishonoured, but among 
us Is adored, bring forth to the light our own 
conceptions about the Godhead, whatever 
these may be, like some noble and timely 
birth. Not that I have at other times been 
silent; for on this subject alone I am full of 
youthful strength and daring ; but the fact is 
that under present circumstances I am even 
more bold to declare the truth, that I may not 
(to use the words of Scripture) by drawing 
back fall into the condemnation of being dis- 
pleasing to God.* And since every discourse 
is of a twofold nature, the one part establish- 
ing one’s own, and the other overthrowing 
one’s opponents’ position ; let us first of all state 
our own position, and then try to controvert 
that of our opponents ;—and both as briefly as 
possible, so that our arguments may be taken 
in at a glance (like those of the elementary 
treatises which they have devised to deceive 
simple or foolish persons), and that our 
thoughts may not be scattered by reason of the 
length of the discourse, like water which is not 
contained in a channel, but flows to waste 
over the open land. 

II. The three most ancient opinions con- 
cerning God are Anarchia, Polyarchia, and 
Monarchia. The first two are the sport of the 
children of Hellas, and may they continue to 
be so. For Anarchy is a thing without order ; 
and the Rule of Many is factious, and thus 
anarchical, and thus disorderly. For both 
these tend to the same thing, namely disorder ; 
and this to dissolution, for disorder is the first 
step to dissolution. 

@ Hel. it. 4; x. 38, 
VOL. VII, 

‘4 

ON THE SON, 301 

3ut Monarchy is that which we hold in 
honour. It is, however, a Monarchy that is 
not limited to one Person, for it is possible for 
Unity if at variance with itself to come into a 
condition of plurality ; 4 but one which is made 
of an equality of Nature and a Union of mind, 
and an identity of motion, and a convergence 
of its elements to unity—a thing which is 
impossible to the created nature—so_ that 
though numerically distinct there is no sever- 
ance of Essence. ‘Therefore Unity® having 
from all eternity arrived by motion at Duality, 
found its rest in'I'rinity. This is what we 
mean by Father and Son and Holy Ghost. 
The Father is the Begetter and the Emitter ; ¥ 
without passion, of course, and without ref- 
erence to time, and not in a corporeal man- 
ner. ‘The Son is the Begotten, and the Holy 
Ghost the Emission; for I know not how 
this could be expressed in terms altogether ex- 
cluding visible things. For we shall not ven- 
ture to speak of ‘‘an overflow of goodness,’’ 
as one of the Greek Philosophers dared to say, 
as if it were a bowl overflowing, and this in 
plain words in his Discourse on the First and 
Second Causes.6 Let us not ever look on this 
Generation as involuntary, like some natural 
overflow, hard to be retained, and by no 
means befitting our conception of Deity. 
‘Therefore let us confine ourselves within our 
limits, and speak of the Unbegotten and the 
Begotten and That which proceeds from the 
Father, as somewhere God the Word Himself 
saith. 

III. When did these come into being ? They 
are above all «‘ When.’’ But, if I am to speak 
with something more of boldness,—when the 
Father did. And when did the Father come 
into being. There never wasa time when He 
was not. And the same thing is true of the 
Son and the Holy Ghost. Ask me again, and 
again I will answer you, When was the Son 

a Billius and others here read Authority, which is not supported 
by the best MSS., or by the context. 

B Elias explains this to mean that of old men knew only One 
Person in the Godhead ; and until the Incarnation this knowledge 
was sufficient; but from that time forward they acknowledged a 
Second Person, and through Him a Third also, the Holy Ghost. 
But this explanation falls far short of Gregory’s meaning, which 
certainly is that the movement of selfconsciousness in God from all 
Eternity made the Generation of the Son, and the Procession of 
the Holy Ghost, a necessity. Allis objective in God. cf. Petav. 
de Deo, IL., viii., 16; also, Greg. Naz., Or, xxiii, gs 

Y TpoBodrets-mpoBodr}y was atermused by the Gnostics to describe 
the Emanations by which the distance between the Finite and the 
Infinite was according to them bridged over; and on this account 
it fell under suspicion, and was rejected by both Arius and Atha- 
nasius. ‘Tertullian used it with an explanation which is satisfactory 
as regards the mpoBoAy of the Son ; but when he comes to apply it 
to the Procession of the Holy Ghost he uses an illustration which is 
in almost the very words rejected by Gregory (c. Prax., 7, 8 
See Swete, p. 56). Origen did not admit it. Later when. this 
danger was past, the word came into use again as the equivalent 
of éxmépevats, at first with reserve and explanations in the text, but 
later on as an accepted term. See Swete “On ‘he Doctrine Of 
The Holy Spirit,” p. 36. 

6 The expression is from Plato, 

302 

begotten ?. When the Father was not begotten, 
And when did the Holy Ghost proceed ? When 
the Son was, not proceeding but, begotten 
beyond the sphere of time, and above the 
grasp of reason ; although we cannot set forth 
that which is above time, if we avoid as we 
desire any expression which conveys the idea 
of time. For such expressions as ‘¢ when”? 
and ‘before’? and “ after’? and “from the 
beginning’? are not timeless, however much 
we may force them ; unless indeed we were to 
take the Aeon, that interval which is coex- 
tensive with the eternal things, and is not 
divided or measured by any motion, or by 
the revolution of the sun, as time is measured. 

How then are They not alike unoriginate, 
if They are coeternal? Because They are from 
Him, though not after Him. For that which 
is unoriginate is eternal, but that which is 
eternal is not necessarily unoriginate, so long 
as it may be referred to the Father as its origin. 
Therefore in respect of Cause They are not 
unoriginate ; but it is evident that the Cause 
is not necessarily prior to its effects, for the 
sun is not prior to its light. And yet They 
are in some sense unoriginate, in respect of 
time, even though you would scare simple 
minds with your quibbles, for the Sources of 
Time are not subject to time. 

IV. But how can this generation be passion- 
less? In that it is incorporeal. For if corporeal 
generation involves passion, incorporeal gen- 
eration excludes it. And I will ask of you in 
turn, How is He God if He is created? For 
that which is created is not God. I refrain 
from reminding you that here too is passion if 
we take the creation in a bodily sense, as time, 
desire, imagination, thought, hope, pain, risk, 
failure, success, all of which and more than 
all find a place in the creature, as is evident 
toevery one. Nay, I marvel that you do not 
venture so far as to conceive of marriages and 
times of pregnancy, and dangers of miscar- 
riage, as if the Father could not have begotten 
at all if He had not begotten thus; or again, 
that you did not count up the modes of gen- 
eration of birds and beasts and _ fishes, and 
bring under some one of them the Divine and 
Ineffable Generation, or even eliminate the 
Son out of your new hypothesis. And you 
cannot even see this, that as His Generation 
according to the flesh differs from all others 

(for where among men do you know of a 

Virgin Mother ?), so does He differ also in His 
spiritual Generation ; or rather He, Whose 
Existence is not the same as ours, differs from 
us also in His Generation. 

V. Who then is that Father Who had no be- 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

ginning? One Whose very Existence had no 
beginning ; for one whose existence had a be- 
ginning must also have begun to be a Father. 
He did not then become a Father after He 
began to be, for His being had no beginning. 
And He is Father in the absolute sense, for 
Ile is not also Son; just as the Son is Son in 
the absolute sense, because He is not also 
Father. ‘These names do not belong to us in 
the absolute sense, because we are both, and 
not one more than the other; and we are of 
both, and not of one only ; and so we are 
divided, and by degrees become men, and per- 
haps not even men, and such as we did not 
desire, leaving and being left, so that only the 
relations remain, without the underlying 
facts. 

But, the objector says, the very form of the 
expression ‘“ He begat’? and ‘‘ He was begot- 
ten,’’ brings in the idea of a beginning of gen- 
eration. But what if you do not use this ex- 
pression, but say, ‘He had been begotten 
from the beginning ’’ so as readily to evade 
your far-fetched and time-loving objections ? 
Will you bring Scripture against us, as if we 
were forging something contrary to Scripture 
and to the truth? Why, every one knows that 
in practice we very often find tenses inter- 
changed when time is spoken of ; and especially 
is this the custom of Holy Scripture, not only 
in respect of the past tense, and of the present ; 
but even of the future, as for instance ‘* Why 
did the heathen rage ?’’® when they had not 
yet raged; and ‘they shall cross over the 
river on foot,’’¥ where the meaning is they did 
cross over. It would be a long task to reckon 
up all the expressions of this kind which stu- 
dents have noticed. 

VI. So much for this point. What is their 
next objection, how full of contentiousness and 
impudence? He, they say, either voluntarily 
begat the Son, or else involuntarily. Next, 
as they think, they bind us on both sides with 
cords ; these however are not strong, but 
very weak. For, they say, if it was involun- 
tarily He was under the sway of some one, and 
who exercised this sway ? And how is He, over 
whom it is exercised, God? But if voluntarily, 
the Son isa Son of Will; how then is He of 
the Father ?—and they thus invent a new sort 
of Mother for him,—the Will,—in place of the 
Father. ‘There is one good point which they 
may allege about this argument of theirs ; 
namely, that they desert Passion, and take re- 
fuge in Will. For Will is not Passion. 

a Elias explains this to refer to the fact that children leave and 
are left by parents ; or else to the death of cither one or the other. 
BPS. 1,1. y Ps. Ixvi. 

Secondly, let us look at the strength of their 
argument. And it were best to wrestle with 
them at first at close quarters. — You yourself, 
Who so recklessly assert whatever takes your 
fancy ; were you begotten voluntarily or in- 
voluntarily by your father? If involuntarily, | 
then he was under some tyrant’s sway (O ter- 
rible violence !) and who was the tyrant? You 
will hardly say it was nature,—for nature is 
tolerant of chastity. If it was voluntarily, 
then by a few syllables your father is done 
away with, for you are shewn to be the son of 
Will, and not of your father. But I pass to | 
the relation between God and the creature, 
and I put your own question to your own wis- 
dom. Did God create all things voluntarily 
or under compulsion? If under compulsion, 
here also is the tyranny, and one who played 
the tyrant ; if voluntarily, the creatures also 
are deprived of their God, and you before 
the rest, who invent such arguments and tricks 
of logic. For a partition is set up between 
the Creator and the creatures in the shape of 
Will. And yet I think that the Person who 
wills is distinct from the Act of willing; He 
who begets from the Act of begetting ; the 
Speaker from the speech, or else we are all 
very stupid. On the one side we have the 
mover, and on the other that which is, so to 
speak, the motion. Thus the thing willed is 
not the child of will, for it does not always 
result therefrom ; nor is that which is begot- 
ten the child of generation, nor that which is 
heard the child of speech, but of the Person 
who willed, or begat, or spoke. But the 
things of God are beyond all this, for with 
Him perhaps the Will to beget is generation, 
and there is no intermediate action (if we 
may accept this altogether, and not rather con- 
sider generation superior to will). 

VII. Will you then let me play a little upon 
this word Father, for your example encourages 
me to be so bold? ‘The Father is God either 
willingly or unwillingly ; and how will you es- 
cape from your own excessive acuteness? If 
willingly, when did He begin to will? It could 
not have been before He began to be, for there 
was nothing prior to Him. Or is one part of 
Him Willand another the object of Will? If 
so, He is divisible. So the question arises, as 
the result of your argument, whether He 
Himself is not the Child of Will. And if un- 
willingly, what compelled Him to exist, and 
how is He God if He was compelled—and that 
to nothing less than to be God? How then 
was He begotten, says my opponent. How 
was He created, if as yousay, He was created ? 
For this is a part of the same difficulty. Per- | 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

y 

ON THE SON. 

303 

haps you would say, By Will and Word. You 
have not yet solved the whole difficulty ; for 
it yet remains for you to shew how Will and 
Word gained the power of action. |For man 
was not created in this way. 

VILL. How then was He begotten? This 
Generation would have been no great thing, if 
you could have comprehended it who have no 
real knowledge even of your own generation, 
or at least who comprehend very little of it, 
and of that little you are ashamed to speak ; 
and then do you think you know the whole? 
You will have to undergo much labour before 
you discover the laws of composition, forma- 
tion, manifestation, and the bond whereby 
soul is united to body,—mind to soul, and 
reason to mind ; and movement, increase, as- 
similation of food, sense, memory, recollec- 
tion, and all the rest of the parts of which you 
are compounded ; and which of them belongs 
to the soul and body together, and which to 
each independently of the other, and which 
is received from each other. For those parts 
whose maturity comes later, yet received their 
laws at the time of conception. ‘Tell me 
what these laws are? And do not even then 
venture to speculate on the Generation of 
God ; for that would be unsafe. For even if 
you knew all about your own, yet you do not 
by any means know about God’s. ‘And if you 
do not understand your own, how can you 
know about God’s? For in proportion as 
God is harder to trace out than man, so is the 
heavenly Generation harder to comprehend 
than your own. But if you assert that because 
you cannot comprehend it, therefore He can- 
not have been begotten, it will be time for 
you to strike out many existing things which 
you cannot comprehend ; and first of all God 
Himself. For you cannot say what He is, even 
if you are very reckless, and excessively proud 
of your intelligence. First, cast away your 
notions of flow and divisions and sections, and 
your conceptions of immaterial as if it were 
material birth, and then you may perhaps 
worthily conceive of the Divine Generation. 
How was He begotten ?—I repeat the question 
in indignation. ‘The Begetting of God must 
be honoured by silence. It is a great thing for 
you to learn that He was begotten. But the 
manner of His generation we will not admit 
that even Angels can conceive, much less you. 
Shall I tell you how it was? It was ina man- 
ner known to the Father Who begat, and to 
the Son Who was begotten. Anything more 
than this is hidden by a cloud, and escapes 
your dim sight. 

IX. Well, but the Father begat a Son who 

2 

304, 

either was or was not in existence. What 
utter nonsense! This is a question which ap- 
plies to you or me, who on the one hand were 
in existence, as for instance Levi in the loins of 
Abraham ; # and on the other hand came into 
existence ; and so in some sense we are partly 
of what existed, and partly of what was non- 
existent ; whereas the contrary is the case with 
the original matter, which was certainly cre- 
ated out of what was non-existent, notwith- 
standing that some pretend that it is unbegot- 
ten. But in this case ‘‘ to be begotten,’’ even 
from the beginning, is concurrent with ‘to 
be.’? On what then will you base this cap- 
tious question? For what is older than that 
which is from the beginning, if we may 
place there the previous existence or non-exist- 
ence of the Son? In either case we destroy 
its claim to be the Beginning. Or perhaps you 
will say, if we were to ask you whether the 
Father was of existent or non-existent sub- 
stance, that he is twofold, partly pre-existing, 

| 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

partly existing ; or that His case is the same | 

with that of the Son ; that is, that He was cre- 
ated out of non-existing matter, because of 
your ridiculous questions and your houses of 
sand, which cannot stand against the merest 
ripple. 

I do not admit either solution, and I declare 
that your question contains an absurdity, and 
not a difficulty to answer. If however you 
think, in accordance with your dialectic as- 
sumptions, that one or other of these alterna- 
tives must necessarily be true in every case, let 
me ask you one little question: Is time in 
time, or is it not in time? If it is contained 
in time, then in what time, and what is it but 
that time, and how does it contain it? But 
if it is not contained in time, what is that sur- 
passing wisdom which can conceive of a time 
which is timeless? Now, in regard to this 
expression, ‘¢I am now telling a lie,’’ admit 
one of these alternatives, either that it is true, 
or that it is a falsehood, without qualification 
(for we cannot admit that it is both). But 
this cannot be. For necessarily he either is 
lying, and so is telling the truth, or else he is 
telling the truth, and so islying. What won- 
der is it then that, as in this case contraries 
are true, so in that case they should both be 
untrue, and so your clever puzzle prove mere 
foolishness? Solve me one more riddle. 
Were you present at your own generation, and 
are you now present to yourself, or is neither 
the case? If you were and are present, who 
were you, and with whom are you present ? 

a This is the Arian dilemma, ‘* Did the Son exist before he was 
begotten ?”’ B Heb, vii. 10, 

And how did your single self become thus 
both subject and object ? But ifneither of the 
above is the case, how did you get separated 
from yourself, and what is the cause of this 
disjoining ? But, you will say, it is stupid to 
make a fuss about the question whether or no 
a single individual is present to himself; for 
the expression is not used of oneself but of 
others. Well, you may be certain that it is 
even more stupid to discuss the question 
whether That which was begotten from the be- 
ginning existed before its generation or not. 
For such a question arises only as to matter di- 
visible by time. 

X. But they say, The Unbegotten and the 
Begotten are not the same; and if this is so, 
neither is the Son the same as the Father. It 
is clear, without saying so, that this line of ar- 
gument manifestly excludes either the Son or 
the Father from the Godhead. For if to be 
Unbegotten is the Essence of God, to be be- 
gotten is not that Essence ; if the opposite is 
the case, the Unbegotten is excluded... What 
argument can contradict this? Choose then 
whichever blasphemy you prefer, my good in- 
ventor of a new theology, if indeed you are 
anxious at all costs to embrace a blasphemy. 
In the next place, in what sense do you assert 
that the Unbegotten and the Begotten are not 
the same? If you mean that the Uncreated 
and the created are not the same, I agree with 
you; for certainly the Unoriginate and the 
created are not of the same nature. But if 
you say that He That begat and That which is 
begotten are not the same, the statement is in- 
accurate. For it is in fact a necessary truth 
that they are the same. For the nature of the 
relation of Father to Child is this, that the off- 
spring is of the same nature with the parent. 
Or we may argue thus again. What do you 
mean by Unbegotten and Begotten, for if you 
mean the simple fact of being unbegotten or 
begotten, these are not the same; but if you 
mean Those to Whom these terms apply, how 
are They not the same? For example, Wis- 
dom and Unwisdom are not the same in them- 
selves, but yet both are attributes of man, who 
is the same ; and they mark not a difference 
of essence, but one external to the essence.* 
Are immortality and innocence and immuta- 
bility also the essence of God? If so God has 
many essences and not one; or Deity is a 
compound of these. For He cannot be all 
these without composition, if they be essences. 

XI. They do not however assert this, for 
these qualities are common also to other beings. 

acf. Petavius De Trin., V. ii., 2, 

But God’s Essence is that which belongs to 
God alone, and is proper to Him. But they, 
who consider matter and form to be unbegot- 
ten, would not allow that to be unbegotten is 
the property of God alone (for we must cast 
away even further the darkness of the Maniche- 
ans.* But suppose that it is the property of 
God alone. What of Adam? Was he not 
alone the direct creature of God ? Yes, you 

will say. Was he then the only human be- 
ing? By no means. And why, but because 

humanity does not consist in direct creation ? 
For that which is begotten is also human. 
Just so neither is He Who is Unbegotten 
alone God, though He alone is Father. But 
grant that He Who is Begotten is God; for 
He is ef God, as you must allow, even though 
you cling to your Unbegotten. 
you describe the Essence of God? Not by 
declaring what it is, but by rejecting what it is 
not. For your word signifies that He is not 
begotten ; it does not present to you what is 
the real nature or condition of that which has no 
generation. What then 7s the Essence of God ? 
It is for your infatuation to define this, since 
you are so anxious about His Generation too ; 
but to us it will be a very great thing, if ever, 
even in the future, we learn this, when this 
darkness and dulness is done away for us, as 
He has promised Who cannot lie. "This then 
may be the thought and hope of those who 
are purifying themselves with a view to this. 
Thus much we for our part will be bold to say, 
that if it is a great thing for the Father to be 
Unoriginate, it is no less a thing for the Son 
to have been Begotten of such a Father. For 

not only would He share the glory of the Un- 

originate, since he is of the Unoriginate, but 
he has the added glory of His Generation, a 
thing so great and august in the eyes of all 
those who are not altogether grovelling and 
material in mind. 

XII. But, they say, if the Son is the Same as | 

the Father in respect of I’ssence, then if the 
Father is unbegotten, the Son must be so like- 
wise. Quite so—if the Essence of God con- 
sists in being unbegotten ; and so He would 
be a strange mixture, begottenly unbegotten. 
If, however, the difference is outside the Es- 
sence, how can you be so certain in speaking 
of this? Are you also your father’s father, 
so as in no respect to fall short of your father, 
since you are the same with him in essence ? 
Is it not evident that our enquiry into the 
Nature of the Essence of God, if we make it, 

a The Manichzeans, who believed in two eternal principles of 

good and evil, light and darkness, held that darkness too was un- 
begotten (Llias), 

‘Then how do | 

ON THE SON. 

305 

will leave Personality absolutel unaffected ? 
Ms y 

| 
| But that Unbegotten is not a synonym of 

God is proved thus. If it were so, it would 
be necessary that since God is a relative term, 
Unbegotten should be so likewise ; or that 
since Unbegotten is an absolute term, so must 
God be. . . . Godofnoone. For words 
which are absolutely identical are similarly 
applied. But the word Unbegotten is not 
used relatively. For to what is it relative ? 
And of what things is God the God ? Why, 
of all things. How then can God and Unbe- 
gotten be identical terms? And again, since 
Begotten and Unbegotten are contradictories, 
like possession and deprivation, it would fol- 
low that contradictory essences would co-cx- 
ist, which is impossible.e Or again, since 
possessions are prior to deprivations, and the 
latter are destructive of the former, not only 
must the Essence of the Son be prior to that 
of the Father, but it must be destroyed by 
the Father, on your hypothesis. 

XIII. What now remains of their invincible 
arguments ? Perhaps the last they will take 
refuge in is this. If God has never ceased to 
beget, the Generation is imperfect ; and when 
will He cease? But if He has ceased, then He 
must have begun. Thus again these carnal 
minds bring forward carnal arguments. 
Whether He is eternally begotten or not, I 
do not yet say, until I have looked into the 
statement, ‘‘ Before all the hills He begetteth 
Me,’’* more accurately. But I cannot see 
the necessity of their conclusion. For if, as 
they say, everything that is to come to an end 
had also a beginning, then surely that which 
has no end had no beginning. What then 
will they decide concerning the soul, or the 
Angelic nature? If it had a beginning, it 
will also have an end; and if it has no end, 
it is evident that according to them it had no 
beginning. But the truth is that it had a be- 
ginning, and will never have an end. Their as- 
sertion, then, that that which will have an end 
had also a beginning, is untrue. Our position, 
however, is, that as in the case of a horse, or an 
Ox, or a man, the same definition applies to 
all the individuals of the same species, and 
whatever shares the definition has also a right 
to the Name; so in the very same way there 
is One Essence of God, and One Nature, and 

a Because ‘* Son” implies “ begotten.” But (ex hyp.) ‘ Unbe- 
gotten” is synonymous with ** God,” 

306 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

least we are to hold that Truth is a matter not — 

of names but of realities. But our opponents, 
as if they were afraid of leaving any stone un- 
turned to subvert the Truth, acknowledge in- 
deed that the Son is God when they are com- 
pelled to do so by arguments * and evidences ; 
but they only mean that He is God in an 
ambiguous sense, and that He only shares the 
Name. 

| ity. 

XIV. And when we advance this objection | 

against them, ‘‘ What do you mean to say 
then? That the Son is not properly God, 
just as a picture of an animal is not properly an 
animal ? 
sense is He God at all?” 
should not these terms be ambiguous, and in 

And if not properly God, in what | 
They reply, Why | 

both cases be used in a proper sense? And they — 

will give us such instances as the land-dog 
and the dogfish; where the word Dog is am- 
biguous, and yet in both cases is properly 
used, for there is such a species among the 

ambiguously named, or any other case in 

which the same appellative is used for two 
things of different nature. But, my good 

friend, in this case, when you include two | 
natures under the same name, you do not as- | 
sert that either is better than the other, or 

that the one is prior and the other posterior, 
or that one is in a greater degree and the 
other in a lesser that which is predicated of 
them both, for there is no connecting link 
which forces this necessity upon them. One 
is not a dog more than the other, and one less 
so; either the dogfish more than the land-dog, 

or the land-dog than the dogfish. Why should — 

they be, or on what principle? But the com- 
munity of name is here between things of 
equal value, though of different nature. But 
in the case of which we are speaking, you 
couple the Name of God with adorable Ma- 
jesty, and make It surpass every essence and 
nature (an attribute of God alone), and then 
you ascribe this Name to the Father, while 
you deprive the Son of it, and make Him sub- 
ject to the Father, and give Him only a sec- 
ondary honour and worship; and even if in 
words you bestow on Him one which is 
Equal, yet in practice you cut off His Deity, 
and pass malignantly from a use of the same 
Name implying an exact equality, to one 
which connects things which are not equal. 
And so the pictured and the living man are 
in your mouth an apter illustration of the re- 
lations of Deity than the dogs which I in- 
stanced. Or else you must concede to both 

a The Benedictines here translate Adyw by “ Scripture,’? on 
the ground that Reason is not competent to assert the Divinity of 
the Word, 

an equal dignity of nature as well as acommon 
name—even though you introduced these nat- 
ures into your argument as different; and 
thus you destroy the analogy of your dogs, 
which you invented as an instance of inequal- 
For what is the force of your instance 
of ambiguity, if those whom you distinguish 
are not equal in honour? For it was not to 
prove an equality but an inequality that you 
took refuge in your dogs. How could any- 
body be more clearly convicted of fighting 
both against his own arguments, and against 
the Deity ? 

XV. And if, when we admit that in respect 
of being the Cause the Father is greater than the 
Son, they should assume the premiss that He 
is the Cause by Nature, and then deduce the 
conclusion that He is greater by Nature also, 
it is difficult to say whether they mislead most 
themselves or those with whom they are argu- 
ing. For it does not absolutely follow that 
all that is predicated of a class can also be 

predicated of all the individuals composing it ; 
for the different particulars may belong to dif- 
ferent individuals. For what hinders me, if 
I assume the same premiss, namely, that the 
Father is greater by Nature, and then add this 
other, Yet not by nature in every respect 
greater nor yet Father — from concluding, 
Therefore the Greater is not in every respect 
greater, nor the Father in every respect I*ather ? 
Or, if you prefer it, let us put it in this way: 
God is an Essence: But an [ssence is not in 
every case God; and draw the conclusion for 
_ yourself — Therefore God is not in every case 

God. I think the fallacy here is the arguing 
from a conditioned to an unconditioned use 
of a term,* to use the technical expression of 
the logicians. For while we assign this word 
Greater to His Nature viewed as a Cause, they 
infer it of His Nature viewed in itself. It is 
just as if when we said that such a one was a 
dead man they were to infer simply that he 
was a Man. 

XVI. How shall we pass over the following 
point, which is no less amazing than the rest ? 
Father, they say, is a name either of an essence 
or of an Action, thinking to bind us down on 
both sides. If we say that it is a name of 
an essence, they will say that we agree with 
them that the Son is of another Essence, 
since there is but one Essence of God, and 
this, according to them, is preoccupied by 
the Father. On the other hand, if we say 
that it is the name of an Action, we shall be 

a Or as the schoolmen say the fallacy is, A dicto secundum quid 
ad dictum simpliciter, one of the many forms of Undistribuied 
Middle Term. Petavius, however (De Trin., II., v., 12), pro- 
| nounces the argument of this section unsatisfactory, 

supposed to acknowledge plainly that the Son 
is created and not begotten. For where there 
is an Agent there must also be an Effect. And 
they will say they wonder how that which is 
made can be identical with ‘That which made 
it. | should myself have been frightened with 
your distinction, if it had been necessary 
to accept one or other of the alternatives, 

and not rather put both aside, and state a. 

ON THE SON. 

397 
glory and the Impress of His Essence,’’? * and 
‘‘the Image of His Goodness,’’ # and «Him 
hath God the Father sealed.’?¥ Lord, King, 
Me That Is, ‘The Almighty. «The Lord 
rained down fire from the Lord ;’’® and «A 

_ Sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy 

Kingdom ;’’* and ‘ Which is and was and is 

_to come, the Almighty’’ —all which are 

third and truer one, namely, that Father is — 

not a name either of an essence or of an action, 
most clever sirs. But it is the name of the 

Relation in which the Father stands to the | 

Son, and the Son to the Father. For as with 
us these names make known a genuine and 
intimate relation, so, in the case before us too, 
they denote an identity of nature between 
Him hat is begotten and Him That begets. 
But let us concede to you that Father is a 
name of essence, it will still bring in the idea 
of Son, and will not make it of a different 
nature, according to common ideas and the 
force of these names. 
you, the name of an action; you will not de- 
feat us in this way either. The Homoousion 
would be indeed the result of this action, or 
otherwise the conception of an action in this 
matter would be absurd. You see then how, 
even though you try to fight unfairly, we 
avoid your sophistries. But now, since we 
have ascertained how invincible you are in 
your arguments and sophistries, let us look at 
your strength in the Oracles of God, if per- 
chance you may choose to persuade us out of 
them. 

XVII. For we have learnt to believe in and 
to teach the Deity of the Son from their great 
and lofty utterances. And what utterances 
are these? These: God—The Word—He 
That Was In The Beginning and With The 
Beginning, and The Beginning. ‘In the 
3eginning was The Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word was God,’’¢ and 
‘“With Thee is the Beginning,’’& and «* He 
who calleth her The Beginning from genera- 
tions.’’¥ Then the Son is Only-begotten ; 
The only ‘begotten Son which is in the 
bosom of the Father, it says, He hath de- 
clared Him.’’® The Way, the Truth, the Life, 
the Light. <I am the Way, the Truth, and 
the Life; and “*l-ant-the Licht -of the 
World.’’?€ Wisdom and Power, ‘ Christ, the 

2 

Let it be, if it so please | 

_ additions. 

clearly spoken of the Son, with all the other 
passages of the same force, none of which is 
an afterthought, or added later to the Son or 
the Spirit, any more than to the Father Him- 
self. For Their Perfection is not affected by 
There never was a time when He 

_ was without the Word, or when He was not 

Wisdom of God, and the Power of God.’’ iz 

The Effulgence, the Impress, the Image, the 

Seal; ‘*Who being the Effulgence of His | 

@ John i. r. BPsucxag. y Isa. xi. 4. 

¢e John vii. 12; ix. 5; xiv. 6, HCOrsivizd, 

8 John i, 18 | 

the Father, or when He was not true, or not 
wise, Or not powerful, or devoid of life, or of 
splendour, or of goodness. 

But in opposition to all these, do you 
reckon up for me the expressions which make 
for your ignorant arrogance, such as “ My 
God and your God,’’” or greater, or created, 
or made, or sanctified ; ® Add, if you like, Ser- 
vant* and Obedient’ and Gave# and Learnt,” 
and was commanded,é was sent,® can do noth- 
ing of Himself, either say, or judge, or give, 
or will. And further these,—His ignorance,? 
subjection,’ prayer,” asking,” increase, being 
made perfect.x And if you like even more 
humble than these ; such as speak of His sleep- 
ing, hungering,® being in an agony,¢* and 
fearing 38 or perhaps you would make even 
His Cross and Death a matter of reproach to 
Him. His Resurrection and Ascension I fancy 
you will leave to me, for in these is found some- 
thing to support ov position. A good many 
other things too you might pick up, if you 
desire to put together that equivocal and in- 
truded god of yours, Who to us is True God, 
and equal to the Father. For every one of 
these points, taken separately, may very easily, 
if we go through them one by one, be ex- 
plained to you in the most reverent sense, and 
the stumbling-block of the letter be cleansed 
away—that is, if your stumbling at it be honest, 
and not wilfully malicious. ‘To give you the 
explanation in one sentence. What is lofty 
you are to apply to the Godhead, and to that 
Nature in Him which is superior to sufferings 
and incorporeal; but all that is lowly to the 
composite condition YY of Him who for your 

a Heb. i. 3 R. VL B Wisd. vii. 26. 
6 Gen. xix. 24. esi xiv. 6; 
7 John xx. 17, 28. 4 Prov. viii. 22 

y John vi. 27. 
GREE to: : 
; John x. 36; Acts ii. 36, 

« Phil. 11. 7. A Phil. 11. 8. wu John i, ra. 
v Heb. v. 8. € Johu x. 18 ; xiv. 31. o Ib. iv. 34; v. 23, Sq 
Ls V.219, 30. p Mark xiti, 32. or Cor. xv. 28. 

uv John xiv. 16, @ Luke ii. 52. 
RLED Ve O} etc: Ww Matt. viit. 24; Mark iv. 38. 

w Matt. iv. 2; Luke iv. 2. aa Touke xxii. 44. BB Heb. v. 7, 
yy S. Gregory often speaks of Human Nature as our composite 

7 Luke vi. 12. 

308 GREG 

ORY NAZIANZEN. 

sakes made Ilimsclf of no reputation and was 
Incarnate—yes, for it is no worse thing to say, 
was made Man, and afterwards was also exalted. 
The result will be that you will abandon these 
carnal and grovelling doctrines, and learn to be 
more sublime, and to ascend with His God- 
head, and you will not remain permanently 
among the things of sight, but will rise up 
with Him into the world of thought, and 
come to know which passages refer to His 
Nature, and which to His assumption of Hu- 
man Nature. 

XIX. For He Whom you now treat with 
contempt was once above you. He Who is 
now Man was once the Uncompounded. What 
He was He continued to be; what He was 
not He took to Himself.? In the beginning 
He was, uncaused ; for what is the Cause of 
God? But afterwards for a cause He was born. 
And that cause was that you might be saved, 
who insult Him and despise His Godhead, 
because of this, that He took upon Him your 
denser nature, having converse with Flesh by 
means of Mind. ¥ While His inferior Nature, 
the Humanity, became God, because it was 
united to God, and became One Person ® be- 
cause the Higher Nature prevailed . . . 
in order that I too might be made God so far 
as He is made Man.¢ He was born—but He 

being; and here he means the Sacred Humanity exclusively ; 
there is no shadow of suspicion of Nestorianism or Eutychianism 
attaching to his name. 

a The word oixovoyia is used in four principal senses: (a) The 
ministry of the Gospel, cf. Ephes. i. 2. Col. i, 25, etc., and S, 
Cyril Hieros., has the expression ‘‘ Economy of the Mystery” 
(Cat.. xxv.). It is also used absolutely by S. Chrysostom and 
others. (b) The Providence of God, as by Epiphanius, Greg. 

yss., and others. (c) The Incarnation, as in the text, without 
any epithet—in which use it is opposed to 7 OedTys. Sometimes 
however epithets are added. (d) ‘Vhe whole Mystery of Redemp- 
tion, including the Passion. 

Bcf. S. Leo, Serm. xxi., De Nativ. Dei, c. ii. ‘‘ Remaining 
what He was, and putting on what He was not, He united the true 
form of a servant to that form in which He was equal to God the 
Father, and combined both natures in a union so close that the 
lower was not consumed by receiving glory, nor the higher lessened 
by assuming lowliness. 

y ‘‘ Mediante anima,” cf. Orat. xxxviii., 13. 
III., vi. Jungmann, de Verbo Incarn., c. 68, 
Creed, p. 188. Petav. de Incarn. Ao Bae <A 

5 yevouevos avOpwros 6 KaTw Geds. The passage is one of 
great difficulty. Elias Cretensis renders the words as follows ;— 
** Becoming Man, the inferior God, because humanity was”? etc. ; 
but his rendering i is rejected as impossible by Petavius (de Incarn., 
RVs 8s Sc Se 14d Itis grammatically possible (Madvig, Gk. Syn- 
tax, 9 a, rem. 3) for 8 katTw, standing as it does, to qualify avOpwros. 
(ii.) But the cat yevduevos Oe6s may be taken as anom. 
absolute, which would have been expressed by a gen. if dvOpwros 
had not been the same Person as 6mtAjnoas, 

e As by the Incarnation He who was God was made perfect 
Man, so Man was made perfect God, and each nature retained its 
own qualities, Or it may mean that God Incarnate was made 
Man in respect of body, soul, and mind ; that is, in all points; and 
the Humanity which He assumed was in all these points Deified ; 
and therefore they who are His kindred and imitators share to that 
extent the Deification (Elias). Inthe First Epistle to Cledonius 
(v. infra) the Priest, against Apollinarius, which is sometimes 
reckoned as the 51st Oration, S. Gregory says, ‘‘ The Godhead 
and the Manhood are two natures, just as soul and body are. 

3ut there are not two Sons or two Gods; although Paul did thus 
entitle the outward man and the inward. “And, to "speak succinctly, 
the Natures which make our Saviour are distinct, for the Invisible 
is not the same as the visible, nor the Timeless as that which is 
subject to time ; but He is not two Persons, God forbid, for both 
these are one in the union, God being made Mz ny and Man being 
made God, or however else you may express it.” And upon this 

” 

S. T. Aq., Summa, 
Forbes, On Nicene 

He was born of a woman 
—but she was a Virgin. ‘The first is human 
the second Divine. In His Human nature 
He had no Father, but also in His Divine Nat- 
ure no Mother. Both these® belong to 
Godhead. He dwelt in the womb—but He 
was recognized by the Prophet,’ himself still 

had been begoiten : 

in the womb, leaping before the Word, for 
Whose sake He came into being. He was 

wrapped in swaddling clothesé—but He took 
off the swathing bands of the grave by His 
rising again. He was laid in a manger—bDut 
He was glorified by Angels, and proclaimed 
by a star, and worshipped by the Magi. Why 
are you offended by that which is presented 
to your sight, because you will not look at 
that which is presented to your mind? He 
was driven into exile into Egypt—but He 
drove away the Egyptian idols.¢ He had no 
form nor comeliness in the eyes of the Jews $— 
but to David He is fairer than the children of 
men.” Andon the Mountain He was bright 
as the lightning, and became more luminous 
than the sun,® initiating us into the mystery 
of the future. 

XX. He was baptized as Man—but He re- 
mitted sins as God*—not because He needed 
purificatory rites Himself, but that He might 
sanctify the element of water. He was tempted 
as Man, but He conquered as God; yea, He 
bids us be of good cheer, for He has overcome 
the world.« | He hungered—but He fed thou- 
sands ;* yea, He is the Bread that giveth life, 
and That is of heaven. He thirsted—but He 
cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto 
Me and drink.# Yea, He promised that foun- 

S. Thomas Aquinas remarks that it is true, if by Man you undcr- 
stand simply Human Nature, and not a Human Person; in this 
sense it was brought to pass that Man was God; or in other 
words Human Nature was made that of the Son of God. (Summa, 
oe XVi., 7.) 

OTE any does not admit Mary to be the Mother of God 
(asclviaoi’, he is separated from God. If any say that He passed 
through the Virgin as through a _ conduit, and that He was not 
formed in her both divinely and humanly (divinely, because with- 
out ahuman father ; humanly, because in accordance with the 
laws of gestation), he is in like manner atheistic. If any assert 
that the Humanity was thus formed, and the Deity subsequently 
added, heis condemned ; for this is not a generation of God, but 
an evasion of generation” (3:G, Nad Cled pd.) Thomas 
Aquinas explains the fitness of the title thus: "The Blessed Virgin 
could be denied to be the Mother of God only if either His Hu- 
manity had been conceived and born before ‘That Man was the 
Son of God ;—which was the position taken up by Photinus; or 
else if the Humanity had not been assumed into the unity of the 
Person (or Sys of the Son of God ;—which was the posi- 
tion of Nestorius. Doth these positions are erroneous. ‘Therefore 
to deny that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of God is heretical 
(Summa, III., xxxv.,'4). Inthe text S. Gregory merely means that 
the Godhead of our Lord was not derived from His Blessed 
Mother, just as his Manhood was not derived from any man; but, 
as the extract at the beginning of this Note shews, he would be 
the last to take up the Nestorian notion, which was afterwards 
condemned at the Council of Ephesus. 

B Both These, i.e., the being without Father, and without Mother 
is a condition which belongs only to the Godhead. 

y S. John the Baptist (S, Luke i.). § Luke ii. 41. 

e Referring, perhaps, to the tradition that at the coming of 
Christ into Egypt all the Idols in the land fell down and were 
broken, Isa. liii. 2. " Bs, xlv..2; @ Matt. xvii. 2. 

t Matt, iii. 13 ; ix,6, « John xvi, 33. Alb.vi. 10. m Ib, vil. 37 

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORATION. 

tains should flow from them that believe. He 
was wearied, but He is the Rest of them that are 
weary and heavy laden. He was heavy with 
sleep, but He walked lightly over thesea.2 He 
rebuked the winds, He made Peter light as he 
began to sink.Y He pays tribute, but it is out 
of a fish ;* yea, He is the King of those who 
demanded it.¢ 

He is called a Samaritan and a demoniac ; $— 
but He saves him that came down from Jeru- 

salem and fell among thieves ;7 the demons 

acknowledge Him, and He drives out demons, 
and sinks in the sea legions of foul spirits,® 
and sees the Prince of the demons falling like 
lightning.t He is stoned, but is not taken. 
He prays, but He hears prayer. He weeps, 
but He causes tears to cease. He asks where 
Lazarus was laid, for He was Man; but He 
raises Lazarus, for He was God.* He is sold, 
and very cheap, for it is only for thirty pieces 
of silver ;* but He redeems the world, and that 
at a great price, for the Price was His own 
blood.“ As asheep He is led to the slaughter,” 
but He is the Shepherd of Israel, and now of 
the whole world also. Asa Lamb He is silent, 
yet He is the Word, and is proclaimed by the 
Voice of one crying in the wilderness. He is 
bruised and wounded, but He healeth every 
disease and every infirmity.° He is lifted up 
and nailed to the Tree, but by the Tree of 
Life He restoreth us; yea, He saveth even 
the Robber crucified with Him ;7 yea, He 
wrapped the visible world in darkness. He is 
given vinegar to drink mingled with gall. 
Who? He who turned the water into wine, 
who is the destroyer of the bitter taste, who 
is Sweetness and altogether desire.* He lays 
down His life, but He has power to take 
it again ;7 and the veil is rent, for the mysteri- 
ous doors of Heaven are opened ; the rocks are 
cleft, the dead arise.» He dies, but He gives 
life, and by His death destroys death. He is 
buried, but He rises again; He goes down 
into Hell, but He brings up the souls; He 
ascends to Heaven, and shall come again to 
judge the quick and the dead, and to put to 
the test such words as yours. If the one give 
you a starting point for your error, let the 
others put an end to it. 

XXI. This, then, is our reply to those who 
would puzzle us ; not given willingly indeed (for 
light talk and contradictions of words are not 
agreeable to the faithful, and one Adversary is 

a Matt. xi. 28. 

On DSR. anes G 
7 Take x. 30, etc. 
« John xi. 43. 

v Isa, liii. 7. 

mw Luke xxiii. 43. 
Ten) Ollie 1 O. 

BIb, viii. 24. 

e John xix. 19. 

@ Luke vili. 28-33. 
A Matt. xxvi. 15. 
€ John i. 23. 

p John it. r-rr. 

v Matt. xxvii. 51. 

y Lb. xiv. 25, 30. 
G Pb,, vit. 48. 
GLb. as. 

1. Det. 4. 16. 

‘Oo Sashineos. 

o Cant. v. 16. 

309 

enough for us), but of necessity, for the sake 
of our assailants (for medicines exist because 
of diseases), that they may be led to see that 
they are not all-wise nor invincible in those 
superfluous arguments which make void the 
Gospel. For when we leave off believing, 
and protect ourselves by mere strength of 
argument, and destroy the claim which the 
Spirit has upon our faith by questionings, and 
then our argument is not strong enough for 
the importance of the subject (and this must 
necessarily be the case, since it is put in 
motion by an organ of so little power as is our 
mind), what is the result? The weakness of 
the argument appears to belong to the mystery, 
and thus elegance of language makes void the 
Cross, as Paul also thought. For faith is that 
which completes our argument. But may He 
who proclaimeth unions and looseth those that 
are bound, and who putteth into our minds to 
solve the knots of their unnatural dogmas, if 
it may be, change these men and make them 
faithful instead of rhetoricians, Christians in- 
stead of that which they now are called. 
This indeed we entreat and beg for Christ’s 
sake. Be ye reconciled to God,* and quench 
not the Spirit ;¥ or rather, may Christ be rec- 
onciled to you, and may the Spirit enlighten 
you, though so late. But if you are too fond 
of your quarrel, we at any rate will hold 
fast to the Trinity, and by the ‘Trinity may 
we be saved, remaining pure and without 
offence, until the more perfect shewing forth 
of that which we desire, in Him, Christ our 
Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever. 
AMEN. 

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORA- 
Pry OW Pies =e Pe OSCON DD 
CONCERNING THE SON. 

I, Since I have by the power of the Spirit 
sufficiently overthrown the subtleties and intri- 
cacies of the arguments, and already solved in 
the mass the objections and oppositions drawn 
from Holy Scripture, with which these sacri- 
legious robbers of the Bible and thieves of the 
sense of its contents draw over the multitude 
to their side, and confuse the way of truth ; 
and that not without clearness, as I believe all 
candid persons will say; attributing to the 
Deity the higher and diviner expressions, and 
the lower and more human to Him Who for 
us men was the Second Adam, and was God 
made capable of suffering to strive against sin ; 

ax Cor, i. 17. P2-Cor, v.20; y t LHESsuve srg, 

310 

yet we have not yet gone through the passages 
in detail, because of the haste of our argu- 
ment. But since you demand of us a brief 
explanation of each of them, that you may not 
be carried away by the plausibilities of their 
arguinents, we will therefore state the explana- 
tions summarily, dividing them into numbers 
for the sake of carrying them more easily in 
mind. 

Il. In their eyes the following is only too 
ready to hand ** ‘Vhe Lorp created me at the 
beginning of His ways with a view to His 
works.’’ * How shall we meet this? Shall 
we bring an accusation against Solomon, or 
reject his former words because of his fall 
after-life ? Shall we say that the words are 
those of Wisdom herself, as it were of Knowl- 

a 

edge and the Creator-word, in accordance 
with which all things were made? For 

Scripture often personifies many even lifeless 
objects ; as for instance, ‘* The Sea said ’’ 8 so 
and so; and, ‘**’The Depth saith, It is not in 
me ;’’?¥ and ‘*’The Heavens declare the glory 
of God ;’’® and again a command is given to 
the Sword ;€ and the Mountains and Hills are 
asked the reason of their skipping. We do 
not allege any of these, though some of our 
predecessors used them as powerful arguments. 
But let us grant that the expression is used of 
our Saviour Himself, the true Wisdom. Let 
us consider one small point together. What 
among .all things that exist is unoriginate ? 
Vhe Godhead. For no one can tell the origin 
of God, that otherwise would be older than 
God. But what is the cause of the Manhood, 
which for our sake God assumed? It was 
surely our Salvation. What else could it be? 
Since then we find here clearly both the 
Created and the Begetteth Me, the argument 
is simple. Whatever we find joined with a 
cause we are to refer to the Manhood, but all 
that is absolute and unoriginate we are to 
reckon to the account of His Godhead. Well, 
then, is not this ‘* Created ’’ said in connection 
with a cause? He created Me, it so says, 

a Prov. vii, 22. The A. V. has in this place Possessed, and this 
has very high authority ; but the Hebrew word in almost every case 
signifies to Acquire, It is used, says Bp. Wordsworth (ad 7 4); 
about cighty times in the O. T., and in only five places is it ren- 
dered in our Translation by Possess ;—in two of which (Gen. xiv. 
10, 22, and Ps. CXXXIX, 13) it might w ell have the sense of Creating, 
and in two (Jer. xxxli. 15, and Zech. xi. 5) of Getting. In some an- 
cient Versions (LXX. and Syr.) it is rendered by Create. S. Je- 
rome in his Ep. ad Cypr. (ii. 697) says that the word may here be 
understood of possession, but in his Comm, on Ephes. ii. ( p. 342) 
he adopts the rendering Create, which he applies to the Incarna- 
tion, as in several places does S. Athanasius. But Wordsworth 
thinks it better to apply the words to the Eternal Generation, as 
S. Hilary expounds it (c, Arianos, who argued from it that Christ 
was a creature); ‘quia Filius Dei non corporalis parturitionis cst 
genitus exemplo, sed ex perfecto Deo perfectus Deus natus ; 
ideo ait creatam se esse Sapientia ; omnem in generatione sua 

notionem passionis corporalis excludens.” / B Is..scxin. 4, 
Y JOD xXxVill, t4x. 20 PS, XIX, Ty) 9 ZECh anilo'7, 1256 dS, Oxtye Ox 

GREGORY ee 

e the ee of His ways, with a view 
_to his works. Now, the Works of His Hands 
-are verity and judgment ;¢ for whose sake 
He was anointed with Godhead ;8 for this 
anointing is of the Manhood; but the «He 
begetteth Me”’ is not connected with a cause ; 
or it is for you to shew the adjunct. What 
argument then will disprove that Wisdom is 
called a creature, in connection with the lower 
generation, but Begotten in respect of the first 
and more incomprehensible ? 

III. Next is the fact of His being called 
Servant ¥ and serving many well, and that it is 
a great thing for Him to be called the Child of 
God. For in truth He was in servitude to flesh 
and to birth and to the conditions of our life 
with a view to our liberation, and to that of all 
those whom He has saved, who were in bond- 
age under sin. What greater destiny can be- 
fall man’s humility than that he should be inter- 
mingled with God, and by this intermingling 
should be deified,® and that we should be so 
visited by the Dayspring from on high,¢ that 
even that Holy ‘Vhing that should be born 
should be called the Son of the Highest,$ and 
that there should be bestowed upon Him a 
Name which is above every name? And what 
else can this be than God ?—and that every 
knee should bow to Him ‘That was made of no 
reputation for us, and That mingled the Form 
of God with the form of a servant, and that 
all the House of Israel should know that God 
hath made Him both Lord and Christ ?% For 
all this was done by the action of the Begot- 
ten, and by the good pleasure of Him ‘That 
begat Him. 

IV. Well, what is the second of their great 
irresistible passages? ‘* He must reign,’’ ® till 
such and such a time . . . and ‘ be received 
by heaven until the time of restitution,’’ * and 
‘‘have the seat at the Right Hand until the 
overthrow of His enemies.’’* But after this ? 
Must He cease to be King, or be removed 
from Heaven? Why, who shall make Him 
cease, or for what cause? What a bold and 
very anarchical interpreter you are; and yet 
you have heard that Of His Kingdom ‘¢here 
shall be no end.® Your mistake arises from not 

et 4 

understanding that Until is not always exclu- 
sive of that which comes after, but asserts 7/ 
to that time, without denying what comes 

a BS-0xt. 9: PB Ps. x1¥. 9. 

vy Tso. cl in6-siltr oe exc, here mistranslates ; the Hebrew 
and the Latin have the same word in all the passages quoted below, 
while the LX X. varies, as follows: Isa. xliil. 1. mats. 19. matées, 
Sovaor. xliv. 2, mais, 21. mais. xlviii. 29. SobAov, xlix. 3. dovAos. 
5. SovAov. 6. maida, 7. SovAov. lii. 13. wats. lili. 11. SovAevovTa, 

6 See Prolegomena, sce. ii. and 2 Pet. i. 4. e Luke i. 78. 

¢ Phil. ii. 9 MACS 1c 36; §6 0.7) Cor. xv. « Acts iil, 23, 

KES aGxnare A Joukea 33. Cf, Nic, ieee: 

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORATION. 311 

aficr it. ‘To take a single instance—how else 
would you understand, ‘* Lo, Iam with you 
always, even unto the end of the world?’’ 4 
Does it mean that He will no longer be so 
afterwards. And for what reason? But this is 
not the only cause of your error; you also fail 
to distinguish between the things that are signi- 
fied. He is said to reignin one sense as the 
Almighty King, both of the willing and the 
unwilling ; but in another as producing in us 
submission, and placing us under His Kingship 
as willingly acknowledging His Sovereignty. 
Of Tlis Kingdom, considered in the former 
sense, thereshall benoend. But in thesecond 
sense, what end will there be? His taking us 
as His servants, on our entrance into a state 
of salvation. For what need is there to Work 
Submission in us when we have already sub- 
mitted? After which He arises to judge the 
earth, and to separate the saved from the lost. 
After that He is to stand as God in the midst 
of gods,® that is, of the saved, distinguishing 
and deciding of what honour and of what 
mansion each is worthy. 

V. Take, in the next place, the subjection by 
which you subject the Son to the Father. What, 
you say, is He not now subject, or must He, if 
He is God, besubject to God ?¥ You are fash- 
ioning your argument as if it concerned some 
robber, or some hostile deity. But look at it 
in this manner: that as for my sake He was 
called a curse,® Who destroyed my curse; and 
sin,é who taketh away the sin of the world; 
and became a new Adam $§ to take the place of 
the old, just so He makes my disobedience 
His own as Head of the whole body. As long 
then as I am disobedient and rebellious, both 
by denial of God and by my passions, so long 
Christ also is called disobedient on my ac- 
count. But when all things shall be subdued 
unto Him on the one hand by acknowledg- 
ment of Him, and on the other bya _ reforma- 
tion, then He Himself also will have fulfilled 
His submission, bringing me whom He has 
saved to God. For this, according to my 
view, is the subjection of Christ ; namely, the 
fulfilling of the Father’s Will. But as the 
Son subjects all to the Father, so does the 
Father to the Son; the One by His Work, 
the Other by His good pleasure, as we have 
already said. And thus He Who subjects 
presents to God that which he has subjected, 
making our condition His own. Of the same 

a Matt. xxviii. 20, Bees boxe. ty 

y S. Gregory would here shew that the subjection of Christ of 
which S. Paul speaks in_ the passage quoted, is that of the Head 
of the Church, representing the members of His body. Cf. S. Am- 
brose, de Fide V. vi., quoted by Petavius, de Trin. IIL. v. 2. 

6 Gal- iii. 13. a Cor, Vv. 2X. e@x-Cor, xv; 45. 

kind, it appears to me, is the expression, ‘* My 
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me ?’’ @ 
It was not He who was forsaken either by the 
Father, or by His own Godhead, as some have 
thought, as if It were afraid of the Passion, 
and therefore withdrew Itself from Him in 
His Sufferings (for who compelled Him either 
to be born on earth at all, or to be lifted up 
on the Cross?) But as I said, He was in His 
own Person representing us. For we were 
the forsaken and despised before, but now by 
the Sufferings of Him Who could not suffer, 
we were taken up and saved. Similarly, He 
makes His own our folly and our transgres- 
sions; and says what follows in the Psalm, 
for it is very evident that the Twenty-first 8 
Psalm refers to Christ. 

VI. The same consideration applies to an- 
other passage, ‘‘ He learnt obedience by the 
things which He suffered,’’¥ and to His 
‘¢strong crying and tears,’’ and His ‘‘ Entrea- 
ties,’’ and His ‘‘ being heard,’’ and His « Re- 
verence,’’ all of which He wonderfully wrought 
out, like a drama whose plot was devised on 
our behalf. For in His character of the Word 
He was neither obedient nor disobedient. For 
such expressions belong to servants, and in- 
feriors, and the one applies to the better sort 
of them, while the other belongs to those who 
deserve punishment. But, in the character of 
the Form of a Servant, He condescends to 
His fellow servants, nay, to His servants, and 
takes upon Him a strange form, bearing all 
me and mine in Himself, that in Himself He 
may exhaust the bad, as fire does wax, or as 
the sun does the mists of earth; and that I 
may partake of His nature by the blending. 
Thus He honours obedience by His action, 
and proves it experimentally by His Passion. 
For to possess the disposition is not enough, 
just as it would not be enough for us, unless 
we also proved it by our acts; for action is 
the proof of disposition. 

And perhaps it would not be wrong to 
assume this also, that by the art® of His love 
for man He gauges our obedience, and measures 
all by comparison with His own Sufferings, so 
that He may know our condition by His own, 
and how much is demanded of us, and how 
much we yield, taking into the account, along 
with our environment, our weakness also. For 
if the Light shining through the veil € upon 
the darkness, that is upon this life, was perse- 
cuted by the other darkness (I mean, the Evil 

GaP Sixty 1 Ble S. ee Vey y Heb, Ve 8, ete 

6 Leuvenclavius translates ‘The art of this lovingkindness 
gauges,” etc. ; F ; 

e The Benedicitnes render, “In darkness, that is, in this life 

> 7 ”» if $ 
because of the veil of the body. 

312 

One and the Tempter), how much more will the 
darkness be persecuted, as being weaker than it ? 
And what marvel is it, that though Ie entirely 
escaped, we have been, at any rate in part, 
overtaken 2? For it is a more wonderful thing 
that He should have been chased than that we 
should have been captured ;—at least to the 
minds of all who reason aright on the subject. 
1 will add yet another passage to those I have 
mentioned, because 1 think that it clearly 
tends to the same sense. I mean ‘In that 
IIe hath suffered being tempted, He is able 
to succour them that are tempted.’’* But 
God will be all in all in the time of restitution ; 
not in the sense that the Father alone will Be ; 
and the Son be wholly resolved into Him, like 
a torch into a great pyre, from which it was 
reft away for a little space, and then put back 
(for [ would not have even the Sabellians in- 
jured ® by such an expression) ; but the entire 
Godhead when we shall be no longer 
divided (as we now are by movements and 
passions), and containing nothing at all of 
God, or very little, but shall be entirely like. 

VII. As your third point you count the Word 
Greater ; ¥ and as your fourth, ‘to My God and 
your God.é And indeed, if He had been 
called greater, and the word equal had not 
occurred, this might perhaps have been a 
point in their favour. But if we find both 
words clearly used what will these gentlemen 
have to say? How will it strengthen their 
argument? How will they reconcile the 
irreconcilable? For that the same thing 
should be at once greater than and equal 
to the same thing is an impossibility; and 
the evident solution is that the Greater refers 
to origination, while the Equal belongs to the 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Nature ; and this we acknowledge with much | 

good will. But perhaps some one else will 
back up our attack on your argument, and 
assert, that That which is from such a Cause is 
not inferior to that which has no Cause ; for it 
would share the glory of the Unoriginate, 
because it is from the Unoriginate. And 
there is, besides, the Generation, which is to 
all men a matter so marvellous and of such 
Majesty. For to say that he is greater than 
the Son considered as man, is true indeed, but 
is no great thing. 
God is greater than man? 

Greater. 
VIII. As to the other passages, My God 
would be used in respect, not of the Word, but 

a. Heb. ii. 18. 

B The Benedictines take mapa 0eipécOwoay in an active sense : 
“Twould not let even the Sabellians wrest such an expression.” 

y John xiv. 28 OTs, ar, 

Tor what marvel is it if | 
Surely that is 
enough to say in answer to their talk about | 

of the Visible Word. lor how could there be 
a God of Him Who is properly God? In the 
same way He is Father, not of the Visible, 
but of the Word; for our Lord was of two 
Natures ; so that one expression is used pro- 
perly, the other improperly in each of the 
two cases; but exactly the opposite way to 
their use in respect of us. For with respect 
to us God is properly our God, but not pro- 
perly our Father. And this is the cause of 
the error of the Heretics, namely the joining 
of these two Names, which are interchanged 
because of the Union of the Natures. Andan 
indication of this is found in the fact that 
wherever the Natures are distinguished in our 
thoughts from one another, the Names are also 
distinguished ; as you hear in Paul’s words, 
‘*’The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father 
of Glory.’’ * ‘The God of Christ, but the lather 
of glory. For although these two terms express 
but one Person, yet this is not by a Unity of 
Nature, but by a Union of the two. What 
could be clearer ? 

IX. Fifthly, let it be alleged that it is said of 
Him that He receives life,? judgment,y inheri- 
tance of the Gentiles,® or power over all flesh,¢ 
or glory,§ or disciples, or whatever else is men- 
tioned. ‘This also belongs to the Manhood ; 
and yet if you were to ascribe it to the God- 
head, it would be no absurdity. For you 
would not so ascribe it as if it were newly ac- 
quired, but as belonging to Him from the 
beginning by reason of nature, and not as an 
act of favour. 

X. Sixthly, let it be asserted that it is writ- 
ten, The Son can do nothing of Himself, but 
what He seeth the Tather do.1 ‘The solu- 
tion of this is as follows :—Can and Cannot are 
not words with only one meaning, but have 
many meanings. On the one hand they are 
used sometimes in respect of deficiency of 
strength, sometimes in respect of time, and 
sometimes relatively to a certain object; as 
for instance, A Child cannot be an Athlete, 
or, A Puppy cannot see, or fight with so and 
so. Perhaps some day the child will be an 
athlete, the puppy will see, will fight with that 
other, though it may still be unable to fight 
with Any other. Or again, they may be used 
of that which is Generally true. For instance, 
A city that is set on a hill cannot be 
hid ;® while yet it might possibly be hidden 
by another higher hill being in a line with it. 
Or in another sense they are used of a thing 
which is not reasonable ; as, Can the Child- 
ren of the Bridechamber fast while the 

° 

a Ephes. i.17. | 6 John viii. 54. yJohnv.22. 8 Ps. ii. 8. 
€ John xvi. 2. § 2 Pet.i.17, etc. » Johnv.19. 6 Matt. v, 14, 

THE FOURTH THEOLOGICAL ORATION. 

Bridegroom is with them; whether He be 
considered as visible in bodily form (for the 
time of His sojourning among us was not one 
of mourning, but of gladness), or, as the 
Word. For why should they keep a bodily 
fast who are cleansed by the Word?’ Or, 
again, they are used of that which is contrary 
to the will; as in, He could do no mighty 
works there because of their unbelief,y—i.e. 
of those who should receive them. For 
since in order to healing there is need of both 
faith in the patient and power in the Healer, 
when one of the two failed the other was im- 
possible. But probably this sense also is to 
be referred to the head of the unreasonable. 
For healing is not reasonable in the case of 
those who would afterwards be injured by 
unbelief. The sentence The world cannot 
hate you,* comes under the same head, 
does also How can ye, being evil, speak 
good things?’ For in what sense is either 
impossible, except that it is contrary to the 
will? ‘There is asomewhat similar meaning 
in the expressions which imply that a thing 
impossible by nature is possible to God if He 
so wills; as that aman cannot be born a sec- 
ond time,® or that a needle will not let a camel 
through it.* For what could prevent either of 
these things happening, if God so willed ? 

XI. And besides all this, there is the abso- 
lutely impossible and inadmissible, as that 
which we are now examining. For as we as- 
sert that it is impossible for God to be evil, or 
not to exist—for this would be indicative of 
weakness in God rather than of strength—or for 
the non-existent to exist, or fer two and two 
to make both four and ten, so it is impossi- 
ble and inconceivable that the Son should do 
anything that the Father doeth not.“ For all 
things that the Father hath are the Son’s; ” 
and on the other hand, all that belongs to the 
Son is the Father’s. Nothing then is peculiar, 
because all things are in common. For Their 
Being itselfis common and equal, even though 
the Son receive it from the Father. It is in 
respect of this that it is said I live by the 
Father ;& not as though His Life and Being 
were kept together by the Father, but because 
He has His Being from Him beyond all time, 
and beyond all cause. But how does He see 
the Father doing, and do likewise? Is it like 
those who copy pictures and letters, because 
they cannot attain the truth unless by looking 

a Mark ii. 19. B John xv. y Mark vi. 5. 

6 Note with the Benedictines that & ‘Cregony i is here speaking 
of our Lord alone, not of ordinary Physicians ; hence he uses the 
singular. ls Vil. 7. Matt. xii. 34. 

7 Matt. xix. 26. ohn ili. 4. « Matt. xix. 24, 

A One MS, reads * to ra ourteen,”” 

mw John v. 19. v Ib, xvi. 15. € Ib. vi. 57, 

313 

at the original, and being led by the hand by 
it? But how shall Wisdom stand in need of 
a teacher, or be incapable of acting unless 
taught? And in what sense does the Father 
‘To’? in the present or in the past? Did 
He make another world before this one, or is 
He going to make a world to come? And did 
the Son look at that and make this? Or will 
He look at the other, and make one like it? 
According to this argument there must be 
Four worlds, two made by the Father, and 
two by the Son. What an absurdity! He 
cleanses lepers, and delivers men from evil 
spirits, and diseases, and quickens the dead, 
and walks upon the sea, and does all His 
other works; but in what case, or when did 
the Father do these acts before Him? Is it 
not clear that the Father impressed the ideas 
of these same actions, and the Word brings 
them to pass, yet not in slavish or unskilful 
fashion, but with full knowledge and in a 
masterly way, or, to speak more properly, like 
the Father? For in this sense I understand 
the words that whatsoever is done by the 
Father, these things doeth the Son likewise ; 
not, that is, because of the likeness of the 
things done, but in respect of the Authority. 
This might well also be the meaning of the 
passage which says that the Father worketh 
hitherto and the Son also ;# and not only so but 
it refers also to the government and preserva- 
tion of the things which He has made; as is 
shewn by the passage which says that He 
maketh His Angels Spirits,? and that the 
earth is founded upon its steadfastness (though 
once for all these things were fixed and made) 
and that the thunder is made firm and the 
wind created.Y Of all these things the Word 
was given once, but the Action is continuous 
even now. 

XII. Let them quote in the seventh place 
that The Son came down from Heaven, not 
to do His own Will, but the Will of Him 
That sent Him.é Well, if this had not been 
said by Himself Who came down, we should 
say that the phrase was modelled as issuing 
from the Human Nature, not from Him who 
is conceived of in His character as the Saviour, 
for His Human Will cannot be opposed to 
God, seeing it is altogether taken into God ; 
but conceived of simply as in our nature, 
inasmuch as the human will does not com- 
pletely follow the Divine, but for the most part 
struggles against and resists it. For we under- 
stand in the s same way the words, Father, if 

a Johny. 17. p Ps. Ros ama ragga (9, 

yack Amos iv..13, where A. V. reads, He That formed the 
mountains and created the wind. 

6 John vi. 38. 

314 

it be possible, let this cup pass from Me; 
Nevertheless let not what T will but Thy 
Will prevail.¢ For it is not likely that He 
did not know whether it was possible or not, 
or that Ile would oppose will to will, But 
since, as this is the language of Him Who 
assumed our Nature (for He it was Who came 
down), and not of the Nature which He 
assumed, we must meet the objection in this 
way, that the passage does not mean that the 
Son has a special will of His own, besides that 
of the Father, but that He has not; so that 
the meaning would be, ‘‘ not to do Mine own 
Will, for there is none of Mine apart from, 
but that which is common to, Me and Thee; 
for as We have one Godhead, so We have one 
Will.’’?8 For many such expressions are used 
in relation to this Community, and are ex- 
pressed not positively but negatively ; as, e.g., 
God giveth not the Spirit by measure,” for 
as a matter of fact He does not g7ve the Spirit 
to the Son, nor does He measure It, for God 
is not measured by God; or again, Not my 
transgression nor my sin.§ The words are 
not used because He has these things, but 
because He has them not. And again, Not 
for our righteousness which we have done,§ 
for we have not done any. And this mean- 
ing is evident also in the clauses which fol- 
low. For what, says He, is the Will of 
My Father? ‘That everyone that believeth 
on the Son should be saved, and obtain the 

final Resurrection.” Now is this the Will of | 

the Father, but not of the Son? Or does He 
preach the Gospel, and receive men’s faith 
against His will? Who could believe that ? 
Moreover, that passage, too, which says that 
the Word which is heard is not the Son’s® but 
the Father’s has the same force. For I cannot 
see how that which is common to two can be 
said to belong to one alone, however much I 
consider it, and I do not think any one else 
can. If then you hold this opinion con- 
cerning the Will, you will be right and rev- 
erent in your opinion, as I think, and as every 
right-minded person thinks, 

XIII. ‘The eighth passage is, That they may 
know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
Christ Whom Thou hast sent ;* and There is 

none good save one, that is, God.4 The 
solution of this appears to me very easy. For 

a Matt. xxvi. 39: 

B Observe that S. Gregory expressly limits this paraphrase to 
the Divine Nature of our Lord, and is not in any way denying 
to Hima Human Will also:—indeed in the preceding sentence 
he distinctly asserts it. ‘The whole passage makes very strongly 
avainst the heresy of Apollinarius, which adopted the Arian tenet 
that in our Lord the Divine Logos supplied the place of the human 
soul. y John ii. 34. PS. Js Be 

e Dan. ix. 18. ¢ John vi. 40. n V.1. Restoration. 

@ John xiv. 24. Ke Lb acyits 3, A Luke xviii. 19. 

GREGORY “NAZIANZEN, 

if you attribute this only to the Father, where 
will you place the Very Truth? For if you 
conceive in this manner of the meaning of 
To the only wise God,* or Who only hath 
Immortality, Dwelling in the light which 
no man can approach unto,®& or of to the 
king of the Ages, immortal, invisible, and 
only wise God,? then the Son has vanished 
under sentence of death, or of darkness, or at 
any rate condemned to be neither wise nor 
king, nor invisible, nor God at all, which sums 
up all these points. And how will you prevent 
His Goodness, which especially belongs to 
God alone, from perishing with the rest? I, 
however, think that the passage That they 
may know ‘Thee the only true God, was 
said to overthrow those gods which are falsely 
so called, for He would not have added and 
Jesus Christ Whom ‘Thou hast sent, if The 
Only ‘True God were contrasted with Him, 
and the sentence did not proceed upon the 
basis of a common Godhead. ‘The ‘* None is 
Good’’ meets the tempting Lawyer, who was 
testifying to His Goodness viewed as Man. 
For perfect goodness, He says, is God’s alone, 
even if a man is called perfectly good. As 
for instance, A good man out of the good 
treasure of his heart bringeth forth good 
things.6 And, I will give the kingdom to 
one who is good above Thee.¢ . . . Words 
of God, speaking to Saul about David. Or 
again, Do good, O Lord, unto the good$ 
. . . and all other like expressions concern- 
ing those of us who are praised, upon whom 
it is a kind of effluence from the Supreme 
Good, and has come to them in a secondary 
degree. It will be best of all if we can _per- 
suade you of this. But if not, what will you 
say to the suggestion on the other side, that on 
your hypothesis the Son has been called the 
only God. In what passage? Why, in this: 
—This is your God; no other shall be ac- 
counted of in comparison with Him, and a 
little further on, after this did He shew 
Himself upon earth, and conversed with 
men.” This addition proves clearly that the 
words are not used of the Father, but of the 
Son ; for it was He Who in bodily form com- 
panied with us, and was in this lower world. 
Now, if we should determine to take these 
words as saidin contrast with the Father, and 
not with the imaginary gods, we lose the 
Father by the very terms which we were press- 
ing against the Son. And what could be more 
disastrous than such a victory ? 

XIV. Ninthly, they allege, seeing He ever 

B Ib. vi. 16. y Ib.i. 17. 6 Mat. xii. 35. 

ox Times. 17, M 
GPS Cxxya.4: m, Baruch 111.135, 37- 

€iI Sam. XVecze, 

liveth to make intercession for us.4 
beautiful and mystical and kind. For to 
intercede does not imply to seek for ven- 
geance, as is most men’s way (for in that there 
would be something of humiliation), but it is 
to plead for us by reason of His Mediatorship, 
just as the Spirit also is said to make interces- 
sion forus.8 For there is One God, and One 
Mediator between God and Man, the Man 
Christ Jesus.y For He still pleads even now 
as Man for my salvation; for He continues 
to wear the Body which He assumed, until He 
make me God by the power of His Incarna- 
tion; although He is no longer known after 
the flesh §—I mean, the passions of the flesh, 
the same, except sin, as ours. ‘Thus too, we 
have an Advocate, Jesus Christ, not indeed 
prostrating Himself for us before the Father, 
and falling down before Him in slavish fash- 
ion . . . Away with a suspicion so truly 
slavish and unworthy of the Spirit! For 
neither is it seemly for the Father to require 
this, nor for the Son to submit to it; nor is it 
just to think it of God. But by what He suf- 
fered as Man, He as the Word and the Coun- 
sellor persuades Him to be patient. I think 
this is the meaning of His Advocacy. 

XV. Their tenth objection is the ignorance, 
and the statement that Of the last day and hour 
knoweth no man, not even the Son Himself, 
but the Father. And yet how can Wisdom be 
ignorant of anything —that is, Wisdom Who 
made the worlds, Who perfects them, Who re- 
models them, Who is the Limit of all things 
that were made, Who knoweth the things of 
God as the spirit of a man knows the things 
that arein him?” For what can be more per- 
fect than this knowledge? How then can 
you say that all things before that hour He 
knows accurately, and all things that are to 
happen about the time of the end, but of the 
hour itself He is ignorant? Yor such a thing 
would be like a riddle; as if one were to say 

THES POUR DE THROLOGICATL. OR EON, 

that he knew accurately all that was in front | 

of the wall, but did not know the wall itself; 
or that, knowing the end of the day, he did 
not know the beginning of the night — where 
knowledge of the one necessarily brings in the 
other. Thus everyone must see that He 
knows as God, and knows not as Man ;—if 
one may separate the visible from that which 
is discerned by thought alone. For the ab- 
solute and unconditioned use of the Name 
‘<The Son’? in this passage, without the addi- 
tion of whose Son, gives us this thought, that 

4 

0) 

15 

O, how | we are to understand the ignorance in the most 

reverent sense, by attributing it to the Man- 
hood, and not to the Godhead. 

XVI. If then this argument is sufficient, let 
us stop here, and not enquire further. But if 
not, our second argument is as follows :—Just as 
we do in all other instances, so let us refer His 
knowledge of the greatest events, in honour 
of the Father, to The Cause. And I think 
that anyone, even if he did not read it in the 
way that one of our own Students® did, 
would soon perceive that not even the Son 
knows the day or hour otherwise than as the 
Father does. For what do we conclude from 
this? That since the Father knows, therefore 
also does the Son, as it is evident that this 
cannot be known or comprehended by any 
but the First Nature. ‘There remains for us to 
interpret the passage about His receiving com- 
mandment,® and having kept His Command- 
ments, and done always those things that 
please Him ; and further concerning His being 
made perfect,Y and His exaltation,® and His 
learning obedience by the things which He 
suffered ; and also His High Priesthood, and 
His Oblation, and His Betrayal, and His 
prayer to Him That was able to save Him 
from death, and His Agony and Bloody Sweat 
and Prayer,* and such like things; if it were 
not evident to every one that such words are 
concerned, not with That Nature Which is 
unchangeable and above all capacity of suffer- 
ing, but with the passible Humanity. ‘This, 
then, is the argument concerning these objec- 
tions, so far as to be a sort of foundation and 
memorandum for the use of those who are 
better able to conduct the enquiry to a more 
complete working out. It may, however, be 
worth while, and will be consistent with what 
has been already said, instead of passing over 
without remark the actual Titles of the Son 
(there are many of them, and they are con- 
cerned with many of His Attributes), to set 
before you the meaning of each of them, and 
to point out the mystical meaning of the 
names. 

XVI. Wewill begin thus. The Deity can- 
not be expressed in words. And this is proved 
to us, not only by argument, but by the wisest 
and most ancient of the Hebrews, so far as 
they have given us reason for conjecture. 
For they appropriated certain characters to 
the honour of the Deity, and would not even 
allow the name of anything inferior to God to 
be written with the same letters as that of 

a Heb. vil. 25. B Rom. viil 26. y 1 Tim, i. 5. 
0.2 Com Ne 326. @x1-johinaiy x, 
¢ Mark xiii. 32. WTCOr UM. FT 

a lias thinks that the great S. Basil is here referred to. Petavius 
thinks the first argument of c. xvi. forced and unsatisfactory. 
B John xit,.49.* yy Feb: w-7, ete. *,-6 Phils itso. « eduuke xin 44. 

316 

canteen cede eee. ZEN, 

God, because to their minds it was improper | names of His nes others of His Gov- 

that the Deity should even to that extent ad- 
mit any of His creatures to a share with Him- 
self. How then could they have admitted 
that the invisible and separate Nature can be 
explained by divisible words? For neither 
has any one yet breathed the whole air, nor 
has any mind entirely comprehended, or 

. . . | 
speech exhaustively contained the Being of 

God. But we sketch Him by His Attributes, 

and so obtain a certain faint and feeble and | 

partial idea concerning Him, and our best 

‘Theologian is he who has, not indeed discov- | 

ered the whole, for our present chain does not 
allow of our seeing the whole, but conceived 
of Him to a greater extent than another, and 
gathered in himself more of the Likeness or 
adumbration of the Truth, or whatever we 
may call it. 

XVIII. As far then as we can reach, He 
Who Is, and God, are the special names of His 
‘ssence ; and of these especially He Who Is, 
not only because when He spake to Moses in 

was, this was what He called Himself, bidding | 

him say to the people ‘I Am hath sent me,’’ 4 
but also because we find that this Name is the 
more strictly appropriate. For the Name @eds 
(God), even if, as those who are skilfulin these 
matters say, it were derived from Oéev ® (to 
run) or from Av@ew (to blaze), from continual 
motion, and because He consumes evil condi- 
tions of things (from which fact He is also 
called A Consuming Fire), would still be one 
of the Relative Names, and not an Absolute 
one; as again is the case with Lord,® which 
also is called a name of God. I am the 
Lord Thy God, He says, that is My name; ¢ 
and, The Lord is His name.¢ But we are en- 
quiring into a Nature Whose Being is absolute 
and not into Being bound up with something 
else. But Being is in its proper sense pecu- 
liar to God, and belongs to Him entirely, and 
is not limited or cut short by any Before or 
After, for indeed in him there is no past or 
future. 

XIX. Of the other titles, some are evidently 

a Exod. ili. 14. 

BThe derivation of eds from O€ew (to run) is given by 
Plato (Crat., 397c). That from AtOecy blaze) is found also in 
S. John Damascene (De Fide Orth., I., 12), who however may 
have borrowed it from S. Gregory, or Yori the source whence the 
latter took it. S. Athanasius also admits it (De Defin., 11). Other 
definitions are, according to Suicer, (1) Oeacbar (to see), ¢. g. 
Gree. Nyas, in Cant, dom. Vs-.{3) bene (to contemplate), 
Athan. (Juaest Misc.. Qu. XI. ,Oeds Acyerat amd 70 Oewpety Ta TavTa, 
olover Bewpos kat Oeos, nyovv OeatTns Tmavtwy. (3) Tebevae (to 
place), Clem., Al. Strom., I. s. fin,, @¢0s mapa Thy Béouv eipnrac. 

fbn iv. 24. 

Lord (Kvptos) is simply the LXX. rendering of the word 
which in reading Hebrew is substituted for the Ineffable Name. 
Thus in the passages quoted, had the original language been 
used, the Four-Lettered Name would have appeared, 

€ Ish: xhie8. ¢ Amos, ix, 6, 

ernment of the world, and of this viewed un- 
der a twofold aspect, the one before the other 
in’*the Inearnation. For instance the Al- 
mighty, the King of Glory, or of ‘The Ages, or 
of The Powers, or of The Beloved, or of 
Kings. Or again the Lord of Sabaoth, that 
is of Hosts, or of Powers, or of Lords; these 

are clearly titles belonging to His Author- 
ity. But the God either of Salvation or of 

Vengeance, or of Peace, or of Righteousness ; 
or of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of all the 
spiritual Israel that seeth God,—these belong 
to His Government. Jor since we are goy- 
erned by these three things, the fear of pun- 
ishment, the hope of salvation and of glory 
besides, and the practice of the virtues by 
which these are attained, the Name of the God 
of Vengeance governs fear, and that of the 
God of Salvation our hope, and that of the 
God of Virtues our practice ; that whoever at- 
tains to any of these may, as carrying God in 

himself, press on yet more unto perfection, 
the mount, and Moses asked what His Name | 

and to that affinity which arises out of virtues. 
Now these are Names common to the God- 
head, but the Proper Name of the Unoriginate 
is Father, and that of the unoriginately Be- 
gotten is Son, and that of the unbegottenly 
Proceeding or going forth is The Holy Ghost. 
Let us proceed then to the Names of the Son, 
which were our starting point in this part of 
our argument. 

XX. In my opinion He is called Son because 
He is identical with the Father in Essence ; and 
not only for this reason, but also because He 
is Of Him. And He is called Only-Begotten, 
not because He is the only Son and of the 
Father alone, and only a Son; but also be- 
cause the manner of His Sonship is peculiar to 
Himself and not shared by bodies. And He 
is called the Word, because He is related to 
the Father as Word to Mind; not only on. 
account of His passionless Generation, but al- 
so because of the Union, and of His declara- 
tory function. Perhaps too this relation 
might be compared to that between the Defini- 
tion and the Thing defined ® since this also is 
called Adyos.? For, it says, he that hath mental 
perception of the Son (for this is the meaning 
of Hath Seen) hath also perceived the Father ; ¥ 
and the Son is a concise demonstration and 
easy setting forth of the Father’s Nature. For 
every thing that is begotten is a silent word 
of him that begat it. And if any one should 
say that this Name was given Him because 

a Of the oration on Christmas Day, where He is called 6 ToD 
Tlatpos opos Kai Adyos, and see Note there. 

B Ratio (relation ; sometimes reason) Sermo (discourse) and 
Verbum (Word) are all renderings of Adyos. y John xiv. g. 

Foe FOURTE THEOLOGICAL ORATION. 

3t7 

He exists in all things that are, he would not | 

be wrong. For what is there that consists 
but by the word? He is also called Wisdom, 
as the Knowledge of things divine and human. 
lor how is it possible that He Who made all 
things should be ignorant of the reasons of 
what He has made? And Power, as the Sus- 
tainer of all created things, and the Furnisher 
to them of power to keep themselves together. 
And Truth, as being in nature One and not 
many (for truth is one and falsehood is mani- 
fold), and as the pure Seal of the Father and 
His most unerring Impress. And the Image 
as of one substance with Him, and because He 
is of the Father, and not the Father of Him. 
lor this is of the Nature of an Image, to be 
the reproduction of its Archetype, and of that 
whose name it bears ; only that there is more 
here. For in ordinary language an image is 
a motionless representation of that which has 
motion ; but in this case it is the living repro- 
duction of the Living One, and is more exact- 
ly like than was Seth to Adam,¢ or any son to 
his father. For such is the nature of simple 
existences, that it is not correct to say of them 
that they are Like in one particular and Unlike 
in another ; but they are a complete resem- 
blance, and should rather be called Identical 
than Like. Moreover he is called Light as being 
the Brightness of souls cleansed by word and 
lite. For if ignorance and sin be darkness, 
knowledge and a godly life will be Light. 
: And He is called Life, because He is 
Light, and is the constituting and creating Pow- 
er of every reasonable soul. For in Him we 
live and move and have our being,® according 
to the double power of that Breathing into us ; 
for we were all inspired by Him with breath, 
and as many of us as were capable of it, and 
in so far as we open the mouth of our mind, 
with God the Holy Ghost. He is Righteous- 
ness, because He distributes according to that 
which we deserve, and is a righteous Arbiter 
both for those who are under the Law and for 
those who are under Grace, for soul and body, 
so that the former should rule, and the latter 
obey, and the higher have supremacy over the 
lower ; that the worse may not rise in rebel- 
lion against the better. He is Sanctification, 
as being Purity, that the Pure may be con- 
tained by Purity. And Redemption, because 
He sets us free, who were held captive under 
sin, giving Himself a Ransom for us, the Sacri- 
fice to make expiation for the world. And Re- 
surrection, because He raises up from hence, 
and brings to life again us, who were slain by sin. 

| 

XXI. These names however are sll com- 
mon to Him Who is above us, and to Him Who 
came for our sake. But others are peculiarly 
our own, and belong to that nature which He 
assumed. So He is called Man, not only that 
through His Body He may be apprehended 
by embodied creatures, whereas otherwise this 
would be impossible because of His incom- 
prehensible nature; but also that by Himself 
He may sanctify humanity, and be as it were 
a leaven to the whole lump; and by uniting 
to Himself that which was condemned may 
release it from all condemnation, becoming 
for all men all things that we are, except sin ; 
—body, soul, mind and all through which 
death reaches—and thus He became Man, 
who is the combination of all these; God in 
visible form, because He retained that which 
is perceived by mind alone. He is Son of 
Man, both on account of Adam, and of the 
Virgin from Whom He came; from the one 
as a forefather, from the other as His Mother, 
both in accordance with the law of generation, 
and apart from it. He is Christ, because of 
His Godhead. For this is the Anointing of 
His Manhood, and does not, as is the case 
with all other Anointed Ones, sanctify by its 
action, but by the Presence in His Fulness of 
the Anointing One; _ the effect of which is 
that That which anoints is called Man, and 
makes that which is anointed God. He is 
The Way, because He leads us through Him- 
self; The Door, as letting usin ; the Shepherd, 
as making us dwell in a place of green pas- 
tures,* and bringing us up by waters of rest, 
and leading us there, and protecting us from 
wild beasts, converting the erring, bringing 
back that which was lost, binding up that 
which was broken, guarding the strong, and 
bringing them together in the Fold beyond, 
with words of pastoral knowledge. The Sheep, 
as the Victim: The Lamb, as being perfect : 
the Highpriest, as the Offerer ; Melchisedec, 
as without Mother in that Nature which is 
above us, and without Father in ours; and 
without genealogy above (for who, it says, 
shall declare His generation ?) and moreover, 
as King of Salem, which means Peace, and 
King of Righteousness, and as receiving tithes 
from Patriarchs, when they prevail over 
powers of evil. They are the titles of the 
Son. Walk through them, those that are 
lofty in a godlike manner ; those that belong 
to the body in a manner suitable to them ; or 
rather, altogether in a godlike manner, that 
thou mayest become a god, ascending from 

a Gen. v, 3. B Acts xvii. 28, y Gen. ii. 7. 

VO Velie 

GPs xxUN 2, 

318 

below, for His sake Who came down from on 
high for ours. 
this, and thou shalt never err, cither in the 
loftier or the lowher names; Jesus Christ is 
the Same yesterday and to-day in the Incar- 
nation, and in the Spirit for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

THE FIFTH. THEOLOGICAL 

TION 

ORA- 

On Tue Hory Sptirir. 

I. Suc then is the account of the Son, and 
in this manner He has escaped those who would 
stone Him, passing through the midst of them. 
Por the Word is not stoned, but casts stones 
when He pleases; and uses a sling against 
wild beasts—that is, words—approaching the 
Mount® in an unholy way. But, they go on, 
what have you to say about the Holy Ghost ? 
From whence are you bringing in upon us this 
strange God, of Whom Scripture is silent ? 
And even they who keep within bounds as to 
the Son speak thus. And just as we find in 
the case of roads and rivers, that they split off 
from one another and join again, so it hap- 
pens also in this case, through the superabund- 
ance of impiety, that people who differ in all 
other respects have here some points of agree- 
ment, so that you never can tell for certain 
either where they are of one mind, or where 
they are in conflict. 

Il. Now the subject of the Holy Spirit pre- 
sents a special difficulty, not only because when 

these men have become weary in their dispu- | 

tations concerning the Son, they struggle with 
greater heat against the Spirit (for it seems to 
be absolutely necessary for them to have some 
object on which to give expression to their 
impiety, or life would appear to them no 
longer worth living), but further because we 
ourselves also, being worn out by the multi- 
tude of their questions, are in something of the 
same condition with men who have lost their 
appetite ; who having taken a dislike to some 
particular kind of food, shrink from all food ; 
so we in like manner have an aversion from 
all discussions. Yet may the Spirit grant it 
to us, and then the discourse will proceed, 
and God will be glorified. Well then, we 
will leave to others¥ who have worked upon 
this subject for us as well as for themselves, as 

we have worked upon it for them, the task of | 

examining carefully and distinguishing in how 

@ Like ivi 2p, 30: PB Texots xix, 13. 

y E.g. 5. Basil and S, Gregory of Nyssa, 

} 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

-many senses the word Spirit or the word Holy 

In all and above all keeyy to | 

is used and understood in Holy Scripture, 
with the evidence suitable to such an enquiry ; 
and of shewing how besides these the com- 
bination of the two words—I mean, Holy 
Spirit—is used in a peculiar sense; but we 
will apply ourselves to the remainder of the 
subject. 

III. hey then who are angry with us on 
the ground that we are bringing in a strange 
or interpolated God, viz. :—the Holy Ghost, 
and who fight so very hard for the letter, 
should know that they are afraid where no 
fear is ;* and I would have them clearly under- 
stand that their love for the letter is but a 
cloak for their impiety, as shall be shewn later 
on, when we refute their objections to the ut- 
most of our power. But we have so much 
confidence in the Deity of the Spirit Whom 
we adore,®& that we will begin our teaching 
concerning His Godhead by fitting to Him 
the Names which belong to the ‘Trinity, even 
though some persons may think us too bold. 
The Father was the True Light which light- 
eneth every man coming into the world. 
The Son was the True Light which lighten- 
eth every man coming into the world. ‘The 
Other Comforter was the True Light which 
lighteneth every man coming into the world.¥ 
Was and Was and Was, but Was One Thing. 
Light thrice repeated; but One Light and 
One God. This was what David represented 
to himself long before when he said, In ‘Thy 
Light shall we see Light.6 And now we have 
both seen and proclaim concisely and simply 
the doctrine * of God the ‘Trinity, compre- 
hending out of Light (the Father), Light (the 
Son), in Light (the Holy Ghost). He that 
rejects it, let him reject it;$ and he that 
doeth iniquity, let him do iniquity ; we pro- 
claim that which we have understood. We 
will get us up into a high mountain,” and 
will shout, if we be not heard, below; we 
will exalt the Spirit; we will not be afraid ; 
or if we are afraid, it shall be of keeping 
silence, not of proclaiming. 

IV. Ifever there was a time when the Father 
was not, then there was a time when the Son 
was not. If ever there was a time when the 
Son was not, then there was a time when the 
Spirit was not. If the One was from the be- 
ginning, then the Three were so too. If you 

GPs, dans 

B mpeoBevew is not commonly used in this sense, but there are 
classical instances of it (eg. ‘sch. Choeph., 488; Soph., Trach., 
106s, and it occurs also in Plato), and this is the sense in which 
it is here rendered by Billius ; but a V. L. of some MSS. gives the 
meaning, whose cause we are pleading, which is a more frequent 
use of the word. y John i. 9. PS .exx20v001 0: 

e Al, The Confession. Golsnexxiwe. milDsexlaece 

For what 
Or 

you do not set up the other Two. 
profit is there in an imperfect Godhead ? 

throw down the One, I am bold to assert that — 

| 

if 

rather, what Godhead can there be if It is not | 

And how can that be perfect which 
And_ surely 

perfect ? 
lacks something of perfection ? 

there is something lacking if it hath not the | 
Holy, and how would it have this if it were | 

without the Spirit? For either holiness is 
something different from Him, and if so let 
some one tell me what it is conceived to be ; 

or if it is the same, how is it not from the be- | 

ginning, as if it were better for God to be at 

one time imperfect and apart from the Spirit ? | 

If He is not from the beginning, He is in the 
same rank with myself, even though a little 
before me ; for we are both parted from God- 
head by time. If He is in the same rank 
with myself, how can He make me God, or 
join me with Godhead ? 

V. Or rather, let me reason with you about 
Him from a somewhat earlier point, for we 
have already discussed the Trinity. 

The Sad- | 

ducees altogether denied the existence of the — 
Holy Spirit, just as they did that of Angels 

and the Resurrection ; rejecting, I know not 
upon what ground, the important testimonies 
concerning Him in the Old Testament. And 
of the Greeks those who are more inclined to 
speak of God, and who approach nearest to us, 
have formed some conception of Him, as it 
seems to me, though they have differed as to 
His Name, and have addressed Him as the 

the like. But of the wise men amongst our- 
selves, some have conceived of him as an Ac- 
tivity, some as a Creature, some as God; and 
some have been uncertain which to call Him, 

out of reverence for Scripture, they say. as | 

though it did not make the matter clear either 
way. And therefore they neither worship 
Flim nor treat Him with dishonour, but take 
up a neutral position, or rather a very misera- 
ble one, with respect to Him. And of those 
who consider Him to be God, some are or- 
thodox in mind only, while others venture 
to be so with the lips also. 

either as a Creature of God, or as God. 

ONe Cite Ola GSP rel c: 

319 

longs to these names is also a sequence in the 
facts. 

VI. But we cannot enter into any discussion 
with those who do not even believe in His 
existence, nor with the Greek babblers (for 
we would not be enriched in our argument 
with the oil of sinners). With the others, 
however, we will argue thus. The Holy 
Ghost must certainly be conceived of either 
as in the category of the Self-existent, or as in 
that of the things which are contemplated in 
another; of which classes those who are 
skilled in such matters call the one Substance 
and the other Accident. Now if He were an 
Accident, He would be an Activity of God, 
for what else, or of whom else, could He be, 
for surely this is what most avoids composition ? 
And if He is an Activity, He will be effected, 
but will not effect and will cease to exist 
as soon as He has been effected, for this is the 
nature of an Activity. How is it then that 
He acts and says such and such things, and 
defines, and is grieved, and is angered, and 
has all the qualities which belong clearly to 
one that moves, and not to movement? But 
if He is a Substance and not an attribute 
of Substance, He will be conceived of 
For 
anything between these two, whether having 
nothing in common with either, or a com- 
pound of both, not even they who invented 
the goat-stag could imagine. Now, if He is 

-acreature, how do we believe in Him, how 
Mind of the World, or the External Mind, and | 
same thing to believe 1N a thing and to be- 

God, 

And I have 

heard of some who are even more clever, and > 
measure Deity ; and these agree with us that 
there are Three Conceptions ; but they have | 
separated these from one another so com- | 
pletely as to make one of them infinite both | 

in essence and power, and the second in 

power but not in essence, and the third cir- | 
cumscribed in both ; thus imitating in another : 
way those who call them the Creator, the 

Co-operator, and the Minister, and consider 

that the same order and dignity which De- | 

oO 
“a 

are we made perfect in Him? For it is not the 

lieve anour it. ‘The one belongs to Deity, 
the other to—any thing. But if He is 
then He is neither a creature, nor a 
thing made, nor a fellow servant, nor any of 
these lowly appellations. 

VII. There—the word is with you. Let the 
slings be let go; let the syllogism be woven. 
Wither He is altogether Unbegotten, or else He 
is Begotten. If He is Unbegotten, there are 
two Unoriginates. Ifhe is Begotten, you must 
make a further subdivision. He is so either 
by the Father or by the Son. “And if by the 
lather, there are two Sons, and they are 
Brothers. And you may make them twins if 
you like, or the one older and the other 
younger, since you are so very fond of the 
bodily conceptions. But if by the Son, then 
such a one will say, we get a glimpse of a 
Grandson God, than which nothing could 
be more absurd. For my part however, if I 
saw the necessity of the distinction, I should 

Ges cxltcss. 

cies sak ine NAZIANZEN. 

320 

have acknowledged the facts without fear of 
the names. For it does not follow that be- 
cause the Son is the Son in some higher rela- 
tion (inasmuch as we could not in any other 
way than this point out that He is of God and 
Consubstantial), it would also be necessary to 
think that all the names of this lower world 
and of our kindred should be transferred to 
the Godhead. Or may be you would con- 
sider our God to be a male, according to the 
same arguments, because he is called God 
and Father, and that Deity is feminine, from 
the gender of the word, and Spirit neuter, be- 
cause It has nothing to do with generation ; 
But if you would be silly enough to say, with 
the old myths and fables, that “God begat the 
Son by a marriage with His own Will, we 
should be introduced? to the Hermaphrodite 
god of Marcion and Valentinus® who imag- 
ined these newfangled A‘ons. 

VIII. But since we do not admit your first 
division, which declares that there is no mean 
between Begotten and Unbegotten, at once, 
along with your magnificent division, away 
go your Brothers and your Grandsons, as 
when the first link of an intricate chain is 
broken they are broken with it, and disap- 
pear from your system of divinity. For, tell 
me, what position will you assign to that 
which Proceeds, which has started up between 
the two terms of your division, and is intro- 
duced by a better Theologian than you, our 
Saviour Himself? Or perhaps you have taken 
that word out of your Gospels for the sake of 
your Third Testament, The Holy Ghost, 
which proceedeth from the Father ;¥ Who, 
inasmuch as He proceedeth from That Source, 
is no Creature ; and inasmuch as He is not Be- 
gotten is no Son; and inasmuch as He is be- 
tween the Unbegotten and the Begotten is God. 
And thus escaping the toils of your syllogisms, 
He has manifested himself as God, stronger 
than your divisions. What then is Procession ? 
Do you tell me what is the Unbegottenness of 
the Father, and I will explain to you the 
physiology of the Generation of the Son and 

a Trenzus, I., 6. 

B It would seem that S. Gregory commonly confused Marcion 
with Marcus, one of the leaders of the Gnostic School of Valentinus. 
In another place he speaks of the /Mons of Marcion and Valen- 
tinus, evidently meaning Marcus; for the system of Marcion is 
characterized by an entire absence of any theory of Emanations 
(Fons). Similarly there is no trace in Marcion of this notion 

of a hermaphrodite Deity, but there is something very like it in 
the account of Marcus given by S. Irenzus. 

y John xv. 26. ‘It did not fall within this Father’s (Greg. Naz.) 
province to develop the doctrine of the Procession. He is content 
to shew that the Spirit was not Generated, seeing that according to 
Christ’s own teaching He Proceeds from the Father. ‘The question 
of His relation to the Son is alien to S. Gregory Nazianzen’s pur- 

ose; nor does it seem to have once been raised in the great battle 

etween Arianism and Catholicity which was fought out at Con- 
stantinople during Gregory’s Episcopate”? (Swete on the Proces- 
sion, p. 107). 

the Procession of the Spirit, and we shall both 
of us be frenzy-stricken for prying into the 
mystery of God.* And who are we to do these 
things, we who cannot even see what lies at 
our feet, or number the sand of the sea, or the 
drops of rain, or the days of Ikternity, much 
less enter into the Depths of God, and supply 
an account of that Nature which is so un- 
speakable and transcending all words ? 

IX. What then, say they, is there lacking to 
the Spirit which prevents His being a Son, for 
if there were not something lacking He would 
be a Son? We assert that there is nothing 
lacking—for God has no deficiency. But the 
difference of manifestation, if I may so express 
myself, or rather of their mutual relations 
one to another, has caused the difference of 
their Names. or indeed it is not some de- 
ficiency in the Son which prevents His being 
Father (for Sonship is not a deficiency), and 
yet He is not Father. According to this line 
of argument there must be some deficiency in 
the Father, in respect of His not being Son. 
For the Father is not Son, and yet this is not 
due to either deficiency or subjection of Es- 
sence ; but the very fact of being Unbegotten 
or B egotten, or Proceeding has given the 
name of Father to the First, of the Son to the 
Second, and of the Third, Him of Whom we 
are speaking, of the Holy Ghost that the dis- 
tinction of the Three Persons may be _ pre- 
served in the one nature and dignity of the 
Godhead. For neither is the Son Father, for 
the Father is One, but He is what the Father 
is; nor is the Spirit Son because He is of 
God, for the Only-begotten is One, but He is 
what the Son is. The Three are One in God- 
head, and the One Three in properties ; so 
that neither is the Unity a Sabellian one,® nor 

a Ecclus i. 2. 

B Sabellius, who taught at Rome during the Pontificate of Cal- 
listus, was by far the most important heresiarch of his period, and 
his opinions by far the most dangerous. While strongly empha- 
sizing the fundamental doctrine of the Divine Unity, he also 
admitted in terms a ‘Trinity, but his Trinity was not that of the 
Catholic dogma, for he represented it as only a threefold manifes- 
tation of the one Divine Essence. The Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost are in his view only temporary phenomena, which fulfil 
their mission, and then return into the abstract Monad. Dr Schaff 
(Hist. of the Church, Ante-Nicene Period, p. 582) gives the follow- 
ing concise account of his teaching : 

- “The unity of God, without distinction in itself, unfolds or 
extends itself in the course of the word’s development, in three 
different forms and periods of revelation, and after the completion 
of redemption returns into Unity. The Father reveals Himself in 
the giving of the Law or the Old Testament Economy (not in the 
creation also, which in his view precedes the Trinitarian revela- 
tion) ; the Son in the Incarnation ; the Holy Ghost in inspiration ; 
the revelation of the Son ends with the Ascension; that of the 
Spirit goes on in generation and sanctification. He illustrates the 
‘Trinitarian revelation by comparing the Father to the disc of the 
sun, the Son to its enlightening power, the Spirit to its warming 
influence, He is also said to have likened the Father to the body, 
the Son to the soul, the Holy Ghost to the spirit of man: but this 
is unworthy of his evident speculative discrimination, His view 
of the Logos too is peculiar. The Logos is not identical with 
the Son, but is the Monad itself in its transition to Triad ; that is, 
God conceived as vital motion and creating principle ; the Speak- 
ing God, as distinguished from the Silent God. Each Person (or 

OD ie 

does the Trinity countenance the present evil 
distinction, 

X. What then? Is the Spirit God? Most 
certainly. Well then, is He Consubstantial ? 
Yes, if He is God. Grant me, says my op- 
ponent, that there spring from the same 
Source One who is a Son, and One who is 
not a Son, and these of One Substance with 
the Source, and I admit a God and a God. 
Nay, if you will grant ime that there is another 
God and another nature of God I will give 

you the same ‘Trinity with the same name and | 

facts. But since God is One and the Supreme 
Nature is One, how can I present to you the 
Likeness ? Or will you seek it again in lower 
regions and in your own surroundings? it is 
very shameful, and not only shameful, but 
very foolish, to take from things below a 
guess at things above, and from a fluctuat- 
ing nature at the things that are unchanging, 
and as Isaiah says, to seek the Living among 
the dead. But yet I will try, for your sake, 
to give you some assistance for your argument, 
even from that source. I think I will pass 
over other points, though I might bring for- 
ward many from animal history, some gener- 
ally known, others only known to a few, of 
what nature has contrived with wonderful 
art in connection with the generation of ani- 
mals. or not only are likes said to beget 
likes, and things diverse to beget things di- 
verse, but also likes to be begotten by things 
diverse, and things diverse by likes. And if 
we may believe the story, there is yet another 
mode of generation, when an animal is self- 
consumed and self-begotten.? There are also 
creatures which depart in some sort from their 
true natures, and undergo change and _trans- 
formation from one creature into another, by 
a magnificence of nature. And indeed some- 
times in the same species part may be gener- 
ated and part not; and yet all of one sub- 
stance ; which is more like our present subject. 
J will just mention one fact of our own nature 
which every one knows, and then I will pass 
on to another part of the subject. 

XI. What was Adam? A creature of God. 
What then was Eve? A fragment of the creat- 
ure. And what was Seth? The begotten of 
both. Does it then seem to you that Creature 
and Fragment and Begotten are the same 
thing? Of course it does not. But were not 
these persons consubstantial? Of course they 

Aspect—the word is ambiguous) is another Uttering; and the 
Three Persons together are only successive ev olutions of the 
Logos, or world-w ard aspect of the Divine Nature. As the Logos 
proceede:! from God, so He at last returns into Him, and the pro- 
cess of Trinitarian develo ypment closes.” 

@ Isa. vill. 19. Bae. the. Phen: “Eidt.;ii. 37. 

a 

or ag a a 321 

were. Well then, here it is an acknowledged 
fact that different persons may have the saie 
substance. I say this, not that I would attri- 
bute creation or fraction or any property of 
body to the Godhead (let none of your con- 
tenders for a word be down upon me again), 

but that I may contemplate in these, as on a 
stage, things which are objects of thought 
alone. or it is not possible to trace out any 
image exactly to the whole extent of the truth. 
But, they say, what is the meaning of all this ? 
lor is not the one an offspring, and the other 
a something else of the One? Did not both 
ive and Seth come from the one Adam ? 
And were they both begotten by him? No; 
but the one was a fragment of him, and the 
other was begotten by him. And yet the two 
were one and the same thing; both were hu- 
man beings ; no one willdeny that. Will you 
then give up your contention against ‘the 
Spirit, “that He must be either altogether be. 
gotten, or else cannot be consubstantial, or be 
God ; and admit from human examples the 
possibility of our position ? I think it will be 
well for you, unless you are determined to be 
very quarrelsome, and to fight against what is 
proved to demonstration. 

XII. But, he says, who in ancient or modern 
times ever worshipped the Spirit ? Who ever 
prayed to Him? Where is it written that we 
ought to worship Him, or to pray to Him, 
and whence have you derived this tenet of 
yours? We will give the more perfect reason 
hereafter, when we discuss the question of the 

‘unwritten ; for the present it will suffice to say 

that it is the Spirit in Whom we worship, and 
in Whom we pray. For Scripture says, God 
is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must 
worship Him in Spirit and in truth.« And 
again,—We know not what we should pray 
for as we ought ; but the Spirit Itself maketh 
intercession for us with groanings which ecan- 
not be uttered ;* and I will pray with the 
Spirit and I will pray with the understanding 
also ; Y—that is, in the mind and in the Spirit. 
Therefore to adore or to pray to the Spirit 
seems to me to be simply Himself offering 
prayer or adoration to Himself. And what 
godly or learned man would disapprove of this, 
because in fact the adoration of One is the 
adoration of the Three, because of the equality 
of honour and Deity between the Three? So 
I will not be frightened by the argument that 
all things are said to have been made by the 
Son ;° as if the Holy Spirit also were one of 
these things. For it says all things that were 

B Rom. viii. 26, 

a John iv. 24. alana 
ol 2 

y 1 Cor. xiv. 15. 

made, and not simply all things. Tor the 
Father was not, nor were any of the things that 
were not made. Prove that He was made, 
and then give Him to the Son, and number Him 
among the creatures ; but until you can prove 
this you will gain nothing for your impiety from 
this comprehensive phrase. lor if He was 
made, it was certainly through Christ ; 1 my- 
self would not deny that. But if He was not 
made, how can He be either one of the All, 
or through Christ? Cease then to dishonour 
the Father in your opposition to the Only-be- 
gotten (for it is no real honour, by presenting 
to Him a creature to rob Him of what is more 
valuable, a Son), and to dishonour the Son in 
your opposition to the Spirit. Tor He is not 
the Maker of a Fellow servant, but He is glori- 
fied with One of co-equal honour. Rank no 
part of the Trinity with thyself, lest thou fall 
away from the ‘Trinity ; cut not off from [ither 
the One and equally august Nature ; because 
if thou overthrow any of the ‘Three thou wilt 
have overthrown the whole. Better to take a 
meagre view of the Unity than to venture on 
a complete impiety. 

XII. Our argument has now come to its 
principal point ; and I am grieved that a prob- 
lem that was long dead, and that had given way 
to faith, is now stirred up afresh ; yet it is neces- 
sary to stand against these praters, and not to 
let judgment go by default, when we have the 
Word on our side, and are pleading the cause 
of the Spirit. If, say they, there is God and 
God and God, how is it that there are not 
Three Gods, or how is it that what is glori- 
fied is not a plurality of Principles? Who is 
it who say this? ‘Those who have reached a 
more complete ungodliness, or even those who 
have taken the secondary part; I mean who 
are moderate in a sense in respect of the Son. 
For my argument is partly against both in 
common, partly against these latter in particu- 
lar. What I have to say in answer to these is 
as follows :—What right have you who wor- 
ship the Son, even though you have revolted 
from the Spirit, to call us ‘Tritheists ? Are not 
you Ditheists? For if you deny also the wor- 
ship of the Only Begotten, you have clearly 
ranged yourself among our adversaries. And 
why should we deal kindly with you as not 
guite dead? But if you do worship Him, 
and are so far in the way of salvation, we will 
ask you what reasons you have to give for your 
ditheism, if you are charged with it? Ifthere 
is in you a word of wisdom answer, and open 
to us also a way to an answer. Tor the very 
same reason with which you will repel a 
charge of Ditheism will prove sufficient for us 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

against one of Tritheism. And thus we shall 
win the day by making use of you our accus- 
ers as our Advocates, than which nothing can 
be more generous. 

NIV. What is our quarrel and dispute with 
both ? ‘To us there is One God, for the Godhead 
is One, and all that proceedeth from Him is 
referred to One, though we believe in ‘Vhree 
Persons. For one is not more and another 
less God; nor is One before and another after ; 
nor are They divided in will or parted in 
power; nor can you find here any of the qual- 
ities of divisible things ; but the Godhead is, 
to speak concisely, undivided in separate Per- 
sons; and there is one mingling of Light, as 
it were of three suns joined to each other. 
When then we look at the Godhead, or the 
First Cause, or the Monarchia, that which we 
conceive is One; but when we look at the 
Persons in Whom the Godhead dwells, and at 
‘Those Who timelessly and with equal glory 
have their Being from the First Cause—there 
are Three Whom we worship. 

XV. What of that, they will say perhaps : do 
not the Greeks also believe in one Godhead, 
as their more advanced philosophers declare ? 
And with us Humanity is one, namely the 
entire race; but yet they have many gods, 
not One, just as there are many men. But in 
this case the common nature has a unity which 
is only conceivable in thought ; and the indi- 
viduals are parted from one another very far 
indeed, both by time and by dispositions and 
by power. For we are not only compound 
beings, but also contrasted beings, both with 
one another and with ourselves; nor do we 
remain entirely the same for a single day, to 
say nothing of a whole lifetime, but both in 
body and in soul are in a perpetual state of 
flow and change. And perhaps the same may 
be said of the Angels* and the whole of that 
superior nature which is second to the Trinity 
alone; although they are simple in’ some 
measure and more fixed in good, owing to 
their nearness to the highest Good. 

XVI. Nor do those whom the Greeks wor- 
ship as gods, and (to use their own expression) 
demons, need us in any respect for their accus- 
ers, but are convicted upon the testimony of 
their own theologians, some as subject to pas- 
sion, some as given to faction, and full of in- 
numerable evils and changes, and in a state of 
opposition, not only to one another, but even 
to their first causes, whom they call Oceani 

a ‘‘ Similarly it is clear concerning the Angels, that they have a 
being incapable of change, so far as pertains to their nature, with 
a capacity of change as to choice, and of intelligence and affections 
and —— in their cwn manner” (S, Thomas Aq., Summa, 1, 
raise 

ON 

and ‘Tethyes and Phancetes, 

| 
and by several | 

other names ; and last of all a certain god who | 

hated his children through his lust of rule, and 
swallowed up all the rest through his greedi- 
ness that he might become the father of all 
men and gods whom he miserably devoured, 
and then vomited forth again. And if these 
are but myths and fables, as they say in order 
to escape the shamefulness of the story, what 
will they say in reference to the dictum that 
all things are divided into three parts, 
and that each god presides over a different 
part of the Universe, having a distinct pro- 
vince as well as a distinct rank ? But our faith 
is not like this, nor is this the portion of 
Jacob, says my Theologian. But each of 
these Persons possesses Unity, not less with 
that which is United to it than with itself, by 
reason of the identity of Essence and Power. 
And this is the account of the Unity, so far 
as we have apprehended it. If then this ac- 
count is the true one, let us thank God for the 
glimpse He has granted us; if it is not let us 
seek for a better. 

XVII. As for the arguments with which you 
would overthrow the Union which we support, 
I know not whether we should say you are jest- 
ing or in earnest. lor what is this argument ? 
‘Things of one essence, you say, are counted 
together,’’? and by this ‘counted together,’’ 

you mean that they are collected into one — 
But things which are not of one | 

number.é 
mpnee are Bot. Gide eoupted «<4 
that you cannot avoid speaking of three gods, 
according to this account, while we do not 
run any risk at all of it, inasmuch as we 
assert that they are not consubstantial. And 
so by a single word you have freed yourselves 
from trouble, and have gained a pernicious 
victory, for in fact you have done something 

like what men do when they hang themselves | 

for fear of death. Tor to save yourselves 
trouble in your championship of the Mon- 
archia you have denied the Godhead, and 
abandoned the question to your opponents. 
But for my part, even if labor should be 
necessary, I will not abandon the Object of 
my adoration. And yet on this point I can- 
not see where the difficulty is. 

XVIII. You say, Things of one essence are 
counted together, but those which are not con- 
substantial are reckoned one by one. Where 
did you get this from? From what teachers of 

a. Homer, Tlie xiv. 189. B Ter. x. 16. 
Petavius prs tises this dictum, De Trin. peley pe oulitG 6g 
cvvapiomecrat, as when you say Three Gods, or Three Me - 
and the like, as you do when you reckon up things of the same 
sort, On the other hand, you must use the plural number in 
reckoning up things w hich differ in kind, 

deri Peiay SD. S23 

dogma or mythology 2 Do you not know that 
every number expresses the quantity of what 
is included under it, and not the nature of 
the things? But I am so oldfashioned, or 
perhaps I should say so unlearned, as to use 
the word ‘Three of that number of things, 
even if they are of a different nature, and to 
use One and One and One ina different way 
of so many units, even if they are united in 
essence, looking not so much at the things 
themselves as at the quantity of the things in 
respect of which the enumeration is made. 
But since you hold so very close to the letter 
(although you are contending against the Iet- 
ter), pray take your demonstrations from this 
source. ‘There are in the Book of Proverbs 
three things which go well, a lion, a goat, 
and a cock; and to these is added a fourth ; 
a King making a speech before the people,+* 
to pass over the other sets of four which are 
there counted up, although things of various 
natures. And I find in Moses two Cherubim 8 
counted singly. But now, in your techno- 
logy, could either the former things be called 
three, when they differ so greatly in their 
nature, or the latter be treated as units when 
they are so closely connected and of one 
nature? Forif I were to speak of God and 
Mammen, as two masters, reckoned under one 
head, when they are so very different from 
each other, I should probably be still more 
laughed at for such a connumeration. 

XIX. But to my mind, he says, those things 
are said to be connumerated and of the same 
essence of which the names also correspond, 
as Three Men, or Three gods, but not Three 
this and that. What does this concession 
amount to? It is suitable to one laying down 
the law as to names, not to one who is as- 
serting the truth. Vor I also will assert that 
Peter and James and John are not three or 
consubstantial, so long as | cannot say Three 
Peters, or ‘Phree Jameses, or Three Johns ; for 
what you have reserved for common names 
we demand also for proper names, in accord- 
ance with your arrangement; or else you will 
be unfair in not conceding to others what you 
assume for yourself. What about John then, 
when in his Catholic Epistle he says that 
there are Three that bear vernneees the Spirit 

CG PiOVOSR. OG. Jo, 40 BI xod) SNxvity 7. 

y This is the famous passage of the Wighesssk | int John vy. 3, 
In some few later codices of the Vulgate are found the words which 
form verse 7 ofour A.V. But ne ither verse 7 nor these words are 
to be found in a: ny Greck MS, earlier than the Fifteenth C entury } 
nor are they quoted by any Greck Father. and by very few and 
late Latin ones. ‘T hey have been thought to be cited by S. Cyp- 
rian in his work on the Unity of the Church ; and this citation, ifa 
fact, would be a most important one, as it would throw back their 
reception to an early date, But ‘Pischendorf (Gk. ‘Test., Ed. vitt, 
ad. loc.) gives reasons for believing that the quotation is only ap+ 
parent, and is really of the last clause of verse 8 

324 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

and the Water and the Blood? Do you think 
he is talking nonsense? First, because he has 
ventured to reckon under one numeral things 
which are not consubstantial, though you say 
this ought to be done only in the case of 
things which are consubstantial. Tor who 
would assert that these are consubstantial ? 
Secondly, because he has not been consistent 
in the way he has happened upon his terms ; 
for after using Three in the masculine gender 
he adds three words which are neuter, con- 
trary to the definitions and laws which you 
and your grammarians have laid down. [Tor 
what is the difference between putting a mas- 
culine Three first, and then adding One and 
One and One in the neuter, or after a mascu- 
line One and One and One to use the Three 
not in the masculine but in the neuter, which 
you yourself disclaim in the case of Deity? 
What have you to say about the Crab, which 
may mean either an animal, or an instrument, 
or a constellation? And what about the 
Dog, now terrestrial, now aquatic, now celes- 
tial? Do you not see that three crabs or dogs 
are spoken of ?. Why of course it is so. Well 
then, are they therefore of one substance? 
None but a fool would say that. So you see 
how completely your argument from con- 
numeration has broken down, and is refuted 
by all these instances. For if things that are 
of one substance are not always counted under 
one numeral, and things not of one substance 
are thus counted, and the pronunciation of 
the name® once for all is used in both cases, 
what advantage do you gain towards your 
doctrine ? 

XX. I will look also at this further point, 
which is not without its bearing on the subject. 
One and One added together make Two; 
and Two resolved again becomes One and 
One, as is perfectly evident. If, however, 
elements which are added together must, as 
your theory requires, be consubstantial, and 
those which are separate be heterogeneous, 
then it will follow that the same things must 
be both consubstantial and heterogeneous. 
No: I laugh at your Counting Before and 
your Counting After, of which you are so 
proud, as if the facts themselves depended 
upon the order of their names. If this were 
so, according to the same law, since the same 
things are in consequence of the equality of 
their nature counted in Holy Scripture, some- 
times in an earlier, sometimes in a later place, 
what prevents them from being at once more 

_.@ isc. Though the things referred to may differ essentially, yet 
if the name by which they are known is the same, one utterance of 
it with one numeral is enough to express a collection of them all, 

honourable and less honourable than them- 
selves? Isay the same of the names God and 
Lord, and of the prepositions Of Whom, and 
By Whom, and In Whom, by which you 
describe the Deity according to the rules of 
art for us, attributing the first to the Father, 
the second to the Son, and the third to the 
Holy Ghost. For what would you have 
done, if each of these expressions were con- 
stantly allotted to Each Person, when, the fact 
being that they are used of all the Persons, 
as is evident to those who have studied the 
question, you even so make them the ground 
of such inequality both of nature and dignity. 
This is sufficient for all who are not altogether 
wanting in sense. But since it is a matter of 
difficulty for you after you have once made an 
assault upon the Spirit, to check your rush, 
and not rather like a furious boar to push 
your quarrel to the bitter end, and to thrust 
yourself upon the knife until you have received 
the whole wound in your own breast ; let us 
go on to see what further argument remains 
to you. 

XXI. Over and over again you turn upon 
us the silence of Scripture. But that it is not 
a strange doctrine, nor an afterthought, but 
acknowledged and plainly set forth both by 
the ancients and many of our own day, is 
already demonstrated by many persons who 
have treated of this subject, and who have 
handled the Holy Scriptures, not with in- 
difference or as a mere pastime, but have 
gone beneath the letter and looked into the 
inner meaning, and have been deemed worthy 
to see the hidden beauty, and have been 
irradiated by the light of knowledge. We, 
however in our turn will briefly prove it as 
far as may be, in order not to seem to be over- 
curious or improperly ambitious, building on 
another’s foundation. But since the fact, that 
Scripture does not very clearly or very often 
write Him God in express words (as it does 
first the Father and afterwards the Son), be- 
comes to you an occasion of blasphemy and 
of this excessive wordiness and impiety, we 
will release you from this inconvenience by a 
short discussion of things and names, and 
especially of their use in Holy Scripture. 

XXII. Some things have no existence, but 
are spoken of; others which do exist are not 
spoken of; some neither exist nor are spoken 
of, and some both exist and are spoken of. 
Do you ask me for proof of this? I am ready 
to give it. According to Scripture God sleeps 
and is awake, is angry, walks, has the Cheru- 
bim for His Throne. And yet when did He 
become liable to passion, and have you ever 

ON. THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

heard that God has a body? This then is, 
though not really fact, a figure of speech. 
lor we have given names according to our 
own comprehension from our own attributes 
to those of God. His remaining silent apart 
from us, and as it were not caring for us, for 
reasons known to Himself, is what we call His 
sleeping ; for our own sleep is such a state of 
inactivity. And again, His sudden turning 
to do us good is the waking up; for waking 
is the dissolution of sleep, as visitation is of 
turning away. And when He punishes, we 
say He is angry ; for so it is with us, punish- 
ment is the result of anger. And His work- 
ing, now here now there, we call walking ; for 
walking is change from one place to another. 
His resting among the Holy Hosts, and as it 
were loving to dwell among them, is His sit- 
ting and being enthroned ; this, too, from 
ourselves, for God resteth nowhere as He doth 
upon the Saints. His swiftness of moving is 
called flying, and His watchful care is called 
His lace, and his giving and bestowing¢ is 
His hand; and, in a word, every other of the 
powers or activities of God has depicted for 
us some other corporeal one. 

XXIII. Again, where do you get your Un- 
begotten and Unoriginate, those two citadels of 
your position, or we our Immortal? Show me 
these in so many words, or we shall either set 
them aside, or erase them as not contained in 
Scripture; and you are slain by your own 
principle, the names you rely on being over- 
thrown, and therewith the wall of refuge in 
which you trusted. Is it not evident that 
they are due to passages which imply them, 
though the words do not actually occur? 
What are these passages?—I am the first, 
and I am the last,® and before Me there 
was no God, neither shall there be after 
Me.y For all that depends on that Am makes 
for my side, for it has neither beginning nor 
ending. When you accept this, that nothing 
is before Him, and that He has not an older 
Cause, you have implicitly given Him the 
titles Unbegotten and Unoriginate. And _ to 
say that He has no end of Being is to call Him 
Immortal and Indestructible. ‘The first pairs, 
then, that I referred to are accounted for thus. 
But what are the things which neither exist in 
fact nor are said? ‘That God is evil; that a 
sphere is square ; that the past is present ; that 
man is not a compound being. Have you 
ever known a man of such stupidity as to 
venture either to think or to assert any such 
thing? It remains to shew what are the 

var. lect., receiving. 6 Isa. xli. 4. y Ib, xliti, 10, 

325 

| things which exist, both in fact and in lan- 

guage. God, Man, Angel, Judgment, Vanity 
(viz., such arguments as yours), and the sub- 
version of faith and emptying of the mystery. 
XXIV. Since, then, there is so much differ- 
ence in terms and things, why are you such a 
slave to the letter, and a partisan of the Jewish 
wisdom, and a follower of syllables at the ex- 
pense of facts? But if, when you said twice 
five or twice seven, I concluded from your 
words that you meant ‘Ten or Fourteen ; or if, 
when you spoke ofa rational and mortal animal, 
that you meant Man, should you think me to 
be talking nonsense? Surely not, because I 
should be merely repeating your own mean- 
ing; for words do not belong more to the 
speaker of them than to him who called them 
forth. As, then, in this case, I should have 
been looking, not so much at the terms used, 
as at the thoughts they were meant to convey ; 
so neither, if I found something else either not 
at all or not clearly expressed in the Words of 
Scripture to be included in the meaning, 
should I avoid giving it utterance, out of fear 
of your sophistical trick about terms. In this 
way, then, we shall hold our own against the 
semi-orthodox—among whom I may not count 
you. For since you deny the Titles of the 
Son, which are so many and so clear, it is 
quite evident that even if you learnt a great 
many more and clearer ones you would not 
be moved to reverence. But now I will take 
up the argument again a little way further 
back, and shew you, though you are so clever, 
the reason for this entire system of secresy. 
XXV. There have been in the whole period 
of the duration of the world two conspicuous 
changes of men’s lives, which are also called 
two ‘Testaments, * or, on account of the wide 
fame of the matter, two Earthquakes ; the one 
from idols to the Law, the other from the Law 
to the Gospel. And we are taught in the Gospel 
ofa third earthquake, namely, from this Earth 
to that which cannot be shaken or moved.® Now 
the two Testaments are alike in this respect, 
that the change was not made on a sudden, 
nor at the first movement of the endeavour. 
Why not (for this is a point on which we 
must have information)? That no violence 
might be done to us, but that we might be 
moved by persuasion. For nothing that is 
involuntary is durable; like streams or trees 
which are kept back by force. But. that 
which is voluntary is more durable and safe. 

a Heb. xii. 26. 

B Referring to the earthquake at the giving of the Law on Mt. 
Sinai (Heb. xiii,), and to the prophesy of Haggai (ii. 6), with 
reference to the Incarnation. ‘The third great earthquake is that 
of the end of the world (Heb. xii, 26), 

ag 

The former is due to one who uses force, the 
latter is ours; the one is due to the gentleness 
of God, the other to a tyrannical authority. 

Wherefore God did not think it behoved Him ~ 

to benefit the unwilling, but to do good to the 
willing. And therefore like a Tutor or Phy- 
sician He partly removes and partly condones 
ancestral habits, conceding some little of what 

tended to pleasure, just as medical men do — 

with their patients, that their medicine may 
be taken, being artfully blended with what is 
nice. Tor itis no very easy matter to change 
from those habits which custom and use have 
made honourable. Jor instance, the first cut 
off the idol, but left the sacrifices ; the second, 
while it destroyed the sacrifices did not forbid 
circumcision. Then, when once men had 
submitted to the curtailment, they also yielded 
that which had been conceded . them ; in 
the first instance the sacrifices, in the second 
circumcision ; and became instead of Gentiles, 
Jews, and instead of Jews, Christians, being 
beguiled into the Gospel by gradual changes. 
Paul is a proof of this ; for having at one time 
administered circumcision, and submitted to 
legal purification, he advanced till he could 
say, and I, brethren, if I yet preach cir- 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN., 

additions, and, as David says, Goings up, and 
advances and progress from glory to ee the 
Light of the ‘Trinity might shine upon ihe 
more illuminated. Lor this reason it was, I 
think, that He graduve//y came to dwell in the 
Disciples, measuring Himself out to them 
according to their capacity to receive Him, at 
the beginning of the Gospel, after the Pas- 
sion, after the Ascension, making perfect their 
powers, being breathed upon them, and ap- 
pearing in fiery tongues. And indeed it is 
by little and little that He is declared by 
Jesus, as you will learn for yourself if you will 
read more carefully. I will ask the Father, He 
says, and He will send you another Com- 
forter, even the spirit of ‘Truth.? This He 
said that Hie might not seem to bea rival 

God, or to make His discourses to them by 
another authority. Again, He shall send 

Him, but it is in My Name. He leaves out 
the I will ask, but He keeps the Shall send,y 
then again, LI will send,—HTlis own dignity. 
Then shall come,® the authority of the Spirit. 

XXVIII. You see lights breaking upon us, 
gradually ; and the order of ‘Theology, which 

itis better for us to keep, neither proclaiming 

cumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution ?¥ | 

His former conduct belonged to the temporary 
dispensation, his latter to maturity. 

XXXVI, 
Theology ® except that it proceeds the reverse 
way. For in the case by which I have illus- 
trated it the change is made by successive sub- 
tractions ; whereas here perfection is reached 
by additions. For the matter stands thus. ‘The 
Old ‘Testament proclaimed the Father openly, 
and the Son more obscurely. The New mani- 
fested the Son, and suggested the Deity of the 
Spirit. Now the Spirit Himself dwells among 
us, and supplies us with a clearer demonstra- 
tion of Himself. For it was not safe, when 
the Godhead of the Father was not yet ac- 
knowledged, plainly to proclaim the Son ; nor 
when that of the Son was not yet received to 
burden us further (if I may use so bold an 
expression) with the Holy Ghost; lest per- 
haps people might, like men loaded with food 

beyond their strength, and presenting eyes as — 
did either He promise, or the Spirit teach. 

yet too weak to bear it to the sun’s light, risk 
the loss even of that which was within the 
reach of their powers; but that by gradual 

a Acts x¥i. 3. B Ib, xxi. 26, y Galat. vii. 7-17. 
6 Theology is here used in a restricted sense, as o 
‘sll the doctrine of the Deity of the Son or Lo gos 
uently used in this limited sense; ex: imples. of which may 
reat wy be found in Gregory of Nyssa, Basil, Chrysostom, and 
othe A similar use occurs in Orat, XXAV ILI., c. 8, in which 
piosag age P@codoyla is contrasted with otkovouda, the doctrine of our 
ord’s Divinity with that of the Incarnation, 

enon ie simn- 

It is very 

| 

To this I may compare the case of | 

thought. 
| He 
_ His disciples « (though they were filled with 

things too suddenly, nor yet keeping them hid- 

den to the end. Tor the former course would be 
unscientific, the latter atheistical ; and the for- 
mer would be calculated to startle outsiders, the 
latter to alienate our own people. I will add 
another point to what I have said ; one which 
may readily have come into the mind of some 
others, but which | think a fruit of my own 
Our Saviour had some things which, 
said, could net be borne at that time by 

many teachings), perhaps for the reasons | 

have mentioned; and therefore they were 
hidden. And again He said that all things 

should be taught us by the Spirit when He 

should come to dwell amongst us.$ Of these 
things one, I take it, was the Deity of the 
Spirit Himself, made clear later on when such 
knowledge should be seasonable and capable 

of being received after our Saviour’s restora- 

tion, when it would no longer be received 

with incredulity because of its marvellous 

For what greater thing than this 
If 
indeed anything is to be considered great and 
worthy of the Majesty of God, which was 
either promised or taught. 

XXVUI. This, then, is my position with re- 
gard to these things, and I hope it may be al- 
ways my position, and that of whosoever is fis 

character. 

B John xiv. 16, 17. 

a Ps. Ixaxiv. 7, and 2 Cor. in. 18. 
€ lbs xyirte, ~ ¢-Ib, 

y John xvi. 7. 6 Lb, xvi, 8 xiv, 20 

ON THE 

to me; to worship God the Father, God the | 

Son, and God the Holy Ghost, ‘Three Persons, 
One Godhead, undivided in honour and glory 
and substance and kingdom, as one of our 
own inspired philosophers* not long departed 
shewed. Let him not sce the rising of the 
Morning Star, as Scripture saith,® nor the glory 
of its brightness, who is otherwise minded, or 
who follows the temper of the times, at one 
time being of one mind and of another at an- 
other time, and thinking unsoundly in the 
highest matters. For if He is not to be wor- 
shipped, how can He deify me by Baptism ? 
but if He is to be worshipped, surely He is an 

Object of adoration, and if an Object of adora- | 

tion He must be God; the one is linked to the 
other, a truly golden and saving chain. And 
indeed from the Spirit comes our New Birth, 
and from the New Birth our new creation, and 
from the new creation our deeper knowledge 
of the dignity of Him from Whom it is de- 
rived. 

XXIX. This, then, is what may be said by 
one who admits the silence of Scripture. But 
now the swarm of testimonies shall burst upon 
you from which the Deity of the Holy Ghost 
shall be shewn to all who are not excessively 
stupid, or else altogether enemies to the Spirit, 
to be most clearly recognized in Scripture. 
Look at these facts :—Christ is born ; the Spirit 
is His Forerunner. He is baptized; the Spir- 
it bears witness. He is tempted ; 
it leads Him up.@ He works miracles; the 
Spirit accompanies them. He ascends; the 
Spirit takes His place. What great things 
are there in the idea of God which are not in 
His power?* What titles which belong to 
God are not applied to Him, except only 
Unbegotten and Begotten? For it was need- 
ful that the distinctive properties of the Father 
and the Son should remain peculiar to Them, 
lest there should be confusion in the Godhead 
Which brings all things, even disorder $ itself, 
into due arrangement and good order. Indeed 
I tremble when I think of the abundance of 
the titles, and how many Names they outrage 
who fall foul of the Spirit. He is called the 
Spirit of God, the Spirit of Christ, the Mind 
of Christ, the Spirit of The Lord, and Himself 

a Perhaps S. Gregory Thaumaturgus is meant. He was born 
about A.D. 210, The date of his death is uncertain, but was 
probably not before 270, He was Bishop of Neoczsarea in Pontus. 
Amongst his works was an Exposition of the Faith, which he is 
said to have received by direct revelation, and in it the words in 
the text were contained. S. Gregory in another Oration refers to 
the closing sentences as the substance of the Formula itself: 
Phere ts “nothing created or servile in the Trinity, nor anything 
superinduced, as “though previously non-existing and introduced 
afterwards. Never, therefore, was the Son wanting to the Father, 
nor the Spirit to the Son; but there is ever the same ‘Trinity, un- 
changeable and unalterable (Reynolds, in Dict. Biog.). 

B Job it, 9. y Luke i. 33; ellieg 2 2b er lVaL Ts 6 Luke iy. 1, 18, 

€ Acts il. 4. Sv. 1. Yea, even disorder, 

the Spir- | 

PRO ob PR, 327 

The Lord, the Spirit of Eaetortidh, of Prat, of 
Liberty; the Spirit of Wisdom, of Under- 
standing, of Counsel, of Might, of Knowledge, 
of Godliness, of the lear of God. lor He is the 
Maker of all these, filling all with His Essence, 
containing all things, filling the world in His 
Essence, yet incapable of being comprehended 
in His power by the world; good, upright, 
princely, by nature not by adoption ; sanctify- 
ing, not sanctified ; measuring, not measured ; 
shared, not sharing; filling, not filled ; con- 
taining, not contained ; inherited, glorified, 
reckoned with the Father and the Son; held 
out as a threat ;* the Finger of God; fire like 
God; to manifest, as I take it, His consub- 
stantiality) ; the Creator-Spirit, Who by Bap- 
tism and by Resurrection creates anew; the 
Spirit ‘That knoweth all things, That teacheth, 
That bloweth where and to what extent He 
listeth ; That guideth, talketh, sendeth forth, 
separateth, is angry or tempted ; ‘That reveal- 
eth, illumineth, quickeneth, or rather is the 
very Light and Life ; That maketh ‘Temples ; 
That deifieth ; That perfecteth so as even to 
anticipate Baptism,® yet after Baptism to be 
sought as a separate gift;¥ That doeth all 
things that God doeth; divided into fiery 
tongues; dividing gifts; making Apostles, 
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers ; 
understanding manifold, clear, piercing, un- 
defiled, unhindered, which is the same thing 
as Most wise and varied in His actions ; and 
making all things clear and plain ; and of in- 
dependent power, unchangeable, Almighty, 
all-seeing, penetrating all spirits that are intel- 
ligent, pure, most subtle (the Angel Hosts I 
think); and also all prophetic spirits and 
apostolic in the same manner and not in the 
same places ; for they lived in different places ; 
thus showing that He is uncircumscript. 
XXX. They who say and teach these things, 
and moreover call Him another Paraclete in, 
the sense of another God, who know that blas- 
phemy against Him alone cannot be forgiven,é 
and who branded with such fearful infamy An- 
anias and Sapphira for having lied to the Holy 
Ghost, what do you think of these men?£ Do 
they proclaim the Spirit God, or something 
else? Now really, you must be extraordinarily 
dull and far from the Spirit if you have any 
doubt about this and need some one to teach 
you. So important then, and so vivid are 
His Names. Why isit necessary to lay before 
you the testimony contained in the very 

a Viz, :—where we are told that Blasphemy against Hun hath 
never forgiveness. 

B As in the case of the Centurion Cornelius, Acts x. 9. 

y 1. e, in Confirmation, 6 Matt. xii. 31. « Acts v. 3, ete 

328 

words ? 

| 

And whatever in this case also® is | 

suid in more lowly fashion, as that He is | 

Given, Sent, Divided; that He is the Gift, 
the Bounty, the Inspiration, the Promise, the 
Intercession for us, and, not to go into any 
further detail, any other expressions of the 
sort, is to be referred to the First Cause, that it 
nay be shewn from Whom He is, and that 

men may not in heathen fashion admit Three | 

Principles. For it is equally impious to con- 
fuse the Persons with the Sabellians, or to 
divide the Natures with the Arians. 

AXXI. Lhave very carefully considered this 
matter in my own mind, and have looked at it 
in every point of view, in order to find some 
illustration of this most important subject, 
but [I have been unable to discover any thing 
on earth with which to compare the nature of 
the Godhead. For even if I did happen upon 
some tiny likeness it escaped me for the most 
part, and left me down below with my exam- 
ple. 1 picture to myself an eye,® a fountain, 
a river, as others have done before, to see if 
the first might be analogous to the Father, the 
second to the Son, and the third to the Holy 
Ghost. For in these there is no distinction 
in time, nor are they torn away from their 
connexion with each other, though they seem 
to be parted by three personalities. But I 
was afraid in the first place that I should pre- 
sent a flow in the Godhead, incapable of 
standing still; and secondly that by this fig- 
ure a numerical unity would be introduced. 
For the eye and the spring and the river are 
numerically one, though in different forms. 

XXXII. Again I thought of the sun and a ray 
and light. But here again there was a fear lest 
people should get an idea of composition in 
the Uncompounded Nature, such as there is 
in the Sun and the things that are in the Sun. 
And in the second place lest we should give 
Iessence to the Father but deny Personality to 
the Others, and make Them only Powers of 
God, existing in Him and not Personal. For 
neither the ray nor the light is another sun, 
but they are only effulgences from the Sun, 
and qualities of His essence. And lest we 
should thus, as far as the illustration goes, at- 
tribute both Being and Not-being to God, 
which is even more monstrous. I have also 
heard that some one has suggested an illustra- 
tion of the following kind. A ray of the Sun 
flashing upon a wall and trembling with the 

movement of the moisture which the beam has | 

taken up in mid air, and then, being checked 

a As before in the case of the Son. See above, Theol., iii. 13, 

B Ehas Cretensis says that the Fyc in this passage is not to be 
understood of the member of the body so called, but as the Exe tor 
the centre of a spring, the point from which the water flows, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

by the hard body, has set up a strange quiver- 
ing. Vor it quivers with many rapid move- 
ments, and is not one rather than it is many, 
nor yet many rather than one; because by 
the swiftness of its union and separating it es- 
capes before the eye can see it. 

XXXII. But it is not possible for we to 
make use of even this ; because it is very evident 
what gives the ray its motion ; but there is noth- 
ing prior to God which could set Him in mo- 
tion ; for He is Himself the Cause of all things, 
and He has no prior Cause. And secondly be- 
cause in this case also there is a suggestion of 
such things as composition, diffusion, and an 
unsettled and unstable nature. . none 
of which we can suppose in the Godhead. In 
a word, there is nothing which presents a 
standing point to my mind in these illustra- 
tions from which to consider the Object 
which I am trying to represent to myself, un- 
less one may indulgently accept one point of 
the image while rejecting the rest. Finally, 
then, it seems best to me to let the imaves 
and the shadows go, as being deceitful and 
very far short of the truth; and clinging my- 
self to the more reverent conception, and rest- 
ing upon few words, using the guidance of 
the Holy Ghost, keeping to the end as my 
genuine comrade and companion the enlight- 
enment which I have received from Him, and 
passing through this world to persuade all 
others also to the best of my power to worship 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the One God- 
head and Power. To Him belongs all glory 
and honour and might for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

ORATION XXXII. 

AGAINST THE ARIANS, AND CONCERNING 

HinMsEeLE. 

Delivered at Constantinople about the middle of the 
year 380. 

I. WHERE are they who reproach us with 
our poverty, and boast themselves of their own 
riches ; who define the Church by numiiers,# 
and scorn the little flock ; and who measure 
Godhead,® and weigh the people in the bal- 
ance, who honour the sand, and despise the 
luminaries of heaven; who treasure pebbles 
and overlook pearls ; for they know not that 

_ sand is not in a greater degree more abundant 

than stars, and pebbles than lustrous stones— 

a Shewing the absurdity of defining the Church by counting 
heads. 

B This refers to the distinction drawn by the Arians in degree as 
to the Godhead, asserting the Spirit to be great, the Son greater, 
and the Father greatest (cf, Or, xlii,, 16). 

AGAINST THE ARTANS. 

329 

that the former are purer and more precious 
than the latter? Are you again indignant ? 
Do you again arm yourselves? Do you again 
insult us? * Is this a new faith? Restrain 
your threats a little while that I may speak. 
We will not insult you, but we will convict 
you; we will not threaten, but we will re- 
proach you; we will not strike, but we will 
heal. ‘This too appears an insult! What 
pride! Do you here also regard your equal 
as your slave? If not, permit me to speak 
openly ; for even a brother chides his brother 
if he has been defrauded by him. 

II. Would you like me to utter to you the 
words of God to Israel, stiff-necked and hard- 
ened ? ‘*O my people what have I done unto 
thee, or wherein have I injured thee, or where- 
in have I wearied thee ?’’ & ‘This language in- 
deed is fitter from me to you who insult me. 
It isa sad thing that we watch for opportun- 
ities against each other, and having destroyed 
our fellowship of spirit by diversities of opin- 
ion have become almost more inhuman and 
savage to one another than even the barbarians 
who are now engaged in war against us, band- 
ed together against us by the Trinity whom 
we have separated ; with this difference that 
we are not foreigners making forays and raids 
upon foreigners, nor nations of different lan- 
guage, which is some little consolation in the 
calamity, but are making war upon one an- 
other, and almost upon those of the same 
household ; or if you will, we the members 
of the same body are consuming and _ being 
consumed by one another. Nor is this, bad 
though it be, the extent of our calamity, for we 
even regard our diminution as a gain. But 
since we are in such a condition, and regulate 
our faith by the times, let us compare the 
times with one another ; you your Emperor, ¥ 
and I my Sovereigns ;* you Ahab and I Josias. 
‘Vell me of your moderation, and I will pro- 
claim my violence. But indeed yours is pro- 
claimed by many books and tongues, which I 
think future ages will accept as an immortal 
pillory for your actions and I will declare my 
own. 

III. What tumultuous mob have I led against 
you? What soldiers have I armed? What 
veneral boiling with rage, and more savage 
than his employers, and not even a Christian, 
but one who offers his impiety against us as 
his private worship to his own gods : re Whom 

a The beginning of the Oration was as disturbed by 
hostile demonstrations on the part of Arian hearers. 

B Mic, vi. 3. y Valens. § Theodosius and Gratian, 

e Dr, Ullmann makes this passage refer to outrages perpetrated 
in Constantinople itself on Gregory, by his Arian opponents, On 
one occasion, he says, in the night time the meetingplace of the 
Orthodox was assailed; a mob of Arians, and in particular 

have I besieged while engaged in prayer and 
lifting up their hands to God ? When have I 
put a stop to psalmody with trumpets? or 
mingled the Sacramental Blood with blood of 
massacre? What spiritual sighs have I put an 
end to by cries of death, or tears of penitence 
by tears of tragedy? What House of prayer 
have I made a burialplace? What liturgical 
vessels which the multitude may not touch 
have I given over to the hands of the wicked, 
of a Nebuzaradan,* chief of the cooks, or of 
a Belshazzar, who wickedly used the sacred 
vessels for his revels, and then paid a ries 
penalty for his madness ? ‘‘ Altars beloved ’”’ 
Holy Scripture saith, but ‘* now defiled.’’Y ee 
what licentious youth has insulted you for our 
sake with shameful writhings and contortions? 
O precious Throne, seat and rest of precious 
men, which hast been occupied by a succes- 
sion of pious Priests, who from ancient times 
have taught the divine Mysteries, what hea- 
then popular speaker and evil tongue hath 
mounted thee to inveigh against the Christian’s 
faith? O modesty and majesty of Virgins, 
that cannot endure the looks of even virtuous 
men, which of us hath shamed thee, and out- 
raged thee by the exposure of what may not 
be seen, and showed to the eyes of the impious 
a pitiable sight, worthy of the fires of Sodom ? 
I say nothing of deaths, which were more 
endurable than this shame. 

IV. What wild beasts have we let loose upon 
the bodies of Saints,—like some who have 
prostituted human nature,—on one single ac- 
cusation, that of not consenting to their im- 
piety ; or defiled ourselves by communion 
with them, which we avoid like the poison 
of a snake, not because it injures the body, 
but because it blackens the depths of the soul ? 
Against whom have we made it a matter of 
criminal accusation that they buried the dead, 
whom the very beasts reverenced? And 
what a charge, worthy of another theatre and 
of other beasts! What Bishop’s aged flesh 
have we carded with hooks in the presence of 
their disciples, impotent to help them save by 
tears, hung up with Christ, conquering by 
iain and sprinkling the people with their 

women of the lowest stamp, set on by monks, armed themselves 
with sticks and stones, and forced an entrance into the peaceful 
place of holy worship. The champion of orthodoxy well nigh be- 
came a martyr to his convictions ; the Altar was profaned, the con- 
secrated wine was mixed with blood ; the house of prayer was made 
scene of outrage and unbridled licentiousness. ‘The Benedictine 

Iditors, however, whom Benoit follows, think the reference is to 
the disturbances in Alexandria when the Arian Lucius was forcibly 
intruded into the Chair of Athanasius by the Prefect Palladius. A 
full account of the atrocities by w hich his installation was marked 
is to be found in a letter of Peter, the i ea or orthodox Patri- . 
arch, preserved in Theodoret (H. E. IV. 22). This L ucius was 
living i in Constantinople and abetting the Arian party there at the 
time when Gregory pronounced this Oration. 

aa Kings xxv. 11. B Dan. v.-3. y Hos, vili. rx (LXX.). 

GREGORY NAZIAN 

ZEN. 

339 

precious blood. and at last carried away to | the action. 
death, to be both crucified and buried and | memory. 

glorified with Christ; with Christ Who con- 
quered the world by ‘such victims and sacri- 
fices ? What priests gh those contrary 
elements fire and water divided, raising a 
strange beacon over aes sea, and set on fire to- 
gether with the ship in which they put to 
sea? * Who (to cover the more numerous 
part of our woes with a veil of silence) have 
been accused of inhumanity by the very mag- 
istrates who conferred such favour on them ? 
Por even if they did obey the lusts of those 
men, yet at any rate they hated the cruelty of 
their purpose. ‘The one was opportunism, the 
other calculation; the one came of the law- 
lessness of the Emperor, the other of a con- 
sciousness of the laws by which they had to 
judge. 

V. And to speak of older things, for they too 
belong to the same fraternity ; whose hands liy- 
ing or dead have I cut off—to bring a lying 
accusation against Saints,8 and to triumph over 
the faith by bluster? Whose exiles have I 

é 
numbered as benefits, and failed to reverence | 

even the sacred colleges of sacred philosophers, 
whence I sought their suppliants? Nay the 
very contrary is the case; I have reckoned 
as Martyrs those who incurred anger for the 
truth. Upon whom have I, whom you accuse 
of licentiousness of language, brought harlots 
when they were almost fleshless and bloodless ? 
Which of the faithful have I exiled from their 
country and given over to the hands of lawless 
men, that they might be kept like wild beasts 
in rooms without light, and (for this is the sad- 
dest part of the tragedy) left separated from 
each other to endure the hardships of hunger 
and thirst, with food measured out to them, 
which they had to receive through narrow 
openings, so that they might not be permitted 
even to see their companions in misery. And 
what were they who suffered thus? Men of 
whom the world was not worthy.” Is it thus 
that you honour faith? Is this your kind 
treatment of it? Ye know not the greater part 
of these things, and that reasonably, because 
of the meee of ne facts an ~ ¢ pleasure of 

a Socrates (H. E. IV. 16) gives an account of the murder of 
eighty Priests by order of Valens. The Prefect of Nicomedia, 
being afraid to execute the Emperor’s commands by a public ac- 
tion, put these men on board a ship, as if to send them into exile, 
but gave orders to the crew to set the vessel on fire on the high 
seas, and leave the prisoners to their fate. 

Billius, however, thinks that the reference is to the martyrdom of 
a single Priest, whose death in this way is described by S. Gre- 
gory in his panegyric on Maximus (Or. xxv. 10, p. 461, 462). 

BS. Athanasius was accused by the Arians of having murdered 
a Meletian Bishop named Arsenius, and cut off his hand to use for 
magical purposes ; and ata Synod held at Tyre in 334 they pro- 
duced the alleged handinabox. Athanasius, however, was able to 

produce Arsentus alive and unmutilated ; but even so os accusers 
ak re not satisfied. y Heb, xi. 38 

-———set 

sut he who suffers has a better 
There have been even some more 
cruel than the times themselves, like wild boars 
hurled against afence. [demand your victim 
of yesterday? the old man, the Abraham-like 
Father, whom on his return from exile you 
grected with stones in the middle of the day 
and in the middle of the city. But we, 
if it is not invidious to say so, begged off 

. 

even our murderers from their danger. God 
says somewhere in Scripture, How shall I 

pardon thee for this? & Which of these things 
shall [ praise ; or rather for which shall I bind 

a wreath upon you ? 

VI. Now since your antecedents are such, I 
should be glad if you too will tell me of my 
crimes, that I may either amend my life or be 
put toshame. My greatest wish is that I may 
be found free from wrong altogether ; but if 
this may not be, at least to be converted from 
my crime; for this is the second best portion 
of the prudent. For if like the just man I do 
not become my own accuser in the first in- 
stance,Y yet at any rate I gladly receive healing 
from another. ‘‘ Your City, you say to me, is 
a little one, or rather is no city at all, but only 
a village, arid, without beauty, and with few 
inhabitants.’? But, my good friend, this is 
my misfortune, rather than my fault ;—if in- 
deed it be a misfortune ; and ifit is against my 
will, Iam to be pitied for my bad luck, if I 
may put itso; but if it be willingly, I am a 
philosopher. Which of these is a crime? 
Would anyone abuse a dolphin for not being a 
land animal, or an ox because it is not aquatic, 

or a lamprey because it is amphibious? But 
we, you go on, have walls and theatres and 

racecourses and palaces, and beautiful great 
Porticoes, and that marvellous work the un- 
derground and overhead river,* and the 
splendid and admired column,® and_ the 
crowded marketplace and a restless people, and 
a famous senate of highborn men. 

VII. Why do you not also mention the con- 
venience of the site, and what I may call the 
contest between land and sea as to which owns 
the City, and which adorns our Royal City 
with all their good things? ‘This then is our 
crime, that while you are great and splendid, 
we are small and come from a small place ? 
Many others do you this wrong, indeed all 
those whom you excel ; and must we die be- 

a The reference is perhaps to Eusebius of Samosata, who was 
killed by a tile thrown at him by an Arian woman. In dying he 
bound his friends by an oath not to allow the murderess to be pun- 
ished. JO Vien Fe y Prov. xviii. 17. 

6 Valens had constructed an Aqueduct, partly subterranean, 
partly raised on arches, for the supply of water to the Capital. 
e A magnificent column on which stood an equestrian statue of 

| Cue the: Great. 

cause we have not reared a city, nor built walls 
around it, nor can boast of our racecourse, or 
cur stadia, and pack of hounds, and all the 
follies that are connected with these things ; 
nor have to boast of the beauty and splendour 
of our baths, and the costliness of their mar- 
bles and pictures and golden embroideries of all 
sorts of species, almost rivalling nature? Nor 
heve we yet rounded off the sea for ourselves, 
or mingled the seasons, as of course you, the 
new Creators, have done, that we may live in 
what is at once the pleasantest and the safest 
way. Add if you like other charges, you who 
say, The silver is mine and the gold is mine,# 
those words of God. We neither think much 
of riches, on which, if they increase, our Law 
forbids us to set our hearts, nor do we count 
up yearly and daily revenues ; nor do we rival 
one another in loading our tables with enchant- 
ments for our senseless belly. For neither do 
we highly esteem those things which after we 
have swallowed them are all of the same worth, 
or rather I should say worthlessness, and are 
rejected. But we live so simply and from 
hand to mouth, as to differ but little from 
beasts whose sustenance is without apparatus 
and inartificial. 

VIII. Do you also find fault with the rag- 
gedness of my dress, and the want of elegance 
in the disposition of my face? for these are 
the points upon which I see that some persons 
who are very insignificant pride themselves. 
Will you leave my head alone, and not jeer at 
it, as the children did at Elisseeus ? What fol- 
lowed T will not mention. And will you 
leave out of your allegations my want of educa- 
tion, and what seems to you the roughness 
and rusticity of my elocution? And where 
will you put the fact that I am not full of 
small talk, nor a jester popular with company, 
nor great hunter of the marketplace, nor 
given to chatter and gossip with any chance 
people upon all sorts of subjects, so as to make 
even conversation grievous; nor a frequenter 
of Zeuxippus, that new Jerusalem; nor one 
who strolls from house to house flattering and 
stuffing himself; but for the most part staying 
at home, of low spirits and with a melancholy 
cast of countenance, quietly associating with 
myself, the genuine critic of my actions ; and 
perhaps worthy of imprisonment for my use- 
lessness ? How is it that you pardon me for 
all this, and do not blame me for it? How 
sweet and kind you are. 

@ Hage, 8, : : 

B It is not certain what is the allusion here. Some think a 
great Circus or Hippodrome for chariot races; others say an in- 
sutution im which were heretical schools : others again, the great 
baths of Zeuxippus. 

AGAINST THE ARIANS. 

IX. But Lam so old fashioned and such a 
philosopher as to believe that one heaven is 
common to all; and that so is the revolution 
of the sun and the moon, and the order and ar- 
rangement of the stars; and that all have in 
common an equal share and profit in day and 
night, and also change of seasons, rains, fruits, 
and quickening power of the air ; and that the 
flowing rivers are a common and abundant 
wealth to all; and that one and the same is the 
Karth, the mother and the tomb, from which 
we were taken, and to which we shall return, 
none having a greater share than another. And 
further, above this, we have in common reason, 
the Law, the Prophets, the very Sufferings of 
Christ, by which we were all without excep- 
tion created anew, who partake of the same 
Adam, and were led astray by the serpent and 
slain by sin, and are saved by the heavenly 
Adam and brought back by the tree of shame 
to the tree of life from whence we had fallen. 

X. I was deceived too by the Ramah of 
Samuel, that little fatherland of the great man ; 
which was no dishonour to the Prophet, for it 
drew its honour not so much from itself as from 
him; nor was he hindered cn its account from 
being given to God before his birth, or from 
uttering oracles, and foreseeing the future ; nor 
only so, but also anointing Kings and Priests, 
and judging the men of illustrious cities. I 
heard also of Saul, how while seeking his fath- 
er’s asses he found a kingdom. And even 
David himself was taken from the sheepfolds 
to be the shepherd of Israel. What of Amos ? 
Was he not, while a goatherd and scraper of 
sycamore fruit entrusted with the gifts of pro- 
phecy ? How is it that I have passed over 
Joseph, who was both a slave and the giver of 
corn to Egypt, and the father of many myriads 
who were promised before to Abraham? Aye 
and I was deceived by the Carmel of Elias, 
who received the car of fire; and by the sheep- 
skin of Elisseeus that had more power than a 
silken web or than gold forced into garments. 
I was deceived by the desert of John, which 
held the greatest among them that are born of 
women, with that clothing, that food, that 
girdle, which we know. And I ventured even 
beyond these, and found God Himself the 
Patron of my rusticity. I will range myself 
with Bethlehem, and will share the ignominy 
of the Manger ; for since you refuse on this ac- 
count honour to God, it is no wonder that on 
the same account you despise His herald also. 
And I will bring up to you the Fishermen, and 
the poor to whom the Gospel is preached, as 
preferred before many rich. Will you ever 

| leave off priding yourselves upon your cities ? 

332 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Will you ever revere that wilderness which you 
abominate and despise? I do not yet say 
that gold has its birthplace in sand ; nor that 
translucent stones are the product and gifts 
of rocks; for if to these I should oppose all 
that is dishonourable in cities perhaps it would 
be to no good end that I should use my free- 
dom of speech. 

XI. But perhaps some one who is very cir- 
cumscribed and carnally minded will say, 
‘«* But our herald is a stranger and a foreigner.”’ 
What of the Apostles? Were not they strangers 
to the many nations and cities among whom 
they were divided, that the Gospel might have 
free course everywhere, that nothing might 
miss the illumination of the Threefold Light, 
or be unenlightened by the Truth; but that 
the night of ignorance might be dissolved for 
those who sat in darkness and the shadow of 
death ? You have heard the words of Paul, 
‘‘that we might go the Gentiles, and they 
to the Circumcision.’’* Be it that Judea is 
Peter’s home ; what has Paul in common with 
the Gentiles, Luke with Achaia, Andrew with 
Epirus, John with Ephesus, Thomas with In- 
dia, Mare with Italy, or the rest, not to go 
into particulars, with those to whom they went ? 
So that you must either blame them or excuse 
me, or else prove that you, the ambassadors of 
the true Gospel, are being insulted by trifling. 
But since I have argued with you in a petty 
way about these matters, I will now proceed 
to take a larger and more philosophic view of 
them. 

XII. My friend, every one that is of high 
mind has one Country, the Heavenly Jerusa- 
lem, in which we store up our Citizenship. All 
have one family—if you look at what is here 
below the dust—or if you look higher, that In- 
breathing of which we are partakers, and which 

jected and emulated ? 

we were bidden to keep, and with which I must | 

stand before my Judge to give an account of 
my heavenly nobility, and of the Divine Image. 
Everyone then is noble who has guarded this 
through virtue and consent to his Archetype. 
On the other hand, everyone is ignoble who 
has mingled with evil, and put upon himself 
another form, that of the serpent. And these 
earthly countries and families are the play- 
things of this our temporary life and scene. 

For our country is whatever each may have | 

first occupied, either as tyrant, or in misfortune ; 
and in this we are all alike strangers and _pil- 
grims, however much we may play with names. 

And the family is accounted noble which is | 

either rich from old days, or is recently raised ; 

and of ignoble birth that which is of poor par- 
ents, either owing to misfortune or to want of 
ambition. For how can a nobility be given 
from above which is at one time beginning 
and at another coming to an end; and which 
is not given to some, but is bestowed on others 
by letters patent? Such is my mind on this 
matter. Therefore I leave it to you to pride 
yourself on tombs or in myths, and I endeav- 
our as far as I can, to purify myself from de- 
ceits, that I may keep if possible my nobility, 
or clse may recover it. 

XII. It is thus then and for these reasons 
that I, who am small and of a country without 
repute, have come upon you, and that not of 
my own accord, nor self-sent, like many of 
those who now seize upon the chief places ; 
but because I was invited, and compelled, and 
have followed the scruples of my conscience 
and the Call of the Spirit. Ifit be otherwise, 
may I continue to fight here to no purpose, 
and deliver no one from his error, but may 
they obtain their desire who seek the barren- 
ness of my soul, if I lie. But since I am 
come, and perchance with no contemptible 
power (if I may boast myself a little of my 
folly), which of those who are insatiable have I 
copied, what have I emulated of opportunism, 
although I have such examples, even apart 
from which it is hard and rare not to be bad ? 
Concerning what churches or property have I 
disputed with you; though you have more 
than enough of both, and the others too 
little 2 What imperial edict have we re- 
What rulers have we 
fawned upon against you? Whose boldness 
have we denounced? And what has been 
done on the other side against me? ‘‘ Lord, 
lay not this sin to their charge,’’ even then I 
said, for I remembered in season the words of 
Stephen,* and so I pray now. Being reviled, 
we bless: being blasphemed we retreat.® 

XIV. And if Iam doing wrong in this, that 
when tyrannized over I endure it, forgive me 
this wrong; I have borne to be tyrannized 
over by others too; and I am thankful that 
my moderation has brought upon me the 
charge of folly. For I reckon thus, using 
considerations altogether higher than any of 
yours ; what a mere fraction are these trials of 
the spittings and blows which Christ, for Whom 
and by Whose aid we encounter these dan- 
gers, endured. I do not count them, taken 
altogether, worth the one crown of thorns which 
robbed our conqueror of his crown, for whose 
sake also I learn that I am crowned for the 

a Galat. ii. 9. 

a Acts vil. 59. B 1 Cor. iv. 12, 

AGAINST THE ARIANS. 330 

hardness of life. I do not reckon them worth 
the one reed by which the rotten empire was 

destroyed ; of the gall alone, the vinegar | 
alone, by which we were cured of the bitter | 

taste ; of the gentleness alone which He shewed 
in His Passion. Was He betrayed with a kiss ? 
He reproves with a kiss, but smites not. Is 
he suddenly arrested 2? He reproaches indeed, 
but follows ; and if through zeal thou cuttest 
off the ear of Malchus with the sword, He will 
be angry, and will restore it. 
in a linen sheet,* he will defend him. And if 
you ask for the fire of Sodom upon his cap- 
tors, he will not pour it forth; and if he take 
a thief hanging upon the cross for his crime, 
he will bring him into Paradise through His 
Goodness. Let all the acts of one that loves 
men be loving, as were all the sufferings of 
Christ, to which we could add nothing 
greater than, when God even died for us, to 

cles of God, which I have been taught by the 
Holy Fathers, which I have taught alike on all 
occasions, not conforming myself to the op- 
portune, and which I will never cease to 

teach; in which I was born, and in which | 

will depart. 
XVI. These I call by name (for they are not 

nameless like the stars which are numbered 
and have names),* and they follow me, for I 

And if one flee | 

| 
| 
| 
| 
\ 

| 
| 

refuse on our part to forgive even the smallest | 
_ compounded of elements and numbers ; from 

wrongs of our fellow-men. 

XV. Moreover this also [reckoned and still 
reckon with myself; and do you see if it is 
not quite correct. I have often discussed it 
with you before. These men have the 
houses, but we the Dweller in the house ; they 
the ‘Temples, we the God; and _ besides it is 
ours to be living temples of the Living God, 
lively sacrifices, reasonable burnt-offerings, 
perfect sacrifices, yea, gods through the ado- 
ration of the Trinity. They have the people, 
we the Angels ; they rash boldness, we faith ; 
they threatenings, we prayer; they smiting, 
we endurance ; they gold and silver, we 
the pure word. ‘Thou hast built for thyself 
a wide house and large chambers (recognize 
the words of Scripture), a house ceiled and 
pierced with windows.’’& But not yet is this 
loftier than my faith, and than the heavens to 
which I am being borne onwards. Is mine a 
little lock? But it is not being carried over 
a precipice. Is mine a narrow fold? But it 
is unapproachable by wolves ; it cannot be en- 
tered by a robber, nor climbed by thieves and 

strangers. I shall yet see it, I know well, 
wider. And many of those who are now 

wolves, I must reckon among my sheep, and 
perhaps even amongst the shepherds. ‘This is 
the glad tidings brought me by the Good Shep- 
herd, for Whose sake I lay down my life for 
the sheep. I fear not for the little flock, for 
it is seen at a glance. I know my sheep and 
am known of mine. Such are they that know 
God and are known of God. My sheep hear 
my voice, which I have heard from the ora- 

a Mark xiv, 51. Bi Jer xxue 145 

VOL. VIT, 

rear them up beside the waters of rest; and 
they follow every such shepherd, whose voice 
they love to hear, as you see; but a stranger 
they will not follow, but will flee from him, 
because they have a habit of distinguishing the 
voice of their own from that of strangers. 
They will flee from Valentinus® with his di- 
vision of one into two, refusing to believe that 
the Creator is other than the Good. ‘They will 
flee from Depth and Silence, and the mythical 
“Kons, that are verily worthy of Depth and Si- 
lence. ‘They will flee from Marcion’s 7 god, 

Montanus’é evil and feminine spirit ; from the 

/matter and darkness of Manes;¢ from Noy- 

atus’$ boasting and wordy assumption of 
purity ; from the analysis and confusion of 
Sabellius,” and if I may use the expression 

4 2 

@ Ps. cxlyin 4. 

B VALENTINUs, a celebrated Gnostic leader of the Second Cen- 
tury, was one of the first Gnostics who taught in Rome. He was 
probably of /Egypto-Jewish descent, and was educated at Alex- 
andria. He died in Cyprus about 160. His system is a very 
curious one, giving the reins to the wildest vagaries of the imagin- 
ation. The original eternal Being, or Absolute Existence, he called 

3ythos or Depth; and to this he assigned as a wife Sige or Silence. 
From this union there sprang thirty 7Zons or Emanations, who un- 
folded the Attributes of the Deity and created the world. 

y MARCION was a contemporary of Valentinus. He was ana- 
tive of Sinope in Pontus, of which city his father was Bishop. He 
supposed Three Principles, the Good God, Who was first revealed 
by Christ; the Just Creator, Who is the ‘+ hot-tempered and imper- 
fect” God of the Jews ; and the intrinsically evil Hyle or Matter, 
which is ruled by the Devil. He also distinguished two Messiahs ; 
one a mere warrior prince sent by the Jewish God to restore 
Israel; the other sent by the Good God for the delivery of the 
whole human race. 

6 Monranus, a Phrygian enthusiast of the middle of the Second 
Century, imagined himself the inspired Organ of the Paraclete. 
Connected with him were two Prophetesses, Priscilla and Max- 
imilla, who left their husbands to follow him. His heresy, or 
rather his schism, spread to Rome and Northern Africa, and 
threw the whole Church into confusion. He was very early an- 
athematized by Bishops and Synods of Asia, but he carried the 
great African, Tertullian, away by his frenzy. 

e Manes or Mant, a Persia philosopher, astronomer, and 
painter of the Third Century, who introduced into Christianity some 
elements drawn from the religion of Zoroaster, especially its 
mpatov Wwevdos, Dualism, the co-eternity of two contradictory prin- 
ciples, Light and Darkness, Spirit and Matter, Good and Evil. 
‘This heresy flourished till the Sixth Century, S. Augustine himself 
having been for nine years led away by it. It is believed not to 
be wholly extinct even now in some parts of Eastern Christendom. 

¢Novatus was a Carthaginian Priest, who at first rebelled 
against his Bishop, S. Cyprian, on account of his severity in the 
treatment of persons who had lapsed in the Decian persecution. 
At Rome, however, this same Novatus, either out of simple antag- 
onism to constituted authority, or because he had really changed 
his views, adopted the extremest rigorism, and became one of 
the most violent partisans of the Priest Novatian, whom his fol- 
lowers contrived to get consecrated as a rival Bishop of Rome, in 
opposition to Cornelius, the reigning Pope. They set up a new 
“*church,”? and arrogated to themselves an exclusive claim to the 
title of Cathari, the Pure. : 

7 SABELLIUS, a native of the Libyan Pentapolis, rejected the 
Catholic Faith of the Trinity of Persons in God, and would only 
allow a Trinity of manifestations. 

And 

334 GREGORY 

his absorption, contracting the Three into One, 

instead of defining the One in Three Personal- 

ities ; from the difference of natures taught by 
Arius® and his followers, and their new 
Judaism, confining the Godhead to the Unbe- 
gotten ; 
took his beginning from Mary. But they 
worship the Father and the Son and the Holy 
Ghost, One Godhead ; God the Vather, God 
the Son and (do not be angry) God the Holy 
Ghost, One Nature in ‘Three Personalities, 1n- 
tellectual, perfect, Self-existent, numerically 
separate, but not separate in Godhead. 

XVIL. ‘These words let everyone who threat- 
ens me to-day concede to me ; the rest let who- 
ever will claim. ‘The Father will not endure to 

from Photinus’ # earthly Christ, who | 

be deprived of the Son, nor the Son of the Holy | 
Ghost. Yet that must happen if ‘They are con- | 

fined to time, and are created Beings 

for that which is created is not God. Nei- 

ther will I bear to be deprived of my con- | 

secration; One Lord, One Faith, One Bap- 
tism. Ifthis be cancelled, from whom shall I 
get a second? What say you, you who des- 
troy Baptism or repeat it? 
spiritual without the Spirit? Has he a share 
in the Spirit who does not honour the Spirit ? 
Can he honour Him who is baptized into a 
creature anda fellow-servant? It is not so; 
it is not so; for all yourtalk. I will not play 
Thee false, O Unoriginate Father, or Thee O 
Only-begotten Word, or Thee O Holy Ghost. 
I know Whom I have confessed, and whom I 
have renounced, and to Whom I have joined 
myself. I will not allow myself, after having 
been taught the words of the faithful, to learn 
also those of the unfaithful; to confess the 
truth, and then range myself with falsehood ; 
to come down for consecration and to go back 

Can a man be. 

even less hallowed ; having been baptised that — 

I might live, to be killed by the water, like 
infants who die in the very birthpangs, and 
receive death simultaneously with birth. Why 
make me at once blessed and wretched, newly 
enlightened and unenlightened, Divine and 
godless, that I may make shipwreck even 
of the hope of regeneration? A few words 
willsuffice. Remember your confession. In- 
to what were you baptised? The Father? 
Good but Jewish still. The Son? . 

good . . but not yet perfect. The 

a [tis hardly necessary here to dwell on the Arian tenets ; cf. 
Prolegomena to the Theological Oration. 

8 PHotiNus was a Galatian by birth, and flourished in the fourth 
century, a little earlier than 5. Gregory. He seems to have 
taught that our Lord Jesus Christ was a mere man, and had no 
existence previous to His Birth of the Virgin Mary. He made 
Jesus rise on the basis of His human nature, by a course of moral 
improvement, to the divine dignity, $9 that the Divine in Him is < 
th'ng of growth: cf. Schaff, He. be, Nicene Period, vol. i. p. 653. 

=) 

NAZIANZEN. 

Holy Ghost? . «4 Very S401016 aeeernegraeee 
this is perfect. Now was it into these simply, 
or some common name of Them? The latter. 
And what was the common Name? Why, 
God. In this common Name believe, and 
ride on prosperously and reign,” and pass on 
from hence into the Bliss of Heaven. And 
that is, as L think, the more distinct apprehen- 
sion of ‘These ; to which may we all come, in 
the same Christ our God, to Whom be the 
glory and the might, with the Unoriginate 
Father, and the Lifegiving Spirit, now and 
for ever and to ages of ages. Amen, 

ORATION XXXIV. 
ON THE ARRIVAL OF THE EGYPTIANS. 

Tus Oration was preached at Constantinople in 
380, under the following circumstances : 

Peter, Patriarch of Alexandria, had sent a mission 
of five of his Suffragans to consecrate the impostor 
Maximus to the Throne occupied by Gregory. This 
had led to much trouble, but in the end the intruder 
had been expelled and banished, Shortly afterwards 
an Egyptian fleet, probably the regular corn ships, had 
arrived at Constantinople, apparently on the day be- 
fore a Festival. The crews of the ships, landing next 
day to go to Church, passed by the numerous Churches 
held by the Arians, and betook themselves to the little 
Anastasia. $. Gregory felt himself moved to congrat- 
ulate them specially on such an act, after what had re- 
cently passed, and accordingly pronounced the follow- 
ing discourse. 

I. I witt address myself as is right to those 
who have come from Egypt; for they have 
come here eagerly, having overcome illwill 
by zeal, from that Egypt which is enriched by 
the River, raining out of the earth, and like 
the seain its season,—if I too may follow in my 
small measure those who have so cloquently 
spoken of these matters ; and which is also 
enriched by Christ my Lord, Who once was a 
fugitive into Egypt, and now is supplied by 
Egypt; the first, when He fled from Herod’s 
massacre of the children ; & and now by the love 
of the fathers for their children, by Christ the 
new Food of those who hunger after good ; * 
the greatest alms of corn of which history 
speaks and men_ believe ; the Bread which 
came down from heaven and giveth life to the 
world, that life which is indestructible and in- 

- dissoluble, concerning Whom I now scem to 

hear the Father saying, Out of Egypt have I 
called My Son.é 

ll. For from you hath sounded forth the 
Word to all men; healthfully believed and 
preached ; and youare the best bringers of fruit 
of all men, specially of those who now hold the 

pas lV. aBuNiatt ats: y John vi. 33. 8 Hos. Midets 

ON EE ARKIVAL OF THE EGY?VIIANS, 

| 
right faith, as far as I know, who am not only 
_ Were—to possess nothing) nor anything else, 

a lover of such food, but also its distributor, 
and not at home only but also abroad. For 
you indeed supply bodily food to peoples and 
cities so far as your lovingkindness reaches ; 
and you supply spiritual food also, not to a 
particular people, nor to this or that city, cir- 
cumseribed by narrow boundaries, though its 
people may think it very illustrious, but to 
almost the whole world. And you bring the 
remedy not for famine of bread or thirst of 
water,* which is no very terrible famine—and 
to avoid it is easy ; but to a famine of hearing 
the Word of the Lord, which it is most miser- 
able to suffer, and a most laborious matter to 
cure at the present time, because iniquity 
hath abounded,® and scarce anywhere do I| 
find its genuine healers. 

IIT. Such was Joseph your Superintendent 
of corn measures, whom I may call ours also ; 
who by his surpassing wisdom was able both to 
foresee the famine and to cure it by decrees of 
government, healing the ill-favoured and starv- 
ing kine by means of the fair and fat.y And 
indeed you may understand by Joseph which 
you will, either the great lover and creator 
and namesake of immortality or his successor 
in throne and word and hoary hair, our new 
Peter,® not inferior in virtue or fame to him 
by whom the middle course was destroyed and 
crushed, though it still wriggles a little weak- 
ly, like the tail of a snake after it is cut off; 
the one of whom, after having departed this 
life in a good old age after many conflicts 
and wrestlings, looks upon us from above, I 
well know, and reaches a hand to those who 
are labouring for the right ; and this the more, 
in proportion as he is freed from his bonds ; and 
the other is hastening to the same end or dis- 
solution of life, and is already drawing near 
the dwellers in heaven, but is still so far in 
the flesh as is needed to give the last aids to 
the Word, and to take his journey with richer 
provision. 

IV. Of these great men and doctors and 
soldiers of the truth and victors, you are the 
nurslings and offspring ; of these neither times 
nor tyrants, reason nor envy, nor fear, nor ac- 
cuser, nor slandcrer, whether waging open war 
against them, or plotting secretly ; nor any who 
appeared to be of our side, nor any stranger, nor 
gold—that hidden tyrant, through which now 
almost everything is turned upside down and 
made to depend on the hazard ofa die; nor 
flatteries nor threats, nor long and distant ex- 
iles (for they only could not be affected by con- 

B Matt. xxiv. 12. 
6 Athanasius. 

a Amos Vili. 15. 

y Gen. xli. 29 sq. 

oo9 

fiseation, because of their great riches, which 

whether absent or present or expected, could in- 
duce to take the worse part, and to be anywise 
traitor to the ‘Trinity, or to suffer loss of the 
Godhead. On the contrary indeed, they grew 
strong by dangers, and became more zealous 
for true religion. Tor to suffer thus for Christ 
adds to one’s love, and is as it were an earnest to 
high-souled men of further conflicts. These, O 
Egypt, are thy present tales and wonders. 

V. Once thou didst praise me thy Mendesian 
Goats, and thy Memphite Apis, a fatted and 
fleshy calf, and the rites of Isis, and the muti- 
lations of Osiris, and thy venerable Serapis, a 
log that was honoured by myths and ages 
and the madness of its worshippers, as some 
unknown and heavenly matter, however 
it may have been aided by falsehood ; and 
things yet more shameful than these, multiform 
images of monstrous beasts and creeping things, 
all of which Christ and the heralds of Christ 
have conquered, both the others who have been 
illustrious in their own times, and also the 
Fathers whom I have named just now; by 
whom, O admirable country, thou art more 
famous today than all others put together, 
whether in ancient or modern history. 

VI. Wherefore I embrace and salute thee, O 
noblest of peoples and most Christian, and of 
warmest piety, and worthy of thy leaders ; for 
I can find nothing greater to say of thee than 
this, nor anything by which better to welcome 
thee. AndI greet thee, toa small extent with 
my tongue, but very heartily with the move- 
ments of my affections. O my people, for I call 
you mine, as of one mind and one faith, in- 
structed by the same Fathers, and adoring the 
same ‘Trinity. My people, for mine thou art, 
though it seem not so to those who envy me. 
And that they who are in this case may be the 
deeper wounded, see, I give the right hand of 
fellowship before so many witnesses, seen and 
unseen. And I put away the old calumny by 
this new act of kindness. O my people, for 
mine thou art, though in saying so I, who am 
least of all men, am claiming for myself that 
which is greatest. For such is the grace of the 
Spirit that it makes of equal honour those who 
areof one mind. O my people, for mine thou 
art, though it be afar, because we are divinely 
joined together, and ina manner wholly differ- 
ent to the unions of carnal people; for bodies 
are united in place, but souls are fitted together 
by the Spirit. O my people, who didst for- 
merly study how to suffer for Christ, but now 

a Galat. ii. 9. B isaclxiie4: 

336 

if thou wilt hearken unto me, wilt study not 
to do aught, but to consider the power of do- 
ing to be a sufficient gain, and to deem that 
thou art offering a sacrifice to Christ, as in 
those days of thy endurance so in these of meek- 
ness. O people to whom the Lord hath pre- 
pared Himself to do good, as to do evil to thine 
enemies. O people, whom the Lord hath cho- 
sen to Himself out of all peoples ; O people who 
art graven upon the hands of the Lord, to whom 
saith the Lord, Thou art My Will; and, Thy 
gates are carved work, and all the rest that is 
said to them that are being saved. O people ; 
—nay, marvel not at my insatiability that I 
repeat your name so often ; for I delight in 
this continual naming of you, like those who 
can never have enough of their enjoyment of 
certain spectacles or sounds. 

VIL. But, O people of God and mine, beau- 
tiful also was your yesterday’s assembly, which 
you held upon the sea, and pleasant, if any 
sight ever was, to the eyes, when I saw the 
sea like a forest, and hidden by a cloud made 
with hands, and the beauty and speed of your 
ships, as though ordered for a procession, and 
the slight breeze astern, as though purposely 
escorting you, and wafting to the City your 
city of the Sea. Yet the present assembly 
which we now behold is more beautiful and 
more magnificent. For you have not hast- 
ened to mingle with the larger number, nor 
have you reckoned religion by numbers, nor 
endured to be a mere unorganized rabble, 
rather than a people purified by the Word of 
God; but having, as is right, rendered to 
Cesar the things that are Cesar’s, ye have 
offered besides to God the things that are 
God’s; to the former Custom, to the latter 
Fear; and after feeding the people with your 
cargoes, you yourselyes have come to be fed by 
us. For we also distribute corn, and our dis- 
tribution is perhaps not worth less than yours. 
Come eat of my Bread and drink of the Wine 
which I have mingled for you.@ — I join with 
Wisdom in bidding you to my table. For I 
commend your good feeling, and I hasten to 
meet your ready mind, because ye came to US 
as to your own harbour, running to your like ; 
and ye valued the kindred Faith, and thought 
it monstrous that, while they who insult high- 
er things are in harmony with each other and 
think alike, and think to make good each 
man’s individual falsehood by their common 
conspiracy, like ropes which get strength 
from being twisted together; yet you should 
not meet nor combine with those who are of the 

a Isai. Ixiv. 12, etc, B Prov. ix, 5. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| That which is First is also above nature. 

same mind, with whom it is more reasonable 
that you should associate, for we gather in the 
Godhead also. And that you may see that 
not in vain have youcome to us, and that you 
have not brought up ina port among stran- 
gers and foreigners, but amongst your own 
people, and have been well guided by the 
Holy Ghost ; we will discourse to you briefly 
concerning God; and do you recognize your 
own, like those who distinguish their kindred 
by the ensigns of their arms. 

VIII. I find two highest differences in things 
that exist, viz.:—Rule, and Service ; not such 
as among us either tyranny has cut or poverty 
has severed, but which nature has distin- 
guished, if any like to use this word. Il’or 
Of 
these the former is creative, and originating, 
and unchangeable ; but the other is created, 
and subject and changing; or to speak yet 
more plainly, the one is above time, and the 
other subject to time. The Former is called 
God, and subsists in Three Greatest, namely, 
the Cause, the Creator, and the Perfecter ; I 
mean the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost, who are neither so separated from one 
another as to be divided in nature, nor so 
contracted as to be circumscribed by a single 
person ; the one alternative being that of the 
Arian madness, the other that of the Sabellian 
heresy ; but they are on the one hand more 
single than what is altogether divided, and on 
the other more abundant than what is alto- 
gether singular. The other division is with 

| us, and is called Creation, though one may be 

exalted above another according to the pro- 
portion of their nearness to God. 

IX. This being so, if any be on the Lord’s 
side let him come with us,* and let us adore the 
One Godhead in the Three ; not ascribing any 
name of humiliation to the unapproachable 
Glory, but having the exaltations of the Triune 
God continually in our mouth.* — For since we 
cannot properly describe even the greatness of 
Its Nature, on account of Its infinity and unde- 
finableness, how can we assert of It humilia- 
tion? But if any one be estranged from God, 
and therefore divideth the One Supreme Sub- 
stance into an inequality of Natures, it were 
marvellous if such an one were not cut in sun- 
der by the sword, and his portion appointed 
with the unbelievers,Y reaping any evil fruit of 
his evil thought both now and hereafter. 

X. What must we say of the Father, Whom 
by common consent all who have been preoccu- 
pied with natural conceptions share, although 

a Exod, xxxii. 26. B Ps. cxlix. 6. y Luke xii. 46. 

ON Si, ARTY 

AL 

Ife hath endured the beginnings of dishonour, 
having been first divided by ancient innoya- 
tion into the Good and the Creator. 
the Son and of the Holy Ghost, see how sim- 
ply and concisely we shall discourse. 

or subject to change; or that either in time, 
or place, or power, or energy He could be 
measured ; or that He was not naturally good, 
or not Self-moved, or not a free agent, ora 
Minister, or a Hymnsinger; or that He 
feared, or was a recipient of freedom, or was 
not counted with God; let him prove this 
and we will acquiesce, and will be glorified 
by the Majesty of our Fellow Servants, though 
we lose our God. But if all that the Father 
has belongs likewise to the Son, except Caus- 
ality ; and all that is the Son’s belongs also 
to the Spirit, except His Sonship, and what- 
soever is spoken of Him as to Incarnation for 
me aman, and for my salvation, that, taking 
of mine, He may impart His own by this new 
commingling ; then cease your babbling, 
though so late, O ye sophists of vain talk that 
falls at once to the ground ; for why will ye 
dic O House of Israel ? *—if I may mourn for 
you in the words of Scripture. 

XI. For my part I revere also the Titles of 
the Word, which are so many, and so high and 
great, which even the demons respect. And 
I revere also the Equal Rank of the Holy 
Ghost; and I fear the threat pronounced 
against those who blaspheme Him. And 
blasphemy is not the reckoning Him God, but 
the severing Him from the Godhead. And 
here you must remark that That which is blas- 
phemed is Lord, and That which is avenged is 
the Holy Ghost, evidently as Lord. I cannot 
bear to be unenlightened after my Enlighten- 
ment, by marking with a different stamp any 
of the Three into Whom I was baptized ; and 
thus to be indeed buried in the water, and in- 
itiated not into Regeneration, but into death. 

XII. I dare to utter something, O Trinity ; 
and may pardon be granted to my folly, for 
the risk is to my soul. I too am an Image of 
God, of the Heavenly Glory, though I be 
placed on earth. I cannot believe that I am 
saved by one who is my equal. If the Holy 
Ghost is not God, let Him first be made God, 
and then let Him deify me His equal. But 
now what deceit this is on the part of grace, 
or rather of the givers of grace, to believe in 

OF THE. EGYPTIANS. 

And of | 

If any | 
one could say of Either that He was mutable | 

337 

after the Laver Iam blackened, if I am to see 
those who are not yet cleansed brighter than 
myself; if T am cheated by the heresy of my 
saptizer ; if I seek for the stronger Spirit and 
find Him not. Giveme a second Font before 
you think evil of the first. Why do you 
grudge me a complete regeneration ? Why 
do you make me, who am the Temple of the 
Holy Ghost as of God, the habitation of a 
creature ?. Why do you honour part of what 
belongs to me, and dishonour part, judging 
falsely of the Godhead, to cut me off from the 
Gift, or rather to cut me in two by the gift ? 
Either honour the Whole, or dishonour the 
Whole, O new Theologian, that, if youare wick- 
ed, you may at any rate be consistent with your- 
self, and not judge unequally of an equal nature. 

XIII. ‘To sum up my discourse :—Glorify 
Him with the Cherubim, who unite the Three 
Holies into One Lord,* and so far indicate the 
Primal Substance as their wings open to the 
diligent. With David be enlightened, who said 
to the Light, In Thy Light shall we see Light,8 
that is, in the Spirit we shall see the Son; and 
what can be of further reaching ray? With 
John thunder, sounding forth nothing that is 
low or earthly concerning God, but what is 
high and heavenly, Who is in the beginning, 
and is with God, and is God the Word,y and 
true God of the true Father, and not a good 
fellow-servant honoured only with the title of 
Son; and the Other Comforter (other, that is, 
from the Speaker, Who was the Word of God). 
And when you read, I and the Father are 
One,® keep before your eyes the Unity of Sub- 
stance ; but when you see, ‘‘ We will come to 
him, and make Our abode with him,’’ € remem- 
ber the distinction of Persons ; and when you 
see the Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 
think of the Three Personalities. 

XIV. With Luke be inspired as you study 
the Acts of the Apostles. Why do you range 
yourself with Ananias and Sapphira, those 
vain embezzlers (if indeed the theft of one’s 
own property be a vain thing) and that by 
appropriating, not silver nor any other cheap 
and worthless thing, like a wedge of gold,$ or 
a didrachma, as did of old a rapacious soldier ; 
but stealing the Godhead Itself, and lying, 

not to men but to God, as you have heard. 
~ What? Will you not reverence even the au- 
thority of the Spirit Who breathes upon 
_ whom, and when, and as He wills? He 

God and to come away godless; by one set of /comes upon Cornelius and his companions 

questions and confessions leading to another before Baptism, 
Alas for this fair fame, if | the hands of the Apostles ; so that from both 

set of conclusions. 

@ Ezek. xviii, 31. 

to others after Baptism, by 

y John i. x, 

BPs. XxxVi. ig. I 
¢ Josh, vii. 21, 

ailsai. vi. 3, , 
€ John xiv. 23. 

0.1 Ds. Xe dob 

the guise of a Master and not of a Servant, 
and from the fact of His being sought to make 
perfect, the Godhead of the Spirit is testified. 

sides, both from the fact that He comes in 

XV. Speak of God with Paul, who was , 
caught up to the third Heaven,* and who some- 

times counts up the Three Persons, and that in 
varied order, not keeping the same order, but 

reckoning one and the saine Person now first, 
now second, now third; and for what pur- | 

pose P 
Nature. 

Why, to shew the equality of the | 
And sometimes he mentions ‘Three, | 

sometimes ‘Two or One, because That which | 

is not mentioned is included. 
times he attributes the operation of God to 
the Spirit, as in no respect different from Him, 

sons saying, ‘One God, of whom are all 
things, and we in Him; and one Lord Jesus 

And some- | 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

extent, and form us to that humility which is 
the producer of exaltation. As I said then, 
He is made a Fisherman ; He condescendeth to 
all; He casteth the net ; He endureth all things, 
that He may draw up the fish from the depths, 
that is, Man who is swimming in the unsettled 
and bitter waves of life. 

II. ‘Vherefore now also, when He had fin- 
ished these sayings He departed from Galilee 
and came into the coasts of Judea beyond 
Jordan ; He dwelleth well in Galilee, in order 
that the people which sat in darkness may see 
great Light.¢ He removeth to Judea in order 
that He may persuade people to rise up from 
the Letter and to follow the Spirit. He teach- 

eth, now on amountain; now He discourseth 
and sometimes instead of the Spirit he brings | 
in Christ ; and at times he separates the Per- | 

Christ, by whom are all things, and we by. 

Him ;’’ # at other times he brings together the 
one Godhead, ‘* For of Him and through Him 
and in Him are all things ;’’ ¥ that is, through 

the Holy Ghost, as is shown by many places in | 

Scripture. To Him be glory for ever and ever. 

Amen. 

ORATION XXXVII. 

On THE Worvs or THE GospEL, ‘‘ WHEN 
Jesus HAD FINISHED THESE SAayYINGs,”’ 
ETC.—S. MATT. XIX. I. 

I. Jesus Who Chose ‘The Fishermen, Him- 
self also useth a net, and changeth place for 
place. Why? Not only that He may gain 
more of those who love God by His visitation ; 
but also, as it seems to me, that He may hal- 
low more places. ‘To the Jews He becomes 
asa Jew that He may gain the Jews; to 
them that are under the Law as under the 
Law, that He may redeem them that are 
under the Law; to the weak as weak, that 
He may save the weak. He is made all things 
to all men that He may gain all. Why dol 
say, All things to all men? For even that 

I find that the Saviour suffered. For He is 
made not only a Jew, and not only doth He 
take to Himself all monstrous and vile names, 
but even that which is most monstrous of all, 
even very sin and very curse; not that He 
it such, but He is called so. For how can He 
be sin, Who setteth us free from sin; and how 
can He be a curse, Who redeemeth us from the 
curse of the Law ?® But it is in order that He 
may carry His display of humility even to this 

B x Cor. viii. 6. 

a.m Cor Ris oi ‘ 
6 Gal, iit. 10, 13. 

y Rom. x1. 36. 

on a plain; now He passeth over into a ship ; 
now He rebuketh the surges. And perhaps He 
goes to sleep, in order that He may bless sleep 
also ; perhaps He is tired that He may hallow 
weariness also; perhaps He weeps that He 
may make tears blessed. He removeth from 
place to place, Who is not contained in any 
place; the timeless, the bodiless, the uncir- 
cumscript, the same Who was and is; Who 
was both above time, and came under time, 
and was invisible and is seen. He was in the 
beginning and was with God, and was God. 
The word Was occurs the third time to be 
confirmed by number. What He was He 
laid aside; what He was not He assumed ; 
not that He became two, but He deigned to 
be One made out of the two. For both are 
God, that which assumed, and that which 
was assumed ; two Natures meeting in One, 
not two Sons (let us not give a false account 
of the blending). He who is such and so 
great—but what has befallen me? I have 
fallen into human language. Tor how can So 

_ Great be said of the Absolute, and how can 

That which is without quantity be called Such ? 
But pardon the word, for I am speaking of the 
greatest things with a limited instrument. 

_ And That great and long-suffering and form- 
less and bodiless Nature will endure this, name- 
which Paul could not endure to say of himself | 

ly, my words as if of a body, and weaker than 
the truth. For if He condescended to Flesh, 
He will also endure such language. 

III. And great multitudes followed Him, 
and He healed them there, where the multitude 
was greater. If He had abode upon His own 
eminence, if He had not condescended to in- 
firmity, if He had remained what He was, 
keeping Himself unapproachable and incom- 
prehensible, a few perhaps would have fol- 
lowed Him—perhaps not even a few, possibly 

alsa. ix, 1 B Johni 1 

ON Sr WORDS 

only Moses—and He only so far as to see 
with difficulty the Back Parts of God. 
He penetrated the cloud, either being placed 
outside the weight of the body or being 
withdrawn from his senses; for how could 
he have gazed upon the subtlety, or the in- 

Kor | 

corporeity, or I know not how one should call . 
it, of God, being incorporate and using mate- | 

rial eyes? But inasmuch as He strips Himself 
for us, inasmuch as He comes down (and I 

speak of an exinanition, as it were, a laying | 

aside and a diminution of His glory), He be- 
comes by this comprehensible. 

IV. And pardon me meanwhile that I again | 

suffer a human affection. I am filled with 
indignation and grief for my Christ (and I 
would that you might sympathize with me) 
when I see my Christ dishonoured on this ac- 
count on which He most merited honour. Is 
He on this account to be dishonoured, tell me, 
that for you He was humble? Is He therefore 
a Creature, because He careth for the creature ? 
Is He therefore subject to time, because He 
watches over those who are subject to time? 
Nay, He beareth all things, He endureth all 
things.@ And what marvel? He put up with 
blows, He bore spittings, He tasted gall for 
my taste. And even now He bears to be 
stoned, not only by those who deal despite- 

fully with Him, but also by ourselves who | 
| plies with another question ; The baptism of 

seem to reverence Him. For to use corpo- 
real names when discoursing of the incor- 
poreal is perhaps the part of those who deal 
despitefully and stone Him; but pardon, I 
say again to our infirmity, for I do not will- 
ingly stone Him ; but having no other words 
to use, we use what we have. Thou art 
called the Word, and Thou art above Word ; 
Thou art above Light, yet art named Light ; 
Thou art called Fire not as perceptible to 

sense, but because ‘Thou purgest light and | 

worthless matter; a Sword, because Thou 
severest the worse from the better; a Fan, 
because Thou purgest the threshing-floor, and 
blowest away all that is light and windy, and 
layest up in the garner above all that is 
weighty and full; an Axe, because Thou cut- 

test down the worthless fig-tree, after long | 

patience, because Thou cuttest away the roots 
of wickedness ; the Door, because ‘Thou bring- 
est in; the Way, because we go straight ; the 
Sheep, because Thou art the Sacrifice; the 
High Priest, because Thou offerest the Body ; 
the Son, because Thou art of the Father. 

Again I stir men’s tongues ; again some men | 

rave against Christ, or rather against me, who 

| 

Gls tie Geb ii, 3 

39 

have been deemed worthy to be a herald of 
the Word. Iam like John, The Voice of one 
crying in the wilderness *—a wilderness that 
once was dry, but now is only too populous. 
V. But, as I was saying, to return to my 
argument; for this reason great multitudes 
followed Him, because He condescended to 
our infirmities. What next? The Pharisees 
also, it says, came unto Him, tempting Him, 

_and saying unto Him, is it lawful for a man 

to put away his wife for every cause? Again 
the Pharisees tempt Him; again they who 
read the Law do not know the Law ; again 
they who are expounders of the Law need 
others to teach them. It was not enough that 
Sadducees should tempt Him concerning the 
Resurrection, and Lawyers question Him about 
perfection, and the Herodians about the poll- 
tax, and others about authority ; but some one 
must also ask about Marriage at Him who can- 
not be tempted, the Creator of wedlock, Him 
who from the First Cause made this whole race 
of mankind. And He answered and said unto 
them, Have ye not read that He which made 
them at the beginning made them male and 
female? He knoweth how to solve some of 
their questions and to bridle others. When 
He is asked, By what authority doest thou 
these things? He Himself, because of the 
utter ignorance of those who asked Him, re- 

John, was it from Heaven or of men? He 
on both sides entangles His questioners, so 
that we also are able, following the example 
of Christ, sometimes to check those who argue 
with us over-officiously, and with still more 
absurd questions to solve the absurdity of 
their questions. T’or we too are wise in 
vanity at times, if I may boast of the things 
of folly. But when He sees a question that 
calls for reasoning, then He does not deem 
His questioners unworthy of prudent answers. 

VI. ‘The question which you have put 
seems to me to do honour to chastity, and to 
demand a kind reply. Chastity, in respect of 
which I see that the majority of men are ill- 

_ disposed, and that their laws are unequal and 

irregular. For what was the reason why they 
restrained the woman, but indulged the man, 
and that a woman who practises evil against 
her husband’s bed is an adulteress, and the 
penalties of the law for this are very severe ; 
but if the husband commits fornication against 
his wife, he has no account to give? I do not 
accept this legislation ; I do not approve this 
custom. ‘They who made the Law were men, 

@ Exod. xx, 213 xxxill, 20, 23. Biv Cor. xis 7, 

a Matt. iii, 3. 

340 

and therefore their legislation is hard on 
women, since they have placed children also 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

under the authority of their fathers, while | 

leaving the weaker sex uncared for. 

God | 

doth not so; but saith Honour thy father and | 

thy mother, which is the first commandment _ 

with promise; that it may be well with thee ; 
and, He that curseth father or mother, let him 
die the death. Similarly He gave honour to 
good and punishment to evil. And, The bless- 
ing of a father strengtheneth the houses of 
children, but the curse of a mother uprooteth 
the foundations. See the equality of the 
legislation. There is one Maker of man and 
woman; one debt is owed by children to 
both their parents. 

VII. How then dost thou demand Chastity, 
while thou dost not thyself observe it? How 
dost thou demand that which thou dost not 
vive? How, though thou art equally a body, 
dost thou legislate unequally? If thou en- 
quire into the worse—lhe Woman Sinned, 
and so did Adam. ‘The serpent deceived them 

both ; and one was not found to be the — 
3ut dost | 
own wife. 

stronger and the other the weaker. 
thou consider the better? Christ saves both 
by His Passion. Was He made flesh for the 
Man? So He was also for the woman. Did 
He die for the Man? 
saved by His death. 

second is indulgence, the third is transgres- 
sion, and anything beyond this is swinish, 
such as has not cven many examples of its 
wickedness. Now the Law grants divorce for 
every cause; but Christ not for every cause ; 
but He allows only separation from the whore ; 
and in all other things He commands patience. 
He allows to put away the fornicatress, be- 
cause she corrupts the offspring; but in all 
other matters let us be patient and endure ; or 
rather be ye* enduring and patient, as many 
as have received the yoke of matrimony. If 
you see lines or marks upon her, take away 
her ornaments; if a hasty tongue, restrain 
it; if a meretricious laugh, make it modest ; 
if immoderate expenditure or drink, reduce 
it; if unseasonable going out, shackle it; if 
a lofty eye, chastise it. It is uncertain 
which is in danger, the separator or the se- 
parated. Let thy fountain of water, it says, 
be only thine own, and let no stranger share 

it with thee; and, let the colt of thy favours 
and the stag of thy love company with thee ; 

The Woman also is _ 
He is called of the | 

seed of David ;¥ and so perhaps you think the | 

Man is honoured ; but He is born of a Virgin, 
and this is on the Woman’s side. ‘They two, 
He says, shall be one Flesh; so let the one 

. { 
flesh have equal honour.’’ And Paul legislates — 
_who is ranged among these by his character. 

for chastity by His example. How, and in 
what way? ‘This Sacrament is great, he says, 

sut [speak concerning Christ and the Church.? | 

It is well for the wife to reverence 
through her husband: and it is well for the 
husband not to dishonor the Church through 
his wife. Let the wife, he says, see that she 
reverence her husband, for so she does Christ ; 
but also he bids the husband cherish his wife, 
for so Christ does the Church. Let us, then, 
ceive further consideration to this saying. 
Vill. Churn milk and it will be butter ;$ 

Christ | 

| 
{ 

/ ent day. 

do thou then take care not to bea strange 
river, nor to please others better than thine 
But if thou be carried elsewhere, 
then thou makest a law of lewdness for thy 
partner also. ‘Thus saith the Saviour. 

IX. But what of the Pharisees? To them 
this word seems harsh. Yes, for they are also 
displeased at other noble words—both the 
older Pharisees, and the Pharisees of the pres- 
For it is not only race, but dispo- 
sition also that makes a Pharisee. ‘Thus also 
I reckon as an Assyrian or an Egyptian him 

What then say the Pharisees? If the case 
of the man be so with his wife, it is not 
good to marry. Is it only now, O Pharisee, 
that thou understandest this, It is not good 
to marry ?¥ Didst thou not know it before 

when thou sawest widowhoods, and orphan- 
hoods, and untimely deaths, and mourning 

examine this and perhaps you may find some- | 

thing more nourishing in it. For I think 
that the Word here seems to deprecate second 
marriage. For, if there were two Christs, 
there may be two husbands or two wives ; but 
if Christ is One, one Head of the Church, let 
there be also one flesh, and let a second be 
rejected ; and if it hinder the second what is 
to be said fora third? The first is law, the 

B Gen. ii. 6. 
ce ib;vse22sed, 

y Rom. i. 3. 
§ Prov, xxx. 33. 

a Keclus, i. rr, 

6 Ephes. ¥, 32, 

succeeding to shouting, and funerals coming 
upon weddings, and childlessness, and all the 
comedy or tragedy that is connected with 
this? Either is most appropriate language. 
It is good to marry; I too admit it, for 
marriage is honourable in all, and the bed 
undefiled. It is good for the temperate, 
not for those who are insatiable, and who 
desire to give more than due honour to the 
flesh. When marriage is only marriage and 
conjunction and the desire for a succession of 
children, marriage is honourable, for it brings 
into the world more to please God. But 

a An indication that S. Gregory was himself unmarried. 
‘ 3 es 

B Proy, v. 17. y Matt, xix. 10, Heb, xi, 4 

ON EE WORDS 

OF. Pils GOSPEL, 341 

when it kindles matter, and surrounds us with 
thorns, and as it were discovers the way of. 
vice, then I too say, It is not good to marry. | 

X. Marriage is honourable; but I cannot | 
say that it is more lofty than virginity ; for 
virginity were no great thing if it were not | 
better than a good thing. Do not however 
be angry, ye women that are subject to the 
yoke. We must obey God rather than man. 
But be ye bound together, both virgins and 
wives, and be one in the Lord, and each 
others’ adornment. ‘There would be no celi- 
bate if there were no marriage. For whence 
would the virgin have passed into this life? 
Marriage would not have been venerable un- 
less it had borne virgin fruit to God and to 
life. Honour thou also thy mother, of whom 
thou wast born. Honour thou also her who 
is of a mother and is a mother.* A mother 
she is not, but.a Bride of Christ she is. The 
visible beauty is not hidden, but that which 
is unseen is'visible to God. All the glory of 
the King’s Daughter is within,® clothed with 
golden fringes, embroidered whether by ac- 
tions or by contemplation. And she who 
is under the yoke, let her also in some de- 
gree be Christ’s; and the virgin altogether 
Christ’s. Let the one be not entirely chained 
to the world,” and let the other not belong to 
the world at all. For that which is a part to 
the yoked, is to the virgin all in all. Hast 
thou chosen the life of Angels? Art thou 
ranked among the unyoked? Sink not down 
to the flesh; sink not down to matter; be 
not wedded to matter, while otherwise thou 
remainest unwedded. A lascivious eye guard- 
eth not virginity; a meretricious tongue 
mingles with the Evil One; feet that walk 
disorderly accuse of disease or danger. Let 
the mind also be virgin; let it not rove 
about ; let it not wander; let it not carry in 
itself forms of evil things (for the form is a 
part of harlotry) ; let it not make idols in its 
soul of hateful things. 

XI. But He said unto them, All men can- 
not receive this saying, save they to whom 
it is given. Do you see the sublimity of the 
matter? It is found to be nearly incompre- | 
hensible. or surely it is more than carnal | 
that that which is born of flesh should not 
beget to the flesh. Surely it is Angelic that 
she who is bound to flesh should live not ac- 
cording to flesh, but be loftier than her na- | 
ture. ‘The flesh bound her to the world, but | 
reason led her up to God. The flesh weighed 

aThe passage is obscure. Combefis reads, ‘though she be 
not a mother’”’ but the MSS are against him. us 
B Ps. xlv. 14. y Luke vii. 14. 

her down, but reason gave her wings; the 
flesh bound her, but desire loosed her. With 
thy whole soul, O Virgin, be intent upon God 
(I give this same injunction to men and to 

| women); and do not take the same view in 

other respects of what is honourable as the 
mass of men do ; of family, of wealth, of throne, 
of dynasty, of that beauty which shews itself 
in complexion and composition of members, 
the plaything of time and disease. If thou 
hast poured out upon God the whole of thy 
love ; if thou hast not two objects of desire, 
both the passing and the abiding, both the 
visible and the invisible, then thou hast been 
so pierced by the arrow of election, and hast 
so learned the beauty of the Bridegroom, that 
thou too canst say with the bridal drama and 
song, thou art sweetness and altogether love- 
liness. 

XII. You see how streams confined in 
lead pipes, through being much compressed 
and carried to one point, often so far depart 
from the nature of water that that which is 
pushed from behind will often flow constantly 
upwards. So if thou confine thy desire, and 
be wholly joined to God, thou wilt not fall 
downward ; thou wilt not be dissipated ; thou 
wilt remain entirely Christ’s, until thou see 
Christ thy Bridegroom. Keep thyself unap- 
proachable, both in word and work and life, 
and thought and action. From all sides the 
Evil One interferes with thee ; he spies thee 
everywhere, where he may strike, where 
wound thee ; let him not find anything bared 
and ready to his stroke. The purer he sees 
thee, the more he strives to stain thee, for the 
stains on a shining garment are more conspic- 
uous. Let not eye draw eye, nor laughter 
laughter, nor familiarity night, lest night 
bring destruction. For that which is grad- 
ually drawn away and stolen, works a mischief 
which is unperceived at the time, but yet at- 
tains to the consummation of wickedness. 

XIII. All men, He saith, cannot receive 
this saying, but they to whom it is given. 
When you hear this, It is given, do not un- 
derstand it in a heretical fashion, and bring 
in differences of nature, the earthly and the 
spiritual and the mixed. For there are 
people so evilly disposed as to think that some 
men are of an utterly ruined nature, and some 
of a nature which is saved, and that others 
are of such a disposition as their will may lead 
them to, either to the better, or to the worse. 
For that men may have a certain aptitude, 
one more, another less, I too admit ; but not 
that this aptitude alone suffices for perfection, 
but that it is reason which calls this out, that 

342 

nature may proceed to action, just as fire is 
produced when a flint is struck with iron. 
When you hear ‘To whom it is given, add, 
And it is given to those who are called and 
to those who incline that way. lor when 
you hear, Not of him that willeth, nor of 
him that runneth, but of God that shew- 
eth mercy,# I counsel you to think the same. 
lor since there are some who are so proud of 
their successes that they attribute all to them- 
selves and nothing to Him that made them 
and gave them wisdom and supplied them 
with good ; such are taught by this word that 
even to wish well needs help from God ; or 
rather that even to choose what is right is 
divine and a gift of the mercy of God. For 
it is necessary both that we should be our own 
masters and also that our salvation should be 
of God. ‘This is why He saith not of him 
that willeth; that is, not of him that willeth 
only, nor of him that runneth only, but also 
of God. ‘That sheweth mercy. Next ; since 
to will also is from God, he has attributed the 
whole to God with reason. However much 
you may run, however much you may wrestle, 
yet you need one to give the crown. Except 
the Lord build the house, they laboured in 
vain that built it: Except the Lord keep the 
city, in vain they watched that keep it.é I 
know, He says, that the race is not to the 
swift, nor the battle to the strong,” nor the vic- 
tory to the fighters, nor the harbours to the 
good sailors; but to God it belongs both to 
work victory, and to bring the barque safe 
to port. 

XIV. In another place it is also said and 
understood, and perhaps it is necessary that I 
should add it as follows to what has already 
been said, in order that I may impart to you 
also my wealth. ‘The Mother of the Sons of Ze- 
bedee, in an impulse of parental affection, asked 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

He? ‘They shall drink the cup; but to sit 
on My right hand and on My left—it is not 
Mine, He saith, to give this, but to whom it 
hath been given.’’ Is then the ruling mind 
nothing ? Nothing the labour? Nothing the 
reasoning ?. Nothing the philosophy ? Nothing 
the fasting? Nothing the vigils, the sleeping 
on the ground, the shedding floods of tears ? 
Is it for nothing of these, but in accordance 
with some clection by lot, that a Jerenitas is 
sanctified, and others are estranged from the 
womb ? 

XV. I fear lest some monstrous reasoning 
may come in, as of the soul having lived else- 
where, and then having been bound to this 
body, and that it is from that other life that 
some receive the gift of prophecy, and others 
are condemned, namely, those who lived 
badly. But since such a conception is too 
absurd, and contrary to the traditions of the 
Church (others if they like may play with 
such doctrines, but it is unsafe for us to play 
with them) ; we must in this place too add to 

_the words ‘lo whom it hath been given,”’ 

_ thing bold about eunuchs. 

a thing in ignorance of the measure of what she | 

was asking,°® but pardonably, through the excess 
of her love and of the kindness duce to her chil- 
dren. For there is nothing more affectionate 
than a Mother,—and I speak of this that I 
may lay down a law for honouring Mothers. 
Their mother, then, asked Jesus that they 
might sit, the one on His right hand, the 
other on his left. But what saith the Saviour ? 
He first asks if they can drink the Cup which 
He Himself was about to drink; and when 
this was professed, and the Saviour accepted 
the profession (for He knew that they were 
being perfected by the same, or rather that 
they would be perfected thereby) ; what saith 

@ Worm, i. £6, 
y Eeccles..1x,,. 12. 

B Ps, cxxvii. 3. 
6 Matt. xx; 20, etc; 

this, “* who are worthy ;’’ who have not only 

received this character from the Father, but 
have given it to themselves. 
XVI. For there are eunuchs which were 

- made eunuchs from their mother’s womh, etc, 

I should very much like to be able to say some- 
Be not proud, ye 
who are eunuchs by nature. For, in point of 
self-restraint, this is perhaps unwilling. For it 
has not come to the test, nor has your self- 
restraint been proved by trial. For the good 
which is by nature is not a subject of merit ; 
that which is the result of purpose is laudable. 
What merit has fire for burning, for it is its 
nature to burn? What merit has water for 
falling, a property given to it by its Maker? 
What thanks does the snow get for its cold- 
ness, or the sun for its shining ?—It shines 
even if it does not wish. Claim merit if you 
please by willing the better things. You will 
claim it if, being carnal, you make yourself 
yourself spiritual ; if, while drawn down by 
the leaden flesh, you receive wings from rea- 
son; if though lowly born, you are found 
to be heavenly; if while chained down to 
the flesh, you shew yourself superior to the 
flesh. 

XVII. Since then, natural chastity is not 
meritorious, I demand something else from 
the eunuchs. Do not go a whoring in re- 
spect of the Godhead. Having been wedded 
to Christ, do not dishonour Christ. Being per- 
fected by the spirit, do not make the Spirit 
your own equal. If I yet pleased men, says 

a eee 
Paul, [should not be the servant of Christ. If | off: 

I worshipped a creature, I should not be called 
a Christian. For why is Christianity pre- 
cious? Is it not that Christ is God, unless 
my mingling with Him in love is a mere hu- 
man passion? And yet I honour Peter, but | 
am not called a Petrine; and Paul, but have 
never been called a Pauline. I cannot allow 
myself to be named after a man, who am born 
of God. 
Ifim to be God that you are called a Chris- 
tian, may you ever be so called, and may you 
remain in both the name and the thing; but 
if you are called trom Christ only because you 
have an affection for Him, you attribute no 
more to him than other names which are 
given from some practice or fact. 

XVIII. Consider those men who are de- 
voted to horse racing. ‘They are named after 
the colours and the sides on which they have 
placed themselves. You know the names 
without my mentioning them. If it is thus 
that you have got the name of Christian, the 
mere title is a very small thing even though 
you pride yourself upon it. But if it is be- 
cause you believe Him to be God, shew your 
faith by your works. If the Son is a creature, 
even now also you are worshipping the crea- 
ture instead of the Creator. If the Holy 
Ghost is a creature, you are baptized in vain, 
and are only sound on two sides, or rather 
not even on them; but on one you are alto- 
gether in danger. Imagine the Trinity to be 
asingle pearl, alike on all sides and equally glis- 
tening. If any part of the pearl be injured, 
the whole beauty of the stone is gone. So 
When you dishonour the Son in order to hon- 
our the lather, He does not accept your hon- 
our. The Vather doth not glory in the dis- 
honour of the Son. 
glad Father,? how much more doth the hon- 
our of the Son become that of the Father ! 
And if you also accept this saying, My Son, 
glory not in the dishonour of thy Father,7 
similarly the Father doth not glory in the 
Son’s dishonour. If you dishonour the Holy 
Crhost, the Son receiveth not your honour. For 
though He be not of the Father in the same 
way as the Son, yet He is of the same Father. 
Kither honour the whole or dishonour the 
whole, so as to have a consistent mind. I can- 
not accept your half piety. I would have 
you altogether pious, but in the way that I 
desire. Pardon my affection: I am grieved 
even for those who hate me. You were one 
of my members, even though you are now cut 

If a wise Son maketh a | 

| 

So then, if it is because you believe | 

| 
| 

ON THE WORDS OF THE GOSPEL. 343 

perhaps you will again become a mem- 
ber; and therefore I speak kindly. ‘Thus 
much for the sake of the Eunuchs, that they 
may be chaste in respect of the Godhead. 

XIX. For it is not only bodily sin which is 
called fornication and adultery, but any sin 
you have committed, and especially trans- 
gression against that which is divine. Per- 
haps you ask how we can prove this :—They 
went a whoring, it says, with their own in- 
ventions.* Do you see an impudent act 
of fornication? And again, ‘They committed 
adultery in the wood.? See you a kind of 
adulterous religion? Do not then commit 
spiritual adultery, while keeping your bodies 
chaste. Do not shew that it is unwillingly 
you are chaste in body, by not being chaste 
where you caz commit fornication. Why 
have you done your impiety? Why are you 
hurried to vice, so that it is all one to call a 
man a Eunuch ora villain? Place yourselves 
on the side of men, and, even though so late, 
have some manly thoughts. Avoid the wo- 
men’s apartments ; do not let the disgrace of 
proclamation be added to the disgrace of the 
name. Would you have us persevere a little 
longer in this discourse, or are you tired with 
what we have said ? Nay, by what follows let 
even the eunuchs be honoured. For the word 
is one of praise. 

XX. ‘There are, He says, some eunuchs 
which were so born from their mother’s 
womb; and there are some eunuchs which 
were made eunuchs of men; and there be 
eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs 
for the Kingdom of Heaven’s sake. He that 
is able to receive it, let him receive it. I 
think that the discourse would sever itself 
from the body, and represent higher things by 
bodily figures; for to stop the meaning at 
bodily eunuchs would be small and very weak, 
and unworthy of the Word ; and we must un- 
derstand in addition something worthy of the 
Spirit. Some, then, seem by nature to incline 
to good. And when I speak of nature, I am 
not slighting free will, but supposing both— 
an aptitude for good, and that which brings 
the natural aptitude to effect. And there arc 
others whom reason cleanses, by cutting them 
off from the passions. ‘These I imagine to be 
meant by those whom men have made Eunuchs, 
when the word of teaching distinguishing the 
better from the worse and_ rejecting the one 
and commanding the other (like the verse, 
Depart from evil and do good), works spiritual 
chastity. ‘This sort of making eunuchs I ap- 

OG Gralat Taro. BeRkOVi x x y Ecclis. tit, 10, 

oPsi-cviv 49% B Jer, iii, 9 (Libere), WRoXRNVIE 275 

3-44 
prove ; and I highly praise both teachers and 
taught, that the one have nobly effected, and 
the other still more nobly endured, the cut- 
ting off, 

XNXI. And there be eunuchs which have | 

made themselves cunuchs for the Kingdom of 
Heaven’s sake. 
met with teachers, have been laudable teach- 
ers to themselves. No father nor mother, 
no Priest or Bishop, nor any of those com- 

missioned to teach, taught you your duty; | 

but by moving reason in yourself and by 
kindling the spark of good by your free will, 
you made yourself a eunuch, and acquired 

| 
! 
| 
| 

Others, too, who have not | 

| 
| 
| 
| 

such a habit of virtue that impulse to vice be- | 

came almost an impossibility to you. ‘There- 
fore I praise this kind of Eunuch-making also, 
and perhaps even above the others. He 
that is able to receive it let him receive it. 
Choose which part you will; either follow the 
‘Teacher or be your own teacher. One thing 
alone is shameful—that the passions be not 
extirpated. It matters not how they are ex- 
tirpated. The teacher is God’s creature ; and 
you also have the same origin; and whether 
the teacher grasp this grace, or the good be 
your own—it is equally good. 

XXII. Only let us cut ourselves off from 
passion, lest any root of bitterness springing 
up trouble us ;* only let us follow the image ; 
only let us reverence our Archetype. Cut off 
the bodily passions ; cut off also the spiritual. 
lor by how much the soul is more precious 
than the body, by so much more precious is it 
to cleanse the soul than the body. And if 
cleansing of the body be a praiseworthy act, 
see, I pray you, how much greater and higher 
is that of the soul. Cut away the Arian im- 
piety ; cut away the false opinion of Sabellius ; 
do not join more than is right, or wrongly 
sever ; do not either confuse the Three Persons 
into One, or make Three diversities of Nature. 
‘The One is praiseworthy if rightly understood ; 
and the Three when rightly divided, when the 
division is of Persons, not of Godhead. 

XXII. I enact this for Laymen too, and I 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

enjoin it also upon all Priests, and upon those | 
J , 

commissioned to rule. 

to aid. It is a great thing to check murder, 
to punish adultery, to chastise theft; much 
more to establish piety by law, and to bestow 
sound doctrine. My word will not be able to 
do as much in fighting for the Holy Trinity as 
your Edict, if you will bridle the ill disposed, 
if you will help the persecuted, if you will 

Come to the aid of the | 
; : ; | 
Word, all of you to whom God has given power 

check the slayers, and prevent people from 
being slain. I am speaking not mercly of 
bodily but of spiritual slaughter. For all sin 
is the death of the soul. 6 Rome (a 
my discourse end. 

XXIV. But it remains that I speak a prayer 
for those who are assembled. Husbands alike 
and wives, rulers and ruled, old men, and 

/ young men, and maidens, every sort of age, 

bear ye every loss whether of money or of 
body, but one thing alone do not endure—to 
lose the Godhead. I adore the Father, I 

_adore the Son, I adore the Holy Ghost; or 

rather We adore them; I, who am speaking, 
before all and after all and with all, in the 
same Christ our Lord, to whom be the glory 
and the might for ever. Amen. 

INTRODUCTION 
ON THE 

TO THE ORATION 
THEOPHANY. 

Tue Title of this Oration has given rise 
to a doubt whether it was preached on Dec. 
25, 380, or on Jan. 6, 381. The word 
Theophania is well known as a name for the 
Epiphany; which, however, according to 
Schaff,* was originally a celebration both 
of the Nativity and the Baptism of our Lord. 
The two words seem both to have been used 
in the simplest sense of the Manifestation 
of God, and certainly were applied to Christ- 
mas Day. ‘Thus Suidas, ‘*The Epiphany is 
the Incarnation of the Saviour;’’ and Epi- 
phanius (Her., 53), ‘‘ The Day of the Epi- 
phany is the day on which Christ was born 
according to the flesh.’? But S. Jerome ap- 
plies the word to the Baptism of Christ ; 
‘The day of the Epiphany is still venerable ; 
not, as some think, on account of His Birth in 
the flesh ; for then He was hidden, not mani- 
fested ; but it agrees with the time at which 
it was said, This is My beloved Son (In 
Ezech. I.). There is also a Sermon, attri- 
buted to S. Chrysostom, ‘¢On the Baptism of 
Christ,’’? in which it is expressly denied that 
the name Theophany applies to Christmas. 
The Oration itself, however, contains evidence 
to shew that the Festival of our Lord’s Birth 
was kept at the earlier date; for in c. 16 
the Preacher says, ‘‘ A little later you shall see 
Jesus submitting to be purified in the river 
Jordan for my purification.’? And another 
piece of evidence occurs in the oration In 
Sancta Lumina, c. 14, ‘¢ At His Birth we duly 
kept festival, both I the leader of the feast, 

a Heb. cx, 15, 

oH. E., Nic-Rer.,-p. 309. 

and you. Now we are come to another 
action of Christ and another Mystery.”’ 

The Oration is thus analysed by Abbé 
Beénoit: 

«« After an exordium which is full of the en- 
thusiasm and joy which such a subject natur- 
ally inspires the Orator recommends _ his 

hearers to celebrate the Festival by a pious | 

gladness, and by hearing the Word of God ; 
and not as the heathen celebrated their feasts, 
by profane amusements and all kinds of ex- 
cess. He will try to satisfy their desires by 
speaking to them of God. God is infinite, 
ineffable, eternal, the Sovereign Good. He 
created the Angels in the beginning out of 
goodness. The fall of the Angels was followed 
by the creation of the material world. Man 
too fell, and God shewed His mercy even in 
the punishment. He used various means to 
raise him again; and at length He came 
Himself. Then the speaker forcibly argues 
against those who misuse the infinite conde- 
scension of the Word to contest His Godhead ; 
he rapidly traces the principal features of His 
Life—at once human and Divine; and ends 
with a recommendation to his hearers to imit- 
ate in all things the Life of Christ, so that 
they may have a share in His Kingdom in 
Heaven.’ 

It is considered one of the best of Gregory’s 
discourses. ‘‘ By the grandeur of the plan,’’ 
says Bénoit, ‘‘the elevation of the ideas, and 
the rich fund of doctrine, this discourse is in- 
contestably one of 5. Gregory’s most remark- 
able efforts.’’ 

ORATION XXXVIII. 

ON THE THEOPHANY, OR BIRTHDAY OF 

CHRIST. 
I. CuRIsT Is BORN, glorify ye Him. Christ 
from heaven, go ye out to meet Him. Christ 

on earth ; be ye exalted. Sing unto the Lord 
all the whole earth ;* and that I may join both 
in one word, Let the heavens rejoice, and let 

the earth be glad, for Him Who is of heaven: 

and then of earth. Christ in the flesh, rejoice 
with trembling and with joy ; with trembling 
because of your sins, with joy because of your 
hope. Christ of a Virgin ; O ye Matrons live 
as Virgins, that ye may be Mothers of Christ. 
Who doth not worship Him That is from the 
beginning? Who doth not glorify Him That 
is the Last ? 

OPRSAXCVie Tt, 

II. Again the darkness is past ; again Light is 
made ; again Egypt is punished with darkness ; 
again Israel is enlightened by a pillar. ‘The 
people that sat in the darkness of ignorance, 
let it see the Great Light of full knowledge. 
Old things are passed away, behold all things 
are become new.’ ‘The letter gives way, the 
Spirit comes to the front. ‘The shadows flee 
away, the ‘Truth comes in upon them. Mel- 
chisedec is concluded.é He that was without 
Mother becomes without Father (without 
Mother of His former state, without I’ather of 
His second). ‘The laws of nature are upset ; 
the world above must be filled. Christ com- 
mands it, let us not set ourselves against Him. 
O clap your hands together all ye people,* be- 
cause unto us a Child is born, anda Son given 
unto us, Whose Government is upon His 
shoulder (for with the Cross it is raised up), 
and His Name is called ‘The Angel of the 
Great Counsel of the Father. Let John cry, 
Prepare ye the way of the Lord:” I too will 
cry the power of this Day. He Who is not 
carnal is Incarnate; the Son of God becomes 
the Son of Man, Jesus Christ the Same yes- 
terday, and to-day, and for ever.? Let the 
Jews be offended, let the Greeks deride ;* let 
heretics talk till their tongues ache. Then 
shall they believe, when they see Him ascend- 
ing up into heaven; and if not then, yet when 
they see Him coming out of heaven and sit- 
ting as Judge. 

III. Of these on a future occasion ; for the 
present the Festival is the Theophany or 
Birth-day, for it is called both, two titles being 
given to the one thing. For God was mani- 
fested to man by birth. On the one hand 
Being, and eternally Being, of the Eternal 
Being, above cause and word, for there was no 
word before The Word ; and on the other hand 
for our sakes also Becoming, that He Who 
gives us our being might also give us our Well- 
being, or rather might restore us by His In- 
carnation, when we had by wickedness fallen 
from wellbeing. ‘The name Theophany is 
given to it in reference to the Manifestation, 
and that of Birthday in respect of His Birth. 

IV. This is our present Festival; it is this 
which we are celebrating to-day, the Coming 
of God to Man, that we might go forth,’ or 

a. Exod, xiv. 20. Br Leay-ance G3 TeCOre Va £74 

§ The meaning clearly is that the type presented by Melchisedec 
(Heb. vii. 3) is fulfilled in Christ. ‘The explanation here given by 
S. Gregory is the ordinary one found in the Fathers. Thus, e.g., 
Theodoret says, ‘‘Christ our Lord is without Mother as God, for 
He was begotten of the Father alone; and without Father as Man, 
for He was born ofa pure Virgin.””. Oecumenius has almost the 
exact words of Gregory. So also S. Augustine (Tract im Joann, 
8), ‘Christ was singularly born of a Father without a Mother, ofa 
Mother without a Father ; without Mother as God, without Father 
as Man.”’ e Ps, xlvii. 1. ¢ Isa. ix, 6. 4 Matt. 11.3. 

0 Heb. xiii, 8. Kae Core ose A Ephes. iv, 22, 24. 

346 
rather (for this is the more proper serene 
that we might go back to God—that putting 
off the old man, we might put on the New ; 
and that as we died in Adam, so we might 
live in Christ,¢ being born with Christ and 
erucilied with Him and buried with Him and 
rising with THim.® lor I must undergo the 
beautiful conversion, and as the painful suc- 
ceeded the more blissful, so must the more 
blissful come out of the painful. Tor where 
sin abounded Grace did much more abound ; ¥ 
and if a taste condemned us, how much more 
doth the Passion of Christ justify us? ‘There- 
fore let us keep the Feast, not after the man- 
ner of a heathen festival, but after a godly 
sort ; not after the way of the world, but in 
a fashion above the world; not as our own, 
but as belonging to Him Who is ours, or 
rather as our Master’s; not as of weakness, 
but as of healing; not as of creation, but of 
re-creation. 

V. And how shall this be? Let us not adorn 
our porches, nor arrange dances, nor decorate 
the streets; let us not feast the eye, nor en- 
chant the ear with music, nor enervate the 
nostrils with perfume, nor prostitute the taste, 
nor indulge the touch, those roads that are so 
prone to evil and entrances for sin ; let us not 
be effeminate in clothing soft and flowing, 
whose beauty consists in its uselessness, nor 
with the glittering of gems or the sheen of 
gold® or the tricks of colour, belying the 
beauty of nature, and invented to do despite 
unto the image of God; Not in rioting and 
drunkenness, with which are mingled, I know 
well, chambering and wantonness, since the 
lessons which evil teachers give are evil; 
or rather the harvests of worthless seeds are 
worthless. Let us not set up high beds of 
leaves, making 
what belongs to debauchery. Let us not ap- 
praise the bouquet of wines, the kickshaws of 
cooks, the great expense of unguents. Let 
not sea and land bring us as a gift their prec- 
ious dung, for it is thus that I have learnt to 
estimate luxury; and let us not strive to out- 
do each other in intemperance (for to my 
mind every superfluity is intemperance, and 
all which is beyond absolute need),—and this 
while others are hungry and in want, who are 
made of the same clay and in the same man- 
ner. 

VI. Let us leave all these to the Grecks and 
to the pomps and festivals of the Greeks, who 
call by the name of gods beings who rejoice 
in the reek of sacrifices, and who consistently 

a7 Cor, xy 22, B Col. uate y Rom: vate; 0 Romsxine 13. 

imei Pe ee N. 

i: ines with their belly ; evil inventors and 

tabernacles for the belly of | 

worshippers of evildemons. But we, the Ob- 
ject of whose adoration is the Word, if we 
must in some way have luxury, let us seek it 
in word, and in the Divine Law, and in his- 
tories 5 especially such as are the origin of this 
Feast; that our luxury may be akin to and 
not far removed from Him Who hath called 
us together. Or do you desire (for to-day I 
am your entertainer) that I should set before 
you, my good Guests, the story of these 
things as abundantly and as nobly as I can, 
that ye may know how a foreigner can feed 
the natives of the land, and a rustic the peo- 
ple of the town, and one who cares not for 
luxury those who delight in it, and one who 
is poor and homeless those who are eminent 
for wealth ? 

We will begin from this point; and let me 
ask of you who delight in such matters to 
cleanse you mind and your ears and your 
thoughts, since our discourse is to be of God 
and Divine ; that when you depart, you may 
have had the enjoyment of delights that really 
fade not away. And this same discourse shall 
be at once both very full and very concise, 
that you may neither be displeased at its de- 
ficiencies, nor find it unpleasant through sa- 
tiety. 

VII. God always was,? and always is, and 
always will be. Or rather, God always Is. For 
Was and Will be are fragments of our time, 
and of changeable nature, but He is Eternal 

seing. And this is the Na ame that He gives 
to Himself when giving the Oracle to Moses 
in the Mount. For in “Himself He sums up 
and contains all Being, having neither begin- 
ning in the past nor end in the future; like 
some great Sea of Being, limitless and un- 
bounded, transcending all conception of time 
and nature, only adumbrated by the mind, 
and that very dimly and scantily ; 
not by His Essentials, but by His Environ- 
ment; one image being got from one source 
and another from another, and combined into 
some sort of presentation of the truth, which 
escapes us before we have caught it, and takes 
to flight before we have conceived it, blaz- 
ing forth upon our Master-part, even when 
that is cleansed, as the lightning flash which 
will not stay its course, does upon our sight 
in order as I conceive by that part 
of it which we can comprehend to draw 
us to itself (for that which is altogether incom- 

a Alluding to his own recent arrival at Constantinople, after a 
life spent in the distant country of Cappadocia, and in ministering 
in small and insignificant places like Nazianzus. 

B The whole of this passage occurs again verbatim in the second 
Oration for Easter Day, cc. 1ii.-ix. 

ON THE SHVOrmANY, 

prehensible is outside the bounds of hope, 
and not within the compass of endeavour), 
and by that part of It which we cannot com- 
prehend to move our wonder, and as an object 
of wonder to become more an object of de- 
sire, and being desired to purify, and by puri- 

fying to make us like God ;# so that when we | 

have thus become like Himself, God may, to 
use a bold expression, hold converse with us 
as Gods, being united to us, and that perhaps 
to the same extent as He already knows those 
who are known to Him. 
then is boundless and hard to understand ; and 

all that we can comprehend of Him is His | 

boundlessness ; even though one may conceive 
that because He i is of a simple nature He is 
therefore either wholly incomprehensible, or 
perfectly comprehensible. For let us further 
enquire what is implied by ‘‘is of a simple 
nature.’” For it is quite certain that this 
simplicity is not itself its nature, just as com- 
position is not by itself the essence of com- 
pound beings. 

VIII. And when Infinity is considered from 
two points of view, beginning and end (for 
that which is beyond these and not limited by 
them is Infinity), when the mind looks to the 
depth above, not having where to stand, and 
leans upon phenomena to form an idea of God, 
it calls the Infinite and Unapproachable which 
it finds there by the name of Unoriginate. 
And when it looks into the depths below, and 
at the future, it calls Him Undying and Im- 
perishable. And when it draws a conclusion 
from the whole it calls Him Eternal (aiwvos). 
For Eternity (aiwy) is neither time nor part 
of time; for it cannot be measured. But 
what time, measured by the course of the sun, 
is to us, that Eternity is to the Everlasting, 
namely, a sort of time-like movement and in- 
terval co-extensive with their existence. This, 
however, is all I must now say about God ; 
for the present is not a suitable time, as my 
present subject is not the doctrine of God, 
but that of the Incarnation. But when I say 
God, I mean Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 
lor Godhead is neither diffused beyond these, 
so as to bring inamob of gods 3; nor yet is it 
bounded by a smaller compass than these, so 
as to condemn us for a poverty-stricken con- 
ception of Deity ; either Judaizing to save the 
Monarchia, or falling into heathenism by the 
multitude of our gods. For the evil on either 
side is the same, though found in contrary di- 
rections. ‘This then is the Holy of Holies,§ 
which is hidden even from the Seraphim, and 

OR BIRTHDAY 

The Divine Nature | 

a John x. 15 
B ‘The Holy oe Holies here means the Holy Trinity. 

OF CHRIST. 347 

is glorified with a thrice repeated Holy,¢ 
meeting in one ascription of the Title Lord 
and God, as one of our predecessors has most 
beautifully and loftily pointed out. 

IX. But since this movement of self-contem- 
plation alone could not satisfy Goodness, but 
Good must be poured out and go forth be- 
yond Itself to multiply the objects of Its be- 
neficence, for this was essential to the highest 
Goodness, He first conceived the Heavenly 
and Angelic Powers. And this conception 
was a work fulfilled by His Word, and _per- 
fected by His Spirit. And so the secondary 
Splendours came into being, as the Ministers 
of the Primary Splendour ; whether we are 
to conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or 
as Fire of an immaterial and incorruptible 
kind, or as some other nature approaching 
this as near as may be. I should like to say 
that they were incapable of movement in the 
direction of evil, and susceptible only of the 
movement of good, as being about God, and 
illumined with the first rays from God—for 
earthly beings have but the second illumina- 
tion ; but I am obliged to stop short of saying 
that, and to conceive and speak of them only 
as difficult to move because of him,? who for 
his splendour was called Lucifer, but became 
and is called Darkness through his pride ; and 
the apostate hosts who are subject to him, 
creators of evilY by their revolt against good 
and our inciters. 

X. Thus, then, and for these reasons, He 
gave being to the world of thought, as far as I 
can reason upon these matters, and estimate 
great things in my own poor language. ‘Then 
when His first creation was in good order, He 
conceives asecond world, material and visible ; 
and this a system and compound of earth and 
sky, and all that isin the midst of them—an ad- 
mirable creation indeed, when we look at the 
fair form of every part, but yet more worthy 
of admiration when we consider the harmony 
and the unison of the whole, and how each 

a. The reference is to the Ter Sanctus or Triumphal Hymn, 
which is found in every Liturgy. The previous writer referred | to is 
thought by some to be S, Athan: rsius, but by others S. Dionysius 
the Areopagite, who has some words on this point in his treatise 
De Corlest. Hier., c. 7. But the most competent scholars deny the 
authenticity of the works attributed to S. Dionysius, and place 
them from one hundred to one hundred and fifty years later than 
S. Gregory’s time. 

BS. ‘Thomas Aquinas (Summa I., qu. 63, art. 7) gives reasons 
for thinking that Satan was originally the highest of all the angclic 
hosts. ‘This, however, is an opinion in which many high authori- 
ties differ from him. At: any rate, Satan as Lucifer must have held 
a very high place. 

y Hvil, says Nicetas here, has no positive existence, but is the 
negation of good. | ‘‘ The faculties of mind and body which are 
used ina sinful action are indeed things, and are the creatures of 
God; but the sin itself is not a thing, and consequently not a 
creature. God is indeed the Author of all that is, of every sub- 
stance; but sin is not a substance, and is not. It is a declination 
from substance and from being, and not a part of it. (Mozley, 
Treatise on the Augustinian doctrine of predestination.) 

348 

part fits in with every other, in fair order, and 
all with the whole, tending to the perfect 
completion of the world as a Unit. This was 
to shew that He could call into being, not 

GREGORY Nae Zine. 

only a Nature akin to Himself, but also one | 
y , 

altogether alien to Himself. For akin to 
Deity are those natures which are intellectual, 
and only to be comprehended by mind; but 
all of which sense can take cognisance are ut- 
terly alien to It; and of these the furthest 
removed are all those which are entirely des- 
titute of soul and of power of motion. Dut 

perhaps some one of those who are too festive © 
and impetuous may say, What has all this to | 

do with us? Spur your horse to the goal. 
Talk to us about the Festival, and the reasons 
for ‘our being here to-day. 
what Iam about to do, although I have be- 

nation to God. For to this, I think, tends 
that Light of ‘Vruth which we here possess but 
in measure, that we should both see and ex- 
perience the Splendour of God, which is wor- 
thy of Him Who made us, and will remake 
us again after a loftier fashion. 

XH. ‘This being He placed in Paradise, 
whatever the Paradise may have been, having 
honoured him with the gift of Free Will (in 
order that God might belong to him as the re- 
sult of his choice, no less than to Him who 
had implanted the seeds of it), to till the im- 
mortal plants, by which is meant perhaps the 
Divine Conceptions, both the simpler and the 

~more perfect ; naked in his simplicity and in- 

Yes, this is | 

gun at a somewhat previous point, being com-— 
pelled to do so by love, and by the needs | 

of my argument. 
XI. Mind, then, and sense, thus distin- 

guished from each other, had remained within | 

their own boundaries, and bore in themselves 

the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent 

praisers* and thrilling heralds of His mighty 
work. Not yet was there any mingling of both, 
nor any mixtures of these opposites, tokens 

of a greater Wisdom and Generosity in the | 

creation of natures ; nor as yet were the whole 
riches of Goodness made known. Now the 
Creator-Word, determining to exhibit this, 
and to produce a single living being out of 
both—the visible and the invisible creations, 
I mean—fashions Man; and taking a body 
from already existing matter, and placing in 
it a Breath taken from Himself® which the 
Word knew to be an intelligent soul and the 
Image of God, as a sort of second world. He 
placed him, great in littlenessY on the earth ; 
a new Angel, a mingled worshipper, fully 
initiated into the visible creation, but only 
partially into the intellectual; King of all 
upon earth, but subject to the King above ; 
earthly and heavenly ; temporal and yet im- 
mortal ; visible and yet intellectual ; half-way 
between greatness and lowliness; in one per- 
son combining spirit and flesh ; spirit, because 
of the favour bestowed on him; flesh, be- 
cause of the height to which he had been 
raised; the one that he might continue to 
live and praise his Benefactor, the other that 
he might suffer, and by suffering be put in 
remembrance, and corrected if he became 
proud of his greatness. A living creature 
trained here, and then moved elsewhere ; and, 
to complete the mystery, deified by its incli- 

artificial life, and without any covering or 
screen ; for it was fitting that he who was 
from the beginning should be such. Also He 
gave hima Law, as a material for his Free 
Will to act upon. ‘This Law was a Com- 
mandment as to what plants he might partake 
of, and which one he might not touch. ‘This 
latter was the Tree of Knowledge ; not, how- 
ever, because it was evil from the beginning 
when planted ; nor was it forbidden because 
God grudged it to us Let not the ene- 
mies of God wag their tongues in that direc- 
tion, or imitate the Serpent . . But it 
would have been good if partaken of at the 
proper time, for the tree was, according to my 
theory, Contemplation, upon which it is only 
safe for those who have reached maturity of 
habit to enter; but which is not good for 
those who are still somewhat simple and 
greedy in their habit; just as solid food 
is not good for those who are yet tender, and 
have need of milk.¢ But when through the 
Devil’s malice and the woman’s caprice, to_ 
which she succumbed as the more tender, and 
which she brought to bear upon the man, as 
she was the more apt to persuade, alas for my 
weakness! (for that of my first father was 
mine), he forgot the Commandment which 
had been given to him; he yielded to the 
baleful fruit ; and for his sin he was banished, 
at once from the Tree of Life, and from Para- 
dise, and from God ; and put on the coats of 
skins that is, perhaps, the coarser flesh, 
both mortal and contradictory. This was the 
first thing that he learnt—his own shame ; ¥ and 
he hid himself from God. Yet here too he 
makes a gain, namely death, and the cutting 
off of sin, in order that evil may not be im- 
mortal. Thus his punishment is changed into 
a mercy ; for it is in mercy, I am persuaded, 
that God inflicts punishment. 

XI. And having been first chastened by 

GPS Rix, B Gen, i 7. y Sc. a microcosm, 

@ Heb, v. 12. B- Geni, 5: y Rom. i, 22-31. 

ON 

THE THEOPHANY, OR BIRTHDAY OF CHRIST. 349 

many means (because his sins were many, | for a short while, that I may have a share in 

whose root of evil sprang up through divers 
causes and at sundry times), by word, by law, 
by prophets, by benefits, by threats, by plagues, 
by waters, by fires, by wars, by victories, by 

defeats, by signs in heaven and signs in the 

air and in the earth and in the sea, by unex- 
pected changes of men, of cities, of nations 
(the object of which was the destruction of 
wickedness), at last he needed a stronger rem- 
edy, for his diseases were growing worse ; 

mutual slaughters, adulteries, perjuries, unnat- | 

ural crimes, and that first and last of all evils, 
idolatry and the transfer of worship from the 
Creator to the Creatures. As these required a 
greater aid, so also they obtained a greater. 
And that was that the Word of God Himself 
—Who is before all worlds, the Invisible, the 
[Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, Beginning of 
Beginning,* the Light of Light, the Source of 
Life and Immortality, the Image of the Ar- 
chetypal Beauty, the immovable Seal, the un- 
changeable Image, the [ather’s Definition 4 
and Word, came to His own Image, and took 
on Him flesh for the sake of our flesh, and 
mingled Himself with an intelligent soul for 
my soul’s sake, purifying like by like; and in 
all points except sin was made man. Con- 
ceived by the Virgin,y who first in body and 
soul was purified by the Holy Ghost® (for 
it was needful both that Childbearing should 
be honoured, and that Virginity should receive 
a higher honour), He came forth then as God 
with that which He had assumed, One Person 
in two Natures, Flesh and Spirit, of which the 
latter deified the former.¢ O new comming- 
ling; O strange conjunction; the Self-Exis- 
tent comes into being, the Uncreate is crea- 
ted, That which cannot be contained is con- 
tained, by the intervention of an intellectual 
soul, mediating between the Deity and the 
corporeity of the flesh. And He Who gives 
riches becomes poor, for He assumes the poy- 
erty of my flesh, that I may assume the rich- 
ness of His Godhead. 
Himself, for He empties Himself of His glory 

a Cf. Light of Light Begotten. Christ our Lord is called ‘* The 
Beginning of the Creation of God, because by Him all things 

Father is the Unoriginate Principle of all, and the Origin and 
Fount of Godhead. ‘The Scholiast here refers to Ps. cx. 3, which 
in the Vulgate and LXX, runs ‘‘ With Thee is the Beginning in the 
day of Thy Power.” 

B Cf. Theol.: IV. xx., where S. Gregory says ‘ Perhaps this Re- 
lation might be compared to that between the Definition and the 
thing defined.” Nicetas remarks that, justas the definition de- 
clares the nature of the defined, so the Personal Word shows forth 
the Nature of the Father. Suidas (in voce 6pos ) says that the 

He that is full empties © 

_for the Spirit? 

phrase is used to show the Unity of Nature between the Father | 

and the Son. It is not, however, of frequent occurrence. 

y Luke i. 35. 

6S. Gregory does not seem to have been aware of the doctrine 
of the ‘‘ Immaculate Conception.” 

€ See note on In Sancta Lumina, c. xiv, 
VOR. Vall 

What is the riches of His 
Goodness? What is this mystery that is 
around me? [had ashare in the image; I 
did not keep it; He partakes of my flesh that 
He may both save the image and make the 
flesh immortal. He communicates a second 
Communion far more marvellous than. the 
first, inasmuch as then He imparted the better 
Nature, whereas now Himself partakes of the 
worse. ‘This is more godlike than the former 
action, this is loftier in the eyes of all men of 
understanding. 

XIV. ‘To this what have those cavillers to 
say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead, 
those detractors of all that is praiseworthy, 
those darkeners of light, uncultured in respect 
of wisdom, for whom Christ died in vain, those 
unthankful creatures, the work of the Evil 
One? Do you turn this benefit into a re- 
proach to God? Wilt thou deem Him little 
on this account, that He humbled Himself for 
thee ; because the Good Shepherd, He who 
lays down His life for His sheep, came to seck 
for that which had strayed upon the moun- 
tains and the hills, on which thou wast then 
sacrificing, and found the wanderer ; and hav- 
ing found it,® took it upon His shoulders—on 
which He also took the Wood of the Cross ; 
and having taken it, brought it back to the 
higher life; and having carried it back, num- 
bered it amongst those who had never strayed. 
Because He lighted a candle—His own Flesh 
and swept the house, cleansing the world 
from sin; and sought the piece of money, the 
Royal Image that was covered up by passions. 
And He calls together His Angel friends on 
the finding of the coin, and makes them 
sharers in His joy,¥ whom He had made to 
share also the secret of the Incarnation? Be- 
cause on the candle of the Forerunner there 
follows the light that exceeds in brightness ; 
and to the Voice the Word succeeds ; and to 
the Bridegroom’s friend the Bridegroom ; to 
him that prepared for the Lord a peculiar peo- 
ple, cleansing them by water in preparation 

Dost thou reproack God 
Dost thou on this account 

His Fulness. 

with all this? 

_ deem Him lessened, because He girds Himself 

were made; and He is of the Beginning, inasmuch as God the | 
g 

with a towel and washes His disciples’ feet, 
and shows that humiliation is the best road to 
exaltation? Because for the soul that was 
bent to the ground He humbles Himself, that 
He may raise up with Himself the soul that 
was tottering to a fall under a weight of sin? 
Why dost thou not also charge upon Him as a 

@ Johnex.. rr, B Luke xv. 4, sq. y Ib. xv. 8, 10, 

Bb 

350 

crime the fact that He eats with Publicans and 
at Publicans’ tables,¢ and that He makes disci- 
ples of Publicans, that He too may gain some- 
what 3) SO We 
of sinners. Ifso, we must blame the physi- 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

the salvation | 

cian for stooping over sufferings, and enduring | 

evil odours that he may give health to the 
sick ; or one who as the Law commands bent 
down into a ditch to save a beast that had 
fallen into it.8 

XV. He was sent, but as man, for He was 
of atwofold Nature; for He was wearied, and 
hungered, and was thirsty, and was in an 
agony, and shed tears, according to the nature 
of a corporeal being. And if the expression 
be also used of Him as God, the meaning is 
that the Father’s good pleasure is to be con- 
sidered a Mission, for to this He refers all that 
concerns Himself; both that He may honour 
the Eternal Principle, and because He will 
not be taken to be an antagonistic God. And 
whereas it is written both that He was_ be- 
trayed, and also that He gave Himself up ¥ 
and that He was raised up by the Father, and 
taken up into heaven ; and on the other hand, 
that He raised Himself and went up; the for- 
mer statement of each pair refers to the good 
pleasure of the Father, the latter to His own 
Power. Are you then to be allowed to dwell 
upon all that humiliates Him, while passing 
over all that exalts Him, and to count on your 
side the fact that He suffered, but to leave 
out of the account the fact that it was of His 
own will? See what even now the Word has 
to suffer. By one set He is honoured as God, 
but is confused with the Father,’ by another 

a Luke v. 29. 

B S. Gregory is referring to the provision of the Law, which or- 
ders a man, if he see his friend’s or his enemy’s ox or ass fallen 
under a burden or going astray, to lend assistance ; but the terms 

of his reference are rather to the reasoning of our Lord with the | 

Pharisees about the Sabbath. Luke will. 15 and xiv. 5. 

y Cf. év 7 vuxri év 7 mapedidoro, waddov Se éavtov mapedidov. 
Canon of Liturgy of S. Mark (Swainson p. 517). Ea nocte qua 
tradidit seipsum. Lit. Copt. S. Basil (Ib.). Cum statuisset se 
tradere. Coptic S. Basil (Hammond, p. 209) Rot. Vatic, and 
Cod. Ross. of S. Mark, has only 7. v. 7 €avt, maped. (Swainson, 
50) ; so too S. Basil (Ib., 81) in Cod. B. M., 22749 and Barberini 
of S. Chrys. ({b., gi) ;_but the whole expression 1s in Chrys. (cent. 
xi., ib. 129) and in Greek S. James (78. 272-3), but Syriac S. 
James has ‘‘in qua nocte tradendus erat,” (Canon. Univ., 
YEthiop. Hammond, 258). Pride guam pateretur is the form in 
the Canon of the Roman, Ambrosian, and Sarum Missals; but 
the Mozarabic, which is largely of an Eastern character, has 7 
gua nocte tradebatur. (Hammond, 333). 

& The Sabellian heresy may be briefly described as the doctrine | 

of One God exercising three offices, as opposed to the Catholic 
Faith of One God in three Persons. Sabellius himself was a Priest 
of the Libyan Pentapolis, who at Rome in the time of Pope Zephyr- 
inus embraced the heresy of Notus, which maintained that God 
the Father suffered for us on the cross in the form of Christ. His 
followers, who openly declared themselves first about A.D. 357, 
thought that God, to Whomas the Source of all things the name 
of Father is given, is called the Son when He united Himself to 
the humanity of Jesus for the work of our redemption; and in 
like manner Heis the Holy Spirit when manifested for the work 
of sanctification. Sabellius was condemned by « Council held 
at Rome, probably in 258; again at Nicea, and again at Constan- 
tinople, where Sabellian Baptism was pronounced invalid. 

He is dishonoured as mere flesh ¢ and severed 
from the Godhead. With which of them will 
He be most angry, or rather, which shall 
He forgive, those who injuriously confound 
Him or those who divide Him? For the for- 
mer ought to have distinguished, and the lat- 
ter to have united Him; the one in number, 
the other in Godhead. Stumblest Thou at 
His flesh 2 So did the Jews. Or dost thou 
call Him a Samaritan; and 2.4 DL aill 
not say the rest. Dost thou disbelieve in His 
Godhead? ‘This did not even the demons, 
© thou who art less believing than demons 
and more stupid than Jews. ‘Those did per- 
ceive that the name of Son implies equality of 
rank; these did know that He who drove 
them out was God, for they were convinced of 
it by theirown experience. But you will ad- 
mit neither the equality nor the Godhead. It 
would have been better for you to have been 
either a Jew or a demoniac (if I may utter 
an absurdity), than in uncircumcision and in 
sound health to be so wicked and ungodly in 
your attitude of mind. 

XVI. A little later on you will see Jesus 
submitting to be purified in the River Jordan 
for my Purification, or rather, sanctifying the 
waters by His Purification (for indeed He 
had no need of purification Who taketh away 
the sin of the world) and the heavens cleft 

a Arianism was the result of a strong opposition to Sabellian- 
ism, coupled with a misunderstanding of the argument against 
it. There was, no doubt, a danger of falling into the opposite 
error of ‘T'ritheism, to avoid which Arianism ‘‘ divided the Sub- 
stance” and virtually—and in the end explicitly—denied the 
Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ. Arius was a Priest of Alex- 
andria, and it was there that he began to publish his opinions, in 
the early years of the Fourth Century (318) ; but. Newman traces 
the origin of the heresy to Antioch and its Judaizing tendency. At 
a meeting of the clergy in Alexandria the Bishop, S. Alexander, 
gave an address on the coeternity, and coequality of the Father 
and the Son, and used the expression Thy avTyy ovalav exery, that 
They had the same Substance. Arius protested against this as 
a Sabellian statement, and used the words «ttoma (creature) and 
moinua (a thing made) of the Son, adding the sentence which 
became so famous, 4v ore ov« jv,—there was a time when the Son 
did not exist. Having ineffectually tried private remonstrance, 
S. Alexander brought the matter in 321 before his Provincial 
Synod, in which were present about 100 Egyptian and Pentapol- 
itan Bishops, who after giving the matter a patient hearing, ex- 
communicated Arius and his principal adherents. But it was too 
late to undo the mischief. The heresy spread widely, and the 
whole Eastern Church was stirred by the controversy. At lasta 
great Council of the whole Church met at Nicaea in 325, sum- 
moned by the Emperor; and there the heresy was unequivocally 
condemned, and the great Creed propounded with its watchword, 
the Homoousion. ‘The false teaching had however struck its 
roots deep and wide; and though now banned by the anathema 
of the Church, it was long in dying; and indeed at one time it 
seemed as if—humanly speaking—it must swamp the whole Catholic 
Church, Under various forms the Semi-Arians who claimed to 
differ from the faith of Nica only bya single letter, the Actians 
and Eunomians, who went to the furthest extreme of the falsehood 
(Anomoeans), and many others, the heresy spread far and wide: 
and when S. Gregory came to Constantinople there was not one 
Catholic Church or Priest to be found in the place, and only a few 
scattered folk who still held to the Faith of the Consubstantial. 
Gregory’s wonderful discourses however came to their aid, and 
partly under his presidency was held _the Second Ocecumenical 
Synod, which condemned the heresy of Macedonius, a still further 
development of Arianism, which denied also the Deity of the 
Holy Ghost. Arianism survived for another two centuries among 
the Goths and Vandals, the Burgundians and Lombards ; but 

. it never ruse again as a power in the Church, 

asunder, and witness borne to him by the 
Spirit That is of one nature with Him;* you | 
shall see Him tempted and conquering and 
served by Angels,® and healing every sicknessY 
and every disease,® and giving life to the dead 
(O that He would give life to you who are 
dead because of your heresy), and driving out | 
demons,* sometimes Himself, sometimes by his 
disciples ; and feeding vast multitudes with a 
few loaves ; § and walking dryshod upon seas 3” 
and being betrayed and crucified, and cruci- 
fying with Himself my sin ; offered as a Lamb, 
and offering as a Priest; as a Man buried in 
the grave, and as God rising again; and then 
ascending, and to come again in His own 
glory. Why what a multitude of high festi- 
vals there are in each of the mysteries of the | 
Christ; all of which have one completion, 
namely, my perfection and return to the first 
condition of Adam. 

XVII. Now then I pray you accept His Con- 
ception, and leap before Him ; if not like John 
from the womb,?® yet like David, because of 
the resting of the Ark.t Revere the enrol- 
ment on account of which thou wast written 
in heaven, and adore the Birth by which thou 
wast loosed from the chains of thy birth, and 
honour little Bethlehem, which hath led thee 
back to Paradise; and worship the manger 
through which thou, being without sense, 
wast fed by the Word. Know as Isaiah bids 
thee, thine Owner, like the ox, and like the 
ass thy Master’s crib; if thou be one of those 
who are pure and lawful food, and who chew 
the cud of the word and are fit for sacrifice. 
Or if thou art one of those who are as yet 
unclean and uneatable and unfit for sacrifice, 
and of the gentile portion, run with the Star, 
and bear thy Gifts with the Magi, gold and 
frankincense and myrrh,” as to a King, and 
to God, and to One Who is dead for thee. | 
With Shepherds glorify Him;” with Angels 
join in chorus; with Archangels sing hymns. 
Let this Festival be common to the powers | 
in heaven and to the powers upon earth.é | 

| 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

lor I am persuaded that the Heavenly Hosts 

join in our exultation and keep high Festi- 

val with us to-day? . . . because they love | 

men, and they love God . , just like 

those whom David introduces after the Pas- | 

sion ascending with Christ * and coming to meet | 
Ib, iv. 23. 

6 Nicetas distinguishes between Négog of Madakia, saying | 
that the first is actual disease, and the second the premonitory | 
failing of health which prognosticates a disease. And, so, he says, | 
in reference to the soul, Négos is actual sin, while MaAakéa is the | 
relaxation of the will which leads and assents to actual sin. | 
xe Lb, ixy, 33. Lbs ixi-r4e 7 Ib. ix, 25, | 
| 

a Matt. iii. 13, 17. B Ib. iv. x13. 

6 Luke i. 41. 7 (62, Samay Tas « Luke ii, 1-5. 
AL ¢., original Sn-(Ps. i, 5), (alsae tg. 
UMattiaitn. Gluukei, tags. one Liturgy. m Ps. xxiv. | 

ies 

| Sacrament. 

INTRODUCTION TO Tie ORATION ON THE POLY LIGHTS 351 

Him, and bidding one another to lift up the 
Paves: 

XVII. One thing connected with the Birth 
of Christ I would have you hate... the 
murder of the infants by Herod.« Or rather 
you must venerate this too, the Sacrifice of 
the same age as Christ, slain before the Offer- 
ing of the New Victim. If He flees into Egypt,6 
joyfully become a companion of His exile. It 
is a grand thing to share the exile of the per- 
secuted Christ. If He tarry long in Egypt, 
call Him out of Egypt by a reverent worship 
of Him there. Travel without fault through 
every stage and faculty of the Life of Christ. 
Be purified; be circumcised ; strip off the 
veil which has covered thee from thy birth. 
After this teach in the Temple, and drive out 
the sacrilegious traders.y Submit to be stoned 
if need be, for well I wot thou shalt be hidden 
from those who cast the stones; thou shalt 
escape even through the midst of them, like 
God.? If thou be brought before Herod, an- 
swer not for the most part.¢ He will respect 
thy silence more than most people’s long 
speeches. If thou be scourged,$ ask for what 
they leave out. ‘Taste gall for the taste’s sake ; 
drink vinegar ;® seek for spittings ; accept blows, 
be crowned with thorns, that is, with the 
hardness of the godly life; put on the purple 
robe, take the reed in hand, and receive mock 
worship from those who mock at the truth ; 
lastly, be crucified with Him, and share His 
Death and Burial gladly, that thou mayest 
rise with Him, and be glorified with Him and 
reign with Him. Look at and be looked at 
by the Great God, Who in Trinity is wor- 
shipped and glorified, and Whom we declare 
to be now set forth as clearly before you as 
the chains of our flesh allow, in Jesus Christ 
our Lord, to Whom be the glory for ever, 
Amen. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE ORATIONS 
ON THE HOLY LIGHTS AND ON 
HOLY BAPTISM. 

THe Oration on the Holy Lights was preached 
on the Festival of the Epiphany 381, and was 
followed the next day by that on Baptism. In 
the Eastern Church this Festival is regarded 

_ as more particularly the commemoration of our 
_ Lord’s Baptism, and is accordingly one of the 
' great days for the solemn ministration of the 

It is generally called Theophania, 

a Matt. ii. 16. B Ib. v. 13. Syohniterg.- <del b: Vili. 59. 
€ Luke xxiii. 9. GC John XtXeon, 4 Matt. xxvii. 34. 

6 John xix, 29. OMA, SNViG7, ciel Nx Fil. 38) 

bo 

352 

and the Gospel in the ees is S. Matthew 
iit. 13-17. . The Sunday. m the Octave as 
called pera ta dora (After The Lights), point- 
ing to atime when the Feast was known as the 
‘«« Holy Lights,’’? as seems to have been the 
case in S. Gregory’s day. ‘This name is de- 
rived from Baptism, which was often in an- 
cient days called Hlumination, in reference to 
which name (derived from the spiritual grace 
of the Sacrament) lighted torches or candles 
were carried by the neophytes. It would ap- 
pear that the solemnites of the Festival lasted 
two days, of which the second was devoted to 
the solemn conferring of the Sacrament. Ac- 
cordingly we find two Orations belonging to 
the Festival. In the first, delivered on the 
Day itself he dwells more especially on the 
Feast and the Mystery of our Lord’s Baptism 
therein commemorated ; and proceeds to speak 
of the different kinds of Baptism, of which he 
enumerates Five, viz. :— 

1. The figurative Baptism of Israel by Moses 
in the cloud and in the Sea. 

2. The preparatory Baptism of repentance 
ministered by S. John the Baptist. 

The spiritual Baptism of water and the 
Holy Ghost given us by our Lord. 

4. The glorious Baptism of Martyrdom. 

5. The painful Baptism of Penance. 

In speaking of this last he takes occasion to 
refute the extreme rigorism of the followers of 
Novatus, who denied absolution to certain 
classes of sins committed after Baptism. 

In the second Oration, delivered next day, 
he dwells on the Sacrament of Baptism and its 
spiritual effects ; and takes occasion to reprove 
the then still prevalent practice of deferring 
Baptism till the near approach of death. He 
likewise dwells on the truth that the validi- 
ty and spiritual effect of the Sacrament is 
wholly independent of the rank or worthiness 
of the Priest who may minister it; and he 
concludes with a sketch of the obligations 
which its reception involyes, with a very val- 
uable exposition of the Creed, and of the Cere- 
monies which accompanied the administration 
of the Sacrament. 

TRACT QIN: «Keno ee 
ORATION ON THE Hoy LIGHTS. 

I. Again My Jesus, and again a mystery ; not 
deceitful nor disorderly, nor belonging to 
Greek error or drunkenness (for so I call their 
solemnities, and so I think will every man of 
sound sense) ; but a mystery lofty and divine, 

GRE epee fee 

and allied to the Glory above. For the Holy 
Day of the Lights, to which we have come, 
and which we are celebrating to-day, has for 
its origin the Baptism of my Christ, the True 
Light That lighteneth every man that cometh 
into the world,* and effecteth my purification, 
and assists that light which we received from 
the beginning from Him from above, but 
which we darkened and confused by sin. 

II. Therefore listen to the Voice of God, 
which sounds so exceeding clearly to me, who 
am both disciple and master of these mysteries, 
as would to God it may sound to you; I Am 
The Light Of The World.? Therefore ap- 
proach ye to Him and be enlightened, and let 
not your faces be ashamed,” being signed with 
the true Light. It is aseason of new birth,® let 
us be born again. Itis a time of reformation, 
let us receive again the first Adam.¢ Let us 
not remain what we are, but let us become 
what we once were. The Light Shineth In 
Darkness,$ in this life and in the flesh, and is 
chased by the darkness, but is not overtaken 
by it:—I mean the adverse power leaping up 
in its shamelessness against the visible Adam, 
but encountering God and being defeated ;— 
in order that we, putting away the darkness, 
may draw near to the Light, and may then 
become perfect Light, the children of perfect 
Light. See the grace of this Day; see the 
power of this mystery. Are you not lifted up 
from the earth? Are you not clearly placed 
on high, being exalted by our voice and 
meditation ? and you will be placed much 
higher when the Word shall have prospered 
the course of my words. 

III. Is there any such among the shadowy 
purifications of the Law, aiding as it did with 
temporary sprinklings, and the ashes of an 
heifer sprinkling the unclean;” or do the 
gentiles celebrate any such thing in their 
mysteries, every ceremony and mystery of 
which to me is nonsense, and a dark inven- 
tion of demons, and a figment of an unhappy 
mind, aided by time, and hidden by fable? 
For what they worship as true, they veil as 
mythical. But if these things are true, they 
ought not to be called myths, but to be proved 
not to be shameful ; ® and if they are false, they 
ought not to be objects of wonder ; nor ought 
people so inconsiderately to hold the most 
contrary opinions about the same thing, as if 
they were playing in the market-place with 
boys or really ill-disposed men, not engaged 

a Johni. 9. B John viii. 12. PSSxxxivesss 
e l.e., the condition of man before the fall. 2 
n This i is the same word which in S. Johni. 5, is dees by 
‘*comprehend.” 6 Heb, vii. 13. 

6 Lad lice 
Ib 

in discussion with men of sense, and worship- 
pers of the Word, though despisers of this ar- 
tificial plausibility. 

IV. Weare not concerned in these mysteries 
with births of Zeus and thefts of the Cretan 
‘Tyrant* (though the Greeks may be displeased 
at such a title for him), nor with the name of 
Curetes, and the armed dances, which were to 
hide the wailings of a weeping god, that he 

might escape from his father’s hate. For indeed | 

it would be a strange thing that he who was 
swallowed as a stone should be made to weep 
as achild.6 Nor are we concerned with Phry- 
gian mutilations and flutes and Corybantes,y 
and all the ravings of men concerning Rhea, 
consecrating people to the mother of the gods, 
and being initiated into such ceremonies as 
befit the mother of such gods as these. Nor 
have we any carrying away of the Maiden,é 
nor wandering of Demeter, nor her intimacy 
with Celei and Triptolemi and Dragons ; nor 
her doings and sufferings . . for I am ashamed 
to bring into daylight that ceremony of the 
night, and to make a sacred mystery of obscen- 
ity. Eleusis knows these things, and so do 
those who are eyewitnesses of what is there 
guarded by silence, and well worthy of it. 
Nor is our commemoration one of Dionysus, 
and the thigh that travailed with an incom- 
plete birth, as before a head had travailed with 
another ;€ nor of the hermaphrodite god, nor 
a chorus of the drunken and enervated host 5 
nor of the folly of the Thebans which honours 
him; nor the thunderbolt of Semele which 
they adore. Nor is it the harlot mysteries 
of Aphrodite, who, as they themselves admit, 
was basely born and basely honoured; nor 

have we here Phalli and Ithyphalli,$ shameful | 

aT.e., Zeus, who was said by some to be a deified man, once 
tyrant of Crete, where his tomb was shown. 

B'Vhe allusion is to the birth of Zeus. Kronos the Titan, father of 
the gods, was the husband of Rhea, who bore him children. But 
an oracle having declared that Kronos should be dethroned by his 
children, he swallowed them immediately after they were born. 
Rhea, however, on the birth of Zeus, aided by the Curetes, a wild 
band of Cretan Priests, concealed the child, and substituted a 
stone, which Kronos swallowed in his haste without perceiving the 
difference. i 
the children whom he had previously swallowed 
and Zeus the prophecy was fulfilled. 
imprisoned in ‘Tartarus. 

y.There was a temple of Rhea in Phrygia, in which at her 
festivals people mutilated themselves to do her honour. ‘The flutes 
alluded to served to turn the thoughts of the sufferers from the pain 
of the operation. ‘The Corybantes were the ministers of the god- 
dess, who led the wild orgies of her worship. It is believed that 
there is an allusion to this practice of self-mutilation in Galat. vr: 
Soatleast S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, and all the Greek Fathers take 
the passage. S 1 
same sense, applies it mystically ; and Estius, who here follows Eras- 
mus, refers the ‘cutting off” merely to excommunication, a sense 
which he calls “ Apostolico sensu dignior,” though why * dégaior” 
it is not easy to see. Yet he acknowledges that those who interpret 
it literally do so ‘won tuemerito” 

6 The mythus of the Rape of Persephone and its consequences. 

€ Dionysus was said to have been born from the thigh of Zeus, 
as Athene to have sprung full-grown 
his head. 

§ These myths and practices are too shameful to be described. 

; and by them 

ORATION ON THE HOLY LIGHTS. 

The stone made him very sick, and he vomited forth | 

Kronos was deposed and . 

5S. Thomas Aquinas, understanding the word in the | 

and armed at all points from | 

398 

| both in form and action; nor Taurian mas- 
| sacres of strangers ;# nor blood of Laconian 
youths shed upon the altars, as they scourged 
themselves with the whips ;8 and in this case 
alone use their courage badly, who honour a 
| goddess, and her a virgin. For these same 
| people both honour effeminacy, and worship 
| boldness. 
_ _V. And where will you place the butchery 
—of Pelops,y which feasted hungry gods, that 
| bitter and inhuman hospitality ?- Where the 
horrible and dark spectres of Hecate, and the 
underground puerilities and sorceries of 'Tro- 
phonius, or the babblings of the Dodonzan 
Oak, or the trickeries of the Delphian tri- 
_pod, or the prophetic draught of Castalia, 
which could prophesy anything, except their 
own being brought to silence ?& Nor is it the 
sacrificial art of Magi, and their entrail fore- 
bodings, nor the Chaldean astronomy and 
horoscopes, comparing our lives with the 
movements of the heavenly bodies, which 
cannot know even what they are themselves, 
or shall be. Nor are these Thracian orgies, 
from which the word Worship (Ipnoketa) is 
said to be derived; nor rites and mysteries 
of Orpheus, whom the Greeks admired so 
much for his wisdom that they devised for him 
a lyre which draws all things by its music. 
Nor the tortures of Mithras* which it is just 
that those who can endure to be initiated into 
such things should suffer ; nor the manglings 
of Osiris,$ another calamity honoured by the 

Egyptians ; nor the ill-fortunes of Isis” and 
the goats more venerable than the Mendesians, 
and the stall of Apis,® the calf that luxuri- 
ated in the folly of the Memphites, nor all 
those honours with which they outrage the 
Nile, while themselves proclaiming it in song 
to be the Giver of fruits and corn, and the 
measurer of happiness by its cubits.¢ 

VI. I pass over the honours they pay to rep- 

a See the Iphigenia In Tauris of Euripides. 

B It was a custom of the Spartans that at their great festival of 
Artemis the youths who were just coming of age (Kphebi) should 
scourge themselves cruelly on her altar in honour of the goddess, 
and to prove their manhood. 

y The gods came to dine with Tantalus, and he, to do them 
_ honour, boiled his son Pelops for their food. They, however, 
found it out, and restored him to life : not, however, before Dem- 
eter had unwittingly eaten his shoulder, in the place of which they 
substituted one of ivory. 
| 8S, Jerome, commenting on Isaiah xli. 22, says: ‘ Why could 
| they never predict anything concerning Christ and His Apostles, 
| or the ruin and destruction of their own temples? If then they 
| could not foretell their own destruction, how can they foretell any- 
thing good or bad?” 
| e€These Mysteries were of Persian origin, connected it is said 
with the worship of the Sun. The neophytes were made to 
undergo twelve different kinds of torture. 

¢ The Egyptian Mysteries. 

9 Zeus fell in love with Isis, and carried her off in the form ofa 
heifer. Here, discovering the fraud, sent a gadfly, which drove 
| Isis mad. 

6 Apis, the sacred bull, worshipped at Memphis. 

ti.e., that the prosperity of the country was proportionate to 
the annual rise of the River, 

354 

tiles, and their worship of vile things, cach of 
which has its peculiar cultus and festival, 
all share in a common devilishness ; 
they were absolutely bound to be ungodly, 
and to fall away from honouring God, and to 

things made with hands, 
not imprecate anything worse upon them- 
selves than that they might worship just such 
things, and honour them in just such a way ; 

and | 
so that, if | 

| 
| 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

turned into a den of all sorts of passions, 
which cruelly devour and consume the inner 
man; but there was this further evil, that man 
actually made gods the advocates of his pas- 

| sions, so that sin might be reckoned not only 
be led astray to idols and works of art and | 

men of sense could | 

that, as Paul says, they might receive in them- | 

selves that recompense of their error which was 
meet,* in the very objects of their worhip ; 

not so much honouring them as suffering dis- | 

honour by them; abominable because of their 
error, and yet more abominable from the vile- 
ness of the objects of their adoration and 
worship; so that they should be even more 
without understanding than the 
their worship ; 
the latter are vile. 

VIL. Well, let these things be the amusement 
of the children of the Greeks and of the demons 
to whom their folly is due, who turn aside 
the honour of God to themselves, and divide 
men in various ways in pursuit of shameful 
thoughts and fancies, ever since they drove us 
away from the Tree of Life, by means of the 
‘Tree of Knowledge unseasonably ® and im- 
properly imparted to us, and then assailed us as 
now weaker than before ; carrying clean away 
the mind, which is the ruling power in us, 
and opening a door to the passions. For, 

objects of | 
being as excessively foolish as | 

irresponsible, but even divine, taking refuge 
in the objects of his worship as his apology. 
VIII. But since to us grace has been given 
to flee from superstitious error and to be joined 
to the truth and to serve the living and true 
God, and to rise above creation, passing by 
all that is subject to time and to first motion ; 
let us look at and reason upon God and things 
divine ina manner corresponding to this Grace 
given us. But let us begin our discussion of 
them from the most fitting point. And the 
most fitting is, as Solomon laid down for us; 
us; ‘The beginning of wisdom, he says, is to 
get wisdom. And what this is he tells us; 
the beginning of wisdom is fear.6 For we 
must not begin with contemplation and leave 
off with fear (for an unbridled contemplation 
would perhaps push us over a precipice), but 
we must be grounded and purified and so to 
say made light by fear, and thus be raised to 
the height. For where fear is there is keep- 

ing of commandments; and where there is 
keeping of commandments there is purifying of 

the flesh, that cloud which covers the soul and 
suffers it not to see the Divine Ray. And 
where there is purifying there is Illumination ; 

and Illumination is the satisfying of desire to 
_ those who long for the greatest things, or the 

being of a nature envious and man-hating, or | 

rather having become so by their own 
wickedness, they could neither endure 

who were 

that we | 
below should attain to that which is | 

above, having themselves fallen from above | 

upon the earth; nor that such a change in 
their glory and their first natures should have 
taken place. ‘This is the meaning of their 
persecution of the creature. For this God’s 
Image was outraged ; and as we did not like 

Greatest ‘Thing, or That Which surpasses all 
greatness. 

IX. Wherefore we must purify ourselves 
first, and then approach this converse with the 
Pure ; unless we would have the same experi- 
ence as Israel,y who could not endure the glory 

of the face of Moses, and therefore asked for a 

to keep the Commandments,¥ we were given | 

over to the independence of our error, 
as we erred we were disgraced by the objects 
of our worship. For there w as not only this 
calamity, that we who were made for good 
works ® to the glory and praise of our Maker, 
and to imitate God as far as might be, were 

a Rom. i. 27. 

8 cf. Orat. in Theoph. ¢. 12. The explanation seems to be, that 
the * Knowledge of good and evil” was a necessary part of the 
development of man’s intellect, but that a premature attempt 
to attain it fer sadéune instead of by a gradual progress would 
prove fatal. Had human nature gone through its originally 
ingonrieg educational stages, it might have re ached to the know- 

Ize of evil without having ‘that knowled ge alloyed and deterior- 

ee d by the experience of evil, but might have known it, as God 
does, without taint. (Blount, Ann. Bible on Gen. ii. 7.) 
y Lbid. i. 28, OEph,. ti, 105) Phi, 1. 15, 

And | 

veil ; § or else would feel and say with Manoah 
‘We are undone O wife, we have seen God,’’¢ 
although it was God only in his fancy; or 
like Peter would send Jesus out of the boat,$ 
as being ourselves unworthy of such a visit ; 

/and when I say Peter, I am speaking of the 

man who walked upon the waves ;” or like Paul 
would be stricken in eyes,’ as he was before he 
was cleansed from the guilt of his persecution, 
when he conversed with Him Whom he was 

_ persecuting—or rather with a short flash of 

That great Light ; or like the Centurion would 
seek for healing, but would not, through a 
praiseworthy fear, receive the Healer into his 
house. Let each one of us also speak so, as 

y Exod. xxxiv. 30. 
¢ Luke v. 8 
6 Matt. viii. 8, 

B Ib. i. 7 sq. 
e Judg. xiil. 23. 
@ Acts ix. 3-8. 

a Prov. iv. 7. 
2 Cor. iti. 7. 
7 Matt. xiv. 29. 

— | 

ORATION. ON THE HOLY LIGHTS. 

ad gn ee ee ee ee 

long as he is still uncleansed, and is a Centu- 
rion still, commanding many in wickedness, 

and serving in the army of Czesar, the World- | 

ruler of those who are being dragged down; 

‘*T am not worthy that thou shouldest come — 
But when he shall have | 

under my roof.’’ 
looked upon Jesus, though he be little of 
stature like Zaccheus® of old, and climb up on 

the top of the sycamore tree by mortifying his — 

members which are upon the earth,® and hay- 
ing risen above the body of humiliation, then 
he shall receive the Word, and it shall be said 

to him, This day is salvation come to this | 
Vhen let him lay hold on the salva- | 

house. 
tion, and bring forth fruit more perfectly, 
scattering and pouring forth rightly that which 
as a publican he wrongly gathered. 

X. For the same Word is on the one hand 
terrible through its nature to those who are 
unworthy, and on the other through its loving 
kindness can be received by those who are 
thus prepared, who have driven out the un- 
clean and worldly spirit from their souls, and 
have swept and adorned their own souls by 

self-examination, and have not left them idle | 

or without employment, so as again to be oc- 
cupied with greater armament by the seven 
spirits of wickedness . . . the same number 

as are reckoned of virtue (for that which is | 

hardest to fight against calls for the sternest 
efforts) . . . but besides fleeing from evil, 
practise virtue, making Christ entirely, or at 

any rate to the greatest extent possible, to — 
dwell within them, so that the power of evil | 

cannot meet with any empty place to fill it 
again with himself, and make the last state of 
that man worse than the first, by the greater 
energy of his assault, and the greater strength 
and impregnability of the fortress. But when, 
having guarded our soul with every care, and 
having appointed goings up in our heart,® and 
broken up our fallow ground,¢ and sown unto 
righteousness,$ as David and Solomon and Jere- 

miah bid us, let us enlighten ourselves with | 
the light of knowledge, and then let us speak | 

of the Wisdom of God that hath been hid in 
a mystery,” and enlighten others. Meanwhile 
let us purify ourselves, and receive the ele- 
mentary initiation of the Word, that we may 

do ourselves the utmost good, making our- | 

selves godlike, and receiving the Word at His 
coming; and not only so, but holding Him 
fast and shewing Him to others. 

XI. And now, having purified the theatre © 
by what has been said, let us discourse a little | 

about the Festival, and join in celebrating 

B Col. iit. 5. y Luke xix. g. 6 Ps. Ixxxiv, 5. 

@ Luke xix. 3. 
i ¢ Prov, xi. 18. 7 2.Cor, 1:16, 

€ Jet. iv. 3% 

355 
| 

this Feast with festal and pious souls. And, 
since the chief point of the Festival is the re- 
membrance of God, let us call God to mind. 
Vor I think that the sound of those who keep 
Festival Zhere, where is the dwelling of all 
the Blissful, is nothing else than this, the 
hymns and praises of God, sung by all who 
_ are counted worthy of that City. Let none 
be astonished if what I have to say contains 
some things that I have said before; for not 
only will I utter the same words, but I shall 
speak of the same subjects, trembling both in 
tongue and mind and thought when I speak of 
God for you too, that you may share this 
laudable and blessed feeling. And when I 
speak of God you must be illumined at once 
by one flash of light and by three. ‘Three 
in Individualities or Hypostases, if any prefer 
so to call them, or persons,* for we will not 
quarrel about names so long as the syllables 
amount to the same meaning ; but One in re- 
spect of the Substance—-that is, the Godhead. 
For they are divided without division, if I 
_may so say; and they are united in division. 
For the Godhead is one in three, and the 

a The sense of Person (here mpdéowrov), which is the usual 
post-Nicene equivalent of bméetagts, was by no means gencrally 
attached to that word during the first Four Centuries, though here 
and there there are traces of such a use. ‘Throughout the Arian 
| controversy a great deal of trouble and misunderstanding was 
| caused by the want of a precise definition of the meaning of 
| vmdaracts. It seems to have been at first understood by the 
Eastern Church to mean Real Personal Existence—Reality being 
the fundamental idea. In this fundamental sense it was used in 
Theology as expressing the distinct individuality and relative bear- 
ing of the Three ‘‘ Persons” of the Blessed ‘l'rinity to each other 
(70 (Sov mapa 7d Kowwov, Suidas). But Arius gave it a heretical 
twist, and said that there are ‘Three Hypostases, in the sense of 
Natures or Substances ; and this doctrine was anathematized by 
the Nicene Council, which, apparently regarding the term 
bméaracts as exactly equivalent to ovgia (as Arius tried to make 
it) condemned the proposition that the Son is é& érépas tbroaracews 
} ovaias (Symb, Nic.). Similar is the use of the word in S. Atha- 
nasius. As against Sabellius, however, who taught that in the 
Godhead there are tpta mpéowr7a (using this word in the sense of 
Aspects only) but would not allow tpeis vroazdaets fi. €., Self-exise 
tent Personalities), the post-Nicene Church regarded tréaracis 
as designating the Person, and spoke freely of tpets broartdcets. 
The Western Church increased the confusion by continuing to re- 
gard rdetacts as equivalent to oveta, and translating it by Sub- 
| stantia or Subsistentia. It was not till the word Essentia came 
into use to express ovova that the Western Church grasped the dif- 
ference, so long accepted in the East, so as to use the words accu- 
rately. Meantime, however, there would seem to have grown up a 
difference in the use of the two words supposed to represent 
vnéatacts, of the samekind as that between drdaracts and ovcia; 
Substantia being appropriated to the Essence of a thing, that 
which is the foundation of its being; while Subsistentia came 
rather to connote a limitation, i.e., Personality. Thus the West 
also became confused, and Substantia was held to be the true 
equivalent of vmdaraots, Hence the condemnation at Sardica 
(4.D. 347) by the Western Bishops of the doctrine of Three Hypo- 
stases as Arian. The confusion lasted long, but in 362 a Council 
was held at Alexandria, when this difference was seen to be a mere 
logomachy, and it was pronounced orthodox to confess either 
Tpets VTogTacets in the sense of “ Persons,” or pwiay vréaracw in 
that of ‘‘ Substance.” Our author in his Oration to the Fathers 
of the Council of Constantinople fully acknowledges this. ‘* What 
do you mean,” he says, “by Umogracets or mpdcgwra? You mean 
that the Three are distinct, not in Nature, but in Personality.” 
And in the Panegyric on S. Athanasius (Or, xxi. c. 35), he remarks 
on the orthodoxy of the phrase ula obota, tpets Uroatacets, that 
the first expression refers to the Nature of the Godhead, the second 
to the special properties of the Persons. With this, he says, the 
, Italians agree, but the poverty of their language is such that it 
does not admit of the distinction between ovgia and vmdatacts, 

and therefore has to call in the word mpégwzov, which if misunder-~ 
. stood is liable to be charged with Sabellianism, 

356 

three are one, in whom the Godhead is, 
or to speak more accurately, Who are the 
Godhead. Excesses and defects we will omit, 
neither making the Unity a confusion, nor the 
division a separation. We would keep equally 
far from the confusion of Sabellius and from 
the division of Arius, which are evils diametri- 
cally opposed, yet equal in their wickedness. 
For what need is there heretically to fuse God 
together, or to cut Him up into inequality ? 

Father, of Whom are all things, and One Lord 
Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things ; and One 
Holy Ghost, in Whom are all things ;* yet 
these words, of, by, in, whom, do not de- 
note a difference of nature (for if this were the 
case, the three prepositions, or the order of 
the three names would never be altered), but 
they characterize the personalities of a nature 
which is one and unconfused. 
proved by the fact that They are again col- 
lected into one, if you will read—not care- 
lessly—this other passage of the same Apostle, 
‘¢Of Him and through Him and to Him are 
all things ; to Him be glory forever, Amen.’’ 8 
The Father is Father, and is Unoriginate, for 
He is of no one; the Son is Son, and is not 
unoriginate, for He is of the Father. But if 
you take the word Origin in a temporal sense, 
He too is Unoriginate, for He is the Maker of 
Time, and is not subject to Time. The Holy 
Ghost is truly Spirit, coming forth from the 
Father indeed, but not after the manner of 
the Son, for it is not by Generation but by 

Procession (since I must coin a word for the | 

sake of clearness); for neither did the Father 
cease to be Unbegotten because of His beget- 
ting something, nor the Son to be begotten 
because He is of the Unbegotten (how could 
that be?), nor is the Spirit changed into 
Father or Son because He proceeds, or because 
He is God—though the ungodly do not be- 
lieve it. Vor Personality is unchangeable ; 
else how could Personality remain, if it were 
changeable, and could be remoyed from one 
to another? But they who make ‘ Unbe- 
gotten’? and ‘ Begotten’? natures of equivo- 
cal gods would perhaps make Adam and Seth 

a 2 Cor. viii. 6. B Rom. xi. 36. 

y The Coining is simply of the adverbial form; the Substantive 
is found in earlier writings. S. Gregory himself uses it Orat. 
Theol. V. 
the verbs mpoépxer@ar, mpotevac. 

differ in 

And ‘this 184 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

nature, since the former was hot 
born of flesh (for he was created), but the 
latter was born of Adam and Eve. ‘There is 
then One God in Three, and These ‘Three 
are One, as we have said. 

XIII. Since then these things are so, or 
rather since This is so; and His Adoration 
ought not to be rendered only by Beings above, 
but there ought to be also worshippers on earth, 

that all things may be filled with the glory 
XII. For to us there is but One God, the | 

~ sonally engaged. 
| after Our Likeness?’ . . . 

of God (forasmuch as they are filled with 
God Himself); therefore man was created 
and honored with the hand* and Image of 
God. But to despise man, when by the envy 
of the Devil and the bitter taste of sin he was 
pitiably severed from God his Maker—this 
was not in the Nature of God. What then 
was done, and what is the great Mystery that 
concerns us? An innovation is made upon 
nature, and God is made Man. ‘* He that 
rideth upon the Heaven of Heavens in the 
East’’® of His own glory and Majesty, is 
glorified in the West of our meanness and 
lowliness. And the Son of God deigns to 
become and to be called Son of Man; not 
changing what He was (for It is unchange- 
able) ; but assuming what He was not (for 
He is full of love to man), that the Incom- 
prehensibley might be comprehended, con- 
versing with us through the mediation of the 
Flesh as through a veil; since it was not pos- 
sible for that nature which is subject to birth 
and decay to endure His unveiled Godhead. 
Therefore the Unmingled is mingled; and 
not only is God mingled with birth and 
Spirit® with flesh, and the Eternal with 
time, and the Uncircumscribed with measure ; 

a ‘The rest of the Creation was made by the command of 
God, but Man was formed by the hand of God.” (Wordsworth 
in Gensal.7-) 

“There was a peculiar glory in the creation of Man, distin- 
guishing him from the rest of the creatures. The creatures in- 
ferior to man were called into being by a simple act of the Divine 
Will; but in the case of man, bearing as he does the nature and 
the form which God was about to assume as His own, and which, 
once assumed, was never again to be laid aside, the process of 
creation was markedly different. ‘Then for the first time the Most 
Holy Persons of the Blessed ‘Trinity appear upon the scene. They 
are manifested as in mutual consultation and common action per- 
zt Us make Man in Our Image 
Then followed the exercise of crea- 
tive power as a personal act, the putting forth the Hand of God 
to fashion the body of Man; ‘the Lord God formed Man of 
the dust of the earth.’ Afterwards came the yet higher work in 
the infusion of the immaterial invisible life enshrined in the body, 

' perfecting the work of God; ‘He breathed into his nostrils the 

' Divine Dispensations, p. 44.) 
He uses other words also, as éx7emiyes, mpdodos, and | 

As to the question of the Double Procession (Filioque) see | 

Introd. to Orat. Thecl. V. Dr. Swete (Doctr, of H. S. p. 118) 
says, ‘It is instructive to notice how at this period the two great 
Sees of Rome and Constantinople seem to have agreed in abstain- 
ing froma minuter definition of the Procession, Both in East and 
West the relations of the Spirit to the Son were being examined by 
individual theologians ; 

but S. Gregory and S. Damasus appear | 

to have alike refrained from entering upon a question which did | 

not touch the essentials of the Faith.’ He adds ina note ‘ This 
is the more remarkable because Damasus was of Spanish origin.” 

breath of life and Man became a living soul.’” (T. ‘T’. Carter, The 
Ps. xvid: 

y Ullmann comments on this passage as follows : There is in it, 
as follows especially from what comes after, the double sense that 
the Infinite Godhead entered in Christ into the limitations of a 
finite human life ; and in consequence of this, since otherwise as 
an infinite Being it was not fully cognisable by the finite human 
soul, became in this limitation cognisable in some degree to it, as 
it was not before this special manifestation in Christ. 

6‘ In this and several other places mvedua and vods evidently 
denote the Divine the Spiritual, taken in the highest and purest 
sense, in which it is lifted above the odépg, and generally above all 
that is material; in which sense S, John says, mvedHa 0 eds.” 
Ullmann. 

ORATION ON THE HOLY LIGHTS, ie 

but also Generation with Virginity, and dis- 
honour with Him who is higher than all 
honour ; He who is impassible with Suffering ,¢ 
and the Immortal with the corruptible. lor 
since that Deceiver thought that he was uncon- 
querable in his malice, after he had cheated 
us with the hope of becoming gods, he was 
himself cheated by God’s assumption of our 
nature; so that in attacking Adam as he 
thought, he should really meet with God, and 
thus the new Adam should save the old, and 
the condemnation of the flesh should be abol- 
ished, death being slain by flesh. 

XIV. At His birth we duly kept Festival, 
both I, the leader of the Feast, and you, and all 
that is in the world and above the world. With 
the Star we ran, and with the Magi we wor- 
shipped, and with the Shepherds we were 
illuminated, and with the Angels we glorified 
Him, and with Simeon we took Him up in 
our arms, and with Anna the aged and chaste 
we made our responsive confession. And 
thanks be to Him who came to His own in 
the guise of a stranger, because He glorified 
the stranger.6 Now, we come to another 
action of Christ, and another mystery. I 
cannot restrain my pleasure ; I am rapt into 
God. Almost like John I proclaim good tid- 
ings ; for though I be not a Forerunner, yet 
am I from the desert.y Christ is illumined, 
let us shine forth with Him. Christ is 
baptized, let us descend with Him that we 
may also ascend with Him. Jesus is baptized ; 
but we must attentively consider not only this 
but also some other points. Who is He, and 
by whom is He baptized, and at what time ? 
He is the All-pure; and He is baptized by 
John; and the time is the beginning of His 
miracles. What are we to learn and to be 
taught by this? To purify ourselves first ; 
to be lowly minded; and to preach only in 
maturity both of spiritual and bodily stature. 
The first® has a word especially for those 
who rush to Baptism off hand, and without 
due preparation, or providing for the stabil- 
ity of the Baptismal Grace by the disposition 
of their minds to good. For since Grace con- 
tains remission of the past (for it is a grace), 
itis on that account more worthy of reverence, 

a ‘‘In a double sense:—cither that the Godhead is, in union 
with the Man Jesus, subjected to suffering (cf. Or. XXI. 24), or 

that the Divine Substance, which is unapproachable by any pas- | 

sion or suffering, combined itself with a Man, whose nature cannot 
be free from such emotions.” Ullmann. 

Bi.e., human nature, which was severed from and made hostile 
to God by sin. Teeae aS ITniky 

6 That the All-pure was baptized is to remind us of our need 
of preparation. ‘hat He was baptized by John is to teach us 
humility towards the Priesthood, even if the Priest be socially our 
inferior, ‘That He was baptized at thirty years of age shews that 
the Teachers and Rulers of the Church ought not to be very young 
men. Scholiast, 

] 
that we return not to the same vomit again. 

_ The second speaks to those who rebel against 
the Stewards of this Mystery, if they are their 
superiors in rank. ‘The third is for those who 
are confident in their youth, and think that 
any time is the right one to teach or to pre- 
side. Jesus is purified, and dost thou despise 
purification? . . . and by John, and dost 
thou rise up against thy herald? . . . 
and at thirty years of age, and dost thou be- 
fore thy beard has grown presume to teach 
the aged, or believe that thou teachest them, 
though thou be not reverend on account of 
thine age, or even perhaps for thy character ? 
But here it may be said, Daniel, and this or 
that other, were judges in their youth, and 
examples are on your tongues; for every 
wrongdoer is prepared to defend himself. 
But I reply that that which is rare is not the 
law of the Church. For one swallow does 
not make a summer, nor one line a geome- 
trician, nor one voyage a sailor. 

XV. But John baptizes, Jesus comes to Him¢ 
perhaps to sanctify the Baptist him- 
self, but certainly to bury the whole of the 
old Adam in the water; and before this and 
for the sake of this, to sanctify Jordan ; for 
as He is Spirit and Flesh, so He consecrates 
us by Spirit ahd water. John will not re- 
ceive Him; Jesus contends. ‘I have need 
to be baptized of Thee’’y says the Voice to 
the Word, the Friend to the Bridegroom ; ¢ he 
that is above all among them that are born 
of women,* to Him Who is the Firstborn of 
every creature ;$ he that leaped in the womb,” 
to Him Who was adored in the womb; he 
who was and is to be the Forerunner? to Him 
Who was and is to be manifested. «I haye 
need to be baptized of Thee;’’ add to this 
‘¢and for Thee ;’’ for he knew that he would 
be baptized by Martyrdom, or, like Peter, 
that he would be cleansed not only as to his 
feet. <*And comest Thou to me?’’ This 
also was prophetic; for he knew that after 
Herod would come the madness of Pilate, 
and so that when he had gone before Christ 
would follow him. But what saith Jesus ? 
«Suffer it to be so now,’’ for this is the 
time of His Incarnation; for He knew that 
yet a little while and He should baptize the 
Baptist. And what is the “Fan?’’ The 
Purification. And what is the ‘ Fire?” 
The consuming of the chaff, and the heat 

@ Math: iit314, 
6 John iii, 39, 
y Luke 1, 41. 
6 “*He who was the forerunner on earth, and was to be the 
forerunner in Hades of Christ, Who manifested Himself on 
earth, and manifested Himself also in Hades.” Elias Cretensis, 
s John xiii. 9, 

B John v. 35. Matt. iii. 17. 
€ Matt. Nt 113 Goliis' 5 

ofthe Spirk. And what.che** Axe?” —The 
excision of the soul which is incurable even 
after the dung. And what the Sword? The 
cutting of the Word, which separates the 
worse from the better,® and makes a division 
between the faithful and the unbeliever ;¥ and 
stirs up the son and the daughter and the 
bride against the father and the mother and 
the mother in law,§ the young and fresh against 
the old and shadowy. And what is the 
Latchet of the shoe, which thou John who 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

baptizest Jesus mayst not loose?* thou who | 

art of the desert, and hast no food, the new 
Klias,¢ the more than Prophet, inasmuch as 
thou sawest Him of Whom thou didst pro- 

Him Who for our sake took form, and was bap- 

_ tized, and was crucified; let us speak about 

the different kinds of Baptism, that we may 
come out thence purified. Moses baptized ¢ 
but it was in water, and before that in the 
cloud and in the sea.? This was typical as 
Paul saith; the Sea of the water, and the 
Cloud of the Spirit ; the Manna, of the Bread 
of Life ; the Drink, of the Divine Drink. John 
also baptized ; but this was not like the baptism 
of the Jews, for it was not only in water, but 
also ‘‘unto repentance.’’ Still it was not 

_ wholly spiritual, for he does not add‘ And 

phesy, thou Mediator of the Old and New | 

‘Testaments. What is this? Perhaps the 
Message of the Advent, and the Incarnation, 
of which not the least point may be loosed, 
I say not by those? who are yet carnal and 
babes in Christ, but not even by those who 
are like John in spirit. 

XVI. But further—Jesus goeth up out of 
the water . . . for with Himself He car- 
fies up thé world. . . ahd sees the 
heaven opened which Adam had shut against 
himself and all his posterity,? as the gates 
of Paradise by the flaming sword. And 
the Spirit bears witness to His Godhead, 
for he descends upon One that is like Him, 
as does the Voice from Heaven (for He to 

Whom the witness is borne came from thence), | 
and like a Dove, for He honours the Body | 

(for this also was God, through its union with 
God) by being seen in a bodily form; and 
moreover, the Dove has from distant ages 
been wont to proclaim the end of the Deluge. 
But if you are to judge of Godhead by bulk 
and weight, and the Spirit seems to you a 
small thing because He came in the form of a 

Dove, O man of contemptible littleness of | 

thought concerning the greatest of things, you 
must also to be consistent despise the King- 
dom of Heaven, because it is compared to a 
grain of mustard seed ;* and you must exalt 
the adversary above the Majesty of Jesus, be- 
cause he is called a great Mountain,* and 
Leviathan # and King of that which lives in the 
water, whereas Christ is called the Lamb,’ and 
the Pearl, and the Drop? and similar names. 

XVII. Now, since our Festival is of Bap- 
tism, and we must endure a little hardness with 

a Tuke xiii. &. B Heb. iv. 12. 

6 Micah vii. 6. ejohn i, 27. 

y One important MS. reads ‘* Us Who.” 
6 Gen. iii. 24. c Ib. viii, 12. 

A Zech. iv. 7 

# The word Leviathan does not occur in the LX.X., though it is 

Natt: x 35, 
Luke vit. 26. 

« Matt. xiii, 31. 

found twice in other Greek Versions of the Book of Job, Viz.i—ili, 

v Isa. li, 7. 
Osi lxxiioy 

8 and xl. 20. 
§ Matt, xiii. 46, 

| 
i 

in the Spirit.’’ Jesus also baptized, but in 
the Spirit. This is the perfect Baptism. 
And how is He not God, if I may digress a 
little, by whom you too are made God? I 
know also a Fourth Baptism—that by Mar- 
tyrdom and blood, which also Christ himself 
underwent ;—and this one is far more august 
than all the others, inasmuch as it cannot be 
defiled by after-stains. Yes, and I know ofa 
Fifth also, which is that of tears, and is much 
more laborious, received by him who washes 
his bed every night and his couch with tears ;¥ 
whose bruises stink through his wickedness 58 
and who goeth mourning and of a sad counte- 
nance ; who imitates the repentance of Manas- 
seh € and the humiliation of the Ninevites$ upon 
which God had mercy ; who utters the words 
of the Publican in the ‘Temple, and is justified 
rather than the stiff-necked Pharisee ;” who 
like the Canaanite woman bends down and 
asks for mercy and crumbs, the food of a dog 
that is very hungry.?® 

XVIII. I, however, for I confess myself to be 
aman,—that is to say, an animal shifty and ofa 
changeable nature,—both eagerly receive this 
Baptism, and worship Him Who has given it 
me, and impart it to others; and by shewing 
mercy make provision for mercy. For I 
know that I too am compassed with infirmity, 
and that with what measure I mete it shall be 
measured to me again.* But what sayest thou, 
O new Pharisee pure’ in title but not in in- 
tention, who dischargest upon us the senti- 
ments of Novatus,* though thou sharest the 

a Lev. xi. Bs Con's. 2. y, Ps. vi. 6. 8 Ib, xxxviii. 5. 
€ 2 Chron. xxxviii. 12. ¢ Jon. iii. 7-10. n Luke xvii. 13. 
O Matt. xy. 27. « Heb... ¥, 2. « Matt, vil. 2. 

A ‘The Novatians were known as Cathari or Puritans. 

w In a.p. 251 Novatus, a Presbyter of the Church of Carthage, 
who with others had formed a party against S. Cyprian, their 
Bishop, came to Rome, and excited Novatian tc become leader in 
a similar schism against Cornelius, the recently elected Bishop of 
the Apostolic See. The plea urged on_ behalf of the schism was 
that Cornelius, who was of one accord with Cyprian, had lapsed in 
the time of the persecution under Decius, A.p. 250, and that he 
had relaxed the discipline of the Church by admitting to Com- 
munion on too easy terms those who had been guilty of a similar 
offence ; and that therefore he ought not to be recognized as a true 
Bishop of the Church, but a faithful Pastor should be chosen in his 
place. Consequently Novatian was elected by some who held these 

' yiews, and was consecrated by three Bishops, There seem ta 

ORATIONS ON THE HOLY LIGHTS. 

359 

sae infirmities? Wilt thou not give any | 
place to weeping? Wilt thou shed no tear ? | 
Mayest thou not meet with a Judge like thy- 
self? Art thou not ashamed by the mercy 
of Jesus, Who took our infirmities and bare — 
our sicknesses;* Who came not to call the 
righteous but sinners to repentance ;8 Who 
will have mercy rather than sacrifice ; who | 
forgiveth sins till seventy times seven.y How 
blessed would your exaltation be if it really 
Were purity, not pride, making laws above | 
the reach of men, and destroying improve- 
ment by despair. For both are alike evil, 
indulgence not regulated by prudence, and 
condemnation that will never forgive ; the one | 
because it relaxes all reins, the other because | 
it strangles by its severity. Shew me your 
purity, and I will approve your boldness. 
But as it is, I fear that being full of sores you 
will render them incurable. Will you not 
admit even David’s repentance, to whom his 
penitence preserved even the gift of prophecy ? 
nor the great Peter himself, who fell into hum- 
an weakness at the Passion of our Saviour ? 
Yet Jesus received him, and by the threefold 
question and confession healed the threefold 
denial. Or will you even refuse to admit 
that he was made perfect by blood (for your 
folly goes even as far as that)? Or the trans- 
gressor at Corinth ? But Paul confirmed love 
towards him when he saw his amendment, 
and gives the reason, ‘‘ that such an one be | 
not swallowed up by overmuch sorrow,’’€ 
being overwhelmed by the excess of the pun- 
ishment.¢ And will you refuse to grant 
liberty of marriage to young widows on ac- 
count of the liability of their age to fall? 
Paul ventured to do so; but of course you | 
can teach him; for you have been caught | 
up to the Fourth heaven, and to another | 
Paradise, and have heard words more un- | 
speakable, and comprehend a larger circle in | 
your Gospel. 
XIX. But these sins were not after Baptism, | 
you will say. Where is your proof? Either 
prove it—or refrain from condemning ; and if 

| 
| 
| 
| 

have been a good many of his followers in Constantinople at this 
time, ‘There had been at one time a disposition among them to 
reunite themselves to the Catholic Church, for they were orthodox 
in faith; but it had been hindered by the malevolence of their 
party leaders ; so that the schism continued, and the Novatians 
must be added to the opponents with whom S. Gregory had to — 
Geil: a Matt. vii. 17. ese Ty 

y Ib. xviii. 22, 6 John xxi. 15 sq. € 2) Cars it..7. 

¢ ‘* This too often ignored page gives a solemn contradiction to 
those who, falsifying history as well as theology, pretended two 
centuries ago to revive by their extravagant rigour the spirit of the 
primitive Church, ‘The spirit of the Church never changes. In- 
flexible against error, it is full of gentleness and kindliness for | 
repentant sinners. ‘Lhe spirit of the Church is that of the Saints 
of all times ; or rather it is that of the Divine Shepherd, Who | 
made Himself known above all by His unspeakable tenderness and | 
His inexhaustible mercy to lost sheep.” (Benoit S. G, de N.) 

there be any doubt, let charity prevail. But No- 
vatus, you say, would not receive those who 
lapsed in the persecution. What do you 
mean by this? If they were unrepentant 
he was right; I too would refuse to receive 
those who either would not stoop at all or not 
sufficiently, and who would refuse to make 
their amendment counterbalance their sin ; 
and when I do receive them, I willassign them 
their proper place;# but if he refused those 
who wore themselves away with weeping, I 
will not imitate him. And why should No- 
vatus’s want of charity be a rule for me? He 
never punished coyetousness, which is a sec- 
ond idolatry ; but he condemned fornication 
as though he himself were not flesh and body. 
What say you? Are we convincing you by 
these words? Come and stand here on our 
side, that is, on the side of humanity. Let 
us magnify the Lord together. Let none of 
you, even though he has much confidence in 
himself, dare to say, Touch me not for I am 
pure, and who isso pure as I? Give us too 
a share in your brightness. But perhaps we 
are not convincing you? Then we will weep 
for you. Let these men then if they will, 
follow our way, which is Christ’s way; but 
if they will not, let them go their own. Per- 
haps in it they will be baptized with Fire, in 
that last Baptism which is more painful and 
longer, which devours wood like grass,® and 
consumes the stubble of every evil. 

XX. But let us venerate to-day the Baptism 
of Christ; and let us keep the feast well, not in 
pampering the belly, but rejoicing in spirit. 
And how shall we luxuriate? «* Wash you, 
make you clean.’?¥ If ye be scarlet with sin 
and less bloody, be made white as snow; if 
ye be red, and men bathed in blood, yet be 
ye brought to the whiteness of wool. Any- 
how be purified, and you shall be clean (for 
God rejoices in nothing so much as in the 

-amendment and salvation of man, on whose 

behalf is every discourse and every Sacra- 

ment), that you may be like lights in the 

world, a quickening force to all other men; 

that you may stand as perfect lights beside 

That great Light, and may learn the mys- 
tery of the illumination of Heaven, enlight- 
ened by the Trinity more purely and clearly, 
of Which even now you are receiving in a 
measure the One Ray from the One God- 
head in Christ Jesus our Lord; to Whom 
be the glory and the might for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

ai.c., their proper class among the Penitents. 
B x Cor. iii, 12-19. y Isa, 1. 17, 18, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

ORATION So. 

THe. ORATION oN Hoty Barriga. 
Preached at Constantinople Jan, 6, 381, being the day 
following the delivery of that on the Holy Lights, 

illustrious Day of the Holy Lights; for it was 
fitung that rejoicings should be kept for our 
Salvation, and that far more than for wed- 
dings and birthdays, and namedays, and 
house-warmings, and registrations of children, 
and anniversaries, and all the other festivities 
that men observe for their earthly friends. 
And now to-day let us discourse briefly con- 
concerning Baptism, and the benefits which 
accrue to us therefrom, even though our dis- 
course yesterday spoke of it cursorily ; partly 
because the time pressed us hard, and partly 
because the sermon had to avoid tediousness. 
Vor too great length in a sermon is as much 
an enemy to people’s ears, as too much food 
is to their bodies. . . . It will be worth 
your while to apply your minds to what we 
say, and to receive our discourse on so im- 
portant a subject not perfunctorily, but with 
ready mind, since to know the power of this 
Sacrament is itself Enlightenment. 

II. The Word recognizes three Births for 
us ; namely, the natural birth, that of Baptism, 
and that of the Resurrection. 

passion; but the second is by day, and is 
destructive of passion, cutting off all the veil 
that is derived from birth, and leading on to 

the higher life; and the third is more terrible 

: » invine ce i | i é : 
and shorter, bringing together in a moment | generation, the Seal, and everything that is 

_ honourable. 
_ given to us in return for nothing on our part ; 

all mankind,” to stand before its Creator, and 
to give an account of its service and con- 
versation here; whether it has followed the 
flesh, or whether it has mounted up with the 
spirit, and worshipped the grace of its new 
creation. My Lord Jesus Christ has showed 
that He honoured all these births in His own 
Person; the first, by that first and quickening 
Inbreathing ;° the second by His Incarnation 
and the Baptism wherewith He Himself was 
baptized ; and the third by the Resurrection 

a Enlightenment (wrttouds) is one of the most ancient names 
for Holy Baptism; the name, in fact, which S. Gregory uses 
throughout this Oration, and which his Latin translator ‘almost 
invariably renders by Baptismus. 

B ‘This Veil is Original Sin, by which the soul is darkened and 
as it were covered, 

y All Mankind (wav 7d mAdouo). mAdocma would not be cor- | 

rectly rendered by Creation. It is a word belonging solely to 
Man, who was formed by the Hand of God, and who, alone 
among creatures, has to give an account of his past life to his 
Creator at the Last Day. (Edd. Bened.) 0 Gem, aig. 

_ put to the Godward conscience. 
_ to our weakness, the renunciation of the flesh, 
the following of the Spirit, the fellowship of 

is the image of the heavenly Dliss. 

ing, as He became the Firstborn* among many 
brethren, so also to become the Firstborn froin 
the dead. 

III. Concerning two of these births, the first 
and the last, we have not to speak on the 
present occasion. Let us discourse upon the 
second, which is now necessary for us, and 

i ; - which gives its name to the Feast of the 
I. YresrerDay we kept high Festival on the | 

Lights. Illumination is the splendour of 
souls, the conversion of the life, the question 
It is the aid 

the Word, the improvement of the creature, 

the overwhelming of sin, the participation of 

light, the dissolution of darkness. It is the 
carriage to God, the dying with Christ, the 
perfecting of the mind, the bulwark of Faith, 
the key of the Kingdom of heaven, the change 

of life, the removal of slavery, the loosing of 
_chains, the remodelling of the whole man. 

Why should I go into further detail? II- 
lumination is the greatest and most magnifi- 
cent of the Gifts of God. For just as we 
speak of the Holy of Holies, and the Song of 
Songs, as more comprehensive and more ex- 
cellent than others, so is this called Hlumina- 

_ tion, as being more holy than any other 

illumination which we possess. 
IV. And as Christ the Giver of it is called 

_by many various names, so too is this Gift, 

| whether it is from the exceeding gladness of 
Of these the | 5 5 

first is by night, and is servile, and inyolves | 

its nature (as those who are very fond of a 
thing take pleasure in using its name), or that 
the great variety of its benefits has reacted for 
us upon its names. We call it, the Gift, the 
Grace, Baptism, Unction, Hlumination, the 
Clothing of Immortality, the Laver of Re- 

We call it the Gift, because it is 

Grace, because it is conferred even on debtors ; 
Baptism, because sin is buried with it in the 
water; Unction, as Priestly and Royal, for 
such were they who were anointed ; Ilumina- 
tion, because of its splendour ; Clothing, be- 
cause it hides our shame; the Laver, because 
it washes us; the Seal because it preserves us, 
and is moreover the indication of Dominion. 

“a In it the heavens rejoice; it is glorified by 
of which He was the Firstfruits ; condescend- | J f 6 ) 

Angels, because of its kindred splendour. It 
We long 

a Rom. viii, 29. Biol. aoa8: 

y This is the literal version of the passage, which is somewhat 
loosely quoted from 1S. Peter iii. 21, where the A. V. renders 
“the answer of a good conscience towards God,’’ and the R. V., 
“The interrogation (Marg. inquiry) of a good conscience, etc.” 
The passage is usually explained as referring to the Interroga- 
tories in Holy Baptism, answered by the threefold Vow which en- 
lists us “under Christ's banner against sin, the world, and the 
Devil,” professes the Faith, and promises obedience. 

indeed to sing out its praises, but we cannot 
worthily do so. 

V. God is Light:¢ the highest, the unap- 
proachable, the ineffable, ‘That can neither be 
conceived in the mind nor uttered with the 
lips,® That giveth life to every reasoning creat- 
ure.Y He is in the world of thought, what the 
sun is in the world of sense ; presenting Himself 
to our minds in proportion as we are cleansed ; 
and loved in proportion as He is presented to 
our mind ; and again, conceived in proportion 
as we love Him; Himself contemplating and 
comprehending Himself, and pouring Himself 
out upon what is external to Him. That Light, 
I mean, which is contemplated in the Father 
and the Son and the Holy Ghost, Whose 
riches is Their unity of nature, and the one 
outleaping of Their brightness. A second 
Light is the Angel, a kind of outflow or com- 
munication of that first Light, drawing its 
illumination from its inclination and obedi- 
ence thereto; and I know not whether its il- 
lumination is distributed according to the 
order of its state, or whether its order is due 
to the respective measures of its illumination.® 
A third Light is man; a light which is visible 
to external objects. For they call man light ¢ 
because of the faculty of speech in us. And 
the name is applied again to those of us who 
are more like God, and who approach God 
more nearly than others. I also acknowledge 
another Light, by which the primeval dark- 
ness was driven away or pierced. It was the 
first of all the visible creation to be called into 
existence; and it irradiates the whole uni- 
verse, the circling orbit of the stars, and all 
the heavenly beacon fires. 

VI. Light was also the firstborn command- 
ment given to the firstborn man (for the com- 
mandment of the Law is a lamp and a light ;¢ 
and again, Because ‘Thy judgments are a light 
upon the earth) ;” although the envious dark- 
ness crept in and wrought wickedness. And 
a Light typical and proportionate to those 
who were its subjects was the written law, 
adumbrating the truth and the sacrament of 
the great Light, for Moses’ face was made 
glorious by it.@ And, to mention more Lights 
—it was Light that appeared out of Fire to 
Moses, when it burned the bush indeed, but 
did not consume it, to shew its nature and to 
declare the power that was in it. And it was 
Light that was in the pillar of fire that led 

@.r-Jonnei..5: B > Tim, vic. 16. y John i, 9. 

8S. Thomas Aquinas (Summa I qu. 108) seems to solve this 
question in accordance with the second of these alternatives. 

€ dws (masc) is a common poetical word for Man. It is prob- 
ably derived from the root (Indo-Eur, Bha) of ¢aw, which also 
appears in dyzt, and modified in dacvw. ¢ Prov. vi. 23. 

7 Ps. xix, 105. @ Exod. xxxiv. 30. & Lbs ltte 2 

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM, 

36.1 

Israel and tamed the wilderness.* It was 
Light that carried up Elias in the car of fire,# 
and yet did not burn him as it carried him. 
It was Light that shone round the Shepherds ¥ 
when the Eternal Light was mingled with the 
temporal. It was Light that was the beauty 
of the Star that went before to Bethlehem to 
guide the Wise Men’s way,® and to be the 
escort of the Light That is above us, when He 
came amongst us. Light was Vhat Godhead 
Which was shewn upon the Mount to the dis- 
ciples—and a little too strong for their eyes.¢ 
Light was That Vision which blazed out upon 
Paul, and by wounding his eyes healed the 
darkness of his soul. Light is also the bril- 
liancy of heaven to those who have been puri- 
fied here, when the righteous shall shine forth 
as the Sun,” and God shall stand in the midst 
of them,® gods and kings, deciding and dis- 
tinguishing the ranks of the Blessedness of 
heaven. Light beside these in a special sense 
is the illumination of Baptism of which we are 
now speaking ; for it contains a great and mar- 
vellous sacrament of our salvation. 

VII. For since to be utterly sinless belongs 
to God, and to the first and uncompounded 
nature (for simplicity is peaceful, and not 
subject to dissension), and I venture to say 
also that it belongs to the Angelic nature too; 
or at least, I would affirm that nature to be 
very nearly sinless, because of its nearness to 
God; but to sin is human and belongs to the 
Compound on earth (for composition is the 
beginning of separation); therefore the master 
did not think it right to leave His creature 
unaided, or to neglect its danger of separation 
from Himself; but on the contrary, just as 
He gave existence to that which did not exist, 
so He gave new creation to that which did 
exist, a diviner creation and a loftier than the 
first, which is to those who are beginning life 
a Seal, and to those who are more mature in 
age both a gift and a restoration of the image 
which had fallen through sin, that we may 
not, by becoming worse through despair, and 
ever being borne downward to that which is 
more evil, fall altogether from good and from 
virtue, through despondency; and having 
fallen into a depth of evil (as it is said) despise 
Him ;* but that lke those who in the course 
of along journey make a brief rest from labour 
at an inn, we should be enabled to accomplish 
the rest of the road fresh and full of courage. 
Such is the grace and power of baptism; not 
an overwhelming of the world as of old, but a 

Oy yes, Mills 2 ie 
5 Matt. ii. 9. 
y Matt, xiil. 43. 

B 2 Kings ii, 11, y Luke ii. 9. 
e Luke ix. 32, 34. ¢ Acts ix. 3. 
4 Wisd. iit. 7. t Prov. xviii. 3 (LXX.). 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

purification of the sins of each individual, and — 
spare the figtree,* and not yet to cut it down, 
though accused of unfruitfulness ; but to allow 
VIII. And since we are double-made, I mean | 

a complete cleansing from all the bruises and 
stains of sin. 

of body and soul, and the one part is visible, the 
other invisible, so the cleansing also is twofold, 

by water and the spirit; the one received visibly | 

in the body, the other concurring with it in- 
visibly and apart from the body ; the one typ- 
ical, the other real and cleansing the depths. 
And this which comes to the aid of our first 
birth, makes us new instead of old, and like 

- one. 

God instead of what we now are; recasting us 
us descend with Him, that we may also be 

without fire, and creating us anew without 
breaking us up, For, tosay it all in one 

word, the virtue of Baptism is to be under- | 
stood as a covenant with God for a second | 
And indeed | 

life and a purer conversation. 
all need to fear this very much, and to watch 
our own souls, each one of us, with all care, 
that we do not become lars in respect of this 
profession. or if God is called upon as a 
Mediator to ratify human professions, how 
great is the danger if we be found transgressors 
of the covenant which we have made with 
God Himself; and if we be found guilty be- 
fore the Truth Himself of that lie, besides our 
other transgressions . . . and that when there 
is no second regeneration, or recreation, or re- 
storation to our former state, even though we 
seek it with all our might, and with many 
sighs and tears, by which it is cicatrized over 
(with great difficulty in my opinion, though 
we all believe that it may be cicatrized). Yet 

a 

husbandman, will entreat the Master still to 

you to put dung about it in the shape of tears, 
sighs, invocations, sleepings on the ground, 
vigils, mortifications of soul and body, and 
correction by confession and a life of humili- 
ation. But it is uncertain if the Master will 
spare it, inasmuch as it cumbers the ground of 

-another asking for mercy, and becoming de- 

teriorated by the longsuffering shewn to this 

Let us then be buried with Christ by 
Japtism,® that we may also rise with Him ; let 

exalted with Him; let us ascend with Him, 
that we may also be glorified together. 

X. If after baptism the persecutor and 
tempter of the light assail you (for he assailed 

~even the Word my God through the veil,” the 
_ hidden Light through that which was mani- 

if we might wipe away even thescars I should | 

be glad, since I too have need of mercy. 
it is better not to stand in need of a second 

But | 

fested), you have the means to conquer him. 
Fear not the conflict; defend yourself with 
the Water ; defend yourself with the Spirit, by 
Which all the fiery darts of the wicked shall 
be quenched.® It is Spirit, but That Spirit 
which rent the Mountains.¢ It is Water, but 
that which quenches fire. If he assail you 
by your want (as he dared to assail 
Christ), and asks that stones should be made 
bread, do not be ignorant of his devices.$ 
Teach him what he has not learnt. Defend 
yourself with the Word of life, Who is the 
Bread sent down from heaven, and giving life 
to the world.” If he plot against you with 
vain glory (as he did against Christ when he 
led Him up to the pinnacle of the temple and 

said to Him, Cast Thyself down ® as a proof 

cleansing, but to stop at the first, which is, I. 

know, common to all, and involves no labour, 
and is of equal price to slaves, to masters, to 
poor, to rich, to humble, to exalted, to gentle, 
to simple, to debtors, to those who are free 

from debt; like the breathing of the air, and | 

the pouring forth of the light, and the changes 
of the seasons, and the sight of creation, that 
great delight which we all share alike, and 
the equal distribution of the faith. 

IX, For it is astrange thing to substitute for | 

a painless remedy one which is more painful ; 
to cast away the grace of mercy, and owe a 
debt of punishment; and to measure our 
amendment against sin. Tor how many tears 
must we contribute before they can equal the 

fount of baptism; and who will be surety for 

us that death shall wait for our cure, and that 

the judgment seat shall not summon us while | 

still debtors, and needing the fire of the other | 

world? You perhaps, as a good and pitiful 

of ‘Thy Godhead), be not overborne by ela- 
tion. If you be taken by this he will not 
stop here. For he is insatiable, he grasps at 
every thing. He fawns upon you with fair 
pretences, but he ends in evil; this is the 
manner of his fighting. Yes, and the robber 
is skilled in Scripture. On the one side was 
that It is written about the Bread, and on 
the other that it Is written about the Angels. 
It is written, quoth he, He shall give His 
Angels charge concerning thee, and they 
shall bear thee in their hands.* O vile 
sophist ! how was it that thou didst suppress 
the words that follow, for I know it well, 
even if thou passest it by in silence? I will 
make thee to go upon the asp and_basil- 
isk, and I will tread upon serpents and 
scorpions, being fenced by the ‘Trinity. 

B Rom. vi. 4; Col.ii.12. 
6 Kphes. vi. 16. ¢ 1 Ki. xix. 11, 
@>Mattuiy..6:. eles. xci-14. 

a Tuke xiii. 8. 
y i.c., the Sacred Manhood. 
Geo Corsi, x1.9 4) John vig. 

If he wrestle against thee to a fall through 
avarice, shewing thee all the Kingdoms at 
one instant and in the twinkling of an cye, as 
belonging to himself, and demand thy worship, 
despise him as a beggar. Say to him relying 
on the Seal, “ I am myself the Image of God ; 
I have not yet been cast down from the 
heavenly Glory, as thou wast through thy 
pride; I have put on Christ; I have been 
transformed into Christ by Baptism ; worship 
thou me.’’ Well do I know that he will depart, 
defeated and put toshame by this; as he did 
from Christ the first Light, so he will from 
those who are illumined by Christ. Such 
blessings does the laver bestow on those who 
apprehend it; such is the rich feast which it 
provides for those who hunger aright. 

XI. Let us then be baptized that we may 
win the victory ; let us partake of the cleans- 
ing waters, more purifying than hyssop, purer 
than the legal blood, more sacred than the 
ashes of the heifer sprinkling the unclean,¢ and 
providing a temporary cleansing of the body, 
but not a complete taking away of sin; 
for if once purged, why should they need 
further purification? Let us be baptized to- 
day, that we suffer not violence® to-morrow ; 
and let us not put off the blessing as if it were 
an injury, nor wait till we get more wicked 
that more may be forgiven us; and let us not 
become sellers and traffickers of Christ, lest 
we become more heavily burdened than we 
are able to bear, that we be not sunk with all 
hands ¥ and make shipwreck of the Gift, and 
lose all because we expected too much. While 
thou art still master of thy thoughts run to the 
Gift. While thou art not yet sick in body or 
in mind, nor seemest so to those who are with 
thee (though thou art really of sound mind) ; 
while thy good is not yet in the power of others, 
but thou thyself art still master of it ; while thy 
tongue is not stammering or parched, or (to say 
no more) deprived of the power of pronouncing 
the sacramental words ; while thou canst still 
be made one of the faithful, not conjecturally 

me Pele sy 44 
B There is here an untranslateable play upon words. 

y Again.a play upon words. Bamrigeodae is sometimes used in 
the sense of to be drowned. ‘The word primarily means to Imn- 
merse, and this of course, when applied toa ship, is to sink her. 
The practice of immersion in Holy Baptism was undoubtedly 
universal in the primitive ages, except where in cases of necessity 
persons were baptized in sickness, or in prison under sentence of 
death ; and in such cases this ‘Clinic’? Baptism, though recog- 
nized as valid, and therefore not to be repeated, was viewed as it 
regular, and disqualified its recipient from subsequently receiving 
Holy Orders, Affusion was gradually allowed, probably for clim- 
atic reasons, to become the prevailing practice of the West, 
though immersion predominated as late as the ‘I'welfth Century. 
It is, however, a remarkable fact that the Didache, a Manual of 
instruction which some date within the lifetime of the Apostles, 
and nearly all are agreed in placing not later than the early years 
ofthe Second Century, expressly permits affusion, without any 
hint of irregularity, or mention of atiy circumstance of necessity 
except scarcity of water, 

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM. 

363 

| F : 

| but confessedly ; and canst still receive not 
pity but congratulation; while the Gift is 
still clear to thee, and there is no doubt about 
it; while the grace can reach the depth of 
thy soul, and it is not merely thy body that 
is washed for burial; and before tears sur- 
round thee announcing thy deccase—and even 
these restrained perhaps for thy sake—and thy 
wife and children would delay thy departure, 
and are listening for thy dying words ; before 
the physician is powerless to help thee, and is 
giving thee but hours to live—hours which 
are not his to give—and is balancing thy salv- 
ation with the nod of his head, and discours- 
ing learnedly on thy disease after thou art 
dead, or making his charges heavier by with- 
drawals, or hinting at despair ; before there 
is a struggle between the man who would 
baptize thee and the man who seeks thy 
money, the one striving that thou mayest re- 
ceive thy Viaticum, the other that he may be 
inscribed in thy Will as heir—and there is no 
time for both. 

XII. Why wait for a fever to bring you this 
blessing, and refuse it from God? Why will 
you have it through lapse of time, and not 
through reason? Why will you owe it toa 
plotting friend, and not to a saving desire ? 
Why will you receive it of force and not of 
free will; of necessity rather than of liberty ? 
Why must you hear of your death from 
another, rather than think of it as even now 
present? Why do you seek for drugs which 
will do no good, or the sweat of the crisis, 
when the sweat of death is perhaps upon you ? 
Heal yourself before your extremity ; have 
pity upon yourself the only true healer of 
your disease; apply to yourself the really 
saving medicine ; while you are still sailing 
with a favouring breeze fear shipwreck, and 
you will be in less danger of it, if you make 
use of your terror as a helper. Give yourself 
occasion to celebrate the Gift with feasting, 
not with mourning ; let the talent be cultiv- 
ated, not buried in the ground; let some 
time intervene between the grace and death, 
that not only may the account of sins be 
wiped out, but something better may be 
written in its place; that you may have not 
only the Gift, but also the Reward ; that you 
may not only escape the fire, but may also in- 
herit the glory, which is bestowed by cultiva- 
tion of the Gift. For to men of little soul 
/itis a great thing to escape torment; but 
men of great soul aim also at attaining re- 
ward. 

XIII. I know of three classes among the 
saved ; the slaves, the hired servants, the sons, 

| 
| 
| 

364 

If you are aslave, be afraid of the whip ; if you 
are a hired servant, look only to receive your 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 
| 
| 

hire ; if you are more than this, a son, revere | 

Him asa Father, and work that which is good, 
because it is good to obey a Father ; and even 
though no reward should come of it for you, 
this is itself a reward, that you please your 
Father. 
these things. How absurd it would be to 
grasp at money and throw away health; and 

economical oyer the cleansing of the soul ; 
and to seek for freedom from earthly slavery, 
but not to care about heavenly freedom ; and to 
make every effort to be splendidly housed and 
dressed, but to have never a thought how you 
yourself may become really very precious ; 
and to be zealous to do good to others, with- 
out any desire to do good to yourself. And 
if good could be bought, you would spare no 
money; but if mercy is freely at your feet, 
you despise it for its cheapness. 

Let us then take care not to despise | 

ures, and to Him your uselessness. How 
great is the danger that surrounds you. How 
many the unexpected mischances. War has 
expended you ; or an earthquake overwhelmed 
you; or the sea swallowed you up ; or a wild 
beast carried you off; or asickness killed you ; 
or a crumb going the wrong way (a most 
insignificant thing, but what is easier than for 
a man to die, though you are so proud of the 

_ divine image) ; or a too freely indulged drink- 
to be lavish of the cleansing of the body, but | 
or a horse ran away with you; or a drug mali- 

ing bout;* or a wind knocked you down ; 

ciously scheming against you, or perhaps found 
to be deleterious when meant to be whole- 
some ; or an inhuman judge ; or an inexorable 
executioner ; or any of the things which make 

| the change swiftest and beyond the power of 

Every time | 

is suitable for your ablution, since any time | 

may be your death. With Paul I shout to 
you with that loud voice, ‘Behold now is 
the accepted time ; behold Now is the day of 
salvation ;’’# and that Now does not point to 
any one time, but is every present moment. 
And again ‘‘ Awake, thou that sleepest, and 
Christ shall give thee light,’’® dispelling the 
darkness of sin. For as Isaiah says,Y In the 
night hope is evil, and it is more profitable to 
be received in the morning. 

XIV. Sow in good season, and gather to- 
gether, and open thy barns when it is the time 
to do so; and plant in season, and let the clus- 
ters be cut when they are ripe, and launch 
boldly in spring, and draw thy ship on shore 
again at the beginning of winter, when the sea 
begins to rage. And let there be to thee also 
atime for war and atime for peace; a time to 
marry, and a time to abstain from marrying ; 
a time for friendship, and a time for discord, 
if this be needed; and in short a time for 
everything, if you will follow Solomon’s ad- 
vice.6 And it is best to do so, for the advice 
is profitable. But the work of your salvation 
is one upon which you should be engaged at 
all times; and let every time be to you the 
definite one for Baptism. If you are always 
passing over to-day and waiting for to-mor- 
row, by your little procrastinations you will be 
cheated without knowing it by the Evil One, 
as his manner is. 
present, and to God the future ; to me your 
youth, and to God old age; to me your pleas- 

0.2 Cor. vi,.2; 
y Isa. xxviil. 19, LXX. 

B Ephes. v. 14. 
6 Ecci. il. 1 sq. 

Give to me, he says, the | 

| 

| 
| 

human aid. 

XV. But if you would fortify yourself before- 
hand with the Seal, and secure yourself for the 
future with the best and strongest of all aids, 
being signed both in body and in soul with 
the unction, as Israel was of old with that 
blood and unction of the firstborn at night 
that guarded him,* what then can happen to 
you, and what has been wrought out for you? 
Listen to the Proverbs. ‘If thou sittest, he 
says, thou shalt be without fear; and if thou 
sleepest, thy sleep shall be sweet.’’¥ And listen 
to David giving thee the good news, ‘* Thou 
shalt not be afraid for the terror by night, for 
mischance or noonday demon.’’® ‘This, even 
while you live, will greatly contribute to your 
sense of safety (for a sheep that is sealed is 
not easily snared, but that which is unmarked 
is an easy prey to thieves), and at your death 
a fortunate shroud, more precious than gold, 
more magnificent than a sepulchre, more re- 
verent than fruitless libations,é more season- 
able than ripe firstfruits, which the dead bestow 
on the dead, making a law out of custom. 
Nay, if all things forsake thee, or be taken 
violently away from thee ; money, possessions, 
thrones, distinctions, and everything that be- 
longs to this early turmoil, yet you will be 
able to lay down your life in safety, having 
suffered no loss of the helps which God gave 
you unto salvation. 

XVI. But are you afraid lest you should de- 
stroy the Gift, and do you therefore put off your 
cleansing, because you cannot have it a sec- 
ond time? What? Would you not be afraid 
of danger in time of persecution, and of losing 

a Some MSS. read ‘A flooded river.” j 
Exod. xil. 22. y Prov. iil. 24. 6 Ps, xc. 5. 

e Billius suggests, though without adopting it in his text, a 
slight conjectural alteration, which would read “Than funeral 
games and libations;” but this, though it gives a very good 
sense, is a needless departure from the MSS, ¢ Luke ix. 60. 

ORATION 

the most precious Thing you eae ees 
Would you then on this account avoid be- 
coming a Christian? Perish the thought. 
sucha fear isnot for a.sané man; such an 
argument argues insanity. O incautious cau- 
tion, if may so. O trick of the Evil One! 
‘Truly he is darkness and pretends to be light ; 
and when he can no longer prevail in open 

vice, apparently good, really evil, if by some 
trick at least he may prevail, and we 
escape from his plotting. And this is clearly 
what he is aiming at in this instance. For, 

being unable to persuade you to despise Bap- 

tism, he inflicts loss upon you through a fic- 
titious security ; that in consequence of your 
fear you may suffer unconsciously the very 
thing you are afraid of ; and because you fear 
to destroy the Gift, you may for this very 
reason fail of the Gift altogether. This is his 
character ; and he will never cease his duplic- 
ity as long as he sees us pressing onwards to- 
wards heaven from which he has fallen. Where- 
fore, O man of God, do thou recognize the 
plots of thine adversary ; for the battle is 
against him that hath, and it is concerned 
with the most important interests. ‘Take not 
thine enemy to be thy counsellor ; despise not 
to be and to be called Faithful. As long as you 
are a Catechumen you are but in the porch of 
Religion ; you must come inside, and cross 

ON HOLY tir 

365 

cee Or will you wait to be washed till 
y 

you are dead, and not so much the ob- 

ject of pity as of dislike? Are you re- 

gretting the dregs of pleasure, being your- 

self in the dregs of life? It is a shame- 

ful thing to be past indeed the flower of 

your age, but not past your wickedness ; 

but 

_cither to be involved in it still, or at least to 
war, he lays snares in secret, and gives ad-_ 

the court, and observe the Holy Things, and | 

look into the Holy of Holies, and be in com- 
pany with the Trinity. Great are the inter- 
ests for which you are fighting, great too the 
stability which you need. Protect yourself 
with the shield of faith. He fears you, if you 
fight armed with this weapon, and therefore 
he would strip you of the Gift, that he may 
the more easily overcome you unarmed and 
defenceless. He assails every age, and every 
form of life; he must be repelled by all. 
XVII. Art thou young? stand against thy 
passions ; be numbered with the alliance in the 
army of God: * do valiantly against Goliath.6 
Take your thousands or your myriads ;7 thus 
me your manhood ; 
youth to be withered, being killed by the im- 
perfection of your faith, “Are you old and 
near the predestined necessity? Aid your 
few remaining days. Entrust the purification 
to your old age. Why do you fear youthful 
passion in deep old age and at your last 

a The Benedictine EK ditors punctuate | differently, and render 
“Stand against passions with the assistance (of Baptism), be 
numbered in the army of God,” remarking that David fought Go- 
liath without allies, leaning on God’s assistance: and that S. 
Gregory here certainly means that a Christian who relies on the 
aid of his Baptism is to stand firm in the battle against the Devil. 

Bx Saimin 32. y ED, 2Svilia.7 « 

ViGlita valk 

but do not allow your 

| you an infant child ? 
find no 

Have 
Do not let sin get any 
opportunity, but let him be sanctified from 
his childhood ; from his very tenderest age let 
him be consecrated by the Spirit. Fearest 
thou the Seal on account of the weakness of 
nature? O what a small-souled mother, and 
of how little faith! Why, Anna even before 
Samuel was born# promised him to God, and 
after his birth consecrated him at once, and 
brought him up in the priestly habit, not 
fearing anything in human nature, but trust- 
ing in God. You have no need of amulets or 
incantations, with which the Devil also comes 
in, stealing worship from God for himself in 
the minds of vainer men. Give your child 
the Trinity, that great and noble Guard. 
XVIII. What more? Are you living in Vir- 
ginity ? Be sealed by this purification ; make 
this the sharer and companion of your life. Let 
this direct your life, your words, every member, 
every movement, every sense. Honour it, that 
it may honour you; that it may give to your 
head a crown of graces, and with a crown of 
delights may shield you.& Art thou bound by 
wedlock? Be bound also by the Seal; make 
it dwell with you as a guardian of your con- 
tinence, safer than any number of eunuchs or 
of doorkeepers. Art thou not yet wedded to 
flesh? Fear not this consecration; thou art 
pure even after marriage. I will take the risk 
of that. I will join you in wedlock. I will 
dress the bride. Wedo not dishonour mar- 
riage because we give a higher honour to vir- 
ginity. Iwill imitate Christ, the pure Grooms- 
man and Bridegroom, as He both wrought a 
miracle at a wedding, and honours wedlock 
with His Presence. Only let marriage be 
pure and unmingled with filthy lusts. ‘This 
only I ask; receive safety from the Gift, and 
give to the Gift the oblation of chastity in its 
due season, when the fixed time of prayer 
comes round, and that which is more precious 
than business. And do this by common con- 
sent and approval. For we do not command, 
we exhort ; and we would receive something 
of you for your own profit, and the common 
security of you both. And in one word, 

seem so by delaying your purification. 

(Cig g SEs sahe Cor B Keelusy xx Xiig. y John il, 1-11. 

366 
there is no state of life and no occupation to 
which Baptism is not profitable. You who 
are a free man,® be curbed by it ; you who 
are in slavery, be made of equal rank; you 
who are in grief, receive comfort; let the 
ladsome be disciplined; the poor receive 
riches that cannot be taken away; the rich 
be made capable of being good stewards of 
their possessions. Do not play tricks or lay 
plots against your own salvation. Tor even 
if we can delude others we cannot delude 
ourselves. And so to play against oneself is 
very dangerous and foolish. 

7 
c 

said:—Rahab the harlot was justified by one 
thing alone, her hospitality, though she re- 
ceives no praise for the rest of her conduct ; 
and the Publican was exalted by one thing, 
his humility,® though he received no testimony 
for anything else 3 so that you may learn not 
easily to despair concerning yourself. 

XX. But some will say, What shall I gain, 
if, when Lam preoccupied by baptism, and have 

cut off myself by my haste from the pleasures 

XIX. But you have to live in the midst of | 

public affairs, and are stained by them ; and it 
would be a terrible thing to waste this mercy. 
‘The answer is simple. Flee, if you can, even 
from the forum, along with the good company, 
making yourself the wings of an eagle, or, to 
speak more suitably, of adove . . . for 
what have you to do with Cesar or the things 
of tesa Po. until you can rest where 
there is no sin, and no blackening, and no 
biting snake in the way to hinder your godly 
steps. Snatch your soul away from the world ; 
flee from Sodom; flee from the burning ; 
travel on without turning back, lest you 
should be fixed as a pillar of salt.@ Escape to 
the Mountain lest you be destroyed with the 
plain. But if you are already bound and 
constrained by the chain of necessity, reason 
thus with yourself; or rather let me reason 
thus with you. It is better both to attain the 
good and to keep the purification. But if it 
be impossible to do both it is surely better to 
be a little stained with your public affairs than 
to fall altogether short of grace ; just as I think 
it better to undergo a slight punishment from 
father or master than to be put out of doors ; 
and to be a little beamed upon than to be left 
in total darkness. And it is the part of wise 
men to choose, as in good things the greater 
and more perfect, so in evils the lesser and 
lighter. Wherefore do not overmuch dread 
the purification. For our success is always 
judged by comparison with our place in life 

| 

by our just and merciful Judge ; and often one — 

who is in public life and has had small success 
has had a greater reward than one who in the 

man to advance a little in fetters, than for one 
to run who is not carrying any weight ; or to 

of life, when it was in my power to give the 
reins to pleasure, and then to obtain grace ? 
Yor the labourers in the vineyard who had 
worked the longest time gained nothing therc- 

by, for equal wages were given to the very 

lest.¥ You have delivered me from some 
trouble, whoever you are who say this, be- 

- cause you have at last with much difficulty 

told the secret of your delay; and though | 
cannot applaud your shiftiness, I do applaud 
your confession. But come hither and listen 
to the interpretation of the parable, that you 
may not be injured by Scripture for want of 
information. First of all, there is no question 
here of baptism, but of those who believe at 
different times and enter the good vineyard 
of the Church. For from the day and hour 
at which each believed, from that day and 
hour he is required to work. And then, al- 
though they who entered first contributed 
more to the measure of the labour yet they 
did not contribute more to the measure of the 
purpose ; nay perhaps even more was due to 
the last in respect of this, though the statement 
may seem paradoxical. or the cause of their 
later entrance was their later call to the work 
of the vineyard. In all other respects let us 
see how different they are. ‘The first did not 
believe or enter till they had agreed on their 
hire; but the others came forward to do the 
work without an agreement, which is a proof 
of greater faith. And the first were found to 
be of an envious and murmuring nature, but 
no such charge is brought against the others. 
And to the first, that which was given was 
wages, though they were worthless fellows ; to 
the last it was the free gift. So that the first 
were convicted of folly, and with reason de- 

_prived of the greater reward. Let us see what 
enjoyment of liberty has not completely suc- — 
ceeded ; as I think it more marvellous for a 

be only a little spattered in walking through | 

mud, than to be perfectly clean when the road 
is clean. ‘To give you a proof of what I have 

a év e£ovora evidently means ‘Tui juris—your own master. 
B Gen. xix, 26, 

would have happened to them if they had been 
late. Why, the equal pay, evidently. How 
then can they blame the employer as unjust 
because of their equality ? For all these things 
take away the merit of their labour from the 

first, although they were at work first; and 
| therefore it turns out that the distribution of 

a Josh. vi. 25; James ii. 25. B Luke xvii. 14. 
y Matt. xx. 1 sq. 

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTISM. 3 

| 
equal pay was just, if you measure the good | 

will against the labour. 
XXI. But supposing that the Parable does 
sketch the power of the font according to your 

interpretation, what would prevent you, if you | 
entered first, and bore the heat, from avoiding | 

envy of the last, that by this very lovingkind- 
hess you might obtain more, and receive the 
reward, not as of grace but as of debt? And 
next, the workmen who receive the wages are 
those who have entered, not those who have 
missed, the vineyard; which last is like to be 
your case. So that if it were certain that you 
would obtain the Gift, though you are of such 
a mind, and maliciously keep back some of 
the labour, you might be forgiven for taking 
refuge in such arguments, and desiring to 
make unlawful gain out of the kindness of the 
master ; though I might assure you that the 
very fact of being able to labour is a greater 
reward to any who is not altogether of a huck- 
stering mind. But since there is a risk of 
your being altogether shut out of the vineyard 
through your bargaining, and losing the capit- 
al through stopping to pick up little gains, 
do let yourselves be persuaded by my words 
to forsake the false interpretations and contra- 
dictions, and to come forward without arguing 
to receive the Gift, lest you should be snatched 
away before you realize your hopes, and 
should find out that it was to your own loss 
that you devised these sophistries. 

XXII. But then, you say, is not God merci- 
ful, and since He knows our thoughts and 
searches out our desires, will He not take the 
desire of Baptism instead of Baptism? You are 
speaking in riddles, if what you mean is that 
because of God’s mercy the unenlightened is 
enlightened in His sight ; and he is within the 
kingdom of heaven who merely desires to at- 
tain to it, but refrains from doing that which 
pertains to the kingdom. TI will, however, 
speak out boldly my opinion on these matters ; 

and I think that all other sensible men will : 

range themselves on my side. Of those who 
have received the gift, some were altogether 
alien from God and from salvation, both ad- 
dicted to all manner of sin, and desirous to be 

bad ; others were semivicious, and in a kind | 

of mean state between good and bad; others 
again, while they did that which was evil, yet 
did not approve their own action, just as men 
in a fever are not pleased with their own sick- 
ness. And others even before they were il- 

luminated were worthy of praise 3 partly by | 

nature, and partly by the care with which 

after their initiation became evidently better, 

| 
| 

| 

307 

and less liable to fall; in the one case with a 
view to procuring good, and in the other in 
order to preserve it. And amongst these, 
those who gave in to some evil are better 
than those who were altogether bad; and 
better still than those who yielded a little, are 
those who were more zealous, and broke up 
their fallow ground before Baptism ; they 
have the advantage over the others of having 
already laboured; for the font does not do 
away with good deeds as it does with sins. 
But better even than these are they who are 
also cultivating the Gift, and are polishing 
themselves to the utmost possible beauty. 
XXII. And so also in those who fail to re- 
ceive the Gift, some are altogether animal or 
bestial, according as they are either foolish or 
wicked ; and this, I think, has to be added to 
their other sins, that they have no reverence at 

_all for this Gift, but look upon it as a mere gift 

—to be acquiesced in if given them, and if 
hot given them, then to be neglected. Others 
know and honour the Gift, but put it off; 
some through laziness, some through greedi- 
hess. Others are not in a position to receive 
it, perhaps on account of infancy,* or some 
perfectly involuntary circumstance through 
which they are prevented from receiving it, 
even if they wish. As then in the former case 
we found much difference, so too in this. 
They who altogether despise it are worse than 
they who neglect it through greed or care- 
lessness. ‘hese are worse than they who 
have lost the Gift through ignorance or tyran- 
ny, for tyranny is nothing but an involuntary 
error.@ And I think that the first will have 
to suffer punishment, as for all their sins, so 
for their contempt of baptism; and that the 
second will also have to suffer, but less, be- 
cause it was not so much through wickedness 
as through folly that they wrought their. fail- 
ure; and that the third will be neither glori- 
fied nor punished by the righteous Judge, as 
unsealed and yet not wicked, but persons who 
have suffered rather than done wrong. For 
not every one who is not bad enough to be 
punished is good enough to be honoured : 
just as not every one who is not good enough 
to be honoured is bad enough to be punished. 
And I look upon it as well from another 
point of view. If you judge the murderously 
disposed man by his will alone, apart from the 

a That S. Gregory did not reject infant Baptism is clear, from 
the directions given later on in this Oration (c. xxviii; and cf. c. 
xvil, S. fin.). He is here referring simply to the inability of infants 
to bring themselves to the font whereby through the mistaken 

, scruples of parents ae must have died unbaptized. 
they prepared themselves for Baptism. ‘These | 

h are due altogether to external tyranny 

B1.e., The sins whic 3 j 
they are involuntary, whereas 

do not involve guilt, inasmuch as 
the guilt of sin is in the will, 

CC i2 

act of murder, then you may reckon as bap- 
tized him who desired baptism apart from the 
reception of baptism. But if you_cannot do 
the one how can you do the other? I cannot 
see it. Or, if you like, we will put it thus :— 
If desire in your opinion has equal power 
with actual baptism, then judge in the same 
way in regard to glory, and you may be con- 
tent with longing for it, as if that were itself 
glory. And what harm is done you by your 
not attaining the actual glory, as long as you 
have the desire for it ? 

XXIV. ‘Therefore since you have heard these 
words, come forward to it, and be enlightened, 
and your faces shall not be ashamed + through 
missing the Grace. Receive then the En- 
lightenment in due season, that darkness pur- 
sue you not, and catch you, and sever you 
from the Illumining. The night cometh 
when no man can work® after our departure 
hence. The one is the voice of David, the 
other of the True Light which lighteth 
every man that cometh into the world.’ And 
consider how Solomon reproves you who are 
too idle or lethargic, saying, How long wilt 
thou sleep, O sluggard,® and when wilt thou 
arise out of thy sleep? You rely upon this or 
that, and ‘‘ pretend pretences in sins ;’’ ¢ I am 
waiting for Epiphany ; I prefer Easter ; I will 
wait for Pentecost. It is better to be bap- 
tized with Christ, to rise with Christ on the 
Day of His Resurrection,” to honour the Man- 
ifestation of the Spirit. And what then ? 
The end will come suddenly in a day for 
which thou lookest not, and in an hour that 
thou art not aware of ; and then you will have 
for a companion lack of grace; and you will 
be famished in the midst of all those riches of 
goodness, though you ought to reap the oppos- 
ite fruit from the opposite course, a harv- 
est by diligence, and refreshment from the 
font, like the thirsty hart ® that runs in haste 
to the spring, and quenches the labour of his 
race by water; and not to be in Ishmael’s 

a Ps. xxxiv. 5. B John xii. 35. y Ib. i. 4. 8 Prov. vi. 9. € Ps. cxli. 4. 

¢ The: Festivals of Easter and Pentecost were set apart as 
early as the Second Century for the solemn administration of Holy 
Baptism; and S. Siricius Bishop of Rome about the time of 
S. Gregory of Nazianzus, states that all the Churches agreed in 
keeping these exclusively. But this is a mistake (though Van Es- 
pen says (II., c. i., tit. 2, c. 4) that S. Siricius acknowledges the 
existence of the different custom, but condemns it, and gives refer- 
ence to ad. Himerum Tarraconensen, c. 2), for there is evidence 
that in many Churches the Epiphany also was thus observed, and 
in some Christmas also. But Tertullian (De Bapt.) says that no 
time is unsuitable. In the Western Church, however. Papal de- 
crees, Conciliar Canons, and Imperial Capitularies from the VIth 
to the XII Ith. Centuries abound, limiting the administration, ex- 
cept in cases of sickness, to the two seasons of Easter and Pente- 
cost, on the Vigils of which it is still provided for in the Missals. 
No doubt it was felt to be a very useful limitation, when most per- 
sons who were presented for Baptism were adults, and required 
wee ee When this ceased to be the case the rule gradually 

ecame obsolete, and has long ceased to be observed. 

7 Matt. xxiv. 50. @- Bs: xis 1. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

case, dried up for want of water,* or as the 
fable has it, punished by thirst in the midst 
of a spring. It is a sad thing to let the 
market day go by and then to seek for 
work. It is a sad thing to let the Manna 
pass and then to long for food. It is a sad 
thing to take a counsel too late, and to be- 
come sensible of the loss only when it is im- 
possible to repair it ; that is, after our depart- 
ure hence, and the bitter closing of the acts 
of each man’s life, and the punishment of sin- 
ners, and the glory of the purified. ‘There- 
fore do not delay in coming to grace, but 
hasten, lest the robber outstrip you, lest the 
adulterer pass you by, lest the insatiate be sat- 
isfied before you, lest the murderer seize the 
blessing first, or the publican or the fornicator, 
or any of these violent ones who take the King- 
dom of heaven by force.Y For it suffers vio- 
lence willingly, and is tyrannized over through 
goodness. 

XXV. Take my advice, my friend, and be 
slow to do evil, but swift to your salvation ; 
for readiness to evil and tardiness to good are 
equally bad. If you are invited to a revel, be 
not swift to go; if to apostasy, leap away ; if 
a company of evildoers say to you, ‘* Come 
with us, share our bloodguiltiness, let us hide 
in the earth a righteous man unjustly,’’® do 
not lend them even your ears. ‘Thus you will 
make two very great gains; you will make 
known to the other his sin, and you will 
deliver yourself from evil company. — But 
if David the Great say unto you, Come 
and let us rejoice in the Lord ;¢ or another 
Prophet, Come and let us ascend into the 
Mountain of the Lord ;¢ or our Saviour Him- 
self, Come unto me all ye that labour and 
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,” 
or, Arise, let us go hence, shining brightly, 
glittering above snow, whiter than milk,? 
shining above the sapphire stone ; let ns 
not resist or delay. Let us be like Peter and 
John, and let us hasten ;* as they did to the 
Sepulchre and the Resurrection, so we to the 
Font; running together, racing against each 
other, striving to be first to obtain this Bless- 
ing. And say not, ‘*Go away, and come 
again, and tomorrow I will be baptized,’’ 
when you may have the blessing today. ize! 

a Gen. xix. 15. $qq ° 
B The allusion is to the well known story of Tantalus, whose 
punishment in hell was said to be that, being tormented with hus- 
ger and thirst, he was condemned to stand for ever in water up to 
his lips, but to be unable to drink, and to have a tree laden with 
luscious fruit within easy reach, but to be unable to gather of it. 
Matt. xi. 12. Prov. i. 11. eles: XCV.ae. 
Mic. iv. 2. » Matt. xi. 28. 
@ The A. V.is here used, as more accurate than the LXX. 
The passage is quoted freely from Lam. iv. 7. 
« John xx. 3. A Prov. iii, 28. 

ORATION ON 

will have with me father, mother, brothers, 
wife, children, friends, and all whom I value, 

HOLY BAPTISM, 

and then I will be saved; but it is not yet | 

the fitting time for me to be made bright ;’’ 
for if you say so, there is reason to fear lest 
you should have as sharers of your sorrow 
those whom you hoped to have as sharers of 
your joy. Ifthey will be with you, well ;— 
but do not wait for them. For it is base 
to say, ‘* But where is my offering for my 
baptism, and where is my baptismal robe, in 
which I shall be made bright, and where 
is what is wanted for the entertainment of my 
baptizers, that in these too I may become 
worthy of notice? For, as you see, all these 
things are necessary, and on account of this 
the Grace will be lessened.’’ 
trifle with great things, or allow yourself 
to think so basely. The Sacrament is greater 
than the visible environment. Offer jour- 
seff; clothe yourself with Christ, feast me 
with your conduct; I rejoice to be thus 
affectionately treated, and God Who gives 
these great gifts rejoices thus. Nothing is 
great in the sight of God, but what the poor 
may give, so that the poor may not here also 
be outrun, for they cannot contend with 
the rich. In other matters there is a dis- 
tinction between poor and rich, but here the 
more willing is the richer. 

XXVI. Let nothing hinder you from going 
on, nor draw you away from your readiness. 
While your desire is still vehement, seize upon 
that which you desire. While the iron is hot, 
let it be tempered by the cold water, lest any- 
thing should happen in the interval, and put 
an end to your desire. I am Philip; do you 
be Candace’s Eunuch.* Do you also say, 
‘*See, here is water, what doth hinder me 
to be baptized?’’ Seize the opportunity ; 
rejoice greatly in the blessing; and having 
spoken be baptized; and having been bap- 
tized be saved ; and though you be an Ethi- 
opian body, be made white in soul. Do not 
say, ‘A Bishop shall baptize me,—and he 
a Metropolitan,—and he of Jerusalem (for the 
Grace does not come of a place, but of the 
Spirit),—and he of noble birth, for it would 
be a sad thing for my nobility to be insulted 
by being baptized by a man of no family.” 
Do not say, ‘*I do not mind a mere Priest, if 
he is a celibate, and a religious, and of an- 
gelic life ; for it would be a sad thing for me 
to be defiled even in the moment of my cleans- 
ing.”’ Do not ask for credentials of the 
preacher or the baptizer. For another is his 

369 
judge,* and the examiner of what thou canst 
not see. For man looketh on the outward 
appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart. 
sut to thee let every one be trustworthy for 
purification, so only he is one of those who 
have been approved, not of those who are 
openly condemned, and not a stranger to the 

Church. _Do not judge your judges, you who 
need healing ; and do not make nice distinc- 

‘oe oP J 
tions about the rank of those who shall cleanse 

you, or be critical about your spiritual fathers. 
One may be higher or lower than another, but 
all are higher than you. Look at it this way. 
One may be golden, another iron, but both 

_are rings and have engraved on them the 
_same royal image; and thus when they im- 

Do not thus | 

press the wax, what difference is there be- 
tween the seal of the one and that of the 
other? None. Detect the material in the 
wax, if you are so very clever. ‘Tell me 
which is the impression of the iron ring, 
and which of the golden. And how do they 
come to be one? The difference is in the 
material and not in the seal. And so anyone 
can be your baptizer; for though one may 
excel another in his life, yet the grace of 
baptism is the same, and any one may be 
your consecrator who is formed in the same 
faith. 

XXVII. Do not disdain to be baptized with 
a poor man, if you are rich ; or if you are noble, 
with one who is lowborn ; or if you are a mas- 
ter, with one who is up to the present time your 
slave. Not even so will you be humbling your- 
self as Christ, unto Whom you are baptized to- 
day, Who for your sake took upon Himself even 
the form of a slave. From the day of your 
new birth all the old marks were effaced, and 
Christ was put upon all in one form. Do not 
disdain to confess your sins, knowing how 
John baptized, that by present shame you may 
escape from future shame (for this too is a 
part of the future punishment) ; and prove 
that you really hate sin by making a shew of 
it openly, and triumphing over it as worthy 
of contempt. Do not reject the medicine of 
exorcism, nor refuse it because of its length. 
This too is a touchstone of your right disposi- 
tion for grace. What labour have you to do 
compared with that of the Queen of Ethiopia,# 
who arose and came from the utmost part of 
the earth to see the wisdom of Solomon? And 
behold a Greater than Solomon is hereY in the 
judgment of those who reason maturely. Do 
not hesitate either at length of journey, or 
distance by sea; or fire, if this too lies before 

@ Acts viii. 36, 

BrKgs. x: x, y Matt. xii, 42, 

Gar am, AVI, 7, 

370 

you ; or of any other, small or great, of the 
hindrances that you may attain to the gift. 
But if without any labour and trouble at all 
you may obtain that which you desire, what 
folly it is to put off the gift: ‘* Ho, every one 
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters,’ * saias 
invites you, ‘‘and he that hath no money, 
come buy wine and milk, without money and 
without price.’’ O swiftness of His mercy: 
O easiness of the Covenant: This blessing 
may be bought by you merely for willing it ; 
He accepts the very desire as a great price; 
He thirsts to be thirsted for; He gives to 

drink to all who desire to drink ; He takes it | 

asa kindness to be asked for the kindness ; He 
is ready and liberal; He gives with more plea- 
sure than others receive.@ Only let us not be 
condemned for frivolity by asking for little, 
and for what is unworthy of the Giver. 
Blessed is he from whom Jesus asks drink, as 
He did from that Samaritan woman, and 
gives a well of water springing up unto eter- 
nal life.y Blessed is he that soweth beside all 

waters, and upon every soul, tomorrow to be | 

ploughed and watered, which today the ox 
and the ass tread, while it is dry and without 
water,® and oppressed with unreason. And 

blessed is he who, though he be a ‘‘ valley of | 
rushes,’’€ is watered out of the House of the 

Lord; for he is made fruitbearing instead of 
rushbearing, and produces that which is for 

the food of man, not that which is rough and | 

unprofitable. And for the sake of this we 
must be very careful not to miss the Grace. 
XXVIII. Be it so, some will say, in the case 
of those who ask for Baptism; what have you 
to say about those who are still children, and 
conscious neither of the loss nor of the grace? 
Are we to baptize them too? 
any danger presses. For it is better that they 
should be unconsciously sanctified than that 
they should depart unsealed and uninitiated. 
A proof of this is found in the Circumcision 

on the eighth day, which was a sort of typical | 

seal, and was conferred on children before 
they had the use of reason. And so is the 
anointing of the doorposts,§ which preserved 
the firstborn, though applied to things which 
had no consciousness. sut in respect of 
others” I give my advice to wait till the end 

of the third year, or a little more or less, when | 
they may be able to listen and to answer some- 

thing about the Sacrament ; that, even though 

they do not perfectly understand it, yet at any — 

alsa.lv.1. B Acts xx.35. y Jolniv. 7. 

€ Joel iii. 18; The Hebrew word rendered ‘trushes” by the 
LXX. is in our Hebrew text Shittim—acacia trees. 

¢ Exodxiimen: y i.e. when there is no danger, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Certainly, if 

| rate they may know the outlines ; and then to 
_ sanctify them in soul and body with the great 
sacrament of our consecration, For this is 
| how the matter stands; at that time they be- 
| gin to be responsible for their lives, when rea- 
| son is matured, and they learn the mystery of 
life (for of sins of ignorance owing to their 
tender years they have no account to give), 
and it is far more profitable on all accounts to 
be fortified by the Font, because of the sud- 
den assaults of danger that befall us, stronger 
than our helpers. 

XXIX. But, one says, Christ was thirty 
years old when He was baptized,* and that al- 
though He was God; and do you bid us hurry 
our Baptism ?—You have solved the difficulty 
_ when you say He was God. For He was abso- 
lute cleansing ; He had no need of cleansing : 
but it was for you that He was purified, just as it 
was for you that, though He had not flesh, yet 
He is clothed with flesh. Nor was there any 
_danger to Him from putting off Baptism, for 
- He had the ordering of His own Passion as of 
His own Birth. But in your case the danger 
is to no small interests, if you were to depart 
after a birth to corruption alone, and without 
being clothed with incorruption. And there is 
this further point for me to consider, that that 
particular time of baptism was a necessity for 
Him, but your case is not the same. He 
_manifested Himself in the thirtieth year after 
His birth and not before ; first, in order that 
'He might not appear ostentatious, which is 
'a condition belonging to vulgar minds ; and 

next, because that age tests virtue thoroughly, 

and is the right time to teach. And since it 

was needful for Him to undergo the passion 
_ which saves the world, it was needful also 
that all things which belong to the passion 
should fit into the passion ; the Manifestation, 
'the Baptism, the Witness from Heaven, the 
Proclamation, the concourse of the multitude, 
| the Miracles; and that they should be as it 

were one body, not torn asunder, nor broken 
apart by intervals. For out of the Baptism 
and Proclamation arose that earthquake of 
people coming together,® for so Scripture 
: calls that time ;¥ and out of the multitude arose 
the shewing of the signs and the miracles that 
lead up to the Gospel. And out of these came 
the jealousy, and from this the hatred, and out 
of the hatred the circumstance of the plot 
against Him, and the betrayal ; and out of 
these the Cross, and the other events by which 
our Salvation has been effected. Such are the 

8 Isa. xxxii. 20. | 

a Luke iti. 23. i 
6 All the City was moved.” A. V., lit. ‘‘shaken as by earth: 
| quake,” y Matt, xxi. 10, 

reasons in the case of Christ * so far as we can 
attain to them. And perhaps another more 
secret reason might be found. 

ORATION ON HOLY BAPTIS: 

aes 
wae 

| 
at the same time your safeguard of them. 

XXX. But for you, what necessity is there | 

that by following the examples which are far 
above you, you should do a thing so ill-advised 
for yourself ? 
of the Gospel History which are quite differ- 
ent to what happens nowadays, and the seasons 
of which do not correspond. For instance 
Christ fasted a little before His temptation, 
we before Easter. 
are concerned it is the same,® but the differ- 
ence in the seasons is no little one. He 
armed Himself with them against temptation ; 
but to us this fast is symbolical of dying with 
Christ, and it is a purification in preparation 
for the festival. And He fasted absolutely 
for forty days, for He was God; but we 
measure our fasting by our power, even though 
some are led by zeal to rush beyond their 
strength. Again, He gave the Sacrament of 
the Passover to His Disciples in an upper 
chamber, and after supper, and one day 
before He suffered; but we celebrate it in 
Houses of Prayer, and before food,y and after 
His resurrection. He rose again the third 
day ; our resurrection is not till after a long 
time. But matters which have to do with 
Him are neither abruptly separated from us, 
nor yet yoked together with those which con- 
cern us in point of time ; but they were handed 
down to us just so far as to be patterns of what 
we should do, and then they carefully avoided 
an entire and exact resemblance. 

XXXI. Hf then you will listen to me, you 
will bid a long farewell to all such arguments, 
and you will jump at this Blessing, and begin 
to struggle in a twofold conflict ; first, to pre- 
pare yourself for baptism by purifying your- 
self; and next, to preserve the baptismal gift ; 
for it is a matter of equal difficulty to obtain a 
blessing which we have not, and to keep it 
when we have gained it. For often what zeal 
has acquired sloth has destroyed; and what 
hesitation has lost diligence has regained. A 
great assistance to the attainment of what you 
desire are vigils, fasts, sleeping on the ground, 
prayers, tears, pity of and almsgiving to those 
who are in need. And let these be your 
thanksgiving for what you have received, and 

a.i.e., the reasons why He was not baptized till He was thirty. 
B Here is an indication that the Forty Days of Lent were a 
well known observance in S. Gregory’s time. At the Council of 

Nicasa this period was taken for granted. ‘he Great Fast of the 

Eastern Church begins on the Monday after the Sunday cor- 
responding to our Quinquagesima, and the Fast is kept to some 
extent even on Sunday, 

y Note the rule of Fasting Communion here recognized as 
universal, 

For there are many other details | 

You have the benefit to remind you of many 
commandments ; so do not transgress them. 
Does a poor man approach you? Remember 
how poor you once were, and how rich you 
were made. One in want of bread or of 
drink, perhaps another Lazarus,* is cast at 

— your gate; respect the Sacramental ‘l'able to 

As far as the fasting days | 

which you have approached, the Lread of 
Which you have partaken, the Cup in Which 
you have communicated,® being consecrated 
by the Sufferings of Christ. If a stranger 
fall at your feet, homeless and a foreigner, 
welcome in him Him who for your sake was 
a stranger, and that among His own,v and 
who came to dwell in you by His grace, and 
who drew you towards the heavenly dwelling 
place. Be a Zaccheus,® who yesterday was a 
Publican, and is to-day of liberal soul; offer 
all to the coming in of Christ, that though 
small in bodily stature you may show yourself 
great, nobly contemplating Christ. A sick 
or a wounded man lies before you; respect 
your own health, and the wounds from which 
Christ delivered you. If you see one naked 
clothe him, in honour of your own garment 
of incorruption, which is Christ, for as many 
as were baptized into Christ have put on 
Christ.¢ If you find a debtor falling at your 
feet,§ tear up every document, whether just or 
unjust. Remember the ten thousand talents 
which Christ forgave you, and be not a harsh 
exactor of a smaller debt—and that from 
whom? From your fellow servant, you who 
were forgiven so much more by the Master, 
Otherwise you will have to give satisfaction 
to His mercy, which you would not imitate 
and take as your copy. 

XXXII. Let the laver be not for your body 
only, but also for the image of God in you ; not 
merely a washing away of sins in you, but 
also a correction of your temper; let it not 
only wash away the old filth, but let it purify 
the fountainhead. Let it not only move you 
to honourable acquisition, but let it teach you 
also honourably to lose possession; or, which 
is more casy, to make restitution of what you 
have wrongfully acquired. For what profit 
is it that your sin should have been forgiven 
you, but the loss which you have inflicted 
should not be repaired to him whom you haye 
injured? ‘Iwo sins are.on your conscience. 
the one that you made a dishonest gain, the 

@ Luke xvi. 19 sq. , 

8 Note that this allusion implies that Communion in both Kinds 
was given separately, as in the Anglican Church, not by intinction, 
as in the present Orthodox Eastern Church. 

y John i. rz. 6 Luke xix. 1 sq. 

e Galat, iii, 27, ¢ Matt. xviii, 23, &e, 

372 
other that you retained the gains; you re- 
ceived forgiveness for the one, but in respect 

GREGORY NAZIANZ 

_ received. 

of the other you are still in sin, for you have — 

still possession of what belongs to another ; 
and your sin has not been put to an end, but 
only divided by the time which has elapsed. 
Part of it was perpetrated before your Bap- 
tism, but part remains after your Baptism ; 
for Baptism carries forgiveness of Past, not of 
Present sins; and its purification must not be 
played with, but be genuinely impressed upon 
you; you must be made perfectly bright, and 
not be merely coloured ; you must receive the 
gift, not of a mere covering of your sins, but 
of a taking them clean away. 
they whose iniquities are forgiven? . 

this is done by the complete cleansing . . - 
and whose sins are hidden this 
belongs to those who are not yet healed in 
their deepest soul. Blessed is the man to 
whom the Lord will not impute sin. . . . 
This is a third class of sinners, whose actions 
are not praiseworthy, but who are innocent 
of intention. 

XXXII. What say I then, and what is my 
argument? Yesterday you were a Canaanite 
soul bent together® by sin; today you have 
been made straight by the Word. Do not be 
bent again, and condemned to the earth, as if 
weighed down by the Devil with a wooden 
collar, nor get an incurable curvature. Yes- 
terday you were being dried up? by an abun- 
dant hemorrhage, for you were pouring out 
crimson sin; today stanched and flourishing 
again, for you have touched the hem of Christ 
and your issue has been stayed. Guard, I 
pray you, the cleansing lest you should again 
have a hemorrhage, and not be able to lay 
hold of Christ to steal salvation ; for Christ 

does not like to be stolen from often, though | 

He is very merciful. Yesterday you were 
flung upon a bed, exhausted and paralyzed, 
and you had no one when the water should 
be troubled to put you into the pool.’ ‘To- 
day you have Him Who is in one Person Man 
and God, or rather God and Man. You 
were raised up from your bed, or rather you 

Blessed are | 

took up your bed, and publicly acknowledged | 

the benefit. Do not again be thrown upon 
your bed by sinning, in the evil rest of a 
body paralyzed by its pleasures. But as you 

now are, so walk, mindful of the command,* 

Behold thou art made whole; sin no more 
lest a worse thing happen unto thee if thou 
prove thyself bad after the blessing thou hast 

as, XXXL. it: é 
6 Luke xiii. 11, which 5. Gregory has apparently mixed with a 
recollection of Matt, xv. 21. 

Y Matt, ix. 20, 6 John y, 1, &c, elb. v. 14, 

Spa 

sire 

You have heard the loud voice, 
Lazarus, come forth,* as you lay in the tomb ; 
not, however, after four days, but after many 
days; and you were loosed from the bonds 
of your graveclothes. Do not again become 
dead, nor live with those who dwell in the 
tombs; nor bind yourself with the bonds of 
your own sins;¥ for it is uncertain whether 
you will rise again from the tomb till the last 
and universal resurrection, which will bring 
every work into judgment,® not to be healed, 
but to be judged, and to give account of all 
which for good or evil it has treasured up. 
XXXIV. If you were full of leprosy, that 
shapeless evil, yet you scraped off the evil mat- 
ter, and received again the Image whole. 
Shew your cleansing to me your Priest, that I 
may recognize how much more precious it is 
than the legal one. Do not range yourself with 
the nine unthankful men, but imitate the tenth.¢ 
For although he was a Samaritan, yet he was 
of better mind than the others. Make cer- 
tain that you will not break out again with 
evil ulcers, and find the indisposition of your 
body hard to heal. Yesterday meanness and 
avarice were withering your hand ; to-day let 
liberality and kindness stretch it out.$ It is a 
noble cure for a weak hand to disperse abroad, 
to give to the poor,” to pour out the things 
which we possess abundantly, till we reach 
the very bottom; and perhaps this will gush 
forth food for you, as for the woman of Sa- 
repta, and especially if you happen to be teed- 
ing an Elias, to recognize that it is a good 
abundance to be needy for the sake of Christ, 
Who for our sakes became poor. If you were 
deaf and dumb, let the Word sound* in your 
ears, or rather keep there Him Who hath 
sounded. Do not shut your ears to the In- 
struction of the Lord, and to His Counsel, 
like the adder to charms. If you are blind 
and unenlightened, lighten your eyes that 
you sleep not in death.“ In God's Light see 
light,” and in the Spirit of God be enlightened 
by the Son, That Threefold and Undivided 
Light. If you receive all the Word, you will 
bring therewith upon your own soul all the 
healing powers of Christ, with which separate- 
ly these individuals were healed. Only be not 
ignorant of the measure of grace ; only let not 
the enemy, while you sleep, maliciously sow 
tares.€ Only take care that as by your cleans- 
ing you have become an object of enmity to 
the Evil One, you do not again make yourself 

§ Eccles. xii. 14+ 
9 Ps. cxii. 9. 

A Ps. lviii. 4, 5. 

& Matt. xiii. 25, 

a John xi.43. BMarkv. 3. y Ps. Ixvitl. 9 
e Juke xvii. 12, &c. G libs wit? 

61 Kgs. xvii. 8, &c. « Mark vii. 32. 
pe Ib, xiii. 3. v Ib. xxxvie 9. 

ORATION 

an object of pity by sin. Only be careful 
lest, while rejoicing and lifted up above meas- 
ure by the blessing, 
pride. Only be diligent as to your cleansing, 
‘+ setting ascensions in your heart,’’* and keep 
with all diligence the remission which 
have received as a gift, in order that, while 
the remission comes from God, the preserva- 
tion of it may come from yourself also. 
XXXV. 
ways the parable,® 
perfectly help yourself. ‘Phe unclean and 
malignant spirit is gone out of you, being 
hased by baptism. He will not submit to the 

expulsion, he will not resign himself to be 
houseless and homeless: He goes through 

waterless places, dry of the Divine Stream, and 
there he desires to abide. He wanders, seeking 
rest; he finds none. He lights on baptized 
souls, whose sins the font has washed away. 
He fears the water; he is choked with the 
cleansing, as the Legion were in the sea.¥ 
Again he returns to the house whence he 
came out. He is shameless, he is contentious, 

he makes a fresh assault upon it, he makes a_ 
If he finds that Christ has | 

new attempt. 
taken up His abode there, and has filled the 
place which he had vacated, he is driven back 
avain, and goes off without success and is 

become an object of pity in his wandering | 

state. But if he finds in you a place, swept 
and garnished indeed, but empty and _ idle, 
equally ready to take in this or that which 
shall first occupy it, he makes a leap into it, 
he takes up his abode there with a larger 
train; and the last state is worse than the 
first, inasmuch as then there was a hope of 
amendment and safety, but now the evil is 
rampant, and drags in sin by its flight from 
good, and therefore the possession is more se- 
cure to him who dwells there. 

XXXVI. I will remind you again about II- 
luminations, and that often, and will reckon 
them up from Holy Scripture. 
shall be happier for remembering them (for 
what is sweeter than light to those who have 
tasted light?) and [ will dazzle you with my 
words. ‘There is sprung up a light for the right- 
cous, and its partner joyful gladness.é And, 
The light of the righteous is everlasting ; € and 

Thou art shining wondrously from the everlast- | 

aPs, Ixxxiv. 6. SoLXX. and Vulgate. Variotis interpreta- 
tions are given of there Steps, but they differ only by indicating 
different virtues and good works as especially intended, and may 
weil be summed up under the three heads of the purgative, il- 
Juminative, and unitive ways of salvation. A man can set in his 
heart such a ‘going up” by the co-operation of grace and free 
will. —NeaLre & LIitreepAace in Iss. B Luke xi. 24. 

y Mark v. 13. DPS, Revi iy € Prov. xiii. 9. 

For I myself 

How shall this be?) Remember al- | 
. 1 
and so will you best and most 

ON: HOLY Bar Tian. 

t 

you fall again through | 

you , 

j 

| 
| then s 

Go 

ios) 
™, 

ing mountains, is said to God, | think of the 
Angelic powers which aid our efforts after good. 
And you have heard David's words; ‘Vhe 
Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whoin 
hall | fear? And now he asks that the 
Light and the ‘Truth may be sent forth for 
him,® now giving thanks that he has a share 

in it, in that the Light of God is marked upon 

him ;7 that is, that the signs of the illumina- 
tion given are impressed upon him and recog- 
nized. One light alone let us shun—that 
which is the offspring of the baleful fire ; let 
us not walk in the light of our fire,® and in the 
flame which we have kindled. For I know a 
cleansing fire which Christ came to send upon 
the carth,e and He Himself is anagogically ¢ 
called a Fire. This Fire takes away whatso- 
ever is material and of evil habit; and this 
He desires to kindle with all speed, for He 
longs for speed in doing us good, since He 
gives us even coals of fire to help us.27 [know 
also a fire which is not cleansing, but aveng- 
ing ; either that fire of Sodom? which He pours 
down on all sinners,* mingled with brimstone 
and storms, or that which is prepared for the 
Devil and his Angels or that which proceeds 
from the face of the Lord, and shall burn up 
his enemies round about ;" and one even more 
fearful still than these, the unquenchable fire ¥ 
which is ranged with the worm that dicth not 
but is eternal for the wicked. For all these 
belong to the destroying power ; though some 
may prefer even in this place to take a more 
merciful view of this fire, worthily of Him 
That chastises. 

XXXVII. And as I know of two kinds of 
fire, so also do I of light. The one is the light 
of our ruling power directing our steps accord- 
ing to the will of God ; the other is a deceitful 
and meddling one, quite contrary to the true 
light, though pretending to be that light, 
that it may cheat us by its appearance. ‘This 
really is darkness, yet has the appearance of 
noonday, the high perfection of light. And 
so I read that passage of those who continually 

flee in darkness at noonday ; ° for this is really 

night, and yet is thought to be bright light 
by those who have been ruined by luxury. 
For what saith David? ** Night was around 
me and | ee | it not, for I thought that my 

7 

Ps. lexyis 4s B Tb, elt. 35 ¥ Ib, iv. 
Olsas.l. 2%, e Luke xil. 49. 
¢Anagoge is one of the three methods of mystical interpreta- 
tion, according to the distich, 
Littera scripta docet : 
Quid speres an: igoge } 
w?efi Isa, xvii, 14, LAX @Gen, RIN... Bhs «PS, the Gs 
A Matt. xxv. 41. p Ps. Nevi. 3; y Mark ix, 44, &e; 
éi.e. ‘To view the i there spoken of as ‘Temporal punish- 
ment, with a purpose of correcting and reforming the sinner. “This 
is not S, Gregory's own v iew of the mei ining of the passage, though 
he admits it to be tenable, o Isa. xvi. 3 

Quid credas allegoria : 
On uid agas troy olog ries 

T ty 

7+ 

luxury was cnlightenment.’’ ¢ 
they, and in this condition ; but let us kindle 
for ourselves the light of knowledge.® ‘This 
will be done by sowing unto righteousness, 
and reaping the fruit of life, for action is the 
patron of contemplation, that amongst other 
things we may learn also what is the true light, 
and what the false, and be saved from falling 
unawares into evil wearing the guise of good. 
Let us be made light, as it was said to the 
disciples by the Great Light, ye are the 
light of the world.y Let us be made lights 
in the world, holding forth the Word of Life ; § 
that is, let us be made a quickening power to 
others. Let us lay hold of the Godhead ; let 
us lay hold of the First and Brightest Light. 
Let us walk towards Him shining, before our 
feet stumble upon dark and hostile mountains. ¢ 
While it is day let us walk honestly as in the 
day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in 
chambering and wantonness,$ which are the 
dishonesties of the night. 

XXXVIII. Let us cleanse every member, 
Brethren, let us purify every sense ; let nothing 
in us be imperfect or of our first birth ; let us 
leave nothing unilluminated. Let us enlighten 
our eyes,” that we may look straight on, and not 
bear in ourselves any harlot idol through cu- 
rious and busy sight; for even though we 
might not worship lust, yet our soul would be 
defiled. If there be beam or mote,® let us 
purge it away, that we may be able to see 
those of others also. Let us be enlightened 
in our ears; let us be enlightened in our 
tongue, that we may hearken what the Lord 
God will speak,* and that He may cause 4 
us to hear His lovingkindness in the morning, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

But such are 4 

1 ies 

| 

touching them over gently, nor delighting in 
smooth things, but handling them as is worthy 
of Him, the Word ‘Phat was made flesh for 
and so far following the example of 
Vhomas,* not pampering them with daintics 
and sauces, those brethren of a more balciil 
pampering,® but tasting and learning that thc 
Lord is good,y with the better and abiding 
taste; and not for a short while refreshing 
that baneful and thankless dust, which lcts 
pass and does not hold that which is given io 
it; but delighting it with the words which 
are sweeter than honey.® 

XAXXIX. And in addition to what has been 
said, it is good with our head cleansed, as the 
head which is the workshop of the senses is 
cleansed, to hold fast the Head of Christ,« 
from which the whole body is fitly joined to- 
gether and compacted ; and to cast down our 

sin that exalted itself, when it would exalt us 

~and cleanses them. 

above our better part. It is good also for the 
shoulder to be sanctified and purified that it may 
be able to take up the Cross of Christ, which 
not everyone can easily do. It is good for the 
hands to be consecrated, and the feet; the 
one that they may in every place be lifted up 
holy ;¢ and that they may lay hold of the dis- 
cipline” of Christ, lest the Lord at any time he 
angered ; and that the Word may gain cre- 
dence by action, as was the case with that 
which was given in the hand of a prophet ; ® 
the other, that they be not swift to shed blood, 
nor to run to evil,« but that they be prompt to 
run to the Gospel and the Prize@ of the high 
Calling, and to receive Christ Who washes 
And if there be also a 

cleansing of that belly which receiveth and 

and that we may be made to hear of joy and | 

gladness,“ spoken into godly cars, that we may 
not be asharp sword, nor a whetted razor,” ner 
turn under our tongue labour and toil, but 
that we may speak the Wisdom of God in a 
mystery, even the hidden Wisdom,® reverenc- 
ing the fiery tongues.7 Let us be healed also 
in the smell, that we be not effeminate ; and 
be sprinkled with dust instead of sweet. per- 
fumes,? but may smell the Ointment that was 
poured out for us,§ spiritually receiving it ; and 
so formed and transformed by it, that from us 
too a sweet odour may be smelled. Let us 
cleanse our touch, our taste, our throat, not 

« A strange paraphrase of the last clause of Ps. cxsxix. 11, in 
the LXX., ‘And I said, then the darkness shall swallow me, and 
night is enlightenment in my luxury.” 

B Thus ILXX. in Hosea x. 12, where we read “ Break up your 
fallow ground.” y Matt. v. 14, ® Phil, di te. 26, 

e Jer. xlii. 16, $ Rom, xi, rt, 7 Prov. iv, 28. 

@ Matt. vil.2. -# Ps, lexxy. 8¢. AT, exlii. 8, > Ibe liv 8, 
» Ib, vit. 4.3 hi, 2; Tb. ays OrGor, ie 9 

wr Acts ii. a, p Isa. ili, 34, oCant, 4,3) 

digesteth the food of the Word, it were good 
also ; not to make it a god by luxury and the 

meat that perisheth but rather to give it all 

possible cleansing, and to make it more 
spare, that it may receive the Word of 

God at the very heart, and grieve honouralbly 
over the sins of Israel.” I find also the heart 

~and inward parts deemed worthy of honour, 

David convinces me of this, when he prays 
that a clean heart may be created in him, and 
a right spirit renewed in his inward parts ; § 
meaning, I think, the mind and its movements 
or thoughts. 

XL. And what of the loins, or reins, for we 

must not pass these over? Let the purifica- 

_ tion take hold of these also. 

Let our loins be 
girded about and kept in check by conti- 

8 Quia gula est parens immunditiz et luxurias 
Ps. Coie, TORt 

qs, a1, 22... 10 lara te 

AsPhilaingrs. 
€-PSeli..30; 

a John xx. 28. 
y Ps. xxxiv. 8. 
e Ephes, iv. 16, $1 Tim. ii. 8. 
« Mal. i. 1 sq.; Prov. i. 16. 
p. John vi. 27. v Jer: iv. 19, 

ORATION 

ON HOLY 

BAPTISM. 

nence, as the Law bade Israel of old when par- 
taking of the Passover.* For none comes out 
of Egypt purely, or escapes the Destroyer, 
except he who has disciplined these. And 
let the reins be changed by that good conver- 

sion by which they transfer all the affections | 

to God, so that they can say, Lord, all my 
desire is before Vhee,® and the day of man 
have [ not desired ; ¥ for you must be aman of 
desires,® but they must be those of the spirit. 
For thus you would destroy the dragon that 
carries the greater part of his strength upon 
his navel and his loins,* by slaying the power 
that comes to him from these. Do not be 
surprised at my giving a more abundant hon- 
our to our uncomely parts,$ mortifying them 
and making them chaste by my speech, and 
standing up against the flesh. Let us give 
to God all our members which are upon the 
earth ;7 let us consecrate them all; not the 
lobe of the liver® or the kidneys. with the 
fat, nor some part of our bodies now this now 
hat (why should we despise the rest ?); but 
let us bring ourselves entire, let us be reason- 
able holocausts,* perfect sacrifices ; and let us 
not make only the shoulder or the breast a 
portion for the Priest to take away,’ for that 
would be a small thing, but let us give our- 
selves entire, that we may receive back our- 
selves entire; for this is to receive entirely, 
when we give ourselves to God and offer as a 
sacrifice our own salvation. 

XLI. Besides all this and before all, keep I 
pray you the good deposit, by which I live and 
work, and which I desire to have as the com- 
panion of my departure ; with which I en- 
dure all that is so distressful, and despise all 
delights; the confession of the Father and 
the Son and the Holy Ghost. This I commit 
unto you to-day; with this I will baptize you 
and make you grow. This I give you to 
share, and to defend all your life, the One 
Godhead and Power, found in the Three in 
Unity, and comprising the Three separately, 
not unequal, in substances or natures, neither 
increased nor diminished by superiorities or 
inferiorities ; in every respect equal, in every 

B Ps. xxxviii. 9. y Job xvii. 16. 

oats, 1h 4, Jobo sin thy) he Con tie og, | -y-Gol. nt. 5 

6 Levit. itt, 4. The Mosaic Law ordered that the upper part of 
the liver and the kidneys, together with the fat, should in certain 
sacrifices be consecrated to God ; signifying that anger (which 
was intimated by the liver, which produces bile), and lust (signi- 
fied by the kidneys and the fat) should especially be sacrificed to 
God. Again Moses assigned the shoulder and the breast of some 
sacrifices to the Priests, hinting x obscurely at this, that we ought to 
take care to offer our hearts to the Priests by confession (for the 
heart is signified by the breast which protects it) and also our acs 
tions, which are intended by the shoulder, that by the Priest they 
may de presented to God. But the Apostle bids us mortify all our 
members which are upon the earth, and offer ourselves entire as a 
sacrifice to God, destroying with the sword of the Word of God all 
our evil and corrupt affections. —-NICETAS. 

« Rom. xii, 1, A Levit, vii. 34. 

ao. Pxbds xi tk, 

Each God because Consubstantial ; 

respect the same; just as the beauty and the 
greatness of the heavens is one; the infinite 
conjunction of Three Infinite Ones, Each God 
when considered in Himself; as the Father so 
the Son, as the Son so the Holy Ghost: the 
Three One God when contemplated together ; 
One God 
because of the Monarchia. No sooner do I 
conceive of the One than T am illumined by 
the Splendour of the ‘Three ; no sooner do I 
distinguish Them than I am carried back to 
the One. When TI think of any One of the 
Three I think of Him as the Whole, and my 
eyes are filled, and the greater part of what I 
am thinking of escapes me.* [I cannot grasp 
the greatness of ‘That One so as to attribute a 
greater greatness to the Rest. When I con- 
template the Three together, I see but one 
torch, and cannot divide or measure out the 
Undivided Light. 

XLII. Do you fear to speak of Generation 
lest you should attribute aught of passion to the 
impassible God? JI on the other hand fear to 
speak of Creation, lest I should destroy God 
by the insult and the untrue division, either 
cutting the Son away from the Father, or 
from the Son the Substance of the Spirit. 
For this paradox is involved, that not only is 
a created Life foisted into the Godhead by 
those who measure Godhead badly ; but even 
this created life is divided against itself. For 
as these low earthly minds make the Son sub- 
ject to the Father, so again is the rank of the 
Spirit made inferior to that of the Son, until 
both God and created life are insulted by the 
new Theology. No, my friends, there is 
nothing servile in the Trinity, nothing cre- 
ated, nothing accidental, as I have heard one 
of the wise ® say. If I yet pleased men I 
should not be the servant of Christ, says the 
Apostle; ¥ and if I yet worshipped a creature, 
or were baptized into a creature, I should not 
be made divine, nor have changed my 
birth. What shall I say to those who wor- 
ship Astarte or Chemosh, the abomination of 
the Sidonians, or the likeness of a star,6.a god 
a little above them to these idolaters, but 
yet a creature and a piece of workmanship, 
when I myself either do not worship ‘Two of 
Those into Whose united Name I am _ bap- 
tized, or else worship iy fellow-servants, for 
they are fellow-servants, even ifa little higher 
in the scale ; for differences must exist among 
fellow-servants. 

XLIII. I should like to cail the 

first 

Father the 

ai. Iff think of One Blessed Person, the other Two ate not 
in ae mind, and sothe greater part of God esc me es me 

S, Gregory Thaumaturgus, y Galat, i, 10 § Anos y, 26, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

greater, because froin tii flows both the Equal- 

ity and the Being of the Equals (this will be 
eranted on all hands), but Iam afraid to use the 
word Origin, lest I should make Him the Ori- 
gin of Interiors, and thus insult Him by prece- 
dencies of honour. Tor the lowering of those 
Who are from Him is no glory to the Source. 
Moreover, I look with suspicion at your in- 
satiate desire, for fear you should take hold of 
this word Greater, and divide the Nature, us- 
ing the word Greater in @// senses, whereas it 
does not apply to the Nature, but only to Orig- 
ination. Tor in the Consubstantial Persons 
there is nothing greater or less in point of Sub- 
stance. I would honour the Son as Son be- 
fore the Spirit, but Baptism consecrating me 
through the Spirit does not allow of this. 
But are you afraid of being reproached with 
‘Tritheism? Do you take possession of this 
good thing, the Unity in the Three, and leave 
me to fight the battle. Let me be the ship- 
builder, and do you use the ship ; or if another 
is the builder of the ship, take me for the 
architect of the house, and do you live in it 
with safety, though you spent no labour upon 
it. Youshall not have a less prosperous voy- 
age, or a less safe habitation than I who built 

the risk; be mine also the reward of being 
the Director of your soul, and consccrating 
you by Baptism. But if you are already right- 
ly disposed, and marked with the good in- 

scription, see that you keep what is written, 

them, because you have not laboured upon | 

them. See how great is my indulgence; see 
the goodness of the Spirit; the war shall be 
mine, yours the achievement; I will be un- 
der fire, and you shall live in peace; but 
join with your defender in prayer, and give 
me your hand by the Faith. I have three 
stones which I will sling at the Philistine ; ¢ I 
have three inspirations against the son of the 
Sareptan,® with which I will quicken the slain ; 
I have three floods against the faggots with 
which I will consecrate the Sacrifice with 
water, raising the most unexpected fire ;¥ and I 
will throw down the prophets of shame by the 
power of the Sacrament. 

ALIV. What need have I any more of | 

speech? It is the time for teaching, not for con- 
troversy. I protest before God and the elect 
Angels,® be thou baptized in this faith. If thy 
heart is written upon in some other way than 

as my teaching demands, come and have the > 
writing changed ; I am no unskilled caligra-_ 

pher of these truths. I write that which is writ- 
ten upon my own heart ; and I teach that which 
I have been taught, and have kept from the 

beginning up to these hoar hairs.€ Mine is _ 
ai Sam. xvii. 49. Bx Kgs. xvii. 21. 
¥y Th. xxii, 93. Or Lim, vier, 
€ Supposing S. Gregory's birth to have been in 325, the earliest 

date which seems at all probable, he would be under 60 in 381, when 
this Oration was delivered ; so that the expression on the text must 
be held to be a rhetorical exaggeration. 

Suidas, however, pushes | 

and remain unchanged in a changing time 
concerning an unchanging Thing. Follow 
Pilate’s example in the better sense ; you who 
are rightly written on, imitate him who wrote 
wrongfully. Say to those who would persuade 
you differently, what I have written, I haye 
written.* For indeed I should be ashamed if, 
while that which was wrong remained in- 
flexible, that which is right should be so easily 
bent aside ; whereas we ought to be easily bent 
to that which is better from that which is 
worse, but immovable from the better to the 
worse. If it be thus, and according to this 
teaching that you come to Baptism, lo I will 
not refrain my lips,® lo I lend my hands to the 
Spirit; let us hasten your salvation. ‘The 
Spirit is eager, the Consecrator is ready, the 
Gift is prepared. But if you still halt and 
will not receive the perfectness of the God- 
head, go and look for someone else to baptize 
—or rather to drown you: I have no time to 
cut the Godhead, and to make you dead in the 
moment of your regeneration, that you should 
have neither the Gift nor the Hope of Grace, 
but should in so short a time make shipwreck 
of your salvation. For whatever you may 
subtract from the Deity of the Three, you will 
have overthrown the whole, and destroyed 
your own being made perfect. 

XLV. But not yet perhaps is there formed 
upon your soul any writing good or bad ; and 
you want to be written upon today, and formed 
by us unto perfection. Let us go within the 
cloud. Give me the tables of your heart; I 
will be your Moses, though this be a bold 
thing to say; I will write on them with the 
finger of God a new Decalogue.Y I will write 
on them a shorter method of salvation. And 
if there be any heretical or unreasoning beast, 
let him remain below, or he will run the risk 
of being stoned by the Word of truth. I will 
baptize you and make you a disciple in the 
Name of the Father and of the Son and of the 
Holy Ghost;® and These Three have One 
common name, the Godhead. And you shall 
know, both by appearances* and by words 
that you reject all ungodliness, and are united 
to all the Godhead. Believe that all that is 
in the world, both all that is seen and all that 

back the date of his birth as far as 299 or 300; which docs not fit 
in well with the chronology of his life, as given by himself. 
@ John xix. 22. Bes exlco, y Exod. xxxvi, 28, 
Ob. xix. 13. e Matt, xxvill. 19. 

ORATION ON 

is unseen, was made out of nothing by God, 
and is governed by the Providence of its 
Creator, and will receive a change to a better 
state. 
kingdom, either unoriginate or self-existent or 
created by God; but that it is our work, and 
the evil one’s, and came upon us through our 
heedlessness, but not from our Creator. Be- 
lieve that the Son of God, the Eternal Word, 
Who was begotten of the Father before all 
time and without body, was in these latter 
days for your sake made also Son of Man, born 
of the Virgin Mary ineffably and _ stainlessly 
(for nothing can be stained where God is, 
and by which salvation comes), in His own 
Person at once entire Man and perfect God, 
for the sake of the entire sufferer, that He 
may bestow salvation on your whole being, 
having destroyed the whole condemnation of 
your sins: impassible in His Godhead, pas- 
sible in that which He assumed ; as much Man 
for your sake as you are made God for His. 
Believe that for us sinners He was led to 
death ; was crucified and buried, so far as to 
taste of death; and that He rose again the 
third day, and ascended into heaven, that He 
might take you with Him who were lying 
low ; and that He will come again with His 
glorious Presence to judge the quick and the 
dead ; no longer flesh, nor yet without a body, 
according to the laws which He alone knows 
of a more godlike body, that He may be seen 
by those who pierced Him,¢ and on the other 
hand may remain as God without carnality. 
Receive besides this the Resurrection, the 
Judgment and the Reward according to the 
righteous scales of God; and believe that this 
will be Light to those whose mind is purified 
(that is, God—seen and known) proportionate 
to their degree of purity, which we call the 
Kingdom of heaven ; but to those who suffer 
from blindness of their ruling faculty, dark- 
ness, that is estrangement from God, propor- 
tionate to their blindness here. Then, in the 
tenth place, work that which is good upon 
this foundation of dogma; for faith without 
works is dead,® even as are works apart from 
faith. This is all that may be divulged of 
the Sacrament, and that is not forbidden to 
the ear of the many. ‘The rest you shall learn 
within the Church by the grace of the Holy 
‘Trinity ; and those matters you shall conceal 
within yourself, sealed and secure. 

XLVI. But one thing more I preach unto 
you. ‘The Station in which you shall presently 
stand after your Baptism before the Great 

a Rev. i. 7. B James ii. 17. 

Believe that evil has no substance or | 

BOUL Y BAe Po, Bue 
Sanctuary 4 is a foretype of the future glo- 
ry. The Psalmody with which you will 

be received is a prelude to the Psalmody of 
Heaven ; the lamps which you will kindle are 
a Sacrament of the illumination there with 
which we shall meet the Bridegroom, shining 
and virgin souls, with the lamps of our faith 
shining, hot sleeping through our carelessness, 

that we may not miss Him “th at we look for if 
He come unexpectedly ; nor yet unfed, and 
without oil, and destitute of good works, that 
we be not cast out of the Bridechamber. For 
I see how pitiable is such a case. He will 
come when the cry demands the meeting, and 
they who are prudent shall meet Him, with 
their light shining and its food abundant, but 
the others seeking for oil too late from those 
who possess it. And He will come with 
speed, and the former shall go in with Him, 
but the latter shall be shut out, having wasted 
in preparations the time of entrance ; and they 
shall weep sore when all too late they learn the 
penalty of their slothfulness, when the Bride- 
chamber can no longer be entered by them for 
all their entreaties, for they have shut it against 
themselves by their sin, following in another 
fashion the example of those who missed the 
Vedding feast® with which the good Father 
feasts the good Bridegroom ; one on account of 
a newly wedded wife ; another of a newly pur- 
chased field ; another of a yoke of oxen ; which 
he and they acquired to their misfortune, 
since for the sake of the little they lose the 
great. For none are there of the disdainful, 
nor of the slothful, nor of those who are clothed 
in filthy rags and not in the Wedding gar- 
ment even though here they may have thought 
themselves worthy of wearing the bright robe 
there, and secretly intruded themselves, de- 
ceiving themselves with vain hopes. And 
then, What? When we have entered, then 
the Bridegroom knows what He will teach us, 
and how He will converse with the souls that 
have come in with Him. He will converse 
with them, I think in teaching things more 
perfect and more pure. Of which may we 
all, both Teachers and ‘Taught, have share, in 
the Same Christ our Lord, to Whom be the 
Glory and the Empire, for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

a The word here used is Pema, which properly means #2 

latform. In an Oriental Church the East end of the building is 
raised by one or more steps above the choir. A little distance 
Kast of these steps is a great Screen called the Ic onostasis, from 
the pictures ([cons) with which it is covered. It has three doors, 
one in the centre, called the Royal Gates, leading to the Altar; 
one on the left hand, leading to the Prothesis, or Credence ; and 
one on the right to ‘the Sacristy. The whole raised portion is 
called the Bema, or sometimes the Altar, the Altar proper being 
known as the ‘Throne. 

B Luke xiv. 16, &c. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE ORATION 

ON PENTECOST. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 
| 

Ir is uncertain to what year the following | 

Oration belongs. It was, however, certainly 
delivered at Constantinople; the Benedictine 
Editors think in the year 381, in which case 
the day would be May 16. An indication 
tending to establish this date is found in c. 14, 
in the expression of apprehension of personal 
danger to himself for his boldness in setting 
forth the true faith. In fact, in the earlier 
part of this year, after the Emperor ‘Vheodos- 
ius had put him in possession of the Patri- 
archal ‘Throne, vacant by the expulsion and 
deposition of the Arian Demophilus, he had 
narrowly escaped assassination at the hands of 
the Arians. 

The Oration deals again with the subject of 
the Fifth Theological Oration, the question of 
the Deity of the Holy Ghost, but proceeds to 
establish the point by quite a different set of 
arguments from those adopted in the former 
discourse, none of whose points are here re- 
peated. 

The Preacher begins by commenting on the 
various ways in which [estivals are kept by 
Jews, by Heathen and by Christians. ‘Then 
he remarked on the mystical significance of 
the number Seven, which he illustrates by 
several instances ; and next proceeds with his 
principal Subject. 

God the Holy Ghost, he says, completes 
the work of Christ. ‘Those who regard Him 
as a Created Being, as did the followers of 
Macedonius, are thereby guilty of blasphemy 
and impiety. ‘The true Faith recognizes Him 
as God; and this belief is necessary to salva- 
tion; yet some reserve must be employed in 
applying that Name to Him. We must in- 
deed insist on the recognition of His posses- 
sion of all the attributes of Godhead; and we 

must at any rate bear with those who, like the | 
| while ; whereas they are for the most part, 

Orator himself, also give Him the Name of 
(sod, which he hopes all his hearers will re- 
ceive from the Holy Ghost grace todo. ‘Then 
he proceeds to shew from Holy Scripture that 
in fact all the Attributes of Deity do belong 
to the Holy Spirit; and that His distinctive 
Personal Mark is that He is neither Unbe- 
gotten like the Father, nor Begotten like the 
Son. He does not touch on the question of 
the double Procession. 

It would seem from some expressions inc. 8 
that this Discourse was not delivered to his 
usual audience, but to an Assembly of ‘ Re- 
ligious.”’ 

The ‘Title of the Oration varies in different 

| 

MSS.- Thus some have it **Of The Same 
On Pentecost,’’ to which one adds ‘* And On 
The Holy Spirit ;’’ and another puts it ‘Of 
The Same, a Homily on Pentecost”) The 
printed Editions before the Benedictine have 

| On The Holy Pentecost.” 

ORATION XLI. 
On Punvecost, 

I, Ler us reason a little about the Festival, 
that we may keep it spiritually. For dif- 
ferent persons have different ways of keeping 
Iestival ; but to the worshipper of the Word 
a discourse seems best; and of discourses, 
that which is best adapted to the occasion. 
And of all beautiful things none gives so much 
joy to the lover of the beautiful, as that the 
lover of festivals should keep them spiritu- 
ally. Let us look into the matter thus. The 
Jew keeps festival as well as we, but only in 
the letter. For while following after the 
bodily Law, he has not attained to the spirit- 
ual Law. ‘The Greek too keeps festival, but 
only in the body, and in honour of his own 
gods and demons, some of whom are creators 
of passion by their own admission, and others 
were honoured out of passion. ‘Therefore 
even their manner of keeping festival is 
passionate, as though their very sin were 
an honour to God, in Whom their passion 
takes refuge as a thing to be proud of. We 
too keep festival, but we keep it as is pleasing 
to the Spirit. And it is pleasing to Him that 
we should keep it by discharging some duty, 
either of action or speech. ‘This then is our 
manner of keeping festival, to treasure up 
in our soul some of those things which are 
permanent and will cleave to it, not of those 
which will forsake us and be destroyed, 
and which only tickle our senses for a little 

in my judgment at least, harmful and ruinous. 
For sufficient unto the body is the evil 
thereof. What need has that fire of further 
fuel, or that beast of more plentiful food, 
to make it more uncontrollable, and too vio- 
lent for reason ? 

II. Wherefore we must keep the feast spiritu- 
ally. And this is the beginning of our dis- 
course ; for we must speak, even if our speech 
do seem a little too discursive ; and we must 
be diligent for the sake of those who love 

a'They deify bad passions, and then act as if the gratification of 
them were an honour to the gods in whom they ave personified 
them, 

Jearning, that we may as it were Mix up Some 
seasoning with our solemn festival. ‘The 
children of the Hebrews do honour to the 
number Seven, according to the legislation of 
Moses (as did the Pythagoreans in later days 
{0 the number lour, by which indeed they 
were in the habit of swearing ® as the Simon- 
jans and Marcionites? do by the number 
Hight and the number ‘Thirty, inasmuch as 
they have given names to and reverence a 
system of Afons of these numbers); [I can- 
vot say by what rules of analogy, or in conse- 
quence of what power of this number; any- 
how they do honour toit. One thing indeed 
is evident, that God, having in six days 
created matter, and given it form, and having 
arranged it in all kinds of shapes and mix- 
tures, and having made this present visible 
world, on the seventh day rested from all His 
works, as is shewn by the very name of the 
Sabbath, which in Hebrew means Rest. If 
there be, however, any more lofty reason than 
this, let others discuss it. But this honour 
which they pay to it is not confined to days 
alone, but also extends to years. That be- 
longing to days the Sabbath proves, because it 
is continually observed among them; and 
in accordance with this the removal of leaven 
is for that number of days.y And that belong- 
ing to years is shewn by the seventh year, the 
year of Release;® and it consists not only of 
Hebdomads, but of Hebdomads of Heb- 
domads, alike in days and years. ‘The Heb- 
domads of days give birth to Pentecost, a 
day called holy among them; and_ those 
of years to what they call the Jubilee, which 
also has a release of land, and a manumission 
of slaves, anda release of possessions bought. 
Yor this nation consecrates to God, not only 

aThe followers of Pythagoras swore by their master, who 
taucht them the mystic properties of the number Four, which he 
called the Fountain of the Universe, because all things were made 
of four elements. 

BVhe Simonians and Marcionites were two Gnostic sects, the 
one deriving its name from Simon Magus, the other from Marcion 
of Sinope. Simon, of whom we read in the Acts ec. viil., is gen- 
erally regarded by the Fathers as the precursor of the Gnostic 
Heresies. Tle maintained a system of Emanations from God. of 
which he claimed to be himself the chief. In his teaching the first 
cause of all things was an Ineffable Existence or Non-existence, 
which he sometimes called Silence and sometimes Fire, from which 
the Universe was generated by a series of six Emanations called 
Roots, which he arranged in pairs, male and female; and these 
six contained among them the whole Essence of his first Principle 
Silence, ‘hese Roots with Simon himself and his consort Helena, 
nitde up the Ogdoad referred to in the text. 

Marcion was a native of Sinope in Pontus, and flourished about 
the middle of the Second Century. His system of teaching was 
mainly rationalistic, and did not recognize (Dr. Mansel tells us, 
“ Gnostic Heresies,” p. 203) any theory of Emanations as connect- 
ing links between God and the world ; for from his point of view the 
Supreme God was not, even indirectly. the Author of the world. 
It would seem that S. Gregory is confusing Marcion with Valen- 
tinus, an Egyptian heresiarch who flourished about the same time. 
In his theory we first find a system of © Afons,” divided into an 
Ogdoad, a Decad, and a Dodecad. Or he may mean Marcus, a 
follower of Valentinus, and founder of the subordinate sect of the 
Marcysians. y lexod,. Xt, ts, Th, eh, 

ON PENTECOST, 379 

| the firstfruits of offspring, or of firstborn, but 
also those of days and years. Thus the ven- 
eration paid to the number Seven gave rise 
also to the veneration of Pentecost. Por seven 
being multiplied by seven generates fifty 
all but one day, which we borrow from 
the world to come, at once the Eighth and 
the first, or rather one and indestructible, 
lor the present sabbatism of our souls can 
find its cessation there, that a portion may be 
given to seven and also to eight® (so some 
of our predecessors have interpreted this pas: 
sage of Solomon). 

III. As to the honour paid to Seven there are 
many testimonies, but we will be content with 
afew out of the many. For instance, seven 
precious spirits are named ; for I think Isaiah & 
loves to call the activities of the Spirit spirits ; 
and the Oracles of the Lord are purified seven 
times according to David,y and the just is de- 
livered from six troubles and in the seventh is 
not smitten.® But the sinner is pardoned not 
seven times, but seventy times seven.¢ And 
we may see it by the contrary also (for the 
punishment of wickedness is to be praised), 
Cain being avenged seven times, that is, 
punishment being exacted from him for his 
fratricide, and Lamech seventy times seven, 
because he was a murderer after the law and 
the condemnation.» And wicked neighbours 

a¥ccles. xi. 2. S. Gregory himself (Or. xviii. ‘fin landem 
Patris,” c, 20) comments upon this passage as enjoining hberal 
almsgiving. S, Ambrose (in Luc. vi.) has a mystical interpreta- 
tion somewhat resembling that here referred to ; but | cannot find 
a predecessor of Gregory on the verse. Some later commentators, 
according to Cornelius and Lapide, take the Seven of the poor in 
thus life, and the Kight of the souls in Purgatory, following a com- 
mon interpretation of these numbers. Isa, xi.2. y Ps. xix. 6. 

Job v. 19. e Matt. xviii. 22. Gen. iv. 24. 

9 Lt will be worth while, says Nicctas, to add S, John Chrysos- 
tom’s account of the sevenfold punishment which was inflicted on 
Cain. The number Seven he says (Hom. in Gen. xix. 5, Pp. 168 c.) 
is often used in Holy Seripture in the sense of multitude. as G2, 
in such places as, Phe barren hath borne seven,” and the like. 
So here ; the greatness of the crime is implied, and that it is not a 
simple and single crime, but seven sins ; and those of such a sort 
that every one of them must be avenged by a very severe punish- 
ment. Virst, that he envied his brother when he saw that God 
loved him, a sin which without any other added to it was suffi- 
cient to be deadly. ‘The next was that this sin was against a 
brother, ‘The third that he compassed a deceit. ‘The fourth that 
he perpetrated a murder. ‘The fifth that it was his brother that he 
slew. ‘The sixth that he was the first man to commit a murder. 
The seventh that he lied to God. You have followed these steps 
with your mind, or do you desire that I should repeat the enumera- 
tion ina fuller way, to make you understand how each of these 
sins would be visited with a very severe penalty, even if it stood 
alone. Who would judge a man worthy of pardon who envies 
another simply because he enjoys the favour and love of God? 
Here then is one very great and inexpiable sin. And this is shewn 
to be even more atrocious when he who is envied is a brother, and 
has done him no wrong. Further, he contrived a deceit, bringing 
his brother out by a trick into the field, without reverence for 
nature herself. The fourth crime is the murder which he com- 
mitted, he fifth is that it was his brother whom he put to death ; 
his brother, I say, that came out of the same womb, Sixthly, he 
was the first inventor of murder. Seventhly., when questioned by 
God he did not hesitate to lic. And therefore because he dared 
to lay hands on his brother, he draws upon himself severe punish- 
ments, He then proceeds to shew how Lamech's crime was worse 
than Cain’s, and is therefore said to be punished seventy times ; 
that is, in manifold ways. Lamech slew aman and a young man, 
and this, after the law against murder had been given; that is, 
after God had punished Cain, Cain’s punishment he says was 

380 

receive sevenfold into their bosom ;* and the | 

House of Wisdom rests on seven pillars,? and 
the Stone of Zerubbabel is adorned with seven 
eyes ;¥ and God is praised seven times a day. 
And again the barren beareth seven, the per- 
feet number, she who is contrasted with her 
who is imperfect in her children.’? $ 

1V. And if we must also look at ancient his- 
tory, Lperceive that Enoch,” the seventh among 
our ancestors, was honoured by translation. [ 
perceive also that the twenty-first, Abraham,? 
was given the glory of the Patriarchate, by 
the addition of a greater mystery. For the 
Hebdomad thrice repeated brings out this 
number. And one who is very bold might 
yenture even to come to the New Adam, my 
God and Lord Jesus Christ, Who is counted 
the Seventy-seventh from the old Adam who 
fell under sin, in the backward genealogy 
according to Luke.* And I think of the seven 
trumpets of Jesus, the son of Nave, and the 
same number of circuits and days and priests, 
by which the walls of Jericho were shaken 
down.’ And so too the seyen compassings of 
the City; in the same way as there is a mys- 
tery in the threefold breathings of Elias, the 
Prophet, by which he breathed life into the 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

To the same doctrine belongs, I think af I 

| . 
may omit the seven-stemmed and seven-lamped 

| 

candlestick of the Pemple%) that the ceremony 
of the Priests’ consecration lasted seven days ; 8 
and seven that of the purifying of a leper,” and 
that of the Dedication of the Temple® the 
same number, and that in the seventieth year 
the people returned from the Captivity ; © that 
whatever is in Units may appear also in 

| Decads, and the mystery of the Hebdomad 

son of the Sareptan widow, and the same _ 

number of his floodings of the wood,” when 
he consumed the sacrifice with fire sent from 
God, and condemned the prophets of shame, 
who could not do the like at his challenge. 
And the sevenfold looking for the cloud 
imposed upon the young servant; and Elis- 
seus stretching himself that number of times 
upon the child of the Shunammite, by which 
stretching the breath of life was restored.é 

sevenfold, corresponding to his seven. sins !—t. Cursed is the 
ground for thy sake. 2. Thou shalt till the ground; Le., thou 
shalt never rest from the toils of husbandry. 3. It shall not yield 
unto thee its strength; 4. thy labours shall be barren, and 5.° sighing 
and trembling” shalt thou be. And the sixth is from the lips of 
Cain himself:—‘ If Thou castest me out from the earth,”’ i.e., 
from all earthly conveniences, ‘from Thy face shall I be hid.’ 
And God put a mark upon Cain ; this is the seventh punishment 
—a mark of infamy declaring his guilt and shame to all that should 
see him. Others according to the same authority (and Bishop 
Wordsworth adopts the explanation) explains it thus. From 
Cain to the Deluge are seven generations, and then the world was 
punished because sin had spread far and wide. But Lamech’s 
sin could not be cured by the Deluge, but only by Him Who 
taketh away the sin of the world. “Then count all the generations 
from Adam to Christ, and according to the Genealogy in Luke, 
you will find that our Lord was born in the seventieth gencration. 
This is S. Jerome's explanation. Ps, its, 227 

B Prov.ix.i. y Zech. iii. 9. 8 Ps. cxix. 164. € 1 Sam, il. 5. 

¢ Peninnah who had “many” children is called Imperfect in 
her children, because Many is an indefinite word; whereas Han- 
nah’s one child Samuel was so perfect a man that he was as it 
were seven to his mother. For Seven is mystically, as Six or Ten 
is arithmetically, the perfect number. (Six because itis the sum of 
its own factors 1, 2, 3; I'en, because it is the basis of numera- 
tion ; Seven because it is the number of Creation ; for God rested 
on the Sabbath Day.) 

n Jude 14. @ Gen. v. 22. ik Laken, Si 
A Josh. vi. 4. &e. pt Kees. op ote PAD exvilt. 293 

& 2 Kgs. iv. 25, where the LXX. has “Che contracted himself 
upon the child until seven times, and the child opened his eyes ;” 
saying nothing about the sneezing of the child, which the Hebrew 
and Vulgate mention, while they omit the number in the case of 

be reverenced in amore perfect number. — but 
why do I speak of the distant past? — Jesus 
Himself who is pure perfection, could in the 
desert and with five loaves feed five thousand, 
and again with seven loaves four thousand. 
And the leavings after they were satisfied were 
in the first case twelve baskets full, and in the 
other seven baskets; neither, I imagine, 
without a reason or unworthy of the Spirit. 
And if you read for yourself you may take 
note of many numbers which contain a mean- 
ing deeper than appears on the surface. Dut 
to come to an instance which is most useful 
to us on the present occasion, not that for 
these reasons or others very similar or yet 
more divine, the Hebrews honour the Day of 
Pentecost, and we also honour it ; just as there 
are other rites of the Hebrews which we observe 
; . they were typically observed by 
them, and by us they are sacramentally re- 
instated. And now haying said so much by 
way of preface about the Day, let us proceed 
to what we have to say further. 

V. Weare keeping the feast of Pentecost and 
of the Coming of the Spirit, and the appointed 
time of the Promise, and the fulfilment of our 

hope. And how great, how august, is the 
Mystery. ‘The dispensations of the Body of 

Christ are ended ; or rather, what belongs to 
His Bodily Advent (for I hesitate to say the 
Dispensation of His Body, as long as no dis- 
course persuades me that it is better to have 
put off the body 7), and that of the Spirit is 
beginning. And what were the things per- 
taining to the Christ? The Virgin, the 
Birth, the Manger, the Swaddling, the Angels 
glorifying Him, the Shepherds running to 
Him, the course of the Star, the Magi wor- 
shipping Him and bringing Gifts, Herod's 

Flisha’s similar action. S. Bernard has a curious explanation of 
the seven sneezes of the child (in Cant. xvi). : 

a Ex. xxv. 32. 37: B Levit. vill. 33. _y Ib. xiv, 8. 

& x Kings viii. 6. e 2 Chron. xxxvi. 32. 

¢ Different words are used here as in the New Testament for 
Baskets. The second implies a larger size; it is the word used 
for the ‘* basket ” in which St. Paul was let down from the wall of 
Damascus, Acts 1x. 25. ; ‘ 

7 S. Gregory makes this explanation because there were certain 
heretics who taught that our Lord at His Ascension laid aside His 
Humanity. It is said that this was held by certain Manichxans, 
who based their idea on Ps. xix. 4, where the LXX. and Vulgate 
read, ‘ He hath set His ‘Vabernacle in the Sun.’’ 

murder of the children, the Flight of Jesus 
into egypt, the Return from Egypt, the Cir- 
cumcision, the Baptism, the Witness from 
Heaven, the Temptation, the Stoning for our 
sake (because He had to be given as an Ex- 
ample to us of enduring affliction for the 
Word), the Betrayal, the Nailing, the Burial, 
the Resurrection, the Ascension; and 
these even now He suffers many dishonours 
at the hands of the enemies of Christ; and 
He bears them, for He is longsuffering. But 
from those who love Him He receives all that 
is honourable. And He defers, as in the for- 
mer case His wrath, so in ours His kindness ; 
in their case perhaps to give them the grace 
of repentance, and in ours to test our love ; 
whether we do not faint in our tribulations @ 
and conflicts for the true Religion, as was 
from of old the order of His Divine Economy, 
and of his unsearchable judgments, with which 
He orders wisely all that concerns us. Such 
are the mysteries of Christ. And what fol- 
lows we shall see to be more glorious ; and 
may we too be seen. As to the things of the 
Spirit, may the Spirit be with me, and grant 
me speech as much as I desire ; or if not that, 
yet as is in due proportion to the season. 
Anyhow He will be with me as my Lord ; 
not in servile guise, nor awaiting acommand, 
as some think.6 For He bloweth where He 
wills and on whom He wills, and to what ex- 
tent He wills.y ‘Thus we are inspired both to 
think and to speak of the Spirit. 

VI. They who reduce the Holy Spirit to the 
rank of a creature are blasphemers and wicked 
servants, and worst of the wicked. For it is 
the part of wicked servants to despise Lord- 
ship, and to rebel against dominion, and to 
make That which is free their fellow-servant. 
But they who deem Him God are inspired by 
God ¢ and are illustrious in their mind; and 
they who go further and ca// Him so, if to 
well disposed hearers are exalted; if to the 
low, are not reserved enough, for they com- 
mit pearls to clay, and the noise of thunder 

@ Kphes. iii. 13. 

6 ‘The reference is to the Macedonians or Pneumatomachi, fol- 
lowers of Macedonius, Patriarch of Constantinople, who had 
passed from extreme or Anomaan Arianism to Semi-Arianisin, 
and was forcibly intruded on the See by order of Constantius in 
343, but was afterwards deposed. “After his deposition he 
broached the heresy known by his name, denying the Deity of the 
Holy Ghost; some of its adherents, with Macedonius himself, 
maintaining Him to be a_merecreature; others stopping short of 
this ; and others calling Him a creature and servant of the Son. 
The heresy was formally condemned in the Ecumenical Council 
of Constantinople in 381. y John ti. 8. 

6S. Gregory here commends the practice of reserve in respect 
of the Deity of the Holy Ghost. To deZfeve it is necessary to sal- 
vation, he would say ; but in view of the prevailing ignorance it is 
well to be careful before whoin we give Him the Name of God. 

sut he demands that his hearers should give to the Holy Ghost 

all the Attributes of Godhead, and should bear with those who, 
like himself, gave Him also the Name, as he prays that they all 
may have grace to do (Bénoft), 

NOGHIC® Vobky 

ON PENTECOST, 381 

| 
| 

of | 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

to weak cars, and the sun to feeble eyes, and 
solid food to those who are still using milk ;¢ 
whereas they ought to lead them little by little 
up to what les beyond them, and to. bring 
them up to the higher truths ; adding light to 
light, and supplying truth upon truth. ‘Vhere- 
fore we will leave the more mature discourse, 
for which the time has not yet come, and 
will speak with them as follows. 

VIL. If, my friends, you will not acknowl- 
edge the Holy Spirit to be uncreated, nor yet 
eternal ; clearly such a state of mind is due to 
the contrary spirit—forgive me, if in my zeal I 
speak somewhat over boldly. If, however, 
you are sound enough to escape this evident 
impiety, and to place outside of slavery Him 
Who gives freedom to yourselves, then see for 
yourselves with the help of the Holy Ghest 
and of us what follows. For I am_ persuaded 
that you are to some extent partakers of Him, 
so that I will go into the question with you as 
kindred souls. Either shew me some mean 
between lordship and servitude, that I may 
there place the rank of the Spirit ; or, if you 
shrink from imputing servitude to Him, there 
is no doubt of the rank in which you must 
place the object of your search. But you are 
dissatisfied with the syllables, and you stumble 
at the word, and it is to you a stone of stum- 
bling and a rock of offence ; 8 for so is Christ 
to some minds. It is only human after all. 
Let us meet one another in a spiritual man- 
ner ; let us be full rather of brotherly than of 
self love. Grant us the Power of the God- 
head, and we will give up to you the use of 
the Name. Confess the Nature in other words 
for which you have greater reverence, and we 
will heal you as infirm people, filching from 
you some matters in which you delight. For 
it is shameful, yes, shameful and utterly illogi- 
cal, when you are sound in soul, to draw petty 
distinctions about the sound, and to hide the 
‘Treasure, as if you envied it to others, or were 
afraid lest you should sanctify your own tongue 
too. But it is even more shameful for us to 
be in the state of which we accuse you, and, 
while condemning your petty distinctions of 
words to make petty distinctions of letters. 

VITI. Confess, my friends, the ‘Trinity to be 
of One Godhead ; or if you will, of One Nature ; 
and we will pray the Spirit to give you this 
word God. He will give it to you, I well know, 
inasmuch as He has already granted you the 
first portion and the second ;¥ and especially 

a Heb. v. 12. PB Ise -viit. 24 + Rom, ix, 934.5, Pet i. & 

Le, inasmuch as He has granted you a right faith in the 

Rs : eo ae 
| Consubstantiality and Unity of the Trinity, Lam sure He will in 

time grant you the grace also to call Him by the Name cof God, 

pd 

GREGORY 

382 
if that about which we are contending 1s 
some spiritual cowardice, and not the devil’s 
objection. Yet more clearly and concisely, 
let me say, do not you call us to account for 
our loftier word (for envy has nothing to do 
with this ascent), and we will not find fault 
with what you have been able to attain, until 
by another road you are brought up to the 
same resting place. Vor we are not seeking 

victory, but to gain brethren, by whose separ- 

ation from us we are torn. ‘This we concede 
to you in whom we do find something of vital 
who are sound as to the Son. 

truth, 

We ad- | 

mire your life, but we do not altogether ap-— 

prove your doctrine. Ye who have the things 
of the Spirit, receive Himself in addition, that 
ye may not only strive, but strive lawfully ,¢ 
which is the condition of your crown, 

May 

this reward of your conversation be granted | 

you, that you may confess the Spirit perfectly 
and proclaim with us, aye and before us, all 
that is His due. Yes, and I will venture even 
more on your behalf; [ will even utter the 
Apostle’s wish. So much do I cling to you, 
and so much do I revere your array, and the 
colour of your continence, and those sacred 
assemblies, and the august Virginity, and 
purification, and the Psalmody that lasts all 
night® and your love of the poor, and of the 
brethren, and of strangers, that I could con- 
sent to be Anathema from Christ, and even 
to suffer something as one condemned, if only 
you might stand beside us, and we might 
glorify the ‘Trinity together. — For of the 

others why should I speak, seeing they are | 
divide the Substance, as 1 understand it, but 

clearly dead (and it is the part of Christ alone 
to raise them, Who quickeneth the dead by 
His own Power), and are unhappily separated 
in place as they are bound together by their 
doctrine; and who quarrel among them- 

selves as much as a pair of squinting eyes in — 

looking at the same object, and differ with 

one another, not in sight but in position—if 
of fire. 

indeed we may charge them only with squint- 
ing, and not with utter blindness. | And now 
that I have to some extent laid down your 
position, come, let us return again to the 
subject of the Spirit, and I think you will fol- 
low me now. 

IX. The Holy Ghost, then, always existed, 
and exists, and always will exist. He neither 
had a beginning, nor will He have an end ; but 
He was everlastingly ranged with and num- 
bered with the Father and the Son. For it was 

a2 Tim. ii. 5. 

B The Constantinopolitan followers of Macedonins at the period 
were noted for their strict asceticism. ‘Ihe attempt to revive the 
Night Office among the secular Clergy of the Diocese brought 
great odium on S. John Chrysostom a few years later. 

NAZIANZEN. 

———_— 

not ever fitting that either the Son should be 
wanting to the Father, or the Spirit to the 
Son. For then Deity would be shorn of Its 
Glory in its greatest respect, for It would seem 
io have arrived at the consummation of per- 
fection as if by an afterthought. ‘Therefore 
He was ever being partaken, but not partak- 
ing; perfecting, not being perfected ; sancti- 
fying, not being sanctified ; deifying, not 
heing deified; Himself ever the sane with 
Himself, and with Those with Whom Ile is 
ranged; invisible, eternal, incomprehensible, 
unchangeable, without quality, without quan- 
tity, without form, impalpable, self-moving, 
eternally moving, with free-will, self-power- 
ful, All-powerful (even though all that is of 
the Spirit is referable to the First Cause, just 
as is all that is of the Only-begotten); Life 
and Lifegiver; Light and Lightgiver ; absol- 
ute Good, and Spring of Goodness ; the Right, 
the Princely Spirit; the Lord, the Sender, 
the Separator ; Builder of His own Temple ; 
leading, working as He wills; distributing 
His own Gifts; the Spirit of Adoption, of 
Truth, of Wisdom, of Understanding, of 
Knowledge, of Godliness, of Counsel, of lear 
(which are ascribed to Him *) by Whom the 
Father is known and the Son is glorified ; and 
by Whom a/one He is known ; one class, one 
service, worship, power, perfection, sanctifi- 
cation, Why make a long discourse of it? 
All that the Father hath the Son hath also, 
except the being Unbegotten; and all that 
the Son hath the Spirit hath also, except the 
Generation. And these two matters do not 

rather are divisions within the Substance. 

X. Are you labouring to bring forth objec- 
tions? Well, soam I to get on with my dis- 
course, Honour the Day of the Spirit; re- 
strain your tongue if you can a litle, It Js 
the time to speak of other tongues—reverence 
them or fear them, when you see that they are 
To-day let us teach dogmatically ; 
to-morrow we may discuss. To-day let us 
keep the feast ; to-morrow will be time enough 
to behave ourselves unseemly—the first mysti- 
cally, the second theatrically ; the one in the 
Churches, the other in the marketplace ; the 
one among the sober, the other among the 
drunken ; the one as befits those who vehe- 
mently desire, the other, as among those who 

ai.e., by Isaiah. ’ : 2 

B Job xxxvill. 4, Ps. V. 10, XXXVI.) CXXXIX, 7-35, exlii,, Isa. x1. 1- 
3, xIvili, 16, Mal. iti, 6, Wisd. 1. 2, John 1. 14, iij. 24, xv. 26, 
xvi. 14, 15, Acts xii. 2, Rom. iv, 17, xv. 16, 19, I Cor. 10, vi. 
19, Vili, 2, 2 Cor, iii. 1, 6, xiii. 4, 2 Thess. ill. 5, 1 Pim, vi. 10, Heb, 
ia as 

make a joke of the Spirit. Having then put | 
an end to the element that is foreign to us, 
let us now thoroughly furnish our own friends. 

Al. He wrought first in the heavenly and 
angelic powers, and such as are first after God 
and around God, For from no other source 

flows their perfection and their brightness, and 
the difficulty or impossibility of moving them 
to sin, but from the Holy Ghost. And next, 
in the Patriarchs and Prophets, of whom the 
former saw Visions of God, or knew Him, 
and the latter also foreknew the future, having 
their master part moulded by the Spirit, and 
being associated with events that were yet fut- 
ure as if present, for such is the power of the 
Spirit. And next in the Disciples of Christ 
(for I omit to mention Christ Himself, in | 
Whom He dwelt, not as energizing, but as | 
accompanying His Equal), and that in three | 
Ways, as they were able to receive Him, and 
on three occasions ; before Christ was glori- 
fied by the Passion, and after He was glorified | 
by the Resurrection ; and after His Ascen- 
sion, or Restoration, or whatever we ought to 
call it, to Heaven, Now the first of these 
manifests Him—the healing of the sick and 
casting out of evil spirits, which could not | 
be apart from the Spirit; and so does that 
breathing upon them after the Resurrection, 
which was clearly a divine inspiration ; and 
so too the present distribution of the fiery 
tongues, which we are now commemorating. 
But the first manifested Him indistinctly, the 
second more expressly, this present one more 
periectly, since He is no longer present only | 
in energy, but as we may say, substantially, | 
associating with us, and dwelling in us. For 
it was fitting that as the Son had lived with 
us in bodily form—so the Spirit too should 
appear in bodily form; and that after Christ | 
had returned ta His own place, He should | 
have come down to us—Coming because He | 
is the Lord; Sen¢, because He is not a rival | 
God. For such words na less manifest. the 
| 

| 

Unanimity than they mark the separate Indi- 
viduality, 
XII. And therefore He came after Christ, 
that a Comforter should not be lacking unto | 
us; but Awefher Comforter, that you might | 
acknowledge His co-equality. For this word 
Another marks an Alter Ego, a name of equal 
Lordship, not of inequality. For Another is 
not said, I know, of different kinds, but of 
things consubstantial. And He came in the 
form of ‘Tongues because of His close relation 
to the Word. And they were of Fire, per- 
haps because of His purifying Power (for our 
Scripture knows of a purifying fire, as any one 

ON PENTECOST. 383 

who wishes can find out), or else because of 
Ifis Substance. Tor our God is a consuming 
Mire, and a Vire* burning up the ungodly ; 8 
though you may again pick a quarrel over 
these words, being brought into difficulty by 
the Consubstantiality. And the tongues were 
cloven, because of the diversity of Gifts ; 
and they sat to signify His Royalty and Rest 
anong the Saints, and because the’ Cherubiny 
are the Throne of God. And it took place 
in an Upper Chamber (I hope I am not seem- 
ing to any one over tedious), because those 
who should receive it were to ascend and be 
raised abave the earth; for also certain upper 
chambers? are covered with Divine Waters,® by 
which the praise of God are sung. And Jesus 
Himself in an Upper Chamber gave the Com- 
munion of the Sacrament to those who were 
being initiated into the higher Mysteries, that 
thereby might be shewn on the one hand that 
God must come down to us, as I know He 

did of old to Moses ; and on the other that 

we must go up to Him, and that so there 

should come to pass a Communion of God 

with men, by a coalescing of the dignity, 
For as long as either remains on its own foot- 
ing, the One in His Glory ¢ the other in his 
lowliness, so long the Goodness of God can- 
hot mingle with us, and His lovingkindness 

is incommunicable, and there is a great gulf 
| between, which 

cannot be crossed; and 
which separates not only the Rich Man from 
Lazarus and Abraham’s Bosom which he longs 
for, but also the created and changing natures 
from that which is eternal and immutable. 
XH. This was proclaimed by the Prophets 
in such passages as the following :—The Spirit 
of the Lord is upon me ; $ and, There shall rest 
upon Him Seven Spirits ; and The Spirit of the 
Lord descended and led them ;7 and The spirit 
of Knowledge filling Bezaleel,? the Master- 
builder of the Tabernacle ; and, ‘The Spirit 
provoking to anger ;* and the Spirit carrying 
away Elias ina chariot, and sought in double 
measure by Elisseeus; and David led and 
strengthened hy the Good and Princely Spirit.# 
And He was promised by the mouth of Joel 
first, who said, And it shall be in the last days 
that I will pour out of My Spirit upon all 
flesh (that is, upon all that believe), and 
upon your sons and upon your daughters,” and 

a@ Heb. xii. 29. B Deut. iv. 24 Ps.¢iv.34 <6. Psz-exlyitis 4, 

€ émi mepiomys ; Billius renders ‘In specula sua,” “On His 
watch tower,” and the meaning is admissible, but the context seems 
rather to point to the passive sense of Majesty or Glory, ‘The 
word is not in the Lexicon, and Suicer does not notice it ; but the 
corresponding adjective has pxdy the passive sense. Specula, 
however, is used in the sense of Eminence, but apparently only 
geographically. Isa. Ixi, 1, 

9 Lb. xi. 25 Lili, 14. @ Exod. xxxi. 3. 

I > « Isa. Ixiii. 10, 
AA Kes, nor & Ps. It. 12; cxliti. 10. 

v Joel it. 28, 

pd2 

384 

the rest; and then afterwards by Jesus, being 

glorified by Him, and giving back glory to | 

Him, as He was glorified by and glorified the 
Father. And how abundant was this Promise. 
He shall abide for ever, and shall remain with 
you, whether now with those who in the sphere 
of time are worthy, or hereafter with those 
who are counted worthy of that world, when 
we have kept Him altogether by our life here, 
and not rejected Him in so far as we sin. 
XIV. This Spirit shares with the Son in 
working both the Creation and the Resurrec- 
tion, as you may be shewn by this Scripture ; 
By the Word of the Lord were the heavens 
made, and all the power of them by the breath 
of His Mouth; and this, The Spirit of God 
that made me, and the Breath of the Almighty 
that teacheth me ;¥ and again, ‘Thou shalt send 
forth Thy Spirit and they shall be created, and 
Thou shalt renew the face of the earth.6 And 
He is the Author of spiritual regeneration. 
Here is your proof :—None can see or enter 
into the Kingdom, except he be born again 
of the Spirit,¢ and be cleansed from the first 
birth, which is a mystery of the night, by a 
remoulding of the day and of the Light, by 
which every one singly is created anew. ‘This 
Spirit, for He is most wise and most loving,$ 

| 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

make proof of Him as gentle, not as wrathful, 
by confessing His Dignity; and let us not 
desire to see Him implacably wrathful. He 
too it is who has made me today a bold her- 

| ald to you;—if without rest to myself, God 

if He takes possession of a shepherd makes | 

him a Psalmist, subduing evil spirits by his 
song,” and proclaims him King; if he possess 
a goatherd and scraper ® of sycamore fruit,« He 
makes him a Prophet. 
and Amos. If He possess a goodly youth, He 
makes him a Judge of Elders,* even beyond his 
years, as Daniel testifies, who conquered the 
lions in their den.“ If He takes possession of 
Fishermen, He makes them catch the whole 

Call to mind David | 

world in the nets of Christ, taking them up — 

in the meshes of the Word. 
and Andrew and the Sons of Thunder, thund- 
ering the things of the Spirit. 
ans, He makes gain of them for discipleship, 
and makes them merchants of souls; witness 
Matthew, yesterday a Publican, today an 
Evangelist. If of zealous persecutors, He 
changes the current of their zeal, and makes 
them Pauls instead of Sauls, and as full of 
piety as He found them of wickedness. And 
He is the Spirit of Meekness, and yet is pro- 
voked by those who sin. Let us therefore 

a John xiv. 16, BPs a00n, 6. y Job xxxill. 4. 

8 Ps. civ. 30. ¢Johniii3. § Wisd.i.6. 91 Sam. xvi. 23. 

@ The Hebrew word means ‘a cultivator of sycamores.” The 
LXX. rendering is due to the process of maturing the fruit, which 
grows on the stem of the trunk, and is made to mature by punctur- 
ing it with an iron instrument, when after three days the fruit is 
fit to eat. ‘he Hebrew word occurs only this once in the Bible; 
Aquila renders it by “ Looking for ;”’ Symmachus by “ propping 
with stakes,” x Amos Vil. 14. A Susannah. (ee omiwl2ze 

Look at Peter | 

| 

be thanked ; but if with risk, thanks to Him 
nevertheless ; in the one case, that He may 
spare those that hate us; in the other, that 
He may consecrate us, in receiving this reward 
of our preaching of the Gospel, to be made 
perfect by blood. 

XV. They spoke with strange tongues, and 
not those of their native land ; and the wonder 
was great, a language spoken by those who 
had not learnt it. And the sign is to them 
that believe not,* and not to them that believe, 
that it may be an accusation of the unbcliev- 
ers, as it is written, With other tongues and 
other lips will I speak unto this people, and 
not even so will they listen to Me saith the 
Lord. But they heard. Here stop a little 
and raise a question, how you are to divide 
the words. For the expression has an am- 
biguity, which is to be determined by the 
punctuation. Did they each hear in their 
own dialectY so that if I may so say, one 
sound was uttered, but many were heard ; the 
air being thus beaten and, so to speak, sounds 
being produced more clear than the original 
sound ; or are we to put the stop after ‘* they 
Heard,’’ and then to add ‘‘ them speaking in 
their own languages ’’ to what follows, so that 
it would be speaking in languages their 
own to the hearers, which would be foreign 
to the speakers? I prefer to put it this latter 

way ; for on the other plan the miracle would 

be rather of the hearers than of the speakers ; 
whereas in this it would be on the speakers’ 
side; and it was they who were reproached 
for drunkenness, evidently because they by 

the Spirit wrought a miracle in the matter of 

If of Public- 

the tongues. 

XVI. But as the old Confusion of tongues 
was laudable, when men who were of one lan- 
guage in wickedness and impiety, even as 
some now venture to be, were building the 
‘Tower ; 6 for by the confusion of their language 
the unity of their intention was broken up, 
and their undertaking destroyed; so much 
more worthy of praise is the present miracu- 
lous one. For being poured from One Spirit 
upon many men, it brings them again into 
harmony. And there is a diversity of Gifts, 
which stands in need of yet another Gift to 

@te Cor xiv. 22. B Isa. xxviii. 11. ae, 
y The actual order of the words in the Greek of Acts 11. 6 15, 
They heard each individual in his own dialect them speak- 
ing ; so that the position of the comma affects the meaning. 
CNA X1s072 

a a 

discern which is the best, where all are praise- 
worthy. And that division also might be | 
called noble of which David says, Drown O 
Lord and divide their tongues.¢ Why? Be- 
cause they loved all words of drowning, the 
deceitiul tongue.8 Where he all but expressly 
arraigns the tongues of the present day ¥ 
which sever the Godhead. Thus much upon 
this point. 

XVII. Next, since it was to inhabitants of | 
Jerusalem, most devout Jews, Parthians, Medes, | 
and Ilamites, Egyptians, and Libyans, Cret- | 
ans too, and Arabians, and Mesopotamians, | 
and my own Cappadocians, that the tongues | 
spake, and to Jews (if any one prefer so to | 
understand it), out of every nation under | 
heaven thither collected ; it is worth while to | 

| 
} 

sce who these were and of what captivity. 

For the captivity in Egypt and Babylon was | 
circumscribed, and moreover had long since 
been brought to an end by the Return; and | 
that under the Romans, which was exacted | 
ior their audacity against our Saviour, was | 
not yet come to pass, though it was in the | 
hear future. It remains then to understand it | 
of the captivity under Antiochus, which hap- | 
-pened not so very long before this time. 
But if any does not accept this explanation, 
as being too elaborate, seeing that this cap- 
tivity was neither ancient nor widespread 
over the world, and is looking for a more 
reliable—perhaps the best way to take it 
would be as follows. The nation was re- 
moved many times, as Esdras related; and 
some of the Tribes were recovered, and some 
were left behind; of whom probably (di- 
spersed as they were among the nations) some 
would have been present and shared the 
miracle. 

XVIII. These questions have been examined 
before by the studious, and perhaps not with- 
out occasion ; and whatever else any one may 
contribute at the present day, he will be | 
joined with us. But now it is our duty to 
dissolve this Assembly, for enough has been 
said. But the Festival is never to be put an 
end to; but kept now indeed with our bodies : 
but a little later on altogether spiritually 
there, where we shall see the reasons of these 
things more purely and clearly, in the Word 
Himself, and God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, 
the ‘True Testival and Rejoicing of the Saved 
—to Whom be the glory and the worship, 
vith the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and 
for ever, Amen. 

Ona. ly: Bibel 4, 

THE LAST FAREWELL. 

spiritual needs. 

|‘ THe Last FAREWELL ’”’ 

y Arians, Macedonians, and kindred sects. 

385 

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XLIE. 
“THe Last FAREWELL.” 

Titis Oration was delivered during the Second 
(cumenical Council, held at Constantinople 
A.D. 351. Historical as well as personal mo- 
tives render the occasion of the deepest inter- 
est. ‘The audience consisted of the one hundred 
and fifty Bishops of the Eastern Church who 
took part in the Council, and of the speaker’s 
own flock, the orthodox Christians of Constan- 
tinople. He had by his own exertions gathered 

_ that flock together, after it had been ravaged 

by heretical teachers. He had won the admi- 
ration and affection of its members, by his 
courageous championship of the Faith, his 
lucid teaching, and his fatherly care for their 
He had been, against his 
will, enthroned with acclamation in the highest 
ecclesiastical position in the Eastern Church, 
and called to preside over the Synod of its 
assembled Bishops. Finding himself unable 
to guide the deliberations of the Council in re- 

| gard to a question of the highest importance, 

and perceiving that he himself and his posi- 
tion were made by some of the Bishops a fresh 
cause of dissension, he felt bound to resign 
his high office, and endeayour by this personal 

Sacrifice to restore peace to the Church. His 
language is worthy of the occasion. Obliged 
5 S So 

to deal with the topics which had caused dis- 
sension, he handles them with gentle and dis- 
criminating tact; he speaks with great self- 
restraint in his own defence; he sets forth 
with tenderest feeling the common experiences 
of himself and his flock: he gives with dig- 
nity and clearness his last public exposition 
of the Faith; and finally, in language of 
exquisite beauty, spoken with the quivering 
tones of an aged man, he bids a tender fare- 
well to his flock, his cathedral, and his throne, 
with all their affecting associations. It was 
an occasion whose pathos is unsurpassed in 
history. Orator and audience were alike 
deeply moved, and the emotion has been re- 
newed in all those who have read_ his words, 
and realised the scene of their delivery. 

IN THE PRESENCE 
OF “THE HUNDRED AND FIFTY 

BIsHops. 

ONE 

t. What think ye of our affairs, dear shep- 
herds and fellow-shepherds: whose fect are 
beautiful, for you bring glad tidings cf peace 

380 

and of the good things * with which ye have 
come ; beautiful again in our eyes, to whom 
ye have come in season, not to convert a 
wandering sheep,® but to converse with a pil- 
grim shepherd ? 
pilgrimage? And _ of its fruit, or rather of 
that of the Spirit’ within us,8 by Whom we 
are ever moved,® and specially have now 
been moved, desiring to have, and perhaps 
having, nothing of our own? Do you of 
yourselves understand and perceive—and are 
you kindly critics of our actions? Or must 
we, like those from whom a reckoning is de- 
manded as to their military command, or civil 
government, or administration of the excheq- 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

! 

hither and thither as each one could find 

shelter or pasture, or could gratefully secure 

What think ye of this our — 

uer, publicly and in) person submit to you 

the accounts of our administration? Not in- 
deed that we are ashamed of being judged, 
for we are ourselves judges in turn, and both 
with the same charity. But the law is an 
ancient one: for even Paul communicated to 
the Apostles his Gospel: ¢ not for the sake of 

its own safety ; like that flock which was har- 
assed by lions, dispersed by tempest, or scat- 
tered in darkness, the lamentation of prophets 
who compared it to the misfortunes of Israel,* 
given up to the Gentiles ; over which we also 
lamented, so long as our lot was worthy of 
lamentation. Tor in very deed we also were 
thrust out and cast off, and scattered upon 
every mountain and hill, from the need of a 
shepherd : & and a dreadful storm fell upon the 
Church, and fearful beasts assailed her, who do 
not even now, after the calm, spare us, but with- 
out being ashamed of themselves, wield a greater 
power ‘than the time should allow ; while a 
gloomy darkness, far more oppressive than the 
ninth plague of Egypt, the darkness which 
might be felt,y enveloped and concealed every- 
thing, so that we could scarcely even see one 

~ another. 

ostentation, for the Spirit is far removed from — 

all ostentation, but in order to establish his 
success and correct his failure, if indeed there 
were any such in his words or actions, as he 
declares when writing of himself. Since even 
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the 
prophets,” according to the order of the Spirit 
who regulates and divides all things well. 

And do not wonder that, while he rendered © 
his account privately and to some, I do so — 

publicly, and to all. For my need is greater 
than his, of being aided by the freedom of my 
censors, if | am proved to have failed in my 
duty, lest I should run, or have run, in vain.® 
And the only possible mode of self-defence is 

speech in the presence of men who know the | 

facts. 

2. What then is my defence?! If it be 
false, you must convict me, but if true, youon 
behalf of whom* and in whose presence I 
speak, must bear witness to it. For you are 
my defence, iy witnesses, and my crown of 
rejoicing,* if I also may venture to boast my- 
selfa little in the Apostle’s language. ‘This 
flock was, when it was small and poor, as far 
as appearances went, nay, not even a flock, 
but a slight trace and relic of a flock, without 
order, or shepherd, or bounds, with neither 
right to pasturage, nor the defence of a fold, 
vandering upon the mountains and in caves 
and dens of the earth,” scattered and dispersed 

@ Isai. li. 7: Rom with 68:5, Matt. sen. 22,. 7 -Gal v.22; 
8 @ Tims iy tq, ¢ Acts xvil. 28, 6 Tattle Te 
n 1 Cor. xiv. 32. 0 Gal. i. 2% ir Cor. is. 5. 
Kk On behalf of, i.c., the Christians of Constantinople, whose 
DPastor he had been, who were present at the time in the church, 
At Thess, u. 19. p Heb. xi. 38, 

| 

3. ‘To speak in a more feeling strain, trust- 
ing in Him Who then forsook me, as in a 
Father, ‘* Abraham has been ignorant of us, 
Israel has acknowledged us not, but ‘Thou art 
our Father, and unto Thee do we look ;° be- 
side ‘Thee we know none else, we make mention 
of Thy name.’’* ‘Therefore, says Jeremiah, 
T will plead with Thee, I will reason the cause 
with Thee.¢ We are become as at the begin- 
ning, when Thou barest not rule” over us, and 
Thou hast forgotten Thy holy covenant, and 
shut up ‘Thy mercies from us. Therefore we, 
the worshippers of the ‘Trinity, the perfect sup- 
pliants of the perfect Deity, became a reproach 
to Thy Beloved, neither daring to bring down 
to our own level any of the things above us, 
nor in such wise to rise up against the godless 
tongues which fought against God, as to make 
His Majesty a fellow servant with ourselves ; 
but, as is plain, we were delivered up on ac- 
count of our other sins, and because our conduct 
had been unworthy of Thy commandments, 
and we had walked after our own evil mind. 

For what other reason can there be for our 

being delivered up to the most unrighteous — 
and wicked men of all the dwellers upon the 
earth ? First Nebuchadnezzar ® afflicted us,‘ 
possessed during the Christian era with an 
anti-Christian rage, hating Christ just because 

he had through Him gained salvation, and 

having bartered the sacred books for sacrifices 
to those who are no gods. He devoured me, 

_he tore me in pieces, a slight darkness envel- 

oped me,* if 1 may even in my lamentation 

a: Tegel, ex, Ti, 
© Tsai. Asti: 26; 
n Isai. xiii. 19, 
i jer, 34s 

Pb; sxmy.-6. ¥ Jexod. X21, 
€ Tb. sees 73 GX): (Seem esth © 
0 Nebuchadnezzar, i.e. Julian, 
« Ps, lv. 6 (LXX.), 

EE LAST 
keep to the language of Scripture. If the Lord 
had not helped me,¢ and righteously delivered 
him to the hands of the lawless, by casting 
him off (such are the judgments of (rod) to 
the Persians, by whom his blood was right- 
cously shed for his unholy sheddings of blood, 
since in this case alone justice could not afford 
even to be longsuffering, my soul had shortly 
dwelt in the grave. ‘The secondyY no more 
kindly, if he were not even more erievous 
still, for while he bore the name of Christ, he 
was a false Christ, and at once a burden and 
a reproach to the Christians, for, while to obey 
him was ungodly, to suffer at his hands was 
inglorious, since they did not even seem to be 
wronged, nor to gain by their sufferings the 
glorious title of martyr, inasmuch as the truth 
Was in this case perverted, for while they suf- 
fered as Christians, they were supposed to be 
punished as heretics. Alas! how rich we 
were in misfortunes, for the fire consumed the 
beauties of the world. ‘That which the palmer- 
worm left did the locust eat, and that which 
the locust left did the caterpillar eat: then 
came the cankerworm,¢ then, what next I know 
hot, one evil springing up after another. But 
for what purpose should I give a tragic de- 
scription of the evils of the time, and of the 
penalty exacted from us, or, if I must rather 
call it so, the testing and refining we endured ? 
At any rate, we went through fire and water,$ 
and have attained a place of refreshment by 
the good pleasure of God our Saviour. 

4. ‘To return to my original startingpoint. 
This was my field, when it was small and poor, 
unworthy not only of God, Who has been, and 
is cultivating the whole world with the fair 
seeds and doctrines of piety, but, apparently, 
even of any poor and needy man of slender 
means. Nay it did not deserve to be called 
a field, requiring neither barn nor threshing- 
floor, and not even worthy of the sickle; 
with neither heap nor sheaves, or small and 
untimely sheaves, like those on the housetop, 
which do not fill the hand of the reaper, nor 
call forth a blessing from them which go by.” 

FAREWELL. 387 

Such was my field, such my harvest ; great | 

and well-eared and fat in the eyes of Him 
Who beholdeth hidden things, and becoming 
such a husbandman, its abundance springing 
from the valleys of souls well tilled with the 
Word: unrecognized however in public, and 
not collected together, but gathered in frag- 
ments, as an ear gleaned in the stubble,® as 
gleaning-grapes in the vintage, where there 

@ Ps. xciv. 17. 
6 Joel i, 19. 
9 1b, cxxix. 6 sqq. 

B Ib. xciv. 17. y The second, i.e., Valens, 
Ck Detie de GPs: levi. 12, 
OMich vile rs (EXX.) 

is no cluster left. L think I may add, only 
too appropriately, I found Israel like a figtree 
in the wilderness,* and like one or two ripe 
grapes in an unripe cluster, preserved as .a 
blessing from the Lord,® and a consecrated 
firstfruit, though small as yet and scanty, 
and not filling the mouth of the eater: and as 
an ensign on a hill,y and as a beacon ona 
mountain, or any other solitary thing visible 
only to few. Such was its former poverty 
and dejection. 

5. But since God, Who maketh poor and 
maketh rich, Who killeth and maketh alive pa 
Who maketh and transformeth all things ; 
Who turneth night into day,® winter into 
spring, storm into calm, drought into abun- 
dance of rain ; and often for the sake of the 
prayers$ of one righteous man sorely perse- 
cuted ; Who lifteth up the meek on high, and 
bringeth the ungodly down to the ground ; ? 
since God said to Himself, I haye surely scen 
the affliction of Israel;* and they shall no 
longer be further vexed with clay and. brick- 
making ; and when He spake He visited, and 
in His visitation He saved, and led forth His 
people with a mighty hand and outstretched 
arm,* by the hand of Moses and Aaron,’ His 
chosen—what is the result, and what wonders 
have been wrought? ‘Those which books 
and monuments contain. For besides all the 
wonders by the way, and that mighty roar, 
to speak most concisely, Joseph came into 
“gypt alone,“ and soon after six hundred 
thousand depart from Egypt.” What more 
marvellous than this? What. greater proof 
of the generosity of God, when from men 
without means He wills to supply the means 
for public affairs? And the land of promise 
is distributed through one who was hated, 

_and he who was sold € dispossesses nations, 

and is himself made a great nation, and that 
small offshoot becomes a luxuriant vine,? 
so great that it reaches to the river, and 
is stretched out to the sea,* and spreads from 
border to border, and hides the mountains 
with the height of its glory and is exalted 
above the cedars, even the cedars of God, 
whatever we are to take these mountains and 
cedars to be. 

6. Such then was once this flock, and such 
it is now, so healthy and well grown, and if 
it be not yet in perfection, it is advancing 
towards it by constant increase, and I pro- 

GAGS sito Chex x.) 
61 Sam. ii. 6 sqq. 
1S. James v. 16, 17. 
RBs. GxXxxvis 12. 
vy Exod. xii. 37. 
o Hos. x1, 

Balsaiclxy. 8; 
e Amos v. &. 

y fb. xxki 9. 
$1 Kings xviii. 42, 
@Ps. exlyit..6. t Exod. iit. 7. 
Alb. Ixxvii. 20. a Gen. xxxvii. 28, 
& Gens xlix, 23; 
w Ps, Ixxx. 8 et seq. 

388 

phesy that it will advance. This is foretold 

me by the Holy Spirit, if I have any prophetic | 

instinct. and insight into the future. And 
from what has preceded I am able to be con- 

fident, and recognize this by reasoning, being | 
Would you prefer the whole of the Canaanites 
to Abraham alone ?# or the men of Sodom to 

the nursling of reason. For it was much more 
improbable that, from that condition, it should 
reach its present development, than tat. .as 
it now is, it should attain to the height of re- 
nown. 

For ever since it began to be gathered | 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 
| 

| 
\ 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

| 

together, by Him Who quickeneth the dead,* | 

bone to its bone, joint to joint, and the Spirit 

of life and regeneration was given to it in> 

their dryness, its entire resurrection has been, 
I know well, sure to be fulfilled: so that the 
rebellious should not exalt themselves,” and 
that those who grasp at a shadow, or ata 

no other roof but the sky to cover it, than 
impiety rolling in wealth, and that three 
gathered together in the Name of the Lord 
count for more with God than tens of thou- 
sands of those who deny the Godhead. 

Lot ?¥ or the Midianites to Moses,® when each 
of these was a pilgrim and a stranger? How 
do the three hundred men with Gideon, who 
bravely lapped, compare with the thousands 
who were put to flight ? Or the servants of 
Abraham, who scarcely exceeded them in 
number, with the many kings and the army 
of tens of thousands whom, few as they were, 

_ they overtook and defeated ?¢ Or how do you 

dream when one awaketh,® or at the dispers- 
| the sea, a remnant shall be saved 27 And 

ing breezes, or at the traces of a ship in the 
water,¢ should not think that they have any- 
thing. Howl, firtree, for the cedar is fallen ! § 
Let them be instructed by the misfortunes of 
others, and learn that the poor shall not al- 
way be forgotten,” and that the Deity will not 
refrain, as Habakkuk says, from striking 
through the heads of the mighty ones? in His 
fury—the Deity, Who has been struck through 
and impiously divided into Ruler and Ruled, 
in order to insult the Deity in the highest de- 
gree by degrading It, and oppress a creature 
by equality with Deity. 

7. I seem indeed to hear that voice, from 
Him Who gathers together those who are 
broken, and welcomes the oppressed: En- 
large thy cords, break forth on the right hand 
and on the left, drive in thy stakes, spare 
not thy curtains.*. I have given thee up, and 
I will help thee. In a little wrath I smote 
thee, but with everlasting mercy I will 
glorify thee.* ‘The measure of His kindness 
‘xeeeds the measure of His discipline. The 
former things were owing to our wicked- 
ness, the present things to the adorable Trin- 
ity: the former for our cleansing, the present 
for My glory, Who will glorify them that 
glorify Me,* and I will move to jealousy 
them that move Me to jealousy. Behold 
this is sealed up with Me,# and this is 
the indissoluble law of recompense. But 
thou didst surround thyself with walls and 
tablets and richly set stones, and long por- 
ticos and galleries, and didst shine and 
sparkle with gold, which thou didst, in part 
pour forth like water, in part treasure up like 
sand; not knowing that better is faith, with 

B Fzck, xxxvii. 7, 10. y Ps. Ixvi. 7. 
e Wisd. v. 9 sqq- ¢ Zech. x1. 2. 
O:Hab. ait 13: qlsat, live: 
Ast-Sdm, 1.30, p Deut, xxx. 21, 346 

a Rom. iv. 17. 
6 Ps, Ixxiil. 20. 
ike Sal 0} 

K Ib, liv. 8. 

understand the passage that though the num- 
ber of the children of Israel be as the sand of 

again, I have left me seven thousand men, 
who have not bowed the knee to Baal?? 
This is not the case; it isnot? God has not 
taken pleasure in numbers. 

8. ‘Thou countest tens of thousands, God 
counts those who are in a state of salvation ; 
thou countest the dust which is without num- 
ber, I the vessels of election. For nothing is 
so magnificent in God’s sight as pure doctrine, 
and a soul perfect in all the dogmas of the 
truth.—For there is nothing worthy of Him 
Who made all things, of Him by Whom are 
all things, and for Whom are all things,‘ so 
that it can be given or offered to God: not 
merely the handiwork or means of any indi- 
vidual, but even if we wished to honour Him, 
by uniting together all the property and handi- 
work of all mankind. Do not I fill heaven 
and earth?* saith the Lord! and what house 
will ye build Me? or what is the place of My 
rest? But, since man must needs fall short of 
what is worthy, I ask of you, as approaching it 
most nearly, piety, the wealth which is com- 
mon to all and equal in My eyes, wherein the 
poorest may, if he be nobleminded, surpass 
the most illustrious. For this kind of glory 
depends upon purpose, not upon affluence. 
These things be well assured, I will accept at 
your hands. To tread” My courts ye shall 
not proceed, but the feet of the meek é shall 
tread them, who have duly and sincerely 
acknowledged Me, and My only-begotten 
Word, and the Holy Spirit. How long will 
ye inherit My holy Mountain?® How long 

aS. Matt. xviii. 20. BGen, xii. 6; xili, 12, y Ib. xix. 1. 

6 Exod. ii. 15. ¢ Judg. vii. 5. Gen. xiv. 14. 

n Isai. x. 223 Rom. ix. 27. 601 Kings xix. 18; Rom. x1. 4. 

t1Cor. viii, 6. « Jer. xxiii. 24. A Isai. Ixviswes So peib si. 12: 

vy To tread, etc. The Arians for a time had been in possession 
of the churches of Constantinople, 

é Isai, xxvi, 6 (LXX.). o Ib. lvii. 13; Ixv. 9. 

tee LAST PAR EWEEL. 

shall My ark be among the heathen?* Now 
for a little longer ye indulge yourselves in 
that which belongs to others, and gratify your 
desires. For as ye have devised to reject Me, 
so will I also reject you,® saith the Lord 
Almighty. 

9. ‘This Iseemed to hear Him say, and to 
see Him do, and besides, to hear Him shouting 
to His people, which once were few and 
scattered and miserable, and have now become 
many, and compact enough and enviable, Go 
through yY My gates® and be ye enlarged. Must 
you always be in trouble and dwell in tents, 
while those who vex you rejoice exceedingly ? 
And to the presiding Angels, for I believe, as 
John teaches me in his Revelation, that each 
Church has its guardian, Prepare ye the way 
of My people, and cast away the stones from 
the way,$ that there may be no stumblingblock 
or hindrance for the people” in the divine road 
and entrance, now, to the temples made with 
hands,® but scon after, to Jerusalem above,‘ and 
the Holy of holies there,* which will, I know, 
be the end of suffering and struggle to those 
who here bravely travel on the way. Among 
whom are ye also called to be Saints,* a people 
of possession, a royal priesthood,” the most ex- 
cellent portion of the Lord, a whole river from 
a drop, a heavenly lamp from a spark, a tree 
from a grain of mustard seed,” on which the 
birds come and lodge. 

to. These we present to you, dear shep- 
herds, these we offer to you, with these we 
welcome our friends, and guests, and fellow 
pilgrims. We have nothing fairer or more 
splendid to offer to you, for we have selected 
the greatest of all our possessions, that you may 
see that, strangers as we are, we are not in 
want, but though poor are making many rich. 
If these things are small and unworthy of 
notice, I would fain learn what is greater and 
of more account. For, if it be no great thing 
to have established and strengthened with 
wholesome doctrines a city which is the eye 
of the universe, in its exceeding strength by 
sea and land, which is, as it were, the link be- 
tween the Eastern and Western shores, in 
which the extremities of the world from every 
side meet together, and from which, as the 
common mart of the faith, they take their 
rise, a city borne hither and thither on the 
eddying currents of so many tongues, it will 
be long ere anything be considered great or 

Gor Sanievi, cry Bo HHes..1¥2:6. 

EARCViillg ds 
0 Acts vil. 48. t Gal. iv. 26. 
A Rom. i. 6. 

§ 2° Cors, Vic 10; 

389 

worthy of esteem. But if it be indeed a sub- 
ject for praise, allow to us some glory on this 
account, since we have contributed in some 
portion to these results which ye see. 

ri. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see,* 
thou critic of my words! See the crown 
which has been platted in return for the 
hirelings of Ephraim? and the crown of inso- 
lence; see the assembly of the presbyters, 
honoured for years and wisdom, the fair order 
of the deacons, who are not far from the 
same Spirit, the good conduct of the readers, 
the people’s eagerness for teaching, both of 
men and women, who are equally renowned 
for virtue: the men, whether philosophers or 
simple folk, being alike wise in divine things, 
whether rulers or ruled, being all in this re- 
spect duly under rule; whether soldiers or 
nobles, students or men of letters, being all 
soldiers’ of God, though in all other respects 
meek, ready to fight for the Spirit, all rever- 
encing the assembly above, to which we ob- 
tain an entrance, not by the mere letter, but 
by the quickening Spirit, all in very deed 
being men of reason, and worshippers of Him 
Who is in truth the Word: the women, if 
married, being united by a Divine rather than 
by a carnal bond; if unwedded and _ free, 
being entirely dedicated to God; whether 
young or old, some honourably advancing 
towards old age, others eagerly striving to re- 
main immortal, being renewed by the best of 
hopes. 

12. To those who platted this crown—that 
which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord,° 
nevertheless I will say it—I also have given 
assistance. Some of them are the result of 
my words, not of those which we have ut- 
tered at random, but of those which we have 
loved—nor again of those which are mere- 
tricious, though the language and manners of 
the harlot have been slanderously attributed to 
me, but of those which are most grave. Some 
of them are the offspring and fruit of my 
Spirit, as the Spirit can beget those who rise 
superior to the body. To this I have no 
doubt that those who are kindly among you, 
nay all of you, will testify, since I have been 
the husbandman of all: and my sole reward is 
your confession. For we neither have, nor 
have had, any other object. For virtue, that 
it may remain virtue, is without reward, its 
eyes fixed alone on that which is good. 

13. Would you have me say something 
still more venturesome ? Do you see the 
tongues of the enemy made gentle, and those 

B Ib. xxviii. 1 (LXX.). 
So Cory x1 A17, 

@, [sac Ixs 4. 
y 2 Dis degs 

390 GREGORY 

; | 
who made war upon the Godhead against me — 

tranquillised ? This also is the result of our 
Spirit, of our husbandry. 
disciplined in our exercise of discipline, nor 
do we hurl insults, as many do, who assail not 
the argument but the speaker, and sometimes 
strive by their invective to hide the weakness 

of their reasoning ; as the cuttlefish are said 
to cast forth ink before them, in order to 
escape from their pursuers, or themselves 

to hunt others when unperceived. But we 
show that our warfare is in behalf of Christ 
by fighting as Christ, the peaceable and 
meex,* Who has borne our infirmities, fought.6 
Phough peaceable, we do not injure the word 
of truth, by yielding a jot, to gain a reputa- 
tion for reasonableness ; for we do not pursue 
that which is good by means of ill: and we 
are peaceable by the legitimate character of 

our warfare, confined as it is to our own 
limits, and the rules of the Spirit. Upon 
these points, this is my decision, and I lay 

down the law for all stewards of souls and dis- 
pensers of the Word: neither to exasperate 
others by their harshness, nor to render them 
arrogant by submissiveness : 
good words in treating of the Word, and in 
neither direction to overstep the mean. 

14. But you are perhaps longing for me to 
give an exposition of the faith, in so far as I 
amiable. For I shall myself be sanctified by 
the effort of memory, and the people also will 
be benefited, by its special delight in such 
discussions, and you will fully acknowledge 
it—unless we are the objects of groundless 

ee 

lor we are not un- | 

salvation which saves themselves alone, with- 
out bestowing upon others the overflow of 
their blessings. Among these would I range 

~myself, and all who by my side have nobly 

its details: 

ing, 

dared to confess the truth. 

15. One concise proclamation of our teach- 
ing, an inscription intelligible to all, is this 
people, which so sincerely worships the Trin- 
ity, that it would sooner sever anyone from 
this life, than sever one of the three from the 
Godhead: of one mind, of equal zeal, and 
united to one another, to us and to the Trin- 
ity by unity of doctrine. Briefly to run over 
‘That which is without beginning, 
and is the beginning, and is with the begin- 
is one God. Tor the nature of that 
which is without beginning does not consist 

in being without beginning or being unbe- 

for the nature of anything lies, not in 
zt mm the 

gotten, 
what it is not but in what it is. 

assertion of what is, not the denial of what is 

but to be of. 

| 

(are. Now, 

' one Nature—God. 

envy, as the rivals, in the manifestation of the | 
of Persons runs its course, not so as to be 
_ confounded, but so as to be possessed, with- 
out distinction of time, of will, or of power. 

truth, of these whom we do not excel. For 
as, of deep waters, some in the depths are 
utterly hidden, some foam against any ob- 
struction, and hesitate a while before breaking 
(as they promise to our ears), some do actu- 
ally break ; so also, of those who are 
ors of the Divine philosophy—setting 
the utterly misguided—some keep their piety 
entirely secret and hidden within themselves, 
some are not far from the birth pangs, avoid- 
ing impiety, yet not speaking out their piety, 
either from cautious reserve in their teach- 
ing, or under pressure of fear, being themselves 

not. And the Beginning is not, because it is 

/a beginning, separated from that which has 
no beginning. 

lor its beginning is not its 
nature, any more than the being without he- 
ginning is the nature of the other. For these 
are the accompaniments of the nature, not 
the nature itself. That again which is with 
that which has no beginning, and with the 
beginning, is not anything else than what they 
the name of that which hes no 
beginning is the Father, and of the Beginning 
the Son, and of that which is with the Begin- 
ning, the Holy Ghost, and the three have 
And the union is the 
Father from Whom and to Whom the order 

For these things in our case produce a plural- 

ity of individuals, since each of them is separ- 

profess- | 
aside © 

sound, as they say, in mind, but not making | 

sound their people, as if they had been en- 
trusted with the government of their own 
souls, but not of those of others ; while there 
are some who make public their treasure, un- 
able to restrain themselves from giving birth 

aS. Matt. xi. 29. Pills vitleag eolsarclinicay 

| throwing the Oneness. 
to their piety, and not considering that to be | 

ate both from every other quality, and from 
every other individual possession of the same 
quality. But to Those who have a simple 
nature, and whose essence is the same, the 
term One belongs in its highest sense. 

16. Let us then bid farewell to all con- 
tentious shiftings and balancings of the truth 
on either side, neither, like the Sabellians, 
assailing the Trinity in the interest of the 

_ Unity, and so destroying the distinction by 

a wicked confusion; nor, like the Arians, 
assailing the Unity in the interest of the 
‘Trinity, and by an impious distinction over- 
For our object is not 
to exchange one evil for another, but to en- 
sure our attainment of that which is good. 
These are the playthings of the Wicked One, 

who is ever swaying our fortunes towards the 
evil. But we, walking along the royal road 
which lies between the two extremes, which 

THE LAST FAREWELL. 

| 
| 

is the seat of the virtues, as the authorities | 

say, believe in the Father, the Son and the 
Holy Ghost, of one Substance and glory; in 
Whom also baptism has its perfection, both 
nominally and really (thou knowest who hast 
been initiated!) ; being a denial of atheism 

301 

ence was its prior condition, has not being in 
the striet sense of the term. And how can 
that, which strictly has not being, be God ? 
Not one single one, then, of the Three is 
acreature, nor, what is worse, came into being 

for my sake; for in that case he would be not 

and a confession of Godhead ; and thus we are — 

regenerated, acknowledging the Unity in the 
Essence and in the undivided worship, and 
the ‘Trinity in the Hypostases or Persons 
(which term some prefer.) And let not those 

who are contentious on these points utter — 

their scandalous taunts, as if our faith de- 
pended on terms and not on realities. Vor 
what do you mean who assert the three Hypo- 

stases ? Do you imply three Essences by the 
term?) [am assured that you would loudly 

shout against those who do so. For you teach 

only a creature, but inferior in honour to ts. 
For, if Iam for the glory of God, and he is 
for my sake, as the tongs for the waggon, the 
saw for the door, Iam his superior in causal- 
ity. Por in whatever degree God is superior 
to creatures, in the same degree is he, who 
came into being for my sake, inferior to me 
who exist for God’s sake. 

18. Moreover, the Moabites and Ammonites 

must not even be allowed to enter® into the 

| 

that the Essence of the Three is One and | 

the same. 
Three Persons? Do you imagine a single 
compound sort of being, with three faces,# 
or of an entirely human form? Perish the 
thought! You too will loudly reply that he 
who thinks thus, will never see the face of 
God, whatever it may be. What is the 
meaning of the Hypostases of the one party, 
of the Persons of the other, to ask this fur- 
ther question? ‘That They are three, Who are 
distinguished not by natures, but by proper- 
ties.8 excellent. How could men agree 
and harmonize better than you do, even if 
there be a difference between the syllables 
you use? You see what a reconciler I am, 
bringing you back from the letter to the sense, 
as we do with the Old and New ‘Testaments. 
17. But, to resume: let us speak of the 
Unbegotten, the Begotten, and the Proceed- 
ing, if anyone likes to create names: for we 

What do you mean, who assert the | 

shall have no fear of bodily conceptions at-— 
scripture, a task requiring fuller and more 

taching to ‘Those who are not embodied, as 
the calumniators of the Godhead think. 
the creature must be called God’s, and this is 
for us a great thing, but God never. Other- 
wise I shall admit that God is a creature, if I 
become God, in the strict sense of the term, 
For this is the truth. 

are not Gods. And if a creature, he is not 
God, for he had a beginning in time. And 
there was a time when he who had a begin- 
ning was not. And _ that of which non-exist- 

alivth three faces (or masks). A play upon the word 
mpoogwzov which is used in theology in the sense of Person. 
B Properties. Cf, xliii, 30, note, 

For _ 

If God, He is not a_ 
creature; for the creature ranks with us who 

\ 

Church of God, I mean those sophistical, 
mischievous arguments which enquire curi- 
ously into the generation and inexpressible 
procession of God, and rashly set themselves 
in array against the Godhead: as if it were 
necessary that those things which it is beyond 
the power of language to set forth, must either 
be accessible to them alone, or clse have no 
existence because they have not compre- 
hended them. We however, following the 
Divine Scriptures, and removing out of the 
way of the blind the stumbling blocks con- 
tained in them, will cling to salvation, daring 
any and every thing rather than arrogance 
against God. As for the evidences, we leave 
them to others, since they have been set forth 
by many, and by ourselves also with no little 
care. And indeed, it would be a very shame- 
ful thing for me at this time to be gathering 
together proofs for what has all along been 
believed. For it is not the best order of 
things, first to teach and then to learn, even in 
matters which are small and of no conse- 
quence, and much more in those which ere 
Divine and of such great importance. Nor, 
again, is it proper to the present occasion to 
explain and disentangle the difficulties of 

careful consideration than our present purpose 

will allow. Such then, to sum up, is our 
teaching. I have entered into these details, 

with no intention of contending against the 
adversaries: for I have already often, even if it 
be imperfectly, fought out the question with 
them: but in order that I might exhibit to 
you the character of my teaching, that you 
might see whether T have not a share in the 
defence of your own, and do not take my 
stand on the same side, and opposed to the 
same enemics as yourselves. 

& Deut xxiiie'3. 

19. You have now, my friends, heard the 
defence of my presence here: if it be deserv- 
ing of praise, thanks are due for it to God, 
and to you who called me; if it has fallen 
below your expectation, I give thanks even on 
this behalf. For Lam assured that it has not 
been altogether deserving of censure, and am 
confident that you also admit this. Have we 
at all made a gain¢ of this people? Have we 
consulted at all our own interests, as I see is 
most often the case? Have we caused any 
vexation to the Church? ‘Lo others possibly, 
with whose idea that they had gained judg- 
ment against us by default, we have joined 
issue 1n Our argument; but in no wise, as far 
as I am aware, to you. Ihave taken no ox 
of yours,® says the great Samuel, in his conten- 
tion against Isracl on the subject of the king, 
nor any propitiation for your souls, the Lord 
is witness among you, nor this, nor that, pro- 
ceeding at greater length, that I may not 

count up every particular ; but I have kept the | 

priesthood pure and unalloyed. And if I 
have loved power, or the height of a throne, 
or to tread Kings’ courts, may I never possess 
any distinction, or if I gain it, may I be 
hurled from it. 

20. What then do I mean? I am no pro- 
attained to so high a degree of virtue. Give 
me the reward of my labours. What reward ? 

would suppose, but that which it is safe for me 
to seek. Give me a respite from my long 
labours ; give honour to my foreign service ; 
elect another in my place, the one who is be- 

who is clean of hands, someone who is not 
unskilled in voice, someone who is able to 
gratify you on all points, and share with you 
the ecclesiastical cares ; for this is especially 
the time for such. But behold, I pray you, 
the condition of this body, so drained by time, 
by disease, by toil. What need have you of a 
timid and unmanly old man, who is, so to 
speak, dying day by day, not only in body, 
but even in powers of mind, who finds it 
difficult to enter into these details before you? 
Disobey not the voice of your teacher: for 
indeed you have never yet disobeyed it. I 
am weary of being charged with my gentle- 
ness. I am weary of being assailed in words 
and in envy by enemies, and by our own. 
Some aim at my breast, and are less success- 
ful in their effort, for an open enemy can be 
guarded against. Others lie in wait for my 

G2: Corian, B x Kings xii, 2. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

back, and give greater pain, for the unsus- 
pected blow is the more fatal. If again I have 
been a pilot, I have been one of the most 
skilful; the sea has been boisterous around us, 
boiling about the ship, and there has been con- 
siderable uproar among the passengers, who 
have always been fighting about something or 
another, and roaring against one another and 
the waves. What a strugele I have had, 
seated at the helm, contending alike with the 
sea and the passengers, to bring the vessel sate 
to land through this double storm? Had they 
in every way supported me, safety would have 
been hardly won, and when they were opposed 
to me, how has it been possible to avoid mak- 
ing shipwreck ? 

21. What more need be said? But how 
can I bear this holy war? For there has 
been said to be a holy, as well asa Persian, 
war.* How shall I unite and join together 
the hostile occupants of sees, and hostile pas- 
tors, and the people broken up along with, 
and opposed to them, as if by some chasms 

caused by earthquakes between neighbour- 

ing and adjoining places; or as, in pesti- 
lential diseases, befalls servants and mem- 
bers of the family, when the sickness readily 

attacks in succession one after another; and 
ficient in virtue without reward, having not 

besides the very quarters of the globe are af- 
fected by the spirit of faction, so that East 

_and West are arrayed on opposite sides, and 
Not that which some, prone to any suspicion 

bid fair to be severed in opinion no less than 
in position. How long are parties to be mine 
and yours, the old and the new, the more 
rational and the more spiritual, the more 

~noble and the more ignoble, the more and the 
ing eagerly sought on your behalf, someone 

less numerous? I am ashamed of my old age, 
when, after being saved by Christ, I am called 
by the name of others. 

22.8 I cannot bear your horse races and 
theatres, and this rage for rivalry in expense 
and party spirit. We unharness, and harness 
ourselves on the other side, we neigh against 
each other, we almost beat the air, as they do, 
and fling the dust towards heaven, jike those 

which are excited; and under other masks 

satisfy our own rivalry, and become evil ar- 
biters of emulation, and senseless judges of 
affairs. ‘To-day sharing the same thrones and 
opinions, if our leaders thus carry us along ; 
to-morrow hostile alike in position and opin- 
ion, if the wind blows in the contrary direc- 
tion. Amid the variations of friendship and 
hatred, our names also vary : and what is most 

aA Holy War, That against the Phocians to avenge their sac- 

| rilege at Delphi. 

B § 22 is a comparison of Ecclesiastical partisanship to the emu- 
Jation and party spirit connected with the horse races in the amphi- 

| theatre, 

terrible, we are not ashamed to set forth con- 
trary doctrines to the same audience; nor are 
we constant to the same objects, being ren- 
dered different at different times by our con- 
tentiousness. They are like the ebb and flow 
of some narrow strait.¢ For as when the 
children are at play in the midst of the mar- 
ket place, it would be most disgracetul and 
unbecoming for us to leave our household 
business, and join them; for children’s toys 
are not becoming for old age : so, when others 
are contending, even if I am better informed 
than the majority, I could not allow my- 
self to be one of them, rather than, as I now 
do, enjoy the freedom of obscurity. For, be- 
sides all this, my feeling is that I do not, on 
most points, agree with the majority, and can- 
not bear to walk in the same way. Rash and 
stupid though it may be, such is my feeling. 
That which is pleasant to others causes pain 
to me, and I am pleased with what is painful 
to others. So that I should not be surprised 
if I were even imprisoned as a disagreeable 
man, and thought by most men to be out of my 
senses, as is said to have been the case with 
one of the Greek philosophers, whose modera- 
tion exposed him to the charge of madness, 
because he laughed at everything, since he saw 
that the objects of the eager pursuit of the ma- 
jority were ridiculous ; or even be thought full 
of new wine as were in later days the disciples 
of Christ, because they spoke with tongues,® 
since men knew not that it was the power of 
the Spirit, and not a distraction of mind. 

23. Now, consider the charges laid against 
us. You have been ruler of the church, it is 
said, for so long, and favoured by the course 
of time, and the influence of the sovereign, a 
most important matter. What change have 
we been able to notice? How many men 
have in days gone by used us outrageously ? 
What sufferings have we failed to undergo? 
Ill-usage ? Threats? Banishment ? Plunder ? 
Confiscation ?. The burning” of priests at sea ? 
The desecration of temples by the blood of 
the saints, till, instead of temples, they became 
charnel-houses ?. The public slaughter of aged 
Bishops, to speak more accurately, of Patri- 
archs ? The denial of access to every place 
in the case of the godly alone? In fact 
any kind of suffering which could be men- 
tioned >? And for which of these have we re- 
quited the wrongdoers? For the wheel of 
fortune gave us the power of rightly treating 
those who so treated us, and our persecutors 
ought to have received a lesson. Apart from 

a Narrow strait, lit. Euripus. B Acts il. 4. 
y Lhe burning, ete., cf. This was by order of Valens. 

tas Ak PARE WELL, 

393 

all other things, speaking only of our experi- 
ences, not to mention your own, have we 
not been persecuted, maltreated, driven from 
churches, houses, and, most terrible of all, 
even from the deserts? Have we not had to 
endure an enraged people, insolent governors, 
the disregard of Emperors and their decrees ? 
What was the result ? We became stronger, and 
our persecutors took to flight. That was actually 
the case. The power to requite them seemed 
to me a sufficient vengeance on those who 
had wronged us. These men thought other- 
wise ; for they are exceedingly exact and just 
in requiting: and accordingly they demand 4 
what the state of things permits. What gov- 
ernor, they say, has been fined 2? What popu- 
lace chastised? What ringleaders of the pop- 
ulace? What fear of ourselves have we been 
able to inspire for the future ? 

24. Perhaps® we may be reproached, as we 
have been before, with the exquisite character 
of our table, the splendour of our apparel, the 
officers who precede us, our haughtiness to 
those who meet us. I was not aware that we 
ought to rival the consuls, the governors, the 
most illustrious generals, who have no oppor- 
tunity of lavishing their incomes; or that our 
belly ought to hunger for the enjoyment of 
the goods of the poor, and to expend their 
necessaries on superfluities, and belch forth 
over thealtars. I did not know that we ought 
to ride on splendid horses, and drive in mag- 
nificent carriages, and be preceded by a pro- 
cession and surrounded by applause, and have 
everyone make way for us, as if we were wild 
beasts, and open out a passage so that our ap- 
proach might be seen afar. If these sufferings 
have been endured, they have now passed 
away : Forgive me this wrong.Y Elect an- 
other who will please the majority: and 
give me my desert, my country life, and my 
God, Whom alone I may have to please, and 
shall please by my simple life. It is a painful 
thing to be deprived of speeches and confer- 
ences, and public gatherings, and applause 
like that which now lends wings to my 
thoughts, and relatives, and friends and hon- 
ours, and the beauty and grandeur of the city, 
and its brilliancy which dazzles those who 
look at the surface without investigating the 
inner nature of things ; but yet not so pain- 
ful as being clamoured against and besmirched 
amid public disturbances and agitations, which 
trim their sails to the popular breeze. For 
they seek not for priests, but for orators, not 

a Demand. After all these persecutions, some thought S. 
Gregory ought to have used his influence with Theodosius to re- 
quite or punish the former persecutors of the orthodox. 

B Perhaps, an ironical passage. V2 GOre Xitel: 

394 

for stewards of souls, but for treasurers of | 
money, not jor pure offerers of the sacrifice, 
but for powerful patrons. I will say a word | 
in their deience: we have thus trained them, 
by becoming all things to all men,# whether to — 
save or destroy all, | know not. 

25. What say you? Are you persuaded, 
have you been overcome hy my words? Or 
must I use stronger terms in order to persuade 
you? Yea by the ‘Trinity Itself, Whom you 
and { alike worship, by our common hope, | 
and for the sake of the unity of this people, 
grant me this favour; dismiss me with your 
prayers 3 let this be the proclamation of ny | 
contest ; give me my certificate of retirement, 
as sovereigns do to their soldiers ; and, if you 
will, with a favourable testimony, that I may | 
enjoy the honour of it; if not, just as you. 
please ; this will make no difference to me, un-— 
til Godsces what my case really is. What suc- 
cessor then shall we elect? God will pro-— 
vide Himself ® a shepherd for the office, as He © 
once provided a lamb for a burnt-offering. I 
only make this further request,—let him be | 
one who is the object of envy, not the object | 
of pity ; not one who yields everything to all, | 
but one who can on some points offer resist- | 
ance for the sake of what is best: for though 
the one is most pleasant, the other is most 
profitable. So do you prepare for me your 
addresses of dismissal; 1 will now bid you. 
farewell. 

26. Farewell my Anastasia,’ whose name 
is redolent of piety: for thou hast raised up 
for us the doctrine which was in contempt: 
farewell, scene of our common victory, 
modern Shiloh,é where the tabernacle was 
first fixed, after being carried about in its | 
wanderings for forty years in the wilderness. 
Farewell likewise, grand and renowned tem- 
ple, our new inheritance, whose greatness is 
now due to the Word, which once wast a 
Jebus,* and hast now been made by us a Jeru- | 
salem. larewell, all ye others, inferior only to— 
this in beauty, scattered through the various | 
parts of the city, like so many links, uniting | 
together each your own neighbourhood, which | 
have been filled with worshippers of whose | 
existence we had despaired, not by me, in- 
my weakness, but by the grace which was 
with me.§ Farewell, ye Apostles,” noble set- 
tlers here, my masters in the strife; if I have 

a 1 Cor. ix. 22. B Gen. xxii. 8. 

y <lmastasia. The little church ‘tof the Resurrection” in 
which the orthodox Christians worshipped with S. Gregory at 
pet on his arrival, while the churches of the city were held by the 
Aeretics. 

6 Josh. xviii, 4. € 4 Chron, xi: 4. x Cor, xy. 10. 

n clfostles, The Church of the Holy Apostles, to which Con- 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

- are in the hands of God. 

stantius translated the relics of SS. Andrew, Luke and Timothy. 

not often kept festival with you, it has been 
possibly due to the Satan¢ which I, like S. 
Paul,® who was one of you, carry about in my 
body for my own profit, and which is the 
cause of my now leaving you. Farewell, my 
throne, envied and perilous height ; farewell 
assembly of high priests, honoured by the 
dignity and age of its priests, and all ¥e 
others ministers of God round the holy table, 
drawing nigh to the God Who. draws high 
to you.¥ T’arewell, choirs of Nazarites, har- 

_ monies of the Psalter, night-long stations, ven- 

erable virgins, decorous matrons, gatherings 
of widows and orphans, and ye eyes of the 

poor, turned towards God and towards me. 

Farewell, hospitable and Christ-loyed dwell- 
ings, helpers of my infirmity, Farewell, ye 
lovers of my discourses, in your eagerness 
and concourse, ye pencils seen and unseen, 
and thou balustrade, pressed upon by those who 
thrust themselves forward to hear the word. 
Farewell, Emperors, and palace, and minis- 
ters and household of the Emperor, whether 
faithful or not to him, I know not, but 
for the most part, unfaithful to God. Clap 
your hands, shout aloud, extol your orator 
to the skies. ‘This pestilent and garrulous 
tongue has ceased to speak to you. ‘Though 
it will not utterly cease to speak; for it will 
fight with hand and ink: but for the present 
we have ceased to speak. 

27. Varewell, mighty Christ-loving city 
I will testify to the truth, though thy zeal be 
not according to knowledge.® Our separation 
renders us more kindly. Approach the truth: 
be converted at this late hour. Honour God 
more than you have been wont to do. It is 
no disgrace to change, while it is fatal to 
cling to evil. Farewell, East and West, for 
whom and against whom I have had to fight ; 
He is witness, Who will give you peace, if 
but a few would imitate my retirement. For 
those who resign their thrones will not also 
lose God, but will have the seat on high, 
which is far more exalted and secure. Last 
of all, and most of all, I will cry,—farewell 
ye Angels, guardians of this church, and of 
my presence and pilgrimage, since our affairs 
Farewell, O Trin- 
ity, my meditation, and my glory. Mayest 
Thou be preserved by those who are here, 
and preserve them, my people: for they are 
mine, eyen if I have my place assigned else- 
where ; and may I learn that Thou art ever 
extolled and glorified in word and conduct. 

a Satan, Z.ec., ** Thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan *—in 
S. Gregory’s case serious ill health. 

B Cor. xvii. 7. y 8S. James iv. 8, 6 Rom. x. 2. 

PE ANE GAMICIC ON -o. (Bor. 

My children, keep, I pray you, that which 
is committed to your trust.¢ Remember my 
stonings.B ‘The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with you all. Amen. 

INTRODUCTION TO ORATION XLIII. 
THe Panrcyric on S. Bast... 

S. Basi died January 1, a.p. 379. A se- 
rious illness, in addition to other causes, pre- 
vented S$. Gregory from being present at his 
funeral (Epist. 79). Benoit holds that an 
expression (Epitaph, cxix. 38) in which S. 
Gregory says that his ‘lips are fettered’’ 
proves that he was still in retirement at Seleu- 
cia. ‘This is an unwarranted deduction. In 
this Oration, § 2, the Saint, alluding to his 

| powers of human eloquence. 

illness in disparaging terms, alleges his la-_ 

bours at Constantinople as a more pressing 
reason for his absence: and says that he un- 

dertook the task according to the judgment — 

of S. Basil. This implies that S. Gregory 
went to Constantinople before the death of 
S. Basil, or that he had then been influenced 
by his friend’s advice and was on the point of 
setting out—more probably the former, as we 
may be sure that, if 5S. Gregory had been still 
at Seleucia, no reason but physical incapacity 
would have kept him from his friend’s side. 
His pressing duties at Constantinople and the 
difficulties of the long journey were the ‘¢ other 
causes ’’ of his letter to S. Gregory of Nyssa: 
and we know that he suffered from serious ill- 
ness at Constantinople (Carm. xi. 887. Orat. 
xxill. 1). S. Gregory left Constantinople in 
June, A.p. 381, and ‘Tillemont places the date 
of this Oration soon after his return to Nazi- 
anzus. Benoit thinks that it was probably 
delivered on the anniversary of S. Basil’s 
death. ‘Phe Oration, as all critics are agreed, 
is one of great power and beauty. Its length 

395 
quite as proud as any other man of his own, 
should himself now furnish me with the grand- 
est subject which has ever fallen to the lot of 
an orator. lor I think that if anyone de- 
sired, in making trial of his powers of elo- 
quence, to test them by the standard of that 
one of all his subjects which he preferred (as 

_ painters do with epoch-making pictures), he 

would choose that which stood first of all 
others, but would set aside this as beyond the 
So great a task 
is the praise of such a man, not only to me, 
who have long ago laid aside all thought of 
emulation, but even to those who live for elo- 
quence, and whose sole object is the gaining 
of glory by subjects like this. Such is my 
opinion, and, as I persuade myself, with perfect 
justice. But I know not what subject I can 
treat with eloquence, if not this ; or what great- 
er favour I can do to myself, to the admirers 
of virtue, or to eloquence itself, than express 
our admiration for this man. To me it is 
the discharge of a most sacred debt. And 

our speech is a debt beyond all others due to 

those who have been gifted, in particular, 
with powers of speech. ‘To the admirers of 

_ virtue a discourse is at once a pleasure and an 

incentive to virtue. 

lor when ¢ I have learned 
the praises of men, I have a distinct idea of 
their progress; now, there is none of us all, 
within whose power it is not to attain to any 
point whatsoever in that progress. As for 
eloquence itself, in either case, all must go 
well with it. For, if the discourse be almost 
worthy of its subject—eloquence will have 
given an exhibition of its power; if it fall far 
short of it, as must be the case when the 
praises of Basil are being set forth, by an 

actual demonstration of its incapacity, it will 

(62 pages folio), the physical weakness of the | 

speaker, and the limits of the endurance of 
even an interested audience, incline us to sup- 
pose that it was not spoken in its present 
form. We cannot well set aside expressions 
which clearly point to actual delivery, but it 
may have been amplified later. 

FUNERAL ORATION ON THE GREAT S, BASIL, 
BisHor OF CAESAREA IN CAPPADOCIA. 

t. It has then been ordained that the great 
Basil, who used so constantly to furnish me with 
subjects for my discourses, of which he was 

B Col. iv. 18. 

a1 Jim, vi. 20, 

have declared the superiority of the excel- 
lences of its subject to all expression in 
words, 

2. ‘These are the reasons which have urged 
me to speak, and to address myself to this con- 
test. And at my late appearance, long after 
his praises have been set forth by so many, 
who have publicly and privately done him 
honour, let no one be surprised. Yea, may 
I be pardoned by that divine soul, the object 
Of my constant reverence! And as, when he 
was amongst us, he constantly corrected me 
in many points, according to the rights of a 
friend and the still higher law; for I am not 
ashamed to say this, for he was a standard of 
virtue to us all; so now, looking down upon 
me from above, he will treat me with indul- 

et 

a For when, etc. This seems to be the sense of an admittedly 
difficult sentence. 

gence. I ask pardon too of any here who are 
among his warmest admirers, if indeed any- 
one can be warmer than another, and we 
are not all abreast in our zeal for his good 
fame. For it is not contempt which has 
caused me to fall short of what might have 
been expected of me: nor have L been so re- 
gardless of the claims of virtue or of friend- 

ship; nor have I thought that to praise him | 

befitted any other more than me. 
first reason was, that I shrunk from this task, 
for I will say the truth, as priests * do, who 
approach their sacred duties before being 
cleansed both in voice and mind. In the 
second place, I remind you, though you know 
it well, of the task & in which I was engaged 
on behalf of the true doctrine, which had 
been properly forced upon me, and had carried 
me from home, according, as I suppose, to the 
will of God, and certainly according to the 
judgment of our noble champion of the truth, 
the breath of whose life was pious doctrine 
alone, such as promotes the salvation of the 
whole world. As for my bodily health, I 
ought not, perhaps, to dare to mention it, 
when my subject is aman so doughty in his 
conquest of the body, even before his removal 
hence, and who maintained that no powers of 
the soul should suffer hindrance from this our 
fetter.Y So much for my defence. I do not 
think I need labour it further, in speaking of 
him to you who know so clearly my affairs. 
I must now proceed with my eulogy, com- 
mending myself to his God, in order that my 
commendations may not prove an insult to 
the man, and that I may not lag far behind all 

{ 
No! my | 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

are many others concerned with this my na- 
tive land, of illustrious men of Cappadocia, 
renowned for its youthful progeny,* no less 
than for its horses. Accordingly we match 
with his father’s family that of his mother. 
What family owns more numerous, or more 
illustrious generals and governors, or court 
officials, or again, men of wealth, and lofty 

thrones, and public honours, and oratori- 
cal renown? If it were permitted me to 

' wish to mention them, I would make noth- 

others ; even though we all equally fall as far | 

short of his due, as those who look upon the 
heavens or the rays of the Sun. 

3. Had I seen him to be proud of his 
birth, and the rights of birth, or any of those 
infinitely little objects of those whose eyes are 

on the ground, we should have had to inspect | 

a new catalogue of the Heroes. What details 
as to his ancestors might I not have laid under 
contribution! Nor would even history have 
had any advantage over me, since I claim 
this advantage, that his celebrity depends, not 
upon fiction or legend, but upon actual facts 
attested by many witnesses. On his father’s 
side Pontus offers to me many details, in no 
wise inferior to its wonders of old time, of 
which all history and poesy are full; ® there 

a As priests, or, more generally, ‘‘as those who approach our 
temples.” In the E. there were lavers at the entrance to the 
churches for the ablutions of intending worshippers. 

ing of the Pelopide and Cecropidx, the 
Alemzonids, the Atacidee, and Heracleide, 
and other most noble families: inasmuch as 
they, in default of public merit in their house, 
betake themselves to the region of uncertainty, 
claiming demigods and divinities, merely 
mythical personages, as the glory of their 
ancestors, whose most vaunted details are in- 
credible, and those which we can believe are 
an infamy. 

4. But since our subject is a man who has 
maintained that each man’s nobility is to he 
judged of according to his own worth, and 
that, as forms and colours, and likewise our 
most celebrated and most infamous horses, 
are tested by their own properties, so we too 
ought not to be depicted in borrowed plumes ; 
after mentioning one or two traits, which, 
though inherited from his ancestors, he made 
his own by his life, and which are specially 
likely to give pleasure to my hearers, I will 

then proceed to deal with the man himself. 

Different families and individuals have differ- 
ent points of distinction and interest, great 
or small, which, like a patrimony of longer or 
shorter descent, come down to posterity: the 
distinction of his family on either side was 
piety, which I now proceed to display. 

s. There was a persecution, the most fright- 
ful and severe of all; I mean, as you know, 
the persecution of Maximinus, which, follow- 
ing closely upon those which immediately 

preceded it, made them all seem gentle, by 
| . . . . 
its excessive audacity, and by its eagerness to 

win the crown of violence in impiety. 

B Of the tashy i.e., of restoring the orthodox faith in Constanti- | 

Fetter, i.e., the body. 

nople. 
& History and poesy, .g., Xenophon, Polybius, and Apollonius. 

It 
was overcome by many of our champions, 
who wrestled with it to the death, or well- 
nigh to the death, with only life enough left 
in them to survive their victory, and not 
pass away in the midst of the struggle; 
remaining to be trainers® in virtue, living 
witnesses, breathing trophies, silent exhor- 
tations, among whose numerous ranks were 

' found Basil’s paternal ancestors, upon whom, 

a Renowned, etc. Cf. Homer, Odrax. 272 : 
B Trainers, lit. “anointers”—those who physically and by 
their advice prepared athletes for their exercises. 

ep ay. 

in their practice of every form of piety, that | 

period bestowed many a fair garland. So 
prepared and determined were they to bear 
readily all those things on account of which 

Christ crowns those who have imitated His 

struggle on our behalf. 

6. But since their strife must needs be law- 
ful, and the law of martyrdom alike forbids 
us voluntarily to go to meet it (in considera- 
tion for the persecutors, and for the weak) or 
to shrink from it if it comes upon us ; for the 
former shows foolhardiness, the latter coward- 
ice; in this respect they paid due honour to 

the Lawgiver; but what was their device, or | 
rather, to what were they led by the Provi-— 

dence which guided them in all things ? 
‘They betook themselves to a thicket on the 
mountains of Pontus, of which there are many 
deep ones of considerable extent, with very 

few comrades of their flight, or attendants — 

upon their needs. Let others marvel at the 
length of time, for their flight was exceed- 
ingly prolonged, to about seven years, or a 

little more, and their mode of life, delicately | 
nurtured as they were, was straitened and _ 

unusual, as may be imagined, with the dis- 

comfort of its exposure to frost and heat and — 

rain: and the wilderness allowed no fellow- 
ship or converse with friends: a great trial 
to men accustomed to the attendance and 
honour of a numerous retinue. But I will 
proceed to speak of what is still greater and 
more extraordinary: nor will anyone fail to 
credit it, save those who, in their feeble and 

dangerous judgment, think little of perse- 

cutions and dangers for Christ’s sake. 

7. These noble men, suffering from the 
lapse of time, and feeling a distaste for ordin- 
ary food, felt a longing for something more 
appetising. They did not indeed speak as 

Israel did,* for they were not murmurers ® like — 

them, in their afflictions in the desert, after 
the escape from Egypt—that Egypt would 
have been better for them than the wilderness, 
in the bountiful supply of its flesh-pots, and 
other dainties which they had left behind 
them there, for the brickmaking and _ the clay 
seemed nothing to them then in their folly— 
but in a more pious and faithful manner. For 
why, said they, is it incredible that the God 
of wonders, who bountifully fedy in the wilder- 

ness his homeless and fugitive people, raining | 
bread upon them, and abounding in quails, © 

nourishing them not only with necessaries, 
but even with luxuries: that He, Who di- 
vided the sea,® and stayed the sun,¢ and parted 

B x Cor. x. 10. y Exod. xvi. 13. 

a. Exod. xvi. 2 et seq. <; 
EsOShe ihe Lon XK e125 

b, xiv. 21. 

VO Te VETS 10, 

THE PANEGYRIC “ON -5, BASIL, 

397 

the river, with all the other things that He 

has done; for under such circumstances the 
mind is wont to recur to history, and sing the 
praises of God’s many wonders: that bie, 
they went on, should feed us champions of 
piety with dainties to-day ? Many animals 
which have escaped the tables of the rich, 
have their lairs in these mountains, and many 
eatable birds fly over our longing heads, any 
of which can surely be caught at the mere fiat 
of ‘Thy will! At these words, their quarry 
lay before them, with food come of its own 
accord, a complete banquet prepared without 
effort, stags appearing all at once from some 
place in the hills. | How splendid they were! 
how fat! how ready for the slaughter! It 
/might almost be imagined that they were an- 
_noyed at not having been summoned earlier. 
Some of them made signs to draw others after 
_ them, the rest followed their lead. Who pure 
_ sued and drove them? No one. What riders ? 
| 

What kind of dogs, what barking, or cry, 
or young men who had occupied the exits 
according to the rules of the chase? They 
were the prisoners of prayer and righteous 
| petition. Who has known such a hunt among 
men of this, or any day ? 

8. O what a wonder! They were themselves 
stewards of the chase ; what they would, was 
caught by the mere will to do so; what was 
left, they sent away to the thickets, for another 
meal. The cooks were extemporised, the 
dinner exquisite, the guests were grateful for 
this wonderful foretaste of their hopes. And 
hence they grew more earnest in their struggle, 
in return for which they had received this bless- 
| ing. Such is my history. And do thou, my 
persecutor, in thy admiration for legends, tell 
_ of thy huntresses,* and Orions, and Actzons, 
_ those ill-fated hunters, and the hind substituted 

for the maiden, if any such thing rouses thee 
to emulation, and if we grant that this story 
is no legend. ‘The sequel of the tale is too 
disgraceful. For what is the benefit of the 
_ exchange, if a maiden is saved to be taught to 
-murder her guests, and learn to requite hu- 
manity with inhumanity ? Let this one in- 
stance, such as it is, chosen out of many, repre- 
sent the rest, as far as I am concerned. I 
have not related it to contribute to his repu- 
tation: for neither does the sea stand in need 
of the rivers which flow into it, many and 
great though they be, nor does the present 
subject of my praises need any contributions 
_to his fair fame. No! my object is to exhibit 
| a Huntresses, esp. Artemis, a passion for whom was fatal to 

Orion and Actwon, 
B The maiden, Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon. 

€ 

398 GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

the character of his ancestors, and the exam- 
ple before his eyes, which he so far excelled. 
or if other men find it a great additional ad- 

| 

anyone of old has been given by God for the 

common advantage, it was neither fitting that 
he should be born of other parents, nor that they 

vantage to receive somewhat of their honour | 

from their forefathers, it is a greater thing for 

him to have made such an addition to the | 
original stock that the stream seems to have | 
-my praises upon those whom 1 have commem- 

run uphill. 
g. ‘The union of his parents, cemented as it 

-orated, and proceed to treat of Basil himself, 

was by a community of virtue, no less than | 
by cohabitation, was notable for many rea- | 

sons, especially for generosity to the poor, for 
hospitality, for purity of soul as the result of 
self-discipline, for the dedication to God of a 
portion of their property, a matter not as yet 

so much cared for by most men, as it now | 

has grown to be, in consequence of such pre- 

vious examples, as have given distinction to | 

it, and for all those other points, which have 
been published throughout Pontus and Cap- 
padocia, to the satisfaction of many: in my 
opinion, however, their greatest claim to dis- 
tinction is the excellence of their children. 
Legend indeed has its instances of men whose 
children were many and beautiful, but it is 
practical experience which has presented to us 
these parents, whose own character, apart from 
that of their children, was sufficient for their 
fair fame, while the character of their children 
would have made them, even without their 
own eminence in virtue, to surpass all men 
by the excellence of their children. For the 
attainment of distinction by one or two of 
their offspring might be ascribed to their 
nature ; but when all are eminent, the honour 
is clearly due to those who brought them up. 

This is proved by the blessed roll of priests | 

and virgins, and of those who, when married, 
have allowed nothing in their union to hinder 
them from attaining an equal repute, and so 
have made the distinction between them to 
consist in the condition, rather than in the 
mode of their life. 

to. Who has not known Basil, our arch- 
bishop’s father, a great name to everyone, 
who attained a father’s prayer, if anyone, I 
will not say as no one, ever did? For he 
surpassed all in virtue, and was only prevented 
by his son from gaining the first prize. Who 
has not known Emmelia, whose name was a 
forecast of what she became, or else whose life 
was an exemplification of her name? For she 

had a right to the name which implies grace- | 

fulness, and occupied, to speak concisely, the 
same place among women, as her husband 
among men. So that, when it was decided that 
he, in whose honour we are met, should be given 
to men to submit to the bondage of nature, as 

should possess another son: and so the two 
things suitably concurred. I have now, in obe- 
dience to the Divine law which bids us to pay 
all honour to parents, bestowed the firstfruits of 

premising this, which I think will seem true 
to all who knew him, that we only need his 
own voice to pronounce his eulogium. lor 
he is at once a brilliant subject for praise, and 
the only one whose powers of speech make 
him worthy of treating it. Beauty indeed and 
strength and size, in which I see that most 

~men rejoice, I concede to anyone who will—- 

not that even in these points he was inferior 
to any of those men of small minds who busy 
themselves about the body, while he was still 
young, and had not yet reduced the flesh by 
austerity—but that I may avoid the fate of 
unskilful athletes, who waste their strength in 
yain efforts after minor objects, and so are 
worsted in the crucial struggle, whose results 
are victory and the distinction of the crown, 
The praise, then, which I shall claim for him is 
based upon grounds which no one, I think, 
will consider superfluous, or beyond the scope 
of my oration. 

11. I take it as admitted by men of sense, 
that the first of our advantages is education ; 
and not only this our more noble form of it, 
which disregards rhetorical ornaments and 
glory, and holds to salvation, and beauty in 
the objects of our contemplation: but even 
that external culture which many Christians 
ill-judgingly abhor, as treacherous and dan- 
gerous, and keeping us afar from God. lor 
as we ought not to neglect the heavens, and 
earth, and air, and all such things, because 
some have wrongly seized upon them, and 
honour God’s works instead of God: but to 
reap what advantage we can from them for our 
life and enjoyment, while we avoid their dan- 
gers ; not raising creation, as foolish men do, 
in revolt against the Creator, but from the 
works of nature apprehending the Worker,* 
and, as the divine apostle says, bringing into 
captivity every thought to Christ : 8 and again, 
as we know that neither fire, nor food, nor 
iron, nor any other of the elements, is of itself 
most useful, or most harmful, except accord- 
ing to the will of those who use it ; and as we 
have compounded healthful drugs from certain 
of the reptiles ; so from secular literature we 

a Rom. 1, 20, 25, B 2 Cor, x5. 

ee 

% 

have received principles of enquiry and specu- 
lation, while we have rejected their idolatry, 
terror, and pit of destruction. Nay, even 
these have aided us in our religion, by our 
perception of the contrast between what is 
worse and what is better, and by gaining 
strength for our doctrine from the weakness 
of theirs. We must not then dishonour educa- 
tion, because some men are pleased to do so, 
but rather suppose such men to be boorish 
and uneducated, desiring all men to be as 

they themselves are, in order to hide them- | 
selves in the general, and escape the detection — 

of their want of culture. But come now, 

admissions, let us contemplate the life of | 

Basil. 
12. In his earliest years he was swathed 
and fashioned, in that best and purest fashion- 

ing which the Divine David speaks of as pro- | 

ceeding day by day,* in contrast with that of 
the night, under his great father, acknow- 
ledged in those days by Pontus, as its common 
teacher of virtue. 
and reason grew and rose together, our illus- 

Under him then, as life. 

trious friend was educated : not boasting of a_ 

‘Thessalian mountain cave, as the workshop of 

his virtue, nor of some braggart Centaur,® the 
tutor of the heroes of his day: nor was he— 

taught under such tuition to shoot hares, and | 

run down fawns, or hunt stags, or excel in 
war, or in breaking colts, using the same per- 
son as teacher and horse at once; nor nour- 
ished on the fabulous marrows of stags and 
lions, but he was trained in general education, 
and practised in the worship of God, and, to 
speak concisely, led on by elementary instruc- 
tions to his future perfection. 

are successful in life or in letters only, while | 

deficient in the other, seem to me to differ in 
noting from one-eyed men, whose loss is 
great, but their deformity greater, both in 
their own eyes, and in those of others. 
While those who attain eminence in both 
alike, and are ambidextrous, both possess per- 

THe PANDGYRIC: ON S; BASIL. 

| make it 
For those who | 

_ the motion of a man in a lethargy. 
suit was philosophy, and breaking from the 

39 
outlines of perfection before the time of per- 
fection arrived. 

13. When sufficiently trained at home, as 
he ought to fall short in no form of excellence, 
and not be surpassed by the busy bee, which 
gathers what is most useful froin every flower, 
he set out for the city of Cwsarea,* to take his 
place in the schools there, I mean this illus- 
trious city of ours, for it was the guide and 
mistress of my studies, the metropolis of let- 
ters, no less than of the cities which she excels 
and reigns over: and if any one were to de- 
prive her of her literary power, he would 

rob her of her fairest and special distinction. 
and, after this sketch of our subject and these 

Other cities take pride in other ornaments, of 
ancient or of recent date, that they may have 
something to be described or to be seen. 
Letters form our distinction here, and are our 
badge, as if upon the field of arms or on the 
stage. His subsequent life let those detail 
who trained him, or enjoyed his training, as 
to what he was to his masters, what he was to 
his classmates, equalling the former, surpass- 
ing the latter in every form of culture, what 
renown he won in a short time from all, both 
of the common people, and of the leaders of 
the state ; by showing both a culture beyond 
his years, and a steadfastness of character be- 
yond his culture. An orator among orators, 
even before the chair of the rhetoricians,® a 
philosopher among philosophers, even before 
the doctrines of philosophers: highest of all a 
priest among Christians even before the priest- 
hood. So much deference was paid to him 
in every respect by all. Eloquence was his 
by-work, from which he culled enough to 
an assistance to him in Christian 
philosophy, since power of this kind is needed 
to set forth the objects of our contemplation. 

_ For a mind which cannot express itself is like 

His pur- 

world, and fellowship with God, by concern- 

ing himself, amid things below, with things 

_ above, and winning, 

fection, and pass their life with the blessedness | 
_ remain. 

of heaven. ‘This is what befell him, who had 

at home a model of virtue in well-doing, the — 
very sight of which made him excellent from | 

the first. As we see foals and calves skipping 
beside their mothers from their birth, so he 

too, running close beside his father in foal- | 
_ thence he was sent by God, and by his gener- 

like wantonness, without being left far behind 

in his lofty impulses toward virtue, or, if you | 

will, sketching out and showing traces of the 
future beauty of his virtue, and drawing the 
@ PShOXXXIN, 16: 

B Centanus, Alluding to Chiron, the tutor of Achilles, 

| 
| 

where all is unstable and 
fluctuating, the things which are stable and 

14. ‘Thence to Byzantium, the imperial city 
of the Kast, for it was distinguished by the emi- 
nence of its rhetorical and philosophic teach- 
ers, whose most valuable lessons he soon assimi- 
lated by the quickness and force of his powers : 

ous craving for culture, to Athens the home of 
letters. Athens, which has been to me, if to 

a Cesarca. the Cappadocian city, as seems plain from the con- 
text. Yet Villemont and Billius incline to think Ca:sarea in Pales- 
tine is meant. 

B Chair, ctc., Before he had studied rhetoric and philosophy. 

9 
“~ 

400 

any one, a city truly of gold, and the pa- 
troness of all that is good. 

to know Basil more perfectly, though he had 

For it brought me | 

not been unknown to me before; and in my | 

pursuit of letters, I attained to happiness ; 
and in another fashion had the same experi- 
ence as Saul, who, seeking his father’s asses, 
found a kingdom, and gained incidentally 
what was of more importance than the object 
which he had in view. Hitherto my course 
has been clear, leading me in my encomiums 
along a level and easy, in fact, a king’s high- 

way: henceforth I know not how to speak or | 

whither to turn: for my task is becoming ar- 
duous. For here I am anxious, and seize 
this opportunity to add from my own experl- 
ence somewhat to my speech, and to dwell a 
little upon the recital of the causes and cir- 
cumstances which originated our friendship, 
or to speak more strictly, our unity of life and 
nature. For as our eyes are not ready to 
turn from attractive objects, and, if we violent- 
ly tear them away, are wont to return to 
them again; so do we linger in our descrip- 
tion of what is most sweet to us. 
of the difficulty of the undertaking. I will 
try, however, to use all possible moderation. 
And if Iam at all overpowered by my regret, 
pardon this most righteous of all feelings, the 
absence of which would be a great loss, in the 
eyes of men of feeling. 

1s. We were contained by Athens, like two | 

Lam afraid | 

branches of some river-stream, for after leaving — 
according to the boorishness or refinement of 

the common fountain of our fatherland, we had 
been separated in our varying pursuit of cul- 
ture, and were now again united by the im- 
pulsion of God no less than by our own 
agreement. I preceded him by a little, but 
he soon followed me, to be welcomed with 
great and brilliant hope. For he was versed 

was a great thing for either of us to outstrip 
the other in the attainment of some object of 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

drive in their seats, they beat the air, (instead 
of the horses) with their fingers as whips, they 
yoke and unyoke the horses, though they are 
none of theirs: they readily exchange with 

' one another drivers, horses, positions, leaders : 

and who are they who do this? Often poor 
and needy fellows, without the means of sup- 
port for a single day. ‘This is just how the 
students feel in regard to their own tutors, 
and their rivals, in their eagerness to increase 
their own numbers and thereby enrich them. 
The matter is absolutely absurd and silly. 
Cities, roads, harbours, mountain tops, coast- 
lines, are seized upon—in short, every part of 
Attica, or of the rest of Greece, with most of 
the inhabitants; for even these they have 
divided between the rival parties. 

16. Whenever any newcomer arrives, and 
falls into the hands of those who seize upon 
him, either by force or willingly, they ob- 
serve this Attic law, of combined jest and 
earnest. He is first conducted to the house 
of one of those who were the first to receive 
him, or of his friends, or kinsmen, or country- 
men, or of those who are eminent in debating 
power, and purveyors of arguments, and there- 
fore especially honoured among them ; and their 
reward consists in the gain of adherents. He is 
next subjected to the raillery of any one who 
will, with the intention I suppose, of check- 
ing the conceit of the newcomers, and reduc- 
ing them to subjection at once. The raillery 
is of a more insolent or argumentative kind, 

the railer; and the performance, which seems 

_yery fearful and brutal to those who do not 
know it, is to those who have experienced it 

very pleasant and humane: for its threats are 
feigned rather than real. Next, he is con- 

_ ducted in procession through the market place 
in many languages, before his arrival, and it» 

our study. And I may well add, as a seasoning 
’ oe 

to my speech, a short narrative, which will be 
4 reminder to those who know it, a source of 
information to those who do not. 
young men at Athens in their folly are mad 

Most of the | 

1 

after rhetorical skill—not only those who are | 
ignobly born and unknown, but even the noble | 

and illustrious, in the general mass of young 
men difficult to keep under control. 
are just like men devoted to horses and exhi- 
bitions, as we see, at the horse-races ; they 
leap,® they shout, raise clouds of dust, they 

at Sam.ix., 8: 

B They leap, etc. This passage refers to the spectators who 
unite in sympathy with, and imitate as far as possible, in their ex- 
citement. the actions of, those who drive the chariots in the races. 

They 

to the bath. The procession is formed by 
those who are charged with it in the young 
man’s honour, who arrange themselves in two 
ranks separated by an interval, and precede 
him to the bath. But when they have ap- 
proached it, they shout and leap wildly, as if 
possessed, shouting that they must not ad- 
vance, but stay, since the bath will not admit 
them; and at the same time frighten the 
youth by furiously knocking at the doors: 
then allowing him to enter, they now present 
him with his freedom, and receive him after 
the bath as an equal, and one of themselves. 
This they consider the most pleasant part of 
the ceremony, as being a speedy exchange 
and relief from annoyances. On this occasion 
I not only refused to put to shame my friend 
the great Basil, out of respect for the gravity of 

Ds PANEGYRIG ONS. BASTE, 

401 

his character, and the ripeness of his reasoning — 
powers, but also persuaded all the rest of the | 

students to treat him likewise, who happencd 
not to know him. lor he was from the first 
respected by most of them, his reputation 
having preceded him. The result was that 
he was the only one to escape the general 
rule, and be accorded a greater honour than 
belongs to a freshman’s position. 

17. ‘This was the prelude of our friendship. 
This was the kindling spark of our union: 
thus we felt the wound of mutual love. Then 
something of this kind happened, for | think 
it right not to omit even this. I find the 
Armenians to be not a simple race, but very 
crafty and cunning. At this time some of 
his special comrades and friends, who had 
been intimate with him even in the early 
days of his father’s instruction, for they were 
members of his school, came up to him under 
the guise of friendship, but with envious, and 
not kindly intent, and put to him questions 
of a disputatious rather than rational kind, 
trying to overwhelm him at the first onset, 
having known his original natural endow- 

18. ‘Their efforts having thus proved fruit- 
less, while they severely blamed their own 
rashness, they cherished such annoyance 
against me that it broke out into open hos- 
tility, and a charge of treachery, not only 
to them, but to Athens herself: jmasmuch 
as they had been confuted and put to shame 

-at the first onset, by a single student, who 

ments, and unable to brook the honour he | 

had then received. For they thought it a 
strange thing that they who had put on their 
gowns, and been exercised in shouting, should 
not get the better of one who was a stranger 
and a novice. I also, in my vain love for 
Athens, and trusting to their professions with- 
out perceiving their envy, when they were 
giving way, and turning their backs, since I 
was indignant that in their persons the repu- 
tation of Athens should be destroyed, and so 
speedily put to shame, supported the young 
men, and restored the argument; and by the 
aid of my additional weight, for in such cases 
a small addition makes all the difference, and, 
as the poet says, ‘made equal their heads in 
the fray.’?* But, when I perceived the secret 
motive of the dispute, which could no longer 
be kept under, and was at last clearly exposed, 
I at once drew back, and retired from their 
ranks, to range myself on his side, and made 
the victory decisive. He was at once de- 
lighted at what had happened, for his sagacity 

was remarkable, and being filled with zeal, to — 

describe him fully in Homer’s language, he 
pursued in confusion® with argument those 
valiant youths, and, smiting them with syllo- 

gisms, only ceased when they were utterly 

routed, and he had distinctly won the hon- 
ours due to his power. Thus was kindled 
again, no longer a spark, but a manifest and 
conspicuous blaze of friendship. 

@ Homer II. xi. 72. B Ib, xi. 496. 

had not even had time to gain confidence. 
Ie moreover, according to that human feel- 
ing, Which makes us, when we have all at 
once attained to the high hopes which we 
have cherished, look upon their results as in- 
ferior to our expectation, he, | say, was dis- 
pleased and annoyed, and could take no de- 
light in his arrival. He was seeking for what 
he had expected, and called Athens an empty 
happiness. I however tried to remove his an- 
n0yance, both by argumentative encounter, 
and by the enchantments of reasoning ; alleg- 
ing, as is true, that the disposition of a man 
cannot at once be detected, without a long 
time and more constant association, and that 
culture likewise is not made known to those 
who make trial of her, after a few efforts and 
ina short time. In this way I restored his 
cheerfulness, and by this mutual experience, 
he was the more closely united to me. 

tg. And when, as time went on, we 
acknowledged our mutual affection, and that 
philosophy* was our aim, we were all in all 
to one another, housemates, messmates, inti- 
mates, with one object in life, or an affection 
for each other ever growing warmer and 
stronger. Love for bodily attractions, since 
its objects are fleeting, is as fleeting as the 
flowers of spring. For the flame cannot sur- 
vive, when the fucl is exhausted, and departs 
along with that which kindles it, nor does de- 
sire abide, when its incentive wastes away. 
But love which is godly and under restraint, 
since its object is stable, not only is more 
lasting, but, the fuller its vision of beauty 
grows, the more closely does it bind to itself 
and to one another the hearts of those whose 
love has one and the same object. This is the 
law of our superhuman love. I feel that I am 
being unduly borne away, and I know not 
how to enter upon this point, yet I cannot 
restrain myself from describing it. For if | 
have omitted anything, it seems, immediately 
afterwards, of pressing importance, and of 
more consequence than what I had preferred 
to mention. And if any one would carry me 
tyrannically forward, I become like the polyps, 

~ which when they are being drageed from their 

holes, cling with their suckers to the rocks, 

a Philosephy, here, a truly Christian life. 

402 

and cannot be detached, until the last of these 
has had exerted upon it its necessary share of 
force. If then you give me leave, | have my 
request, if not 1 must take it from myself. 

20. Such were our feclings for each other, 
when we had thus supported, as Pindar® has 
it, our ‘well-built chamber with pillars of 
gold,’’ as we advanced under the united in- 
fluences of God’s grace and our own affec- 
tion. Oh! how can I mention these things 
without tears. 

We were impelled by equal hopes, in a pur- 
suit especially obnoxious to envy, that of let- 
ters. 
Was of service to us. 
to gain the first place for himself, but to yield 
it to the other; for we made each other’s 
reputation to be our own. We 
have one soul, inhabiting two bodies. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Yet envy we knew not, and emulation | 
We strugeled, not each 

| 
| 

seemed to | 
And | 

if we must not believe those whose doctrine is | 

«All things® are in all;’’ yet in our case it 

was worthy of belief, so did we live in and 
with each other. 
of us was virtue, and living for the hopes to 

The sole business of both | 

business and name—to be and to be called 
Christians—of which we thought more than 
Gyges® of the turning of his ring, if this is not 
a legend, on which depended his Lydian sov- 
ereignty: or than Midas® did of the gold 
through which he perished, in answer to his 
prayer that all he had might turn to gold— 
another Phrygian legend. For why should 
I speak of the arrow of the Hyperborean 
Abaris,Y or of the Argive Pegasus,® to whom 
flight through the air was not of such conse- 
quence as was to us our rising to God, through 
the help of, and with each other? Hurtful as 
Athens was to others in spiritual things, and 
this is of no slight consequence to the pious, 
for the city is richer in those evil riches—idols 

| —than the rest of Greece, and it is hard to 

avoid being carried along with their devotees 
and adherents, yet we, our minds being closed 
up and fortified against this, suffered no in- 
jury. On the contrary, strange as it may 
seem, we were thus the more confirmed in the 
faith, from our perception of their trickery 

-and unreality, which led us to despise these 

come, having retired from this world, before 

our actual departure hence. With a view to 
this, were directed all our life and actions, un- 
der the guidance of the commandment, as we 

sharpened upon each other our weapons of | 

virtue; and if this is not a great thing for me 

to say, being a rule and standard to each 

other, for the distinction between what was 
right and what was not. Our associates were 
not the most dissolute, but the most sober of 
our comrades ; not the most. pugnacious, but 
the most peaceable, whose intimacy was most 
profitable ; knowing that it is more easy to be 
tainted with vice, than to impart virtue; just 
as we can more readily be infected with a 
disease, than bestow health. Our most cher- 
ished studies were not the most pleasant, but 

the most excellent; this being one means of 

forming young minds in a virtuous or vicious 
mould. 

21. Two ways were known to us, the first 
of greater value, the second of smaller conse- 
quence: the one leading to our sacred build- 

ings and the teachers there, the other to secu- 

lar instructors. All others we left to those 
who would pursue them—to feasts, theatres, 
meetings, banquets. For nothing is in my 
opinion of value, save that which leads to vir- 
tue and to the improvement of its devotees. 
Different men have different names, derived 
from their fathers, their families, their pur- 
suits, their exploits: we had but one great 

a Olymp. Od. vi. 1. 
B AM things, etc., i.e. Empedocles and Anaxagoras. 

divinities in the very home of their worship. 
And if there is, or is believed to be, a river * 
flowing with fresh water through the sea, or 
an animal$ which can dance in fire, the con- 
sumer of all things, such were we among all 
our comrades. 

22. And, best of all, we were surrounded 
by a far from ignoble band, under his instruc- 
tion and guidance, and delighting in the same 
objects, as we ran on foot beside that Lydian 
car,” his own course and disposition: and 
so we became famous, not only among our 
own teachers and comrades, but even through- 
out Greece, and especially in the eyes of its 
most distinguished men. We even passed be- 
yond its boundaries, as was made clear by the 
evidence of many. For our instructors were 
known to all who knew Athens, and all who 
knew them, knew us, as the subject of conver- 

sation, being actually looked upon, or heard 

of by report, as an illustrious pair. Orestes 
and Pylades® were in their eyes nothing to 

a Gyges is said to have hada ring by means of which he could 
make himself invisible, and by thus using it was able to seize on 
the Kingdom of Lydia. 

B Afidas, said to have had the power granted of turning every- 

' thing he touched to gold. Accordingly, as this power took effect on 

his food, he died of hunger. 

y Abaris, a Hyperborean priest of Apollo, who was satd to have 
given him an arrow, on which he rode through the air. 

8 Pegasus, called Argive, because caught near to Argos, the 
winged horse, by the aid of which Bellerophon was said to have 
destroyed the Chimzra. 

e€ A river, etc. ‘The Alpheus. a river of Arcadia. 

C Animal. The salamander, a lizard said to be impervious to 
the action of fire. Plin. N. H. x. 67. 

n Lydian car, proverbial expression for anything whose speed 

' distances all competitors. 
| @ Orestes and Pylades, types of close comradeship in Greek 
| tragedies. 

_ Minotaur. 

us, or the sons of Molione,* the wonders of | 
the Homeric scroll, celebrated for their union | 
in misfortune, and their splendid driving, as | 
they shared in reins and whip alike. But I 

have been unawares betrayed into praising 

myself, in a manner I would not have allowed | 
in another. And it is no wonder that | 

gained here insome advantage from his friend- | 
ship, and that, as in life he aided me in virtue, ! 
so since his departure he has contributed to | 
my renown. But I must return to my proper 
course. 

23. Who possessed such a degree of the 
prudence of old age, even before his hair was 
gray? Since it is by this that Solomon de- 
fines old age.8 Who was so respectful to both 
old and young, not only of our contempo- 
raries, but even of those who long preceded | 
him? Who, owing to his character, was | 
less in need of education? Yet who, even 
with his character, was so imbued with learn- 
ing? What branch of learning did he not | 
traverse ; and that with unexampled success, 
passing through all, as no one else passed 
through any one of them: and attaining such 
eminence in each, as if it had been his sole 
study? The two great sources of power in 
the arts and sciences, ability and application, 
were in him equally combined. For, because 
of the pains he took, he had but little need 
of natural quickness, and his natural quickness 
made it unnecessary for him to take pains ; 
and such was the codperation and unity of | 
both, that it was hard to see for which of the 
two he was more remarkable. Who had such 
power in Rhetoric, which breathes with the 
might of fire, different as his disposition was | 
from that of rhetoricians? Who in Gram- 
mar, which perfects our tongues in Greek and 
compiles history, and presides over metres 
and legislates for poems? Who in Philos- 
ophy, that really lofty and high reaching 
science, whether practical and speculative, or 
in that part of it whose oppositions and 
struggles are concerned with logical demon- 
strations ; which is called Dialectic, and in 
which it was more difficult to elude his verbal 
toils, if need required, than to escape from 
the Labyrinths?® Of Astronomy, Geome- 
try, and numerical proportion he had such a 
grasp, that he could not be baffled by those 
who are clever in such sciences: excessive | 
application to them he despised, as useless to — 

a Sons of Molione, Eurytus and Cteatus. Hom. IIL. ii. 621. Their 
father was Actor. B Wisd. iv. 8. 
y Which breathes, a phrase used Hom. Il, vi. 182 of the | 
Chimera. 
§ Labyrinths, the mythical mazes of Crete, the home of the | 

| . a ° 
| ancl: his care of the sick, 

lamentations, embraces and tears. 

thing that men in distress could do. 

TE AN EGY RIC ON S: BASIL, 403 

those whose desire is godliness: so that it is 

_ possible to admire what he chose more than 

what he neglected, or what he neglected more 
than what he chose. Medicine, the result of 
philosophy and laboriousness, was rendercd 
necessary for him by his physical delicacy, 
Irom these begin- 
nings he attained to a mastery of the art, not 
only in its empirical and practical branches, 
but also in its theory and principles. But 
what are these, illustrious though they be, 

compared with the moral discipline of the 

man? ‘To those who have had experience of 
him, Minos and Rhadamanthus® were mere 
trifles, whom the Greeks thought worthy of 
the meadows of Asphodel and the Elysian 
plains, which are their representations of our 
Paradise, derived from those books of Moses 
which are also ours, for though their terms 

are different, this is what they refer to under 

other names. 
24. Such was the case, and his galleon 

_was laden with all the learning attainable by 

the nature of man; for beyond Cadiz # there 
is no passage. ‘There was left no other need 
but that of rising to a more perfect life, and 
grasping those hopes upon which we were 
agreed. ‘The day of our departure was at 
hand, with its attendant speeches of farewell, 
and of escort, its invitations to return, its 
For there 
is nothing so painful to any one, as is separa- 
tion from Athens and one another, to those 
who have been comrades there. On that oc- 
casion was seen a piteous spectacle, worthy 
of record. Around us were grouped our fel- 
low students and classmates and some of our 
teachers, protesting amid entreaties, violence, 
and persuasion, that, whatever happened, they 
would not let us go ; saying and doing every- 
And 
here I will bring an accusation against my- 
self, and also, daring though it be, against that 
divine and irreproachable soul. For he, by 
detailing the reasons of his anxiety to return 
home, was able to preyail over their desire to 
retain him, and they were compelled, though 

with reluctance, to agree to his departure. 
But I was left behind at Athens, partly, to 

say the truth, because I had been prevailed 
on—partly because he had betrayed me, hay- 
ing been persuaded to forsake and hand over 
to his captors one who refused to forsake him. 

_A thing incredible, before it happened. For 

a Minos and Rhadamanthus, Kings of Crete and Lycia, 
fabled to have been made judges in the lower world because of 
their justice when on earth. 

B Beyond Cadiz. The Atlantic Ocean beyond Cadiz was fe: 

| puted impassable by the ancients. 

404 

GREGORY “NAZIANZEN, 

it was like cutting one body into two, to the | 

destruction of either part, or the severance of 
two bullocks who have shared the same man- 
ger and the same yoke, amid pitiable bel- 
lowings after one another in protest against 
the separation. 
long duration, for I could not long bear to be 
seen in piteous plight, nor to have to account 
to every one for our separation: so, after a 
brief stay at Athens, my longing desire made 
me, like the horse in Homer, to burst the 
bonds of those who restrained me, and pranc- 
ing o’er the plains, rush to my mate. 

25. Upon our return, after a slight indul- 
gence to the world and the stage, sufficient to 

However, my loss was not of © 

— among us. 

eratify the general desire, not from any in- | 
clination to theatrical display, we soon be- — 

came independent, and, after being promoted 
from the rank of beardless boys to that of 

men, made bold advances along the road of | 
-also is Jeroboam, the slave and apostate. 

philosophy, for though no longer together, 
since envy would not allow this, we were 
united by our eager desire. ‘The city of 
Cesarea took possession of him, as a second 
founder and patron, but in course of time he 
was occasionally absent, as a matter of neces- 

sity due to our separation, and with a view to _ 

our determined course of philosophy. Duti- 
ful attendance on my aged parents, and a suc- 
cession of misfortunes kept me apart from him, 
perhaps without right or justice, but so it was. 
And to this cause I am inclined to ascribe all 
the inconsistency and difficulty which have be- 

I do not venture, nor is it just, to accuse them 
all. I approve the nautical custom, which 
first gives the oar to the future steersman, and 
afterward leads him to the stern, and entrusts 
him with the command, and seats him at the 
helm, only after a long course of striking the 
sea and observing the winds. As is the case 
again in military affairs: private, captain, 
general. ‘This order is the best and most ad- 
vantageous for their subordinates. And if it 
were so in our case, it would be of great ser- 
vice. But, as it is, there is a danger of the 
holiest of all offices being the most ridiculous 
For promotion depends not upon 
virtue, but upon villany ; and the sacred 
thrones fall not to the most worthy, but to the 
most powerful. Samuel, the seer into futu- 
rity, is among the prophets: but Saul, the re- 
jected one, is also there. Rehoboam, the 
son of Solomon, is among the kings, but so 

And there is not a physician, or a painter who 
has not first studied the nature of diseases, or 
mixed many colours, or practised drawing : 
but a prelate is easily found, without laborious 
training, with a reputation of recent date, 
being sown and springing up in a moment, as 
the legend * of the giants goes. We manu- 
facture those who are holy ina day, and bid 

- those to be wise, who have had no instruction, 

fallen my life, and the hindrances in the way 

of philosophy, which have been unworthy of 
my desire and purpose. But as for my fate, 
let it lead whither God pleases, only may its 
course be the better for his intercessions. 
regards himself, the manifold love of God to- 
ward man,* and His providential care for our 
race did, after shewing forth his merits under 

| 

As 

many intervening circumstances with ever | 

greater brilliancy, set him up as a conspicu- 

ous and celebrated light for the Church, by | 

advancing him to the holy thrones of the 
priesthood, to blaze forth, through the single 
city of Caesarea, to the whole world. And in 
what manner ? Not by precipitate advance- 
ment, nor by at once cleansing and making 
him wise, as is the wont of many present can- 
didates for preferment: but bestowing upon 
him the honour in the due order of spiritual 
advancement. 

26. For I do not praise the disorder and 
irregularity which sometimes exist among us, 
even in those who preside over the sanctuary. 

a Litsai; 4, 

and have contributed nothing before to their 
dignity, except the will. So one man is con- 
tent with an inferior position, and abides in 
his low estate, who is worthy of a lofty one, 
and has meditated much on the inspired 
words, and has reduced the flesh by many 
laws into subjection to the spirit: while the 
other haughtily takes precedence, and raises 
his eyebrow over his betters, and does not 
tremble at his position, nor is he appalled at 
the sight, seeing the disciplined man beneath 
him ; and wrongly supposes himself to be his 
superior in wisdom as well as in rank, having 
lost his senses under the influence of his posi- 
tion. 

27. Not so our great and illustrious Basil. 
In this grace, as in all others, he was a public 
example. For he first read to the people the 
sacred books, while already able to expound 
them, nor did he deem himself worthy of this 
rank® in the sanctuary, and thus proceeded to 
praise the Lord in the seat of the Presbyters, ¥ 
and next in that of the Bishops, attaining the 
office neither by stealth nor by violence, in- 

stead of seeking for the honour, being sought 

a The legend, i.e., of Cadmus who sowed at Thebes the 
dragon’s teeth from which sprung giants. 

B This rank, i.c., the office of Lector, or Reader. y Ps. Cvit, 32 

he: PANEGY KIC >ON oS, Baxotl. 405 

for by it, and receiving it not as a human 
favour, but as from God and divine. ‘The ac- 
count of his bishopric must be deferred ; over 
his subordinate ministry let us linger a while, 
for indeed it had almost escaped me, in the 
midst of my discourse. 

28. There arose a disagreement between 
him and his predecessor ¢ in the rule over this 
Church; its source and character it is best to 
pass over in silence, yet it arose. He was a 
man in other respects far from ignoble, and | 
admirable for his piety, as was proved by the 
persecution of that time, and the opposition | 
to him, yet his feeling against Basil was one 
to which men are liable. For Momus seizes | 
not only upon the common herd, but on the | 
best of men, so that it belongs to God alone | 
to be utterly uninfluenced by and proof against | 
such feelings. All the more eminent and wise | 
portion of the Church was roused against him, | 
if those are wiser than the majority who have | 

\ 
| 
| 
} 

separated themselves from the world and con- 
secrated their life toGod. I mean the Naza- 
rites® of our day, and those who devote them- _ 
selves to such pursuits. They were annoyed 
that their chief ¥ should be neglected, in- 
sulted, and rejected, and they ventured upon a 
most dangerous proceeding. They determined | 
to revolt and break off from the body of the | 
Church, which admits of no faction, severing 
along with themselves no small fraction of the 
people, both of the lower ranks, and of those — 
of position. ‘This was most easy, owing to 
three very strong reasons. In the first place, 
the man was held in repute, beyond any other, 
I think, of the philosophers of our time, and 
able, if he wished, to inspire with courage the | 
conspirators. Next, his opponent ® was sus- 
pected by the city, in consequence of the tu- 
mult which accompanied his institution, of - 
having obtained his preferment in an arbitrary — 
manner, not according to the laws and canons. 
Also there were present some of the bishops ¢ | 
of the West, drawing to themselves all the 
orthodox members of the Church. 

29. What then did our noble friend, the dis- 
ciple of the Peaceable One? It was not his 
habit to resist his traducers or partisans, nor | 
was it his part to fight, or rend the body of 
the Church, which was from other reasons the 
subject of attack, and hardly bestead, from _ 

a His predecessor, Fusebius, Archbishop of Czesarea. 

B Nazarites, i.e., the monks. y Their chicf, i.e. Basil. 
§ Hrs opponent, lit, the man who was vexing him,” te., Muse- 
rius. 

¢ Bishops. It is uncertain who these bishops were. Clemencet 
thinks they were Lucifer and Eusebius of Vercella. Dut a sepa- 
ration had ere this taken place between them in consequence. of 
Tucifer’s rash action at Antioch. Nor is it certain that Musebius | 
had not already returned to Ltaly. 

a great part of the Church. 
-honour the Father, by dishonouring His off- 

the great power of the heretics. With my ad- 
vice and earnest encouragement on the point, 
he set out from the place with me into Pontus, 
and presided over the abodes of contemplation 
there. He himself too founded one * worthy 
of mention, as he welcomed the desert to- 
gether with Elijah and John,® those professors 
of austerity ; thinking this to be more profit- 
able for him than to form any design in refer- 

ence to the present juncture unworthy of his 

philosophy, and to ruin in a time of storm the 
straight course which he was making, where 
the surges of disputation were lulled to acalm. 

| Yet wonderfully philosophic though his re- 

tirement was, we shall find his return still 
more wonderful. For thus it was. 

30. While we were thus engaged, there sud- 
denly arose a cloud full of hail, with destruc- 
tive roar, overwhelming every Church upon 

| which it burst and seized: an Emperor,’ most 

fond of gold and most hostile to Christ, in- 
fected with these two most serious diseases, 
insatiate avarice and blasphemy ; a persecu- 
tor in succession to the persecutor, and, in 

' succession to the apostate, not indeed an apos- 
tate, though no better to Christians, or rather, 

to the more devout and pure party of Chris- 
tians, who worship the Trinity, which I call 
the only true devotion and saving doctrine. 
For we do not measure out the Godhead into 
portions, nor banish from Itself by unnatural 
estrangements the one and unapproachable 
Nature; nor cure one evil by another, de- 

_stroying the godless confusion of Sabellius by 
amore impious severance and division ; which 
-was the error of Arius, whose name declares 

his madness, the disturber and destroyer of 
For he did not 

spring with his unequal degrees of Godhead. 
But we recognize one glory* of the Father, 
the equality of the Only-begotten ; and one 
glory of the Son, that of the Spirit. And we 
hold that, to subordinate any of the Three, is 
to destroy the whole. For we worship and 
acknowledge Them as Three in their proper- 
ties, but One in their Godhead. He how- 
ever had no such idea, being unable to loox 

a One, amonastery. The rule of S, Basil is widely observed to 
this day in Eastern monasteries. Cf. § 34. 

B Yohx, Saint John Baptist. y eln Emperor, Valens. 

6 Mfadness, cf. li. 37. Note. 

e Glory. ‘The word &é£a means both ‘ doctrine” and * glory.” 

C Properties. idiryntes. Petav. de Trin. iv. Proem. §2 gives 
other Greek equivalent terms. The Latin terms are ‘* xoffones” (5. 
Thom. Aq. Sumina. I. xxxit. qu. 2), Aroprtetates or relationes. 
They denote those relative ‘‘ attributes ad intra ” which distinguish 
the Persons, if they do not actually constitute the Personality of 
each of the Three Divine Persons. ‘They are five in number, Un- 
begottenness, Paternity, Filiation, active and passive Spiration. 
Perhaps the nearest English equivalent is * characteristic (or dis- 

. tinctive) relations.’"—Cf. Orat. sli. 15. 

406 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

up, but being debased by those who led him, 
he dared to debase along with himself even 

the Nature of the Godhead, and became a | 

wicked creature reducing Majesty to bondage, 
and aligning with creation the uncreated and 
timeless Nature. 

3r. Such was his mind, and with such im- 
piety he took the field against us. For we 
must consider it to be nothing else than a bar- 
baric inroad which, instead of destroying walls, 
cities and houses, and other things of little 
worth, made with hands and capable of res- 
toration, spent its ravages upon men’s souls. 

| 
| 

other, thrust away a third. 

A worthy army joined in his assault, the evil | 

rulers of the Churches, the bitter governors 
of his world-wide Empire. Some of the 
Churches they now held, some they were as- 
saulting, others they hoped to gain by the 
already exercised influence of the Emperor, 
and the violence which he threatened. But 
in their purpose of perverting our own, their 
confidence was specially based on the small- 
ness of mind of those whom I have mentioned, 
the inexperience of our prelate, and the in- 
firmities which prevailed among us. The 
struggle would be fierce: the zeal of numer- 
ous troops was far from ignoble, but their 
array was weak, from the want of a leader and 
strategist to contend for them with the might 
of the Word and of the Spirit. What then 
did this noble and magnanimous and truly 
Christ-loving soul? No need of many words 
to urge his presence and aid. 
he saw me on my mission, for the struggle on 

He became to 
some a stout wall and rampart,¢ to others an 
axe breaking the rock in pieces,? or a fire 
among the thorns,Y¥ as the divine Scripture 
says, easily destroying those fagots who were 
insulting the Godhead. And if his Barnabas, 

who speaks and records these things, was of 

service to Paul in the struggle, it is to Paul 
that thanks are due, for choosing and making 
him his comrade in the strife. 

33. ‘Thus the enemy failed, and, base men 
as they were, for the first time were then 
basely put to shame and worsted, learning not 
to be ready to despise the Cappadocians, of all 
men in the world, whose special qualities are 
firmness in the faith, and loyal devotion to 

the Trinity ; to Whom is due their unity and 

strength, and from Whom they receive an 
even greater and stronger assistance than they 
are able to give. Basil’s next business and 
purpose was to conciliate the prelate, to allay 
suspicion, to persuade all men that the irri- 

tation which had been felt was due to the 

At once when | 

behalf of the faith was common to us both, he | 

yielded to my entreaty ; and decided by a 

most excellent distinction, based on spiritual | 
reasons, that the time for punctiliousness (if | 
indeed we may give way to such feelings at | 

all) is a time of security, but that forbearance 
is required in the hour of necessity. He 
immediately returned with me from Pontus, 
and as a zealous volunteer took his place in 
the fight for the endangered truth, and de- 
voted himself to the service of his mother, the 
Church. 

32. Did then his actual efforts fall short of 
his preliminary zeal? Were they directed by 
courage, but not by prudence, or by skill, 
while he shrank from danger? Or, in spite 
of their unexampled perfection on all these 
points, was there left in him some trace of ir- 
ritation? Far from it. He was at once com- 
pletely reconciled, and took part in every 
plan and effort. He removed all the thorns 
and stumbling blocks which were in our way, 
upon which the enemy relied in their attack 
upon us. He took hold of one, grasped an- 

temptation and effort of the Evil one, in his 
envy of virtuous concord: carefully comply- 
ing with the laws of obedience and spiritual 
order. Accordingly he visited him, with in- 
struction and advice. While obedient to his 
wishes, he was everything to him, a good 
counsellor, a skilful assistant, an expounder of 
the Divine Will, a guide of conduct, a staff 
for his old age, a support of the faith, most 
trusty of those within, most practical of those 
without, ina word, as much inclined to good- 
will, as he had been thought to hostility. 
And so the power of the Church came into 
his hands almost, if not quite, to an equal de- 
gree with the occupant of the see. For in 
return for his good-will, he was requited with 
authority. And their harmony and combina- 
tion of power was wonderful. ‘Phe one was 
the leader of the people, the other of their 
leader, like a lion-keeper, skilfully soothing 
the possessor of power. For, having been re- 
cently installed in the see, and still somewhat 
under the influence of the world, and not yet 
furnished with the things of the Spirit, in the 
midst of the eddying tide of enemies assault- 
ing the Church, he was in need of some one 
to take him by the hand and support him. 
Accordingly he accepted the alliance, and 
imagined himself the conqueror of one who 
had conquered him. 

34. Of his care for and protection of the 
Church, there are many other tokens ; his 
boldness towards the governors and other 

o Jer, i, 18. B Ib, xxiii, 29. y Ps. cxviti, 12, 

ie 

most powerful men in the city: the decisions 
of disputes, accepted without hesitation, and 
made effective by his simple word, his in- 
clination being held to be decisive: his sup- 
port of the needy, most of them in spiritual, 
not a few also in physical distress: for this 
also often influences the soul and reduces it to 

Tae AN EGY RIG CON So BASIE. 

| tables. 

‘These were the works of Moses and 

~ Khijah, and my God, from Whom they too de- 

subjection by its kindness ; the support of the | 

poor, the entertainment of strangers, the care 
of maidens; legislation * written and unwrit- 
ten for the monastic life: arrangements of 
prayers,? adornments of the sanctuary, and 
other ways in which the true man of God, 
working for God, would benefit the people: 
one being especially important and note- 
worthy. There was a famine, the most 
severe one ever recorded. ‘The city was in 
distress, and there was no source of assistance, 
or relief for the calamity. For maritime 
cities are able to bear such times of need 
without difficulty, by an exchange of their 
own products for what is imported: but an 
inland city like ours can neither turn its 
superfluity to profit, nor supply its need, by 
either disposing of what we have, or import- 
ing what we have not: but the hardest part 
of all such distress is, the insensibility and in- 
satiability of those who possess supplies. For 
they watch their opportunities, and turn the 
distress to profit, and thrive upon misfortune : 
heeding not that he who shows mercy to the 
poor, lendeth to the Lord,’ nor that he that 
withholdeth corn, the people shall curse 
him: ® nor any other of the promises to the 
philanthropic, and threats against the inhu- 
man. But they are too insatiate, in their ill- 
judged policy ; for while they shut up their 
bowels against their fellows, they shut up 
those of God against themselves, forgetting 
that their need of Him is greater than others’ 
need of them. Such are the buyers and 
sellers of corn, who neither respect their fel- 
lows, nor are thankful to God, from Whom 

straitened. 

35. He indeed could neither 
from heaven by prayer,é to nourish an es- 
caped people in the wilderness,’ nor supply 
fountains of food without cost from the depth 
of vessels which are filled by being emptied,” 
and so, by an amazing return for her hospital- 
ity, support one who supported him; nor 
feed thousands of men with five loaves whose 
very fragments were a further supply for many 

a Leoisiertion. - ‘Ch. S26, 
B Prayers. Yhe liurgy of S. Basil together with that of S. 

Chrysostom are still the authorized liturgies of the [astern | 

Church. : 
¢ Exod. xvi. 15. 

b. xi. 26, 

9 1 Kings xvii. 14. 

y Prov. x1x. 17. - 
GPs. Ixxvillw24, 

rived their power. Perhaps also they were 
characteristic of ‘their tinte and its circum- 
stances: since signs are for unbelievers not for 
those who believe.? But he did devise and exe- 
cute with the same faith things which corre- 
spond to them, and tend in the same direction. 
lor by his word and advice he opened the 

stores of those who possessed them, and so, 

according to the Scripture dealt food to the 
hungry,” and satisfied the poor with bread,é 
and fed them in the time of dearth,€ and filled 
the hungry souls with good things. And in 
what way? for this is no slight addition to 
his praise. He gathered together the victims 
of the famine with some who were but slightly 
recovering from it, men and women, infants, 
old men, every age which was in distress, and 
obtaining contributions of all sorts of food 
which can relieve famine, set before them 
basins of soup and such meat as was found 
preserved among us, on which the poor live. 
‘Then, imitating the ministry of Christ, Who, 
girded with a towel, did not disdain to wash 
the disciples’ feet, using for this purpose the 

_aid of his own servants, and also of his fellow 

servants, he attended to the bodies and souls 
of those who needed it, combining personal 
respect with the supply of their necessity, and 
so giving them a double relief. 

36. Such was our young furnisher of corn, 
and second Joseph: though of him we can 
say somewhat more. For the one made a 
gain from the famine, and bought up Egypt” 
in his philanthropy, by managing the time 
of plenty with a view to the time of famine, 
turning to account the dreams of others for 
that purpose. But the other’s services were 
gratuitous, and his succour of the famine 

/ gained no profit, having only one object, to 

win kindly feelings by kindly treatment, and 

to gain by his rations of corn the heavenly 
comes what they have, while others are | 

rain bread | 

blessings. Further he provided the nourish- 
ment of the Word, and that more perfect 
bounty and distribution, which is really heay- 
enly and from on high—if the word be that 
bread of angels,? wherewith souls are fed and 
given to drink, who are a hungered for God,‘ 
and seek for a food which does not pass away 
or fail, but abides forever. ‘This food he, 
who was the poorest and most needy man 
whom I have known, supplied in rich abun- 
dance to the relief not of a famine of bread, 

Gite NiAtts Ie TO: 
Ole. GxxHIt, 5, 
6 Bbw Ovi. G56 Lke ty 53% 
OPS. Ixxviii, 25. 

BeuiCor. xy, 22% y Tsai. lvit. 7. 
lb. Xero. 
7, Geit. ‘xii, 1 etseq: 
tole TMi mes seats WeO) 

408 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

nor of a thirst for water, but a longing for that the case of our Saviour, and of every specially 

Word ¢ which is really lifegiving and nourish- 
ing, and causes to grow to spiritual manhood 
him who is duly fed thereon, 

37. After these and similar actions—why 
need I stay to mention them all ?—when the 
prelate whose name 8 betokened his godliness 
had passed away, having sweetly breathed his 

last in Basil’s arms, he was raised to the lofty | 
, y 

throne of a Bishop, not without difficulty or 
without the envious struggles of the prelates of 
iis native land, on whose side were found the 
greatest scoundrels of the city. But the Holy 
Spirit must needs win the day 
the victory was decisive. Jor He brought 

and indeed | 

irom a distance, to anoint him, meny illus- | 

trious and zealous for godliness, and with 
them the new Abraham, our Patriarch, I 
mean my father, in regard to whom an extra- 
ordinary thing happened. For, failing as he 
was from the number of his years, and worn 
away almost to his last breath by disease, he 
ventured on the journey to give assistance by 
his vote, relying on the aid of the Spirit. In 

brief, he was placed in his litter, as a corpse | 
is laid in its tomb, to return in the freshness 

and strength of youth, with head erect, hav- 
ing been strengthened by the imposition of 
hands and unction, and, it is not too much to 
say by the head of him who was anointed. 
‘his must be added to the instances of old 
time, which prove that labour bestows health, 
zealous purpose raises the dead, and old age 
leaps up when anointed by the Spirit. 

38. Having thus been deemed worthy of 
the office of prelate, as it is seemly that men 
should who have lived such a life, and won 
such favour and consideration, he did not 
disgrace, by his subsequent conduct, either 
his own philosophy, or the hopes of those 
who had trusted him. But he ever so far 
surpassed himself as he has been shown hither- 
to to have surpassed others, his ideas on this 

point being most excellent and philosophic. | 

For he held that, while it is virtuous in a 
private individual to avoid vice, and be to 
some extent good, it is a vice in a chief and 
ruler, especially in such an office, to fail to 
surpass by far the majority of men, and by 
constant progress to make his virtue corre- 
spond to his dignity and throne: for it is 
difficult for one in high position to attain the 
mean, and by his eminence in virtue raise up 
his people to the golden mean. Or rather 
to treat this question more satisfactorily, I 
think that the result is the same as I see in 

a Amos Vill. 11. : 

y Wer. 

B Name, Eusebius, ic., ‘* pious,” godly.” 
Eusebius of Samosaba and S. Gregory the Elder. 

| ‘Thomassin, 

wise man, I fancy, when He was with us in 
that form which surpassed us and yet is ours. 
For He also, the gospel says, increased in 
wisdom and favour, as well as in stature,* not 
that these qualities in Him were capable of 
growth: for how could that which was_per- 
fect from the first become more perfect, but 
that they were gradually disclosed and dis- 
played? So I think that. the virtue of Basil, 
without being itself increased, obtained at 
this time a wider exercise, since his power 
provided him with more abundant material. 
39. He first of all made it plain that his 
office had been bestowed upon him, not by 
human favour, but by the gift of God. This 
will also be shown by my conduct. For in 
what philosophic research did he not, about 
that time, join with me? So every one 
thought that I should run to meet him after 
what had happened, and show my delight at 
it (as would, perhaps, have been the case 
with any one else) and claim a share in his 
authority, rather than rule beside him, ac- 
cording to the inferences they drew from our 
friendship. But, in my exceeding anxiety to 
avoid the annoyance and jealousy of the time, 
and specially since his position was still a 
painful and troubled one, I remained at 
home, and forcibly restrained my eager de- 
sire, while, though he blamed me, Basil ac- 
cepted my excuse. And when, on my subse- 
quent arrival, I refused, for the same reason 
the honour of this chair, and a dignified 
position® among the Presbyters, he kindly 
refrained from blaming, nay he praised me, 
preferring to be charged with pride by a 
small clique, in their ignorance of our policy, 
rather than do anything contrary to reason 
and his own resolutions. And indeed, how 
could a man have better shown his soul to be 
superior to all fawning and flattery, and his 
single object to be the law of right, than by 
thus treating me, whom he acknowledged as 
among the first of his friends and associates ? 
40. His next task was to appease, and allay 
by magnanimous treatment, the opposition to 
himself: and that without any trace of flattery 
or servility, but in a most chivalrous and 
magnanimous way ; with a view, not merely 
to present exigencies, but also to the fostering 
of future obedience. For, seeing that, while 
tenderness leads to laxity and slackness, sever- 
ity gives rise to stubbornness and self-will, he 
was able to avoid the dangers of each course 

aS. Luke ii, 52. : 
B Dignified position, known later as that of Vicar General. 
Dise. Bcclul. 673903; 

by a combination of both, blending his cor- 
rection with consideration, and gentleness 
with firmness, influencing men in most cases 
principally by his conduct rather than by 
argument: not enslaving them by art, but 
winning them by good nature, and attracting 
them by the sparing use, rather than by the 
constant exercise, of his power. And, most 
important of all, they were brought to recog- 
nize the superiority of his intellect and the 
inaccessibility of his virtue, to consider their 
only safety to consist in being on his side and 
under his command, their sole danger to be in 
opposition to him, and to think that to differ 
from him involved estrangement from God. 
‘Thus they willingly yielded and surrendered, 
submitting themselves, as if in a thunder-clap, 
and hastening to anticipate each other with 
their excuses, and exchange the intensity of 
their hostility for an equal intensity of good- 

will, and advance in virtue, which they found | 

to be the one really effective defence. 
few exceptions to this conduct were passed by 
and neglected, because their ill-nature was 
incurable, and they expended their powers in 

The | 

THE PANEGYRIC ONS. BASIL. 

| 

wearing out themselves, as rust consumes itself 

together with the iron on which it feeds. 

41. Affairs at home being now settled to 
his mind, in a way that faithless men who did 
not know him would have thought impos- 

sible, his designs became greater and took a_ 

loftier range. 

For, while all others had their | 

eyes on the ground before them, and directed — 

attention to their own immediate concerns, 
and, if these were safe, troubled themselves no 

further, being incapable of any great and | 

chivalrous design or undertaking ; he, moder- 
ate as he was in all other respects, could not 

409 

secking from Him the dispersion of the press- 
ing misfortunes, while he himself was asleep, 
but felt bound to come to her aid at some 
expense to himself. 

42. For what could be more distressing 
than this calamity, or call more loudly on one 
whose eyes were raised aloft for exertions on 
behalf of the common weal? The good or 
ill success of an individual is of no conse- 
quence to the community, but that of the 
community involves of necessity the like con- 
dition of the individual. With this idea and 

| purpose, he who was the guardian and patron 

of the community (and, as Solomon says 
with truth, a perceptive heart is a moth to 
the bones,* unsensitiveness is cheerily confi- 
dent, while a sympathetic disposition is a 
source of pain, and constant consideration 
wastes away the heart), he, I say, was conse- 
quently in agony and distress from many 
wounds ; like Jonah and David, he wished 
in himself to die’ and gave not sleep to his 
eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids,¥ he expend- 
ed what was left of his flesh upon his reflec- 

' tions, until he discovered a remedy for the 

evil: and sought for aid from God and man, 
to stay the general conflagration, and dissipate 
the gloom which was lowering over us. 

43. One of his devices was of the greatest 
service. After a period of such recollection as 
was possible, and private spiritual conference, 
in which, after considering all human argu- 
ments, and penetrating into all the deep things 

_of the Scriptures, he drew up a sketch of pious 

| 
| 
| 

be moderate in this, but with head erect, cast- 

ing his mental eye about him, took in the 

whole world over which the word of salvation | 

has made its way. 
creat heritage of God, purchased by His own 
words and laws and sufferings, the holy na- 
tion, the royal priesthood,¢ in such evil plight 
that it was torn asunder into ten thousand 
opinions and errors: and the vine brought 
out of Egypt and transplanted,® the Egypt of 
impious and dark ignorance, which had 
grown to such beauty and boundless size that 
the whole earth was covered with the shadow 
of it, while it overtopped mountains and 
cedars, now being ravaged by that wicked 
wild boar, the devil, he could not content 
himself with quietly lamenting the misfortune, 
and merely lifting up his hands to God, and 

ar Hetaits.g. B Ps, 1xxx. 9. 

And when he saw the | 

doctrine, and by wrestling with and attacking 
their opposition he beat off the daring assaults 
of the heretics: overthrowing in hand to 
hand struggles by word of mouth those who 
came to close quarters, and striking those at a 
distance by arrows winged with ink, which is 
in no wise inferior to inscriptions on tablets ; 
not giving directions for one small nation only 
like that of the Jews, concerning meats and 
drinks, temporary sacrifices, and purifications 
of the flesh ;® but for every nation and part of 
the world, concerning the Word of truth, the 
source of our salvation. Again, since unrea- 
soning action and unpractical reasoning are 

alike ineffectual, he added to his reasoning 

the succour which comes from action ; he paid 
visits, sent messages, gave interviews, in- 
structed, reproved, rebuked,¢ threatened, re- 
proached, undertook the defence of nations, 
cities and individuals, devising every kind of 
succour, and procuring from every source 
specifics for disease: a second Bezaleel, an 

a Prov. xiv. 30 (LXX). 

: B Jonah iv. 8. 
7 PS. Xxx OHHebe 1x0 20; 

e 2 Time iv, 2. 

410 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

architect of the Divine tabernacle,* applying | to draw to itself us who were lying upon the 

every material and art to the work, and com- 
bining all in a harmonious and surpassing 
beauty. 

44. Why need I enter into further detail ? 
We were assailed again by the Anti-Christian 
Hmperor,? that tyrant of the faith, with more 
abundant impiety and a hotter onset, inas- 
much as the dispute must be with a stronyver 
antagonist, like that unclean and evil spirit, 
who when sent forth upon his wanderings from 
man, returns to take up his abode in him 
again with a greater number of spirits, as we 

| against us. 

have heard in the Gospels.y ‘This spirit he — 
of Presbyters at sea, impious generals, not 

imitated, both in renewing the contest in 
which he had formerly been worsted, and in 
adding to his original efforts. He thought 

that it was a strange and insufferable thing — 

that he, who ruled over so many nations and 
had won so much renown, and reduced under 

the power of impiety all those round about | 
him, and overcome every adversary, should be — 
publicly worsted by a single man, and a single | 
city, and so incur the ridicule not only of | 

those patrons of ungodliness by whom he was 
led, but also, as he supposed, of all men. 
45. It is said that the King® of Persia, on 

urged to immoderate threats, by elation at 

the numbers of every race of men which in | 

his wrath and pride he was leading against 
them: but thought to terrify them the more, 
by making them afraid of him, in consequence 
of his novel treatment of the elements. A 
strange land and sea were heard of, the work 
of the new creator ; and an army which sailed 
over the dry land, and marched over the 
ocean, while islands were carried off, and the 
sea was scourged, and all the other mad _ pro- 
ceedings of that army and expedition, which, 
though they struck terror into the ignoble, 

and steadfast hearts. ‘There was no need 
of anything of this kind in the expedition 

| 
| 

ground. 

46. Furious indeed were his first acts of 
wantonness, more furious still his final efforts 
What shall I speak of first ? 
Exiles, banishments, confiscations, open and 
secret plots, persuasion, where time allowed, 
violence, where persuasion was impossible. 
Those who clung to the orthedox faith, as 
we did, were extruded from their churches ; 
others were intruded, who agreed with the 
Imperial soul-destroying doctrines, and begged 
for testimonials of impiety, and subscribed to 
statements still harder than these. Burnings ¢ 

those who conquered the Persians, or sub- 
dued the Scythians, or reduced any other bar- 
baric nation, but those who assailed churches, 
and danced in triumph upon altars, and de- 
filed the unbloody sacrifices with the blood of 
man and victims, and offered insult to the 
modesty of virgins. With what object? The 
extrusion of the Patriarch Jacob,® and the in- 
trusion in his place of Esau, who was hated,v 
even before his birth. ‘This is the description 
of his first acts of wantonness, the mere re- 

collection and mention of which even now, 
his expedition into Greece, was not only . 

rouses the tears of most of us. 

47. Accordingly, when, after passing through 
all quarters, he made his attack in order to en- 
slave this impregnable and formidable mother 
of the Churches, the only still remaining un- 
quenched spark of the truth, he discovered 
that he had been for the first time ill advised. 
For he was driven back like a missile which 
strikes upon some stronger body, and recoiled 
like a broken hawser. Such was the prelate 
of the Church that he met with, such was the 
bulwark by which his efforts were broken and 
dissipated. Other particulars may be heard 

_from those who tell and recount them, from 
were ridiculous in the eyes of men of brave — 

| ence: 

avainst us, but what was still worse and more | 

harmful, this was what the Emperor was re- 
ported to say and do. 
his mouth unto heaven, speaking blasphemy 
asainst the most High, and his tongue went 
through the world.¢ Excellently did the in- 

their own experience—and none of those who 
recount them is destitute of this full experi- 
ut all must be filled with admiration 
who are aware of the struggles of that time, 

_the assaults, the promises, the threats, the 

He stretched forth | 

commissioners sent before him to try to pre- 
vail upon us, men of judicial and military 

rank, men from the harem, who are men 

spired David before our days thus describe | 

him who made heaven to stoop to earth, and 
reckoned with the creation that supermun- 
dane nature, which the creation cannot even 
contain, even though in kindness to man it 
did to some extent come among us, in order 

BR Eeiperors Valens. 4 to, Latico, ey. 
Xerxes, © DSSS Os 

a iixod. xxxi. 2. 

6 Ning. 

among women, women among men, whose 
only manliness consisted in their impiety, 
and being incapable of natural licentiousness, 
commit fornication in the only way they 
can, with their tongues; the chief cook 

a Rurnings, A.D. 370. Kighty ecclesiastics, sent on a mission to 
Valens at Nicomedia, were by his orders sent to sea off the coast 
of Bithynia, and, the vessel being set on fire, were burnt to death. 

B Facod, .e., Athanasius. Esau = George. — y Rom. ix. 11. 

Nebuzaradan,* who threatened us with the 
weapons of his art, and was despatched by his 
own fire. But what especially excites my 
wonder, and what I could not, even if | 

iE Paver vy RIC ONS, BASIL, 

| death,”’ 

would, pass by, I will describe as concisely as — 

possible. 
48. Who has not heard of the prefect ® of 

those days, who, for his own part, treated us | 

with such excessive arrogance, having himself 

| 

been admitted, or perhaps committed, to bap- | 
tism by the other party ; and strove by ex-_ 

ceeding the letter of his instructions, and 

gratifying his master in every particular, to | 

guarantee and preserve his own possession of 
power. ‘Though he raged against the Church, 
and assumed a lion-like aspect, and roared like 
a lion till most men dared not approach him, 
yet our noble prelate was brought into or 

rather entered his court, as if bidden to a> 

feast, instead of to a trial. 
scribe, either the arrogance of the prefect or 

How can I fitly de- | 

the prudence with which it was met by the > 

Saint. ‘What is the meaning, Sir Basil,’ 
he said, addressing him by name, and not as 
yet deigning to term him Bishop, ‘‘ of your 
daring, as no other dares, to resist and oppose 
so great apotentate ?’’ ‘In what respect ?’’ 
said our noble champion, ‘* and in what does 
my rashness consist 2? For this I have yet to 
learn.”’ 

of your Sovereign, when all others have 
yielded and submitted themselves ?’’ *“* Be- | 

cause,’’ said he, ‘‘ this is not the will of my 
real Sovereign; nor can I, who am the creature 
of God, and bidden myself to be God, submit 
to worship any creature.’’ ‘And what do 
we,’’ said the prefect, ‘‘seem to you to be? 
Ave we, who give you this injunction, nothing 
at all? What do you say to this? Is it not 
a great thing to be ranged with us as your 
associates 9°": ** Yow are, I will not .deny 
it,’’ said he, ‘a prefect, and an_ illustrious 
one, yet not of more honour than God. And 
to be associated with you is a great thing, 
certainly ; for you are yourself the creature of 
God; but so it is to be associated with any 
other of my subjects. For faith, and not per- 
sonal importance, is the distinctive mark of 
Christianity. 

49. ‘hen indeed the prefect became ex- 
cited, and rose from his seat, boiling with 
rage, and making use of harsher language. 
«¢ What ?’’ said he, ‘‘ have you no fear of my 
authoriy? " * “Hear of what ?°* said Basil, 
« How could itatiectme? ~~ "Ot what? Of 

a Nebusaradan, Wemosthenes, a creature of Valens, sent to 
persuade Basil to yield to the Eemperor, 

B Prefect. Modestus 

‘In refusing to respect the religion | 

_ tening. 

with such boldness, to Modestus.’’ 

AIl 
any one of the resources of my power.” 
¢e What are these?”” said Basil, ‘* pray, inform 
me.’’ ** Confiscation, banishment, torture, 
‘¢Hfave you no other threat ?’’ said 
he, ‘‘for none of these can reach me.,”’ 
‘*How indeed is that?’’ said the prefect. 
‘* Bécause,”’ “he teplied, a man Who las 
nothing, is beyond the reach of confiscation 3 
unless you demand my tattered rags, and the 
few books, which are my only possessions. 
Banishment is impossible for me, who am con- 
fined by no limit of place, counting my own 
neither the land where I now dwell, nor all of 
that into which I may be hurled; or, rather, 
counting it all God’s, whose guest and depend- 
ent I am. As for tortures, what hold can 
they have upon one whose body has ceased to 
be? Unless you mean the first stroke, for 
this alone is in your power. Death is my 
benefactor, for it will send me the sooner to 
God, for Whom I live, and exist, and have all 
but died, and to Whom I have long been has- 
Me 

50. Amazed at this language, the prefect 
said, ** No one has ever yet spoken thus, and 
ate ek 2 

_ perhaps,’’ said Basil, ‘* you have not met with 
_a Bishop, or in his defence of such interests 
he would have used precisely the same lan- 

| 
| 

guage. For we are modest in general, and 
submissive to every one, according to the pre- 
cept of our law. We may not treat with 
haughtiness even any ordinary person, to say 
nothing of so great a potentate. But where 
the interests of God are at stake, we care for 
nothing else, and make these our sole object. 
Fire and sword and wild beasts, and rakes 
which tear the flesh, we revel in, and_ fear 
them not. You may further insult and threat- 
en us, and do whatever you will, to the full 
extent of your power. ‘Vhe Emperor him- 
self may hear this—that neither by violence 
nor persuasion will you bring us to make com- 
mon cause with impiety, not even though 
your threats become still more terrible.” 

51. At the close of this colloquy, the pre- 
fect, having been convinced by the attitude of 
Basil, that he was absolutely impervious to 
threats and influence, dismissed him from the 
court, his former threatening manner being re- 
placed by somewhat of respect and deference. 
He himself with all speed obtained an audi- 
ence of the Emperor, and said: ‘We have 
been worsted, Sire, by the prelate of this 
Church. He is superior to threats, invincible 
in argument, uninfluenced by persuasion. We 
must make trial of some more feeble charac- 
ter; and in this case resort to open violence, 

412 GREGORY 

or submit to the disregard of our threaten- 
ings.’’ Hereupon the Emperor, forced by 
the praises of Basil to condemn his own con- 
duct (for even an enemy can admire a man’s 
excellence), would not allow violence to be 
used against him: and, like iron, which is 
softened by fire, yet still remains iron, though 
turned from threatening to admiration, would 
not enter into communion with him, being 
prevented by shame from changing his course, 

but sought to justify his conduct by the most | 

plausible excuse he could, as the sequel will 
show. 

52. For he entered the Church attended by 
the whole of his train ; it was the festival of the 
Epiphany, and the Church was crowded, and, 
by taking his place among the people, he made 
a profession of unity. ‘The occurrence is not 
to be lightly passed over. Upon his entrance 
he was struck by the thundering roll of the 
Psalms, by the sea of heads of the congrega- 
tion, and by the angelic rather than human 
order which pervaded the sanctuary and its 
precincts: while Basil presided over his peo- 
ple, standing erect, as the Scripture says of 
Samuel,* with body and eyes and mind undis- 

NAZIANZEN. 

turbed, as if nothing new had happened, but — 
fixed upon God and the sanctuary, as if, so to | 

say, he had been a statue, while his ministers 
stood around him in fear and reverence. At 
this sight, and it was indeed a sight unparal- 
leled, overcome by human weakness, his eyes 
were affected with dimness and giddiness, his 
mind with dread. ‘This was as yet unnoticed 
by most people. But when he had to offer 
the gifts at the Table of God, which he must 
needs do himself, since no one would, as usual, 
assist him, because it was uncertain whether 
Basil would admit him, his feelings were re- 
vealed. For he was staggering, and had not 
some one in the sanctuary reached out a hand 
to steady his tottering steps, he would have 
sunk to the ground in a lamentable fall. So 
much for this. 

53. As for the wisdom of his conference 
with the Emperor, who, in his quasi-commu- 
nion with us entered within the veil to see 
and speak to him, as he had long desired to 
do, what else can I say but that they were in- 
spired words, which were heard by the cour- 
tiers and by us who had entered with them? 
This was the beginning and first establishment 
of the Emperor’s kindly feeling towards us ; 
the impression produced by this reception put 
an end to the greater part of the persecution 
which assailed us like a river. 

_ recorded for us.& 

54. Another incident is not of less impor- 
tance than those I have mentioned. ‘The 
wicked were victorious, and the decree for his 
banishment was signed, to the full satisfaction 
of those who furthered it. ‘Phe night had 
come, the chariot was ready, our haters were 
exultant, the pious in despair, we surrounded 
the zealous traveller, to whose honourable dis- 
grace nothing was wanting. What next? It 
was undone by God. For He Who smote the 
first-born of Egypt,* for its harshness towards 
Israel, also struck the son of the Emperor 
with disease. How great was the speed! 
There was the sentence of banishment, here 
the decree of sickness: the hand of the wick- 
ed scribe was restrained, and the saint was pre- 
served, and the ‘man of piety presented to us, 
by the fever which brought to reason the arro- 
gance of the Emperor. What could be more 
just or more speedy than this? ‘This was the 
series of events: the Emperor’s child was sick 
and in bodily pain. ‘The father was pained 
for it, for what can the fatherdo? On all sides 
he sought for aid in his distress, he summoned 
the best physicians, he betook himself to inter- 
cessions with the greatest fervour, and flung 
himself upon the ground. Affliction humbles 
even emperors, and no wonder, for the like 
sufferings of David in the case of his child are 
But as no cure for the evil 
could anywhere be found, he applied to the 
faith of Basil, not personally summoning him, 
in shame for his recent ill treatment, but en- 
trusting the mission to others of his nearest 
and dearest friends. On his arrival, without 
the delay or reluctance which any one else 
might have shown, at once the disease relaxed, 
and the father cherished better hopes; and 
had he not blended salt water with the fresh, 
by trusting to the heterodox at the same time 
that he summoned Basil, the child would have 
recovered his health and been preserved for 
his father’s arms. ‘This indeed was the con- 
viction of those who were present at the time, 
and shared in the distress. 

55. The same mischance is said to have be- 
fallen the prefect. He also was obliged by 
sickness to bow beneath the hands of the 
Saint, and, in reality, to men of sense a visita- 
tion brings instruction, and affliction is often 
better than prosperity. He fell sick, was in 
tears, and in pain, he sent for Basil, and en- 
treated him, crying out, ‘*I own that you 
were in the right; only save me!’’ His 
request was granted, as he himself acknow- 
ledged, and convinced many who had known 

at Sam.-xix, 20, 

a Exod. xil. 29. BizsSamexi 16, 

Tike PANEGY RIC ON: S, BASIL, 

413 

—_—_ —_ 

nothing of it; for he never ceased to wonder 
at and describe the powers of the prelate. 
Such was his conduct in these cases, such its 
result. Did he then treat others in a different 
way, and engage in petty disputes about trifles, 
or fail to rise to the heights of philosophy in 
a course of action which merits no praise and 
is best passed over in silence? By no means. 
He who once stirred up the wicked Hadad 
against Israel,* stirred up against him the pre- 
fect® or the province of Pontus ; nominally, 
from annoyance connected with some poor 
creature of a woman, but in reality as a part 
of the struggle of impiety against the truth. 
T pass by all his other insults against Basil, 
or, for it is the same thing, against God; 
for it is against Him and on His_ behalf 
that the contest was waged. One instance 

of it, however, which brought special dis- 
grace upon the assailant, and exalted his ad- | 

versary, if philosophy and eminence for it 
be a great and lofty thing, I will describe at 
length. 

56. The assessor of a judge was attempting 
to force into a distasteful marriage a lady of 
high birth whose husband was but recently 
dead. At a loss to escape from this high- 
handed treatment, she resorted to a device no 
less prudent than daring. She fled to the 
holy table, and placed herself under the pro- 
tection of God against outrage. What, in 
the Name of the Trinity Itself, if I may in- 
troduce into my panegyric somewhat of the 
forensic style, ought to have been done, I do 
not say, by the great Basil, who laid down the 
law for us all in such matters, but by any one 
who, though far inferior to him, was a priest ? 
Ought he not to have allowed her claim, to 
have taken charge of, and cared for, her; to 
have raised his hand in defence of the kind- 
ness of God and the law which gives honour 
to the altar? Ought he not to have been will- 
ing to do and suffer anything, rather than take 
part in any inhuman design against her, and 
outrage at once the holy table, and the faith 
in which she had taken sanctuary? No! said 
the baffled judge, all ought to yield to my 
authority, and Christians should betray their 
own laws. ‘The suppliant whom he demand- 
ed, was at all hazards retained. Accordingly, 
in his rage, he at last sent some of the magis- 
trates to search the saint’s bedchamber, with 
the purpose of dishonouring him, rather than 
from any necessity. What! Search the 
nouse of a man so free from passion, whom 
the angels revere, at whom women do not 

B Lhe prefect. 

at Kings xi. rq. 

VOI Veul, 

Eusebius. 

venture even to look? And, not content 
with this, he summoned him, and put him on 
his defence ; and that, in no gentle or kindly 
manner, but as if he were a convict. Upon 
Basil’s appearance, standing, like my Jesus, 
before the judgment seat of Pilate, he pre- 
sided at the trial, full of wrath and _ pride. 
Yet the thunderbolts did not fall, and the 
sword of God still glittered, and waited, 
while His bow, though bent, was restrained. 
Such indeed is the custom of God. 

57. Consider another struggle between our 
champion and his persecutor. His ragged 
pallium having been ordered to be torn away, 
‘*T will also, if you wish it, strip off my coat,’’ 
said he. His fleshless form was threatened 
with blows, and he offered to submit to be 
torn with combs, and he said, “ By such 
laceration you will cure my liver, which, as 
you see, is wearing me away.’’ Such was 
their argument. But when the city perceived 
the outrage and the common danger of all— 
for each one considered this insolence a dan- 
ger to himself, it became all on fire with rage ; 
and, like a hive roused by smoke, one after 
another was stirred and arose, every race 
and every age, but especially the men from the 
small-arms factory and from the imperial weav- 
ing-sheds. For men at work in these trades 
are specially hot-tempered and daring, be- 
cause of the liberty allowed them. Each man 
was armed with the tool he was using, or 
with whatever else came to hand at the 
moment. ‘Torch in hand, amid showers of 
stones, with cudgels ready, all ran and 
shouted together in their united zeal. Anger 
makes a terrible soldier or general. Nor were 
the women weaponless, when roused by such 
an occasion. ‘Their pins were their spears, 
and no longer remaining women, they were 
by the strength of their eagerness endowed 
with masculine courage. It is a short story. 
They thought that they would share among 
themselves the piety of destroying him, and 
held him to be most pious who first laid 
hands on one who had dared such deeds. 
What then was the conduct of this haughty 
and daring judge? He begged for mercy 
in a pitiable state of distress, cringing before 
them to an unparalleled extent, until the ar- 
rival of the martyr without bloodshed, who 
had won his crown without blows, and now 
restrained the people by the force of his per- 
sonal influence, and delivered the man who had 
insulted him and now sought his protection. 
This was the doing of the God of Saints, Who 
worketh and changeth all things fot the best, 
who resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to 

4t4 

the humble.« And why should not He, Who 
divided the sea and stayed the river, and 
ruled the elements, and by stretching out set 
up atrophy, to save His exiled people, why 
should not He haye also rescued this man 
from his perils ? 

8. ‘This was the end and fortunate close, in 
the Providence of God, of the war with the 
world, a close worthy of his faith. But here 
at once is the beginning of the war with the 
Bishops, and their allies, which involved great 
disgrace, and still greater injury to their sub- 
jects. For who could persuade others to be 
temperate, when such was the conduct of 
their prelates? For a long time they had 
been unkindly disposed towards him, on three 
grounds. ‘They neither agreed with him in 
the matter of the faith, except in so far as 
they were absolutely obliged to yield to the 
majority of the faithful. 
together laid aside the grudge they owed him 
for his election. And, what was most griev- 
ous of all to them, though they would have 
been most ashamed to own it—he so far out- 
shone them in reputation. ‘There was also a 
further cause of dissension which stirred up 
again the others. When our country had 
been divided into two provinces and metro- 
political sees, and a great part of the former 
was being added to the new one, this again 
roused their factious spirit. The one? 
thought it right that the ecclesiastical boun- 
daries should be settled by the civil ones : and 
therefore claimed those newly added, as_be- 
longing to him, and severed from their former 
metropolitan. The other? clung to the an- 
cient custom, and to the division which had 
come down from our fathers. Many painful 
results either actually followed, or were strug- 
gling in the womb of the future. Synods 
were wrongfully gathered by the new metro- 
politan, and revenues seized upon. Some 
of the presbyters of the churches refused obe- 
dience, others were won over. In conse- 
quence the affairs of the churches fell into a 
sad state of dissension and division. Novelty 
indeed has a certain charm for men, and they 
readily turn eyents to their own advantage, 
and it is easier to overthrow something which 
is already established, than to restore it when 
overthrown. What however enraged him 
most was, that the revenues ® of the ‘Taurus, 
which passed along before his eyes, accrued to 
his rival, as also the offerings at Saint Ores- 

aS. James jv. 6. 
B The one, 1.c., Anthimus, Bishop of Tyana. 
The other, i.e., Basil. 
Revenues. The dues and offerings of the people of the dio- 
cese. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Nor had they al- | 

tes’, of which he was grteatly desirous to 
reap the fruits. He even went so far as, on 
one occasion when Basil was riding along his 
own road, to seize his mules by the bridle 
and bar the passage with arobber band. And 
with how specious a pretext, the care of his 
spiritual children and of the souls entrusted to 
him, and the defence of the faith—prctexts 
which veiled that most common yice, Insati- 
able avarice—and further, the wrongfulness of 
paying dues to heretics, a heretic being any 
one who had displeased him. 

59. The holy man of God however, metro- 
politan as he was of the true Jerusalem above, 
was neither carried away with the failure of 
those who fell, nor allowed himsclf to over- 
look this conduct, nor did he desire any in- 
adequate remedy for the evil. Let us see how 
great and wonderful it was, or, 1 would say, 
how worthy of his soul. He made of the dis- 
sension a cause of increase to the Church, and 
the disaster, under his most able management, 
resulted in the multiplication of the Bishoys 
of the country. From this ensued three most 
desirable consequences ; a greater care tor 
souls, the management by each city of its own 
affairs, and the cessation of the war in this 
quarter. I am afraid that I myself was treated 
as an appendage to this scheme. By no other 
term can I readily describe the position. 
Greatly as I admire his whole conduct, to an 
extent indeed beyond my powers of expres- 

sion, of this single particular I find it impos- 

sible to approve, for I will acknowledge my 

feelings in regard to it, though these are from 
other sources not unknown to most of you. I 
mean the change and faithlessness of his treat- 
ment of myself, a cause of pain which even 
time has not obliterated. For this is the 
source of all the inconsistency and tangle of my 
life; it has robbed me of the practice, or at 
least the reputation, of philosophy ; of small 
moment though the latter be. ‘The defence, 
which you will perhaps allow me to make for 
him, is this; his ideas were superhuman, and 
having, before his death, become superior to 
worldly influences, his only interests were 
those of the Spirit: while his regard for 

friendship was in no wise lessened by his 
readiness then, and then only, to disregard 

its claims, when they were in conflict with his 

paramount duty to God, and when the end 

he had in view was of greater importance than 

the interests he was compelled to set aside. 
60. I am afraid that, in avoiding the impu- 

tation of indifference at the hands of those 

a Orestes. Achapel dedicated to S. Orestes at the foot of Mt. 
Taurus, where the offerings were collected. 

Coe - 

obcane ON 5S. pannus 

who desire to know all that can be said about | 

him, I shall incur a charge of prolixity from 
those whose ideal is the golden mean. 
the latter Basil himself had the greatest. re- 
spect, being specially devoted to the adage 
as Gla things the mean *is the best,’ and 
acting upon it throughout his life. Neverthe- 
less, disregarding alike those who desire un- 
due conciseness or excessive prolixity, I pro- 
ceed thus with my speech. Different men 

For | 

_ riches of His Godhead. 

415 

Eick and not, in consequence, to have 
greater needs: but he looked to the lilies and 
the birds,t whose beauty is artless, and their 
food casual, according to the important advice 
of my Christ, who made Himself poor 8 in the 
flesh for our sakes, that we might enjoy the 
Hence came his single 
coat and well worn cloak, and his bed on the 
bare ground, his vigils, his unwashedness (such 

' were his decorations) and his most sweet food 

attain success in different ways, some applying © 

themselves to one alone of the many forms of 
excellence, but no one, of those hitherto known 
to me, arriving at the highest eminence in all 
respects ; he being in my opinion the best, 
who has won his laurels on the widest field, 
or gained the highest possible renown in some 
single particular. Such however was the 
height of Basil’s fame, that he became the 
pride of human kind. Let us consider the 
matter thus. Is any one devoted to poverty 
and a life devoid of property, and free from 
superfluity ? 
body, and the necessary coverings of the flesh ? 
His wealth was the having nothing, and he 
thought the cross, with which he lived, more 
precious than great riches. Forno one, how- 
ever much he may wish, can obtain possession 
of all things, but any one can learn to despise, 
and so prove himself superior to, all things. 
Such being his mind, and such his life, he 
had no need of an altar and of vainglory, nor 
of such a public announcement as ‘‘ Crates ® 
sets Crates the Theban free.’”’ For his aim 
was ever to be, not to seem, most excellent. 
Nor did he dwell in a tub,Y and in the midst 
of the market-place, and so by luxuriating in 

What did he possess besides his | 

publicity turn his poverty into riches; but 
was poor and unkempt, yet without ostenta- | 

tion: and taking cheerfully the casting over- 
board of all that he ever had, sailed lightly 
across the sea of life. 

6rt. A wondrous thing is temperance, and > 
fewness of wants, and freedom from the domin- | 

ion of pleasures, and from the bondage of that 
cruel and degrading mistress, the belly. 
was so independent of food, and, without exag- 
geration, more free from the flesh ?. For he flung 
away all satiety and surfeit to creatures desti- 
tute of reason, whose life is slavish and debas- 
ing. He paid little attention to such things 
as, next to the appetite, are of equal rank, but, 
as far as possible, lived on the merest necessa- 
ries, his only luxury being to prove himself not 

_ community life. 
Who | 

and relish, bread, and salt, his new dainty, 
and the sober and plentiful drink, with which 
fountains supply those who are free from 
trouble. ‘The result, or the accompaniment, 
of these things were the attendance on the sick 
and practice of medicine, our common intel- 
lectual pursuit. For, though inferior to him in 
all other respects, I must needs be his equal in 
distress. 

62. A great thing is virginity, and celibacy, 
and being ranked with the angels, and with 
the single nature ; for I shrink from calling it 
Christ’s, Who, though He willed to be born for 
our sakes who are born, by being born of a 
Virgin, enacted ¥ the law of virginity, to lead 
us away from this life, and cut short the power 
of the world, or rather, to transmit one world 
to another, the present to the future. Who 
then paid more honour to virginity, or had 
more control of the flesh, not only by his per- 
sonal example, but in those under his care? 
Whose are the convents, and the written reg- 
ulations, by which he subdued every sense, 
and regulated every member, and won to the 
real practice of virginity, turning inward the 
view of beauty, from the visible to the invis- 
ible; and by wasting away the external, and 
withdrawing fuel from the flame, and revealing 
the secrets of the heart to God, Who is the 
only bridegroom of pure souls, and takes in 
with himself the watchful souls, if they go to 
meet him with lamps burning and a plentiful 
supply of oi1?® Moreover he reconciled most 
excellently and united the solitary and the 
These had been in many re- 
spects at variance and dissension, while neither 

of them was in absolute and unalloyed pos- 

session of good or evil: the one being more 
calm and settled, tending to union with God, 
yet not free from pride, inasmuch as its virtue 
lies beyond the means of testing or compari- 
son; the other, which is of more practical 
service, being not free from the tendency to 
turbulence. He founded cells¢ for ascetics 

a The mean, etc. A saying of Cleobulus, one of the seven 
Sages. 

B Crates. He made this proclamation when he had stripped 
himself of all his possessions, 

y In a tub, like Diogenes, the Cynic. 

aS. Matt, vi. 26. B 2 Cor. viii. 9. 
y Enacted by his religious rule, or as some say by a treatise on 
Virginity. §S. Matt. xxv. 2. 
e Cells, efc. This passage strongly favours the yiew of Clemen- 
cet that S. Gregory uses movagrypia in the literal sense of * the 

Ff 2 

AIO 

: . . | 
and hermits, but at no great distance from his 

cenobitic communities, and, instead of distin- 
cuishing and separating the one from the 
other, as if by some intervening wall, he 
brought them together and united them, in 
order that the contemplative spirit might not 
be cut off from society, nor the active life be 
uninfluenced by the contemplative, but that, 
like sea and land, by an interchange of their 
several gifts, they might unite in promoting 
the one object, the glory of God. 

63. What more? A noble thing is philan- 
thropy, and the support of the poor, and the 
assistance of human weakness. Go forth a lit- 
tle way from the city, and behold the new 
city,* the storehouse of piety, the common 
treasury of the wealthy, in which the-superflui- 
ties of their wealth, aye, and even their neces- 
saries, are stored, in consequence of his exhor- 
tations, freed from the power of the moth,® no 
longer gladdening the eyes of the thief, and 
escaping both the emulation of envy, and the 
corruption of time: where disease is regarded 
in a religious light, and disaster is thought a 
blessing, and sympathy is put to the test. 
Why should I compare with this work Thebes ¥ 
of the seven portals, and the Egyptian Thebes, 
and the walls of Babylon, and the Carian 
tomb of Mausolus, and the Pyramids, and the 
bronze without weight of the Colossus, or the 
size and beauty of shrines that are no more, 
and all the other objects of men’s wonder, 
and historic record, from which their found- 
ers gained no advantage, except a slight meed 
of fame. My subject is the most wonderful 
of all, the short road to salvation, the easiest 
ascent to heaven. ‘There is no longer before 
our eyes that terrible and piteous spectacle of 
men who are living corpses, the greater part 
of whose limbs have mortified, driven away 
from their cities and homes and public places 
and fountains, aye, and from their own dear- 
est ones, recognizable by their names rather 
than by their features: they are no longer 
brought before us at our gatherings and meet- 
ings, in our common intercourse and union, 
no longer the objects of hatred, instead of 
pity on account of their disease ; composers 
of piteous songs, if any of them have their 
voice still left to them. Why should I try 
to express in tragic style all our experiences, 
when no language can be adequate to their 
hard lot? He however it was, who took the 
lead in pressing upon those who were men, 
that they ought not to despise their fellow- 

abodes of sclitaries,” and that there is no great distinction be- 
tween Kowvwrexot and puyddes. Cf. ii. 29. xxi. 10-19. 

a New city—a hospital for the sick. B S. Matt. vi. 19. 

y Thebes, etc. The ‘ seven wonders of the world,” 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

men, nor to dishonour Christ, the one Head 
of all, by their inhuman treatment of them ; 
but to use the misfortunes of others as an op- 
portunity of firmly establishing their own lot, 
and to lend to God that mercy of which they 
stand in need at His hands. He did not 
therefore disdain to honour with his lips this 
disease, noble and of noble ancestry and _brill- 
iant reputation though he was, but saluted 
them as brethren, not, as some might suppose, 
from vainglory, (for who was so far removed 
from this feeling?) but taking the lead in 
approaching to tend them, as a consequence 
of his philosophy, and so giving not only a 
speaking, but also a silent, instruction. The 
effect produced is to be seen not only in the 
city, but in the country and beyond, and 
even the leaders of society have vied with one 
another in their philanthropy and magnanim- 
ity towards them. Others have had _ their 
cooks, and splendid tables, and the devices 
and dainties of confectioners, and exquisite 
carriages, and soft, flowing robes; basil’s 
care was for the sick, and the relief of their 
wounds, and the imitation of Christ, by 
cleansing leprosy, not by a word, but in deed. 

64. As to all this, what will be said by 
those who charge him with pride and haughti- 
ness? Severe critics they are of such con- 
duct, applying to him, whose life was a stan- 
dard, those who were not standards at all. Is 
it possible that he who kissed the lepers, and 
humiliated himself to such a degree, could 
treat haughtily those who were in health: 
and, while wasting his flesh by abstinence, 
puff out his soul with empty arrogance? Is 
it possible to condemn the Pharisee, and ex- 
pound the debasing effect of haughtiness, to 
know Christ, Who condescended to the form 
of a slave, and ate with publicans, and washed 
the disciples’ feet, and did not disdain the cross, 
in order to nail my sin to it: and, more in- 
credible still, to see God crucified, aye, along 
with robbers also, and derided by the passers 
by, impassible, and beyond the reach of suf- 
fering as He is; and yet, as his slanderers 
imagine, soar himself above the clouds, and 
think that nothing can be on an equality with 
him. Nay, what they term pride is, I fancy, 
the firmness and steadfastness and stability of 
his character. Such persons would readily, 
it seems to me, call bravery rashness, and the 
circumspect a coward, and the temperate mis- 
anthropic, and the just illiberal. For indeed 
this philosophic axiom is excellent, which 
says that the vices* are settled close to the 

a The vices. This was the doctrine of Menander and Aristotle. 

virtues, and are, in some sense, their next- 
door neighbours: and it is most easy, for 
those whose training in such subjects has been 
defective, to mistake a man for what he is 
not. For who honoured virtue and castigated 
vice more than he, or showed himself more 
kind to the upright, more severe to the 
wrong doers? His very smile often amounted 
to praise, his silence to rebuke, racking the 
evil in the secret conscience. And if a man 
have not been a chatterer, and jester, and 
gossip, nor a general favourite, because of 
having pleased others by becoming all things 
to all men,* what of that? Is he not in the 
eyes of sensible men worthy of praise rather 
than of blame? Unless it is a fault in the 
lion that he is terrible and royal, and does 
not look like an ape, and that his spring is 
noble, and is valued for its wonderfulness : 
while stage-players ought to win our admira- 

acters, because they please the vulgar, and 
raise a laugh by their sounding slaps in the 
face, 
was so pleasant when you met him, as I know, 
who have had the longest experience ? 
vas more kindly in his stories, more refined 
in his wit, more tender in his rebukes? His 
reproofs gave rise to no arrogance, his relaxa- 
tion to no dissipation, but avoiding excess in 
either, he made use of both in reason and 
season, according to the rules of Solomon, 
who assigns to every business a season. 

65. But what are these to his renown for 
eloquence, and his powers of instruction, 
which have won the favour of the ends of the 
world? As yet we have been compassing the 
foot of the mountain, to the neglect of its 
summit, as yet we have been crossing a strait, 
paying no heed to the mighty and deep ocean. 
lor I think that if any one ever has become, 

or can become, a trumpet, in his far sounding | 

| 

or allowing his eloquence to outstrip his rea- 
soning powers? In both respects he won a 
like distinction, and showed himself to be his 
own equal, and absolutely perfect. ‘To search 
all things, yea, the deep things of God © is, 
according to the testimony of S. Paul, the 
office of the Spirit, not because He is ignorant 

of them, but because He takes delight in their 

contemplation. Now all the things of the 
Spirit Basil had fully investigated, and hence 
he drew his instructions for every kind of 
character, his lessons in the sublime, and his 
exhortations to quit things present, and adapt 
ourselves to things to come. 

66. ‘The sun is extolled by David for its 
beauty, its greatness, its swift course, and its 
power, splendid as a bridegroom, majestic as 
a giant ;® while, from the extent of its circuit, 

/it has such power that it equally sheds its 
tion for their pleasant and philanthropic char- 

And if this indeed be our object, who — 

Who | 

light from one end of heaven to the other, and 
the heat thereof is in no wise lessened by dis- 
tance. Basil’s beauty was virtue, his great- 
ness theology, his course the perpetual mo- 
tion reaching even to God by its ascents, and 
his power the sowing and distribution of the 
Word. So that I will not hesitate to say even 

_ this, his utterance went out into all lands,y and 

rowing the words from David. 

the power of his words to the ends of the 
world: as 5. Paul says of the Apostles,® bor- 
What other 

_ charm is there in any gathering to-day 2?) What 

ity, and those beneath them ? 

pleasure in banquets, in the courts, in the 
churches? What delight in those in author- 
What in the 
hermits, or the cenobites? What in the lei- 
sured classes, or those busied in affairs? What 
in profane schools of philosophy or in our 
own? ‘There is one, which runs through all, 
and is the greatest—his writings and labours. 

_ Nor do writers require any supply of matter 

| 

resonance, or a voice of God, embracing the — 
universe, or an earthquake of the world, by | 
_everybody’s mouth, and he is the best teacher 

some unheard of miracle, it is his voice and 
intellect which deserve these titles, for sur- 

passing and excelling all men as much as we | 

surpass the irrational creatures. 

Who, more © 

than he, cleansed himself by the Spirit, and | 
_ who are specially eager for instruction. 

made himself worthy to set forth divine 
things? Who was more enlightened by the 

light of knowledge, and had a closer in- | 

sight into the depths of the Spirit, and by the 
aid of God beheld the things of God ? Whose 
language could better express intellectual 
truth, without, as most men do, limping on 

GT. COrhixes2. B Eccles, iii. x, 

| 

besides his teaching or writings. All the 
laborious studies of old days in the Divine 
oracles are silent, while the new ones are in 

among us who has the deepest acquaintance 
with his works, and speaks of them and ex- 
plains them in our ears. For he alone more 
than supplies the place of all others to those 

67. I will only say this of him. Whenever 
I handle his Hexaemeron, and take its words 
on my lips, I am brought into the presence of 
the Creator, and understand the words of cre- 
ation, and admire the Creator more than be- 
fore, using my teacher as my only means of 

B PS. Xixx6, 
6 Rom. x. 18. 

a1 Cor. ii. 10. 
y Ps. xix. 5. 

GREGORY NAZIANZIEN, 

take up his poleimical 

works, I see the fire of Sodom,* by which the 
wicked and rebellious tongues are reduced to 
ashes, or the tower of Chalane,? impiously 
built,y and righteously destroyed. Whenever 
T read his writings on the Spirit, I find the 

God Whom I possess, and grow bold in my — 

utterance of the truth, from the support of his 
theology and contemplation. 

His other trea- | 

tises, in which he gives explanations for those — 

who are shortsighted, by a threefold inscrip- 
tion on the solid tablets of his heart, lead me 
on from a mere literal or symbolical interpre- 
tation to astill wider view, as I proceed from 
one depth to another, calling upon deep ® after 
deep, and finding light after light, until I at- 
tain the highest pinnacle. When I study his 
panegyrics on our athletes, I despise the body, 
and enjoy the society of those whom he is 
praising, and rouse myself to the struggle. 
His moral and practical discourses purify soul 
and body, making me a temple fit for God, 

The cnemy were on the watch for the unquali- 
hed statement.‘ the Spirit 1. Gods waels, 
although it is true, they and the wicked pa- 
tron of their impiety imagined to be impious ; 
so that they might banish him and his power 
of theological instruction from the city, and 
themselves be able to seize upon the church, 
and make it the starting point and citadel, 
from which they could overrun with their evil 
doctrine the rest of the world. Accordingly, 
by the use of other terms, and by statements 
which unmistakably had the same meaning, 
and by arguments necessarily leading to this 
conclusion, he so overpowered his antagonists, 
that they were left without reply, and in- 
volved in their own admissions,—the greatest 
proof possible of dialectical power and skill. 
His treatise on this subject makes it further 
manifest, being evidently written by a pen 
borrowed from the Spirit’s store. He post- 

_ poned for the time the use of the exact term, 

and an instrument struck by the Spirit, to — 

celebrate by its strains the glory and power of 
God. In fact, he reduces me to harmony and 

order, and changes me by a Divine transfor-— 

mation, 

68. Since I have mentioned theology, and 
his most sublime treatises in this science, I 
will make this addition to what I have already 
said. For it is of great service to the com- 
munity, to save them from being injured by 
an unjustifiably low opinion of him. My re- 
marks are directed against those evil disposed 

persons who shelter their own vices under — 

cover of their calumnies against others. In 

his defence of orthodox teaching, and of the | 

union and coequal divinity of the 
Trinity, to use terms which are, I think, as 
exact and clear as possible, he would have 
eagerly welcomed as a gain, and not a danger, 
not only expulsion from his see, in which he 

Holy | 

had originally no desire to be enthroned, but | 
 versations with me, from whom he concealed 

even exile, and death, and its preliminary 
tortures. This is manifest from his actual 
conduct and sufferings. For when he had 
been sentenced to banishment on behalf of the 
truth, the only notice which he took of it was, 
to bid one of his servants to take his writing 
tablet and follow him. He held it necessary, 

| ject, 

according to the divine David’s advice, to | 

guide his words with discretion,* and to en- 
dure for a while the time of war, and the as- 
cendency of the heretics, until it should be 
succeeded by a time of freedom and calm, 
which would admit of freedom of speech. 

a Gen. xix. 24. 

B Chalane, 
y Gen.xi..4; il 

: LXX, for Babel. 
Ps, xlit, 8. ii 

€ Tb cAit. 5. 

begging as a favour from the Spirit Himself 
and his earnest champions, that they would 
not be annoyed at his economy, nor, by 
clinging to a single expression, ruin the whole 
cause, from an uncompromising temper, at a 
crisis when religion was in peril. He assured 
them that they would suffer no injury from a 
slight change in their expressions, and from 
teaching the same truth in other terms. For 
our salvation is not so much a matter of words 
as of actions; for we would not reject the 
Jews, if they desired to unite with us, and yet 
for a while sought to use the term ‘‘ Anoint- 
ed’’ instead of ‘‘ Christ: ’’ while the com- 
munity would suffer a very serious injury, if 
the church were seized upon by the heretics. 
69. That he, no less than any other, ac- 
knowledged that the Spirit is God, is plain 
from his often having publicly preached this 
truth, whenever opportunity offered, and 
eagerly confessed it when questioned in pri- 
vate. But he made it more clear in his con- 

nothing during our conferences upon this sub- 
Not content with simply asserting it, he 
proceeded, as he had but very seldom done 
before, to imprecate upon himself that most 
terrible fate of separation from the Spirit, if 
he did not adore the Spirit as consubstantial 
and coequal with the Father and the Son. 
And if any one would accept me as having 
been his fellow labourer in this cause, I will 
set forth one point hitherto unknown to most 
men. Under the pressure of the difficulties 

a Economy. Jn refraining from the express assertion ‘The Holy 
Ghostis God” —some have blamed S. Basil for this: but his cons 
duct has the approval of S, Athanasius. Ep. ad Palladium, 

ee 

of the period, he himself undertook the 
economy, while allowing freedom of speech 
to me, whom no one was likely to drag from 
obscurity to trial or banishment, in order that 

die ee ee ON ey, eo, 

by our united efforts our Gospel might be | 

firmly established. I mention this, not to 
defend his reputation, for the man is stronger 
than his assailants, if there are any such; but 
to prevent men from thinking that the terms 
found in his writings are the utmost limit 
of the truth, and so have their faith weak- 
ened, and consider that their own error is 

supported by his theology, which was the | 

joint result of the influences of the time and 
of the Spirit, instead of considering the sense 
of his writings, and the object with which 

they were written, so as to be brought closer | 

to the truth, and enabled to silence the parti- 
sans of impiety. At any rate let his theology 
be mine, and that of all dear to me! And 

so confident am I of his spotlessness in this — 

respect, that I take him for my partner in 

was consummated. 

419 
der of life, but Basil’s whele life was a trans- 
lation, and he was completely tested in a 
complete life. Noah was entrusted with the 
ark,# and the seeds of a new world committed 
to a small house of wood, in their preserva- 
tion from the waters. Basil escaped the del- 
uge of impiety and made of his own city an 
ark of safety, which sailed lightly over the 
heretics, and afterwards recovered the whole 
world. 

71. Abraham was a great man, a patriarch, 
the offerer of the new sacrifice,® by presenting 
to Him who had given it the promised seed, 
as a ready offering, eager for slaughter. But 
Basil’s offering was no slight one, when he 
offered himself to God, without any equiva- 
lent being given in his stead, (for how could 
that have been possible?) so that his sacrifice 
Isaac was promised even 

_ before his birth,y Basil promised himself, and 

| 
| 

this, as in all else: and may what is mine be | 
attributed to him, what is his to me, both at | 

the hands of God, and of the wisest of men! 
Tor we would not say that the Evangelists are 

took for his spouse Rebekah, I mean the 
Church, not fetched from a distance by the 
mission of a servant,® but bestowed upon and 
entrusted to him by God close at home: nor 
was he outwitted in the preference of his 

_ children, but bestowed upon each what was 

at variance with one another, because some | 

are more occupied with the human side of 
the Christ, and others pay attention to His 
Divinity ; some having commenced their his- 
tory with what is within our own experience, 
others with what is above us; and by thus 
sharing the substance of their message, they 

have procured the advantage of those who | 
receive it, and followed the impressions of | 

the Spirit Who was within them. 

7o. Come then, there have been many men 
of old days illustrious for piety, as lawgivers, 
generals, prophets, teachers, and men brave 
to the shedding of blood. 
our prelate with them, and thus recognize his 
merit. Adam was honoured by the hand of 
God,¢ and the delights of Paradise,® and the 
first legislation: Y but, unless I slander the 
reputation of our first parent, he kept not the 
command. Now Basil both received and 

observed it, and received no injury from the | 

tree of knowledge, and escaped the flaming 
sword, and, as I am well assured, has attained 
to Paradise. Inos first ventured to call upon 
the Lord.6 Basil both called upon Him 
himself, and, what is far more excellent, 
preached Him to others. Enoch was_ trans- 
lated,¢ attaining to his translation as the reward 
of a little piety (for the faith was still in 
shadow) and escaped the peril of the remain- 

B Ib. it. 8. 4. Ib. ity 10; 

a Gen. i, 27. a 
€ Ibs, ¥,.27. 

61h. iv. 26, 

Let us compare | 

due to him, without any deception, according 
to the judgment of the Spirit. I extol the 
ladder of Jacob,* and the pillar which he 
anointed to God, and his wrestling with Him, 
whatever it was; and, in my opinion, it was 
the contrast and opposition of the human 
stature to the height of God, resulting in the 
tokens of the defeat’ of his race. I ex- 
tol also his clever devices and success in cat- 
tle-breeding, and his children, the twelve 
Patriarchs, and the distribution of his bless- 
ings, with their glorious prophecy of the fu- 
ture. But I still more extol Basil for the lad- 
der which he did not merely see, but which 

he ascended by successive steps towards ex- 

| 
| 

_ food. 

cellence, and the pillar which he did not 
anoint, but which he erected to God, by pil- 
lorying the teaching of the ungodly ; and the 
wrestling with which he wrestled, not with 
God, but, on behalf of God, to the overthrow 
of the heretics ; and his pastoral care, where- 
by he grew rich, through gaining for himself 
a number of marked sheep greater than that 
of the unmarked, and his illustrious fruitful- 
ness in spiritual children, and the blessing 
with which he established many. 

72. Joseph was a provider of corn,” but in 
Egypt only, and not frequently, and of bodily 
Basil did so for all men, and at all 

6 Tbh xii, __ y Ib. xviii. 10, 
e [b. xxvii. 12. ‘ 
n Gen. xli. 40, 

a Gen. vi. 13. 
6 Ib, xxiv. 3. : | 
¢ Defeat or “loss of generative power,” 

420 

times, and in spiritual food, and therefore, in 
my opinion, his was the more honourable 
function. Like Job, the man of Uz,* he was 
both tempted, and overcame, and at the 
close of his struggles gained splendid honour, 
having been shaken by none of his many as- 
sailants, and having gained a decisive victory 

over the efforts of the tempter, and put to | 

silence the unreason of his friends, who knew | 

not the mysterious character of his affliction. 
‘*Moses and Aaron among His priests.’’ 8 
Truly was Moses great, who inflicted the 
plagues upon Egypt,” and delivered the people 
among many signs and wonders, and entered 
within the cloud, and sanctioned the double 

| 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN:, 

consecrated to God from the womb, and 
offered with a coat¢ at the altar, and was he 
not a seer of heavenly things, and anointed of 
the Lord, and the anointer of those who are 
perfected by the Spirit? Among the kings, 

David is celebrated, whose victories and 
trophies® gained from the enemy are on 

record, but his most characteristic trait was 
his gentleness,y and, before his kingly oflice, 

his power with the harp, able to soothe even 

law, outward in the letter, and inward in the | 

Spirit. Aaron was Moses’ brother,® both natur- 
ally and spiritually, and offered sacrifices and 
prayers for the ‘people, as the hierophant of 
the great and holy tabernacle, which the 
Lord pitched, and not man.¢ Of both of 
them Basil was a rival, for he tortured, not 
with bodily but with spiritual and mental 
plagues, the Egyptian race of heretics, and 
led to the land of promise $ the people of pos- 
session, zealous of good works ;” he inscribed 
laws, which are no longer obscure, but en- 
tirely spiritual, on tables ® which are not broken 
but are preserved; he entered the Holy of 
holies, not once a year, but often, I may say 
every day, and thence he revealed to us the 
Holy Trinity; and cleansed the people, not 
with temporary sprinklings, but with eternal 
purifications. 
of Joshua?* His generalship, and the distri- 
bution of the inheritance, and the taking pos- 
session of the Holy Land. And was not Basil 
an Exarch?* Was he not a general of those 
who are saved by faith?“ Did he not assign 
the different inheritances and abodes, accord- 
ing to the will of God, among his followers ? 
So that he too could use the words, ‘‘ The 
lot is fallen unto me in pleasant places ;’’ ¥» and 
‘¢my fortunes are in Thy hands,’’ é fortunes 
more precious than those which come to us on 
earth, and can be snatched away. 

73. Further, to run over the Judges, or 
the most illustrious of the Judges, there is 
««Samuel among those that call upon His 
Name,’’° who was given to God before his 
birth,” and sanctified immediately after his 
birth, and the anointer with his horn of kings 
and priests.e But was not Basil as an infant 

a Jobi. 1 B P&. see 26: y Exod. vii. 8 et seq. 
OLD Xe A e Hebs vin, 2. exe, 
M-TAE, de 62 Cox, ais: EEROCUXMIV. 0% CRLED. M15, UIQ; 
«Josh. 1, 2, A Exarch or Metropolitan, 
Eph. u. 8. v Ps.exyvi.6. Tb. xx7a.. 16, 
O-[b; iGx1x. 6. WT Oain, 1y.20; p Lb. vi, 13> 

What is the special excellence — 
skin from on high, his indifference to the 

| 

| 
| 
\ 

the evil spirit. Solomon asked of God and 
obtained breadth of heart,® making the furth- 
est possible progress in wisdom and contem- 
plation, so that he became the most famous 
man of his time. Basil, in my opinion, was 
in no wise, or but little inferior, to the one in 
gentleness, to the other in wisdom, so that he 
soothed the arrogance of infuriated sovereigns 5 
and did not merely bring the queen of the 
south from the ends of the earth, or any 
other individual, to visit him because of his 
renown for wisdom, but made his wisdom 
known in all the ends of the world. I pass 
over the rest of Solomon’s life. Even if we 
spare it, it is evident to all. 

74. Do you praise the courage of Elijah ¢ in 
the presence of tyrants, and his fiery transla- 
tion ?¢ Or the fair inheritance of Elisha, the 
sheepskin mantle, accompanied by the spirit 
of Elijah?” You must also praise the life of 
Basil, spent in the fire. JI mean in the multi- 
tude of temptations, and his escape through 
fire, which burnt, but did not consume, the 
mystery of ‘*the bush,’’ ® and the fair cloak of 

flesh. I pass by the rest, the three young men 
bedewed in the fire,‘ the fugitive prophet pray- 
ing in the whale’s belly,* and coming forth 
from the creature, as from a chamber; the 
just man in the den, restraining the lions’ rage,* 
and the struggle of the seven Maccabees, 
who were perfected with their father and mo- 
ther in blood, and in all kinds of tortures. 
Their endurance he rivalled, and won their 
glory. 

75. I now turn to the New Testament, and 
comparing his life with those who are here 
illustrious, I shall find in the teachers a source 
of honour for their disciple. Who was the 
forerunner of Jesus?” John, the voice of the 
Word,é the lamp of the Light,° before Whom 
he even leaped in the womb,7 and Whom he 
preceded to Hades, whither he was despatched 
by the rage of Herod,? to herald even there 

a Chguipani i co: 
61 Kings iv. 29. 

@ Bxod-ainer: 
#2 Macc. vii..1. 
oS. John v. 35; 1.8. 

Be2ccameyve nleSh CXXRXIT eT (eons 
€ 2eKINLS Ah Koy AGL TEs EL Da Mie, 98 5s 
c Dan, iii. 5. « Jonah ii. 1. A Dan. vi. 22. 
v S. Luke i. 76, Solis ices 
TS. soukeul 4%. pS. Matt. xiv, 10. 

Him who was coming. And, if my language 

scems audacious to anyone, let me assure him | 

beforehand, that in making this comparison, 
I neither prefer Basil, nor imply that he is 
equal to him who surpasses all who are born 
cf women,* but only show that he was stirred 
to emulation, and possessed to some extent his 
striking features. For it is no slight thing for 
the earnest to imitate the greatest of men, 
even in a slight degree. Is it not indeed 
manifest that Basil was a copy of John’s asce- 
ticism 2? He also lived in the wilderness, and 
wore in nightly watchings a ragged garb, dur- 
ing his shrinking retirement ; he also loved a 
similar food, purifying himself for God by 
abstinence; he also was thought worthy to be 
a herald, if not a forerunner, of Christ, and 
there went out to him not only all the region 
round about,® but also that which was beyond 
its borders; he also stood between the two 
covenants, abolishing the letter of the one by 
administering the spirit of the other, and 
bringing about the fulfilment of the hidden 
law through the dissolution of that which 
was apparent. 

76. He emulated the zeal of Peter,y the in- 
tensity of Paul, the faith of both these men of 
name and of surname, the lofty utterance of 
the sons of Zebedee, the frugality and sim- 
plicity of all the disciples. Therefore he was 
also entrusted with the keys of the heavens,® 
and not only from Jerusalem and round about 
unto Ilyricum,¢ but he embraces a wider circle 
in the Gospel; he is not named, but becomes, 
a Son of thunder; and lying upon the breast 
of Jesus, he draws thence the power of his 
word, and the depth of his thoughts. He was 
prevented from becoming a Stephen,$ eager 
though he was, since reverence stayed the 
hands of those who would have stoned him. I 
am able to sum up still more concisely, to 
avoid treating in detail on these points of each 
individual. In some respects he discovered, 
in some he emulated, in others he surpassed 
the good. In his many-sided virtues he ex- 
celled all men of this day. I have but one 
thing left to say, and in few words. 

77. So great was his virtue, and the emi- 
nence of his fame, that many of his minor char- 
acteristics, nay, even his physical defects, have 
been assumed by others with a view to no- 
toriety. For instance his paleness, his beard, 
his gait, his thoughtful, and generally medita- 
tive, hesitation in speaking, which, in the ill- 
judged, inconsiderate imitation of many, took 
the form of melancholy. And_ besides, the 

y Acts iv. 8. 
¢ Acts vil. 58. 

a. So Mattixt. rire 
OSoMattexviea 

Pelbstit.+s. 
e Rom, xv. 1. 

SELB Pee VIR AON cae alee 

421 
style of his dress, the shape of his bed, and 
his manner of eating, none of which was to 
him a matter of consequence, but simply the 
result of accident and chance. So you might 
see many Basils in outward semblance, among 
these statues in outline, for it would be too 
much to call them his distant echo. For an 
echo, though it is the dying away of a sound, 
at any rate represents it with great clearness, 
while these men fall too far short of him to 
satisfy even their desire to approach him. 
Nor was it aslight thing, but a matter with 
good reason held in the highest estimation, to 
chance to have met him or done him some 
service, or to carry away the souvenir of some- 
thing which he had said or done in jest or in 
earnest: as I know that 1 have myself often 
taken pride in doing; for his improvisations 
were much more precious and brilliant than 
the laboured efforts of other men. 

78. But when, after he had finished his 
course, and kept the faith,* he longed to de- 
part, and the time for his crown was ap- 
proaching,® he did not hear the summons: 
‘“*Get thee up into the mountain and die,” y but 
* Die, and come up to us.” And here again he 
wrought a wonder in no wise inferior to those mentioned 
before. For when he was almost dead, and breathless, 

and had lost the greater part of his powers, he grew 
stronger in his last words, so as to depart with the 

| utterances of religion, and, by ordaining the most ex- 

cellent of his attendants, bestowed upon them both his 
hand and the Spirit: so that his disciples, who had 
aided him in his priestly office, might not be defrauded 
of the priesthood. The remainder of my task I ap- 
proach, but with reluctance, as it would fall more fitly 
from the mouths of others than from my own. For I 
cannot philosophise over my misfortune, even if I 
greatly longed to do so, when I recollect that the loss 
is common to us all, and that the misfortune has be- 
fallen the whole world. 

7g. He lay, drawing his last breath, and awaited by 
the choir on high, towards which he had long directed 
his gaze. Around him poured the whole city, unable 
to bear his loss, inveighing against his departure, as if 
it had been an oppression, and clinging to his soul, as 
though it had been capable of restraint or compulsion 
at their hands or their prayers. Their suffering had 
driven them distracted, all were eager, were it possible, 
to add to his life a portion of their own, And when 
they failed, for it must needs be proved that he was a 
man, and, with his last words ‘* Into thy Hands I com- 
mend my spirit,” 6 he had joyfully resigned his soul to 
the care of the angels who carried him away ; not with- 
out having some religious instructions and injunctions 
for the benefit of those who were present—then oc- 
curred a wonder more remarkable than any which had 
happened before. 

80. The saint was being carried out, lifted high by 
the hands of holy men, and everyone was eager, some 
to seize the hem of his garment,€ others only just to 
touch the shadow,$ or the bier which bore his holy re- 
mains (for what could be more holy or pure than that 
body), others to draw near to those who were carrying 

B Philei. 23.) y Deut. xxxii. 49. 
eS. Luke viii. 44. 

GActs. VTS. 

a2 Tim. iv. 7. 
© PSseckls 67 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

it, others only to enjuy the sight, as if even this were 
beneticial, Market places, porticos, houses of two or 
three stories were filled with people escorting, preced- 
ing, following, accompanying him, and trampling upon 
each other; tens of thousands of every race and age, 
beyond all previous experience. The psalmody was 
overborne by the lamentations, philosophic resignation 
sank beneath the misfortune. Our own people vied 
with strangers, Jews, Grecks, and foreigners, and they 
with us, for a greater share in the benefit, by means 
of amore abundant lamentation, To close my story, 
the calamity ended in danger ; many souls departed 
along with him, from the violence of the pushing and 
confusion, who have been thought happy in their end, 
departing together with him, ‘‘ funeral victims,” per- 
haps some fervid orator might call them, The body 
having at last escaped from those who would seize it, 
and made its way through those who went before it, 
was consigned to the tomb of his fathers, the high 
priest being added to the priests, the mighty voice 
which rings in my ears to the heralds, the martyr to 
the martyrs. And now he is in heaven, where, if I 
mistake not, he is offering sacrifices for us, and pray- 
ing for the people, for though he has left us, he has 
not entirely left us. While I, Gregory, who am half 
dead, and, cleft in twain, torn away from our great 
union, and dragging along a life of pain which runs 
not easily, as may be supposed, after separation from 
him, know not what is to be my end now that [ have 
lost my guidance. And even now I am admonished 
and instructed in nightly visions, if ever I fall short of 
my duty, 

| fought and the assaults we have endured. 

stay by thy cntreatics our thorn in the flesh,@ given to 
us by God for our discipline, or prevail upon us to 
bear it boldly, and guide all our life towards that 
which is most for our profit, And if we be translated, 
do thou receive us there also in thine own tabernacle, 
that, as we dwell together, and gaze together more 
clearly and more perfectly upon the holy and blessed 
Trinity, of Which we have now in some degree received 
the image, our longing may at last be satisfied, by 
gaining this recompense for all the battles we have 
Such are 

_ our words on thy behalf: who will there be to praise 
| us, since we leave this life after thee, even if we of- 

fer any topic worthy of words or praise in Christ Jesus 
our Lord, to Whom be glory forever? Amen, 

INTRODUCTION TO 
ORATION ON 

Tis Oration was not, as its tithe would perhaps 
lead us to suppose, delivered immediately after the 
first ; but an interval of many years elapsed between 
them, and the two have no connection with each oth- 
er. Chronologically they are the first and last of 5. 
Gregory’s Sermons, The Second was delivered in 
the Church of Arianzus, a village near Nazianzus, 
where he had inherited some property, to which he 
withdrew after resigning the Archbishopric of Con- 
stantinople, and then, finding the administration even 

THE. SECOND 
EASTER. 

_ of the little Bishopric of Nazianzus too much for 

And my present object is not so much to | 

mingle lamentations with my praises, or to portray the | 

public life of the man, or publish a picture of virtue 
common to all time, and an example salutary to all 
churches, and to all souls, which we may keep in view, 
as a living law, and so rightly direct our lives as to 
counsel you, who have been completely initiated into 
his doctrine, to fix your eyes upon him, as one who 
sees you and is seen by you, and thus to be perfected 
by the Spirit. 

81, Come hither then, and surround me, all ye 

laity, both of our own country and from abroad ; aid 
mie in my eulogy, by each supplying or demanding the 
account of some of his excellences, Regard, ye occu- 

pants of the bench, the lawgiver; ye politicians, the | 

statesman 3 ye men of the people, lis orderliness ; ye 
men of letters, the instructor ; ye virgins, the leader 
of the bride; ye who are yoked in marriage, the re- 
strainer ; ye hermits, him who gave you wings; ye 
cenobites, the judge ; ye simple men, the guide; ye 
contemplatives, the divine; ye cheerful ones, the 
bridie ; ye unforiunate men, the consoler, the staff of 
hoar hairs, the guide of youth, the relief of poverty, 
the steward of abundance. Widows also will, I imag- 
ine, praise their protector, orphans their father, poor 

men their friend, strangers their entertainer, brothers | 

the man of brotherly love, the sick their physician, 
whatever be their sickness and the healing they need, 
the healthy the preserver of health, and all men 

his advancing years and declining strength, he re- 
tired to Arianzus about the end of A.D. 383, dying 
there in 389 or 390. ‘‘ The exordium of this discourse 
is quite in the style of the Bible ; the Orator here de- 
scribes and puts words into the mouth of the Angel of 
the Resurrection. His object is to show the impor- 
tance of the day’s solemnities, and to explain allegor- 
ically all the circumstances of the ancient Passover, 
applying them to Christ and the Christian life. Two 
passages are borrowed verbatim from the discourse on 

: , | the Nativity, preached at Constantinople ” (Benoit). 
members of his choir, both of the clergy and the | 

The Benedictine Editors profess themselves unable 

to determine whether this repetition is due to 5, 
_ Gregory himself—or to the carelessness of some aman- 

him who made himself all things to all that he might | 

gain the majority, if not all. 

$2, This is my offering to thee, Basil, uttered by 
the tongue which once was the sweetest of all to thee, 
of him who was thy fellow in age and rank. 

uensis, 
ORATION XLV. 
THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER. 

I. I wiil stand upon my watch,® saith the 
venerable Habakkuk ; and I will take my post 
beside him today on the authority and ob- 
servation which was given me of the Spirit; 
and I will look forth, and will observe what 
shall be said to me. Well, I have taken my 
stand, and looked forth; and behold a man 

_ riding on the clouds and he is very high, and 

his countenance is as the countenance of an 
Angel,” and his vesture as the brightness of 

piercing lightning ; and he lifts his hand to- 

If it have j 

approached thy deserts, thanks are due to thee, for it | 

was from confidence in thee that I undertook to speak 
of thee. But if it fall far short of thy expectations, 
waat must be our feelings, who are worn out with age 
and disease and regret for thee ? Yet God is pleased, 
when we do what we can, Yet mayest thou gaze upon 
us from above, thou divine and sacred person ; either 

ward the East, and cries with a loud voice. 
His voice is like the voice of a trumpet; and 

round about Him is as it were a multitude of 

the Heavenly Host; and he saith, Today is 
salvation come unto the world, to that which 

a 2 Cor. xii. 7. 8 Hab. ii, 1 y Jud. xiii. 6 

IE SECOND (ORATION ON EASTER, 

is visible, and to that which is invisible. 
Christ is risen from the dead, rise ye with 
Him. Christ is returned again to Himself, 
return ye. Christ is freed from the tomb, be 
ye freed from the bond of sin. 
hell are opened, and death is destroyed, and 
the old Adam is put aside, and the New is 
fulfilled ; if any man be in Christ he is a new 
creature ;* be ye renewed. ‘Thus he speaks ; 
and the rest sing out, as they did before 
when Christ was manifested to us by His 
birth on earth, their glory to God in the 

The gates of 

423 

of expectation, but as having already come to 
pass, and gathering the whole world unto it- 
self. Tet then different persons bring forth 
different fruits and offer different offerings 
at this season, smaller or greater. . such 
spiritual offerings as are dear to God 

as each may have power. For scarcely An- 

_ gels themselves could offer gifts worthy of its 

highest, on earth, peace, goodwill among | 

men.8 
words among you. And would that I might 
Angel’s, and should sound through all the 
ends of the earth. 

II. ‘The Lord’s Passover, the Passover, and 
again I say the Passover to the honour of the 
Trinity. This is to us a Feast of feasts and a 
Solemnity of solemnities ¥ as far exalted above 
all others (not only those which are merely 
human and creep on the ground, but even 

And with them I also utter the same — 

rank, those first and intellectual and pure be- 
ings, who are also eye-witnesses of the Glory 
That is on high; if even these can attain the 
full strain of praise. We will for our part of- 
fer a discourse, the best and most precious 
thing we have—especially as we are praising 

the Word for the blessing which He hath 
recelyve a voice that should rank with the | 

those which are of Christ Himself, and are 

celebrated in His honour) as the Sun is above 
the stars. Beautiful indeed yesterday was our 
splendid array, and our illumination, in which 
both in public and private we associated our- 

» | 
selves, every kind of men, and almost every | 

rank, illuminating the night with our crowded 
fires, formed after the fashion of that great 
light, both that with which the heaven above 
us lights its beacon fires, and that which is 
above the heavens, amid the angels (the first 
luminous nature, next to the first nature of 
all, because springing directly from it), and 
that which is in the Trinity, from which all 
light derives its being, parted from the un- 
divided light and honoured. 

bestowed on the reasoning creation. I will 
begin from this point. For I cannot endure, 
when I am engaged in offering the sacrifice of 
the lips concerning the Great Sacrifice and 
the greatest of days, to fail to recur to God, 
and to take my beginning from Him. ‘There- 
fore I pray you, cleanse your mind and ears 
and thoughts, all you who delight in such sub- 

jects, since the discourse will be concerning 

God, and will be divine; that you may de- 
part filled with delights of a sort that do not 
pass away into nothingness. And it shall be 
at once very full and very concise, so as nei- 
ther to distress you by its deficiencies, nor to 
displease you by satiety. 

III. God# always was and always is, and al- 
ways will be; or rather, God always Is8 For 
Was and Will Be are fragments of our time, 
and of changeable nature. But He is Eternal 

| Being; and this is the Name He gives Him- 

But today’s — 

is more beautiful and more illustrious ; inas-— 

much as yesterday’s light was a forerunner 

of the rising of the Great Light, and as it~ 

were a kind of rejoicing in preparation for 
the Festival; but today we are celebrating 

the Resurrection itself, no longer as an object” 

(1 Oo} ABS gm 

B ‘The reading ev8oxca of the Received Text is pronounced by 
‘Tischendorf to have less authority than evdoxtas, which he adopts 
on the testimony of important MSS., but chiefly on the strength 
of a citation and comment three times in Origen, and because all 
the Latin Fathers read dona voluntatis. Lachmann, ‘Tregelles, 
Westcott, and with some hesitation Alford follow him; though 
Tregelles and Westcott allow evdoxias a place in the margin. 
Wordsworth (giving no reason) ; and Scrivener because he thinks 
it makes better sense, read evéoxia, and scout evéokias ; which, 
however, is found in four of the five oldest MSS., and in all the 
Tatin versions and Fathers. ‘The Greek Fathers, however, all but 
unanimously support the Received Text. 

y€optTH éoptwr, Kat mavyiyupis mavnyvpiov. éopTy says Nice- 

tas, is one thing, majyupis another. éopty is the Commemora- 
tion ofa Saint; mavyyvpts is Easter, or Ascension, or some other 
mystical festival. Thus Synesius calls the Paschal Letters of the 
Alexandrian Patriarch mavnyupica ypdumara, 

| Mount. 

self when giving the Oracles to Moses in the 
Yor in Himself He sums up and 
contains all Being, having neither beginning 
in the past nor end inthe future . like some 
great Sea of Being, limitless and unbounded, 
transcending all conception of time and nature, 
only adumbrated by the mind, and that very 
dimly and scantily not by His Essentials 
but by His Environment,’ one image being 
got from one source and another from another, 
and combined into some sort of presentation 
of the truth, which escapes us before we have 

caught it, and which takes to flight before we 

have conceived it, blazing forth upon our 
master-part, even when that is cleansed, as 

the lightning flash which will not stay its 

a This passage to the end ofc. ix. occurs verbatim in the oration 
on the ‘Theophany, ce.vit.-aiit. 

B “There is no Past in Eternity, and no Future; for that which 
is past has ceased to be, and that which is future has not yet 
come into existence ; but Eternity is only Present; it has no Past 
which does not still exist nor any Future which does not yct 
exist” (S. Augustine de Vera Rel., c. 49). 

The Environment here spoken of seems to mean those 
| created Existences of which God is the Self-Existent Cause, 

424 

‘ in order, as I 
conceive, by that part of it which we can 

course does upon our sight 2. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

comprehend to draw us to itself (for that | 

which is altogether incomprehensible is out- 
side the bounds of hope, and not within the 

compass of endeavour) ; and by that part of It | 

Which we cannot comprehend to move our 
wonder; and as an object of wonder to be- 
come more an object of desire; and being 
desired, to purify ; and purifying to make us 
like God ; so that, when we have become like 
Himself, God may, to use a bold expression, 
hold converse with us as God ; being united 

the same extent as He already knows those 
who are known to Him.¢ ‘The Divine Nature, 

into heathenism by the multitude of our gods. 
lor the evil on either side is the same, though 
found in contrary directions. ‘Thus then is 
the Holy of Holies, Which is hidden even 
from the Seraphim, and is glorified with a 
thrice-repeated Holy meeting in one ascription 
of the title Lord and God, as one of our 
predecessors has most beautifully and loftily 
reasoned out. 

V. But since this movement of Self-contem- 
plation alone could not satisfy Goodness, but 
Good must be poured out and go forth be- 

yond Itself, to multiply the objects of Its 
to us, and known by us; and that perhaps to | 

beneficence (for this was essential to the high- 

_ est Goodness), He first conceived the Angelic 

then, is boundless and hard to understand, and | 

all that we can comprehend of Him is His 
boundlessness ; even though one may conceive 
that because He is of a simple Nature He is 
therefore either wholly incomprehensible or 
perfectly comprehensible. For let us further 
enquire what is implied by ‘‘is of a simple 
Nature ?”’ 
simplicity is not itself its nature, just as com- 
position is not by itself the essence of com- 
pound beings. 

IV. And when Infinity is considered from 

For it is quite certain that this. 

| 

two points of view, beginning and end (for | 

that which is beyond these and not limited 

into the depths above, not having where to 
stand, and leans upon phenomena to form 
an idea of God it calls the Infinite and Un- 
approachable which it finds there by the 
name of Unoriginate. And when it looks 
into the depth below and at the future, it 
calls Him Undying and Imperishable. And 
when it draws a conclusion from the whole, it 
calls Him Eternal. 
time nor part of time; for it cannot be 
measured. But what time measured by the 
course of the sun is to us, that Eternity is to 
the Everlasting ; namely a sort of timelike 
movement and interval, coextensive with 
Their Existence. This however is all that I 
must now say of God; for the present is not 
asuitable time, as my present subject is not 
the doctrine of God, but that of the Incarn- 
ation. And when I say God, I mean Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost ; for Godhead is neither 

and Heavenly Powers. And _ this conception 
was a work fulfilled by His Word and jer- 
fected by His Spirit. And so the Secondary 
Splendours came into being, as the ministers 

of the Primary Splendour (whether we are to 
conceive of them as intelligent Spirits, or as 

| Fire of an immaterial and incorporeal kind, 

or as some other nature approaching this as 
near as may be). I should like to say that 
they are incapable of movement in the direc- 
tion of evil, and susceptible only of the move- 
ment of good, as being about God and illum- 
inated with the first Rays from God (for 
earthly beings have but the second illumina- 

_ tion), but I am obliged to stop short of saying 
by them is Infinity), when the mind looks | 

that they are immovable, and to conceive and 

speak of them as only difficult to move, be- 

lor Eternity is neither | 

diffused beyond These, so as to introduce a_ 

mob of gods, nor yet bounded by a smaller 
compass than These, so as to condemn us_ for 
a poverty stricken conception of Deity, either 
Judaizing to save the Monarchia, or falling 

a Johnex, x53. x4Cor, -xiliere: 
33 

cause of him who for His Splendour was called 
Lucifer, but became and is called Darkness 
through his pride; and the Apostate Hosts 
who are subject to him, creators of evil by 
their revolt against good, and our inciters. 
VI. Thus then and for these reasons, He gave 
being to the world of thought, as far as I can 
reason on these matters, and estimate great 
things in my own poor language. Then, when 
His first Creation was in good order, He con- 
ceives a second world, material and visible ; 
and this a system of earth and sky and all that 
is in the midst of them; an admirable crea- 
tion indeed when we look at the fair form of 
every part, but yet more worthy of admiration 
when we consider the harmony and unison of 
the whole, and how each part fits in with 

_ every other in fair order, and all with the 

whole, tending to the perfect completion of 
the world asa Unit. This was to shew that 
He could call into being not only a nature 
akin to Himself, but also one altogether alien 
to Him. For akin to Deity are those natures 
which are intellectual, and only to be com- 
prehended by mind; but all of which sense 
can take cognizance are utterly alien to It; 

THE ea, elias vecina rae 

and of these 
all those which are entirely destitute of soul 
and power of motion. 

VII. Mind then and sense, thus distin- 
cuished from each other, had remained within 
their own boundaries, and bore in themselves 
the magnificence of the Creator-Word, silent 
praisers and thrilling heralds of His mighty 

work. Not yet was there any mingling of 
both, nor any mixture of these opposites, 

tokens of a greater wisdom and generosity in 
the creation of natures; nor as yet were the 
whole riches of goodness made known. Now 
the Creator-Word, determining to exhibit 
this, and to produce a single living being out 
of both (the invisible and the visible creation, 
I mean) fashions Man; and taking a body 

the furthest removed from It are | 

— tongues in that direction, 

ON EASTER. 428 

act upon. ‘This Law was a commandment as 
to what plants he might partake of, and which 
one he might not touch. ‘This latter was the 
Tree of Knowledge; not, however, because it 
was evil from the beginning when planted ; 

nor was it forbidden bec ause God grudged it 
to men—let not the enemies of God wag their 
or imitate the ser- 
pent. But it would have been good if partaken 
of at the proper time; for the ‘Tree was, ac- 

_ cording to my theory, Contemplation, which 

from already existing matter, and placing in , 

it a Breath taken from Himself (which the 
Word knew to be an intelligent soul, and the 
image of God), as a sort of second world, 
great in littleness, He placed him on the 
earth, a new Angel, a mingled worshipper, 
fully initiated into the visible creation, but 
only partially into the intellectual ; king of all 
upon earth, but subject to the King above; 
earthly and heavenly ; temporal and yet im- 
mortal ; visible and yet intellectual ; half-way 

between greatness and lowliness ; in one per-— 
son combining spirit and flesh ; spirit because 

of the favour bestowed on him, flesh on ac- 

count of the height to which he had been — 

raised ; the one that he might continue to live 

and glorify his benefactor, the other that he | 
might suffer, and by suffering be put in re- | 
membrance, and be corrected if he became | 

proud in his greatness; a living creature, 
trained here and then moved elsewhere; and 
to complete the mystery, deified by its inclin- 
ation to God for to this, I think, 
tends that light of Truth which here we pos- 
sess but in measure ; that we should both see 
and experience the Splendour of God, which 
is worthy of Him Who made us, and will dis- 
solve us, and remake us after a loftier fashion. 

VIII. This being He placed in paradise— 
whatever that paradise may have been (having 
honoured him with the gift of free will, in 
order that good might belong to him as the 
result of his choice, no less than to Him Who 
had implanted the seeds of it)—to till the im- 
mortal plants, by which is perhaps meant the 
Divine conceptions, both the simpler and the 
more perfect ; naked in his simplicity and in- 
artificial life; and without any covering or 
screen ; for it was fitting that he who was from 
the beginning should be such. And He gave 
Fina law, 

it is only safe for those who have reached ma- 
turity of habit to enter upon; but which 

not good for those who are still somewhat 
simple and greedy; just as neither is solid 
food good for those who are yet tender and 
have need of milk. But when through the 
devil’s malice and the woman’s caprice,* to 
which she succumbed as the more tender, and 
which she brought to bear upon the man, as 
she was the more apt to persuade—alas for my 
weakness, for that of my first father was mine ; 
he forgot the commandment which had been 
given him, and yielded to the baleful fruit ; 
and for his sin was banished at once from the 
tree of life, and from paradise, and from God ; 
and put on the coats of skins, that is, perhaps, 
the coarser flesh, both mortal and contradict- 
ory. And this was the first thing which he 
learnt—his own shame—and he hid himselt 
from God. Yet here too he makes a gain, 

namely death and the cutting off of sin, in 
order that evil may not be immortal. ‘Thus, 

his punishment is changed into a mercy, for 
it is in mercy, I am persuaded, that God in- 
flicts punishment. 

TX. And having first been chastened by 
many means because his sins were many, whose 
root of evil sprang up through divers causes and 

sundry times, by word, by law, by prophets, 

as material for his free will to ; 

by benefits, by threats, by plagues, by waters, 
by fires, by wars, by victories, by defeats, by 
signs in heaven, and signs in the air, and in 
the earth, and in the sea; by unexpected 
changes of men, of cities, of nations (the ob- 
ject of which was the destruction of wicked- 
ness) at last he needed a stronger remedy, for 

his diseases were growing worse ; mutual 
slaughters, adulteries, perjuries, unnatural 

crimes, and that first and last of all evils, idol- 
atry, and the transfer of worship from the 
Creator to the creatures. As these Be a 
greater aid, so they also obtained a greater, 

And that was that the Word of God Himself, 
Who is before all worlds, the Invisible, the 
Incomprehensible, the Bodiless, the Begin- 

a Wisd, il, 24. 

ning of beginning, the Light of Light, 
Source of Lite and Immortality, the Image of 
the Archetype, the Immovable Seal, the Un- 
changeable Image, the Father’s Definition and 
Word, 
Him Flesh for the sake of our flesh, and min- 
gled Himself with an intelligent soul for my 
soul’s sake, purifying like by like; and in all 
points except sin was made Man; conceived 
by the Virgin, who first in body and soul was 

came to His ee Image, and took on | 

purified by the Holy Ghost, for it was needful | 
both ‘That Child- bearing should be honoured | 
and that Virginity should receive a higher 

honour. He came forth then, as God, with 
‘Vhat which He had assumed; one Person 
in two natures, flesh and Spirit, of which 
the latter deified the former. O new com- 
mingling ; O strange conjunction! the Self- 
existent comes into Being, the Uncreated is 
created, That which cannot be contained is 
contained by the intervention of an intellect- 
ual soul mediating between the Deity and the 
corporeity of the flesh. And He who gives 
riches becomes poor ; for He assumes the pov- 
erty of my flesh, 
of His Godhead. 
Himself; for He empties 

Himself of His 

Glory for a short while, that I may have a- 

share in His Fulness. What is the riches of 
His Goodness ? What is this mystery that is 
around me? I had a share in the Image and 
I did not keep it; He partakes of my flesh 
that He may both save the Image and make 
the flesh immortal. He communicates a Sec- 
ond Communion, 
the first, inasmuch as then He imparted the 
better nature, but now He Himself assumes 
the worse. ‘This is more godlike than the 
former action ; this is loftier in the eyes of all 
men of understanding. 

that I may assume the riches — 
He that is full empties 

the | 
of Promise. 

sairachalat Dice iacomes 

ieee etre to things above and to the Land 
And we observe that a thing 
which we often find to have happened in 
Scripture, the change of certain nouns from 
an uncertain to a clearer sense, or from a 
coarser to a more refined, has taken place in 
this instance. For some people, supposing 
this to be a name of the Sacred Passion, and 
in consequence Grecizing the word by chang- 
ing Phi and Kappa into Pi and Chi, called 
the Day Pascha.* And custom took it up and 
confirmed the word, with the help of the ears 
of most people, to whom it had a more pious 
sound. 

XI. But before our time the Holy Apostle 
declared that the Law was but a shadow of 
things to come,® which are conceived by 
thought. And God too, who in still older 
times gave oracles to Moses, said when giving 
laws concerning these things, See thou make 
all things according to the pattern shewed 
thee in the Mount,Y when He shewed him the 
visible things as an adumbration of and de- 
sign for the things that are invisible. And 
I am persuaded that none of these things 
has been ordered in vain, none without a rea- 

_son, none in a grovelling manner or unwor- 

far more marvellous than | 

X. But perhaps some one of those who are > 

too impetuous and festive may say, ‘* What has 
all this to do with us? Spur on your horse 
to the goal; talk to us about the Festival and 
the reasons for our being here to-day.’’ Yes, 

this is what [am about to do, although I have | 

begun at a somewhat previous point, being 
compelled to do so by the needs of my argu- 
ment. 
scholars and lovers of the beautiful if we say 
a few words about the word Pascha itself, for 
such an addition will not be useless in their 
ears. ‘This great and venerable Pascha is 
called Phaska by the Hebrews in their own 
language ; andthe word means Passing Over. 
Historically, from their flight and migration 
from Egypt into the Land of Canaan ; spirit- 
ually, from the progress 

There will be no harm in the eyes of | 

thy of the legislation of God and the ministry 
of Moses, even though it be difficult in cach 
type to find a theory descending to the most 
delicate details, to every point about the 
Tabernacle itself, and its measures and mate- 
rials, and the Levites and Priests who carried 
them, and all the particulars which were en- 
acted about the Sacrifices and the purifica- 
tions and the Offerings ;* and though these 
are only to be understood by those who rank 
with Moses in virtue, or have made the near- 
est approach to his learning. For in that 
Mount itself God is seen by men ; on the one 
hand through His own descent from His lofty 
abode, on the other through His drawing us 
up from our abasement on earth, that the In- 
comprehensible may be in some degree, and 
as far as is safe, comprehended by a mortal 
nature. For in no other way is it possible 
for the denseness of a material body and an 

a Pascha represents the Hebrew PHSKH. Throughout 2 Chron, 
the LXX. represents the word by Phasek, which like Pascha is a 
transliteration of the Hebrew word. Vhe form which the translit- 

' eration takes is due to the fact that the Greek language does not 

and sanent from | 

tolerate these two aspirates in juxtaposition. S, Gregory is cor- 
rect in remarking that Pascha has no real connection with macxw 

| (to suffer), though it might appear to unlearned ears that it has. 

B Heb; x. y Exod. xxv. 4o. 

S agaipeua is given by the Lexicons as the Heave-Offering, and 
it is certainly used in that sense among others (all sacrificial) in 
the LXX. Suicer, however, follows Suidas in regarding the word 
as quite general ; he also quotes Zonaras’ definition , ‘Quod offer- 
tur apatpena dicitur, quod a toto mactatz animantis corpore ab- 
stractum sit.” Balsamon, according to the same authority, makes it 
the portion which was severed from the carcase of the victim and 
set apart for the Priest (/.e., the heave-offering, Lev. vii. 14, 32). 

THE, SECOND ORATION (ON BASTER, 

imprisoned mind to come into consciousness | 
of God, except by His assistance. ‘Then 
therefore all men do not seem to have been | 
deemed worthy of the same rank and _ posi- | 
tion; but one of one place and one of an- 
other, each, I think, according to the measure | 
of his own purification. Some have even | 
been altogether driven away, and only per- | 
mitted to hear the Voice from on high, name- 
ly those whose dispositions are altogether like 
wild beasts, and who are unworthy of divine | 
mysteries. 
XII. But we, standing midway between | 
those whose minds are utterly dense on the 
one side, and on the other those who are very | 
contemplative and exalted, that we may 
neither remain quite idle and immovable, nor 
yet be more busy than we ought, and fall 
short of and be estranged from our purpose— — 
for the former course is Jewish and very low, | 
and the latter is only fit for the dream-sooth-_ 
sayer, and both alike are to be condemned—. | 
let us say our say upon these matters, so far | 
as is within our reach, and not very absurd, 
or exposed to the ridicule of the multitude. 
Our belief is that since it was needful that we, 
who had fallen in consequence of the original | 
sin, and had been led away by pleasure, even | 
as far as idolatry and unlawful bloodshed, 
should be recalled and raised up again to our | 
original position through the tender mercy of | 
God our Father, Who could not endure that 
such a noble work of His own hands as Man 
should be lost to Him; the method of our 
new creation, and of what should be done, 
was this :—that all violent remedies were dis- 
approved, as not likely to persuade us, and 
as quite possibly tending to add to the plague, 
through our chronic pride; but that God dis- 
posed things to our restoration by a gentle 
and kindly method of cure. For a crooked 
sapling will not bear a sudden bending the 
other way, or violence from the hand that 
would straighten it, but will be more quickly 
broken than straightened; and a horse of a 
hot temper and above a certain age will not 
endure the tyranny of the bit without some 
coaxing and encouragement. ‘Therefore the 
Law is given to us as an assistance, like a 
boundary wall between God and idols, draw- 
ing us away from one and to the Other. And 
it concedes a little at first, that it may receive 
that which is greater. It concedes the Sacri- 
fices for a time, that it may establish God in 
us, and then when the fitting time shall come 
may abolish the Sacrifices also; thus wisely 
changing our minds by gradual removals, 
and bringing us over to the Gospel when we 

have already been trained to a prompt obedi- 
ence. 

XIII. ‘Thus then and for this cause the writ- 
ten Law came in, gathering us into Christ ; and 
this is the account of the Sacrifices as I ac- 
count for them, And that you may not be 
ignorant of the depth of His Wisdom and _ the 
riches of His unsearchable judgments,¢ He did 

~not leave even these unhallowed altogether, 
_or useless, or with nothing in them but mere 

blood.8 But that great, and if I may say so, 
in Its first nature unsacrificeable Victim, wes 
intermingled with the Sacrifices of the Law, 
and was a purification, not for a part of the 
world, nor for a short time, but for the whole 
world and for all time. For this reason a 
Lamb was chosen for its innocence, and its 
clothing of the original nakedness. For such 
is the Victim, ‘That was offered for us, Who 
is both in Name and fact the Garment of in- 
corruption. And He was a perfect Victim 
not only on account of His Godhead, than 
which nothing is more perfect; but also on 

account of that which He assumed having 
_ been anointed with Deity, and having become 
one with That which anointed It, and I am 

bold to say, made equal with God. 
because offered for Adam ; 

A Male, 
or rather the 

_ Stronger for the strong, when the first Man 

had fallen under sin; and chiefly because 
there is in Him nothing feminine, nothing 
unmanly ; but He burst from the bonds of 
the Virgin-Mother’s womb with much power, 
and a Male was brought forth by the Proph- 
etess,Y as Isaiah declares the good tidings. 
And of a year old, because He is the Sun of 
Righteousness ® setting out from heaven, and 
circumscribed by His visible Nature, and _ re- 
turning unto Himself.¢ And ‘¢The blessed 
crown of Goodness,’’—being on every side 
equal to Himself and alike ; and not only this, 
but also as giving life to all the circle of the 
virtues, gently commingled and intermixed 
with each other, according to the Law of 
Love and Order.¢ And Immaculate and 

a Rom. xi. 33. : 

B'Vhe Jewish Sacrifices had a deep inner meaning and mystery. 
In a limited sense they may be called Sacraments of the future 
Atonement, which they prefigured and appealed to. But only in 
a limited sense can they be so called, because they did not convey 
grace to the soul, but only appealed to the grace to come ; and so 
the Sin-offerings of the Law are only said to cover, not to fake 
away sin. They removed the spiritual disqualification for wor- 
ship; but they did not restore full Spiritual Communion with God, 
Still they were not altogether unhallowed or useless like those of 
the heathen, inasmuch as they did point forward and plead the 
merits of the One true Sacrifice. : 

MeiG At, seus S S Mal, wv. 2... 

e ‘The Greek here is very obscure. ‘Ihe meaning seems to be 
that which Nicetas suggests, viz.:—-that our Lord in coming to 
earth and becoming Incarnate did not in His Divine Nature leave 
Heaven, but was, while stil here on earth in His own words, 
“The Son of Man Which is in Heaven.” 

¢Christ is ‘fa blessed crown of goodness’ 

’ 

according to the 

428 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

guileless, as being the Healer of faults, and of 

the defects and taints that come from sin. 
For though He both took on Him our sins 
and bare our diseases, yet He did not Him- 
self suffer aught that needed healing. For 
He was tempted in all points lke as we are 
yet without sin.® For he that persecuted the 
Light that shineth in darkness could not over- 
take Him. 

XIV. What more? The First Month 
introduced, or rather the beginning of months, 
whether it was so among the Hebrews from the 
beginning, or was made so later on this account, 
and became the first in. consequence of the 
Mystery; and the tenth of the Month, for this 
is the most complete number, of units the first 
perfect unit, and the parent of perfection. And 

is 

| ent life, into which tne 

piuneval darxness is 

dissolved, and all things come into life and 

it is kept until the fifth day, perhaps because | 

the Victim, of Whom Iam speaking, purifies the 
five senses, from which comes falling into sin, 
and around which the wer rages, inasmuch as 
they are open to the incitements to sin. And 
it was chosen, not only out of the lambs, but also 
out of the inferior species, which are placed on 
the left hand Y—the kids; because He is sacri- 
ficed not only for the righteous, but also for 
sinners ; and perhaps even more for these, in- 
asmuch as we have greater need of His mercy. 
And we need not be surprised that a lamb 
for a house should be required as the best 
course, but if that could not be, then one 
might be obtained by contributions (owing to 
poverty) for the houses of a family ; because it 
is clearly best that each individual should suf- 
fice for his own perfecting, and should offer his 
own living sacrifice holy unto God Who called 
him, being consecrated at all times and in 
every respect. But if that cannot be, then that 
those who are akin in virtue and of like dispos- 
ition should be made use of as helpers. For 
I think this provision means that we should 
communicate of the Sacrifice to those who are 
nearest, if there be need. 

XV. Then comes the Sacred Night, the An- 
niversary of the confused darkness of the pres- 

saying of David, Thou shalt bless the crown of the year with Thy 
goodness (Ps. Ixv. 11). The idea of a year is taken from the Sun; 

that of the crown from the year (for the year is a circle guarded 
with four seasons), and from the circle again equality. Therefore 
the crown is Christ, as adorning and beautifyi ing the minds of be- 
lievers. But the year of Goodness was that time when Christ 
moved by goodness was declaring the Gospel, as Isaiah saith of 

Fath He hath sent Me to preach the Gospel to the poor, to pro- | 

claim the acceptable year of the Lord” (Isa, Ixi, 1, 2). Thus the 
Crown is on every side equal. For if one draw a line from the 
upper side to the lower, and the same in a tr: ausverse direction, all 
the intervals will be equal, And _ the Crown is like itself, because 
its figure is seen alike on every side, for on every side it is seen as 
a round. 
of Righteousness, as composed of all the virtues, and having no 
end of His goodness and righteousness ; and of chek righteousness 
one quality is equality, that is, it allows neither excess nor defect. 
For excess and defect do not arise from virtue and righteousness, 
but from fault and unrighteousness (Nicetas). 

alsa, lili. 4. Biteb ave 15) Math XAY... 33. 

Therefore Christ as to His Humanity is called a Crown | 

| 

rank and form, and that which was chaos is 
reduced to order. ‘Then we flee from Egypt, 
that is from sullen persecuting sin; and from 
Pharaoh the unseen tyrant, and the bitter 
taskmasters, changing our quarters to the world 
above; and are delivered from the clay and 
the brickmaking, and from the husks and dan- 
gers of this fleshly condition, which for most 
men is only not overpowered by mere husklike 
calculations. ‘Then the Lamb is slain, and act 
and word are sealed with the Precious Blood ; 
that is, habit and action, the sideposts of our 
doors; I mean, of course, of the movements of 
mind and opinion, which are rightly opened 
and closed by contemplation, since there is a 
limit even to thoughts. . Then the last and 
gravest plague upon the persecutors, truly wor- 
thy of the night; and Egypt mourns the first- 
born of her own reasonings and actions which 
are also called in the Scripture the Seed of the 
Chaldeans* removed, and the children of Baby- 
lon dashed against the rocks and destroyed ; 4 
and the whole air is full of the cry and clamour 
of the Egyptians ; and then the Destroyer of 
them shall withdraw from us in reverence of 
the Unction. Then the removal of leaven ; 
that is, of the old and sour wickedness, not of 
that which is quickening and makes bread ; 
for seven days, a number which is of all the 
most mystical,Y and is co-ordinate with this 
present world, that we may not lay in provis- 
ion of any Egyptian dough, or relic of Pharisaic 
or ungodly teaching. 

XVI. Well, let them lament ; we will feed 
on the Lamb toward evening—for Christ’s 
Passion was in the completion of the ages ; be- 
cause too He communicated His Disciples in 
the evening with His Sacrament, destroying 
the darkness of sin; and not sodden, but roast 
—that our word may have in it nothing that is 
unconsidered or watery, or easily made away 
with ; but may be entirely consistent and solid, 
and free from all that is impure and from all 
vanity. And let us be aided by the good coals,$ 
kindling and purifying our minds from Him 

a Judith v. 6. 

B: PS CRS: 

y We are to part with leaven for seven days (Exod. xii. 15), 
that is, with sin for the whole week of this life. ‘The number Seven 
Days signifies the passing of time which revolves in weeks. And 

this number is mystical, because it is virgin and signifies virginity 
and the angelic life; for it alone, as arithmeticians teach, of all 
the numbers within the decade. is neither a multiple nor a measure, 
and also contains in itself the Four and the Three. Tor there are 
four elements of the world, and the ‘Trinity is their Creator, He 
calls it co-ordinate with the world, because the world was made in 
seven days, and again because when seven thousand years are 
completed the end ef the world is to come (Nicetas). S. Augustine 
(Civ. Dei.c. il. 31) says that the number Seven often stands for 
the Universe, because it is made up of Four which is altogether 
even (2 and 2 the sum of two even numbers) and ‘Three which is 
altogether uneven (t and 1 and 1). Iisaeevi.e6, 

That cometh to send fire on the carth,« that 
shall destroy all evil habits, and to hasten its 
kindling. Whatsoever then there be, of solid 
and nourishing in the Word, shall be eaten with 
the inward parts and hidden things of the 
mind, and shall be consumed and given up to 
spiritual digestion; aye, from head to foot, 
that is, from the first contemplations of God- 
head to the very last thoughts about the Incar- 
nation. Neither let us carry aught of it abroad 
nor leave it till the morning ; 
our Mysteries may not be carried out to them 
that are outside, nor is there beyond this night 
any further purification ; and procrastination is 
not creditable to those who have a share in the 
Word. lor just as it is good and well-pleasing 
to God not to let anger last through the day,® 
but to get rid of it before sunset, whether you 
take this of time or in a mystical sense, for it is 
not safe for us that the Sun of Righteousness 
should go down upon our wrath; so too we 
ought not to let such Food remain all night, 
nor to put it off till to-morrow. But whatever 
is Of bony nature and not fit for food and 
hard for us even to understand, this must not 
be broken ; that is, badly divined and miscon- 
ceived (I need not say that in the history not 
a bone of Jesus was broken, even though His 
death was hastened by His crucifiers on account 
of the Sabbath) ;¥ nor must it be stripped off 
and thrown away, lest that which is holy should 
be given to the dogs,® that is, to the evil hearers 
of the Word ; just as the glorious pearl of the 
Word is not to be cast before swine; but it 
shall be consumed with the fire with which the 
burnt offerings also are consumed, being re- 
fined and preserved by the Spirit That search- 
cth and knoweth all things, not destroyed in 
the waters, nor scattered abroad as the calf’s 
head which was hastily made by Israel was by 
Moses, fora reproach for their hardness of heart. 

XVII. Nor would it be right for us to pass 

’ 

THE SECOND ORATION ON EASTER. 

i 

429 

/ mandment, that we look not around, nor stay 
in all that neighbourhood, but that we escape 

because most of | 

as if they were acts. 

~ nest looks. 

to the mountain, that we be not overtaken by 
the strange fire of Sodom, nor be congealed 
into a pillar of salt in consequence of our turn- 
ing back to wickedness; for this is the result 
ot delay. Ith bitter herbs, for a life accord- 
ing to the Will of God is bitter and arduous, 
especially to beginners, and higher than pleas- 
ures. For although the new yoke is easy and 
the burden light,* as you are told. yet this is 
on account of the hope and the reward, which 
is far more abundant than the hardships of this 
life. If it were not so, who would not say that 
the Gospel is more full of toil and trouble than 
the enactments of the Law? For, while the 
Law prohibits only the completed acts of sin, 
we are condemned for the causes also, almost 
The Law says, 7how shalt 
not commit adultery» Wit you may not even 
desire, kindling passion by curious and ear- 
Thou shalt not kill, says the Law : 
but yow are not even to return a blow, but 
on the contrary are to offer yourself to the 
smiter. How much more ascetic is the Gos- 
pel than the Law! Zhou shalt not forswear 
thyself is the Law; but you are not to swear 
at all, either a greater or a lesser oath, for an 
oath is the parent of perjury. Zhou shalt not 
join house to house, nor field Zo field, OpPpress- 

iy the poor ;® but you are to set aside willingly 
o bo eae 

over the manner of this eating either, for the | 
shameful passion, be restrained by a girdle of 

Law does not do so, but carries its mystical 
Jabour even to this point in the literal enact- 
ment. Let us consume the Victim in haste, 
eating It with unleavened bread, with bitter 
herbs, and with our loins girded, and our shoes 

on our feet, and leaning on staves like old — 
men; with haste, that we fall not into that | 
fault which was forbidden to Lot § by the com- | 

a Take xii. 49. B Kphes. iv. 26. 

y S. Gregory does not mean to say that our Lord's death was 
actually hastened by violent actions on the part cf the Jews, which 
we know was not the case; but that they were anxious that it 
should take place before the Sabbath began. ‘The two thieves, who 
were still living, received the coup de grace from the Roman sol- 
dicrs, who broke their legs; but our Lord. much to their astonish- 
ment, was dead already, so this course was not taken with Him, 
but Hits side was pierced with a spear. 

5 Matt. vii. 6. € Wxod. xxxii. 20. 

AN Be lca ila G 

6 Gen xix. 17. 

even your just possessions, and to be stripped 
for the poor, that without encumbrance you 
may take up the Cross¥ and be enriched with 
the unseen riches. 

XVIII. And let the loins of the unreason- 
ing animals be unbound and loose, for they 
have not the gift of reason which can overcome 
pleasure (it is not needful to say that even 
they know the limit of natural movement). 
3ut let that part of your being which is the 
seat of passion, and which neighs,® as Holy 
Scripture calls it, when sweeping away this 

continence, so that you may eat the Passover 
purely, having mortified your members which 
are upon the earth,* and copying the girdle $ of 
John, the Hermit and Forerunner and great 
Herald of the Truth. Another girdle | know, 
the soldierly and manly one, I mean, from 
which the EKuzoni of Syria and certain Mono- 
zoni™ take their name. And it is in re- 
spect of this too that God saith in an oracle 
to Job, ‘ Nay, but gird up thy loins like a 

a Matt. xi. 20, Deeds. Meo y Nath x2 23. 

6 Jer. ve 8s eCOhiiy a2 GNiatts Wis ds 

7 ‘The expression is often used in the LXX. to represent 
the word 3754, translated A Band, especially in 2 Kings. 

On 
ot 

430 
man, and give a manly answer.’? ¢ With this | 
also holy David boasts that he is girded with | 
strength from God,® and speaks of God Him-— 
self as clothed with strength Y and girded about 
with power—against the ungodly of course— | 
though perhaps some may prefer to see in this — 
a declaration of the abundance of His power, 
and, as it were, its restraint, just as also He 
clothes Himself with Light as with a garment.® 
for who shall endure His unrestrained power 
and light? Do I enquire what there is com- 
mon to the loins and to truth? What then is 
the meaning to $. Paul of the expression, | 
‘Stand, therefore, having your loins git | 
about with truth?’’€« Is it perhaps that con- 
templation is to restrain concupiscence, and | 
not to allow it to be carried in another direc- 
tion? For that which is disposed to love in a 
particular direction will not have the same 
power towards other pleasures. 

XIX. Aad as to shoes, let him who is about 
to touch the Holy Land which the feet of God | 
have trodden, put them off, as Moses did upon | 
the Mount,$ that he may bring there nothing | 
dead ; nothing to come between Man and God. | 

So too if any disciple is sent to preach the | 
Gospel, let him go ina spirit of philosophy 
and without excess, inasmuch as he must, be- 
sides being without money and without staff 
and with but one coat, also be barefooted,” that 
the feet of those who preach the Gospel of 
Peace and every other good may appear beau- 
tiful.@ But he who would flee from Egypt and 
the things of Egypt must put on shoes for 
safety’s sake, especially in regard to the scor- 
pions and snakes in which Egypt so abounds, 
so as not to be injured by those which watch 
the heel,* which also we are bidden to tread 
under foot.6 And concerning /he sfaff and 
the signification of it, my belief is as follows. 
There is one I know to lean upon, and another 
which belongs to Pastors and ‘Teachers, and 
which corrects human sheep. Now the Law 
prescribes to you the staff to lean upon, that 
you may not break down in your mind when 
you hear of God’s Blood, and His Passion, 
and His death ; and that you may not be car- 
ried away to heresy in your defence of God ; 
but without shame and without doubt may eat 
the Flesh and drink the Blood, if you are de- 
sirous of true life, neither disbelieving His 
words about His Flesh, nor offended at those 
about His Passion. Lean upon this, and stand 
firm and strong, in nothing shaken by the ad- 
versaries nor carried away by the plausibility 

a Job xxxviii, 3. B Psu xvill.o2e y Ib. xciii. 1. 
Slbvewv.2. eLph,v. 14. | ¢ Exod. iii. s. yy Matt.’ xs 05 
OVisay ls -7e « Gen, il, 15. A Luke x, 19. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

— est robber. 
whilst thou wast fighting with the clay (that is, 

of their arguments. Stand upon thy High 
Place; in the Courts of Jerusalem * place thy 
feet; lean upon the Rock, that thy steps in 
God be not shaken. 

XX. What sayest thou? ‘Thus it hath 
pleased Him that thou shouldest come forth? 
out of Egypt, the iron furnace; that thou 
shouldest leave behind the idolatry of that 
country, and be led by Moses and his lawgiv- 
ing and martial rule. I give thee a piece of 
advice which is not my own, or rather which 
is very much my own, if thou consider the 
matter spiritually. Borrow from the Egyptians 
vessels of gold and silver ; ¥ with these take thy 

| journey; supply thyself for the road with the 

goods of strangers, or rather with thine own. 
‘There is money owing to thee, the wages of thy 
bondage and of thy brickmaking ; be clever on 
thy side too in asking retribution ; be an hon- 
Thou didst suffer wrong there 

this troublesome and filthy body) and wast 
building cities foreign and unsafe, whose me- 
morial perishes witha cry.6 What then? Dost 
thou come out for nothing and without wages ? 
But why wilt thou leave to the Egyptians and 
to the powers of thine adversaries that which 
they have gained by wickedness, and will 
spend with yet greater wickedness? It does 
not belong to them: they have ravished it, 
and have sacrilegiously taken it as plunder from 
Him who saith, The silver is Mine and the 
gold is Mine,* and I give it to whom I will. 
Yesterday it was theirs, for it was permitted to 
be so; to-day the Master takes it and gives it 
to thee, that thou mayest make a good and 
saving use of it. Let us make to ourselves 
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,” 
that when we fail, they may receive us in the 
time of judgment. 

XXI. If you are a Rachel ora Leah, a pa- 
triarchal and great soul, steal whatever idols of 
your father you can find ;® not, however, that 
you may keep them, but that you may destroy 
them; and if you are a wise Israelite remove 
them to the Land of the Promise, and let the 
persecutor grieve over the loss of them, and 
learn through being outwitted that it was vain 
for him to tyrannize over and keep in bondage 
better men than himself. If thou doest this, 
and comest out of Egypt thus, I know well 
that thou shalt be guided by the pillar of fire 
and cloud by night and day.* The wilderness 
shall be tamed for thee, and the Sea divided ; 4 

a Ps. cxxii. 2. 

B éfeAOerv c. acc. loci; a very rare use, but found in classi- 
cal authors. y Exod. xi. 2. es 1%, 00; ¢ Hag. ii. 8. 

G Mattexsc. 14) n Luke xvi. 9. 0 Gen, xxxi. 19. 

« Exod, xiii, 20. ALD yoiV. cers 

6G Bats 

Pharaoh shall be drowned ;% bread shall be 
rained down; 8 the rock shall become a fount- 
ain;¥ Amaleck shall be conquered, not. with 
arms alone, but with the hostile hand of the 
righteous forming both prayers and the invin- 
cible trophy of the Cross ;® the River shall be 
cut off; the sun shall stand still; and the moon 
be restrained ;€ walls shall be overthrown even 
without engines; $ swarms of hornets shall ie) 
before thee to make a way for Israel, and to hold 
the Gentiles in check 37 and all the other events 
which are told in the history after these and 
with these (not to make a lone story) shall be 
given thee of God. Such is the feast thou art 
keeping to-day; and in this manner I would 
have thee celebrate both the Birthday and 
the Burial of Him Who was born for thee and 
suffered for thee. Such is the Mystery of the 
Passover; stich are the mysteries sketched by 
the Law and fulfilled by Christ, the Abolisher 
of the letter, the Perfecter of the Spirit, who by 
His Passion taught us how to suffer, and by 
Tis glorification grants us to be glorified with 
Tliin. 

XXII? Now we are to examine another fact 
and dogma, neglected by most people, but in 
my judgment well worth enquiring into. ‘To 
Whom was that Blood offered that was shed for 
us, and why was It shed? I mean the precious 
and famous Blood of our God and Highpriest 
and Sacrifice. We were detained in bondage 
by the Evil One, sold under sin, and receiving 
pleasure in exchange for wickedness. | Now, 
since a ransom belongs only to him who holds 
in bondage, I ask to whom was this offered, 
and for what cause? If to the Evil One, fie 
upon the outrage! If the robber receives ran- 
som, not only from God, but a transom which 
consists of God Himself, and has such an illus- 
trious payment for his tyranny, a payment for 
whose sake it would have been right for him 
to have left us alone altogether. But if to the 
Father, Task first, how? For it was not by 
Him that we were being oppressed ; and next, 
On what principle did the Blood of His Only 
begotten Son delight the Father, Who would 
not receive even Isaac, when he was being 
offered by his Father, but changed the sacrifice, 
putting a ram in the place of the human vic- 
tin?* Isit not evident that the Father accepts 
Him, but neither asked for Him nor demanded 
Him; but on account of the Incarnation, and 
because Humanity must be sanctified by the 
Humanity of God, that He might deliver us 

B Ib. xvi. rs. 

a Exod. xiv. 28. y Ib. xvii. 6. 
6 Ib. xvii. 10, 11° € Josh, ili, 15, 16. | bes ees ce Fe 
7 Ib. vi. 20, 6 Ib. xxiv. 12. eeGene xxi. at; &ce 

A Have we not here the germ of the idea, afterwards known 

ECOND ORATION ON EASTER. 

as the Scotist, that the Incarnation was the purpose of God in- | 

431 

Himself, and overcome the tyrant, and draw 
us to Himself by the mediation of His Son, 
Who also arranged this to the honour of the 
Father, Whom it is manifest that He obevs 
in all things? So much we have said of 
Christ; the greater part of what we might say 
shall be reverenced with silence. But that 
brazen serpent® was hung up asa remedy for 
the biting serpents, not asa type of Hin that 
suffered for us, but as a contrast; and it saved 
those that looked upon it, not hee arse they be- 
lieved it to live, but because it was killed. and 
killed with it the powers that were subject to 
it, being destroyed as it deserved. And what 
is the fitting epitaph for it from us? “© 
death, where is thy sting? O vrave, where is 
thy victory ?’?8 ‘Thou art overthrown by the 
Cross; thou art slain by Him who is the Giver 
of life; thou art without breath, dead, without 
motion, even though thou keepest the form of 
a serpent lifted up on high on a pole. 

XXIII. Now we will partake of a Passover 
which is still typical, though it is plainer than 
the old one. For that is ever new which is now 
becoming known. It is ours to learn what is 
that drinking and that enjoyment, and Ilis to 
teach and communicate the Word to His dis- 
ciples. Tor teaching is food, even to the Giver 
of food. Come hither then, and let us partake 
of the Law, but in a Gospel manner, not a lit- 
eralone; perfectly, not imperfectly ; eternally, 
not temporarily. Let us make our Head, not 
the earthly Jerusalem, but the heavenly City ; 7 
not that which is now trodden under foot hy 
armies,® but that which is glorified by Anvels. 
Let us sacrifice not young calves, nor lambs 
that put forth horns and hoofs,¢ in which many 
parts are destitute of life and feeling ; but let us 
sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise upon the 
heavenly Altar, with the heavenly dances; let 
us hold aside the first veil; let us approach the 
second, and look into the Holy of Holies.¢ 
Shall I say that which is a greater thing yet ? 
Let us sacrifice ovrselies to God; or rather let 
us go on sacrificing throughout every day and at 
every moment. Let us accept anything for the 
Word’s sake. By sufferings let us imitate Tis 
Passion: by our blood Jet us reverence His 
Blood: Ict us gladly mount upon the Cross. 
Sweet are the nails, though they be very pain- 
ful. Tor to suffer with Christ and for Christ 
is better than a life of ease with others. 

ARIV. If you-are a Simon of Cyrene,” take 

dependently of the Fall, for the perfecting of Humanity; but that 
the Passion and death of Incarnate God were the direct result 
of the sin of man? a Num. x1. o. 7 

B Hos. xiit. 14 and 1 Cor. xv. 55. pot (iby ee, Ueee 

fo aa Rts tare ip 
7 Mark xv. 21. 

Luke xxi, 20-24. 
¢ Heb, xiii. 15 and x. zo. 

Ges 

o 

432 GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

up the Cross and follow. 

If you are crucified | 

with Him as a robber,* acknowledge God as a | 
and does, so now in His battle and triumph for 

penitené robber. If even He was numbered 
among the transgressors for you and your sin, 
do you become law-abiding for His sake. Wor- 
ship Him Who was hanged for you, even if you 
yourself are hanging; make some gain even 

? 

things that He hath done from time to time 

the sake of Mankind. 
ing of the question the twofold answer. 

\nd give to the doubt- 

And 

if they marvel and say as in Isaiah’s drama 

from your wickedness ; purchase salvation by | 
garments red of Him that is without blood or 

your death ; enter with Jesus into Paradise,¥ so 
that you may learn from what you have fallen.® 

Contemplate the glories that are there ; let the | 
— the Body that suffered, adorned by the Passion, 

murderer die outside with his blasphemies ; and 
if you be a Joseph of Arimathaea,* beg the Body 
from him that crucified Him, make thine own 
that which cleanses the world. If you be a 
Nicodemus, the worshipper of God by night, 
bury Him with spices.” 
another Mary, or a Salome, or a Joanna, weep 
in the early morning. Be first to see the stone 
taken away,® and perhaps you will see the Angels 
and Jesus Himself. Say something; hear His 
Voice. If Hesay to you, Touch Me not,* stand 
afar off; reverence the Word, but grieve not ; 
for He knoweth those to whom He appeareth 
first. Keep the feast of the Resurrection ; 

If you be a Mary, or | 

Who is this that cometh from Edom and 
from the things of earth? Or How are the 

body, as of one that treads in the full wine- 
press?# Set forth the beauty of the array of 

and made splendid by the Godhead, than 
which nothing can be more lovely or more 
beautiful. 

XXVI.8 To this what will those cavillers 
say, those bitter reasoners about Godhead, 

those detractors of all things that are praise- 

come to the aid of Eve who was first to fall, of | 
Her who first embraced the Christ, and made | 

Him known to the disciples. Be a Peter or a 
John; hasten to the Sepulchre,running together, 
running against one another, vying in the noble 
race.s And even if you be beaten in speed, win 
the victory of zeal; not Looking into the tomb, 
but Going in. And if, like a Thomas, you 
were left out when the disciples were assembled 
to whom Christ shews Himself, when you do 
see Him be not faithless;" and if you do not 
believe, then believe those who tell you; and 
if you cannot believe them either, then have 
confidence in the print of the nails. If He 
descend into Hell,” descend with Him. Learn 
to know the mysteries of Christ there also, what 
is the providential purpose of the twofold de- 
scent, to save all men absolutely by His man- 
ifestation, or there too only them that believe. 

worthy, those darkeners of Light, uncultured in 
respect of Wisdom, for whom Christ died in 
vain, unthankful creatures, the work of the 
Evil One. Do you turn this benefit into a re- 
proach to God? Will you deem Him little on 
this account, that He humbled Himself for 
your sake, and because to seek for that which 
had wandered the Good Shepherd, He who 
layeth down His life for the sheep,Y came upon 
the mountains and hills upon which you used 
to sacrifice,> and found the wandering one ; and 
having found it, took it upon His shoulders,¢ 
on which He also bore the wood; and having 
borne it, brought it back to the life above; 
and having brought it back, numbered it 
among those who have never strayed. ‘That 
He lit a candle,$ His own flesh, and swept the 

house, by cleansing away the sin of the world, 

XXV. And if He ascend up into Heaven, | 

ascend with Him. 
who escort Him, or one of those who receive 
Him. 
higher, that they may receive Him, exalted 
after His Passion. Answer to those who are in 
doubt because He bears up with Him His 
body and the tokens of His Passion, which He 
had not when He came down, and who there- 
fore inquire, ‘‘ Who is this King of Glory ?’”’ 

a Luke xxiii. 42. 8 Tsa.lnis 22. y Luke xxii. 43. 

o Revs 1.75. e Luke xxiii. 52. CaJonna. 7. 
n John xix, 39. OLX tere, KDSy 3505 17> 
A Tb. 956 9;,.4¢ MADwxx. 25. v I Pet. iii. 19. 

£\Lukei xxiv. sm 0: Psy XXIV 75. 10, 

Be one of those angels | 

and sought for the coin, the Royal Image that 
was all covered up with passions, and calls to- 
gether His friends, the Angelic Powers, at the 
finding of the coin, and makes them sharers of 
His joy, as He had before made them sharers of 
the secret of His Incarnation? ‘That the Light 
that is exceeding bright should follow the 
Candle -Forerunner,”. and the Word, the 
Voice, and the Bridegroom, the Bridegroom’s 
friend,® that prepared for the Lord a peculiar 

| people * and cleansed them by the water* in 

Bid the gates be lifted up,® or be made | 

preparation for the Spirit? Do you Reproach 
God with this? Do you conceive of Him as 
less because He girds Himself with a towel and 
washes His disciples,“ and shows that humilia- 
tion is the best road to exaltation ;” because He 
humbles Himself for the sake of the soul that 

alsa. louie a. 

B This passage, to nearly the end of c, XXVII., is taken from 
the Oration on the Nativity, cc. XIIL-XIV. y John x. 11. 

6 Johnv. 35. e Hos. iv. 13. Glukesxy. 4,5: 

7 lib. XV. 0 50: Qala. 23; 111,90. 20: 

« A reminiscence of S. Luke i. 17. A Matt. ii. rz. 

m John xiii, 4, 5. Ue Matt, xxiit.t2: 

Bete 

is bent down to the ground,* that He may even 

SECOND ORATION ON EASTER. 

exalt with Himself that which is bent double | 

under a weight of sin? How comes it that you 

He eateth with Publicans® and at Publicans’ 
tables, and makes disciples of Publicans ¥ that 
ile too ymay make some gain. And what 
gain ? The salvation of sinners. Ifso, one must 
blame the physician for stooping over suffering 
and putting up with evil smells in order to 
give health to the sick; and him also who 
leans over the ditch, that he may, according to 
the Law, save the beast that has fallen into it. 

XXVIII. He was sent, but sent according to 
His Manhood (for He was of two Natures), 
since He was hungry and thirsty and weary, 
and was distressed and wept, according to the 
Laws of human nature. But even if He were 
sent also as God, what of that? Consider the 
Mission to be the good pleasure of the Father, 
o which He refers all that concerns Himself, 
both that He may honour the Eternal Principle, 
and that He may avoid the appearance of being 
a rival God. For He is said on the one hand 
to have been betrayed, and on the other it is 

written that He gave Himself up; and so too | 

that He was raised and taken up by the Father, 
and also that of His own power He rose and 
ascended. ‘The former belongs to the Good 
Pleasure, the latter to His own Authority ; but 
you dwell upon all that diminishes Him, while 
you ignore all that exalts Him. For instance, 
you score that He suffered, but you do not add 
“of His own Will’? Ah, what things has the 
Word even now to suffer! By some He is hon- 
oured as God but confused with the Father; by 
others He is dishonoured as Flesh, and is sev- 
ered from God. With whom shall He be most 
angry—or rather which shall He forgive—those 

uncircumcision and robust health to be thus ill 
and ungodly disposed. But for our war with 

such men, let it be brought to an end by their 
do not also charge it upon Him as acrime that | 

who falsely contract Him, or those who divide | 

Him? For the former ought to have made a 
distinction, and the latter to have made a 
Union, the one in number, the other in God- 
head. Do youstumble at His Flesh? So did 
the Jews. Do you call Him a Samaritan,’ and 
the rest which I will not utter ? 
eyen the demons, O man more unbelieving 
than demons, and more stupid than Jews. 
Jews recognized the title Son as expressing 
equal rank; and the demons knew that He 
who drove them out was God, for they were 
persuaded by their own experience. But you 
will not either admit the equality or confess the 
Godhead. It would have been better for you 
to have been circumcised and a demoniac—to 
reduce the matter to an absurdity—than in 

a Luke xiii. 10, ete, 

iB Markeiteer so 6: 
¥ [bukexvs-2; ll 

6 John vii. 48. 

This did not | 

The 

returning, however late, to a sound mind, if 
they will; or else if they will not, let it be 
postponed to another occasion, if they continue 
as they are. Anyhow, we will have no fear 
when contending for the ‘Trinity with the help 
of the ‘Trinity. 

AXVIT. It is now needful for us to sum up 
our discourse as follows: We were created 
that we might be made happy. We were made 
happy when we were created. We were en- 
trusted with Paradise that we might enjoy life. 
We received a Commandment that we might 
obtain a good repute by keeping it; not that 
God did not know what would take place, but 
because He had laid down the law of Free 
Will. We were deceived because we were the 
objects of envy. We were cast out because we 
transgressed. We fasted because we refused to 
fast, being overpowered by the ‘Tree of Know- 
ledge. For the Commandment was ancient, 
coeval with ourselves, and was a kind of educa- 
tion of our souls and curb of luxury, to which we 
were reasonably made subject, in order that we 
might recover by keeping it that which we had 
lost by not keeping it. We needed an Incarn- 
ate God, a God put to death, that we might 
live. We were put to death together with 
Him, that we might be cleansed; we rose 
again with Him because we were put to death 
with Him; we were glorified with Him, 
because we rose again with Him. 

XXIX. Many indeed are the miracles of 
that time: God crucified; the sun darkened 
and again rekindled ; for it was fitting that the 
creatures should suffer with their Creator ; the 
veil rent; the Blood and Water shed from 
His Side; the one as from aman, the other 
as above man; the rocks rent for the Rock’s 
sake; the dead raised for a pledge of the final 
Resurrection of all men; the Signs at the 
Sepulchre and after the Sepulchre, which none 
can worthily celebrate ; and yet none of these 
equal to the Miracle of my salvation. A. few 
drops of Blood recreate the whole world, and 
become to all men what rennet is to milk, draw- 
ing us together and compressing us into unity. 

XXX. But, O Pascha, great and holy and 
purifier of all the world—for I will speak to 
thee as to a living person—O Word of God 

-and Light and Life and Wisdom and Might— 

for I rejoice in all Thy names—-O Offspring 
and Ixpression and Signet of the Great Mind ; 
O Word conceived and Man contemplated, 
Who bearest all things, binding them by the 

Word of Thy power; reeeive this discourse, 

434 

not Now as firstiruits, but perhaps as the com- 
pletion of my offerings, a thanksgiving, and at 
the sume time a supplication, that we may suf- 
fer no evil beyond those necessary and sacred 
cares in which our life has been passed ; and 
stay the tyranny of the body over us; (Thou 
seest. O Lord, how great it is and how it bows 
me down) or ‘Thine own sentence, if we are to 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

be condemned by Thee. But if we are to be 
released, in accordance with our desire, and he 
received into the Heavenly ‘Vabernacle, there 
too it may be we shall offer Thee acceptable 
Sacrifices upon ‘Vhine Altar, to Pather and 
Word and Holy Ghost; for to Thee belongeth 

all elory and honour and might, workl without 
end. Amen. 

SebeC) PETlLeRs 

SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE. 

Nery 
a 

a 

A SELECTION FROM THE LETTERS OF SAINT GREG- 
ORY NAZIANZEN, SOMETIME ARCHBISHOP OF COY- 

STANTINOPLE. 

DIVISION I. 

LETTERS ON 

INTRODUCTION. ‘ 

The ciccumstances which called forth the two 
letters to Cledonius have already been described 
in the first section of the General Prolegomena, 
and it will not be necessary here to add much 
to what was there said. In the letter to Nec- 

THE APOLLINARIAN 

tarius, his own successor on the throne of Con- | 
filled up by the Godhead of the Son, cannot 

stantinople, written about A.D. 383, and some- 
times reckoned as Orat. XLVI.,S. Gregory gives 
extracts from a work of Apollinarius himself, 
but without mentioning the title of the book. 

| 
| 

[n this treatise the fundamental errors of the | 
services in the past had been of so much value 

heresy (see Proleg. c. 1, p. 172) are laid down. 
Apollinarius, according to 5. Gregory, declares 

that the Son of God was from all eternity | 

clothed with a human body, and not from the 

time of His conception only by the Blessed Vir- | 

vin; but that this humanity of God is without 

human mind, the place of which was supplied | 

by the Godhead of the Only-begotten. 

And | 

he goes even further and ascribes passibility | 

and mortality to the very Godhead of Christ. 
‘Therefore S. Gregory earnestly protests against 
any toleration being granted to these heretics, 
er even permission to hold their assemblies; 
for, he says, toleration or permission would cer- 

/ cunda in A.D. 382. 

CONTROVERSY. 

guard the doctrine of the Unity of Christ; and 
he thought that the orthodox expression of ‘Two 
Whole and Perfect Natures tended to a Nestor- 
ian division of the Person of Christ; and so he 
used language which certainly seemed to con- 
found the natures, or at any rate to make the 
Incarnation imperfect, inasmuch as a Christ in 
Whom the human mind is absent, and its place 

be said to be perfect Man. But while I:pi- 
phanius mentions these extravagances of the 
heresy, and does so with a lingering feeling of 
regret for the lapse of so good a man whose 

to the Church, yet, in the spirit common to 
Ecclesiastical authorities of the time, he would 
rather ascribe them to an expansion of .\pol- 
linarius’ teaching by his younger disciples who 
did not really understand what Apollinarius 
himself meant. 

Olympius, to whom the last of this series is 
addressed, was Governor of Cappadocia Se- 
He wasaman for whom 5, 
Gregory hada very high esteem, and with whom 
he was upon terms of close friendship, as will 

be seen from other letters of Gregory to him in 

another division of this Selection. 

tainly be regarded by them as a condonation — 
appeal to the secular power for aid to punish 

of their doctrinal position, and a condemnation 
of that of the Church. Dr. Ullman, however, 
thinks that while S. Gregory was certainly 
speaking the truth in saying that he had in his 
hands a pamphlet by Apollinarius, yet that he, 
perhaps unconsciously, exaggerated the heret- 
ical character of its contents, pushing its state- 

Lhe 6eCae 

sion of the present letter was the necessity to 

a sect of Apollinarians at Nazianzus, who had 
ventured to take advantage of S. Gregory’s ab- 

‘sence at the Baths of Xanxaris to procure the 
consecration of a Bishop of their own way of 

ments to consequences which Apollinarius — 

would have repudiated. The one purpose of 

the latter was, in Dr. Ullman’s view, to safe- | 

thinking. Technically the See was vacant, 
but the adiministration had been committed to 
Gregory by the Bishops of the Province, and 
though he, foresecing some such attempt on the 
part of the heretics, had been very earnest in 

438 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN., 

pressing upon the Metropolitan and his Com. , 

proyincials the necessity of filling this throne 
by a canonical clection, yet he was by no means 
prepared to hand over the authority, with which 
he had been invested, to an irregularly elected 
and uneanonically consecrated heretic. 

3IsHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE. 
(en, CCIES 

To NECTARIUS, 

The Care of God, which throughout the 
time before us guarded the Churches, seems to 
have utterly forsaken this present life. And 
my soul is immersed to such a degree by cal- 
amities that the private sufferings of my own 
life hardly seem to be worth reckoning among 
evils (though they are so numerous and great, 
that if they befel anyone else I should think 
them unbearable) ; but I. can only look at the 
common sufferings of the Churches; for if at 
the present crisis some pains be not taken to 
find a remedy for them, things will gradually 
get into an altogether desperate condition. 
Those who follow the heresy of Arius or Eu- 
doxius (I cannot say who stirred them up to 
this folly) are making a display of their dis- 
ease, as if they had attained some degree of 
confidence by collecting congregations as if by 
permission. And they of the Macedonian 
party have reached such a pitch of folly that 
they are arrogating to themselves the name of 
Bishops, and are wandering about our districts 
babbling of Eleusius* as to their ordina- 
tions. Our bosom evil, Eunomius, is no 
longer content with merely existing ; but unless 
he can draw away everyone with him to his 
ruinous heresy, he thinks himself an injured 
man. <All this, however, is endurable. ‘The 
most grievous item of all in the woes of the 
Church is the boldness of the Apollinarians, 

contents of which surpass all heretical pravity. 
lor he asserts that the Flesh which the Only- 
begotten Son assumed in the Incarnation for 
the remodelling of our nature was no new ac- 

quisition, but that that carnal nature was in the 

Son from the beginning. And he puts for- 
ward as a witness to this monstrous assertion a 

~ garbled quotation from the Gospels, namely, 

{ 

whom your Holiness has overlooked, I know 

not how, when providing themselves with 
authority to hold meetings on an equality with 
myself. However, you being, as you are, 
thoroughly instructed by the grace of God in 
the Divine Mysteries on all points, are well 
informed, not only as to the advocacy of the 
true faith, but also as to all those arguments 
which have been devised by the heretics 
against the sound faith ; and yet*perhaps it will 
not be unseasonable that your Excellency 
should hear from my littleness that a pamphlet 
by Apollinarius has come into my hands, the 

a Eleusius was Bishop of Cyzicus, a prominent leader of the 
Semi-Arian party. He bore a very high character for personal 
holiness, and approached more nearly to orthodoxy than most of 
his associates, men like Basil of Ancyra, Eustathius of Sebaste, 
etc. He obstinately maintained, however, Macedonian views on 
the Deity of the Holy Ghost, even after their condemnation by the 
Council of Constantinople, 

No man hath Ascended up into Heaven save 
He which came down from Heaven, even the 
Son of Man which is in Heaven.* As though 
even before He came down He was the Son of 
Man, and when He came down He brought 
with Him that Flesh, which it appears He had 
in Heaven, as though it had existed before the 
ages, and been joined with His Essence. lor 
he alleges another saying of an Apostle, which 
he cuts off from the whole body of its context, 
that The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven. 
Then he assumes that that Man who caine 
down from above is without a mind, but that 
the Godhead of the Only-begotten fulfils the 
function of mind, and is the third part of this 
human composite, inasmuch as soul and body 
are in it on its human side, but not mind, the 
place of which is taken by God the Word. 
This is not yet the most serious part of it; that 
which is most terrible of all is that he declares 
that the Only-begotten God, the Judge of all, 
the Prince of Life, the Destroyer of Death, is 
mortal, and underwent the Passion in’ His 
proper Godhead ; and that in the three days’ 
death of His body, His Godhead also was put to 
death with His body, and thus was raised again 
from the dead by the Father. It would be 
tedious to go through all the other propositions 
which he adds to these monstrous absurdities. 
Now, if they who hold such views have author- 
ity to meet, your Wisdom approved in Christ 
must see that, inasmuch as we do not approve 
their views, any permission of assembly granted 
to them is nothing less than a declaration that 
their view is thought more true than ours. Tor 
if they are permitted to teach their view as 
godly men, and with all confidence to preach 
their doctrine, it is manifest that the doctrine 
of the Church has been condemned, as though 
the truth were on their side. For nature does 
not admit of two contrary doctrines on the 
same subject being both true. How then could 
your noble and lofty mind submit to suspend 
your usual courage in regard to the correction 
of so great an evil? But even though there 1s 
no precedent for such a course, let your inim- 
itable perfection in virtue stand up at a crisis 
like the present, and teach our most pious 

@ John ui. 13. B Cor, xve 470 

Ixmperor, that no gain will come from his zeal | 
for the Church on other points if he allows such 
anevil to gain strength from freedom of speech 
for the subversion of sound faith. 

To CLEDONIUS THE Priest AGAINST 
APOLLINARTUS. (Ep. CI.) 

TO OUR MOST REVEREND AND GOD-BELOVED 
BROTHER AND FRELLOW-PRIEST CLEDONIUS, 
GREGORY, GREETING IN THE LORD. 

I desire to learn what is this fashion of in- 
noyation in things concerning the Church, 
which allows anyone who likes, or the passer- 
by,# as the Bible says, to tear asunder the flock 
that has been well led, and to plunder it by 
Jarcenous attacks, or rather by piratical and 
fallacious teachings. Tor if our present as-— 
sailants had any ground for condemning us in 
regard of the faith, it would not have been | 
right for them, even in that case, to have ven- 
tured on such a course without giving us notice. 
They ought rather to have first persuaded us, 
or to have been willing to be persuaded by us 
(if at least any account is to be taken of us as 
fearing God, labouring for the faith, and help- 
ing the Church), and then, if at all, to innov- 
ate; but then perhaps there would be an ex- 
cuse for their outrageous conduct. But since 
our faith has been proclaimed, both in writing 
and without writing, here and in distant parts, 
in times of danger and of safety, how comes it 
that some make such attempts, and that others 
keep silence ? 

‘The most grievous part of it is not (though 
this too is shocking) that the men instil their 
own heresy into simpler souls by means of 
those who are worse; but that they also tell 
lies about us and say that we share their opin- 
ons and sentiments ; thus baiting their hooks, 
and by this cloak villainously fulfilling their 
will, and making our simplicity, which looked 
upon them as brothers and not as foes, into a 
support of their wickedness. And not only so, | 
but they also assert, as I am told, that they | 
have been received by the Western Synod, by 
which they were formerly condemned, as is 
well known to everyone. — If, however, those 
who hold the views of Apollinarius have either | 
now or formerly been received, let them prove 
it and we will be content. For it is evident 
that they can only have been so reccived as 
assenting to the Orthodox Faith, for this were 
an impossibility on any other terms. And 

eo 

a Ps. Ixxxi14, 

' are not two Sons or two Gods. 

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 439 

they can surely prove it, either by the minutes 
of the Synod, or by Letters of Communion, 
for this is the regular custom of Synods. But 
if it is mere words, and an invention of their 
own, devised for the sake of appearances and 
to give them weight with the multitude through 
the credit of the persons, teach them to hold 
their tongues, and confute them ; for we believe 
that such a task is well suited to your manner 
of life and orthodoxy. Do not let the men 
deceive themselves and others with the asser- 
tion that the ‘* Man of the Lord,’’ as they call 
Him, Who is rather our Jord and God, is 
without human mind. — For we do not sever the 
Man from the Godhead, but we lay down as a 
dogma the Unity and Identity of Person, Who 
of old was not Man but God, and the Only 
Son before all ages, unmingled with body or 
anything corporeal; but Who in these last 
days has assumed Manhood also for our salya- 
tion ; passible in His Flesh, impassible in His 
Godhead ; circumscript in the body, uncir- 
cumseript in the Spirit; at once earthly and 
heavenly, tangible and intangible, comprehen- 
sible and incomprehensible ; that by One and 
the Same Person, Who was perfect Man and 
also God, the entire humanity fallen through 
sin might be created anew. 

If anyone does not believe that Holy Mary 
is the Mother of God, he is severed from the 
Godhead. If anyone should assert that He 
passed through the Virgin as through a chan- 
nel, and was not at once divinely and humanly 
formed in her (divinely, because without the 
intervention of a man; humanly, because in 
accordance with the laws of gestation), he is 
in like manner godless. If any assert that the 
Manhood was formed and afterward was 
clothed with the Godhead, he too is to be con- 
demned. For this were not a Generation of 
God, but a shirking of generation. If any in- 
troduce the notion of Two Sons, one of God 
the Father, the other of the Mother, and dis- 
credits the Unity and Identity, may he lose 
his part in the adoption promised to those who 
believe aright. For God and Man are two 
natures, as also soul and body are; but there 
For neither 
in this life are there two manhoods; though 
Paul speaks in some such language of the inner 
and outer man. And (if [am to speak con- 
cisely) the Saviour is made of elements which 
are distinct from one another (for the invisible 
is not the same with the visible, nor the time- 
less with that which is subject to time), yet 
He is not two Persons. God forbid! lor 

— both natures are one by the combination, the 
| Deity being made Man, and the Manhood 

440 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

detticd or however one should express it. And 

I say different Elements, because it is the re- 
verse of what Is the case in the ‘Trinity; for 
There we acknowledge different Persons so as 
not to confound the persons; but not different 
Ilements, for the ‘Three are One and the same 
in Godhead. 

It any should say that it wrought in Him by 
grace as in a Prophet, but was not and is not 
united with Him in Essence—let him be emp- 
ty of the Higher Energy, or rather full of the 
opposite. If any worship not the Crucified, 
let him be Anathema and be numbered among 
the Deicides. 
perfect by works, or that after His Baptism, 
or aiter His Resurrection from the dead, He 
was counted worthy of an adoptive Sonship, 
like those whom the Greeks interpolate as add- 
ed to the ranks of the gods, let him be 
anathema. For that which has a beginning or 
a progress or is made perfect, is not God, al- 
though the expressions may be used of His 
gradual manifestation. If any assert that He 
has now put off His holy flesh, and that His 
Godhead is stripped of the body, and deny 
that He is now with His body and will come 
again with it, let him not see the glory of His 
Coming. For where is His body now, if not 
with Him Who assumed it? For it is not laid 
by in the sun, according to the babble of the 
Manichaeans, that it should be honoured by a 
dishonour ; nor was it poured forth into the air 
and dissolved, as is the nature of a voice or 
the flow of an odour, or the course of a light- 
ning flash that never stands. Where in that 
case were His being handled after the Resurrec- 
tion, or His being seen hereafter by them that 

| 

head is also saved. 

If any assert that He was made | 

| 

pierced Him, for Godhead is in its nature in- | 

visible. 

Nay; He will come with His body—_ 

so I have learnt—such as He was seen by His | 

Disciples in the Mount, or as he shewed Him- 
self for a moment, when his Godhead over- 
powered the carnality. And as we say this to 
disarm suspicion, so we write the other to cor- 
rect the novel teaching. 
{lis flesh came down from heaven, and is not 
from hence, nor of us though above us, let him 
be anathema. Vor the words, The Second 
Man is the Lord from Heaven ;# and, As is the 
Heavenly, such are they that are Heavenly ; 
and, No man hath ascended up into Heayen 
save He which came down from Heaven, even 
the Son of Man which is in Heaven; and the 
like, are to be understood as said on account of 
the Union with the heavenly ; just as that All 
Things were made by Christ,y and that Christ 

a Cor, xv. 47. B John iii. 13. y John i. 3. 

If anyone assert that | 

dwelleth in your hearts is said, not of the visi- 
ble nature which belongs to God, but of what 
is perceived by the mind, the names being 
mingled like the natures, and flowing into one 
another, according to the law of their intimate 
union, 

If anyone has put his trust in Him as a Men 
without a human mind, he is really bereft of 
mind, and quite unworthy of salvation. [or 
that which He has not assumed He has not 
healed ; but that which is united to His God- 
If only half Adam fell, 
then that which Christ assumes and saves may 
be half also; but if the whole of his nature 
fell, it must be united to the whole nature of 
Him that was begotten, and so be saved as a 
whole. Let them not, then, begrudge us our 
complete salvation, or clothe the Saviour only 
with bones and nerves and the portraiture of 
humanity. For if His Manhood is without 
soul, even the Arians admit this, that they 
may attribute His Passion to the Godhead, 2s 
that which gives motion to the body is also 
that which suffers. But if He has a soul, and 
yet is without a mind, how is He man, for 
man is not a mindless animal? And _ this 
would necessarily involve that while His form 
and tabernacle was human, His soul should be 
that of a horse or an ox, or some other of the 
brute creation. This, then, would be what Ie 
saves ; and I have been deceived by the ‘Truth, 
and led to boast of an honour which had been 
bestowed upon another. But if His Man- 
hood is intellectual and not without mind, let 
them cease to be thus really mindless. but, 
says such an one, the Godhead took the place 
of the human intellect. How does this touch 
me? For Godhead joined to flesh alone is 
hot man, nor to soul alone, nor to both apart 
from intellect, which is the most essential part 
of man. Keep then the whole man, and min- 
gle Godhead therewith, that you may benctit 
mein my completeness. But, he asserts, He 
could not contain ‘Two perfect Natures. Not 
if you only look at Him in a bodily fashion. 
Tor a bushel measure will not hold two bush- 
els, nor will the space of one body hold two 
or more bodies. But if you will look at what 
is mental and incorporeal, remember that | in 
my one personality can contain soul and rea- 
son and mind and the Holy Spirit ; and before 
me this world, by which I mean the system of 
things visible and invisible, contained Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost. For such is the na- 
ture of intellectual Existences, that they can 
mingle with one another and with bodics, in- 

@ liphes. iit. 17. 

LETTERS. OF- SAINT GREGORY: NAZIANZEN. 

corporeally and invisibly. lor many sounds 
are comprehended by one ear ; and the eyes of 
many are occupied by the same visible ob- 
jects, and the smell by odours; nor are the 
senses narrowed by each other, or crowded 
out, nor the objects of sense diminished by the 
multitude of the perceptions. But where is 
there mind of man or angel so perfect in com- 
parison of the Godhead that the presence of 
the greater must crowd out the other? ‘The 
light is nothing compared with the sun, nor a 
little damp compared with a river, that we must 
first do away with the lesser, and take the 
light 
the earth, to enable it to contain the greater 
and more perfect. For how shall one thing 
contain two completenesses, either the house, 
the sunbeam and the sun, or the earth, the 
moisture and the river? 
inquiry ; for indeed the question is worthy of 
much consideration, Do they not know, then, 
that what is perfect by comparison with one 
thing may be imperfect by comparison with an- 
other, as a hill compared with a mountain, or 
a vrain of mustard seed with a bean or any oth- 
er of the larger seeds, although it may be called 
larger than any of thesame kind? Or, if you 
like, an Angel compared with God, or a man 
with an Angel. So our mind is perfect and 
commanding, but only in respect of soul and 
body ; not absolutely perfect ; and a servant 
and a subject of God, not a sharer of His 
Princedom and honour. So Moses was a God 
to Pharaoh,* but a servant of God,® as it is 
written ; and the stars which illumine the night 
are hidden by the Sun, so much that you could 
not even know of their existence by daylight ; 
and alittle torch brought near a great blaze is 
neither destroyed, nor seen, nor extinguished ; 

from a house, or the moisture from | 

| 

of Flesh, as they call it. 
Here is matter for | 

_as the doctors say of illnesses. 

A441 

assumed a body but left out the mind, then 
there is an excuse for them who sin with the 
mind; for the witness of God—according to 
you—has shewn the impossibility of healing it. 
Let me state the greater results. You, my 
good sir, dishonour my mind (you a Sarco- 
Jater, if T am an Anthropolater * that you 

/ may tie God down to the Flesh, since He can- 

not be otherwise tied ; and therefore you take 
away the wall of partition. But what is my 
theory, who am but an ignorant man, and no 
Philosopher. Mind is mingled with mind, 
as nearer and more closely related, and 
through it with flesh, being a Mediator be- 
tween God and carnality. 

Further let us see what is their account of 
the assumption of Manhood, or the assumption 
If it was in order 
that God, otherwise incomprehensible, might 
be comprehended, and might converse with 
men through His Flesh as through a veil, their 
mask and the drama which they represent is a 
pretty one, not to say that it was open to Him 
to converse with us in other ways, as of old, in 
the burning bush and in the appearance of a 
man.¥ But if it was that He might destroy the 
condemnation by sanctifying like by like, then 
as He needed flesh for the sake of the flesh 
which had incurred condemnation, and soul 
for the sake of our soul, so, too, He needed 
mind for the sake of mind, which not only 
fell in Adam, but was the first to be affected, 
For that which 
received the command was that which failed to 
keep the command, and that which failed to 
keep it was that also which dared to trans- 

gress; and that which transgressed was that 

which stood most in need of salvation ; and 
that which needed salvation was that which 

but is allone blaze, the bigger one prevailing | 

over the other. 

But, it may be said, our mind is subject to 
condemnation. What then of our flesh? Is 
that not subject to condemnation? You must 
therefore either set aside the latter on account 
of sin, or admit the former on account of 
salvation. If He assumed the worse that He 

also He took upon Him. ‘Therefore, Mind 
was taken upon Him. This has now been ce- 

/monstrated, whether they like it or no, by, to 

might sanctify it by His incarnation, may He | 

not assume the better that it may be sanctified 
by His becoming Man ? 
leavened and has become a new lump, O ye 
wise men, shall not the Image be leavened and 
mingled with God, being deified by His God- 
head? And I will add this also: If the mind 
was utterly rejected, as prone to sin and sub- 

ject to damnation, and for this reason He | 

| ory retorts upon them that if so, they are worse themselves, being 

a Exod. vil. 1. 

BNum. xii. 7. 

If the clay was | 

use their own expression, geometrical and 
necessary proofs. But you are acting as if, 
when a man’s eye had been injured and his 
foot had been injured in consequence, you 
were to attend to the foot and leave the cye 
uncared for; or as if, when a painter had 
drawn something badly, you were to alter the 
picture, but to pass over the artist as if he had 
succeeded. But if they, overwhelmed by these 
arguments, take refuge in the proposition that 
it is possible for God to save man even apart 

a The Apollinarians seem to have charged the Orthodox with 
being Anthropolaters, or worshippers ofamere Man. S. Greg- 

actually Sarcolaters, or worshippers of mere flesh, denying Mind 

' to Him whom they adore as Lord and Saviour. 

Bebxode its 23 y Gen. xviil. 5. 

442 

from mind, why, [ suppose that it would be | 

possible for Him to do so also apart from flesh 
by a mere act of will, just as He works all 
other things, and has wrought them without 
body. ‘Take away, then, the flesh as well as 
the mind, that your monstrous folly may be 
complete, But they are deceived by the lat- 

cause they do not know the custom of Script- 
ure. We will teach them this 
what need is there even to mention to those 
who know it, the fact that everywhere in 
Scripture he is called Man, and the Son of 
Man ? 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

understood by the many. And I write it, 

not with any desire to compose a treatise, but 

only to check the progress of deceit ; and if 

it is thought well, I will give a fuller account 
of these matters at greater length, 
3ut there is a matter which is graver than 

_ these, a special point which it is necessary that 
ter, and, therefore, they run to the flesh, be- 

I should not pass over. I would they were even 

cut off that trouble you,* and would reintroduce 

also: Lor } 

If, however, they rely on the passage, The | 
Word was made Flesh and dwelt among us,? 
and because of this erase the noblest part of | 

Man (as cobblers do the thicker 

part of | 

skins) that they may join together God and _ 
Vlesh, it is time for them to say that God is _ 
God only of flesh, and not of souls, because it 
is written, ‘* As Thou hast given Him power 

over all Flesh,’’® and ‘‘ Unto Thee shall all 
Flesh come ;’’Y and ‘ Let all Flesh bless His 
holy Name,’’® meaning every Man. Or, 

again, they must suppose that our fathers went | 

down into Egypt without bodies and invisi- 
ble, and that only the Soul of Joseph was im- 
prisoned by Pharaoh, because it is written, 
‘They went down into Egypt with threescore 

and fifteen Souls,’’€ and ‘‘‘The iron entered | 

into his Soul,’’$ a thing which could not be— 

bound. ‘Phey who argue thus do not know 
that such expressions are used by Synecdoche, 

declaring the whole by the part, as when | 

Scripture says that the young ravens call upon 

God,” to indicate the whole feathered race; or | 

Pleiades, Hesperus, and Arcturus® are men- 

tioned, instead of all the Stars and His Provid- | 

ence over them. 

Moreover, in no other way was it possible» 

for the Love of God toward us to be mani- 
fested than by making mention of our flesh, 
and that for our sake He descended even to 
our lower part. For that flesh is less precious 
than soul, everyone who has a spark of sense will 
acknowledge. And so the passage, The Word 
was made Flesh, seems to me to be equivalent 
to that in which it is said that He was made 

sin,* or a curse for us; not that the Lord was | 

transformed into either of these, how could He 
be? But because by taking them upon Him 
He took away our sins and bore our iniquities.# 
This, then, is sufficient to say at the present 
time for the sake of clearness and of being 

@ Jolin 1 24e, “Bab. aaviie oy. yes xv 240-1 baCxlyic2n: 
e Acts vis 245 | ¢ Psiicve 18: yyaltst Cxlviin 8s O.Jobux, 9: 
x2 Cor, vy, 2%) AnGals Atle 73" felisay tilt 47, Most 

| 

a second Judaism, and a second circumcision, 
and a second system of sacrifices. For if 
this be done, what hinders Christ also being 
born again to set them aside, and again being 
betrayed by Judas, and crucified and buried, 
and rising again, that all may be fulfilled in the 
same order, like the Greek system of cycles, 
in which the same revolutions of the stars bring 
round the same events? = lor what the method 
of selection is, in accordance with which some 
of the events are to occur and others to be 
omitted, let these wise men who glory in the 
multitude of their books shew us. 

But since, puffed up by their theory of the 
Trinity, they falsely accuse us of being un- 
sound in the Faith and entice the multitude, 
it is necessary that people should know that 
Apollinarius, while granting the Name of God- 
head to the Holy Ghost, did not preserve the 
Power of the Godhead. For to make the 
‘Trinity consist of Great, Greater, and Greatest, 
as of Light, Ray, and Sun, the Spirit and the 
Son and the Father (as is clearly stated in 
his writings), is a ladder of Godhead not lcad- 
ing to Heaven, but down from Heaven. But 
we recognize God the Father and the Son and 
the Holy Ghost, and these not as bare titles, 
dividing inequalities of ranks or of power, but 
as there is one and the same title, so there is 
one nature and one substance in the Godhead. 

But if anyone who thinks we have spoken 
rightly on this subject reproaches us with hold- 
ing communion with heretics, let him prove 
that we are open to this charge, and we wiil 
either convince him or retire. But it is not 
safe to make any innovation before judgment 
is given, especially in a matter of such import- 
ance, and connected with so great issues. We 
have protested and continue to protest this be- 
fore God and men. And not even now, be 
well assured, should we have written this, if we 
had not seen that the Church was being torn 
asunder and divided, among their other tricks, 
by their present synagogue of vanity.8 = But if 
anyone when we say and protest this, either 
from some advantage they will thus gain, or 
through fear of men, or monstrous littleness of 

BIER 6 Axia eos, 

a Galat. v, 12, 

—— 

mind, or through some neglect of pastors and 
governors, or through love of novelty and 
proneness to innovations, rejects us as unwor- 
thy of credit, and attaches himself to such 
men, and divides the noble body of the Church, 
he shall bear his judgment, whoever he may 
be,* and shall give account to God in the day of 
judgment.? = But if their long books, and their 
new Psalters, contrary to that of David, and 
the grace of their metres, are taken for a third 
‘Testament, we too will compose Psalms, and 
will write much in metre. Jor we also think 
we have the spirit of God,y if indeed this is a 
gift of the Spirit, and not a human novelty. 
This I will that thou declare publicly, that we 
may not be held responsible, as overlooking 
such an evil, and as though this wicked doc- 
trine received food and strength from our in- 
difference, 

AGAINST APOLLINARIUS; THE SEC- 
OND LETTER 'TO CLEDONIUS. 
(Ep. CIE.) 

Forasmuch as many persons have come to 
your Reverence seeking confirmation of their 
faith, and therefore you have affectionately 
asked me to put forth a brief definition and 
rule of my opinion, I therefore write to your 
Reverence, what indeed you knew before, that 
I never have and never can honour anything 
above the Nicene Faith, that of the Holy 
Fathers who met there to destroy the Arian 
heresy ; but am, and by God’s help ever will 
be, of that faith; completing in detail that 
which was incompletely said by them concern- 
ing the Holy Ghost; for that question had 
not then been mooted, namely, that we are to 
believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost 
are of one Godhead, thus confessing the Spirit 
also to be God. Receive then to communion 
those who think and teach thus, as I also do; 
but those who are otherwise minded refuse, and 
hold them as strangers to God and the Cathol- 
ic Church. And since a question has also 
been mooted concerning the Divine Assump- 
tion of humanity, or Incarnation, state this 
also clearly to all concerning me, that I join 
in One the Son, who was begotten of the 
‘ather, and afterward of the Virgin Mary, 
and that I do not call Him two Sons, but wor- 
ship Him as One and the same in undivided 
Godhead and honour. — But if anyone does 
not assent to this statement, either now or 
hereafter, he shall give account to God at the 
day of judgment. 

a, Galat, v. 10. 8 Matt. xii. 36. y 1 Cor. vii. 40. 

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

443 

Now, what we object and oppose to their 
mindless opinion about His Mind is. this, to 
put it shortly ; for they are almost alone in the 
condition which they lay down, it 

as is 

through want of mind that they mutilate His 

| 

mind. But, that they may not accuse us of 
having once accepted but of now repudiat- 
ing the faith of their beloved Vitalius® which 
he handed in in writing at the request of the 
blessed Bishop Damasus of Rome, I will give 
a short explanation on this point also. For 
these men, when they are theologizing among 
their genuine disciples, and those who are in- 
itiated into their secrets, like the Manichaeans 
among those whom they call the “ Elect,’’ ex- 
pose the full extent of their disease, and scarce- 
ly allow flesh at all to the Saviour. But when 
they are refuted and pressed with the common 
answers about the Incarnation which the Scrip- 
ture presents, they confess indeed the ortho- 
dox words, but they do violence to the sense ; 
for they acknowledge the Manhood to be 
neither without soul nor without reason nor 
without mind, nor imperfect, but they bring 
in the Godhead to supply the soul and reason 
and mind, as though It had mingled Itself only 
with His flesh, and not with the other proper- 
ties belonging to us men; although His sin- 
lessness was far above us, and was the cleans- 
ing of our passions. 

Thus, then, they interpret wrongly the 
words, But we have the Mind of Christ,® and 
very absurdly, when they say that His God- 
head is the mind of Christ, and not under- 
standing the passage as we do, namely, that 
they who have purified their mind by the imi- 
tation of the mind which the Saviour took of 
us, and, as far as may be, have attained con- 
formity with it, are said to have the mind of 
Christ ; just as they might be testified to have 
the flesh of Christ who have trained their flesh, 
and in this respect have become of the same 
body and partakers of Christ; and so he says 
‘©As we have borne the image of the earthy 
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.”’ 
And so they declare that the Perfect Man is not 

a Vitalius or Vitalis was one of the principal followers of 
Apollinarius, and by him was consecrated schismatical Bishop of 
Antioch, where, while yet orthodox, he had been ordained a 
priest by Meletius. But he quarrelled with his Bishop through 
jealousy of another priest, and then fell under the influence of 
Apollinarius. He was summoned to Rome to clear himself of the 
charge of heresy ; and bya clever manipulation of language he 
produced a confession which the Pope, Damasus. accepted as 
orthodox; but the Pope remitted the whole case to Paulinus, who 
was at that time recognized by the Western Church as rightful 

Sishop. Vitalius, however, was unable to accept the test re- 
quired, and seceded. On his return from Rome he had visited 
Nazianzus, where S. Gregory received him as a brother in the 
faith, though further acquaintance compelled him to withdraw 
from this position. Vitalius, while admitting that our Lord had 
both a human body and a human soul, denied Him a human 
mind ; whose place, according to his teaching, was supplied by 
the Divinity. 6: i Cori ii, x6, y 1 Cor. xv. 49. 

444 said Se ee 

He who was in ai] points tempted like as we are proclainatiun sad 
yet without in ;* hed the at of God and meetingall who ¢o 11 
Flesh. For what, say they, can be more per- | tom and cistine tian 3 
fect than this? a God-bearing Man. 
They play the same trick with the word that What could be more 
Cescribes the Incarnation. viz.: He was made thouzh these new her 
Man, explaining it to mean. not. He wasin the deal of the title? - 
human nature with which Hesurrounded Him- sophistical grace throzg) 
self, according to the Scripture, He knew what antithesis, and a sort of 
was in man;? but teaching that it me to the wninetructed, yet it is 
consorted and conversed with men. and taking f absurdities 
refuge ns oe expression which says that He follies. For if one were to «1 e the word 
Was Se 1 Earth and conversed with Men.y Van or Flesh into Ged (the first would please 
And w er can anyone contend further? They us, the secc hi 
who take away the Hi umanity and the Interior wonderful 
Image cleanse by their new] y invented mask what conclusio: 

nie soar carteade 6 aa 5 ; ceen.:- « 
Oonliv our outside," and that which is seen: so 
ar in conflict with themselves that at one time, 
. 7 pete ee : - } .. 
jor the sake of the flesh, they explain all the 

14 Lorna) 79 2 o- 5 7 
rést In 2 SOs 2 Carnal Manner (ior it & 

oy IN 

from hence that they have derived their secor 

Judaism and their silly thousand years delight 
in paradise, and almost the idea that we shall 
esume agail same conditions after these rospel, 

ars); and atanother time they our faith: in ese sill ‘lie Marty rs |] 
asa — rather than a their witness, and in vain hav« 

our anc i not even such as are free from Grace is a matter of metres and not of the faith 
i ] for this sur pose the apostolic ex- And who will not marvel 
stood and spoken in a sense in that on their own authori 
which is not apostolic. that our Saviour was gs irist. and 
made in the omen of Men and found in such sayings as He was born, He was ecepict, 
‘ 3a Man.* as though by these words He was hengry. He was thirsty, He was 
ae not the human form. but some wearied, He was asleep; but reckon to J 
1antom and appearance. Divinity such as these: He was glorified 
then these expressions, rightly under- Angels, He overcame the Tempter. He fed the 
od, make for orthodoxy. but wrongly inter- tie ap in the wil cerness, and He fed them in 
preted are heretical, what is th sere to be sur- such a manner, and 1 He walked upon the sea; 
prised at if we received the words of Vitalius in ‘ail say on the one hand that the ‘* Where 
the more orthodox sense: our desire that they have ye laid Lazarus?” * belongs to us, but 1 
should be so meant persuading us, though loud voice “ Lazarus, Come I orth “'® 2nd the 
‘at the intention of his writ- raising him thet had been f Ls 
ings his is, I think, the reason why above our nature: and that whil ‘He was 
Damasus himself, having been subsequently inan Agony. He was crucified. = buried. #4 
renee’ informed. and at the same time lear ning belongs to the V ey on the other hand, *‘ He 
»y their former explanations. was confident. He rose again. He ae 
them and overturned their — to the In ner Treasure; and then they 
written. confession of faith with an Anathema: use us of introducing two natures, separate 
as well as because he was vexed at the deceit or r conflicting, and of dividing the supernatural 
which he had suffered from them through sim- and wondrous Union. They ought, either not 
plicity. to do that of which they accuse us. or not to 
since, then. they have been openly con- accuse us of that ne thev do: so at least if 

, 1 
pression. und 

assleZ 

in 
Past 
or 
op 
a 
SR 
J 
a 
ud 
C) 
Ly 
ew § 
par 
Z 
 § 
iT 
i 

Cx Coral 

7 

victed of this. let them not be angry. but let they are resolved to be consistent and not to 
nem be ashamed of themselves: and let them pr opound at once their own and their oppon- 
not stander us. but abase themselves and wipe ents’ principles. Such is their want of rea- 
off from their portals that great and marvellous son; it conflicts both with itself and with the 

re 
i] 
a) 

a Heb. iv. rs. B John ii. 25. Y iad 1k: 37. eas 
& Matt. xxih, 25, 20, © iat: @ John xi. 34. fe Ji. x 62. 

sare 

truth to such an extent that they are neither 
conscious nor ashamed of it when they fall out 
with themselves. © Now, if anyone thinks that 
we write all this willingly and not upon com- 
pulsion, and that we are dissuading trom unity, 
and not doing our utmost to promote it, let 
him know that he is very much mistaken, and 
has not made at all a good guess at our desires, 
tor nothing is or ever has been more valuable 
In our eyes than peace, as the facts themselves 
prove: though their actions and brawlings 
against us altogether exclude unanimity. 

Bp. CXXYV. 
‘To OLyMPIvs. 

Even hoar hairs have something to learn ; 
and old age, it would seem, cannot in all 
respects be trusted for wisdom. I at any 
rate, Knowing better than anyone, as I did, 
the thoughts and the heresy of the Apollin- 
arians, and seeing that their folly was intoler- 
vine; yet thinking that I could tame them by 
patience and soften them by degrees, I let my 
hopes make me eager to attain this object. 
But, as it seems, I overlooked the fact that I 
Was making them worse, 

VOLZVAG 

Pet LikhS Ol eoaINE: GREGORY. NAZIANZEN 

and injuring the 

445 
Church by my untimely philosophy. — For 
gentleness does not put bad men out of coun- 
tenance. And now if it had been possible 
tor me to teach you this myself, | should not 
have hesitated. you may be sure, even to un- 
dertake a journey bevond my strength to throw 
myselt at the teet of your Excellency. But 
since my illness has brought me too far, and 
it has become necessary for me to try the hot 
baths of Nanwaris at the advice of my medical 
men, I send a letter to represent me. These 
wicked and utterly abandoned men have dared, 
in addition to all their other misdeeds, either 
to summon, or to make a bad use of the pas- 
sage (Lam not prepared to say precisely which) 
ot certain Bishops, deprived by the whole 
Synod of the Eastern and Western Church ; 
and, in violation of all Imperial Ordinances, 
and of vour commands, to conter the name of 
Bishop on a certain individual of their own 
misbelieving and deceittul crew : encouraged 
to do so, as I believe. by nothing so much as 
my great infirmity: tor [ must mention this. 
It this is to be tolerated. vour Excellency wil! 
tolerate it, and I too will bear it. as 1 have 
otten before. But it it is serious, and not to 
be endured by our most august Emperors, pray 
punish what has been done—though more 
mildly than such madness merits. 

Hh 

DIVISION II. 

CORRESPONDENCE WITH SAINT BASIL THE GREAT, ARCHBISHOP OF 
CAESAREA. 

Ep. I. 

(Perhaps about A.b. 357 or 358 3 In answer | 

to a letter which is not now extant. ) 

To BASIL HIS COMRADE. 

I have failed, I confess, to keep my pro- 
mise. I had engaged even at Athens, at the 
time of our friendship and intimate connection 
there (for I can find no better word for it), 
to join you in a life of philosophy. But I 
failed to keep my promise, not of my own will, 
but because one law prevailed against another ; 
T mean the law which bids us honour our par- 
ents overpowered the law of our friendship and 
intercourse. Yet I will not fail you altogether, 
if you will accept this offer. I shall be with 
you half the time, and half of it you will be 
with me, that we may have the whole in com- 
mon, and that our friendship may be on equal 
terms; and so it will be arranged in such a 
way that my parents will not be grieved, and 
yet I shall gain you. 

| ages OB 

(Written about the same time, in reply to 
another letter now lost. ) 

I do not like being joked about Tiberina 

and its mud and its winters, O my friend, who. 
the stately names of Abode of Thought, Monas- 

are so free from mud, and who walk on tiptoe, 
and trample on the plains. 
wings and are borne aloft, and fly like the ar- 
rows of Abaris, in order that, Cappadocian 
though you are, you may flee from Cappado- 
cia. Have we done you an injury, because 
while you are pale and breathing hard and 
measuring the sun, we are sleek and well fed 

and not pressed for room? Yet this is your 
condition. You are luxurious and rich, and 
go to market. I do not approve of this. 
Lither then cease to reproach us with our mud 
(for you did not build your city, nor we make 
our winter), or else for our mud we will bring 
against you your hucksters, and the rest of 
the crop of nuisances which infest citics, 

Ep. IV. 

(In answer to Ep. XIV., of Basil, about 

| 361.) 

You may mock and pull to pieces my af- 
fairs, whether in jest or in earnest. ‘This is a 
matter of no consequence; only Jaugh, and 
take your fill of culture, and enjoy my friend- 
ship. Everything that comes from you is 

' pleasant to me, no matter what it may be, and 

how it may look. For I think you are chat- 
fing about things here, not for the sake of 

_chaffing, but that you may draw me to your- 

You who have | 

| 

self, if 1 understand you at all; just lke peo- 
ple who block up streams in order to draw 
them into another channel. That is how your 
sayings always seem to me. 

For my part I will admire your Pontus and 
your Pontic darkness, and your dwelling place 
so worthy of exile, and the hills over your 
head, and the wild beasts which test your faith, 
and your sequestered spot that les under them 

or as I should say your mousehole with 

tery, School ; and your thickets of wild bushes, 
and crown of precipitous mountains, by which 
may you be, not crowned but, cloistered ; and 
your limited air ; and the sun, for which you 
long, and can only see as through a chimney, 
O sunless Cimmerians of Pontus, who are con- 
demned not only to a six months’ night, as 

ee, ee 

some are said to be, but who have not even a 
part of your life out of the shadow, but all 

! 

your life is one long night, and a real shadow | 

of death, to use a Scripture phrase. And I 
admire your strait and narrow road, leading 
: I know not if it be to the Kingdom, 
or to Hades, but for your sake I hope it is the 
Kingdom. 
ing country, what is your wish? Am I 
falsely to call it Eden, and the fountain divided 
into four heads, by which the world is wa- 
tered, or the dry and waterless wilderness 
(only what Moses will come to tame it, bring- 
ing water out of the rock with his staff)? For 
all of it which has escaped the rocks is full of 
gullies; and that which is not a gully is a 

thorns is a precipice ; and the road above that 
is precipitous, and slopes both ways, exercising 
the mind of travellers, and calling for gymnas- 
tic exercises for safety. And the river rushes 
roaring down, which to you is a Strymon of 
Amphipolis for quietness, and there are not 
so many fishes in it as stones, nor does it flow 

into a lake, but it dashes into abysses, O my — 

grandiloquent friend and inventor of new 
names. or it is great and terrible, and over- 
whelms the psalmody of those who live above 
it; like the Cataracts and Catadoupa of the 
Nile, so does it roar you down day and_ night. 
It is rough and fordless; and it has only this 
morsel of kindness about it, that it does not 
sweep away your dwelling when the torrents 
and winter storms make it mad. his then is 
what I think of those Fortunate Islands and of 
you happy people. And you are not to ad- 
mire the crescent-shaped curves which strangle 
rather than cut off the accessible parts of your 
Highlands, and the strip of mountain ridge 
that hangs over your heads, and makes your 
life like that of ‘Tantalus; and the draughty 
breezes, and the vent-holes of the earth, which 
refresh your courage when it fails; and your 
musical birds that sing (but only of famine), 
and fly about (but only about the desert). No 
one Visits it, you say, except for hunting ; you 
might add, and except to look upon your dead 
bodies. This is perhaps too long for a letter, 
but it is too short fora comedy. If you can 
take my jokes kindly you will do well, but if 
not, I will send you some more. 

Pi Vy 
(CIRCA A.D. 361.) 

Since you do take my jokes kindly, I send 
you the rest. My prelude is from Homer. 

Ii 

And as for the interven- | 

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

447 

* Come now and change thy theme, 
And sing of the inner adornment,” 

OD, vill. 492, 

Your roofless and doorless hut, your fireless 
and smokcless hearth, your walls dried by fire, 
that we may not be hit by the drops of the mud, 
condemned like ‘Pantalus thirsting in the midst 
of waters, and that pitiable feast with nothing 
to eat, to which we were invited from Cappa- 
docia, not as to a Lotus-eater’s poverty, but to 
a table of Alcinous—we young and miserable 
survivors of a wreck. For I remember those 

_loaves and the broth (so it was called), yes, 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
\ 

I 

al 

and I shall remember them too, and my poor 
teeth that slipped on your hunks of bread, and 

k . y _then braced themselves up, and pulled them- 
thicket of thorns ; and whatever is above the > wor 4X 

selves as it were out of mud. You yourself will 

_Taise these things toa higher strain of tragedy, 

having learnt to talk big through your own suf- 
ferings. for if we had not been quickly 
delivered by that great supporter of the poor 
—TI mean your mother—who appeared Oppor- 
tunely like a harbour to men tossed by a storm, 
we should long ago have been dead, rather 
pitied than admired for our faith in Pontus. 
How shall I pass over that garden which was 
no garden and had no vegetables, and the 
Augean dunghill which we cleared out of the 
house, and with which we filled it up (se. 
the garden), when we drew that mountainons 
wagon, I the vintager, and you the valiant, 
with our necks and hands, which still bear the 
traces of our labours. ‘*O earth and sun, O air 
and virtue’? (for I will indulge a little in 
tragic tones), not that we might bridge the 
Hellespont, but that we might level a preci- 
pice. If you are not put out by the mention 
of the circumstances, no more am 1: but if 
you are, how much more was I by the reality. 
I pass by the rest, through respect for the 
others from whom I received much enjoyment. 

Ep. V1, 

(Written about the same time, in a more 
serious vein. ) 

What I wrote before about our stay in 
Pontus was in joke, not in earnest; what | 
write now is very much in earnest. O that 
one would place me as in the month of 
those former days,* in which I luxuriated with 
you in hard living; since voluntary pain is 
more valuable than involuntary delight. O 
that one would give me back those psalmodies 

a Job xxix, 2. 

2 

448 GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

and vigils and those sojournings with God in | 
prayer, and that immaterial, so to speak, and | 
unbodied lite. O for the intimacy and one- 
souledness of the brethren who were by you 
divinized and exalted: O for the contest and 
incitement of virtue which we secured by writ- 
ten Rules and Canons; O for the loving labour 
in the Divine Oracles, and the light we found 
in them by the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
Or, if I may speak of lesser and slighter mat- 
ters, O for the daily courses and experiences ; 
© for the gatherings of wood, and the cutting 
of stone; O for the golden plane-tree, more 
precious than that of Xerxes, under which sat, 
not a King enfeebled by luxury, but a Monk 
worn out by hard life, which I planted and 
Apollos (Imean your honourable self) watered ; ¢ 
but God gave the increase to our honour, that 
a memorial might remain among you of my 
diligence, as in the Ark we read and believe, 
did Aaron’s rod that budded.® ‘To long for all 
this is very easy, but it is not easy to attain it. 
But do you come to me, and conspire with me 
in virtue, and co-operate with me, and aid me 
by your prayers to keep the profit which we used 
to get together, that I may not perish by little 
and little, like a shadow as the day draws to its 
close. I would rather breathe you than the 
air, and only live while I am with you, either 
actually in your presence, or virtually by your 
likeness in your absence. 

Ep. VIII. 

(Written to S. Basil shortly after his Ordina- 
tion as Priest, probably toward the end of 
A.D. 362.) 

I approve the beginning of your letter ; but 
what is there of yours that I do not approve? | 
And you are convicted of having written just 
like me; for I, too, was forced into the rank 
of the Priesthood, for indeed I never was eager 
for it. We are to one another, if ever any | 
nien were, trustworthy witnesses of our love for 
a humble and lowly philosophy. But perhaps 
it would have been better that this had not 
happened, or I know not what to say, as long 
as I am in ignorance of the purpose of the 
Holy Ghost. But since it has come about, we 
must bear it, at least so it seems clear to me ; and 
especially when we take the times into con- 
sideration, which are bringing in upon us so 
many heretical tongues, and must not put to 
shame either the hopes of those who have 
trusted us thus, or our own lives. 

Ql OGY ihe 6: BNum, xvii. 8, ro. 

_y The Editors render ‘‘And you were a he just as I also was 
circumscribed,” etc., butthe Greek hardly bears this rendering, 

Ep. XIX. 

(This Epistle should be read in connection 

| with the three addressed to Eusebius of Ceesa- 

rea, to which it refers. For the circumstances 
see General Prolegomena, § 1, p. 194.) 

It is a time for prudence and endurance, and 
that we should not let anyone appear to be of 
higher courage than ourselves, or let all our 
labours and toils be in an instant brought to 
nothing. Why do I write this, and wherefore ? 
Our Bishop Eusebius, very dear to God (for so 
we must for the future both think and write of 
him), is very much disposed to agreement and 
friendship with us ; and as fire softens iron, so 
has time softened him; and I think a letter of 
appeal and invitation will come to you from 
him, as he intimated to me, and as many _per- 
sons who are well acquainted with his affairs 
assure me. Let us be beforehand with him then, 
either by going to him, or by writing to him ; 
or rather by first writing and then going; in 
order that we may not by and by be put to 
shame by being defeated when it was in our 
power to secure a victory by being honourably 
and philosophically beaten, which so many are 
asking from us. Be persuaded by me then, and 
come; both on this account and on account of 
the bad times ; for a conspiracy of heretics is 
assailing the Church ; some of them are here 
now, and are troubling us ; and others, rumour 
says, are coming; and there is reason to fear 
lest the Word of Truth should be swept away, 
unless there be stirred up very soon the spirit of 
a Bezaleel, the wise Master builder of such ar- 
guments and dogmas. If you think I ought to 
go too, to stay with you and travel with you, 
I will not refuse to do even this. 

(We insert here the three letters to Eusebius, 
which are so closely connected with the above 
as not to seem out of place.) 

Ep. XVI. 
To EvseEpius, Bishop OF CASAREA. 

Since I am addressing a man who does not 
love falsehood, and who is the keenest man I 
know at detecting it in another, however it may 
be twined in skilful and varied labyrinths ; 
and, moreover, on my own part I will say it, 
though against the grain I do not like artifice, 
either, both from my natural constitution, and 
because God’s Word has formed me so. There- 

f 

Wdeedidl Poles Od 

fore | write what presents itself to my mind ; 

SfiNT GREGORY 

and I be you to excuse my plain speaking, or 
| 

you will wrong the truth by depriving me of my 
liberty, and fore ing me to restrain within my- 

self the pain of my grief, like some secret and 
malignant disease. I rejoice that I have your 
respect (for Lam aman, as some one has said 
before), and that | am summoned to Synods and 
spiritual conferences. But Lam troubled at the 
slight which has been inflicted on my most 
Reverend brother Basil, and is still inflicted on 
him by Your Reverence ; for I chose him as 
the companion of my life and words and high- 
est. philosophy, and he is so still; and I never 
had reason to regret my judgment of him. 
is more temperate to speak thus of him, that I 
may not seem to be praising myself in admiring 
him. You, however, I think, by honouring me 

Nz nee ZEN. 

449 
to accept more as the freedom of a friend 
than the flattery of an enemy. 

eps & VEER. 

To Evusepius or Casarea. 

Twas never meanly disposed towards your 
Reverence ; do not find me guilty. But after 
allowing myself a little liberty and bol dness, 

just to “telieve and heal my urief, I at once 

, bowed and submitted, and willingly subjected 

4 

and dishonouring him, seem to be acting likea | 
man who should with one hand stroke a man’s | 

head, and with the other hand strike him on the 
face ; or while tearing up the foundations of a 
house should paint the walls and decorate the 
exterior. If then you will listen to me, this is 
what you will do, and [ claim to be listened 
o, for this is justice. If you will pay due at- 
tention to him, he will do the like by you. 

And [ will follow him as a shadow does the | 

body, 
peace. 

being of little worth and inclined to 
For Tam not so mean as to be willing 

in other respects to philosophize, and to be of | 
the better part, but to overlook a matter which — 

is the end of all our teac hing, namely love ; 

especially in regard to a Priest, and one of | 
so high a character, and one whom I know of. 
all my acquaintances to be the best both in life 

and doctrine and conduct. 
not obscure the truth. 

For my pain shall 

Ep. XVII. 

To Eusepius, ARCHBISHOP OF C/ESAREA. 

complain of my letter, but rather in a spiritual 
and philosophical one, and as was fitting, un- 
less this too wrongs ‘* your most eloquent Greg- 
ory.’’ For though youare my Superior in rank, 

senting himself as dangerously ill. 

_ politan. 

myself to the Canon. What else could I have 
done, knowing both you and the Law of the 
Spirit? But if I had been ever so mean and 
ignoble in my sentiments, yet the present time 
would not allow such feelings, nor the wild 
beasts which are rushing on the Church, nor 
your own courage and manliness, so purely and 
genuinely fighting for the Church. I will 
come then, if you wish it, and take part with 
you in prayers and in conflict, and will serve 
you, and like cheering boys will stir up the 
noble athlete by my exhortations. 

Dace, @ oe 

To THE GREAT BAsIL. 

(About the middle of the year 370. On the 
death of Eusebius Basil seems to ha e formed a 
desire that his friend Gregory should succeed to 
the vacant Metropolitanate ; and so he wrote 
to him, without mentioning the death of the 
Archbishop, to come to him at Casarea, repre- 
Gregory, 
deeply grieved at the news, set off at once, but 
had not proceeded far on his way when he 
learned that Basil was in his usual health, and 
that the Bishops of the Province were assem- 
bling at Caesarea for the Election of a Metro- 
He saw through the artifice at once; 

_and thinking that Basil had wished to secure 
[ did not write in an insolent spirit, as you | 

yet you will grant me something of liberty and — 

just freedom of speech. ‘Therefore be kinder to 
me. But if you regard my letter as coming 
from a servant, and from one who has not the 
right even to look you in the face, I will in 

this instance accept your stripes and not even | 

shed a tear. Will you blame me for this also ? 
That would befit anyone rather than your Re- 
verence. I*or it is the part of a high-souled man 

' 
| 
| 
| 
u 

his presence at the Metropolis in order that his 
influence might bring about his own (Basil’s) 
Election, he wrote him the following indignant 
letter. Nevertheless both he and his father felt 
that no one was so well fitted to succeed to the 
vacant throne; and so Gregory wrote in his 
father’s name the three letters which we have 
placed next, addressed respectively to the 
people of Ceesarea, to the Bishops attending 
the Synod, and to Eusebius Bishop of Samo- 
sata. ) 

Do not be surprized if I say something strange, 
which has not been said before by anyone. 
I think you have the reputation of being a steady 

450 

safe and strong-minded man, but also of being 

more simple than safe in much that you plan 
and do. For that which is free from evil is 
also in proportion slow to suspect evil, as is 
shewn by what has just occurred. You have 
summoned me to the Metropolis at the moment 
when a council has been called for the election 
of a Bishop, and your pretext is very seemly 
and plausible. You pretend to be very ill, in- 
deed at your last breath, and to long to see me 
and to bid mea last farewell; I do not know 
with what object, even what my presence can 
effect in the matter. I started in great grief at 

what had happened; for what could be of | 

higher value to me than your life, or more dis- 
tressing than your departure? And I shed a 
fountain of tears; and I wailed aloud; and [ 
felt myself now for the first time unphilosoph- 
ically disposed. What did I leave unperformed 
of all that befits a funeral? But as soon as I 
found that the Bishops were assembling at the 
City, at once I stopped short in my course ; 
and I wondered first that you had not per- 
ceived what was proper, or guarded against 
people’s tongues, which are so given to slander 
the guileless; and secondly that you did not 

think the same course to be fitting for me as for — 
yourself, though our life and our rule and every- 

thing is common to us both, who have been 
so closely associated by God from the first. 

Thirdly, for I must say this also, I wondered | 

whether you remembered that such nominations 

are worthy of the more religious, not of the 

more powerful, nor of those most in favour with 
the multitude. | For these reasons then I backed 
water, and held back. 
do, come to this determination, to avoid these 
public turmoils and evil suspicions. I shall see 
your Reverence when the matters are settled 
and time allows, and I shall have more and 
graver reproaches to address to you. 

Ep. XLI. 

To THE PEOPLE or CASAREA, 

FATHER’S NAME. 

IN HIS 

Tam a little shepherd, and preside over a tiny 

flock, and I am among the least of the servants | 

of the Spirit. But Grace is not narrow, or 
circumscribed by place. 
dom of speech be given even to the small,— 
especially when the subject matter is of such 
creat importance, and one in which all are 
interested—even to deliberate with men of 
hoary hairs, who speak with perhaps greater 
wisdom than the ordinary run of men. You 

are deliberating on no ordinary or unimpor- | 

Now, if you thinkas I | 

Wherefore let free-— 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

tant matter, but on one by which the common 
interest must necessarily be promoted or injured 
according to the decision at which you arrive. 
l‘or our subject matter is the Church, for which 
Christ died, and the guide who is to present it 
and lead it to God. Tor the light of the body 
is the eye,* as we have heard; not only 
the bodily eye which sees and is seen, but 
that which contemplates and is contemplated 
spiritually. But the hght of the Church is the 
Bishop, as is evident to you even without our 
writing it. As then the straightness or crook- 
edness of the course of the body depends upon 
the clearness or dulness of the eye, so must the 
Church necessarily share the peril or safety in- 
curred by the conduct of its Chief. You must 
then take thought for the whole Church as the 
Body of Christ, but more especially for your 
own, which was from the beginning and is now 
the Mother of almost all the Churches, to which 
all the Commonwealth looks, like a circle de- 
scribed round a centre, not only because of its 

orthodoxy proclaimed of old to all, but also 

because of the grace of unanimity so evidently 
bestowed upon it by God. You then have sum- 
moned us also to your discussion of this matter, 
and so are acting rightly and canonically. But 
we are oppressed by age and infirmity, and if 
we by the strength given us by the Holy Ghost 
could be present (nothing is incredible to them 
that believe), this would be best for the com- 
mon welfare and most pleasant to ourselves, 
that we might confer something on you, and 
ourselves have a part of the blessing; but if I 
should be kept away through weakness, I will 
give at any rate whatever can be given by one 
who is absent. 

I believe that there are others among you 
worthy of the Primacy, both because of the 
greatness of your city, and because it has been 
governed in times past so excellently and by 
such great men ; but there is one man among 
you to whom I cannot prefer any, our son 
well beloved of God, Basil the Priest (1 

' speak before God as my witness); a man 
_ of pure life and word, and alone, or almost 

alone, of all qualified in both respects to stand 

against the present times, and the prevail- 

ing wordiness of the heretics. I write this 
to men of the priestly and monastic Orders, and 
also to the dignitaries and councillors, and to 
the whole people. If you should approve it, 
and my vote should prevail, being so just and 
right, and given with God’s aid, Iam and will 
be with you in spirit; or rather I have already 
set my hand to the work—and am bold in 

a Matt. vi. 22, 

Lilith OF 

the Spirit. But if you should not agree with 
me, but determine something else, and if the 
matter is to be settied by cliques and relation- 
ships, and if the hand of the mob is again 
to disturb the sincerity of your vote, do what 
pleases you—I shall stay at home. 

Br. XLIL. 

(The comprovincial Bishops had notified the 
elder Gregory of their Synod, but without men- 
tioning its date or purpose or inviting him to 
take part in it—probably because they knew 

how strongly he would support the election of | 

Basil, to which they were unfavourable. 5. 
Gregory therefore wrote the following letter 
in his father’s name. ) 

To THE BISHOPS. 

How sweet and kind you are, and how full of 
love. You have invited me to the Metropolis, 
because, as I imagine, you are going to take 
some counsel about a Bishop. So “much I 
learn from you, though you have not told me 
either that Iam to be present, or why, or 
when, but have merely announced to me sud- 
denly that you were setting out, as though re- 
solved not to respect me, and as not desirous 
that I should share your counsels, but rather 
putting a hindrance in the way of my coming, 
that you may not meet me even against my will. 
This is your way of action, and I will put 
up with the insult, but I will set before you 
my view and how I feel. Various people will 
put forward various candidates, each accord- 
ing to his own inclinations and interests, as is 
usually the case at such times. But I cannot 
prefer anyone, for my conscience would not 
allow it, to my dear son and fellow priest 
Basil. Lor whom of all my acquaintance do I 
find more approved in his life, or more powerful 
in his word, or more furnished altogether with 
the beauty of virtue? But if you allege weak 
health against him, I reply that we are choos- 
ing not an athlete but a teacher. And at the 
same time is seen in this case the power of Him 

siecna GREGORY NAZIANZEN, 

we 

ao! 

Ev. XLIT. 
(There still seemed a probability that in- 
trigues and party spirit would carry the day, 

and so the two Grevories determined to call 

in the aid of Eusebius of Samosata, though 
he did not belong to the Province. He-had 
been a conspicuous champion of orthodoxy 
against the Arian Emperor Valens, and the 
Gregories hoped much from his presence at the 
Synod. He responded to their appeal, and 
undertook the three hundred miles of very diffic- 
ult travelling to throw in his influence with the 
cause which they had at heart. Hesaw, how- 
ever, that it was necessary that the aged Bishop 
of Nazianzus, notwithstanding his years and 

infirmities, should make the effort, and he per- 

that strengthens and supports the weak, if such | 

they be. If you accept this vote I will come 
and take part, either in spirit or in body. But 
if you are marching to a foregone conclusion, 
and faction is to overrule justice, I shall rejoice 
to have been overlooked. ‘The work must be 
yours ; but pray for me.¢ 

a There is here a various reading (the difference being merely 
the result of itacism) which seems to give a better sense ; ‘‘ Ours 
{s to pray for you.” 

| some comfort for my afflictions. 

The result was all that 
could be desired ; for Basil was elected by a 
unanimous vote. ‘The letter, which S. Gregory 
wrote in his own name to thank him, will be 
found later on.) 

suaded him to go. 

To Eusenius, Bisnop or SAMOSATA, 

O that I had the wings of a dove, or that 
my old age could be renewed, that | might be 
able to go to your charity, and to satisfy the 
longings that | have to see you, and to tell you 
the troubles of my soul, and in you to find 
Tor since 
the death of the blessed Bishop Eusebius | am 
not a little afraid lest they who on a foriner 
occasion set traps for our Metropolis, and 
wanted to fill it with heretical tares, should 
now seize the opportunity, and uproot by their 
evil teaching the piety which has with so much 
labour been sown in the hearts of men, and 
should tear asunder its unity, as they have done 
in many Churches. As soon as I received let- 
ters from the Clergy asking me not to forget 
them in their present circumstances, I looked 
round about me, and remembered your love 
and your right faith and the zeal with which 
you are ever possessed for the Churches of God ; 
and therefore I sent my beloved Eustathius, 
my Deacon and helper, to warn your Kever- 
ence, and to entreat you, in addition to all 
your toils for the Churches, to meet me, and 
both to refresh my old age by your coming, 

and to establish in the Orthodox Church that 

piety which is so famous, by giving her with 
us (if we may be deemed worthy to Have 2 
share with you in the good w ork) a Shepherd 
according to the will of the Lord, who shall 
be able to rule His people. For we have a 

452 

man before our eyes, and you are not unac- 
quainted with him ; and if we are permitted to 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

obtain him I know that we shall acquire great ' 

boldness towards God, and shall confer a very 
great benefit upon the people who have called 
upon our aid. T beg you again and again to 
put away all delay, and to come to us be- 
fore the bad weather of the winter sets in. 

EP. ALY, 

(After the Consecration every one thought 
that Gregory would at once join his friend ; 
and Basil himself much wished for his assist- 
ance. But Gregory thought it better to re- 
strain his desire to see his friend until jealousics 
had had time to calm down. So he wrote the 
following letter to explain the reasons for his 
staying away at this juncture.) 

To BASIL. 

When I learnt that you had been placed on 
the lofty throne, and that the Spirit had_ pre- 

‘* What a word has escaped the fence of your 
teeth,’’ or how could you dare to say such a 
thing, if I too may be somewhat daring ? 
How could your mind set it going, or your 
ink write it, or your paper receive it, O lec- 
tures and Athens and virtues and_ literary 
labours! You almost make me write a tragedy 
by what you have written. Do you not know 
me or yourself, you eye of the world, and 
great voice and trumpet and palace of learn- 
ing? Your affairs trifles to Gregory ? What 
then on earth could any one admire, if Gregory 
admire not you? ‘There is one spring among 
the seasons, one sun among the stars, and one 
heaven that embraces all things ; and so your 
voice is unique among all things, if I am capa- 
ble of judging such things, and not deceived hy 
my affection—and this I do not think to be the 
case. But if it is because I do not value you 
according to your worth that you blame me, 
you must also blame all mankind; for no one 
else has or will sufficiently admire you, unless it 
be yourself, and your own eloquence, at least if 

it were possible to praise oneself, and if such 

vailed to publish the candle upon the candle- | 

stick, which even before shone with no dim 
light, I was glad, I confess. Why should I 
not be, seeing as I did that the commonwealth 
of the Church was in sorry plight, and needed 
such a guiding hand? Yet I did not run to 
you off hand, nor shall I run to you, not even 
if you ask me yourself. 
may be careful of your dignity, and that you 
may not seem to be collecting partisans under 
the influence of bad taste and hot temper, as 
your calumniators would say; and secondly 
that I may make for myself a reputation for 
stability, and above illwill. When then will 
you come, perhaps you will ask, and how long 
will you put it off 2 As long as God shall bid 

me, and until the shadow of the present enmity , 
For the | 

and slander shall have passed away. 
lepers, I well know, will not hold out very 
long to keep our David out of Jerusalem. 

Ep. XLVI. 
(The new Archbishop seems not to have been 

satisfied with the reasons given in Gregory’s 
last letter ; so the latter writes again.) 

LO CBASIL. 

How can any affairs of yours be mere grape- 
gleanings to me, O dear and sacred friend ? 

First, in order that I. 

were the custom of our speech. But if youare 
accusing me of despising you, why not rather 
of being mad? Or are you vexed because I am 
acting like a philosopher? Give me leave to 
say that this and this alone is higher than even 

_ your conversation. 

Ep. XLVII. 

(The division of the civil Province of Cap- 
padocia into two Provinces in the year 372 was 
followed by ecclesiastical troubles. Anthimus, 
the Bishop of Tyana, the civil metropolis of the 
new division of Cappadocia Secunda, main- 
tained that the Ecclesiastical divisions must ne- 
cessarily follow the civil, and by consequence 
claimed for himself that the purely civil action 
of the State had 7Aso facto elevated him to the 
dignity of Metropolitan of the new Province ; 
and this pretension was supported by the Bish- 
ops of that district, who were as a rule not well 
disposed towards the great Archbishop. The 
next three letters are connected with this dis- 
pute. ) 

LOB ASits 

I hear that you are being troubled by this 
fresh innovation, and are being worried by 
some sophistical and not unusual officiousness 
on the part of those in power ; and it is not to 
be wondered at. For I was not ignorant of 
their envy, or of the fact that many of those 

around you are making use of you to further 
their own interests, and are kindling the spark 
of meanness. 
philosophically affected by your troubles, or in 
any way unworthy of yourself and me. Nay, | 

LETTERS OF SAINT GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

. a . 1 
I have no fear of seeing you un- 

think that it is now above all that my Basil will » 

be known, and that the philosophy which all 
your life you have been collecting will shew it- 
self, and will overcome the abuse as with a 
high wave; and that you will remain unshaken 
while others are being troubled. If you think 
it well, I will come myself and perhaps shall be 
able to give you some assistance by my counsel 
(if the sea needs water, you do counsel! ) 5 but 
in any case I shall derive benefit, and shall learn 
philosophy by bearing my part of the abuse. 

Ep. XLVIII. 

(Shortly after the events described above, Ba- 
sil determined to strengthen his own hands by 
creating a number of new Bishoprics in the 
disputed Province, to one of which, Sasima, he 
consecrated Gregory, very much against the 
will of the latter, who felt that he had been 
hardly used, and did not attempt to disguise 
his reluctance. See Gen. Prolegg. p. 195.) 

‘LO. BASIL: 

Do leave off speaking of me as an ill-educ- 
ated and uncouth and unfriendly man, not even 
worthy to live, because I have ventured to be 
conscious of the way in which I have been 
treated. You yourself would admit that I have 

not done wrong in any other respect, and my | 

own conscience does not reproach me with hay- 
ing been unkind to you in either great or small 
matters; and I hope it never may. I only 
know that I saw that I had been deceived 
too late indeed, but I saw it—and I throw 
the blame on your throne, as having on a sud- 
den lifted you above yourself; and I am weary 
of being blamed for faults of yours, and of havy- 
ing to make excuses for them to people who 
know both our former and our present relations. 
Vor of all that I have to endure this is the most 
ridiculous or most pitiable thing, that the same 
person should have both to suffer the wrong 
and to bear the blame, and this is my present 
case. Different people blame me for different 
things according to the tastes of cach, or each 
man’s disposition, or the measure of their ill 
feeling on my account; but the kindest re- 
proach me with contempt and disdain, and 
they throw me on one side after making use 

453 

of me, like the most valueless vessels, or those 
frames upon which arches are built, which afier 
the building is complete are taken down and 
cast aside. We will let them be and say what 
they please; no one shall curb their freedom 
ofspeech. And do you, as my reward, pay off 
those blessed and empty hopes, which you de- 
vised against the evil speakers, who ac cused you 
of insulting me on pretence of honouring me, as 
though I were lightminded and casily taken in 
by such treatment. Now I will plainly speak 
out the state of my mind, and you must not 
be angry with me. For I will tell you just what 
I said at the moment of the suffering, not 
in a fit of anger or so much in the sense of as- 
tonishment at what had happened as to lose 
/ my reason or not to know what I said. E will 
| not take up arms, nor will I learn tactics which 
I did not learn in former times, when the oc- 
~ casion seemed more suitable, as every one was 
arming and in frenzy (you know the illness of 
the weak), nor will I face the martial Anthimus, 
though he be an untimely warricr, being my- 
self unarmed and unwarlike, and thus the 
more exposed to wounds. Fight with him 
yourself if you wish (for necessity often makes 
warriors even of the weak), or lock out for 
some one to fight when he seizes your mules, 
' keeping guard over a defile, and like Amalek 
of old, barring the way against Israel. Give 
me before all things quiet. Why should T fight 
for sucking pigs and fowls, and those not my 
own, as though for souls and canons? Why 
should I deprive the Metropolis of the cele- 
brated Sasima, or lay bare and unveil the 
secret of your mind, when I ought to join in 
concealing it? Do you then play the man 
and be strong and draw all parties to your 
own conclusion, as the rivers do the winter 
torrents, without regard for friendship or inti- 
macy in good, or for the reputation which such 
a course will bring you. Give yourself up 
to the Spirit alone. I shall gain this only 
from your friendship, that I shall learn not to 
trust in friends, or to esteem anything more 
valuable than God. 

Ep. XLIX. 

(The Praises of Quict.) 

iG. Washi. 

You accuse me of laziness and idleness, be- 

cause I did not accept your Sasima, and be- 
cause I have not bestirred myself like a Bishop, 

454 

and do not arm you against each other like a 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

mons to me; and when | Ceclined it and said 

bone thrown into the midst of dogs. My great- 

est’ business always is to keep free from busi- 

ness. And to give you an idea of one of my 

good points, so much do I value freedom from 
business, that I think I might even be a stand- 
ard to all men of this kind of magnanimity, 
and if only all men would imitate me the 
Churches would have no troubles ; nor would 
the faith, which every one uses as a weapon in 
his private quarrels, be pulled in pieces. 

oe. 1 

(At the request of Anthimus it would appear 

that S. Gregory wrote to S. Basil a letter, not 

now extant, proposing a conference between — 

the rival Metropolitans. Basil took umbrage 
at the well-meant proposal, and wrote a stiff 
letter to 5. Gregory, to which the following is 
the reply.) 

To BASIL. 

How hotly and like a colt you skip in your 

letters. Nor do I wonder that when you have 
just become the property of glory you should 
wish to shew me what you find glory to be, so 

that you may make yourself more majestic, like | 

those painters who picture the seasons. But, 
to explain the whole matter about the Bishops, 
and the letter by which you were annoyed ; 
what was my starting point, and how far I 
went, and where I stopped, appears to me to 

presence on the orthodoxy of Basil 

be too long a matter for a letter, and to be a. 

subject not so much for an apology as for a 

most noble Anthimus came to us with certain 
Bishops, whether to visit my Father (this at 
least was the pretext), or to act as he did act. 
He sounded me in many ways and on many 
subjects ; dioceses, the marshes of Sasima, my or- 
dination, flattering, questioning, threat- 
ening, pleading, blaming, praising, drawing 
circles round himself, as though I ought only 
to look at him and his new Metropolis, as being 
the greater. Why, I said, do you draw vour 

line to include our city, for we too deem our | 

Church to be really a Mother of Churches, and 
that too from ancient times? In the end he 
went away without having gained his object. 
mach out of breath, and reproaching me with 
Basilism, as if it were a kind of Philipism. Do 
you think T did you wrong in this? And now 
look at the letter from me, who, you say, In- 
sulted you. They fashioned a Synodal sum- 

that the thing was an insult, they then asked as 
an alternative that through me you should be 
invited to deliberate upon these matters. ‘This 
T promised, in order to prevent their first plan 
being carried out ; placing the whole matter in 
your hands, if you choose to call them together, 
and where and when. And if I have not in- 
jured you in this, tell me where there is room 
for injury. If you have to learn this from me, 
T will read you the letter which Anthimus sent 
me, after invading the marshes, notwithstand- 
ing my prohibitions and threats, insulting and 
reviling me, and as it were singing a song of 
triumph over my defeat. And what reason is 
there that I should offend him for your sake 
and at the same time displease you, as though 
[ were currying favour with him? You ought 
to have learnt this first, my dear friend ; and 
even if it had been so, you should not have 
insulted me,—if only because I am a Priest. 
But if you are very much disposed to ostenta- 
tion and quarrelsomeness, and speak as my Su- 
perior—as the Metropolitan to an insignificant 
Suffragan, or even as to a Bishop without a 
See—I too have a little pride to set against 
yours. ‘That is very easy to anybody, and is 
perhaps the most suitable course. 

Ep. LVIII. 

(An attack had been made in Gregory’s 
in respect 
of the Deity of God the Holy Ghost; and in 
this letter he gives his friend an account of the 
way in which he had defended him. Unfor- 

wn pee : _ tunately Basil was not pleased with the letter, 
history. ‘To explain it to you concisely :—the — 

taking it as intended to convey reproach under 
the guise of friendly sympathy. ) 

To BAsIL. 

From the first I have taken you, and I take 
you still, for my guide of life and my teacher 
of the faith, and for every thing honourable that 
can be said; and if any one else praises your 
merits, he is altogether with me, or even be- 
hind me, so far am I surpassed by your piety, 
and so thoroughly am I yours. And no won- 
der; for the longer the intimacy the greater the 
experience ; and where the experience is more 
abundant the testimony is more perfect. And 

if [ get any profit in life it is from your friend- 

ship and company. This is my disposition in 
regard to these matters, and I hope always will 

be. What I now write I write unwillingly, 
but still I write it. Do not be angry with 
me, or I shall be very angry myself, if you do 
not give me credit for both saying and writ- 
ing it out of goodwill to you. 

Many people have condemned us as not firm 
in our faith; those, I mean, who think and 
think rightly that we thoroughly agree. Some 
openly charge us with heresy, others with cow- 
ardice; with heresy, those who believe that 
our language is not sound; with cowardice, 
they who blame our reserve. I need not. re- 
port what other people say; I will tell you 
what has recently happened. 

There was a party here at which a great 
many distinguished friends of ours were present, 
and amongst them was a man who wore the 
name and dress which betoken piety (i.e. a 
Monk). They had not yet begun to drink, 
but were talking about us, as often happens at 
such parties, and made us rather than anything 
else the subject of their conversation. They 
admired everything connected with you, and 
they brought me in as professing the same 
philosophy ; and they spoke of our friendship, 
and of Athens, and of our conformity of views 
and feelings on all points. Our Philosopher 
was annoyed by this. ‘‘ What is this, gen- 
tlemen?’’ he said, with a very mighty shout, 
‘¢what liars and flatterers you are. You may 
praise these men for other reasons if you 
like, and I will not contradict you; but I can- 
not concede to you the most important point, 
their orthodoxy. Basil and Gregory are falsely 
praised ; the former, because his words are a 
hetrayal of the faith, the latter, because his 
toleration aids the treason.’’ 

What is this, said I, O vain man and new 
Dathan and Abiram in folly? Where do you 
come from to lay down the law for us? How 
do you set yourself up as a judge of such great 
matters? <‘‘I have just come,’’ he replied, 
‘from the festival of the Martyr Kupsychius ¢, 
(and so it really was), and there I heard the 
creat Basil speak most beautifully and perfectly 
upon the Godhead of the Father and the Son, 
as hardly anyone else could speak; but he 
slurred over the Spirit.’ And he added a 
sort of illustration from rivers, which pass 
by rocks and hollow out sand. ‘* As for you 
my good sir,”’ 
do now express yourself openly on the God- 
head of the Spirit,’? and he referred to some 
remarks of mine in speaking of God at a 
largely attended Synod, as having added in 

a He suffered under the Emperor Hadrian. The Festival was 

Sept. 7. 

455 

respect of the Spirit that expression which has 
made a noise, (how long shall we hide the 
candle under the bushel?) ‘but the other 
man hints obscurely, and as it were, merely sug- 
gests the doctrine, but does not openly speak 
out the truth ; flooding people’s ears with more 
policy than piety, and hiding his duplicity by 
the power of his eloquence.’ 

«It is,’’ I said, ‘* because I (living as I do 
in a corner, and unknown to most men who 
do not know what I say, and hardly that I 
speak at all) can philosophize without danger ; 
but his word is of greater weight, because he 
is better known, both on his own account and 
on that of his Church. And everything that 
he says is public, and the war around him is 
great, as the heretics try to snatch every naked 
word from Basil’s lips, to get him expelled 
from the Church ;_ because he is almost the only 
spark of truth left and the vital force, all else 
around having been destroyed; so that evil 
may be rooted in the city, and may spread 
over the whole world as from a centre in that 
Church. Surely then it is better to use some 
reserve in the truth, and ourselves to give 
way a little to circumstances as to a cloud, 
rather than by the openness of the proclama- 
tion to risk its destruction. For no harm will 
come to us if we recognize the Spirit as God 
from other phrases which lead to this conclu- 
sion (for the truth consists not so much in 
sound as in sense), but a very great injury 
would be done to the Church if the truth were 
driven away in the person of one man.’”’ ‘The 
company present would not receive my econ- 
omy, as out of date and mocking them; but 
they shouted me down as_ practising it rather 
from cowardice than for reason. It would be 
much better, they said, to protect our own 
people by the truth, than by your so-called 
Economy to weaken them while failing to win 
over the others. It would be a long business 

_and perhaps unnecessary to tell you all the de- 
tails of what I said, and of what I heard, and 

how vexed I was with the opponents, perhaps 

-immoderately and contrary to my own usual 

he said, looking at me, ‘* you 

temper. But, in fine, I sent them away in the 
same fashion. But do you O divine and 
sacred head, instruct me how far I ought to go 
in setting forth the Deity of the Spirit; and 
what words I ought to use, and how far to use 
reserve ; that I may be furnished against oppo- 
nents. For if I, who more than any one else 
know both you and your opinions, and have 
often both given and received assurance on 
this point, still need to be taught the truth 
of this matter, I shall be of all men the most 
ignorant and miserable. 

Ep.” LIX. 

(The reply to Basil’s somewhat angry answer 
to the last.) 

Aaya ty Vs nee 

This was a case which any wiser man would 
have foreseen; but I who am very simple and 
foolish did not fear it in writing to you. My 
letter grieved you; but in my opinion neither 
rightly nor justly, but quite unreasonably. And 
whilst you did not acknowledge that you were 
hurt, neither did you conceal it, or if you did 
it was with great skill, as with a mask, hiding 
your vexation under an appearance of respect. 
But as to myself if I acted in this deceitfully 
or maliciously, I shall be punished not more by 
your vexation than by the truth itself; but if 
in simplicity and with my accustomed good- 
will, I will lay the blame on my own sins 
rather than on your temper. But it would 
have been better to 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

have set this matter | 

straight, rather than to be angry with those | 

who offer you counsel. But you must see to 
your own affairs, inasmuch as you are quite 
capable of giving the same advice to others. 

For who would flinch, who would not rather 
take courage in speaking and contending for 
the truth under you and by your side ? 

Ep, 1X. 

(Gregory was not able, owing to the serious 
illness of his Mother, to carry out the promise 

at the end of Ep. LIX. ; so he writes to explain 

and excuse himself. ) 

To Been. 

The Carrying Out of your bidding depends 
partly on me; but partly, and I venture to 
think principally, on your Reverence. What 
depends on me is the good will and eagerness, 
for I never yet avoided meeting you, but have 
always sought opportunities, and at the present 
moment am even more desirous of doing so. 
What depends on your Holiness is that my af- 
fairs be set straight. For I am sitting by my 
lady Mother, who has for a long time been 
suffering from illness. And if I could leave 
her out of danger you might be well assured 

_ that I would not deprive myself of the pleasure 

You may look upon me as very ready, if God > 

will, both to come to you, and to join you in 

| 

of going to you. So give me the help of your 
prayers for her restoration to health, and for my 

the conflict, and to contribute all that I can. | journey to you. 

DIVISION 

MISCELLANEOUS 

$1. Lerrers to His BRorHEer C@sarlus. 

Bp. Vil, 

(On the death of the Emperor Constantius 
the undisputed succession devolved on_ his 
cousin Julian the Apostate, who at once be- 
gan to employ all the power of the Empire to 
discourage, while not absolutely persecuting, 
Christianity, and to restore the supremacy of 
the ancient Paganism. One of his first acts 
was to dismiss all the men who had held high 
dignities under his predecessor. S. Czesarius, 
Gregory’s brother, was however to be except- 
ed; Julian, who had perhaps known and es- 
teemed him at Athens, did all that he could to 
keep him at Court, and to attach him to him- 
self. This caused much anxiety to Gregory 
and other friends of Caesarius, who foresaw that 
Julian would do his utmost to shake the young 
man’s faith, and could not feel sure that he 
would have courage to resist such assaults. In 

nis trouble Gregory wrote him the follow... | 
Shortly afterwards the expected at- | 
S. Czesarius bravely held 

Etter. 
rempt was made. 

his ground against the Emperor, and after de-— 

claring his unalterable determination to hold 
firm to his faith, resigned his office at Court and 
withdrew to Nazianzus. ) 

I have had enough to blush for in you; that 
I was grieved, it is hardly necessary to say to 
him who of all men knows me best. But, 
not to speak of my own feelings, or of the dis- 
tress with which the rumour about you filled 
me (and let me say also the fear), I should 
have liked you, had it been possible, to have 
heard what was said by others, both relations 
and outsiders, who are any way acquainted 
with us (Christians I mean, of course,) about 
yo} and me; and not only some of them, but 

everyone in turn alike; for men are always — 

more ready to philosophize about strangers 
than about their own relations. Such speech- 

Ill. 

LETTERS, 

es as the following have become a sort of 
exercise among them: Now a Bishop’s son 
takes service in the army; now he covets ex- 
terior power and fame; now he isa slave of 
money, when the fire is being rekindled for 
all, and men are running the race for life; 
and he does not deem the one only glory and 
safety and wealth to be to stand nobly against 
the times, and to place himself as far as pos- 
sible out of reach of every abomination and 
defilement. How then can the Bishop ex- 
hort others not to be carried along with the 
times, or to be mixed up with idols? How 
can he rebuke those who do wrong in other 
ways, seeing his own home takes away his 
right to speak freely? We have every day to 
hear this, and even more severe things, some 
of the speakers perhaps saying them from a 
motive of friendship, and others with unfriend- 
ly feelings. How do you think we feel, and 
what is the state of mind with which we, men 
professing to serve God, and to deem the only 
good to be to look forward to the hopes of the 
future, hear such things as these ?. Our vener- 
able Father is very much distressed by all that 
he hears, which even disgusts him with life. 
1 console and comfort him as best I can, by 
making myself surety for your mind, and as- 
suring him that you will not continue thus 
to grieve us. But if our dear Mother were 
to hear about you (so far we have kept her 
in the dark by various devices), I think 
she would be altogether inconsolable ; being, 
as a woman, of a weak mind, and besides 
unable, through her great piety, to control her 
feelings on such matters. If then you care 
at all for yourself and us, try some better 
and safer course. Our means are certainly 
enough for an independent life, at least for a 
man of moderate desires, who is not insatia- 
ble in his lust for more. Moreover, I do not 
see what occasion for your settling down we 
are to wait for, if we let this one pass. But 
if you cling to the same opinion, and every 

458 

thing seems to you of small account in com- 
parison with your own desires, I do not wish 
to say anything else that may vex you, but 
this I foretell and protest, that one of two 
things must happen; either you, remaining a 
genuine Christian, will be ranked among the 
lowest, and will be in a position unworthy of 
yourself and your hopes; or in grasping at 
honours you will injure yourself in what is 
more important, and will have a share in the 
smoke, if not actually in the fire. 

Ee. ATV. AND XIE 

(Under the Emperor Valens Cesarius re- 
turned to public life and was made Questor of 
Bithynia. While he was in this office the fol- 
lowing letters were written to him by his brother 
on behalf of two cousins, Eulalius, who after- 
wards succeeded Gregory in the Bishopric of 
Nazianzus, and with whom Gregory was on 
terms of intimate friendship, and Amphilochius, 
who, through the roguery of a partner, had 
got into some trouble at Constantinople about 
money matters, and for whom he asks aid and 
advice. Some however think that this letter is 
not addressed to his brother (who may have 
been at Constantinople at the time), but to 
some other officer of high rank at the Imperial 
Court. Amphilochius soon after retired from 
the world, and by a.p. 347 was already bishop 
of the important See of Iconium. Gregory’s 
letters to him are given later in this division.) 

Do a kindness to yourself and to me, of a 

kind that you will not often have an oppor- | 
tunity of doing, because opportunities for such — 

kindnesses do not often occur. 
most righteous protection of my dear cousins, 

who are worried more than enough about a. 

property which they bought as suitable for re- 
tirement, and capable of providing them with 
some means of living; but after having com- 
pleted the purchase they have fallen into 
many troubles, partly through finding the 
vendors dishonest, and partly through being 
plundered and robbed by their neighbours, so 
that it would be a gain to them to get rid of 
their acquisition for the price they gave for it, 
plus the not small sum they have spent on it 
besides. If, then, you would like to transfer 
the business to yourself, after examining the 
contract to see how it may be best and most 
securely done, this course would be most ac- 
ceptable both to them and me; but if you 
would rather not, the next best course would be 
to oppose yourself to the officiousness and dis- 

Undertake a | 

honesty of the man, that he may not succeed 
in gaining one advantage over their want of 
business habits, either by wronging them if 
they retain their property, or by inflicting loss 
upon them if they part with it. Tam really 
ashamed to write to you on such a subject. 
All the same, since we owe it to them, on 
account both of their relationship and of 
their profession (for of whom would one rather 
take care than of such, or what would one be 
more ashamed of than of being unwilling to 
confer such a benefit?) do you either for your 
own sake, or for mine, or for the sake of the 
men themselves, or for all these sakes put to- 
gether, by all means do them this kindness, 

Ep. XXIII. 

Do not be surprized if I ask of you a great 
favour; for it is from a great man that I am 
asking it, and the request must be measured by 
him of whom it is made ; for it is equally absurd 
to ask great things from a small man, and small 
things from a great man, the one being unsea- 
sonable, and the other mean. I therefore pre- 
sent to you with my own hand my most precious 
son Amphilochius, a man so famous (even be- 
yond his years) for his gentlemanly bearing, that 
I myself, though an old man, and a Priest, and 
your friend, would be quite content to be as 
much esteemed. What wonder is it if he was 
cheated by a man’s pretended friendship, and 
did not suspect the swindle? For not being 
himself a rogue, he did not suspect roguery, 
but thought that correction of language rather 
than of character was what was wanted, and 
therefore entered into partnership with him 
in business. What blame can attach to 
him for this with honest men? Do not then 
allow wickedness to get the better of virtue; 
and do not dishonour my grey hairs, but do 
honour to my testimony, and add your kind- 
ness to my benedictions, which are perhaps 
of some account with God before Whom we 
stand. 

Ep. XX. 

(In A.D. 368 the City of Niczea in Bithynia 
was almost entirely destroyed by a terrible 
earthquake. Ceesarius lost his house, and his 
personal escape was almost miraculous. Gre- 
gory writes (as also did Basil) to congratulate 
him on his escape, and profits by the occasion to 
urge upon him retirement from his secular avo- 
cations. Cvesarius soon resolved to follow this 
advice, and was taking steps to carry this reso- 

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS. 

lution into effect, when he died suddenly, early 
in A.D. 369, aged only go. He left the whole 

of his large property to the poor, but it fell for — 

a time into the hands of designing persons, and 
Gregory, who was his brother’s executor, had 
much difficulty in recovering it for the purpose 
for which it had been intended. 

(See the let- | 

ter to Sophronius, Prefect of Constantinople | 
. ' P A | 
on this subject.) He was buried at Nazian- | 

zus in the Church of the Martyrs, in a vault 
which his parents had prepared for themselves. 
Gregory preached the funeral sermon, which is 
given in the former part of this volume. ‘These 
four are the only letters known to have passed 
between the brothers. ) 

Even frights are not without use to the wise ; 
or, as I should say, they are very valuable and 
salutary. 
may not happen, yet when they do they in- 
struct us. For the afflicted soul, as Peter® 
somewhere admirably says, is near to God ; and 
every man who escapes a danger is brought into 
nearer relation to Him Who preserved him. 

Let us not then be vexed that we had a share | 

in the calamity, but let us give thanks that we 
were delivered. And let us not shew our- 
selves one thing to God in the time of peril, 
and another when the danger is over, but let 
us resolve, whether at home or abroad, whether 
in private life or in public office (for [ must 
say this and may not omit it), to follow Him 
Who has preserved us, and to attach ourselves 
to His side, thinking little of the little con- 
cerns of earth; and let us furnish a tale to those 
who come after us, great for our glory and the 
benefit of our soul, and at the same time a very 
useful lesson to all, that danger is better than 
security, and that misfortune is preferable to 
success, at least if before our fears we belonged 
to the world, but after them we belong to God. 
Perhaps | seem to you somewhat of a bore, by 
writing to you so often on the same subject, 
and you will think my letter a piece not of ex- 
hortation but of ostentation, so enough of this. 
You will know that I desire and wish especially 
that I might be with you and share your joy 
at your preservation, and to talk over these 
matters later on. But since that cannot be, I 
hope to receive youhere as soon as may be, 
and to celebrate our thanksgiving together. 

§ 2. ToS. GREGORY OF Nyssa. 

(Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, was a younger 
brother of Basil the Great. Ordained a 

For, although we pray that they | 

_self and my friends over a bad plan. 

Reader at an early age he grew tired of his 
vocation, and became a professor of Rhetoric. 
This gave scandal in the Church and occa- 
sioned much grief to his friends. Gregory 
of Nazianzus, wrote him the following letter of 
remonstrance, which was not without effect, 
for shortly afterwards he gave up his secular 
avocation, and retired to the Monastery which 
his brother Basil had founded in Pontus. Ffere 
he spent several years in the study of Holy 

_ Scripture and the best Commentators. ) 

Ep. f. 

There is one good point in my char- 
acter, and I will boast myself of one point 
out of many. Iam equally vexed with my- 
Since, 
then, all are friends and kinsfolk who live ac- 
cording to God, and walk by the same Gospel, 
why should you not hear from me in plain 

words what all men are saying in whispers? 

They do not approve your inglorious glory (to 
borrow a phrase from your own art), and your 
gradual descent to the lower life, and your 
ambition, the worst of demons, according to 
Euripides. For what has happened to you, 
O wisest of men, and for what do you con- 
demn yourself, that you have cast away the 
sacred and delightful books which you used 
once to read to the people (do not be ashamed 
to hear this), or have hung them up over the 
chimney, as men do in winter with rudders and 
hoes, and have applied yourself to salt and 
bitter ones, and preferred to be called a Pro- 
fessor of Rhetoric rather than of Christianity ? 
I, thank God, would rather be the latter than 
the former. Do not, my dear friend, do not 
let this be longer the case, but, though it is full 
late, become sober again, and come to your- 
self once more, and make your apology to the 
faithful, and to God, and to His Altars and 
Sacraments, from which you have withdrawn 
yourself. And do not say to me in proud 
rhetorical style, What, was I not a Christian 
when I practised rhetoric? Was I not a 
believer when I was engaged among the boys ? 
And perhaps you will call God to witness. No, 
my friend, not as thoroughly as you ought to 
have been, even if I grant it you in part. 
What of the offence to others given by your 
present employment—to others who are prone 
naturally to evil—and of the opportunity at- 
forded them both to think and to speak the 
worst of you? Falsely, I grant, but where 

a Source of the quotation unknown. 

a Pheen., 534. 

was the necessity ? 
himself alone but also for his neighbour ; nor is 
it enough to persuade yourself, you must per- 
suade others also. If you were to practise 
boxing in public, or to give and receive blows 

GREGORY: NAZAANZEN. 

For a man lives not for | 

in the theatre, or to writhe and twist yourself | 

shamefully, would you speak of yourself as 
having a temperate soul ? 

Such an argument | 

does not befit a wise man; it is frivolous to 

accept it. If you make a change I shall re- 
joice even now, said one of the Pythagorean 
philosophers, lamenting the fall ofa friend ; but, 
he wrote, if not you are dead to me. But 
I will not yet say this for your sake. Being a 
friend, he became an enemy, yet still a 
friend, as the ‘Tragedy says. But I shall be 
grieved (to speak gently), if you do neither 
yourself see what is right, which is the highest 
method of all, nor will follow the advice of 
others, which is the next. ‘Thus far my coun- 
sel. Forgive me that my friendship for you 

of their holes, as you write. 

behalf and on behalf of the whole priestly © 

Order, and I may add on that of all Chris- 
tians. And if I may pray with you or for you, 
may God who quickeneth the dead aid your 
weakness. 

Ep. LXXII. 

(When 5S. Gregory was consecrated Bishop 
of Nyssa the Imperial ‘Throne was occupied by 
Valens, an ardent Arian, whose mind was bent 
on the destruction of the Nicene Faith. He ap- 
pointed, with this object, one Demosthenes, a 
former clerk of the Imperial Kitchen, to be 
Vicar of the civil Diocese of Pontus. An old 
quarrel with Basil had made this man unfriendly 
to Gregory, and after persecuting him in various 
small ways for some time he procured, A.D. 275, 

allegations of irregularity in his consecration, 
and to try Gregory on some frivolous charges 
of malversation of Church funds. Gregory was 
unable to attend this Synod, which met at 
Ancyra, on account of an attack of pleurisy ; 
and another was summoned to meet at Nyssa 
itself. Gregory however refused to appear, 
and was deposed as contumacious. ‘Thereupon 
Valens banished him, and he seems to have 
fallen into very low spirits, almost into de- 
spondency at the apparent triumph of the 
heretical party. ‘The three letters which follow 
throw some light upon his state at this time. 
They were written in answer to letters of his 
now lost, and their object was to comfort him 
in his trouble and to encourage him to take 
heart again in the hope of a good day coming. 

This more cheerful tone was justified by the 
event, for on the death of Valens, A.p. 378, the 
exiled Bishops were restored by Gratian, and 
Gregory was replaced in his Episcopal Throne, 

to the great joy of the faithful of his Diocese. ) 

Do not let your troubles distress you too 
much. or the less we grieve over things, the 
less grievous they are. It is nothing strange 
that the heretics have thawed, and are taking 
courage from the springtime, and creeping out 
They will hiss 
for a short time, I know, and then will hide 
themselves again, overcome both by the truth 
and the times, and all the more so the more 
we commit the whole matter to God. 

Ep, LXXIII. 

As to the subject of your letter, these are 

; /my sentiments. I am not angry at being over- 
makes me grieve, and kindles me both on your ) ory = 

looked, but I am glad when I am honoured. 
‘The one is my own desert, the other is a proof 
of your respect. Pray for me. Excuse this 
short letter, for anyhow, though it is short, it 

_ is longer than silence. 

Ep. LXAXIV. 

Although I am at home, my love is expatri- 
ated with you, for affection makes us have all 
things common. ‘Trusting in the mercy of 
God, and in your prayers, I have great hopes 
that all will turn out according to your mind, 
and that the hurricane will be turned into a gen- 
tle breeze, and that God will give you this re- 

ward for your orthodoxy, that you will over- 

- come your opponents. 

Most of all I long to see 

you shortly, and to have a good time with you, 

the summoning of a Synod to enquire into some , *% T pray. 

sure of affairs, at any rate cheer me by a letter, 
| 

But if you delay owing to the pres- 

and do not disdain to tell me all about your 

circumstances, and to pray for me, as you are 

accustomed to do. May God grant you health 
and good spirits in all circumstances,—you who 
are the common prop of the whole Church, 

Ep. LXXVI. 

(Basil. the Great ded Jan:< 1; 2.0)78. 
Gregory of Nazianzus was prevented by very 
serious illness from attending his funeral, 
and therefore wrote as follows to Gregory of 
Nyssa. ) 

This, then, was also reserved for my sad life, 
to hear of the death of Basil, and the departure 

MISCE 

of that holy soul, which has gone from us that 
it may be with the Lord, for which he had been 
preparing himself all his life. And among all 
the other losses I have had to endure this is 
ihe greatest, that by reason of the bodily sick- 
ness from which I am still suffering and in 
great danger, I cannot kiss that holy dust, or 
be with you to enjoy the consolations of a just 
philosophy, and to comfort our common 
friends. But to see the desolation of the 
Church, shorn of such a glory, and bereft of 
such a crown, is what no one, at least no one 
of any feeling, can bear to let his eyes look 
upon, or his ear hearken to. But you, I think, 
though you have many friends and will receive 
many words of condolence, yet will not derive 
comfort so much from any as from yousrelf and 
your memory of him ; for you two were a pat- 
tern to all of philosophy, a kind of spiritual 
standard, both of discipline in prosperity, and 
of endurance in adversity ; for philosophy bears 
prosperity with moderation and adversity with 
dignity. This is what I have to say to Your 
Excellency. But for myself who write so, 
what time or what words shall comfort me, 
except your company and conversation, which 
our blessed one has left me in place of all, that 
seeing his character in you as in a bright and 
shining mirror, I may think myself to possess 
him also ! 

Ep. LXXXI. 

You are distressed by your travels, and think 
yourself unsteady, like a stick carried along 
by a stream. But, my dear friend, you must 
not let yourself feel so at all. For the travels 
of the stick are involuntary, but your course 
is ordained by God, and your stability is in 
doing good to others, even though you are 
not fixed to a place ; unless indeed one ought 
to find fault with the sun, for going about the 
world scattering his rays, and giving life to all 
things on which he shines ; or, while praising 
the fixed stars, one should revile the planets, 
whose very wandering is harmonious. 

EP, “CLAS XIL. 

(Gregory after his resignation of the Patri- 
archal See of Constantinople had retired to 
Nazianzus, and had been persuaded to under- 
take the administration of the diocese then 
vacant, until the vacancy should be filled. 
The Bishops of the Province wished him to 
retain it altogether, and therefore were in no 
hurry to proceed to election. At length 

VOL. ViRls 

LLANEOUS LELTERS, 

cousin 

461 

however they yielded to the continually ex- 
pressed wishes of Gregory and chose _ his 
Fulalius. Soon however Gregory’s 
enemies spread abroad a report that this elec- 
tion had been made against his wishes, and 
with the intention of unfairly ousting him from 
the administration of that Church. ‘lhe fol- 
lowing letter was written in consequence of 
this slander. ) 

Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged, 
and, which is the greatest of my misfortunes, 
that war and dissensions are among us, and 
that we have not kept the peace which we re- 
ceived from our holy fathers. ‘This I doubt 
not you will restore, in the power of the Spirit 
who upholds you and yours. But let no one, 
I beg, spread false reports about me and my 
lords the bishops, as though they - had pro- 
claimed another bishop in my place against 
my will. But being in great need, owing to 
my feeble health, and fearing the responsibility 
ofa Church neglected, I asked this favour of 
them, which was not opposed to the Canon 
Law, and was a relief to me, that they would 
give a Pastor to the Church. He has been 
given to your prayers, a man worthy of your 
piety, and I now place him in your hands, the 
most reverend Eulalius, a bishop very dear to 
God, in whose arms I should like to die. If 
any be of opinion that it is not right to ordain 
another in the lifetime of a Bishop, let him 
know that he will not in this matter gain any 
hold upon us. For it is well known that I 
was appointed, not to Nazianzus, but to Sa- 
sima, although for a short time out of reverence 
for my father, I as a stranger undertook the 
government. 

es RCH A. 

A LETTER OF CONDOLENCE ON THE DEATH 
OF His Sister THEOSEBLA. 

(The writer of the article on Gregory Nyssen 
in the Dict. Biogr. supposes her to have been 
his wife, but produces no evidence of this be- 
yond the ambiguous expression in this letter 
which speaks of her as ‘‘ the true consort of a 
priest,’’ but on the other hand she is expressly 
called his Sister in the same letter. Some 
writers have imagined that she was the wife of 
Gregory Nazianzen himself, but there is no 
evidence to show that he was ever married. 
The date of her death is uncertain, but it was 
probably subsequent to a.p. 381. It would 
seem that the term Consort might have a 
general application to those who shared in the 

are 
same work, and consequently the Benedictine 

Editors regard ‘Theosebia as a Deaconess of the 
Church of Nyssa.) 

I had started in all haste to go to you, and 
had got as far as Euphemias, when I was de- 
layed by the festival which you are celebrat- 
ing in honour of the Holy Martyrs ;_ partly be- 
cause I could not take part in it, owing to my 
bad health, partly because my coming at so 
unsuitable a time might be inconvenient to 
you. I had started partly for the sake of see- 

ing you after so long, and partly that I might | 

admire your patience and philosophy (for I 
had heard of it) at the departure of your holy 
and blessed sister, as a good and _ perfect man, 
a minister of God, who knows better than any 
the things both of God and man ; and who re- 
gards as a very light thing that which to others 
would be most heavy, namely to have lived 
with such a soul, and to send her away and 
store her up in the safe garners, like a shock 
of the threshingfloor gathered in due season,* 
to use the words of Holy Scripture ; and that 
in such time that she, having tasted the joys of 
life, escaped its sorrows through the shortness 
of her life; and before she had to wear mourn- 
ing for you, was honoured by you with that fair 
funeral honour which is due to such as she. I 
too, believe me, long to depart, if not as you 
do, which were much to say, yet only less than 
you. But what must we feel in presence of 
a long prevailing law of God which has now 
taken my Theosebia (for I call her mine be- 
cause she lived a godly life ; for spiritual kin- 
dred is better than bodily), Theosebia, the 
glory of the church, the adornment of Christ, 
the helper of our generation, the hope of 
woman ; 
glorious among all the beauty of the Brethren ; 

Theosebia, the most beautiful and | 

‘Theosebia, truly sacred, truly consort of a 
priest, and of equal honour and worthy of the — 

Great Sacraments,® Theosebia, whom all future 
time shall receive, resting on immortal pillars, 
that is, on the souls of all who have known her 
now, and of all who shall be hereafter. And 
do not wonder that I often invoke her name. 
For I rejoice even in the remembrance of the 
blessed one. Let this, a great deal in few 
words, be her epitaph from me, and my word 
of condolence for you, though you yourself are 

quite able to console others in this way through | 

your philosophy in all things. Our meeting 
(which I greatly long for) is prevented by the 
reason I mentioned. But we pray with one 
another as long as we are in the world, until 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN: 

the common end, to which we are drawing 
nigh, overtake us. Wherefore we must bear 
all things, since we shall not for long have 
either to rejoice or to suffer. 

3. To Eusepius BIsHoP OF SAMOSATA, 

EP, ALM, 

(This letter, urging his friend to attend at 
Cesarea for the election of a Metropolitan in 
succession to Eusebius, has been already given 
in the second division of this Selection. ) 

Ep, XLIV. 

(Eusebius, having in response to the ap- 
peal referred to above, betaken himself to 
Cesarea, the Elder Gregory, though in very 
feeble health, resolved to attend the Synod in 
person, that Basil’s Election might be secured 
by their joint exertions, Gregory the Younger 
sent the following letter by his father to ex- 
plain to his friend the reason why he had not 
come too. ‘The date is about September of 

the year 379.) 

Whence shall I begin your praises, and by 
what name shall I give you your right appella- 
tion? The pillar and ground of the church, 
or a light in the world, using the very words 
of the apostle, or a crown of glory to the re- 
maining portion of christendom ;* or a gift of 
God, or the bulwark of your country, or the 
standard of faith, or the ambassador of truth, 
or all these at once, and more than all? And 
these excessive praises I will prove by what we 
shall see. What rain ever came so seasonably 

toa thirsty land, what water flowing out of 

the rock to those in the wilderness? What 
such Bread of Angels did ever man eat? 
When did Jesus the common Lord ever so sea- 
sonably present Himself to His drowning dis- 
ciples, and tame the sea, and save the perish- 

ing, as you have shewn yourself to us in our 

weariness and distress, and in our immediate 
danger as it were of shipwreck? I need not 
speak of other points, with what courage and 
joy you filled the souls of the orthodox, and 
how many you delivered from despair. 

But our mother church, Cesarea I mean, 
is now really putting off the garments of her 

widowhood at the sight of you, and putting on 

again her robe of cheerfulness, and will be yet 
more resplendent when she receives a pastor 

a Job. v. 26. B Referring to her office as a Deaconess. 

| 

a Alluding to his work in opposing the prevalence of Arianism, 

worthy of herself and of her former Bishops 
and of your hands. For you yourself see 
what is the state of our affairs, and what a 
miracle your zeal has wrought, and your toil, 
and your godly plainness of speech. Avge is 
renewed, disease is conquered,* they leap who 
were in their beds, and the weak are girded 
with power. 
ters too will turn out as we desire. You have 
my father, moreover, representing both him- 
self and me, to put a glorious close to his 
whole life and to his venerable age by this 
present struggle on behalf of the Church, And 
I shall receive him back, I am well assured, 
strengthened by your prayers, and with youth 
renewed, for one must confidently commit 
all in faith to them. But if he should end 
his life in this anxiety, it would be no calamity 
to attain to such an end in such acause. — Par- 
don me, I beg of you, if [ give way a little to 
the tongues of evil men, and delay a little to 
come and embrace you, and to complete in 
person what I now pass over of the praises due 
to you. 

Ep. LXIV. 

(In the year 374 Eusebius and other ortho- 
dox Bishops of the East were banished by 
Valens and their thrones filled with Arian 
intruders. Eusebius was ordered to retire to 
Vhrace, and his journey lay through Cappado- 
cia, where he saw Basil, but Gregory to his 
great grief was too unwell to leave his house 
and go to meet him. Instead he sent the fol- 
lowing letter. ) 

When Your Reverence was passing through 
our country I was so ill as not to be able even 
to /ook out of my house. And I was grieved 
not so much on account of the illness, though 
it brought about the fear of the worst, as by the 
inability to meet your holiness and goodness. 
My longing to see your venerable face was 

MISCULLANLOUS: LETTERS. 

By all this 1 guess that our mat- — 

like that which a man would naturally feel | 

who needed healing of spiritual wounds, and 
expected to receive it from you. But though 
at that time the effect of my sins was that I 
missed the meeting with you, it is now by 
your goodness possible for me to find a remedy 
for my trouble, for if you will deign to remem- 
ber me in your acceptable prayers, this will 
be to me a store of every blessing from God, 
both in this my life and in the age to come. 
For that such a man, such a combatant for 
the Faith of the Gospel, one who has endured 

a Alluding to the effort made by his father. 

463 

such persecutions, and won for himself such 
confidence before the all-righteous God by his 
patience in- tribulation—that such a man 
should deign to be my patron also in his prayers 
will gain for me, 1 am persuaded, as much 
strength as I should have gained through one 
of the holy martyrs. ‘Therefore let me en- 
treat you to remember your Gregory without 
ceasing in ail the matters in which | desire to 
be worthy of your remembrance. 

Ep. LXV. 

(Eusebius having replied to the former letter 
Gregory wrote again, having an opportunity of 
communicating with his friend through one 
Eupraxius, a disciple of Eusebius, who passed 
through Cappadocia on his way to visit his 
master. This letter is sometimes attributed to 
Basil. ) 

Our reverend brother Eupraxius has al- 
ways been dear to me and a true friend, but 
he has shewn himself dearer and truer through 
his affections for you, inasmuch as even at 
the present time he has hurried to your rev- 
erence, like, to use David’s words, a hart 
to quench his great and unendurable thirst 4 
with a sweet and pure spring at your pa- 
tience in tribulations. Deign then to be his 
patron and mine. 

Happy indeed are they who are permitted 
to come near you, and happier still is he who 
can place upon his sufferings for Christ’s sake 
and upon his labours for the truth, a crown 
such as few of those who fear God have ob- 
tained. For it is not an untested virtue that 
you have:shown, nor is it only in atime of 
calm that you have sailed aright and steered 
the souls of others, but you have shone in the 
difficulties of temptations, and have been 
greater than your persecutors, having nobly de- 
parted from the land of your birth. Others 
possess the threshold of their fathers,—we the 

heavenly City ; others perhaps hold our throne, 

but we Christ. _O what a profitable exchange! 
How little we give up, to receive how much! 
We went through fire and water, and I believe 
that we shall also come out into a place of re- 
freshment. ‘or God will not forsake us for 
ever, or abandon the true faith to persecution, 
but according to the multitude of our pains 
His comforts shall make us glad. This at 
any rate we believe and desire. But do you, 
I beg, pray for our humility. And as often 

a Ps, xiii. 1. 

bo 

464 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

as occasion shall present itself bless us with- 
out hesitation by a letter, and cheer us up by 

news of yourself, as you have just been good — 

enough to do. 
Ep. LXVI. 

(The following letter is sometimes attributed 
to Basil, and is found in his works as well as 
in those of Gregory. ‘The MSS. however, 

ioned into many ornaments, and used by art 
for many purposes ; yet it remains what it is— 
gold; and it is not the substance but the form 
which admits of change. So also, believing 

that your kindness will remain unchanged for 

your friends, although you are ever climbing 
higher, I have ventured to send you this re- 
quest, because I do not more reverence your 

high rank than I trust your kind disposition. 

with only a single exception, give it to the— 
_ spectable son Nicobulus, who is in all respects 

latter.) 

You give me pleasure both by writing and 
remembering me, and a much greater pleas- 
ure by sending me your blessing in your letter. 
But if I were worthy of your sufferings and of 
your conflicts for Christ and through Christ I 

should have been counted worthy also to come | 

to you, to embrace Your Piety, and to take 
example by your patience in your sufferings. 
But since I am not worthy of this, being troub- 
led with many afflictions and hindrances I do 
what is next best. I address Your Perfection, 

and I beg you not to be weary of remember- 

ing me. For to be deemed worthy of your 

letters is not only profitable to me, but is also | jetters to Ceesarius ) 

a matter to boast of to many people, and is an | 

honour, because I am considered by a man of 
so great virtue, and such near relations with 
God, that he can bring others also by word 
and example into relation to Him. 

§ 4. To SopHrontus, PREFECT OF Con- 

STANTINOPLE. 

(Sophronius, a native of the Cappadocian 
Ceesarea, was an early friend and fellow-student 
of Gregory and Basil. He entered the Civil 
Service, and soon rose to high office. In A.D. 
365 he was appointed Prefect of Constantinople, 
as a reward for timely intimation which he gave 

to the Emperor Valens of the usurpation at- 

tempted by Procopius. 

He is chiefly known | 

to us by the letters of Gregory and Basil, in- 

voking his good offices for various persons. 
Ep. 21 was written in A.D. 369 to commend to 
him Nicobulus, Gregory’s nephew by mar- 

riage, the husband of Alypiana, daughter of his | 
glory by and through you; and be everything 

sister Gorgonia. This Nicobulus was a man of 
great wealth and ability, but much disinclined 
for public life. Gregory constantly writes to 
one and another high official to get him excused 
from appointments which had been thrust upon 
him.) 

Ep. XXI, 

Gold is changed and transformed into 
various forms at various times, being fash- 

I entreat you to be favourable to my most re- 

allied with me, both by kindred and by inti- 
macy, and, which is more important, by dis- 
position. In what matters, and to what extent? 
In whatever he may ask your aid, and as far as 
may seem to you to befit your Magnanimity. 
I on my part will repay you the best I have. 
I have the power of speech, and of proclaim- 
ing your goodness, if not nearly according to 
its worth, at any rate to the best of my ability. 

Ep. XXII. 

(Is for Amphilochius, written at the same 
time and in consequence of the same trouble 
as that which we have placed second of the 

As we know gold and stones by their look, 
so too we may distinguish good men from 
bad in the same way, and do not need a very 
long trial. For I should not have needed many 
words in pleading for my most honourable son 
Amphilochius with Your Magnanimity. I 
should rather have expected some strange and 
incredible thing to happen than that he would 
do anything dishonourable, or think of such a 
thing, in a matter of money; such a universal 
reputation has he as a gentleman, and as wiser 
than his years. But what must he suffer? 
Nothing escapes envy, for some word of blame 
has touched even him, a man who has fallen 
under accusation of crime through simplicity 
rather than depravity of disposition. But do 
not allow it to be tolerable to you to overlook 
him in his vexations and trouble. Not so, I 
entreat your sacred and great mind, but hon- 
our your country* and aid his virtue, and 
have a respect for me who have attained to 

to this man, adding the will to the power, for 
I know that there is nothing of equal power 
with Your Excellency. 

Ep. XXIX. 

(Of the same year. Here Cesarius had 
bequeathed all his property to the poor; but 

a Sophronius and Amphilochius were natives of Cesarea. 

his house had been looted by his servants, and 
his friends could only find a comparatively 
small sum. Besides this a number of persons, 
shortly afterwards, presented themselves as cred- 
itors of his estate, and their claims, though in- 
capable of proof, were paid. ‘Then others kept 
coming forward, until at last the family refused 
to admit any more. Then a lawsuit was threat- 
ened. Gregory intensely disliking all this, and 
dreading moreover the scandal which might 
be caused by legal proceedings, writes as fol- 
lows to the Prefect. ) 

You see how matters stand with me, and 
how the circle of human affairs goes round, 
now some now others flourishing or the re- 
verse, and neither prosperity nor adversity re- 
maining constant with us, as the saying is, but 
ever changing and altering, so that one might 
trust the breezes, or letters written in the 
waters, rather than human prosperity. 
what reason is this? I think it is in order that 
by the contemplation of the uncertainty and 
anomaly of all these things we may learn the 
rather to have recourse to God and to the fu- 
ture, giving scanty thoughts to shadows and 
dreams. But what has produced this talk, 
for it is not without a cause that I thus philo- 
sophize, and I am not idly boasting ? 

Ceesarius was once one of your not least 
distinguished friends ; indeed, unless my broth- 
erly affection deceives me, he was one of your 
most distinguished, for he was remarkably well 
informed, and for gentlemanly conduct was 
above the average, and was celebrated for the 

number of his friends; among the very first of | 

these, as he always thought and as he persuad- 
ed me, Your Excellency held the first place. 
These are old stories, and you will add to 
them of your own accord in rendering hon- 
ours to his memory ; for it is human nature to 
add something to the praises of the departed. 
gut now (that you may not pass over this 
story without a tear, or that you may weep to 
some good and useful purpose), he lies dead, 
friendless, solitary, pitiable, deemed worthy 
of a little myrrh (if even of so much), and 
of the last small coverings, and it is much that 
he has found even thus much compassion. 
But his enemies, as I hear, have fallen upon 
his estate, and from all quarters with great 
violence are plundering it, or are about to do 
so. O cruelty! Osavagery! And there is no 
one to hinder them: but even the kindest of 
his friends only calls upon the laws as_ his 
utmost favour. If I may put it concisely, I 
am become a mere drama, who once was wont 
to be happy. Do not let this seem to you to 

MISCELLANEOUS EETIERS. 

465 

be tolerable, but help me by sympathy and 

For , 

by sharing my indignation, and do right by 
the dead Cesarius. Yes, in the name of friend- 
ship herself; yes, by all that you hold dearest ; 
by your hope (which may you make secure by 
shewing yourself faithful and true to the de- 
parted), I pray you do this kindness to the 
living, and make them of food hope. Do you 
think that I am grieved about the money? It 
would have been a more intolerable disgrace 
to me if Czesarius alone, who thought he had 
so many friends, turned out to have none. 
Such is my request, and from such a cause does 
it arise, for perhaps my affairs are not alto- 
gether matters of indifference to you. In what 
you will assist me, and by what means, and 
how, the matter itself will suggest and your 
wisdom will consider. 

Ep. XXXVII. 

(A letter of recommendation for Eudoxius 
a Rhetorician for whom Gregory had a warm 
regard. ) 

To honour a mother is a religious duty. 
Now, different individuals have different mo- 
thers; but the common mother of all is our 
country. This mother you have honoured by 
the splendour of your whole life; and you will 
honour her again now by obtaining for me that 
which I entreat. And what is my request? 
You certainly know Eudoxius the Rhetorician, 
the most learned of her sons. His son, to 
speak concisely, another Eudoxius both in life 
and learning, now approaches you through me. 

In order then to get yourself a yet better 

myself have any claim to it. 

name, be helpful to him in the matters for 
which he asks your assistance. For it were a 
shame were you, who are the universal Patron 
of our Country, and who have done good to 
so many, and I will add, who will yet con- 
tinue to do so, should not honour above all him 
who is most excellent in learning and in his 
eloquence, which you ought to honour, if for 
no other reason, because he uses it to praise 
your goodness. 

Ep. XX XIX. 

(About the same date. .\ recommendation 
of one Amazonius, whose learning was much 
respected by Gregory.) 

I wish well to all my friends. And when I 
speak of friends, I mean honourable and good 
men, linked with me in virtue, if indeed I 
Therefore at 

409 

GREGORY: NAZIANZEN., 

the present time when seeking how I might» 

do a kindness to my excellent brother Ama- 
zonius (for I was very much pleased with the 
man in some intercourse which has. lately 
taken place between us), I thought I might re- 
turn him one fayour for all,—in your friend- 
ship and protection. or ina short time he 
shewed proof of an extensive education, both 
of the kind which I used once to be very 
zealous for, when I was shortsighted, and of 
that for which I am zealous in its place since 
I have been able to contemplate the summit of 
virtue. Whether [in my turn have appeared 
to him to be worth anything in respect of 
virtue is his affair. At any rate I shewed him 
the best things I have, namely, my friends to 
him as my friend. Of these I reckon you as 
the first and truest, and want you to shew 
yourself so to him—as your common Country 
demands, and my desire and promise begs ; for 
I promised him your patronage in return for 
all his kindness. 

Ep. XCIII. 

(Written soon after Gregory’s resignation 
of the Archbishopric. ) 

Our retreat and Icisure and quiet have about 
them something very agreeable to me ; but the 

fact that they cut me off from your friendship | 
and society is not so advantageous but rather | 

the other way. Others enjoy your Perfection, 
to me it would be really a great boon if I 
might have just that shadow of conversation 
which comes in a letter. Shall Isee you 
again ? 
Iam so proud, and shall this be granted to 
the remnant of my life? Ifso, all thanks to 
God: if not, the best part of my life is over. 
Pray remember your friend Gregory and pray 
for him. 

Ep. CXXXV. 

(About the middle of a.p. 382 Theodosius, 
on the recommendation of S.. Damasus, 
summoned a new Synod of Eastern Bish- 
ops to meet at Constantinople, to try and heal 
the schism which had been embittered by the 
election of Flavian at Antioch. As soon as 
Gregory heard of the convocation of this 
Synod he wrote to several of his influential 
friends at Court, to beg them to do their ut- 
most for the promotion of peace. ) 

Tam philosophizing at leisure. 
injury my enemies have done me, and I should 

Shall I embrace again him of whom | 

That is the | 

| 

be glad if they would do more of the same sort, 
that I might look upon them still more as 
benefactors. lor. it often happens that those 
who are wronged get a benefit, while they, 
whom we would treat well, sufferinjury. ‘Vhat 
is the state of my affairs. But if I cannot 
make every one believe this, I am very anxious, 
that at all events you, for them all, to whom I 
most willingly give an account of my affairs, 
should know, or rather I feel certain that you 
do know it, and can persuade those who do 
not. You, however, I beg to give all diligence, 
now at any rate, if you have not done so before, 
to bring together to one voice and mind the 
sections of the world that are so unhappily 
divided ; and above all if you should perceive, 
as I have observed, that they are divided not on 
account of the Faith, but by petty private in- 
terests. ‘To succeed in doing this would earn 
you a reward; and my retirement would have 
less to grieve over if I could see that I did not 
erasp at it to no purpose, but was like a Jonas, 
willingly casting myself into the sea, that the 
storm might cease and the sailors be saved. 

_ If, however, they are still as storm-tost as ever, 

I at all events have done what I could. 

§ 5. To AmpniLocnius THE YOUNGER. 
Ep. 1X. 

(Constantine and Constantius had granted 
exemption from the military tax to all 
clerics. This privilege was, however, abolished 
by Julian, and was restored by Valentinian and 
Valens: but the collectors of revenue often 
tried to levy it on them in spite of the exemp- 
tion. The collector at Nazianzus tried to do 
this in the case of a Deacon named Euthalius, 
in whose behalf Gregory wrote the follow- 
ing letter to Amphilochius, who was at the time 
one of the principal magistrates of the province. 
The date of the letter is given as A.D. 372, the 
year of Gregory’s Ordination to the Priesthood. 
For further particulars about this Amphilochius, 
see introd. to letters II. and HI. to Cesarius 
Epp, 22; 23.) 

Support a wellbuilt chamber with columns of 
gold, as Pindar@ says, and make yourself from 
the beginning known to us on the right side in 
our present anxiety, that you may build yourself 
a notable palace, and shew yourself in it with a 
good fame. But how will you do this? By 
honouring God and the things of God, than 

Whom there can be nothing greater in your 

a Olymp., Od. vi., 1 

oe eee 

eyes. But how, and by what act can you 
honour Him? By this one act, by protecting the 
servants of God and ministers of the altar. 

» 
f 
| 
| 

One of these is our fellow deacon Euthalius, on — 

whom, I know not how, the officers of the 

Prefecture are trying to impose a payment of 

gold after his promotion to the higher rank. 
Pray do not allow this. Reach a hand to this 
deacon and to the whole clergy, and above all 
to me, for whom you care; for otherwise he 
would have to endure a grievous wrong, alone 
of men deprived of the kindness of the time 
and the privilege granted by the Emperor to 
the Clergy, and would even be insulted and 
fined, possibly on account of my weakness. — It 

would be well for you to prevent this even if 

others are not well disposed. 

Be Ker, 

(See the first letter to Sophronius. The 
nature of the trouble here alluded to is 
unknown. ‘There are several letters to various 
persons in reference to his troubles and diffi- 
culties, many of them coming from his reluc- 
tance to undertake the duties of any public 
office. He died at an early age, leaving his 
widow, Alypiana, with a large family to bring 
up in very reduced circumstances. Her troub- 
les and the education of her children were 
matters of much concern to Gregory, whose fre- 
quent letters on the subject will be found below. ) 

I approve the statement of Theognis, who, 
while not praising the friendship which goes 
no further than cups and pleasures, praises that 
which extends to actions in these words, 

Beside a full wine cup a man has many friends : 
But they are fewer when grave troubles press. 

We, however, have not shared winecups with 
each other, nor indeed have we often met 
(though we ought to have been very careful to 
do so, both for our own sake, and for the sake 
of the friendship which we inherited from our 
fathers), but we do ask for the goodwill which 
shews itself in acts. A struggle is at hand, and 
a very serious struggle. 
has got into unexpected troubles, from a quarter 
from which troubles would least be looked for. 
Therefore I beg you to come and help us as 
soon as you can, both to take part in trying the 
case, and to plead our cause, if you find that a 
wrong is being done us. 
come, at any rate do not let yourself be pre- 
viously retained by the other side, or sell for a 
small gain the freedom which we know from 
everybody’s testimony has always characterized | 
you. 

My son Nicobulus | 

But if you cannot | 

itr 467 

Ep. XXV. 
(Amphilochius was acanitied of the charges 
made against him, referred to in former. let- 

ters; but the result of the accusation on his 
own mind was such that he resigned his office, 
and retired to a sort of hermitage at a place 
called Ozizala, not far from Nazianzus, where 
he devoted his hours of labour to the cultivation 
of vegetables. ‘Vhe four letters which follow 
are of no special importance, and are only 
given as specimens of the lighter style which 
Gregory could use with his intimate friends. ) 

I did not ask you for bread, just as I would 
not ask for water from the inhabitants of Ostra- 
cine. But if I were to ask for vegetables from 
aman of Ozizala it were no strange thing, nor 
too great a strain on friendship ; for you have 
plenty of them, and we a great dearth. I beg 
you then to send me some vegetables, and 
plenty of them, and the best quality, or as, 
many as you can (for even small things are 
great to the poor) ; for I am going to receive 
the great Basil, and you, who have had experi- 
ence of him full and philosophical, would not 
like to know him hungry and irritated. 

Ep. XXVI. 

What a very small quantity of vegetables 
you have sent me! ‘They must surcly be golden 
vegetables! And yet your whole wealth 
consists of orchards and rivers and groves and 

' gardens, and your country is productive of 
vegetables as other lands are of gold, and 

You dwell among meadowy leafage. 

But corn is for you a fabulous happiness, and 
your bread is the bread of angels, as the saying 
is, so welcome is it, and so little can you reckon 
upon it. Either, then, send me your vege- 
tables less grudgingly, or—I won’t threaten 
you with anything else, but I won’t send you 
any corn, and will see whether there is any 
truth in the saying that grasshoppers live on 
dew! 

Ep. XXVII. 

You make a joke of it; but I know the 
danger of an Ozizalean starving when he has 
taken most pains with his husbandry. ‘There 
is only this praise to be given them, that even 
if they die of hunger they smell sweet, and 
have a gorgeous funeral. How so? Because 
they are covered with plenty of all sorts of 
flowers, 

468 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Ep. XXVIII. 

In visiting the mountain cities which bor- 
der on Pamphylia I fished up in the Mountains 

the depths with a net of flax, but I snared my 
game with the love of a friend. And _ having 
once taught my Glaucus to travel by land, I 
sent him as the bearer of a letter to Your 
Goodness. Please receive him kindly, and 
honour him with the hospitality commended in 
the Bible, not forgetting the vegetables. 

Ep. LXII. 

(The Armenian referred to is probably 
Eustathius Bishop of Sebaste, the capital 
of Armenia Minor. He had been a disciple 
of Arius, but more than once professed the 
Nicene Faith, changing his opinions with his 
company. His personal character however 
stood very high, and for a long time S. Basil re- 
garded him with affectionate esteem. Indeed 5. 
Basil’s Rule for Monks is based on one drawn 
up by him. But after Basil’s elevation to the 
‘piscopate Eustathius began to oppose him 
and to calumniate him on all sides, and even 
entered openly into communion with the 
Arians. It would seem that this man tried to 
get Amphilochius round to his side, and 
through him Gregory.) 

The Injunction of your inimitable Honour 
is not barbaric, but Greek, or rather christian ; 
but as for the Armenian on whom you pride 
yourself so, he is a downright barbarian, and 
far from our honour. 

Ep> L414. 
To AMPHILOCHIUS THE ELDER. 

(In a.p. 374 Amphilochius was made Bishop 

of Iconium; and his father, a man of the same | 

name, was deeply aggrieved at being thus de- 
prived of his son, to whom he had looked to 
support him in his old age, and accused Gre- 
gory of being the cause. Gregory, who had just 
lost his own father, writes to undeceive him, 
and to convince him how much he dreads the 
burden of the responsibilities of the episcopate 
for his friend as well as for himself.) 

Are you grieving? I, of course, am full of 
joy! Are you weeping? I, as you see, am 
keeping festival and glorying in the present 

state of things! Are you grieved because your 
son is taken from you and promoted to honour 
on account of his virtue, and do you think 
it a terrible misfortune that he is no longer 

with you to tend your old age, and, as his 
a sea Glaucus; I did not drag the fish out of | 

custom is, to bestow en you all due care and 
service? But it is no grief to me that my 

father has left me for the last journey, from 
which he will return to me no more, and [ 

shall never see him again! ‘Then I for my 
part do not blame you, nor do I ask you for 

_due condolence, knowing as I do that private 
- troubles allow no leisure for those of strangers ; 

for no man is so friendly and so philosophical 
as to be above his own suffering and to com- 

fort another when needing comfort himself. 

But you on the contrary heap blow on blow, 

when you blame me, as I hear you do, and 

_ think that yourson and my brother is neglected 

by us, or even betrayed by us, which is a still 
heavier charge; or that we do not recognize 
the loss which all his friends and _ relatives 
have suffered, and I more than all, because I 
had placed in him my hopes of life, and looked 
upon him as the only bulwark, the only good 
counsellor, and the only sharer of my piety. 
And yet, on what grounds do you form this 
opinion? If on the first, be assured that I 
came over to you on purpose, and because [I 
was troubled by the rumour, and I was ready to 
share your deliberations while it was still time 
for consultation about the matter; and you 
imparted anything to me rather than this, 
whether because you were in the same distress, 
or with some other purpose, I know not what. 
But if the last, I was prevented from meeting 
you again by my grief, and the honour I owed 
my father, and his funeral, over which I could 
not give anything precedence, and that when 
my sorrow was fresh, and it would not only 
have been wrong but also quite improper to be 
unseasonably philosophical, and above human 
nature. Moreover, I thought that I was pre- 
viously engaged by the circumstances, espec- 
ially as his had come to such a conclusion as 
seemed good to Him who governs all our 
affairs. So much concerning this matter. 
Now I beg you to put aside your grief, which 
is most unreasonable I am sure; and if you 
have any further grievance, bring it forward 
that you may not grieve both me in part and 
yourself, and put yourself in a position un- 
worthy of your nobility, blaming me instead 
of others, though I have done you no wrong, 
but, if I must say the truth, have been equally 
tyrannized over by our common friend, al- 
though you used to think me your only bene- 
factor. 

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS: 

| a irae ee eG 
To AMpHILOCHIUS, BisHop OF ICONTUM. 

Searcely yet delivered from the pains of 
my illness, I hasten to you, the guardian of my 
cure. For the tongue of a priest meditating 
of the Lord raises the sick. Do then the 
greater thing in your priestly ministration, 

and loose the great mass of my sins when | 
you lay hold of the Sacrifice of Resurrection, — 

For your affairs are a care to me waking or 
sleeping, and you are to me a good plectrum, 
and have made a welltuned lyre to dwell 
within my soul, because by your numerous 
letters you have trained my soul to science. 
But, most reverend friend, cease not both to 
pray and to plead for me when you draw down 
the Word by your word, when with a blood- 
less cutting you sever the Body and Blood of 
the Lord, using your voice for the glaive.* 

Ep. CLXXXIV. 

(Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia in Cappadocia 

Secunda, who had apparently taken a prominent | 

part in the election and consecration of Eulalius 
to the See of Nazianzus, was accused of heresy 
by Helladius Archbishop of Czesarea, and a 
Council met at Parnassus to try him, A.D. 383. 
Gregory, not being able personally to attend 
this Synod, writes to Amphilochius, to beg him 
to undertake the defence of the accused. ‘The 
letter is lost, but Gregory’s friend carried out 
his mission with success, and the following 
letter is to thank him for his kindness. ) 

The Lorp fulfil all thy petitions (do not 
despise a father’s prayer), for you have 
abundantly refreshed my age, both by having 
gone to Parnassus, as you were invited to 
do, and by having refuted the calumny against 
the most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop. 
For evil men love to set down their own faults 
to those who convict them. For the age of 
this man is stronger than all the accusations, 
and so is his life, and we too who have often 
heard from him and taught others, and those 
whom he has recovered from error and added 
to the common body of the church; but yet 
the present evil times called for more accurate 
proof on account of the slanderers and evil- 
disposed ; and this you have supplied us with, 
or rather you have supplied it to those who 
are of fickler mind and easily led away by 
such men. 
journey, and will personally give testimony, 

a A very clear assertion of the Real Presence. 

But if you will undertake a longer | 

469 
and settle the matter with the other bishops, 
you will be doing a spiritual work worthy of 
your Perfection. I and those with me salute 
your Fraternity. 

S$ 6. To Necrartius ArcHBIsnor or Con- 
5) 
STANTINOPLE, 

(Gregory, having failed to persuade the 
Councilof a.p. 381 to end the schismat Antioch 
by recognizing Paulinus as successor to Mele- 
tius, thought it best for the sake of peace to 
resign the Archbishopric. ‘The Council elected 
in his place Nectarius, a catechumen at the 
time, who was Prator of Constantinople, and 
he was consecrated and enthroned June g, A.D. 
381. Gregory always maintained cordial rela- 
tions with him; and the following letter was 
written in answer to the formal announcement 
of his election. ) 

Ep. LXXXVIII. 

It was needful that the Royal Image should 
adorn the Royal City. For this reason 
it wears you upon its bosom, as was fitting, 
with the virtues and the eloquence, and the 
other beauties with which the Divine Favour 
has conspicuously enriched you. Us it has 
treated with utter contempt, and has cast away 
like refuse and chaff or a wave of the sea. But 
since friends have a common interest in each 
other’s affairs, I claim a share in your welfare, 
and feel myself a partaker in your glory and 
the rest of your prosperity. Do you also, as is 
fitting, partake of the anxieties and reverses of 
your exiles, and not only (as the tragedians 
say) hold and stick to happy circumstances, 
but also take your part with your friend in 
troubles; that you may be perfectly just, living 
justly and equally in respect of friendship and 
of your friends. May good fortune abide with 
you long, that you may do yet more good ; 
yes, may it be with you irrevocably and eter- 
nally, after your prosperity here, unto the pas- 
sage to that other world. 

Boece kr, 

(A letter of no great importance, except as 
shewing the friendly feelings which Gregory 
continued to maintain towards his successor. ) 

Affairs with us go on as usual: we are quict 
without strifes and disputes, valuing as we do the 
reward (which has no risk attaching to it) of 
silence, beyond everything. And we have de- 
rived some profit from this rest, having by God’s 
mercy fairly recovered from our illness. Do 

470 

you ride on an: reign, as holy David says,¢ 
and may God, Who has honoured you with 
Priesthood, accompany you throughout, and set 
it for you above all slander. And that we may 
give each other a proof of our courage, and may 
not suffer any human calamity as we stand be- 
fore God, I send this message to you, and do 
you promptly assent to it. ‘There are many 
reasons which make me very anxious about 
our very dear Pancratius. Be good enough to 
receive him kindly, and to commend him to 
the best of your friends, that he may attain his 
object. 
military service to obtain relief from public 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

| 

His object is through some kind of 

office, though there is no single kind of life | 
that is unexposed to the slanders of worthless | 

men, as you very well know. 

Brae et HB 

(Written about A.p. 382, commending his 
friend George, a deacon of Nazianzus, to the 

good offices of the Archbishop and the Count | 
of the Domestics, or Master of the Imperial | 

Household, on account of his private troubles 
and anxieties. ) 

People in general make a very good guess at 
your disposition—or rather, they do not con- 
jecture, but they do not refuse to believe me 
when I pride myself on the fact that you deem 
me worthy of no small respect and honour. 
One of these people is my very precious son 
George, who having fallen into many losses, 
and being very much overwhelmed by his 
troubles, can find only one harbour of safety, 

namely, to be introduced to you by us, and to | 
obtain some favour at the hands of the Most 

Illustrious the Count of the Domestics. 
them this favour, either to him and his need, 
or else, if you prefer it, to me, to whom I know 
you have resolved to grant all favours; and 
facts also persuade me that this is true of you. 

Ep. CLXXXV. 
(See Introduction to Ep. CLX XXIV. above, 

p. 469. Bosporius was to be sent to Constantin- — 

Grant | 

ople that his cause might there be tried in the | 

Civil Courts. Gregory therefore writes to the 
Archbishop to point out what a serious infringe- 
ment of the rights of the Church this would be. 

Probably the attitude which Nectarius took up | 

at the suggestion of Gregory was the occa- 

sion of the Edict which ‘Theodosius addressed in | 

February, A.b. 384 or 5, to the Augustal Prefect, 
withdrawing all clerics from the jurisdiction of 
the civil tribunals, and placing them under 
the exclusive control of the episcopal courts. ) 

aPs, xlv, 4. 

Whenever different people praise different 
points in you, and all are pushing forward your 
good fame, as in a marketplace, I contribute 
whatever I can, and not less than any of them, 
because you deign also to honour me, to cheer 
my old age, as a well-beloved son does that of 
his father. For this reason I now also venture 
to offer to you this appeal on behalf of the 
Most Reverend and God-beloved Bishop Bos- 
porius ; though ashamed on the one hand that 
such a man should need any letter from me, 
since his venerable character is assured both by 
his daily life and by his age; and on the other 
hand not less ashamed to keep silence and not 
to say a word for him, while I have a voice, 
and honour faith, and know the man most in- 
timately. The controversy about the dioceses 
you will no doubt yourself resolve according 
to the grace of the Spirit which is in you, and 
to the order of the canons. But I hope Your 
Reverence will see that it is not to be endured 
that our affairs are to be posted up in the sec- 
ular courts. For even if they who are judges 
of such courts are Christians, as by the mercy 
of God they are, what is there in common. be- 
tween the Sword and the Spirit? And even 
if we yield this point, how or where can it be 
just that a dispute concerning the faith should 
be interwoven with the other questions? Is 
our God-beloved Bishop Bosporius to-day a 
heretic? Is it to-day that his hoar hair is set 
in the balance, who has brought back so 
many from their error, and has given so great 
proof of his orthodoxy, and is a teacher of us 
all? No, I entreat you, do not give place to 
such slanders ; but if possible reconcile the op- 
posing parties and add this to your praises ; 
but if this may not be, at all events do not al- 
low us all, (with whom he has lived, and with 
whom he has grown old,) to be outraged by 
such insolence,—us whom you know to be accu- 
rate preachers of the Gospel, both when to be so 
was dangerous, and when it is free from risk ; 
and to be unable to endure any detraction 
from the One Unapproachable Godhead. And 
I beg you to pray for me who am suffering 
from serious illness. I and all who are with me 
salute the brethren who surround you. May 
you, strong and of good courage and of good 
fame in the Lord, grant to us and the Churches 
the support which all in common demand. 

Ep. CLXXXVI. 
(A letter of introduction for a relative.) 

What would you have done if I had come 
in person and taken up your time? Iam quite 
certain you would have undertaken with all 

zeal to deliver me from the slander, if I may 
take as a token what has happened before. 
Do me this favour, then, through my most dis- 
creet kinswoman who approaches you through 
me, reverencing first the age of your petitioner, 
and next her disposition and = piety, which is 
more than is ordinarily found in a woman ; 
and besides this, her ignorance in business- 
matters, and the troubles now brought upon 
her by her own relations; and above all, my 
entreaty. ‘The greatest favour you can do me 
is speed in the benefit for which I am asking. 
For even the unjust judge in the Gospel * shewed 
kindness to the widow, though only after long 
beseeching and importunity. 

MISCELLANEOUS LETTERS. 

Sut from you |. 

ask for speed, that she may not be overwhelmed | 

by being long burdened with anxieties and 
miseries ina foreign land ; though I know quite 
well that Your Piety will make that alien land 
to be a fatherland to her. 

Ee. COL, 

(An important letter on the Apollinarian 
controversy has already been given above. ) 

§ 7. To TuHropore, Bisnop or TyANa. 

(Theodore, a native of Arianzus, and an in- 
timate friend of Gregory, accompanied him 
to Constantinople A.D. 379, and shared his per- 
secution by the Arians, who broke into their 
church during the celebration of the divine 
liturgy, and pelted the clergy with stones. 
Theodore could not bring himself to put up 
with this, and declared his intention of prose- 
cuting the aggressors. Gregory wrote the fol- 
lowing letter to dissuade him from this course, 
by shewing him how much more noble it is to 
forgive than to revenge. ) 

Ep. LXXVII. 

I hear that you are indignant at the out- 
rages which have been committed on us by 
the Monks and the Mendicants. And it is 
no wonder, seeing that you never yet had felt 
a blow, and were without experience of the 
evils we have to endure, that you did feel 
angry at such a thing. But we as experienced 
in many sorts of evil, and as having had our 

share of insult, may be considered worthy of 

belief when we exhort Your Reverence, as old 
age teaches and as reason suggests. Certainly 
what has happened was dreadful, and more than 
dreadful,—no one will deny it: that our altars 
were insulted, our mysteries disturbed, and 

@:S. buke xvi. ete: 

471 
that we ourselves had to stand between the 
communicants and those who would stone 
them, and to make our intercessions a cure for 
stonings ; that the reverence due to virgins was 
forgotten, and the good order of monks, and 
the calamity of the poor, who lost even their 
pity through ferocity. But perhaps it would 
be better to be patient, and to givean example 
of patience to many by our sufferings. For 
argument is not so persuasive of the world in 
general as is practice, that silent exhortation. 

We think it an important matter to obtain 
penalties from those who have wronged us: an 
important matter, I say, (for even this is some- 
times useful for the correction of others)—but 
it is far greater and more Godlike, to bear with 
injuries. Tor the former course curbs wicked- 
ness, but the latter makes men good, which is 
much better and more perfect than merely 
being not wicked. Let us consider that the 
great pursuit of mercifulness is set before us, 
and let us forgive the wrongs done to us that 
we also may obtain forgiveness, and let us by 
kindness lay up a store of kindness. 

Phineas was called Zelotes because he ran 
through the Midianitish woman with the man 
who was committing fornication with her,* and 
because he took away the reproach from the 
children of Israel: but he was more praised be- 
cause he prayed for the people when they had 
transeressed.® Let us then also stand and make 
propitiation, and let the plague be stayed, and 
let this be counted unto us for righteousness. 
Moses also was praised because he slew the 

| Egyptian that oppressed the Israelite ; ¥ but he 

was more admirable because he healed by his 
prayer his sister Miriam when she was made 
leprous for her murmuring. Look also at 
what follows. The people of Nineve are 
threatened with an overthrow, but by their 
tears they redeem theirsin.€ © Manasses was the 
most lawless of Kings,$ but is the most conspic- 
uous among those who have attained salvation 
through mourning. 

O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee,’ 
saith God. What anger is here expressed—and 
yet protection is added. What is swifter than 
Mercy? ‘The Disciples ask for flames of Sod- 
om upon those who drive Jesus away, but He 
deprecates revenge.® Peter cuts off the car of 
Malchus, one of those who outraged Him, but 
Jesus restores it. And what of him who asks 
whether he must seven times forgive a brother 
if he has trespassed, is he not condemned for 

a Num. xxiv. 7. 
6 Num. xu. 40. 
7 Hos. vi. 4. 

Bi ese Gute 40500 ts y Exod. ii. 12. 
€ Jon. iil. 10. 2 Chron. xNxxtii. 12, 13, 

Oise buke ix 54¢ « Ib, xxil. 50, 

Are 
o/ < 

his niggardliness, for to the seven is added sev- 
enty times seven? * What of the debtor in the 
Gospel who will not forgive as he has been for- 

given ?8 Is itnot more bitterly exacted of him 
for this? And what saith the pattern of 
prayer? Does it not desire that forgiveness 

may be earned by forgiveness ? 

Having so many examples let us imitate the 
mercy of God, and not desire to learn from 
ourselves how great an evil is requital of sin. 
You see the sequence of goodness. — First 
it makes laws, then it commands, threatens, 
reproaches, holds out warnings, restrains, 
threatens again, and only when forced to do so 
strikes the blow, but this little by little, open- 
ing the way to amendment. Let us then not 
strike suddenly (for it is not safe to doso), but 
being selfrestrained in our fear let us conquer 
by mercy, and make them our debtors by our 
kindness, tormenting them by their conscience 
rather than by anger. Let us not dry upa fig 
tree which may yet bear fruit,Y nor condemn it 
as useless and cumbering the ground, when 
possibly the care and diligence of a skilful gar- 
dener may yet heal it. And do not let us so 
quickly destroy so great and glorious a work 
through what is perhaps the spite and malice of 
the devil; but let us choose to shew ourselves 
merciful rather than severe, and lovers of the 
poor rather than of abstract justice ; and let us 
not make more account of those who would 
enkindle us to this than of those who would 
restrain us, considering, if nothing else, the dis- 
grace of appearing to contend against mendi- 
cants who have this great advantage that even 
if they are in the wrong they are pitied for their 
misfortune. But as things are, consider that all 
the poor and those who suppert them, and _ all 
the Monks and Virgins are falling at your feet 
and praying you on their behalf. Grant to all 
these for them this favour (since they have suf- 
ferred enough as is clear by what they have 
asked of us) and above all to me who am their 
representative. And if it appear to you mon- 
strous that we should have been dishonoured by 
them, remember that it is far worse that we 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

eagerness, and you bestow on us a preliminary 
festival. Such is what Your Reverence gives 
us. And we in return give you the greatest 
thing we have, our prayers. But that you may 
have some small thing to remember us by, we 
send you the volume of the Philocalia of Origen, 
containing a selection of passages useful to 
students of literature. Deign to accept this, 
and give us a proof of its usefulness, being 
aided by diligence and the Spirit. 

LH da, OS oO 

(Written a little later, as a letter of thanks 
for an Easter Gift. ‘Theodore had quite re- 
cently been made Archbishop of ‘Vyana. ) 

We rejoice in the tokens of love, and especi- 
ally at such a season, and from one at once so 
young a man, and so perfect ; and, to greet you 
with the words of Scripture, stablished in your 
youth,® for so it calls him who is more advanced 
in wisdom than his years lead us to expect. 
The old Fathers prayed for the dew of heaven 

and fatness of the earth ® and other such things 

should not be listened to by you when we make | 

this request of you. May God forgive the no- 
ble Paulus his outrages upon us. 
Ep. CXV. 

(Sent about Easter a.p. 382 with a copy of 
the Philocalia, or Chrestomathy of Origen’s 
works edited by himself and S. Basil.) 

You anticipate the Testival, and the letters, 

Proce ke: xin 7. 

for their children, though perhaps some may un- 
derstand these things in a higher sense ;_ but we 
will give you back all in a spiritual sense. ‘The 
Lord fulfil all thy requests,y and mayest thou 
be the father of such children® (if I may pray 
for you concisely and intimately) as you your- 
self have shewn yourself to your own parents, 
so that we, as well as every one else, may be 
glorified concerning you. 

Ep. CXXII. 

You owe me, even as a sick man, tend- 
ing, for one of the commandments is the 
Visitation of the sick. And you also owe to the 
Holy Martyrs their annual honour, which we 
celebrate in your own Arianzus on the 23rd of 
the month which we call Dathusa.¢ And at 
the same time there are ecclesiastical affairs not 
a few which need our common examination. 
Tor all these reasons then, I beg you to come 
at once: for though the labour ‘s great, the 
reward is equivalent. 

Ep. CXXIII. 

(To excuse himself for postponing his ac- 
ceptance of an invitation. ) 

I reverence your presence, and I delight in 
your company ; although otherwise I counsel- 

@ Ps: cxliv. 2, B Gen. xxvii. 28. __ y Ps. xx. 7. 
6 It seems clear, as Benoit remarks, that this expression refers to 

| Sptritual fatherhood. ‘Theodore does not appear to have been 

/ married, 

€ Probably July, 

led myself to remain at home and philosophize 
in quiet, for I found this of all courses the most 
profitable for myself. And since the winds are 
still somewhat rough, and my infirmity has not 
yet left me, I beg you to bear with me patient- 
ly for a little while, and to join me in my 
prayers for health ; and as soon as the fit season 
comes I will attend upon your requests. 

Ep. CXXIV. 

(A little later on, when the weather was more 
settled, Gregory accepts the invitation and 
proposes to come at once, but declines to at- 
tend the Provincial Synod. ) 

You call me? And I hasten, and that for 
a private visit. Synods and Conventions I sa- 
lute from afar, since I have experienced that 

MIsCELLANROUS. LETTERS. 

| 

most of them (to speak moderately) are but | 

sorry affairs. What then remains? Help with 
your prayers my just desires that I may obtain 
that for which I am anxious. 

ie. CLE. 

(On his retirement from Constantinople 
Gregory had at the request of the Bishops of 
the Province, and especially of Theodore of 
Tyana the Metropolitan, and Bosporius Bishop 
of Colonia (see letters above) and at the earnest 
solicitation of the people, undertaken the charge 
of the Diocese of Nazianzus ; but he very soon 
found that his health was not equal to so great 
a task, and that he could not fulfil its calls 
upon him. He struggled on for some time, 
but at length, finding himself quite unequal to 
it, he wrote as follows to the Metropolitan: ) 

It is time for me to use these words of 
Scripture, To whom shall I cry when I am 
wronged ?@ Who will stretch out a hand 
to me when I am oppressed? To whom 
shall the burden of this Church pass, in its 
present evil and paralysed condition? I pro- 
test before God and the Elect Angels that 
the Flock of God is being unrighteously dealt 
with in being left without a Shepherd or a 
Bishop, through my being laid on the shelf. 
For I am a prisoner to my ill health and have 
been very quickly removed thereby from the 
Church, and made quite useless to everybody, 
every day breathing my last, and getting more 
and more crushed by my duties. If the Pro- 
vince had any other head, it would have been 
my duty to cry out and protest to it contin- 
ually. But since Your Reverence is the Su- 
perior, it is to you I must look. For, to leave 
out everything else, you shall learn from my 

a Hab, ii. 1. 

473 

fellow - priests, Kulalius the Chorepiscopus @ 
and Celeusius, whom I have specially sent to 
Your Reverence, what these robbers ® who have 
now got the upper hand, are both doing and 
threatening. ‘To repress them is not in the 
power of my weakness, but belongs to your 
skill and strength; since to you, with His 
other gifts God has given that of strength also 
for the protection of His Church. — If in saying 
and writing this I cannot get a hearing, I shall 
take the only course remaining to me, that of 
publicly proclaiming and making known that 
this Church needs a Bishop, in order that it 
may not be injured by my feeble health. 
What is to follow is matter for your consider- 
ation. 

Er. CLIII. 

(S. Gregory had to carry out his threat. 
He resigned the care of Nazianzus, and 
nothing would induce him to withdraw 
his resignation. Bosporius wrote him an_ur- 
gent letter with this object, but he replied as 
follows : ) 

To Bosporius, Bishop or COoLoNIA. 

Twice I have been tripped up by you, and 
have been deceived (you know what I mean), 
and if it was justly, may the Lord smell from 
youan odour of sweet savour ; ¥ if unjustly, may 
the Lord pardon it. For so it is reasonable 
for me to speak of you, seeing we are com- 
manded to be patient when injuries are in- 
flicted on us. But as you are master of your 
own opinions, soam I of mine, ‘That trouble- 
some Gregory will no longer be troublesome 
to you. I will withdraw myself to God, 
Who alone is pure and guileless. I will retire 
into myself. ‘This I have determined ; for to 
stumble twice on the same stone is attributed 
by the proverb to fools alone. 

To Tureopore, ARCHBISHOP OF TYANA. 
Ep. CLVI. 

(S. Gregory succeeded at the end of A.D. 
382 in convincing the Metropolitan and _ his 
Comprovincials of his sincerity in desiring to 
retire ; and so they began to cast about fora Suc- 
cessor. Gregory desired that his cousin the 

a Chorepiscopi;—a_ grade of clergy called into existence m the 
Jatter part of the Third Century, first in Asia Minor, to meet the 
difficulty of providing Episcopal supervision in the country dis- 
tricts of large Dioceses, They seemed to have been allowed to 
confer the Minor, but not the Holy Orders, unless by special com- 
mission from the Diocesan, on the ground of their lack of original 
Jurisdiction. ‘That they were originally possessed of full Episcopal 
Orders there can be no doubt, but eventually the position was 
allowed to be held by Priests, and in the West the office became 
practically merged in that of the Archdeacon, 

BVhe Apollinarians. y Gen. vill. 21. 

474 

. 

Chorepiscopus Eulalius should be nominated, 
but the Bishops felt some jealousy at what they 
took to be an attempt on his part to dictate to 
them, and refused to allow him to take any 
part in the election, on the ground that he 
either never had been, or at any rate had 

ceased to be one of the Bishops of the Pro- 
vince. He protested, but finding that he 
could not convince them he withdrew his 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN, 

claim to a vote and wrote to Theodore, as fol-_ 

lows i—) 

Our spiritual affairs have reached their 
limit: I will not trouble you any further. 
Join together: take your precautions: take 
counsel against us: let our enemies have the 
victory: let the canons be accurately observed, 
beginning with us, the most ignorant of men. 
There is no ill-will in accuracy; only do not 
let the rights of friendship be impeded. The 
children of my very honoured son Nicobulus 
have come to the city to learn shorthand. 
Be kind enough to look upon them with a 
fatherly and kindly eye (for the canons do not 

sents itself to our mind. Very many people, 
as it seems to me, delude themselves by con- 
sidering oaths which are taken with the sanc- 
tion of spoken imprecations to be real oaths, 
hut those which are written and not verbally 

uttered, to be mere matter of form, and 
no oaths at all. Tor how can we suppose 
that while a written schedule of debts is 

more binding than a verbal acknowledgment, 
yet a written oath is something other than 
an oath? Or to speak concisely, we hold an 
oath to be the assurance given to one who 
asked for and obtained it. Nor is it sufficient 

_to say that he suffered violence (for the vio- 

forbid this), but especially take care that they | 

live near the Church. For I desire that they 
should be moulded in character to virtue by 
continual association with Your Perfectness. 

Er. CLXIII. 

(George a layman of Paspasus, was sent 
by Theodore of Tyana to Saint Gregory 
that the latter might convince him of his 
error and sin in repudiating an oath which 
had taken, on the ground that it was tak- 
en in writing and not za voce. Gregory 
seems to have brought him to a better mind, 
and sent him back to the Metropolitan with 
the following letter, requesting that due pen- 
ance be imposed upon him, and have its length 
regulated by his contrition. This letter was 
read to the Second Council of Constanti- 
nople in 553, by Euphrantes, a successor of 
‘Theodore in the See of Tyana, and was ac- 
cepted by the Fathers, wherefore it is regarded 
as having almost the force of a Canon of the 
Church Universal.) 

1 
ne 

God grant you to the Churches, both for 
our glory, and for the benefit of many, being 
a you are so circumspect and cautious in 
spiritual matters as to make us also more cau- 
tious who are considered to have some advan- 
tage over you in years. Since, however, you 
have wished to take us as partners in your 
spiritual inquiry (I mean about the oath which 
George of Paspasus appears to have sworn), 
we will declare to Your Reverence what pre- 

lence was the Law by which he bound himself ), 
nor that afterwards he won the cause in the 
Law Court—for the very fact that he went to 
law was a breach of his oath. I have per- 
suaded our brother George of this, not to pre- 
tend excuses for his sin, and not to seek out 
arguments to defend his transgression, but to 
recognize the writing as an oath, and to be- 
wail his sin before God and Your Reverence, 
even though he formerly deceived himself and 
took a different view of it. ‘This is what we 
have personally argued with him; and it is 
evident that if you will discourse with him 
more carefully, you will deepen his contrition, 
since you are a great healer of souls, and hav- 
ing treated him according to the Canon for 
as long a time as shall seem right, you will 

_ afterwards be able to confer indulgence upon 

him in the matter of time. And the meas- 
ure of the time must be the measure of his 
compunction. 

Ep, CLXXXITI. 

(Helladius, Archbishop of Ceesarea, contested 
the validity of the election of Eulalius to the 
Bishopric of Nazianzus, and accused Bosporius 
of heresy. 5. Gregory here throws the whole 
weight of his authority into the other scale. It 
is however manifest from the very terms of the 
letter that the person addressed is not Theodore 
of Tyana. It was conjectured by Clemencet 
that perhaps he was Theodore of Mopsuestia. ) 

Envy, which no one easily escapes, has got 
some foothold amongst us. See, even we Cap- 
padocians are in a state of faction, so to speak— 
a calamity never heard of before, and not to 
be believed—so that no flesh may glory* in the 
sight of God, but that we may be careful, since 
we are all human, not to condemn each other 
rashly. For myself, there is some gain even 
from the misfortune (if I may speak somewhat 

@1 Cor, i, 29. 

paradoxically), and I really gather a rose out | 
of thorns, as the proverb has it. Hitherto I 
have never met Your Reverence face to face, 
nor conversed with you by letter, but have 
only been illuminated by your reputation ; but 
now I am of necessity compelled to approach 
you by letter, and I am very grateful to him 
who has procured me this privilege. I omit to | 
write to the other Bishops about whom you wrote | 
to me, as the opportunity has not yet arisen. 
Moreover my weak health makes me_ less 
active in this matter; but what I write to you 
I write to them also through you. My Lord 
the God-beloved Bishop Helladius* must 

MISCELLANEOUS LETEERS: 

cease to waste his labour on our concerns, For 
it is not through spiritual earnestness, but | 
through party zeal, that he is seeking this; and | 
not for the sake of accurate compliance with | 
the canons, but for the satisfaction of anger, | 
as is evident by the time he has chosen, and 
because many have moved with him unreason- 
ably, for I must say this, and not trouble my- 
self about it. If I were physically in a 
condition to govern the Church of Nazianzus, 
to which I was originally appointed, and not 
to Sasima as some would falsely persuade you, 
I should not have been so cowardly or so ignor- 
ant of the Divine Constitutions as either to 
despise that Church, or to seek for an easy life 
in preference to the prizes which are in store | 
for those who labour according to God’s will, 
and work with the talent committed to their | 
care. For what profit should I have from my 
many labours and my great hopes, if I were ill 
advised in the most important matters? But 
since my bodily health is bad, as everyone can | 
plainly see, and I have not any responsibility 
to fear on account of this withdrawal, for the 
reason I have mentioned, and I saw that the 
Church through cleaving to me was suffering 
in its best interests and almost being destroyed 
through my illness, I prayed both before and 
now again my Lords the God-beloved Bishops 
(If mean those of our own Province) to give | 
the Church a head, which they have done by | 
God’s Grace, worthy both of my desire and of | 
your prayers. This I would have you both. 
know yourself, most honourable Lord, and also 
inform the rest of the Bishops, that they may 
receive him and support him by their votes, 
and not bear heavily on my old age by believ- 
ing the slander. Let me add this to my letter. 
[f your examination finds my Lord the God- 
beloved Priest Bosporius guilty concerning the 
faith—a thing which it is not lawful even to sug- 
gest—(I pass over his age and my personal | 

a Basil’s successor. 

475 
testimony) judge him so yourselves. But if 
the discussion about the dioceses is the cause 

of this evil report and this novel accusation, 
do not be led away by the slander, and do not 
give to falsehoods a greater strength than to 
the truth, I beg you, lest you should cast into 
despair those who desire to do what is right. 
May you be granted good health and spirits 
and courage and continual progress in the 
things of God to us and to the Church, whose 
common boast you are. 

CXXXIX. 

(This letter is written at a somewhat earlier 
date in reference to the consent he had been 
induced to give to remaining for some time 
longer as administrator of the See of Nazianzus. 
It is certainly not addressed to Theodore of 

Tyana, and it is not known who this ‘Theo- 
dore is. ) 

Ep. 

He Who raised David His servant from the 
Shepherd’s work to the Throne, and Your 
Reverence from the flock to the Work of the 
Shepherd : He that orders our affairs and those 
of all who hope in Him according to His own 
Will: may He now put it into the mind of 
Your Reverence to know the dishonour which 

have suffered at the hands of my Lords the 

Bishops in the matter of their votes, in that 

_ they have agreed to the Election,* but have ex- 

cluded us. I will not lay the blame on Your 
Reverence, because you have but recently 
come to preside over our affairs, and are, as is 
to be expected, for the most part unacquainted 
with our history. ‘This is quite enough: for I 
have no mind to trouble you further, that I 
may not seem burdensome at the very begin- 
ning of our friendship. But I will tell you 
what suggests itself to me in taking counsel 
with God. I retired from the Church at Nazi- 
anzus, not as either despising God, or looking 
down on the littleness of the flock (God for- 
bid that a philosophic & soul should be so 
disposed ) ; but first because I am not bound 
by any such appointment: and secondly be- 
cause I am broken down by my ill health, and 
do not think myself equal to such anxieties. 
And since you too have been heavy on me, in 
reproaching me with my resignation, and I 
myself could not endure the clamours against 
me, and since the times are hard, threatening 
us with an inroad of enemies to the injury of 
the commonwealth of the whole Church, I fi- 
nally made up my mind to suffer a defeat 
which is painful to my body, but perhaps not 

a See Introd. to Ep. 157. 
B Probably equivalent to A Monk. 

476 

bad for my soul. 
body to the Church for as long as it may be 
possible, thinking it better to suffer any dis- 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

I make over this miserable | 

tress to the flesh rather than to incur a spiritual 

injury myself or to inflict it upon others, who 
have thought the worst of us, judging from 
their own experience. Knowing this, do pray 
for me, and approve my resolution: and per- 
haps it 1s not out of place to say, mould your- 
self to piety. 

§ 8. To Nicoruwus. 

(See the introduction to the first letter to So- 
phronius above.) 

Ep. XII. (about a.p. 365). 

You joke me about Alypiana as being little | 

and unworthy of your size, you tall and im- 
mense and monstrous fellow both in form and 
strength. For now I understand that soul is a 
matter of measure, and virtue of weight, and 
that rocks are more valuable than pearls, and 
crows more respectable than nightingales. 
Well, well! rejoice in your bigness and your 

| 

cubits, and be in no respect inferior to the 
— best and most beautiful letter which can con- 

famed sons of Aloeus.¢ You ride a horse, and 

shake a spear, and concern yourself with wild 

beasts. But she has no such work; and no 

great strength is needed to carry a comb, or | 

to handle a distaff, or to sit by a loom, “ For 
such is the glory of woman. ’’ ¥ And if you 
add this, that she has become fixed to the 
ground on account of prayer, and by the great 
movement of her mind has constant com- 
munion with God, what is there here to boast 

-—_—_—_____ ———_______ — —-—_ — - a 

Benoit thinks this and the following ones were 
written to the Younger Nicobuius. ) 

Of those who write letters, since this is what 
you ask, some write at too great a length, and 
others err on the side of deficiency ; and both 
miss the mean, like archers shooting at a mark 
and sending some shafts short of it and others 
beyond it; for the missing is the same though 
on opposite sides. Now the measure of letters 
is their usefulness: and we must neither write 
at very great length when there is little to say, 
nor very briefly when there is a great deal. 
What? Are we to measure our wisdom by the 
Persian Schaene, or by the cubits of a child, 
and to write so imperfectly as not to write at 
all but to copy the midday shadows, or lines 
which meet right in front of you, whose lengths 
are foreshortened and which show themselves 
in glimpses rather than plainly, being recog- 
nized only by certain of their extremities? We 
must in both respects avoid the want of mod- 
eration and hit off the moderate. This is my 
opinion as to brevity; as to perspicuity it is 
clear that one should avoid the oratorical form 
as much as possible and lean rather to the 
chatty: and, to speak concisely, that is the 

vince either an unlearned or an educated 
reader; the one, as being within the reach of 
the many; the other, as above the many ; and 
it should be intelligible in itself. It is equally 
disagreeable to think out a riddle and to have 
to interpret a letter. The third point about a 
letter is grace: and this we shall safeguard if 

_we do not write in any way that is dry and 

of in your bigness or the stature of your body? | 

Take heed to seasonable silence: listen to her 
voice: mark her unadornment, her wom- 
anly virility, her usefulness at home, her love 
of her husband. Then you will say with the 
Laconian, that verily soul is not a subject for 
measure, and the outer must look to the inner 
man. Ifyou look at the things in this way 
you will leave off joking and deriding her as 
little, and you will congratulate yourself on 
your marriage. 

Ep; Li, 

(An answer to a request made by Nicobulus 
for a treatise on the art of writing letters. 

a Otus and Ephialtes, the two Homeric Giants, who piled Pelion 
on Ossa and Olympus on Pelion in the vain endeavour to reach 
heaven and dethrone Zeus, but were slain by Apollo, (See Hom., 
Odyss., xi,, 305-320.) 

B An instrument used in weaving to make the web firm and close. 

y From his own Poem against women who take too much pains 
about adorning themselves (i., 267). 

unpleasing or unadorned and badly arranged 
and untrimmed, as they call it; as for instance 
astyle destitute of maxims and proverbs and 

_ pithy sayings, or even jokes and enigmas, by 

which language is sweetened. Yet we must not 
seem to abuse these things by an excessive em- 
ployment of them. ‘Their entire omission 
shews rusticity, but the abuse of them shews 
insatiability. We may use them about as much 
as purple is used in woven stuffs. Figures of 
speech we shall admit, but few and modest. 
Antitheses and balanced clauses and nicely di- 
vided sentences, we shall leave to the sophists, 
or if we do sometimes admit them, we shall do 
so rather in play than in earnest. My final 
remark shall be one which I heard a clever 
man make about the eagle, that when the birds 
were electing a king, and came with various 
adornment, the most beautiful point about him 
was that he did not think himself beautiful. 
This point is to be especially attended to in 
letter-writing, to be without adventitious orna- 

ment and as natural as possible. So much 
about letters I send you by a letter; but per- 
haps you had better not apply it to myself, who 
an. busied about more important matters. ‘The 
rest you will work out for yourself, as you are 
quick at learning, and those who are clever in 
these matters will teach you. 

pe Ee 

(Nicobulus asked Gregory to publish a col- 
lection of his letters. Gregory forwards a copy. ) 

You are asking flowers from an autumn 
meadow, and arming Nestor in his old age, in 
demanding from me now something clever in 
the way of language, after I have long neglected 
all that is enjoyable in language and in life. 
But yet (since it is not an Iurysthean or Her- 
culean labour that you are imposing on me, 
but rather one which is very agreeable and 
quiet, to collect for you as many of my own 
letters as I can), do you place this volume among 
your books—a work not amatory but oratori- 
eal, and not for display so much as for use, and 
that for our own home.* For different authors 
have different characteristics, greater or small- 
er. Mine is a tendency to instruct by maxims 

and positive statements wherever opportunity | 

occurs. And as in a legitimate child, so also in 

than parents are shewn by bodily characteristics. 
Mine are such as I have mentioned. 
repay me both by writing and by deriving profit 
from what I have written. I cannot ask for or 
request any better reward than this, either more 
profitable to the asker, or more becoming him 
who gives it. 
Ep. LIII. 

(Gregory put a collection of Basil’s letters 
with his own, and gave them the first place. 
Nicobulus seems to have been surprised at this, 
and asked the reason. Gregory explains as 
follows. ) 

I have always preferred the Great Basil to 
myself, though he was of the contrary opinion ; 
and so I do now, not less for truth’s sake than 
for friendship’s. This is the reason why I have 
given his letters the first place and my own the 
second. For I hope we two will always be 
coupled together; and also I would supply 
others with an example of modesty and submis- 
sion. 

Hips stv. 

On Laconicism. To be laconic is not 
merely, as you suppose, to write few words, 

a I.e, as a model of Christian style. 
VOL. VII. 

DMISCELELANBROUS LEPTERS, 

You may | 

477 
but to say a great deal in few words. Thus I 
call Homer very brief and Antimachus lengthy. 
Why? Because I measure the length by the 
matter and not by the letters. 

Er. LY, 

An Invitation. You flee when I pursue you: 
perhaps in accordance with the laws of love, 
to make yourself more valuable. Come then, 
and fill up at last the loss I have suffered by 
your long delay. And if any home affairs 
detain you, you shall leave us again, and so 
make yourself more precious as an object of 
desire. 

S$ 9. To Otynrivs. 

(Olympius was Prefect of Cappadocia Secun- 
dain 382. One letter to him against the 
Apollinarians, has already been given ; the rest, 
which are to follow are mainly recommenda- 
tions of various persons to his patronage. ) 

Ep. CIV. 

All The Other favours which I have re- 
ceived I know to be due to your kindness ; 
and may God reward you for them with His 

, ‘iss / own mercies; and may one of these be, that 
language, the father is always visible, not less | 

you may discharge your office of prefect with 
good fame and splendour from beginning to 
end. In what [now ask I come rather to give 
than to receive, if it is not arrogant to say so. 
I personally introduce poor Philumena to you, 
to entreat your justice, and to move you to 
the tears with which she afflicts my soul. She 
herself will explain to you in what and by 
whom she has been wronged, for it would not 
be right for me to bring accusations against 
any one. But this much it is necessary for 
me to say, that widowhood and orphanhood 
have a right to the assistance of all right- 
minded men, and especially of those who have 
wife and children, those great pledges of pity, 
since we—ourselves only men—are set to 
judge men. Pardon me that [ plead with you 
for these by letter, since it is by ill health that 
I am deprived of seeing a ruler so kind and so 
conspicuous for virtue that even the prelude 
of your administration is more precious than. 
the good fame of others even at the end of 
their term. 

CY. 

The time is swift, the struggle great, and 
my sickness severer, reducing me almost to 
immovability. What is left but to pray to God, 
and to supplicate your kindness, the one, that 

Ep. 

Kk 

478 

He will incline your mind to gentler counsels, 
the other that you will not roughly dismiss our 
intercession, but will receive kindly the wretched 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN, 

Paulus, whom justice has brought under your | 

hands, perhaps in order that it may make you 
more illustrious by the greatness of your kind- 
ness, and may commend our prayers (such as 
they are) to your mercy. 

Er, CYI,. 

ITere is another laying before you a let- 
ter, of which, if the truth may be said, you 
are the cause yourself, for you provoke them by 
the honour you do them. Here too is another 
petitioner for you, a prisoner of fear, our kins- 
man Eustratius, who with us and by us en- 
treats your goodness, inasmuch as he cannot 

endure to be in perpetual rebellion against your — 

government, even though a just terror has 
irightened him, nor does he choose to entreat 
you by anyone else than me, that he may make 
your mercy to him more conspicuous through 
his use of such intercessors, whom at all events 
you yourself make great by thus accepting their 
appeal. I will say one thing, and that briefly. 
All the other favours you conferred upon ime ; 

but this you will confer upon your own judg- | 

ment, since once you purposed to comfort our 
ave and infirmity with such honours. And I 
will add that you are continually rendering 
God more propitious to you. 

Er. CXXV. 

(Given above, § 1.) 

Ep. CXXVI. 

(While Gregory was at Xantharis an oppor- 
tunity presented itself for seeing Olympius, but 
a return of illness prevented him from taking ad- 
vantage of it. He writes to express his regret, 

and takes the opportunity also to request that — 

Nicobulus may be exempted from the charge 
of the Imperial Posts.) 

[ was happy in a dream. For having been 
brought as far as the Monastery to obtain some 
comfort from the bath, and then hoping to 
meet you, and having this good fortune almost 
in my hands, and having delayed a few days, 
[ was suddenly carried away by my illness, 
which was already painful in some respects and 
threatening in others. And, if one must find 
some conjecture to account for the misfortune, 
I suffered in the same way as the polypods do, 
which if torn by force from the rocks risk the 
loss of the suckers by which they attach them- 

selves to the rocks, or carry off some portion 
of the latter. Something of this kind is my 
case. And what I should have asked Your 
Excellency for had I seen you, I now venture 
to ask for though I am absent. 1 found my 
son Nicobulus much worried by the care of 
the Post, and by close attention to the Monas- 
tery. He is not a strong man, and has great 
distaste for solitude. Make use of him for any- 
thing else you please, for he is eager to serve 
your authority in all things; but if it be pos- 
sible set him free from this charge, if for no 
other reason, at any rate to do him honour as 
my Hospitaller. Since I have asked many 
favours from you for many people, and have 
obtained them, I need also your kindness for 
myself. 

Ep. CXXXI. 

(In 382 Gregory was summoned to a Synod 
at Constantinople ; he wrote to Procopius, the 
Prefectus Urbi, and declined to go, on the 
ground of his great dislike to Episcopal Synods, 
from which, he said, he had never known any 
good to result. However he seems to have re- 
ceived a more urgent summons through Icarius 
and Olympius. His reply to Icarius has been 
lost ; that to Olympius is as follows. ) 

It is more serious to me than my illness, 
that no one will believe that I am ill, but that 
so long a journey is enjoined upon me, and | 
am pushed into the midst of troubles from 
which I rejoiced to have withdrawn, and al- 
most thought that I ought to be grateful for 
this to my bodily affliction. For quiet and 
freedom from affairs is more precious than the 
splendour of a busy life. I wrote this yesterday 
to the Most Illustrious Icarius, from whom I 
received the same summons: and I now beg 
your Magnanimity also to write this for me, for 
you are a very trustworthy witness of my ill 
health. Another proof of my inability is the 
loss which I have now suffered in having been 
unable even to come and enjoy your society, 
who are so kind a Governor, and so admirable 
for virtue that even the preludes of your term 
of office are more honourable than the good 
fame which others can earn by the end of 
theirs. . 

Ep. CXL. 

Again I write when I ought to come: but 
I gain confidence to do so from yourself, O 
Umpire of spiritual matters (to put the first 
thing first), and Corrector of the Common- 
weal—and both by Divine Providence; who 
have also received as the reward of your piety 

_ that your affairs would prosper to your mind, 

». >a 

MISCELLANEOUS 

and that you alone should find attainable 
what to every one else is out of reach. For 
wisdom and courage conduct your govern- 
ment, the one discovering what is to be done, 
and the other easily carrying out what has 
been discovered. And the greatest of all is the 

purity of your hands with which all is direct- 

ed. Where is your ill-gotten gold? ‘Vhere 
never was any; it was the first thing you 
condemned to exile as an invisible tyrant. 
Where is illwill? It is condemned. Where 
is favour? Here you do bend somewhat (for I 
willaccuse you a little), but itis in imitating the 
Divine Mercy, which at the present time your 
soldier Aurelius entreats of you by me. — I call 
him a foolish fugitive, because he has placed 
himself in our hands, and through ours in yours, 
sheltering himself under our gray hair and our 
Priesthood (for which you have often professed 
your veneration) as if it were under some Im- 
perial Image. See, this sacrificing and un- 
bloodstained hand leads this man to you; a 
hand which has written often in your praise, 
and will Iam sure write yet more, if God con- 
tinue your term of government—yours, I mean, 
and that of your colleague ‘Themis. 
Er, CXLI. 

(The people of Nazianzus had in some way 
incurred the loss of civic rights; and the 
Order for the forfeiture of the title of City 
had been signed by Olympius. ‘This led to 
something like a revolt on the part of a cer- 
tain number of the younger citizens: and this 
Olympius determined to punish by the total 
destruction of the place. S$. Gregory was 

| as [ am, 

again prevented by sickness from appearing in| 

person before the Governor: but he pleaded 
the cause of his native city (using its official 
Latin name of Diocesarea) in the following 
letters so successfully as to induce Olympius to 
pardon the outbreak. ) 

Again an opportunity for kindness: and 
again | am bold enough to commit to a letter 
my entreaty about so important a matter. 
My illness makes me thus bold, for it does not 
even allow me to go out, and it does not per- 
mit me to make a fitting entrance to you. 
What then is my Embassy? Pray receive it 
from me gently and kindly. The death of a 
single man, who to-day is and to-morrow will 
not be and will not return to us is of course 
a dreadful thing. But it is much more dread- 
ful fora City to die, which Kings founded, 
and time compacted, and a long series of years 
has preserved. I speak of Dioczesarea, once a 

LAGS: 479 

City, a City no longer, unless you grant it 
merey,.-“lamk* Gat this. place now falls at 
your feet by me: lei it have a voice, and be 
clothed in mourning aid cut off its hair as in 
a tragedy, and Jet it spesk to you in such 
words as these: 

Give a hand to me that lie in the dust: 
help the strengthless: do not add the weight 
of your hand to time, nor destroy what the 
Persians have left me. It is more honourable 
to you to raise up cities than to destroy those 
that are distressed. Be my founder, either by 
adding to what I possess, or by preserving me 
Do not suffer that up to the time of 
your administration I should be a City, and 
after you should be so no longer: do not 
give occasion to after times to speak evil of 
you, that you received me numbered among 
cities, and left me an uninhabited spot, which 
was once a city, only recognizable by moun- 
tains and precipices and woods. 

‘This let the City of my imagination do and 
say to your mercy. But deign to receive an 
exhortation from me as your friend: certainly 
chastise those who have rebelled against the 
Iedict of your authority. On this behalf I am 
not bold to say anything, although this piece of 
audacity was not, they say, of universal design, 
but was only the unreasoning anger of a few 
young men. But dismiss the greater part of 
your anger, and use a larger reasoning. ‘They 
were grieved for their Mother’s being put 
to death; they could not endure to be called 
citizens, and yet to be without political 
rights: they were mad: they committed an of- 
fence against the law: they threw away their 
own safety: the unexpectedness of the calamn- 
ity deprived them of reason. Is it really 
necessary that for this the city should cease to 
be a city? Surely not. Most excellent, do 
not write the order for this to be done. 
Rather respect the supplication of all citizens 
and statesmen and men of rank—for remem. 
ber the calamity will touch all alike—even if 
the greatness of your authority keeps them 

silent, sighing as it were in secret. Re- 
spect also my gray hair: for it would be 

dreadful to me, after having had a great city, 
now to have none at all, and that after your 
government the ‘Temple which we have raised 
to God, and our love for its adornment, Is to 
become a dwelling for beasts. It is not a ter- 
rible thing if some statues were thrown down 
—though in itself it would be so—but 1 would 
not have you think that I am speaking of this, 
when all my care is) for more important 
things: but it is dreadful if an ancient city 
is to be destroyed with them—one which has 

Keke 

480 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

splendidly endured, as I, who am honoured by — 

you, and am supposed to ha ’e some influence, 
have lived to see. But tnis is enough upon 
such a subject, for [ vaall not, if I speak at 
greater length, lind anything stronger than 
your own reasons, by which this nation is gov- 
erned—and may more and greater ones be 

governed by them too, and that in greater | 

commands. ‘This however it was needful 
that Your Magnanimity should know about 
those who have fallen before your feet, that 
they are altogether wretched and despairing, 
and have not shared in any disorder with 
those who have broken the law, as I am certi- 
fied by many who were then present. ‘There- 
fore deliberate what you may think expe- 
dient, both for your own reputation in this 
world, and your hopes in the next. We will 
bear what you determine—not indeed with- 
out grief—but we will bear it: for what else 
can we do? If the worse determination pre- 
vail, we shall be indignant, and shall shed a 
tear over our City that has ceased to be. 

Ep. CXLIT. 

Though my desire to meet you is warm, 
and the need of your petitioners is great, 
yet my illness is invincible. ‘Therefore I am 
bold to commit my intercession to writing. 
Have respect to our gray hair, which you have 
already often reverenced by good actions. 
Have respect also to my infirmity, to which 
my labours for God have in part contributed, 
if | may swagger a little. For this cause spare 
the citizens who look to me because I use some 
freedom of speech with you. And _ spare also 
the others who are under my care. — For public 
affairs will suffer no damage through mercy, 
since you can do more by fear than others by 
punishment. May you, as your reward for this, 
obtain such a Judge as you shew yourself to 
your petitioners and to me their intercessor. 

Ep. CXLITI. 

What does much experience, and experi- 
ence of good do for men? It teaches kind- 
ness, and inclines them to those who en- 
treat them. There is no such education in 
pity as the previous reception of goodness. 
‘This has happened to myself among others. I 
have learned compassion by the things which 
I have suffered. And do you see my great- 
ness of soul when I myself need your gentle- 
ness in my own affairs? I intercede for others, 
and do not fear lest I should exhaust all your 
kindness on other men’sconcerns, I am writ- 

ing thus on behalf of the Presbyter Leontius— 
or, if I may so describe him, the ex-Presbyter. 
If he has suffered sufficiently for what he has 
done, let us stop there, lest excess become in- 
justice. And if there is still any balance of 
punishment due, and the consequences of his 
crime have not yet equalled his offence, yet re 
mit it for our sake and God’s, and _ that of the 

_sanctuary, and the general assembly of the 

priests, among whom he was once numbered, 
even though he has now shewn himself un- 
worthy of them, both by what he has done 
and by what he has suffered. If I can prevail 

| with you it will be best ; but if not, I will bring 

to you a more powerful intercessor, her who is 
the partner both of your rule and of your good 

| fame. 

Ep. CXLIV. 

(Verianus, a citizen of Nazianzus, had been 
offended by his son-in-law, and on this ac- 
count wished his daughter to sue for a divorce. 
Olympius referred the matter to the Episcopal 
arbitration of S. Gregory, who refused to 
countenance the proceeding, and writes the 
two following letters, the first to the Prefect, 
the second to Verianus himself.) 

Haste is not always praiseworthy. Tor this 
reason I have deferred my answer until now 
about the daughter of the most honourable Ve- 
rianus, both to allow for time setting matters 
right, and also because I conjecture that Your 
Goodness does not approve of the divorce, in- 
asmuch as you entrusted the enquiry to me, 
whom you knew to be neither hasty nor un- 
circumspect in such matters. Therefore I have 
refrained myself till now, and, I venture to 
think, not without reason. But since we have 
come nearly to the end of the allotted time, 
and it is necessary that you should be informed 
of the result of the examination I will inform 
you. The young lady seems to me to be of 
two minds, divided between reverence for her 
parents and affection for her husband. Her 
words are on their side, but her mind, I rather 
think, is with her husband, as is shewn by her 
tears. You will do what commends itself to 
your justice, and to God who directs you in 
all things. I should most willingly have given 
my opinion to my son Verianus that he should 

| pass over much of what is in question, with a 

view not to confirm the divorce, which is en- 
tirely contrary to our law,* though the Roman 
law may determine otherwise. For it is neces- 
sary that justice be observed—which I pray you 
may ever both say and do. 

a The law of the Church, 

her Wer riers, 

Bea CXL, 

Public executioners commit no crime, for 
they are the servants of the laws: nor is the 
sword unlawful with which we punish crim- 
inals. But nevertheless, the public executioner 
is nota laudable character, nor is the death- 

bearing sword received joyfully. Just so 
neither can I endure to become hated by 
confirming the divorce by my hand an 

tongue. Itis far better to be the means of 
union and of friendship than of division and 
parting of life. I suppose it was with this in 
his mind that our admirable Governor entrust- 
ed me with the enquiry about your daughter, 
as one who could not proceed to divorce 
abruptly or unfeelingly. For he proposed me 
iot as Judge, but as Bishop, and placed me as 
a mediator in your unhappy circumstances. | 
bey you therefore, to make some allowance for 
my timidity, and if the better prevail, to us? 
ine as a servant of your desire: I rejoice in re- 
ceiving such commands. But if the wors: 
and more cruel course is to be taken, seek for 
some one more suitable to your purpose. J 
have not time, for the sake of favouring your 
friendship (though in all respects I have the 
highest regard for you), to offend against Gol, 
to Whom [ have to give account of every ac- 
tion and thought. I will believe your daugh- 
ter (for the truth shall be told) when she ca: 

TUSCHELUANEOUS Lilt TERS, 

| 

481 
hanimity in doing good, | am bold to present 
this petition. 

Suppose Nicobulus to be the worst of men: 

| —though his only crime is that through me he 

lay aside her awe of you, and boldly declare | 

the truth. 
—for she assigns her words to you, and her 
tears to her husband. 

To QLYMPiUs. 
tee 

This is what [ said as if by a sort of proph- 
ecy, when I found you favourable to every 
request, and was making insatiable use of your 
gentleness, that I fear I shall exhaust your kind- 
ness upon the affairs of others. For see, a 
contest of my own has come (if that is mine 
which concerns my own relations), and I can- 
not speak with the same freedom. 
cause it is my own. For to entreat for myself, 
though it may be more useful, is more humil- 
Tavis. AiG Next, aim. Airaid. Of Excess. as 
destroying pleasure, and opposing all that is 
good. So matters stand, and I conjecture only 
too rightly. Nevertheless with confidence in 
God before Whom I stand, and in your mag- 

At present her condition is pitiable | 

First, be- | 

is an object of envy, and more free than he 
ought to be. And suppose that my present 
opponent is the most just of mer. For I am 
ashamed to accuse before Your Uprightness 
one whom yesterday I was supporting: but I 
do not know if it will seem to you just that 
punishment should be demanded for one man’s 
crimes from another, though these were quite 
strange to him, and had not even his consent ; 
from the man who has so stirred his household 
and been so upset as to have surrendered to his 
accuser more readily than the latter wished. 
Must Nicobulus or his children be reduced to 
slavery as his persecutors desire? Tam ashamed 
both of the ground of the persecution and 
of the time, if this is to be done while both 
you are in power and I have influence with you. 
Not so, most admirable friend, let not this be 
suggested to Your Integrity. But recognizing 
by the winged swiftness of your mind the 
malice from which this proceeds, and having 
respect to me your admirer, shew yourself a 
merciful judge to those who are being disturbed 
—for to-day you are not merely judging be- 
tween man and man, but between virtue and 
vice; and to this more consideration than by 
an ordinary man must be given by those who 
are like you in virtue and are skilful governors. 
And in return for this you shall have from me 
not only the matter of my prayers, which [ 
know you do not, like so many men, despise ; 
but also that I will make your government 
famous with all to whom [ am known. 

Ep. CLIY. 

To me you are Prefect even after the ex- 
piry of your term of office—for I judge things 
differently from the run of men—because you 
embrace in yourself every prefectoral virtue. 
For many of those who sit on lofty thrones are 
to me base, all those whose hand makes them 
base and slaves of their subjects. But many 
are high and lofty though they stand low, whom 
virtue places on high and makes worthy of 
greater government. But what have I to do 
with this? No longer is the great Olymptus 
with us, nor does he bear our rudder-lines. We 
are undone, we are betrayed, we have become 
again the Second Cappadocia, after having 
been made the First by you. Of other men’s 

a L.e. who are accessible tu bribery. 

482 

maiters why should £ speak? but who will 

cherish the old age of your Gregory, and ad- 

minister to his weakness the enchantment of — 

honours, and make him more honourable be- 
cause he obtains kindness for many from you ? 
Now then depart on your journey with escort 

and greater pomp, leaving behind for us many | 

GREGORY Nay NZ, 

tears, and carrying with you much wealth, and 
that of a kind which few Prefects do, good 
fame, and the being inscribed on all hearts, 
pillars not easily moved. If you preside over 
us again with greater and more illustrious rule, 
| (this is what our longing augurs), we shall offer 
to God more perfect thanks. 

PV ULC E S. 

GREGORY 

INDEX OF 

PSUBJEC 

NAZIANZEN. 

CTS. 

[INCLUDING THE INTRODUCTION AND NOTES. ] 

Abaris, tale of, 402. 

Adam, old and new, compared, 210. 

Acacius, heretic, 275. 

Aéschylus, 318. 

Aétians, heretical body, 281, 292. 

Aétius, heretic, professedly con- 
demned at Seleucia, 275; mas- 

ter of Eunomius in heresy, 280. | 

Aged, addressed and comforted, 235. 
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, 
4g otk ‘opposed by Arius, 350. 

Alexandria, the throne of S, Mark, - 

277 councik (at, under Atha- 
nasius, 283. 

Altar, approached by Gorgonia, 243; 
venerable table, 257; table of 
God for the offerings to God, 
4123; where Christ is honoured, 
243; God’s altars and sacra- 
ments, 4593; profaned by the 
violent Arians, 329. 

Alypiana, niece of Gregory Nazi- 
enzen, 464, 476 

Amazonius, admired by Gregory 
Nazienzen for learning, 465. 

Ambrdsep- Orr, 370: 

Ammianus Marc,, 234. 

Amphilochius, Bishop of Iconiun, 
458, 408; defends Kulalius at 
Parnassus, 469 ; Gregory’s let- 
ters to, 458, 464, 468, 469. 

Amphilochius (the Younger), 466, 
467 ; Gregory’s letter to, 467. 

Anagoge, a method of interpreta 
OTE 7% 

Anarchia, as applied to God, 301 

Anastasia, a church in Constanti- 
nople, 334, 394. 

Anaxagoras, 236. 

Animals, so wonderful in their in- 
stincts, 297. 

Antitypes of the Precious Body and | 

Blood, 2 

Anomcean Arians, 281, 284. 

Anthimus, 
245, 414, 452; opposes Gregory 
at Sasima, 195 ; ; yet favors 
Gregory, 454; ; opposes Basil, 
145, 245, 412, 452 Sq. 

Anthropolaters, name given to the 
Orthodox, 441. 

Antioch, church — troubled 
schism, 198, 466. 

Antony, founder of monasticism, 
270. 

Argument, its conditions stated, 301. 

with 

Bishop of Tyana, 195, | 

‘ Apollinarian heresy, 196, 197, 199, | 

308, 438; Gregory’s letters 
against, 437 sq. 

Apollinarians, at Constantinople, 
197, 198; at Nazianzus, 437 ; 
conditions of their reception in 
the Church, 459. 

Apollinarius, or Apollinaris, Bishop 
of Laodicea, 198; teacher of 
S. Jerome, 198 ; his own teach- 
ing, 198, 308, 437; 438; piss 
sible meaning and purpose of 
his teaching, 437 3; once much 
favoured, 198 ; his error regard- 
ing Christ’s humanity, 198, 199, 
314; excommunicated by a 
Roman Synod, 199. 

Arianism, the mother of heresics, 
196; called a madness, 212, 
236, 405; traced to a Jewish 
source, 350 ; revolt from Sabel- 
lianism, 350 ; how suspected in 
the Three Ilypostases, a7 3 its 
history and development, 350 ; 
its teaching on the Trinity, “360, 
a te 273, 275, 350 ; condemned 
at the eS, a Niczea, 350. 

Arians, their misuse of Origcn’s 
writings, 19253 were supported 
by the emperors, 196, 197; 
persecuted Gregory at Constan- 
tinople, 197, 471; boasted of 
their numbers, 328, 428 ; were 
troublesome and tumultuous, 
328, 329, 406 ; perverted dace 
trine of the use of words, 275 ; 

were deprived by Theodosius, 

| 198; their mobs were violent 
| and profane, 329, 406, 471; bey 
| 

introduced bishops, 463; Greg 
ory’s oration against, 328 sq 

Ariminum Council issued an ree 
Creed, 192. 

' Aristophanes, 256. 

Aristotle, 236, 
Arius, heretic, 212, 272, 301, 350; 

| accused of madness in doctrine, 
212, 258, 272, 405; his name 
‘*q profane spot, 
of Alexandria, 350% his errors 
GW tier Prinlty. 072. 373"5 Gon- 
demned at Alexandrian Coun- 
cil and Niczea, 350; his ex- 
communication and death, 272. 
Arsenius, Meletian Bishop, said to 

vanes priest. 

have been murdered by Atha: | 

_ Austerities of Gorgonia, 

nasius, 273, 
alive, 330. 
| Athanasius, "Bishop of Alexandria, 

189, 271; his festivals in the 
Fast, 269 ; compared with the 
patriarchs and prophets, 270 ; 
his habits and character, 270 
sq.; his early training, 270, 
2713 passed through the en- 
tire series of orders, 271; was 
led in an orderly fashion to the 
throne of S. Mark, 271, 272; 
opposed George of Cappado- 
Cla, 273, 274 >, ‘present. atthe 
Council of Niczea with his bish- 
op, 273; accused of murdering 
Arsenius, 273; 330°; his exiles, 
189, 263, 75: 246, °270, A103 
retired io the Egyptian monks, 

2743 his constancy in aid of 
the ee 276 sq.; popularly 

3305 produced 

eulogized beyond even the em- 
peror, 2773; great writer and 

controversialist, 199, 2703 his 
theme the Holy Trinity, 278, 
2793 reverence shown to hin, 
277, 2783 harmonious in his 
teaching, 277; banished hy 
Constantius, 278, 279; exiled 
by Julian and recalled by Jo- 
vian, 279 ; his death, 269, 280; 
wrote the Life of S. Antony, 
370; Gregory’s oration upon, 
269 sq. 
Atheism as related to theology, 
212; of Sabellius, 
Athens, its condition in the fourth 
century, Igo. 
Atoms, ancient 
291. 
Augustine, Bishop of Ilippo, for a 
time Manichean, 333; referred 
to, 345, 428. 

a2t2 

theories of, 185, 

SA Dy 

referred to, 426. 

Baptism, names, 360 sq. ; our il 
Minatron, 212; .255;_. 352, 35 
300 sq., 208, 373 S source of put 
ity, 242, 370+; thre “ies 364 ; the 
Gift, 364, 376; for the image 
of God renewed, 371 3 type of 
future glory, 397 ; its three im- 
Swe ae 281; its ceremonial, 
Rone 59 281 ; different ee 
of, 352; prepared for, 357, 365, 

Balsamon, 

Sali Site, 3a0) ab. abs. 
379s jobeaG 2a er delay to, 
aq. ; affusion and immer- 
ou, S03-7 x 
ambitions shown in, 
benefits in the sacrament, 360 
sq., 360 sy., 375 sq.3 of Christ, 
351 sq., 360 sq.; infant, 367, 
3703 times of administration 
become limited, 368 ; 
oration on, 351 sq, 
Basil, Bishop of Ancyra, 
Arian deposed, 276, 438. 
Basil, Bishop of Ceesarea, a Cappado- 
cian, sonof Basiland Emmelia, 
187, 398; educated at Casarea, 
Constantinople, and Athens, 
189, 3993 his friendship with 
Gregory Nazianzen, 188 sq., 260, 
395 sq-, protected by Gregory at 
the University in Athens, 190, | 
400, 401 ; visited the Holy Sep- | 
ulchre, 191, 404; a solitary in 
Pontus, Igt, 4043; formed his 
monastic rule, IgI, 415, 468 ; 
studies history with Gregory, 
Ig2; was made a Reader, 404 ; 
unwillingly ordained by Enu- 
sebius, 194, 404; probable mo- 
tive for the ordination, 194 ; re- 
tires to Pontus, 194 5 reconciled 
to Eusebius, 195, 405, 408; 
elected to succeed him, 195, 
205, 408; asserted his rights 
as Metropolitan, 195 ; erected | 
Sasima into a See and conse- 
crated Gregory for it, 195, 245, 
4533 himself consecrated by. 
Gregory (Elder), Eusebius of 
Samosata, and another, 408 ; 
resisted Valens dividing Cap-. 
padocia, 195, 410, 414; con- | 
duct as bishop, 408 sq. 3 awes | 
even the emperor, 412 ; fights | 
with the bishops, 412; en- | 
counters the civil, 413 3 victory 
over Valens’ Prefect, 4113 has 
sentence of exile cancelled, 412 ; 
fed the people in famine, 407 ; 
supported by the monks, 405 ; 
his prudence, learning, etc., 
403, 415 sq. 3 scene at his death | 
and burial, 196, 395, 460, 421, 
22 ; dates, 395, 400 ; compared 
with patriarchs, 6té), ALS‘ Sq. 5 
thought unsound on the Deity 
Gt the Ioly Ghost, 454; on 
panegyric by Gregory, 395 sq. 
present at the funeral oration 
on Gregory (Elder) ; Gregory’s | 
letters to, 446 sq. ; quoted, 226, 

i 

/ 
3( 

I 

5 

Semi- 

236; 284: ; ; | 
Bees and_ spiders’ instinctive skill, | 
he ; | 
Begotten and) Unbegotten in the! 
Godhead; 213,272; 373," 401 
sq. [God], 
Benoit, Abbe, 193, 245, 260, 345, | 

359, 381, 422. 

3ernard, 208, 

Bethlehem, little, metropolis of the | 
world, 260 ; on the road to] 
Paradise, 351 

desire for, 189, 367 ; | 
369 $ our | 

Gregory’s | 

| Catechumens, 

Christ, truly divine, 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN 

Dillius, 200, 233; Sousa, 

inthis: tires obo, 

Bishops, | their rule, 219; their 
election in tumult, 265, 266 ; 
consecration, 265, 2006, 

Blood of Christ, to whom offered, 
431. 

Blount, 354 

Body, Gregory’s synonyms for, 

214, 

| 2423 and soul, now and here- 
after, 236, 255% ; 
| Bosporius, Bishop of Colonia, 

friend of Gregory Nazianzen, 
469, 470, 473; assisted at Eu- 
lalius’ consecration, 469 3 ac- 

cused and acquitted, 469, 474 ; | 

called before the civil courts, 
nee es 
Bright, opinion on fourth century 

documents, 

213, 279, 

199; quoted, Ig9, 

Cwsarea, wrath of Julian against, 
265, 266; saved by the bold- 
ness of Gregory (Elder), 

Cesarius, brother of Gregory Nazi- | 

anzen, 188, 204, 229; educated 
at eu and Alexandria, 
188, 
training, 230, 231 5 renownedas 
astudent, 189, 231 ; court phy- 

229, 231; inherited true} 

sician at Constantinople, 191 ; | 

22g, 232; returned with Greg- 
ory to Nazianzus, Ig1, 
2; went back to court and 
was ee ge by Julian, tor, 
194, 201, 229, 232, 233, 457 3 
retires from the court, 194, 220, | 
933; B34; 457 4 tus. baptism; 
195; 22 
preferment in Bithynia, 195, 
229, 234, 458; offered appoint- 
ment by Constantius, 229, 233; 

27 
~-Q, 
2 

| 

defeats Julian in argument, 
229; is to be tried on Julian’s 
feturii, 2343. dies; 195; 220, 

236, 2343 lédves 
to the poor, 195, 236, 464, 405; 
is buried at Nazianzus, 195, 
234.3 honoured in Constanti- 
nople, 2323 on the roll of the 
Saints, 254 ; panegyric by Greg- 
oryy 230 Sq. ; Gregory’s letters 
to, 457 sq. 

Cain, his sevenfold 

999° 

punishment, 

in SP ee phe 

Cappadocia, the province divided, 

. 187, 195, 245, 452. : 

Carterius, teacher of Gregory Nazi- 
anzen in Cesarea, 188. 

_Casuistry rules cases, 208 sq., 226, 

os Ae Bea 
Chance, as a ruler, 248. 
Chanting the Psalter, 242. 

| Chariot-racing described, 286. 

Chastity, for men as well as for 
women, 239 8q.5 343- 

G horepiscopi, 473. 

198, 199, 301 

Sq.) 343, 353 54-5 4253 truly 

human, 198, 199, 307 sq., 345 

8q., 350 425, 426, 437 $q.; 

9, 234 ‘458, 4593 has_ 

his property | 

A tne saciiice. 202, 223) 351, 
429; to whom was he offered, 
431; how truly incarnate, 209, 
210, 437 sq.3 born of a Virgin 

mother, 210; 301 308 aan 
345, 349) 357, 360, 3775 the 
Only Begotten Son of the 

Father, 31.6.3--his Sacrifice-com- 
memorated as Antitype, 223 ; 
still present with Ilis people, 

255, 250:5 ins mere saaboaieg 
intercession, 256, 314, 315; 
worshipped by the Arians, 239 : 
Ilis title and power, 22 the 

mediator, 270; the Second 
Adam, 309 ; as a King and a 
Dervalit, sro2 suffering i in obes 
dience, 311, B12, 5304 * stiffered 
being tempted, 312; Ilis Can 
and Cannot, 312, 313, 316, 317; 
came to do His Father’s will, 
3f3; 33935. has 4 Buiman. wall, 
314; His Ignorance, 315, 317 ; 
Ifis names considered, 317 ; 
how like Melchisedec, ot7 3 ‘ 
tg ine of antinomies, 338 ; 

be honoured in his Lhauillee. 
3393 was betrayed and gave 

ilimself up, 350; an Example 
and aid, 351; honoured all 
states by taking them, 360; 
the true Paschal Lamb, 428 Sq.5 

typefied under the Law, 352 ; 
true man in his Ascension, 380 ; 
orations on_ his Baptism, 352 
Sq. 

Christian, teaching so varied, 212 ; 
priest's office and work, 223 ; 
union with Christ, 228 ; trials 

and difficulties, 233, 262 ; con- 
stancy not obstinacy or coward- 

ice, 234; reverence for holy 
things, 257; persecutions in 
various forms, 2623; life for 
eternity, 237, 2553; our high- 
ést title, 243, 

Christians, often rude and un- 

worthy, 206, 221 ; in hypocrisy, 
206 ; objects of contempt, 221, 
222; live for the future, 2 
2553 have one heaven, hope, 
and citizenship, 232. 
Christmas called Theophany, 
Chrysostom borrowed ideas from 
Gregory Nazienzen, 194, 200; 
unpopular at Constantinople, 
287 ; quoted, 231, 344. 
Church must have order and au- 
thority, 205 ; arrangements in, 
226, 377, 404, 407; spiritual 
status in, 226, 377; the mighty 
Body of Christ, 271; not de- 
fined: ‘by mumbers, 2285. its 
teaching, how corrupted, 272 ; 
likened to a collection of 
beasts, 214. 
Church buildings described, 

, 

iat 

207, 

Chinn of Anastasia in Constanti- 
nople, 336, 397; of the Holy 
Apostles, 397; of S. Orestes 
at Mte=daunus) Aras) .of the 
martyrs at Nazianzus, 459, 

Cleanthes, 236. 

Cledonius, priest of Nazianzus, 
199 3 two letters to, 201, 439, 

_ 443- 

Gleincncel, 211, 226,233, 252, 
260, 415. 

Glertetts, 240: 

Ccenobites in communities, yet re- 
lated to lrerimits, 211, 274. 

Combefis, 225. 

Confession, as part of repentance, | 

252; its excellence, 253, 375 3 
self-conviction, 253; for heal- 
ing, 205, 209, 252, 375. 
Confusion of tongues reversed at 
Pentecost, 384, 385. 
Consecration of Bishops, 265, 266, 
267; by three Bishops, 267. 
Constantine, the. Emperor, 212 ; 
his equestrian statuc, 330. 
Constantinople, its religious condi- 

tion in the fourth century, 196, | 
286, 387 sq.3 its court influ-| 

290. * 
“59-3 

ences, I9I Sq., 
General Council, 275, 281, 284, 
387 ; the council's anathemas, 

A 

Consubstantial, belonging to the 

Son, 192, 280, 281; and to the | 

Holy Spirit, 381. 

Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, ban- 
ished, 358. 

Corybantes in Greek Mythology, 

£4, 

Gaunet Of Nigied; 285, “B95 ; 
Constantinople, 275, 281, 

Creation of the world by God, 
303) 347) 356, 360, 
angels and men, 360 sq., 383 
sy. 424 sq.3 of plasma, 360 ; 
man’s purpose in, 433. 

Creed (Arian), issued at Ariminum, 
492 ; at Seleucia, 192; at An- 
tioch, 260. 

Cross represented by Moses, 245. 

Cynics, their teaching, 288. 

Cyprian, 269, 323. 

Cyril; Alex, 213s 

ed 

harassed | 
by the Arians, 196; the second | 

Egypt, fertility and favour, 334 sq. | 

| 

| 

Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, deposed 

hy Constantius, 276 ; quoted, 
213, 308. 

Dedalus, Gnossian choirs of, 2098. 

Damianus, Bishop of Rome, 199, 
356, 4433 excommunicates 
Apollinarius, 199, 443. 

Dead, their obsequics and treat- 
ment, 234, 2355 Arig: AOS 
nual memofials, 235; prayer 

| 

for their entry into bliss, 235, | 

244, 4223 in unknown light, 
225; not to be mourned for, 

236; happier out of the world, 
3 enter on a sense of hap- 

SRS | 
43) 
6 ; have anticipations 

piness, 

Lae | 

me) 

of happiness and receive new | 

INDEX OF SUBJECTS. 

4 

| Pi Stys Soo eGos Ml te Le 
| feared in Christ, 268. 

| Degrees as applicable to Godhead, 
| 260, 328; in the priesthood, 
| 404, 459. 

| Delphian tripod silent on its own 
fate, 353. 

Democritus, 236. 
/ Demophilus, Arian bishop, — ex- 

pelled from the see of Constan- 
tinople, 248, a 
Demosthenes, Prefect of Valens, 

411-413; Vicar of Pontus and | 
eneiny of Gregory Nyssa, 460, | 

Dianius, Bishop of Caesarea, 265. 

Diocwsarea, Roman name of Naz- | 

lanzus, 187. 

Direction of souls so difficult, 208. 

Sq,; 22%, 
Disciplina, penitential, 209 ; of the | 

secret, 221, 258. | 

Divine nature eternal, 235 ; studies | 

for the Christian, 205, 266 ; 
judgments on disobedience, 
B46 Bir} are avetted by xe- 
pentance, 250 sq.; for the sake 
of mercy, 252 ; judgments are 
to be considered, 253; divine 
things unchangeable and _ eter- 
nal, 268. 

mystically 

Sarthquakes, applied, 

2 

3 
Easter, the day of the Resurrection, 

203, 422, 423; great festival, 
203, 308, 422, 423; queen of | 
days, 263 ; the Lord’s Passover, 
4235; oration on, 422 sq, 

Belecties, BT 3: 

Economy, a certain reserve in 
teaching, 247, 258, 287, 3206, 
381; its different theological | 
senses, 308, | 

Egyptian idols destroyed, 308 ; 
sailors addressed by Gregory, 
334 

Eleusius, 

SC. 
Bishop of Cyzicus, 428 ; 

Semi-Arian, Macedonian, and | 

yet much respected, 438. 

Elis Greensis, 215, 219,226, 295, | 

_ 308, 302, 315, 325, 357. 
Emanation, as a theological term, 
_ 391; 3793 Gnostic, 379. : 
Immelia, mother of $. Basil, 398. 

Enoch desired to know God, 394, | 

ar 

a5 
Epiphanius apologises for Apolli- 

narius, 437; quoted, 292, 308. 

an- |) Ephesus, council of, 308. 

Epicurus, Athenian philosopher, 236, 
288; his teaching, 288, 291. 

Epiphany, different uses of the 
word, 344. 
Episcopal elections, 265, 266, 271 ; 

consecration by three bishops, 

2673 office parental and spirit- 

ual, 268. 

visions, 236, 2443 precede the Error, sources Ol, 2 

living, 269, 280: their 
commenced in rhetoric, 
280, 422. 

Death as regarded by Christians, 

cultus 
268, | 

Essence, how predicated of the 
Godhead, 279 sq., 301 sq., 
| 3353 how different from Hy- 

| postasis, 279, 355. 

487 

Ieternity of God, 347, 423, 424. 

Kucharist, how honoured by the 
faithful, 2575; lime and place 
of mystery and intercession, 
263; how celebrated by Greg- 
ory the Elder, 263; action in 
consecrating, 264; grief mod- 
erated in the presence of, 257. 

Euclides, 236, 

Eudoxius, rhetorician and friend of 
Gregory Nazianzen, 465. 

| Eulalius, succeeded Gregory at Na- 

Rianzs;. 19S; Sot Ags; “AGT, 

473, 4743 cousin of Gregory 

and Cwsarius, 458; election 

contested, 469, 474. 

| Eulogy, rules and conditions of 

230, 230 5¢., 254, 268, 273, 

EG, 107; ost) 
sq.3. Opposed by Gregory, 280 
sq.3 Whence and how devel- 
oped, 282, 286. 

Eunomians favoured in Constanti- 
nople, 1973 to be rebaptised, 
281; anathematised by the 
council of Constantinople, 284 ; 
Gregory’s oration against, 284 
sq. 

Eunomius, Cappadocian Bishop of 
Cyzicus, 281; some of his 
arguments, 251, 2925 retired 
to Chalcedon, 281, 

Eunuchs, their influence, 275, 342, 
5433 bribed. agaitist “the 
Church, 2753 not meritorious 
iii theif chastity, o4%,; 243 3 
Chamberlains of Constantius, 
2753 represent higher truths, 
343s 344+ 

Euphrantes, Bishop of Tyana, 474. 

Eupraxius, disciple of Eusebius Sam- 
osata, 463. 

Euripides, 353, 459. 

Eusebius, Bishop of Cisarea, 194, 
448; his character sketched, 
405 ; made bishop though un- 

| baptised layman, 265 ; ordains 

S. Basil, 1943 quarrels with 5, 
Basil, 194, 405 ; succeeded by 
S Basil, 266, 408, 449 ; dies, 
195, 408, 449 ; Gregory’s letters 
to, 448 sq. 

Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata, 330 ; 

| champion of orthodoxy, 451; 
assisted. at S; Basil's conse- 
cration, 330, 4513 banished by 
Valens, 4633; appealed to by 
the two Gregories on behalf of 
S. Basil, 451; Gregory’s let- 
ters to, 451, 462. 

Eustathius of Sebaste, deposed, 276, 
284, 468; his heretical teach- 
ing, 284, 4383 shifting in opin- 
ion and policy, 468. 

“utyches, his heretical 
210, 

Suzoius, fellow-student of Gregory 
Nazianzen, 189. 

Evil, its definition, 347. 

Exorcism, medicine of, 369, 373. 

Experience teaches caution, 267. 

Ezekiel teaches warning to the 
priests, 218, 219. 

| 

’ 

| Funomian heresy, 
| 

teaching, 

— 

— 

488 

Famine and pestilence, divine judg- 
ments, 248 sq. 

Fatherhood, in relation to the son, | 
306 ; in relation to the Trinity, | 
EOS, 21S, 205, $01, 8q., 936.80, 

Fasting before Easter, 371. | 

Taustinus, Bishop of Iconium, 238, 
243 ; witness to Gorgonia’s cure, 
243. 

Female modesty, prudence, orna- 
ments, tC, 241, Sey. 261. 
Festivals for the remembrance of 

God, 355 ; annual for the saints, 
235, 269; of different kinds, 
423. 

Fire of eternal punishment, 373. 

Fifth element suggested, 291. 

Flavian, Bishop of Antioch, 466. 

Forbes, Bishop, 308. | 

Foretaste of glory felt now, 244; of 
bliss in the place of waiting, 
236. | 

Forgiving spirit, its power and bless- | 
ing, 262. | 

Fortune, Temple of, at Ceesarea, de- 
stroyed, 266, 

Friends should have justice done - 
them, 238, 243; have one soul 
in two bodies, 402. 

i : | 
Faith, a gift of baptism, 259. | 
| 

Gabriel, 209. 

Generation of the Son, 283, 286, 
301 sq., 310, 375 ; fear in using 
the term, 375. | 

George of Cappadocia, Arian in- | 
truder,* 273 6q,,°470%5 his con- 
duct at Alexandria, 410 ; his in- | 
solence toward Athanasius, 274, 
275, 410; deceived the emper- | 
or and was supported by hin, | 
275 ; bribed heavily, 275 ; over- | 
ran Egypt and the East, 275, | 

410 ; was murdered at the death | 

| 

| 
| 

of Constantius, yet not by Chris- | 
tians, 277. 

George, deacon of Nazianzus, 470. 

George, layman of Paspasus, sent to | 
Gregory Nazianzen, 474. | 

God, Trinity in Unity, 193, 259, | 
2472, 273, 270. 2S0\sG,, 2O5 Sq. 571 
301 Sq., 336, 347, 351 S4., 375, 
442; Three in Properties, 405 ; 
immeasurable, 260, 272, 273 
290, 423 ; incorporeal, 291, 292; | 
infinite in all perfections, 345, 
347, 423 ; in heaven and earth, | 
252, 388 ; cannot be Three, 322, 
347, 405; rules the world in 
His Providence, 248 sq.3 can- 
not be defined, 289, 290, 294, 
206, 315, 423; the names of 
Ilis essence, 316; is beyond 
reason, 290, 294 ; fills all things, 
291 ; whether in place or out of | 
place, etc,, 292; the form, what, | 
295; the council and essence, 
295 ; the unbegotten, begotten 
and Proceeding One in, 272, | 
273, 301 sq., 316, 320 ; whether 
anarchia, monarchia, or poly- | 
archia, 301 ; beyond the idea of | 
time, 301, 346, 347; cannot do 

GR EGOK ¥ 

evil, 3133 mot measured by 
numbers, 326; not grasped ly 
human speech or thought, 324; 
325, 3673 conclusions regarding, 
251 sq., 288 sq.; different ternis 
defined as belonging to, 280; 
philosophisings upon, 285 sq.;_ 
conceived by the Greek mind, 
319; loves purity and truth, | 
405; glory unapproachable, 
ree 

God, crucified, 433. 

God’s house of many mansions dis- | 
cussed, 233. 

Gods in heathendom, whence de- 
rived and how, 293 sq. 

Gorgonia, sister of Gregory Nazian- 

zen, 188, 201, 204 ; her husband 
Alypius, two sons bishops and 
three daughters, 238, 464; 
Faustinus, Bishop of Iconiun, 
her spiritual father, 238, 243 ; 
trained in virtue at home, 239 ; 
guide to her husband and ac- 
tive in acts of piety, 240 sq.; 
miracles related of her, 242, 
243; obtains baptism for her 
husband, 2443; death at Iconi- 
um and its scenes, 2443 on the | 
roll of the saints, 254. 
Greeks formed a conception of God, | 
319; believe in one godhead, | 
322; worship demons, 322, 
354, 375; deify bad passions, | 
378; their mythologies, 3533) 
their mythical tales, 4o2. | 
Gregory (the Elder), Bishop of Nazi- | 
anzus, 187; belonged to the | 
sect of Hypsistarians or Hypsis- | 
tians, 187, 239, 254, 256; con- | 
verted through Nonna, his wife, | 
187, 239, 254, 256, 260; had | 
Gregory in his priesthood, 188 ; | 
in his baptism was also or- 
dained, 258, 259; always just 
and liberal, 256, 260 sq.; his 
pastoral fidelity in a woodland 
rustic church, 259 sq. 3 thought 
worthy of miracles, 263 ; night- 
ly austerities, 265; built the 
Church of Nazianzus, 267 ; sub- 
scribed an. Arian créed,. but 
apologised and drew back, 102, 
260; had need of Gregory’s re- 
turn from Constantinople, 192. 
204, 225 sq.; has Gregory his 
coadjutor at Nazianzus, 195, 
BOA, 225, 19aG SCs reheat 
in Gregory’s writings, 204, 230 ; 
much revered by his son Greg- 
OLy.204,, 2200Sq., ser ensg. pes 
5q.5 ‘xesisted: Julian, 265, 260-; 
saved Czeesarea from Julian, 
2606 ; promoted the election of 
S. Basil to -Cosarea, aga scied, 
LOS, 240; 25454207, egy. Avis 
forty-five years in the priest- 
hood, 267 ; funeral oration pro- | 

nounced upon, 255 sq. 

Gregory (the Younger) Bishop of | 
Nazianzus, his life, 187 sq. ;| 
father Gregory, mother Nonna, 
sister Gorgonia, brother Czsa- | 

NAZLANZEN, 

ius, 187 Sq., 229 sq., 238 3 ded- 
icated to the priesthood before 
his birth, 188, 258; first edu- 
cated at Caesarea, under Carte- 
Tus. 180,- 230 + “ins friendship 
commenced with §, Basil, 1&8, 
255 Sia. 395° SG 5. well “to 
Alexandria and Athens, 189 ; 
dedicated himself in a storm to 
baptism, 189, 264; date of 
baptism uncertain, 189; pro- 
tected S, Basi at the “aiver- 
sity in Athens, 189, 400; un- 
popular among the students, 
196; his opinion of young Ju- 
lian, 190, 227, 387; went to 
Constantinople, 191, een. rid 
a desire for solitude, 191, 206, 
245, 267, 4533 studicd Script- 
ure with S. Basil, 192, 402, 
4725; sent a copy of Origen’s 
Philocalia to Theodore, Bishop 
of Tyana, 102, 472 3 yak. an 
Basil’s monastery, 192, 194; 
returned to Nazianzus, 192, 
200, 204, 225 sq.; guided his 
father from Arianism, 192, 6 Cele 
260 ; was unwillingly ordained 
to the priesthood, 193, 194, 
204, 208; considered it an act 
of tyranny, 207, 2223 escaped 
to. Pontus, but returned to 
Nazianzus, 193, 204 sq., his 
first sermon there, 193, 204 sq., 
227 Sq. 3 writes on the priestly 
office, 194, 200, 204, 208 sq. ; 
aids his father against Julian, 
194; Vicar-General under his 
father, 226, 245, 406; recon- 
ciled Basil and Eusebius Ce- 
sarea, 195, 405, 409 ; promoted 
Basil’s election at Ccsarea, 
195, 268, 449 sq., 462 ; unwill- 
ingly consecrated to Sasima by 
Basil, 195, 268, 453; feeling 
against Basil, 195, 453; re- 
sisted by Anthimus, 195, 245, 
454; made coadjutor to his 
father at Nazianzus, 195, 225, 
245 sq., set free at his father’s 
death, 195; preached his 
father’s funeral oration, 195, 
254 sq. ; withdrew to Seleucia, 
196 ; called to Constantinople, 
and his work there, 196, 197, 
385 $q-, 4713 was unpopular, 
EQS, 320, AVE > epnepascd 10 
leave, 198, 385 ; enthroned ly 
Theodosius the Emperor, 198, 
378, 3853; president of the 
Second Ecumenical Council, 
198, 385 ; resigned the presi- 
dency, 198, 385, 469 ; retired 
to Nazianzus, 198, 268, 461, 
469, 473, 4753 then to Arian- 
ZS, LOS, 422) Ayan hisscdeaiinn 
199, 422 ; his dates, 188, 192, 
103)" 100,220.45 2317, 376, 422. 
was opposed to Episcopal sy- 
nods, 478; wrote against the 
military tax, 466; his usual 
titles, .187, 280; his appear- 
ance and character, 199 sq. ; 

sy POS 

EE ae oe 

felt himself unfit to rule, 207, 
222 ; bequeathed his property 
to the poor, 200; had charge 
of Cesarius’ property for the 
sane, 464, 465; his writings 
Alte 1S: IiteituLe, 200, 201 5 as 
a teacher on the Incarnation, 
193, 197, 199, 279 5q., 3903 
as a teacher on the Trinity, 
197 sq., 280 sq. ; Opposed to 
the Eunomians and Macedo- 
nians, 280; persecuted by the 
Arians, 329 
collections of letters from him 

and Basil, 477; Theological | 

Orations, 280 sq.; Funeral 
orations on his_ father, 
254 sq. 3 on Gorgonia, 238 sq. 5 
bi. Cessanius; “Os, 230. 8q.'5 
Orations on the Theophany, 
344 sq. 3; on the Holy Lights 
and Baptism, 352 sq. ; on Pen- 
tecost, 378 sq. ; on returning to 
Nazianzus from Pontus, 193, 
204 sq., 227 sq. 3; on leaving 
Constantinople, 385 sq. 5 sy- 
nopsis of the Theological ora- 
tions, 282, 284. 

Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, Cappa- 
docian, 187, 4593 induced 
Gregory to go to Sasima, 245 ; 
professor of rhetoric, 459 5 was 
in Basil’s monastery, then con- 
secrated to Nyssa, 459, 460 ; 
Gregory Nazienzen, letters to, 
459; quoted, 239, 254, 308. 

Gregory the Great, borrowed from 
Gregory Nazienzen for his work 
on the priesthood, 194, 200, 208. 

Gregory, deacon, friend of Gregory, 
200. 

Gregory, Arian, nominated for Alex- 
andria, 2 

Grief moderated before the Eucha- 
TISt,. 257. 

Gyges, King of Lydia, 402. 

3. 

Habakkuk denouncing wickedness, 
aioe 

ITarvest, picture of an unseasonable, 
249. 
Ileavenly glory and blessedness, 
239, 240; One to all, 331. 
Ifelladius, Bishop of Ceesarea, ac- 
cuses Eulalius of heresy, 4609, 
474, 475- 

TIcraclitus, 236. 

Heretics oppressed the Catholics, 
400 sq. 

Hermaphrodite god of Marcion, 
320. 

Hermits, and how related to Coeno- 
ikea we 2Ubs 

Ifieron, philosopher, 236. 

Iesiod, 256. 

Ilippocrates, 210, 

History a guide to conduct, 227. 

Holy Ghost, in relation to the Trin- 
ity, 193, 301 sq., 381; is God, 
247, 318, 321, 382; His ema- 
nation and emission, 3013; by 
procession, 301, 320; the Para- 
clete, 327; as related to Christ 

sq., 4603; carly | 

195; | 

INDEX OFF SUBJECTS. 

and no strange god interpo- 
lated, . 318, 327; 304 5. reserve 
in teaching Ilis divinity, 247, 
381, 3825 an object of direct 
worship, 318, 321, 3525 as an- 

otlier comforter, 353-5 lol a 
créature, 319, 321, 394 sq. $ 

blasphemy against, 327 5 2 gift 
in confirmation, 327 3 the guide 
of life, 245 ; as taught by Greg- 
ory, 283, 254, 380 sq. ; shares 
with the Son in creation and 
resurrection, 384; beyond the 
idea of time, 301, 318; theo- 
logical oration upon, 318 sq. 
IIoly Lights, oration upon, and its 
date, 351 sq. 
Homceon, Acacian, 275. 
Homeeousion, Arian, 275. 
Ifomo-ousion, Catholic, 275, 280. 

Hope greater than our deserts, 237 3 

one for all, 331, 332. 
Horse-racing, 343, 392, 400. 
Ilosea, teaching on false teachers, 

217. 
Hospitality a Christian duty, 241. 
Human nature, how related to evil 

| and good, 207. 

Humanity of Christ, false teaching 
upon, 198. 

Iypostatis, theological term de- 
fined, 279, 280, 301 sq.) 355, 
391. 

Ilypsistarians or Iypsistians, 187, 
254; were they idolaters, 239, 
286; tenets professed once by 

| Gregory the Elder, 187, 239, 

254, 250; their tenets, 256. 

Idolaters of Egypt, 335, 3533 of 
Grecian mythologies, 353 ; how 
they developed their ideas, 
293; fled from Gregory the 
Elder, 239. 

Tlumination of baptism, 212. 

ous, 328. 
Immaculate conception of Mary un- 
known, 349. 
Immortality, 296, 297. 
Impossibilities in God, 312, 313- 
Incarnation of Christ true and com- 
plete, 198, 199, 308, 338, 349, 
439 sq. 3 not a mere grace, 440 ; 

what purpose to humanity, 210, 
440, 441 ; for the second Adam, 

the human soul, 210, 440, 441 ; 
Apollinarian, against, 198. 
Infinity as seen in God, 347. 
Instinct, so powerful in brutes, 297. 
Instruction easy on the pure mind, 
213; difficult on the impure 
and on false teaching, 213, 214. 
Intercession, public, 243, 254, 263 5 
parental, 230-232, 240, 254; 
allowed to the deceased, 253- 

sacred rites, 263. 

Jerome at Constantinople, 
quoted, 344, 353- 

Illustrations, imperfect and danger- | 

depraved by heresies, 210 ; for. 

309 sq-, 348, 4255 through | 

256, 268; mingling with the 

198 ; 

489 

‘Jerusalem, the heavenly, 239, 240. 

Jew did not pronounce God’s name, 
SES: 

Jewish sacrifices and offerings, 426, 

| 427. 

Job, an example of suffering, 275- 

Joel, on penitence, 

John the Baptist as Christ’s fore- 
runner, 270, 357. 

John Chrysostom, 379. 

Jonah, as messenger to Nineveh, 
225, 220; 

Jovian, the Emperor, 197, 223, 279, 
283; pious and gentle, 279 3 

| recalls Athanasius and receives 

a synodal letter, 278, 279. 

Judaism, its poverty in theology, 

| 212. 

Judgments, divine, 248, 249 ; their 
causes to be considered, 253, 
254. 

Julian, Emperor, contemporary of 
Gregory Nazianzen, 188, 457 3 
his character and aims, Igo, 

| 200, 233, 265 ; Gregory’s opin- 

ion of him, Igo, 277, 3873 the 
apostate, 265 ; made Emperor, 

194, 265, 4573 undermined 

Christianity, 194, 233, 265, 277, 

4573; apparently impartial, 197, 

233, 265 ; of unhappy memory, 

33 3 tried to seduce Cisarius, 

194, 233, 457 3 threatened Nazi- 

anzus, 194, 265; threatened all 

opposing him, 194, 233, 265 3 

persuaded by cruelty, 233, 265 5 

incensed at the Caesarea elec- 

tion, 266; was cruel to the 

Catholics, 267, 386, 387 5 re- 

newed the military tax, 466 ; 

was defeated and slain, 194, 

279, 3873 incidents of his 

death, 200. 

Kiss of peace, how guarded, 257. 
Knowledge, man’s advance in, 348, 
A 

354- 
Kronos in Greek mythology, 353. 

| 
| 

| 
Labyrinth of Crete, 403. 

-Lavers at church doors for ablu- 
tions, 396. 

Law, the, its spiritual purpose, 427, 

| 433+ 

Leaven, why cast out, 425. 

| Legal prefiguring the Christian, 352, 

375: 

Lent, the fast of forty days, 371. 

Leo, 308. 

/Leontius, Bishop of Czsarea, 258, 

~) 
Wm 

| Leuenclavius, 311. 

| Liddon, 213. 

, Light is in God and in other beings, 
361 3 asrelated to baptism, 212, 
258, 352, 359 $q-, 368, 373 84. 

“Tike” in godhead, a term of 
semi-Arianism, 275. 

Life, short, sometimes a blessing, 
210; short always compared 
with eternity, 235, 255; and 
death in succession, 208, 

490 

Little things made honourable, 330 
Sc. 

Liturgical forms, 257, 267, 407. 

Litwey, 267, aor. of St, Basil 
of of, Chrysostom, 407. 

Loaves, basket of pure 
crossed in blessing, 264. 

Logos in relation to Gad, 316, 320. 

Low Sunday, how named in the, 
fourth century, 264, 

Lucius intruded at Alexandria, 329. | 

and | 

Sie 
white, | 

Mansel, 370. 

Marriage, good one is God's gift, 
256; forms the closest union, 
255. | 

Martyrdom not to be sought, 397 ; 
nearly attained by $, Basil, | 
413. | 

Martyrs in Pontus, 397. 

Matter not eternal, 291. 

Melchisedec, a type made good in 
Christ, 317, 345 3 patristic in- 
terpretation, 345. 

Meletius, Bishop of Antioch, pre- 
sided at Second Ecumenical 
Council, and died, 198. | 

Men, different classes to be differ- 
ently dealt with, 211. 

Methodius, 225. 

Micah’s argument 
teachers, 217, 

Midas, tale of, 4o2. 

Ministry required in the Church 

against false 

a 
205. | 
Minos, King of Crete, 403. | 
Miracles in God’s Providence, 243: 

connected with Gregory the | 

Elder, 263, 267; connected Nicctas, 203, 204, 347, 349, 379, | 

with Gorgonia, 242 sq. 

Mixing wine and water, 214. 

Models by examples, 207, 249 sq., 
256 sq.3 difficulty of being’ 
such, 208. | 

Molione, sons of, 403, | 

Monarchia as related to God, 301, 
322, 347. 

Monasteries of Egypt and the The- | 
baid, 274. | 

Monastic communities in Egypt, | 
274; rule of S. Antony, 2903) 
rule of S. Basil, 191, 405, 415, 
468. 

Money applied by S. Nonna, 261. 

Monks as related to Coenobites and 
hermits, 211, 270; the over- 
zealous part of — Gregory’s | 
church, 260, 276; their influ- 
ence, 455 their share in Epis- 
copal elections, 266; called | 
Nazarites, 266, 394, 405 ; at | 
Nazianzus opposed their Bish- | 
op’s Arianism, 192; received | 
Athanasius in exile, 274, B75 3 
were received by Basil into. 
cells, 413, 459. 

Mono-ousion, 280, 

Montant, 211, 

Montanus, Phrygian enthusiast and 
heretic, 397. 

Mother of God, its legitimate mean- 

| 
| 

| 
| 

ing, 199. 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

comfort 

A 

~~ 

to 
55, 207 sq. 

Mourners, Christian, 
235 St 
Cys Oar 

teries, the great, 

Chistes. sacinice:; 22 how 

» performed in the fourth cen- 
tury, 2633 celebrated by the 
priest, 263 ; Grecian and Egyp- 
tian, 353; : 

Mystery, christian use of the word, 
203; ‘‘time of the mystery,” 
263 ; of human life, 240, 

Mystic numbers, 379, 428. 

Mozl 

Mys related to 

Name of Christ, its power, 222. 

Nature, used as to God, 28; the 
first nature, 2935 two natures. 
in one Person by the Incarna- 
tion, 338; Manichean differ- 
ences of, 347. 

Nazianzus, called Diocesarea by 
the Romans, 187 ; | maintained 
the faith, 194 ; suffered froma 

plague of hail, 247; was a’ 
small poor place, 330, 346; 

had church built by Gregory, 
267 3 was to lose its civil rights, 

479. 

Neale and Littledale, 373. 

Nectarius, catechumen, — elected 
Bishop of Constantinople, 108, 
469 ; Gregory’s letters to, 201, 
438, 469 sq. 

Nestorius’ teaching, 210, 308. 

Newman, 270, 27 

Nicwa, shaken by earthquake, 220, 
234, 458 ; Council of, 258, 275 ; 
council of men united by the 
Iloly Ghost, 273. 

_ 423) 427. 
Nicobulus, Gregory’s nephew, 464, 
476, 4773; published a collec- 
tion of Basil and Gregory’s let- 

tere, 479, 

Night hours of prayer at Constan- | 

tinople, 287, 382. 

Nonna, wife of Gregory the Elder, 
and mother of Gregory Nazian- 
zen, Cxsarius and Gorgonia, 
187, 195, 204, 230, 239 3 charac- 
ter sketched by Gregory, 230 
Sq., 239, 2568q., 261; had pray- 
erful care of her children, 230- 
292, 2643. ‘nided.dn Her hus: 
band’s conversion, 187, 239, 
254, 258; survived her hus- 
band, 2543; received Casarius’ 
honoured remains, 234 ; a good 
partner to Gregory the Elder, 

256, 257, 2603 sought piety for | 

ornament, 257; her reverence 
for holy things, 257, 261 ; liber- 
ality to the poor, 261 ; interced- 
ing for her husband’s recovery, 
263 ; miraculous feeding in a 
vision, 264; dies, 195. 

Notus, author of Sabellianism, 350. 

Novatian, a priest, friend of Nova- 
tus, intruded at Rome, 333, 
358. 

Novatian heresy, 196, 197, 333, 358, 
359° 

_ Novatians at Constantinople, 107; 
| 359; violent at Rome, 333; 
called themselves Cathari or 
_ Puritans, 333, 358. 

Novatus, heretic, first rebelled 
against his bishop §, Cyprian, 

2c8 

_ 333, 358. 
Nunbers, honours to, 270 Sh. 428, 

Oecumenius, 345. 
| Olympius, governor of Cappadocia 
Secunda, 4373 correspondent 
of Gregory, 437 sq. ; letters to, 
445) 477) 478, 479, 480, 481. 
Orders, minor, 271, 
Ordination, how a mystery, 203. 
Orestes and Pylades, 4o2. 
, Origen, as a Commentator, 192 ; his 
Philocalia, 192, 472; not Arian, 
| Ig2 ; quoted, 215, 225. 

Ornaments, female, 241, re 207, 
476. 
Orthodox persecuted by Constan- 

tius, 274, 2753 by Julian, 267, 

386, 387. 

Painters by words, 207, 272. 
Painting the human face, 241, act, 

| 261. 

Paradise of Eden interpreted, 348. 
Parties in teaching, 215, 279. 
Pascha explained, 426, 

_ Passover explained for Christians, 

4206 sq. 

Pastoral care requires good judg- 

| ment, 210-212, 

Paul, the Apostle, his life and teach- 
ing, 215-217; in the Third 

Heaven, 295, 338. 

Paulinus, Bishop of Antioch, 443, 
469. 

Pegasus, tale of, 402. 

Pelops in Greek mythology, 353. 

Pentecost, festival of, 368 ; oration 

| on, 378 sq. ; the coming af the 
Spirit, 380 sq. 

People, uneducated, should lcave 
deep questions, 229, 

Person, defined in theology, 355, 391; 
three in one Godhead, 272, 273, 
3533 their relations, 288, 355. 

Petavius, 208, 210, 212, 279, 301, 
306, 308, 311, 315, 405. 

Peter, Bishop, expelled from Alex- 

andria, 329; sent Bishop to 

| place Maximus at Constanti- 

nople, 334. 

| Philosophizings about 

world, etc., 285-288. 

Philosophy as understood by the 

fathers, 205. 

Philagrius, Cappadocian consul in 

| Alexandria, 277. 

Photinus and his heresy, 334. 

Physicians of soul and body com- 
pared, 208-210, 

Pindar, 262, 402. 

| Pious are sensitive as to truth, 213. 

Plato and his archetypal forms, 230, 
285;;, quoted, 205, 225, 7280, 
292. 

Pliny, 402. 

Ine ] 

Pneumatomachi, 283, 284, 381. 

God, the 

oe pe) oe Lane 

Polyarchia as to God, 301. 

Pinyer ron Giesanius: alter death, 

2353; and for Gorgonia, 244 5: 

the time and place for prayer | 

Retirement, 
1 pi 
Reynolds, 327. 
Rhadamanihus, King of Lycia, 403. 

Rhea in Greek mythology, aH. 

| Rich and people equal in baptism; 
ELC, 30d: 

| Rule difficult but necessary, 207, 
ora ¢ title= acl service 
33°. 

its purpose to Basil, 

Set) 257, 371 } louses Of,” 371 
sq. 

Priest, set apart from the people, | 
221. 

Priestly office, how so important, | 
208-210; its duties and diffi- | 
culties, 208 sq., 255, 404; ils | 

responsibility, 220 ; reproached | 

it the bad, “22r, 271, 
ens teswecied. in thé worthy, 
2573, 223), 357) 413,35 Preparas 
tions for, 259, 261, 271, 404; 
reached by training, 404. 

Priests, Jewish, reproved, 
Christian, their rules, 
mace: a. living . sacrifice, 223, 
a71 ;). eonseorated, 223; In- 
truded priests unworthy and 
insolent, 271 5 bad, have more 
need to offer for themselves, 
St, 

Procession of the Iloly Ghost, 273, 
284; from the Son, 2843 dou- 
ble procession, 356. 

Procilus, 223. 

Procopius, 
stantinople, 478. 

Properties of Godhead, 405. 

Prophecy, none of itself from an 
oracles.353; 

Prophets, their teaching applied, 
217 sq. 

Providence directs all, 248 sq. 

Psalter chanted, 
Gorgonia’s dying lips, 
thundering roll of, 412. 

Ptolemzus, 236. 

Punishment of the ungodly, 244. 

Purity necessary for conceiving di- 
vine truths, 213, 285 sq., 288, 
354, 355: 

Pyrrho, 236, 272. 

Pythagoras and his discipline for ini- 
tiation, 288; taught 
numbers, 379. 

219 ; 

244 ; 

Rank gained by good service, 205. 

Refor mation, a part of repentance, | 
250 Sq. 
Regeneration, a gift of cleansing 

and perfection, 244, 258 ; from | 

the Holy Spirit, 244 ; a seal or 
a, gilt “Or grace, 244s hy -the 
water and the spirit, 258. 
Repentance, to meet God’s judg- 
ments, 250; joined with refor- 
miahone-of life, 250, 254.045 <2, 
public act and its philosophy, 

2 a 
Reserved sacrament, 243. 
Responsive service, 257. 

Resurrection, celebrated on Easter, 

203 ; great moral and spiritual 

POWEs, 203, 225 sqy5 given to 
the dead, 236; completion to 
the Blessed, 236, 237 ; pictured 
by Gregory, 236 sq. 

aS] | 
either authority or service, 220, | 

2193. 

Prefectus urbi at Con-/ 

242, 394, 4125 on | 

mystic 

sabellianism, 197, 212, 259, 273, 

2795 312, 320, 330; 350) 3555 
| atheistic, 212; how suspected, 
| 279 3 condemned at Rome, Ni- 
| cea, and Constantinople, 350. 
peapellits: Heetie, 22,320, 333, 

| 359; 355- s 
Sacrament, “reserved, 243; anti- 
types of the Lord’s Body and 
Blood, 243; change in cus- 

toms from Christ’s, 3713 how 
celebrated in Gregory’s time, 
| OFT, 
Sacramental blood mixed with blood 
of massacre, 329. 

Sacrifice of Christ, 203, 223; of 

self; 203, 223; of q contrite 
heart, 247 ; of praise, 247. 
be , 2473 08] 7. 
Sadducees denied the spiritual 

world, 319. 

Salamander, tale of, 402. 

Salt, pledge of fidelity, 239, 257. 

| Sanctuary, equivalent to sacrament, 
271; profaned by Christians, 

206, 2713 for different orders 

of clergy, 404, 412; its order 
and dignity, 412. 

Sarcolaters, 441. 

Sasima, described, Gregory’s dio- 
cese, 195; resigned by Greg- 
ory, 268; filled by Kulalius, 
199, 201. 

| Satan, as Lucifer, fell, 347 ; how to 
be defeated, "302, 363. 

Schaff, 281, 320, 334, 344. 

Schism, thre: atened at Nazianzus and 
healed by Gregory, 1923 as 
seen in Constantinople, 197. 
| Schools of philosophy, ete., 236. 
ripture, its silence, 324, 327- 

' See, suffragan, 266, 

Seleucia, Council 
269, 275. 

| Self- peste vi for amendment 
and forgiveness, 253) Sha: 

~Semi-Arian party, 192, 197; allied 
with Macedonians, 197; their 
terms for covering heresy, 275. 

Severity, unchurchlike, 359. 

Sextus Empiricus, sceptical teacher, 
272, 

Simonians, Gnostic sect, 379. 

confessed for removal, 209; 
the destruction of the soul, 268 ; 
actual and potential, 351, 425. 
Sinlessness is divine alone, 252. 

Siricius, Bishop of Rome, 368. 
| Socrates, history, 192, 234, 

284, 339 

Solitary life, its benefit to S. Basil, 
I9I, 192, 200. 

ath: “Arian, -FO2; 

| 

| 

Dd 

“ 

72) 

unite, - 

| 

Sophocles, 

4ot 

one : ee 
Son in relation to Trinity, 193, 212, 

301 sq., 343, 3493 the Only 
Begotten, 212, 301 sq., 316; 
how named in Scripture, 307, 
349 ; hicariate,. 36n scp. 
200° St.4° 2404 Sulneet-Ao. the 
Paha 311; the second Adan, 
309, 349 3 Hlis obedience, 311 ; 
Logos, Katio, Sermo, Verbum, 
316; in relation to the Father, 
306, 343. 
318. 
Sophronius, Cappadocian Prefect of 
Constantinople, 464 ; letters to, 
404, 497, 477. 

as 

Soul, its quality as from God and 

205% af 
responsibility 

united to the body, 
great value, 210 ; 
of guiding, 208 sq., 221; dif- 
ferent from spirit, 350 5 nt 
death has sense of happiness, 
236; may then ose fuller 

sare 244, 245- 

Souls, the direction of, 

arts, 208; laid bare 

the art of 
for cure, 

208, 209; one soul in two 
bodies, 402. 

Sozomen, 234. 

Spiritual pride and worldliness, 221. 

State of life no barrier to godliness, 
240, 

Statues in church, 267. 

Stoics, their teaching, 288. 

Studies of Basil and Gregory, 192, 
231; ancient course of, 231. 

, Suicer, 206, 426. 

Suidas, 344, 349, 426. 

Sun as an image of God, 300. 

Supreme Being, God, 213. 

Swainson, 350. 

Swete, 301, 356. 

Sycamore culture, 384. 

Symmachus, 354. 

Synesius, 425. 

Synods, the age of, under Constan- 
tius, 192. 

Table, the venerable, 257 ; the pro- 
fane or unholy, 257 ; the holy, 
261, 4133 table of God for the 
ofierings to God, 4123 holy 
table a place of sanctuary, 413. 

| Taming of animals, 214. 

- Thekla, 

| Theocritus, 

Tantalus, the ¢ reek myth of, 368. 

Teacher must be pure, 207 $q., 214 5 
not self-appointed, 215. 

Teaching religious truth by degrees, 
215 3 not by the unfit, 215. 

Temple, man a living, 241. 

Terms used once and ‘disused, 210. 

Ter-sanctus, 347, 351. 

virgin saint of Seleucia, 

9 

205. 
Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia, 

174. 
Theodore, Bishop of Tyana, 192, 
4743; native of Arianzus, 471 5 

friend of Gregory Nazianzen, 
192,471, 473) 474- 
Theodoret, 224, 1272; 320) C452 
Theodosius, Catholic emperor, 196 ; 
deprived the Arians, 198 ; sum- 

moned the Second Ecumenical 
Council, 284; made Gregory 
archbishop, 3783 restored the 
churches to the orthodox, 389 ; 

was for peace, 466; by edict, 
A.D, 364-385, withdrew all 
clerics from the civil courts, 470. 

Theology, various meanings of the 
word, 326; necessary study, 
212; depraved by Atheism, 
Judaism, Polytheism, 212. 

Theophany, name for FEpiphany, 
8445 applied to -Christmas, 
344, 345 3 also to Christ’s bap- 
lism, 351; oration on, when | 
delivered, 344. 

Theos (80s), its 
pen 

Theosebia, sister of Gregory Nyssus, 
461; letter of condolence on 
her death, 461, 462. 

Thomas Aquinas, 290, 308, 322, 
347; 495. 

Tilemont, 215. 

Tischendorf, 323. 

Touto-ousion, 280. 

Trees, the two in Eden, 348, 354, 
425. 

Truth, Christian, 
grees, 215. 

Tyana, capital of Cappadocia Se- 
cunda, 187, 195. 

radical meaning, 

taught by de- 

Ullman, 192, 
357, 437: 

193, 239, 281, 356, 

~Unmarricd, 

Uniberotten Ones the were 272.27. 
304, 305, 316, 325, 391. 

Uninitiated, the, 206. 

Unity, in the Godhead, 193, 212, 
270, 322,323 5 IM tockine and 
oilice, 271, 

University life pictured, 190, 400, 
402. 

a- higher ‘state “than 

marricd, 240. 

Valens, Emperor, an Arian, 195, | 
197, 387, 405, 460 ; oppressed | 
the Catholics, 197, 387, 410, 
460, 462; divided Cappadocia, | 
195, 245, 410; ordered eighty | 
priests to be murdered, 330, 
410; had a form of Christian- 
ity, 387,410; opposed and other 
Catholics, 410 sq.; was awed 
by Basil «an -Chitch.Ar2 5 
favoured Casarius, 458; abol- 
ished the military tax, 466 ; his 
dates, 233. 

Valentinus, 
333, _379- 

Vanity of human life and its con- 
ditions, 235, 236. 

Ventriloquists, 214. 

Verianus, citizen of Nazianzus, 480 ; 
letters to, 481. 

Virginity, compared with marriage, 
341, 349, 365; favoured by 
Basil, 415 ; 
baptism, 365, 394. 

Egyptian heretic, 320, | 

honoured even in| 

GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

Virgins, outraged at Alexandria by 
the Arians, 329. 

Vitalius or Vitalis, Apollinarian 
Bishop of Antioch, 443; de- 
ceived Damasus at Rome, vis- 
ited: Nazanzs, sas convicted 
by Paulinus, 443. 

| 

| Wealth, the best, is good example, 
241, 

Wine and water mixed, 214, 

Witnesses, the passage in 1 Johnvy., 
75D, discussed, Ba. 

iW izards, 214. 

|; Woman, not always a_help-meet, 

257. 

Word of God, 355; the name re- 
Vere, 837. 4rR. 

Wordsworth, 310. 

Worlds, visible and invisible, 212 ; 
when ‘created, 215". 940% 34% 5 
created by God, 290, 303, 347 ; 
filled with created life, 296 sq.; 
adapted by divine wisdom, 347, 
395 Sd. 

Wrongs done and punished, 253, 

peak 

Zechariah denounces the priests, 

| 218. 

Zeus in Greek mythology, 353. 

Zeuxippus, an uncertain allusion to, 
331 

ae ~) ¥ 

i Zonaras, 426. 

>. GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 

INDER OP. TEXTS. 

PAGE PAGE PAGE | PAGE 

Ger ee eos. e220 |) Gen: ah ab 6 254 | Ex, xxi, 2... a 399 | Dent, ausil, or CSRs 
RO we age aby ihe, ke RIV eR ig eel Oe rey Si 2") aes 
1s5 65. | Seay ako Rie ee ss 388 Sa. Be oo. ao | 99.41 he Ma tae ges 
Pee ey ae aig) he Se 279 xxiv, 8 : +. 420 SRN. AQ. e see 
vay cae a SA eee SE SRG, 5%, ee 228 | Josh ds 200g ee 
210, 317, 348, 360 Wee i gaa ev BR, BF a «280 is. 25, 1G = 5° 4 eae 

ii. 8 se ee) ris ee fcc AO Be AD a omy SAN Mi 2, es ee 
i that bo AED Ha, 361, 441 Bivens Se. aes Veta ae ee 
TP aoe gs SOO ill. 4 - ar Se p03) aaa eae 5: 420 TAM 6. « eee 
iy. 3a. DG, 894 NS eee XXX, 33 38. . | 223 i: ee 
Ende g. ae MT) gs a ee XXXi. . 410 0.44 Soo 
Pe Oy at a eS es 3 a Fee es | XXXi, : Pa aft ae t= 6 Wil SE ge oc ee 
i ea cog ee eo i 2 oa aU MRR ET ee aed, My TOE es ot ee 
a Se ee kee iv. 10 2 203 po 9 es ey Me TB je oe a ae 
Oy te ae 2s iv. Io, 13 27 , Bay MM QO @5 ok. Ba SOO i, og ey 
Mths fo B88 iv. 27 es 9.9.15 1S RCC a tS RV, Yow i a 308 
MAG ys 396 Woes 248 REN TG ig. 220 MMA, PR ao ky eee 
ly, 26 ~.. 204; 410 pig ean aan 255, 441 xxaill, 20, 23° ~ 3304 Jud, vil. § 4 9405, aee 
Mie ER wien EO Wily 8d, ie 420 SEN, a! Sos BBO x Oo oe ae 
ee a ee Wi Ts, 5 es REO SEE Og ws aes BRS a Si gna ee 
eee S109 4 (20K. pit Oar 7 ae XXKIV. 90. (954, 201 STAs ye ee 
Wee eo est eae RRs TO gin Saevil. yy. 388 tM. IG 4. a ee 
a3 ia ie mo ceed (0) Bi ee ie AEX. 204. «' 2901 2 Samed, 20 4 6 aoe 
i ae Se ee gl Ae eer ere <u Ae er eee A, AO ie Pee as 
nic 80 ae Bac pa reg By eee sR oe Vis AOS 5 a ee Be es tee 
ME oy Rie ae AE ea. at. Oe Vit TA, Bane a. a8 Hei S00 4, ua aoe 
ay ee eae. oS eee vs Wie a4 oa gS Se ds a 
2 ae a ee ae aH 22. 364, 270 Wyse oy ge aa eS eee sete eae 
RROD eg 5 Boe Mie tet oc AES MR! Sie ae ys ce Tie Tat Bh 29 aw ROS 
0 Ea tae SO We eas, eo 5 ae Val SG go ake cS ie ee a ee 
We ee ee we 20 4g AO pe 223, 2Ac Bie en ay | ee 
Be Eo ea EC ios cig kar Oe xi. 44, 45 eta BRS Vig Bie es oe Oe 
5 2 a me MVE ER yo 2 eA MAO wie a ee Wite Biot et tne ee 
ey oe os oe er iy 20... Boa, 345 SY, (Bt ea 1 a ee nies 
OIL, GO a ae Mtv. Sti. s SOR a RVG SH vs sy oes 5 a ee 
Sols Oe: MI BR en. SRG HM, OF a a <a Me AE ee oe 
Rie Sra, ee WOR ec i Bae Sei OES i eee 
xix. I§ Sq... 368 BU OD g” dai HS eaiv; 1 LAR. 2b 5a St 1s aga er 
25 Ee Yo en 8 Ble rst, iy, os BOF REV 27, OG. Se os He. Se 
ie i 9 ae Ry ey os, Be} Med, ee a BFR Bg ee 
ike ae gs = Si Til i eS 8 4 ME og eats a ee pd a 2 loam es Fo, 
271, 373, 418 WTA A Rn, BOR REA ag coy: at i 26 a ee 

oe Se nS 2 xvi. 15. 407, 431 a. eS | xvi. 23. . + 384 
Sh Pe gs See Sate hehe BOO PVN eop LO Aa SVL EA) nc ake 
ot ae SE ie 2 eer a es eee RS EM BOs rt BOR 
Roe rk ar | ie 259, 264, 431 sc a ee ae we xvii. 4g. . 222, 376 
Se ah eS, Be St AO Bn”. kot HRs A eee oe a ae 
SEIT 4 ae 2 ACID Fa Saranac MVE Te ee ed Be, OO ge oe eae 
eau Ot SG. yoo, MV Pay a. Bape Pe Fe hy ee xix. 24. . . 206 
CVT 20 od, OAR Br TO) TG o>. O46.) Deut, iv. 24.) 390, 48s xxiii, 23... | 228 
SONVENLy Mia” g SOG Ritet Ss . 4TS, 276 WoO an 5 IO) Se, Bh we ae BRS 
NAV D2 Oe ae 2 irae Ce eer 8 SAT he sila ir a Se Met es ae AO 
2.9.8 es oo aaa rane” Ie OEE DOK ce ay OD Se op a, eo Vis ca 6 le NG 
eK Ot Oh 2 ge xix, 16-18 . . 289 Revs (or ee ang See i EA ee eS 
ARKVIN ZS. 3899472 213 ke), Cae ee <2 REVI GO me a 253 Ml FOS 6 ge ae 
Ser ES dey isthe Og po cia 0 a ae (0) DOCU spy Gas 2 RO) Be BS a ces S278 
Xe Sosa so. 435 KHL Beara. atk) RXR MUGS se ee eee Sa MeO Soin atli2 Ns eaten 200 

VOlLe Vall wel 

404 

1 Kings iv. 
vill. 6 

29 

XVI. 4 
xvi 6 
ri. 8 sq. 
ne oe 
~ en 
a 
XVill. 42 
XVI. 44 
RIX, Ek 
pa 9 eae 8 
xix, 15 
2 Kings ts. 

I2 

Xvil, 21 
XVI; 33 
eke SO, 
1 8. Ape Me 
1 Chron, xi. 4 : 
2 Chron, XXxill,, 12, 
13 
XXXVI, 32 
XEXVIll. 12 
Job i. 3 

XX1, 
XXV1. 
XXV1il. 
xxix, 2 

9.0.6 8 dae 
XXXi. 32. 
RUA A, 
XXXVIL.Q ; 
XXXVI: I . 244, 
XXXVIil. 287 
XXXVIi1. 
XXXVI. 
XXXVill. 

IO ~ XX. 
14 

G2 BO 

31 

eat. TO. ais 
vd re Be 
1, 20 
xlili. 3 
as 1s 
io 
eae. 
i> 12 
aes 

Ve. Ors 

AIO; 

36 LXX. 

GREGORY. 

NAZIANZEN. 

PAGE PAGE 
Vi. BLA 249 , Ps. xlv.4 . 334, 470 
Ae eae 358 xlv. 6 : 307 
vill. I 289 | i, BIC 
Vill. 3 290 | xlv. 14 341 
Vill. 5 a7 | mls F 345 
xy O.2 430 Ay ES 2 ann 
ix. 18 : 388 | Le 250 
X.7 , 225, 374.4 is ae 247 
oa Pie oe é 3734 sys ee 
xi Ti. 217 | li. 8 og acy 
xll. 7 224 | ie 247 ae 
xlil. 3 372, i .52 i coe 
xv Uo ans Ge he 374 
VIG 27 = B28. 420 Ay 385 
xvii. § . 249 Ugh eee 318 
xviii. g . 276 lv. 6 LXX, 386 
XVlii. II, 293 ey ane ; 205 
xvii. 12. 220 Iv. 9 . 385 
RVI; 32 2 430 ae a, 286 
Xvill. 33°. 224 Ivii. 4 374 
XVlli, 39. 220 lyli. g 224 
XVill, 46 250 Ivill, 4 LXX. 262 
Sie, ee 310 lviili, 4,5. 37 
Sub dye ie 348 Iviii.. 5, 6 LXX, 
Kite A, XX, 350 209 
>a - 299, 417 ES eee 314 
xix. 6 RR ALF ae Ae ee 250 
xix. 10 220 Ixi. Io 222 
6 a 472 Ixiii, I 407 
» <b Be 311 Ixiii, § LXX, oie 
EML:fE 5 4 220 Ixiv, 32 . 431 
Xxlil, 2 ae Ixw-2 442 
204, 2565.- 317 Ixv. 9 253 
XXlil. 5 eer aoe Ixvi. 6 ere ao 
XXIV. 3 220, 351 Ixvi. 7 251, 388 
> 4 Piya oe 432 invialg:. .°°..; BR 
xxvi. 4 LXX. . 442 | Ixy. 6:*. 254 
xxvi, 7 LXX, 220 Ixvili, 4. 356 
XXVIl. 4. 224 Ixvili. g . 372 
XXIX. Q 227 Ixviii, I1 227 
xxx. 6 421 ve, ee oy a 
Xxxl. 16. 420 isix, 2 2225 239 
roo 44 bis: eee 372 noat,-6*, aco 
REX O 238 Fe Cha RPE ai ay 
mod 6 ‘berate Mee Bin 224 
220, 238, 384 Ixxill. g . 410 
XXXIIL. Ig 407 Ixxiil, 20: ; 388 
XV Es ~ 286 Ixxiii, 23, - 227 
XXXIV. 5. 352, 368 ixxy, 8, 262 
SONY er Se A as Ixxv. 9 248 
REK1 Vv. 16 252 | ixxy. “‘I6+, 248 
REEVES 382 | IRR ay2 
xXxxvi. 6. 248 | Ixxvii. 20 387 
KeKviy Ft 296 Teeth a hea 264 
WL Or eos Boe on ee ge 
318, 337, 372 Ixxviil, 25 407 
XXXVIl. 4 eae Ixxvill. 50 249 
XXXVil. 7 + 208 Ixxviil. 70 227 
XXXV1i. 27 308, 343 bother. Ms 251 
XXXVIi1. 5 - 7 age Sho. sh Sie cane: J agatene Sf 
SXRV Og so eae xia. 79.5 Bag Sh6 
EXKIC, 45 8. 23 1K ae: ss ae 
pa Soa 1Xxx:.'9 409 
od eo 224, 267 aoe ae 439 
sl eee 376 Geseh ae) 223 
xt. 2 368 sce, ar Az 
xhi. 4 244 oo creer Baal 
xi: _! 418 boca on, 274 
xliii, : 463 Ixxxili, 13 207 
xliv. of Le: 2277, Ixxxiv. 5 355 
md RNeaJO oo. eer 237, Ixxxiv, 6 373 
xlv, 2 308 Dpex mye 7 326 

PAGE 
Ixxxv, 8. 374 
a ae ee et 
xxecval, ole Noe 207, 
XG. TO 267 
xcl. 5 364 
xci, 14 362 
xCU. Do: 4 256 
aC. F 430 
ere oF 262 
sotto As iy Sa 387 
KCv.2 A 202 
ern. may fe! 
xcv. 6 one 
ya 368 
<9) ed Os ears 
oe, as ae 
<Cr26 420 
Clan. 227 
Cis. 261 
Cl Ts 255 
Civ. 2 430 
ci¥eg 353 
C1Ve Ge 2, ee 
cle. 4,5 ee pee 
CTV Od ge ae 
fos ae © ae 214 
Sry. 2Or 7 e 384 
cv. I5 272 
cv. 18 ay Aa 
ergs 249, 276 
CVI. 22.46 i Bae 
CVi. 30, 31 . 471 
PY 39 221, 343 
Cvil. 407 
CVll, 9205" 807, aoa, 
CVils 40... 22% 
Cx ae 310 
renee 307 
4 ae a 227 
cai. 310 
-10) 248 
CR. & 418 
CX1l. Q 241, 372 
cx. 7 227 
cxiv, 6 310 
CXVIt. ie 406 
exvili, 19 aor 
Cin 420 
cxix, 21. 290 
cxix, 00 Ik. ~2a5 
reoreb epee gen 237 
CX TOS. eee aa 
Chix G5 361 
Cx et 223, 245 
Cox. 204-5. aimee 
CoE Shs ay 
CORT 258 
Cex 25 430 
CEXV. 3 274 
Ca ee 314 
COM IG ele ge 
Crear 7 342 
CX ET ee aa 
CXRIKE 3 ENN ee 22 
OxxixaO)SGsi, 387 
Coxe 7 2 oe 24 
CXR, Tele, 
262, 420 
CXXRIE 4 . 409 
@xoxegt: 1ase i Aw coy, 
Cxeedin 15 407 
CXXXlli, 2 245 

Prow, 7 

PAGE 
Gxeevte ios seats eg 
EXESVILO 22 
CXEXVLIL. OG + oD 
CXXxIx,..6 P 296 
ORNS, Gy oe 
CXXXIX, 7-15 B02 
GRAMS GSC) tees OU 
Cox, It Ikon 
374 
fo od. ano Er 399 
Oke gs i Peery 
OR ag Sa ke es eS 
CR ete ee. UO 
Gein Lene es) BOO 
exli. ee ae ShO 
Gels Or ianat. 2275 
exlil. ae wie BOs 
(o.0 Fub Oe tae 22 
exhil, 8 ag 74 
eli: 2O.4: 5 383 
(Ky. es ts eee 
CEG eae ee 
Cv 10 Ad 
Cxy, 2°, 442 
exlvi, 8 ix. 242 
exlvil. 4. . 300, 333 
CRIVE. Be. 287 
exlyii. 8 . 442 
exlvili. 4, ar AOS 
yond vb ara © bite png ver eee Fe 18 
Fe Pee bas tatoo 
So ee a OS 
a0 e.g ae 
3 ee 78. 
iii, 12 252 
aD, oo 364 
lll, 28 368 
oe Be . 354 
Iv. 25 374 
iyccey BI 
Oe oy ae 340 
apices ee 368 
Vis ; eT 
viii. 22 307, 310 
vill, 25 395 
bee © ok, 380 
ee SA : 336 
nore. 380 
ois BU, 230 
xi. 18 (eee 
bas em 407 
XI, Q S73 
aA foe ovat, 
xiv. 30 LXX. 409 
ce er ee 
~ Pie SS 
xvill, 3 LXX, 361 
xvili, 17, 330 
cra Dy ie ea 407 
SO a eet 
RX CO, Be 
xe 3 40) 
xxv, 12 223 
pe. 15) : 286 
SS lee 215 
ET eel 248 
MIN Oa a bs 220) 
SOewe ly, 254, 261 
XXR ZOE Or 22 
Be Ogee os 349 
MAK lO 256 
xxxi, 10, 240 

| Eccles. i. 

1 a 
Song of Sol. 1. 

Isa, 

INDIA OF 

ee 
| tap aa 

Tee 

225, 275, 2 

Pag ae a 

x: 
xil, 
ane 
Xil. 

¥ 

vic 10 

ix, I 

5a 

x 22 

260, 

259; 

214, 

filo Seve 
1S s 

(9 ar 

XXV1. 
eae 
XXVIli, 

XXVIiL, 
XXVII1, 
XXVIL. 
XX VU. 
XXV11L. 
XXIX. Q 
XXIX, 

weit oe 

BEN. S thes 

ie bP.) & 

1 LXX. 

tf 
Be 
iy ol ODS 
iq LX. 
25 

ID: 
2I 

XXX. 17 

KE: 
XXXVI, 

XXXVI, 

odd 

ue 
ah c1D, 
xli. 
xlil. I 
xlii, 8 
xlii, 
xiii 
Slit 2 
xiv. 3 
ivi, t 
xl vill. 
pet 
Iviii. 
oe 

2 

6 

a 

20 

at LXE; 

8 ; 
217, 

25 

14 
LO °% 

rob & a 

4 

16 

<9 

3 54. 

Le Ey eo a 

li. 
lii. 
lil. 
lik 
liti. 
lili, 

li. 
liii. 
lili. 
liv. 
liv. 
hye: 
be 
lvil. 
lvii. 
Penick 
Eyiliy 2 
Ivili. 9 
Tes 4. 

Ptoot 

Ixii. 3 
ete 
iit, 
Tay, 

4 
6 

Si 10 

IB Siieme & 
itil 
]xiii. 
xiii. 
Lscirr, 

2 
~] 

13 
14 

254, 
Exe, 

LXX. 

(his) 

397; 

n” 
Oo 

IN NE NHR KE WYN bo 

wo ) iS) NOW sb Ocisgd QOoOw oO 

bh NOW Nd Pe Be NO NWO NWWwWW b d¢ 

NPN wR w+ 

PmMm GN 
KR MU NR &. 

WGI RON NO bd 
Oe £2 6.0) 
DN DW W tv oO 

Isa, ixtv. 
Ixiv. 
Ixiv. 
Ixv, 
Ixv, 
Ixv. 
ievi, 
Ixvi. 

Zz 

< 
CONT G2 

in 2 

NW eo Hw 
ww 

as 

4 
5 

5 
iY 

5 

29 

Vill. 
2 
x; 
He ek 

5 
he oe 

219, 

at Te, 

Xil, 

10 

Bil; 23 

XV. 
XVil. 
Sxi. 

XXill, 

Vil. 
xiii. 
NIV. 
Sty. 
XV1il, 
D o,4 
Soci, 
XXL 
eA 

Vie. 

SRNL: 

XEN 
RN, 
XNRT. 

XXXIV. 
DO ha 
XXXIV. 
MND. 
XXXI1V. 

2 

ES Ch, 

20? 
“O53, 

205% 

255; 

222, 
276, 

12 LXX. 

14 

i. 4-28 
se 
a 
20 
14 
5 

4-20 
31. 

r10 ae 
ee 

12 

1G Ey 

24 sq. 

c 

Ne) 
Cove © 

Seca Cy Say 

Ce OC 
Ce A os 

WN NNN WOO Go WO bw HN 

Narn Ponn wVwhd 

Se) 

Wh HHA HN WHO b& NO NN 
Mn =i WOO UIs SI bob B&G ST 
NI Gs oO 

nA 

OW Hh kh NL b 

H 
Or 

Ow NN KRN 
Au NNW 

KE an 

ga © ee OOP oe CO) 
(oe) 

DOPW MOAN HK MOON NW 

Tit oe 

NNHNHWDNKHNHWNHHHHNHW HHH KH HHO NN HD WO 

mb = 

Wmnto 

496 

Ezek, “xomevil. 35q; 

GREGORY NAZI AnZE, 

SXRVUL’ 7, FO 
7010 9. eB Uy, 

Dan, ill. 5 

bids. iE, 4 

Joel 

Vite e 

xiv, 

33 
iv. oa 

384, 

227, 

ws a ES. 

150 ak, 
eel Ah 

pa 2 LXX. 
2 4 PE 

xiii, 7, 8 
xiii, 14 

i. 4 

HP Co Yad ; 
ee ts le age 
Pee Cs Ae 
ie 
ce -ae 
ii, 14 
il, 15 
ity Ty 
ak, 23 
li, 28 
pte es) 

Amos ii. 7 

iv. 7. 

x. G:.. 

Jonah i. 3 (his) 

il. 
lil. a E 
iil. 7-10. 
NG 16 
a ees oer 

Micah ii. 3 

iil. 
Vee 
Ae ee a 
Wii. ol exe 
vii. 1-4. 
vii. 6 

19-12 

Nahunii. 1, 2 

222; 

222, 

335) 

228 

PAGE | 

237 | Nahum ii. to 

388 | Hab, i. 2 sq. 

219 | a a 

420 | 06. oot 
286 | a Rae CA wee ye 
329 aL ae ge 
292 li, 16 ; 
420 sa Pees fe 

250 | Hagg. i. I 

251 | Lag 

274 ia cee 

314 | PRs eae : 
255 | Ry cee ee aa 
375 | ii. 12 sq. : 
264), Zeek. au teu, 

205 i O.. 

389 iv. a: 
221 wr LA 3 
432 v. 8 nies, 
243 My Th Ea, 
243 sa an 
471 pe 254, 
217 2 ae Ces 
249 a 

217 <i 55°0 

249 os Page ‘ane 
217 Tye 7 218, 
329 | Mal. i. 1 sq. 

387 a oa 

387 ee Ge 

Via HN. 5,7 

oan sige 

249 UN aa 

431 pie eee 

387 a B.-4 

249 | iw 2. 

217 Judith ¥. oe 

387 | Wisdom 1: 2. 

249 0 

207 Oe a 
252 i. 2s 274, 
251 by ke es 
251 i, LS 

254 iD 4 

383 v. 9 Sq. 

370 v. 10 sq. 

253 vil. 26 

250 me 15 

251 | Ecclus.1, 2 

313 | ili. 9 

397 | iii. IO 

253 | i bh eae & . . 
375 | XXV. Q 215, 
244 Fas ee 
384 | ST Gh 
254 | pa bo eae Wate 
408 Baruch ili. 35, 37 
316 Hi 37 : 
225 | Susanna, verse 5 
420:) Bel verse 33 

252 | 2 Macc. vil. 1 

358 Matt. ii. g 

471 | Leo e I) 

409 | At: Tal 

222 | ihe 

aes ae il. 26 ee 
g68 aang 339, 
329 1 WO Bee ede 
387 i Gye 

217 bu ata) t 

358 lie 2 

plies iii. 13 

P Matt aiieeta 17 210.035 1 

Ts hea 
ae ty 
Je es ae 

vill, 24. 
Vili. 32 

i 67 

aii. 34 
xii. 35 

xill, 5 
xii. 7 
ILL. 
mais, 
xill, 
xili. 
xiii. 
Xlv. 
XIv. 
Xiv. 
Xiv, 
XV, 
XV. 
ag ae Soe 
xvi. 16, 
VI. 2 
XVils 24). 
Sis ee 
x, 2 
vill i2o}s 
Xvi VE - 
SVL 2s 
xviii, 23 Sq. 
Xviii. 28 sq. 
ob rtd (0 Faery 
Ibe, Py Eee 
xix20- 

210, 

S12, 

219, 

13a, 

358, 

216, 

bs 

, 289, 

359; 
3972 

243, 

219, 

3575 

Seo) 

30. 

359; 

PAGE 
Rey 

Riyi 
352 

PAGE 
Math, 2601 scan: 366 
axe 430 
XX, 20 Sq. 342 
xxl. 10 370 
0 PE Kh 227, 
XX11, 13 . 220 
po abe gs 269 
xe. Fea Pads 
ABU" a 432 
FUL aa 219 
AKG ee 5 444 
Posh eee, 248 
ies Ty 23 
Xe SO 368 
pe, 4 415 
Rayer | 250 
Iva 2 219 
Sxul eos 252 
pes nck ae 428 
XW aL 373 
pease de 309 
XF¥L 30 314 
xxvi, 67, era 
Xxvll, 28 351 
XXVIl. 34 351 
I 35 210 
xxvil. 51 309 
XXVill, Ig 376 
XXVIll, 20 311 
Mark ii;, 16, 10>. 433 
TAG a3 
bi Pas 6 262 
His 29 32% 
iv. 3, 14 285 
iv. 38 307 
Weue ss 372 
V. 13 373 
vE Gs 343 
Vil 54 206 
vii. 32 372 
ix. 44 sq 373 
» ab ee en eA | 
xi, 32 207; 315 
beh Fe ce | nee 
bg fee 8 ! ART 
Luke i t¢ 432 
eee 432 
Loe Ke et BLO 
1 eh 327, 349 
ae + 308, 351 
Laas. = pe dz 
i. 69 . 271 
1. Or: 420 
Mayon" 310 
il, I-5 351 
Tease 210 
ia 2 id ee 
ii. 14. 210, 423 
MoT AG Se ae oe 
Bie Oe 308, 420 
ace 307, 408 
sNUae. iae 4 420 
lii. 9, 29 432 
Mea22 327 
i 23 370 
iii. 34 380 
Ivioles 327 
We l. 1S 327 
ive 2 307 
ive 23 207 
iv. 29, 30 318 
Vio) 4s 295) 354 

INDEX OF 

PAGE | 

350 John i. 27. 

Lake v. 29 
VO. eyes 
Vie te 307 
vi, 16 273 
vi. 44 292 
vii, 26 358 
vii. 38 pares 
vill. 6 215, 220 
vill, 14 341 
viii, 28-33 . 309 
vill. 31 287 
Vil. 44 421 
i ate Ae 7! 361 
ix. 54 471 
ix. 60 364 
Fo. 309 
%, 10-. 430 
X. 30 Sq 309 
53 Oe aa 219 
Kio 24, (373: 410 
2a ae 253 
xii, 46 ~ 330 
SL 4@ Sp ete 
xii, 44 » 355 
xll, 47 ae eae 
xl. 49 Siar aes 
x1, 7 ree Ve 
ait Bab saa, 20 
xill. IO sq “435 
p 2 Nan a 372 
MV, 10: 228 
xiv. 16 sq 277 
> 5 aero ae 224 
xy 2. 433 
XV. 4, 5 432 
XV. 4 sq 349 
xv. 8,9 32 
xv. 8, 10 349 
Ne Oe: Pe 
xvi. 9 430 
SVs TQS S71 
SVEVeqA 250 
XVIE. 12 372 
VICE Sth ae 471 
Sy I 358 
xviil. 14. 306 
als eva hoes Bue’ 
See Sth 371 
ae, 355 
eee 355 
XIX. 35, 278 
XX1, 20-24 . 431 
Xxil, 44. 307 
xxll. 50 . 471 
Xxill. g anh 
eiie ee, 432 
Xxill. 43. 309, 432 
iE SO ee ee 
9 ye aie 224 
DOM ee eo oe oe 

John i. 1 307 337 338 
bao 
rae? i 
i. 4 308 
Leg 269, 3$2, 361 
i. 8 7 420 
ig . 318, 352, 361 
pee ees Sol 
sn oak e307 
tots, 382, 442 
Loe, i EgOT, 
ie2gr 270, 309 

3095 
275, 
"352, 

250, 

a F< eo 
‘ - (bis): 

270 

vi. . 
vi. 33 
vi. 38 
vi. 40 
vi. 45 
peceys 

vil, 12 
vil. 17 
Vil. 37 
vill, 12 
viii. 48 
vill. 54 
vill. 59 

2. Oe i ie 

Xl. 43 

357 420, 

307, 
334 

309; 

255, 349; 

"347, 
397; 

309, 372; 

i. 47 Sq 

xil, 35 

PAGE | 

358 
365 
aoe 
444 
354 
Ke, 
380 
438 
440 
352 
272 
Fad 
357 
370 
2% 
307 
3/2 
are 
Fg, 
Shas 
3°97 
312 
3°7 
250 

432 
308 
374 
362 
313 
314 
206 

Joh xvi, 15. 

xvi. 26 
Sv, 33 
RVIL. 2 
XVll. 3 
xix. e 

bab de Gy: 

Xx. 17 

xx. 17, 28 

5 aa 
ee Dey 
2.4 
xn 27 
XX 25 
Acts i. 18. 

og 

Xi, 2 
xlli, 41 
xvi. 4 

evi ae. 
“Vile Zo. 

> a 
xxi. 26 

Rom, % 3 

viii. 26 

Vitl2oe 4 

ix. 3. 

TEATS: 

akg 

as ae 

“277, 421 

259, 361 

317) 3 

"382, 388 

315, a 

327) 393 

262, 332 

497 
PAGE 
} ROME Ie Bers 381 
x, 2 275, 394 
Sa 386 
ye Ko ae 417 
aE 388 
Mi 10 230 
a. .23 296 
pa Eee 
220, 202, Ae 
Mi, 36: 3S Gee 
wae Sede et 
. _ 2371 338, 356 
She eg 
= 223, 254, 375 
Be As Se, eee 
a, 8 Fr eee 
xill., 13 346, 374 
Xlv. 2 tg st eee 
xiv. 3, 6 216 
ae ee 421 
x¥. 10, 39 382 
DF oe Oo fea 217 
1 a sl Ol 309 
a 345 
1,24. avg 
aes eo ae 
ih. OF j (OE, Sa S255 
Meg CBO AE 
HO: ge) 28% 200 
iu. 10 . . . 

227, 290; 362, 417 
Mths a ee ee 
tig sig eee 
ii. 10, 224, 443 
Hy TZ. +: gy ee 
Hi. iy 2 vee eee 
Vi Ga a 216, 224 
iO: 448 
lil. 7. 354 
Tike Oe, ale ao 
i, 12. |. ay eee 
lil. 12-19 359 
ill. 13-15 271 
Hi, IS oy are 
bee 210, 255 
iv.9. 216, 222 
1: ee 216,332 
iv. 15 216, 229, 248 
iv. 21 2160, 272 
Vi 216 
v. 8 203 
Lmir f 345 
a ee ae it 221 
Wisi 382 
vii. 3, 8, 25,31 216 
vil, 40 « 443 
Vill, 2 382 
viii. 3 a a aa 
vill. 6 338, 388 
1 ces 386 
ix. 7. 23 
1x. 15 5 ae 
1X 22 394, 417 
i 27 ae (coo 
a2 358 
pe (8. 397 
e235 216 
>. 9 ee (72 205 
xi, 20 205 
xil, 23 375 
XI 20) 5 287 
cite 7 237) 330 

498 GR pens ih ae 

PAGE PAGE PAGE | 
© Con i. Oe Og Cor, eg Boe) Pl mee a ied, Vii. 3 
> OU baa) ae 210. 246, Dobie 3 : ae 216 Mi, 14 , i eee | vil. Io 

294, 295) 4 42 Sik 1 ee 2.6, 5 eee, e484 vias 
civ 2 223 1 Asal ie TO” 3. Ba a ee ee vii. 23 
My Oo ec a eae Te (ols eno ee a eee Vil. 25 
ore ne 8 CAM ab ager 17-9 ( Bi avg Oo eee MO Rt eee vil. 27 
RINE OOo nt a Maat sedie i. Oa ta eo | ae SC vill, 2 
Sot age ta a ae a ai oe, A eter a ix, 3, 24. 

384, 386, 407 ie TO 8S oe aes be Se cas A Ee ae ee Be” 
ean Se Tee Wl Mage (2 Sree | ey reer aer ed) ix. 10 aa 
Se een Os 27a 216, 311, 442 | eee ere ix, 14 
SRR ev ee LO sie, ireraeee ie yn s\61c] | Se ere sere ix. 10 
RO os ara SOM iil, 2 aa ieee ae ah a ee a 
ke ee BGO Le 237 | BUCS arate a ei 
eee le SAS iv. 26 . . . 389 | _. 237) 355) 375, 429 x 20%, 
ie opr $237, 2407 Me Oe ee a cee Cae | Se ER Ge a 5 ame Se 
Getta Fhe se 310 v. = ee 442 | te a ae hee x. 38. 
Peete. 300 eae ee eee. FS 5. 5 gee X1.Q. + . . 42 
= el aera 311 | V, e255) SBR | ET hese, 19 2). gee oe re 
xv. 47. 438, 440 | vi. 14 BS | | AYO on oo ee xli,2 . 209, 
> as eae | a vii. 7-17 a OD | Vv. = aye - oe 18 

280; 227 2 Wig Bea ie ph Wek oes 3-2 om: See ) 11, ; 
aw ne. ..s. “a — | iB mn Cees. 2244-2 LNCS Nish iy, eae xii, 23, 29. 23m 
ee ee | ess 15 ee SS ee A ha aie! xii, 23 ; 

Ria 3S eS) Tht tees ile Boa ioe ae Aare xi, 2G. 4) gy 
Ge 7. R88, LAE 1 ae ee em ii, z pa eee A 259 | it. 295 ay 
eee Oa li 22 ay. te re. | Ss xii, 2 core 
ce | ir 214 | ce ose. ee ee aes xiii, 4 
Me fe a SS . 382 | te x 4 BRR ili. ys hs ee xill, 8 
ee eka ae AO. m.I7 . . . 209 1, Z foie oe | xiil, 15 
A Og Fo.) Un, V2 Akl a 6 20S Ml 4 Se xii, 20. 

IESE Ce Sa aan ato’ 27 4 i ia Fe ru. vi. 10 . +. «) 382) James ii, 17°. 
Ae ec. 65s, SO Mite sty st ee 5 ees ere 255 ii, 19 
Sey |) ae ear 216 iv. eo. cea en vi. 16: 220, 314, 361 | i 5 
te ys 4 ae lv. 16 . 205, 374 vi. *9 yt ee a | 2 = 
De aaa evans Wie ee SU spa any YE 20 eee 
: 4 at ene iH iv. 24 5 hos 247 2Tim.i. 11. 216, 259 | V, 40, 37 
Moe ek A TS POH ea tu ASO 1. 14 Fe wage jt Pet. i. 7 
ee at At Nee eect a eae a Be) ps ee i 
ae eats 30 git deplete saree | 7: reer: il. 5 ee 352 | ii. q 
otc att 442 Ves op BAD Mee. a as ee il. ogee 
Wee oy eee Wee Se a rs eho iii. 8 213 11. g . 246, 389, 
iS es 2. OO. ee a ah ee Iv, 2 ea ck 409 li, 21 gor 
mee Sees Sgt.” nO i a Se a 
SONG es twit’ 3D NR fig RO INC ai ow cee | iil. 19 
WO ee. a eee | Ma aa ee ee Be Bes i 219 iv. e 
I i eee | Niven li20h Geta oe li. 14 . 216, 420 | 2 
AL ete meee a! © ec Dey AL Bre hc 8 ; 404 hae Soe ae 
iii ; eek ek oe eO2 adel Toone. ee ae WiOCe - eut eeeae 
ihe 203, 237, 415 | Phil. i. i a ea ae iO eee 301 | v. 8 ca ae 
Boe oe 26 | Lee ii. 4 Sao ove? 246 2 Feat. a 2 oo 
Mee el 004 216, 237 243, 421 ii, I Sie ee) 1, 17 Sq, 
mi Oey 210; as il. 4 246 iW.I2 . . © 358 | URE Le ee 
Cre a Ss OS ie es eee ‘ 372, I John i. 7 
ee ee _, 209; 246, 307, 444 DfES: ois = ae 444 | Hi, ek : 
pe a Re eS Thy hr een ns Or snes ee ae 
eet... 2 4 21D It Qo ee Oe as 7 A ee a “4 
Riad . 5 S16 he ee eO VS. os oe a ee 
ee ke ii. 15+ 16 Renter 2.) Gass: ee ae | : J 
219. 250, 205,328 WA are 255 v. 9 sq oe ae ¥ 
xii. . . ane. 422 ii. - Se yc ee Viitda Go, ae ee ii. 5 
els kOe, ee OTD Wage, hare ae yg Vo Te TAs, 214 ay see 
Fen, 02 2 Gee eS Dae a kee LO ae sortie ae 214, 215 xix 1A. 

Printed by James Parker and Co., Crown Ward, Orford. 

ae ee 
a 
eee 

é 

ee! 
os 

nko 

BINDING SECT. OCT 12 1982 

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers 
Letters and selected works 

5 Bret! aby Bd 7B 

, Hh Vf: 

it teat ‘i 

ie fee hs Vi 
oP oeeataah aan 
. f t; : Mid vie bye 
4 90 s t vat t 
. 1 ie i 

Payer ¥ 
Poree y eat + 

: eather aE LAM NG ee | ha dates yy i oy 
: ev eb ed eek BP ay seis yee bey ; 
oe He Tie eri ji Neate Ute ute nth eet 
: Heeeeatta tis le bite elt, Lt Re 
: ptr Bier rales ine 
i tei rt fy os te 
fas ih ite ss 
He ‘ Hie a yt ae 
c ay 
; : gal 
$ r at atin heel 2 
w 
s 
* 
wri 
+ i 
he toy ji 
Ramil STR URS tA 
a ane Betti ff At 
fs tH aie 
i 
‘ H es | 
yt pe cae 
z 3 othe 
fn 
5 by air 5 Ae 
fer 
: Ves - 
Bites 
eps 
ae ieee oh 
Fay oda 
; f f peda 
3 : { Saas et aay wae 
rf 
: : hate 
3 Moth cigh Trae Ny 
2 VO asrisieee 
; * Sate a 

a vars i 
2 mints 
: tes Be ayieiy bese Hist? 
IS if pass cal tite bi rea Bett 
ne SPE is Range gor es) 
es Yt, 
; ia ve : MMs 
‘ht % oe : 
; : 
seed Lu “ 3 
: Bs 4 ei a4 Ee ° re } vi 
= Wepinart4 : : se ; 
© : 5 : 
3 ie 
Sey 

Baines 3 
- + 

oe 
S 
sf 2 

ee 

Le 

ar 
SS 

y 
a 
a ae i ue 

linda nN 

eee 

an 
aaa 
a 
sho 
es 
Ay Hs 4 
by ede 
eH j 
iy ty 
a i 7 
fe N i. 
. if” ‘ 
te eine 
ab) lalate ia, 
Broa | 
7 a c 
; Spy : 
Hy brecmates SORE : 
pieeepasasoeeneetrtry ‘ 
RB LUN ENED 4 th 
a TRUM k tceh ERNEST 
4 MAN Nise Aa) Parte 
HH RA ViN Wittig ih conearprichs tat eis a 
i a eet Abe? Wha A 
itd ah * ert + | 
ea x: Hi Rate ' ueyalt te 

phys. 

ttt 4 

Beira iee ae 
4 

ac 
ee nt H ee ‘est 
ie aarsestics ce ae : 
SA naepy UMP bee! Wc A? es 
Ly He ue Teme nic ? 
Her Ap sh fi Sede NH i ma nin 
ibhtarad om Bary re 

net IRE hy 
teat ae 

ye sf ‘ 
iM ra Cn ‘ in 
Mi “hheasa UG 
srs teh yy He 

4 

43 de 
ah AP 
iain 

ein 
Arep KS 
: enti ee ay ne : 
i as etal i 
ee 4 
neh ‘i Neth | 
ait 7 ie tes i | 
Siro Hey rele wae ‘ait uae eh A Heb MIR Sth : 
Fan Ts we ecu hee tite ‘ iis i : | 
es “as He Fells yin he iri at) ke Ke : 
Ki » | 
: mi | 
ts 
nen | 
a at ai n't on eh 

i 
oa 
sh 

Ba RA a 
8 eye hi teat 

‘iS 
si. Sey ee iS