XTbc Merit’s (Ilassics 

CDXLII 

THZ ANALECTS 

or THE CONVERSATIONS OE 
CONFUCIUS 
WITH HIS DISCIPEES'AND 
CTKI AIN vI/THERS 

< 'M ( 'RP I \I\ f KSl I \ I’Kl 

A At I N HUTJS] , 1 ,( I 
/ hUi*'L'ur}^h (ilasK. iU’ Xu,' )t ofk 

I Mflbourtte fn.rii Jhmthnv 

( akutta Miii/ru's 
I M i‘H \< \ \ MIL I ( >K.P 
ri ni I .!U K lo nil rM\ i un i\ 

I'/l'ttii. h, / ,/,/v Hits 

( (>M U( IL!^ 

HIS Al IHh I LMPI J at HIS 

BIKlll-PLAt:h, c:ij''l FU, SII^^TL'^fCJ 

‘I'luK-i the frin^-liis claik cacs 

.110 liiunorons, kind .incl llioiii^litlul. . . 

THE ANALECTS 

or THE CONVERSATIONS OF 
CONFUCIUS 
WITH HIS DISCIPLES AND 
CERTAIN OTHERS 

As translated into English 
by 

WILLIAM EDWARD SOOIHILL 
M.A. Oxon., Hon. M.A. Cantab. 

I ate Profe^wr of Chinese Literature and 
Language j Oxford University 

Editea His i> JJGHltR 
LADY HOSIE, M.A, Cantab. 

Autlio) of ^ 

* Tzlo Gentlemen of China* 

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
LONDON : HUMPHREY MILFORD 

Professor Soothiir s jransIatUn of The AnaUcts of 
Confucius was first published in 1910 ! fn ^The 

PKINIFD JN GREAT BRITAIN 

C 0 NFUC 4 US 

By 

LADY HOSIE 

In the year 551 b.c. Confucius was born 
in the city of Ch'ii Fu, which lies in the 
hilly part of that province of north-east 
China which we know to-day as Shan- 
tung. The Empire was divided into many 
warring States, some little more than a 
township with its suburbs: tradition has 
it that these ‘states’ nlimbered 124 shortly 
before jhe Sag-e’s birth and a nominal 72 
during his life. * The ‘states’ clustered 
about th^ basin of the Yeljow River and 
were the birthplace of Chinese culture 
and political identity; while the Yangtse, 
the greatest river of the^hina we visualize 
to-day, was little known. The population 
probably did not exceed 13 millions, 
against the 400 millions of to-day. The 
language, though intrinsically the same, 
was much stronger in final gutturals, 

VI 

OONFUCIUS 

labial»,and dentals, and would notnowbe 
understood. THese earlier Chinese, how- 
ever, were already long acquainted with the 
arts of civilization and were thus sharply, 
differentiated from the tribes of the north- 
west — by their bronzes, pottery, culti- 
vated clothing such as furs, linen, silks, 
and f)0ssibly woollen or felt materials, 
their houses being of brick or rammed 
clay; and tiled roofs were in existence. 
Chairsliad not been invented; so we read 
that the Master, Confucius, would not sit 
on his ‘mat’ unless it were straight. Books 
were cumbrous, beiitg made from separ- 
ate slips of bamboo; and we read that he 
thrice wore out the leathern thongs which 
bound together his copy of the I Ching or 
Book of Change^ a curious and difficult 
collection of astrological and semi-trans- 
cendental maxims, which still attracts and 
puzzles the students of Chinese literature. 

The most ancient life of Confucius is 
called ‘The Family Sayings’. One of his 

CONFUCIUS 

yii 

ancestors was a man of learning •whose 
son, an officer of talent and honour, was 
murdered by a powerful minister who 
.carried off his beautiful wife. She strangled 
herself, and he only obtained her corpse. 
The family were living in the State of 
Sung; but, owing to the undying enmity 
caused by the outrage, three generations 
later the K'ung family moved to*the State 
of Lu, one of them becoming governor of 
the town where Confucius’s grandfather 
was born. Confucifts’s father was noted 
for his physical strength and courage. In 
an attack on a city, the enemy enticed his 
men within the open gateway and were 
lowering the portcullis to entrap them, 
when he, by a stupendous effort, caught 
hold of it and supported it till the last of 
his men had escaped. At seventy, after 
nine daughters had been born to him by 
his first wife, and a crippled son by a 
concubine, this hardy old man took unto i 
himself yet another, a young maiden, as 

OONFUCIUS 

viii 

wife. 6he bore him this most famous son, 
calling him ‘Ch iu’ because of the noble 
proportions of his forehead. In The Ana- 
lects, he refers to himself several times as 
‘Ch'iu’; and again as Chung Ni, his other 
cognomen. But he is mostly spoken of 
by his family surname of K'ung, which 
has bten latinized for us in K'ung-fu-tzu, 
or Confwcius, meaning K'lmg the Philo- 
sopher. 

It is*the character and sayings of the 
child of this marriage in that age of con- 
fusion and turmoil and in the, limited 
China of nearly 2,560’years ago which 
during the centuries have been the guid- 
ing star of Chinese character. Nor would 
any to-day be so bold as to claim that he 
‘ has surpassed hirp, either in life or ideal: 
for Confucius set before himself, with 
admirable singleness of purpose, to live 
as befits the Man of Virtue; and right 
nobly he carried it out, and suffered, too, 
in particular for his ideals of government 

CONFUCIU*S 

of the people. Great words were ever upon 
his lips: sincerity, modesty, magnanim- 

ity, conscientiousness, courage, courtesy, 
respect for others. Wisdom such as this, 
even though chanted by rote as at last 
came tp happen, given into the ears of 
succeeding generations of China’s young 
men, could not fail to leave its Mark, 

and is a tremendous inheritance. •Chinese 

people exhibit, even to our uninstructed 
and critical Western eyes, a ripeness and ^ 
education of manners perceptibly not of 
recent, growth; 

Once when Fan Ch'ih, a disciple, asked 
about Virtue, the Master s^id; ‘In private 
life be courteous, in handling public busi- 
ness be serious, with all men be sincere.;; 
Even though you go among barbarians, you 
may not relinquish these virtues !’ 

Legends concerning the birth of Con- 
fucius have grown, the chief being that a 
spirit appeared to his mother which said, 
‘You shall bear a son, a sage, and you 

CONFUCIUS 

must ‘bring him forth^in a hollow mul- 
berry tree’. Wfiile she was carrying him, 
five old nien, the spirits of the ‘Five 
Planets’, led before her an animal, shaped 
like a cow, covered with dragon’s scales 
and with one horn like the unicorn: the 
sacred //«, which only appears at the ad- 
vent*of a sage. A similar beast, with a 
broken ieg, was caught a fcouple of years 
before the Sage’s death. Confucius went 
to sec it and burst into tears, realizing that 
it predicted his owit death. The piece of 
ribbon his mother had attached .at his 
birth to its horn was* still there, it is said. 

When she told her husband about the 
prediction of the hollow mulberry tree, 
he informed her that a cave of that name 
existed not far av^ay; and there she gave 
birth to her son, a spring bubbling up 
forthwith for his first bath and then dying 
away. ‘The child’, so run the Chinese 
stories, ‘was of an extraordinary appear- 
ance, with a mouth like the sea, ox lips, a 

CONFUCIU'S 

dragon’s back’, and tlie top of his head 
prominent. This sounds neither hand- 
some nor attractive to us; but i^ point of 
fact, though pictures of Confucius are 
rare and cannot be considered genuine, 
the oldest show us a man with the broad 
strong equable face of the countryman of 
North China to-day. He wears a hand- 
some high cap with an ornament*in it and 
fringe; his tunic is folded with care, for he 
liked to be handsome in his dress. ’ Under 
the fringe his large dark lustrous eyes are 
liumotQus, kind and thoughtful, and he 
w'ears a pleasing hatf-smite. His ears are 
always shown as very large, for large ears 
are to the Chinese a sign of sagacity. He 
has the thin elegant bear^ of the Chinese 
gentleman. He was taller than the average 
and must have had a good physique, for 
he walked, drove, and rode long leagues 
when travelling from state to state with 
his disciples, suffering hunger better thanS 
they did. On one occasion their food 

CONFUCIUS 

failed* and the disciples were so- ill 
could not stand. Even Tzu Lu, the Bold, 
the former soldier, grumbled, and asked: 

‘Does a man of the higher order also have 
to suffer want ?’ 

■ ‘The superior man bears want unshaken,’ 
replied the Master, ‘the inferior man in want 
becoilies demoralized.’ 

“Confuckis also was a sportsman; he liked 
archery and he fished, but ‘never with a 
net; and when shooting he did not aim at 
a resting bird’. At I9 he was married, in 
Chinese fashion, to a lady from die State 
of Sung. Their son,*K^ung Li, was born 
the following^ year 531 b.c., but he is 
known by his other name, Po Yii, in The 
Analects^ meaning The Carp, because the 
Duke of Lu, und^r whom Confucius was 
then serving, sent a present of a carp at 
the birth. It must be admitted that Con- 
fucius showed no sort of favouritism or 
perceptible affection towards his son who 
became a disciple too, beyond advising 

CONFUCIUS 

xiii 

him to s.tudy the Odes and the Ru’es of 
Ceremony wlien once they met in a hall, 
as another disciple, Ch'en K'ang, elicited 
by questioning Po Yii. There is a tradi- 
tion that, some twenty years later, Con- 
fucius had to divorce his wife, after hej 
had begun his exile: but in the Li Chi,' 
or Record of Rites, the account of the 
manner in which Po Yii, the son, bewailed 
his mother’s death in 485 b.c., makes this 
tradition seem doubtful. Nevertheless, 
it is apparent, even in- The Analects^ that 
the son of his spirit, whom he* calls by his'; 
surname Hui and ^hom we know as Yen 
Hui, was dearer to him than any son of . 
his body. Yen Hui’s virtue* lay in putting 
into practice Confucius’s teaching. This 
evidence of human affection in Confucius’s 
character, however, attracts us, as does 
his constant sympathy with mourners. 
He once even ordered Tzu Kung to un- 
yoke one of the horses from the carriage 
and present it to the family of a former 

CONFUCIUS 

xiv 

■i* 

host US a contribution towards the funeral 
expenses. Tzu Kung objected; but the 
Master replied, ‘I dislike the thought of 
■ my tears not being followed by practical 
sympathy.’ In his old age, a pestilence 
fell upon his village, and he ‘put on his 
Court robes and stood on the eastern 
Steps’, sharing the sacrificial procession 
and the. anxieties of his fellows. 

Already at the age of 22, his fame as a 
student had attracted to his side a number 
of followers, and 'he entered upon his 
career as founder and teacher of school. 
It is a remarkable coincidence that in this 

to 
his 

gracious -spirited disciple Plato followed, 
so Confucius’s bylliant disciple, Mencius, 
later expanded the Master’s teachings 
with great illumination. One might also 
compare the position of Confucius in 
Chinese culture with that of Moses in 
Jewish eyes; as one who gave the laws 

same era Socrates was drawing pupils 
himself in Greece, and that just as 

CONFUCIUS, XV 

of Right Living. Confucius himself, .with 
deep humility, refused tef be considered 
an original thinker. He called^ himself a 
‘transmitter’, declaring that his philo- 
sophy was based on the wisdom of the 
ancients, whom, as in The Analects, he 
constantfy quotes. For him Right Living 
meant essentially the harmonizing by the 
Man of Virtue of his own personality into 
the social order, and work for its progress 
and his own. His method is to look con- 
stantly and modestly at the good example i 
of parents and ejders, then at Ihc ancient 
wisdom of the past, and then to respect 
the ministers of state and the prince. His 
theory was that if a prince set his ministers 
a good example, they would do the same 
by the people, and all the land would 
follow virtue and peace. In short, he 
believed in the infectious power of good ; 
but with him it started at the top of the 
social tree, and not with the fishermen and 
carpenters! When the minister Chi K'ang 

CONFUCIUS 

xvi 

Tzu tasked his opinion on good govern- 
ment, the Master responded : 

‘If youp-aspirations are for good, Sir, the 
people will be good. The moral character 
of those in high position is the breeze, the 
character of those below is the grass. When 
the grass has the breeze upon it, it assuredly 
bends.’ 

The West has so long accepted the rather 
cynical dictum that a nation receives the 
government it deserves, that this entirely 
opposite view of the school of Confucius 
may well receive thought. 

In 529 B.c.-his mother died, and Con- 
fucius removed his father’s body from its 
temporary interment to bury it with his 
mother’s. The mound being four feet 
high over the tomb, he left the final details 
to his disciples and set off homewards. A 
violent storm came which partly broke 
down the mound, and his disciples arrived 
home late and had to explain the reason. 
He burst into tears, crying that they did 

CONFUCIUS xvii 

not build such poor mounds ‘in plden 
times’. He had built this high mound, he 
explained, because he was ‘a man of the 
north, south, east, and west’, meaning 
that destiny might cause him to travel far 
in any direction from the resting-place of 
his parents. He kept the full three years 
mourning. One of the disciples, the cynic 
and sceptic Tsai Wo, who did not always 
please him, once asked whether one year’s 
mourning for parents was not enough. 

‘Would you feel at ease, then, in eating 
good rice and v^earing fine clothes.^’ asked 
the Master. 

‘I should,’ was the reply. 

‘If you 'would feel at ease, then do so, 
rejoined Confucius. 

After Tsai Wo had gone, he exclaimed 
at his lack of feeling, asserting that ‘only 
when a child is three years old does it 
leave its parents’ arms’, and the period 
of mourning should be three years also. 
Confucius, however, could realize the 

442 b 

xviii CONFUCIUS 

duties of parents to children. When he 
became Chief Justice in Lu, he formed a 
habit of consulting those present at a case 
as to their opinion of it, and deciding 
according to the best opinion offered — a 
species of early consultation of a jury. 
On one occasion a father brought his 
refractory son for a punishment involving 
the death penalty. Confucius put both in 
prison and subsequently released both. 
On beftig remonstrated with by his prince, 
he replied: 

‘When superiors fail in .their duty, and 
yet propose to. have their inferiors put to 
death, this is not right. This father has not 
taught his son Ico be filial.’ 

In the year 5^3 b.c. music began to play 
a large part in the cultivation of his spirit, 
though the instruments of his day would 
seem crude indeed to us. Both poetry and 
song were included; specially the com- 
position of pieces for state occasions. The 
noted musician Hsiang came t6 Lu and 

CONFUCIUS 

XIX 

taught Confucius. There are references 
in The Analects toliis coutteously helping 
the ‘bandmaster’ to his seat, ra^jier against 
the disciples’ pride. But the bandmasters, 
like the musician of to-day in China, were 
usually blind. Music represented to his 
mind an effort of the spirit to interpret the 
harmony of the universe, which, accord- 
ing to his idea, could particularly be 
exemplified in the harmonious govern- 
ment of a state. He fulminated agafnst the 
‘modern’ light emotional music, and, like i 
Plato, preferred the austere Doric strain 
of the ancients. When once asked about 
the administration of a state, he warned 
his interlocutor to ‘avoid specious men, 
and the songs of Cheng’, the modern 
music. 

‘I hate the way in which purple robs red 
of its lustre: I hate the way the airs of 
Cheng pervert correct music; and I hate 
the way in which sharp tongues overthrow 
both states and families!’ 

SONFUCIUS 

A few paragraphs in The Analects are not 
very intelligible to the Western reader, 
yet the events to which they refer are 
known to any scholar in China. One 
such praises a bandmaster Chih who 
migrated to Clfi, while others of the 
Emperor’s musicians who performed at 
each'^ offering of his daily meals — the 
drummer and the player on the ‘stone 
chimes’ — migrated as far as an island in the 
sea. Tlie Chinese reader realizes they are 
being praised because they left a licen- 
tious Court rather than debaje their 
sacrificial art. -Music affected Confucius 
profoundly. He heard the Shao music, 
with its appropriate stately posturings and 
dances, which interpreted The Accession 
to the Throne; and for three months 
afterwards, he says in The Analects, he 
was unconscious of the taste of meat. ‘1 
did not imagine that Music had reached 
such perfection!’ 

In 518 B.c. a powerful minister of Lu, 

CONFUCIUS 

xxj 

Meng I hy name, gave orders on his death- 
bed that his son sfiould Be sent to study 
under Confucius. The adv^t of this 
young noble, with a relative, also a cadet 
of high birth, gave immediate prestige to 
the school of Confucius, and his fame 
grew. He was now 33. In The Analects 
he gives, towards the end of his life, a 
short account of his mental and spiritual 
progression. 

The Master said: i. ‘At fifteen I set my 
mind upon wisdom. 2. At thirty I stood 
firm. 3. ,At forty I was free from doubts. 

4. At fifty I understbod the laws of Heaven. 

5. At sixty my ear was still docile. 6. At 
seventy I could follow the 'desires of my 
heart without transgressing- the right.’ 

It was about 518 B.q. also that Con- 
fucius received the great pleasure through 
these new disciples of a visit to the capital, 
which was then at Loyang, in the present 
province of Honan. Deeply interested in 
the impenal and temple rites, the ancient 

CONFUCIUS 

^xii 

musk and ritual, he met those who could 
inform him tfiereon. He visited the 
grounds <?f the temples to Heaven and 
to Earth, and was greatly pleased with 
‘a metal statue of a man with three clasps 
on his mouth, and his back covered with 
an enjoyable homily on the duty of 
keeling a watch upon his lips’, says Pro- 
fessor Legge! His chief wish was to 
meet Laotzu, the mystic philosopher, a 
very old man, his post being Keeper of the 
Imperial Archives.* It is not quite certain, 
but probable, that the two met, and they 
seem to have talked fibely. It is Ssu-ma 
Ch'ien, the great historian, who, in a 
famous passage, gives the account. As he 
avowedly preferred Laotzu to Confucius, 
he may be somewhat prejudiced. Con- 
fucius seems to have praised the past sages 
in his usual way. 

‘Those whom you talk about are dead,’ 
said Laotzu, ‘and their bones are mouldered 
to dust; only their words remain. . . . Put 

CONFUCIUS xxiii 

away your proud air and many desires^your 
insinuating habit and wild*will. These are 
of no advantage to you. This is all I have 
to tell you.’ 

Confucius is made to say concerning 
Laotzu : 

T know how birds can fly, how fishes 
swim, and how animals can be snared.# But 
the runner may be snared, the swimmer 
may be hooked, and the flyer shot by the 
arrow. But there is the dragon! I fannot 
tell how he mounts on the wind through the 
clouds, and rises to heaVen. To-day I have 
seen Laofzu, and can only compare him to , 
the dragon !’ 

These two schools of thought have con- 
tinued to sway Chinese minds ever since; 
and indeed Western thinkers face the same 
problem. Laotzu, the qiystic, versed in 
the induction of trance and the escape 
of the spirit from fleshly bonds through 
breathing, something after the manner of 
Yoga in India, was the direct opposite 
of Confucius who felt deeply the call to 

CONFUCIUS 

^xiv 

serve in this present life. Through all his 
subsequent wanderings, Confucius and 
his disciples were criticized by men who, 
following the way of Laotzu, turned 
hermit, and concerned themselves only 
to till a plot of land for bare sustenance. 
They accused him of talking to please 
people, of ‘perching here and perching 
there’, when driven to exile. One of them 
tried to seduce Tzu Lu, suggesting that it 
was useless attempting to stem the swell- 
ing torrents of destruction into which the 
world was rushing. 

‘As for you, 'instead of following a leader 
who flees from one to another, had you not 
better follow those who flee the world 
entirely.^’ 

And he fell to ra^ng in his seed without 
more ado. When Tzu Lu reported it, the 
Master replied; 

‘I cannot herd with birds and beasts, and 
if I may not associate with mankind, with 
whom am I to associate.^ Did right rule 

CONFUCIUS 

prevail in the world, I should not be taking 
part in reforming it.’ 

He was wont to say that his#knowledge i 
was not intuitive but resulted from hard 
work and mental application. The advent 
of Buddhism into China a thousand years 
later reinforced the ascetics and mystics: 
after which for centuries the Confucian 
and the Buddhist philosophies often 
clashed, but sometimes intermingled. 
There have been famous Confucianists 
who were also Buddliist, and others who 

' t 

attacked Buddhism with wit and scepti- 
cism. Confucius himself evidently tried 
the esoteric w^ay, but his practical spirit 
made nothing of it. 

‘I have spent the whole day without food 
and the whole night without sleep in order 
to meditate. It was of no use. It is better 
to learn!’ 

Confucius had no need to adopt the 
methods of others ; indeed his own poli- 
tical and philosophical teaching drew large 

xxvi OONFUCIUS 

K 

numbers of listeners and followers. One 
tradition has it that three thousand came 
during the ^ears of his success to inquire 
of him. But in 517 b.c. his Duke, Chao 
of Lu, asserted himself against the three 
powerful chieftains who had kept him in 
tutelage, taxed his revenues, and used him 
as fi^rehead. Unfortunately his revolt 
failed, and he had to flee, and seven years 
later died in exile. Confucius also left Lu 
for a neighbouring State whose duke 
would have offered him control of a dis- 
trict but was dissuaded by a*jealou^ minis- 
ter who considered Confucius a visionary. 
Eight years later Confucius returned to 
Lu where another representative of the 
ducal house. Ting, had been made chief 
of the state by the chieftains, although 
they themselves were now exploited by 
turbulent underlings. These chieftains 
are mentioned at times in The Analects^ 
e.g. as assuming sacrificial and ducal 
rites to which they had no claim. In 501 ' 

CONFUCIUS 

xxvji 

B.c. Duke Ting appointed Corffucius; 
governor of Chung Tu district, and in a 
year, history says, he had produced a 
marvellous change for good. ‘A thing 
dropped in the streets was not picked up.’ 
Confucius became Chief of the Office of 
Works, then Chief Justice; he dismantled 
rebel strongholds, and took away ^ower 
from the feudal lords, and exalted the 
sovereign. ‘A transforming government 
went abroad. Dishonesty and dissolute- 
ness hid- their heads! Loyalty and good 
faith became ‘the characteristics of the 
men, and chastity and docility that of the 
women. Confucius became the idol of 
the people, and flew in songs through 
their mouths.’^ At 56 he was Prime 
Minister. His wonde,rful achievements 
roused the fear and envy of a neighbour, 
the Prince of Ch'i, whose minister had 
already tried to abduct Duke Ting and 

would have done, but for the alertness of 
\ 

* Legge’s Introduction. 

xxviii CONFUCIUS 

% 

Confucius. The prince now tried other 
tactics. Under pretext of an alliance, he 
sent Duke fing a present of eighty picked 
singing-girls, or courtesans, and a hun- 
dred and twenty thoroughbred horses, to 
tempt him from attention to state. At 
first these were lodged outside the city, 
Confticius strenuously opposing their 
acceptance. The minister Chi, however, 
went and looked upon them, and painted 
their attractions so enticingly that the 
Duke succumbed and took the women 
into his harem. For three days no state 
business was held, the great sacrifice soon 
afterwards was curtailed, and the Duke 
failed to send the sacrificial flesh to his 
ministers. Confucius was vanquished. He 
went out, with niany a backward look, 
deep grief, and ‘resisting footsteps’ as his 
disciple Mencius puts it, to an exile which 
lasted thirteen years. His disciple, Tzu Lu, 
led him first to the capital of the State of 
Wei, where his brother-in-law was host. 

CONFUCIUS 

xxiy 

Duke Ling there assigned him an annual 
income of sixty thousand measures of 
grain; but he was more dissipated than 
Duke Ting, and after ten months Con- 
fucius left for the State of Ch'en. There 
were dangers on the road and they were 
attacked, and finally he returned to Wei, 
where, however, his chief obstruction 
was Nan-Tzu, the beautiful but wanton 
wife of the Duke, behind whom he had 
to drive out in the carriage. ‘Lust in front, i 
virtue behind’, the people commented. 
He left /or Sung State, passing through 
Ts'ao where Huan T'ui, the brother of 
one of his disciples, tried to kill him by 
having a tree pulled down on him and 
his disciples. The band of exiles hardly 
escaped, and fled in di^erent directions. 
Tzu Kung, a devoted disciple, amused his 
Master later by repeating the description 
given by a peasant when they were in- 
quiring his whereabouts, who ended that 
Confucius had looked as ‘disconsolate as 

CONFUCIUS 

XXX 

% 

the d«g of a broken-down family]’ ‘How 
like! How likSl’ said Confucius with 
laughter; (or he certainly did not lack 
a sense of humour. Indeed, on reading 
'"The Analects^ one is struck by Confucius’s 
good cheer. Chinese scholars for many 
centuries have considered him too sacro- 
sanct to be amusing; but it is to be hoped 
that the present generation may now be 
allowed to savour the salt of his wit. He 
talkedVery freely with this faithful band 
of followers and spared his tongue not 
at all in his desire to disciple them to per- 
fection. He pokes fun at the rashness of 
Tzu Lu, the former soldier, whose sur- 
name was Yu. Once, in jest, he said, ‘My 
doctrines make no progress. I will get 
me upon a raft and float away upon the 
sea, and take Yu as companion’. Izu Lu 
was preening himself upon this when 
Confucius added, ‘Yu is fonder of daring 
than I; he also exercises no discretion!’ 
‘It is only the very wisest an J the very 

CONFUCIUS 

XXXI 

stupidest who never change’, he said on, 
another occasion. Tsai Wo, the sceptic, 
put this problem: if someone ^aid, ‘there 
is a man in the well, the altruist, he sup- 
posed, would go after him’. Confucius 
outdid him in realism, and demurred 
that €ve*n an altruist would ‘first make 
certain there really was a man dowrf the 
well !’ Tzu Kung once said piously, ‘What 
I do not wish others to do to me, that also 
I wish not to do to tliem.’ ‘Tzu !’ s5id the 
Master, ‘that is a point to which you have 
not attained!’ A certain man was recom- 
mended to him as ‘thinking thrice before 
he took any action’. Confucius tersely 
replied, ‘Twice is sufficient!’ ‘Of all 
people,’ he says at one point, ‘maids and 
servants are hardest to keep in your 
house. If you are friendly with them,, 
they lose their deference; if you are re- 
served with them, they resent it.’ He 
hated the greedy: ‘how hard is the case 
of the mail who stuffs himself with food 

XXXll 

CONFUCIUS 

the livelong day’, and suggested he would 
be better occupifcd playing checkers ! One 
lazy disciple shocked him by sleeping all 
day. Another thought education was 
not an essential to a ruler, and Confucius 
sharply reduced his reasoning to an ab- 
surdity, ending, ‘I hate glib people’. His 
disciple, Jan Ch'iu, by whose aid he was 
recalled eventually from exile, showed 
himself later as rapacious and militant, 
and Confucius old as he was then, lion- 
like lifted his head and said, ‘You may 
beat the drums and attacl^ him. He is no 
disciple of mine !’ One of the most famous 
stories concerning Confucius is how, on 
the lonely side of Mt. T'ai, he heard the 
mourning wail of a woman. He sent Tzu 
Lu to ask why she sat there. ‘My hus- 
band’s father was killed here by a tiger, 
my husband also, and now my son has 
met the same fate.’ ‘Then why,’ Con- 
fucius asked, ‘do you dwell in so dreadful 
a place 

CONFUCIUS 

XXXlll 

‘Because here/, she answered, ‘tHere is 
no oppressive ruler.’ 

‘Scholars,’ he said to his disciples; 
‘remember this: oppressive rule is more 
cruel than a tiger.’ 

His ideas of good government were 
deeply absorbed by his best disciples. 
Duke Ai once said to Yu Jo, known 
later as the philosopher Yu Tzu and 
who was so like Confucius that it was 
proposed he be put in his place after his 
death; ‘It is a year of dearth, ^nd we have 
not revrfjnue efiough for our needs.’ Yu 
Jo suggested that the taxes be diminished 
to one-tenth instead of the customary 
two-tenths. ‘Why, with two- tenths I have 
still not enough, how could I manage with 
one- tenth ‘If the pegple enjoy plenty,’ 
was the rejoinder, ‘with whom will the 
Prince share want } But if the people are 
in want, with whom will the Prince share 
plenty The Prince, it seems, must 
share his people’s want as well as plenty. 

■»4Z 

c 

xxxtv 

CONFUCIUS 

Ratfely have we record of an action 
that would not perhaps receive our appro- 
bation. Ftom Sung Confucius went to 
Chen, staying there three years with the 
Warden of the Wall, till the State of Wu 
began to make war on Chen and Con- 
fucius had to leave for Wei. ' At the 
frontier he was seized at P'u by an officer 
in rebellion against the Duke of Wei, who 
only liberated Confucius on his taking 
a solemn oath not to proceed to Wei. 
Regaining his freedom, however, the 
Master continued to Wei, and being asked 
by his disciples whether it was right to 
.{break such an oath, replied: ‘It was a 
forced oath. The spirits do not hear 
such.’ On another occasion, he acted with 
deliberate insincerity. Ju Pei, an old 
scholar who had misbehaved, wished to 
see the Master. Confucius excused him- 
self from receiving him ‘on the ground of 
sickness; but when his messenger had 
gone out of the door, he took up his 

C O NF U Cl US XXXV 

harpsichord and Jaegan ^to sing, so that 
Ju Pei might hear!’ 

The long thirteen years of %xile found 
him journeying from state to state but 
always firm in spirit. Duke Ling of Wei, 
to whose service Confucius returned 
now and again for default of any other, 
would receive him well enough but did 
not use his services. Confucius remarked 
to Jan Ch'iu on the growth of the {popula- 
tion. ‘What next should be done for 
them,’ asked Jan Ch'iu. ‘Enrich them,’ 
was th« reply, ‘And what next.^’ con- 
tinued Jan Ch'iu. ‘Educate them,’ was' 
the Master’s famous reply. He once 
sighed, ‘Were a prince to employ me, in 
a twelvemonth something could be done, 
but in three years the wcrk could be com- 
pleted!’ An official from the State of 
Chin invited him to office there, and Con- 
fucius was tempted; but the official was 
in rebellion against his chief, and honest 
Tzu Lu protested successfully against his 

xxxvi CONFUCIUS 

Master’s acceptance. The peasants for 
whose benefit in truth he was undergoing 
this exile, ‘were not grateful ; and they 
criticized him in their rough way as the 
‘man who knows he cannot succeed and 
keeps on trying’. The recluses and her- 
mits, sneering, told him it was all useless ; 
while state after state put aside his coun- 
sels of peace and care for the people. 
Only this faithful band, lovers of wisdom, 
walked with him. Once we have a picture 
of them together ifi The Analects^ when 
his heart swelled with gratification and 
happiness as he looked upon them; at 
Ming Tzu standing by his side, looking 
so calm in reserved strength, Tzu Lu so 
full of energy, and Jan Ch'iu and Tzu 
Kung so frank arjd fearless. He foretold 
that Tzu Lu would not die in his bed: 
neither did he, for he chose death rather 
than forsake in peril his feudal Chief. 

In 492 B.c. the way seemed open for 
his return to his native state. The danc- 

CONFUCIUS 

xxxvii 

ing-girls and thg horses had brought 
Duke Ting to the untimely end desired 
by their donor, and he hadd^een dead 
three years: the minister Chi Huan, who 
had tempted the duke, had also died, but 
in remorse, and had charged his successor 
to recall Confucius. This official, Chi 
K'ang Tzu, however, sent instead for the 
disciple Jan Ch'iu, not too satisfactory a 
pupil. Yet he did so well that the niinister 
inquired who had taught him the ways 
of government. Corffucius, meanwhile, 
longing,to retifrn, left Duke Ling of Wei 
who was only inquiring of him how to 
make war, moved on to Ch'en and then 
to Ts'ai, to-day the provinces of Hupeh 
and Hunan. There he nearly starved 
through the machinations of officials. 
Yet he kept ever cheerful, playing on his 
lute and singing. For eight more years 
he thus wandered, sometimes welcomed 
but never given the chance to serve : even 
back to Wei where Duke Ling had died 

xxxviii CONFUCIUS 

and his wife had been murdered by her 

stepson and all was rebellion. 

At last, when Confucius was 68, he was 
recalled home, b.c. 484. To the end, as 
Chu Hsi, or Chu Tzu, the first great com- 
mentator on The Analects puts it, ‘Lu 
failed to make use of him, nor did he any 
longer seek to enter office’. Chi K'ang 
Tzu, the minister, who had recalled him, 
frequently consulted him concerning the 
art of government in general, but not to 
much effect. The -next few years Con- 
fucius devoted to editing-and writing an 
Introduction to the Book of History; to 
arranging the Book of Rites and Cere- 
monies; to classifying the Odes; and to 
setting in order the music, both of the 
temple and the^ court, for ceremonial 
purposes. Probably at this time, too, he 
supplied his disciple Tzeng Tzu with the 
material for his Classic of Filial Piety: and 
he studied for his own interest the I Ching 
or Book of Changes. Soon after his 

CONFUCIUS 

xxxix 

return, his son ]^o Yii^died, leaving a 
grandson Chi. Chi’s son, Tzu Ssu, be- 
came a pupil of the philosopher and dis- 
ciple Tseng Tzu, and it was from Tseng 
Tzu that Meng Tzu, known to us as M^n- 
cii^, the greatest follower, obtained his 
education. Three of these are responsible 
for the canon of the Four Books which 
have been the basis of Chinese education 
till the present era and the formativej)Ower 
of the Chinese character: Tseng Tzu 
for the Great Learnirig, Tzu Ssu for the 
Doctrine of the Mean (or Way of Balanced 
Living), and Mencius for the Classic 
hearing his name, while The Analects are 
the fourth. The beloved disciple. Yen 
Yiian (or Hui, as the Master usually calk_ 
him, being his surnan;e) died the year’ 
after Confucius’s son, and his exceeding 
grief caused his other disciples to remon- 
strate. Confucius had hoped his mantle 
would fall upon Yen Hui. Once he re- 
marked, as if for his own warning: ‘Hui 

xl CONFUCIUS 

. was rtot one who gave me any assistance. 
He was invariably satisfied with whatever 
I said!’ T«vo years later, the impetuous 
Tzu Lu died also in battle. 

In the fifth year after his return from 
his long exile Confucius, aged 73, rose 
early one morning, with his hands clasped 
as customarily behind his back, and 
dragging his staff, and moving out of the 
door of the house, he crooned from one 
of the Odes which he had so much loved 
during life: 

‘The great mountain must crumble;; 

The strong beam must break; 

And the wise man wither away like a plant.’ 

Tzu Kung heard and sadly asked: Tf the 
great mountain shall crumble, to whom 
shall I look up Next Confucius spoke 
to him concerning the position of his own 
corpse after death. It was to be placed 
between the two house pillars, as if the 
dead were both host and guest; and he 
ordained the last sacrifices and rites. He 

CONFUCIUS xli 

then said, thinking as ever about his jife- 
work for the state :* 

‘No intelligent monarch ariseg; there is 
not one in the empire that will make me his 
master. My time has come to die.’ 

He returned to his couch and a week later 
he died on the fourth day of the eleventh 
month, 479 

When Tzu Lu once asked about man’s 
duty to the spirits of the departed, Con- 
fucius replied: ‘While still unable "to do 
your duty to the living, how can you do; 
your duty to the dead.^’ When Tzu Lu 
ventured to ask about death, the Master 
replied, ‘Not understanding life, how can 
you understand death The Master years 
before had once been seriously ill, and 
Tzu Lu asked leave to have prayers 
offered. ‘Is there authority for such a 
step.^’ Confucius asked. ‘There is,’ Tzu 
Lu replied; ‘In the litanies for the dead it 
is said, “We pray to you, spirits celestial 
and terrestrial”.’ The Master answered, 

xlii CONFUCIUS 

‘My^ praying has been for long.’ He 
meant that his life of service and faith 
in the right was a prayer Heaven hears. 
On another occasion, when speaking of 
his unpopularity, he says: ‘But does not 
Heaven know me And again, ‘He who 
sins against Heaven has no where left for 
prayer.’ 

After his death began his glorification, 
which at first was offered his disciples; 
but they refused to take his place. Said 
Tzu Kung of the Master: 

‘He is the sun, the moon, which there is 
no way of climbing over, and though a man 
desire to cut himself off from them, what 
harm does he do to the sun or moon.^ . . . 
The impossibility of equalling our Master 
is like the impossibility of scaling a ladder 
and ascending to fhe skies.’ 

Confucius died in the family home in Ch‘u 
Fu, Shantung province, and his descen- 
dants were later raised to be dukes, so that 
there is a Duke Kung to-day. People still 

CONFUCIUS xliii 

make pilgrimages to the sacred gpove. 
There is no shrine: but there is still his 
well : and there is a stylus, or stQne, raised 
up, to which emperors have made obei- 
sance, on which is written, ‘Confucius, The 
Primal Sage’. A large figure of the Sage 
is seated In the beautiful old temple: and 
his disciples are ranged on either side*. In 
195 B.c. the founder of the Han dynasty 
offered an ox at his tomb and since then, 
till the emergence of the Chinese republic 
in 1 91 1, annual sacrifices were made to 
Confucips. Each school-child raised his 
clasped hands in the morning on arrival to 
the little tablet with Confucius’s name on a 
shelf in a corner of the room. Since 191 1 
his following has waned and waxed, and 
waned again. Some years ago the Four' 
Books were relegated to university study 
and are no longer the main preoccupation 
of Chinese schools. But times change. 
There is now a return of interest to the 
great heritage of China’s past treasury of 

xliv 

CONFUCIUS 

wisdom. We of the West may well pon- 
der also, on the deep steadiness and cheer- 
fulness of his spirit, on his faith in the 
Power that makes for Righteousness — 
even to the point of accepting bitter and 
long exile for its sake. 

THE ANALECTS 

The Analects^ or Conversations of Con- 
fucius^ were probably compiled after his 
death by followers of his two disciples 
Tseng and Yu, referred to as ‘philo- 
sophers’ in the opening paragraphs. They 
are, in the main, his discourses with his 
disciples and inquirers, though some are 
also sayings of the disciples. The Em- 
peror Ch'in Shih Huang, founding a new 
dynasty 213 b.c.^, ordered that all books 
should be burnt and all scholars buried 
alive, so that History might begin with 
himself. But his reign was short; and a 
few precious relics escaped. An ancient 
copy of The Analects was discovered 

CONFUCIUS xlv 

about 150 B.c. in a cranny of a wall o^the 
house which had been occupied by Con- 
fucius himself, and another oopy was 
found in a neighbouring state. Mean- 
while the form of Chinese handwriting 
had altered from the antique ‘tadpole’ 
style of Confucian days to the present 
square characters, and the ancient books 
were indecipherable save to a few scholars. 
One such was the head of Confucius’s 
own clan, and the king of the day ordered 
him to decipher his great ancestor’s work: 
which hejdid. There are a few discrepan- 
cies between the two versions, but these 
are unimportant except to the scholar, and 
the Chinese text used for the present book . 
is the one generally accepted. 

There have been many schools of 
thought and commentators on The Ana- 
lects: the best-known being Chu Hsi, or 
Chu Tzu, whose voluminous writings in r 
the twelfth century a.d. were the crown 
of Chinese scholarship. The Analects 

xlvi CONFUCIUS 

weft first translated .into Latin for the 
benefit of non-Chinese readers in 1687, 
by a RcAnan Catholic missionary; and 
later re-translated by Italian and French 
Fathers. In 1861 Dr. Legge, a Protestant 
missionary to China, later the first to 
hold the Chair of Chinese Language and 
Literature at Oxford University, pub- 
lished his magnificent translation of the 
whole of the Chinese Classics, including 
■The Analects. In 1910, Professor Soothill, 
feeling that a more modern interpretation 
was desirable, published his translation of 
The Analects^ together with the Chinese 
text, and full notes, comparing all the 
translations. He also was a Protestant 
missionary for many years in China and 
later succeeded, to Dr. Legge’s Chair 
at Oxford. It is his, this last trans- 
lation, without the Chinese texts and 
with very abridged Notes, which the 
reader has before him in the present 
volume. 

CONFUCIUS 

xlvii 

Professor Soothill died in 1935. It 4 ias 
been a great joy for me, his daughter, to 
have had the opportunity thesa last few 
months, while working on this book, 
to be again in the company of my 
father’s mind in this interpretation of 
Confucius*. At the same time, no one 
who walks also in spirit with his mighty 
protagonist can fail to be deeply im- 
pressed by the grandeur of such a Master. 
It has been a searching privilege to fallow 
him with Tzu Kung and Yen Hui and 
Tseng Tju into exile, for the sake of 
good government: to hear him poke a 
little fun at Tzu Lu’s over-boldness: ‘to 
ramble under the trees by the Rain Altar’, 
with him as an unseen, very humble, ‘out- 
side pupil’, in the Chinese term; and to 
listen to this great scholar and gentleman 
discourse on life and social responsibili- 
ties, on Sincerity and Virtue. 

CHINA, 1937 DOROTHEA HOSIE 

CONTENTS OS' THE BOOKS 

VOLUME I 

BOOK I. Concerning Fundamental Prin- 
ciples ...... I 

BOOK II. Concerning Government . . 8 

VOLUME II 

BOOK III. The Eight Dancers: Concern- 
ing Manners and Morals . . • 17 

BOOK IV. Concerning Virtue ... 28 

VOLUME III 

BOOK V. Concerning Certain Disciples 

and Others 36 

BOOK VI. Concerning Certain Disciples 
and Other Subjects .... 48 

VOLUME IV 

BOOK VII. Concerning the Master Him- 
self . • . . . *59 

BOOK VIII. Chiefly Concerning Certain 
Ancient Worthies .... 71 

VOLUME V 

BOOK IX. Chiefly Personal ... 80 

BOOK X. Concerning the Sage in His 
Daily Life 

92 

CONTENTS OF THE BOOKS xlix 

VOiUME 

BOOK XI. Chiefly Concerning the Dis- 
ciples .... . 102 

BOOK XII. Concerning Virtue, Nobility, 
and Polity . . . . *115 

VOLUME VII 

BOOK xiif. Chiefly Concerning Govern- 
ment ...... 128 

BOOK XIV. Chiefly Concerning Govern- 
ment and Certain Rulers . . -143 

VOLUME VIII 

BOOK XV. Chiefly on the Maintenance of 
Principles and Character . . .162 

BOOK xvt. Concerning Ministerial Re- 
sponsibility, et alia . . . .176 

• VOLUME IX 

BOOK XVII. Recording Unsuitable Calls 
and Sundry Maxims . . . .187 

BOOK XVIII. ConcerningAncientWorthies 200 

VOLUME X 

BOOK XIX. Recorded Sayings of Some 
Disciples ...... 208 

BOOK XX. Concerning Right Govern- 
ment 219 

442 A 

CHRONOLOGY 

B.C. 

c. 2356. Emperor Yao, and 

2255. Emperor Shun, the two great, good, semi- 
mythical first rulers. 

2205. The Hsia Dynasty. 

1766. The Shang, or Yin Dynasty. 

1122. The Chou Dynasty, founded by King 
Wu, son of King W^n, to both of whom 
Confucius looked back as heroes. King 
Wu established the baronial fiefs, however, 
and in three centuries the Empire was 
reduced to a band of warring states. 

800-729. Cheng K'ao Fu, Ancestor of Con- 
fucius. 

710. Murder of his son, with whom the name 
K'ung began. His great-grandson moved 
from Sung State to Lu. 

c. 625-549. Shu Liang Ho, Father of Con- 
fucius. 

551. BIRTH OF CONFUCIUS. 

549. Death of his Father. 

^32. Married. Obtained office. 

530. Began teaching. 

529. Death of his Mother. 

523. Studied music. 

CHRONOLOGY 

li 

518. Heir of M^ng became his pupil. ProBably 
visited the Capital an 3 may have met 
Laotzu. 

517. Followed his Duke into exile at Ch'i, for 
eight years. 

516. Returned to Lu. Fifteen years out of 
office, but teaching. 

509. Duke Chao died in exile. Duke Ting 
succeeded. 

501. Became Magistrate of Chung Tu. 

500. Minister of Crime, or Chief Justice. 

498. Possibly Prime Minister. 

496. Present of singing-girls to Duke Ting, 
who accepted. 

CONFUCIUS WENT INTO THIRTEEN YEARS* EXILE. %ftXk 

495. In Wei. Attacked in K'uang, on way i;o 
Sung. 

494. In Ch'en three years. 

492. Back to Wei. To Yellow River, and Chin. 

491. To Ts'ai. In distress and starvation on the 
way. 

490. In Ts'ai. 

489. In She, and Ch'u. 

488. Back to Wei, Duke Ling had died, and the 
state was in confusion. 

485. Death of Confucius’s wife. 

483. RECALLED TO LU IN HIS 68tH YEAR. 

482. Death of his son, Po Yii. 

lii CHRONOLOGY 

481.' Death of Yen Hui, the beloved scholarly 
disciple. 

480. Death of Tzu Lu, the bold disciple, in 
battle. 

479. DEATH OF CONFUCIUS. 

372-289. MENCIUS. 

NOTE ON THE CONVERSATIONS 

Confucius is said always to have answered 
the questions of his disciples according to their 
character and need. 

Thus it is told, for instance, when Tzu Lu the 
soldier first sought him, Confucius asked him 
of what he was most fond. ‘My long sword!’ 
replied Tzu Lu. Confucius suggested that if he 
added culture to his present ability,' he would 
be a more superior man. Tzu Lu replied: ‘On 
the southern hill is a bamboo, straight by nature 
and that needs no bending; if you cut it down 
and use it, it will pierce the hide of a rhinoceros. 
What need is there of learning.^’ Replied the 
Master: ‘Yes, but if you notch and feather it, 
barb and sharpen it, will it not penetrate much 
deeper.^’ Tzu Lu understood, and willingly 
submitted to be taught. 

THE 36 DISCfPLESi 

1. Ch'en K'ang, called usually TzH CKin. 

When his brother died, the wife and 
steward proposed to immolate some liv- 
ing persons to serve him in the shades. 
Tzu K'ang suggested none were better 
fitted than the wife and steward! No 
more was heard of the matter. 

2. CKi-tiao K'ai pleased the Master for his 

modesty, V. v. 

3. Ch'in Chang, or Lao. Nothing known of 

him except IX. vi. 

4. Chung Yu, mostly called TzU Lu^ a famous 

disciple, like Peter for boldness, rashness, 
an<^ honesty: a soldier by training and 
preferring his ‘long sword’ to all else till 
his Master won him to education. Con- 
fucius often smiles at his remarks. He 
died in battle rather than desert his 
feudal lord. 

5. Chit Yiian, called Chii So Yuy an officer in 

Wei who had lodged the Master during 
the exile and become a disciple. 

6. Fan Hsuy or Fan Ch'ih, a young soldier, 

* The name in italics is that which is most used in 
The Analects, and under which name the disciple can be 
found in the Index to this book. 

liv THE Jff DISCIPLES 

who drove the Master’s chariot at times 
and questioned him. 

7. Fu-Pu Ch'i, called TzU Chien, who suc- 

ceeded in bringing good administration 
to a township by considering men as 
men, not only labourers. 

8. Jan Ch'iuy or Tzu Yu, or just Ch'iu, whom 

Confucius calls ‘a man of much pro- 
ficiency’ and who was the means of his re- 
call to Lu: but who gave way to the 
greed and military desires of Duke Ai and 
the Minister, Chi K'ang Tzu, and won the 
Master’s disapproval on several occasions. 

9. Jan Keng, or Po Niu, appointed to govern 

Chung Tu, formerly governed by Con- 
fucius, through the influenc6 of Con- 
fucius himself. 

10. Jan Yung, called Chung Kung^ a fine char- 

acter though his father was noted for his 
meanness, VI. iv. Kinsman to the two 
preceding. 

11. yh Pei, a former disciple who had given 

offence, and whom the Master refused to 
receive, XVII. xx. 

12. Kao Ch'ai, or TzU Kao, ‘dwarfish and ugly, 

but of great worth and ability’. Tzu Lu 
had him appointed the Governor of Pi, 
a border town, XI. xxiv. 

THE je DISCIPLES Iv 

13. Kung-ksi CA'/A, ,or Tzu Hua or Ch'ih: 

noted for his knowledge of the Rites. 

14. Kung-yeh CKang^ who had beer^wrongfully 

imprisoned ; a good man to whom Con- 
fucius gave his daughter as wife. 

15. Kung-po Liao, known only for his slander- 

ing Tzii Lu. 

16. K'ung Li, or Po Yu, son of Confucius. 

17. Lin Fang’, all that is known of him is in 

III. iv and vi. 

18. Min Sun, or Min Tzu Chien, noted for 

purity and filial affection. 

19. Nan-kung Kua, or Nan Yung, to whom 

Confucius gave his elder brother’s 
daughter as wife. When the palace of 
Difke Ai was on fire, and others thought 
only of saving goods, he saved the 
library, thus preserving the Annals of the 
Chou Dynasty, and other antiquities. 

20. Pu Shang, or Tzu Hsia. When his son died, 

he nearly wept himself blind, but lived 
to a great age, and presented copies 
of the Classics to Prince W^n of 
Wei in 406 b.c. An exact scholar, but 
lacking width of scholarship. 

21. Shin CF eng has left no trace, except that he 

was strong and passionate, V. ix. 

22. Ssii-ma King, brother of the bad official 

Ivi THE 36 DISCIPLES 

Huan Ti who tri^d to have Confucius 
killed. 

23. Tan-^qj. Mieh-ming^ so ugly that at first 

Confucius was repelled. Later he had 
three hundred disciples, and his memory 
is revered still in Kiangsu, VI. xii. 

24. Tsai Yii, or Tzu Wo, or Tsai Wo, took part 

in a rising which caused Confficius to be 
ashamed of him; argues several times 
with the Master; a cynic. 

25. Tseng Shen, or Tsing TzH, or Shen, as 

Confucius sometimes calls him, is one 
of the most famous disciples. Of wide 
learning, pleasing in appearance, noble 
and dignified, solid in virtue, and of 
impressive speech; so says Tzu Kung. 
His love for his parents was phenomenal. 
As a boy, gathering fuel on the hills, he 
once realized that his mother needed him 
greatly. She had bitten her finger, to call 
him, in default of other means, and he 
felt the paind Every time he read the 
mourning rites, he was moved to tears. 
He composed the Classic of Filial Piety, 
k probably under Confucius’s direction, 
edited the Great Learning, and may have 
composed ten books of the Book of 
Rites. 

THE 36 DISCIPLES Ivii 

26. Tsin Tien, father pfTsen^ Tzu, who loved 

peaceful joys, V. xxiv. 

27. Tso-cKiu Ming is considered ratjjer a prede- 

cessor than a disciple of the Sage, though 
his tablet is with the disciples in the 
temples, V. xxiv. 

28. Tuan-mu Tzfl, or TzU Rung, a fine dis- 

ciple, said to have risen from poverty to 
affluence through his abilities, and of 
such diplomatic talents that tradition 
says he saved the state of Lu from the 
machinations of the more powerful state 
of Ch'i. He was so devoted to the 
Master that he remained at his grave 
three years with the other disciples, and 
thrdfe years after that. 

29. Tuan-sun Shih, or TziZ Chang, noted for his 

humility and diligence. 

30. Tzu~fu Ching-po, an officer of Lu, of whom 

little is known. 

31. Wu-ma Shih, thirty years younger than 

Confucius, but little known. 

32. Yen Hui, or Yen Yiian, Tzu Yuan, or often 

called Hui by Confucius, the beloved 
disciple, an unostentatious scholar, white- 
haired at 29 through hard study. Con- 
fucius bewailed him so much at his 
death that the disciples remonstrated. 

Iviii THE 36 DISCIPLES 

33. Yen Wu YaOg father pf Yen Yiian, and of 

poor family circumstances. 

34. Yen Y^n, or Tzii Yu, distinguished for his 

literary acquirements. He reformed the 
people of Wu Ch'eng by civilizing arts, 
and was commended by the Master. 

35. Yu Jo, or TzU Yu, but later known as the 

philosopher Yu Tzu, was noted for his 
good memory and love of antiquity. He 
resembled in voice and appearance the 
Master so closely that, when Confucius 
died, the disciples proposed to put him 
in Confucius’s place. Along with the 
disciples of Ts^ng Tzu, his followers are 
credited with the compilation of The 
Analects. 

36. Yiian Hsien, or Yuan SsU, noted for his 

purity of purpose, modesty, and happi- 
ness despite poverty. 

DRAMATIS PERSONAE 

CONFUCIUS, called the master usually, but 
sometimes referred to by his official name of 
CHUNG Ni, or the master k'ung. Usually 
called ch'iu when he speaks of himself. 

His 36 Disciples : ‘The ten discerning ones’ are his 
main interlocutors, though all take some share. 

References are made to : 

Duke Ling of Wei, with his beautiful dissolute 
wife, Nan-Tzu. 

Duke Ting of Lu, whose acceptance of the 
80 courtesans drove Confucius out of tlie 
State of Lu. 

Duke Ai of Lu, who reigned when Confucius 
was recalled to Lu. 

Duke of She, a very small state, who had arro- 
gated to himself the title. 

Duke Ching of Ch'i, who was too old to reform. 

Various Ministers of State, chief of whom are: 

Chi K'ang Tzu, who recalled fifst Jan Ch'iu, then 
the disciples, from exile, and later Confucius. 
An inquirer as to good government, but not 
a very good practiser. 

Huan Tui, brother of a disciple, but who had 
tried to have Confucius killed by a falling 
tree during the exile. 

lx DRAMATIS PERSONAE 

Hui of Liu-hsia^ an incorruptible judge. 

Tsang Wen Chung, Prime Minister of Lu, 
jealoustrof Hui. 

Various Clans and Chiefs, e.g. House of Chi, 
who arrogated to themselves rites due only 
to emperors or dukes. 

A few Admirers and Inquirers, but more 
Critics, the Ascetics, and Recluses; also 
Peasants. 

Also references to: 

The Emperors Yao, Shun, and Yu, the first 
great semi-mythical emperors, who engin- 
eered the waterways, founded the Calendar, 
the family system, and instituted laws. 

Duke (or King) Wen of Chou who was the 
faithful Regent of the infant son* of his great 
brother King Wu; both kings. Wen and Wu, 
being of much nobility, intelligence, and 
learning. 

Ancient Worthies, such as P'eng and the two 
Princes Po I and Shuh Ch'i, who starved to 
death rather than be disloyal even to a bad 
ruler. 

Asterisks in the text denote explanatory notes at the 

end of tlie book. 

Names left without asterisk denote disciples of 

Confucius. 

volume: I 

BOOK I 

CONCERNING FUNDAMENTAL 
PRINCIPLES 

CHAPTER I 

I. The Master said: ‘Is it not indeed a 
pleasure to acquire knowledge and con- 
stantly to exercise oneself therein ? 2. And 
is it not delightful to have men of kifldred 
spirit come to one from afar? 3. But is 
not he a true philosopher who, though he 
be unrecognized of men, cherishes no' 
resentment ?’ 

CHAPTER II 

I. The philosopher Yu* said; ‘He who 
lives a filial life, respecting the elders, who 
yet is wishful to give offence to those 
above him, is rare; and there has never 
been any one unwishful to offend those 
above him, who has yet been fond of creat- 
ing disorder. 2. ; The true philosopher 
442 

B 

2 

THE ANALECTS: I 

devotes himself to the fundamentals, for 
when those have been established right 
'Courses ifaturally evolve; and are not filial 
vdevotion and respect for elders the very 
'foundations of an unselfish life ?’ 

CHAPTER III . 

The Master said: ‘Artful speech and an 
ingratiating demeanour rarely accompany 
virtue.* 

CHAPTER IV 

The philosopher Tseng* said : ‘I daily ex- 
amine myself on three points,- -In plan- 
ning for others have I failed in conscien- 
tiousness ? In intercourse with friends 
jhave I been insincere ? And have I failed 
to practise what I have been taught?’ 

CHAPTER V 

The Master said : ‘To conduct the govern- 
ment of a State of a thousand chariots 
there must be religious attention to busi- 
ness and good faith, economy in expendi- 

THE ANALECTS: I 

3 

ture and love of the people, and their em-; 
ployment on public works at the proper 
seasons.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

The Master said: ‘When a youth is at 
home let* him be filial, when abroad re- 
spectful to his elders; let him be circum-i 
spect and truthful and, while exhibiting 
a comprehensive love for all men, let him 
ally himself with the good. Having so 
acted, if he have energy to spare, let him 
employ it in polite studies.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

Tzu Hsia said: ‘He who transfers his 
mind from feminine allurement to ex-' 
celling in moral excellence; who in serv- 
ing his parents is ready to do so to the 
utmost of his ability; who in the service 
of his prince is prepared to lay down 
his life; and who in intercourse with his 
friends is sincere in what he says, — ^though 

4 THE ANALECTS: I 

Others may sp^ak of him as uneducated, 
I should certainly call him educated.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. The Master said: ‘A scholar who is not 
grave will not inspire respect, and his 
learning will therefore lack stability. 2. 
His chief principles should be conscien- 
tiousness and sincerity. 3. Let him have 
no friends unequal to himself. 4. And 
when in the wrong let him not hesitate to 
amend.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

The philosopher Tseng said: ‘Solicitude 
on the decease of parents, and the pursuit 
of this for long after, would cause an 
abundant restoration of the people’s 
morals.’ 

CHAPTER X 

Tzu Ch'in inquired of Tzu Kung saying: 
‘When the Master arrives at any State he 

THE ANALECTS: I 5 

always hears about its ^administration. 
Does he ask for this information, or, is it 
tendered to him.^* 2. ‘The Master,’ said 
Tzu Kung, ‘is benign, frank, courteous, 
temperate, deferential and thus obtains it. 
The Master’s way of asking, — ^how differ- 
ent it is from that of others!’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said: ‘While a man’s father 
lives, mark his tendencies; when his father 
is dead, mark his conduct. If for three 
years he 3 oes not change from his father’s 
ways, he may be called filial.’ 

CHAPTER XII 

1 . The philosopher Yu said : ‘In the usages 
of decorum it is naturalness that is of 
value. In the regulations of the ancient 
kings this was the admirable feature, both 
small and great deriving therefrom. 2. But 
there is a naturalness that is not permis- 

6 THE ANALECTS: I 

sible; for to k^w to be natural, and yet 
to be so beyond the restraints of decorum 
is also no\. permissible/ 

CHAPTER XIII 

The philosopher Yu said: ‘When you 
make a promise consistent with what is 
right, you can keep your word. When 
you show respect consistent with good 
taste,^you keep shame and disgrace at a 
distance. When he in whom you confide 
is one who does not fail his friends, you 
may trust him fully.* 

CHAPTER XIV 

‘The Master said : ‘The scholar who in his 
food does not seek the gratification of his 
appetite, nor in his dwelling is solicitous 
of comfort, who is diligent in his work, 
and guarded in his speech, who associates 
with the high-principled, and thereby 
directs himself aright, — such a one may 
really be said to love learning.’ 

THE ANALECTS: I 

7 

CHAPTER 

I. ‘What do you think/ asked Tzu Kung, 
‘of the man who is poor yet not servile, or 
who is rich yet not proud ?’ ‘He will do,’ 
replied the Master, ‘but he is not equal to 
the man .who is poor and yet happy, or 
rich and yet loves courtesy.’ 2. Tzu 
Kung remarked: ‘The Ode says this is 
Like cutting, then filing; 

Like chiselling, then grinding. 

That is the meaning of your remark, is it 
not.^’ 3. ‘Tz'u.!’ said the Master. ‘Now 
indeed I can begin to talk with him about 
the Odes, for when I tell him the premise 
he knows the conclusion.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said; ‘I will not grieve that 
men do not know me; I will grieve that 
I do not know men.’ 

fiOOK II 

CONCERNING GOVERNMENT 
CHAPTER I 

The Master said : ‘He who governs by his 
moral excellence may be compared to the 
pole-star, which abides in its place, while 
all the stars bow towards it.* 

CHAPTER II 

The Master said : ‘Though the Odes num- 
ber three hundred, one phrase can cover 
them all, namely, “With purpose un- 
diverted”.* 

CHAPTER III 

I. The Master said: ‘If you govern the 
people by laws, and keep them in order by 
penalties, they will avoid the penalties, 
yet lose their sense of shame. 2. But if you 
jgovern them by your moral excellence, 
and keep them in order by your dutiful 

THE ANALECTS: II 9 

conduct, they will retain ^their sense* of 
shame, and also live up to this standard.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

I. The Master said: ‘At fifteen I set my 
mind upop wisdom. 2. At thirty I stood 
firm. 3. At forty I was free from doubts. 
4. At fifty I understood the laws of 
Heaven. 5. At sixty my ear was docile. 
6. At seventy I could follow the desires of 
my heart without transgressing the right.’ 

CHAPTER V 

I. When Meng I Tzu* asked what filial 
duty meant, the Master answered: ‘It is 
not being disobedient.’ 2. Afterwards 
when Fan Ch'ih was driving him the 
Master told him, saying: ‘Meng Sun asked 
me what filial piety meant, and I replied 
“Not being disobedient.” ’ 3. Fan Ch'ih 
thereupon asked, ‘What did you mean.^’ 
The Master answered: ‘While parents 

lo THE ANALECTS; II 

live serve thern rightfully; when they are 
dead bury them with filial rites, and 
sacrifice to them with proper ordinances/ 

CHAPTER VI 

When Meng Wu Po* asked what filial 
duty meant the Master answered : ‘Parents 
should only have anxiety when their chil- 
dren are ill/ 

CHAPTER VII 

When Tzu Yu asked the meaning of filial 
piety the Master said: ‘The fili^ piety of 
the present day merely means to feed one’s 
parents; but even one’s dogs and horses 
receive their food; — without reverence 
wherein lies the difference ?’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

When Tzu Hsia asked the meaning of 
filial piety the Master said: ‘The be- 
haviour is the difficult matter. When 

THE ANALECTS: II „ 

anything is to be done, t]ien the young 
should undertake the burden of it; when 
there is wine and food, then th6y should 
serve them to their seniors. But is this 
alone to be considered filial piety?’ 

CHAPTER IX 

The Master said : T could talk to Hui* for 
a whole day and, as if he were stupid, he 
never raised an objection; but when he 
withdrew and I examined into his conduct 
when not with me, I nevertheless found 
him fully,competent to demonstrate wh.it 
I had taught him. Hui ! he was not stupid.’ 

CHAPTER X 

I. The Master said: ‘Observe what he 
does; 2. look into his motives; 3. find out 
in what he is at peace. 4. Can a man hide 
himself? Can a man hide himself?’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said: ‘He who keeps on re- 

12 

THE ANALECTS: II 

viewing his old^and acquiring new know- 
ledge may become a teacher of others.’ 

CHAPTER XII 

The Master said : ‘The higher type of man 
is not a machine.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

On Tzu Kung asking about the nobler 
type .of man the Master said: ‘He first 
practises what he preaches and afterwards 
preaches according to his practice.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Master said : ‘The nobler type of man 
is broad-minded and not prejudiced. The 
inferior man is prejudiced and not broad- 
minded.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘Learning without 
tninking is useless. Thinking without 
learning is dangerous.* 

THE ANALECTS: II 13 
CHAPTER 5 fVI 

The Master said: ‘To devote oneself to 
irregular speculations is decidedly harm- 
ful.’ 

. CHAPTER XVII 

The Master said ; ‘ Yu !* Shall I teach you 
the meaning of knowledge } When you 
know a thing to recognize that you know 
it; and when you do not, to know' that 
you do not know, — that is knowledge.’ 

CHAPTER XVIII 

I. Tzu Chang was studying with a view 
to preferment. 2. The Master said to him : 
‘Hear much, be reserved in what causes 
you doubt, and speak guardedly of the 
rest; you will then suffer little criticism. 
See much, be reserved in what seems im- 
prudent, and act guardedly as to the rest; 
you will then have few regrets. With 
little for criticism in your speech, and 

14 THE ANALECTS: II 

4 

little to regret«in your conduct, — herein 
you will find preferment.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

Duke Ai* inquired saying: ‘What should 
I do to insure the contentment of the 
people ‘If you promote the upright and 
dismiss the ill-doer,’ replied Confucius, 
‘the people will be contented; but if you 
promote the ill-doer and dismiss the 
upright, the people will be discontented.’ 

CHAPTER XX 

When Chi K’ang Tzu* asked how to in- 
spire the people with respect and loyalty, 
so that they might be mutually emulous 
(for the welfarci of the state), the Master 
said: ‘Lead them with dignity and they 
will also be dutiful; be filial and kind and 
they will be loyal; promote those who 
excel and teach the incompetent, and they 
will encourage each other.’ 

THE ANALECTS: II 

15 

CHAPTER 3*XI 

I. Some one addressed Confucius with 
the remark: ‘Why, Sir, are you not in the 
public service ?’ 2. The Master answered : 
‘Does not the Book of History say con- 
cerning filial duty, — “But one’s duty as 
a son and friendliness to one’s brethren 
are shown forth in the public service?” 
These then are also public service. Why 
should your idea alone be considered as 
constituting public service?’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said: ‘A man who is without 
good faith— I do not know how he is to 
manage! How can a waggon without its 
yoke-bar for the ox, or a carriage without 
its collar-bar for the ho'rses, be made to 
move?’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

I. Tzu Chang asked whether the con- 
dition of things ten ages hence could be 

i6 THE ANALECTS: II 

foreknown. 2i. The Master answered: 
‘The Yin dynasty perpetuated the civiliza- 
tion of the Hsia; its modifications and 
accretions can be known. The Chou per- 
petuated the civilization of the Yin, and 

its modifications and accretions can be 

1 

known. Whatever others may succeed 
the Chou, their character, even a hundred 
ages hence, can be known.* 

CHAPTER XXIV 

I. The Master said: ‘To sacrifice to a 
spirit of an ancestor not one's own is 
sycophancy. 2. To see the right and 
not do it is cowardice.* 

VOLUME ll 
BOOK III 

THE EIGHT DANCERS: CONCERNING 
MANNERS AND MORALS 

CHAPTER I 

Confucius said of the head of the House 
of Chi,* who had eight rows oC dancers 
performing in his Temple: ‘If he can bear 
to do this, what can he not bear to do 

CHAPTER II 

The members of the three great Houses cT 
Lu* used the Yung Ode at the removal of 
the sacrifices. The Master said : 

‘ “Assisted by princes and noblemen. 
Solemnly stands the Son of Heaven,” — 
What application can this.have in the hall 
merely of the three Families 

CHAPTER III 

The Master said; ‘A man who is not vir- 
tuous, what has he to do with worship } 

442 

c 

i8 THE ANALECTS: III 

A man who is not virtuous, what has 
he to do with the music of the temple ?’ 

CHAPTER IV 

I. Lin Fang* asked what was the chief 
principle in observances of ritual. 2. 
The Master answered: ‘A great question 
indeed!, 3. In ceremonies in general, it is 
better to be simple than lavish: and in the 
rites of mourning, heart-felt distress is 
better than observance of detail.* 

CHAPTER V 

The Master said: ‘The tribes of the east 
and north have their princes, and are not, 
like all our great land, without leaders.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

When the chief of the Chi family was 
going to sacrifice on Mount T'ai,* the 
Master addressing Jan Yu said: ‘Can you 
not save him from this sin ‘I cannot,* he 

THE ANALECTS: III 19 

replied. ‘Alas!’ said the Master, ‘is tfiat 
not saying that the Spirit of Mount T*ai 
is not equal to that of Lin Fang.^’ 

CHAPTER VII 

The Master said ; ‘A gentleman never con-< 
tends in anything he does — except per- 
haps in archery. Even then, heJiOws to 
his rival and yields him the way as they 
ascend the pavilion; in like manner he 
descends and offers him the penalty cup, 
— in his contentions he is still a gentle- 
man.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. Tzu Hsia asked: ‘What is the meaning 
of the passage,* — 

“As she artfully smiles 
What dimples appear! 

Her bewitching eyes 
Show their colours so clear. 
Ground spotless and candid 
For tracery splendid!”.^’ 

20 

THE ANALECTS: III 

*2. ‘The painting comes after the 
ground-work,’ answered the Master. 

3. ‘Then manners are secondary.^’ said 
Tzu Hsia. ‘ ’Tis Shang* who unfolds my 
meaning,’ replied the Master. ‘Now in- 
deed, I can begin to discuss the poets with 
him.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

The Master said: ‘I can describe the 
civilization of the Hsia dynasty, but the 
descendant State of Ch'i does not yield 
adequate documentation. I can describe 
the civilization of the Yin dynasty, but 
the descendant State of Sung does not 
yield adequate documentation. And all 
because of the deficiency of their records 
and wise men. Were those sufficient, then 
I could confirm’ my views.’ 

CHAPTER X 

The Master said: ‘At the Quinquennial 
Sacrifice in the Lu Ancestral Temple, 

THE ANALECTS: III 

21 

after the libation has beeg sprinkled ,* I 
have no further wish to look on.’* 

CHAPTER XI 

When some one asked the meaning of the 
Quinquennial Sacrifice, the Master re- 
plied : ‘I do not know. He who knew its 
meaning, would he not find hipiself in 
regard to the whole Empire as if he were 
looking upon this.^’ — pointing to his 
palm.* 

CHA.PTER XII 

I. He sacrificed to his forefathers as if 
they were present; he sacrificed to the 
gods as if the gods were present. 2. The 
Master said: ‘For me not to be present at 
a sacrifice is as if I did not sacrifice.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

I. Wang-sunChia*inquired: ‘Whatis the 
meaning of the saying, “It is better to pay 
court to the god of the Hearth than to the 

22 

THE ANALECTS: III 

god of theHa|l” ? 2 . ‘Not so,’ answered 

Confucius, ‘He who sins against Heaven 
has nowhere left for prayer.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Master said: ‘Chou had the advan- 
tage of surveying the two ' preceding 
dynasties. How full was its culture! 
I follow Chou dynasty ideas.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

When the Master first entered the Grand 
Temple he asked abbut ei^ery thing, 
whereupon some one remarked: ‘Who 
says the son of the man of Tsou knows 
the correct forms On entering the 
Grand Temple he asks about everything.’ 
The Master hearing of it remarked: 
‘This too is correct form.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

^The Master said: ‘In archery piercing 
4he target is not the essential, for men are 

THE ANALECTS: III 23 

not of equal strength. Suc;Ji was the rule 
of yore.* 

CHAPTER XVII 

1. Tzu Kung wished to dispense with the 
live sheep presented in the Ducal Temple 
at the announcement of the new moon. 

2. The Master said: ‘T'zu! You care for 
the sheep. I care for the ritual.’* 

CHAPTER XVIII 

The Master said: ‘If one were to serve 
one’s priijce with perfect homage, people 
to-day would deem it sycophancy.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

When Duke Ting* asked how a prince 
should employ his ministers, and how 
ministers should serve their prince, Con- 
fucius replied saying: ‘A prince should 
employ his ministers with courtesy. A 
minister should serve his prince with 
loyalty.’ 

24 

THE ANALECTS: III 

CHAPTER XX 

The Master said: ‘The Kuan Chu Ode* is 
passionate without being sensual, is plain- 
tive without being morbid/ 

CHAPTER XXI . 

I. When Duke Ai asked Tsai Wo* con- 
cerning Vhe altars to the tutelary deities 
of the land, 2. Tsai Wo responded: ‘The 
sovereign of Hsia adopted the pine, the 
men of Yin the cypress, but the men of 
Chou the chestnut, intimating that the 
people should stand in dread/ 3. On the 
Master hearing of this he said: ‘When a 
deed is done it is useless to discuss it, 
when a thing has taken|^ts course it is 
useless to remonstrate, what is past and 
gone it is useless to blame/ 

CHAPTER XXII 

I. The Master said: ‘The calibre of Kuan 
Chung’s* mind was but limited!’ 2. Some 

THE ANALECTS: III 25 

one observed: ‘Do you piean that KTuan 
Chung was economical?’ 3. ‘Kuan,’ he 
replied, ‘maintained his San Kuei palace, 
and *he members of his staff performed 
no double duties, — how can he be con- 
sidered economical ?’ 4. ‘But surely Kuan 
Chung understood etiquette?’ 5. ‘The 
prince of a state,’ said Confucius, ‘has 
a screen to mask his gate,— ^uan too 
had his gate-screen. Princes of state, 
when two of them have a friendly meeting, 
use a stand for their inverted pledge-cups, 
— Kuan, too uSed such a cup-stand. If 
Kuan understood etiquette, who does not 
understand it ?’ 

CI|^PTER XXIII 

The Master discoursing to the state Band 
Master of Lu on the subject of music 
said: ‘The art of music may be readily 
understood. The attacl^ould be prompt 
and united, and as the piece proceeds it 
should do so jiarmoniously, with clear- 

26 

THE ANALECTS: III 

ness of tone, ai\;l continuity of time, and 
so on to its conclusion.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The Officer in charge of the frontier town 
of I requested an interview,, saying: 
‘Whenever a man of virtue has come here 
I have never failed to obtain an interview,’ 
— whereupon the followers of the Sage 
introduced him. On coming out he ob- 
served: ‘Why do you grieve, gentlemen, 
over this loss of office The Empire for 
long has been without light and leading; 
but Heaven is now going to use your 
Master as an arousing tocsin.’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master spoke of the Shao* music as 
perfectly beautiful in form and perfectly 
goodin its influence. He spoke of the Wu* 
music as perfectly beautiful in form but 
not perfectly good in its influence. 

THE ANALECTS: III 

27 

CHAPTER ^j:XVI 

The Master said: ‘High station filled 
without magnanimity, religious obser- 
vances performed without reverence, and 
“mourning” conducted without grief, — 
from what standpoint shall I view such 
ways?’ 

BbOK IV 
CONCERNING VIRTUE 
CHAPTER I 

The Master said: ‘It is the moral character 
of a neighbourhood that constitutes its 
excellence, and how can he be considered 
wise who ^oes not elect to dwell in moral 
surroundings ?’ 

CHAPTER II 

'I'he Master said: ‘A man without virtue 
cannot long abide in adversity, ^nor can 
he long abide in happiness; but the vir- 
tuous man is at rest in virtue, and the 
wise man covets it.* 

CHAPTER III 

^he Master said: ‘Only the virtuous are 
h^fempetent to love or to hate men.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

The Master said: ‘He who has really set 
his mind on virtue will do no evil.’ 

THE ANALECTS: IV 

2p 

CHAPTER* V 

I. The Master said: ‘Wealth and rank are 
what men desire, but unless they be ob- 
tained in the right way they may not be 
possessed. Poverty and obscurity are 
what men detest; but unless prosperity be 
brought about in the right way, they are 
not to be abandoned. 2. If ^ man of 
honour forsake virtue how is he to fulfil 
the obligations of his name.^ 3. A man of 
honour never disregards virtue, even for 
the space of a single meal. In moments 
of haste he cleaves to it; in seasons of 
peril he cleaves to it.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

I. The Master said: ‘I have never seen one 
who loved virtue, nor one who hated 
what was not virtuous. He who loved 
virtue would esteem nothing above it; 
and he who hated what is not virtuous 
would himself be so virtuous that he 

30 THE ANALECTS: IV 

would allow nothing evil to adhere to 
him. 2. Is there any one able for a single 
day to devote his strength to virtue.^ I 
have never seen such a one whose ability 
"would be sufficient. 3. If perchance 
there be such I have never seen him.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

The Master said : ‘A man’s faults all con- 
form to his type of mind. Observe his 
faults and you may know his virtues.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

The Master said; ‘He who heard the 
truth in the morning might die content 
in the evening.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

The Master said: ‘The student who aims 
at wisdom, and yet who is ashamed of 
shabby clothes and poor food, is not yet 
worthy to be discoursed with.’ 

THE ANALECTS: IV 

31 

CHAPTER.* X 

The Master said: ‘The wise man in his 
attitude towards the world has neither 
predilections nor prejudices. He is on: 
the side of what is right.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said: ‘The man of honour 
thinks of his character, the inferior man 
of his position. The man of honour 
desires justice, the inferior man favour.’ 

CHAPTER XII 

The Master said : ‘He who works for his 
own interests will arouse much ani- 
mosity.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Master said : ‘Is a prince able to rule 
his country with courtesy and deference, 
— then what difficulty will he have } And 
if he cannot rule his country with cour- 

32 THE ANALECTS: IV 
% 

tesy and defeaence, what use are the 
forms of courtesy to him ?’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Master said : ‘One should not be con- 
cerned at lack of position, but should be 
concerned about what will fit him to 
occupy it. One should not be concerned 
at being unknown, but should seek to 
be worthy of being known.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

I. The Master said: ‘Sheri!* My.teaching 
contains one all-pervading principle.* 
‘Yes,’ replied Tseng Tzu. 2. When the 
Master had left the room the disciples 
asked, ‘What did he mean.^’ Tseng Tzu 
replied, ‘Our Master’s teaching is simply 
this: Conscientiousness within and con- 
sideration for others.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said: ‘The wise man is in- 

THE ANALECTS: IV 33 

formed in what is right.# The inferioi 
man is informed in what will pay.* 

CHAPTER XVII 

The Master said: ‘When you see a man 
of worth, think how to rise to his level. 
When you see an unworthy man, then 
look within and examine yoursglf.’ 

CHAPTER XVIII 

The Master said: ‘In his duty to his 
parents a son may gently remonstrate 
with theril. If he see that they are not in- 
clined to yield, he should be increasingly 
respectful but not desist, and though 
they deal hardly with him he must not 
complain.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

The Master said: ‘While a father or 
mother are alive, a son should not travel 
far. If he travel he must have a stated 
destination.’ 

442 

r> 

34 

THE ANALECTS: IV 

CftAPTER XX 

The Master said: ‘If for three years a son 
does not change from his father’s ways, 
he may be called filial.’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said: ‘The age of one’s 
parents should ever be kept in mind, as 
an occasion at once for joy and for fear,’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said: ‘The 'men of old were 
reserved in speech out of shame lest they 
should come short in deed.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

The Master said: ‘The self-restrained 
seldom err.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The Master said: ‘The wise man desires 
to be slow to speak but quick to act.’ 

THE ANALECTS: IV 

35 

CHAPTER X^V 

The Master said: ‘Virtue never dwells 
alone; it always has neighbours.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI 

Tzu Yu Said: ‘In serving one’s prince 
importunity results in disgrace; as im- 
portunity between friends results in 
estrangement.’ 

VOLUME III 
BOOK V 

CONCERNING CERTAIN DISCIPLES 
AND OTHERS 

CHAPTER I 

I. The Master said of Kung Yeh Ch'ang* 
that he was a suitable man to marry, for 
though he had been in prison it was 
through no wrong-doing of his. So he 
gave him his own daughter to wife. 2. 
The Master said of Nan Yung* that when 
the country was well governed he would 
not be set aside, and when the country 
was ill governed he would escape suffer- 
ing and death. So he gave him his elder 
brother’s daughter to wife. 

CHAPTER II 

The Master said of Tzu Chien: ‘An 
honourable man indeed is such a one as 
he! Were the state of Lu without men 

THE ANALECTS: V 37 

of honour how could he Jiave acquired 
this excellence?’ 

CHAPTER III 

Tzu Kung asked: ‘What is your opinion 
of me?’ ‘You are a vessel,’ said the 
Master. ‘What sort of a vessel?’ he 
asked. ‘A jewelled temple-vessel’ was the 
reply. 

CHAPTER IV 

1. Some one remarked: ‘A virtuous man 
is Yung, but he is not ready of speech.’ 

2. ‘What need has he of ready speech ?’ 
said the Master. ‘The man who is always 
ready with his tongue to others will often 
be disliked by them. I do not know about 
his virtue, but what need has he of ready 
speech ?’ 

CHAPTER V 

The Master wanted to engage Ch'i-tiao 
K'ai in office, but he replied: ‘I still lack 
confidence for this.’ Whereat the Master 
was pleased. 

38 

THE ANALECTS: V 

C’rfAPTER VI 

The Master said: ‘My doctrines make no 
progress. I will get me on a raft and float 
away upon the sea! If any one accom- 
panies me will it not be Yu?* Tzu Lu 
on hearing this was pleased; v/hereupon 
the Master said: ‘Yu is fonder of daring 
than I; he also exercises no discretion.’ 

CHAPTER VII* 

I. Meng Wu Po* asked whether Tzu Lu 
was a man of virtue. The Master an- 
swered: ‘I do not know.’ 2. On his 
repeating the question the Master said: 
‘ Yu ! In a kingdom of a thousand chariots 
he might be appointed to the administra- 
tion of its levies, but I do not know about 
his virtue.’ 3. ‘What about Ch'iu?’ he 
asked, to which the Master replied : 
‘Ch'iu! Over a city of a thousand 
families, or a household of a hundred 
chariots, he might be appointed as con- 

THE ANALECTS: V 

39 

troller; but I do not krvJw about his 
virtue.’ 4. ‘And what about Ch'ih ?’ he 
asked. ‘Ch'ih!* said the Master. ‘Girded 
with his sash and standing in a Court, he 
might be appointed to converse with its 
guests; but I do not know about his 
virtue.’ 

CHAPTER VIII* 

I. The Master addressing Tzu Kung 
said: ‘Which is the superior, you or 
Hui V 2, ‘How dare I look at Hui.^’ he 
answered; ‘Hui bears one point and from 
it apprehends the whole ten. I hear one 
point and apprehend a second therefrom.’ 
3. The Master said: ‘You are not equal 
to him, I grant you, you are not equal to 
him.’ 

CHAPTER IX* 

I. Tsai Yii spending the daytime in sleep, 
the Master said: ‘Rotten wood is unfit for 
carving, and a wall of dirt unfit for plas- 
tering. As to Yii, — what is the use of 

THE ANALECTS: V 

40 

reproving hin?!’ 2. ‘Formerly,’ he con- 
tinued, ‘my attitude towards others was 
to hear what they said and give them 
credit for their deeds. Now my attitude 
towards others is to listen to what they 
say and note what they do. It is through 
Yii that I have made this change.’ 

CHAPTER X 

The Master said : ‘I have never seen a man 
of strong character.’ Some one remarked, 
^P^here is Shen Ch'eng..’ ‘Ch'eng!’ said 
the Master. ‘He is under the influence of 
his passions, and how can he be possessed 
of strength of character?’ 

CHAPTER XI 

Tzu Kung said: ‘What I do not wish 
others to do to me, that also I wish not 
to do to them.’ ‘Tz’u!’ observed the 
Master, ‘that is a point to which you have 
not attained.’ 

THE ANALECTS: V 

41 

CHAPTER XII 

Tzu Kung said: ‘Our Master’s culture 
and refinement all may hear; but our 
Master’s discourse on the nature of man 
and the laws of heaven it is not given 
to all to hear.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

When Tzu Lu heard any precef)t and had 1 
not yet been able to put it into practice, 
he was only afraid lest he should hear 
some other. 

CHAPTER XIV 

Tzu Kung asked: ‘On what ground has 
K'ung Wen T zu* received his posthumous 
title of Wen V ‘He was clever and fond 
of learning,’ replied the Master, ‘and he 
was not ashamed to seek knowledge from 1 
his inferiors; — that is why he has been 
styled “Cultured 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master remarked of Tzu Ch'an* that 

42 THE ANALECTS: V 

he had four of the Ideal Man’s charac- 
teristics; — ^in his personal conduct he was 
serious, in his duty to his superior he was 
deferential, in providing for the people 
he was beneficent, and in directing them 
he was just. 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said: ‘Yen P'ing Chung* was 
gifted in the art of friendship. Whatever 
the lapse of time, he maintained towards 
his friends the same consideration.’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

The Master said: ‘Tsang Wen Chung* 
kept a large tortoise in an edifice, on 
whose pillar-tops, were representations of 
hills, and on its king-posts of water 
plants, — of what sort was his wisdom.^’ 

CHAPTER XVIII 

I. Tzu Chang asked : ‘The Prime Minister 

THE ANALECTS: V 43 

Tzu Wen* thrice took pffice as prime 
minister with never a sign of elation, and, 
though thrice retired from it, showed 
never a sign of annoyance; also he never 
failed to explain to the new Minister 
the policy of his late ministry; — what 
would you say of him ?’ ‘He was con- 
scientious,* answered the Master. ‘Was 
he a man of ideal virtue aske*d the dis- 
ciple. ‘I do not know,* said the Master. 
‘Why should he be deemed a man of ideal 
virtue.^’ 2. ‘When Ts'ui Tzu* put to 
death th^ Prince of Ch'i, although Ch'en 
Wen Tzu held a fief of ten chariots he 
abandoned all and left the country. On 
reaching another state he said: “They 
are like our Minister Ts'ui Tzu,** and left 
it. On reaching another state, he again 
said: “They are like our Minister Ts'ui 
Tzu,’* and left it. What would you say 
of him .^* ‘He was clean-handed,* said the 
Master. ‘Was he a man of ideal virtue 
asked the disciple. ‘I do not know,’ 

44 

THE ANALECTS: V 

answered the l^faster. ‘Why should he 
be deemed a man of ideal virtue?’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

Chi Wen Tzu* used to think thrice before 
acting. The Master hearing of it said: 
‘Twice would do.’ 

% 

CHAPTER XX 

The Master said; ‘While good order pre- 
vailed in his state, Ning Wu Tzu* was a 
wise man. When the state fell into dis- 
order, he was a fool. His wisdom may be 
equalled, his folly cannot be equalled.’ - 

CHAPTER XXI 

When the Master was in the state of 
Ch‘en he said: ‘Let us return! Let us re- 
turn ! My young people at home are am- 
bitious and hasty; their culture acquires 
elegance, but they do not know how to 
shape affairs.’* 

THE ANALECTS: V 45 
CHAPTER X*XII 

The Master said: ‘Po I and Shu Ch'i* 
never bore ills in mind; hence those who 
bore them resentment were few.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

The Master said: ‘Who says that Wei- 
shang Kao* is upright } Some one begged 
vinegar of him, whereupon he begged it 
of a neighbour and gave that!’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The Master said: ‘Plausible speech, an 
ingratiating demeanour, and fulsome re- 
spect, — Tso Ch'iu Ming* was ashamed of 
them ; I, Ch’iu,* also am ashamed of them. 
To conceal one’s resentment and yet 
appear friendly with a man, — Tso Ch*iu 
Ming was ashamed of it; I, Ch'iu, also am 
ashamed of it.’ 

46 

THE ANALECTS: V 

CH'APTER XXV 

1. Once when Yen Yuan and Tzu Lu 
were standing by him the Master said: 
‘Suppose each of you tells his wishes?’ 

2. ‘I should like/ said Tzu Lu, ‘to have 
carriages and horses and light furs to 
wear, so as to share them with my friends, 
nor would I feel any annoyance if they 
spoilt them.’ 3. ‘I should like,’ said Yen 
Yiian, ‘never to make a display of my 
good qualities, nor a parade of my merits.’ 
4. ‘May we hear the Master’s wishes?’ 
asked Tzu Lu. ‘They would be,’ said the 
Master, ‘to comfort the aged, be faithful 
to my friends, and cherish the young.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI 

The Master said: ‘It is all in vain! I have 
never yet seen a man who could perceive 
his own faults and bring the charge home 
against himself.’ 

THE ANALECTS: V 

47 

CHAPTER X^VII 

The Master said: ‘Even in a hamlet of 
ten houses there must be men as con- 
scientious and sincere as myself, but none 
as fond of learning as I am.’ 

600K VI 

CONCERNING CERTAIN DISCIPLES 
AND OTHER SUBJECTS 

CHAPTER I 

I. The Master said: ‘Yung!* He is fit to 
occupy a ruler’s seat.’ 2. Chung Kung* 
thereupon asked concerning Tzu-sang 
Po-tzu. ‘He will do,’ said the Master, 
‘but he is easy-going.’ 3. ‘For a man who 
is strict in his own life,’ observed Chung 
Kung, ‘to be easy in conduct in the sur- 
veillance of the people may, I ‘suppose, 
be allowed ^ But he who is easy-going in 
private and easy-going in public, — that 
surely is sheer laxity.^’ ‘Yung’s state- 
ment is correct,’ said the Master. 

CHAPTER II 

Duke Ai* asked which of the disciples was 
fond of learning. Confucius answered 
him: ‘There was Yen Hui, — he was fond 
of learning; he never visited his anger on 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

49 

another, and he never repeated a fault. 
Unfortunately his life was short and he 
died. Now there is none like him, nor 
have I heard of one who is fond of learn- 
ing.’ 

CHAPTER III 

I . TzuHua* having been sent on a mission 
to the Ch'i State, Jan Tzu asked for grain 
for his mother. The Master said, ‘Give 
her afu' He asked for more. ‘Give her 
^.yii then,’ was the reply. Jan Tzu gave 
her five ping. 2. The Master remarked: 
‘On Ch'ih setting out for Ch'i he drove 
sleek horses and wore light furs. I have 
heard that the wise man succours the 
needy; he does not add to the rich.’ 

3. When Yiian Ssu was made governor 
of a certain place, the Master allowed him 
nine hundred measures of grain, which 
he declined. 4. ‘Do not decline it,’ said 
the Master. ‘Can you not bestow it in 
your courts and hamlets, parishes, and 
villages 

442 

E 

50 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

OHAPTER IV 

The Master speaking of Chung Kung* 
said: ‘If the offspring of a brindled ox be 
ruddy and clean-horned, although men 
may not wish to use it, would the gods 
of the hills and streams reject it ?’ 

CHAPTER V 

i^he Master said, ‘Hui! His heart for 
three months together never departed 
from virtue. As to the others, on some 
day or in some month, they reached it, 
but that was all.* 

CHAPTER VI 

Chi K'ang T zu* asked whether Chung Yu 
were suited for employment in the ad- 
ministration. ‘Yu is a man of decision,’ 
said the Master. ‘What difficulty would 
he find in the administration.^* ‘And 
T'zu.^* he said, ‘Is he suitable for the 
administration.^* ‘T*zu is a man of pene- 

THE ANALECTS: VI 51 

tration,’ was the answer. ‘What difficulty 
would he find therein.^* ‘And Ch'iu?’ he 
asked, ‘Is he suitable for the administra- 
tion.^’ ‘Ch'iu is a man of much pro- 
ficiency,’ was the answer. ‘What difficulty 
would he ^nd therein V 

CHAPTER VII 

The head of the Chi clan* sent to ask Min 
Tzu Ch'ien to be governor of Pi. Min 
Tzu Ch’ien replied, ‘Courteously decline 
the offer for me. If any one comes for me 
again, theli I shall certainly be far away: 
on the banks of the Wen River!’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

When Po Niu was ill the Master went to 
inquire about him. Having grasped his 
hand through the window he said: ‘We 
are losing him. Alas! It is the will of 
Heaven. That such a man should have 
such a disease! That such a man should 
have such a disease!’ 

52 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

CHAPTER IX 

The Master said: ‘What a man of worth 
was Hui!* A single bamboo bowl of 
millet; a single ladle of cabbage soup; 
living in a mean alley ! Others could not 
have borne his distress, but Hui never 
abated his cheerfulness. What a worthy 
man was Hui!’ 

CHAPTER X 

Jan Ch'iu* remarked : ‘It is not that I have 
no pleasure in your teaching, Sir, but I 
am not strong enough.’ ‘He who is not 
strong enough,’ answered the Master, 
‘gives up half way, but you are drawing 
the line already.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master speaking to Tzu Hsia* said; 
‘Be you a scholar of the nobler type, not 
a scholar of the inferior man’s type.* 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

53 

CHAPTER »II 

When Tzu Yu was governor of the city 
of Wu, the Master asked him: ‘Have you 
been able to obtain men ?’ ‘There is one 
Tan-t'ai Mieh-ming/ was the reply, ‘who 
when walking takes no short cuts, and 
who, except on public business, has never 
yet come to my abode.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Master said : ‘Meng Chih-fan* is no 
boaster. When they were fleeing he 
brought up the rear, and only when about 
to enter the gate did he whip up his horse, 
saying: “It is not that I dare to be in the 
rear; my horse would not come on.” ’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Master said : ‘Without the eloquence 
of T‘o, the temple reader, and the beauty 
of Prince Chao* of Sung, it is hard to 
make headway in the present generation.’ 

54 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘Who can go forth ex- 
cept by the Door ? Why will not men go 
by the Way?’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said; ‘When nature exceeds 
training, you have the rustic. When 
training exceeds nature, you have the 
clerk. It is only when nature and train- 
ing are proportionately blended that you 
have the higher type of man.’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

The Master said: ‘Man is born for up- 
rightness. Without it he is lucky to 
escape with his life !’ 

CHAPTER XVIII 

The Master said: ‘He who knows the 
truth is not equal to him who loves it, 
and he who loves it is not equal to him 
who delights in it.’ 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

55 

CHAPTER XIX 

The Master said: ‘To men above the 
average one may discourse on higher 
things; but to those who are below the 
average one may not discourse on higher 
things.’ 

CHAPTER XX 

When Fan Ch'ih asked what constituted 
wisdom the Master replied: ‘To devote 
oneself earnestly to one’s duty to hu- 
manity and, while respecting the spirits 
of the departed, to avoid them, may be 
called wisdom.’ On his asking about 
virtue, the Master replied : ‘The man of 
virtue puts duty first, however difficult,' 
and makes what he will gain thereby 
an after consideration — and this may be 
called virtue.’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said: ‘The clever delight in 
water, the virtuous in the hills; the clever 

56 THE ANALECTS: VI 

are restless, thfe virtuous calm; the clever 
enjoy life, the virtuous prolong life.’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said: ‘The state of Ch’i, at 
one reform, could attain to the standard 
of Lu ; but Lu, at one reform, could attain 
to ideal 'government.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

The Master exclaimed: ‘A wassail-bowl 
that is no longer used as a bowl! What 
a bowl! What a bowl!’* 

CHAPTER XXIV 

Tsai Wo* asked, saying: ‘An altruist, even 
if some one said to him. “There is a man 
in the well,” would, I suppose, go in 
after him ‘Why should he act like that 
answered the Master. ‘The higher type 
of man might hasten to the well, but not 
precipitate himself into it; he might be 

THE ANALECTS: VI 

57 

imposed upon, but not •utterly hood- 
winked.’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master said: ‘The scholar who be- 
comes widely versed in letters and who 
restrains his learning within the bounds 
of good conduct is not likely to leave 
the track.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI 

When the Master went to see Nan-tzu,* 
Tzu Lu showed his displeasure, on which 
the Sage swore to him saying: ‘If I have 
in any way done wrong, may Heaven 
reject me ! May Heaven reject me !’ 

CHAPTER XXVII 

The Master said: ‘How perfect is the 
virtue that accords with the Golden 
Mean! And long has it been rare among 
the people!’ 

58 THE ANALECTS: VI 

CH!A.PTER XXVIII 

Tzu Kung said: ‘Suppose there were one 
who conferred benefits far and wide upon 
the people, and who was able to succour 
the multitude, what might one say of 
him? Could he be called a philanthro- 
pist?’ ‘What has he to do with philan- 
thropy?’ "said the Master. ‘Must he not 
be a sage ? Even Yao and Shun* felt their 
deficiency herein. 2. For the philan- 
thropist is one who desiring to maintain 
himself sustains others, and desiring to 
develop himself develops others. 3. To 
be able from one’s own self to draw a 
parallel for the treatment of others, — 
that may be called the rule of philan- 
thropy.’ 

VOLUME IV 
BOOK VII 

CONCERNING THE MASTER 
HIMSELF 

CHAPTER I 

The Master said: ‘As a transmitter, not 
an originator, a believer in and lover of 
antiquity, I venture to compare myself 
with our ancient worthy P*eng/* 

CHAPTER 11 

The Master said: ‘The meditative treasur- 
ingup of knowledge, the unwearying pur- 
suit of wisdom, the tireless instruction of 
others, — which of these is found in me ?’ 

CHAPTER III 

The Master said: ‘Neglect in the cultiva- 
tion of character, lack of thoroughness in 
study, incompetency to move towards 
recognized duty, inability to correct my 
imperfections, — these are what cause me 
solicitude.’ 

6o THE ANALECTS: VII 
CHAPTER IV 

In his leisure hours the Master relaxed his 
manner and wore a cheerful countenance. 

CHAPTER V 

The Master said : ‘How utterly’ fallen off 
I am! For long I have not dreamed as of 
yore that! saw the Duke of Chou.’* 

CHAPTER VI 

I. The Master said: ‘Fix your mind on 
the right way; 2. hold fast to it in your 
moral character; 3. follow it up in kind- 
ness to others; 4. take your recreation in 
the polite arts.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

The Master said: ‘From him who has 
brought his simple present of dried flesh 
seeking to enter my school, I have never 
withheld instruction.’ 

THE ANALECTS: VII 

6i 

CHAPTER WII 

The Master said: ‘I expound nothing to 
him who is not earnest, nor help out 
any one not anxious to express himself. 
When I have demonstrated one angle and 
he cannot bring me back the other three, 
then I do not repeat my lesson.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

I. When the Master dined by the side of: 
a mourner he never ate to the full. 2. On 
the same day that he had been mourning 
he never sang. 

CHAPTER X 

I. The Master addressing Yen Yiian said: 
‘To accept office when required, and to 
dwell in retirement when set aside, — only 
you and I have this spirit.’ 2. ‘But sup- 
pose,’ said Tzu Lu, ‘that the Master had 
the conduct of the armies of a great state, 
whom would he associate with him.^’ 
3. ‘The man,’ replied the Master, ‘who 

62 THE ANALECTS: VII 

bare-armed would beard a tiger, or rush 
a river, dying without regret, — him I 
would not have with me. If I must have 
a colleague, he should be one who on the 
verge of an encounter would be appre- 
hensive, and who loved strategy and its 
successful issue.’ 

.. CHAPTER XI 

The Master said: Tf wealth were a 
thing one could count on finding, even 
though it meant my becoming a whip- 
holding groom, I would do it. As one 
cannot count on finding it, I will follow 
the quests that I love better.’ 

CHAPTER XII 

The subjects which the Master treated 
with great solicitude were ; — fasting, war, 
and disease. 

CHAPTER XIII 

When the Master was in Ch*i he heard the 
Shao music and for three months was 

THE ANALECTS: VII 63 

unconscious of the taste o^ meat.* ‘I did 
not imagine/ said he, ‘that music had 
reached such perfection as this.* 

CHAPTER XIV 

I. Jan Yu asked: ‘Is our Master for the 
Prince of ‘Wei .^’* ‘Ah!* said Tzu Kung, 
‘I will just ask him.* 2. On entering he 
said: ‘What sort of men were ?o I and 
Shuh Ch'i .^’* ‘Worthies of old,’ was the 
reply. ‘Did they repine.^* he asked. ‘They 
sought virtue and they attained to virtue, 
answered the Master; ‘why then should 
they repine.^’ Tzu Kung went out and 
said : ‘The Master is not for the Prince.* 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘With coarse food to 
eat, water for drink, and a bent arm for 
a pillow, — even in such a state I could 
be happy, for wealth and honour ob- 
tained unworthily are to me as a fleeting 
cloud.* 

64 

THE AHALECTS: VII 
ci;apter XVI 

The Master said : ‘Given a few more years 
of life to finish my study of the Book of 
Changes* and I may be free from great 
errors.’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

tr 

The subjects on which the Master most 
frequently discoursed were, — the Odes, 
the History, and the observances of the 
Rites; — on all these he constantly dwelt. 

CHAPTER XVIII 

I. The Duke of She* asked Tzii Lu what 
he thought about Confucius, but Tzu 
Lu returned him no answer. 2. ‘Why did 
you not say,’ said the Master, ‘he is simply 
a man so eager for improvement that he 
forgets his food, so happy therein that 
he forgets his sorrows, and so does not 
observe that old age is at hand 

CHAPTER XIX 

The Master said: ‘I am not one who has 

THE ANALECTS: VII 65 

innate knowledge, but on® who, loving 
antiquity, is diligent in seeking it therein.* 

CHAPTER XX 

The Master would not discuss prodigies, 
prowess, lawlessness, or the supernatural. 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said: ‘When walking in a 
party of three, my teachers are always 
present. I can select the good qualities 
of the one and copy them, and the un- 
satisfactory qualities of the other and 
correct them in myself.’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said ; ‘Heaven begat the virtue 
that is in me. Huan T’ui,* — what can he 
do to me V 

CHAPTER XXIII 

The Master said: ‘My disciples! Do you 
think I possess something occult ? I hide 

■ 44 * 

F 

66 THE ANALECTS: VII 

nothing occult from you. I do nothing 
that is not made known to you my 
disciples : — you have the real Ch"iu.’* 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The Master took four subjects for his 
teaching, — culture, conduct, conscien- 
tiousness, and good faith. 

r 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master said: ‘It is not mine to see 
an inspired man. Could I behold a noble 
man, I would be content.’ 2. The Master 
said : ‘It is not mine to see a really good 
man. Could I see a man of constant 
purpose, I would be content. 3. Affecting 
to have when they have not, empty yet 
affecting to be full, in straits yet affecting 
to be prosperous, — how hard it is for 
such men to have constancy of purpose!* 

CHAPTER XXVI 

The Master fished with a line, but not 

THE ANALECTS: VII 67 

with a net; when shooting He did not aim 
at a resting bird. 

CHAPTER XXVII 

The Master said: ‘There are men, prob- 
ably, who ^do things correctly without 
knowing the reason why, but I am not 
like that: I hear much, select the gpod and 
follow it; I see much and treasure it up. 
This is the next best thing to philoso-- 
phical knowledge.’ 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

I. The people of Hu-hsiang were ill- 
conditioned folk; hence when a youth 
from there had an interview with the sage, 
the disciples wondered. 2. ‘In sanctioning 
a man’s entry here,’ said the Master, ‘I 
sanction nothing he may do on his with- 
drawal. Why, indeed, be so extreme.^ 
When a man cleanses himself and comes 
to me I may accept his present cleanness 
without becoming sponsor for his past.’ 

68 

THE ANALECTS: VII 

CHAPTER XXIX 

The Master said: ‘Is virtue indeed afar 
off? I crave for virtue and lo! virtue is 
at hand.’ 

CHAPTER XXX 

I. The minister of justice of the state of 
Ch'en gsked whether Duke Chao knew 
the Regulations.* ‘He knew them/ replied 
Confucius. 2. When Confucius had with- 
drawn, the Minister bowed to Wu-ma 
Ch'i to come forward and said; ‘I have 
heard that a man of noble parts is not 
biased. May then a noble man be yet 
biased.^ Duke Chao took his wife from 
the house of Wu, of the same surname 
as himself, and spoke of her as the elder 
Lady Tzu of Wu. If the duke knew 
the Regulations, who does not know 
them.^’ 3. Wu-ma Ch'i reported this, 
whereupon the Master remarked: ‘I am 
fortunate. If I make a mistake, people 
are sure to know of it!’ 

THE ANALECTS: VII 69 

CHAPTER X 3 ^XI 

When the Master was in company with 
any one who was singing and the piece 
was good, he always had it repeated, 
joining in the melody himself. 

CHAPTER XXXII 

The Master said ; ‘In literature perhaps I 
may compare with others, but as to my 
living the noble life, to that I have not 
yet attained.’ 

CHAPTER XXXIII 

The Master said : ‘As to being a sage, or 
a man of virtue, how dare I presume to 
such a claim. ^ But as to striving thereafter 
unwearyingly, and teaching others there- 
in without flagging, — that can be said of 
me, and that is all.’ ‘And that,’ said Kung- 
hsi Hua, ‘is just what we disciples cannot 
learn.’ 

70 

THE ANALECTS: VII 

CH«APTER XXXIV 
Once when the Master was seriously ill 
Tzu Lu asked leave to have prayers 
offered. ‘Is there authority for such a 
step.^’ asked the Master. ‘There is,’ Tzu 
Lu replied. ‘In the litanies it is said, “We 
pray to you, spirits celestial and terres- 
trial”.’ The Master answered, ‘My pray- 
ing has been for long.’ 

CHAPTER XXXV 
The Master said: ‘Men, if prodigal, are 
uncontrolled; if frugal then narrow: 
but better be narrow than uncontrolled.’ 

CHAPTER XXXVI 
The Master said : ‘The noble man is calm 
and serene, the inferior man is continually 
worried and anxious.’ 

CHAPTER XXXVII 
The Master was affable yet dignified, 
commanding yet not overbearing, cour- 
teous yet easy. 

BOOK VIII 

CHIEFLY CONCERNING CERTAIN 
ANCIENT WORTHIES 

CHAPTER I 

• 

The Master said: ‘T'ai Po* may be de- 
scribed as possessing a character of the 
noblest. He resolutely renounced the 
imperial throne, leaving people no 
ground for appreciating his conduct.’ 

CHAPTER II 

I. The Master said: ‘Courtesy uncon- 
trolled by the laws of good taste becomes 
laboured effort, caution uncontrolled be- 
comes timidity, boldness uncontrolled 
becomes recklessness, and frankness un- 
controlled becomes effrontery. 2. When 
the highly placed pay generous regard to 
their own families, the people are equally 
stirred to kindness. When they do not 

72 THE ANALECTS: VIII 

discard old dependants, neither will the 
people deal meanly with theirs.’ 

CHAPTER III 

When the philosopher Tseng was taken 
ill,* he called his disciples and said: ‘Un- 
cover my feet, uncover my arms. The 
Ode says: 

“Be anxious, be cautious. 

As when near a deep gulf. 

As when treading thin ice.” 

But from henceforth I know I shall 
escape all injury, my disciples.* 

CHAPTER IV 

I. During Tseng Tzu’s illness Meng 
Ching Tzu* called to make inquiries. 2. 
Tseng Tzu spoke to him saying: ‘When 
a bird is dying, its song is sad. When a 
man is dying, what he says is worth 
listening to. 3. The three rules of conduct 
upon which a man of high rank should 
place value are, — in his bearing to avoid 
rudeness and remissness, in ordering his 

THE ANALECTS: VIII 73 

looks to aim at sincerity, imd in the tone 
of his conversation to keep aloof from 
vulgarity and impropriety. As to the 
details of temple vessels, — there are pro- 
per officers for looking after them.’ 

CHAPTER V 

Tseng Tzu said: ‘Talented, yet seeking 
knowledge from the untalenteci; of many 
attainments, yet seeking knowledge from 
those with few; having, as though he had 
not; full, yet bearing himself as if empty; 
offended against, yet not retaliating, — 
once upon a time I had a friend who lived 
after this manner.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

Tseng Tzu said: ‘The man to whom one 
could entrust a young orphan prince and 
delegate the command over a hundred //, 
yet whom the advent of no emergency, 
however great, could shake, — ^would he 
be a man of the nobler order Of the 
nobler order he would certainly be.’ 

74 

THE ANALECTS: VIII 

CHAPTER VII 

I. Tseng Tzu said: ‘The scholar must not 
be without capacity and fortitude, for his 
load is heavy and the road is long. 2. He 
takes virtue for his load, and is not that 
heavy Only with death does his course 
end, and is not that long.^’ 

c 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. The Master said: ‘Let the character be 
formed by the poets; 2. established by 
the laws of right behaviour; 3. and 
perfected by music.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

The Master said: ‘The people may be 
made to follow a course, but not to under- 
stand the reason why.’ 

CHAPTER X 

The Master said: ‘Love of daring and 
resentment of poverty drive men to 

THE ANALECTS: VIII 75 

desperate deeds ; and men^who lack moral 
character, if resentment of them be carried 
too far, will be driven to similar deeds/ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said : ‘If a man have gifts as 
admirable as those of Duke Chou,* yet be 
vain and mean, his other gifts are un- 
worthy of notice/ 

CHAPTER XII 

The Master said: ‘It is not easy to find 
a man who has studied for three years 
without aiming at pay/ 

CHAPTER XIII 

I. The Master said; ‘The man of un- 
wavering sincerity and love of moral dis- 
cipline will keep to the death his excellent 
principles. 2. He will not enter a tottering 
state nor dwell in a rebellious one. When 
law and order prevail in the empire, he is 

76 THE ANALECTS: VIII 

in evidence. Y'^hen it is without law and 
order, he withdraws. 3. When law and 
order prevail in his state, he is ashamed 
to be needy and of no account. When 
law and order fail, he is ashamed to be in 
affluence and honour.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

< 

The Master said: ‘He who does not oc- 
cupy the office does not discuss its policy.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘When the bandmaster 
Chih entered on his duties, how the clos- 
ing strains of the Kuan Chii* filled the ear 
with the grandeur of their volume!’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said: ‘With the impulsive 
yet evasive, the simple yet dishonest, 
the stupid yet untruthful, I hold no 
acquaintance.’ 

THE ANALECTS: VIII 77 
CHAPTER XVII 

The Master said : ‘Learn as if you were not 
reaching your goal, and as though you 
were afraid of missing it.’ 

CHAPTER XVIII* 

The Master said : ‘How sublime the way 
Shun and Yii undertook the empire, and 
yet as if it were nothing to them!* 

CHAPTER XIX* 

I. The Master said: ‘Great indeed was the 
sovereignty of Yao! How sublime he 
was! Only Heaven is great, and only 
Yao answers to its standard. How vast 
he was ! Beyond the power of the people 
to express! 2. How sublime were his 
achievements! How brilliant his civiliz- 
ing regulations!’ 

CHAPTER XX* 

I. Shun had five ministers and the empire 
was well ruled. 2. King Wu remarked: 

78 THE ANALECTS: VIII 

‘I have ten adjutants, able administrators.* 
3. Confucius said: ‘Is it not a true saying 
that talent is hard to find } Yet only at the 
transition of the T'ang Dynasty into the 
Yii was it richer in talent than at the 
founding of the Chou, when indeed one 
of its ministers was a woman, so that in 
reality there were only nine men. 4. 
Possessor of two of the empire’s three 
parts, with which he submissively served 
the dynasty of Yin, the virtue of the 
founder of the Chou may indeed be 
called perfect virtue.’ 

CHAPTER XXI* 

The Master said: ‘In Yii I can find no 
room for criticism. Simple in his own 
food and drink, he was unsparing in his 
filial offerings to the spirits. Shabby in 
his workaday clothes he was most scru- 
pulous as to the elegance of his kneeling- 
apron and sacrificial crown. Humble as 

THE ANALECTS: VIII 79 

to the character of his palase, he spent his 
strength in the draining and ditching of 
the country. In Yii I find no room for 
criticism.’ 

VOLUME V 
BOOK IX 
CHIEFL Y PERSONAL 
CHAPTER I 

The Master seldom spoke on profit, on 
the orderings of Providence, and on per- 
fection. , 

CHAPTER II 

I. A man of the village of Ta-hsiang re- 
marked: ‘What a great man is K'ung, the 
Philosopher. Yet though his learning is 
vast, in nothing does he acquire a reputa- 
tion.’ 2. The Master on hearing it, ad- 
dressing his disciples, said: ‘What shall 
I take up.^ Shall I take to driving.^ Or 
shall I take to archery.^ I will take to 
driving.’ 

CHAPTER III 

I. The Master said: ‘A linen cap is the 
prescribed form, but nowadays silk is 
worn. This saves expense, and I follow 

THE ANALECTS: IX 8i 

the general usage. 2. Salfltation below 
the audience hall is the prescribed 
form, but now they salute above. This 
is assumption, and therefore, though in- 
fringing the general usage, I follow the 
rule of bowing below.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

The Master was entirely free from four 
things : he had no preconceptions, no pre- 
determinations, no obduracy, and no 
egoism. 

CHAPTER V 

I. When the Master was in jeopardy in 
K'uang,* 2. he said, ‘Since King Wen is no 
longer alive, does not the mantle of 
enlightenment {win) rest here on me.^ 
3. If heaven were going to destroy this 
enlightenment, a mortal like me would 
not have obtained such a connexion with 
it. Since heaven is not ready to destroy 
this enlightenment, what can the men of 
K'uang do to me 

44Z 

G 

82 

THE ANALECTS: IX 

CHAPTER VI 

I . A great minister inquired of Tzii Kung 
saying, ‘Your Master, — he is surely in- 
spired? What varied acquirements he 
has!’ 2. Tzii Kung answered, ‘Of a truth 
Heaven has lavishly endowed him, to the 
point of inspiration, and his acquirements 
are also many.’ 3. When the Master 
heard of it, he said: ‘Does the minister 
really know me? In my youth I was in 
humble circumstances, and for that reason 
gained a variety of acquirements, — in 
common matters: but does nobleness of 
character depend on variety? It does not 
\depend on variety.’ 4. Lao* said, ‘The 
Master used to say, “I have not been 
occupied in official life, and so have had 
time to become acquainted with the 
arts!” ’ 

CHAPTER VII 

The Master said: ‘Am I indeed a man 
with innate knowledge ? I have no such 

THE ANALECTS: IX 83 

knowledge; but when aif uncultivated 
person, in all simplicity, comes to me with 
a question, I thrash out its pros and cons 
until I fathom it.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

• 

The Master said; ‘The phoenix* comes 
not, the river manifests no directing plan. 
All is over with my hopes!’ 

CHAPTER IX 

Whenever he saw a person in mourning, 
or in official cap and robes, or one who 
was blind, the Master on noticing him, 
even though the man were his own junior, 
always arose; or, if he were passing such 
a one, he always quickened his steps. 

CHAPTER X 

I . Yen Yiian heaved a deep sigh and said :* 
‘The more I look up at It, the higher It 
rises. The more I probe It, the more im- 
penetrable It becomes. I catch a glimpse 

84 THE ANALECTS: IX 

of It in front, '’and It is instantly behind. 

2. But our Master step by step skilfully 
lures men on. He has broadened me by 
culture, and restrained me by reverence. 

3. If I wished to stop I could not, and 
when at times I have exhausted all my 
powers, something seems to stand majes- 
tically before me; yet though I seek to 
pursue my path towards It, I find never 
a wav.’ 

J 

CHAPTER XI 

I. Once when the Master was seriously 
ill, Tzu Lu set the disciples to act as if 
they were a statesman’s officers. 2. Dur- 
ing a remission of the attack Confucius 
observed: ‘For what a long time has Yu* 
carried on his impositions ! In pretending 
to have retainers when I have none, whom 
do I deceive.^ Do I deceive Heaven.^ 
3. Moreover, would I not sooner die in 
the arms of you, my disciples, than in the 
arms of officials ? And, even if I did not 

THE ANALECTS: IX 85 

have a grand funeral, should I be dying 
by the roadside ?’ 

CHAPTER XII 

Tzu Kung asked: ‘If I had a lovely jewel* 
here, should I shut it up in a casket and 
keep it, of seek a good price and sell it ?’ 
‘By all means sell it! Sell it!’ answered the 
Master, — ‘But I myself would®wak for 
a good offer.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

I. The Master proposed to go and dwell 
among the nine uncivilized tribes of the 
east; 2. whereupon some one remarked: 
‘But they are so uncivilized, how can you 
do that.^’ The Master responded, ‘Were 
a man of noble character to dwell among 
them, what lack of civilization would 
there be 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Master said: ‘It was only after my 
return from Wei to Lu that music* was 

86 THE ANALECTS: IX 

revised, and that tlie secular and sacred 
pieces were properly differentiated.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘In public life to do my 
duty to my prince or minister; in private 
life to do my duty to my fathers and 
brethren; in my duties to the departed 
never daring to be otherwise than diligent ; 
and never to be overcome with wine, — in 
which of these am I successful V 

CHAPTER XVI 

Once when the Master was standing by 
a stream he observed: ‘All is transient, 
like this! Unceasing day and night!’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

•The Master said: ‘I have never yet seen 
a man whose love of virtue equalled his 
love of woman.’ 

THE ANALECTS: IX 

87 

CHAPTER X\»III 

The Master said: ‘Suppose I am raising 
a mound, and, while it is still unfinished 
by a basketful, I stop short, it is I that 
stops short. Or, suppose I begin on the 
level ground, — although I throw down 
but one basketful, and continue to do so, 
then it is I that makes progress.’^ 

CHAPTER XIX 

The Master said: ‘Ah! Hui* was the one 
to whom I could tell things and who never 
failed to attend to them.* 

CHAPTER XX 

The Master, referring to Yen Yiian,’*' said : 
‘Alas! I ever saw him make progress, and 
never saw him stand still.’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said: ‘There are blades that 
spring up and never flower, and there are 
others that flower but never fruit.’ 

88 

THE ANALECTS: IX 

CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said : ‘The young should in- 
spire one with respect. How do we know 
that their future will not equal our pre- 
sent } But if a man has reached forty or 
fifty without being heard of, he, indeed, 
is incapable of commanding respect!’ 

* CHAPTER XXIII 

The Master said: ‘Can any one refuse 
assent to words of just admonition.^ But 
it is amendment that is of value. Can 
any one be otherwise than pleased with 
advice persuasively offered } But it is the 
application that is of value. Mere interest 
without application, mere assent without 
amendment, — I can do nothing what- 
ever with men of such calibre.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The Master said: ‘Make conscientious- 
ness and sincerity your leading principles. 
Have no friends inferior to yourself. And 

THE ANALECTS: IX 89 

when in the wrong, do ^jot hesitate to 
amend.’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master said: ‘You may rob a three 
corps army of its commander-in-chief, 
but you cannot rob even a common man 
of his will.’ 

CHAPTER XXVT 

I. The Master said: ‘Wearing a shabby, 
hemp-quilted robe, and standing by 
others dressed in fox and badger, yet in 
no way abashed, — Yu* would be the one 
for that, eh } 2. Unfriendly to none, and c 
courting none, what does he that is not 
excellent.^’ 3. As Tzu Lu afterwards was 
perpetually intoning this, the Master ob- 
served: ‘But how can those two points 
alone be sufficient for excellence.^’ 

CHAPTER XXVII 
The Master said: ‘Only when the year 

90 THE ANALECTS: IX 

grows cold da we realize that the pine and 
the cypress are the last to fade.’ 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

The Master said: ‘The enlightened are 
free from doubt, the virtuous from 
anxiety, and the brave from fear.’ 

* CHAPTER XXIX 

The Master said: ‘There are some with 
whom one can associate in study, but who 
are not yet able to make common advance 
towards the truth : there are others who 
can make common advance towards the 
truth, but who are not yet able to take 
with you a like firm stand ; and there are 
others with whom you can take such a 
firm stand, but with whom you cannot 
associate in judgement.’ 

CHAPTER XXX 

I. ‘The blossoms on the cherry tree 
Are changing and quivering. 

THE ANALECTS: IX 91 

Can I do aught but think of thee 
In thy far-distant dwelling?’* 

2. The Master said ; ‘The poet had never 
really bestowed a thought. If he had, what 
distance wouldhave existed ?’ 

BOOK X 

CONCERNING THE SAGE IN HIS 
DAILY LIFE 

CHAPTER I 

I. Confucius in his native village bore 
himself with simplicity, as if he had no 
gifts of .speech. 2. But when in the 
temple or at court, he expressed himself 
readily and clearly, yet with a measure of 
reserve. 

CHAPTER II 

I. At court, when conversing with 
ministers of his own rank, he spoke out 
boldly; when conversing with the higher 
ministers he spoke respectfully; 2. but 
when the prince was present, his move- 
ments were nervous, though self-pos- 
sessed. 

CHAPTER III 

I. When the prince summoned him to 
receive a visitor, his expression seemed 

THE ANALECTS: X 93 

to change, and his knees as it were bent 
under him. 2. As he saluted those who 
stood with him, on the right hand or the 
left as occasion required, his robe in 
front and behind hung straight and un- 
disturbed; 3. and, as he hastened forward, 
it was as if with outstretched wings. 4. 
When the visitor had departed he always 
reported, saying, ‘The Guest is ho longer 
looking back at us.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

I . On entering the palace gate he appeared 
to stoop, as though the gate were not high 
enough to admit him. 2. He never stood 
in the middle of the gateway, nor in going 
through did he step on the sill. 3. As he 
passed the throne he wore a constrained 
expression, his knees appeared to bend,and 
words seemed to fail him. 4. As he as- 
cended the audience liall, holding up his 
skirt, he appeared to stoop, and he held 
his breath as if he dare not breathe. 5 . On 

94 

THE ANALECTS: X 

coming forthi from his audience, after 
descending the first step, his expression 
relaxed into one of relief; at the bottom 
of the steps he hastened forward as with 
outstretched wings, and on regaining his 
place he maintained an attitude of nervous 
respect. 

CHAPTER V 

I. He carried the ducal mace with bent 
back, as if unequal to its weight, neither 
higher than when making a bow, nor 
lower than when offering a gift: his ex- 
pression, too, was perturbed and anxious, 
and he dragged his feet as if something 
were trailing behind. 2. While offering 
the presents with which he was com- 
missioned he wore an easy look; 3. and 
at the subsequent private audience he bore 
himself with amiability. 

CHAPTER VI 

I. He did not wear facings of purple or 
mauve, 2. nor even in undress did he use 

THE ANALECTS: X 95 

red or crimson. 3. In the Iiot weather he 
wore an unlined gown of fine or loose- 
woven material, but always outside and 
over another. 4. With a black robe he 
wore black lambskin, with a light robe 
fawn, and with a yellow robe fox. 5. His 
undress fur gown was long, with the 
right sleeve cut short. 6. He always had 
his sleeping-garment made halt as long 
again as his body. 7. He had thick fox 
or badger for home wear. 8. When out 
of mourning he omitted none of the 
usual ornaments. 9. His skirts, all save 
his court skirt, he always shaped towards 
the waist. 10. He did not pay visits of 
condolence in dark lamb’s fur or a dark 
hat. II. At the new moon he always 
put on his court robes and presented 
himself at court. 

CHAPTER VII 

I. When fasting he always wore a spot- 
less suit of linen cloth. 2. When fasting, 

96 THE ANALECTS: X 

too, he always altered his diet, and in his 
dwelling always changed his seat. 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. He had no objection to his rice being 
of the finest, nor to having his meat finely 
minced. 2. Rice affected by the weather, 
or turned, he would not eat, nor fish that 
was unsound, nor flesh that was tainted. 
Neither would he eat anything dis- 
coloured, nor that smelt, nor that was 
under- or over-cooked, or not in season. 
3. He would not eat anything improperly 
cut, nor anything served without its 
proper seasoning. 4. However much 
meat there might be, he did not allow 
what he took to exceed the flavour of the 
rice; only in wine he had no set limit, 
short of mental confusion. 5. Bought 
wine or dried meat from the market he 
would not eat. 6. He was never without 
ginger at his meals; 7. but he was not a 
great eater. 8. After the sacrifices in the 

THE ANALECTS: X 

97 

ducal temple he never kept his share of 
the flesh overnight, nor the flesh of his 
ancestral sacrifices more than three days, 
lest after three days it might not be eaten. 
9. He did not converse while eating, nor 
talk when in bed. 10. Though his food 
were only coarse rice and vegetable broth, 
he invariably offered a little in sacrifice, 
and always with solemnity. ’ 

CHAPTER IX 

He would not sit on his mat unless it were 
straight. 

CHAPTER X 

1. When his fellow villagers had a feast 
he only left after the elders had departed. 

2. When his fellow villagers held a pro- 
cession to expel the pestilential influences, 
he put on his court robes and stood on 
the eastern steps. 

CHAPTER XI 

I. When sending complimentary in- 
quiries to any one in another state, he 

442 

H 

98 THE ANALECTS: X 

bowed twice zs he escorted his messenger 
forth. 2. On K'ang Tzu* sending him a 
present of medicine he bowed and ac- 
cepted it, but said: ‘As I am not well 
acquainted with it, I do not dare to taste 
it.’ 

CHAPTER XII 

When his stable was burnt down, on 
coming forth from the Audience he asked, 
‘Is any one hurt.^’ He did not ask about 
the horses. 

CHAPTER XIII 

I. When the prince sent him a present of 
food, he always adjusted his mat and first 
tasted it himself; but if the prince’s pre- 
sent were fresh meat, he always had it 
cooked, and set it before his ancestors. 
Were the prince’s present living, he al- 
ways kept it alive. 2. When in attendance 
on the prince at a state dinner, while the 
prince sacrificed he acted the subordinate 
part of first tasting the dishes. 3. When 

THE ANALECTS: X 

99 

he was ill and the prince came to see him, 
he had his head laid to the east, and his 
court robes thrown over him, with his 
sash drawn across. 4. When his prince 
commanded his presence, he did not wait 
while his carriage was being yoked, but 
started on Foot. 

CHAPTER XIV 

On entering the imperial Ancestral 
Temple, he asked about every detail. 

CHAPTER XV 

I. When a friend died, with no one to see 
to the rites, he would say, ‘I will see to his 
funeral.’ 2. On receiving a present from 
a friend, unless it were sacrificial flesh, he 
never made obeisance, not even if it were 
a carriage and horses. 

CHAPTER XVI 

I. In bed he did not lie like a corpse. At 

loo THE ANALECTS: X 

home he woremo formal air. 2. Whenever 
he saw any one in mourning, even though 
it were an intimate acquaintance, his ex- 
pression always changed, and when he 
saw any one in a cap of. state, or a blind 
man, even though not in public, he always 
showed respect. 3. On meeting any one 
in deep mourning, he would bow to the 
crossbar of his carriage, as he did also to 
any one carrying the census boards. 4. 
When entertained at a rich repast, he 
always expressed his appreciation with an 
altered look and by standing up. 5. On 
a sudden clap of thunder, or a violent 
storm of wind, his countenance always 
changed. 

CHAPTER XVII 

I. When mounting his carriage he always 
stood correctly, holding the mounting- 
cord in his hand. 2. In the carriage he did 
not look behind, nor speak hastily, nor 
point with his hands. 

THE ANALECTS: X 

lOI 

CHAPTER X^flll 

I. Seeing their faces it rose, hovered about 
and settled again. 2. The Master re- 
marked: ‘Ah! hen-pheasant on the hill 
bridge, you know your time ! You know 
your time<I’ 3. Tzu Lu motioned towards 
it, whereupon it smelt at him three times 
and rose.* 

VOLUME VI 
BOOK XI 

CHIEFLY CONCERNING THE 
DISCIPLES 

CHAPTER I , 

I. The Master observed: ‘In the arts of 
civilizatipn our forerunners are esteemed 
uncultivated, while in those arts, their 
successors are looked upon as cultured 
gentlemen. 2. But when I have need of 
those arts, I follow our forerunners.’ 

CHAPTER II 

I. The Master said: ‘Of all who were with 
me in Ch en and Ch ai,* not one now 
comes to my door.’ 2. Noted for moral 
character there were Yen Yuan, Min Tzu 
Ch'ien, Jan Niu and Chung Kung; for 
gifts of speech Tsai Wo and Tzu Kung; 
for administrative ability Jan Yu and 
Chi Lu; and for literature and learning 
Tzu Yu and Tzu Hsia. 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

103 

CHAPTER I€I 

The Master said: ‘Hui was not one who 
gave me any assistance. He was invari- 
ably satisfied with whatever I said.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

The Master said: ‘What a filial son Min 
Tzu Ch'ien has beenl No onel:akes ex- 
ception to what his parents and brothers 
have said of him!’ 

CHAPTER V 

Nan Yung frequently repeated the White 
Sceptre Ode.* Confucius gave him his 
elder brother’s daughter to wife. 

CHAPTER VI 

Once when Chi K‘ang Tzu* asked which 
of the disciples was fond of learning, the 
Master replied: ‘There was Yen Hui who 
was fond of learning, but unhappily his 

104 the ANALECTS: XI 

life was cut chort and he died, — now 
there is none.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

I . When Yen Yiian died, Yen Lu* begged 
for the Master’s carriage in order to sell 
it and purchase an outer shell. 2. The 
Master answered: ‘Gifted or not gifted, 
every one considers his own son. When 
my son Li died, he had a coffin but no 
shell. I did not walk on foot to provide 
a shell for him, for I have to follow behind 
the great officers of state and may not go 
afoot.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

When Yen Yiian* died the Master said: 
‘Alas ! Heaven has bereft me; Heaven has 
bereft me.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

I. When Yen Yiian* died the Master be- 
wailed him with exceeding grief, where- 
upon his followers said to him, ‘Sir! You 

THE ANALECTS: XI lo; 

are carrying your grief to excess.’ 2 
‘Have I gone to excess.^’ asked he. 3. 
‘But if I may not grieve exceedingly over 
this man, for whom shall I grieve 

CHAPTER X 

1. When Yen Hui* died the other disciples 
proposed to give him an imposirjg funeral, 
to which the Master said ; ‘It will not do.’ 

2. Nevertheless they buried him with 
pomp. 3. ‘Hui!’ said the Master, ‘You 
regarded me as a father, while I am not 
permitted to regard you as my son. But 1 
it is not I who do this. It is these disciples.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

When Chi Lu* asked about his duty to the 
spirits the Master replied: ‘While still 
unable to do your duty to the living, how 
can you do your duty to the dead.^’ 
When he ventured to ask about death, 
Confucius answered: ‘Not yet under- 

io6 THE ANALECTS: XI 

Standing life, 'how can you understand 
death?’ 

CHAPTER XII 

I. Once when Min Tzu was standing by 
the Master’s side he looked so self-re- 
liant, Tzu Lu so full of energy, and Jan 
Yu and Tzu Kung so frank and fearless 
that the Master was highly gratified. 2. 
‘But,’ said he, ‘a man like Yu* will not 
come to a natural death.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

I. When the men of Lu were for rebuild- 
ing the Long Treasury, 2. Min Tzu 
Ch'ien observed, ‘How would it do to 
restore it as before? Why need it be 
reconstructed ?’ 3. The Master said ; ‘This 
man seldom speaks, but when he does he 
is sure to hit the mark.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

I. The Master said: ‘What is Yu’s* harp 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

107 

doing in my school ?’ 2. The other dis- 
ciples on hearing this ceased to respect 
Tzu Lu, whereupon the Master said: 
‘Yu! he has ascended the hall, though he 
has not yet entered the inner rooms/ 

CHAPTER XV 

I. Tzu Kung asked which was ihe better, 
Shih or Shang?* The Master replied: 
‘Shih exceeds, Shang comes short/ 2. ‘So 
then,’ queried he, ‘Shih surpasses Shang, 
eh ?’ 3. ‘To go beyond the mark,’ replied ) 
the Master, ‘is as bad as to come short 
of it.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

I. The Chief of the Chi clan was richer 
than Duke Chou had been, yet the dis- 
ciple Ch'iu* collected his revenues for him 
and kept on still further increasing his 
income. 2. ‘He is no disciple of mine,’ 
said the Master. ‘ Y ou may beat the drum, 
my sons, and attack him.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

108 

CHAPTER XVII 

I. Ch'ai was simple-minded; 2. Shendull; 
3. Shih shallow; 4. Yu unrefined.* 

CHAPTER XVIII 

I. The Master said: ‘Hui!* he was almost 
; perfect, yet he was often in want. 2. T'zu* 
was not content with his lot, and yet his 
goods increased abundantly; neverthe- 
less in his judgements he often hit the 
mark.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

When Tzu Chang asked what charac- 
terized the way of the man of natural 
goodness, the Master replied: ‘He does 
not tread the beaten track, nor yet does 
he enter into the inner sanctum of philo- 
sophy.’ 

CHAPTER XX 

The Master said: ‘That a man’s address 
may be solid and reliable, this one may 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

109 

grant; but does it follow that he is a man 
of the higher type, or is his seriousness 
only in appearance ?’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

When Tzu Lu asked whether he should 
put what’he heard into immediate prac- 
tice, the Master answered, ‘You have 
parents and elders still living, wliy should 
you at once put all you hear into prac- 
tice?’ When Jan Yu asked whether he 
should put what he heard into immediate 
practice, the Master answered, ‘Put what 
you hear at once into practice.’ Kung-hsi 
Hua asked: ‘When Yu asked if he should 
put the precepts he heard into immediate 
practice, you. Sir, replied, “You have 
parents and elders alive”; but when 
Ch*iu asked if he should put the precepts 
he heard into immediate practice, you. 
Sir, replied, “Put what you hear at once 
into practice.” As I am perplexed about 
your meaning I venture to ask a solution.’ 

no 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

‘Ch'iu/ answered the Master, ‘lags be- 
hind, so I urged him forward; but Yu has 
energy for two men, so I held him back.’ 

CHAPTER X'XII 

When the Master was put in peril in 
K'uang, Yen Hui fell behind. On the 
Master saying to him, ‘I thought you 
were dead,’ he replied, ‘While you. Sir, 
live, how should I dare to die.^’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

I. When Chi Tzu-jan* asked if Chung 
Yu and Jan Ch'iu could be called great 
ministers, 2. the Master replied, ‘I thought, 
Sir, you were going to ask about some- 
thing extraordinary, and it is only a ques- 
tion about Yu* and Ch'iu.* 3. He who may 
be called a great minister is one who serves 
his prince according to the right, and 
when that cannot be, resigns. 4. Now, as 
for Yu and Ch'iu, they may be styled 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

III 

ordinary ministers.’ 5. ‘So, then,’ said 
Tzu Jan, ‘they would follow their chief, 
eh.^’ 6. ‘A parricide or regicide,’ an- 
swered the Master, ‘they would assuredly 
not follow, however.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

I. When Tzu Lu obtained the^appoint- 
ment of Tzu Kao* as governor of Pi, 2. 
the Master said, ‘You are doing an ill 
turn to another man’s son.’ 3. ‘He will 
have his people and officers,’ replied Tzu 
Lu, ‘he will also have the altars of the land 
and the grain, why must he read books 
before he is considered educated .^’ 4. ‘It 
is because of this kind of talk,’ said the 
Master, ‘that I hate glib people,’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

I. Once when Tzu Lu, Tseng Shih, 
Jan Yu, and Kung-hsi Hua were seated 
with the Master, 2. he said,* ‘You no 

II2 

THE ANALECTS: XI 

doubt consider me a day or so your 
senior, but pray do not so consider me. 
3. Living in private life you are each 
saying: “I am unknown.” Now suppose 
some prince were to take notice of you, 
what would you like to do.^’ 4. Tzu Lu 
in off-hand manner replied,* Give me a 
kingdom of a thousand chariots, hemmed 
in by two great powers, oppressed by in- 
vading troops, with famine superadded, 
and let me have its administration, — in 
three years’ time I could make it brave 
and, moreover, make it know the right 
course to pursue.’ The Master smiled at 
him. 5. ‘And how about you, Ch'iu.^’ 
‘Give me a district of sixty or seventy li 
square,’ answered he, ‘or say, one of fifty 
or sixty li square, and let me have its 
administration, — in three years’ time I 
could make its people dwell in plenty; 
but as to the arts of civilization, I should 
have to await a nobler man.’ 6. ‘And how 
about you, Ch'ih V ‘I do not say that I 

THE ANALECTS: XI 113 

could do it/ answered he, ‘but I should 
like to learn. I would like at the service in 
the great ancestral Temple, or say, at the 
Prince’s imperial audience, to take part, 
in cap and gown, as a minor assistant.’ 

7. ‘And how about you, Tien V Pausing 
as he thrummed his harp, its notes still 
vibrating, he left the instrument, arose, 
and replied, saying, ‘My wishes are differ- 
ent from those presented by these three 
gentlemen.’ ‘What harm in that.^’ said 
the Master. ‘Let each name his desire.’ 
‘Mine would be,’ he said, ‘towards the end 
of Spring, with the dress of the season all 
complete, along with five or six newly 
capped young men, and six or seven 
youths, to bathe in the River I, enjoy the 
breezes among the Rain Altars, ^nd re- 
turn home singing.’ The Master heaved 
a deep sigh and said, ‘I am with Tien.’ 

8. When the three others withdrew, 
Tseng Shih remained behind and asked, 
‘What do you think of the remarks of 

442 

1 

1 14 THE ANALECTS: XI 

these three disciples?’ The Master an- 
swered, ‘Well, each of them merely stated 
his aspirations.’ 9. ‘Then why did you 
smile. Sir, at Yu ?’ he pursued. 10. ‘The 
administration of a country demands a 
right bearing,’ was the reply, ‘but his 
speech lacked modesty, — that is why I 
smiled at him.’ ii. ‘But Ch'iu, — was it 
not a state that he wanted ?’ ‘Where do 
you see a district of sixty or seventy, or 
of fifty or sixty li that is not a state ?’ was 
the answer. 12. ‘And Ch'ih, — was it not 
a state that he wanted ?’ ‘In the Ancestral 
Temple and at the prince’s audience, 
who but a prince takes a part?’ was the 
reply. ‘Yet if Ch‘ih were to act a minor 
part who could act the major?’ 

BOOK XII 

CONCERNING VIRTUE, NOBILITY, 
AND POLITY 

CHAPTER I 

I. When Yen Yiian asked the meaning of 
virtue, the Master replied : ‘Virtue is the 
denial of self and response to what is right 
and proper. Deny yourself fo» one day 
and respond to the right and proper, and 
everybody will accord you virtuous. 
For has virtue its source in oneself, or is 
it forsooth derived from others.^’ 2. 
‘May I beg for the main features V asked 
Yen Yiian. The Master answered ; ‘When 
wrong and improper do not look, when 
wrong and improper do not listen, 
when wrong and improper do not speak, 
when wrong and improper do not move.* 
‘Though I am not clever,’ said Yen Yiian, 
‘permit me to carry out these precepts.* 

CHAPTER II 

When Chung Kung asked the meaning 

ii6 THE ANALECTS: XII 

of virtue, the Master said : ‘When abroad, 
behave as if interviewing an honoured 
guest; in directing the people, act as if 
officiating at a great sacrifice; do not do 
to others what you would not like your- 
self; then your public life will arouse no 
ill-will nor your private life any resent- 
ment.’ ‘Though I am not clever,’ replied 
Chung Kung, ‘permit me to carry out 
these precepts.’ 

CHAPTER III 

I . When Ssu-ma Niu asked for a definition 
of virtue, 2. the Master said: ‘The man 
of virtue is chary of speech.’ 3. ‘He is 
chary of speech! Is this the meaning of 
virtue demanded Niu. ‘When the 
doing pf it is difficult,’ responded Con- 
fucius, ‘can one be other than chary of 
talking about it .^’ 

CHAPTER IV 

I . When Ssu-ma Niu asked for a definition 

THE ANALECTS: XII 117 

of the man of noble mind, the Master 
said: ‘The man of noble mind has neither, 
anxiety nor fear.’ 2. ‘Neither anxiety nor 
fear!’ he rejoined. ‘Is this the definition 
of a noble man ?’ ‘On searching within,’ 
replied the Master, ‘he finds no chronic 
ill, so why should he be anxious or why 
should he be afraid V 

CHAPTER V 

I. Once when Ssu-ma Niu* sorrowfully 
remarked, ‘Other men all have their 
brothers, I alone am without,’ 2. Tzu 
Hsia responded : ‘I have heard it said, 3. 
“Death and life are divine dispensations, 
and wealth and honours are with Heaven. 
4. When the man of noble mind unfailing- 
ly conducts himself with self-respect, 
and is courteous and well-behaved with 
others, then all within the four seas are his 
brotliers. How, then, can a fine man 
grieve that he is without a brother.^” ’ 

THE ANALECTS: XII 

ii8 

CHAPTER VI 

When Tzu Chang asked what was meant 
by insight, the Master replied: ‘He who 
is unmoved by the insidious soaking in 
of slander, or by urgent representations of 
direct personal injury, may truly be called 
a man of insight. Indeed, he who is un- 
moved by the insidious soaking in of 
slander or by urgent representations of 
direct personal injury, may also indeed be 
called far-sighted.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

I. When Tzu Kung asked what were the 
essentials of government, the Master re- 
plied: ‘Sufficient food, sufficient forces, 
and the confidence of the people.’ 

2. ‘Suppose,’ rejoined Tzu Kung, ‘I 
were compelled to dispense with one, 
which of these three should I forgo first } ’ 
‘Forgo the forces,’ was the reply. 

3. ‘Suppose,’ said Tzu Kung, ‘I were 

THE ANALECTS: XII 119 

compelled to eliminate another, which 
of the other two should I forgo ?’ ‘The 
food,’ was the reply; ‘for from of old 
death has been the lot of all men, but a 
people without, faith cannot stand.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. ChiTzu-Ch'eng*remarked: ‘Toraman 
of high character to be natural is quite 
sufficient; what need is there of art to 
make him such 

2. ‘Alas!’ said Tzu Kung, ‘Your Ex- 
cellency’s words are those of a noble man, 
but a team of four horses cannot overtake 
the tongue. 3. Art, as it were, is nature ; as . 
nature, so to speak, is art. The hairless' 
hide of a tiger or a leopard is about the 
same as the hide of a dog or a sReep.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

I. Duke Ai* inquired of Yu Jo* saying: ‘It 
is a year of dearth, and we have not 

120 

THE ANALECTS: XII 

revenue enough for our needs; what is to 
be done?’ 2. ‘Why not simply tithe the 
land ?’ replied Yu Jo. 3. ‘Why, with two- 
tenths,’ said the Duke, ‘I have still not 
enough, how could I manage with the 
one-tenth system?’ 4. ‘If the people 
enjoy plenty,’ was the rejoinder, ‘with 
whom will the prince share want? But 
if the pedple are in want, with whom will 
the prince share plenty?’ 

CHAPTER X 

I. When Tzu Chang asked the best way 
to improve his character and to dis- 
criminate in what was irrational, the 
Master said: ‘Take conscientiousness and 
''sincerity as your ruling principles, sub- 
mit also your mind to right conditions, 
and your character will improve. 2. When 
you love a man you want him to live, 
when you hate him you wish he were 
dead; but you have already wanted him 

THE ANALECTS: XII 121 

to live and yet again you wish he were 
dead. This is an instance of the irrational. 

3. “Not indeed because of wealth, 

But solely because talented.” 

CHAPTER XI 

1 . When Duke Ching of Ch'i* inquired of 
Confucius the principles of goyernment, 

2. Confucius answered saying: ‘Let the 
prince be prince, the minister minister, 
the father father, and the son son.* 

3. ‘Excellent!’ said the Duke. ‘Truly, if 
the prince be not prince, the minister not 
minister, the father not father, and the son 
not son, however much grain I may have, 
shall I be allowed to eat it.^’ 

CHAPTER XII 

I. The Master said: ‘Yu* was a fellow! 
He could decide a dispute with half a 
word.’ 2. Tzu Lu never slept over a 
promise. 

122 THE ANALECTS: XII 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Master said: ‘I can try a lawsuit as 
well as other men, but surely the great 
thing is to bring about that there be no 
going to law.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

When T£u Chang asked about the art of 
government, the Master replied: ‘Ponder 
untiringly over your plans, and then con- 
scientiously carry them into execution.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘The scholar* who be- 
comes widely versed in letters, and who 
restrains his learning within the bounds of 
good conduct, is not likely to leave the 
track.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said : ‘The man of noble mind 
seeks to achieve the good in others and 

THE ANALECTS: XII 123 

not their evil. The little-minded man is 
the reverse of this.’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

When Chi K'artg Tzu* asked Confucius 
for a definition of government, Con- 
fucius replied : ‘To govern means to guide 
aright. If you, Sir, will lead^the way 
aright, who will dare to deviate from the 
right V 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Chi K'ang Tzu, being plagued with 
robbers, consulted Confucius, who an- 
swered him saying: ‘If you. Sir, be free 
from the love of wealth, although you 
pay people, they will not steal.* 

CHAPTER XIX 

Chi K'ang Tzu asked the opinion of Con- 
fucius on government and said: ‘How 
would it do to execute the lawless for the 
good of the law-abiding.^* ‘What need, 

124 

THE ANALECTS: XII 

Sir, is there of capital punishment in your 
administration?’ responded Confucius. 
‘If your aspirations are for good, Sir, the 
people will be good. The moral character 
of those in high position is the breeze, the 
character of those below is the grass. 
When the grass has the breeze upon it, it 
assuredly bends.’ 

CHAPTER XX 

1. Tzu Chang asked what a man must be 
like in order to gain general estimation. 

2. ‘What is it that you mean by general 
estimation?’ inquired the Master. 3. ‘To 
ensure popularity abroad and to ensure it 
at home,’ replied Tzu Chang. 

4. ‘That,’ said the Master, ‘is popular- 
ity, not, esteem. 5. As for the man who 
^meets with general esteem, he is natural, 
lipright, and a lover of justice; he weighs 
what men say and observes their ex- 
pression, and his anxiety is to be more 
lowly than others; and so he ensures 

THE ANALECTS: XII 125 

esteem abroad, as he ensures it also at 
home. 6. As to the seeker of popularity, 
he assumes an air of magnanimity which 
liis actions belie, while his self-assurance 
knows never a misgiving, and so he 
ensures popularity abroad, as he also 
ensures it at home.’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

I. Once when Fan Ch'ih was rambling 
along with the Master under the trees at 
the Rain Altars, he remarked : ‘May I ven- 
ture to ask how one may improve one’s 
character, correct one’s personal faults, 
and discriminate in what is irrational .^’ 

2. ‘An excellent question,’ rejoined the 
Master. 3. ‘If a man put duty^ first and 
success after, will not that improve his 
character.^ If he attack his own failings 
instead of those of others, will he not 
remedy his personal faults } For a morn- 
ing’s anger to forget his own safety and 

126 THE ANALECTS: XII 

involve that of his relatives, is not this 
irrational ?’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

I. Once when Fan Ch'ih asked the mean- 
ing of virtue, the Master replied, ‘Love 
your fellow men.’ On his asking the 
meaning of knowledge, the Master said : 
‘Know your fellow men.’ 

2. Fan Ch'ih not having comprehended, 

3. the Master added: ‘By promoting the 
straight and degrading the crooked you 
can make even the crooked straight.’ 

4. Fan Ch'ih withdrew and afterwards 
meeting Tzu Hsia said to him: ‘A little 
while ago, when I had an interview with 
the Master, and asked for a definition of 
knowledge, he replied, “By promoting 
the straight and degrading the crooked 
you can make even the crooked straight,” 
— ^what can he have meant .^’ 

5. ‘What a rich maxim that is!’ replied 
Tzu Hsia. 6. ‘When Shun had the em- 

THE ANALECTS: XII 127 

pire,* he chose from amongst the multi- 
tude and promoted Kao Yao, whereupon 
all who were devoid of virtue disappeared. 
And when T'ang had the empire, he too 
chose from ampngst the multitude and 
promoted I Yin, whereupon all who were 
devoid of Virtue disappeared.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII* 

I. On Tzu Kung inquiring the duties 
to a friend, the Master replied: ‘Advise 
him conscientiously and guide him dis- 
creetly. If he be unwilling, then cease; 
do not court humiliation.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The philosopher Tseng said: ‘The wise' 
man by his culture gathers hisT friends, 
and by his friends develops his goodness 
of character.’ 

VOLUME VII 
BOOK XIII 

CHIEFLY CONCERNING GOVERN- 
MENT 

CHAPTER I 

I. When Tzu Lu asked about the art of 
government the Master replied: ‘Be in 
advance of people; show them how to 
work.’ 

2. On his asking for something more, 
the Master added: ‘Untiringly.’ 

CHAPTER II 

I. When Chung Kung was minister for 
the House of Chi he asked for advice on 
the art of government, whereupon the 
Master said: ‘Utilize first and foremost 
your subordinate officers, overlook their 
minor errors, and promote those who are 
worthy and capable.’ 

2. ‘How may I know those who are 
worthy and capable T he asked. ‘Promote 

THE ANALECTS: XIII 129 

those you do recognize;’ was the reply; 
‘as to those whom you may fail to recog- 
nize, is it likely that others will neglect 
them ?’ 

CHAPTER III 

I. ‘The Prince of Wei,’* said Tzu Lu, ‘is 
awaiting you. Sir, to take control of his 
administration, — what will you under- 
take first, Sir ?’ 

2. ‘The one thing needed,’ replied the 
Master, ‘is the correction of terms.’ 

3. ‘Are you as wide of the mark as 
that. Sir?’ said Tzu Lu, ‘Why this cor- 
recting ?’ 

4. ‘How uncultivated you are, Yu!’ 
responded the Master. ‘A wise man, in 
regard to what he does not un4erstand, 
maintains an attitude of reserve. 5. If 
terms be incorrect, then statements do' 
not accord with facts; and when state- 
ments and facts do not accord, then busi- 
ness is not properly executed; 6. when 

442 

K 

130 THE ANALECTS: XIII 

business is not properly executed, order 
and harmony do not flourish; when order 
and harmony do not flourish, then justice 
becomes arbitrary; and when justice be- 
^comes arbitrary, the people do not know 
how to move hand or foot. 7. Hence 
whatever a wise man states he can always 
define, and what he so defines, he can 
^^ways carry into practice; for the wise 
^an will on no account have anything 
remiss in his definitions.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

I. On Fan Ch'ih requesting to be taught 
agriculture, the Master replied, ‘I am not 
as good as an old farmer for that.’ When 
he askqd to be taught gardening the 
Master answered, ‘I am not as good as 
an old gardener for that.’ 

2. On Fan Ch'ih withdrawing, the 
Master said : ‘What a little-minded man is 
Fan Hsu! 3. When a ruler loves good 

THE ANALECTS: XIII 131 

manners, his people will not let them-, 
selves be disrespectful ; when a ruler loves 
justice, his people will not let themselves 
be unsubmissive; when a ruler loves good 
faith, his people will not venture to be 
insincere; — and if he be like this, then 
people will come from every quarter 
carrying their children strapped on their 
backs; — what does he want with learning 
agriculture ?’ 

CHAPTER V 

The Master said: ‘A man may be able to 
recite the three hundred Odes, but if, 
when given a post in the administration, 
he proves to be without practical ability, 
or when sent anywhere on a mission, he is 
unable of himself to answer a question, 
although his knowledge is extensive, of 
what use is it?’ 

CHAPTER VI 

The Master said; ‘If a ruler is himself 

132 THE ANALECTS: XIII 

upright, his people will do their duty with- 
out orders; hut if he himself be not up- 
right, although he may order they will 
not obey.’ 

CHAPTER 'VII 

The Master said: ‘Lu and Wei are brother 
states even in their misgovernment.’* 

CHAPTER VIII 

The Master said of Ching,* a scion of the 
ducal House of Wei, that he dwelt well 
content in his house. When first he began 
to possess property, he called it *a pass- 
able accumulation’; when he had pros- 
pered somewhat, he called it ‘passably 
complete’; and when he had amassed 
plenty, he called it ‘passably fine’. 

CHAPTER IX 

I. When the Master was travelling to Wei, 
Jan Yu drove him. 2. ‘What a numerous 
population!’ remarked the Master. 

THE ANALECTS: XIII 133 

3. ‘The people having grown so 
numerous, what next should be done for 
them ?’ asked Jan Yu. ‘Enrich them,’ was 
the reply. 

4. ‘And wheayou have enriched them, 
what next should be done.^’ he asked. 
‘Educate them,’ was the answer. 

CHAPTER X 

The Master said: ‘Were any to 

employ me, in a twelvemonth something 
could have been done, but in three years 
the work could be completed.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master remarked: ‘How true is the 
saying: “If good men ruled the country 
for a hundred years, they could eVen tame 
the brutal and abolish capital punish- 
ment!” ’ 

CHAPTER XII 

The Master said: ‘If a kingly ruler were 

134 the ANALECTS: XIII 

to arise, it would take a generation before 
virtue prevailed, however.’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Master said: ‘If a man put himself 
aright, what difficulty will he have in the 
public service; but if he cannot put him- 
self aright, how is he going to put others 
right 

CHAPTER XIV 

Once when Jan Tzu came from court,* the 
Master asked, ‘Why are you so late.^’ 
‘We had affairs of state,’ was the reply. 
‘They must have been family affairs, 
then,’ said the Master. ‘If there had been 
affairs of state, although I am not en- 
gaged in office, yet I should have been 
consulted about them.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

I. Duke Ting* inquired whether there 
were any one phrase by the adoption of 
which a country could be made pros- 

THE ANALECTS: XIII 135 

perous. ‘No phrase can be expected to 
have such force as that/ replied Con- 
fucius. 2. ‘But there is the popular saying, 
“It is hard to be a prince, and not easy to 
be a minister.” ,3. If a prince perceive the 
difficulty of being a prince, may he not 
expect through that one phrase to prosper 
his country.^’ 

4. ‘Is there any one phrase,’*he asked, 
‘through which a country may be ruined 
‘No phrase can be expected to have such 
force as that,’ replied Confucius. ‘But 
there is the popular saying, “I should 
have no gratification in being a prince, 
unless none opposed my commands.” 
5. If those are good, and no one opposes 
them, that surely is well. But if they are 
not good, and no one opposes tljem, may 
he not expect in that one phrase to ruin 
his country.^’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

I. When the Duke of She* asked the 

136 THE ANALECTS; XIII 

meaning of good government^ 2. the 
Master answered; ‘The near are happy 
and the distant attracted/ 

CHAPTER 5CVII 

When Tzu Hsia was magistrate of Chii- 
fu,* he asked what should be his policy, 
^hereupftn the Master said: ‘Do not be 
’ jn a hurry; do not be intent on minor 
advantages. When one is in a hurry, 
nothing is thorough; and when one is 
intent on minor advantages, nothing 
great is accomplished.* 

CHAPTER XVIII 

I. The Duke of She* observed to Con- 
fucius: ‘Jn my part of the country there 
is a man so honest that when his father 
appropriated a sheep he bore witness to 
it.* 2. ‘The honest in my part of the 
country,* replied Confucius, ‘are differ- 
ent from that, for a father will screen his 

THE ANALECTS: XIII 137 

son, and a son his father, — and there is 
honesty in that.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

Once when FarfCh'ih asked about virtue, 
the Master said : ‘In private life be cour- 
teous, in handling public business be 
serious, with all men be conscientious. 
Even though you go among barbarians, 
you may not relinquish these virtues.’ 

CHAPTER XX 

I. Tzu Kung asked: ‘What must an 
official be like to merit his name ‘If in 
his personal conduct,’ replied the Master, 
‘he has a sensibility to dishonour, and 
wheresoever he be sent will not disgrace 
his prince’s commission, he may be said 
to merit his title.’ 

2. ‘I would venture to ask who may be 
ranked lower,’ said Tzu Kung. ‘He whom 
his relatives commend as filial and whose 

138 THE ANALECTS: XIII 

neighbours commend as brotherly,’ was 
the answer. 

3. ‘I venture to ask the next lower,’ said 
Tzu Kung. ‘He is one who always stands 
by his word,’ was the answer, ‘and who 
persists in all he undertakes; he is a man 
of grit, though of narrow ouflook; yet 
perhaps he may be taken as of the third 
class.’ 

4. ‘What would you say of the present- 
day government officials.^’ asked Tsu 
Kung. ‘Faugh!’ said the Master. ‘A set 
of pecks and hampers, unworthy to be 
taken into account!’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said. ‘If I cannot obtain 
men of the Golden Mean to teach, those 
whom I must have, let them be the 
ambitious and the discreet; for the 
ambitious do make progress and take 
hold, and as to the discreet, there are 
things that they will refuse to sanction.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XIII 139 
CHAPTER XXII 

I. The Master said: ‘The men of the 
South have a saying: “A man without 
constancy will make neither a soothsayer 
nor a doctor.”* How well put! 2. The 
I Ching says: “If a man be inconstant in 
his moral character, some one will bring 
disgrace upon him.” * 3. The faster re- 
marked: ‘All because he did not think 
well beforehand.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

The Master said : ‘The true gentleman is 
friendly but not familiar; the inferior man 
is familiar but not friendly.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

Tzu Kung asked : ‘What would you say of 
the man who is liked by all his fellow 
townsmen V ‘That is not sufficient,’ was 
the reply. ‘Then what would you say 
of him who is hated by all his fellow 

140 THE ANALECTS: XIII 

townsmen?’ ‘Nor is that sufficient,’ was 
the reply. ‘What is better is that the 
good among his fellow townsmen like 
him, and the bad hate him.’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master said : ‘The true gentleman is 
easy to serve, yet difficult to please. If 
you attempt to please him in any im- 
proper way, he will be displeased; but 
when it comes to appointing men in their 
work, he has regard to their capacity. The 
inferior man is hard to serve, yet easy to 
please. If you attempt to please him, even 
in an improper way, he will be pleased; 
but in appointing men their work, he ex- 
pects them to be fit for everything.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI 

The Master said: ‘The well-bred are 
dignified but not pompous. The ill-bred 
are pompous, but not dignified.’ 

THE ANALECTS: Kill 141 

CHAPTER XXVII 

The Master said: ‘The firm of spirit, the 
resolute in character, the simple in man- 
ner, and the slow of speech are not far 
from virtue.’ 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

Tzu Lu asked: ‘What qualities must one 
possess to be entitled to be called an 
educated man.^’ ‘He who is earnest in 
spirit, persuasive in speech, and withal of 
gracious bearing,’ said the Master, ‘may 
be called an educated man; — earnest in 
spirit and persuasive of speech with his 
friends, and of gracious bearing towards 
his brothers.’ 

CHAPTER XXIX 

The Master said: ‘When a good man has 
trained the people for seven years, they 
might then be fit to bear arms.’ 

142 THE ANALECTS: XIII 
CHAPTER XXX 

The Master said: ‘To lead an untrained 
people to war may be called throwing 
them away.* 

BOOK XIV 

CHIEFLY CONCERNING GOVERN- 
MENT AND CERTAIN RULERS 

CHAPTER I 

When Hsien* asked the meaning of dis- 
honour, the Master said: ‘When his 
country is well-governed to ba thinking 
only of pay, and when his country is ill- 
governed to be thinking only of pay, — 
that is dishonour for a man.’ 

CHAPTER II 

I. Hsien again asked: ‘If a man refrain 
from ambition, boasting, resentment, and 
selfish desire, it may, I suppose, be 
counted to him for virtue.’ 2. ‘It may 
be counted for difficult,’ said tlie Master, 
‘but whether that alone is virtue, I know 
not.* 

CHAPTER III 

The Master said: ‘The scholar whose 

144 the ANALECTS: XIV 
regard is his comfort is unworthy to be 
deemed a scholar.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

The Master said: ‘When law and order 
prevail in the land, a man may be bold 
in speech and bold in action; but when 
the land lacks law and order, though he 
may take bold action, he should lay 
restraint on his speech.’ 

CHAPTER V 

The Master said: ‘A man of principle is 
sure to have something good to say, but 
he who has something good to say is not 
necessarily a man of principle. A vir- 
tuous man is sure to be courageous, but 
a courageous man is not necessarily a man 
of virtue.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

Nan Kung Kua remarked to Confucius 
by way of inquiry: ‘Is it not a fact that 
Prince I* excelled as an archer, and Ao* 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 145 

could propel a boat on dry land, yet 
neither died a natural death, while Yii* 
and Chi, who took a personal interest in 
agriculture, became possessed of the em- 
pire?’ The Master made no reply, but 
when Nan Kung Kua had withdrawn, he 
observed: ‘A scholar indeed is such a 
man! Such a man has a true estimation 
of virtue!’ 

CHAPTER VII 

‘There may perhaps be men of the higher 
type who fail in virtue, but there has 
never been one of the lower type who 
possessed virtue.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

The Master said: ‘Can love be other than 
exacting, or loyalty refrain from ad- 
monition ?’ 

CHAPTER IX 

The Master said: ‘In preparing a state 
document in Cheng,* P’i Shen drafted 

146 THE ANALECTS: XI V 

it, Shih Shu revised it, the Foreign 
Minister Tzu Yii amended it, and Tzu 
Ch’an of Tung Li embellished it.’ 

CHAPTER X 

I. Somebody asked the Master what he 
thought aboutTzu Ch’an :* ‘He js a kindly 
man,’ was the reply. 2. Asked about Tzu 
Hsi,* he said: ‘That fellow indeed!’ 3. 
Asked about Kuan Chung, he said: ‘There 
was a man! The head of the Po family 
was despoiled for him of his town of 
P'ien with its three hundred families, yet 
never even complained, though he had 
to live on coarse food to the end of his 
days.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said: ‘To be poor and not 
complain is difficult; to be rich and not 
arrogant is easy.’ 

CHAPTER XII 

The Master said: ‘Meng Kung Ch'o* 
would excel as comptroller of the Chao 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 147 

or Wei families, but is not fit to be 
minister in the states of T'eng or Hsieh/ 

CHAPTER XIII 

I. When Tzu I^u asked what constituted 
the character of the perfect man, the 
Master replied: ‘If he have the sagacity 
of Tsang Wu Chung,* the purity of 
Kung Ch'o, the courage of Chuang Tzu 
of P'ien, and the skill of Jan Ch'iu, and 
if he refine these with the arts of courtesy 
and harmony, then, indeed, he may be 
deemed a perfect man/ 

2. ‘But what need is there,’ he added, 
‘for the perfect man of the present day 
to be like this? Let him when he sees 
anything to his advantage think whether 
it be right; when he meets w^th danger 
be ready to lay down his life; and, how- 
ever long-standing the undertaking, let 
him not belie the professions of his 
whole life: then he, too, may be deemed 
a perfect man/ 

148 THE ANALECTS: XIV 

CHAPTER XIV 

I. The Master put a question to Kung- 
ming Chia* about Kung-shu W en-tzu, and 
said: ‘Is it really true that your Master 
neither talks, nor laughs, nor accepts any- 
thing ?’ 

2. ‘That arises from the exaggeration 
of reporters,’ answered Kung-ming Chia. 
‘Our Master talks only at the right time, 
hence people do not tire of his talk; he 
only laughs when he is really pleased, 
hence people do not tire of his laughter; 
he only accepts things when it is right to 
do so, hence men do not tire of his ac- 
cepting.’ ‘Is that so.^’ said the Master. 
‘Can that indeed be so?' 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said : ‘Tsang Wu Chung* held 
on to the fief of Fang while he begged the 
Duke of Lu to appoint his brother as his 
successor. Although they say he did not 
coerce his prince, I do not believe it.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 149 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said: ‘Duke W^n of Chin* was 
double-dealing and dishonourable. Duke 
Huan of Ch’i was honourable and not 
double-dealing!’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

1. ‘When Duke Huan* put to death his 
brother, Prince Chiu,* observed Tzu Lu, 
‘Shao Hu died for him, but Kuan Chung 
did not. Was he not lacking in virtue V 

2. ‘Duke Huan,’ answered the Master, 
‘brought the barons together without re- 
sorting to chariots of war, and all through 
thepower of Kuan Chung.* Whose virtue 
was like his.^ Whose virtue was like 

\i\%r 

CHAPTER XVIII* 

I . Tzu Kung asked : ‘Was not KuanChung 
deficient in virtue.^ When Duke Huan 
had his brother Prince Chiu put to death, 

150 THE ANALECTS: XIV 

Kuan Chung was incapable of dying, and 
even became his minister.’ 

2. ‘After Kuan Chung became minister 
to Duke Huan,’ replied the Master, ‘he 
made the duke leader of the barons, and 
entirely reduced the empire to order, so 
that people down to the present day are 
recipients of his benefactions. But for 
Kuan Chung we should be wearing our 
hair loose and folding our clothes to the 
left. 3. Would you require from him that 
which is deemed fidelity by common men 
and women, who show it by committing 
suicide in some ditch, nobody being the 
wiser 

CHAPTER XIX 

I. The Minister Chiian, formerly a re- 
tainer of Kung-shu Wen-tzu,* afterwards 
went up to court in company with Wen- 
tzu. 2. The Master on hearing of it ob- 
served: ‘Wen well deserves to be con- 
sidered “a promoter of culture”.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 151 

CHAPTER XX 

I. When the Master was speaking of the 
unprincipled character of Duke Ling of 
Wei, K'ang-tzu* observed: ‘Such being 
the case, how is it he does not lose his 
throne?’ *2. ‘Chung-shu Yii,’ answered 
Confucius, ‘has charge of the envoys; the 
Reader T'o has charge of th^ ancestral 
temple; Wang-sun Chia commands the 
forces; — and, such being the case, how 
should he lose his throne?’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said : ‘He who speaks without 
modesty will perform with difficulty.’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

I. When Ch'en Ch'eng-tzu* slew Duke 
Chien, 2. Confucius bathed himself and 
went to court, where he petitioned Duke 
Ai, saying: ‘Ch’en Heng has slain his 

152 THE ANALECTS: XIV 

prince, I beg you to take vengeance on 
him/ 

3. ‘Lay the information before the three 
nobles,’ replied the Duke. 

4. ‘Seeing that I rank, next after the 
ministers,’ soliloquized Confucius (as he 
withdrew), ‘I dare not do other than peti- 
tion; and the prince says: “Inform the 
three nobfes!” ’ 

5. He went to the three nobles and peti- 
tioned them, but they declined action; 
whereupon Confucius remarked; ‘Seeing 
that I rank next after the ministers, I dared 
not do other than make my petition.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

When Tzu Lu asked what constituted a 
man’s dujy to his prince, the Master said: 
‘Never deceive him and then you may 
boldly withstand him.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

The Master said: ‘The progress of the 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 153 

nobler-minded man is upwards, the pro- 
gress of the inferior man is downwards.’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master said : ‘The men of old studied^ 
for the sake of self-improvement; the 
men of the present day study for the ap-. 
probation of others.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI* 

I. Chii Po Yii* having sent a messenger 
to convey his respects to Confucius, 2. 
Confucius made him sit down along with 
him and questioned him, asking: ‘What 
is your master doing now.^’ The messen- 
ger replied: ‘My master is seeking to 
make his faults fewer, but has not yet 
succeeded.’ When the messenger had 
withdrawn, the Master observe^: ‘What 
a messenger! What a messenger!’ 

CHAPTER XXVII 
The Master said:* ‘He who does not oc- 
cupy the office does not discuss its policy.’ 

154 THE ANALECTS: XIV 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

The Philosopher Tseng said: ‘A wise 
man, even in his thoughts, does not stray 
from his own duty.’ 

CHAPTER XXIX 

The Master said : ‘The higher type of man 
is modest in what he says, but surpasses in 
what he does.’ 

CHAPTER XXX 

I. The Master said: ‘There are three 
characteristics of the noble man’s life, 
to which I cannot lay claim: — being 
virtuous he is free from care; possessing 
knowledge he is free from doubts; being 
courageous he is free from fear.’ 2. ‘That 
is what ypu say of yourself,’ replied Tzu 
Kung! 

CHAPTER XXXI 

Tzu Kung being in the habit of making 
comparisons, the Master observed: ‘How 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 155 

worthy T'zu must be! As for me, I have 
not the time to spare.’ 

CHAPTER XXXII 

The Master said: ‘A wise man is not 
distressed .that people do not know him; 
he is distressed at his own lack of ability.’ 

CHAPTER XXXIII 

The Master said: ‘Is not he a man of real 
worth who does not anticipate deceit nor 
imagine that people will doubt his word ; 
and yet who has immediate perception 
thereof when present .^’ 

CHAPTER XXXIV 

I. Wei-shengMou,*5neeringat Confucius, 
said : ‘Ch'iu, what are you doing with this 
“perching here and perching there”.^ Are 
you not making a business of talking 
to please people?’ 2 . ‘I should not dare 
to talk only to please people,’ replied 

156 THE ANALECTS: XIV 

Confucius; ‘and I should hate to be ob- 
stinately immovable/ 

CHAPTER XXXV 

The Master said: ‘A good horse is not 
praised for its strength but for its 
character.’ 

CHAPTER XXXVI 

I. Some one asked: ‘What do you think 
about the principle of rewarding enmity 
with kindness,^’ 2. ‘With what, then, 
would you reward kindness.^’ asked the 
.Master. 3. ‘Reward enmity with just 
treatment, and kindness with kindness.’ 

CHAPTER XXXVII 

I. ‘No one knows me, alas !’ exclaimed the 
Master. 2. ‘Why do you say. Master, that 
no one knows you ?’ said Tzu Kung. ‘I 
make no complaint against Heaven,’ re- 
plied the Master, ‘nor blame men, for 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 

157 

though my studies are lowly, my mind 
soars aloft; and does not Heaven know 

me: 

CHAPTER XXXVIII 

I. Kung-po Liao* having spoken against 
Tzu Lu to’ Chi-sun, Tzu-fuChing-po in- 
formed Confucius thereof, and said : ‘Our 
lord’s mind is undoubtedly being dis- 
turbed by Kung-po Liao, but I am still 
strong enough to have his carcass ex- 
posed in the market-place.’ 2. The Master 
replied: ‘If my principles are going to- 
prevail, it is so fated; if they are going to 
fail, it is so fated ; what can Kung-po Liao 
do against Destiny.^’ 

CHAPTER XXXIX 

$ 

I. The Master said: ‘Some good men 
withdraw from the world. 2. Withdrawal 
from fatherland comes next in order; 
3. next is from uncongenial looks; 4. 
and next is from uncongenial language.* 

158 THE ANALECTS: XIV 

CHAPTER XL 

The Master said: ‘There are seven men 
who have done this/ 

CHAPTER XLI 

On one occasion when Tzu Lii happened 
to spend the night at Stone Gate, the gate 
opener asked him, ‘Where are you from ?’ 
‘Master K’ung’s,^ replied Tzu Lu. ‘Is 
not he the one who knows he cannot suc- 
ceed and keeps on trying to do so ?’ was 
the response. 

CHAPTER XLII 

I. The Master was playing on a stone chime 
one day in Wei, when a hermit* carrying 
a basket passed the door of the K'ung 
abode and remarked; ‘With what feeling 
he is playing the chimes !’ 2. Presently he 
jeered; ‘How contemptible is this petrified 
ting-tinging! Seeifig that everybody 
ignores him, let him stop and have done 

THE ANALECTS: XIV 159 

with it. “If the water is deep you strip up 
to the waist; if shallow you tuck up your 
skirt!” ’ 3. ‘What a stoic he is!’ observed 
the Master. ‘But his way is not difficult.’ 

CHAPTER XLIII 

Tzu Chang said: ‘The Book of History 
says that when Kao Tsung* observed the 
imperial mourning he did not speak for 
three years. What may be the meaning 
of that.^’ 2. ‘Why need you specialize 
Kao Tsung All the men of old did the 
same,’ answered Confucius. ‘When a 
prince died, all his officers attended to 
their several duties in obedience to the 
prime minister for three years.’ 

CHAPTER XLIV 

The Master said: ‘When those in high 
position are fond of orderly behaviour, 
service from the pebple is easily com- 
manded.’ 

i6o THE ANALECTS: XIV 

CHAPTER XLV 

When Tzu Lu asked what should be the 
character of a man of the nobler order, the 
•Master replied : ‘He should cultivate him- 
self unfailingly to respect others.’ ‘Will it 
suffice to be like this asked Tzu Lu. ‘He 
should cultivate himself so as to ease the 
lot of others,’ was the reply. ‘And is this 
sufficient.^’ asked Tzu Lu. ‘He should 
cultivate himself so as to ease the lot of the 
people. He should cultivate himself so 
as to ease the lot of the people: — even 
Yao and Shun'*' ever remained assiduous 
about this!’ 

CHAPTER XLVI 

Yiian Jang* sat squatting and waiting as 
the Master approaciied, who said to him; 
‘When young being mafnerless, when 
grown up doing nothing worthy of men- 
tion, when old not dying, — this is being 
a rogue!’ And with this he hit him on the 
shank with his staff. 

THE ANALECTS: XIV i6i 

CHAPTER XLVII 

I. A youth from the village of Ch'iieh was 
acting as messenger for Confucius, so 
some one said concerning him: ‘He has 
made good progress, I suppose ?’ 2. ‘I 
notice,’ replied the Master, ‘that he occu- 
pies the seat of adult age, and I notice that 
he walks on a level with his seniors. It is 
not that he seeks to progress, he wants 
speedy arrival!’ 

442 

M 

VOLUME VIII 
BOOK XV 

CHIEFLY ON THE MAINTENANCE 
OF PRINCIPLES AND character 

CHAPTER I 

1. When Duke Ling of Wei* asked Con- 
fucius about military tactics, Confucius 
replied: ‘With the appurtenances of wor- 
ship I have indeed an acquaintance, but as 
to military matters I have never studied 
them.’ Next day he straightway took his 
departure. 

2. On the way in Ch'en their supplies 
failed, and his followers were so ill that 
they could not stand. 3. Tzu Lu with 
some irritation sougiit an interview and 
said : ‘Does a man of the higher order also 
have to suffer want,^’ ‘The superior man 
bears want unshaken,’ replied the Master 
‘the inferior man in want becomes de- 
moralized.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XV 163 

CHAPTER II 

I. ‘T'zu,’ said the Master, ‘You regard me 
as a man of multifarious study who re- 
tains all in mind, eh ?’ 2. ‘Yes,’ answered 
he; ‘but maybait is not so ?’ 3. ‘No,’ was 
the reply,,‘I have one principle connecting 
all.’ 

CHAPTER III 

‘Yu,’ said the Master, ‘there are few who 
understand virtue.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

The Master said: ‘May not Shun* be in- 
stanced as one who made no effort, yet 
the empire was well governed } For what 
effort did he make ? Ordering himself in 
all seriousness, he did nothing but main- 
tain the correct imperial attitude.’ 

CHAPTER V 

I. When Tzu Chang asked how to succeed 
with others, 2. the Master made answer: 
‘If you are sincere and truthful in what 

i 64 the ANALECTS: XV 

you say, and trustworthy and circumspect 
in what you do, then although you be in 
the land of the barbarians you will succeed 
with them. But if you are not sincere and 
truthful in what you s^y, and untrust- 
'^orthy and not circumspect in what you 
do, are you likely to succeed even in 
your own country? 3. When standing, 
see these principles there in front of you. 
When in your carriage, see them resting 
on the yoke. Then you will succeed 
everywhere.’ 4. Tzu Chang inscribed 
these counsels on his sash. 

CHAPTER VI 

I. The Master said: ‘What a straight man 
was the recorder Yii !* When the country 
was well^overned. He was like an arrow; 
and when the country was ill governed, 
he was still straight as an arrow. 

2. What a noble man is Chii Po Yii!* 
When the country is well governed, he 
holds office; but when the country is ill 

THE ANALECTS: XV 165 

governed, he can roll up his portfolio 
and keep it in his bosom/ 

CHAPTER VII 

‘Not to enlighten one who can be en- 
lightened is to \^aste a man; to enlighten 
one who ‘Cannot be enlightened is to 
waste words. The intelligent man neither 
wastes his man nor his words.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

The Master said: ‘The resolute scholar 
and the virtuous man will not seek life at 
the expense of virtue. Some even sacri- 
fice their lives to crown their virtue.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

When Tzu Kung asked about the practice 
of virtue, the Master'lreplied : ‘A workman 
who wants to do his work well must first 
sharpen his tools. In whatever state you 
dwell, take service with the worthiest of 
its ministers, and make friends of the 
most virtuous of its scholars.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XV 

1 66 

CHAPTER X 

I. Yen Yuan once asked about the ad- 
ministration of a state. 

2. The Master replied: ‘Adopt the 
calendar of Hsia;* 

3. Ride in the state carriage of Yin;* 

4. Wear the cap of Chou;* 

5. In my sic adopt the Shao dances;* 

6. Banish the songs of Cheng,* and 
avoid specious men; for the songs of 
Cheng are licentious, and specious men 
dangerous.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said; ‘Who heeds not the 
future will find sorrow at hand.’ 

CHAPT^.R XII 

‘It is all iA vain!’ said the Master. ‘I have 
never yet seen a man as fond of virtue as 
of beauty.’* 

CHAPTER XIII 

‘Was notTsangWenChung*like one who 

THE ANALECTS: XV 167 

had stolen his office ?’ remarked the 
Master. ‘He knew the excellence of Hui 
of Liu-hsia,* yet did not appoint him as 
a colleague.’ 

CH'APTER XIV 

The Master said: ‘He who demands much 
from himself and little from others will 
avoid resentment.* 

CHAPTER XV 

The Master said: ‘If a man does not ask 
himself, “What am I to make of this 
“What am I to make of that — there is 
nothing whatever I can make of him.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Master said : ‘Men who associate to- 
gether the livelong day and v^ose con- 
versation never rises to what is just and 
right, but whose delight is in deeds of 
petty shrewdness — how hard is their 
case!’ 

i68 

THE ANALECTS: XV 

CHAPTER XVII 

The Master said : ‘The noble man takes the 
Right as his foundation principle, reduces 
it to practice with all courtesy, carries it 
out with modesty, and fenders it perfect 
with sincerity. Such is the ncAle man. 

♦ CHAPTER XVIII 

;The Master remarked: ‘The noble man 
is pained over his own incompetency; he 
is not pained that others ignore him.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

The Master said: ‘The noble man hates 
to end his days and leave his name un- 
distinguished.’ 

CHAPTER XX 

The Master said: ‘The noble man seeks 
what he wants in himself ; the inferior man 
seeks it from others.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XV 169 

CHAPTER XXI 

The Master said : ‘The noble man upholds 
his dignity without striving for it; he is 
sociable without entering any clique.’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said : ‘The wise man does not 
appreciate a man because of what he says ; 
nor does he depreciate what he says be- 
cause of the man.’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 

‘Is there any one word,’ asked Tzu Kung, 
‘which could be adopted as a lifelong rule 
of conduct .^’ The Master replied : ‘Is not j 
Sympathy the word } Do not do to others 
what you would ncft like yourself.’ 

CHAPTER XXIV 

I. The Master said: ‘In my treatment of 
men, whom have I unduly disparaged or 
whom have I unduly extolled ^ If there 

170 THE ANALECTS: XV 

be one whom I have so extolled, there is 
that by which he has been tested . 2. Thus 
and with such people the Three Dynasties 
pursued their straightforward course.’ 

CHAPTER XXV 

c 

The Master said : ‘I can still go back to the 
days when a recorder left a temporary 
blank in his records, and when a man who 
had a horse would lend it to another to 
ride. Now, alas! such a condition no 
more exists.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI 

The Master said : ‘Plausible' words con- 
found morals, and a trifling impatience 
may confound a great project.’ 

CHAPTER XXVII 

The Master said; ‘Though all hate a man, 
one must investigate the cause; and 
though all like him, one must also in- 
vestigate the cause.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XV 

171 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

The Master said : ‘A man can enlarge his 
principles; it is not his principles that 
enlarge the man.’ 

.CHAPTER XXIX 

The Master said: ‘To err and not reform 
may indeed be called error.’ 

CHAPTER XXX 

The Master said: ‘I have spent the whole 
day without food and the whole night 
without sleep in order to think. It was 
of no use. It is better to learn.’ 

CHAPTER XXXI 

The Master said: ‘The wise man makes 
duty, not a living, his aim; fot there is 
hunger even for a farmer, and some- 
times emolument for a scholar! But 
the wise man is anxious about his duty, 
not about poverty.’ 

172 

THE ANALECTS: XV 

CHAPTER XXXII 

I. The Master said : ‘If a man intellectually 
realizes a given principle, but if his moral 
character does not enable him to live up 
to it, even though he has reached it, he 
will decline from it. 2. Though intel- 
lectually he has attained to it, and his 
moral character enables him to live up to 
it, if he does not govern people with 
dignity, they will not respect him. 
3. And though he has intellectually at- 
tained to it, his moral character enables 
him to live up to it, and he governs with 
dignity, if he instigates the people to act 
in a disorderly manner, he is still lacking 
in excellence.’ 

CHAPTER XXXIII 

The Master said: ‘A man of the higher 
type may not be distinguishable in minor 
responsibilities, but he can undertake 
great ones. An inferior man cannot un- 

THE ANALECTS: XV 173 

dertake great responsibilities, but may 
be distinguished in minor ones.’ 

CHAPTER XXXIV 

The Master said : ‘Virtue is more to man 
than either water or fire. I have seen men 
die through walking into water or fire, 
but I have never seen a man (^e through 
walking the path of virtue.’ 

CHAPTER XXXV 

The Master said : ‘He upon whom a moral 
duty devolves should not give way even 
to his master.’ 

CHAPTER XXXVI 

The Master said: ‘The wise man is in- 
telligently, not blindly, loyal.’* 

CHAPTER XXXVII 

The Master said: ‘In serving one’s prince, 
one should give careful attention to his 

174 

THE ANALECTS: XV 

business, and make the pay a secondary 
consideration.’ 

CHAPTER XXXVIII 

The Master said : ‘In teaching there should 
be no class distinctions.’ 

CHAPTER XXXIX 

The Master said: ‘Those whose ways are 
different do not make plans together.’ 

CHAPTER XL 

The Master said : ‘In language perspicuity 
is everything.’ 

CHAPT'ER XLI 

I. The State Bandmaster Mien* once called 
to see him. On arriving at the steps the 
Master said, ‘Here are the steps.’ On 
coming to the mat, he said, ‘Here is your 
mat.’ When all were seated the Master 

THE ANALECTS: XV 

>75 

informed him: ‘So and so is here, so and 
so is there.’ 

2. When the Bandmaster had gone, 
Tzu Chang inquired: ‘Is it the proper 
thing to tell a Bandmaster those things 
3. ‘Yes,’ answere’d the Master, ‘undoubt- 
edly it is ‘the proper thing for a blind 
Bandmaster’s guide to do so.’ 

BOOK XVI 

CONCERNING MINISTERIAL 
RESPONSIBILITY ET ALIA 

CHAPTER I 

I. The chief of the House of Chi* being 
about to invade the minor principality of 
Chuan-yii, 2. Jan Yu and Chi Lu inter- 
viewed Confucius and said: ‘Our chief 
is about to commence operations against 
Chuan-yii fief.’ 

3. ‘Ch'iu,’ said Confucius, ‘is not this 
misdeed yours V 4. The Head of Chuan- 
yii was appointed by the ancient kings to 
preside over the sacrifices to the Eastern 
Meng; the fief also is within the boun- 
daries of our state, and its ruler is direct 
sacrificial minister of the crown. What 
business has your chief with attacking it V 
5. ‘It is our master’s wish,’ said Jan 
Yu, ‘neither of us two ministers wishes it.’ 
6. ‘Ch'iu,’ replied Confucius, ‘Chou Jen 
had a saying: “Let him who is allowed to 

THE ANALECTS: XVI 177 

use his ability retain his position, and let 
him who cannot retire. Of what use is he 
as a blind man’s guide, who neither holds 
him up when totteringj nor supports him 
when falling V' 7. Moreover, your remark 
is quite wrong,. for when a tiger or a wild 
bull escape's from its cage, or when tor- 
toise-shell or a precious stone is injured 
in its cabinet, whose fault is it?’ 

8. ‘But now,’ said Jan Yu, ‘Chuan-yii is 
strongly fortified and near to Pi. If our 
chief does not take it now it must here- 
after become a cause of anxiety to his 
descendants.’ 

9. ‘Ch'iu,’ replied Confucius, ‘the man 
of honour detests those who decline to 
say plainly that they want a thing and 
insist on making excases in regard there- 
to. 10. I have heard that the rfiler of a 
kingdom, or the chief of a house, is not 
concerned about his people being few, 
but about lack of equitable treatment; nor 

is he concerned over poverty, but over 

442 

N 

178 THE ANALECTS: XVI 

the presence of discontent; for where 
there is equity there is no poverty, where 
concord prevails there is no lack of peo- 
ple, and where contentment reigns there 
are no upheavals, ii. Such a state of 
things existing, then, if any outlying peo- 
ple are still unsubmissive he attracts them 
by the promotion of culture and morality, 
and wheif he has attracted them he makes 
them contented. 12. But here are you 
two, Yu and Ch'iu, assisting your chief; 
for though an outlying people are un- 
submissive, he cannot attract them; and 
though the state is disorganized and dis- 
rupted, he cannot preserve it. 13. And yet 
he is planning to take up arms within his 
own state. I myself fear that Chi-sun’s 
cause for anxiety do6s not lie in Chuan-yii, 
but within his own gate-screen!’ 

CHAPTER II 

Confucius said : ‘When good government 
prevails in the empire, civil ordinances 

THE ANALECTS: XVI 179 

and punitive expeditions issue from the 
emperor. When good government fails 
in the empire, civil ordinance and puni- 
tive expeditions issue from the nobles. 
When they issue from a noble, it is rare 
if the empire be not lost within ten 
generations. When they issue from a 
noble’s minister, it is rare if the empire 
be not lost within five generatlbns. But 
when a minister’s minister holds com- 
mand in the kingdom, it is rare if it be 
not lost within three generations. 2. 
When there is good government in the, 
empire, its policy is not in the hands of 
ministers. 3. And when there is good 
government in the empire, the people do 
not even discuss it.’ 

CHAPTER III 

Confucius said: ‘The revenue has de- 
parted from the ducal house* for five 
generations, and the government has de- 
volved on ministers for four generations. 

i8o THE ANALECTS: XVI 

That, alas! is why the descendants of the 
three brothers Huan* are so reduced!’ 

CHAPTER IV 

Confucius said: ‘There are three kinds of 
friends that are beneficial, and three that 
are harmful. To make friends with the 
upright,, with the faithful, with the well- 
informed, is beneficial. To make friends 
with the plausible, with the insinuating, 
with the glib, is harmful.’ 

CHAPTER V 

Confucius said: ‘There are three ways of 
pleasure-seeking that are beneficial, and 
there are three that are harmful. To seek 
pleasure in the refinements of manners 
and music, to seek pleasure in discussing 
the excellences of others, to seek pleasure 
in making many worthy friends — these 
are beneficial. To seek pleasure in un- 
bridled enjoyment, to seek pleasure in 

THE ANALECTS: XVI i8i 

looseness and gadding, to seek pleasure in 
conviviality — these are harmful.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

Confucius said: ‘There are three errors 
to be avoided when in the presence of a 
superior: to speak before being called 
upon, which may be termed forwardness ; 
not to speak when called upon, which may 
be termed timidity; and to speak before 
noting a superior’s expression, which may 
be called blindness.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

Confucius said: ‘There are three things 
the nobler type of ri¥an is on his guard 
against. In the period of youtli, before 
his physical nature has settled down, he 
guards against lust. Having reached his 
prime, when his physical nature has now 
attained its mature strength, he guards 

182 THE ANALECTS: XVI 

against combativeness. When he has 
reached old age, and his physical nature 
is already decaying, he guards against 
acquisitiveness.’ 

CHAPTER VIIL 

I. Confucius said: ‘The man of noble 
mind holds three things in awe. He holds 
the Divine Will in awe; he holds the 
great in awe; and he holds the precepts 
of the sages in awe. 2. The baser man, 
not knowing the Divine Will, does not 
stand in awe of it; he takes liberties with 
the great; and makes a mock of the pre- 
cepts of the sages.’ 

CHAP^’ER IX 

Confucius said: ‘Those who have innate 
wisdom take highest rank. Those who 
acquire it by study rank next. Those who 
learn despite natural limitations come 
next. But those who are of limited 

THE ANALECTS: XVI 183 

ability and yet will not learn — these form 
the lowest class of men.’ 

CHAPTER X 

Confucius said : ^The wise man has nine 
points of thoughtful care. In looking, 
his care is to observe distinctly; in listen- 
ing, his care is to apprehend clearly; in 
his appearance, his care is to be kindly; 
in his manner, his care is to be courteous; 
in speaking, his care is to be conscien- 
tious ; in his duties, his care is to be earnest ; 
in doubt, his care is to seek information; 
in anger, he has a care for the conse- 
quences; and when he has opportunity 
for gain, his care is whether it be right V 

CHAPTER XI 

I. Confucius said; ‘.“They look up at the 
good as if fearing not to reach it, and 
shrink from evil as if from scalding water.” 
I have seen such men, as I have heard such 

i 84 the ANALECTS; XVI 

sayings. 2. “They dwell in seclusion to 
think out their aims, and practise right 
living in order to extend their principles” 
— I have heard such sayings, but I have 
never seen such men.’ 

CHAPTER XlT 

I. Duke Ching of Ch'i* had a team of a 
thousand^'horses, but on the day of his 
death, his people knew of no virtue for 
which to praise him. Po-I and Shu-Ch'i 
starved to death at the foot of Mount 
Shou-Yang, and down to the present the 
people still praise them. 2. Does not that 
illustrate this } 

CHAPTER XIII 

I . Ch'en K ang oncd asked Po Yii :* ‘Have 
you ever had any lesson different from 
the rest of us from the Master V 

2. ‘No,’ was the reply, ‘but he was once 
standing alone, and as I hastened across 
the hall, he remarked: “Have you studied 

THE ANALECTS: XVI 185 

the Odes?” “No,” I replied. “If you do 
not study the Odes,” he said, “you will 
have nothing to use in conversation.” 
On going out I set myself to study the 
Odes. 3. Another day, he was again 
standing alone, and as I hastened across 
the hall, lie asked: “Have you studied ther 
Rules of Ceremony ?” “No,” I replied. 
“If you do not study the Cereinonies, you 
will have no grounding.” On going out 
I set myself to study the Ceremonies. 4. 
These are the two lessons I have received.’ 

5 .’When Ch'en K'ang came away he re- 
marked with delight, ‘I asked one thing 
and obtained three — I have learnt about; 
the Odes, I have learnt about the Cere- 
monies, and I have learnt that the Wise 
Man keeps his soit'at a distance.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

The wife of the prince of a state is called 
by the prince himself ‘Fu-jen’. The 
Fu-jen calls herself ‘Hsia T'ung’. The 

i86 THE ANALECTS: XVI 

people of the state call her ‘Chiin Fu- 
jen’. When speaking of her to one of 
another state they call her ‘Kua Hsiao 
Chiin’; but one of another state would 
also call her ‘Chiin Fu-jen’.* 

VOLUME IX 

BOOK XVII 

RECORDING UNSUITABLE CALLS 
AND SUNDRY MAXIMS 

CHAPTER I 

I. Yang Huo* wanted to see Confucius but 
Confucius would not go to see him, so he 
sent Confucius a present of a sucking pig. 
Confucius, timing his visit when the other 
would be out, w^nt to tender his acknow- 
ledgements, but met him on the way. 2. 
‘Come,’ he said to Confucius, ‘let me 
have a word with you. If a man,’ he 
said, ‘hide his talent in his bosom, and 
thus share in his country’s misguidance, 
can he be called a loter of his fellow men T 
‘He cannot,’ was the reply.* ‘If a man 
who would like to take part in public 
affairs is continually losing his oppor- 
tunity,canhe be called wise .^’ ‘Hecannot,’ 
was the reply. ‘Days and months are 

i88 THE ANALECTS: XVII 

passing by, the years do not wait for us/ 
‘That is so,’ said Confucius, ‘I will take 
office presently.’ 

CHAPTER II 

The Master said: ‘By nature men nearly 
resemble each other ; in practice they grow 
wide apart.’ 

CHAPTER III 

The Master said: ‘It is only the very 
wisest and the very stupidest who never 
change.’ 

CHAPTER IV 

I. When the Master arrived at Wu* 
city, he heard everywhere the sound of 
stringed instruments and singing; where- 
upon he smiled and* laughingly said, 
‘Why use a cleaver to kill a chicken 
3. ‘A while ago. Sir,’ .replied Tzu Yu, 
‘I heard you say: “When men of rank 
have learnt wisdom they love their 
fellow men; and when the common people 

THE ANALECTS: XVII 189 

have learnt wisdom they are easily com- 
manded”.’ 4. ‘My disciples!’ said the 
Master, ‘Yen’s remark is right. What I 
said before was only in jest.’ 

CHAPTER V 

I. When Kung-shan Fu-jao* was holding 
Pi in revolt against the House of Chi, 
he sent for the Master, who was inclined 
to go to him. 2. But Tzu Lu was dis- 
pleased, and said: ‘Verily there is no- 
where at all to, go; why then must you 
think of going to Kung-shan V 3. ‘Here 
is one calling me, and can he be doing it 
for nothing.^’ answered the Master. ‘If 
one be willing to employ me, may I not 
make an eastern Chou of his state.^’ 

CHAPTER VI 

Tzu Chang asked Confucius the meaning 
of virtue, to which Confuciu? replied: 
‘To be able everywhere one goes to 
carry five things into practice constitutes 

190 THE ANALECTS: XVII 

Virtue.’ On begging to know what they 
were, he was told: ‘They are courtesy, 
magnanimity, sincerity, earnestness, and 
kindness. With courtesy you will avoid 
insult, with magnanimity you will win 
all, with sincerity men will’trust you, with 
earnestness you will have success, and 
with kindness you will be well fitted to 
command others.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

I. Pi Hsi* sent a formal ir\,vitation and the 
Master was inclined to go. 2. But Tzu 
Lu observed: ‘Once upon a time, I heard 
you say. Sir, “With the man who is 
personally engaged in a wrongful enter- 
prise, the man of honour declines to 
associate.” Pi Hsi is holding Chung-mou 
in revolt, t/hat will it be like. Sir, if you 
go there V , 

3. ‘True,’ said the Master, ‘I did use 
those words \ but is it not said of the really 
hard, that you may grind it and it will not 

THE ANALECTS: XVII 191 

grind down ; also is it not said of the really 
white, that you may dye it but it will not 
turn black? 4. Am I indeed a bitter 
gourd? Must I, like it, be hung up and 
never eaten?’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. The Master said: ‘Yu, have you ever 
heard of the six good words *and the six 
things that obscure them ?’ ‘Never,’ was 
the reply. 2. ‘Sit down then, and I will 
tell you.’ 3. ‘Loye of kindness, without 
a love to learn, finds itself obscured by 
foolishness. Love of knowledge, without 
a love to learn, finds itself obscured by 
loose speculation. Love of honesty, with- 
out a love to learn, finds itself obscured 
by harmful candour. Love of straight- 
forwardness, without a love to fearn, finds 
itself obscured by ipisdirected judgement. 
Love of daring, without a love to learn, 
finds itself obscured by insubordination. 
And love for strength of character, with- 

192 THE ANALECTS: XVII 

out a love to learn, finds itself obscured by 
intractability.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

I . The Master said ; ‘My sons, my disciples, 
why do you not study the poets 2. 
Poetry is able to stimulate the mind, 3. it 
can train to observation, 4. it can en- 
courage s6cial intercourse, 5. it can 
modify the vexations of life; 6. from it 
the student learns to fulfil his more imme- 
diate duty to his parents,- and his remoter 
duty to his prince; 7. and in it he may 
become widely acquainted with the names 
of birds and beasts, plants and trees.’ 

CHAPTER X 

The Master said to hit son Po Yii: ‘Have 
you studi^ the Chou Nan and the Chao 
Nan } Is not the man \yho does not study 
the Chou Nan and the Chao Nan Odes* 
like one who stands with his face hard up 
against a wall, eh V 

THE ANALECTS: XVII 193 

CHAPTER XI 

The Master said: ‘ “Offerings!” they say, 
“Offerings!” Can mere gems and silk 
be called offerings? “Music!” they say, 
“Music!” Can mere bells and drums be 
called mu^c ?’ 

CHAPTER XII 

The Master said: ‘He who shams a 
stern appearance while inwardly he is 
a weakling, can ®nly be compared with 
the vulgar and low; indeed is he not like 
the thief who sneaks through or skulks 
over walls ?’ 

CHAPTER XIII 

The Master said: ‘Your honest^country- 
man is the spoiler of morals.’* 

CHAPTER XIV 

The Master said: ‘To proclaim on the 

442 

o 

194 the ANALECTS: XVI 

road what you hear on the way is virtue 
thrown away.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

I. ‘These servile fellows!’ said the Master. 
‘How is it possible to serve one’s prince 
along with them.^ 2. Before obtaining 
their position they are in anxiety to ob- 
tain it, and when they have it they are 
in anxiety lest they lose it; 3. and if men 
are in anxiety about losing their position, 
there is no length to which they will not 

go- 

CHAPTER XVI 

1. ‘In olden times,’ said the Master, ‘the 
people had three faults, which nowadays 
^perhaps no longer exist. 2. High spirit 
ih olden *times meant liberty in detail; 
the high spirit of to-day means utter 
looseness. Dignity of old meant re- 
serve; dignity to-day means resentment 
and offence. Simple-mindedness of 

THE ANALECTS: XVII 195 

old meant straightforwardness; simple- 
mindedness to-day is nothing but a mask 
for cunning.’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

The Mast&r said: ‘Artful address and an ^ 
insinuating demeanour seldom accom- 
pany virtue.’ 

CHAPTER XVIII 

The Master said:«I hate the' way in which 
purple robs red of its lustre; I hate the 
way the airs of Cheng* pervert correct 
music; and I hate the way in which sharp 
tongues overthrow both states and 
families.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

I. ‘I wish I could do without speaking,’ 
said the Master. 2. ‘If you did not speak, 
Sir,’ said Tzu Kung, ‘what should we 
disciples pass on to others.^’ 3. ‘What 

196 THE ANALECTS: XVII 

speech has Heaven ?’ replied the Master. 
;‘The four seasons run their courses and 
all things flourish; yet what speech has 
Heaven ?’ 

chapter’ XX 

\ 

Ju Pei* wished to see Confucius, who ex- 
cused himself on the ground of sickness; 
but when ’’the messenger had gone out 
at the door, he took up his harpsichord 
and began to sing, so that Ju Pei might 
hear it. 

CHAPTER XXI 

I. Tsai Wo, asking about the three years’ 
mourning, suggested that one year was 
long enough. 2. ‘If,’ said he, ‘a well-bred 
man be three years Without exercising his 
manners, 'his manners will certainly de- 
generate; and if for three years he make no 
use of music, his music will certainly go 
to ruin. 3. In one year the last year’s grain 
is finished and the new grain has been 

THE ANALECTS: XVII 197 

garnered, the seasonal friction-sticks have 
made their varying fires, — ^a year would 
be enough.’ 

4. ‘Would you, then, feel at ease in 
eating good rice and wearing fine clothes.^* 
asked the Master. ‘I should,’ was the 
reply. 

5. ‘If you would feel at ease, then do so; 
but a well-bred man, when •mourning, 
does not relish good food when he eats 
it, does not enjoy music when he hears 
it, and does not f^el at ease when in a com- 
fortable dwelling; therefore he avoids 
those things. But now you would feel at 
ease, so go and do them.’ 

6. When Tsai had gone out, the Master 
said: ‘The unfeelingness of Tsai Yii! 
Only when a child ic three years old does 
it leave its parents’ arms, and the three 
years’ mourning is the universal mourn- 
ing everywhere. And Yii, — ^was not he 
the object of his parents’ affection for 
three years.^’ 

198 THE ANALECTS: XVII 
CHAPTER XXII 

The Master said : ‘How hard is the case of 
the man who stuffs himself with food the 
livelong day, never applying his mind to 
anything ! Are there no checkers or chess 
to play ? Even to do that is surely better 
than nothing at all.’ 

pHAPTER XXIII 
Tzu Lu once asked: ‘Does a man of the 
nobler class hold courage in estima- 
tion.^’ ‘Men of the nobler class,’ said the 
’faster, ‘deem rectitude the highest thing. 
It is men of the nobler class, with 
courage but without rectitude, who rebel. 
It is men of the lower order, with courage 
but without rectitude, who become rob- 
bers.’ 

^CHAPTER XXIV 
I. ‘Do men of the nobler class detest 
others V asked Tzu Kung. ‘They do de- 
test others,’ answered the Master. ‘They 
detest men who divulge other people’s 

THE ANALECTS; XVU 199 

misdeeds. They detest those low, base: 
people who slander their superiors. They 
detest the bold and mannerless. They 
detest the persistently forward who are 
yet obtuse. 2. And have you, T'zu, 
those whom ybu detest.^’ he asked. ‘I 
detest thbse who count prying out in- 
formation as wisdom. I detest those who 
count absence of modesty as^courage. I 
detest those who count denouncing a 
man’s private affairs as straightforward- 
ness,’ replied Tzu Kung. 

CHAPTER XXV 

The Master said: ‘Of all people, maids 
and servants are hardest to keep in your 
house. If you are friendly with them they 
lose their deference; if you are reserved 
with them they resint it.’ 

CHAPTER XXVI 

The Master said : ‘If a man reach forty and 
yet be disliked by his fellows, he will be 
so to the end.’ 

BOOK XVIII 

CONCERNING ANCIENT WORTHIES 
CHAPTER I 

1. The viscount of Wei’*' withdrew from 
serving the tyrant Chou; the viscount of 
Chi was made a slave; Pi Kah remon- 
strated with the tyrant and suffered death. 

2. The Master said: ‘The Yin Dynasty 
thus had three men of virtue.’ 

CHAPTER II 

Hui of Liu-hsia* filled the office of Chief 
Criminal Judge, but had been repeatedly 
dismissed, and people said to him, ‘Is it 
not time, sir, for you to be going else- 
where T ‘If I do honest public service,’ 
said he, ‘where shall I go and not be often 
dismissed } Andif Ia!n willing to do dis- 
honest public service, what need is there 
for me to leave the land of my parents T 

CHAPTER III 

Duke Ching* of Ch'i, speaking of how he 

THE ANALECTS: XVIII 201 

should receive Confucius, said : ‘I cannot 
receive him on an equality with the chief 
of the Chi house; I will receive him in 
a style between the lords of Chi and 
Meng.’ ‘But,’ he resumed, ‘I am old, and 
cannot make us6 of him.’ Confucius de- 
parted. 

CHAPTER IV 

The men of Ch*i sent to Lu a present of 
a troupe of female musicians,* whom Chi 
Huan Tzu accepted, and for three days no 
Court was helcl^ whereupon Confucius 
took his departure. 

CHAPTER V 

I. Chieh Yii,* an eccentric man of Ch'u, 
one day came singing past Confucius’ 
carriage, saying, ‘ph, Phoenix! Oh, 
Phoenix! What a fall is here!, As to the 
past, reproof is useless, but the future may 
still be overtaken. iDesist! Desist! Great 
is the peril of those who now fill office.* 

2 . Confucius alighted, desiring to speak 

202 THE ANALECTS: XVIII 

to him, but he hurriedly avoided the 
Sage. So he had no chance of a talk 
with him. 

CHAPTER VI 

I. Ch'ang Chii and Chieh Ni* were culti- 
vating their land together when Con- 
fucius was passing that way, so he sent 
Tzu Lu to inquire for the ford. 

2. ‘And who is that holding the reins in 
the carriage asked Ch ang Chii. ‘It is 
K'ung Ch'iu,’ replied ^.Tzu Lu. ‘Is it 
K'ung Ch'iu of Lu V he asked. ‘It is,’ was 
the reply. ‘Then he knows the ford,’ said 
he. 

3. Tzu Lu then questioned Chieh Ni. 
‘Who are you, sir.^’ asked Chieh Ni. ‘I 
am Chung Yu,’ was the answer. ‘Are you 
a disciple f)f K'ung Ch'iu of Lu ‘Yes,* 
replied he. ‘All the world is rushing head- 
long like a swelling torrent and who will 
help you to remedy it he asked. ‘As for 
you, instead of following a leader who 

THE ANALECTS: XVI 1 1 203 

flees from one after another, had you not 
better follow those who flee the world 
entirely ?’ With this he fell to raking in his 
seed without a pause. 

4. Tzu Lu went off and reported to his 
Master what they said, who remarked 
with surprise: ‘I cannot herd with birds 
and beasts ; if I may not associate with man- 
kind, with whom then am 1 1» associate } 
Did right rule prevail in the world, I 
should not be taking part in reforming it.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

I. Once when Tzu Lu* was following the 
Master on a journey he happened to fall 
behind. Meeting an old man carrying a 
basket on his staff, Tzu Lu asked him, 
‘Have you seen my.Master, sir ‘You,* 
said the old man, ‘whose four Ipibs know 
not toil, and who cannot distinguish the 
five grains, who may your Master be 
With that he planted his st&ff in the 
ground and commenced weeding. 

204 the ANALECTS: XFIII 

2. Tzu Lu joined his hands together in 
salutation and stood waiting. 3. The old 
man kept Tzu Lu for the night, killed a 
fowl, prepared millet, and gave him to 
eat, introducing also his two sons. 

4. Next morning Tzu Lu went his way 
and reported his adventure. ‘ ‘He is a 
recluse,’ said the Master, and sent Tzu 
Lu back again to see him, but on his 
arrival the old man had gone. 5. Where- 
upon Tzu Lu said to the sons: ‘It is not 
right to refuse to serve pne’s country. If 
the regulations between old and young 
in family life may not be set aside, how 
is it that your father sets aside the duty 
between a prince and his ministers } In 
his desire to maintain his own personal 
purity, he subverts o«e of the main prin- 
ciples of society. A wise man in whatever 
office he occupies, ^fulfils its proper 
duties, even though he is well aware 
that right' principles have ceased to make 
progress.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XVIII 205 

CHAPTER VIII 

I. The men noted for withdrawal into 
private life were Po I, Shu Ch'i, Yii 
Chung, Yi Yi, Chu Chang, Hui of Liu- 
hsia, and Shao Lien.* 

2. The Master observed; ‘Those of 
them who would neither abate their high 
purpose, nor abase themselves, it seems to 
me were Po I and Shu Ch'i. 3. Concerning 
Hui of Liu-hsia and Shao Lien, while 
they abated theif«high purpose and abased 
themselves, what they said made for social 
order, and what they did hit the mark of 
what men were anxious about; and that 
is all. 4. Concerning Yii Chung and Yi 
Yi, though in their seclusion they were 
immoderate in theif utterances, yet they 
sustained their personal purit/, and their 
self-immolation had weighty purpose. 

5. ‘But I am different from these. Witli 
me there is no inflexible “thou shall” or 
“thou shall not”.’ 

206 THE ANALECTS: XVIII 

CHAPTER IX 

I. The Bandmaster Chih* migrated to 
Ch'i; 2. Kan, the band-leader of the 
second repast, migrated to Ch'u; Liao of 
the third repast to Ts'ai; while Ch'iieh 
of the fourth repast migrated .to Ch'in. 
3. The big drummer Fang Shu penetrated 
to the nortj^ of the River; 4. the kettle- 
drummer Wu penetrated to the river Han ; 
5. while Yang, the assistant master, and 
Hsiang, the player on the stone chime, 
penetrated to an island fn the sea. 

CHAPTER X 

The Duke of Chou* addressing his son, 
the Duke of Lu, said: ‘The wise prince 
does not neglect his relatives ; nor does he 
cause his chief ministers to be discon- 
tented at hf*s not employing them; he does 
not dismiss old servants from office with- 
out some grave cause for it; nor does he 
expect one man to be capable of every- 
thing.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XVIII 207 

CHAPTER XI 

The Chou Dynasty* possessed the eight 
valiant men, Po Ta, Po Kua; Chung T'u, 
Chung Hu; Shu Yeh, Shu Hsia; Chi Sui 
and Chi Wa. 

VOLUME X 
BOOK XIX 

RECORDED SAYINGS OF SOME 
DISCIPLES 

f 

CHAPTER I 

Tzu Chang said: ‘A servant of the State, 
who in the^ presence of danger offers his 
life, whose first thought in presence of 
.personal gain is whether it be right, 
whose first thought in sacrifice is rever- 
ence, and whose first thought in mourn- 
ing is grief — he commands approval.’ 

CHAPTER II 

Tzu Chang said: ‘If a man possess virtue 
without its enlarging him, if he believe 
in truth but without*' steadfastness, how 
can you te^l whether he has these qualities 
or not 

CHAPTER III 

The disciples of Tzu Hsia asked Tzu 
Chang* concerning friendship. ‘What 

THE ANALECTS: XIX 209 

does Tzu Hsia say?’ he inquired. ‘Tzu 
Hsia says,’ they replied, ‘If a man be suit- 
able, associate with him, if he be unsuitable, 
turn him away.’ ‘This is different from 
what I have been taught,’ said Tzu 
Chang. ‘A wise man honours the worthy 
and tolerates all ; he commends the good 
and commiserates the incompetent. Am 
I a man of exceptional wor1:h? Then 
whom among men may I not tolerate ? 
Am I not a man of worth ? Then others 
would be turning»me away. Why should 
there be this turning of others away then ?* 

CHAPTER IV 

Tzu Hsia said: ‘Even the inferior arts 
certainly have their attraction ; but to go 
far into them invol^%s a risk of their be- 
coming a hindrance to progr^s: so the 
wise man lets them#alone.’ 

CHAPTER V 

Tzu Hsia said:,‘He who day by day finds 

442 

p* 

aio THE ANALECTS: XIX 

out where he is deficient, and who month 
by month never forgets that in which he 
has become proficient, may truly be called 
a lover of learning.’ 

CHAPTER VI 

Tzu Hsia said : ‘Broad culture and a steady 
will, earnest investigation and personal 
reflection, — virtue is to be found therein.’ 

CHAPTER VII 

Tzu Hsia said: ‘As the f/arious craftsmen 
dwell in their workshops that they may 
do their work effectively, so the Wise 
Man applies himself to study that he may 
carry his wisdom to perfection.’ 

CHAPTER VIII 

Tzu Hsia' said: ‘The inferior man always 
embellishes his mistakes.’ 

CHAPTER IX 

Tzu Hsia said: ‘The Wise Man varies 

THE ANALECTS: XIX zii 

from three aspects. Seen from a distance 
he appears stern; when approached he 
proves gracious; as you listen to him you 
find him decided in opinion.* 

CHAPTER X 

Tzu Hsia 5aid : ‘The Wise Man obtains the 
people’s confidence before imposing bur- 
dens on them, for without* confidence 
they will think themselves oppressed. He 
also obtains the confidence of his prince 
before pointing, out his errors, for be- 
fore obtaining such confidence his prince 
would deem himself aspersed.’ 

CHAPTER XI 

Tzu Hsia said: ‘He who does not over- 
step the threshold in the major virtues, 
may have liberty o^ egress and ingress in 
the minor ones.’ 

ChIpteR XII 

I. Tzu Yu remarked : ‘Tzu Hsi^ s disciples 
and scholars iij sprinkling and sweeping 

212 THE ANALECTS: XIX 

floors, in answering calls and replying to 
questions, and in advancing and retiring 
are right enough; but these are the minor 
branches of education. What is their use 
when radical principles are absent ?’ 

2. When Tzu Hsia heard of it he said: 

I 

‘Ah! Yen Yu is indeed astray. What is 
there in the wise man’s teaching that is 
of first importance for propagation, and 
what is there that is secondary and may 
be neglected } Disciples are just like the 
various species of plants, which are 
classified so as to distinguish them. For 
can the wise man allow his teaching to 
befool his disciples } Moreover does any 
one but a Sage embrace in himself the 
whole beginning and end of learning 

K-. 

CHAPTER XIII 

Tzu Hsia said: ‘The occupant of office 
when his duties are finished should betake 
himself to study; and the, student when 

THE ANALECTS: XIX 213 

his studies are finished should betake 
himself to office.’ 

CHAPTER XIV 

Tzu Yu observed: ‘Iii mourning let grief 
suffice as its highest expression.’ 

CHAPTER XV 

Tzu Yu remarked: ‘My friend Chang* 
does things hardly possible to others, but 
he is not yet perfect in virtue.’ 

CHAPTER XVI 

Tseng Tzu said: ‘What a stately manner 
Chang puts on! It must be hard to live 
the perfect life alongside him.’ 

CHAPTER XVII 

Tseng Tzu said: ‘Hiave heard the Master 
say: “Though a man may never before 
have shown what was in him* surely he 
will do so when he mourns his parents.” * 

214 the ANALECTS; XIX 
CHAPTER XVIII 

Tseng Tsu said; T have heard the Master 
observe that the filial piety of Meng 
Chuang Tzu* might in other particulars 
be possible to other men, but his un- 
altered maintenance of his father’s ser- 
vants, and of his father’s administration, 
— these thqy would hardly find possible.’ 

CHAPTER XIX 

When the Chief of the Meng family ap- 
pointed Yang Fu* as chit?f criminal judge, 
the latter came to ask advice of Tseng 
Tsu who replied: ‘The rulers have lost 
their principles, and for long the people 
have been disorganized; hence, when 
you discover evidence against a man, be 
grieved for and cofnmiserate him and 
take no pleasure in your discovery.’ 

chapter'xx 

Tzu Kung said: ‘Even the iniquity of 
Chou* was not as extreme as is stated. 

THE ANALECTS: XIX 215 

That is why the wise man abhors to dwell 
in the swamp, where all the evil of the 
world flows in.’ 

CHAPTER XXI 

Tzu Kung said! ‘The transgressions of 
the Wise Man are like eclipses of the sun 
or moon. When he transgresses all men 
look at him. When he recows all men 
look up to him.’ 

CHAPTER XXII 

I. Kung-sun Ch"ao*ofWei once inquired 
of Tzu Kung: ‘From whom did Chung 
Ni* get his learning 2. ‘The doctrines of 
Wen and Wu have never yet fallen to the 
ground,’ replied Tzu Kung, ‘but have 
remained amongst^ men. Gifted men 
have kept in mind their noblerjprinciples, 
while others not so gifted have kept in 
mind the minor,’^o*that nowhere have the 
doctrines of Wen and Wu beren absent. 
From whom then, could our Master not 

2i6 the ANALECTS: XIX 

learn? And, moreover, what need was 
there for him to have a regular teacher ?’ 

CHAPTER XXIII 
I. Shu-sun Wu-shu,* talking to the high 
officers at Court, remarked: ‘Tzu Kung 
is a superior man to Chung Ni.’’ 2. Tzu-fu 
Ching-po took and told this to Tzu Kung, 
who replie^ 3 : ‘One might illustrate the 
position with the boundary wall of a 
building. As to my wall, it only reaches 
to the shoulder, and witji a peep you may 
see whatever is of value in the house and 
home. 3. The Master’s wall rises fathoms 
high, and unless you find the gate and go 
inside, you cannot see the beauties of 
the temple and the richness of its host of 
officers. 4. But thosf? who find the gate 
perhaps ase few, — ^indeed does not His 
Honour’s remark confirm this view ?’ 

f 

'CHAPTER XXIV 
Shu-sun Wu-shu* having spoken dis- 

THE ANALECTS: XIX 217 

paragingly of Chung Ni, Tzu Kung ob- 
served : ‘There is no use in doing that, for 
Chung Ni cannot be disparaged. The 
excellences of others are mounds and hil- 
locks, which may nevertheless be climbed 
over, but ChuAg Ni ! He is the sun, the 
moon, which there is no way of climbing 
over; and though a man may desire to 
cut himself off from them,* what harm 
does he do to the sun or moon ? He only 
shows that he has no idea of proportion.’ 

CHA'PTER XXV 

I. Ch'en Tzu Ch'in once said to Tzu 
Kung: ‘You are too modest. Sir. How 
can Chung Ni be considered superior to 
you 2. ‘An educated man,’ replied Tzu 
Kung, ‘for a singjp expression is often 
deemed wise, and for a single^ expression 
is often deemed foolish ; hence one should 
not be heedless in what one says. 3. The 
impossibility of equalling OLft Master is 
like the impossibility of scaling a ladder 

2i8 the ANALECTS: XIX 

and ascending to the skies. 4. Were our 
Master to obtain control of a country, 
then, as has been said, “He raises his 
people and they stand ; he leads them, and 
they follow; he gives them tranquillity 
and multitudes resort to* him; he brings 
his influence to bear on them and they 
live in harmony; his life is glorious and 
his death bewailed,” — how is it possible 
for him to be equalled.^’ 

ROO.K XX 

CONCERNING RIGHT GOVERNMENT 
CHAPTER I 

I. Yao* said: ‘O, thou Shun! The ce- 
lestial lineage rests in thy person. Faith- < 
fully hold to the golden mean. Should 
the land become lean, Heaven’s bounties 
will forever end towards y 5 u.’ 2. And 
Shun in like terms charged Yii. 

3. T'ang said: ‘I thy child Li, Dare to 
use a black ox,«^nd dare clearly to state 
to Thee, O Most August and Sovereign 
God, That the sinner I dare not spare, 
Nor keep Thy ministers, O God, in ob- 
scurity, As Thy heart, O God, discerns. 
If I have sinned. Let it not concern the 
country; If my country has sinned. Let 
the sin rest on me.* 

4. Wu of Chop conferred great lar- 
gesses, the good being enriched. 5. ‘Al- 
though,’ said he, ‘the tyrant* Chou had 
his host of princes closely related to 

220 

THE ANALECTS: XX 

the throne, they compared not with my 
men of virtue; and iris upon me that the 
grievances of the people fell.’ 

6. He paid careful attention to the 
weights and measures, revised the laws 
and regulations, restored the disused 
offices; and universal government pre- 
vailed. 

7. He re-established states that had 
been extinguished, restored the lines of 
broken succession, called to office men 
who had exiled themselves; and all the 
people gave him their hearts. 8. What 
he laid stress on were the people’s food, 
mourning for the dead, and sacrifices. 
9. By his magnanimity he won all, by his 
good faith he gained the people’s confi- 
dence, by his diligence he achieved his 
ends, and by his justice all were gratified. 

CHAPTER II 

I. Tzii Chang inquired of Confucius, say- 
ing, ‘How should a man act to achieve the 

THE ANALECTS: XX 

221 

proper administration of government?’ 
The Master replied ? ‘Let him honour the 
five good and banish the four bad rules; 
then he will be a worthy administrator.’ 
‘What is meant by the five good rules ?’ 
asked Tzu Chang. ‘That the ruler,’ re- 
plied the Master, ‘be beneficent without 
expending the public revenue, that he 
exact service without arousing dissatis- 
faction, that his desires never degenerate 
to greed, that he be dignified but without 
disdain, and that he be commanding but 
not domineering.’ 

2. ‘What is meant by beneficence with- 
out expenditure?’ asked Tzu Chang. 
The Master replied: ‘To benefit the peo- 
ple by the development of their natural 
resources; is not this a public benefaction 
without expense to the revenue ? If he 
select suitable woi^s to exact from them 
— who then will be dissatisfied ? If his 
desires are for the good of others, and he 
secure it, hov; can he be greedy ? The 

222 

THE ANALECTS: XX 

wise ruler without considering whether 
the persons concerned are many or few, 
or the affair small or great, never permits 
himself to slight them, — is not this to 
be dignified without disdain ? The wise 
ruler arrays himself properly in robe and 
cap, and throws a nobility into his looks, so 
that men looking upon him in his dignity 
stand in awe of him, — and is not this com- 
manding without being domineering ?’ 

3. ‘What is the meaning of the four bad 
rules?’ asked Tzu Chang. The Master 
replied, ‘Putting men to death without 
having taught them their duty, — which 
may be called cruelty; expecting the com- 
pletion of works when no warning has 
been given, — which may be called op- 
pression; remissness ki ordering and then 
demand for instant performance, — which 
may be called robbery; and likewise, 
when giving rewards to men, offering 
them in grudging fashion, — which may 
be called being merely an official.’ 

THE ANALECTS: XX 223 
CHAPTER III 

t 

I. The Master said: ‘He who does not 
know the divine law cannot become a 
noble man. 2. He who does not know 
the laws of right conduct cannot form his 
character’. 3. He who does not know the 
force of words, cannot know men.’ 

NO.TES 

Book /. 

ii. and iv. The followers of the two philo- 
sopher-disciples Yu (Tzu Lu) and Tseng 
(Tseng Tzu) are credited with compiling 
The Analects’: so here they mention 
speci^ly their own masters. 

Book II. 

V. Meng I Tzu, or Meng Sun, a <ninister of Lu 
who gave orders on his death-bed, 5 18 B.C., 
that his son should be sent to Confucius. 

v-viii. Confucius answers each inquirer differ- 
ently. 

vi. Meng Wu Po, son of the above. 

ix. Hui is Yen Hui, or Yen Yiian, but usually 
called Hui by the Master; his favourite. 

xvii. Yu was bold Tzu Lu’s surname. 

xix. Duke Ai, 494-467 b.c., was duke of Lu on 
Confucius’s return from exile. 

XX. Chi K'ang Tzu, sometimes K'ang TzG, or 
Chi-sun, was minister to die above: he had 
Confucius recalled from exile, after the 
disciple Jan Ch'iu had acted for some years. 

Book III. 

— ^ 

i. C/rc. 5158.0. The Chi and die Meng families 
were alldescendants ofDukeHuan,7ioB.c., 

226 

NO TES: III 

upon whom permission to use Imperial 
rites had been bestowed: but for a cadet 
family like Chi to perform them was pure 
arrogance. 

ii. Again arrogant families usurping Imperial 
rites. 

iv. and vi. are the only occasions we hear of the 
disciple Lin Fang. 

vi. Similar usurpation, but on the summit of a 
sacred mountain. 

viii. Quoted from one of the poems excluded 
by Confucius from The Odes. Shang was 
Tzu Hsia’s surname. 

X. The rest of the ceremony was usurpation. 

xi. The meaning of this has been much disputed. 

xiii. Wang-sun Chia, an over-powerful official 
of Wei: and he was suggesting that it paid 
better to give homage to the kitchen ser- 
vants than in the family temple. 

xix. This occurred before the exile, while Con- 
fucius was still minister in Lu to Duke Ting. 

XX. The Kuan Chu Ode u.ters good King W^n’s 
longing in ancient times for his bride. 

xxi. The disciple Tsai Wo took part in a rebel- 
lion and earned his Master’s disapproval. 

xxii. Kuan Chung has been called the Bismark 
of ancient China. His motto was, ‘I give 
that you may give in return.’ 

NO TES: III-V 

2Z7 

XXV. The Shao, a piece of ancient ritual music, 
meaning ‘The Succession to the Dynasty* 
The Wu meant ‘Ifhe Overthrow*. 

Book IF. 

XV. Shen, surname of Ts6ng Tzu. 

Book V. 

i. Two worthy disciples. 

vii-ix. Meng Wu Po, see ii. vi. Tzu-Lu = Yu; 
Jan Ch'iu = Ch'iu; Kung-hsi Ch'ih = 
Ch'ih; Tsai Yii, or Yu = Vsai Wo. 

xiv. A play on the name, Wen, which means 
‘Cultured*. K'ung Wen Tzu had caused 
his lord to divorce his wife, and then 
married his dkvn daughter first to him, and 
later to his successor. Yet he had desire t 
for knowledge. 

XV. A high officer of state who later wept at 
Confucius’s death. 

xvi. A contemporary of Confucius and minister 
of state. 

xvii. A minister of st«te, more superstitious. 

xviii. I. Tzii Wen was Prime Mimster of Ch'u. 

Tradition says he was born a bastard, 
exposed, sucklAl by a tiger, and found by 
a prince, who brought him up. He never 
showed his emotions, but concerned him- 
self entirely with his country’s welfare, 

228 

NOTES: V 

hence was perfect in loyalty. But that is 
not enough, says Confucius. 

2. Ch'en Wen Tzu, minister of Ch'i, re- 
nounced all rather than live in rebellious 
states. Ts'ui Tzu, minister of Ch'i, mur- 
dered his prince, 548 B.c. 

xix. A minister in Lu. 

XX. A minister in Wei. 

xxi. Confucius was in exile, about the age of 60, 
and had hopes of being recalled; instead 
of which tlie disciple Jan Ch'iu was bidden. 

xxii. Po I and Shu Ch'i were two princes of a 
small state at the end of the Shang dynasty. 
The throne was left to Shu Ch'i, who 
refused to take his elddr brother’s place. 
Po I likewise declined, and both withdrew 
from court. When King Wu the Good 
took up arms against the dissolute Chou 
Emperor, they still declined to join him, 
and died of starvation rather than dwell in 
a disloyal state. Admired by Confucius. 

xxiii. A supposedly upright man, who neverthe- 
less gave the condiment as if it were his own. 

xxiv. Tso Ch'iu Ming, an older disciple of 
Confucius. Ch'iu isF Confucjus himself, 
the nanae given by his mother, meaning 
‘Prominence’, referring to the shape of his 
forehead. 

NOTES: VI 

229 

Book VI. 

r. Yung =- Nan-Kung Kua: Chung Kung = 
Jan Yung: disciples. Of Tzu-sang Po-tzu 
nothing is known beyond this reference. 

ii. Duke Af, see i. xix. 

hi. Tzu Hua — Ch'ih. Jan Tzu or Jan Ch'iu 
was the clever but rather unscrupulous 
disciple. Yiian Ssu was the modest poor 
one of pure life. 

iv. Chung Kung’s father wgs notoriously 
mean; but his son was different and 
accepted by Confucius. 

vi. Chi K'ang Tzu, the minister of Lu under 

Duke Ai, sej ii. xx, asks the characters of 
three ,discipl&: Chung Yu, or Yu = Tzu 
Lu; Tzu = Tuan-mu Tzu, or Tzu Kung; 
Ch'iu — Jan Ch'iu. Tzu Lu and Jan 
Ch'iu became his officials, and did not 
always satisfy Confucius’s ideals, specially 
Jan Ch'iu; e.g. see xvi. i: vi. x. 

vii. The head of the Chi clan was a usurper, 
while Min Tzu ^h'ien was noted for his 
purity of purpose. 

ix. The favourite disciple, poor but a scholar, 
= Yen Yiian. 

X. See vi. 

xi. An exact scholar, widely read, but precise 
rather thaa great. 

NOTES: VI-VII 

230 

xiii. A brave minister of Lu who also went into 
exile at the same time as Confucius, anil 
made this jest. 

xiv. Prince Chao, a handsome decadent. 

xxiii. Confucius refers to himself as a wassail- 

bowl that could well be used; but a bowl 
that is unused is a sad o'oject. 

xxiv. Tsai Wo, the lazy sceptical disciple. 

xxvi. Nan-tzu, the beautiful dissolute wife of 
Duke Ling of Wei, whom Confucius as an 
official felt himself obliged to visit, as was 
the custom; to honest Tzu Lu’s displeasure. 

xxviii. Yao and Shun, the two great first rulers. 

Book VII. 

i. P'eng was merely a high officer of the Shang 
dynasty who, tradition says, lived till he 
was 700 years old. Confucius, in his 
modesty, does not claim even to be equal 
with a great Sage of the past. 

V. Duke Wen of Chou was Confucius’s ideal of 
a ruler. He established the Chou dynasty 
when Regent for his infant nephew, later 
King Wu. Sometimes called King W^n. 

xiii. Shao music, see iii. xxv. 

xiv. Duke Lfng of Wei’s son tried to kill his 
notorious step-mother. Nan Tzii (see vi. 
xxvi, Note), and fled. Duke Ling died, 

NOTES: VII 231 

and the state supported the grandson as 
ruler. His father^ thereupon returned and 
fought his own son for the throne, and 
won. Confucius was in Wei during this 
crisis, but regarded both son and grandson 
as unfilial and supported neither. Po I and 
Shu Ch'i, seft v. xxii. 

xvi. The Book of Changes, or I Chmg\ astro- 
logical metaphysics. 

xviii. Sh^ was a very small state, and its ruler 
had arrogated to himsefi' the title of 
duke. 

xxii. Huan T’ui, a minister of war, who, hating 
Confucius, had sent his men to pull a tree 
down upon ^Confucius by the roadside, 
during the exile : his brother, Ssu-ma K^ng 
being a disciple. 

xxiii. The real Ch'iu means Confucius himself. 

XXX. This must have occurred in 493 b.c., 
during Confucius’s stay in Ch'en. For 
Duke Chao of Lu Confucius had gone 
into his first exile sixteen years before: 
how could he do aught but jj^arry criticism 
of him.^ By Chinese regulations marriage 
is forbidden between people of the same 
surname. Duke Chao of the House of Wu 
avoided this by calling his bride Lady TzO 
of Wu. Tjjis was a ruse, and all knew it. 

NO TES: VIII-IX 

232 

Book Fill. 

• *, 
i. T'ai Po renounced th* succession* in ancient 

days because his views on loyalty to the 

Shang emperors differed from his father’s; 

yet he gave no reason in public. 

iii. The disciple Tseng Tzu tliought of his body 

as a gift from his parents, to be kept un- 
harmed and in tact. He shows his ^sciples his 
limbs entire. Chinese still follow this idea. 

iv. Meng Chiqg Tzu, a young minister of Lu, 

and son of Meng Wu Po, see n. vi. 
xi. Duke Chou = Duke Wen of Chou, see vii.v. 
XV. Remark made probably after Confucius’s 
return and reorganization of the music in Lu. 
xviii-xxi. Shun and Yii were great .servants of 
the state in semi-mythical times. Both 
controlled the floods, ordained laws, and 
divided the land into provinces. Yao, 
‘ Emperor, 2356 b.c., first unified the state 
and set forth the Calendar of 366 days. 
King Wu founded the Chou dynasty 1122 
B.C., but had long decayed rebelling against 
the last debauched Yin Emperor. The Em- 
peror Yii was noted for simplicity of life. 

Book IX, 

V. During the exile, the Master came to K'uang, 
where a mistaken facial resemblance to an 

NO TES: IX-XI 

233 

oppressor, Yang Huo, caused the in- 
habitants to ^ut hjpi and the disciples into 
danger. For King Wen, see vii. v. Note. 

vi. 4. The only mention of the disciple Lao, 
or Ch'ih Chang. 

viii. No supernatural sign is given for him. 

X. Poetic way of sfieaking of The Ideal. 

xi. Tzu Lil = Yu. 

xii. They spe^k of Confucius’s doctrine as ‘the 
jewel’. 

xiv. After the exile and the return home. 

xix, XX. Hui = Yen Yiian, the favourite 
disciple. 

xxvi. Tzu Lu = Yu. 

XXX. From^one o^the poems not included in 
the classical Canon. 

Book X. 

xi. 2. K'ang Tzu = Chi K'ang Tzu, the 
minister to Duke Ai of Lu. The polite 
custom was to acknowledge edible pre- 
sents by at once tasting them. 

xviii. A passage of acknowledged difficulty; 
one suggestion being that Tfcu Lu caught 
and cooked th^ hen pheasant, Confucius 
smelt it thrice, and rose — not eating. 

Book XL 

ii. A remark ma^e in old age about the disciples 

234 

NO TES: XI 

who were with him in exile. 2. A famous 
list of ‘the ten di^cemifig ones’ amongst 
the disciples, except that Ts^ng Tzu is not 
mentioned. 

V. The couplet that Nan Yung cJianted thrice 
daily, ran: ‘The White Sceptre’s flaw may 
be ground away, But'^ flaw in my words 
has no remedy.’ 

vi. Chi K'ang Tzu, the minister, see ii. xx, Note. 

vii-x. Yen Lu, father of the beloved disciple, 
Yen Yiian, wanted a grand funeral for his 
son when he died. Confucius replied that 
he had not sold his carriage even for his 
own son’s funeral the preceding year, as 
state position obliged him to keep it. But 
the disciples buried him with much pomp, 
with Confucius bewailing that tliey should 
thus do; for Yen Yuan (Hui) would have 
understood a simple cortege. 

xi. Chi Lu = Tzu Lu. 

xii. Tzii Lu = Yu. 

xiv. Yu (TzQ Lu), the* soldier, liked martial 
music. ^ 

XV. Two learned disciples. Shih = Tzu Chang, 
well spoken of by T zflKung for his humili ty . 
Shang = Pu Shang, or Tzu Hsia, several 
sayings of whose occur in Book XIX. 

xvi. Ch'iu = Jan Ch*iu, the, clever unscru- 

NO TES: XI-XII 235 

pulous disciple. Duke Chou was rich by 
right of imperial sjate. 

xvii. The characters of four disciples when they 
entered the school pf Confucius originally: 
Ch'ai =? Kao Ch'ai, or Tzu Kao; Shen = 
the great disciple Tseng Tzu, or Tseng 
Shen; Shih =*Tzu Chang, well spoken of 
later by Tzu Kung for his humility and 
diligence; Yu = Tzu Lu, the soldier who 
became philosopher. 

xviii. Hui = Yen Yiian. T'zu = Tzu Kung. 

xxiii. Chi Tzu-jan is the younger brother of Chi 
K'ang TzQ, the minister, see ii. xx. Note. 
He asks aboi^t the characters of Tzfl Lu 
(Chung Yu) dbd Jan Ch'iu : the family was 
meditating getting rid of their prince. 

xxiv. Tzu Kao was the ugly dwarfish disciple. 

XXV. Again the characters of tlie disciples come 
out. Tzfl Lu talks of military prowess. Jan 
Ch'iu wants to enrich an administration. 
Ch'ih, or Kung-hsi Hua, loved the services 
of the temple. Ti A, or TsengTien, father of 
the disciple Tseng Tzfl, longs for happy i 
companionship and strolling in early 
summer. 

Book XIL 

V. Ssfl-ma Niu’% brotli^r, Huan T’ui, had tried 

236 

NO TES: XII-XIII 

to kill Confucius. Tzu Hsia comforts him 
nobly. 

viii. Chi Tzu-Ch'eng was a high official who 

disliked the veneer of the times. 

* 

ix. Duke Ai of Lu, see ii. xix. Vu Jo — Tzu 

Yu. 

X. 3. A quotation, perhaps ftieaning that people 
are not sought out for wealth bht talent. 

xi. This occurred in 518 b.c. when Confucius 

was 35 3^ears old. The duke had lost his 
government to his ministers, and was 
surrounded by many concubines through 
whose jealousies the family relationships 
were all astray. See xvi. xii and xviii. iii. 

xii. Yu = Tzu Lu. 

XV. See VI. xxv. 

xvii to xix. Chi K'ang Tzu, the minister, see 
II. XX. xix is a famous paragraph, 
xxii. 6 . Shun, the early great emperor, and Kao 
Yao his minister. T'ang was the first 
emperor of the Shang or Yin dynasty, and 
I Yin his minister. *■ 

Book XIII. 

Hi. Prince of Wei, see vKi. xiv. This famous 
passagq emphasizes the need of exact 
wording and thought, to achieve even 
good government. 

NO TES: Xlll-Xiy 237 

vii. Said with a sigh, for the states of Lu an(i 
• Wei, originally bj^other states, were also 

brothers in upheaval. 

viii. The Master praised Ching because he was 
not greody or proud. 

xiv. The Master rebuking Jan Ch'iu, for he 
himself was entitled to consultation if 
State affairs were in progress. 

XV. Duke Ting, see iii. xix. 

xvi and xviii. Duke of She, see vii. xviii. 

xvii. A city in the state of Lu. 

Book XIV. 

i and ii. Hsien = Yiian Ssu, noted for his 
modesty and purity. 

vi. Prince I* and Ao, athletes of ancient times. 
Yii in person and Chi through his posterity, 
tlte Chou dynasty, developed the resources 
of the land in ancient times, and thus 
became rulers. 

ix. Ch^ng was a small state, needing and 

receiving the co-#)perative service of all 
its officials to survive. 

X and xi. Tzu Ch’an was a kindly ofecial but not 
lenient, see v. x\». Tzu Hsi had prevented 
his prince from employing Confucius, 
xii. M^ng Kung Ch'o (see xiii), an official of 
more probijy than talent. 

238 NO TES: XIV 

xiii. Tsang Wu Chung was a sage of the pre- 
ceding reign. Kung Ch'o = Meng Kuvig 
Ch'o, of preceding chapter, xii. Chuang 
Tzu of P'ien killed two tigers in one day. 
Jan Ch'iu is the clever butcunscrupulous 
disciple serving under Chi K'ang Tzu 
in Lu. 

xiv. Kung-ming Chia was disciple to Kung-shu 
Wen-tzu, an official who was a stoic 
philosopher. 

XV. Tsang Wu Chung, having offended the 
ruler, fled in disgrace, but kept a hold on 
the fief of Fang, demanding that his half- 
brother be appointed to its command. 

xvi. Duke Wen, 635-<527 #b.c.: Duke Huan 
683-640. B.c. Neither was upright, but 
Huan was at least not treacherous. 

xvii and xviii. Duke Huan, see above. Shao 
Hu and Kuan Chung were both ministers 
of the murdered Prince Chiu. Shao com- 
mitted suicide in protest, but Kuan Chung 
asked merely to ben imprisoned, later took 
office under Huan, and acted with so much 
ability that Confucius praises him. See x. 

xix. Kung-shu Wen-tzu, ‘see xiv. xiv. A play 
on the word W^n, which means ‘Cultured'. 

XX. K'ang- tzfl == Chi K'ang Tzu, the minister 
in Lu. Duke Ling, though unprincipled. 

NO TES: XIV 239 

had three excellent ministers to do the 
work of goATernn^nt. 

xxii. Ch'en was minister in the neighbouring 
state of Ch'i and had slain his duke, Chien, 
greatly «hocking Confucius. He wished 
Duke Ai to take up arms, but Duke Ai’s 
three chieftains- were secretly allies of the 
murderer, and put Confucius off. 

xxvi. Chii Po Yii, a former disciple, host and 
sage. 

xxvii. See viii. xiv. 

xxxiv. Wei-sh^ng Mou, an aged recluse and 
moralist, who sneered at Confucius’s 
wandering exile, and teachings. 

xxxviii. Kung-po VLiao, the Duke’s uncle, 
jealous of Tzfl Lu, who was putting into 
practice the Master’s teachings, spoke 
against him to their common lord, the 
minister Chi K'ang Tzfl, or Chi-sun. 
Tzii-Lu Ching-po, a powerful minister, and 
a disciple, threatened drastic retaliation. 

xlii. The basket-carrie% also a recluse, is at first 
moved by Confucius’s music; then jeers 
that Confucius has not the Sense to accom- 
modate himself to tlie shallowness of the 
times. 

xliii. Kao Tsung, Emperor of* the Shang 
dynasty, 13^3-1265 B.C. 

240 

NO TES: XIV-XF 

xlv. Yao and Shun, the first great emperors, 
xlvi. Yiian Jang, an old scapegrace. 

Book XV. 

i. Duke Ling of Wei, K’usband o^Nan-tzu, the 
dissolute beauty. See xiv. xx. Confucius 
went to Wei more than once in his exile, 
iv. Shun, Emperor, see viii. xviii. , 
vi. I. In the ‘Family Sayings of Confucius’, the 
recorder Yu is said to have been unable to 
obtain the promotion of good officials and 
the dismissal of bad. So, when dying, he 
ordered that his body should be laid out 
in an unworthy place and state. When his 
prince saw, he realizec^ the lesson: and Yii 
accomplished after death what had been 
impossible to him before. 

2. Chii Po Yii, see xiv. xxvi. 

X. 2. The Calendar of the Hsia dynasty, 
according to the greatest ancient thought, 
by beginning at the winter solstice, set 
forth rightly the harmonious place of 
heaven, earth, and man, and thus gave 
right directions for prince and peasant. 

3. The state carriage of the Yin dynasty was 
of simple wood, without trappings. 

4. The ckp of Chou, with its fringe, was 
used for sacred rites. 

NO TES: XV-XVI 241 

5. The posturings accompanying the ancient 
Shao jnusic'were^ stately and ordered, see 

in. XXV. 

6. The songs of Cheng were modern and 
frivoloits to the ear of Confucius. 

xii. Said when he saw Duke Ling riding out 
witli his wanton wife, Nan-Tzu. 

xiii. Tsang Wen Chung, Prime Minister of Lu. 
Hui of Liu-hsia, an incorruptible judge, 
see XVIII. 2, 8. 

xli. Musicians in ancient China, as now, were 
often blind. Confucius treated such with 
courtesy, both for their art and their 
disability. 

Book xvi: 

i. The disciples Jan Ch'iu and Tzu Lu were 
in the service of the Chief of Chi, who 
was now planning to attack a small buffer 
town, being greedy for its sacrificial re- 
venues. The Master plainly tells them that 
they cannot shel"^ their responsibility and 
dissociate themselves from their Chief. 

iii. A concrete example of the'pnnciple of the 
preceding pi^ragraph; and a description of 
the times. Huan, see xiv. xvi. 

xii. Duke Ching of Ch*i, see xii. xi and xviii. iii. 

xiii. Po Yii, Copfucius’s son. 

*B 

242 

NO TES: XVI-XVII 

xiv. This may be an ancient interpolation, or 
Confucius may have said it to rectify some 
disorder. Fu-jen = Consort. The prin- 
cess calls herself Hsia T'ung, or The 
Handmaid. Her own people‘call her The 
Prince’s Consort: but when speaking to 
those from other states, politely say Our 
Unworthy Prince’s Consort. These others 
would, however, speak of her as Prince’s 
Consort. 

Book XVII . 

i. Yang Huo, usurping servant, Comptroller 
to the House of Chi, could not persuade 
Confucius to do other t^an decline politely 
any association with him. 
iv. See vi. xii. Tzu Yu, or Yen Yen, was 
administrator at Wu-ch’eng, and had taken 
great pains to practise tiie Master’s principles 
of government. He misunderstands the 
Master’s jesting at his over-hard work. 

V. Kung-shan Fu-jao, , -minister to the Chi 
House, had imprisoned the head of that 
family, seizing the fief of Pi. 
vii. Pi Hsi, minister of Chin state. 

X. The Chou Nan and the Chao Nan, the two 
first books in The Odes, dealing with self- 
culture and the regulation of the family. 

NO TES: XVII-XVIII 

243 

xiii. Because he hates any change. 

Xviii. See XV. X.* 

XX. Ju Pei, a former disciple who had offended. 

Book xvm. 

i. Period of Chou, the last of the Yin emperors, 

1 1 53-1 122 B?c. Viscount of Wei was the 
tyrartt’s step-brother by a concubine. Chi 
and Pi Kan were his uncles. All remon- 
strated with him and suffered. The tyrant 
tore out Pi Kan’s heart that he might see 
a sage’s heart. 

ii. See xv. xiii. 

iii. See XII. xi. Confucius departed, not because 

of anj^’lack •f honour, for the proposed 
treatment midway between Chi and Meng 
was honourable: but because Duke Chi 
was too old to reform his government. 
Circ. 516 B.c. 

iv. The famous incident when Confucius was 

eclipsed by the eighty courtesans. Chi 
Huan, minister tg> Duke Ting, persuaded 
Ting to accept them. 

V. A recluse. 

vi. Two other reduces. K'ung Ch'iu — Con- 

fucius. Chung Lu = Tzfl Lu. 

vii. Another recluse. Tlie five grains: rice, 
millet, whq^t, &c.^ 

NOTES: XVIII-XIX 

244 

viii. Po I and Shu Ch'i, see v. xxii. Yii Chung 
was the younger brother of T'aj, Po, vii. r. 
He cut off his hair, tattooed his body like 
the natives among whom he went to dwell, 
and considered nakedness an«<adornment. 
Of li and Chu Chiang nothing is known. 
Hui of Liu-hsia is the incorruptible judge 
of XV. 13. Shao Lien was a man of the 
‘Eastern barbarians’ who admirably per- 
formed his mourning rites. 

ix. The eight honourable court musicians left 

Lu state on its degeneration, going as far 
as the islands at sea. The ‘River’ is the 
Yellow River, Which seemed a great 
distance in those dayst' The duke had 
four meals a day and possibly appropriate 
music at each repast. 

X. The Duke of Chou was regent for his son, 
the Duke of Lu, and this saying of his is 
said to have been traditional in Lu. 

xi. Eight valiant men of old, said to have been 
brothers, sons of on?k mother, born as four 
sets of pivins, as is seen by the pairs of 
names. 

Book XIX. 

Recorded Sayings of Some Disciples. ‘This 

book only records sayings of the disciples, chiefly 

NO TES: XIX-^X 245 

those of Tzu Hsia and next those of Tzu 
Kung. Fonn th%school of Confucius, after 
Yen Tzu no one equalled Tzu Kung in acu- 
men, and after Ts|ng Tzu none equalled Tzu 
Hsia ilt sincerity.’ Chu Tzu’s commentary. 

iii. Tzfl Chang was noted for his modesty, Tzu 
Hsia for his*pl-ecise scholarship. 

XV. Chang = Tzu Chang. 

xviii and xix. Meng Chuang Tzu, a minister of 
Lu, retained his father’s ^rvants after he 
died, though some were unworthy: and 
his father’s administration, though some 
of it mistaken. Yang Fu was a disciple of 
Tseng TzQ^ the disciple of Confucius. 

XX. The tyfant Ohou, last of the Yin dynasty, 
see XVIII. i. 

xxii. Kung-sun Ch'ao, the* Duke of Wei’s 
grandson, a young courtier. Chung Ni — 
Confucius. 

xxiii and xxiv. Shu-sun Wu-shu, a high officer 
of Lu, mentioned rather unfavourably in 
The Family Sewings. Tzfl Kung denied 
energetically any superiojity to Con- 
fucius (Chung Ni]^ 

Book XX. 

This book consists of three chapters. The 
first chiefly contiiins sayings of the great 

wo TES: XX 

246 

dynastic founders quoted from the Book 
of History, SAu CAi^g; the secend giving 
Confucius's ideas on government; the 
third an aphorism by him. 

Yao, Shun, Yii, the first empetftrs. T'ang, 
1765-1752 B.C., who founded the Shang 
dynasty. Wu = King ■* Wu the Good, 
who overthrew the Chou dynasty. 

INDEX 

« t ^ 

AI, Duke of Lu, ii. xfx; lu. xxi; vi. ii; xii. ix; 
XIV. xxii. 

Ao, Chinese ^trong maa, xiv. vi. 

Ch'ai, xi. xvii. See Kao. 

Ch'ai, State, xi. i. * * 

Chang, xi?c. xv. See Tiu Chang. 

Ch'ang Chii, recluse, xviii. vi. 

Chao, Duke of Lu, vii. xxx. 

Chao, Prince of Sung, vi. xiv. 

Chao Nan, Ode, xvn. x. 

Ch'en, state, v. xxi. 

Ch'en Ch'eng-tzu, minister, xiv, xxii. 

Ch'en Kang, or Ch'en TzQ Ch'in, see T^u Ch'in. 
Ch'en Wen minister, v. xviii. 

Cheng, Songs of, xv. x; xvii. xviii. 

Cheng, state, xiv. ix. 

Ch'eng — Shin Ch'ing, v. x. 

Chi, HoUse of, in. i, v, vi; xi. xvi; xiii. ii; xvi. i; 

XVII. V. 

Chi Huan TzO, minister, xviii. iv. 

Chi K'ang TzO, minister to Duke Ai; ii. xx; 
X. xi; XI. vi; xii. jvii-xix; xiv. xx; (Clii-sun) 
XIV. xxxviii; xvi. i. 

Chi Lu, see T{u Lu, xi. xi. 

Chi-sun, see Chi K'lyig TzO. 

Chi Tzii-Ch'6ng, minister, xii. viii. 

Chi TzQ-jan, xi. xxiii. 

Chi, Viscount of, xviii. i. 

Chi Wfin TzCi, qiinister^v. xviii. 

INDEX 

248 

Ch'i, Prince of, v. xviii. 

Ch'i, state, iii. ix; vi. xxii; vti. xiiij, xrv. xvi»; 

XVI. xii; XVIII. iii, iv, ix. 

Cfii-tiao Naiy v. v. 

Chieh Ni, recluse, xviii. va 
Chieh Yu, recluse, xviii. v. 

Chien, Duke of Ch'i, xiv. xx. 

Chill, bandmaster, viii. xv; xViii. ix. 

Ching, rich man of Wei, xili. viii. 

Chiu, Prince, xiv. xvii, xviii. 

CH'IU = Confucius, V. xxiv; xiv. xxxiv. 

Ch'iu, see Jan €Xiu, 

Chou, Duke, vii. v; viii. xi; xi. xvi. 

Chou dynasty, ii. xxiii; ill. xiv, xxi; vii. xx; 
XV. i; XVIII. xi; xx. i. 

Chou Nan, Ode, xvii. 

Chu Chang, worthy, xviii. vwi. 

Ch'u, state, xviii. v, ix. 

Chu Po Yu — Chii Yuan, xiv. xxvi; xv. vi. 
Chii-fu, district, xiii. xvii. 

Chuan-yii, state, xvi. i. 

Chiian, minister, xiv. xix. 

Chuang Tzu, strong man, xiv. xiii. 

Chung Kung — Jan Yung, or Y ung, v. iv; vi. i, iv; 
XI. ii; XII. iii. 

Chung-mou, town, xvii. vii. 

CHUNG NI Confucius, XIX. xxii-xxv. 

Chung Yu, see Tiu Luf 
Ch'Ueh, village, xiv. xlvii. 

t 

Fan Ch'ih, or Fan Hsii, ii. v; vi. xx; xn. xxi, xxii; 
XIII. iv, xix. 

INDEX 

249 

Fang, fief, xiv. xv. 

Fa-Pu Ch'i^see Chien. 

Han, RiVer, xviii. ix. 

Hsia dynasty, n. xxiii; lij. ix, xxi. 

Hsien, see Yilhn Hsien, or Yuan Ssu. 

Hu-hsiang, district, vii. xxviii. 

Huan, Duke of Ch^,- xiv. xvi, xvii. 

Huan T’ui^ minister, vii. xxii. 

Hui, see Yen Hui, or Yen Yuan. 

Hui of Liu-hsia, judge, xv. xiii; xviii. ii, viii. 

I, the archer, xiv. vi. 

I, tile frontier town, m. xXiv. 

Ii, the ancient worthy, xvin. viii. 

I Ching, Book of Change#, vii. xvi; xill. xxii. 

I Yin, minister, xi^ xxii. 

Jan Cliiu -- Jan Yu, Jan Tzu, or Ch'iu, m. vi; 
V. vii; VI. iii, vi, x; vii. jfiv; xi. ii. xii, xvi, 
xxi, xxiii, xxv; xii. ix, xiii, xiv; xvi. i. 

Jan Niu -- Jan Keng, or Po Niu, vi. viii; xr. ii. 
Jan Kung, or Jan Yung: sec Chung Rung. 

Ju Pei, XVII. XX. 

K'ang Tzii, see Chi K*ang TzQ. 

Kao Ch'ai, see T{u Kao. 

Kao Tsung, Emperor, xi\% xlviii. 

Kao Yao, minister, jdi. xxii. 

Kuan ChU, music, iii. xx; viii. xv. 

Kuan Chung, minister, iii. xxi; xivfx, xvii, xviii. 
K'uang, district, ix. v; xi. xxii. 

INDEX 

250 

Kung-hsi CXihy or Hua, v. vii; vii. xxxiii; xi. xxi, 

XXV. 

Kung-ming Chia, stoic, ^Av. xiv. 

Kung-po LiaOy xiv. xxxviii. 

Kung-shan Fu-jao, minisjer, xvii. v. 

Kung-shu Wen-tzu, stoic, xiv. xiv,*Xix. 
Kung-sun Ch'ao, Duke’s grandson, xix. xxii. 
Kung Yeh Changy V. i. 

K'UNG = Confucius, IX. ii. 

K’UNG CH'IU = Confucius, XVIII. vi. 

K'ung Li, see Po Yii. 

K’ung Wen Ttj, minister, v. xiv. 

Lao, IX. vi. 

Lin Fang, iii. iv, vi. 

Li, see Po Yii. 

Ling, Duke, xiv. xx; xv. i. 

Lu, House of, iii. ii, x; xiv. xr. 

Lu, state, v. ii; vi. xxii; ix. xiv; xi. xiii; xiii. vii; 
XIV. XV ; XVIII, iv. 

Meng, family, xix. xix. 

Meng Chih Fan, minister, vi. xiii. 

Meng Ching Tzu, minister, viii. iv. 

Meng Chuang TzO, minister, xix. xix. 

M^ng I TzQ, or M^ng Sun, ii. v. 

M^ng Kung Ch’o, xiv. xii, xiii. 

Meng Wu Pc^,- ii^, vi; v. vii. 

Mien, bandmaster, xv. vii. 

Min Sun, or Min T{it Chien\ vi. vii; xi. ii, iv, xii, 
xiii. 

Music, III. xxiif; vii. xiii; ix. xiv; xvii. xi; xviii. ix. 
Musicians, female, xviii. iv. 

INDEX 

»5i 

• 

Nan Kung Kua, or Nan Yung, v. i; xi. v; xiv. vi. 
Nan-TzQ, wife of Duke ^ing, vr. xxvi. 

Ning Wu,Tzu, minister, v. xx. 

P'eng, ancient worthy. Mil. i. 

Pi, fief, XI. xx?v; xvi. i; xvii. v. 

Pi Hsi, minister, xvii. vii. 

Po I, Prince, v, xxiT;'vii. xiv; xvni. i. 

Pi Kan, sage, xviii. i. 

Po Niu “ Jan Keng, or Jan Niu, vi. viii; xi. ii. 
Po Yii, or Li, - K'ung Li, xi. vii; xvi. xiii; 

XVII. X. 

Pu Shang, see Tiu Hsia. 

River, The (Yellow), xviii. ix. 

Shang = Tiu Hsia^xt. xv. 

Shao, music^ni. wf; vii. xiii; xv. x. 

Shao Hu, official, xiv. xvii, xviii. 

Shao Lien, worthy, xviii. viii. 

Shd, Duke of, vii. xviii; xni. xvi, xvii. 

Shen — Tseng Tiu, xi. xv, xvii. 

Shen CX&ng, v. x. 

Shih = Tiu Chang, xi. xv, xvii. 

Shu Ch*i, worthy, v. xxii; vii. xiv; xvin. i. 
Shu-sun Wu-shu, officii, xix. xxiii. xxiv. 

Shun, Emperor, vi. xxviii; viii. xviii, xx; ix. v; 

XII. xxii; XIV. xiv; xv. iv; ^x. i. 

Sung, state, iii. ix; vi. «iv. 

SsH-rna King, or Niu, xii. iii, iv, v. 

Ta-hsiang, village, ix. ii. 

T'ai, Mount, iii. yi. 

INDEX 

T'ai Po, vii. i. 

Tan-t'ai Mieh-ming, VI. jfji. . 

T'ang dynasty, viii. xx. 

T'ang, Emperor, xn. xxii; xx. i. 

Ting, Duke of Lu, in. kix; xni. j^. 

T'o, temple reader, vi. xiv; xiv. xx. 

Ts'ai, state, xviii. ix. , 

Tsai Woy or Yii, v. ix; vi, xxiv; xvil. xxi. 

Tsang WSn Chung, minister, xv. xiii.* 

Tsang Wu Chang, minister, xvi. xiii, xv. 

Tseng Tiiky I. jy, ix; iv. xv; viii. iii-vii; xi. xvii; 

XII. xxiv; XIV. xxviii. 

Tseng Tien, XI. xxv. 

Tso Ch*iu Mingy V. xxiv. 

Ts'ui Tzu, V. xviii. , 

Tuan-mu Tzu, see Tiu Rung., 

Tuan-sun Shih, see Tiu ChaUg. 

Tzu, Lady (of Wu), vii. xxx. 

Tzu Ch'an, statesman, v. xv; xiv. ix, x. 

Chang = Tuan-sun Shih, or Shih, ii. xviii, 
xxiii; v. xviii; xi. xv, xvii, xix; xii. vi, x, 
xiv, xx; XIV. xliii; xv. v, xli; xvii. vi; xix. i, 
ii, iii, XV, xvi; xx. ii. 

T^u Chien — Fu-Pu Ch'i, v. ii. 

TiH Ch'in — Ch'fin Kangl i. x; xvi. xiii; xix. xxv. 
T^u-fu Ching-pOy XIV. xxxviii; xix. xxiii. 

Tzfl Hsi, omciaf, xiv. x. 

7^1? Hsia — Pu Shang, or, Shang, i. vii; n. viii; 
VI. xi; XI. ii, xv; xii. v, xx; xiii. xvi; xix. 
i-xiii. 

Tzii Hua, see Kung-hsi Ch'ih. 

T^a KaOy XI. xxiv. 

INDEX 

^53 

Tiu Rung = Tuan Mu Tzu, or Tzu, i. x, xvi* 
n. xiiij III. xyii; v. iii, viii, xi-xiii; vi. vi, 
xxviii; Vn. xiv; ix. *1, xii; xi. ii, xii, xv, xviii; 

XII. vii, viii; xiii. xx, xxiv; xiv. xviii, xxxi*, 
xxxvii; xv. ii, .ix, xxiii; xvii. xix, xxiv; 
XIX. XX, ixv. 

Tiu Lu ~ Chung Yu, Yu, or Chi Lu (xi. xi), 
II. xvii; V. vi,, yii, xiii, xxv; vi. vi, xxvi; 
VII. x^ xviii, xxxiv; ix. xi, xxvi; x. xviii; 
XI. ii, xi, xii, xiv, xvii, xxi, xxiii-xxv; xil. xii; 

XIII. i, iii, xxviii, xii, xiv; xvi. i; xvii. v, vii, 
viii, xxiii; xviii. vi, vii. 

Tzu-sang Po-tzu, vi. i. 

Tzu Wen, prime minister, v. xviii. 

Tiu Yu ■- Yen Yen, or Yen Yu, ii. vii; iv. xxvi; 

VI. xii; XI. ii; xvii. iv;icix. xii, xiv, xv. 

Tz’u, see T^u Rung. 

Wang-sun Chia, ollicial, iii. xiii; xiv. xx. 

Wei, state, ix. xiv; xiii. vii,*ix; xiv. xx, xii; 
XV. i; XIX. xxii. 

Wei, Prince of, vii. xiv; xiii. iii. 

Wei, Viscount of, xviii. i. 

Wei-shang Kao, minister, v. iv. 

Wei-sh5ng mou, recluse, xiv. xxxiv. 

Wen, Duke or King, *111. xx; vii. v; viii. xi; 

IX. V, xix, xxii; xx. i. 

Wen, Duke of Chin, xiv. jtvi. 

Wu, city, VI. xii; xvii^iv. 

Wu, King, VIII. xx; xx. i; xix. xxii. 

Wu, music, HI. xxv. 

Wu-ma Ch'i, or Sliih, vii. xxx. 

INDEX 

^54 

'Yang Fu, judge, xix. xix. 

Yang Huo, Comptroller, xviii. i. 

Yao, Emperor, vi. xxviii|fviii. xix; xfv, xlv; xx* i. 
Yen, see Tiu Yu. 

Yen Hui == Hui, Yen Yiian, Tzu Yiian, ii. ix; 
V, viii, XXV ; vi. ii, ix; vii. xf ix. x, xix, xx; 
XI. ii, iii, vi-x, xviii, xx; xii. i; xv. x. 

Yen Lu = Yen Wu Yao, xi.^vii. 

Yen P^ing Chung, minister, v. xvi. , 

Yen Yen, or Yen Yu, see T^u Yu. 

Yen Yiian, iii. ix, xxi, see also Yen Hui. 

Yin, dynasty, fi. xxiii; viii. xx; xii. xxii; xv. x; 

XVIII. i. 

Yu, see T^u Lu. 

Yu Joj or Yu Tzu, i. ii, xii, xiii; xii. ix. 

Yung, see Nan^kung I(ua. 

Yu, see Tsai IVoy or Yu. 

Yii, dynasty, vni. xx, 

Yu, Emperor, viii. xviii, xxi; xiv. vi; xx. i. 

Yii, recorder, xv. vi. 

Yii Chung, sage, xviii. viii. 

Yiian Jang, scapegrace, xiv. xlvi. 

Yiian Ssu, or Yuan Hsien, or Hsien, vi. iii; xiv. i, 
ii. 

Note . — The names of tjre disciples in italics are 
those most used in The Analects. 

GREAT BRITAIN 
AT THE 

UNIVERSITV PRESS 
OXFORD 
BY 

JOHN JOHNSON 
PRINTER 
TO THE 
UNIVERSITY 

THE WORLD’S CLASSICS 

A SERIES in constant progress, containing over 
four hundred volumes, and offering in a size 
adapted for the pocket, and at a ’ow price, the most 
famous works in the English language, with more 
than a lew translations. Many of the volumes con- 
tain introductions by the best modern writers. 

POCKET SIZE, 6x3! inches (as this list). Large 
type, on thin opaque paper, in superfine art cloth. 

A NUMBER of the volumes are also obtainable in 
Pebble grain Moroccoette and in Natural grain 
Morocco. These are specially recommended for 
presentation. 

THE VOLUMES are obtainable through any book- 
seller. 

IN THE FOLLOWING LIST the books are classi- 
fied as below : 

Anthologies Letters 

Autobiography Literary Criticism 

Biography Phitosophy and Science 

Classics-Greek and Homan Poetry 
Drama Politics, Political Theory, 

Essays and Belles Lettres and Political Economy 
Fiction (Short Stories are Jieligion 
grouped separately) I'Xiort Stories 
History Travel and Topography 

AN INDEX OF AUTHORS is given at the end of 
the list. 

THE 

WORLD’S CLASSICS 

PKINTliiD ON OXFORD INDIA PAPEfl 

The following Works are obtainable in superfine 
maro*n cloth, gilt lettered on back, ' 
gilt top, and marker. 

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE 

Borrow. Lavengro and Romany Rye. 

Maude (Aylmer). Life of Tolsfoy. 

Tolstoy. Anna Karenina. Translated by Louise 
and Aylmer Maude. 

1'rollope. Last Chronicle of Barset. 

„ Orley Farm.* 

„ Wiinejm Finn. 

„ Thineas Redux. 

THREE VOLUMES IN ONE 

Dante. The Divine Comedy. Italian te.xt and 
translation by M. B, Anderson. 

English Short Stories (Nineteenth and Twentieth 
Centuries). 

Rabelais (Fran<;'OIs). Gargan^a ^nd Pantagruel. 

Tolstoy.* War and Peaoe. Revised translation by 
Louise and Aylmer Maude. 

4 

‘THE WORLD’$ CLASSICS* 

COMPLETE LIST OF THE SERIES 

{ 

‘If Anthologies 

A Book of American Verse. Selected and edited by A. C. Ward 
(428). 

A Book of Narrative Verse. Con>pilcd by V, II. Collins, Intro- 
ductir*' by Edmund Blunden (350). ♦ • 

A Book of Scottish Verse. Compiled by R, L. Mackie (417). 

American Criticism. Representative Literary Essays. Chosen 
by Norman Foerster (354). • ' 

English Essays, chosen and arranjted by W, Peacock (32). 

English Essays, i6oo-igoo, chosen by S, V, Makozeer and B, 11 . 
Blacktcell (172). 

English Essays, Modern. Two Scries. Selected by H. S. 
Milford (280, 406). 

English Prose from mandeville to ruskin, chosen and arranged 
by W. Peacock (45). 

English Prose, chosen and arranged by W. Peacock in 5 volumes : 
1, WYCLIFFE to CLARK IDON ; II, MILTON tO GRAY; III, WAL- 
P0IJ5 to lamb; IV, LANDOR tO HOLMIiS; V, MRS. GASKELL lO 
HENRY JAMES (219-23). 

English Prose, Narrative, Dcscnjptive, Dramatic (malory to 
STEVENSON), Compiled by //. A, Treble (204). 

English Songs and Ballads, compiled by T» Crosland. 

New edition, with the text revised, and additional poems (13). 

English Short Stories (Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries), 
selected by //. S. Milford. Three Se: ics (193, 228, 315). 

English Verse. Edited by W, Peacock. I, Earl/Lyrics to shake- 
8PEARB (308); II, CAMPION to .thc Ballads (309); III, drydln 
to WORDSWORTH (310); ,IV, SCOTT tO ELIZABETH DROWNING 
(3II); V, LONGFELLOW tO RUPERT DROOKB (3x2). 

Letters written in War-time (P'lftcenth to Nineteenth Cen- 
turies), selected and arranged by II. Wragg (202). 

A Miscellany op Tracts and Pamphlets. Sixteenth to Nine- 
teenth Centuries. Edited by ^.C. H ard {304). 

Palgrave's Golden Treasury, with 188 pages of additional poems 
from LANDOR to BLUNDEN (133). 

Reading at Random. A * World’s Classics * Anthology. Edited 
by Ben Ray Redman (410). 

% Autobiography c 

Aksakoff(Serghei). Trans. byjK D. Duff. A Russian Gentleman 
(241). Years of Childhood (242). L Russian Schoolboy (261). 

Cellini (Benvenuto) (300). 

. ^ Quincey (Thomas). Confessions of an Opium-Eater (23). 

p.iANKLiN (Benjamin). I’lie Autobiography, edited from his 
original manuscript by John Bigelow (250). 

Gibbon (Edward). Autobiography. Intro/iuction by7« 

(139). 

AUTCjfelOGRAPHY! BIOGRAPHY. THE 'CLASSICS’ 

Haydon (vENjAiyliN Robert). The Autobiography. Introduc- 
tion and Epilogue by Edmund Blunden (314). 

Hunt4Eeigh). AufobioTgraphy. \r\ito. Edmund Blunden 
Mill (John Stuart). Autobiography. I ntroduction by //aro/d 
Laski (262). 

ToLsyoY. A Confession, Ind What I believe. Translated^by 
Avlmer Maud^ (22g).* 

7'rollope (Anthony). Atobiography. Introduction by 
Michael Sddleir (239), 

^ Biography 

Carlyle. The Life of j[nhn Sterling. Introduction by IT. Hale 
White {* Mafk Ruthe^ord') (144). 

Crabbe, Life of. By his Son. Introduction by E, M. Forster 
(404). 

Dobson (Austin). Four Frenchwomen: Charlotte Corday. 
Madame Roland, Princess dc Lamballe, Madame dc Genhs 
(24«). f , 

Emerson. Representative Men. (With English Traits) (30). 

Francis or Assisi (St.). 1 he Little Flowers; and 'Fhe Life of 
Brother Giles. Translated into English verse by James Rhoades 
(265). 

G askell (Mrs.). The Life of Charlotte Bronte (214). 

Houghton (Lord). Life of Erats (364). 

JoHN.soN (Sa.muix), Lf^es of the Poets. 2 vols. (83, 84). 

Maude (Aylmer^. I dft^of Tolstoy. 2 vols. (383, 384). 

Scott (Sir W/ILter). Lives of the Novelists. Introduction by 
A usti n Dobson ( 94) . 

Trevelyan (Sir G. O.). Life of Macaulay. With a new Intro- 
. duction by G. M. Trevelyan. 2 v(fls. (401, 402). 

Walton (Izaak). Lives of Donne, Wotton, Hooker, Herbert, 
Sanderson. Introduction by George Saintsbury (303). 

The ‘ Classics \ Greek and Roman 

Atscuvu’s. The Seven I’lafs. Translated into English Verse by 
Leu'is Campbell (117). 

Aristopiiaj^es. I'he Ach.arnians, I^igj|ls, Birds, and Frogs, 
'Pranslutcd by .7. Hoohham Ffyere, Intro. IF. Merry 
Homer. Translated by Iliad (18). Odyssey (36). 
Sophocles, 'Phe Seven nays. Translated into English Verse by 
Letvis Campbill (116). • 

Virgil. 'I'hc Acncid, Georgies, and E^ogucs. Translatcd^jr' 
John pryden (37). 

— — The Acncid, Georgies, and Eclogues. Translated by 
James Rhoades (2 #7)* 

6 

•THE WORLD’b CLASSICS' 

*[f Drama 

BnowNiNG (Rodert). ^oems and Plays, 1833-42 (58). 

Concr£vh (William). Complete Works. 2vols. Introduction by 
Bonamy Dohrie, I, The Comedies. II, The Mourning Bride, 
^ith Letters, Poems, and Miscellanies *(276, 277). 

Eighteenth Century Comedy. #c\RQunAR’s Bfeaux* Stratagem, 
STEEL-r’s Conscious Lovers, gay’s Peggar’s Opera, Fielding’s 
Tom Thumb, goldsmith’s She Stoops to Conquer (292). 

EigViteenth Century. Lesser Comedies op the. Edited by 
Allardyce Nicoll. I'he hve comedies arc art^ujr murphy’s 'Fhc 
Way to keep him, georgb colman’s The Jealous Wife, mrs. 
INCHDALd’s Everyone has his P'ault, Thomas Morton’s Speed 
the Plough, and Frederick reynolds#*s The Dramatist (321). 

Five Elizabethan CoxMedif^. Edited by A. K. Mclluraith, Con- 
tains Greene’s Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay, peele’s The Old 
Wives’ Tale, lyly’s Campaspe, dekker’s Shoemaker’s Holiday, 
and the anonymous Merry Devil of Edmonton (422). 

Five Pre-Shakespearean Comedies. Edited by F. S. Boas. Con- 
tains medvvall’s Fulgc^’hs and Lucrece, heywood’s 'Fhe FourPP., 
udall’s Ralph Roister Doister,the anonymous Gammer Gurton’s 
Needle, and Gascoigne’s Supposes (418). 

Goethe. Faust, Parts I and 11 . Translated by Bayard Taylor. 
Intro, by Marshall Monttiomcry and notes by Douj^las lalcr (380). 

Ibsen, Henrik. Peer Gynt. Trans, with an Introduction bv 
R. Ellis Roberts (446). '• 

Marlowe’s Dr. Faustus (with cofthe's Faust. Part I, trans. 
J. Anster), Introduction by Sir A. IR* H'^2rf^(I35). 

Restor.ation TRAGEDIF.S. dryden’s All for Love, '*otway’s Venice 
Preserved, southerne’s Oronooko, rowe’s Fair Penitent, and 
Addison’s Cato. Introdiy;tion by Bonamy Dohr^e (313). 

Shakespeare, Plays and Poems. * Preface by /]. C. Ski nburnc. 
Introductions by Edtcard Dozeden. 9 vols. Comedies. 3 vols. 
(loo, loi, 102). Histories and Poems. 3 vols. (103, 104, 105), 
Tragedies. 3 vols, (106, 107, 108). 

Shakespeare, Six Plays by Contemporaries of. dfkker, The 
Shoemaker’s Holiday; Webster, The White Devil; Beau- 
mont and FLETCHER, The Knight of the Burning Pestle, and 
Philastcr; Webster, The Duchess of Malfi; massingir, A 
New Way to pay Old Debts. Ed/.ed by C. B. Wheeler (199). 

Sheridan. Plays. Introduction hy Joseph Knight (79). 

Tolstoy, The Flaysy (y.mpictc edition, including the posthu- 
mous plays. I’ranslatcd by La(nse and Aylmer Maude (243)* 

,JSssays and Belles Lettres 

Bacon. The F.ssays, Civil and Moral (24). 

Carlyle. On Heiocs and Hero- W^oi ship (6,2). Past and Present, 
Introduction by G. K. Chesterton (153). Sartor Kesartus (19). 

ESSAYS AND |eLLES LETTRES 7 

Dobson (^ustinJ At Prior Park, &c. (259). Eighteenth- Century 
Vignettes. "I hice Series (245-7). Four Frenchwomen (248). 
Oldf^ensington Pllace*&c.(258). A Pafeidinof Philanthropy, &c, 
(256). Rosalba’s lournal, &c. (260). Side-Walk Siudi^ (257). 
Emerson. English IVaits, and Representative Men (30). Essays, 
Two Series (6). ^ ^ ^ 

English CriticS|l Essays. 3^olumes : I, Sixteenth to Eighteenth 
Centuries; II, Nineteenth Centur>s III, Twentieth Century 
(240, 206, ?os). • 

English Essays, chosen and arranged by IF. Peacock (32). 

(A Book of^ i6oo-i90|> (172). 

Modern. Two Scries. Selected by //. S. Milford (zSo, 406), 

English Prose, mandeville to ruskin. Chosen by IF. Peacock 
(45). Also a selection in 5 volumes by the same editor: I, \VY- 
CLIFFE to clarendon (^9); II, MILTON tO GRAY (22c); III, WAL- 
POLE to LAMnt22 1 ) ; I V, LANDOKtO H 0 LMES( 222 ) ; V, MRS. GASKELL 
to HENRY JAMES (223). 

English Prose. Narrative, Descriptive, and Dramatic (204). 
Froude(J. a.). Short Studies on Great Subjects. Series 1 (269). 
Hazlitt (William). Characters of Slykespeare’s Plays (205). 
The English Comic Writers (124). Sketches and Essays. 
Essays on Men and Manners ( 1 5). Table-l'alk (5). The Spirit 
of the Age (57). Winterslow (25). 

Holmes (Oliver Wendell). The Autocrat of the Breakfast- 
Table (61). The Poet at the Breakfast-Table (95). The Pro- 
fessor at the Breakfast-Tabl<^(89). 

IloRNE (R. H,). A NeW Spirit of the Age (127), 

Hunt (Leigh), tssays^nd Sketches (115). 

Irving (Washington). The Sketch Book (173)* 

Lamb. Essays of Elia, and The Last Esrays ot Elia (2). 

Landor. Imaginary Conversations. Selected (196). 

Milton. Selected Prose, intreduefion by A/c/co/m \V. Wallace 

(293)- 

Montaigne’s Essays. Florio’s translation. 3 vols. (65, 70, 77). 
Reynolds (Sir Joshua). The Discourses, &c. (149). 

Ruskin. {Ruskin House Editions, by anan^ement %vith Messrs, 
Allen ^ Umiin, Ltd.) *A Joy tor Ever*, and The Two Paths. 
Illustrated (h 7). Sesame and Lilies, and Ethics of the Dust 
(145). Tim^ and I’ide, and The Crown of Wild Olive (146). 
Unto this Last, and Muntra Pulveris (148). 

Rutherford (Mark). Pages from a Journal (358). 

Smith (Alexander). D,reamthorp, &J|. (:»o). 
SMOLLETT.^^’ravcls through Ffance and Italy (90). 

Sterne (Laurence), A ^ntimental Journey. Introduction by 
Virginia Woolf (333). ^ 

Stevenson (R. L.), Virginibus Pucrisque, and Across the Plains 
(296). 

Thoueau. Walden ( 68 ). 

Tolstoy. Translated by A, Maude, *What is Art?* and Essaya 
on Art (331). 

8 ‘THE WORLD’# CLASSICS* 

Tracts and Pamphlets, from john knox to ii. c, wbli s (304), 
Walton and Cotton. The Compleat Angler. Introduction by 
John Buchan (430). ^ \ 

White CGilbert). The Natural History of ; 5 clbornc (22), 
Whitman. Specimen Days in America (371). 

^ Fiction (For Short Stories see separate headtpg) 

AiNgwoRTH (W. Harrison). The Tower of London (162). 
Austen (Jane). Lmrna(i29). Prui? and Prejudice (335). Mans- 
field Park (345). Northanger Abbey (355). ^Persuasion (356). 
Sense and Sensibility (389). 

Blackmore(R. D.). Lorna Doonc. Introduction by Sir Herbert 
Warren (17 1). 

Borrow (George). Lavengro (66). The Romany Rye (73). 
Bronte (An.ne). Agnes Grey (141). Tenant ot WildtcU Hall 
(hy). 

Bronte (Charlotte). Jane Eyre (i). Shirley(i4). VilUtte (47). 

The Professor, and the Poems of the Brontes (78). 

Bronte (Emily). VVutKering Heights (10). 

Bunyan. 'Phe Pilgrim’s Progress (12). Mr. B.idman (33S). 
Butler (Samuel). The Way of ail Flesh. With an Essay by 
Bernard Slime (438). 

Cervantes. Don Quixote. 2 volumes (130, 13 1). 

CoBLOLD (Rev. Richard). M.'xr^garct Catchpole ( 1 19). 

Collins (Wilkie). The Moonstone, jntroduction by T, 
Bliot (316). 'Fhe Woman in White (226). ^ 

Cooper (J. Fenimoue). I'he Last ot th(. Mohica/is (163). 
Defoe. Captain Singleton (82). Robinson Crusoe. Part I (17). 
Dickens. Barnaby Rudgc(286). Christmas Books ( 107). Edwin 
Drood (263). Great Exp'Ctations (128), Hard Times (264). 
Old Curiosity Shop (270), Oliver Twist (8). Pickwick Papers. 
2 volumes (120, I2ij. Tale ot Two Cities (38). 

Disraeli (Binjamin). Coningsby (381 ). Sybil (291). 

Eliot (George). Adam Bede (63). Felix Holt (179). I’hc Mill 
on the Floss (31). Romola(i78), Scenes of Clerical Life (155). 
Silas Marncr, See. (80). 

Fielding. Jonathan Wild (382). Joseph Andrew" (334). 

Galt (John), 'Fhe Entail. Introduction by John Ayscough 
(177;. 

Gaskell (Mrs.). Cousin Phillis, and Other 'Pales, &c. (168). 
Cranford, The Cage. at (Branford, and 'Phc Moorl 'nd Cottage 
( 1 10). Lizzie Leigh, The Grey Woman, and Other Talcs, &c. 
(175), Mary Barton (86). North a-id South (154). Right at 
Last, and Other "I'alcs, &c. (203). Round the Sofa (190). 
j. iuth (88). kylvia*3 Lovcfs(i56). Wives and Daughters(i57). 
Goldsmith. The Vica. of Wakefield (4). 

Harrls (Joel Chandler). Uncle Remus (361). 

Hawthorne. House of the Seven Gables (273). The Scarlet 
Letter {26). Tales (319). * 

FI(|riON 9 

Holme (CiNSTAtJ^H). beautiful End (431). Crump Folk going 

• Home (4x9). He-vho-^:ame ? (440).^ The Loneiy Plough (390). 
The 4 )ld‘Koad froli (400). ThcfSplendid Failing (416). 

'rhc Things whicf Belong (425). The Trumpet^ in the 

Dust (409). 

Kingsley (Henry). Geofffy Hamlyn (271). Ravenshoe (26^). 
Austin Elliot (V07). * ‘ 

La Motte Fouq&e, Undine, Sintram, &c. (408). 

Le Fanu (J. S). Unde Sills. Intro, by Montague R.Jafftfs (306). 

Lesage. Gil Bias. Edited y, Fitzmaurice-Kelly, 2 vols. (*51, 
152). 

Marryat. Mr. Midshipman Easy (160). Jacob Faithful (439). 

Melville (Herman). \Ioby Dick (225). Typce (274). Omoo 
(275). White Jacket (^53). 

Morier (J. J.).* Hajji*Baba (238). Hajji Baba in England (285), 

Peacock (T. L.). Headlong Hall ; and Nightmare Abbey (339). 
Misfortunes of Elphin; and Crotchet Castle (244). 

Radelais. Gargantua and PantagrucL Translated by Urquhart 
and Motteux, with notes and map. 3 volumes (411-13). 

S(;oTT. Ivanhoe (29). * 

Smollett. Roderick Random (353). Humphry Clinker (290). 

Sterne. Sentimental Journey (333). Tristram Shandy (40). 

Stevenson (R. L.). Kidnapped ; and Catriona (297). The Master 
of Ballantrae (441). Treasure hdand U95\ 

Sturgis (Howard). Be^hambc#. Intro, by Gerard Hopkins (429). 

S\v ift. GuIliver^s Travels (20). 

'Faylor (MiiAugws). Ctinfessions or a Thug (207). 

'Fhackeray. Henry Esmond (2S). 

Tolstoy. Translated by Louise and Aylmer Maude. Anna 
Karenina. 2 volumes (210, 21 1).^ Childhood. Boyhood, and 
Youth (352). 'Fhe Cossacks, &c. (208). Ivdn llych, and Hadji 
Murdd (432). The Kreutzer Sonata, (266). Resurrection, 
trails, by L. Maude (209). Twenty-three I'ales (72). War and 
Peace. 3 volumes (233-5). 

Trollope. American Senator (3*91). Ayala’s Angel (342). Bar- 
chester Towers (208). 'i'hc Belton EstBte(25 1). TheClavcnngs 
(252). Cousfh Henry (343). Doctor ThornetzgS). Dr.Wortle’s 
School(3 17). The EiJstact1|I^jamonds(357). Framley Parsonage 
(305). The Kellys and (he 0 ‘ Kellys (341). Lady Anna (443). 
Last Chronicle of Barset. 2 vols. (3|>8,^9()). Miss Mackenzie 
(278). CTTfcv Farm. 2 vols. (^^23, 424).^Phincas Finn. 2 vols. 
(.^47,448). PhineasRcdu.K. 2 Vols. (450, 45 1). Rachel Ray (279). 
Sir Harry Hotspur ( 33 ^* 'Pales ot all Countries (397). The 
Three Clerks (140), The Warden (217)9 The Vicar of 
Bullhampton (272). 

Watts-Dunton (Theodore). Ayhvin (52). 

Wharton (F.dith). ’Phe I louse of Mirth. With a new Introduc- 
tion by the Authoi»(4J7). 

12 ‘THE WORLD'I CLAisiC^’. 

Hombr. Translated by /’optf. Ihad (iS;. Oclvssey (;^). 

Hood. Poems. Introduction by (87). * 

Ibsen. Peer Gynt. Tr^slated by R. Bilis mberts (446). 

Keats. Poems (7). ^ 

Keble.* The Christian Year (181). ^ 

Longfellow. Hiawatha, Miles Standish, Tales of a Wayside 
ITin, &c. (174). ^ ^ / 

Macaulay. Lays of Ancient Romfi; Ivry : Tjfe Armada (27). 
Marlo^i*. Dr. Faustus (with goetwi-'s Faust, Fart I, trans. 

J. Anster), Introduction by .Sir A, W, Ward (135). 

Mil 5 r^. The English Poems (i8|). ' 

Morris (William). The Defence of Guenevdid, Life and Death 
of Jaion, and other Poems (183). 

Narrative Verse, A Hook of. Compiled by \\ H, Collins, 
With an Introduction by Edmund Blimden (350). 

Nekrassov. Trans, by Juliet Soskice, iVho 'can be*happy and free 
in Russia ? A Poem (213). Poems (340). 

Palgrave. The Golden Treasury. With additional Poems (133). 
Rosseiti (Christina). Goblin Market, &c. (184). 

Scott (Sir Walter). Selected Poems (186). 

Scottish Verse, A Booft of. Compiled by R, L, Marktc (417)- 
Shakespeare. Plays and Poems. Preface by A, C. Sivinburtic, 
Introductions by Edtvard Doteden, g volumes. Comedies. 3 
volumes (100, loi, 102). Histories and Poems. 3 volumes 
(103, 104, 105). Tragedies. 3 volumes (106, 107, 108). 
Shelley. Poems. A Selection (187). 

Tennyson. Selected Poems. Httro. by^/r (3). 
Virgil. The Aencid, Georgies, a\id Eclogues. I’ranslated by 
Dryden (37). Translated by James Rhoades C22y). 

Wells (Charles). Joseph and his Brethren. A Dramatic Poem. 

Intro, by A. C. Suinburne, and Note by T, Watts-Duntoni 143). 
Whitman. A Selection. Ir^roduction by E,de Selincourt (218), 
W^HiTTiER. Poems: A Selection (188). 

Wordsworth, Poems: A Selection (189). . 

f Politics^ Political Economy, Political Theory 

Bagehot (Walter). The English Constitution. With an Intro- 
duction by the Earl of BalJ our (330). « 

Buckle. I’he History of Civiiizati<m. 3 volumes (41, 48, 53), 
Burke (Edmund). Letters. ScIcctCd, with an Introduction, by 
Harold J, Laski (237). Works. 6 volumes. 1 : A Vindica- 
tion of Natural Socif*ly*^Thc Sublime and Bcauti/»d. &c, (71). 
II: The Present Discontents jr and Speeches and Letters on 
America (8 1 ). HI : Speeches on Ind^a, &c. (1 x i). IV: Waitings 
on F*rance, 1^90-1 (i 12). V: Writings on Ireland, &c.(i 13). VI: 
^ LcttertoaiNoblc Lord; and Letters on a Regicide Peace (114). 
’EV'^lish Speeches, frdn burke to glad.stone. Selected and 
edited by E, R. Jones (i 01) • 

Macaulay. Speeches. Selected, with Introduction and footnotes, 
by G, M. Young ( 433 )* ' ' 

JpVli^cs, Aligion, etc. 13 

MachiaveJ.li. llh^rioce (43;. 

Maine (Sy HenHyI ifecicnt Law (362). 

Mill Stuar’S. <Jn Liberty, Repiescntativc Government, 
and the Subjectiop of Women (170). 

Milton(John). Selected Prose. Inivo, Malcolm WAVallace^z^i). 
RusKiN. *AJt)y for Ever*, and The Two Paths, Illustrated (1^7). 
Time and TWe, and Th^Crown of Wild Olive (146). Unto 
this Last, and^unera PuReris (148). 

Smith (Ada^!). The Welfth of Nations. 2 volumes (ff, 59). 
Speeches and Documents on British Colonial Policy (^63- 
1917). Ed. Kiitfu volumes (215, 216). 

Speeches and Dootments on the British Dominions, x^ifll^3i. 

Selected, with Introduction, by A, B. Keith (403). ^ 

Speeches and -Documents on Indian Policy (1756-1921), 
Edited, w'ith Introduction, by A. B, Keith (231, 232). 
Speeches on British Foreign Policy (1738-1914). Edited by 
Edfiar R, Jones ^ M.P, (201). 

Tolstoy. What then must we do ? Translated, with an Intro- 
duction, by Avlmer Maude (281). 

Tracts and Pamphlets, A Miscellany^f. Sixteenth to Ninc- 
.teenth Centuriea. Edited by A. C. Ivard (304). 

Religion 

The (.)ld THi)TAMENT. Revised Version. 4 vols. (385-8), 
Apocrypha, 1 he, in the Revised Version (294). 

The Four Gospels, and the A#ts of the Apostles. Authorized 
Version (.344). 

The New TESTAtiENT.^^evised Version (346), 

A Kempis (Th(>mas). Uf the Imitation of Christ (49), 

Aurelius (Marcus). Translated by John Jackson (60). 

Bunyan. The I*ili^rim’s Progress (12^). Mr. Badman (338), 
Confucius. I he Analects. Trans. by^F. E, SoothilL Introduction 
by Lady Hosie (4.42). 

Koran, The. Translated by E, H, Palmer. Introduction by 
Reynold A, Nicholson (328). 

Tolstoy. Translated by Ayln\fr Maude, A Confession, and 
Whar I believe (229). On I.ife, frnd Essays on Religion (426), 
The Kingdej^n of God, and Peace Essays (445). 

*|[ Short Stories 

Africa, Stories of. Chosen by E. C. Parnwell (359), 

Au-strian ^l^ioRT Stories, SeiecteiS an|| translated by MarU 
Busch (337). 

Crime and Detection. 'Jwo Scries (301, 351), Stories by h, c, 

BAILEY, ERNEST BRAMAH, O, K. CHESTERTON, SIR A^ CONAN DOYLE, 
R. AUSTIN FREEMAN, W. VV, JACOBS, EDEN PHILPOTTS, ‘ SAPPER* 
DOROTHY SAYi’RS, and Others. . % 

Czech Tales, Selected. Tran.slated by Maris Busch and OUo 
Pick (288). Nine stories, including two by the brothers 

CAPEU. 

i6 INDEX OF 

Keats. 12. 

Keble (John), 12. 

Keith (A. ihh 13. 

Kingsley (Henry), g. 

Koran, Mhc, 13. 

Lamb (Charles), 7. 

Lar Motte Fouqu^, g. 

Landor (W. S.), 7, 

. Lc Fanu (J. S.), g. 

* Lesage) g. 

Lot^'cllow (H. W.), 12. 

“"ivijxauniy \T. B.), 10, 12. 
Machh'velli, 13. 

Maine, .Ur Henry, 13- 
Marcus Aurelius, xi, 13. 
Marlowe (Christopher), 6, 12. 
Marryat (Captain), 9. 

Massinger, 6. 

Maude (Aylmer). 3,5. 

Meinhold (F W.). 9. 

Melville (Herman), 9, 14. 

Mill (John Stuart). 5, 13.. 
Milton (John), 7, 12. 

Montaigne. 7. 

More (Paul Elmer), 10. 

Moricr (J. J.), 9^14 
Morris (W.), la. 

Morton. 6. 

Motley (J. L.), lo. 

Murphy, 6. 

Narrative Verse, 4. t2. 
Nckrassov, 12, 

New Testament, 13, 

Old Testament, 13. 

Otway, 6. 

Palgrave (F. T.), 4, 

Pamphlets and Tracts, 4. 
Peacock ( 1 \ L,), 9. 

Peacock (W.), 4. 

Persian (From the), 14. 

Poe (Ed^ar Allan), 14. 

Polish '1 ales, 14, • 

Prescott (W. H.), 10. 
Pre-Shakespearean Comedies, 6. 

Rabelais, 3, o. 

Heading at Handom, 4. r 

Redman (B. R.), 4- ** 

Restoration 'I ragedics, 6. 
Reynolds (Frederick), 6 

Reynolds rf-^ii . Joshua. , 7. 
Ro8s«ti ((rhristina), 

RowC 6. * J 
Ruskin (J< hn), 7, 13. 
Russian Short Stones, 14. 
R’^thciford (Mark), 7. 

•Saintc-Bcuve, , \'o. 

wcott (Sir W.h 5, 9, 12, 14. 

Scottish Verse, 

Shakespeare, 6, 12. 

Shakespeare Criticism 10. 
’Shakespeare"! ■’ Predecessors anJ 
Contemporaries, 6. 

Shelley, 12. 

Sheridan (R. B.), 6. 

Smith (Adam). 13* 

Smith (Alexander), 7- 
Smollett (T.), 7, 9, 14. 

Sophocles, 5. 

Souiherre. 6. 

Southey (Robert), 10. 

South Seas, Short Stories of, 14. 
Spanish Short Stories, 14. 

Steele, 6. 

Sterne (Laurence), 7, 0, 14. 
Stevenson (R. L.), 7, 9. 

Sturgis, 9. 

Swift (Jonathan), 9, 

Taylor (Meadows), 9. 
'^^fennyson (Lord). 12. 
Thact^ray (W. M.), 9* 

Thorcau (H. D.), 7* 

Three Dervishes, 'Fhc, 14. 
Tolstoy, 3, 5,6, 7,9. II, 13. T 4 - 
Tracts and f^amphlets, 4, 8. 
Trevelyan, 5. 

Trollope (Anthony), 3 » 5 . 9 » M- 

Virgil, 5, 12. 

Walton (Izaak), 5, 8. 

Walts- Dunton (’I'hcodore), g, 
Webster, 6. 

W^clls (Charles), t2. 

V;eUs (H. G.). 4. 

Wharton (Edith), 9. 

White (Gilbert), 8,10. 
Whitman (Walt), Vecz. 
Wliittier (J. G.) 12. 
Weedtworth (William), la. 

Further Volumes are in preparation* 

December 1936 

tM C.*PAT BRlTAtH