THE ESSENTIAL HU AIN ANZI 

TRANSLATIONS FROM THE ASIAN CLASSICS 

TRANSLATIONS FROM THE ASIAN CLASSICS 

Editorial Board 

Wm. Theodore de Bary, Chair 

Paul Anderer 

Donald Keene 

George A. Saliba 

Wei Shang 

Haruo Shirane 

Burton Watson 

THE ESSENTIAL 

Huainanzi 

Liu An, King of Huainan 

TRANSLATED, EDITED, AND SELECTED BY 

John S. Major - Sarah A. Queen - 
Andrew Seth Meyer -Harold D. Roth 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS • NEW YORK 

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Publishers Since 1893 

New York Chichester, West Sussex 

cup.columbia.edu 

Copyright © 2012 Columbia University Press 
All rights reserved 
E-ISBN 978-0-231-50145-3 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Huainan zi. English. Selections. 

The essential Huainanzi / Liu An, King of Huainan ; translated, edited, and 
selected by John S. Major ... [et al.]. 

p. cm. — (Translations from the Asian classics) 

Includes bibliographical references (p.) and index. 

ISBN 978-0-231-15980-7 (cloth : alk. paper) 

ISBN 978-0-231-15981-4 (pbk. : alk. paper) 

ISBN 978-0-231-50145-3 (e-book) 

I. Liu, An, 179-122 B.C. II. Major, John S. III. Title. 

BL1900.H824E5 2012 
320.01—dc23 

2011033920 

A Columbia University Press E-book. 

CUP would be pleased to hear about your reading experience with this e-book at 
cup -ebook@columbia. edu . 

CONTENTS 

Sketch of Early Chinese History, with Special Reference to 

the Huain anzi 

Introduction 

1. Originating in the Wav 

2. Activating the Genuine 

3. Celestial Patterns 

4. Terrestrial Forms 

5. Seasonal Rules 

6. Surveying- Obscurities 

7. Quintessential Spirit 

8. The Basic Warp 

9. The Ruler’s Techniques 

10. Profound Precepts 

11. Integrating Customs 

12. Responses of the Wav 

13. Boundless Discourses 

14. Savings Explained 

15. An Overview of the Military 

16. and 17. A Mountain of Persuasions and A Forest of 

Persuasions 

18. Among Others 

19. Cultivating Effort 

20. The Exalted Lineage 

21. An Overview of the Essentials 

Glossary of Personal Names 

Brief Bibliography 

Index 

Translations from the Asian Classics 

SKETCH OF EARLY CHINESE 

HISTORY. WITH SPECIAL 

REFERENCE TO THE HUAINANZI 

ca. 3500-2000 B.C.E.: Era of legendary sage-rulers 

Appearance of advanced Neolithic jade-working 
cultures in several parts of China; complex 
chieftainships develop into protostates. Hie supposed 
era of the Divine Farmer, the Yellow Emperor, and 
other mythical sage-rulers and culture heroes, 
ca. 1950-1550 B.C.E.: Xia dynasty 

Dynasty supposedly founded by the flood-tamer Yu 
the Great. Beginning of the Bronze Age, beginning of 
hereditary monarchy. Last ruler is Tyrant Jie. 
ca. 1550-1046 B.C.E.: Shang dynasty 

Founded by Tang the Victorious. High Bronze Age 
culture: elaborate tombs and worship of royal 
ancestors, divination by means of oracle bones, 
earliest Chinese writing. Last ruler is Tyrant Djou. 
1046-771 B.C.E.: Western Zhou dynasty 

Founded by Kings Wen and Wu, consolidated by the 
Duke of Zhou. China is divided into numerous states 
ruled by aristocrats owing ritual and military support 

to the Zhou kings. 

722-481 B.C.E.: Spring and Autumn period 

Named for a chronicle kept by the dukes of Lu. 
Decline of Zhou royal power, emergence of large, 
powerful states and the ba “hegemon” system. 
Lifetime of Confucius (551-479 B.C.E.). 

481-221 B.C.E.: Warring States period 

Constant interstate warfare. Emergence of shi 
“knights” as a key social class. Numerous political 
thinkers debate ways to create an orderly, safe, and 
wellgoverned society. 

221-206 B.C.E.: Qin dynasty 

Last Zhou king dies in 256 B.C.E. State of Qin begins 
campaign to conquer remaining warring states and 
consolidate their territory into a single empire. 
Campaign succeeds in 221; ruler takes the title First 
Emperor of Qin. Ambitious but overreaching 
centralization of power. First Emperor dies in 210; 
Qin state collapses in 206. 

206 B.C.E.-7 C.E.: Western (or Former) Han dynasty 

206 B.C.E.: Liu Bang proclaims himself king of Han; 
takes title of emperor in 202. Liu Chang becomes 
first king of Huainan in 196. 

195-188 B.C.E.: Emperor Hui. 

188-180 B.C.E.: Interregnum of Empress Dowager 
Lii. 

180-157 B.C.E.: Emperor Wen. Liu Chang dies in 
174; kingdom of Huainan temporarily abolished. Liu 
An becomes second king of Huainan in 164. 

157-141 B.C.E.: Emperor Jing. Kingdom of Huainan 
becomes a center of learning. 

141-87 B.C.E.: Emperor Wu. Huainanzi presented to 
emperor in 139 B.C.E. Liu An dies and kingdom of 
Huainan ends in 122 B.C.E. 

THE ESSENTIAL HU AIN ANZI 

INTRODUCTION 

The Huainanzi (The Master of Huainan) is a compendium 
of knowledge dating from early in China’s Han dynasty 
(206 B.C.E.-220 C.E.). It was compiled under the auspices 
of, and probably with the active participation of, Liu An 
(1797-122 B.C.E.), the king of Huainan. Liu An was an 
influential member of the imperial family who ruled a 
sizable kingdom within the Han Empire. He also was known 
as an essayist, critic, poet, and patron of learning. 

The Huainanzi was completed and presented to the 
imperial throne in 139 B.C.E. Its twenty-one chapters 
contain a comprehensive survey of contemporary 
knowledge, from self-cultivation techniques to the arts of 
rulership and from cosmology and geography to public 
speaking, military affairs, and the importance of education. 
The book’s final chapter summarizes the entire work and 
claims that it synthesizes the best features of all other 
schools of thought, thereby creating a compact yet 
comprehensive distillation of all knowledge necessary for 
ruling the empire. For readers today, it opens a fascinating 
window into the intellectual and political life of China in 
the second century B.C.E. 

Historical Background 

For much of the first millennium B.C.E., China was divided 
into a large number of states ruled by members of a 
hereditary aristocracy. Those rulers were nominally subject 
to the authority of the kings of the Zhou dynasty (1046- 
256), but after the eighth century B.C.E. the power of the 
Zhou kings waned, and they had little control over state 
affairs. For a time, during the Spring and Autumn period 
(722-481), the state rulers themselves tried to keep order, 
recognizing a succession of first-among-equals strongmen 
called ba (hegemons) who exercised authority on behalf of 
the Zhou kings. But that system eventually broke down, and 
during the Warring States period (481-221), the states 
grew larger and more powerful but fewer in number as the 
larger states conquered and absorbed their smaller 
neighbors. Warfare and treachery were commonplace, and 
philosophers and political theorists had only moderate 
success devising systems of rulership that would restore 
order once again. 

In the mid-third century B.C.E., just as the enfeebled 
Zhou dynasty was coming to an end, the king of the state of 
Qin embarked on a conscious program of conquest, 
intended to defeat the other states and bring all of China 
under his own dominion. Abolishing hereditary offices, the 
king instituted a merit-based bureaucracy in the state of 
Qin and mobilized the whole population for the twin 
purposes of agriculture and war. His campaign was 

successful, and the last of the Zhou-era states submitted to 
Qin in 221 B.C.E. Taking the newly coined title Qin 
Shihuangdi (First Emperor of Qin), he extended his strict 
laws and bureaucratic government throughout the country. 
Fie then embarked on an ambitious—and, as it proved to be, 
overly ambitious—program of public works: building 
roads, canals, a section of the Great Wall, and his own huge, 
magnificent tomb. When the First Emperor died in 210, the 
country erupted in rebellion and civil war, and the Qin 
dynasty collapsed. The causes of that collapse were 
complex, but the explanation widely accepted at the time 
emphasized the populace’s resentment of the burden of 
taxes and labor service placed on them, as well as the 
regime’s policy of inflicting severe punishments for even 
petty crimes. 

The principle of a united China endured, however, after 
some initial backtracking. In 206 B.C.E., the rebel chieftain 
Liu Bang proclaimed himself king of Han, and four years 
later, having defeated the last of his rivals, he assumed the 
title of emperor. Having come to power, he had to decide 
what his new government would look like and to what 
extent it would reflect the centralizing tendencies of Qin. 
Initially the new emperor instituted a hybrid system, 
keeping most of western China under direct imperial 
control and dividing the lands in the rich eastern parts of 
the country into kingdoms, semiautonomous realms that 

were handed over to the emperor’s important allies and 
relatives. At the time, this would have been seen as a 
perfectly normal policy, sanctified by centuries of use. 
Soon, however, the Han dynasty found itself involved in a 
generations-long struggle to define the proper relationship 
between the imperial government and the neofeudal 
kingdoms. Rebellions and plots against the imperial throne 
by various regional kings were brutally suppressed in 196, 
174, and 154 B.C.E. Some scholars suggest that at least 
some of these ‘Rebellions” were provoked, and perhaps 
fabricated, by imperial authorities as a way of eliminating 
the regional kings and bringing their territory under 
imperial control. 

Liu An, the patron and editor of the Huainanzi, was a 
grandson of the Han dynasty’s founder, Liu Bang. Liu An’s 
father, Liu Chang, had been established as king of Huainan 
in 196 B.C.E., when he was still an infant. (Tire name of the 
kingdom means “south of the Huai River.” At its largest 
extent, it encompassed the present-day Anhui and Jiangxi 
provinces and some adjacent territories.) In 174, the 
youthful Liu Chang was accused of rebellion and died on 
the road to exile. Although the kingdom of Huainan was 
temporarily abolished, it was reestablished (with much less 
territory) in 164, when Liu An, still in his teens, was named 
the second king of Huainan. He grew up to be a talented and 
ambitious monarch whose royal palace became a magnet 

for writers and intellectuals. At some point, Liu An began 
working with some of his guest-scholars to produce a book 
that would synthesize the best points of all schools of 
thought and provide infallible guidance on how a 
government should be run. That book is what we now know 
as the Huainanzi. 

The fourth Han sovereign, Emperor Jing (r. 157-141 
B.C.E.), also was a grandson of the founder and thus was 
Liu An’s cousin. Much of the Huainanzi was compiled 
during Emperor Jing’s reign, and it is quite possible that the 
writing of this manifesto for imperial government reflected 
Liu An’s hope that he might succeed his cousin as emperor. 
(Unlike later European monarchies, Chinese dynasties did 
not always pass down the throne to the eldest son of the 
late ruler; succession could also run from brother to 
brother, cousin to cousin, and so on.) That did not happen, 
however. Instead, a teenage son of Emperor Jing, Liu Che, 
mounted the throne. Known to posterity as Emperor Wu 
(the Martial Emperor), he reigned from 141 to 87 B.C.E., 
winning a reputation as the Han dynasty’s longest-ruling and 
most successful emperor. 

Having been passed over in the imperial succession, Liu 
An tried to find another outlet for Iris ambitions. In 139 
B.C.E., he traveled to the Han capital at Chang’an and 
presented his treatise on good government, the Huainanzi, 
to the imperial throne. He evidently intended to establish 

himself as a trusted elder cousin (in effect, an honorary 
uncle) and personal adviser to the young emperor. Records 
tell us that Emperor Wu was “delighted” with the book, but 
Liu An himself failed to gain much influence at court. He 
returned to Huainan and in 122 was accused of harboring 
imperial ambitions. He committed suicide rather than face 
prosecution, the kingdom of Huainan was abolished, and 
Liu An’s extensive library and other personal possessions 
were confiscated by the throne. Even though Liu An died in 
disgrace, the Huainanzi lived on. It never achieved 
canonical status (it was not, for example, part of the 
curriculum of studying for the imperial civil service 
examinations), but the Huainanzi endured through the 
centuries, attracting the attention of numerous 
commentators and intellectuals for the inherent interest of 
its ideas, the beauty of its prose, and its comprehensive 
approach to understanding the cosmos and the place of 
humans in it. 

The Huainanzi 

Hie Huainanzi consists of twenty-one chapters. Hie final 
chapter, “An Overview of the Essentials,” summarizes and 
characterizes the entire work. Written in an elaborate style 
of prose-poetry, that chapter probably was recited orally at 
the imperial court when Liu An presented the book to 
Emperor Wu. Hie “Overview” claims that the book’s twenty 

substantive chapters encompass the best features of all 
earlier thinkers and thus supersede them. Moreover, the 
chapters leave out nothing of importance and so constitute 
a complete, unique, and infallible guide to the policies that 
should be followed by the imperial clan in governing the 
empire. The book envisions an emperor who has undergone 
rigorous training in the techniques of self-cultivation, 
leading to a state of sagehood (that is, being perfectly 
aligned with the basic forces of the cosmos); who has been 
comprehensively educated in history, statesmanship, 
rhetoric, and other necessary qualities; and who rules 
through loyal ministers and reliable bureaucrats, supported 
by the Lords of the Land—hereditary aristocrats like Liu 
An himself. It envisions an imperial establishment that is 
adaptable to changing times but preserves the best features 
of the past. Liu An’s vision of empire reflected his own 
position and his own self-interest. In the end, though, that 
vision was overtaken by the imperial regime’s centralizing 
tendencies and by an imperial ideology that differed 
significantly from Liu An’s intellectual program. Yet some 
of its basic ideas remained influential, including the notion 
that the emperor should have the qualities of a sage and that 
his rule should be so attuned to cosmic forces and cycles 
as to seem effortless. 

Sources and Claims 

In the early Han period, Liu An’s Huainanzi became part of 
a lively, energetic, sometimes acrimonious multipart 
conversation among scholars and administrators about the 
nature of the cosmos, the role of humans in it, the structure 
and function of government, and other fundamental issues. 
Some intellectuals of the time took the position that a 
single text—for example, the Spring and Autumn Annals 
(Chunqiu ) or one of its principal commentaries or the 
Changes (Yijing or Zhouyi) —constituted a complete and 
infallible (if properly interpreted) source of all knowledge 
and wisdom. Others advocated a doctrine (imperfectly 
understood today and still debated by scholars) known as 
Huang-Lao that supposedly combined the teachings of 
Laozi (that is, the Daodejing) and the Yellow Emperor. 
Others, like Liu An, advocated drawing on a diverse menu 
of texts to formulate a syncretic doctrine. Earlier works of 
this type, such as the Mr. Lii s Spring and Autumn Annals 
(Liishi chunqiu), directly influenced the Huainanzi. In 
turn, the Huainanzi makes the extraordinary claim that it 
distills and encompasses all essential knowledge, thus 
rendering all earlier books superfluous and making it 
unnecessary to compose any more new ones. Not 
surprisingly, that claim was not widely endorsed by 
contemporaries. Still, the Huainanzi offers a very wide- 
ranging and informative look at the intellectual currents in 
the early Han. 

Root and Branch 

The central organizing metaphor of the Huainanzi is the 
concept of roots and branches—in other words, that certain 
ideas, concepts, institutions, and texts are fundamental, 
while others are derivative or peripheral. Put another way, 
the roots are associated with principles and the Way, and 
the branches are associated with “affairs,” or actualizations 
of the principles of the Way. Hie first eight chapters of the 
work are ‘foot” chapters; the next twelve deal with “branch” 
issues; and the last summarizes and makes claims for the 
work as a whole. Hie root chapters build on one another to 
create a framework for the branch chapters that follow. 

Chapter 1 deals with the Way ( dao ), the indivisible 
monad that is both the universal source of all tilings and the 
all-encompassing totality of everything. 

Chapter 2 describes how individual humans can align 
themselves with the Way to achieve extraordinary states of 
accomplishment such as the Genuine or the Perfected. 

Chapters 3 . 4, and 5 form a cosmological trilogy of 
chapters that examine, respectively, astronomy and 
astrology, geography (both real and mythical) and the 
interactions of topography and living beings, and the 
calendar and the appropriate rituals and emblems for every 
month and season. These three chapters correspond 
structurally to the familiar triad in early Chinese thought— 
Heaven, Earth, and Man—in the order in which they emerge 

from the cosmic root. 

Chapter 6 introduces the concept of resonance, the idea 
that every stimulus evokes a response conveyed through the 
medium of qi. hi principle, these stimuli and responses 
should be comprehensible through an understanding of 
cosmic regularities, but the chapter admits that in practice 
many of them remain mysterious. 

Chapter 7 covers the theory and techniques of personal 
self-cultivation, fundamental to success as a ruler (political 
and administrative techniques of rulership are considered 
“branch” phenomena). 

Chapter 8 articulates a theory of history that sees 
humans progressing from a ‘foot” state of primitive 
communitarianism, associated with the Way and its 
Potency, through successively elaborate forms of culture 
associated with “branch” virtues such as Humaneness and 
Rightness, down to the present day when laws and 
punishments have become necessary for government. The 
self-cultivated ruler is urged to adhere to the root while 
making properly expedient use of branch techniques. 

Chapters 9 through 20 describe various branch 
phenomena, including rulership and administration (9), the 
relationship between government and moral values (TO), 
customs and ritual (11), qualities of the ideal ruler (12), the 
concept of change in historical context (13), proverbial 
wisdom (14), the military (15), rhetoric (16 and 17), the 

vagaries of human affairs (18), the necessity of education 
and personal effort (19), and Moral Potency as the 
foundation of government (20). Obviously the 
classification of these matters as branch phenomena does 
not imply that they are unimportant, only that they are 
derived from fundamental principles, rather than being 
fundamental in their own right. 

Key Concepts in the Huainanzi 

Hie Way ( dao ) is the source of everything in the universe 
and embraces all things in their totality. Nothing can exist 
apart from or in contrast to the Way; the Way cannot be 
negated. Even the term itself is provisional. In fact, the Way 
is not namable because to name it would be to differentiate 
it from something else. (As the opening line of the Laozi 
famously puts it, “The Way that can be called ‘Tlie Way’ is 
not the everlasting Way.”) According to the Huainanzi, the 
key to success in all human activities is that they be attuned 
to the Way. Hie term also can be used to denote a specific 
doctrine, teaching, or technique (for example, “the Way of 
charioteering”). 

Potency (tie) is the activation of the Way in the 
phenomenal world. Hie word de is etymologically related 
to another word (also pronounced de) that means “to 
obtain,” so potency has the connotation of “to accumulate.” 
For example, during the spring and summer, the potency of 

yang accumulates while the potency of yin reciprocally 
diminishes. But in autumn and winter, yin’s potency 
accumulates while yang’s potency diminishes. The sage- 
ruler accumulates potency, allowing him to bestow rewards 
on the deserving. Therefore, de also has the sense of 
“reward” or “benefit.” When the term occurs in the 
Huainanzi in contexts that are clearly Confucian in 
orientation (for example, in regard to such virtues as 
Humaneness and Rightness), we translate it as “Moral 
Potency.” (Older, and in our view less apt, translations of 
this difficult word include “power” and “virtue.”) 

Qi means both “matter” and “energy.” Everything that 
exists is made of qi, and every action is a manifestation of 
qi energy. Qi comes in various textures, from the most 
ethereal and refined to the coarse and lumpish. Ethereal qi 
is heavenly, and coarse qi is earthly. Spirits are made of 
highly refined qi, but ordinary physical matter is made of 
coarse qi. Highly refined states of consciousness such as 
tranquillity and clarity are manifestations of ethereal qi. Qi 
consequently serves as a vibrating, resonant medium that 
conveys responses to stimuli. In medical and self- 
cultivation contexts, qi means “vital energy” or “vital 
breath,” the animating principle of a living body. Tire 
principal aims of various techniques of self-cultivation are 
to refine the body’s qi, to attain deep states of insight, and 
to control and direct the flow of energy within the body. 

Wu and you are paired antonyms that mean “to be 
without” and “to have,” ‘Nonexistence” and “existence,” 
‘Nothing” and “something.” We live in the world of 
“something,” but ‘Nothing” is both temporally and 
conceptually prior to “something.” Wu contains myriad 
potentialities, but you is reduced to a single instantiation. 
For that reason, the Huainanzi (like the Daoist classics the 
Laozi and the Zhuangzi ) exhibits a strong preference for 
wu over you. 

In the Huainanzi' s cosmology, the primal unity of the 
undifferentiated Way divides into yin and yang, two 
reciprocal forces that are in a constant state of motion and 
transformation. Yin and yang are complementary rather 
than antagonistic. Urey are paired opposites, each 
containing the germ of, and ultimately evolving to become, 
the other. Yin is dark, female, moist, low-lying, cool, 
oviparous, and winter; and yang correspondingly is bright, 
male, dry, high, warm, viviparous, and summer. Unlike 
some other Han texts, the Huainanzi does not 
conspicuously privilege yang over yin but regards both as 
cosmic forces necessary for the universe to function. 

Tire Five Phases (mixing ) represent the five 
paradigmatic manifestations of qi: Wood, Fire, Earth, 
Metal, and Water. (Tire term wuxing is sometimes 
translated as ‘five elements,” but this is misleading because 
the five are paradigms, not constituents, of physical 

phenomena.) The five are “phases” of qi in the same sense 
that steam, liquid water, and ice are “phases” of H 2 0. All 
phenomena can be classified as belonging to one or another 
of the Five Phases, as well as being yin or yang. 

Resonance (ganying ) refers to the ability of a stimulus 
to evoke a response through the vibrating medium of qi, 
even in the absence of a perceptible physical connection 
between the two. The classic example is that if the “C” 
string of one musical instrument is plucked, the “C” string 
of a nearby instrument will vibrate. Chapter 6 of the 
Huainanzi describes resonance as being both crucial to the 
workings of the cosmos and deeply mysterious and hard to 
fathom. 

Nature (xing) is the quality that makes a thing itself, the 
attributes that are present from birth in a living creature. 
“Nature” is often contrasted with deliberate human 
undertakings, so it is said that to run and kick is the nature 
of a horse, while to control a horse with bit and reins is to 
impose human will on the animal. 

Self-cultivation (yang shen) refers to a variety of 
meditative techniques and disciplines aimed at refining and 
controlling one’s store of vital energy to attain a state of 
authenticity that is a manifestation of “quintessential spirit” 
(jingshen). These are collectively referred to as “the 
techniques of the mind.” The results of successful self- 
cultivation are described with a variety of terms denoting 

superior attainments: both the Superior Man ( junzi ) and the 
Sage ( sheng ) are regarded as active participants in the 
human realm of affairs, while the Genuine ( zhenren ) and 
the Perfected ( zhiren ) are mysterious, self-sufficient 
beings beyond the reach of ordinary concerns. One 
consequence of self-cultivation can be the achievement of 
“spirit-illumination” (or “spiritlike illumination”), an 
ability to see deeply into matters hidden from the 
perception of ordinary humans. 

Wu wei literally means “without acting.” In the 
Huainanzi, it generally does not refer to a state of utter 
inaction but to the ability of a person (especially a ruler) to 
be so attuned to the Way and therefore so filled with 
Potency that his desires are translated into reality without 
any visible effort on his part. Things that occur through wu 
wei appear to come about “naturally” or “spontaneously” 
(ziran [thus of itself]). 

Transformation (him ) is the most profound of several 
terms for change (“change,” “alteration,” “shift,” and so on) 
in the Huainanzi. A sage-ruler is able to “transform the 
people” by projecting his Potency in such a way as to evoke 
a spontaneous positive response in the natures of the 
people in his realm. 

Humaneness ( ren ), Rightness (yi), Ritual (//), and 
Music (yue) are virtues and social phenomena associated 
especially with the teachings of Confucius and his 

followers. In the Huainanzi, these are taken to be valuable, 
indeed essential, qualities of a well-governed society in the 
conditions that obtain in the present day. But they are 
derived, rather than fundamental, qualities (“branches” 
rather than ‘foots”). Thus government conducted by means 
of these virtues is inferior in principle to the primitive 
harmony brought about by the sages of antiquity, who, being 
perfectly attuned to the Way, transformed the people by 
means of non-action. 

Sources of the Huainanzi 

True to its stated claim to draw on the best ideas of all 
previous thinkers and texts, the Huainanzi quotes, 
paraphrases, alludes to, and echoes a very wide range of 
earlier materials. It treats four texts as canonical; that is, it 
usually quotes them by name and regards them as 
authoritative in affirming or ratifying a position. These four 
are the Laozi, the Odes, the Changes, and the Documents. 
The Huainanzi also draws heavily on many other texts but 
seldom or never refers to them by title. 

Chapter 1 of the Huainanzi is heavily based on the 
Laozi, which therefore can be said to form the root of the 
work’s root chapters. Interestingly, the Laozi is not 
referred to by name in Huainanzi 1. Instead, it appears that 
the authors of the opening chapter of the Huainanzi 
assumed that its readers were thoroughly familiar with its 

source text. But the Laozi is quoted extensively by name in 
Huainanzi 12 and in many other chapters of the text. 

The Odes (a collection of some three hundred poems 
comprising liturgical hymns, dynastic legends, folk songs, 
and other genres), the Changes (a divination text consulted 
for aid in making decisions), and the Documents (a 
collection of supposedly ancient historical documents of 
varying degrees of reliability) became closely associated 
with the Confucian tradition during the Han dynasty. Tire 
Huainanzi quotes these texts, usually by name, most often 
in the “branch” chapters of the text and only seldom in the 
“root” chapters. This is consistent with the Huainanzi’ s 
position that the Confucian virtues, like Humaneness, 
Rightness, Propriety, and Music, are derived properties of 
the Way. 

Tire Huainanzi also draws extensively on the Zhuangzi 
(the second great work, along with the Laozi, of pre-Han 
Daoism), which forms the philosophical basis for 
Huainanzi 2 and 7 and is often alluded to (but not usually 
cited by name) in other chapters, both ‘foot” and “branch.” 
Several Huainanzi chapters allude to the Hanfeizi (which 
argues for hard-nosed political centralism and 
performance-based rewards and punishments to achieve 
political goals), the Xunzi (a work in the Confucian 
tradition that advocates a pragmatic approach to political 
and administrative issues and places great emphasis on the 

need for education and moral cultivation), and the Guanzi 
(itself a highly eclectic work dealing with government 
administration, cosmology, self-cultivation, and other 
matters). The Huainanzi also draws on, or at least shares 
material with, earlier syncretic texts such as the Shizi 
(.Master Shi ) and the Liishi chunqiu. 

Individual chapters of the Huainanzi can often be 
associated with particular source texts. Huainanzi 3 
borrows from astronomical and cosmological texts like the 
‘Tian wen” (Questions About Heaven) section of the poetic 
anthology Chuci (Elegies of Chu). Huainanzi 4 has much 
in common with the Shanhaijing (Classic of Mountains 
and Seas), an account of real and mythical geography 
within and beyond the borders of China. Much of 
Huainanzi 5 quotes from (or shares a source text with) the 
Liishi chunqiu, while Huainanzi 15 draws on a rich 
tradition of pre-Han military texts such as the Sunzi bingf 'a 
(Master Sun’s Arts of War). In addition, portions of the 
Huainanzi apparently quote from or are based on earlier 
texts that have been lost and are now unknown or known 
only by title. For example, several sections of Huainanzi 3 
quote verbatim from a short work known as the “Wuxing 
zhan” (Stations of the Five Planets), a previously unknown 
text archaeologically recovered at Mawangdui, Changsha, 
in Hunan Province, in 1973. Probably many other passages 
in the Huainanzi are quoted from lost and now untraceable 

sources. 

The fact that much of the Huainanzi is taken from 
earlier sources does not mean, however, that the text is 
simply a grab bag of recycled materials. Tire genius of Liu 
An and his court scholars was precisely that, drawing on 
early China’s rich textual tradition and creating new 
material as needed, they formulated a comprehensive and 
persuasive view of the world and how it should be ruled by 
a sagelike, cultivated, and morally potent sovereign. 

About This Book 

The Essential Huainanzi is an abridgment of The 
Huainanzi: A Guide to the Theory and Practice oj 
Government in Early Han China, the first complete 
English translation of Liu An’s great work. Although about 
20 to 30 percent of each chapter is included in this 
abridged volume, most of the ancillary features of the 
unabridged volume, such as the appendices explaining 
technical terms and an extensive bibliographical essay, have 
been omitted. Our aim in this book is to create a highly 
readable condensation of the Huainanzi while making it 
easy to refer to the unabridged work for readers who wish 
to do so. A few, very inconspicuous corrections to the 
translation have been made in this abridged volume; 
otherwise, the corresponding material in the unabridged 
and abridged texts is identical. 

The introduction to each of the chapters of the abridged 
translation (except that to chapter 21 itself) begins by 
quoting the chapter summary from Huainanzi 21, “An 
Overview of the Essentials.” After this self-introductory 
passage, we briefly describe the content of the chapter, its 
sources, the significance of the chapter title, and the place 
of the chapter in the work as a whole. Considerably longer 
and more detailed chapter introductions may be found in 
the unabridged edition. 

Section numbers (not present in the original Chinese 
text of the Huainanzi) were added to the unabridged 
translation, both to reveal underlying structural features of 
the text and to facilitate references to the translation itself. 
The numbers of sections quoted in full or in part in this 
volume match the section numbers in the unabridged 
translation. 

We were careful to preserve in the formatting of our 
translations, in both the unabridged edition and this book, 
such formal characteristics as block prose, parallel prose 
(set line for line and indented), and verse (set line for line 
and indented even more). These features are important to 
appreciating the literary qualities of the text as well as the 
rhetorical force of its arguments. 

We omitted most of the footnotes in the abridged 
edition, except for the explanatory footnotes necessary for 
understanding special terms, historical anecdotes, and the 

like. Those readers who require such information can find 
footnotes explaining textual issues, cross-references, and 
other scholarly questions in the corresponding passages in 
the unabridged translation. 

The proper names of persons, identified in footnotes in 
the unabridged translation, are collected in a glossary at the 
end of this volume, to reduce further the distraction of 
numerous footnotes to the text. 

For readers who might wish to consult the Chinese text 
on which our translation is based, the unabridged 
translation is keyed by chapter, page, and line to D. C. Lau, 
A Concordance to the Huainanzi (Huainanzi zhuzi 
suoyin ) (Hong Kong: Commercial Press, 1992). 

We already have defined some of the key terms in the 
Huainanzi, but a fuller explanation of these and other 
terms may be found in two appendices in the unabridged 
translation volume: appendix A, ‘Key Chinese Terms and 
Their Translations,” and appendix B, “Categorical Terms.” 

In this book’s short bibliography, we mention two 
Chinese editions of the Huainanzi and a few key Western- 
language translations and studies. A more extensive 
bibliography of translations and studies, along with a brief 
account of the transmission and textual history of the 
Huainanzi, may be found in the unabridged translation 
volume, in appendix C, “A Concise Textual History of the 
Huainanzi and a Bibliography of Huainanzi Studies.” 

Further information about the historical background, the 
intellectual and political life of the early Han dynasty, the 
sources of the Huainanzi, the state of modern Huainanzi 
studies, and other related matters can found in the general 
introduction to the unabridged translation. Likewise, more 
detailed information on individual chapters can be found in 
the chapter introductions of that work. 

We gratefully acknowledge the contribution to the 
complete translation, and to this abridged volume, of two 
colleagues: Michael Puett, who participated in the 
translation of chapter 13 . and Judson Murray, who 
participated in the translation of chapter 21 . 

We hope that this abridged edition of the Huainanzi will 
be read with interest and pleasure and that it will stimulate 
some readers to explore further in the field of Huainanzi 
studies. 

One 

ORIGINATING IN THE WAY 

“Originating in the Way” 

[begins with] the six coordinates contracted and 
compressed 

and the myriad things chaotic and confused. 

[It then] diagrams the features of the Grand One 
and fathoms the depths of the Dark Unseen, 
thereby soaring beyond the frame of Empty 
Nothingness. 

By relying on the small, it embraces the great; 
by guarding the contracted, it orders the expansive. 

It enables you to understand 

the bad or good fortune of taking the lead or following 
behind 

and the benefit or harm of taking action or remaining 
still. 

If you sincerely comprehend its import, floodlike, you can 
achieve a grand vision. 

If you desire a single expression to awaken to it: 
“Revere the heavenly and preserve your genuineness.” 
If you desire a second expression to comprehend it: 

“Devalue things and honor your person.” 

If you desire a third expression to fathom it: 
“Externalize desires and return to your genuine 
dispositions.” 

If you grasp its main tenets, 

inwardly you will harmonize the Five Orbs 

and enrich the flesh and skin. 

If you adhere to its models and standards 
and partake of them to the end of your days, 
they will provide the means 

to respond and attend to the myriad aspects of the 
world 

and observe and accompany its manifold alterations, 
as if rolling a ball in the palm of your hand. 

Surely it will suffice to make you joyous! 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Originating in the Way” (Yuan dao), the first of the eight 
foundational or ‘foot” chapters of the text, is significant 
because it provides the cosmological basis for the entire 
Huainanzi collection. It opens with a beautiful poetic 
rhapsody on the cosmology of the Way (dao) and its 
Potency (de) in the tradition of the Laozi, certainly one of 
the canonical sources for this essay and for the book as a 
whole. In it we see a detailed examination of how these 
cosmic foundations are manifested in the world and an in- 
depth description of how sages are able to use their unique 

penetrating vision of these foundations, attained through 
self-cultivation, to bring peace and harmony to the realm. 
Coming at the beginning of the entire twenty-one-chapter 
book and presented to the court at a time when its 
compiler, Liu An, was trying to dissuade his nephew, 
Emperor Wu, from accepting the arguments of his 
Confucian (ru) advisers, this chapter serves a number of 
purposes. 

First, even though the chapter never directly affirms a 
particular intellectual affiliation, its cosmological, 
psychological, and political philosophy shows its 
indebtedness to the Laozi and some other important early 
Daoist sources on the relationship of cosmology and self- 
cultivation to rulership. Only such an ideal of rulership 
comprehends the inner workings of the cosmos and applies 
that wisdom to governing in harmony with them. Second, as 
the opening chapter of the collection, “Originating in the 
Way” sets out general themes that will be pursued in more 
detail in much of the remainder of the work, such as 
cosmology, human psychology and self-cultivation, and 
political philosophy. Its importance to understanding the 
entire book and seeing it in a clearer light cannot be 
overemphasized. 

Perhaps the most important focus of this chapter is on 
how the Way generates and infuses the innate natures of all 
things and guides their spontaneous interaction through a 

series of regular patterns such as the movements of the 
stars and planets and the structured flow of vital energies in 
the human being. Taken together, these natures and patterns 
form a ‘Normative natural order.” Sages accord with this 
order through a self-cultivation process that is described in 
this chapter. Its authors recommend practices that empty 
out consciousness to attain psychological states of 
tranquillity and freedom from self that, when they are 
applied to daily affairs, produce clear cognition, unbiased 
attitudes, and effortless action that yield a spontaneous 
harmony with the normative natural order. This cognitive 
mode is the essence of skilled rulership. 

One 

1.1 

As for the Way: 

It covers Heaven and upholds Earth. 

It extends the four directions 
and divides the eight end points. 

So high, it cannot be reached. 

So deep, it cannot be fathomed. 

It embraces and enfolds Heaven and Earth 
It endows and bestows the Formless. 

Flowing along like a wellspring, bubbling up like a 
font, 

it is empty but gradually becomes full. 

Roiling and boiling, 

it is murky but gradually becomes clear. 

Therefore, 

pile it up vertically: it fills all within Heaven and 
Earth. 

Stretch it out horizontally: it encompasses all within 
the Four Seas. 

Unwind it limitlessly: it is without distinction between 
dawn and dusk. 

Roll it out: it expands to the six coordinates.- 

Roll it up: it does not make a handful. 

It is constrained but able to extend. 

It is dark but able to brighten. 

It is supple but able to strengthen. 

It is pliant but able to become firm. 

It stretches out the four binding cords and restrains 
yin and yang. 

It suspends the cosmic rafters and displays the Three 
Luminaries. 

Intensely saturating and soaking, 

Intensely subtle and minute, 

Mountains are high because of it. 

Abysses are deep because of it. 

Beasts can run because of it. 

Birds can fly because of it. 

The sun and moon are bright because of it. 

The stars and timekeepers move because of it. 

Qilins wander freely because of it. 

Phoenixes soar because of it.= 

1.3 

The most exalted Way 

generates the myriad tilings but does not possess 
them, 

completes the transforming images but does not 
dominate them. 

Creatures that walk on hooves and breathe through beaks, 
that fly through the air and wriggle on the ground, 

depend on it for life, yet none understands its 
Potency; 

depend on it for death, yet none is able to resent it. 
Those who attain it and profit are unable to praise it; 
those who use it and lose are unable to blame it. 

It gathers and collects yet is not any richer for it. 

It bestows and confers yet it not diminished by it. 

It cycles endlessly yet cannot be fathomed. 

It is delicate and minute yet cannot be exhausted. 

Pile it up, but it will not get higher; 

Collapse it, but it will not get lower. 

Add to it, but it will not increase. 

Take away from it, but it will not decrease. 

Split it, but it will not get thinner. 

Kill it, but it will not be destroyed. 

Bore into it, but it will not deepen. 

Fill it in, but it will not get shallower. 

Hazy! Nebulous! Tbu cannot imagine it. 

Nebulous! Hazy! Tbur use will not exhaust it. 

Dark! Obscure! It responds formlessly. 

Deep! Penetrating! It does not act in vain. 

It rolls and unrolls with the firm and the pliant. 

It bends and straightens with the yin and the yang. 

1.5 

Therefore, 

the affairs of the world cannot be deliberately 
controlled. 

Yo u must draw them out by following their natural 
direction. 

Tire alterations of the myriad things cannot be 
fathomed. 

You must grasp their essential tendencies and guide 
them to their homes. 

When a water mirror comes in contact with shapes, it is 
not because of wisdom and precedent that it is able to 
flawlessly reflect the square, round, crooked, and straight. 
Therefore, the echo does not respond at random, and the 
shadow does not independently arise. Urey mimic sounds 
and forms and tacitly grasp them. 

That which is tranquil from our birth is our heavenly 
nature. Stirring only after being stimulated, our nature is 
harmed. When things arise and the spirit responds, this is 
the activity of perception. When perception comes into 
contact with things, preferences arise. When preferences 
take shape and perception is enticed by external things, our 
nature cannot return to the self, and the heavenly patterns 
are destroyed. 

Thus those who break through to the Way do not use the 
human to change the heavenly. Externally they transform 
together with things, but internally they do not lose their 

genuine responses. 

Urey attain Nothing, but their needs are provided for. 
Urey are always on the move but find a place to lodge 
for the night. 

Small and great, tall or short, each has its proper role. Tire 
myriads spring forth and leap and prance in profusion, yet 
they do not lose track of their norms. 

So when they rest above, the people do not find them 
heavy. 

When they are located in front, the multitudes do not 
injure them. 

All the world returns to them 
Tire wicked and perverse fear them. 

It is because they do not compete with the myriad things 
that none is able to compete with them. 

1.8 (in part) 

Therefore, 

those who break through to the Way return to clarity 
and tranquillity. 

Those who look deeply into things end up not acting 
on them. 

If you use calmness to nourish your nature, 
and use quietude to transfix your spirit, 
then you will enter the heavenly gateway. 

What we call “Heaven” 

is pure and untainted. 

Unadorned and plain, 

it has never begun to be tainted with impurities. 

What we call “human” 

is biased because of wisdom and precedent. 

Devious and deceptive, 

it is what looks back to past generations and interacts with 
the vulgar. 

Thus, 

that the ox treads on cloven hooves and grows horns 
and that the horse has a mane and square hooves, 

This is heavenly [i.e., natural]. 

Yet to put a bit in a horse’s mouth 
and to put a ring through an ox’s nose, 

This is human. 

Those who comply with Heaven roam with the Way. 
Those who follow the human interact with the 
mundane. 

Now, 

you cannot talk to a fish in a well about great things 
because it is confined by its narrow space. 

You cannot talk to a summer bug about the cold 
because it is restricted to its season. 

You cannot talk to petty scholars about the Utmost 
Way because they are confined by the mundane and 
bound up by their teaching. 

Thus sages 

do not allow the human to obscure the heavenly 

and do not let desire corrupt their genuine responses. 

Urey hit the mark without scheming; 

they are sincere without speaking; 

they attain without planning; 

they complete without striving. 

Their vital essence circulates into the Magical Storehouse, 
and they become human along with what fashions and 
transforms them. 

1.9 (in part) 

Therefore, 

sages internally cultivate the root [of the Way within 
them] 

and do not externally adorn themselves with its 
branches. 

Urey protect their Quintessential Spirit 
and dispense with wisdom and precedent. 

In stillness they take no deliberate action, yet there is 
nothing left undone. 

In tranquillity they do not try to govern, but nothing is 
left ungoverned. 

What we call ‘ho deliberate action” is to not anticipate 
the activity of things. 

What we call “nothing left undone” means to adapt to 

what things have [already] done. 

What we call “to not govern” means to not change how 
things are naturally so. 

What we call ‘Nothing left ungoverned” means to adapt 
to how things are mutually so. 

Tire myriad things all have a source from which they 
arise; 

[the sages] alone understand how to guard this root. 

Tire hundred endeavors all have a source from which 
they are produced; 

[the sages] alone understand how to guard this 
gateway. 

Tlrus exhausting the inexhaustible, 

reaching the limit of the infinite, 

illuminating things without bedazzling them, 

and inexhaustibly responding to things like an echo 

[responds to sound]: 

This is what we call “being released by Heaven.” 

1.10 

Tlrus those who attain the Way: 

Hreir wills are supple, but their deeds are strong. 

Tlreir minds are empty, but their responses are dead 
on. 

What we mean by a supple will is 

being pliant and soft, calm, and tranquil; 

hiding when others do not dare to; 

acting when others are unable to; 

being calm and without worry; 

acting without missing the right moment; 

and cycling and revolving with the myriad things. 

Never anticipating or initiating 
but just responding to things when stimulated. 
Therefore, 

the honored invariably take their titles from the base, 
and those of high station invariably take what is below 
as their foundation. 

Urey rely on the small to embrace the great; 

they rest in the inner to regulate the outer; 

they act pliantly to become firm; 

they utilize weakness to become strong; 

they cycle through transformations and push where 

things are shifting; 

they attain the Way of the One and use the few to 
correct the many. 

What we mean by strength of deeds is 

responding with alacrity when encountering 
alterations; 

pushing away disasters and warding off difficulties; 
being so strong that there is nothing unvanquished; 
facing enemies, there are none that are not humiliated; 
responding to transformations by gauging the proper 

moment 

and being harmed by nothing. 

Therefore, 

if you wish to be firm, you must guard it by being 
pliant. 

If you wish to be strong, you must protect it by being 
supple. 

When you accumulate pliability, you become firm. 
When you accumulate suppleness, you become strong. 
Keep a close watch on what you are accumulating 
in order to know the tendencies toward fortune or 
misfortune. 

Strength defeats what is not its equal. When it encounters 
its equal, it is neutralized. 

Pliability defeats what exceeds itself. Its power cannot be 
measured. 

Thus when an army is strong, it will be destroyed. 
When a tree is strong, it will be broken. 

When leather armor is hard, it will split open. 

Because teeth are harder than the tongue, they wear 
out first. 

Therefore, the pliant and weak are the supports of life, 
and the hard and strong are the disciples of death. 

1.12 

Of all things under Heaven, none is more pliant and supple 

than water. 

Nonetheless, it is 

so great that its limits cannot be reached; 
so deep that it cannot be fathomed; 
so high that it reaches the infinite; 
so distant it merges into the boundless. 

Increasing and decreasing, draining away and filling 
up, 

it circulates without restraints into the immeasurable. 
When it ascends into the heavens, it becomes the rain 
and the dew. 

When it descends to the earth, it becomes moisture 
and dampness. 

If the myriad things do not gain it, they will not be 
born. 

If the various endeavors do not gain it, they will not 
succeed. 

It completely embraces the various things without 
partiality or favoritism. 

It seeps through to the tiniest of creatures without 
seeking their gratitude. 

Its richness sustains the entire world without being 
depleted. 

Its Potency extends to the hundred clans without being 
expended. 

It circulates [everywhere], yet we cannot exhaust it. 

It is so subtle that we cannot seize it in our hands. 
Strike it, and it is not wounded. 

Pierce it, and it is not injured. 

Chop it, and it is not cut apart. 

Try to set it alight, and it will not burn. 

Seeping, draining, flowing, disappearing, 

Mixing and blending, intertwining with [things], it 
cannot be differentiated. 

It is so sharp it can pierce a hole in metal and stone. 

It is so strong it can give sustenance to the entire 
world. 

It dissolves into the realm of the Formless, 

And soars beyond the region of the Nebulous. 

It meanders its way through the rivers and valleys, 
and surges out into the vast wildernesses. 

Depending on whether it is abundant or deficient, 
it takes from or gives to Heaven and Earth. 

It gives to the myriad things equally without 
preferences. 

Hrerefore, 

without being partial or impartial, gushing and 
undulating, it totally merges with Heaven and Earth. 
Without favoring the left or the right, coiling and 
swirling, it ends and begins with the myriad things. 

Hris is what we call ‘Terfect Potency.” 

Tire reason that water is able to achieve its Perfect 

Potency within the entire world is that it is gentle and 
soaking, moist and slippery. Thus, in the words of Lao Dan: 
Tire most pliant tilings in the world 
ride roughshod over the most rigid. 

[This is because] they emerge from the Nonexistent 
and enter into the Seamless. 

I thereby understand the benefits of taking no action. 

Now the Formless is the Great Ancestor of things, 
and the Toneless is the Great Ancestor of sound. 

Their son is light; 
their grandson is water; 

And both are generated by the Formless. 

Light can be seen but cannot be held; 
water can be held but cannot be destroyed. 

Thus of all things that have shapes, none is more honored 
than water. 

1.14 

Joy and anger are aberrations from the Way; 
worry and grief are losses of Potency. 

Likes and dislikes are excesses of the mind; 
lusts and desires are hindrances to nature. 

Violent anger ruins the yin; 
extreme joy collapses the yang. 

The suppression of vital energy brings on dumbness; 
fear and terror bring on madness. 

When you are worried, aggrieved, or enraged, 
sickness will increasingly develop. 

When likes and dislikes abundantly pile up, 
misfortunes will successively follow 
Thus, 

when the mind is not worried or happy, it achieves the 
perfection of Potency. 

When the mind is inalterably expansive, it achieves the 
perfection of tranquillity. 

When lusts and desires do not burden the mind, it 
achieves the perfection of emptiness. 

When the mind is without likes and dislikes, it 
achieves the perfection of equanimity. 

When the mind is not tangled up in things, it achieves 
the perfection of purity. 

If the mind is able to achieve these five qualities, then it 
will break through to spiritlike illumination. To break 
through to spiritlike illumination is to realize what is 
intrinsic. 

Therefore, 

if you use the internal to govern the external, 
then your various endeavors will not fail. 

If you are able to realize internally, 
then the external can be attended to. 

If you realize it internally 

then your Five Orbs-will be in repose; 

worries and anxieties will be at peace. 

Your sinews will be powerful, and your muscles will 
be strong; 

your ears and eyes will be acute and clear. 

Though you are placid and calm, you do not waver. 
Though you are hard and strong, you do not break. 
There is nothing you overshoot 
and nothing you fall short of. 

When you dwell in the small, you will not be cramped; 
when you dwell in the great, you will be unrestrained. 
Your soul will not be agitated; 
your spirit will not be troubled. 

Clear and limpid, still and calm, 

you will become a hero to the entire world. 

1.17 

Hie mind is the master of the Five Orbs. It regulates and 
directs the Four Limbs and circulates the blood and vital 
energy, gallops through the realms of accepting and 
rejecting, and enters and exits through the gateways and 
doorways of the hundreds of endeavors. Therefore if you 
do not realize it [your intrinsic nature] in your own mind 
and still want to control the entire world, this is like having 
no ears yet wanting to tune bells and drums and like having 
no eyes and wanting to enjoy patterns and ornaments. You 
will, most certainly, not be up to the task. 

Thus the world is a spiritlike vessel: you cannot act 
deliberately on it; you cannot control it. Those who attempt 
to deliberately act on it will be defeated by it; those who try 
to control it will lose it. Now the reason that Xu You 
devalued the world and would not trade places with Yao was 
because he had the intention of leaving the world behind. 
Why was this so? Because he thought that you should act 
on the world by adapting to it [and not trying to force your 
own will on it]. 

Tire essentials of the world: 
do not lie in the Other 
but instead lie in the self; 
do not lie in other people 
but instead lie in your own person. 

When you fully realize it [the Way] in your own person, 
then all the myriad things will be arrayed before you. When 
you thoroughly penetrate the teachings of the techniques of 
the mind, then you will be able to put lusts and desires, 
likes and dislikes, outside yourself. 

Therefore [if you realize the Way], 

there is nothing to rejoice in and nothing to be angry 

about, 

nothing to be happy about and nothing to feel bitter 
about. 

You will be mysteriously unified with the myriad 
things, 

and there is nothing you reject and nothing you affirm. 
You transform and nourish a mysterious resplendence 
and, while alive, seem to be dead. 

L_That is, the three dimensions: up-down, front-back, and left-right. 

2. The qilin was a mythical animal with the head of a lion or dragon, horns, the body 
of a horse, and hooves like those of a goat or deer. The phoenix ( fenghuang ) was 
a mythical bird somewhat resembling a peacock or a pheasant. Both were said to 
appear only during times of good gpvernment. 

3. The Five Orbs correspond to the five organs of the human physiology. They 
were thought to be important generative and coordinating junctures for the 
dynamic matrix of qi that composed the mind-body system: the lungs, liver, 
spleen, g^ll bladder, and kidneys. The term refers to organic systems, not just to 
the physical viscera; hence we speak of the pulmonary, hepatic, choleric, 
splenic, and renal orbs. 

Two 

ACTIVATING THE GRNTJTNE 

“Activating the Genuine” exhaustively traces the 
transformation [of things] from their ends to their 
beginnings; 

infuses and fills the essence of Something and 
Nothing; 

distinguishes and differentiates the alterations of the 
myriad things; 

unifies and equates the forms of death and life. 

It enables you to 

know to disregard things and return to the self; 
investigate the distinctions between Humaneness and 
Rightness; 

comprehend the patterns of identity and difference; 
observe the guiding thread of Utmost Potency; 
and know the binding cords of alterations and 
transformations. 

Its explanations tally with the core of the Profound 
Mystery 

and comprehend the mother of creation and 
transformation. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Activating the Genuine” is the second of the eight ‘foot” 
or foundational chapters of the text and serves as a 
companion to chapter 1 . “Originating in the Way,” in its 
overarching cosmology and self-cultivation themes. 
Whereas ‘Originating in the Way” is very much indebted to 
the Laozi, “Activating the Genuine” is thoroughly steeped 
in the Zhuangzi, three of whose authorial voices are 
powerfully represented in its pages. - 

All the principal themes of chapter 2 are found in the 
Zhuangzi. These include cosmogony, the precariousness of 
life, the existence of archaic utopias governed by 
spiritually perfected sage-rulers, the devolution of history 
and the degradation of spiritual realization that have 
occurred over time, the nature of perfected human beings, 
the Way as the source of the entire universe, the spiritual 
perfection of sages who through meditative “inner 
cultivation” return to the wellsprings of the spirit that lie 
deep within human nature, and the importance of the right 
balance of nature and destiny in the human ability to attain 
sagerulership and spiritual fulfillment. 

The authors of chapter 2 hark back to the Utopian past of 
“great perfection,” in which the people lived in simplicity 
and harmony with one another and with all creatures. They 
were led by Genuine human beings, now rare but still 
present, who, expert in the “techniques of the Way,” 

embraced Potency and lived in accord with the foundations 
of the cosmos. Deeply grounded in an internal experience 
of all aspects of the transcendent Way, these Perfected 
persons bring a dispassionate clarity to ruling the people 
and influence them toward tranquillity and harmony simply 
by their presence. Yet these Genuine human beings are not 
fundamentally different from other people: they share a 
natural tendency for the senses to perceive clearly and to 
be naturally tranquil but easily disturbed by lusts and 
desires. Tliese sages differ from others, however, in how 
they use the meditational “techniques of the mind” in order 
to keep their spirits clear, their minds empty of desires and 
preferences, and their consciousness illumined and 
impartial. They thus allow their own natures to engender 
spontaneous and genuine responses to things and so to 
cultivate the internal and use it to rule the external. The 
authors of chapter 2 criticize the current-day disciples of 
Confucius and Mozi for failing to do this, observing that 
their Way is external and derived from the branches rather 
than from these internal psychospiritual roots. As the 
authors say, when what is external does not disturb what is 
internal, then nature can function spontaneously and 
harmoniously and will achieve Potency. Thus the genuine 
responses of our innate natures to the many life situations 
that constitute our destiny are completely facilitated and 
the Way is fully embodied. This is the foundation of 

enlightened rulership. 

Two 

2.2 (in part) 

The Great Clod= 

loads me with a body, 
burdens me with a life, 
eases me with old age, 
rests me with death. 

That I found it good to live is the very reason why I find it 
good to die. 

[You can] hide a boat in a ravine, 
hide a fishing net in a marsh: 
people call this “secure.” 

However, in the middle of the night, a strong man can put 
[the boat] on his back and run off with it, and the sleeper 
does not know about it. It is appropriate to hide small 
things within the large. But if you do so, your thing just 
might vanish from you. But if you hide the world in the 
world, then there is nothing that can conceal its form. 

How can it be said that things are not grandly 
indiscriminate? You once happen on the shape of a human 
being and are especially pleased. But humanity has a 
thousand alterations and ten thousand transformations, 

never reaching its limit, wearing out and then renewing; 
should not your joy be incalculable? Compare it to a 
dream: 

In a dream we become a bird and fly into the sky. 

In a dream we become a fish and disappear into the 
deep. 

When we are dreaming, we do not know it is a dream; only 
after we awaken do we realize it is a dream. Only when we 
have a great awakening do we realize that this present 
moment is the ultimate dream. In the beginning before I 
was born, how could I have known the joy of being alive? 
Now in this moment when I have not yet died, how can I 
know that death is not also joyful? 

In ancient times, Gongniu Ai suffered from a cyclical 
illness: every seven days he would transform into a tiger. 
His older brother opened his door and entered to spy on 
him, and when he did, the tiger snatched and killed him. 
Thus, 

his [outer] patterns and markings became those of a 
beast; 

his fingernails and teeth shifted and changed; 
his consciousness and mind altered; 
his spirit and form transformed. 

When he was a tiger, he did not know that he had ever been 
a human being. When he was a human being, he knew 
nothing about being a tiger. These two alternated in 

opposition, yet each found joy in the form it took. 
Cleverness and confusion displace [each other] endlessly, 
and who knows from what they spring? 

When water approaches winter, it congeals and 
becomes ice. 

When ice welcomes spring, it melts and becomes 
water. 

Ice and water shift and change in the former and latter 
positions as if they were running around in an eternal 
circle; which has the time to know bitterness or joy? 

2.3 

Among the people of antiquity were some who situated 
themselves in the chaotic and obscure. Their spirit and vital 
energy did not leak out to their exteriors. The myriad things 
were peaceful and dispassionate and so became contented 
and tranquil. The qi of [baleful comets such as] 
‘fnagnolias,” “lances,” “colliders,” and “handles” was in 
every case blocked and dissipated so that they were unable 
to cause harm. At that time, the myriad peoples were wild 
and untamed, not knowing East from West; 
they roamed with their mouths full, 
drummed on their bellies in contentment. 

In copulation they followed the harmony of Heaven; 
in eating they accorded with the Potency of Earth. 

Urey did not use minute precedent or ‘fight and wrong” to 

surpass one another. Vast and boundless, this is what we call 
“Grand Order.” And so those in high station 

directed [ministers] on their left and right and did not 
pervert their natures; 

possessed and pacified [the people] and did not 
compromise their Potency. 

Thus, 

Humaneness and Rightness were not proclaimed, and 
the myriad things flourished. 

Rewards and punishments were not deployed, and all 
in the world were respected. 

Their Way could give rise to great perfection, but it is 
difficult to find a quantitative measure for it. Hrus, 
calculating by days there is not enough; 
calculating by years there is surplus. 

Fish forget themselves in rivers and lakes. 

Humans forget themselves in the techniques of the 
Way. 

The Genuine of antiquity stood in the foundation of Heaven 
and Earth, were centered in uninterrupted roaming, 
embraced Potency, and rested in harmony. Tire myriad 
things were to them like smoke piling higher. Which of 
them would willingly create discord in human affairs or use 
things to trouble their nature and destiny? 

2.4 

The Way has both a warp and a weft linked together. [Tire 
Perfected] attain the unity of the Way and join with its 
thousand branches and ten thousand leaves. 

Tlrus 

because they have it in high position, they can 
promulgate their decrees; 

because they have it in low position, they can forget 
their baseness; 

because they have it in poverty, they can take pleasure 
in their work; 

because they have it in distress, they can be settled 
amid danger. 

When the great cold arrives, frost and snow descend: 
only then do we understand the vigor of pine and cypress; 

Withstanding difficulties, walking into danger, with 
profit and harm arrayed before them: only then do we 
understand how sages do not lose the Way. 

Tlrus those who are able to 

wear on their heads the Great Circle [of Heaven] will 
traverse the Great Square [of Earth]; 
mirror Mist Purity will contemplate Great Luminosity; 
stand amid Vast Peace will be situated in the great hall; 
roam amid Dark Obscurity will have the same 
brilliance as the sun and moon. 

Tlrus, 

they take the Way as their pole; 

Potency as their line; 

Rites and Music as their hook; 

Humaneness and Rightness as their bait; 
they throw them into the rivers; 
they float them into the seas. 

Though the myriad things are boundless in numbers, which 
of them will they not possess? 

2.6 

To grasp the intensely bright and not blacken it, 

act with the perfectly pure and not sully it, 

rest in profound obscurity and not darken it, 

sit at the pivot of Heaven and not destroy it, 

to be unobstructed by the Mengmen or Zhonglong 

mountains, 

unhindered by swift currents, deep chasms, or the 
depths of Luliang, 

unimpeded by the obstructions of Taihang, Shijian, 
Feihu, or Gouwang. 

Only those who embody the Way are able to not be 
defeated [by these things]. 

For these reasons, their persons reside on rivers and seas, 
and their spirits roam under the palace gateway. Had they 
not attained the One Source, how could they have reached 
this point? 

For these reasons, residing with the Perfected 

makes families forget their poverty, 
makes kings and dukes scorn honors and riches 
and delight in poverty and baseness, 
makes the brave deflate their anger 
and makes the greedy diminish their desires. 

Urey sit and do not teach; 
they stand and do not dispute. 

When they are empty, they go; 
when they are full, they return. 

Thus they do not speak and can quench others with 
harmony. 

For these reasons, [those who embody] the Utmost Way 
take no action. 

Now a dragon, then a snake, 
they expand and contract, 
coil and uncoil, 

and alter and transform with the seasons. 

Outside, they follow prevailing customs; 
inside, they guard their nature. 

Their ears and eyes are not dazzled. 

Their thoughts and reflections are not entangled. 

Those who in this way lodge their spirit maintain the simple 
in order to roam in vast purity, draw into compliance the 
myriad things, and cause the many excellences to 
germinate. 

For these reasons, 

the spirit will depart from those who belabor their 
spirit; 

the spirit will lodge with those who rest their spirit. 
The Way emerges from the One Source, penetrates the 
Nine Gateways, is scattered through the Six Crossroads, 
and is displayed in the domain of the boundless. It is still 
and silent and thereby empty and nonexistent. It is not that 
it acts on things; it is that things act on themselves. For 
these reasons, when affairs comply with the Way, it is not 
that the Way has accomplished them but that the Way has 
impelled them. 

2.11 

The nature of water is clear, yet soil sullies it. 

The nature of humans is tranquil, yet desires disorder 
it. 

What human beings receive from Heaven are [the 
tendencies] 

for ears and eyes [to perceive] colors and sounds, 
for mouth and nose [to perceive] fragrances and tastes, 
for flesh and skin [to perceive] cold and heat. 

Tire instinctive responses are the same in everyone, but 
some penetrate to spiritlike illumination, and some cannot 
avoid derangement and madness. Wiry is this? Hrat by 
which they [these tendencies] are controlled is different. 
Hrus, 

the spirit is the source of consciousness. If the spirit 
is clear, then consciousness is illumined. 
Consciousness is the storehouse of the mind. If 
consciousness is impartial, then the mind is balanced. 
No one can mirror himself in flowing water, but [he 
can] observe his reflection in standing water because 
it is still. 

No one can view his form in raw iron, but [he can] 
view his form in a clear mirror because it is even. 

Only what is even and still can thus give form to the nature 
and basic tendencies of things. Viewed from this 
perspective, usefulness depends on what is not used. Thus 
when the empty room is pristine and clear, good fortune 
will abide there. 

If the mirror is bright, dust and dirt cannot obscure it. 
If the spirit is clear, lusts and desires cannot disorder 
it. 

To work at reclaiming the Quintessential Spirit once it has 
already overflowed externally is to lose the root and seek it 
in the branches. If external and internal do not tally and you 
desire to interact with tilings; if you cover your mysterious 
light and seek to know [things] with the ears and eyes; this 
is to discard your brilliance and follow your blindness. This 
is called “losing the Way.” When the mind goes 
somewhere, the spirit swiftly lodges there. By returning the 
spirit to emptiness, this lodging dissolves and is 

extinguished. This is the wandering of the sage. 

Thus those in antiquity who ordered the world invariably 
penetrated the basic tendencies of nature and destiny. Their 
taking and giving were not necessarily the same, [but] they 
were as one in uniting with the Way. 

Yo u do not refrain from wearing fur in summer 
because you cherish it but because it is too hot for 
your person. 

Yo u do not refrain from using a fan in winter to 
conserve it but because it is too cold for comfort. 

Hie sages 

assess their bellies and eat; 
measure their frames and dress. 

Hiey compose themselves, that is all; from whence can the 
mind of greed and dissipation arise? 

Thus, 

a person who can have the world is invariably someone 
who will not strive for it. 

A person who can possess fame and praise is 
invariably someone who will not scurry in search of 
them. 

Hie sage has broken through to it. Having broken through to 
it, the mind of lust and desire is external [to him]. 

2.12 

Hie disciples of Confucius and Mozi all teach the 

techniques of Humaneness and Rightness to the age, yet 
they do not avoid destruction. If they personally cannot 
practice [their teachings], how much less may those they 
teach? Why is this? Because their Way is external. To ask 
the branches to return to the roots: if even Xu You could 
not do it, how much less the common people? If you 
genuinely break through to the basic tendencies of nature 
and destiny, so that Humaneness and Rightness adhere [to 
your actions], how then can choosing and discarding suffice 
to confuse your mind? 

If 

the spirit has no obstruction and the mind has no 
burden, 

if they are pervasively comprehending and minutely 
penetrating, 

calm and quiescent and free of tasks, 
without any congealing or stagnancy, 
attentive in empty stillness, 

then 

power and profit cannot lure them; 
logicians cannot delight them; 
sounds and colors cannot corrupt them; 
beauty cannot debauch them; 
wisdom cannot move them; 
courage cannot frighten them; 

This is the Way of the Genuine. Those who are like this 

shape and forge the myriad things and in their being human 
are conjoined with what creates and transforms. 

Amid Heaven and Earth, 
in space and time, 

nothing can destroy or impede them. 

What generates life is not life; 

what transforms things is not transformation. 

Their spirits: 

cross Mount Li or the Taihang [Mountains] and have 
no difficulty; 

enter the Four Seas or the Nine Rivers and cannot be 
trapped; 

lodge in narrow defiles and cannot be obstructed; 
spread across the realm of Heaven and Earth and are 
not stretched. 

If you do not penetrate to this [point], 

though your eyes enumerate a group of one thousand 
sheep, 

though your ears distinguish the tones of the eight 
winds, 

your feet perform the “Northern Bank” dance; 
your hands execute the “Green Waters” rhythm; 
your intelligence encompasses Heaven and Earth; 
your brilliance illuminates the sun and moon; 
your disputations unknot linked jewels; 
your words add luster to jade and stone; 

These will still be of no aid to governing the world. 

2.13 

Tranquillity and calmness are that by which the nature 
is nourished. 

Harmony and vacuity are that by which Potency is 
nurtured. 

When what is external does not disturb what is 
internal, then our nature attains what is suitable to it. 
When the harmony of nature is not disturbed, then 
Potency will rest securely in its position. 

Nurturing life so as to order the age, 
embracing Potency so as to complete our years, 

This may be called being able to embody the Way. 

Those who are like this: 

Their blood and pulse have no sluggishness or 
stagnation; 

their five orbs have no diseased qi; 
calamity and good fortune cannot perturb them; 
blame and praise cannot settle on them like dust; 
thus can they reach the ultimate. [However,] if you do not 
have the age, how can you succeed? If you have the right 
character but do not meet your time, you will not even be 
able to safeguard your person. How much less so one who 
is without the Way! 

Moreover, the instinctive responses of human beings 

are for 

the ears and eyes to respond to stimulus and 
movement, 

the mind and awareness to recognize worry and 
happiness. 

The hands and feet to rub at pains and itches and to 
avoid cold and heat. 

This is how we interact with things. 

If a wasp or a scorpion stings your finger, your spirit 
cannot remain placid. 

If a mosquito or a gadfly bites your flesh, your nature 
cannot remain settled. 

The worries and calamities that come to disturb your mind 
are not limited to the poisonous bites of wasps or 
scorpions or the annoyance of mosquitoes and gadflies, yet 
you want to remain tranquil and vacuous. How can it be 
done? 

Tire ears of one whose eyes are examining the tip of 
an autumn hair will not hear the sound of thunder and 
lightning. 

Tire eyes of one whose ears are harmonizing the tones 
of jade and stone will not see the form of Mount Tai. 
Why is this? Urey are attending to what is small and 
forgetting what is big. Now the arrival of the myriad things, 
pulling and plucking at my nature, grabbing and grasping at 
my feelings, is like a spring or fountain, even if one wanted 

to not be ruled [by them], could this be achieved? 

Now a person who plants a tree irrigates it with 
springwater and beds it in fertile soil. If one person 
nurtures it and ten people harvest it, there will certainly be 
no spare splinters; how much less if the entire kingdom 
hacks at it together? Though one wanted it to live for a long 
time, how could this be accomplished? 

If you leave a basin of water in the courtyard to settle for 
one full day, you will still not be able to see your eyebrows 
and lashes. If you muddy it with no more than one stir, you 
will not be able to distinguish square from circular. The 
human spirit is easy to muddy and difficult to clarify, much 
like the basin of water. How much more so when an entire 
age stirs and disturbs it; how can it attain a moment of 
equanimity? 

1. These three voices are the authentic writings of Zhuang Zhou, the “Primitivist,” 

and the “Syncretist.” The Zhuangzi is a layered text, written by several hands 
over a period of time, and some of its latest portions might be roughly 
contemporaneous with the Huainanzi. 

2. “The Great Clod” is a slightly ironic Daoist term for the physical world. 

Three 

CELESTIAL PATTERNS 

“Celestial Patterns” provides the means by which to 
harmonize the qi of yin and yang, 
order the radiances of the sun and moon, 
regulate the seasons of opening [spring/summer] and 
closing [fall/winter], 

tabulate the movements of the stars and planets, 
know the permutations of [their] retrograde and proper 
motion, 

avoid the misfortunes associated with prohibitions and 
taboos, 

follow the responses of the seasonal cycles, 
and imitate the constancy of the Five Gods. 

It enables you to 

possess the means to gaze upward to Heaven and 
uphold what to follow 

and thereby avoid disordering Heaven’s regularities. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

The term tian wen (celestial patterns) means “astronomy” 

in modem Chinese, but the classical term has a much 
broader reach, encompassing also astrology, cosmology, 
calendrics, mathematical harmonics, and meteorology. 
Although some passages in Huainanzi 3 may strike 
modern readers as both obscure and highly technical, from 
the point of view of Han intellectual history, this chapter 
treats its topics in rather general terms, omitting the sorts 
of technical detail that would be the province of specialists. 
Although the chapter is not a manual for practicing 
astrologers, attentive readers would learn enough to be able 
to participate in a discussion in which these topics arose 
(such as a court debate about astrologically based policy). 

This chapter draws on, and is generally consistent with, a 
substantial body of pre-Han and Han astronomical and 
astrological lore. Some of its source texts still exist, 
notably a poetical catechism called “Questions about 
Heaven,” which is included in an ancient anthology of 
poetry, the Chuci (Elegies ofChu). In fact, portions of 3.1, 
3.4, 3.13-3.16, and 3.25 give direct answers to that text’s 
questions. Other sections of the chapter appear to be “set 
pieces” quoted from writings that are no longer extant, so 
whose existence can only be inferred. Lending strength to 
that inference is section 3.6, quoted from a text that was 
unknown until a manuscript copy was recovered 
archaeologically from a tomb at Mawangdui (near 
Changsha, Hunan Province) in 1973. 

Hie principal message of this chapter is that all tilings in 
the cosmos are interconnected and that human plans and 
intentions are subject to the influence of various cosmic 
cycles and correlations. Section 3.2, for example, 
discusses the influence of yin and yang on the behavior and 
transformations of various creatures. Section 3.6 gives 
correlates for each of the five naked-eye planets. Section 
3.28 (as well as sections 3.29-3.31, which are not included 
here) demonstrates the numerological links between 
weights and measures and the musical notes of the five- 
tone and twelve-tone scales. Other passages, not included 
in this abridged version, give correlates for the eight winds 
(3.12), the interactions of yin and yang with the twelve 
lunar months (3.16), the twenty-four fifteen-day periods of 
the solar year (3.18), and the twelve-year orbital cycle of 
the planet Jupiter (3.33), among many other topics. Tire 
reader will learn from these passages that such cycles and 
correlations must be understood and taken into account in 
the formulation of policy. 

Three 

3.1 

When Heaven and Earth were yet unformed, all was 
ascending and flying, 
diving and delving. 

Thus it was called the Grand Inception. 

Tire Grand Inception produced the Nebulous Void. 

Tire Nebulous Void produced space-time; 
space-time produced the original qi. 

A boundary [divided] the original qi. 

That which was pure and bright spread out to form 
Heaven; 

that which was heavy and turbid congealed to form 
Earth. 

It is easy for that which is pure and subtle to converge 
but difficult for the heavy and turbid to congeal. 
Therefore 

Heaven was completed first; 

Earth was fixed afterward. 

Tire conjoined essences of Heaven and Earth produced 
yin and yang. 

Tire supersessive essences of yin and yang caused the 

four seasons. 

The scattered essences of the four seasons created the 
myriad things. 

The hot qi of accumulated yang produced fire; the 
essence of fiery qi became the sun. 

The cold qi of accumulated yin produced water; the 
essence of watery qi became the moon. 

The overflowing qi of the essences of the sun and the moon 
made the stars and planets. 

To Heaven belong the sun, moon, stars, and planets; 
to Earth belong waters and floods, dust and soil. 

In ancient times Gong Gong and Zhuan Xu fought, each 
seeking to become the thearch.—Enraged, they crashed 
against Mount Buzhou;= 

Heaven’s pillars broke; 
the cords of Earth snapped. 

Heaven tilted in the northwest, and thus the sun and 
moon, stars and planets shifted in that direction. 

Earth became unfull in the southeast, and thus the 
watery floods and mounding soils subsided in that 
direction. 

3.2 

Tire Way of Heaven is called the Round; 
the Way of Earth is called the Square. 
The square governs the obscure; 

the circular governs the bright. 

The bright emits qi, and for this reason fire is the 
external brilliance of the sun. 

Tire obscure sucks in qi, and for this reason water is 
the internal luminosity of the moon. 

Emitted qi endows; 
retained qi transforms. 

Thus yang endows and yin transforms. 

Tire unbalanced qi of Heaven and Earth, becoming 
perturbed, causes wind; 

the harmonious qi of Heaven and Earth, becoming 
calm, causes rain. 

When yin and yang rub against each other, their interaction 
produces thunder. 

Aroused, they produce thunderclaps; 
disordered, they produce mist. 

When the yang qi prevails, it scatters to make rain and 
dew; 

when the yin qi prevails, it freezes to make frost and 
snow. 

Hairy and feathered creatures make up the class of 
flying and walking things and are subject to yang. 
Creatures with scales and shells make up the class of 
creeping and hiding things and are subject to yin. 

Tire sun is the ruler of yang. Therefore, in spring and 
summer animals shed their fur; at the summer 

solstice, stags’ antlers drop off. 

The moon is the fundament of yin. Therefore when the 
moon wanes, the brains of fish shrink; when the moon 
dies, wasps and crabs shrivel up. 

Fire flies upward; 
water flows downward. 

Thus, 

the flight of birds is aloft; 

the movement of fishes is downward. 

Things within the same class mutually move one 
another; 

root and twig mutually respond to each other. 
Therefore, 

when the burning mirror sees the sun, it ignites tinder 
and produces fire. 

When the square receptacle sees the moon, it 
moistens and produces water. 

When the tiger roars, the valley winds rush; 
when the dragon arises, the bright clouds accumulate. 
When qilins wrangle, the sun or moon is eclipsed; 
when the leviathan dies, comets appear. 

When silkworms secrete fragmented silk, the shang 
string [of a stringed instrument] snaps. 

When meteors fall, the Bohai-surges upward. 

3.3 

The feelings of the rulers of men penetrate to Heaven on 
high. 

Tlrus, 

if there are punishments and cruelty, there will be 
whirlwinds. 

If there are wrongful ordinances, there will be plagues 
of devouring insects. 

If there are unjust executions, the land will redden 
with drought. 

If there are unseasonable ordinances, there will be 
great excess of rain. 

Tire four seasons are the officers of Heaven. 

Tire sun and moon are the agents of Heaven. 

Tire stars and planets mark the appointed times of 
Heaven. 

Rainbows and comets are the portents of Heaven. 

3.6 

What are the five planets? 

Tire East is Wood. Its god is Tai Hao. His assistant is Gou 
Mang. He grasps the compass and governs spring. His spirit 
is Year Star [Jupiter]. His animal is the Bluegreen Dragon. 
His musical note is jue; his days are jia and yi. 

Tire South is Fire. Its god is Yan Di. His assistant is Zhu 
Ming. He grasps the balance beam and governs summer. 
His spirit is Sparkling Deluder [Mars]. His animal is the 

Vermilion Bird. His musical note is zhi; his days are bing 
and ding. 

Tire Center is Earth. Its god is the Yellow Emperor. His 
assistant is Hou Tu [“Sovereign of the Soil”]. He grasps the 
marking cord and governs the four quarters. His spirit is 
Quelling Star [Saturn], His animal is the Yellow Dragon. 
His musical note is gong; his days are wit and ji. 

Tire West is Metal. Its god is Shao Hao. His assistant is 
Ru Shou. He grasps the T-square and governs autumn. His 
spirit is Great White [Venus]. His animal is the White Tiger. 
His musical note is shang ; his days are geng and xin. 

Tire North is Water. Its god is Zhuan Xu. His assistant is 
Xuan Ming. He grasps the weight and governs winter. His 
spirit is Chronograph Star [Mercury]. His animal is the 
Dark Warrior. His musical note is yu; his days are ren and 
giii. 

3.24 

In the third [and final] month of spring, abundant thunder 
sounds forth, bringing in the rains. 

In the third [and final] month of autumn, the qi of Earth 
has not yet become [completely] quiescent, and one gathers 
in the killed things. All crawling things become torpid and 
hide away, and country dwellers shut their gates. Gray 
Woman comes out and brings down frost and snow. 

Thus the qi of the twelve times of the year progress until 

they reach an end [again] in the second month of spring, 
when what has been stored away is received forth [again] 
and the cold is shut away Then Tranquil Woman drums and 
sings to regulate the harmony of Heaven and to make grow 
the hundred kinds of cereals, the beasts and birds, and the 
herbs and trees. 

In the first month of summer the crops ripen; the cries 
of pheasants and pigeons become prolonged, causing the 
emperor to look forward to the annual harvest. 

Thus, 

if Heaven does not give forth yin, the myriad things 
cannot be born; 

if Earth does not give forth yang, the myriad things 
cannot grow to maturity. 

Heaven is round; 

Earth is square; 

the Way is exactly in the middle. 

Tire sun [produces] accretion; 
the moon [produces] paring away. 

When the moon reverts [in its course], the myriad 
creatures die. 

When the sun attains its apogee, the myriad creatures 
are born. 

Separated from mountains, the qi of mountains is 
hidden away. 

Separated from water, aquatic insects become 

dormant. 

Separated from trees, leaves wither. 

When the sun is not seen for five days, [the ruler] will 
lose his throne. Even a [ruler who is a] sage cannot 
withstand this. 

3.25 

The sun rises up from the Bright Valley, bathes in the Pool 
of Xian, and rests in the Fusang Tree.-This is called Dawn 
Light. 

Ascending the Fusang Tree, it thereupon commences its 
journey. This is called Emergent Brightness. 

[When the sun] reaches the Bent Slope, this is called 
Dawn Brilliance. 

[When the sun] reaches the Steaming Spring, this is 
called the Morning Meal. 

[When the sun] reaches the Mulberry Field, this is 
called the Late-Morning Meal. 

[When the sun] reaches the Balance Beam of Yang, 
this is called Within the Angle. 

[When the sun] reaches Kun Wu, this is called the 
Exact Center. 

[When the sun] reaches the Bird Roost, this is called 
the Lesser Return. 

[When the sun] reaches the Valley of Grief, this is 
called the Dinner Hour. 

[When the sun] reaches Woman’s Sequence, this is 
called the Great Return. 

[When the sun] reaches the Angle of the Abyss, this is 
called the Raised Pestle. 

[When the sun] reaches Carriage Stone, this is called 
the Descending Pestle. 

[When the sun] reaches the Fountain of Grief, it halts; its 
female attendant rests her horses. This is called the 
Suspended Chariot. 

[When the sun] reaches the Abyss of Anxiety, this is 
called Yellow Dusk. 

[When the sun] reaches the Vale of Obscurity, this is 
called Definite Dusk. 

The sun enters the floodwaters of the Abyss of Anxiety; 
sunrise emerges from the drainage stream of the Vale of 
Obscurity. [Tire sun] travels over the nine continents, 
[passing through] seven resting places, [covering a distance 
of] 507,309 li. Tire divisions [of its journey] make dawn, 
daylight, dusk, and night. 

3.28 

Thus it is said, “Tire Way begins with one.” One [alone], 
however, does not give birth. Therefore it divided into yin 
and yang. From the harmonious union of yin and yang, the 
myriad things were produced. Thus it is said, 

‘One produced two, 

two produced three, 

three produced the myriad things.” 

[With regard to] Heaven and Earth, three months make 
one season. Thus a sacrifice of three [types or portions of] 
cooked grains are used in mourning rites. The year 
continues for three shifts [of seasons] to make the seasonal 
nodes [complete their cycle]. Armies emphasize three 
signal flags in order to maintain control. 

Using three to examine matters: 3 x 3 = 9. Thus the 
Yellow Bell pitch pipe is nine inches long and harmonizes 
with the note gong. Furthermore, 9 x 9 = 81. Thus the 
number of the Yellow Bell is established therein. Yellow is 
the color of the Potency of Earth; the bell is that by which 
the [seeds of] qi are sown. At the winter solstice the qi of 
accretion produces Earth; the color of Earth is yellow. Thus 
the [note of the winter solstice] is called Yellow Bell. 

Tire number of pitch pipes is six, classified as female and 
male [for a total of twelve]. Thus it is said there are twelve 
bells to act as adjuncts to the twelve months. Each of the 
twelve is based on three. Thus if one sets up [the number] 
one and triples it eleven times [i.e., 3 11 ], the total is 
177,147. Tire Great Number of the Yellow Bell is thereby 
revealed. 

3.41 

Of those prized by the heavenly spirits, none is more prized 

than the Bluegreen Dragon. Tire Bluegreen Dragon is 
otherwise called the Heavenly Unity, or otherwise taiyin. 
[Tire country corresponding to] the place where taiyin 
dwells cannot retreat but can advance. [lire country 
corresponding to] the place beaten against by the Northern 
Dipper cannot withstand attack. When Heaven and Earth 
were founded, they divided to make yin and yang. 

Yang is born from yin; 
yin is born from yang; 

they are in a state of mutual alternation. The four binding 
cords [of Heaven] communicate with them. 

Sometimes there is death; 
sometimes there is birth. 

Thus are the myriad things brought to completion. 

[Of all creatures that] move and breathe, none is more 
prized than humans. 

[Tire bodily] orifices, limbs, and trunk all communicate 
with Heaven. 

Heaven has nine layers; man also has nine orifices. 
Heaven has four seasons, to regulate the twelve 
months; 

Man also has four limbs, to control the twelve joints. 
Heaven has twelve months, to regulate the 360 days; 
Man also has twelve joints, to regulate the 360 nodes. 
A person who undertakes affairs while not obeying Heaven 
is someone who deviates from what gave birth to him. 

1. “Thearch” is our translation of the Chinese word di. Its connotations of divine 
rulership emphasize the transcendent qualities of a sage-emperor (whether 
mythical or real) empowered by the Way. 

2. Mount Buzhou was a mythical mountain northwest of China, considered to be 
the pivot point of the cosmos. 

3. The Bohai is a shallow body of water forming China’s northeastern coast, 
bounded by the Liaodong and Shandong peninsulas. 

4. All the places mentioned in this passage are mythical or astral, not actual 
geographical locations. The Fusang Tree was a magical mulberry tree on which 
the sun-crow perched before beginning its daily trip across the sky. 

Four 

TERRESTRIAL FORMS 

‘Terrestrial Forms” provides the means by which to 
encompass the length from north to south, 
reach the breadth from east to west, 
survey the topography of the mountains and hillocks, 
demarcate the locations of the rivers and valleys, 
illuminate the master of the myriad things, 
know the multitude of categories of living things, 
tabulate the enumerations of mountains and chasms, 
and chart the roadways far and near. 

It enables you to 

circulate comprehensively and prepare exhaustively, 
so that you cannot be roused by things 
or startled by oddities. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

‘Terrestrial Forms” is an account of world geography from 
the point of view of the Western Han dynasty. It ignores 
political geography (such as the states of the Warring 
States period or the kingdoms, provinces, and counties of 

the Han Empire) and gives only a cursory account of the 
physical geography of China itself. It names the provinces, 
mountains, and marshes associated with the eight 
directions and the center, as well as the eight winds, and 
gives an extensive list of rivers and their sources. But the 
authors of ‘Terrestrial Forms” appear to be more interested 
in the wider world beyond China’s borders, with an 
emphasis on the mythical, the magical, the distant, and the 
strange. Special attention is given to Mount Kunlun, the 
mountain at the center of the world, associated with the 
goddess known as the Queen Mother of the West and her 
elixir of immortality. Sections 4.15 and 4.16 list various 
strange and grotesque peoples living beyond the boundaries 
of the known world, along with various mythical places 
such as the land of the Torch Dragon and the grave-mound 
of Lord Millet. 

Hris chapter emphasizes that physical features of terrain 
interact in important ways with plants, animals, and people. 
Section 4.8, for example, contends that various 
topographical features have specific physical effects on the 
people who live near them; section 4.9 (not included here) 
makes a similar case for types of soil. Tire chapter also has 
a section (4.11) that proposes a kind of zoological 
taxonomy based on physical features of various animals. 
Section 4.18 describes an evolutionary process that gives 
rise to various kinds of living creatures, and section 4.19 

(not included here) describes an analogous process for the 
growth of minerals in the soil. 

In general, the chapter’s analytical viewpoint involves 
understanding the influences and cyclical transformation of 
yin and yang and the Five Phases. The chapter’s sources 
include the “Questions About Heaven” poetical catechism 
of the Chuci anthology, the compendium of real and 
mythical geography known as the Shanhaijing (Classic of 
Mountains and Seas), and most likely other texts that are 
no longer extant. The chapter’s understanding of world 
geography is based on the work of the cosmographer Zou 
Yan (fl. ca. 300 B.C.E.). He proposed that China (which was 
divided into nine provinces by the mythical hero Yu the 
Great after he had drained away the waters of the Great 
Flood) was situated in the southeastern corner of a great 
square continent divided into nine subcontinents. Tire great 
continent was itself one of nine such continents, all 
surrounded by a boundless ocean. This schematic view of 
world geography accounted for the location of Mount 
Kunlun to China’s northwest and for the observable fact 
that China is bordered on the east and the southeast by 
water. 

This chapter reminds the reader that while China is the 
“Middle Kingdom,” it also is part of a much larger 
terrestrial world. And like chapter 3 (with which it forms a 
pair), it stresses that everything in the world is 

interconnected and in a constant state of flux. 

Four 

4.1 (in part) 

Everything that exists on earth lies 
within the six coordinates [and] 
within the outer limits of the four directions. 

To illuminate it, [it has] the sun and moon; 
for its warp threads, [it has] the stars and planets; 
to regulate it, [it has] the four seasons; 
to control it, [it has] the great Year Star. 

Between Heaven and Earth are nine continents and eight 
pillars. Tire dry land has nine mountains; the mountains have 
nine passes. There are nine marshes, eight winds, and six 
rivers.... 

4.2 (in part) 

Hie expanse within the four seas measures 28,000 li from 
east to west and 26,000 li from south to north. There are 
8,000 li of watercourses passing through six valleys; there 
are six hundred named streams. There are 3,000 li of roads 
and paths. 

Yu employed Tai Zhang to measure the earth from its 
eastern extremity to its western extremity. It measured 

233,500 li and 75 double paces. He also employed Shu Hai 
to measure from its northern extremity to its southern 
extremity. It measured 233,500 li and 75 double paces. 

4.4 

The waters of the Yellow River issue from the northeast 
corner of the Kunlun Mountains and enter the ocean, 
flowing [eastward] along the route of Yu through the Piled- 
Stone Mountains .- 

The Vermilion River issues from the southeast corner 
and flows southwest to the Southern Sea, passing to the 
east of Cinnabar Marsh. The Weakwater [River] issues from 
the southwest corner; when it reaches Heli, its overflowing 
waves pass through the Flowing Sands and flow south to 
enter the Southern Sea. Tire Yang River issues from the 
northwest corner and enters the Southern Sea south of [the 
country of] the Winged People. 

The four streams [originate in] the divine springs of the 
[Yellow] Emperor, from which can be concocted all kinds 
of medicinal substances to bring physical well-being to the 
myriad creatures. 

4.5 

If you climb to a height double that of the Kunlun 
Mountains, [that peak] is called Cool Wind Mountain. If 
you climb it, you will not die. If you climb to a height that 

is doubled again, [that peak] is called Hanging Gardens. If 
you ascend it, you will gain supernatural power and be able 
to control the wind and the rain. If you climb to a height 
that is doubled yet again, it reaches up to Heaven itself. If 
you mount to there, you will become a spirit. It is called 
the abode of the Supreme Thearch. 

Hie Fu [= Fusang] Tree in Yang Province is baked by the 
sun’s heat. Hie Jian Tree on Mount Duguang, by which the 
gods ascend and descend [to and from Heaven], casts no 
shadow at midday. If one calls [from that place], there is no 
echo. It forms a canopy over the center of the world. Hie 
Ruo Tree is to the west of the Jian Tree. On its branches are 
ten suns; its blossoms cast light upon the earth. 

4.8 

In the [fabric of] the earth’s shape, 
east and west are the weft; 
north and south are the warp. 

Mountains are the cumulative [result of] accretion; 
valleys are the cumulative [result of] cutting away. 

High places govern birth; 
low places govern death. 

Hills govern maleness; 
valleys govern femaleness. 

Water [congealed] in a round shape forms pearls; 
water [congealed] in a square shape forms jade. 

Clear water yields gold; the dragon’s lair in the depths 
yields the quintessential beauty of jade. 

Various sorts of earth give birth [to living creatures], 
each according to its own kind. 

For this reason, 

Tire qi of mountains gives birth to a preponderance of 
men. 

Tire qi of low wetlands gives birth to a preponderance 
of women. 

Tire qi of dikes produces many cases of muteness. 

Tire qi of wind produces many cases of deafness. 

Tire qi of forests produces many cases of paralysis of 
the legs. 

Tire qi of wood produces many cases of spinal 
deformity. 

Tire qi of seashores produces many cases of 
ulcerations of the lower extremities. 

Tire qi of stone produces much strength. 

Tire qi of steep passes produces many cases of goiter. 
Tire qi of heat produces many cases of early death. 

Tire qi of cold produces much longevity. 

Tire qi of valleys produces many cases of rheumatism. 
Tire qi of hills produces many cases of rickets. 

Tire qi of low-lying places produces much human 
fellow-feeling. 

Tire qi of mounds produces much covetousness. 

The qi of light soil produces much hastening after 
profit. 

The qi of heavy soil produces much sluggishness. 

The sound of clear water is small; 
the sound of muddy water is great. 

People [who live near] rushing water are light; 
people [who live near] placid water are heavy. 

The central region produces many sages. 

All tilings are the same as their qi; all things respond to 
their own class. 

Thus, 

In the south are herbs that do not die; 

In the north is ice that does not melt. 

In the east are countries of superior people. 

In the west is the corpse of Xing Can. 

4.11 

All birds and fish are born of yin but are of the class of 
yang creatures. Thus birds and fish are oviparous. Fish 
swim through water; birds fly in the clouds. Thus at the 
beginning of winter, swallows and sparrows enter the sea 
and transform into clams. = 

The myriad [living] creatures all are born as different 
kinds. 

Silkworms eat but do not drink. 

Cicadas drink but do not eat. 

Mayflies neither eat nor drink. Armored and scaly 
creatures eat during the summer but hibernate in the winter. 
Animals that eat without mastication have eight bodily 
openings and are oviparous. 

Animals that chew have nine bodily openings and are 
viviparous. 

Quadrupeds do not have feathers or wings. Animals that 
have horns do not have upper [incisor] teeth. 

[Some] animals do not have horns and are fat but do 
not have front teeth. 

[Other animals] have horns and are fat but do not have 
back teeth. 

Creatures born during the day resemble their fathers; 
creatures born at night resemble their mothers. 
Extreme yin produces females; 
extreme yang produces males. 

Bears hibernate, and birds migrate seasonally. 

4.14 (in part) 

Wood overcomes Earth, Earth overcomes Water, Water 
overcomes Fire, Fire overcomes Metal, Metal overcomes 
Wood. Thus, 

grain is born in the spring and dies in the fall. 

Legumes are born in the summer and die in the winter. 
Wheat is born in the autumn and dies in the summer. 
Green vegetables are born in the winter and die in 

midsummer. 

When Wood is in its prime, Water is old, Fire is about 
to be bom, Metal is paralyzed [imprisoned], and Earth 
is dead. 

When Fire is in its prime, Wood is old. Earth is about 
to be born, Water is paralyzed, and Metal is dead. 

When Earth is in its prime, Fire is old. Metal is about 
to be born, Wood is paralyzed, and Water is dead. 

When Metal is in its prime, Earth is old, Water is 
about to be born, Fire is paralyzed, and Wood is dead. 
When Water is in its prime, Metal is old, Wood is 
about to be born, Earth is paralyzed, and Fire is dead. 

4.18 (in part) 

Downyhair gave birth to Oceanman.—Oceanman gave 
birth to Ruojun. Ruojun gave birth to sages; sages gave birth 
to ordinary people. Thus creatures with scanty hair are born 
from ordinary people. 

Winged Excellence gave birth to Flying Dragon. Flying 
Dragon gave birth to the phoenix. The phoenix gave birth to 
the symurgh. Hie symurgh gave birth to ordinary birds. 
Feathered creatures in general are born from ordinary 
birds. 

Hairy Heifer gave birth to Responsive Dragon. 
Responsive Dragon gave birth to Establish Horse. Establish 
Horse gave birth to the qilin. Hie qilin gave birth to 

ordinary beasts. Hairy animals in general are born from 
ordinary beasts. 

Scaly One gave birth to Wriggling Dragon. Wriggling 
Dragon gave birth to Leviathan. Leviathan gave birth to 
Establish Emanation. Establish Emanation gave birth to 
ordinary fishes. Scaly creatures in general are born from 
ordinary fishes. 

Armored Abyss gave birth to First Dragon. First Dragon 
gave birth to Dark Sea-Turtle. Dark Sea-Turtle gave birth to 
Divine Tortoise. Divine Tortoise gave birth to ordinary 
turtles. Armored creatures in general are born from 
ordinary turtles. 

1. Kunlun is the name of a mythical mountain or mountain range northwest of 
China, home of the goddess Queen Mother of the West and associated with the 
elixir of immortality. It is not necessarily identical with the actual mountain range 
north of Tibet that bears the same name. The Piled-Stone Mountains are a 
mythical mountain range for which various early texts give different and 
inconsistent locations. 

2. In early China, it was widely believed that species of animals could transform 
into other animals in the same yin-yang/Five Phase category. For another 
example see 5.3, in which field mice are said to change into quail. 

3. All the names given in this section are fanciful or allegorical and, as such, are not 
included in the “ Glossary of Personal Names .” 

Five 

SEASONAL RIJLRS 

“Seasonal Rules” provides the means by which to 
follow Heaven’s seasons above, 
use Earth’s resources below, 

determine standards and implement correspondences, 
aligning them with human norms. 

It is formed into twelve sections to serve as models and 
guides. 

Ending and beginning anew, 
they repeat limitlessly, 
adapting, complying, imitating, and according 
in predicting bad and good fortune. 

Taking and giving, opening and closing, 
each has its prohibited days, 
issuing commands and administering orders, 
instructing and warning according to the season. 

[It] enables the ruler of humankind to know the means by 
which to manage affairs. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Seasonal rules” is the third part of a trilogy with chapters 
3 and 4. Having established, in those chapters, the patterns 
of Heaven (and their astrological significance) and the 
shape of Earth (and how creatures interact with 
topography), the HuainanzV s authors turn here to the role 
of monthly and seasonal ritual time in the proper governing 
of the empire. Reflecting the annual waxing and waning of 
the powers of yin and yang and the successive seasonal 
potency of each of the Five Phases (Wood, Fire, Earth, 
Metal, and Water), the chapter prescribes ritual behavior, 
colors of vestments, and actions of government for each of 
the year’s twelve months; proscribes certain other 
behaviors and actions; and warns of the bad consequences 
of applying the rules appropriate to any one season 
inappropriately to any of the others. 

The first twelve sections of the chapter are substantially 
identical to a text, generally known as the Yue ling 
(Monthly Ordinances), that is preserved in the first twelve 
chapters of the syncretic text Liishi chunqiu {Mr. Lii’s 
Spring and Autumn Annals, ca. 240 B.C.E.) and also in the 
Han ritual compendium the Liji {Record of Rites). Perhaps 
the Huainanzi version was borrowed (with small but 
systematic differences) from the Liishi chunqiu version, 
but it also is possible that both drew on a now unknown 
source text. Unlike the Liishi chunqiu and Liji versions of 
the text, the Huainanzi divides the year not into the four 

natural seasons of the solar year but into five seasons (with 
the third month of summer being treated as an artificial 
fifth season, “midsummer”) so as to make all the ritual 
prescriptions of the seasons conform to the correlative 
cosmology of the Five Phases. The chapter thus integrates 
yin-yang and Five Phase theory in a detailed and holistic 
fashion for the guidance of government policy throughout 
the year. Huainanzi 5 also contains three otherwise 
unknown additional sections that complement the material 
in the twelve month-by-month sections. 

The excerpts included here are 5.3, the ordinances for 
the third and last month of spring (representing all of the 
first twelve sections of the text); 5.13, which relates the 
monthly ordinances particularly to the seasons and the 
directions; and 5.15, which describes the annual round of 
yang and yin (and the government’s corresponding social 
policies) through the use of tool metaphors, a trope highly 
characteristic of the Huainanzi. 

Five 

5.3 

In the final month of spring, Zhaoyao-points to then [east- 
southeast]. [The lunar lodge] Seven Stars culminates at 
dusk; Ox Leader culminates at dawn. [Spring] occupies the 
east. Its days are jia and yi. Its beasts are [those of the] 
scaly [class]. Its [pentatonic] note is jue. The pitch pipe [of 
the third month] is Maiden Purity. The number [of spring] is 
eight. Its flavor is sour. Its smell is rank. Its sacrifices are 
made to the door god. From the body of the sacrificial 
victim, the spleen is offered first. 

The tong tree begins to bloom. Field mice transform 
into quail. Rainbows first appear. Duckweed begins to 
sprout. The Son of Heaven wears bluegreen clothing. He 
mounts [a carriage drawn by] azure dragon [horses]. He 
wears azure jade [pendants] and flies a bluegreen banner. He 
eats wheat with mutton. He drinks water gathered from the 
eight winds and cooks with fire [kindled from] fern stalks. 
The imperial ladies of the Eastern Palace wear bluegreen 
clothing with bluegreen trim. They play the qin and the se. 
The weapon [of spring] is the spear. The domestic animal 
[of spring] is the sheep. [The Son of Heaven] holds the 

dawn session of court in the corner [chamber of the 
Mingtang] to the right of the Bluegreen Yang Chamber. 2 

[He orders] the Master of Boats to turn over the boats 
[to inspect them] five times over and five times back and 
then to deliver a report [on their condition] to the Son of 
Heaven. The Son of Heaven thereupon boards his boats for 
the first time [in the new year], A sturgeon is offered in the 
inner chamber of the [ancestral] temple, and prayers are 
made that the wheat should bear grain. 

In this month, the production of qi reaches its fullest, 
[and] yang qi is released. Young plants grow no more, and 
the sprouting plants attain their maximum growth, but they 
cannot [yet] be gathered in. The Son of Heaven orders those 
in authority to open the granaries and storehouses to assist 
the impoverished and the bereft, to relieve the exhausted 
and [those who are] cut off [from their families], and to 
open the strong rooms and treasuries to distribute rolls of 
silk. He sends embassies to the nobles, inquires after 
eminent scholars, and performs courtesies to the worthy. 
He orders the Minister of Works, when the seasonal rains 
are about to descend, to mount his carriage as the water 
descends and, following all of the roads from the capital 
city, make an inspection of the plains and uncultivated 
fields, repairing the dikes and embankments, channeling the 
ditches and watercourses, following to its end every road 
and comprehending every byway, 

beginning at the metropolis, 
stopping [only] upon reaching the border. 

Those who hunt, [whether with] nets or with arrows, with 
rabbit snares or bird nets, or by putting out poisoned bait, 
are prohibited from going out from the nine gates [of the 
city]. [The Son of Heaven] also [issues] a prohibition to the 
foresters in the wilderness, [saying that there must be] no 
cutting down of mulberry trees or cudrania trees. Tire 
turtledove spreads its wings, [and] the crested hoepoe lands 
in the mulberry tree. Preparing plain cocoon frames, round 
baskets and rectangular baskets, the royal consort and the 
royal concubines fast and perform austerities. Then they go 
to the mulberry [groves] in the eastern suburbs where 
the lady overseers initiate 
and supervise [the work of] sericulture. 

[He] commands [those in charge of] the five storehouses to 
order the workmen to inspect the gold and iron, the pelts 
and hides, the sinew and horn, the arrowshaft bamboo and 
the bow-wood, the grease and glue, the cinnabar and lac, 
[seeing to it that] there is none that is not excellent. 
Selecting an auspicious day in the last ten day period of the 
month, [he holds] a great musical performance, which 
brings jubilation. Moreover [he orders] bulls to be mated 
with cows and stallions with mares; afterward the female 
animals are driven out to their herdsmen. He orders on 
behalf of the kingdom an exorcism at the nine gates [of the 

capital city], [and] sacrificial [animal victims] are torn apart 
in order to bring an end to the qi of springtime. 

If the ordinances for this month are observed, sweet rain 
will fall during the three ten-day periods of the month. If, 
during the last month of spring, the ordinances of winter 
were carried out, then cold qi would from time to time 
issue forth; all the plants and trees would wither; and the 
state would [suffer] great fear. If the ordinances of summer 
were carried out, the people would [suffer] epidemics; the 
seasonal rains would not fall; and nothing would grow on 
the mountains and tumuli. If the ordinances of autumn were 
carried out, Heaven would produce a flood of yin. Rains 
would fall [unseasonably] early, [and] military rebellions 
would break out. 

The third month governs villages. Its tree is the pear. 

5.13 

There are five positions. 

The extreme limit of the eastern region begins from 
Stele-Stone Mountain, passing through the Land of 
Chaoxian-and the Land of Giants, hr the east it reaches the 
place from whence the sun rises, the land of the Fu [-Sang] 
tree, the wild fields of the Green-Land trees. The places 
ruled by Tai Hao and Gou Mang [encompass] 12,000 li.- 

The ordinances [of the East] say: Hold fast to all 
prohibitions. Open what is closed or covered. Penetrate to 

the utmost all blocked-up passes. Extend to the frontiers 
and passes. Wander afar. Reject resentment and hatred. Free 
slaves and those condemned to hard labor [for crimes]. 
Avoid mourning and grief. Refrain from imposing corporal 
punishments. Open gates and dams. Proclaim a [general] 
distribution of wealth [from the public treasury]. 
Harmoniously resolve [any] resentment [that may be] 
abroad. Pacify the four directions. Act with pliancy and 
kindness. Put a stop to hardness and [overbearing] strength. 

Tire extreme limit of the southern region begins from 
outside [= beyond] [the country of] the people of North- 
Facing Doors and passes through the country of Zhuan Xu. 
It extends to the wild lands of Stored Fire and Blazing 
Winds. Tire regions governed by the Vermilion Thearch and 
Zhu Rong encompass 12,000 li. 

Tire ordinances [of the south] say: Ennoble the virtuous 
[and] reward the meritorious. Show kindness to the 
beneficent and excellent. Come to the aid of the hungry and 
thirsty. Raise up those who display prowess in agriculture. 
Relieve the poor and destitute. Show kindness to orphans 
and widows. Grieve with the infirm and ill. Dispense great 
emoluments [and] carry out great bestowals of rewards. 
Raise up ruined lineages. Support those who have no 
posterity. Enfeoff nobles. Establish [in office] worthy 
assistants. 

Tire extreme limits of the central region extend from 

Kunlun east through the region of [the two peaks? of] 
Constancy Mountain. Kris is where the sun and the moon 
have their paths. It is the source of the Han and Jiang [= 
Yangzi] rivers. [Here are] the open fields of the multitudes 
of people, [the lands] suitable for the five [kinds of] grain. 
At Dragon Gate the He [= Yellow] and the Qi rivers merge. 
[Here, Yu the Great] took swelling earth to dam the 
floodwaters and traced out the [nine] provinces. [Krese 
territories] extend eastward to SteleStone Mountain. Kre 
territories governed by the Yellow Emperor and the 
Sovereign of the Soil encompass 12,000 li. 

Kre ordinances [of the center] say: Be evenhanded 
without inconsistency. Be enlightened without petty fault 
finding. Embrace, enfold, cover over, [and] enrich as with 
dew, so that there is none who is not tenderly enwrapped in 
[the royal] bosom. Be vast and overflowing, without private 
considerations. Let government be tranquil, to bring about 
harmony. Succor, nurture, and feed the old and the weak. 
Send condolences to [the families of] the dead, inquire 
after the sick, [all] to escort the myriad creatures on their 
return. 

Kre extreme limits of the regions of the west extend 
from Kunlun through the Flowing Sands and the Sinking 
Feathers, westward to the country of Kiree Dangers. [Krey 
extend to] the Walled City of Stone and the Metal Palace 
[and] the open fields of the people who drink qi and do not 

die. Hie territories governed by Shao Hao and Ru Shou 
encompass 12,000 li. 

Hie ordinances [of the west] say: Scrupulously use the 
laws. Punishment of the guilty must be carried out. Take 
precautions against thieves and robbers. Prohibit sexual 
license and debauchery. Issue instructions regarding the 
general collection [of harvest taxes]. Make a careful record 
of all collections [of revenue]. Repair city walls and outer 
fortifications. Repair and clear out drainage pipes. Close 
off footpaths and lanes; block up sluices and ditches. Shut 
off flowing water, swamps, gorges, and valleys. Guard 
doors and gates. Set out [in readiness] weapons and armor. 
Select officials. Punish the lawless. 

Hre extreme limits of the regions of the north extend 
from the nine marshes and the farthest reaches of Exhaust- 
the-Summer Gloom, north to the Valley Where Ordinances 
Cease. Here are the open fields of freezing cold, piled-up 
ice, snow, hail, frost, sleet, and of pooling, soaking, 
massed-up water. Hre regions governed by Zhuan Xu and 
XuanMing encompass 12,000 li. 

Hre ordinances [of the north] say: Extend all 
prohibitions. Firmly shut and store away. Repair [the 
fortifications of] the frontiers and passes. Fix gates and 
water barriers. Prohibit walking around [outside the city 
walls]. Speedily carry out corporal punishments. Kill those 
who are under sentence of death. Close up the city gates 

and the gates of the outer fortifications. On a large scale, 
conduct investigations of strangers. Put a stop to 
communications and travel. Prohibit the pleasures of the 
night. Close up [chambers] early and open them late, in 
order to restrain lewd folk. If lewd persons are already to 
be found, they must be seized and held under severe 
restraint. Heaven has already almost completed its cycle: 
Punishments and executions must [be carried out] without 
any being pardoned; even in the case of [royal] relatives of 
surpassing venerableness, the law must be carried out to the 
full degree. 

There must be no travel by water. 

There must be no opening up of that which is stored 
away. 

There must be no relaxation of punishments. 

5.15 

Regulating the standards: 

For the great regulation of yin and yang, there are six 
standards. 

Heaven is the marking cord. 

Earth is the level. 

Spring is the compass. 

Summer is the balance beam. 

Autumn is the square. 

Winter is the weight. 

Hie marking cord is that by which the myriad things 
are marked out. 

Hie level is that by which the myriad things are 
leveled. 

Hie compass is that by which the myriad things are 
made round. 

Hie balance beam is that by which the myriad things 
are equalized. 

Hie square is that by which the myriad things are made 
square. 

Hie weight is that by which the myriad things are 
weighed. 

Hie marking cord as a standard: 

It is straight without swerving. 

It is long and inexhaustible. 

It is long enduring and does not wear out. 

It reaches to far distances without deviation. 

It matches Heaven in Potency. 

It matches the spirits in illumination. 

[By its means,] what one desires may be obtained, 
and what one loathes may be caused to perish. 

From ancient times to the present, there can be no 
deviation from its trueness. Its innate Potency is vast and 
subtle; it is broad and capacious. For this reason, the 
Supreme Hiearch takes it as the ancestor of things. 

Hie level as a standard: 

It is flat and not bumpy, 
balanced and not inconsistent, 
broad and capacious, 
spacious and abundant, 
so as to be harmonious. 

It is pliant and not hard, 
acute but not injurious, 
flowing and not stopped up, 
simple [to use] and unsullied, 

expansively penetrating and [proceeding in] an orderly 
course. 

It is comprehensive and subtle but not sluggish. 

The level makes things perfectly flat without error, 
thereby the myriad things are leveled. 

The people are without malice or scheming; resentment 
and hatred do not arise. Therefore the Supreme Thearch 
uses it to make all things level. 

The compass as a standard: 

It revolves without repeating itself. 

It is round without turning [from its course]. 

Great but without excess, 
broad and spacious, 

feelings and actions are ordered [thereby]. 

It is expansively penetrating and [proceeds] on an 
orderly course. 

Abundant! Simple! 

Hie hundred forms of resentment do not arise. 

The standard of the compass does not err; 
it gives birth to both qi and pattern. 

Tlie balance beam as a standard: 

It is deliberate but does not lag behind. 

It is impartial and not resented. 

It bestows but is not benevolent. 

It condoles but does not rebuke. 

It adjusts to an appropriate level the people’s 
emoluments. 

It continues but does not heap up. 

Majestic! Brilliant! 

Only those [possessing] Potency act thus. 

Nurturing, bringing to full growth, transforming, 
rearing; 

the myriad creatures abundantly flourish. 

It makes the five [kinds of] grain bear seed, 
and the bounded fields be fruitful. 

Government [by this standard] does not err; Heaven and 
Earth are illuminated thereby. 

Hie square as a standard: 

It is majestic and not contrary. 

It is hard and unbroken. 

It seizes but does not provoke resentment, 

[Penetrates] within but does no injury. 

It is stern and severe but not coercive. 

Its ordinances are carried out but without wasteful 
destruction. 

In killing and smiting, its ends are attained; 
the enemy is brought to submission. 

The square’s trueness is without error; all punishments 
are [thereby] suitably fulfilled. 

Tire weight as a standard: 

It is hasty but not excessive. 

It kills but does not slaughter. 

It is filled to completion. 

It is comprehensive and subtle but without 
sluggishness. 

It inflicts destruction on things but does not single 
things out. 

It punishes and kills without pardon. 

Sincerity and trustworthiness are essential to it, 
Strength and sincerity make it firm. 

Cleanse away filth! Chastise the evil! 

Wickedness may not be tolerated. 

Therefore, if correct [policies] for winter are to be carried 
out, [the ruler] must appear 

weak in order to be strong, 
pliant in order to be firm. 

Tire weight’s trueness is without error; through it the 
myriad things are shut away. 

In the regulation of the Mingtang, 

be tranquil, taking the level as a pattern. 

Be active, taking the marking cord as a pattern. 

For the government of spring, adopt the compass. 

For the government of autumn, adopt the square. 

For the government of winter, adopt the weight. 

For the government of summer, adopt the balance 
beam. 

Thus dryness and dampness, cold and heat, will arrive 
in their proper seasonal nodes. 

Sweet rain and fertile dew will descend in their proper 
times. 

1. Zhaoyao is a star at the end of the “handle” of the Northern Dipper, which acts 
as a celestial dial making a complete circuit of the horizon in a year. Here it is 
described as pointing in succession to the months and their associated directions. 

2. The Mingtang (Bright Hall) was a temple in which the ruler worshipped Heaven. 
Different descriptions of this hallowed structure are found in a number of early 
texts. The Huainanzi depicts it as a structure containing nine rooms, in which 
the ruler performs rituals corresponding to the months and the seasons. 

3. Chaoxian is an ancient Chinese name for Korea. 

4. Section 5.13 deals with geography on a grand scale, describing not only China 
(“the central region”) but also fantastic regions beyond China’s frontiers, ruled 
by mythical being?. 

Six 

SURVEYING OBSCURITIES 

“Surveying Obscurities” provides the means by which to 
discuss 

Utmost Essence penetrating the Nine Heavens, 

Utmost Subtlety sinking into the Formless, 
Unblemished Purity entering Utmost Clarity, 
and Luminous Brightness penetrating Dark Obscurity. 
It begins by 

grasping tilings and deducing their categories, 

observing them, taking hold of them, 

lifting them up, and arranging them, 

and pervasively positing them as categories of 

similarity, 

by which tilings can be understood as ideas and visualized 
as forms. 

It then 

penetrates various obstructions, 
bursts open various blockages, 
to guide your awareness, 
to connect it to the Limitless. 

[It] then thereby illuminates 

the stimuli of the various categories of things, 

the responses of identical qi, 

the unions of yin and yang, 

and the intricacies of forms and shapes. 

It is what leads you to observe and discern in a far-reaching 
and expansive way. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

The first five chapters of the Huainanzi establish the 
characteristics of the Way and its primacy in cosmogony, in 
the attainment of sagehood, and in the cosmological realms 
of Heaven, Earth, and Time. In chapter 6 . “Surveying 
Obscurities,” the Huainan masters turn to a phenomenon 
they cannot fully explain, although they are certain that it 
exists. This is “resonance,” which is thought of as a kind of 
sympathetic vibration in the force field of qi that pervades 
the cosmos. Because resonance acts not only on physical 
objects but also on emotions and intentions, the actions of 
humans have clear and predictable effects in the natural 
world. Impiety, injustice, and bad government lead to 
human catastrophes and natural disasters, whereas 
following the Way and instituting good government lead to 
human happiness and celestial harmony. Accordingly, it is 
imperative, the chapter maintains, for the ruler to look into 
the roots of bad and good government, identify himself 
with the One, and make his actions conform to the Way, so 

as to lay the foundation for the whole world to be 
harmonious and tranquil. In the end, however, the means by 
which resonance operates remain cloaked in obscurity. As 
the chapter’s title implies, the phenomenon can be 
perceived in its general outlines but not with complete 
clarity. 

Some passages in “Surveying Obscurities” resemble 
lines in the Zhuangzi, the Liishi chunqiu, the Guanzi, and 
other early texts, but the chapter as a whole is not heavily 
dependent on such texts as sources. Instead, it draws its 
illustrative material from a body of anecdotal lore in wide 
circulation in the Warring States and early imperial eras, 
material that also is used extensively in the later chapters 
of the Huainanzi. 

Although “Surveying Obscurities” is one of the shortest 
chapters in the entire Huainanzi, it is arguably also one of 
the most important because it explains the constant 
interaction and transformation of all phenomena central to 
the Huainanzi 's worldview. 

Six 

6.1 (in part) 

In ancient times Music Master Kuang played the tune 
“White Snow” and because of that, spiritlike creatures 
descended [from heaven]; wind and rain arrived violently; 
Duke Ping became impotent and ill; and the lands of the 
state of Jin reddened [with drought].- 

The Commoner Woman cried out to Heaven. Thunder 
and lightning beat down; Duke Jing’s lookout tower 
collapsed; his limbs and body were broken and slashed; and 
floodwaters gushed from the sea.= 

Now the blind music master and the Commoner Woman 
were of a [social] rank as lowly as swaying weeds; 
their [political] weight was as light as windblown 
feathers; 
yet 

by concentrating their essences and disciplining their 
intentions, 

abandoning their [mundane] responsibilities and 
storing up spirit [energy], 

upward, they penetrated to ninefold Heaven, rousing and 
putting into action the utmost essence. 

Looking at things from this perspective in regard to the 
punishments [sent by] Heaven on high: Though one dwells 
in a broad wasteland or a dark valley, 
at a remote distance or a secluded hideaway, 
in a multilayered stone refuge, 
or at a frontier barrier or narrow defile, 
there is no place where one may escape them. This is clear. 

6.2 

That things in their [various] categories are mutually 
responsive is [something] dark, mysterious, deep, and 
subtle. 

Knowledge is not capable of assessing it; 
argument is not capable of explaining it. 

Thus, 

when the east wind arrives, wine turns clear and 
overflows [its vessels]; 

when silkworms secrete fragmented silk, the shang 
string [of a stringed instrument] snaps. 

Something has stimulated them. 

When a picture is traced out with the ashes of reeds, 
the moon’s halo has a [corresponding] gap. 

When the leviathan dies, comets appear. 

Something has moved them. 

Thus, when a sage occupies the throne, he embraces the 
Way and does not speak, and his nurturance reaches to the 

myriad people. But when ruler and ministers [harbor] 
distrust in their hearts, back-to-back arcs appear in the sky. 
The mutual responses of spirit qi are subtle indeed! 

Thus, 

mountain clouds are like grassy hummocks; 
river clouds are like fish scales; 
dryland clouds are like smoky fire; 
cataract clouds are like billowing water. 

All resemble their forms and evoke responses according to 
their class. 

Tire burning mirror takes fire from the sun; 
the square receptacle takes dew from the moon. 

Of [all the things] between Heaven and Earth, even a 
skilled astrologer cannot master all their techniques. [Even] 
a hand [that can hold] minutely tiny and indistinct things 
cannot grasp a beam of light. However, from what is within 
the palm of one’s hand, one can trace [correlative] 
categories to beyond the extreme end point [of the 
cosmos]. [Thus] that one can set up [these implements] and 
produce water and fire is [a function of] the mutually 
[responsive] movement of yin and yang of the same qi. Hrat 
is how Fu Yue bestrode [the lunar lodges] Winnowing 
Basket and Tail. 

Thus, 

maximum yin is freezing cold; 
maximum yang is blazing hot. 

Hie two of them come together and interconnect to bring 
about harmony, and the myriad things thereby are born. If 
there were lots of males and no females, how indeed would 
transformation be able to create [anything]? This is what is 
known as 

the argument that is not spoken 

and the Way that is not [called] “the Way.” 

Hius 

to attract those who are far-off [i.e., emissaries], one 
employs non-action; 

to cherish those who are close by, one employs non¬ 
interference. 

But only one who “walks by night” is able to have this 
[technique]. Hius [he] retires [his] fast horses so they [only] 
make dung, and [Inis] chariot tracks do not need to extend 
beyond far-off lands. Hiis is what is called 
racing while sitting, bathing on dry land, 
darkness at noon, bright light at night, 
melting pitch in winter, 
making ice in summer. 

6.6 

In ancient times, when Wang Liang and Zaofu went driving, 
[as soon as] they mounted their chariots and took hold of 
the reins, the horses set themselves in order and wanted to 
work together. 

They obediently paced in step with one another; 
[whether] pulling hard or easing off, they were as one. 
Their hearts were in tune and their qi harmonious; 
their bodies [became] more and more light and 
coordinated. 

Urey were content to work hard and happy to go 
forward; 

they galloped away as if they would vanish. 

Urey went right and left like [the waving of] a whip; 
they circled around like a jade bracelet. 

All people of that era considered [Wang Liang and Zaofu] 
to be superlative [charioteers], but that was because they 
had not yet seen any [truly] worthy ones. Now consider the 
charioteering of Qian Qie and Da Bing. They 
considered reins and bits superfluous, 
got rid of whips and cast aside goads. 

Before the chariot began to move, it was starting on 
its own. 

Before the horses were given the signal, they were 
walking on their own. 

Urey paced [like the] sun and moved [like the] moon. 
Urey flashed [like the] stars and advanced [like the] 
dark. 

Urey raced [like] lightning and leaped [like] ghosts. 
Advancing or withdrawing, gathering strength or 
stretching out, 

they did not see the slightest barrier. 

Thus, 

with no gesturing or pointing, 
with no cursing or scolding, 

they overtook the wild geese flying to Piled-Stone 
Mountain, 

passed the jungle fowl [flying to] Guyu Mountain. 

Their galloping was like flying; 

their bursts of speed like thread snapping. 

[It was] like riding an arrow or mounting the wind, 
like following a cyclone and returning in an instant. 

At dawn they started from Fusang 
and set with the sun at Luotang. 

This was taking something unused and obtaining its 
usefulness: it was not done by examining tilings through 
reason or thought or through the exercise of manual skill. 
Whenever urgent desires took form in the breasts [of Qian 
Qie and Da Bing], their quintessential spirits were [already] 
communicated to the six horses. This was a case of using 
non-driving to go driving. 

1. “White Snow” was a work of sacred music. When Duke Ping (of Jin, r. 557-532 
B.C.E.) ordered it played in a secular setting, calamities ensued. 

2. The nameless “Commoner Woman” was falsely accused by her sister-in-law of 
murdering her mother-in-law. Duke Jing of Qi reigned from 547 to 490 B.C.E. 

Seven 

QUINTESSENTIAL SPIRIT 

“Quintessential Spirit” provides the means by which to 

trace to the source the root from which human life 
arises 

and understand what animates humans’ form, frame, 
and nine orifices. 

Taking its images from Heaven, 

it coordinates and identifies humans’ blood and qi 
with thunder and lightning, wind and rain; 
correlates and categorizes humans’ happiness and 
anger 

with dawn and dusk, cold and heat. 

Judging the distinctions between life and death, 
distinguishing the traces of identity and difference, 
regulating the workings of movement and stillness, 
it thereby returns to the Ancestor of nature and destiny. 

It is what enables you to 

cherish and nourish the essence and spirit, 
pacify and still the ethereal and earthly souls, 
not change the self on account of things, 

and fortify and preserve the abode of Emptiness and 
Nothingness. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Quintessential Spirit” is the first chapter of the Huainanzi 
to introduce human beings systematically into the grand 
scheme of things. The text continues its methodical 
explication of the underlying powers, patterns, and forces 
of the cosmos and its creatures before turning, in the later 
chapters of the work, to illustrations and amplifications of 
the workings of the Way in the world of affairs. 

Chapters 1 and 2 introduced cosmology and ontology; 
chapters 3 through 5 explored the various dimensions of 
Heaven, Earth, and Time; and chapter 6 explained the 
mysterious operations of resonance by which things in the 
world interact through stimuli and responses. In chapter 7 . 
the authors turn to human beings, the third leg of the early 
Chinese conceptual tripod of Heaven, Earth, and Man. They 
identify the Quintessential Spirit as the primordial vital 
energy of consciousness, what gives humans their 
distinctive abilities to function cognitively in the outer 
world and contemplatively in the inner world. 

The authors begin by identifying the origins of the 
Quintessential Spirit in the genesis of the cosmos. It is 
associated with Heaven and yang energies, in contrast to 
the physical body, which is associated with Earth and yin 
energies. Perfected human beings are able to preserve this 

Quintessential Spirit through a meditative practice 
(“techniques of the mind”) that involves emptying the mind 
and cultivating tranquillity, a practice described throughout 
this chapter: human beings tend to lose Quintessential 
Spirit through an externalizing process that occurs through 
excessive stimulation of the senses. But adepts at inner- 
cultivation practice—sages, the “Perfected,” and the 
“Genuine”—prevent this loss by maintaining an inner focus 
through careful circulation of the vital breath, eventually 
reaching complete union with the Way and so developing 
many of its characteristics. Using an enhanced cognitive 
function referred to as “spiritlike illumination,” they 
maintain this connection throughout their interactions in 
the phenomenal realm, thus establishing that inner 
cultivation is the foundation of success in the outer world. 

The authors of this chapter express their contempt for 
two groups of rivals: practitioners of the moving 
meditation called ‘Guiding and Pulling” (of the qi), 
portrayed as health fanatics who nurture their bodies at the 
expense of the minds and spirits; and Confucian literati, 
who stifle and suppress their true natures in a vain effort to 
cultivate themselves. This chapter shares a number of 
phrases and terms with the “inner chapters” of the 
Zhuangzi but also is greatly indebted to the “Inward 
Training” chapters of the Guanzi and probably other works 
of the inner-cultivation tradition that are now lost. 

Seven 

7.1 

Of old, in the time before there was Heaven and Earth: 
There were only images and no forms. 

All was obscure and dark, 
vague and unclear, 
shapeless and formless, 
and no one knows its gateway. 

There were two spirits, born in murkiness, one that 
established Heaven and the other that constructed Earth. 

So vast! No one knows where they ultimately end. 

So broad! No one knows where they finally stop. 
Thereupon 

they differentiated into the yin and the yang 
and separated into the eight cardinal directions. 

Tire firm and the yielding formed each other; 
the myriad things thereupon took shape. 

Tire turbid vital energy became creatures; 
the refined vital energy became humans. 

Therefore, 

the Quintessential Spirit is of Heaven; 
the skeletal system is of Earth. 

When the Quintessential Spirit enters its gateway 
and the skeletal system returns to its root, 
how can I still survive? 

For this reason, the sages 

model themselves on Heaven, 
accord with their genuine responses, 
are not confined by custom, 
or seduced by other men. 

Urey take 
Heaven as father, 

Earth as mother, 
yin and yang as warp, 
the four seasons as weft. 

Through the tranquillity of Heaven, they become pure. 
Through the stability of Earth, they become calm. 
Among the myriad things, 

those who lose this perish; 
those who follow this live. 

Tranquillity and stillness are the dwellings of spiritlike 
illumination; 

emptiness and nothingness are where the Way resides. 
For this reason, 

those who seek for it externally lose it internally; 
those who preserve it internally attain it externally as 
well. 

It is like the roots and branches of trees: none of the 

thousands of limbs and tens of thousands of leaves does not 
derive from the roots. 

7.4 

Tire apertures of perception [eyes and ears] are the 
portals of the Quintessential Spirit. 

The vital energy and attention are the emissaries and 
servants of the Five Orbs. 

When the eyes and ears are enticed by the joys of 
sound and color, then the Five Orbs oscillate and are 
not stable. 

When the Five Orbs oscillate and are not stable, then 
the blood and vital energy are agitated and not at rest. 
When the blood and vital energy are agitated and not at 
rest, then the Quintessential Spirit courses out 
[through the eyes and ears] and is not preserved. 

When the Quintessential Spirit courses out and is not 
preserved, 

then when either good fortune or misfortune arrives, 
although it be the size of hills and mountains, one has no 
way to recognize it. 

But 

if you make your ears and eyes totally clear and 
profoundly penetrating and not enticed by external 
things; 

if your vital energy and attention are empty, tranquil, 

still, and serene and you eliminate lusts and desires; 
if the Five Orbs are stable, reposed, replete, and full 
and not leaking [the vital energies]; 
if your Quintessential Spirit is preserved within your 
physical frame and does not flow out; 
then even gazing back beyond bygone ages and looking 
further than things that are to come; even these things 
would not be worth doing, much less discriminating 
between bad and good fortune. 

Therefore it is said, “Tire farther you go, the less you 
know.” This says that the Quintessential Spirit cannot be 
allowed to be enticed by external things. 

Therefore, 

the five colors disrupt the eyes and cause them to be 
unclear; 

the five sounds confuse the ears and cause them to not 
be acute; 

the five tastes disrupt the mouth and cause it to lose 
the ability to taste; 

preferences confuse the nature and cause it to fly 
about [from one thing to the next]. 

These four things are how the people of this world 
commonly nourish their natures. 

However, they all are human attachments. 

Therefore it is said: 

“Lusts and desires cause humans’ vital energy to 

dissipate; 

likes and dislikes cause human’ minds to tire.” 

If you do not quickly eliminate them, your attention and 
vital energy will diminish daily. 

7.7 (in part) 

Those whom we call the Perfected are people whose inborn 
nature is merged with the Way. 

Therefore, 

they possess it but appear to have nothing. 

They are full but appear to be empty. 

They are settled in this unity and do not know of any 
duality 

They cultivate what is inside and pay no attention to 
what is outside. 

They illuminate and clarify Grand Simplicity; 
taking no action, they revert to the Unhewn.- 
They embody the foundation and embrace the spirit in 
order to roam freely within the confines of Heaven and 
Earth. Untrammeled, they ramble outside this dusty world 
and wander aimlessly in their taskless calling. Unfettered 
and unhindered, they harbor no clever devices or cunning 
knowledge in their minds. 

Thus death and life are great indeed, but they do not alter 
them. Although Heaven and Earth support and nourish, they 
are not protected by them. Urey discern the flawless and do 

not get mixed up with things. While seeing the chaos of 
affairs, they are able to preserve their origin. 

Beings like these 

negate obsession and fear 

and cast aside sensory perceptions. 

Their mental activity is concentrated internally 
and penetrates through to comport with the One. 

At rest, they have no objectives; 
in motion, they set no goals. 

Artlessly they go forth; 
peacefully they come back. 

Their bodies are like withered wood; 
their minds are like dead ashes. 

They forget the Five Orbs; 
lose their physical frames; 
know without studying; 
see without looking; 
complete without acting; 
and differentiate without judging. 

When stimulated, they respond; 
when pressed, they move; 
when it is unavoidable, they go forth, 
like the brilliant glow of a flame, 
like the mimicry of a shadow. 

Taking the Way as their guiding thread, they are necessarily 
so. Embracing the foundation of Grand Purity, they contain 

nothing, and things cannot disturb them. Vast and empty, 
they are tranquil and without worry 

Great marshes may catch fire, but it cannot burn them. 
Great rivers may freeze over, but it cannot chill them. 
Great thunder may shake the mountains, but it cannot 
startle them. 

Great storms may darken the sun, but it cannot harm 
them. 

For this reason, 

they view precious pearls and jade as being the same 
as gravel. 

Urey view the supremely exalted and maximally 
favored [at court] as being the same as wandering 
guest [scholars]. 

Urey view [the beauties] Mao Qiang and Xi Shi as 
being the same as funerary figurines. 

Urey take life and death to be a single transformation 
and the myriad tilings to be a single whole. 

Urey merge their vital essence with the Root of Great 
Purity 

and roam freely beyond the boundless. 

Urey have a vital essence but do not [recklessly] 
expend it; 

and have a spirit but do not [thoughtlessly] use it. 

Urey identify with the artlessness of the Great 
Unhewn 

and take their stand amid the supremely pure. 

This is how their Quintessential Spirit is able to verge upon 
the Way; this is the roaming of the Perfected. 

7.8 

If you huff and puff, exhale and inhale, 
blow out the old and pull in the new, 
practice the Bear Hang, the Bird Stretch, 
the Duck Splash, the Ape Leap, 
the Owl Gaze, and the Tiger Stare: 

This is what is practiced by those who nurture the body. 
Hiey are not the practices of those who polish the mind 
[e.g., the Perfected]. They make their spirit overflow, 
without losing its fullness. When, day and night, without 
injury, they bring the spring to external tilings, they unite 
with, and give birth to, the seasons in their own minds. 

Moreover, there are those who mortify their bodies 
without harming their minds, 

and those who cede their dwelling [i.e., the mind] 
without diminishing their Quintessence. 

Hie thinking of the leper is not altered; 
the body of the madman not impaired. 

But when their spirits eventually make their far-off journey, 
who will have time to think about what they did [in their 
lives]? Thus even though the body disappears, the spirit is 

never transformed. If you use what does not transform in 
response to transformations, [even through] a thousand 
alterations and ten thousand evolutions, you will not have 
begun to reach a limit. 

What transforms returns to the Formless; 

what does not transform is born together with Heaven 

and Earth. 

A tree dies because its greenness has departed. But can 
that which gives life to a tree be a tree itself? Analogously, 
what fills the body is not the body. Thus, 

What gives birth to the living never dies, yet that to 
which it gives birth does die. 

What transforms things never transforms, yet that 
which it transforms does transform. 

If you take the world lightly, then your spirit will have 
no attachments. 

If you minimize the myriad things, then your mind will 
not be led astray. 

If you equalize death and life, then your mentality will 
not be fearful. 

If you take all alterations and transformations as 
[being] the same, then your clarity will not be 
darkened. 

Tire masses take these as empty words, but I take them as 
my ideal and prove them true. 

7.14 

Shallow scholars in this declining age do not understand 
how to get to the origins of their minds and return to their 
root. Urey merely sculpt and polish their natures and adorn 
and stifle their genuine responses in order to interact with 
their age. Thus, 

when their eyes desire something, they forbid it with 
measures; 

when their minds delight in something, they restrict it 
with rites. 

Urey hasten forth in circles and formally scrape and bow 
while the meat goes bad and becomes inedible 
and the wine goes sour and becomes undrinkable. 
Externally they restrict their bodies; 
internally they belabor their minds. 

Urey damage the harmony of yin and yang 

and constrain the genuine responses of their nature to 

fate. 

Tlrus throughout their lives, they are sorrowful people. 

Those who penetrate through to the Way are not like 
this. 

Urey regulate the genuine responses of their natures, 
cultivate the teclmiques of the mind, 
nourish these with harmony, 
take hold of these through suitability. 

Urey delight in the Way and forget what is lowly; 

Urey find repose in Potency and forget what is base. 

Since their natures desire nothing, they attain whatever 
they desire. 

Since their minds delight in nothing, there are no 
delights in which they do not partake. 

Those who do not exceed their genuine responses do 
not allow them to tie down their Potency. 

Those who find ease in their natures do not allow them 
to injure their inner harmony. 

Thus with 

their relaxed bodies and untrammeled awareness, 
their standards and regulations, 
they can become models for the empire. 

1. The “Unhewn” (sometimes also translated as the “Uncarved Block”) refers to the 
original, undifferentiated state of matter: a block of wood or stone that has not 
yet been carved and therefore retains the possibility of being carved into 
anything. It is a common Daoist metaphor for the unitary mind of the sage. 

Eight 

THE BASIC WARP 

‘The Basic Warp” provides the means by which to 
illuminate the Potency of the great sages 
and penetrate the Way of the Unique Inception. 
Delineating and summarizing the devolution of 
decadent eras from past to present, 
it thereby praises the flourishing prosperity of earlier 
ages 

and criticizes the corrupt governments of later ages. 

It is what enables you to 

dispense with the acuity and keenness of hearing and 
sight, 

still the responses and movements of the essence and 
spirit, 

restrain effusive and ephemeral viewpoints, 
temper the harmony of nourishing your nature, 
distinguish the conduct of [the Five] Thearchs and 
[Three] Kings, 

and set out the differences between small and great. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“The Basic Warp,” the last of the HuainanzV s “root” 
chapters, uses several different but generally 
complementary descriptions of an imagined historical past 
to raise questions about the nature of sage-rulership and to 
criticize government in the present era. In all these 
scenarios, an archaic era of agrarian primitivism is 
idealized as a time when sages, embodying the Way and its 
Potency, could govern almost invisibly by means of non¬ 
action. Both the human and the natural worlds responded 
resonantly to the sages’ superior qualities. Qualities like 
Humaneness and Music were intrinsic to the sage and were 
not (as they later became) mere expedients to control the 
populace in times that departed ever more profoundly from 
the Way. But inevitably the world began to devolve from the 
archaic ideal. People perceived deficiencies in their lives 
and increasingly took steps to satisfy their desires. Tire 
more they did so, the more the situation degenerated from 
primordial simplicity and unity. Thus we find ourselves in 
an era of discord and turmoil. What is to be done? 

Tire answer is perhaps surprising. Although latter-day 
calamities have led to suffering and turmoil, they also have 
created an opportunity for a contemporary ruler—one wise 
enough to avoid the pitfalls of extravagance, excess, 
cruelty, and greed—to establish a new era of sagely rule. In 
tranquil times, there is no need for remarkable men or 
extraordinary measures. But in times of danger and trouble, 

a ruler who knows how to embody the unmediated unity of 
the Grand One, to align himself with the Way and its 
Potency, to match his actions to the rhythms of the 
cosmos, and to become imbued with spirit illumination has 
a golden opportunity to govern as a sage. 

The chapter’s title, “Tire Basic Warp,” proposes an 
analogy: the Way, Potency, Humaneness, Rightness, and 
other qualities of the sage are like the warp threads strung 
on a loom in preparation for weaving a piece of cloth. Into 
this warp, the ruler weaves the weft threads of 
administration to produce the fabric of good government. 

Tire divinities and sage-rulers that appear in this chapter 
are the common property of a wide range of early Chinese 
texts. Although “Tire Basic Warp” is not heavily dependent 
on any particular source text for its material, its analytical 
point of view seems clearly grounded in the Laozi. 

Eight 

8.3 

The people of antiquity made their qi the same as that of 
Heaven and Earth; they wandered in an era of unity. At that 
time, 

there was no garnering advantage by praise and 
rewards, 

no intimidation by mutilations and punishments. 

Ritual and Rightness, purity and modesty, had not yet 
been established; 

slander and flattery, Humaneness and contempt, had 
not yet been set up; 

and the myriad peoples had not yet [begun to] treat one 
another with fraud and oppression, cruelty and exploitation 
—it was as if they were still immersed in turbid obscurity. 
Coming down to the era of decline, [it transpired that] 
people were abundant, but wealth was scarce; 
people labored to the utmost, but their nourishment 
was insufficient. 

Thus competition and strife were born, and Humaneness 
was valued. The Humane and the petty minded were[, 
however,] not treated equitably. 

Neighbors formed groups, 
and friends formed cabals. 

Urey promoted falsehood and deceit, 
cherished a spirit of contrivance and artifice, 
and lost [their] natural tendencies. 

Thus Rightness was valued. 

None of [the people’s] feelings associated with yin and 
yang [i.e., sexual feelings] were free from the stimulation 
of blood and qi. Men and women [therefore] gathered in 
places and promiscuously dwelt together without 
distinction. Thus Ritual was valued. 

Instinctive feelings overflowed and were mutually 
conflicting. Urey could not stop themselves and therefore 
were discordant. Thus Music was valued. 

Thus, Humaneness, Rightness, Ritual, and Music, though 
able to save [the world] from ruin, are still not the 
perfection of comprehensive governance. 

Humaneness is able to save people from strife; 
Rightness is able to save people from errors; 

Ritual is able to save people from lewdness; 

Music is able to save people from melancholy. 

When spirit illumination is established in the world, 
then minds revert to their original state. 

When minds revert to their original state, then 
people’s natures become good. 

When people’s natures become good, they are 

followed by Heaven and Earth and by yin and yang. 
Wealth then becomes sufficient. When wealth becomes 
sufficient, the people are respectful; covetousness, petty 
mindedness, anger, and competition have no occasion to 
arise. From this, one can see that [under these 
circumstances,] there is no need for Humaneness and 
Rightness. 

When the Way and its Potency are established in the 
world, then the people become pure and simple. Thus 
their eyes are not fixed on beauty; 
their ears are not drawn to sounds. 

If there were [entertainers] sitting in rows and singing 
songs or prancing about with their hair hanging loose— 
even if they were as alluring as Mao Qiang or Xi Shi, 
[the audience] would take no pleasure in them; 
even if the tunes were ‘Tailing Wings” or “Martial,” 
they would not find any joy in them. 

Even if the lewdness had no limit, it would come to 
nothing. 

From this one can see that [under these circumstances,] 
there is no need for Ritual and Music. Thus, 

when Potency declines, Humaneness is born; 
when conduct fails, Rightness is established. 

When harmony is lost, there are sounds and ditties; 
when rituals are decayed, comportment is gaudy. 

Tims, 

if one understands spirit illumination, then one can 
understand the inadequacy of the Way and its Potency 
for effecting things; 

if one understands the Way and its Potency, then one 
can understand the inadequacy of Humaneness and 
Rightness inputting things into practice; 
if one understands Humaneness and Rightness, then 
one can understand the inadequacy of Ritual and 
Music in regulating conduct. 

8.7 

The thearch embodies the Grand One; 
the king emulates yin and yang; 
the he gem on-follows the four seasons; 
the prince uses the six pitch pipes. 

Now the Grand One 

encloses and contains Heaven and Earth, 

weighs on and crushes the mountains and streams, 

retains or emits yin and yang, 

stretches out and drags along the four seasons, 

knots the net of the eight directional endpoints, 

and weaves the web of the six coordinates. 

It renews the dew and universally overflows without 
partiality; it [causes the] waterflies to fly and wriggling 
things to move; there is nothing that does not rely on it and 
its Potency in order to live. 

Yin and yang 

uphold the harmony of Heaven and Earth and shape the 
physical forms of the myriad diversities. 

[Urey] retain qi and transform things in order to bring 
to completion the kinds of the myriad categories. 

Urey stretch out and draw back, 
roll up and uncoil. 

They sink into the unfathomable, 

end and begin [again] in emptiness and fullness, 

revolving in the without-origin. 

Tire four seasons: 
spring birth, 
summer growth, 
autumn harvest, 
winter storage. 

For obtaining and bestowing, there are times; 
for going out and entering, there are measures. 
Opening and closing, expanding and contracting, they 
do not deviate from their [proper] order; 
happiness and anger, hardness and pliancy, do not 
depart from their principles. 

Tire six pitch pipes are 
life and death, 
reward and punishment, 
granting and taking away. 

Anything that is otherwise lacks the Way. Therefore 

pay heed to the balance beam and weight, the level and 
the marking cord; 

examine into the light and the heavy. 

This is sufficient to govern within the boundaries [of a 
state]. 

Therefore one who embodies the Grand One 
discerns the true responses of Heaven and Earth 
and penetrates the regularities of the Way and its 
Potency. 

His comprehensive brilliance bedazzles like the sun 
and moon; 

his essence and spirit penetrate the myriad things. 

His motion and rest are in tune with yin and yang; 

his happiness and anger harmonize with the four 

seasons; 

his Moral Potency and magnanimity extend to beyond 
the borderlands; 

and his fame and reputation pass down to later 
generations. 

One who emulates yin and yang 

has Potency comparable to Heaven and Earth 

and brilliance like that of the sun and moon; 

his essence is as comprehensive as that of ghosts and 

spirits. 

He wears roundness as a hat 
and squareness as shoes; 

he embraces the gnomon 

and holds fast to the marking cord. 

Within, he is able to govern his person; 
without, he is able to win people’s minds. 

When he promulgates edicts and issues commands, there is 
no one in the world who does not comply with them. 

One who follows the four seasons 
is pliant but not fragile, 
hard but not brittle, 
lenient but not reckless, 
demanding but not overbearing. 

He is liberal, pliant, responsible, and indulgent in his 
nourishing the multitudes of creatures; in his Moral 
Potency he is magnanimous to the simpleminded and 
forgiving of the deviant; he is devoid of partiality. 

One who uses the six pitch pipes 

quells disorder and prohibits violence; 

advances the meritorious and demotes the unworthy. 

He supports the reliable so as to create order; 

he drives away the treacherous in order to create 

peace; 

he straightens out the bent in order to create 
uprightness. 

He discerns the Way of prohibitions and pardons, openings 
and closings. He relies on timeliness and utilizes the power 
of circumstance in order to win over the hearts of the 

people. 

If a thearch [merely] embodies yin and yang, [his 
throne] will be usurped. 

If a king [merely] models himself on the four seasons, 
[Iris territory] will be seized. 

If a hegemon [merely] regulates himself by the six 
standards, he will be disgraced. 

If a prince neglects the level and the marking cord, he 
will be eradicated. 

If [a person of] small [standing] carries out great 
[affairs], the results will be turbulent, insubstantial, 
and uncongenial. 

If a great [person] carries out petty [matters], the 
results will be narrow, cramped, and unpleasing. 

If [the] honorable and mean do not lose their [proper] 
embodiments, then the world will be [properly] governed. 

8.9 

Generally speaking, disorder arises from profligate 
indolence. Hie sources of profligate indolence are 
fivefold: 

[erecting] great roof beams and framing timbers; 
building palaces and halls; 

courtyard buildings, storied towers, and covered 
walkways; 

aviaries and well houses; 

with pillars and planks of fruitwood; 

all joined together in mutual support; 

masterpieces of skillful carpentry; 

carved into twists and coils; 

overflowingly engraved and carved and polished; 

adorned with peculiar patterns and spiraling waves; 

[with ornamentation] dripping, floating, billowing, 

subsiding; 

water chestnut and dwarf oak twining and enfolding; 
extensive, profuse, disordered, fecund; 
cleverly artificial, joined together in apparent 
confusion; 

each [effect] exceeding the last: 

Such is profligate indolence based on wood. 

Tire depths of excavated ponds and lakes; 

the distance of aligned dikes and embankments; 

the flow of diverted [streams] through gorges and 

valleys; 

the straitness of ornamental zigzag channels; 

the piling up of stone slabs and the strewing about of 

stones 

in order to make borders and set out stepping-stones; 
the placing of barriers and dampers in the furious 
rapids 

so as to stir up the surging waves; 

the making of angles and riffles, bends and meanders 

to imitate the rivers of [Fan]yu and [Cangjwu; 

the augmenting of lotus and water-chestnut plantings 

so as to feed turtles and fish, 

swans, geese, kingfishers, 

fed with leftover rice and sorghum; 

dragon boats with prows carved like water birds, 

wafted along by the breeze for pure pleasure: 

Such is profligate indolence based on water. 

High pounded-earth city walls and fortifications, 
plantings of trees [as barriers] in passes and defiles; 
the impressiveness of lofty belvederes and 
observation posts; 

the immensity of extravagant gardens and walled 
parks, 

the sight of which satisfies every desire and wonder, 

the height of lofty gate towers that ascend to the 

clouds and blue [sky]; 

great mansions rising tier upon tier, 

rivaling the height of Kunlun; 

the construction of barrier walls and enclosures, 

the making of networks of roads, 

the leveling of highlands and filling in of depressions, 

the piling up of earth to make mountains, 

for the sake of easy passage to great distances; 

the straightening of roads through flatlands and hills, 

so that [drivers] may ceaselessly gallop and race 

without [fear] of stumbles or falls: 

Such is profligate indolence based on earth. 

Great bells and tripods, 

beautiful and heavy implements, 

engraved all over with floral and reptilian designs, 

all twisting and intertwined, 

with recumbent rhinos and crouching tigers, 

coiling dragons interlacing together; 

blazingly bright and confusingly contrived, 

shiningly dazzling, brilliantly glittering, 

topsy-turvy, convoluted, luxuriant, tangled, 

[with] overall fretwork and written inscriptions, 

[with] engraved and polished ornamentation; 

cast tin-alloy decorated mirrors, 

now dark, now bright, 

rubbed minutely, every flaw removed; 

frost patterns and deep-cut inlay work, 

resembling bamboo matwork, basketry, or netting, 

or brocade wrappings, regular or irregular, 

the lines numerous but each one distinct: 

Such is profligate indolence based on metal. 

Frying, boiling, roasting, grilling, 

the quest to blend, equalize, and harmonize [flavors], 

trying to capture every permutation of sweet and sour 

in the manner of Jing and Wu; 

burning down forests in order to hunt, 

stoking kilns with entire logs, 

blowing through tuyeres and puffing with bellows 

in order to melt bronze and iron 

that extravagantly flow to harden in the mold, 

not considering an entire day sufficient to the task. 

Tire mountains are denuded of towering trees; 
the forests are stripped of cudrania and catalpa trees; 
tree trunks are baked to make charcoal; 
grass is burned to make ash, 

[so that] open fields and grasslands are white and bare 
and do not yield [vegetation] in season. 

Above, the heavens are obscured [by smoke]; 
below, the fruits of the earth are extinguished: 

Such is profligate indolence based on fire. 

Of these five, [even] one is sufficient for [a ruler] to lose 
control of the world. 

For this reason, in ancient times the making of the 
Mingtang was such that 

below, mud and dampness should not rise up [in the 
walls]; 

above, drizzle and fog should not enter into [the 
building]; 

and on all four sides, the wind should not come in. 

Tire earthen [walls] were not patterned; 

the woodwork was not carved; 

the metal fittings were not ornamented. 

Clothing [was made] with untrimmed corners and 
seams; 

hats were designed without fancy corners and folds. 
Tire [Mingjtang was sufficiently large for the 
movement of [those who] arranged the liturgies; 
it was sufficiently quiet and clean for sacrifices to the 
high gods and for ceremonies [directed at] the spirits 
and deities. 

This was to show forth to the people knowledge, simplicity, 
and economy. 

8.12 

In ancient times, the Son of Heaven had his royal domain, 
and the Lords of the Land each had the same [domains as 
called for by their rank]; each took care of his own portion, 
and none was permitted to usurp another. If there was one 
who did not follow the kingly Way, 

who was cruel and oppressive to the masses, 
who fought over land and tried to usurp territory, 
who disrupted the government and violated 
prohibitions, 

who when summoned [to the king’s court] would not 
come, 

who when given commands would not carry them out, 
who when forbidden [things] would not desist, 
who when admonished would not alter, 

then [the Son of Heaven] raised an army and went forth to 
punish him, 

executing the prince, 
getting rid of his supporters, 
shutting his ancestral tombs, 
sacrificing at their altars of the soil, 

[and] then selecting by divination one of his sons or 
grandsons to replace him. 

But in later ages, [rulers] 

endeavored to enlarge their lands and encroach on the 
territory of others, forming alliances ceaselessly, 
raised armies for unrighteous causes and mounted 
punitive expenditions against the guiltless; 
killed innocent people and cut off the lineages of the 
former sages. 

Large countries set off to attack [others]; 

small countries built fortifications to defend 

themselves. 

[Such rulers] confiscated people’s oxen and horses, 
took captive their sons and daughters, 
destroyed their ancestral temples, 
carried off their weighty treasures, 

[so that] streams of blood flowed for a thousand li, 
and sun-bleached skeletons choked the wild lands. 

To satisfy the desires of greedy lords—this is not how 
armies should be managed. 

Now the purpose of armies is to punish cruelty, not 
too commit cruelties. 

The purpose of music is to bring forth concord [in 
human relations], not to create licentiousness. 

The purpose of mourning is to bring about a 
consummation of grief not to create what is 
meretricious. 

Thus, 

there is a Way of serving close relations, and love is 
thee principal means off serving them. 

There is substance in the [rituals of] attendance at 
court, and respect is its highest expression. 

There are rituals for the implementation of mourning, 
and grief is their principal quality. 

There are techniques for the use of arms, and 
Rightness is their foundation. 

If the foundation is established, then the Way can bee 
implemented; 

if the foundation is harmed, then the Way will be 
abandoned. 

1. The office of “hegemon” was, according to later historical accounts, held in 
succession by several rulers of large states during the Spring and Autumn period 
(722-481 B.C.E.). The hegemon was recognized by his fellow rulers as a “first 
among equals” who wielded authority on behalf of the reigning Zhou king (the 
Zhou monarchy having, by then, become nearly powerless) to maintain peace 
and order among the states. 

Sine 

THE RIJLRR’S TRCHNTOIJRS 

‘Tlie Ruler’s Techniques” [addresses] the affairs of the 
ruler of humankind. It provides the means by which to adapt 
tasks [to individuals] and scrutinize responsibilities so as to 
ensure that each of the numerous officials exerts his 
abilities exhaustively. [It] illuminates 

how to wield authority and manage the handles of 
governance 

and thereby regulate the multitudes below; 
how to match official titles with actual performance 
and investigate them [with the techniques of] threes 
and fives. 

It is what enables the ruler of men to 

grasp techniques and sustain essentials 

and not act recklessly based on happiness or anger. 

Its techniques 

straighten the bent and correct the crooked, 
set aside self-interest and establish the public good, 
enabling the one hundred officials to communicate in an 
orderly fashion 

and gather around the ruler like the spokes of a wheel, 
each exerting his utmost in his respective task, 
while the people succeed in their accomplishments. 
Such is the brilliance of the ruler’s techniques. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Tire Ruler’s Techniques” begins by stating: “Tire ruler’s 
techniques [consist of] establishing non-active management 
and carrying out wordless instructions.” This serves notice 
that the chapter is not a handbook of tips and tricks for an 
energetic bureaucrat but a comprehensive plan for 
achieving the kind of effective self-cultivation, charismatic 
appeal, and radiant moral force required for a person to be 
a true universal monarch, a “Son of Heaven.” Tire ruler’s 
non-active orientation is made possible by time-tested 
techniques that have proved efficacious in creating a 
harmonious and just society in which the common people 
flourish and officials support their ruler as spokes of a 
wheel joined to the hub. lire ruler’s ability to instruct and 
yet remain silent as he does so lies in the wondrous power 
of vital energy (qi), which, through selfcultivation, he 
possesses in quintessential form. By means of this 
Quintessential qi, which in its most refined state is 
referred to in this chapter interchangeably as the “Utmost 
Essence” or “spirit,” the ruler can avail himself of the Way 
of Heaven above and transform the people below. In this 
manner, the ruler achieves a kind of profound and pervasive 

resonance with his subjects. Stirring their hearts as a fine 
melody would, such “wordless instructions” are infinitely 
more persuasive, far-reaching, and influential than any 
verbal command or purposeful act could be. 

True to the HuainanzV s claim to synthesize the best of 
all previous schools of thought, “Tire Ruler’s Techniques” 
draws on a very wide range of pre-Han and early Han 
statecraft literature. Significantly, while it is possible to 
find in this chapter numerous parallels and allusions to 
such works as the Laozi, the Hanfeizi, the Xunzi. the Liishi 
chunqiu, and the Guanzi, direct quotations from those 
works are relatively rare, and “Tire Ruler’s Techniques” 
clearly represents a new synthesis rather than a simple 
rehash of old ideas. 

This is the longest chapter in the Huainanzi, and it is 
also one of the most wide-ranging. Topics addressed 
include non-action, positional advantage, sincerity, Potency 
and Moral Potency, following the natural propensity of 
things, and laws, taxes, officials, and administrative 
methods, among others—all of which fall under the 
capacious rubric of “techniques.” 

Nine 

9.1 

The ruler’s techniques [consist of] 

establishing non-active management 
and carrying out wordless instructions. 

Quiet and tranquil, he does not move; 
by [even] one degree he does not waver; 
adaptive and compliant, he relies on his underlings; 
dutiful and accomplished, he does not labor. 

Therefore, 

though his mind knows the norms, his savants transmit 
the discourses of the Way; 

though his mouth can speak, his entourage proclaims 
his words; 

though his feet can advance, his master of ceremonies 
leads; 

though his ears can hear, his officials offer their 
admonitions .- 
Therefore, 

his considerations are without mistaken schemes; 
his undertakings are without erroneous content. 

His words [are taken as] scripture and verse; 

his conduct is [taken as] a model and gnomon for the world. 
His advancing and withdrawing respond to the seasons; 
his movement and rest comply with [proper] patterns. 
His likes and dislikes are not based on ugliness or 
beauty; 

his rewards and punishments are not based on 
happiness or anger. 

Each name names itself; 
each category categorizes itself. 

Affairs emerge from what is natural; 
nothing issues from [the ruler] himself. 

Hrus kings in antiquity wore caps 

with strings of pearls in front so as to mask their 

vision 

and silk plugs in their ears so as to obstruct their 
hearing. 

Hie Son of Heaven surrounded himself with screens so as 
to isolate himself. 

Thus, 

what the ruler patterns himself on is far away, but what 
he grounds himself in is nearby; 
what he governs himself with is great, but what he 
preserves is small. 

Now, 

if his eyes looked recklessly, there would be 
profligacy; 

if his ear listened recklessly, there would be delusion; 
if his mouth spoke recklessly, there would be 
disorder. 

One cannot fail to guard carefully these three gateways. 

If you wish to regulate them, that is in fact to distance 
yourself from them; 

if you wish to embellish them, that is in fact to injure 
them. 

9.2 

Heavenly qi becomes your ethereal soul; 
earthly qi becomes your substantive soul. 

Return them to their mysterious dwelling place, so 
that each resides in its proper place. 

Preserve and do not lose them, so that above you 
communicate with the Grand One, for the essence of 
the Grand One communicates with Heaven, 
and the Way of Heaven is mysterious and silent, 
shapeless and without pattern. 

Heaven’s limit cannot be reached; 
its depths cannot be plumbed. 

Still it transforms together with humans, [though] 
knowledge cannot grasp it. 

9.10 

Now, 

for boats to float on water 
and carts to go on land 
is their natural propensity. If 

a carriage hits a tree and breaks an axle, 
or if a boat runs aground and shatters the hull, 
there is no reason for people to bear resentment against the 
tree or the rock; they will blame the lack of skill [of the 
carriage driver or the boatman]. They know that [trees and 
stones] possess no [conscious qualities]. Thus 

when the Way includes wisdom, there is confusion; 
when Potency includes the mind, there is danger; 
when the mind includes the eyes, there is 
bedazzlement. 

No weapon is more powerful than awareness and the 
will. Even the great sword Moye is inferior to them . 2 
No brigand is as strong as yin and yang. The 
drumsticks and drums [signaling attack] are inferior to 
them. 

Now the weight and the balance beam, the compass and the 
square, once fixed do not change. 

Their calibrations are not altered for the sake of Qin 
or Chu; 

their form does not change for the Hu or the Yue 
[tribes]. 

Constant and unswerving, going straight and not 
meandering, taking form in a single day and passed down 

for ten thousand generations, they act through non-action. 
Thus, 

states have rulers who perish, but no era can see the 
destruction of the Way. 

People have distress and poverty, but principles never 
fail to be passed on. 

From this standpoint, non-action is the Ancestor of the 
Way. Attaining the Ancestor of the Way, one responds to 
things without limit. When one relies [merely] on human 
talents, the highest kind of statecraft is difficult. 

9.23 

Law is the standard of measurement for the world, the level 
and the marking cord of the ruler. 

[He who] proclaims the laws does so to [impose] law 
on the lawless; 

[lie who] sets up rewards does so to reward those who 
deserve rewards. 

After the laws are set, 

those who obey the laws are rewarded, 

and those who fall short of the marking cord[’s line] 

are punished. 

For the honorable and noble, the punishments are not 
decreased, 

and for the lowly and base, the punishments are not 
increased. 

If someone disobeys the law, even if he is [otherwise] 
worthy, he must be punished. 

If someone meets the standard, even if he is 
[otherwise] unworthy, he must be found innocent. 

Thus the Way of the public good will be opened up, and that 
of private interest will be blocked. 

In ancient times, 

a system of responsible officials was established so as 
to restrain the people and thus prevent them from 
doing just as they pleased. 

The position of ruler was set up to control the 
officials so that they could not carry out [policy] on 
their own. 

Laws, records, propriety, and Rightness were used to 
restrain the ruler so that he could not exercise absolute 
authority. 

When none of the people could blindly follow their 
own desires, the Way was triumphant. 

When the Way was triumphant, Patterns were apparent. 
Thus government returned to non-action. Non-action does 
not mean [that the ruler] froze and was inert but that nothing 
any longer emanated from the ruler personally. 

Now the inch comes from the millet grain; the millet 
grain comes from physical forms. Physical forms come 
from shadows; shadows come from the sun. This is the root 
of standards of measurement. 

Music comes from the [pentatonic] notes; the notes 
come from the pitchpipe tones; and the pitch-pipe tones 
come from the wind. This is the ancestry of sound. 

Law comes from Rightness. Rightness comes from what 
is appropriate for the people. What is appropriate for the 
people accords with the human heart. This is the sine qua 
non of government. 

Thus, 

those who penetrate to the root are not confused about 
the branches. 

Those who see the fundamental are not confused about 
the details. 

Law is 

not a gift of Heaven, 
not a product of Earth. 

It was devised by humankind but conversely is used [by 
humans] to rectify themselves. Thus, 

what you have in yourself you must not criticize in 
others; 

what you lack in yourself you must not seek in others; 
what is established for inferiors must not be 
disregarded by superiors; 

what is prohibited to the people must not be practiced 
by [the ruler] himself. 

A country that can be said to be lost is not one without a 
ruler but one without laws. 

To twist the law does not mean to have no laws [at all] 
but, rather, that the laws are not employed. That is 
equivalent to not having laws. Thus when the ruler first 
establishes laws, he begins by making himself an example 
and a standard; thus the laws are implemented in the world. 
Confucius said, 

“If the ruler himself is upright, even though he does 
not issue orders, they are carried out; 
if he is not upright, though he issue orders, they are 
not followed.” 

Thus when the prohibitions apply to [even the ruler] 
himself, then his orders will be carried out among the 
people. 

9.26 

Holding on to the handles of authority and positional 
advantage makes it easy to transform the people. 

That the ruler of Wey took into service [Confucius’s 
disciple] Zilu was because [the ruler’s] authority was 
heavy. 

That Dukes Jing and Huan of Qi made ministers of 
Guan Zhong and Yan Ying was because [the rulers’] 
positions were exalted. 

That [sometimes] 

the timid can subdue the brave 

and the unintelligent can control the wise 

is because they can use positional advantage successfully. 
Now, 

the limbs of a tree cannot be larger than its trunk, 

the stem cannot be stronger than the root. 

So it is said that light and heavy, large and small, have that 
by which they mutually control each other. It is like the way 
the five fingers are attached to the arm. Urey can grasp, 
extend, snatch, or grab, and none [happens] other than as we 
wish it. This is to say, the small are appendages of the large. 
Thus to have the benefit of positional advantage means that 
what you hold is very small but what you manage is very 
large; what you guard is very compact, but what you control 
is vast. Thus a tree trunk ten [hand] spans [in 
circumference] can support a roof weighing a thousand jun, 
and a key five inches long can control the opening and 
closing [of a door]. How can this small amount of material 
be sufficient for the task? Tire position they occupy is the 
important thing. 

Confucius and Mo Di cultivated the teclmiques of the 
former sages and had a penetrating understanding of the 
theories of the six arts. Their utterances adhered to their 
doctrines, and their personal actions embodied their will. 
[Yet] those who, admiring their Rightness and following 
their influence, submitted to them and served them did not 
amount to more than a few tens of individuals. But if they 
had occupied the position of Son of Heaven, everyone in 

the world would have become Confucians or Mohists. 

King Zhuang of Chu was distressed because Wen Wuwei 
was killed in [the state of] Song. He pushed up his sleeves 
in anger and arose [to invade Song]. [Officials] in robes and 
caps fell in with him at every stage along the road so that at 
last they formed a whole army beneath the walls of Song. 
[His grasp of] the handles of authority was weighty. 

King Wen of Chu liked to wear a cap of xie fur,-and the 
people of Chu imitated him. King Wuling of Zhao attended 
court wearing a belt [decorated with] shells and a cap 
[plumed] with pheasant feathers, and the [entire] state of 
Zhao transformed [their dress] along with him. Yet if an 
ordinary person were to go to court wearing a xie -fur hat, a 
belt of shells, and a cap [plumed] with pheasant feathers, he 
could not avoid being laughed at by others. 

There is not one in ten thousand among the common 
people who loves goodness, rejoices in uprightness, and, 
without waiting to hear what is forbidden or punishable, 
naturally stays within the scope of the laws and standards. 
But if [the ruler] hands down commands that must be 
followed, so that those who obey them benefit and those 
who disobey them suffer, then before the sun [dial’s] 
shadow has moved, no one within the Four Seas will fail to 
toe the line. 

Thus, grasping a sword or a glaive by the blade and 
[advancing to fight]—not even Beigongzi or Sima Kuaikui 

could be used to respond to an enemy attack [in that 
manner]. But if he were to grasp the hilt and raise the tip of 
the blade, then even an ordinary person might prevail. If 
[even] Wu Huo [or Jie Fan] were to pull on an ox’s tail from 
behind, even though the tail might break off, still the ox 
would not go where they wanted it to [because] that would 
be working against [its natural propensities]. But if you put 
a mulberry stick through [the ox’s] nose, even a five-foot- 
tall child could lead it anywhere within the Four Seas, 
[because] that would be complying with [its natural 
propensities]. 

With a seven-foot oar you can steer a boat to the right or 
to the left because it uses the water [itself] to assist it. Tire 
Son of Heaven issues commands. His orders are 
implemented and his prohibitions observed because he uses 
the people [themselves] as his positional advantage. 

If the ruler defends the people against what does them 
harm and opens [a way] for the people to have what brings 
them benefit, then his awesomeness will spread like the 
bursting of a dike or the breaking of a dam. Hrus if you 
follow the current and head downstream, it is easy to reach 
your goal; if you gallop with your back to the wind, it is 
easy to go far. 

When Duke Huan of Qi set up his government, he got rid 
of meat-eating animals, [got rid of] grain-eating birds, and 
took down snares and nets. With these three undertakings, 

he pleased the common people. 

When [Tyrant] Djou murdered his uncle. Prince Bi Gan, 
his blood relatives grew resentful. When he cut off the legs 
of people who were crossing the river in the early morning, 
tens of thousands of people rebelled. With these two 
undertakings, he lost the world. 

Now, 

[a ruler’s] Rightness cannot be relied on to benefit 
everyone in the world, but if it benefits one person, 
the world will follow his example. 

[A ruler’s] cruelty might not be enough to harm 
everyone in the world, but if it harms one person, the 
whole world might rise in rebellion. 

Thus, 

Duke Huan made three undertakings and [subsequently 
presided over] nine gatherings of the Lords of the 
Land. 

Djou performed two undertakings, and [subsequently] 
he could not live even as a commoner. Thus one 
cannot but be careful of one’s actions. 

9.27 

When the ruler levies taxes on the people, he must first 
calculate what the harvest will bring in, weigh what the 
people have in storage, and find out, [in anticipation of] 
abundance or dearth, the numbers of people who have a 

surplus or a shortage. Only after this should he use [tax 
revenues to pay for] chariots, carriages, clothing, and food 
to satisfy his desires. 

High terraces and multistoried pavilions, serried rooms, 
and linked chambers—it is not that they are not elegant, but 
when the people do not even have hollowed-out caves or 
wattle huts in which to shelter themselves, an enlightened 
ruler does not enjoy them. 

Rich [food], strong wines, and sweet pastries—it is not 
that they are not good, but when not even husks of the grain 
or beans and peas make it to the mouths of the people, then 
the enlightened ruler does not find [such delicacies] sweet. 

A well-made bed and finely woven mats—it is not that 
these are not restful, but when the people live in frontier 
walled towns, braving danger and hardship, dying in the 
meadowlands [leaving] sun-bleached bones, an enlightened 
ruler does not [lie] peacefully [in his fine bed]. 

Thus those who ruled over humanity in antiquity felt such 
sorrowful despondency for [the troubles of] the people that 
if some went hungry in the state, his food would not 
be heavily seasoned; 

if some people were cold, in winter he would not wear 
furs. 

When the harvest was abundant and the people 
prosperous, only then would the ruler set up the bells and 
drums and display the shields and axes [used in ceremonial 

dances]. Ruler and ministers, superiors and subordinates, 
then with one mind took pleasure in them, so that there was 
not a single sorrowful person in the state. 

Thus people in ancient times created 

[instruments of] metal, stone, bamboo, and strings to 
express their joy;- 

weapons, armor, axes, and halberds to display their 
anger; 

wine cups and libations, [sacrificial] meat stands and 
platters, pledges and toasts, to verify their happiness; 
unbleached mourning garments and straw sandals, 
breast-beating and gyrating, crying and weeping, to 
communicate sorrow. 

These all are cases of things that swell up internally and 
then become manifest externally. [But] coming down to 
[the times of] disorderly rulers, 

in taking from the people, they did not calculate their 
strength; 

in seeking [taxes] from those below, they did not 
measure their savings. 

Men and women were not able to pursue their callings of 
farming and weaving because they had to supply the 
demands of their superiors. Their strength was exhausted 
and their resources were depleted. Rulers and ministers 
despised one another. Thus [if just when] the people 
reached the point that, with parched lips and agitated livers, 

they had only enough for the moment with nothing put 
aside, the rulers began to have the great bells struck, the 
drums beaten, the reed pipes played, and the qin and se 
plucked, it would have been just like descendants donning 
armor to enter the ancestral temple or wearing silk gauze to 
go on a military campaign. [One could say that] they had 
lost sight of that from whence joy in music rises. 

Now as people pursue their livelihoods, if a single man 
follows the plow, he can till no more than ten mu of land. 
The yearly harvest from fields of middling quality would 
not exceed four dan per mu. His wife and children and the 
elderly and infirm must also rely on this. Sometimes there 
are diverse calamities such as floods, droughts, and natural 
disasters. He also has to pay the taxes to the ruler for the 
expenses of chariots and horses, and soldiers and armor. 
From this point of view, the life of commoners is pitiful 
indeed! Now over the great [expanse] of Heaven and Earth, 
[on average] a three-year period of farming should produce 
a surplus of one year’s grain. Thus roughly 

over nine years, there should be three years’ savings, 
six years’ accumulation in eighteen years, 
and nine years’ reserve in twenty-seven years. 

Even if there were floods, droughts, or natural disasters, 
none of the people would become distressed and 
impoverished and be left to wander about in utter 
destitution. 

Thus if the state does not have 
a reserve of nine years’ production, it is called 
“insufficient.” 

Without six years’ accumulation, it is called “pitiful.” 
Without three years’ surplus, it is called 
“impoverished.” 

Thus humane princes and enlightened rulers are 
restrained in what they take from those below; they are 
measured in supporting themselves. As a result, the people 
can receive the bounty of Heaven and Earth and not 
encounter the difficulties of hunger and cold. But if there 
are greedy rulers and violent princes, they vex those below, 
plundering and confiscating [goods] from the people to 
gratify their insatiable desires. Consequently, the people 
have no means to avail themselves of Heaven’s Harmony or 
tread the path of Earth’s Bounty. 

9.29 

Generally people say that you want 

your heart to be small [cautious] and your will to be 
large [expansive]; 

your wisdom to be round [comprehensive] and your 

conduct square [proper]; 

your abilities to be many and your affairs few. 

“Tire heart should be cautious” means that you should 
consider difficulties before they arise, prepare for 

calamities before they occur, guard against transgressions 
and be careful about small matters, and not dare to give rein 
to your desires. 

“Tire will should be expansive” means that you should 
bring together and embrace the myriad states, unify and 
standardize diverse customs, ally and shelter the 
commoners as if uniting them as a single people, and act as 
the hub when [opinions about] right and wrong converge 
like the spokes of awheel. 

“Wisdom should be round” means that you turn like a 
circle with no distinction between beginning and end, and 
flow to the four directions like a deep and inexhaustible 
spring. When the myriad things arise together, there is 
nothing to which you fail to turn your attention and 
respond. 

“Conduct should be square” means that you should be 
straight and unswerving, pure and uncorrupted. Even if you 
are destitute, you never change your patterns, and when 
successful, you never force your will [on others]. 

“Abilities should be many” means that you must be 
competent in both civil and military matters, and adhere to 
proper deportment both in movement and at rest. In your 
actions, in promoting and demoting, you always do what is 
appropriate. You meet with no opposition, and so nothing is 
incomplete or inappropriate. 

“Affairs should be few” means that you grasp the handles 

and wield the techniques [of governance], get what is 
important so as to respond to the multitudes, grasp the 
essence so as to govern widely, dwell in quietude and stay 
centered, revolve at the pivot, and use the one to bring 
together the myriads, like bringing together [the two halves 
of] a tally. 

Thus, 

if your heart is cautious, you can put a stop [to 
problems] in their incipient stages. 

If your will is great, there will be nothing you do not 
embrace. 

If your knowledge is round, there will be nothing you 
do not know. 

If your conduct is square, you will not act in certain 
instances. 

If your abilities are many, there will be nothing you 
cannot put in order. 

If your affairs are few, the essence will be what you 
grasp. 

In ancient times when the Son of Heaven held court, 
he arranged for 

lords and ministers to present forthright admonitions, 
scholars of wide learning to chant the Odes, 
music masters to sing critiques of government, 
and the populace to offer their opinions. 

Secretaries recorded the ruler’s misconduct; 

chefs cut down on his delicacies. 

But still this was not considered sufficient, so 

Yao put in place a drum [at the palace gate] for anyone 
wishing to admonish [him]; 

Shun set up a board on which to post criticisms; 

Tang had a superintendent of rectitude; 

King Wu set up a small drum to remind him to be 
careful. 

[Thus], when mistakes were still trivial, there already were 
precautions taken against them. 

According to the sage’s concept of goodness, no act 
[of goodness] is so small that it should not be carried 
out. 

According to his concept of misconduct, no act [of 
misconduct] is so trivial that it should not be 
corrected. 

Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang, King Wen and King Wu confidently 
faced south and ruled the world. In those times, 
when a gong was struck, they ate; 
when the [musical composition] “Concord” was 
played, the table was cleared. 

After finishing their rice, they offered a sacrifice to the 
stove god. In their conduct, they did not make use of 
shamans’ invocations. 

Ghosts and spirits did not dare to work black magic on 
them; 

mountains and rivers did not dare to harm them. 

Urey could be said to be [truly] noble. Yet they were 
preoccupied and fearful, 
daily more and more careful. 

From this point of view, then, the sage’s heart is cautious. 
The Odes says, 

“Indeed this King Wen 
was cautious and reverent; 
illustriously he served the High God, 
thus securing good fortune.” 

Is this not what is referred to here? 

When King Wu of Zhou attacked the Shang dynasty, he 
disbursed the grain from the Zhuqiao granaries, 
distributed the money from the Lutai treasury, 
built a mound over Bi Gan’s tomb, 
designated as exemplary the [ancestral] village of 
Shang Rong, 

brought under royal control the ancestral temple of 
Cheng Tang, 

and freed Ji Zi from prison. 

He let people of all sorts remain in their own homes and 
till their own fields. 

He did not distinguish between old and new [friends] 
but drew near only to those who were worthy. 

He made use of those who had not previously served 
him 

and employed those who were not [previously] his 
own men, 

comfortably treating the newcomers as if they had long 
been in his employ. From this point of view, then, the sage’s 
will is expansive. 

King Wen of Zhou 

comprehensively surveyed successes and failures 
and everywhere investigated right and wrong. 

[I Ic considered] what made Yao and Shun glorious 
and [why] Jie and Djou perished, 
then recorded all [his findings] in the Mingtang. Thereby he 
increased his wisdom and expanded his erudition so he 
could respond to anything that departed from the 
foursquare. From this point of view, then, the sage’s 
wisdom is round. 

King Cheng and King Kang 

carried on the task of Kings Wen and Wu, 

preserved the institution of the Mingtang, 

looked into the traces of [ancient states] that endured 

or perished, 

and observed the alterations of success and failure. 

If something 

contravened the Way, they would not say it; 
contravened Rightness, they would not do it. 

Their words were not spoken heedlessly; 
their actions were not carried out heedlessly. 

They selected what was good, and only then would they 
pursue a course of action. From this point of view, then, the 
conduct of the Superior Man is square. 

Confucius’s penetrating qualities [were such that] 
in wisdom he surpassed Chang Hong; 
in bravery he was superior to Meng Ben. 

His feet were quicker than an agile rabbit; 
his strength could lift a city gate. 

His abilities certainly were many. Nevertheless, 
his bravery and strength were not heard about; 
his skills and mastery were not known. 

It was only through carrying out filial piety and the Way that 
he became an “uncrowned king.” His affairs certainly were 
few. 

In the 242 years of the Spring and Autumn period, fifty- 
two states perished and thirty-six rulers were assassinated. 
Confucius 

upheld goodness and condemned wickedness, 
[thereby] 

perfecting the Way of [the True] King. 

His discussions certainly were broad. Nevertheless, 
when he was besieged in Kuang, 
his expression and complexion did not alter. 

He plucked [his qin] and sang without pausing. 

When it came to the point that his life was in danger, 
when he encountered calamities and dangerous 

difficulties, 

he clung to Rightness and practiced his principles, and his 
will was fearless. His sense of discrimination [between life 
and death] certainly was clear. 

Thus, [in serving] as minister of justice in Lu, when he 
heard cases, he invariably came to a decision. In compiling 
the Spring and Autumn Annals, he did not give accounts 
of ghosts and spirits, nor did he dare to [inject] his personal 
opinions. 

Now the wisdom of sages certainly embraces many 
things; what they preserve gets to the essence. Thus when 
they take some action, the outcome is invariably glorious. 
The wisdom of a foolish person certainly is very little, yet 
the things he tries to do are numerous. Thus when he acts 
on something it is certain to fail. In wisdom, Wu Qi and 
Zhang Yi did not compare with Confucius and Mo Di, yet 
they contended with rulers of ten-thousand-chariot states. 
This is why they eventually had their bodies torn apart by 
chariots and their lineages wiped out. Now 

if [the ruler] uses uprightness to transform [the 
people] by teaching, that is easy and he will certainly 
succeed. 

If he uses depravity to manipulate society, that is 
difficult and he will certainly fail. 

Now, if you are going to establish a pattern of conduct and 
make it general throughout the world, to abandon the easy 

route that is sure to succeed and to follow the difficult way 
that is bound to fail would be the height of stupidity and 
confusion. 

The six opposites must, without fail, be scrutinized 
carefully. 

1. Because this sentence breaks the parallelism of the whole passage, we suspect 
that the text might have originally read, “his officials receive the admonitions [of 
others].” 

2. The precious sword Moye, mentioned several times in the Huainanzi, took its 
name from Mo Ye, wife of the legendary swordsmith Gan Jiang and herself a 
superlatively skilled smith. 

3. The xie is identified as a mythical single-homed bovine animal said to be able to 
distinguish between people who told the truth and those who did not. A cap 
supposedly made from the animal’s fur was popular for a time in Chu and was 
adapted for use at the Qin court. 

4. Here “joy” includes the concept of “music.” Both words are written with the 
same character, which means “joy” when pronounced le and “music” when 
pronounced yue. 

Ten 

PROFOUND PRECEPTS 

“Profound Precepts” 

parses and analyzes [various] assessments of the Way 
and its Potency, 

ranks and puts in sequence [diverse] differentiations 

of Humaneness and Rightness, 

summarizes and juxtaposes the affairs of the human 

realm, 

generally bringing them into conformity with the Potency 
of spirit illumination. 

It proposes similes and selects appositions 
to match them with analogies and illustrations; 
it divides into segments and forms sections 
to respond to brief aphorisms. 

It is what makes it possible to find fault with persuasions 
and attack arguments, responding to provocations without 
error. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Profound Precepts” posits that the ruler must follow the 

promptings of his inner heart and honor his innermost 
feelings as the basis of his rule, rather than relying on laws, 
rituals, institutions, or the advice of worthies. “Profound 
Precepts” thus evinces a deep commitment to concepts of 
moral autonomy and moral agency. In turn, these echo the 
radical optimism of the celebrated Confucian philosopher 
Mencius, who centuries earlier had argued passionately for 
the power of human emotions to uplift the world. The ideal 
ruler accordingly seeks goodness within himself and 
thereby brings goodness to the world. He is able to do so 
because the intrinsic moral inclinations of his heart, 
expressed in such feelings as Humaneness and Rightness, 
are shared by all humanity. Guided by his own feelings, he 
is able to connect in a profound way with his people, 
leading them by means of a kind of empathetic resonance 
that is more powerful than any commands he might utter. 
Through vigilant introspection, the ruler establishes a close 
communion with the stirrings of his inner heart, relying on 
his personal Humaneness and Rightness to establish a 
government under which the people are loved and benefited 
as a father loves his son. Ruler and ruled are in perfect 
accord, and by cultivating his inherent feelings, the ruler 
sets the world in order. 

Transcending ordinary human emotions—such as sorrow, 
joy, happiness, and anger—for a deeper level of inner 
experience, sage rulers respond to others with a profound 

sense of equanimity and transform the hearts of the people 
by projecting the moral force of their deeply rooted 
feelings. Much of this chapter outlines how human 
resonance works, demonstrating the central importance of 
the human heart and how its feelings evoke sympathetic and 
resonant responses from others. Of particular relevance is 
the concept of inner sincerity, an emotion identified with a 
person’s deepest psychic self. In this chapter, it is 
portrayed as preceding speech and actions and enabling the 
expression of other emotions. 

Of all the chapters in the Huainanzi, chapter 10 may 
fairly be called the most strongly Confucian in orientation. 
It draws its ideas and themes (although seldom its exact 
language) from the whole pre-Han and early Han Confucian 
corpus, including the Lunyu ( Analects of Confucius), the 
Liji ( Record of Rites), the Mengzi (The Book of Mencius), 
the Zisizi (The Book of Master Zisi), the Zhong yong 
[Doctrine of the Mean, chapter 32 of the Liji), and the 
archaeologically recovered text the Wuxingpian (The Five 
Kinds of Conduct). The chapter’s title, “Profound 
Precepts,” refers to both its content and literary form. 
Most of the 118 brief moral assertions are followed by a 
few lines of explication. Such “precepts” would be well 
suited for use in various oral contexts (such as court 
debates) to argue against false opinions, precisely as the 
summary in chapter 21 suggests. 

Ten 

10.1 

Hie Way at its highest has nothing above it; 
at its lowest it has nothing below it. 

It is more even than a [carpenter’s] level, 

straighter than a marking cord, 

rounder than a compass, 

and more square than a [carpenter’s] square. 

It embraces the cosmos and is without outside or inside. 
Cavernous and undifferentiated, it covers and supports with 
nothing to hinder it. 

Therefore, those who embody the Way 
are not sorrowful or joyful; 
are not happy or angry. 

Hiey sit without disturbing thoughts, 
and sleep without dreams. 

Hiings come, and they name them. 

Affairs arise, and they respond to them. 

10.5 

The Way is what guides things; 

Potency is what supports nature. 

Humaneness is visible proof of accumulated kindness. 
Rightness is what comports with the human heart and 
conforms to what is appropriate for the majority of 
humankind. 

Thus 

when the Way was extinguished, Potency was 
employed. 

When Potency declined, Humaneness and Rightness 
were born. 

Thus 

the earliest era embodied the Way but did not have 
Potency. 

Tire middle period had Potency but did not cherish it. 
The latter-day era was anxious and fearful lest even 
Humaneness and Rightness be lost. 

10.6 

If not for Humaneness and Rightness, the Superior 
Man would have nothing to live for. 

If he loses Humaneness and Rightness, he will lose 
the reason for his existence. 

If not for cravings and desires, the petty man would 
have nothing to live for. 

If he loses his cravings and desires, he will lose his 
reason for living. 

Thus 

the Superior Man fears losing Rightness. 

The petty man fears losing what is valuable to him. 
When we look at what people fear, we understand how 
different they are. 

The Changes says, 

“Chasing a deer without a guide. 

It goes into the forest. 

For the Superior Man to follow it would not be so 
good as to abandon it. 

Should he follow it, he would encounter difficulty.” 

10.10 

When the Superior Man sees [the ruler’s] 
transgressions, he forgets about punishment [for 
pointing it out]. Thus he is able to remonstrate. 

When he sees a worthy, he forgets about [the worthy’s 
low] rank. Thus he is able to yield modestly. 

When he sees others who do not have enough, he 
forgets [his own] poverty. Thus he is able to give 
charitably. 

10.16 

There is nothing that does not have some use. 

7 mnxiong and wuhui are the [most] virulently 
poisonous of herbs, but a good physician uses them to 

save people’s lives. 

Dwarves and blind musicians are the troubled invalids 
of humankind, but the ruler of men uses them to 
perform music. 

For this reason, the sage prepares even the shavings from 
the timber. There is nothing that he does not use. 

10.17 

With one shout, a brave warrior can cause the Three Armies 
to retreat. What disperses them is his complete sincerity. 

Thus 

if you command, but [the troops] do not [comply] 
harmoniously; 

if you have intentions, but [the troops] do not support 
you, 

it surely is the case that something is not in accord with 
your inner heart. 

Thus the reason that Shun, without descending from his 
mat, [was able to] preserve the world was because he sought 
it within himself. Thus if the ruler makes more and more 
excuses, the people will practice more and more deceit. To 
have a body that is crooked and a shadow that is straight— 
such a thing has never been heard of. 

10.24 

Tire essence of the heart can transform [others] like a 

spirit, but it cannot point out things to them. 

The essence of the eye can cut through obscurities, 
but it cannot give clear warning. 

What lies within the dark and obscure cannot be verbalized 
to others. 

Thus, 

Shun did not descend from his mat, and the world was 
ordered. 

[The tyrant] Jie did not leave his throne, and the world 
was disordered. 

Certainly, feelings are deeper than spoken commands. To 
seek from others what one lacks in oneself—such has 
never been heard of from ancient times to the present. 

10.25 

If the speech is identical but the people trust it [in 
some cases], it is because trust preceded the speech. 

If the command is identical but the people are 
transformed by it [in some cases], it is because 
sincerity lay beyond the command. 

When sages rule above and the people are moved and 
transformed, it is because their feelings have paved the way 
for them. When there is movement above and no response 
below, it is because feelings and orders are at variance with 
one another. 

Thus the Changes says, 

“The overbearing dragon will have [reason to] regret.” 

10.26 

A three-month-old infant does not yet understand the 
distinction between benefit and harm, but the love of a kind 
mother is conveyed to the infant because of her feelings. 
Thus, the usefulness of what is spoken—how 
manifestly tiny it is! 

The usefulness of what is not spoken—how vastly 
great it is! 

10.29 

Rightness is more exalted than a ruler. 

Humaneness is more intimate than a father. 

Thus 

the ruler in relation to his ministers [has the power to] 
kill them or let them live, but he cannot force them to 
do their jobs with negligent unconcern. 

A father in relation to his children [has the power to] 
reject them or raise them, but he cannot force them to 
be without anxious concern. 

Thus 

when Rightness transcends the ruler himself, 
and Humaneness transcends the father himself, 
the ruler is exalted and his ministers are loyal; 

the father is compassionate and his children are filial. 

10.31 

Actions undertaken near at hand cause a civilizing influence 
to spread far away. Now when he examined his evening gait, 
the Duke of Zhou was embarrassed by his shadow.- 

Thus the Superior Man scrutinizes [himself] in solitude. To 
abandon what is close at hand in expectation of what is far- 
off is to obstruct [one’s path]. 

10.42 

If you turn to goodness, even if you err, you will not 
be censured. 

If you do not turn to goodness, even if you are loyal, 
you will invite calamity. 

Thus 

being censorious toward others is not so good as 
being censorious toward yourself. 

Seeking it [i.e., goodness] in others is not so good as 
seeking it in yourself. 

10.51 

The actions of the sage 

are not joined with anything 

and are not separated from anything. 

By analogy, it is like a drum. 

There is no instrument that is in tune with it, 
and no instrument that cannot be accompanied by it. 

10.54 

Culture is the means by which we connect to things. 
Feelings bind inwardly, 
but desires manifest themselves externally. 

If you use culture to obliterate feelings, feelings will 
be lost. 

If you use feelings to obliterate culture, culture will 
be lost. 

When the guiding patterns of culture and feelings 
interpenetrate, the phoenix and the qilin will roam 
extensively. That is to say, the embrace of your Utmost 
Potency will be far-reaching. 

10.56 

Tire ruler wills it. 

Tire people fulfill it. 

This is because of his inner sincerity. 

Before saying a word, he is trusted; 
without being summoned, they come. 

Something precedes it. 

10.65 

The Way of the Superior Man is 
close but cannot be attained, 
low but cannot be ascended, 
contains nothing inside it, but cannot be filled. It is 
enduring yet brilliant, 
far-reaching yet illustrious. 

To understand this and so follow the Way is something that 
cannot be sought in others but only attained from the self. 
If you abandon the search within yourself and seek it in 
others, you will have strayed far from it. 

10.79 

In an age that has the Way, a man is given to the state. 

In an age that does not have the Way, the state is given 
to a man. 

When Yao ruled the world as king, his anxiety did not abate. 
When he conferred [his rulership] on Shun, his anxiety 
disappeared. Anxiously he watched over it; joyfully he gave 
it to a worthy. To the end he did not consider the benefit [of 
rulership] to be his private possession. 

10.83 

Tire sprouts of good fortune are flossy and fine, 
and the birth of bad fortune is tiny and trifling. 

Since the beginnings of good and bad fortune are tiny as a 
sprout, people overlook them. Only sages see their 

beginnings and know their ends. 

Thus a chronicle says, 

‘Tire wine of Lu was weak and Handan was surrounded; 
the lamb broth was not poured, and the state of Song 
was endangered.’- 

10.87 

One whose Rightness includes a sense of 
appropriateness is called a Superior Man. 

One whose appropriateness abandons a sense of 
Rightness is called a petty man. 

Penetrating wisdom achieves [its goals] without 
exertion; 

the next best kind exerts itself without becoming worn 
out; 

the lowest kind becomes worn out without exerting 
itself. 

Men of antiquity tasted [the food offered in sacrifice] 
but did not covet it. 

Men of today covet [the sacrificial food] but do not 
care about its taste. 

10.101 

The Superior Man does not say, 

“Small [acts of] goodness are not important enough to 

do” and therefore sets them aside. Small [acts of] 
goodness accumulate to become great goodness. 

[He also does not say], 

“Small [acts of] misconduct do not do any harm” and 
therefore does them. 

Small [acts of] misconduct accumulate to become 
great misconduct. 

For the same reason, 

a pile of feathers can sink a boat; 
lots of light things can break an axle. 

Thus the Superior Man observes prohibitions [even] 
regarding minutiae. 

10.102 

A single pleasing act is not sufficient to constitute 
goodness. Accumulate pleasing acts and they become 
Moral Potency. 

A single hateful act is not sufficient to constitute 
wrong. Accumulate hateful acts and they will become 
evil. 

Thus 

the [reputation for] goodness of the Three Dynasties 
[Xia, Shang, and Zhou] [reflects] the accumulated 
praise of a thousand years; 

the [reputation for] evil of Jie and Djou [reflects] the 
accumulated condemnation of a thousand years. 

10.106 

Hie Superior Man is sincere in Humaneness. 

When he acts, it is out of Humaneness; 

when he does not act, it is also out of Humaneness. 

Hie petty man is sincere in his own inhumaneness. 

When he acts, it is out of inhumaneness; 
when he does not act, it is [also] out of inhumaneness. 
[Someone whose] goodness comes from the self, rather 
than coming from others, is [a person] in whom 
Humaneness and Moral Potency flourish. 

Hius, 

if your feelings overcome your desires, you will 
flourish. 

If your desires overcome your feelings, you will 
perish. 

10.111 

Good fortune is born of non-action; 
bad fortune is born of many desires. 

Harm stems from not preparing; 
weeds stem from not hoeing. 

Sages do good as if afraid they will not attain it; they 
prepare against disaster as if afraid they cannot avoid it. 

10.113 

The sage does not seek praise, nor does he avoid 
condemnation. He corrects his person and acts with 
rectitude, and the various evils dissipate of their own 
accord. 

Now were he to 

abandon rectitude and follow the crooked, 

turn Iris back on truth and follow the crowd, 
this would be to consort with the vulgar and to internalize 
acting without standards. Thus the sage reverts to himself 
and does not take [the lead from others]. 

1. Because he was walking with poor posture, which was a violation of ritual 
correctness even if there was no one else around to observe it. 

2. Both these lines refer to incidents in which minor errors in protocol led to major 
military confrontations. 

Eleven 

INTEGRATING CUSTOMS 

“Integrating Customs” provides the means by which to 

unify the weaknesses and strengths of the various 
living tilings, 

equate the customs and habits of the nine Yi [tribes], 
comprehend past and present discourses, 
and thread together the patterns of the myriad things. 
[It] 

manages and regulates the suitability of Ritual and 
Rightness 

and delineates the ends and beginnings of human 
affairs. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

The title of chapter 11, “Qi su,” is strongly evocative of the 
title of chapter 2 of the Zhuangzi, the “Qi wu lun” (On 
Treating All Tilings as Equal). Because Qi means to “bring 
together,” or “to put on a par,” the title of chapter 11 of the 
Huainanzi has been translated as “Equalizing Customs” or 
‘Tutting Customs on a Par.” Indeed, one of the chapter’s 

main themes is the equivalence of all cultural norms 
through time and space: the ancient rites of the imperial 
court are not ultimately more normative than the current 
folkways of “barbarians” living on the fringe of the empire. 
As the chapter summary just quoted demonstrates, 
however, the Huainanzi evokes further dimensions of the 
term qi. Just as the Way of the Zhuangzi does for all things 
in the universe, the sage of the Huainanzi integrates all 
customs of the world into a dynamic harmony 

“Integrating Customs” is the HuainanzVs focused 
treatment of the subject of Ritual, atopic that was of urgent 
importance to statecraft thinkers of the Warring States and 
early empire. In both ancient Chinese thought and the text 
of the Huainanzi, “Ritual” encompassed all forms of 
symbolic action from the most austere to the most 
mundane, ranging from the grand sacrifices of the imperial 
cult to the small courtesies (such as bowing) that transpired 
between people at a chance meeting. “Integrating Customs” 
thus evinces many parallels with the ritual texts of the 
classical age, especially the Liji (Record of Rites). The 
opening lines of “Integrating Customs,” for example, 
echoes the famous dictum of the Zhongyong (Doctrine oj 
the Mean, chapter 32 of the Liji) that ‘following nature is 
called the Way.” Both the Liji and Huainanzi were 
obviously engaged in a contemporaneous discourse about 
the nature of ritual, although it is not clear which text was 

the source for the other. 

“Integrating Customs” agrees with Confucian texts like 
the Liji that ritual is an indispensable tool for rulers in the 
current age, but it breaks from them in viewing ritual as 
having only contingent rather than ultimate value. At one 
time, there were sages but no rituals. Now, however, ritual 
has become necessary to the task of government because 
the Han live in latter days of decline. Moreover, 
“Integrating Customs” breaks with the Liji in insisting that 
the current power of ritual does not derive from the 
wisdom of the sages of antiquity but from the penetrating 
insight of the sage-ruler of today. Only the monarch whose 
level of cultivation has given him a perfect reading of the 
patterns of the cosmos and body politic can fashion rituals 
appropriate to the current cultural and social conditions of 
the empire. 

Eleven 

n.i 

Following nature and putting it into practice is called 
“the Way”; 

attaining one’s Heaven[-born] nature is called 
“Potency.” 

Only after nature was lost was Humaneness honored; 
only after the Way was lost was Rightness honored. 

For this reason, 

when Humaneness and Rightness were established, the 
Way and Potency receded; 

when Ritual and Music were embellished, purity and 
simplicity dissipated. 

Right and wrong took form, and the common people 
were dazzled; 

pearls and jade were revered, and the world set to 
fighting [over them]. 

These four were the creations of a declining age and are the 
implements of a latter age. 

Now Ritual 

distinguishes the revered and the lowly, 
differentiates the noble and the base. 

Rightness is what unites sovereign and minister, father and 
son, elder brother and younger brother, husband and wife, 
friend and friend. 

What the current age considers Ritual [demands] 
reverence and respect yet [causes] jealousy. 

What it considers Rightness is boastful and 
condescending yet [is deemed] potent. 

[Because of them,] 

ruler and minister oppose each other; 
blood kin become resentful of one another. 

This is to lose the basis of Ritual and Rightness. Thus 
[government] is confused and complicated. 

When water accumulates, it generates fish that eat one 
another; 

when earth accumulates, it generates beasts that 
[devour] one another’s flesh; 

when Ritual and Rightness are embellished, they 
generate false and hypocritical scholars. 

To blow on ashes yet not to want to get a mote in one’s 
eye, 

to wade through water yet not to want to get soaked: 
these [things] are impossible. 

In antiquity, the people were naive and ignorant, [and] 
they did not know west from east. The [expressions on] 
their faces did not exceed their feelings [within], [and] their 
words did not outstrip their deeds. 

Their clothes were warm and without pattern; 
their weapons were blunt and had no edge. 

Their songs were joyful yet without warbling; 
their sobbing was mournful yet without shouting. 

They dug wells and drank, 
plowed fields and ate. 

They had nothing with which to adorn their beauty, nor did 
they grasp for acquisitions. 

Kinsmen did not praise or deprecate one another; 
friends did not resent or revere one another. 

Upon the creation of Ritual and Rightness and the 
valuation of goods and wealth, deception and falsehood 
sprouted, [and] blame and praise proliferated together; 
resentment and reverence arose in concert. Because of 
this, 

there was the perfection of Zeng Can and Xiao Ji, 
the perversity of Robber Zhi and Zhuang Qiao. 

Thus where there is the Great Chariot and the Dragon 
Banner, the feathered canopy and hanging straps, teams of 
horses and columns of riders, there must be the wickedness 
of drilling [peep]holes and removing crossbars,-digging up 
graves and climbing over walls. Where there are cunning 
patterns and complex embroidery, fine cloth and gossamer 
silk, there must be clomping along in straw sandals and 
those whose short coats have unfinished hems. Thus it is 
clear that high and low depend on each other, the short and 

the long give form to each other. 

Now the frog becomes the quail, [and] the water 
scorpion becomes the dragonfly. These all give rise to what 
is not of their own kind. Only the sage understands their 
transformations. 

When the Hu [northern “barbarians”] see hemp, they 
do not understand that it can be used to make cloth. 
When the Yue [southern “barbarians”] see fleece, they 
do not know that it can be used to make a [felt] rug. 
Thus with one who does not comprehend things, it is 
difficult to discuss transformation. 

In ancient times, Grand Duke Wang and Duke Dan of 
Zhou met with each other after receiving fiefs. 

Grand Duke Wang asked the Duke of Zhou, “How will 
you govern Lu?” 

Tire Duke of Zhou said, “I will exalt the noble and draw 
close to my kindred.” 

Tire Grand Duke said, “Henceforward Lu will grow 
weaker!” 

Tire Duke of Zhou asked the Grand Duke, “How will 
you govern Qi?” 

Tire Grand Duke said, “I will raise up the worthy and 
promote those of merit.” 

Tire Duke of Zhou said, “In later generations, there 
will certainly be a ruler who rises through 
assassination.” 

Afterward, Qi grew daily larger, to the point of becoming 
hegemon. After twenty-four generations, [the ducal house] 
was replaced by the Tian clan. Lu grew daily smaller, being 
destroyed in the thirty-second generation. Thus the 
Changes says, 

‘Treading on frost, hard ice descends.” 

The sages’ perception of outcomes at their origin is [truly] 
subtle! Thus the “mountain of dregs” originated with the 
use of ivory chopsticks; the Toasting beam” originated 
with a hot ladle. 2 

11.5 

If the original nature of human beings is obstructed and 
sullied, one cannot get at its purity and clarity—it is 
because tilings have befouled it. The children of the Qiang, 
Dii, Bo, and Dee [“barbarians”] all produce the same sounds 
at birth. Once they have grown, even with both the xiang 
and diti interpreters,-they cannot understand one another’s 
speech; this is because their education and customs are 
different. Now a three-month-old child that moves to a 
[new] state after it is born will not recognize its old 
customs. Viewed on this basis, clothing and ritual customs 
are not [rooted in] people’s nature; they are received from 
without. 

It is the nature of bamboo to float, [but] break it into 

strips and tie them in a bundle and they will sink when 

thrown into the water—it [i.e., the bamboo] has lost its 
[basic] structure. 

It is the nature of metal to sink, [but] place it on a boat 
and it will float—its positioning lends it support. 

The substance of raw silk is white, [but] dye it in 
potash and it turns black. 

The nature of fine silk is yellow, [but] dye it in 
cinnabar and it turns red. 

Hie nature of human beings has no depravity; having been 
long immersed in customs, it changes. If it changes and one 
forgets the root, it is as if [the customs one has acquired] 
have merged with [one’s] nature. 

Thus 

the sun and the moon are inclined to brilliance, but 
floating clouds cover them; 

the water of the river is inclined to purity, but sand and 
rocks sully it. 

Hie nature of human beings is inclined to equilibrium, 
but wants and desires harm it. 

Only the sage can leave things aside and return to himself. 

Someone who boards a boat and becomes confused, not 
knowing west from east, will see the Dipper and the Pole 
Star and become oriented. Nature is likewise a Dipper and a 
Pole Star for human beings. 

If one possesses that by which one can see oneself, 
then one will not miss the genuine dispositions of 

things. 

If one lacks that by which one can see oneself, then 
one will be agitated and ensnared. 

It is like swimming in Longxi:—the more you thrash, the 
deeper you will sink. 

Confucius said to Yan Hui, “I serve you by forgetting 
[you], and you also serve me by forgetting [me]. Although it 
is so, even though you forget me, there is still something 
that has not been forgotten that persists.”—Confucius 
understood the root of it. 

The actions of one who gives free rein to desires and 
loses his nature have never been correct. 

Controlling one’s person [in this way leads to] danger; 
controlling a state [in this way leads to] chaos; 
leading an army [in this way leads to] destruction. 

For this reason, those who have not heard the Way have no 
means to return to nature. Thus the sage-kings of antiquity 
were able to attain it in themselves, and their orders were 
enacted and their prohibitions were binding. Their names 
were carried down to later ages, [and] their Potency spread 
throughout the Four Seas. 

11.6 

For this reason, whenever one is about to take up an affair, 
one must first stabilize one’s intentions and purify one’s 
spirit. 

When the spirit is pure and intentions are stable, 
only then can things be aligned. 

It is like pressing a seal into clay: 

if it is held straight, [the impression] will be straight; 
if it is held crookedly, [the impression] will be 
crooked. 

Thus 

when Yao chose Shun, he decided simply with his 
eyes; 

when Duke Huan chose Ning Qi, he judged him simply 
with his ears. 

If on this basis one were to give up technique and 
measurements and rely on one’s ears and eyes, the 
[resulting] chaos would certainly be great. That the ears and 
eyes can judge is because one returns to feelings and 
nature. 

If one’s hearing is lost in slander and flattery 
and one’s eyes are corrupted by pattern and color, 
if one then wants to rectify affairs, it will be difficult. 

One who is suffused with grief will cry upon hearing a 
song; 

one suffused with joy will see someone weeping and 
laugh. 

That grief can bring joy 
and laughter can bring grief— 
being suffused makes it so. For this reason, value 

emptiness. 

When water is agitated, waves rise, 
when the qi is disordered, the intellect is confused. 
Aconfused intellect cannot attend to government; 
agitated water cannot be used to establish a level. 

Thus the sage-king holds to the One without losing it, and 
the genuine dispositions of the myriad things are 
discovered, the four barbarians and the nine regions all 
submit. The One is the supremely noble; it has no match in 
the world. Tire sage relies on the matchless; thus the 
mandate of the people attaches itself [to him]. 

One who practices Humaneness must discuss it [in 
terms of] grief andjoy; 

one who practices Rightness must explain it [in terms 
of] grasping and yielding. 

If the human eye does not see beyond ten li and one 
wants to comprehensively reach all people within the 
[four] seas, grief andjoy will not suffice. 

If one does not have the amassed wealth of the world 
and wants to comprehensively supply the myriad 
people, [material] benefit cannot be enough. 

Moreover, pleasure, anger, grief, and joy arise 
spontaneously from a stimulus. 

Thus, 

a cry issues from the mouth, 
tears flow from the eyes— 

all burst forth within 
and take form externally. 

It is like 

water flowing downward 
or smoke rising upward: 

What compels them? Thus, 

though one who forces oneself to cry feels pain, he 
does not grieve; 

though one who forces intimacy will laugh, there is no 
harmony. 

Feelings come forth within, and sounds respond externally. 
Thus, 

the jug of food of Xi Fuji was better than the Chuiji 
jade of Duke Xian of Jin, 

the bound meat-strips of Zhao Xuanmeng were more 
worthy than the great bell of Earl Zhi.- 
Thus [though] ritual may be elaborate, it does not suffice 
for effecting love, yet a sincere heart can embrace [those 
at] a great distance. 

11.8 (in part) 

Ritual is the patterning of substance. 

Humaneness is the application of kindness. 

Thus Rites accord with human feeling and make for them an 
ordered pattern, and Humaneness bursts forth as a blush 
that appears in one’s countenance. 

When Ritual does not surpass substance 

and Humaneness does not surpass [the proper degree 

of] kindness, 

this is the Way of ordering the world. 

The three-year mourning period—forces a person to 
what he cannot reach; thus he supplements his feelings 
with pretense. 

The three-month observance breaks off grief, 
coercing and hacking at nature. 

The Confucians and the Mohists do not [find the] origin [of 
their doctrines] in the beginnings and ends of human 
feelings and are committed to practicing mutually opposed 
systems [for] the five grades of observance. Sorrow and 
grief are contained in feelings; burial and interment 
correspond to nurturing. 

Do not force people to do what they are incapable of; 
do not interrupt what people are able to complete. 

11.9 

Rightness is following the patterns and doing what is 
appropriate; 

Ritual is embodying feelings and establishing a design. 
Rightness is appropriateness; 

Ritual is embodiment. 

Of old, 

the Youhu clan acted with Rightness and perished; they 

understood Rightness but did not understand 
appropriateness.- 

Lu instituted Rites and was pared down; they 
understood Rites but not embodiment. 

In the rites of Youyu. the altar was made of earth; 
sacrifices were to the central eaves; the tombs were one 
mu square; his music was the ‘Tool of Xian,” the “Bearing 
Clouds,” and the “Nine Harmonies.” His clothing gave 
prominence to yellow. 

The altar of the lords of Xia was made of pine; they 
sacrificed to the door [god]; their tombs were walled; and 
their coffins were shrouded. Tlreir music was the nine 
movements of the ‘Tipes of Xia,” the “Six Dance Troops,” 
the “Six Lines,” and the “Six Blossoms.” Their clothes gave 
prominence to green. 

In the rites of the Yin [i.e., Shang], their altar was made 
of stone; they sacrificed to the gate; [and] their tombs were 
planted with pines. Tlreir music was the “Great Melody” and 
“Morning Dew.” Tlreir clothing gave prominence to white. 

In the rites of the Zhou, their altar was made of chestnut; 
they sacrificed to the stove; their tombs were planted with 
cypress; their music was the ‘Grand Martiality,” the ‘Three 
Elephants,” and the “Beneath the Mulberry.” Tlreir clothing 
gave prominence to red. 

Their Ritual and Music were contradictory; their clothes 
and regulations were opposed; yet none lost the affection 

[appropriate to] kinship and remoteness, the discipline of 
superior and inferior. Now to seize on one ruler’s methods 
and statutes while rejecting the customs transmitted from 
ages [past] is like tuning a se and [then] gluing the bridges 
in place.- 

Therefore the enlightened ruler clothes himself with 
rites and propriety [and] girdles himself with discipline and 
conduct. His clothes suffice 
to cover his frame, 
to follow the ancient canons, 
to accommodate bowing and bending, 
to convenience his body and frame, 
to ease his movement and steps. 

He does not strive for an extraordinary or beautiful 
appearance or a cornered, diagonal cut. 

His belt suffices 

to tie a knot and gather the flaps, 
to bind tightly and cinch fast. 

He feels no urgency that [it be made of] round and square 
patterned [embroidery]. 

Thus he institutes Rites and Rightness; he acts with 
utmost Moral Potency, but he is not fixated on the 
Confucians and the Mohists. 

1. These were means to spy on or fraternize with the opposite sex outside marriage. 

2. “Mountain of dregs” and “roasting beam” refer to the extravagant feasts given by 
Tyrant Djou, last king of the Shang dynasty, and the cruel punishments he meted 

out to his enemies. 

3. The xiang and did were interpreters employed to facilitate interactions between 
the Chinese Central States and their “barbarian” neighbors. Their exact functions 
are unknown. 

4. Longxi was a commandery in the northwestern territory of the Han Empire (in 
present-day Gansu Province). “Swimming in Longxi” evidently was or became a 
recognizable trope for a dangerous or foolhardy activity, but if there was an 
antecedent text that helped explain why, it has been lost. 

5. The meaning here is not completely transparent in either the Huainanzi or the 
parallel passage in the Zhuangzi. The sense seems to be that true personal 
advancement depends on “forgetting” the constituents of individual identity. 
Thus Confucius teaches best when he forgets Yan Hui, and Hui studies best 
when he forgets Confucius. What “persists” in the wake of such forgetting is 
pristine nature, which is merged with the Way. 

6. For these anecdotes, see the “ Glossary of Personal Names .” 

7. The Confucians advocated elaborate mourning rituals extending over twenty-five 
months, whereas the Mohists advocated simple and austere mourning rituals 
lasting only three months. The Huainanzi criticizes both positions. 

8. In legendary times, the Youhu clan rebelled against Qi, son of Yu the Great (tamer 
of the Great Flood) because they objected to Yu’s bequeathing the throne to Qi 
by hereditary succession. (They contended that he should have followed the 
example of Yao and Shun and handed over the throne to a virtuous commoner.) 
The rebellion failed. 

9. The syntax of the original text is convoluted, but this seems to be the sense of the 
metaphor: Chinese zitherlike instruments, such as the twenty-five-string se, had 
wooden bridges that could be moved back and forth along the strings to adjust 
their pitch. A Three Kingdoms (220-265 C.E.) text contains this anecdote: “A 
man of Qi went to a man of Zhao to study the se. He relied on [the teacher] to 
first tune it, then glued the bridges in place and went home. For three years, he 
could not play a single melody.” 

Twelve 

RESPONSES OF THE WAY 

“Responses of the Way” 

picks out and draws together the relics of past affairs, 
pursues and surveys the traces of bygone antiquity, 
and investigates the reversals of bad and good fortune, 
benefit and harm. 

It tests and verifies them according to the techniques 
of Lao and Zhuang, 

thus matching them to the trajectories of gain and 
loss. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

This chapter describes the qualities of the ideal ruler 
through fifty-six anecdotes, each capped with a citation 
from the Laozi that supports the anecdote’s didactic 
claims. These anecdotes and many others of the same kind 
appear to have circulated in various forms (written, oral, or 
both) during the Warring States and Han periods and may be 
considered a distinctive genre of early Chinese prose. 
Those collected in “Responses of the Way” contain 

everything from recondite accounts of mystical wandering 
to moralizing speeches, ethical prescriptions, and practical 
political counsel. They illustrate how the Way can be 
understood by the ruler and be used to ensure the success 
and prosperity of his reign. The Laozi here is vested with 
canonical authority, showing how the anecdotes should be 
interpreted so as to support the vision of empire and sage- 
rulership promoted in the Huainanzi more generally. 

As is true of several other chapters of the Huainanzi 
consisting of many short sections (for example, chapters 
IQ, 14, 16, T7, and 18), “Responses of the Way” begins 
with an establishing anecdote that sets the theme for the 
chapter as a whole. Section 12.1 features short dialogues 
between Grand Purity and Inexhaustible, Non-action and 
Non-beginning, concerning the nature of the Way. These 
dialogues affirm the ineffable unity of the Way and are 
reinforced by two quotations from the Laozi. Hie first 
states that “when all the world recognizes good as good, 
there is ill,” and the second is the famous affirmation that 
“those who know do not speak; those who speak do not 
know.” The reader thus is prepared to read the following 
anecdotes as a discourse on the nature of the Way, with 
interpretations backed by the authority of the Laozi. 

These anecdotes depict crucial moments and dilemmas 
in a wide range of political contexts, discussing the 
principles to be implemented and attributes to be embodied 

by the ideal ruler to ensure the success of his regime. As is 
true of the Huainanzi generally, this chapter draws on and 
synthesizes a wide range of philosophical principles and 
political techniques. Tire ideal ruler depicted here is not 
only a self-cultivated Daoist sage but also a compassionate 
moralist and a hard-headed realist. Filtered through the lens 
of the Laozi, these anecdotes illustrate the applicability of 
the Way to a variety of human affairs. 

Twelve 

12.1 

Grand Purity asked Inexhaustible, “Do you know the Way?” 

Inexhaustible responded, “I don’t know it.” 

[Grand Purity] then asked Non-action, “Do you know the 

Way?’ 

Non-action replied, “I know it.” 

[Grand Purity said,] “Does this Way that you know have 

norms?” 

Non-action responded, ‘Yes, the Way that I know has 

norms.” 

[Grand Purity] inquired, “What are the norms, then?” 

Non-action responded, “The Way that I know 
can be weak or strong; 
it can be soft or hard; 
it can be yin or yang; 
it can be dark or bright; 
it can embrace or contain Heaven and Earth; 
it can respond to or await the Limitless. 

These are the norms by which I know the Way.” 

Grand Purity then asked Non-beginning, “Earlier, I asked 

Inexhaustible about the Way and Inexhaustible replied, ‘I 

don’t know it.’ I then asked Nonaction and Non-action 
responded, ‘I know it.’ So I asked him, ‘Does this Way that 
you know have norms?’ Non-action then responded, ‘Yes, 
the Way that I know has norms.’ When I asked him whether 
he could [name] the norms, he responded, ‘I know that the 
Way 

can be weak or strong; 

it can be soft or hard; 

it can be yin or yang; 

it can be dark or bright; 

it can embrace or contain Heaven and Earth; 

it can respond to or await the Limitless. 

Hiese are the norms by which I know the Way.’ This being 
so, between Inexhaustible’s not knowing and Non-action’s 
knowing, which is right and which is wrong?” 
Non-beginning answered, 

“Not knowing it is deep while knowing it is shallow; 
not knowing it is internal while knowing it is external; 
not knowing it is refined while knowing it is coarse.” 
Grand Purity then gazed up at the heavens and said 
with a long sigh, 

“Then is not knowing, in fact, knowing? 

And is knowing, in fact, not knowing? 

Who knows that knowing it is not knowing 
and that not knowing it is knowing?” 

Non-beginning responded, 

“The Way cannot be heard, for what is heard is not the 
Way; 

the Way cannot be seen, for what is seen is not the 
Way; 

the Way cannot be spoken, for what is spoken is not 
the Way. 

Who knows the formlessness of what gives form to 
form? 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“When all the world recognizes good as good, 
there is ill.” 

Therefore 

those who know do not speak; 
those who speak do not know. 

12.3 

Huizi drafted the state laws on behalf ofKingHui [of Wei]. 
When he had completed them, he showed them to the 
elders, all of whom praised them. He then submitted them 
to King Hui. King Hui was elated by them and showed them 
to Zhai Jian. Zhai Jian exclaimed, “Excellent.” 

King Hui inquired, “Since they are excellent, can we 
implement them?” 

Zhai Jian responded, “We cannot.” 

King Hui then asked, ‘If they are excellent, why can we 
not implement them?” 

Zhai Jian answered, “Now take those who haul heavy 
logs: those in front call, ‘Heave!’ while those behind 
respond, ‘Ho!’ This is a chant to encourage the strength of 
those who haul heavy loads. Could it really be that they do 
not know either the melodies of Zheng and Wey or the 
[tune called] ‘Whirling Chu’? Although they know such 
melodies, they do not use them because they do not suit the 
circumstance as well as this chant does. Governing a state 
is a matter of ritual and not a matter of literary eloquence.” 
Therefore the Laozi says: 

“Tire more detailed the laws and edicts, 
the more thieves and robbers there are.” 

Hris is what is meant here. 

12.5 

When the Duke of Bo won possession of the state of Jing 
[i.e., Chu], he could not [bring himself to] distribute among 
the people the grain [kept in] the storehouses. On the 
seventh day [after the conquest], Shi Qi entered [the capital] 
and said [to the Duke of Bo]: ‘Abu obtained this wealth 
through unrighteous means. Moreover, you could not [bring 
yourself to] share it. Calamity is sure to arrive. If you are 
incapable of giving [this wealth] to the people, it would be 
best to burn it so as not to give them cause to harm us.” The 
Duke of Bo did not heed his advice. 

On the ninth day [after the conquest], the Duke of She 

entered [the capital]. He brought out the goods from the 
Supreme Storehouse in order to distribute them to the 
multitudes. He then removed the weapons from the Lofty 
Repository in order to distribute them to the common 
people. Thereafter he attacked the Duke of Bo, and on the 
nineteenth day [after the conquest] he captured him. 

To desire the state when one does not yet possess it may 
be called the utmost avarice. To be incapable of acting on 
behalf of others, not to mention being incapable of acting 
on behalf of oneself, may be called utmost foolishness. 
How is the Duke of Bo’s stinginess any different from the 
cannibal owl’s love for its offspring? 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“Rather than holding it upright and filling it to the 

brim, 

better to have stopped in time. 

Hammer it to a point, 

and the sharpness cannot be preserved forever.” 

12.8 

Viscount Xiang of Zhao dispatched an attacking force 
against [the “barbarian” state of] Dee and defeated it. When 
the inhabitants of [the two cities of] Zuo and Zhong had 
been captured, a messenger arrived to report the victory to 
Viscount Xiang, who was just about to eat his meal. When 
Viscount Xiang heard the news, an anxious expression 

appeared on his face. His attendants asked: “Capturing two 
cities in one morning is a cause for celebration. Why, then, 
do you appear so anxious?” 

Viscount Xiang replied: “Tire swelling of the Yangzi and 
Yellow rivers does not last more than three days; wild 
winds and violent rains do not last a morning; the sun at 
high noon lasts for less than a moment. Now the virtuous 
conduct of the Zhao clan has not yet amounted to anything, 
and yet in one morning two cities have been captured. Our 
demise is imminent!” 

When Confucius heard about this, he said: “Tire Zhao 
clan will surely prosper!” 

Anxiety leads to prosperity; 

happiness leads to ruin. 

Winning is not difficult, but preserving victory presents 
real challenges. Tire worthy ruler relies on his sense of 
anxiety to preserve victory, and so his good fortune extends 
to his descendants. Tire states of Qi, Chu, Wu, and Yuc all 
were victorious for a time, yet eventually their rulers were 
captured and ruined because they did not understand how to 
preserve victory. Only the ruler who possesses the Way can 
preserve victory. Confucius had enough strength to draw 
back the bolted gate of the capital, but he did not want to 
become known for his strength. Mozi engaged in defensive 
warfare that forced Gongshu Ban to submit to him, yet 
Mozi did not want to be known as a warrior. Those who are 

skilled at preserving victory consider their strength as 
weakness. 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“Tire Way is empty, 

yet when you use it, you need not refill it.” 

12.13 

Marquis Wu of Wei asked Li Ke: “Why did the state of Wu 
perish?” 

Li Ke responded: “Countless battles and countless 
victories.” 

Marquis Wu retorted: “But countless battles and 
countless victories are the good fortune of the state and its 
ruling family. How could such things be the sole cause of 
Wu’s downfall?” 

Li Ke replied: 

“With countless battles, the populace grows 
exhausted; 

with countless victories, the ruler grows arrogant. 

Rare indeed is the state that does not perish when an 
arrogant ruler governs an exhausted populace! 

Arrogance leads to recklessness, and recklessness 
depletes material resources. 

Exhaustion leads to resentment, and resentment drives 
the people to their wits’ end. 

Given that both superior and subordinate were depleted, the 

demise of Wu appears to have occurred rather late. This is 
why King Fuchai [of Wu] took his own life after [Iris defeat 
at the battle of] Gansui.” 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

‘To withdraw when merit is achieved and reputation 
established is the Way of Heaven.” 

12.18 

Duke Huan [of Qi] was reading in the upper part of his hall 
while Wheelwright Flat was hewing a wheel in the lower 
part. Setting aside his hammer and chisel, the wheelwright 
asked Duke Huan, T venture to ask what books you are 
reading?” 

“Tire books of the sages,” said the duke. 

“Are the sages still alive?” 

“They already are dead,” said the duke. 

“Then what you are reading are merely the lees and dregs 
of the sages.” 

Flushing in anger, Duke Huan replied, ‘How dare you, a 
wheelwright, presume to criticize the books I am reading? 
If you can explain yourself, all right. If you cannot explain 
yourself, you shall die.” 

‘Yes, I can explain. I will put it in terms of my 
occupation as a wheelwright,” said Wheelwright Flat. “If 
[the blows of the mallet] are too hard, [the chisel] will bite 
and not budge; if they are too gentle, [the chisel] will slide 

and not take hold. To make the chisel neither slide nor stick 
is something you can sense with your hand and feel with 
your heart. Then you can get it down to the utmost subtlety. 
But I have not been able to teach it to my son, and my son 
has not been able to learn it from me. That’s why I am an 
old man still hewing wheels after sixty years. Now what the 
sages have said contains some truth, but since they are dead 
and long gone, all that remains is the lees and dregs [of 
their teachings].” 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“Tire Way that can be spoken 
is not the constant Way; 
the Name that can be named 
is not the constant Name.” 

12.19 

Previously, when Sicheng Zihan acted as minister to the 
state of Song, he said to the lord of Song, “Tire danger or 
safety of this state and the orderliness or disorderliness of 
its people depend on how you execute rewards and 
punishments. Now the gifts of rank and reward are what the 
people love—these you should carry out personally. Tire 
punishments of execution and mutilation are what the 
people hate—may I ask that I administer them?” 

The lord of Song responded: “Excellent! I will enjoy the 
peoples’ praises while you will suffer their resentments. 

This way I’ll be sure to know how to avoid being the 
laughingstock of the Lords of the Land.” 

Hie lord of Song then carried out the rewards while 
Zihan [implemented] the punishments. When the people of 
the state came to understand that the regulations 
concerning executions and amputations rested solely with 
Zihan, the grand ministers of state treated him with 
affection, and the hundred surnames [i.e., the common 
people] feared him. Before a year had passed, Zihan had 
murdered the lord of Song and usurped his government. 
Hierefore the Laozi says: 

“The fish must not be allowed to leave the deep; 
the efficacious instruments of state must not be 
revealed to anyone.” 

12.24 

Viscount Jian of Zhao died and had not yet been buried 
when the people of Zhongmou shifted their allegiance to 
the state of Qi. When Viscount Jian of Zhao had been 
buried for five days, Viscount Xiang [his son] raised troops 
to attack and encircle them. The encirclement was not yet 
complete, when a one-hundred-foot section of the city wall 
suddenly crumbled. Viscount Xiang then beat the gong and 
withdrew his troops. An official of his army remonstrated 
with him, saying, “When you were punishing the crimes of 
Zhongmou, its city walls crumbled. This is a sign that 

Heaven supports us. Why, then, should we abandon the 
attack?” 

Viscount Xiang replied, “I heard that Shuxiang once said: 
‘A Superior Man does not impose on others when they 
profit, nor does he attack others in distress.’ Let the people 
of Zhongmou repair their walls. Only when the walls have 
been repaired, will we attack them.” When the people of 
Zhongmou heard of the viscount’s [sense of] justice, they 
asked to surrender. 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“Now, 

it is because he alone does not contend 
that no one can contend with him.” 

12.31 

When Duke Wen of Jin attacked the city of Yuan, he agreed 
with his grand ministers on [a period of] three days [to 
capture the city]. When three days passed and Yuan did not 
surrender, Duke Wen ordered a retreat. A military officer 
said: “Yuan is sure to surrender in another day or two.” 

Tire ruler responded: ‘1 did not realize that it would not 
be possible to defeat Yuan in three days and so agreed with 
the grand ministers on [a period of] three days to capture 
the city of Yuan. Now if we do not end this campaign, even 
though the designated time has elapsed, it would mean 
forfeiting my trustworthiness to obtain Yuan. I will not do 

it.” 

When the people of Yuan heard about this, they said: 
“With a ruler like this, how could we refuse to surrender?” 
Urey promptly surrendered. When the people of Wen heard 
about this, they also asked to surrender. 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“How dim! How obscure! 

Yet within it is the Quintessence. 

This essence is profoundly genuine, 
for what lies within is trustworthy. 

Therefore beautiful words can buy honor, 

[but] beautiful deeds can raise a man above others.” 

12.36 

King Cheng [of Zhou] questioned Ym Yi about governing. 
“What kind of virtuous conduct will inspire the people to 
feel affection for their ruler?” he asked. 

Ym Yi replied: “Employ them according to the proper 
seasons. Treat them with respect and compliance.” 

King Cheng inquired: ‘To what extent should one 
practice such things?” 

Ym Yi responded: “Practice them as if you were facing a 
deep abyss or treading on thin ice.” 

King Cheng said: “How frightening to be a king!” 

Ym Yi replied: “Those between Heaven and Earth and 
within the Four Seas who are good are loved by the people; 

those who are not good are despised by the people. In 
ancient times, the subjects of the Shang and Xia reversed 
their allegiances; they came to despise [the tyrants] Jie and 
Djou and submitted to the rulership of Kings Tang and Wu. 
Hie people of Susha all took it upon themselves to attack 
their lord and shift their allegiance to the Divine Farmer. 
Such things are well understood in our age. How could you 
not be frightened!” 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“What others fear 
you also must fear.” 

12.41 

Hie queen consort of the king of Qi died. Hie king wanted 
to appoint a new queen consort but had not yet decided who 
it would be, so he directed his ministers to deliberate the 
issue. Hie Duke of Xue, hoping to discover the king’s 
choice, presented him with ten pairs of earrings, one of 
which was especially beautiful. Hie next morning he asked 
about the whereabouts of the most beautiful pair of 
earrings and urged that the woman who now had them 
should be appointed queen consort. Hie king of Qi was 
delighted by this and thereafter respected and valued the 
Duke of Xue even more. Hius, if the intentions and desires 
of the lord are visible on the outside, he will fall subject to 
the control of his underlings. 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

“Block the openings, 
shut the doors, 

and all your life you will not labor.” 

12.43 

Mizi had governed Shanfu for three years when Wuma Qi 
changed his appearance by wearing tattered clothes and a 
short hemp jacket so that he could [secretly] observe what 
transformations had taken place there. He saw a night 
fisherman catch a fish and let it go. Wuma Qi asked him: 
‘You sir, being a fisherman, want to catch fish. Why then do 
you catch them and let them go?” 

Tire fisherman replied: “Mizi does not want us to catch 
small fish. Since all the fish I caught were small ones, I let 
them go.” 

Wuma Qi returned home and reported his findings to 
Confucius: “Mizi is the most Morally Potent of all! He is 
able to inspire people to conduct themselves in the dark of 
the night as if they were facing a strict punishment for their 
actions. How is Master Mi able to achieve such things?” 

Confucius replied: “I, Qiu, once asked him about 
governing. He replied, ‘Sincerity in this takes shape in that.’ 
Mizi must be practicing this technique.” 

Therefore the Laozi says: 

‘He discards that and takes this.” 

Thirteen 

BOUNDLESS DISCOURSES 

“Boundless Discourses” provides the means by which to 
stitch up the spaces in ragged seams and hems 
and plug up the gaps in crooked and chattering teeth.- 
It welcomes the straightforward and straightens out 
the devious, 

in order to extend the Original Unhewn and thereby 
anticipate 

the alternations of success and failure 
and the reversals of benefit and harm. 

It is what enables you to 

not be foolishly immersed in the advantages of 
political power, 

not be seductively confused by the exigencies of 
affairs, 

and so tally with constancy and change 

to link up and discern timely and generational 

alterations, 

and extend and adjust [your policies] in accordance with 
transformations. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

Using numerous examples, “Boundless Discourses” shows 
that change has always been a part of human history, from 
remote antiquity to the present day. It argues that 
successful rulers do not resist change in a futile attempt to 
uphold the policies and standards of the past but instead 
modify their actions to suit changing customs and 
circumstances. Sages, on whom rulers are urged to model 
themselves, are portrayed as having a unique insight that 
allows them to see the enduring reality behind superficial 
qualities. That, in turn, enables them to adapt to change and 
to innovate while following diverse strategies to realize the 
Way under varying circumstances. 

The vision of primordial antiquity presented here is 
somewhat different from that found in chapter 8 . ‘The 
Basic Warp.” In that chapter, the society of the remote past 
is presented as a kind of communitarian ideal that, 
regrettably but inevitably, is no longer available to us in 
more complicated modern times. Chapter 13 . in contrast, 
acknowledges that primitive society was peaceful and 
innocent but also describes it as poor, inconvenient, and 
dangerous. Therefore, to ease the lives of the people, the 
sages contrived inventions: houses, agricultural 
implements, and much more. Chapters 8 and 13 do agree, 
however, that every change begets more change and that the 
ruler’s role is managing change and adapting to new 

circumstances. 

As is true of many chapters in the Huainanzi, and in 
keeping with the text’s claim for itself, this chapter draws 
on a wide range of earlier texts and intellectual lineages to 
create its own distinctive synthesis. Of particular 
importance to its emphasis on the inevitability of change 
are the Mozi and the Hanfeizi, both of which affirm that not 
only is it impossible to return to the simple ways of the 
remote past but if it were possible, it still would not be 
desirable. This underscores the basic stance of the 
Huainanzi as a whole: that it is a practical blueprint for 
successful government in its own time. 

1. “Ragged seams and hems” and “gaps in crooked and chattering teeth” are 
metaphors for the various shortcomings of the age, the consequences of 
persistent decline from the primordial era of sage-rulership. 

Thirteen 

13.1 

In ancient times, those who wore [plain] caps and [simple] 
rolled collars ruled the world. Their Potency was of life, 
not death, of giving, not usurping. None in the world 
rejected their service; all embraced their Potency. In those 
times, 

yin and yang were harmonious and tranquil; 
the winds and rains were timely and moderate. 

The myriad things prospered and flourished; 

nests of birds and owls could be inspected on bended 

knee; 

wild animals could be ensnared and kept compliant. 
What need was there for official costumes, wide sashes, 
buckled collars, grand insignia? 

13.2 

In ancient times, the people lived in humid lands, hollowing 
out caves again and again. 

In the winters, they could not bear the frost, the snow, 
the fog, the dew; 

in the summers, they could not bear the oppressive 

heat, the sultry days, the mosquitoes, the flies. 

The sages therefore created for them the pounding of earth 
and the cutting of trees to make houses. Above they placed 
ridgepoles, and below they placed rafters 
to protect against the winds and rain 
and to keep out the cold and heat. 

The common people were put at ease. 

Bo Yu was the first to make clothing. He spun the hemp, 
working the warp with his hand, suspending it through his 
fingers, and forming it like netting. Later generations [of 
sages] made looms for doubled weaves to increase their 
usefulness. Tire people were thus able to protect their 
bodies and drive off the cold. 

In ancient times, [the people] 
sharpened sticks to plow, 
polished clam shells to weed, 
cut firewood to make fuel, 
and hauled jars to draw water. 

The people labored, but their gains were few. Later 
generations [of sages] made them plows, plowshares, and 
hoes; axes for cutting firewood; and well sweeps for 
drawing water. Tire people were at ease, [and] their gains 
multiplied. 

In ancient times, the great rivers and famed waterways 
cut across the roads and impeded the comings and goings 
of the people. Consequently, [the sages] hollowed logs and 

squared timbers to make rafts and boats. Therefore, 
according to a place’s circumstances of plenty or dearth, 
things could be exchanged and transported. 

Urey made shoes from hides and traversed a thousand 

//; 

they endured the labor of carrying loads on their 
backs. 

[The sages] thus created for them 

the bending [of wood] into wheels and the 
constructing of carts, 

the hitching of horses and the yoking of oxen. 

The people could thus go great distances without tiring. 

Since ferocious beasts would injure people and there 
was nothing with which to stop them, [the sages] created 
for them the casting of metal and the forging of iron to 
make weapons and arms. Hie animals could harm them no 
more. 

Thus, 

pressed by difficulties, [the sages] searched for what 
was advantageous; 

bound by adversity, they created what was necessary. 

In each case, the people used what they had come to know 
[from the sages] 

to eliminate what harmed them 
and to seek what benefited them. 

If the unchanging past cannot be followed, if the martial 

implements [of the past] cannot be relied on, then there 
will be [occasions when] the laws and standards of the 
former kings must be adjusted to changing [circumstances]. 

13.6 

In antiquity, 

the people were pure, the artisans skillful, 

the merchants straightforward, the women simple. 

This is wiry 

governance and education were easily transformed [in 
response to circumstances], 

and habits and customs were easily adjusted [to suit 
changing times]. 

In the present age, Moral Potency is declining more and 
more, and the customs of the people are becoming more 
and more stingy. Wanting to use straightforward and simple 
laws to put in order a people already corrupted is like 
wanting to control a horse without a bit and a whip. 

In ancient times, the Divine Farmer used no regulations 
or commands, yet the people followed. Tang [i.e., Yao] and 
Yu [i.e., Shun] had regulations and commands but no 
punishments. 

The Xiaused no false words; 
the Shang made oaths; 
the Zhou made covenants. 

When one comes down to the present time, people accept 

shame and think lightly of being disgraced; they value 
taking and belittle giving. Wanting to use the way of the 
Divine Farmer to put things in order would only make 
chaos inevitable. When Bocheng Zigao resigned from 
being a Lord of the Land and simply tilled the fields, the 
world exalted him. Now, those who resign from office and 
become hermits occupy the bottom [rung] of their locales. 
How can this be considered the same? 

Tire armies of antiquity had bows and swords; their 
lances had no sharp points; their halberds, no tips. 

Tire armies of the later ages have siege weapons and 
battering rams with which to attack, spiked balls with which 
to defend, arrays of crossbows with which to shoot, and 
iron chariots with which to fight. 

When states fought in ancient times, they did not kill the 
young, [and] they did not capture the old. 

What in antiquity was proper is today laughable; what was 
taken to be honorable in antiquity is taken to be disgraceful 
today; what was taken to be order in antiquity is taken to be 
chaos today. 

Now, 

the Divine Farmer and Fuxi did not give out rewards 
and punishments, yet the people did no wrong; but 
those who govern [today] are unable to dispense with 
laws and rule the people. 

Shun grasped a shield and axe and brought the Miao 

rulers to submission, yet those who lead campaigns 
[today] are unable to use arms to reduce the violence. 
Looking at the issue from this perspective, it is clear that 
laws and standards are the means to assess the customs of 
the people and regulate relaxation and work; instruments 
and implements accord with the alterations of the times and 
are regulated to fit what is suitable. Now, 

the sages created laws and the myriad people were 
regulated by them; 

the worthies established rituals and the ignorant were 
restrained by them. 

[But] people who are regulated by laws cannot propose 
far-reaching initiatives; 

those who are restrained by rituals cannot effect 
responsive alterations. 

An ear that does not know the difference between high 
and low [tones] cannot order tunes and notes; 
a mind that does not understand the source of order 
and disorder cannot impose regulations and laws. 

It is necessary to have 

an ear that uniquely hears, 
discernment that uniquely sees; 
for only then can you take personal responsibility for 
implementing the Way. 

Now, 

the Yin replaced the Xia; 

the Zhou replaced the Yin; 

the Spring and Autumn period replaced the Zhou. 

The rites of the Three Dynasties were not the same. Why 
should antiquity be followed? 

13.13 

When [a ruler] causes the world to be desolate and chaotic, 
Rites and Rightness are cut off; 
bonds and ties are dispensed with. 

Tire strong take advantage of the weak; 
attackers force the submission of the vanquished; 
minister and ruler lack hierarchical distinction; 
the noble and the humble lack deferential order; 
armor and helmets become infested with lice and 
fleas; 

swallows and sparrows roost in the tents and canopies; 
so that the soldiers never get any rest. At that point, he may 
begin to adopt a cautious demeanor and [conduct] reverent 
rites, but [it will be too late and] he will invariably be 
destroyed with no possibility of being restored. 

When [a ruler causes] the world to be secure and 
peaceful, 

administration and instruction are harmonious and 
equitable; 

the one hundred names [i.e., the common people] are 
reverent and affable; 

superiors and subordinates are mutually affectionate. 
At that point, [the ruler] might begin to establish an 
atmosphere of leniency. [If so,] he will embolden the 
courageous and strong and so will be unable to avoid falling 
subject to the laws of those who have authority. 

For this reason, 

sages can be yin, and they can be yang; 

they can be weak, and they can be strong; 

in tempo with the times, they are active or still; 

in accordance with the inner substance of things, they 

establish merit. 

When things become active, they know their 
reversions; 

when affairs sprout forth, they anticipate their 
alterations; 

when things transform, they act in their image; 
when things move, they respond to them; 
this is why to the end of their days, they are effective and 
free of troubles. 

13.20 

With regard to actions, 

there are some that you want to carry out, but 
circumstances warrant that you abandon them; 
there are some that you want to avoid, but 
circumstances warrant that you pursue them. 

There was a man of Chu who boarded a boat and 
encountered a typhoon. Tire waves were upon him, and in 
his fright he threw himself into the water. It is not that he 
did not covet life and fear death but that sometimes in 
fearing death, you commit the contradiction of being 
forgetful of your life. Thus human lusts and desires are also 
like this. 

Among the people of Qi was someone who stole gold. 
Just when the market was most crowded, he arrived, 
grabbed it, and fled. When held by force and asked: “Why 
did you steal gold from the market?” He responded: ‘1 did 
not see anyone, I only saw gold.” When the mind is 
preoccupied with desires, it forgets what it does. For this 
reason, sages 

scrutinize the alterations of movement and rest, 
accord with the due measures of receiving and giving, 
order the feelings of liking and loathing, 
and harmonize with the occasions of happiness and 
anger. 

When [the distinctions of] movement and rest are 
attained, calamities will not be encountered; 

when receiving and giving are in accord, crimes will 
not accumulate; 

when liking and loathing are ordered, anxiety will not 
come near; 

when happiness and anger are in [proper] occasion, 

resentment will not encroach. 

Thus, those who have achieved the Way are not indifferent 
to obtaining [tilings] but are not ravenous for wealth; 
what they have, they do not abandon, 
but what they do not have, they do not seek. 

They are constantly full but not overflowing; 
they persevere in emptiness but are easily satisfied. 

Now the rain that drips from the eaves is sufficient to fill 
to overflowing a hu vessel, but the waters of the Yangzi and 
Yellow Rivers cannot fill a leaking zhi cup.-Thus the human 
heart is like this. If you make yourself conform to the 
Techniques of the Way in measurement and limitation, food 
will fill the emptiness; clothes will block the cold; and it 
will suffice to care for the body of one seven feet tall.=-But 
if you lack the Techniques of the Way in measurement and 
limitation and try to practice restraint and moderation on 
your own, the positional advantage of ten thousand chariots 
will not suffice to make you honored, and all the wealth in 
the world will not suffice to make you happy. 

1. A hu is a large storage vessel, and a zhi is a small drinking cup. 

2. A Han “foot” (chi) was about nine inches long, so, in modem terms a person 
“seven feet tall” in Han measure would have been about five feet, three inches. 

Fourteen 

SAYINGS EXPLAINED 

“Sayings Explained” provides the means by which to 

compare through analogy the tenets of human affairs 
and elucidate through illustration the substance of 
order and disorder. 

It ranks the hidden meanings of subtle sayings, 
explaining them with literary expressions that reflect 
ultimate principles. 

Thus it patches up and mends deficiencies due to 
errors and oversights. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Sayings Explained” is a collection of gnomic sayings (set 
off in italics in our text), most of which are followed by a 
few lines of commentary that explicate and clarify their 
significance. Although at first glance, the sayings and 
explications may seem to be merely conventional 
statements of received wisdom, taken as a whole they 
recapitulate and reinforce important concepts and themes 
addressed elsewhere in the Huainanzi : What are the 

essential attributes of the sage? How does the sage bring 
order to his intrinsic self and, by extension, to the world? 
Tire sayings collected in this chapter address these central 
concerns, and the truths they are intended to express are 
explained through various analogies and illustrations. 

Many, perhaps most, of the sayings collected here would 
have been familiar to educated people in the early Han, as 
analogous passages can be found in a wide range of earlier 
texts. The distinctive contribution of the Huananzi’s 
treatment of these sayings lies in the explications, which 
consistently address the attributes of sage-rulership and 
how they may be attained through self-cultivation. Tire 
sayings and explications depict several ideal human types 
that illustrate what a sage-ruler can and should be. Tire 
Genuine Person embodies a pristine, primeval time before 
the emergence of time, when there was perfect unity. He 
identifies completely with the Grand One—that is, the 
divine embodiment of primal nondifferentiation. Tire Sage 
is fundamentally, although not exclusively, associated with 
the empty, nameless, formless, non-active, non-striving, 
nonintervening attributes of the Way. His ability to embody 
these aspects of the Way empowers him to sustain an inner 
equanimity in his person and a harmonious unity in his 
governance. Thus in ordering his person, the sage avoids 
the various external distractions that can entangle the mind 
and disturb the nature, hr ruling, the sage’s qualities enable 

him to have to suffer neither the malice of his underlings 
nor the resentment of the common people. The Superior 
Man is more deeply engaged with the differentiated world 
of affairs but nevertheless rises above petty concerns. Tire 
Genuine Person, the Sage, and the Superior Man all have 
profound lessons to teach real-world rulers about the 
nature and practice of rulership. 

Fourteen 

14.1 

Cavernous and undifferentiated Heaven and Earth, chaotic 
and inchoate Uncarved Block, not yet created and fashioned 
into things: this we call the “Grand One.” Together 
emerging from this unity, so that each acquired its 
distinctive qualities, there were birds, there were fish, there 
were animals: this we call the “differentiation of things.” 
Regions became distinguished according to their 
categories; 

things became differentiated according to their 
groupings. 

Hreir natures and destinies were dissimilar; all acquired 
their physical forms in the realm of “Being.” 

Separate and not interconnected, differentiated as the 
myriad things, none could return to their Ancestor. Thus, 
when animated, things are said to be alive; 
when dead, things are said to be expired. 

In both cases, they are things. It is not that there was 
nothing that made things into things; rather, what made 
things into things is not among the myriad things. 

In antiquity, at the Grand Beginning, human beings came 

to life in “Nonbeing” and acquired a physical form in 
“Being.” Having a physical form, [human beings] came 
under the control of things. But those who can return to 
that from which they were born, as if they had not yet 
acquired a physical form, are called the “Genuine.” Tire 
Genuine are those who have not yet begun to differentiate 
from the Grand One. 

14.2 

The sage 

does not for the sake of a name become a corpse; 
does not for the sake of stratagems store things up; 
does not for the sake of affairs take on 
responsibility; 

does not for the sake of wisdom become a ruler. 

[Tire sage] 

dwells in the Formless, 
moves in the Traceless, 
and wanders in the Beginningless. 

He does not initiate things for the sake of good 
fortune, 

nor does he begin things to deal with misfortune. 

He remains in Emptiness and Non-being 
and moves when he cannot do otherwise. 

For those who desire good fortune, sometimes suffer 
misfortune, 

and those who desire benefit, sometimes suffer harm. 
Thus, 

those who are secure through non-action become 
endangered when they lose that by which they are 
secure [i.e., non-action]. 

Those who are well ordered through nonintervention 
become disordered when they lose that by which they 
are well ordered. 

14.5 

Those who trust themselves cannot be swayed by 
slander or flattery. 

Those whose knowledge is sufficient cannot be 
enticed by power or profit. 

Thus, 

those who fully comprehend the genuine qualities of 
their nature do not strive to accomplish what their 
nature cannot accomplish. 

Those who fully comprehend the genuine qualities of 
their destiny do not concern themselves with what 
their destiny cannot control. 

For those who fully comprehend the Way, things are not 
enough to disorder their inner harmony. 

14.8 

Trace to the source Heaven s decree, 

cultivate the techniques of the mind, 

regulate likes and dislikes, 

follow your disposition and nature, 

and the Way of governing [oneselj] will come 

through. 

If you trace to the source Heaven’s decree, you will 
not be deluded by bad or good fortune. 

If you cultivate the techniques of the mind, you will 
not be unrestrained in your happiness and anger. 

If you regulate your likes and dislikes, you will not 
covet what is useless. 

If you follow your disposition and nature, your desires 
will not exceed the appropriate limits. 

If you are not deluded by bad or good fortune, your 
movement and stillness will comply with the inherent 
principles of things. 

If you are not unrestrained in your happiness and 
anger, your rewards and punishments will not be 
partial. 

If you do not covet what is useless, you will not allow 
your desires to harm your nature. 

If your desires do not exceed the appropriate limits, 
you will nurture your nature and know contentment. 

As a general rule, these four things cannot be sought after 
in what is outside the self nor can you bestow them on 
others. You can obtain them only by returning to the self. 

14.9 

The world 

cannot be acted on by knowledge; 
cannot be discerned through perceptiveness; 
cannot be governed by intervening; 
cannot be subjugated through humaneness; 
and cannot be vanquished through strength. 

These five are all aspects of human talent. If your Potency 
does not flourish, you will not be able to perfect even one 
of them. Where Potency is established, these five will not 
be endangered. But where these five appear, Potency will 
not be established. 

Thus, 

if you grasp the Way, stupidity will be more than 
sufficient; 

if you lose the Way, knowledge will be insufficient to 
the task. 

14.11 

The root of governance lies in bringing security to 
the people. 

The root of bringing security to the people lies in 
using them sufficiently. 

The root of using them sufficiently lies in not taking 
them from their seasonal tasks. 

The root of not taking them from their seasonal 

tasks lies in decreasing what they need to attend to. 
The root of decreasing what they need to attend to 
lies in moderating their desire. 

The root of moderating their desire lies in returning 
to their nature. 

The root of returning to their nature lies in 
eradicating [what] burdens [their mind]. 

If you eradicate [what] burdens [their mind], they will 
become empty Being empty, they will become balanced. 
Balance is the beginning of the Way. 

Emptiness is the abode of the Way. 

14.17 

If you disregard the Way and rely on knowledge, 
invariably you will be endangered. 

If you abandon technique and employ talent, 
invariably you will encounter difficulties. 

There have been those who perished because their 
desires were numerous; 

there have never been those who were endangered 
because they were free from desires. 

There have been those who desired order but 
suffered disorder; 

there have never been those who preserved what is 
constant and yet lost their state. 

Thus, 

while knowledge [alone] will not suffice for you to 
avoid trouble, 

stupidity [alone] will not suffice to jeopardize your 
peace. 

If you preserve these distinctions 

and act in accordance with these principles, 

when you lose, you will not feel vexed, 

and when you succeed, you will not feel happy. 

For when you accomplish something, it is not because 
you have acted deliberately, 

and when you acquire something, it is not because you 
have sought after something. 

What you receive, you take without [consciously] 
accepting; 

what you give, you confer without [consciously] 
distributing. 

If you [nourish] life in accordance with spring, 

and you kill in accordance with autumn, 

those to whom you grant life will not view you as 

exerting Moral Potency, 

and those whom you subject to death will not viewyou 
as expressing anger. 

[Thus] you will have come close to the Way. 

14.18 

The sage does not do things that are wrong 

yet does not hate those who do wrong to him. 

He cultivates Moral Potency worthy of praise 
yet does not seek the praise of others. 

He cannot prevent ill fortune from arising 
yet trusts that he personally will not summon it. 

He cannot assure that good fortune will invariably 
befall him 

yet trusts that he personally will not yield to it. 
[Thus,] 

if misfortune befalls him, because it is not something 
he sought to bring about, should he fail, he feels no 
anxiety. 

If good fortune befalls him, because it is not 
something he sought to bring about, should he 
succeed, he feels no pride. 

He knows that what determines bad and good fortune 
is beyond his control. 

Thus, he is joyful abiding at his leisure and governs 
through non-action. 

14.22 

The sage has no conscious deliberations; 
he has no fixed ideas. 

He neither welcomes what arrives 
nor sends off what departs. 

Though others occupy positions north, south, east, 

and west, 

he alone is established at the center. 

Thus, he encounters various crooked ways, but he does not 
lose his rectitude; the world flows to and fro, but he alone 
does not leave his [ancestral] shrine and walled city. 

Thus, 

he does not encourage what he likes, 
nor does he avoid what he dislikes; 
he simply follows Heaven’s Way. 

He does not initiate, 

nor does he personally assume authority; 
he simply complies with Heaven’s Principles. 

He does not make plans in advance, 
nor does he miss the opportune moment; 
he simply complies with Heaven’s Times. 

He does not seek to obtain things, 
nor does he shun good fortune; 
he simply goes along with Heaven’s Patterns. 

He does not seek after what he does not possess, 
nor does he lose what he has obtained. 

Inwardly he experiences no unexpected misfortune; 
outwardly he experiences no unexpected good 
fortune. 

Since neither ill fortune nor good fortune arises, how can 
others harm him? 

14.35 

The Way of Rulership is not the means by which one 
acts; 

it is the means by which one does not act. 

What does ‘^ion-action” mean? [It means that] 

the wise do not avail themselves of their position to 
intervene; 

the courageous do not avail themselves of their 
position to engage in violence; 
and the humane do not avail themselves of their 
position to confer kindness. 

This may be called “non-action.” Through non-action, you 
can grasp the One. 

The One is the root of the myriad things. It is the Way that 
is unopposed. 

14.39 

To regulate your body and nourish your nature, 
moderate your sleep and rest, 
be appropriate in your food and drink, 
harmonize your happiness and anger, 
and make suitable your movement and stillness. 

When you achieve the [ability to] carry out these things 
within the self, noxious qi will have no means to be 
produced. Is not this similar to one who, fearing an 

asthmatic attack might occur or a skin ulcer burst forth, 
takes the proper precautions in advance? 

14.49 

The clothing of the sage is neither long nor short. 
His conduct is neither extraordinary nor unusual. 

His clothing does not arouse notice. 

His conduct does not elicit observation, 
and his speech does not incite criticism. 

When successful, he is not ostentatious. 

When impoverished, he is not afraid. 

When honored, he is not showy. 

When ignored, he is not bereft. 

He is extraordinary yet does not appear unusual. 

He is always appropriate yet identifies with the 
multitudes. 

There are no means to name him. This is what is called 
“Great Merging.” 

14.53 

Too many deals impoverish the merchant. 

Too much artistry exhausts the craftsman. 

It is because their minds are not [focused on] one thing. 
Thus, 

when the span of a tree is great, its height is 
compromised. 

When the flow of a river is wide, its depth is 
compromised. 

If you possess knowledge but lack technique, though you 
bore with an awl you will never get through anything. 

If you possess a hundred different kinds of skills but lack 
a single Way, though you achieve things you will not be able 
to sustain [your achievements]. 

Thus the Odes states: 

‘The good man, the Superior Man, 
his propriety is one. 

His propriety is one. 

His heart is as if bound.” 

How bound by oneness is the Superior Man! 

14.56 

Non-action is the substance of the Way. 

Following behind is the outward form of the Way. 

Those who do not act control those who act; this is 
[called] technique. 

Those who follow behind control those who take the 
lead; this is [called] the proper sequence of things. 

If you rely on technique, you will be strong. 

If you understand the proper sequence of things, you 
will be calm. 

Now when it came to giving away Mr. Bian’s jade disk,- 
when he had not yet obtained it, [Mr. Bian] was ahead. 

When he pleaded to present it and would not give up 
despite his indignation, he was behind. 

If three men live together and two begin to quarrel, each 
will think he is right, and neither will listen to the other. 
Though the third man is a fool, he will invariably resolve 
the dispute from the sidelines. This is not due to his 
intelligence but is because he was not fighting. 

If two men begin to fight and a weakling stands at their 
side, if he helps one man, that man will win. If he aids the 
other man, that man will avoid defeat. Though the two 
fighters are strong, invariably [the outcome is] controlled 
by the single weakling. This is not due to his courage, but 
due to the fact that he does not fight. 

Looking at it from this perspective, 

that those who follow behind control those who take 

the lead 

and that those who are still defeat those who are 
excitable 

is due to following the proper sequence of things. 

To defy the Way and abandon the proper sequence of 
things, hoping thereby to encounter good luck; 
to alter constant norms and change precedents, relying 
on your intelligence in your desire to cover up for 
yourself; 

to pass over your own errors and to take credit when 
you hit the mark; 

to conduct yourself from a position of darkness and 
recklessly change things; 
to remain throughout your life unaware; 
such actions are called “reckless.” 

To be dissatisfied with misfortune and satisfied with 
good fortune, 

to regret committing errors and feel satisfied when 
you achieve merit, 

to push ahead and not know to return, 
this [too] is called‘feckless.” 

14.67 

When the sage encounters things in the world amid their 
thousand alterations and myriad evolutions, he 
invariably relies on what never transforms to respond to 
what is always transforming. 

Cold and heat stand in opposition to each other. 

During the season of intense cold, the ground cracks 
and water freezes, yet fire’s capacity to burn is not 
diminished as a consequence. 

During the season of intense heat, stones melt and 
metal fuses, yet fire’s capacity to burn is not enhanced 
as a consequence. 

Tire alterations of cold and heat neither harm nor benefit 
his person, for his inner substance is unchanging. 

14.71 

When the Superior Man does good, he cannot 
ensure that it will bring good fortune; 
when he refuses to do evil, he cannot ensure that it 
will not bring bad fortune. 

If good fortune arrives, since it is not something he 
sought, he does not proclaim Iris achievements; 
if bad fortune arrives, since it is not something he 
elicited, he does not regret his actions. 

If he should cultivate himself inwardly to the utmost and 
still adversity and bad fortune arrive, it is due to Heaven and 
not the person. Therefore, within himself his mind is 
constantly tranquil and still, and his Moral Potency is 
unencumbered. Even the barking of a dog cannot startle him 
because he naturally trusts his genuine responses. 

Thus, 

those who understand the Way are not confused; 
those who understand fate are free from anxiety. 

L Mr. Bian’s jade disk, also known as Mr. He’s jade disk, was a fabulous precious 
object discovered by Bian He, a man of Chu, in the mountains of that state. 
When the jade was presented to King Li of Chu as an uncut matrix, the king 
suspected Bian He of fraud and had his left foot cut off as punishment. When 
King Li died and Bian He tried to present the jade to his son, King Wu, the king 
ordered that his right foot be cut off. When King Wu finally had the stone cut 
and polished, its precious nature was revealed. 

Fifteen 

AN OVERVIEW OF THE MILITARY 

“An Overview of the Military” provides the means by which 
to illuminate 

the techniques of battle, victory, assault, and capture; 
the force of formations and movements; 
and the variations of deception and subterfuge 
embodying the Way of Adaptation and Compliance 
and upholding the Theory of Holding Back; 
it is what [enables you] to 

know that when you form for battle or deploy to fight 

contrary to the Way, it will not work; 

know that when you assault and capture or fortify and 

defend contrary to Moral Potency, it will not be 

formidable. 

If you truly realize its implications, 

whether advancing or retreating, moving right or left, 

there will be no place to be attacked or endangered. 

It takes relying on force as its substance 
and clarity and stillness as its constant. 

It avoids fullness and follows emptiness, 

as if driving forward a flock of sheep. 

Such are the means to discuss military affairs. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

One possible translation for the title of chapter 15, “Bing 
lue,” is “Military Strategies.” As the chapter summary 
makes clear, however, chapter 15 deals with all dimensions 
of military affairs, from tactics and strategy to basic 
military organization, the role of the military in state and 
society, and the ethics of war. Moreover, in section 21.3, 
the Huainanzi compilers make clear that chapter 15 was 
designed to exemplify the “overview” as a genre of wilting. 
Thus we translate the title as “An Overview of the Military.” 

True to its title, chapter 15 surveys and draws on an 
expansive corpus of military writings inherited from the 
Warring States period (such as, but not limited to, the 
famous Master Sun s Arts of War (Sunzi bingfa). By the 
Han, the oncenew outlook of these texts had become 
authoritative, and the Huainanzi treats their concepts and 
terminology as self-evidently normative. Thus battlefield 
outcomes are not determined by valor or divine favor but 
by the shifting dynamics of shi, or ‘force,” a purely 
material measure of potential combat effectiveness. 
Victory is not secured by physical strength or bravado but 
by skillful manipulation of the “usual” and “extraordinary” 
tactical responses in order to confuse the opponent and 
gain the advantage of surprise. 

Chapter 15 does bring its own original perspective to 
military affairs, however. The Huainanzi insists that human 
society had once (albeit briefly) existed in the complete 
absence of arms or conflict. Thus, although military affairs 
were indispensable to imperial rule (and national security) 
in the current age, they did not hold the key to ultimate 
power and authority. Moreover, although the authors 
acknowledge the importance of skill and knowledge, they 
insist that victory could be achieved only by the 
commander who had acquired transcendently penetrating 
insight through mystical self-cultivation. Finally, in keeping 
with Liu An’s interests, “An Overview of the Military” 
emphasizes that the military could never be used to 
routinize power throughout the imperial domain. Military 
offensives might be undertaken only to “sustain those who 
[were] perishing, revive those [lineages] that had been cut 
off,” that is, to protect the hereditary prerogatives of vassal 
princes like Liu An himself. The chapter ends with a 
description (15.26) of an extraordinary ritual in which the 
successful commanding general atones for his “treason” in 
wielding state power (which properly belongs to the ruler 
alone) during the course of the campaign. 

Fifteen 

15.1 

In antiquity, those who used the military did not value 
expanding territory or covet the possession of gold and 
jade. They sought to sustain those who [were] perishing, 
revive those [lineages] that had been cut off, pacify the 
chaos of the world, and eliminate harm to the myriad 
people. 

All beasts that have blood and qi, 
are equipped with teeth and horns. 

Urey have claws in front and paws behind. 

Those with horns gore; 
those with teeth bite; 
those with poison sting; 
those with hooves kick. 

When they are happy, they play with one another; 
when they are angry they injure one another; 
this is their Heaven[-born] nature. 

Humans have instincts for clothing and food, yet 
[material] things are lacking. Hrus they settle together in 
various locations. If the division is not equal, if demands 
are not fulfilled, they fight. When they fight, the strong 

threaten the weak and the brave attack the cowardly. 

People do not have strong muscles and bones or sharp 
claws and teeth, thus 

they cut leather to make armor; 
they forge iron to make blades. 

Greedy and cruel people brutalize and rob the world. Tire 
myriad people are shaken; they cannot rest in tranquillity 
with what they possess. The sage rises up vehemently, 
punishing the strong and the violent [and] pacifying the 
chaotic age. He suppresses danger and eliminates disorder. 
He makes the sullied pure; 
he makes the imperiled calm. 

Thus people are not cut off in mid[life]. 

Tire origins of the military are distant! 

Tire Yellow Emperor once warred with Yan Di; 

Zhuan Xu once fought with Gong Gong. 

The Yellow Emperor warred in the wilds of Zhuolu; 

Yao warred on the banks of the River Dan; 

Shun attacked the Youmiao; 

Qi attacked the Youhu. 

Since the time of the Five Thearchs, [no one] has been able 
to ban [the military], much less in a declining age! 

15.3 

In regard to the military of later ages, although rulers may 
be without the Way, none do not dig moats, build 

battlements, and defend [them]. Those who attack do not do 
so to curtail violence or eliminate harm; they want to 
invade the land and expand their territory. For this reason, 
the bodies pile up and the blood flows; they face one 
another all day, yet the achievement of a hegemon does not 
appear in the age. It is because they act selfishly. 

One who wars for territory cannot become a king; 
one who wars for himself cannot establish his merit. 
One who takes up a task on behalf of others will be 
aided by the multitude; 

one who takes up a task on his own behalf will be 
discarded by the multitude. 

One who is aided by the multitude must [become] 
strong even if he is weak; 

one who is discarded by the multitude must perish 
even if he is great. 

Hie military is 

weak if it loses the Way; 
strong if it obtains the Way. 

Hie commander is 

inept if he loses the Way; 
skillful if he obtains the Way. 

What is called the Way 

embodies the circle and is modeled on the square, 
shoulders the yin and embraces the yang, 
is soft on the left and hard on the right, 

treads in the obscure and carries illumination. 

It alters and transforms without constancy; it obtains the 
source of the One and thereby responds limitlessly. This is 
called spirit illumination. 

The circle is Heaven; 
the square is earth. 

Heaven is circular and without terminus, thus one 
cannot view its form; 

the earth is square and without boundaries, thus one 
cannot see its gateway. 

Heaven transforms and nurtures yet is without form; 
Earth generates and rears and yet is without measure. 
Vague, hazy, who knows their capacity? 

All things have that which defeats them; only the Way is 
invincible. It is invincible because it has no constant shape 
or force. It cycles ceaselessly, like the motion of the sun 
and moon. 

Just as summer and autumn alternate, 
just as the sun and the moon have day and night, 
it reaches an end and begins again; 
it illuminates and becomes dark again. 

None can attain its pattern. 

It controls form yet is formless; 
thus its merit can be complete. 

It objectifies things yet is no object; 
thus it triumphs and does not submit. 

15.4 

Form/punishment-is the ultimate of the military. Arriving 
at being without form/punishment may be called the 
ultimate of the ultimate. For this reason, the great military 
does no injury; it communicates with the ghosts and spirits. 
It does not brandish the five weapons, [yet] none in the 
world dares oppose it. It sets up its drums [but] does not 
open its arsenal, and none of the Lords of the Land do not 
freeze in terror. Thus 

one who wars from the temple becomes emperor; 
one who [effects] spirit transformation becomes king. 
What is called “warring from the temple”—is modeling 
[oneself] on the Way of Heaven. 

Spirit transformation is modeling [oneself] on the four 
seasons. 

He cultivates governance within his borders and those 
afar long for his Potency; 

he achieves victory without battle, and the Lords of 
the Land submit to his might. 

It is because internally his government is ordered. 

In antiquity those who obtained the Way 

in stillness modeled [themselves] on Heaven and 
Earth, 

in motion complied with the sun and moon. 

In delight and anger they corresponded to the four 
seasons; 

in calling and answering they were comparable to the 
thunder and lightning. 

Their voice and breath did not oppose the eight winds; 
their contracting and extending did not exceed the five 
standards. 

Below to those [creatures] that have armor and scales; 
above to those that have fur and feathers; 
all were ordered from first to last. Among the myriad 
creatures and the hundred clans, from beginning to end, 
none was without its proper place. 

For this reason, [the Way] 

enters what is small without being pressed, 
lodges in what is vast without being exposed. 

It seeps into metal and stone; 
it washes over grasses and trees. 

[From] something that expands to fill the limits of the six 
coordinates to the end of a single hair, nothing does not 
cleave to it. The penetration of the Way suffuses what is 
[most] subtle. There is nowhere it does not reside; this is 
why it triumphs over the powerful and the many. 

15.6 

The military has three foundations: 

In ordering the kingdom, regulate within the borders. 

In effecting Humaneness and Rightness, spread Moral 
Potency and Benevolence. 

In establishing correct laws, block deviant paths. 
[When] 

the collected ministers are intimately close, 
the common people are harmonious, 
superiors and inferiors are of a single mind, 
ruler and minister unite their efforts. 

The Lords of the Land submit to your might and the 

four directions cherish your Moral Potency; 

you cultivate governance in the temple hall and extend 

control beyond one thousand li; 

you fold your hands, issue commands, and the world 

responds as an echo. 

This is the highest use of the military. 

[When] 

the territory is broad and the people numerous; 
the ruler is worthy and the commanders loyal; 
the kingdom is rich and the military strong; 
covenants and prohibitions are trustworthy; 
pronouncements and orders are clear. 

The two armies oppose each other; 
the bells and drums face each other; 
yet the enemy flees before the soldiers meet or blades 
clash. This is the middling use of the military. 

[When] 

you understand what suits the terrain, 

practice the beneficial [use of] narrow and obstructed 

[positions], 

discern the alterations of the extraordinary and the 
usual, 

investigate the rules for marching and formation, 
dispersion and concentration; 

bind the drumsticks [to your forearms] and roll the 
drums. 

White blades meet; 
flying arrows are exchanged; 
you wade through blood and tread through guts; 
you cart the dead away and support the wounded; 
the blood flows for a thousand //; 
exposed corpses fill the field; 
thus victory is decided. This is the lowest use of the 
military. 

Now everyone in the world 

knows to work at studying its branches, 
and none knows to resolve to cultivate its root. 

This is to discard the root and plant the limbs. 

Those things that assist the military in victory are many; 
those that ensure victory are few. 

If armor is sturdy and weapons sharp, 
chariots are solid and horses excellent, 
rations and equipment sufficient, 
officers and men numerous, 

these are the great foundations of the army, yet victory is 

not [found] here. If one is clear about 

the movements of the stars, planets, sun, and moon; 
the rules of recision and accretion-and the occult arts; 
the advantages of the rear, front, left, and right; 
these are aids to warfare, yet completeness is not [found] 
here. 

That by which the excellent commander is ensured 
victory is his constant possession of a knowledge without 
origin, a Way that is not a Way. It is difficult to share with 
the multitude. 

15.17 

There is no spirit nobler than Heaven; 
there is no force more versatile than Earth; 
there is no motion more swift than time; 
there is no resource more advantageous than people. 
These four are the pillars and trunks of the military, yet 
they must rely on the Way to operate because [the Way] can 
unite their functions. 

The advantage of terrain overcomes Heaven and time; 
clever tactics overcome the advantage of terrain; 
force overcomes people. 

Thus, 

one who relies on Heaven can be led astray; 
one who relies on Earth can be trapped; 
one who relies on time can be pressured; 

one who relies on people can be fooled. 

Humaneness, courage, trustworthiness, and incorruptibility 
are the most excellent qualities among people. However, 
the brave can be lured; 
the humane can be robbed; 
the trustworthy are easily cheated; 
the incorruptible are easily schemed against. 

If the commander of a host has even one of these [flaws], 
he will be taken captive. 

Seen from this perspective, it also is clear that victory in 
arms is produced by the Pattern of the Way, not by the 
worthiness of human character. 

Thus, deer and elk can be seized by snares; 

fish and turtle can be taken by nets; 

geese and swans can be collected with the dart and 

line. 

Only to the Formless may nothing be done. For this reason, 
the sage 

lodges in the Sourceless, so his feelings cannot be 
grasped and observed; 

moves in the Formless, so his formations cannot be 
attained and traced. 

He has no model and no protocol; 

he does what is appropriate [for what] arrives; 

he has no name and no shape; 

he fashions [a new] image for [each] alteration. 

How deep! 

How distant! 

Through winter and summer, 
through spring and fall, 
above reaching the highest branch, 
below fathoming the deepest depth, 
altering and transforming, 
never hesitating or halting, 
he sets his mind in the Field of Profound Mystery 
and lodges his will in the Spring of the Nine Returns. 
Though one has acute eyes, who can detect his feelings? 

15.26 

Whenever the kingdom has difficulty, from the palace the 
ruler summons the commander, charging him: “Tire fate of 
the altars of the soil and grain are on your person. Tire 
kingdom faces a crisis, I wish you to take command and 
respond to it.” 

When the commander has accepted his mandate, [the 
ruler] orders the Supplicator and Great Diviner to fast, 
sequestered for three days. Going to the Great Temple, 
they consult the Magic Tortoise to divine a lucky day for 
receiving the drums and flags. 

Tire ruler enters the temple portal, faces west, and 
stands. Tire commander enters the temple portal, rushes to 
the foot of the platform, faces north, and stands. 

The sovereign personally grasps the yue ax. Holding it by 
the head, he offers the commander its handle, saying, 
“From here up to Heaven is controlled by [you,] the 
commander.” [The ruler] again grasps the fu ax. Holding it 
by the head, he offers the commander its handle, saying, 
“From here down to the Abyss is controlled by [you,] the 
commander.’- 

When the commander has accepted the fu and yue 
axes, he replies, 

“[Just as] the kingdom cannot be governed from 
without, 

the army cannot be ruled from within. 

[Just as] one cannot serve the ruler with two minds, 
one cannot respond to the enemy with a doubtful will. 
Since [I,] your minister, have received control from you, I 
exclusively [wield] the authority of the drums, flags, and fu 
and yue axes. I ask nothing in return. I [only] hope that Your 
Highness likewise will not hand down one word of 
command to me. 

If Your Highness does not agree, I dare not take 
command. 

If Your Highness agrees, I will take my leave and set 
out.” 

[The commander] then trims his fingernails, dons funeral 
garb, and exits through the “ill-augured” portal.-He mounts 
the commander’s chariot and arrays the banners and axes, 

tied as if not [yet] victorious. On meeting the enemy and 
committing to battle, 

he pays no heed to certain death; 
he does not have two minds. 

For this reason, 

he has no Heaven above; 

he has no Earth below; 

he has no enemy in front; 

he has no ruler behind; 

he does not seek fame in advancing; 

he does not avoid punishment in retreating; 

he [seeks] only to protect the people; 

his benefit is united with that of the ruler. 

This is the treasure of the kingdom, the Way of the superior 
commander. 

If he is like this, 

the clever will plan for him; 

the brave will fight for him; 

their qi will scrape the azure clouds; 

they will be swift as galloping [steeds]. 

Thus before weapons have clashed, the enemy is terrified. 

If the battle is victorious and the enemy flees, [the 
commander] thoroughly dispenses rewards for merit. He 
reassigns his officers, increasing their rank and 
emolument. He sets aside land and apportions it, making 
sure it is outside the feudal mound.—Last, he judges 

punishments within the army. 

Turning back, he returns to the kingdom, lowering his 
banners and storing the fu and yue axes. He makes Iris final 
report to the ruler, saying, “I have no further control over 
the army.” He then dons coarse silk and enters seclusion. 

[Hie commander goes] to ask pardon of the ruler. The 
ruler says, “Spare him.” [The commander] withdraws and 
dons fasting garb. For a great victory, he remains secluded 
for three years; for a middling victory, two years; for a 
lesser victory, one year. 

That against which the military was used was surely a 
kingdom without the Way. 

Thus 

one can triumph in battle without retribution, 

take territory without returning it; 

the people will not suffer illness; 

the commander will not die early; 

the five grains will flourish; 

the winds and rains will be seasonable; 

the battle is won without; 

good fortune is born within. 

Thus one’s reputation will be made, and afterward there will 
be no further harm. 

1_. This is a deliberate pun. The character translated (xing) means both “form” and 
“punishment,” and both meaning? are being invoked here. The latter sense is that 
punishing wrongdoing is the ultimate end of the military but that the ultimate 

fulfillment of this end is achieved when punishments are no longer necessary. 
The former sense is that “form” (the formation of the army in battle, the form of 
plans and operations) is the ultimate arbiter of success for the military but that 
achieving a state of “formlessness” (or accessing the power of the Formless) is 
the ultimate embodiment of martial skill. 

2. “Warring from the temple” alludes to the first chapter of the Sunzi bingfa, which 
discusses the calculations made in the ancestral temple before battle has been 
joined. The basic notion here is that victory is achieved in the careful preparation 
before the battle, not in heroics on the battlefield itself. 

3. That is, the annual waxing and waning of the yin and yang forces in the universe. 

4. The yue and fu axes are the ruler’s military regalia. The conferring of these 
symbols on the commander represents the transfer of sovereign authority to him 
for the duration of the campaign. 

5. That is, the commander symbolically prepares himself for his own funeral and 
leaves by the ill-omened northern door of the palace. These acts signify his 
willingness to die in the ruler’s service. 

6. In other words, the commander ensures that land given as rewards lies outside the 
sacred mound used to perform sacrifices to the ancestors of the defeated ruler, in 
order to avoid angering those ancestral spirits and turning them into malevolent 
gjiosts. 

Sixteen and Seventeen 

A MOUNTAIN OF PERSUASIONS 

AND A FOREST OF PERSUASIONS 

“AMountain of Persuasions” and“AForest of Persuasions” 
demonstrate how to 

skillfully and elegantly penetrate and bore open the 
blockages and obstructions of the many affairs 
and thoroughly and comprehensively penetrate and 
pierce the barriers and hindrances of the myriad 
things, 

proposing analogies and selecting similes, 
distinguishing categories and differentiating forms, 
they thereby 

lead and order your awareness, 
loosen and untie what is knotted up, 
and unravel and unwind what is wound up, 
so as to illuminate the boundaries of affairs. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

As their similar titles suggest, chapter 16 . “A Mountain of 
Persuasions,” and chapter 17 . “A Forest of Persuasions,” 

are collections of brief, persuasive utterances that share 
the same literary form and didactic function in the text. 
Given these similarities, we have chosen to treat these 
chapters together as a pair, following the example of 
Huainanzi 21, “An Overview of the Essentials,” which 
similarly summarizes these chapters together. Their 
purpose seems to be to provide a kind of repository of 
aphorisms (which we refer to here as “persuasions”) that 
could be used in a variety of settings to which the 
performative aspects of language were crucial, such as in 
oral deliberation, instruction, and debate. These “talking 
points” then would give a person engaged in oral argument 
or instruction a kind of arsenal of well-turned phrases with 
which to reinforce the rhetorical force of his arguments. 

These chapters of the Huainanzi are modeled to some 
extent on the similarly titled chapters 22 and 23, “Shui lin 
shang” and “Shui lin xia” (A Forest of Persuasions, parts 1 
and 2), in the Hanfeizi. Another example of the genre is 
Liu Xiang’s slightly later compilation the Shuoyuan (A 
Garden of Sayings), particularly chapter 16 . ‘Tan cong” (A 
Thicket of Remarks). Some of the persuasions found in 
these two Huainanzi chapters may also be found, in only 
slightly different form, in the Hanfeizi and the Shuoyuan. 
This suggests that such compilations of talking points for 
would-be public speakers may have been a widespread and 
highly appreciated Han literary genre. 

Sixteen 

16.1 

The po [substantive soul] asked the hun [ethereal soul], 
“How does the Way take physical form?” The him replied, 
“It takes Nothing There as its physical form.” The po asked, 
“Does Nothing There have a physical form, then?” The him 
replied, “It does not.” The po asked, “If there is Nothing 
There, how can one apprehend it and be informed about it?” 
The him replied, “I only have ways to encounter it, that is 
all. When we look at it, it has no form; when we listen to it, 
it has no sound. We call it ‘the Dark Mystery.’ Tire Dark 
Mystery can be used to refer to the Way, but it is not the 
Way.” The po said, “Now I get it.” Thereupon he turned his 
gaze inward and reverted to himself. The him said, “Those 
who have attained the Way have forms that cannot be seen 
and names that cannot be expressed. You still have ‘form’ 
and ‘name.’ How can you attain the Way?” The po said, 
“What use is speech, then? I shall return to my Ancestor.” 
Hie po turned to look, and suddenly the him could not be 
seen. Hie po then turned and got a grip on himself and also 
entered the formless. 

16.8 

Sages spend their lives talking about governing. What is of 
use is not their words [as such] but what they have to say. 
Singers use lyrics, but what people really enjoy hearing is 
not the lyrics themselves. A parrot can speak, but it cannot 
engage in meaningful discourse. Why is this? It has the 
power of speech but does not have anything to say. 

Thus if someone follows you and walks in your tracks, 
he cannot produce fresh footprints of his own. 

16.10 

Tire four directions are the gates and doors, windows and 
back gates of the Way; which one you go through 
[determines] how you view things. Thus 

fishing can be used to teach someone horseback 
riding; 

horseback riding can be used to instruct a person in 
charioteering; 

and charioteering can be used to teach someone how 
to pole a boat. 

16.18 

Orchids grow in dark valleys. Urey are no less fragrant 
just because no one [happens to] wear them. 

Boats ply rivers and oceans. Urey are no less buoyant 
just because no one [happens to] ride in them. 

Hie Superior Man practices Rightness. He does not 
stop doing so just because no one [happens to] know 
about it. 

16.22 

Those who are in prison consider a day a long time. 
Those who are about to be executed in the 
marketplace consider a day to be very short. 

Hie length of a day has a set standard, but 
from where one person stands it is short 
and from where another stands it is long. 

Hiis is because their center is not balanced. Hius when one 
uses what is not balanced to consider what is balanced, then 
what one takes to be balanced will not be balanced. 

16.28 

A good archer shoots and does not miss the target. 
Hiat is good for the archer, but not good for the target. 
A good fisherman never loses a fish. Hiat is good for 
the fisherman, but not good for the fish. 

Hius where there is that which is good, there also is that 
which is not good. 

16.34 

If you 

grasp a crossbow and call a bird 

or brandish a club and beckon a dog, 
then what you want to come will surely go away instead. 
Thus, 

a fish cannot be hooked without bait; 
an animal cannot be lured with an empty trap. 

16.46 

A hundred men trying to lift a gourd is not as good as one 
person grabbing it and running off. Thus there certainly are 
situations in which a crowd is not as good as a few people. 

Two people pull a cart, and six more push behind. Thus 
there certainly are affairs in which mutual cooperation is 
necessary for success. 

If two people are drowning, they cannot rescue each 
other, but if one is on shore, he can [save the other]. Thus 
identical things cannot set each other in order. It is 
necessary to depend on difference; only then there will be a 
good outcome. 

16.51 

When the ruler wants a plank, his officials cut down a 
tree. 

When the ruler wants a fish, his officials dry up a 
valley. 

When the ruler wants an oar, his underlings give him a 
whole boat. 

When the ruler’s words are like threads, his 
underlings’ words are like rope. 

When the ruler likes one thing, his underlings praise it 
twice. 

When the ruler faults three [people], his underlings 
kill nine. 

16.67 

Someone who wanted to put a stop to slander went from 
door to door saying, “1 really did not have an affair with my 
elder sister-in-law!” The slander increased more and more. 
Trying to stop words with more words 
or affairs with more affairs 
is like making piles of dirt to ward off dust 
or using armloads of firewood to douse a fire. 

Spouting words to expunge slander is like using black dye 
to clean something white. 

16.77 

In a family to the east, the mother died. Her son cried but 
was not sorrowful. A son from a family to the west saw this 
and returned home to his mother, saying, ‘Mother, wiry 
don’t you die right away? I would certainly cry very 
sorrowfully for you!” 

Now if someone really wants his mother to die, if she 
did die, he certainly would not be able to cry sorrowfully 

for her. 

[Likewise,] if someone says, “I have no free time to 
study,” even if he had free time, he would still not be able 
to study. 

16.96 

When the majority are crooked, they cannot tolerate 
the straight; 

when the majority are bent, they cannot tolerate the 
upright. 

Thus, 

when people are in the majority, they eat wolves; 
when wolves are in the majority, they eat people. 

16.103 

When birds are about to arrive, people spread out nets 
to await them. What catches the bird is a single eye of 
the net, but a single-eyed net will never catch a bird. 
Now a person who dons armor prepares for an arrow 
to strike him. If he knew for sure where the arrow 
would hit, he could wear just one tiny scale of armor. 
Matters sometimes cannot be measured beforehand; 
things sometimes cannot be foreseen. 

Thus sages cultivate the Way and await the right time. 

16.114 

When you give someone ahorse but [first] take off the 
harness, 

when you give someone a chariot but [first] detach the 
yoke rings, 

what you have kept is [worth] little, 

and what you have given away is [worth] a lot. 

Thus the peasants have a saying: “If you boil beef without 
salt, you defeat the purpose.” 

16.145 

A man from Ying was going to sell his mother. He said to a 
[prospective] buyer, “This mother is old. Please feed her 
well and don’t let [her life] be bitter.” This is to carry out a 
large offense against Rightness while hoping to perform a 
small act of Rightness. 

Seventeen 

17.1 

To apply the standards of a bygone era in governing the 
world [today] is like a passenger in a boat who lost his 
sword in midstream. Right away he made a mark on the 
boat, intending to come back at night to look for the sword. 
His lack of knowledge of how to sort things out was 
certainly profound! Now to follow the footprints in one 
small corner [of the world] and not to know how to wander 
in accord with Heaven and Earth—no confusion can be 
greater than that. Just because something is suitable for a 
particular time is not enough to make it valuable [always]. It 
can be compared with making earthen dragons in time of 
drought or making [sacrificial] straw dogs during an 
epidemic. Urey are sovereign only at a particular time. 

17.15 

Ure best flavor does not satiate; 

the highest language does not embellish. 

Ure highest joy does not [elicit] laughter; 
the loftiest sound does not call out. 

Ure greatest artist does not chop; 

the greatest cook does not carve; 
the greatest hero does not fight. 

When you attain the Way, its Potency follows. This is like 
the correspondence of the [pitch-pipe] note Yellow Bell 
and the [pentatonic] note gong, or the correspondence of 
the [pitch-pipe] note Great Budding and the [pentatonic] 
note slicing —their consonance cannot be altered.- 

17.32 

The purveyor of coffins desires human illness and 
plague; 

the hoarder of grain desires yearly drought and 
famine. 

17.42 

Metal overcomes wood, but it is not possible to 
destroy a forest with a single knife. 

Earth overcomes water, but it is not possible to plug 
the Yangzi with one clod of earth. 

17.48 

Suppose the stride of a rabbit were made as big as that of a 
horse. It could keep up with the sun and pursue the wind. If 
[a rabbit] actually became [as big as] a horse, though, it 
would not be able to run at all. 

17.49 

In winter there might be thunder and lightning, 
and in summer there might be frost and snow. 
Nevertheless, the inherent tendencies of heat and cold do 
not change. Small differences are not enough to hinder 
constant principles. 

17.64 

A nursing bitch will bite a tiger; 
a brooding hen will peck a fox. 

When their [maternal] concern has been aroused, they do 
not take account of [relative] strengths. 

17.84 

The markings of tigers and leopards attract archers; 
the agility of monkeys and apes brings hunters. 

17.122 

When you see an elephant’s tusk, you know he was 
bigger than an ox. 

When you see a tiger’s tail, you know it was bigger 
than a fox. 

One portion appears, and the remaining one hundred 
portions are known. 

17.132 

With the wheel hub [properly] set up, each of its thirty 

spokes makes full use of its strength but does not detract 
from the others. If you take one spoke alone and set it into 
the hub, discarding all the others, how would it be possible 
to go ten thousand //? 

17.151 

Skillfully using others is like the feet of a millipede; 
though numerous they do not harm one another. 

Or like the lips and the teeth, the hard and the soft rub up 
against each other but do not overcome each other. 

17.190 

When the traveler thinks [of his loved one] on the 
road, 

the one at home dreams in her bed. 

When the kindly mother sighs in Yan [in the north], 
her son misses her in Jing [in the south]. 

These are [cases of] Essence going back and forth. 

17.205 

To take the immensity of the world and entrust it to the 
talent of a single person is like hanging a weight of a 
thousand jun on a single branch of a tree. 

17.219 

Bows must first be adjusted; later you can seek out the 

strong ones. 

Horses must first be trained; later you can seek out 
the fine ones. 

People must first prove trustworthy; later you can 
seek out the able ones. 

17.226 

You do not carve a pure white jade; 
you do not inscribe a beautiful pearl. 

The basic material is more than enough [already]. 

Thus, 

if it strides forth without resting, even a lame turtle 
can go a thousand li; 

if you pile things up without stopping, you can amass a 
great heap. 

1. Yellow Bell and gong and Great Budding and shang are pairs of identical notes. 

Eighteen 

AMONG OTHERS 

“Among Others” provides the means by which to 
observe the alterations of bad and good fortune, 
discern the reversals of benefit and harm, 
diagnose the symptoms of success and failure, 
and mark out and hold up to view the boundaries of 
ends and beginnings. 

[It] 

differentiates and distinguishes the subtleties of the 
one hundred affairs 

and discloses and reveals the mechanisms of 
preservation and loss, 
enabling you to know 

bad fortune as good fortune, 
loss as gain, 
success as failure, 
and benefit as harm. 

If you truly grasp [its] utmost implications, you will 
possess the means to move to and fro and up and down 
among the vulgar of the age, while remaining unharmed by 

slander, abuse, venom, or poison. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

Chapter 18 of the Huainanzi shares its title, “Ren jian,” 
with chapter 4 of the Zhuangzi and could also be translated 
as “Among Human Beings” or “The Human Realm.” As the 
opening section of the chapter explains, here we have left 
the internal domain of the mind and nature and entered the 
multidimensional world of time and space populated by 
ren, “other people,” or, simply, “others.” For this reason, 
we translate the title of chapter 18 as “Among Others.” 

“Among Others” is made up of the same kind of short 
units of anecdotal prose that constitute chapter 12 . 
“Responses of the Way,” most of which are also found in 
other early anthologies such as the Liishi chunqiu, the 
Hanfeizi, and the Zhanguo ce (Intrigues of the Warring 
States). It is not clear whether the Huainanzi (and later 
Han anthologies) drew from these earlier works or whether 
all these texts borrowed from a stock of anecdotal lore that 
circulated in various written and oral forms. Even though 
chapter 18 shares its composite pieces with these other 
texts, it uses them quite distinctively. 

“Among Others” consists almost entirely of pairs of 
anecdotes set into a generic framework. Each section of 
the chapter is set off by a motif composed of two parallel 
and (typically) opposing propositions, for example, “some 
[things] are increased by being decreased, some [things] are 

decreased by being increased” (18.2). The text then 
presents two anecdotes, the first illustrating the first leg of 
the motif and the second illustrating the second. 

The purposes of chapter 18 were multifold. The 
Huainanzi compilers included it as both an example of 
elegant literary parallelism and a commentary on the uses 
and effectiveness of logical disputation (a subject that also 
informs other chapters, especially 10, 16, and 17). On the 
one hand, chapter 18 demonstrates that a skillful orator 
may deploy elegant examples to support almost any side of 
a question. Thus the efficacy of logical argumentation 
cannot be completely discounted in the current age. On the 
other hand, the vagaries of affairs “among others” are so 
complex and contradictory that “no one who is not a spirit 
or a sage” can distinguish the origins of “calamity and good 
fortune.” Thus the means to assess the products of logic or 
literary artistry must be found in more fundamental realms 
accessible only through mystical self-cultivation. 

Eighteen 

18.1 

Hie nature of humans is pure, clear, peaceful, and 
content. 

Hie regulators of affairs are models, gnomons, the 
compass, and the square. 

If you understand the nature of humans, you will not 
err in nurturing yourself. 

If you understand the regulators of affairs, you will 
not be confused in your taking and giving. 

When one end emerges, 
it comprehends limitlessly. 

Roaming the eight limits, 
it gathers it all into a single straw. 

It is called “the mind.” 

Looking at the root and knowing the branches, observing 
the finger and seeing the return [path], holding to the One 
and responding to the many, grasping the essentials and 
ordering the details. Hiese are called “techniques.” 

What the wise are at rest, where the wise go in motion, 
what the wise wield in affairs, that from which the wise act: 
this is known as “the Way.” 

Hie Way: 

Place it in front, and [the cart] will not lean forward; 
place it behind, and [the cart] will not lean backward. 
Put in inside a cramped space, and it will not fill it, 
Spread it over the world, and it will not be stretched. 
For this reason, 

what cause others to exalt and praise you are the 
strengths of the mind. 

What cause others to denigrate and slander you are the 
faults of the mind. 

Words that issue from the mouth cannot be halted 
among others; 

actions that are manifest nearby cannot be kept from 
afar. 

Affairs are difficult to complete and easily defeated; 
reputation is difficult to establish and easily 
abandoned. 

A thousand-// dike will breach because of a cricket or 
ant burrow; 

a hundred-xm? roof will burn because of a spark from 
a crack in the chimney. 

Tire Admonitions of Yao says, ‘Trembling and shaking, 
take heed day by day. People do not stumble over a 
mountain; they stumble over an anthill.” This is why those 
who look lightly on small harms and scorn minor affairs 
will have many regrets. Worrying about a calamity once it 

has arrived is like a sick person’s searching for a good 
doctor once he has already become critically ill. Even if 
[the doctor] has the skill of a Bian Que or a Yu Fu, [the 
patient] will still not live. 

The arrival of calamity is generated by human beings; 
the arrival of good fortune is effected by human 
beings. 

Calamity and good fortune share a gateway; 
benefit and harm are neighbors. 

No one who is not a spirit or sage can distinguish them. 

In all people’s undertaking of affairs, none dares set his 
plans before using his intelligence to reflect and assess. 
Some lead to benefit, others to harm; this is the difference 
between the stupid and the wise. Those who thought that 
they clearly knew the fulcrum of survival and extinction, 
the portal of calamity and good fortune, and who, having 
used it, become trapped in difficulty, cannot be counted. If 
whenever one knew what was right, one’s affair would 
succeed, there would be no unfinished ventures in the 
world. For this reason, 

intelligence and reflection are the portals of calamity 
and good fortune; 

motion and stillness are the fulcrums of benefit and 
harm. 

Tire alterations and transformations of the hundred 
affairs, the order and chaos of the state and the household, 

wait [for them] to be effected. [For this reason, one who 
does not fall into difficulty succeeds.] Thus one cannot but 
take heed of them. 

18.7 

In olden times, among the people of Song there was [a 
family] whose [members] were very close. Hie three 
generations did not separate. Without warning, the 
household’s black cow gave birth to a white calf. They 
asked the grandfather and he said, “This is a good omen. 
Offer it up to the ghosts and spirits.” After one year, the 
father suddenly went blind, and the cow again gave birth to a 
white calf. Hie father again sent his son to consult the 
grandfather. His son said, “Before we listened to 
grandfather and you lost your sight. If we consult him again 
now, what will happen?” His father said, “According to the 
words of the sages, one must first scrutinize and then 
adopt. Hie affair is not yet clear; we must still try asking 
him once more.” Hie son again went to consult the 
grandfather. Hie grandfather said, ‘Hiis is a good omen. I 
again instruct you to offer it to the ghosts and spirits.” [Hie 
son] returned to convey these orders to his father. Hie 
father said, “Carry out grandfather’s instructions.” In one 
year, the son also suddenly went blind. Afterward Chu 
attacked Song, besieging the city. At this time, people 
traded their children for food; they cut up corpses and 

cooked them. Hie able and strong were dead; the old, sick, 
and children all had to mount the city walls. They defended 
them without failing. Tlie king of Chu was furious. When 
the walls were breached, all those defending them were 
slaughtered. It was only because the father and son were 
blind that they did not mount the walls. When the army 
retired and the siege was lifted, both the father and son 
[regained] their vision. 

As for the revolutions and the mutual generation of 
calamity and good fortune, their alterations are difficult to 
perceive. At the near frontier, there was a [family of] 
skilled diviners whose horse suddenly became lost out 
among the Hu [people]. Everyone consoled them. Hie 
father said, ‘Hiis will quickly turn to good fortune!” After 
several months, the horse returned with a fine Hu steed. 
Everyone congratulated them. Hie father said, ‘Hiis will 
quickly turn to calamity!” Hie household was [now] replete 
with good horses; the son loved to ride, [but] he fell and 
broke his leg. Everyone consoled them. Hie father said, 
‘Hiis will quickly turn to good fortune!” After one year, the 
Hu people entered the frontier in force; the able and strong 
all stretched their bowstrings and fought. Among the 
people of the near frontier, nine out of ten died. It was only 
because of lameness that father and son protected each 
other. Hius, 

good fortune becoming calamity, 

calamity becoming good fortune; 
their transformations are limitless, 
so profound they cannot be fathomed. 

18.8 

Some are correct in word yet not comprehensive in action; 
some are faulty of ear and stubborn of mind yet accord with 
substance. 

Gaoyang Tui was about to build a house, [so] he 
consulted a carpenter. The carpenter replied, “It cannot be 
done yet. The wood is still living. If plaster is applied to it, 
it will definitely warp. When green material is covered with 
heavy plaster it may [seem] completed now, [but] it will 
definitely collapse later.” Gaoyang Tui said, “Not so. As the 
wood dries, it gets harder; as the plaster dries, it gets 
lighter. When hard material is covered with light plaster, 
even though it is bad now, it will certainly be better later.” 
The carpenter was out of words, he had no reply. He 
accepted his orders and built the house. When it was 
completed, it was apparently fine, but afterward it indeed 
collapsed. This is what is known as “correct in word yet not 
comprehensive in action.” 

What is called faulty of ear [and] stubborn of mind yet 
according with substance? Lord Jingguo was about to 
fortify Xue. Most of his guest clients tried to stop him; he 
did not listen to them. He told his heralds, “Send no word 

from my guest clients.” Aman of Qi requested an audience, 
saying, “I will speak only three words. If I surpass three 
words, please cook me [alive].” Lord Jingguo heard this and 
granted him an audience. Tire guest rushed forward, bowed 
twice, and rising, said, “Great sea fish,” then retreated. Lord 
Jingguo stopped him, staying, “I want to hear your 
persuasion.” Tire guest said, ‘1 do not dare die for sport.” 
Lord Jingguo said, ‘You, honored sir, have paid no heed to 
distance in coming here, I want you to explain it to me.” 
Tire guest said, “Tire great sea fish: nets cannot stop it, 
hooks cannot catch it. [But] if it beaches and is out of the 
water, then crickets and ants will have their way with it. 
Now Qi is your sea. If you lose Qi, do you think that Xue 
can survive alone?” Lord Jingguo said, “Excellent” and 
thereby halted the fortification of Xue. This is what is 
called “being faulty of ear and stubborn of mind, yet 
attaining the substance in action.” 

Now using “do not fortify Xue” as a persuasion to halt 
the fortification of Xue was not as good as “great sea fish.” 

Thus things 

sometimes are distant yet near to it, 

sometimes are near yet far off the mark. 

18.27 

Tire juxtapositions of the categories of things so that they 
are close [to one another] but of a different family are 

numerous and difficult to recognize. Thus 

some are placed in categories to which they do not 
belong; 

some are excluded from categories to which they do 
belong. 

Some seem so and are not; 
some are not and seem so. 

A proverb says, “When a hawk dropped a rotten mouse, 
the Yu clan was lost.” What does this mean? It is said that 
the Yu clan were tycoons of Liang. Their household was 
replete with riches; they had limitless gold and coins, 
immeasurable wealth and goods. Urey raised a lofty tower 
on the edge of the highway on which they staged musical 
[performances], served wine, and played games of chess. 
As some wandering swordsmen passed under the tower 
together, one of the chess players above moved against his 
friend’s position and laughed as he turned over two pieces. 
[Just at that moment] a flying hawk dropped a rotten mouse 
as it passed and hit the wandering swordsmen. 

Tire wandering swordsmen said to one another, “Tire Yu 
clan’s days of wealth and happiness have been long, and 
they often are scornful of other people’s will. We did not 
dare to disturb them, yet they insult us with a dead mouse. 
If this is not avenged, we will not be able to stand and 
proclaim ourselves to the world. Let us unite our strength 
to a single purpose, lead all our followers, and resolve to 

exterminate their house.” That night they attacked the Yu 
clan and exterminated the house. This is what is called 
“placing it in a category in which it does not belong.” 

What is called “excluding [it] from a category to which 
[it] does [belong]”? Qu Jian told Shi Qi, “Duke Sheng of Bo 
is about to rebel.” Shi Qi said, “Not so. Duke Sheng of Bo 
humbles Iris person and exalts knights; he would not dare 
treat the worthy arrogantly. His house lacks the safeguards 
of keys and locks or the security of crossbars and bolts. He 
uses oversized dou and hu [measures] in distributing [grain] 
and undersized jin and Hang [weights] when collecting [it]. 
Your assessment of him is inaccurate.” Qu Jian replied, 
“These [conditions] are precisely why he will rebel.” After 
three years, Duke Sheng of Bo indeed did rebel, killing 
Prime Minister Zijiao and Minister of War Ziqi. This is 
what is called “being excluded from a category yet 
belonging to it.” 

What is called “seeming so and yet not”? Zifa was the 
magistrate of Shangcai. A common person committed a 
crime and faced punishment. Tire case was disputed and the 
arguments made. When it was decided before the 
magistrate, Zifa sighed with a pitiful heart. When the 
criminal had been punished, he did not forget Zifa’s 
kindness. After this, Zifa committed a crime against King 
Wei and fled. Tire man who had been punished thus 
disguised the one who had been kind to him, and the man 

who had been kind fled with him to a hut below the city 
walls. When pursuers arrived, [the man] stamped his foot 
and said angrily, “Zifa oversaw and decided my crime and 
had me punished; my hatred for him makes my bones and 
marrow ache. If I could get his flesh and eat it, I could 
never have enough!” Tire pursuers all felt he was truthful 
and did not search the interior, so Zifa survived. This is 
what is called “seeming so and yet not.” 

What is called ‘hot yet seeming so”? In antiquity, King 
Goujian of Yuc humbled himself to King Fuchai of Wu. He 
asked to serve [Fuchai] personally as his minister and to 
give [Fuchai] his wife as concubine. He supplied the four 
seasonal sacrifices and remanded tribute every spring and 
autumn. He took down [Iris own state’s] altars of the soil 
and grain, exerted his energies [like a] commoner, lived in 
seclusion, and fought in the front ranks. He was extremely 
humble in all courtesies and extremely submissive in all 
speech. He distanced himself far from the mind of a rebel, 
yet with three thousand men he captured Fuchai at Guxu. 

One cannot fail to examine these four cases. What 
makes it difficult to understand affairs is that [people] hide 
their origins and conceal their tracks; they establish the 
selfish in the place of the impartial; they incline toward the 
deviant over the correct and confuse other people’s minds 
with victory. If one could make what people harbor 
internally tally perfectly with what they express externally, 

then the world would have no lost states or broken 
households. When the fox catches the pheasant, it must 
first prostrate its body and lower its ears and wait for [the 
pheasant] to come. Tire pheasant sees this and believes it, 
thus it can be enticed and captured. If the fox were to widen 
its eyes and stare directly [at the pheasant], manifesting its 
lethal inclination, the pheasant would know to be alarmed 
and fly far off, thus escaping [the fox’s] wrath. 

Tire mutual deception of human artifice 
is not merely the cunning of birds and beasts. 

The resemblances between things and categories that 
cannot be externally assessed are numerous and difficult to 
recognize. For this reason, they cannot but be investigated. 

Vineteen 

CULTIVATING EFFORT 

“Cultivating Effort” provides the means by which those 
whose entry into the Way is not profound 
and whose appreciation of argumentation is not deep 
can, by observing these literary expressions, turn 
themselves around 

to take clarity and purity as constants 
and mildness and serenity as roots. 

[But those who] 

idly and lazily set aside their studies, 

give free rein to their desires and indulge their 

feelings. 

and wish to misappropriate what they lack, 
will be obstructed from the Great Way. 

Now, 

madmen have no anxiety, 
and sages, too, have no anxiety. 

Sages have no anxiety 

because they harmonize by means of Potency, 
whereas madmen have no anxiety 

because they do not know [the difference between] 
bad and good fortune. 

Thus, 

the non-action of those who fully comprehend [the 
Way] 

and the non-action of those who are obstructed from 
[the Way] 

are alike with regard to their non-action 

but differ with regard to the means by which they are 

non-active. 

Tlrus, on their behalf, what can be heeded has been brought 
to the surface, declared, circulated, and explained, thereby 
inspiring scholars to diligently appropriate [these 
principles] for themselves. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

“Cultivating Effort” offers arguments that can be used to 
challenge a number of political and philosophical views 
that seem to have been in vogue at the time the Huainanzi 
was created. Together, these arguments support the general 
theme of the chapter, that cultivating effort is necessary in 
a wide variety of contexts and among a wide variety of 
people, from the sage who tries to bring benefit to the 
world to the common man who tries to lift himself morally 
through education and training. Rhetorically, the chapter 
provides the reader with valuable examples of techniques 
of assertion and refutation that can be used in oral debate. 

Accordingly, the chapter is a teaching tool in form as well 
as in content. Each of the chapter’s seven sections lays out 
a sustained argument that begins by asserting or refuting a 
particular proposition. In every case, personal effort is 
seen to be indispensable even when it pertains to the key 
concept of “non-action” ( wuwei ), advocated throughout the 
Huainanzi as a technique of sagely government. Here 
“non-act ion” is redefined to highlight the importance of 
human agency and human exertion. 

The opening lines of this chapter comprise an interesting 
and unusual case in which the Huainanzi seems to directly 
contradict itself. Chapter 8 . ‘Tire Basic Warp,” begins by 
stating, ‘The reign of Grand Purity was harmonious and 
compliant and thus silent and indifferent.” Chapter 19 
begins, “Some people say: ‘Those who are non-active are 
solitarily soundless and indifferently unmoving. . . .’ I 
believe this is not so.” How can we account for this 
discrepancy? The answer, we believe, is that these 
statements must be viewed in context, for when they are, 
the apparent contradiction tends to disappear. Chapter 8 
refers to a simple, remote (and unrecoverable) era in which 
everyone was so attuned to the Way that a ruler had only to 
reign in order to rule. Chapter 19 . though, refers to a much 
more complicated contemporary world in which a do- 
nothing ruler would not stay on his throne for long. The 
author of ‘'Cultivating Effort” does not deny the principle 

of witwei (non-action), but he denies that it means doing 
nothing. Rather, he shows, the great sages of antiquity 
worked hard. It is just that their efforts were so attuned to 
the Way that the good consequences of their acts became a 
cosmic imperative, (hi this way, chapter 19 is consistent 
with chapter 13 . which insists that a successful ruler must 
constantly embrace and respond to change.) 

The Huainanzi is, above all, intended as a practical guide 
to good rulership. Here the author makes clear that the 
ruler’s self-cultivation, preparation, education, and hard 
work all are indispensable elements of good and lasting 
government. 

Nineteen 

19.1 

Some people say: “Those who are non-active 
are solitarily soundless 
and indifferently unmoving. 

Pull them, and they do not come; 
push them, and they do not go. 

Only those who are like this give the appearance of having 
attained the Way.” 

I believe this is not so. I might ask them: “Is it possible 
to refer to such men as the Divine Farmer, Yao, Shun, Yu, 
and Tang as sages?’ [Even] those who hold to this view [of 
non-action] certainly could not contend otherwise. [But] if 
you examine these five sages, it is clear that none of them 
achieved non-action. 

In ancient times, 

the people fed on herbaceous plants and drank [only] 
water, 

picked fruit from shrubs and trees 
and ate the meat of oysters and clams. 

They frequently suffered tribulations from feverish 
maladies and injurious poisons. Consequently, the Divine 

Farmer first taught the people to plant and cultivate the five 
grains. 

He evaluated the suitability of the land, 

[noting] whether it was dry or wet, fertile or barren, 
high or low 

He tried the taste and flavor of the one hundred plants 
and the sweetness or bitterness of the streams and 
springs, 

issuing directives so the people would know what to avoid 
and what to accept. At the time [Ire was doing this], he 
suffered poisoning [as many as] seventy times a day. 

Yao established filial piety, compassion, humaneness, 
and love, inspiring the people to become like sons and 
brothers. 

To the west, he taught the People of the Fertile Lands; 
to the east, he reached the Blackteeth People; 
to the north, he soothed the Yudu People; 
and to the south he made inroads to Jiaozhi. 

He exiled Huan Dou to Mount Chong, 

pursued the Three Miao [tribes] to Three Dangers 

[Mountain], 

banished Gong Gong to Yuzliou. 
and executed Gun at Feather Mountain. 

Shun created homes. 

Constructing walls and thatching roofs, 
opening lands and planting grains, 

he directed all the people 

to abandon their caves and 
each to establish a family dwelling. 

These are the practices he initiated. 

To the south he chastised the Three Miao [tribes], 
dying along the way at Zangwu. 

Yu, 

bathed by torrential rains 

and combed by violent winds, 

cleared the waterways and dredged the rivers, 

bored through Dragon Gate, 

opened up Yin Pass, 

repaired the embankments of Peng Li [i.e., Boyang Lake], 
mounted the four vehicles,- 
followed the mountains, 
and marked their trees, 
leveling and ordering the water and land 
so as to determine [the boundaries of] the eighteen hundred 
states. 

Tang 

rose early and retired late 

to take full advantage of his perspicacious 
intelligence; 

reduced taxes and lightened demands 
to enhance the people’s livelihood; 
displayed virtue and bestowed favor 

to rescue the impoverished and bereft. 

He mourned the dead and inquired about the afflicted 
to take care of orphans and widows. 

[Consequently,] 

the common people grew close to and cleaved to him. 
His policies and directives flowed forth and circulated 
[everywhere]. 

Thus he subsequently 

marshaled his troops at Mingtiao, 
surrounded [Jie] of the Xia at Nan Guo, 
punished him for his transgressions, 
and banished him to Mount Li. 

These five sages were rulers who made the world 
flourish. Urey labored their bodies and used their minds to 
the utmost on behalf of the people to bring benefit and 
eradicate harm, yet they never tired of doing so. 

Now if you raise a beaker of wine, 
no one would notice [the strain] from your face, 
but if you lift a vat [weighing] a dan, sweat will flow 
profusely. 

How much more so will this be the case if you take on 
the worries of the world 

and assume responsibility for all the affairs within the 
[Four] Seas! 

This is far heavier than a vat weighing a dan. 

Moreover, these sages 

were not embarrassed by their humble status 
but regretted that the Way did not prevail; 
were not anxious about their brief life spans 
but worried that the people were impoverished. 

For this reason, 

when Yu acted on the waterways, 

he used his own body to break through the banks of the 

Yangxu [River]; 

and Tang, at the time of the great drought, 

offered himself as a sacrifice at the edge of Mulberry 

Forest. 

If the sages’ solicitousness for the people was as clear as 
this, is it not deluded to accuse them [of being] “non- 
active”? 

Furthermore, in ancient times 

when emperors and kings were established, it was not 
to serve and nourish their [own] desires; 
when sages took office, it was not to indulge and 
delight their own persons. 

It was because in the world, 

the strong oppressed the weak, 
the many violated the few, 
the clever deceived the ignorant, 
and the brave dispossessed the timid. 

Those who possessed knowledge did not impart it; 
those who accumulated wealth did not distribute it. 

Thus the Son of Heaven was established in order to 
equalize them. 

Since one person’s intelligence was not sufficient to 
shed light on all things within the [Four] Seas, the Three 
Dukes and the Nine Ministers were established to aid and 
assist him. 

Since inaccessible states with varied customs and 
remote and secluded locales could not receive and be 
enriched by the ruler’s virtue, Lords of the Land were 
established to instruct and admonish them. 

This made it so that 
no land was untended, 

no season was not [met with its proper] response, 
no official concealed his activities, 
no state neglected to benefit [the people]. 

By these means, they clothed the cold and fed the hungry, 
nourished the old and infirm, and gave respite to those 
wearied from their labors. 

[Moreover,] if you look at the sages from the perspective 
of the common man, then 

[the cook] Yi Yin, with cauldron on his back, sought to 
serve Tang; 

[the butcher] Lii Wang, with carving knife in hand, 
entered Zhou [to serve as a high official]; 

Baili Xi was sold back to [Duke Mu of] Qin; 

Guan Zhong was tied and fettered [and taken to the court 

of Duke Huan of Qi]. 

Confucius’s stove was not black, 
and Mozi’s mat was not warm.= 

Thus it is that sages 

do not consider mountains high, 
do not consider rivers wide. 

They withstand insult and humiliation in order to seek to 
serve a ruler of their age. They do not crave high salaries or 
covet official posts but instead want to work to advance the 
world’s benefits and eradicate the common people’s 
hardships. In a work that has been transmitted to us it is 
written: 

‘The Divine Farmer was haggard and downcast; 

Yao was emaciated and forlorn; 

Shun was weather-beaten and dark; 
and Yu had calloused hands and feet.” 

Looking at it from this perspective, the sages’ anxious 
toiling for the common people is profound indeed. Thus 
from the Son of Heaven down to the common people, when 
the four limbs are not exercised 
and thought and forethought [are] not applied, 
yet the tasks of governance are addressed and resolved— 
such a tiring has never been heard of. 

19.7 

Those who fully comprehend things cannot be startled 

by the unusual; 

those who are versed in the Way cannot be moved by 
the strange; 

those who examine words cannot be dazzled by their 
designations; 

those who investigate into forms cannot be misled by 
their appearances. 

People who follow the conventions of the present age 
mostly revere the ancient and scorn the present. Thus those 
who formulate [teachings of] the Way necessarily ascribe 
them to the Divine Farmer or the Yellow Emperor; only 
then will they proceed with their discussion. Muddled 
rulers of chaotic eras venerate what is remote and what 
proceeds therefrom, so they value such things. Those who 
study are blinded by their theories and respect [only] what 
they have heard. 

Facing one another, 

seated with a dignified air they praise [the ancients]; 
stiff-necked they recite [the ancient texts]. 

This shows that the distinction between what is true and 
what is false is not clear. 

Now, 

without a square and a compass, even Xi Zhong could 
not determine square and round; 
without a level and a marking cord, even Lu Ban could 
not straighten the crooked. 

Thus. 

when Zhongzi Qi died, Bo Ya broke the strings and 
destroyed his qin, knowing that in his times no one 
could appreciate his playing. 

When Hui Shi died, Zhuangzi ceased to talk, 
perceiving that there was no one else with whom he 
could converse. 

At the age of seven, Xiang Tuo became Confucius’s teacher. 
From time to time, Confucius listened to his words. If 
someone this young were to offer a persuasion to a village 
elder, though, the child would not have time to duck a blow 
on the head. How would he be able to illuminate the Way 
[under such circumstances]? 

In the past, Xiezi had an audience with King Hui of Qin, 
and the king was pleased with him. He asked Tang Guliang 
about him. Tang Guliang said, ‘Xiezi is a debater from 
Shandong who uses clever persuasions to gain the 
confidence of young princes.” King Hui accordingly hid his 
anger and awaited Xiezi. The next day when Xiezi had a 
second audience, the king rejected him and would not heed 
him. It is not that [Xiezi’s] persuasion differed but that the 
way in which the king heard it changed. 

If you mistake [the note] zhi for [the note] yu, it is not 
the fault of the string; 

if you mistake a sweet taste for a bitter one, it is not 
the mistake of the flavor. 

A man from Chu had some boiled monkey meat that he 
gave to his neighbors. Urey thought it was dog meat and 
found its flavor pleasing. Later, when they heard it was 
monkey, they knelt down and vomited all they had eaten. 
This was a case of not even beginning to know about flavor. 

A music master from Handan made up a new tune and 
said it was composed by Li Qi. All the people vied to learn 
it. Later when they discovered it was not written by Li Qi, 
they all abandoned the tune. This was a case of not even 
beginning to know about music. 

A country fellow found a rough piece of jade. Being 
pleased by its appearance, he considered it to be precious 
and hid it away. When he showed it to others, people 
considered that it was just a stone, so he threw it away. This 
was a case of not even beginning to know about j ade. 

Thus when your [views] tally with what is essential, you 
will value what is true and [give] equal [consideration to] 
the present and the ancient. If you do not have the means to 
heed persuasions, then you will value what has come down 
from the past, [simply] because it is remote. This is why 
[Bian] He cried so hard that he bled at the foot of Mount 
Jing. 

Now, 

a sword may be broken off and bent, thin and scratched, 
chipped and broken, and warped and twisted, but if it said to 
have been the sword of King Qingxiang of Chu, then it is 

prized, and the people will compete to wear it. 

A qin may be twangy and sharp, crooked and bent, with 
its resonance gone and its aftertones excessive, but if it is 
said to have been the qin of King Zhuang of Chu, then it is 
[prized], and the favored will contend to play it. 

Although the short-handled spears from Mount Miao and 
the [cast-iron] spear points of Sheepshead [Mountain] can 
cut through a dragon boat in the water and pierce armor of 
rhinoceros hide on land, no one wears them on Iris belt. 

Although qins made of mountain tong wood with 
sounding boards of rivervalley catalpa wood may sound as 
pure, lingering and clear as [the music of] Master Tang or 
Bo Ya, no one plays them. 

Those with penetrating discernment are not like this. 

The swordsman hopes for a sharp blade; he does not 
hope for [the perfection of] a Moyang or a Moye; 
the horseman hopes for a thousand li [steed]; he does 
not hope for [the perfection of] Hualiu or Lii’er; 
the qin player hopes for a pure, lingering, and clear 
sound; he does not hope for [the perfection of] Lanxie 
or Haozhong.- 

One who [studies by] reciting the Odes and the 
Documents hopes to achieve a comprehensive 
understanding of the Way and a general knowledge of 
things; he does not hope for [the perfection of] a “Great 
Plan” or an ‘Gde of Shang.” 

Sages perceive what is true and what is false, just as 
what is white and black is distinguished by the eye 
and what is high pitched and low pitched is 
differentiated by the ears. 

But most people are not like this. Within themselves they 
lack a master [by means of which] to make [such] 
discernments. It is like a man who is born after his father 
dies. When [in later years] he climbs the tomb mound, he 
will wail and cry as ceremony demands, but nothing makes 
[those feelings] cleave to his heart. 

Thus, 

when a boy and his twin look alike, only their mother 
can distinguish them. 

When jade and [ordinary] stone are of the same sort, 
only a fine craftsman can identify them. 

When texts and chronicles record strange things, only 
sages can discuss them. 

Now, if we should get a new text from a sage and 
attribute it to Confucius or Mozi, then those disciples who 
point to every sentence and accept the text [as genuine] will 
certainly be numerous. Thus 

a beauty need not be of the same type as Xi Shi; 
a knowledgeable scholar need not be of the same sort 
as Confucius or Mozi. 

If his mind has the perspicacious capacity to penetrate 
things, then he will write books to illustrate matters, and 

they will be taken up by the learned. A scholar who truly 
attains clear-minded understanding, who grasps the 
profound mirror in his mind, illuminating things brilliantly 
and not changing his mind on account of [whether 
something is] ancient or current, will accordingly propound 
his writings and clearly point out [his views]. Then, even 
though his coffin might close, he would have no regrets. 

Formerly Duke Ping of Jin ordered his officials to make 
[a set of] bells. When they were finished and presented to 
Music Master Kuang, the latter said, “Tire bells are not in 
tune.” 

Duke Ping said, ‘T have shown them to skilled persons, 
and they all think they are in tune. Yet you think they are 
not. Why?” 

Music Master Kuang said, ‘Tf they are for those of later 
generations who have no knowledge of the notes, then they 
will do; but for those who know the notes, they will 
certainly know they are not in tune.” Tims Music Master 
Kuang’s wish for well-tuned bells was for those of later 
generations who knew the notes. 

Tire [people of the] Three Dynasties acted the same as 
we do, and the Five Hegemons had the same level of 
intelligence as we. [But] they alone had the reality of sagely 
knowledge, while we lack even 

the reputation of a country village 
or the common knowledge of a poor lane. 

Why? [It is because] they set themselves straight and 
established their integrity, while we are rude idlers and lazy 
layabouts. 

Now Mao Qiang and Xi Shi were recognized by the 
world as beauties, but if they were made to 
carry putrid rats in their mouths 
and be wrapped in hedgehog skins, 
and dress in leopard fur,- 
with waist sashes of dead snakes, 
even cloth-wearing, leather-belted [ordinary] people 
passing by all would look off to the left or right and hold 
their noses. But if we were to let them 
wear perfume and unguents, 
adjust their moth eyebrows, - 
put on hair clasps and earrings, 
dress in fine silk, 

and trail [sleeves of] Qi silk gauze, 

with white face powder and black mascara, 

wearing jade sash-bangles, 

walking with gliding steps, 

wearing sprigs of fragrant angelica, 

with enticing looks, 

bewitching smiles, 

haunting glances, 

speaking delicately and softly, 

exposing their beautiful teeth, 

twitching the dimples in their cheeks, 
then even among the great statesmen of the royal court, 
whose conduct displays a stern will and haughty air, there 
would be none who would not court these beauties, long for 
them, and desire to have sex with them. 

Nowadays a person of average talent, benighted by 
ignorant and deluded wisdom, cloaked in insulting and 
shameful conduct, who has no training in his own calling or 
in the techniques that are his responsibility—how could he 
not make people look askance at him and hold their noses? 

Now dancers twirl their bodies like rings of jade. Urey 
bend and touch the ground and turn quickly and nimbly. As 
they move, they twist and turn, lithe and beautiful, imitating 
spirits. 

Their bodies seem as light as wind-borne autumn 
floss, 

their hair like banners flapping in the wind, 
their steps are quick as those of a racehorse. 

Acrobats, raising poles of wu [tong] or catalpa wood and 
grasping crooked tree branches, are as uninhibited as 
monkeys. Laughing, they pull the leaves toward them; 
crouching and stretching like dragons, they perch on the 
branches like swallows. Holding thick tree limbs, they raise 
them effortlessly. As they dance, they rise like dragons or 
birds as they gather. Tlrey grasp and release; how fast they 
move! 

There is no one among the spectators who does not grow 
faint at heart and weak in the knees. Meanwhile, the 
performers continue their act with a smile and then put on 
the costumes for the feather dance. 

Tire dancers do not [inherently] have such supple and 
nimble [bodies]; 

the acrobats do not [inherently] have such keenness 
and strength. 

It was the gradual, long-term practice and training that made 
them so. Thus, 

when a tree grows, no one sees its progress; at a 
certain point, we realize that it has grown tall. 

If a hard object is continually [sharpened] on a 
whetstone, no one sees it diminishing, but at some 
point we realize that it is thinner. 

Pigweed and hyssop grow by leaps and bounds, each day 
adding several inches. But they cannot be used for the 
crossbeams of a building. With hardwoods [like] lindera, 
southernwood, or camphor, only after seven years can their 
growth be recognized. Then they can be used to make 
coffins and boats. 

Thus, matters 

that can be accomplished easily gain small fame for 
the one who does them; 

[those] that are difficult to accomplish gain great 
merit. 

The Superior Man cultivates his good points. Even though 
there might not be an [immediate] advantage, good fortune 
will come later. Thus the Odes says, 

‘Tire days pass and the months proceed; 
through study of brightness and brilliance, 

I gain radiance and light.” 

This is what is referred to here. 

1. Most of the several explanations of the “four vehicles” include boats for water 
and carts for land. The remaining ones might be a mud sledge, a vehicle or shoes 
especially useful in climbing mountains, another kind of mud sledge, and a sedan 
chair. 

2. Confucius’s stove was not black and Mozi’s mat was not warm because their 
duties as teachers so often took them away from home. 

3. Moyang and Moye were famous swords; Hualiu and Lii’er were famous horses; 
and Lanxie and Haozhong were famous qin. Each was an exemplar of perfection. 

4. In this context, the connotation is of masculinity and perhaps barbarism, not of 
luxury or feminine elegance. 

5. Moth eyebrows were artificial eyebrows applied with makeup. 

Twenty 

THE EXALTED LINEAGE 

‘The Exalted Lineage” 

traverses the eight endpoints, 
extends to the highest heights, 
illuminates the three luminaries above, 
and harmonizes water and earth below. 

It aligns the Way of past and present, 

orders the hierarchy of human relationships and 

patterns, 

summarizes the tenets of the myriad regions, 
and returns them home to a single root, 
thereby 

knotting the net of the Way of Governance 

and weaving the web of the affairs of the True King. 

[It] then 

traces to the source the techniques of the mind, 
sets in order instinct and nature, 
and thereby 

provides a lodging place for the numen of Clarity and 
Equanimity. 

It clarifies and purifies the quintessence of spirit 
illumination, 

thereby enfolding and cleaving to the harmony of 
Heaven. 

It provides the means to observe how the Five Thearchs and 
the Three Kings 

embraced the heavenly qi, 

cherished the Heavenly Heart, 

and grasped centrality and savored harmony. 

Their Moral Potency having taken shape within [them], 

it then cohered Heaven and Earth, 

issued forth and aroused yin and yang, 

ordered the four seasons, 

rectified the changeable directions, 

calmed things with its tranquillity, 

and extended them with its efficaciousness. 

[Their Moral Potency] then thereby 

fired and smelted the myriad things, 

buoyed up and transformed the innumerable life 

forms, 

singing forth, they harmonized, 
moving about, they followed along, 
so that all things within the Four Seas with a single mind 
unanimously offered their allegiance. 

Tims, 

lucky stars appeared, 

auspicious winds arrived, 
the Yellow Dragon descended, 
phoenix nests lined the trees, 
and the qilin tarried in the open fields. 

Had Moral Potency not taken shape within [them], 
yet their laws and tributes were implemented, 
and their regulations and measures were employed 
exclusively, 

then the spirits and divinities would not have 
responded to them; 

good fortune and blessings would not have returned 
home to them; 

all things within the Four Seas would not have 
submitted to them; 

and subjects would not have been transformed by 
them. 

Thus, 

Moral Potency that takes shape within 
is the great foundation of governance. 

This is [the message of] “Tire Exalted Lineage” of the 
Profoundly Illustrious. 

“An Overview of the Essentials” (21.2) 

With this final substantive chapter of the Huainanzi, the 
reader is invited to “knot the net of the Way of Governance 
and weave the web ... of the True King,” thus rounding off 
his education. “Tire Exalted Lineage” reminds the young 

monarch, who is the intended audience of the entire book 
and who presumably aspires to sagely rule, that the “Moral 
Potency that takes shape within is the great foundation of 
governance.” Moreover, this chapter makes clear that such 
internally generated Moral Potency has far-reaching 
cosmopolitical implications affecting both Heaven above 
and the people below In making its case, the chapter 
identifies for the reader a number of exemplary rulers of 
both the recent and the remote past who embodied these 
ideals and thereby brought order and harmony to the wider 
world. 

As the chapter title suggests, these great rulers are seen 
as being part of a virtual lineage culminating in the rulers of 
the present Han dynasty, the Liu clan (of which the 
HuainanzV s sponsor-editor, Liu An, was himself a 
prominent member). Not surprisingly, whereas many 
earlier chapters of the Huainanzi drew, in various ways, on 
the whole corpus of pre-Han and early Han literature, the 
principal source for this chapter is the Huainanzi itself. 
This long and rhetorically rich chapter recapitulates many 
of the themes and concepts associated with sage-rulership 
found in earlier chapters of the Huainanzi, and so it brings 
this great work to a close. 

Twenty 

20.1 

Heaven 

established the sun and moon, 
arranged the stars and planets, 
harmonized the yin and yang, 
and displayed the four seasons. 

Tire day serves to blaze things with sunlight; 
the evening serves to give them respite; 
the wind serves to dry things out, 
and the rain and dew serve to moisten them. 

In giving life to things, no one sees the means by 
which it nurtures them and yet things reach maturity. 

In taking life away from things, no one sees the means 
by which it sends them off to death and yet things 
cease to exist. 

This is called “spirit illumination.” Sages take it as their 
model. Thus, 

when they initiate good fortune, no one sees from 
whence it originates and yet it arises. 

When they eradicate calamity, no one sees the means 
by which they do so and yet it disappears. 

Move away from it; it nears. 

Approach it; it recedes. 

Search for it; it will not be obtained. 

Examine into it; it is not insubstantial. 

Reckon it by days; it is incalculable. 

Reckon it by years; there is surplus. 

20.3 (in part) 

When the High Ancestors went into mourning, for three 
years they did not speak, and all within the Four Seas were 
silent and voiceless. [But] as soon as a single word was 
uttered, [they] greatly moved the world. This is because 
they relied on their Heavenly Heart when opening and 
closing their mouths. Thus, as soon as you stimulate the 
root, the hundred branches all respond. It is like the spring 
rains watering the myriad things; 
turbulently they flow, 
copiously they spread out; 
there is no place that is not moistened 
and no plant that does not thrive. 

Thus, when the sage embraces his Heavenly Heart, his 
voice can move and transform the world. Thus, when his 
Quintessential Sincerity is stimulated within, an embodied 
qi responds in Heaven: 

Lucky stars appear, 
yellow dragons descend, 

auspicious winds arrive, 
sweet springs appear, 
excellent grains thrive, 
rivers do not fill and overflow, 
and the seas do not churn and roil. 

Thus the Odes says, 

“Nurturing and yielding are the hundred spirits 
even to the rivers and mountain peaks.” 

When you oppose heaven and oppress the myriad things, 
the sun and moon [suffer] partial eclipses; 
the five planets lose their proper orbits; 
the four seasons overstep one another. 

In the day it is dark and at night it is light; 
mountains crumble and rivers flood; 
in winter there are thunderstorms, and in summer 
there are frosts. 

Hie Odes says, 

“In the first month, frost is abundant; 
my heart is anxious and grieved.” 

20.5 

Now with regard to ghosts and spirits, 

we look for them, but they are without form; 
we listen for them, but they are without voice; 
yet we perform the Suburban Sacrifice to Heaven and the 
[appropriate] observances to the mountain and river 

[spirits]. 

With prayer and sacrifice we seek prosperity; 
with invocations and charms we seek rain; 
with tortoise shell and milfoil we decide matters. 

Tire Odes says, 

“When the spirits might descend 
cannot be calculated. 

How can you treat them with disdain?” 

20.10 

Heaven, Earth, and the four seasons do not [purposefully] 
produce the ten thousand things. 

Spirit and illumination join, 
yin and yang harmonize, 

and the myriad things are born. When a sage rules the 
world, he does not change the people’s nature but soothes 
and facilitates the nature that is already present and purifies 
and cleanses it. Thus following [the nature of things] may 
be considered great, whereas making [things] may be 
considered minor. 

Yu dredged the Dragon Gate, broke through Yique, 
demarcated the Yangzi River, and channeled the Yellow 
River [so that] they ran eastward into the sea, by following 
the [natural] flow of water. 

Lord Millet reclaimed the grasslands and introduced 
tillage, fertilized the soil and planted grain, enabling each 

of the five grains to grow appropriately, by following the 
propensity of the soil. 

Tang and Wu, with three hundred armored chariots and 
three thousand soldiers in armor, quelled the violent and 
rebellious and brought Xia and Shang under control, by 
following the people’s desire. 

Tlrus if you can follow [the nature of things], you will be 
matchless in the world. 

Now if things first have what is natural to them, 
afterward human affairs can be governed. 

Tlrus, 

a fine carpenter cannot carve metal, 

and a skillful blacksmith cannot melt wood. 

Tire propensity of metal is that it cannot be carved, 
and the nature of wood is that it cannot be melted. 

You can 

mold clay into a vessel, 
gouge out wood and make a boat, 
forge iron and make a blade, 
cast metal and make a bell, 
by following their [inherent] possibilities. 

You can 

drive a horse and lead an ox, 
use a rooster to announce night’s end, 
and tell a dog to guard the gate— 
because it follows their natures. 

People have a nature that is fond of sex, so there is the 
ceremony of marriage. 

Urey have a nature that [requires] food and drink, so 
there is the suitability of a great banquet. 

Urey have a nature that delights in music, so there are 
the sounds of bells, drums, pipes, and strings. 

Urey have a nature to grieve and be melancholy, so 
there are the customs of wearing mourning clothes, 
crying, and jumping about [at funerals]. 

Therefore, the institutions and laws of the former kings 
followed what the people liked but [also] established 
controls and civilizing [restrictions] for them. 

Following along with people’s fondness for sex, they 
set up the rites of marriage so men and women could 
be [properly] separated. 

Following along with their delight in music, they 
rectified the sounds of the “Ya” and “Song” so that 
habits and customs would not be unrestrained. 
Following along with their preference to live as 
families and find joy in their wives and children, they 
taught filial piety so that fathers and sons would be 
affectionate. 

Following along with their delight in friendship, they 
taught brotherly love so that older and younger would 
be in proper standing with each other. 

Only after this did they 

use court ceremonies to clarify high rank and low 
and use rural libations-and archery contests to clarify 
adulthood and youth. 

In season, [the youths] held exercises to practice using 
weapons or entered school according to their station to 
learn to cultivate the arts of human relations. 

These all are cases in which people already possessed 
[qualities] by nature, which sages fashioned and completed. 

Thus if the nature is not there, it is not possible to 
educate or train [a person]. If the nature is there but has not 
been nurtured, he cannot follow the Way. 

It is the nature of the silkworm to make silk, but 
unless you have a skilled female worker to boil the 
cocoon in hot water and draw its filaments, there can 
be no silk. 

An egg transforms into a chick, but unless you have a 
mother hen to sit on and warm the egg and brood it for 
several days, it cannot produce a chick. 

Human nature is endowed with Humaneness and Rightness, 
but unless you have a sage to institute laws and standards to 
teach and guide them, people will not be able to find the 
correct path. 

Thus the teaching of the former kings was 

to follow what people delight in so as to encourage 

goodness and 

to follow what people hate so as to prohibit 

wickedness. Thus, 

punishments and penalties were not used, but awe¬ 
inspiring conduct seemed to flow forth [everywhere]. 
Policies and ordinances were limited, but their 
transforming brilliance [pervaded] as if they were 
spiritlike. 

Thus if you follow nature, the whole world will come 
along with you. If you go against nature, even if you were to 
publish the laws, it would be of no use. 

20.13 (in part) 

Tire sage 

covers like Heaven, upholds like Earth, 
illuminates like the sun and moon, 
harmonizes like yin and yang, 
transforms like the four seasons, 

[treats] the myriad things all differently, 
is without precedent or novelty, 
is without stranger or kin. 

Thus [the sage] takes Heaven as his model. 

Heaven does not have [only] a single season; 

Earth does not have [only] a single benefit; 
humankind does not have [only] a single affair. 
Therefore, 

various undertakings cannot but have multiple origins; 
hurried steps cannot but take different directions. 

Hie Five Phases are of different c/i, but all are 
harmonious. 

Hie Six Arts are of different categories, but all are 
connected. 

Warmth and kindness, gentleness and goodness, are 
the influences of the Odes', 

purity and grandeur, nobility and generosity, are the 
teachings of the Documents', 

clarity and brilliance, perception and penetration, are 
the norms of the Changes', 

deference and self-control, respect and humility, are 
the behaviors of the Riles; 

broad-mindedness and magnanimity, simplicity and 
easiness, are the transforming [qualities] of the Music; 
reprimands and critiques, blame and appraisal, are the 
polishing cloths of the Spring and Autumn [Annals]. 
Hius [if relied on exclusively], 

the shortcoming of the Changes is superstition; 

the shortcoming of the Music is lewdness; 

the shortcoming of the Odes is foolishness; 

the shortcoming of the Documents is rigidity, 

the shortcoming of the Rites is stubbornness, and 

the shortcoming of the Spring and Autumn is 

censoriousness. 

Hie sage uses [all] six in conjunction and both prizes and 
institutes them. 

20.18 

In governing the self, 

it is best to nurture the spirit. 

The next best is to nurture the body. 

In governing the state, 

it is best to nurture transformation. 

Tire next best is to correct the laws. 

Aclear spirit and a balanced will, 
the hundred joints all in good order, 
constitute the root of nurturing vitality. 

To fatten the muscles and skin, 
to fill the bowel and belly, 
to satiate the lusts and desires, 
constitute the branches of nurturing vitality. 

If the people 

yield to one another and compete to dwell humbly; 
delegate benefit and compete to receive scantily, 
work at tasks and compete to follow arduously, 
daily transformed by their superiors and moved to 
goodness without realizing the means by which they came 
to be so, this is the root of government. 

With beneficial rewards to encourage goodness 
and fearful punishments to prevent misdeeds, 
laws and ordinances corrected above 
and the common people submitting below: 
these are the branches of government. 

Earlier generations nurtured the root, but later 
generations served the branches. This is why Great Peace 
does not arise. Now a ruler who desires to govern well 
does not appear in every age, and a minister who can 
accompany a ruler in initiating good government does not 
appear once in ten thousand [officials]. To rely on a 
minister who does not appear once in ten thousand to seek 
out a ruler who does not appear in every age is the reason 
why they do not meet once in ten thousand years! 

20.19 

Tire nature of water 

is to be saturating and clear. 

In valleys where it is stagnant 
and gives birth to green algae, 

[that results from] not controlling it [according to] its 
nature. If you make channels where it flows and deepen the 
flow or build up where it [threatens to] flood through and 
raise [its level], you will enable it to move in compliance 
with its natural propensity, moving along and flowing 
onward. Though carrion and rotten bones flow and mix with 
the water, they cannot pollute it. The nature [of water] is not 
different; it is just a matter of whether it can flow through 
[a channel] or not flow through. 

Customs and habits are like this. If [the ruler’s] sincerity 
floods through to goodness of will, 

builds embankments against depravity of heart, 
opens up the road to goodness 
and blocks the path to wickedness, 
then likewise [sincerity] emerges into a single Way, [so 
that] the people’s nature can become good and customs and 
habits can be beautified. 

20.23 

In ancient times, 

laws were established, but they were not violated; 
punishments were elaborated, but they were not used. 

It is not the case that they could punish but did not punish. 

The hundred kinds of artisans adhered to the seasons, and 
their many achievements were, without exception, brilliant. 
Propriety and Rightness were cultivated, and the worthy and 
the virtuous were employed. Thus they promoted 

the loftiest in the world to become the Three Dukes, 
the loftiest in the state to become the Nine Ministers, 
the loftiest in the counties to become the twenty- 
seven grandees, 

and the loftiest in the prefectures to become the 
eighty-one functionaries. 

Those whose knowledge surpassed ten thousand men 
were called “talented”; 

those whose knowledge surpassed a thousand men 
were called “eminent”; 

those whose knowledge surpassed a hundred men were 
called “brave”; 

those whose knowledge surpassed ten men were 
called “prominent.” 

Those who 

understood the Way of Heaven, 
investigated the patterns of Earth, 
penetrated human feelings, 

whose greatness sufficed to accommodate the 
multitudes, 

whose Moral Potency sufficed to embrace the distant, 
whose trustworthiness sufficed to unify heterogeneity, 
and whose knowledge sufficed to understand 
alteration 

were the “talented” among men. 

Those whose 

Moral Potency sufficed to transform [the people] 
through education, 

conduct sufficed to accord with Rightness, 
Humaneness sufficed to win the multitudes, 
and brilliance sufficed to illuminate those below 
were the “eminent” among men. 

Those whose 

conduct sufficed to be ceremonious and exemplary, 
knowledge sufficed to resolve deceptive 
resemblances, 

honesty enabled them to distribute resources, 
trustworthiness enabled them to inspire [others] to 
honor their commitments, 
accomplished deeds could be emulated, 
and spoken words could be used for guidance 
were the “brave “ among men. 

Those who 

held to their duties and did not abandon them, 
dwelled in Rightness and were not partisan, 
encountered hardships and did not illicitly avoid them, 
and perceived advantages and did not illicitly gain 
from them 

were the “prominent” among men. 

Tire “talented,” “eminent,” “brave,” and “prominent” each 
in accordance with their degree of ability occupied their 
official position and attained what was appropriate to each. 
From the root flowing to the branches, using the heavy 
to control the light, 

when the ruler called, the people harmonized; 
when the ruler moved, the lowly followed. 

Within the Four Seas, all submitted with a single mind, 
turning their backs on greed and avarice and turning toward 
Fhimaneness and Rightness. In transforming the people, 
they resembled the wind stirring the grasses and trees, 
leaving nothing unaffected. 

20.28 

Those who have the ability to accomplish the work of 
hegemon or king are invariably those who gain victory; 
those who have the ability to gain victory are 
invariably those who are powerful; 
those who have the ability to be powerful are 
invariably those who employ the people’s strength; 
those who have the ability to employ the people’s 
strength are invariably those who gain the people’s 
hearts; 

those who have the ability to gain the people’s hearts 
are invariably those who gain mastery over the self. 
Thus, 

the heart is the root of the self; 
the self is the root of the state. 

There has never been a person who gained “the self' 
and lost the people; 

there has never been a person who lost “the self’ and 
gained the people. 

Thus, to establish the basis of order, you must exert 
yourself to secure the people. 

Tire root of securing the people lies in sufficiency of 
use; 

the root of sufficiency of use lies in not taking them 
from their seasonal [work]; 

the root of not taking them from their seasonal [work] 
lies in reducing endeavors; 

the root of reducing endeavors lies in regulating 
desires; 

the root of regulating desires lies in reverting back to 
nature. 

It has never been possible 

to agitate the root yet calm the branches; 

to pollute the source yet purify the flow. 

Thus, 

those who know the essential qualities of nature do 
not endeavor to make nature do what it cannot do. 
Those who know the essential qualities of fate are not 
anxious about what fate cannot control. 

Thus, 

those who do not [erect] lofty palaces and terraces do 
not do so because they cherish trees; 
those who do not [cast] massive bells and tripods do 
not do so because they cherish metal. 

Urey straightforwardly put into practice the essential 
qualities of nature and fate so that their regulations and 
measures can be taken to constitute a standard for the 
myriad people. 

Now when 

the eyes delight in the five colors, 
the mouth relishes enticing flavors, 
the ears are enraptured by the five sounds, 
the seven orifices struggle with one another and harm 

[your] nature, daily attracting wicked desires and disturbing 
its heavenly harmony. If you cannot govern “the self,” how 
can you govern the world? Thus if in nurturing the self you 
achieve regulation, then in nurturing the people you will 
win their hearts. 

The expression “taking possession of the world” does 
not refer to holding power and position, accepting 
hereditary rank, or being referred to by a respectful title. It 
means 

linking up with the strength of the world 
and winning the hearts of the world. 

The territory of [the tyrant] Djou to the left reached the 
Eastern Sea and to the right reached to the Sea of Sands. 
Before him lay Jiaozhi and behind him lay Tbudu.—I lis 
armies climbed Rong Pass and reached the Pu River. Their 
warriors numbered in the tens and hundreds of thousands, 
but they all shot their arrows backward and fought with 
their halberds turned [toward the tyrant]. King Wu of Zhou 
with his left hand held a yellow battle-ax and with his right 
grasped a white banner to direct Iris armies, and the enemy 
were shattered like broken tiles and fled, collapsing like a 
pile of earth. 

[The tyrant] Djou had the title of “the one who faces 
south” [i.e., the ruler] but lacked the praise of even a single 
man. This is how he lost the world. Thus Jie and Djou 
cannot be considered [to have been true] kings, and [Kings] 

Tang and Wu cannot be considered to have banished them. 

The Zhou people dwelled in the lands of Feng and Hao. 
Their territory did not exceed a hundred li, yet they swore 
an oath against [the tyrant] Djou at Mulberry Field and 
attacked and occupied the Yin state. They 

held a memorial service at the ancestral temple of 
Tang the Victorious, 

conferred a plaque at the gates of the village where 

Shang Rong lived, 

built up the tomb of Bi Gan, 

and released the imprisoned Jizi. 

Only then did they 

snap the drumsticks and destroy the drums of war, 

retire the five kinds of weapons, 

release the oxen and the horses, 

gather up the jade insignia tablets, 

and accept the fealty of the world. 

The people [lit. the ‘hundred surnames”] sang ballads to 
celebrate them while the Lords of the Land, grasping gifts 
of exotic birds, came calling at their court, for the hearts of 
the people had been won. 

1. “Rural libations” refers to a kind of village festival during which participants 
drank in order of seniority. 

2. This description reflects the orientation of Chinese maps, with south at the top 
of the page. The places named correspond approximately to the Yellow Sea, the 
Gobi Desert, Vietnam, and the Inner Asian frontier grasslands. 

Twenty-One 

AN OVERVIEW OF THE 

ESSENTIALS 

“Yao lue,” or “An Overview of the Essentials,” stands 
somewhat apart from the twenty chapters of the Huainanzi 
that precede it. Although ‘Yao lue” appears at the end of the 
work (following the established convention of Chinese 
works of the late Warring States and early Han periods), it 
serves as, and apparently was written as, an introduction to 
the entire work. It explains why the book was written, 
orients readers to its contents, and makes claims for its 
value and universal validity. We believe that the chapter was 
originally written by Liu An himself for oral recitation at 
the imperial court as an introduction to and description of 
the Huainanzi when the entire text was formally presented 
to Emperor Wu in 139 B.C.E., shortly after he ascended the 
throne. Having been recited at court, the “overview” would 
then have been appended in written form to the twenty 
substantive chapters of the Huainanzi, serving as a 
postscript to review and summarize its contents. 

Hie chapter consists of four complementary sections. 
Hie first introduces the work as a whole and provides a list 
of the twenty chapter titles that, strikingly, form a rhymed 
set. Hie second gives a thoughtful and illuminating 
summary of each chapter in turn. (We have quoted these 
summaries in our introductions to each of the chapters.) 
Hie next section links the twenty chapters together in a 
grand design, showing that each chapter builds on those that 
precede it. Hie final section argues for the cogency and 
significance of the work as a whole by placing it in a 
comparative and historical framework. 

Hie form of this chapter is distinctive and of great 
interest. It is a fu (poetic expression), a type of verse very 
popular in Han China, and of which Liu An was an 
acknowledged master. (Another example of the genre in the 
Huainanzi is section 8.9.) As we see in this chapter, works 
in the fu genre tend to be quite long, and to make intricate 
use of rhyme, shifting meter, and ornate, baroque 
vocabulary. Apparently, fu were usually composed in 
writing (again as seems to be the case here) for oral 
recitation. Both the written text and the oral recitation were 
expected to be virtuoso performances, in which the literary 
quality of the work increased both its prestige and its 
persuasiveness. It is inspiring to think of Liu An (or a 
professional performer reciting on his behalf) intoning this 
dazzling poetic composition as a way of launching the 

Huainanzi on its long career as a major work of Chinese 
philosophy. 

Twenty-One 

21.1 (in part) 

We have created and composed these writings and 
discourses as a means to 

knot the net of the Way and its Potency 

and weave the web of humankind and its affairs, 

above investigating them in Heaven, 

below examining them on Earth, 

and in the middle comprehending them through 

patterns. 

Although they are not yet able to draw out fully the core of 
the Profound Mystery, they are abundantly sufficient to 
observe its ends and beginnings. If we [only] summarized 
the essentials or provided an overview and our words did 
not discriminate the Pure, Uncarved Block and 
differentiate the Great Ancestor, then it would cause 
people in their confusion to fail to understand them. 

Thus, 

numerous are the words we have composed 
and extensive are the illustrations we have provided, 
yet we still fear that people will depart from the root and 
follow the branches. 

Thus. 

if we speak of the Way but do not speak of affairs, 
there would be no means to shift with the times. 
[Conversely], 

if we speak of affairs but do not speak of the Way, 
there would be no means to move with [the processes 
of] transformation. 

Therefore we composed [the book’s] twenty 
essays.... 

21.3 

In all, these interconnected writings are the means to focus 
on the Way and remove obstructions, enabling succeeding 
generations to know what is appropriate to uphold or 
abandon and what is suitable to endorse or reject. 

Externally, when they interact with things, they will 
not be bewildered; 

internally, they will possess the means to lodge their 
spirit and nourish their qi. 

Urey will take ease in and merge with utmost harmony, 
delighting themselves in what they have received from 
Heaven and Earth. 

Therefore, 

Had we discussed the Way [“Originating in the Way”] 
and not illuminated ends and beginnings [“Activating 
the Genuine”], 

you would not know the models to follow 

Had we discussed ends and beginnings and not 

illuminated Heaven, 

Earth, and the four seasons [“Celestial Patterns,” 
‘Terrestrial 

Forms,” and “Seasonal Rules,” respectively], 
you would not know the taboos to avoid. 

Had we discussed Heaven, Earth, and the four seasons 
and not introduced examples and elucidated 
categories, 

you would not recognize the subtleties of the 
quintessential qi [“Surveying Obscurities”]. 

Had we discussed the Utmost Essence and not traced 
to its source the spiritlike qi of human beings, 
you would not know the mechanism by which to 
nourish your vitality [“Quintessential Spirit”]. 

Had we traced to their source the genuine dispositions 
of human beings and not discussed the Potency of the 
great sages, 

you would not know the [human] shortcomings 
associated with the Five Phases [“Tire Basic Warp”]. 
Had we discussed the Way of the [Five] Thearchs and 
not discussed the affairs of the ruler, 
you would not know the proper order distinguishing 
the small from the great [“Tire Ruler’s Techniques”]. 
Had we discussed the affairs of the ruler and not 

provided precepts and illustrations, 

you would not know the times for taking action or 

remaining still [“Profound Precepts”]. 

Had we discussed precepts and illustrations and not 
discussed alterations in customs, 
you would not know how to coordinate and equate 
their main tenets. [“Integrating Customs”]. 

Had we discussed alterations in customs and not 
discussed past events, 

you would not know the responses of the Way and its 
Potency [“Responses of the Way”]. 

To know the Way and its Potency but not know the 
perversions of the age, 

you would lack the means to accommodate yourself to 
the myriad aspects of the world [“Boundless 
Discourses”]. 

To know “Boundless Discourses” but not know 
“Sayings Explained,” 

you would lack the means to take your ease. 

To comprehend writings and compositions but not 
know the tenets of military affairs, 
you would lack the means to respond to [enemy] 
troops [“An Overview of the Military”]. 

To know grand overviews but not know analogies and 
illustrations, 

you would lack the means to clarify affairs by 

elaboration [“A Mountain of Persuasions” and “A 
Forest of Persuasions”]. 

To know the Public Way but not know interpersonal 
relations, 

you would lack the means to respond to ill and good 
fortune [“Among Others”]. 

To know interpersonal relations but not know 
“Cultivating Effort,” 

you would lack the means to inspire scholars to exert 
their utmost strength. 

Should you desire 

to forcibly abridge this composition 
by observing and summarizing only its essentials 
without traveling its winding paths and entering its subtle 
domains, this will not suffice to exhaust the meanings of 
the Way and its Potency. 

Therefore, we composed [these] writings in twenty 
chapters. Thereby 

the patterns of Heaven and Earth are thoroughly 
examined; 

the affairs of the human realm are comprehensively 
engaged; 

and the Way of [the Five] Thearchs and [Three] Kings 
is fully described. 

Their discussions are 

sometimes detailed and sometimes general, 

sometimes subtle and sometimes obvious. 

Hie tenets advanced in each chapter are different, 
and each has a reason for being expressed. 

Now, if we spoke exclusively of the Way, there would be 
nothing that is not contained in it. Nevertheless, only sages 
are capable of grasping its root and thereby knowing its 
branches. At this time, scholars lack the capabilities of 
sages, and if we do not provide them with detailed 
explanations, 

then to the end of their days they will flounder in the 
midst of darkness and obscurity 

without knowing the great awakening brought about by 
these writings’ luminous and brilliant techniques. 

Now, the “Qian” and “Kun” [trigrams] of the Changes 
suffice to comprehend the Way and disclose its meanings. 
With the eight trigrams you can understand the inauspicious 
and auspicious and know bad and good fortune. 
Nevertheless, Fu Xi made them into the sixty-four 
permutations [i.e., hexagrams], and the house of Zhou 
added six line-texts to each of the hexagrams, and these are 
the means to 

trace to the source and fathom the Way of Purity and 
Clarity 

and grasp and follow the Ancestor of the myriad 
things. 

Hie number of the five notes does not exceed gong, shang. 

jue, zhi, and yu. Nevertheless, you cannot play them all on 
the [unstopped] five strings of a qin. You must control and 
harmonize the fine and thick strings, and only then can you 
produce a melody 

Now, if you draw only the head of a dragon, those 
observing it will not be able to identify what animal it is. 
But if you add the body, there will be no confusion as to the 
animal’s identity. 

Now, 

if our references to the “Way” were numerous, 

[but] if our references to “things” were few; 
if our references to “techniques” were extensive, 

[but] if our references to “affairs” were superficial, 
and we extended this [throughout] our discussions, 
we would be left speechless. 

Anyone who intended to study this 
and who firmly wished to build on it, would [also] find 
himself with nothing to say. 

Now, 

discussions about the Way are surpassingly profound; 
therefore, we have written many compositions on it 
[i.e., the Way] to reveal its true qualities. 

Tire myriad things are surpassingly numerous; 
therefore we have broadly offered explanations of 
them to communicate their significance. 

Though these compositions may be 

winding and endless, 
complicated and slow going, 
intertwined and numerous, 
and distant and dawdling, 

in order to distill and purify their utmost meaning and 
ensure that they are neither opaque nor impenetrable, we 
have retained them and not discarded them. 

Now, although the debris and putrid carcasses floating in 
the Yangzi and Yellow rivers cannot be surpassed in number, 
nevertheless those who offer sacrifices draw water from 
them. [This is because] the rivers are so large. 

Although a cup of wine may be sweet, if a fly is 
immersed in it, even commoners will not drink it. [This is 
because] the cup is so small. 

If you sincerely comprehend the discussions in these 
twenty chapters, you will thereby 

observe their general patterns and grasp their 
essentials, 

penetrate the Nine Fields, 

pass through the Ten Gates, 

externalize Heaven and Earth, 

and extend beyond the mountains and rivers. 

Wandering and ambling through the span of a single 
age, 

governing and fashioning the forms of the Myriad 
Things, 

surely this is an excellent journey! This being the case, 

you will clasp the sun and the moon without being 
burned, 

and you will anoint the myriad things without drying 
up. 

How ample! How lucid! 

It is enough to read this [alone]! 

How far-reaching and vast! How boundless! 

Here you may wander! 

21.4 (in part) 

In this book of the Liu clan [i.e., the Huainanzi ], [we 
have] 

observed the phenomena of Heaven and Earth, 
penetrated past and present discussions, 
weighed affairs and established regulations, 
measured forms and applied what is suitable, 
traced to its source the heart of the Way and its 
Potency, 

and united the customs of the Three Kings, 
collecting them and alloying them. 

At the core of the Profound Mystery, 

the infinitesimal movements of the essence have been 

revealed. 

By casting aside limits and boundaries 

and by drawing on the pure and the tranquil, 

[We have] thereby 
unified the world, 
brought order to the myriad things, 
responded to alterations and transformations, 
and comprehended their distinctions and categories. 
We have not 

followed a path made by a solitary footprint 
or adhered to instructions from a single perspective 
or allowed ourselves to be entrapped or fettered by 
things so that we would not advance or shift according 
to the age. 

Thus, 

situate [this book] in the narrowest of circumstances 
and nothing will obstruct it; 

extend it to the whole world and it will leave no empty 
spaces. 

GLOSSARY OF PERSONAL 

NAMES 

This glossary contains the names of all personages found in the excerpted text, 
whether mythical, legendary, or historical, with the exception of names such as 
Grand Purity, Inexhaustible, and Wheelwright Flat that are clearly fanciful. Names 
are alphabetized by Chinese name. For example, Duke Huan of Qi is found under 
Huan (Duke Huan of Qi), and Music Master Kuang is found under Kuang (Music 
Master Kuang). 

BAHJ XI was the prime minister of Qin in the time of Duke Mu (ca. 660-621 
B.C.E.). He was captured by Jin forces in Yi and escaped to Chu. Duke Mu told 
the ruler of Chu that Baili Xi had abandoned his office and offered five 
sheepskins for his return for prosecution. He thus secured the return of his 
valuable minister for a trifling amount. 

BEIGONGZI (also known as Beigong You) was a famous swordsman of Qi, 
regarded as a paragon of courage. 

BI GAN (eleventh century B.C.E.) was an upright uncle of Tyrant Djou, last king of 
the Shang dynasty. King Djou supposedly had his heart tom out to see if the 
heart of a famous worthy was any different from that of an ordinary person. 
BIAN HE attempted to present a piece of raw jade to successive kings of Chu. 
Twice he was accused of fraud and severely punished but ultimately was 
vindicated. 

BIAN QUE (fifth century B.C.E.) was a famous physician. 

BO (Duke of Bo, Duke Sheng of Bo [d. 479 B.C.E.]) was a grandson of King Ping 
of Chu (r. 528-516 B.C.E.). His father was executed by the ruler of Zheng, and 
the Duke of Bo urged the prime minister of Chu to attack Zheng. Instead, Chu 
formed an alliance with Zheng and sent an army to help Zheng repel an invasion 
by Jin. The Duke of Bo rebelled and killed the Chu prime minister but was 
himself trapped in a bathhouse and killed. 

BO YAwas a master musician who famously broke his instrument when Zhongzi 

Qi, the person who most appreciated his music, died. 

BO YU, supposedly a minister of the (mythical) Yellow Emperor, is identified as 
the inventor of clothing. 

BOCHENG ZIGAO, a (mythical) Lord of the Land in predynastic times, was 
appointed by Yao but resigned his rank on the appointment of Shun to be Son of 
Heaven, complaining that government had become too burdensome and complex. 

CHANG HONG (d. 492 B.C.E.) was an official of the state of Lu, famed for his 
skill in astronomy, calendrical computations, and divination. 

CHENG (King Cheng of Zhou [r. 1043-1021 B.C.E.]) was the third king of the 
Zhou dynasty. The Duke of Zhou served as his regent until he reached his 
majority. 

CHENG TANG. See Tang (King Tang or Tang the Victorious). 

CHONG’ ER See Wen (Duke Wen of Jin). 

CONFUCIUS (Kongzi [Master Kong] or KongQiu [551-479 B.C.E.]) is regarded 
as China’s first philosopher and is especially revered as a great teacher. 

DA BING and QIAN QUE were mythical charioteers of the astral god known as the 
Grand One (Taiyi). 

DAN, DUKE. See Zhou Gong (Duke of Zhou). 

DIVINE FARMER See Shen Nong. 

DJOU (Tyrant Djou [r. 7-1046 B.C.E.]), a semi-legendary last king of the Shang 
dynasty, was known for his extravagance and cruelty. 

FU YUEwas a (possibly legendary) minister during the Shang dynasty (ca. 1550— 
1046 B.C.E.). He is said to have ascended to Heaven by riding on certain 
constellations. 

FUCHAI (King Fuchai of Wu [r. 495-477 B.C.E.]) defeated King Goujian of Yie 
and took him prisoner. He was subsequently defeated, and his state was 
extinguished, by the resurgent King Goujian with the help of the beautiful 
concubines Mao Qiang and Xi Shi, who had been sent from Yie to seduce and 
distract him. 

FUXI (Tamer of Beasts) was a mythical culture-hero of predynastic times, credited 
with domesticating animals and creating the trigrams and hexagrams of the 
Changes. He is associated with his sister-spouse Niiwa, with early images of the 
pair often depicting them with entwined serpentine bodies. 

GAN JIANG was a legendary swordsmith of superlative skill and the husband of 
the equally renowned swordsmith M o Ye. 

GAO YANG TUI was a grandee of Song, about whom nothing else is known. 

GONG GONG was a mythical figure supposed to have lived during the 
predynastic era of sage-rulers. His name could be translated as “Master 
Artisan.” He fought a titanic battle with Zhuan Xu, during which one of the 
pillars of Heaven was so damaged that the land tilted upward in the northwest. 

GONGNIU AI was what might colloquially be termed a “weretiger.” According to 
one commentator, the ability to transform into a tiger was a hereditary trait of 
the Gongniu clan. 

GONGS HU (also known as Gongghu Ban or Lu Ban [ca. fifth century B.C.E.]) 
was a legendary artisan of supreme skill. He is said to have invented a “Cloud- 
Scaling Ladder” with which the king of Chu planned to attack the walled capital 
of the state of Song, until Mozi persuaded him that his own disciples, who were 
defending Song, could defeat this technology. 

GOU MANG was a mythical being or deity associated with the planet Jupiter. 

GOUJIAN (KingGoujian of Yie [r. 496-465 B.C.E.]) was defeated by KingFuchai 
of Wu and endured the humiliation of becoming his servant, but he later led a Yie 
army to defeat KingFuchai and extinguish his state. 

GRAND ONE (Taiy i) was an astral deity who embodied the unity of the Way. 

GRAY WOMAN was a mythical goddess or fairy associated with winter. 

GUAN ZHONG was one of the most celebrated statesmen of the Spring and 
Autumn period. He served as prime minister under Duke Huan of Qi (r. 685-643 
B.C.E.). The text known as the Guanzi bears his name but was written or 
compiled several centuries after his lifetime. 

GUN was the (mythical) father of Yi the Great. He tried but failed to control the 
Great Flood and was therefore punished by the sage-ruler Shun. 

HAN FEI (d. 233 B.C.E.) was a statecraft theorist during the late Warring States 
period. The text that bears his name, the Hanfeizi, was an important source for 
the Huainanzi. 

HOU JI (Lord Millet) was a mythical sage-king of the predynastic era and divine 
ancestor of the ruling clan of the Zhou dynasty. 

HOU TU (Sovereign of the Soil) was a mythical ruler during China’s predynastic 

period. 

HUAN (Duke Huan of Qi [r. 685-643 B.C.E.]) was one of the most powerful rulers 
of the Spring and Autumn period. He was the first to hold the post of hegemon 
and employed the famous statesman Guan Zhong as his prime minister. 

HUAN DOU, a mythical figure who supposedly was a minister under the sage-ruler 
Yao, was exiled for opposing the accession of Shun to the throne. 

HUANG DI, the Yellow Emperor, was a mythical sage-ruler of ancient China, 
associated with the central regions and the planet Saturn. He was credited with 
inventing the calendar, metallurgy, and other cultural phenomena. 

HUI (King Hui of Qin [r. 337-311 B.C.E.]) was an aggressive ruler who expanded 
the power of Qin during his tenure as monarch. After taking the throne, he 
executed the reformer Shang Yang but continued his progressive policies. 

HUI (King Hui of Wei, also known as King Hui of Liang [r. 369-319 B.C.E.]) was 
the first ruler of Wei to assume the title of king. He moved the capital of Wei to 
Da Liang and oversaw the building of several large-scale public works. At the 
end of his long reign, after suffering successive defeats by powerful neighbors, he 
initiated a campaign to attract scholars and drew figures like Mencius to his 
court. 

HUI SHI. See Huizi. 

HUIZI (Master Hui or Hui Shi [fourth century B.C.E.]) was a sophist who served 
as chief minister of King Hui of Liang (also known as King Hui of Wei). He is 
often depicted as having engaged in debates with Zhuangzi. 

JI ZI (or Jizi) was a (possibly legendary) loyal official of the Shang dynasty. He 
was condemned to death by the tyrannical King Djou but escaped execution by 
feigning madness. 

JIAN (Viscount Jian of Zhao, also known as Zhao Yang [d. 475 B.C.E.]), a 
ministerial vassal of Jin, was the successful leader of the Zhao clan in factional 
struggles against rival vassal clans. He was a proponent of government reform 
known for casting the penal laws of Jin onto bronze tripods for public display. 

JIE (Tyrant Jie [ca. 1550 B.C.E.]), the semi-legendary last king of the Xia dynasty, 
was known for his cruelty and profligacy. He was overthrown by Tang the 
Victorious, founding king of the Shang dynasty. 

JIE FAN was supposedly a strongman of the late Warring States period, about 

whom nothing else is known. 

JING (Emperor Jing of the Han Dynasty, personal name Liu Qi [r. 157-141 
B.C.E.]) was the fourth emperor of the Han dynasty. He was a grandson of the 
founding emperor, Liu Bang (Emperor Gao), and son of Emperor Wen. He and 
Liu An, the sponsor-editor of the Huainanzi, were cousins, and much of the 
book seems to have been written during Jing’s reign. 

JING (Duke Jing of Qi [r. 547-490 B.C.E.]) was placed on the throne by the rebel 
Cui Zhu. He was reputed to be a harsh and licentious ruler but to have improved 
somewhat under the edifying influence of Yan Ying. 

JINGGUO (Lord Jingguo, also known as Tian Ymg) was a scion of the Tian clan 
who became prime minister of Qi in 311 B.C.E. His son attained fame as Lord 
Mengchang. His fief of Xue is located in present-day Shandong Province. 

KANG (King Kang of Zhou [r. ca. 1021-996 B.C.E.]) was the fourth king of the 
Zhou dynasty. 

KUANG (Music Master Kuang), a semi-legendary figure said to have been Master 
of Music for the state of Jin during the Spring and Autumn period, was regarded 
as the greatest authority on music in ancient China. He is mentioned frequently 
in early texts. 

KONGZI or KONG QIU. See Confucius. 

LAO DAN (sixth century B.C.E.), a possibly legendary figure, has traditionally 
been identified with Laozi, the “Old Master,” the supposed author of the work 
known as the Laozi or the Daodejing. 

LI JI, Lady (seventh century B.C.E.) was a woman of a northern “barbarian” Rong 
tribe who became the favorite concubine of Duke Xian of Jin. His infatuation 
with her led to a train of disastrous events. 

LI KE (also known as Li Kui [ca. 455-395 B.C.E.]) was a statesman and 
government reformer who served as the prime minister of Wei under Marquis 
Wen. He is credited with inventing certain techniques of rule, such as using the 
sale and purchase of state grain reserves to stabilize prices. 

LI QI was a famous musician in the state of Zhao. 

LI ZHU was supposedly a minister to the mythical sage-king Huangdi, the Yellow 
Emperor. 

LIU AN (179-122 B.C.E.) was the patron, editor, and probable coauthor of the 

Huainanzi. He became king of Huainan in 164 B.C.E., succeeding his father after 
an interval of some years during which the kingdom was greatly reduced in size. 
He presided over a highly literary court that became a magnet for writers and 
intellectuals. Accused of plotting rebellion against the Han imperial throne, he 
committed suicide in 122 B.C.E. 

LIU BANG (r. 206-195 B.C.E.) was the founding emperor of the Han dynasty, 
posthumously known as Emperor Gao. 

LIU CHANG (1997-174 B.C.E.) was the father of Liu An, patron of the 
Huainanzi. A son of the Han founder, Liu Bang, he was enthroned as king of 
Huainan while still an infant but later was accused of rebellion and died on the 
road to exile. 

LIU CHE. See Wu (Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty). 

LIU QI. See Jing (Emperor Jing of the Han dynasty). 

LORD MILLET. See Hou Ji. 

LU BAN. See Gongghu Ban. 

LU BUWEI (d. 235 B.C.E.) was a prime minister of Qin during the late Warring 
States period. He assembled a group of scholars as his clients and, with their 
assistance, produced a large and highly syncretic text, the Liishi chunqiu, that 
served as both a model and an important source for the Huainanzi. 

LU WANG. See Wang (Grand Duke Wang). 

MAO QIANG and XI SHI were famous beauties from the state of Wie, credited 
with helping engineer the destruction of the state of Wu by so distracting King 
Fuchai (r. 495—477 B.C.E.) that he neglected his royal duties. Their names 
became emblematic of perfect feminine beauty. 

MENCIUS (Mengzi [Master Meng], personal name Meng Ke [ca. 390-305 
B.C.E.]) was a philosopher and teacher, the leading Confucian disciple of his era. 
The Huainanzi draws to some extent on the text that bears his name. 

MENG BEN was a semi-legendary fearless hero of the Warring States period, 
known for his acute vision. 

MIZI (also known as Mi Buqi and Zijian [b. 521 B.C.E.]) was a disciple of 
Confucius. 

MO DI. See Mozi. 

MO YE was the wife of the legendary swordsmith Gan Jiang and herself a 

superlative smith. The legendary sword “Moye” is named for her. 

MO H (Master Mo, personal name Mo Di [fl. fifth century B.C.E.]) was a rival of 
Confucius who advocated “universal love” and opposed offensive warfare. In 
the Huainanzi, Mozi and Confucius are often paired as exemplary philosophers. 

MU (Duke Mu of Qin [r. ca. 650-621 B.C.E.]) was a notably effective ruler during 
the Spring and Autumn period. 

MUSIC MAS TER KUANG. See Kuang (M usic M aster Kuang). 

NESfG QI, a native of Wei during the Spring and Autumn period, began life in 
poverty and ultimately rose to succeed Guan Zhong as the prime minister of Qi. 
He first attracted the attention of Duke Huan with his mournful singing. 

PING (Duke Ping of Jin) ruled from 557 to 532 B.C.E. 

QI was the son of Wi the Great, the mythical tamer of the Great Flood and 
legendary founder of the Xia dynasty. When he inherited the throne from his 
father, the principle of hereditary dynastic succession was established. 

QIAN QUE and DA BING were mythical charioteers of the astral god known as the 
Grand One (Taiyi). 

QIN SHIHUANGDI (First Emperor of Qin [259-210 B.C.E.]) became king of Qin 
in 246 B.C.E. In a series of campaigns, Qin then defeated and absorbed all the 
other states of the Warring States period by 221, uniting China as a single empire 
for the first time. When he died in 210, his dynasty quickly collapsed and was 
succeeded by the Han dynasty in 206 B.C.E. 

QINGXIANG (King Qingxiang of Chu) ruled from 299 to 263 B.C.E. 

QU JIAN was a grandee of Chu. 

QUEEN MOTHER OF THE WEST (Xiwangmu) was a goddess who ruled over a 
paradise on Mount Kunlun, somewhere to the northwest of China. She was 
believed to know the recipe for an elixir of immortality. 

RU SHOU was a mythical being or deity associated with the planet Venus. 

SHANG RONG was a (possibly legendary) Shang dynasty worthy who was put 
to death by Tyrant Djou for his honest admonitions against the king’s abuses. 

SHAO HAO was a mythical being or deity associated with the planet \fenus. 

SHE (Duke of She, also known as Shen Zhuliang [fifth century B.C.E.]) was a 
grandee and vassal of Chu who led the forces that put down the rebellion of the 
Duke of Bo. 

SHEN NONG (Divine Farmer) was a mythical culture-hero of predynastic times, 
credited with inventing agriculture. 

SHENG (Duke Sheng of Bo). See Bo (Duke of Bo). 

SHI QI (d. 479 B.C.E.) was a minister and diplomat in the service of Duke Sheng of 
Bo. He assisted the duke in his rebellion against the Chu throne. When the 
rebellion was put down, he was boiled alive as punishment. 

SHU HAI was supposedly an official in the service of the semi-mythical ruler Yi 
the Great, the mythical tamer of the Great Flood and legendary founder of the 
Xia dynasty. 

SHUN (also known as Youyu or Yu [written with a character different from that for 
the name of Yi the Great]) was a mythical sage-king of the predynastic era. He 
was given the throne by his predecessor, Yao, and similarly passed over his 
unworthy son and bequeathed the throne instead to Yu the Great, the mythical 
tamer of the Great Flood and legendary founder of the Xia dynasty. 

SHUXIANG was the nickname of Yangshe Xi, a grand officer of the state of Jin 
during the Spring and Autumn period who was known for his worthiness and 
ability. 

SICHENG ZIHAN. See Zihan. 

SIMAKUAEKUI was a knight of Zhao during the Warring States period, famed for 
his skill with a sword. 

SOVEREIGN OF THE SOIL See Hou Tu. 

SUNZI (Master Sun, personal name Sun Wu [fl. sixth century B.C.E.]) was a 
famous general who, according to legend, led the armies of Wu to a great victory 
over Chu in the sixth century B.C.E. A later text that bears his name, the Sunzi 
bingfa {Master Sun’s Arts of War), is an important source for the military 
teachings of the Huainanzi. 

SUPREME THEARCH (Shang di) was the chief deity and celestial ruler of ancient 
Chinese religion, dating back to at least the Shang dynasty (ca. 1550-1046 
B.C.E.). 

TAIHAO was a mythical being or deity associated with the planet Jupiter. 

TAI ZHANG was supposedly an official in the service of the semi-mythical ruler Yi 
the Great, the mythical tamer of the Great Flood and legendary founder of the 
Xia dynasty. 

TAIYL See Grand One. 

TANG (King Tang or Cheng Tang [Tang the Victorious] [ca. 1550 B.C.E.]) was the 
semi-legendary founder of the Shang dynasty. 

TANG (Master Tang, also known as Music Master Tang) is said to have instructed 
Confucius in the art of playing the qin. 

TANG GULIANG was a minister of Qin in the time of King Hui (r. 337-311 
B.C.E.). 

TRANQUIL WOMAN was a deity associated with maintaining the harmonious 
progression of the seasons. 

VERMILION THEARCH (Chi di) was a mythical ruler of high antiquity, 
sometimes equated with Yan di, the Flame Emperor. 

WANG (Grand Duke Wang, also known as Lii Wang [eleventh century B.C.E.]) was 
a commoner who sold meat by the roadside before he came to the attention of 
King Wu of the Zhou. After being promoted, he became the Zhou military 
commander at the battle of Muye, when the Zhou dynasty achieved its final 
victory over the Shang. His descendants, the Ji clan, later ruled the state of Qi 
until they were overthrown by the Tian clan in 379 B.C.E. 

WANG LIANG was a grandee of the state of Jin during the Spring and Autumn 
Period, known for his skill as a charioteer. 

WEI (King Wei of Chu) reigned from 339 to 329 B.C.E. 

WEN (Duke Wen of Jin, also known as Chong’er [r. 636-628 B.C.E.]) was a storied 
ruler who, despite having a crippling physical deformity and being forced to live 
in exile in early life, rose to become one of the most powerful leaders of the state 
of Jin and the second Zhou vassal lord to assume the title of hegemon. He figures 
in many early texts. 

WEN (King Wen of Chu [r. 689-677 B.C.E.]) is credited with having established the 
state of Chu as a major power during the Spring and Autumn period. 

WEN (King Wen of Zhou [r. ca. 1099-1049 B.C.E.]) was the founder of the Zhou 
dynasty. 

WEN WUWEI (also known as Shen Zhou), a Chu vassal in the time of King 
Zhuang, was sent on a diplomatic mission to Qi without asking the ruler of Song 
for free passage through his territory and consequently was killed en route. 

WU (Emperor Wu of the Han dynasty, personal name Liu Che [r. 141-87 B.C.E.]) 

was the son of Emperor Jing. He became emperor at the age of about fifteen and 
had a long and brilliant reign. He was a first cousin once removed from Liu An, 
king of Huainan, who presented the Huainanzi to him at a court audience in 139 
B.C.E. 

WU (King Wu of Zhou [r. ca. 1049-1043 B.C.E.]) completed the conquest of the 
Shang dynasty begun by his father, King Wen of Zhou, by defeating the Shang 
army in the battle of Muye in 1046 B.C.E. 

WU (Marquis Wu of Wei [r. 396-371 B.C.E.]), the second ruler of the independent 
state of Wei, expanded his state’s territories through a series of aggressive 
campaigns. 

WU HUO was a legendary strongman who served King Wu of Qin (r. 310-307 
B.C.E.). 

WU QI (d. 381 B.C.E.) was a famous statesman and soldier of the Warring States 
period. He led armies for Lu and Wei and eventually was employed as prime 
minister by King Dao of Chu. He led Chu effectively until the king’s death, 
when the aristocratic clans of Chu murdered him out of resentment. The Wuzi, a 
text on military strategy, is attributed to him. 

WULING (King Wuling of Zhao [r. 325-295 B.C.E.]) was a dynamic ruler who 
initiated political and military reforms. He expanded Zhao’s territory but fell 
victim to factional fighting among his sons and was starved to death in his own 
palace. 

WUMAQI (also known as Wuma Shi [fl. ca. 500 B.C.E.]) was a native of Lu and a 
disciple of Confucius. 

XI FUJI was a minister of Cao during the Spring and Autumn period. He sent a 
plate of food containing the precious Chuiji jade disk to the ducal scion Chong’er 
during the latter’s wanderings in exile. Chong’er later went on to become Duke 
Wen of Jin and hegemon. 

XI SHI and MAO QIANG were famous beauties from the state of \lie, credited 
with helping engineer the destruction of the state of Wu by so distracting King 
Fuchai (r. 495-477 B.C.E.) that he neglected his royal duties. Their names 
became emblematic of perfect feminine beauty. 

XIZHONG was a Cartwright of legendary skill. 

XIAN (Duke Xian of Jin [r. 676-651 B.C.E.]) gave the Prince of Wi a rare jade disk 

called the Chuiji Jade in exchange for granting a Jin army the right of passage 
through Yu territory. The Jin army then treacherously conquered Yu. Later, Duke 
Xian had his own heir killed in order to replace him with the son he had fathered 
with the “barbarian” Lady Li Ji, and the struggle for title to the throne lasted for 
four generations. 

XIANG (Viscount Xiang of Zhao [d. 425 B.C.E.]) was the leader of the Zhao clan 
who orchestrated the alliance that brought down Earl Zhi and led ultimately to 
the partition of the state of Jin into the three independent kingdoms of Hann, 
Wei, and Zhao. 

XIANG TUO was a precocious youngster who at the age of seven supposedly 
instructed Confucius. 

XIAO JI (Ji the Filial [ca. 1200 B.C.E.]), the son of King Wuding of the Shang 
dynasty, was renowned for his filial piety. He fell victim to his stepmother’s 
slander and died in exile. 

XTEZI (also known as Qi Shezi [fourth century B.C.E.]) was a “persuader.” 

XING CAN was a mythical rebel in the predynastic era of sage-rulers. When his 
head was cut off, he continued to fight, using his nipples as eyes and his navel as 
a mouth, singing and dancing while brandishing a shield and an ax. 

XU YOU was a legendary hermit in the time of the mythical sage-rulers of 
prehistory. 

XUAN MING was a mythical being or deity associated with the north and with the 
planet Mercury. 

XUE (Duke of Xue, also known as Tian Ymg and Lord Jingguo) was a scion of the 
Qi royal house during the Warring States period and the father of Lord 
Mengchang. He served as prime minister under KingXuan (r. 319-301 B.C.E.). 

XUNZI (Master Xun, personal name Xun Kuang [ca. 310-271 B.C.E.]) was his 
generation’s leading disciple of Confucius. The text that bears his name was an 
important source for the Huainanzi. 

YAN DI, the Flame Emperor, was a mythical figure associated with the south and 
the planet Mars and supposed to have been a ruler duringthe predynastic period 
of ancient China. He fought, and was defeated by, Huang Di, the Yellow 
Emperor. 

YAN HUI (fl. ca. 500 B.C.E.) was Confucius’s favorite disciple. His early death 

greatly saddened the Master. 

YAN Y1NG (also known as Yanzi [d. 500 B.C.E.]) was a celebrated minister who 
served three successive dukes of Qi with great loyalty and dedication. 

YANGSHE XI. See Shuxiang. 

YAO (also known as Tang [written with a character different from that for the name 
of Tang the Victorious]) was a mythical sage-king in the predynastic era. Rather 
than pass down the throne to his unworthy son, he abdicated in favor of the 
supremely virtuous Shun. 

YELLOW EMPEROR See Huang Di. 

YI YIN, a legendary minister of King Tang, the founder of the Shang dynasty, was 
famous for his cooking. 

YIN YI (also known as Shi Yi [Scribe Yi]), the grand historian of the Zhou court in 
the time of King Cheng (r. 1043-1021 B.C.E.), was an astronomer and a diviner 
of renowned skill. 

YOUYU. See Shun. 

YU (Yu the Great) was the mythical tamer of the Great Flood and legendary founder 
of the Xia dynasty. 

YU FU was a mythical physician, supposed to have lived at the time of the Yellow 
Emperor. 

ZAOFU appears frequently in the Huainanzi as the paragon of chariot drivers. He 
was said to have been the charioteer of King Mu of Zhou (tenth century B.C.E.) 
on his legendary journey to the West. 

ZENG CAN. SeeZengzi. 

ZENGZI (Zeng Can [505-435 B.C.E.]) was a prominent disciple of Confucius, 
mentioned in many early texts. 

ZHAI JIAN (fourth century B.C.E.) was a hereditary minister at the court of Wei 
during the Warring States period. 

ZHANG YI (d. ca. 310 B.C.E.) was a statesman, strategist, and diplomat of the 
Warring States period. A native of Wei, he traveled as a “roaming persuader” 
seeking employment at various courts until King Hui made him the prime 
minister of Qin. Zhang’s policies greatly expanded the power of Qin. Contrary 
to the claim made in Huainanzi 9.29, his life did not end in execution. 

ZHAO XUANMENG (also known as Zhao Dun and Viscount Xuan of Zhao [fl. 

late seventh century B.C.E.]) was a minister of Jin. He consolidated control over 
the Jin court and presided over a period of peace and stability. In 607 B.C.E., he 
fell out of favor with Duke Ling (r. 620-607) and was forced into exile. The duke 
had planned an ambush to kill Zhao, but he was saved by a knight named Ling 
Zhe, to whom Zhao had earlier provided food when he was starving. 

ZHI (Earl Zhi, also known as Earl Yao of Zhi [d. 453 B.C.E.]) was a colorful figure 
who was a master of strategy and deceit. For example, he once gave an enormous 
bronze bell to the ruler of the northern Qiu You people. In order to transport the 
bell to their homeland, the Qiu You had to build a road, which Earl Zhi then used 
to invade and annex their territory. Earl Zhi is also portrayed as an example of 
overreaching ambition. As leader of the Zhi clan, he seemed poised to bring all 
the vassal clans of Jin under his sway, until his arrogant belligerence drove the 
Hann, Wei, and Zhao clans to unite to destroy him. 

ZHI (Robber Zhi) was a legendary bandit of the Warring States period known for 
his daring, cunning, and ferocity. His name is preserved in the title of chapter 29 
of the Zhuangzi and is invoked in many early texts as an exemplar of rapine. 

ZHONGZI QI was a close friend of the master musician Bo Ya. When he died, Bo 
Ya broke his qin (stringed instrument) because no one else could sufficiently 
appreciate his playing. 

ZHOU GONG (Duke of Zhou, also known as Duke Dan of Zhou [eleventh century 
B.C.E.]) was a younger brother of King Wu of Zhou. He served as the regent for 
King Cheng until the latter became old enough to assume the throne. The Duke 
of Zhou was regarded by Confucius as a paragon of royal virtue. 

ZHU MING (also known as Zhu Rong) was a mythical being associated with the 
south and with the planet Mars. 

ZHU RONG. See Zhu M ing. 

ZHUAN XU was a mythical sage-ruler who supposedly lived during the 
predynastic era. In some traditions, he is associated with the north and with the 
planet Mercury, but in other traditions he is associated with the south. He 
fought a titanic battle with Gong Gong, during which one of the pillars of 
Heaven was so damaged that the land tilted upward in the northwest. 

ZHUANG (King Zhuang of Chu [r. 613-591 B.C.E.]) initially had little interest in 
government, but through the remonstrance of loyal ministers, he became a 

competent and forceful leader and rose to be hegemon of the Zhou realm. 

ZHUANG QIAO was a man of Chu who led a revolt during the reign of King Huai 
(r. 328-299 B.C.E.). 

ZHUANGZI (Master Zhuang, personal name Zhuang Zhou [fourth century 
B.C.E.]) was a celebrated Daoist philosopher. The book that bears his name, the 
Zhuangzi, has been shown to be a work of multiple authorship, although some 
portions might be from the hand of Zhuang Zhou. 

ZIFA (late fourth century B.C.E.) served as both a general and a civil official in the 
state of Chu. 

ZfflAN (Sicheng Zihan [sixth century B.C.E.]) was a minister of the state of Song. 
Although he was renowned for his incorruptibility, his historical reputation is 
mixed: ultimately, he murdered the lord of Song and usurped his throne. 

ZULAO and ZIQI (fifth century B.C.E.) were paternal uncles of Duke Shengof Bo. 

ZLLU (also known as Ji Lu and Zhong You [fifth century B.C.E.]) was a disciple of 
Confucius. Militarily inclined, he served as a steward to the powerful Ji clan of 
Lu. 

ZIQI and ZULAO (fifth century B.C.E.) were paternal uncles of Duke Shengof Bo. 

ZLSI(fifth century B.C.E.) was a grandson of Confucius and an important thinker 
in his own right. The text that bears his name, now preserved only as fragments, 
was a source for the Huainanzi. 

ZQU YAN (ca. 300 B.C.E.) was a philosopher credited with systematizing the basic 
properties of yin and yang and the Five Phases of qi, and with envisioning the 
world as a set of nine continents. 

BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Chinese Texts 

Lau, D. C. Huainanzi zhuzi suoyin (A Concordance to the 

Huainanzi). Chinese University of Hong Kong, Institute of Chinese Studies 
Ancient Chinese Text Concordance Series. Hong Kong: Commercial Press, 1992. 
Zhang Shuangdi Huainanzi jiaoshi f t#??). 2 vols. Beijing: Beijing 

University Press, 1997. 

Western-Language Translations 
and Studies 

Ames, Roger T. The Art of Ruler ship: A Study of Ancient Chinese Political Thought. 
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1983. Reprint, Albany: State University 
of New York Press, 1994. [A translation of chapter 9] 

Ames, Roger T., and D. C. Lau. Yuan Dao: Tracing Dao to Its Source. Classics of 
Ancient China. New York: Ballantine Books, 1998. [A translation of chapter 1] 
Kraft, Eva. “Zum Huai-nan-Tzu. Enfurung, Ubersetzung (Kapitel I und II) und 
Interpretation.” Monumenta Serica, no. 16 (1957): 191-286; no. 17 (1958): 128— 
207. 

Larre, Claude, Isabelle Robinet, and Elisabeth Rochat de la Wlee. Les grands traites 
du Huainanzi. \hrietes sinologiques, vol. 75. Paris: Institut Ricci, 1993. 
[Translations of chapters 1,7, 11, 13, and 18] 

Le Blanc, Charles. Huai-nan Tzu: Philosophical Synthesis in Early Han Thought: 
The Idea of Resonance (Kan-ying) with a Translation and Analysis of Chapter 
Six. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press, 1985. 

Le Blanc, Charles, and Remi Mathieu. Mythe et philosophie a Taube de la Chine 
imperiale: Etudes sur le Huainanzi. Montreal: Presses de l’Universite de 

Montreal, 1992; Paris: De Boccard, 1992. 

Le Blanc, Charles, and Remi Mathieu, eds. Philosophes taoistes. \bl. 2, Huainan zi: 
Texte traduit, presente et annote. Bibliotheque de la Pleiade. Paris: Editions 
Gallimard, 2003. Complete translation. 

Major, John S. Heaven and Earth in Early Han Thought: Chapters Three, Four and 
Five of the Huainanzi. SUNY Series in Chinese Philosophy and Culture. Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1993. 

Roth, Harold D. The Textual History of the Huai-nan Tzu. Monographs of the 
Association for Asian Studies, vol. 46. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Association for Asian 
Studies, 1992. 

Ryden, Edmund. Philosophy of Peace in Han China: A Study of the Huainanzi Ch. 

15 on Military Strategy. Taibei: Ricci Institute, 1998. 

\hnkeerberghen, Griet. The Huainanzi and Liu An’s Claim to Moral Authority. 
SUNY Series in Chinese Philosophy and Culture. Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 2001. 

Wallacker, Benjamin. The Huai-nan-tzu, Book Eleven: Behavior, Culture and the 
Cosmos. American Oriental Series, vol. 48. New Haven, Conn.: American 
Oriental Society, 1962. 

INDEX 

Page numbers refer to the print edition but are hyperlinked to the appropriate 
location in the e-book. 

Admonitions ofYao, 192 
affairs, human ( shi ), 18. 31. 111. 123 
in chcio. 14 . 153. 154. 156 
in chav. 18 . 189-96 
in chav. 20 , 216. 219 
in chav. 21 . 227. 229. 230. 232 
See also military affairs 
alteration ( bian ), 163. 173 
in chav. 18 . 192-93 
in chav. 21 . 227-28. 232 
See also change; transformation 
Analects ( Lunyu ), 112. See also Confucius 
anecdotes, 135-36 
animals 

in chav. 4 , 54. 55 
in chav. 5 , 57. 59. 60. 61. 65 
in chav. 8 . 90 
in chav. 9 . 102-3 
in cto. 77 . 126. 127 
in chav. 13 . 147. 148 
in cAqp. 14 , 155 
in cto. 75 . 167. 170. 173 
in chav. 16 . 181. 182 
in chav. 17 . 185-86 
in chav. 18A95A96 
in chav. 20 . 217 

See also dragons; horses; qilin; tigers 
archery, 60-61. 180. 186.218 

astrology/astronomy, 5. 39-40. 57, 70. 71. See also cosmology; Dipper; Jupiter 
cycle 

Baili Xi, 203 

“barbarians,” 99. 123. 127. 130. 139. 150. 168. 201 
Beigongzi (Beigong You), 102 
bells, 25.91. 104. 171.207.217. 223 
Yellow, 46. 185 
benmo. See root and branch 
Bi Gan, 103. 107. 224 
Bian He, 205 

jade disk of, 162 
Bian Que, 192 
Bo, Duke of, 139 
Bo Ya, 205. 206 
Bo Yi, 148 
BochengZigpo, 149 
Book of Documents. See Documents 

calenders, 5^39 
Chang Hong, 108 

change (yi), 145-46. 148. 150. See also alteration; transformation 
Changes (Classic of Changes', tying; Zhouyi), 5, 9. 114, 116. 127. 219. 230 
Chaoxian, state of (Korea), 61 

charioteering, 6. 46, 71-72. 109, 126, 149, 152, 172. See also horses 

cheng. See sincerity 

Cheng, King of Zhou, 108. 143 

Chong’er, Prince. See Wen, Duke of Jin 

Chuci {Elegies of Chu), 10. 40, 50 

Chunqiu. See Spring and Autumn Annals 

Confucianism, 7 

classics of, 9. 112. 124 

Confucians {ru), 14. 74. 102. 111. 112. 131. 133 
Confucius (KongQiu), 8. 28. 34 

in chap. 9 . 101. 102. 108. 109 
in chap. 77 . 128-29 
in chap. 12 , 140. 144 
in chap. 19 . 203. 205. 207 
cosmology, 74 

correlative, 58. 70. 73 
culture {wen), U_8 

customs {su), 106. 123-33. 149. 150. 203. 220. 229 

Da Bing (sage-king), 71-72 

Dan, Duke of Zhou, 127 

Daodejing. See Laozi 

Daoism, 14. 78n.l , 136. See also Laozi 

de. See Moral Potency; Potency 

Dee tribes, 127. 139 

Dii tribes, .127 

Dipper (Big Dipper, Northern Dipper), 47. 59n.l . 128 
Divine Farmer (Shennong), 143. 149. 200. 204 

Djou, King of Shang (tyrant; Djou Xin), 103. 108. 120. 127n.2 . 143. 223-24 
Doctrine of the Mean. See Zhongyong 

Documents {Classic of Documents', Shang shu\ Shujing), 9. 206, 219 

dragons, 43. 44. 47. 53. 55 

drums, 25. 44. 99. 104. 170. 171. 174. 217. 224 

Earth (earthly; di ), 5 

in chap. 7 . 16. 22 

in chap. 2 . 30. 31. 35 

in chap. 3 . 41, 42, 44, 45. 46. 47 

in chap. 4 . 51. 54-55 

in chap. 5 . 57. 63. 65 

in chap. 6 . 68 

in chap. 7 . 74. 75. 76. 78. 80 

in chap. 8 , 85, 86, 87 
in chap. 9 , 105 
in cto. 12 . 137. 138 
in chap. 14 , 155 

in cto. 75 . 169. 170. 172. 173. 174 
in chap. 17 , 184 
in cto. 20 . 212. 216. 219. 221 
in cto. 21 . 227. 228. 229. 231 
in Heaven-Earth-Man triad, 5, 74 
See also Five Phases; Heaven 
education, 4, 6, 9, 149, 198, 199 
emptiness ( xu ), 24. 34, 73, 130, 152, 165 
in chap. 14 . 154, 156, 158 
See also Nothingness 

fate/destiny ( ming ), 80, 164, 223 
filial piety ( xiao ), 108, 117, 201, 217 
Five Human Relationships, 125 
Five Orbs ( wu zang ), 24, 36, 76, 77, 78 
Five Phases ( wuxing ), 7. 58, 219, 228 
in chap. 4 , 50, 54-55 
in chap. 8 , 89-92 

Five Thearchs, 83, 168,211,228, 229 
form/formlessness (xing/ wu xing ), 67, 80, 138, 179 
in chap. 1 , 16, 23 
in chap. 14 , 154, 156 
in cflgp. 75 . 169, 173 
fu (poetic exposition), 226 
Fu Mie, 21 

Fuchai, King of Wu, 141. 196 
Fuxi, 149, 230 

Gan Jiang (swordsmith), 99n.2 
ganying. See resonance 

Gao, Emperor of Han. See Gaozu, Emperor 

Gao Xin. See Zhuan Xu 

GaoyangTui, 194 

Gaozu, Emperor (Liu Bang), 2-3 

Genuine Person ( zhenren ), 8, 28, 31, 35, 74, 154, 155 

geography, 5, 49-55, 61-63 

gnomons ( biao ), 98. 191 

Gong Gong, 42. 168.201 

Gongniu Ai, 30 

Gongshu (Gonggun Ban, Lu Ban), 140, 204 
Gongzi Xiao Bo. See Huan, Duke of Qi 
Goodness, 102. 107. 108. 218. 219. 220-21 
in chap. 10 . 112. 117. 119. 120 
Gou M ang, 44, 61 
Goujian, King of Wie, 196 
government (zhi), 6, 112, 139, 158, 170 
5. 58. 65-66 

chap. 

6. 68. 70 

chap. 

8. 83. 84. 86. 

, 88,; 

chap. 

11. 124. 

126, 

130 

chap. 

13. 149- 

-50 

chap. 

16. 179. 

181 

chap. 

19. 198- 

-99,: 

204 

chap. 

20. 211- 

-24 

89. 92-93 

centralization of, 2-3 
by sage-rulers, 4, 20 
techniques of, 8-9. 95-109 
See also officials/ministers; rulership; sage-rulers 
Grand One (Taiyi), 87^88^98^154^ 155^ 160^ \&LSee also Way 
Grand Purity (tai qing), 79. 136. 137-38. 198 
Great Clod, 29 

Guan Zhong(Guanzi, Guan Yiwu, Zhongfu), 101, 203 
Guanzi {Book of Master Guan), 9, 68, 74, 96 

Gun. 201 

Han dynasty, 1. 2-3. 9. 49. 213. See also Gaozu, Emperor; Wu, Emperor 
Hanfeizi, 9. 96. 146. 178. 190 
harmony (he), 44.71. 81. 86. 105. 123. 156. 171 
in chap. L 14. 15 
in chap. 2 . 28. 31. 32. 36 
in chap. 20 . 212.213. 223 
in chap. 21 , 228 
He. See Bian He 
Heaven ( tian ) 

in chap. L 16. 19. 20. 22 

in chap. 2 . 30.31.32. 33. 35 

in chap. 3 . 39.41.42.43.44. 45.46. 47 

in chap. 4 , 51. 52 

in 5 . 57. 63. 64. 65 

in chap. 6 . 68. 69. 70 

in cto. 7 . 73. 74. 75. 76. 78. 80 

in chap. 9 . 96. 98. 105 

in chap. 11 , 125 

in cto. 72 . 137. 138. 141 

in chap. 14 . 155. 157. 160. 164 

in chap. 15 . 167. 169. 170. 172. 173. 174 

in chap. 17 , 184 

in chap. 20 . 211.212.213.214.215.216.219. 221 
in chap. 21 . 227. 228. 229. 231 
in Heaven-Earth-M an triad, 5^74 
Heavenly Heart (tianxin), 211. 215 
hegemons (ba), 2. 87. 89. 127. 168. 207. 222 
horses, 8. 19. 55.71-72.206 
Hou Ji. See Millet, Lord 
Hou Tu, 44 
Hu tribes, 99. 127 

Huainanzi (Master ofHuainan) 

authorship of, 3-4 

sources of, 4-5. 9-10. 14. 40. 50. 112. 124 
structure of, 5-6 
Hualiu (horse), 206 

Huan, Duke of Qi (Gongzi Xiao Bo), 101. 103. 129. 141.203 

Huan Dou, 201 

Huang-Lao tradition, 5 

Huangdi. See Yellow Emperor 

Hui, King of Pin. 205 

Hui, King of Wei, 138-39 

Hui Shi (Huizi), 138. 205 

human beings (humankind, others; ren), 19. 74, 189-96. See also affairs, human; 
sages 

human nature. See nature 
Humaneness {ren), 6, 7, 8, 9 

in chap. 2 . 27.31.32. 34-35 
in chap. 8 , 84, 85, 86, 87 
in chap. 10 . 111. 112. 114. 116. 117. 120 
in chap. 1L 130. 131 
in chap. 14 , 157, 160 
in chap. 15 . 171. 173 
in chap. 79 , 201 
in chap. 20 . 218, 221, 222 
hun and po souls, 179 

inner cultivation. See self-cultivation 
Ji Lu. See Zilu 

Jian, Viscount of Zhao (Zhao Yang), 142 

Jie, King of Xia (tyrant), 108, 116. 120. 143.202. 224 

Jie Fan, 102 

Jing, Duke of Qi, 69, 101 
Jing, Emperor (Liu Qi; Han), 3 
Jingguo, Lord. See Xue, Duke of 

jingshen. See spirit, quintessential 
Jizi, 107. 224 
junzi. See Superior Man 
Jupiter cycle, 40. 44 

Kang, King of Zhou, 108 
Kuang, Music Master, 69. 207 
Kunlun, Mount, 50. 52. 62. 90 

Laozi (Daodejing ), 5. 6. 7. 9. 84. 96 
and chav. L 14. 27-28 

and chav. 12 . 135-36. 138. 139. 140. 141. 142. 143^14 
Laozi (Lao Dan), 5. 23. 135 
Lau, D. C., 11 
laws, 2. 6. 111. 171 

in chav. 5 . 61. 62. 63 
in chav. 9 . 96. 99-101. 102 
in chav. 12 . 138-39 
in chav. 13 . 149. 150 
in chav. 20 . 212.217.218.219. 220. 221 
Li, King of Chu, 162n.l 
Li Ke (Li Kui), 140^41 
Li Qi, 205 
Liji. See Rites 

Liu An (king of Huainan), 1. 3^L 10. 14. 166. 213. 225. 226 

Liu Bang. See Gaozu, Emperor 

Liu Chang (king of Huainan), 3 

Liu Che. See Wu, Emperor 

Liu Qi. See Jing, Emperor 

Liu Xiang, 178 

liuhe. See six coordinates 

Lu Ban. See Gongshu 

Lii Shang. See Wang, Grand Duke 

Lii Wang (butcher), 203 

Lii’er (horse), 206 
lunar lodges (xiu), 71 
Lunyu. See Analects 

Liishi chunqiu {Mr. Lil’s Spring and Autumn ), 5, 9, 10, 58, 68, 96, 190 
Mao Qiang, 79, 86, 207-8 

Master Sun s Arts of War {Sunzi bingfa), 10, 166, 170n.2 

Mawangdui texts, 10, 40, 112 

Mencius (MengKe, Mengzi), 111 

Mencius (.Mengzi ), 112 

M eng Ben (M eng "Vlie), 108 

Mercury, 44 

Miao tribes, 150, 168, 201 
military affairs (ww), 6, 165-75, 229 
Millet, Lord (Hou Ji), 50,216 
mind-heart (xin), 191, 192 

techniques of, 8. 25,28, 74,81, 157,211 
M ingtang (Hall of Light), 60, 65, 92, 108 
Mizi (Mi Zijian, Mi Buqi), \M 
Mo Di. See Mozi 

Mohists, 102, 131, 133. See also Mozi 
Moral Potency (de), 7. 96, 120, 133, 144, 149 
in chap. 8 , 88, 89 
in chap. 14 , 159, 164 
in chap. 15 . 165, 171 
in chap. 20 . 212,213,221 
mourning, 46,61,93, 104, 131,215,217 
Moye (sword), 99, 206 

Mozi (Mo Di), 28, 34, 102, 109, 140, 146, 203, 207 
Mu, Duke of Qin, 203 
Murray, Judson, 12 
Music (Classic of Music), 219 
Music (yue ), 8, 9, 32, 40, 59, 139, 185 
in chap. 8 . 84, 86, 87, 88, 89, 93 

in chav. 9 . 100. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108 

in chap. 10 . 115. 117 

in chav. 11 . 125. 132 

in chap. 19 . 205 

in chap. 20 . 2X1 

in chap. 21 . 230 

See also bells; drums; pitch pipes; qin; se 

Nameless ( wuming ), 154. See also Way 
nature ( xing ), 8, 18, 167 

in chav. 2 . 28, 33, 34, 36 
in chav. 11 . 125. 127. 128. 129 

in chav. 14 . 156. 157. 158. 161 
in chav. 20 . 216. 217-18. 220. 223 
NingQi, 129 

non-action (wuwei), 8, 9, 71, 84, 120 
in chav. 1 , 20, 23 
in cto. 9 . 96. 97. 99. 100. 102 
in chav. 12 . 136. 137-38 
in chav. 14 . 154. 156. 159. 160. 162 
in chav. 19 . 197-98. 200. 202 
norms ( shu ), 137-38, 163 

Nothingness (non-being, wu), 7, 13, 73, 155, 156. See also non-action 

Odes (Classic of Odes; Shijing), 9. 106, 107, 162, 206, 209, 215, 216, 219 
officials/ministers, 62, 70, 142, 150, 171. 181,203 
in chav. 9 . 95, 96, 97, 100, 102, 104, 106 
in chav. 10 . 116, 117 
in chav. 11 . 125, 126 
in chav. 20 . 220, 221 
See also government; rulership 
oral literature, 178, 190, 198, 225, 226 

parallelism, 190 

Perfected Person ( zhiren ), 8, 28, 31, 32, 74, 77-80. See also sages 

persuasions ( shuo , shut). 111, 177-87,205,229 
phoenix (feng, fenghuang ), 17, 55, 118, 212 
Ping, Duke of Jin, 69, 207 
pitch pipes, 46, 59, 100, 104, 132, 185,217 
six, 87, 88, 89 
See also bells 

po soul. See hun and po souls 
poetry ( shi ), 4, 226. See also Chucv, Odes 
positional advantage (force; shi), 96, 101-2, 103, 152, 166 
Potency (de), 6-7. 8. 46, 81, 147, 157, 170, 185, 197 
in chap. L 14, 17, 22, 23 
in chap. 2 . 27, 28, 30-31,32, 36 
in chap. 5 , 64, 65 
in chap. 8 , 83, 84, 86, 87, 88 
in chap. 9 , 96, 99 
in chap. 10 . Ill, 113, 114, 118 
in chap. 11 . 125, 129 
in chap. 21 . 227, 228, 229, 232 
See also M oral Potency 

primitivism, agrarian, 83-84, 146, 147-49, 200, 221-22 
Puett, Michael, 12 

qi (vital energy), 7, 53, 161, 228 
in chap. 1 . 14, 23, 24 
in chap. 2 , 30, 36 

in chap. 3 . 39,41-42, 43,44, 45, 46 
in chap. 5 , 60, 61, 62, 64 
in chap. 6 , 67, 68, 70, 71 
in chap. 7 . 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79 
in chap. 8 , 85, 86, 87 
in chap. 9 , 96, 98 
in chap. 1L 123, 130 
in chap. 15 , 167, 175 
in cha£_20, 211,215,219 

daoyin (guiding and pulling of), 74 
noxious, 161 
and resonance, 5^8 
Oi (son of Mi). 131n.8 
Qi, state of, 144 
Qian Qie, 71-72 

qilin (mythical beast), 17, 43, 55, 212 

qin (musical instrument), 59, 104, 108, 118, 205, 206, 230 

Qin, state of, 2 

Qin Shihuangdi (Zhao Zheng), 2 
QingNii (Gray Woman), 44 
Qingxiang, King of Chu, 205 
Qu Jian, 195 

Queen Mother of the West (Xiwangmu), 50, 52n.l 

resonance (stimulus and response; ganying ), 5-6, 8, 84, 96, 112, 130, 185 
in chap. 6 , 68, 69-72 
in chap. 7 , 74, 78, 81 
Rightness (yi), 6, 7, 8, 9, 150, 171 
in chap. 2 , 27, 31, 32, 34-35 
in chap. 8 , 84, 85, 86, 87, 93 
in chap. 9 . 100, 102, 103, 108, 109 
in chap. 10 . Ill, 112, 114, 116, 117, 119 
in chap. 11 , 123, 125, 126, 130, 131, 133 

in chap. 16 , 180, 183 
in chap. 20 , 218, 221,222 
Rites ( Liji ; Record of Rites), 58, 112, 124, 219 
ritual (//), 5, 6, 8, 32, 80, 111, 139, 150 
in chap. 5 , 58, 59 
in chap. 8 , 85, 86, 87, 93 
in chap. 11 , 123-33 
ritual (i continued) 

in chap. 15 , 166, 174-75 
in chap. 20 , 216, 218 

root and branch ( benmo ), 6, 8, 9, 34, 76, 100, 172, 191 
in chap. 7 . 20, 28 
in chap. 20 . 215. 220. 222. 223 
in chap. 21 , 227, 230 
Ru Shou, 44. 62 
rulership, 2. 4. 6. 10. 28. 140 
in chap. 7 , 14-15 
in chap. 9 . 95-109 
in chap. 13 . 146. 150-51 
in chap. 14 , 154. 160 
in chap. 75 . 168. 173-75 
in chaps. 16 and 77, 179. 181 
in chap. 19 . 198-99 
in chap. 20 , 211-24 
in chap. 21 . 228-29 
techniques for, 8. 95-109 

See also government; officials/ministers; sage-rulers 

sage-rulers, 4. 7. 8. 10. 20.28. 146. 154 
in chap. 7 . 14-15 
in chap. 6 , 68. 70 
in chap. 8 , 83-84 
in cto. 10 . 111-12. 116 
in chap. 77 . 124. 129. 130 

in chap. 12 , 135-36 
in chap. 19 . 198-99 
in chap. 20 . 211-24 
sages ( shengren ), 8. 19-20. 55 
in chap. 2 . 28. 31-32. 34 
in chap. 6 . 68. 70 
in chap. 7 . 74. 76 
in chap. 8 . 83. 93 
in chap. 9 . 102, 107. 109 
in cto. 70 . 115. 116. 117. 119. 121 

in chav. 11 . 123. 124. 126. 127. 128 

in chav. 13 . 146. 147-48. 150. 151 
in chav. 14 . 153-54. 156. 159. 161. 163 
in chap. 15 . 168, 173 
in chav. 16 . 179. 182 
in chap. 18 . 192. 193 
in chav. 19 . 197. 198. 200-204. 206-7 
in chav. 20 . 214.216.218.219 
in chap. 21 . 228, 230 

San Miao (Three Miao tribes). See Miao tribes 
se (zitherlike instrument), 59, 104, 132 
seasons, 51, 76, 170, 203, 228 
in chap. 3 . 39, 41, 43 
in chap. 5 , 57-66 
in chap. 8 , 87, 88, 89 
in chav. 20 . 212, 214, 216, 218, 221 
self-cultivation, 7. 8. 14, 74, 96, 136, 166, 190, 199 
in chap. 2 . 27, 28 
in c/zap. 14 . 154, 164 
in chap. 20 . 222-24 
and rulership, 4^6 

Shang(Ym) dynasty, 107, 132, 143, 149, 150,216 

Shang shu. See Documents 

Shangdi (Supreme Thearch), 52, 64 

Shanhaijing (Classic of Mountains and Seas), 10, 50 

Shao Hao, 44, 62 

She, Duke of (Shen Zhuliang), 139 

Sheng, Duke of Bo, 195 

Shennong. See Divine Farmer 

shi. See affairs, human; positional advantage 

Shi Qi, 139, 195 

Shijing. See Odes 

Shizi (Master Shi), 9 

Shu Hai, 51 

Shujing. See Documents 
Shun (sage-ruler), 129. 168 
in chap. 9 . 106. 107 
in chav. 10 . 115. 116. 119 
in chap. 13 , 149. 150 
in chav. 19 . 200. 201. 204 
Shuo yuan (Liu Xiang), 178 
SichengZihan, 142 
Sima Kuaikui, 102 

sincerity (cheng), 112. 115. 116. 118. 131. 144.215 
six coordinates ( liuhe ), 16. 51. 87, 170 
so-of-itself (spontaneously, naturally; ziran), 8 
space-time ( yuzhou ), 41 

spirit, quintessential (jingshen ), 8, 20, 34, 72, 73-81 
spirit illumination ( shenming ), 8, 24, 33, 64, 74, 111, 169 
in chap. 8 , 84, 86, 87 
in chav. 20 . 211.214.216 
spirit transformation ( shenhua ), 170 
Spring and Autumn Annals (Chunqiu ), 5, 109, 219 
Spring and Autumn period, 2, 87n.l , 108, 150 
statecraft, 96. 99. 124 
Sunzi bingfa {Art of War), 10, 166, 170n.2 
Superior Man (junzi ), 8. 108. 142, 180, 209 
in chav. 10 . 114. 117. 118. 119. 120 
in chav. 14 . 154. 162. 163-64 

Tai Hao, 44, 61 
Tai Zhang, 51 
Taiyi. See Grand One 

Tang, King of Shang (sage-ruler), 107, 143, 149 
in chav. 19 . 200. 201-2. 203 
in cto. 20 . 216. 224 
Tang, Music Master, 206 

Tang Guliang, 205 
taxes, 2. 96. 103-5. 202 
techniques (shu), 161, 162, 191, 198, 230 
of government, 8-9, 95-109 
of the mind (xin shu), 8. 25,28, 74, 81. 157, 211 
of the Way ( dao shu), 28, 31, 152 
See also Guanzi 

Three Dynasties, 120, 150. See also Shang dynasty; Xia dynasty; Zhou dynasty 

Three King?, 83,211,229, 232 

Three Miao tribes (San Miao). See Miao tribes 

tian. See Heaven 

“Tian wen” (Questions About Heaven; Chuci), 10, 40, 50 
Tian Ying. See Xue, Duke of 
tianxin. See Heavenly Heart 
tigers, 30, 43, 44 

tool metaphors (carpenter’s square, level, compass), 99, 113, 191, 204 
in chap. 5 , 58, 63-66 
in chap. 8 , 88, 89 

transformation (metamorphosis; hua), 8, 21, 50, 68, 80, 163, 173, 219 
in chap. 2 . 27, 29, 30, 32, 35 

in chap. 3 , 40, 42 
in chap. 1L 127, 128 
in chap. 18 , 192-93 
in chap. 21 , 227-28 
See also alteration; change 
Trustworthiness (xin), 173, 187, 221, 222 

Unhewn (uncarved block; pu), 78, 79, 145, 155, 227 

vacuity (xu), 36. See also emptiness 
\fenus, 44 

Wang, Grand Duke (Lii Wang, Taigong Wang), 127 

Wang Liang, 71 

Warring States period, 2, 166 

Way ( dao ), 5-6. 8.9. 185. 191 

chav. 

1. 14. 16 

-21, 

23, 

25 

chav. 

2. 28.31 

, 32, 

33, 

34. 36 

chav. 

6 . 68. 70. 71 

chav. 

7. 74. 76 

, 77, 

79, 

81 

chav. 

8. 83. 84 

, 86, 

87, 

88. 89. 93 

chav. 

9. 96. 97 

, 98, 

99, 

100. 108 

chav. 

10. 111. 

113, 

114 

chav. 

11. 124. 

125, 

129 

. 131 

chav. 

12. 135. 

136, 

187 

-38. 140. 

141 

chav. 

13. 146. 

152 

chav. 

14. 154. 

156, 

157 

. 158. 159 

, 160, 

, 162, 

chav. 

15. 165. 

168- 

-69, 

170. 172. 

173, 

175 

chav. 

16. 179. 

180, 

182 

chav. 

19. 197. 

198, 

200 

. 202. 204 

,205, 

,206 

chav. 

20. 211.: 

218, 

221 

in chap. 21 . 227-32 
techniques of {dao shu), 28, 31, 152 
weights and measures, 40, 100. See also tool metaphors 
Wen, Duke of Jin (Prince Chong’er), 143 
Wen, King of Chu. 102 
Wen, King of Zhou, 107, 108 
Wen Wuwei (Shen Zhou), 102 
Wisdom (zhi), 19. 20. 119 
wu. See military affairs; Nothingness 
Wu, Emperor (Liu Che; Han), 3.4. 14. 225 
Wu, King of Chu, 162n.l 
Wu, King of Zhou, 107. 108. 143.216. 224 
Wu, M arquis of Wei, 140 
Wu Huo, 102 
Wu Qi, 109 

Wuling, King of Zhao, 102 
Wuma Qi (Wuma Shi), 144 

wuwei. See non-action 
wuxing. See Five Phases 
Wuxingpian (Mawangdui text), 112 

Wuxingzhan {Prognostications of the Five Planets ; M awangdui text), JO 

Xi Fuji, 130 
Xi Shi, 79. 86. 207-8 
Xi Zhong, 204 

Xia dynasty, 143. 149. 150.216 

Xian, Duke of Jin, 130 

Xiang, Viscount of Zhao, 139^10, 142 

Xiang Tuo, 205 

Xiao Ji, 126 

Xiezi (Qi Shezi), 205 

xing. See nature 

Xing Can, 54 

Xu You, 25.34 

Xuan M ing, 44. 63 

Xue, Duke of (Tian Ying, Lord Jingguo), 144. 194 
Xunzi, 9. 96 

Yan Di, 44. 168 
Yan Hui (Yan Yian), 128 
Yan Ying. See Yanzi 
Yanzi (Yan Ying), 101 

Yao (sage-ruler), 25. 106. 107. 119. 129. 149. 168 
in chav. 19 . 200. 201.204 
Yellow Emperor (Huangdi), 5. 44. 52. 62. 168. 204 
Yi tribes, 123 
Yi Yin (cook), 203 
Yin Yi (Scribe Yi), 143 
yin-yang, 6-7. 99 

in chav. 1 . 17. 18. 23 

in chav. 3 . 39. 40,41^12. 43.45.46. 47 

in chap. 4 . 50, 54, 55 
in chap. 5 . 58, 60, 63 
in chap. 6 . 67, 71 
in c/zap. 7 , 74, 75, 76, 80 
in c/zap. & 86, 87, 88, 89 
in chap. 12 . 137. 138 
in c/zap. 75 . 147. 151 
in chap. 15 . 169, 172n.3 
in c hap. 20. 212.214.216.218 
See Nothingness 
Youhu clan, 131. 168 
Youmiao tribes, 168 

Yu (sage-ruler), 50.51.62. 107. 131n.8 . 149.216 
in chav. 19 . 200. 201. 202. 204 
YiFu. 192 
Yie tribes, 99. 127 
Yueling {Monthly Ordinances), 58 

Zaofii, 71 

Zengzi (ZengCan), 126 
Zhai Jian, 138-39 
Zhang Yi. 109 

Zhangnoce {Intrigues of the Warring States), 190 

Zhao Xuanmeng (Zhao Dun, Viscount Xuan of Zhao), 130 

Zhao Zheng. See Qin Shihuangdi 

Zhaoyao (star), 59 

Zhi, Earl (Earl Yao, Zhi Bo), 130 

Zhi, Robber, 126 

Zhong You. See Zilu 

Zhongyong {Doctrine of the Mean), 112. 124 
Zhongzi Qi, 205 
Zhou, Duke of, 117, 127 
Zhou dynasty, 1-2. 132. 149. 150 
Zhouyi. See Changes 

Zhu Ming, 44 

Zhuan Xu (Gao Xin; sage-ruler), 42, 44, 62, 63, 168 

Zhuang, King of Chu, 102, 206 

Zhuang Qiao, 126 

Zhuang Zhou, 28n.l 

Zhuangzi, 135, 205 

Zhuangzi, 7. 9. 28, 68, 74, 123, 129n.5 . 190 
Zifa (magistrate), 195 
Zijiao, 195 

Zilu (Ji Lu, Zhong You), 101 

Ziqi, Minister of War, 195 

ziran (so-of-itself; spontaneously, naturally), 8 

Zisizi, 112 

Zou Yan, 50 

TRANSLATIONS FROM THE ASIAN CLASSICS 

Major Plays of Chikamatsu, tr. Donald Keene 1961 

Four Major Plays of Chikamatsu, tr. Donald Keene. Paper back ed. only. 1961; rev. 
ed. 1997 

Records of the Grand Historian of China, translated from the Shih chi of Ssu-ma 
Ch ’ien, tr. Burton Watson, 2 vols. 1961 

Instructions for Practical Living and Other Neo-Confucian Writings by Wang Yang- 
ming, tr. Wing-tsit Chan 1963 

Hsiin Tzu: Basic Writings, tr. Burton Watson, paperback ed. only. 1963; rev. ed. 
1996 

Chuang Tzu: Basic Writings, tr. Burton Watson, paperback ed. only. 1964; rev. ed. 
1996 

The Mahabharata, tr. Chakravarthi V Narasimhan. Also in paperback ed. 1965; rev. 
ed. 1997 

The Manydshu, Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai edition 1965 

Su Tung-p’o: Selections from a Sung Dynasty Poet, tr. Burton Watson. Also in 
paperbacked. 1965 

Bhartrihari: Poems, tr. Barbara Stoler M iller. Also in paperback ed. 1967 

Basic Writings of Mo Tzu, Hsiin Tzu, and Han Fei Tzu, tr. Burton Watson. Also in 
separate paperback eds. 1967 

The Awakening of Faith, Attributed to Asvaghosha, tr. Yoshito S. Hakeda. Also in 
paperbacked. 1967 

Reflections on Things at Hand: The Neo-Confucian Anthology, comp. Chu Hsi and 
Lu Tsu-ch’ien, tr. Wmgtsit Chan 1967 

The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, tr. Philip B. Yampolsky. Also in 
paperbacked. 1967 

Essays in Idleness: The Tsurezuregusa of Kenko, tr. Donald Keene. Also in 
paperbacked. 1967 

The Pillow Book ofSei Shdnagon, tr. Ivan Morris, 2 vols. 1967 

Two Plays of Ancient India: The Little Clay Cart and the Minister s Seal, tr. J. A. B. 
van Buitenen 1968 

The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu, tr. Burton Watson 1968 
The Romance of the Western Chamber (Hsi Hsiang chi), tr. S. I. Hsiung. Also in 
paperback ed. 1968 

TheManydshu, Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai edition. Paperback ed. only. 1969 
Records of the Historian: Chapters from the Shih chi of Ssu-ma Ch ’ien, tr. Burton 
Watson. Paperback ed. only. 1969 

Cold Mountain: 100 Poems by the T’ang Poet Hanshan, tr. Burton Watson. Also in 
p ap erback ed. 1970 

Twenty Plays of the Nd Theatre, ed. Donald Keene. Also in paperback ed. 1970 
Chushingura: The Treasury of Loyal Retainers, tr. Donald Keene. Also in paperback 
ed. 1971; rev. ed. 1997 

The Zen Master Hakuin: Selected Writings, tr. Philip B. Yampolsky 1971 
Chinese Rhyme-Prose: Poems in the Fu Form from the Han and Six Dynasties 
Periods, tr. Burton Watson. Also in paperback ed. 1971 
Kukai: Major Works, tr. Yoshito S. Hakeda. Also in paperback ed. 1972 
The Old Man Who Does as He Pleases: Selections from the Poetry and Prose ofLu 
Yu, tr. Burton Watson 1973 

The Lion s Roar of Queen Srimala, tr. Alex and Hideko Way man 1974 
Courtier and Commoner in Ancient China: Selections from the History of the 
Former Han by Pan Ku, tr. Burton Watson. Also in paperback ed. 1974 
Japanese Literature in Chinese, vol. 1: Poetry and Prose in Chinese by Japanese 
Writers of the Early Period, tr. Burton Watson 1975 
Japanese Literature in Chinese, vol. 2: Poetry and Prose in Chinese by Japanese 
Writers of the Later Period, tr. Burton Watson 1976 
Love Song of the Dark Lord: Jayadeva’s Gitagovinda, tr. Barbara Stoler Miller. 
Also in paperback ed. Cloth ed. includes critical text of the Sanskrit. 1977; rev. 
ed. 1997 

Rydkan: Zen Monk-Poet of Japan, tr. Burton Watson 1977 

Calming the Mind and Discerning the Real: From the Lam rim chen mo of Tson- 
kha-pa, tr. Alex Way man 1978 

The Hermit and the Love-Thief: Sanskrit Poems of Bhartrihari and Bilhana, tr. 
Barbara Stoler Miller 1978 

The Lute: Kao Ming’s P’i-p’a chi, tr. Jean Mulligan. Also in paperback ed. 1980 

A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns: Jinnd Shotdki of Kitabatake Chikafusa, tr. H. 
PaulWley 1980 

Among the Flowers: The Hua-chien chi, tr. Lois Fusek 1982 
Grass Hill: Poems and Prose by the Japanese Monk Gensei, tr. Burton Watson 
1983 

Doctors, Diviners, and Magicians of Ancient China: Biographies of Fang-shih, tr. 

Kenneth J. DeWoskin. Also in paperback ed. 1983 
Theater of Memory: The Plays of Kalidasa, ed. Barbara Stoler Miller. Also in 
p ap erback ed. 1984 

The Columbia Book of Chinese Poetry: From Early Times to the Thirteenth Century, 
ed. and tr. Burton Watson. Also in paperback ed. 1984 
Poems of Love and War: From the Eight Anthologies and the Ten Long Poems of 
Classical Tamil, tr. A. K. Ramanujan. Also in paperback ed. 1985 
The Bhagavad Gita: Krishna’s Counsel in Time of War, tr. Barbara Stoler Miller 
1986 

The Columbia Book of Later Chinese Poetry, ed. and tr. Jonathan Chaves. Also in 
p ap erback ed. 1986 

The Tso Chuan: Selections from Chinas Oldest Narrative History, tr. Burton 
Watson 1989 

Waiting for the Wind: Thirty-six Poets of Japans Late Medieval Age, tr. Steven 
Carter 1989 

Selected Writings ofNichiren, ed. Philip B. Yampolsky 1990 
Saigyd, Poems of a Mountain Home, tr. Burton Watson 1990 
The Book ofLieh Tzu: A Classic of the Tao, tr. A. C. Graham. Momingside ed. 1990 
The Tale of an Anklet: An Epic of South India—The Cilappatikaram ofIlanko Atikal, 
tr. R. Parthasarathy 1993 

Waiting for the Dawn: A Plan for the Prince, tr. with introduction by Wm. Theodore 
deBary 1993 

Yoshitsune and the Thousand Cherry Trees: A Masterpiece of the Eighteenth-Century 
Japanese Puppet Theater, tr., annotated, and with introduction by Stanleigh H. 
Jones, Jr. 1993 

The Lotus Sutra, tr. Burton Watson. Also in paperback ed. 1993 

The Classic of Changes: A New Translation of the I Ching as Interpreted by Wang 

Bi, tr. Richard John Lynn 1994 

Beyond Spring: Tz ’u Poems of the Sung Dynasty, tr. Julie Landau 1994 
The Columbia Anthology of Traditional Chinese Literature, ed. Victor H. Mair 1994 
Scenes for Mandarins: The Elite Theater of the Ming, tr. Cyril Birch 1995 
Letters ofNichiren, ed. Philip B. Yampolsky; tr. Burton Watson et al. 1996 
Unforgotten Dreams: Poems by the Zen Monk Shdtetsu, tr. Steven D. Carter 1997 
The Vimalakirti Sutra, tr. Burton Watson 1997 

Japanese and Chinese Poems to Sing: The Wakan roei shu, tr. J. Thomas Rimer and 
Jonathan Chaves 1997 

Breeze Through Bamboo: Kanshi ofEma Saiko, tr. Hiroaki Sato 1998 
A Tower for the Summer Heat, by Li Yi, tr. Patrick Hanan 1998 
Traditional Japanese Theater: An Anthology of Plays, by Karen Brazell 1998 
The Original Analects: Sayings of Confucius and His Successors (0479—0249), by 
E. Bruce Brooks and A. Taeko Brooks 1998 
The Classic of the Way and Virtue: A New Translation of the Tao-te ching ofLaozi as 
Interpreted by Wang Bi, tr. Richard John Lynn 1999 
The Four Hundred Songs of War and Wisdom: An Anthology of Poems from 
Classical Tamil, The Purananuru, ed. and tr. George L. Hart and Hank Heifetz 
1999 

Original Tao: Inward Training (Nei-yeh) and the Foundations of Taoist Mysticism, 
by Harold D. Roth 1999 

Po Chii-i: Selected Poems, tr. Burton Watson 2000 

Lao Tzu’s Tao Te Ching - A Translation of the Startling New Documents Found at 
Guodian, by Robert G. Henricks 2000 

The Shorter Columbia Anthology of Traditional Chinese Literature, ed. Victor H. 
M air 2000 

Mistress and Maid (Jiaohongji), by M eng Chengshun, tr. Cyril Birch 2001 
Chikamatsu: Five Late Plays, tr. and ed. C. Andrew Gerstle 2001 
The Essential Lotus: Selections from the Lotus Sutra, tr. Burton Watson 2002 
Early Modern Japanese Literature: An Anthology, 1600-1900, ed. Haruo Shirane 
2002; abridged 2008 

The Columbia Anthology of Traditional Korean Poetry, ed. Peter H. Lee 2002 
The Sound of the Kiss, or The Story That Must Never Be Told: Pingali Suranna s 

Kalapurnodayamu, tr. \bcheru Narayana Rao and David Shulman 2003 
The Selected Poems of Du Fu, tr. Burton Watson 2003 
Far Beyond the Field: Haiku by Japanese Women, tr. Makoto Ueda 2003 
Just Living: Poems and Prose by the Japanese Monk Tonna, ed. and tr. Steven D. 
Carter 2003 

Han Feizi: Basic Writings, tr. Burton Watson 2003 
Mozi: Basic Writings, tr. Burton Watson 2003 
Xunzi: Basic Writings, tr. Burton Watson 2003 
Zhuangzi: Basic Writings, tr. Burton Watson 2003 

The Awakening of Faith, Attributed to Asvaghosha, tr. Yoshito S. Hakeda, 
introduction by Ryuichi Abe 2005 
The Tales of the Heike, tr. Burton Watson, ed. Haruo Shirane 2006 
Tales of Moonlight and Rain, by Ueda Akinari, tr. with introduction by Anthony H. 
Chambers 2007 

Traditional Japanese Literature: An Anthology, Beginnings to 1600, ed. Haruo 
Shirane 2007 

The Philosophy of Qi, by Kaibara Ekken, tr. Mary Evelyn Tucker 2007 
The Analects of Confucius, tr. Burton Watson 2007 
The Art of War: Sun Zi’s Military Methods, tr. Victor Mair 2007 
One Hundred Poets, One Poem Each: A Translation of the Ogura Hyakunin Isshu, 
tr. Peter McMillan 2008 
Zeami: Performance Notes, tr. Tom Hare 2008 
Zongmi on Chan, tr. Jeffrey Lyle Broughton 2009 

Scripture of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine Dharma, rev. ed., tr. Leon Hurvitz, 
preface and introduction by Stephen R. Teiser 2009 
Mencius, tr. Irene Bloom, ed. with an introduction by Philip J. Ivanhoe 2009 
Clouds Thick, Whereabouts Unknown: Poems by Zen Monks of China, Charles Egan 
2010 

The Mozi: A Complete Translation, tr. Ian Johnston 2010 

The Huainanzi: A Guide to the Theory and Practice of Government in Early Han 
China, by Liu An, tr. John S. Major, Sarah A. Queen, Andrew Seth Meyer, and 
Harold D. Roth, with Michael Puett and Judson Murray 2010 
The Demon at Agi Bridge and Other Japanese Tales, tr. Burton Watson, ed. with 

introduction by Haruo Shirane 2011 

Haiku Before Haiku: From the Renga Masters to Bashd, tr. with introduction by 
Steven D. Carter 2011 

The Columbia Anthology of Chinese Folk and Popular Literature, ed. Victor H. Mair 
and M ark Bender 2011 

Tamil Love Poetry: The Five Hundred Short Poems of the Airikurunuru, tr. and ed. 
Martha Ann Selby 2011 

The Teachings of Master Wuzhu: Zen and Religion of NoReligion, by Wendi L. 
Adamek 2011 

Table of Contents 

Cover 
Title Page 

Copyright 

Contents 

Sketch of Early Chinese History, with Special Reference to 

the Huainanzi 
Introduction 

1. Originating in the Wav 

2. Activating the Genuine 

3. Celestial Patterns 

4. Terrestrial Forms 

5. Seasonal Rules 

6. Surveying Obscurities 

7. Quintessential Spirit 

8. The Basic Warp 

9. The Ruler’s Techniques 

10. Profound Precepts 

11. Integrating Customs 

12. Responses of the Wav 

13. Boundless Discourses 

14. Savings Explained 

15. An Overview of the Military 

16. and 17. A Mountain of Persuasions and A Forest of 

Persuasions 

18. Among Others 

19. Cultivating Effort 

20. The Exalted Lineage 

21. An Overview of the Essentials 

Glossary of Personal Names 

Brief Bibliography 

Index 

Translations from the Asian Classics