THE 

SACRED BOOKS 

OF THE 

HINDUS 

VOLUME VIII. 

THE NY AY A SUTRAS OF GOTAMA 

TRANSLATED BY 

[AttllfflPADHYAYA SAT1SA CHANDRA VIDYABHUSANA, M.A., PD. D., 

* PRINCIPAL, SANSKRIT COLLEGE, CALCUTTA. 

REVISED A EDITED BY 

NANDA LAL SINHA, M.A., B.L. . 

BEHAR & ORISSA CIVIL SERVICE 

^ PUBLISHED BY 

rf)r. L.ALIT MOHAN BASU, M.B., at the Panini Office, 
Bhuvaneswari Asram ; 35, Bahadurganj, 
Allahabad City, (U. P.) 

from the Manager ’* Office : THE PANINI OFFICE, Bahadurganj, Allahabad. 
Printed by M. Manzur Ahmad at the Modern Printing Work*, Allahabad. 

« Price Rupees Eight only. 

J 

THE 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS 

Translated by various Sanskrit Scholars. 

EDITED BY 

MAJOR B. D. BASU, I.M.S. 

(Retired.) 

VOL. VIII. 

THE NYAYA SUTRAS OF GOTAMA 

Second Edition 

PUBLISHED BY 

Dr. LALIT MOHAN BASU, M B. 

THE PANINI OFFICE, BHUVANE^W 4RI As$EUVU, BiHADUKGANJ 

Jaila&a6fl& 

j by M. Manzuu Aiimad at tiie Modern Printing Works 

1930 

THE 

NYAYA SUTRAS OF GOTAMA 

TRANSLATED BY 

mahAmahopAdhyAya satISa chandra 

VIDYAbHUSANA, m.a,ph.d. 
Principal, Sanskrit College, Calcutta 

Revised and Enlarged by 
NANDALAL SINHA, m.a., b.l. 
Bihar and Orissa Civil Service. 

published by 

Dr. L. M. BASU, M. B. 

THE pANINI OFFICE, BHUVANEgWARI A^RAMa, BAHADURGANJ 

&lla&abab 

Printed by M. Manzur Ahmad at tiie Modern Printing Works 

1930 . 

A A 

f®ajor Yamanabasa Yasu, 

I. B. jl. (fyfir*b), 
jSrffalar, JSattti nab yiji{ii80jt|c>r, 

tt)c Dersatile CDftoc of 

CJie ^>atrct> J&oofes of t|je JMntuiai*^ 

the Author of 

C{)e [Bnfctan jUflebttinal plants, 

Che historian of Jfnfcta,^ 

this teiocb 

is humiflp DeDicateD 
as a math of 

Jbirlasling Jbu* anb X^rsnt*. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

Page. 

Introduction ... ... ... ... ... I 

BOOK I, CHAPTER I. 

The Sixteen categories ... ... ... ... ... 1 

Release ( 3T15FT) ... ... ... ... ... 2 

Means of knowledge (STJTTtSJ ) ... ... ... ... 3 

Perception (Slc?T^I) ... ... ... ... ••• 3 

Inference (STjJJTR) ... ... ... ... ... 4 

Comparison (j ... ••• ... ... •• 4 

Word or verbal testimony ( ) defined ... ... ... 5 

Objects of knowledge (Stifar) ... ... ... 5 

Soul (frTcJT«0 defined ... ... ••• ... ••• 6 

Body (sfrcfa:) defined ... ... ... ... ... 6 

Sense () defined ... ... ... ... ... 6 

Element ( ) defined ... ... ... ... •• 7 

Qualities (Jpr) of earth, etc. ... ... ... ... 7 

Intellect () defined ... ••• ... ••• 7 

Mind (H«T: ) defined ... ... ••• ... 7 

Activity (ST^f%) defined and explained ... ... 8 

Fault (^FST ) defined ... ... > ... ... ••• 8 

iTransmigration ( stesTSTR ) defined ... ... 9 

Fruit (iW) defined ... ... •• ... ••• 9 

^ain () defined ... ... ••• ••• 9 

Release ( ) defined ... ... ••• ••• 9 

Doubt () defined and explained ... ... ••• 10 

Purpose (5RJ3PT) defined ... ... ••• •• H 

Example or familiar instance ( ) ... ... ... 11 

Tenet ( f^T5[Tf5T) defined ... ... ... H 

A dogma of all the Schools ( ^T5^cT?=r%3CT ? 3’ ) ... ... 12 

A dogma peculiar to some School ( STf?T?F3rftl*dCRf ) ... ••• 12 

A hypothetical dogma ( ) ... ... ... 12 

An implied dogma ( ) ... ... ••• 13 

( H ) 

Page. 

Members of a syllogism ( ) 

Proposition (flld^lT ) .. ... ... — 

Reason ( iirj ) ... 

Homogeneous or affirmative reason ( ) 

Heterogeneous or negative reason(^^TPT^g) 

Example ( ) 

Homogeneous or affirmative example ( ^STTsff^Tif/C’3' ) 
Heterogeneous or negative example ( )... 

Application, affirmative and negative ( ; 3‘ t R ? T ) 
Conclusion ( ) 

Confutation ( 3f7s ) 

Ascertainment (fsng*r) 

BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

Discussion ( «TT^ ) 

Wrangling (5157) ... ... ... ... 

Cavil ( ) 

Fallacies of reason ( ) 

The erratic ( ) 

The contradictory ( ) 

The controversial or equal to the question ( !T7»*3!J^rar ) 
The reciprocal or unproved ( <8TWT?nT ) 

The mistimed ( ^WTcftcT ) 

Quibble ( €5^0 

Quibble in respect of a term ( ) ... 

Quibble in respect of a genus ( ^TnTT?*TiJ5r ) 

Quibble in respect of a metaphor ( ) 

Futility ( 5JT% ) 

An occasion for rebuke ( ffT5Ti£5«IT«T ) 

BOOK II, CHAPTFR I 

Doubt ( ) examined 

The means and objects of knowledge ( SWrupStiftr ) examined. 

Perception ( 331$? ) examined 

Special kinds of knowledge ( fTRfetta ) 

'1 he relation of perception and inference ( 

The whole ( ) and its parts ( ) 

13 

14 
14 

14 

15 
15 
15 

15 

16 
17 
17 
17 

19 

20 
20 
21 
21 
21 
22 

22 

23 

23 

24 

24 

25 

26 
27 

29 

32 

38 

40 

41 

42 

( Hi ) 

Inference ( 5r*JJTT*T ) examined ... 

Page. 

. . . 

• • • 

... 43 

The time present, past and future ^RtVcT, H«mT?r) examined44 

Comparison ( ^tWTrf ) exmined ... 

... 

... 46 

Word or verbal testimony ( 3d*? ) examined 

... 48 

The Veda ( ) examined 

• mm 

... 50 

Injunction ( f%fvi ) 

... 52 

Persuasion ( ) 

... 53 

Praise ( ) 

• » ■ 

... 53 

Blame ( f^P^T ) 

... 53 

Warning (<1*3?%-) 

• ■ • 

«»< 

... 53 

Prescription ( ) ... 

• • • 

... 53 

Reinculcation ( ) 

■ • ■ 

■ • • 

... 53 

Tautology ( ) 

■ • ■ 

... 54 

The Medical ScienceX^ 1 ^®^ ) 

»»' 

... 54 

BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

Means of knowledge ( SHTFIJ ) examined 
Rumour 

Presumption ( ) 

Probability ( ) 

Non-existence ( ^PTR 1 ) •• 

The nature of sound ( Jd®? ) examined 
Otherness ( ) 

Letters, their modifications and substitutes 
Word ( ) 

Individual ( ) 

Form ( ) 

Genus ( Mlilri ) 

( 

) 

BOOK III, CHAPTER 1. 

Sense ( ) is not soul( 3TT?JT«l.) 

Body ( 3d*5k ) is not soul ( M< ) 
Duality of the eye ( ) 

Remembrance (^%)... 

Mind ( JT*T: ) is not soul ( =Mic+f«4) 
The soul ( established 

The body ( skk ) is earthy 

.. 55 
.. 55 

.. 55 
.. 55 

.. 55 
.. 59 

.. 65 
.. 69 

.. 75 

.. 75 
.. 75 

.. 75 

.. 80 
.. 81 
.. 82 
.. 84 

.. 85 
.. 86 
.. 88 

• • • 

( iv ) 

The eye-ball ( ) is material 

• a a 

Page. 
... 90 

The senses ( ) are material ( ) 

• • 

... 92 

The eye ( ) and its ray ( ) 

... 92 

The senses ( sf?3FT ) are more than one 

a a a 

... 96 

Touch ( ) 

» • • 

.. 97 

The senses are five () ... 

• • a 

... 98 

The qualities of the elements ( ) 

... 100 

BOOK III, CHAPTER II. 

Intellect or knowledge ( ) is not eternal 

» • a 

... 105 

Knowledge is not momentary 

■ « • 

... 108 

The nature of knowledge ( !TT*T )... 

... Ill 

/Recollection ( ) 

... 115 

^Desire and aversion ( ) ... 

• 1 • 

... 117 

/The mind ( W ) is not the seat of knowledge 

a a a 

... 119 

/Memory ( ) and its causes ... 

... 120 

/Knowledge ( ) is not a natural quality of the 

body 

... 124 

/Non-snnultaneousness of knowledge (sTHl4faBKl) 

a a a 

... 127 

/'l he mind ( JT*P ) is atomic ( ) 

• a a 

... 128 

^Desert ( ) producing the body ... 

... 128 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

Activity ( ST^f% ) 

a a a 

... 133 

Faults ( ) ... 

a • a 

... 133 

Stupidity (iffe ) 

• a • 

... 134 

Transmigration ( ) 

• a a 

... 135 

Entitj does notarise from non-entity (?TiTT3T^ WWtctrf%.) 

... 136 

God ( fssTC: ) ... 

• a a 

... 138 

Production from no-cause ( ^rf^ffTTr??! ) 

a a a 

... 139 

All are not non-eternal ( ’O^fTfsTc^pO ... 

. a a 

... 140 

All are not eternal ( «T Hssf 

a a a 

... 141 

All are not distinct ( *T ^35? )... 

a a a 

... 142 

Self-existence and relative non-existence (^g^WR)144 

No fixity of number ( ) 

a a a 

... 146 

Fruit ( ) examined ... 

a • a 

... 147 

Pain ( 5 .tw ) examined ... 

a a a 

... 151 

( V ) 

Release ( ) examined 

Debts and t roubles ( gjtff ^JJI ) ... 

BOOK TV, CHAPTER II 
The rise of true knowledge ( cTT^!T75Tta?f% ) 

The whole and its parts ( ) ... 

Atom ( 3RJ ) ... 

The non-reality of things ( snsTRTi ^TTqTcWTT^Tvrfsvi: ) 
False apprehension ( ftrssrFT^rfsg. ) 

Meditation ( ) ... 

Discussion, wrangling and cavil ( ) ... 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I 

Futility ( arrfir) 

Balancing the homogeneity ( )... 

Balancing the heterogeneity ( ihlSsfelJTr ) ... 
Balancing an addition ( ^r^WJTT ) 

Balancing a subtraction ( ) 

B alancing the questionable ( ) 

Balancing the unquestionable ( ) 

Balancing the alternative ( ) 

Balancing the reciprocity (^T^I^Ttrr ) 

Balancing the co-presence ( HTfH^WT ) 

Balancing the mutual absence ( ^STTFcT^nTT ) 

Balancing the infinite regression ( 5W=!^OTT ) 
Balancing the counter-e'ample ( 5li%glIT« ! cWJrr ) 
Balancing the non-producecl ( ) 

Balancing the doubt ( WNei+H ) 

Balancing the controversy ( SffitjtLltWT ) ... 

Balancing the non-reason ( ) 

Balancing the presumption ( 5l^Tqi%^TJIT )... 
Balancing the non-difference ( ) 

Balancing the demonstration ( SJtmfri-HUT ) 

Balancing the perception ( ) ... 

Balancing the non-perception ( ^Ijl'RlfssrcifRT ) 
Balancing the non-eternal ( ) 

Bal ancing the eternal ( ) 

Page- 
.. 152 
... 152 

... 157 
... 157 
... 162 
... 165 
... 168 
... 170 
... 173 

... 174 
... 174 
... 174 
... 176 
... 176 
... 176 
... 1 /6 
... 176 
... 176 
... 182 
... 1S2 
... 184 
... 184 
... 186 
... 187 
... 189 
... 190 
... 192 
... 193 
... 195 
... 196 
... 197 
... 198 
... 200 

( vi ) 

Balancing the effect ( ) 

Admission of an opinion ( *Tcn«pT ) 
Six'Yvinged disputation ( ) 

BOOK V, CHAPTER II. 
Occasions for rebuke ( frmCPJR ) 

Hurting the proposition ( srf%tTTs[T{fr ) 
Shifting the proposition ( ) 

Opposing the proposition ( srf^TfTf^Tto ) ... 

Renouncing the proposition ( ) 

Shifting the reason ( 

Shifting the topic ( 3T«IT?cR!l^) 

The meaningless (f*PC&E) 

The unintelligible ( srfsTsJTmtf ) 

The incoherent ( ?PTT«f ) 

The inopportune ( ^rsn^cf^KrT ) ... 

Sajingtoo little ( ) 

Saying too much ( ) 

Repetition ( 5«T^ri*£ ) 

Silence ( ) 

Ignorance ( 3HTR ) 

Non-ingenuity ( ?w{?PTT ) 

Evasion (fsr£?) 

Admission of an opinion ( TTcfig^T ) 
Overlooking the censurable ( ) 

Censuring the non-censurable ( 

Deviating from a tenet ( ) 

Fallacies of a reason { ) ... 

) 

Page. 
... 201 
... 203 
... 204 

... 207 
... 208 
... 209 
... 209 
... 210 
... 210 
... 211 
... 212 
... 212 
... 212 
... 213 
... 213 
... 214 
... 214 
... 215 
.. 216 
... 216 
... 216 
... 216 
... 217 
217 

... 218 
... 218 

FOREWORD. 

I 

Differences of opinion prevail as to the precise number of the original 
aphorisms of the Nyaya-Stitra of Gotama. Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. Satis'a- 
chandra Vidyabhfisana* is inclined to take the extreme view that it is only 
the first book of the Nyaya-Stitra containing a brief explanation of the 
sixteen categories that we are justified in ascribing to Gotama, while the 
remaining four books bear marks of different hands and ages, the last and 
most considerable additions having been made by Vdtsy&yana who sought 
to harmonise the different, and at times conflicting, additions and interpola¬ 
tions by the ingenious introduction of Sfttras of his own making fathered 
upon Gotama. We are unable to subscribe to this view. The Nyaya- 
Sfltra is admittedly a system of philosophy, and its method, like that of the 
Vais'eaika, consists in the enumeration, definition and examination of the 
categories. You cannot retain the first book, and reject the others, without 
mutilating the system. As regards the so-called references in the second, 
third and fourth books to the tenets of the Vais'esika, Yoga, Mimamsi, 
Veddnta and Buddhist philosophy, it should not be forgotten that every 
system of thought which has flourished on the soil of India has its source 
in a common fund of national philosophy, “a large Manasa lake of philoso¬ 
phical thought and language, far away in the distant North, and in the 
distant past, from which each thinker was allowed to draw for his own pur¬ 
poses”. Similarity of words and ideas here and there is therefore not a 
safe guide in the determination of the originality or otherwise of one system 
in relation to another. Moreover, isolated similarity of thought and expres¬ 
sion is no ground for the rejection of whole books as spurious. The 
parallelism between the wording of some of the aphorisms and certain 
passages m the Lankivatara Sfltra, Madhyamika S&tra, and the Sataka is 
also misleading. For mstnace, as observed by Dr. Keith**, on the authority 
of Wmternitz, Gesch. d. md. Litt, II. i. 243, the Lankavatara Sdtra in 
its present form is not earlier than the sixth century A. D , that is, is later 
than even Vatsy&yana. 

The Nyaya-Bhasya of Vatsyayana also presents a most formidable 
obstacle to the acceptance of the theory propounded by Dr. Vidy&bhdjana. 
For it is not confined to the first book alone but covers the other books as well. 
The difficulty can be overcome only by denying the authentic character 
of the Bh&jya in its present form. And this is exactly what Dr. Vidyi- 
bhdaaua has done. We are not aware of any good reason for doubting the 
genuineness of the Bhd?ya as it has come down to us. Let us examine 

* Introduction, page X. 

** Indian Logic and Atomism, by A, B. Keith, 1921 , page 23 . 

( ii ) 

Dr. Vidy4bhfisac.a’s reasons. He translates aphorism II i. 29 (II .i. 28 of 
the Bibliotheca Indica series edition) as follows • “It may be objected that 
the contact of a sense with its object is not the cause of perception, as it is 
inefficient in some instances”, and then proceeds : 

"An objector may say that the contact of a sense with its object is 
not the cause of perception, as we find that a person listening to a song may 
not see colour, though it comes m contact with his eye. 

“Vatsyayana interprets the aphorism as follows —If the conjunction 
of soul with mind is not accepted as the cause of perception a well-known 
conclusion will be debarred, viz., the mark of the mind is that only one act 
of knowledge is possible at a time. This interpretation, heie inappropriate, 
is based on the Bh&sya-commentary published by the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal in 1865. I fully agree with those who hold that the real Bhasya- 
commentary of Vatsyayana is not yet available to us.” 

Similarly he translates the next aphorism as follows • "It is not so, 
because there is pre-eminence of some particular object”, and proceeds 

“It is admitted that a person while listening to a song may not see 
colour, though it comes in contact with his eye. Yet the instance does 
not prove that the contact of a sense with its object is not the cause of 
perception, for it is to be understood that his intent listening prevents him 
from seeing the colour. In other words, the auditory perception supersedes 
the visual perception, because the song is more attractive than the colour. 

“Vatsyayana interprets the aphorism thus —The conjunction of the 
soul with mind is not rendered useless, even if there is predominance of the 
senses and their objects. If perception is produced when a person is asleep 
or inattentive, it is because there is then the predominance of his sense and 
its object, though even then there is a faint conjunction of soul with mind 
This interpretation is based on the Bhftfya-commentary as available to us, 
It is ingenious but out of place here.” 

With due respect to the memory of the distinguished critic we submit 
that he has not been quite fair in his representation of the Nyaya-Bhasya 
on these two aphorisms In the translation and explanation which we have 
felt constrained to substitute in the text in place of the above we have tried 
to show what Vatsyayana exactly means It will be seen that Viltsya yana’s 
interpretation of the two aphorisms is not necessarily inappropriate or out 
of place It also goes without saying that for a pseudo-Vatsyayana who 
could produce a Bh 4 §ya which has commanded universal respect through 
all the ages, it would not have been difficult to avoid such inappropriateness 
as is alleged, or to grasp the more obvious interpretation which he is supposed 
to have missed. Moreover, it is well-known that uncertainties as to the 
correct reading of the My^ya-Satra and the Ny 4 ya-Bhs sya have given rise 
to two different schools of interpretation from very early times. One of 

( iH ) 

these schools is represented by T&tparya-Paris'uddhi and Ny&ya-Parisi'ala 
of Udayan<ich<irya and Paris'uddln-Prak&s'a and Anvik§a-Xaya-Tattvabodha 
of Vardhamana Upadhyaya , the other school, by Tatparya-Tik& and Ny&ya- 
SAchi-Nibandha of Vachaspati Mis'ra Mere difference of opinion as to the 
appropriateness of the Bhasya here and theie cannot, therefore, be accepted 
as a sufficient reason for questioning the authenticity of the BhSsya in its 
present form. On the other hand, the BhSiya has been accepted as genuine 
in all the seats of Sanskrit learning m India, and, among modern researchers 
in the field, by MahimahopadhySyas Chandrakanta Tarkalankara, 
Bhimicharya Jhalkikar, Gangadhara fSSstrl Tailanga, and Dr Gangmfitha 
Jhi. Even amongst European orientalists Dr. Herrman Jacobi does not 
doubt that the author of the complete Nyaya-Bha6ya is one and the same 
person. Dr. Keith also is convinced that there is no evidence of any corrup¬ 
tion of the text of the Nyaya-Bhaaya, and that the suggestion that 
V&tsySyana is responsible for remodelling the Nyava-Sfttra is wholly 
unsupported by evidence * 

Vatsyayana is an ancient Risi By tradition he is regarded as 
“Bhagavan”, “Mum”, “Mahamum”, and “Maharsi” His date cannot be very- 
far removed from the time when the aphorisms of Gotama were first reduced 
to writing. Mahamahopi dhyaya Vasudeva Sastn Abhyankar assigns circa 
300 A D to him ** It is therefore reasonable to conclude that all the 
original aphorisms of Gotama have been preserved m the Nyaya-Bhasya of 
Vatsyayana. Difficulties have been experienced from very early times in 
picking out the Sfttra from the BhaBya, particularly in those places where the 
Bhasya does not clearly indicate the Sfttra These difficulties have been 
considerably enhanced by the privilege enjoyed by Bh&sya-writers and 
undoubtedly exercised by Vatsyayana of raising issues and solving them in 
the course of the Bhasya in the form of aphorisms **“* This has misled many 
scholars in attributing the aphonsms of Vatsyayana to Gotama and vice 
versa. The results of such diverse readings are shown below in a tabular 
form 

i. Reading retened to by M-M Chandrakanta 
Tarkalankara in ^rigopala Vasumallik 
Fellowship Lectures on Hindu Philo¬ 
sophy, 1898 .. . ... 547 aphorisms. 

♦Indian Logic and Atomism, by A B. Keith, 1921, pages 25 and 27. 

**Sarva-Dars'ana-Sangraha, Government Oriental (Hindu) Series 
No. 1, Poona, 1924. 

***Cf. “The knowers of Bhflsyas know that to be a Bhajya by which 
is explained the meaning of aphorisms by means of words appropriate to 
the aphorisms as well as texts of the commentator himself.” 

( iv ) 

2. Publication by the Asiatic Society of Bengal 

m the Bibliotheca Indica series, 1865 ... 540 aphorisms. 

3. According to Nyayakosa by M. M. Bhima- 

charya Jhalkikar, second edition, 1893 
(Bombay Sanskrit Series No. XLIX) ... 537 „ 

4. According to M. M. Dr. Ganganatha Jha 

in the Nyaya-Dars'ana, Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series, 1920—25 ... ... 532 „ 

According to M. M. Gangadhara ^astri 
Tailan'ga in the Vizianagram Sanskrit 
Series, volume IX, 1896 ... .. 531 „ 

According to Nyayasilchimbandha of 

Vachaspati Mis'ra, area. 841 .. 528 „ 

The diversity of readings, again, is not confined only to the number of 
the aphorisms, but extends also to the aphorisms themselves, for 111 regard 

S 

6 . 

lu jjcii Lil»UiCLi apnui ioiuo ^uuuiii^in.onji o uuu cunijjin>i j uuityi an lvj vy 

they are aphorisms or are the assertions of the author of the Bhasya. The 
statement below will explain the position from this point of view. Thus : 

Book 

Chapter. 

Number of 
aphorisms ac¬ 
cording to the 
edition of the 
Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, 1865. 

Number 
rejected | 
by Vdch- 
aspati 

Number 
added by 
V 4 chaspati. 

Number of aphor¬ 
isms according 
to Ny&ya-Stichi- 
Nibandha of 
Vachaspati Mis'ra. 

I 

i 

1 

41 

' * 1 

41 

. ii 

1 

20 

* 

1 

* 

20 

II 

1 

1 1 

1 69 

2 ] 

I 

68 

1 ii 

j 

71 

3 ! 

1 

I ' 1 

69 

III 

. i 

75 

6 

4 

73 

1 ii 

78 

6 

* 

1 72 

IV 

1 i 

1 

| 68 

2 

1 

67 

1 m 

50 

1 * 

1 

5 i 

V 

i 

43 

( 

* 

* 

43 

ii 

1 

1 25 

1 

* 

24 

I-V 

; i-x 

| 540 

20 

8 

00 

( V ) 

Since the publication of the Nyaya-Bh&gya by the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal a fairly large number of valuable manuscripts have come to light, 
and the results of recent investigations go to confirm the correctness of the 
Index to the Aphorisms of Nyaya (Nyaya-Stichi-Nibandha) by Vachaspati 
Mis'ra We have therefore revised the work of Dr Vidyabhueana according 
to, and on the authority of, Vachaspati The twenty 1 ejected aphorisms 
are however retained in appendix B. The eight additional aphorisms 
bear serial numbers Si, 172, 226, 227, 228, 261, 404 and 461 of the present 
edition 

M M. Dr. Gang.matha Jhl and Pandit Dhutidir&ja §Astri nave also 
followed the Nyaya-Sftchi-Nibandha m theii edition of the “The Sfttras of 
Gautama and Bhasya of Vatsyiyana with two Commentaries” published 
in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Benaies, 1925. They have, however, 
retained four aphorisms which have been omitted from the NyAya-Sdchi- 
Nibandha. The total number of aphorisms according to them is therefore 
532 instead of 528. The learned editors have not assigned any specific 
reasons for treating these four aphoristic statements as aphorisms of Gotama. 
They merely state that they “feel constrained to deviate from it (i e , the 
NyAya-Sflchl'Nibandha) on the clear authority of either the Bhasya or the 
Vartika." With due respect for the authority of Dr. Jha we are unable to 
persuade ourselves to be of the same view. The absence of these so-called 
aphorisms leaves no extraordinary or unsual gap in the line of thought in 
the aphorisms of Gotama. We are therefore content to follow the lead of 
M. M. Chandrakanta Tark&lankJra m accepting Vachaspati Mis'ia as a 
reliable guide to thfe aphorisms of Gotama. 

II 

In his posthumous work entitled “History of Indian Logic”, published 
by the University of Calcutta in the year 1921, Dr Vidyabhfljana has 
completely changed his opinions as to the authoisinp and the date of the 
composition or compilation of the NyAya-Sfttras We give below a resume 
of the results of his latei reseaiches with oui comments thereon. 

.^/'’“The word ny&ya popularly signifies ‘right’ or ‘justice’. The Nadya¬ 
s'Astra is therefore the science of right judgment or true reasoning” 1 “Tech¬ 
nically the word nydya signifies a syllogism (or a speech of five parts), and 
the Anviksiki was called Ny&ya-s' dstra, when nydya constituted its special 
topic.’’ 1 “The term ‘Ny&ya’ in the sense of Logic does not appear to have 
been used m literature before the first century A D. PAnini (about 35 ° B. C ) 
did not know the word ‘Ny&ya’ in the sense of Logic.”* “There is no doubt 
that P&nini derives the word nydva (evidently m the sense of justice) from 

1. History of Indian Logic, 1921, page 40. 
3. Ibid., page 41 

( Vi ) 

the root nl in his Ajiadhyayi, 3—-3—'122, as follows :— 'XC&fFt PTpffair^irrcTgr 
His Aft.idhyJyt, 4—2—60, mgsirorf? i'«rlIcja^, does not, however, presuppose 
ny&ya in the sense of ‘Logic’.” 3 

“Medhatithi Gautama (was) the founder of Anvikaiki par excellence 
(circa 550 B C.)”. 4 He “was quite different from Aksaptda While one 
lived m MithiH, the other flourished at Prabhasa in Kathiawai The 
Brahmanda-pur&na describes Ak|apida and KariAda as the sons of a Br«h- 
mana named Soma-§arm 4 who was 3 iva incarnate, and well-known for his 
practice of austerities at the shrine of Prabhisa during the time of Jatdkaruya 
Vy.lsa.” 5 * “It is by no means easy to determine v^ho was the real author of 
the Nyaya-shtra Gautama and Aksap ida seem both to have contributed 
to the production of the work 

The Nyaya-Sutra “treats of four distinct subjects, viz. (1) the 
art of debate ( tarka) (2) the means of valid knowledge (pramana), 

(3) the doctrine of syllogism (avayava), and (4) the examination of 
contempoi aneous philosophical doctrines (anyamata-pariksd )”, 7 The first 
two subjects, “ combined together, constitute the Tarka-s'astra (the philoso¬ 
phy of reasoning), popularly known as Gautami-vidya (the Gotamide 
learning) ” 7 “The third subject, the doctrine of the Syllogism, does not appear 
to have been known in India a cons ideiable time before the Christian era 
The fourth subject refers to numerous philosophical doctrines that weie 
propounded from time to time upto the second century A. D. Gotama’s 
Tarka-s'astra, after these two subjects had been introduced into it, became, 
about the second century A. D , designated as the NySya-sutra, the apho¬ 
risms on logic,” 7 

" Ananta-yajvan, in his commentary on the Pitrimedha-sotra, observes 
that Gautama and Aksapida were the same person, while the Nyaya-kosa 
mentions a legend to account for the name as applied, according to it, to 
Gautama As no credible evidence has been adduced m either case, I 
consider the identification as fanciful, and maintain that Gotama or Gautama 
was quite different from Aksap Ida, but that both of them contributed to the 
production of the Nyaya-sutra, one at its early stage and the other in its final 
form ” 8 

3 Ibid., page 41, footnote 4. 

4 Ibid., page 17. 

5. Ibid., page 49. 

6. Ibid., p. 49. 

7. Ibid., p. 497. 

8. Ibid,, p. 498. 

( vii ) 

“Though AkeapSda introduced into the Nyaya-sutra the doctrine of the 
syllogism, he was by no means the first promulgator of the doctrine—nay, not 
even its first disseminator. The doctrine was carried to great perfection in 
Greece by Aristotle m the fourth century B. C. (384—323 B. C.). That 
it was known even 111 India prior to Ak§ap 4 da is apparent from a notice of 
the same in the Charaka-samhita, about 78 A D.” 9 

“ Some philosophical doctrines of the third and fourth centuries A. D. 
were incorporated into the Ny&ya-sutra of Aksapada by VStsyAyana the 
first commentator (about 400 AD), through the introduction of certain sfitras 
of Ins own making fathered upon Aksapada ” 10 

Thus, according to Dr. Vidyfibhusana, “ Ancient logic was called 
Anvikstki, or the science of debate, but with the introduction of syllogism or 
proper reasoning it came to be called Nyaya from the first century A. D.", 11 
and that “The Ancient School, which reached the height of its development 
at the hands of Akeapflda about 150 A. D., extended over a period of one 
thousand years, beginning with Gautama about 550 B.C. and ending with 
Vfltsyayana about 400 A. D.” 12 

Ill 

It is gratifying to find that Dr. Vidyabhusana has discarded his former 
opinion that only the first book of the Ny&ya-sutra is the work of Gotama, 
while the remaining four books bear maiks of different hands and ages. His 
opinion now is that Gotama’s “work on Anviksiki has not come down to us in 
its original form,” 13 and that Aksapada is “ the real author of the Nyaya- 
sfctra which derived a considerable part of its materials from the Anviksiki- 
vidya of Gautama’’ 14 . We have already explained why the charge against 
Vatsayayana, viz., that he interpolated into the Ny lya-sitra aphorisms of his 
own making fathered upon Aksapada, must be rejected The theory, again, 
that Gotama and Aksap.'.da are two different persons is equally unsound. Dr. 
Vidyabhufaua is wrong in supposing that AkaapSda and Kanflda were sons 
of Soma-s'armt The word ‘sons’ in the text of the Brahm8 nda Purflna means 
disciples. There is also no inconsistency in Gotama, born in Mithiia, pro 
ceeding to Frabhasa for education. The identity of Gotama and AkeapSda 
does not admit of doubt Dr. Vidyabhugana himself has fully established 
it in the Introduction. We shall only point out that the commentators on 
Amara-koaa : Naiyayikah tu akeapadah”, explain that Aksapftda, Aksapftda— 

9 Ibid., pp. 498— 499 - 

10 Ibid., p. 497, foot note 3. 

11 Ibid., Introduction, p. xvi. 

12 Ibid., p. 157. 

13 Ibid, p. 20. 

14 Ibid., p. 50, 

( viii ) 

these two are the names of Gotama who holds that the number of Predicables 
is sixteen, viz., PiamAna, Piameya, Sams'aya, etc. 

Dr. Vidyabhusaua seems to us to have been induced to change his 
opinion as to the authorship and the date of the composition or compilation 
of theNysya-Sutraby the idea that the doctrine of the syllogism was imported 
into India from Greece We propose, theiefoie, to discuss this point, not fully, 
but m some detail Dr Vidy ibhSsana’s refetence to Pimm is incomplete 
Fanim does not use the word “ NyAya” in the sense of justice only In As 
tadhyayi, I 3 36 Fsprr WFFJIH farm* 0HS3 fan: the root ni 

is said to take the atmanepada form of conjugation when it is used in one 01 
other of the seven senses mentioned therein. One of these senses is Juana, 
knowledge The commentators explain JBAna as Prameyanis'chaya, ascer¬ 
tainment of the object of right knowledge. They also illustrate the use 
of the verb in this sense thus Tattvam nayate, demonstrates or verifies 
the truth. It is therefoie idle to argue that Pan mi did not know the word 
“Nyaya” m the sense of Logic. And Parnni is as old as ‘Most probably 
the seventh century B C in my opinion, for which good authority might 
he cited” (Ancient and Hindu India by V A Smith, second edition, 1923, 
page 57, footnote 1) 

Again, according to Dr Vidy&bh isana, the old ^nviksiki was 
called Ny&ya-Sastra when Ny&ya in the technical sense of the syl¬ 
logism came to constitute its special topic, t e , about the second century 
A D. This argument is demolished by Bhasa’s reference to “Medh&tithelj 
Nyiyas'astrain”, the Nyaya- 3 istra of Medhatithi, in his drama PratimA 
Dr Vidyabhueana seeks to get out of the difficulty by observing that by 
“Ny aya-s'astra” BVnsa “really meant its prototype the Anvlksikt” But the 
question is not what Bhflsa really meant, but that the term NySya-^ftstra 
m the sense of Logic was prevalent in the days of Bh 3 sa whereas, according 
to Dr. Vidy‘ibhusana, it came into use about the second century A. D 
And Bhftsa, m the opinion of M-M. Pandit Ganapati Sastri, is even older 
than Panim (vide his introduction to PraCuud nAiaka) 

Dr. Keith shows a more correct appreciation of the position of Indian 
Logic vis a vis the Logic of Greece He says . “Of logical doctnne in its 
early stages there is no reason whatevei to suspect a Greek origin: the 
syllogism of Gautama and Kanada alike is obviously of natural growth, but 
of stunted development It is with D.gniga only that the full doctrine of 
invariable concomitance as the basis of mfeience in lieu of 1 easoning by 
analogy appears, and it is not unreasonable to hazaid the suggestion that 
in this case again Gieek influence may have been at work. But the possi¬ 
bility of a natural development is not excluded ...” 15 

15 , Indian Logic and Atomism, 1921, p. 18. 

( « ) 

Hut we do not .lgiec with tlie learned lJecloi that the doctnne of 
in\ an able concomitance was unknown to Indian Logic befoie the time of 
Dignfiga. We apprehend that he has misted the full significance and the 
true function of the example in the syllogism The icascning of Kaunda 
and Gotama was not meiely item paiticular to particular and their example 
was not a mere particular experience. Generally, as Welton points out, “even 
in cases where the inference at first sight seems to be founded on one or more 
particular experiences, it is leally based on the lecogmtiun of the universal 
element in which they agice , and this may be expics^ed m a geneial pro¬ 
position which forms the major premise of a syllogism” 1 n . The need for 
the um\er&al was fully recogm=ed by Kan&da and Gotama They do not 
draw their conclusion from the example alone, but from the reasoti as well. 
The function of the example and the icasoii have also been distinguished by 
Kanada According to him inference is based on the relation of “It is its’ 
between the subject and the reason , and this relation can be grasped by the 
intellect and not by the sense He has aho explained (Vais'csika-Sfltra, 
III. 1 14) that the mark of mfcicnce must be preceded by the recollection 
of its universal 1 elation (prastddhi) to that of which it is a mark. The 
Vais'esika-Sfltra is older than the NySya-Sfttra. It is clear therefore that 
the doctrine of the universal relation was not borrowed from Greece. 

N. S. 

i« 

Intermediate Logic by J. Welton and A. J. Monahan, 1911, p, 371, 

INTRODUCTION. 

I.—GOTAMA THE FOUNDER OF NYAYA PHILOSOPHY. 

P&nini, the celebrated Sanskrit grammarian, who is supposed to have 

flourished about 350 B. C.,* derives the word 
piahied° ld Njflyaex ’ “Nyt\ya”+ from the root “i” which conveys the 

same meaning as “gam”—to go. “Ny&ya” as 
signifying logic is therefore etymologically identical with “nigama” the 
conclusion of a syllogism. Logic is designated in Sanskrit not only 
by the word “Ny&ya” but also by various other words which indicate 
diverse aspects of the science For instance, it is called “Hetu-vidy.V’t 
or “Hetu-^stra” the science of causes, “Aimksiki”§ the science of 
inquiry, “Pram&na-§&stra” the science of correct knowledge, 
“Tattva-S&stra” the science of categories, “Tarka-vidya” the science 
of reasoning, “V&d&rtha” the science of discussion and “Phakkiksl- 

♦Panmi is said to have been a disciple of Upavarsa, minister of a King 
of the Nanda dynasty, about 350 B. C., as is evident from the following .— 

srs**! fgnarsrrf f 1 

<T3T qrfSjrfjRTTf II 

(Kath&sarit-sfigara, Chapter IV., veisc 20) 

Dr. Otto Bcehtlingk observes — 

“We need therefore only make a space ot fifty years between each 
couple of them, in order to arrive at the year 350, into the neighbourhood 
of which date our grammarian is to be placed, accoidmg to the Kath 3 sarit- 
sagara.”— Goldstucker’s Pay mi, p 85 

(Panini’s Astadhy 3 yi 3-3-122,) 

t kit ^ 

grtst I'll tfs[R> 

srrasp! srrgt qqqftfst tg fe erret .*nbr fltof ^ 

II 

(Lalitavistara, Chapter XII., 

_ rt ^ r, r\ 

SIT 

p 179 , Dr. Rajendra Lai Mttra’s 

(AmarakoBa, svargavarga, verse 155). 

( a ) 

S&stra” the science of sophism. Ny&ya-sutra is the earliest work 
extant on Ny&ya Philosophy. 

The Nyflya or logic is said to have been founded by a sage named 
Gotama.* He is also known as Gautama, 
The founder of Nyftya Afesap&dat and Dirghatapas.t The names 

AksapJda or Dirghata- Gotama and Gautama point to the family to 
pas. which he belonged while the names Aksap&da 

and Dirghatapas refer respectively to his meditative habit and practice 
of long penance. 

In the Liigveda-samhiti as well as the Sathapatha-Br&hmana of the 
white Yajurveda we find mention of one Go- 
The family of Gotama. tama W ^ Q was gon Q f Rahugana § and priest 

of the Royal family of Kuru-sriujaya for whose victory in battle he 

*r HigiffT w JT^rgfflr: i 

JTtdTJT zrw fam h: ii 

(Naisadhachantam 17-75.) 

cTOt srref 3 qrf fr fc r I il 

(Padmapuraiia, Uttarakhanda, Chapter 263 ) 

»Tt?nT: ^ ft t 

(Skanda-puritna, K6hk& Khanda, Chapter XVII) 

!TcrT%^ 7 TirrJifftif%rt 3 : jtsit fwsFsr: it 

(U dyotak&ra’s Nyayavartika, opening lines.) 

In the Sarvadais'ana-samgraha Nyaya philosophy is called the Aksapada 
system 

JKfilidisa’s Raghuvams'ani 11-33. 

§ 1 ^c'sfETRTTTirr softer i 

etai w ^ ^jRr^fr ^ ^ *3?^ ^^mrf wi 

StT^TtTT^Rr I rT^T ^ ^T^^fqffTTT^fRTq; 1 ift^T 5 I 

S'Vmf ^STRT 3d%T SITOfc*. | 

1 higveda-samhitl, Mandala i, Sfikta 81, Mantra 3, Sfiyaca’s commentary). 

5 ffrortsfrt Iwrm star i 
cift nterat vrfvnjj jdf^d srra - ti 

(Satapatha Br&hmana of the white Yajurveda, Kfiuda 1, Adhy&ya 4 
Madhyandmiya recension.) 

( ii*' ) 

prayed to Indra, Nodh&h, * son of Gotama, was also called Gotama 
who composed several new hymns in honour of Indra. The sages 
sprung from the family of Gotama are designated Gotamasali I who 
were very intelligent ; and Agm, pleased with their adoration, gave 
them cattle and rice in abundance. It is related that Gotama, once 

pinched with thirst, prayed for water of the Marut-Gods, who out of 
mercy, placed a wellj before him transplanted from elsewhere The 
water gushing out copiously from the well not only quenched his 
thirst but formed itself into a river, the source of which was the seat 
of the original well. 

In the Rigveda-samhit& the descendants of Gotama as already 

The teachers called 
Gautama. 

noticed are also called Gotama while in later Vedic 
literature they are called Gautama. The Vamsa- 

Br&hmana of the S&maveda mentions four members 
of the Gotama family§ among the teachers who transmitted that 

*^nrrq^ item 1 

(Rvgveda-samhitS., Mandala i, Sukta 63, Mantra 13 ) 

(Rigveda-samhita, Mandala i, Sukta 61, Mantra 16) 

E'rTRT OTcT^T 

sr ^ jfe* ?nfcr srrroTfffaRR n 

(Rigeda-samhitd, Mandala 77, Sukta 77, Mantia 5) 

tfsur* 33g s * re r w ff ffcmR <n*pr i 

^nr f%sr^r cpfcm ^rnrfir n 

(Rigveda-samhita, Mandala 1, Sukta 85, Mantra 11) 

Sayana m commenting on Rigveda samhitu, Mandala i, Sukta 77, 
Mantra 10, observes — 

i ffcw =?sf^r- fircrorar ft fen q-qrf i 

rRsfatf ir^rrsfT^«r’ ^ ftcw sijft fersff <ri if si 

creqTR ?rr§Tf ^ rrfarerrcrf 
<ngff rrwrar^-1 3Pnr4Js5RT srffq^rf i 

The well (utsadhi) is alluded to m the Rigveda, Mandala 1, Sukta 88, 
Mantra 4, thus — 

wff W fff fsff t 

slgr cTt «iid*ii^dl 3«|s* ScSrff : II 

§ fWt TTTlffrTmT. ffsFFfar ftcW: 1 

Sttmavedlya Vatus'a-Brahmana, Khanda 2, Satyaviata Samas'rami’s edi¬ 
tion, p. 7 .) 

( iv ) 

Veda to posterity, vis., the Radha-Gautama, G&tri-Gautama, Sumanta- 
babhrava-Gautama and Samkara-Gautama, and the Chh&ndogya 
Upanisad of the same Veda mentions another teacher named H&ndru- 
mata-Gautama* who was approached by Satya-Kama J&v&la to be 
his teacher. The Gobhila Grihya Sutra of the S&maveda cites the 
opinion of a Gautama t who held that during the winter season there 
should be three oblations offered to the dead ancestors. Another 
Gautama was the author of the Pitrimedha SutraJ which perhaps 
belongs to the S&maveda. The Brihadhranyaka § of the white 
Yajurveda mentions a teacher named Gautama, while in the Katho- 
panisad of the Black Yajurveda the sage Nachiketas|j who conversed 
with Yama on the mystery of life, is called Gautama which evidently 
is a generic name as his father is also called Gautama in the same 
work. A Gautama \ is mentioned as a teacher in the Kausika sutra 

jffcnr i 

(Samavediya Vams'a-Br&hmana, Khanda 2). 

(Samavediya Vams'a-Br&hmana, Khanda 3.) 

11 \ 11 

(Chh&ndogya Upanisad, Adhyaya 4, Khanda 4). 

t 11 a 11 

WS5R 5f%JTT^TTf!T II VS || 

cPJT II II 

(Gobhila Grihya Sutra, 3-10) 

t An incomplete manuscript of the Pitrimedha Sutra is contained in the 
Library of the Calcutta Sanskrit College, but the work was printed in 
America several years ago. 

SpfNnrrf sfow: n ^ i r i ^ n 

(Brihaddranyaka, Adhy&ya 4,) 

II sqwrfrr fju’ 1 

stpst *rarf?r 11 % 11 

(Kathopamsad, Valh 5.) 

q^rr ^qr^fcnr^ffcnrt i 

S5ft?r sr«nf qr i 

(Kathopanisad, Valli 5.) 

*|Vide Weber's History of Indian Liteialure, p. 153. 

( V ) 

of the Atharvaveda while to another Gautama is attributed the 
authorship of the Gautama Dharma sutra # an authoritative work on 
the sacred law, 

We need not take any notice of one Gautama* who, at the bidding 
of his mother, as stated in the Mahabharata, cast into the Ganges 
his old and blind father Dirghatamas who was however miraculously 
saved. 

The R&mayana mentions a Gautama} who had his hermitage in a 
grove at the outskirts of the city of Mithil& where 
Gautama, husband be lived with his wife Ahaly&. It is well-known how 
of Ahaly&. Ahaly&, for her seduction by Indra, was cursed by 

her lord to undergo penace and mortification until 
her emancipation at the happy advent of RAma. The Adhy&tma 
R&mdyana, while repeating the same account, places the hermitage 
of Gautama§ on the banks of the Ganges , and our great poet K&lidasa 
follows the R&mayaiiic legend describing Gautamall as Dirghatapas, 
a sage who practised long penance. 

* The text of the Gautama Dharma-sutra has been printed several times 
in India while an English translation of it by Dr, G. Buhler has appeared 
m the Sacred Books of the East Series. 

t t ^Trrtn 5 Tnr tErmf f^sn^Tcr it rr 11 

xm: vrft f^RFTT ti \\ 11 

«TTtT I 

^ 33 TFI. aP WH T KJ JTflW: II Rtt II 

(Mah&bh&rata, Adiparva Adhyaya 104). 

t grsr ^rrsrcr \ 

ftp ^77 1 

sTTrjf*r^rfa ^rrqr^ srrem. 11 ii 

Wimt faster II *<•, II 

Ramityana, Adik&nda, Sarga 48). 

"Tfcnrcrmtf 5^7 tnrr^esrr ft i g i gt ft 11 11 

(Adhyalma Rtimayana, ildikanda, adhjiiya 6) 

II th <wRnf gm«rfir: t 

y i*i+il 

( vi ) 

The Viyupurina describes a sage named Aksapada* as the disciple 
of a Brahmana named Soma Sarm4 who was Siva 
Aksap&da. incarnate and well-known for his practice of aus¬ 

terities at the shrine of Prabh&sa during the time of 
Jatukarnya VyAsa. This Aksapida mentioned along with Kanida is 
evidently no other person than Gotama or Gautama who founded the 
Ny4ya philosophy. As to the origin of the name Aksap4da (/‘having 
eyes in the feet”) as applied to Gautama, legend has it that Gautama 
was so deeply absorbed m philosophical contemplation that one day 
during his walks he fell unwittingly into a well out of which he was 
rescued with great difficulty, God therefore mercifully provided him 
with a second pair of eyes in his feet to protect the sage from further 
mishaps.jAnotber legendf which represents Vyasa, a disciple of Gau¬ 
tama, lying prostrate before his master unti' the latter condescended 
to look upon him, not with his natural eyes, but with a new pair of 
eyes in his feet, may be dismissed with scanty ceremony as being the 
invention of a later generation of logicians, anxious to humiliate 

Vyasa for vilification of the Ny4ya system in his Mahabharata and 
Vedanta sutra. 

5?T- 

II II 

(Raghuvams'a, Sarga 11). 

* if SHH thUHIct I 

*fwiwi 11 \\ 

JUT rt 3^T ?T7hl«n': | 

^ 11 \ o \ \\ 

v (Vdyupu rana, Adhyftya 23). 

t ^TRnrt ft sqr^TFT g^Jtw ?r srfsr- 

jnr «n&r TOrf^r. qit^f TOwftf qta- 

wit1 

(Nyayakosa, 2nd edition, by M. M. Bhimacarya Jhalakikara, Bombay) 

( vii ) 

The people of Mithild (modern Darbhanga in North Behar) 
ascribe the foundation of Ny&ya philosophy to 
Local tradition. Gautama, husband of Ahaly&, and point out as the 
place of his birth a village named Gautamasth&na 
where a fair is held every year on the 9th day of the lunar month of 
Chaitra (March-April). It is situated 28 miles north-east of Darb- 
hanga and has a mud-hill of considerable height (supposed to be the 
hermitage of Gautama) at the base of which lies the celebrated 
•‘Gautama-kunda” or Gautama’s well the water whereof is like milk 
to the taste and feeds a perennial rivulet called on this account 
Ksirodadbi or Khiroi (literally the sea of milk). /Two miles to 
the east of the village there is another village named Ahaly&sth&na 
where between a pair of trees lies a slab of stone identified with 
Abaly& in her accursed state. In its vicinity there is a temple which 
commemorates the emancipation of Ahalya by Rama Chandra. The 
Gautama-kunda and the Ksirodadhi river, which are still extant at 
Gautama-sthana, verify the account of Gotama given above from the 
Rigveda while the stone slab and the temple of Rama at AhalyA,- 
sthana are evidence corroborative of the story of Ahalya as given in 
the R&mayana. There is another tradition prevalent in the town of 
Chapra that Gautama, husband of Ahalyft and founder of the Nyftya 
philosophy, resided in a village now called Godnh. at the confluence of 
the rivers Ganges and Sarayu where a Sanskrit academy called Gau¬ 
tama Thomson Pdtbas&la has been established to commemorate the 
great sage. 

It seems to me that Gautama, son of Rahugana, as mentioned in 
the Eigveda, was the founder of the Gautama family 
The founder of from which sprang Gautama, husband of Ahalyd, as 
identified! 11 ' 05013 '^ oarrated in the R&m&yana. It is interesting to note 
that Satananda*, son of Gautama by AhalyA, is a 
priest in the royal family of Janaka much in the same way as Gautama, 

srfctw 9 ar i 

(RAm&yana, akUk&nda, Sarga 50). 

(Uttara R&ma charitam), 

( viii ) 

son of Rahugana, is a priest in the royal family of Kurusrmjaya. The 
fields waving with paddy plants which greet the eyes of a modern 
traveller near and round Gautama-sthftna bear testimony to Agni’s gift 
of rice and cattle in abundance to the family of Gautama. The Ny&ya 
philosophy was, on the authority of the tradition prevalent in Mithila, 
founded by Gautama, husband of AhalysL The same Gautama has 
been designated as Aksap&da in the V&yu Purina already referred to. 
Aksapida has been identified by Anantayajvan* with the author of the 
Pitrimedha Sutra as well as with that of the Gautama Dharma sutra, 
and it is possible that he is not other than the Gautama referred to in 
the Kausika sutra of the Atharva Veda. The other Gautamas 
mentioned in the Br&hmanas, Upanisads, etc., appear to be the 
kinsmen of their illustrious name-sake. 

The Ramayana, as we have found, places the hermitage of 

, T , Gautama, husband of Ahalyft, at Gautama-sthana 

His residence. 

twenty-eight miles north-east of Darbhfuigft while 
the Adhyatma R&mftyana places it on the banks of the Ganges at 
its confluence with the Sarayu off the town of Chapra. The Vayu- 
pur&na fixes the residence of Aksap&da, supposed to be identical 
with Gautama, at Prabh&sa-j- beyond Girnar in Kathiawar on the 

*To the Grihya Sutras of the S&maveda probably belong also Gautama’s 
Pitr imedhasutra (Cf. Burnell, p. 57 , the commentator Anantayajvan identifies 
the author with Aksapada the author of the Nyaya-sutra), and the Gautama- 
dharma-sutra.—Webei’s History of Indian Liteiature, p. 85 

f Prabhasa washed on its western side by the river Sarasvati and 
reputed as the residence of Krisna, is mentioned in the Srfmad Bhagavata 
thus •— 

(Bhagavata, Skandha II, adhy&ya 6 ) 

snvnsi i^Taaf arakscr* i 

(Bhagavata, Skandha II, adhyftya 30.) 

Prabhasa was situated beyond the rock of Girnar in Kathiawar where 
we come across all the edicts of As'oka as well as as an inscription of 
Rudradama supposed to be the first inscription in Sanskrit dated about 
100 A. D. which mentions Chandra Gupta and As'oka by names. There 
are also some inscriptions in Gupta characters, and there is no doubt that 
Prabhasa situated on the Sarasvati acquired celebrity in very old times. 

( ix ) 

sea-coast, To reconcile these conflicting statements it has been 
suggested that Aksap&da otherwise known as Gotama or Gautama 
was the founder of the Nyftya philosophy, that he was born at 
Gautama-sthana in Mithila on the river Ksirodadhi, lived for some 
years at the village now called Godnti, at the confluence of the 
Ganges and Sarayu until his retirement to Prabh&sa the well-known 
sacred place of pilgrimage in Kathiawar on the sea-coast. 

The Satapatha Brahmana mentions Gautama along with Asur&* 

Hi, age about 550 B.C. ya, - ia and the V ^ u P^na (already quoted) 

states that Aksapuda, alms Gotama or Gauta¬ 
ma, flourished during the time of JUtukarnya Vy&sa. Now J&tu- 
karnya, according to the Madhukdnda and Yajhavalkya Kaiida of 
the Satapatha Brfthmana * (K&nva recension), was a pupil of A.sur&- 
yana and Ydska who are supposed to have lived about 550 B. C. 
This date tallies well with the time of another Gautama who, together 
with Aranemi, is described in the Divyavadanaf, a Buddhist Sanskrit 
work translated into Chinese in the 2nd century A. D., as having 
transmitted the Vedas to posterity before they were classified by 
Vyasa. It does not conflict with the view that Aksap&da is identical 

This Pr abb as a is not to be confounded with another town called 
Prabhasa m Kaus&mbi near Allahabad on the Jumna where there is an 
inscription, dated about the 2nd century B C , of A&adasena, a descendant 
of Sonakilyana ol Adhicchatra, (vide Dr. Fuhrer’s Pabhosa inscriptions in 
Epigiaphia Indica, Vol, II, pp. 242-243 ) 

* Vide Webei’s History of Indian Literature, p. 140. 

In the Madhyandmiya lecension of the Satapatha Brahmana a teacher 
intervenes between Y'iska and Jatukarnya, vvz Bharadvaja Cf. 

.'rrorapafr q regrenf 

(Satapatha Brahmana, Madh} and inly a recension, Kan da 14, adhyaya 5 ) 

fThe 33rd chapter of the Divy 3 .vad.lna called Matanga Sutra, m 
Chinese Mo-tan-nu-cm, was translated mto Chinese by An-sln-kao-cie of the 
Eastern Han dynasty in A, D. 148-170. [Vide Bunjiu Nanjio’s Catalogue 
of the Chinese Tripitaka). In it we read :— 

aiH t^T5TT qCfldRH : ^s[FT l fqp 

t snarer: 

qT^qfcT 1 SJ37: <Tf^cTS?g^T 

(Divy&vadUna, Chap. XXX 111 ). 

( X ) 

with Gautama, author of the Gautama Dharma-Sutra which is 
“ declared to be the oldest of the existing works on the sacred law* ” 
Aksapada-Gautama, founder of the Nyaya Philosophy, was almost a 
contemporary of Buddha-Gautama who founded Buddhism and 
Indrabhuti Gautama who was a disciple of Mah&vira, the reputed 
founder of Jainism. 

The fourfold division of the means of knowledge (Pramana) into 
perception, inference, comparison and word found in the Jaina Prakrita 
scriptures such as the Nandi-Sutra, Sth&naiiga-Sutraf and Bhagavati 
Sutra compiled by IndrabhutuGautama finds its parallel in the 
Nyaya-Sutra of Aksapada-Gautama leading to the conclusion that 
this particular doctrine was either borrowed by Indrabhuti from 
Aksap&da or was the common property of both. In the Pali and 
Prakrita scriptures Gautama is called Gotama, and a Pith Sutta 
mentions a sect called “Gotamaka,’'+ who were followers of Gau¬ 
tama, identified perhaps with the founder of the Nyaya Philosophy. 
The Pt\li Canonical scriptures such as the Brahmajala Sutta, § 

* Buhler observes —These arguments which allow us to place Gautama 
before both Baudhayan a and VtWistha are that both these authois quote 

Gautama as an authonty on law. These facts will, I think, suffice 

to show that the Gautama Dhauna Sutra may be safely declared to be the 
oldest of the existing woiks on the sacred law.” (Buhlei’s Gautama, 
Introduction, pp. XL 1 X and L 1 V, S. B E. series). 

t tr-sr# <f srtr 

ST3irr% ?TRTit i 

(Sthananga-Sutra, Page 309, published by Dhanapal Singh). 

t Vide Prol T. W. Rhj's David's Intioduction to the Kassapa-Sihanada 
Sutta, pp 220-222 It is observed — 

“I he only alternative is that some Brahman a, belonging to the Gotama 
Gotra, is hcic rcterred to as having had a community of Bhiksus named 
after him.” 

§ vz, Qvirarr err er er# sforcft i yr 

l 

(Biahmajala Sutta 1-32, edited by Rhys Davids and Carpenter). 

sto ysmyi-^T ^ * ‘srrfa yTsrsrr 

(Udana, p. io, edited by Paul Sleinthal, P. T. S. edition). 

( *i ) 

Ud&na, etc., which embody the teachings of Buddha, mention a class 
of Sramanas and Br&hmanas who were “takkt” or “takkika” (logicians) 
and “vimamsi” (casuists) and indulged in “takka” logic) andvimamsii, 
(casuistry), alluding perhaps to the followers of Aksapitda-Gautama 
described as “Gotamaka.” 

The Kathavatthuppakarana a Pali work of the Abhidhamma- 
pitaka, composed by Moggaliputta Tissa at the third Buddhist 
Council during the reign of Asokaabout 255 B C , mentions “patinnfb” 
(in Sanskrit : “pratijna,” proposition), “Upanaya” (application of 
reasons), “Niggaha” (in Sanskrit : “Nigraha,” humiliation or defeat) 
etc., which are the technical terms of Ny&ya philosophy or Logic. 
Though Moggaliputta Tissa has not made any actual reference to 
Logic or Nyaya, his mention of some of its technical terms warrants 
us to suppose that that philosophy existed in some shape in India 
in his time about 255 B. C. These facts lead us to conclude that 
Gotama, Gautama or Ak^ap;\da, the founder of Nyaya Philosophy, 
lived about the year 550 B. C. 

II. NYAYASfirrRA THE FIRST WORK ON NYAYA PHILOSOPHY. 

To Gotama, Gautama or Ak&apada, of whom a short account has 
The earliest con- been 8 iven above, is attributed the authorship of 
tribution to the the Ny&ya-Sutra, the earliest work on Nyftya 
Sfltra hteratuic. Philosophy. Sanskrit literature in the Sutra or 
aphoristic style was presumably inaugurated at about 550 B. C. and 
the Ny&ya-Sutra the author of which lived, as already stated, at 
about that time, must have been the hrstj- contribution to that litera¬ 
ture. The "Sutta’’ or Sutra section of the Pali literature reads very 

* The teims “Patinna,” (pratijna., proposition) and “niggaha” (nigraha, 
defeat) occur in the following passages .— 

*f =ET cWT tTrSST I M Mft'j-jIFT M^3TT ( 

(Kathavatthuppakarana, Siamese edition, p. 3). 

“Niggaha-Catukkam” is the name of a section of the first chapter of the 
Kathavat thuppakarana while “Upanaya-Catukkam” is the name of another 
section of that work. 

fKapila is stated in the S&mkhye-K&riktt, verse 70, to have taught his 
philosophy to Asuri who is mentioned in the S'atapatha Br&hmana as a 

teacher, AsurfLyana and Yaska who followed Asuri were the teachers of 
J&tukainya, a contemporary of Aksap&da-Gautama. Kapila therefore 

( xii ) 

much like a body of sermons bearing no affinity with the Sutra 
works of the Brahmanas, 

The Ny&ya-Sxitra is divided into five books, each containing two 
The oradual dev- c ^ a P ters called tthnikas or Diurnal portions. It is 
elopment of the believed that Aksapada finished his work on Ny&ya 
NjAya-Sfitia, j n ten lectures corresponding to the ahnikas re¬ 

ferred to above. We do not know whether the whole of the 
Ny&ya-Sutra, as it exists at present, was the work of Aksapffda, nor 
do we know for certain whether his teachings were committed to writ¬ 
ing by himself or transmitted by oral tradition only. It seems to me 
that it is only the first book of the Nyftya-Sutra containing a brief 
explanation of the 16 categories that we are lustified in ascribing to 
Aksapfida, while the second, third and fourth books which discuss 
particular doctrines of the Vaisesika, Yoga, Mimiimsu, Vedanta and 
Buddhist Philosophy bear marks of different hands and ages.j In 
these books there are passages quoted almost ve/botim from the 
Lanka vatar a-Sutr a , a Sanskrit work of the YogAchara Buddhist 
Philosophy, from the Madhyamika Sutra of Nagarjuna-j- and from the 
Sataka+of Arya Deva—works which were composed in the early 
centuries of Christ |rhe fifth book treating of the varieties of futile 
rejoinders and occasions for rebuke was evidently not the production 
of AksapAda who dismissed those topics without entering into their 
details. The last and most considerable additions were made by 
Vatsy&yana, otherwise known as Pakula Svami, who about 450 A. D. 
wrote the first regular commentary, “Bhasya”, on the Nysiya Sutra, 
and harmonised the different, and at times conflicting, additions and 
interpolations by the ingenious introduction of Sutras of his own mak¬ 
ing fathered upon AksapadaA 

preceded Aksapada by at least three genet ations. Kapila's Philosoph) is 
believed to have come down by oral auditions and was not peihaps com¬ 
mitted to wilting in his life-time. Hence the Xyaya-Sutia has been stated 
to be the first work of the SCitia period 

* Vide Ny&ya SCitra 4-2-26, which quotes the Lankavat&ra Stitra (dated 
about 300 A.D) 

t Vide Nyaya-Stora 2-1-39. 4 - 1 - 39 , and 4-1-48, which cuticlse the MAdhj?- 
mika Sfttia. 

t Vide NyAya-Sfttra 4-1-48 which criticises S'ataka of Aryaveda. 

( xni ) 

The Nyi\ya-Sutra has, since its composition, enjoyed a very 

great popularity as is evident from the numet- 
Commentaiies on the , 

N\aya-Sutra ous commentaries that have from time to time 

centred round it, A few of the commentaries 

are mentioned below —. 

TEXT. 

1. NyAy-a-Sutia by Gotama or Aksap&da (550 B C.) 

Commentaries. 

2. NyAya-Bhasya by YAtsy Ay an a (450 A. D ) 

3 Ny Aya-V.ntika by' Udyotakara. 

4. NyAva-Vartika-tatparya-tiKA by Vschaspati Mis'ra. 

5 Nyaya-VSrtika-t&tparyatika-paris'uddhi by Udayana. 

6 Paus'uddipiak&'sA by Vardhamana 

7. Vaidhamanendu by PadmanAbha Misha 

/ 

8. Xy A y A lank Si a by Si Ikantha. 

9 X_vSyAlank.ua Vritti by Jayanta 
10 Xy Ay a-maiiyai 1 by Jayanta. 

11. NyAya-Yntti by Abhayatilakopadhvay a. 

12. Xy A ya-Vritti by* Vis'vanatha. 

13. MitabhSsinl Vritti by MahSdeva Vcdanti. 

14. Nyayaprak.'s'a by Kes'ava Mis'ra. 

15. NyAyabodhini by Govardhana. 

16. Nyftya Sutra VydkhyA by Matluu Anfttha 

III. RECEPTION ACCORDED TO THE NY AY \ PHILOSOPHY. 

It appears from the Chhindogya-upanisad, Bnhad£lranyaka-upa- 
nisad and Kausitaki Br&hmana* tha.. Philosophy 
Philosophy inaugur- (Adhyatma-Vidya) received its first impetus 
the military caste. from the K^atriyas (members of the military 

caste) who carried it to great perfection. King 
Ajfttasatru in an assembly of the Kuru-Panch&las consoled a Brah- 
mana named Svetaketu, son of Arum of the Gautama family, that 

* Kausitald-Biahmana 2-1, 2, 16,4. 

Brihadftranyaka 2-1-20, 2-3-6 

Chh&ndogya 3-14-1 ; 5-11, 24 , 1-8-9 . 1 - 9 - 3 . 7' 1_ 3 an d 5 " 11 * 

JTT R RteRTR^t ^ 5IR» RR: 5^1 f^XT TT^fcT <r**TTg 

(ChhAndogya-upanisad 5-3). 

( xiv ) 

he had no cause of being sorry for his inability to explain certain 
doctrines of Adhy&tma-Vidyd which were known only to the 
Ksatriyas. It may be observed that Mahfivira and Buddha who 
founded respectively Jainism and Buddhism—two universal religions 
based on poilosophy or Adhyfitma-Vidyd—were also Ksatriyas. 
Kapila is reputed to be the first Brahmana who propounded a system 
of philosophy called Samkhya, but his work on the subject not 
having come down to us in its original form we are not in a position 
to ascertain what relation it bore to the Vedas or what kind of recep¬ 
tion was given to it by the orthodox Br&hmanas. We know for 
certain that the most powerful Brahmana who undertook to study and 
teach philosophy openly was Gotama, Gautama or Aksap&da, the 
renowned author of the NyiVya-Sutra He founded a rational system of 
philosophy called “Nyfiya” which at its inception had no relation with 
the topics of the Vedic Samhita and Brahmana. At this stage the 
Nyaya was pure Logic unconnected with the scriptural dogmas. 
Aksapada recognised four means of valid knowledge, vis., perception 
inference, comparison and word of which the last signified knowledge 
derived through any reliable assertion. 

This being the nature of Nyaya or Logic at its early stage it was 
not received with favour by the orthodox com- 
received wthf a\ our* munit y of Brahmauas who were anxious to estab¬ 
lish an organised society, paid their sole attention 
to the Samhitds and Br&hmanas which treated of rituals, ignoring 

Professor P Deussen obsei \ cs •— 

In this narrative, presetved by two different Vedic schools, it is expressly 
declared that the knowledge of the Brahman as atman, the centrale docti me 
of the entire Vedanta, is po-sessed by the King , but, on the contiuiy, 
is not possessed by the Brahmana "famed as a Vedic scholar.”—Philosoph} 
of the Upanishads, pp \y —18 

Again he remaiks :—We aie forced to conclude, if not with absolute 
certainty, yet with a \eiy high degiee of probability, that as a inattci ot 
fact the doctrine of the &tman standing as it did in such sharp contiast to 
all the principles of the Vedic ritual, though the original conception may 
have been due to Br t hmanas, was taken up and cultivated primarily not 
m BrShmaua but in Ksatriya circles, and was first adopted by the faimei 
m later times. Philosophy of the Upanishads, p. 19. 

^ si§r 1 Rnw+tmK 1 i 

asr 1 

( XV ) 

altogether the portions which had nothing to do with them. The 
sage Jaimini* in his Mimaipsa-Sutra distinctly says that the Veda 
having for its sole purpose the prescription of actions, those parts 
of it which do not serve that purpose are useless We are therefore 
not surprised to find Manu J ' enjoining excommunication upon those 
members of the twice-born caste who disregarded the Vedas and 
Dharma-Sutra relying upon the support of Hetu-S&stia or Logic. 
Similarly Valmiki in his Ramayana + discredits those persons of 
perverse intellect who indulge in the frivolities of Anvlksiki, the 
science of Logic, regardless of the works of sacred law (Dharma- 
sastra) which they should follow as their guide. Vy&sa in the 
Mahiibh&rata,§ Santiparva, relates the doleful story of a repen¬ 
tant Br&hmana who, addicted to Tarkavidya (Logic), carried 

These four piegnant expressions (Mah&vftkya) originated tiom the 
Brahmanas, whence it may be concluded Nirguna-Biahma-Vidy.i 01 know¬ 
ledge of absolute Brahman was confined among them It w as the Saguna- 
Brahma Vidyj 01 knowledge of Biahman limited by form and atti lbutes that 
is said to have been introduced by the Ksatnyas 

# | \ | R | \ | 

(Mimamsa SutiaJ, 

i i 

?rrf^?rsti u 

(Manu, adhyiya 2, verse Ilj 

f*rdf ?r 11 \% n 

(R&m&yana Ayodhya K&nda, barga 100J 

§ rrfrri'rT^T | 

wsrfasrr eretr tgrr^ i 

3T7^T ^ SlgRmS ^ II II 

srrferqr =sr 1 

J>I5TT^r# THT flfST II II 

(Mahibharatu, S'antiparva, adhyiya 180.) 

In the Gandharva tantra we find — 

(Quoted in Prinatosinttantra). 

( xvi ) 

on debates divorced from all faith in the Vedas and was on 
that account, turned into a jackal m his next birth as a penal- 
ty. In another passage of the SAntiparva, Vy&sa warns the followers 
of the Ved&nta Philosophy against communicating their doctrines to a 
Naiyuyika or Logician. Vyasat does not care even to review the 
Ny&ya system in the Brahma-sutra seeing that it has not been recog¬ 
nised by any worthy sage. Stories of infliction of penalties on those 
given to the study of Nyaya are related in the Skanda Parana^ and 
other works , and in the Naisadha-charita§ we find Kali satirising the 
founder of Nyfiya Philosophy as “Gotama” the “most bovine” among 
sages. 

Gradually however this system of philosophy instead of rely ing 

entirely upon reasoning came to attach due weight 

Ny a y a reconciled to t he authority of the Vedas, and later on, after 
with scriptural dog¬ 
mas its reconciliation with them, the principles of 

Nyaya were assimilated in other systems of philosophy such as the 

Vaisesika.il Yoga, Mimfl,ms£L,*l S&tpkhya**, etc 

* srrqqqqifiiq sir^r' qrsq I 

X X X X X 

?T <TOq fq^Rrq ^ || II 

(Mah&bh&rata, S'antiparva, adhyaya 246 ). 

f ^TqftflrCTirTcqPcTITSN^T II ^ II 

(Ved5nta-sGtra 2 - 3 ), 

I qlrrq ^wqq qq qq nn 

3fTHtS5£T ijfqf^qq STTqRfr | 

«lfq%5T*?rq*5q- I 

^rqqptfqqrrcrq qq srfqcqfq h 

(Skanda Purana, Kalikakhanda, adhyaya 17 ) 

§ gq»q q fst^r?qrq ircTgfq: \ 

qrRWf cTJT^q q*JT f%cq ^r. II 

HVais'esika-sfttra r- 1 - 4 , 2 - 1 - 15 , 1 - 1 - 16 , 2 - 1 - 17 , 2 - 2 - 17 , 2 - 2 - 32 , 3 - 1 - 15 , 9 - 2 - 3 , 
9 - 2 - 4 . 

ijayanarayaua Tarkapanchananas edition). 

*1 Mimpmsa-sCitra 1 - 1 - 4 , 1 - 3 - 1 , 1 - 3 - 2 , 1 - 3 - 3 , 1 - 4 - 14 , 1-4*35, 1 - 5 - 8 , 3 - 1 - 17 , 
3 - 1 - 20 , 4 - 3 - 18 , 5 - 1 - 6 , 10 - 3 - 35 . 

Samkhya-sutra 1 - 60 , 1 - 101 , 1 - 106 , 5 - 10 , 5 - 11 , 5 - 13 . 

Yoga-s&tra 1 - 5 , 6 , 

( xvu ) 

Henceforth the Nyaya was regarded as an approved branch 
of learning. Thus the Gautama-Dharma-sutra* 

vedTbranchknow- prescnbe s a course of training in Logic (Ny&ya) 
ledge. foi the King and acknowledges the utility of 

Tarka or Logic in the administration of justice though in the case of 
conclusions proving incompatible ultimate decision is directed to be 
made by reference to persons versed in the Vedas. Manut says that 
dhanna or duty is to be ascertained by logical reasoning not opposed 
to the injunctions of the Vedas. He recommends Logic (Ny&ya) as a 
necessary study for a King and a logician to be an indispensable member 
of a legal assembly. Y&]Sa-valkya| counts “Nyaya" or Logic among 
the fourteen principal sciences while Vyasa§ admits that he was able to 
arrange and classify the Upanisads with the help of the Aiwiksiki or 
Logic. In the Padma-purana'I Logic is included among the fourteen 

* ronr sn^rci^r, tRm sqiFsft- 

1.«nqrfvFrT& rrefowjqm: i storsctto 

fesrfaqrr) Irfareii^q: sraratsr fargr i 

(Gautamadhaima-sfltra, adhyaya n), 

1 srrq vrarr^si =ar r 

sr srar 5 ?re: 11 

(Manu, adhyaya 12 , verse ioCj. 

f^rrf i 

^nr^f^^^ricir^f ^TrTkf^rtsr srfocr: i 

(Manu, adhySya 7 , verse 43 ), 

qwrcrfirqr qfrq?*. 11 

(Manu. adhyaya 12 , verse 111). 

t ^Ttjjftrr^ffVjrfgT snwnrenr^fJrfsrcTT: i 
^?r: fqsrR'r *srwf^«r II 

(Yajnavalkya samhita, adhyaya r, verse 3 ) 

§ cfTcT 3 I 

cTR f^T TU^Jl 

(Mahabharata quoted by Vis'vandtha in his Vritti on Nyaya-sdtra 1 - 1 - 1 ). 

II 1 

jfhTRTT n 

irerere frir ^ yr: i 

(Padma-pur&na, vide Muir’s Sanskrit text Vol. Ill, p. 27), 

( xviii ) 

principal branches of learning promulgated by God Visnu, while in the 
Matsya-purana," 1 Nyaya-vidyft, together with the Vedas, is said to have 
emanated from the mouth of Brahma himself. In fact so wide¬ 
spread was the study of Nyaya that the Mahabharata is full of 
references to that science. 

In the Adiparva of the MahbaMrata Ny&yaf or Logic is mention¬ 
ed along with the Veda and Chikitsa. (the science of medicine), and the 
hermitage of Kasyapa is described as being filled with sages who 
were versed in the NyAya-tattva (logical truths) and knew the true 
meaning of a proposition, objection and conclusion. The Santi- 
parvaj refers to numerous tenets of Ny&ya supported by reason and 
scripture while the A,svamedha-parva§ describes the sacrificial ground 
as being resounded by logicians (Hetu-vi\din) who employed argu- 
ments and counter-arguments to vanquish one another. In the Sabba- 
parvall the sage Narada is described as being versed in Logic 

* SRPcTCSJ Wfo** I 

ufarrsn ?q , iq , fsrcrr 5sr srfrngrewgm ll 

(Mat^ya-puiina 3-2). 

t «n*rf*r$rT ^ qi^rqRr ?r*n i 

tg^* snf st-jt 11 v® n 

(Mahabharata, Adiparva, adhyaya 1 ). 

11 ii 

^«rrisi#T%gT?cr <TOTT«Nr?rT i 

^T5rfTRfgCTn:|. || yy II 

(Mahabharata, Adiparva, adhyaya 70J. 

STTf^fa: 1 
II II 

(Mahabharata, Santiparva, adhyaya 210J. 

§ dfcpi stirr v g tg^nrf^r: i 

tgerr^rg. ^i*nf: n w n 

(Mahabharata, A'svamedhaparva, adhyaya, 85). 
T??r 11 \ \\ 

( xix ) 

(Nydyavid) and skilful in distinguishing unity and plurality (“aikya” 
and "nanatva"), conjunction and co-existence (“saiayoga’ and "sama- 
vaya”), genus and species (“parupara’), etc, capable of deciding 
questions by evidences (Pramana) and ascertaining the validity and 
invalidity of a five-membered syllogism (Panchi\vayava-viUrya). 

In fact the Nyaya (Logic) was in course of time deservedly 

_ held in very high esteem. If it were allowed to 

The course of Nyaya. ... . , , , 

follow its original course unimpeded by reli¬ 
gious dogmas it would have risen to the very height of perfection. 
Nevertheless the principles of Nyaya entering into the different 
systems of phi'osophy gave them each its proper compactness and 
cogency just as Bacon’s Inductive Method shaped the sciences and 
philosophies of a later age in a different country. It is however to 
be regretted that during the last five hundred years the Nyaya has 
been mixed up with Law (smnti, Rhetoric (alahkara), Vedanta, etc , 
and thereby has hampered the growth of those branches of knowledge 
ui$l which it has grown up as a sort of parasite. 

SMskrit College, Calcutta. 1 SATIS CHANDRA VIDYABHU- 
The yth November , /prj. j SANA. 

n a n 

errors i 

^ Tl Ct xl ^ ^T ^ II ^ II 

(Mahabharata, Sabh.ipai \ a, adhy.'iya 5). 

THE NYiYA-StfTRAS. 

Book I.— Chaptmr I. 

Wte TO ST^TStH fgFrt f%fT^rTT 

*rf TOsfrr tcqmre 

f*ui?s«rT?fRf 11 ^ hi x« 

SWTO pram&na, proof , n^q prameya, provable, knowable, object of 
proof; sfara samfiaya, donbt, uncertainty ; Prayojana, aun, purpose, 

JEIfq dristfcnta, example, familiar instance j siddb&nta, conclusion, 

WTsraq avayava, members of the syllogism ; qqf tarka, hypothetical reaso¬ 
ning, confutation , ftofq mrnaya, ascertainment; qUf vada, discussion, 3 » 5 <l 
jalpa, sophistry ; fqa«£T vitandS-, cavil, wrangling , £?qr*rra hetv 4 bhaaa, 
psendo-mark, fallacy ; ohhala, quibbling , 3 TT% ] 4 ti, futility , 
nigraha-stb&na, occasion for rebuke, opponent’s errors , Tattva- 

jfi&n&t, from knowledge of the true nature , ni^Sreyasa- 

adhigamah, attainment of the supreme good. 

1 . Supreme felicity is attained by the knowledge about the 
true nature of the sixteen categories, viz., means of right knowledge 
( pramana), object o t right knowledge (prameya), doubt ( samsaya ), 
purpose ( prayojana ), familiar instance ( dristanta ) established tenet 
{ siddhanta /f memueis' ( avayava ), confutation ( tarka# ), ascertain- 

* The English equivalent for “tarka ” is variously given as “con¬ 
futation, ” ‘ argumentation, ” 1 reductio ad absurdum,” “ hypothetical 
reasoning, ” etc. 

-2 

BO^Kl CHAPTER I. 

ment (nirnaya), discussion (vada), wrangling (jalpa ), cavil (vitanda), 
fallacy ( hetvabhasa ), quibble ( chhala), fiitihty ( jati ), and occasion 
for rebuke ( mgrahasfchana ). 

Knowledge about the true nature of the sixteen categories* means true know¬ 
ledge by the “enunciation,” “definition” and “critical examination” o£ 
the categories. Book 1 (of the Nj&ya SAtra) treats of “enunciation” and 
“definition,” while the remamnmg four Books are reserved for “critical 
examination” The attainment of supreme felicity is preceded by the 
knowledge of four things viz , (1) that which is fit to be abandoned viz., 
(pain), (2) that which produces w hat is fit to be abandoned ( viz , misappre¬ 
hension, etc), ( 3 ) complete destruction of what is fit to be abandoned and 
(4) the means of destroying what is fit to be abandoned (viz , true know- 
ledge+). 

g-iisf duhkhfl, pain , jamna, birth ; nffw pravritti, activity , 
dosa, fault ; ffl«i 5 fT 5 f mithya-jnaiia, false knowledge ; 3 tT^ltTftqi^ uttara- 
uttara-apaye, on the disappeaiance of one after another in the reverse 
order; tat anantaia ajai&t, owing to the absence of each 

successive one ; apavaigiih final release, attainment of the end 

2. Pam, birth, activity,’faults and misapprehension—on the 
successive annihilation of these in the reverse order, there follows 

release. 

Misapprehension, faults, activity, birth and pain—these in their 
^ unmteriupted course constitute the “ world. ” Release, which consists in 
the soul's getting rid of the world, is the condition of supreme felicity 
marked by perfect tranquillity and not tainted by any defilement. A 
person, by the true knowledge of the sixteen categories, is able to remove 
his misapprehensions. Wfceu this is done, his faults, viz., affection, 

* V’ktsy&yan a observes :— 

fhfqqi =ar?q STT^tq JTf%. I 55 $rof qflw 1 

—(N\ayadaisnna, p. 9 , Bibliotheca ludioft Scries). 

—(Mj Ayadariina, p. 2 ) 

THE NYlYA-Stf IRAS. 

3 

aversion and stupidity, disappear He is then no longer subject to any 
activity and is oonsequertlv freed from transmigration and pains ThiB 
is tbe way in which his release is effected and supreme felicity securod. 

/ xT?sr$=rT “srmnuR* v 

JT^raff pratyaksa, perception , anumflna, inference , 31in*T 

npam&na, comparison , Sabda, word , SWD Rf pram&n 4 ai j proofs, 
means of right knowledge. 

3\ Perception, inference, comparison and word ( verbal testi¬ 
mony)—these arc the means of right knowledge. 

J [The Ch&rvakas admit only one means of right knowledge, vie., 
perception (pratyaksa) , the Yaiiesikas and Banddkas admit two viz., 
perception and-mference (annm&na) ; the Sankhyas admit three, viz , per¬ 
ception, inference and verbal testimony ( agama or sabda ) , while the 
Naiy&yikas, whose fundamental work is the Nyaya-eutra, admit four, viz., 
perception, inference, verbal testimony and comparison (upaw 4 na). The 
Prilbh&karas admit a fifth means of right knowledge called presumption 
(arbh&patti), the Bhattas and Yedantins admit a sixth, viz , non-existence 
(abh&va), and the Paurfinikas recognise a seventh and eighth means of 
right knowledge, named probability (sambhava) and rumour (aitihyaV). 

indriya-&rtha-saniTikar3a-atp*nnam 1 produced 
from tbe contact of the Bense with the object , 5 JT«m jfi&nam, knowledge ; 

a-vy apadeiyatn, without naming , srsilRT^rfT a-vyabhicli&ri, 
unerring ; vyavas 4 ya- 4 tmakam r certain in nature, JTCftlf pra- 

tyaksam, perception. 

4. Perception is that knowledge which arises from the contact 
of a sense with its object, and which is determinate, unnameable and 
non-erratic. 

Determinate —This epithet distinguishes perception from indetermi¬ 
nate knowledge ; as, for instance, a man looking from a distance cannot 
ascertain whether there is smoke or dust. 

Unnameable —Signifies that the knowledge of a thing derived 
through perception has no connection with the name which the thing 
hears. 

4 

BOOK I, CHA.PT1H I 

Non-eiratic —In summer the sun's rays ootning in contact with 
earthly heat quiver and appear to the eyes of men as water Ihe know¬ 
ledge of water derived in this way is not perception To eliminate such 
cases the epithet non-erratic has been used 

[This aphorism may also be translated as follows:—Hercoptioil 
is knowledge and which arises from the contact, of a sense with its object 
and which is non-erratic being either, indeterminate fnirvikalpaka, as 
“this is something”) or determinate (savikalpaka, as “this is a Bi 4 h- 
mana *’)] 

n \\\m 

WT atha, then ; tat-pffrvakam, preceded by perception ; 

tn-vidham, threefold ; Stjjlfwf stmmbam, inference ; 5^5 pfirva-vat, 
from caase to efEect • se^a-vat, from effect to cause ; WJTTSH^T 

uanyto-dristam, commonly seen , W cha, and. 

5. Inference is knowledge which is preceded by perception, 
and is of three kinds, viz., 4 priori, 4 posteriori and ‘commonly seen/ 

A priori is the knowledge of effect derived from the perception of 
its cause e g , one seeing clouds infers that there will be rain. 

A posteriori is the knowledge of oanBB .derived from the perception 
of its effects, e.g., one seeing a river swollen infers that there was rain. 

'■Commonly seen 5 is the knowledge of one thing derived from the 
perception of another thing with which it is commonly seen, e g., one 
seeing a beast possessing horns, infers that it possesses also a tail, or 
one seeing smoke on a hill infers that there is fire on it. ^ 

prasiddha-s4dharmy4t, through similarity to a known 
object ; s4dhya s4dhanam, the making known of the thing 

posited ; sqJTTW upam4nam, comparison, analogy. 

6. Comparison is the knowledge of a thing through its simi¬ 
larity to another thing previously well known. 

A man, hearing from a forester’that a bos gavaeus is like a «ow, 
resorts to a forest where he sees an animal like a cow- Having recollected 
what he heard he institutes a comparison, by which he arrives at the con- 
viotion that the animal which he sees is bos gavaeus, This is knowledge 

THE NYlYA-StiTRAS 

6 

derived through comparison Some hold that comparison is not a 
separate means of knowledge, for when one notices the likeness of a 
cow in a strange animal one really performs an act of perception In 
reply, it is urged that we cannot deny comparison as a separate means 
of knowledge, for how does otlieiwise the name bos gavaeus signify the 
general notion of the animal called bos gavaeus? That t e name 60s 
gavaeus signifies one and all membeis of the bos gavaeus class is m-t a 
result of perception, but the consequence of a distinct knowledge, called 
companson. 

s TT c a fr r^aj: \\\\\\*\\ 

WTHl’n&Ti apta-upadesah, the direction or instruction of a reliable 
person , iabdah, word, testimony. 

7. Word (verbal testimony) is the instructive assertion of a 
reliable person. 

A reliable person is one—may be a r>s’, arya or mlechha,—who as an 
expert in a certain matter is willing to communicate his experiences of it. 

[Suppose a young man coming to the side of a river oannot ascer¬ 
tain whether the river is fordable or not, and immediately an old expert' 
enced man of the locality, who has no enmity against him, comes and 
tells him that the river is easily fordable : the word of the old man is to 
be acoepted as a means of right knowledge, called verbal testimony] 

✓ “^r fETSfETOcsrxg 

*TJ sah, it, word ; dvi-vidhah twofold ; drista- 

adrista-artha-tvit, because its object may be seen or not seen. 

8. It is of two kinds, viz., that which refers to matter which is 
seen, and that which refers to matter which is not seen. 

The first kind inyolves matter which can be actnally verified. 
Though we are incapable of verifying the matter involved in the second 
kind, we can somehow ascertain it by means of inference. 

[Matter which is seen eg, a physician’s assertion that physical 
strength is gamqd by taking butter] 

[Matter which is not seen, e g., a religions teacher’s assertion that one 
conquers heaven by performing horse-saorifices]. 

fre ww i fcg “r&rC n\\\m 

BOOK I, CHAPTER I 

WPITf &tma, soul , s^rira, body , mdriya, sense , 9 izf aitha, 

object , gFl buddhi consciousness, intellect, leason, understanding , jpfi 
tnauas, muni, sensonu a , JTjfo pravritti , fl? dosa, fault, STiUnra pretya- 
bliAva, rebn th , pbaia, fruit, e[!^ duhkha, pain, SIRHfT apavarga, 
release, salvation , jj tu, excludes other provables , ptameyam, the 

obje t of pi oof. 

'9 Soul, body, senses, objects of sense, intellect, mind, activity, 
fault, trans uigialion, fruit, pain and release—are the objects of 
risht.knowiedge. 

The objects of right knowledge are also enumerated as substance, 
qnality, action, generality, particnlaiity, intimate relation [and non¬ 
existence which are the technicalities of the Vaiscsika philosophy] 

f^5T fn map frrarra “sn?*rat 
fra uw»t°# 

ichchhA, desire . dveaa, aversion ; SH 1 & prayatna, effort, gtj 
sukha, pleasme , duhkha. pain , 5fr*r jnAna, cognition , srrfJW Atina- 
nah, of the soul, f^p" lingam, mai k. 

10. Desire, aversion, volition, pleasure, pain and intelligence are 
the marks of the soul 

[These abide iu the soul, or rather are the qualities of the substance 
called soul] 

chcstA mdriya artha Asrayah, site or locus of volition, 
or striving, senses, and objects, viz , pleasure and pain , sariram 

body 

11. Body is the site of gesture, senses and sentiments. 

Body is tbe site of gesture, inasmuch as it strives to reach what is 
desirable and to avoid what is hateful. It is also the site of senses, for 
the latter act well or ill, according as the former is in good or bad order. 
Sentiments which comprise pleasure and pam are also located m the 
body which experiences them. 

^OT ^ <c f 

HUH Tgif wttnfitj glu Ana-rasaua-chakfus-tvak-SrotiAni, nose, 

tongue, eye, skin and ear , mdrij&nu, organs of sense ; 

bhfttebhyah, from the elements. 

THE NYiYA-SftTRAS. 

12. Nose, tongue, eye, skm and ear are the senses produced from 
elements. 

Nose is of the same nature as earth, tongue as water, eye as light, 
shin as air and ear as ether 

“*JrTTT5l" «WIW 

Prithivi, eirth , wr<T 4 ( uih, water. ^swteias, fire, qfj: vftyuh, air; 
wraqt &k&gam, ether , lti, these , *J?nfk bhu'4m, elements. 

13. Earth, water, light, air and ether—these are the elements. 

TH wf tfis^r: Gandha-rasa rupa-spaiin 6 abd 4 h, smell, taste, 
colour, touch and sound , sfsjstufqgqir: prithivi- 4 di-gun 4 h, attributes of 
earth, etc., Tat-arth&h, objects of them, the senses, 

14. Smell, taste, colour, touch and sound are objects of the 
senses and qualities of the earth, etc. 

Smell is the object of nose and the prominent quality of earth, taste 
iB the object of tongue and quality of water, coluui is the object of eye 
and quality of fire, touch is the object of skin and quality of air, and 
sound is the object of ear and quality of ether. 

7 W^IW 

3^: buddhih consciousness, understanding , Upalabdhih, 

apprehension, intuition , sqsf jnftnain, cognition , lti, this. 3PW?sn< an- 
artha-antaram, statement of synonyms. 

15. Intellect, apprehension and knowledge—these are not 
different from one another. 

[The term apprehension ( upalabdhi ) is generally used in the sense 
of perception (prufya&sa) According to the Sinkhya philosophy, 
intellect (buddht), which is the first thing evolved out of primordial 
matter (piahrih), is altogether different from know ledge (Jndna), which 
consists in the reflection of external objects on the soul (jourusa ), tba 
abode of transparent consciousness]. 

5*Tq^T*T3rqf%: “*r%t \\\\\\\\\\ 

BOOK 1 , CHAPTER I. 

yugapat, siinulane'ius , 5 rT*fT 3 ?, lf^s Jn&na-anubpatt h, non-appe- 
arance of cognitions , iffTtT: inannsuti, of manasjtnind, lingara, mark 

16. The mark of the mind is that there do not arise (in the 
soul ) more acts of knowledge than one at a time. 

i 

It is impossible to perceive two things simultaneously Perception 
does not arise merely from the contact of a sense-organ with its object, 
but it requires also a conjunction of the mind Now, 'the mind, which 
is au atom'c substance, cannot be conjoined with more than one sense- 
organ at a time, hence there cannot occur more acts of perception than 
one at one time 

irm mi turn 

STf%! Pravrittih, activity, VAk-buddhi-sarira firam- 

bhah the start made by speech, manas and body. 

17. activity is that which makes the voice, mind and body 
begin their action. 

There are three kinds of action, viz , vocal, mental and bodily, each 
of which may be sub divided as good or bad. 

Bodily actions which are bad are :—( 1 ) billing, ( 2 ) stealing, and ( 3 ) 
committing adultery 

Bodily actions which are good are :—( 1 ) giving, ( 2 ) protecting, and 
( 3 ) serving. 

Vocal actions which are bad are:—( 1 ) telling a lie, ( 2 ) using harsh 
language, (3) slandering, and ( 4 ) indulging in frivolous talk. 

Vocal actions which aie good are : —( 1 ) speaking the truth, ( 2 ) 
speaking what is useful, ( 3 ) speaking what is pleasant, and ( 4 ) reading 
sacred books. 

Mental actions which are bad are :—(t)malice, ( 2 ) covetousness, and 
( 3 ) scepticism 

Mental actions which are grood are:—( 1 ) compassion, ( 2 ) refraining 
from covetousness, and ( 3 ) devotion. 

3 S 8 iT*!J: pravartanA laksan&h, of which the characteristic is to 
move to activity , ^nT: dosSh, faults. 

THE NYAYA-StfTRAS. 

6 

18. Faults have the characteristic of causing activity. 

The faults are affeotion, aversion and Btnpidity. 

' “irfswTcf:” n ^ i ^ i v? 11 

punar-utpattih, re appearance, re-birth • pretya- 

bh&vah, existence after passing away. 

19. Transmigration means re births. 

Transmigration is the series of births and deaths. Birth ib the 
connection of soul with body, sense-organs, mind, intellect, and sen¬ 
timents, while death is the soul’s separation from them. 

it ^ m ii 

srfira: pravritti-dn§a-janitah, produced by activity and 
fault jsuf: arthah, object ; phalam, fruit. 

20. Fruit is the thing produced by activity and faults. 

Fruit consists iu the enjoyment of pleasure or suffeung of pain. 
All activity and faults end in producing pleasure which is acceptable, 
and pain which is fit only to be avoided. 

3rrsRT<a2=t*!f \ i \ » « 

UraWTSStffof b&dlian4-1 ak§anam, of which the characteristic is restraint 
or irritation ; ?£:ian , duhkham, pain. 

21. Pain has the characteristic of causing uneasiness. 

Pain is affliction which every one desires to avoid. The aphorism 
may also be translated as follows :— 

Pain is the mark of hindrance to the soul. 

“men!: n \ t \ \ ^ n 

tat-atyanta-vimok?ah, absolute deliverance from this } 
; apavargah, attainment of the goal, final release, salvation. 

22. Release is the absolute deliverance from pain. 

A soul which is no longer subject to transmigration is freed from 
all pains. Transmigration, which consists in the soul's leaving one body 
and taking another, is the cause of its undergoing pleasure and pain. 
The soul attains release as soon as there is an end of the body, and, con¬ 
sequently, of pleasure and pain. Those are mistaken who maintain that 

2 

10 

BOOK I, CHAPTER T. 

release enables the soul, not only to get rid of all pains, but also to attain 
eternal pleasure, for pleasure is as impermanent as pain and the body. 

ssrorerong fsraNi^r " \\\\\\^\\\ 

JBUT«ftsNi*lil?OT^: sam&na-aneka-dharma-npapatteh, from the appear¬ 
ance of Beveral common properties ; ^[Erfaq^f! vipratipatteh, from con¬ 
tradiction ; gq^sugq^'ir.Usa^RUtcr: upalabdhi-anupalabdhi-avyavasth&- 
tah, from absence of uniformity of apprehension and from that of non¬ 
apprehension , vis sa-apeksah, in which there iB need of the 

distinguishing mark, farWT: vimarfiah, consideration, judgment, mm 
Bamfiayah, doubt 

23. Doubt, which is a conflicting judgment about the precise 
character of an object, arises from the recognition of properties com¬ 
mon to many objects, or of properties not common to any of the objects, 
from conflicting testimony, and from irregularity of perception and 
non-perception. 

Doubt is of five kinds, according as it arises from— 

(1) Recognition of common properties, e.g., seeing in the twilight a 
tall object we cannot decide whether it is a man or a post, for the pro¬ 
perty of tallness belongs to both. 

(2) Recognition of properties not common, eg., hearing a sound, one 
questions whether it is eternal or not, for the property of soundnees 
abides neither in man, beast, etc., that are non-eternal, nor in atoms 
which are eternal. 

(3) Conflicting testimony , eg., merely by study one cannot decide 
whether the soul exists, for one system of philosophy affirms that it does, 
while another system states that it does not. 

(4) Irregularity of perception, eg, we peroeive water in the tank 
where it really exists, but water appears also to exist in the mirage where 
it really does not exist 

A question arises whether water is perceived only when it actually 
exists, or even when it does not exist 

(5) Irregularity of non-perception, eg., we do not perceive water in 
the radish where it really exists, and also on dry land where it does nob 

exist. 

A question arises whether water is not perceived only when it does 
not exist, or also when it does exist. 

THE NY.S.YA SUTRAS 

11 

rfr| “JT^ToRJ^ \\\\\\^\\ 

q^yam, which , artbam, object , s>f*T$en adhikritya, intending; 
5j^ar^ pravartate, acts ; rT?I tat, that prayojanam, purpose. 

24. Purpose is that with an eye to which one proceeds to act. 

Purpose refers to the thing which one endeavours to attain or avoid, 

[A man collects fuel for the purpose of cooking his food] 

STTWsT'S gT|ST«f ^ 

II \ I \ I ^ II 

laukika-parikgak&nftm, o f average men and of men. 
possessing discrimination either by nature or as a result of education j 
^rf&T 5 ! 3I*f yasmin arthe, in which object , gfjg^rrcf buddhi s&myam, com¬ 
munity of idea , CTr sabr, that, drist&ntah, example, familiar instance. 

25. H familiar instance is the thing about which an ordinary 
man and an expert entertain the same opinion. 

[With regard to the general proposition, “wherover there is smoke 
there is fire/’ the Samiliar instance is a kitchen in which fire and-stnoke 
abide together, to the satisfaction of an ordinary man as well as an acute 
investigator]. 

II \ I \ I 

tantra-adhikarana abhyupagama samsthitih, 
established truth about the-subject matter of a irantra or course of tea¬ 
ching about a number of interrelated subjects, or of an adhikarana or 
topic of discussion or of an abhyupagama or admission without proof ; 
f^rajTRTr siddhantah, conclusion, established tenet. 

26. Tin established tenet is a dogma resting on the authority 
of a certain school, hypothesis, or implication. 

srsfcPS JTfaa?5rrfu«T»aT)-'g!PHr sarva-tantra-prati-tantra*- 

adhi-karana-abhynpagama-samsthibi-artha-antara-bh&vftt, owing to diffe* 
rences as tenets of all the tantras, of a particular tantra, of a topic or of 
an admission. 

27. The tenet is of four, kinds owing to the distinction between* 

12 

BOOK I, CHAPTER I. 

a dogma of all the schools, a dogma peculiar to some school, a hypothetical 
dogma and an implied dogma. 

» \ \ \ i ^ « 

sarva-tantra-aviruddhah, unopposed in all tantraB or 
systems , tantie, in the particular tantra or system ; BtfafRi: adhikri- 
tah, included, intended, dealt with, treated , sarva-tantra- 

siddhAntah, established tenet of all the system*, universal tenet. 

28. A dogma of all the schools is a tenet which is not 
opposed by any school and is claimed by at least one school. 

The five elements (viz , earth, water, light, air and ether), the five 
ob]otts of sense (viz , smell, taste, colour, touch and sound), etc, are 
tenets which are accepted by all the schools 

w X i X 1 ^ 11 

samfina tantra-siddhah, accepted in identical or allied 
systems; 'TC^Pstiferg;: para-tantra-asiddhab, not accepted in different 
Bystems, srftassi falser: prati-tantra Biddh&ntah, established tenet of a 
particular system, particular tenet. 

V 29. A dogma peculalr to some school is a tenet which is 
accepted by similar schools, but rejected by opposite schools. 

" A thing cannot come into existence out of nothing”—this is a 
peculiar dogma of the S&hkhyas. [The eternity of sound is a peculiar 
dogma of the Mitn&msakas]. 

U \ I \ I II 

yat-siddhan, on and in the proof of whioh ; 
anya-prakarana-siddhih, another sub-topic is proved and needed; W- Bah, 
that, adhikarapa-siddh&ntab, established tenet of a topic 

of discussion. 

30. An hypothetical dogma is a tenet which, if accepted, 
leads to the acceptance of another tenet. 

THE NYAYA-StiTRAS. 

13 

“ There is a soul apart from the senses, because it can recognise 
one and the same object by seeing and touching” If you accept this 
tenet you must also have accepted the following :—(1) That the sonsos 
are more than one, (2) that each of the senses has its particular object, 

(3) that the soul derives its knowledge through the channels of the senses, 

(4) that a substance which is distinct from its qualities is the abode of 
them, etc. 

n \ \ \ i \\ ii 

BIltfflraTMfqJWRC a-pariksita-abhynpagam&t, after admi sion of a 
tenet without proof or examination ; TOeftof tat-viSesa-pariksanam, 

examination of particulars concerning it, stvgTOw abhyupagama- 

siddh&ntah, established tenet of an admission without proof or of a con¬ 
cession. 

31. An Implied dogma is a tenet which is not explicitly 
declared as such, but which follows from the examination of particulars 
concerning it. 

The discussion, whether sound is eternal or non-eternal, pre-suppo- 
ses that it is a substance. “That sound is a substance” is here an 
implied dogma. [The mind has nowhere been stated in the NyAya-sAtra 
to be a sense-organ, but it follows from the particulars examined concer¬ 
ning it that it is so]. 

pratijSa-hetu-ud&harana-npanaya-nigama- 
n&ni, proposition, mark, instance, ratiocination and inference ; sbWdls 
avayav&h, members of a syllogism. 

32. The members ( of a syllogism ) are proposition, reason, 
example, application, and conclusion. 

[1. Proposition.—This hill is fiery, 

2. Reason.—Because it is smoky, 

3. Example —Whatever is smoky is fiery, as a kitchen, 

4 Application —So is this hill (smoky), 

5. Conclusion.—Therefore this hill is fiery J 

Borne lay d own five more members as follows :— 

14 

BOOK I, CHAPTER I, 

1 (a) Inquiry as to the proposition (]'ijMs4) —Is this hill fiery in ' 1 
all its parts, or in a particular part ? 

2 (a) Questioning tho reason ( samiaya ).—That which you call 
smoke may be nothing but vapour 

3 (a) Capacity of the example to warrant the conclusion (sakya- 
pi&pti) —Is it true that smoke is always a concomitant of fire ? In a 
kitchen there are .>f course both smoke and fire, but in a red-hot iron- 
hall there is no smoke. 

4 (a) Purpose for drawing the conclusion ( prayojana )—Purpose 
consists in the determination of the tiue conditions of the hill, in order 
to asceitain whether it is such that one can approach it, or such that one 
Bhould avoid it, or such that one should maintain an att tude of indiffer¬ 
ence towards it. 

4 (b) Dispelling all questions ( samsayavyudksa) —It is beyond all 
question that the hill is smoky, and that smoke ib an invariable concomi¬ 
tant of fire. 

*nsqrft^or: “urafri*« \ \ \ \ w » 

*n«uf 5 fifSr: s&dhya-nirdefiah, declaration of what is to be established; 
srfasn pratijn&, proposition. 

33. A proposition is the declaration of what is to be estab¬ 
lished. 

Sound is non-eternal—this is a proposition. 

“|g:* 

asgfWraTUWfct ud&haraija-B&dharmy&t, through similarity to instance; 
gpiU HTUW sadhya-sadhanam, statement of the means of establishing what 
is to be established ; 531 hetuh, mark. 

34. The reason is the means for establishing what is to be 
established through the homogeneous or affirmative character of the 
example. 

Proposition —Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason —Because it is produced, 

Example (homogeneous).—Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as 
a pot. 

The example “ pot ” possesses the same character as is implied in 
the reason, viz,, “being produced,” inasmuch as both are non-eternal. 

THE NYirA-SOTRAS. 

ih 

“cTST” II \ \ \ I n 

UVT tath4, likewise ; sNwfsf vaidharmy4t, through dissimilarity to 
instance. 

35. Likewise through heterogeneous or negative character. 

Proposition.—Sound is non eternal, '» 

Reason -—Because it is produced, 

Example (heterogeneous).—Whatever is not non-eternal is not pro¬ 
duced, as the soul. 

The example “ soul ” possesses a character heterogeneous to that 
which is implied in the reason, viz , “being produced,” inasmuch as one 
is eternal and the other non-eternal, 

»wi^u 

sadhya-s4dharmy4t, through similarity to what is to be 
■established ; aqjjfrn# tat-dharma-bh4yi, m which the property of what 
is to be established exists , gSI-rT: dfigt&ntah, example , udahara- 

nam, instance. 

36. a homogeneous (or affirmative example is a familiar 
instance which is known to possess the property to be established, and 
which implies that this property is invariably c ntained in the reason 
given. 

Proposition.—Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason.—Because it is produced, 

Homogeneous example —Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a 
pot 

Here “ pot ” is a familiar instance which possesses the property of 
non-eternality and implies that whatever is “produced” is attended by 
the same property (non eternality). 

gf|pnfrnfT ii^wu 

tat-viparyay&t, through dissimilarity to what is to be estab¬ 
lished , ai v4, or j vipaiitam, contrary, opposite. 

37. A heterogeneous (or negative) example is a familiar 
instance which is known to be devoid of the property to be established 

16 

BOOK I, CHAPTER I. 

and which implies that the absence of this property is invariably rejec¬ 
ted in the reason given. 

Proposition.—Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason.—Because it is produced. 

Heterogeneous example .—Whatever is not non-eternal is not prodneed, 
as the soul. 

Here the “soul” is a familiar instance which is known to be devoid 
of the property of non-eternality and implies that if anything wore pro¬ 
duced, it would necessarily be deprived of the quality of eternahty, i e. 
‘being produced’ and ‘eternal’ are imcoinpatible epithets. 

“zmm” II ^ m ^ II 

ud&harana-apekeah dependent updh instance ; rP-Tl tathA, 
so. 3q$il7?: upasamharah winding up, conluding. ;r cf«JT na tatbaiti, not 
so , qr v&, or ; s&dhyasya, of what is to be established , upa- 

nayah. ratiocination. 

38. Application is a winding up, with reference to the example, 
of what is to be established as being so or not so. 

Application is of two kinds : (1) Affirmative and (2) Negative The 
affirmative application, which ib expressed by the word “so,” occurs 
when the example is of an affirmative character. The negative, which is 
expressed by the phrase “not so,” occurs when the example is of a nega¬ 
tive character. 

Proposition —Sound is non-eternal. 

Reason.—Because it is prodneed, 

Example.—Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a pot. 

Affirmative application — So is Bound (produced), 

Conclusion.—Therefore sound is non-eternal. 

Or: 

Proposition —Sound is non-eteruai, 

Reason.—Because it is produced. 

Example.—Whatever is eternal is not produced, as the soul, 

Negative application .—Sound is not so ( i.e ., sound iB not not-pro- 
duced), 

Conclusion.—Therefore sound is not eternal. 

THU NY 1.YA StiTRAS. 

17 

t^^r|ajTrJTmfn^T: \\\\\\^\\ 

(?9<lt*nQ[ hetn-apadesiit, after statement of the mark ; jtRts?T*IT: 
pratijn&yah, of proposition ; gs^gif punah-vachanam, re-statement ; 
£trr*req( nigamanam, inference. 

89. Conclusion is the re-stating of the proposition, after the 
reason has been mentioned. 

Conclusion is the confirmation of the proposition, after the reason 
and the example have been mentioned. 

Proposition.—Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason.—Because it is produced, 

Example.—Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a pot, 

Applicatian.—So is sound (produced). 

Conclusion —Therefore sound is non-eternal. 

5 

w \ \ \ \v> w 

a-vijfi&ta-tattve, true nature oF which is not known, 3T«f 
arthe, in the case of an object ; CTBOtalFttcT.' k&nina-upapatti-tnh, by show¬ 
ing the appropriateness of the desired causes ; tattva-jfi&na- 

artham, for the purpose of knowledge of true natuie , uhah, reasoning; 
rR5s tarkah, confutation, reductio ad absurdnin 

40 Confutation, which is carried on for ascertaining the real 
character of a thing of which the character is not known, is reaso¬ 
ning which reveals the character by showing the absurdity of all con¬ 
trary characters 

Is the soul eternal or non-eternal ? Here the real character of the 
soul, viz., whether it is eternal, or non-eternal, is not known. In ascertain¬ 
ing the character, we reason as follows :—If the soul were non-eternal, it 
wonld be impossible for it to enjoy the fruits of its own actions, to 
undergo transmigration, and to attain final release But such a conclu¬ 
sion is absurd : such possibilities are known to belong to the soul : there¬ 
fore, we must admit that the soul is eternal. 

18 

BOOK!, CHAPTERI. 

vimrisya, arguing ; qafwfepnfrn^t paksa-pratipaks&bh} &m, from 
opposite positions ; artha-avadh&rajnam, determination of 

object ; nirnayah, ascertainment. 

41. Hscertalnment is the removal of doubt, and the determi¬ 
nation of a question, by hearing two opposite sides. 

A person wavers and donbts if certain statements are advanced to 
him by one of two parties, but opposed by the other party. His doubt 
is not removed until by the application of reason he can vindicate either 
of the parties. The process by which the vindication is effected is called 
ascertainment. Ascertainment is not, however, in all cases preceded 
by doubt; for instance, m the oase of perception things are ascertained 
directly. So also we ascertain things directly by the authority of scrip¬ 
tures, or through discussion. But m the case of investigation, doubt must 
precede ascertainment. 

THE NY A.Y A-SftTRi-S. 

Id 

Book I. —Chapter II. 

q^Tgi^q- 

w: q^WRrq^:qmr|T ii \ \ ^ i ^ n 

UUreRR5?rT'=l«flqT3r*U: pram&na-tarka-8§,dhana-up&lambhah, proof and 
disproof, affirmation and negation, by means of pram&n&B or proofs or 
instruments of right knowledge and tarka or confutation ; 
siddh&uta-a-viruddhah, not opposed to the established tenets j q g f tW^mqsr ; 
pancha-avayava-upapannah, presenting 1 the five members of tho syllog¬ 
ism ; qejirfgf'IST'tftir?: paksa-pratipaksa-parigrahuh, admission of opposite 
views on the same subject , g[^: v&dah, discussion. 

42. Discussion is the adoption of one of two opposing sides. 
■What is adopted is analysed in the form of five members, and 
defended by the aid of any of the means of right knowledge, while its 
opposite is assailed by confutation, without deviation from the established 
tenets —1, 

[ A dialogue or disputation (kath&) is the adoption of aside by a dis¬ 
putant and its opposite by hia opponent. It is of three kinds, viz, dis¬ 
cussion which aims- at ascertaining the truth, wrangling which aimB at 
gaining victory, and cavil which aims at finding mere faults. A discutient 
is one who engages himself in a disputation as a means of seeking the 
truth}. 

An instance of discussion is given below :— 

Discutient—There is soul. 

Opponent—There is no soul. 

Discutient—Soul is existent ( proposition ). 

Beoause it is an abode of consciousness (reason). 

Whatever is not existent, is not an abode of conscionsness r 
as a hare’s horn (negative example). 

Sonl is not so, that is, soul is- an abode of consciousness 
(negative application). 

Therefore soul is existent (conclusion). 

Opponent—Soul is non-existent (proposition). 

Because, etc. 

-- Discutient—The scripture which is a-verbal testimony declares the- 

'existence of soul. 

20 

BOOK 1, CHAPTER II 

Opponent ••• ••• •*• ••• ••• ••• ••• 

Discntient—If there were no son], it would not be possible to appre¬ 
hend one and the same object, through sight and touch. 

Opponent ••• *>■ ••• ... ... ••• ••§ 

Discntient—The doctrine of soul harmonises well with the various 
tenets which we hold viz, that there are eternal things, that everybody 
enjoys pleasure or suffers pain, according to his own actions, etc. There¬ 
fore, there is soul 

[The discussion will be considerably lengthened if the opponent 
happens to be a Buddhist, who does not admit the authority of Bcripture 
and holds that theie aie no eternal things, etc.] 

u \ i ^ i ^ i 

qsirai'T'TW: yatha-ukta-upapannah, presented as stated i, e. possess¬ 
ing all the characteristics of a discussion , 

chhala-j&ti-mgrahastliana fc&dhana-up&lambhah, affirmation and nega¬ 
tion by means of quibbling, futility, and opponent’s errors , 5157: jalpah, 
sophistry. 

43. Wrangling, which aims at gaming victory, is the defence 
or attack of a proposition in the manner aforesaid, by quibbles, 
futilities, and other processes which deserve rebuke—2. 

A wrangler is one who, engaged in a disputation, aims only at victory, 
being indifferent whether the arguments which he employs support his 
own contention or that of his opponent, provided that he can make out 
a pretext for bragging that he has taken an active partin the disputation. 

^ Hra'T^rwRTfftt “ ramrsx” u \ \ ^ i 311 

sah, that, 1 . e. sophistry , pratipaksa-sthApana- 

hinah, without the demonstration of one of the opposite views , 
vitaudA, cavil. 

44. Qavll is a kind of wrangling, which consists in mere 
attacks on the opposite side—3. 

A eaviller does not endeavour to establish anything, but confines 
himself to mere carping at the arguments of his opponent. 

THE NYlYA-StJTRAS. 

21 

sttot:” u ^ i ^ i a u 

tfS^fwf?Fg^n;Ri!mrr?m’3?TlT^TS!TataT: savyabhich&'-a-virnddha-prakara- 
nasama s&dhyasama-k&hUit&h, erratic or multifarious, contradictory, 
synonymous with the prakarana or subject under discussion, synonymous 
with what is to be established, and time-expired , tc=nWRT: hetu-&bh&s&h, 
pseudo-marks. * 

45. Fallacies of a reason are the erratic, the contradictory, 
the equal to the question, the un L roved, and the mistimed.—4. 

3PR35TTfrr^: U \ \ ^ H u 

wtatfera: ana-eka-antikah, not-one-pomted ; Ba-vyabhi- 

ch&rah, erratic. 

46. The erratic is the reason which leads to more conclusions 
than one—5. 

An instance of the erratic is given below :— 

Proposition —Sound is eternal, 

Erratic reason —Because it is intangible. 

Example—Whatever is intangible is eternal, as atoms, 

Application.—Bo is sound (intangible), 

Conclusion.—Therefore sound is eternal. 

Again : 

Proposition.—Sound is non-eternal, 

Erratic reason —Because it is intangible, 

t 

Example,—Whatever is intangible, is non-eternal,as intellect, 
Application.—So is sound (intangible). 

Conclusion.—Therefore sound is non-eternal. 

Here from the reason there have been drawn two opposite conclu¬ 
sions, viz. ■ that sound is eternal, and that sound is non-eternal. The 
reason or middle term is erratic when it is not pervaded by the major 
term, that is, when there is no universal connection between the major 
term and the middle term, as pervader and pervaded. ‘‘Intangible” is per¬ 
vaded neither by ' eternal ’ nor by ‘ non-eternal ’ In fact, there is no 
universal connection between ‘ intangible ’ and ‘ eternal ’ or ‘non-eternal.* 

“t sreg:” \\\\\\\\\ 

22 

BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

siddh&ntam, established tenet, nbhyupetya, admit- 

tins' or depending upon , tat-virodhi, contradictory thereof , 

v.ruddliah, contradictory. 

47. 'lhe contradictory is the reason which opposes what is to 
be established—6. 

Proposition.—A pot fa produced, 

Contradictory reaaon.—Because it is eternal. 

Here the reason ia contradictory, because that which is eternal la 
never produced 

ii ^ i ^ i *» ii 

yasmitt, whence ; pratarana-chintA, discussion of 

the subject , S', sah, that , faoivran nirn-aya-artham, fo-r the purpose of 
the inference; apadistah, assigned, prabarana-samah, 

synonymous with the subject under consideration. 

48. Equal to the question is the reason which provokes the 
very question, for the solution of which it was employed.—7. 

Proposition—Sound is non-eternal. 

Reason which is equal to the question —Because it is not possessed of 
the attribute of eternality. 

* Won-eternal ’ is the same as ^not possessed of the attribute of 
eternality.* In determining the question, whether sound is non-eternal, 
the reason given is that sound is non-eternal,or,in other words, the reason 
begs the question. 

II \ \ ^ » « » 

sadhya avis stah. not distinguished from what is to 
be established , s&dhya-tv4b, requiri ng to be established j flPHKCT* 

s&dhya-samah, synonymous with what is to be established. 

49. The unproved is the reason which stands in need of proof, 
in the same way as the proposition does—8. 

Proposition —Shadow is a substance. 

Unproved leason.—Because it possesses motion. 

He.e, unless it is actually proved that shadow possesses motion, we 
cannot accept it as the reason for tho proposition that shadow is a sub- 

THE NY.&.YA StJTRAS. 

23 

stance. Just as the proposition stands in need of proof, so does the reason 
itself. It is possible that the motion belongs to the person who causes 
■that obstruction of light witch is called shadow. 

“35T*nata:” « ^ i ^ i « n 

k&la atyaya-apadi§tah, assigned after lapse of time ; 
g rerafa ? k&la-atitah, time-expired, mistimed. 

60. The mistimed is the reason which is adduced when the 
time is passed in which it might hold good.—9. 

Proposition.—Sound is durable. 

Mistimed reason —Because it is manifested by union, as a colour. 

The colour of a jar is manifested when the jar comes into union with 
% lamp, bat the colour existed before the union took place, and will con¬ 
tinue to exist after the union has ceased Similarly, the sound of a drum 
is manifested when the drum comes into uuion with a rod, and the sound 
must, after the analogy of the colour, be presumed to have existed before 
the union took place, and to continue to exist after the union has ceaBed. 
Hence, sonnd's durable. The reason adduced here is mistimed, because 
the manifestation of sound does not take place at the time when the drum 
comes into union with the rod, but at a subsequent moment when the 
union has ceased. In the case of colour, however, the manifestation takes 
place prat at the time when the jar comes into union with the lamp. Be¬ 
cause ihe time of their manifestation is different, the analogy between 
coloui and sound is not complete; therefore, the reason is mistimed. 

Borne interpret the aphorism as follows :—The mistimed is the 
reason which is adduced in a wrong order among the five members, 
foi instance, as, if the reason is stated before the proposition. But this 
interpretation, according to VatsySlyana, is wrong; for a word bears ita 
legitimate connection with another word (in a Sanskrit sentence) even if 
they are placed at a distance from each other, and, on the other hand, 
even the closest proximity is of no use if the words are disconnected in 
their sense * Moreover, the placing of members in a wrong order ia 
noticed in the Ny&ya-sutra as a nigrahasthdna (occasion for rebuke), 
called aprdpta-kdla (inopportune) (V. ii. 11.) 

stUHfauH! vachana-vighktah, opposition to statement; 
artha-vikalpa upapattya, by the assumption of an alternative import; 
chhalaw, quibble, finding fault with. 

* (Quoted by Vatsy&yana in the Nyaya-bh&sya, p. 250). 

24 

BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

61. Quibble is the opposition offered to a proposition by the 
assumption of an alternative meaning.—10. 

*\ ''S 

II \ i ^ i \\ ii 

aq; tat, it; fgfqisf tri-vidham, three-fold ; qrargsi v&k-chhalam, quib¬ 
ble in reapect of a word , 5TUTr?9S5i s&inanya-chhalam, quibble in respect 
of a genua , gqgiTsqf upach&ra-chhalam, quibble m respect of a metaphor; 

cha iti, and 

52. It is of three kinds, viz , quibble in respect of a term, quibble 
in respect of a genus, and quibble in respect of a metaphor.—11. 

*j*r*lf u \ i ^ i ^ « 

wfMtarftrfMt a-vifiesa-abhihite, stated in a general way ; wsf arthe, 
in reapect of an object epK: vaktuh, speaker’s , StfuUTUTqf abhipraysit, 
from the intention , wuf artha-antara kalpan&, supposition of a 

different object, * &k ctihalam, quibble in respect of words. 

53. Qujbble in respect of a term consists in wilfully taking 
the term in a sense other than that intended by a speaker who has 
happened to use it am big .ously.—12. 

A speaker says : “ Tins boy is nava-kamhala (possessed of a new 
blanket). ” 

A quibbler replies: “ This hoy is not certainly nava-kambala 

(possessed of nine blankets), for be has only one blanket.” 

Here the word nava,, which ig ambiguous, was used by the speaker 
in the sense of “ new, ” but haB been wilfully taken by the quibbler in 
the sense of "nine.” 

u \ i-^ i \\ a 

SWJU3! sambhavat.ih, possible, STST5U artbasva, of import ; 
SlUIRTUWUifrunt atis&in&nya-yog&t, from the application of a higher 
genus ; a-sambhfita-aitha-kalpan&, supposition of an 

impossible import; RIR lasts' B&m&nya-chhalam, quibble in respect of a 
genus. 

THJ2 NYAYA-S0T4tAS. 

25 

54. Quibble in respect of a genus consists m asserting the 
impossibility of a thing which is really possible, on the (ground that it 
belongs to a certain genus which is very wide —13. 

A speaker says: “This Br&hmana is possessed of learning and 
condnct. ” 

An objector replies : “It is impossible, for how can it be inferred 
that this person is possessed of learning and conduct because he is a 
Biahmana? There are little boys who are Bi&hmanas, yet not possessed 
of learning and conduct.” 

Here the objector is a quibbler, for he knows well that possession 
of learning and conduct was not meant to be an attribute of the whole 
class of Br&limanas, but it was ascribed to “this ” particular Br&hmana 
who lived long enough in the world go render it possible for him to 
pursue studies and acquire good morals. 

« ^ t ^ i V? w 

dharrna-vibalpn-nirdeSe, in the case of transference 
of epithet ; WsfasranfaiN: artha-sadbhavn-piatisedhah, denial of the 
possibility of sense , upach&ra-chhnlaui, quibble in respect of a 

metaphor. 

55. Quibble In respect of a metaphor consists in denying 
the proper meaning of a word by taking it literally, while it was used 
metaphorically, and vice versa .— 14. 

A speaker says: “The scaffolds cry out ” 

An objector replies: “It is impossible for scaffolds to cry out, for they 
are inanimate objects ” 

Here the objector is a quibbler, for he knew well that the word 
scaffolds was used to signify those standing on the scaffolds. 

II \ I ^ I W II 

v4k chhalam, verbal quibble, playing on words , eva, 
itself , upachAra-chh&lam, metaphoricaj quibble, playing on* 

metaphors , tat-aviSns&t, there being no difference from it- 

56. It may be said that quibble m respect of a metaphor is in 

4 

26 

BOOK 1, QHAPTER IT. 

reality quibble in respect of a term, for the first is not different from 
the second.—15. 

^ w ^ ^ i ^ n 

qua, not, tat-artha-antara-bh&vat, being different 

objects Denial of the possibility of sense is not the same as tlio 
supposition of a different sense. 

57. But it is i ot so, for there is a distinction between them.—16. 

Words are taken in their duect (literal) meanings m the cuse of 
‘quibble m respect of a term, ’ while they are taken in their duect (liteial) 
as well as mdiiect (secondary) meanings in the case of ‘quibble in 
respect of a metaphor ’ 

sfT w \ t ^ i ^ u 

avis<'se, in the absence of distinction ,51 \ A, or , fefgg; 
kiiichit t&dharun through partial similarity , <£*3315551 eka-cliliaU- 
prasangah, one quibble only will result 

58. If you do not admit that one is differant from another 
simply because there is some similarity between them, then we should 
have only one find of quibble.—17. 

If ‘quibble in respect of a metaphor’ were not different from 
‘quibble m respect of a term, * then these two also would not be different 
fioin ‘quibble in respect of a genus,’ because there is some similarity 
among all of them. This is absurd, hence the three kinds of quibble 
aie different from one another. 

5?c*orw*r “sura:” h \ \ \ \ it 

Hiquf s&dliarmy a-vaidhaimj &bh) &in by means of simila¬ 

rity and di&similanty , JT?5WIT«f praty avastL&nam, opposition , 3Tlfar: jatik, 
futility. 

59. Futility consists in offering objections founded on mere 
similarity or dissimilarity.—18. 

A disputant says: “The soul is inactive, because it is ali-pervading 
as e<diei ” 

His opponent replies : “ If the soul is inactive because it bears simi¬ 
larity to ether as being all-pervading, why is it not active because it 
beais similarity to a pot as beiug a seat of union ?” 

the nyIya-sOtbas. 

27 

The reply is futile, because it overlooks the universal connection 
between the middle term and the major term which is existent in the 
arguments of the disjHitant, but wanting in the arguments of the opponent. 
Whatever is all-pervading is inactive, but whatever is a seat of union- 
is not necessarily active. 

Or again : 

Disputant —Sound is non-eternal, because unlike ether it is a product. 

Opponent—If sound is non-eternal because as a prodnct it is dis¬ 
similar to ether, why is it not eternal because ,as an object of auditory 
perception it is dissimilar to a pot ? 

The reply is futile, because it overlooks the universal disconnection 
between the middle term and the absence of the major term. There is a 
nn iversal disconnection between “a product” and “ not non-eternal, *’ 
but there is no such disconnection between “ an object of auditory per¬ 
ception ” and * not eternal ” 

M 1 ^ I ^ II 

fiwfa'rRr: vipratipattih, wrong deduction ; Sfjrfaqfo: apratipattih, 
indecision , 9 cba, and, mgraha-sthanam, occasion for rebuke, 

ground of defeat. 

60. an occasion for rebuke arises when one misunderstands, 
or does not understand at all.—19, 

If a person begins to argue in a way which betrays his utter 
ignorance, or wilfully misunderstands and yet persists in showing that 
he understands well, it is of no avail to employ counter arguments. Ho 
is quite unfit to be argued with, and there is nothing left for his opponent 
but to turn him out or quit his oompany, rebuking him as a blockhead 
or a knave. 

An instance of occasion for rebuke:— 

Whatever is not quality, is substance 

Because there is- nothing except colour, etc (quality ) 

A person who argues in the above way is to be rebuked as a fool, 
for his reason (which admits only quality) opposes his proposition 
(which admits both quality and substance ) 

Another instance : 

Disputant.—Fire is not hot. 

Opponent.—But the evidence of touch disproves such a statement. 

28 

BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

Disputant, in order to gain the confidence of the assembled people, 
says—“0 learned audience, listen, I do not say that fire ib not hot, etc. 

It is only meet that the opponent should quit the company of a 
man who argues in this way. 

II \ \ ^ I II 

?rfif$5»nq: tat-Tiknlp&t, from their varieties ; 5TT%fTO5W«T jdti- 

nigrahasth&na-bahutvam, multiplicity of futility and ground of 
defeat. 

61. Owing to the variety of kinds, there is multiplicity of 
futilities and occasions for rebuke.—20. 

There are 24 kinds of futility and 22 kinds of oocaBion for rebuke 
which will be treated respectively in Chapter 1 and Chapter II of Book V. 

tfermorerrwn*w«rfstcffcmrfl^n U^i 

THE NYAYA-SOTRAS 

29 

Book II, Chapter I. 

*sm :« ^ I \ \ \ II 

CTTPTPfc q’lrfe^TOr^rac sam&na-aneka-dharma-adhyavas&y&b, from the 
asecrtaimnent of common or more than one attributes of two objects ; 
VI?*rcK>=r*3fc338TOT?f anyatara-dharma adhyavasayHt, from the ascertain¬ 
ment of the attributes of one of them , gr v&, or , w na, not, ijrepf: samSayah, 
doubt. 

62. Some say that doubt cannot arise from the recognition of 
common and uncommon properties, whether conjointly or separately.-1. 

I Conjointly .—It is said that doubt about an object is never pro¬ 
duced if both the common and uncommon properties of the object are 
recognised. For instance, if we see m the twilight a tall object which 
moves, we do not doubt whetber it is a man or a post. We at once decide 
that it is a man, for though tallness is a property possessed in common 
by man and post, locomotion is a property which distinguishes a man from 
a post. 

Separately —Likewise, doubt about an object is said never to be pro¬ 
duced if only the common or the uncommon properties are recognised. For 
instance, if we see a tall object in the twilight, we have no reason to doubt 
whether it is a man or a post. Tallness is certainly a property possessed 
in common by man and post, but the tallness of a man is not identical 
with that of a post: it merely resembles it. Now, the knowledge of simi¬ 
larity between the tallness of a man and that of a post presnpposes a 
knowledge of the man and the post, of which two kinds of tallneBs are 
attributes. If there is already a knowledge of the man and the post, 
there cannot be any doubt about them, for knowledge is the vanquisher 
of doubt. 

I) ^ I \ \ ^ II 

vipraAipatti-avyavasthfl-adhyavas&y&fc, from 
the ascertainment of contradiction or of irregularity of perception and 
non-perception. ^ cha, and. 

63. It Js further said that doubt cannot arise, either from 
conflicting testimony, or from the irregularity of perception and non- 
per caption.—2, 

3d 

BOOK IT, CHAPTER I. 

^ 11 ^ \ \ \ ^ u 

fsprfstJvft vipratipattan, if contradiction be a cause of doubt; cha, 
also , ?l«lf 3 T 38 sampratipattelj, from agreement. 

61. In the case of conflicting testimony there is, according to 
them, a strong conviction (on each side).—?. 

Suppose a disputant (Naiyayi ka) says •. there is bouI. His opponent 
(Buddhist) replies : there is no soul. 

The disputant and hiB opponent are quite sure that their respective 
statements are correct. Hence there is no doubt, but on the contrary 
there is conviction, m the minds of both. 

oETGTR^ci^rT^ToEror^rTm: \\y\m 

avyavasthft, irregularity, STTcflfir Atmani, in itself 
vyavasthita-tv&t, being regular , =ar cha, and ; WBtMWnTT: a-vyava- 
sth&y&h, from irregularity. 

65. Doubt, they say, does not arise from the irregularity of 
perception and non-perception, because in the irregularity itself there 
is regularity.—1. 

An irregularity may he designated as Buch with reference to some¬ 
thing else, hut with reference to itself it is a settled fact. If the irregu¬ 
larity is settled in itself, it is regular and cannot cause doubt. On the 
other hand, if the irregularity is not settled in itself, it is devoid of its 
own character and cannot cause doubt. 

II ^ \ \ l H II 

a*IT tath&, similarly ; atyanta-samSayah, endless doubt; 

3$'stflWSr! tat-dharma-satatya upapatteh, from continuous existence 
of the attributes thereof. 

66 Likewise, there is, they say, the chance of an endless doubt, 
owing to the continuity of its cause.—5. 

Recognition of properties common to many objects is, for instance, 
a cause of doubt. The common properties continue to exist, and hence 
there will, they say, be no cessation of doubt. 

5fT II ^ I \ I \ II 

THE NYiYA SOTRAS 

31 

WNSTiWSPIRI yath&-u.kta-adhyavas &3 ac, from the ascertainment as 
•stated by the opponent , eva, certainly ; tat-visesa- 

apek§4fc, in which there is need of the differentia , samsaye, doubt 

arising , «f na, not , WSSTCIS a-sam&ayah, absence o£ doubt, «T na, not; 
atyanta-samsayah, endless doubt , \4, or. 

67. In reply, it is stated that the recogmt'un of properties 
common to many objects, etc., are certainly causes of doubt, if there 
is no reference to the precise characters of the objects : there is no 
chance of no -doubt or of endless-doubt.—6 

It is admitted that doubt does not arise from the recognition of 
common and uncommon properties conjointly. Aphorism 2-1-1 brings 
forth the objection that doubt is not produced even by the recognition 
of common or uncommon properties alone It is said that, while we see 
a tall object m the twilight, we at onee think of a man and a post, both 
of which are tall. Thus there is knowledge rather than doubt about 
the man and post suggested by the tall object. The present aphorism 
dismisses the objection, by stating that there ib certainly a common (non- 
distinctive) knowledge about a man and a post suggested by the tall 
object, but there is no precise (distinctive) knowledge about them. Precise 
knowledge (that is, knowledge of the precise character which distinguishes 
a man from a post) being absent, doubt must arise. Similar arguments 
will apply to doubt arising from the recognition of non-common 
properties alone. 

Aphorisms 2-1-2 and 2-1-3 raise the objection that doubt does not 
ai iso from conflicting testimony, as the disputant and his opponent are 
both confident of their respective contentions. The present aphorism 
disposes of the objection, by pointing out that, in the case of conflicting 
statements, one is led to believe that both statements are worth consi¬ 
deration, but is unable to penetrate into the precise characters of the 
statements. Hence, though the disputant and his opponent remain fixed, 
the umpire and the audience are thrown into doubt by their conflicting 
statements. 

Aphorism 2-1-4 raises the objection that doubt cannot arise from 
the irregularity of perception and non-perception, as the irregularity is 
settled in itself. The present aphorism meets the objection by stating 
that the irregularity cannot be concealed by meie veibal tricks. The 
irregularity, though settled in itself, does not lose its own character until 
the objects which cause it are removed. 

32 

BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

Aphorism 2-1-5 giveB rise to the fear that there is the possibility of an 
endless doubt, inasmuch as the cause is continuous. The present aphor¬ 
ism removos the fear by stating that, though materials of doubt, such as 
common properties, etc , continue to exist, we do not always recognise 
them. Unless there is recognition of the common properties, etc , there 
cannot be doubt. 

u ^ i \ i • n 

HSI yatr a, wherever , tfstTS: samsayafc, doubt ; 35t tatra, there ; qsf 
evam, in this way; 3^trrfS#li nttara-uttara-prasafigah, sequence of 
arguments one after another. 

68. Examination should be made in this way of each case 
where there is room for doubt.—7. 

It has been stated that knowledge about the true nature of the cate¬ 
gories cousists in the true knowledge of their enunciation, definition, and 
examination. In case of nell-known facts admitted by all, there should bo 
no examination. We aie to examine only tboBe cases wheie there is room 
for doubt. The authoi explains, therefore, first the uatuie of douht, aud 
then proceeds to examine the other categories, lest there should beany 
room for douot in them 

ri%f: u ^ i \ \ c n 

U?*ieflRhrt pratyal so a liuaia, of perception and the rest , SHTTWHf 
a-pr&trAnyam, absence of tlio characteristic of being the means of right 
knowledge ; traik&lya-asiddheh, because of their non-opera¬ 

tion in any of the three divisions of time, past, present, and future 

69. Perception and other means of knowledge, says an objector, 
are invalid, as they are impossible at all the three times,—8. 

According to the objector, perception is impossible at the present, 
past and future times, or, in other words, perception can neither be prior 
to, nor posterior to, nor simultaneous with, the objects of sense. 

U ^ \ \ \ < II 

<£? pfirvam, before , % hi, because : pramfina-siddhan, if 

the means of right knowledge, perception,, etc , come into existence , *r 
na, not , indriya-artha-s&nmkai§at, from the contact of 

THE NyIyA-SOtRaS. 

.3# 

the sense and object; Jre<Taift?qi%i pratyaksa-utpattib, production of 
perception. 

70. If perception occurred anternrly it could not, he says, 
have arisen from the contact of a sense with its object.—9. 

With reference to the perception of colour, for instance, it is asked 
whether the colour precedes perception or the perception precedes colour. 
If yon say that perception occurred anteriorly or preceded the colour, you 
must give up your definition of perception, viz , that perception arises 
'from the contact of a sense with its object. 

•ISfxiRf pafichat, after , siddhau, if it comes into existence, si 

na, not ; JWtofrn: pram&nebhyah, from the means of right knowledge; 
prameya-siddhih, establishment of what is to be proved 

71. If perception is supposed to occur posteriorly you cannot, 
he continues, maintain the conclusion that objects of sense are estab¬ 
lished by perception.—10. 

The objection stands thns :—The means of right knowledge are 
stated by you to be perception, inference, comparison and verbal testi¬ 
mony. All objects of right knowledge are said to be established by them. 
The objects of sense, for instance, are supposed to be established by per¬ 
ception : colour is said to be established by visual perception. This 
conclusion will have to bo abandoned if you say that perception occurs 
posteriorly to the objects. 

U ^ \ \ » XX « 

yugapat, simultaneously , siddhau, if it comes into exist¬ 
ence; prati-artha-niyata-ti At, being restricted to each 

object; krama-vritti tva-abh&vah, absence of the charac¬ 

teristic of being in successive order , 3^^*^ buddhinAm, of cognitions 

72. If perception were simultaneous with its object there would 
not, says the objector, be any order of succession in our cognitions, 
as there is uo such order in their corresponding objects.—11. 

Various objects of sense c..n exist at one time, e.g , colour and smell 
exist in a flower at the same time. If we hold that perception is simui? 
taneous with its object, we must admit that the colour and the smell eaq 

5 

34 

BOOK IT, CHAPTER I. 

’be perceived at the same tune, that is, our perception of colour must be 
admitted to be simultaneous with our perception of smell. This is absurd, 
becauso two acta of perception, nay, two cognitions cannot take place 
at the same tune. As there is an order of succession in our cognitions, 
perception cannot be simultaneous with its object. The aphorism may 
also be explained as follows:— 

"In knowing a colour we perform, we may say, two kinds of know¬ 
ledge simultaneously, viz., perception and inference. As soon as our eye 
comes in contact with the colour, perception results which does 
not, however, enable us to be aware of the colour. The colour is brought 
home to ns by inference which, we may say, is performed simultaneously 
with tl e perception Now, says the objector, perception and inference 
being two different kinds of knowledge cannot be simultaneous, as the 
mind which is an atomic substance cannot be instrumental in producing 
more than one kind of knowledge at a time. 

sfersmflra;: trail.alya-asiddheh, from the non-existence (of the means 
of right knowledge) m all the three times , pratisedlia- 

an-upapattih, non-establishment of denial or negation. 

73. In reply, it is stated that if perception and other means of 
right knowledge are impossible, the denial of them is also impossible.-12. 

Owing to absence of the matter to be denied, the denial is inopera¬ 
tive. 

I) ^1^11 

sarva-pram&na pratisedhAt, owing to the denial of 
all the means of right knowledge , xj cha, and , 5rfef*hgrgT?f%: pratisedha- 
an-upapattih, non-existence of denial 

74-. Moreover, the denial itself cannot be established, if you deny 
all means of right know ledge.—13. 

If you are to establish anything (e g , denial), yon can do so only 
by one or more of the means of right knowledge, viz., perception, infer¬ 
ence, comparison, etc. If you deny them, there will be left nothing 
which will lead you to the establishment of the thing. Hence you will not 
be able to establish the denial itself. 

THE NYiYA-SftTRAS. 

35 

tat-pr&mariye, if denial is valid ; 5T. v4, or , «t na, not; 
sarva-pram&na-viprati^edhah, denial of all the means of 

right knowledge. 

75. If you say that your demal is based on a certain means of 
ri^ht knowledge, you do thereby acknowledge the validity of the 
means.—14. 

Suppose yon. deny a> thing, because it is not perceived. You do there¬ 
by acknowledge that perception is a means of right knowledge Similarly, 
inference, etc., are also to be acknowledged as means of right knowledge. 

scrs^T^T^rRrffsrrr^f: ti^iW 

f q ti g qTCgfg^H: trai-k&lya-apratisedhah, non-denial by reference to 
three times ; w cha, and j Sabd4t, from sound , htodya- 

siddhivat, like the proof of the existence of the drum, afe*t^. tat-siddheh, 
from the proof of their existence. 

76. The means of right knowledge cannot, therefore, be denied. 
They are established in the manner that a drum is proved hy its sound. 
—15. 

There is, sayB VatsySyana, no fixed rule that the means of right 
knowledge should precede objects of right" knowledge or should suc¬ 
ceed thorn or be simultaneous with them. The order of precedence is 
never uniform Look at the analogous oases : a drum precedes its sound, 
and illumination succeeds the sun, while smoke is synchronous with fire, 

u^tt ^ n ^ \ \ i \\ u 

trifar pramex&, what is to be established, ^ cha, and; g?ir tul&, 
something-possessing weight, a pair of scales, a measure of weight; 

pramanya-vat, like its being a means of right knowledge by 
being used as a weight. 

77. The character of an object of right knowledge resembles 
that of a balance by which a thing is weighed.—16. 

Joist as a balance is an instrument for measuring weight, but is a 
measured object when it is itself weighed in another balance, so tha 
senses, etc, are said to be instruments of right knowledge from one point 
of view, and objects of right knowledge from.another, point of view. The 
eye, for instance, is am nstrument of perception as well as an object of 
perception. So also the means of right knowledge may, if'occasion arises, 
be also regarded as objects of right knowledge. 

86 

POOK II, CHAPTER I. 

SOTUaa. pran fin i-tah, from the means of right knowledge , : 

siddlieh, knowledge or proof being, STJTTniT*lt pi atn&nau&ai, of the means of 
night knowledge , sn?P!lTJ?rcftT%sr?rf: pratn&na-antara siddhi-prasangah, 
implication of the existence of other means of right knowledge. 

78. If an object of right knowledge, continues the objector, is 
to be established by a means of right knowledge, this latter needs 
also to be established by another means cf right knowledge.—17. 

The objection stands thus :—• 

You say that an object of right knowledge is to be established by a 
means of right knowledge. I admit this, and ask how yon establish 
the means of right knowledge itself. Since a means of right knowledge 
may also be regarded as an object of right knowledge, yon are required 
to establish the so called means of right knowledge by another means of 
right knowledge, and so on. 

afgfafw: tat-vimvnttehh, in case of the cessation of the other means 
after the cognition of the means of right knowledge , 51 v&, on the other 
hand , pram&na-siddhi-vat, as m the case of the proof or 

knowledge of the means of right knowledge ; sritafatiaf: prameya- 
siddliib, proof of the object of right knowledge. 

79. Or, he continues, if a means of right knowledge does not 
require another means of right knowledge for its establishment, let an 
object of right Knowledge be also established without any means of 
right knowledge.—18. 

A means of right knowledge stands in the same category as an 
object of right knowledge, if you are to establish either of them. 
If the means of right knowledge is accepted as self-established, 
the object of right knowledge must also, according to the objector, bo 
accepted as self-established In such a contingency perception, inference, 
etc , will he superfluous. 

w n^qireiaii%if5Tif?5|: u ^ i \ i u 

5 na, no , prad!pa-prak&§a-siddhi-vat, like proof 

of illumination of the lamp j tat-siddheh, because of the proof 

thereof i. e. the means of right knowledge. 

THE NYlYA-SOTRAS. 

37 

80. It is not so : the means of right knowledge are established 
like the illumination of a lamp.—19. 

A lamp illumines a jar and onr eye illumines the lamp. Though 
it is sometimes the lamp, and sometimes the eye, that illumines, you are 
bound to admit a general notion of illuminator. Similarly, you must admit 
a general notion of the means of right knowledge as distinguished from 
that of the objects of right knowledge The means will not, of course, 
he regarded as such when included under the category of an object. 

[The aphorism is also interpreted as follows :—Just as a lamp 
illumines itself and the other ob]eots, the me&.is of right knowledge 
establish themselves and the objects of right knowledge. Hence percep¬ 
tion establishes itself and the objects of sense] 

Note .—Objections raised m aphorisms 8,9,10,11,16, 17 and 18 
emanated from the Bnddhist philosophy. The reply given in aphorisms 
12, 13, 14, 16 and 19, represents the views of Brahmamc philosophers 
who regard perception as a real act and objects as self existent entities. 
According to the Bnddhist philosophers, however, neither perception nor 
objects have any self-existence. They acquire an apparent or condi¬ 
tional existence, in virtue of a ceitain relation which exists between them. 
Cause and effect, long and short, prior and posterior, etc , are all relative 
terms. The whole world is a net-work of lelationB. The relations them¬ 
selves are illnsory, as the objects which are related have no Belf-existence. 
Hence the world is an illusion, or has a mete conditional existence. But 
where there ib conditionality, there is »<> tiuth. Truth and conditionality 
are incompatible terms. That which neutralises all relations is the void 
or absolute which lies beyond the conditional world. To speak the truth, 
the world is an absolute nothing, though it has a conditional existence. 
Vide my Translation of the M&dhyaonka aphorisms m the Journal of the 
Buddhist Text Society, Calcutta, for 1895, 1896, 1897, 1898 and 1899. 

ii ^ m ii 

kvachit, m some cases, e. g. lamp , mvritti-dar- 

6an&t, from the observation of cessation , anivntti-daraan&t, 

from the observation of non-cessation or non-absence , ^ cba, and ; 
kvaohit, in some cases, e. g. jar ; an-eka-antah, not-one-ended, 

uncertain. 

81. Seeing that m some cases other proofs are not required and 

38 

BOOK II, CS A.PTFB I. 

that in some cases there is need of other proofs, your argument is 
indecisive—20, 

This i» m reply to those who argue that just as a light does not 
require another light to illuminate it, even so the proofs, 1 . e. the means 
of right knowledge also may not require- anything else to prove them , in 
other words, that every means of right knowledge is also the means of its 
own right knowledge. The reply is that the example cannot be stretched 
so far, because there is nothing to distinguish the hetu (reason), viz to 
be the illuminator, from the ud&harana ( example ), viz. the lamp, in 
this respect The means of right knowledge and a lamp both illuminate 
objects ; a lamp also illuminates itself ; but it does not therefore follow 
that the means of right knowledge also illuminates itself. For a lamp 
which illuminates objects, can also be illuminated by another lamp , and 
it would then follow on the same analogy that the means of right know¬ 
ledge which illuminates objects, may be also illuminated by other means. 
Thus your argument leads to opposite conclusions. 

u ^ \ \ \ u 

5T3l8Sre5«iP!JT3'T! 1 lfw: prafcyaksa-lak^ana-an-upapattih, non-establishment 
of the definition of perception ; W?Wlld^trrac A-samagra-vachan&t, from 
incomplete statement. 

82. An objector may say that the definition of perception as 
given before is untenable, because incomplete.—-21, 

Perception has been defined as knowledge which arises from the 
contact of a sense with its object. This difinition is-said to be defective, 
because it does not notice the conjunction of soul with mind, and of 
mind with sense, which*are also causes- of perception- 

«^n^Rnt^%T^f^r^qf^Ti[ II ^ I ^ I ^11 

W na, not, sut-JTOTO: itma-mansofi, of soul and mind , 
sannikarsa-abh&Lye, in the absence of contact ; ST€d$rte<?fw : pratyaksa- 
utpattih, production of perception. 

'*'■ 83. Perception, it is said, cannot arise unless there is conjunc¬ 
tion of soul with mind.—22, 

From the contact of a sense with its object no knowledge arises 
unless, it is said, there is alBO conjunction, of soul with mind. A sense 
coming in contact with its object produces knowledge in our soul, only if 
the sense is conjoined with the mind. Hence the conjunction of soul 
with mind should be mentioned as a necessary element in the definition 
of perception. 

THE NYiYA SUTRAS 

39 

IT^: II ^ I ^ 1^ II 

f^tsra»rerai?for dik-desd-k&la-ak.aseau, in respect of direction, space, 
iime and ether, ■wft api, also , evam, similar ; sfttn: prasangah, 
implication. 

84. Were it so, observes one of the assembly then direction, 
space, time and ether should also be enumerated among the causes of 
perception.—23. 

Direction, space, time and ether are also indispensable conditions in 
tho production of knowledge Gut even the objector does not feel the 
necessity of enumerating these among the causes of perception. 

iRRST^re: II ^ I \ I ^ II 

5rPTf55|F?3T3[ ]n&na-lihga«tv&fc, because cognition or knowledge is its 
mark ; siTctpi: &tmanah, of soul , H na, not, aPWtter: anavarodhah, non¬ 
exelusion. 

85. r Jhe soul, we point out, has not been excluded from our 
■definition, inasmuch as knowledge is a mark of the soul —24. 

Perception has been described as knowledge, and knowledge implies 
the soul which is its abode Consequently, in speaking of knowledge, the 
soul has, by implication, been mentioned as a condition in the production 
of perception. 

nrre: u ^ i \ i ^ 11 

tat-ayaugapadya-lmga-tvat, because non-simul¬ 
taneity of cognitions is its mark , ^ cha, and ; «i na, not; 3TTCC manasah, 
of mind. 

86. The mind, too, has not been omitted from our definition, 
inasmuch as we have spoken of the non-simultaneity of acts of 
knowledge —25. 

Perception has been defined as knowledge. An essential character¬ 
istic of knowledge is that more than one act of knowing cannot take place 
at a time. This characteristic is due to the mind, an atomic substance, 
which is conjoined with tbe sense, when knowledge is produced. Hence, 
in speaking of knowledge, we have, by implication, mentioned the mind 
as a condition of perception. 

11 ^ i \ i ^ 11 

40 

BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

pratyaks<i nimitta tv&t, because it is the condition 
ofpecception , iudnja-a.rthay.ih, of sense and object, 

sanmkarsasya, of c intact ; ^5tTS^*T sva-fiabdena, by identical term, 
Specific ; STWJf vaclianatn, statement. 

87- Ihe contact of a sense with its object is mentioned as the 
special cause of perception —26. 

There are many kinds of knowledge, such as perception, recollection, 
ete. Conjunction of soul with mind is a cause which operates in the 
production of all kinds of knowledge, while the contactof a sense with its 
object is the cause which operates only in perception. In our definition 
of perception we have mentioned only the spiecial cause, and have omitted 
the common causes which precede not only perception, but also other 
kinds of knowledge. 

U ^ « \\ U 

supta-vy&sakta-manaH&m. of minds asleep and inatten¬ 
tive; ^ cha, and , indriya-arthayoh, of sense and object , af^TW- 

fafirafwracsannikarsa-nimitta- tv&t, because contact is the condition. 

88- The contact of a sense with its object is certainly the main 
cause, as perception is pro luced even when one is asleep or inatten¬ 
tive —27. 

Even a sleeping person hears the thundering of a cloud if his ear is 
open to it, and a careless person experiences heat if his skin is exposed 
to it. 

n ^ \ \ \ ^ u 

taih, by these; w cha, also ; apadesah, difEerenciation; 

5TrafW3faT>!jt jn&na-vises&nam, of particular cognitions. 

89- By the senses and their objects are also distinguished ihe 
special kinds of knowledge.—28. 

The special kinds of knowlege are the five varieties of perception, 
viz , by sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. These are distinguished 
by the senses in whoBe spheres they lie, or by the objects which they 
illumine. Thus the visual perception is called eye-knowledge or colour- 

THE NYAYA SUTRAS 

41 

knowledge, the auditory ,perception is called ear-knowledge or sound- 
knowledge, the olfactory perception is called nose-knowledge or smell* 
knowledge, the gustatory perception is called tongue-knowledge or taste- 
knowledge and the tactual perception is called skin-knowledge ortouch- 
knowledge. 

U ^ » * I II 

'' suRt5T?3rT3C vyAhata- tv&b, because it is precluded or obstructed ; srtiT 
a-hetuh, no argument, 

90. ' ( The above, says the Objector, is ) no argument, because it 
is precluded.—-29. 

The conclusion reachedjjn 1 the_ preceding three aphorisms is that 
the contact of the sense and the object, and not the contact of the sense 
and mind nor the contact of the soul and mind, should be stated to be 

r 

the cause of perception To this the objector puts in a rejoinder. The 
meaning is that if in certain circumstances, e g where the person is 
asleep or inattentive, perception takes place without tie contact of the 
i^oul and mind, then there would be nothing to prevent several cognitions 
from being produced at one and the same time, and thus the tenet that 
the non-production of several cognitions simultaneously is the mark of 
the mind ( Ny&ya-sfttra, I. i 16 ) wonld be violated Therefore the sfttra 
I. i 16 precludes, or is precluded by, the aigument advanced in the 
preceding three aphorisms. 

II \ I \ I II 

i ; */»» > ' 1 

*T na, not; artha vises i-pi&baly at, on account of 

the prevalence or intensity of a particular peicept or sensible object. 

91. ( We reply that there is ) no (such preclusion or violation). 
( In the case of a person who is asleep or inattentive perception ta' es 
place ) through the intensity of the sensible object.—30. 

The three aphorisms in question. Nos 87 89, do not imply that the 
contact of the soul and mind sometimes is, and s imetiraet is not, the 
the cause of perception. They merely emphasise the fact that the con¬ 
tact of the sense and object is the principal cause of perceptual cogni¬ 
tion. For the intensity of'the object and the keenness of the sense 
directly establish contact of the object with the sense, and not of the 
sense with mind and the soul. 

6 

II ^ I t » W !l 

42 

BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

STrjjSjf pratyaksam, peroeption ; BTTjjrr-f anum&natn, inference, 
eka-desi-grahan&t, because of apprehension of a patt, srssq: 
npalabdheh, of cognition 

•92. Ferception, it may be urged, is inference, because it illu¬ 
mines only a part as a mark of the whole.—31. 

We are said to perceive a tree, while we really perceive only a pait 
of it. 'this knowledge of the tree, as a whole,derived from the knowledge 
ol a part of it is, acooidmg to the objectors, a case of inference. 

u ^ i \ i ^ 11 

si no, no, cftTSTU pratyaksena, by perception , qraq cirtigf yavat lavat, 
so much as that , ssfct api, evenj aq^HT^ upalambh&t, because there is 
cognition. 

93. Eut this is not so, for perception is admitted of at least 
that portion uhich it actually illumines.—32. 

The objectois themselves admit that a partis actually perceived. 
Hence, perception as a means of knowledge is not altogether denied, and 
it is accepted as different from inference. 

n ^ \ \ \ ^ n 

• aadhy a-t\ at, because it iB what is to be established j 
sjqqrgfh avayavmi, in respect of the whole , sandehah, doubt 

9t. There is, so v.e say, doubt about the v hole, because the 
whole has yet to be established.—33. 

The objectors say that parts alone are realities and that there is no 
whole behind them. A tree, for instance, is yellow in some paits and 
green in other parts If the tree was one whole, then the contradictory 
qualities of yellowness and greenness conld not have belonged to it 
simultaneously Hen^e the parts aione must, according to them, he 
regai dod as teal. 

n ^ \ \ \ u 

sai va-agrahanam, non-apprehension of all, ar^jsqfa^: 
avayavi-asiddheh, in case of non existence of the whole, 

9.\ If there were no whole, there would, it is replied, he noil- 
perception of all.—31. 

THE NYITA-SOtRAS. 

43 

All signifies substance, quality, action, generality, pai ticularity and 
intimate relation. None of these would be perceptible, if the whole were 
denied. Suppose that the parts aAone are real Then, since a pait is not 
of fixed dimension, it may itself be divided into parts, these latter again 
into further parts, and so on, until we reach tie atoms which are the 
ultimate parts Now the atoms which possess no bulk me not perceptible. 
Similarly, the quality, action, etc., which inhere in the atoms, aie also not 
perceptible Consequently, if we deny that thoic is a‘whole,* neither the 
substance nor quality, etc., would be perceptible 

dhih-ana-likarsaija upapattch, because of the fact of 
holding and pulling , W cha, and. 

96. There is a whole ^ because we can hold, pull, etc.—35. 

If there were no whole, we could not have held or pulled an entire 
thing by holding or pulling a part of it. Wo say, • one jar,’ ‘one man/ 
etc. This use of * one * would vanish, if there were no whole. 

sentl-vana-vat, like an army and a foieat , Hjcf grahanara, 
apprehension , iti, so , chet, if , w na, no , ati-mdriya- 

tv&t, because of their being beyond the senses , anunatn, of the 

atoms. 

97. The illustration from an army c r a forest does not hold 
good, for atoms cannot be detected by the sense-. —30 

If any one were to say that just as a single soldier or a single tree 
may not be seen from a distance, but an army consisting of numerous 
soldi 9 rs or a forest consisting of numerous trees is seen, so a single atom 
may not be perceptible, but a jar consisting of numerous atoms will be 
perceptible, and these atoms being called ‘one jar/ the use of ‘one’ will 
not vanish, the analogy, we reply, does not hold good, because the 
Boldiers and trees possess bulk and so are preceptible, wheieas the atoms 
do not possess bulk andso are individually not peiceptible It is absurd to 
argue that, because soldiers and trees are perceptible in the mass, atoms 
are perceptible in the mass also :to avoid this conclusion, we must admit 
the existence of a whole beyond the parts. 

44 

BOOK IT, CHAPTER I 

rodlia apaghfita-sfidriBj ebhyah, from obstruction 
(as in the caseof a stieam) disturbance (as in the case of an ants’ nest) 
and (artificial) similanty , vy abhich&i fit, as it errs , Sfguijf 

anumanam, mfereucS ; oTJJfTTOf apramfiqam, not a means of right 
knowledge. 

98. Inference, some say,'is not a means of right knowledge, 
as it errs in certain cases e, g , when a rh er is banked, when something 
is damaged, and when similarity misleads, dc.—37. 

If we see a river swollen, we mfei that there has been rain, if we 
see the ants carrying off their eggs, we infer that there will be rain , and 
if we hear a peacock scream, we infer that clouds are gathering. These 
inferences, says an objector, are not necessarily correct, for a river may 
be swollen because embanked, the ants may carry off their eggs because 
their nests have been damaged, and the so-called screaming of a peacock 
may be nothing but the voice of a man. 

II ^| \ I II 

•T na, no , ekadeSa-tifisa-sfidrisyebhyah, from the 

part, fear, and similarity , artha antara-bhfivfit, because 

It is something different. 

99. It is not so, because our, inference is based on something 
else than the part, fear and likeness.—38. 

The swelliug of a river caused by rain is different from that which 
results from the embankment of a part of it , the former is attended by a 
great rapidity of currents, an abundance of foain, a mass of floating 
fruits,leaves, wood, etc. The manner in which aDts carry off their eggs 
just before ram is quite different from the manner in which they do so 
when their nests cue damaged. The an,ts run away quickly in a steady 
line when rain is imminent, but fear makes them fly in disorder when 
their nests are damaged The screaming of a peacock which suggests 
gathering clouds is quite different from a man’s imitation of it, for the 
latter is not natural. If in such cases any wrong inference is drawn, 
the fault is in tne person, nob in the process. 

vartamfina-abbfiva^, non-existence of present time; 

patatah, jof the falling; qfaaqfaasqqgrsstqqw: pafcita-patitavya-kfila- 
upapatteh_, because of proof of the time through which it has fallen 
and the time through which it will fall. 

THE NYAYA-SCtRAS. 

45 

100. Ihere is, some say, no present time because when a 
thing falls, we can know only the time through which it has faJlen and 
the time through which it will yet fall —*39. 

Inference has reference to thiee times In the a priori inference we 
pass from the past to the present, in the a posteriori from the present to 
the past, and in the ‘ commonly seen ’ from the present to the present. 14 
is, therefore, proper that we should examine the three tunes. The reason 
which leads some people to deny the present time is that when a fruit* 
for instance, falls from a tree, we recognise only the past time taken up 
by the fruit in traversing a certain distance and the future time which 
will yet be taken up by the fruit in traversing the remaining distance. 
There is no intervening distance which the fruit can traverse at the 
so-called present time. Hence, they say, there is no present time. 

gift: tayoh, of these two ; sjfq api, also ; 3TVTTW: abh&vah non-existence; 
vartam&ra-abh&ve, in the case of the non-existence of the 
present, ?T?<hjr?9T<l tat-apeksa-tv4t, because of being related to it. 

101. If there is no present time, there will, it is replied, be no 
, past and future times, because they are related to it —40. 

The past is that which precedes the present, and the future is that 
which succeeds it. Hence, if there is no present time, there cannot be 
any past or future time. 

N ^ \ \ \ 9 \ W 

W na, not , stfO ilsune^T. atita-anagatayoh, of the past and the future; 
, itaia-itnra-apeksli-siddhib, establishment by inutal 

dependence. 

102. The past and future cannot he established by a mere 
mutual reference.—41. 

If the past is defined as that which is not the future and the future 
is defined as that which is not the paBt, the definition would involve a 
fallacy of mutual dependency. Hence we must admit the present time, 
1 to which the past and future are related. 

*rannrwil‘ vartam&na-abh&ve,, in the case of the non-existence of 

46 

BOOK II, C H YFTETt I. 

the present,nsqfogof sarva-agrahan,am, non-apprehension of all, 
prat)’aksa-au-upapaiteh, owing to impossibility of perception 

103. If there were no lire sent time, sen-e perception would be 
impossible, know le Ige \\ ould be impossible,—12. 

If you deny the present time, there cannot be any perception which 
illumines only what is present in time; and, in the absence of perception, 
all kinds of knowledge-would be impossible. Hence the piesenc time is 
established by confutation or the principle of red act w ad absuidum 

sq^iqq^qqm U ^ \ \ U 

fJeraraas^f'T'W kritat&-kartavyat&-upapatteh, from the possibility 
of a thing having been accomplished and remaining to be accomplished, 
ubhayatliS., botliways , ST£°f grahanam, apprehension. 

104. We can know both the past and the future, for we cau 
conceive of a thing as made and as about to be made—43. 

The present time is indicated by what continues, the past by what 
has been finished, and the futuie by what has not yet begun. 

atyanta p aja-ekadesa s&dbarmyat, from absolote, 
almost complete or partial similarity , upam&na-asiddih, non- 

establishment of comparison 

105. Comparison, some say, is not a means of.right knowledge, 
as it cannot be established either through complete or considerable or 
partial simil inty.—j!. 

On the ground of complete similarity we never say c< a cow is like a 
cow, ” on the ground of considerable similarity we do not say that ''a 
bufEilo is like a cow,” and on the gronn.i of partial similarity we do not 
say that” a mustai d seed is like Mount Mein ” Hence comparison is 
regai ded by some as not a means of light knowledge, for it has no 
precise standard 

prasiddha-s&dharmyat, from wellknown similarity ; 
uparnaua-siddheh, because of establishment of comparison ; 
ukta-dosa-anapapatfcih, non-application of the defeat urged. 

10 This objection does not hold good, for comparison is estab¬ 
lished through similarity in a high degree.—15. 

THE Nv'i.YA-SCrTUAS, 

47 

The snnilai lty m a high degree ■exists between such well-known 
objects ns a cow and a bos gavceus, etc. 

w ^ i \ \ n 

sr<WU pratvaksen.i, by perception , STSTJijgifb^: apiatyaksa-siddheh, 
because of establishment of what is not an object or perception 

107. Comparison, some say, is not different from inference, for 
both seek to establish the unperceived by mea is of the perceived —16. 

We recognise a bos gava^us at fiist sight tinough its special similar¬ 
ity to a cow which we have often peiceived This knowledge of a pre¬ 
viously unperceived object denied through its similarity to a peiceived 
object 13 , it has been said, nothing but a case of inference. 

*T na, not , 3T£T6«I8ji apratyuksa, unperceived , gavaye, in a boa 
gavasus , STTTTmisf pramana-aithnm, the pnrpose of proof, utility as proof; 
SWTlSRrT upamanasi a, of comparts m , pusyamah, we see. 

108. It is net m a bos gavmus unperceitcd that we find t 1 e real 
matter of compari on.—47. 

The matter of comparison is similarity, e g , between a cow and a 
bos gavrens The bos gavteus in which we notice the similarity is fiist 
perceived, that is, on perceiving a bosgavseus we notice its similarity to a 
cow Hence comparison supplies us with knowledge of a perceived thing, 
through its similarity to another thing also preceived This characteristic 
distinguishes it from infeience, which furnishes us with knowledge of an 
unperceived thing through that of a thing peiceived 

n ^ \ \ \ u 

g«rt tatlia iti, and thus , 3T7?T®T{nf upasamhaiat, from conclusion, 
summation , upamana-siddeh, from the establishment of com¬ 
parison , w na, nob j a-visesalj> non-difference. 

103. There is non-difference, inasmuch as comparison is 
established thiougli the compendious expression ‘‘so "■—4S. 

It is not true that comparison is identical with inference, because 
the former is established through the compendious expression “ so. ,, 
‘ As is a cow, so is a bos gavsBus'—this is an instance of comparison. 
This use of ‘ so’ makes it clear that comparison is a distinct means of 
right knowledge. 

18 

BOOK II, CH1PTER I. 

wy\m& 

atrs^s sibdiih, word , argm^ anumfi iam, inference , sisfsq aithasya, of 
the object , sr; an-upalabdheh, because of non-cognition , «*gifqcqiq( 
anurneyat\ kt, because of its having to be inferred 

110- Verbal testimony, say some, is inference, "because the 
object revealed by it is not perceived but inferred.—19. 

Infemnce gives us the knowledge of an unperceived object, through 
the knowledge of an obiect which is perceived. Similarly, verbal testi- 
mony enables us to acquire the knowledge of an unperceived object, 
through the knowledge of a word which is perceived. The verbal testi¬ 
mony is,therefore, supposed by some to be inference, as the object 
reveald by both is unperoeived. 

3TO^^ir^T%Trsrra[ 11 ^ i \ i f 11 

upalabdheh, of consciousness, cognition, apprehension; 
a-dvi-pravritti-tv&t, not having a dual application. 

111. In respect of perceptibility the two cases are not, continues 
the objector, different.—50. 

In mfereuce as well as in vei bal testimony we pass to an unperceived 
object through an object which is perceived. In respect of perceptibility 
of the object through which we pass, ihe inference does not, continues the 
objector, differ from the verbal testimony. 

H ^ \ \ | m II 

sambandli&t, from relation or connection ; ^ cha, and. 

11?. There is, moreover, adds the objector, the some connection. 
. —51. 

Just as in inference there is a certain connection between a sign (s.?., 
Bmoke) and the thing signified by it (e. g. t fire), 1 so in verbal testimony 
‘there is connection between a word and the object signified by it. So 
inference, says the objector, is note different from verbal testimony. 

Upta-upadesa-a&marthy&t, through force derived 
from the declaration by a reliable person j 3 Ts^T*f?fJrcqq: Sabda-artha- 
sampratyayaty, complete intuition of the object from the word. 

THE NYAYA-Sff TRAS. 

49 

113* In reply, we say that there is reliance on the matter signified 
by a word, because the word has been used by a reliable person.—52. 

Id reference to the objections raised in aphorisms 49 and 50, we say 
that we rely oil Unseen matter, not simply because it is signified by words, 
bat because they are spoken by a reliable person. There are, some say, 
paradise, nymphs, Uttarakurus, seven islands, ocean human Battlements, 
etc. We accept them as realities, not because they are known through 
words, but because they are spoken of by persons who are reliable. Hence 
verbal testimony is not inference. The two agree in conveying knowledge 
an object through its sign, but the sign in one is different from the sign 
in the other. In the case of verbal testimony, the special point is to 
decide whether the sign (word) comes from a reliable person. 

Aphorism 51 speaks of a certain connection between a word and the 
object signified by it>. The present aphorism points out that the connection 
is not a natural one. We acknowledge that a word indicates a certain 
object, but we deny that the object is naturally or necessarily connected 
with the word. Hearing, for instance, the word “cow,” we think of the 
anunal signified by it, nevertheless the word and the animal are not 
Connected with each other by nature or necessity. In the case of inference, 
however, the connection between a sign ( e g., smoke) and the thing 
Bigmfied ( eg., fire ) is natural and necessary. Therefore, the connection 
involved m inference is not of the same kind as that involved in verbal 
testimony. 

g^aJr^Tf'i * purana-pradAha-p&tana-anupalabdheh, from 

non-apprehension of filling, burning, and splitting , =u cha, and ; 
toWniTiTR': sambUndha-abh&vah, non existence of connection. 

114. There is no natural connection between a wofd and the 
Object signified by it, as we do not find that the words fool, fire and 
hatchet, are accompanied by the actions filling, burning and 
Splitting.—53. 

If a word were naturally connected with the object signified by it, 
then by uttering the words food, fire and hatchet we should have found 
our mouth filled up (with food), burnt (with fire) and split (by a hatchet). 
But such is never the case. Hence there ib no natural connection between 
a word and the object signified by it, and consequently verbal testimony 
is not inference. 

50 

BOOK II, CHAPTER!. 

it 3 .1 'X i tft « 

6abda artha-vyavasthdiiftt, fiom the fixity of (tlio 
intuition) of object from word ; STfffeihg: a-prntisedlmh, non-contradiction, 

115. It cannot, says an objector, be denied that thero is a fixed 
connection between words and their meanings.—51. 

A particular word denotes a particular meaning, e g tlie word ‘cow’ 
denotes the animal of that name, but it does not denote a hoise, a jar, or 
any other thing. There is, therefore, in the case of vet bnl testimony, a 
fixed connection between a word and its meaning as then- is m the case ol 
inference a fixed connection between a sign and llu> tiling signified Ilonce 
verbal testimony is considered by the objector to bo a case of inference 

n ^ i \ \ hh u 

91 na, not ; ?Twf«H>?gT5r sainayika-tvat, from being conventional , 
sabda-artha-sampratyayasya, of the intuition of object 

from word. 

0 110. We reply, it is through convention that the meaning of a 

^■word is understood.—55. 

The connection between a word and its moaning is conventional 
and not natuial. The connection, though fixed by man, is nob inseparable 
and cannot tberefoie be the basis of an inference 

v ii x 1 1 i ^ « 

jati vifiese, with paiticular classes , g cha, and , asfvpwnf 
aniyamat, from absence of natural uniformity 

117. There is no universal uniformity of connection between a 
word and its meaning.—56. 

The risia, aryas and mlechchha3 use the same word m different senses, 
eg the woi d “yava” is used by the aryas to denote a long-awned grain, 
but by the miochchhaB to denote a panic-seed So the connection betwien 
a word and its meaning is not everywhere uniform, and consequently 
verbal testimony cannot be considered as inference. 

II^WlI 

tat, that, word ; wnwistf a-pram&nyam, not a means of right 
knowledge, invalid; -Wtjasqisrra j^fF, anrita-vyAgbata-punarukta- 

dosebhyah, owing to the defects of falsity, futility and repetition. 

THE NYAyA-SOTRAS. 

5(1 

^ 118. The Veda, some say, is nnreliable, as it involves the faults 
of untruth, eontradictio • and tautology.—57. 

The Veda, which i^ a kind of veibal testimony, is not, some say, a 
means-of right knowledge. It is supposed by them to be tainted with the 
faults of untruth, contradiction and tautology. For instance, the Veda 
affirms that a son is produced when the sactifice for the sake of a son is 
perfoimed It often happens that the son is not produced, though the 
sacrifice has been performed. 

Theie are many contradictory injunctions in the Veda, eg., it dec¬ 
lares “lot one stieiifice when the sun has risen,” also “ let one sacrifice 
when the sun has not r>sen,” etc. There is such tautology as ‘ let the 
first hymn be recited tin ice,” “let the last hymn be recited thrice,” etc. 

H ^ I \ I He u 

«f na, not, karma-kartri-sadhana-vaiguny&t, from 

defect in the act, agent, or materials. 

119. lhe so called untruth in the Veda comes from some defect 
in the act, operator or materials of sacrifice —58. 

Defect in the act consists in sacrificing not according to rules, defect 
in the operator (officiating priest) consists m his not being a learned man, 
and defect in tLe materials consists m the fuel being wet, butter being 
not fresh, remuneration ( to the officiating priest) being small, etc. A son 
is sure to be produced as a result of performing the sacrifice, if these 
defects are avoided. Therefore, there is no untruth in the Veda. 

^ » \\ ^ U 

Stwjihil abhyupetya, arriving at a decision; kala-bhede, m the 

case of alteration of the time , dosa-vachan&t, there being the 

declaiatum of the defect 

120. Contradiction would occur if there were alteration of the 
tune agreed upon.—59. 

Let a person perfoim sacrifice before sunrise or after sunrise if he 
has agreed upon doing it at either of the times. Two alternative courses 
being open to him, he can perform the sacrifice before sunrise or after 
sunrise, according to bis agreement or desire. The Veda cannot be 
ebarged with the fault of contradiction, if it enjoins such alternative 
courses. 

BOOK II, mAFTER I: 

52" 

it ^ \ \ t %° it 

anuvada-upapatteh, fiotuthe possibility of its beings 
re-inculcation , 9 cha, and 

121. There is no tautology, becat se re inculcation is of advan¬ 
tage.—60. 

Tautology means a useless repetition, which never occurs in, the 
Veda. If there is any repetition there, 't is either for completing a certain 
number of syllables, or for explaining a matter briefly expreBBed, etc. 
“Let the first hymn be recited tlirice," “let tlie last hymn be recited 
thrice”—such instances embody a useful repetition. 

snqqfsrwT** u ^ » \ t u 

snwfstwnw vAkya-vibh&gasya, of the division of speech, 'ST cha, and; 
artha-grahan&t, from apprehension of different objects. 

122. And because there is necessity for the classification of 
Veche speech.—61. 

It is necessary to divide tbe \edtc speech into classes based oa 
special characters. 

vidhi-arthft\ a.ln-nnav&da-vachana-vini- 
yog&t, from tbe distribution of speech as in jam ti»n, persuasion and re¬ 
in culcation. 

123. The Vedic speech being divided on the principle of injunc¬ 
tion, persuasion and re-inculcation —62, 

The two main divisions of the Veda are ( I ) hymn and ( 2 ) ritual. 
The ritual portion admits of three sab-divisions, viz, injunctive, persua¬ 
sive andre-inculcative. 

ficre: fNmsp: u ^ \ \ \ ^ u 

vidhih, injunction , fsrifPT^: vidhAyakafc, that which prescribes 
something positive. 

124, An injunction is that which exhorts us to adopt a certain 
course of action [ as the means of attaining good].—63. 

The following is an injunction :—“ Let him who desires paradise 
perform the fire-sacrifice." This is a direct oommand. 

thb nyAta-sOtras. 

53 

SdldR'^T q*fKR: q^T^q H^l\l^ll 

<3^ ! stutih, praise ; fsp^f mnda, hUame , para kritilp, doing- of 

others, failures of others ; 5 TT 3 «T: pura-kalpalj, tradition, customs-ofi old , 
ffa lti, such ; wfqT^: artha-vidah, persuasion. 

125. Persuasion is effected through praise, blame, warning^ and 
prescription.—6‘4. 

Praise is speech which persuades as to- a certain course of action- by 
extolling its consequences, e.g., "By the Sarvajit sacrifice gods com- 
quered all, there is nothing like Sarvajit sacrifice, it enables ns to obtain 
everything and to vanquish every one, etc.” Here there is no direct 
command, bnt the Sarvajit sacrifice is extolled m such a way that we 
are persuaded to perform it. 

Blame is speech which persuades ns to adopt a certain course of 
action by acquainting ns with the undesirable consequences of neglecting 
it, e g , "One who performs any other sacrifice, neglecting the Jyotistoma, 
falls into a pit and decays there” Here one is persuaded to perform the 
Jyotistoma sacrifice, the neglect of which brings about evil consequences. 

Warning is the mentioning of a course of action, the obstruction of 
which by some particular person led to bad consequences, e g., on pre¬ 
senting oblation one is to take the fat first and the sprinkled batter 
afterwards, bnt alas ! the Charaka priests first took the sprinkled butter 
which was, as it were, the life of fire, etc. Here the foolish course of action 
adopted by the Charaka priests should Berve as a warning toother priesta 
who ought to avoid the coarse. 

Prescription implies the mention of something as commendable on 
account of its antiquity, eg , "By this the Br&hmanas recited the S&ma 
hymn, etc.” 

n ^ I \ I II 

vidhi-vihitasya, of what is prescribed by injnnction ; 
anu-vachanair, repetition , ST3^T?: anuvadah reinculcation. 

126. B e-inculcation is the repetition of that which has been 
enjoined by an injunction,—65. 

Be-inculcation may consist of (1) the repetition of an injunction, or 
(2) the repetition of that which has been enjoined. The first is called 
verbal re-incnlcation and the second objective re-inculcation. In the Veda 
there is re-inouloation, as in ordinary use there is repetition. "Non ete?« 

BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

nal not eternal”—this is a verbal repetition. “Non-eternal, possessing 
the character of extinction”—this is objective repetition. 

*T na, not , anm ada-pnnaruktayoh, of remculcalrm 

e,nd repetition , fsf$T: vi&sf.ih., difference ; sabda ablna,a- 

npapatteh, because of the existence of the repetition of words 

127. f lhere is, some say, no difference between re inculcation 
and tautology, as- there is in either case a repetition of some expression 
already used.—36. 

Re-inoulcabion is supposed by some to be a fault, inasmuch as it 
does not, according to them, differ from tautology 

Sft'Erere*Ter^T?5^'T^ sighratara-gamana-upadesa-vat, like the du ertlon 
of going faster and faster which indicates intensity of action , sjurrctif 
abhyas&t, from repetition ; sr na, not , 3rfk$tai a-viseBah, non-differonre 

128. There is a difference, because re-inculcation serves some 
useful purpose, as, e.g., a command, to go faster.—67. 

Tautology consists of a useless repetition, but the repetition m the 
case of re-inculcation is useful, eg., “go on, go on”—signifies “ go faster.’ 

mantia a_> urvedu-prS.mAnya-vat, like the validity of 
mantra or chant and of medical science , g cha, and , aFsnffi«un tat p>a- 
manyam, its validity , 3tf{jr5TfJTT«iirT apta-prkm&ny&t, from the authonty of 
the reliable speaker. 

129. The Veda is reliable like the spell and the medical science, 
because of the reliability of their authors.—68. 

The spell counteracts poison, etc , and the medical science prescribes 
correct remedies The authority which belongs to them is derived from 
their authors, the sages, who were reliable peisons The sages them¬ 
selves weie tellable, because (l)they had an intuitive perception of truths, 
(2) they had great kindness for living beings and (3) they had the desire of 
communicating their knowledge of the truths. The authors, (lit , the 
Beers and speakers} of the Veda were also the antho-rs of the spell and 
medical science Hence, like the spell and medical science, the Veda 
must be accepted as authoritative. The view that the Veda is authorita¬ 
tive because eternal, is untenable 

THE NYi.YA-SftTRAS. 

55 

Book II, Chapter IL 

^ na, not , cliahistvam, to be four , ^irtvfq^HWmranrwr'KT^ 

artihya-aithapatti sd.mbhava-abliava-piam&nN ar, because tradition, pre¬ 
sumption, probability and non existence aie also means of right know¬ 
ledge 

130. Some say that the means of right Icnou ledge are more 
than four, because rumour, presumption, probability and non-c istence 
are also valid.—1. 

In Book I, chapter 1, aphorism 3, the means of right knowledge 
ha\e been stated to be four, viz , perception, infeience, comparison and 
veibal testimony Some say that there aie other means of light know¬ 
ledge, such as rumour, presumption, probability and non existence 

Rumour is an assertion which has come from one to another without 
any indication of the source from which it first originated, t g , in this 
fig tree there live goblins. 

Pt ebumjption is the deduction of one thing from the declaration of 
another thing '.eg , from the declaration that‘unless thei e is cloud, there 
is no ram/ we deduce that ‘there is rain, if there is cloud.’ A more 
familiar instance of presumption is this : the fat Devadatta does not eat 
duung the day time. Heie the presumption is that he eats in the night 
for it is impossible for a person to be fat if be does not eat at all. 

Ptjbaoility consists in cognising the existence of a thing from that 
of another thing in which it is included, e. g., cognising the measure of 
an ddhalca from that of a drona of which it is a fourth part, and cognis¬ 
ing the measure of a prastha from that of an ddhalca of which it ifl-» 
quaiter. 

Of two opposite things, the non-,existence of one establishes the 
existence of .the other, r g the non existence of ram establishes the 
combination of wind and cloud. When there is a combination of wind 
and cloud, drops of water cannot fall, in spite of their weight 

u ^ i ^ i ^ ti 

Sabde. in word , aitihya-an-artha- antara-bh&v&t, 

from existence of tradition as a son-different object; wgffr# annm&ne, in 

BOOK II, CHAPTER IT. 

66 

inference ; arth&patti-sambhava-abh&va-an- 

a,rtha-antara-bha\fit, from existence of presumption, probability and non¬ 
existence as non-different objects j ^ cha, and , a*STf?f%'slJ a-prati$odhah, 
non-contradiction. 

131. This, we reply, is no contradiction, since rumour is inclu¬ 
ded in verbal testimony, and presumption, probability and non-exis¬ 
tence are included in inference —2. 

Those who maintain that ramcur, presumption, probability and 
non-existence are valid, do not really oppose our division of the means 
of right knowledge into four, viz , perception, inference, comparison and 
verbal testimony. 

Rumour partakes of the general characteristics of verbal testimony, 
and is a special kind of it 

Presumption is explained as the knowledge of a thing derived 
through the consideration of it from the opposite standpoint. For ins¬ 
tance, the fat Devadatta does not eat during the day tune ; here the 
presumption is that he eats in the night. The fact of his eating in the 
night has not been expressly stated, bat is ascertained from this consi¬ 
deration that a person who does not eat during the day cannot be strong 
unless he eats in the night. It is evident that presumption, like inference, 
passes from a perceived thing to an nnperceived one, because they are 
in some way connected. 

Probability is inference, because it is the cognizance of a part from 
knowledge of a whole with which it is inseparably connected. 

Non-existence is inference, inasmuoh as it really infers the obS- 
truction of a cause from the non-existence of its effect through a certain 
connection, viz., if the obstruction occurs, the effect cannot oocur. 

Hence rumour, etc., are not independent means of right knowledge, 
but are included in the four, enumerated in Book I, Chapter I, apho¬ 
rism 3. 

3>rafq 1 U| II ^ I ^ I \ II 

swfqfo! arthdpattib, presumption ; mnnof apram&nam, not a means 
of right knowledge ; anaikantikatv&t, because it is not one* 

pointed. 

132. —Presumption, some say, is not valid, because it leads to 
uncertainty.—3, 

THE NYIyA-SOTRAS. 

57- 

- “ If there is no cloud, there will be no rain”—from this we are 

-said to presume that if there is a cloud there will be rain But it often 
happens that a cloud is not followed by ram So presumption doe3 not 
always lead to certainty. 

u ^ i ^ i 2 11 

anarthftpattau, in respect of what vs not a presumption; 
arth&patti-abhunanat, from attribution of being pre¬ 
sumption. 

133. We reply . if there is any uncertainty, it is due to your 
supposing that to be a presumption which is not really so.—1. 

“ If there is no cloud, there will be no rain”—from this we aie 
entitled to presume that if there is rain there must have been a cloud But 
if yon pretend to presume that “ if there is a cloud, there will be rain,” 
your so-called presumption will be an invalid one 

11 ^ 1 ^ I ^ II 

stfh^vnUTJTl'Kf prati^edha-aprim&nyam, invalidity of the contradiction; 
cha, and , anaih&utikatv from being not-one-pomted. 

134. The objection itself, we say, is invalid, because it leads to 
uncertainty.—>5. 

“Presumption is not valid, because it leads to uncertainty”—this 
is your objection. In it there are two pomtB for consideration, «?, 
(1) the validity of presumption and (2) the existence of presumption. 
Your objection refers to one of the points, viz the validity of presumption. 
Bo you do not deny the existence of presumption In some instances, 
however, your objection may refer to more points than one. Jn fact, 
the nature of your objection is not definite in itself, or, iu other woids, 
it leads to uncertainty Hence youi objection is invalid. 

rlrJTWT^ 5TT II ^ 1 ^ I \ II 

afJrmiv^ tat pidti'anye, if the contradiction be valid , v&, or ,«t na, 

not; Wlf , jT^irr*n' , Rf artbapatti-apifhuanyam, invalidity of presumption. 

135. Of, if that be valid, then our presumption is not invalid.—6. 

Perhaps you will say that your objection is valid, because you can 
ascertain in each case whether one or more points ate inferred to by the 
objection. Similarly, we shall say that our piot>umption is not invalid, 

8 

58 

'BOOK IT, CHAPTERII. 

because we can ascertain in each case whether the presumption is capable 
of leading to more conclusions than one. Hence, if you say that your 
‘objection is valid, we shall say that our presumption is also valid. 

u ^ i ^ i * u 

«T na, not; abli4va-pr&,tn6nyam, non-existence to be a means 

of right knowledge , prameya-asiddheh, because of the non-exis¬ 

tence of what is to be the object of right knowledge. 

136. Some say that non-existence is not a means of right 
knowledge, because there is no ohject which is known by it.—7. 

: n^iqi 

laksitesu, in marked objects ; SsfafTr^T 5 ! alakBana laksita- 

tvat, from being maiked by what is not a mark , SRsfifRlHi alaksitanain, 
of unmarked objects ; tat-prameya-siddheh, from their affirma¬ 

tion as objects of knowledge. 

137. Non-existence, we reply, serves to mark out an object 
unmarked by the mark which characterises other ojjecls.—8. 

Suppose a person wants to bring a pot which is not blue The 
absence of blueness is a mark which will enable him to mark out the 
particular pot he wants to bring, and to exclude the other pots which 
are bine. Thus an object may be known through the non-existence 
( absence ) of its mark- 

?TWT5T 

(l^KU 

wrfk asati, non-existent, Slif arthe, m the case of an object , «i ns, 
not, srerrc; abhftvah, non-existence or absence of mark ; iti chet, ■ 

if so ; W na, no , : anya-laksana-upapatteh, from affirmation of 

other marks. 

138. If you say that the non-existence ( absence ) of a marie 
is impossible where there was no mark at all, it is, we reply, not so, 
because the non-existence ( absence ) is possible in reference to a mark 
elsewhere.—9. 

We can, says an objector, talk of a mark being non-existent (absent), 
if it was previously existent (present). A pot is said to be not blue only 
in reference to its being blue previously. In reply, we say that it is net 
so. “Not-blue” is no doubt possible only in reference to “blue/’ hut 
that blueness may exist elsewhere. For instance, we can talk of this 
pot being not blue, in contrast to that pot which is bine. 

the nyXy a-sOtras: 

5a 

af?5I^i tat siddhehr, from presence therein, i e. m marked objects ; 
alaksitesu, m respect of unmarked objects , sjfjj: ahetuh, no mark. 

139. Though a mark may distinguish the object which is 
marked, the non-existence ( absence ) of the mark cannot, some say, 
distinguish the object which is not marked.—10. 

A blue pot is distinguished by the blueness which is its mark But 
How can we, says the objector, distinguish an unmarked object by the 

non-existence ( absence ) of the mark which it does not possess ? 

\ 

* ^wn 5 rf*«Rn^sm%§: n ^ i ^ \ \\ \\ 

H na, no , @Strarafwn^§nftir^: laksana-av88tliita-apeks&-9iddheb, from 
establishment by reference to objects in which marks are present 

140. This is not so, because the non-existence (absence) of a 
mark serves as a mark, in relation to the presence of the mark.—11. 

We can speak of a pot being not blue, m relation to one which is 
bine. Hence, though not-blneneBS is not a positive mark, it serves as a- 
( negative ) mark, in relation to blueness 

M i ^ i ^ it 

SJT*F piak, prior ; 3?q^i utpatteh, to production . smr^nqw. abhftva- 
Upapatteh, from affirmation of non-existence , <3 ilia, and 

T4il. Moreover, we perceive non-existence as a mark antecedent 
to the production of a thing.—12. 

There are two kinds of non-existence, viz , antecedent non-existence 
and subsequent non existence. When we say that there will be a jar, 
Vie perceive the mark of non-existence of the jar in the halves which are 
destined to compose it. This is antecedent non existence Sunilaily, 
when we say that a jar has broken, we perceive the maik of non existence 
of the jar in the parts which composed it. This is subsequent non- 
existence. 

. , WtR^oTRC &di-mat-tv&t, becauseit has a beginning «tf^-q^?qniaindriy- 
j^ka-tv&t, because it ia sensuous , fRTOSIjq^lTrer kritaka vat-npacb&r&t, 
because it is treated as any other product % cha, and. 

60 

BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

142 Sound is not eternal, because it has a beginning and is 
cognised by our sense and is spoken of as artificial.—13. 

Sound is non-ete»nal, because it begins or arises from the concus¬ 
sion of two hard substances, e g., an axe and a tree, etc. Another ground 
for the non-eternal’ty of sound is that it is cognised by our sense More- 
ovor, we attribute to sound the properties of an artificial object, eg., we 
speak of a sound being grave, acute, etc. This would be impossible, if 
it had been eternal 

Some say that the so called beginning of a sound is merely a mani¬ 
festation of it, that is, sound does not leally begin, but (is merely mani¬ 
fested by the concussion of two hard substinces In reply, we say that the 
concussion does not mimfest, but produces a sound. You cannot suppose 
the concussion to be the manilester and sound the manifested, unless 
you can prove that the coniussion and sound are simultaneous. But the 
proof is impossible, as a sound is heard at a gieat distance even after 
the concussion of the substances has ceased So sound is not manifested 
by the concussion It is, however, legitimate to suppose that sound is 
produced by the concussion, and that one Bound produces another sound, 
and so on, until tho last sound is heard at a great distance. 

*1^ \\ ^ I ^ I H 

ft na, no , ghata-abh&va-B&m&nya-nitya-tvat, 

because the non existence of a pot after destruction and the genus which 
is cognisable thtc ugh contact with the sense are eternal; ffti^l mtyesn, 
in the oase of eternal objects , anitya-vat, as non-eternal ; 

npachar&t, from treatment , cha, and 

143. Some w ill not accept this argument, .because the non¬ 
existence of a jar and the genus of it are eternal, and eternal things 
are also spoken of as if they were artificial.—14. 

Some say that it is not true that whatever has a beginning is non- 
eternal. Look I the non existence (destruction) of a jar which began when 
the jar was broken is eternal (indestructible). Whatever is cognised by 
our sense is non-eternal : this is also said to be an unsound argument. 
Wheu, for instance, we perceive a jar, we perceive also its genus (? e , jar* 
ness), which is eternal. It is further said that we often attribute to 
eternal things the properties of an artificial object, e g., we speak of the 
extension of ether as we speak of the extension of a blanket. 

THE NY AY A RtlTRAS. 

6t 

cT^>TRB^T: tattva-bl Aktayoh, of true and false eternals ; rrr^Tf^f^Tmr^ 
n&nil-tva-vibMg&t, from division as many , ansqfawTC: R-vyabhich&rah, 
absence of uncertainty. 

144. There is, we reply, no opposition because there is distinc¬ 
tion between what is really eternal and what is partially eternal —16. 

That which is really eternal belongs to the three times But the non- 
existence ( destruction) of a jar does not belong to three times, as it was 
impossible before the jar was broken Hence the non-existence (destruc¬ 
tion) of a jar which has a beginning is not really eternal. 

w ^ \ ^ ^ 11 

sant&n&-anuui&na-viScBanat, from the inference 
of continuity which is the distinguishing characteristic (of sound) 

145. It is only the things cognised by our sense as belonging to 
a certain genus that must, we say, be inferred to be non-eternal.—16. 

The objectors have said that things cognised by onr sense are not 
necessarily non-eteinal, ej.aswe perceive a jar, we also perceive its 
genus jar-ness, which is eternal. In ieplj, we say that not all things 
cognised by our sense are non-eternal, but only those that belong to a 
certain genus. A jar, for instance, is non-eternal, because we perceive 
it as belonging to the genus jar-ness. Bat jar-ness which is cognised by 
our sense is not non-eternal, because it does not belong to a further genus, 
named jar-nesa-neas. Similarly, sound is non-eteranl, because it is cog¬ 
nised by our sense as belonging to the genus called sound-nesB. 

The aphorism may also be interpreted as follows :—Sound is non¬ 
eternal, beoanse it is inferred to advance in a series. 

We do not say that whatever is cognised by our sense is non-eternal: 
onr intention is to say that things cognised by our sense as advancing in 
a senes are non-eternal. Sonnd is cognised in that manner ( i.e., sound 
advances like a wave), and hence sound is non-eternal. 

5% n ^ i v® u 

k&rana-dravyasya, of the causal substance ; sr^rtfis^sr 
pradega-Sabdena, in terms of extension ; sifip-iRUJ abhidhgn&t, from decla- 

62 

BOOK II, CHAPTER II 

ration or designation , nityesu, in the case of eternal objects , stfi? 

api, also sjwrfirsnr: a vyabhicharah, absence of uncertainty. 

148. We further say that only artificial things are designated 
by the terui extension,—17. 

When we speak of the extension of ether, we really mean that the 
extension belongs to an artificial things which has for its substratum the 
ether Hence we do not in reality attribute to eternal things the pi opertiea- 
of artificial objects. 

STUB pi&k, prior , uchli&ianat, to pronunciation , an- 

upalabdheh, from non-apprehension , av aiana &di-an- 

upalabdlieh, from nuu-appi ehension of the causes of non-apprehension; 
9 cha, and 

147. Sound is non-eternal, because neither do we perceive it 
before pronunciation, nor do we notice any i eil which covers it.—18. 

If sound were eternal, it would be peroeived before pronunciation. 
You cannot say that sound really existed before pronunciation but was 
covered by some veil, for we do not notice any such veil. 

n ^ \ ^ \ n 

tat-an-upalabdheh, of its non-apprehension , STjpiSSJifi'rtj an- 
upalambliat, from non-apprehension , fivarana-upapattih, estab¬ 

lishment of the causes of non apprehension 

148 1 he veil, some say, really exists, because we do not per¬ 

ceive the non-perception thereof.—19. 

The objectors say ;—If you deny the veil because it is not perceived, 
we deny the non-perception of tie veil because it is also not perceived. 
The denial of non-perception is the same as the acknowledgment of 
perception, or, in other words, the veil is acknowledged to be existent. 

srwrm H ^ I ^ I ^ || 

an upalarabhftt, from non-apprehension , srfif api, even J 
an-upalabdhi-sadbli&vavat, like existence of non-appre¬ 
hension , if na, not,lf[3TOi3<wftr:&varana an-upapattih,non-establishment 

THE Nv'i.YA.-SffTKAS. 

63 

of the causes of non-apprehension. an-upalambh&ti, from non¬ 

apprehension 

149. If you assert non-perception of the \ ell, though the non¬ 
perception is not perceived, we, continue the objectors, assort the e is- 
tenee of the veil, though it is not perceived,—_0. 

You admit non-perception of the veil, though you do not perceive-it 
(non-perception) Similarly, we, the objectors, admit the existence of the 
veil, though we do not perceive it. 

u ^ t ^ \ ^ n 

HIfcTig; an-upalambha-fttraaka-tvAt, from the nature of its 
Toeing non-apprehension , an-upalabdheh, of non apprehension ; 

Hff^.’ a-hetuh, not a mark, 

150. This, we reply, is no reason, because non-perception con¬ 
sists of absence of perception .—<2 L 

A veil is a thing fit to be perceived Oar non-perception of it 
indicates its absence. On the other hand, the non percj.tion of a veil is 
mot a thing fib to be perceived. Hence, non-perception of the non-percep¬ 
tion leads us to nothing real, 

»W»f<3T5l a-sparsa-tv&t, being intangible. 

151. Some say that sound is eternal, because it is intangible.—22. 

EtlieT which is intangible is eternal. Sound mast, similarly, acord- 
irg to some, be eternal, because it is intangible. 

^ n ^ I ^ I ^ u 

«T na, no ; karraa-amtya-tv&t, because action is non-eternal. 

152. This we deny, because action is non-eternal —23. 

Action is non-eternal, though it is intangible. Hence, intangibiliy 
does not establish eternality. 

5n*sjR?Err3n^ ti ^ \ ^ i yp ti 

if, na, no ; angfif?*I?Wt<f anu-nitya-tv&t, because atom is eternal. 

153. An atom, on the other hand, is eternal though not 
intangible —24. 

BOOKII, CHAPTER II. 

(64 

Tangibility is not incompatible with eternality, eg. atoms are 
tangible, yet eternal 

II ^ I ^ I II 

samprad&n&t, from delivery. 

154. Sound, some say, is eternal, because of the traditionary 
teaching —25. 

A preceptor conld not have imparted knowledge to his pupils by 
means of sounds, if these were penshable ( non-eternal). In fact, the tra¬ 
ditionary teaching would, according to the objectors, be impossible, if 
the sounds were non eternal 

^ I ^ I ^ II 

tat-antar&la-an-upalabdheh, from non-apprehension 
in the interval between them , sifjj: a-hetuh, not a mark. 

155. This is, we reply, no reason, because sound is not perceived 
in the interval —26. 

Suppose a preceptor delivers certain Bounds (m the form of a lecture) 
which are received by his pupil. The sounds are not audible in the 
interval between the preceptor giving them and the pupil receiving them. 
They would never be inaudible, if they were eternal. 

ii ^ i ^ i ii 

3TKn<l*U3[ adhy&pau&c, from teaching ; STsfenta: a-pratisedhajj, ab¬ 
sence of contradiction. 

156. This, say the objectors, is no argument, because there is 
the teaching.—27. 

The objectors say :—If the sounds, as soon as they came out of the 
preceptor, were destroyed and did not reach the pupil, there could not be 
any teaching carried on. But there is the teaching, hence sound does 
not perish, or, in other, words, it is eternal. 

nbhayoh, in both ; q^T^Ts pak?ayoh, views , anya- 

tarasya, of the one or the other ; srwrrTWT^ adh\ &pan&t, from teaching , 
wsrfaiw a-pratisedhah, non-opposition. 

157. In whichever of the two senses it is accepted, the teaching 
does not offer any opposition.—28. 

THE NYAyA-SOTRAS. 

65 

The word “ teaching " may be interpreted either as (1) the pupil’s 
receiving the sounds given by his preceptor, or as (2) the pupil's imitat¬ 
ing the sounds of his preceptor, as one imitates dancing. Neither of these 
interpretations would support the eternality of sound. In consonance 
with the first interpretation we shall say that the sound coming out of 
the preceptor produces another sound, and so on, until the last sound 
reaches the pupil. This would make sound uon-eternal It iB obvious 
that the second interpretation similarly proves the non-eternality of 
sound. 

wsrora n ^ i ^ \ ^ u 

W'lrarff abhyA-At, from repetition 

158. Sound, continue the objectors, is eternal, because it is 
capable of repetition —29. 

That which is capable of rejection is peisistent or not perishable, 
•e g., one and the same colour can bo epeitedly looked at, because it is 
persistent One and the same sound can similarly be repeatedly uttered, 
hence it is peis stent or not perishable. 

51 ^ I ^ | || 

W na, no , W*a?t anya tve, were it otherwise , srfq apt, even , srvtTOTO 
abhy&sasya, of repetition ; upacli&i&t, from treatment or use. 

159. It is, we reply, not so, because even if sounds were “other" 
(different), repetition could take place.—liO 

Repetition does not prevent penshubleness, because repetition is 
possible even if the things repeated are “other "or different, eg., be 
sacrifices twice, he dances thrice, etc. Here the two sacrifices are different, 
and yet we use the repetitive word ‘twice’ , similarly the three dancings 
are difierent, and yet we use the repetitive word 1 thrice ' 

anyat, other , anyasm&t, from other ; wipqeqrff an-anya- 

tvfitj from not being other; an-anyat, not other; ltl, thus ; 

W*WiSvn«r: any vtil-abh&vab, non existence of otherness. 

160. Some say that there is no such thing as otherness, because 
what is called “ other,” in reference to some other, is not other in 
reference to itself.—31. 

9 

68 

BOOK IT, OH VPTER IT. 

167. 'Ihat the substratum of sound is intangible is no counter¬ 
argument.—38. 

Sound has not for its substratum any of the tangible substances, 
viz, earth, water, fire and air, for, it is found to be produced even where 
these do not exist. For instance, scund is produced in a vacuum which 
is devoid of smell, taste, colour and touch, which are the qualities of 
tangible substances. The reason why the sound produced in a vacuum 
dues not reach our ears is that theie is no air to carry it. Hence the 
substratum of sound is an intangible substance, ether. 

It is a peculiarity of sound that it cannot co-abide with oolour, etc. 
A tangible substance {eg., earth ) which is the abode of smell may also 
be the abode of colour, taste or touch. But the Bubstance, in which 
sound abides, cannot be the abode of any other qualities. ThiB distin¬ 
guishes the substratum of sonnd fiotn the substrata of other qualities. 
This peculiar substratum is called ether. 

The fact of having an intangible substratum is no bar to the non- 
eternality of sound. Sound, though its Bnbstratnm is the intangible ether, 
is produced by the contact of two hard substances. One sound produces 
another sound (or a certain vibration), which again causes another sonnd 
(or vibration), and bo on, until the last Bound (or vibration) ceases owing 
to some obstacle. Sound is theiefore non-eternal. 

^*0% II ^ \ ^ l II 

i vibhakti-antara-npapatteh, from affirmation of diffe¬ 
rent divisions or inflections ; ^ cha, and ; sam&se, in the case of co- 
inherence, or of a compound 

,168. Sound cannot be supposed to co-abide with other qualities, 
for there are also varieties of it.—19 

In each tangible substance there is only one kind of smell, taste, 
touch or colour. If we suppose that sound abides with one or more of 
these qualities in a tangible substance, we must admit that Bound is of 
one kind only. Bnt sound is of various kinds, such as grave, acute, etc ; 
and even the same sound may vary in degrees, according to the nature of 
the obstruction it meets. This proves that sound does not abide with other 
qualities in a tangible aubstanoe. It further proves that sound is not 
unalterable or eternal. 

Also signifies that this aphorism is to be considered along with 
aphorism 2—2—38, in which a reason for the non-eternality of sound is 
given. 

THE NYAyA-SOTRAS. 

69 

^fsCR: II ? I 9° II 

vikAra-Adesa-upadei&t, from the rnle of modification 
and substitution , Sams iyah, doubt. 

169. Prom the injunction about modification and substitute 
there arises doubt.— LO. 

The word ‘ dadhi, ’conjoined with the word * atra, * becomeB ‘ dadh- 
yatra, ’ by the rule of Sanskrit grammar. Looking at ‘ dadhi-atra ' and 
* dadhyatra,’ we notice that there is i in the former and y in the latter. 
Here some say that i undergoes modification as y, while others say that j(i 
comes as a substitute for i. Consequently we are thrown into doubt 
whether letters really undergo modifications or take up substitutes. 

u ^ i ^ i s\ » 

prakriti-vivriddhau, on the augmentation of the root ; 
vik&ra-vivriddheh, because there is augmentation of tho modi* 

fioation 

170. If letters underwent modification, an increase of bulk m 
the original material would be attended by an increase of bulk in the 
modification —41. 

If we accept the theory of modification, the letter y which originat¬ 
ed from the Bhort i must be supposed to be Ibhb in bulk than the y which 
originated from the long i. But in reality the y in both the cases is of 
the Bame bulk. Hence it is concluded that letters do not undergo modi* 
fication, but take up other letters as substitutes. 

II ^ I ^ I g^ il 

nyuna sama adhika upalabdheh, from apprehension 
of less, same, and more , vikArAnAm, of modifications ; a- 

hetnh, not a mark. 

171. The foregoing argument, some say, is futile, because 
we find modification less than, equal to, and greaterthan, the original 
material.-—42. 

'i he bulk of the modification does not, in all cases, correspond to 
the bulk of the original material, e.g , thread is of less bulk than cotton 
which is its original material, a bracelet is equal in bulk to the gold of 
which it is made, and a banyan tree ib greater in bulk than the seed from 
which it springs. Hence the argument against the theory of modification 
is, according to the objectors, baseless. 

70 

BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

f^fcr^Tfq- ii^iv^n 

fgff^«a^*r dvi-vidhs-sya, of twofold ; wflr api, even ; hetoh, reasons; 
•urrtrTff abh&v&t, owing to absence , 5T*n«I!t* a-s&dhanam, not a means of 
proof ; dr'stkntah, example. 

172. On account of the absence of both the positive and negative 
mavl<s of inference, we say, the example does not establish the point.—13. 

The examples cited by the opponent are irrelevant. They are neither 
similar nor dissimilar to the case under consideration: they belong 
altogether to a different category. An example which can establish a 
point mnst contain the reason which is fonnd present in the thing to bo 
established. Not only are the examples not a means of proof here, but 
they are also not the examples required. 

II ^ I ^ I W U 

na, no ; argsusr^alirf a tulya-prakritin&m, of different roots; 

vikara-vikalpat, from difference of modifications . 

173. It is not so, because we spoke of those modifications which 
originated from different materials.—44, 

A modification may not correspond in bulk to its orignal material. 
But if the original materials are different, their modifications are expected 
to be different. Here i being different from t, their modifications are 
expected to be different. Bat y issues from i as well as i Hence y is not 
a modification of * or S. 

5[S^BrsBT^ IffII ^ I ^ I II 

dravya-vikare; in the case of the modification of subs¬ 
tance in general; vaisamya-vat, as there is dissimilarity ; 

varna-vik&ra-vikalpah, difference of the modification of letter in 
general. 

174. There is, says an objector, difference between a letter 
and its modification, as there is between a substance and its modi- 
ficati in. —45 

According to the objector, there is difference between the letter*'(or$) 
and it modification y , as there is diffeience between the substance cotton 
and its modification thread. 

* Tqq^qqfvjqq=^; H ^ I ^ I II 

THE NTiYA StiTRAS. 

•T na, no ; vikAra-dbarma-an- upapatteh, because off 

non-establishment of the character of a modification 

175. In reply, we say that it is not so, because the character of 
a modification does not exist here —46. 

A modification must be of the same nature as its original material, 
though the former may not correspond in bulk to the latter. A bracelet 
is no doubt a modification of gold or silver, but a horse ib not a modifica¬ 
tion of a bull. Similarly, y, which is a semi-vowel, is not a modification 
®f i (or i) which is a full vowel. 

n 3 4 ^ | II 

fwiCTISl*n*S( vikara-prapt&nAm, of those which have undergone modi¬ 
fication ; *T3«TTl<l^: a-punah-apatteli, from non-return to original form. 

176. A thing which has undergone modification does not again 
return to its original form.—47. 

Milk modified into curd does not again attain the state of milk. 
Bnt i having reached the condition of y may again revert to its original 
form. Hence y is not a modification of 

SFmuvhtg:« ^ i ^ n?= n 

suvarna-AdinAm. of gold and the like; punafe- 

Apatteh, from return to original , a-hetuh, not a mark. 

177. Some say that this is untenable, because golden ornaments 
may again be convert! d into their original forms —48. 

A golden bracelet is converted into a mass of gross gold which 
again may be modified into a bracelet The objector, relying on the 
analogy of golden ornaments, says that in the case of letters the theory of 
modification does not suffer by % reaching the condition of y and again 
returning to its original form. 

^ I ^ \ II 

w na, not, tat-vikArApara, of its modifications ; fJsUSWW- 

suvarna-bhAva-a-vyatirekAt, from not giving up the nature 

of gold. 

178. The analogy, we say, is inapt, because the modifications 
of gold (called ornaments) do not relinquish the nature of gold.—49. 

72 

BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

A masa of gold when made into ornaments does not relinquish its 
own nature. But % when converted into y loses its own nature. Hence 
the analogy is unsuitable. 

II ^ I ^ I u 

Rtc*T?% nitya tve, were letters eternal , a-vikaiat, from non* 

modification ; a-uitya-tve, weie they non-eteinal , q cha, and, 

9 Rsrc?IHT 3 C an-avasthanat, from non-persistence. 

179. If the letter were eternal it could not be modified, and 
if it were impermanent it could not abide long enough to furnish the 
material for modification.—50. 

On the supposition of the letters being eternal, i cannot be modified 
intoy , and on the supposition of their being impermanent, i must perish 
before it can be modified into y. 

ii ^ i ^ i m u 

fiiewi nity&nam, of eternals ; ati-indriya-tvat, from being 

Buper-sensnons ; tat-dharma-vikalj &t, from difference of 

attributes ; varna-vikaianam, of the modifications of letters; 

Wlflfar. a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

180. Though the letters be eternal, their modification, says 
an objector, cannot be denied, as some of the eternal things are 
beyond the grasp of the senses, while others possess a different charac¬ 
ter —51. 

JuBt as Borne eternal things (as ether) are supersensnons while others 
(such as cowhood) are cognisable by tie sense, so some eternal things as 
ether may be unmodifiable while others such as letters may be susceptible 
to modification. 

^ ii^i^h 

an-avasth&\»-tve, in case of not persisting , « cha, and ; 
varna-upalabdhi-vat, like apprehension of letters, 
tat-vikara-upapattih, establishment of their modifications. 

181. Even if the letters are impermanent, their modification, 
like their perception, is, according to the objector, possible.—52. 

THE' NYAYA.sOTRi.S.' 

73 

Even if you say that letters are impermanent, you admit that they 
abide long enough to be capable of being perceived Why then cannot 
they abide long enongh to be capaple of being modified ? 

qq^*=r*TSrra^: II s* I ^ II 

fsTCSirafwe^ vik&ra-dharmi-tve, where there is the character of under¬ 
going modification ; nitya-tva-abh&v&t, from absence of eter- 

nality ; CT9R3? k&la-antare, at another time , vik&ra-upapatteh, 

from establishment of modification , W cha, and , 9rfafa*ta: a-prati§edhah, 
non-contradiction. 

182. In reply, we say that our position is unassailable, because 
there is no eternalness where there is the character of modification and 
because your so-called modification presents itself at a time subsequent 
to the destruction of the original material —53. 

The letters cannot be modified if you say-that they are eternal,because 
modification is the reverse of eternalness. When a thing is modified it 
assumes another nature, abandoning its own Again, the letters cannot be 
modified if you say that they are impermanent, because there is no time 
for » (of dadhi) to be modified into y when a (of atra) follows. The sound 
‘dadhi’ is produced (pronounced) at, the fiiat moment, exists (continuously) 
during the second moment, and perishes at the third moment. The sound 
"atra” is produced (pronounced) at the second moment, exists (continues) 
during the third moment, and perishes at the fourth moment. Now, i (of 
dadhi) cannot be modified into y until a (of atra) has come into existence. 
Bata comes into existence at the third moment, when i has already 
perished. So, on the supposition of impermanency of letters, modification 
iB impoasidle. 

tt ^ I ^ \ \\ 

prakriti-a niyam&t, from non-restriction to the root; 
qoffa+TTI’Ht varija-vik&ian&in, of the modifications of .letters. 

183. Letters are not modified, because there is no fixity as to 
: the original material of their modification -—54. 

In the case of real modifications there is a fixity as regards their 
original materials, e.g., milk is the original material of purd, but noli,vice 
versa. In the case of letters, however, there is no fixed rule, eg..* is' the 

‘p i 

10 

74 

BOOK II CHAPTER II. 

original material of y in dadhyatra (dadhi + atra), but y iB the original 
material of * in vidbyati (vyadh + ya + tt). Hence the operation of modi¬ 
fication is not really applicable to letters, 

ftsFiintTfasra: n * i * i u 

a-myame, in the case of non-restriction, ffrgiTftrniyam&t, because 
of restriction, 1 , e. rule or uniformity , *T na, not, sifgqJT: a-myamalj, non- 
restriction- 

184. Some say that there is no lack of fixity, because the 
absence of fixity itself is fixed.—55. 

I is sometimes modified into y, and y, sometimes mto i. So in res¬ 
pect of letters there is no fixity as to the original materials of their modi¬ 
fication. This much, however, is fixed that there is no fixity, or in other 
words, the absence of fixity is fixed Hence the objector, who is a quibbler, 
contends that there is fixity at least as to the negative aspect of modifi¬ 
cation. 

u ^\^\\\ 

BrrteirT niyama-aniyama-virodh&t, owing to contradiction 
of restriction and non-restriction , amyame, in respect of non-restri- 

ction , faumtl niyam&t, there being restriction ; ’g cba, and ; a- 

pratisedhah, non contradiction. 

185. By saying that the absence of fixity is fixed, you cannot 
feet aside our reason, because the fixity and its absence are contradic¬ 
tory terms.-—5G. 

Our reason is that in respect of letters there is no fixity as to their 
modification. You contend that, though there is no fixity, the absence of 
fixity is fixed. Our reply is that, though the absence of fixity is fixed, it 
does not establish fixity as a positive fact, because fixity ib incompatible 
with the absence of fixity. 

sNrfsrasT?;: n * i * i h» n 

Qi!!T ? <T?T'T\giTTTif gnna-antara-&pafcti-npamarda-lirilsa- 

vriddhi-leia-filefebhyah, from the ensuing of a different quality, overcoming, 
shortening, lengthening, dropping and incoming ; g tn, but; 
vik&ra-upapatteh, from establishment of modification ; goffq^rf; yarns* 
yik^rah, modification of letters, 

THE N'Yi.YA-SftTRAS. 

75 k 

180. There is an apparent modification of letters in the case 
of their attaining a different quality, talcing up substitutes, becoming 
short or long and undergoing diminution or augmentation.—57.. 

A letter is said bo attain a different quality when, for instance, the 
grave accentuation is given to what was acutely accented As an instance 
of a letter accepting a substitute, we may mention gam as becoming 
gachchh. A long vowel is sometimes shortened, eg , nadl ( in the vocative 
case ) becomes nadi. A short vowel is lengthened, eg , 1 muni * (in the 
vocative case) becomes ‘ mune ” Diminution occurs in such cases as 
‘ asq-tas ’ becoming 1 stas ‘ In ‘ devan&m ' ( deva-p&m) na is an augment. 

% n * i * i qc n 

^ te, they, letters , fqWfcq-aT: vibhakti-ani&h, with inflections ; 
padam, word' 

187. The letters ended with an affix form a word. —58. 

Words are of two kinds: nouns and verbs A noun ends in a sup 
affix, eg RAinas (KAma+su), while a verb ends irna tin affix, e.g., bhavati 
(bhfi + ti), 

tfajqr: iisi^ukw 

tat-arthe, as to the object or meaning of the word , 
fjfwsft vyakti akriti-j&ti-sannidhau, invariable association with an indivi¬ 
dual, form and. class ; upachaiAt, from use, sam&ayaH, 

doubt. 

188. There is doubt what a word ( noun ) really means," as il 
invariably presents to us-an individual, form and genus. —59.. 

The word ‘ cow 3 reminds ns of an individual (a four-footed"aminal), 
its form (limbs) and its genus ( cowhood ) Now, it is asked, what is tha 
real signification of a word (noun)—an individual, form or genus ?■ 

ztr'ZT* rr ^ i h i n 4 

qi y&-sabda-aamfjfa- 

ty&ga-pangraha-samkhylL-vriddhi-iipachaya-varQa-sam&sa-anubandh&r^nir 

of the word, that, 1 e. any nonn, collection, avoiding, accepting, number* 
growth, colour, connection, and propagation ; «q«) vyaktan, in the^>g]|aa' 
of the individual ; iTOirft upach&r&t, from use, nrffe; vyaktih, indiridosa. 

78 

BOOK IT, CH \PTT:R IT. 

189. Some say that the word (noun) denotes individual, because 
it is only in respect of individuals that we can use “ that,” ‘‘collection,” 
“ gi\ ing,” ‘‘taking,” ‘‘number,” “waxing," “waning,” “colour/* 
“ compound” and “ propagation.”—60. 

“ That cow is going ^—here the term “ that ” can be used only in 
reference to an individual cow Similarly, it is only in respect of indivi¬ 
duals that we can use the expressions “collection of cows,” “ he gives 
the cow,” “ he takes the cow,” “ ten cows, “ cow waxes,” “ cow wanes,” 
“ red cow,” “ cow-legs ” and “cow gives birth to cow.” 

* M i 3 i H 

W na, no ; tat-an-avasthin&t, from its non-persistence. 

190. A word (noun ) does not denote an individual, because 
there is no fixation of the latter.—61. 

Unless we take genus into consideration, the word cow will denote 
any individual of any kind. Individuals are infinite. They cannot he 
distinguished from one another, unless we refer some of them to a certain 
genus and others to another genus, and so on. In order to distinguish a 
cow-individual from a horse-individual, we must admit a genus called 
cow distinguished from a genus called horse. 

^ i * \ w 

OSWOT trfspnfefTr^wi: sahaoharana- 

stliana-iadarthya-vritta-m4na dharana- h3inipya-yoga-s3dhana ddhipatye- 
bhyafi, from association, place, purpose, function, measure, containing, 
vicinity, conjunction, sustenance and supremacy, snjTHTT^znw 
nyi br4hmana-mancha-kata_Taia-saktu cliandana gang3.-Sj.kata- 
nnna-purugesn, in respect of a br&hmana, scaffold, mat, king flour, 
sandal wood, GangS, cart bullock, food and person , an ag rt a-tat bh3ve, 
m the absence of object or inherent meaning; api, even ; ag'fgR: tat- 
upacli3 3h, its nse 

191. Though a word does not literally bear a certain meaning, 
it is used figuratively to conVey the same, as in the case of Brahmana, 
scaffold, inat, king, flour, sandalwood, Ganges,cart, food and man, in 

THE NYiYA SOTRAS. 

77 

consideration of association, place, design, function, measure, containing, 
vicinity, conjunction, sustenance and supremacy.—62. 

If the word does not denote an individual, how is it that|we refer to 
an individual cow hy the expression “ that cow is feeding ’’ r The answer 
is that, though the word eow may not literally mean an individual, we may 
refer to the same figuratively There are such instances as:—-‘Feed the 
staff ’ means ‘ feed the Br&hmana holding a staff, ’ ‘ the Bcaffolds shout * 
means 1 men on the scaffolds shout,’ ‘ he makes a mat ’ means * he aims at 
making a mat,’ ‘Yama’ (chastiser) means ‘a king,’‘abushel of flour’means 
flour measured by a bushel, ‘ a vessel of saudal-wood ’ means c sandal¬ 
wood placed in a vessel, ' ‘cows are grazing on theZGanges ’ means * cows 
are grazing in the vicinity of the Ganges ,* 1 a black cart ’ means a cart 
marked with blackness, ’food’ means ‘ life ’ and ‘this person (Bharadv&ja) 
is a clan ’ means ‘ this person is the head of a clan.’ 

^35^^erRT%f: n ^ i ^ i mi 

«TT$%: 4kritih, form ; tat-apeksa-tv&t, as being dependent 

Upon it; Battva-vyavastb&na-siddheh, from the establish* 

ment of the identity or position of an entity. 

192. Some Say that the word ( noun ) denotes form by which 
an entity is recognised.—63. 

We use suoh expressions as ' this is a cow ’ and e this is a horse' 
only with reference to the forms of the cow and the horse. Hence it is 
alleged by some that the word denotes form. 

II ^ I ^ I II 

vyakti-4krifi-yukte, possessing individuality and form; 
wfalapi, also , apraBang&t, from non-apphcation whjP&TCfbnH 

proksana-&dtnSm, of immolation, etc., mrit-gavake, in respect of an 

earthenware cow , 3Trf^ : jatih. class or genns 

193. Others say that the word ( noun ) must denote genus, 
otherwise why in an earthenware cow, possessed of individuality and 
form, do we not find immolation, etc. ?—64. 

We can immolate a real cow, but not an earthenware cow, though 
the latter possesses individuality and form. The distinction between a 
real cow and an earthenware one is that the former comes nnder the 

78 

BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

genua cow, but tie latter does not. Hence it is urged by some that a 
word ( noun ) denotes genua. 

M I ^ I ^|| 

W na, no ; sufife &kriti-vyakti-apeksa tvat, from being 

dependent upo-n form and individuality ; 3n?ufa3«l , <i>: j&ti-abhivyakteh, of 
the manifestation of the genus. 

194. In reply, we say that it is not genus alone that is meant 
by a word (noun), because the manifestation of genus depends on the 
form and individuality —63. 

The genua abides in the individual, and the individual cannot be 
recognised except by its form. Hence genus ha9 reference both to the 
form and individual,lor, in other words, the genus alone iB not the sigmfica- 
tion of a word. 

ii * i ^ i ^ n 

vyakti kkriti-j&tayah, individual, form and genus; g 
tu, but, qgisf: padarthah the object; denoted by the word. 

195. The meaning of a word ( noun ) is, according to us, the 
genus, form and individual.—66. 

The word (noun) signifies all the three, though prominence is given 
to one of them. For the purpose of distinction, the individual is pro- 
minent. In order to convey a general notion, peT-eminence is given to 
the genus In practical concerns, much importance is attached to the form. 
A3 a fact, the word ‘ noun’ ordinarily presents to us the form, denotes the 
individual and connotes the genus. 

/ ii ^ \ ^ \ ti 

s*tRb; vyaktih, individual ; JjmRr^TOni: guna-visesa-&firayaE, the 
abode of particular attnbutes wftf: murtih, body, substance. 

196. An individual is that which has a definite form and is 
the abode of particular qualit es.—07. 

An individual is any substance which is cognised by the senses, as 
a limited abode of colour, taste, smell, touch, weight, solidity, tremulonsness, 
velocity or elasticity. 

J ii ^ i ^ i ^5 ii 

THE NYlYA-SftTRAS. 

79 

AkritiH, form, i&ti-lrngaAkhjA, that by which the 

genus and the marks of the genus are manifested. 

197. The form is that which is called the token of the 
genus.—68. 

The genus cowhood, for instance, is recognised by a certain colloca¬ 
tion of the dewlap which is a form. We cannot recognise the genus of a 
formless substance. 

j sni%: w ^ i ^ \ n 

samana-prasava-dtmika, that the nature of which is to 
produce the same idea or cognition , 3TT%: jatih, genus, class. 

198. Genus is that whose nature is to produce the same con¬ 
ception.—69. 

Cowhood is a genus which underlies all cows. Seeing a cow some¬ 
where, we acquire a general notion of cows ( i.e., derive knowledge of 
cowhood ). This general notion enables us on all subsequent occasions to 
recognise individual cows. 

80 

BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

Book III.—Chapter I. 

✓ M ^ [ \ I ^ II 

darsana-sparian&bhy&m, by means of sight and touch; 
eka-artha grahan&t, because of the apprehension of the same 

object. 

199. A sense is not soul because we can apprehend an object 
through both sight and touch. 

« Previously I saw the jar and now I touch it: ” such expressions 
will be meaningless if <l 1 ” is not different from eye which cannot touch 
and from skm which cannot see. In other words, the *' I " or bouI is 
distinct from the senses. 

* ftr«Rosror^qrr?rm ^ i \ \ ^ u 

W na, no , fq«ras5V9Tiqrnx visaya-vyavasth&n&t, owing to the particular ^ 
relation or allocation of the senses to the objecte. 

200. This is, some say, not so because there is a fixed relation 
between the senses and their objects. 

Colour, for instance, is an exclusive object of the eye, sound of 
the ear, smell of the nose, and so on. It is the eye that, according to 
the objectors, apprehends colour, and there is no necessity for assuming 
a soul distinct from the eye for the purpose of explaining the apprehen¬ 
sion of colour. 

MUM*. 

tat-vyavastlian&t, from that allocation ; eva, itself; 
*n?!TO35TWI?l &tma-sadbhhv&t, because of the existence of the soul , wnfato: 
a-pratifedhah, non-opposition. 

201. 1 his is, we reply, no opposition because the existence of 
soul is inferred from that very fiyed relation. 

There is a fixed relation between the senses and their objects, ay., 
between the eye and colour, the ear and sound, and so on. It is the eye 
and not the ear that can apprehend colour, and it is the ear and not the eye 
that can apprehend sound. If a Ben so were the soul it could apprehend only 
one object, but “ L ” can apprehend many objects, that is, “ I ” can see 
colour, hear sound, and so on. Hence the “ I ” or soul which confers 
unity on the various kinds of apprehension is different from the senses 
each of which can apprehend only one object. 

THE NYiYA-StFTRAS. 

81 

/ qmsKTmenrj u 3 \ \ i s ti 

wc^rl 6 irira-d&he, in burning the body , p&taka-abhav&t, 

as there would be absenoe of sin. 

20 2. I f the body we e soul there should be release J'rom sins as 
soon as the body was burnt. 

If a person has no soul beyond his body he should be freed from 
sins when the body is destroyed But in reality sins pursue him in las 
subsequent lives. Hence the body is not soul 

The aphorism admits of another interpretation :— 

If the body were soul there could arise no sin from billing 
living beings. 

Our body vai ies in dimension and character with every moment. 
The body which exists at the present moment is not responsible for the 
sin which was committed at a pievious moment inasmuch as the body 
whioh committed the sin is now non existent In other words, no sin 
would attach to the person who killed living being3 if the soul were 
identical with our transient body 

u 3 i ^ i h 11 

tat-abhiWahj absenoo of sin , STIrW-TST^ff sa-atinaka pi ad&he, 
in burning the body endowed with a soul , api, even , 

tat-mtyatv&t, as the soul is eternal 

203. There would, says an objector, be no sin even if the body i 
endowed with a soul w ere burnt, for the soul is eternal. 

In the previous aphorism it was shown that the commission of 
Bins would be impossible if we supposed the body to be the soul. In the 
present aphorism it is aigued by an objector that we should be incapable 
of committing sins even on the supposition of the soul being distinct 
from our body, for buoIi a soul is eternal and cannot be killed. 

II ^ | \ | ^ || 

^ na, no , k&rya-&sraya kartri badhat, because there 

is killing of the body which is at once the cause and the field of experi- 
once, or killing of the field of experience i.e. the body and of its cause 
i e. the senses, or killing of the embodied life of the soul. 

II 

82 

BOOK Iff. Cfl \PTER I 

20k In reply we Bay that it is not so because \\ e are capable 
of.killing the Lody which is the site of operat ons of the soul. 

Though the soul is indestructible we can kill the body which is 
the seat of its sensations, lienee we are not incapable ot committing 
sins by killing or murder. Moieovei, if we do not aumit a permanent 
soul beyond our frail body wd slia.ll be c »nfronted by many absuidities 
such as “ loss of merited action ” ' krtta-li&ui ) and “ gam ot unmerited 
action ” ( akritabh) Agama ) A man who has committed a ceitain sin may 
not suffer its consequences in thislile ami unlessthere is a soul continuing 
to his next life he will not suffer them at all. This is a “ 1 >ss of merited 
action” Again, we often find a man suffering the consequences of action 
which he never did in this life Hus would be a “ gam of unmerited 
action,” unless we beLieved that his soul did the action in his previous life. 

M n ® 11 

savya-dr etasya, of that which is seen by the left eye , 
itarena, by the other , jretlfif3JRTiT pratyablnjnAn&t, because there is 
recognition. 

205 [ r J here is a soul beyond the sense ] because what is seen 

by the left eye is recognised by the right. 

A thing perceived previously by the left eye is recognised now by 
the right eye This would have been impossible if the soul were identical 
With the left eye or the right eye ou the principle that the seat of recog* 
nition must be the same as the sent of perception. Oon'equently we 
must admit that there is a soul which is distinct from the left and right 
eyes and which m the common seat of perception and recognition. 

Tf rSnfiWFIUI 

«T na, no , ekasmin, in one and the same , nft-A* 

asthi-vyavahite, separated by the nasal bone , f^f^rfiwrsTTfl dvitva-abhuna- 
nat, because there arises the conceit of duality of the eye 

206 . Some say that the eyes are not two* the conceit of duality 
arises from the single organ of vision being divided by the bone of 
the nose. 

The objectors argue as follows :— 

If the eyes were really two, viz , right and left, we would have been 
bound to admit a soul distinct from the senses as the common seat of 

THflNflYA SftTtlAS. 

8S 

perception and recognition. But there is only one eye which is divided 
by the bridge of the nose and which perforins the two functions o£ 
perception and iecognition lienee there is, according to the objectors, 
nbsoul beyond the eve 

f|rfl 5 nfg?T[Scn^f B 3 f \ I < 11 

eka-vin&se, on the destinotion of the one ; fgahjrfk«IT¥n?J 
dvitiya-a-vmas&t, :is there is nun-de&ti uctioc of the other ; «T na, not ; 
eka-tv tun, un lty 

207. "Ihe eyrS, we reply, are reailv two because the destruction 
of one does not c mse the destEoction of the other. 

If tie organ of vision was only one, then on the destruction of that 
one (i e , one eye ) rhere woubl be total blindness. 

3T5TO5R 1^ :qcR qsrs§*|g: II ^ I l I \o Ik 

Wg^HTSft avayava lifiao. on the desti urtion of a part; stfa api, even ; 
avaiavi apalabdheh, as the whole ib cognised ; a?5<j: a hetnh 

no reason. 

208. r i his is, some say, no argument, for the destruction of 
a part do. s not causa the des.ructio.i of the whole 

The ob]i*cti)is say :—Ju-iC as a trera d les not perish though a branch 
of it has been destroyed, so there may not be total blindness though 
one eye ( a part of the org in <>f vi'-ioti ) has been destroyed, 

II 3 I ^ r \\ || 

dr sr&nta-virodh&t, owing to conflict with the familiar 
instance , vntfa^l: a prat'sidlmh,, non- opposition 

209. This is, we reply, no opposition to our argument inasmuch 
as your illustration is in ipt. 

The illustration o£ a tree and its branch is not quite apt, for a tree 
does not exist in its entirety but assumes a mutilated condition when 
a branch of it is cut off. The right eye, on the other hand, remains is 
a perfect condition and performs the full function, of an eye even when 
the left eye is destroyed. 

u ^ i \ i n 

indriya-autara- vik&r&t, as there takes place modi¬ 
fication of another sense. 

84 

BOOK III CHAPTER I. 

^ 210. The soul is distinct from the senses, because there is an 
excitement of one sense through the operation of another sense. 

When we see an acid substance, water ovei flows our tongue. In 
other words, in virtue of tiie opeintmn of our visual sense there is an 
excitement in the sense of tnste This would be impossible unless there 
was a soul distinct from the senses The soul seeing the acid Bubstance 
remembers itB proj erties , ni a tlie lemembrance of the acid properties 
excites tho sense of taste 

* M t ^ i n 

sr na, no , ?Jjrar: smnteh, of memory, recollection , ^JFttsqRiiTRfqTq 
smartavya-visaya-tv&t, because it has the thing recollected as its ob]ect. 

211. It is, some say, not so because remembrance is lodged 
in the object remembered. 

Remembrance, according to the objectors, is lodged m the thing 
remembered and does not necessarily presuppose a soul. 

WII $ I \ I II 

U^TMT3*0S?3lWm tat Stma-guini s.wlbh&v&t, because of its existence as 
a quality of the soul , wsrfa%<l: a-pra! isedliah, non-opj OBiton. 

212. This is, w e reply, no opposition, because remembrance is 
really a quality of the soul. 

Remembrance is based on perception, that is, one can remember 
only that thing which one has peiceived. It often happens that seeing 
the colour of a thing we remember its smell. This would be impossible 
if remembrance was a quality of a sense, eg., the eye which has never 
smelt the thing. Hence remembrance must be admitted to be a quality 
of a distinct substance called soul winch is the common seat of perceptions 
of colour and of smell. 

TRT% II 3 I \ I II 

*T na, no , Atma-pratipatti-hetflu&m, of the reasons or 

pi’oofs of the existence of a separate soul; mffo manasi, to the mind; 

sambhavftt, because of applicability. 

213. There is, some say, no soul other than the mind because 
the arguments which are adduced to establish the “ soul ’* are apphe- 
able to the mind. 

THE NYA7A-SGTRAS. 

85 

The substance of the objection is this:— 

We can apprehend an object by both the eye and the shin. It is 
’true that the acts of seeing and touching the object by one agent cannot 
be explained unless we suppose the agent to be distinct from both the eye 
and the skin ( i e , from the senses), let however the agent be identified 
with the mind. 

m i ^ i ^ « 

5TTfj: jn&tuh, of the knower , 5fl«TOT'iJ5ita'rW: jn&iia-s&dhaua-upapatteh, 
as there must be instruments of knowing, sara]fi&-bheda-matram, 

mere difference of name. 

214. Since there is a knower endowed with an instrument of 
knowledge it is, we reply, a mere verbal trick to apply the name 
“ mind ” to that which is really the “ soul. ’* 

To explain the acts of seeing, touching, etc you admit an agent 
distinct from the senses which are oalled its instiuments. The sense or 
instrument by which the act of thinking is performed is called the 
“mind” The agent sees by the eye, hears by the ear, smells by the nose, 
tastes by the tongue, touches by the skin and thinks by the “ mind.” 
Hence we must admit the agent ( soul ) over and above the mind If you 
call the agent as “ nund, ” you will have to invent another name to 
designate the instrument. This verbal trick will not, after all, affect onr 
position. Moreover, the m’nd cannot be the agent as it is atomic in 
nature. An atomic agent cannot perform the acts of seeing, hearing, 
knowing, feeling, etc. 

fasnreq u ^ \ \ i u 

fnniT: myamah, rule , w oh a, and , fargJTR: nir-anum&nah, devoid of 
in ference. 

21 1 . Yo ir conclusion is moreover opposed to inference. 

We admit a unml apart fiom the soul. If you deny any one of them 
or identify one with the other, an absuid conclusion will folow Unless 
you admit the mind you will not be able to explain the internal percep¬ 
tion. By the eye you can see, by the ear you can hear, by the nose you oan 
smell, by the tongue you can taste and by the skin you can touch. By 
what sense do you carry on internal perception, viz., thinking, imagining, 
etc ? Unless you admit the mind for that purpose your conclusion will 
be opposed to inference. 

86 

BOOK III, CHAPTERI. 

\\ \ \\ \ \c n 

pfirva-abhyasta smriti-anubandhftt, from association 
with, or sequence from, memoiy j revinnsly experienced , 5T1WT j&tasyn, of 
the new-born, the child , har^a-bhaya-soka-sampratipatteti, 

on account oE the necarieuee of pleasure, fear and grief. 

216 ( The soul is to be admitted ) on account of joy, fear 

and grief arising tn a child from the men.ory of things pre* iously 
e cperienced. 

A new-born child manifests marks of joy, fear and grief This is 
inexplicable unless we suppose that the child perceiving certain thiugs 
in this life remembers the corresponding things of the past life. The 
things which used to excite joy, fear and grief in the past life continue to 
do so in this life The memory of the past proves the previous birth as 
well as the existence of the soul. 

H \ \ l ^ II 

padina-hdisn, in the case of the lotus, etc. , 
prabndha-saruuniaiiu vit&iavat, like the modifications of opening and 
closing tafc-v.k&i .ill its modifications. 

217, It is ■ bjci tcd that the changes of countenance in a child 
are like those of expanding and closing up in a lotus. 

The objection stands thus :— 

Just as a lotus which ib devoid of memory expands and closes up 
by itself, so a child expresses joy, fear and grief even without the recollec¬ 
tion of the things with whioh these were associated in the previous life. 

M M i ^ ii 

•T na, no , 3$n- oTt sfcro'ViFfreFSCT usna stta-vn sa-kala-nimitta tv&fc, 
because of their lieing caused by heat, cold, rain and season , 

pantha htmaka-vikfuanam, of the modifications or changes in 
things constituted by the five (elements) 

218. This is, we reply, not so 1 >ecau ,e the changes in inani uate 
things are caused by heat, cold, ram an l season. 

THE NYlYA-sGTRAS. 

8 ? 

The changes of expansion and contraction in a lotus are caused by 
heat and cold Similarly the changes of countenance m a child must be 
caused by something. What is that thing ? It is the recollection of 
pleasure and pain associated with the things which are perceived. 

« $ I \ * M 

sfw pretya, transmigrating; AhAra-abhi Asa-kritAt, 

produced by the habit of eating ( in the previous life ) , w s wnf*M l *f Pf 
stanya abhilAsftt, from the desire for the mother's milk. - 

219. A child's desire for milk in this life is caused by the pra¬ 
ctice of his having drunk it in the previous life. 

A child just born drinks the breast of biB mother through the 
remembrance that he did so m the previous life as a means of satisfying 
hunger. The child's desire for milk in this life is caused by the re¬ 
membrance of his experience in the previous life. This proves that the 
child’s soul, though it has abandoned a previous body and has accepted 
a new one, remembers the experiences of the previous body. 

M * \ \ \ Sft II 

ayasah, of the iron ; ayask&ntu-abhigamana. 

vat, like the approach to the loadstone , tat-upa-sarpanam, the 

approach of the infant. 

220. Some deny the above by saying that a new-born child 
approaches the breast of his mother just as an non approaches a 
loadstone (without any cause). 

The objection iuna thus :— 

Just as an irou approaches a loadstone by itself, so does a child 
approach the breast of his mother without any cacBe. 

*ix**FH Hfirorarc u ^ \ \ i ^ « 

if na, no , anyatia, elsewhere , pravritti-abliAi At, on 

account of absence of activity. 

221. 'this is, we reply, not so because there is no approach 
towards any other thing. 

You say that there is no cause which makes an iron approach a 
loadstone, or a child the breast of his mother. How do you then explain 

88 

BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

that an iron approaches only a loadstone but not a clod of earth and a 
child approaches only the bieast of his mother and not any other thing ? 
Evidently there is some cause to regulate these fixed relations. 

m i \ i u 

faTcl vita i&ga-janma-a darsan&b, because the rebirth of 
one who is free from desire is not observed. 

222. We find that none is lorn without desire. 

Every creature is born with some desires which are associated with 
the things enjoyed by him in the past life In other words, the desire 
proves the existence of the creature or rather of his soul in the previous 
lives. Hence the soul is eternal. 

^nrgrs^cqf%3lTT5rqi%: II ^ I \ I ^ II 

sa-guna-dravya-utpatti- vat, like the production of 
substances endowed with qualities , tat-utpattih, its production. 

223. Some say that the soul is not eternal because it may he 
produced along with desire as other things are iproduced along with 
their qualities. 

The objection stands thus :— 

Just as a jar, when it is produced, is distinguished by its colour, etc, 
so the soul when it is produced is marked by its desire, etc. Heuce the 
desireB do not pre-snppose the soul in the previous lives or, in other 
words, the soul is not eternal, 

* II ^ I \ I ^ II 

«T na, no , samkalpa-nimitta-tvflt, because of their 

being caused by samkalpa, i.e volition ( springing from the recollection 
of past experience ) , laga AdinAm, of desire, eto. 

221. This is, we reply, not so because the desire in a new-born 
child is caused by the ideas left in his soul by the things he enjoyed in 
his previous lives. 

The desire implies that the soul existed in the previous lives or, in 
other words, the soul is eternal. 

mfsbi li ^ I ^ I ^9 II 

p&rthivam, earthy , guna-antara-upalabdheh, 

THE NYJlYA-SOTRAS. 

89 

because of the perception of the quality of the earth 

225. Our body is earthy because it possesses the special quali¬ 
ties of earth. 

In other worlds there are beings whose bodies are watery, 6ery, 
airy or ethereal Though out body is composed of all the hire elements 
we call it earthy owing to the preponderance of earth in it. 

qTf^rr«T%srcr m i ^ i ^ n 

pAithiva-&pya-taijasain, composed of elements of earth, 
water, and fire, tat-gnna-upalabdheh, because of the perception 

of their attributes. 

226. The body is composed of the elements of earth, water 
and fire, as the attributes of these elements are perceived in it. 

nihfivasa uehohhvfUa-upalabdheh, because of the 
perception of in breathing and out-breathing , cnaiurbhautikam, 

composed of four elemonts 

227. The body is composed of four elements, because uperib ms 
the operations of in-breathing and out breathing. 

iwnt^ rypiwmmilwi: gandha-kleda- ; tlka-vy(iha-vvaL&s.i-u&ue- 
bhyah, by reason of sinell, wetness, digestion, circulation of bluod, and 
room for movement , p&ilcha bhautikam, composed of five 

elements. 

228. The body is composed of live elements, as it possesses 
smell, wetness, digestion, circulation of blood and room for movement. 

In the body there are smell and moistnre which are attributes of earth 
and water respectively. Digestion and circulation of blood are done res¬ 
pectively by fire and air. There is also in the body room for the move¬ 
ment of the other elements m it, and therefore ether is also present in it. 

Gotama has not taken the trouble to refute these doubtful reason¬ 
ings in the above three aphorisms. They are generally refuted by the 
authority of the Veda in the next aphorism. 

im » \ i \\ u 

12 

90 

BOOK lit, CHAPTER I. 

3ifaJW?T <n Tra 4ruti-pi Asian' at, from the authority of the Veda, ^ cha, 

and. 

229. In virtue of tl’e authority of scripture too. 

That out body is earthy is proved by our scripture. In the section 
on “ Dissolution into the primordial matter,” there aie such texts as: 
May the eye be absorbed into the sun, may the body be absorbed into the 
earth, etc. The sun is evidently the souice of the eye and the earth of 
the body. 

3 M » ^ « 

krisnasare, the eyeball, afa sati, there being • gqsPHTRf 
upalambh&t, because theie is perception (of colour; , vyatirichya, 

screening,removiug ; w cha, and , SqSSMqttJ upalambhat, because there is 
perception , samsayah, doubt 

230 It is doubtful as to whether a sense is material or all- 
pervading because there is perception when there is ( contact with ) 
the eye-ball and there is perception even when the eye-ball is far off. 

The eye-ball is said by some to be a material ( elemental ) substance 
inasmuch as its function is limited by its contact A. thing is seen 
when it has contact with the eye-ba.ll, but it is not seen when the eye-ball 
is not connected In other words, the eye-ball, like any other material 
Bubstance, exercises its function only in virtue of its contact with things. 
Others hold that the eye-ball is a non-material all-pervading Bubstance 
inasmuch as it can pei ceive things with which it has not come in 
contact. The eye-ball does not tomch the things which it sees from 
a distance. Hence the question arises as to whether the eye-ball is 
a material or an all pervading substance. 

u 3 \ \ \ \\ u 

mahat anu-grahan&t, because it apprehends both the 
large and the small. 

231. It is contended that the eye-ball is not a material substance 
because it can apprehend the great and the small. 

If the eye-hall had been a material substance it could have appre¬ 
hended only those things which coincided with itself in bulk. But we 

TnE NYiYA. Sfl l’R\S. 

91 

find it can appiehend tilings of gieater and smaller bulk. So it is 
contended that the eye ball is not a material substance. 

m i ^ i 3? n 

T^jqsfqRr^rrf^rSt'nq; rasmi-artha-sanmkaisa visesat, from a special 
contact of the ocular ray with the object, tat-grahanam, the 

apprehension of the large and the small 

232. ( The Naiyayika’s reply to the above is that)) it is by the 
contact of the ray that the thi igs great and small are apprehended. 

The Naiy&yikas say that even on the supposition of the eye-ball 
being a matenal substance the appiehension by it of the great and the 
Btnall will nos be unpiSsible Their explanation is that though the eye¬ 
ball itself does n it coincide with things which are greater or smaller in 
balk, yet the rays issuinu- from the eye-ball reach the things m. their 
entire extent Hence in s-pite of the e\e ball being a material substance 
there is no impossibility for it to appiehend tlie great and the small. 

g: u \ \ \ \ it 

tat-an-upalabdlieh, because of its non-perception ; 
a-hetub, not a cause. 

233. Contact is not the cause because we do not perceive the 

ray. 

The contact of a ray nil'll a thing is not the cause of apprehension 
of the thing because we perceive no ray issuing from the eye ball. 

U^I^U 

<f na, not ; wgdtTORW anumiyarn&nasya, of that which can- be- 
inferred , qsttflH: pratyaksatah, by perception , wgqsrfssr: an-upalabdhih ? . 
non-apprehension , swrqfij: abh&va-hetuh, a mark of non-existence. 

234. '.-That we do not apprehend a thing through perception'is, 
no proof of non-existence of the thing because we may yet apprehend ife, 
through inference 

The ray issuing from the eye is not perceived 1 as it is supersensuonst 
But it is established by inference like the lower half of the earth or the 
other side of the moon. 

II \ I \ I IS 

92 

BOOK 111 On \PTER I 

dravya-guna dhai tna-bhed&fc, according to differences 
of the nature of the substance and the attribute , ^ cha, and , 
upalabdln niyamah. mle of peiception 

235 And perception dependes upon the special character of the 
substance and its qi ahtts. 

A mbstarce i lies- it possesses magnitude, or a quality unless it 
-n«s' of-- ii\ ’u.isn^ss, is r.ot perceived From the absence of magnitude 
ar.u oh 1 >n i ! •» the ray of the eye-ball is not perceived. 

\\\\\\^\\ 

111 p k i dravya—am.ufvyat, from combination in more 
than one subsiai.i. ■ u, a vis. - it, from peculiarity, l e. per¬ 
ceptible intensity , ot coloui , ^ cha, and , rupa-upalabdhih, 

perception <>• colour 

230. A colour is perceived only when it abides in many things 
intimately and possesses obuousness. 

The sun’s ray is perceived as it possesses an obviousness in respectof 
colour and touch But the ray of the eye-ball is not perceived as it is 
obvious neither in lespect of colour unt in respect of touch. 

u \ \ \ i ^ w 

^Ttrfwt! karma-kai itah, detei mined or organised by karma or 
deseits , cha, and , indrii anam, of the senses ; vyfthah, 

order or assemblage , puiufa artha-tantrah, subservient to tho 

purposes of the purusa or man 

237. And the senses subservient to the purposes of man have 
been set in order by his deserts. 

The order referred to is as follows .— 

The eye emits ray which does not possess the quality of obviousness 
and cannot consequently burn the thing it touches Moreover, tad there 
been obviousness in the ray it would have obstructed our vision by stand¬ 
ing as a screen between the eye and the thing. This sort of arrangement 
of the senses was made to enable man to attain his purposes according to 
his merits and demerits. 

THE NYAYA SOTRAS 

93 

uiadhyandiu<i-nlk& prakfisa-an-upalabdhi- 
vat, like the non-perception of the light of a meteor at midd&v , 
tat-an-upalabdlnh, its non-perception 

238. Some say that the ray of the eye (possesses ubviousntss o 
colour but it) is not perceived just as the li 0 ht of a meteor at idua) is> 
not perceived. 

The light of a meteor though possessing obviousness of colour ib not 
perceived at midday because it is then overpowered by the light of the 
sun Similarly, some say, the ray of the eye possesses obviousnesss of 
colour but it is not perceived during the day tune on account of its being 
overpowered by the light of the sun. 

* h ^ \ \ i 11 

ttna.no tfstr&trau, at night, vrft.ipi, even ir-prasw: anu, alabdh. h, 
from its non-perception. 

239. It is, we reply, not so because even in the night the ray of 
the eye is not perceived. 

Had the ray of the eye possessed obviousness of colour it would have 
been perceived dui ing the night when it cannot be overpoweied bv the 
light of the sun. As the ray of the eye is not perceived even during the 
night we must conclude that it does not possess >bviousness of colour. 

M i ^ t 9^ n 

mnramsnfra b4hya-prak&sa-anugrah&t, through conjunction with, 
or co-operation of, external light, visaya-upalabdheh, because 

perception of objects (takes place ) , an-abhivyakti-tafc, from 

non-man if estation , an-upalabdhih, non-perception. 

240. The ray of the eve is not perceived in consequence of its 
unubviousness but not on account of its total absence Ltcausc tleaches 
objects through the aid of external light. 

In the eye there is ray which does not however possess an obviou" 
colonr. Had the eye possessed no ray it conld not have perceived ar 
object. (Since the eye perceives objectB, it possesses ray in it, and since 
requires the aid of external light (such as the light of the sun) to percei 
them it follows that the ray does not possess the quality of Obviousne,^ 
This aphorism answers the objection raised m 3-1-35. 

94 

BOOK III, CHA.PTER I. 

^ifWoTTrl H $ I \ I 2 \ II 

abhivyaktau, in case of man festation , ^ cha, and ( where 
co-operation of external light is not required ) , abhibhavat, 

because it is overpowered 

\ 

241. And the in isibility of the ray of the eye cannot be due 
to its being overpowered ( by an external light such as the light of the 
sun ) because the overpowering is possible only of a thing which posses¬ 
sed obviousness. 

It is only a thing which possesses obviousness or manifestation that 
can be overpowered or obscured But how can we throw a thing into 
obscurity which never possessed manifestation ? We cannot there foie s.iy 
that tho ray of the eye is not perceived on account of its having been 
overpowered by an external light. 

M I ^ I 22 II 

naktafli liaia nayana-rasmi-dai fiar.at, because 
the ray of the eye is seen in the case of prowlers by night , ^ cha, and 

242. There must be ray in t’’e eye of man as we see it m the 
eye of animals that move abo it m the night. 

We see that animals wandering by night, such as cats, possess ray 
in their eyes By this we can conjecture that there is ray in the eye o! 
man. 

atsn^l apiapya, without reaching ; agef grahanam, apprehension ; 

k&cha-abhra-patala-sphatika-antarita-upalab- 

dheh, because of perception of things screened by glass, mica, and 
crystal 

2 IS. Some say that the eye can perceive a thing even witho it 
coming in ( o ta^t with it by me ns of its rays ju-it as things screened 
from us by glass, mica, membra e or crystal are seen, 
j The objection raised in this aphorism contmterts the NjAya theory 
0 contact ( in piatyakfa) and seeks to prove that the senses aie not 
hjterial substances 

M I \ I 2^ H 

THE NYiYA-StTTRAS 

95 

kudva antarita an-upalabdheh, because of non-per¬ 
ception of what is screened from view by a wall , a-pratisedhnh, 

non-contradiction 

244. (The foregoing objection is not valid) because we cannot 
perceive what is screened from us by walls. 

The eye cannot really peiceive a thing without coming in contact 
with it by meaus of its rays. For instance, a thing which is screened 
from us by a wall is not perceived by our eyes. 

STJrra^TrTTtl U \ I \ I II 

a pratighhiAt, from non-obstruction , sanni- 

karga-upapattih, establishment of contact 

24o. There is a real contact because there is no actual obstruc¬ 
tion ( caused by glass, mica, membrane or crystal). 

The ray issuing from the eye can reach an external object through 
glass, mica, etc., which are transparent substances. There being no 
obstruction caused by these substances, the eye comes really in contact 
with the external object. 

n 

hditya-rasmefc, of the sun’s ray ; sphatika-anta- 

re, being screened by a crystal; wfq api, even , afi®T dahye, towards -a 
combustible substance ; ; a-vigh&t&t, from non-obstruction. 

246. A ray of the sun is not prevented from reaching a com¬ 
bustible substance though the latter is screened by a crystal. 

This is an example which supports the theory of contact, viz., a ray 
issuing from the eye passes actually through a crystal to an object lying 
beyond it. 

II 3 I X re N 

H na, no ; faTSTOgsraiTirf itara-itara-dharma-prasang&t, on account 
of implication of mutual properties 

247. It is, some say, not so because the character of one pre¬ 
sents itself in the other. 

The objection stands thus :— 

If a ray issuing from the eye can reach an object screened by a 
Bfcal, why oan it not reach another object which is screened by a wall ? 

96 

BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

According to the objector the propeity of the crystal presents itself in the 
wall 

WTSm^qtqtjfi QA vn fi^T: 

II 3 I \ I II 

Udaraa-udakayoh, in a mirror and in water; 
prasada ev&bh&vyftt, from natural clearness or transparency ; 
rupa-upalabdhi-vat like the perception of colour or form ; agqsfca: tat- 
upalabdhih, its perception 

24S. In reply we say that the perception of a thing screened by 
a < rystal takes place in the same manner as that of a form in a 
mirror or water owing to the possession of the character of trans¬ 
parency. 

The form of a face is reflected on a mirror because the latter 
possesses transparency Similaily, a thing is reflected on a crystal inas¬ 
much as the latter is transparent. A wall which does not possess trans¬ 
parency can reflect nothing It is therefore entirely due to the Datura of 
the screens that we can or cannot perceive things through them. 

jSigroaRT u \ i \ i sft u 

SHTgfjTarat drista-anuinit4n4m, of things seen and inferred , fwqlnufk- 
myoga-pratisedha-an-upapattih, inapplicability of injunctions 
and prohibitions, assertions and denials 

249. It is not possible to impose injunctions and prohibitions 
on facts which are perceived or inferred to be of some fixed character. 

A orystal and a wall are found respectively to be transparent and 
non transparent It is not possible to alter their character by saying 
“ let the crystal be non-transparent " and “ let the wall be transparent.” 
Likewise, a ray of the eye in passing to a thing is obstructed by a wall 
but not by a crystal. This is a perceived fact which cannot be altered 
by our words Hence the theory of contact remains intact. 

^RTr5n^rgrfgRT?TTf5rT^^ q 

II ^ I \ I ^ II 

WWi*q?^ sthana-anya-tve, from occupying different places ; ifTSTTf^RI 
nina-tvat, because of diversity , ffTOfatHWITOfT?! avByavi-n4na-sthina- 

THE NT\iYA-SOTRAS. 

97 

tv&t, from a whole occupj ing different places, w cha, and; sam&ayah, 
doubt. 

250. Since many things occupy many places and since also one 
thing possessing different parts occupies many places, there arises doubt 
as to whether the senses are more than one. 

There is doubt as tu whether there are as many senses aB there 
are sensuous functions oi whether all the functions belong to one sense 
possessing different pai ts 

II 3 I ^ I II 

tvak, skin, touch ; SfWlfafaiei: a vyatirek&t, from its non* 

exclusion. 

251. Some say that the senses are not many as none of them is 
independent of touch (skin). 

The eye, ear, nose and tongue are said to be mere modifications of 
touch ( skin) which pert idea them, that is, there is only one BenBe, viz., 
touch (skin), all others being merely its parts. 

sr spq^srfaq*^: ii \ i \ \ h# ii 

W na, no , } u^apat, simultaneously ; artha-an-upa- 

labdheh, from non-perception of objects. 

■ 252. Touch is not the only sense because objects are not 
perceived simultaneously. 

Had there been on ly one sense viz., touch, it would have in con¬ 
junction with the mind produced the functions of seeing, hearing, smell¬ 
ing, tasting, etc., simultaneously. But we cannot perform different func¬ 
tions at once. This pr ives that the senses are many : the mind which is 
an atomic substance being unable to come in contact with the different 
senses at a time cannot produce different functions simultaneously. 

5*writail II ^ i ^ ii 

vipraiifedh&t, because there is obstruction ; W cha, and ; if 
na, not, tvak, touch ; ek&, only one. 

253, Touch cannot be the only sense prohibiting the function 
of other senses. 

Touoh can perceive only those objects which are near (oontiguons) 
but it cannot perceive objects which are far off. As a fact we can por« 

13 

98 

BOOK III, Oil APTER I 

ceive colour and sound from a gieafc distance This is certainly not the 
“function of touch but of some other sense which can reach distant objects. 

II * I ^ 1 ^ II 

induya- aitha, pancha-tv at, because the objects of the 

senses are five. 

554. Senses are five because there are five objects. 

There are five objects, ti.a , colour, _ sound, smell (odour), taste 
(savour) and touch which aie cngnisod respectively by the eye, ear, nose, 
tongue and skin. There are theiefoie five senses ooriesponding to the 
five objects. 

H II \ \ \ I ^ U 

«! na, no , tat-ai tha-bahu tvat, because their objects are 

many. 

255. Some say that the senses are not five because there are 
more than five objects. 

The objects of sense aie said to be many such as good smell, bad 
smell, white colour, yellow colour, bitter taste, Bweet taste, pungent taBte, 
warm touch, cold touch, etc Accoiding to the objector there must be 
senses corresponding to all these objects 

(I ^ l ^ 1 || 

q5q-qrUsqfa(SEiqr gandha-tva&di-a-vyatirek&t, because of the non¬ 
exclusion of the chaiactet of smell, etc. , qfsn^tot gandha-adin&m, of smell, 
etc., wrfafo* a-pratisedhah, non exclusion. 

256. There is, we reply, no objection because odour (smell), etc. 
are net er devoid of the nature of odour (Sowell), etc. 

Good odour, bud odoui, etc are not diffeient objects of sense but 
they all c ..no under the genus odour. It is the nose alono that cognises 
oil suits of odour—good or bad. Similarly all colouis—white, yellow, 
blue or green—aie cognised by the eye In fact there aie only five 
objects which aie cognised by the five senses. 

ft n ^ i \ i ^ H 

fTTCfgTsqfafcEKi: visaya-tva-a-vyatirek&t, because of the non-exclus¬ 
ion of the character of their being objects of sense , eka-tvam, 

unity, 

THE NYlY A. SOTRAS. 

9» 

257. Some say that there is oniy one sense as the so called 
different objects of sense are n t de\oid of the character u an 

object. 

The objection raised in this aphorism is as follows:— 

The so-called different objects, viz, coloui, sound, smell (odour), 
taBte (savour) and touch agree with one another in each of them being an 
object of sense. As they all possess the common characteristic of being 
an object of sense it is much sirni ler to say that the object of sense 
is only one. If there is only ono object of sense, the sense must also 
be one only. 

?! na, no, buddhi-lakBana-adhistli&na- 

gati-&kriti-jfi±i-pancha-tvebhyah, because of fivefolduess of the states of 
consciousness which the senses pmdu.ee, their sites, their movements, 
their shapes and their origins. 

258. It is, we reply, not so because the senses possess fr e-fold 
character corresponding to the characters of knowledge, sites, processes, 
forms.and materials. 

The senses must be admitted to be fiv6 on the following grounds:— 

(a) The chai acters of knowledge—J’lieie ate five senses conespon- 
ding to the five characters of knowledge, viz, visual, auditory, olfactory, 
gustatory and tactual. 

(h) The 3ites—The senses aie five on account of the various sites 
they occupy. The visual sense ies>ls oil the ejeball, the aud'tuiy sense 
on the ear-hole, the olfactory seuae 011 the nose, the gustatory sense on lha 
tongue, while the tactual sense occupies the whole body. 

(c) The processes—There aie five senses involving five different 
processes, e. g , the visual senso appieliends a colour by approaching 
it through the (ocular) ray while the tactual sense apprehends an object, 
which iein association with the body, and so on. 

(d) The forms—The senses are of different forms, e g , the eve 
partakes of the nature of a blue ball, and the ear is not different fiuiu 
ether, etc. 

(e) The materials—The senses are made up of different materials : 
the eye is fiery, the ear is ethereal, the nose is earthy, the tongue is watery,, 
and the skin (touch) rs airy. 

100 

BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

II ^ I \ I ^ II 

bhuta-guna-visesa-upalabdheh, on account of the 
perception of the specific attributes of the elements , tad&tmyam, 

identity. 

259. The senses are essentially identical with the elements in 
consequence of the possession of their special qualities. 

The five senses, viz., the eve, ear, nose, tongue and skin ( touch ), 
are essentially identical with the five elements, viz , fire, ether, earth, 
water and air, whose special qualities, viz , colour, sound, smell (odour), 
savour (taste) and tangibility, are exhibited by them. 

*qscr<TS^cTT: <JTO 3 *n:il ^1^11 

n^TO^TP^hfls^Migandha i asa-rupa-spai ia SabdAn&m, of smell, taste, 
form, touch, and sound , sparsa-paryantah, those ending with 

touch , ufsis*U. prithivjah, of the earth 

260. Of odour ( smell), savour ( taste ), colour, tangibility 
( touch ) and sound those ending with tangibility belong to earth. 

35# 1131^11 

ap-tejo-v&yunam, of uatei, fire and air , phr- 

vam pfirvam, each preceding one, apohya, discarding; 

Akaaasya, of ether , 3vTT: uttarah, the last 

261. Rejecting each preceding one in succession they belong 
respectively to water, fire and air ; the last (sound) belongs to ether. 

The earth possesses four qualities, viz , odour (smell), savour (taste), 
colour and tangibility. In water there are three qualities, viz., savour, 
colour and tangibility; colour and tangibility are known to be the qualities 
of fiie while tangibility and sound belong respectively to air and ether. 

5 T II \ I \ I II 

si ua, no ; sarva-guna-an-upalabdheh, an account of 

the non-perception of all the attributes. 

262. An objector says that it is not so because an element is 
not apparently found to possess more than one quality. 

T.lie substance of the objection is that the earth does not possess 
foui qualities but only oue quality, vie., odour (smell) which is apprehended 

THE NYAYA-StyTRAS. 

101 

by the nose. Water does not possess three qualities but possesses only 
one quality, viz , savour ( taste ) which is apprehended by the tongue. 
Similarly the other elements do, each of them, possess only one quality. 

II ^ I \ I II 

eka-eka-fiyena, one to one , uttara-nttara* 

guna-sadbliav4t, because of the existence of the attributes m each succeed¬ 
ing one ; arKiom uttai&nam, in the succeeding ones , a^3«resfi«l: tat-an- 
upa-labdhih, non-perception thereof. 

263. The objector further says that the_ qualities belong to the 
elements, one to one, in their respective order so that there is non-per¬ 
ception of other qualities in them. 

The substance of the objection is this :— 

Odour (smell) is the only quality of the earth. Consequently the 
other three qualities, viz., savour (taste), colour and tangibility, alleged to 
belong to the earth, are not found in it. Savour (taBte) is the only quality 
of water, hence the other two qualities, viz., colour and tangibility alleged 
to belong to water, are not found in it. Colour is the only quality of fire, 
and hence the other quality, viz., tangibility alleged to belong to fire, is 
not fonnd in it. Tangibility is of course the quality of air and Bound 
of ether. 

tpHwfrq M i \ i » 

fag' vigtam, covered, interpenetrated ; far hi, for ; SPT? aparam, one ; 
sntin aparena, by another. 

264. Of the elements one is, according to the objector, often 
interpenetrated by others. 

The objection is explained as follows: 

The earth is often interpenetrated by water, fire and air and is 
consequently found to possess savour (taste), colour and tangibility besides 
odour (smell). Similar is the case with water, etc. 

* i» ^ i \ i « 

H na, no ; qifafsfTUUh p&rthiva-ftpyayoh, of the earthy and the watery, 
of the terrene and aqueous ; pratyakfa-tv&t, because of being 

perceptible. 

102 

BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

265. It is, we reply, not so because there is visual perception of 
the earthy and t'.e n atery. 

The Naiyuyikas meet the foregoing objections by saying that the 
earth ieally possesses four qualities, water three, fire two, air one, 
and ether one. H id the earth possessed only odour ( smell ) and the 
water only savour (taste) then it would have been impossible for us 
to see the earthy and watery things We are competent to see only 
those things which possess colour, and if the eaitb and water had 
not possessed colour how could we have seen them P Since we can 
see the eaithy and the watery it follows that they possess colour If you 
say that eaith and watei are visible because they aie mixed with 
the fiery things which possess colour, why then the arr and ether are 
also not visible ? There is no rule that it is only the earth and water 
that can be mixed with fiery things but that the air and ether cannot be 
so mixed. Proceeding in this way we find that the earth, etc. do not 
each possess only one quality. 

q^qdnr^Tc^TrT (I \ \ \ I ^ tt 

pui va-pfirva guna-utkai§&t, owing to the predominance 
of each preceding attribute , tat-tat-pradh&nain, each is predomi¬ 

nant attribute of each corresponding element. 

266. Owing to the predominance of one quality m an element, 
a sense is characterised by the quality which pre-dommates in its corres¬ 
ponding element. 

The nose is characterised by odour (smell) which predominates in 
its corresponding element the earth ; the tongue is characterised by 
savour (taste) which piedominates in its cori espondmg element the water; 
the eye is characterised by colour which piedominates in its corrrespond- 
ing element the fire ; the skin (touch) is eharacte-i tsed by tangibility 
which abides in us cot lespondmg element the air while the ear is 
characterised by sound which is the special quality of its corresponding 
element the ether. 

w ^ t x i ^ it 

tat- vyavasthftnam, distribution thereof , jj tu, however; 
hhftyastvftt, according to their fitness. 

267. A sense as distinguished from its corresponding element is 
determined by its fineness. 

THE NYlYA-SUTRAS. 

103 

A sense (eg, the eobo) which is the fine part of an element (e.g , the 
earth} is able to perceive a special object (eg, odour} owing to the 
act-force (samskdra, karma) of the person possessing the sense A sense 
cannot perceive more than one object because it possesses the predo- 
minant quality of an element, e g., the nose possesses only odour which is 
the predominant quality of the earth, the tongue the savour of water, the 
eye the colour of fire, and so on. 

II ^ I ^ I <»o u 

sgmRt sagun&n&m, of those attended with attributes ; 
indriya-bb&v&t, being themselves the senses. 

268. A sense is really called as such when it is attended by 
its quality. 

Some may say why a sense ( the nose for mBtauce j cannot perceive 
its own quality (odour). The reply is that a sense consists of an element 
endowed with its quality. It is only when a sense is attended by the quality 
that it can see an object. Now in perceiving an object the sense is 
attended by the quality but in perceiving its own quality it ib not so at¬ 
tended. Consequently a sense cannot perceive its own quality. 

W ^ I \ I » 

tena, by that j tp* eva, alone ; tasya, its ; a-grahan&t, 

on account of non-apprehension ; 9 cha, and. 

269. Moreover an object is never perceived by itself. 

An eye can see an external object but it cannot see itself. On the 
same principle a sense cannot perceive its own quality. 

K ^ | X t « 

sy na, no ; ^is^gilitasssish sabda-guna-upalabdheh, because of perception 
of the attribute of sound 

270. It is, some say, not So because the quality of sound is 
perceived by the ear. 

'ihe objeotion stands thus:— 

It ib not traa that a sense cannot perceive its own quality. The ear, 
for instance, oan peroeive sound which is its own quality. 

gwriq w \ \\ \ n » 

104 

BOOK. Ill, CHAPTER 1. 

tat-upalabdhih, its perception ; itara- 

itara-dravya-guna- vaidharmy&t, from difference from the attribute of 
every other substauce. 

271. The perception of sound famishes a contrast to that of 
other qualities and their corresponding substrata. 

The nose, tongue, eye and skin can respectively smell earth, taste 
water, see colour and touch air only when they are attended by their 
own qualities, viz , odour (smell), savour (taste), colour and tangibility. 
But an ear when it hears sound is not attended by any quality. In fact 
the ear is identical with the ether and hears sonnd by itself. By indirect 
inference we can prove that sound is the special quality of the ether : 
odonr is the predominant quality of the earth, Bavour of water, oolunr of 
the eye, and tangibility of the skin (touch): sound must therefore be the 
quality of the remaining element, viz., the ether. 

THE NyAYA-SOTRAS. 

105 

Book III, Chapter II. 

ii * i ^ \ \ ii 

karma-4kfi,ia*sadharniyfkt, owing to its resemblance to 
action and etber , sam&ayah, doubt 

272. Since the intellect resembles both action and ether there is 
doubt as to whether it is transitory or permanent. 

Inasmuch as the intellect bears likeness to both action and ether 
in respect of intangibility, theie arises the question whether it is transi¬ 
tory like an action or peimanent like the ether We find in the intellect 
the function of ougmatiou and decay whioh marks transitory things as 
well as the function of recognition which marks permanent things. “ I 
knew the tree,” “ I know it ” and “ 1 shall know it ”—these are expres¬ 
sions which involving the ideas of origination and decay indicate our 
knowledge to be transitory. “ I who knew the tree yesterday am knowing 
it again today 51 —this is an expression which involving the idea of 
continuity indicates our knowledge to be permanent. Hence there is 
doubt as to whether the intellect which exhibits both kinds of knowledge 
is really transitory or permanent. 

v H ^ ^ \ ^ II 

visaya-pratyabhijfi&n&t, because of recognition of 

objects- 

273. Some say that the intellect is permanent because there .is 
recognition of objects. 

The S&mkhyas maintain the permanency of the intellect on the ground 
of its capacity for the recognition of objects A thing which was known 
before is known agaiu now—this soit of knowledge is called recognition. 
It is possible only if knowledge which existed in the past continues also 
'at the present, that is, if knowledge is persistent or permanent. Recogni¬ 
tion would have been impossible if knowledge had been transitory. Hence 
the S&mkhyas conclude that the intellect which recognises objects is 
permanent. 

II ^ I ^ I ^ II 

s&dhya-sama-tv&t, because the proof is the same as the 
thing to be proved , srfgs a-hetuh, no mark. 

U 

106 

BOOK in, CHAPTER It. 

/• 274. The foregoing reason is not, we say, valid inasmuch as it 
requires proof like the very subject in dispute.. 

Whether the intellect is permanent or not—this is the subject 
in dispute. The S&mkhyas affirm that it is permanent and the reason 
adduced by them is that it can recognise objects. The Naiyayikas dispute 
not only the conclusion of the S&mkhyas but also their reason They 
say that the intellect does not recognise objects butht is the soul that does 
so. Knowledge cannot be attributed to an unconscious instrument, the 
intellect, but it must be admitted to be a quality of a conscious agent, 
the soul. If knowledge is not a quality of the soul, what else oan be its 
quality ? How is the soul to be defined ? There is therefore no proof as 
to the validity of the reason, viz., that the intellect recognises objeots. 

j ^ ^ \ ^ \ & u 

IT na, no , yugapat, simultaneously, a-grahan4t, because 

of non-perception. 

275 Knowledge is neither a mode of the permanent intellect 
nor identical with it because various sorts of knowledge do not occur 
simultaneously. 

The Skmkbyas affirm that knowledge is a mode of the permanent 
intellect from which it is not different. Knowledge, according to them, 
is nothing but the permanent intellect modified in the shape of an object 
which is reflected on it through the senses The Naiyftyikas oppose this 
view by saying that if knowledge as a mode of the permanent intellect is 
not different from.it, then we must admit various sorts of knowledge to be 
permanent. But as a fact various sorts of knowledge are not perma¬ 
nent, that is,we cannot receive various sorts of knowledge simultaneously. 
Henoe knowledge is not identical with the permanent intellect. 

^ ^ U ^ \ ^ \ Sill 

WTrgfvrSfT^ a-pratyabhijn&ne, during non-recognition ; qr oha, and ; 
vin&sa-prasahgalj, implication of destruction. 

276. And in the cessation of recognition there arises the conting¬ 
ency of cessation of the intellect. 

If knowledge as a mode of the intellect is not different from it, then 
the cessation of recognition which >s a kind of knowledge should be 
followed by the cessation of the intellect. This will upset the conclusion 
of the Sdmkhyas that the intelleot is permanent. Henoe knowledge is not 
identical with the intellect. 

THE NYiYA StfTRASi 

107 

J u ^ i ^ i ^ it 

krama vritti-tiafc, owing to its operation being success¬ 
ive j a-yugapafc, non-simultaneous ; grahanam, reception, 

apprehension. 

277. Ihe reception of different sorts of knowledge is non- 
simultaneous owing, accordiug to us, to our mind coming in contact 
with different sen es m succession. 

The Naiy&yikas say that if knowledge as a mode of the permanent 
intellect had. been identical with it, then there would have been neither a 
variety of knowledge nor origination and cessation of it. The different 
sorts of knowledge do not occur simultaneously because they are produced, 
according to the Naij&yikas, by the mind which is atomic in dimension 
coming in contact with the senses m due succession. 

WT?!lfflgrT5f a-pratyabhijfi&natn, non-recognition, ■a cha, and, fsTtraPtR- 
visaya-antara vyaaang&t, due to occupation with another object, 

278. The recognition ( or knowledge ) of an object cannot take 
place when the mind is drawn away by another object. 

We cannot hear a sound by our ear when the mind conjoined with 
the eye is drawn away by a colour. This shows that knowledge is 
different from the intellect, and that the mind which is at unic in dimen¬ 
sion serves as an instrument for the production of knowledge. 

% y h JicwrargE n ^ i ^ \ c u 

si na> no •, nrWT^nT gati-abhAv&t, because of absence of motiom 

279. The intellect cannot be conjoined with the senses in* 
Succession because there is no motion in it. 

The mind which, according to the NaiySyikas, is-atomic in dimension' 
can move from one Bense-organ to another in succession to produce 
different kinds of knowledge. This is impossible m the case of the 
intellect which, according to the S&mkbyas, is not only permanent but 
also all-pervading and as such cannot change its place, that is, does not 
possess the tendency to be conjoined with the different sense-orgaas in 
succession. In fact there is only one internal sense called the mind, the 
other two bo- called internal senses—intellect ( Buddhi ) and Belf-aoa o e jfc . 

108 

BOOK HI, CHAPTER II. 

(Abamk&ra)—being superfluous It is not all-pervading, and knowledge 
is not its mode. Knowledge classified as visnal, olfactory, etc. is of 
different kinds whiob belong to the soul. 

T ?! ?f^lfvnTT^^T sphatika-anyatva-abhim&na-vat, like conceit that 
a crystal is other than what it is , 5r^r?^rfiwTff! tat-anya-tva-abhim&nah, 
the conceit of its being other than what it is. 

280. A conceit of difference is said to arise in the intellect in 
the same way as the appearance of diilerence in a crystal. 

As a single crystal appears to assume the different colours of different 
objects which are redacted on it, so the intellect though one appears, 
according to the S&mkhya, to be modified into different sorts of knowledge 
under the influence of different objects reflected on it through tho senses. 

sphatike, in the case of a crystal ; arRl api, even • 
apara-apara-utpatteh, of diverse manifestations one after another ; jjrfiac*;- 
kssnika-tv&t, being momentary ; 5HSf»fcit vyaktin&m, of the indivi¬ 
dual inaifestations , a-hetuh, no mark. 

281. It is said to be absurd even m the case of a crystal being 
replaced by newer and newer ones which grow up owing to all indivi¬ 
duals being momentary. 

The S&mkhya says that as a crystal seems to be modified by the 
colours which are reflected on it, so the intellect seems to be modified by 
the objects which are reflected on it through the senses. In reality there 
is, according to the S4mkhya, neither any modification of the crystal 
nor that of the intellect This theory has in the preceding aphorism 
been controverted by the Naiyayikas and is in the piesent aphorism 
opposed by the Buddhists According to the latter all things, including 
even onr body, are momentary. A thing which exists at the present 
moment grows up into another thing at the next moment so that tlieie 
is no wonder that m the couise of moments there should grow up crystals 
of different colours or intellects of different modes. Hence the conclusion 
of the Samkhyas that a crystal remains unaltered is, according to the 
Buddhists, untenable. 

u ^ i ^ \ u it 

THE NYiYA-SOTRAS. 

109 

myama-hetu-abh&v&t, owing to the absence of any 
reason for the rule (of growth and decay) , yath& daisanam, 

exactly as seen , WPWSfT abhyanu]fia, assent, 

282. Owing to the absence of any absolute rule we shall give 
our assent according to the nature of each occurrence. 

It is not tiue that in every case there are at each moment newer 
growths. Our body no doubt undergoes increase and decrease but a 
piece of stone or a crystal does not, so that the doctrine of growth applies 
to the first case but not to the second. Hence there is no general rule 
that a thing at the lapse of a moment should be replaced by another thing 
whioh grows up in its place. 

M t ^ i n 

«T na, no , 3f<*tfwflRTST6|iTTi!il'l^5'if! utpatti vinisa karana-upalabdheh, 
because of the perception of the cause of production and destruction. 

283. There is no absence of link as we perceive the cause of 
growth and decay. 

The growth of a thing is the increase of its parts while the decay 
is the decrease of them An ant-hill gradually increases m dimension 
before it attains its full growth while a pot decreases m dimension before 
it reaches its final decay. We never find an instance in which a thing 
decays without leaving any connecting link for another thing which 
grows in its place There is in fact no linkless growth or linkless decay. 

m i ^ i ^3 u 

ksira-vin&se, in the case oE the destruction of milk ; 9TO3PT- 
k&rana-anupalabdhi-vat, like the non-perception of the cause , 
dadhi-utpatti vat, like the production of cuid,W cha, and, 
tat-utpattih, its production. 

28 J*. The growth of newer crystals m the place of an old one is 
comparable, according to some, to the grow th of curd in the place of 
milk the cause of whose decay is not perceived. 

The Buddhist says that there are things which grow and decay 
without the gradual increase and decrease of their parts. Of such things 
we do not find the cause of the first growth ( origination ) and the last 
deoay (cessation), that is, there is no link between the thing which ceases 

110 

BOOK HI, CHAPTER II. 

and another thing which grows in its palce. The milk, for instance, 
ceases without leaving any connecting link for the curd which growB m 
its place. Snnilaily new crystals grow to take the place of an old one 
which decays without leaving any mark The crystal which exists at 
the present moment is not the same one that existed at the previous 
moment There is no connection whatsoever between them. 

II 3 i ^ I \2 II 

lin^atah, from the mark , giahsn&t, from perception ; w 

na, not, aijtr^sfsst: an-npalabdhih, non-perception. 

28 5 'J here is no non-perception of the cause of final decay as 
it is cognisable by its mark. 

The Naiyayikas say that it is not true that we do not perceive the 
final decay of the milk which is the cause of the first growth of the card. 
The mark attending the final decay of milk ( that is, the disappearance 
of sweet flavour ) is the cause of the destruction of the milk, and that 
attending the fiist growth of card (that is, the appearance of acid flavour) 
is the cause of ics production. So through the mark we really perceive 
the cause of decay of milk and growth of curd. But there is no such 
mark perceptible m the case of a crystal which at the lapse of a moment 
is said to be leplaced by another crystal of a different character. 

rf w-g: M i ^ i ^ u 

W na, not , payasah, of milk ; parinfiraa- 

guna antara-pr&durbh&v&t, owing to the appearance or evolntion of a 
different attribute or quality in virtue of transformation, 

286. There is, it is alleged, no destruction of the milk but only 
a change of its quality. 

The Samkhya says that the milk as a substance is not destroy¬ 
ed to produce another substance called card In reality a quality of 
the m Ik, viz sweet flavour, is changed into another quality, viz., acid 
flavour 

^ i ^ i \\ n 

sjrfffaTUf vyuha-antai &fc, from one set ( of causes ) , 
dravya-antara-utpatti-darsanam, obseivation of the production of another 

THE NYAyA-SCtRAS. 

lit 

substance ,pfirva-dravya-nivritteh, of tbe cessation of the 
previous substance , «nnrt«P^ anum&nam, inference. 

287. Seeing that a thing grows from another thing whose parts 
are disjoined, we infer that the latter thing is destroyed. 

Seeing that a thing grows after the component parts of another 
thing hare been disjoined, we infer that the latter thing has really been 
destroyed The card, for instance, is not produced until the component 
parts of the milk have been destroyed. This shows that the growth of 
curd follows the decay of milk. 

m i ^ i v® 11 

nfuq kvachit, in some cases , faRH®r$rTi!ITg'reK\J: vin&5a-k4rana-an- 
upalahdheh, from the non-perception of the cause of destruction , 
kva chit, in some cases , 9 cha, and , ?q3S^: upalabdheh, from perception; 
an-eka-antah, not-one-ended, uncertain. 

288 There will be an uncertainty of conclusion on the assum¬ 
ption that the cause of destruction is perceived in some cases and not 
perceived in others. 

In the case of a jar being produced out of a piece of clay you say 
yon perceive the cause of destruction of the clay and production of the 
jar, but in the case of the curd growing out of milk yon say that you do 
not perceive the cause of destruction of the milk and production of the curd. 
This sort of perception in certain cases and non-perception in others will 
lead to an uncertainty of conclusion. As a fact in every case there is 
perception of the cause of destruction Milk, for instance, is destroyed 
when there is the contact of an acid substance. 

U II 

^ na, not; sjsjjqitfuh indriya-arthayoh, of the sense and of theohject; 
3%**^ tat-vin4Se, on their destruction , 8?f<T api, also , jn&na- 

avasthanat, from the continuance of cognition. 

289. Knowledge belongs neither to the sense nor to the object 
because it continues even on the destruction thereof. 

If knowledge had been a quality of the sense, it could net continue 
after the sense had been destroyed. But knowledge in the form of memory 

112 

BOOK 111, CHAPTER II. 

is found actually to abide even, after the sense has perished. Hence the 
Bense is not the abode of knowledge Similarly it may be proved that 
knowledge does not abide in the object 

h w*: ii ^ i ^ i ^ it 

yugapat, simultaneously , ]fieya-an-upalabdheh, from 

the non-perception of the knowables , ^ cha, and , w na, not , in an a 

sah, of the mind. 

290. It does not also belong to the mind the existence of which 
is inferred from the knowables not being perceived simultaneously. 

As two or more things cannot be known (perceived) simultaneously, 
it is to be concluded that the mind which is an instrument of our know¬ 
ledge is atomic in dimension. If we supposed this mind t.o be the abode 
of knowledge we could not call it an instrument m the acquisition of the 
same , and knowledge as a quality of an atom would in that case be¬ 
come imperceptible. An atomic mind as the abode of our knowledge 
would stand moreover m the way of a yogi perceiving many things simul¬ 
taneously through many sensuous bodies formed by his magical power. 

tat, it, the objection ; acma-guna-tve, were (cognition) 

an attribute of the soul , wfq api, also , tulyam, the same. 

291. Even if knowledge were a quality of the soul it would, says 
some one, give rise to similar absurdities.. 

The objection stands thus:—If the soul which is all-pervading 
were the abode of knowledge, there would be the simultaneous perceptions 
of many things in virtue of different sense-organs coming in contact with 
the soul simultaneously. But two or more things are never perceived 
simultaneously : the soul cannot therefore be the abode of knowledge, 
that is, knowledge cannot be a quality of the soul 

» ndnyaih, with the senses ; manasah, of the mind ; 

sannikaisa-abh&v&t, owing to absence of contact or connec¬ 
tion , tat-an-utpattih, non-production of simultaneous cognitions. 

292. There is, we reply, non-production ofsimultaneons cognitions 
on account of the absence of contact of the mind with many sense- 
organs at a time.. 

THE NYiYA-SOTRAS. 

It3 

Tl.e Naiyayikas say that the soul cannot perceive an object unless 
the latter comes in contact with a sense which is conjoined with the 
mind. Though many objects can come m proximity with their corres¬ 
ponding senses simultaneously, the mind which is atomic m dimension 
can come in conjunction with only one sense at a time. Hence two or 
more tilings are not perceived simultaneously although the soul which 
perceives them is all-pervading. 

•T na, no , utpatti-karana-an-apades&t, owing to 

non-predication of cause of production 

293 This is held by some to be untenable as there is no ground 
for the production of knowledge. 

The objection stands thns:—It has been argued by the Naiy&yikas 
that there is absence of production of simultaneous cognitions on account 
of the lack of contact of the senses with the mind An opponent takes 
exception to the word “ production ” and says that knowledge cannot be 
said to be produced if it is regarded as a quality of the soul which is 
eternal. 

: vin&Sak-aiana-aii-npalabdheh, owing to non-per¬ 
ception of the cause of destruction , cha, and , avasthane, 

in the case of the existence (of cognition id the soul ), 
tat-nitya-tva-prasangah, implication of its eternality. 

294. If knowledge is supposed to abide in the soul there is the 
contingency of its being eternal as there is perceived no cause of its 
destiuctioa. 

Knowledge can never be destroyed if it is supposed to be a quality 
of the soul. A quality may be destroyed in two ways—(l) either by the 
destruction of its abode, or (2) by the production of an opposite quality in 
its place. In the case of knowledge neither of these is possible as the 
soul which is its abode is eternal and as we find no opposite qualify taking 
its place, Honce it follows that if knowledge is a quality of the soul it is 
eternal. But as knowledge is not eternal it is not a quality of the bouI. 

SffsRiresuitii; a-mtya-tva-grah&t, from the observation of non- 

15 

114 

BOOK 111, CHAIM’CK II. 

eternahty ; buddheh, of cognition , buddhi-antar&fc, from 

another cognition, vin&sah, destruction, Sabda-yafc, as in 

the case of sound 

295 Cognitions being found to be non-eternal there is, we reply, 
destruction of one cognition by another like that of a sound. 

We realize that cognition (knowledge) is not eternal when we 
observe that at one time there arises in us a certain kind of cognition 
(knowledge) and at the next time that cognition ( knowledge )-vanishes 
giving rise to another kind of cognition (knowledge). It has been asked 
how cognitions undergo destiuction. Our reply is 'that one cognition 
vanishes as soon as it is replaced by another cognition which is opposed 
to it just as a sound-wave is destroyed by another Bound-wave which takes 
its place. 

m 1 ^ 1 it 

jn&na-samaveta-iitma-pradeiSa-sannikarsfit, 
from contact with a certain part of the soul in which cognition (in the 
form of impression) inheres, U*K7: manasah of the mind; ^£eg?«r#: smriti- 
utpatteh, because of the production of recollection; W na, r.ot ; 
yugapat, simultaneous ; 3f<jRr; utpattih, piudaction. 

296. Since recollection (memory) is produced,according to some, 
by the conjunction of the mind with a certain part of the soul in which 
knowledge (irapre sion) inheres, there is no simultaneous production of 
many recollection. 

If knowledge be a quality of the soul there is the possibility of many 
recollections being produced simultaneously inasmuch as the many 
impressions deposited in our soul by our past perceptions are liable at once 
to be revived and developed into recollections by the mind whose contact 
with the soul always remains constant. Some say that there is no such 
possibility of simultaneousness because recollections are produced, accor¬ 
ding to them, by the mind coming in contact with particular parts of the 
soul in which particular impressions inhere. As the mind cannot come in 
contact with all parts of the soul simultaneously, the many impressions 
deposited in different parts of the soul are not revived and developed into 
recollections at ouce. 

w \ \ \ \ ^ w 

THE NYAYA-StiTRAS. 

115 

s* na, not; antah sarira-vritti-tv&t, because it baa 

its operation within the body , manasah, of the mind. 

297. This is, we reply, not so because it is m ithm the body that 
the mind has- its function.. 

It has been said in the preceding aphorism that recollections are 
produced by the mind coming in due order in conjunction with particular 
parts of the soul in which impressions mheie This is, according to the 
Naiyhyikas,-untenable because the mind cannot come in conjunction with 
the soul except in the body, and if tho conjunction takes place in the body 
then there remains the possibility of simultaneous lecollections. 

« 3 1 ^ \ n 

s&dhya-tvat, because it is the thing to be established ; sr&J: 
a-hetuh, not a mark. 

298. This is, some say, no reason because it requires to be 
proved.. 

The Naiyayikas say that the uund comes in conjunction with the 
soul only within the limit of the body. Some oppose this by saying that 
until they receive sufficient proof they cannot admit that tlie conjunc- 
fcion takes place only in tlie body 

sinaratahi of the person recollecting , STtfawTSThnw: sarfra- 
dharana-upapatteh, because of the fact' of his sustaining the body ; 
WTf?T*tai a-pratisedbah, nou-contradiction 

299. If? is, we reply, not unreasonable because a person is found" 
to sustain-his body even while he performs an act of recollection. 

If we suppose that a recollection is produced by the mind coming in 
conjunction with a particular part of the soul outside the body, we cannot 
account for the body being sustained during the time when the 'recollec¬ 
tion is performed. The body in order that it may be sustained requires 
an effort wbioh is supplied by the mind coming in conjunction with the 
soul. Now the-effort which arises from the conjunction is of two kinds, 
viz., (1) the effort for sustaining, and (2) that for impelling (setting in 
motion). The body will be devoid of the first kind of effort if we suppose 
the mind to wander away from it for conjunction, with the souL 

tie 

BOOK III, CHAPTER II 

sf na, no; tat, thia , anTgnfaeaE* hsu-gati-tvat, owing to swiftness, 
rpTSC manasah, of tlie mind 

300. This is, some say, not so because ihe mind moves 
swiftly. 

Some meet the objection raised in the preceding aphorism by saying 
that the mind while producing a recollection by its conjunction with the 
soul outside the body can, on account of its swift motion, come back at 
once to the body to pioduce the effort required for the sustenance of the 
same. 

* u ^i^° ii 

«T na, no, smarana-kala-aniyam&t, as there is no rule 

as to the time of recollection 

301. It is, Are repl}’, not so because there is no fixed rule as to 
the duration of recollection. 

The Naiyayikas oppose the view expressed in the foregoing aphorism 
on the ground that the mind, if it is to be conjoined with the soul outside 
the body, may take a prettj long time to produce a recollection there, 
so that it may not come back to the body with sufficient quickness to 
produce the effort required for the sustenance of it 

u u 

siTSnifrvmg-nSisraTfiT! atma-prerana-yab-richchha jfia-tA-bhili, in virtue 
of a direction of the soul, spontaneity or chance, and the characteristic 
of its being the knower, ■g cha, and, *T na, no, samyoga* 

Visesah, particular conjunction. 

302 There is no peculiar conjunction of the soul with the mind 
either in virtue of the former sending the latter in search of what it 
AAishe'i to recollect or through the latter being congmzant of what is to 
be recollected or through arbitrariness 

If we suppose the soul to send the mind to recollect a particular 
thing we encounter the absurdity of admitting that the soul already 
possesses the memory of what it is going to recollect. If on the other 
hand we suppose the mind to move out of its own accord for a particular 
recollection, we shall have to assume 4>hat the mind is the knower but in 
reality it is not so. We cannot even hold that the mind comes i n 
conjunction with the soul arbitrarily for in that case there will remain 
no order then as to the ooourrenoe of the objects of recollection 

THE NY AY A SCTRAS 

117 

^f^uifsT^ar otfpqi^i^.1 

j f 

y szmn*KU s rcT: vy&sakta-manasah, of a man whose mind is absorhed in 
something else; <?T^s^*T%sT p&da-vyatbanena, by the hurting of his foot, 
Bomyoga-visesena, with the particular conjunction; 
sam&nam, similar. 

303. This is, some say, parallel to the particular conjunction 
which occurs in a man who while rapt in mind hurts his foot. 

If a man while looking eagerly at dancing hurts his foot with a 
thorn, he feels pain because his mind comes instantly in conjunction 
with his soul at the foot which has been hurt. Similarly the peculiar 
conjunction referred to in the foregoing aphorism takes place, according 
to some, through the mind being cognizant of what is to be recollected. 

sRlWlfippf^Sfnwf pranidhftna-linga-4di-jn&n&n&m, of concentration 
and cognition of the marks, etc, 3Ug<l<13ll4t't&yugapat bhAvftt, owing to 
non-simultaneousneBS ; a-yugapat, non-eimultaneous ; 

smaranam, recollection. 

304. Becollections are not simultaneous owing to the non- 
simultaneousness of the efforts of attention, operations of stimuli, 
etc. 

A recollection is produced by the mind coming in conjunction with 
the soul in which impressions inhere. The product ; on of recollection 
also presupposes efforts of attention, operations of stimuli, etc. As theBe 
do not occur simultaneously there is no simultaneonsness of recollections. 

M i ^ i W » 

jnasya, of the knower ; ichchh&-dve$a-nimitta- 

tvat, because of their being caused by desire and aversion ; STTfarf'^rzfrj 
4rambha-mvrittyoh, of action and inaction 

305. Desire and aversion belong to the soul inasmuch as 
they are the causes of its doing an act or forbearing from doing 
the same. 

The S&mkhyas say that knowledge is a quality of the soul fPurusa) 
while desire, aversion, volition, pleasure and pain are the qualities of 

118 

BOOK III, CHAPTER II 

the internal sense (the mind) This is, according to the Naiy&yikas, 
unreasonable because a person does an act or forbear from doing it on 
account of a certain desiie for or aversion against the same The desire 
and aversion again are caused by the knowledge of pleasure and pain 
respectively. Hence it is established that knowledge, desire, aversion, 
volition, pleasure and pain have all of them a single abode, that is, 
they are the qualities of a single substance called the soul. 

ST^fc^TT^Tf^T: \\\\^\\ 

tat-lmga-tvat, because they are their marks , 
ichchlifi dvesayoh, of desire and aversion; piiLrthiva-adyesu, 

in res;ect of tho terrene, etc , aisrfMto; a-pratisedhah non-obsti uctton 

306. It cannot, some say, be denied that desire and aversion 
belong to the body inasmuch as they are indicated by activity and 
forbearance from activity. 

The Cli&rvakas say that activity and forbearance from activity are 
the marks respectively of desire and aversion which again are the effects 
of knowledge. Now the body which is made of earth, etc. is the abode 
(field) of activity and forbeaiance fiom activity. Hence it is also the 
abode of knowledge, desire, aversion, etc, 

H 3 I ^ I ^ U 

parasu-adi^u, in the axe, etc, arambha- 

nivritti-darsan&t, from the observation of action and inaction. 

307. This is, we reply, unreasonable because activity and for¬ 
bearance from activity are found in the axes and the like. 

Just as an axe, which is found sometimes to split a tree and at 
other times not to split it, is not a receptacle of knowledge, desire and 
aveision, so the body winch is made of eaith, etc. is not an abode of 
knowledge, etc., though we inay find activity and fotbearance from 
activity in it. 

RTOTT5ro4t g U ^ I ^ I || 

isrmifiroifl niyama-amyamau, regularity aud irregularity ; g tu, 
but , tat-visesakan, their distinguishing marks 

30S. The regularity and irregularity of possession demarcate 
the soul and matter. 

THE NYA7A-S0TRAS. 

119 

A material thing is by nature inactive but becomes endowed w th 
activity when it is moved by a conscious agent There is no such irregu¬ 
larity or uncertainty as to the possession of activity, etc by the soul. 
Knowledge, desire, aversion, etc abide m the soul through an intimate 
connection, while these belong to matter through a mediate connection. 
We cannot account for the function of recognition, etc. if we assume 
knowledge to abide in the material atoms a conglomeration of which 
forms the body. Those who suppose the body to be the seat of know¬ 
ledge cannot admit the efficacy of deserts and can offer no consolation 
to sufferers. 

q^rflitsesrrac yathokta-hetu-tvkfc, for the reasons already given; 
*Hta*5RTRI paratantryat, from subserviency; a-krita-abhy&- 

gam&t, from usurpation of the unearned , gcha, and, ua, not; mR?: 
manasah, of the mind. 

309. The mind is not the seat of knowledge on account of 
reasons already given, on account of its being subject to an agent and 
owing to its incapacity to reap the fruits of another’s deeds. 

The mind cannot be the seat of knowledge because it has already 
been shown in aphorism 1. 1. 10 that desire, aversion, volition, pleasure 
and pain are the marks of the soul. Had the mind been the abode of 
knowledge it could have come in contact with the objects of sensd inde¬ 
pendent of any agent. Since it cannot do so it is to be admitted to be a 
material thing serving the purpose of an instrument in the acquisition 
of knowledge. If you say that the mind itself is the agent yon will have 
to admit that it is not anatom but possessed of magnitude like the soul so 
that it can apprehend knowledge, etc. which are its qualities. In order 
to avoid the simultaneousness of many perceptions it will further be 
necessary to assume an internal sense of an atomic dimension like the 
mind as we understand it. These assumptions will lead you to accept in 
some shape the tenets of the Naiy&yikas. On the supposition of the mind 
(or body) being the seat of knowledge and consequently of merits and 
demerits, it will be possible for work done by a person not to produce 
its effects on him after death and it may even necessitate a person to 
■ suffer for work not done by him. Hence the mind is not the seat of 
knowledge, desire, aversion, volition, pleasure and pain. 

m t ^ i * 

120 

BOOK III, CHAPTER IT. 

panfie?4t, by exhaustion , qitiTOfirTRr. yatha ukta-hetu-upa- 

patteh, from the operation of the reasons already given , *3 cha, and. 

310. Knowledge, etc must be admitted to be qualities of the 
soul by the principle of exclusion and on account of arguments already 
adduced. 

Knowledge is a quality which inheres in a substance. That sub¬ 
stance is neither the body nor the sense nor the mind. It must therefore 
be the soul. The body cannot be the abode of knowledge because it is a 
material substance like a pot, cloth, etc. Knowledge cannot belong to the 
sense as the latter is an instrument like an axe Had the sense been the 
abode of knowledge there could not be any recollection of things which 
were experienced by the Bense before it was destroyed. If knowledge 
were a quality of the mind many perceptions could be simultaneous. 
But this is impossible. Hence the abode of knowledge is not the mind, 
but it is the soul which is permanent so that it can perceive a thing now 
as well as remember one perceived in the past. 

m i ^ i imi 

TOTof smarnam, recollection; g tu, but; WtTilCT: atmanah, of the 
aoul ; jna-svabh&vy&t, because ltB nature is to be the knower, 

311. Memory belongs to the soul which possesses the character 
of a*"knower.—43. 

The soul is competent to recollect a thing because it possesses the 
knowledge of the past, present and future. 

M 1 ^ 1 U 

pramdhaua- 

mbandha-abhyftsa lmga-laksana-s&dnSya parigraha-asraya-fisrita-samban- 
dha-4nantarya-viyoga-eka-k4rya-virodha-atisaya-pr&pti-vy&vadh&na-sukha- 
dnhkha-ichohh&-dvesa-bhaya-arthitva-kriy4-r4ga-dharma-adharma-niinit- 
tebhyah, from the causes of concentration, context, repetition, mark, cha¬ 
racteristic, similarity, relationship, container, contained, connectio n, 

THE Nr It A SftTRAS. 

121 

immediacy, separation, co-efficient, opposition, excess, acquisition, dis¬ 
tance, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, fear, entreaty, action, passion, 
merit and demerit. 

312. Memory is awakened by such causes as attention, con¬ 
text exercise, signs, marks, likeness, possession, relation of re¬ 
fine and refugee, immediate subsequency, separation, similar em¬ 
ployment, opposition, excess, receipt, intervention, pleasure and 
pam, desire and aversion, fear, entreaty, action, affection and merit 
and demerit.- 

Attention —enables ns to fix the mind on one object by checking it 
from wandering away to any other object. 

Context —is the connection of subjects such as proof, that which 
is to be proved, etc. 

Exercise —is the constant repetition which confirms an impression. 

Signs —may be (1) connected, (2) inseparable (intimate), (3) correla- 
ted or (4) opposite, e g , smoke is a sign of fire with which it is 
connected, horn is a sign of a cow from which it is inseparable 
an arm is a sign of a leg with which it is correlated;" and the 
non-existent is a sign of the existent by the relation of opposi-/ 
tion. 

Mark —a mark on the body of a horse awakens the memory of the 
stable in which it was kept. 

Likeness —as the image of Devadatta drawn on a^board reminds ns 
of the real person. 

Possession —such as a property awakens the memory of the owner 
and vice versa. 

Refuge and refugee —such as a king and his attendants. 

Immediate subsequency —as sprinkling the rice and pounding it in a 
wooden mortar. 

Separation —as of husband and wife. 

Similar employment —as of fellow-disciples. 

Opposition —as between a snake and ichneumon. 

Excess —awakening the memory of that whidh exceeded. 

Receipt —reminding us of one from whom something has been or 
will be received. 

Intervention —such as a sheath reminding us of the sword, 

16 

122 

BOOK III, CH APT ELI II 

• Pleasure and pain —reminding us of that which caused them 

Desire and aversion —reminding us of one whom we liked or hated. 

Fear —reminding us of that which caused it, eg, death. 

Entreaty —reminding us of that which was wanted or prayed 
for 

Action —such as a chariot reminding us of the chauoteer. 

Affection —as recollecting a son or wife. 

Merit and demerit —through which there is recollection of the causes 
of joy and sorrow experienced in a previous life. 

n 3 i ^ i h 

karma-anavasth&vi-grahan&t, beoause of the cogni¬ 
sance of momentary events by action 

313. Knowledge perishes instantly because all actions are 
found to be transitory. 

Does knowledge perish instantly like a sound or does it continue 
like a pot ? Knowledge perishes as soon as it is produced in virtue of its 
being an action. In analysing an action, Bitch as the falling of an arrow, 
•we find that the arrow undergoes a series of movements m the course of 
its falling to the ground. Similarly m examining an act of knowledge 
we find that a aeries of steps are undergone by the act in the course of its 
production. These steps perish one after another in due succession. 
Hence it is clear that knowledge is transitory. If knowledge were per¬ 
manent we could say, “I am preceiving a pot,” even after the pot has 
been removed from our sight Since we cannot use such an expression 
we must admit that knowledge is not permanent but transitory. 

wsuTBUfwiwrewiiw?sng[ ^qrsqws- 

sifwsrat n ? i * i n 

a-vy akta-grahanam, cognition of the indistinct, w»raWifV' 

an avasth&yi-tv&t, being unendnnng s Rrw?fi«Tra vidyut-slmp&te, on 
the flash of lightning ; rfipa-avyakta-grahana-vat, like 

the indistinct cognition of form. 

314. An opponent fears that if knowledge were transitory no 
object could be known distinctly just as there.is no distinct apprehen¬ 
sion of colour during a flash of light nin g. 

THE NYIyA-SOtR’AS. 

123 

The fear of the opponent arises thus :—If knowledge were transitory 
it coaid not at a moment apprehend an object in its entirety, that is, could 
not apprehend the infinite number of its properties at once Hence the 
object could only be know-n indistinctly. As a fact, however, we can 
know things distinctly Hence knowledge is not transitory. 

u 3 i $ 1 n 

tjjirafnnq hetu npadan&t, from' the reason advanced, 
pratiseddhavya-abhyanujnA, admission of what is sought to be disproved. 

315.. From the argument advanced you have, we reply, to admit 
that which you went to disprove. 

In the previous aphorism the opponent feared that if knowledge 
were transitory no object coaid be- apprehended distinctly The Naij&- 
yika removes the fear by saying that objects are apprehended indistinct¬ 
ly not owing to the transitorinesS' of knowledge but on account of our 
apprehending only their general qualities. The knowledge which takes 
cognizance of objects as possessed of both the general and special qua 
lities is distinct but that which concerns itself only with the general 
qualities is indistinct. 

The aphorism may be explained in another way:—The very illustra¬ 
tion cited by you, viz , that there is distinct apprehension during a flash 
of lightning leads yon to admit the transitoriness of knowledge which 
you went to disprove. 

ftTWIBmOTil pradipa-archih-santati-abhivyakta- 
grahana-vat, like the .apprehension of that which is illuminated by the 
stream of the rays of the lamp , tat-grahanam, distinct appre¬ 

hension. 

316.. Although knowledge is transitory there is distinct appre¬ 
hension through it as there is one through the series .of momentary 
rays of a lamp. 

Though the series of rays emitted by a lamp are transitory the 
apprehension through them is distinct. Similarly though our knowledge 
is transitory there is no obstacle to oar apprehension being distinct. 

$5$ 11 \ i ^ i 11 

dravye, in a substance, sva-puna-paraeuijn- 

* Vi haspati read-3 a «i to show that the opponent’s appieheneion. i*- 
nnfounded. 

124 

BOOK III, CHAPTER II. 

upalabdheh, from the perception of its own as well as of other attributes, 
(ftras samkayah, doubt. 

317. From our perceiving in a substance the qualities of 
itself as -well as of others there arises, says an opponent, a doubt as 
to whether the knowledge perceived in our body is a quality of 
its own. 

In water we perceive liquidity which is one of its natural qualities 
as well as warmth which is an adventitious one. One may therefore ask 
as to whether the knowledge perceived m our body iB a natural quality 
of the latter or is a mere adventitious one 

qra raftfa ff n^ i * i v* n 

y&vat-karira-bh&vi-tv&t, because (form, etc.) endnre 
aB long as the body does; rllpa.&din&tn, of form, etc. 

318. [Knowledge is not a natural quality of the body be¬ 
cause it furnishes a contrast to] colour, etc. which as natural qua¬ 
lities of the body do exist as long as the latter continues. 

Knowledge, according to the Naiy&yika, is not a natnral quality of 
the body because it may not continue quite sb long aa the body does. 
But such is not the case with colour, etc. which as natural qualities of 
the body do always exist with it. Hence knowledge is merely an adven¬ 
titious quality of the body. 

rc m 1 * ' * 

W na, no; UTOJigiDTfrf?irTW: p&ka-ja-guna-antarautpatteh, ^because of 
the production of other attributes caused by the action of heat. 

319. It is, says an opponent, not so because other q ua lities 
produced by maturation do arise. 

It has been stated that a substance and its natural qualities co-exist 
with each other and that knowledge not being always co-existent with the 
body is not a natural quality of the latter An opponent in order to main¬ 
tain that a substance and its natural qualities are not necessarily co¬ 
existent cites the instance of a jar whose natural colour is blue but 
which assumes a red colour through maturation in fire. 

srafFfjfaf: TOUMiwEflta: nv^ircn 

THE NYlYA-SftTRAS. 

125 

pratidvandvi siddheh, fr >m the production of opposites, 
«ri*5»r5Tm pakajanam, in the case of attiibutes caused by the action of 
heat; a-pratisedliah, non-contradiction 

320. This is, we reply, no opposition becauses maturation occurs 
if there is production of opposite qualities. 

A jar which was blue may through maturation become red but it 
is never totally deprived of colour which is its natural quality. But a 
body (dead) may be totally devoid of knowledge which is therefore not a 
natural quality of it In the case of maturation moreover a quality is 
replaced by an opposite one with which it cannot co-abide, e. g, the 
blueness of a jar may through maturation assume redness but cannot co- 
abide with the same. In the case of the body however knowledge is not 
replaced by an opposite quality. Henoe knowledge is not a natural qua¬ 
lity of the body. 

scrfosnfcsrm m i ^ t n 

sarira-vy&pi-tvAt, because it pervades the body 

321. [Knowledge, says an opponent, is a natural quality] be¬ 
cause it pervades the whole body. 

The opponent tries to prove that knowledge is a natural quality of 
the body because it pervades, according to him, the whole body and 
the numerous parts of it. But this, according to the ,Naiy&yika, is un¬ 
reasonable as it leads to the assumption of numerous seats of knowledge, 
that is, souls in the body destructive of all order and system as to the 
feeling of pleasure, pain, etc. 

.„... r: m i if mt« 

wna, no ; keia-nakha-Adisu, in the hair, nails, etc; «tgqv«4i 

an-npalabdheh, because of non-perception. 

322. [Knowledge does not pervade the whole body] as it is not 
found in the hair, nails, etc. 

Knowledge does not pervade tho whole body, e. g , it is not found 
in the hair, nails, etc. It cannot therefore be a natural quality of the 
body. 

This aphorism may also be explained as follows:— 

It is not true that a substance should be entirely pervaded by it# 
natural qualities. Colour, for instance, i'b a natural quality of the body 
but it does not pervade the hair, nails, etc. 

126 

BOOK III, CHAPTEE II. 

?^sqtfs?r*q , l^ tvak-paryanta-tv&t, because of ending with the skin, 
SBCfaPt Saifrasya, of the body, kega nakha-AdiBu, in the hair, 

nails, etc , STJT4*I: a-prasangah, non-following. 

323. The body being bounded by touch (cuticle) there is, says 
an opponent, no possibbty of knowledge abiding in the hair, 
nails, etc. 

The hair, nails, etc. are not, according to the opponent, part of the 
body as they are not bounded by touch (cuticle). Knowledge oannot 
consequently abide in them * 

The aphorism may also be interpreted as- follows r— 

The body being bounded by touch (cuticle) there is no possibility of 
colour abiding in the hair, nails, etc. 

u ^ 1 ^ i u 

qTtft’potsrHlfct garira guna-vaidharmyftt, from dissimilarity to attri¬ 
butes of the body 

324. Knowledge, we reply, is not a quality of the body because 
of its difference from the well-known qualities of the same. 

The Naij ftyika says:— 

The qualities of the body are of two kinds, viz: (1) those which are 
cognised by the external senses e g , colour, and (2) those which are not 
cognised by tlwra r e g , gravity. Knowledge-does not come under either 
of the categories as it is nncognizable by the external senses and is at 
the same time cognizable on account of our being aware of the same. 

The aphorism may also be explained as follows t-— 

The qualities of the body are cognized by the external BenseB but 
knowledge is not bo cognized. Consequently knowledge cannot be a 
quality of the body. 

5* U 3 I * l 11 

W iu, no , 1 upa-&dinain, of form, etc , itara-itara- 

vaidhavmy&t, from dissimilarity of one to- another. 

325‘. Ihis is, says the opponent not so because of the mutual 
difference in character of the colour, etc. 

THE NT AY A-SOTRAS. 

127 

The opponent argues :— 

If yon say that knowledge is not a quality of the body because it 
differs in character from othei well-known qualities of the same, I should 
say that the well-known qualities themselves diffet from each other, e g. t 
the colour is cognized by the eye bnt the touch is not. You cannot on 
this ground say that colour is a quality of the body but touch is not. 

m i ^ i hh 11 

aindnyaka-tv&t, from being sensible; rffpa- 

&dinH.n, of form, etc , snrfar^t*. a-jiratisedhah, non-contradictior.. 

326. There is, we reply, no objection to colour, etc. being qua¬ 
lities of the body because these are cognized by senses. 

The colour, etc. may differ from touch, etc. m respect of certain 
aspect of their character but they all agree in one respect, viz , that they 
are all cogmsable’by one or another of the external senses. But know¬ 
ledge is not so cognized and cannot therefore be a qualify of the body. 

m i ^ i ^ u 

jnftna-avaugajiady&t, from non-sunultaneity of cognitions; 
ekam, one , jt-t: manat, mind 

327. The mind is one on account of the non-simultneousness of 
cognitions. 

If there were more minds than one, they could come in contact with 
many senses at a time si that many cogmt' ois C'iu!d be produced simul¬ 
taneously As many cognitions are never produced at once the mind 
must be admitted to be one. 

^ w \ \ * \ n 

w na, no, yugapat, simultaneously, an-eka- 

kriy& upalabdheh, from the perception of more than one action or 
change - 

328. It is, says an opponent, not so because we do cognize many 
acts simultaneously. 

The objection stands thus:-A certain teacher while walking on 
a road holds a waterpot in his hand Hearing wild sounds he, out of fear, 
looks at the road, recites a sacred text and thinks of the nearest place 

BOOK. Ill, CHA.PTE& It. 

of safety. The teacher is supposed in this instance to perform visual 
perception, auditory perception, recollection, etc., simultaneously. Thu 
would be impossible if there were only one mind. 

U 3 I *1^11 

BI5iraRf^7^T«T^t al&ta-chakra-dars ma-vat, like the observation of a 
circle of fire caused by a revolving firebrand ; cT^'755 r ®v=fs tat-upalabdhih, 
their perception; Mu-sanohfi &t, from rapid movement. 

329. The appearance of simultaneous ness is, we reply, due to the 
mind coming in contact with different senses in rapid succession like 
the appearance of a circle of firebrand. 

Just as a firebrand while whirling quickly appears to form a conti¬ 
nuous circle, so the mind moving from one sense to another in rapid 
succession appears to come in contact with them simultaneously. Hence 
the cognitions produced by the contact appear to the simultaneous 
though in reality they are successive. 

u ^ l * i ii 

yathh-ukta-hetu-tv&t, from the reasons already stated, 9 
cha, and ; woj: anuh, atomic. 

330 And on account of the aforesaid reasons the mind is an 

atom. 

If the mind were possessed of magnitude it could come in contact 
with many senses at a tune so that many cognitions could take place 
simultaneously. Since this has been found to be impossible the mind 
iB an atom 

II \ \ ^ \ \o || 

pfirva-krita-phala-anubandh&t, following as the 
fruit of acts previously done , tat-utpattih, its production. 

331. The body is produced as the fruit of our previous deeds 
(deserts). 

Our present body has been made up of elements endowed with the 
fruits of merit and demerit of our previous lives. 

n \ i ^ i ^ n 

bhfitebhyah, from the elements ; mfirti-upad&na- 

vat, like the formation of bodies, tat-up&danam, its production. 

THE NYAYA-SOtRAS. 

129 

332. The formation of our body of elements, says an opponent* 
resembles that of a statue of stone, etc. 

The objection stands thus:—Just as a statue is formed of stone, 
clay, etc., which are devoid of deserts, our body has been made up of 
elements which are not endowed with the fruits of our previous merits and 
demerits. 

•r na, no ; s&dhya-satna-tv&t, because this is the same as 

the thing to be established. 

333. It is, we reply, not so because the statement requires 

proof. 

To prove that our body is formed of elements which are devoid of 
.deserts, the opponent cites the instance of a statue made up of clay or 
Btone, which is supposed to bear no oonnection whatsoever with deserts. 
The Naiy&yika replies that the very example cited requires to be verified 
for clay,etc. are made of atoms which have actually a reference to deserts 
as they comport themselves in such a way as to work out the designs of 
Retributive Justice. 

II \ \ ^ I ^ II 

W na, no; utpatti-nimitta-tv&t, because of their being 

the conditions of production; JTraiPrah m&t&-pitroh, of the blood and 
the seed. 

33-4. Not so because father and mother are the cause of its 
production. 

The formation of our body cannot be compared to that of a clay* 
statue because the body owes its origin to the sperm and blood of our 
father and mother while the statue is produced without any seed at all. 

rWTfK** II ^ I ^ I II 

a*IT tath&, so , tngTTO &h&rasya, of the food. 

335. So too eating is a cause. 

The food and drink taken by the mother turns into blood which 
develops the embryo (made up of the sperm of the father) through the 
various stages of formation of the arbuda (a long round maBs), mdmsa-peit 

17 

130 

BOOK III, CHAPTER II. 

(a piece of flesh), halala (a round lump), kandard (sinewB), sirah (head), 
■pdni (hands), pdda (legs), etc. Eating rs therefore a cause of production 
of our body but not of a clay-statue. 

irr^T M 1 ^ I V* U 

jn?TT piaptau, in the case of union , ^ cha, and ; a-myam&t, 

because there is no uniformity 

336. And there is desert beca se of uncertainty even in the 
case of uni' d. 

All unions between husband and wife are not followed by the produc¬ 
tion of a child (body). Hence we must acknowledge the desert of the 
child to be a co-operative cause of its birth 

scr^r i qf%THmT!^ 

sntffoqfarsifflTrsra sarira-utpatti-mmitta-vat, as it is the condition of 
the production of the body , ^iibcqrTtftfirw samyoga-utpatti-nimittam, 
condition of the production of (generative) union , qnf karma, desert. 

337 Desert is the cause not onl\ of the production of the body 
hut also of its conjunction with a soul. 

Just as the earth, etc , independent of a person’s desert, are unable 
to produce his body, so the body itself as a seat of particular pleasures 
and pains is unable to be connected with u soul without the intervention 
of the desert of the latter. 

1 3 I II 

H^etena, by this, a-niyainah, absence of uniformity; jr?gqi: 

prati-uktah, answered 

338. By this the charge against inequality is answered. 

Some persona are found to possess a healthy body while others an 
unhealthy one, a certain body is beautiful while another ugly. This 
inequality in the formation of the body is due to the desert acquired by 
the persons m their previous lives. 

The aphorism may also be interpreted as follows;— 

338 By this the charge against uncertainty is answered. 

It i3 dne entirely to the interference of the desert that the union 
between husband and wife is not always followed by the production of a 
child (body). 

THE NYAYA S&TRaS. 

i3r 

gsi<=egpregtm5f styles 

g?5t tat, that, Wf[Eaifft3*Jt adr.sta kilritam, caused by adr.pta ; 
iti chet, should you say , ga: pnn..hv again , fJcSTSTU: tat prasaiigah its impli¬ 
cation ; arrgif apavarge, in the case of release 

339. If the the body was attached to a soul only to remove the 
inexperie .ce of the latter, then the same inexperience would recur 
after the s ml had been emancipated (released). 

An opponent says that there is no necessity for admitting the desert 
and that the body which is made up of elements is connected with a Bool 
only to enable the latter to experience objects and realize its distinction 
from matter (prakriti) As soon as the soul satisfies itself by the ex¬ 
perience and attains emancipation (release) it is separated from the body 
for ever The Naiy&yika asks: “ Why is not the sonl, even after emanoipa- 
ion (releasa), again connected with a body to regain its experiential 
power?" Since the opponent does not admit desert there ib nothing 
else to stop the connection. 

It ^1^11 

inanah-kartna mu itta tvat, from its being caused by 
the action of t le mind , w cha, and, samyoga-an-nchchhedah, 

H'On-termination of conjunction. 

340 And there tv ill be no cessation of the conjunction if it is 
caused by the desert of the mind. 

Those who maintain that the desert is a quality of the mind cannot 
Explain why there ahould at all be a separatum of the body from the 
mind which is eternal Tf it is saul tiiat the very desert which connected 
the body with the mind does also separate it therefrom, we shall be 
constrained to admit an absurd conedus on that one and the same thing 
is the cause of life and death. 

3mnTTljqq=i: U ^ ^ I It 

: nitya-tva-prasangah, implication of eternabty ; V cha> 
and, prstyana-an upapattoh from non proof of departure. 

341. Owing to there being no reason for destruction we should- 
find the body to be eternal. 

If the body is supposed to be produced from elements independent 
of deserts, we should not find anything the absence of which will caueu 

BOOK HI, CHAPTER II. 

1&2 

its destruction. In the event of the destruction being arbitrary, there will 
be no fixed cause to effect emancipation or rebirth thereafter as the 
elements will always remain the same. 

ii ^ i ^ i *\ ii 

wgg3 W arBr?g?grgtI anu-sykma-tk-mtya-tva-vat, like the eternality of 
the darkness of the atom; qsnt etat, this ; syht, may be. 

342. The disappearance of the body in emancipation (release) 
is, according to an opponent, eternal like the blackness of an 
atom. 

The opponent says:—Just as the blackness of an atom suppressed 
by redness through contact with fire does not reappear, eo the body which 
has once attained emancipation (release) will not reappear. 

M I ^ I H 

IT na, no; a-kyita-abhyAgama-prasang&t, from impli¬ 

cation of the acquisition of the unearned. 

343. This is, we reply, not so because it would lead us to admit 
what was undemonstrable. 

The argument employed in the previous aphorism is, according to 
the NaiyAyika, futile for it cannot be proved that the blackness of an 
atom is suppressed by redness through contact with fire, for it ie possible 
that the blackness is altogether destroyed. 

The aphorism may also be interpreted as follows 

This is, we reply, not so, because it would lead ub to''acknowledge 
the consequence of actions not done by us. 

Unless we acknowledge deserts there will be no principle governing 
he enjoyment of pleasure and suffering of pain. The absence of such a 
principle will be repugnant to all evidences—perception, inference and 
scripture. 

THE NYAYA-SOtRAS. 

13 ?, 

Book IV.—Chapter I. 

W $ \ \ I \ « 

pravrittih, activity , yathA-uktA, as explained. 

344. Activity, as it is, has been explained. 

The definition of activity is to be found in aphorism 1-1-17. 

*raT ^TT: II 5M ^ I ^ II 

g«n tathA, similarly; ^TT: dosAh, faults. 

345. So the faults. 

The definition of faults haB been given in aphorism 1-1-18. The 
faults which co-abide with intellect in the soul are caused bv activity, 
produce rebirths and do not end until the attainment of final release 
(apavarga). 

n » i \ i * « 

tat-trai-rASyam, thoir three foldnen«; 
rAga-dvega-moha-artha-antara-bliAvAb, according to the differences of 
affection, aversion, and stupidity, or attraction, ropnlsion and eon* 
fusion. 

346. The faults are divisible in three groups, as all of them are 
included in affection, aversion and stupidity. 

The faults are divided in three groups, viz., affection, aversion fin<l 
stupidity. Affection includes Inst, avarice, avidity and covetousness. 
Aversion includes anger, envy, malignity, hatted and implacability. 
Stupidity includes misapprehension, suspicion, arrogance and careless* 
ness. 

U £ I ^ * SMI 

m ta, no ; elra-prati-anlha-biAiat, beeatj*® they are 

only the opposites of the »ame thir.g, rjaw.e.y »fu© hr. on fed go, 

347. It i 3 , born'i say, not so, because tbey &/<s the opjxseiis# ©f 
one tingle thing. 

The ebjeetieo stands th ns:—There is ce distinction between 
affection, a version and stupidity, a* all of them are dmtruetihb by ms 
single thing, vii tf perfect knowledge. The three, in m far as they are 
destructible by one single thing/ are &£ * Uniterm ehameter. 

184 

BOOK IV, CHA.PTEK I. 

im ^ i u 

•sfiWTrat vyabhieh&r&t, on aocounfc of erring; *r|g: a-hetuh, not 
a mark. 

348. This reason, we reply, is not good, because it is 
erratic. 

To prove that there is no distinction between affection, aversion and 
stupidity, the opponent has advanced the reason that all the three are 
destructible by one single thing. This reason is declared by the N&iya. 
yika to be erratic, because it does not apply to all cases, e. g , the bine, 
black, green, yellow, brown and other colours, although they afe different 
from one another, are destructible by one Bingle thing, viz , contact with, 
fire. 

iNf *TTf: U 1? I \ I ^ II 

^qf tes&m, among them ; itl$t mohah, stupidity, confusion ; 
p&piyan the worst, W na, not, a-mudhasya, of the non stnpid; 

itara utpatteli, because of the production of the other two. 

349. Of the three, stupidity is the worst, because in the 
case of a person who is not stupid, the other two do not come into 
existence. 

There are three faults, viz, affection, aversion and stupidity, of 
which the last is the worst, because it is only a stupid person who may 
be influenced by affection and aversion. 

nimitta-naimittika-bh&v&t, owing to the relation 
of cause and effert , aitlia antaia bli&vih, condition of being 

a different object, dosibhyab, from faults. 

350. There is then, says an opponent, a diffe"ence between 
stupidity and other faults owing to their interrelation of cause and 
effect. 

The opponent argues as follows:—.Since stupidity is the cause of 
the other two faults, it must be different from them. In fact there cannot 
be the relation of cause and effect between two things which are not 
different from each other, 

THE NYiYA-SttTRAS, 

rss 

* II $ [ \ \ ^ || 

>1 na, no •, doga-laksana-avarodh&t, from inclusion by 

the definition of fault, ifrfttr inohasya, of stupidily, 

351. It is, we reply, not so, because faults as already defined' 
Include stupidity. 

Stupidity is indeed a fault because it is homogeneous with or 
possesses the character of the same as defined in aphorism 1-1-18. 

wrT#rfTf%%Tqq^^f \m\m 

ftftrw^firfwtnnws nimitta-naimittika-uppapatteb. from the relation 
of cause and effect; W cha, and ; gmn^lsist tulya-]fitiy&nftm, of homo* 
geneous things, sjufartej; a-pratifedhah, non-contradiction, 

352. And there is, we reply, no prohibition for homogeneous 
things to stand in the relation of cause and effect. 

It is not proper to exclude stupidity from the faults on the mere 
ground that they stand to each other in the relation of cause and effeqjj. 
In fact the homogeneous things such as two substances or two qualities 
may stand to each other in the relation of cause and effect, e g., in thef 
case of a jar being produced from its two halves we notice the relation 
of cause and effect between the jar aud the halves which are homogeneous 
with each other. 

SncWSrcSTri* 9rWTSff%l|: II ? m r 11 

Atma-nitya-tve, the soul being eternal pretyao 

bh&va-siddhih, proof of re-birth, of existence after passing away. 

353. Transmigration is possible if the soul is eternal. 

Transmigration defined m ) 1-19 belongs to the eoul and not to 
the body. The series of births and deaths included in it is possible 
only if the soul is eternal. If the soul were destructible, it wonld meet 
with two unexpected chances, viz , destruction of actions done by it 
(krita-h&ni) and suffering from actions not done by it (akrit&bhy&gama)."! 

jrfq^JTWRqTrl » 5? \ \ I XI « , 

vyakt&t, from the manifested , «PS5T*irH vyakt&n&m, of th» 
manifested, sragurtnaqigt pratyak§a-prainanyat, from the authority of 
perception. 

136 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER t. 

35 4s. There is evidence of perception as to the production of the 
distinct from the distinct. 

It is found that jars, ate , which are distinct, ara produced from 
earth, etc., which are also distinct. Similarly our body ia produced from 
the elements. 

h u » i x i ^ « 

*T na, no; wiRf ghatat, from the pot; wZlfsr^Tr: ghata-a-nispattefc 
from the non-production of the pot. 

355. It is, some say, not so, because ajar is not produced from 
another jar. 

The objection stands thus:—You cannot Bay that there is the 
production of a distinct thing from another distinct thing, e. g., a jar is 
not produced from another jar. 

U tfl ^ I II 

vyaktat, from the manifested, i.e earth 5 ghata* 

nispatteh, from the production of the pot j a-pratigedhah, non¬ 

contradiction. 

356. There is, we reply, no prohibition for a jar being produced 
from a distinct thing. 

A jar may not be produced from another jar but it is certainly 
produced from another distinct thing, viz., from its bowl-shaped halves. 
There is therefore no bar against the production of the distinct from the 
distinct. 

11 v 1 ^ 1 \n 

srorant abhav&t, from non existence ; bh&va ntpattih, pro¬ 
duction of existence j w na, no, an-upamridya, withont destroying; 

STr^rhm pr4durbh4v4t, as there is production. 

357. Some say that entity arises from non-entity, as there is no 
manifestation unless there has been destruction. 

A sprout cannot come into existence, unless the seed from which it 
comes has been destroyed. This Bhows that there is no manifestation 
of effect withont the destruction of its cause. 

m $ 1 \ i xn 11 

■ THE NYAyA-SOtRAS. 

137 

«miani vy&gh&t&t, on account of obstruction, inconsistency ; 
a-prayogah, non-application of the argument. 

368. It is, we reply, not so, because such an expression, incon¬ 
sistent as it is, cannot be employed 

To say that a thing comes into existence by destroying another 
thing which is its cause, is a contradiction in terms, for if that which, 
according to you, destroys the cause and takes the place thereof,waB not 
existent prior to the destruction, then it cannot be Baid to be a destroyer, 
and if it existed prior to the cause, then it cannot be said to come into 
existence on the destruction thereof. 

n » \ \ i ^ u J 

t| na, not ; atita an&gatayolj, to the past and the future; 

k&raka-Sabda-prayog&t, from application of the word doer. 

359. There is, says the objector, no inconsistency, because 
terms expressive of action are figuratively applied to the past and 
foture. 

The objector says as follows :—There is no impropriety in the 
statement that a thing oomes into existence by destroying another thing 
which is its cause, for terms expressive of action are figuratively enaployed 
to denote that which is not existent now but which existed in the past or 
will exist in the future, e. g-, he congratulates himself on the son that is 
to be born. In the sentence “a sprout comes into existence by destroying 
its cause” —the term expressive of destruction is figuratively applied to 
the sprout that will come into existence in the future. 

?! w 2 \ \ i n 

■T na, no , vinastebhyah, from what has been destroyed; 

' a-ni$patteh, as there is no production. 

360. It is, we reply, not so because nothing is produced from 
things destroyed. 

A sprout doeB not spring from a seed already destroyed. Hence 
we can lay down the general rule that entity does not arise from non¬ 
entity. 

» 8 i ^ 11 

* 18 

138 

BOOK IV, CU APTi® I, 

krama-nirdei4t, from the declaration of order or proces- 
aion i MufyteT i a-pratisedhahi, non-contradiction. 

361. There is no objection if destruction is pointed out only as 
a step in the processes of manifestation. 

In connection with earth, water, heat, eto,, a seed undergoes destruc¬ 
tion of its old structure and is endowed with a new structure A sprout 
cannot grow from a seed, unless the old structure of seed is destroyed 
and a new stincture is formed It is m this sense allowable to say that 
manifestation is preceded by destruction This does not preclude a Beed 
from being the cause of a sprout But we do not admit an unqualified 
assertion that pioduction springs from destruction or entity arises from 
non-entity. 

to n a \ \ \ u 

isvarah, the loid , k4ianam, cause , 

pnrusa-karma-&-phalya-darsan4t, from Beeing the failure of the acts 
of man. 

362. God, sayB some one, is the sole cause of fruits, because 
marPs acts are found occasionally to be unattended by them. 

Seeing that man doeB not often attain Buccess proportionate to his 
exertions, some one infers that tuese are entirely subservient to God who 
alone can provide them with fruits. 

*T na, no , gsTOWT?*T(% puru§a-kama-abh4ve, in the absence of the 
act of man ; qj^ifbwrd: phala-a-nispatteh, because of non-production of 
fruit. 

363. This is, some are afraid, not so, because in the absence 
of man’s acts there is no production of fruits. 

The fear referred to arises thus:—If God were the only source 
of fruits, man could atcain them even without any exertions. 

tat-k4rita-tv4fc, from their being caused to arise by him • 
sttfjs a-hetuh, not a cause. 

THE NYAYA-SGtBAS. 

I3& 

364. Since fruits are awarded by God, man’s acts, we conclude, 
are not the sole cause thereof. 

, Man performs acts which are endowed with fruits by God. The 
acts become fruitless without His grace. Hence it iB not true that man's 
acts produce fruits by themselves 

God is a soul specially endowed with qualities. He is freed from 
piisapprehension, carelessness, etc , and is enriched with merit, knowledge 
SfUd concentration. He possesses eight supernatural powers (snch as the 
power of becoming as small as an atom) which are the consequenoeof His 
merit and concentration His merit, which conforms to His will, produces 
merit and demerit m each person and sets the earth and other elements 
in action. God is, as it were, the father of all beings Who can 
demonstrate the existence of Him who transcends the evidences of percep¬ 
tion, inference and scripture ? 

¥TT^trtrr%: 

a-mmitta-tah, from no cause , bhava-utpattih, 

production of existence or entity , kantakataiksnya-' 

&di-dai6auat, from the observation of the sharpness of a thorn, and the 
like. 

365. From an. observation of the sharpness of thorn, etc., some 
say that entities are produced from no cause. 

The objectors argue as follows;—Tlirnns are by nature sharp, hills- 
beautiful, and stones smooth. None has made them so. Similarly on# 
bodies, etc , are fortuitous effects which did not spring from a cause, that 
is, were not made by God- 

r sTf^f^TTf^WTr^n^rTRmTTrr: im 11 ^ n 

srfwfnwF*tftiW?3rac a-nunitta-mmitta-tv&t, being caused by no-cause ; 
*1 n-a, not , arfftflTWrU a-nnmfrta-tah, from no cause. 

366. Entities cannot be said to be produced from no-cause, be¬ 
cause the no-cause is, according to some, the cause of the production. 

An opponent has said that entities are produced from no-cause. 
Some critics point out that the use of the fifth case-affix 4n connection. 
With no-oause indicates that it is the cause. 

^rfimifwiiiTt^K«tb^R*nsn?irra%«K n s? i \ i ^8 a 

140 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER t. 

s nimitta-a-nimittayoh, between cause and no cause ; 
arthft-antara-bhfkv&t, there being the relation of two different 
objects ; 5srJT%%*: a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

B67. The aforesaid reason preseats no opposition, because cause 
and no-cause are two entirely different things. 

Cause and no-canse cannot be identical, e. g , a jar which is water- 
lean cannot at the same time be fall of water. The doctrine involved in 
this aphorism does not differ from the one explained in 3-2-66 [according 
to which our body cannot be made up independent of our desert (Karma). 

II » I * I » u 

^ ’ 
sarvarn, all ; a nityam, non eternal j 

utpatti-vinaaa-dharmaka tvat, because of their possessing the character 
of production and destruction. 

368. All, says some one, are non-eternal, because they possess 
the character of being produced and destroyed. 

All things including our body which is material and our intellect 
which is immaterial are non-eternal inasmuch as they are subject to the 
law of production and destruction. All things which are produced and 
destroyed are non-eternal. 

II ? I ^ I ^ II 

W na, no , a-nitya-ta-mtya-tv&t, non-eternalness being 

eternal. 

369. These are, we reply, not so, because of the' non-eternal* 
ness being eternal. 

If non-eternalness pervades all things you must admit it to be 
eternal Hence, all are not non- eternal, for there is at least one thing, 
via., non-eternalness, which is eternal. 

firrfRqTgfiRTStfSr^ ll&l^ll 

tat-a-nitya-tvam, non-eternalness of that ( i e. non-eternal- 
neBs ) ; w#: agneh, in the case of fire ; ^Tfl' d&hyarn, combustible, fuel; 

vin&sya-anu-vin&ia-vat, like the destruction following 
after the destructible. 

§70. Some hold non-eternalness to be not eternal on the analogy 
of a fire which dies out after the combustibles have perished. 

THE NYIYA-SOtRAS. 

141 

The objection is explained as followsJasfc as a fire dies oat as 
soon as the things which caught it have perished, so the non-eternalneaa 
disappears as soon all non-eternal things have passed away. Hence, 
non-eternalness is not eternal. 

u&i^en 

fsfiqttr nityasya, of the eternal ; *W?HT<WR' a-praty&khy&natn, non- 
denial ; yath4-npalabdhi, according to perception or knowledge; 

vyavasth&nat, from regnlation. 

371. There is no denial of the eternal, as there is a regulation 
as to the character of our perception. 

Whatever is perceived to be produced or destroyed is non-eternal 
and that which is not so is eternal, e. g , there is no perceptual evidence 
as to the production or destruction of ether, time, space, soul, mind, 
generality, particularity and intimate relation. Consequently theBe are 
eternal. 

II ? I \ I ^ It 

sarvam, all ; fattf nityam, eternal ; qg?£ifsrc*T?3r3 paficha-bhflba- 
nitya-tv&t, owing to the eternalness of the five elements. 

372. Some say that all are eternal, because the five elements 
are so. 

The elements which are the material causes of all things are eter* 
nal, consequently the things themselves are eternal. 

II $ I \ I II 

si na, no, atpatti-vin&Sa-kfiraija-uplabdheh, owing 

to perception of the canses of production. 

373. These are, ire reply, not so, because we perceive the causes 
of production and deduction. 

All things are non-eternal because we find them to be produced and 
destroyed. Whatever is produced or destroyed is non-eternal. 

tlCraranrfraKl tat-laksana-avarodh&t, from inclusion by its definition ; 
a-pratigedhah, non-contradiction. 

142 

B00& IV, CHAPTER I. 

374. This is, some say, no refutation, because the character of 
the elements is possessed by the things which are produced or 
destroyed. 

The objector says as follows:—A thing which is made up of an 
element, possesses the character of the element Since the element is 
eternal, the thing also must be so. 

it & | \ \ ^ (I 

■T na, no ; 3r«li%cTf^TTOihT3resr: utpatti-tat-k&raria-upalabdheh, owing 
to perception of production and its cause. 

375. This is, we reply, no opposition because we perceive 
production and the cause thereof. 

An efEect inherits the character of its cause but the two are nofc 
identical, e g., ether is the cause of sound, although the former is eternal 
and the latter non-eternal. 

Moreover we actually perceive that things are produced which con¬ 
vince us of their non-eternalness If production is regarded as a mere 
vision of a dream, then the whole world is no better than an illusion 
which can serve no practical purpose. 

If all things were eternal there could be no effort or activity on our 
part to attain any object. Hence all are not eternal. 

h u ? i \ i \\ n 

NS 

sr na, no; WRwrcgqq^: vyavastM-an-npapatteh, from the impossibility 
of uniformity. 

376. If all things were eternal there would be no regulation of 

time. 

Some say that things are eternal, because they existed even before 
they were produced and will continue even after they are destroyed. 
Bat this view, contends the Naiyfy ika, is absurd. It destroys all regu¬ 
lation with regard to time, for if all things were perpetually existent,, 
there could not be any use of Buch expressions as "was produced” and 
<« will be destroyed” which presuppose a thing wbioh was non-existent 
to come into existence or one which is existent to lose its existence. 

u & \ \ i m » 

THE NYlYA-StiTRAS. 

143 

sarvam, all j S*P5 prithak, diverse ; bh4va-lak- 

gana-prithak-tvat, owing to diversity of the marks of existence. 

377. Some say that all are aggregates because each consists of 
several marks. 

A jar, for instance, is an aggregate consisting of several parts, snoh 
as bottom, sides, back, etc., and several qualities, such as, sound, smell, 
taste, colour, touch, eto. There is not a single entity devoid of its several 
parts or qualities. 

[This refers to the Buddhist doctrine which denies a substance apart 
from its qualities and a whole apart from its parts as is evident from the 
writings of N&gftrjuna*, Arya Devaf and others.] 

n 9 i ^ i w u 

*T na, no ; «r^99EiP$: an-eka-lakf anaih, by several marks ; 
eka-bhava-nispatteh, because of constitution of one entity. 

878. These are, we reply, not so because by several marks one 
single entity is constituted. 

The Naiy&yika says that there is certainly a substance apart from 
its qualities and a whole apart from its parts, e g., we must admit an 
entity called a jar as the substratum of its several qualities, such as 
colour, smell, etc , and its several parts such as bottom, sides, back, etc. 

[The BuddhistsJ oppose this view by saying that the substance 

afrrcwrtTgqpq c fr fsrwre’ it 

(M&dhyamika SCttra Chap, I. page 64 , Prof. Poussin's edition.} 

jtstt * firer?! i ’ 

5WT II II 1 

(M&dhyamika Shtra, Chap. I, page 71; Poussin's edition.) 

t f? wprd i ‘ 

wuifi W2. sre^aff setrfa « 

ngf »j| I > 

(Sataka quoted in the M&dhyamika Vritti, p. 71.) 

t 3 frfw w gwi RrsYrcrfVtfwwrar: i tffSf- 

i *r% fftrsrVqfr- 

sfsqai gRuf^x: q^rofs «n«n: i smunTJWxT^qjpgqi wn«g13 i 

(M4dhy&nuk& Chap. I. p. 66, Poussin’s edition) 

144 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

independent of its qualities and the whole independent of its parts ad¬ 
mitted by theNaiy&yikas are opposed to reason and cannot he accepted 
as realities though there is no harm in acknowledging them as “ appear¬ 
ances for the fulfilment of our practical purposes.] 

ii * i ^ i ^ u 

9 qr<!]sqereqr;n<X laksana-vyavasth&n&f;, from the distribution of marks; 
ir^eva, surely ; swRnta: a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

379. There is, moreover, no opposition on account of the very 
distribution of the marks. 

The Naiyayika says as follows :—Our conclusion is unassailable 
owing to the marks abiding in one single entity. A jar, for instance, 
possesses two marks, viz , tangibility and colour, by each of which it can 
be identified. 

If there wore no jar beyond its tangibility and colour we could not 
use such expression as "I see the jar whioh I touched yesterday.” To 
enable us to ascertain the identity there must be a substance called jar 
beyond its tangibility and oolour which are two distinct qualities belong¬ 
ing to the same substance. 

The opponent,has said that “ all are aggregates.’VWhence, we ask, 
does the aggregate arise if there are no nnits ? The very reason given 
that “each consists of several marks” presupposes an “ each” or unity 
or entity beyond the marks or aggregate. 

: II » I \ I ^ II 

€IW sarvam, all ; smrq: a-bh&vah, non-existence ; bh&vesn, in 

entities ; itara-itara-abhfiva-siddheli, from proof of mutual 

non-existence 

380. All are non-entities because the entities are non-existent 
in relation to one another, 

In the expression “ a horse is not a cow ” there is the non-existence 
of “ cow ” in the “ horse ” and in the expression “ a cow is not a horse ” 
there is the non-existence of “ horse ” in the “ oow.” As a fact every 
thing is non-exiatent in so far as it is not identical with another thing. 

* qx: flwsr 5 «tffc wtr *rnr zr<^r<rwi?f?sr«T«rfaf 

wm 1 ur^ST?qfiifa i qwfq 

(MAdhy amikfi, Yritti. p. 70, Chap. 1; Poussin's edition.) 

THE NYAY A-SOTRAS. 

145 

H *T3TRT^ It ? I \ I II 

*T na, no ; sva-bhava-siddheh, from existence by own 

nature ; wurarq; bh&v&n&tn, of entities. 

381. It is, we reply, not so because the entities are existent in 
reference to themselves. 

A cow is a cow though it is not a horse : a thing is existent in 
reference to itself though it is non-existent in so far as it is not another 
thing. 

5f n » I \ I H 

ST, no j ^arURfafig;: sva bhfiva siddlnh, proof of own nature ; BTl^flar^ 
Apeksika-tvat, being relative. 

382. Some say that entities are not self-existent inasmuch as 
they exist in relation to one another. 

The objection is explained as follows :— 

A thing is called short only in relation to another thing which is 
Jong, and vice versa-, the long and short are inter-related. 

[This refers to the M&dhyamika Buddhist doctrine* of " relation " 
according to which all things are mter-dependent and nothing is 
self-existent,] 

ii » i \ i it 

vy&hata-tv&t, being inconsistent; stgrEH a-yuktam, not 

rational. 

383. The doctrine, we reply, is unreasonable because it hurts 

itself. 

If the long and short are inter-dependent then neither of them 
can be established in the absence of the other, if neither of them is self- 
existent, then it will be impossible to establish the inter-relation ; and in 
the absence of all relations the, doctrine of the opponent will fall to the 
ground. 

® !T JTWhtgfa: < 

*ronr: *tw wRrwtfer 3*u n 

(M&dhyamika Siitra, Chap. XV, p. 93, B. T. Society's edition.) 

19 

146 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

[The Mfidhyamikas say that there is no reality* underlying any 
entity, and that the entities exist only by virtue of their mutual relations 
which are mere illusions Viewed from the standpoint of absolute truth 
the world is void, ^dnyajt but measured by the standard of ‘‘relation ” 
or “ condition ” it possesses an apparent existence which serves all our 
practical purposes.] 

sankhyH-eka-anta-a-siddhih, non-proof of the fixity 
of number , k&iana-an-upapatti-upapattibhyam, by 

proof and disproof of cause 

384. Neither through the reason being given nor through the 
reason being omitted there is the establishment of the fixity of 
numler. 

Some say that there is only one thing (Brahma) pervading all 
the so-called varieties Otheis ssy that things are of two kinds, vit , 
the eternal and the non-eternal Certain philosophers find three things, 
viz., the knower, knowledge and the kuowable, while others treat of four 
things, viz., the agent of knowledge, means of knowledge, object of 
knowledge and act of knowledge. In this way the philosophers indulge 
themselves in a fixed number of things. The Naiy&yikas oppose them by 
Baying that there is no reason to establish the fixity of number. The 
fixed number is the S&dhya or that which is to be proved and the T^ason 
is that which is to prove it. Now, is the reason included in the Sddhya or 
excluded from it? In either case the fixity of number will be unfixed. 
If, on the other hand, the reason is not different from the Sddhya, there 
is no means to establish the Sddhya. 

t* 3f3T^n^ra*noTT3 u 2 1 \ \ ^ w 

5T na, no , k&rana-avayava-bh&v&t, the cause being a 

member or part. 

* suxrftrsr 9 t q^q; i 

qsr fq?rfer ht ff snrjj QTfg vjfbvufa u 

( Arya Ratn&kara Sutra quoted in Madhyainika Vritti, Chap. I, 24 ; 
B. T. Society’s edition.) 

t tr i 

^ qq^fsa 5T qqq ? ^ aqsf % u 

(Madhyamika Sutra, Chap. XV, p. 96, B. T. Society’s edition.) 

the nyIya-sOtras. 

147 

385. This is, some say, not so, because the reason is a part of 
the number. 

The objection is this:— 

The number of things is fixed, and there is no disturbance of the 
fixity on the score of the reason being included m, excluded from, or 
identical with, the number, for the reason is a part of the number aud as 
such ia not different from it. 

fSrc^5r3rrc?T^|<g: n ? \ \ i 93 u 

nir-avayava-tibeing without a member or part , sjfjj: 
a-hetuh, no reason. 

386. The reason, we reply, is not valid because there is no part 
available for the purpose 

The opponent has argued that the number is fixed and that the 
reason is only a part of it. The Nai} &yika countei argues that the number 
cannot be fixed until the reason is fixed and it wil! be absurd to hx the 
number with an unfixed reason. The reason which is asserted by the 
opponent to be a part of the number will remain unfixed until the num¬ 
ber itself is fixed. 

The doctrine of the fixity of number, opposed as it is to the eviden¬ 
ces of perception, inference and scnptnre, is a false doctrine which 
cannot Pefute the variety of things established through the speciality 
of their characters. If there is an agreement as to the number of things 
on the ground of their general characters, and difference otifche ground 
of their special characters, then the doctrine of fixity is admittedly to- 
be abandoned. 

. ^ ^ 335 ?; (| 2 I \ l 9*tl 

sadyah, immediately ; k.ila-anfcare, at another time , w 

cha, and , 'RSsfwsi’W: phala-mspatteh, on account of production of fruit ; 

aarasajnh, doubt 

387. 1 here arises doubt as to* the fruit which is produced either, 
instantly or after a h ng interval. 

Seeing that some action such as cooking produces its effect imme¬ 
diately while another action such as ploughing does not bring about any 
effect until sometime has passed away, a certain person asks whether- 

148 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER I.' 

the fruit of maintaining the Bacred fire will be produced immediately or 
after a considerable lapse of time 

n a i \ i a* u 

«KT55TS3^*!l k&la-antarena, after a lapse of time , srfsTWjfaj a-nispattih, 
non-production , ^gfastrsTKl hetu-vm.is&t, because of the destruction o£ 
the cause. 

388. It cannot, says some one, be produced after a lapse of 
time because the cause has disappeared. 

The objection is this :— 

The fruit (viz., the attainment of heaven) cannot be produced after 
our death because the action (viz .,'maintaining the sacred fire) calculated 
to produce the fruit was destroyed befoie our death. 

ii 9 i \ i ii 

Jfl^ prak, prior , nispatteh, to production; vriksa- 

phala-vat, like the fruit of a tree , a?I tat, that *uirj[ «yat, will be. 

389. This fruit, we reply, before it is produced, bears analogy to 
the fruit of a tree. 

Just as a tree, whose roots are now nourished with water, will be 
able to produce fruits m the futuie, so the sacred fire which is maintain¬ 
ed now will enable the mamtauier to attain heaven after death. The 
doctrine involved here ha3 been explained in aj lionsui 3-2- 60, 

W II 5? I \ I II 

•l na, no , a-sat, non-existent , ua, nut , sat, existent,; «r na, 
not ; sat-a-sat, existent-and-non-existent , asat-satoh,o£ the 

non-existent and existent, thjxufil vaidharmy&t,- owing to dissimilarity, 
difference. 

390. Some say that the fruit, anterior to its production, is neither 
existent nor non-existent nor both, because existence and non-existence 
are incongruous. 

The fruit (or any effect) anterior to its production was not non¬ 
existent because the material causes are so regulated that each 
one thing is not produced from each other thing promiscuously. 
We cannot suppose the fruit to have been existent prior to its production 
beoause a thing cannot be said to come into existence if it had already 
an existence. The fruit was not both existent and non-existent prior to 

THE NYAyA-SOTRAS. 

149 

its production because existence and non-existence are incompatible 
with each other. 

[The aphorism refers to the M&dhyamika Buddhist philosophy 
which maintains that the effect, before it is produced, is neither existent 
nor non-existent nor both, aB is evident from the writings of N&g&rjuna* 
and Ary a Deyaj\] , 

II | \ || 

3«qt<?3*wq;^5ncX utp&da-vyaya-dar&an&t, from the observation of pro* 
duction and destiuction. 

391. It is, we reply, a fact that the fruit before it was produced 
was non-existent because we witness ithe production and destruc¬ 
tion. 

When a jar is produced we find that it was non-exiBtent prior to 
the production. 

3^3 n ? i ^ i ii 

buddhi-siddham, established by the understanding ; g tu, 
but, aq tat, that ; sraq a-sat, non-existent. 

392. That it was non-existent, is established by our understand¬ 
ing. 

It is only when a thing is non-existent that we can apply ourselves* 
to the production of it by means 'of suitable materials. A weaver, for 
instance, Beta himself to work for a web which is non-existent but which 
he knows he can make by means of threads. 

fhraal aa; srarmgsu^ i 

(Nag&rjnna’s,Madhyamika tsfitra, Chap. VII, p. 51 ; B. T. Society's 
edition.) ^ - 

f qa?t a rawa i 

qqtvafatilTfa aaj* W&ft II 

( Arya Deva’s Pataka quoted in the M&dhyamika Vyitti, Chap. 11>< 4; 
B. T. Society's edition.) 

150 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

alraya-vyatirekfit, m the absence of a receptacle 
i|8f*l»i5rc | .f%q5f vriksa phala-utpatti-vat, like the production of the fruit of 
a tree , it 1 , tine , ST^g: a-lietulj. no reason. 

S93. Some say that the analogy to the fruit of a tree is ill founded 
because a receptacle is aw anting. 

It has been stated that the fruit obtainable from maintaining the 
sacred fire beats analogy to the fiuit of a tree. An opponent finds fault 
with the analogy by showing that the tree which produces fiuits now is- 
the sainetiee which was previously nourished with water, but the body 
which is alleged to attain heaven after death is not the same body which, 
maintained the sacred fire. The two bodies being different their analogy 
to the tree is ill-founded. 

U S I \ \ Sft II 

sftiN piiieh, of pleasure, satisfaction , WTcJTFW^r^nj atma &sraya-tv&fc, 
having the soul as its receptacle or support , surfa^I. a-pratisedhah, non¬ 
contradiction 

394. The foregoing objection, we reply, is unreasonable because 
the soul is the receptacle of happiness. 

It is not our body that maintains the sacred fire or attains heaven. 
In reality the soul is the receptacle for both these acts The soul which- 
maintained the secied fire is identical with the soul which enjoys happi¬ 
ness in heaven. Consequently a receptacle ib not awanting and the 
analogy to the tree is not ill-founded. 

5jna.no ; putra pasu-st’ii-parich- 

chhada-hiranya-anna adi-phdla-nirdes&t, because the fruits declared are 
son, cattle, wife, elithes, gold, food etc 

39o. The soul, some say, cannot he the receptacle for the fruits- 
which are mentioned, viz., a son, a wife, cattle, attendants, gold, 
food, etc. 

The objection is this : — 

If the fiuit consists merely of happiness it can be lodged m the 
soul. Bur. tho soul cannot be the receptacle for such finite as a son, a 
Wife, cattle, etc which are mentioned in the scnpime 

^5T|q^T^: II?) 

THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 

151 

tat-sambandh&G, through connection with them , 
phala-mspatteh, because of piodmtion of fruit , tesu, m them j 
igR: phala-vat-upach&rah, predication as fruit. 

396. 1 he fruit, we reply, is attributed to them because it is 

produced through their conjunction. < 

In reality the fruit is happiness. We attribute the name fruit to 
' a son, wife, etc., because happiness is produced through them. 

5r5%cqf%: nviwa 

foRrvnirasrnfrni?* vividha-Mdhan4-yogfl,t, through connection with 
various distresses , duhkham, pam , ^ eva, surely ; 3rs%qq{%: janina- 
utpattih, production of birth. 

397. Birth is a pain because it is connected with various 
distresses. 

Birth is stated to be a pain because it signidea our connection with 
the body, the senses and the intellect which bring us various distresses. 
The body is the abode in which pam resides, the senses are the instru¬ 
ments by which pain is experienced, and the intellect is the agent which 
produces in us the feeling of pain. Our birth as connected with the 
body, the senses and the intellect iB necessarily a source of pain. 

^ «t a I X \ w I) 

• - W na, not; sukhasya, of pleasure ; antaralanispat- 

teh, because of production during intervals. 

398. Pleasure is not denied because it is produced at inter¬ 
nals. 

We cannot altogether deny the existence of pleasure which often 
arises amidst pains 

b&dhanS-a-nivritteh, there being non-cessation of dis¬ 
tress j vedayatnh, of the feeling person; paryesana-dos&t, 

from the fault of pursuit , a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction 

399. This is, we reply, no opposition because distresses do not 
disappear from a person who enjoys one pleasure and seeks 
another. 

152 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

The substance of the Naiy&yika’s reply is this:— Pleasure itself is 
to be regarded as pain because even a person who enjoys pleasure is 
tormented by various distresses. His objects may be completely frustrated 
or fulfilled only partially, and while he attains one object he cannot resist 
tbg temptation of pursuing another which causeB him uneasiness. 

§:*sriini3^ Haitian 

dnhkha-vikalpe, in a form of pain , j-pgnrFwRRRf sukha-abhi- 
man&t, from a conceit of pleasure ; W cha, and. 

400. And because there is conceit of pleasure in what is only 
another name for pain. 

Some persons thinking that pleasure is the summurn bonurn are 
addicted to the world which causes them various distresses through birth, 
infirmity, disease, death, connection with the undesirable, separation 
from the desirable, etc. It is therefore clear that one who pursues 
pleasure does in reality pursue pain, or, in other words, pleasure is a 
synonym for pain. 

it 2 \ \ \ h* ii 

rina-kle$a-pravritti-anubandhat, because debts, 
troubles and activity pnrsue us to the end ; apavarga-abhflvah, 

absence of release. 

401. There is, some say, no opportunity for us to attain release 
because of the continual association of our debts, troubles and 
activities. 

The objection stands thus:— The Bcripture declares that as soon as 
we are born we incur three debts which we must go on clearing off until 
the time of our decay and death; and troubles are our constant compa- 
nions, while activities pursue us throughout our life. There is then no 
opportunity for us to attain release. 

The three debts are:— 

Debt to sages (Rishi riria)—which can be cleared off only by under¬ 
going a course of Btudent life. 

Debt to gods (Deva-rina)—from which we can be freed only by 
performing sacrifices. 

Debt to our^ progenitors (Pitri-rina)—which cannot be cleared off 
except by begetting children. 

Activity has been defined in 1-1-17 and 1-1-18, 

THE NyAyA-SOtRAB. 

153 

li ^ I ^ I H<il 

TOnr^isafrgrr#: pradh&na-sabda-an-upapatteh, from failure of the 
word 10 the principal sense , <J3RT3^>T guna labdena, bj the word in the 
secondary sense , wggT?: anuv&dah, interpretation , nindA* 

pralamsS-upapatteh, because of the establishment of blame and praise 

402. If an expression is inadmissible in its literal sense we 
are to accept it in its secondary meaning to suit blame or 
praise. 

“As soon as a person is born he incurs three debts'-’—this expression, 
inadmissible as it is in its literal sense, is to be takeD in its secondary 
meaning, viz., “as soon as a person enters the life of a householder, he 
incurs three debts the clearing off of which brings him credit ” The ex¬ 
pression “until the time of our decay and death” signifies that “as long 
as we do not arrive at the fourth stage when we are to adopt the life of a 
mendicant.” If the scriptural texts are interpreted in this way, it be¬ 
comes clear that our whole life does not pass away iu the mere clearing 
off of our debts. 

im 11 ii 

tnrrfl<H!ITT sam&ropauat, through transferring , attnani, to the 

soul ; SJfffa%a: a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

403. There is no lack of opportunity for our release because 
the sacrifices (to be performed for clearing off our debts) are trusted 
to the soul. 

A Brahman, while old, should refrain from all searches after sons, 
wealth and retinue. >§iuti (Veda) instructs him to retire trmn the world 
when he has trusted to his soul the sacrifices which he used to perform 
to clear off his debts. By so doing he will imagine that his soul is the 
sacrificial fire in which his physical actions are offered as oblatious. 
Freed from all debts, he will live on alms and find an ample opportunity 
Tor effecting his own release. 

As regards the division of life into stages,there is the authority 
of Itih&sa, Pur&na and Obarma j§astra. 

TOfwro « v \ \ i ^ » 

20 

154 

HOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

Trg ! spn'*?rT»| l 7 t Tg p&tra-chaya anta an-upapatteh, boeanse of the non- 
proof of performances ending with the collection of the saoilficial vessels 
at death, g cha, and, phala-abhavah, absence of fruit. 

404. Because the performances ending with the collection of the 
sacrificial vessels at death cannot reasonably be supposed ( to have been 
prescribed for all without distinction), there would be an absence of 
fruits (which could impede release) 

For a householder keeping alive the sacrificial fire it is prescribed 
that at his death the sacrificial vessels should be collected and burnt with 
his body Such a man continues to perform acts till ihe end and these 
acta must produce results which must be exhausted by experiencing them 
before release can be attained But these acts are not meant for those 
who retire from the world and have no desne for sons, wealth or other 
worlds. Therefore, so far as such men are concerned, the Vedio injunctions 
in respect of the sacrificial vessels end the like do not cause any obstacle 
to the attainment of release 

« ? i ^ i ^ n 

ggHHI susuptasya, of one in deep sleep , svapna-a-darsane, 

in not seeing dreams ; klesa-a-bh&va-\at, like absence of 

troubles; apavargah, release 

405. As there is no distress in a person w ho is sound asleep and 
sees no dream, so there is no association ot troubles in one who attains 
release. 

A person who has, through the knowledge of Brahma, attained 
release, is freed from all bonds of lust, pleasure, paiu, etc. 

[The word klesa (here rendeied as trouble) is a trchnical term very 
extensively used m the Buddhist Sanskut and I'stli literature to signify 
depravity, deGlement, conuption or passion Klesa, called in Pah kileso, 
is the cause of all sinful actious and consequently of lebirths Aihatship 
consists in the annihilation of khsa The Pali Pitakas enumerate ten 
kilesas, oE which five are prominent The ten kilesas are:— 

(gree d )» (hatred), (stupidity), (pride), f^rfg; 

(heretical view), (doubt), (sloth), (arrogance), 

(shamelessness) and (recklessness) 

The Buddhist Sanskrit books enumerate six klesas and twenty-four 
t'jj) aklesas. 

THE NY AY A SUTRAS'. 

155 

*5|FBEi: II 

« 

^rn*. srfcr^w m^tsiw 11 

(Dharmasamgraha LXVII.y 

srgfstaf^Tipm; i creror 11 

sr^: ir^isBr twf uTrHsr sires u^t flrfilrsnafcsrroqT 
^strHJiarscsi ^rarar srm?r sfacr^rer^Ttrasrerwi ftrac fsrattf 

^r=5rrc^fcT n 

(DharmasaAgraha LXIX.) 

The word klcs'i used in trhe Ny&ya Sutra 4-1 58, 4-1-62, 4-1-63 and 
4-1-64 evident])' conveys the meaning of moial depravity, Hina-hlesa 
( Sta'Nto ) used-in 4-! 63 rings in my ears as a phrase borrowed from 
the Buddhist plnloso ( liy ] 

5T JTff%: srm^aTHTsr u s \ \ i \\ w 

si na, no , 5Tgf%: pravr’ttih, activity , JrffraPTMT*! prati-sandh&n&ya, 
for binding again to birth , ifai? 3TOT hina-klesa-sya, of one whose troubles 
have disappeaied 

40(3. The activity of one who has got rid of the troubles does not 
tend to obstruction. 

Activity does not present any obstacle to release (apavarga) in 
respect of aj.eison who is heed from the troubles of lust, hatred and 
stupidity. In his case activity produces neither merit nor demerit, and 
consequently no re-birth. 

H ^SJWTTTOcSTrat II 8* I \ l II 

•T na, no , fjfsRfrtS. kles-a-santateli, of the stream of troubles; ^fnrtfir- 

Bv&bh&vika-tv&c, being natural. 

407. There is, some say, no end of troubles because these are 
natural 

The objection raised here is this:—None can attain release because 
it is impossible to get rid of troubles which are natural (beginningless). 

ofa^prak, prior ; ubpattejr, to production, abh&va- 

a-nitya-tva vat, like the non-eternahty of non-existence , fSBTlfsR* sv&bhft* 
▼ike, in the natural , stfoapi, also ; a-nitya tvaui, non-eternaiity. 

156 

BOOK IV, CHAPTE.B I. 

408. Even the natural, says some one, are non-eternal like 
the non-existence that was antecedent to production. 

The objection raised in the previous aphorism is answered by some 
one as follows:— 

A noif-existence antecedent to production is natural (beginningless) 
but it disappears as soon as the production takes place. Similarly the 
troubles are natural (beginningless) but they terminate as Boon as release 
is attained 

A jar before it is produced is non-existent This non-existence is 
called antecedent non-existanoe. It has no beginning but ithaB an end 
for it disap peais as soon as the jar is produced The troubles like the 
antecedent non-existence are beginningless but not endless. 

[ It is only an existence, that is, an existent thing, that can be called 
eternal or non-eternal We cannot apply the epithets “ eternal ” and 
“ non-eternal ’’ to non-existence except in a figurative sense ] 

tl ? \ \ I ^ II 

a»aj$f*lHT 9 Tsff!eJre^gq[ anu-syama-ta a-mtya-tva-vat, like the non-eter- 
nality of the darkness of the atom , 9T v&, or. 

409. Or non-eternal like the blackness of an atom. 

An earthy atom, which is naturally black, changes its colour when 
it is baked red in the kiln. Likewise the troubles which are natural 
disappear as soon as release is attained. 

II 9 I \ I ^ 11 

«l na, no ; sankalpa-nimitta-tv&t, being caused by will 

or deliberation , 9 cha, and ; mTT^i raga-adinam, of desire, etc. 

410. It is, we reply, not so because affection, etc. are caused by 
misapprehension. 

The Naiyayika says:—There is no necessity for us here to admit 
that a thing which is natural (beginningless) may not be endless The 
troubles are not in fact natural(beginningless) because they are caused by 
activity which springs from our affection, aversion and stupidity. These 
last are generated by our misapprehension. The troubles, not being 
natuial, there is no lack of opportunity for us to attain release. 

THE NYAYA-S&TRA.S 

157 

Book IV.— Chapter II. 

T%: II 9 I ^ I \ II 

gtaf*lf*PtrHt dosa-nimitt&n&m, of the causes of faults ; tattva- 

jfi&nftt, through knowledge of the truth , sjgapufffqfo: ahank&ra-nivrittib, 
cessation of ahamk&ra. 

411. Through knowledge about the true nature of the causes of 
faults, there is cessation of egotism. 

Egotism is stupidity of the form “ I am." It consists of the notion, 
* I am/' entertained by a person tn respect of what ib not self. It 
disappears as soon as we attain knowledge about the trne nature of the- 
faults which are caused by all objects such as body, etc. enumerated in 
aphorism 1—1—9 

ftaftfari firw: ll 9 I ^ I ^ It 

doga-nimittam, the cause of fanlts ; rfipa-Adayah,' 

form, etc j f^TT: vigay&fc, objects j Bankalpa-krit&h, adopted by 

the will. 

412. The colour and other objects, when regarded as good, 
become the causes of faults. 

It is only when we look upon oolour or any other object as a source 
of enjoyment that it becomes a cause of our affection, aversion or Btupidity. 

II SM ^ I ^ H 

nfirftnf tat-nimittam, their cause , g tu, bnfc ; sr^qsnfhjnw: avayavi- 
abhimhnah, regard as a whole. 

413. The faults are caused through a conception of the whole 
apart from its parts. 

The faults are produced if a man or woman looks upon each other 
aq a whole, viz., as a inale or female with all his or her paraphernalia of 
teeth, lips, eyes, nose, etc., together with their secondary marks ; and they, 
are shunned if be or she looks upon each other by parts only, viz., upon 
his or her hair, flesh, blood, bone, nerve, head, phlegm, bile, excrement, 
etc., all of which are frail. The notion of the whole engenders Inst while 
that of the parts produoes equanimity. We must regard every thing from 
the standpoint of evil, e. g., the rice boiled with poison is looked npon by 
a wordly man as rice and by an ascetic as poison. 

158 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER HE. 

k 2 r ^ i 2 ii 

IV?Jrsfw?Ttff5fV'!flfI vidyh-a-v idyll dvatvidhyht, from twofoldnesa of 
knowledge and of ignorance , 8iiT«T: samfiayah, doubt. 

414. Owing to the apprehension and non-apprehension being 
each of two kinds, there arises a doubt as to the existence of a whole 
apart from its parts. 

There are two kinds of apprehension, viz , real and unreal. The 
apprehension of water in a tank is real while that of mirage as a mass of 
water is unreal. The non-apprehension ib also of two kinds, viz , real and 
unreal. The non-apprehension of a hare’s horn (which is non-existent) is a 
real ncn-apprehension while that of the ether (which is existent) is an 
unreal non-apprehension. The apprehension and non-apprehension being 
both real and unreal there arises a doubt as to- whether there ib really a 
whole apart from its parts. If we apprehend a whole apart from its 
parts, our apprehension may be unreal. If we do not apprehend a whole, 
our non-apprehension toe may be unreal. 

II 5? I ^ I U 

tat-a-samsayah, no doubt about it; purva-hetu- 

prasiddha-tvat, having been established by reasons already stated. 

415. There is no room for doubt with regard to the existence 
of a whole already established through arguments. 

No one has yet set aside the arguments employed in aphorism 
2—1—34 to establish a whole apart from ite parts. 

rfff ?T WCR: II ? I ^ I \ I) 

vritti-an-upapatteh, from absenoe of proof of inolnsion ; 
srftf api, also , grff tarhi, then , w na, not , samiayah donbt. 

416. There is, says some one, no room for doubt even with 
regard to the non-existence of a whole on account of the impossibility 
of ihe whole residing anywhere. 

In the preceding aphorism the Naiy&yika has said that there is no 
doubt as to the existence of a whole apart from its parts as demonstrated 
in aphoriBm 2—1—34 In the present aphorism his opponent Bays that 
there is no doubt as to the non-existence of a whole apart from its parts 
because neither the whole can reside in its parts nor the latter m the 

THE NTl7A-SCTRAS. 

J59r 

former. One affirms that there is a whole while the other affirms that 
there is a no-whole. In either case there is no room for doubt. 

;i $ i ^ mi 

^US&B^TrifwFfig: kritsna-eka deia a-vntti tv&t, because of not being 
eo-extensive with the whole, avayav&nkm, of the parts ; «toukt- 

avayavi-abhfUah, non-existence of the whole. 

417. There is, says the objector, no whole because its parts 
reside init neither totally nor partially. 

A part does not occupy the whole in its totality owing to the differ¬ 
ence of their dimension; neither does it occupy the whole partially 
becanBe the part can reside neither in itself nor in another part. 

It 8 I ^ I C II 

te§u, in them , ■a cha, and , *rf$: a-vritteh. because of non-resi¬ 
dence , avayavi-abh&vah, non-existence of the whole. 

418. Also because the whole does not, continues the objector, 
reside in its parts. 

The whole does not reside in each of its parts separately on account 
of the difference of their dimension. Neither 'does it reside in some of 
its parts collectively because in that case it loses its connection with the 
other parts. 

n ? i ^ i < n 

prithak, other j w cha, and , avayavebhyah, than the 

parts ; 9*1^: a-vritteh, because of non-residence. 

419. Owing to the lack of residence, affirms the objector, there 
is no whole apart from its parts. 

The whole does not exist as the relation between it and its parts 
is not that of the container and the contained. 

* ^icms^sRcrr: u $ i ^ i \° it 

*f na, not ; w cha, and , s^qsft avayavf, the whole , avayav&h, 

parts 

420. And the parts are not the whole. 

160 

BOOK TV, CHAPTER II. 

The objector says that the relation between the whole and its parti 
is not that of identity. No one says that the thread lathe web or the pillar 
is the house. 

ekasmtn, in one ; bheda-abhAvAt, owing to absence 

of difference ; ^tRatinltTTgqTW: bheda-sabda-prayoga-an-upapatteh, be¬ 
cause of impropriety of nse of the word difference ; eUT^-Tc a-prasnah, no 
question. 

421. There is, we reply, no room for the question owing to the 
impropriety in the use of the term “ variety *’ in reference to 
what is one. 

In aphorism 4-—2—7 an opponent raised the question as to whether 
the whole occupied its parts totally or partially. The NaiyAyika disposes 
of the question by saying that there is no room for it because the terms 
“ totally ” and “ partially ” cannot be applied to “ one. “ The term 
“ totally” is employed only in the case of several things of which no one 
has been left out while the word “ partially ” refers to an aggregate of 
which some parts have been left out Now, neither the term “ totally ” 
nor the term “ partially ” is applicable to what iB “ one ”, that is, to a 
*' whole ” In the case of a whole the employment of language implying 
variety is unjustifiable. 

|| & \ ^ \ H 

SWWt'<ib*tli avayava-Antarh-abh&ve, in the absence of another part; 
wfa api, also ; WfW: a-vritteh, owing to non-residence or non-fnnction ; 
sjfg: a-hetuh, no mark or reason or argument. 

422. r lhe question, we further reply, is unreasonable because 
even if one part could be the residence of another part, it would not be 
the residence of the whole. 

When we speak of a whole residing in its parts we mast not under¬ 
stand that the term residence refers to any space, in fact it refers to the 
relation of refuge and refugee. A refuge is that with which the refugee 
is inseparably connected and without which it can never exist. Hence 
there is no impossibility of the whole residing in its parts. 

THE NYiTA-SOTRAS. 

161 

kesa-samTihe, m respect of a collection of bans, §'ff?f?%r?55fs(i|* 
taiminka-npalabdhi-vat, like the perception of one affected with a 
dimness of sight; agqssisiar: tat -upalabdhih, its perception. 

423. The perception of a “whole - * bears analogy to that of a 
collection of hairs by a person affected with a dimness of sight. 

Just as a person of dim sight cannot perceive hairs separately hat 
can perceive them m a mass, so we cannot perceive the atoms separately 
but can perceive them m a mass m the form of a ]ar or the like. 

ott mm to w » i ^ i \a u 

sva-visaya-an-atikramona, by reason oi its not going 
beyond its own object , ^f^qgg indriyasya, of the sense , qgflJ^airqin patu- 
manda-bhavat, according to keenness and dullness , fqqqirx’JreT visaya- 
grahana-sya, of the apprehension of object , a*rr tatlia, like , wig. bhavah, 
condition , q na, no , grfqqil' a-vi?aye. to what is not its object , JTf%: 
pravrituh, operation. 

424. A sense is inoperative in reference to what is not its object 
because its acuteness or dullness of apprehension is restricted to its own 
object which it connot transcend. 

The eye, whether it is acute or dim, cannot apprehend a sound. 
Similarly the ear, sharp or dull, cannot see a colour All senses have 
their special objects to which their operation is restricted An atom 
which is supersensuous, cannot be appiehended by any of oursenses—no 
matter whether these are acute or dim Each hair being perceptible, its 
collection also is capable of being perceived whereas the atoms bomg 
imperceptible their collection cannot be perceived. As we can perceive 
the collection of atoms in the shape of ■> jar or the like, we must admit 
that the collection or the whole is a reality independent of its parts 
(the atoms). 

is ? \ ^ \ xh w 

WgqqTqqfgJT$T , T: avayava avayavi-prasaiigah, relation of whole and 
parts ; q cha, and , i£cf evam, then , art up ; sreranf pralay&b, topralaya, 
dissolution. 

425. The whole and its parts should in that case be supposed to 

continue up to the time of annihilation. * J 

21 

162 

’BOOK IV, CHAPTER II. 

Even if we admit the existence of a whole and its parts, we cannot 
suppose them to continue for ever because they are subject to destrnc* 
tion at the time of annihilation. A whole has got its parts and the 
parts again have their parts which do not cease until they become non* 
existent at the time of annihilation. 

* II ? I ^ I ^ « 

*T na, no , JT5Tq: pralayah, dissolution , Anu-sad-bMv&t, 

owing to the existence of the atom. 

426. I here is, we reply, no annihilation becausa there are 
atoms. 

There will never come a time when there will be an utter annihi¬ 
lation, for things will even then continne to exist in the state of atoms. 
An atom is a thing of the smallest dimension, that is, a thing which is 
mot capable of being of smaller dimension. 

VX c*T II ? I * I II 

qf param, beyond , v&, or , arih trnteh, of trnti, a minute part. 

427. An atom is that which is not capable of being divided. 

An atom is not divisible into further parts 

[Two atoms make a dvyanuJca (dyad) and three dvyanukas make 
a tryasarenu (triad) All things which wepeiceive are composed of 
tryasarenus An atom (aim) is finer than a dvyannka and the latter finer 
then a tryasarenu ] 

rr^TivT%: n » i ^ i \c, u 

fikfisa vyatibliedat, owing to interpenetration of 
ether ; tat-an-upapattih, its non-proof. 

428. There is, says some one, an impossibility of such a thing, 
as it is divided throughout by ether 

The Naiyayika defines the atom as a whole which has no parts, 
that is, a thing which is not divisible into further parts Someone 
controverts the definition by saying that an atom is not devoid of part 3 
because it is intersected by ether within and witKout . 

cJT II £ ( ^ | ^ l! 

akasa-a-aarva-gafca-tvam, non-omnipenetcatwn of 

ether , y&, or. 

-TirE.NYlYA-SttTRAS. 

163* 

429. Else there would not be the omnipresence of the ether. 

The ethei would nob be called omnipresent if it could not reside 
Within the atoms 

g ^rconJrresr^RT^Tssr rr^rnsr: 

spa: antah, in , affs bahih.,out, =a oha, and ; k&rya-dravya 

-sya, of the efEeot substance, a>r?*nwa?W^aT?l k&rana-antara-vachan&t, owing 
to declaration of another cause ; stc&Tzlf a-karye, in a non-effect, 3^*nW: 
tatr-a-bh&vah, its absence. 

430. There is no within’* “without" of an eternal thing. 
The terms are applicable only to factitious things inasmuch as they 
imply constituents other than those which are seen. 

The word “ within ” refers to that constituent of a thing which is 
enclosed by another constitnet thereof while the word u wiiliont ” refers 
to the constituent which encloses another constitnennt, but is not enclosed 
by it. These terms’ cannot be applied to eternal things such as atoms 
which do not possess constituents some of which may enclose the rest. 

^ocTJT^ II » I ^ I ^ H 

sabda-samyoga-bibhav&t, owing to universality of 
conjunction of sound , *3 cha, and ; sarva-gatam, all-penetrating. 

431. The ether is omnipresent because of the universality of its 
conjunction which is a cause of sound. 

Owing to sound being produced everywhere it is inferred that 
the ether is omnipresent. If a certain place were devoid of contact with 
ether there would be no sound there. There is in fact a conjunction of 
ether everywhere. 

wrarawf: u a i ^ i n 

a-vyuha-viatambha-vibhu-tvani, characteristios- 
ef not being massed, not offering obstruction, and being universal , ^cha v 
and ; &k&6a-dharm&h, the .attributes or properties of ether. 

432. The ether possesses three properties, viz., that it is not repet 
led, that it does not obstruct and that it is all-pervading. 

164 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER II. 

The ether is not repelled because it does not possess any form, 
it does not obstruct because it is intangible, and it is all*pervading 
because it is omnipresent. 

$ I R \ V M 

fffaUrrt murti-mat&m, of things possessing a form ,W cha, and 
«j«T 5T: sarastliana-upapatteh from proof of position, shape ; 
avayava-sad- bh&vah, existence of parts. 

433. There are, says some one, parts in an atom because a thing 
that is endowed with a form must also possess a collocation of parts. 

The objection stands thus:—• 

An atom is divisible into parts becanse it possesses a form, that is, 
it is of a limited dimension. 

[The ether, soul, space and time being of unlimited dimensions are 
not divisible into parts ] 

im ^ I ^ li 

tfqhirn 5 #: samyoga-upapatteh, from proof of conjunction; g cha, 

and. 

434. An atom, continues the objector, must possess parts be¬ 
cause it is capable of being conjoined with another atom. 

The objection is this:— 

The fact that atoms possess the quality of conjunction proves that 
they have parts, because an atom can come in conjunction with another 
only in some of its parts. 

|| ? 1^ l^ll 

an-avastha-Js&ri-tv&t, as causing instability, regression; 
an-avastha-an- upapatteh, because of unreasonableness of 
regression ; ^ cha, and , aurfa^t: a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

435. The doctrine of the indivisibility of atom cannot, we reply, 
be refuted because such a refutation would give rise to a regreasus ad in - 
fimtim which is not proper. 

THE NYAYA-SCtEAS. 

1 65 

If yon Bay that an atom is divisible into parts, yon will have to 
admit that those parts again are divisible into futher parts This 
would give rise to a regressus ad infinitum which should, if possible, be 
avoided. If all things were indefinitely divisible we should find a large 
thing and a small one to be of equal dimension as both would possess an 
infinite number of parts. A thing although indefinitely divided should 
not lose itself. There must remain a particle, viz., an atom which should 
not perish even at the time of annihilation. 

^TSTRf 

^ ^gqjqfi'sr: u 9 i ^ \ ^ u 

spjSTI buddhyA, by the understanding ; vivechanat, from 

separation \ jj tu, but ; *n*nfc«ngq5sfsvi: yAth&troya-an-npalabdhih, non-per¬ 
ception of reality , tantu-apakarsane, on the separation of the 

threads ; pata-sadbhAva-an-npalabdhi-vat, like the non¬ 
perception of the existence of fabric j tat-an-upalabdih, its non¬ 

perception ■, 

436. Things, some say, do not possess a reality if they are 
separated from our thoughts, just as there is no reality ma web separated 
from its threads. 

The objection is this:— 

Things do not possess a reality independent of onr thoughts just 
as a web does not possess a reality independent of its threads. Hence 
it is our thoughts alone that are real, external things are all unreal. 
[This aphorism refers to the doctrine of the YogAchAra Buddhist 
philosophy explained in the LankAvatAra Sutra. J * 

ii s \ ^ \ y* « 

5«II5^ftng vyAhata-tvAt, being obstructed ; Sltsj: a-hetuh, not a mark. 

437. The reason, we reply, is not good as it hurts itself. 

STOTTS I 

( H qftsrxf, $5 T® ) 

sNqqarc qq \o u 

m 

BOOK'IY, CHAPTER II. 

The Naiy&yika says that his opponent’s reason, vie., that things 
do not possess a leahty rf they aie separated from our thoughts, 
is self-destructive because if fchinge are capable of being separated from 
our thoughts they cannot be said to be unreal, and on the other hand' 
if things are unreal they aie incapable of being separated from our 
thonghts. The opponent commits a contradiction by saying that things- 
are unreal and at the same time by going to separate them from our 
thoughts. 

u * 1 ^ 1 yz u 

a^TSRr^TcT tat-dlraya-tvat, because an effect is dependent on the oansev 
au^q^STfiJin a-prithak-grahanam, non-apprehension as separate. 

438. r l here is, we reply, no separate perception of a refuge and 
its refugee. 

A web being the refuge of its threads, the- perception of the former 
includes that of the latter so that there are no separate perceptions of 
them. If our thoughts were the refuge of external things, then there 
would be no separate perceptions of them. But the opponent’s argu¬ 
ment. viz , that "if things are separated from our thoughts,” makes 
it manifest that our thoughts are not the refuge of external things. 

VI ^ I H 

nunttci: pramana-tah, by means of proof , ‘g: cha, and; W*fsrfa<rai 
artha-pratipatteh, because of establishment of object. 

439. And things are established by evidences; 

The reality of things is proved by evidences such as perception. 
Every thing requires an evidence for its establishment. The very asser¬ 
tion that " things are not real if they cannot be separated from our 
thoughts” must be based on an evidence if it is to commend itself to our 
acceptance. Hence we cannot deny things if they are establised by evi* 
deuces. 

n v \ \ 1 n 

pram6na-an-upapatti-upapatti-bhy&m,by reason' 
of application and non-application of proofs. 

440. The non-reality of things is demonstrated neither by evidence 

nor without them. * 

the nyAya-sCTtras. 

16? 

The proposition that “there is nothing” cannot be proved in any 
way If you say that there is an evidence to prove it, yon hurt your 
own proposition, viz., that, "there is nothing If again you say that there 
is no evidence, how do you then establish your porposition ? 

II 21^ \\\ II 

^arjrf^«!TfvmT«T3r3[ svapna-visaya-abhim&na-vat, like the idea of objects 
seen in a dream ; aisf ay am, this ; H’WUnifalfiWR: pratnana-prameya- 
abhim&nah, idea of proof and the object of proof. 

441. The concept of the means and the objects of knowledge, 
says some one, bears analogy to that of things appearing m a dream. 

The means and the objects of knowledge are as delusive as things 
appearing in a dream. 

[ The aphorism 4-2-31 and 4-2-32 evidently refer to the Buddhist 
doctrine of ‘'non-reality” expounded in the Arya Up&li-pricchft-Sa- 
madhi raja-s&tra, Arya-gagana-ganja-sutra, Madhyamika-sutra, Arya-rat- 
n&vali, Lalitavistara-sutra and other Mah&y&na works.*] 

T II S I ^ I ^ II 

Tn&y&-gandharva-uagara-inriga-tri6nik&-vat, 
like illusion, the city of the celestial musicians, and mirage , srr va, or. 

442. It may, continues the objector, be likened to jugglery, the 
city of the celestial quiristers or a mirage. 

The means and the objects of knowledge are as unreal as things ex- 
hibited in jugglery, etc. 

|^r¥TT5TT^f%^: N 9 I ^ I N 

ffWreui hetu-a-bh&\ &t, owing to nonexistence of cause ; 5rfa%: 
a-aiddhih non-proof. 

■ ?r«rT m^TT «r«>T ^sfr i 

3f*fr?*n^T«n ^ , <£JT II Madhyamika-Sutra, Chap. VII.' 

qster n<t(^T m*rr i 

rnumigm 3 fdfcrrrflrafiT adrom? srwer 11 

( Quoted in M&dhyamik& Vritti, p. 57). 

VTT^TT ^filf ft I (Arya-Up&lipriocba, quoted in M. V 63) 

l ( Arya-Sam&dhir4ja- ‘ 
Bhattaraka quoted iu Li&dkanuh,& Vritti, Chap. XXI.) 

168 

BOOK TV, CHAPTER II. 

443. This cannot, we reply, be proved, as there is no reason 

for it. 

There is no reason that the concept of the means and the objects of 
knowledge should bear an analogy to the concept of things appearing in 
a dream but not to that of things appearing in our wakeful state. If 
you, to prove the unrealty of things in a dream, adduce the reason that 
these are not perceived in our wakeful state, we would, to prove the reality 
of the means and the objects of knowledge, adduce the reason that these 
are perceived m our wakeful state 

n 8 \ ^ \ « 

smriti-sahkalpa-vat, like memory and imagination, “3 cha, 
and , svapna-visaya-abhim&nah, idea of object seen in a 

dream. 

444. The concept of things in a dream arises in the same way 
as remembrance and imagination. 

Th9 things that appear m a dream are notunreal. We can conceive 
of them in a dream just as we can do in our wakeful Btate. Our concept 
of things in the dream is due to our memory and imagination. 

It is by a reference to the knowledge in onr wakeful condition, 
that we ascertain our knowlenge in the dream to be unreal. Bat in the 
event of there being only one condition, viz., that of wakefulness, the ana¬ 
logy to the dream would not be appropriate. 

cjrl II 8 I ^ I $1 U 

mithya-upalabdhi-vinasah, destruction of false per¬ 
ception or cognition ; tattva-jn&nSt, from knowlege of reality j 

svapna-v saya-abhimana-pran&sa-vat, like the des¬ 
truction of the idea of things seen m a dream , prati-bodhe, on 

awakening, 

445. Our false apprehension is destroyed by a knowledge of the 
truth, just as our concept of objects in a dream comes to an end on our 
awaking. 

In the case of jugglery, the city of the celestial quiristers and 
the mirage, our appi ehension, if it is false, consists of our imputing “that” 
to what is “not that” just as when we mistake a poBfc for a man. The 

THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 

169 

Objects of the apprehension are, however, not unreal, inasmuch aB they 
arise from our memory and imagination. 

Jugglery {m&y&) consists of a false apprehension produced in others 
by an artifice through the use of materials similar to those originally 
announced by him. 

Just as our concept of objects in a dream passes away aB Boon as we 
are awake, so also our false apprehension of objects disappears as soon as 
we attain a true knowledge of those objects. 

II 9 I ^ I ^ II 

buddheh, of the understanding, of (false) knowledge; w cha, also; 
ijU evam, likewise ; fkfirfrTOratasswffit nimitta-sadbMva-upalambhat, from 
perception or cognition of the cause and its existence. 

446. There is therefore no denial of false knowledge, inas¬ 
much as we perceive that there is a cause for that knowledge. 

It has already been shown that our concept of objects in a dream is 
unreal, inasmnch as we do not actually perceive them at that time, but 
that the objects of the dream are not unreal, inasmuch as they arise from 
oUr memory and imagination. In fact, the objects that give rise to false 
knowledge are never unreal, although the knowledge itself may be false. 

h9i^i^ii 

tattva-pradh&na -bbedat, owing to the distinction of the 
reality and the primary idea or appearance, rmthyA-bnddheh, of 

false knowledge ; ffsrs^iqqRr: dvai-vidhya-upapattih, proof of twofoldness. 

447. And false knowledge involves a two-fold character on 
account of the distinction between the essence and appearance of its 
object. 

"When wo mistake a post for a man, our knowledge assnmes the 
form “that is man.” Our knowledge of the post, in so far as it is called 
“that’*, is a true knowledge, but in so far as it is described as “man”, 
is a false knowledge. This falsity of knowledge is due to our recognition 
of certain properties common to the post and the man. • 

u 9 » ^ i n 

^WTfwfat^bn^UTfTTrt sara&dhi -visega-abhy&s&t, from the practice of a 
particular contemplation. 

22 

170 

BOOX IV, CHAPTER II. 

448. The knowledge of truth is rendered habitual by a special 
practice of meditation. 

Meditation is the soul’s union with the mind abstracted from the 
senses whose contact with objects does not produce any perception. The 
knowledge of the truth is rendered habitual by the repeated practice of 
this meditation. 

n $ \ ^ \ ^ u 

si na, no , amfh^tasTT^ilTcI artha-vi6esa-pr&balyat, owing to predomin¬ 
ance of certain objects. 

449. Meditation, some say, is not practicable by reason of the 
predominance of certain external objects. 

There are innumerable obstacles to meditation, e. g. t hearing the 
■thundering noise of a cloud, one is prevented from practising meditation. 

fj^TT^w: ii v i ^ i 8 ° ii 

fjenf^Rr: ksut-adi-bhih, by hanger,etc , sRtTstih pravarttan&t, from 
incitement; cha, and 

450. And by reason of our being impelled to action by hunger, 
etc. 

Hunger and thirst, heat and cold, disease, etc. sometimes prevent 
us from practising meditation 

II & I ^ I 9 \ « 

purva-krita-phala-anubandh&t, from sequence of 
frnits of previous acts , tat-utpattih, its production. 

451. It arises, we reply, through possession of the fruits of out 
former works. 

We acquire a habit of practising meditation m consequence of onr 
good deeds of a previous life. 

n ? i ^ i ^ 11 

aranya-guhA-pulina-fi.di-'su, in forests, caves and 
river bank j yoga-abhy&sa-upade&a^t,instruction of the prac¬ 

tice of yoga or contemplation. 

452. We are instructed to practise meditation in such places as 
a forest, a cave or a sand-bank. 

THE NYlYA-SOTRAS-. 

17® 

The meditation practised in these places is not seriously disturbed 
by any obstacle. 

sresrifs’afcf 3 *^: n $ i ^ 1 ^ 11 

WWnf apavarge, in release ; wfa api, also , qef evam^, similar ; sRfjp; 
prasahgah, implication. 

453. Such possibilities may occur even in release. 

Even a person who has attained release may be disturbed by the 
violence of an external object. 

H U ? I ^ I w II 

«T na, no ; fhs<raTS , $raiwnftfc9Tcj niapanna-avaiyambh&vi-tvilt, being in¬ 
evitable only where (a body has already been) formed. 

454. It is, we reply, not so, because knowledge must spring up 
only in a body already in the state of formation. 

A violent external object produces knowledge only in a body which 
has been formed, in eonsequenoe of oar previous deeds, and which is 
endowed with senses, etc. 

H 8 I ^ I « 

tat-abhavah, its non-existence , ^ cba, and ; srqgrf apa-varge-„ 

in release. 

455. And there is absence of a body in our release. 

Our merits and demerits having already been exhausted, we cazmofr 
get a body after we have attained release. Release is the perfect freedom^ 
from all sufferings : it consists in. a complete destruction of all the seeds 
and seats of sufferings. 

tnt: II 8 I ^ I 2 % II 

a^sf tat-artham, to that end; UwfSpmiwif yama-niyamSbhy&m,by 
means of external and internal self-control; &tma-samskhra^ 

purification of the soul , yog&fc, from treatise on yoga or contemplat¬ 
ion ; <e oha, and ; snan^JTf^J'Tr#! adhyhtma-vidhi-upayaib, by means, efi 
injunctions and practices regarding the souk 

172 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER II. 

456. For that purpose there should be a purifying of our soul 
by abstinence from evil and observance of certain duties as well as by 
following the spiritual injunctions gleaned from the Yoga institute. 

In order to attain release we must practise meditation after the soul 
has been purified by onr abstinence , etc. The injunctions gleaned from 
the Yoga institute refer to penances, the controlling of oar breaths, the 
fixing of our mind, etc. 

^rT^: tl 9 I ^ I u 

SJIswsiOTwnH: jn&na-grahana-abhy&sah, study of the science of the 
soul and constant application to it ; tat-vidyaih, with those who are 

versed in it ■ w cha, and ; STS' saha, with ; samv&dah, conversation. 

457. To secure release, it is necessary to study and follow this 
treatise on knowledge as well as to hold discussions with those learned 
in that treatise 

The spiritual injunctions furnished by the Yoga institute cannot be 
properly assimilated unless we have already acquired a trne knowledge 
of the categories explained m the Ny&ya f§astra. It is therefore very 
useful to study tho Nyay a &&stra and to hold discnssions with persons 
learned in the {§&stra. 

n ? i ^ i k n 

?f tam conversation ; sisya-guru-sabrah- 

maob&n-visista-sreyorthibhih, with disciples, preceptors, fellow students, 
and seekers after the supreme good ; an-asfiyibhih, with unen- 

vious , abhyupey&t, resort to. 

458. One should enter upon discussions with unenvious persons, 
such as disciples, preceptors, lellow-students and seekers of the 
aummum bonum- 

The epithet “unenvious” excludes those who do not seek truth but 
desire victory. Discussion has been defined in aphorism 1—2—1. 

m jrctsrcisNfifcit n 9 i ^ i k n 

srfcl'TJiffcW pratipaksa-hinam, without advancing opposition ; ?rR? api, 
even ; art va, or ; HT^rsTHlsf prayojana-artham, for the sake of the purpose ; 
«f$31 arthi-tve, where one needs it. 

THE NYIya-SOTRAS. 

m 

459. In case of a necessity, for the search of truth, discussion 
may be held even without an opposing side. 

A person desirous of knowledge may snbmit his views for exami* 
nation by simply expressing his curiosity for truth without an attempt 
to establish the views. 

II 91 ^ I 3° II 

tattva-adhyavas&ya-samraksana-artham, for the sake 
of the conservation of the true and certain knowledge about reality ; vTSPV- 

jalpa-vitande, sophistry and cavil ; tffagft gjftqnil p i f vija-praroha-Bam 
raksana-artham, for the sake of the preservation of the shoots from seeds ; 
g»g <W r ra ETC*!igqC kantaka-s&kh&4varana-vat, like the fencing or covering of 
thorns and branches. 

460. Wranglings and cavils may be employed to keep up our 
zeal for truth just as fences of thorny boughs are used to safeguard 
the growth of seeds. 

Certain talkative people propound philosophies which are mutually 
opposed, while others violate all sense of rectitude out of a bias for their 
own side. Seeing that these people have not attained true knowledge 
and are not freed from faults, we may, in our disputation against them, 
employ wrangliugs and cavils which do not in themselves deserve any 
profit or encomium. 

TSRZig II 5? I ^ I m II 

m«lf t&bhy&m, by means of them, sophistry and cavil; vigr- 

ihya, for overcoming $ kathanam, statement. 

461. Sophistry and cavil should be employed also in declaring 
the truth to overcome the attack of the erratic. 

174 

BOOK V, CHAFFEE I. 

Book V -—Chaptfr I. 

5(TRTsr?l4f^^ i 'RT^qi| l 

srrfgir^f nm^T?r^rqf%^9i^a , ^^T|^mqTq&- 

^^qq^q^fS^qgq^ft^Rr^TmrJT 3ST«TCRT:Ui*|^|| 

gisnaftqwt??! cqtavfa«ifa«tf ftsF 5 traT«r srrtasrrfsrswff JrFagsRrrgsqfa: ?ftrc- 
JnETOTlh^lfa^r f^^Tqqrg'rassqg'lsfsSlfflBTlf^W s&dharmya-vaidhar- 

mya-utkarsaapakar§a-varnya-avarnya-vikalpa-s&dhya-pr&pti-apr&pti-pra- 
sanga-pratidrist&nta-anutpatti-sain&aya-prakarana-ahetu-arthfl.patti-avise- 
sa-upaptti-upalabdhi-anupalabdhi-nitya-amtya-k&rya-sam&li, identicals 
in respect of resemblance, difference, addition, subtraction,, questionable, 
unquestionable, alternative, thing to be established, presence, absence, 
regression, connter-example, non-production, doubt, topic, non-reason, 
presumption, non-difference, demonstration, perception, non-perception, 
eternal, non-eternal, and effect. 

462. futilities are as follows-—(1) Balancing the homogeneity, 
(2) balancing the heterogeneity, (3) balancing an addition, (4) balancing 
a subtraction, (5) balancing the questionable, (6) balancing the 
unquestionable, (7) balancing the alternative (8) balancing the 
reciprocity, (9) balancing the co-presence, (10) balancing the mutual 
absence, (11) balancing the infinite regression, (12) balancing the 
counterexample, (13) balancing the non-produced, (14) balancing the 
doubt, (15) balancing the controversy, (16) balancing the non-reason, 
( 17 ) balancing the presumption, (18) balancing the non-difference, 
(19) balancing the non-demonstration, (20) balancing the perception, 
(21) balancing the non-perception, (22) balancing the non-eternality, 
(23) balancing the eternality and (24) balancing the effect. 

Futility, which is a fallacious argument, has been in general terms 
defined in aphorism 1-2-18. The twentyfour kinds of futility enunciated 
here will each be defined in due course The fallacious characters of the 
twentyfour kinds will also be exposed in Separate aphorisms. 

M H I ^ I ^ II 

THE NYlYA-SttTftA'S. 

1?5 

sadharmy a-vaidharmy&-bhy4m, by means of resem¬ 
blance and difference , upasamh&re, in case of a conclusion , rRifwf- 

tat-dharma-viparyaya-upapatteh, on account of the absence 
of that characteristic , s&dharmya-vaidharmya-Bamau, 

identicals in respect of resemblance and difference. 

463. If against an argument bated on a homogeneous or 
heterogeneous example one offers an opposition based on the same 
kind of example, the opposition will be called “balancing the 
homogeneity’’ or “balancing the heterogeneity". 

Balancing the homogeneity — A certain person, to prove the non- 
«ternality of sound, argues as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

Because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers the following futile opposition:— 
Sound is eternal, 

' i 

because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

The argument, viz ., sound is non-eternal, is based on the homo¬ 
geneity of sound with the non-eternal pot on the ground of both being pro¬ 
ducts. The opposition, viz , sound is eternal, is said to be based on 
the homogeneity of sound with the eternal sky on the alleged ground of 
both being incorporeal. This sort of opposition, futile as it is, is called 
“balancing the homogeneity”, which aims at showing an equality of the 
arguments of two sides m respect of the homogeneity of examples 
employed by them. 

Balancing the heterogeneity .—A certain person, to prove the non-eter- 
nality of sound, argues as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 

whatever is not non-eternal is not a product, 

as the sky, 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

Sound is eternal, 
because it is incorporeal, 
whatever is not eternal is not incorporeal, 

as a pot. 

176 

BOOK V, CHATTEB 1, 

The argument, m 2 ., sound is non-eternal, is based on the heterogeneity 
of sound from the not-non-eternal sky, which are mutually incompatible. 
The opposition, viz., sound is eternal, is said to be based on the heteroge¬ 
neity of sound from the not-incorporeal pot which are alleged to be in¬ 
compatible with each other. This sort of opposition, futile as it is, is called 
“balancing the heterogeneity”, which aims at showing an equality of 
the arguments of two sides m respect of the heterogeneity of examples 
employed by them, 

u h i \ i t « 

iflc^rq go-tv&t, from bovineness, the generic idea of a cow , 
go-siddhi-vat, like the proof of a cow ; afesrf^iJtat-Biddhih, its proof. 

464. That is, we say, to be established like a cow through 
cowhood (or cow-type). 

The Naiy&yika says:—If the opposition referred to in the previous 
aphorism is to be valid it mast be based on the example, homogeneous 
or heterogeneous, exhibiting a universal connection between the reason and 
the predicate snch as we discern between a cow and cowhood or a universal 
disconnection between the reason and the absence of the predicate such as 
we discern between a cow and absence of cowhood. In the argument— 
“sound is non-eternal, because it is a product, like a pot”, the homogeneous 
example “pot” exhibits a universal connection between productivity 
and non-eternality, all products being non-etornal, but in the opposition 
—“sound is eternal, because it is incorporeal, like the sky”—the homo¬ 
geneous example “sky” does not exhibit a universal connection between 
incorporeality and eternality because there are things, such as intellect 
or knowledge, which are incorporeal but not eternal. A similar obser¬ 
vation is to be made with regard to the opposition called “balancing the 
heterogeneity.” In the opposition “sound is eternal, because it iB incor¬ 
poreal, whatever is not eternal is not incorporeal, as a pot”, the 
heterogeneous example “pot” does not exhibit a universal disconnection 
between incorporeality and absence of eternality because there are 
things, such as intellect or knowledge, which are incorporeal but not 
eternal. 

II % \\ | 2 II 

THE NYAyA-SOtB AS. 

\iY 

€rr«qgg|^[: s&dhya-drist4ntayoh, of the thing to be established and 
the example , dharma-vikalp4t, from exchange or mntual tran¬ 
sfer of properties; ubhaya-s4dhya-tv4t, both being m need of 

proof; ^ cha, and, 3S3»gT I TOT3r l,? ?fa l, ?Tf%=P5 l T£rrK?HTtTfs utkarsa-apakaisa-varnya- 
avarpya*vikalpa-s4dhya-sam4h, identicals in respect of addition, subtra¬ 
ction , doubtful, not-doubtfnl, alternative and the thing to be established. 

465. The subject and example alternating their characters or 
both standing in need of proof; there occur (futilities called) “balancing 
an addition”, “balancing a subtraction”, ‘‘balancing the questionable", 
“balancing the unquestionable”, ‘‘balancing the alternative” and 
“balancing the reciprocity. 

Balancing an addition .—If against an argument based on a certain 
character of the example one offers an opposition based on an additional 
character thereof, the opposition will be called '‘balancing an addition.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argnes 
as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 

like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

Sound is non-eternal (and corporeal), 
because it is a product, 

like a pot (which is non-eternal as well as corporeal). 

The opponent alleges that if sound is non-eternal like a pot, it 
Blast also be corporeal like it: if it ib not corporeal let it be also not 
non-eternal. This sort of futile opposition is called “balancing aj> 
addition” which aims at showing an equality of the argument of two 
sides in respect of an additional character (possessed by the example and 
attributed to the subject) 

Balancing a subtraction —If against an argument based on a 
Certain character of the example one offers an opposition based on 
another character wanting in it, the opposition will be called “balancing 
a subtraction.” 

A certion person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues 
as follows:— 

23 

178 

■BOO'K V, CHAPTER I. 

Sound :s non-eternal, 

, because it is a product, 

like a pot. 

A certain other person offers the following futile opposition:— 
Sound is non-eternal (but not audible), 
because it is a product, 

like a pot (which is non-eternal but not audible.) 

The opponent alleges that if sound is non-eternal like a pot, it 
cannot be audible, for a pot is not audible, and if sound is Btill held to 
be audible, let it be also not non-eternal. This sort of futile opposition is 
called ‘‘balancing a subtraction” which aims at showing an equality of 
the arguments of two sides m respeot of a certain character wanting in 
the example (and consequently also in the subject). 

Balancing the questionable —If one opposes an argument by main¬ 
taining that the character of the example is as questionable as that of the 
subject, the opposition will be called “balancing the questionable.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues 
aa follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

A pot is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like sound. 

The opponent alleges that if the non-eternality of sound is called in 
'question, why is not that of the pot too called in question, as the pot 
and sound are both products ? His object is to set aside the argument 
on the ground of its example being of a questionable charaoter. This 
sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the questionable" which 
aims at showing an equality of the arguments of two sides in respect 
of the questionable character of the subject as well as of the example. 

Balancing the ilnguestionable .—If one opposes an argument by 
alleging that the character of the subject is as unquestionable as that 
of the example, the opposition will be called “balancing the unques¬ 
tionable.” 

THE NYiYA SUTRAS. 

17»> 

A certain person,, to prove the non-eternality 

follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition 
A pot is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like sound. 

The opponent alleges that if the non-eternality of a pot is held to' 
be unquestionable, why is not that of Bound too held to be so, as the pot 
and sound are both products ? His object is to render the-argnment 
unnecessary on the ground of its subject being of an unquestionable 
character. This sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the 
unquestionable” which aims at showing the equality of the argur 
ments of two sides in respect of the unquestionable character of the 
example as well as of the subject. 

Balancing the alternative .—If one opposes an argument by attri¬ 
buting alternative character to the subject and the example, the opposi¬ 
tion will be called “ balancing the alternative ” 

A certain person, to prove the non -eternality of Bound, argues as- 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thust-— 

Sound is eternal and 1 formless, 
because it is a product, 

like a pot (which is non-eternal and has forms). 

The opponent alleges that the pot and sound are both-products^ 
yet one has form and' the other is-formless : why on the-same principle’ 
is notone (the pot) non-eternal and the other (sound) eternal? This sort 
of futile opposition is called “balancing the- alternative” which aim® 
at showing an equality of the arguments of two sideB m respect oi tha*> 
alternative characters attributed to the subxectand example,. 

of sound, argueB as- 

thus:— 

180 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

Balancing the reciprocity —If one opposes an argument by alleging 
a reciprocity of the subject and the example, the opposition will be 
called "balancing the reciprocity.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

A pot is non-eternal, > 

because it is a product, 
like sound. 

The opponent alleges that the pot and sonnd being both products 
one requires proof for its non-eternahty as much as the other does. 
Sound is to be proved non-eternal by the example of a pot and the pot 
is to be proved non-eternal by the example of sound. This leads 
to a reciprocity of the pot (example) and sonnd (subject) resulting in 
no definite conclusion as to the eternality or non-eternahty of sonnd. 
This sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the reciprocity” which 
brings an argument to a stand-still by alleging the reciprocity of the 
Bubject and the example. 

\\^\\ \ HU 

fisfefcj kinchit, partial , s&dharmy&t, from resemblance ; 

upasamh&ra-siddheh, from proof of the conclusion; vaidha- 

rmy&t, from difference ; 3refa%£T: a-pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

466. This is, we say, no opposition because there is a difference 
between the subject and the example although the conclusion is drawn 
from a certain equality, of their characters. 

The Naiyayika sayBs—The futilities called “balancing an addition,” 
"balancing a subtraction,”' “balancing the questionable,” “balancing 
the unquestonable’* and “balancing the alternative” are all based 
on the false supposition of a complete equality of the subject and the 
example. Though therff is no denial of an equality of the subject and 
the example in certain characters, there is indeed a great difference 
between them in other characters. 

THE NYAYA-SOtRAS. 

l§lr 

r Sound is non-eternal. 

' because it is a product, 

like a pot. 

In tbis argument although there is an equality of "sound” and 
“pot” m respect of their being both products, there is a great difference 
between them in other respects. A cow possesses some characters m 
common with a los qavaeus but there is no complete identity between them. 
No body can commit the futilities mentioned above if he beara in mind 
the equality of the subject and the example only in those characters which 
are warranted by the reason (middle term). In the case of the futility called 
“balancing an addition” it is clear that the equality supposed to exist 
between the pot and sound m respect of corporeality is not warranted by 
the reason (m 2 being a product), because there are things, such as 
intellect or knowledge, which are products but not corporeal. Similarly 
with regard to the futility called "balancing a subtraction,” the reason 
(viz. being a product) does not justify an equality of sound and pot in 
respeot of their being not audible. As regards the futilities called 
"balancing the questionable” and "balancing the unquestionable,” we 
cannot ignore the difference between the subject and the example without 
putting an end to all kinds of inference. The futility called "balanc¬ 
ing the alternative” introduces an equality between the pot and sound 
in respect of a character (mz. being eternal) which iB not warranted by 
the reason, viz. being a product. 

u h i \ \ % u 

sadhya-atidesat, from extension of the thing to be establ¬ 
ished ; cha, and , dnst&nta-upapatteh, because of proof of the 

example. 

467. And because the example happens to surpass the subject. 

The futility oalled "balancing the reciprocity” is based on the 
false supposition that the example stands exactly on the same footing as 
the subject. But that one surpasses the other is evident from aphorism 
1-1-25 which states that the example does not stand in need of proof 
as to its characters. 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

132 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

In this argument sound (the subject) may not be known by some 
to be non-eternal but a pot (the example) is known by all to be a product 
as well as non-eternal. ‘‘Balancing the reciprocity” is therefore a falla¬ 
cious argument. 

HTcsr stt f#t: srrssrT 

mCcSTT STT^IUTS^ II $ I \ t to It 

JITtil pr&pya, reaching, covering ; s&dhyam, the thing to be 

established , a-pr&pya, not reaching; sit v&, or r fair hetoh, of the 

mark or reason • m e f*TT pr&ptysL, by the fact of covering or co-extenBion ; 

a visista-tv&t, being undistinguished or identical; STSTTCfSTT a-pr4- 
ptvft, by reason of non-co-extension ; SRTTSTSPc^RI a s&dhaka-tv&t, not being 
a means of establishment, si cha, and ; sn'r^WlfERUU pr&pti-apr&pti-aamau, 
identicals in respect of presence and absence. 

468. If against an argument based on the co-presence of the 
reason and the predicate or on the mutual absence of them one offers 
an opposition based on the same kind of co-presence or mutual 
absence, the opposition will, on account of the reason being non- 
distinguished from or being non-conducive to the predicate, be called 
“balancing the co-presence” or “ balancing the mutual absence " 

Balancing the co-presence .—If against an argument based on the co¬ 
presence of the reason and the predicate, one offers an opposition based 
on the same kind of co-presence, the opposition will, on account of the 
reason being non-distmguished from the predicate, be called “ balancing 
the co-presence.” 

A certain person, to prove that there is fire in the hill, argnes as 
-follows:— 

The hill has fire, 
because it has smoke, 
like a kitchen. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:_ 

The hill has smoke, 
because it haB fii e, 
like a kitchen. 

THE NYAYA-SftTRA8. 

183 

The arguer has taken the smoke to be the reason and the fire to be 
the predicate. The opponent raises a question as to whether the smoke 
is present at the same site which is occupied by the fire or is absent from 
that site. If the smoke is present with the fire at the same site, there 
remains, according to the opponent, no criterion to distinguish the 
reason from the predicate. The smoke is, m his opinion, as much a 
reason for the fire as the fire for the smoke. This sort of futile opposi¬ 
tion is called “balancing the co-presence” which aims at stopping an 
argument on the alleged ground of the oo-presenoe of the reason and the 
predicate. 

Balancing the mutual absence .-—If against an argument based on* 
the mutual absence of the reason and the predicate, one offers an opposi¬ 
tion based on the same kind of mntual absence, the opposition will, on 
account of the reason being non-conducive to the predicate, be called 
“balanomg the mutual absence.” 

A certain person, to prove that there iB fire in the hill, argues as 
follows:— 

The hill has fire, 
beoause it has smoke, 

like a kitchen. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

The hill has smoke, 
because it has fire, 
like a kitchen. 

The opponent asks: “Is the smoke to be regarded as the reason 
beoause it iB absent from the site of the fire?” “Such a supposition ia 
indeed absurd.” The reason cannot establish the predicate without 
being connected with it, just as a lamp cannot exhibit a thing which is 
not within its reach. If a reason unconnected with the predicate could 
establish the latter, then the fire could be as much the reason for the 
.smoke as the smoke for the fire. This sort of futile opposition is called 
“balancing the mutual absence” which aims at bringing an argument 
to a close on the alleged ground of the mutual absence of the reason and 
the predicate. 

Mil ™ 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

1184 

ghata-&di-niBpatti-darian&t, from the observation of 
the production of the pot and the like , 'pldane, in the case of oppr¬ 
ession ; W aha, and • s?f»TWI?r<f abbichhr&t, from spells ; a-pra&ise- 

dhab) non-contradiction. 

469. This is, we say, no opposition because we find the production 
of pots by means of clay as well as the oppression of persons by 
spells. 

A potter cannot produce a pot without getting clay within hiB 
reach but an exorcist can destroy persons by administering spells from 
a distance. Hence it is clear that a thing is accomplished sometimes by 
the cause being present at its site and sometimes by being absent from 
it. “Balancing the co-presence’ 5 and “balancing the mutual absence’ 5 
which attach an undue importance to the proximity or remoteness of 
sites, are therefore totally fallacious arguments. 

II H I \ I « » 

dristantasya, of the example ; sETCUHSfir^ariJ k&rana-an-apa- 
deSslt, from non-application of the cause , USlUSUTUTcJ prati-avasthan&t, from 
counter-opposition j w cha, and , prati-dristantena, by a counter¬ 
example ; prasanga-pratidri§t&nta-samau, identicals in 

respect of regression and counter-example. 

470. If one opposes an argument on the ground of the example 
having been established by a series of reasons or on the ground of the 
existence of a mere counter-example, the oppostion will be called 
“balancing the infinite regression" or ‘‘balancing the counter¬ 
example" 

Balancing the infinite regression.—A certain person, to prove the 
non-eternality of Bound, argues as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition -thuss—■ 

If sound is proved to be non-eternal by the example of a pot, how 
is the pot again to be proved as non-eternal? The reason which proves 
the noD-eternahty of the pot is to be proved by a further reason. Thi® 
gives nee to an infinite regression which injures the proposition “sound 

THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 

185 

ia nod-eternal* 1 not less than the proposition “sound is eternal.** This 1 - 
sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the infinite regression* 1 
which aims at stopping an argument by introducing an infinite regression 
which is said to beset the example. 

Balancing the counter-example .—A certain person, to prove the non- 
eternality of sonnd, argues as follows :— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

Sound iB eternal, 
like the sky. 

The opponent alleges that if sonnd is held to be non-eternal by the 
example of a pot, why it should not be held to be eternal by the example 
of the sky? If the example of the sky is set aside, let the example of 
the pot too be set aside. This sort of futile opposition is called “balanc¬ 
ing the counter-example” which aims at setting aside an argument 
by the introduction of a counter-example. 

n n i \ i 

\° II 

pradlpa-up&dana prasnga uivritti-vat, like the 
cessation of the need for a collection of lamps , tat-vmivnttih. 

its cessation. 

471, The example does not, we say, require a series of reasons 
for its establishment just as a lamp does not require a series of lamps 
to be brought in for its illumination. 

The Naiy&yika says:— 

An example is a thing the characters of which are wellknown to an 
ordinary man as well as to an expert It does not require a series of 
reasons to reveal its own character or to reveal the character of the sub¬ 
ject with which it stands in the relation of homogeneity or heterogeneity. 
In this respect it resembles a lamp which illumines itself aB well as the 
things lying within its reach. 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

188 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

In this argument the pot is the example which is so well-known that 
it requires no proof as to its being a product or being nou-eteinal. 

Hence the opposition called '‘balancing the infinite regression*' 
is'not founded on a sound basis 

II !* \ \ I N II 

pratidristanta-hetu-tve, the counter-example being a 
reason , =5 cha, and , «T na, nod , ?r?g: a-heuuh, not a reason , ger«cT: drist^n- 
tah, the example. 

472. The example, we say, cannot be set aside as unreasonable 
only because a counter-example is advanced as the reason. 

The Naiy&yika says:— 

The opponent must give a special reason why the counter-example 
should betaken as specially fitted to lead toa conclusion and the example 
should not betaken as such. Until such a special reason is given, the 
counter-example cannot be accepted as leading to a definite conclusion. 
In fact a mere counter-example without a reason ^middle term) attending 
it cannot be conducive to any conclusion. Hence we must rely on an 
example attended by reason but not on a counter example unattended by 
reason. 

Sound is eternal, 
like the sky. 

This opposition which is founded on a mere counter-example is 
therefore to be rejected as unreasonable. 

II H I \ I ^ II 

STI^fi pr&k, prior , 3?q^: utpattbh, to production , k&rana- 

abhhvat, from the non-existence of the cause, STg?qFTT 5 W.' an-utpatti-samah, 
identical in respect of non-production. 

473. If one opposes an argument on the ground of the property 
connoted by the reason being absent from the thing denoted by the 
subject while it is not yet produced, the opposition will be called 
“balancing the non-produced.” 

A certain person, to prove that sound is non-eternal, argues as 
follows:— 

THE NTiYA-SOTRA-S. 

187 

' 8 onnd is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

Souud is eternal, 

because it is a non-effect of effort, 
like the sky. 

The opponent alleges that the property connoted by the reason, 
viz., being an effect of effort, is not predicable of the subject, viz., 
sound (while it is not yet produced). Consequently sound ib not non- 
eternal, it must then be eternal. There is, according to the opponent, 
an.apparent agreement between the two sides as to the sound being non- 
eternal on account of its being a non-effect of-effort. r lhis sort of futile 
opposition is- called “balancing the non-produced” which pretends 
to show 'an equality of the argument of two sides assuming the thing 
denoted by the subject to be as yet non-produced 

u % \ \\\^\\ 

?r*n*Trani tatha-bhavat, from the nature given to a thing when it is 
produced , ntpanuasya, of the thing produced . CTTntaqqr: k&rana- 

ttpapatteh, owing to proof of the cause , *T nav not, «BT€*!Fsfa%iiI. karana-pra- 
tisedhah, contradiction of the cause. 

474 This is, we say, no opposition against our reason so well 
predicable of the subject which becomes as such only when it is produced. 

The Naiyayika disposes of the futtle opposition called, “balancing 
the non-produced'* by stating that the subject can become as each only 
when it is produced, and that there is then no obstacle to the property 
•E tne reason being predicated of it. The opposition, viz, “sound 
(while nonrproduced) is eternal, because it is not then an effect of effort,” 
cairies no weight with it, since we do nob take the sound to be the subject 
before it 13 produced Sound, while it is produced, is certainly an effect. 
e£ effort and as such is non-eternal. 

188 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

samanya-dristintayoh, of the genus and the (individual 
put forward as) example ; amdriyaka-tve, being sensible , 97T^ 

sam&ne, equally , fifc3TfJiaT K H'3wan<I nitya-anitya-sadharmyat, from resembl¬ 
ance of things eternal (genus) and non-eternal (individual), 931337: sani- 
gaya-Bamah, identical m respect of doubt. 

475. If one opposes an argument on the ground of a doubt arising 
from the homogeneity of the eternal and the non-eternal consequent on 
the example and its gen is (or type) being equally objects of perception 
the oppositon will be called “balancing the doubt.’* 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues aa 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal 

because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thns:— 

Sound is non-eternal or eternal (?) 
because it is an object .of perception, 
like a pot or pot-UBBB. 

Tho opponent alleges that sound is homogeneous with a pot as well 
as pot-ness inasmuch as both are objectB of perception, but the pot 
being non-eternal and pot-ness (the genus of pots or pot-type) being eternal 
there arises a doubt as to whether the sound is non-eternal or eternal. 
This sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the doubt” which 
aims at rejecting an argument in consequence of a doubt arising from 
the homogeneity of the eternal and the non-eternal. 

II ^ i \ | \*i II 

s&dharmy&t, from resemblance , samsaye, doubt arising; 
W na, and ; sam&ayah, doubt, twwgfq vaidharmySt, from difference ; 

ubhaya-thd, in both ways , qr v&, or ; samsaye, doubt arising ; 

*The term sdmAnya in the sense of“geneiaI notion, genus or type** 
was evidently taken form the Vaifiesika philosophy. 

THE N Y A Y A-SOTR A S. 

IS& 

WSrarcfSTOSTSfn: atyanta-samsaya-prasangah, implication of unending 
doubt , ffRute^MKpnrWT?! nitya tva-an-abhyupagam&t, from non-admission 
of eternality , W cha, and ; HTJTHW sAtnanya-sya, of the genus ; siafa^sr. a- 
pratisedhah, non-contradiction. 

476. This is, we say; no opposition because we do not admit that 
eternality can be established by the homogeneity w ith the genus : a 
doubt that arises from a knowledge of the homogeneity vanishes from 
that of the heterogeneity, and that which arises in both ways never ends. 

The NaiyAyika says:— 

Sound cannot be said to be eternal on the mere ground of its homo- 
geneity with pot-ness (the genus of pots or pot-type) but must be 
pronounced to be non-eternal on the ground of its heterogeneity from 
the same in respect of being a product. Though on the score of 
homogeneity we may entertain doubt as to whether sound is eternal 
or non-eternal, but on the score of heterogeneity we can pronounce it 
undoubtedly to be non-eternal. In this case we must bear in mind that 
we cannot ascertain the true nature of a thing unless we weigh it m 
respect of its homogeneity with as well as heterogeneity from other 
things. If even then there remains any doubt as to its true nature, that 
doubt will never end. 

maf3snT%f: u ^ i ^ \ \\ w 

ubhaya-sAdharmy&t, from resemblance to both ; jrfaBmfa- 
prakriyA-siddheh, because of proof of the operation (of the snbject and 
its opposite), prakarana-samah, identical m respect of the topic. 

477. ‘‘B alan cing the controversy” is an opposition which is 
conducted on the ground of homogeneity with {or heterogeneity from) 
both sides. 

A ceitain persou, to prove the non -eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 

like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus. 1 
Sound is eternal, 

because it is audible, 
like sound-ness. 

190 

BOOK V, CHAPTER L 

The opponent alleges that the propo-ut >n, viz. sound is-non-eternal, 
cannot fce proved because the reason, viz , audibility which is homo¬ 
geneous with b>th sound (which is non-eternal} and soar dne-^g (shich ib 
eternal), provokes the very controversy for the settlement of which it was 
employed Tnis sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the cm- 
tiovers}” which harts an. argument by giving rise tj the very controversy 
which was to be settled. 

: nra^ v iT^qqi%: qraq^tqq^: 

« $ t \ i u 

i ratipakfat, from the connter-snbje''t . prakarana- 

siddheh, ber'aa->e of prod of the topic , Sjfk*lWT^TlTTT: prutisedha-an-upapa- 
ttih, non-pioof o-t the contradiction ; srfk’?!?l'lT#. pratipaksa u, apatteh, 
bee sis uo of proof of the counter-subject 

478. This is, we sa^, no opposition because it provokes a 
controversy which has an opposing side. 

The Naiy&yika Hays:—The opposition called “balancing the con¬ 
troversy*' cannot set aBide the main argument because it leads to a 
controversy which supports one side quite as strongly as it is opposed 
by the other side, 

ff^T^qif%|fn * i \ \ n 

traik&lya-a-siddheh, because of non-operation in all the 
three times , ffft: hatch, of the reason ; w|g?ra: a-hetu-samah, identical 
in respect of non-reason. 

* 

479. “Bal mcing the non- reason” is an opposition which is based 
on the reason bein^ shown to be impossible at all the three times. 

Aceitain. person, to pn ve the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal", 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

Here “being a product’* is the reason or sign for “being non- 
eternal*' which is the predicate or sigmficate 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 

191 

The Teason or sign is impossible at all the thiee times because it 
cannot precede, succeed, or be simultaneous with the predicate or 
sign ideate. 

(a) The reason (or sign) does not precede the predicate (or signi- 
fieate) because the former gets its name only when it establishes the latter. 
It is impossible for the reason to be called as such befoie the establish¬ 
ment of the predicate. 

(6) The reason (or sign) does not succeed the predicate(or significate) 
because what would be the use of the former if the latter existed already ? 

(c) The reason (or sign) and the predicate (or significate) cannot 
exist simultaneously for they will then be reciprocally connected like 
the right and left horns of a cow. 

This sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the non-reason ” 
which aims at setting aside an argument by showing that the reason is 
impossible at all the three tunes. 

?\ ii h \ \ \ it 

>1 na, no j betu-ta^, from the reason ; Sirwifsre. s&dhya-siddheli, 

from the establishment of the thing to be established , traikA- 

lya-a-siddhih, non-pioof of operation in the three times. 

480. There is, we say, no impossibility at the three times because 
the predicate or significate is established, by the reason or sign. 

The Naiyayika says:—The knowledge of the knowable and the 
establishment of that which is to be established take place from reason 
which mast precede that which is to be known and that which ib to be 
established. 

u s* \ \ i ii 

pratisedha-an-upapatteh,from non-proof of contradiction 
or opposition , srfb%§» , *T J rfoiii=t: pratiseddhavya-a-prati-sedhah, non-contrad¬ 
iction of the thing to be coi indicted. 

481. There is, we further say, ro opposition of that which is to 
be opposed, because the opposition itself is impossible at all the three 
times. 

192 

BOOK V, CHAPTER r. 

It being impossible for tbe opposition to precede, succeed or be 
simultaneous with that which is to be opposed, the opposition itself is 
invalid and consequently the original argument holds good. 

3RrsfTq%a: 

arth&patti-tah, from presumption ; sffaqafrfa^: prati-paksa- 
siddheh, from proof of counter-subject, arujf<rfwTarth&patti-samah, iden¬ 
tical m respect of presumption. 

482. If one advances an opposition on the basis of a presumption 
the opposition will be called ‘‘balancing the presumption " 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thuB:-— 

Sound is presumed tjp be eternal, 
because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

The opponent alleges that if sound is non-eternal on account of its 
homogeneity with non-eternal things (e g. in respect of its being a pro¬ 
duct), it may be concluded by presumption that sound is eternal on 
account of its homogeneity with eternal things (p.g. in respect of its being 
incorporeal}. This sort of futile opposition is called "balancing the 
presumption" which aims at stopping an argument by setting presump¬ 
tion as a balance against it. 

» H i \ i ^ « 

an-ukta-sya, of thing not Stated ; artMpatteh, from 

piesumption , paksa-h&neh, of injury to, or loss of, position , 

u .ipattih, proof , an-ukta-tv4t, because it is unsaid; 

an-aikantika-tvat, because of multifariousness, arfch&pafcfceh, of 

piemmption. 

THE NYAYA-SOtRAS. 

193 

483. If things unsaid could come by presumption, there would, 
we say, arise a possibility of the opposition itself being hurt on account 
of the presumption being erratic and conducive to an unsaid conclusion. 

Sound is eternal, 

becanse it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

If by presnmption we could draw a conclusion unwarranted by the 
reason, we could from the opposition cited above draw the following 
conclusion:— 

Sound is presumed to be non-eternal, 
becanse it is a product, 
like a pot. 

This would hurt the opposition itself In fact the presumption as 
adduced by the opponent is erratic. If one says that “sound is 
non-eternal because of its homogeneity with non-eternal things’-’, the pre¬ 
emption that naturally follows is that “sound is eternal because of its 
homogeneity with eternal things” and vice versa. There is no rule that 
presnmption should be made in one case and not in the case opposed to 
it , and in the event of two mutually opposed presumptions no definite 
conclusion would follow. Hence the opposition called “balancing the 
presumption” is untenable. 

H q t t I ^ « 

: eka-dharma-upapatteh, from proof of one property ; wfsr- 
avi&ese, m case of non-difference , ST5gffej?l'Tsr?fTiR| sarva-avi6e,a-prasan- 
g&b, from implication of non-difference in all respects. sabdh&va- 

upapatteh, because of proof of existence ; a-vise?a-samah, iden¬ 

tical in respect of non-difference. 

484. If the subject and example are treated as non-different 
in respect of the possession of a certain property on account of their 
possessing in comn on the property connoted by the reason, it follows 
as a ccclusiou that all things are mutually non-different in respect of 
the posse sion of every property on account of their being existent : this 
sort oi opposition is called “balancing the non-difference " 

20 

194 

T?© OK V/CEAtTEBT 

A certain person, -to prove the non-eternulity of ’sound, argues as 
•follows:— 

Sound is non eternal, 

because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

■A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus: — 

‘If the pot and sound are treated as non-different in respect of noa- 
•eternalifcy m consequence of then- both being products, it follows as a 
conclusion 'that -all things are mutually non-different in respect of the 
possession of every property in consequence of their being existent. 
Therefore, -no 'difference existing between the eternal and the non- 
eternal, sound may be treated as eternal. This soit of opposition is called 
“balancing the uan-differeTice” which aims at hurting an argument by 
assuming all things to be mutually non difiemnt. 

gtfirg wug qq^: \\^\\\ y\\ 

kva chit, in some cases , sunfgqTW: dharma-anupapatteh, from 
non-proof of the property , fffef kva chit, in some cases , oha, and; 
gqq^: upapatteh, from proof , srRraqivrft: pratusedha-abh&vah, absence of 
contradiction. 

485. This is, we say, no opposition because the property possess¬ 
ed in common by the subject and the example happens in certain msta- 
-nces to abide in the reason while in other instances not to abide in it. 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot 

Here the pot and sound possessing in common the property of being 
a product are treated as non-different in respect of the possession of now- 
eternality On the Bame principle if all things are treated as non-different 
in consequence of their being existent, we would like to know in what 
respect they are non-different. If they are treated ae non-different in 
respect of non-eternality, then the argument would stand thus:— 

All things are non-eternal, 
because they are existent, 
like (?) 

In this argument “all things" being the subject, there is nothing 
left which may serve as an example. A part of the subject cannot be cited 
as the example because the example must be a well-established thing 

THENYifA SflTRAS. 

1P5' 

while the subject is a thing which is yet to be established. The argument,. 
for want of an example, loads to no conclusion. In fact all things are 
not non-eternal since some at least are eternal. In other words, non- 
eternalit-y abides in some existent things and. does not abide m other 
existent things Hence all things are not mutually non-different and the 
opposition called “balancing the non-difference” is unreasonable. 

« s* i ^ t tr 

TOTOrotfrrar-: ubhaya karana upapatteh, from proof of causes of 
both ; sqqfcrsff: upapatti-samah, identical in respect of proof. 

486. If an opposition is offered by showing that both the- 
demonstrations are justified by reasons the opposition will be called* 
“balancing the demonstration^.’ 

A certain person demonstrates the uon-eternality of sound as- 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers an opposition by the alleged demons* 
teation of the eternality of sound as follows:—• 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

The reason in the firet demonstiation supports the non-etemality 
of sound while that in the second demonstration supports the eternality 
ef sound, yet both- the demonstrations- are alleged to be right. The 
opponent advanced the second apparent demonstration as a balance 
against the first to create a dead-look. This sort of opposition is called 
“ balancing the demonstration^’. 

lLpapatti-karana-abhyanujnanat, fro-m admission 
of cause of proof ( of the counter-subject a-pratifedhah non¬ 

contradiction. 

487. This is,, we say, no opposition because there is an admiss* 
ion of the first demonstration. 

196 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

The Naij&yika says:— 

The opponent having asserted that both the demonstrations are 
justified by reasons, has admitted the reasonableness of the first demons¬ 
tration which supports the non-eternality of sound. If to avoid the 
incompatibility that exists between the two demonstrations, he now denies 
the reason which supports non-eternality we would ask why does he not 
deny the other reason which supports eternality of sound, for he can 
avoid incompatibility by denying either of the reasons Hence the op¬ 
position called “balancing the demonstration” is not well-founded. 

u ** \ \ \ ^ ii 

mrdista-kilrana-abh&ve, in the absence of the known 
cause , sjfq api, even , upalambh&t, from perception , stRsflqmT: 

upalabdhi-samah, identical in respect of perception. 

488. If an opposition is offered on the ground that we per¬ 
ceive the character of the subject even without the intervention of the 
reason, the opposition will be called “balancing the perception.’’ 

A certain person, to prove the non eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:— 

Sound can be ascertained to be non-eternal even without the reason 
that it is a product, for we perceive that sound is produced by the branches 
of trees broken by wind. This sort of opposition is called “balancing 
the perception” which aims at demolishing an argument by setting up 
an aot of perception as a balance against it. 

sft u h i \ i ^ u 

k&rana-antarkt, from other causes ; srfqapi, also, 
tat dharma-upapatteh, from proof of that property ; a-pratisedh- 

ah, non contradiction. 

489. This is, we say, no opposition because that character can 
be ascertained by other means as well. 

THE NYIYA-SOtRAS. 

197' 

The Naiyayika says that the argument, viz , “sound is non-eternal 
because it is a product, like a pot,” implies that sound is proved to be 
non-eternal through the reason that it is a product It does not deny 
other means, such as perception, etc., which also may prove sound to be 
non-eternal. Hence the opposition called “balancing the perception” 
does not set aside the main argument. 

^qqs^jqsn^qTqrefi- sf|qft€tqq€*gq- 

qjiqqq: II u i \ I ^ II 

tat-an-upalabdheh, from non-cognition of that, anrqgsmrg an- 
npalambh&t, from non-perception ; abh&va-siddhau,non existence 

being established j tat-viparita-upapatteh from proof of its 

opposite , gr*£q3if®’=l?HT: an-upalabdhi-samah, identical in respect of non¬ 
perception. 

490. If against an argument proving the non existence of a thing 
by the non-perception thereof, one offers an opposition aiming at prov¬ 
ing the contrary by the non-perception of the non-perception, the opp¬ 
osition will be called ‘‘balancing the non-perception.” 

In aphorBun 2-2-18 the Naiy&yika has stated that there is no veil 
which covers sound for we do not perceive such a veil.In aphoraim 2-2-19 
his opponent has stated that there is a veil because we do not perceive the 
non-perception thereof. If the non-perception of a thing proves its non¬ 
existence, the non-perception of the non-perception must, m the opinion 
of the opponent, prove the existence of the thing. This sort of opposition 
is called “balancing the non-perception” which aims at counteracting 
an argument by setting up non-perception as a balance against it. 

- n n i ^ \ \° » 

an uplambhaiuiaka-tvat, being of the natuie of non¬ 
perception , apTUvSSilr. an-upalabdheh, of non-cognition , wtfj: a-hetuh, 
not a reason. 

491. The reasoning through non-perception is not, we say, sou¬ 
nd, because non-perception is merely the negation of perception. 

The Naiy&yika says:—Perception refers to that which is existent 
while non-perception to that which is non-existent. The non-perception of 
non-perception which signifies a mere negation of non-perception cannot 

198 

BOOK V, CHAPTER 1. 

be interpreted as refeiring to an existent thing. Hence the opposition 
called “balancing the non-perception” is not well-founded-. 

3|T«tf?rs55qf«Tt*^ inina-vikalpAn&tn, of diverse forms of cognition , w cha, 
and , W^I*ltara'^5Tr?I bhava abh&va-samved-an&fc, from consciousness of exis¬ 
tence and non existence ; STtRTclWf adhi-&tmam, in the bouI. 

492. There is, moreover, an internal perception of the existence 
as well as of the non-existence of the various kinds of knowledge. 

There are internal perceptions of such forms as “I am sure,” “ I 
am no.t sure,” “ 1 have doubt,” “ I have mr doubt”, etc., which prove that 
we can perceive the non existence of knowledge as well as the existence 
thereof. Hence the non-perception itself is perceptible, and' as there is 
no non-perception of non-perception, the opposition called “balancing the’ 
non-perception” falls to the ground. 

I ^ ir 

sfidharmyftt, through resemblance ; tulya- 

dharma-upapatteh, because of proof of equal properties ; Qsqf 
sarva-anityatva-prasahg&t, from implication of non-eternality of all; 
sipTSKTOr anitya-samah, identical in respect of non-eternal'ity. 

493. If one finding that things which are homogeneous possess 
equal characters, opposes an argument by attributing non-eternahty to- 1 
all things, the opposition will be called "balancing thenon-eternality”. 

A certain person, to prove 1 the non-eternality of sound,- argues a# 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal 1 , 

because it is a product,. 

like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:—■ 

If sound is non-eternal on account of its being homogeneous with 
a pot which is non-eternal, it will follow as a consequence that all things 
are non-eternal beoause they are in some one orother respect homogeneous 

THE NYiYA-SftTRAS. 

199 

With the pot— a consequence which will render all inferences impossible 
for want of heterogeneous examples. This sort of opposition is called 
“balancing the non-eternal” which seeks to counteract an argument on 
'the alleged ground that all things are non-eternal. 

* i * i \\ » 

•giWttarftla&dharmy&t, through resemblance ; siffcraf: a siddheh,because 
of non-establishment , pratisedha-asiddhih, non-establishment 

of contradiction ; fffdMpratisedhya-s&dharmyat, throngh resem¬ 
blance to what is to be contradicted ; 9 cha, and. 

494. The opposition, we say, is unfounded because nothing can 
be established from a mere homogeneity and because there is homo¬ 
geneity even with that which is opposed. 

The Naiy&yika says:— 

We cannot ascertain the character of a thing from its mere homo¬ 
geneity with another thing: in doing so we must consider the logical 
-connection between the reason and the predicate. Sound, for instance, 
is non-eternal not merely because it is homogeneous with a non-eternal 
pot but because there is a universal connection between “being a pro¬ 
duct” and “being non-eternal.” Hence it will be unreasonable to 
conclude that all things are non-eternal simply because they are homo¬ 
geneous with a mon-eternal pot m some one or other respect. Similarly 
a mere homogeneity of all things with the eternal sky m some one or 
■other respect, does not prove all things to be eternal. The opposition 
called “balancing the non-eternal” is therefore nob founded on a sound 
basis. 

TOgre t w 

wtvwramrsrrenik^r: mi 11 u 

dristinte, in the example , W cha, aDd ; SPtTOWT*nt»T s4dhya- 
•s 4 dhana-bb 4 vena, by the lelation of the thing to be established and the 
means ef establishing it, ST^ifT^W pra]natasya, of the known , WJTW dhar- 
rnasya, of property , tgewtl hetu tv4t,being the reason , 3W tasya, its ; * 
cha, and ; WTOT ubhaya-th4, both ways , W31SC bh&v4t, from existence ; 
4* na, not ■, a-visefah, non-difference. 

200 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

495. There h, we say, no non-distinction, because the reason is 
known to be the character which abides in the example as conducive to 
the establishment of the predicate and because it is applied in both 
ways. 

The Naiy&yika says that we are not justified in concluding that 
all things are non-eternal because there is no character in respect of 
which “all things” may be homogeneous with a pot. In order to arrive 
at a correct conclnsion we must consider the reason aB being that 
character of the example (and consequently of the subject) which bears 
a universal connection with the character of the predicate. The pot 
possesses no such character in common with “all things ” The reason 
moreover is applied in the homogeneous as well as in the heterogeneous 
ways We cannot draw a conclnsion from a mere homogeneity of ( he 
subject with the example in a certain respect The opposition called 
"balancing the non-eternal” is therefore unreasonable. 

u h i \\ ^ ii 

fwftf nityam, eternally , amtya-bb&v&t, from the nature of 

being non-eternal , sifbf^ anitye, in the non-eternal • : anitya- 

tva-npapatteh, from proof of eternality , f?R*t¥r*T: mtya-samah, identical 
in respect of eternal. 

496. If one opposes an argument by attributing eternality to 
all non-eternal things on the ground of these being eternally non-eternal, 
the opposition will be called “balancing the eternal.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus:—Yon say 
that sound is non eternal Does this non-eternahty exist m sound always 
or only sometimes,? If the non-eternality exists always, t he sound must 
also be always existent, or, in other words, sound is eternal. If the non- 
eteruality exists only sometimes, then too the sound most in the absence 
of non-eternality be pronounced to be eternal. This sort of opposition 
is called “balancing the eternal” which counteracts an argument by 
setting up eternality aB a balance against it. 

THE HJAYA-SOtRAS. 

201 

THcSTr^twt: JTRT-. 

^srmra: ii H i \ i H u 

HrHr%rat pratisedhye, in what is to he contradicted ; mtyam, eter¬ 
nally , siftjTOTSrni anitya-bh&v&t, from the nature of being non-eternal ; 
stfqe% anitye, in the non-eternal, mtyatva-upapatteh, from 

proof of eternality ; srfs^DTT?: pratisedha-abh&vah, absence of contradic¬ 
tion. 

497. This is, we say, no opposition because the thing opposed 
is always non-eternal on account of the eternality of the non-eternal. 

The Naiyayika aaya : — 

By speaking of eternality of the non-eternal you have admitted 
sound to be always non-eternal and cannot now deny itB non-eternality. 
The eternal and non-eternal are incompatible with each other : by admit¬ 
ting that sound is non-eternal you are precluded from asserting that it 
is also eternal. Hence “balancing the eternal ” is not a sound opposi¬ 
tion. 

icfrffi T: II M \ \ I ^ II 

mn wwtNwm prayatna-k&rya-aneka-tv6t, from the diversity of the ( 
effects of effort; kfirya-samah, identical in respect of effect. 

498. If one opposes an argument by showing the diversity of 
the effect of efforts, the opposition will be called “balancing the effect." 

A certain person to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus :— 

The effect of effort is found to be of two kinds, viz (I) the produc¬ 
tion of something which was previously non-existent, e. g a pot, and 
(2) the revelation of something already existent, e g water m a well. 
Is Bound an effect of the first kind or of the second kind { If sound is an 
effect of the first kind it will be non-eternal but if it is of the Becond 
kind it will be eternal. Owing to this diversity of the effect of effort, 
it is not possible to conclude that sound is non-eternal, This sort of 
opposition is called “balancing the effort.” 

26 

202 

BOOK V , CH APTITR1. 

karya-anya-tve, in respect of the otherneBS of the effect; 
prayataa-a-hetu-tvam, effort is not the cause; 
an-upalabdhi-karana-upapatteh, because of proof of the cauBe of non- 
perception. 

499. Effort did not give rise to the second kind of effect, because 
there was no cause of non-perception. 

The Naiyayika answers the opposition called “balancing the effect” 
as follows :— 

We cannotsay tbsit sound is revealed by oar effort because we are 
unable to .prove that it existed already. That sound did not exist 
previously is proved by our non-perception of the same at the time. You 
cannot say that our non-perception was caused by a veil because no veil 
covered sound. Hence sound is an effect which is not revealed but 
produced. 

OTFft II H I X I ^ u 

jrfaih# pratisedhe, in the case of contradiction , tufa api, also ; twrg: 
sam&nah, similar , dosah, defect. 

500. The same defect, we say, attaches to the opposition too. 

A certain person argued:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

A certain other person opposed it saying that Bound wonld notbs 
non-eternal if “effect” meant a thing revealed. 

The Naiy&yika observes that if an argument is to be set aside 
owing to an ambiguous meaning of the word “effect”, why is not the 
opposition too set aside on the same ground ? The reason in the argu¬ 
ment is as erratic as that m the opposition. Just as there is no special 
m'ound to suppose that the “effect” in the argument signified “a thing 
produced and not revealed,” so also there is no special ground to suppose 
that the word in the opposition signified “a thing revealed and not 
produced.” Hence the opposition called “balaucing the effect” is self¬ 
destructive. 

THE NY.&YA. SfTTftA.3 

203* 

^oor^cT^ II H I \ 1 ?° II 

fT&r aarvatra, everywhere ; qut^evam, similarly. 

501. Thus everywhere. 

If a special meaning is to be attached to the opposition, the same 
meaning.will have to be attached to the original argument. In this 
respect there will be an equality oF the two sides in the case of all kinds' 
of opposition such as “balancing the homogeneity", etc. 

u ^ i ^ i u 

srfaWsrofa^? pratisedha-vipratisedhe., in respect of the contradiction 
of a contradiction ; pratisedha-dosa-vat, as in the case of 

defect in contradiction , ^Itrt dosah, defect 

502. Defect attaches to the opposition of the opposition just as 
it attaches to the opposition. 

A certain person to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

A certain other person, seeing that the effect is of diverse kinds,, 
offers an opposition thus :— 

Sound is eternal, 

because it >s an effeet of effort. 

(Here “effect" may mean “a thing revealed by effort ” ) 

The argaer replies that sound cannot be concluded to he eternal 1 
because the reason “effect" is erratic (which may mean “a thing pro* 
dnced by effort"). 

The opponent rises again to say that sound cannot also be conclud¬ 
ed to be non-eternal because the reason “effect" is erratic (which may 
mean a thing revealed by effort). So the defect which is pointed out in 
the case of the opposition, may also be pointed out in tho case of the* 
opposition of the opposition. 

wuft uatgut n n 1 1 1 a 

204 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. ’ 

pratisedham, contradiction ; sadosam, with defect, defec¬ 
tive ; awgiteu abhynpetya, admitting for the sake of argument; srfa%qfsrsr%- 
$$ pratiaedha-vipratifedhe, m case of contradiction of a contradiction ; 
¥?niw: sam&nah, similar, same j doga-prasangah, implication of 

defect; ftaigSTt mata-anujM, admission of an opinion. 

503. If one admits the defect of his opposition in consequence 
of his statement that an equal defect attaches to the opposition of the 
opposition, it will be called “admission of an opinion.” 

A certain person lays down a proposition which is opposed by a cer¬ 
tain other person. The first person, viz, the disputant, charges the opposition 
made by the second person, viz . the opponent, with a defect, e.g , that the 
reason is erratic. The opponent instead of rescuing his opposition from the 
defect with which it has been charged by the disputant, goes on charg¬ 
ing the disputant's opposition of the opposition with the Bame defect.' 
The counter-charge which the opponent brings in this way is interpreted 
by the disputant to be an admission of the defect pointed ont by him. 
The disputant’s reply consisting of this kind of interpretation iB called 
“admission of an opinion.” 

^s-rfroiwr- 

nnmrWRt fftr ff«r m 111 9 * ■ 

svapaksa-laksana-apeksa-upapatti-npasamhare, 
in the conclusion by demonstration (in the opposite aide) of, instead of re¬ 
moving, the defect m one’s own side ; hetu-mrdeSe, m the state¬ 
ment of reason ; UTRf para-pak§a-do§a-abhyupagam&t, from 

admission of the defect of other side ; dosah, defect ; lti, it is. 

504. “Admission of an opinion" also occurs when the disputant 
instead of employing reasons to rescue his side from the defect with- 
which it has been charged, proceeds to admit the defect in consequence 
of his statement that the same defect belongs to his opponent's side 
as well. 

Six winged disputation (Satpakai kath&). 

<• _ 

Disputant—to prove the non-eternality of Bonnd says:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

This is the first wing- 

THU NriYA-SOTRAS. 

203? 

Opponent—seeing that the effect ie of diverse kinds, offers an 
opposition thus:—• 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort* 

(Here “effect” means a thing which already existed and is now 
revealed by effort). 

This is the second wing* 

Disputant—seeing that the reason “effect” is erratic, charges the 
opposition with a defect thus :— 

Sound is not eternal, 

because it is aneffeot of effort. 

(Here the reason “effect 1 ’ is erratic meaning (I) either a thing that 
did not previously exist and is now produced or (2) a thing that already 
existed and is now revealed by effort). 

This is the third wing. 

Opponent— finding that the reason “effect," which is erratic, 
proveB neither the eternality nor the non-eternality of sound, brings a 
counter-charge against the disputant thus 

Sound is also not non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

He alleges that the defect (viz. the erraticity of the reason) with 
which his opposition (viz. sound is eternal) is charged, also attaches to 
the opposition of the opposition made by the disputant (viz. sound is not 
eternal or non-eternal). 

This is the fourth wing. 

Disputant—finding that the counter-charge brought against him 
amounts to his opponent's admission of self-defect says:— 

The opponent by saying that “sound is also not non-eternal” 
has admitted that it is also not eternal In other words, the counter-charge 
has proved the charge, that is, it has indicated that the opponent admits 
the disputant’s opinion. 

This is the fifth wing. 

Opponent— finding that the disputant instead of rescuing his 
argument from the counter-charge has taken shelter under his opponent's 
admission of the charge says:— 

206 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

The disputant by saying that “sound, is also not eternal*' has 
admitted that it is also not non-eternal* In other words, if the counter* 
charge proves the charge, the reply- to the counter-charge proves the 
counter-charge itself. 

This iethe sixth wing. 

The first, third and fifth wings belong to the disputant while the 
second,- fourth and sixth to the opponent. The sixth wing is a repetition 
of the fourth while the fifth wing is a repetition of the third. The sixth 
wing is also a repetition of the meaning of the fifth wing. The third and 
fourth wings involve the defect of “admission of an opinion." All the 
wings except the first three are unessential. 

The disputation would have come to a fair close at the third wing 
if the disputant had'pointed oat that the word “effect" had a special 
meaning, viz., a thing which did not previously exist but was produced. 

The disputant and the opponent instead* of stopping at the proper 
limit has carried on their disputation through six wings beyond which no 
further wing is possible. After the six-winged disputation has been 
carried on, it becomes patent that neither the disputant nor the opponent 
is a fit person to- he argued with. 

THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 

207 

BOOK V.—CHAPTER IL 

irm^TfTR: srraffT&ita; srriTfrT^sn- 

% m^«Rf%^mT45RqT4^Rjn5r- 

IrSTWT^rT^ n h i ^ \ \ II 

irfayUTTfir: PratijM-htlnih, injury to the proposition, arfa^ts^ prati- 
|n&-antaram, change of proposition; trFgrgjrfWita: prati]n&-virodhah, conflict 
of proposition, srf^RrnjSijm: pratijfi4-sanny&sah, abandonment of proposition; 

hetn-antara^n, change of the reason, anrl-fltf artha-antaram, change 
of topic; nir-arthakam, meaningless, wfgsrrai*? a-vijn&ta-artham, 

■unintelligible; vraufaf apa-arthakam, senseless; STgia^i^ a-prapta-k&lam, 
before-time, disordered, miaarranged, sgtf nyunam, deficient; «rfq$ adhi- 
kam, too much, superfluous, verbose; gsretf pnnar-uktam, repetition, SRg- 
*n^lf an-anubh&sanam, non-reply, silence; 3T5JT*f, a-jnflnam, ignorance; 
swfawa-pratibha, want of ready wit, fg&ifo: viksepah, evasion, diversion ; 
•JTfTTfsJT, mata-anujn&, admission of an opinion , <l*g5^T3^8ffof paryannyo- 
jya-upek§anam, overlooking the censurable ; ^Tgift3UI3«iln: niranuyojya- 
anuyog&h, censuring the non-censurable ; apa-siddh&ntah, 

contrary tenet; f?trPTClT: hetu-4bh4sah. pseudo-marks ; ^ cha, and ; f5|l|- 
nigraha-stMnani, grounds of defeat, occasions for rebuke. 

505. Tie occasions for rebuke are the following:— 

1. Hurting the proposition, 2. Shifting the proposition, 3. Op¬ 
posing the proposition, 4. Renouncing the proposition, 5. Shifting 
the reason, 6. Shifting the topic, 7. The meaningless, 8. The unintel¬ 
ligible, 9. The incoherent, 10. The inopportune, 11. Saying too little, 
12. Saying too much, 13. Repetition, 14. Silence, 15. Ignorance, 
16. Non-ingenuity, 17. Evasion, 18. Admission of an opinion, 
19 Overlooking the censurable, 20. Censuring the non-censurable, 
21. Deviating from a tenet, and 22. The semblance of a reason. 

The definition of “an occasion for rebuke" has been given in apho¬ 
rism 1-2-19. “An occasion for rebuke” which is the same as “aground of 
defeat", “a plaoe of humiliation” or “a point of disgrace” arises generally 

208 

BOOK V, CHAPTER II. 

in connection with, the proposition or any other part of an argument and 
may implicate any disputant whether he is a discutient, wrangler or 
caviller. 

prBtidr!St4nta-dharma-abhyanujn&, admission of 
the property of the counter example ; sva-^rist^nte, in one's own 

example , srfagriftfsr: pratijfia-h&nili, injury to the proposition. 

SOP. “Hurting the proposition." occurs when one admits in one’s 
own example the character of a counter-example. 

A disputant argues as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

Becanse it is cognisable by sense, ^ 

Whatever is cognisable by Ben Be is non-eternal 

asa pot, 

• t . Sonnd is cognisable by sense* 

Therefore sonnd is non-eternal. 

A certain other person offers an opposition thus :— 

A genus (e- g., potness or pot-type), which is cognisable by sense, 
is found to be eternal, why cannot then the sonnd which is also 
cfognisable by sense, be eternal ? 

The disputant being thus opposed Bays : — 

Whatever is cognisable by sense is eternal 

as a pot, 

Sonnd is oognisable by sense, 

Therefore sonnd is eternal. 

By thns admitting in his example (pot) the character of a counter¬ 
example (genua or type), he has hurt his own proposition ( vis . sonnd is 
non-eternal). A person who harts his proposition in this way deserves 
nothing but rebuke. 

q wifafrtrMm yrmfu: nra?n- 

V5TCH,* n i ^1 \ u 

THE NYlYA-SGfRAS. 

209 

sfasTKrsilrfBra^ pratijnilta-artha-pratisedhe, there being opposition 
to the object or topic proposed; dharma-vikalp&t, through a 

different property, a^fsT^T: tat-artha-mrdesah, statement of that object; 
SlfilSFPcftflf pratijnA-antaram, change of proposition. 

507. ‘‘Shifting the proposition’* arises when a proposition being 
opposed one defends it by importing a new character to one’s example 
and counter-example. 

A certain person argues as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is cognisable by sense 
like a pot 

A certain other person offers an opposition thus:— 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense like a genus (or type). 

The first person in order to defend himself says that a genus (ortype) 
and a pot are both cognisable by sense, yet one is all-pervasive and 
the other is not so: hence the sound which is likened to a pot is non- 
all-pervasively non-eternal. 

The defence thus made Involves a change of proposition. The 
proposition originally laid down was:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 
while the proposition now defended is: 

Sound is non-all-pervasively non-eternal. 

A person who shifts his proposition in this way is to be rebuked 
inasmuch as he has not relied upon his original reason and example. 

nrafrrt^torct'J: n fesnfaftw : « H • ^ l s? n 

srfasrrf'?^! pratijn4-hetvoh. of the proposition and the reason; Orfh*: 
virodhah, contradiction; pratijBfi-virodhah, conflict of propo* 

sition. 

508. “Opposing the proposition’’ occurs when the proposition, 
and its reason are opposed to each other. 

27 

210 

'BOOK V, CHAPTER II. 

Substance is distinct from quality, 

because it is perceived to be non-diatinct from colour, etc. 

In iihis argument it is to be observed tbat if Bubstance is distinct 
from quality it must also be distinct from colour, etc which constitute 
the quality. The reason, viz substance is non-distinct from colour, etc , is 
opposed to the proposition, viz substance is distinct from quality. A per¬ 
son who thus employs a reason which opposes his proposition is to be I 
rebuked as a fool. 1 

uh i ^ t h u 

qtSTjrfadiJ paksa-prati^edhe, there being opposition to the Bulqect; 
jrfa5fraT*lf , W3«T^ pratijfi&ta artha apanayanam, removal of the object pro¬ 
posed, fffairross'iTlSr: pratnM-sann^&sah, abandonment of the proposition. 

509. A proposition bein' opposed if one disclaims its import, it 
■will be called “renouncing the proposition.’* 

A certain person argues as follows:— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense. 

A certain other person offers an opposition thus:— 

Just as a genus (or type) is cognisable by sense and is not yet non¬ 
eternal, bo a sound is cegniBable by sense and is not yet non-eternal. The 
first person, as a defence against the opposition, disclaims the meaning of 
his proposition thus:— 

Who says that sound is non-eternal ? f 

This sort of denial of the import of one’s own proposition is called 
“renouncing the proposition" which rightly furnishes an occasion for 
rebuke. 

u n i ^ i \ n 

a-viiesa-ukte, stated without particulars, of a general cha¬ 
racter, hetau, reason, mark, pratisiddhe, being opposed , 

vifiegam, particular or special character ; ^r; ichchhatah, of one who 
desires; £hetu-antaram, change of reason. 

THE NYlYA SftTRAS. 

211 

510. “Shifting the reason" occurs when the reason of a general 
character being opposed one attaches a special character to it. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of Bound, argues as 
follower— 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense. 

A certain other person says that sound cannot be proved to be 
non-eternal through the mere reason of its being cognisable by sense, just 
as a genus (or type) such as pot-ness (or pot-type) is cognisable by sense 
and is not yet non-eternal. 

The first person defends himself by saying that the reason, viz. 
being cognisable by sense, is to be undei stood as signifying that which 
conies under a genus (or type) and is as such cognisable by sense. 
Sound comes under the genus (or type) “soundness’' and is at the same 
tune cognisable by sense, but a genus or type such as pot-ness or pot- 
type does not come under another genus or type (such as pot-neBs-ness 
or pot-type-type) though it is cognisable by sense Such a defence, which 
consists in shifting one’s reason, rightly furnishes an occasion for 
rebuke. 

U H I ^ I to u 

prakritat, real, under consideration; st*??n arth&t, from the 
object, a-pratisanibaddh&rtham, importing an un-correlated, 

irrelevant object, artba antaram, change of topic or object, 

611. “Shifting the topic” is an argument which setting aside the 
real topic introduces one which is irrelevant. 

A certain person, to prove the eternality of sound, argues as 
follows?— 

Sound is eternal (proposition), 

becausi it is intangible (reason). 

Being opposed by a certain other person he attempts, in the absence 
of any other resource, to defend his position as follows: 

Hetu, which is the Sanskrit equivalent for “reason," is a word derived 
from the root “hi" with the suffix “ta". A word, as a part of a speech, may 
bo a noun, a verb, a prefic oran indeclinable-, A noun is defined as eto. etc. 

212 

BOOK V, CHAPTER II. 

The defence made in this way furnishes an instance of defeat through 
non-relevancy. The person who makes it deserves rebuke. 

varna-krama-mrdesa-vat, like the statement of the 
order of letters ( in the alphabet ), nir-arthakam, meaningless. 

512. ‘‘The meaningless 1 ’ is an argument which is based on a 
non-sensical combination of letters into a series. 

A certain person, to prove the eternality of sound, argues as 

follows:— 

Sound is eternal, 

because k, c, t, t and p are j, r, g, d and d, 
like jh, bh, gh, dh and dh. 

As the letters k, c, t, etc. convey no meaning, the person who 
employs them in his argument deserves rebuke. 

H i ^ \ < w 

pansat-prativ&dibhyilm, by the assembly and the 
opponent ; fir; tnh, three times, wfirffa' abhihitam, stated ; srfq api, even; 
etfirayUf a-vijn&tam, not understood , srfergjTgrs? a-vijn&ta-arthaai, unintel¬ 
ligible 

513. “The unintell'gible JJ is an argument, which although repea¬ 
ted three times, is understood neither by the audience nor by the 
opponent. 

A certain person being opposed by another person and finding no 
means of self-defence, attempts to hide his inability m disputation by 
using words of doable entendre or words not in ordinary use or words 
very quickly uttered which as such are understood neither by his opponent 
nor by the audience although they are repeated three times. This sort 
of defence is called “unintelligible” which rightly furnishes an occasion 
for rebuke. 

« n i ^ i \°« 

THE NYAYA-StiTRAS. 

213 

paurvyaAparya-a-yosjAt, owing to absence of sequence; 
WsrRfgssr^fu'n a-pratisambaddba-artham, of unconnected import , 
apa-arthakam, senseless. 

514. “The incoherent” is an argument which conveys no 
connected meaning on account of the words being strung together 
without any syntactical order. 

A certain person being opposed by another person and finding no 
other means of self-defence, argues as follows;— 

Ten pomegranates, six cakes, a bowl, goat's skin and a lump of 
sweets. 

This sort of argument, which consist of a series of unconnected 
words, is called “the incoherent” which rightly piesents on occasion 
for rebuke. 

« m ^ \ \\ h 

stsRirfvTsnfcnrasf avayaya-viparyAsa-vachanam, statement without the 
order of the member of an argument , 3Wiy+l«f a-pi&pta-k&lam, disordered. 

515. ‘‘The inopportune” is an argument the parts of which are 
mentioned without any order of precedence. 

A certain person, to prove that the hill has fire, argues as follows:—• 
The hill has fire ( proposition ). 

Whatever has smoke has fire, as a kitchen (example). 

Because it has smoke ( reason )• 

The hill has fire ( conclusion ). 

The hill has smoke( application ). 

This sort of argument is called “the inopportune” which rightly 
presents an occasion for rebuke. Since the meaning of an argument is 
affected by the order in which its parts are arranged, the person who 
overlooks the order cannot establish his conclusion and is therefore 
rebuked. 

M i ^ i * 

214 

BOOK V, CHAPTER II. 

hinam, deficient, spiral anya-tamena, by any one; wfq api, 
even ; SRqq^r avayavena, member , nyunam, deficient. 

516. If an argument lacks even one of its parts, it is called 
‘‘saying too little." 

The following is an argument whicb contains all its five parte;— 

1. The hill has fire (proposition ), 

2. Because it has smoke ( reason ), 

3. All that has smoke has fire, as a kitchen (example ), 

4 The hill has smoke ( application ), 

5. Therefore the hill has fire ( conclnsion 

As all the five parts or members are essential, a person who omits 
even one of them should be scolded as “saying too little." 

M I ^ I ^ I 

f^TfWufvrc; hetn-ndSharaga-adhikam, consisting of more than one 
reason or example ; siftr+H adhikam, verbose, redundant. 

617. “Saying too much’* is an argument which consists of 
more than one reason or example. 

A certain person, to prove that the hill has fire, argnes as follows*.— 
The hill has fire ( proposition ), 

Because it has smoke ^reason ), 

And because it has light ( reason ), 
like a kitchen (example ), 
and like a furnace ( example ), 

In this argument the second reason and the second example are 
redundant. 

A person, who having promised to argue in the proper way ( accord¬ 
ing to the established usage ), employs more than one reason or example 
is to be rebuked as “saying too much." 

sjs^renTt: gmaTW-M* h=ii^ w h \ \*\\ 

THE NYXyA-SOtRAS. 

215 

6 ibda-arthay oh, of the word and the object , gwsfesf punar- 
vachanam, restatement , g*T^ punar-uktam, repetition , SRT3T anyatra, 
-elsewhere , anuvad&t, than re-inculcation, anuvida 

518. “Repetition” is au argument in which (except in the case 
of reinculcation ) the word or the meaning is said over again, 

“Repetition of the word —Sound is non eternal, 
sound is Don-eternal 

Repetition of the meaning —Sound is non eternal, 

echo is perishable, what is heard is impermanent, etc. 

A person who unnecessarily commits repetition is to be rebuked 
as a fool. 

Reincalcation has been explained in aphorism 2-1-65. 

ST^T^TTO^r ^rscns^H || ** I ^ | ^ II 

arafcf arthat, from context , StFl^r apannasya, of what has followed ; 
sva. fiabdena, by its own name , punar-vachanam, restate¬ 

ment. 

519. “Repetition” consists also in mentioning a thing by name 
although the thing has been indicated through presumption. 

*• A. thing possessing the character of a product is non-eternal” 
—this ib a mere repetition of the following.— 

“A thing not possessing the character of a product is not non- 
eternal.’' 

^ U H I ^ I ^ II 

vi]fiatasya, of what has been understood , qfogr parisada, by 
the assembly, ft. trih, three times , abhihita- sya, of what has 

been declared , ?jfq, even , a pi ati-uchcharanam, non-reply; 

an-anubliasanam, non-reply. 

520. "Silence” is an occasion for rebuke which arises when the 
opponent makes no reply to a proposition although it has been repeated 
three times by the disputant within the knowledge of the audience. 

216 

BOOK V, CHAPTER Tl. 

How can a disputant carry on his argument if his opponent main¬ 
tains an attitude of stolid silence? The opponent is therefore to he 

rebuked. 

u h i ^ i \* it 

arfMn?n^ a-vijfiatam, the not-nnderstood; ^ cha, and , a-jnanam 
ignorance. 

621. ‘‘Ignorance*’ is the non-understanding of a proposition. 

Ignorance is betrayed by the opponent who does not understand a 
proposition although it has been repeated three times within the know¬ 
ledge of the audience H*>w can an opponent refute a proposition the 
meaning of which he cannot understand ? He la to be rebuked for his 
ignorance. 

II H I ^ I ^ II 

uttarasya, of the answer, *rsr%'jfw: a-pratipattih, non-sngges- 
tion, srnRw a-pratibhk, want of ready wit 

522. “Non-ingenuity*’ consists in one's inability to hit upon a reply. 

A certain person lays down a proposition. If Mb opponent under¬ 
stands it and yet cannot hit upon a reply, he is to be scolded as wanting 
in ingennity. 

wwTCfm T5i%q: u n \ ^ \ n 

5Pr®*IT¥Ijfra[ k&rya-vy4sahg4t, through pretext of other business; 
katha-vichchhedah, cutting short a discussion; fgEfhl: viksepalf, 
evasion, diversion. 

523. ‘‘Evasion’* arises if one stops an argument on the pretext 
of going away to attend another business. 

A certain person having commenced ’a disputation in which he 
finds it impossible to establish his side, stops its further progress by 
saying that he has to go away on a very urgent bnsiness. He who stops 
the disputation in this way courts defeat and humiliation through 
evasion. 

IIHI ^ V « 

sva-pak|a-do§a-abhyupagan)4t, by admitting defect 

THU NYi.IA SOi'ttAS. 

217 

in one’s own side ; TOrf para-pakse, in the opposite side ; ^fasr&Tt dosa- 
prasangah, attribution of defect; mata-anujna, admission of an 

opinion. 

524. ‘‘The admission of an opinion 3 consists in charging the op¬ 
posite side with a defect by admitting that the same defect exists m 
one's own side. 

A certain person addressing another person Bays:_“Yon are a 

thief.” 

The other person replies :—“You too are a thief.” 

This person, instead of removing the charge brought against him, 
throws the same charge on the opposite side whereby he admits that the 
charge against himself is trne This sort of counter-charge or reply is 
an instance of “admission of an opinion” which brings disgrace on the 
person who makes it. 

m ^ I ^|| 

nigraha-sth&na-prftptasya, of one who has reached the 
ground of defeat, wfknf: a-mgrahah, not defeating , par- 

yanuyojya-upeksanam, overlooking the censurable 

525. “Overlooking the censurable” consists in not rebuking a 
person who deserves rebuke. 

It is not at all unfair to censure a person who argues in a way which 
furnishes an occasion for censure. Seeing that the person himself does 
not confess his short-coming, it is the duty of the audience to pass a 
vote of censure on him. If the audience failed to do their duty they 
would earn rebuke for themselves on account of their “over-looking the 
censnrahle.” 

f^vf^rraTTflVtJfr ii 

H i ^ i ^ il 

a-nigraha-sth&ne, in case of non defeat , 
nigraha-stliana-abhiyogah, accusation of defeat , nir-anu- 

yojya-anuyogah, censuring thenon-censurable. 

526. “Censuring the non censurable” consists in rebuking a per¬ 
son who does not deserve rebuke. 

28 

213 

BOOR > CHAPTER II. 

A person brings discredit on himself if he rebukeB a person who does 
not deserve rebuke. 

f%fU V* ^ \^\\\ 

siddh&ntam, tenet , abhyupetya, accepting , qtfwqTroi 

a-niyamAt, through departure, or wandering , kath&-prasangah, 

disputation ; stqfs^r^s apa-siddb&ntah, contrary to tenet. 

£27. A person who after accepting a tenet departs from it in the 
course of his disputation, is guilty of “deviating from a tenet." 

A certain person promises to cai ry on his argument in consonance 
with the R&tpkhya philosophy which lays down thatfl) what is existent 
never becomes non-existent, and (2) what is non existent never comes into 
existence, etc A certain other person opposes him by saying that all 
hnman activity would be impossible if the thing now non-existent could 
not come into existence in the course of tune and that no activity would 
cease if what is existent now conld continue for ever If the first person 
being thus opposed admits that existence springs from non existence and 
non-existence from existence, then he will rightly deserve rebuke for 
his deviation from the accepted tenet. 

h h \ ^ 1 ^ 11 

g'fWWret: hetu-abhfisah, pseudo-marks, W cha, and ; qsftSFT: yath&- 
ukt&h, as stated before, 

528. “The fallacies of reason*’ already explained do also furnish 
occasions for rebuke. 

From aphorism 1-2 4 it is evident that the fallacies are mere 
fcmblauces of a reason. A person who employs them in a disputation 
does certainly deserve rebuke. 

There are infinite occasions for rebuke of whioh only twenty-two 
have been enumerated here. 

APPENDIX A- 

NYAYA-SfrCHt-NIBANDHA 

of 

VACH.ASPATI MI!§RA 

[ Baaed on the text edited by Dr GangAratha JhA, M A., D Litt., 
and published in the Chaukhatnba Sanskrit Senes, Benares ] 

The Nyaya-l§Astra contains five books, ten chapters, eighty-four topics, 
five hundred and twenty-eight aphorisms, one hundred and ninety- 
sixmeasures, and eight thousand, three hundred and eighty-five syllables. 

[Book=adhyAya, Chapter=Ahnika, lit. a daily portion, Topie = pra- 
karana, Aphonsm = Su.tra, Measure = pada, SylIable = ak§ara.J 

AdhyAya—I: Ahnika.—1: Prakaranas—7 : Sutras—41. 

1. Statement of the subject matter ( visaya ), purpose ( prayojana ) 

and relation ( aambandha ) of the §Astra—Ss. 1-2. 

2. Definitionjif PramAna ( Instrument of Bight Cognition 1 )—Ss. 3-8. 

3. Definition of Prameya (Object of Bight Coguition )—Ss 9-22. 

4. Definition of the pre-requisites ( purva anga ) of a Nyaya—Ss 23-25. 

5. Definition of SiddhAnta (Tenet) which is the basis of aNyAya—Ss 26-31. 

6. Definition of NjAya £ ProcesB of Ratiocination or Reasoning) 

—Ss 32-39. 

7. Definition of processes subsidiary (^uttara anga) to a NjAya. 

—Ss. 40-41. 

AdhyAya—I: Ahnika-2 : Prakarantas-4 : Sutras-20. 

1. Definition of KatbA £ Controversy )—Ss. 1-3. 

2. Definition of HetvAbhAsa ( Fallacious Marks of Inference )—Sb.4-9. 

3. Definition of Chhala ( lit. Fraud, Quibble ) —Ss.l0-l7. 

4. Definition of Lingadoga £ General Fault li^Marka of Inference ) due 

to incapacity of the arguer £ Puru?a‘flAakti 18*20. 

( 220 ) 

Adhyaya—II: Ahnika-lj Prakaranas-9: Sutras-68. 

1. Examination of Samsaya (Doubt )—Ss. 1-7. 

2. Examination of Pram&na generally—Ss. 8-20. 

3. Examination of Pratyaksa ( Perception )—Ss. 21-32, 

4. Examination incidentally of Avayavi ( tbe whole )—Ss. 33-36. 

5. Examination of Anum&na ( Inference ) — 8s 37-38. 

6. Examination ( introductory ) of the present time—Ss 39-43. 

7. Examination of Upam&na ( Analogy )— Sa. 44-48. 

8. Examination of 6abda (lit. word, Testimony ) generally-Ss 49-56. 

9. Examination of 6abda in particular (the Veda ) —Ss 57-68. 

Adhyaya—II: Ahnika 2: Prakara?aB 4: Sutras-b9. 

1. Examination of the fourfold division of Pramana—Ss 1-12. 

2 Examination of the doctrine of thenon-eternality of Sabda-Ss 13-39. 
8. Examination of the doctrine of Sabda-parinama ( Transformation of 

word j—Ss 40-57. 

4. Examination of Sahda-Sakti ( Force of Word )—Ss 58-69. 

Adhy&ya—III : Ahijika-1: Prakarnas-9: Sutras-73. 

1. The Soul is over and above the SenseB—Ss. 1-3. 

2. The Soul is different from the Body —Ss.4-6. 

3. Refutation (incidentally) of the doctrine that the Eye is only one 

—Ss. 7-14. 

4. The Manas (Mind) is not the Soul—Ss.—15-17. 

5. The Soul is eternal—Ss. 18-26. 

6. Examination of the Body—Ss.27-31. 

7. Examination of thfc materiality (bhautika-tva ) of the Indriys 
(Sense )—Ss. 32-51. 

8. The Indriya is manifold—Ss. 52-6!. 

9. Examination of Artha ( Sense and Object of Sense )—Ss 62-73, 

Adhy&y a-III : Ahmka-2:-Prakaranas 7 : Sutras—72. 

1 The Buddhi ( Cognition ) is not eternal —Ss. 1-9. 

2, Introduction of the doctrine of Transiency (kgana-bhanga)—Ss. 10-17. 

3, The Buddhi is an attribute of the Sonl—Ss. 18-41. 

4, The Buddhi perishea as soon as produced (utpanna-apavargitva) 

—Ss. 42-45. 

C 221 ) 

5. The Buddhi is not a quality of the Body—Ss 46-55. 

6. Examination of the Manas—Ss 56-59. , 

7 The Body is produced by Adrista ( Deserts )—.Sg, 60-72. 

Adhy&ya-IV : Ahnika-1: Prakaranas-14: Sdtras-67. 

1. Examination of the Faults and Pravritti ( Activity )_Ss 1-2. 

2. Dosa (Fault ) is threefold—Ss.3-9. 

3. Examination of Pretya-bh&va ( Re-birth )—Ss. 10-13. 

4. The tJpadAna (material) cause of the Universe is not the {§unya 

( Void )—Ss. 14-18. 

5. tsvara ( God ) is not the Up&d&na of the Universe—Ss. 19-21. 

6. Chance is not the Up&d&na—Ss 22-24 

7. Refutation of the doctrine that all is non-eternal ( Sarva-anitya-tva ) 

—Ss 25-28. 

8. Refutation of the doctrine that all ib eternal ( Sarva-nitya-tva) 

—Ss. 29-33. 

9. Refutation of the doctrine that all is discrete ( Sarva-prithak-tva) 

—Ss. 34 36. 

10. Refutation of the doctrine that all is void ( Sarva4ftnya-t&-) 
—Ss. 37-40. 

11. Refutation of the doctrine that the Reality is one or otherwise fixed 
in number ( Saqakhyi-ek&nta-v&da )—Ss 41-43. 

12. Examination of Phala (Fruit)-—Ss. 44-53. 

13. Examination of Duhkha ( Pain )—Ss. 54-57. 

14. Examination of Apavarga (Release)—Ss. 58-67. 

Adhyfkya-IV : Ahnika 2 : Prakaranas-6 : S&tras—51. 

1. Production of Tattva-]S4n a (Knowledge of Reality)—Ss. 1-3. 

2. Incidental examination of the relation of the whole (avayavi) and 

parts ( avayava)—Ss. 4-17. 

3. Examinaton of the Partless (niravayava, e. g. Atom )— Ss.18-25. 

4. Refutation of the doctrine of the transiency of external objects 

( b&hya-artha-bhahga )—Ss. 26-87. 

5. How Tattva-Jn&na is developed—Ss. 38-49. 

6. How Tattva-Jfi&na is maintained—Ss. 50-51. 

c 222 ) 

Adhy&yarY: Almika-1: Prakaranas-17: Sutras-43 

1. Introduction of Parity of Reasoning ( JSti ): (24 ): Identicals (2) m 

respect of Resemblance and Difference—Ss. 1-d. 

2. Identicals ( 6 ) in relation to the Sadhya ( subject ) and Dristanta 

( Example ): that is, arising from the diverse properties of the 

Subject and the Example—Ss 4-6. 

3. Identicals (2 ) in respect of the extension or non-extension of the 

Hetu ( Mark ) to the S&dhya ( subject )—Ss. 7-8. 

4. Identicals ( 2 ) in respect of regression and connber example— 
Ss- 9-11. 

5. Identical (l)in respect of non-prodnction—.Ss. 12-13. 

6 Identical ( 1) in respect of doubt— Ss. 14-15. 

7. Identical ( 1 ) in respect of the Topic—Ss. 16-17. 

8. Identical ( 1 ) in respect of non-Mark—Ss. 18-20. 

9 Identical (1) in respect of Presumption—Ss 21-22. 

10. Identical ( 1 ) in respect of Non-difference—Ss. 23 24, 

11. Identical ( 1) in respect of Demonstration—Ss. 25-26. 

12. Identical ( l ) in respect of Cognition—Ss. 27-28. 

13. Identical ( 1 ) in respect of Non-Cognition—Sa. 29-31. 

14. Identical ( 1 ) in respect of the Non-eternal—Ss. 32-34, 

15. Identical ( l ) in respect of the Eternal—Ss. 85-36. 

16. Identical ( 1 ) in respect of the Effect—Ss. 37*38. 

17. Entile Controversy of Six Steps—Ss. 39-48. 

Adhyaya V : Ahruka-2 : Prakaranas-7 : Sfitrs.s-24. 

1. Enunciation of the five Errors of the opponent depending upon the 

one or the other of the Proposition and the Mark—Sa. 1-6, 

2. The four Errora leading to failure to establish the desired proposition 

—Ss 7 10. 

3. The three Errors leading to mispreseDtatioD of one’B own conclusion 

—Ss 11-13. 

4. The Error of Repetition—Ss. 14-15. 

5. The four Errors leading to failnre to reply—Ss. 16*19. 

6. The three Errors of acquiescence m a defeot, failure to attack, and 

misplaced attack—Ss. 20-22. 

7. The two Errors of Inconsistency and Fallacies_Ss. 23-24. 

APPENDIX B. 

S&TRAS OMITTED 

IN THE SECOND EDITION. 

*c n ^ i \ i ^« 

1. Moreover, the perception is not merely of a part, for there 
is a whole behind the part. 

The perception of a part does not exclade perception of the whole, 
of which it is a part. If you touch the hand, leg or any other limb of a 
person, you are said to touch the person. Similarly, if you perceive a part 
of a thing, yon are said to perceive the thing, A part implies the whole^ 
and perception of a part implies perception of the whole. 

n ^ i \ i sr h 

2. There is, in the case of verbal testimony, no perception of 
the connection. 

The connection between a sign and the thing signified, which is the 
basis of inference, is obvious to perception. For instance, the inference 
that "the hill is fiery, because it is smoky” is based on a certain connec¬ 
tion between smoke and fire which is actually perceived in a kitchen or 
elsewhere. The connection between a word and the objects signified by it, 
whioh is the basis of verbal testimony, is not obvious to perception. The 
word Uttarakuru, for instance, signifies the conntry of the name, bnt the 
connection between the word and the country is not perceived, as the 
latter lies beyond our observation. Hence, verbal testimony is not 
inference. 

fesisSf ^ ^scrc: u ^ i ^ i ^ u 

3. There is doubt about the nature of tound, because there are 
conflicting opinions supported by conflicting reasons. 

Some say that souud is a quality of ether, and that it is all-pervading, 
eternal, and capable of being manifested. Others say that sound, like 
smell, etc., is a quality of the substance m which it abides, and is capable 
of being manifested. Sound is Baid by others to be a quality of ether 

( 224 ) 

and to be subject to production and destruction, like knowledge Others 
again say that sound arises from the concussion of elements, requires no 
abode, and is subject to production and destruction. Hence, there arises 
doubt about the true nature of sound. 

4. There is, according to the objector no inaptness in the analogy, 
as tiie modification of a letter does not rekn ^uish the general notion of 

letters. 

Just as gold is modified into a bracelet without relinquishing the 
general notion o? gold, so the letter t undergoes modification as y without 
relinquishing the general notion of letters. 

5. A qualiiy belongs, we reply, to a thing possessing a general 
notion, but not to the general notion itself, 

A bracelet is a modification of & ring, inasmuch as both of them are 
gold which possesses the general notion of goldness The letter y cannot 
be a modification of the letter i, because they haye not as their common 
basis another letter which possesses the general notion of letterness. 

6. Also because the things remembered are innumerable. 

If memory were lodged in things, we could remember mnumerabls 
things at a time Bat none can remember more things than one at a time. 
Hence memory must be supposed to be a quality of a separate substance 
called sonl (endowed with a mind). 

7. The senses are material substances inasmuch as they invari¬ 
ably receive obstruction. 

Nothing can offer obstruction to a non-material all-pervading sub¬ 
stance. The senses receive obstruction from wall, etc , and are therefore 
material substances 

8. It is, we reply, not so because the objects of other senses are 
not perceived by touch (skin). 

If there had been only one sense, biz., touch (skin), theD it conld 
have seen colour, heard sound and Boon. But a blind man possessing 

( 225 ) 

the sense of touch cannot see colour. Hence it is concluded that senseB 
are many. 

^Ttq^rfs^TorTTTq^ffqq': 

9. Perception of various objects of sense is comparable to that 
of smoke by a special part of touch. 

Justao smoke is perceived by a special part of touch located in the 
eye, so Bound, smell etc., are perceived by special partB of touch specially 
located. 

ssTTfacsnrstg: 

10. This is, according to ns, absurd as it involves contradiction. 

It has been said that touch is the only sense by the special parts of 
which special functions are performed. Now it is asked whether the 
special parts of touch do not partake of the natnre of senses. If they do, 
then the senses are many. If on the other hand they do not partake of 
the nature of senses, then it is to be admitted that oolour, sound, etc., are 
not cognisable by the senses. 

11. And it is through their commixture, continues the objector, 
that there is the apprehension of more than one quality* 

The objector further says as follows:— 

The earth possesses only odour ( smell ), and if sometimes savour 
(taste) is also found there it is because the earth is then mixed with 
water. Similarly if there is odour (small) in water it is because the earth 
is mixed with it. 

12. It is, we reply, not so because there is no proof. 

The Samkhya says that the variety of knowledge arises from the 
same intellect appearing to be modified by the various objects which are 
reflected on it throngh the senses. The variouB modes which the intellect 
Undergoes, that is, the various kinds of knowledge are not real but only 
apparent. The Naiy&yikas dispose of thiB view by saying that there is 
no proof as to the unreality of the modes, that is, the various kinds of 
knowledge, inasmuch as they are ,found to originate and cease in duo 
order in consequence of the contact of senses and their objects and vice 
versa. 

C 226 ) 

nrruwrw 

KVW» 

13. [It is not true that] there is possibility of sinmltaneousness 
in the case of recollections which are independent of the efforts of 
attention, etc., just as in the case of cogi itious derived from impres¬ 
sions of equal vividness not dependent on stimuli 

Some say that recollections which are not dependent on the efforts 
of attention, etc , may be simultaneous like several cognitions or acts of 
knowledge tliataie produced from impressions of equal vividness witliout 
the aid of external stimuli But this view ib untenable because neither 
the recollections nor the sevei al acts of knowledge are simultaneous The 
acts of knowledge, though derived from impressions of equal vividness, 
will appear in succession according to the amount, of attention paid 
to them, and the recollectons though not dependent on the effoits of 
attention will appear noe after another in proportion to the strength of 
Btimuli that revive them. 

14. It is unreasonable also on account of the non-perception 
of knowledge in pots and the like. 

In a pot there is activity indicated by the conglomeration of 
different earthy partB while in sand there is forbearance from activity 
indicated by the disruption of the parts from one another. Yet there is 
no knowledge, desire or aversion in a pot or sand. Hence the body ia 
not the seat of knowledge, desire or aversion. 

15. If knowledge were permanent it would always be percep¬ 
tible so that there would be no recollection. 

If there is knowledge it is perceptible and as long as there is per- 
ception there is no recollection. Hence on the supposition of knowledge 
being permanent there would he a total absence of recollection. 

10. And the separation between the sgul and the body r, effected 
by the termination of the deserts. 

( 227 ) 

It is in virtue of its deserts that a soul is joined with a particular 
body and it is by the exhaustion of the deserts that the separation 
between the two takes place The soul cannot be separated from the 
body until it attains perfect knowledge through the cessation of ignorance 
and lust. 

17. It is not reasonable, because the body is found to be produced 
in case of both fulfilment and non-fulfilment of its ends. 

In the previous aphorism it was stated that the body was produced 
only to enable the soul to experience objects and to realize its distinction 
from matter (prakriti). lathe present aphorism the Naiy&yika points 
out the worthlessness of the statement by showing that the body is 
produced irrespective of the fulfilment or non-fulfilment of its ends, that 
is, it is produced in the case of the soul experiencing objects and realizing 
its distinction from matter as well as in the case when the soul remains 
enchained on account of its failure to realize itB distinction from matter. 

In a certain school of philosphy the desert is supposed to be a 
quality of the atoms and not of the sonl. In virtue of the desert atoms 
are said to combine together into a body (endowed with a mind) to enable 
the soul to experience objects, and realize its distinction from matter. 
This school of philosophy fails to explain why the soul after it has 
attained emancipation (release) is not again connected with a body 
inasmuch as the atoms composing the body are never devoid of deserts. 

18. The fruit, we reply, is not immediate because it is enjoyable 
after a lapse of tune. 

The fruit of maintaining the sacred fire is the attainment of heaven 
which is not possible until the time of death when the soul departs from 
our body. 

nai^w 

19. An injunction must be appropriate to its occasion just as a 
topic must be appropriate to the treatise which deals with it, 

A treatise on Logic which is to deal with its own special problems 
cannot be expected to treat of etymology and syntax which form the 
subject of a separate tieatise A sacred book winch professes to deal 
fpitb tb® hie of a household® 1 ' can appropriately bestow every encomium 

< 228 ) 

on him. A cereain Vedic text extols karma by saying that immortality is 
attained by the force of one’s own acts, while another text lays down &b a 
compliment to asceticism that immortality cannot be attained except 
throngh rennnciation . Some text declares emphatically that it is by the 
knowledge of Brahman alone that one can attain immortality, there is no 
other way to it. There are again certain textB which attach an equal 
importance to study, sacrifice ann charity each of which is to be perform¬ 
ed by us at the different stages of oar life. Hence a text which aims at 
extolling the life of a householder can, without creatiag any miBsappre- 
hension in ub, lay down that as soon as we are born we incur three debts 
which we must go on clearing off until the time of our decay and death. 

ino^stn 

20. In reinculcation there is no repetition in as much as a special 
meaning is deduced from the word which is repeated. 

The hill has fire (proposition), 

Because it has smoke (reason), 

All that has smoke has fire 

as a kitchen (example), 

The hill has sznoke (application), 

Therefore tbe hill haB fire (conclusion). 

In this argument the “conclusion" is a mere repetition of the 
"proposition" and yet it serves a special parpose. 

( 229 ) 

APPENDIX C. 

Vatsyayana’s Commentary on the Nyaya-Sutra* of Gotama. 

(Summary) 

BOOK 1 s CHAPTER I. 

Topic i: Subject-matter, purpose and relations: Sfltras 1 - 2 . 

Pram&aa (Means of Proof) is connected with Artha (Object), because 
the success of activity (pravritti) depends on the establishment of the Artha 
by means of Pramina. Activity consists in the effort to acquire or to avoid 
an Artha after its cognition by means of Pram&na. Artha is pleasure, cause 
of pleasure, pain, cause of pain. The knower (pramat&), the means of 
knowledge (pram An a), the knowable (prameya) and knowledge (pramiti),— 
these four terms comprehend artha-Tattva, the truth about the Object. 
By Tattva (reality) is meant, in the case of an existent thing, the being 
existent, and, in the case of a non-existent thing, the being non-existent. 
In other words, an existent something which always appears as existent 
and in a particular form and is never known in any other form, is called a 
reality. Similarly in the case of a non-existent thing But how can a thing 
which does not exist be known ? The pram&na which reveals an existent 
thing, reveals a non-existent thing as well. Absence of cognition, while the 
pram Ac as are operative, is the test of non-existence. 

The Nyaya-Sfltras groups existent things under sixteen classes 
(l. 1 . 1 ). They constitute its subject-matter : Its purpose is to teach how 
to know them in their true character. Among these sixteen classes it is 
the knowledge of the reality of the soul and other knowables (I. 1 . 9 ) which 
is the cause of the attainment of the supreme good (mbs'reyasa). One 
attains the supreme good by thoroughly realising the four subjects estab¬ 
lished m the Ny&ya-Siltras, namely the thing to be avoided (1 e., pain), its 
causes (1 e , desire and ignorance), absolute avoidance, and the means of 
such avoidance (i.e , true knowledge) which is to be secured. 

It is true that PramSna and Prameya comprise all objects. Doubt 
and the rest (I. 1 1 ) are included m them. These have been separately 
mentioned to show that they have received special treatment in the 
Ny&ya-S&tras. Four Sciences (VidyA) have been propounded for the benefit 
of mankind : VArttA, vocation, the science of agriculture, trade, commerce, 
etc., which produces wealth (artha), supplies the physical needs of man ; 
Daodaniti, the rule of the rod, polity, controls his passions, desires and 
emotions and enables him to enjoy the amenities (k&ma) of social life ; 
Tray!, the three Vedas (Rik, Yajus and Sslma), which deals with the 

( 230 ) 

sacrifice of Agnihotra, etc., enriches his religious experience (dharma); 
and Anvikfiki, the science of reflection, critique, which deals with the soul, 
etc., ministers to his spiritual needs and helps him to attain Release (mok$a) 
Ny&ya-vidya is this fourth science of Anvik§iki. If the Ny&ya did not tieat 
of doubt and the rest as its special subjects, it would not be distinguished 
from a pure science of the self like the Upanisads. 

Nyaya (reaso ning) has no scope where the object either is not pei ceived 
or is already ascertained, but only where it is doubted. As has been said, 
“ Ascertainment is the determination of the object by means of opposite 
views after first impression’’ (I. 1 . 41 ) The order of sequence is : fiist 
impression, doubt, opposite viesvs, application of Ny&ya (reasoning), detei- 
mination of the object, ascertainment, knowledge of reality. On this account, 
Sams'aya (Doubt) in the form of “what this may be,” which is mdeterm- 
minate cognition consisting of the mere first impression of an entity, 
is separately mentioned, though it is included in the class of Piameya 
(knowable.) 

Prayojana (Purpose) is that by which one is prompted to act. It is 
an object which one desires to secuie or desires to reject Purpose pervades 
all living beings, all acts and all systems of knowledge. For its promotion 
does Nyaya proceed. 

Nyiiya is the investigation of objects by the application of the 
processes of proposition, etc. (I. 1 . 32 ) which are the Piamanas (means 
of knowledge) such as Peiception, etc. lnterence based on peicep- 
tion and revelation is called Anviksft, re-view, that is, review of what has 
been viewed by perception and revelation. The system of knowledge 
which proceeds by this method, is Anviksild, Ny&ya-vidya, Ny&ya-s'astra. 
Inference which is contradicted by perception and revelation, is pseudo- 
nyflya, false reasoning. 

Vada, Jalpa and Vitandd are the three forms of discourse or contro¬ 
versy (KathA). Vada and Jalpa have definite ends m yiew, Vitanda has 
not. Vada (assertion or discussion) has the ascertainment of the truth 
as its object In Jalpa (sophistry) the opponent only seeks personal victory. 
Vitanda (cavil) is merely destructive criticism. If it advances a pioposition 
of its own, it ceases to be itself, if it does not, it becomes a meaningless 
jargon. 

Dristanta (Example) is an object of perception in respect of which the 
observation of common people and of experts is unobstructed. It is a 
Prameya. It has been separately mentioned on account of its impoitance. 
Both inference and revelation rest upon it : without it neither inference nor 

( 231 ) 

revelation would be possible. The application of Ny&ya depends upon it. 
The position taken up by an opponent is assailed on the ground of its 
contradiction to the Example , by agreement with it one’s own position is 
established. The Nihilist (nlstika) abandons his nihilism if he admits an 
Example. If he does not admit one he robs himself of the weapon 
with which to strike down the opponent. It makes possible to define 
the Udaharana (instance), the third member of a Nyaya or syllogism 
(I. i. 36, 37). 

When an object is at last known in the form “Such and such exists,” 
it is called a Siddhanta, an established tenet, a conclusion. It is also a 
Prameya. It has been separately mentioned because Vada, Jalpa and 
Vit and a find scope only where there exists a diversity of siddhantas or 
principles of discourse, and not otherwise 

Avayavas (Membeis), that is, the five beginning with PratijSa (Propo¬ 
sition) (I. l. 32), are so called with reference to the concatenation of words 
considered as a whole, which completes the establishment of the object to 
be established. In them combine all the Pramanas : Pratijna (Proposition) 
(is the enunciation for demonstration to another of the object obtained 
from) Agama (revelation, Testimony) , Hetu (Reason or Mark) is (the vehicle 
of) Anumuna (Inference), Udftharana (Instance) is (an object of) Pratyaksa 
(Perception), Upanayana (Application) is Upamana (Comparison), Niga- 
mana (Conclusion) shows the convergence of all towards the same object. 
Such is the Nyaya par excellence Vttda, Jalpa and Vitanda proceed by 
means of it. The ascertainment of the specific character of a reality depends 
upon it For this reason, the members have been separately mentioned, 
though, as forms of Sound, they are included in the general class of the 
Prameya. 

Tarka (Hypothesis) is neither included in the PramAnas nor is it 
an additional Pramana, but is subservient to the Pram&nas, and as 
such conduces to tattva-jnana, knowledge of reality For instance : Is 
birth the result of past acts or is it the result of causes other than past acts ? 
The object being thus unknown, there follows rational doubt or conjecture : 
if birth is the result of acts, then termination of birth is possible through 
the termination of the cause , but if it is the lesult of causes other than 
acts, then the termination of the cause being beyond the power of man, the 
termination of birth is also impossible. Or, if birth is accidental, then as it 
happens by accident, it will happen again, the cause of cessation therefore 
cannot be expected ; hence the termination of birth is not possible. Tarka 
subserves the Pramanas which proceed to establish one out of the alternate 

( 232 ) 

suppositions, namely that birth is due to action. It conduces to tattva- 
jnana, knowledge of reality, through an analysis of the subject-matter of 
tattva-jnana. Tarka which is of such a character, in association with the 
Pramanas, helps in the establishment as well as in the elimination of the 
object. For this reason it has been separately mentioned, though it is 
included in the Prameya. 

Nirnaya (Ascertainment) is tattva-jnana, knowledge of truth. It is 
the result of the Pramanas. V&da (discussion) ends with it. For its mainten¬ 
ance are Jalpa and Vitanda. Tarka (hypothesis) and Nirnaya (ascertainment) 
help carry on the affairs of the world. For this reason Nirnaya though 
included in the Prameya, has been separately mentioned 

Vada is discussion in which different speakers take part, each seeking 
to make good his own hypothesis, and which ends with the establishment 
of one or other of the hypotheses It has been separately mentioned to 
emphasise its special feature. By the use of it as so defined tattva-jnana, 
knowledge of truth, is attained. 

Jalpa (sophistry) and Vitanda (cavil) are varieties of Vada, and are 
employed to keep up the effort in the pursuit of truth. 

Hetvabhasas (Fallacies of Reason) »have been mentioned separately 
from Nigrahasthanas (Occasions for Rebuke,) because they furnish ground 
of attack in Vada, while Nigrahasth&nas do so m Jalpa and Vitanda. 

Chhala (Quibble), Jati (Futility) and Nigrahasthanas have distinctions 
of their own and are therefore separately mentioned. 

Thus is Anviksiki divided by the topics of the Pramanas, etc. It is 
the light of all sciences, the way of all actions, the foundation of all pious 
acts. It is this which has been recited among the four Sciences. 

And the tattva-jiiana, knowledge of truth, produced by Anviksiki 
for the realisation of the supreme good, should be understood according to 
the scope of each science. In the present Science of the Soul it 
means knowledge of the truth about the soul, etc., and the realisation 
of the supreme good means the attainment of Release. 

The supreme good does not arise immediately after the knowledge of 
the truth about the soul, etc. False knowledge in many forms exists in 
regard to the prameyas from the soul to release (I 1 9 ) Eg the soul 
does not exist; the not-soul is looked upon as the soul, pam as pleasure, the 
non-eternal as the eternal, non-release as release, the cause of fear as not 
the cause of fear, the ugly as the pleasant, what is fit to be avoided as not 
so ; there is no karma (action) nor the fruit of karma; sams&ra (stream of 
births and deaths) is not due to dosa or faults ; there is no animal or embo¬ 
died soul or entity or soul which is to depart and, after departing, to come 

( 233 ) 

back ; birth has no reason behind it, therefore cessation of births in future 
comes about by itself, hence existence after departing from life has a begin- 
nig but no end, it has a cause, but karma is not its cause ; re-birth does 
not require a soul, but is brought about by the disjunction and conjunction of 
the body, the senses and the stream of ideas and sensations ; in release we 
fear there is cessation of all action, in release which means separation from 
everything much that is good is lost, hence how can an intelligent man like 
such release which is unconsciousness, the cessation of all experience of 
pleasure ? 

From such false knowledge arise attraction for things agreeable and 
avertion to things disagreeable. Under the influence of attraction and 
aversion spring up untruthfulness, envy, delusion or attachment, greed, and 
other faults. The faults incite to acts of vice with the body, speech and 
mind. Vices p oduce adharma, demerit. Virtues produce dharma, merit. 
In the text (I. 1. 2) pravritti, activity, has the sense of its products, merit 
and demnt. It is the cause of good or evil birth 

Birth is the appearance of the body, the senses and the intellect, 
or coguition (buddhi) as an aggregate It is the condition of Pam which 
is known as disagreeable feeling, hindrance, suffering, burning 

These conditions, namely false knowledge, faults, activity, birth and 
pain, ever following without interruption, constitute samsara or the wheel 
of life. Knowledge of truth removes false knowledge. On the removal 
of false knowledge faults disappear. On the disappearance of faults activity 
ceases. On the cessation of activity birth does not take place. In the 
absence of birth there is no pain. In the absence of pain absolute success, 
t. e release, which is the supreme good, is attained. 

Know lege of truth is the opposite of the false notions mentioned 
above. And therefore just as food mixed with honey and poison/is 
unacceptable so is also pleasuie tainted with pain. 

The method of the Nyaya-Siltras is threefold enumeration, definition 
and examination. First is given the division of the subject enumerated, 
and then the definition of each division. Next is given the subdivision of 
the subject enumerated and defined. 

The subdivisions of Pramana are Pratyaksa (perception), Anum&na 
(inference), Upamana (comparison) and 6abda (word). 

Pratyaksa is the vritti (modification) of each sense accoidirg to each 
object appropriate to it Vritti is proximity or knowledge. Whenever there 
is proximity there is knowledge of reality. The consequence of knowledge 
is the idea of avoidance or acquisition or indifference. 

( 234 ) 

Anumana is the knowledge of the object after the observation of 
the previously known mark. 

Upamana is the knowldge of an object by means of its resemblance 
to a known object. 

Sabda is that by which an object is designated, i.e, made known as 
such and such. 

The four pramanas sometimes operate conjointly and sometimes 
individually according to the nature of the prameya. Thus : the existence 
of the soul is known from testimony, by inference (I i io), and by percep¬ 
tion through a particular conjunction of the internal organ with the soul 
brought about by the power of meditation of a Yogi. In the case of heaven 
there can be neither the observation of a mark nor perception. When the 
rumbling of a cloud is heard, the cloud is not an object of perception or of 
testimony, but of inference from the sound. In the case of one’s own hand 
there is neither inference nor testimony. 

Pramiti, knowledge, which is thus the result of the pramanas, 
ultimately rests on perception The object of enquiry which is obtained 
from testimony, is sought to be known by means of the observation of the 
mark ; that which is inferred from the observation of the mark, is sought to 
be seen by perception , and when the object is realised in peiception the 
enquiry ceases. 

Topic 2 • Definition oj Piamanas • Sdtras j-S 

Gotama now proceeds to give the definition of each of the four 
pramanas 

Perception is the knowledge which is produced from the contact of the 
sense with the object. The contact of the soul with the mind and of the 
mind with the sense is not mentioned, because it is common to cognitions 
produced by all the pramanas The definition only gives the specific cause 
of perceptual knowledge. The knowledge of the object produced from the 
contact of the sense with the object takes the form of ‘‘colour”, “taste”, etc. 
The words, colour, taste, etc are the names of the visaya-> or contents of the 
knowledge But the name-words have no operation at the time of the 
production of the knowledge of the object , they operate only when use has 
to be made of the knowledge. Hence the knowledge of the object produced 
from the contact of the sense with the object is independent of words. 
Again, mirage is also produced from the contact of the sense with the 
object But it is not perception, because it is erratic, unreal. Perceptual 
knowledge must be unerring, real. For the same reason doubt or uncertain 
knowledge.V. g. be that a post or a man, a cloud of smoke or of dust, is not 

( 235 ) 

perceptual knowledge. Moreover, the latter must be discreet, specific, 
particular, and not general such as is produced from the contact of the soul 
with the mind alone. 

The soul, etc. as well as pleasure, etc. are also objects of perception. 
But their perception is not produced from the contact of the sense with 
the object. 

Manas, the mind, is a sense, but it has been separately mentioned 
because of its distinctive character. The senses are constituted by the 
elements, are restricted each to its own province, and possess attributes. 
The mind, on the other hand, is not constituted by the elements, and is 
all-extensive and without attribute. Hence it is said that perceptual know¬ 
ledge of the soul, etc., which is produced from a particular conjunction of 
the soul and the mind, is not produced from the contact of the sense with the 
object. Otheiwise, the docrtme that the mind is a sense which has been 
established in the Vais'esika-Shtras, is also admitted in the Ny&ya-Sfttras, 
according to the rule of intepretation that the doctnne of another which is 
not controverted, is approved. 

Inference is the knowledge the antecedents of which are the observa¬ 
tion of the connection between the mark and the thing marked, and the 
observation of the mark (liiiga, sign) Recollection of the mark follows from 
the observation of the mark and the thing marked as connected. By means 
of recollection and tHe obseivation of the mark an unperceived object is 
inferred. 

Inference of succession is of three kinds • (r) from cause to effect, ( 2 ) 
from effect to cause, and ( 3 ) from change of position, as, e.g., the inference 
of the movement of the sun from its change of position in the sky. In¬ 
ference of co-existence is as of the fire by smoke ; that is, when two 
objects have been pieviously known as co-existent, the presence of one, 
though not perceived, is inferred from the presence of the other. Inference 
also takes place by the method of exhaustion or residue; e.g. Vais'esika- 
Sfttras, II, 1 . 25 . Again, where the connection of the mark and the thing 
marked is not an object of perception, inference of the thing marked which is 
unperceived, may yet take place through the resemblance of the mark to 
some other object e. g , the inference of the soul by means of desire, etc.; 
desire, etc. are attributes, attributes reside m substances, the substance in 
which desire, etc. reside, is the soul. 

The sphere of perception is the present ; that of inference is the 
present, past and future, 

( 236 ) 

Comparison makes an object known through its resemblance to a 
known object, e. g. as the cow so the bos gavaeus. Comparison subserves 
perception. It enables one to know an object designated by a particular name 

Testimony is the direction of an Apta, i. e of one, be he a seer or 
a man of culture or a savage, who possesses true knowledge and is truthful 
The object of testimony may be of this world or of the other world. 
The testimony of common people is confined to the things of this world , 
the testimony of seers embraces things of the other world also. Both kinds 
of testimony are pramana : the former is based on actual experience , the 
latter, on inference. 

It is by means of these four pramanas and not otherwise, that the 
affairs of gods, men and lower animals are conducted 

Topic 3 Definition of Prameya ( knowable \. Sutras g -22 

The pramanas make known the soul, the body, the senses, object, cogni¬ 
tion, the mind, activity, faults, re-birth, the fruit, pain and release. The soul 
is the seer of all, the experiencer of all, the all-knower, the all-reacher. The 
body is the field of its experience The senses are the instruments of its 
experience. The objects of the senses are the things to be experienced 
The experience is cognition The senses do not extend to all objects That 
which embraces all objects is the inner sense, the mind. Activity and faults 
are the causes which accomplish the soul’s experiences of the body, the 
senses, the objects, cognition, and pleasure. • This body is neither its first 
nor its last. There is no beginning of its past bodies. Its future bodies will 
end only when release is attained. This is re-birth. The fruit is the 
action of pleasure and pain with their causes on the soul Pam is a 
constant companion of pleasure and enters as an element in its experience. 
For this reason, and not to ignore the experience of pleasure as an agreeable 
feeling, pleasure has not been separately mentioned Release is the 
negation of ^ all possibility of births and deaths, the total annihilation of all 
pain. It is the final fruit of a process of self-culture of which the successive 
stages are withdrawal from the world and concentration upon the self, 
meditation, thoughtfulness, and dispassion. 

There are innumerable pramevas such as substance, attribute, action, 
genus, species, combination ( v Vais'esika-Siltras, I. i. 4 ) and their varieties. In 
the Nyaya-Shtras twelve prameyas have been specially taught, because 
knowledge of the truth about them leads to release, while false knowledge 
about them leads to the stream of births and deaths. 

The soul cannot be apprehended through the contact of the senses. It 
is known from testimony and from inference by the marks of desire, aversion, 

( 237 ) 

activity, pleasuie, pain and cognitions Desire, aversion and activity imply 
lecollection of past experiences of pleasure and pain, the power of selection 
of one particular object out oi many as the cause of pleasure or of pam, and 
the adaptation of activity towards its acquisition or aioidancc ^JJ-hey 
therefore prove the existence of a single entity which witnesses a multitude 
of objects Pleasure and pain also persist in mcmoiy , the sight of then 
causes re\ ives then memory There must be therefore an entity in which 
pleasure and pain sink into oblivion. Cognition involves doubt and 
determination. The performer of the two functions must be one and the 
same 

Some deny the existence of the soul and maintain that there is only a 
series ot conscious states severally corresponding to specific objects But 
they also do not admit that the same series re-appears m other bodies Even 
so it cannot be said to have influence in the same body at successive periods 
of time , for the two cases do not materially differ from each otliei. In the 
individual body theie is only one soul, foi one can recollect only what one 
has seen, and not what has been seen by another, or has not been seen at 
all. Similarly souls are different m different bodies, for one does not 
recollect what has been seen by anothei. Those who deny the existence of 
the soul fail to explain these phenomena. 

The body is the field or vehicle of the soul’s experience, because the 
movement towards the acquisition or avoidance of an object takes place in 
the body, because the efficiency of the senses varies according to the health 
or disease of the body, and because the resonance of pleasure and pam 
appears in the body. 

The instruments of experience, i. e., the senses, are the poweis of 
smell, taste, sight, touch and hearing. The elements of the earth, water, fire, 
air and ether are their respective causes. Smell, taste, sight, touch and 
sound are respectively the attributes of the elements and.the objects of 
the senses. 

Cognition is not, as some hold, the modification of an unconscious or 
insentient instrument or organ called buddhi, intellect. Consciousness cannot 
spring from unconsciousness Buddhi, intellect or reason, is not the medium 
of cognition, but cognition itself. 

Memory, inference, testimony, doubt, ready wit, dream, cognition, 
conjecture, feeling of pleasure, etc. and desire, etc are marks of the mind. 
The senses are not their cause. They must have some other cause That 
is the mind. Simultaneous non-production of cognitions even while the 
senses are in contact with their objects is also the mark of the mind, 

2 

( 238 ) 

Activity is the start or action of the body, speech and mind. In the 
Sfttra (I. i. 17) the mind is intended by the word "buddhi”. 

Faults move the knower to activity. They are attraction, aversion and 
stupidity. Where theie is false knowledge there are attraction and aversion. 
Their existence in others is known from their acts. 

Re-birth or transmigration is connection again with the body, the 
senses, the mind and cognition, whether here or elsewhere. The condition 
of recurrent births and deaths has no beginning and ceases on the attainment 
of release. 

Fruit is the experience of pleasure or of pam. It is inevitable so long 
there is connection with the body, the senses, objects and cognition. 

The mark of pain is bMhanft, 1. e , obstruction or hindrance, suffering, 
burning The element of pam is present in all things, the body, the senses, 
the objects, etc. They impede the activity of the soul. 

Release is everlasting deliverance from birth which is the source of 
pain. This is the state which arises when the present birth ends and another 
birth does not take place^/'This state continuing unlimited is called 
Apavarga, release. Abhaya, Ajara, Amrityupada, Brahmaksemaprapti aie 
its other descriptions. Abhaya is fearless : in release there is no longer any 
fear of samsara. Ajara is undecaymg. This disproves the doctrine that 
Brahman modifies (parin&ma) as the fabric of the universe of names and 
forms. If Brahman undeigoes modification as a whole, then as a whole it 
becomes other than it is, and therefore liable to destruction. If, on the other 
hand, it should modify in part, then being divisible it would be equally 
liable to destruction. Amrityupada is the status of non-death or immortality. 
This is in answer to the Vamjs'ikas who hold that release is the extinction 
of the mind like the extinction of a lamp. Brahmaksemaprapti is the 
attainment of the bliss of Brahman 

Some think that permanent pleasure, like the largeness of the soul, is 
manifested m the state of release, and that the absolutely released soul 
enjoys pleasure as so manifested. But there is no evidence, neither percep¬ 
tion, nor inference, nor testimony, that permanent pleasure, like the laigeness 
of the soul, is manifested in the state of release. If manifestation of per¬ 
manent pleasure takes place at a particular time, then it is a product and 
therefore requires a cause. If, on the other hand, the manifestation, like 
pleasure, is ever present, then a soul in bondage will also enjoy it as much 
as a released soul. If you say that the manifestation of pleasure is a pro¬ 
duct and that the conjunction of the soul and mind is its cause, then another 
contributory cause is required. For, in the state of sams&ra, the conjunction 

( 239 ) 

of the soul and mind requires the aid of dharma or acts of virtue to 
produce the cognition of pleasure. But if in the state of release the conjunc 
tion of the soul and mind is an independent cause of the cognition of- 
pleasure, then in the case of the cognition of colour, etc. the senses also will 
not be needed. If, again, dharma or acts of virtue be the contributory cause, 
then a cause of dharma is required, because it is a product. If, on the 
other hand, you say that virtue boin of Yogic meditation or trance is the 
cause, then, as a product, it is liable to dcsti uction, and as such it would 
negate unlimited enjoyment of pleasure, for, as an effect, the enjoyment will 
cease with the cessation of its cause If you say that the manifestation of 
pleasure is ever present but that the connection of the soul with the body, 
etc. prevents its experience in the state of samsara, your position would be 
untenable. The body, etc. have been created to subserve the purpose of 
the soul’s enjoyment. To say that they would obstruct such enjoyment is 
a contradiction in terms. On the other hand, there is no reason to infer that 
a soul without a body can have any expei lence. Instructions about release 
and the activity of the seekers of release do not furnish any such leason. 
For these are directed not to the attainment of a desired object but to the 
termination of what is not desired. There is no good which is not inter¬ 
penetrated with evil The avoidance of evil therefore necessarily entails 
the avoidance of good as well. It is impossible to avoid evil separately. If you 
say that, as a matter of fact, people foisake visible temporal y pleasure and 
long for permanent pleasure, we would lejoin that it would be better to 
suppose that in the same way after transcending the visible temporary body, 
senses and cognition, the released soul obtains permanent body, senses and 
cognition. In this way, the identity of soul in the case of the released will 
also be accomplished The eternahty of the body, etc is no moie opposed 
to the pramanas and therefore impossible to assume than the eternality of 
pleasure. When a revealed text predicates everlasting pleasure of a released 
soul, by pleasure it means non-existence of pain Instances of such use of 
the word are plentiful in populai parlance. Should a man strive after 
release being attracted by the prospect of eternal pleasure, he cannot attain 
release, for attraction is a bond, and while the bond exists no one can be 
released. Now, if the soul’s attraction for eternal pleasure is abandoned, 
then on its abandonment attraction for eternal pleasure does not become 
an obstacle. Such being the case eternal pleasure may accrue to the released 
soul or may not accrue. But the attainment of release does not stand on 
the horns of a dilemmaic doubt. 

Topic 4 .: Definition of the preliminaries of a Ny&ya : Sutras 23*25. 

Doubt is consideration in expectation of a distinction. Expectation 

( 240 ) 

of a distinction is the cognition that one does not find the chai actei istic 
which will determine one or another of two or more possible objects as a 
particular object. It arises (i) trom the observation of common pioperties 
only appertaining (a) to objects of the same class, or (6) to objects of the 
same and different classes, or (2) from contradiction, e g , the soul exists, the 
soul does not exist, 01 (3) from irregularity of perception and non-perception 
(for example, see text). 

Purpose is the obiect which is determined as fit to be acquued 01 fit 
to be avoided It is the resolution which induces activity for the acquisition 
or avoidance of such an object 

An Example is an object which is undei stood by people of insight 
m the same way as by common people who do not possess intellectual 
excellence either by nature or by training 

Topic 5 Definition of Siddhanta : Sutias 26-31 

A tenet is the statement of the complete demonstiation of an object 
as of a particular character. It may relate to the subject matter (>) of a 
system of knowledge or (2) of a topic of discussion or (3) of an admission 
made with a view to the examination of its special nature 

l he senses aie the powers of smell, etc , the objects of the senses aie 
smell, etc , the earth, etc are the elements, obiects ate known by the pi a 
manas—these aie examples of tenets common to all systems of knowledge 
Non-existence cannot come into existence, existence cannot pass into non¬ 
existence, con cious entities do not change, there are intrinsic differences 
in the objects of the body, senses and mind as well as 111 their lespcctuc 
causes—tnese aie peculiar to the Samkhyas, while among the special tenets 
of the Yogas are . elemental creation is due to the act of the puru'-a, the 
faults and activity are the causes of acts, conscious entities aie endowed 
vvitli their lespective attributes, the non-existent can be brought into exis¬ 
tence, what is produced can be destroyed. 

The knower is othei than the body 01 the senses, because, 1 g, the 
same object is apprehended by sight and touch (III 1 1)—this is the example 
of a leading or governing tenet For from its establishment follows the 
establishment of the following the senses are moie than one, the senses 
aie restucted to then respective objects, they aie known by the appie- 
hension of their own objects, and are the means of the knowei’s cognition 
ol objects , substance is other than the attributes of smell, etc , and is the 
substratum of attributes , consciousness comprehends all objects 

The following is an example of an admitted tenet. Let it be assumed 
without examination that sound is a substance. Is it eternal 01 1^ it 

( 241 ) 

non-eternal ? Being a substance it must be either eternal or non-eterfial. 
Let us examine its special character. 

Topic 6 • Definition of Nyaya : Sutras 32-jp. 

The avayavas or members are the integral parts of an argument 
designed to establish a particular object. They are five m number. Some 
add five more, via inquiry, doubt, capacity, purpose and removal of doubt. 
But they are not integral parts of a Ny&ya. Inquiry is for the sake of the 
tiue knowledge of an object which is yet unknown. True knowledge is for 
the sake of the acquisition or avoidance of the object or of indifference to 
it. When one makes such an inquiry another proceeds to demonstrate the 
object. Inquiry therefore cannot be a part of the argument or demons- 
tiation. Similarly, doubt which gives rise to the inquiry, embraces contra¬ 
dictory attributes and therefore cannot be an antecedent or proximate 
condition of cognition , for only one or the other of two contradictory 
attributes can be the truth. Capacity is the capacity of the pram&nas to 
make the prameya known to the knower, if the prameya is capable of being 
know n at all. It cannot properly be a part of the demonstrative argument. 
Purpose is the ascertainment of the truth It is the result of the argument 
and not its part. Removal of doubt is the censure of the opposite view and 
its preclusion ior the sake of grasping the tiuth It is not a part of the 
digument Inquiry and the lest help to fix the object to be ascertained , 
proposition and the othei toui members help to demonstrate the truth 
about it. 

Proposition is the enunciation of a thing as possessing the attribute 
which is going to be demonstrated E. g. Sound is non-eteinal 

Reason is the means of the demonstiation of the attribute in question 
tlnough the generic nature ot the attribute as shown by its existence in the 
Example. E. g because it is a product. A product which is non-eternal, 
has been seen. 

The leason may be negative also. E g Sound is non-eternal, because 
pioducts which are eternal, arc the soul and similai substances 

The sadhya or the thing to be demonstrated may be an attribute, e.g. 
non-eternality of sound, 01 a thing possessing an attubute, eg. non-eteinal 
sound. In the text (J 1 36J “Tat” refers to the lattei as"dharma,” attribute, 
is separately mentioned. A Di'isi&nta, Example, becomes an Udaharana, 
Instance or refei ence, w hen it possesses the attubute as possessing which 
the thing in question is to be demonstrated, as a necessaiy consequence of 
another attribute which it possesses in common with the thing. Ihe instance 
therefore is the statement of the relation betw een the two attributes as of 

( 242 > 

that which is to be demonstrated and that which is the means of its demon¬ 
stration. E. g. The attribute, to be a product, is common to sound and a 
pot; in the pot the attribute, to be a product, is the cause of the attribute, 
to be non-eternal; the attribute, to be non-eternal, is to be demonstrated 
in the case of sound; therefore a pot possessing the attribute of non- 
eternality which is to be demonstrated in the case of sound as a necessary 
consequence of its attribute of being a product which it possesses in common 
with sound, fulfils the function of an Instance in the argument. Similarly 
an Instance may be of the negative kind. E g sound is non-eternal, because 
it is a product; non-products are eternal, such as the soul, etc. Here the 
soul, etc. are negative Instances. 

The force of the Reason and the Instance is very subtle, difficult to 
understand, to be comprehended only by great scholars. 

Application is the statement which brings forward the attribute as 
such and such or not as such and such which the thing to be demonstrated 
possesses in common with the Instance Application is either positive or 
negative according as the Instance or the Reason is positive or negative. 
E g. a pot is a product, non-eternal, so is sound a product The attribute 
of sound that it is a pi oduct is thus brought forwaid. Similarly, the soul 
is not a product, eternal; so is not sound. By the negation its attribute of 
being a product is brought forward (The Instance shows the universal 
concomitance of the reason and the thing to be demonstrated Application 
is the bringing forward of such a reason in the thing to be established ) 

Nigamana or conclusion is the bringing together of the Proposition, 
Reason, Instance and Application. E g sound is non-eternal, because it is 
a product. 

In the statement of the argument consisting of the members the 
pramanas appear together and through mutual connection demonstiate the 
object. Their concurrence is shown thus ■ The proposition that sound is 
non-eternal, comes from Testimony. For, Perception and Inference 
corroborate it, and he who is not a Risi, is not independent of them. 
Inference is the Reason, because resemblance is discovered in the Instance 
The Instance is an object of Perception Comparison is the Application. 
Conclusion is the exhibition of the capacity of all of them to demonstrate 
one single object. Their mutual connection or inter-relation appears thus • 
The Proposition renders the operation of the reason, etc. possible. The 
Reason furnishes the means of demonstration ; is brought forward in the 
Instance and the thing to be demonstrated ; and by its predication makes 
tile fe-statement of the proposition in the Conclusion possible. The 

( 243 ) 

Instance furnishes the resemblance or difference as the means of the 
demonstration of the thing; and makes Application possible through 
resemblance to it. Without Application the attribute which is the cause of 
demonstration cannot be brought forward in the thing, and it cannot in 
consequence demonstrate the object. Without Conclusion the proposition, 
etc., as isolated, cannot opeiate towards the same end and therefore cannot 
produce demonstration 

The function of the Proposition is to connect the attribute to be 
demonstrated with the thing The function of the Reason is to state that 
the attribute to be demonstrated, whether it be similar or dissimilar to the 
Instance, is the cause of demonsti ation. The function of the Instance is to 
show that the two attributes are related in the same substratum as the thing 
to be demonstrated and the means of demonstration. The function of 
Application is the establishment of the co-existence of the attribute which is 
the means of demonstration with the attribute which is to be demonstrated. 
Conclusion serves the purpose to exclude contrary suggestions against the 
establishment of the relation of that which is to be demonstrated and that 
which is the means of demonstration between the attributes present in the 
Instance. 

On the clear definition of the Reason and Instance there cannot arise 
multiplicity of Futility and Occasion for Rebuke (Cf I. 11 20) through 
varieties of opposition by means of resemblance and difference He who 
uses Futility offers opposition without determining the inferential relation 
of the two attributes m the Instance The inferential relation of the two 
attributes being grasped as established in the Instance, the attribute which 
is determined as the means of demonstration, is adopted as the reason, and 
not mere resemblance nor mere difference. 

Topic 7 : Definition of the Accessories of a Ny&ya: Sutras 4.0 — 41, 

Tarka, Hypothesis, is cogitation or conjecture, for the sake of know¬ 
ledge of truth, in respect of an unknown object by the elimination of 
contrary suppositions. To take the example of the soul: Is it a product 
or a non-product? This is Vimars'a, contraposition of two opposite 
attributes. Assent is given to the one or the other according as the reason 
for such assent is forthcoming. If the soul is a non-product, it will 
experience the fruit of its action, and will on the eradication of the cause of 
re-birth attain release ; samsttra and release will thus be possible. If it is 
a product, these will not be possible. For its connection with the body, etc. 
will not be the result of its action. Neither will there be the experience of 
the fruit of its own action. In this situation one gives one’s assent to the 

( 244 ) 

supposition which is based on reason, i.e. serves to explain the phenomena 
of re-birth and release. Cogitation or conjectuie (Oha) in this form is called 
Tarka, hypothesis. This is not knowledge of the truth which ascertains, 
determines, makes certain that the soul is such and such and nothing eke 
It is foi the put pose of the know ledge of the truth It lea\es the supposition 
to which assent is gi\en, to hold the field undisputed . aftei which knowledge 
of the tiuth is produced thiough the foice of the piam&nas 

Ascertainment is the determination of an obiect. aftei doubt, by means 
of the thesis and the counter-thesis. Here thesis means affirmation, 
and counter-thesis, negation. In a controversy one of these ultimately 
must cease and the other must stand. Ascertainment is the determination 
which w ill stand But the determination of an obiect cannot be possible 
by means of thesis and counter-thesis What really happens is thi> The 
speaker supports the object proposed w'lth reasons and attacks its negation 
The opponent contradicts the reasons put fonvard by the speakei and iepek 
the attack on the negation urged by h.mself In the lesult the reasons and 
attacks either of the speaker or of the opponent cease. That which 
remains, whether the thesis or the countei-thesis, is one, and bj means of it 
the object is determined Such determination is ascertainment. 

Vimars'a, contraposition, helps Nylya by distinguishing two contiaiy 
positions, and has leference to contraries residing in the same subAiatum. 
But where contradictory attributes of the individuals of a class spring fiom 
causes inherent m the individuals, theie is not contraposition but colloca¬ 
tion. E g. some substances are active, some aie inactive Again, m the 
same sub^tiatum contradictory attubutes may appear at different time^. 
E g. a substance may be active at one moment and inactive at another 
moment. 

Contraposition is not required in every case of ascertainment. In 
perception the determination of an object through the contact of the sense 
and object is asceitamment. Similarly in matters of 6&stra and Discourse 
there is no room for Contraposition. For 6&stra, eg by Jyoti^toma 
sacrifice one attains heaven, there can be no doubt. In Discourse both the 
speaker and the opponent are sure of their grounds. Contraposition applies 
only in cases of Examination or investigation. 

Book I: Chapter li. 

Topic 8 • Definition of KathS. ( Discourse ) : Sutras i — j. 

There are three forms of Discourse, Vfida or discussion (with eldeis), 
and Jalpa or sophistry and VitandS, or cavil (among rivals). Vada consists 
in the advancement of the thesis and counter-thesis, ie. contradictory 

C 245 ' 

attributes residing m the same substratum , eg. the soul'exists, the soul 
does not exist. Such contradictories as reside in dif’feient substiata, eg. 
the soul is eternal, cognition is non-eternal, do not form thesis and counter¬ 
thesis. In Vada the thesis is maintained by means of the ptamiinas, the 
counter-thesis is attacked or negatived by showing its absurdity, and vice 
versa. When m the piocess one is silenced the other is established Theic 
is no room for the Occasion tor Rebuke in Vada, as its place has been 
assigned to Jalpa (I. 11 2) One form of Occasion for Rebuke, vn. the 
fallacy of ieason called the contiadictorv (I. 11 6) is peimitted m Vada, as 
also are “Saying too little” (V. 11. 12) and “Saying too much” (V. 11. 13). 
In the text (I. 11. 1), “Pramdnatarka”, though included in “Avayava,” are 
separately mentioned to show’ that the establishment of the thesis only is to 
be done by pramdnas, and the negation by tarka In Vada the maintenance 
of the thesis and the negation of the counter-thesis may be done also by the 
piamanas, eg. peiception, etc, independently of the five members of a 
XyAya. The maintenance of the thesis and the negation of the counter¬ 
thesis are equally the functions of Vada whereas negation is the mam 
function of Jalpa. 

As in Vada the thesis is maintained by means of pram An as and the 
counter-thesis is negatived by means of tarkas, so in Jalpa these two objects 
are achieved by means of Chhala, JAti and Nigrahasthfma. The e e however 
fulfil a negative function, as is clear from their definitions (I. 11 10, 18, 19). 

They therefore do not directly serve to maintain or establish the thesis. But 
they do so indirectly by lending suppoit to the pramdnas establishing the 
thesis, by the negation of the counter-thesis (vide IV. 11 50). Jalpa thus 
subserves Vada. 

VitandA, on the other hand, is mere negation. It lends no support to 
the maintenance either of the thesis or of any counter-thesis. Nor does it 
seek to establish any thesis of its own. It is not directed to any such end. 
In this it is distinguished from Jalpa. 

Topic p : Definition of Fallacy of Reas on : Sutras • 4-9 

Fallacies of Reason lack the characteristic of a maik of mfeience 
m a given case but appear as such a mark as they may be marks 
of inference in other cases. They fall into five classes. (1) The 
erratic is not confined to one or the other of two contradictory 
attributes, e. g where the eteinahty of sound is to be established, 
untouchability cannot be the maik of inference, for while a pot which 
possesses touch is non-eternal, the atoms which also possess touch 
are eternal. Again, the soul which is without touch is eternal, whereas 

3 

( 246 ) 

cognition which is also touchless is non-eternal. (2) The contradictory is 
the mark which contradicts the very tenet on which it rests. E. g. A modi¬ 
fication loses its identity as it cannot be eternal, though it loses its identity, 
it still exists as it cannot be destroyed The reason that a modification cannot 
be eternal is contradicted by the speaker 1 " own tenet that a modification 
which is losing of identity still exists. For that which loses its identity 
ceases to exist. Existence and loss of identity aie contradictory attributes 
and cannot abide together. (3) Where the subject matter of the topic is 
advanced as the reason for the desired inference, the maik is said to be 
identical with the topic, eg it is not known whether sound is eternal or 
non-eternal. Eternality and non-eternality are in this case the conti adictory 
attributes the contraposition of which starts the discussion of the topic To 
advance as a reason for the desired inference that sound is eternal or that 
sound is non-eternal is to stop the discussion altogether and to make the 
determination of the truth impossible. (4) The mark w Inch itself stands 
in need of proof equally as the subject is called identical with the subject 
(For example see text, I. 11. 8) (5) The time-expned mark the com¬ 

mentary has been fully given in the text. 

Topic 10 . Definition of Quibble • Sutras : 10-17. 

Quibble consists in playing upon (1) words, (2) ideas and (3) meta¬ 
phors. E. g. (1) A quadruped means an animal and not a table (2) To 
say that a particular Brahmana is learned is not to say that learning is an 
attribate of the genus Brahmana so that all Brahmanas are learned. (3) The 
scaffolds cry, means that the men on the scaffolds for execution cry, and not 
the wooden structures. Between verbal and metaphorical quibbles there is 
this distinction that while m the former there is supposition of a different 
sense, in the latter there is negation of the existence of a sense. 

Topic 11 Definition of General Faults in Marks of Inference dm to 
incapacity of the speaker Sutras . 18-20. 

These are Jati and Nigrahasthana. Jati literally means that which is 
born. Here it means w hatever reply is provoked or called into being by the 
reason advanced by the opponent It is applied to negative the opponent’s 
reason through resemblance and difference Where the reason brings 
forward the resemblance to the Instance, Jati opposes the reason by 
bringing fonvaid the difference from the Instance, and vice versa. 

Nigrahasthana is ground of defeat. Examples of Nigrahasthdna are 
self-contradictory or wrong conclusion, failure to reply, etc. 

The varieties of J&ti and Nigrahasthana are manifold (see I. 11. 20, 
V. i, 1 and V. ii. 1), 

(24 1 ) 

BOOK II s CHAPTER 1. 

Topic 12 : Doubt. Sutras : i —7. 

Ascertainment has been defined (Sutra I. 1. 41) as the determination, 
after raising doubts, of an object by means of thesis and counter-thesis. 
Doubt has been defined in Sutra I. i 23. But some doubt the possibility of 
doubt. Their arguments are stated below: 

(1) An attribute belonging to objects of the same class which is either 
wholly unknown or wholly known cannot cause doubt. 

(2) An attribute which is cognised as belonging to two definite objects 
of the same cla~>s cannot cause doubt, because the objects are thereby 
cognised. 

(3) Cognition of a common attribute cannot raise doubt m lespect 
of the object possessing the attribute, as an attribute is different fiom an 
object. 

(4) Cognition of a common attribute cannot cause doubt because 
cognition is opposed to doubt. 

( 5 ) —(8) The same objections apply mutatis mutandis to the case of 
an attribute belonging to objects of different classes. 

(9) Cognition of the attribute of one of two possible objects, e. g„ 
“Be it a man 01 a post,” also cannot cause doubt, because cognition of the 
attribute means cognition of the object. 

(10) Differences of opinion and irregularity of perception and non¬ 
perception also cannot be the cause of doubt unless one becomes aware of 
these differences and of the irregulai ity, and when one becomes aware of 
them he has cognition of them and cognition is opposed to doubt. 

(n) Those who hold different opinions in respect of an object are 
certain about their own opinions. 

(12) The 11 regularity of peiception and non-perception is also fixed in 
itself. 

(13J If cognition of common attributes be a cause of doubt then doubt 
will never cease, because even when the objects are determined the common 
attributes will still belong to them and enter into cognition along with 
them. 

To the above our reply is as follows : 

(1) The Sutra (I. i 23) does not mean that common attributes them¬ 
selves aie causes of doubt It means that cognition of common attributes 
causes doubt This is clear from the expressions “Apeksa”, “Upapatti” and 

( 248 ) 

“Dharraa”. Apeksa is need, expectancy, of cognition. Upapatti is existence, 
the cognition that common attnbutes arc present Dharma, attribute, is an 
object and implies the cogniscr. 

(2) That an attiibute is common to two objects of the same class 
refers to a previous experience when the two objects were cognised. The 
cognition of the attribute subsequently fails to decide which of the objects is 
the thing that now stands before the eyes. This decision can be arrived at 
by the cognition of the attribute which differentiates one of the objects fiom 
the other. Hence there is room for doubt. 

(3) The Sutra does not say that the cognition of one object is the 
cause of doubt in lespect of a different object. 

(4) It is true that cognition is opposed to doubt. But the cause of 
doubt is not the cognition of the common attiibute but non-cognition i e , 
uncertainty, as to the distinctive attribute. 

(5) —(8) The same replies apply to the objections m regaid to the 
doubt caused by the cognition of the common attributes of hetergeneous 
objects. 

(9) When an object is cognised as such its specific chaiacter is 
cognised For this leason, doubt does not arise m respect of it 

(10)—(12). As regards differences of opinion and irregularity of pciccp- 
tion and non-perception, their certainty and fixity cannot prevent doubt, 
because what is wanted to be "known is the specific character which will 
determine which opinion and which perception and non-perception aie 
true bo long as this distinctive attribute is not cognised there must lie 
doubt 

(13) The Sutra does not say that the cognition ot common attnbutes 
alone causes doubt Doubt depends upon the non-cognition of the distinctnc 
attribute When this is known doubt ceases. Hence perpetual doubt is not 
entailed 

In every cutical examination of an object the thesis and countei-thesis 
should be thus established first by the lemoval of objections to them. 

Topic 13 • The Pramanas in general Sutras S-20 

Some thinkers maintain that Perception, Inference, Compauson and 
Word are not pramanas (sources of knowledge) because it cannot be show 11 
that they exist before, after, or along with, the prameyas (objects ot 
knowledge) If Perception, e 5 cognition of smell, etc by the senses, 
exists as a pramana before the existence of the smell, etc , then the defini¬ 
tion of Perception as cognition pioduced from the contact of the senses and 

( 249 ) 

objects does not hold good. On the othet hand, if Peiception as a pram&na 
comes dftei the cognition of the piameya, then it is useless as the prameya 
has already been otherwise cognised. Lastly, it the piamanas co-exist with 
the prameyas then there would be simultaneity of several cognitions and 
the inference of the mind by the non-simulateneity of cognitions would be 
demolished. 

To the above objection, we reply as follows — 

The fallacy of the objectoi’s leasoning lies in this that he has dis¬ 
tributed the piam&uas, and has compounded the pramey as, m respect of 
time. The piameyas (like the pramanas) do some come befoie, some after, 
and some along with, the pramanas Thus, the sun’s raj s appear before 
then effect, the blooming of the lotus , a lamp which illumines an object in 
a daik room comes aftei the object, wheie the existence of fire is m- 
fened by the existence of the smoke the cause and object of cognition 
appeal at the same time Theie is theiefoie no hard and fast iule as to 
the lelative position of the piamanas and the piamey as in time Moieovei, 
piamina and prameya aie cot lelative teims as the cause and the object 
of cognition Where the piamana follows the pramcj a the conelation 
still exists, as a “cook” is always a cook e\en when he is not actually cook¬ 
ing 

Then, what doe-, the objection establish ? Is it the negation of the 
existence of the piamanas 01 the knowledge of then non-existence ? It 
cannot be the foimei because w lien you pi oceed to negate their existence 
iou thereby admit then existence, fot what is non-existent cannot be 
negated It cannot be the lattei, because > oui \ ciy at gument becomes a 
piamana as it makes known the non existence of the pi am mas, Peiception, 
etc. 

The lea son advanced by the obicctoi again can be tinned equally 
agam-t himself The leason is “non-existence in the past, futuic and pie- 
sent”. The negation cannot piecede the thing to be negated, i e the 
plain anas, because thcic is tlien nothing to be negated If it follows, then 
in the absence of the negation, the piamanas cannot be called the thing to 
be negated II it co-exi-ts with the ptaminas, then the existence of the 
thing to be negated being admitted the negation becomes useless. 

Again, the opponent’s leasomng is invalid if he cannot cite a familiar 

instance (I i 32) in suppoit of the 1 cason It he cites a familial instance 
then this being an object of peiception, Peiception as a piamana is admitted 
by him and his negation of all piamanas falls to the ground. The reason 
thus becomes what is known as the fallacy of the contiadictoiy leason 

( 250 ) 

(I. ii. 6). Further, we have already shown that in the reasoning of five 
members all the pramanas are combined. The opponent cannot say that 
the pramanas are valid in his reasoning and not in the reasoning of others. 

The reason, “non-existence in the past, future and present", advanced 
by the opponent, does not also stand scrutiny. For piamanas do operate 
subsequently as when the existence of a flute is inferred by its tunc. 

The pramanas are tlius established Pramana and piameya aie, how¬ 
ever, correlative terms. Whatever is the cause of cognition is pramana , 
whatever is the object of cognition is prameya When the nature, character 
and strength of a pramana is under examination it is a prameya, just as 
scales and weights by which things are measured may themselves be objects 
of measurement. Thus the soul, being the object of cognition, is a piameya 
(knowable) , as it is an independent agent in the act of cognition, it is the 
knower Cognition, being the cause of apprehension, is pramana ; as an 
object of apprehension, it is a prameya. Where it is neither pramana nor 
a prameya it is pramiti (knowledge). 

Now, admitting all this, asks the opponent, aie the pramanas, Per¬ 
ception, etc., established by other pramanas or are they independent ot 
any pramana ? Our answer is that to admit the need of other pramanas 
would entail infinite legression which is illogical, while to say that 
the piamanas do not stand in need of establishment would imply that the 
soul and other piameyas also do not require to be established and that the 
pramanas themselves are futile. Our reply therefore is that just as a lamp 
which is a cause of petception is itself made known by the contact of the 
eye which is aKo a cause of peiception, in other words, just as Peiception is 
the piamana ot Perception, so the piamanas. Perception, etc , are established 
by themselves mutually It is not necessary that pramana and prameya should 
belong to different classes of objects It is seen that the soul knows itself by 
itself in such case-' as “I feel pleasure, 1 feel pam ” So also is the mind 
infeiied by the mind, non-simultaneity of heterogeneous cognitions being 
the mark of its inference. Moreover, nothing is known to exist winch cannot 
be cognised by the foui piamanas There is therefore no reason to assume 
other pramanas 

Some aie of opinion that just as a lamp reveals itself as well ail object 
without the aid of anothci lamp so the pram&nas reveal them selves as well 
as their objects and do not requite the aid of other pram&nas This view 
cannot be accepted. For there are objects such as a pot which do not reveal 
themselves but require pramanas. Is there any special reason to account for 
the difference m the two cases ? If there is no such reason, the example 

( 251 ) 

cited leads to no conclusion but stands by itsell If there is such a leason 
then the example presents a special case and does not establish a general 
mle 

Topic 14 Of Pei ception Sutras 21 — J3 

Some think that the definition of Pei ception (I 1 4) is incomplete as it 
does not include the contact of the soul and the mind, wheieas in the absence 
of such contact theie can be 110 peiception We also hold that the contact 
of the soul and the mmd is also necessaij foi the pioduction of peiception. 
Otheis think that the contact of the sense and the object is the cause of 
perception because the one piecedes the othei. In that case space, position, 
time and ethei would also be the cause of peiception foi the> aluaj s precede 
it. But they axe not Let us now explain why the contact of the soul and 
the mmd and the contact of the mind and the sense have not been included 
in the definition of perception Cognition is an ittubute of the soul and is 
the maik of its existence (I 1 10), and non-simultaneity of cognitions has 
been assigned as the maik of the existence of the mmd (I 1 16) It has 

thus been mentioned that the contact of the soul and the nnnd and of the 
mind and the sense is also a cause of peiception The contact ot the soul 
and the mind is not onlj a cause of peiception but also ot infeience, com¬ 
parison and verbal cognition But the contact ot the sense and the object 
is the specific cause of peiception alone Hence it lias been expiessly 
mentioned. Not only is it the specific cause, it is also the dominant cause 
of peiception as evidenced in the case where a loud sound or the like 
foices itself upon the notice of a man m sleep 01 absoibed m other things. 
Moreovei, it is by refeience to the senses and the objects that cognitions 
are differentiated as tactual, oculai, olfactoiy, etc 

When a perception foices itself into the soul duiing sleep 01 distinc¬ 
tion the contact of the mind with the soul and the sense suie'y takes place. 
This contact is not due to the volition and attention of the soul But in the 
soul abides another attnbute namelj adrista, pioduced by Activity and the 
Faults, which accomplishes all things. Dnected by adrista the mind comes 
into contact with the sense. Adrista it is which produces substances, 
attributes and actions, induces action in the four classes of atoms and in the 
mmd, and pioduces bodies, senses and objects 

Some argue that Perception is leally infeience, because 111 it from the 
appiehension of a pait the whole is cognised. For instance, the eye sees a 
pait of the tree and the cognition of the tiee is produced Let us consider 
this objection to our doctrine of Perception as a separate pram&na. The 
tree is either a mass of atoms or an organised whole different from the 
atoms. In the former case neither the part apprehended nor the other part 

( 252 ) 

is the tree , hence there can be no inference from the one to the other. If 
it is said that from the one part the other part is inferred and then the two 
parts are integrated producing the cognition of the tree, then the cause of 
the cognition of the tree is not mfeience but something else In the lattci 
case as m the opinion of the opponent the whole is not present in the pait 
apprehended it is not appiehended and even it it is apprehended then there 
i-, no occasion for it" inference Moreor ei, the reason ad\ anced by the 
opponent, namely appi ehen=ion of the part, disproves his case, for at least 
the part is the object of Perception. Lastly inference is based on Peicep- 
tinn, e g. of fire and smoke as connected 

What is then the object other than the part ’ Is it a whole 01 an 
aggregate of atoms ’ By a whole we mean a unity, the product as dis¬ 
tinguished from it" constituent parts, of which the parts are the substratum 
and in which the causes of apprehension are present Eveiy product is 
such a whole and not a mere aggregare of atoms. Such being the case 
there is not merely the apprehension of a part only but also of the whole 
associated with the part. To this the opponent replies by saying that as 
the whole by its very conception covers all the parts and is not limited to 
any single pait it is impossible that there should be the apprehension of the 
whole in the apprehension of a part. We reply that partial apprehension 
is intelligible m the case of the parts which by their nature a’ e disconnected 
and mutually exclude one another But in the case of the whole such 
partial apprehension is impossible because it is an indivisible unity and has 
no part except its constituents from which it is distinct. By its nature the 
whole is apprehended as a whole along with the parts which are apprehen¬ 
ded and is not apprehended with the parts which are not apprehended. 

Topic if: Of the Whole (Avayavi) • Sutras : jj — j6. 

The doubt as to the existence of the whole as distinct from its consti¬ 
tuent parts is not justified These constituent parts, vis., the atoms, are 
themselves imperceptible. And if the whole did not exist there would be 
non-apprehension of “ all, ” that is, substance, attribute, action, genus, 
species, and combination (vide Vais'e ? ika-Sutra, I 1, 4) But these are 
actually apprehended, e. g the pot (substance) is dark, one, large, connec¬ 
ted with the floor (attributes), shakes (action), exists (genus), is earthen 
(species) (the attributes inhering in it by combination) The whole thcrcfoie 
exists The Sutia (II 1. 35) also supports the existence of the whole by the 
argument that without there being a whole the parts could not hold 
together noi could the thing be capable of being pulled, etc. This reason¬ 
ing may not be convincing. For the holding, pulling, etc, are due to 

( 253 ) 

cohesion (samgraha, integration). Cohesion is a distinct attribute co¬ 
existing with the conjunction of the paits and produced by moistness as in 
the case of an unbui nt pot, and by melting as in the case of the burnt pot. 
With the whole as their cause these should have been possible in the case 
of a heap of dust. And where no such whole is produced, as, eg , when 
pieces of wood are glued together, even there they should not have held 
together and been capable of being pulled. 

Those who maintain that the object of perception is not the whole 
but the aggregate of atoms should, on the contrary, be asked • When you 
apprehend the object as one, what is your idea of unity ? Do you mean 
by it identity or plurality of objects 11 If you say that unity is the identity 
of the object, then such unity is distinct fiom the diveisity of the atoms, 
and the whole is thus established If, on the other hand, you say that 
the idea that the object is one is m respect of the plurality of atoms cons¬ 
tituting the object, then the idea is self-contradicloiy. 

The opponent may rejoin that a plurality can by lea-on ol distance 
give rise to the idea of unity as in the case of an arm) or a foiest We 
leply that this cannot be, for the reason that while diveisity of the units 
composing an army or a forest can be apprehended on ncaier appioach, the 
diversity of the individual atoms can never be so appiehcnded, so that 
the error as to the apparent unity of an army or a toicst cannot arise in 
regard to an assembly of atoms 

Again, an army 01 a foiest is, on the theoiy of the opponent, nothing 
but an aggregate of atoms, and the unity of such aggiegates is the veiy 
thing which is under examination. The instances cited aie thciefoic them¬ 
selves in need of prool. 

Then, ciroi presupposes coircct cognition. It is possible to mi-take a 
post for a man only when one possessc cognition ol a real man Similailv 
the erroneous idea of unity m respect oi an aggicgatc ot atoms presupposes 
the existence of unity somewheie It cannot exist in the aggregate for the 
aggregate is a plurality. It must theicforc exist in something distinct from 
the plural aggicgate, i.e , the whole Hence a pot is not a mere collection 
of atoms but is a w'holc, as otherwise it could not be perceived as one. 

It may be argued that the idea of unity derived from the apprehen¬ 
sion of sound, touch, smell, etc., as one may account for the apprehension 
of an aggregate of atoms as one. But the argument is not suppoited by 
any special reason which would show that the apprehension of a pot as 
one is erroneous and not correct Moreover, sound, touch, smell, etc , are 
also of a composite character like a pot. 

4 

( 254 ) 

Unity and magnitude co-exist. The atoms have no magnitude. Yet 
a pot constituted by them possesses magnitude, Similarly a pot possesses 
unity. In respect of magnitude also a pot bears no analogy to sound which 
is known as minute and large, for sound has no extension which can be 
delimited like the extension of a pot. Again, the conjunction of two 
objects which does take place could not be possible were they only aggre¬ 
gates of atoms instead of unities Conjunction is a distinct attribute and not 
unreal. It develops a new attribute in the conjoint object , a flagged staff 
is neithei a staff nor a flag. The cause of the cognition of the staff as thus 
qualified is conjuction. It is apprehended along with the apprehension of 
the qualified object. It cannot belong to atoms 01 collections of atoms as 
m that case it could not be apprehended. 

The existence of natural kinds such as cow-ness, horse-ness, trec-ness, 
etc which cannot be ignored, also proves the existence of an object which 
is piesent in the aggregotes of atom 3 aud is yet different from them These 
distinct objects are the unitaiy wholes. 

Topic 16 : Of Inference Sutias • 37-3S. 

Some say that Inference can nevet be an instrument of tiuc cognition 
because, e.g , the swelling of a river may be due to obstruction as well as to 
ram, the carrying off of eggs by ants maybe due to distuibancc of their nests 
as well as to imminence of rain and the screaming of the peacock ma\ be 
imitative as well as real, so that the inference by means of these milks, 
namely that rain has fallen, that ram w ill fall and that rain is falling, may 
be all incorrect To this we reply that this is not so, that is, that inieienre 
as an instrument of right cognition is not imalid, and that the incoirectness 
of the inference in the cases cited is due not to the defective nature of the 
piocess of Infeience but is due to the fallacious chaiacter of the maiks It is 
because the man mistakes pseudo-maiks for true maiks that he falls into uioi 

Topic 17 Of the Present Time Sutras 39-33. 

We have said that infeience operates m respect of matteis past, lutuie 
and piesent. But the opponent denies the existence of the time piesent 
His argument is that when a falling fruit detached from the stem approaches 
towards the ground all that can be seen is the distance it has fallen and 
the distance it has to fall and not any intervening distance which can 
give the idea of the present that it falls or is falling. We reply that time 
is manifested not by distance (space) but by action. The past is the time 
where action has ceased, the future, where it will take place ; and the 
present, where action is apprehended in the object. Thus the past and the 
futuic depend upon the present. They cannot be a pair of correlated duals 

( 255 ) 

like long and short, light and shade, for there is no reason for such corre¬ 
lation , nor is the past or the future itself established otherwise than by 
leference to the present. Moreovei, there is no universal correlation of 
duals; e g. coloui and touch, smell and taste are not correlatives. Furtliet, 
the past and the future cannot be mutually the cause of each other, for so 
long as one of them is not established it cannot serve as the cause of the 
other, and vice versa The truth is that the present is manifested by the 
existence of the object substance exists, attribute exists, action exists. 
He who denies this denies the possibility of Perception, for Perception 
requires contact of the senses with objects which exist, are present. Infer¬ 
ence, etc. depend upon Perception. The denial of the present theiefoie 
amounts to a denial of know ledge itself. Again, we have apprehension of 
the present alone as well as in association with the past and thefutme. 
For action may be continuous as in cooking or repeated as in cutting down 
a tree. In these cases all the three times are associated , e g the cooking 
commenced, the cooking is going on, the cooking will be completed The 
object exists, is the instance of the apprehension of the present by itself. 

Topic iS Of Comparison . Suttas 44-48. 

Comparison ( vide Sutra 1 1 6), says the opponent, fails as an instru¬ 
ment of true cognition in any case ; for if the resemblance is complete the 
cognition will be “ As a cow so a cow ” , if it is incomplete, the cognition 
will be. “As a bull so a buffalo” , and if it is partial the cognition will be “ As 
one thing so anything else,” which are all absurd. To this we reply that 
Comparison does not proceed on mere resemblance but on the well-known 
resemblance, that is, on the resemblance which is definitely known to be the 
means of establishing cognition of an object. Let then Comparison be a 
form of Inference, rejoins the opponent, as in both cases theie is cognition 
of the unknown by the known. We reply that Compaiison is distinguished 
from Inference in this that m the former it is necessaiy, while m Inference 
it is not necessaiy, to see the object to be known E. g the bos gavaeus 
must be seen before it can be known as such by its resemblance to the 
cow. Moreover, in Comparison the resemblance must be pointed out by one 
to another. The man who knows both the cow and the bos gavaeus points 
out the resemblance to the man who knows the cow but does not know 
the bos gavaeus. Lastly, the conclusion in Comparison takes the form 
“ as the cow so the bos gavaeus ” but the conclusion in Inference is not of 
this form “ As the smoke, so the fire.” 

Topic 19 : Of the Wordm general : Sutras : 49-^6. 

The opponent says that Testimony is not different from Inference, 
because (1) the meaning which is not known and which is not an object of 

( 256 ) 

perception is known by means of the word which is known, as in Inference 
the unknown is known by means of the known, (2) cognition from Testimony 
does not, as does cognition from Comparison, differ from cognition from 
Inference, and (3) there is unnersal concomitance of the word and its 
meaning. To this we reply that in Testimony the word by itself is not 
competent to produce cognition of truth, and that it derives the force to 
produce such a cognition only from its being spoken by an apta or truth- 
know ing bene\olent person, as in the case of “ heaven,” * apsaras,” “ uttara 
kurus,” “seven islands and seven oceans," ‘the worlds Bhuli, Bhuvah, 
Svar, etc ,” and so on. Inference is not =o dependent upon an apta Thi, 
also constitutes the difference of cognition from Testimony to cognition 
from Inference. Again, the relation of the w'ord and the meaning is that 
of the signifier and the significate. and is not natural (dependent on and 
follow ing from a law of nature) Natural concomitance exists between two 
objects when both are perceptible to the senses, as in the case of fire and 
smoke. But objects denoted by words are not perceived by Hearing, and 
there are objects denoted by words which are not perceptible by any sense. 
Therefore the supposed natural connection of the word aud meaning cannot 
be established by any means It cannot be said that the meaning alw ays 
accompanies the w r oid, tor in that case whenever the words food, fire, and 
sword are uttered the mouth should be filled with food, burnt w ith fire and 
cut with sword Neither can it be said that the word always accompanies 
the meaning, for m that case the vocal apparatus should be found near the 
pot and other objects It is true there is a uniformity 111 the relation of the 
word and the meaning. But this uniformity is due to convention cieated 
by the will of man and handed down from generation to generation This 
is clear from the fact that the same word conveys different meanings among 
different races of mankind. 

Topic 20 Of the Veda . Sutras 57-68. 

Some condemn the Veda on the ground of futility, contradiction and 
repetition But where the Vedic injunctions fail of their purpose the 
fault does not lie w ith the Veda but with the performer and the performance 
(in the same way as scientific experiments fail in the hands of nouces) 
The so-called contradictory injunctions have reference to different points of 
time. The so-called repetition is re-inculcation with a purpose. The state¬ 
ments in the Veda admit of interpretation in the manner of secular 
statements. They are either • (1) injunctions or (2) exhortations or (3) 
re-inculcations, E. g. (1) He who desires heaven let him perform the 
Agmhotra sacrifice ; or let him cook food , (2) this is the first among the 

( 257 ) 

sacnfices, this Jyoti&toma, etc. , or life, strength, pleasure, etc. are all in the 
food, (3) he offers Agnihotra, he offers with curd , 01 cook, cook The 
authoiitative chaiacter of the Veda lests on its being the declaiation of 
Aptas as m the case of Mantias and Medical Science Mantras to counter¬ 
act poisons, ghosts and lightning and medicines to cuie diseases aie 
vindicated by results. Some of the Vedic injunctions are similaily vindicated 
byiesults. The infallibility of otheis is inferred fiom the infallibility of 
the Aptas who have declaied them The Aptas aie peisons who have 
duectly known the truth, who are kind to living beings and who are willing 
to communicate the tiuth as known by them. In the seculai affairs of men 
also reliance on statements of aptas is seen Moieovei, the same Risis who 
are the seers and speakeis of the Veda ate also the‘-eeis and speakers of 
Mantias and medicines 

* Ihe Vedic woids aie authontative because they are significant of 
tiuth and not because they aie eternal They aie not eternal as in that 
case all words would be 1 elated to all objects at the same time Non- 
eternality does not entail loss of significance, foi oidinaij seculai \void c 
which are not eteinal are yet significant Seculai woids cannot be eternal, 
for in that case the statements of those who aie not Aptas would not be 
untrue. It cannot be said that the woids of non-uptas aie non-eteinal, foi 
there is no leason to distinguish them fiom the woids of the aptas In the 
case of seculai woids also their validity depends on comention and not on 
their eternahty In both cases the authoi lly of the aptas confers authority 
on their words The eteinality of Vedic woids arises fiom their uninter¬ 
rupted succession in tiadition, study and application in all ages and world- 
cycles (manvantaras), past and future 

Book II: Chapter ii. 

Topic 21 Ihe Pramanas are not mote than four . Sutias /— 12. 

We admit that Tiadition (Aitihya), Implication (Aithipatti), Com¬ 
position (Sambhavaj and Non-existence 01 Negation (Abh iva) aie also 
means of knowledge , but we do not admit that they aie different fiom the 
four means enumeiated by us, nz Feiception, Infeience, Companson and 
Word. Tiadition consists of opinions coming down fiom generation to 
generation in unintenupted succession, the origin of which is lost in oblivion t 
Implication is cognition following fiom the sense of what is stated, e g., 
when it is said that without clouds there can be no 1am, it follows that with 
clouds there can be rain. Composition consists in the apprehension of the 

( 258 ) 

presence of one object from the apprehension of the presence of another 
object which never exists without the former^ e. g the apprehension of the 
presence of the ounce from the apprehension of the presence of the pound 
Non-existence is the negative, the contradictory, a 1 - the non-existent of the 
existent, e, g., absence of ram m the presence of clouds leads to the 
cognition of the conjunction of the clouds with high winds. 

Tradition is not different from Word or Testimony, as its authority is 
derived from the same source, ms., its emanating from an Apta. Implication 
Composition and Non-existenee are not different from Inference which is 
cognition of the imperceptible by means of the perceptible. Implication and 
Non-existence or Negation proceed on the basis of contradiction, Com¬ 
position, cognition of the component fiom the composite, proceeds on the 
basis of universal concomitance 

Some question the validity of Implication on the ground that even 
when clouds exist rain does not sometimes fall In putting fonvaid this 
objection they mistake for Implication what is not Implication From the 
statement that there can be no effect without a cause, it follows that wheie 
the cause exists the effect is produced This is Implication according to the 
law of contiadiction The failure of the cause to produce the effect on 
account of the operation of counter-agents is an attribute of the cause, and 
not the object of cognition by Implication. The object of cognition by 
Implication is that the pioduction of the effect depends upon the existence 
of the cause. 

Non-existence or Negation is held by some to be not an instrument 
of cognition on the ground that the object of such cognition does not exist 
This is a rash argument There aie innumerable objects of cognition which 
are appiehended by means of Negation in the form of cognition of non¬ 
existence To take one example: Wheie from a heap of cloths some of 
which are marked and the otheis are not marked, the unmarked ones aic 
taken out, the action of taking them out depends on their cognition and 
their cognition is produced by the non-existence of any maik. The negation 
of mark is thus a means of cognition and therefore a pramana, foi a 
pramana is nothing but a means of cognition. For the purpose of negation 
it is not necessary that an object should first be produced and then 
destroyed , e. g., for cloths to be unmarked, it is not necessary first to put 
marks on them and then to efface the marks. For the negation of marks 
in some cloths can be perceived by seeing the presence of marks in othei 
cloths. Negation is correlated to affirmation whether in the same or in a 
different substratum. Moreover, negation or non-existence is of two kinds, 

( 259 ) 

antecedent and consequent. Non-existence prior to production is antecedent 
non-existence, non-existenee after destruction is consequent non-existence. 
The absence ot marks in cloths which have never been marked is antecedent 
non-existence of maiks m the cloths. 

Topic 22 Sound is not eternal • Sutras • ij—jg 

Diverse opinions are held as to the duration of Sound. The 
Miimrpsakas assert that Sound is an attribute of Ether, is all-pervading, 
eternal, and it> not produced but manifested. The Samkhyas hold that 
Sound co-exists w ith smell, etc , inheres in substances, is existent like smell, 
etc, and is not produced but manifested. The Vais'esikas maintain that 
Sound is an attnbutc ot Ether and is liable to production and destruction 
like cognition. The Bauddlias think that Sound is produced from the 
agitation of the great Elements, is without any support and is liable to 
production and dcstiuction. These opinions gne use to doubt as to what 
the tiuth of the matter maybe. The truth is that Sound is non-eteinal, 
because (i) it originates fiom a cause, (2) is sensible, and (3) is Heated as a 
pioduct Whatever is caused is non-eternal, 1 e, is also destroyed. 
Conjunction and disjunction ol substances are the causes of Sound. They 
arc the causes of its production and not of its manifestation It is not an 
object of manifestation because it is appiehended by Ilcai mg The sense ol 
Hearing is impondeiabic and thciefore cannot go out and leach the place 
where Sound appears. Sound reaches the sense of Heanng 111 a senes of 
sounds in the way of waves ot water, after the cessation of the Conjunction 
(e g of the axe and the tiee m cutting) which produces it An object which 
is manifested is apprehended wheie it is manifested. This is not the case 
with Sound. The diffetencc 111 the intensity ol Sounds also show that they 
arc not diffeient from other products such as pleasuie and pain It cannot 
be said that Sound is one and of a uniform character and is manifested by 
Conjunction the strength of which accounts for the pitch of the Sound as 
perceived F01 this cannot explain the phenomenon of the overpowering 
of one sound by another, e g of the sound of the flute by the sound ot the 
dium. Heterogeneous objects do not ovei power one anothei , e g colour 
does not ovei power touch An object docs not ovei power itself Objects 
of the same class overpower one anothei , e. g , bughtci colouis overpowei 
less bright colours Similarly, when it is seen that the sound of the flute is 
drowned by the sound of the drum it must be admitted that the two sounds 
are two separate objects and that they vary in intensity. Intensity is their 
attribute and is not due to the strength of their causes. Theiefore sounds 
are pioduced and not that one unilorm eternal sound is only manifested. 

( 260 ) 

Moreover, manifestation must take place where the causes of manifestation 
operate That being so, as the flute and the drum are operated in different 
places Sound manifested in the flute cannot be subdued by Sound mani¬ 
fested m the drum If it is said that difference of place does not matter 
then the beating of a drum anywhere would drown Sound manifested in all 
flutes all over the world at the same time The theory thus is untenable 
The phenomena of sound can be explained only on the theory that sounds 
are produced and that they become perceptible only when they reach the 
sense of Hearing in waves. 

The opponent attacks the three reasons given m support of the non- 
eternality of sound, (i) the destruction of a pot originates from the 
disjunction of its causes , the non-existence of the pot after destruction is 
eternal. (2) genus which is perceptible is eternal, (3) as we speak of the paits 
of a tree or a blanket which are non-eternal so we speak of the parts of 
Ethel and the Soul which are eternal To this we reply, (1) There is a 
difference between the eternal and the pseudo-eternal. That object is 
eternal which has come into existence without production (by conjunction or 
disjunction ot parts) and which never loses its self-existence Non-existence 
after destruction of an object is not eternal in this sense. Moreover, m the 
case of sound there is no cause to originate its destruction m the manner 
of the pot. Therefore the analogy of the pot does not hold good (2) Sound 
is non-eternal, not because it is perceptible but because of the manner in 
w'hich it comes into contact with the sense of Hearing and becomes percep¬ 
tible. (31 When we speak of the parts of a tree or a blanket w e mean 
their constituents. But Ether and the Soul have no constituent paits. 
The use of the woid paits in regard to them is metaphorical, and comevs 
the sense that their contact with finite objects does not pervade the whole 
of them The conjunction of two fiuits does not pervade the whole of diem 
but is confined to parts only Similaily w'hen we sav that an object is 111 
contact with Ether or the Soul we mean that it is not in contact with even 
part of Ether or the Soul and to convey this meaning vve say that it is m 
contact with a part of Ether or the Soul As conjunction does not peivadc 
the whole of its substiata, ‘-o sound docs not peivadc the whole oi Ethel, 
and cognition, etc do not pervade the whole of the Soul. 

\ ou may ask, Why has not Gotama embodied m an aphorism the 
tenet that Ether and other eternal substances have no pails? Our reply is 
that in many topics he has not brought out all the sides ; that is his character¬ 
istic. He thinks that in such cases one can ascertain the tiuth from the 
tenet of his $&,srra. The tenet of his Sastra is, as is well known, Nyaya, 

( 261 ) 

that is, many-branched Inference not inconsistent with Perception and 
Revelation 

Again, how «ne we to know that an object exists ur that an object 
does not exist ? By cognition or 11011-cogmtion accoiding to pramana. By 
this test sound is non-existent before utteiance because it is then not 
cognised and because any obstruction to its cognition is also not cognised. 

The reasons given in suppoit of the theory that Sound is eternal aie 
(p) that it is intangible like Kthei, (2) that it is capable of being imparted by 
the teachei to the pupil, (3) that it admits of repetition, and (4) that the cause 
of its destruction is not peicci%-cd The hist reason is fallacious, because the 
atom which is tangible is eternal, while action which is intangible is non¬ 
eternal As regards the second it is seen that an object of gift is perceptible 
on its w ay from the donm to the donee But sound is not peiceptiblc and 
thcicforc does not exist in the interval between the teachei and the pupil, 
Xe\ eithcless, it may be said, instruction is lecened by the pupil and fmin 
the tact of instruction the existence of Sound in the mteiv.il is to be inferied, 
wheicby the gift of Sound from the teachei to the pupil becomes possible 
To this wc reply that the opponent has yet to establish what constitutes 
instruction Is it that Sound residing in the teachei actually mows troin 
him and icachos the pupil, 01 is it imitation ot what is done by the teachei 
as m the case ol a dancing lesson’ Such being the case uistiuction does 
not lemove the doubt as to the validity of instruction as a mark of the 
possibility of the gift ol Sound by the teachei to the pupil In legaid to 
the third 1 cason. it is aigued that as the persistence ol coloui makes it 
possible to see it again and again so the peiststence ol Sound 1 mulcts possible 
its utteiance times without numbei But icpetitioii is possible also 111 the 
case ol objects which aie not poisistcnt, that is, aie diffuent at e\eiy time 
they appeal Thus, wc say, he danced twice, lie eats twice, etc As legalds 
the fourth leason it is said that the cause ol the destitution of non-eternal 
things, e g a clod of earth, is seen , and that it Sound weie non-etemal the 
cause ol its destitution would also be peicened, blit that such a cause is 
not percened , and that theiefoie Sound is not non-eteinul We leplv that 
if the non-appiehension of the cause ol the destitution ol Sound implies its 
non-destruction, the non-apprehension of the cause ol its noii-heanng also 
implies its constant hearing, X on-hearing cannot be due to absence of 
manifesting agents, foi wc hate aheady shown the impossibility of Sound 
being an object of manifestation. If then the opponent’s thooiy is reduced 
to this that the hearing of Sound is without any .pause then why should he 
not admit that the destruction of Sound also is without any cause? We do 

5 

( 262 ) 

not say, however, that there can be no cognition of the cause of the 
destruction of sound. The existence of such cause can be mfened from the 
fact which we have alteady established that sounds are pioduced m a senes 
The first sound is produced by conjunction and disjunction and gives rise 
to the second sound which, in its turn, to the third and so on and on till 
the series is stopped and the last sound is destroyed by some obstruction 
such as a wall Each succeeding sound destroys its immediate predecessor 
Then, when a bell is rung various sound series of different tones, high and 
higher, low and lower, are heard Such diverse differences m tone and 
timbre cannot co-exist in one eternal permanent Sound. And w ithout them 
differences in aural cognitions cannot be explained The cause of the 
differences in the intensity of sound is the dcgiee of force u ith which the 
bell is rung and which is communicated to the sound series produced by it 
The existence of such force in the bell cannot be denied For the ringing 
of the bell does not produce sound when the hand is placed upon it This 
shows that the force is stopped in its action by the conjunction of the hand 
It is also perceived by touch that the vibrations set up m the bell by the 
foice of ringing gradually die away On the other hand, if the non¬ 
apprehension of the cause of the destruction of Sound proves its cteinality 
then the manifestation of Sound after its appearance would continue for c\ci 
as no cause of its desti uction is apprehended. 

Sound cannot be an attribute of Ether, says the opponent, because 
in that case the stopping of the vibrations in the bell by the hand could not 
cause its destruction. According to him, sound and the vibrations which 
cause it must reside in the same substiatum We reply that the objection 
does not apply, because Ether is intangible. The non-cognition of sound m 
the same substance w ith colour, taste, smell and touch and the phenomena 
of sound series show that sound is the attribute of an intangible all-pen ading 
substance, 1 c Ether. Sound exhibits a twofold difference a bell, c g , 
pioduccs diftciont vaiietics of sound and in each variety there is a difference 
of pitch These differences could not be possible if sound were an attiibutc 
of the same substance with coloui, etc., as in that case like colour, etc , it 
would be of one unalterable character. 

Topic 23 • Of the Mo I’fication of Sound Sutras 40-51 

Sound is either Varna, articulate, letter, or Dhvani, inarticulate, noise 
In regard to sound as letter, when Dadln and Atra, for instance, become 
Dadhyatra, what does happen ? Modification or substitution ? Is 1 modified 
as_y or is replaced by y ? We say that i is replaced by y . Our reasons are 
as follows . (1) When one object, eg, a piece of gold, modifies into anothei 

( 263 ) 

object, eg., a ring, some attributes disappear, other attributes appeal ■ while 
the same material subsists in the modification ; but this is not the case 
where t gives place to /. (2) The effort lequired in the utterance of i is 

diffeient from the effoit required in the utterance of /. (3) Where y comes 

in the place of 1 and where / stands by itself as 111 yatatc, and where t gives 
place toy and where 1 stands by itself as in tdam , the effort lequired 111 the 
utterance of the / m the two cases does not differ, and the effort 
required m the utterance of the 1 in the two cases also does not 
differ. (4) The modification of 1 into y is not cognised as the modific¬ 
ation of milk into curd is perceived. (5) The theory of modification 
of letters is not necessary for the purpose of the mles ot grammar. (6) 
One letter is not the pioduct of another. They aie all independently 
pioduced. (7) Modification can be either transformation, 1 e, change of form 
or production But neither is possible in the case of letters. (8) Where bhu 
takes the place of ns, vacli of dr it, you do not say modification takes place. 
Similarly not modification but substitution takes place in the case of single 
letters. (9) In the case of modification the bulk of the modification varies 
accordfng to the bulk of the original ; but whether 1 is long or short makes 
no difference in / The opponent rejoins that modifications are some¬ 
times greater than the original as m the case of a tree from ah acorn and 
sometimes equal to the original as in the case of a ring from a piece of gold and 
sometimes less than the original as m the case of yarns from cotton. To 
this we reply fiist that mere example unsuppoi ted by any reason, homoge¬ 
neous or heterogenous, cannot establish a proposition; otherwise a horse 
would be a modification of a bullock, both being beasts of 
burden. In the second place, when we refer to the bulk of the original 
and the modification we intend to say that a modification follows its 
original in essentials so that if the onginals differ the modifications 
also must differ. But m the case 111 question y does not follow its 
original, 1 c,, it does not become long or short according as it takes the place 
of 1 long or shoit. It is therefoie not a modification of t. It cannot be 
said that the base 1 is not affected by its attributes of longness and short¬ 
ness and that y follows the base. For what happens in the modification of a 
base, eg , gold 01 clay, is that its original form is destroyed and a new form 
is produced. But in the case in question there is no evidence that 1 is 
destroyed and / is produced from the disintegrated 1. (10) When Dadhyatra 
is disjoined 1 returns to its orignal form, but curd never returns to milk ; 
therefore/ is not a modification of 1. It is true that a ring can be reduced 
to a piece of gold again. But the analogy does not hold good here. For 
gold remains constant; it becomes a ring by giving up and taking up some 

( 264 ) 

attribute*. A similar change does not take place in the case of i and r. 
It cannot be said that letter-ness remains constant in i and y , for i and t 
cannot be attributes of the general attribute letter-ness. 

in) Again, the letters arc either eternal or non-eternal. If they aic 
eternal, they cannot undergo modification If they are non-eternal, then 
one is destroyed before another takes its place. To this it may be leplied 
by the opponent that theie aie eternal thing- which vary in their attiibutes , 
eg., the atoms aie imperceptible while the letters are perceptible , therefoie 
while the atoms do not undergo modification letters may. The argument 
is imalid The 1 eason advanced, namely difference of attributes, is a con¬ 
tradictory ieason, it contradicts the supposed eternal character of letters 
Modification and eternality aie cnntiadictory teims On the other hand, 
it cannot be said that as the hearing of the letters is possible though the\ 
are destroyed at the third moment aftei their production, so their modific¬ 
ation also ma) be possible. Tor a meie example cannot establish a pioposi- 
tion. The reason must be stated. If the hearing of the letters be the 
reason, then w'e say that the uniaeisal concomitance ot the hearing of the 
letters and of the modifications of the letters is yet to be established I he 
fallacy of the opponent’s aigument is s^dharmya-sama t V. 1. 2 ) 

(12) A further rea-on why y cannot be a modification ol / is that 
srmetunes we find 1 in the place ot y as m J'yadh becoming vidhyati 

The expression “mcdifcaiton if lettei” u-ed by giammanans dees 
not mean that one letter is tianstoimed into, or pioduced by, anothet 

letter It means the substitution of one letter m place ot anothet It 
appeals in six diffetent toims • (a) change of attribute, as when the grave 
takes the place of the acute accent . (/>) suppression, as when bhu takes the 
place of as, (ci deciease, as when the long is replaced by the shoit , (d 1 
lnctease. as when the short is replaced by the long or the prolated , le) cui- 
tailment, as when sta/i comes in the place of as , and {/) coalescence, as when 
the base or the affix is augmented. These are all instances of substitution 

The result of the abo\e examination is to show that sound is non- 
eternal. Sound does not lemain constant under change of foims nor siu- 
vives in its product. It is produced at one moment, exists at the second 
moment and is destroyed at the third moment by the sound to which it 
gi\ es rise or by the obstruction which it meets. 

Tofu 24 : Of the Force of Words : Sutras : jS-6p. 

Gotama now pioceeds to determine the foice of w’ords on which depend 
the validity of Word as pramuna. A word consists of letters ending in an 

( 265 ) 

affix. Affixes aie nominal or verbal. Prefixes and indeclinable-^ have their 
nominal affixes elided (Panmi, II. iv. 28) Words lead to the cognition of 
objects. It is therefore necessary to determine the nature or force of words. 
Let us take the word, cow, for example. The Woid is used to denote an 
individual, a form and a genus. The doubt therefore arises as to whether 
it denotes any one or all of these objects One part}’ says that the word 
denotes the mdudiual, because individuals which differ from one another 
and possess attributes, and not the genus which is unproduced, undifferen¬ 
tiated and devoid of form, parts and atributes, admit ot (rij specification, 
this cow, that cow, etc , (< 5 ) collection, a herd of cows , (r) gilt, he gives cows 
to the learned, (d) possession, the BiAhmana’s cow , (d) enumeration, ten 
cows (r) growth, the cow grows , (/) emaciation, the cow grows lean , (g/ 
colour, white cow , (//) association, the good of the cow , and (/) piopagation, 
the cow produces a calf. To this w e reply that the above uses of the w ord 
cow are rendeied possible only because the objects indicated aie endowed 
with the genus cow -ness. The use ol the w ord cow in respect of the 
individual is metaphoiical, as in such cases as when we say, he is a 
Shakespeaie, he dwells on the lake, he is weaving a mat (when the mat is 
yet non-existent), etc , etc 

Some think that the form is the denotation ot the woid . because foim 
consists in the configuration ot parts which endures, and because without 
the cognition of the foi ms we cannot distinguish a cow fiom a I101 se. This 
is not conect, because mere form has no connection with the genus. It 
is the substance cow which is connected with the genus When we say. 
wash the cow,bung the cow, we mean the substance m which the genus 
cow-ness is present, and not a wooden cow though it possesses the appeal ance 
(individual) and form of a cow Neither can the genus alone be the denota¬ 
tion of the woid , for theie can be no cognition of the genus without the 
cognition of the individual and foim. 

The tinth is that the individual, foim and genus are all the denota¬ 
tion of the w’ord There is no fixed 1 ule of the 1 elation as pnncipal and 
secondaiy among them Tire force ot the w >id is the same in regatd to 
each of them. When specification is intended, the individual becomes 
principal, genus and foim become secondary , when specification is not 
intended, the genus becomes principal, the individual and foim become 
secondary. 

The individual is that which is manifested. It is perceptible by the 
senses. Every subtanee is not manifested to the senses I he individual 
is that substance which is produced by the conjunction of parts and which 

( 266 ) 

is the substratum, as far as may be, of specific attributes such as smell 
taste,colour, touch, gravity, density, fluidity , impetus, and finite magnitude 

The form is that b} which the genus and the marks oi the genus are 
made known It consists in the enduung or fixed configuration ot the 
parts of the entities cow, etc , and of the parts of those paits 

The genus is that which produces similar cognition in respect of 
different substrata Bj reason of it mdi\ idual objects are not differentiated 
from one another It is the cause of the assimilation of objects It is a 
minor Samunv a or genus when it establishes non-difference of some objects 
among themselves and their diffeience fiom some othei objects 

Book 111: Chapter I. 

Topic 25 The Senses ai e not the Soul Sutras 1—j 

There are two kinds of predication (ij a part is piediCated ot a 
whole of which it is a part, eg the tree stands b\ the loots ( 3 | one thing 
is piedicated of a different thing, eg he cuts with the axe What is the 
nature of the predication in such cases as A man sees w ith the e\ e, 
knows with the mind, discriminates with the intellect, feels pleasure and 
pam w ith the bodj ” ? Are the ev e, the mind, the intellect and the bodv 
predicated as parts of a whole of which thev aie the paits, 01 of something 
different from them’ Thus anses the doubt as to whethei the soul is 
indentical with the o ganism ot the bodv, the senses, the mind, the intellect 
and the feelings, or distinct from it ’ The tiuth is that it is distinct from 
the organism ot the bod>, etc Because the same object is apptehended bv 
the different senses That agent which apprehends the same object b\ 
means of the dideient senses and assimilates 01 integrates the mutualh 
independent intuitions of the diffeient senses is a different object- It is the 
soul The senses cannot effect the assimilation because one sense cannot 
peiform the function ot anothei sense Ncr can the oiganism becau c 
being an aggregate it lacks the unity of apperception lanuvv avasava I see 
and touch) It is true that objects are allotted to the senses so that in the 
absence of a sense its object cannot be appiehended Eg the blind cannot 
see, the deaf cannot hear Bit this dies not shaw that each sense is 1 
conscious entity and that the supposition of another conscious entity is 
superfluous For the apprehension or non-apprehension of objects accoidmt, 
to the efficiency 01 inefficiencv of the senses will be the same whether the 
senses are themselves regarded as the conscious agents or as the instruments 
of a conscious agent On the contrary, the very fact that the senses aie 
limited in their respective functions proves the existence of the soul, as 

( 267 ) 

conscious, all-knowing, the receivei of the contents of all the senses, 
unaffected by the distribution of objects among the senses. The following 
instances of the operations of the conscious agent will show that its recog¬ 
nition as a distinct entity cannot be avoided. (1) He who sees colour, 
infers (lecalls) taste and smell previously peiceived He who peiceives 
smell inters colour and taste. And so m the case of the other senses also 
Again, after seeing colour one smells the flavour, and after smelling flavour 
one sees colour This assimilated apprehension of the objects of all the 
senses without any fixed order of succession must take place in the same 
site and cannot have any other agent but the soul (n) It also assimilates 
the various intuitions of perception, inference, testimony and doubt, 
embracing manifold objects and having it as their cause, and assimilating 
knows, as lllustiated in its comprehending the contents of a book, treating 
of all sensible objects Thus hearing letters uttered one after another, it 
integrates them as woids and sentences and assimilates them with meaning 
which is not to be grasped by the eai , then, cognising the fixed relation 
of words and meanings, it appiehends quite a number of objects belonging 
to inoie than one sense, which cannot be apprehended by the senses 
severally. This absence of limitation of the objects to be known in the 
case of the all-knowei, which meets us at every step, cannot be cucum- 
vented, by attubuting consciousness to the senses 

Topic 26 The Body ti not the Soul Sutras 7— 6. 

In the Sutra III. 1 4 the word “Body ” stands tor the living being in 
the shape of the organism of the body, the senses, cognitions and feelings. 
Now, the scriptuies declare that killing is a sin and that sin acciues to the 
agent (Even those Bauddhas who deny the existence of a soul admits the 
existence of virtue and vice) But if there were no soul othei than the 
organism of the body, senses, cognitions and feelings, then the dcclaiation 
of the scriptures would be meaningless and virtue and vice would be 
impossible l'or, the oigamsm undergoes change at cvciy moment and is 
nothing but a senes of changes one taking the place of anothei at every 
moment It would follow that the organism to which the sin ol killing 
would accrue would be different from the oigamsm which would kill. 
Again, if re-buth be possible of such an oigamsm it would not be due to 
past acts, so that there would be no law of ‘karma’ and study and practices 
for the sake of release would be futile. It may be argued that m the case 
of the killing of an oigamsm endowed with a soul there would also be no 
sin, for the reason that the soul is eternal and cannot be killed But the 
argument does not hold good, because we do not say that killing is the 
destruction of an eternal entity. By killing we mean the destruction, or the 

( 268 ) 

causing the anaesthesia, disease, inefficiency, disturbance of the interconnec¬ 
tions or the disorganisation of the body which is the field of the expeuence 
of pleasure and pain, and also of the senses which are the instruments of 
the apprehension of their respective objects. Or the Sutia (III. 1 6) ma\ 

mean that killing is the disturbance or disorganisation of the association of 
the soul with the organism of the bod}', senses and cognitons by vuLue of 
which association only the soul is the agent in the experience of pleusuie 
and pain, and without which it can ha\e no experience It docs not mean 
the distinction of the soul as an eternal entity 

Tufa 27 The sense of sight r> not one . Sutia- 7 —17 

YVhat is seen with the right eye is recognised a- having been seen with 
the left eye. Such recognition also is a mark of the existence ol the soul 
But the opponent urges that here at any late a soul is not needed to account 
for the phenomena, because the sense of sight is really one and appeals as 
dual owing to its updating on either side of the nasal bone The objection 
is futile. When one eye is destroyed the other does not suffer destruction 
along with it Of course, a tiec remains a tiee even atlei a branch is cut 
off. But the analogy does not apply here For a tree is an aggregate of 
parts each of which is an aggregate by itseM bo that the destiuction of a 
part does not entail the destiuction of the other pait- But the ej c is 
supposed to be a unity. Or, * Dpstanta-vnodha " in the Sutra (III. 1 111 
may mean that the supposition is contrarv to expeuence For, m the skull 
there are two sockets foi the eyes Again, when one eyeball is ptessed the 
apprehension of the object by the two eves becomes difleient, and on the 
iemo\al of the ptessurc the apprehension b\ the two eves becomes sunilai 

(17) Association of niias 

The mouth watei- on seeing or smelling an oiange, tin-1-due to 
the recollection ot the taste And this shows that consciousness 1- 
not m the sense, tor what is seen by one is not lecollcctcd by anuthei 
To this the opponent leplie- by alleging that recollection is caused 
by the receipt (the object iccollcctedj and that this, and not the soul, cau-c- 
the action in the mouth at the sight or smell of an oiange But 
iccollection must be an attribute of the soul, and as such piove the 
existence ol the soul On the supposition of the senses being conscious 
thcic would be either no iccollection or there would be no older ot recollec¬ 
tion For the senses aic diverse agents and on the supposition there is 
nothing to assimilate 01 co-oidmate their expcilences , hence theie would be 
no recollection. Or every sense would recollect the experience of every othei 
sense ; which is contrary to experience : one does not remember what is seen 

( 269 ) 

by another. It follows that there must be a different agent capable of 
appiehending diverse objects , and that is the soul The affairs of living 
beings depend on memory. The watenng of the mouth as the mark of the 
existence of the soul is a mere instance 

Then our opponent argues that memory does not infer the soul, 
because the cause of recollection is impiession and its content the object 
recollected and not the soul in cither case. But he has not exactly deter¬ 
mined the content of memory. Let us see what it leally is. The 
statement which indicates the content of metnoiy takes one or another 
of the following forms ; (a) I knew that object , (b) I have known that 
object ; (c) that object has been known by me , and (d) I had knowledge 
in respect of this object. In each of these statements not merely the 
object, but the object previously known associated with the knower and the 
knowledge forms the content of memory , m othei words, every act of 
recollection comprehends the agent, the act and the object of cogni¬ 
tion. This is m regard to an object which i-> not before the senses. 
In regard to an object which is before the senses, 1 e in the case 
of recognition, three cognitions are assimilated, pioceeding from the one 
and the same agent and not from diverse agents nor fiom no agent 
Thus, in the statement, I see now what I hav c seen before, the prev ious 
seeing and the consciousness of seeing aie two cognitions, while the present 
seeing is the thud cognition These cognitions combine to connect a 
single object with a single agent Thus this content of memory, the soul, 
which the opponent leaves undetermined, but which is present in memory 
and is clearly known, is sought to be negated by the reason that the 
object remembered is the content of memoiy. 

Memoiy is not mete memoiy nor is the object lemembeied its only 
content. The assimilation of experiences which takes place ill an act of 
memory cannot be possible without something to which all objects are 
equally accessible, as m the case ot assimilation m an act of cognition. A 
single knower within whose purview ate all objects assimilates its own 
cognitions as I shall know that object, I know that object, I knew' that 
object, and, desiung to know, and not knowing toi a long time, feels ccitain 
at last that it knew the object Similarly it assimilates mcmoiv diawing 
its contents from the time luturc, present and past, opeiating with the 
desire to remember. Were the entity merely a series of impressions (or 
ideas), as impressions (and ideas) disappear as they arise at every moment, 
not a single impression (or idea) would be left which could be aware of any 
cognition and act of memory in association with all the three times. And 
without such awareness theie can be no assimilation of cognition and 

G 

( 270 ) 

memoiy in the form of “I (know or remember)”, “(This cognition 01 ic- 
collection is) Mine”, as it is not possible in the case of cognition and memoiy 
in different bodies. It follows, therefore, that there does exist a single 
entity penetrating all objects which unites and maintains the unity of the 
series of cognitions and the series of memories, and which docs not 
establish such unity of its cognitions and memories with that of anothei on 
account of the absence of its operation in the latter’s body 

Topic 28 The Mind is not the Soul Sutias 75-/7 

But, uiges the opponent, the functions attributed to the soul may all 
be possible for the mind We reply that the opponent is quairellmg about 
names and not about the reality. The instruments of knowledge such as 
the eye, nose, touch, must belong to a knosvcr So also does the 
thinker penetiating all objects possess an instrument of thinking in the 
form of the internal 01 gan competent to reach all objects That being so, 
the opponent eris in calling the knower the mind and not the soul, and 
not allowing the mind to be called the mind, though admitting that it is the 
mstiument of thought. On the othei hand, if he denies that the tlnnkei 
possesses an instrument of thought which can icach all objects, then the 
knower can veiy well do without the instruments of knowledge, and the 
opposition will thereby entail the disappearance of all the senses as well 
The distinction between sens e-expei ience and thought-expci lence is not 
unfounded. Each sense is limited to its special object and cannot go 
beyond that limit. None of the senses can reach that other class of objects 
which include pleasuie, etc. For the cognition of pleasure, etc a diffeient 
instrument is needed It is known by its mark of non-simultaneity of 
cognitions, due to its coming into contact with the external senses one at a 
time. 

Topic 2<p The Soul is eternal Sutias 18-26. 

• Some entities aie eternal, some arc non-eternal. Is the soul which 
is established as distinct from the organism of the body, senses, mind 
and cognitions, eternal or non-eternal 3 The answ'er is that the \eiy 
reasons which piovc the existence of the soul throughout the stages of 
infancy, childhood, youth and old age, also prove its existence alter its 
separation from the body, etc For, an infant to whom the things of the 
world arc yet unknown feels joy, feai and grief This is rendered possible 
by memory, and not otherwise, and memory depends upon past experience, 
and this depends upon past life and nothing else The somatic resonance 
of the infant in the presence of the causes of joy, fear and grief cannot be 
explained on the analogy of the opening and closing of a lotus , lor 111 the 

( 271 ) 

case of a full grown man it is found that his changes of countenance due 
to joy, feai and grief are not automatic like the opening and closing of a 
lotus. Theie is theiefore no reason why these should be so in the case of 
an infant. Moreov er, the changes in a lotus ai e known to be due to a 
definite cause, namely the action of heat, cold, ram and season, and are 
not quite automatic Similarly the changes of joy, etc must be due to 
a definite cause, and that cause cannot be anything but the conti¬ 
nuity of memory Again, the new-born baby’s instinctive desue for 
the mother’s milk shows the habit of taking food and this habit necessarily 
implies a previous body in which the soul has experienced hungei and its 
satisfaction with food. This instinctive desire for food beais no analogy to 
the attraction of the lion towards a magnet. For the approach of the iron 
towards a magnet has also a definite cause , otherwise pebbles, etc., would 
also be drawn tawaids a magnet But the cause is not apparent to the eye 
and has to be inferred both as legai ds its nature and its limitation. The 
inference must be made from the action itself. Thus iron appioaches only 
a magnet, and only at a certain distance Similarly only an infant moves 
for food only and when in the mother’s arms Is the cause of such move¬ 
ment past habit or something else 7 It is seen that memory of past exper¬ 
ience causes adults to approach food for the satisfaction of hunger. The 
same must be the cause also in the case of the infant. 

Then a man is born possessing Attraction, and the source of Attraction 
is the after-thought of the contents of previous experience which can be 
possible only in a previous body. The soul, remembering the objects 
experienced in a previous body, becomes attracted to those objects 
Attraction thus links together two successive births and it is not possible 
to point to a beginning of its connection with the body. 

But how do you know that the recollection of past experience gives rise 
to Attraction m a new-born baby, and that it is not produced in the same 
way as are the properties of a substance (e g., jar) along with the substance 
itself from the same cause 7 The soul and its attraction aie not produced 
simultaneousl)' like a pot and its properties, because Attraction, etc. are due 
to samkalpa, imagination, thought. It is seen that Attraction is produced 
by the thought of living beings enjoying objects, the thought springs 
from the memory of past experiences Hence it is inferred that the Attrac¬ 
tion which the baby feels is also caused by the memory ot past experiences. 
Attraction could be produced like the property of a pot were the soul a 
product and were the cause ot Attraction something other than the 
memory of past experiences But neither of these is the case. Should it 
be supposed that adrista, t,e , merit and demerit, is the cause of Attraction, 

( 272 ) 

even then connection with a previous body cannot be denied, for the 
production of adriuta must have taken place in the previous life and not 
in this. 

The truth is that Attraction for an object anscs from the entire 
occupation of the mind with that rbiect, and this is nothing but habitual 
experience of the object which deteimmes modes of thinking in futiiie 
Attraction diffe's according to the sphere of bnth which is deteinuned bv 
karma or adrisla, and the new-born entity derives its name fiom the sphere 
of its birth 

Topic jo The Body is of the Em th % editin' Sutras 27-31 

It has been demonstrated that the soul’s connection with the bod) 
is without beginning and that +he bod) in which it experiences plcasuie 
and pain is due to its own kaima It is to be investigated whether the 
body possesses a single chaiactei like the sense of smell, etc 01 a diveise 
character Doubt arises in this respect owing to the diffeienccs of opinion 
on the subject 1 he truth is that the human bodv is constituted b) the 
element of Eaith alone because the distinctive attilbute of Earth namelv 
smell, is obseived m it At the same time it is not denied that the other 
elements conjoin w ith Eaith as conditions in the production of the human 
body Similarl) all the elements conjoin to pioduce aqueous, igneous 
aerial and etherial bodies m different worlds to seive the paiticulai puiposes 
of the souls There is also scriptuial authority foi the view that the human 
body is constituted by Euth alone, e g , ‘ Let thy t> c go to the sun let 
th> body go to the Eaith” (Rigveda, X xvi 3), “I make the sun tin e' e 
. I make the Earth thy body” (&itapatha Biahmana, X\ II \ 111 4C) In 
the one the pioduct resolves into its quiescent ongmal , in the othei the 
product is derived from the ongmal 

Topic 31 lhe Sente* ait constituted by the Elements Sutras 32 31 

To take the case of the c}e (Sight) Colour is perceived when the 
pupil of the eye is unimpaued, and is not perceived when it is impaiied. 
The pupil is a material bod) On the othei hand, the pupil itself does 
not come into contact vv>th the object when its coloui is peiceived At 
the same time theie must be some contact as otheivvise perception 
of coloui cannot be possible The e) e thcrefoie must be immateiial 
in the sense of not being constituted by the manifested 01 visible 
elements, and must be all-pervading In this state of unceitaintv 
one aigues that the senses must be immateiial and all-peivading 
because they apprehend objects of widely divergent dimensions fiom the 
acoin to the Himala}a mountain. To this the reply is that the preception 

( 273 ) 

of objects of 'diffeient dimensions by the eye is due to different contacts of 
ocular rays with the objects Such contact is essential m ocular peiception 
as is pioved by the fact there is no peiception wheie there is an obstruction 
It is no aigument against the existence of oculai lays that they are not 
perceived Foi perception is not the sole test of existence Infeience by 
the maik of obstiaction pieventing contact piovc^> then existence, as it does 
in the case of the othci side ot the moon and the lovvei portion of the earth 
The rule of peiception \aues m its application accoiding to the natuie of 
substances and attnbutes E g, uatei vapom hanging m the an is not 
perceived but its cool touch is felt heat ravs aie net perceived, but their 
warmth is expenenced Similaily hire exists in various conditions In 
the solar rays both coloui and touch aie developed and so they aie perceived 
In the rajs of light tiom a lamp coloui is developed and touch is un¬ 
developed , these too aie peiccptible Tne in hot water possesses developed 
touch and undeveloped coloui , hence it is impelceptible In the ocular 
file both coloui and touch aie undeveloped hence it is impel ceptible The 
development 01 accession of intensity ot coloui is one of the conditions of the 
perception ot coloui 

This peculiarity of the oculai lays auscs fiom the natuie of the senses. 
Like the multt-foim aggiegations of all substances the organisation of the 
senses i- bi ought about by merit and dement to mbscivc the pmj ose of 
the soul which consists in the cognition of ob)ects and the experience of 
pleasure and pam 

Some tlunkeis aiguc as follows The le llience ot the sense of sight 
on meeting an obstiuction is an attubute ot a matunl substance Foi this 
is the ease with all mateinl substances m all cucumstances On the other 
hand, the penetiation of glass, mica, etc , bv the oculai lays shows that they 
are non-material So the point lemams doubtlul W e say that this is not 
so, for the reason given is eriatic Foi such penetiation is also seen in the 
case of the light of a lamp which illumines objects beyond glass, etc., and 
of heat which cooks giams in a vessel 

\on-perccption again may be due to oveipowering, as m the case of 
a meteoi which is not '•een when the sun shines In the case of ocular rays 
there is such a special cause of then non peiception, namely, as alieady 
stated, want of development or intensity That the ocular rays lack m 
intensity also appears from the fact that the eye cannot appiehend objects 
without the aid of external light The oculai lay s aie not ovei powered, foi 
overpowering can take place only when the thing oveipoweied has been 
developed. The ocular rays are not perceived even at night in all ca=es. 

( 274 ) 

That such rays exist appears from the observation of these rays in the eyes 
of prowlers by night, e. g., cat, tiger, etc. There is no generic difference 
between the eyes of these animals and of men, because the sight m both 
cases is impeded by obstructions. 

The perception of objects behind a plate of gla~,s or mica 01 a thin 
stratum of cloud offers no argument against the pioposition that the contact 
of the senses with the objects is the cause of cognition. For in these cases 
there is really no obstruction, but actual contact is established through the 
glass, etc. The sun’s rays also cause burning through a crystal. In all 
such cases the interspaces among the components of the intervening sub¬ 
stances provide a passage whereby direct contact is established between the 
rays and the objects on which they operate. 

But why cannot a wall, e g , offer such a passage ’ Because a w all is 
not constituted in the same way as glass is How do you know this’ 
This is known from the nature of the things as revealed by their effects 
The ocular rays reflected from the smooth surface of the mirror makes one’s 
own face perceptible. This clarity of the minor is its nature Similaily a 
wall does not reflect light rays This is its nature Thus expenence show-, 
that glass, etc., offers no obstruction, while a wall, etc , do, to the passage ot 
light rays. And no arbitrary limitations can be imposed upon facts 
established by perception and inference For these pramauas leveal leality 
as it is. Objects as they really are, in their own nature, m then ow r n 
character, are established by the pramlyas These must be accepted as such 
and must not be modified at landom Obstruction is inferred m the case of 
a wall by the fact of the non-perception of objects behind it. Non 
obstruction is inferred in the case of glass, etc. by the fact of peiception ot 
objects behind them. 

Topic 32 The Senses are manifold Sutras 52-61. 

Some say that, though the senses are located in diffeient paits of the 
body, they are in reality only one, as the skin is present in eveiy such 
location It is true that even mspite of the presence of the skin a blind 
man does not -ee. But the skin is differentiated in its powei 
in different parts of the body and that is the reason why the blind 
do not see, because blindness means loss of the particular power in 
the particular part of the skin. This argument of the opponent is self¬ 
destructive. For it amounts to an admission of the difference of the senses 
Moreover, not only the skin but the elements of Earth, etc., constitute the 
site of the senses. Touch cannot be the cne and universal sense, as in that 

( 275 ) 

case coloui, touch, taste, etc would all be peiceived simultaneously, which 
is not the case. In the peiception of coloui Touch cannot establish contact 
between itself and an object scieened fiom \iew, and perception without 
contact of sense and object is impossible The objects of sense again aie 
moie than one, and the senses have to perform moie than one function 
The sense of touch cannot serve the puipose of the sense of sight and 
vice vetsa So also in the case of the othei senses Sensible objects being 
five, the senses also must be five in number Moieo\er, they pioduce five 
dififeient kinds of cognition, aie located m fi\ e dilfti ent sites, lia\ e fi\e different 
operations, possess five different shapes and have five diffeient origins 
Sight opeiates b> going out of the eyes and teaching its obiects Sound 
reaches Hearing in waves Tne othei senses opeiate when the objects come 
into contact with them by the movement of the b>dv Smell, Taste and 
Touch are limited in shape to then sites Sijtt lesidmg in the pupils of 
the ej'es goes out to pervade objects Ileaiing is nothing else than Ethet 
and is all peivading Itisinfened by the peiception of sound It does 
not reveal all sounds because it ij limited bv its site acccoiding to the ment 
and dement of the soul The ongins of the senses aie the five elements 
lespectivelj, as thev seveially m ike manifest and appiehend the specific 
attnbutes of the five cleme its Thev aie not modifications of the uninamfest 
matter (avyakta ) 

Topic33 l he Objuts of the Senses biitias 62 f3 

bmell, Taste, Colour and Touch are the attnbutes ol Edith , Taste, 
Colour and Touch, of Watei Coloui and Touch, of Tire Touch, of Air, 
and Sound, of Evhei The opposite v lew is that the elements possess only 
one attribute each and that othei attributes aie peiceived m them on ing to 
their interpenetiation bj r othei elements The intei peneliation, it is also 
said, is not mutual among all the elements but of the pieceding by the 
succeeding in the ordei ot then mention as Eaith Watei, Ene, Air and 
Ethei This view is not coriect Fo>, as a mattei ot fact bodies foimed 
of Eaith and Watei aie peiceptible to the eve the} must theiefoie possess 
coloui Moieovei, inteipenctiation must aflect both the element mtcipenet- 
lated and that mteipenetianng But coloui is not peiceived m Ait though 
it is said to intei peneti ate Fuc The theoij of intei pcncti at ion therefore 
has to be 1 ejected 

What is the explanation then of the fact that the senses constituted 
by the elements do not appiehend all the attnbutes of then respective 
elements? The explanation is that the senses become dominant in respect 
of that attribute which is piomment in then lespective elements This limit¬ 
ation of the scope of the senses is due to the sainskaia, le, tendency or 

( 276 ) 

potency which lb the lesnltant of kaima (appetency) of the soul which they 
serve, just as the things of the world, e g , poison, heibs, guns, c<c , serve 
specific puiposes of man accoiding to his kaima, and e\eiy single thing 
does not serve all his puiposes 

The senses aie also limited m then scope in this that they aic them 
selves insensible in lespect of then own attnbutes Sight foi instance 
cannot see its own coloui Smell cannot smell its own smell This is 
because in perception the instiument must be endowed with the same 
attribute as the object, and when its own atti lbute is to be the object of its 
appiehension, the condition of peiception is not piesent In othei woids, 
an atti lbute cannot appiehend itself —a sense does not appiehend its own 
attribute because of the absence of the auxiliaiy attnbute The peiception 
of sound by Heai mg is an exception which tests the lule Ileaiing is composed 
of Etbei In the peiception of sound it is independent ol the possession of 
the attnbute of sound as an auxiliaiy That Ileai ing is comp >scd of Ethei 
is known as follows The soul is the heaiei "Mind cannot be the instill¬ 
ment of hearing as in that case theie would be no deafness as mind is 
not liable to destiuctmn Eaith, W atei, Fue and An aie not known to have 
the capacity to ptoduoe Heating Ethei thciefoic is the constituent of 
Hearing 

Book III Chaptei 11 

Topic Cogm ion is not eta mil Sutias / 9 

It is a matter of common experience that cognitions appeal and 
disappear Then non-eternahty is quite manifest, and is taken ten gianted in 
N-S , I 1 16 The topic is concerned with the lefutation of the speculation 
of the Samkhyas that Buddhi is eternal In suppoit of the view they 
aigue that unless Buddhi, cognition weic eternal, le-cogmtion would not be 
possible To this the ieply is that the ieuson given is not valid, bee uise it 
has yet tobc pioved that le'■ogmtion is done by Buddhi, and not by the 
soul, as we hold We maintain that cognition, peiception, appiehension 
awaieness, intuition, undcistanding is an attnbute of the soul If \ou hold 
that consciousness belong to the instalment you have to explain the natuic 
of the conscious soul If you admit that cognition is by the Buddhi, the 
mnei instiument, you should explain what natuie, what attnbute, what 
reality is left to the conscious soul, what use it makes of cognition residing 
m Buddhi If you say that the soul makes conscious and Buddhi knows, 
then where is the diffeience ? To make conscious, to know, to pciceive and 
to apprehend convey the same meaning It, on the othei hand, you admit 

( 277 ) 

that Buddhi makes known and the soul knows, we agree. Buddhi is then 
the instrument of cognition, the mind. The mind is eternal, but recognition 
of objects is not the reason for its eternality. For then the eyes too would 
be eternal, for one recognises with the left eye what is seen with the 11'ght 
eye. Recognition belongs to the knower and not to the instrument of 
knowledge. 

The Samkhyas also hold that Buddhi is eternal and that modifications 
in the foim of cognitions emanate from it accoidmg to objects and that the 
modifications are m essence not different from the original. This view 
again is not correct. For in that case all objects would be perceived at 
the same time, which is not the case Again, if Buddhi ancl its modifica¬ 
tions were identical then the disappearance of the modification would entail 
the disappearance of Buddhi also. This shows that Buddhi and its modifica¬ 
tions are not identical in essence Further, they are different and modificat¬ 
ions arise m the mind one after another which account for the fact that the 
objects of all the senses are not apprehended all at once. Also when the 
mmd is attached to one object there can be no cognition of anothei object. 
This shows that the mind is not all-pervading and moves from one object to 
another. Our view is that the inner instrument, the mind, is eternal but 
not all-pervading , that the mind is one while its cognitive modifications 
are manifold , and that this could not be possible were the modifications 
identical with the mmd in essence. The soul therefore knows and not 
the mind. The mind’s attachment to one object really means its contact 
with one sense The attachment or occupation is leally of the soul. 
There is no foice in the aigument that the modification like the mind with 
which it is identical is leally one but looks as many in the same way as 
does a crystal look diveise in the proximity of different colours m succession, 
so that simultaneous cognitions of all objects need not necessarily be 
entailed. For the diversity in the case of the crystal is only apparent 
while the diversity of cognitions is real, as it is a fact of experience that 
cognitions appear and disappear one after another. 

Topic 35 : The transiency of the things of the world . Sutras ; 10-17. 

The Sfupkhya who maintains that the crystal remaining constant 
undergoes modifications is opposed by the Nihilist who urges that nothing 
in the world is permanent, that everything is in a flux, and that the crystal 
is a new crystal at every successive moment, as is found in the case of 
the human body which decays, throws off refuse and grows again by 
assimilating food. We have to point out that the proposition is too wide 

7 

( 278 ) 

and is supported neither by perception noi by infeience, and that we can 
give our assent to it m accordance with our observation of nature. Growth 
and decay in recurrence are seen in the human body These are 
not seen m stones and crystals. We also demur to the speculation of the 
thorough-going Nihilist that a new entity is produced at every moment out 
of the ashes of the old, foi the reason that the causes of such wholesale 

production and destruction are not apprehended The destruction of milk 

and the production of curd furnishes no analogy. For the destruction of 
milk is seen and the cause of its destiuction is infened. The production of 
curd is seen and its cause is inferred. In the ca=e of the crystal no such 
production or destruction is seen, and there is no occasion for the inference 
of any cause. 

Some (S&inkhyas) say in reply to the Nihilist that milk is not destroyed 
but only transforms mto a different chaiactcr, or merely develops cliffeient 
properties. To them we say that the constituents of milk disintegi ate and 
redintegrate as curd, wheieby the destruction of milk is infeired. What 
we deny is that there is a total destruction of milk and that cuid is entnelv 
a new product and that there is no cause for such destruction and produc¬ 
tion. Seeing that in some cases the cause of destruction is apprehended and 

that in some it is not apprehended it cannot be admitted that all is a 
flux. 

Topic36) . Cognition is an attribute of the Soul : Sutras • 18-41. 

Cognition is either piesent when it is called intuition, or past when 
it is called recollection The intuition of the red colour of a rose, for 
instance, survives in memo-y even after the destruction of the eye’and 
the rose. It therefore belongs not to the object nor to the sense but to 
the knower. The knower, again, is not the mind, but the soul. For the 
mind is only an instrument under the control of the soul. It is the inner 
instrument which brings abiut the cognition of pleasure and pain and recollec¬ 
tion. If cognition be it-> attribute then it would cease to be an instrument. 
Its existence as an instrument is inferred by the non-simultaneity of cogni¬ 
tions. If you distinguish between the mind and the inner mstiument, then 
what we call the soul you call the mind, and what we call the mind you 
call the inner instrument Your difference with us is about names only. 
Or the Sutia (III. ii 19) may mean that whereas simultaneous cognitions 

of diverse objects by the mind is impossible, the Yogins by their power of 

Yoga bring abouts imultaneous cognitions in several bodies with all the 
senses created by them for the purpose to exhaust their karma, and that 
this shows that cognitions do not belong to the mind but to the soul. It 

( 279 ) 

may be objected that cognitions cannot belong to the soul because as the 
soul is all-pervading and eternal, (1) simultaneous cognitions of all objects 
and (li) the eternality of cognitions will be thereby entailed. Our reply to 
the first is that the cause of the production of cognition is not merely the con¬ 
tact of the senses with the objects but also the contact of the senses with 
the mind, and that as mind is atomic simultaneous cognitions of all objects 
is impossible. To the last we reply that eveiy embodied soul knows 
within itself that cognition is non-eternal ; and that like one sound by 
another a piecedmg cognition is destioyed by a succeeding one 

But then impressions produced by cognitions aie the causes of 
recollection, and these, according to you, says an objector, abide in the soul ; 
the contact of the soul and the mind which is equally a cause of recollec¬ 
tion, also exists , how is it that all the memories of the soul from the 
beginning of time aie not levived at one and the same moment ? Some 
meet the objection with the reply that the mind serially comes into contact 
with the different parts of the soul on which cognitions have left their 
impress and that for this reason all memories arc not revn ed simultaneously. 
The reply is not correct. For the mind can ncvci come into contact with 
the soul as transcending the body, (the soul being a universal and eternal 
substance, it pen ades the body and also transcends it), because the function 
of the mind is confined within the body The life of an embodied soul consists 
m its conjunction with the mind togethei with a i ehiclc of the experience 
(body) necessitated by past karma which is m fiuition That the mind 
without a body is incapable of subserving the purpose of soul appears from 
the fact that the contact of the mind and the soul generates the double effoit 
of support and direction, and that if the mind opeiatcd outside the body the 
body would chop down by giawiy for want of suppoit 

The swift movement of the mind will not solve the difficulty, for there 
are memories which take a consideiable length of time to revive them 
through a senes of intermediate stages which for long keep the mind 
engaged. Moreover, conjunction of the soul and mind independently of 
the body is not the cause ot recollection. The body is the field of the 
soul’s expei tence If without it the meie conjunction of the mind with 
the soul could pioduce cognition, pleasure, etc., then the body would be 
perfectly useless. 

Some of us point out that the contact of the mind and the soul outside 
the body cannot be established either by the direction of the soul, or by 
chance, or by the mind’s being the knower. For the direction of the soul 

( 280 ) 

implies that the soul already knows the object of memory to which it directs 
the mind ; and if the memory is already revived there is no need for any 
contact of the mind. All memories are not revived by chance, i. e. all of 
a sudden ; some take mental effort for a long time to revive them Nor 
is the mind the knower But this, we say, is only a partial view of the 
matter For cognitions do take place and there must be particular con¬ 
junction of the soul and the mind, as when a thorn suddenly pucks the 
foot of a man and pam is felt by him when his mind was engaged elsewhere, 
e. g. a beautiful scenery. As this particular conjunction is due to adnsta, 
conjunction may be similarly pioduced by adrista serially m the case of 
non-simultaneous revival of all memories. The true reply, however, to the 
explanation offered, namely that the mmd serially comes into contact with 
parts of the soul, is as given, that is, that the mmd must opeiate within 
the body and not outside it. 

The contact of the soul and the mind and the impressions are not the 
sole causes of recollections. These depend also on attention and cognition 
of signs (vide Sutra III. 11. 41). Recollections do not occur simultaneously 
because their causes do not occur simultaneously. Even in cases of flashes 
of memory recollection is not independent of attention, etc What happens 
in such cases is that the mind is occupied with several objects and one of 
them engages attention and revives a memory without our being aw ai e 
of the cause of such revival. The mind is associated with the soul in the 
body for a specific purpose determined by adrista. Its dimension is atomic 
It can come into contact with one impression at a time. Hence theie can 
be no simultaneity of recollections. 

Some hold the view that while cognition is an attnbute of the soul, 
desire, aversion, volition, pleasure and pain are the attributes of the inner 
instrument, 1. e the mmd. This view is not coriect. For we find that these 
refer to one and the same agent and substiatum as cognition. It is the 
knower which resolves to put forth effort for the acquisition of pleasuie 
and the avoidance of pam. Therefore, these must also be the attributes 
of the soul. 

The Materialist twists the above argument to his advantage Says 
he • You argue that acquisition and avoidance proceed from desire and 
aversion and that desire and aversion are attributes of consciousness. But 
atoms are acted upon by attraction and repulsion. They must then 
possess desire and aversion and therefore be conscious. To this we reply 
that uniformity in the one and want of uniformity in the other distinguish 

( 281 ) 

the two cases Gravity, e g„ is a propei ty of all material substances ; it 
adheres to them in all cncumstances. But while activity is found in atoms 
it is absent from such things as a pot. The activity which is found in 
matenal bodies such as an axe, or in the atoms, is caused by the will of the 
knowei 01 by his kaima under the will of the All-Knowei A second 
objection to the materialistic view is that as each atom would be endowed 
with consciousness, tlieie would be a pluiality of knoweis in a single 
product, which is not wan anted by any leason Moieov ei, the leasons 
previously given foi the existence of the soul and its eteinality completely 
refute the theory that consciousness belongs to material substances 

To sum up Consciousness does not belong to the mind 01 for the 
mattei of that to the senses or the elements , foi the reasons alieady 
adduced commencing with Sutia I 1 10, “Desut, aversion, volition, pleasure 
and pain aie the maiks of the Soul”, and also on account of their existing for 
the sake of anotliei, and also in viitue of the moral law Tlicv exist for 
the sake of another whose volition incites them to activity Then, oil the 
supposition that consciousness belongs to the elements, senses and the 
mind, all of which disintegiate at death, the consequences of their activity 
would befall the soul at 01 as lebnth, which is contraiy to the moial law. 
Hence by pi oof by exhaustion consciousness must be the attribute of the 
soul Moreovei, the leasons alieady given in suppoit of this have been 
vindicated by the lefutation of the aiguments against them Or 
the word “Upapatti" in the Sutia (III 11 41) means lebirth, and 
furnishes an additional leason in suppoit of the view that consciousness 
belongs to the soul A senes ot cognitions without a soul cannot account 
foi lebnth Itcanoffei no explanation ot samsfua and release If the 
woildweiea congeries olseues of conscious states theic could be no 
haimony, no co-oidination, no oigamsation in society and the conduct of 
the affairs of the world would be impossible W ltbm the man also there 
would be the same chaos and confusion and lecollection would be an 
impossibility, because one state could not lcmembci what was expenenced 
by an antecedent state Therefoie the soul which knows also lecollects. 
Its natuie is to know. Eveiy one is awaie of the unity of the cognitions 
"I shall know”, “I know,” “I knew ” 

Topic 37 Cognition is momenta)y b Citrus 42*0,5 

Cognition lasts but an instant, as it is action Its continuity is only 
apparent as m the case of the motion of an aiiow shot fiom a bow which 
is really a series of instantaneous motions So long as the pot, e g, is 
piesent befoie the eyes theie is cognition , as soon as it is lemoved the 

( 282 ) 

cognition ceases. The duration of cognition is made up of cognitions 
arising every moment. On the other hand, the persistence of cognition will 
mean perpetual perception, and recollection will be rendered unnecessary , 
for the cause of recollection is not cognition but the impression left by 
cognition. It is a misconception to hold that cognition which disappears as 
soon as it is produced can give us only the apprehension of the genus and not 
of the individual, as m the case of a flash of lightning. In the flash of 
lightning you can see that a thing is a man but cannot determine his indivi¬ 
dual characteristics. Similar would be the case were cognition instantaneous 
The objection is groundless. For thcchaiacter of the cognition depends 
upon the causes which give rise to it. Where the cause of the cognition is 
fleeting the apprehension is indeterminate, general , where it is not 
fleeting the app.ehetision is deteiminate, detailed For cognition is 
the apprehension of an object, whethei indeterminate or deteimi¬ 
nate. The various characteristics of an object, generic and specific, 
provide cognition with its manifold contents In respect of each such 
content the cognition is self-complete and determinate. It is merely a 
convention to speak of the cognition of the generic aspects of an object as 
indeterminate and of the cognition of its specific aspects as deteiminate. 
The mstantaneity of cognition m no way affects perception even when the 
object is also momentary E g in a lamp the flame consists of a series of 
radiant energies emitted by the lamp Each such ladiation is an object of 
cognition, and the series of such cognitions gives us the perception of the 
flame of the lamp. 

Topic jS • COHSCtOtHHJii IS lUt VI tliZ Body SfitldS 

The colour and other attributes of the body co-exist w ith the bod\ 
But a dead body does not possess consciousness It cannot be compared 
to momentum, for momentum depends upon definite causes and no such 
causes of consciousness aic found present 01 absent in the body The cause 
of consciousness in the body can be neithai in the body as m that case 
death would make no difieiotice, nor in another substance as in that case 
there would be no leason why it should not produce consciousness in stones 
and stocks, nor m both as in that case there would be no leason why 
consciousness should be produced in the body and not in other things ol 
the same class with it. The disappeatatice of consciousness from the body 
at death cannot also be compared to the destruction of the dark colour ot 
earth by baking, for baking does not merely destroy black colour but also 
pioduces red colour, while no such new production m the body is icund 
at death, but the total cessation of consciousness. Moreover, baking 

( 283 ) 

produces red colour in eaith because the materials for such colour exist in 
the earth. But m the body are not found agencies destructive of conscious¬ 
ness Further, consciousness peivades every paiticle of the body and on 
the theoiv in question theic would be mnumei ible conscious entities m a 
single bodj so that pleasuie pain and cognition would be entirely 
localised m the part affected and would not affect «in\ othci pait, which is 
contrary to expeiicnce. Oui statement that consciousness pervades every 
part of the bodv of couise excludes the ban, nails etc For the} do not 
constitute the body which extends upto the skm onl} The bod} is defined 
as the seat of the senses, the field of the activity ot the soul and the mind, 
and of the expei lence of pleasure, pain, cognition Jloreovei, the 
attributes of the bodv aie eithei impeiceptibic as, eg., gravity, 
or perceptible as, eg, coloui , but consciousness is neither impercep¬ 
tible because one is avvaie ot it nor sensible because it is apprehended b} 
the mind. It follows that consciou-ncss is not an attubute of the body 
And this conclusion furthei ccnfiims the previous conclusion that cognition 
does not belong to the mind, the senses and the bod} but to the s 0 ul 

7 opic jg Of the Mind Sutras jp 

In the oiganism of the mind, senses, cognitions and the bod} thcie 
is only one mind The unit} cf the mind is infciied horn the non-simul¬ 
taneity of cognitions ol se\eial objects through the diffeicnt senses When 
we obseive the diffeient movements ot an individual we seem to have 
several cognitions at one and the same time But this is due to the 
swiftness of the cognitions and of the movements ot the mind Everyone 
is aware within oneself that cognitions aiise m sequence according to the 
serial opeiation of the senses in lespect ol their object= Recollections 
also appeal in sequence This shows that succession and not simaltancit} 
is the tiuth That swiftness of ccgmtirns and of the movements of the 
mind obliterates, as it weie, then succession is best lllustiated when we at a 
glance grasp the meaning of a sentence which involves the hearing of each 
letter as uttued, their foimation into words, the recollection of the meanings 
of the vvoids, their syntactical connection, etc And the same reason, 
namely non-simultaneity of cognitions, also establishes that the mind is 
atomic. 

Topic 4.0 Adfista is the cause of the Body Sutras 60-72. 

Karma, 1 e the activity or the start made by speech, cognition and 
the body, produces as its fiuit merit and demerit which abide in the soul. 
Moved by these and not independently the elements produce the body. 
Dwelling in the body the soul 1 egards the body as itself. Being attached 

( 284 ) 

to the body and out of the craving for enjoyment in it the soul cognises 
objects and creates saraskaras or appetencies in the foim of merit and 
demerit which lead to rebirth where again the same sequence of cause and 
effect is repeated, and so on. This succession of events can be possible 
only on the explanation that the elements are moved for the production 
of the body under the influence of karma to subserve the ends of the soul 
It is seen that a man, to serve his purposes, makes conveyances and the 
like fiom suitable mateuals. The Atheist says that in making a statue 
sand, stone, colounng and other materials are used as they exist in nature 
without reference to any karma and that so the case may be with the 
production of the body from the elements. We reply that it is yet to be 
established that sand, stone, etc. exist in nature by themselves w ithout 
reference to any karma and not to serve the ends of the soul. Moieover, 
a statue is not produced from seeds whereas the body is. This imolves 
three karmas, viz of the soul experiencing life in the womb and of the 
parents enjoying the fruit in the shape of a son. Further, food taken by 
the mother nourishes and develops the embryo till bnth thiough \anous 
processes of assimilation. It is thus clear that the action of the materials 
in forming and developing the body is dependent upon karma. The 
operation of karma is also manifest from the fact that every appioach of the 
parents does not become fruitful. 

Not only is karma the cause of the production of the body , it is 
also the cause of the conjunction of a particular body with a particular soul 
The body is a highly intricate mechanism and cannot as such be brought 
about by the foituitous concourse of atoms. Similarly the bodies of no 
two men are exactly the same This perplexing diversity of outfit in the 
form of the body can be explained only by karma, namely that every man 
has his own destiny to fulfil and that he gets the body which he merits 

The causality of karma m the production of the body also accounts 
for the soul’s disjunction from the body on the exhaustion of kaima, through 
the removal of delusion by true knowledge. Thus the seed of futuie birth 
is not produced and karma in fruition is exhausted by experience Weie 
the elements, on the other hand, which are indestructible, independent 
causes of the production of the body, there would be no release. 

The Samkhyas hold that the soul’s non-experience of Piakriti 
or Matter is the cause of the production of the body in and thiough which 
the soul is to experience Prakriti, and that when the experience is 
accomplished the soul regains final separation from the body On this 
theory a released soul also may again be connected with the body. Foi if 

( 285 ) 

experience is necessary for the soul when it had no body experience may 
be necessary also after its separation from the body It cannot be argued 
that separation from the body takes place after the purpose of the soul’s 
experience of Prakriti has been accomplished and that theretore there is 
no reason for its being again connected with the body. For the experience 
of a single soul fulfils the purpose of the experience of Pakriti. and Pakriti 
which has performed before one soul has its object accomplished ; yet we 
find that the production of bodies is uninterrupted. The production of the 
body is therefore not from non-karma and for the purpose of the soul's 
experience of Prakriti. It is due to karma and for the experience of the 
fruit of karma. 

Others maintain that the soul’s experience is not ot Pakriti but of the 
fruits of karma and that this is b-ought about by adrista inhering in 
atoms. This attribute of the atoms is a cause of activity. Impelled by it 
the atoms come together and foi m the body The mind then enters the 
body. In the body so formed and possessed by the mind the soul cognises 
objects. But in this view also bodies can be produced even for a released 
soul because the attribute of adrista appertaining to the atoms is indes¬ 
tructible. 

Others again opine that the nnnd by its own adrista enters the body. 
In that case also there can be no separation of the mind from the body. 
For to what will this separation be due ? On our theory karma m fruition 
in the present body is exhausted by experience and separation from the 
body takes place. The adrista of the mind, on the other hand, cannot be 
the cause of both birth and death. 

Further, if the elements as such could produce the body then the body 
once produced would, m the absence of any cause of destruction, continue 
for ever If death were due to chance then there would not be so much 
diversity m the manner of death as is seen. 

Some think that as the dark colour of the atom is destroyed for ever 
by the application of heat and red colour is produced in its place, so on the 
theory of the production of the body by adrista the body w ill not be 
produced again in the state of release. This view is altogether unsupported 
by any reason. No familiar instance is cited. Neither perception nor 
inference is advanced. 

Or “ Akrita—abhyagama—prasanga in the Sutra illmeans 
that the doctrine that the production of the body is not due to karma will 
entail that the experience of pleasure and pain is without any cause. This 
is contrary to perception, inference and scriptural texts. This would mean 

8 

( 286 ) 

that acts are neither good nor bad and that the acts of men are not 
responsible for their experience of pleasure and pain. This is the false 
view of perverted minds. 

BOOK IV : CHAPTER i. 

Topic j.i : Activity and Faults : Sutras i — 2. 

Activity (I. i. 17) and Faults (I. i. 18) have already been explained. 
They have been examined in the examination of the body, etc. from which 
spring merits and demerits. The Faults, like cognition, are attributes of 
the soul. They are the causes of sarasara or transmigration, because they 
are the causes of activity and re-birth As sarnsiira is without beginning, 
they also proceed without beginning. They cease to be when false 
knowledge is destroyed by knowledge of the truth. 

Topic j.2 : Faults fall into three groups . Sutras : 3 —-p 

There are three collections of Faults • (1) Attraction consisting of 
lust, greed, craving, longing and covetousness ; (2) Aversion consisting of 
anger, envy, jealousy, hatred and implacability ; (3) Delusion consisting 
of false knowledge, doubt, pride and carelessness. Attachment is the mark 
of Attraction ; want of forbearance, of Aversion ; and misapprehension, of 
Delusion. Every man is aware of their existence within himself. The 
fact that they are all liable to be ^oyed by knowledge of the truth does 
not show that they do not tall it ;a ,,„..-x.mct classes. For the colours of the 
earth such as blue, etc. are distinct colours, though they can be all 
destroyed by the application of heat The colours again are quite distinct 
though they have a common source, vi'i. fire Similarly, the Faults aie 
quite distinct from one another, though false knowledge is their common 
origin. 

Among the Faults Delusion is the woist For a man who is lice 
from it is not influenced by the othei two. Misapprehension runs through 
Attraction and Aversion also. Delusiou therefore is their cause And 
it is thus that they disappear on the lemoval of Delusion by knou- 
ledge of the truth 

Topic pi Pretyabhava ( Transmigration) Sfitras 10 — 13 

Birth is not production, death is not destiuction The etciniU 

of the soul makes pretyabhfiva possible. The eternal soul forsakes 
the former body and takes up another body. Both these processes constitute 
pretyabhava. To say that the production and destruction of entities cons¬ 
titute pretyabhava is to deny the moial law according to which one expe¬ 
riences the consequences of one’s own acts. While the doctrine of total 
annihilation would render the teachings of the Risis meaningless. 

( 287 ) 

How, from causes of what character, are bodies, etc produced? A 
body is not produced from another body. A pot is not produced from another 
pot. All is not the cause of all. Like produces like. A pot is produced from 
potsherds of the like material. This is the testimony of perception which is 
the highest evidence. On the strength of this experience it can be inferred 
that the causes of the gross elements of earth, etc aie the most subtle 
supersensible eternal substances possessing colour and other attributes found 
in the gross elements. The existence of such substances is thus revealed 
The inference is from the known to the unknown. 

The gross elements which are produced from the most subtle eternal 
elements furnish the materials for the production of the body, senses and 
objects with which the soul becomes associated after leaving its previous 
body. This is the tiuth. The views of sectarians will be next considered. 

Topic 'I he Void ts not the came of the World: Sfttras • rp-zS 

Some say that the sprout comes into existence b> destioying the seed, 
i.e, that from the non-existence of the seed is the existence ot the spiout. 
This is not correct. For if the sprout is the cause of the destruction of the 
seed then it must have existence before the seed is destroyed, and in that 
case it cannot be said to come into existence tiom the destiuction of the 
seed It is ti ue that causal predication is made in respect of objects past 
and future, eg, a lost article causes sorrow , a son yet to be born causes 
pleasure. But such predication rests on mere sequence. So also when the 
sprout which is yet to appear is said to be the cause of the destruction of 
the seed the predication of causality merely states a sequence, and not a 
true causal relation, namely that the sprout is produced from the destroyed 
seed, i.e., that existence springs from non-existence. The truth is that the 
parts of a structure disintegrate and redintegrate into another structure, and 
that bodies are produced from such redintegration and not from non-existence 
or void. The relation of antecedent and consequent between these two 
processes is not denied. 

Topic yj ; Is'vai a (God) is tiot the material cause of the World : Sfltras 

19-21, 

Some say that the void may not be the material cause of the 
woild but that Brahman is the material cause of the fabric of names 
and forms, because it is seen that the destiny of man does not 
depend upon the efforts of man alone but also on the dispensation of God 
also. This view is not correct. For Brahman cannot be conceived other¬ 
wise than as a soul, fs'vara is a soul which is all-doing, all-knowing, all- 
etnbiacirg, Arirra (pever to teccme smaller than even an atom), etc, are 

( 288 ) 

His eight excellences. He acts by mere will (and not by physical means) 
and disposes the merits and dements appertaining to each soul and the 
elements of earth, etc. to activity. He is thus absolutely free in the work 
of creation. He is like a friend, He is the father of created beings. These 
attributes cannot be possible in Him without the possession of cognition. 
Therefore He cannot be anything but a soul. So also declares the f§ruti: 
“The seer, the cogniser, the all-knower, the Lord.” He cannot be compre¬ 
hended by perception, inference and revelation. He can be indicated only 
by the analogy of our own souls. 

Topic 4.6 : The World is not the Result of Chance ; Stitras .• 22-24. 

Some say that like the sharpness of thorns, streaks of colour m rock 
minerals and the smoothness of the stone, the production of the body, etc, 
is from material causes without the intervention of an efficient cause. This 
view does not differ from the view that the creation of the body, etc. is not 
the result of the action of man, which has been refuted in III. 11. 60-72. 

Topic 47 : All is not non-eternal • Sfttras : 25-28. 

Some say that all things are non-eternal as production and destruc¬ 
tion are their nature. Some oppose this tenet by asserting that the alleged 
non-eternality must itself be eternal and thus will furnish an opposition to 
the non-eternality of all things (including non-eternallty.) But non-cternal- 
ity cannot be eternal ; like fire destioying itself along with the fuel, it 
ceases to be along with the destruction of all things. The tiue reply to 
the tenet of the non-eternality of all things is that there can be no denial 
of what is really eternal. What is eternal and what is non-eternal is to be 
settled by the test of cognition. Things which are found by means of the 
prama^as to be liable to production and destruction must be regarded as 
non-eternal, while things which are not found to be so liable must be regarded 
as eternal. The eternals thus determined are the most subtle elements, 
ether, time, space, soul, mind, their attubutes, genus, species, combination. 

Topic 48 : All is not eternal: Stitras : 2p-jj. 

Some say that as all things are nothing but the five elements and as 
the five elements are eternal, all things must, therefore, be eternal. This 
tenet is negatived by our actual cognition of the production and destruc¬ 
tion of things. The mere resemblance of things to the elements in respect 
of their attributes is not a true mark of the inference of their eternality. For 
there are reasons also to account for their difference m regard to duration 
The resemblance in respect of attributes only shows that the elements are 
the material causes of the things. On the other hand, there is actual 
cognition of production, and of the cause of production, of things This 

( 289 ) 

cognition proves their non-eternality. The activity of man who seeks to 
produce what is pleasant and to destroy what is painful, also presupposes 
that all things are not eternal. It is further well-known that composite 
substances undergo production and destiuction Again, sound, action, 
cognition, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, and volition are neither 
included among the elements nor possess their attributes. It cannot 
be said that the cognition of production is as unreal as cognition in a 
dream ; for the same can be said about the cognition of the elements. 
Moreover, there is this fundamental difference between eternal and non¬ 
eternal things that the former are beyond the reach of the senses and are 
not subject to production and destruction. (Thus is the Samkliya view 
refuted. The view of those who believe in autogenesis is next considered ) 

It is said that production and destruction are mere changes of attribute 
and not of substance which is constant, and so eternal , in other words, that 
there are really not production and destruction but only development and 
envelopment. But this view of the persistence of entities at all times fails 
to provide any means of diffeientiation as to (i) development and enve¬ 
lopment, (2) the attribute developed and the one enveloped, (3) the moments 
of development and envelopment, (4) the paiticular attribute developed and 
enveloped and another, (5) the past and the futuie Hence the view must 
be rejected. 

Topic 49 : All is not discrete . Sittras • 34.-36. 

Some say that an entity as a single unity does not exist, because the 
names by which entitles are denoted connote a plurality , e. g. a “Jar” is the 
name of a bundle of attributes such as colour, taste, touch and smell, and 
of parts such as bottom, sides, neck, etc. But this is not right , for attributes 
are different from substance and paits are different from the whole, as 
already explained (see II 1. 33-36.) Moreover, names do not change ; for 
instance, we say, “The jar I saw I touch, the jar I touched I see”. Then, 
mere collocations ot atoms are imperceptible, because atoms are so. That 
which is perceived m a collocation of atoms is a single entity. Again, the 
admission of a collocation whether of atoms or of attributes or of paits is 
the admission of a unity. 

Topic 50 : All is not void: Sfltras : 37-40. 

Some say that all is non-existence, because existence and non-exis¬ 
tence appear in every entity , e g. m a cow there is presence of cow-ness 
and there is absence of horse-ness and everything else. The argument involves 
a twofold contradiction, (r) “All” is definable, as it means more than one 
and without exception ; while “non-existence” is not definable, as it is the 

( 290 ) 

negation of existence. (2) If all is non-existence then one thing, e. g. cow- 
ness, cannot be the negation of another thing e. g. horseness. Then, all 
entities have existence by their own nature , a cow is existent as a cow. 
There is no cognition of a cow as non-existence. When it is said that a 
Cow is non-existent in the form of a horse and it is not said that a cow is 
non-existent in the form of a cow, it is admitted that a cow as a cow is 
existent. The statement that a cow is not a horse is a denial of their 
identity and not of the cow as an entity. 

The opponent rejoins that what is called the nature or chaiacter ot 
an entity has merely a relative existence like length and shortness. To 
this the reply is that relativity depends upon an absolute standaid. If 
both the terms long and short are relative then they destroy each othei. 
These terms, again, do not apply to atoms or objects of equal size It 
relativity weie a fact as asserted, then surely some difference would ha\e 
appeared in them. What relativity really implies is that when two objects 
are seen together it enables us to see the excess of the one over the other. 

Topic 51 ; Reality is not numerically fixed • Siltras • 41-43. 

Some say that (1) all is one, being equally existent, (2) all is dual, 
being eternal and non-eternal, (3) all is a triad, being the cogniser, the 
means of cognition, and the ccgnnable, (4 ) all is a quaitet, being the 
knower, the means of knowing, the know able, and knowledge , and so forth. 
This is not correct, because of impossibility of proof. For if the matter to 
be proved and the reason for it are diverse then the number asserted is 
exceeded , if not, then in the absence of any reason there can be no proof. 
It is no answer to say that a part of the matter to be proved will 
furnish the reason for the proof. For in unity there can be no part. So in 
the case of duality, etc. These views deny the diversity of objects formed 
in special characters, and are thus opposed to perception, mfeience and 
testimony, and therefore false. The truth is that objects are classified 
according to their resemblances and diversified according to their differ¬ 
ences. 

Totic 52 : Phala {Fruit) : Sutras : 44-53 

It is seen that when a man cooks his food, he gets the fiuitofhis 
labour immediately, while when he sows seed he gets the harvest after a 
lapse of time. Therefore when it is said that heaven is the fruit of the 
pcrfmmance of agnihotra sacrifice, the doubt arises as to whether the fruit 
will be obtained immediately or after a lapse of time. We know that 
heaven is not obtained immediately. On the other hand, w r e do net t ee 

( 291 ) 

how it can be obtained afterward, for the activity in the shape of the per¬ 
formance of the sacrifice must have ceased to operate long ago. To this 
the reply is that activity produce, Samskara (potency) in the form of merit 
and demerit, which in co-nperation with other conditions produces the fruit 
at another time, in the same way as water poured at the root of a tree 
causes through intermediate agencies the appearance of flowers and fruits. 

It is true that in the case of the tree, the action and the result both 
appear in the same body, ie., the tree, while in the case of the sacrifice, the 
action is pet formed in one bjdy and the fruit is enjoyed m another body. 
But bodies are merely the fields, the performer-enjoyer is the soul. The 
soul performs the action, the merit resides m the soul, the fruit in the form 
of happiness accrues to the soul Where the fruit of action is declared 
to be a son, a wife, cattle, wealth, etc., these are only the symbols and sources 
of happiness which is the real fruit. 

Topic 55 . Duhkha {Pam) Sfttras 54-57- 

Pain has been enumerated after Fiuit (in I 1. g, and defined in 1 .1 21. 
Pleasure has been neither enumerated nor defined) The omission 
however does not imply a total denial of pleasure , for such denial is 
impossible seeing that all beings bear testimony to the existence of pleasute. 
The teaching that pleasuie is to be regai ded as denoted by the word pain 
is given, for the purpose of the avoidance of pain, to one who, on account of 
the experience of the stream of births and deaths, has become indifferent and 
desires to avoid pain For all beings, all the worlds, all re-births are, through 
the co-existencc of pain, penetiated with budhana or impediment or hinder- 
ance or obstruction which is the characteristic of pain In the text (IV 1 
54) “Bath” means that which is born, namely the body, senses and cognition 
The impediment is of various grade. It is the greatest in the case of those 
who aie m hell, middling, ot the lower animals , least, of men , less, of the 
celestial beings and of dispassionate men Thus seeing that impediment 
in some degree or other exists in all the worlds the teachers apply the 
definition of pam to pleasure as well as to its means, namely the body, senses, 
cognition Hereby attraction towards the worlds ceases, thirst for them is 
cut off, release is obtained from all pam It is like the avoidance of the 
pain of death by one who thiows away milk mixed with poison 

Pleasure no doubt appears in the intervals of pain. But the longing 
for and pursuit of pleasure and the attendant evils such as non-fulfilment 
of desire, its partial fulfilment, fulfilment with risks, etc , produce various 
mental suffering, and consequently even at the moment of pleasure the 

( 292 ) 

impediment to the freedom of the soul continues. It is tor this reason that 
“birth” is declared as pain, and not on account of the non-existence of 
pleasure. Again, there is no pleasure in the attainment and enjoyment of 
which pain in some form or other is not experienced Moreover, “birth", 
infirmity, disease, contact with disagreeable things, separation from agree¬ 
able things, non-fulfilment of desire are the necessary conditions and 
inevitable consequeuces of the pursuit of pleasuie But a man with 
whom pleasure is the supreme good regards these also as grades 
of pleasure and thus never gets fiee from transmigration For the 
awakening of such a man also “birth” is declared a-, pain. The expres¬ 
sion “ Birth is pain ” (m IV. 1. 54) however does not mean that the 
body, senses and cognition are by their own nature pain but that they like 
pleasure are so being interpenetrated with impediment. 

Topic 54. : Apavarga ( Release) . Shtras 5S-67. 

Some say that the attainment of release is impossible on account of 
(1) the chain of debts, (2) the chain of perversions, and (3) the chain of 
activity. The repayment of debts is enjoined as follows “A Biahmana. as 
he is born, is born encumbered with three debts by celibacy and study he 
repays the debt to the Riais , by performing sacrifices, to the deities , and by 
begetting progeny, to the Pitris” (^atapatha Brahmana, 1-7-2-1). As 
regards sacrifices it is further laid down “These sacrifices agmhotra, 
dars’a and purnamasa shall be performed until death or infirmity mteivenes. 
Either by infirmity or by death is one freed from the obl.gation to peifoim” 
So no time is left for the pursuit of release. (Perversions are false knowledge, 
egotism, attraction, aversion and love of life. Yoga-Sutra, II 3) These 
cling to one from life to life Again, from birth till death the activity of 
the speech, mind and body never leaves a man for a moment. Therefore 
the attainment of release as descnbed in I 1. 2 is not established. 

To the above the reply is as follows (1) In the text of the Satapatha 
Brahmana the word “debts” is used not in its primary but m a secondary 
sense. For primarily a debt and its repayment must be inter vivos 
That condition is not present in the case under consideration. The 
secondary application of the word is for the sake of condemnation and com¬ 
mendation. Like a debtor who does not repay his debts a man who does 
not pci form acts deserves condemnation , and like a debtor who repays 
his debts a man who performs acts deserves commendation. Again, the 
expression “ as he is boin ” is also used in a secondary sense. F01 suicly 
an infant has neither the desire for the fruit of, nor the capacity to perfoini, 
all those acts, sacrifice, etc. Similarly the declaration about performance 

( 293 ) 

of acts till infirmity or death should be rationally interpreted. For if it is 
taken literally it becomes superfluous, for infirmity and death necessarily 
put a stop to all performance. The declaration really means that perform¬ 
ance should be continued till the desire is satisfied with the attainment of 
fruit. The word “Javi” which the objector has explained as infirmity really 
means the fourth stage of life, the stage of renunciation For it is then that 
a man having, after realising the futility of all worldly objects, 1 enounced 
the desiie foi woilds, wealth and progeny, is freed from the obligation to 
perform acts. “Jara” cannot mean infirmity or inability here, foi in the case 
of men who are not themselves able to perform acts, a proxy is allowed such 
as a disciple whose service is required by the gift of learning. 

Again, the text m question is a 1 c-inculcation (and not an oiiginal 
injunction, as theie is no word m it to expiess an injunction). It can be 
interpieted either as a re-inclucation or as one pleases The former mter- 
pietation is the more lational The sense therefore is that a householdei 
has no option but to peiiorm piescnbed acts as a debtor ha-' no option but 
to repay debts. The perfoimances which accomplish the fiuit, and not 
the fruit, are the subject of a man’s effort. Injunctions lay down the means 
which is to be brought into operation and the fruit which is to be produced. 
"Jayamina”, as he is born, therefore refers to him whom these concern, 
namely the householder. This is not to deny the other stages of life, 
namely the student, the renunciate and the recluse. For every 6astra is 
confined to its own subject matter. These Bifthmana texts are concerned 
with the duties of householdei s only. 

Riks (sacied verses) and Brahmanas (sacred piose texts) declare release 
(foi all stages of life). Thus there are the Riks : (a) Risis, begetting piogeny 
and desiring wealth, entered death by reason of acts, other Risis, dis¬ 
criminative, attained immortality beyond the reach of acts, 

(b) Neither by act nor by piogeny nor by wealth but by renunci¬ 
ation some attained lmmoi tality; beyond heaven (1. e. outside the reign of 
Avidya), hidden in the cave (1. e. beyond the reach of ordinary pramanas), 
that which shines, the yatis (recluses) enter. 

(c) Know I this Person, great, of the splendoui of the sun, beyond 
darkness ; by knowing Him one crosses over death ; there is no other path 
for the journey. 

There are also the Brahmanas : (a) There aie three suppoits of 
Dharma, sacrifice, study and gift. The first is penance ; the second is the 
celibate-student residing in the university or college of the preceptor; the 
third is such a student who spends his life in the college. All of them go to 

9 

( 294 ) 

the regions of the virtuous. He who is steady in Brahman attains immorta¬ 
lity. (Chhandogya Upanisad, II. xxm. i) 

(b) Desiring this world only the renunciates take to renunciation. 
(Brihat Aranyaka Upanisad, IV. iv, 22). 

(c) Now they declaie that man is m essence desire. As he desires 
so he resolves; as lie resolves so he acts ; as he acts »o he becomes. 

Thus declaring that transmigration is the result of acts, the texts 
teach what is good : Desiring, when he becomes non-desuing, desire-free, 
desire-less, self-desiring, desire-fulfilled, his pranas (vital forces) do not go 
out, they are withdrawn into the soul even here Being truly Brahman, he 
attains Brahman. (Brihat Aranyaka Upanisad, IV. iv. 5, 6). 

Theiefore it is unreasonable to say that the chain of debts prevents 
release. The text, Those four paths leading to deities, (Taittiriya 
SamhitA, V. vn. 23), again, shows that there are four, and not one, stages 
of life. 

The text about the performance of agnihotra, dars'a and purnamAsa 
applies only to those who desire the fruit. For the Veda enjoins the closing 
of sacrifices and renunciation. Thus, "Having fulfilled the prAjApatya 
sacrifice, having offered all his possessions in it, transplanting the fires m the 
soul, let a Brahmana walk away from the world”. This shows that the 
removal of the sacrificial fires is enjoined for those who have risen above 
the desire for progeny, wealth and worlds and have ceased to desire the 
fruit of sacrifices. So declare the BrAhmana texts; e. g. Resolving to 
take to another order of life Yajnavalkya addressed Maitreyi thus : I wish, 
O dear one, to go away from this place; let me reconcile you to KatyAyam 
O Maitreyi, you have received initiation from me. That much, O dear one, 
is immortality. So saying Ydjnavalkya went away. 

The performance of acts till infirmity and death could not be intended 
for all without distinction. For such acts end with the collection of the 
sacrificial vessels at death which can be possible in the case of householdeis 
only. Had that been the intention there would have been no declaration 
of lising above desues as in the text - It so happened in days of yore 
that BrAhmanas, versed in the sacred lore and learned, did not desire 
progeny; (they thought) what should we do with progeny ? we for whom 
the soul is the whole world. They, rising above the desires for progeny, 
wealth and worlds, led the life of mendicants. (Brihat Aranyaka Upanisad, 
III. v. 1). For such men acts ending with the collection of the sacrificial 

vessels cannot be possible. Moreover, the fruit does not incite all men to 
activity to the same extent 

The order of the householder is not the only order of life. ItihAsas, 
Puranas and Dharmas'Astras declare four orders of life. These as well as 

( -295 ) 

the sacred verses and Brahmana texts are authoritative in regard to their 
respective subject matters, like the senses Sacrifice is the subject matter 
of the sacred verses and Br&hmana texts, the character of men, of Itihisas 
and PurSnas; and social conduct, of the Dharmas'astras. If Dharmas'&stras 
had no authority, chaos would ensue through non-regulation of the conduct 
of men. The authority of Itih&sas and Pur&nas has been declared by the 
Brahmana text. Atharv&ngirasa declared the Itihasa and Furfina, they 
constitute the fifth of the Vedas (Chhandogya Upamsad, III. iv . 2). 

(2) The chain of perversions also can offer no obstacle to the attain¬ 
ment of release. For as in the case of a man 111 deep sleep, when he 
dreams no dreams, the chain of attraction and the chain of pleasure and pain 
are snapped, so also in the state of release. And this the lmowers of 
Brahman instance as the condition of the released soul. 

(3) In the case of a man whose perversions have suffered decay, 
the activity does not tend to re-birth at the end of the previous birth. 
Such re-birth is caused by adrista, 2 e. merit and dement abiding in the 
soul. Absence of re-birth at the end of the previous bnth is lelease. 
This does not entail the futility of acts. For what is declared is that 
re-birth does not take place at the end of the previous birth, and not 
that the experience of the consequences of acts is denied. In such a case 
all previous acts reach fruition m the last birth. 

An objection is raised by some who say that the stream ol perver¬ 
sions is natural and without beginning and therefore impossible of being 
cut short. It is no answer to this objection that just as antecedent non¬ 
existence (which is without beginning) of an entity is terminated by the 
entity when produced, so the natmal stieam of perversions is not eternal. 
Neither is the objection met by the argument that just as the natural dark 
colour of the atom from before tune is terminated by the application of 
fire, even so is the stream of perversions. For eteinality and non-eternality 
are attributes of positive entities only, thcii application to non-entities is 
only metaphorical. There is also no reason for the conclusion that the 
dark colour of the atom is without beginning. Nor is there any reason 
for the proposition that what is not in need of production is non-eternal 

The true answer to the objection is as follows Subconscious will 
is the efficient cause of the perversions, attraction, etc. They are duejto 
acts and to themselves mutually. Attraction, aveision and delusion arise 
from subconsciously produced wrong notions of things as attractive, 
repulsive and delusive. Acts produce the bodies of living beings and in 
them the perversions of attiaction, aversion and delusion according to a 
fixed rule. For it is actually seen that attraction is dominant in some 

( 296 ) 

bodies, and delusion in some others. Their production is also reciprocal. 
The deluded man is attracted; the deluded man is angered, the attracted 
man is deluded ; the angered man is deluded. Now, the production of the 
false notions of things ceases through knowledge of the truth and owing 
to the non-production of their cause there follows the absolute non¬ 
production of attraction, etc. There is again no special force in the 
statement that the stream of perversions is without beginning For all 
these entities, the body, etc., associated with the soul, come down m 
sequence without beginning. There is nothing which was not produced 
before and has been produced for the first time, except knowledge of the 
truth. Such being the case it is not premised by us that what is not liable 
to production is capable of destruction. As regards acts which produce 
the bodies of living beings in diverse classes of animal life, they do not 
become the efficient cause of the production of attraction, etc., after the 
destruction of false notions of things is brought about by the knowledge of 
the truth about them. They continue, however, to be productive of pleasure 
and pain, for m producing them they are independent of false notions. 

Book IV . Chapter ii. 

Topic : Production of knowledge of Truth : Sutras l—J 

Now, false knowledge is not mere non-production of true know ledge. 
It is not a negative but a positive thing. It is delusion. The object the 
false knowledge of which is the seed of sam»aia or succession of births and 
deaths, is to be known in its essence. False knowledge consists in the 
apprehension of the not-soul as the soul, in the delusion, the ahaipkara 
(I—manufacture) in the form “ I am (this)”. Ahamk&ra is the vision of one 
who sees the not-soul as “ I am (this)”. The objects of aharakA.ra are the 
body, senses, mind, feelings and cognitions. When a man feels cominced 
about this assemblage of objects, the body, etc., as “ I am (this) ”, as his ver\ 
self, their destruction he regards as the destruction of himself, and being 
overcome with the desire for their non-destruction, adopts them again and 
again, and so adopting them, strives for birth and death ; and as no 
separation from them takes place, he is never absolutely released from pain 
He who sees all this as pain, the vehicle of pam, and pleasure tinged with 
pam, knows pain thoroughly, and pain so known decays for want ot 
adoption or acceptance, like food mixed with poison Similarly he sees 
the faults and action as causes of pain. So he abandons the faults The 
faults having decayed, activity does not tend to re-birth (IV i. 63) Thus 
the man discriminates (1) that re-birth, fruit and pain are the things to be 
known, (2) that action and faults are to be avoided, (3) that release is to be 
attained, and (4) that knowledge of truth is the means of its attainment. 

( 29 1 ) 

Having thus divided the knowables as those which are wrongly identified 
with the soul, those to be known, those to be abandoned and those 
to be attained, when the man devotes himself to them, constantly 
turns them over in thought and influences them with thought, there 
appears to him perfect vision, awareness of the things as they are, 
knowledge of truth. The knowables from the body to pain (I. i. 9) are due 
to faults because they are the objects of false knowledge. True knowledge 
about them prevents ahamk&ra or their identification with the soul. And 
so through knowledge of truth, on the successive removal of pain, birth, etc. 
(I 1. 2), release is obtained This is a resume of the teachings of all 
fkstras and is not a new teaching. 

The objects of the senses are the objects of desire. They are colour, 
etc. When they are wrongly conceived they cause the opeiation of attrac¬ 
tion, aversion and delusion. So meditation for the sake of true knowledge 
should be first concentrated on them Aftei wrong notions about them 
have ceased then thought should be focussed on the body, etc. which are 
more nearly connected with the soul so as to remove ahamkfira in lespect 
of them. Thus the man who is dispassionate to objects external as well 
as internal, is called released. 

The cause of the faults is the conceit which regards objects as wholes 
and pays no attention to their paits. For instance, when a man is attracted 
to a noman, and a woman is attracted to a man, they are attracted by the 
particular parts of the body such as the teeth, lips, eyes, nose, or by 
some special features in them Such attention increases the passion 
for each other. The faults which it entails are to be abandoned. Attention 
should be directed to the impure aspects of the body such as the hair, 
flesh, blood, bones, smews, etc. By this means the attraction of passion 
is destroyed. Thus everything presents a twofold aspect, good and bad. 
It should be regarded as bad. Food mixed with poison is considered 
as poison. 

Topic 56 • Relation of the Whole and Pants • Sutias p-i 7. 

There can be no doubt about the existence of the whole over and above 
the parts (see u. 1. 33 ct suj) To this the tollowmg objections aie urged : 

(1) Each single part cannot exist in the entire whole owing to the difference 
of their size and as that would entail the exclusion of the other parts. 

(2) It cannot occupy a portion of the whole because the whole as 
conceived has no such portions. (3) The whole cannot reside in each 
single part as their sizes are different and as that would entail that a subs¬ 
tance is constituted by a single component. (4) It cannot reside in a 
portion of a part because parts ha\e no portions. (5) It is not known to 

( 298 ) 

exist away from the parts, (6) It cannot be an attribute of the parts for 
the reasons stated before 

To this the reply is : The doubt is not justified , for the whole being a 
single entity, the distinction of entire and parts is inapplicable to it. When it 
is said that the whole resides m the parts what is meant is that the whole 
covers the parts, i. e it makes possible for the parts to combine to form a single 
entity. So that parts may have independent existence, but there can be no 
whole unless there were parts. Therefore in the case of a person who seeks 
the supreme good what is prohibited is the conceit which regards objects as 
wholes, and not that the existence of wholes is denied. Just as false notions 
m respect of colour, etc. is prohibited, and not that colour, etc are denied. 

Again, single atoms are not perceptible. They cannot be therefoie 
perceptible m mass. Yet bodies constituted by atoms are perceptible 
What makes them perceptible is the existence of wholes over and above 
the parts. The something perceptible m the collocation of atoms is the 
whole. To say that there is no perception of the whole in the paits is 
suicidal, for in the last analysis only the atoms are left and they are not 
object of perception , so that the requued object of perception, i e parts, 
is reduced to something imperceptible. On the othei hand, the argument 
cannot be pushed to the extreme conclusion denying the total existence 
of all things. For atoms cannot be so negated. They are the least 
indivisible parts of bodies. 

Topic 57 The Partless : Sutras 18-25. 

Nothing exists, lejoins the pessimist , the wholes aie 1 educed to 
partless atoms, but partless eternal atoms are an impossibility, because 
the ether must pervade them both inside ahd outside in which case they 
cannot be partless, or, if the ether does not so pervade them, then the ether 
cannot be all-pervading as is claimed for it To this the reply is that the 
terms inside and outside can be applied only to a body composed of parts 
and are inapplicable to the atoms themselves which are partless. As 
regards the ether it cannot but be all-pervading For nothing pondeiable 
or corporeal exists which is not in conjunction with the ether. A sound 
produced spreads over the ethei. Conjunctions with minds, atoms, and 
their effects also spread over the ether The characteristics of the ethei 
are that it is nowhere parted and rc-united like water by a passing boat, 
and that nowhere does it offer resistance to moving bodies. This shows 
that it is partless and intangible 

Then an atom cannot be a product , for if it is a product its con- 
stitutents must be more minute and in that case it will not be an atom. 
As partless it is eternal, A product is non-eternal, not because of the 

( 299 ) 

pervasion of the ether but because of the disintegration of the parts. The 
pessimist rejoins that the atoms cannot be partless, for the reason that 
they possess a definite shape (spherical) and also enter into conjunctions 
among themselves. The objection to this i ejoinder is that it will lead to 
infinite regression which is illogical, and will also eliminate gravity and 
diversity of dimensions and entail equality of dimension between the whole 
and the part as a consequence of infinity ot parts in each part and part of 
a part. 

Topic 38 ■ External objects are not transient • Sutras 26—37. 

(The Buddhist addresses the Naiyuytka thus • ) You defend the 
existence of external objects on the ground ot our cognitions of those 
objects. But they are false cognitions. For instance, the cognition of a 
piece of cloth is a figment of the imagination. Because when a cloth is 
dissected only the yarns are left, and no cloth is found. Similarly in all 
cases. (The Naiyayika replies •) This argument involves a self-contradiction. 
If an analysis of things by reason is possible then the non-cognition of the 
real nature of the things is impossible. The product is not perceived sepa¬ 
rately from its causes because it subsists in them Where the causes are 
imperceptible analysis of their products by reason surely causes their distinct 
apprehension; as in the case of the atoms Moieover, analysis by reason is 
the same as cognition by means of the pram 3 nas. The pramanas establish 
the existence of external objects On the other hand, there can be no proof 
of the proposition that all is non-existent. For if there is any proof then “all” 
which includes proof is not non-existence If there is no proof the proposition 
is not established. It cannot be said that there is no existence, but only 
a conceit, of pramtlnas an d prameyas as in the case of objects seen in a 
dream, hallucination, mirage, etc F01 there is no reason to support the 
supposition In the first place, there is no reason to believe that objects 
seen in a dream are unreal. On the contrary, there are reasons to show 
that they are real. Diveisity of dream cognitions must be due to different 
causes. In the second place, if it is said that dream cognitions are unreal 
because they disappear on waking then it is admitted that apprehension and 
non-apprehension are respectively the marks of inference of the existence 
of things existent and non-existent. Objects of dieam are no more unreal 
than objects of recollection and imagination. All these objects are based 
on reality previously apprehended. After waking, by comparison with 
waking cognitions, dreams are found to be unreal So that the experiences of 
the waking consciousness form the real basis of dream cognitions. 

Thus there are objects and wrong cognitions of objects. Wrong cogni¬ 
tions of obje cts are destroyed through true knowledge as the conceit of the 

( 300 ) 

cognition of objects in dreams disappears on waking. Similarly the sun’s 
rays opposed by the radiation of heat from the earth quiver and are mistaken 
for water. On nearer view the wiong cognition is removed. So every¬ 
where what is destroyed is the wrong cognition, and not the object. Mo 
man has ever at any place a wrong cognition which is not without a real 
cause Moreovei, there is a duality ot cognition m each of the cases cited : 
the magician, the waking man and the man near by know the phenomena of 
the magic, dream and mirage as unreal, while the spectatois, the sleeping 
man and the man at a distance know them as real. These diverse cogni¬ 
tions could not be possible if all things were non-existent. 

(As to the Nihilist) • wrong cognition itself cannot be negated , for its 
cause and its existence are apprehended. Every man is aware of 
wrong cognition and of its cause. Wiong cognition therefoie has existence 
Wrong cognition embraces a twofold object, reality and appeal ance, e. g. 
the pillar and man, where a pillar is mistaken foi a man It arises fiom 
the perception of the common attributes of two similat things Where, 
on the other hand, all objects aie of a unifoim character devoid of name 
and reality (as with the opponent), there can be no possibility of wiong 
cognition. In the case of smell and other prameyas, the cognitions of which 
are said to be wrong, the cognitions are certainly true cognitions, because 
they do not embrace the duality of reality and appeal ance. Therefore it is 
unreasonable to hold that the cognitions of pramanas and prameyas are 
wrong. 

Topic jp : Development of True Knoivledge : Sfttras 38-pp. 

When the mind is withdrawn from the senses and is held steadfast by 
the retentive effort, its conjunction with the soul takes place (as m the state 
of deep sleep) When this conjunction of the mind with the soul is asso¬ 
ciated with the desire to know the truth (which is not the case in deep sleep), 
cognitions in respect of the objects of the senses are not produced. From 
the habitual cultivation of this state does cognition of truth arise There 
are objects however which by their intensity or by then nature force them¬ 
selves upon consciousness even in this state of the mind , e. g. thunderclap, 
hunger, thirst, heat, cold, diseases, etc. Nevertheless the habit of Yoga 01 
concentration or communion is possible as the result of excellence of virtue 
or merit which is the cause of true knowledge, accumulated by pi actice 
preformed m previous lives. For the purpose of avoiding distiactions ins¬ 
truction has been given for the practice of Yoga in forests, caves and 
river beds. The virtue born of the practice of Yoga accompanies a man 
even in another life. In the fullness of its accumulation as the cause of 
true knon ledge, and there being the contemplation of Sam&dhi or the repose 

( 30 i ) 

of the mind in the soul, true knowledge is produced. Even in ordinary 
affairs a man is heard to say : “I did not see, my mind was elsewhere.” 

In the state of release objects, however intense, cannot force them¬ 
selves on the soul For they can produce cognitions onlj thiongh con¬ 
junction with the senses. And the necessary condition ot the pioduction ot 
cognitions is the body biought into existence under the influence of past 
acts, as the seat of effort, senses and objects. Release is the non-existence, 
tlnough the non-existence ot merit and dement, of the body and senses as 
the seat of the condition of the production of cognitions It follows there¬ 
fore that release is deliverance from all pain. Because in the state of release 
the seed of all pain, the vehicle of all pam, is destroyed. 

For the attainment of release reclamation of the soul is to be accomplished 
by means of Yama and Niyama and of the practices enjoined by the rules 
of self-culture. Yama (non-violence, veracity, non-covetousness, study and non- 
accumulation of wealth) is enjoined for all men. Niyama (cleanliness of body 
and mind, contentment, penance, sacred study and contemplation ot God) is 
enjoined for special classes. Reclamation of the soul means deciease of 
demerit and increase of merit. Rules of self-culture are to be know n from the 
treatises on Yoga. The practices theiein taught aie Tapas (penance), Prana- 
yama (control of breath), Piatyahara (withdiawal of the mind), Dhyana 
(contemplation) and Dhaiana (fixity ot contemplation). The practice ot 
meditation in respect of the objects of the senses is tor the sake of the 
destruction of attraction and aversion The means is the adoption of the 
conduct ot the Yogins. 

The other means are the study and practice of the science ot the 
soul, i. e. Anviksiki, the spiritual science. Practice consists m constant 
study, hearing and judging. Foi the maturity of the wisdom so acquiied, 
in the form of removal of doubt and awakening to unknown objects, in 
other words, for the confirmation of what has been ascertained by oneself 
as the truth, converse should be held with those who are versed in the lore, 
whether they be disciples, preceptors, or fellow' students, who are eager to 
attain the supreme good, provided they aie not jealous. If it is considered 
that the advancement of a counter-thesis to the thesis propounded by them 
may not be welcome to them, attempt need not be made to establish one s 
own thesis. One should merely express the desne to know the truth and be 
willing to receive wisdom. In this way one should engage in converse with 
them and correcst one’s own view as well as the conflicting views of ex¬ 
treme thinkers. 

Topic 60 : Maintenance of True Knowledge : Shtras 50-do. 

Like the cover of thorns for the safety of the sprouting seed, sophism 

10 

( 302 ) 

and cavil may be employed for the safety of the search for the truth, by 
those who are not yet free from faults and who have not yet attained true 
knowledge, against those who launch an attack out of zeal for their own 
views. And a counter-attack may be made upon those who offer insult from 
pride of learning, foi their subjugation and not out of the desire to know 

the truth. This permission is only tor the sake of maintaining the knowledge 
acquired and not tor the sake of gain, woiship or reputation. 

Book V. Chapter 1. 

Topic 61. Examination 0/Jutis by resemblance and difference • Sutias 1—j 
Jatis are reasons urged in opposition to the reason advanced in suppoit 
of a demonstration They are of twenty-four kinds. They do not succeed 
in refuting the opposition. Their common function is to equate or to reduce 
the opponent’s reason to the same class with themselves. This they do 
m twenty-four different ways and from these they derive their respective 
definitions. Thus, (1) to oppose resemblance to resemblance as the reason 
The soul possesses action, because it possesses volition or adrista (ment and 
demerit) which is the cause of action, in the same way as does a pebble 
possess action as it is shot from a catapult which is a cause of action. 
This demonstiation by means of resemblance is opposed by the following 
equally based on resemblance. The soul does not possess action, because 
it is all-pervading, in the same way as the sky, being all-pervading, does 
not possess action. And no special reason exists to determine the validity 
of the one as against the other conclusion. In the absence of such a reason 
the opposition counteracts the demonstration, (2) To oppose difference 
to (a) resemblance and ( b) difference . (a) The pebble shot from a catapult 
is finite but the soul is not finite, therefore the soul does not possess action 
like the pebble. ( b ) The sky is inactive because it does not possess the 
cause of activity , but the soul possess the cause of activity, therefore it is 
not inactive. The reply to these antinomies of reason is that the thesis or 
the counter-thesis is established in the same way as a particulai animal is 
established to be a cow through its possession of cowness. Antinomies 
arise where the demonstration is based on mere resemblance or mere 
difference, and not on the possession of a distinctive attribute or charactei, 
An animal is established as a cow, not merely through its resemblance to 
another animal possessing dewlap, etc., but through such resemblance and 
the possession of the particular or distinctive genus, viz., cowness. Similarly 
mere dissimilarity to a horse does not establish a cow, but dissimilarity 
of characteristic attribute. Antinomies arise from fallacies of reason. 

Topic 62: Six JUtis relative to the S&dhya and Drist&nta : Sutras 4.-6, 
These arise from confusion of the diverse attributes of the sadhya 

( 303 ) 

(the thing to be established) and the dristanta (example), (t) If the soul 
is active like a pebble, it is also touchable like the pebble, on the other 
hand, if it is not touchable, it cannot be active (2) The pebble which is 
active is not all-pervading , therefore the soul which is active like the 
pebble, must also be not all-pervading (3) The activity of the pebble is 
certain, therefore the activity of the soul is equally certain (4) The 
activity of the soul is uncertain, being yet to be demonstiated, theiefore the 
activity of the pebble is equally uncertain (5) Objects possessing the 
cause of action are some heavy, e g , the pebble, and some light, e. g. air ; 
therefoie objects possessing the cause of action aie some active, eg, the 
pebble and some inactive, c. g , the soul. (6) It, as is the pebble so is the 
soul, then as is the soul so is also the pebble. 

The reply to the above is that what is established cannot be repu¬ 
diated and that comparison through resemblance in parts is established as 
in the case • as the cow so the bos gaveeus, where their difference in many 
respects is no reason against the inference. Similarly where the infeiential 
attribute is found in the dristanta in univeisal 1 elation with the atlnbute 
to be established, the difference between the sadhya and the dristanta in 
other respects cannot hinder the inference As legards the assumption ol 
uncertainty in the dristanta and certainty m the sadhya, (3), (4) and (6) 
above, no such confusion is possible, because a dristanta for the purpose 
of demonstration is that object in respect of which thei c is unanimity ot 
opinion amongst men both trained and untrained 

Topic 6j. Extension or Non-extension of the Iletu to the Sadhya. 
Stitras 7— -8. 

The opposition to the demonstiation takes this loim The lnleiential 
mark and the attubute to be established either co-oxist 01 do nut co-cMst 
in the sfidhya or subject. If they co-exist then nothing else remains to be 
demonstrated. If they do not co-exist, then theie can be no demonstration ; 
for a lamp cannot illumine an object with which it does not co-exist m the 
same place. To this the reply is that the co-existence 01 non-co-existence 
of the two attributes is not a material factor m the production of an effect, 
for it is seen that a pot is produced when the agent, instruments and the 
ground come into contact with the lump ot clay, while suffeung may be 
caused to a man by means ot supernatural poweis directed from a distance. 

Topic 6j. Regression and Counter-example Sutras p—//. 

The opposition is to the effect that the example ltselt requires demons¬ 
tration and that an equally suggestive counter-example exists. To this 
the reply is : (1) Those who wish to see, bring a lamp for the illumination of 
the object to be seen, while the lamp itself is seen without another lamp. 

. ( 304 ) 

Similarly an example is an already know n object and serves tlic purpose 
of making known what is yet unknown. It is useless to establish its cause. 
(2) If the counter-example can cause an inference why not an example ? 
The absence of any special character is common to both. 

Topic 65. Non-production • Sutras 12 — ij . 

The opposition is to the effect that sound, e g., is said to be non¬ 
eternal because it comes after effort, but that prior to its production when 
sound is not produced the character of coming after effort which is the 
cause of non-eternality, does not exist, and that therefore sound is eternal 
and cannot be produced. To this the reply is that when sound becomes 
sound it is produced and in being produced comes after effort and that 
thus the cause of its non-eternality is obtained. 

Topic 66. Doubt • Sutras ij .— -ij. 

The opposition is to the effect that theie is resemblance of sound, e g. 
to the eternal, namely potuess, both being cognisable by the senses, and 
also to the non-eternal, namely pot, the character of coming aftei an effoit 
appertaining to both, and that therefore it is doubtful whether sound be 
eternal or non-eternal. To this the reply is that where doubt anses from the, 
cognition of resemblance without the cognition of difference the doubt ceases 
on the cognition of difference, e. g., the cognition of coming after effoit, 
that wheie doubt arises from the cognition of both resemblance and difference 
the doubt can never cease, and that mere lesetnblance can never be an 
eternal source of doubt. 

Topic 67 Frakarana [Topic) • Sutras 16 — 17. 

Here the opposition moves within the topic and does not advance any 
outside reason for or against the thesis or counterthesis which constitutes 
the topic. Thus, sound is non-eternal because it comes after effort, like a 
pot; and sound is eternal because it resembles potness which is eternal, 
both being perceptible to the senses. It is required to determine which of 
these two views represents the truth. To say that sound resembles the 
non-eternal because it comes after effort is futile It leaves the countei- 
thesis ummpaied. For both proceed upon resemblance. The truth is that 
the thesis and counter-thesis arise not from resemblance but from absence of 
tiue knowledge. As soon as truth is determined the topic comes to an end 
Topic 63 Hetu {Reason, Mark) : Sutras . 18 — 20. 

The opposition is to the effect that the Mark is no Mark, because, if it 
exists before or after the sadhya (subject), it can have no operation, and 
if it exists along with the s&dhya there is no knowing which is the sadhya 
and which the Mark. To this the reply is that the same argument would 
apply to the opponent’s denial of the Mark. The truth is that it is a matter 

( 305 ) 

ot common experience that the production of what is to be produced and 
the knowledge of what is to be known do follow fiom causes. The opposi¬ 
tion based on the points ot time is futile 

Topic 69. Arth&palti {Presumption). Siltras 21 — 22, 

The opposition is that the argument that sound is non-eternal by reason 
of its resemblance to non-eternal objects, namely in coming after effort, 
implies that sound is eternal by reason of its resemblance to eternal objects, 
namely in being touchless. To this the reply is that the argument by 
presumption would apply equally against the opponent, that the presumptive 
argument does not determine the tiuth, and that mere divergence of nature 
is no ground for presumption, e. g., the fact that pebbles which are solid 
tail to the ground, does not imply that water which is liquid does not fall 
to the ground. 

Topic 70 Non-differemc • Sutras 23—23 
The opposition is to the effect that if the resemblance ot sound and 
the pot in respect of their coming after effoit leads to then resemblance in 
being non-eternal, then the 1 esemblance of all objects in respect of their 
being existent leads to their resemblance in othei tespects To this the 
reply is that the “other respects” should be defined It the expression 
means non-etei nality, then the non-eternalitv ot sound which is the thesis is 
admitted by the opponent The tiuth is that existence is the highest genus 
and there is no other common attribute possessed by all existent objects. 
The Vainas'ikas (Nihilists) no doubt maintain that like existence non- 
eteinality also is a common attribute of all objects. Their thesis then 
should be- All entities aie non-eternal, because they aie existent. The 
thesis is so wide that no instance can be found foi the demonstiation And 
a Reason or Mark without an instance does not exist A part ol the sadhya 
(all entities) cannot be the instance, because the character of a sadhya is that 
it is yet to be established Moreover, if the sadhya is to furnish the instance 
it will furnish instances both eternal and non-eternal wheieby the object of 
the nihilist will be defeated 

Topic 7/ . Demonstration Sutras 23-26 
The opposition is to the effect that as m the case ot sound, e. g , the cause 
of its non-eternahty is demonstrable, so is also the cause of its eteinality, 
'ore. absence of touch To this the reply is that if the opposition is valid the 
non-eternahty of sound is admitted, and that if the argument is not valid 
the opposition also falls to the ground. 

Topic 72 • Cognition . Sutras . 27-28. 

The opposition is that the cognition of sound does not depend only 
on the cause which is specified, viz, its coming attei effort, but that there is 

( 306 ) 

cognition of sound also when the branches of trees are broken by high winds 
(without the effort of man). To this the reply is “ coming after effoit ” is the 
statement of a cause and not of the cause of sound, and that as to be a 
product is the mark of non-eternality, the opposition does not rebut the 
demonstration. The existence of sound bears no analogy to the existence of 
underground water, for example. The latter exists but is not perceived 
because of some obstiuction. But no such obstruction to peiception exists 
in the case of sound. Theiefore it cannot be said to exist unpeiceived. 
Hence sound is not an instance of the manifestation of an existent object but 
of the production of a non-existent object 

Topic 73 Non-cognition Sutias 29-31. 

The opposition is to the effect that in the case of sound the non- 
cognition of the obstruction to its perception is itself as such incapable of 
cognition, and that the non-cognition of its non-cognition proves the existence 
of such obstiuction, and that therefore it does not follow that obstructions 
do not prevent the cognition of sound (prior to its manifestation) In other 
words, non-cognition which is urged against the existence of obstruction 
equally applies to the non-cognition of obstruction. 

To this the reply is that cognition is of the natuie of appiehension, 
while non-cognition is of the nature of non-apprehension, and that the object 
of cognition is something that exists, while the object of non-cogmtion is 
something that does not exist. Therefore when cognition does not appre¬ 
hend, come into contact with, any obstruction m the case of sound it 
follws that such obstruction does not exist Cognition or non-cognition is 
not its own object ; the object is something different. Otheiwise non-cogm- 
tion will destroy itself , and leave obitruction and its cognition unaffected 
Moreover, every body is aw arc of diverse foims of cognition within himself. 
So that a man becomes awaie of the non-cognition of obstiuction to the 
preception of sound m the same way as when he feels that his doubt lemams 
or that his doubt is removed 

Topic 79 Non-eternal Sfttras • 32-33 
The opposition is that as sound is said to be non-eteinal by leason of 
its resemblance to a pot, so for the same reason all entities would be noii- 
eteinal. To this the reply is that the opposition destroys itself; because if 
all entities are to be non-eternal owing to their resemblance to a pot, then 
the opposition will be equally futile as the thesis which it seeks to refute 
(1 e non-etenality of sound), owing to its resemblance to the thesis in being 
presented in the form of an argument of five members. Moreover, mere 
difference does not constitute the inferential mark. The mark of inference 
is that particular form of lesemblance or difference which is universally 

( 307 ) 

known to be the means of the establishment of the proposed attribute in 
the sadhya. 

Topic 75 . the Eternal : Sfttras : 35-36. 

The opposition is that the non-eternahty of sound is itself either eternal 
or non-eternal and that in the former case sound also must be eternal and that 
in the latter case the supposed non-eternahty of sound will some time cease 
and sound will be eternal. To this the reply is that the allegation that the 
non-eternahty of sound is eternal is an admission of its non-eternahty which 
is sought to be opposed Moreover, by the non-eternality of sound is 
meant that sound which has been pi oduced, ceases to exist after destruc¬ 
tion, and not that non-eteinality is a positive quality inhereing in sound. 
In such a case of non-existence due to destruction as the non-eternahty of 
sound the question does not ai ise as to whether the non-eternahty is eternal 
or non-eternal, Eternality and non-eternahty again are contradictory 
attributes and cannot be predicated together of the same thing at the 
same time. 

Topic 76 . the Effect • Sfitras 37-38. 

The opposition is to the effect that the ieason, "coming aftei effort”, 
does not necessarily infer the pioduction of something which had no 
existence before, e. g a pot, but that it may also infer the effect as manifesta¬ 
tion by the removal of obstruction, so that sound, though an effect, being 
manifested, may yet be eternal. To this the reply is that where manifes¬ 
tation is effected by the removal of obstiuction the obstruction is known, but 
that in the case of sound there is cognition of no such obstruction the 
removal of which by effoit causes its manifestation. It follows that sound is 
non-eternal. 

Topic 77 . Futile Controversy of Six Steps . Sittras : 39 ~ 73 - 

(Where the opposition employs a futile reason and the speaker meets it 

with a proper reply the conti oversy ends in the determination of the truth 

as shown 111 the Sutras 1 to 38 But where the speaker also employs a 
futile reason to meet a futile reason the controversy drifts into six steps and 
ends in confusion). The six steps have been exhibited in the text. 

Book V : Chapter ii. 

Topic 78 Errors of the Proposition and the Mark : Sutras . 1-6. 

They are five in numbei : 

(1) Admission of the attribute of the counter-example m one’s own 
example which is the means of the establishment of one s proposition. 

(2) Substitution for one’s own proposition a different proposition 
suggested by the reason put forward by the opponent. 

(3) Contradiction between the proposition and the reason. 

( 308 ) 

(4) Abandonment of the proposition on opposition. 

For examples of the above see pages 208-210. 

(5) Qualification of the Mark, on opposition. E. g. : The speaker 
sets out with the proposition that all manifested objects must have a 
common origin, and advances the reason that magnitude is their common 
attubute. The opponent urges that magnitude is seen in things not having 
the >ame origin as well as in things having the same origin Upon this the 
speaker qualifies his reason and re-states it as that all manifested things, 
while endowed with the same nature of causing pleasure, pain and delusion, 
possess magnitude He thus changes the reason and admits that the reason 
previously advanced was not sufficient to establish the proposition. And as 
regards the reason subsequently put forward, it fail= of its purpose in the 
absence of an Example, for an Example must be of a different class and 
his own reason, all things etc., precludes the possibility of any such example 
being found , while, if it is found, it must be something having a different 
origin and thereby hurt his proposition 

Topic 7p • Errors of Failure to Establish the Proposition ■ Sutras • 7— 10. 

The number of such errors is four • 

(1) Irrelevancy, (2) absence of sense, (3) obscurity, and (4) incoherence. 
F01 examples see pages 211-213. 

Topic 80 • Errors of Misstatement of one's argument: Sutras 11 — 13 

There are three of such errors 

fi) Absence of order among the members of the Nyaya. 

(2) Absence of one or more of the members of the NySya. 

(3) Redundancy of Reasons or Examples. 

For examples see pages 213-214. 

Topic 81 Error of Repetition . Sutras 14. — 15. 

Repetition should be distinguished fiom re-inculcation (see II. 1 65). 
Repetition also includes express mention of what appears clear by impli¬ 
cation. For examples see page 215. 

Topic 82 ■ Errors of Non-reply . Sutras : 16 — rp. 

Their number is four : 

(1) Failure to re-state the counter-thesis, so as to demolish it. 

(2) Ignorance of the meaning of the counter-thesis, which cannot there¬ 
fore be demolished. 

(3) Want of ready wit, which naturally courts defeat, 

(4) Evasion on some pretext. 

Topic 83 : Errors of Weakness and Confusion : Sutras : 20 — 22. 

They are 

(1) Admission of the opponent’s view and turning it against him. 

(2) Overlooking the censurable in the opposition. 

(3) Censuring the non-censurable in the opposition. 

Topic 84 • Errors of Inconsistency and Fallacies of Reason : Sutras • 23—24. 

These are 

(1) Deviation fiom tenet, i. e., random discourse at variance with the 
subject proposed. For example see the text 

(2) Fallacies of reason are, as described, grounds of defeat, and not 
on any other account. By their very nature they furnish occasions for 
rebuke. 

APPENDIX D. 

Alphabetical Index to the Sutras. 

PAGE 

p VGr 

STS’fctg 11 2 21 63 

iii 2 7i 132 ^q^«i*wj*rnr3«T- 
iv 1 66 156 v 1 30 197 

sr^nw^aiaqafssr. 

^TITRrferflc. II I 44 46 ^NTWITWI^T- 

?w qfatgq^m^ ii i 20 62 

fW=5T ... i 1 5 4 ^^qeJTWPTT?^- 

^rv^rq H l ^qfdM qr: 2 27 64 $fara*qt<Tsrf&T in 1 38 92 

srcsrfaTrmfqrqfff- ^tnrf^*nsqfirer.*:i 2 5 21 

ITRT^ li 2 4 57 3J?cT5rfl«r 3 ; iMff>qF4 

r^fr^iTg- qnTqiraraFPiT^qrraf 

hr. IV 2 25 164 ^* R: •• lv 2 20 162 

srsreiFiTRrc^ ^ srqjfa- 

^g^rg foi£ r w f%. 11 2 52 7 1 “ 2 31 65 

ftn^rar- wtffijawiroin* aft- 

ftWt ftrg F ta n g- ^wnrtawr- 

^Ft: ... v 2 22 217 fijl® 5 * - 1 1 31 *3 

__ ?nqTT3^5^rf: iv 2 43 171 

WTJrcrgrsisi^fa; fs^a- . . . 4 , _ fn . 

uftTO. »> 2 24 113 . 

wftftRrat «n)N%: -fwreiwrat. .U 1 63 100 

^fhjWT^- 1 47 95 

i.r.c.lr.L, fefir sraarnifTa ^ ta^arar* 

<oq i^rgnr ... lii 2 7 107 

OT: - " 1 23 139 WFtfiJt « ta» 

^RWraTfsWW: ii 2 55 '4 ... iii 2 5 106 

*i:|a>^5rro?q s & q^ifr^q- srsir^r 4»MiyM£?f' 

*>fcn«m?q#: v 1 22 192 ■•■ •** “* 1 45 94 

( 310 ) 

PAGE 

STTfJT^Ri; ... iv 1 14 136 
srfiraqtlft 'STT^TPRI^ iii 1 43 94 
3 TWTrai<^ ... ii 2 29 65 

qm ^l- 

... ii 

^TTOWi; iii 

mwmrretsr. iv 

^nif^Tq^q - ^ns^i 3^- 
cJ-eJHH. ... v 

sro fr q Pdd - qfdtf^T^- 
^fqfe ^ r t r v 

5 Rr^ ... li 

1 59 1 

1 22 87 

2 42 170 
2 15 215 
1 21 192 

2 3 56 

SrfaStqirif Srf?rfq^ 

V 2 

fic^snn# ^qrerssrcj- 

... in 2 

^rssrq^srrarffr sqsrf^qr- 

PAGE 

6 210 

43 122 

^ 131 ^ 5 RKIFTT: 11 1 4 30 

gf^^Tf^gryrfT jgr ^ i fa 

^TTfrr^rarif: iv 2 22 162 

^drrsraqjq^i: 11 2 34 66 

Sff^Tcq'^r dT^TTq- f% % 

^qw%iwd- 11 2 9 58 

^qjnc^Tcl ... ii 2 22 63 

^qsn^T^qfd^- 11 2 38 67 

m. 

iii 

^sv <^3 iii 

d 

^q^T^KTfrrir 

^3 - - - iv 

2 58 128 

... iv 2 18 162 

1 10 83 I snqSTCTreHddrST 3T iv 2 19 162 

sn^fdstffdfofUsSrT 11 2 68 78 

2 li 213 ^frr^r^c^Tcr *rer- 

11 2 63 77 

2 12 160 ! sn^ffTKrrt $c*T«Tsr%% 

I - ... IV 1 10 135 

sr?i?n?r N iv 2 15 161 

’wlM^ianT^ s^ r qnr%Tq- 
q^dd^^un*}^- 

... i 1 40 17 

?rfWRT v 2 17 216 { 

qrfT - ' 

^qTqT^frcTTqjicRr 

... 1 2 12 24 i 

sifasfc qr 

... 1 2 17 26 

?TT?JTq?:qnT^5TlRrTf¥r{g 

^sremfspita. iii 2 31 116 

srffrr^nqcq'flTW'T^r 

sr^ri^i 

3 n^T 3 =hsn. swT^rroT- 
sqT^^qrqcifigqTT^tr- 

iii 

1 9 5 

1 50 96 

?qRfeq>T?cr- 

^TsT sfWdTd ili 1 48 95 

( 3H ) 

PAGE 

PAGE 

ii 2 

arnrta^rr sr®?: i l 

^J^fSTfSI^ ... ii l 

iv 1 

% 

irrarpqTr^Tt f«rf- 
ffrflr .. i l 
Spsi'i I'nn.fsNiHTTc^ lii 1 
m 1 

5 %qT«fcrBpK'rf?q 5 r' 

^■q^vqm^r <n gqgr i$ - 

13 59 ii 2 35 66 

W V 1 25 195 

52 48 ^rcnvnarfcr; srfqrqr- 

STf%Tsgf': g ^Wtf 'v 1 16 189 
50 149 ! 3W q^qtT? q rr c^ T f - 

ii 2 28 64 

3 R\ 

13 m 

firaift: sqsrerrqTTJT^- 

Slrq^H ... l 1 

i 

, mm wf^^TSfcr 
6 | quhnq ... iv 1 58 152 

12 83 , * 

56 98 qqjvrfffqq^rfq^ 

i ^qffqjfaWET^nTre^T- 

qtqq^;fq$tq^nr: v l 23 193 

q^fqsrrfl fsrftqrfq^rm- 

*f ... iii 1 9 83 

iv 2 11 160 

4 3 

m 2 21 112 

spwsntr ... iv 1 19 138 

s. 

18 216 
48 149 

34 14 

v 2 

IV 1 

i is.'My'yTqTqfr^rrw- 
^rrasflg .. i 1 

’TCT^Rt 5 T qT 

5 qqlri«hi i^qg^RT^- 

ST%^>q: ... V 1 

^ 3 - 

q^rfsvr: ... iii 1 65 101 

M,rlHl ' fcq 7T: 5T?3^5: iii 2 67 30 

it 

^f^nKcm^n^tarnr- 

. qfrPter ••• iii 2 55 127 

j g^ q p ic ra : ... iii 1 - 39 92 
J+HiWiywifc^r’ 
qiq: in 2 1 105 

ii 1 

26 195 

50 48 iii 2 42 122 

( 312 ) 

PAGE 

snfSnawifaeSNr* 

CJjQjrfyr^T?: |fgr ii 2 17 6i 

'T'T#C!Tf^«T: v 1 28 196 

g i raagw^ T rw nfa ^k - 

... V 2 19 216 

«EFrTs*r& sRRsntgter- 

tlT^: ... v 1 38 202 

srrwremq-fe 4 >t<«it- 

<for ... i 2 9 23 

^I^T I »=d < ! <u I f^ Tfrfgg- 

fbrHIJill^ iv 1 45 148 

If 

... V 1 5 180 

JT%PT: ... ill 1 46 94 

11 1 43 46 

iv 2 7 159 

fra? H4ll ^r^vTFWTf 

^rnr^rsTn^ 

TOPT iii 1 32 90 

MfTiWfssr: ... iv 2 13 160 

g ffl r ftsfe i ry r fa frsr iv l is 137 

^ ... in 2 6 107 

stf^rw^: V 1 24 194 

44 pel fa Cfri^iW 

^ w- 

^TJrT: 

ii 1 

^4il*-d. ... iii 2 

iii 2 

51 3 5 31*1 iv 5 

JT. 

5 fl^wr: 9 T 3 J+T%- 

... iii 

^STOTHf^er: iii 

^’? 3 aq^Fcn-^fe , n m : 

43 §I^' 

3 TTCT. ... n 2 

4 ic 4 l ^tlfaf^ 3 fT- 

fc*rf?c: ... v 1 

3 . 

HTTf^f^W%^kTri?W^ 

sn^^R^r^E^rariifr- 
f^nfw i i 

sr. 

! ^f^prTOTSfll: g l -Cfc^ i 1 

PAGE 

20 37 

17 111 

: 13 109 
! 40 170 

1 30 89 
1 5S 98 
l 62 100 

1 14 7 

! 57 74 
. 3 176 

i 8 183 

[ 12 6 

11 6 

( 313 ) 

PAGE 

3T. 

ari fafefrfr 5rrf?r*mT^ ii l 56 50 

?RW^fc«ft m 2 34 117 

^Nrr^msR: iii l 16 85 

**■ 

srs iv 2 47 172 

?nrf5r^ccrT^TcJT*ff 

snsra^vi: .. 11 1 24 

i r R f y fi s qrai =sr srrawrsr- 

^ g[ i rr ^ TTcTr^ v 1 31 

*rfar»rcr ^rjrTf^JT 
g iNg cWfa : .. ill 2 25 
rrsn^Tq[?n^5R jt?t. m 2 56 

39 

198 

114 

127 

cf 

cTcSETfidc4i3^g. 1V 1 21 138 

... i 2 11 24 

rTr#m??f ^JTl^TSlfPcI?:- 

*ITsng ... iv 1 3 133 

?R*sraTsragrsj ftrsqr^- 

IV 2 37 169 

^r^irR^fsrirwfg-vrriTTf- 

S *rffl ! srrc. ... n 2 15 61 

?R^Tv<i^rrJi^r?:^Frrr«r' 

«ft3PElTT5‘ 

srcgwgrro 

<P?3 ... iv 2 50 173 

3T if ^RPWTCff* 

... it 1 14 34 

PAGE 

5TrSmn^ 3T ^mhrST- 

sn t n ^ rn , ii 2 6 57 
rT^**kgrg <T»5Tfsr7#- 

3&gq flM& « ra TC iv 1 53 150 

ii 2 10 59 

pfoPT#: ... ii 1 5 30 

rTOT^TT: ... iv 1 2 133 

?rm ^TTSTT^rW^ 

srfafo. ... v 1 13 187 

cTssrr thrpsrfci. ... i l 35. 15 
cTOTSfTCSqr ... iii 2 64 129 

cr&cgrafrcrfTOH- 

ii 1 48 47 

^cq?arfiwr*rteqspf i 1 22 9 

cSWjfrsqspf lit 2 68 131 

cr^ft?*Tc5RwMsr‘ f^sn^qr- 

iv l 27 140 

a^ g q qs^TO wrryrra- 

g^fst-renr \ 1 29 197 

sr^mfcr n 2 19 62 

.cT^g^^g- ill 1 35 91 

II2 26 64 

cT^STTHT^ffgcT 3 TT^TcT- 

gsretfi^i^ ii l 57 50 

crgjn^nrm^Tf ... iv 2 45 171 

ci^*rrar. ^TPirwisr^Tt^f^ 

clfWrMcdrg 111 1 5 81 

cT^flT^ JTKciW^nfT- 
crotf^cTCT^t- 

f^gf 1 : ii 2 32 66 

( -314 ) 

PAGE 

cf Hti ^<4 

JT5f?=r: ... ii 1 25 39 

cT9f^r q-^f^mTWTnTTrJT- ^fVR^qpT IV 

mJTTWT^q'lTIT- rTTWrf fqajH xv 

fq«jqT^: . . iv 2 46 171 I cT^?IT?T^5TW lii 

5'4ThMi^ifct<rfl%- ^ f^HrhM^cn: q^*^ ii 

^rfqrstTiq^KTc^r- &qf irtf qTqTq-rarijj?- 

5FT: ... ii 2 59 75 iv 

H^hnq. <£rt3*fe- 1 iv 

^ ^ r “' iv 2 5 158 ^q^HTqf^qr- 

^ qjTTI ... ii 

35qw ... ill 2 20 112 fc > . »s „...„. 

•* K ^ q^Tsqrsrrarq^nR sn^T^r- 

’Tr'T't; t h 84 , ^r^r^ ai 

q^T^q iTO^ :: qfawrg 
qq{%. ... n 

5EHT ... v 

pRrrsrqcqrsr^^narfqjHiv 2 28 166 

tgrqrcr ... ill 1 73 103 1 

T^^rrse 
%7I^<slTf^qq. 

m 

iii 

fpTjpqq; ... 1 2 20 28 

cTfsfWfWif JWTqTfef^- 

qrSI^q%^C: n 1 18 36 

rHSi'TWST fqqTlrTq; i 1 37 15 f^T3q%^T^ 

5 . 

... in 1 69 102 ^ jt R^q y i q r W TT^qRT^- 
g^5q^?TRT^qTrJT^r- il^llrf ... lil 

qr^rfprqq in l 3 so_ f ^ii reTOT «h 'T $ ' frsr^4 

^PqTf^q^^qnJT^fftscircT ST^:, ... j, 

fSTSPcT ... i 1 26 11 
crf^fWrf ?qqq*qfar- 

ffTJT ^ ... iv 2 3 157 cF5JT??rcmTqT^ra*T: i 
crqk^flTqi qrNTTJrwr% , fH?TTf*T- 

.... ii 1 40 45 JTRTxmr ... i v 

tTg^TTqTT'qT^qfrrqg: iv 1 31 141 SSI^GldMT f^RTnsd^- 
<r%^?qTf^^T£qqt: qrfsi- 5vngqq%- iii 

TO ^sqqfaqqr: in 2 35 118 ?lT?5rfqd^Tgpsrr^iq: iii 

PAGE 

2 48 172 
2 51 173 

1 71 103 

2 58 75 

1 6 134 
! 8 159 

1 28 40 

1 15 35 

1 12 34 

1 18 190 

l 52 126 
1 53 97 

1 1 80 
1 23 39 

1 2 2 

L 57 152 

1 51 96 

l 11 83 

( 315 ) 

PAGE 

PAGE 

srsq^STTfTTir STfafUT^ST 
srerfsifagST^- 

^ ... V 1 9 184 

Surer ssr sn«rorasr- 
srefar gfrFT 
gt^nsraraT- 

fsiffa: ... V 1 34 199 

sflufsrfir^ ^>n^rt fwrr 

^rfSUT^TT: ... iv 2 2 157 
$ ,i i , fwfH ; di«if civrtnsn- 

^ffTTfsTffo. IV 2 1 157 

srsugrjrvtjf^T^^vr- 

fsgftRTJT ... in 1 37 91 

g a r fawn S 

^!jf^ , ^JT?:f^<=h«<T - ii 2 45 70 

*ranr . iii 2 46 123 

fafasrenfa tfTT^flT^T^- 

SHtf ii 2 43 70 

uf^srsw^- 

^ ... i 2 14 25 

ST. 

*r 

... ii 1 58 51 

* ^tffsreifsn^ ii 2 21 63 

’T^I^Nil^frren!; iv 1 42 146 

a iii 1 6 81 

a ^Wsuf^ygir- 

... iii 2 51 125 

*n^r ... iii 1 44 94 

* nfsisrer#: ^UTTTTfir- 

^rUTrJl ... iv 1 64 155 
ST*I3WTsn^ ... in 2 8 107 

?T STCTa STITfJT^#: iv 1 12 136 
ST STCTffTsr^rTTTTsq’fsTcqr- 

U^rRT^^r ... ii 2 14 60 

*r 

frr^f^TjqreinqT- 
siTTTr^ .. ii 2 1 55 

?r ... iv 2 10 159 

*3^r*«rTiTT(T II 2 61 76 

iT STSpMTfcTTT^T ill 1 57 98 

sr rT^^+rrere i 2 16 26 

sr fT^rairf^cgrsffTO. ni 2 29 115 
it da^TTrnijT ^twitt- 

sq-frforer ii 2 49 71 

ST aftcTW^rct'-TT- 

srft^U .. iv 1 8 135 

ST fiT^TTWWUfa- 

?WT«T .. iv 2 14 171 

»t uto - TftrjTnrsjTiTren:- 

jngsrerTa in 2 15 110 

M nCi 

?cpa- iii 2 48 124 

IT <CTfaVrenTt' STc*T$T* 

cUT^ ... iii 1 67 101 

it 

STTf^rfaf 5 ^ iv 1 52 150 
it jpu^nrfart 

fsTWRT: ... iv 1 20 138 

n srersrcj ^ttitTT^ 

cgqsiwn^ ii 1 32 42 

( 316 ) 

PAGE 

fi=s=RC: ... ii 1 19 36 
q iv 2 16 162 j 

sr Jtfff%: ST^reF'-Trsrq- 

^faifsPFT iv 1 63 155 1 

$fa5nf^Tct*q: lii l 60 99 , 
31 ^nq^TT^Tjym tu 2 4 106 
ST ^TTT^‘5^i , f^T^TT T T ■ 

sisq 

in 

2 

57 

127 

ST gqq^qTgqsTsq- 

iii 

1 

54 

97 

st Trqisrqgqsqsq 

111 

1 

41 

93 

ST SsTTT^STTffTcr^rC* 

%qpqTq ... 

ST 5T5Tspqfe>^cTT^T- 

in 

2 

54 

126 

f^: 

ii 

2 

11 

59 

st fq^qqigqq^. 

n 

2 

46 

70 

st fqq^wnsfq^: 

iv 

1 

17 

137 

ST fqqqsq?re*TTSTPT 

iii 

1 

2 

80 

sr sqqpqTgqq=q. 

IV 

1 

33 

142 

»T spqsj^qtqvrsq 

111 

1 

72 

103 

ST 

iii 

1 

64 

100 

q ^T^qrqfqrTrqrsq 

H-TSTP^STT^ 

q ^T^5qfqfqq , rqT?TT- 

iv 

1 

67 

156 

qTqlsrm 

ni 

1 

26 

88 

q HrwrcTTT?qTq 

in 

f> 

2 

62 

129 

q ^rTflfqsFcqrs^Titi 

r 

^Rsrsqq^q 

u 

1 

55 

50 

q g^qTsqsq^r- 

fsrq^: ... ' 

IV 

1 

55 

151 

q ^TW^q^TTfqqqTq 

q ^Sjq - ^JTqaqfqqq - , 

lii 

2 

30 

116 

iii 

1 

13 

84 

PAGE 

ST ^qmq fs -T fes nfr%- 

^T?T ... iv 1 39 145 
ST ^flT^ffW^^TSIT^iv 1 38 145 
ST t^cT: 

^T5qT % f|^: v 1 19 191 

STT^frT5?TTRq^Te5n3TTr5r- 

f¥TS*TrF: ... ii 2 65 78 

STT^fsTfSTrSrm ... ii 2 24 63 

STr?ft?TTSTTqSTSTtfeTtfTSrr* 

11 1 41 45 

sncftcrrSTTSTcPTt- 

srmsTr^ ... iv l 16 137 

fqq>5qT^ ii 2 44 70 

sTTrJTsrfirqf^rhssrT qqf% 

^TSffSITr^ ill 1 15 84 

STTcWsrar: SETfaq>qfal% 

srsq#?q{%. 11 1 22 38 

STTfsTPSTrTTfsTcSTr^T^ iv 1 26 140 

STT^ffraffTM^q- STfsnjm- 

Hi 1 36 91 

sngarr^ssT^TuqkftRtcT. 

WS^TWiratW#: ii 1 66 54 
STT^EvTSJTtfs^Tq- 

... iv 1 35 143 

SITScT .JflsIts^f^fqTSJT. 

STS* ... lit 2 26 114 
snsqs STfsqqTqTSJ. iii 1 23 87 

1 sn?q-?% S^qT^qlq- 

■eiKIc^ ... ii 2 30 65 
*TTJIr?r^ qqq snmQT^- 

^Jnsr^r tjjstw ii 1 47 47 
srTWTersrTmsj# srftqr- 

... ii 2 7 58 

< 317 ) 

*T*JfidNsTra5?Tni. ii 1 30 41 

frp}fsRt | snTr5I5q , m; iv 2 39 170 

JTnsra 

f?RTg**l WMfH^nffT5Tf: 

v 2 21 217 

fe <icciwiiy w srcw- 

^qq^. ill 2 70 131 

•gWETWH m ii 2 50 72 

Wf(: . v 1 35 200 

: ?TFTTir??TTWrJT 

fSsp5qq*smR|; iv 1 28 141 

... ii 2 51 72 

Irl^qq^q 

ge^RTTcfl^RTW* 

ST fata: •■ iv 1 9 135 

iv 1 7 134 

^wrmr^5¥f?r^sr iv l 24 139 

g crfg#- 

^ m 2 37 118 

fawrsr firr^m^T- m i 17 85 

%Wtc^¥lT^T?I5CITq7R- 

ffsqgfrT ... lii 2 11 108 

fsTOUTOrafa^Sf: ii 2 56 74 

iv 1 43 147 

fqfrW w* i^^q^r- 

v 1 27 196 

ztTrpjffa^ m \ 29 89 

^rncvnfsr^fr3 iii 1 49 95 

fftFsrqrqqr^rg^r^ifq 

^Tqrq^rqTr^ ill 2 18 111 

5«TT?en:flmr3 ii 1 38 44 

^fiUcqfft^vnqm iv 1 4 133 

foft^feTftqssnjfla- 

f§[r-qTftmT5Tr3 lii 1 8 82 

«ftwfTW»TW*nt- 

3113 ni 2 22 113 

sncqrTTcTf^T5Cqiq^. j v j 32 14 2 

3Tcq%firfaT!cq l«fl cTT* 

fqqr ... iii 2 63 129 
?Irqf%fq t TT3nq.TC < gt- 

qvist ... ill 2 12 109 

*TlfHfrlRl«luiN>n.<!jl’ 

... iv 1 30 141 

qt^nri^Tqq^n^frrrr- 
cqTrq^TqT^fq^»r- 
*Tqjr^ ... iii 1 20 86 

^RTTJTtS: ... ii 2 42 69 

q. 

qs?q%qq qfanrrcrrof- 

qqqqqf^irT^qT^r: v 2 5 210 
q^qif^'f qqtq^rqfaq- 

fq^rcqrr%f»R. iii 1 19 86 
q?:«ir^Tqn^q^ff%* 

q*Wi3 ui 2 36 118 

q^qT3j£: iv 2 17 162 

( 318 ) 

PAGE 

in*. v v 

qq ^T ^gr ... iii 2 39 119 

v 2 

f q f lTrTT^ v 2 9 212 

q^rfesfsft «t TOri&*r: 

sr^qfef|vi- li 1 10 33 

WTjjTOfi g: ii 2 36 67 

qiq^qr^Tgqq^R 

q*mm: iv 1 61 153 

tnfapsr gip? cret- 

... iii 1 27 88 

qrfaVTvq^^rer 

^r^ajqjiqjTS^: iii 1 28 89 

5^?qf%: q?qmq: i 1 19 9 

qgsqsi ^rrsFOT- 

5TT5T- ... ii 1 53 49 

, l v 4ti?wi«ri3 5 t ? ^ it! • 

l?qf%: ... in 2 60 128 

iT«rl?cr^ v 2 

fq^TTfq- 

S=sc : 

11 z 

5fq%: 

iv 2 41 170 

... iii 1 68 102 

q ni^r^W ri; qgr- 

Sjfcqfo: ... ii 1 9 32 

... iii 1 18 86 

qqspqTqq^vqr iv 2 9 159 

’jf^TTq^Nrt '4 T^i,I'^i^i- 

faf^Jcnfq i 1 13 7 

*5JH^ ... n 2 

qftannpnfkcw- 

TSF^MPcTqfiRt^* 

qr^qfq^tmfcreTq- 

snfHsqq'TM^^^- 

^TSC^ITfilcqfeTT- 

Tmq&mTfarw#- 

WT: ... iii 2 

TlRfpaTTrf^fTf^fqqTqT- 
q^Hq^rqi^iqr^- 

... iii 2 

afwt^r^^iwr- 
ft*W5TF*r wr: i l 
STfwrcTT^JTf^^ qjffqqr- 

... v 2 

qf^Tfrr^Tfq. 

srfasrrfsrcter. srf^rr- 

f^^qjqf^rrar^jrqT- 
$fcCTrsmran*r s?jrw- 
finf 5^ ^rRTRgqTq- 
qj«HH'wffT¥nf5T^ql 
JTcngfrr qssfgwfl^- 

PAGE 

10 212 
7 211 
41 69 
54 73 

41 120 

33 117 
32 13 

3 208 

( 319 ) 

PAGE 

Sqfei>S.i r dl^c4l ¥iraT- 
Sf fsra^qTqrfq v 2 

feqt&rta: srfcT- 

STr^^T^PJJTgq (rK*jq«- 
4-etMIC^ ... li 

l 207 , iTcsreny'Vnirn«rinqq tqrr* 

sqrftr^. ii 

trrfqtter ... v 

sr^rjsn'cTvmfer^rr ^q- 

gaKd srid^iurffT. v 

srfossFcrtg?^ =q qitg- 
fsr??r: ... v 

m^h-su* 

qiwRi^q: ni 

qfdqsr^Wqfq eTT sr^r- 
SRpiqfq^ iv 

qraqgn^ jr^cqprf^rsf ■ 

affd^ v 3T3T7%: v 

qfq^qfsrqf^q srfq^q. 

qtqq^tq: v 

qfq^q 

*iwit qtqSTCTf^ 

ffdi^r v 

2 4 209 
2 2 208 

1 11 186 j 

2 49 124 

I 

2 49 172 

i 

i 

1 17 190 | 
1 41 203 ! 

i 

1 42 203 | 

sTcq^irgiTPnqm qjirsqi: 

qqmjrfq ... i 
STr ii 1 

srqWif^ ^rTc^rfirs^rar- 

«Trrf5fd'ff%: v 1 

sis%ngqTqtfa?3T- 

qsi*rm^. iv i 

OTi<yd*4JTqqtaraBr 

ftr^’FcrrRr^: qsjr- 
qqqtqq^T. q^sfcTT^I- 
qfor^TqTq: 1 

srmqrcrsiT^qf^q^’ iv 
qqiqyfr: fcr?: sn r wg rsn 

qf^qT^qq^f- qf?rqg> 

sqrsrfq^q: v 1 20 191 

qfq^qrawrqq qT%RT- 

fNpKcqn^ ii 2 5 57 

qfq^qsfq grrrqr qrq v l 39 202 
fq^qfq?qqTqT- 
qfq?^ frtrqcqtqq^ 1 ■ 
qfcT^qT¥TTq. ... v 1 36 201 
SrqsrfqfSrrrcqr^fpsr- 
qr^ql: ^mqjq^q 

ii 1 26 39 

St^q^JTR^tqiTrfqjT' 

gq^sq: ... ii 1 31 41 

• 11 
qjTRjq&q^fjfTqqqrsrq* 
qSFcTf^CFqiqq* 
qqqrfqqjqqTqjusM l=i- 
qq^Tlfqrqra^crsn - - 

fqfqqC^qTqTSTT 
frqTf«T £wrfq- 

TfJT •■ ^ 

qqnuigqqrgqqfo- 

vqn^ ... iv 5 

srq^rqf^qvfqTr^qnq* 
sm; ••• v 

PEGS 

21 38 

8 32 

3 3 

46 47 

45 123 
10 185 

59 153 

1 19 

29 166 

17 36 

1 1 

30 166 
16 35 

37 201 

( 320 ) 

page 

1 18 8 

snr&TTsrsmn 

S*S: 

qj^ ... 1 20 9 

snjfaqrsfrtRT iv 1 1 133 

?f3 ••• i 1 17 8 

^msmgqwRH i l 6 4 

4-q lg qiT T 3 fe. £ • 

gffrra> <fc rrg«refe ii l 45 46 

c*srT*Tfgr$OTfiT- 

cScSN* ... iv 1 65 155 

T^si ii 2 18 62 

srnjc^w^tqT^sr ii 2 12 59 

Sn?JrT#. WOfTW- 

v l 12 186 

r¥?TT^ ... iv 1 46 148 
wml’ETTfSftnTT^ iii 2 65 130 

stf^t ^rrewrFq 3T |?n: 

3TW sfafsrecsiT?- 
utw rspqsresrresr- 

V 1 7 182 
iv 1 51 150 

Mrill^lTWI^^irl I r^rf 1 

iii 1 27 87 

5T 

qTVWTffTfrr'^T?T. q^q. 

iv 1 56 151 

qnqqTvi^j g.iqfirflr i 1 21 9 

fwrc 

q^sv4’t.»if¥T3qf%j 31 

iv 1 

jjl^gqjqvlfs 

«rUd^H. ... i 1 

iv 1 

^r^rrT^TWT- 
qvrwn^ iv : 

pr*TT HT3T3T 

qmTctqTgq^fsg^cT- 
F rqqq>q% 

qigqvffswtT^^q- 
srfssT: ... iv : 

*r 

^3ci?njf3$l^ni?is^crT. 

^Tcian^ ... ni 

^wfr ^qr^ RqxTf- 
qi^T 3^ ... iii 

IT 

^Tfs^RrT^Tqrfs'q: iii 
*T3.sRif^Rrc3r5xr 
*frrTTjg^Sf : iii 

3rqnnwTTH qrnr- 

q^TTci: 

111 

nrqi ^qwnr^iT^Nir- 

'*>l'4s(l ... iv 

ftr«iTtq5risvffq3nn^3?3- 
fTfrTr^qSI fqqqjfa- 

PAGE 

42 93 

1 15 7 

L 49 149 

2 36 169 

2 26 165 

1 61 100 
2 61 128 

1 40 92 

2 69 131 

1 68 54 

1 33 90 

2 32 167 

iv 2 35 168 

( 321 ) 

PAGE 

PAGE 

iv 2 23 164 ^JTf%rWnTT^t 

q — ii 

'i^ Jfl: ••• H 1 7 32 tT^ 5T§^ ... u i 

qf^^T^q’TWTCqj%ffqr ^f v 7tqHRT^n^qv?rt 

fefvqT- sqfiT^r^T^^T^m- 

fcr i 1 30 12 qJTTq^ 11 

q^Tti^r^rq(•wotiiii 2 59 128 ^f. 

srattRtgcgTcqRcFsrqr^- ^r^rqjsqq^snsrrtqTqrar- 

frenwrnrnT^r «t ■•■ iv 

JRST. ... iii 2 38 119 wf^®rerwrei%cR*i- 
q«ntBTwm^n?nt^ crfgr- ^fsRrroi crqita- 

^qr^Ur^fjpr^ ?rr^f- _— 11 

3fPTt iTTcq^^RTOT STTil 1 6 30 f^Wj^ JT^^iMT^q^r- 

^mJT?rr«r?ftqr?TTHr- #ferqrar^rqnT!Tr q%T- 

5r«q. ... i 2 2 20 SftF^nwf sr 

qq?fo 1 

rTrq^tsrW’ i 1 24 11 _. v crv 

wmt wuSwrr ® 

r J] ,C r-4 .,.. n_ 1 „=*. t*ct qm. 1 

** " ' 7 qwrfq^snqfwr^i^v 

^W?T: ... i 2 7 22 

qW^S^t¥lTfqrqT5[ ■ 

qr^tqT^ .. ui 2 47 124 

nnR«£- 

sqrRT- 

tCdffTfTTflTq: TcTcf' qfdcf- 
qftcrsqqnfsftqq^; ii 
qcffrRTmir ^rqfsrsqj 
qrq^TTJiqq#. ii 

__ rT^fq^qTrf. i 

2 60 75 ^ mf%¥rT ^ ?T ^ Tskf '.. 

— i 1 16 7 fqrq?qT«T- 

qqintqT^q^rsq^ ^ ^ f%q»T- 

**m: ... iii 2 19 112 ^tarehsiPlf^: ii 

1 11 33 

1 34 91 

1 37 43 

1 36 144 

2 8 58 
2 14 110 

1 25 11 

2 10 23 
2 8 212 

1 39 44 

1 42 45 

2 15 25 

1 61 52 

2 53 73 

( 322 ) 

PAGE 

fqqqtqrarqmsq^q'; ii2 47 71 

fw^OT^Tr*rSI£r: ii 2 40 69 
f^TTcr^ qftq^r fqtfa- 

srqJTTTtp^ ... v 2 16 215 

srsiq- 

fefsrfeSqrqqr ii 1 bd 32 | 

iii 

frSTgqiRkfir q 

^fsiq 1 ... iv i 
sqrRTfqsfqxq^^qfrT- 
trq ... iv 
i sqqjTgcqqqqr qfq^rqriTT- 

,v 2 4 158 ' ^ ■■•.. lv 

ii l 63 52 ! si fRh4?iT^rltqm^t 

fqf^ftq^qrqqqqrrq- ! ^fq: ... ii : 

grr^ .?. ii l 65 53 j s^?qT^%5rr?rEr?g 
fg^q^-n^rqqr^qq-qfqfq- ' qqpi ... li 

qmrr^ -. n l 62 52 | sqq-cqT^fqgqT 
fqqT?iqjTWqq^sv>^T- I 

q*qTqqf?q?qcqwf ii 2 37 67 , qqqi *mq. ii 

sqfaqroq^g 

IV 

snq^qr^ qfqrcq?q* 1 sqrqrdi^qqtq: iv 

... in 2 23 113 sqRTtFJiq^ qTqsrq^q 
fqqnrfqjreqn^T^Tsq^ u 2 33 66 | (4q ' iqfq ' ?t^ ^T hut- 

fqqfdMfxi<qfdqfx<^ I ... ltl 

fqq^qTqq; i 2 19 27 | sqr^qcqr^jqiJ*. iv 

fqqfqqrfl q yqfqqTp ii 1 3 30 5qTfq?qT3[^g li 

fqqfqTqsqq^qT'sqq^rr- ‘ iv 

q^q ... ii 1 2 29 ^cpq^r^sqpqcpqfq- 

fqqfq%qr5q q rqit^iii t 55 97 ^J!R’jqs^qfqif^- 

fqqqqqqFmqsr sr- gJTTqr^ ... iii 

... 11 2 39 68 5t 

ffWJTOj . l 41 17 

fqfqqqrqqrafrqTf % | qTqTqqfccrcflTqrqqT. 

qq^?qTcqr%' IV 1 54 151 qfq^q. 

fqqqcqTsqrq^r^jr- 

... iii 1 59 98 q?T^ 

fqqqq^PTirrqrr^ iii 1 2 105 Siskin- $qqqq jq- 

fq«i irrc qfcu ... iii l 66 101 ^fpqqrararqrq v 

11 

IV 

PAGE 

24 88 
6 158 
13 136 

1 11 135 

2 67 78 
2 66 78 

2 64 77 
1 5 134 

1 15 139 

2 32 117 
1 40 115 

1 29 -11 

2 27 165 

2 16 110 

2 2 55 
2 21 163 
2 14 214 

( 323 ) 

ii 

^apilvrTq^ ii i 

qr^mTqrTcr iii 
?Rk3?Trfq?5rre[ iii 

rc^r^T- 
nTrq-% fafaer qaf ni 

^T^rTfqsfar: a 

sr. 

*RT- =q fjpsra: 

... 1\ 

fsfqvft 5 ursi- 

ft G 

? 5rar ... i 
* 7%q^mTffcn 
... i 

^wrftrf^n'WTrerrer iv 
SWHd^fa^q: q*> 
?F3lTfef «T: sr%- 
^fef«iTFcr ; i 
^Tvra^rrfm^T srrfq: ii 

^dim^FP3qK-qq ^n- qfT- 
^IrR^rr^q^^FTT- 
51 5T STCW: ii 

fawtfc i 

1 

1 

2 

1 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 
1 

2 
2 

1 

9 

1 

PAGE 

54 50 

49 48 
53 126 

4 81 

50 125 

66 130 

67 54 
31 S9 

25 88 
70 1 3 

44 147 

8 5 

3 20 

38 169 

29 12 

69 79 

1 29 

23 10 

PAGE 

«i i^i ftt^rsrf^- 

*Nr: ... iv 

STfacfriUfy T- 

^Tcnr?[ i 

*iq?T?3rTfq35q*rr?q 
sfa$?lh*f. STWcFST- 
.. 1 
... \ 

i sNr fq?q q^qfq^- 

c5r?^ .. iv 

1 srq ?«i»WT^r^wj^£r- 

1 60 153 

1 7 11 

1 28 12 
1 40 203 

1 29 141 

SrSTr* ... IV 1 34 142 

^gqJTTfUqfdq-'3T^7 q%- 

y\ * d 

TOTgT’TRT 11 1 13 34 

^rwwffi^gfq^rf^JTm- 

swfocqTd ... iv 1 5 140 

sRnram JTTqf^dTfr- 

1 qr-qfa- 

•6 

trrqrH 

m 

1 37 144 
1 34 42 

1 7 82 

1 ^sqfasrrefsreqqqq;?:- 

n i 

WTT^TW^TJTqiT^T- 
irqmT^IT. ... l 2 4 21 

^ViqTftiqrT^r 3T§r- 

qq^rerr^raf^q^- 

q^T%sfq ii 2 62 76 

SKT^T- 

gqqr^qqRTwn^ iv l 41 146 
3T*d M l^«Mfy5lq<in^ li 2 16 61 

( 324 ) 

PAGE 

ii 2 25 64 
ii 1 51 48 

^T»trTT%sr 

i 2 13 24 
iv 2 24 164 

iwnn<^- 

HrowilNnafcrot v l 2 174 
^rPTTt^T^Hrt trcsrsr- 

*«IT5T3TTf?r: ... i 2 18 26 

Plr A l'+»iM^iHi v 1 1 174 

^TTV^Firf^JTvanffqqfT. 

q^TIK- 
^ * 

f?Tr?T^W: ... v 1 32 198 

*ira*qfc5fa& q peri^t Ihr- 
Tq%*pror qT ^frra-- 

^R^Tsr^mrur^ 
pqTOTPqWTqfrTqq- v 1 15 188 
^rrawrM^fSf: qr^m- 
%f|q. qfafcamrsr- 

... v 1 33 199 
^wr^TWfaffT *%ii 1 33 42 
HTWtqT^tg: ... iii 2 27 115 
^q^qTPq^ftffqqjSqT- 

qiq , +qq^qfeq4fq- 

HTv-qf^^i qfafrr i 
STTSTOJTrST^tg- in 

^^T?cT 1 

&4ifri^J!lI ^ q^qTPcTt- 
qq^l; ... v 

PAGE 

1 4 176 

1 33 14 

2 3 105 

1 36 15 
1 6 181 

^TTsqcqTcerT- 

vq*m ... i 2 8 22 

OTRr?qg 6 ST?^te[qq>- 

?% *TJTT^ fq?qTf?Trq 
^TTqTqf^SPTOW: v 1 14 187 
qT?5TH^fq 

filTCf«r: ... i 2 6 21 

f^qTfcTffvg^fqTfqqmg 
qjqiq^fnt sqfefqT 
pgr- .. V 2 23 218 

fjHeqreR&ffsrar ^fpsrqr- 
«Jqr: ^qiqfJTffrTT- 
?qT^ ... ii 1 27 40 

^qqrf^qfgq^qq^dg- ii 2 48 71 

WqsiFi ^sir- 

vnqq^qqrr. iv 1 62 154 

qfqjfirflr %srr- 

cft^qfqr^^TTq; a l 36 43 
q^Rr. g^rq^q 

^rqsfqT^ ... a 1 64 53 

rqTsrrpqc^ pn^Tc^T^qq 

*nnq. ... ai 1 52 96 

^qrfeqqpqrqTfamqpm- 

gpqcqrfqjnq: iii 2 9 108 

( 325 ) 

SST^fftHNH - 

£$ ... hi 2 

c^Toqjft l^^TJTT- 
sqrirf ... iii 2 

mzt ■ irfta*ro!jfcrolfc- 

tfa^sr. ... iii 2 

A 

^rsr- 

farprcfinTTsr iv i 

rg»T?I^WT^t77T3TT?lTT7ST 
^ TO^ft SFRTSpTT V 2 

tgf^sl qrc*r?^tarr*3- 

3[f?r ... v l 

PAGE 

10 ICS 
40 120 
28 115 

34 168 
20 216 

43 204 

PAGE 

qil-Hg&ITfWTHr: IV 

qgn^^mnfsc 
qr^r rraTAT^t 
STlfrT: -. iv 

2 31 167 

2 14 161 

€• 

. . v 2 12 213 

v 2 13 214 

t^n^TTrSrfe^^sqr- 

WT3^r ... ni 2 44 123 

=gr?r f^rr m R q; i l 39 17 

iv 2 33 167 

fNmTCITBJ ?rtfta>T: v 2 24 218 

APPENDIX E. 

Word Index to the Nyaya Sutras. 

—#— 

3RTO iv. 2. 20. 
iii. 2. 72. 

iii- 2. 38. 

3T^: iv. 1. 27. 

ii. 1. 42., iii. 2 6. 
SlHf^iii. 1. 71., iii. 2. 4. 
3RTTJTV. 2. 1., v. 2. 17. 

^ ii 2. 24., iii. 1. 33., iii. 2. 
59., iii. 2. 71., iv. 1. 66., iv. 
2. 16. 

Sl^n^ii. 1. 36. 
ii. 2. 62. 

Wtti. 1. 22., ii. 1. 5., ii. 1. 6., 

ii. 1. 44., v. 1. 15. 

ii. 1. 5-, v. 1. 15. 
i. 2. 9. 

*f^?TT^v. 1- 6. 

iii. 2. 41. 

*f?rcrmTwr i 2 .13. 
5rf^nrm?iRTiTr^ i. 2 .13. 

SRfcr ii. 1. 41., iv. 1. 16. 

’•^Spl^ii. 1. 36., ii. 2. 51. 
ii. 2. 44. 

*Wi. 1. 5, 

31 

iii. 1. 24 
iv. 1. 62. 

siFSr&m^i. 1. 8. 
g lf^gf frr Hi^ ii. 1. 50 
3T3pf iii. 2. 41. 

3lf^» v. 2. 1., v. 2. 13. 
STfaiRW i. 1. 26., l. 1. 27., 
30. 

i. 1. 24. 

3Tfa$cT: i. 1. 28. 

SlfsRnT: i. 1. 1. 
srfaBW iii. 1-60. 

srarsrcrrar iv. 2.50. 

ii. 1.1, n. l. 2. 

1 . 6 . 

3r«TTcir iv. 2. 46. 

3nsrr?jmv. l. 31. 

3ls*TT<T5m*. li. 2. 28. 

^Jrfg+iKl' iv. 2. 14. 

3RKTcTT ii. 2. 32. 

3|!I<^rgT^ii. 2. 31. 

V. 2. 1. 

3PTT^: ii. 2. 35. 

iii. 2. 22,, v. 1. 9. 
iii- I- 42. 

( 

5PT«J q,WT ^ v - *• 15> 

1. 1. 15. 

?R«IT5?T^i. 1. 15. 

3FT£rfo€l ii. 2. 4. 

SHS Tter ii 1. 24. 
iv. 2. 25. 

SWWrnTT^ii. 2. 50., ii. 2. 61. 
sRarcmfa in. 2. 42. 

sisrsresnfar^ ii. 2. 52. 
ma q ftft r- iv. 2. 48. 

SWWWfr r ii. 1. 41 , iv. 1. 16. 
vrfsm^- V. 2. 21 
qfarcg WTfr V. 2. 22. 
gtrfsr^r v. 1 l , v 1. 15 
5frf5Tc«r IV. 1. 25 
gr fa c * T cg r lit. 2.25., V. 1. 32 
srOrWf# iv. 1 . 27, iv 1 65. 
^Tfac^TcTT iv. 1 26 
3rfacsr?sn^ii. 2 23 
wfll*nir*niv 1. 35 , v. 1. 35 
v. 1. 35 , v. 1. 36. 

3rfWcMrcj ii. 2. 50. 
jrftaraiii. 2. 14., iv. 1 66. 
sHfacsrwr V. 1. 32 
srfafir?r iv. 1. 23. 

STfafarTCr IV. 1. 22., IV 1. 23. 
STfafaW: iv. 1. 23. 
srfwjT n. 2. 56. 

3lf5r*m. ii. 2. 55 ., ni. 2. 67. 

wfomr^n. 1. 54, iii. 2. 30., iii. 

2. 65 , v. 2 23- 

srfirofc ii. 2. 55. 

5Srf?r«TJTt iii. 2. 37. 

ii. 1. 20. • 

328 ) 

: iv. 1. 56. 
iv. 1. 45. 

srffnsTrf': iv. 1. 12. iv. 1. 17 ,iv 1. 

20 . 

^•jThcqlri^ v. 1. 22. 

iii 1. 42 
=3^^: iii. 2. 69. 
v. 1. 1. 

^ ;jrMfrt; i. 1. 16., iii. 2. 21. 
srgtrofrT ii. 2. 20., IV. 1. 41 „ iv. 2 
30. 

ii. 1. 45 , iii. 1. 51. iv. 2. 
18. v. 1. 17. 

STg'TJrf: ii. 1. 42., ii. 2. 46., iii. 2 
70., iv. 1. 33 , iv. 1. 61. 
iv 2. 6 , iv. 2. 11., iv. 2. 25. 
v. 1. 20 , v. 1. 24. 

ii 2. 21., v. 1. 30. 
ii. 2. 20., v. 1 29 

, STS'T^rfssr 1. 1. 23., ii. 2. 20., V 1. 
38. 

w g q fffa r: ii. 2. 36., iii. 1. 36., iii. 

1. 40., iii. 1 65 , iii- 2. 14. iv. 

2. 26. 

! iii. 1. 40, iv. 2. 

26. 

v. i. .9. 

ii. 1. 49.; ii. 1. 53., 

ii. 2. 19. ii 2. 21 , ii. 2. 
26., ii. 2. 34., ii. 2. 35 , 

ii. 2. 37 , iii. 1. 41 , 

iii. 1. 64., iii. 2. 

( 329 ) 

17., in. 2. 19., iii. 2. 23. 
v. 1. 29. v 1. 3G. 

iv. 1. 14 i 

1. 65. 1 

SfTg^lT^iu. 1. 18-, iv. 1, 58-, iv. 

2. 41. 1 

irgsFv^ff ii. 2. 60. 

v. 2 . 16. 

?igiTT5r i. 1. 3 

g rg ffW i. 1. 5., ii. 1, 31., ii. 1. 37- 
li. 1. 49., ii. 2. 16., iii. 2. 16. 

S lgOT fr ii. 2. 2. 

^ gfare r rar r iii. l. 51. 
snjifamrflrer m. 1. 36. 

ii. 1. 49 

STgjqPT: v. 2. 1., v. 2. 22. 

ii. 1. 60., ii. 1. 62, ii. 1. 

66 . 

313 ^: ii. 1. 65., iv. 1. 59 

2. 14. 

i. 1. 23. ii. 1. 1 , m 1. 38 , 
iv. 1- 35. 

v. 1. 37. 
ii. 1. 1. 

ii. 1.20., iii. 2. 17. 
i. 2. 5. 

zfizrrfaitriKi ii. 2. 3., ii. 2. 5., v. 

. 1 . 22 . 

ii. 1. 57. 

W iii. 2. 26. 

ZFrt* i. 1. 2, i. 2. 16 , a. 2. 39. 

iii. 1. 12, iii. 2. 48., iv. 2. 
12 , iv. 2. 20. 

1. 15 , v. 2. 1., v. 2. 3, 

v. 2. 6. 

ii. 2. 2, iv. 1. 24. 
^*Tn.feT4»KI?^ in. 1. 12. 

SPrTCT^ v. 1. 28. 

a. 2. 26, iv. 1. 55, 
SSRTfor iii 1. 45, iii. 1. 46, 

3RR iv. 1. 44. 
srwrafrl V. 2. 12- 
ii. 1. 1. 

3F«r5n>:i*f ii. 1. 1. 

ii. 2. 28. 

sFq-crr ii, 2 , 31 
®r«Tr5r iii. 2 . 9 . 

ii 2. 30., V. 1. 38, 

SRnr iii. 1 23, V- 2 . 14. 

i. 1. 30 
3p*TWTtJji. 2. 31. 

ii. 2. 9. 

3F?n*ii. 2. 31. 

ui. I • 63. 

v. 1. 1., v. 1. 4. 

iv. 2. 26. 

SlfjiwKjJli iii. 1. 63. 

SPTfcs. i. 2. 7, i. 2. 9. 

3PT^ST: ii. 1. 28. 

SR^STT^i. 1. 39. 
m q «w r v. 2. 5. 

iii. i. 66. 

( ^q^CR^ : iii. 2. 1C. 

i i. t. 31 . 

3FPPT iv. 1. 58. 

( 330 ) 

3PT°PT : i. 1. 2., i. 1. 22., iv. 1. 62. 

i. 1- 9. 

g P Tff *? iii. 2. 68 , iv. 2. 43., iv. 2. 
45. 

srcfer grer. v. 2. 1. v. 2. 23. 
5Erqpn^ i l 2. 

sptr 1.1.2. 

sptpJ' v. 2. 1. 

3pn4f»q;v. 2. 10. 

wfa ii. 1. 23 , ii 1. 32., ii. 1. 40., 

ii. 2 14, ii 2 17., ii. 2. 20. 

ii. 2. 33.. ii. 2, 62., ii. 2. 64., 

iii. 1. 5. iii. 1- 10, iii. 1. 41. 

111., 1. 48 , iii 2. 10, iii 2. 
18 , iii. 2. 20, iv. 1 65 , iv. 2. 

6., iv. 2. 12., iv. 2. 43, iv. 2 

49., v. 1, 27., v- 1. 28, v. 1- 

39., v. 2. 9., v. 2 12 , v. 2. 16. 

ii 2. 47. 

v. 1. 43. 

1. 1. 23., i 1. 38. 

SF^IRT^ii 1. 40., ii. 2. 65. 
Sl^rfcnsr. ii. 2. 32. 

SPhiJT ii. 1. 41., ii. 2. 11. 

1 . 6 . 
i v . 2 - 28> 

iii 1. 63. 

ii* 1. 15., ii. I- 54., ii. 
2. 2., ii. 2. 27., ii. 2. 38., ii. 

2. 51 , ii 2. 53., ii. 2. 56, 

iii. 1 3., iii. 1. 11., iii. 1- 

14., iii. 1. 46., iii. 2. 

28., iii. 2, 35., iii. 2. 49., 
iii. 2. 55., iv. 1. 13., iv. 1.18. 

iv. 1. 24., iv. 1. 31., iv. 1. 

51., iv. 1. 56., iv. 1. 66., 

iv., 2. 25., v. 1. 8., v. 1. 

15., v. 1. 20 , v 1. 26., 

iii. l. 47. 

srsrfrPTfa i. 2. 19., V. 2. 18. 
srufcTW v. 2. 1. v. 2. 18. 

v. 2. 7., v. 2. 10. 
STSTc^ ii. 1. 46. 
sresisifsrar: ii. 1. 46. 

3WR# ii i; 47. 

3W5ErfimJT iii. 2. 7. 

in 2. 5. 

3mc?TT^5rT!f iv. 1. 28. 

SPHTNUH II. 1. 37., ii. 2. 3. 
sprofrr iv. 1. 15. 

%pr>j r. iv. 2. n. 

3W5OT: iii. 2 52. 
snreriTTcI. ii 2. 64. 
sunfa v . l. l. 
ytfifnwft v l. 7. 

ssrrawv. 2. l., v. ?. n. 

3WFR iii. 1. 45.. v. 1. 7. 

SWWrctf u. 1. 8, ii. 1-57., ii. 5. 
3WR ii. 2 1, ii 2. 9., iv. 1. 37., 
iv. 1. 65., v. 1. 29., v. 1. 31. 
3TWR- ii. 1. 11., ii 1. 39., ii. 1. 

40., ii. 1. 53, ii. 2. 31.. 
iv. 1. 58 iv. 2. 7., iv. 2. 
8 , iv. 2. 14., iv. 2. 20., iv. 2. 

45., v. 1. 24., v. 1. 36. 
swRsmrrctf ii. 2. 7. 
swrcrtjj: iii. 1. 36. 

STORT^ii. 2. 53, iii. 1. 4, iii. 1. 

23, iii. 2. 8, iii. 2. 11., 

iv. 1* 14., .iv 1. 62-i iv. 2. 

11., iv. 2. 33 , v. 1. 12. v 1. 

13., v. 1. 34. 

WTFt ii- 1. 40 , ii. 1. 42., ii. 2, 32, 
iv. 1. 20 , iv. 2. 12 , v. 1. 27. 

srerafcrra: ii. 2.12, 
srfipWRsni; iii. 1 22. 

V. 1 8. 

5ri^rvn!rra[.ii. 2. 17. 
srfwsiFn^i. 2. 12. 

sifirasrrac. in. 1. 43. 

srfiWR: iii- 2. 9 , iv 2. 3 , iv. 2. 

31., iv. 2. 34. 

srfflJTTfra^ iii. 2. 9 , iv. 2. 31. 
srfwrTiTT^ iv. 1. 57. 

v. 2. 22. 

srfasSRT iii. 2. 45. 
srfassreT: ii' 2. 65- 
ili. 1. 43. 

SrfcHNr^iii. 1. 21. 

srfirftrr v. 2. 9. 

v. 2. 16. 
i. 2. 12. 

^RRKT^frriii 2. 11., iii. 2. 44. v 

2 . 2 . 

^P^nprnTTc^ v. 1. 26. 

3r«TPUT iii. 2. 72. 

Sffwrrcr ii. 1. 66 , ili. 2. 41., iv 2. 
47. 

Srwrre^cTT^ iii. 1, 21. 
ii. 2. 30, 

3P*TT*rr^ li. 1- 67., ii. 2. 29., iv. 
2. 38. 

srwjqrnr j. I. 26., i. 1. 27. 

: i. 1. 31* 
i. 1. 31., v. 1. 43 , v. 2. 

20 . 

i. 2. 6., ii. 1‘ 59., v. 1. 42. 
v. 2. 23. 

SlvgfaTrJ. iv- 2. 48. 

3^5^ iv. 1. 6. 

iv 2. 31 
3PTCT iii. 1. 22. 

SW^SRTJrT: iii. 1. 2?. 
iv. 1. 40. 

sr^iTT^iii. 2. 6., iii. 2. 33. 

3I?frTT<* v. 2 10 

ii- 1- 25 
iii. 2 56. 

3 lflr iii. 2. 45. 

?!»} i. 1 4.. i- 1. 28-, i. 1- 41., i. 2. 
10, i. 2. 14., i. 2. 16., iv. 
2 .29., iv. 2. 39-. v. 2- 3., v, 
2. 5., 

3pj* i. 1. 24., i- 1- 40., i. 2. 7., ii 1. 
47., iv. 2. 46., iv. 2. 49., v. 2. 

9. 

31*5: i. I- 20. 
srfe’WT i. 2. 13. 

3r*5?Ti?!n^. ii* 1- 61- 
31*5*51' V. 2. 14. 

3r*5snT li. 1 64. 

3j*5f%5fa li. 1. 30. 

3p5^istf*T*T. li. 1. 52. 

iii. 1. 32. 

*fei. 2.13., ii. 1.49. 

3P&5: i. I- 14- 
^q5r^v. 2. 7 , v. 2. 15. 

( 331 ) 

( $32 ) 

SwffSTC i. 1. 27., i. 2. 12.. I. 2. j 
16., ii. 1. 38., iv. 1. 3., iv. 1. 

7 , iv. 1. 24. 

srarferc V 2. 1.. V. 2. 7. 
gra fere s g cRT i. 2. 12. 
^r«rT5rT^GT¥rrmct i* 2. 16., ii. 1. 

lii. 1. 54. 

3raTqr?nnHH!tr ii. 2. 6. 
?mTqwfwrfrr^ u. 2 4. 

3r*mrfrT ii. 2. 2.. V. i. 1. 

35T«riqf%- ii. 2. 3. 

v 1. 21- 

gra fafam v. i 21. 
srsrfarT. v. l. 22. 
srf^ iii 2. 41. 

IV. 2. 49 
3Slf«lfa: iv. 2. 48. 

3W i. 1, 25 , i. 1. 40 . i 2. 12. 
iv 2. 42. 

ii. 2, 8 
ii 2. 8. 
ii. 2. 10. 

31WST iii. 1. 30. 

SPTOTOt i. 1. 41. 

i, 1. 1 , i. 1. 32., i. 2. 1. 

iii. 1. 10., iv. 1. 42. iv. 2. 
12., iv. 2. 15 , iv. 2. 23., v. 
2 , 11 . 

in 1. 10. 
iv 2. 7. 

i. 1. 32., iv. 2. 10. 

iv. 2. 15. 

SPTOfofH ii 1. 33 

ii. 1, 34., iii. 1. 10., iv. 2. 
3 , iv. 2. 7., iv. 2. 8., iv. 2. 10. 

v. 2. 12 . 
iv. 2 . 9 . 

SI^Nn^iv. 1 . 8, iv. 1. 31. 
v. 1. 1., v. 1. 4. 

iv. 2. 44. 

SR^JRTr^lii 2. 18. 

ii. 2. 37., in. 2. 2 3. 
3T3r%I?T ii, 2. 11. 

*rfaWT*T i. 1. 40, v. 2. 9. 

v 2 9 , v. 2 17 
^feWdcirei 1. 1. 40. 
gtfg rarepfr v. 2 . 1 . 

=sfwm^iii. 1. 4S. 

?rf^rT iv 2 . J . 
sfipPS’: i. 1. 28. 
srfofsre: i. 2 . 8. 
srflrfsree^v. 1 .7 

srfwst* i. 2. 12., V. 1. 7., 1 

34. 

11 . 1. 45, ii. 1. 68., v. 
1. 23., v. 2. 6. 

1 sTfirctasra 1 . v. 1 23- 
i. 2 . 15. 

i. 2. 17. v. 1. 23. 
iv. 2. 14. 
iv. 2 . 22 . 

WTlf^T^iv. 2. 7. 

1 iv, 2 8, iv. 2. 9„ iv. 2 

12 . 

11 2 . 49., ill. 1 . 53 
111 . 1 53., iii. 1. 59. 

I 

( 333 ) 

'• 1.4. 

?ic*ifSTxirc:- 11 . 2. 15, ii 2. 17. 
sissrfasnf?: i. l. 4. 
nestSTCSIT ii. i. 2 , ii. 1. 4. 
^SFPTPJT: ii. 1. 4. 
flKpresrarffr ii. 1. 4. 

3133J5 iv. 2. 22. 
sisnrw ii. 2. 34. 
srent; iv. l 49 . 

ii. 2. 9. 

TO$ iv. 1. 47. 

TOOT ii. 1. 21. 

TO«JcT i. 2- 13. 

TOSW ii. 1. 6, iv 2. 5. 

?T%r ii. 2. 32. 

^'Tslcsrn* ii 2 22 , ii 2. 38. 
toitoc=ii^ v 1. 7. 
srfsrfe: ii. 1 41 , ii. 1. 44., iv 
1. 41., iv 2 33, v. 1. 19, 

v. 1 3 5. 

3T%3f: ii. 1. 8., ii-1. 12 , ii 1 34 

ii. 2. 7 , ii 2. 11., v. 1. 18 , v. 

1. 33. 

ii. 1. 29, ii- 2. 10., ii. 2 21., 
ii. 2. 26., ii. 2. 42, ii. 2. 

48-, iii. 1. 10, lii. 1 35. in. 

2. 3., iii. 2. 10., in. 2. 27., 

iv 1. 5., iv 1. 21., iv. 1 

43, iv. 1. 50., iv 2. 12 
iv 2. 27., v. 1 11., v 1. 30. 

S lt gOT : v. 1. 18. 

^ni'hR iv. 2. 1. 

3TT. 

$rT4»TO ii. 1. 35. 

iv. 1.19. 

iii. i. 63. 

srmsr iii. 2. 1., iv. 2. 18., iv. 2. 

19., iv. 2. 22. 

W*l«m i. 1. 13. 

3rraT$t3 ii. 1. 23. 

ii. 2. 59., ii. 2 64., ii. 2. 
65 , ii. 2. 66. 

WT$%: ii. 2. 63, ii. 2. 68. 

3OTTO ii. 1. 15 

3TT3R i. I-9-, iii. 2 31., iv. 1 10. 
3 Tr fU4> rOTJ v. 1. 30. 

STrJTST i. 1. 4 
srrcwgjoj iii l 14 

glT fHU<Ue^ i,j. 2. 20. 

OTJTfsT ii. 1. 4.. iv. 1. 60. 

OTOTt iii. 2. 40. 

SHOT: i 1- 10-, ii. 1- 24. 

iii. 1.15 
ii. 1. 22. 

TOTO?[TOT|, ill. 1. 3. 

iv. 2. 46. 

TOUT iv. 1. 51. 

?TT^T iii 1. 50. 

3TT% i. 1. 14., ii. 2. 18, iii. 1. 58-, 

iv. 1- 22., iv. 1- 52. 

STTf^SP:^. ni. 1. 48 
SITfOT^T'l ii- 2. 13. 

iii. 2 51., in. 2. 52-, iv.2. 42. 
TOfWr ii. 1- 8„ ni- 2, 47; iii. 2. 54., 

iii. 2. 55. 
srr^n ii. 2. 40. 
t OTfl iii- 2. 35. 

ii. 2. 62. 

( 334 ) 

iii. 2. 41. 
gnrcr- i. 1.13. 
grmf% ii. 2 l. 
grTTrf: ii. 2. 48. 
girrerer v. 2.15. 

iv. 1. 39 

grrer i. 1. 7., ii. 1 52 , ii. 1 68. 
grragwre*. iv 2.15. 
gllHMWlW^ ii- 1- 68. 
grrgsfi? ii i 68. 

grrTTfl i. 1. 17 , Hi. 2. 34 , iii. 2- 

36., 

grR^r ii 2. 19-, ii. 2- 20., 
gnfrf. ii. 2- 47 
gnsg ill. 2. 19-, iii. 2. 58- 
grow ill. 2. 41, iv. 1. 50- 
grTSR: i. 1. 11. 

gTTSRRT^iv, 1, 51., iv. 2. 28- 
gTTfSjrT iii. 2- 43- 
gnw v. 2 15. 
gTT^T^ iii 2. 64 
URK iii 1 21. 

%■ 

v. 2. 6. 

i- 1. 10, iii. 2. 3.4, iii. 2. 35. ; 

iii. 2. 41., 

SrTC iv. 1 6. 

iii. 1. 7. 

ii. 1. 41., ii. 2. 32., iii. 1 

49., iii. 1. 73., iii. 2. 54, iv. 1 

i. 1 10., i. 1. 13., i. 1. 15., i 1. 

17., i. 1. 21. i. 1. 38., i. 2. 
11 -, ii. 1 36., ii. 1. 48., ii. 
1. 64, ii. 2. 9., ii. 2, 17 , ii. 2 
31 , iv. 1 50., v. 1. 43. 

i. 1. 4., iii. 1. 12 

iii. 1. 70. 

iv. 2. 14. 
iffSRTWT iii. 1. 39 

i. 1. 12. 

Sf^RRiii. 1. 12. 

?f?5[<Tpi i- 1. 4, i. 1. 9 i. 1. 11 , ii. 
1. 9; iii. 1. 56. 

rfSgqT&rt ii, 1. 26, iii. 2. 18. 
in. 2- 21. 

t. 

i»cn:: iv- 1. 19- 

i. 2- 2 , ii. 1- 6, ii. 1. 45, ii. 1. 
57-, iii 2. 38., in- 2■ 39, in 2. 
59. 

3tR^v. 2- 1., v. 2. 14-, 

ii. 1. 66. 

iv. 1. 1. 

3?fir: v. 2. 24. 
grR' v. 2. 6. 

TaiW^ii. 2- 18- 

v. 1. 1., v. -1. 4. 

iii. 1. 68. 

TrTC i. 1. 2., ii. 1. 7. 

^0T5C: iii. 1.63. 

ii. 1. 7. 

v. 2. 18. 

( 335 ) 

i 1. 2. 

ii 1. 7-, iii. 1. 65. 
^^IrTCTQjf iii- 1- 65 

Scqfrr in. 2 . 12. iii 2. 13, iii. 2. 

16., in. 2 63., in. 2. 66, iv. 1 
30-, iv 1. 32, v 1. 1 

U?Tf% i. 1 19, ii. 1 9-, ii. 1 22, 

iii. 1. 25 , in 2. 25. iii 2. 60, 

iv. 1. 14, iv. 1. 22, iv. 1 54., 

iv- 2. 41 , 

■JfqfW^iii 1 25., iv- t 50. 

ii. 2. 12, iii. 2. 10., iii. 2. 
25 , iii, 2. 48, iv. 1 6 , iv. 1 
65 , v. 1 12. 

3v«I?!T i. 1. 4. 

v. 1- 13. 

STORf IV. 1- 48. 

SRfqj^T. iii. 1. 50- 

awa ir i- 1* 32, i. 1. 34.. i. 1. 38., 

v- 2. 13 

i- 1- 36. 

ii- 1. 37. 
ii. 2- 60- 

sq^R i. 2. 11. i. 2 14, i. 2. 15. 
^q^TC ii- 2. 62. iv. 1. 53. 
Tq^RT^. ii. 2. 13, ii. 2. 14, ii. 2. 

30., ii- 2- 60. 

;jqt*r ii. 1 . 52. 
sq^ST: i- 1. 7., iv. 2. 42. 

ii. 1. 67. 

^q^IfT^ ii. 2. 40- 

^qqq i. i. 32 . 

sqjw: i 1. 38. 

^qq^qT i- 2-10- 
^qqi% v. 1 25-, V. 1. 43. 

sqq%: ii 2 . 19 , iv. 2. 37., v. 1. 

22 . 

sqqfrTcT i- 1. 40- 
^qfrRnr: V. 1 25. 

^qq^: i. 1 23., ii 1 5., ii. 1. 21, 
ii. 1 35 , ii 1. 39, ii. 1. 43, 
ii. 1. 60, ii. 1. 66., ii. 2. 9, n. 

2- 39., iii. 1. 16, iii. 2. 28., iii. 

2. 39., iii. 2. 70, iv. 1 9, iv. 1. 

59., iv 2. 24., v. 1. 6., v. 1 13, 
v. 1- 17 , v. 1. 23 , v> 1- 24., v. 

1. 25, v 1. 28, v. 1. 29., v. 

1. 32-, v. 1. 35., v. 1. 36., v. 

1 38. 

sqqqr; i. 2. l, i. 2 2. 
sqqfowri iv. 1. 41 , iv. 2. 30. 

yqH^ ii 2 .57. 

<rqJTR i 1. 3, ii 1. 44-, ii- 1. 45., 
ii. 1. 48. 
sj qg re i l 6. 

^qmq^T: i. 1.3- 
4qUH4q ii. 1. 47 
sqqRTfafe: II. 1 44. 

^crarfivi i. 1. 23, iv. 1. 28., iv. 2 

35., v. 1. 1. 

i. 1. 15., in. 1. 73, iii. 2. 

58., iv- 2-13. 

^q^rfsqfqqq: iii 1. 37. 

^qvrfsqq^ii. 2. 52-> iii- 1. 50., iii. 

2.13., 

^q g tfsqrew. v l. 27. 

ii. 1. 31-, ii- 1- 50-, ii 2. 
42^, iii. 1 10., iii. 1. 28., iii. 1. 

, 45., in- 1- 61., in. 1- 72., ,u. 2. 

( 336 ) 

12, iii. 2 46., iii. 2. 57., 

30-, iv« 1- 32- 
sqvpamifl ii- 2. 35. 

ii. 1. 3.2, iii. 1. 32., iv. 

36-, v. 1. 27 
iii- 1. 22. 
v. 1. 5. 
l- 1. 38. 

ii. 1- 48- 

3^^ V. 1. 2., v. 1. 43. 
^rcTT^I^iii. 2. 61. 

OTT^T^ra^iii. 2. 61- 

iii. 2. 44. 
sqitt iv. 2- 46. 

i. 2. 1, i. \ 2. 
v- 2. 1., v. 2. 21. 

3¥T*r v. 1 4., v. 1. 16., v. 1. 25. 
3 WCT ii- I- 43o v- 1- 15., v. 1. 34. 
3¥Pn ii- 2- 29. 

S^ST^TST iii. 1- 40- 
3^ iii. 1. 20. 

3 ;. 

3 ;^: i. 1. 40 

M- 

iv. 1. 58. 

1. ?. 17., iii. 1. 9. iii 2- 41, iii. 

2. 57. iv. I- 4., v. 1. 23. 

<^3 iii 1. 9., iii. 1. 59. 

ii. 1. 31., ii. 1- 38., ii. 1. 44-, 
iv 2 7. 

ii. 1. 31. 

«^VTT3 iv. 1. 35. 
nS&fefnfr iii. 1. 9. 

H^feT^iii. 1. 8., iv. 2. 11. 

«^JT ni. 1. 55. 
c^TSrT iv. 1. 41. 

*^&T^Tr|; iii- 1. 1. 

iii. 1 • 65. 

H3T ni. 2. 56. 
n^ni. 2. 71. 
ulta iii. 2. 67 
^ ii. 1. 6., iii. 1. 3., 

iii. 1. 71., iv. 1. 36., iv. 1. 54. 
atf ii 1 7 , ii. 1. 23, iv. 2..15., iv. 

2 36., iv. 2 43, v. 1. 40 

qfair n. 2. 2. 

^fe^csn^ii. 1 2 • 1-3 , iii. 2. 55 

v. 1. 14. 

**>? 11 . 2. 62 

iv. 1. 22., iv 2. 50. 

SR«TT v. 2. 19., v. 2. 23. 

1 ii. 1. 58 
j in. 1. 6* 

1 ii* 1. 58., ii. 2. 23., iii. 2. 1., 

1 iii- 2. 42-, iii- 2. 69., iv. 1.19., 

iv. 1. 20. 

iii. 1- 39. 

3Jo<T5n i. 2. 12- 
sf?T3 iii. 1 45. 

'hK'h iv. 1. 16- 

i. 1. 40., ii. 2. 17., ii. 2. 33, 

ii. 2. 34-, iii. 2. 13., iii. 2. 17, 

iii. 2. 22., iii. 2. 23., iv- 1. 19., 

iv. 1. 0-, iv. 1. 32., iv- 1. 41., 

iv. 1. 42., iv- 2. 20., v. 1. 12., 

( 337 ) 

v. 1 12., v. 1. 25., v. 1. 26., 
v. 1. 27., v. 1. 28., v- 1. 38 

OTftcrcsrra; iv. 1. 21- 
«RTftcf ill. 2. 68. 

3RtftcST iv. 2. 25. 

«KTO iii. 2. 41., iv 2. 20, v 1 37-, 
v 1 38 , v 2. 19. 

4>WOT ‘ v- 1- 37. 
sjnwsnrr: v. 1. l- 
fTwhara iii. 1- 6 

cfTHST i- 2. 9-, ii- 1- 23-, ii 1. 39-, iii. 
2. 30-, iv. 1. 44 

ii 1. 59 
^rerrcfYcr: i. 9 
*ET5rT?<TC iv. 1. 45. 

5KT5n?cT$ iv. 1. 44 
iv. 1- 45 
i 2. 17., V. 1 5. 

iii. 1 45. 

ii. ?. 13. 
t»ddf ii. 1. 43. 

iv. i\ 7 

iii. 1. 32. 

WiSI iii. 2. 51., in 2. 52., iv. 2. 13- 

iv. 1 18., v. 2. 8. 

'M’tTncW ii. 1- 11- 
SRHffacmcT iii. 2. 6. 

%*IT ui. 2. 41 , iii. 57. 

gfsT iv- 1- 58„ iv. 1. 62), iv. 1. 64. 
ifsTW iv. 1. 63. 

ii. 1- 20. iii. 2. 17., v. 1. 24. 

iii. 2. 10. 

gfa iii 2. 13. 

STOTffftr iv. 2, 40. 

n. 

if*TT ii. 2. 62. 

*TcTT£ iv. 2. 21. 

in. 1. 60., iii. 2. 8 
JTfrlr^T^ iii. 2. 29. 

U?ST i 1. 14., in. 1. 62. 

ni. 1. 58. 
iisqsr iv. 2. 32. 

JFSIT^srf in. 1. 58. 

JTJR ii. 1. 6 7 . 

JTSW u. 1. 47. 

gqjii. 2. 67, in. l.il. in 1. 64, 

m 1 f 5., in. 1.7-', in 1. 73 , 

m 2 48, m 2 46, m. 2. 53, 

iv. 1. 9. 

3F®T: i. 1. 14 

3<UT f crc: ui. 1. 27.. iii 2. 15. 
UKjTwrqfa ii 2 o7. 

3CT IV. 2. 42 
^TteTT^v. 1. 3 

v l. 3. 

5T§Tir in. 2. 45., IV. 2. 47. 

5TPJ11 1 42 , ill. 1.43., ill. 2. 43 , 

iv. 2. 28. 

5T£*!J^ iii. 2. 43., in. 2. 45. 
argHJW iv. 2 14. 

5ipjT^ ui. 1. 33., in 2. 14., iii. 
2. 42. 

STgT^iii. 2. 21. 

3 

I SR iv. 1. 12., iv. 1. 13. 

1 sr^T^iv. 1. 12. 

( 

SSfflR ii 2. 14. 

STFJJ i. 1 . 12 . 

xT 

Tfi. 1 . 5., i. 1. 23, i. 2. 11., i 2. ! 
19 , ii, 1. 2.' u. 1. 3 , ii. 1. 4 , 
ii. 1 15.i ii. 1 16., ii. 1 . 26., 
ii. 1 . 27 , ii. 1. 28 , ii 1. 35., ii. 

1 . 51, ii. 1. 53 , ii’ 1. 56 , ii. 

1 60., u. 1 . 61., n 1 . 68 , ii. 2 

2 ,ii. 2 5 , ii. 2. 12 , u 2 . 13, 

ii. 2. 14 , ii. 2. 33 , ii. 2 35., 

ii. 2. 37., ii. 2 39., ii 2 50 , 
ii. 2 . 51., ii. 2 . 52 , n 2. 53., 

ii. 2. 56., iii. 1. 17., iii 1. 31., i 

iii 1. 32., in. 1. 37., in 1. 39 , 

iii. 1. 43 , in. 1 . 44. iii. 1. 52. 
in. 1. 55., in. 1 . 71 , in. 2 . 5. 
in. 2 7, ni. 2. 13., in 2,19., 
in. 2- 2j , in. 2, 3'., iii. 2. 38 , 

iii. 2 . 39-, in. 2. 9 , ni. 2. 65., 
ui. 2. 69 , iv. 1.9, iv. 1. 44., 

iv. 1. 57., iv. 1. 61., iv. 1. 67. 
iv. 2. 8 . iv. 2. 9., iv 2 10., 
iv. 2 15., iv 2. 20, iv 2 21., 
iv. 2, 22 , iv. 2. 23,. iv, 2. 24.. 
iv. 2 25 5 iv. 2. 29., iv. 2 34.. 
iv. 2 36., iv. 2 37. n. 2. 40 ,' 

iv. 2. 45. iv, 2. 46. iv. 2 47 , 

v. 1. 4., v. 1 6 , v. 1 7., v. l. 

8 , v. 1 , 9., v. J. 11 ., v, 1 . 15., 
v. 1. 22., v. 1. 31., v. 1. 33, 
v. 1 . 34. v. 2 . 1, v. 2. 17., 
v. 2. 25. • 

338 ) 

i iu. 2. 58 
! *a- i. 1. 12. 

>o 

2. 1* 
ii. 2. 62. 

5T03J ii. 2. 62. 
feRT i 2 7. 

^ii. 2. 9., u. 1. 36 , iii 2. 68. 
ii. 2 9 

i. 1. 1'. 

% 

i. 1. 1 , i 2. 2 , l. 2 17. 

33Ti. 2. 10, i. 2. 11 , i. 2. 12, 

1. 2. 13. i. 2 14 , i. 2 15. 

5FJT l 1. 2., in. 1. 24 , iv. 1. 54. 
ni. 1. 24 
i. 1. 20. 

3T57 i. 1. 1 , iv 2 50- 
i. 2 2 

5TR«T. ii. 2. 65. 
ni l. 18. 

5TTf?T 1 1. 1., 1. 2. 2., i. 2. 20., ii 

2. 59, u. 2. 68 , iii 1 62 

srrf?r i 2. 18, ti. 2. 64 , ii. 2. 69 
arrfafaictsr ii 1. 5 . 
srrfafsriTFsqT ii. 2. 68 
ill. 2. 34. 
ing'm. 1. 16. 

|TT«T i 1. 16 , li. 1. 23., 11. 1. 28., 
ui. 1 . It., in. 2. 18., lit. 2. 25 , 
ni. 2. 56., iv. 2. 47 , v. 1. 31. 
1TR i. 1. 4., i. 1. 15. 
fRTSfr i. 1. 2., ui. 2. 33. 

339 ) 

srraTfa i. l. 10. 
star m 2 19 

3 RJ. 1 . 1 2,i 1 5, i.l 14, i 1- 
22,1 1 24, i 1 31., i 1 36, 

1, 1 37, i. 2 6 , i 2 11 , i 2 

15, i 2 16,, i 2 . 20 ., u 1 6 .. 
n. 1 14, ii 1 15, ii 1 18, 

u 1 . 19., a 1 25 , ii 1 40 , ii 

1 57, ii 1 68 , ii 2 6 , ii 2 
10 , n 2 . 19, n 2 26, u 2 

32, ii 2 37, u 2 49, n 2 

52, n 2 62, in 1 3 , in 1 5 , 
in. 1 22 in 1. 65 in 1 68 , 
in 1. 69, m 1 73., in 2 9, 
in, 2 18 in 2 20 , in 2 21 , 

in 2 23, in 2 2J-, in 2 5, 

in 2 37 . in 2 45 , in 2 58, 

in 2 60, m 2 61 in, 2 68 

iv 1 3, iv 1 . 21 , iv ] 27 

iv 1 31, iv 1 32, iv 1 46, 
iv 1 49, iv 1 53, iv 2 3 , 
iv 2 5 , iv 2 13, iv 2 18, 
iv 2 20, iv 2 26 iv 2 41., 

iv 2. 45, iv 2 46, v, 1 

2, v 1 3, v 1 10, v 1 29, 

v 2 3. 

i 1 5 

5PT ii. 1 7. 

iv. 2. 37., iv 2 50. 
i 1 4J. 

rlT^TfSTT^ 1 .1. 1, iv 2. 1, IV 2 35 
ii. 2. 15. 

5Tt# i, l. 40- 

?rfc*rsT n i. 19. 

cTSTT 1 1 35, 1 1 38., 11 1 . 5., Ii. 

1 48, in 2 6 4, iv. 1 2., iv. 
2. 14 v 1 ] 3 

m 1 40 
in. 1 3> 

2 63. 
in. 1 5 

cT^&TfrSncT Hi I 57 
cf?^T l 1 14 
ii 2 59 
in 1 34 
crfsrfrrc 111 1 19 
srflr?? iv. 2 47 

rTfigTTT ii 2 6 
5T§Tll% m 2 13 
in 1 ' 0 . 
cf iv 2 48 
ffg iv 2 26 

cfsr i 1 26,i 1 27 , i 1, 28, i. 1 
29., m 1 39 

51# i 1 28 

5TCTT n 1 40, ii 2 32 
eft? i 1 1 , i 2 1 
5T^ i 1 40 
5 Tff iv 2 6 
rTS«T in 1 71 , v 1 34. 
ii 2 62 

aigic^m. 111 - I 61 
cmm.ii. l. 32. 

g 1 1. 9, u. 2. 66 ., iii. 1. 69., iir* 
C 37-, in 2. 40., iv. 1. 49., iv. 
, , 2 . 3 ., iv- 2 - 26-, 

( 

<SSTC ii 1 16. 
g^rSTTflT^^ ii- 1. 16- 

g«?rsnf v. l. 32- 
<p?T ni. 2. 20. 

£ ii. 2. 58. 

^sn ill. 1 63. 

i. 1 13 
&T iii 1. 71. 

^rr iv. 1. 6 
^5 lv - 1 53, iv 2- 8 
ii 1. 28 

iv 1. 22. 

IftrfoK IV. 2. 13. 

i. 1- 12 , iii. 1. 53 , 
m 2. 52 

c?THT u. 2 60 
5ITO ii. 1 38. 
fir: v 2.9, v. 2. 16. 
firf^^i 1 5., i 2. 11 
iv 2. 7 

VO 

IhnST ii 1 8., ii 1. 12 , ii 1 15-, j 
v. 1 18, v. 1. 19- 
iv 1 3. 

in 2. 11 , in 2 16 
2. 58 

^SH^SRnaTT in 1 1 

in. 1 44, iii. 2. 36, iv. 1. 
22., iv- 1. 48., v. 1-8. 

iii 1 • 4. 

^TIU* iv 1 27. 

*nf iii. 1. 48. 

340 ) 

5-« i. 1. 2-, i. 1. 9., i. 1. 10., iii. 2. 

41-, iv. 1. 57. 
g.*sT. i 1 21., iv. 1. 54. 

i 1. 8., iii. 1 51., 

W* i. I- 5. 

i 1. 1., i. 1 36 , iii. 1 11., v. 
1 . 6 . 

i. 1- 25;. v 1 11. 
fSRWf: v. 1. 4., v. 1. 14. 

iii i 11 
fgJScTW V. I- 9 
V. 1 34- 
ii. 1- 23. 

i- 1. 2 , i. 1 9, l 1. 20„ ii 1. 
45, ii. 1 59., iv. 1.8., iv 2. 1 , 
j iv. 2- 2-, v 1. 42 , v. 1. 43-, v 
, 2 . 20 . 

i ?T7: v. 1 39, % 1. 41. 

! ftTOxRT^ii. 1 59 
v. i. 41. 

( iv 1 57. 

i. 1 IS., iv 1. 2 

ii. 1. t7. iv 1. 7., 
sfsqr ni. 1 25 , iii 1 73 , iii. 2. 16. 

ii. 2. 45 

ii ?. 17., iv 2 *.0. 
sfaq^ncrraTq iii l. 38 
i spsrRcrc ni 2 ib 
iii. 2. 46 

fs^rfwn*^ ni. 1. 8. 
f5dl^rf%5Tm^ iii. 1. 9 

feUra: i. 1. 8- 

at* i- 1- 10., iii. 2. 34., iii. 2. 41., 
iv- !• 3. 
iii- 2. 35- 

( 341 ) 

HT. 

villi. 1. 23., i. 1. 36., i. 2. 14., it. 
1. 1, ii. 46 , ti. ■’ 5 l., iii. 2. 
41., v- 1. 2., v. 1 4-, v 1, 3., 

v. 1. 24, v- 2- 2 , v- 3 

vnrl: iv *’ 22. 
v:tfNl?qT?T iv. 1. 25. 
snfsrefrr^r iii. i. 49. 
spflTTqV i. 1. 36. 
vnfer v l 44. 
vrftfc^ii. 2 53 
vmfaTfc: i. 1. 23 
VIRW i'' 1 35., ii 2 62 

«T. 

. I. 

38., 1. 2. 16., nil, 

11 . 

I 6 

, «l 

I. 

9, it. 1 . 10., 11. 1. 14, 

11. 

1. 

19 , 

ii. 

1. 22., 11. 1. 

. 24 , n 1 

25 

., 11 

. I. 

30 

., ii. 1. 3 2 -. 

11. 1. 36,11 

. 1 

• 38 

., n 

i., 

41., ii. 1 47., 11. 1 48. 

, n 

1. 

55 •» 

ii. 

1. 58., 11. 1. 

, 66., 11 1 

. 67., 11. 2. 

6., 

il. 2. 7., 11. 

2 9., 11. 2. 

11 

, 11.2. 

14 

, ii. 2. 23 , 

11. 2. 24., 1! 

1. 2, 

30 

., 11 

2. 

32., ii. 2. 36., 11. 2. 44 

, n 

2. 

46., 

ii. 

2. 49., 11. 

2. 55., 11. 

2. 

61. 

, n 

2. 

65., 111. 1. 

2 , 111. I. 

6., 

111 

. 1. 

8., 

iii. 1. 13 - 

111. I. 15., 

111 

1. 

20., 

in. 

I. 23., 111. 

I. 26., Ill 

1. , 

3 * 5 , 

iii. 

I. 

41., 111. I. 

, 49 -, in- 1. 

54 

, 111 

. 1. 

55 

., in. I. 57 -, 

111. 1. 60., 

in. 

1. 

64., 

iii. 

1. 67., ni. : 

1. 72., in. 

2. 

4 -, 

in. 

2 . 

00 

., ni. 2. 14,, 

, ui, 

2. 

I 5 -> 

ni. 

2. 18., ni. 

, 2. 19., 111. 

2. 

22., 

iii. 

2. 25 , 1I1. 

2. 26., 111. 

2. 

29., 

in. 

2 . 

30., in. 2. 

31., 111. 2. 

38 . 

, 111 

1. 2. 

48 

ni. 2 54 

., ui. 2. 57. 

, ni 

2 t 

62 , 

ill 2. 63., ill. 2 72., iv. 1. 4., iv. 
1. 6, iv. 1 8., iv 1 12 , iv. 1. 16., 
iv. 1. 17., iv 1. 20, iv. 1 23., iv. 

1. 26, iv 1. 30, iv. 1. 32 , iv. 1. 
33 , iv-. r. 35., tv 1. 38., iv 1. 39., 
iv 1. 42., iv. 1. 47, iv. 1. 52 , iv. 1. 

55., iv. 1 63 , iv. I. 64., iv 1. 67.. 

iv. 2 6, iv 2. to, iv. 2 14., u. 2 

16., iv. 2. 39 , iv. 2. 44., v. 1. ii., 

v. 1 13, v 1 15., v 1. 19., v. 1. 
34 - 

frefsn: iii 1. 44 
»|tq 111. 2 . 51 ., in. 2 . 52 . 

iv. 2 . 32 
JTqsiiii 1 44 

stiitt a 2 1 5 
STWrcq^Tai 1 52 - 
SIT& in. 1 10. 

1 1 . 39 

1 fsTTOHrfsr 1. 1 . 32 . 

I 

fan? 1 1 . 1 ., i 2 . 2 ., i. 2 . 19 -, i. 2 . 

20., v 2. 1. 

v. 2 21- v. 2. 22. 
i. 2 19 

fqwr V 1 . 1 ., V 1 - 14 . 

iv 1 - 29 ., v. 1 . 35 ., v. 1 . 36 . 
fqeqc? ii. 2 37 , ii. 2 . 53 ., in. 2 . 
23 , in- 2 . 70 ., v. 1 . 15 ., v. 1 . 
35 , v. 1 . 36 . 

fq?qrqT<T ii. 2 14 ., ii. 2 . 24 ., iii. 1. 
5 , iv. 1 29 ., 

ii 2. 50 , iv. 1 . 10 . 
iv-1. 28 . 

35., iv 1. 
53 , iv. 1 

( 342 ) 

fsiRW v. 1.35. 
fsrarrcf ii. 2. 51. 

ii. 2. 14., ii 2. 17 
ii. 1. 64, iv. 1. 59 
fsrsFsr iii. 2 41. 

fjrfrrxf ii 2. 36., iv. 1. 7., iv. 1 9-, 

iv 1 24, iv 2. 36. 
fafSrrr lii 2 66-, iv. 2. iv. 2. 3. 
fafiTTRiT iii. 2. 66. 
fsTfira?srra it 1. 26-, 1>. 1 27, iii. 

1 20., iii 1 26., in. 2 34., iii. 

2. 63 , in 2 69 , iv, 1 23 . iv. 

1,67. 

ftfrrcrRT iv 2. 1 
fafirawr ni 2- 41 
fa q^ r a » l. u 

ffPTJT ii. 2 56., ni. 2 37 , iv. 2. 46. 

OPW: iii 1. 17 

fawa ii 2. 55., ii. 2. 56 

faRntjJ iii 2 11. 

fMfrnr iii 1 51. 

V. 2. 1., v. 2-. 8. 
ill. 1 17. 
v. 2 22. 

Wl i.l 1., i. 2. 7. 
frUFT: i. 1 41. 

v. 1. 27. 
fSrsfrr. v. 2 3. 
ftfsiqa v. 2. 8 

iv. 1. 18., iv. 1. 52. 
fMfft i. 2- 14 , v. 1. 43. 
in 2. 36. 

iv. 1., v. 1. 10. 

v. 1. 10. 
ftl#: iii. 2. 16. 
fsTfrqt: ill. 2. 34 
foshra i. 1. 1. 

v. 1. 8 

fasrjrl. iv. 1. 13., iv 1. I 
44., iv, 1 46 , iv. 1 
55* 

iv. 2. 44 
iv. 1 7., iv. 1 9 
ii. 2. 42. 

^ v 2. 1., v 2. 12- 

7 . 

q^r 1. 1. 41,1. 2. 1., V 2. 5 
qsjmfaqwwn i. 1 41 
ii. 2. 28. 
q^TfT^: v. 1. 22 
q^r i. 2. l. 

1 q^RR iii. 1. 56 
q^c^WT: iii. 1 60. 
q^J5T iv. 1. 29. 
q^rr?frqr iii. 1 20. 

TZ iv. 2. 26. 
q£5T iii 1. 45 
qf iv. 2 14. 
q^RT: ii. 1. 39. 
q fad° q~ ii. 1. 39 
q^nl. ii- 2. 66. 

, q^ ii. 2. 58. 
q«Tf^g iii. 1 19. 
q*: i. l. 29. 
q*3»fcT: ii. 1. 64. 
qt?jqf iii. 2. 46. 
q*<fer i. l- 29- 

( 343 ) 

i. 1-29. 

v. 1. 43., v. 2. 21. 
warring iii. 2. 38. 
iv. 2. 17. 

v. 2- 1., v. 2. 22- 

iii. 2* 56. 
q^Nqj iv. 1. 57. 

ii. 2. 62., iii. 2. 44. 
i- 2. 1. 

iv. 1. 53. 
qrf^5T*r iii. 2. 16. 

iii. 2. 42. 

v. 2. 9. 

qft«rerr v. 2. 17. 
qflqwq p i- 1. 25. 
trchgRJ^i. 1. 31. 
qsn^r ii. 1. 10. 
mpmr ii. l. 47. 
qsg iv- 1. 53. 
qrqrsr iii. 2. 52. 
qrosTTSTT iii. 2. 53. 

*TRR> iii. 1. 4. 
qW4>T*{RT^ iii. 1. 4. 

<IT!? iii- 2. 32. 
qTlsr ii- 1. 53. 

<?rf% ii. 2. 36- 
'IT’ftqTqt, iv. 1. 6. 

«irc?F3WT3[ iii. 2. 38. 

<Trf$ra iii. 2. 35. 

iii. 1. 27. 

irrfSniraret: iii. 1. 67. 

v. 1.8. 

S 3 ! iv. 1. 52. 

Spr: i. 1. 19., ii. 1. 57., ii. 1. 66.. 

iii. 2. 68., v. 2. 1., v. 2. 14., v. 

2. 15. 

3^ i. 1. 39., ii. 2. 48. 

ii. 1. 66. 

3*™«<T ii. 1. 64. 

3^* iv. 1. 19., iv. 1. 20. 
S^p5cT?5r: iii. 1. 39. 

5^1 ii. 2. 62. 

^ ii. 1. 53. 

3? ii. 1. 9., iii. 1. 63., iii. 1. 68., 
iii. 2. 16. 

«|sh» i. 1. 5. 

iii. 2. 60., iv. 2. 41. 
iii. 1. 68. 
i. 1. 5. 

'jsrtg: iv. 2. 5. 

iii. 1. 18. 

3«J3> iv. 1. 34., iv. 2. 9. 
T^^MLiv. 1. 34. 

i. 1. 13., I. 1. 14. 
ifasqT: iii. 1. 62. 
qfafcpr v. 2. 10. 

SISTC^F i. 1. 30., i. 2. 4., i. 2. 7., v. 

1 . 1 . 

5T 4>< qj W T i- 2. 4. 

i. 2. 7., v. 1. 16. 
V. 1. 17. 

19. 

ST^TR^v. 2. 7 

st$f?r ii. 2. 41., ii. 2. 54. 

SldWT v. 1. 16. 

SHTR^T v. 1. 34. 

iii. 2. 33., iii. 2. 41. 

i5 

( 344 ) 

STc*igr i 1. 3., ii. 1. 8., ii. 1. 9., ii. 
1. 21., ii. 1. 22„ ii. 1. 26., ii. 1- 
42 , iv. 1. 11. 

STc^^i. 1. 4., ii. 1. 31. 

Uc^ycT: iii. 1. 36. 

STcq^rc^rr^ iii. 1. 67. 

ii. 1. 32., ii. 1. 46. 

SRq-sfte: iv. 1. 4. 
src^Tfinrrar^ iii. 1. 7., iii. 2. 2 
src*rsi ii. i. ii. 

i. 2. 18. 

s rere re g r re rat v. l. 9. 

Sfc^rh. iii. 2. 67. 

ST^ITT i. 1. 32., i. 1. 33., v. 2. 1, 
v. 2. 2., v. 2. 4., v. 2 5. 
srfernrRi^v. 2. 3. 
srfgrirram v. 2. 3., v. 2. 5. 
srf^rm i. 1.39. 
srfacFsr i. 1. 27. 
ir^cFSif^RcT: i. 1. 29. 

v. 1. 1., v. 1. 11., V. 2. 2. 
v. 1.9. 

sfafsrefcr v. 1. 9. 
stf?T5f*SC iii. 2. 49. 

i- 2. 1., i. 2. 3., iv. 2. 49., 
v. 1. 17., v. 1. 21. 
srfln^T^v. 1. 17. 

SI%1SJTWn i. 1. 41. 

5rfrro%. iv. 2. 29. 
srf?r«rt$ iv. 2. 35. 
srfrnrrf^Tr v . 2. 9. 
v. 2. 6. 

wfaft* i. 2. 14., ii. 1. 12., ii. 1. 

13., ii. 2. 5., iii. 1. 51., v. 1. 

17., v. 1. 20., v. 1. 24., v. 4. 

33., v. 1. 36., v. 1. 41., v. 
1.42. - ; 

JTfcT^ v. 1. 39., v. 2. 3., v. 2. 5. 
v. 1. 42. 

srfcT^sr: ii- 1. 14., iv 1. 9., v. 1. 13. 
gfa ' El'jj oq iii. 2. 44., v. 1. 20. 
srf^ssT v. 1. 33. 
sr%^ v. 1. 36. 
srf^T?siRKr iv. 1. 63. 

ii. 1. 53. 
sr^irt iii. 1. 5. 

sreffa ii. 1. 19., iii. 2. 45., v. 1. 10. 
ST^ST ii. 2. 17., iii. 2. 25. 

STOFT iv. 1. 59., iv. 2. 37. 

STSTR iii. 1. 68. 
srafa iii. 1. 19. 

SWTT<!J i. 1. 1., i. 2. 1., ii. 1. 9., ii. 

1. 14 , ii. 1. 17 , ii. 1. 18, ii. 1. 

47., iv. 2. 30., iv. 2. 31. 
sWT^cf: ii. 1. 17., iv. 2. 29. 

ii. 1. 9. 
swrnjrT^ ii. 1. 17. 

SWFJJTJTf ii. 1. 17. 
srarngTfSr i. l. 3. 

SWrFUTgJ* ii. 1. 47. 
snn%W?: ii. 1. 10. 

5T&T i. 1. 1., ii. 1. 10., ii. 2. 7., iv. 

2. 31. 

sifrl^i. 1. 9. 

ST^TT ii. 1. 16. 
sfrrrferaf: ii. 2. 7. 

i. 1. 10., v. 1. 37., v. 1. 38. 
SFfrTT iv. 2. 11. 

J&FTT^ iv. 1. 16. 

ST^T3T«T i. 1. 1., iv. 2. 49. 

( 345 ) 

jtoff i. 1. 24. 

SRrfoi. 1. 24. 
jraasn i. 1. 18. 
srsrersrrativ. 2. 40. 
n«p% i. 1. 2., i. 1. 9., i. 1. 20., iii. 
1. 23., iv. 1. 58. 

STffo: i. 1. 17., iv. 1. 1., iv. 1. 63., 
iv. 2. 14. 

SRlf iv. 2. 50. 

SRPr. iv. 2. 16. 
srafen iv. 1. 59. 

ii. 2. 36. 

sreraTf?fPKT ii. 2. 69. 

STCIT^ iii. 1. 50. 
srftrsc i. 1. 6 , ii. 1. 45. 
iv. 2. 5. 

sra^ v. 1. 1., v. 1. 9. 

SW^RJ^iii. 1. 49., iii. 2. 72., v. 1. 
23., v. 1. 32. 

SHSTf: i. 2. 17., ii. 1. 7, ii. 1. 17., 

ii. 1. 23., ii. 2. 34., ii. 2. 37., 

iii. 2. 5., iii. 2. 23., iii. 2. 52., 

iii. 2. 68., iii. 2. 70., iv. 2. 15., 

iv. 2. 43., v. 1. 42., v. 2. 20., 

v. 2. 23. 

STT^ ii. 2. 12., ii. 2. 18., iv. 1. 46 , 

iv. 1. 65., v. 1. 12. 

sn^far^iii. 2. 15., iv. 1. 14. 
srr«i v . l. 7. 
yf^cMT V. 1. 7. 

STTOTfri ii. 2. 47. 
srrfw iii. 2. 41., v. 1. 1., V. 1. 7. 
iii. 2. 65. 

5IW«m iv. 2. 39. 

ii. 1. 16., ii. 1. 68. 

ii* 2. 1., iv. 1. 11. 

11. l. 14., ii. 2.6. 
strand ii. l. 68. 
smr ii. 1. 44. 

I sntRJ iii. 2. 70. 
i ii. 1. 29. 

| sf£: iv. 1. 57. 

i* 1. 9., iii. 1. 21., i v . 1. 10. ; 
&*raT?r: i. 1. 19. 

iii. 2. 31. 

ii. 2. 64. 

i. 1. 9., iii. 2. 60., iv. 1. 20., 
iv. 1. 44., iv. 1. 50. iv. 1. 52., 

iv. 1. 53., iv. 2. 41. 

<K?ra;i. l. 20. 

<RSF^iv. 1. 46., iv. 1. 53. 

5T. 

503T^iii. 1. 6. 

iv. 2. 20. 

i. 2. 20. 

^rasrr i. 1. 21., iv. 1. 54., iv. 1. 56. 
STTEIsniTSir iii. 1. 42. 

5% i. 1. 9., i. 1. 17., i. 1. 25., iii. 

1. 60*. iii* 2* 24., iv. 1. 49. 
g fe: i* 1. 15. 
gfe re r re i i. 1. 25. 

$5taimii. 1. 11. 

iii. 2. 24., iv. 2. 36. , iv* 2* 37. 

iii. 2. 24. 
sJTircr ii. 2. 62. 

?T. 

iii. 1. 18., iii. 2. 41. 
flTef i. 1. 9., ii. ". 49., iv. 1. 10., iv. 
1. 14., iv. 1. 22., iv. 1. 34., v. 
1. 31. 

( 346 ) 

Tpcr*- iv. 1. 7. 

ART^i. 1. 27., i. 2. 16., ii. 1. 38., 
iv. 1. 3., iv. 1. 4., iv. 1. 7., iv. 
1. 24., iv. 1. 42 , v. 1. 34. 
OT^TRT iv. 1. 38., iv. 2. 26. 

iii. 2. 47., iv. 2. 44. 

i. 1. 36. 
v. 1. 34. 
iv. 1. 37. 

sjenpj iii. 1. 61. 
aj&WT: i. 1. 12., iii. 2. 61. 
^JJ^T^iii. 1.69. 

^ iv. 2. 11. 

iii. 1. 16. 

$37^ iv. 2. 37. 

sr. 

+fHig^ll V. 1. 42., v. 2. 1., v. 2. 20. 

iii. 1. 40. 

i. 1. 9., iii. 2. 56., iii. 2. 69. 
WSTCT: i. 1. 16., ii. 1.25., iii. 2. 19., 
iii. 2. 21., iii. 2. 25., iii. 2. 26., 
iii. 2. 29., iii. 2. 32., iii. 2. 38. 

IT^TRT^ iv. 2. 14. 

JT5RTT ii. 1. 27. 

*nrfcr iii. 1. 15. 

JTf^iii 1. 33. 
iii. 1. 33. 

HMlfoft ; iii. 2. 63. 

JTFTT iv. 2. 32. 

f*T«TT i 1. 2., iv. 2. 35., iv. 2. 37- 
fir ^ T saw rei i. 1 2. 

^rf% in. 2. 61. 

ii. 2. 67. 

iv. 2. 23. 

iv. 2. 32. 4 

ii. 2. 64. 
fcri iv. 1. 3. 
iv. 1. 6. 
iv. 1. 8. 

*Nr ii. l. 68. 

*r. 

q^i. 1. 30., iii. 2. 31. 

*T3T ii. 1. 7. 

WT i 2. 2., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1. 45., iii. 
2. 11., iii. 2. 38., iii. 2. 39 , iii. 
2. 59., iv. 1. 1., iv. 1. 28 , v. 
2. 24. 

sm iv. 2. 46. 

TOIili. 2. 7. 
q-ftTRt i. 1. 25. 

*IT ii. 2. 60. 

?miTc**r iv. 2. 26. 
en^ii. 1. 32., iii. 2. 47. 

5^? ii. 2. 64. 

grPT^i. 1. 16., ii. 1. 11., iii. 1. 

54., iii. 2. 4., iii. 2. 19., ni 2. 

25., iii. 2. 57. 

ii. 2. 62. 

^PTT^i. 2. 13., iv 1. 54., iv. 2. 
46. 

iv. 2. 42. 

ii. 1. 25., iii. 2. 56. 

iii. 1 34. 

iii. 1.44. 

^ i. 1. 14., iii. 1. 62. 
i. 1. 12. 

iii. 2. 41., iv. 1. 3. 
rrJTT^HT iii. 1. 26., iv 1. 67. 

^Tlf ii. 2. 62. 

TT^iii. 1. 41. 

57 i. 1* 14., iii* 1. 62-, iii. 2. 47. 

iii. 2- 54., iii. 2- 55. 

1. 38. 

57^7: iv. 2. 2. 

57 t <mfsgr iii. 1. 38. 

iii. 1. 50. 

Tl«Tii. 1- 37. 

5T. 

ii. 1. 21., ii- 2. 11., iii. 1.60 

iii. 2- 41., iv. 1. 8-, iv. 1. 31 

iv. 1. 34., iv- 1. 36., v- 1. 43., 

5T3RT i. 1. 21. 

51^1%: iv. 1. 35. 
ii. 2. 8. 
ii- 2. 8. 
iii. 2. 35. 
i- 1. 10-, i. 1. 16. 

R'l^'rT' iii* 2* 14. 
fW^fTT^ii. 1-24., ii. 1.25>, iii* 2. 35. 
Tf? iii. 2. 33. 
ii. 2. 57. 
i. 1. 25. 

7 . 

77^: i. 2- 12. 

i- 2. 10., ii. 1- 62. 

i. 1. 39., ii. 1. 26., v. 2. 11., 

v. 2- 14-, v. 2. 15. 

^TSfT^ii. 1. 21., ii. 1. 59-, iv. 2. 20. 
’TiT^ii. 1. 36. 

STCJii.2. 45., ii. 2- 51., ii. 2. 52., ii- 
2. 54., ii. 2. 57., ii. 2. 60., v. 
2 . 8 . 

ii. 2. 45. 

( 347 ) 

STCjfasETT: ii. 2. 57. 

ii. 2 .51., ii. 2 . 54. 

777 v. 1. 1., v. 1. 4. 

ii. 1. 39-, ii. 1. 40., ii. 1. 42. 
3WST iii. 1. 20. 

STTi. 1.37., i. 1.38., i. 2. 17., ii. 1, 

1., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1. 14., ii. 1. 18., 
ii- 2. 6., iv. 1. 66-, iv. 2. 17., iv. 
2. 19., iv. 2. 32., iv. 2- 49., v. 1. 

7., v. 1. 15. 

i. 1. 17., i. 2. 11., i. 2. 12. 
i. 2. 11., i. 2. 12. 

«TTf7 ii« 1. 61, 
dl^i. 1. 1. 

WF%‘- i. 2. 1. 

Tlj: i- 1. 13. 

STT^iTi iii. 1. 63. 

f%«RS7 i- 2- 10-, i. 2. 14., v. 1. 1., 
v. 1. 4. 
ii- 2. 45. 

fsrasqTr^ i. 2- 20, ii. 2. 44-, ii- 2. 

51., v- 1* 4-, v. 2- 3. 
f%7^7Tm v. 1. 31- 

iv- 1. 57. 

fTTJTC 11 . 2. 40-, ii. 2. 41., ii. 2. 

44., ii- 2. 45., ii. 2. 46., ii. 2. 

47., ii- 2. 53. 
iii. 1. 20. 

ii- 2. 50, iii. 1. 12. 
fe^FTCTTJT 11 . 2. 42., ii. 2. 49., ii. 2. 

51., ii- 2. 54., iii. 1. r ^0. 
fspRTTtTT^r: 11 . 2. 53., ii. 2- 57. 
fasfa: v. 2. 1, v. 2. 19. 

flrara:». 2< i°- 

fgiTTcR7 v. ?. 16. 
f^refeT i- 1. l-» i- 2. 3. 

fqqt iv. 2. 50. ' 

fqiIT iv- 2.4. 

iii. 2* 43. 
fqqTqq>: ii- 1. 63. 
fqfq ii- 1. 63., ii- 1- 65., iv- 2- 46- 
fq^-qsfqT^ ii. 1. 62. 
fwsr^aPET: iv- 1. 17. 
fqqTsn l'li. 2*5., ill. 2. 12., iii. 2- 17- 
iii. 2. 23., iv. 1. 25., iv. 1* 30. 
faRTSi: iii- 2- 24., iv. 2. 25- 
fqqrsnq>Kqj ii. 2- 33, ii. 2. 37-, iii 
2. 12, iv. 1. 30- 

fqqTqq iv. 1. 27. 
fqqTS&r^ iv. 1. 45. 
fqqRt iii, 2. 13., iii. 2- 18. 
fqfqqmTq; ii. 1. 62- 
ii. 1. 18. 
fqqtfar v. 1. 29. 
f^q^^i. 1. 37. 
fqqqq v. l. 2. 
fqqqqr^ i l. 37. 
fqqsqfsr v- 2.11. 
fqqfqqfxT ii. 1. 2- 
fqsrfoqfcc: i. 2.19. 
fqqfaq^i: i. 1. 23- 
fqqfqq 5 ^ ii- 1. 3. 
fqqfq^qiq, iii* 1. 55. 
fqsrfa^q v- 1. 41., v. 1, 42. 
fq*rfq> ii. 2. 39- 
fqqqTC^iv. 2. 21. 
fqsmTi^ii. 2 . 15- 
fq¥tHT*q ii. 1. 61. 
fenjfSnfsr iv. 2- 22. 

i. 1. 23. 
fqjJ^T i. 1. 41. 

348 ) 

feft rcg: i. 1. 22. 
fq^HT iii. 2. 41. 
f*R3T i 2. 4. 
fq^: i. 2. 1., i. 2- 6. 
fq^faq iii. 2. 41. 
fq^q; v. 2. 1., v- 2. 4. 
fq^lvn^ii. 2. 56-, iii. 1. 11. 
fqTtsfr i. 2. 6. 
fqfqq iv. 1. 54. 
fqf^: ii. 2. 41. 
fqfijt ii. 2. 41. 
fq^qqTq; iv. 2 . 26. 
fqftTS iv. 2. 48. 

fq*tq i- 1. 23., i. 1. 31-, ii. 1. 56., 

iii. 1. 61., iv- 2. 38, iv- 2. 39- 

fq$tq v. 2. 6. 
feSta: ii 1. 66., iii- 2. 31. 
fqjhqqft iii. 2. 37. 
fq$tqqjT?^ii. 2- 16. 
fqi&qq^|Pjj i. 1. 31. 
fq g tqR C. iii. 1. 34. 
fqttqyqji fa. l 28. 
fqS&UJ iii- 1. 54-, iii. 2. 32. 
fq’Slj iii- 1, 66, 

fqqq iii- 1. 2-, iii. V. 2-, iv. 14, 

iv. 2- 31-, iv. 2. 34-, iv. 2. 35.. 

fqqq?q iii. 1. 59. 

{qqqcqr^iii. M3. 
fqqqT: iv. 2. 2. 
faqqi-dC iii. 2. 7. 
fqq^Tq^: iii. 1. 42. 
fq f flcttq ii. 1- 65. 
q^T5T iv- 2. 50. 
q ' taW T iii-1. 24. 

( 349 ) 

fj^srr iv. 2. 26. 

iv. 1. 46., iv. 1. 50. 
ffa iv. 2- 6. 

ii. 2 57., ii. 2. 60. 

^TcT: iv- 1- 56. 

#5?5tn^ii. 1. 58. 
thn4 i- 2. 18-, V- 1. 1-, V. 1. 2. 
Ivprah^i. 1. 35 , iii. 1. 73., iii. 2- 53, 
iii- 2.-54-) iv. 1- 47 , v- 1. 5., v. 
1- 15. 

th*«rarac.ii. 2. 45. 

SSpeBT^iv. 1. 11, iv 1. 13. 
ggRBFTT iv- 1- 11. 

ii. 2. 59, ii. 2. 64., ii 2. 65-, 
ii. 2- 66- 

sarfo: ii. 2 60., ii- 2. 67. 

-SilrhlMT iii. 2- 10. 
o-^Tbt ii. 2. 60. 

iv- 2- 18. 
iii. l. 32- 
iv-1- 50- 
iii. 2. 32. 

STfiramc*. ii- 1. 37., iv. 1. 5. 

3*RT iv- 1. 48. 
sq-TCR iii. 2. 41. 

i. 1. 23. 

«WIW ii- 2. 63. 

iii. 1. 69- 

ST^n^ii. 1. 54., iii. 1. 2., m. 1. 
3-, iv. 1. 28., iv. 1. 36. 

aT g r ftqagcli g; ii- 1. 4- 
«IWW i. 1. 4. 

®lWJ?TlrJT+ : i. 1. 4. 
f^- iii. 1. 8. 

g qiqrer ii. 1. 57. 

«mrr?n^iv. 1. 15. 
s q-T pif ? ! ^ iii. 2. 50. 

, ii. 1. 27., iii. 2. 32. 

g^TOTfiJRSr: iii. 2. 32. 

5 

1 iii. 2. 7., v. 2> 19. 

ii. 1. 29-, iv. 1. 40-, iv. 

i 2.27. 

I iii. 1. 30., iii. 1. 39. 
g^ g F cRI^ iii. 2. 16. 

SI. 

STtfJ ii 2. 62. 

NO 

SI®5 ii- 1. 54., ii. 1- 66, ii. 2. 60., 
iii- 1. 72., iv. 1. 16-, iv- 1. 59., 
iv 2- 11., iv- 2 21., v. 2. 14., v. 
2- 15- 

SI®^: i. 1- 7-, ii. 2 2-, ii- 1. 49. 
STS^r^iii- 2. 24- 
Sl®^T. i 1. 3., 1. 1.14. 

SIs^T^ii. 1. 15, ii. 1. 52. 

STS^f iii. 1. 62 
1 SI5^T5TT^ ii. 2. 36. 
j ii. 1. 54., ii. 1. 55. 

SJS^ST ii- 2- 17-, iv- 1. 59., v- 2- 15. 

| Snfrc i. 1. 9, l. 1- 17., iii- 2. 26., 
iii. 2. 47 , iii 2. 50-, iii. 2. 53., 

iii. 2. 66 
1 . 11 . 

iii. 1 4. 

OTfcsnrur iii- 2. 28. 

iii- 2- 26- 
SRltaW iii- 2. 52. 
jar<3T iv. 2. 50- 

( 350 ) 

fj&W iv. 2. 48. 
sftsra* ii- 1- 67* 
sfcf iii- 1. 20. 

ii. 1. 33. 
v. 2. 1, v. 2. 5. 

i. I- 4., ii. 1. 27., iii. 2- 21. 

i^STc^i. 1. 5. 
sift; iii. 1. 18, 

VfWtf r iii. 2. 71., iv. 1. 66. 

ii. 2. 34- 
srfar iii. 1- 31. 

i- 1. 12. 
ii. 2. 57. 
sr. 

ii. 1. 26- 

ii. 1. 9., iii. 2. 25. 
;H&W^ JL_L_22. 

ii. 2. 59. 

*nic?T?T: ii. 1. 52. 
srsrflrq^: iii. 1. 18. 
iv. 2. 48. 

STTsr«* ii. 1. 53., iii. 2. 41. 

iii* 1. 26., iv. 1. 67. 
iv. 2. 2. 
iv. 2. 34. 

ii- 2- 60-, iv. 1. 41. 
iii 1. 25. 

<^i< q W T iii. 1. 70. 

50^^ iii. 2. 58. 

^TT ui- 1- 16. 

iii- 1- 16. 

^T?r?r ii 2. 34. 
ui- I- 32. 
ii. 2- 63- 
v. 1- 42- 

iv. 1- 47. 

i- 2- 14-, iv- 2.26., iv. 2. 36., 

v. 1. 23. 

li- 2. 20- 

^PTT^ui. 1. 14., iii. 1. 65., iv. 
2. 16. 

ii. L51-, iv. 1. 53. 
ii. 2. 1-, ii. 2. 2. 

WTSTcT: i. 2. 13. 

iii. 2. 25. 

Srmfa iv. 2. 38. 

SWR i- I- 23., i. 1. 29, ii. 1. 1. 
*HTT% v. 1. 14. 

^mRT^iii. 2. 32. 

*nrw V. 1. 39., V. 1. 42-, V. 1. 43. 

iv. 1. 60. 

ii. 2. 60. 

5WT& ii. 2- 39- 

iii. 2. 43. 

?TW??nrs*T ii. 1. 55. 
ii. 1. 3. 
ii. 2. 25. 
ii. 2. 60. 

iv. 2. 13. 

^T*T iii. 2. 31-, iii. 2. 32-, iii. 2. 

^Tsr. iv- 2. 23. 
STCT: iv. 1. 44. 
^?Tf?T iii. 2. 45. 
■W’-dti. iv- 1. 64. 

\s^y 66., iii* 2. 69., iv. 2. 21., iv. 2. 
24. 

sra i. 1. 27., i. 1. 28., ii. 1. 14., ii. 
1. 42., iv. 2. 21., v. 1. 23, v. 

ii. 2. 16. 

1. 32. 

( 351 ) 

SrsrfHU iii- 1- 64. 

SPOTHci* iv 2. 19. 
sricT'sr i. 1. 27, i. 1. 28. 
snbr v. 1. 40. 

^rkf’tsr ii. l. 34. 

H^T iv. 1. 25., iv- 1. 29., iv. 1- 34., 
iv. 1. 37. 

iv. 2. 50. 

Hssrfwsrnt: i. 2. 4, i. 2- 5. 
iii. 1. 7. 

#TF?: iv. 2. 47. 

v. 1. 31. 

HSPT i- 1- 1., v- I- 1. 
hspihit: v. 1.14. 

HUTO ii. 1. 6-, V. 1. 15. 

r: i. 1. 23., ii. 1. 1., ii. 1. 5., ii. 
1. 6., ii. 1. 7., ii. 2. 40, ii 2. 

59., iii. 1- 32., iii- 1. 51 , ni. 2 
1, iii. 2. 46., iv- 1- 44., iv. 2. 

4., iv- 2. 6-, v- 1- 15. 

HHm iv. 2. 23. 

HfarfeT i. 1. 26., i. 1. 27. 

Hf ii. 2 62, iv. 2. 47. 

HTffipr iii- 2. 41. 

HT^^T: ii. i. 37 ., ii- 1. 38. 

HTOST i. 2. 1., i. 2. 2, ii. 1. 58, iii. 

1. 16., v. 1. 34. 

HTq* il. 6, i- I- 34 

HTOTq i. 2. 18., v. 1. 1., v. 1. 

2 . 

i. 1-6, i- 1. 34., i 2. 17*, 
ii- 1- 44, ii. 1. 45-, iii. 2. 1., v. 
1. 5., v. 1. 14., v- 1- 15-, v. 1. 

16., v. 1. 32., v. 1. 33. 

smar i. I - 6., i. 1. 36-, i. 2. 4., i. 2. 
8-, v. 1- 1., v- I- 4., v. 1. 6,, v. 
1. 7., v. 1. 19., v. 1- 34 
HURTc^i. 2. 8-, ii- 1. 33., iii. 2. 

27 , v. 1. 4. 

HmrFT i 1. 38. 
htsithtt i. 2.4., i. 2. 8. 

iii. 2. 3., iii. 2. 62. 
HT^iTHm: v. 1. 4. 

HrvqHTSR i 1. 6, i. '• 34. 
?TTJT«irf^ii. 1. 52. 

HURT i. 1. 25. 

HTOTKT i. 2. 11, ii. 2- 14., v. 1. 14. 

l- 2- 11., i- 2- 13. 
HTJTTKm. i. 1. 5 
HTOTssiHr v. 1. 15- 
HUT^T a. 2. 62. 
fH3C: i. 1. 29. 
fH5C* iv. 1- 49- 

i- 1 I-, i 2. 1. 
i* 2- 6-, v. 2 23. 
i- 1- 26-, i-1 28., i 1. 29., 

1. 1. 30. 
ii. 1- 17- 

i- 1- 30., iv 1.10., iv- 1- 39., 
v 1. 3* 

fnfeST^: ii- 1. 17. 
fnf^nui' 1- 15, ii 1. 18. 
fH^. ii. 1. 15, it- 1 17-, ii- 1. 19, 
ii. 1. 45, ii. 1. 46., ii 1. 48, ii. 

2. 10-, n. 2 63-, in. 2. 49-, iv. 
1. 37., iv. 1. 38., v. 1. 5-, v. 1. 
16, v 1. 19, v. 1. 21. 

i. 1. 30-, ii- 1. 9; ii- !• 10, ii. 
, 1. 11., v. 1. 29. 

16 

( 352 ) 

^sl i. 1. 10., iii- 2. 41., iv. 1. 57- 
fpn^T iv. 1. 55- 

ii. 1 27. 

ii. 2. 49 

ggpq feftgri ' ii 2. 48. 

iv. 1. 62. 

$irr ii- 1. 36. 

ii. 1 36- 

iii. 1. 21. 

3ft iv. 1. 52. 

*gfcT. ii. 1- 64. 

i 2 2., i. 2. 20., ii. 2. 62. 
^TrTT?qr^ iii. 1. 52. 

^RHT l. 1- 1. 

v. 2. 1. 

^st<rt i- 2. 3. 

i. 1. U, iii. 1. 62. 

*qw*forr: iii. 1. 62. 

iii- 1- 45, iii. 2. 9. 

iii. 1- 48. 

3+>fe*> iii. 2. 10- 

iii. 2. 30- 

ill 2. 33. ill. 2. 40. 

WcT: iii 2. 28. 

Wl iii 1. 13- 

iii. 1-18., iii 2. 25., iv. 2. 34- 
in. 1. 13. 

^ in. 2. 46., v. 2. 15. 
v. 1- 43., v. 2. 20. 

iv. 1. 62., iv. 2- 31., iv. 2. 34., 

iv. 2. 35- 

iv. 1. 38., iv. 1. 39. 

TO iv. 2. 14. 

iv 1.64. 
iv- 1. 65. 

STraTsqT^iii. 1. 50., iii. 2. 40. 
iii. 1. 18- 

^Tftr: v. 2. 1., v. 2. 2. 

% ii. 1. 9., iii. 1. 66. 

iv. 1. 52. 
fft*T iv- !• 63. 
ffrr iv. 2. 49., v. 2. 12 
ffa: i. 2 3. 

tg i. 1- 32., i. 1. 39., iii. 2. 11., iii. 
2. 39., iii. 2. 44., iv- 1. 45., iv. 
2 33, v. 1. 1., v. 1. 43, v. 2. 
1., v- 2 6., v- 2. 13- 
tg: i. 1 34. 

1. 38. 

tg?% v. l. ii. 
tgs: v. 1. 19- 

iii, 2. 38., iii- 2. 59., v. 1. 
34. 

tggi iii. 1. 15. 
t?ft: v. 1. 7., v 1. 18. 
left v. 2. 6. 

tcw*T3rrg.iii. 2.11. 

i. 1, 1. 

tesrmror: i. 2- 4-, V. 2. 1., V. 2. 24. 
tesft: iii. 2. 4. 
ii. 2. 57. 

APPENDIX F. 

Index of Words in English. 

Page. 

Abh&va 3) *44 

Abode *3 

Abode of particular qualities 7 8 

Absence * 3^1 I 7 1 

Absence of link ••• I0 9 

Absence of perception ... 63 

Absolute rule ... I0 9 

Abstinence l 7 2 

Absurd • ■ • 1Q 8 

Absurdities ... 112 

Absurdity ••• *7 

Acceptance 12 

Act ••• i![ j S 1 

Action 6, 8, 43, 5 2 i 63, I0 Si 121 
Activities I S 2 

Activity 2, 6, 8, g, xi8, 133, ISS 
Act of knowledge ... * 4 ® 

Acts l 3$> *39 

Acuteness ••• I ^ 1 

Acuteness or dullness of ap¬ 
prehension ••• l ° l 

Admission of an opinion 204 , 207 , 217 
Adultery ® 

Advantage ••• 5 2 

Affection 2 , 9, 121 , m> l S 6 

Affirmative 

Affirmative application 1 ® 

Affirmative example x 5 

Affix — 75 

Agama 3 

Agent of knowledge ••• 

Page. 

Aggregates ... *43 

Air 12 , 100 

Airy 89 

Aitihya 3 

Akritabhy agama ... 135 

All-pervading 26 . 90,164 

Alteration 5* 

Alteration of time .- 3 1 

Alternating character ... I 77 

Alternative ••• 2 + 

Analogy 
Annihilation 
Ant hill 
Antecedent 
Anumana 
Apavarga 
A posteriori 
Apparently 

23 , 140 , 148 . 150 
... 2 , l6l 
... 109 
59. 156 
3 

... 155 

... 4.45 
100 

Apparent modification 
Appearance 
Appearances 
Appearance of difference 
Application 

75 

169 

... 144 

108 
... i3» 16 

“Pi"- T „o 

Apprehension 7. 9b * 23 > *5 8 * IbI 

A priori ^ 

A priori inference 
Approach 

Aprapta-k&la 
Arbitrariness 

6o, 64, 66 '" 182 ’ 186 

Argumentation 

45 

87 

23 

xx6 

129 

( 354 ) 

Page. 

Arguments 27,84, 

120, 158 

Arrogance 

.. 154 

Arthapatti 

3 

Artificial 

. 60, 62 

Arya 

S 

Arya De 1 a 

143 . 149 

Aryas 

50 

Ascertainment 

... 1, 18 

Adhaka 

55 

Asleep 

... 154 

Assumption 

24 

Assent 

... 109 

Assertion 

5 

Association 

77 .152 

Association of troubles 

... 154 

Assumption 

hi 

Atom 63, 128, 132 

, 156,162 

Atomic dimension 

119 

Atomic mind 

.. 112 

Atomic substance 

... 8,39 

Atoms 

21, 162 

Attack 

... 20 

Attainment of supieme felicity 1 

Attendants 

... 150 

Attention 

H7, 121 

Audience 

31 

Auditory 

. . 27 , 99 

Auditory perception 

... 27, 41 

Augmentation 

75 

Authority 

11, 20, 90 

Authors 

54 

Avayava 

1 

Aversion 3, 6, 9, 118, 133 

Awaking 

168 

A wanting 

150 

B 

Balancing the addition 

174 . 177 

Balancing the alternative 

174.177 

Balancing the co-presence 

174 . 1 8b 

P»ge. 

Balancing the counter-exam¬ 
ple ... 174, 184 

Balancing the controversy 174, 189 

Balancing the demonstration 174, 195 

Balancing the doubt 174, 188 

Balancing the effect 174, 201 

Balancing the eternal ... 200 

Balancing the eternality ... 174 

Balancing the heterogeneity 174, 175 
Balancing the homogeneity 174, 175 
Balancing the infinite re¬ 
gression ... 174, 184 

Balancing the mutual 
absence ... 174, 182 

Balancing the non-difference 174, 193 
Balancing the non-eternality 174, 198 
Balancing the non-perceptioni74, 197 

Balancing the non-produced 174, 186 
Balancing the non-reason 174, 190 
Balancing the perception 174, 196 
Balancing the presumption 174, 192 
Balancing the questionable 174, 177 
Balancing the reciprocity 174, 177 
Balancing the subtraction 174, 177 
Balancing the unquestionable 174, 177 
Bauddhas ... 3 

Beginning ... 60 

Beginningless ... 155 

Bhattas ... 3 

Birth 2,9,151 

Blackness ... 156 

Blame ...53, 153 

Blanket ... 24 

Block-head ... 27 

Bodily actions .. 8 

Body 6, 8, 81, 89, 125, 126, 171 
Bone ... 82 

Bos gavaeus ... 5,47 

Bragging ... 20 

{ 355 ) 

Br&hmana 

Breast 

Buddhi 

Buddhist 

Page 
4 , 2 5 > 76 
... 87 

7 

20, 30, I08 

Buddhist Sanskrit and Pali 
Literature 
Bulk 
Burning 

Capacity 

Carelessness 

Carping 

ChaivAkas 

Categories 

Cattle 

154 

60 

49 

14 . I0 5 
... 139 

20 
3 

... 1, 32 
... 150 

Page 
. no 
1 

128 
167 

52 

184 

129 
68 
no 

.. 60 

Cause 4, 30, 129 138, 141. 157 

Cause and effect ... 134 

Cause of destruction 111,113 

Cause of growth and decay ... 105 

Cause of m-audition ... 66 

Cause of production 129 ,139 

Causes of faults 1 57 

Cave ••• l 7 ° 

Cavil J. 19 . 20, 73 

Caviller ••• 20 

Censuring the non-censurable 207, 217 

Cessation ••• I 3 I 

Cessation of ogotism 1 57 

Cessation of recognition ... J o6 

Cessation of the intellect ... 106 

Channels ••• *3 

Character 10, 14, 16, 1 7 > 3 °> 7 l > 9 2 > 
96, 99, 120,126, 140,169, 

Characterised 102 

Character of an object 99 

Character of a modification 7 1 

Character of perception J 4 1 

Character of transparency 96 

Charaka S 3 

Change 
Chhala 

Circle of fire brand 
City of the celestial quiristers 
Classification of Vedic speech 
Clay 

Clay statue 
Co-abide 
Cognisable 
Cognised 

Cognitions 33 > 34 > n 4 > I2 7 

Collection of parts... ... 164 

Colour 7, 12, 23, 40, 76. 92 , 100, 122, 

125, 126, i$7 

Combustibles ••• J 4 ° 

Command ••• 54 

Common ••• 2 9 

“ Commonly seen ’ ... 4 . 45 

Comparison ... 3 > 4 > 5 i 33 > 46 , 47 
Common properties .. 29 

Compendious expression ... 47 

Complete destruction 
Compound 
Compassion 
Conceit 

Conceit of difference 
Conceit of duality 
Conceit of pleasure 
Concept 

Concept of means 
Conception 
Concentration 
Conclusion 13 
Concomitant 
Conditions 
Conduct 
Confirmation 
Conflicting 
Conflicting judgment 

... 2 

... 76 

8 

82, 108, 153 
... 108 

... 82 

... 153 
... 168 
... 167 
79 , 157 
... 139 
17,21,85, hi , 180 

14 

14 
25 
1 7 
29 
10 

( 356 ) 

Page 

Page 

Conflicting testimony 

... 29 

Debt to Gods 

... 152 

Confutation 

1, 1 7 . 46 

Debt to progenitors 

... 152 

Conjointly 

... 29 

Debt to sages 

... 152 

(Conjunction 8, 38, 77,114, 

n6, 117, 

Debts 

... 152 

' , 13 °, 131 

. 151. 163 

Decay 

105,109 

Connection 3, 27, 48, 49, 50 

Declaration 

4 

/ Connoted 

... 186 

Deeds 

119, 128 

Consciousness 

— 7 > 19 

Defect 

... Jl 

Consequence 

93 .100 

Defence 

20 

Constant audition 

.. 66 

Defilement 

...2, 154 

Constituents 

... 163 

Definite form 

78 

Contact v- 3,33, 40, 91, 94, 107 

Definition 

• 2,33 

Context 

... 121 

Deliverance 

9 

Continuity 

... 30 

Demarcate 

... 118 

Contingency 

106,113 

Demerits 

92,155 

Contradiction 

... 51 

Demonstration 

... 195 

Contradictory 

21, 22, 74 

Denial 

141, 169 

Contradictory reason 

... 22 

Depravity 

... 155 

Contrary 

...17,30 

Desert 

130, 131, 132 

Controvei sy 

174 , 189 

Design 

... 77 

Convention 

... so 

Desire 

6, 87, 88, 117 

Conviction 

... 30 

Desire and aversion 

... 121 

Co-presence 

... 182 

Destruction 2, 61, 73, 83, no, nr, 

Corresponding element 

... 102 

113, 131, 136, 138, 141, 149 

Corresponding substrata 

... 104 

Determinate 

... 3>4 

Corruption 

... 154 

Determination 

18 

Countenance 

... 86 

Deva-rina 

... 152 

Counter argument 

... 68 

Deviating from a tenet 

207,218 

Counter example 

184,186 

Devotion 

8 

Course 

Dharma &istra 

-. 153 

Covetousness 

Dialogue 

... 19 

Cow 

4 

Diminutiion 

... 75 

Cowhood 

... 176 

Dimness 

... 161 

Critical examination 

1 

Direct 

... 26 

Crystal 94, 96, 108, 109 

Direction 

— 39 

Curd 

... 109 

Disappearance 

... 132 

Cuticle 

... 126 

Disconnection 

... 27 

D 

Disciples 

... 172 

Deaths 

... • 9 

Discussion 

1, 13, 19, 172 

( 357 ) 

Page Page 

Disjoined 

... in 

Erratic 

21,134 

Disputant 

27. 30, 31 

Essence and appearance 

... 169 

Disputation 

19 

Established tenet 

.. 1,11 

Dissimilarity 

... 26 

Establishment 

... 146 

Dissolution 

90 

Eternal 10, r3, 17, 21, 60, 63, 65, 67, 

Distinct 

... 136 

72, 81, 88, 113, 13*, 

135, * 40 , 141, 

Distress 

152,1 54 

163, 195, 201 

Distribution 

... 144 

Eternalness 

- 73 

Divisible 

... 133 

Eternality 

16, 22, 189 

Doctrine 

20,164 

Eternity 

... 12 

Dogma 

...12, 13 

Ether 7, 12, 27, 39, 68, 100, 162 

Doubt x, io, 29, 30, 42, 69, 75, 147, 

Ethereal 

... 89 

1 54 . 

158, 188, 189 

Evasion 

207,216 

Dream 

IS4, 167, 168 

Evidence 

136,166 

Drst&nta 

... I 

Examination 

2, 13,32 

Drum 

••■ 23,35 

Example 10, 16, 17, 

175, 177, 180 

Duality 

82 

Excess 

... 121 

Dullness 

... l6l 

Excitement 

... 84 

Durable 

... 23 

Exclusion 

... 120 

Duration 

... Il6 

Exercise 

... 121 

Dust 

3 

Existence ...63, 80, 134, 158 

Duties 

... 172 

Existent 

... 148 

Dvyanuka 

... 162 

Extension 

62 

E 

Expanding 

... 86 

Ear 

7 , 103 

Experience 

5 

Earth 

... 7 ,i2 

Expert 

. • 5 ,11 

Earthenware 

... 77 

Expression 

- 137 

Earthy 

89,102 

Expressive of action 

... 137 

Effect 

4, 134, 201 

External light 

... 94 

Efforts of attention 

... 117 

External objects 

... 170 

Egotism 

... 157 

Eye 

Element 7, 12, 

100, 102, 129 

Eye ball 

... 90 

Emancipation 

131,132 

Eye knowledge 

... 40 

Endless doubt 

... 31 

F 

Entity 37, 77, 136, 137, 139. * 43 , H 5 

Factitious 

... 163 

Entreaty 

... 121 

Fallacies 

... 21 

Enunciation 

... 2,32 

Fallacies of a reason 

21,218 

Epithet 

... 3,16 

Fallacious argument 

... 182 

Equal to the question 

... 22 

Fallacy 

... 2 

( 358 ) 

False apprehension 

Page 1 
... 168 

False knowledge 

... 169 

Familiar instance 

... 1 

Fault 

... 6 

Faults 

2 , 9 , 134 , 157 

Fear 

86,121 

Felicity 

• I j 2 

Fences 

••• 173 

Fiery 

...13,89 

Figuratively 

... 76 

Filling 

... 49 

Five 

10 

Fire brand 

... 128 

Fineness 

... 102 

Fire sacrifice 

... 52 

Five elements 

... 141 

Five objects 

... 98 

Five senses 

... 98 

Fixation 

... 76 

Fixed character 

... 96 

- Fixed connection 

... 50 

{ Fixed relation v /" 

80 

^Fixity 

... 74 

F lxity of number 

... 146 

Food 

49, I'O 

Forbearance 

... 118 

Forbearance of activity 

... 118 

Forest 

...4, 170 

Forester 

• •• 4 

Form 

75,78,79,99 

Formation 

... 171 

Fortuitous effects 

... 139 

Fruit 6, 9, 17, 119, 128, 

138,139,147, 

Fruit of previous deeds 

170 

... 128 

Function 

77,97,115 

Futile 

• M 27 

Futilities 

20, 28, 174 

Futility 

2, 26, 1$0 

Page 

Future 

45 , 137 

G 

Ganges 

... 76 

General notion 

• ■ 37 

Generality 

... 6,43 

Genus 25, 60, 75, 78, 79, 211 

Gesture 

6 

Glass ... 

... 94 

God ... 

... 138 

Gold ... 

7 1,150 

Good ... 

... 157 

Greed ... 

... 154 

Grief .. 

... 86 

Ground 

... 113 

Growth 

... 109 

Gustatory 

... 99 

Gustatory perception 

... 41 

H 

Habitual 

... 170 

Hatchet 

... 49 

Hair ... 

... 125 

Happiness 

... 150 

Horse sacrifices 

5 

Hatred 

... 154 

Heat ... 

... 86 

Heterogeneous 

... 15 

Heterogeneous example 

15 , 175 

Heterogeneity 

... 189 

H etvabhasa 

...2, 21 

Hina-kles'a 

... 155 

Hunger 

... 170 

Homogeneity 188, 

189, 199 

Homogeneous 

... 15 

Homogeneous example 

... 175 

Homogeneous things 

••• 135 

Hurting the proposition 

... 207 

Hypothesis 

11 

Hypothetical 

... 12 

Hypothecial dogma 

12 

Hypothetical reasoning 

... 1 

( 359 ) 

Page. 

Page. 

I 

Inquiry 

14 

Ideas 

88 

Instance 

1, ii, 15 

Identical 

ioo,106 

Instructive assertion 

5 

Ignorance 

27, 207, 216 

Instrument 

... 8 S 

Illumination 

•• 37, 185 

Instrument of knowledge 

... 85 

Illusion 

37 

Intangible 

31 , 63, 68 

Imagination 

. . 168 

Intellect 

6, 7, 9, 105, 106, 107 

Immediate subsequency 

121 

Intelligence 

6 

Immolation 

77 

Internal perception 

198 

Impelling 

• ... us 

Interpenetrated.. 

. 

... 101 

Impermanent 

72 

Interrelation 

... 134 

Implication 

11 

Interrelation of cause and effect 134 

Implied dogma 

13 

Interval 

.. 64, 151 

Impossibility 

25, 158, 162 

Intervention 

... 121 

Impropi lety 

160 

Intimate relation 

... 6,43 

Inactive 

. . 26 

Intimately 

92 

Inadmissible 

- 153 

Invalid 

57 

Inanimate 

.. 25,86 

Invariable 

14 

Inaudition 

66 

Investigator 

11 

Incapacity 

... 119 

Investigation 

18 

Inconsistency 

- 137 

Invisibility 

94 

Incoherent 

207, 213 

Iron 

87 

Incompatible 

... 64 

Ironball 

14 

Incongruous 

148 

Irregularity 

29, 30, 118 

Inconsistent 

■ 137 

Irregulaiity of perception 

... 10 

Indifference 

14 

Itihlsa 

... 153 

Indirect 

26 

J 

Indeterminate 

4 

Jalpa 

... 2 

Individual 7 

, 76, 78, 108 

Jar 

23, 60, 136 

Individuality 

77 

jati 

... 2 

Indivisibility 

... 164 

JijnisS. 

14 

Indivisibility of atoms 

164 

Jnina 

7 

Inequality 

130 

Judgment 

10 

Inexperience 

... 131 

Jugglery 

167, 169 

Inference 3,4, 

13, 36, 42, 44 

Jyosistoma 

53 

85, 91 

K 

Infinite regression 

...174. 184 

Kalala 

130 

Injunction 

... 52, 96 

Kandara 

130 

Inopportune 

... 213 

Kjirma 

... 103 

17 

( 360 ) 

Page. 

Kathi 

19 

Kileso 

... 154 

Killing 

8 

Kitchen 

... ii, 13 

Kles'a 

... 154 

Knave 

27 

Krower 

85, 120 

Knowledge 

1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 13, 32, 39, 

Meaningless 
Means of knowledge 

Page. 
207, 212 
146 

46,85,99,106,111,113,114, 120, 
122, 126, 157, 170, 171 

Means of right knowledge ...1, 3, 35 

Measure ... 77 

Medical Science ... 54 

Meditation ... 170 

Members ... 1, 13 

Membrane ... 94 

Memory ...86, 121 

Merit . 139. 1 55 

Knowledge ot truth 

170 

Merit and demerit 

... 121 

Kritahftni 

135 

Metaphor 

.. 24, 25 

L 

Metaphorically 

25 

Lahtavistara Siltra 

... 167 

Meteor 

93 

Lamp 23, 37, 123, 185 

Mica 

94 

Lank&vatftra Sfttia 

165 

Milk 

. 109 

Light 

7, 12, 93,94 

Mim 4 m-sakas 

.. 12 

Likeness 

121 

Mind 8, 13, 38, 85, 

114, 116 

Link 

. . 109 

Mirage 

...10, 167 

Letter 

••• 72 , 73 

Mirror 

96 

Loadstone 

... 87 

Misapprehension 2, 

139 . 156 

Locomotion 

29 

Mistimed 

.. 21, 23 

Lotus 

86 

Mistimed leason 

23 

M 

M leech a 

■ S. So 

Madhyamika Buddhist 

philo- 

Modification 70, 71, 72, 75 

sophy 

. . 149 

Modification and substitute . 

69 

Madyamika Sutra 

145, 167 

Momentary 

108, 123 

Magnitude 

92 

Motion 

...23,107 

Mahay&na works 

167 

Magical power 

112 

Mamsa-pes'i 

129 

Multiplicity 

28 

Malice 

8 

Mutual absence 

174, 182 

Manifestation 23, 78, 94, 136, 138 

Mutual difference 

126 

Mark 8, 58, no, 

, 121, 143, 144 

N 

Mat 

... 76 

Nagarjuna 

143 , 149 

Material 

Si, 69, 90, 99 

Nails 

.. 125 

Material substance 

90 

Naiyiyika 3, 30, 102, 

106, 118 

Matter 

S, 7, ”8 

Natural 

•• 155 

Maturation 

... 125 

Natural connection 

49 

M 4 y 4 

... 169 

Natural quality 

.. 124 

( Ml ) 

Page. 

Nature 

1. 7 > 98 

Navakambata 

24 

Necessity 

••• 173 

Negative 

15 

Negative application 

16 

Newborn 

... 87. 88 

Night 

94 

Nigraha-sthana . . 

- 2, 23 

Nirnaya 

2 

Nirvikalpaka 

4 

No-cause 

3 39 . Ho 

Non-difference 

• 47 , 193 

Non-distinction ... 

200 

Non-distinguished 

. 182 

Non-eri atic 

3 

Non-entity 136, 137, 144 

Non-eternal 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21,62, 
63, 114, 140, 156, 188, 200, 201 

Non-eternalness 

Non-eteinality 

Non-existence 

Non-existent 

Non-ingenuity 

Non-mateiial 

140 
. 16, 198 
3 . 55 - 5 * 5 , 59 , Co, 91, 
156, 158, 197 
.144. 148 
. ,207, 216 
90 

Non-perception 29, 30, 42, 62, 63, 

110, 197 202 

Non-produced .. 186 

Non-production .. 112 

Non-reality ... 166 

Non-simultaneous - 107 

Non-simultaneousness ...117, 127 
Non-simultaneousness of cog¬ 
nitions • 127 

Non-simultaneity ••• 39 

Non-transparent .. 9 & 

Nose 7, 82 

NyAya Svktra 

Page. 

3 , 13,23 

Object 3, 7,10, 33, 40, 84, 97, 98, 
103, 105, 107, 111, 170, 
Objection .. 46 

Object of knowledge 
Object of right knowledge 
Objects of sense 
Obscurity 
Observance 
Observation 
Obstruction 
Obviousness 
Occasion for rebuke 
Occurrence 
Odour 
Olfactoiy 

Olfactory perception 
Omnipresence 
One 

Operation 

Operations of stimuli 
Operations of the Soul 
Operator 
Opponent 

Oppression of persons by spells 
Opportunity 

.146, 167 
. 1 

7 ,98, 99 

94 

172 

139 

•• 95 . 155 
92 , 93 , 94 
2, 27, 207 
. . 109 

... 98, 100 
99 

41 

163 

... 160 

82, 84, 117 
117 
82 

Si 

19 , 37, 30 
184 
153 

Opposing the proposition ...207,209 
Opposition 24, 64, 80, 121, 

142, 180 

82 

Organ of vision 
Origination 
"Other” 
Oiherness 

105 

65 

65 

Overlooking the censurable...207, 217 

PAda 

130 

( 362 ) 

Pain 

Page. 

2, 6, 9, 151 

Paradise 

52 

Part 

42, 157, 158,159 

Partially 

159 

Partially eternal 

61 

Paitial similarity 

46 

Particularity 

6,43 

Paits 

158, 159. 161 

Parts m an atom 

164 

Past 

• 45. 137 

Paui&nikas 

3 

Perception 3, 4, 5 

, 7, 10, 29, 32, 33, 

37. 38, 39. 

40,41,42,55, 72, 

90, 91, 96, 1 

[02, 136, 166, 196, 

Perception of sound 

197 

1 ... 104 

Perfect tranquillity 

... 2 

Perishable 

65 

Permanency 

105 

Persistent 

. 67, 105 

Permanent intellect 

... 106 

Person 

151 

Persuasion 

- 52. 53 

Pervades 

125 

Philosophy 

10 

Physician 

5 

Pitri rma 

152 

Pleasure 

...6, 9, 151 

Pleasuie and pain 

... 121 

Ploughing 

147 

Possession 96, 

100, 118, 121, 170 

Pot 

.. 2 2 , 120 

PrAbhUkaras 

3 

Practice 

87 

Practicable 

170 

Praise 

- 53, 153 

Prakriti 

... 7. 131 

Pram&na 

... 1 

• 

Page. 

Prameya 
Pratyaksa 
Prayojana 
Preceptors 
Predicable 
Predicate 
Predominance 
Predominant quality 
Prescription 
Present time 
Piesumption 
Previous life 
Pride 

Primordial matter 
Principle 

Principle of injunction 

Probability 

Processes 

Produced 

Product 

Production 

••• 3. 7. 94 
.. i. 14 
172 

... * 187 

...182, 191 
...102, 170 
103 
53 
44 

3> 55> 56, 57, 192, 193 
... 87, 88 

154 

7. 90 
... 120 

52 

• • 3. 55 

99 

136, 147, 148 
27 

59, 112, 129, 130, 136, 
138, 139, Hi. 142, 148, 156, 

184 

Prohibition 

Promiscuously 

Pronunciation 

Proof 

Propagation 

Proper 

Properties 

Property 

Proposition 

Purftna 

Purifying 

Purpose 

Purusa 

96,135 
148 
62 

22, 106 
76 
164 
10, 29, 31 
15, 186 

ii, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 
21, 22, 207, 209, 210 

153 

.. 172 

1, 11, 14, 92 
... 7, 117 

( 363 ) 

Page. 

Page. 

Q 

Regulation 

...141, 142 

Qualities 6, 7 , 13, 68, 88, 89, 92, xoi, 

Reinculcation 

52, 53, 54,215 

124, 127, 139 

Relation^/’ 

135 

Qualities of earth 

89 

Relation of refuge and refugee 121 

Quality 6, 43, 75 

. 84, 100, 124 

Release 2, 6, 9, 

81, 152,153, 172 

Quality of soul 

... 112 

Reliable 

54 

Quality of sound 

103 , 

Reliable person 

... 5,49 

Question 

10 | 

Reliability 

54 

Questioning 

14 j 

Reliance 

... 48 

Quibble 

2, 20, 24, 25 

Remembrance 

... 84, 168 

Renouncing the proposition . 207,210 

K 

Repelled 

163 

Radish 

IO 

Repetition 

53,65, 207, 215 

Rain 

86 

Residence 

...159, 160 

Rapt in mind 

117 

Right knowledge i. 

, 3 . 19 . 35 . 36 , 55 

Ray 

Qi. 93 . 94.95 

Risi 

... 5 . 50 

Reality 

...161, 166 

Ri§i rma 

152 

Really eternal 

... 61 1 

River 

43 

Reason 13,14,15,16,17,106,115, 

Rumour 

... 3,55 

146, 168, 1 82 , 190 

S 

Reasoning 

1 

&abda 

3 

Rebirth 

• 9 . 155 

Sacred books 

8 

Rebuke 2, 

20, 23, 27, 28 

Sacrifice 

... sb 152 

Receipt 

121 

S&dhya 

46 

Receptacle 

150 

Sakya prftpti 

14 

Receptacle of happiness 

150 

Sam&ahir&ja S&tra 

... 167 

Reception 

170 

Sambhava 

3 

Recognition 10, 29, 31, 

105, 106, 107 

Sameness 

66 

Recognition of objects 

105 

S&nkhva Philosophy 

7 

Recollection 40, 114, 

115, 116, 120 

S&nkhyas 

3, 12,105, 117 

Recklessness 

154 

Sams'aya 

... 1, 14 

Reductio ad absurdum 

... 1 ,45 

Sams'aya vyud&sa 

14 

Reflection 

7 

Samskaia 

103 

Refuge 

160, 166 

Sarvajit sacrifice 

53 

Refuge and refugee 

... 121 

Satisfaction 

11 

Refutation 

142 

Satpaksi hath! 

... 204 

Regressus ad infinitum 

164 

Savikalpaka 

4 

Regularity 

.. 30, n8 

Savour 

* 

• 100 

( 364 ) 

Page. 

Page. 

Saying too little 

...207, 214 

Simultaneous cognitions 

. 112 

Saying too much 

...207, 214 

Simultaneously 97, 

106,112 

Scaffolds 

- 25, 76 

Simultaneous pioduction . 

114 

Scepticism 

8 

Sin 

81 

School 

... 12 

Single entity 

H 3 

Screened 

94 

Single thing 

133 

Scnptures 

l8, 19, 20, 90 

Sirali 

r 30 

Search of truth 

173 

Site of opeiations of the soul 

82 

Season 

86 

Sites 

6, 82, 91 

Seat of knowledge 

1 19 

Sixteen categories 

1 

Secondary meaning 

153 

Six-winged disputation 

204, 206 

Sacred fire 

150 

Skin 

7 

Seeds 

173 

Sloth 

154 

Self-existent 

14S 

Smell 

7,12, 86 

Sense 4, 7, 12, 40, 

6o, 82, 84, 85, 90, 

Smoke 

. . 4. 11 

92, 97 . 98 . 

90, 100, 102, 103, 

Smoky 

13 

107, in, 161 

Solution 

22 

Son 

uo 

Sense oigan 

8, 9 . 13 , U2 

Soul 6, 8, 15, 38, 39, 80, 81 

Sense perception 

45 

82, 84, 85, 86, 

88, 113, 

Sentiments 

6,9 

116, 117, 118, 

120, 135, 

Separately 

29 

150, 

153.172 

Separation 

9. 121, 113 

Soul is receptacle of happi¬ 

Series 

9 

ness 

150 

Series of reasons 

. . 185 

Sound 7, 35, 6o j 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 

Several marks 

143 

67, 68, ioo, 103,104, 114 

Shadow 

22 

130. 

131,163 

Shamelessness 

154 

Space 

39 

Shifting the pioposition ...207, 209 

Speech 

52 

Sidfting the reason 

. .307, 211 

Special qualities 

89 IOO. 

Shifting the topic 

207, 211 

Special practice of meditation 170 

Siddhanta 

1 

Spell 

34 ,184 

Significate 

... 191 

Spiritual injunction 

172 

Sight 

80 

Splitting 

49 

Sign 

...121, 191 

Statements 

129, 204 

Silence 

..207, 215 

State of form a t ion 

171 

Similarity 

4, 26, 43, 46 

Statue of stone 

129 

Simultaneous 

33 . 117 

Stealing 

8 

( 365 ) 

Page. 

Step 

138 

Study 

172 

Stupidity 3, 9, 133, 

134 . 135 154 . 

Subject 180,181, 

187, 193 . 194 

Subject in dispute 

106 

Subservient 

92 

Substance 6, 43, 70, 90, 92, 124 

Substitute' 

69 

Substrata 

104 

Substratum 

68 

Succession 

33. 107, 128 

Successive annihilation 

2 

Summer 

4 

Summum bonum 

172 

Sun 

•• 4 . 95 

Supersensuous 

91 

Supreme felicity 

1.3 

Supremacy 

77 

Sustain 

X15 

Sustenance 

77 

Syllogism 

13 

T 

Tactual 

99 

Tactual peiception 

41 

Taking 

76 

Tallness 

10 

Tangibility 

... 64 

T ank 

10 

Tarka 

1 

Taste 

7 

Tautology 

5 i. 52 , 54 

Teaching 

64 

Technicalities 

6 

Tenet 

... i, 13 

Term 

... 24, 26 

Testimony 

3. 5. 10, 29 

“ That ” 

76 

Thing 

... 94 . 111 

Page. 

Thing denoted 

186 

T horn 

... - 139 

Thoughts 

165 

Time 

39 

Tongue 

7 

Touch 

7, 8o, 97, 126 

Touching 

13 

Total absence 

93 

Totally 

159 

Tranquillity 

2 

Transcend 

... 161 

Transitory 

105, 122, 123 

Transmigration 

3 . 9 . 1 3 . 135 

Transparency 

.. 96 

Transpaient consciousness ... 7 

Treatise on knowledge 

172 

Tree 

148 

Trick 

85 

Troubles 

152, 154 . 155 

True knowledge 

2 

True nature 

... 1. 15 7 

Trusted to the soul 

153 

Tryasarenu 

162 

Twilight 

... 10,29 

Type 

211 

U 

Umpue 

31 

Unassailable 

73 

Unattended 

138 

Uncertainty 

56, 57 . i” 

Uncommon piopeities 

29 

Undemonstrab le 

132 

Understanding 

149 

Uneasiness 

9 

Unenvious peisons 

... 172 

Uniformity 

50 

Unintelligible 

...207, 212 

Uninterrupted course 

... 2 

( 366 ) 

Union 

Universal 

Universality 

Universal uniformity 

Unlimited dimensions ; 

Unmarked 

Unnameable 

Unobviousness 

Unperceived 

Unproved 

Unreasonable 145 

Unsaid 

Unsaid conclusion 

Untenable 

Untruth 

Upakles'a 

Upalabdhi 

Upamana 

Uttara Kurus 

Vacuum 

Vflda 

Vais'esikas 

Vais'e&ika Philosophy 

Valid 

Validity 

Vanquisher 

V apour 
Vai leties 

V ariety 
Viitsyayana 
Veda 
Vedantin 

Page. 

... 23 1 26 
... Y, 
/i<63 

- - S°J 
164 

5« I 

3i 

93 

4 7 
22 

150, 160, 186 
193 

193 

113 

Si 

154 

7 

3 

... 49 

68 

... 1 

3 
5 

55, 106, 147 

35 

29 

H 

... 68 

1 60 

2, 3, 23, 35 
5i, 52, 54 
3 

Verbal 

Veibal testimony 
Verbal trick 

r 

Vicinity 

Vision 

Visual 

Visual perception 
Vitanda 
Vocal actions 
Voice 
Volition 

Page. 

* 3 , 5 . 33,41 
81 

Warning 
Water 
Watery 
Waxing 
Web 
Whole 
“ Within ” 
Wife 

•* Without ” 

Word 

World 

Wrangler 

Wrangling 

W 

... 5 ; 

4, 7, IO, 12, 96, 10 
... 89, 10: 
... 7 < 

16 

42, 157, 158, 159, 160, 16 
... 16 

154 

16 

5 , 49 , 50, 75 , 7 < 

... 21 
I, 19, 20, 17 

Yoga institute 

Yogachara Buddhist philosphy 

Yogi 

‘•Yava’’ 

z 

Zeal for truth 

17 

16 

11 

1 7