GOS^EBKMENT OP INDIA 
ARCH/EOLOGICAL SURVEY OP INDIA 

CENTRAL 

ARCHEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 

ACCESSION NO 

No. l g / 

PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES 
VOL. XVI 

THE WORKS OF HSUNTZE 

THE WORKS OF 
HStJNTZR 

TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE, WITH NOTES 

HOMER H. DUBS, Ph.D. 

(Author of Hsilntse, the Moulder of Ancieik Oonfuciamsm) 

41 Gbeat Russell Street, London, W.C. 

1928 

Bate..,.- 

(rnufo. 

s’rnmisN AxrsTm and sons, ltd. 
PBisrarDEs, hebtiobd. 

PBEFACE 

npHIS work contains a translation of all the writings of 
Hsuntze that are both' genuine and important. Hsiintze’s 
writings were much more volumihons than those of either 
Oonfticiu^"' or *Mencins, and consequently contain, much 
repetition. To be sure to give a complete view of Hsitntze’s 
teaching, I have not hesitated to include some writings whose 
authenticity is doubtful, and some which are not so important. 
Matters of authenticity are discussed in the notes. 
Hsuntze was primarily a philosopher, and our aim is to 
imderstand his teaching, I have felt that it is more important 
to make the translation accurate and even literal than to 
make it literary. I hope, nevertheless, that it will be found 
to be readable. 

Matters of textual criticism: and explanation of the text 
have been so admirably summed up by Wang Hsien-Oh'ien ^ 
that I have felt free to omit such matters from the notes except 
where I have differed from him. To aid in reference to that 
work I have indicated the paging or foliation of that 
edition by numerals in the margin of the translation. The 
paragraph division is my own, though Hsiintze’s mind was so 
orderly that his writing falls naturally into paragraphs. The 
paragraph headings placed in the margin are also mine, but 
the paragraph titles placed in the middle of the page are 
original in the Chinese text. 

Should the reader prefer to begin with the most important 

X .y. ^ A photographic reprint ia published by the Com- 

mercial Bress, Shanghai. The sinologue is referred to this work for mattors 
of textual emendation and further elucidation of matters implied in the 
text. 

6 

r 

PEEFAOE 

parts of Hsimtze’s work, ke will find them in Books XVII, 
XIX, XXI, XXII, and XXIII, together with Book IX. 

This translation is throughout a new one, although I have 
not hesitated to make use of whatever partial translations 
have been made.^ As in the case of the first translation of 
every philosopher, there are probably mistakes, and no one 
will welcome corrections or emendations more than I. The 
translations of the q^uotations from the Odes and Eistmj are 
also my own ; I have compared them with Legge’s transla- 
tion and have quoted them by his numbering, but have 
ventured to make a new translation in order to bring out 
the pomt Hslintze uses them to prove. In matters of textual 
criticism I have generally followed the Chinese commentators, 
who have done wonders in clearing up the difficulties of the 
Chinese text. The best edition is that of Wang Hsien-chTen,* 
and I have indicated in the notes any variations from the 
emendations he proposes. Matters of historical criticism have 
also been taken up in the notes. While what we have now as 
Hsiintze’s works are mostly genuine, there are undoubtedly 
large spurious passages. Such can only be tested by the 
canons of historical criticism. In the transliteration of 
Chinese names I have followed in the maiu Wade’s system 
as that best known ; ® thongh I have not hesitated to depart 
from it in the interests of clearness or convenience, especially 
in the case of common words, where there can be no misimder- 

1 Cf. J7,, p, 47, note 3, for a list of theeo. 

* Cf. B,, p. 46, and note 2. 

® The pronunciation of Chinese names is always a stumbling block to 
those unversed in the Chinese language. However, they can take courage 
from the fact that because of the tonio oharaoter of the Chinese language, 
it is impossible to get even on approadmately exact pronunciation without 
prolonged practice under the direction of a Chinese teacher. Indeed, in 

PREFACE 

7 

standing of tlie Chinese character meant. A few Chinese 
moral concepts, such as Tao, Id, Yi, Jen, which, more par- 
ticnlarly than other terms, have no exact equivalent in 
English, and which are translated differently by different 
translators, are indicated by the transliteration in brackets 
placed after an approximate translation.^ It is hoped that 
the notes to the text will help to clear up dffdcult points 
in Haiintze^s writings. hTothing is more irritating than 
an unexplained allusion or an unresolved obscure 
sentence; Chinese texts axe full of commentary, the com- 
mentary often amoimting to several times the length of the 
text. Because an English translation is very largely an inter- 
pretation, and because I have omitted matters of textual 
criticism,® I have tried to avoid very copious notes which 
interrupt the course of the. thought. 

difierent parts of China tliore are greatly varying pronunciations for the 
flame character. So perhaps the best way is to make a brave attempt to 
pronounce the word as it stands and stick to what one gets. Vowels should 
be given the Italian pronunciation, i.o. the English short a and long i should 
be avoided. After Oh, K, T, and Ts an apostrophe indicates the presence 
of a strong aspirate, and the abacnco of an apostrophe changes the pro- 
nunciation of Gh to Dzh, K to G,T to D, and Ts and Dz, By following these 
directions the reader can come near to some one of the Chineae pro- 
nunciations. 

The name of this author, for example, Bfsiintze, is pronolmoed in the 
north shii-in-tz, with a Gk>rman umlaut il and a short The sound of the 
last syllable can be approached by pronouncing tzi (giving the «. its full 
sonant value) and leaving off the vowel. In the south,' this name is pro- 
nounced stin-tz, -with a short w ; this pronunciation is probably nearer that 
of the iime of Hs'bntzc. 

1 On the difSoulty of translating Chinese philosophy, of. J. Percy Bruce's 
translation of (Vhe' Philosophy of Human Nature, the Preface, pp. xii-xv, 
with whose remarks I am in full sympathy. 

! * Which forms a. largo part of the Chinese commentary. Por matters 
of textual criticism and emendation, cf. Wang Hsien-oh'ieu’s edition of 
Hsiintze. 

8 

PREFACE 

One of the foundations of Hsiintze’s pliilosopli7 is his 
conception of history, and consequently his writings abound 
in historical allusions. I have prefaced the translation with 
a sketch of Chinese history and cosmology as presupposed 
by Hsiintze, in the hope of making more systematic the 
reader’s conception of this essential to the understanding 
of this great thinker. More detailed matters are explained 
in the notes to the text. 

Hsiintze was one of the greatest of Chinese philosophers, 
the Aristotle of China. Yet his importance for us consists 
not only in his original contributions, but in the fact that he 
gave the earliest complete and systematic presentation of 
Confucianism, and so presents it in its primitive purity, 
uncorrupted by Buddhistic influences. His orderly mind and 
the fullness of his expositions served to bring out the implica- 
tions of Confucius’ teaching as nowhere else, and make a study 
of his writings indispensable for a Iniowledge of ancient 
Confucianism. For a systematic elucidation of that philosophy, 
the reader is referred to the companion volume to this transla - 
tion, Hsuntze, the Moulder of Anczeni Oonfuaianism, In the 
notes this work is referred to by the abbreviation 
H" It is hoped that this translation will aid in the 
comprehension of the philosophy which has been the most 
powerful moulding force in one great centre of human 
culture for over two thousand years, and thereby to an 
understanding and sympathy with one of the greatest of 
human civilizations. 

Homer H. Dttbs. 

GmoAQO, III. 

Srd Julyt 1926. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Pi-QB 

Pbepaoe 5 

Introduotion, a Sketch of Chinese History . 17 

Cosmology according to Hsuntze. The Five Emperors. 

Yao, Shun, and Yu. The Hsia dynasty, Oh'ie. T'ang, the 
Shang or Yin dynasty, Ohou-sin. The Chou dynasty. King 
Wen, icing Wu. Duke Chou. Degeneration of the Chou 
dynasty. The emperor's title. The feudal states. Cultural 
development. Literature. Break up of the old, Confucianism. 

BOOK I 

An Encoxtbagi-ement to Study .... 31 

The importance of study — illustrations. Meditation not 
as good as learning, OarefuUy select what you study — avoid 
heterodoxy. Do not he lazy or careless. Necessity of 
industry. Necessity of concentration, Learning and 
orthodoxy load to fame. Study what ? The Classics. The 
manner of the learning of the superior man and the little- 
minded man. The importance of the teacher. The 
importance of lA, Scholarship is to know things thoroughly. 

The perfection of scholarship leads to the emperorship and 
satisfaction of all desires. 

BOOK n 

Self-cultivation 43 

Prize self-cultivation. The small-minded man neglects 
self-oultivation. Action should be according to Li, 

Sundry ethical definitions. Control is by Li. Cultivate 
the will. The virtuous are kept in office, and the evil are 
rejected. Manner of walking. Speculation is unprofitable. 
Necessity of the Way {Tao). Necessity of a rule. The 

10 

TABLE OP CONTENTS 

Tules of proper conduct and the teacher. Characteristics 
of good and bad men. Heaven rewards the virtuous. Only 
slightly seek profit. The characteristics of the superior 
man when poor, rich, retired, fatigued, angry, and happy. 

BOOK IV 

On Honour and Shame ‘55 

The general distinctions between being honoured and shameful. ^ 
Oharaoteristies of mon, from the Emperor down to the 
evil-minded, man. Characteristics of the superior man and 
the mean-minded man. People fundamentally alike. 
Becoming a Yao or Ch'ie is dependent on cultivation. Man 
by birth is small-minded. Parable of tho man who had never 
seen good food. Men do not take to the Way of the Kings, 
although it is good, because their natures are bad. Natural 
desires. Hiches como from curbing desires, by forethought, 
and poverty from the opposite. The Way of the Kings is 
great and produces forethought. Guide yourself hy the 
Classics. The desires of everyone cannot he satisfied ; hence 
control them by Li and Yi. 

BOOK V 

Against Physiognomy 67 

Evil and virtue are according to the heart, not the physiog- 
nomy, Examples from history. Tho “ clever fellows '* 
of the day. Man is truly man because he makes distinctions. 

Follow the later Kings. Ancient and present times are alike. 

BOOK VI 

Against the Ten Philosophers .... 77 

To Hsiao and Wei Mou. Ch'ong Chung and Sliih Ch'iu. 

Miciua and Sungtze. Shentze and T'ien P'in. Hueitze and 
Teng Si. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

11 

BOOK VII 

. I’AWJfi 

The Coneucians . 81 

Duke Huan. The Lords Protector were only apparently 
virtuous. The Kings wore virtuous. How to keep in 
office. Howto fill a-liigU position. The stupid man. The 
correct attitude of the prime minister. The vicious serve 
the righteous — this is the nile of the universe. 

BOOK YIII 

The Merit op the Confuoian .... 91 

Duke Chou’s virtue. Praise of the Confuoian literatus. 

The Tao is the way tho superior man acts. Unorthodox 
doctrines. The benefits of study and selLdevelopment, 

The small-minded man. Pour grades of virtue. Tho Sago. 

The Classics. Rebuttal of criticisms of Duke Chou. The 
evidences of a great Confuoian. Common men, common 
Oonfucians, correct Confuoians, and groat Confuoians. The 
importance of the Tao. Original nature and acquired 
characteristics. Pour grades of men. The superior man has 
his standards. 

BOOK IX 

Kingly Government 121 

The art of government. Treat people according to Li. Keep 
a mean botween being distant and familiar. Inequality, 

Li, and Ti arc necessary. Follow tho people's will. How 
to be truly successful. Levying too heavy taxes leads to 
destruction. Force and warfare lead to destruction. 

The true policy of the strong ruler is to conserve his strength 
and not strive. The policy of tho Lord Protector should bo to 
make friends and not to gain territory. Tho policy of the 
King is to rule by virtue. The assistants of a King. The 
government of a King should follow tho Way of tho Kings. 

The principles of a righteous King are fairness and justice. 

A righteous King only tithes tho land; no customs dues. 

Benefits of free trade. The Way of the Kings can deal with 

12 

TABLE OE CONTENTS 

everything. Heaven and earth, Li and Ti, and the superior 
man. The essence of humanity is social organization. 
Conservation of resources. Duties of the officials. Good 
government and prosperity depends on the ruler. How a 
dependent state can become supreme through virtue. The 
militarist. Tho man who is merely secure, insecure, or 
ruined. 

BOOK X 

A Rich Country ISl 

The importance of social divisions. 

BOOK XI 

Kings and Lords Protector . . . .155 

The importance of loving the people. 

BOOK XV 

A Debate on Military Aeeairs .... 157 

The important thing in military art is uniting the people. 

Sources of strength and weakness. The q^ualities that 
make a general. The King's military regulations. The 
people welcomed King Wu. The Kings had executions, 
hut no battles. How can war ever be consistent with 
virtuous rule ? Ts'in’s advance is by an evil method. 

BOOK XVI 

A Strong Country 171 

Evil is from the rulers neglecting Yi. The people should 
accord with their rulers. Tt, faithfulness, Li, and loyalty. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

13 

BOOK XVII 

Concerning Heaven 173 

Do not depend on Heaven for prosperity, but depend on your 
virtue. No spiritual principle in the universe. Know- 
ing Heaven consists in the fulfilment of human duties. 

Good and bad action, prosperity and calamity are from man. 

The superior man imitates Heaven and Earth in their 
oonatanoy. Fame and character development are from one- 
self, not Heaven. Ominous signs, Heavenly and human. 

Prayer for rain. Li and Yi are the true principles of Ufe. 

Kely on self, not Heaven. lA, Criticism of the philosophers. 

BOOK XVIII 

On the Correction oe Errors . . , .187 

Secretivonesa and openness. Were T'ang and Wu rebels ? 

The right to revolt. Should corporal punishment be 
abolished ? Wore T'ang and Wu really powerful ? Did Yao 
and Shim abdicate ? Were Yao and Shun all that is claimed 
of them ? Were ancient burials mean ? Will the doctrine 
that insult is no disgrace prevent quarrels ? The only 
criterion of right is the Way of the Kings. Do men’s passions 
seek little ? 

BOOK XIX 

On the Eules op Proper Conduct (Li) . . 213 

JA arises from the necessity of regulating human desires. 
lA is to educate and nourish. The social distinctions of Li. 

Li is the greatest thing in government. Ts'u failed because 
it did not cultivate JA. The failure of Chou. The Kings 
conquered because they cultivated Jji. The three sources of 
lA. The Bites honour the anoient and follow one's liking. 

The perfection of Rites and conduct. Li is a cosmological 
principle. Li submerges unorthodoxy and makes the Sage. 
Observance of is the greatest thing in character. The 
embellishment and simplification of ceremony. Id cares for 

14 

• TABLE OF CONTENTS 

life and death. Puneial ceremonies. ¥imeral rites give a 
standard of normal emotional observance. Xd is the beautiful 
expression of emotion. Funeral litea are treating the dead 
like the living. ‘Why three years of mourning for parents ? 

Other relatives. \i^y three years of mourning for the 
prince ? Why three months from the enooffining to the 
burial ? Sacrifice is the catharsis of emotion. 

BOOK XX 

On Music 247 

Music is the expression of joyful emotion as appointed by tbe 
Kings — an answer to Micius’ attack. Music harmonizes 
and imites the people. Music turns the people's hearts 
to virtue. The new musio. Music and Li embrace the whole 
heart of man. Music reflects the universe. The district 
gathering shows that the Way of the Kings is easy. 

BOOK XXI 

The Eemoval of Prejubioer .... 257 

All evil is from being prejudiced. Anything unorthodox 
can bring prejudice. Examples of good and evil kings. 
Examples of good and evil ministora and oflicjals. Examples 
of good and evil philosophers. Confucius. The Sage Icnows 
the criterion. The criterion is the Tao. How know the Tao ? 
Emptiness, concentration, unperturbedness. To know the 
7'ao brings true greatness. The mind rules, but must be 
empty, concentrated, and unperturbed. The tub of water. 

Only one expert of each sort. Control of the emotions. 

The Sage. Uncleamess invalidates judgments. Seeing spirits 
and worshipping them. Scientific knowledge can never be 
completed, hence fruitless. Completion of knowledge only 
gained hy following the Way of the Kings as the authority, 
which is the end of aU knowledge. The Way of the Kings is 
the only standard of right and wrong. The secretive prince. 

TAELE OE CONTENTS 

15 

BOOK XXII 

FAGB 

O^f THE Rectification of Terms .... 281 

The sources of terms. Some psychological terms defined. 

The benefit of established terms is to make the people 
virtuous; othervrise there will be disorder. A now K i n g 
must reform the terms by three criteria. (1) The reason 
for having terms — ^terms mark the distinction between noble 
and base, alike and different. (2) The means of discovering 
similarities and differences — ^the senses and the mind. 

The mind gives moaning to impressions. (3) The 
fundamental principles in applying terms to things — ^the 
terms should express the meaning. Classes of terms. Terms 
made by common agreement. One or two realities ? 

Three types of fallacies illustrated. The wise prince 
guides his people by his proclamations and punishments. 

Names, designations, explanations, and dialectic. Litera- 
ture, names, speech, the Tao. The benefit of according with 
the Way. The dialectic of the Sage. The dialectic of the 
Scholar or superior man. The speech of the superior man. 

Desire is innate ; control depends on the mind. The Way 
is the best way to deal with desire. Elimination of desire is 
frrdtloss. Actions should correspond to the standard of the 
Way. Following the Way is all gain. Attempts to satisfy 
desires all end in failure. Inner contentment can vanquish 
poor oircumatances. 

BOOK xxm 

The Nature of Man is Evil .... 301 

Original nature is evil, hence cultivation is necessary. 
Crooked wood and blunt knives ; the Sages trained man's 
nature by Li and Yi. Reply to Mencius, Evil tendencies 
are innate ; virtue is against nature. JA and Yi oomea 
from tlie acquired training of the Sage. Man’s very desire 
to be good comes because his nature is evil. Rebellion 
and disorder come from within man himself. Man is 
clearly evil. The Sage Kings reformed man. Without the 

16 

TABLE OP CONTENTIS 

aothority of the prince there would he univerBal disorder. 
If man's nature were good, that would do away with the 
Sage Kings, X* and 7%. Man's nature is shown to he evil 
because it needs to undergo reform. Li and 7i are not 
from man’s original nature. Human nature is originally 
the same everywhere. The man on the street has the 
power of knowing and practising virtue and of becoming 
a Sage. Everyone has the capacity of becoming a Sage, 
hut not everyone exercises it. Shun says man is evil. 
The knowledge of the Sage, the Superior man. Scholar, 
the small-minded man, and the menial. Three grades of 
courage. The influence of associates. 

A Globs 

Chinese Index and Glossary , . . . 

PAOB 

319 

323 

INTEODUCTION 

A SKETCH OE CHINESE HISTOEY 
Ancient Chinese cosmology begins with two primordial Sding^ 
principles, the Yin and the Yang^ negative and positive Hstotze. 
respectively, throngli whose perpetual combination and 
mutation everything exists . Through these two were produced 
Heaven and Earth. By Heaven ^ was meant Nature, especially 
in its astronomical phenomena, the seasons, the weather, etc. 

By Earth was meant Nature as the producing and sustaining 
power, especially as shown in the growth of plants.® Through 
the combination of Heaven and Earth,® the Ten^Thousand 
Things were born, by which are meant everything between 
Heaven and Earth, especially living and movable objects. 

Erom them man arose. ^ Thus there was a metaphysical 
dualism. But the principle of action of the Yin and Yang^ 

Heaven and Earth, is that of Taa, which is not only a cosmo- 
logical and metaphysical principle, but also a moral one. 

Thus there was also a monism. This cosmology is stated in 
the Classics and is presupposed in Hsiintze, but plays no 
important rule in his philosophy. He accepted it together 
with the rest of the Confuoian history. 

Chinese received history goes back to fabulous ages. But 
Hsiintze wrote : “ Previous to the Five Emperors, there was 

1 This is the meaning given the term by Hsiintze . Other vrriters sometimes 
use it as synonymous with “ God". Of. the discussion of this term in H., 
p. 60 f. 

^ But this growth required the assistance of Heaven (rain) too. 

* Heaven was Yang and Earth Yin. 

* Cf. p. 235 for Hsiintze's own account. 

0 

to 

Yao, Shun 
and Yu. 

18 THE WOKKS OE HSttNTZE 

no reoord.^^ ^ He also mentions Snirien/ tlie inventor of 
lire (probably a culture hero), wbo, according to one account, 
selected Eu7Hsi or T‘ai Hao from among four of his disciples 
to be the first of these Eive Emperors.^ He is dated by present 
historians somewhere about the beginning of the third 
millennium b.o., although the best Chinese historians do not 
give any dates in such remote antiquity. The second of these 
Eive Emperors was Shen-Nung, the “ Divine Earmer ”, and 
the third was Hwang-ti or the Yellow Emperor The 
other two emperors are less distinct. They were very indistinct 
figures even in Hsiintze’s time. He writes, " Of the period 
of the Eive Emperors there is no record of there government, 

. . . because of the length of time intervening.” ^ They were 
probably only culture heroes. 

Eollowing them came three rulers, Yao, Shun, and Yu, 
who have since been among the most popular figures in 
Chinese history and models for all subsequent rulers. Eulogized 
in the Booh of History, they have been held up by Confucius 
and all subsequent Confucians as Sages or Sage-Eongs, com- 
bining the virtue and wisdom of the Sage with the power 
of the king — the most perfect combination to be found. 
After a reign of seventy years, Yao ® wished to abdicate. 
He offered the throne to one of his trusted ministers, who 

» p. 74. 

* p. 203. 

® According to another account, Sui-ren followed lE'u-hsi, which would 
seem to be Hafintze's opinion, since he held that there was no record previous 
to Fu-hsi. Of. EGrth, Th& Ancient History of China, for a fuller account of 
this history. 

* Of. p. 74. 

* Supposed to have reigned 2367-2268 B.o. Cf. JBooJe of History, I, iii. 

A SKETCH OF CHINESE HISTORY 

19 

declined it as being unworthy. Finally a young man named 
Shun, who had exhibited his filial piety by living at peace 
with an obstinately unprincipled father, an insincere step- 
mother, and an arrogant half-brother, and who by his filial 
piety had induced them to live together harmoniously, was 
pointed out as the most qualified ; and the monarch sent 
; for him and married him to his two daughters. Upon the 
death of Yao, Shun mourned three years, and then ascended 
j the throne.^ He organized the government, and passing over 
his own son, he appointed Yu,^ who had been successful in 
curbing the great floods, as his successor. Yu founded the Tho Hsia 
first dynasty, that of Hsia. This dynasty began with a 
virtuous Sage, but gradually degenerated to end in the 
person of Ch‘ie,® a tyrant and immoral wretch, the description Oli'ie. 
of whose vice and cruelty surpasses everything recorded in 
the history of the world, not excepting the darkest periods of 
imperial Rome. 

I The reaction set in under T‘ang, Prince of Shang, who T'ang. 
gathered the righteous forces of the coimtry, defeated and 
banished Chfie to his ancestral home, where he was kept 
prisoner, and founded a new d^masty, that of Shang. Later dynasty 
the capital was changed to Yin, and the dynasty was called 
by that name. But this dynasty too degenerated. The last 
emperor was Chou or Chou-sin,* who was spurred on in his Ohou-sin. 
crimes by a beautiful concubine, Ta-ki. Punishments were 
made severe ; a new form of torture was invented, in which 

^ Supposed to haye reigned 2268-06 B.a. 

2 Supposed to haye reigned 2206-2198 B.o. 

» Dated at 1818-1766 b.o. 

* Dated 1164-22 b.o. 

20 

THE WORKS OP HStNTZE 

The Chou 
dynasty. 

King Wen. 

King Wu. 

a greased copper pillar was laid across a pit of live charcoal, 
and the culprit was made to walk across it ; when he slipped 
and fell into the fire, Ta-ki was greatly delighted. When a 
relative and high official, Pi-kan, remonstrated with Chou 
upon his excesses, Chou cried out, “ They say that a Sage 
has seven orifices in his heart (the seat of the understanding). 
Let us see if this is the case with you.” He then caused Pi-kan 
to be disemboweled before him. Likewise one of the foremost 
of the nobles, the Viscount of Chi, was imprisoned for 
remonstrating. 

In the west, the state of Chou ^ had been growing strong. 
T‘an-fu, known as King T‘ai, had established it securely. 
His grandson, who is known best by his posthumous title, 
King Wen,® developed the state by devoting himself entirely 
to its administration, so that he changed it into a model 
of good government. By making war on neighbouring states 
which the emperor had asked him to subdue, he increased his 
military power. His son King Wu,® found himself at the 
head of a revolutionary party created by the cruelties and 
misgovernment of Chou. After a bloody battle the forces of 
Chou were completely defeated. He took refuge in his palace, 
and set fire to it in order not to fall into the hands of the enemy. 
King Wu, hearing of this, hastened to the palace to convince 
himself of the fact, shot three arrows into the Emperor’s 
corpse, descended from his chariot and stabbed the corpse 

^ Not to be confused with the Emperor Chou. In Chinese the emperor 
is and the dynasty a clear distinction ; but in pronunciation they 
are similar. 

* Ruled 1184.*36 b.o. 

® Ruled 1134-16 b.o., became Emperor 1122 b,o. 

A SKETCH OE CHINESE HISTORY 

21 

with his dagger, after which he severed the head from the body 
and suspended it from a crimson standard. This picture of 
King Wu, given by the historian, is quite different from the 
idealized description given by the Confucian theorists. 

King Wu now became emperor, and founded the dynasty 
of Chou which lasted imtil 249 b.o. After only six years as 
emperor, King Wu died, and his son and successor, King 
Ch'eng,^ was only a minor. King Wu’s brother, known as 
the Duke of Chou, was appointed as Regent, and the Con- Puke Chou, 
fucians (indeed Confucius himself) laud him as one of the great 
Worthies or even as a Sage, especially for his guardianship 
of the young emperor and his refusal to take advantage of the 
opportunity to make himself emperor. To him was due the 
organization of the new government. It was a feudal kingdom, 
arid Duke Chou saw to it that most of the feudatories were 
members of the Imperial Clan. Thus most of China came to 
be ruled by a small group of interrelated families with the 
same culture and traditions. 

But this new dynasty was no more permanent than the 
preceding ones. The feudatories increased their power at dynasty, 
the expense of the emperor, and the northern barbarians 
attacked, so that in 770 b.o. the capital had to be moved for 
fear of these barbarians. Erom this time the weakness of 
the dynasty began. Its sovereignty became merely nominal. 

At first the King of Chou was still nominally .honoured as 
suzerain ; then he became merely the pontifex maximus, 
as Son of Heaven, which title the emperor always 

Reigned 1116-1079 n.o. 

22 

THE WORKS OB' HStlNTZB 

The feudal 
states. 

Lu. 

Sung. 

The 

Emperor’s 

Title, 

liadji and finally lie was totally disregarded. Without any 
powerful outside enemies, China had no necessity to remain 
unified, and was torn between the dissensions of the feudal 
states. 

These feudal states now occupy the foreground of the stage, 
and in the classical period of Chinese literature and philosophy 
they were aU powerful. We must remember that the civilized 
China of that day was but a fraction of what is now China. 
Very little was known of the regions south of the Yangtze 
river. To the east was the ocean and the mountains of 
Shantung, with their barbarians ; to the north were the 
barbarians, and to the west were the mountains. Four seas 
were supposed to surroimd the continent. China was merely 
a group of states situated around the Yellow river. In the 
centre was Lu,^ the cultured state from which was to come 
Confucius. To the west was Sung,^ chiefly noteworthy because 
it was established by King Wu with the object of providing 

^ Lit. This title distinguished the emperor as pontifox maximus. 

The term now used for emperor, ^ did not come into use until appro- 
priated by the first Ts'in emperor. The Ohou emperors styled themselves 
** King ”, ;But as their power deteriorated and that of the feudatories 
increased, the larger of the feudatories assumed the title of King too, until 
there were many Kings. Emperors previous to the Chou dynasty are usually 
spoken of by their name, without any title, showing that the use of “ King ” 
by the Chou emperors represents an advance in the process of magnifying- 
the Son of Heaven. But in their temple name, these earlier rulers were 
entitled which is half of the later title for Emperor, and may be trans- 
lated “ Potentate ” or “ Emperor ”. It was a posthumous title given 
them, Eor the sake of uniformity, we may call them all “ Emperor ” though 
the titles applied to them vary. Cf . Parker, Ancient China, Simplified, p. 66 f . 

* In what is now the south of Shantung, 

’ ^ In the east of Honan, south of the Yellow river. 

A SKETCH OE CHINESE HISTORY* 23 

someone wlio stonld carry on the sacrifices to the monarohs 
of the deposed line of Shang. After the rebellion of Wu-ken, 
the son of Chon-sin, Wei-tze Ch‘i, a prince of the house of 
Shang, was enfeofied with this state and given the title of 
Duke, so that he should be able to carry on the -ancestral 
sacrifi-ces, and that the deceased monarchs should not be 
neglected. These, together with a number of other states, 
were aU small, and formed the centre of the ancient civiliza- 
tion. It was the states surrounding this centre which could 
expand at the expense of the surroundiug uncivilized country, 
and which became most important towards the close of the 
Chou period. To the east was TsT,^ which became wealthy Ts‘i. 
because of its salt and iron industries, although it could 
not expand as much as the others because it was hemmed in 
by the sea-coast. Under Duke Huan,^ his great prime Buke Huan 
minister, Kuan Chung, first stimulated commerce, enriched 
the state through a tax on the iron and salt, and then partly 
by diplomacy and partly by military expeditions, raised 
the state to the pre-eminence among the feudatories. The 
Emperor’s power had waned, and Duke Huan assumed the 
presidency of the feudal powers, called conferences of the 
feudal chiefs, and used his power for peace and concord in 
the empire. He was rewarded by the Emperor with the 
title of Lord Protector,® and even exercised a deciding voice 
in such matters as the succession to the imperial throne. But 
at the death of Kuan Chung he devoted himself to excesses, 
and died neglected by aU, in the fight over the succession. 

1 ^ In the north, of present Shantung. 

* Ruled 686-643 b.o. 

» Lit., 

24 

THE WORKS OF HStlNTZE 

Tsin. 

Han, 

Chao, 

Ts*n. 

Wu. 

Yueh. 

Ts*in. 

There were five of these Lords Protector, as five difierent 
states successively acquired the pre-eminence in the 
empire. 

On the north-west was Tsin,^ once the largest of all the 
feudal states. One of its Dukes became the third of the 
Lords Protector. But it was torn by internal dissensions, 
and finally divided into three states, Han,® Chao,® and Wei,* 
each of which became powerful. On the south was the semi- 
barbaric state of Ts‘u,® which had the whole Yangtze valley 
in which to expand, and so grew to be one of the largest and 
most powerful of the states. It was originally outside the 
limits of the original Chinese civilization, and this fact may 
account for the difierent character of the philosophy of Laotze, 
who was a native of Ts‘u, from that of the rest of China. 
The eastern end of this territory developed a separate state, 
that of Wu,® which became important, but engaged in a 
bitter struggle with its southern neighbour, Yueh,’ and was 
finally annexed by Yueh,® only to be swallowed up in turn 
by Ts‘u.® 

'The largest state of all, the final conqueror of all the others, 

^ ^ The southern part of present Shansi. 

* ^ South Shensi and western Honan. The division occurred in 376 b.o. 

* Shansi and western Chihli. The ancestral home of Hstlntze. 

* Southern Chihli and western Honan. 

‘ ^ Occupying the Yangtze valley. Cf. p. 217 for Hsuntze's description 
of its boundaries. Bos final home was in this state. 

* ^ In the south of Kiangsu. 

* ^ Chehkiang. 

* 473 B.o. 

» 334 B.o. 

A SKETCH OF CHINESE HISTORY 

26 

was: Ts'in, located in tlie west> Beginning as a very small 
state, it acquired power and territory throngli wars witli the 
barbarians. Unlike the others, its people remained simple and 
tmcorrupted by the luxury and cultural influences of civilized 
China, and it never produced a single scholar pf note, devoting 
its strength instead to military purposes. Yet its rulers took 
advantage of clever Chinese scholars who lent themselves to 
the aggrandisement of Ts'in, and by a combination of military 
aggression and husbanding of its strength, it finally conquered 
all the other states of China, then under its King Chen (known 
in history as Tsfln Shih Hwangti, or the First Emperor) it 
unified the country and abolished the feudal system. That a 
prince of a state which had yielded least of all to the cultural 
influences of the Confuoian (Chinese) civilization and which 
disregarded the Confucian code, should eventually conquer 
and attain the position which belonged by rights only to the 
most thoroughly virtuous, hence most thoroughly Confucian 
state — this fact was a shock to every thoughtful man of 
the time. 

This history forms the background and foundation of the 
Confucian philosophy. A great many more characters and 
places than are here mentioned are referred to by Hsiintze. The 
foregoing is what constituted history as the Chinese knew it, 
and the glory of rule continued to be the pinnacle of attain- 
ment, even to such a sophisticated philosopher as Hsiintze. 

In endeavouring to think this long period of history in terms Cultural 
of cultural development, we must remember that the stone 

^ ^ The south of Kansu. Expanded to include the greater part of Shensi. 
It should he distinguished from Tsin, 

26 

THE WOKKS OE HSCNTZB 

Literature. 

age in China probably lasted down until about 2500 b.o.,^ 
which would be about the time of Hwang-ti. The copper age, 
inaugurated at that time, lasted down to about 2200 b.o., 
which would be the time of Yu, from which would date the 
bronze age. The common use of iron came relatively late, about 
600 B.O., only a short time before the birth of Confucius. At 
the same time we must remember that dates prior to 800 e.c. 
are doubtful, and that we cannot be sure of any details prior 
to the Chou dynasty. However, the Chinese have always been 
extremely tenacious of the past, and thereby have made 
some surprisingly accurate deductions of the course of 
cultural development.^ 

Evidently there was a slow advance in culture and in the 
development of writiug, which was scratched or painted on 
strips of bamboo. At first literature consisted in brief, dry 
historical records and some poetry— all for the use of the 
governing classes. Thought was stereotyped by custom. But 
with the development of culture there came a breakdown of 
the central authority, enabling the different states to set 
themselves up as practically independent, and at the same 
time there was a good deal of intercourse, especiaEy among 
the governing classes and travelling merchants. Under 
these circumstances it was not surprising that literature and 

1 These dates are taken from a paper by Dr. V. K. Ting. 

* I refer to the statement made by a writer of the San dynasty, that 
" In Shen-nuug's time, magical power resided in stone implements ; in 
Hwang4i's tme this magioal power passed to jade with which weapons 
wore made ; in the great Yu's time that power passed to bronze (or copper, 
the character may mean both), thanks to which the great canals were 
excavated ; but now the magioal force is found in iron.” Of. also Hirth. 
p. 236. ' 

A SKETCH OE CHINESE HISTOBY 

27 

pHlosopliy should develop. The same phenomena appeared 
as in ancient Grreece — a group of sophists covertly attacking 
the received morality ; serious philosophy seeking for a firm 
basis upon which to found morals, and the development, in 
the most brilliant age of the nation, of a galaxy of thinkers 
and of a classical age in philosophy together with the dying 
out of this philosophical impulse at the end of the Chou period. 

But there was this difference from the situation in Greece — 
classical China was not a new country with only a few hundred 
years of background, but it already possessed a hoary past, 
with traditions of thousands of years of development, and 
stories of ancient kings and emperors, who, although doubtless 
they had been greatly idealized, yet presented ideal figures 
of whom any nation might well be proud, not figures whom 
later generations criticized as did the Greeks the characters 
of Homer. These ancient Worthies greatly influenced the 
time. Ancient China was already ancient in its own eyes, 
and the traditions and customs of the past possessed a 
tremendous hold upon the rulers and people.^ 

With the contentions of the various states for supremacy. Break up 
a new age for thought began. In politicsthere were bewildering 
sets of changes, when boundaries of states changed radically 
every year. The central authority was no more, and with the 
development of many states, each practically independent, 
freedom of thought became possible. Constant warfare 
compelled the feudal chiefs to take account of the latest 
developments in military science, and even seek for new 
inventions in military machinery or strategy. The new, 
not the old, became valuable. A group of sophists arose, 

^ For other aspeote of history, of. H., chap, ii. 

28 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

Confu- 

oiarnsm* 

learned in the art of persuasion, which they used to insinuate 
themselves into high position, without any scruples as to 
whom they served. The philosophers of the day went from 
court to court as did Confucius, until they found a master 
willing to employ them. Every custom, every inherited idea 
was subjected to criticism. There was the clever twisting of 
arguments, which in the absence of any formal logic or 
dictionaries, enabled the sophist to prove that white was 
black. There was the same training in the art of persuasion 
regardless of right or wrong which we find in ancient Greece. 
There was the subjectivism by which Ohuangtze doubted 
whether he was the man he knew himself when awake, or the 
butterfly which he dreamed he was whenasleep. There was the 
more than Cyrenaic individualistic selfishness in which Yangtze 
subordinated the whole world to his own enjoyment. And there 
was the repudiation of the past and its heritage by Micius ^ 
and the endeavour to formulate everything anew on the basis 
of utility and universal love. 

Among these currents of thought, Confucianism represented 
the conservative tendency. Confucius spoke of himself as 
“ A transmitter and not a maker, believing in and loviag the 
ancients ^ an extent seldom realized by the Western 

world that was the case. He did not seek to create anything 
new ; he merely re-edited the ancient records of his race and 
thus embued them with his own spirit. For him history was 
the vehicle of moral instruction, and besides his editing of the 
ancient works, his sole original composition was a history of 
his native state of Lu, which has ever since been extravagantly 
1 Or Mo Ti g g or H 
* Analects, VII, i. 

A SKETCH OE CHINESB HISTOB^ 29 

admired for the subtle way in which, although living in an 
age when the passing of judgments upon rulers was not yet 
possible, he combined moral lessons with history. Learned 
in the traditions of his race, he passed them on to his pupils 
by word of mouth, and they saw everything through the 
medium of his remarkable personality. After him his pupils 
carried on the tradition, and some of them wrote short 
treatises, now found in the Great Learning, Doctrine of the 
Mean, Booh of Rites, Classic of Filial Piety, etc. In Mencius, 
Confucianism found an able and brilliant supporter, who 
carried on the doctrine and was a powerful defence against 
all attacks. It is with a younger contemporary of Mencius, Hsflntze. 
Hsiintze, that we are concerned. The Confucians were the 
conservers of the heritage of the race. They attempted to 
preserve and teach the best that had been developed in the 
past history of the nation. Their original emphasis was not 
upon their own writings, but upon the ancient Classics, the 
ancient heroes, and ancient ways. In the writings of Hsiintze 
we find clear evidence that in that day Confucius was looked 
upon only as the greatest expositor and master of the ancient 
Way or Too, a Sage, but not an original genius. 

“ Confucius possessed the qualities of benevolence and 
wisdom and was not prejudiced, hence his scholarship and 
mastery over aU teachings were sufficient to make him equal 
with the ancient Kings. He possessed the whole of the right 
Way (Too) ; he brought it to people’s notice and he used it ; 
he was not prejudiced nor imable to carry it out.” ^ 

But the Confucians could not remain stationary in this 
time of rapid development. They had to reformulate the 
1 p. 265. 

30 

THE WOBKS OF HSt)NTZB 

ancient doctrines ; they had to systematize and develop 
their teachings to meet new attacks, and they were forced 
to counter-attack their opponents. In Hslintze we find this 
process going on. Oonseq[uently he is of great significance in 
the history of the development of Confucianism on its way 
to become the dominant and sole philosophy of China. In 
Confucianism we are not studying a Chinese philosophy, 
but the Chuiese philosophy, which has and always will 
exercise a profound influence over this great nation. And in 
Hsiintze we find ancient Confucianism coming to its fullest 
expression, and are able to understand this powerful force 
better than in any other writer. 

BOOK I 

AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO STUDY 

Tlie superior man says : Study eiiould never stop. Green 
dye is taken from blue, but it is nearer the colour of nature ® The import- 
than is blue. Ice comes from water, but is colder than —mustra^^^ 
water.® If wood is straight, it conforms to the plumb-line I 
steam it and bend it, and it can be used for a wheel, but its 
curvature must be in accord with the compass. Although it 
were dried in the sun it would not again become straight — 
the bending made it that way. For wood must undergo the 
use of the plumb-line to be straight ; iron must be ground on 
the whetstone to be sharp ; the superior man must make his 
learning broad and daily examine himself in order to have his 
knowledge exact and his actions without blemish. If a 2 
person does not ascend a high mountain, he will not know 
how high heaven is ; if he does not descend into a deep ravine, 
he will not know the depth of the earth ; if he never hears 
the wisdom handed down from the former Kings, he will 
not know the greatness * of knowledge. The children of 
the states of Kan,® Yueh,® Yi,’ and Ho,® all make the same 

^ These numerals in the text refer to the pages (folios) of Wang Hsien* 
oh'ien's edition of Hshntze, ^ ^ 

* Green. 

® I.e., through study, one’s ability can be increased. 

* The commentator, Yang Liang, comments : “ Its benefit to men." 

* A smali feudal state in Kiangsu, later engulfed by the state of Wu. 

* A feudal state in Chehkiang. 

’ ■ Two barbarian tribes on the north and east of China. 

32 

THE WOBKS OP HSttNTZB 

I 

sounds when born, but when grown have different customs — ■ 
teaching makes them thus. The ode says : — 

Alas ! Gentlemen ! 

You will not rest for long ; 

Quietly fulfil your official duties ; 

Love correctness and uprightness : 

Then the spirits will hear you 
And help you to great happiness.'’^ ^ 

The spirits are not greater than the Way (Tao^) which 
influences and reforms men ; no happiness is greater than 
being without unhappiness. 

3 Confucius said : I have already meditated for a whole day. 

Meditation jg good as a moment’s learning.® I have already 

not as good , ^ . 

aa learning, stood on tiptoe to see ; it IS not as good as gomg up on a 
high place and looking all around. If a person goes up on a 
high place and beckons, his arm does not get longer, but it 
can be seen at a distance. If he shonta with the wind, 
his voice does not gain strength, but it can be heard 
more plainly. If he borrows a horse and carriage, it does not 
aid his feet, yet he can travel a thousand U,^ If he 
borrows a boat and oars, even though he cannot swim, he 
can cross rivers or seas. The nature of the superior man is 
no different ; he needs to nse implements. 

Cj f 111 1. V 

select what south there is a bird, called the little tailor bird, 

which nses feathers to make its nest, weaves it with hair, 

aroid hetero' 

doxy. 1 The Book of Od&s (quoted according to Legge’s numbering), II, ti, 

iii, 6. Advice given to an absent official by his friends. 

•it 

* probably an expansion of Analects, XV, xxx. 

* A K is a third of a mile. A thousand li was the distance that certain 
famous legendary horses were supposed to be able to travel in one day. 

I AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO STUDY* 83 

and attaches it to reeds. When the wind blows, the reeds 
snap, the eggs break, and the birdlets die. It is not the fault of 
the nest, for it is well-made ; it is the fault of the reeds to 
which it is attached. In the west there is a plant called the 
She-kan. Its stalk is four inches long and it grows on high 
mountains. But if you look at it from the right angle at the 
edge of an eighty foot gulf, it seems to span the gulf. Not that 
its stalk grows longer, but the angle at which you view it 
makes it seem thus. Baspberry vines growing among hemp 
are straight without being supported ; white sand in black 
mud at the bottom of a pool is black too, because of the 
mud.^ The root of the Lan-huai ^ is called Chih.® If 4 
it is soaked in manure, a gentleman will not come near it 
and nobody wiU like it. It is not because its own substance 
is not excellent, but because it is soaked in manure. So 
when the superior man settles down, he should carefully select 
his dweUing-place ; when he travels for study, he should 
seek out a real scholar ; he should avoid heretical doctrines 
and pursue doctrines that are truly orthodox. When classifica- 
tions of things are made, there must be the things from 
which the classification is made ; when honour or shame 
comes, they necessarily reflect a man’s goodness. 

Spoiled meat produces worms ; rotten fish gives birth to Do not he 
maggots ; laziness, remissness, neglectfulness of one’s person iareiess. 
cause misfortune and calamity. An overbearing attitude 
of itself brings downfall ; a humble attitude brings success. 

Personal impurity brings hatred in one’s path. Pile firewood 

^ I.e., good and evil depend on one's associates. 

* A fragrant plant. 

* Also a fragrant root. 

» 

34 * THE WORKS OE HStHTZE i 

together in one place and the fire will burn violently. 
If land is perfectly level, and water is put on it, it will all 
be wet. Herbs and trees spring from their own land ; birds 
and beasts live in fiooks ; each follows its own kind, 
5 When the target is set up, bows and arrows will fly towards 
it ; ^ if the forest is flourishing, the axe will approach.^ If 
trees make shade, numbers of birds will rest there ; if the 
condiments are put on the table,® the guests wili gather. 
So a person’s talk can call misfortune upon him ; his actions 
can call shame upon him. The superior man is careful of that 
whereon he stands.^ 

inSry^ By gathering earth and making a hill, the wind and raiu 
originate; by gathering water and making a pool, the 
crocodile and dragon are brought forth ; by gathering ® 
goodness and making virtue, wisdom equal with that of the 
gods is obtained, and the heart of the sage is perfected. Eor 
miless a person adds steps and half -steps to each other,® 
he cannot go a thousand li ; unless little streams are gathered, 
rivers and seas cannot be formed. A fast horse in one leap 
cannot go a thousand paces ; hut an old broken down nag 
can do it in ten days — ^its merit consists in not losing time.’ 
If you lose your sickle, you cannot cut down a rotten tree ; 
if you do not lose your sickle, you can carve metal or stone. 

^ Archers ■will come for target practice when the target is set up, 

® A flourishing forest is ripe to be out down. The point is that there is 
always a reason for the advent of misfortune ; people callit upon themselves. 

3 Preparation for a feast. 

* His- learning. 

® Cultivating. 

* We should say, goes a step at a time. 

’ Of. the fable of the hare and tortoise. 

I 

AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO STUDY 

35 

The earthworm has not the benefit of claws or teeth, 6 
nor has it the strength of sinews or bones : on the one hand 
it eats dirt and on the other it drinks muddy water ; it has 
only one thing— diligence. The crab has six legs and two 
pincers. It has not a hole like the earthworm, nor has it any 
place it can trust for security ; but it pays strict attention to 
being fierce. Therefore he who has not a very deep purpose, 
nor a very clear perception, nor very continuously strives 
towards a goal is without illustrious merit. 

The man who tries to travel along both paths of a forked Necessity of 
111 .11 oonoentra- 

road will never get there ; he who serves two masters will tion. 

not be employed. The eye cannot look in two directions at 

once and see clearly; the ear cannot hear two things at 

once and hear clearly. The T'eng-she dragon has no feet but 

flies ; the s<g[uirrel has five talents, but cannot perform any 

one of them to perfection.^ The ode says : ^ 

The turtledove is in the mulberry tree ; 

Its little ones are seven.® 

The virtuous man, my prince. 

Is uniform in his deportment. 

1 Thus explained : the squirrel can fly but cannot fly over a house ; it 
can climb but cannot go to the tip of a tree, it can travel but cannot cross a ■ 
gulf ; it can dig but cannot cover itself ; it can walk but cannot go faster 
than man. It cannot do anytiung really well, though its talents are many ; 
the T'eng-she dragon can only do one thing, fly ; but it can do that well — 
it concentrates. 

® Book of Odes, I, xrv, iii, li 

® But the turtledove has only two young at one time I Do we have 
“ seven " because it rhymes with “ one " ? Or is this a piece of natural 
history fabricated to point a morajl ? Some commentators explain that in 
the morning the turtledove feedb its young in order, beginning with the 
biggest down to the littlest ‘ but in the evening it begins with the littlest 
up to the biggest ; hence it is uniform, because it equalizes things ! 

36 

THE WORKS OE HStiKTZE 

I 

He is uniform in his deportment ; 

His heart is as a knot.” ^ 

So the superior man ^ too knots everything into one.® 

7 In ancient times Hn-pa played the lute so that fishes 
Learning and swimming along came out to listen. P‘e-ya played the lute 
oTthodo^ so that the six horses of the imperial chariot looked up from 

lead to fame. . , , _ , . mi.* 

their feed. For there is no sound so small that it is not 
heard ; there is no action so secret that it does not leave 
traces.* “ If there is jade in the mountain, the trees on it will 
he flourishing ; if there are pearls in the pool the banks will 
not be parched.’* ® How could it be that the man who is 
virtuous and thoroughly orthodox should not be famous ? ® 
Study ^hat ? What should one study ? How should one begin ? The 
The dmm. begins by reciting the Classics and ends in learning the 
rites Its purpose begins with making the scholar, 

and ends in making the sage.® Sincerely put forth your 
efforts, and finally you will progress. Study until death 
and do not stop before. For the art of study occupies the 
whole of life ; to arrive at its purpose, you cannot stop for an 
instant. To do that is to be a man ; to stop is to be a bird 

8 or beast. The Booh of History records political events, 

‘ Tied to one aim. 

* The same word as “ prince 

® i.e., concentration and unity of aim are essential. 

* Cf. “ What is said in the secret chamber shall be shouted from the 
housetops." 

® A proverb still current. 

* By simply following the Confucian Way, fame and success is certain. . 

’ Or, “ rules of proper conduct," 

» Hsfintze has three grades of virtue and wisdom : scholar, superior 
man, and sage. 

I 

AN ENCOUEAGEMENT TO STUDY 

37 

The Booh of Odes ^ regulates sounds so that they shoidd attain 
the normal and not go beyond it. The Booh of Rites (Li) 
deals with the great distinctions of society through rules ; 
it is the unifying principle of general classes of action. Study 
advances to the Booh of Rites (Li), and stops there. ^ This is 
what is meant by the extreme of virtue. The reverence * 
and love of elegance * of the Booh of Rites (Id), the harmony 
of the Booh of Music, the broad knowledge of the Booh of 
Odes and Booh of History, the subtleties ® of the Spring and 
Autumn ^ are the completion of all creation. 

This is the manner of the superior man’s learning ; it goes The^manner 
into his ears, it is taken into his heart, it spreads through his i^g of the 
entire body, it shows itself in every movement. Speaking in 
low tones and moving gently are his ways of action. This minded man. 
is the manner of the little-minded man’s learning ; it goes 
into his ear and comes out of his mouth ; between mouth and 
ear there are only four inches ; how can that be sufficient to 
make his seven feet ’ of body beautiful 1 The purpose of the 
scholarship of the ancients was to improve themselves ; the 
purpose of the study of men at present is to exhibit it to 
others. The study of the superior man is to beautify himself ; 
the study of the little-minded man makes him a bird or calf,® 

To give instruction where it is not asked for is heedless 9 

1 E^om the context, it should he the Book of Music instead of the 
Prohahly there is some primitive error here. 

> As the extreme and end of study. 

’ Bowing and yielding the precedence. 

• Carriages and clothes. 

“ Subtle praise and blame, criticism and exhortation. 

• 'A histoiy of his native state composed by Confucius himself. 

’ The ancient foot was shorter than the modem. 

• He is not big enough even to be a beast ! 

38 

THE WORKS OF HStOTZE 

I 

talking. To tell about two things when a person asks for one 
is tiresome. Needless talking is wrong ; to be tiresome is 
wrong ; the superior man is like an echo.^ 

The In studying there is nothing better than being intimate with 

of the a worthy teacher. The Rites {lA) and Music give principles 
teacher. teaching. The Odes and History tell about the 

ancients, and are not familiar.^ The teaching of the Spring 
and Autumn is suggestive rather than expressed. Associate 
yourself closely with the teacher ; familiarizeyourself with his 
teaching ; reverence it as universal and common to every 
• age. Hence it is said : in studying there is nothing better 
than being intimate with a worthy teacher. According to the 
laws of learning there is nothing which gives quicker results 
than esteeming a worthy teacher. The exaltation of the 
10 rules of proper conduct (Li) is the second essential. If 
a person is neither able to love a worthy teacher nor to exalt 
the rules of proper conduct (Zi), how can he obey the teaching 
of the Odes and History by putting special emphasis upon 
heterogeneous subjects ? To the end of his days he will not 
be able to be more than an ignorant scholar. 

The In the beginning, the ancient Kings founded their rule 

Ij^ortanoe benevolence (Jen^) and Justice (Yi *) ; the rules of proper 
conduct (Li) controlled their ingoings and outgoings, their 
entire path. If a person lifts his fur neck wrapper, bends his 
fingers, rubs it with his hand, the hairs which follow his 
11 action are innumerable.® To try to act according to 
the Odes and History without making the rules of proper 

^ He replies only when and about what ho is asked. 

“ Not forward. 3 

® So a perfect ceremony is likewise beautiful. 

1 

AJ^ ENCOURAGEMENT TO STUDY 

39 

conduct (Li) your pattern, is like sounding a river with the 
fingers or using a spear to pound millet or using an awl in 
eating from a pot — ^it will not succeed. Eor if a person exalts 
the rules of proper conduct (Li), although he may not he 
renowned, he will be a learned man of principle. If he does 
not exalt the rules of proper conduct (Li), although he should 
investigate and discuss, he would be a useless scholar. If a 
person asks something evil, do not tell him ; if he wants to 
tell something that is evil, do not ask ; if he speaks about 
what is evil, do not listen ^ ; if he wishes to quarrel, do not 
discuss with him. If a student comes in the right way (Tao),^ 
then only should he be given instruction. If he does not come 
in the right way (Tao), avoid him. Eor one must first 
reverence the rules of proper conduct (Li), and then only can 
he speak of the means of obtaining virtue (Tao ) ; his speech 
must accord with the rules of proper conduct (Li), and then 
only can he speak of the principles of virtue (Tao) ; his 
demeanour must conform to the rules of proper conduct (Li), 
and then only can he speak of attaining to virtue (Tao), For 
talking about what one is not able to talk is heedless talking ; 
not talking about what one is able to talk is secretiveness ; 
talking without observing the listener’s countenance is 
blindness. The superior man is not heedless, nor secretive, 
nor blind ; he is careful to adapt his speech to his audience. 
The ode ® says : — 

^ Cf., “ If not right and proper, do not look : if not right and proper, 
do not listen ; if not right and proper, do not speak ; if not right and proper, 
do not move.” Analecis, XII, i. This saying has been cleverly embodied 
in the figures of the three monkeys. 

* According to the rules of proper conduct. 

* BooX) of Od%8, II, Tor, ix, 3. 

12 

40 

THE WOEKS OE HStNTZB 

I 

SoholarsMp 
is to know 
. things 
thoTonghly. 

The perfec- 
tion of 
scholarship 
leads to the 
emperorship 
and satisfac- 
tion of all 
desires. 

“ They are neither discourteous nor are they negligent, 
Hence the Son of Heaven ^ has gifts for them ” * — 
this expresses my meaning. 

To miss once in a himdred shots is sufficient to prevent a 
person from being classed as an expert shot ; to fail to go the 
last half step in a thousand li is enough to prevent a person 
from being classed as an expert driver ; to fail to understand 
the niceties of human relationships and to fail to concentrate 
on benevolence (Jen) and justice (Yi) is sufficient to prevent 
a person from being classed as an eminent scholar. Scholar- 
ship is to know things thoroughly and to unify them ; to 
be unified in learning and unified in teaching. The goodness 
of the man on the street is little, his lack of goodness is great ; 
as for example, Ch^ie, Chou,® and the robber Chih.* Scholar- 
ship must be complete and exhaustive. 

The superior man knows that his knowledge is not complete 
or perspicuous, insufficient to be classed as fine ; so he recites 
the Classics sentence by sentence in order to make them 
a part of himself,® he seeks to search into them in order to 
understand them ; ® he puts himself into the places of the 
writers in order to understand their viewpoint; he expels 
any wrong from his nature in order to grasp and mature 

^ The usual term for the emperor. 

* Referring to the appearance of the feudal princes at the imperial 
court, at which time the Emperor gave them gifts as well as received their 
tribute, 

* Two tyrant emperors. 

* A rebel. 

* Lit., he passes himself through them as a string passes through a 

» “ string " of cash. 

* Lit,, to go through them. 

AN BNCOUEAGEMENT TO STUDY 

41 

his knowledge : he makes his eye unwilling to see wkat is 
not right; he makes his ears unwilling to hear what is 
not right; he makes his mouth unwilling to speak what 
is not right ; he makes his heart unwilling to think what 
is not right ; imtil he obtains what he moat desires — . 
the five colours his eyes love, the five sounds his ears love ; 18 
the five tastes his mouth loves, the empire ^ which rejoices his 
heart. Bor this reason, he cannot be overturned by 
force ; mobs of common people cannot change him ; the 
coxmtry cannot move him. His life will be according 
to this, and his death will be according to it. This is what 
is meant by fiirmly grasping virtue. When he has firmly 
grasped virtue, he will be able to fix his mind without dis- 
traction ; when he has fixed his mind, he will be able to 
respond to the situation. When he can fix his mind and can 
respond to the situation, he can be classed as a perfect man. 
Heaven exhibits its brilliance ; Earth exhibits its vastness ; 
the superior man values his own completeness.^ 

1 Being emperor ; the theory was that a perfectly virtuous man would 
inevitably obtain the highest honour — ^become emperor. 

• His complete virtue. This is the Confucian trinity — Heaven, Barth, 
and Man. 

BOOK II 

SELF-GULTIVATIOK 

Wiien you see tlie good, you should be respectful and 13 
investigate yourself to see if you have this virtue or not ; 
when you see evil, you should be anxious and examine your- cultivation, 
self to see if you have it.^ If you possess this goodness, 
you should be firm in it and prize it. If you possess 14 
this evil, you should feel it as a calamity and hate yourself. 

Hence he who criticizes me and does so correctly is my 
teacher ; he who tells me that I am right and does so correctly 
is my friend ; he who flatters me mistreats me. Therefore 
the superior man exalts his teacher, clings to his friend, 
and greatly hates the man who mistreats him. If a man 
prizes and seeks for the good without ever being self-satisfied, 
and if he receives the admonitions of others and is able to 
be warned thereby, even though he did not desire to make 
progress, could he fail to do so ? 

The small-minded man is just the opposite of this. He is The small- 

, - . T , , , , - minded man 

extremely disorderly, but hates that others should criticize neglects seif- 

him ; he is extremely unworthy, but desires that others 

should consider him a Worthy ; his heart is like a tiger or 

wolf,^ his actions are bestial, but yet he hates that others 

should consider him a public injury. He associates closely 

with those who flatter him, and is distant from those who 

^ Cf. Analecta IV, xvii, for an identical statement. 
* Avaricious, 

Action 
should be 
according 
Li. 

U THE WORKS OF HStJKTZE ii 

would reprove or difier from Hm. Tlie correction of error 
is for him a laughing matter, and great faithfulness is mis- 
treatment. Although he does not desire to be ruined, can 
he. avoid it ? The ode says : 

“Now they agree, now they slander one another; 
Things are in a very sad plight. 

If they are given good counsel, 

They all oppose it ; 

If they are given bad coimsel, 

They all accord with it.” 

This is what I mean.^ 

The man who controls his feelings and cultivates his 
to character by the method of everywhere and always doing 
right, although he may not live as long as Peng,^ yet if he is 
strong in cultivating himself, his fame will equal that of Yao 
16 and Yu.® That which enables a person to act appro- 
priately to the occasion, that which enables him to be 
successful when in office,* and to bear poverty when out of 
office, is the rules of proper conduct (Id) and faithfulness. 
Whenever a person deals with flesh and blood,® purposes 
and plans, when it is according to the rules of proper conduct 
(Li), then his government will be successful. If he does not 

^ Booh of Odes, II, v, i, 2. This ode refers to the perversion, of judgment 
in. the country ; good coimsel is rejected and evil counsel is taken — ^wMch is 
the inevitable result when the government is in the hands of smaU-minded 
men. 

* Who lived to be 700 years of age. 

’ Sage-Kings, 

* The only gainful occupation for a Chinese ^gentleman is government 
office. 

® Lit., blood and breath. 

n 

SELF-CULTIVATION 

46 

act according to tlie rules of proper conduct (Li), he is either 
wrong ^ and confused, or careless and negligent. Food and 
drink, clothing, dwelling places, and movements, if in. 
accordance "with the rules of proper conduct (Li), will accord 
to the situation j if not in accordance with the rules of proper 
conduct (Li), they will meet with ruin and calamity. A 
person’s appearance, his bearing, his advancing and retiring 
when lie hastens or walks slowly, if according to the rules of 
proper conduct (Li), is beautiful ; if not according to the 
rules of proper conduct (Li), then he will be haughty, intract- 
able, depraved, banal, and rude. Hence a man who has no 
sense of what is proper (Li) is without a means of livelihood ; 
a matter which is not proper (Li) will not be brought to 
accomplishment ; a government without Li will not be 
peaceful. The ode says : 

“ Every rite (Li) is according to rule. 

Every smile and word is as it should be ” — 
this is what I mean.^ 

To lead the people according to the right is to give them Sundry 
teaching ; to follow ^ the right is obedience. To lead people ^e^Stions. 
according to the wrong is to mislead them ; to follow the 
wrong is sycophancy. To know that the right is 16 

right and that the wrong is wrong is wisdom ; to think that 
the right is wrong and that the wrong is right is stupidity. 

To injure the virtuous is slander ; to maltreat the virtuous 

^ Unreasonable, or against nature. 

“ Book of Odes, II, vi, vi, 3. A sacrificial ode. The reference is to the 
promise of good fortune and success when the sacrifices are properly per- 
formed, as set out in the rest of the verse. Cf. p* 227. 

■ The metaphor is that of a leader and followers in singing. 

46 

THE WOEKS OE HStlNTZE 

II 

is oppression. To say that the right is right and the wrong 
is wrong is uprightness. To steal goods is theft. Hidden 
actions are deceit. Easy talk is boasting. By turns showing 
alacrity in doing things and neglecting them is inconstancy. 
To hold fast to the motive of gain and to discard justice 
( Yi) is to be the most injurious possible kind of person. To 
have heard much is to have a wide knowledge ; to have heard 
little is to be shallow ; to have seen little is to be ignorant. 
To progress with difficulty is to be slow-going ; to forget 
easily is to be leaky.^ A little and ordered is to be well- 
controlled ; much and in confusion is to be disorderly. 

The Method of Controlling the Body and Nourishing 
THE Mind ^ 

Control If a person’s animal feelings are strong and severe, then 

oneself by it. him weaken them so that he may harmonize himself. 

If his thoughts are crafty and secretive, then let him imify 
17 them so that they may be easily good. If he is 
bold and violent, then let him guide his feelings, so as to 
control them. If he is hasty, talkative, and seeking for gain, 
then let him moderate himself so as to be large-minded. 
If he is inferior, tardy in important matters, and avaricious, 
then let him raise himself to a high purpose. If his talents 
are ordinary or inferior, then let him be importunate to 
make friends with a teacher. If he is impertinent and proud, 

^ Metaphor of a leaky house. 

* This seems to he a title to the section given by Hsuntze himself. The 
methods of controlling the body and nourishing the mind were much 
sought after by the superstitious of the day, and later by the Taoists ; long 
life and happiness were thought to be secured by this means. Here Hsiintzo 
annexes this interest to Confucianism. 

II 

SELF-CULTIVATION 

47 

then let him reflect on the calamities that will ensue. If he 
is simple, sincere, upright, and ingenuous,^ then let him make 
himself harmonious by the rules of proper conduct {Li) and 
music. Of all the methods of controlling the body and 
nourishing the mind, there is none more direct than proper 
conduct {Li), none more important than getting a teacher, 
none more divine than to have but one desire. These are 
what I mean by the methods of controlling the body and 
nourishing the mind. 

If a person’s will is cultivated, then he can be prouder 
than the rich and the honourable; if he has emphasized 
the right Way {Too) and justice {Yi), then he can despise 
kings and dukes ; he can contemplate that which is within 
him and despise outer things. It is said ; the superior man 
employs things ; the smalLminded man is the servant of 
things — ^this expresses what I mean. To work hard 18 
but to have his mind peaceful — do that ! To have small 
gain but much justice {Yi ) — do that I To serve an unjust 
(Yi) prince and obtain high position is not as good as serving 
a poor prince ^ and being able to follow the right. The good 
farmer will not refuse to plough because there is no rain : 
the good merchant will not refuse to trade because he loses 
money. The scholar or superior man is not remiss con- 
cerning the right Way (Tm) because of poverty. 

If a man’s deportment is respectful, his heart loyal and The virtuous 
faithful, his methods according to the rules of proper conduct office, Ld the 
(lA) and justice (Yi), and his ruling passions love 

' A type of character combining stupidity and honesty still recognized 
as common among the Chinese. 

* Of a little, harassed country. 

48 

THE WORKS OF HStMTZE 

n 

Manner 

walking. 

benevolence (Jew), were lie to rule over the empire, although 
he were harassed by the four barbarian tribes, people would 
not fail to honour him. If he presses forward to perform 
an arduous undertaking, but is willing to yield to others 
an affair that is readily done or pleasant to do, if he is upright 
and sincere, if he holds to his undertakings and is careful of 
details, were he to rule over the empire, although he were 
harassed by the four barbarian tribes, the people would not 
fail to keep him in office. If his deportment is haughty and 
prejudiced, his heart scheming and deceitful, his methods 
those of Shentze^ and Micius,^ and his ruling passions 

19 unregulated and vile, were he to rule over the country, 
although he were successful in all directions, the people would 
not fail to despise him. If he is careless, timid, and if, when 
there is an arduous undertaking, he turns it over to another, 
if he is persuasive and keen for it and if, when there is an affair 
readily done and pleasant, he shows no indirection in seeking 
it, if he is depraved and not upright, if he becomes careless 
when he has to do difficult things, were he to rule over the 
whole country, although he were successful in all directions, 
he would not fail to be rejected. 

f In walking be reverend and upright and do not get stained 
by mud. In walking do not bend your head as though 

20 you were going to hit something. If you meet a 
companion, bow first ; do not be afraid. For if a gentleman 
only wishes to cultivate himself, he is not offended at meeting 
a commoner. 

t 

t 

\ 

I 

\l 

{. 

i 

I 

‘IK?, lived during the time of King Shan of Ts'i, 342-24 b.o. 
Taught that the worthy need not be advanced. 

* M opposed Li, 

II 

SEM-CULTIVATION 

49 

The 'bay Chi ^ could go a thousand li in a day ; an old 
broken-down horse can make that distance in ten days too. able.^ 
If you wish to exhaust the inexhaustible, to pursue the 
illimitable, even if you go so far as to break your bones 
and utterly destroy your sinews, to the end of your days 
you will not be able to reach your goal. But if there is 
a limit, then, although a thousand U ^ are a great distance, 
whether slowly or quickly, whether first or last, how could 
you fail to arrive at your goal ? But the person who does 
not know the Way (Too), can he exhaust the inexiiaustible 
or pursue the illimitable 1 Can his purpose ever see its 
fulfilment ? Hence there is no reason why the problems 
of “ hardness and whiteness “ likeness and unlikeness,” * 

^ A famous legendary horse. 

> Meaning a great distance. 

* Doctrines of the Neo-Micians, Knng Sen-lung and Huei Shih. Rung 
Sen-lung’s “ Discussion of Hardness and Whiteness ”, reads : Can 
* hardness ‘ whiteness and ‘ stone ’ be three things ? Ho. Can they be 
two things ? Yes. The eye seeing a stone, perceives it is white, but it does 
not perceive it is hard, so calls it a * white atone ’. The hand feeling a stone 
perceives it is hard, hut does not perceive it is white, so calls it a * hard 
stone This shows that hardness and whiteness cannot be united into one." 
Because they are perceived by two different senses. Among the ancient 
Chinese, as among the ancient Greeks, the concept of a *' soul ” or ” con- 
sciousness ” into which the secondary qualities of things could be put 
and by which they could be synthesized had not been developed. 

* Likeness and unlikeness ” refers to the investigation into similarities 
and diSerencea or it may refer to the Heo-Mician doctrines found in Chuang- 
tze ^ "P* of the difference between being similar in the large and 
similar in the small. Being alike in being between heaven and earth is 
called being alike in the large. Things are of different kinds, what is alike 
is called being alike in the small. This is the difference between being 
similar in the large and similar in the small. In this passage it is also said : 

All things are completely alike and completely dissimilar. This is what is 
called being similar and dissimilar in the large. Wo say that all things 

60 

THE WOEKS OE HStNTZE 

II 

“ whether there is thickness or no thickness ^ should not be 
investigated, but the superior man does not discuss them; 
he stops at the limit of profitable discussion. Wonderful 
and gigantic conduct is certainly difficult, but the conduct 
of the superior man stops at the limit of what is profitable. 

21 Eor the scholar says, “ Wait,” and he ^ stops and waits 
for me; I go on and catch up with him. Then how 
can it be that either slowly or quickly, either first or last, he ® 
cannot reach the goal together with him ? * Eor a lame 
tortoise can go a thousand li by not resting a half step ; 
by heaping up earth and not stopping, a mound or hill can 
be made high. By stopping its source and opening its channel, 
a large or small river can be dried up ; by alternately 
advancing and retreating, going to the left and the right, the 
six noble steeds ® could not arrive at the goal. The ability : 
of two men may be greatly difierent ,* how could it be that a j 
lame tortoise could be equal to the six noble steeds ? Yet ^ 

I 

are nevertheless things, all are alike in this respect, hence all things are f 
similar. If you separate and distinguish them, then a man's ears, eyes, nose, I’ 
mouth, face, members, the branches, leaves, and flowers of herbs and j| 
trees are reaUy all dissimilar ; henoe things arc completely dissimilar. This jf 
teaching is one form of relativism. ! 

1 In Ohuangtze, ^ it is also said : What has no tluolcness 

cannot be increased in thioloioss. If its size is a thousand U, it has no 
thickness ; meaning that which is the limit ot thickness cannot have thick- '• 
ness. A thousand U here means the limit of thiclmeas. Because that which ' 
has no thickness cannot be increased in thickness, that which has infinite ; 
thickness also has no thickness, since it cannot be increased in thickness. ; 
For other examples of such logical puzzles, cf. if., p. 219 ff. ' 

® The teacher. 

8 The scholar. 

* The teacher. 

* A famous legendary team of horses. 

n 

SELF-CULTIVATION- 

61 

the lame tortoise arrives at the goal and the six noble steeds 
do not. There is no other reason for it than that the one 
keeps on and the other does not. 

Though the road (Tao) be short, if a person does not travel 
on it, he will never get there ; though a matter be small, {Tao). 
if he does not do it, it will never be accomplished ; if a man 
takes many days of leisure, he will not show much progress. 

He who loves to follow the Way and carries it out is a scholar. 

He who has a firm purpose and treads the Way is a superior 
man. He who is inexhaustibly wise and illustrious in virtue 
is the sage.^ 

A man who is without a rule for action is bewildered ; 22 
if he has a rule, but does not understand it, he is timid; Necoeaityofa 
if he relies upon the rule and knows of what kind it is, then 
only is he calm. 

The rules of proper conduct {Li) is that whereby a person's 
character is corrected ; a teacher is that whereby the rules oonduot and 
of proper conduct (Li) are corrected. Without rules for t®»olier. 
proper conduct (Li) how can I correct myself ? Without 
a teacher how can I Icnow what particular action is according 
to the rules of proper conduct 1 If a person is to live according 
to the rules of proper conduct {IA\ then his emotions must be 
naturally those that go with the rules of proper conduct (Li ) ; 
if he is to speak like his teacher, then his knowledge must be 
equal to that of his teacher. When a person’s emotions are 
naturally in accordance with the rules of proper conduct (Xt), 
and his knowledge is equal to that of his teacher, then he is 
a sage. For to go contrary to the rules for proper action 

^ These are the three grades of virtue and wisdom regularly mentioned 
by Hshntze. 

li 

62 

THE WORKS OE HSt)NTZE 

II 

(Li) is the same as to he without a rule for action ; to go 
contrary to one’s teacher is the same as to be without a 
teacher. Not to hold as right the ways of one’s teacher 
and to prefer one’s own ways, is like a blind man distinguishing 
colours or a deaf man distinguishing sounds ; there is no way 
of getting rid of confusion and error. Hence the student 
follows the rules of proper conduct (Li) and the ways of his 
teacher. But the teacher considers himself to be the correct 
measure of all things and honours that which nature has 
implanted within him. The ode says : 

“ He has not learned, he did not know, 

But he followed the laws of God ” — 
this expresses what I mean.^ 

Oharaoter- Upright, honest, obedient, and reverent to elders — ^such 
and ^ i^ian. Add to that 

a love of study, respectfulness, brilliancy, and not feeling 
himself superior to his equals — such an one can become a 
superior man. Weak, stupid, afraid to work, without 
humility or a sense of shame, but fond of eating and drinking — ■ 
such an one can be called a bad young man. Add to that 
the qualities of being dissolute, overbearing, disobedient, 
dangerous, injurious, and disrespectful — such an one can 
be called an unfortunate young man, who, when led into 
wrong, may suffer capital punishment. 

If a person treats the aged and honourable as they should 
be treated, men in middle life will give him their allegiance. 

^ Book of Odes, III, i, vii, 7. Tbe jneaTiing of this passage is 
that the way of the teacher secretly agrees with the way of Heaven, as 
King Wen imoonsciously followed the laws of Heaven, although he had 
not studied them. 

Heaven 
rewards the 
virtuous. 

n 

SELF-CULTIVATION 

63 

If he treats leniently the unworthy, then those who are 
wise will gather to him. If in his actions he does 23 
not pay attention whether others know of them or not, 
and gives without seeking for a return,, then the worthy 
and xmworthy will unite in honouring him. If a man has 
these three characteristics, although he had great misfortunes, 
would Heaven fail to do as he wished ? ^ 

The superior man only slightly seeks for profit ; he is quick profit!^ 
to keep away from evil. He is timorous in fleeing shame 
and courageous in doing the right {Tao), 

The superior man, when poor, has a profound purpose ; Character- 
when rich or honourable, he is respectful ; when retired, isticp of the 
he does not become lazy ; when working hard or fatigued, 
his bearing is not careless. When angry, he does not 24 
go to the extreme and snatch things away ; when 
happy, he does not go to the extreme and give things away, angry, and 
The superior man, when poor, has a profound purpose, 
because he stresses benevolence (Jen). When rich or honour- 
able, he is respectful, because he humbles himself. When 
retired, he does not become lazy, because he carefully selects 
the principles of his life. When working hard or fatigued, his 
bearing is not careless, because he esteems the beautiful.^ 

When angry he does not go to extremes and snatch things 
away ; when happy, he does not go to extremes and give 
things away, because in this way he overcomes selfishness. 

The History says — 

1 The Chinese implies the answer, No. 

• Not the heauty of painting, soulpture, or music, htit the beauty of perfect 
action. 

64 

THE WORKS OF HStJNTZE 

II 

“Witliout any selflsli likings 

Eeverence tke Way (Tao) of the Kings ; 

Without any selfish dislikes, 

Reverence the path of the Kings.” ^ 

This speaks of the superior man’s ability to make public 
spirit overcome selfish desires. 

* Book of History, V, iv, 14. Also quoted on p. 186. 

BOOK IV 

ON hon'otje and shame 

The general distinction between honour and shame 15 ^ 

depends on the usual circumstances attendant on being Tte gensral 

^ ... TO disbmotions 

peaceful or uneasy, beneficial or injurious to others. * between 

The man who first thinks of justice (Yi) and secondly of gain ^o^^oured 
is honourable ; he who first thinks of gain and second of and ehame- 
justice (Y-i) is shameful. He who has this honour ordinarily 
keeps his office ; ® he who has this shame is ordinarily out of 

1 The first half of the present text of this book does not relate to the 
subject of the book ; which fact would seem to indicate that it is spurious 
or added subsequently to the original writing. Tlie various books of Hsxintze’s 
writing are usually quite unified compositions, and the first section always 
relates to the subject of the book. The usual Chinese practice is to entitle 
a book by its first words, as with some books of the Bible ; in this case 
that criterion would indicate that the book should begin with the words, 

“ Honour and shame,” thereby eliminating the first half of the book. The 
omitted portion is similar to Book III, which also docs not seem to be genuine. 

Its vocabulary is similar but simpler than that of Hsuntze ; it does not 
contain anything new or significant ; it contains a description of tho superior 
man on the lines of that in the last part of Book II ; an exaltation of 
sincerity; a classification of court officials as learned officers, public- 
spirited officers, upright officers, and mean-minded men; the evils of 
piejudioedness, etc. The omitted portion of Book IV contains homilies 
on the subjects of respectfulness, brawling, courage, and grumbling, in the 
Confuoian manner. There is a difl^erence in the literary quality of the two 
parts of tho books. 

* Of. Mencius, II, I, iv for a saying that benevolence brings glory and 
the opposite brings disgrace, and Mencius, VI, i, xvi for distinguishing 
human nobiUty and Heaven’s nobility. 

* In ancient China the only “ gentleman's ” occupation was to be a 
government official. Although there was a feudal nobility, theoretically 
anyone of merit could win his way to high office and distinction. However, 

66 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

IV 

Character- 
istics of men, 
from the 
emperor 
down to the 
evil-minded 
man. 

office. TJie man in office rules others ; the man out of office 
is ruled by others. This is the general distiuction between 
honour and shame. He who is honest and upright is 
ordinarily at peace in his mind and beneficial to others ; he 
who is dissolute and overbearing is ordinarily uneasy in his 
mind and injurious to others. He who is at peace in his mind 
and beneficial to others is ordinarily joyous and calm ; he who 
is uneasy in his mind and injurious to others is ordinarily in 
grief and dangerous circumstances. He who is joyous and 
calm ordinarily has a long life ^ ; he who is in grief and danger 
ordinarily dies young. ^ These are the usual circumstances of 
being peaceful or uneasy, beneficial or injurious. 

Though Nature produced all men, there are distinctions 
whereby they take difierent stations in life. The emperor takes 
his station over the empire because his virtue and character are 
great, his wisdom and power of thought are very illustrious. 
The feudal nobles ® take their station over their dukedoms 
because their government is lawful, their calling the people 
up for public service is timely,^ their hearing of law-suits and 
their judicial decisions are fair ; on the one hand they are 

the situation was not as ideal as Hsuntze makes it to be ; his word 
" ordinarily " covers a multitude of exceptions. The general tendency 
of the Confucians was to idealize history, with a view to making it a moral 
lesson for posterity, 

1 Esteemed as a great happiness, not only because of the extended span 
of days, but because of the honours and authority in the hands of the 
patriarchal head of the clan. 

“ The Chinese word moans “ imder thirty 

* Dukes and marquises. 

* Military service should not interfere with agriculture, especially 
with the times for planting and harvesting the crop. 

IV 

ON HONOUR AND SHAME 

67 

willing to obey tbe orders of tbe emperor and on the other 
they are willing to protect their subjects.^ The officers and 
prefects ^ hold their lands and cities because their purpose 
and actions are cultivated ; they are skilled in meeting 
officials ; on the one hand they are willing to obey their 
superiors and on the other hand they are willing to take 
their responsibilities. The officials and all the government 
servants receive their emoluments and rank because they 
preserve the laws and regulations, the weights and 16 
measures, capital and other punishments, local maps, and 
Domesday books, without knowing their meaning, but they 
carefully guard them, not daring to decrease or increase them, 
and hand them down from father to son ® for the use of the 
king or duke — ^in this way, although the three great dynasties 
are gone, their methods of government are preserved. 
Ordinary people get warm clothes, full stomachs, long life, 
and plenitude of days, and escape from capital and other 
punishments when they show filial piety and are reverent 
to their elders, when they are honest, when they act 
carefully and toil laboriously, when they manage their 
affairs but do not dare to be indolent or proud. Evil men 
gain uneasiness, shame, death, and punishment because 
they excuse false doctrines and gloss over evil speech; 

1 This was a period wiien the emperor was a mere figurehead and the 
feudal nobles did as they pleased. Hsiintzo is speaking of the ideal, not the 
real. No Tiironder the philosophers were called impractical by their own 
generation ! 

* ir two grades of high officials who governed minor divisions 

of territory. They were not part of the feudal nobility, but were selected 
by the heads of the various states. 

® Not so much the oral tradition as the cumbersome pieces of bamboo 
then used for books. 

68 

THE WOKKS OF HStNTZE 

IV 

because they do strange things ^ ; they slander, boast, assault 
and rob ; they are dissolute, overbearing, proud, and 
oppressive ; they change from one party to another ^ to save 
■ their lives shamefully in the midst of a turbulent world. 

They gain uneasiness and danger because their reflections 
17 are not deep, their choices are not careful, their decisions 
as to what to take and what to refuse are inferior and 
dilatory. 

Character- The superior man and the mean-minded man may be 

euperiOT* man the same in ability, original nature, knowledge, and capacity ; 

and the ftonour and hate shame ; they love what is beneficial 

mean-mmded •' . 

man. and hate what is injurious — ^this is that wherein the superior 

man and the mean-minded man are alike. If, however, 
you compare the way (Too) by which they seek their goals, 
then they are different. The mean-minded man is strong 
at boasting, yet desires that others should believe in him ; 
he is strong on imposing on people, yet desires that people 
should be attached to him ; his actions are those of birds and 
beasts, yet he desires that others should consider him virtuous. 
In thought he finds it dijBG.oult to know things ; in action 
he finds it difficult to find peace ; and in what he supports 
he finds it difficult to be established. In the end he 
will certainly never get what he wants and will certainly 
meet with what he hates. On the other hand, the superior 
man is faithful, and so desires that others should believe 
in him; he is loyal, and so desires that others should be 
attached to him ; he cultivates uprightness ; in ruling he is 

^ This prejudice of an ago of custom against novelty has been perpetuated 
by Confucianism. 

* Act as turncoats. 

IV 

ON HONOUR AND SHAME 

59 

discriminating, and so desires tKat otliers shotiLd consider 
him good. In thouglit he finds it easy to know things, in 
action he finds it easy to find peace ; in what he supports 
he finds it easy to be established. In the end he will certainly 
gain what he wants, and will certainly not meet with what 
he hates. For this reason, when out of office, he cannot 
be tinknown; when in office, he will certainly be greatly 
illustrious . If he should die, his name would yet be illustrious. 
The small-minded man always stretches his neck and stands 
on tiptoe and likes to say, “ That man’s knowledge and 
ability is certainly superior to that of ordinary men.” ^ 
For he does not know that he himself is no whit difierent 
from that other man. Thus the superior man looks at things 
rightly, but the small-minded man looks at things wrongly. 
For if a person thoroughly investigates the knowledge and 
capacities of the small-minded man, it will be seen 
that he has more than appears, and that he could 
do what the superior man does. For example, the man of 
Yueh 2 is satisfied with Yueh ; the man of Ts'u ^ is satisfied 
with Ts‘u; the superior man is satisfied with central 
China. ^ This is not because of his knowledge, capacity, 18 
ability, or original nature ; it is because of difierences in 
looking at things and in habits. Benevolent, righteous, 
and virtuous acts are ordinarily safe methods of action ; 
however, it is possible that they may be dangerous.® Filthi- 

^ I.e., “ that man " ia not an ordinary man, but a Worthy. 

* A semi-barbario state on the south-east border of China. 

2 A less barbaric feudal state south of the rest of China. 

* The central and more civihzed states. Lit, . (A textual emendation.) 

® Hstintze admits this possibility, b ut passes on and disregards it. This 

act did not alter in his mind the Confuoian d ootrine (which was not original 
with him) that virtna brought prosperity and vice failure. 

60 

T HE WORKS OF HStJNTZE 

IV 

People 
fundament* 
ally alike. 

Becoming a 
Yao or a 
Oli'ie is 
dependent on 
cultivation. 

ness, lying and clieating, assault and robbery are ordinarily 
dangerous metbods of action ; however, it is possible that 
they may be safe. The superior man considers (Too) what 
is usual ; the small-minded man considers (Too) what is 
imusual.^ 

Everyone has characteristics in common with others. 
When hungry he desires to eat ; when cold he desires to be 
warm ; when toiling he desires to rest ; he wants what is 
beneficial and hates what is injurious — ^with these attitudes 
man is born ; he has them without waiting to learn them ; 
in these respects Yao ^ and Ch^ie ^ were alike. The eye 
distinguishes white and black, beautiful and ugly ; the ear 
distinguishes clear and confused tones and sounds ; the mouth 
distinguishes sour and salt, sweet and bitter ; the nose 
distinguishes perfume and fragrance, strong-smelling and 
rank odours; the bones, body, the skin, and the wrinkles 
distinguish cold and hot, sickness and itching. Man is bom 
with these senses too ; he has them without waiting to learn 
them ; in these respects Yao and Ch'ie were alike. 

A person can become a Yao or a Yu j he can become 
a Ch^ie or a Chih * ; he can become a day labourer or an 
artisan ; he can become a farmer or a merchant ; it depends 
on what trainmg he has accumulated ® from his ways of 

1 Therefore the small man thinks of the few who are sucoessful in evil, 
end hopes to be successful like them. 

* A great and good emperor. 

® An evil tyrant. 

* A notorious robber. 

® Lit. “ what he has accumulated." The Chinese language does not 
distinguish between things which can be counted and those that cannot, 
between the many and the much ; virtue and other accomplishments are 
commonly spoken of as capable of quantitative increase or 

IV 

ON HONOUR AND SHAME 

61 

looking at things and his habits. To be a Yao or 19 
a Yu ordinarily brings peacefulness and honour; to be a 
Ch4e or a Chih ordinarily brings danger and shame ; to be 
a Yao or a Yu ordinarily means pleasure and ease ; to be a 
labourer, artisan, farmer, or merchant, ordinarily means 
trouble and toil ; but most men are the latter and few are 
the former. Why is it 1 Because their natures are low. 

Yao and Yu were not bom great ^ ; but they began in trouble, 
and completed their development by artificial cultivation; 
they had to wait and strain all their resources and then 
only could they be perfect. 

Man by birth certainly is a small-minded man. Without Man by bixth 
a teacher or a set of principles, he can only think of profit.® mSed' 
Man by birth certainly is a small-minded man. If in addition 
he meets an evil age, and is influenced by bad customs, from 
the small he will repeat their smallness, from the evil he will get 
evil. Unless the superior man gains skill to meet the situation, 
he will not have the means wherewith to open up a way for 
goodness to enter his heart. Now, how are men’s mouths 
and minds to know the rules of proper conduct (Li) and 
justice (Yi)? How are they to learn courtesy? How are 
they to learn modesty and shame, firmness of principle and 
the accumulation of virtue ? But they only eat and chew, 
find things good and fill themselves full. If a man has no 
teacher or set of principles, his mind is just like his mouth 
or belly.® 

^ Lit,, “ wholly as they were." 

* As the goal of his activities. 

® There is a play on words ; the word for belly also means “ the seat cX 
the mind and is used in the latter sense above. 

62 

THE WORKS OE HSOHTZB 

IV 

Been good 
food. 

Mon do not 
take to the 
Way of the 
IGngg, 

although, it is 

Parable of Now suppose that a jnau from birth, had never seen meat 

the man who grain, but had only seen pulse, coarse greens, and bran, 
had never & » m t i •, 

then he would be very well satisfied with them. But if 
suddenly he should clearly discern someone holding meat and 
grain coming to him, in astonishment he would gaze at it and 

20 say “ How funny these things are 1 He would smell them 
and they would gratify his nostrils ; he would taste them and 
they would be sweet in his mouth ; he would eat them and 
they would be pleasant to his body. Then he would certainly 
get rid of his old diet and take the new food. 

Now with this parable compare the Way {Too) of the 
ancient Kings, the unifying principles of benevolence (Jen) 
and justice (7i). By them people live in society ; by them 
go^d,lbecause they can preserve and nourish themselves ; by them they 
can make their ways elegant and beautiful : by them they can 
be peaceful and secure. Now compare the Way (Too) of 
Gh‘ie and Chih — ^it is unlike the other. Is it not just as unlike 
as the meat and grain is unlike bran ? But most men follow 
the latter and few follow the former. Why ? Because 
their nature is low. This lowness is the common misfortune 
of the world, the great calamity and great injury of man. 
Hence it is said, The benevolent (Jen) man likes to tell men 
the Way. He tells them of it ; he proclaims it to them ; he 
spreads it abroad ; he repeats it ; he hands it down ; he 
emphasizes it ; then the man who was unintelligent will 
suddenly become intelligent ; he who was narrow will 
suddenly be broad ; he who was stupid will suddenly be 

21 wise. If this be not so, what benefit will there be if 
T‘ang or Wu were over the people, what harm will 

IV 

ON HONOUR AND SHAME 

63 

there be if Ch‘ie and Chou were over the people ? ^ While 
T‘ang and Wu lived, the country obeyed, was well-governed 
and prosperous ; while Gh'ie and Chou lived, the country 
obeyed, was ill-governed and suffered calamity.^ Looking 
at it in this way, how can it be that this was against the 
disposition of man ? Certainly he can be either like the 
latter or like the former ! 

The Desires oe Men 

Eor food they want to have meat.® They want to have Natural 
their clothing beautiful and embroidered. In travelling 
they want to have carriages or horses. In addition they 
desire abundant riches and stored up wealth. However, 
when a man is poor for many years together, he does not 
realize that his desires are not satisfied — ^these are the facts 
of man’s nature. 

Now in real life, man knows how to raise chickens, dogs, Riohea come 
pigs, and swine, and also how to raise cattle and sheep ; yet in 
eating he does not use wine and pork ; he may have a surplus forethought, 
of money ^ in storehouses, yet for his clothing he dares not fr^m^the 
use silk. The economical man may have baskets and boxes opposite, 
of stores, yet in travelling he does not use carriages or horses. 

Why is this ? Not because he does not desire these things. 

tlnlesa a good ruler can bring about the prosperity which natiirally 
follows upon virtue, he is worthless. 

^ The people follow the disposition, of their leader to good or evil. Cf. 

Great Learning, IX, 4. 

* This term for meat (which is so translated throughout this 

chapter) refers to the flesh of the domestic animals — ahorse, sheep, ox, and 
dog ; pork, which is the preferred meat of the Chinese to-day, is not included. 

* lit., “ knives and cloth.” 

64 

THE WOEKS OP HStNTZE 

IV 

It is because lie tbiuks far into tbe future and is afraid that be 
will not bave tbe naeans whereby to perpetuate bis wealth, 
Hence be both economizes and controls bis desires. He 
gathers in and stores bis wealth in order to perpetuate it. 
Is not this thinking far into tbe future very fine 1 Now 
people who live carelessly and who are of shallow knowledge 
do not realize this. In their food they are very extravagant ; 

22 they do not think of tbe future ; suddenly they 
are in difficult circumstances and are poor. This is why 
they do not escape freezing, starvation, using gourds for 
money-bags/ and becoming tbe putrid carcasses ^ in the 
ditches. 

The Way of N^ow wbat about the Way (Too) of the former Kings, 
grea?^d^^ the Unifying principles of benevolence (Jen) and justice (Tt), 
produces the function of tbe History^ the Odes, the Rites (Li), and 
forethought, Music ? ® They are certainly the greatest thoughts of 
the world ; they will make all people who are bom into the 
world think far into the future, and they will protect all 
generations for ever. Their influence is vast ; their 
accumulated virtue is great ; their effects reach out very far. 
Guide • Unless a person thoroughly cultivates himself so as to be 

theTlassics. ^ superior man, he cannot have knowledge.^ Hence it 
is said : A short rope cannot draw water from a deep well ; 
he whose knowledge is limited cannot converse with those who 

^ Being beggars. 

* Of beggars. 

® The OJassics ; in Hsiintze’s day the canon had not yet been officially 
formed, and the character jgg -was not used with them, only the single 
charaotexB mmj&m- BO I have translated by a single 3B3ngIish word. 
The Booh of Mtisic is now lost. 

* This sentence is a doublet in one in Book XIX. 

IV 

ON HONOUE AND SHAME 

65 

reach to the status of a Sage. Then the function of the Odes^ 
the Bistory i the Rites {Li), and the Music is certainly not 
for the ordinary man to understand. Hence it is said: 
Concentrate on them ^ and then you can know more ; possess 
them, and you can be enduring ^ ; be versed in them and you 
can be successful ; think on them and you can be peaceful ; 
repeatedly follow and investigate them and you will love 
them the more. By them control your passions and 23 
you will gain benefit ; by them make a reputation, and 
you will have honour ; by them live in society and you 
will have harmony ; by them live alone and you will be 
satisfied. 

What is man’s pleasure and purpose ? To be honourable The desirw 
as the emperor, to be so wealthy as to own the country ^ — cannot^b^* 
this is what men’s passions alike desire. But if men’s desires 
are given rein, then their authority could not be endured, them by Li 
and things would not be sufficient to satisfy them. Hence 
the ancient Kings invented the rules of proper conduct 
{lA) and justice {Yi) for men in order to divide them * ; 
causing them to have the classes of noble and base, the 
disparity between the aged and the young, and the distinction 
between the wise and the stupid, the able and the powerless ; 
all to cause men to assume their duties and each one to get 
his proper position ; then only can the amount and grade 
of their emoluments be made fitting to their position. This is 
the way (Too) of living in society and having harmony and 

1 Theae ClassioB. 3?or Haiintee's part informing the canon of the ClasBicB, 
of, H., p. 188 ff., 69 f. 

* Not drop out of the path of learning. 

® All the land belonged to the emperor and was held from him. 

* Into social grades ; everybody cannot be emperor. 

66 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

IV 

unity. For when the benevolent (Jen) man is in control, 
the farmers by their strength will be expert at the fields ; 
the merchants by their knowledge of values will be expert 
at using wealth ; all kinds of artisans by their skill will be 
expert at using tools ; none of those above the grade of OflS.cer 
and Prefect, up to the Duke and Marquis will fail to fulfil 
the duties of their office according to benevolence (Jen), 
generosity, wisdom and power — ^then this mil be called the 
Great Equableness. Then whether a man's emolument is'the 
whole empire, he will not think it too much for himself; 
or whether he is gate-keeper, receiver of guests, keeper of 
the gate bar, or night watchman,^ he will not think it too 
little for himself. Hence it is said : Irregular but imiform, 
oppressive but favourable, unlike but alike — ^these are the 
human relationships. The ode says ; 

He received the tribute of the States, large and small, 

He was very generous to those states under him " — 
this expresses what I mean.^ 

J Very tumble posts. 

* Book of Odes, IV, m, iv, 5. This is the next to thelast ode — ^heuoe the 
cauon must have been, complete in the time of Hshutze. But Hsuntze also 
quotes some lost odes. This ode is an eulogy of King T'ang, founderlof 
the Shang dynasty. When the feudal princes brought tribute, the Emperor 
gave them gifts in return. 

BOOK Y 

AGAINST PHYSIOGNOMY 

Piiysiognomy ^ did not exist in ancient times ^ ; a student 1 

should not consider (Too) it. Among the ancients there evU and 

was Kn-pu-tze-ch‘ing ; at the present time there is Tane Chii ’virtue are 

according to 

of Liang ® who physiognomizes men s figure and features, the state of 
and tells their good or had fortune. The common people the pTyal^-^^ 
praise them — ^the ancients did not have this practice, and the gnpmy, 
student should not speak (Too) of it. For to physiognomize 
a person’s appearance is not as good as to consider his 
heart ; * considering his heart is not as good as to select 
his principles. The appearance is subordinate to the heart ; 
the heart is subordinate to the principles. “When a person’s 
principles are upright and his heart obeys them, although 
his physiognomy be repulsive, yet if his heart and principles 
are good, his physiognomy will not hinder him from being 
a superior man. Although his physiognomy be good, yet 
if his heart and principles are evil, his physiognomy will not 

1 There were and still are in China men who profess to tell fortunes by 
the looks or “ bumps ** of persons. These are the Physiognomists This 
practice is more than physiognomy in the Western sense of the word in 
that it professes to foretell the future, as woll as indicate the character of a 
person. The Han dynasty index to the Imperial library includes twenty, 
four volumes on this subject. This book is an example of how Hsiintze 
attacked superstition. 

* An appeal to the prejudico against anything now — charaoteiistio of 
Confucianism. But Hsuntze backs up this appeal by arguments against 
the inadequacy of the method. 

A state whose capital was at the present Nanldng. 

Chinese uses the “ heart " meaning the “ mind 

68 

THE WOKKS OE HStMTZB 

V 

xevent him from being a small-minded man. The superior 
man is called fortunate ; the small-minded man is called 
unfortunate ; hence to be tall or short, small or big, handsome 
or ugly in physiognomy does not prognosticate good or evil 
fortune. The ancients did not have this practice, and the 
student should not regard (Too) it. 

froSTSsTory Emperor Yao was tall, and the Emperor Shun 

’ was short ; King Wen was tall, and Duke Chou was short ; 
Confucius was tall, and Tze Kung^ was short. Eormerly 
there was an official of Duke Ling ^ of Wei, named 
Kung Swen-lii, whose body was seven feet long® and his 
face three feet long and three inches wide, with nose, eyes, 
and ears all there ; yet his fame filled the whole empire. 

2 Swen Shou-ao of Ts‘u was a countryman from the district 
of Chi-sze*; he was bald,® his left leg was longer than 
the other, but by his virtue and without using military force 
he took his place as the virtual ruler of Ts'u. Dulce She 
Tze-kao ® was very small, short, and thin ; he walked as 
though he could not support his clothes; but during the 
rebellion of Dulce Pe he caused Yiin Tze-si ® and Sze-ma 

1 Probably Chung Kung, a distinguished disciple of Confucius. Also 
mentioned on p. 110, q.v. 

» 634-493 B.o, 

* The ancient foot was shorter than the present one. 

* Now called Kuang Chou in Honan, 

® pQ China baldness is considered shameful. 

* Viscount of Ts‘u, 

’ The heir-apparent of Ts‘u. In Ts'u the oldest son did not necessarily 
succeed to the throne of his father. This man was the grandson of King 
P‘ing, who reigned 678-616 b.o. The ruler of Ta'u had only the title of 
Viscount ; but within his own state he was called “ King ”, and so the heir- 
appardnt was styled “ Dulce ”, whereas in other states he would only bo 
entitled “ Prefect ”. 

® The oldest son of King P'ing. 

V 

AGAINST PHYSIOGNOMY 

69 

Tze-cM ^ botk to be put to death. Duke She Tze-kao came 
in, seized Ts'u, killed Duke Pe, and tranquillized the state 
of Ts‘u like tummg over his hand.^ His benevolence (Jm), 
justice {Yi)y merit and fame overshadows all down to 
later ages. 

In ancient times, people did not estimate tallness and 
measure bigness nor consider weights ; were not they never- 
theless successful 1 ® Can it be that they considered whether 
a person’s physiognomy was short, small or big, handsome 
or ugly ? Yet the physiognomy of King Yen of Hsii ^ was 
such that he was very short-sighted and had to look up to see 
a horse ; the physiognomy of Confucius was such that his 
face was like a rumpled square ® ; the physiognomy of Duke 
Chou was such that his body was like a broken tree ® ; the 
physiognomy of Kao Yao ^ was such that his complexion was 
like a peeled melon ® ; the physiognomy of Hung Yao ® was 
such that the skin of his face could not be seen ; the 3 
physiognomy of Ch*uan Shuo was such that his body was as 

^ Another son of Bang P'ing. 

* So easily. 

* Without physiognomy they produced many great men. 

* Another writer says of this cripple that he could not look down, and 
had no bones. He lived in the time of King Mu (1001-947 B.O.). 

* The meaning of this character is uncertain. It is also interpreted as 
meaning “ hairy in the face " or “ two eyed 

* Humpbacked. 

’ Minister of Shun. 

® Yang Liang says that this means light green ; we may conjecture that 
it means hairless, without even any down. 

® Minister of King Wen. 

Too hairy. 

Minister at the doss of the Yin dynasty. 

70 

THE WOEKS OE HSt^TZE 

V 

The '* clever 
fellowp ** of 
the day. 

if tke dorsal spines of a fisli were sticking out ^ ; tlie physiog- 
nomy of Yi Yin ^ was such that on his face there was no 
beard or eyebrows. Yu was lame and T'ang was paralysed ® ; . 
Shun had two pupils in one eye.^ 

Should the student discuss people’s purposes and compare 
their scholarship ; or should he directly consider their 
differences in size, distinguish whether they are handsome 
or ugly and be cheated, and scorned ? The ancients Ch'ie , 
and Chou ® were very tall, attractive, and handsome, the 
greatest heroes in the world. Their sinews and muscles 
were agile and strong ; they could stand up against a hundred 
men. Yet they were killed, their dynasty was destroyed; 
they became the greatest criminals in the country; and later 
ages called them evil — ^this too must be considered. These 
evils wer,e not because they suffered from their features 
but from a narrow knowledge and low ideas. 

Suppose we consider one of the “ clever fellows ” of the 
villages of the present confused age, none of whom fail to 
be handsome and attractive, and have unique clothes and ■ 
womanish ornaments, and who resemble a girl in physical 
constitution and behaviour ; no woman would be unwilling 
to have such an one for her husband ; no unmarried girl 

^ Humpbacked. 

’ Prime Minieter in the Shang dynasty. 

* Partially paralysed. 

* One Chinese commentator says that this is merely saying that he was 
doubly wise. In the present text Yao is also said to have had two pupils ; 
but the addition of his name spoils the regular recurrence of the four character j 
lines of wliich this passage is exclusively composed. The History records | 
this fact of Shun, but not of Yao ; hence this character should probably be ’ 
dropped from the text. 

® Two tyrant emperors, who were the incarnation of everything evil. 

V 

AGAINST PHYSIOGNOMY 

71 

would be uBwillmg to bave bim for ber fianc^, to leave ber 
fal^er’s bouse and be glad to elope with bim, and stand 
shoulder to shoulder witb bim ; yet an average prince would 
err in making bim an official, an average father would err 
in taking him for a son, an average older brother would 4 
err in taking bim for a younger brother, and an average 
man would err in taking bim for a friend. Soon be will be 
bound and taken before the magistrate, and slain before 
a great orowd.^ He will not fail to call upon Heaven and 
weep and cry, bitterly grieving over bis present situation 
and remorseful over bis younger days. This is not because 
be suffered from bis features, but from a narrow knowledge 
and low ideas. Then which would the student rely upon ? * 

♦ * ’H sjs :{! 

Wherein is it that man is truly man ? Because 5 
be makes distinctions.^ Wffien be is hungry be desires to Man is truly 

eat ; when be is cold be desires to be warm : when be is 
. T - T . 1 .1 ue makes difl' 

tired be desires to rest ; be likes what is helpful and dislikes tinotions. 

what is injurious — ^man is born witb these ways of acting ; 
be does not have to wait to get them.'* In these matters 
Yu and Cb*ie were alike. However, man is not truly man 

1 He will become a great criminal. 

2 Tliis chapter should end here, though in the present text there is added 
three times as much. But the subject of physiognomy is dropped, and while 
the remainder of this book might belong to the preceding book, I consider 
it probably spurious, especially in view of the common tendency to add 
to ancient maniiBoripts. The next section deals with : Three sources 
of misfortune and three sources of poverty. The next section is translated 
here ; from its subject matter, it appears genuine : at least, if not by HsUntze » 
it is thoroughly in harmony with his teachings. 

* Between diSerent classes and relationships. 

* They are not acquired characteristics. 

72 

THE WOEKS OE HStJNTZB 

V 

IfoUow the 
later Xiugs. 

more particularly in that he has two feet and no feathers,^ 
hut rather in that he makes distinctions. Now the yellow* 
haired ape ^ also has two feet and no feathers ; but in contrast 
the superior man sips his soup and carves his slices of meat.® 
Hence man is not truly man more particularly in that he has 
two feet and no feathers, but in that he makes distinctions. 
The birds and beasts have fathers and sons, but not the 
afieotion between father and son ; they are female and 
male, but they do not have the proper separation between 
males and females. 

J Hence the path (Tao) of human life cannot be without 
its distinctions ; no distinction is greater than social divisions ; 
no social division is greater than the rules for proper conduct 
{Li) ; the rules for proper conduct are not greater than the 
Sage-Kings.^ 

But there were many ® Sage-Kings ^ ; which one shall 
I follow ? When rules of nice conduct are preserved too 
long, they are lost. There are officers to preserve the arts 
and rules of proper conduct (Li) ; but if preserved to a 
great age, they are relaxed. Hence it is said : If you wish 
to see the footprints of the Sage-Kings, then look where they 
are most clear ; that is to say, at the later Kings. 

1 In ilia pliysioal characteristics. Of. the definition of man in these very 
words by a Greek philosopher. 

® Known for its intelligence. 

® He eats politely. 

* Because they established Zi and Yi, 

® Lit., “ a hundred.*' 

* The Sage-Kings were the great emperors, such as Yao, Shun, Yu, 
T'ang, Wen, Wu, Duke Chou. Mioius had argued that his teaching 
accorded with that of the earlier Sage-Kings. 

’ This term “ later Kings " is used once in this book, once in Book III, 
twice in Book VIII, thrice in Book XXII, and once in Book XXV. It 

V 

AGAINST PHYSIOGNOMY 

73 

These later Kings were the princes of the whole country. 7 
To give up the later Kings and follow those of the extremely 
ancient times is like giving up one’s own prince and serving 
another’s prince. Hence it is said : If you wish to know 
a thousand years, then consider to-day ^ ; if you wish to 
understand ten or a hundred thousand, then examine one 
and two ; if you wish to know the ancient times, then 
examine the Way (Tao) of the Chou dynasty ; if you wish 
to know the way of the Chou dynasty, then examine its men, 
what princes it honours. Hence it is said : By the present 
you can understand the past ; by one you can understand 
a myriad ; by the subtle you can understand the clear — 
this saying expresses what I mean. 

But abandoned incorrigible people say; Ancient and Ancient and 
present times are different in nature ; the methods {Too) 
of good or bad rule were different,® and many people are 
thus misled. Those people are stupid and without learning, 
ignorant and without perception. What they see is like a 
deception, and yet the right Way has been handed down 
for a thousand ages. The abandoned sophist thus shuts 
people up within their doors and halls and cheats them ; 

refers to the great kings (or emperors) of the then reigning dynasty, i.e. Kings 
Wen and Wn, and probably Duke Chon, who were the ideals of the Con- 
fuoiana ; it is used in contrast with Yao, Shun, Yu, etc., who were so 
ancient that little was known about them. By extension it would mean 
the great kings of whichever dynasty a person was living under, especially 
the ruler who founded the dynasty. 

1 This statement is the consequence of Confucius' saying : ‘"Euminate on 
the ancient and you will know the present." 

* From those applicable to-day. Cf . Ghuangtzi XIV, n, vii, 4, where 
this view is expressed. This paragraph interrupts the argument and may 
be an interpolation. 

74 

THE WOBKS OE HSt^NTZE 

V 

and so overcomes the tradition of a thonsand ages. Why 
cannot the Sage he cheated 1 The Sage measures things 
by himself. Hence by present men he measures ancient 
men ; by the events of his day he measures their events ; 
by his classifications he measures their classifications ; by 
his doctrines he measures their merit: by the right Way 
of life (Too) he can completely comprehend things ; the 
8 ancient times and the present are alike. If the 
classification is not violated, although it is old, the principle 
remains the same.^ Hence to consider wrong doctrines 
{Tm) and not be misled, to look at a heterogeneous lot of 
things and not be confused, can be done by this way of 
measuring. 

Previous to the Pive Emperors ^ there is no record ; not 
that there were no worthy men, but because of the length of 
time intervening. Of the period of the Eive Emperors 
there is no record of their government; not because they 
did not have a good government, but because of the length 
of time intervening. Of Yu and T'ang ® there is a record of 
their government, but it is not as good as that of the Chou 
djmasty to investigate ^ ; not because there was no good 
government, but because of the length of time intervening.® 
The longer things have been handed down, the more in 

^ Just as “ torse " and “ oow ” in anoienfc and present times mean the 
same, bo human principles do not change. 

* Preceding Yao. Of. p, 17 f. 

* The first rulers of the Hsia and Shang dynasties respectively. 

* Hot so detailed. 

® Hstintze has no conception of progress ; nothing is said of any change 
in social conditions ; indeed such a supposition would nullify Hshntzo’s 
whole philosophy, which presupposes a static world. It is supposed that 

V 

AGAINST PHYSIOGNOMY 

76 

outline tkey are ; the more recent they are, the more detailed 
they are. When in ontline they merely mention the big 
things ; when detailed, they mention the small things. 
The stupid man hears the outline, but does not know the 
details ; or else he hears the small things and does not know 
the big things.^ This is destroying rules of conduct by 
preserving them too long, losing ceremonials by collecting 
them too long.^ 

tile same principles of government and action as applied in ancient timea 
could be used unchanged to-day ; only the way they wore applied by the 
ancient Worthies is not known in detail. 

1 He fails whether he studies the ancient or the present. 

" Those " later ICings ” were not so recent even to Hsttntze ; Kings Wen, 
Wu, and Duke Ohou were more than 800 years earlier than he 1 But HsUntz© 
thought that was bettor than going back 2,000 years for the ideal of 
government ! 

The remainder of the book seems spurious. This subject is dropped, and 
the hook speaks of the speech of the superior man — ^which must agree with 
that of the earlier Kings and with Li ; it is pleasant because it is right ; the 
superior man correctly estimates and uses all kinds of men ; disputation 
of the Sage, scholar, superior man, and evil man are compared ; not as 
in Book XXII, but according to the amount of preparation needed for a 
true disputation ; the evil dialectioian is worse than a robber and there is 
no hope of change for him. So ends the book. 

BOOK YI 

AGAINST THE TEN PHILOSOPHERS ^ 

They take advantage of the present generation ^ ; they 13 
gloss over unorthodox teachings ; they beautify evil ideas, ^ Hsiao and 
so that they make the coimtry wicked and confused; they 
are hypocritical and deceitful, paltry and insignificant ; 
they cause the country to be chaotic, not Imowing that there 
is anyone who preserves the distinction between right and 
wrong, good and bad government ; they give rein to their 
passions ; they are satisfied to be supercilious ; they perform 
bestial actions ® ; they are insufficient to be classed with the 

^ The present text of the title says : “ Twelve Philosophers.” But the 
^ ^ ^ >1^ which quotes this passage states ” Ten. Philosophers ”, 
omitting Tze-Szo and Mencius. There are several reasons for thinking that 
that text is right. Hsiintze, who was the leader of the Confucian school 
of his day, and a polished gentleman who emphasized courtesy and modera- 
tion, would hardly stoop to such abuse of these two prominent Confucians 
as in this book. (Of. Mencius II, i, ii for how one Confucian would treat 
other disciples of Confucius, and pp. 273, 147 note 1, 193 note 1, 
for Hsiintze’s attitude of approval of Mencius.) While Hsiintze criticizes 
Mencius elsewhere, he nowhere abuses himj instead Hsiintze is a 
follower of Mencius in most matters. In addition, there are stylistic 
diflerences between the part of this book which I have translated and 
the latter part ; the usual formula which sums up the criticism 
is absent from the criticism of Tze Sze and Mencius. The text 
of the ^ ^ is probably preferable here, as the present text 

can only be traced to the commentator Yang Liang, a.d. 818. 

* The time of the “ Contending States,” when ever3rthing, philoBophies, 
customs, morals, political ideals, and especially the political situation was 
in a state of dux. 

* Moral wickedness, not observing the rules of proper conduct and justice, 
which distinguish human beings from beasts. 

78 

THE WOEKS OE HSt)NTZE 

VI 

Oli'eng 
Chung and 
Shih Oh‘iu. 

Hicius and 
Sungtze. 

accomplislied or witli tliose who know how to govern rightly ; 
yet what they support seems reasonable, their teachings are 
plausible, sufficiently so to deceive and mislead the ignorant 
multitude — such are To Hsiao ^ and Wei Mou.® 

These repress their passions ; they are very deep ; they 
4 leave the world to stand alone ; they wrongly think 
that if they are different from others they are superior ; 
but they are unworthy to be classed with the general run 
of people or to make clear the great duties ® ; yet what 
they support seems reasonable ; their teachings are plausible, 
sufficiently so to deceive and mislead the ignorant multitude — 
such are Ch'eng Chung * and Shih Ch'iu.^ 

These did not know how to unite the empire nor how to 
establish the power and reputation of a state ; they honour 
utility and exalt economy, but do not have any ranks in 
society ® ; they are not really sufficient to endure distinctions 
nor to distinguish prince and vassal ; yet what they support 
seems reasonable, their teachings are plausible, sufficiently 
so to deceive and mislead the ignorant multitude — such are 
Mo Ti ’ and Sung Hsin.® 

^ ^ Unknown. 

^ ^ Contemporary of Chuangtze, a Taoist. 

® Loyalty (for a T-assal) and filial piety (for a son), eto. 

A man of Ts'i wlio lived among the hills, would not take money 
from Ms older "brother, refused riches or honour, and unselfishly took car© 
of others’ orchards. He was known for his honesty. Also called T'ien Chung. 

® ^ A Prefect in Wei. 

• They made no distinctdon of classes or ranks ; they would have the 
rulers work together with the ruled. 

’ ^ ^ Micius, who preached universal love and equality, and stressed ‘ 
economy and utility. 

Also called Sung K'en, a native of Sung ; a contemporary 
of Mencius and mentioned by Mm. . 

VI 

AGAINSl THE TEN PHILOSOPHEBS 79 

These honoux the law and yet are without law ; they 
do not follow the old laws but love to make new ones ; 
when they talk to the upper classes they get a hearing from 
them ; when they talk to the lower classes, they get a hearing 
from them. They talk for a whole day ; they write essays ; 
but if one turns round and investigates them, they are a law 
to themselves and cannot be pinned down. They cannot 
manage a country nor establish people’s duties. Yet 
what they support seems reasonable ; their teachings are 
plausible, sufficiently so to deceive and mislead the ignorant 
multitude — such are Shen Tao ^ and Tden Pdn.® 

These do not follow the early Kings ; they do not hold 
that the rules of proper conduct (lA) and justice (Yi) are 
right ; yet they like to deal in strange teachings, and weary 
people with curious ideas. They are very critical but do 
not care about its usefulness ; they debate but impractically. 
They make much fuss but accomplish little ; their doctrines 
cannot be the unifying bond of good government. Yet what 
they support seems reasonable ; their teachings are plausible, 
sufficiently so to deceive and mislead the ignorant multitude 
— such are Huei Shih ® and Teng Si,^ 

Shentze and 
T'ien P*m. 

15 

Eueitze and 
Teng Si. 

1 ^ Shontze- 

> ffl m A native of Ts'i ; his writings were collected in jBIteen books, 
A Taoist. 

3 ^ Prime Minister of Liang, contemporary of Chuangtze. A 
leader of the Neo-Mioians. 

^ ^ ^ Prefect of Cheng ; liked to propound dilemmas. Also a Neo. 
Mcian. It is curious that Kung Suenlung is not mentioned with Huei Shih ; 
possibly because be was only a contemporary of Hsiuntze and not a 
predecessor. 

From this point on tho rest of the book is probably spurious. It begins 
by abusing Tze Sze (grandson of Confucius) and Mencius, as only partially 

80 

THE WORKS OE HStJNTZE 

VI 

following tke ancient Kings j their knowledge is confused, very perverted ; 
they forge Confucius’ words, etc. Confucius and Tze Kung are unoritioizable i 
kings and dukes cannot vie with them in reputation. If people would 
only imitate Shun and Yu, Confucius and Tze Kung, and stop listening to 
the talk of these twelve philosophers, all the trouble in the world would 
stop. Then a paragraph speaks of the evils (chiefly unorthodox teaching), 
the Sage-Kings prohibited ; the virtues that make Worthies and honourable 
people praise a man. Ancient officials are praised and present ones con- 
demned. The superior man does not seek for fame but for right. Tine 
proper hat, clothes, and deportment of various types of men. Abuse of 
Tze Chang, Tze Hsia, Tze Yu (three disciples of Confucius) closes the book. 
A good deal of the opprobrium from which Hshntze has suffered is due to 
this abuse of Tze Szo, Mencius, and other Confuoians contained in the 
fipurious part of this hook. 

t 

BOOK VII 

THE COOTUCIANSi 

THE CONEUCIANS ARE ONLY IMMATURE ^ MENIALS gg 
THEIR TALK RARELY MENTIONS THE FIVE LORDS 
PROTECTOR ® 

Wliy was this the case 1 Because they really could only Duke Huan. 
be rarely mentioned.^ Huan ® of TsT ® was the greatest , 

1 The title of this book is taken from its first -words, not from its subject. 

It is composed of four sections, each with a title. 

® Lit., “ five-foot In ancient times the foot was shorter than at 
present and an adult was ten feet tall. 

• 3 A criticism of the Confucian school. Those Five Lords Protector were 
historical characters -who took the lead in the empire when the authority 
of the Chou emperor weakened. Duke Huan was the first of them, and 
probably the best. The Oonfuoians stood for the legitimacy of the ancient 
political organization, in which the emperor was supreme in authority and 
power ; they disliked that anyone else should have the power that should 
belong to the emperor, even though the emperor had lost his power by 
his own pusillanimity, and Duke Huan used his power to bolster up the 
authority of the Emperor and was recognized as Lord Protector by the 
Emperor himself. To the Oonfuoians theory was everything, historical 
events ought to adapt themselves to the theory ! Confucius himself 
criticized Duke Huan. The five Lords Protector were (1) Duke Huan of 
Ts*i {GSS-eiS B.O.), (2) Duke Siang of Sung (650-637 B.O.), (3) Duke Wen of 
Tain (636-628 b.o.), (4) Duke Mu of Ts'in (669-621 b.c.), (5) King Chuang 
of Ta‘u (613-691 b.o.). In this passage they are further stigmatized by 
being called the “ five Earls " instead of “ Lords ” ! Cf. Mmeius VI, n, vii. 

*• The Oonfucians only discoursed of the good ; hence they could not 
speak pf the five Lords Protector. Cf. Mencius I, i, vii, 2. 

* Duke Huan of the feudal state of Ts*i in present Shantung. His prime 
minister, Kuan Chung, raised Ts'i to the leadership of the feudal states, 
but Huan himself was addicted to the pleasures of the table and the harem. 

Cf. p. 23. 

• In feudal China, the feudal principalities were spoken of as 

** countries ” ; and the whole country was spoken of as ^ “ all under 

Q 

82 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

VII 

of tlie five Lords Protectors. In Ms earlier days lie killed 
lis older brotlier and wrested tlie state from Hm. In his 
internal affairs, he did not marry ofi seven women, aunts 
and sisters ^ ; in his inner apartments there was dissipation 
and extravagance ; he caused the state of Ts‘i to contribute 
half of its wealth as taxes and was not satisfied. In external 
afiairs he deceived Chu,^ made a secret attack on Chii,® 
and absorbed thirty-five states.^ If his actions were so bent 
on evil, depraved, licentious, and extravagant, how could 
he be really great enough to be placed in the same class with 
the great princes 1 ® If he was like this, yet was not ruined, 
but became Lord Protector, why was it ? Alas, Duke Huan 
of Ts‘i had the greatest talents in the world; who could 
destroy him? In a glance he perceived that the ability 
of Kuan Chung was such that he could be entrusted with 
the state ; this was the greatest wisdom in the world. So he 
(Huan) forgot his anger and forgot his enemies and there- 
fA upon established Kuan as Chung Fu ® ; this was the 
greatest decision in the world. Huan established Kuan as 
Chung Fu and of his noble clan none dared to envy him. 

HeaTen", since it comprised all of the then civilized world known to 
the Chinese, really all the world that they knew. I have translated these 
terms throughout by “ state " and “ empire " respectively. 

1 Hinting that he had incestuous relations with them. 

A principality in what is now Shantung. 

* Not the same place as the preceding ; a petty, short-lived state 
in present Shantung. 

* The names of only five of them have come down to ns. 

® Yao, Shun, Yu, etc. 

* Gave him a new name or stylo, “ Father Chung," or explained as " to 
destroy for mo and to serve as a father ". 

vn 

THE CONEUCIANS 

83 

Huan gave Kuan the position of Kao and Kuo,^ but none of 
the officials of Ms court dared to bate Mm. Huan gave 
Kuan three hundred villages ^ on the register of families, 
but none of the rich dared to resist him. Hone of the noble, 
the base, the old, and the young, in their order, failed to follow 
Duke Huan and to honour and respect Mm. This is what 
the greatest talents in the world can do.® If a feudal noble 
has one talent like these, then no one can ruin Mm ; Duke 
Huan had these several talents and had them to perfection ; 
then who could ruin Mm? That he was Lord Protector 
was fitting ; not by chance, but by destiny. 

Then “ The Confucians are only immature menials ; their 
talk rarely mentions the five Lords Protector ” — ^why is tMs ? were only 
Because they did not have a just doctrine of government ; 
they were not very successful ; they were not very refined ; 
they did not satisfy people’s minds. Their course of action . 
was approximately correct ; they used judgment in employing 
and dismissing the people ; they carefully accumulated 
their resources ; they prepared implemen+a wor • fhAv 
were able to overturn their enemies, xjxay cunt^ueieu 
through a deceitful heart. They glossed over their con- 
tentiousness by an appearance of yielding the precedence to 
others ; they relied on an appearance of benevolence (Jen) 
to enable them to tread the path of profit-seeking. They are 
heroes of the small-minded man. But how can they really 
be great enough to be placed in the same class with the 
great princes ? 

Two nobles of bigb rank, entitled 

* Tbe term here used means a place of twenty-five families. The de- 
scendants of Kuan Chung held high feudal position for ton generations. 

• Cf . a similar remark by Confucius, An. XIV, xx. 

84 

THE WOKKS OF HStlHTZE 

VII 

TJie Kings But the Kings were dii^erfent. They were most worthy, 
^Xons. could thereby save the degenerate; they were most 

powerful, and could thereby bear with the weak; in war 
they certainly could have imperilled the weak, but they 
rarely fought with them. They were refined and accom- 
25 plished so as to manifest it to the whole empire. Then 
oppressive states became peaceful and developed of them- 
selves. They only punished by death the dangerous and 
violent. Hence capital pimishment was used very rarely 
by the Sage-Kings. King Wen executed four people.^ 
King Wu executed two people. Duke Chou finished this 
business, and when we come to King CVeng, there were no 
executions. Then how could it be possible that the right 
Way (Too) was not carried out ? ® King Wen carried it out 
in a state of one hundred and the whole empire was united 
under him. Ch‘ie and Chou violated it ; they had the 
• tremendous power of the empire, but they could not grow 

old like ordinary men.* Hence if a ruler can follow the Way, 
then a state of one hundred U is large enough to be 
independent; but if he cannot follow it, then Ts‘u, six 
thousand U in size, would become the servant of its enemy. ^ 
Therefore, when a ruler does not exert himself to follow the 
Way (Too), but instead enlarges his power, he puts himself 
in a dangerous position. 

Named Mi, Yen, Kung, and Tsung. 

Implying the ansTrer, Of course it was. 

® I.O., a small place. 

'They wore killed in thoir prime, 

5 Referring to King Huai of Ts‘u (328-299 b.o.) who died in Ts'in ; his 
son, ICing Hsiang (298-263 B.c.) also served Ts'in. 

.VII 

THE GONEUCIAHS 

85 

THE METHOD OE MAINTATNINa THE EAVOUR OF ONE'S LORD 
AND KEEPING IN OFFICE, AND OF NOT BEING DISLIKED TO 
THE END OF ONE’S DAYS 

If your lord respects and Iionoiiis you, then be reverent How to keep 
to him and observe rule and order, and thus restrain others, 

If your lord trusts and loves you, then be careful and humble. 

If your lord gives you the sole power, then hold it carefully 
and pay attention to your duties. If your lord is satisfied 
and familiar with you, then obey him and do not do wrong. 

If your lord is distant, then be completely honest and pure 
and be not. faithless. If your lord injures or degrades you, 
then be fearful and do not harbour resentment ; if he honours 
you, do not brag ; if he trusts you, be not suspicious. 26 
If your post is a great one, do not presume to keep its emolu- 
ments for yourself alone if you receive office it is 
well to act as if you had not the ability for it ; you should 
first do everything possible in the way of declining it and 
ofiering it to others before accepting it.^ When good fortune 
comes, be amicable and orderly ; when calamity comes, 
be quiet and orderly. If you become wealthy, then use it 
generously; if you are poor, then economize. Be willing 
to accept a high or low station. Be willing to be rich or to. ■ j 
be poor. Be willing to be killed, but never be willing to do 
wrong. This is the method of maintaining the favour of 
one’s lord and keeping in office, and of not being disliked 
to the end of one’s days.® Even though in circumstances 

^ Share with your family, clan, and dependents. 

* Still the standard procedure for a recipient of office. 

* Hsuntze fo\md a patron, in Prince Chuin-shen and was continued in 
office until old age and a change in government forced his retiroment. 

86 

THE WOEKS OF HSt)HTZE 

VII 

of poverty and retirement, the man who nevertheless makes 
this method his model may he called a fortunate man. The 
ode says : 

“ Men loved this One man ^ 

Who carried on obediently the virtuous acts of his 
ancestors, 

Ever talking and thinking how to be filial. 

Illustriously the heir served his ancestors ” ^ — 
this expresses what I mean.® 

THE METHOD 03? SEEKING TO OCCUPY WELL A HIGH 
POSITION, AND TO DO GREAT THINGS, OE OBTAINING THE 
EAVOUB OE THE RULER OE A STATE OE TEN THOUSAND 
CHARIOTS,* AND OE SURELY AVOIDING ANY EVIL CON- 
SEQUENCES 

How to a There is nothing better than esteeming, associating with, 
high position. putting forward the worthy,® being gracious to all, 
doing away with all hatred, and not injuring others. If 
you are equal to your duties, then follow this method {Too). 

27 But if you are not equal to your duties, and fear to lose 
the ruler’s favour, then there is nothing better than to 

^ A designation of the emporor or king. 

* In continuing the work of his forefathers, 

* Book of Odes, III, X, ix, 4, King Wen gives an example of right conduct i 
in continuing the constructive work of his father and grandfather in 
strengthening his house and governing his state well. 

* A large state. 

® This term “ Worthy ” has a technical significance in Confuoian ethics — 
it .means those who have ability and virtue, especially ability in governing ; 
since the occupation, according to Chinese ideas, is governmental position. 

The Worthy is a degree lower than the Sage, who shows these qualities in 
a perfect degree. Micius advocated a similar view, that of advancing the 
worthy, but he did not use this term in a technical sense. Of. Micius, oh. 

8. 9, 10. 

VII 

THE COKEUCIANS 

87 

associate another with yon quickly, to advance the worthy, 
to yield to the able, and be satisfied to follow in their train. 
In this way if yon possess the ruler’s favour, you will assuredly 
be glorious, ' and if you lose his favour you will assuredly 
be without fault. This practice is valuable in serving princes 
and is assuredly the method of being certain of avoiding 
any evil consequences.^ For the wise man in his conduct 
of afiairs, when he is sufficient, concerns himself with his 
inadequacy ; when he is safe, he concerns himself with his 
danger ; when he is contented, he concerns himself with his 
anxieties ; in difficulties he stresses previous preparation 
as if fearing a calamity greatly ; in this way, in all his afiairs, 
he will not fail. Confucius said : “ The skilled workman 
who values the measurement of his material will assuredly 
be economical ; the brave man who values humility will . 

^ This paragraph shows the essentially practical nature of the Confuoians. 
The Confucian philosophy was essentially a “ legitimist " philosophy j they 
looked to the emperor as the great power in the country whom the feudal 
princes must serve ; in this respect Ts'in Shih Hwangti was but restoring 
the ancient Confucian ideal when he made himself the great power in the 
state. During the latter part of the Chou period, the great feudal princes 
were usurping the imperial prerogatives and were condemned by the 
Oonfucians. Cf. Analects III, i, ii. But although Hsuntze accepted this 
idealistic Confucian doctrine, he lived in the age of the Contending 
States, when the emperor's power was weak and the emperor had become 
merely the pontifex maximus ; the real power was in the hands of the 
princes of the different states. Hsuntze’s pupils sought official position, as 
did all educated men of the day ; hence he taught them how to seek pre- 
ferment in the eyes of these very princes who illegitimately usurped power 
(of. the last sentence of this book) ; but he taught them to seek favour by 
righteousness, not artfulness, and therein expressed the Confucian spirit, 
in that his practical sense compelled him to make terms with the practical 
situation of the day, even though it was against the Confucian legitimist " 
doctrine. 

88 

THE WOBKS OE HSt)NTZE 

VII 

assuredly be a Worthy this saying expresses what 
I mean. 

The stupid The stupid man does the opposite of this. When he ^ 

. occupies a high position and wields authority, he likes to i 

do things alone and envies the worthy and the able ; he keeps 
back the meritorious and heavily punishes those who are at 
fault. His mind is proud and arrogant, and he thinks little 
of old hatreds. On the one hand, he is stingy and not ^ 
generous ; on the other he seeks strenuously for authority i 
in order to injure others. Although he docs not seek to be ? 
insecure, will he succeed 1 Therefore, though he be in an i 
honourable position, he is certainly insecure ; though he have 
a high post, he will certainly lose it ; though he obtain the ; 

ruler^s favour, he will certainly be disgraced. You can 

stand and wait for it to happen ; by a breath he will fall. 

Why is that 'i Because those who pull him down are many ; 
but those who support him are few. 

The Methou oe Governing the Empire ' 

By serving your prince you will certainly succeed; by : 
the prime lookmg after others you will assuredly become wise ; 
mimster. establish the great mean and be not double-minded. Then : 

be respectful in putting this method first; be loyal and i 
faithful in being controlled by it; be careful in carrying 
it out ; be honest and upright in keeping it ; in di£6.culties 
follow it ; be diligent in repeating it. Although your lord 
does not appreciate you, he will be without feelings of dislike 
for you ; although your merit be very great, do not have the 
appearance of boasting of your virtue. Seek for little, but 

^ This saying is not in the Classics. 

VII 

THE COKFUCIAHS 

89 

merit mncli. Be not fatigued in love and respectfulness. 

In this way you can never be other than agreeable. By 
serving your prince, you are certain to succeed ; by looking 
after others, you assuredly will become wise — ^this is what 
I mean by the method of governing the empire. 

* 9)c ^ 

The young serve the old : the inferior serve the noble ; Thoyioiovs 
, T i 11 , . . 1 T serve the 

the degenerate serve the worthy — ^this is the pervading righteous- 

rule of the universe. There are people whose circumstances 
are not below that of others, but who err and fall below ^“verse. 
others — ^the minds of evil men are like this. Their purposes 
do not escape their evil minds ; their actions do not escape 
their evil ways (Tao) ; yet they seelc the reputation of being 
a superior man or Sage. Eor example, they are like a man who 
tries to bow down and lick heaven, or to save a person who 
is hanging himself by putting a halter around his feet — 
such a doctrine cannot be carried out ; the more it is done, 
the farther it will carry one from his goal. Hence if the 
occasion demands bending the superior man will bend ; 
if the occasion demands straightening up, he straightens up.^ 

^ The superior man adapts himself to the situation. 

4 

BOOK VIII 

THE MERIT OE THE CONFUCIAH^ 

The Model oe the Grea.t CoOTuoiAisrs 

Wken. King Wu died, King Cli^eng ^ was a minor. Duke Rak© Chou’s 
Chon protected ® King Ch‘eng and succeeded King Wn in 
order to retain the country, because he did not want the 
country to rebel against the house of Chou. He took the 
throne of the Emperor ; he acted as supreme judge of the 
national court ; he took his ease as if his place were secure ; 
yet the country did not consider him covetous of position. 

He killed Kuan-shou,* and dealt with the people of Haii-yin ® ; 
yet the country did not consider him oppressive. He ruled 

A oolleotion of essays on various subjects having general relation 
to the standard of moral life. While it contains undoubtedly genuine 
passages, yet we caimot be sure that all of this book is genuine. The second 
section, calling HsUntze “ Master ", may be compiled by his disciples. 

* The son of King Wu. Cf. p. 21. 

* He acted as regent, literally " acted as a screen for He was Regent 
for seven years. 

* Kuan-ahou was an older brother of Duke Chou, who circulated the 
rumour that Duke Chou wanted the throne for himself. He joined 
with Wu-ken in rebellion and was killed. Kuan was tbe name of the city 
which formed his appanage. He was the second son of King Wen. King Wu 
was the first, and Duke Chou the third. Kuan-shou with two younger 
brothers had been appointed as “ Inspectors " in the territory of Yin, in 
which King Wu had continued Wu-ken, the son of Chou-sin ; they assisted 
him in rebellion, and so Duke Chou had to fight one older and two younger 
brothers. 

* The rebellious people of Yin were deported from Lo-yi,theold capital 
city of the empire under the Yin dynasty. Hafi-yin or Yin-hsfi was a city 
coated in the north of present Honan. 

c 

THE WOBKS OF HS^TZE viii 

the whole cotmtry, and established seventy-one feudal states. 
Of the Chi family ^ there were enfeofied fifty-three ^ ; yet 
the country did not consider him partial. He educated 
and trained King Ch'eng and had him instructed in the 
Way, so he ^ was able to inherit the throne of King Wen. 
Duke Chou turned over the rule to the legitimate scion of the 
house of Chou. He turned back the throne to King Ch'eng ; 
so the country did not cease to serve the house of Chou. 
Then Duke . Chou faced north * and served the new King, 
a He could not for an instant make himself emperor, but 
he could act for the emperor.® Because he was able to do 
that, the country remained in the possession of his house ; 
if he had not been able to do so, the country would have left 
his house. This is the way that Duke Chou protected King 
Ch‘eng and succeeded King Wu in order to retain the country, 
because he did not want the country to depart from the house 
of Chou. 

When King Ch'eng was capped ® and came of age, Duke Chou 
turned over the rule to the legitimate scion of the house of 
Chou and turned back the throne. It is plain that he did 
not have the intention of destroying his master.'^ Duke Chou 
then did not possess the rule ; whereas formerly he had it, 

^ CM was the family name of tlie Ch.ou dynasty. 

2 Or 55 (?). Of. Spring and Autumn, Chao Kan Hsi, eighth year. 

® King Ch'eng. 

* The emperor always faces south, and the courtiers face north. While 
Duke Chou acted as Eegent, he faced south ; now ho became only a courtier 
and faced north. 

* Omitting to preserve the pentameter, and to complete the sense. 

« A ceremony performed at maturity. Eong Ch'eng was capped at 14 
years of age, at which time he took up the rule. 

’ King Ch'eng. 

VIII 

THE MERIT OF THE COOTUCIAN 

93 

now lie did not have it ; this was not abdication : King 
Ch'eng formerly did not possess the rule, but now he had 
it ; this was not taking it away from someone else ; it was 
the orderly passing over of the power in quite proper fashion. 

Hence for a branch to take the place of the head of the house ^ 
is nqt overstepping the bounds of what is right ; for a younger 
brother to kill his older brother 2 is not oppression ; for a 
prince and his minister to exchange positions ® is not improper. 

Because of the peacefulness of the country he ^ ascended the 
throne of King Wen — ^this fact shows that the rights of a 
branch and of the head of the house may also be exchanged. 

The country was satisfied like one person and united. 

Unless he were a Sage, he could not have done this — therefore 3 
he is called the model of the great Confucians. 

King ® Chao of Ts‘in ® questioned the Master, Hsun Praise of the 
Ch‘ing, saying : *'Are Confucian literati of no use to a state ^ 

The master, Hsun Chfing, replied, “ Confucian literati 

1 As Duke Chou took the place of his nephew, King Oh'eng, in ruling as 
Regent. 

2 As Duke Chou condemned his older brother, Kuan-shou, to death for 
treason. 

* As Duke Chou ruled as Regent while King Oh'eng was a minor, and 
became a vassal when ICing Ch'eng took the throne. 

^ King Oh'eng. 

® This section is quoted m ^ ^ 

« 306-251 B.o. : 

’ In this section the character ^ is used instead of ^ for Hsiintze's 
name, just as by Liu Hsiang in his Introduction. ' In ancient times these 
two characters were pronounced alike, as in Cantonese and some other 
dialects to-day, and so were interchanged. The supposition that the change 
was made by Liu Hsiang because the personal name of King Hsuen of the , 

Han dynasty was seems to be without foundation ; had it been the 
case, Liu Hsiang would have changed it throughout. I have indicated the 
diSerence in the translation by omitting the umlaut from Hsiin. 

94 

c 

THE WORKS OF HStMTZE 

vin 

imitate tlie ancient Kings, and magnify tEe mlers of proper 
conduct (JA) and justice (T^). They are diligent ministers 
or sons, and honour their superiors very highly. If the ruler 
would employ them, their place at your court would be most 
appropriate. When they are not employed, they retire, order 
the people, and are guileless—they are thoroughly obedient 
subjects. Although they be poor, harassed, freezing, or 
starving, they would certainly not follow evil methods {Too) 
into avarice. Though they be without even a place to put 
down an awl,^ yet they are clear as to the great principles of 
ruling a district.^ They mourn and no one responds to them ; 
yet they are familiar with the principles of ruling all things 
and of fostering the people. If their position is that of 
ruler, then they are material for a king or duke. If it is 
subordinate, then they are servants of society and the treasures 
of the prince. Although such an one should be retired in a 
poor rustic mean place, no one would fail to esteem him, 
because he sincerely holds to an honourable path {Tdo), 
4 When Confucius was about to be the Minister of Crime,® 
Mr. Shen-yu * did not dare to come to court to drink his 
mutton-broth ; Mr. Kung-shen ® divorced his wife ; Mr. Shen- 
huei ® crossed the border and fled. The traders of cattle and 
horses in Lu did not have false prices, but set them right and 

^ Landless or ■without rule. 

* Lit., " The altars of the gods of the land and grams.” 

* In the state of Lu. 

* These three were all men of Lu. The Family Sayings ^ ^ speaks of 
this man as continually coming to comt to drink his mutton-broth and 
impose upon the merchants. He was a glutton. 

® His wife was adulterous, but he did not control her. 

* He was extravagant beyond what the law allowed. 

VIII THE MEEIT OE THE CONEUCIAN 95 

waited for a buyer. "Wben be lived in a city or community, tbe 
boys of tbe city or community shared tbe produce of tbeir 
nets, and those who bad parents took more than tbe others ; 
tbe virtues of filial piety and reverence to elders so 5 
influenced them. When Confucian literati are at your court, 
they adorn your rule ; when they are in inferior position, they 
beautify the customs. When a Confucian is in an inferior 
position, be is like what I have said.” 

The King said : . “ Yes. Then bow is be when he is a 
ruler ? ” 

Hsun Ob‘ing replied : ‘‘ When be is a ruler, be is great. His 
purpose is fixed within him ; proper conduct {Li) is cultivated 
at bis court ; tbe laws and correct measurements are rectified 
among tbe officials ; loyalty, faithfulness, love, and service- 
ableness are exhibited to tbe people. He would not do one 
unrighteous (not Yi) act nor kill one innocent man to get tbe 
Empire. Such rightness (Y^) is trusted by men. When it is 
known throughout the continent, tbe whole empire will 
respond to it like an echo. Why is this ? Because bis name 
will be honoured and glorious, and tbe coimtry will be willing 
to obey. Hence those who are near will sing and rejoice at 
him ; those who are distant will fall over themselves to 
hasten to him. All within tbe four seas will be as if one family ; 
none of the educated will fail to follow and obey him. There- 
fore be may be called a leader of men. Tbe ode says : B 
* From the west, from tbe east, 

From the south, from the north, 

Hone thought but of obedience ’ ^ 

^ Book of Odes, HI, i, x, 6. 

96 

THE WORKS OK HStJNTZE 

VIII 

— this expresses my meaning. Then if, when the Confucian is 
in an inferior position, he is what I have said, and when he 
is a ruler he is what I have now indicated, how could he be 
said to be of no benefit to a state ? ” 

King Chao said, ” Good.” 

the^WaytL ancient Kings is the magnifying of 

Superior Man benevolence Follow the mean in acting it out. What 

is meant by the mean ? It is the rules of proper conduct (Z^) 
and justice (7i). The Way (Too) is not primarily the Way of 
Heaven ^ ; it is not the way (Too) of Earth ; it is the way 
(Tao) man acts, the way (Zoo) the superior man acts. The 
superior man is not called a Worthy because he can do all 
that men of ability can do.® The superior man is not called 
wise because he knows all that wise men know. The superior 
man is not called a dialectician because he can dispute 
concerning all that dialecticians dispute about. The superior 
man is not called an investigator because he can investigate 
everythmg that investigators investigate into. He has his 
standard. In observing the high and low lands,® in determining 
I whether they are arid or fertile, and in apportioning * the five 
grains,® the superior man is not as good as a farmer. In 

^ The Too is not concerned with the mutations of the Yin and Tanff or 
the peculiarities of mountains and rivers ; it is primarily ethical rather 
than metaphysical, 

* But because he knows the rules of life — the rules of proper conduct and 
justice. Cf. p. 206. 

* Plains and marshes. 

* Pixing which grain is best for which kind of land. Rotation of cr(^a 
was not practised. 

'The five grains are panicled millet, glutinous millet, beans, wheat 
and hemp. 

VIII 

THE MERIT OE THE CONEUCIAN 

97 

knowing about wealth and goods, in determining their fineness 
or impurity, or in distinguishing their value or worthlessness, 
the superior man is not as good as a merchant. In using the 
compass and square, in applying the plumb line, or in being 
accustomed to the use of tools, the superior man is not as good 
as a workman. In not caring for the spirit of right or 7 
wrong, or of true or false, in getting each to modify the other 
so that both are shamed, the superior man is not as good as 
Huei Shih and Teng Si.^ But if he is to estimate people’s 
virtue and accordingly fix their rank, if he is to measure their 
ability and accordingly give them official position, if he is to 
cause the worthy and the unworthy both to get their proper 
rank, the man of ability and the man of no ability both to 
take their proper position ; if all things are to be properly 
attended to ; if he is to respond to changes in the situation ; 
if Shentze and Micius are not to bring in their chatter ; if 
Huei Shih and Teng Sih are not to be allowed their investiga- 
tions ; if speech must be in accordance with the right ; if • 
business must be attended to, then in these matters the 
superior man will show his superiority. 

9)c ^ 

If any piece of business or conduct is beneficial to the Unorthodox 
right, establish it ; but if it is of no benefit to the right, do 
away with it. For this is what is meant by a correct piece of 
business. If any doctrine is of benefit to the right, carry it 
out ; if it is of no benefit to the right, reject it. For this is 
what is meant by a correct doctrine. When a piece of business 
is incorrect, it is called a wicked piece of business. When a 
doctrine is incorrect, it is called a wicked doctrine (Too). 

^ iLeaders of the Neo-Mioians ; great debaters and dialeoiacians. 

98 THE WORKS OE HS'ONTZE viii 

A well-governed age rejects wicTfeed 'business and wicked 
doctrines- {Too), but a disordered age follows after suck. 
But as. for making realities and unrealities intercbange^ 
places, separations of whiteness and hardness, likenesses and 
8- unlikenesses ^ — ^a cultivated ear will not hear such things ; a 
cultivated eye will not see such things ; a scholar practised 
in dialectic will not speak of such things ; although he had 
the wisdom of a Sage, he would not be able to explain them 
briefly. Ignorance of them will not injure a superior man; 
knowing them will not prevent anyone from becoming a small- 
minded man. Ignorance of them will not prevent a workman 
or artisan from being skilled ; ignorance of them will not 
prevent a prince from ruling well. If a king or duke prize 
them, it will confuse the laws ; if the people prize them, it 
will confuse their business. But crazy, deluded, stupid, 
ignorant men from the first follow their ^ crowd of disciples ; 
they discuss their ^ chatter and make plain their ^ illustrations ; 
till they are old and their children are grown they do not 
see their ^ evil ; therefore such are called first-class dolts, 
dhey are not even as good as those who physiognomize 
chickens or dogs to see if they will have fame ^ ! The ode 
says : — 

“ Were you an imp or a water-bow. 

Then you could be got at. 

^ Doctrines of the Neo-Micians. Cf,, p. 49, notes 3 and 4. 

® Referring to the teachers of these doctrines. 

® Anciently domestic animals were prized as telling fortunes. But here 
it is not the oow or horse which tells the fortune, but the minor beasts. 
Hshntzo attacked fortune -telling and physiognomizing ; he is saying that 
the disciples of these Neo-Mieians are not as good as the most absurd 
of the fortune-tellers ! 

viTi THE MEEIT OF THE COOTUCIAN 99 

But when a person can be seen face to face and eye to eye, 

It does not take forever to see thxougli Mm. 

I am making tMs good song, 

To show how very shifty you are ” ^ — 
this expresses my meaning. 

* * 4f 

I desire to be mean and yet noble, stupid yet wise, poor The benefits 
yet right. Can I bring that about ? It is only accomplished 
by study. That student who carries it ^ out is called a 
scholar.^ He who exerts himself and longs for it is a superior 
man.^ He who is versed in it is a Sage. Then what will 
prevent me ® fi'om being on the one hand a Sage or on the other 
hand a scholar or superior man ? Formerly I was undistin- 
guished from the man on the street ; suddenly I am equal to 
Yao and Shun ; is not this being mean and yet noble ? 

Formerly in examining a door and house to determine their 
difEerence I confused them and was unable to distinguish 
them.® Suddenly I become the source of benevolence 9 
{Jen) and justice (F^), I distinguish right and wrong, I draw 
a diagram of heaven and earth upon my palm like dis- 
tinguishing black and white ; is not tMs being stupid yet 
wise ? Formerly I was altogether a man without property ; 

^ Booh of Odes, II, v, v, 8. Gf . p. 293 and notes for this passage. 

* Study. 

* One who has fixed his parpose to study — entered upon the Confucian 
path. Scholar is a technical term here. The three grades of virtue are 
scholar superior man ^ and Sage ^ 

^ The Chou*Li says : Ho who exerts himself to do good and is not indolent 
therein is called a superior man, 

® The first personal pronoun referring to an indefinite personal subject. 

“ So stupid. 

100 

THE WORKS OF HSOOTZB 

viir 

suddenly I have the great ability of ruling the Empire ; 
considered in this way, am I not poor yet rich 1 Now, if 
there were a man here who carefully hoarded a treasure of a 
thousand pieces of gold ^ ; although he begged for food, 
people would call him rich. If he wished clothes, he could not 
wear that treasure ; if he wished food, he could not eat it ; 
if one wished to sell him something, he could not promptly 
pay for it. Then why do people call him rich ? Is it not 
because the substance of great wealth is really in what he 
has ? He is an extremely rich man. Is he not poor and yet 
rich 1 Therefore the superior man is noble though he have 
no title ; he is rich though he have no official emoluments ; 
he is trusted though he does not advertise himself ; he is 
10 majestic though he does not rage ; he is glorious though he 
be poor and retired ; he is happy though he live alone : do not 
his circumstances of being most honourable, most wealthy, 
most important, and most dignified all increasingly show this 
to be true ? Therefore it is said that a person cannot strive 
for an honourable name by forming cliques ; he cannot gain 
it by bragging; he cannot coerce it by power; he must 
sincerely do this * and then only will it come to him. He who 
strives for it will lose it ; if he yields it, it will come to him ; 
if he is modest, his fame will accumulate ; if he brags, it will 
be vain. Therefore the superior man pays attention to 
developing his inner capacities, but yields to others in external 
matters ; he pays attention to cultivating virtue himself, 
and dwells in it by his modesty ; in this way his fame arises 
like the sun and moon ; the country responds like an echo to 

^ Lit., 1^. a piece of gold of twenty taels (ounces) weight. 

* Study. 

VITI 

101 

$ 

THE MERIT OF THE COEFUCIAN 

the thunder. Hence it is said : The superior man is retired 
and yet manifest ; he is subtle and yet clear ; he yields to 
others and yet conquers. The ode says : — 

'' The crane cries in the middle of the marsh. 

Its voice sounds to the sky ” — 
this expresses what I mean.^ 

Mean men are the opposite of this. They form cliques, Tho small- 
yet their associates are all the fewer ; they strive vulgarly, ® 
and their reputation is ail the more shameful ; they toil 
hard to get peace and profit ; but they are in all the more 
danger. The ode says ; — 

“ If people have no conscience ; 

If they hate each other and are prejudiced, 

When one receives position, but does not first yield to others, 

He will himself come to ruin ” — 
this expresses what I mean.® Therefore a man whose ability 
is small but who undertakes a large matter, is like a man 
whose strength is small but who undertakes to carry a heavy 
load ; he will let it go, be quite injured, and be unable to go 
any distance with it. He wbo is unworthy, but thinks 11 
himself a Worthy, is like a hunchback who wants to 
grow tall — the people who point at his hump would be all 
the more numerous.® Therefore the wise king is fixed in 

^ Boo/ts of Odes^ II, rn, x, 2. Tlie crane is unseen but yet is beard, so the 
superior man's fame arises thougb he may not have official position. 

® Book of Odea, II, vxr, ix, 4. This is supposed to he part of a criticism 
of King Yu by his relatives. In explaining this passage (as in many others, 
as for instance, the quotation just above) Mao ^ alludes to Hauntzo’s 
interpretation. 

® His attempts to make himself tall only make bis deformity more 
prominent. 

» 

102 THE WOEKS OE HStftTTZE vm 

virtue and accordingly gives people rank ; wliat appointments 
he makes are not contrary to the proper ranking ^ ; his faith- 
ful ministers are really able and then only dare they receive 
office ; what they do does not overpass their ability. When 
on the one hand the appointments are not contrary to 
proper ranking, and on the other hand people’s abilities 
are not overpassed — ^that is the extreme of good government. 
The ode says : — 

“ There is peace on the right and left 
Which also leads them to come ” — 
this speaks of the relationship of the superior and inferior 
as not being disorderly.® 

Ponr grades The common people’s ® standard of virtue is that goodness 
of virtue. consists in following custom, that the great good * of life is 
possessions and wealth, and that supporting one’s parents is 
to have already reached the right Way {Tao). WTien a person’s 
character is formed according to rule and his will is firm ; when 
he does not allow his selfish desires to confuse what he has 
learned — when a man is like that, he can he called a strong 
' scholar. When a person’s character is formed according to 
rule and his will is firm ; when he likes to correct himself 

* TJbe best men are always placed at the top. 

’ Boole of Odea, II, vu, viii, 4. Mao ^ is misled by Hsiintze’s comment 
to interpret 2]^ 2p. by ^ I have followed The ode is a description 

of the feudal princes coming to pay homage to the Son of Heaven. Because 
of his good govornmont, resulting in peace among the feudal states, the 
rulers are induced to come to his court. 

’ In, contrast to that of the scholar, superior man, and Sage, as below. 

* treasure. 

103 

viij: the- ‘MERIT 01^ THE CONEUCIAH 

according to wBat lie has learned, so as to force and to .beautify 
Ms emotional nature ; when Ms speech is for the most part ‘ 
correct/ though he does not know everjrtMng ; when his 
actions are for the most part correct/ though not without 
eEoit 2 ; when Ms Imowledge and reflection is for the most 
part correct, though not completely so ; when on the one 
hand he is able to magnify those whom he exalts,® and on the 
other hand he is able to instruct those who have not already 
attained to his achievements — ^when a man is like that, he 
can be called a solid superior man. When a person can 
•adjust Mmself to the principles of all the Kings like dis- 
tinguisMng white from black ^ ; when he can respond to 
the changed situation of the moment like counting ‘‘one, 
two ” ; • when he can carry out the Rules of proper conduct . 
(Li) and treat people according to ceremony, but yet be at 
ease in it like using his four limbs ® ; when he can compel 12 
the occasion to show his genius for producing achievements, 

• like commanding the four seasons ® ; when the goodness of 
his just government harmonizes his people so that though 
they be hxmdreds or tens of thousands in number he yet hinds 
them together like one man — ^when a man is like that, he 
may be called a Sage. 

^ Lit., apt. 

* Ivit. the case which comes from being naturally correct. 

3. The Sages. 

* Easily. 

* Naturally ; as the limbs are parts of the body, so proper and oourteou* 
actions are natural parts of his character. 

* As easily as Heaven (the weather-producing Power) commands the 
four seasons to bring forth all vegetable life. 

f 

104 THE WORKS OF HSt)NTZE viii 

The Sage. How regular^ his actions ! He is governed by principles. 

How dignified lie is ! He is able to respect himself. How 
complete ^ bis character ! He has an end and a beginning 
13 to his actions. How contented he is ! He is able 
to prolong his days. How firm he is I He steadily holds to 
the Way (jTao). How brilliant he is ! What he does is the 
essence of wisdom. How orderly he is ! His actions are 
according to fundamental principles. How luxuriant his 
character ! It is beautiful. How glorious he is I His joy is 
the good of men. How mournful he is ! His fear is that 
men would do evil. 

This Way (Too) of his proceeds from one thing. What is 
this one thing ? It is that he grasps its spirit and holds it 
firmly. What is its spirit ? To he completely good and 
fully controlled is its spirit. That all things are insufficient 
to subvert him is to hold it firmly. To grasp its spirit firmly 
is to be a Sage. 

The ClftBBics. The Sage is the channel ® of the Way (Tao). The Way (Tao) 
of the world pervades the Confucian doctrine ; the Way {Tad) 
of all the kings is united in it ; hence the Way {Tcu)) of the 
OAeSf History^ Rites, and the Music follows it. The Odes 
teach this as their purpose ; the History teaches this as its 
business ; the Rites (Li) teach this in their performances ; the 
Music teaches this in its harmony ; the S'pring and Autumn 
teaches this in its subtleties. So the reason that the “ Ballads 

1 Or “ correct " ; ^ explains it as ^ ^ ; or “ very 

**» ^ explains it as ^ ^ ; both of which seem to be conjectural 
explanations based on this passage alone. 

* The ^ ^ defines ^ as ^ ^ ; or “ resolute " -ifb- 

® Lit., “ pipe.” 

I 

vin THE MEKIT OE THE CONEUCIAN 105 

of the States ^ do not countenance oppression is because 
they adopt it and restrain themselves ; the reason that 14 
the “ Minor Odes ” ^ elegant is because they adopt it and 
beautify themselves ; the reason that the " Major Odes ” ® are 
the greater elegancies is because they adopt it and make 
themselves great ; the reason that the ‘‘ Praises ” * are the 
extreme of virtue is that they adopt it and permeate them- 
selves with it. The Way {Tao) of the world culminates in it. 

He who follows it will he preserved ; he who rebels at it will 
he ruined. Prom ancient to present times there has not been 
anyone who followed it, and was not preserved, or who rebelled 
against it and was not ruined. 

:(( iic ^ 

A visitor said : “ Confucius said, ‘ Was Duke Chou very Rebuttal of 
virtuous ? When he took high position,® he was all the more 
respectful of others ; when he became rich he was all the 
more stingy ; when he had conquered his enemies he was 
all the more prepared for war.’ ” 

In reply I said : ” This is impertinent. It was not the 
conduct of Duke Chou and not the saying of Confucius. 

When ® King Wu died, King Ch'eng was a minor ; Duke 

^ The first division of the Book of Odea, 

* The second division of the Book of Odea. The text contains a play on 

words : lit. “ that the Minor Odes are the minor odes means not only 

“ the sound of wind instruments, hence an ode for singing ", hut also 
“ elegant, refined, and thoroughly coiTect 

® The third division of the Odes. There is here a similar play on words 
to that above. The Introduction to the Odes says that there were two 
kinds of states, small and large, hence the Minor and Major Odes. 

^ The fourth division of the Odes, 

® Becamo Regent. 

* A partial repetition of p, 91. 

c 

106 THE WORKS OR HStNTZE viii 

Chou protected King Gh'eng and succeeded to King Wu; 
he took the throne of the Emperor, When he turned his back 
to the screen ^ and arose, the feudal nobles hastened to go 
below the hall.® At such a time who was respectful of others ! ® 
“ He ruled the whole country and established seventy-one 
feudal states ; of the Chi family there were enfeofied fifty- 
. three. If a descendant of the Chou dynasty was not mad or 
deluded he certainly was made one of the glorious feudal 
nobles of the empire ; who would say that Duke Chou was 
stingy ! 

“ When King Wu put Chou to death, he did it on a day 
that the soldiers dreaded * ; he faced east and resisted the 
great year®; then he got to the Fan,® it was overflowing; 
when he got to Huai,’ the road was impassable ; when he 
16 got to Kung-t‘ou,® the mountain fell. Ho-shou ® was 

* The silken, screen in the audience chamber bet-ween the door and 
window. It was ornamented with hatchets or axo-heads. 

* Audience ended. 

* Meaning that Duke Chou, in thus ending the audience, maintained 
hia own dignity. 

* On the ^ ^ day, superstitzously avoided, King Wu joined battle 
with Chou-sin’s forces. Of. Book of History^ V, n, 1. 

® A cycle of twelve years, in which the same branch character returns. 
When King Wu was pursuing Chou, Yfi-sin advised him not to go north- 
ward because the planet Jupiter was in the north \ but King Wu did not 
heed this superstitious advice. Jupiter is called the ^ because twelve 
of its courses through the zodiac make the great year ^ 

* A river in Shantung and Honan. 

A place of uncertain location, possibly ^ Honan, 

in the south of the state of in the south of ^ 

® A mountain in the principality of situated in 
Honan. 

® The eighth son of King Wen, a younger brother of Duke Chou. 

vni 

’ \ ® 

THE MEBIT OE THE COOTUCIAN . 107 

afraid, and said : ‘ Is it not tlien qnite probable that witbiu 
three days the five calamities will visit ns ? ’ . 

“Dulce Chou said: disemboweled Pi-kan,* and 

imprisoned the Viscount of Ohi ® Eei-lien and- Wu-lai rule 
the government ; why is anything probable ? Follow with 
the horse in ordered ranks and go forward ! ’ In the morning 
they ate at Ts‘i ^ ; in the evening they lodged at the Hundred 
Springs ® ; at dawn they settled at the Wilderness of Moh.’ 
They beat their drums,® and Chou’s troops easily submitted ® ; 
thereupon they overthrew the people of Yin^® and killed 
Chou. Then those who did the killing were not the people 
of Chou but because of the people of Yin. Hence there 
were no taking of heads or captives, no rewards for difficult 

i Chou-sm. 

® A worthy minister, 

3 A relative who remonstrated with Ohou-sin. 

4 Two “ favourites ”, one a good runner and the other a strong man. • 

A city in the state of Wei seven furlongs to the north of ^ ^ ^ 

ig jjSf OUMi. 

* A place in the state of Wei 1^, to the north-'West of ^ 

Honan. 

’ The battle-groundin'^ north of Honan, where the decisive battle 
was fought. 

* The signal for the advance to the attack. 

» Mencius did not believe the aocoimt of the pestles floating about in 
blood after the battle {Sook of Hiatoryy V, ni, 9) and Ssuutze nowhere 
mentions that Chou’s soldiers turned their 8i)6ara upon each other as the 
Book of liiatory declares. 

The people of Chou-sin of the dynasty of Yin. 

The retainers of the dynasty of Chon. The Chinese distinguishes clearly 
between the dynasty of Chou ^ and Chou or- Ohou-sin, the last emperor 
of the dynasty of Yin, whereas in English it is impossible to distinguish 
them except by the context. 

r 

108 THE WOEKS OE HStlHTZE vni 

feats.^ On tlie contrary, they litiiig up the three kinds of 
defensive armour ^ and put down the five kinds of weapons ® ; 
they united the country and established their music ; there- 
upon the Wu ^ and Hsiang ® arose and the Shao ® and Hu ® 
ceased. No one within the four seas ^ failed to change his 
feelings and alter his reflections to be moved by them apd 
obey them. Hence people did not close their outside doors ® ; 

10 in crossing the country there were no boundaries ^ ; in such 
a situation who would be prepared for war ? ” ’ 

♦ JlS ♦ * >i« 

The Ts‘ao-fu^® was the best charioteer in the world, but without 

a^eat ^ ^ chariot and horses his ability could not have been seen. 

Confucian. Yi was the best archer in the world, but without a bow 

and arrows his skill could not have been seen. The great 
Confucian is the best harmonizer and unifier in the world, 

^ Of bravery in. battle ; since there was no fighting. 

* The cuirass, the helmet, and the shield j or “ the three kinds of hides " 
(armour was made chiefly of hides) of the one-horned rhinoceros, of the 
two-homed rhinoceros, and of the ox. 

® The sword, the two-edged sword, the lance, the halberd, and the 
arrow ; or, the lance, the halberd, the battle-axe, the shield, and the bow 
and arrow. 

* Wu's music. 

* Also a piece of music of the Chou dynasty. 

* 3oth are music of the dynasty of Yin. The Shao was Slum's music, 

’ On the continent ; in the country of China. 

* At night ; the people were so virtuous and obedient that there were 
no thieves ! When we remember that the China of that day was entirely 
a rural country, such a statement does not seem extravagant. 

® It was like ono family. 

The charioteer of King Mo ^ of the Chou dynasty 1001-947 b.g. 

The Prince of Ch’iung ; a famous rebel who drove T‘ai-k‘ang of the 
Hsia dynasty beyond the Yellow river to T'ai-k'ang Saien in Honan about 
2109 B.O., and kept the power until his death. 

VIII THE MEEIT OF THE CONFUOIAH 109 

but witbout a place of a bundred bis merit cannot 
be seen. 

If tbe chariot is good and tbe borses select, and yet a man 
cannot hereby travel far, a thousand U in one day, then be is 
not a Ts'ao-fu. If tbe bow is adjusted and tbe arrow is 
straight, and yet thereby a man cannot send it far and bit tbe 
bulls-eye, then be is not a Yi. If a man controls a place of a 
hundred li, but yet cannot harmonize and unify tbe whole 
country, and rule tbe strong and oppressive, then be is not 
a great Confucian. 

Although such a great Confucian should be in retirement in 
a poor hamlet or a leaky but, and though he be without even 
a place to put down an awl,^ yet kings or dukes cannot contest 
with him in fame ; when he controls a place of a hundred Uy 
a state of a thousand U cannot contest with him and conquer ; 
he will beat down an oppressive state and unify the whole 
country, yet no one will be able to overturn him — ^this is the 
evidence of a great Confucian. His speech is ordered and his 
actions are appropriate (Li) ; his conduct of afiairs is without 
being dissatisfied with it ; in danger, his responses to changing 
situations are indirectly appropriate ; at the right time he 
moves his abode, at the right season he desists or takes up 
his business ; through a thousand affairs and ten thousand 
changes his way (Tdo) is the same — ^this is the proof of a 
great Confucian. When he is out of office, the ordinary 
Confucian laughs at him ^ ; when he is in ofiSoe heroes 17 

^ A small place to rule, in which, to start Ms career and show his ability. 

* Landless, poverty-stricken. 

* At tbe great Confucian. 

Coziittvon 

men. 

Common 

Oonfucians. 

f 

no THE WORKS OF HSt^NTZE vni 

help him, paltry and insignificent fellows avoid him', eviP 
teachings fear him, and the common people -honour him. 
When he is in office he unites the country ; when he is out of 
office, by himself he establishes an honourable name. Heaven 
could not kill them ; Earth could not bury them ; a time 
like that of Ch'ie and Chih could not soil them ; unless they 
had been great Oonfucians, they could not have been 
established — such were Confucius and Tze Kung,^ 

Thus there are common men, there are common Oonfucians, 
there are correct® Oonfucians, and there are great Con- 
fucians. They have no scholarship ; they are without correct 
moral feeling ; and they consider riches and profit to be the 
stmmum honum — such are commom men. 

They have large clothes, wide girdles, and high ^ hats ; 
they sketchily follow the early Kings, but are satisfied with 
the teaching of a confused age ; they have erroneous learning 
and confused actions ; they do not know that they should 
imitate the later Kings and unify their purposes ; they do 
not know that they should exalt the rules of proper conduct 
Xld) and justice {Yi) and regard the Odes and History as 
important; their clothes, hat, and deportment are ^juite 
like that fashionable and common, yet they do not know 
enough to dislike it ; their speech and talk has quite no 
difference from that of Micius, yet they cannot clearly dis- 
tinguish it ; they invoke the early Kings in order to cheat 

^ XJnortliodox. 

» Probably Cbung-fo^. Of. Analects, V, ir ; VI, i, ivj XI, ii; XII, 
ii. Of. Wang Hsien-cli'ien's Introduction ® f. 46 for diBoussion of this 
name. 

* Or “ elegant ", developed in virtue. 

* Or narrow " ; or “ like oonob, shells ", i.e. high and peaked. 

VIII 

THE MEEIT OF THE CONEUCUH 111 

stupid people and seek for a living ^ ; if they get fed and 
accumulate enougli to fill their mouths they are satisfied ; 
they follow their master, and they serve their talkative 
favourites and their upper class retainers, they are quite like 
life-long prisoners, not daring to have any other purposes — 
such are common Confucians. 

He imitates the later Kings and unifies his purposes ^ ; he 18 
exalts the rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice (Yi) and Correct 
regards the Odes and History as important ; his speech and and 
actions already accord with general principles ; yet there 
are things which his intelligence cannot deal with ; his follow- 
ing the doctrine has not attained to some things ; his learning 
has not come to some things, hence his intelligence cannot 
classify them.® When he knows a thing he says he knows 
it ; when he does not know a thing he says he does not know 
it ; on the one hand he does not use the fact that he does not 
know that which he says that he knows and vice versa to 
deceive himself, and on the other hand, he does not use it to 
cheat others. Thereby he respects the Worthy, fears the law, 
and does not dare to be remiss or proud — such is a correct ^ 
Confucian. 

He imitates the ancient Kings ; he is versed in the rules Great 
of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) ; he unifies his purposes; 
by the shallov/ he deals with the deep ; through the ancient 
he deals with the present ; through one example he deals with 
ten thousand ; if a matter has to do with benevolence (Jen) 

^ Idt., “ clothes and food.” 

• Or “ policies ”, rules or ways of action. 

® In a new situation he is unahle to classify it and put it under an old 
rule and so be able to deal with it. 

* Or “ elegantly virtuous 

112 

THE WOEKS OE HStMTZB 

viit 

and justice (Ei), although it is among the birds or beasts, it 
. is like distinguishing white from black ^ for him ; in dealing 
with strange things and bizarre changes, which have not 
been previously heard of nor have been previously seen, he 
suddenly takes up one corner and then is able to state to what 
class it belongs and answer it ^ without any doubt or dis- 
concertion ; he explains it and sees through it, and it corre- 
sponds to his explanation as two halves of a tally ® — such is a 
great Confucian, 

19 Consequently, if the ruler employs a common man,^ 
a state of ten thousand chariots ® will he destroyed ® ; if 
he employs a common Confucian, a state of ten thousand 
chariots will be barely preserved ; if he employs a correct 
Confucian, a state of a thousand chariots will be at peace ^ ; 
if he employs a great Confucian, then from a place only a 
hundred k’ in size, alter a while or after three years,® the 
country will be unified, the feudal princes will serve bim ; 
if he ® has a state of ten thousand chariots, he wiil appoint 

^ Easy. 

2 As for example in dealing with fallacies ; of. p. 209. 

^ Apiece of bamboo was split in two and half given to each of two men ; 
upon putting the two pieces together, the genuineness of the token could 
be seen in that they fitted together exactly. 

* As prime minister. 

® A large state. 

* Because of his exaltation of riches and profit instead of the benefit of 
the people. 

^ Undisturbed by enemies. 

* Yang Liang says that T'ang of the Shang dynasty and Wen of the 
Ghou dynasty ruled as King after three years of developing and influencing 
their states. 

® The great Confucian. 

VIII THE MEKIT OE THE COMUCIAN . 113 

or remove liis officials, bring things to a proper state, and in 
one morning liis fame will be great. ^ 

Not having learned it ^ is not as good as having learned The 
it ; having learned it is not as good as having seen it carried th*e 
out ; having seen it is not as good as understanding it ; 
understanding it is not as good as doing it. The development 
of scholarship is to the extreme of doing it, and that is its end 
and goal. He who carries it out, knows it thoroughly. He 
who knows it thoroughly becomes a Sage, The Sage founds 
his conduct upon benevolence (Jen) and justice (Yi) ; he 
decides right and wrong accurately ; he makes his speech 
and action correspond to each other, not varying the least 
bit — ^there is no other reason for that than because he simply 
carries it ® out. Therefore he who has heard of it but has 
not seen it, will certainly err, even though he be widely learned. 

He who has seen it but does not understand it, will certainly 
be led astray, even though he have memorized it,^ He who 
understands it but does not carry it out will certainly stumble, 
even though he regard it as important. If a man has not 
learned it nor seen it carried out, although his actions should 
be correct,® he would not be benevolent (Jen) ; every hundred 
of his actions would only be a hundred failures. 

Therefore if a man is without a teacher or precepts,® then 

^ Like T'ang or Wu in conquering their enemies in one battle. 

» Bight learning, the Oonfucian Way of life and knowledge. 

* What he has learned — the Confucian Way. 

* Like a certain Mr. Chih, spoken of in the ^ ^ ^ could 

tell all the ringing and drumming of the instruments and all the posturings 
of the dancers while performing each of the Odes, but could not state their 
meaning I 

* By chance. 

* Lit., '* a Law ’’ in the New Testament sense of the word. 

I 

114 THE WOEKS OF HSONTZE vm ^ 

ifheisintelligent, he will certainly become a robber; if lie is i 
brave, he will certainly become a murderer ; if he has ability 
20 he will certainly cause disorder; if he is an investigator j 

he will certainly become bizarre ^ ; if he is a dialectician, he , 

will certainly go far from the truth. If he has a teacher and ! 

precepts, then if he is intelligent, he will quickly become 
, learned ; if he is brave, he will quickly become awe-inspiring ; j 

if he has ability, he will quickly become perfect ; if he is an i 

investigator, he will quickly arrive at all truth ; if he is a | 

dialectician, he will quickly be able to determine the truth j 

or falsity of all things. Therefore the possession of a teacher 1 

and of precepts is the greatest treasure a man can have ; the ? 

lack of a teacher and of precepts is the greatest calamity a [ 

man can have. ; 

If a man is without a teacher or precepts, he will exalt ; 
his original nature ^ ; if he has a teacher and precepts, he will \ 
exalt self-cultivation. Now a teacher and precepts are what | 
is gained by self-cultivation, not what is obtained from original f 

nature. ji 

nSSeTand Original nature ^ is not good enough to set itself up as the i 
acqTiired ruler of a personality. Original nature is that which I cannot |, 
produce, yet which can be developed. Self-cultivation is :! 
that which I do not originally have, but which can be produced. 
Choices and rejections and habitual practice are the 
means of developing original nature. To concentrate on one i 

^ Like Huei Shih and Teng tSih, the Neo-Mioians. I ^ 

* Which is BTil, and so the man will ho led into evil. 

® Adding the character after ; the comment made hy Yang Liang | 

implies that there were two characters in his text. || 

vni THE MERIT OE THE CONEUGIAN 116 

tMng and not vaiy ^ is tKat wlieieby self-cnltivation is 21 
perfected. Practice alters a person’s inclinations ; if kept 
up for a long time it alters liis inmost being. If a person 
concentrates on one tMng, and does not vary, be will become 
as wise as tbe gods and form a triad with Heaven and Earth. 
For by collecting ^ earth a mountain is made, and by collecting 
water the sea is made,® If the common man on the street 
cultivates * goodness and wholly completes its cultivation, he 
will be called a Sage. Eirst he must seek, and then only 
will he obtain ; he must do it, and then only will he reach 
perfection ; he must cultivate ^ it, and then only can he 
rise ; he must complete its cultivation, and then only can he 
be a Sage. Eor the Sage is the man who has cultivated * 
hims elf. A man who practises® hoeing and ploughing becomes 
a farmer ; if he practises ® chopping and shaving wood, he 

^ Study only orthodox teachings. 

* The same character ^ above translated “ self-cultivation " or 
“ practice ” is here translated “ collecting ", The argument is that as by 
^ (collecting) earth or water, mountains and seas are made, so by ^ 
(collecting or cultivating) goodness a great character is made. Since in 
English we have no word with the meaning of ooUooting both earth or 
water and goodness, the traualation cannot indicate the force of Hsuntzo's 
argument. 

® Hero follows the sentence ; “ The collection of mornings and evenings 
is called a year ; the extreme of height is called Heaven ; the extreme of 
lowness is called Earth ; the six directions (north, south, east, west, up, 
and down) in the world are called the extremes (j^, the word used for the 
north pole)." This sentence interrupts the thread of the discourse and 

I 

THE WORKS OE HSHNTZB 

116 

vin 

becomes an artisan ^ ; if be practises ® trafficking in goods, 
be becomes a merchant ; if be practises ^ tbe rules of proper 
conduct (Li) and justice {Yi)y be becomes a superior man. 
Tbe son of an artisan always follows bis father’s trade, and 
tbe people of a city or state are satisfied to repeat its 
peculiarities. He who lives in Ts'u ^ becomes a man of Tsffi ; 
be who lives in Yueb ^ becomes a man of Yueb ; be who lives 
in central China ® becomes a man of central China. This is 
not from tbe original human nature received from Nature, but 
attained by profuse cultivation. Hence, if a man knows 
bow to pay attention to bis choices and rejections, to be 
careful of bis habits, and to magnify profuse cultivation, be 
will become a superior man. If be follows bis nature and bis 
emotions, and bis scholarship is restricted, be will become a 
small-minded man. If a person is a superior man be is 
usually peaceful and honoured ; if be is a small-minded man 
he is usually in danger and disgrace. All men desire peace 
and honour and dislike danger and disgrace ; hence the 
superior man alone is able to obtain that which he likes ; 
the small-minded man daily invites that which he dislikes. 
The ode says ; — 

“ Now this good man 

Is not sought after nor advances in office. 

^ m Hsiintze seems to mean " carpenter " throughout. 

* A partially oivilizod state to the south of ancient civilized China 

* A still more barbaric state to the south-east of civilized China. 

* Lit., the ancient part of China ruled over by the most ancient 
dynasty of Hsia, central and civilized China. 

VIII 

THE MEEIT OF THE CONEUCIAN 117 

But that hard-hearted man 
Is thought of and promoted again and again. 

So the people are avaricious and disorderly 
And prefer ways which are like poisonous weeds 
— this expresses my meaning.^ 

* ♦ 

The GrRADES OF Men 

Their purposes are not free from crookedness and selfish- Four Grades 
ness, yet they hope people will think them to be public- 
spirited ; their actions arc not free from foulness, yet they 
hope people will think that they act correctly ; they 22 
are very stupid and ignorant, yet they hope people will 
think them to be wise — ^such are ordinary men. In their 
minds they restrain their selfishness and so they are able 
to be public-spirited ; in action they restrain their emotional 
nature, and so they are able to act correctly ; in Imowledge 
they like to inquire about things,^ and so they are able to 
have ability ; they who are public-spirited, who act correctly 
and who have ability, can be called inferior Confucians. 

In their purpose they are fixed in public-spiritedness ; in 
action they are fixed in correct action ; in Imowledge they 

^ Book of Odes, III, iir, iii, 11, A lament over the miagovernmont of 
King Li (878-842 b.O.) — ^ he advanced the evil and neglected the worthy, 
hence the people were led into evil. Such is the action of the small 
minded man when in control of the State. 

2 Confucius, when ho visited the ancestral temple, thought it proper to 
inquire minutely about everything. Analects, III, xv. 

i 

118 THE WORKS OF HStNTZE viii 

compreliend all general principles ; men snoiL as this can be 
called great Confucis^ns. Oreat Confiicians can be emperor, 
or the three dnkes ; inferior Confucians can be feudal nobles, 
prefects, or officers ; ordinary men can be labourers, farmers, 
or merchants. The rules of proper conduct \IA) are the 
standards of all measurement ^ of ministers and officers by 
their ruler ; it includes all grades of men. 

* ^ ^ * 

The speech of the Superior Man has limits ^ ; his actions 
Standards, standards ; in his way of conduct {Tao) there is one 

thing which he emphasizes. In speaking of what should be 
sought for in government, he does not descend below the 
plane of the peace and care of the people ® ; in speaking of 
what purposes should be set up, he does not descend below 
those of an officer ^ ; in speaking of what should be sought 
for in the Way of life {Tao) and virtue, he does not difier from 
those of the later kings. A way (Tao) which antedates that 
of the three dynasties is vague ® ; a method which is different 
from that of the later kings is incorrect. If his speech is 
elevated or depressed, made small or made great, it does not 
go outside the foregoing. This is how the superior man 

^ Lit., “inch, foot, length between outstretched hands, and ten-foot 
length." 

* Standards beyond which he will not go lit., “ a boundary wall to its 
dwelling." Cf. ATwlects XVI, xxviii for a similar sentiment. 

® To aggressive war and the absorption of other states. 

* j;;;' ; to the purposes of ordinary people, money and wealth. 

® The Hsia, Shang, and Chou dynasties — ^anything purporting to come- 
from so ancient a date is too vague and uncertain to be believed or followed 
hence follow the later Kings. * 

vin THE MERIT OE THE CONEUCIAH 119 

keeps Hs puiposes and ideas, even tkougli they are animated, 
within the limits of its dwelling. Therefore if a feudal 83 
noble in asking about government does not attain 
to the plane of the peace and care of the people, then do' 
not answer him ^ ; if a common man in asking to be taught 
does not rise to the plane of how an officer should act, then 
do not teach him.^ If the doctrines of the hundred schools 
do not come up to the level of those of the later kings, then 
do not listen to them. For such a man is called a superior 
man ; his speech has limits and his actions have standards. 

^ As Confucius did not reply wlion questioned about the art of war. 
Analects XV, i, 1. Or as Hsiintze replied when questioned about war as 
in Book XV. 

® As Confucius replied when asked about husbandry — *' Go to a 
farmer ! ” Analects XIII, iv, 1. 

1 

BOOK IX 
KINGLY GOVERNMENT 
Please tell about the Art of Government 

Do not regard seniority but advance tbe worthy and able ; 1 
dismiss the incompetent and incapable without delay ; The art of 
put incorrigible ringleaders to death without trying to reform 
them ; develop the common people without waiting to compel 
them by laws. When men’s rank is uncertain, then there is 
the order of seniority of their families.^ Yet although a man 
is the descendant of a king, duke, prefect or officer, if he 
does not observe the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice 
(Y^), he must be relegated to the common ranks ; although 
he is the descendant of a commoner, if he have acquired learn- 
ing, developed a good character, and is able to observe the 
rules of proper conduct (Z^) and justice (Yi), then elevate him 
to be minister, prime minister, officer, or prefect. But lewd 
people, scandal-mongers, evil-doers, people of perverted 
abilities, shirkers, and unreliable people, should be trained, 
given employment, and time for reformation. Stimulate them 
by rewards ; warn them by punishments ; if they are satisfied 
with employment, then keep them ; if they are not satisfied 
to work, then deport them. Defectives ^ should be received 
and cared for ; if they have ability, they should be given 
positions. The authorities should employ them and clothe 

^ According to the order of their tablets in the ancestral temple. 

* Lit., ” the five kinds of defectives,” the dumb, the deaf, the crippled, 
the lame, and the disabled. Humpbacks, for example, -were employed as 
magicians and exorcists. 

122 

THE WORKS OE HStNTZE 

IX 

and feed them ; they should all be cared for without exception. 
Those who are incorrigible should be put to death without 

2 mercy. Eor this is what is called natural ^ virtue ; this 
is the government of a king. 

The Geeat Distinctions to be made in Holding Couet 

Treat people Treat those who are good who come to you, according to 
^cording to Proper (Li) ; treat those who are not good 

who come to you, with punishment. When those two kinds 
o’f people are distinguished, the worthy and the unworthy 
will not be mixed, right and wrong will not be confused. When 
the worthy and unworthy are not mixed, then heroes will 
come to you ; when right and wrong are not confused, then 
the coimtry will be well governed. If this is all done, your 
reputation will be great ; the whole country will be willing 
to do your bidding, and desist from what you prohibit — 
the duties of a king will be completely performed. 

Keep a mean Whenever in holding a court the ruler is severe and harsh, 
beSgStant people pleasantly, then his 

and familiar, subordinates are afraid and do not love him ; they are 
all silent and do not tell him things. If this is the case, then 
great matters run the risk of being xmfinished, and small 
matters run the risk of being ruined. If he is amicable and 
complaisant, and likes to treat people pleasantly, and does 

3 not stop them, then malicious persons will approach him 
from all sides, and talk will bristle around him, which con- 
tinually tires him out. If this is the case, he will have to 
listen to much and will be kept very busy ; this will also 

^ Or “ Heaven's 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEBNMENT 

123 

injure ids government. Bor if he goes by law but does not 
look into things, then those cases to which the law is not 
applicable will certainly be done wrong. If he gives offices to 
men but does not keep acquainted with what they are doing, 
then those whose ability does not measure up to their duties 
will certainly fail. For unless he is a superior man he cannot 
follow law and yet investigate into things ; he cannot give 
office to men and yet know what they are doing ; he cannot 
be without secret plans ; he cannot leave any good man with- 
out office, and everything cannot be without some mistakes. 
Bor the man who is just is the standard ^ of how to hear cases ^ ; 
he who keeps to the mean ^ is the measure * of how to hold 
court. He who when there is a law, acts according to the law, 
but when there is no law, decides according to the analogies 
of the case, is doing the utmost possible in holding court. 
He who is prejudiced, shows a partisan spirit, and has no 
principles of action is the basest of all in holding court, Bor 
there has been bad government under good laws ; but from 
ancient times to the present there has never been known to be 
a bad government under a superior man. ® It is said : “ Good 
government springs from the superior man ; bad government 
springs from the small-minded man ” — ^this expresses what 
I mean. 

If the classes are equal, there will not be enough for every- 

^ Lit., the steelyard or balances. 

* Hold court. 

® Between harshness and overpleasantness. 

* Lit,, carpenter's inked string or plumb-line. 

® Criticism of Shontzo, who thought good laws were the essence of good 
government and depreciated the necessity of good men in the government, 

124 

THE WOEKS OE HStETZE 

IX 

^ ' wEen everyone’s powers are equal, there is no unity 
necessary. in the state ; when everyone is equal, there is no one to 
employ the people on public services. As soon as there was 
heaven and earth, ^ there was the distinction of above and 
below 3 ; when the first wise king arose, the country he 
occupied had the division of classes. For two nobles cannot 
serve each other ; two commoners cannot employ each other * 
— ^this is a law of nature. Were people’s power and position 
equal, and their likes and dislikes the same, there would not 
be sufficient goods to satisfy everybody, and hence there would 
inevitably be strife. If there were strife, there would inevit- 
ably 3'esult general disorder ; if general disorder, then general 
poverty. The ancient kings hated any disorder, and hence 
established the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) 
to divide tbe people, to cause them to have the classes of poor 
and rich, of noble and inferior, so that everyone would be 
imder someone’s control — ^this is the fundamental thing in 
4 caring for the whole country. The History says : “ They 
are only uniform in that they are not uniform ” — this 

Follow the 
people's will. 

expresses what I mean.® 

When a horse hitched to a carriage is restless, a gentleman 

^ Of. p. 65. Because everybody will seek tbe same goods (riches, etc.) 
and want just as much as those who have the most, and hence there will 
not bo enough for all. This is criticism of the Mioian doctrine of equality. 

* Nature has its distinctions of superior and inferior. 

* elsewhere translated “ superior and inferior ", or “ ruler 
and ruled ". 

^ Only the superior can employ the inferior ; wo must remember that 
the^simpler feudal civilization of Hshntzo 'a day made this a fact. “ Employ " 
in ancient China was used of the emidoyment of a government official by 
the ruler. 

® Book of History V, xxxvii, 19, 

1 

IX laNGLY GOVERNMENT 125 

is not secure in the carriage. When the common people 
are restless under the government, then a prince is not secure 
in his position. When a horse hitched to a carriage is restless, 
there is nothing better than quieting him ; when the people 
are restless under the government, there is nothing better than 
treating them generously. If he chooses the worthy and 
the good, advances the sincere and the reverent, stimulates 
filial piety and respectfulness for elders,^ shelters the orphan 
and the widow, and helps the poor and the needy — ^if he does 
this, the common people will be satisfied with his government. 

When the common people are satisfied with his government, 
then only is a prince secure in his position. It is said : The 
prince is the boat ; the common people are the water. The 
water can support the boat, or the water can capsize the 
boat — ^this expresses my meaning. 

For if a prince wishes to be secure, there is nothing so good 
as a just government and loving the people. If he wishes succcsaful, 
to have glory, then there is nothing as good as exalting the 
rules of proper conduct (Li) and reverencing the scholar.^ 

If he wishes to establish a name for achievement there is 
nothing so good as esteeming the worthy and employing 
the able. These are the great virtues of a prince. When 
these three virtues are achieved, then all else will be achieved ; 
if these three virtues are not achieved, although he should 
indirectly achieve everything else, it would be of no avail. 
Confucius said ® : He who is correct and right in great and 

^ The virtue a younger brother should have for his older brother or a 
younger person for his elder, just as a son should show filial piety to hi* 
parents. 

■ The literary man, who is best fitted to hold office. 

® This saying is not in the Classics. 

126 

THE WOEKS OE HStNTZE 

IX 

small matters is a prince of the superior class ; he who is 
correct and right in great matters but sometimes right and 
sometimes wrong in minor matters is a prince of the middle 
class ; he who is wrong in great matters, although in small 
ones he should be right and correct — I have never seen that 
such an one left anything worth while to posterity. 

Levying too Marquis Ch^eng ^ and Duke Sze ^ were experts at levying 
to*^^ taxes and scheming extortion ; but their ability did not rise 
destruction, point of gaining the allegiance of their people. Tze 

Chang® was one who gained the allegiance of the people, 
but he did not rise to the point of exercising rule. Kuan 
Chung * exercised rule but did not rise to the point of 
5 cultivating the rules of proper conduct (Li). He who 
only cultivates proper conduct (lA) can rule as a righteous 
king ; he who only exercises rule can be powerful ; he who 
only gains the allegiance of the people can be peaceful; 
he who only levies taxes will be destroyed. Eor he who rules 
as righteous king ® tries to enrich the people ; he who rules 
as lord protector ® tries to enrich his retainers ; he who only 
preserves his state tries to enrich the nobles ; he who loses 
his state tries to enrich his coffers and fill his treasury. When 
the coffers are enriched and the treasury is full, yet the people 
are poor — ^this is what is meant by the saying : The nobles 
have superabundance but the masses are in want. If the 
enemy enters its territory, that state cannot defend itself ; 

1 Of Woi, 361-333 B.a. “ Also of Wei, 324-283 b.o. 

® A disciple of Confucius j often, mentioned in the Analects. Chief 
Mmister of the small state of Chen ; the ablest and most upright of states- 
men among Confucius’ contemporaries. Of. Analecta XIV, x \ V, xr. 

* The famous prime minister of Duke Huan of Ts’i. Of. A-nalects III, xxii. 

® By right and virtue. ® By force. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEKNMENT 

127 

if its army goes beyond its borders, it cannot attack ; hence 
it will totter and fall. One only needs to stand and wait for 
it to happen.^ Hence, if I accmnnlate wealth, it will be for my 
own destruction : the enemy will get it and become strong. 

The man who only levies taxes is inviting marauders and 
benefiting the enemy — ^this is the way (Tao) to destroy one’s 
country and endanger one’s person. Hence the wise prince 
does not tread this path. 

He who rules as righteous king^ gains the allegiance 
men ; he who rules as lord protector ® gains the alliance to destruo- 
of his equals ; he who rules by force ^ gains territory. He 
who gains the allegiance of men can make the feudal nobles 
his ministers ; he who gains the alliance of his equals, makes 
friends of the feudal nobles ; he who gains territory makes 
enemies of the feudal nobles. He who can make the feudal 
nobles his ministers can reign as king ; he who makes friends 
of the feudal nobles can rule as lord protector ; he who makes 
enemies of the feudal nobles is in danger. Against the man 
who uses force, the cities of others are guarded and the military 
officers of others are belligerent ; but if I ^ by my strength 
overcome them, then I must inevitably injure the people 
of others greatly. If I injure the people of another greatly, 
then they will certainly hate me greatly. If they hate 
me greatly, then they will more and more seek to strive with 
me. If the cities of another are guarded and his officers are 

' The destruction will come so soon that one need not wait long. 

• Lawful goyernment by truth, righteousness, and principle. 

® The autocrat who works by force and diplomacy. 

* The aggressor who works by force. 

^ The man who uses force ; a Chinese figure of speech, using the first 
personal pronoun for a person hypothetically spoken of ; it partakes of the 
Chinese grace of modesty. 

f 

128 

THE WOEKS OE HSttNTZB 

6 

The true 
policy of the 
strong ruler is 
to conserve 
his strength 
and not 
strive. 

The policy of 
the lord 
protector 

belligerent, but I by my strengtb. overcome them, then I must 
unavoidably injure my own people greatly. If I injure my 
people greatly, then they will certainly bate me greatly. If 
my people bate me greatly, then they will continually be less 
willing to strive for me. If the people of another more and 
more seek to strive with me, and my own people are continually 
less wining to strive for me — ^tbis is tbe way that a strong 
mler becomes weak. If territory comes to me but my people 
leave me — ^I shall bave much trouble but little gain. If 
that wbicb I need to guard ^ is increased, yet that whereby it 
should be guarded ^ be reduced — ^tbis is tbe way that a great 
country becomes small Then tbe feudal nobles will certainly 
form alliances, nurse their hatred, and not forget their enmity. 
They will wait for tbe weaknesses of tbe ruler who is strong 
through force to show themselves ; they will take advantage 
of bis defeat — ^tbis will be tbe time of danger for tbe ruler who 
is great through force, 

Tbe true policy (Tao) of tbe man who Icnows bow to rule 
by force is not to be anxious to use force. He ponders over 
tbe edicts of tbe emperor ; be conserves bis strengtb ; be 
consolidates bis power. When liis strengtb is conserved, tbe 
feudal nobles cannot weaken him ; when bis power is 
consolidated, they cannot despoil him. If tbe empire is with- 
out a righteous king or lord protector in control, such a 
man will always prevail. This is tbe true policy {Tao) of 
tbe man who knows bow to rule by force. 

But tbe lord protector acts difierently. He opens up new 
lands ; be fills granaries and storehouses ; be provides good 

My territory. 

My loyal people. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVERNMENT 

129 

implements ; lie carefully prepares, officers of ability and 
talent. Tben lie gives them, rewards in order to 7 * 
encourage them to progress ; he severely punishes in order 
to restrain thorn. He preserves those who have lost their • 
country and sustains those whose line of succession has run 
out ; he protects the weak and restrains the oppressive. Yet 
he has no intention of acquiring territory ; then the feudal 
nobles will be friends with him. His way is to treat enemies 
as friends ^ ; he respectfully meets the feudal nobles,^ and then 
the feudal nobles will be pleased with him. They make 
friends with .him because he does not seek territory ; if he 
appears to want territory, the feudal princes would be distant 
to him. They are pleased with him because he treats 
enemies as friends ; if he appears to want to make them his 
subordinates, then the feudal nobles will leave him. Hence 
he makes it plain that his motives are not to gain territory ; 
he makes them believe in his way (Tao) of treating enemies as 
friends. ■ If the empire is without a righteous King in control, 
such a man will always prevail. This is the true policy 
(Tao) of the man who knows how to be a Lord Protector. 

King Min was ruined by the five states ® ; Duke Huan * 

1 HetreatsoveryonOjenemyaB well as friend, courteously and respectfully. • 

2 In calling a convocation of the noblos to determine important matters, 
as did Duke Huan. 

® In 284 B.o. this king of Ts'i was defeated by the combined forces of the 
states of Yen, Chao, Ts‘u, and Ts*in, and he was compelled to abdicate 
and flee to Ohii (formerly an independent state, but then absorbed by 
Ts'u). 

* Of Ts‘i. 686-643 b.O. Ohuang threatened to kill Huan if he did not 
return some territory. Huan was Lord Protector, Chief of the feudal 
princes of the empire- ‘ ’ 

K 

I 

130 THE WORKS OP HStJNTZE ix 

was captured by Cbuang ^ of Lu — was for no otber reason 
than that they did not follow this policy, but sought to be 
king. 2 

^te^olioy of But the righteous king acts differently. His benevolence 

rule by”raLe° fills the empire ; his justice (Yi) permeates the land ; 

8 his majesty pervades the country. His benevolence 
{Jen) fills the empire, hence there is no one in the empire 
who does not cherish regard for him ; his justice (Pi;) permeates 
the land, hence no one in the empire fails to honour him ; 
his majesty pervades the country, hence no one in the empire 
cares to oppose him. His unassailable majesty assists in his 
method {Tao) of winning the people,® hence he conquers 
without fighting, he captures cities without attacking them ; 
the whole empire submits without moving a soldier. This 
is he who knows the true policy {Tao) of the righteous king. 
He who knows these three means, ^ if he wishes to be King, 
he can become King ; if he wishes to become Lord Protector, 
he can become Lord Protector ; if he wishes to become 
strong, he can become strong. 

The Assistants of a Kma 

They slionld beautify their actions by proper conduct 
(Xt) and justice (Pi) ; in listening to reports and attending 
to business, it should be according to rule ; they should 
pay attention to minutise and detail. In their actions they 

^ Buko Chuang, 693-6G2 b.o. 

“ Emperor. 

® By humanity, rigliteousness, and justice. 
* Benevolence, justice, and majesty. 

■ IX 

KINGLY GOVERNMENT 

131 

should adapt themselves to changes in circumstances and 
never he at a loss. Such people can he the assistants of a 
king. 

The Government of a King 

Its principles {Tao) should not depart from those of the 
three dynasties ^ ; its methods should not differ from those 
of the later Kings.^ Principles (Tao) which differ from those 
of the three dynasties are loose ; methods which differ from 
those of the later Kings are incorrect. There are models for 
garments ® ; there are rules for buildings * ; there is an 
established way of grading officials and soldiers. Mourning 
rites, sacrifices, and their appropriate utensils all have their 
gradations,® All music which is not correct ® should be 
totally abandoned. All colours which are not subdued ^ should 
be totally dispensed with. All utensils which are not of the 
ancient sort should be destroyed. This is what is meant by 
returning to the ancient. This is the government of a king. 

The Principles of a Righteous Kjng 

He does not honour those who are without virtue ; he does 
not make those who have no ability officials ; he does not 
reward those who have no merit ; he does not punish those 

1 Of Hsia, Shang, and Chou, i.e., it should be foiindcd on the principles 
established by the ancient and great rulers. 

2 The details of the administration of past dynasties are so ancient that 
they are obscure ; henco follow the recent precedents and laws, established 
by the groat Kings of the present dynasty, and so be sure to be right. 

® Ceremonial garments and ordinary clothes. 

* Palaces and houses. 

® I.e., classical and ancient. 

® Appropriate to the rank of the deceased. 

’ Garments dyed gaudily or brilliantly embroidered not to be used ; 
probably because in ancient times there were no brilliant dyes. 

It should 
foUotv the 
Way of the 
Kings. 

Fairness and 
Justice. 

132 

THE WORKS OR HStlNTZE 

IX 

wHo have no guilt. In Ms court there are no positions for 
favourites ; among the people there are none who live off the 
country.^ He advances the worthy and employs the able, 
9 and does not neglect any grade. ^ He represses the 
unprincipled and restrains the overbearing ; yet Ms punish- 
ments are not extreme. The people are observant, and all 
know that he who is virtuous in his home will receive reward 
at the court ; he who is evil in secret will receive punish- 
ment in public. This is what is meant by fixing the principle 
of action. These are the principles of a righteous king. 

The Methods oe a Righteods King 

He grades taxation and rectifies the amount of service to 
land ; no be given ^ ; he regulates everything in order to nourish all 
customs dues.' people. He levies a tithe on the land. At the customs 
houses and market places * he inspects travellers ® but does 
not levy duties.® He prohibits or permits forestry and fishing, 
according to the season ; but he does not tax it. He appraises 
the land ^ and assesses its tax. He regulates tribute ® 
.. according to the distance of the place. There should 
■ be a circulation of valuables ® and grain without restriction 

^ Idle favouritoa ; grafters. 

® He honors virtue, even in the lowest grade of ofEicialdom. 

® In lieu of taxation. 

* Every road, river, and market in Chiiita is still dotted with customs 
houses and harriers which levy duty upon all commerce. 

® To prevent evil characters from entering. 

® Eree trade within the empire ; still one of China’s desiderata. 

’ According to how much it can produce. 

* Sent by the more distant parts of the empire. 

® In that time, trade was still by barter. 

Millet and rice. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEENHENT 

133 

or hindrance, enabling foodstuffs ^ to be freely transported, 
and' all witMn the four seas ® to be like one family. Then 
those who are near will not hide their ability, and those 
who are distant will not grumble at their toil.® There will be 
no unenlightened or secluded country which will fail to fly to 
serve him and be satisfied and rejoice in him. This is 10 
what is called being a leader and teacher of men. These are 
the methods of a righteous King. 

On the north sea ^ there are swift horses and great dogs ; Benefits of 
if this policy were carried out, then China could obtain, 
raise, and use them. On the south sea there are fine feathers, 
ivory, rhinoceros hides, copper, cinnabar, and cornelian; 
then China could get them, and be enriched thereby. On the 
eastern sea there is purple,^ coarse linen, fish, and salt ; then 
China could get them and wear and eat them. On the 
western sea ® there are felt rugs, furs, dyed yak-tails ; then 
China could get them and use them. Then people who live on 
the borders of the sea would have a sufficiency of wood ; people 
who live in the mountains would have plenty of fish ; farmers 
would have a sufficiency of implements without chopping, 
scraping, making pottery, or smelting; the workman and 

^ A rioe-produoing province will still prohibit the export of rice to keep 
down the price of food within the province. 

“ A famous saying. The continent of China vas supposed to be 
surrounded by four seas. 

■ ® In public service. 

* To the north of China towards the groat soa supposed to bound the 
land at the north. 

® A dye plant. 

• This expression merely means to a great distance in the west. This 
passage is a remarkable indication of the extent of early commerce. All these 
goods went by land, and only a peaceful country and developed civilization 
could enable traders to travel such distances. 

134 

THE WORKS. OK HStJNTZB 

JX 

the merchant would have sufficient pulse and millet without 
ploughing the fields. For the tiger and leopard are fierce, yet 
the gentleman could have them skinned and use them. For 
nothing which heaven covers or the earth sustains would 
fail to yield up all its goodness and be brought for his use. 
On the one hand they would adorn the worthy and good, 
and on the other they would nourish the people and give 
them happiness. This is what it means to be a great ruler. 

11 The ode says : 

“ Heaven made the high hill,^ 

King T‘ai brought it under cultivation. 

He began the work ; 

King Wen tranquillized it ” — 
this expresses my meaning,® 

The Way of It ® is able to deal with the confused through its classifica- 
deal^th^^^ tions ; it is able to deal with the myriad ^ through the one.® 
everything. What is begun can be brought to completion ; when a thing 
is brought to completion, another can be begun, like a ring 
without end. Whoever departs from it, his empire decays. 
Heaven and Heaven and Earth are the source of life. The rules of 
and r»’, and proper conduct (Id) and justice (Ki) are the source of good 
government ; the superior man is the source of the rules of 
proper conduct (Li) and justice To carry them ^ out, 

1 The original home of the Chon dynasty in Shensi. 

* Book of OdeSf IV, i, v. Also quoted on p. 178. The meaning is that 
the great king can ntilize the opportunity given by nature to bring forth 
great results. 

* The Mngly method of government. 

* Everything. 

« One principle. 

* They issue from him j here it refers to the King-Sage. 

^ Li and Ti. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEENMENT 

136 

to practise them, to study them much, and to love them greatly 
is the source of being a superior man. For Heaven and 
Earth give birth to the superior man ; the superior man 
brings Heaven and Earth into order; the superior man 
forms a triad with Heaven and Earth ; he is the controller 
of all things, the father and mother of the people. Without 
the superior man Heaven and Earth are not ordered, the 
rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice ( Yi) have no control. 
"When on the one hand there is no prince and leader, on the 
other hand there cannot be the distinction of father and son ^ — 
this is what is called extreme disorder. The prince and minister, 
the father and son, the older and younger brother, husband 
and wife ^ — ^here we have a beginning and end., an end and 
a beginning ; this social structure exhibits the same principles 
as Heaven and Earth ; it is of equal permanence with the 
universe ® — ^this is called the great foundation.^ Hence 
mourning rites, sacrificial rites, court ceremonies, and methods 
of courtesy are governed by one principle. Promotion, degrada- 
tion, condemnation to death, permission to live,® giviug and 
taking away ® are governed by the same principle. That 

^ No social order, 

* Four out of the five Confucian social relations ; the fifth is the relation 
of friend to friend ; omitted because it shows no distinction of superior 
and inferior, and hence is not fundamental to the social order. 

3 Lit,, “ the ten thousand things.” 

* Of life. The Mngly government is founded on the distinctions of 
ordered society. 

* The opposite of condemnation to death, i.e., acquitting an accused 
man and allowing him to live. We must remember that in Hstintze's 
time government was not by law, but by the ruler, who was and is yet 
the law-maker, prosecutor, and judge. The acquittal of an accused man 
was solely dependent upon his word. 

* Of wealth and of&co. 

136 THE WORKS OE HStOSTTZE ix 

tiie prince sWnld be treated as prince, tbe minister should 
be treated ^s minister, tbe father should be, treated as 
father, the son as son, the older brother as older brother, 
the younger brother as younger brother, is following the same 
principle. That the farmer should be treated as farmer, the 
12 scholar as scholar, the labourer as labourer and the 
merchant as merchant is the same principle. 

. Water and fire have essences,^ but not life ; herbs and S 

riic 6ssGnc6 ' - . ( 

of humanity trees have life, but no laiowledge ; birds and beasts have 

organization, knowledge but no sense of what are rights {Yi). Man has an • . 
essence, life, knowledge, and in addition has a sense of 
human rights (Yi) ; hence he is the highest being on earth. 

His strength is not equal to that of the bull ^ ; his running is | 

•not equal to that of the horse ; yet the bull and horse are ' 

used by him. How is that ? Men arc able to form social 
organizations, the former ^ are not able to form social organiza- 
tions. How is it that men are able to form social organiza- 
tions 1 Because of their distinctions. ^ How is it that distinc- 
tions can be carried out ? Through rights (Yi).^ Eor class 
rights (Yi) are harmonized through social distinctions. When 
people are harmonious, they can unite ; when united, they 
have greater strength ; when they have great strength, they 

^ a mobile term for explaining and denoting wbatever is supposed 
to be the source of primary agent in producing and modifying motion, as 
* if it were animated air. It is akin to the concept of form. In Mencius, Legge 
has translated it “ the passion-nature **. 

* The Chinese use the buffalo oow, a great, bulky, ferocious-looking beast. 

* Beasts ; bulls or horses. 

* Social distinctions, high and lo-w. 

® Rights, rights-ness, the personal rights of each class, what is right and 
just. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVERNMENT 

137 

become strong ; when strong, they can dominate nature 
Hence they can have palaces and houses for habitation. 
Hence they can order their actions according to the four 
seasons and control all things. Hence they can enjoy the 
goodness of the whole world. They gain this for no other 
reason than that they have social distinctions and class 
rights (Yi). Hence, if men are to live, they cannot get along 
without forming a social organization. If they form a social 
organiza,tion, but have no social distinctions, then they will 
quarrel ; if they quarrel, there will be disorder ; if there is 
disorder, people will fail to co-operate ; if they fail to co- 
operate, then they will be weak; if they are weak, then 
they will not be able to dominate nature. Hence they could 
not have palaces or houses for habitation. All of which means 
that people cannot abandon the rules of proper conduct 
(I/i) or class rights (Yi) for an instant. He who is able 
thereby ^ to serve his parents, is said to have filial piety ; he 
who is able thereby to serve his older brother is said to have 
brotherly respect ; he who is able thereby to serve his superior 
is said to be obedient ; he who is able thereby to utilize his 
inferiors is said to have the virtues of a prince. A prince 
is one who is good at social organization.^ 

If this doctrine (Tao) of forming a social organization is 
carried out as it should be, then all things will fulfil their 
appropriate function ; the six kinds of domestic animals will 
all thrive ; all living beings will fulfil their destiny.® For if 

^ By Li and Ti, 

® The oharaoter for “ forming a social organization " contains the 
character for “ prince as one of its component parts. 

® Obtain their proper development and fulfil their true function in life. 

138 

THE WORKS OE HStJNTZE 

IX 

their noiirishmcnt and growth is at the proper season, then 
the six kinds of domestic animals will develop and increase ; 
if killing^ and saving alive are at the proper season, then 
grass and trees will fionrish. If government decrees are 
timely,® the people will he united, the worthy and the good, 
will serve the ruler ; it will he the rule of a Sage-King. When 
shruhs and trees are in hloom and leaf, the axe must not enter 
the forest, people must not exit short the life of the trees or' 
shruhs when young, not stop their growth ; when sea tortoises,® 
water lizards,^ fish, turtles, eels, and sturgeons,® are full of 
roe or have spawned, nets or poison must not enter the 
marshes or pools, people must not cut short the life of these 
water creatures when yormg nor stop their growth. The 
springtime ploughing, the summertime weeding, the fall 
harvesting, and the winter storing away of the grain — ^these 
four things must not he out of season.® Hence the five 
cereals will not fail, and the people will have an abundance 
13 of food. Ponds, pools, streams, and marshes should 

' Harvesting grain at the right season ; cutting trees only when fully 
grown ; there may also he implied that “ closed seasons ” should be observed 
in hunting, and that war should be carried on only when it will not interfere 
with the cultivation of the crops. 

“ The same word as above translated, “ at the proper season.” 

® Said to be twenty feet around, supposed to be the original scaly animal. 
Hstintze has used (with the exception of the last two) almost the same 
list of water animals as enumerated in the Bocirine of the Mean, XXVT, 9. 

* A large triton or gavial, ten feet long, found in South China, prized for 
its skin (used for drum heads) and desh (served at weddings). 

® Described as a large sea-monster, 20 to 30 feet long. 

• Hence the Chinese government still, through its almanac, informs the 
farmer of the exact day when each of these seasons and times for particular 
agricultural activity begins ; though the calendar is lunar, yet those dates 
we determined on the basis of a solar calculation. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVERNMENT 

139 

be strictly closed ^ at tbe proper time ; bence fisb and turtles 
will be very plentiful, and tbe people will have a surplus for 
use.® Tbe cutting down and growth of timber should not be 
at tbe wrong season ; then tbe mountains and forests will 
not be bare,® and tbe people will have a surplus of timber. 
This is tbe way tbe Sage-King uses tbe country’s resources. 
On tbe one band, be observes tbe heavens,^ and on tbe 
other be applies it ® to tbe earth. He fills up what is lacking 
in heaven and earth,® and diffuses it upon all things,'^ He 
makes plain that which was obscure ; be makes long that 
which was too short ; be enlarges that which was too narrow. 
Although be is as wise and great as tbe gods, yet be is very 
simple. Hence it is said : By one principle ® be unifies tbe 
whole. Tbe man who acts in this way is called a Sage. 

The Arrajstg-emeht oe Oefioials ® 

Tbe Master of Ceremonies should know tbe number of 
stables for sacrificial animals for preparing delicacies for 
guests of state and for sacrifices. Tbe Minister of tbe Interior 
should Imow tbe number of all tbe clans, of inner and outer 
city walls, and of tbe established utensils.^® Tbe Minister 

1 To fishing. 

® Eor barter, over and above what is needed for food. 

® Evidently deforestation of tbe mountains bad already begun. This 
word“ bare " means literally," bald and bare like tbe bead of an infant." 

* To determine the seasons and times. 

® His knowledge of the seasons. 

® He orders tbe natural resources of tbe country, especially husbandry. 

’ Lit., " tbe ten-thousand things." Heaven, earth, and tbe ten- 
thousand things make up tbe universe. 

» Li and 7i, 

® On this section cf. Booh of History, V, %x, 7-12. 

Standards of measurement and weight. 

The Master of 
Ceremonies. 
The Minister 
of the 

Interior. The 
Minister of 
War. 

140 

THE WOEKS OE HSt)NTZE 

IX 

of War^ stotild know tke number of regiments,^ battalions,® 
14 armour, soldiers, chariots, and companies.^ The prepara- 
InstSor edicts, the examination of odes 

and essays, the elimination of licentious ® music, and 
obediently to do each at its proper time so that barbarian 
or popular ditties should not confuse the odes ® — such should 

The Minister ] 3 e the business of the Chief Instructor. To build embank- 
of Works* 

ments and bridges, to keep the ditches and canals clean ; to 
drain off overflow water ; to keep the reservoirs from over- 
flowing ; in the right season to lead water in ® or to stop it,® 
so that although the year be bad and afflicted with floods or 
drought, the people will have something to weed and mow — 
The BailifE. such should be the business of the Minister of Works. To 
inspect the high and low lands,^® to examine fertile and poor 
soils, to regulate the planting of the five grains, to examine 
into the merit of the farmers,^® carefully to attend to storing 
the grain, and obediently to do each at its proper time, so 

^ Lit., “ cavalry.” Cavalry was the most important arm of military 
service. 

* Lit., 1^, 2,600 men. "For the sizes of these divisions of the 
army also of. Legge, Booh of History, vol, ii, p. 302. 

* Lit., 600 men. 

* Lit., 100 men. Each chariot had a company of men, also given 
as 75 men, accompanying it. 

® Unorthodox. 

* Orthodox music to be kept uncorrupted and alone performed. 

^ Irrigation has always been an important part of Chinese agriculture. 

® To the reservoirs. 

» The water from entering the reservoir. 

The plain and the marsh. 

Glutinous milled, panicled millet, beans, hemp, and wheat ; to 
apportion each to its proper soil. 

See whether they are lazy or industrious, and to encourage industry. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVERNMENT 

U1 

that the f armeis simplify and make few their activities ^ — 
such should be the business of the Bailiff,® To regulate the The Warden 
laws about fixe,® to care for the hills and forests, the marshes, pond?^ 
herbs, trees, fish, turtles and all vegetables, at the 15 
right time to close or open the season,^ so that the country 
shall have abundant supplies of things to use and its wealth 
never be exhausted — such should be the duties of the Warden 
of Parks and Ponds. To make the countryside obey, to control The Local 
the market-squares and residential quarters of cities, to get “ 
people to rear the six domestic animals, to superintend 
arboriculture, to encourage morality, to urge filial piety and 
brotherly reverence, obediently to do each at the proper 
time, so that the people obey the ruler’s edicts and are satisfied 
to live in the country — such should be the duties of the Local 
Official. To supervise all the artisans, to examine into the The Super- 
seasons and activities of the men,® to separate fine and rough Artisans, 
articles, to encourage well-made and useful goods, so that 
goods which are carved and coloured are not made at home ® — 
such should be the duties of the Superintendent of Artisans. 

To observe the Yin and Yang,'^ to prognosticate by the The Witch 
action and reaction of these powers of nature,® and by the 

^ Concentrate on agriculture and do not waste time on other activities, 
such as carpenter- work, pottery, etc. 

® An ofSicer who had oversight of the fields. 

8 Burning the hillsides and marshes for fertilizer. 

* Bor cutting trees, fishing, etc. 

® I.e., to decide the time for different works. There should be a 
harmony between the seasons, the earth-exhalation (formative element), 
the materials, and the skill of the workman. 

* Possibly an old guild or patent law to encourage fine craftsmanship. 

’ Negative and positive principles of Chinese cosmology and 

geomanoy. 

® Boretell the weather (?). 

142 

THE WOEKS OP HSttSTTZE 

IX 

looks of the sky, to scorch the tortoise-shell,^ to arrange 
divining stalks,® to preside at the prayer for averting evil, 
to observe the five omens,® to know their good and bad 
fortune, auspioiousness and inauspiciousness — such should 
be the duties of the hunchback witch and the lame wizard.* ** 
The Mayor. To care for the disposal of refuse from graveyards and privies,® 
to repair the roads, to repress robbers and thieves, to tran- 
quillize hotels and shops, obediently to do each at the proper 
time in order that travelling merchants may be undisturbed 
16 and commerce may be unobstructed — such should be the 
The^mmatGT duties of the Mayor of a market-town. To repress the 
unprincipled, and restrain the overbearing, to guard against 
the wicked and remove the evil-doers, to execute them accord- 
ing to the five punishments, so that the oppressive and over- 
bearing change their actions and wicked deeds are not per- 
formed — ^such should be the duties of the Minister of Crimes. 
The Prime To make the admonition of the people the foundation of his 
policy, to correct the laws, both to hold court and at times 
to inspect the officials, to measure their merit and consider 

* A form of divination. 

2 Divination by the milfoil. These systems of divination are found 
in the Booh of Changes and were commonly used. They are mentioned 
in many places besides the Booh of Changes, so this is not necessarily 
a reference to that book. 

® Bain, sky clearing, overcast sky, want of sequence, or baleful. 

^ Cripples, male and female, were given the official post of witch 
or wizard ; lame men were made soothsayers ; these had charge of 
divination. 

® Every hill is made into a graveyard, and used for pasture ; hence 
it is a source of fertilizer, which is gathered by the farmers, especially 
the women and children. Nightsoil is used for fertilizer and has a 
commercial value. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVERNMENT 

143 

their rewards, and carefully to do each at the proper time, 
so that all the government servants spur themselves to the 
greatest efficiency and all the common people do not become 
negligent-such should be the duties of the Prime Minister. 

To consider the rules of proper conduct {Li) and music, to The Prince 
correct morals, to extend culture, to ennoble customs, both 
to inquire into and judge them and to harmonize them — such 
should be the duties of a Prince or Duke.^ To bring morals The 
to perfection, to be an example of extreme greatness, and of 
utmost refinement, to unify the empire, to stimulate even the 
lowest, so that no one in the empire will fail to obey and 
acknowledge him — such should be the duties of the Emperor.^ 

’ Then if the government is evil, it is the crime of the Prime 
Minister ; if the morals of a state deteriorate, it is the fault 
of the Prince or 'Duke. If the empire is not unified and the 

^ The head of a feudal state. They were at first enfeoffed as only 
Duke or Marquis at the most ; but by Hstintze’s time most of them 
had arrogated to themselves the title of ICing, and so Ssilntze has to 
use this term “ prince ", to be understood ; however, he dis- 
approved of their arrogating to themselves the title of King, which 
properly belonged only to the Emperor, so he does not use tiiat title, but 
another term, meaning “ prince " or “ sovereign ", at which no one 
Qould take offence, "but which was a rebuke to these self-styled kings, 
inasmuch as that word was not used in their titles. This is an example 
of a typically Oonfucian rebuke to constituted authority. In a highly 
cultured country such as ancient China, it would bo patent to every 
educated reader. Confucius used this method of praising or blaming 
kings and lords frequently in his Spring and Autumn, and it is such 
remarks as this one that are meant by the phrase, " the subtleties of 
the Spring and Autumn.” 

* Hero the term “ King ", misappropriated by the feudal rulers, 
is used for the Emperor, to make the point unmistakable. Ho is 
styled the ^ analogy of ^ 

144 

THE WORKS OE HStNTZE 

IX 

feudal princes are commonly disloyal,^ then that man should 
not he Emperor. 

♦ * ♦ * * ' 

Good govern- With ^ all these officers, some have reigned as righteous 
otStcSv King ; with all these, some have become Lords Protector ; 
depends on ^th all of them, thrones have been preserved ; with all 
of them, thrones have been lost. The rule of a kingdom of ten 
thousand chariots ® is that whereby majesty and strength is 
established, whereby fame is beautified, whereby enemies 
are subjected, and whereby the country is made peaceful or 
unquiet, good or bad. But the government depends 
entirely on the ruler, not on others. Whether the rule' of a 
king or lord protector will be stable, in danger, or 
destroyed depends wholly on the ruler himself, not 
on others. 

Therefore when a country’s majesty and strength is 
insufficient to imperil a neighbouring enemy; and its 
fame is insufficient to control the whole empire; such a 
country could not be independent. How could it avoid 
17 becoming suddenly embarrassed ? When the whole 

^ Tiie state of affairs in Hsiintze’s day is that described in this 
sentence. This is one of the few places in Hstintze where the Emperor 
is criticized. Hshntze and the Confucians probably expected the over- 
throw of the Chou dynasty, but not that of the feudal system itself. 

^ From this point on to the end of this book, Yang Liang has made 
no comment. Possibly these pages were lost in his copy. The idiom of 
vocabulary is simpler than the preceding, but thoroughly in Hsiintze's 
manner. 

® Originally only the Emperor had 10,000 chariots ; but later it 
came to mean a large state. 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEENMENT 

145 

empire is coerced by one aggressive state and I ^ wake up to How a 
find that I am doing what I really do not want to do, and ^ 

that I am daily assisting a Ch‘ie ^ ; tbis fact will not prevent become 
me from becoming a Yao ® ; yet tbis is not tbe way that 
merit or fame will come, nor does it follow from tbis fact ^ 

alone that my rule will either be permanent or destroyed, 
peaceful or dangerous. Tbe establishment of fame and 
tbe conditions determining tbe permanence or destruction, 
tbe peace or danger of a prince will certainly depend on tbe 
ruler’s sincere purpose in tbe time when be is self-satisfied 
and flourishing. He who is a real king is in earnest * about 
bis state, and be will rule bis country righteously. He who 
endangers or destroys bis state also endangers or destroys 
his state in tbe days when it is flourishing. Accordingly, I 
should be neutral and impartial, and when there are various 
alliances of states,® I should be quiet, curb my troops, and 
not move them, and so watch tbe aggressive states clinch 
with each other. Therefore I should make my official 
admonitions peaceful; I should restrain my ardour and 
mark time ; I should exercise oversight over tbe people and 
polish them ; while I do that, my troops will become tbe 
strongest in the empire. Accordingly I should cultivate 

^ The ruler of a particular state who wishes to be righteous. The 
Chinese language uses the first personal pronoun in a hypothetical 
example, where we use the third person. 

• An abandoned, wicked emperor ; wo should say “ a Hero 

® A famous, good emperor. 

* Sincerity, one of the Confucian virtues. 

® When the number of important feudal states was reduced by 
fighting to seven, there were alliances of six against a powerful seventh 
and of a weak state with the seventh against the five — this is what is 
referred to here. 

146 

THE WOKKS OE HStNTZE 

benevolence (Jen) and justice"(y'i) ; I sbould sincerely elevate 
my country to prosperity ; I sbould rectify tbe laws ; I sbould 
• cboose tbe worthy and good for my officials ; I sbould nourish 
tbe people ; while I do that, my fame will become tbe greatest 
in the country. My authority will make me important; 
my army will make me powerful ; my fame will make me 
great. Then Yao and Shun, who unified tbe country, could 
not be one iota ^ greater than I sbould be. Those who seek 
to gain power and to subvert others will retire ; and as 
a result tbe worthy and tbe good, officials who recognize 
a Sage, will of themselves come forward to offer their 
services. Punishments and government will be fair; the 
people will be harmonious ; the customs of the state will be 
regulated ; and as a result tbe army will be powerful, cities 
will be impregnable, and enemy states will accordingly submit 
of their own volition. I should pay attention to tbe essentials 
of life,** I sbould accumulate wealth and not recklessly pro^ 
crastinate and waste ; this will cause all the numberless 
officials and people to act according to the laws and usages ; 
as a result wealth will accumulate, and the country will 
therefore become rich of its own accord. "When 
these three things ® are realized in this fashion, the 
18 empire will submit and the prince of an aggressive 
state will accordingly himself not be able to use 
his army against me. How is that ? He will have no 
one to send against me. Those whom he would send 

^ Lit., " one.ten-thoiiBandtli of an ounce,” or a grain of dust.” 

® Agriculture and sericulture. 

3 Righteous authority, a loyal army, and great fame (reputation for 
virtue). 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEENMENT 

147 

must be bis people. But bis people would be attached 
to me ; they would rejoice in me as in tbeir father 
and mother ^ ; they would love me as the fragrance of an 
epidendrum ; then they would turn and regard their own 
superior as a branding iron or tattooing needle, as an enemy 
to themselves. That is human nature. Although a man 
were a Ch‘ie or a Ohih,^ how could, he be willing to do what 
he hates or to injure him whom he loves ? Eor that man ® 
would have gained his allegiance. 

Through these principles it was possible in ancient times 
for a man who originally had only one state to gain the 
empire ; not by invading it, but because he was so very 
willing to cultivate his government. Thus he could punish 
the aggressive and curb the fierce. Thus while Dulce Chou ^ 
was subjugating the south, the northern states grumbled, 
saying, “ Why does he fail to come to us alone ? ” 
When he was subjugating the east, the western states 
grumbled, saying “Why does he come to us only last 
of all ? ” ® Who could strive with such a ruler ? 
Therefore a ruler who acted in that fashion could 
advance from his own state to be Emperor. In times 
of prosperity he strives for peace in order to. give quiet 
to his army and rest to his people, He shows loving 

^ Cf . Mmoina II, x, v, 6 for an argument similar to this one, but less 
developed in detail. 

3 A notorious robber. 

3 Whom he loves. 

*• Regent in the time of King Ch'eng and consolidator of the Chou 
Empire. 

6 Booh of History, VI, ii, iii, 6 ; quoted by Mencius tliree times. 

148 

THE WOBKS OE HStJNTZE 

IX 

The 

militarist. 

afEection to liis people ^ ; lie selects an officer who is con- 
versant with afiairs to manage everything. This man in 
peace gathers in the harvest and develops the country, and 
so there is an abundance of everything. 

The militarist 2 will continually expose and destroy the 
heart of his country. Now I ® shall develop my state, soothe 
it, and protect it.* The wealth and the grain in his treasury 
he ® will daily procrastinate and waste in the midst of a 
wilderness.® Now I shall accumulate wealth and gather it in 
granaries and storehouses. He will daily injure and exhaust 
before his enemies those officers who are his skilled limbs 
and brave emissaries.’ Now I would inspirit them, inspect 
them, and polish them at my court. In this manner he would 
daily accumulate defeat, and I should daily accumulate ease. 
In the relation of prince and minister, ruler and ruled, he 
would be greatly disliked, and the relations of the two would 
daily become more distant and hateful ; I should be greatly 
revered, and the relations of the two would daily become 

^ The present text adds : “ He opens up now land ; he fills his 
granaries and storehouses ; he provides good implements ; then he 
gives them rewards in order to encourage them to progress ; he severely 
punishes in order to warn them ” ; which, is a doublet of what is said 
of the lord protector, p. 128 f. These sentences are probably a later 
addition, as they seem to interrupt the progress of thought here as 
well as to be quoted from the earlier part of this book. 

* Lit., “ the man of soldiers, armour, and weapons.” 

® The same “ I ” as two paragraphs above. 

* Lit., “ cover it over ”, the opposite of ” expose it ”, 

® The militarist. 

* Sis country will become a wilderness from being fought over and 
neglected ; or his battles will he not in his country, but outside of it — 
he will use his treasures outside of his country. 

’ Lit., “ claws and teeth.” 

IX 

KINGLY GOVEBNMENT 

149 

more respectful and loving. In this way I should await his 
collapse, and would be sure of gaining his territory. The 
man who acts in this fashion ^ would become a lord protector. 

The man who follows the ordinary customs when he man who 
is established in authority ; who, when he does things, follows 
the ordinary precedent ; who, in making appointments to 
office or in cashiering officials, advances ordinary officials ; 
who, in dealing with his inferiors and his subjects, 19 
is generous and kindly ; such a ruler will be merely secure 
in his office.** He who, when he is established in authority, insecure, 
is- disrespectful and unpleasant ; who, in doing things, likes 
to keep his plans to himself, and keeps others in doubt ; who, 
in making appointments and in cashiering officials, advances 
the flattering and cunning ; who, in dealing with his inferiors 
and his subjects, likes to encroach upon and plunder them ; 
such a ruler will be insecure and in danger. He who, when or ruined, 
he is established in authority, is proud and overbearing; 
who, in doing things, spoils them ; who, in maldng appoint- 
ments and cashiering officials, advances the ignorant and 
the false ; who, in dealing with his inferiors and his subjects, 
likes to exhibit his power to the extreme and is heedless of 
his reputation ; who likes to use his power of collecting 
taxes, but forgets his fundamental duties,® such a ruler will 
be destroyed. 

Of these five classes, a ruler should not fail to make a good 
choice. He who makes a good choice of the means of being a 
King, Lord Protector, merely secure, insecure, or destroyed, 

^ As “ I " -would act. 

® Merely escapes overthrowal. 

® Of stimulating and caring for agriculture and sericulture. 

160 

THE WOEKS OP HStilTZE 

IX 

will rule others ; lie who does not choose well will be ruled 
by others. He who makes a good choice will rule as Bang ^ ; 
he who does not make a good choice will lose his throne. ^ 
The difference between the man who is King ® and him who 
is destroyed ^ is the difference between ruling others and being 
ruled by others. This difference is very great. 

1 Lit., Wang," 

® Lit,, “ Wang," iJI;;;*, pronounced the same as the preceding “ rule 
as righteous King 

8 Lit,, “ Wang," 3E, 

* Lit,, “Wang," the extreme of loss; not only the individual 
himself loses his throne and life, hut his family too, and a strange 
surname succeeds to power, thus cutting ofE the sacrifices and service 
to the spirits of the family, which is the greatest of misfortunes. 

BOOK X 

A EICH COUNTRY 

All things are present together in the world, but have 1 

different forms. Of themselves they are not appropriate ^ 

, _ T- T I importance of 

but they are used, by men — ^this is art. Dmerent grades of social 

men live together with similar likings, but different moral 

standards (Too), with similar desires but different amounts 

of knowledge — ^this is nature. Their original capabilities 

are alike in wisdom and stupidity. But their developed 

abilities are different and they are distinguished by their 

wisdom and stupidity. If their ability could he alike yet their 

wisdom be dijfferent ; if tbey could act selfishly without 

incurring trouble ; if tbey could give reign to their desires 

and not be limited ; then the people’s hearts would be 

aroused to strife and there could be no satisfaction. If this 

were the situation,^ a wise man could not get to rule ; if a 

wise man did not get to rule, he could not gain merit or fame. 

If he could not gain merit or fame, the multitude would 

not he separated into their proper classes. If the multitude 

were not separated into their proper ranks, the positions of 

prince and subject would not be established. If there were 

no prince to rule the subjects, if there were no superior to 

rule the inferiors, the country would he injured and people 

would give rein to their desires. 

^ No natural teleology. 

* Because of tlie resulting disorder. 

162 

THE WOEKS OE HSCNTZB 

X 

People desire and hate the same things. Their desires are 
many hut things are few. Since they are few, there will 
inevitably be strife. Por what a himdred worlonen accomplish 
goes for the nourishment of one individual; yet an able 
person cannot be skilled in more than one line ; one man 
cannot govern two departments.^ If people leave their 
positions and do not serve each other, there will be poverty ; 

2 if the masses are without social divisions, there will 
be strife. He who is impoverished is in trouble ; he who 
strives will suffer calamity. Por the purpose of rescuing 
people from trouble and eliminating calamity there is no 
method as good as that of making social distinctions plain, 
and forming a social organization. If the strong coerce' the 
weak and the wise terrorize the stupid and the people who 
should be subjects rebel against their rulers and the young 
insult the aged and the government is not guided by virtue, “ 
if these are the circumstances, then the aged and the weak 
will suffer the trouble of losing their support and the strong 
will suffer the calamity of division and strife. 

Work is what people dislike ; gain and profit is what they 
like. If there is no distinction of occupation, then people will 
have difficulty in getting work done and the calamity of 
striving in order to obtain any desired result. If the union 
of male and female, the separation from other males and 
females inherent in the relation of husband and wife, the 

^ Each man can be skilled in only one direction, as K'uei (Shun's Director 
of Music) specialized on the standards of music and Ts'i (Shun's Minister 
of Agriculture) specialized in agriculture. 

* The government should make the strong and wise respect the rights 
of others— -that is Ti, 

X 

A HIGH COIMTRY 

153 

making of engagements by tbe relatives of tbe groom and 
bride to be, tbe sending of betrothal presents and tbe going 
to get tbe bride, are not according to tbe rules of proper 
conduct (Li)\ if this is tbe case, then men will have tbe 
trouble of losing tbeir mates and tbe calamity of having to 
struggle to gain any sex relation. Hence for this reason wise 
men have introduced social distinctions.^ 

1 The remainder of the book contains nothing of interest which is not a 
repetition of what is elsewhere stated, There are paragraphs on the 
importance of enriching the people and storing the surplus, as the funda- 
mental thing in enriching a state ; the importance of social organization 
and class divisions ; the importance of making class divisions plain in 
making the country prosperous ; the importance of caring for the people ; 
the advantage of benefiting the people but not seeking benefit for oneself 
and of loving tbe people but not imposing public service upon them ; the 
moral character of a state can be seen in the prosperity or lack of it among 
the people, in the character of the court and officialdom and ruler ; war 
is caused by desire for fame or territory or by anger, but the benevolent 
man gains his fame and territory without fighting and no one can be angry 
with him ; and government consists in the cultivation of morality. 

A PARAGEAPH FROM BOOK XI 

KINGS AND LORDS PROTECTOR 

For the superior there is nothing as good as loving ^ his 14 
inferior and ruling according to the rules of proper conduct 
{lA). The relation of the superior to the inferior should he 
that of protecting infants. In treating people who are inferior people, 
to oneself, if a subject has committed a petty wrong, although 
he be an orphan, childless, a widower, or widow, ^ do not 
apply the government regulations to him. Then the inferiors 
will love ® their superior, and rejoice in him as in a father 
and mother ; they can be killed rather than disobey him ; 
the prince and the ministers, the rulers and the ruled, the 
noble and the base, the old and the young, even to the 
common people, all will make this their greatest standard of 
conduct. Then they will ail examine themselves within, 
and be careful of their duties. In this respect all the Kings 
were alike, and it is the central and indispensable thing in 
the rules of proper conduct {lA) and laws.* 

“ The moat helpless of people. 

8 ^ ; the love of a superior to inferior is ^ ; that of inferior to 
superior is 

* In. thus making love the essential thing in Li and law, Efsiintze reaches 
his highest insight and comes close to breaking through the crust of tradition- 
alism. But we find only this isolated utterance. He goes on to apply this 
statement to government and thereby introduces the element of precept 
and rule again. 

BOOK XV 

A DEBATE ON MILITARY AEEAIRS^ 

Lin-wU'Cliiiiii ^ debated military af airs with the master, 1 
Hsim Ch'ing,*' before King Hsiao-cVen ^ of Chao. The ; 

The King said, “ I should like to ask what are the important 
points of military art.'’ art » 

_ IS umtizig the 

Lin-wn-chnin replied : “On the one hand observe the people, 
seasons, ® on the other take an advantageous position ; observe 
the movements of the enemy ; when following the enemy 
attack them; when preceding them, reach the goal first. 

These are the important points in managing an army.” 

The master, Hsun Ch‘ing, said, “No. What I have heard 
of the ancient methods (Too) is that in managing an army or i 

a war, everything depends on uniting the people. If the 
bow and arrow did not fit each other, Yi ® could not hit 
the bulls-eye with it. If the six horses did nob team together, 

^ This book is probably an expansion of a possibly historical disputation 
by Hsuntze, made by his disciples. 

® Said to be a general of the state of Ts*u. ** Chnin " is literally a term of 
respect, equivalent to “ sir but not necessarily indicating the individual 
to whom it is applied belongs to the nobility, Lin-wu was this man’s appella- 
tion j his name and surname are unknown. To avoid the English connota- 
tion of Sir ”, I have left ** Chuin ” untranslated. 

" Hsiintze. The character used for his surname here is u- 

* 266-246 B.O. 

® Soldiers were levies, not mercenaries, and had to return home to work 
tho crops ; otherwise the country would suffer. 

* A legendary mighty archer. 

158 

THE WOEES OF HSONTZB 

XV 

Ts‘ao-fui could not go far with them. If the officers and 
people had not been attached and accordant with their prince, | 

T^ang and Wn could not have conquered. Hence the man ■ 

who can get the accord of the people is the best man at • 

managing an army. Hence the only important point in ; 

military affairs is in getting the accord of the people.” 

Lin-wu-chuin said, ‘‘No. What is valuable in military | 
affairs is strength and advantage ; what is done is sudden ■ 
alteration of troop movements and deceitful stratagems. ’ 
He who knows best how to manage an army is sudden in 
his movements ; his plans are very deep laid ; and no one ' 

2 knows whence he may attack. When Hsun ^ and Wu ^ ; 

led armies, they had no enemies in the whole country; 
why should it be necessary to wait for the accord of the 
people ? ” ; 

The master, Hsun Ch‘ing, said, ‘‘No. What I am speaking ' 
of (Too) are the armies of the benevolent {Jen) man, the 
purposes of righteous Kings. What you value is planning 
on the instant, strength and advantage ; what you do is 
attacking, capturing, sudden alteration of troop movements, | 

and deceit ^ — ^the deeds of the nobles,® The armies of the 

^ A famous legendary driver. 

* Hsun*wn, general of King Ho-lii of Wu, 614-496 b.o. 

3 Wu-olii, general of Duke Wu of Wei, 812-758 b.o. ; 

* Stratagems. ^ 

® In contrast to the Kings, such as T*ang, Wen, Wu, etc., who were, or I' 

ought to have been, perfectly righteous. The contrast between the theory 
of morals and the conduct of men forced the Confuoians into this dualistio | 
system of ethics — ^the kingly morality, which was truly righteous, and i 
the morality of the nobles, which was ij^erior and broke over the theoretical 
standard. But this dualism was merely that of the ideal and the actual ; 
it was not a theoretical dualism. 

XV 

A DEBATE ON MILITARY AEEAIES 169 

benevolent (Jen) man cannot use deceit. Tbe former ^ can 
be deceitful disrespectful, and exhaust the people. Between 
the prince and the subject, the ruler and the ruled, there is 
a separation, since there are deviations from virtue. For a 
Ch‘ie to deceive a Chde, is like the wise deceiving the stupid — > 
some success may be looked for. For a Ch4e to deceive a 
Yao, is like using an egg instead of a stone in throwing, or 
using a finger to stir boiling water, or like going into water 
or fire ; if you go into it you will be burned or drowned. 
For with the benevolent (Jen) man, the commanders and 
commanded, all the generals, are of one mind; the three 
armies ^ are of like strength ; the subject serves his prince, 
and the inferior serves his superior as the son serves his 
father or the younger brother serves his older brother, or as 
the hand and arm defend the head and eyes and cover the 
breast and abdomen. To deceive and surprise the enemy 
has just the same efiect as first to alarm and then attack him. 
Moreover when a benevolent (Jen) man controls a state of 
ten he will have intelligence from a hundred U * ; when 
he controls a state of a hundred U he will have intelligence 3 
from a thousand U ; when he controls a country of a thousand 
U, he will have intelligence from the whole continent. ® His 
wisdom and his admonitions will certainly strike the people 

1 The armies of the nobles. 

3 The centre and the two wings of what we should call one army. Or, 

“ army " is a brigade of 12,500 men ; a largo state had three brigades. 

8 A very small place. A “ K " is a third of a mile. 

* people from a distance of thoir own accord give him news. Confucian 
ethics does not stress loyalty to one's own particular leader so much as 
loyalty to the larger good ; the first has been exalted, hut leaving an 
unworthy leader to go over to a better one has been encouraged. 

® Lit,, “ from the four seas." 

160 

THE WOBKS OP HSt)NTZE 

XV 

harmoniously and. tmite them. Por when the soldiers of a 
benevolent {Jen) man are gathered together, they form files ; 
when scattered, they form ranks. ^ His army reaches as far 
as the long blade of Mo-hsie ^ ; whoever runs against it is 
cut in two. It is as keen as the sharp point of Mo-hsie ; who- 
ever meets it is destroyed. When inactive it is like a rock ; 
whoever butts against it will be gored and broken like a 
drooping deer, dripping and wet, and will retreat. Moreover, 
whom would the prince of an aggressive country send against 
me ? ® Those * whom he would send must be his people. 
But his people would be attached to me ; and they would 
rejoice in me as in their father and mother ; they would love 
‘ 4 me as the fragrance of an epidendrum. On the other 
hand, they would regard their superior as a branding iron or 
a tattooing needle, as an enemy. Although a man's passions 
be those of Chfie or Ghih, how could he be willing to do what 
he hates and injure him whom he loves ? ® This would be 
like trying to get a man’s sons and grandsons to injure their 
own father and mother ; instead they would certainly come 
and inform him ; then how could he be deceived ? Hence 
the country which a benevolent {Jen) man controls is daily 
more illustrious. Those of the nobles who obey him before he 
attacks will be safe ; those who do not obey until after he 
attacks will be in a dangerous position. Those who think of 

1 They are 'well-drilled. 

® Ifame of a famous sword, 

3 “ Me " represents the man of perfect virtue ; a figure of speech — “ if 
I were a man of perfect virtue.” 

* ® The sentences enclosed by these figures are a doublet of those on 
p. 146 f. 

XV 

A DEBATE ON MILITARY AFFAIRS 161 

opposing Mm will lose territory, and those who resist Mm will 
be destroyed. The ode says : — 

The martial King ^ displayed Ms banner. 

Reverently he grasped his battle-axe. 

He was like a blazing fire, 

Which no one can stop ” — 
this expresses my meaning.” ® 

King Hsiao-cMen and Lin-wu-chnin said, ‘‘ Good. I should 
like to ask, What methods (Too) do a king’s ® armies use ? 
What movements are permitted them V ^ 

The master, Hsun CMing, said, “ Among all the tMngs 
in the minds of the great kings, generals and leaders were 
[ the least important matters.® I should like to be permitted 

; next to speak (Tao) of the reasons for the strength or weakness, 

: preservation or ruin of those who are kings® and nobles, 

j and of the circumstances which bring safety or danger. If 

f the prince is a worthy person, his country is well-governed 

\ and prosperous ; if the prince is without ability, Ms coimtry 

I is ill-governed and decadent. The country which magnifies 

i the rules of proper conduct {Li) and honours justice (Yt) is 

1 well-governed and prosperous ; the country wMch treats 

[ ^ King T'ang. 

' * Book of Odes, IV, m, iv, 6. This ia the next to the last of the odes, 

j The meaning is that T‘ang won heoanse his character impressed men's minds ; 

although he used military power, his character preceded him and won the 
battle for him. 

I a The king, as the embodiment of virtue. 

* Sarcastic j if a king conquers by virtue, what can his armies do ? 

® This sentence does not seem to connect up with the King’s question. 
Is there a hiatus here, or is Hsuntze merely avoiding the King’s question ? 

• As exemplifying the ideal. 

Exemplifying the actual standard. 

M 

162 

XV 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE. 

negligently the rules of proper conduct {lA) and which esteems 
justice (Yi) lightly is ill-governed and decadent. The one 
which is well-governed and prosperous is strong ; the one 
which is ill-governed and decadent is weal?. These are the 
sources of strength and weakness. If the ruler can be relied 
upon, he is able to use his subjects for his purposes ; if the 
ruler cannot be relied upon, then he is unable to use his 
subjects. He who is able to use his subjects is strong ; he who 
is unable to use his subjects is weak — ^this is the abiding 
principle of strength and weakness. He who magnifies the 
rules of proper conduct (Li) and investigates merit is of 
the first class ; he who stresses official emoluments and 
honours self-restraint is of the second class ; he who values 
military merit most of all and esteems self-restraint lightly 
is of the lower class. These are the general ranks of strength 
and weakness.” ^ 

^ !5s sl« ^ * 

1 At this point there is inserted a mass of material that is nnrolated to 
the subject. BHrst there are a series of antithetical sentences on the weakness 
and strength of states, including “ He whose weapons and defensive armour 
is strong and complete, convenient and efficient, is strong ; he whose 
weapons and defensive armour is weak, inferior, not convenient, nor efficient 
is weak ", wliioh sentence would seem more appropriate to Lin-wu-chuin 
than to HsUntze ; next comes a comparison of the military systems of Wei 
and Ta'in, in favour of the latter, but exalting Duke Huan, King T^ang, and 
King Wu above them, and condemning the two former states for using 
mercenary troops. It is the cultural influence of the rules of proper conduct 
{lA) and justice (Ti) that unites the people. This is the reason it was so 
easy for T‘ang and Wu to overcome Ch‘ie and Chou, and to kill Chou like 
a solitary common man. Four generals of the Contending States are 
mentioned (all of thorn of then recent times) whose armies were not unified 
hut were rather robber soldiers (an appellation which well fits most of China's 

XV 

A .DEBATE ON MILITARY AEEAIRS 163 

King Hsiao-cli‘en and Lin-wii-cliuin said, “ Good. 9 
I should like to ask what are the qualities that make a 
general ? ” 

The master, Hsun Chdng, said, “ In wisdom there is nothing The Qualities 
better than getting rid of doubts ; in action there is nothing a^^Sral. 
better than being without mistakes ; in performing my ^ 
duties there is nothing better than doing them in such a 
way that I can have no regrets. Performance of my duties 
can improve only to the stage where there is no chance for 
regret. Perfection cannot necessarily come from any one 
clement. Hence my orders and edicts should be severe and 
awe-inspiring ; my rewards and punishments should seek to 
be certain and believed in ; my camps and storehouses should 
seek to be well-arranged and secure ; my shiftings, advances, 
and retreats should seek to be safe and stable ; they should 
seek to be quick and speedy. In spying upon the enemy and 
watching their movements, I should seek to be hidden and 
deep ; I should seek to have my spies associate and mix 
with the enemy’s groups. In meeting the enemy and in a 
decisive battle I should do (Tcto) what I am certain of, not 
what I am uncertain about. This is what is meant by the 
six arts.® To be without doing what I desire because I 
desire it, and setting aside what I hate because I hate it ; to 
be without impatience for a victory and forgetfulness of a 

soldiers to-day !) and five princes of the states of more ancient times, as 
having unified their armies, but not as T*ang and Wu — all of which material 
is probably spurious and introduced subsequent to the composition of 
this book. 

^ A figure of speech j Hsuntzo identifies himself with the general here 
spoken of. 

* Bnumeratedin the sentences beginning : “ Hence my orders and edicts." 

164 

THE WOKKS OE HStlNTZE 

XV 

defeat ; not to try to make myself awesome in my own realm, 
but despised outside it ; not to tbink only of seeing tke gain 
and disregarding tke loss ^ ; in all planning to seek to do it 
tborougMy and in using wealtk to be generous — ^this is 
wbat is meant by tke five powers, Tkere are three tkings 
in wkiok I would not obey my master’s orders ; I can be killed 
ratker than be made to rest from completing tkat wkick is 
not finisked ; I can be killed ratker than be made to attack 
witk no intention of winning ; I can be killed ratker tkan 
be made to okeat tke people— tkis is wkat is meant by tke 
three extreme attainments. ^ Whenever a general has 
received kis orders from kis master to command tke three 
armies, when tke three armies are properly disposed, all tke 
military officers have assumed tkeir proper order, and all tkings 
are in tkeir proper places, and when tke master cannot then 
move them to joy ^ nor tke enemy move them to anger ® — ^this is 
wkat is meant by a minister of extremely great attainments. * 
Thought must precede action, be stressed and be attentive. 
To be careful of tke end as of tke beginning, to have tke end 
and beginning alike ® — ^tkis is wkat I call great happiness. 
Success in all tkings comes from being attentive ; defeat 
in being careless. Hence when attention overcomes careless- 
ness, tkere is happiness ; when carelessness overcomes 
attention, tkere is complete failure. When reflexion over- 
comes desire, tkere is obedience ; when desire overcomes 

* In a plan of action. 

® Attain to these points and never vary from them. 

* Against orders. 

The general was also a minister. His attainments are such that he 
can establish this discipline in his army. 

‘ Both full of promise. 

XV A DEBATE ON MILITARY AFFAIRS 166 

reflezion, there is calamity. Fighting should be like guarding 
a post ^ ; marching should be like fighting ; if a general 
gains glory, he should act as though it were luck. To 10 
pay attention to one’s plans without relaxation ; to pay atten- 
tion to business without relaxation ; to pay attention to 
' the ofSicers without relaxation ; to pay attention to the 
people without relaxation ; to pay attention to the enemy 
without relaxation — ^these are what are called the five things 
to be done without relaxation. If a man carefully performs 
these six arts, five powers, and three extreme attainments, 
and observes them by the aid of respectfully paying attention 
: without relaxation — ^this is what I mean by the greatest 

‘ general in the world, who would be as wise as the gods.” 

Lin-wu-chuin said, “ Good. I should like to ask what 
I are the King’s military regulations ? ” 

I The master, Hsun Chfing, replied, “ They are : to beat the Tte King’s 

j drum for an advance to the death ; to drive forward to the regulations. 

‘ death ; to have all officers devoted ^ to their posts ; to 

have the officers and prefects ® hold the ranks to the death. 

When the drum sounds, to advance ; when the gong sounds, to 
retreat. To obey orders is the most important thing; to 
gain glory is secondary. The crime of advancing when 
there is no order to advance and of retreating when there 
is no command to retreat, is equally great. Do not kill the 
aged or the weak ; do not march over the crops. Do not seize 
I those who submit ; do not let those go who are obstinate ; 

I do not arrest those who haste to obey. Whomever you kill, 
do not kill his subjects ; kill those who cause the people to 
^ Avoid over eager pursuit. 

\ ® In the Latin, sense of this word ; devoted to death, 

i ® Here high military ojBSoials, mail-olad warriors fighting from chariots. 

The people 
weloomed 
King Wu. 

166 THE WOEKS OE HStJHTZE zv 

rebel ; but if among the people there are those who defend 
these injurious individuals, they too are injurious. Hence 
those who yield to the sword shall live ; those who resist the 
sword shall die ; those who haste to obey shall bring tribute. 

“Wei T^e-k^ai ^ was invested with the fief of Sung. Tsao 
Gheh-lung ^ was killed in the presence of the army. The 
people of Yin® who submitted were saved alive and were 
treated the same as the people of Chou.'* Hence those who 
were near sang and rejoiced ; those who were distant fell 
prostrate and hastened to submit. There was no darkened 
or rustic state which did not hasten to send envoys and 
joyfully seek peace. Within the four seas ^ it was as if there 
was one family. No enlightened people failed to comply 
and submit. The foregoing is what is meant by a leader of 
men. The ode says : — 

“ From the west, from the east, 

From the south, from the north, 

None thought but of submitting ” — 
this expresses what I mean.® 

^ This man was the half-brother of Chou-sin, the last monarch of the 
Chang dynasty. Wei Tzo-k‘i had opposed the course of Chou-sin, and 
submitted to the new dynasty ; so was given a fief and ordered to continue 
the ancestral sacrifices to the deceased emperors of the Shang dynasty. 
He ruled 1112-1079 B.o. His name was WeiTze-k‘i ; because the character 
K‘i was also that of the Emperor Chin of the Han dynasty, it was changed 
to K‘ai, probably by Liu Hsiang. 

* A general of the state of Chao who .slandered the empress. Or, a flatter- 
ing courtier of Chou-sin. 

^ The dynasty of Shang or Yin ; Hsiintze is referring to the conquest 
of the Yin dynasty by King Wu. 

* The dynasty of which King Wu was the first emperor. 

® The whole continent. This sentence is a popular x^roverb. 

* Book of Odea, III, i, x, 6. Also quoted by Mencius, II, i, iii, 2. 

XV A DEBATE ON MILITABY AFFAIRS 167 

“ The Kings ^ had executions, but no battles.’ If a ^ 
was held, they did not attack ® ; if the army * was obstinate, tions, but no 
they did not attack it.® If the’ ruler and ruled were satisfied 
with each other, then they congratulated them. They did 
not massacre cities ; they did not ambush armies ; they 
did not hold down the people ; they did not keep the 
army over the season.® Hence the people of countries 11 
which were ill-ruled rejoiced at their ^ government, and 
were not satisfied with their o'wn rulers, hut wished them ® 
to come.’* 

Lin-wu-chuin said, “ Good.” 

♦ ♦ * ♦ * 

Cheh-hsiao ® asked a question of the master, Hsun Ch'ing, How can war 
saying, “When you discuss military affairs, you always 
speak of benevolence {Jen) and justice (Yi) as the roots of virtuous 
action. The benevolent {Jen) man loves others ; the just 
{Yi) man follows principle ; then why do you speak of military 
actions ? All that armies are good for is to contend and take 
things from others.” 

1 The ideal Kings. 

“ An enemy city. 

® For fear of injuring their own army. 

. * The enemy’s army. 

“ They won by virtue, overcoming the enemy’s hearts, not by physical . 
strength. 

® The militia should only be called up when their absence would not 
injure the crops ; they should not bo kept in arms at harvest-time — thus 
showing the proper subservience of military to agricultural and peaceful 
matters. 

’ That of the Kings. 

® 'Wished the Kings to come and take them over. Cf. Booh of Eistoryt 
IV, ii, 6. 

* A disciple of Hsiintze. 

168 

THE WOBKS OE HSt)NTZE 

XV 

The master, Hsun ChHng, said, “ It is not as you think. 
This benevolent iJen) man loves others. He loves others, 
hence he hates what injures others. This just (Yi) man 
follows principle. He follows principle, hence he hates 
those that lead others astray. These armies are for the 
purpose of stopping tyranny and getting rid of injury, not 
to contend and take things from others. Hence when the 
armies of the benevolent (Jen) man remain in a place, it is 
like a god being there ^ ; when they have passed, civilization 
develops. It was lilce the falling of a timely rain ; no one 
failed to rejoice — ^this was when Yao punished Huan-tou^ 
or Shun punished the ruler of the Miao ® or Yu punished the 
Minister of Works, ^ or T'ang punished the lord of Hsia,® or 
King Wen punished Ch‘ung, or King Wu punished Chou ; these 
four Emperors ® and two Kings all used benevolent (Jen) and 

^ I.e., marvellous. Hsuntzo did not believe in the existence of gods or 
spirits, but he uses the term “ god " or " godlike " regularly to express 
the idea of the marvellous or the superhuman — “ like what a god 
would do if there were gods,” 

® Cf. Book of History f II, i, iii, 12, and this page, note 4. 

• Aboriginal tribes. Cf. ibid. 

1 This event is otherwise unknown ; the Book of History 11^ i, iii, 12, states 
hat Yao “ banished the Minister of Works to Yu-chou ; confined Huan- 
ou on Mt. Tsung ; drove the ruler of the Miao into San- Wei ; and held 
Kun a prisoner till death on Mt. Yu. When these four criminals were dealt 
with the whole empire submitted.” Elsewhere {p. 219) Hstintze states that 
Yao dealt with Kun, Huan-tou, and the Minister of Works — ^hero he states 
that three different emperors punished these three men. 

® Ch‘io, the last of the Hsia dynasty. 

* The Son of Heaven (emperor) does not seem to have been called** King ” 
during his life until the Chou dynasty ; (but Yang Liang says : “ The Hsia and 
Yin rulers were called Kings, ^ , or Emperors, ^ indifferently,” ) Previous 
to the Chou dynasty they were called Emperor, only after death. The 
Chou-Li says, “ When their tablets are placed in the ancestral temple 

XV 

A DEBATE ON MILITARY AEEAIRS 169 

just (Y^) arimes to gain the empire. Therefore those who 
were near were attached by their goodness ; those who were 
far loved their justice (Yi). Their armies did not ensanguine 
their swords, yet distant regions came to submit to them ; • 
their virtue was so great that it reached to the four ends 
of the world. The Ode says : — 

“ The virtuous man, my prince, 

His justice ( Yi) is without blot — 
this expresses what I mean ^ 

^ * He jK 

Li Sze ® questioned the master, Hsun Ch‘ing, saying, Ts'in’s 

Ts‘in’s ® armies for four generations have been victorious ; 
it is the strongest state in the country ; it has overawed the 
feudal princes ; this has not been done by benevolence {Jen) 
and justice (Yi) but merely by taking advantage of the 
course of events.” ^ 

The master, Hsun Ch'ing, replied, “ It is not as you think. It w 
What you call advantage is an unadvantageous advantage. 

What I call benevolence {Jen) and justice (Yi) is the most 
advantageous advantage. This benevolence {Jen) and justice 

they are styled Emperor, This term for Emperor, is not that 

used noV, which only began with the Ts'in dynasty. Hence the 

** Four Emperors " refers to those preceding the Chou dynasty and the 
“ two Kings " refers to those of the Chou dynasty. 

1 Booh of Odes, I, xiv, iii, 3. 

“ A disciple of Hsiintze, later the famous prime minister of Ts'in Shih 
Hwangti, who ordered the burning of the Oonfuoian Classics. Hsiintze 
has received a good deal of odium because Li Sze was his disciple. Here 
Hshntze shows his disagreement with Li Sze. Of. if., 239 ff. 

3 The state which was shortly to conq^uer all the others. 

* His estimate of the situation was quite correct. 

170 

THE WORKS OE HSttNTZE 

XV 

{Yi) is that wherewith I reform my government. When 
the government is reformed, the people are attached to their 
ruler ; they rejoice in their prince, and easily die for him ; 
hence it was said, ‘ Of all military affairs, generals and 
IS leaders are the least important matters.’ ^ Ts*in for 
four generations has been victorious, but it has been fearful, 
continually fearing that the whole country would unite and 
orush it. This is what I call armies of recent days ; their 
power did not have the right beginning. Hence when T'ang 
exiled Ch‘ie, he did not pursue him when he reached Min-t4ao.® 
When King Wu killed Chou, it was not until the morning of 
Chia-tze ^ that he conquered — ^this was all because of their 
previous cultivation — ^this is what I mean by armies governed 
by benevolence (Jen) and justice (Yi). How you do not seek 
for it at the source, but search for it at the end — this is 
wherein the present generation is misled,” ^ 

1 Cf. p. 161. 

® The ancestral home of Ch'ie, to whioh he fled, and where he was allowed 
to live a prisoner until his death. 

» ^ the first day of the cycle. 

* The next section is q^uoted in Sze-ma Ch'ien's Historical Jiccord between 
two sections of Book XIX, and seems to have been originally part of that 
book, so is transcribed there. Cf. p. 216 f. 

The rest of the hook seems spurious (if this part is not so). The conversa- 
tional form does not reappear, and the various speakers disappear. The 
subject matter is chiefly an elaboration of the preceding — rewards and 
punishments are not enough to support a state, virtue must also be culti- 
vated, together with faithfulness and justice, to make the people attached 
to the ruler and willing to die for him. The three ways of ruling men — ^by 
virtue, by force, and by wealth, being respectively righteous rule, weakness 
and poverty. It is easy to capture a country, but ihe important thing is 
to consolidate the conquest. 

A PARAGRAPH PROM BOOK XVI 

A STRONG COUNTRY 

All wicked men arise because tbe rulers do not 11 
honour justice ^ {Yi) nor reverence it. Now justice (Yi) is 
for the purpose of restraining men from evilly associating with neglecting Yi. 
wicked men. Now the rulers do not honour justice (Y^) 
nor reverence it, and so the people imder them all discard 
their will to justice (Yi) and hasten to make their hearts evil. 

This is how wicked men arise. Moreover, the ruler should people 
be the teacher of the ruled, and the ruled should keep in should accord 
tune with the ruler like an echo responds to a sound or like a 
shadow resembles its object. Hence those who are the 
rulers of others must follow this principle.^ The just (Yi) Yi, 
man within accords with men, and without he accords with 
things ; above he is at peace with his lord, and below he is 
in harmony with the people. To accord within and without, 
above and below, is the nature of justice (Yi). Then of all 
important things in the world, justice ( Yt) is the fundamental 
thing and faithfulness is next to it. Among the ancients, laitkfulnesa, 
Yu and T'ang founded themselves on justice ( Y i) and practised 
faithfulness, and so the empire was well-governed ; Ch‘ie and 
Chou discarded justice (Yi) and rebelled against faithfulness 
and the empire was ill-governed. Hence he who is over men 
must be careful of the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice 
( Yi), and also practise loyalty and faithfulness ; and then 
only will he fit for his position. This is the greatest funda- 
mental thing for princes. 

^ Yi may be translated justice or righteousness ; it means rightness, 
obseryanoe of rights proper to that class of people. 

a Yi. 

BOOK XYII 

CONCBRNINa HEAVEN 

Heaven ^ lias a constant regularity of action. Yao ^ was not 12 
necessary to support its order, nor could Ch'ie ® destroy its Do not 
order. Respond to it in governing a country and success He^wn for 
will result ; follow it in misgovemment, and calamity will 
result. If tlie fundamentals for life ^ are plentiful and are your virtue, 
economically used, then Heaven cannot impoverish the 
country ; if the essentials of life are sufficient and the activities 
of man in preparing them are well timed, then Heaven cannot 
afflict the country. If the right Way of Life {Tad) is culti- 
vated and not opposed, then Heaven cannot send misfortune ; 
fiood or drought cannot cause a famine ; extreme cold or 
heat cannot cause sufiering ; supernatural powers cannot 
cause calamity. But if the fundamentals for life are neglected 
and used extravagantly, then Heaven cannot cause the 
country to be rich ; if the essentials of life are scarce and 

^ The Tvord for Heaven, may mean a personal God or the materia 
sky. Hsuntze uses it in an impersonal sense, so that it very nearly corre- 
sponds to the English " Nature" , and in places in this book it has been so 
translated. But when this is the case, the Chinese equivalent, ** T‘ien," 
has been added to clarify what is meant. Hsiintze is attacking the poptdar 
superstitious conception of Heaven, and so it has seemed better to translate 
^ by “ Heaven ” to show the connexion between the two concepts of 
“ Heaven " and “ Nature ", In the Classics and the popular conception. 

Heaven was an anthropomorphic Deity, while for Hsiintze, Heaven is 
Nature, or Law. 

® A great and good Emperor. 

* An evil tyrant, a “ Nero 

* Agriculture and sericulture, which give food and clothing. 

m THE WORKS OE HSt)]SrTZE . xvii 

the activities of men in preparing them are inopportune, 
13 then Heaven cannot make that country* prosperous. 
If a person rebels against the right Way of life (Tao), and 
acts unseemly, then Heaven cannot make him fortunate. 
Therefore even if flood or drought do not come, there will 
be famine ; even if cold or heat do not approach, there will 
be suffering ; even if supernatural powers do not act, there 
Tnll be calamity. Observing the proper time for action and a 
good government and prosperity are contemporaneous ; 
calamities and good government are not contemporaneous. 
One ought not to grumble at Heaven that things happen 
according to its Way (Tao). Hence to know the Way of 
Heaven is man’s duty ^ ; he who does this is a great Sage.^ 
To produce without acting and to obtain without seeking, s 
this is what is meant by the office of Heaven. Therefore 
although the Way of Heaven is deep, this man will not put 
deep thought on it ; although it is great, he will not use his 
ability for its investigation ; although it is mysterious, he 
will not scrutinize it — ^this is what is meant by refraining from 
contesting with Heaven. Heaven has its seasons. Earth has 
its wealth, Man has his government. The foregoing is what 
is meant by being able to form a triad with Heaven and 
Earth. ^ To give up that wherewith one can form such a triad 

^ The Booh of Changes says : “To know about men, but not about 
Heaven, this is to be a Sage.” 

* He who has all wisdom. 

» These sentences show the influence of Laotze. Hsiintzo's doctrine of 
Heaven as impersonal law is taken from Laotze. 

*■ Of. Doctrine of the Mean, XXII. Man is able to utilize the seasons 
(Heaven), gain the earth's wealth through the efforts of his rulers (in 
China the state controlled agriculture, appointed times for sowing, reaping. 

XVII 

CONCERNING HEAVEN 

176 

and to desire to know those with whom he forms a triad is 
to he led into error.^ 

The fixed stars make their roimd ; the sun and moon spiritual 
alternately shine ; the four seasons come in succession ; th^uSver^. 
the Yin and Ymg^ go through their great mutations ; the 
wind and rain widely affect things ; all things ® acquire 
their germinating principle, and are brought into existence ; 
each gets its nourishing principle ^ and develops to its com- 
pleted state. We do not see the cause of these occurrences, 
but we do see their effects — ^this is what is meant by the 
influence of the spirits.® The results of all these changes are 
known, but. we do not know the invisible source — this is> 
what is meant by the work of Heaven. Only the Sage does; 
not seek to know Heaven. Wben the office of Heaven has 
been established, and the work of Heaven has been perfected, 
the human body is prepared and the human spirit is bom ; 
love, hatred, joy, anger, sorrow, and pleasure are embodied — 
these are what are meant by the natural {T^ien) emotions. 

The ear, the eye, the nose, the mouth, the body, and the 
limbs, each receive stimuli and cannot be interchanged — 

oto.), and so ho is able to form a triad or trinity with Heaven and Earth. 

Heaven and Barth were great deities j they now become expressions of 
universal Law, and man becomes eq[ual with them. 

1 Give up agriculture and serioulture, and instead seek to know the 
secrets of Heaven and Earth — speculation. This is an attack on Chuangtze 
and similar speculators. 

» The negative and positive cosmic principles. 

3 Lit., ^ “ the ten-thousand things ", here particularly referring 
to vegetable life. 

* Wind and rain. 

® Effects, the causes of which are unknown, are attributed to the spirits ; 
spirits do not really cause anything ; what are called the actions of spirits 
are natural occurrences. 

176 

THE WOEES OE HSUNTZE 

XVII 

these are what are meant by the natural {T^ien) senses. 

14 The heart ^ is established in the central cavity 2 to control 
the five senses — ^this is what is meant by the natural 
(T*ien) ruler. 

Knowing^ To use what is not of one’s kind to nourish one’s kind ® — 
sists in the ' this is what is meant by the natural (THen) nourishing. To 
humandutks according to one’s station is what is called happiness ; 

to act contrary to one’s station is called calamity — ^this is 
what is meant by the natural (T^ien) government. To darken 
one’s natural (T^ien) ruler/ to confuse the natural (T*im) 
senses, to throw away the natural (T‘ien) nourishing, to act 
contrary to the natural (THen) government, to violate the 
natural (T^ien) emotions so as to destroy the work of Nature 
{TienY — ^this is what is called the great calamity. The 
Sage purifies his natural (T^ien) ruler, rectifies his natural 
{T‘i€n) senses, makes the natural (T^ien) nourishment sufficient,® 
obeys the natural (T^ien) government, nourishes his natural 
(THen) emotions, in order to develop to perfection his natural 
usefulness.'^ When he acts thus, he knows what he can do 
and what he cannot do. Then heaven and earth fulfil their 
proper function, and he can employ the material world. 
When his actions are completely governed, the nourishment 
for the people is completely obtained, and in his life he injures 
none — ^this is what is meant by knowing Heaven {T^ien). 

1 It is the seat of psychic life, and “ mind 

® The thorax. 

® E.g., animal flesh to nourish manMnd. 

* The mind. 

® The same as the “ work of Heaven ” above. 

* Cultivates agriculture and sericulture. 

’ The same as “ the work of Nature {T‘ien ) ", above. 

XVII 

CONOERNINa HEAVEN 

177 

Eor great skill consists in knowing kow to do a thing without 
striving ; and great wisdom consists in not needing to reflect 
about things.^ What is known about Heaven is that we see 
its phenomena have their regular sequences ; what is known 
about Earth is that it is seen that it meets the conditions of 
life and can produce ; what is known about the four seasons 
is that it is seen that they have a definite number, 16 
and can be used to serve humanity ; what is known about 
the Yin and Yang is that it is seen that they interact and 
can be used in ruling a country. If the man who has a 
responsible post attends to what belongs to Nature {T*ien), 
the people of themselves will keep to the right Way of life 
(Tao), 

Are good and bad government, prosperity and calamity, Good aad bad 
from Heaven {THen) ? I reply : The sun, the moon, . 

the heavenly bodies, the auspicious times, the astrological calamity, are 
calculations of the calendar were the same in the time of 
Yu as in that of Ch^ie. In the time of Yu there was good 
government and prosperity ; in the time of Ch‘ie there was 
ill-government and calamity; prosperity and calamity do 
not come from Heaven. 

Do they come from the seasons ? I answer ; The 
myriad plants spring up, flourish, and grow in spring and 
summer ; they are nourished, the grain develops, is reaped 
and gathered in in the fall and winter. In this also the times 
of Yu and Ch‘ie were the same. Yu had prosperity and Chfle 
had disaster ; prosperity and disaster do not come from 
the seasons. 

Do they come from the Earth ? I answer : When 
* This sentence shows the influence of Laotze. 

N 

f 

178 

THE WORKS OF HSt^NTZE 

xvn 

a plant ox a state obtains a place on the earth, it lives ; when 
its place on the earth is lost, it dies ; in this too Yu and 
Gh^ie were the same. Yu had prosperity, Oh‘ie had misfortune. 
Prosperity and misfortune, good and bad government, are 
not from the Earth. 

The ode says : — 

Heaven made the high hill: 

King T'ai brought it under cultivation ; 

He began the work : 

King Wen tranquillized it ” 
this is the answer to the problem.^ 

The JSuj^rior Nature {T‘ien) does not suspend the winter because men 
<iislihe cold ; the Earth does not suspend its spaciousness 
Earth in their because men dislike distances ; the superior man does not 
constancy. bis good actions because of tbe railings of little- 

minded men. 

Heaven (T*ien) has a constant way of action ; Earth has 
a constant numerical size ; the superior man has a constant 
decorous demeanour. The superior man talks of what is 
constant mth him, but the little-minded man counts his 
accomplishments. The ode says : — 

“ If a person acta according to the rules of proper conduct 
(Li) and justice (Yi), 

And does not overpass their bounds, 

Why should he be anxious about people’s talk 1 ” — 
this expresses what I mean.® 

* JBooh of Odes, IV, i, v. This Ode implies that the success of the Chou 
dynasty -was due to its founders, espeojally King T'ai and King Wen ; 
Nature provided the opportunity, but it was man who worked out his 
success. 

* This ode is not now preserved. 

XVII 

CONCERNING HEAVEN 

179 

The King of Ts‘u ^ has a thousand chariots following him — 16 
this is not wisdom. The superior man eats pulse and drinks 
water— this is not foolishness. It is what is fitting to the 
circumstances. 

If a person's will is cultivated, his virtuous acts are many, I'ame and 
his knowledge and thoughts are clear, then his reputation will deTOlo^ent 
spring forth in the present, and he recorded with the worthies 
of ancient times. It springs forth from what is within one’s Heaven, 
power. Therefore the superior man is anxious about what is 
within his power, and does not seek for what is from Heaven. 

The little-minded man does not concern himself with what 
is within his power, and desires what comes from Heaven.^ 

The superior man is anxious about what is within his power, 
and does not seek for what comes from Heaven — ^this causes 
daily progress. The little-minded man does not concern 
himself with what is within his power and seeks for what 
comes from Heaven— -this causes daily retrogression. There- 
fore the reason why the superior man progresses daily and the 
reason why the little-minded man retrogresses daily is the 
same.® The reason for the difierence between the superior 
man and the little-minded man consists in what we have 
just said. 

When stars fall or the sacred tree groans,* the people of the Ominous 
whole state are afraid. We ask, “ Why is it ? ” I answer : There 
is no reason. This is due to a modification of Heaven and human. 

1 A large feudal state in what was then southern China, hut now the 
Yangtze valley. 

* Good luck. 

® It depends on what he puts his mind on. 

* The sacred tree by the local altar to the lares rusticu 

180 

THE WORKS OP HStJOTZE 

XVII 

Eaxtli, to the mutation of the Yin and Yang?- These are 
rare events. We may marvel at them, but we should not 
fear them. Eor there is no age that has not experienced 
eclipses of the sim and moon, unseasonable rain or wind, or 
17 strange stars seen in groups. If the ruler is illustrious 
and the government tranquil, although these events should 
all come together in one age, it would do no harm. If the 
ruler is unintelligent and his government is bent on evil, 
although not one of these strange events should occur, their 
non-occurrence would be without avail to prevent his fall. 
Hence the falling of stars and the groaning of the sacred tree 
are from the modification of Heaven and Earth, the mutation 
ofthe Yin and Yang. These are rare events. We may marvel 
at them, but we should not fear them. When human ominous 
si^s come, then we should be really afraid. 

What is a human ominous sign % Using a poor plough “ and 
thereby injuring the grain ; the losing of the efieot of the 
fertiliser in hoeing and weeding ; the losing of the allegiance 
of the people by a government bent on evil ; when the fields are 
uncultivated and the harvest is bad ; when the price of grain 
is high and the people are starving ; when there are dead 
bodies on the roads — ^these are what I mean by human ominous 
signs. When the government is not wise ; when appointments 
to office and degradations from office are not opportune; 
when the fundamental matters ® are not attended to — ^these 
are what I mean by human ominous signs. When the rules 

1 CJf. tlie commentaiy of Tso on the Spring and Autumn, Duke Hsl, 
16th year (Leggo’s trans. I, 170). for an echo of thig passage. 

* Made of poor -wood. 

® Agriculture and sericulture. 

CONCEKNING HEAVEN 

181 

.XVII 

of proper conduct {Li) and justice (V^) are not cultivated; 
when the inhabitants of the inner and outer 'apartmejjts ^ 
do not keep apart ; when men and women are immoral ; 
when parents and children distrust each other; when the 
ruler and ruled are at cross purposes and separate ; when 
distress from robbers becomes common — ^these are what I 
mean by human ominous signs. These ominous signs are 
born’of disorder. "When all three kinds of ominous signs come 
together, the country cannot be peaceful. To speak of things 
in this way, is to come very much nearer the truth ; these 
misfortunes are the most grievous ones.® It is said ; The 18 
History does not speak of supernatural events. To set aside 
discussions and investigations which are not pressing, and 
not to engage in them — ^this is the right things for princes 
and their vassals to do. The love of father and son, the 
proprieties separating husband and wife, should be daily 
cultivated like the cutting and polishing of a precious stone, 
and they will not be lost. 

If people pray for rain and get rain, why is that ? I answer : Prayer for 
There is no reason for it. If people do not pray for rain, it 
will nevertheless rain. "When people save the sun or mpon 
from being eaten,® or when they pray for rain in a drought, 
or when they decide an important affair only after divination’ — 
this is not because they think in this way they will get what 

1 I’emales and males, respectively. 

• The present text here contains the foUowkig spurious sentences: 

“ If unopportunely you compel the people to forced labour, then cows 
and horses will breed together and the six domestic animals become an 
ominous sign. We can marvel at these events, but we should not 
fear them." 

® In an eclipse. 

182 

THE WOEKS OF HSteTZE 

XVII 

they seek, but only to gloss over the matter.^ Hence the 
prince thinks it is glossing over the matter, but the people 
thir^k it supernatural. He who thinks it is glossing over the 
matter is fortunate ; he who thinks it is supernatural is 
unfortunate. 

Xiattdjr^are Of the things that are in heaven there are none brighter 
of "t^an the sun and moon ; of the things that are on earth, 
there are none brighter than water and fire ; of goods there 
are none brighter than pearls and jade ; of the things that are 
human there are none brighter than the rules of proper 
conduct (Li) and justice (Yi). For if the sun and moon were 
not high, their brightness would not be great ; if water 
and fire is not gathered together,^ their sheen would not be 
great ; if pearls and jade were not gleaming on the outside, 
19 kings and nobles would not think them precious ; when 
the observance of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) 
are not added to the wealth of a country, its merit and fame 
do not shine. Hence the destiny ® of men is from Heaven ; 
the destiny of a country is from observing the rules of proper 
conduct (Li). The prince who exalts the rules of proper 
conduct (Li) and gives office to the worthy can rule as king ; 
he who makes law important and loves the people can rule 
as lord protector ; he who loves his own profit and multiplies 
deceit is in dangerous circumstances ; he who strives for 
power and seeks to overturn others, he whose ways are 
dark and bent on evil will be overthrown. 

^ Hsiintzo’s reinterpretation of divination. 
* Much, in one place. 

® Non-deterininiatic fate. 

XVII 

CONCERNINa HEAVEN 

183 

How can exalting Heaven and wislimg for its gifts be as Rely on self, 
good as heaping up. wealth and using it advantageously 1 Heaven. 
How can obeying Heaven and praising it be as good as 
adapting oneself to the appointments of Heaven and using 
them 1 How can hoping for the proper time and waiting for 
it be as good as seizing the opportunity and acting ? How 
can relying on things increasing of themselves be as good as 
putting forth one’s energy and developing things ? How can 
thinking of things and comparing them be as good as looking 
after things and not losing them ? How can wishing that 
things may come to pass be as good as taking what one has 
and bringing things to pass ? Therefore if a person neglects 
what men can do and seeks for what Heaven does, he fails to 
understand the nature of things. 

***** 

The principles of proper conduct ^ have remained unchanged Li* 
through the time of all the Kings. They are suffiicient to 
permeate ^ the Way of life (Tao), One king fell and another 
rose ; that which conformed to these principles permeated 
them all. When these principles permeate a government, 
there can be no misgovernment or disorder. He who does 
not know how to make them permeate his actions does not 
know how to alter his actions to suit changing conditions. 

When they permeate the whole of a person’s conduct, he can 
never fad. Ill-government and calamity is bom of their 
lack ; good government comes from exhausting their minutise. 

^ This term is supplied from the context. Probably we should prefix 
“ Li ” to this section as a title, 

“ Tie figure is that of a string that runs through a “ string ” of cash, 
and holds them together. 

m 

THE WORKS OP HStNTZE 

xvn 

For when that which the Way of life (Tao) stresses is the 
golden- mean, it can he followed ; when it is an extreme, it 
20 should not he done ; when it is evil, a person is greatly 

misled. One who walks in the water tests its depth. If 

he does not test it rightly, then he is likely to fall into the 
water. The one who governs the people tests their virtue. 
If he does not test rightly there is likely to he disorder. 
What he tests hy is the rules of proper conduct (Zi). If there 
is no proper conduct (Zt) the age is dark. When the age 
is dark there will he great disorder. For the right Way of 
life (Tao) is never unclear. Conduct relating to what is 
without and within the family circle is tested differently. 
Conduct which refers to these inner and outer circles has 
its uniform principles. Thus we can remove the causes which 
would make the people sink into trouble. 

9{i He 4: ^ 

Criticism of things are one section of the Way (Tap) ; one thing 

-pliilosopiiora. is a section of all things ; the stupid man sees only one 
section of one thing, and thinks that he knows the Way 
(Tao) ; hut he has no such knowledge. Shentze ^ has insight 
about what is behind hut none about what is before. Laotze * 
has insight about what is bent, but not about what is straight. 
Micius ® has insight about what is universal, but not about 

1 ShenTao^ pj said that the worthy sbould not be rewarded nor should 
the able be given office, i.e., he did not advocate stimulating the people 
to improve by advancing them in office. His writings were collected in 
forty-two hooks, which are now lost. 

^ ^ Eeputed author of the Tao Teh Ching. He spoke of the bent 
being better than the straight, and the weak overcoming the strong. 

* Or Mo Ti ^ . Advocated the equality of all in the sight of Heaven, 
and universal love ; he is criticized for neglecting the place of the individual 
in society in favour of universal love. 

XVII 

CONCEENING HEAVEN 

186 

tEe individual. Sungfcze^ has insight about the -few, but 
not about the many. If one considers what is behind, but 
not what is before, then the common people cannot enter 
into the gate of progress. If one considers the bent but 
not the straight, then the noble and base are not distinguished. , 
If one considers the universal, but not the particular, then 
the government cannot operate.^ If one considers the few 21 
but not the many, then the common people will not 
progress. The History says : — 

“ Without any selfish lik in gs, 

Eeverence the Way (Tao) of the Kings ; 

Without any selfish dislikes 
Eeverence the path of the Kings ” — 
this expresses what I mean.® 

1 Sung Hsin ^ 0 or Sung IC'en ^ a native of the state of Stmg, a 
contemporary of Mencius and mentioned by him. He held that men's desires 
tend to become simple and few, whereas each person thinks that they tend 
to become greater and more complex. His writings were collected in 
eighteen books, now lost. The criticism is that his doctrine was only true 
in some instances, hut not in the majority of instances. Hshntze spends 
a good deal of time rebutting his theory of desire. Cf. p, 206 fi. 

* Because the government is founded on the subordination of some . 
individuals to others. 

® Booh of History, V, iv, 14. 

BOOK XYIII 

ON THE CORRECTION OE ERRORS ' 

The sophists common to-day say : “ It is best for a lord to l 
he secretive.” This is not so. The lord is the singing-leader Seoretiveness 
of the people ; the ruler is the model of the subject. When 
they hear the singing-leader, they respond ; when they see 
the model, they act accordingly. But when the singing- 
leader is silent, the people are without response ; when the 
model is inaccessible, then the subjects do not act according 
to it. If they do not respond nor act according to the model, 
then the ruler and ruled cannot help each other. If things 
are thus, then it is the same as if there were no ruler, than 
which no misfortune is greater. Eor the ruler is the foundation 
of the subjects. When the ruler makes known clearly what 
is to be done, then the subjects are governed well. When 
the ruler is upright and sincere, then the subjects are honest 
and guileless ; when the ruler is just and right, then the 
subjects are easily straight. When they are governed well, 
then they are easily united ,* when they are honest and guile- 
less, they are easily employed.^ When they are easily straight, 
then they are easily understood. When they are easily united, 
then the state is strong ; when they are easily employed, then 
the ruler gains glory ; when they are easily understood, then 
the ruler is illustrious. This is the source of good government. 

But when the ruler is secretive, then the subjects are 
^ On public works ; this was a levy, not paid work. 

188 THE WOBKS OF HStNTZE . iviii = 

confused ; witen tlie luler is inaccessible and difficult to 
fathom, then the subjects are embued with falseness ; when 
the ruler is partial and crooked, then the subjects form 
cliques. When the subjects are confused, they are united 
with difficulty ; when they are imbued with falseness, then ’ 
they are difficult to employ ; when they form cliques,' they 
are difficult to understand. When they are united with ! 
difficulty, the state is not strong; when they are 'difficult 
to employ, the ruler has no glory ; when they are difficult 
to understand, then the ruler is not illustrious. This is the ■ 
source of bad government. 

Hence it is best for a lord to be open, and not to be hidden. 

It is best to make things known and not to be secretive. 
For when the custom [Tao) of a lord is to be open, then his 
subordinates are calm ; when the custom {Tao) of a lord is 
to be inaccessible, then his subordinates are uneasy. For when 
3 the subjects axe calm, then they honour their ruler ; when 
the subordinates are uneasy, then they despise their ruler. 
For when the ruler is easy to know, then his subjects love 
their superior; when the ruler is difficult to know, then 
his subjects fear their ruler. When the subjects love their 
ruler, the ruler is at rest ; when the subjects fear their ruler, 
the ruler is in danger. Hence there is nothing in his practices 
{Too) that a lord should hate more than being difficult to 
know, nothing more dangerous than to cause his subjects ‘ 
to fear him. It is said : When those who hate a person are 
many, he is in danger. The History says : He was able 
to make his illustrious virtue show clearly/’ The ode says : ^ 

“ Below he was illustrious.” 

^ Booh of Odes, III, i, ii, 1. For explanation, of. p. 279, note 4. 

xvin ON THE COERECTION OF ERRORS 189- 

Hence tlie ancient Kings made themselves open ; how could 
they be especially inaccessible 1 

* * * ^ ^ 

The sophists common to-day say : Ch^ie and Chon were Wew T'ang 
the legal rulers of the empire ; T*ang and Wn rebelled and 
took it by force/’ ^ This is not so. If by being Emperor is rigiit to 
meant that Ch‘ie and Chon possessed the registers and census 
records of the empire at that time, then yes. If it means that 
they themselves possessed the empire, then no. If it means 
that the empire could be said to be in the hands of Ch*ie and 
Chou, then no . In ancient times the Emperor had a thousand ^ 
officials, and the feudal princes a hundred officials. By being 
king ® is meant to have his command performed through 
the states of China ^ through these thousand officials. By 
beiQg prince is meant to have his command performed 
throughout his borders through those hmidred officials, and 
although his state be not at peace, yet not to be cast aside, 
displaced and ruined. The descendants of the Sage-Kings ® 
inherited the empire ; the authority and the registers were 
in their hands. But if the Imperial Clan of the Empire 
had not a man of ability,® it was unfit for its position. On 
the one hand his subjects hated him, and on the other the 

1 Cf . pp. 19, 20, A Sketch of Chiriese History. Of. also Mencius^ I, n, viii, 

■where ho was asked the same q'aestion. This teaching is found in Chuangtze, 

Book XYIL 

* Round numbers ; other records say Shun had fifty officials, and Yu 
100 ; in the Chou dynasty the emperor had 300 officials. 

* The Chou dynasty emperors called themselves Kings. 

* The term is ^ X “ O'!! th® BCflift Hsia being the name for the first 
Chinese dynasty. The d;pastic name was taken as a geographical name. 

* Yu and T 'ang ; by iinplication Wu is included here too. 

* To rule the empire. 

190 

THE WORKS OK HStJNTZB 

xvm 

feudal princes revolted. Near tlie capital, ttose witMn his 
own borders ^ were not united ; at a distance, the feudal 
princes did not obey. His commands were not performed 
within his own borders. The feudal princes even invaded and 
sliced off some of his territory ® ; they attacked and chastised 
him. ^Vhen such was the situation, although he had not yet 
fallen, I say that he did not truly possess the empire. 
When the Sage-Kings died, those who possessed the authority 
and registers became weak, and became unable to control 
the empire. 

3 When the country has no real prince,® if there is a feudal 
noble who has ability, and if his virtue is illustrious and his 
majesty is great, none of the people of the country will be 
unwilling to take him for prince and leader ; then if he should 
seek out and kill this isolated and wasteful tyrant, he would 
not injure anyone, he would be a blameless ^ subject. If he 
put to death the prince of a tyrannous state, it would be the 
same as killing an ordinary individual. ® A person like this 
can be said to be able to wield the empire. He who is able 
to wield the empire can be called a King. T'ang and Wu 
did not capture the empire ; they cultivated their ways 

1 The peculiar domain of the emperor, not held in fief by another. 

* This was the situation in the time of Hsfintzo himself ; but politeness 
prevented him from expressing the conclusion that the Chou emperors 
were doomed. Confucius, Mencius, and Hstintze all sought employment at 
the important states, hut never even attempted to enter the servioe of the 
Chou emperors. 

* A prince who really governs ; in the sense that a weak ruler is no 
ruler. 

* Lit., “ without a crime.” 

* He would not he committing the crime of “ parricide ” (the ruler was 
regarded as a father). Of. H., p. 258 f. 

xvni ON THE CORRECTION OF ERRORS 191 

(Tao ) ; they carried out the principle of justice {Ji) ; they 
exalted the common benefit of the Empire ; they did away 
with the common sources of injury to the empire ; and so 
the empire turned to them. Chfie and Chou did not resign 
the empire ; they perverted the virtue of Yu and T‘ang ; they 
confused the distinctions of the rules of proper conduct (Li) 
and justice (Yi) \ their bestial actions heaped up misfortune 
for them, completed their evil destiny, and the empire dis- 
missed them. He to whom the empire turns is called King ^ j 
he whom the empire dismisses, is ruined.^ Hence the fact 
that Ch'ie and Chou did not possess the empire and that- 
T‘ang and Wu did not murder their prince is clear from 
this argument. 

T‘ang and Wu were the father and mother of the people.^ 
Ch'ie and Chou were the hated murderers of the people. 
The sophists to-day say that Ch'ie and Chou were princes, 
T‘ang and Wu were murderers ; then their argument is for 
killing the father and mother of the people and makiag a 
leader of their hated murderers — ^there is no calamity greater 
than this. If we understand that he who can unite the people 
is their prince then the empire was never united imder Chfie 
and Chou.® But there never has been the doctrine that T‘ang 
and Wu were murderers — ^that is directly slandering them. 

For the empire is the weightiest thing there is. Unless 
the emperor himself is extremely strong, he will not be able 
to bear its weight. It is the largest of all. Unless he is 

1 “ To bo King " is “ Wang ", 3E » “ h® ruined " is " Wang ", , 
Tbia play on words is also found at tbe end of Book IX. 

* They were so called. 

3 I.e., they were not really emperors. 

192 THE WOEKS OE HSt)NTZE xviu 

most discrimiiiatiiig, lie ■will not be able to divide it properly. 
It is tbe greatest of all. Unless be is most wise, be will not 
be able to harmonize it. Unless be is a Sage, be will not 
be able to fulfil these three extreme requirements. Hence 
unless he is a Sage, he will not be able to rule as lawful King. 
The Sage is he who has completely followed the Way (Too) 
4 and is wholly correct tbereiu. He holds the] balances ^ 
in the empire. Ch'ie^s and Chou’s thoughts were extremely 
dangerous ; their purposes were extremely dark ; their 
actions were extremely evil. Their relatives kept distant 
from them ; worthy people despised them ; their own people 
hated them. They were the descendants of Yu and T‘ang, 
but they did not gain the following of one person. They 
disemboweled Pi-kan and imprisoned the Viscount ofJ^Chi.® 
They were killed, their dynasty fell, and theyjbecame the 
great scorn of the empire. He whom later generations call 
e-dl should study their histories. This is the way of the 
man who is not able to resist his wife.® For an extremely 
worthy man protects the whole country — such were T'ang 
and Wu. An extremely weak man cannot resist his wife — 
such were Chfie and Chou. 

The sophists common to-day say that Ch‘ie and Chou 
possessed the empire, and that T‘ang and Wu were their 
feudatories—how could there be a greater error I It is like 
a hunchback witch or a lame cripple ^ exalting himself and 
thinking that he had knowledge ! For a state can be captured 

1 Discerns right and. -wrong. 

* Cf. note 13, p. 217, and note 1, p. 218, 

* Chou was led on by Ta-ki, his oonoubine ; and Oh‘ie by his concubine. 

* Cf. note 4, p. 142. 

xvm ON THE CORRECTION OF ERRORS 193 

by force, but the empire cannot be captured by force.^ A state 
can be captured by craft, but tbe empire cannot be captured 
by craft. Tbe man who captures by force may possess a 
state, but he cannot possess the empire. Why is this ? I 
answer : A state is a small thing. A small-minded man can 
possess it. Small methods can gain it. Small power can 
control it. The empire is a large thing. A small man 6 
cannot possess it. Small methods (Tao) cannot gain it. Small 
power cannot control it.^ The Empire is extremely large ; 
unless a man is a Sage, he cannot possess it. 

* ♦ ♦ 

The sophists of the day say ; “ The ancient beneficent 
rulers ® had no corporal punishments, but instead had punish- pmSshment 
ments by altering the clothing. Instead of kneeling on a line, ‘^toiwhed ? 
there was wearing an inky turban ; iastead of cuttiug ofE the 
nose, there was wearing straw fringes ^ ; instead of castration, 
there was cutting ofi the leather knee-pads ; iastead of 
cutting ofi the feet, there was wearing hemp sandals ; instead 
of execution, there was wearing ochre coloured clothes without 
any hems — ^the ancient beneficent government was like this.” 

This is not so. Do you thiak that that government was 

^ This is a legitimate deduction jErom the Confucian teaching, A similar 
statement is found in Mencius, VII, ir, xiii. It is the essence of the Con- 
fuoian philosophy of history. Tho victory of Ts'in showed its falsity. Of. 

H,, chap. XVI, especially p. 286 f . 

* At this point there is inserted the following sentence, which is probably 
an interpolation after the time of Ts'in Shih Hwangti, as it expresses the 
final form of the Oonfuoian philosophy of history which did not appear 
unf^l the Ts'in dynasty's violent rise and dramatic fall gave this interpreta- 
tion : “ A small man can possess a state, but he would inevitably fall." 

* Yao and Shun. 

* On the cap worn by adults. 

0 

194 

T3BDE WOBKS OF HSttOTZE 

xvni’ 

beneficent 1 If so, men certainly did commit crime, and 
not only did they not use corporal punisliments, but also 
they did not use punishments by altering the clothing. There 
is no greater confusion than thinking that if a man has 
committed a crime, his punishments should be directly 
lightened, so that a murderer should not die, a man who has- 
assaulted another should not be punished, so that for an 
extremely great crime the punishment should be extremely 
light — ^the ordinary man does not know that there is anything 
to dislike in such punishment ! 

6 The origin of ail punishment is the restraint of violence, the 
hatred of evil, and the warning against its future occurrence.^ 
That a murderer should not die, or a man who injures 
another should not he punished, is favouring violence and 
being liberal to robbers, not hatred of evil. For punishments 
by altering the clothing are dangerous ; they are not bom 
of the ancient beneficent government, but come from the 
confused and evil present. 

The ancient beneficent government was not thus. All 
the ranks of nobility, and the difierent grades of officials have 
rewards and punishments to repay them for their deeds ; 
as their deeds, so their reward. That one thing should 
lose its appropriate recompense is the beginning of confusion. 
That a man’s virtue should not correspond to his rank ; that 
his ability should not correspond to his official grade ; that 
rewards should not fit merit ; that punishments should not 
fit the crime — ^there is no misfortune greater than this ! In 
ancient times King Wu chastised the monarch of the Shang 

1 Hus is the Confncian penal theory. Of. ff., p. 266 f. 

xvin ON THE COERECTION OE EEEOEB 196 

dynasty ^ ; he Idlled Chon ; he cut ofi his head and hung it 
on a crimson banner. Now chastiamg the violent and ptmish- 
ing the overbearing is the summit of good government. All 
the Kings agreed that a murderer should die, and that whoever 
injures another should be punished. We do not know the 
origin of this idea. When punishment fits the crime there 
is good government ; when it does not fit the crime, there is 
bad government. Hence in good government the punish- 
ments are severe ; in bad government the punishments are 
light. Therefore the crimes committed against a good 
government are severe ; the crimes committed against a bad 
government are light. The History says : Punishments 
at times are light and at times are severe ” ^ — ^this expresses 
what I mean. 

?ic * % 5i: % 

The sophists of the day say ; “ T*ang and Wu could not Were T'acg 
make people obey there orders/’ ® Why is this ? They say : 

*'Ts‘u^ and Yueh® would not admit their government.” 

This is not so. T‘ang and Wu were the best people in the world 
at making prohibitions and commands. T'ang lived in Po,® 

i lit., ** the poaseasor of Shang,” i.©., Chou. 

* Booh of Bistory t V, acxvii, par. 29. 

* Hence •were not perfect. 

* An important state to the south of -what -was then China. 

s A state south-east of what was then China. Both of these states 
were semi-barbarous, and on the edge of the civilized country, hence 
less amenable to the Emperor. The fact probably was that these two 
states never did acknowledge T'ang and Wu for the reason that in their 
days Tb‘u and Yueh were barbarous, beyond the confines of the then 
known world, and were unable to acknowledge any Emperor. 

* A place in what is now eastern Honan. 

196 

THE WORKS OF HStJKTZE 

xvra 

King Wu lived in Hao/ botli places of a liundred The 
empire was united, the feudal princes became their vassals, 
enlightened people all were moved to follow them and yield 
to their influence. How is it that Ts^u and Yueh alone would 
not admit their government ? In governing, those Kings » 
observed the situation and regulated the service of vassals 
accordingly ; according to their distance they graded their 
tribute and oflerings. Why should it be necessary that they 
should all be alike ? Hence the people of Lu * offered bowls ; 
the people of Wei ® offered tubs ; the people of Tsfl ® offered 
7 wine-sldns. If the soil and the situation of peoples 
are different, their utensils and adornments cannot but be 
different. Hence the states of China are alike in clothing and 
in institutions. The Mang, Yi, Rung, and Ti ^ are alike 
in dress, but different in institutions. Nobles granted fiefs 
within the royal domain do royal service ; those granted 
fiefs outside the royal domain do feudal service; on the 
feudal marches they do voluntary service ; the Mang and 
Yi ® do forced service ; the Rung and Ti ® do intexmittent 
service. Those who do royal service offer slaughtered victims ; 

^ A place ia wliat is now south-west Chihli. 

* I.e., very small centres. 

3 T'ang and Wu. 

* A central state ; it was Confucius’ home. 

< An important feudal state occupying southern Chihli and eastern 
Honan. 

* An important state occupying northern Shantung and southern Chihli. 
In each case these are articles in which that state excelled. 

’ Aboriginal tribes on the different borders of civilized China. 

* Aboriginal tribes on the south and east. 

® Aboriginal tribes on the north-west and west, 

3® To the father and grandfather of the Bmi>eror, 

XVIII ON THE COBEECTION OE ERBOES 197 

those who do feudal service ofier sacrifices ^ ; those who do 
voluntary service make ofieriags of thanks ^ ; those who do 
forced service offer tribute ; those who do intermittent 
service acknowledge the king. The ofiering of slaughtered 
victims is daily ; the ofiering of sacrifice is monthly ; the 
ofiering of thanks is seasonal ; the tribute is yearly ; 
the acknowledgment of the king is once a generation.® This 
is what is meant by considering their ciccumstances and 
regulating their service, grading their tribute and offerings 
according to their distance — ^this is the extreme of kingly 
government. 

Moreover, T‘su and Yueh were of the class that made a 
seasonal offering of thanks, or yearly tribute, or acknowledg- 
ment of the king once a generation. Must they necessarily 
have been like the others, and put in the class which made 
daily offerings of slaughtered victims or monthly sacrifices, 
before it could be said that they admitted the Emperor’s 
government 1 This is a doctrine like using the compasses 
on a grindstone.* The saying goes: Shallow, not able 8 
to fathom the deep ; stupid, not able to be acquainted 
with wisdom ; a frog in a pit or well, with whom one cannot 
speak of the happiness of the eastern sea ® ; lean men of the 

1 To the gi'eat-grandfather and great-greai-grandfather of the Emperor, 

3 To the two founders of the race. 

3 Upon his accession. 

*■ Inappropriate ; grindstones wore never round and hence compasses 
could not he used on them. 

» An allusion to Chuangtzo's famous allegory. A well-frog boasted of 
his greatness to the turtle of the eastern sea ; but when the turtle described 
the immensity of the ocean, and that it is not affected by the duration of 
time nor by the volume of w’ater, and hence had great happiness, the frog 
was dumbfounded. 

198 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE . 

xvin 

Did Yao and 
Shun 
abdicate t 

ditches,^ witli whom one is not able to reach up to the heights 
of the govermnent of the Kings— this expresses what I mean. 

1|( * He 9it 

The sophists of the day say ; Yao and Shun abdicated and 
yielded the throne.” ^ This is not so. The emperor’s authority 
and position are the most honourable : he has no enemies 
in the country ; then to whom would he yield ? ® His virtue 
was pure and complete ; his wisdom and Idndness was most 
illustrious. When he faced the south ^ and judged the country, 
all liviag people were moved, obeyed, and yielded to his 
iafluence. The country had no retired officers ® nor any 
neglected good men. WThat was like his acts was right ; 
what was unlike them was wrong. Then why should he 
have yielded ® the empire ? 

The sophists reply : “At death they yielded to another 
dynasty.” This also is not so. When the Sage-Kings were on 

1 Beggars, i.e., sballow tMnIdng. 

• Because Yao passed over his o-vm son, Tau-ebu, and selected Shun as 
hie BucoesBor and gave him the reins of office before he (Yao) died. Similarly 
Shun passed over his son, Shang-chuin, and selected Yu, and gave him the 
throne. Yao and Shun alleged old age as a reason for thus retiring from the 
government before death. Yu’s son succeeded him after his death, and 
the Hsia dynasty then began its long reign. This criticism is found in 
Ohuangtze, xvii. 

• Taking yield in the sense of yielding to another stronger than he. 
Abdication seems to have come to mean being forced to give up the rule 
to someone else, and be a term of reproach. Of. p. 92 f. 

^ On his throne. 

• Eetired, because they could not conscientiously obey the dictates of 
the Emperor. 

• Because he was not able to rule the empire, and had to call in another 
to rule instead. Hsfintze is combating two current definitions of the word 
“ yield " sophistioally included in this statement, which would make Yao 
and Shun inferior rulers. 

xvui ON THE CORRECTION OF ERRORS 1.99 

the throne, they passed decisions on people’s virtue and 
thereby decided their rank; they measured their ability 
and accordingly gave them official position. They did every- 
thing to enable the people to do their duty, and each one to 
gain his appropriate reward. They caused those who were 
unable to do this to control their desire for gain by justice 
(Yi), and to beautify their nature by artificial culture ; then 
they united them as their people. "When the Sage-Kings had 
died, and there was no Sage in the country, then certainly 
there was no one with sufficient virtue to whom the empire 
could be abdicated. If there is a Sage in the country, and he 
is among the Emperor’s descendants, then the empire does 
not leave that family ; the dynasty does not change, 9 
the states do not alter their fealty; the empire is sub- 
missive and turn to him ^ without any difference. What 
change is there if a Yao ^ succeeds Yao ? If there is no 
Sage among his descendants, but if there is one among the 
three Dukes, ^ then it is best that the empire should go to 
them ; they will revive and restore it."* Then the empire is 
submissive ; it turns to him without any difference. If a 
Yao ® succeeds Yao, what change is there ? Only a change 
of dynasty, an alteration of government, is difficult. Hence 
when the Emperor lives, the country all exults ; it is most 
obedient and well-governed ; according to people’s virtue is 

1 The new emperor. 

■ A member of the same family ; no change in dynasty. 

* The Grand Tutor, the Grand Assistant, and the Grand Guardian. Of, 
Book of History t V, xx, 6. 

* The figure is that the empire decays at the death of a Sage -King ; but 
another Sage-King, coming ^ter, revives it, 

® A wifl-n of the same q,ualities and ability, a Sage-King. 

200 

THE WORKS OF HSttNTZE 

xvin 

their rank detennmed. The man who is able to carry ‘the 
responsibility of the empire mnst nevertheless die. He has 
completely carried out the distinctions of the rules of proper 
conduct (Li) and justice (Yi); what need is there in adding 
the virtue of abdication ? 

The sophists answer : He abdicates from old' age and 
decay. This also is not so. His body and vital force, his 
sinews and strength may decay, but his wisdom, his pow^ of 
thought, his power of acceptance and rejection ^ does not decay. 

They answer : ** He is old and not adequate to the labour of 
government and rests from it.” This is also the idea of one 
who is afraid to work. The emperor's authority is extremely 
great, but his person is extremely luxurious; his heart is 
most joyful. He is in nowise forced to act against his will, 
and he does not toil ; in honour he has no superior. His 
clothes and coverings are coloured and variegated, with much 
embroidery ; pearls and jade are added to it as ornamenta- 
tion, His food and drink includes much meat and all delicacies, 
with very fragrant flavours. His feasts are prolonged 
10 the drum is beaten to invite him to eat ; the ‘ Yung ' ® 
is played when removing the five sacrifices.* A hundred 
servants hold the sacrifices ® ; they wait in the western ante- 
rooms. When he holds audience, theie is erected a curtain 
of feather screen ; when he turns his back to the silken screen 
between the door and window and rises, the nobles hasten 

i His power of choice, his will. 

* Many courses and delicacies. 

» An ode, I'V, ii, vii, only used by the Emperor. 

* The food of the Emperor is offered as if it were a sacrificial offering to 
him ; this is the extreme of respectfulness. 

® The food. 

xvin ON THE CORRECTION OE ERRORS 201 

to go below the ball.^ "Wlieix be goes out of tbe inner door, 
tbe witcbes and wizards busy tbemselves,^ When he goes 
out,® the Master of Ceremonies and his assistants busy them- 
selves. When he rides in the Imperial Chariot, there 11 
is a fine rush mat to care for his comfort ; by each side is 
a fragrant flower to care for his sense of smell ; in front 
there are ornamented yokes to care for his sense of sight. 
There is the harmonious sound of little bells ^ ; when going 
slow there are the Wu and Hsiang ® ; when going fast there 
are the Shao and Hu ® to care for his sense of hearing. The 
three dukes respectfully hold the shaft ends and grasp the 
inner reins. ^ The nobles grasp the wheels or steady the 
chariot or lead the horses. The marquises of great states ® 
arrange themselves behind ; the prefects follow them. The 
marquises of small states ® and officers of the first class 
follow them. The soldiers wear their armour and line the 
streets. The common people run ofl and hide ; none of them 
dare to look. At rest the Emperor is like a gi'eat god ; in 
action he is like the Ruler of Heaven.^^ 

^ Audiejice closed. 

* To remove any evil influences from his path. 

K Of the palace. 

* On yoke or arm rest, 

* Names of two pieces of music. 

* Names of two pieces of music ; the Shao was Shun’a music. 

Ornamental reins from the inner side of the team of four horses 

abreast. 

* Rulers of important fiefs. 

* Rulers of smaller fiefs. 

Lit., “ spirit." 

n The Chief of the gods, God. This sentence does not imply that Hsfintee 
beHeves in gods and God ; he is merely using the popular conception as an 
analogy. 

202 

THE WORKS OR HSONTZE 

xvni 

Is there any support for old age and care for decay as 
fine as this ? If an old man would rest, would he have peace 
and joy like this ? Hence I say ; The nobles get old, but 
the Emperor does not get old ; there is abdication of a state, 
but no abdication oi: the empire — ^the ancient and the present 
12 are the same in this respect. Hence to say that Yao 
and Shun abdicated and yielded the throne is a lie ; it is the 
tradition of shallow m inds ; it is the doctrine of low minds ; 
it is an ignorant and erroneous principle ; it is changing the 
small to the big ; the appropriate to the inappropriate ; it 
cannot reach up to the great principles of the empire. 

♦ :i< ♦ Ji< * 

andSto^all sophists of the day say : “ Yao and Shun were not able 

that is to instruct and transform others, Why is this 1 Chu ^ and 
the'm^T^ Hsiang ^ were not transformed by their influence.” ® This 
is not so. When Yao and Shun came to the throne, they were 
excellent at instructing and transforming others. When 
they faced south ^ and judged the empire, all living people 
were moved, obeyed, and yielded to their influence. Then 
if Chn and Hsiang alone were not influenced, this was not 
the fault of Yao and Shun, but the crime of Ohu and Hsiang. 
Yao and Shun were the most virtuous men of the empire ; 
Chu and Hsiang were the most paltry men in the empire, 
insignificant fellows of an hour. The sophists of the day do 

^ The son of Yao, 

* The younger brother of Shun. 

* A Sage should be able to influence all about him, the whole country 
* in fact ; how much more should he be able to influence and transform those 

who stood in the relation of filial subservience to him — ^his son or younger 
brother. 

* On the throne. 

xvni ON THE CORRECTION OF ERRORS 203 

not blame Ch.u and Hsiang, but attack Yao and Skun. Is 
not this extremely erroneous 1 Yi ^ and Feng-men were 
tke best arokers tke country has known, but tkey could not 
bit tke bulls-eye witk a bent bow” and crooked arrow. Wang- 
liang and Ts‘ao-fu were tke best drivers tke country kas 
known, but tkey could not go far witk lame korses and a 
broken ckariot. Yao and Skun were tke best at instructing 
and transforming tkat tke country kas known, but tkey 
could not cause paltry insignificant fellows to be transformed. 
"Wkat age kas not had paltry fellows ? "Wkat time kas not 
bad insignificant fellows 1 From tke tune of Ta‘i-kao ® 
and Sui-jen ® tkere have always been suck. Hence tkoae 
wko originate suck teackings are unfortunate ; tkose wko 
study them sufier tkeir calamities. He wko demoliskes tkem 
gains congratulations. Tke ode says 
“ Tke ills of tke people under us 
Are not sent from Heaven ; 

Tkey speak fair words and tken backbite eack otker ; 
Tkeir numerous quarrels are from men ” — 
this expresses wkat I mean.'* 

♦ 4 : * 4 : 

' A legendary aroher. 

• Another designation of J^'hsi, who is the first emperor of Chinese 
historians, placed about the beginning of the tlnrd millennium b.o. 

® The alleged first producer of fire, which he did by rubbing two sticks 
together. He is supposed to have preceded T‘ai-hao ; another theory is 
that he followed T‘ai*hao — ^whieh seems to be what Hshntze implies here. 
By his use of these two names, Hsuntze means, “ From the beginning of 
the race." 

* £ook of Odes, II, iv, is, 7. 

204 

THE WORKS OE HStiNTZE 

XVIII 

Were 
ancient 
burials 
mean ? 

18 The sophistB of the day ^ say : “ In ancient times they gave 
princes mean burials ; coffins were only three inches thick ; 
there were only three thicknesses of grave-clothes and 
coverings over the corpse ; when buried in the field the 
grave did not disturb the field, for they did not raise a mound. 
The decadent present gives sumptuous burials and ornaments 
the coffin, so it raises a mound.” This teaching does not 
rise to the state of knowing the methods (Too) of good 
government, and it is ignorant of the reasons for raising a 
mound or doing the opposite. 

All those who rob men must have a reason. If it is not 
because they do not have enough, then it is because the 
wealthy have too much. But the Sages caused their people 
all to be rich and thoroughly satisfied, and did not allow anyone 
to have too much above what was right. Hence robbers did 
not rob, and thieves did not take things. Hogs and pigs 
vomited beans and millet ® ; farmers and merchants all 
could give away from their stored up wealth. The customs 
were beautiful ; men and women did not take things on the 
roads, and the people were ashamed to pick up anything 
that had been dropped. Hence Confucius said : If the 
empire has the right way {Tao\ the robbers will be the first 
to change. Although a body were covered with pearls and 
jade, although embroidery filled the inner coffin and yellow 
gold filled the outer cofiin, although cinnabar were added 
to it, and it was made heavy with copper, although rhinoceros 
horn and ivory were like trees,® although cornelian and the 

» Here probably referring to Micios ; this was bis doctrine. 

* There was such abundance. 

® In tbe grave ; numerous. 

xvm OK THE COBRECTIOK OE ERROKS 205 

dragon’s moustaclie ^ were like tiieir glittering fruit, 14 
yet men wotild not dig into tke grave.^ Wky was that 1 
Because tke idea of seeking for gain was suppressed, and the 
shame of transgressing one’s duty was great. 

But the present is evil and is the opposite of that. The 
ruler does not keep the law, causing the ruled to act lawlessly ; 
the man of wisdom does not get to think deeply, the man 
of ability does not get to rule, the worthy man does not get 
position. When things are like this, on the one hand the 
natural endowment of man is lost, on the other hand the 
benefits of the earth are lost, and in addition the harmony 
of men is lost. Hence all things fail, riches are hid, and 
calamity arises. Kings and dukes suffer because they do 
not have enough, and the common people freeze, are hungry, 
and starve. Then Chfies and Chous are everywhere and 
robbers and thieves rob so as to endanger even the rulers. 
Accordingly there will he bestial actions and the avarice 
of tigers and wolves. In order to pay the salary ^ of great 
men they will have little children roasted.* When this is 
the situation, what more is it to dig up men’s graves and 
snatch the jewels out of their mouths and seek for gain 'i 
If a man were thns mean and he were buried, he would 
certainly be dug up. How could he get a peaceful burial 1 
They ® will eat his fiesh and gnaw his bones.® 

1 Probably the name of a gem. 

» To rob it. 

• Lit., “ dried meat,” which was the ancient salary of a teacher. 

•* Avarioiousuess. 

® Those whom he has oppressed. 

• Prom hatred. 

206. 

THE WOBKS OE HSttNTZE 

XYIII 

Then to say that in very ancient times burials were mean, 
and hence graves were never dng up ; but in the evil present 
burials are sumptuous, hence graves are robbed,^ is the 
mistake of an especially "wicked man who is confased by 
wrong doctrines, so that he cheats stupid people and causes 
them to sink into the mire, so that they illicitly gain profit ^ — 
this is what is called great wickedness. It is said : He 
endangers others but himself is safe ; he injures others but 
himself gains profit — ^this expresses what I mean. 

* ♦ * ♦ ♦ 

wmtte Your teacher® Sungtze ^ says: “To see clearly that to 
meet with insult is no disgrace "will prevent people from 
disgrace quarreling. Men all consider it a disgrace to meet with 
7 insult, hence they quarrel. When they know that it is no 
disgrace to be insulted, they will not fight.” 

In answer I say : Then is it also according to men’s feelings 
not to hate insult ? They ® replied : " Hate it but do not 
consider it a disgrace.” I answered ; If that is the case, you 
will certaialy not gain what you desire. All men’s quarrels 
must be explained because of what they hate, not 
16 because of what they consider a disgrace. Now can it be that 
the actor ® or dwarf or familiar servant who is cursed and 
insulted and yet does not retaliate, does so because he knows 

^ A reference to Micius' advocacy of simple burials, 

* By saving on burials. 

* A discussion -with two or three of Sungtze’s disciples, retacl’cel and 
added to this chapter, but plainly by Hsiintze. 

* Of. p. 185, note 1. Simgtze’s younger contemporary, yin-wen-tze, 
also had this teaching. 

® The disciples of Sungtze. 

* Actors were considered the dregs of society. 

xvBi ON THE COBRECTION OF EEROM 207 

that being insulted is no disgrace ? The man who does not 
retaliate, does so because he does not mind iasnlt. Now 
suppose a man should come in through the sewer and steal 
another man’ s pigs ?: then the owner would draw his sword and 
halberd and drive him out, and the thief could not escape 
death or wounds . How could this be because the owner under- 
stood the loss of his pigs as an insult ? If this man does not 
shrink from a fight, it is because he hates to lose Ms pigs. 

Although he should consider insult no disgrace, if he does 
not fight, it is because he does not mind losing Ms pigs. 

Although he should know that insult is no disgrace, if he hates 
to lose his pigs, he will certainlj fight. Then whether he 
fights or not does not depend on whether he is disgraced or 
' not, but whether he hates to lose Ms pigs or not. 

' Now your master Sungtze cannot understand that people 
hate insult and wants to persuade people that it is no disgrace. 

I Is not this extremely erroneous ! Although he had a mouth 
and tongue like a bell and clapper, it would be of no use. 

If he does not know it is of no use, then he is not wise. If he 
does know it is of no use, then he is consciously cheating 
people. Then he is not benevolent (Jen). There is no 
shame greater than not to be benevolent (Jen) or unwise. If 
he thinks it is beneficial to people and is really of no benefit to 
people, then he snfiexs a great disgrace and has to retire 
there is no doctrine more defective than this ! 

Your teacher Sun^ze says : To receive insult is no dis- The only 
grace.2 In reply to Mm I say : All discussions must establish 

Way of die 

1 Because Ms doctrine forbids fighting. Kings. 

* The same OMnese word, translated “ disgrace " in the preceding 
paragraphs is translated “ shame in this paragraph. 

208 

THE WORKS 0¥ HStJlJTTZE 

XVUI 

a point of reference, and then only can they be worth any- 
thing. Without a point of reference, right and wrong cannot 
he discriminated, and the argument cannot be settled, Eor 
what we have heard called, ‘‘ The greatest point of reference 
16 in the world,” whence the boundaries of right and wrong, 
rank and title, terms and resemblances, arise, is the 
government of the Kings. All talking and discussions about 
realities and terms have the Sage-Kings for a model. Then 
the discrimination between glory and shame made by the 
Sage-Kings is right. This distinction has two criteria. There 
is just (7^) glory and there is the glory of circumstances. 
There is just (Yi) shame and there is the shame of circum- 
stances. A cultivated will, many virtuous actions, and 
brilliant thoughts — ^this is the glory which comes from within 
oneself; this is called just (Yi) glory. High noble rank, 
great tribute,^ or emoluments,* and surpassing power — ^above 
there are the emperor andthe feudal nobles, and below there 
are the cabinet ministers, the prime minister, the officers 
and the prefects — ^thia is the glory which comes from without ; 
this is called the glory of circumstances. Licentiousness, 
filthiness, transgression of duty, evil principles, pride, 
oppression, and avarice — ^this is the shame which comes from 
within oneself; this is called just (Yi) shame. 1 Revilings, 
insults, pullings of the hair, beatings with the hand, beatings 
by heavy or light rods, cuttings off of the knee cap, decapita-' ; 
tions, quarterings, being led in chains, splittings of the i 

tongue — ^this is shame which comes from without ; this is i 

called the shame of circumstances. These are the two criteria 

1 Befeiring to the Emperor or feudal nobles. 

* Boferring to the high officials. 

XVIII ON THE CORRECTION OE ERRORS 209 

of glory and shame. Hence the superior man can have the 
shame of circumstances, but cannot have, just (Ji) shame. 

The mean-minded man can have the glory of circumstances 
but cannot have just (Yi) glory. There is nothing to hinder 
him who has the shame of circumstances from being a Yao ; 
there is nothing to hinder him who has the glory of circum- 
stances from being a Chde. Only a superior man can have 
both just (Yi) glory and the glory of circumstances ; only a 
mean-minded man can have both just (Yi) shame and the 
shame of circumstances. This is the discrimination of glory 
and shame. The Sage-Kings had this for their method; 
officers and prefects had this for their way (Tao ) ; the officials 
kept it; among the people it became custom; all ages 
cannot change it. 

Now, according to your teacher Svmgtze, this is not so. 17 
He alone wrests the facts to suit himself, and seeks in one 
day to alter them. His doctrine certainly cannot be carried 
out. It is like rolling mud into balls to stop a river or the sea, 
or to uphold Moimt T‘ai ^ by pigmies. It will fall down and 
break to pieces without waiting an instant. If the two or 
three disciples who admire your master Sungtze, do not stop 
it, you will perhaps injure yourselves. 

sH * 

Your master, Sungtze, says ; Men’s passions seek little, 
but everyone thinks that his own passions seek much.” ^ This littlo ? 
is an error. Hence he leads all his disciples, splits hairs in his 
discussions, makes clear his examples and terms, and wants 
to make men understand that there passions seek little. In 

^ Oa the five great mountains of China. 

» Cf . p. 293 f. 

r 

210 

THE WOBHS OE HSUNTZE 

xviii 

reply to him I say : Then is it so that in men’s passions their 
eyes do not desire very much colour, their ears do not desire 
' very much sound, their mouths do not desire very much 
taste, their noses do not desire very much smell, their bodies 
do not desire very much idleness ^ ; is it that men’s emotions 
do not desire these five extremes ? The disciples replied : 
Men’s passions are really like that. 

I answer : If this is so, then his doctrine is certainly not 
true. To say that men’s passions do desire things, but in 
these five extremes they do not desire much is like saying that 
men’s passions desire wealth and position, but do not desire 
goods ; or that they love beauty, but dislike Si-shih.® The 
ancients thought otherwise, i.e. that men’s passions desire 
much, and do not desire little. Hence they rewarded men by 
18 riches and plenty, and pimished them by reduction or 
taking away their goods. In this respect all the Kings were 
alike. Hence the first class of “ worthies ” enjoyed the 
emolument of the empire,^ the next class of “ worthies ” 
enjoyed the emoluments of one state, ^ the lowest class of 

worthies ” enjoyed the emoluments of fields and cities,® and 
honest and upright people had plenty of clothing and food. 
How your master, Sungtze, thinks that their passions desire 
little and do not desire much. Then did the early Kings 
reward men by what they did not desire, and punish them by 

^ Evidently Sungfcze'tj argument was that men do not like the extremes 
of bright colour, loudneBS, etc., hence their passions seek moderation, not 
much, simplicity not multiplicity. 

* A beautiful concubine of the King of Wu, sent him by Yueb. 

® Became emperor. 

Became dukes or marquises. 

® Became ofiScers or prefects. 

xvm ON THE COHBECTION OE ERROES 211 

what they did desire ? There is no confusion greater than 
this 1 Now your master, Sungtze, has a commanding 
presence and loves to persuade people ; he gathers disciples, 
establishes a school, and writes essays. So his persuasion 
cannot avoid making the best of governments the worst 
of governments.* Is not this extremely erroneous ! 

^ The goal of philosophy is good gOTBinment. 

BOOK XIX 

ON THE RULES OE PROPER CONDUCT (XI) 

Whence do the rules of proper conduct (L%) arise % Man ^ 1 
by birth has desire. When desire is not satisfied, then he U arises 
cannot be without a seeking for satisfaction. When this of 

seeking for satisfaction is without measure or of limits, then 
there cannot but be contention. When there is contention, desires, 
there will be disorder ^ ; when there is disorder, then there 
will be poverty. The former Kings ^ hated this confusion 
hence they established the rules of proper conduct {Li) and 
justice (Pi) in order to set limits to this confusion, to educate, 
and nourish men’s desires, to give opportimity for this seeking 
for satisfaction, in order that desire should never be extin- 
guished by things, nor should things he used up by desire ; 
that these two should support each other and should continue 
to exist. This is whence the rules of proper conduct {Id) 
arise. 

Thus the rules of proper conduct {Li) are to educate and Li is to 
nourish. Meat, grain, the blending of the five flavours, are 

^ Begiiming here, Sze-ma Ch'ien quotes this passage in his Eiaiorical 
Record, Chapter on Rites. He quotes almost verbally, omitting a clause 
here and there, and making just enough changes and improvements on 
this text to make it plain that it was original with Hsiintze. 

* This word, » indwies the ideas of a confused social state, bad govern- 

ment, and lack of prosperity. 

* The ancient monarchs who were supposed to have established China's 
social order and civilization. 

2U 

THE WORKS OK HStJNTZB 

XIX 

that whereby the mouth is educated and nourished. The 
pepper, the orchid, fragrance and perfume are that whereby 
the nose is educated and nourished. Engraving, cut gems, 
engraved metal, elegant compositions are that whereby the 
eye is educated and nourished. Bells, drums, pipes, stone 
chimes, lutes, lyres, reed organs are that whereby the ear is 
educated and nourished. Large houses, deep temples, fine 
rush mats, elevated beds, bedrooms, low tables and bamboo 
mats ^ are that whereby the body is nourished. Hence the rules 
of proper conduct (Ia) are to educate and nourish. "When 
the superior man has gotten its education and nourishment, 
he also esteems its distinctions. 

The sooki What are meant by its distinctions ? There are the 
totmotionaof classes of the nohle and the base ; there are the inequalities 
of the senior and the younger ; there is what is appropriate 
to those who are poor and those who are rich, to those who 
are unimportant and those who are important. Hence the 
imperial chariot ^ has a fine rush mat wherewith to take 
care of the emperor’s body ; by his side is carried a fragrant 
flower wherewith to take care of his sense of smell ; in front 
g it has ornamented yokes to care for his sense of sight ; 
the harmonious sound of little bells,® when going slow the Wu 
and Hsiang,^ when going fast the Shao ® and Hu ® are to care 
for his sense of hearing ; the dragon flag with nine scallops 

^ Like those used by the Japanese to-day. 

® Used in going to the sacrifice to Heaven — the chariot of state , 

® On yoke or arm-rest. 

* King Wu's music. 

* The music of Shun ; it captivated Confucius so much that he forgot 
the taste of meat for three months. 

* The music of T‘ang. 

XIX ON THE KULES OF PROPER COKDUCT (i:i) 216 

on the lower border to refresh his spirits ; a sleeping 
rhinoceros/ a male tiger/ alligator adorned harness, a silken 
canopy/ dragon yoke-ends, to care for his majesty. Hence 
the horses of the imperial chariot must be very trustworthy 
and well trained, and then only driven — ^thus caring for his 
safety. He has very capable braves, willing to die, who have 
agreed to be temperate, in order to care for his life. Very 
prudent men expend his money and use it in order to care 
for his wealth. He has very sagacious men who are 3 
respectful and courteous in order to preserve his calmness. 
He has very discreet men who observe the rules of proper 
conduct (Li)y justice (Yi), and all principles of refinement, 
in order to care for his emotions. Hence if it appears that 
a man is only seeking for a livelihood,^ he shall certainly die. 

If it appears that he is only seeking gain,® he shall certainly 
meet with injury. If he is a lazy careless scholar, seeking 
only a quiet life,® he shall certainly be in danger. If he 
thinks that emotional pleasure is joy,"^ he shall certainly be 
destroyed. For if a man concentrates on the rules of proper 
conduct {Li) and justice (Yi), then he will gain both ® ; if he 
concentrates on satisfying the emotional nature, then he will 
lose both. Hence the Confucian doctrine causes men to 

1 Ornaments on the chariot. 

“ Another ornament on the chariot. 

’ The description in Sze-ma Oh'ien's Historical Becord omits this item. 

* Soldiering as a means of livelihood, unwilling to die or be temperate 
among the bodyguard of the emperor. 

6 Unable to use money prudently. 

® Unwilling to be respectful and courteous. 

’ True enjoyment, not knowing the rules of proper conduct. 

* Both the rules of proper conduct and justice, and also the emotional 
nature. 

216 THE WOBKS OF HStNTZE xix 

gain both ; the Mician doctrine ^ causes men to lose both — 
this is the difference between the Confucian and Mician 
doctrines. 

XV, 12 2 The rules of proper conduct (Li) are the greatest thing 
Li IB the in government and in maldng social distinctions ; they 
are the foundation of strength and security : they are the 
government, of being majestic ; they are the focus of honour. 

Kings and dukes gained the empire by following them. By 
not following them, they lost their territory.® Hence 
strong armour and trained armies were insufficient to gain 
virtue ; high city walls and deep moats were insufficient to 
make those rules feared. If they followed this principle 
(Tao) ^ they were successful ; if they did not follow this 
principle (Tao), then they failed. 

The people of Tsffi ® use shark skin and rhinoceros hide 
XV, 13 for armour, as hard as metal or stone, spears of steel 
Wan,® sharp as a bee’s sting ; they are quick and 
not cultivate active, as fast as the whirlwind ; yet its army was almost 

^ Doctrine of Mo Ti ; this attack on Micius, which is so characteristic 
of Hsiintze, is omitted in the Historical Record, 

* At this point the Historical Record, ^ inserts a section from 
Book XV of Efstintze, and then goes on quoting Book XIX. This section 
seems to have been displaced from this point in our present text of Hshntze, 
and consequently I have inserted it here. There are variations in the 
text of the Historical Record and Sshntze which show that the Historical 
Record tried to polish up Hsftntze’s text, and that this passage is original 
with Hsiintze. 

® Lit., “ fell from the local shrines of the deities of the land and grains.” 

* The principle of Li. 

® The state under which Hsiintze held office during the latter part of his 
life, 

“ The district of Nan Yang, in southern Honan. 

XIX OJT THE BXJLES OP PEOPER CONDUCT (X/) 217 

destroyed at Ch^tii-slia ^ and T‘ang Mieh ^ was Idlled. Chuang 
CKdao ® arose and Ts‘u was divided iato three or four. How 
could it be said not to have strong armour and trained troops ? 

The reason for its defeat was that it did not tmite the people 
by this principle (Tao) * The Ju ® and the Ying ® were thought 
to be obstructions very difficult to surmount ; the Yangtze 
and Han ^ were thought to be moats ; the state was bounded 
by the Teng ® forest and bordered by the Pang Ch‘eng 
mountains ® ; yet the army of Ts'in came and captured Yen 
and Ying^^ like shaking a rotten stick. How could it be 
said not to have any firm ramparts, narrow passes, or mountain 
defiles to hinder the army ? The reason for its defeat was 
that it did not unite the people by this principle {Tao)}^ 

Chou disemboweled Pi-kan,^® imprisoned the Viscount of ^chou!^ 

1 Location uncertain. Possibly Oh*ui Hsiang ^ in P‘ei Chuia ^ 

^^^•eseiit Hsiu Ghou, northern Anhuei. In this battle, which occurred in 
301 B.o., the armies of Ts‘i, Han, and Wei together attacked Ts*u and 
killed the T*bu general. It is said that over a thousand men were killed 
in the battle. 

^ The Ts‘u general, 

** At first a robber chieftain, then the general of Ts'u. 

^ That of the rules of proper conduct. 

® A river in Honan, tributary of the Huai. 

A river in Honan. 

’ A tributary of the Yangtze, joining it at Hankow. 

® in the south of Honan. 

» On the north boundary of Ts'u, literally “ square city walls 
A principality in what is now northern Hupeh, south of I-OVeng-hsien. 

The ancient capital of Ts'u, just north of the present Chiang-ling- 
hsieu, Ching-ohou-fu, in southern Hupeh. 

1® That of the rules of proper conduct. 

1® A relative of Chou. He is said to have remonstrated with Chou upon 
his excesses ; whereupon the latter cried, “ They say that a Sage has seven 
orifices in his heart (the seat of the understanding). Let us sec if this is the 
case with you." He then caused Pi-kan to he disemboweled before him. 

218 

THE WORKS OP HSfiNTZB 

XIX 

and invented the torture of the roasting pillar ^ ; he 
incessantly commanded executions ; his ministers and 
subordinates trembled — ^none of them were sure of their lives. 
Yet when the army of Chou ® came, his orders were not obeyed 
by his subordinates ; and he could not make use of his own 
people. How could it be said that his commands were not 
stern or his punishments were infrequent ? The reason for 
his fall was that he did not unite his cotmtry by this principle 
(Tao),^ 

The Kings The soldiers of ancient times had only spears, shields, bows, 
because they and arrows ; yet enemy states submitted without attempting 
cultivated Lt, ^ battle. They did not build inner or outer city walls ; 

XV, 14 they did not dig moats. They did not establish outposts ; 
they did not make much of strategems. Yet states were 
peaceful, unafraid of outside enemies, and secure. There 
was no other reason bnt that they knew the right way of 
action {Too) ® and were fair to the people ; at the right season 
they employed the people,® and sincerely loved them ; the 
subject accorded with his ruler like a shadow to its object 
or an echo to its source. If anyone did not obey the law, then 

^ One of the foremost nobles. Kor protesting against the evil courses of 
his master, he was thrown into prison. King Wu released him, and raised 
a tumulus to Pi-kan. The Viscount of Chi retired to Corea, on the ground 
that he could not serve a sovereign who was a usurper. The authorship 
of part of the Book of History is attributed to him. 

® A copper pillar was greased and placed over hot coals j the culprit had 
to walk across the pillar and fell into the coals. This phrase may also he 
translated “ the punishment of the cupboard 
^ Of the new dynasty of Chou. 

* That of Li. 

® According to Li, 

® On public works or in the army. 

XIX OK THE ROLES OE PROPER CONDUCT {LI) 219 

only did they visit him with piinishnient. Hence they only 
needed to punish one man and the whole country obeyed. 

The criminal did not blame his superior, for he knew that the 
fault was his own. Eor this reason punishments were few, 
yet the ruler’s majesty and the fear of him went everywhere. 

There was no other reason than that they followed this principle 
(Tao),^ In ancient times the emperor Yao in governing the 
whole country killed one man ® and punished two men,® 
and then the whole country was well ruled. It is said : The 
majesty and fearfulness of the ruler should be great, but it 
should not be tried out ; punishments should be established, 
but not used — ^this expresses my meaning.^ 

The ® code of proper conduct {Id) has three sources ; 3 

Heaven and Earth gave birth to it— this is a source ; our The three 

, . „ . . . 1 • • J.-U soluroes of Lt, 

ancestors made it fit the situation — ^this is a source ; tne 

princes and teachers formed it — ^this is a source. Without 

Heaven and Earth, how could it be born ? Without our 

^ That of Li. 

» He imprisoned Kun, the father of Yu, for iifo on Mt. Yu. Of. Book of 
History, II, i, iii, 12, for Yao’s treatment of these three oriminals. Kun 
was disobedient and failed to restrain the floods. The passage in the Booh 
of History may also be interpreted that Kun was executed ; this seems 
to have been Hsiintze'a interpretation. Legge prefers to take the former 
interpretation that Kun was merely imprisoned, because it would be unlikely 
that Yao should kill the father of Yu. 

* He banished the Minister of Works to a place in the northern extreme 
of his Idngdom, Yu-chow, and confined Huan-tou on Mt. Taung, Cf. the 
Booh of History, loc. oit. 

* This is the end of the section from Book XV ; I have followed the 

Historical Record, in continuing from Book XIX. , . , „ . ^ . 

® I^om here on section is quoted by the Ritual of ihe 8emor Tat 
as well as the Histortcah Record. 

220 ■ 

THE WOEKS OT HStJNTZB 

XIX 

ancestors, how could it be produced ? Without princes and 
teachers, how could it be given form ? If one of these were 
lacking, men would be without peace. Hence the Code of 
proper conduct (Li) on the one hand serves Heaven ^ and on 
the other Barth ^ ; it honours our ancestors and magnifies 
the princes and teachers — ^this is how it serves the three 
sources of the code of proper conduct (Li), Hence the Kings ^ 
have Heaven for their first ancestor ® ; the feudal nobles 
dare not move or replace the family tablets ; the officers and 
prefects have a fixed ancestral hall.^ They are distinguished 
by their honourable origin; an honourable origin is the 
source of virtue.® The sacrifice to Heaven is limited to the 
Emperor ; the sacrifices to the gods of the land belong to 
the feudal nobles down to the officers and prefects. 

4 That whereby the honourable are distinguished is that they 
serve the honourable deities ; and the lowly serve the lowly 
deities. It is proper that the great should have the great 
deities, and the small the small deities. Hence he who 

^ Hero probably thought of as the impersoiml source of humanity — a 
tacit acceptance of the Confucian cosmology. 

® The Emperors. 

® Prince Tsi, Shun's IHinister of Agriculture, was the high progenitor 
of the Chou dynasty, and by them made the representative of Heaven. 
Heaven being impersonal, was unable to receive worship, and so each 
dynasty made its ancestor the representative of Heaven, to whom worship 
was offered together with Heaven. Another interpretation of this arrange- 
ment is that it was the result of a syncretism of ancestor worship and 
nature worship. 

* A fixed clan relationship and descent. 

® The Commentary on the Spring and Autumn by Ku-liang quotes this 
sentence and those following. 

XIX ON THE RULES OB’ PROPER CONDUCT (I/) 221 

possesses the empire ^ serves seven generations ^ ; he who 
possesses one state ® serves five generations * ; he who has 
territory which sends forth five chariots ® serves three genera- 
tions ; he who has territory of two chariots serves two 
generations ® ; he who eats from the labour of his hands does 
not achieve the establishment of an ancestral temple. That 
which distinguishes those whose accomplishments are great is 
that they transmit great blessings to their descendants : 
those ‘ whose accomplishments are small transmit small 
blessings. 

At the great sacrifice,'^ on the upper side of the altar there 
is water ® in the wine vessel ; in the three-legged flesh vessel 
there is raw fish ; in front ® there is the meat soup — ^this 
is honouriug the first food and drink. In the seasonal sacrifice, 

1 The emperor. 

® Seven generations of ancestors. The text says “ ten generations ", 
hnt those early writers who q^uote this passage, the Commentary of Ku-liang, 
the Ta Tai Li, and the Historical Record, have “ seven generations ", and 
so we follow them. The emperor has seven shrines for the worship of seven 
generations of ancestors in the ancestral temple ; one shrine for the high 
progenitor and shrines for the six proximate generations of ancestors. Cf. Li 
Ki, XX, 5. 

® A duke or marquis. 

Of ancestors. 

® A place of 10 li (3| miles) sent out one chariot, without about seventy-five 
foot-soldiers. “ Five chariots " would refer to a " prefect ", 

® Ho establishes two shrines to two generations of ancestors. This is the 
" ofScer”, 

’ The triennial worship of the early ancestors. 

® Used because water is more ancient than wine, hence a more primitive 
form of worship. In China, as everjTvhere, the rites were conservative, and 
illustrate the most ancient customs, 

® On the side next the worshipper. 

Made without salt, as in extremely ancient days. 

The Bites 
honour the 
ancient and 
follow one's 
liMng, 

224 

THE WORKS OF HStlNTZE 

XIX 

on the upper side of the altar there is water in the wine vessel, 
but wine and spirits are used^; in front there are two 
varieties of panicled millet, but rice and spiked millet is 
5 eaten. At the monthly sacrifice, the meat soup is 
tasted, but other viands are eaten — ^this is honouring the 
original® but following one’s own liking. Honouring the 
original is called elegant ; following one’s own liking is called 
doing that which is reasonable. When both accord, the 
ceremony becomes beautiful, and returns to uniformity with 
the primitive. This is called the most excellent of all.® Eor 
it is for one and the same reason that the wine vessel on the 
upper side of the altar contains water, the three-legged meat 
dish contains raw fish, the meat dish contains the meat soup.* 
It is for the same reason ® that at a great marriage the father 
does not give the marriage cup to his son, that in the great 
temple the impersonator of the dead is ofiered food,® that 
when first dead the corpse is not even put in a cheap coffin.^ 
It is for the same reason that in the imperial chariot ® there 

1 Water is offered, but wine is used in the accompanying banquet. 

* The ancient or original kind of food. 

® What is both in accord with antiquity and satisfies man's present likings 
is the most excellent form of conduct or ritual. 

* To be like ancient times. Probably these are extremely ancient 
ritual forms. 

® To “ honour the original ” j more recent customs were different and 
not followed ; as for example the ancient custom was not .to encoffin, but 
to bury the dead on a mat, hence when first dead, the corpse is not 
encoflSned at all. 

* At the ancestral sacrifice a youth of the line of the dead impersonated 
him. 

’ Only washed and dressed, and put on a mat. 

* Used to go to the sacrifice to Heaven, the chariot of state. 

xrx ON THE EXILES OE PEOPEE CONDUCT (LI) 223 

should be plain screens, that in tbe sacrifice to Heaven, tbe 
emperor sbonld wear a sackcloth cap, and that in mourning 
apparel the hemp girdles should at first be worn loose. It is 
for the same reason that in the three years’ mourning,^ 6 
the crying is without interruption, that in the Pure Temple,* 
one singer lines out an ode and three others follow, that 
only one bell is hung,* that the “ fu ” drum is beaten as in 
ancient times, that the Vermillion string passes throng the 
hole in the lute.^ 

The 

All rites and rules of proper conduct (Li) begin in accumu- TOrfection of 
lating rules ; they are perfected in becoming beautiful and 
end in producing joy. Hence when they have reached? 
perfection, men’s emotions and sense of beauty are both fully 
e 2 £pressed. The rite is of the second degree when either the 
emotion or the sense of beauty overcomes the other. It is 
of the lowest degree when it reverts to the state of emotion 
and returns to its primitive state. 

Li is that whereby Heaven and Earth unite,® whereby the 
sun and moon are bright, whereby the four seasons are principle, 
ordered, whereby the stars move in the courses, whereby 
rivers flow, whereby all things prosper, whereby love and 
hatred are tempered, whereby joy and anger keep their 
proper place. It causes the lower orders ® to obey, and the 
upper orders to be illustrious ; through a myriad changes 

^ iPor parents ; actually only 26 or 27 months. 

“ The ancestral temple of the Chou emperors, 

3 In that temple. 

* Hole in lute through which strings pass to the nuts. 

® Li is here equated to the Tao, the principle whereby Heaven and 
Earth unite to produce all things. 

* Of men. 

224 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

XIX 

it prevents going astray. But if one departs from it, he will 
be destroyed.^ Is not Li the greatest of all principles ? When 
it is established grandly, it becomes the centre of all, and 
the whole world will not be able to subtract from or add to 
it. Its source and aim accord with one another. Its end 
and beginning reach each other. It is most beautiful, but 
preserves the distinctions.* It can be most closely sorutinked, 
and will be found to be explicable. When the country 
follows it, there is good government and prosperity ; when 
it is not followed there is anarchy and calamity, He who 
follows it is safe ; he who does not follow it is in danger. 
He who follows it will be preserved; he who does not 
follow it will be destroyed. The small-minded man cannot 
fathom this. 

The principle of Li is truly deep ; if the discussions of 
and makea “ hardness and whiteness ” or “ likeness and unlikeness ’’ ^ 
the Sage. -^hey are submerged. Its principle is truly great if 

unauthorizedly made laws or depraved doctrines enter, they 
are destroyed. Its principle is truly high; if tyrannous, 
remiss, insolent people who despise the common people and 
think they are exalted, enter, they fall. For when the plumb- 
line ^ is truly laid out, one cannot be deceived as to whether 

* The quotation by the Bitual of the Senior Tai stops here. 

® Between superior and inferior, etc. 

^ Cf. p. 49, notes 3 and 4. 

* Lit. “ string and ink.” Chinese carpenters ink a string, fasten one end 
to a sharpened nail stuck in a board, and hold the other end taut ; then 
snap the string to make a straight mark along the hoard— this is the instru- 
ment referred to ; hut for the sake of Western readers who may not he 
familiar with this instrument, I haTo called it a plumb-line, which instru- 
ment may also be denoted. 

XIX ON THE EXILES OF PEOPER CONDUCT (ZZ) 226 

a thing is crooked or straight ; when the balances ^ are truly 
suspended, one cannot be cheated in weight; when the 
compass and square are truly applied, a person cannot be 
cheated as to squareness or roundness ; when the superior 
man has investigated into Li, he cannot be cheated as to 
what is false. For the plumb-line is the extreme of 8 
straightness ; the balances are the extreme of equableness ; 
the compass and square are the extreme of squareness and 
roundness : the rules of proper conduct (Li) are the utmost 
of human morality (Tao). Moreover those who do not follow 
the rules of proper conduct (lA) neither are satisfied with it, 
are people without a direction *in life; they who follow the 
rules of proper conduct (Li) and are satisfied with it are 
gentlemen who have a direction to their life. To be able to 
meditate deeply in the rules of proper conduct (Li) is to be 
able to reflect ; to be able to keep from deviating from the 
rules of proper conduct (Li) is to have the power to be firm. 
He who is able to think deeply and to be firm and adds to 
that a love of Li, is a Sage. For as heaven is the utmost in 
height, the earth is the utmost in depth, the boundless ^ 
is the utmost in breadth, so the Sage is the utmost in morality. 
(Tao). Hence the student who resolutely studies Li becomes 
a Sage ; without especially studying it, he is a person without 
direction. 

^ Lit., “ steelyard “ — wooden stick suspended near one end, witli 
the article to he weighed hung on a hook on the short end, and balanced 
by an iron bob bung from a string on the longer end, which is moved along 
the arm of the steelyard until it balances, its place then indicates the proper 
weight. By suspending this instrument improperly, incorrect weight 
results. 

* The four directions, east, west, south, and north. 

Q 

XTX 

226 THE WORKS OE HStJNTZE 

ObservaBce 
of lA is the 
greatest 
thing in 
character. 

The 

emhellish.- 
ment and 
simplification 
of ceremony. 

9 

. The man who observes the rules of proper conduct (Li) 
considers wealth and things as that which proper conduct 
uses ; he considers the division into the noble and base as 
the 'adornment of society ^ ; he considers the many and the 
few. as diEerent classes ^ ; he considers the embellishment 
or the simplification of conduct as the important thing.^ 
■ ■ A, rite (Li) ® is embellished when its beauty is great, but 
its emotional content is small. A rite (Li) is simplified when 
its beauty is small and its emotional content is great. A rite 
reaches, the mean when its beauty and emotional content are 
related as inner and outer, when the visible actions and the 
inner emotions go along together and revolve around each 
other. Hence the superior man when dealing with superiors 
reaches the grand heights ^ ; when dealing 'with inferiors 
he- makes it ^ very simple ; but when dealing with equals he 
keeps to the mean.® Walkmg, fast riding, galloping, and 
furious galloping, are not exempt from this.^ This is the 
si.iperior man’s terrace and his palace,® If a man keeps 

^ Produced by tlie rules of proper conduct. 

® To know in proper conduct. 

“ A pieqe of ritual conduct, whether in the temple or at court, or merely 
in meeting a friend on the street. 

^ Oi Li; he reaches its embellished state. 

“ LL 

* Of ritualistic conduct. Li was extended to the proper greeting of people, 
the proper honorific appellation in conyersation, such as speaking of oneself 
as “ the stupid one ”, etc., a form used to superiors only ; or such embellish* 
ment could be omitted entirely, as when dealing with inferiors ; or only a 
moderate amount used, as in dealing with equals. The important thing 
is to use the right amount. 

’ IBVom the application of the rules of proper conduct ; they reach to 
the whole of life. 

* The limits of his actions ; he is always in the realm of the rules of 
proper conduct as if it were his home. Cf. p. 119 fpr a similar statement. 

XIX ON THE EXJLES OE PROPEE CONDUCT {LI) 227 

witlim this boundary, lie is a scholar or superior man ; if 
he goes beyond this, he is an ignorant fellow. Then he who 
walks up and down, makes a circuit within these boundaries,^ 
and indirectly gains its order is a Sage. Eor he who is dignified 
is so because he has created habits of observing the rules of 
proper conduct {Li) ; he who is great is so because he has made 
broad his observance of the rules of proper conduct {Li) ; he 
who is exalted is so because he has magnified the rules of 
proper conduct {Li) ; he who is illustrious is so because he 
has completely observed the rules of proper conduct {Li).^ 

The ode says : — 

“ Every rite {Li) is according to rule, 

Every smile and word is as it should be ” — 

■ this expresses my meaning.^ 

The man who observes the rules of proper conduct {Li) 
sedulously cares for life and death. Birth is the beginning death, 
of man; death is the end of man; when the end and beginning* 
are both beautiful, the way {Tao) of man is complete. Hence 
the superior man respects the beginning ® and venerates the 
end ^ ; to make the end and previous life ® alike is the practice 
(Tao) of the superior man and the beauty of the rites for proper 
conduct {Li) and justice (Ft). Then to dignify his previous 

^ Oi Xi ; he who covers the entire territory of Li. 

3 The quotation hy Sze-man Ch'ien in the Historical Record ends here. 

3 Booh of Odea, II, vi, v, 3. Also quoted on p. 46. 

* I.e., the whole of life. 

® Of man. 

• “ Previous life,” is the same word previously translated 

” heginning Hsuntze changes from one meaning to the other 

unconsciously. 

228 

THE WOKKS OF HSflNTZB 

XIX 

life and make mean Ms death ^ is to respect him when he 
has knowledge and disrespect Mm when he has no knowledge 
— ^this is the way (Too) of the evil man and shows a rebellious 
inind.2 superior man would consider it a shame to treat 
a low grade of slave or an infant according to a rebellious mind ; 
how much more to treat thus him whom he honours ® or loves. ^ 
Hence in death, tMs ^ is the way (Too). Once dead, a person 
cannot be resurrected again. The minister most honours 
Ms prince by Li ; the son most honours Ms parents by it ; 
because of that it should be completely observed. Por to 
serve the living without loyalty and faithfulness or without 
any sense of what is respectful or beautiful is what is meant 
by shabby treatment. The superior man despises savage 
treatment and is ashamed of shabby treatment. Hence for 
the emperor the inner and outer coffins have seven tMck- 
nesses ; for the feudal nobles five tHcknesses ; for the 
prefects three tMcknesses ; for the officers two tMcknesses. 

10 Besides they each have more or less coverings of cloth 
laid over the corpse in its coffin and presents, generously or 
stingily presented; they each have a great ornamented 
flabellum,® adornments, and things of that sort, to reverence 
and beautify the dead, to cause their life and death, their end 

^ A oritioism of Mioius, who advocated inexpensive burials. 

® Kebellious against the right Way. 

^ BCia prince. 

* His parent. 

® By the rules of proper conduct. 

* A wooden frame, with cloth sides, ornamented with clouds and figures, 
earned with the coffin and set at each comer of the grave to represent his 
palace. 

XIX ON THE RULES OE PROPER CONDUCT (X7) 229 

and previous life, to be alike. Tbis likeness is sufficient to make 
people willmg to do it. TMs is tbe Way {Tao) of tke ancient 
Kings, tbe last thing that a faithful minister or a filial son 
can do. 

The funeraP of the emperor stirs the whole continent, 
and is the business of the feudal nobles ^ ; the funeral of a 
feudal noble stirs all through the states and is the business 
of the prefects ; the funeral of a prefect stirs a whole state, 
and is the business of an officer of the first class ; the funeral 
of a first-class officer stirs a whole region,® and is the business 
of his friends ; the ordinary man’s funeral is the business of 
his clan or fellow- villagers and stirs his district ^ or village ® ; 
the funeral of a criminal ® who has sufEered capital punishment 
cannot be the common business of Ms clan or fellow-villagers, 
but is the business of Ms wife and son ; his inner and outer 
cofifin can be only three inches tMck ; Ms burial clothes and 
grave cloths can only be three in number ; Ms coffin cannot 
be ornamented ; Ms funeral cannot be by day, but at dusk 
he should be buried beside the road, and those who go to 
the burial must wear ordinary clothes. Contrary to oth^ 11 
burials, there should be no term of weeping, no mourning 

1 Tliis word includes all that pertains to a funeral, from the ceremonies 
of dressing the corpse to the hnrial. These ceremonies last months in the 
case of the Emperor and less for others ; hut from the time of death to 
the actual burial may be years. 

a The relatives manage the funeral and leave the son free to mourn. 

3 The “ region “ wasoompoaed of five “ districts ”, and was supposed to 
contain 12,600 families. 

^ A “ district ” was supposed to contain 2,600 famlies. 

® A “ village ” was supposed to be 26 to 50 families. 

8 The term for “ criminal ” is the same now used by Christians for 
” sinner 

Puneml 

coremonies. 

230 THE WOEKS OF HSUNTZE six 

badges, or sackclotb clotMng, witbout tlie near and distant 
relatives waiting for a montli ^ ; everytliing as ordinarily, 
everything as in life. 'When he is buried, it should be as if 
there were no one to mourn for, and the ceremonies should 
stop after the burial ^ — ^this is called the greatest shame. ^ 

The man who observes the rules of proper conduct (Zi) is 
careful in worship and mourning ; but he does not allow 
them to overcome him. ^ When the floss is put to the nostrils, ® 
and when people are waiting for the breathing to stop, then 
the loyal minister or the filial son knows his loss. But if he 
had made all preparations for the encofSning, he would have 
no longer had any hope. His tears fall down and he is in 
fear, yet -his feeling of hope for life has not ended, his grasping 
for life ® has not stopped. When death has occurred, then 
only does he act and make preparations. Hence, although 
the household is prepared, a day must pass and then only 
can the dead be encoifined ; three days, and then go into 
mourniug. After that the messengers who inform the distant 
set out and those who make preparations get to work. For . 

^ Before the funeral. 

® No mourning or worship of the departed. 

® This description of a oriminaVs burial is an intentional reproduction 
of the kind of funeral that Mioius recommended for everyone ; it is thus a 
criticism of him. Micius wanted to econonaizc and prevent the great waste 
of time and money in funerals. Confuoins forbade his disciples giving Yen 
Huei a sumptuous funeral, hut they did so nevertheless ; by the time of 
HMntze sumptuous fimerals scorn to have been looked upon as a necessity. 
Cf. if., p. 137 fE. 

* He does not allow his emotions to overcome his feeling for what is 
right and proper, so that he cannot perform the appropriate ceremonies. 

® To see if the dying man is still breathing. 

* For the dying. 

XIX ON THE RULES OE PROPER CONDUCT {LI) 231 

the funeral should not be later than seventy days, orif hurried, 
not less than fifty days after*,^ . A^^y is this ? That the distant 
may come ; that everything may be obtained ; that all 
matters may be attended to. When the loyal have come, 
when the elapsed time is great, when the ceremonial articles ' 

are prepared, then on the first of the month they divine the 
day, 2 and on the last of the month they divine the biiriah 
place, and then only bury the dead.^ At this time the content 
of meaning of the ceremonies stops, Wko would succeed 
in continuing it ? When the meaningful ceremonies continue 
who would succeed in stopping them ? Eor the three months’ 
burial is for the sake of the living, to beautify the dead, not 
immediately leaving the dead in order to comfort the living. * 

This is the meaning of the most exalted afiectionate thoughts. 

The Regular Principle of Funeral Rites (Li) ig 

At every turn beautify it ® ; in every move, remove it ® Funeral rites 
farther away j with the lapse of time return to the ordinary Standard, of 
course of life. Tor the way (Too) of death is thus ; if it is 
not made beautiful, it becomes ugly; if it is ugly, there -is observance, 
no mourning ; if it is near, it becomes wearisome ; if weari- 
some, then it becomes distasteful; if distasteful, then it 

1 He is speaking of tlie funeral of an officer. 

® Of the burial. 

3 This order of first picking the day and then the site for the grave is the 
opposite of that pursued to-day. 

4 To let the feeling of sorrovr die down gradually. 

® In dressing the corpse, encoffining, etc. 

0 The first rites, washing the body, etc., are performed in the death room; 

,tho next in the great entrance way of the house, the encoffining in the 
reception hall, etc. 

232 

THE WOEKS OE HSCNTZE 

XIX 

becomes neglected ; if neglected, tben it is not done re verently.i 
Suppose on one morning I should lose both parents, and the 
mourners in the funeral should not mourn nor be respectful, 
then I should be loathed by the birds and beasts. The 
superior man would feel shame at that, hence at every turn 
he beautifies death, thereby to lessen its ugliness ; at every 
move, he removes it farther away, thereby reverence con- 
tinues to be felt ; with the lapse of time he returns to the 
ordinary course of life, thereby to tranquillize life. The rules 
of proper conduct {lA) cut off that which is too long and 
stretch out that which is too short ; they diminish that which 
is too much and increase that which is insufficient ; they 
attain to the beauty of love and reverence, and they strengthen 
the excellence of character and right moral feeling {Yi). Eor 
beautiful adornment and ugliness, music and weeping, con- 
tentment and sorrow are opposites ; yet the rites {Li) unite 
them and use them, at the right time they arouse them and 
in turn bring them forward. Eor beautiful adornment, 
music, and contentment, are that whereby a tranquil life is 
supported, and that which brings good fortune. Ugliness, 
weeping, sorrow are that whereby anxiety is nourished, and 
that which brings ill-fortune. Eor the rites provide for 
beautiful adornment, but do not go so far as to be fascinating ; 
they provide for coarse mourning clothes, but do not go so 
far as to be stingy and neglectful ; they provide for music 
and contentment, but do not go so far as licentiousness or 

^ Reverence is the groat virtue in performing rites (it). The first sentence 
in the Booh of Bites is ; “In everything be respectful and the commentator 
says, “ This sentence sums up the -whole of the rites and rules of proper 
conduct (Xt)." 

XIX ON THE BUIiES OF PBOPEB CONDUCT {LI) 233 

^ laziness ; they provide for weeping and sorrow, hut do not 
go so far as an undue degree of distress and self-injury. This 
is the middle path of the rites {Li). Hence the change in 
the feelings and appearance ^ should be sufficient to difEer- 
entiate whether the occasion is a happy or sad one ; it should 
. make plain whether the person honoured is noble or inferior, * 
near or distant,® and it should stop there. Anything beyond 
this is evil. Although it may be difficult,^ the superior 13 
man despises it. For to limit one’s food and eat only so 
much, to limit one’s necessities and be bound by that, to 
[ observe high thinking with the result of making oneself sick 

; and lean, are the way {Tax>) of an evil man, not the ceremonies 

i ' of the rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice (Fi). It is not 
the feelings of a filial son that inspire the person who acts thus.® 

; Hence pleasure, agreeableness, sorrow, and weariness are is the 
j the expression of the feelings of good or bad fortune, sorrow expression of 
i ' or joy, shown in the features. Singing, jesting, weeping, and emotion. 
waiHng are the expression of the feelings of good or bad 
. fortune, sorrow or joy, shown in the voice. Meat, grain, wine, 
fish, pork, and congee, greens, beans, water, and broth ® are 
the expression of the feelings of good or bad fortune, sorrow 
or joy, shown in food and drink. Caps, crowns, embroidered 
I garments, woven silk garments, and coarse mourning clothes, 

^ Of the host or guest, in acting according to the rules of proper conduct. 

® Death does not level all men for the Confuoian, Hrs principle is to 
; treat the dead as if living, hence the noble dead have noble ceremonies ; 

I the inferior dead have inferior ceremonies. 

I 3 In relationship. 

• ^ He should not vie in going beyond the customary ceremony just because 

I it is difficult to do so, 

» Cf. Li-Ki, I, I, iv, (6), 32-24. 

I ® The last five are the food of a son mourning for his parent. 

234 

THE WORKS OK HSUJSTTZE 

XIX 

sackolotli badges, loose woven cloth., and straw sandals 
are the expression of feelings of good or bad fortune, 
sorrow or joy, shown in clothing. Large houses, deep 
14 temples, elevated beds, fine rush mats, low tables and 
mats,i and thatched roofs, lean-to houses, firewood for 
chairs, clods for a pillow,^ are the expression of the feelings 
of good or bad fortune, sorrow, or joy, shown in dwellings. 
These two kinds of feelings certainly have their origin in 
human life. If they are out down or extended, enlarged or 
made shallow, added to or diminished,® thus made to fit the 
situation, completely expressed, glorified and beautified, to 
make the origin and aim, end and beginning all harmonize, 
,so that they can become a pattern for all * generations — these 
are the rules of proper conduct {Li). 

Without following these rules and without much self- 
cultivation, were a person a superior man, he could not know 
how to act. Hence I say, the original nature of man is the 
beginning and material ; acquired characteristics ’are the 
beautification and glorification of the original nature. Without 
original nature, there would be nothing to which to add 
acquired characteristics ; without acquired characteristics, the 
original nature could not become beautiful of itself. When 
original nature and acquired characteristics unite in character- 

1 Used for feasts — like the Japanese to-day. 

“ At the death of his father, the filial son was supposed to live in a lean-to 
thatched shed like a primitive man, during the period of mourning. 

® These opposites refer to different people. In the case of the unworthy 
son, his natural sorrow being so little, it needs to ho deepened j but the 
worthy son needs to have his feelings controlled so that he will not injure 
hiroself from the violence of his passion. 

* Lit., “ ten thousand.” 

XIX ON TEE KULES OF PROPER CONDUCT (LI) 235 

development, then only the name of Sage becomes inseparable 
from that man ; and therefore the benefit of the whole empire 
comes to him.^ Hence it is said : Heaven and Earth unite 
and all things are born ; the Yin and the Ymg meet and 
mutations begin; original nature and acquired ohartioter- 
istics unite and the country is ruled. Heaven can bring things 
to birth, but cannot discriminate things; the Earth can 
support man, but cannot rule men ; imder the canopy of 
heaven the ten-thousand things bring humankind to birth, 
but wait for the Sage and then only are separated in their 
proper classes and uses. The ode says : — 

He has attracted and pacified all spirits, 

Even the spirits of the River ^ and the loftiest mountam 
— ^this expresses what I mean.® 

Funeral rites {Li) are the beautification of the dead by the 
living ; they are sending oS the dead very similarly to in treati^ the 
their life. Hence we should treat the dead like the livmg, 
the absent like the present ; their end and their previous 
life should be alike. When first dead, bathe the head and 
I body, tie the hands, and put food in the mouth, as it was 

‘ in life. If you do not wash the hair, then wet it and 15 

comb it three times only ; if you do not bathe the body, 

, then wet a towel and wipe the body three times only. Fill 
I the ears and put in the ear plugs.^ Provide raw rice for food, 
put dry bones in the mouth, ^ contrary to what is done in life. 

1 He IbeconieB emperor. 

“ The Yellow river. 

8 Booh of Odos, IV, i, i, 8. When the Sage rules even the most important 
of the- spirits are at rest and favourable. 

* Made of white floss silt. 

® Of the corpse ; jade was also used for this purpose. 

236 

THE WORKS OF HSt)NTZB 

XIX 

Arrange tlie tliree enits of nnderclotliing ; wrap the girdle 
around without fastening it. Arrange the face covering ; bind 
up the eyes ; tie up the hair, but do not put on the hat nor 
the hairpin.^ Write his name, and put it upon his tablet, ^ 
80 that his name is not seen, but only the coffin containing the 
body is visible. Arrange the sacrificial articles and the hat 
with a flaring run, but use no fillet to confine the hair. The 
earthern water and wine jars should be empty and not filled. 
There should be a fine bamboo mat but no bed. The wooden 
articles ^ should not be completely carved out ; the pottery 
articles should not be completed ; the thin articles * should 
16 not be usable. The pipes and organ should be prepared 
but not sound in harmony; the lyre and lute should 
be strung, but not tuned. The carriages for carrying these 
articles are buried, but the horses are sent away and informed 
that they are not to be buried. The articles used in life ® 
should be prepared to put into the grave, as if he were moving 
his house. Only a few things should be taken, not all of 
them : a show should be made of doing it, but it should 
not be done thoroughly. The carriages for sacrificial articles 

^ This waa before the custom of cutting the hair or shaving the head 
came into vogue. 

* Not the tablet permanently worshipped. The tablet here meant was 
a wooden one (now a scroll of sillc is used) to provide a resting place for the 
spirit of the deceased until the permanent tablet is prepared. 

* For burial with the dead ; they were originally intended for the use 
of the spirit ; at the present time paper imitations are burned ; but Hsiintze 
reinterprets these ceremonies as treating the dead as if in life — ^it is like 
moving house. He does not believe in the existence of these spirits of the 
dead. 

Made of bamboo or reeds. 

® Articles of personal use, such as how, arrows, plates, howls, etc. 

XIX ON THE EULES OF PEOPEE CONDUCT (LI) 237 

sliould be buiried to the grave and buried, but tbe metal- 
rein ends, tbe reins, the horse collars do not go into the grave. 
This shows that these things are not to be nsed.^ This is 
the manner (Tao) of moving house, but these things are 
plainly not for use. This is all for the sake of emphasizing 
sorrow. For things used in life are adorned, hut not 
completed ; things for the dead are showy, but not useful * 
All rites (Xi), if for the service of the living, are to beautify 
joy ; or if to send ofi the dead, they are to beautify sorrow ; 
or if for sacrifice, they are to beautify reverence ; or if they 
are military, they are to beautify majesty. In this all the 
Kings were alike, the ancient times and the present are the 
same. But we do not know whence they came. Hence 

^ Hie absence of some things necessary for life, such as a carriage wiihout 
horses or harness, shows that the burial of these things is not because the 
man’s spirit is to use them. These articles were originally buried for the 
use of the spirit, but as civilization progressed, the rite was preserved but 
its meaning was changed — ^here Hsiintzo is changing its meaning. Con- 
servative Confucianism stuck to the ancient funeral rites; Hsiintze 
reinterpreted them in harmony with his enlightened view of the non- 
existence of spirits. 

® In this sentence “ things used in life ” and ** things for the dead ” 
both refer to articles for burial with the dead, the distinction being that 
some are actual articles and others only imitations of articles. The Book of 
Bites says : “ In the Chou period people used both (things used in life and 
things prepared especially for the dead), because they did not know whether 
the dead had knowledge or no knowledge, hence they used both things 
used in life and things prepared especially for the dead (to bury in the 
grave),” The ^ M ** * things used in life ' are the how, 

arrows, the plough, the ditching spade, two earthenware dishes, two 
tubs, the wash-basin and the like. The articles for the nature spirits and 
the spirits of the dead are of the sort of things in which wooden articles 
are not completely hewn out, bamboo articles are not completely useful, 
and pottery articles are not completed." 

238 

THE WOEKS OE HStlNTZE 

XIX 

the appearance of a tomb and its tumnlus is like a bouse, ^ 
The appearance of the coffin is like the carriage screen and 

17 cover ; it is like the carriage screen. ^ The appearance 
of the coverings for the bearse and tbe feathery ornaments 
on it are like a door curtain or a bed curtain.® The matting 
and framework for keeping the dirt ofE the coffin is like the 

‘ plaster on the thatch and the screen in front of the door,* 
; Hence funeral ceremonies are for nothing else than to make 
5 plain the meaning of death and life, to send off the dead 
with sorrow and reverence, and at his end to provide for storing 
his body away ; for burial is reverently storing his body away. 
Sacrifice is reverently serving his spirit ® ; engraving his 
eulogy to hand it on to posterity is reverently passing on his 

18 fame. Service of the living is beautifying their life ; 
sending off the dead is beautifying their end ; when the end 
and the previous life are both attended to, the way (Tao) of 
the Sage is completed. Slighting the dead and over- 
emphasizing the living is obscurantism ® ; slighting the living 

^ Ancient tomts seem to hare teen modelled on the primitive dug-out ; 
two stones were put np to represent a door ; they also had a tunnel. One 
theory is that in primitive days, the individual was buried in his house 
(which was a dug-out in the loess), and the family moved to another. 

* The coffin and the carriage screen had the same carvings on the|n. 
The meaning of this sentence is not plain, nor have the Chinese com- 
mentators cleared it up ; there appears to have been some primitive error. 
The idea in this section is the same as in the preceding paragraph, that 
the funeral ceremonies are treating the dead, as if he were alive ; even his 
coffin, etc., are similar to things used in his life. 

® The meaning of this sentence is not clear. 

* All are for keeping dirt from going in. 

® Traditional phraseology; not meant literally. 

* There is a biting play on words here ; the word “ obscurantism " can 
also he translated “ Micianism 

XIX ON THE BXJLES OE PROPER CONDUCT {LI) 239 

and ovei-empliasizing the dead is to be misled; Hlling 
the living to send of£ the dead i is murder. The method 
and manner of the rules of proper conduct [Li) and justice 
(Yi) is to send ofE the dead very similarly to in their life; 
to cause death and life, the end and the present existence 
both to be suitably treated, and to love goodness — ^the 
Confucian does this. 

Why ^ are there three years of mourning ? Ceremonies Why three 
were established in accordance with the strength of mowniJg for 
the emotions in order to beautify the ceremonies relating ■ 
to social relations, to friends and strangers, to kindred and 
those who are not related, and to the noble and base. They 
cannot be added to or diminished. Hence it is said, whatever 
happens, they are the unchanging methods of mourning. 

A bad wound remains for a long time ; a severe hurt heals 
slowly ; three years of mourning arises because ceremonies 
were established in accordance with the strength of the 
emotions. Therefore it is the extremity of the greatest 
distress. Mourning garments, a rush staff, living in a hovel, 
eating rice gruel, using firewood for chaics, and clods for 
a pillow, is the expression of the greatest distress. The 
three years’ mourning is finished in twenty-five months,® 

1 Immolating the living with the dead ; this custom, though disapproved 
hy ajl educated men, never quite died out. 

® Beginning here down to the point where mourning for the prince is . 
taken up (p. 242), this section is the whole of chapter xxxv of the Book of 
Biies (with the exception of one sentence at the end). It fits in so well 
with the argument of this book that it seems plainly to be Hstintze's 
composition. 

® In China, years are reckoned by what year it is “ going on to ” ; ages 
are reckoned thus ; three years is just over two years, until it is “ going 
on to " three years. The period of mourning is now 26 or 27 months. 

240 

THE WOKKS OS' HStNTZB 

XIX 

but the sorrow and distress is not yet ended ; the thinking 
about and longing for the dead is not yet forgotten ; yet 
the ceremonies (Xi) stop at this point.^ Why should they 
not terminate at the funeral and the time for returning to 
ordinary life ^ be at that time ? Every living thing that is 
born between heaven and earth has knowledge. Now if 
one of the larger birds or beasts should lose its mate, after 
a month or season it would certainly return and go about 
its old haunts. Then it would certainly walk back and forth, 
howl, now move and now stop, embarrassed, and not knowing 
what to do, before it can leave the place. Even the small 
ones, such as the grey finch, will twitter a moment before 
it can leave the place. But among living creatures there 
is none with greater intelligence than man. Hence man’s 
sorrow for his parents remains unexhausted even till death. 
But suppose we consider a stupid, mean, immoral, depraved 
man : if in the morning there were a death, by evening he 
19 would have forgotten it ; so if he were allowed to give 
rein to his feelings, he would not be equal to a bird or 
beast. How could he live with his neighbours without 
stirring up trouble ? But suppose we consider a cultivated 
gentleman; for his three years of mourning, which is 
completed in twenty-five months, would be like a team of 
four horses passing over a crevice ® ; even if the time of 
mourning were extended, he would never reach its end. 
Accordingly the early Kings and Sages established a mean, 

^ Mourning dress is put off after the last sacrifice in this 26 or 27 month 
period, 

2 End of mourning. 

2 A fast team passing over a crevice in the road ; swiftly gone by. 

XIX ON THE EXILES OE PEOPEE CONDUCT (LI) 241 

and regulated the period of mourning, all to make it sufficiently 
long to perform a beautiful series of actions, and then only is 
it to be laid aside. 

Then bow is the period detemmied ? There is a break other 
in the moumiug for the nearest relatives at a full year.i 
Why is that ? Heaven and Earth have then already made 
a complete mutation ; the four seasons have then already 
gone through their changes ; everything in the world has 
begun its processes anew. Hence the early Kings, in 
conformity to this, made the period of mourning like it. 

Then why three years 1 To mag^y it ; because they wanted 
to double the time; hence they made it two full years. 

And what is the explanation of nine months’ rnouming® 
and less ? So as to make it not as much as that for parents. 

For three years’ mourning should be considered the magnifi- 
cation of mourning ; the five and three months’ mourniug ® 
should be considered the simplification of moumiug; the 
year and nine months are between these two. Looking 
above. Heaven gives us an example ; lookiug below, Earth 
gives us a pattern ; between we take our model from man. 

The harmony and unity that should characterize man, 
who lives in society, are thus completely shown. For the 
three years of mourning is the most beautiful thing in human 
practices (Too ) ; this is what is called the greatest exaltation 
of human actions. In this all the Kings agree, the ancient 
and the present are the same.* 

1 A change in mourning garments at this time. 

® Moxirning for an tmole. 

® For a great-unole or cousin. 

* The quotation by the JBooih of Rites ends here, 

B 

242 

THE WOEKS OE HStlNTZE 

XIX 

Why three Wliy doeS tKe mourning for a prince take three years ? 
iDg^or^hT^' piince is the lord of rule, the source of law and custom, 
prince ? the one towards whom right feelings ^ and attitudes ^ should 
be completely expressed : Cannot one rightfully follow 
him 3 and exalt him to the highest ? The ode says : — 

“ The generous and respectful prince, 

The father and mother of the people.” 

This prince certainly held the doctrine that he was the 
20 father and mother of the people.'* A father can beget 
a child but cannot feed it ; a mother can feed it but 
cannot instruct it ® : the prince can both feed the people ® 
and is also good at instructing them.’ Is three years enough ? 
A wet-nurse gives me food and drink, and I mourn three 
months for her ; a foster-mother clothes me, and I mourn 
nine months for her ; my prince does both : is three years 
enough for him ? If the prince’s government ® is obtained, 
there is prosperity ; if it is lacking, there is calamity : this 
is the greatest of accomplishments. If it is obtained, there 
is peace ; if it is lacking, there is danger : this is the extreme 
of right feeling.® Since both of these extremes are reached, 
three years of service for him seems not enough ; but should 

^ Jraithfulnesa and sincerity. 

® Respeotfiilness. 

® Treat him as a parent. 

* Cf. Book of History^ V, i, 1, 3, for a similar statement. 

® China is a land of almost nniversally ignorant women. 

< By giving them government posts or by his granaries in famine and 
poverty, and by his government generally. 

By his edicts and laws. 

“ His means of giving food and clothing. 

* The prince’s care for his subjects. 

Mourning, 

XIX ON THE EULES OE PEOPBE CONDUCT \LI) 243 

I go on without end ? Instead of the spirits of the land we 
worship the tutelary god ^ ; instead of the spirits of the grains 
we worship the god of agriculture 2 ; in the sacrifice to Heaven 
all the Kings are included with High Heaven ® and are 
sacrificed to. 

Why three months after the encoffining to the burial % ^^7 

m ‘j- j 1 • • ^ months fron 

io magnify it ; to make it important. The early Kings ^theenooffln. 

feared that in taking up and moving what was most exalted 
and most dear, in leaving the house and going to the grave- 
yard,® the performance would not be beautiful; therefore 
they lengthened the period to make the number of days 
suflS.cient for adequate preparation. Hence for the emperor 
it is seven months ; for the feudal nobles five months ; for 
a prefect three months ; all so that the period may be long 
enough for taking the business in hand : that the business 
may be sufficiently well in hand so that it may be completed ; 

^ Kou Lung, ^ who was mado equal Tvith or taken to represent ail 
the gods of the land. The Emperor, as Son of Heaven, has power to dispose 
of gods as well as mortals, and appointed deceased individuals to represent 
objects or places that were worshipped so as to have someone to receive 
the sacrifice. The point is that instead of many gods of the land we only 
worship one ; instead of many gods of the grain wo worship only one, 
showing that these sacrifices are inferior to the sacrifice to Heaven, as other 
things were inferior to the prince. 

* Hsi or Tsi, was taken to represent those spirits. 

* Thisterm, may be translated “ God " ; but in view of Hsuntze*» 

impersonal view of Heaven, I have translated as above. The Kings were 
taken to represent Heaven and so were included in the worship of Heaven 
which became both a sacrifice to Heaven and to the ancestors of the 
oflBloiatiiig Emperor. This is Hsuntze's interpretation of the much-discussed 
sacrifice to Heaven, 

* Who established the rites. 

* Lit., “ mound " or ** MU " — Chinese graves are on the Mils, 

244 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

XIX 

that it may be completed well enough so as to permit it 
to be beautiful ; that it may be beautiful enough so as to be 
perfect : to permit things to be wholly perfect is the right 
Way (Too). 

21 The emotions produced in him who performs sacrifice^ 
Sacrifice is^ by his memories, ideas, thoughts, and longings, cause him 
"fco change countenance and pant ^ ; it cannot be that such 
feelings should never come to him. For at the time when 
men are joyful and harmonious, the thoughts of a loyal 
minister and a filial son change, and these feelings come to 
him. That which causes them to come is a very strong 
impulse. If such feelings come in vain,® then the emotions 
produced by his memories and ideas ^ are disappointed and 
not satisfied, and that which the rite {Li) could have satisfied 
is lacking. For this reason the early Kings established 
ceremonies for the purpose of honouring the honoured and 
loving the beloved to the utmost. Hence I say ; Sacrifice 
is because of the emotions produced by memories, ideas, 
thoughts, and longings ; it is the extreme of loyalty, faithful- 
ness, love and reverence ; it is the greatest thing of the 
rites (Ia) and of beautiful actions.^ If there were no Sages, 
no one could have understood this. The Sage plainly under- 
stands it ; the scholar and superior man accordingly perform 

^ Sacrifice to the spirits of the deceased. 

* The effect of strong emotion. 

* Because there is no saorifioial ritual to give it expression. 

* Of the departed. 

® Hsiintze's reinterpretation of sacrifice. We must remember that in 
China sacrifice was an elegant form in which food and praise were offered 
to the departed. 

XIX ON THE BULBS OB PBOPEB CONDUCT (LI) 246 

it ^ ; the official observes it ; among the people it becomes 
an established custom. Among superior men it is considered 
to be a human practice (Tao) ; among the common people 
it is considered to be serving the spirits. 

Hence the bells, drums, pipes, stone chimes, lyres, lutes, 
reeds and organs, the Shao,^ the Hu ® of the Hsia dynasty, 
the So ^ of King Wu, the Hsiao-chien-hsiang ^ of Duke Huan 
are that whereby the superior man adapts himself to the 
situation in beautifully expressing Ms joy. Mourning 
garments, a rush stafi, living in a hovel, eating rice gruel, 
using firewood for a chair and clods for a pillow— tMs is the 
way the superior man has of adapting Mmself to the situation 
in beautifully expressing Ms sorrow and distress. Armies 
have their regulations ; criminal law has its degrees of crime, 
all to suit the crime — ^tMs is the way the superior man 
adapts Mmself to the situation in appropriately expressing 22 
Ms hatred. Divination, finding the lucky days, 
fasting, cleaning the temple,® spreading out tables and 
mats, ofiering animals and grain, praying for blessings, as 
if the deceased enjoyed the sacrifice ; taking the ofierings 
and offering them all as if the deceased tasted them ; offering 
the three-legged wine- cup without washing it ® ; for the one 
who saorffices to have a wine bottle ready as if the deceased 

1 Sacrifice to the dead. 

* Emperor Slum’s music. 

* T'ang’s music. 

* Names of pieces of music. 

* The ancestral temple, where the deceased were worshipped. 

® Not washing the wine eupa to offer a second cup of wine to the deceased ; 
using fresh cups instead. 

246 

THE WORKS OE HStNTZE 

XIX 

drank. from Ms goblet ; when tbe guests leave, for tbe host 
to bow them off, change to his mourning clothes and sit down 
and cry, as if the spirit of the departed had left — ^this is 
sorrow, reverence, serving the dead as if serving the living, 
serving the departed as if serving those who are present, 
an appearance without the inner reality, imagery become 
a ritual. 

BOOK XX 

ON MUSIC 

Now “music is the expression of joy.” ^ Men’s feelings 1 

make this inevitable. I'or ® man must needs be joyous ; Music is the 
... T expression of 

if joyous, his feelings must needs be expressed in sound, joyful 

and bodied forth in movement and rest,® and the fact that as 

’ appointed 

1 A q^uotation from tke Booh of Muaic (in the present Booh of Bitea) used Kings- 
as a text. Li-Ki, Oh. xvn, II, 19. 

The Chinese character for “ music ” and for “ joy " is the same, attack, 
though pronounced differently for the two different meanings. 

This section is quoted in the " Book of Music ” in the Booh of Bites {Li-Ki, 

X7II, iii, 27-30 inch). (See JET., p. xxii, note 1, for the manner of composition 
of the Booh of Bites.) The first sentence (in quotation marks) is quoted from 
the older and original part of the ” Book of Music ”, and this quotation, 
together with Hsiintze’s discussion, are added towards the end of the " Book 
of Music Hsuntze’s text shows some roughnesses of reading which 
smoothed out in the " Book of Music”, which fact would tend to show that 
Hsiintze was the author of this section. In addition, Haiintze's characteristic 
references to Mioius, which are omitted in the "Book of Music” (indeed 
the first part of this book is a rebuttal of Mioius' attack on music, taking up 
each item of Mioius' attack in order) would show that it originated with 
Hsiintze, but from the middle of p. 2fi0 on may be spurious. 

Yang Liang, the T'ang dynasty commentator on Hsiintze, has not com- 
mented on this book, though he has commentated on every other book of 
Hsffntze (except Book XII, the Way of the Prince), even on what are 
plainly spurious books — probably his copy of Blsiintze's works did not 
contain this book. He says that Hsiintze ” contains doublets, and is tom, 
tattered, and parts missing, and shows mistakes from inaccurate copying 
(Quoted from his preface, A.d. 818.) 

* Szo-ma Chfien’s HwforicctZ Becord (" Book of Music ”, f. 32) also quotes 
four paragraphs, beginning here. Minor differences of text indicate that he 
probably quoted it from the Booh of Bites, not directly from Hsfintze. 

» Singing and dancing were an integral part of ancient Chinese music. 

by 

to 

248 

THE WORKS OE HSONTZE 

XX 

man directs (Too) sound together with movement and rest 
to eatress the changes in his disposition is completely 
expressed in that statement. Hence man must needs be 
joyous ; if joyous, then he must needs embody his feelings J 
if they are embodied, but without conforming to any 
principles {Tao\ then they cannot avoid being disordered.^ 
The early Kingshated this disorder, hence established the music 
of the “ Ya '' and “ Sung ” ^ to conform it to principle {Too), 
so as to cause its music to produce joy and not to degenerate, 
so as to cause its beauty to change but not stop, so as to 
cause its indirect and direct appeals, its mardf oldness and 
simplicity, its frugality and richness, its rests and notes, 
to stir up the goodness in men’s minds, and to prevent evil 
feelings from ga inin g any foothold. This is the manner 
in which the early Kings established music. But Micius 
attacks it ® ; what is to be done now 1 

Eor when music is performed in the ancestral temple, the 
prince and minister, the ruler and ruled hear it together, 
and they cannot fail to be harmonious and reverent ; when 
it is performed in the inner apartments of the house, father 
and son, older and younger brothers hear it together, and 
cannot fail to be harmonious and afiectionate ; when it is 
performed before the elders of the village or clan, old and 
young hear it together, and cannot fail to be harmonious 
and obedient. Eor music discriminates and unites ^ in order 

^ This -word connotes political disorder, ill-government, and decadence, 
together with nnorthodoxy. 

* Two of the divisions of the Booh of Odes, 

5 One of Micius’ books was entitled " Against Music ” ; his objections are 
answered seriatim by Haiintzo here. 

* The metaphor is from music to morality. 

XX 

ON MUSIC 

249 

to establish harmony ; it compares and distinguishes in order 
to beautify its measures; it is performed in harmony in 
order to create beauty, so that it leads everything in 
one direction (Too), so that it controls all changes — ^this 
is the manner in which the early Kings established music. 

But Micius attacks it ; what is to he done now ? 

Por when I hear the music ^ of the “ Ya and “ Sung ”, my Music ^ 

iiatixtoxuz&0 

purposes are ‘broadened. When I see tne dancers grasp and unites 
their shields and pole-axes,^ practise the lowering and raising people, 
of their heads, the bending and straightening of their bodies, my 
deportment becomes dignified. From the way in which 
they move in groups and adapt themselves to the music, 
the arrangement of the ranks is made correct, and their 
advancing and retreating are together. For music, when 
the dancers step forward, is of attacking and dealing death ; 
when they step back it is of courtesy.^ The meaning of 
attacking, dealing death, and of courtesy are the same ; 
when the dancers step forward to attack and deal death, 
none fail to obey ; when they step back and act courteously, 
none fail to accord. Hence music is the greatest unifier 2 
in the world, the bond of inner harmony, the inevitable 
consequence of human emotion. This is the manner in which 
the early Kings established music. But Micius attacks it. 
what is to be done now 1 

1 “ Music " includes instrumental and vocal music, the words as weU 
as the tune, and also the dancing which accompanies and ® ^ 

it is a much broader term than ^e Englwh " music , and is much closer 

to the ancient Oreeh concept of “ music . 

a Used in military dances ; yak tails wore used in peaceful dances. 

* lit., “ bowing and yielding the precedence. 

260 

THE WORKS OE HStj^NTZE 

XX 

Musio turns 
the people's 
hearts to 
virtue. 

The Ilew 
Music. 

Music is that wliereby the early Kings beautified joy. 
Armies and halberds are that whereby the early Kings 
beautified anger ; so both the joy and the anger of the early 
Kings got their proper expression. Eor this reason, when 
they rejoiced, the whole empire chimed in : when they were 
angry, tyrannous and misgoverned states feared. In the 
Way (Tao) of the early Kings, the rules of proper conduct 
{Li) and music were exactly that in which they excelled.^ 
But Micius attacks it. Hence I say : Micius in regard to the 
correct doctrine {Tao) is like a blind man regarding white 
and black, or like a deaf man regarding harmony and noise, 
or as if a person wishes to go to Ts‘u ^ and sought it in the 
north. 

How sound and music enter deeply into people ; their 
influence is rapid. Eor the early Kings carefully made 
it beautiful. When music is moderate and even, the people 
are harmonious and do not degenerate ; when music is 
reverent and dignified, the people are tranquil and not in 
turmoil. When the people are harmonious and tranquil, 
the armies are strong, cities are secure, and enemy coxmtries 
dare not attack. Then the people will all be safe in their 
dwellings, and happy in their villages, to the point of beiug 
satisfied with their rulers. Therefore their fame will be 
bright ; therefore their glory will be great ; in the whole 
empire none of the people will be unwilling to have this 

^ The quotation in the *' Bookof Muaio ” stops here ; it omits the three 
sentences naming Micius. It follows this quotation from HsCntzo with a 
saying of one of Confucius' disciples, which is plainly an addition to the 
Book. The quotation in the Hiatorical JReCord also stops here. 

* A state in the south of China. 

XX 

ON MUSIC 

261 

prince for tlieir leader. TMs was the beginning made by 
the Kings. 

"When music is pretty and fascinating, it is dangerous ; 
then the people degenerate, are negligent, mean, and low. 
If they lose self-restraint and are negligent, turmoil will 
begin j if they are mean and low, they will wrangle. If 
they are in turmoil and wrangle among themselves, then 
the armies will be weak, cities will be attacked, and enemy 
states will be dangerous. In this situation the people will 
not be safe in their dwellings nor happy in their villages, 
and they will not be satisfied with their rulers. Hence the 
casting aside of the rules of proper conduct (Li) and music, 
and the arising of unorthodox ditties, are the source of anger, 
loss of territory, insult, and disgrace. Therefore the early 
Kings honoured the rules of proper conduct and music, 
and despised imorthodox ditties. In the “Arrangement 
of Officials it is said : “ The preparation of the laws and 
edicts, the examination of odes and essays, the elkoination 
of licentious music, and obediently to do each at its proper 
time, so that barbarian or popular ditties do not confuse 
the OdeS' — ^this is the busmess of the Chief Instructor.” * 

Micius says : Music is what the Sage-Kings attacked, 
and wherein the Confucians err. The superior man thinks 
otherwise. Music is that wherein the Sages rejoiced,® and 
that which can turn the people’s hearts to goodness. Its 

^ A title giren by Hstintze to what ia now a section of Book IX, of. p. 139. 
* Might the quotation as an authority of a part of what is genuinely 
Kstintze's writing indicate that this paragraph is not genuine ? But this 
paragraph is thoroughly in his style and in accordance with his teaching. 

® “ Bejoioe " and “ music " are the same character in Chinese. 

252 

THE WORKS OE HSt)NTZE 

XX 

influence is great ; it changes people’s customs. Hence the 
early Kings directed them by tbe rules of proper conduct 
(Li) and music, and the people were peaceful. How if the 
people have the feelings of liking and hatred, but not the 
reactions of joy and anger, then there will be disorder. 
The early Kings hated this disorder, hence they cultivated 
their characters, and corrected their music, and the whole 
country obeyed them. For mourning clothes and the sound 
3 of crying cause people’s hearts to be sad ; to wear armour, 
head-ornaments, and a helmet, and to sing among the ranks, 
makes people’s hearts reckless. Pretty and fascinating 
appearance, the music of Cheng ^ and Wei ^ make men’s 
hearts licentious ; straight girdles and proper clothes, 
posturing the Shao,® singing the Wu ^ make men’s hearts 
dignified. Hence the ear of the superior man does not listen 
to licentious sounds ; his eyes do not look at 
licentiousness ; his mouth does not utter evil words. 
Of these three things the superior man is careful. “ When- 
ever ® evil and depraved sounds influence men, their rebellious 
temper responds ; when the rebellious spirit has embodied 
itself,® then disorder begins. When correct music influences 

1 A state in present Honan. 

* An important feudal state in present Chihli and Honan, Of. with this 
geographical classification of mnsio the similarly geographic Creek classifica- 
tion of music as Lydian, Phrygian, etc. 

* Shun’s music. 

* Wu’s music, 

^ Here begin a series of reminiscences or quotations from the " Boot of 
Music ’* {hi-Kit XVII, ii, 14). I shall indicate hy quotation marks the extent 
of these reminiscences. The quotations are not verbatim, but altered here 
and there, 

* In the countenance, etc. 

XX ON MUSIC 253 

men, the obedient temper responds to it ; when the obedient 
temper has embodied itself, then tranquillity and good govern- 
ment begins. There is a correspondence between the singing 
and the response ” ; good and evil embody themselves. 
Hence the superior man is careful where he goes and whom 
he approaches. The superior man directs (Too) his will 
by the bells and drums ; he makes his heart rejoice by the 
lyre and lute ; “ he ^ is moved by the shield and the pole- 
axe ^ ; his mind is beautified by the feathers and yak’s tail ® ; 
he is made obedient by the stone chimes and flutes.” Hence 
“ the ^ flne and distmot notes are like Heaven, the large and 
grand notes are like Earth ”, the loweriug and raising of the 
head, and the turnmg aronnd are like the “ four seasons 
Por ® when music plays ”, the will “ is clear ”, the rules 
of proper conduct {Li) are cultivated and the character 
is perfected ; the ear and eye are acute, the body and 
mind are tranquil, the customs and habits are altered, the 
whole country is peaceful,” beautiful, good, and joyous, 
“ Hence it is said : Music is the expression of joy. The 
superior Tnan rejoices to attain to its course {Tqo) j the 
inferior man rejoices to satisfy his desires. If a person 
controls desire by the right Way (Too)} then he rejoices without 
disorderliness. If he forgets the right Way (Too), then he 

^ Another quotation : LuKi, XVII, ii» 16. 

* Military dances. 

* Dances of peace. ^ ^ t v 

* Another quotation or rather reniiniscence. lA-Ki, XVII, ii, 17. Is th« 
paragraph and all the subsequent matter in this Book spurious T It is 
unlike HsiJntee to quote end paraphruse another work as in this seokon. 

» Another quotation, altered. Li-Ki, XVH, ii. 18. The flistorua.! Bmri 
also quotes it. 

264 

THE WOEKS OE HStfiSfTZE 

XX 

rejoices witliout disorderliness. If lie forgets tLe right 
Way (Tao) for desire, then he errs and is not joyful.” Hence 
music is that whereby joy is conformed to principle (Tao). 
“ Metal, ^ stone, silk, and bamboo ” are the things which 
induce (Tao) virtue. When music is played, the people 
turn towards it. Hence music is the greatest power in 
ruliag. But Micius attacks it. 

Musio and Li Moreover “ music ^ is unchanging ” concord, “ The rules 

embraoethe . n . /-r-v o o ^ . . , „ . 

TEliole heart of proper conduct (Li) are unvarying prmciples. Music 

of man. unites; the rules of proper conduct (Li) distinguish.® 
The ‘ union * of the rules of proper conduct (Li) and music 
embraces the whole ^ heart ’ of man. To exhaust the source 
and extreme of change is the nature of music. To display 
sincerity and take away falseness is the law of the rules of 
proper conduct (Xt).” Micius attacked it ; he almost met 
with punishment, but the wise Kings had already passed 
away, and no one corrected him. Stupid people learn 
his doctrines and endanger themselves. The superior man 
4 is clear about music, but he is born in an evil generation 
which hates goodness and will not listen to him. Alas I 
It cannot be done I * Students avoid studying music and 
there is no way to attend to it. 

Mueic reflects ‘‘ Sound ® is the form of musio.” The drum is the great 
pair ® ; the bells are the perfect ruler ; the stone chimes 

1 Another quotation, Li-Ki^ XVII, xii, 19. 

* Another quotation, partly improyed. Li-Kit XVII, iii, 1, 2. 

’ Distinguish the classes of society. 

* An exclamation like that in the Qloss (of. p. 320), Is this section by the 
author of the Qloss^ a close disciple of Hsiintze ? 

• Another reminiscence. Li-Kit XVII, ii, 25. 

• Two faces of the drum, hence a pair. 

XX 

ON MUSIC 

266 

disoiiminate and regulate ; tte organs -of 36 reeds and 13 
reeds respectively are reverent and harmonious ; the flageolet 
of 6 holes and the flute of 3 holes give volume ; the ocarina ^ 
and the bamboo flute ^ are like mist rising from the sea ; 
the lute with many strings ® is easily excellent ; the lute 
mth 7 strings is beautiful ; the vocal parts show the greatest 
clarity ; dancing shows forth the Way (Tm) of Heaven ; 
together, the drum is the leader of the music. ^ Hence the 
drum is like Heaven ; the bells are like Earth ; the stone 
chimes like water ; the organs, the flageolet, and flute are like 
the stars, the sun and the moon ; the hand drum,® the tub 
clapper,® the “ fu ” drum, the bell-frame, the notched sounding 
board,'^ and the time marker,® are like the ten-thousand 
things. How do we know the meaning of dancing 1 The 
dancer’s eyes do not look at himself ; his ears do not listen 
to himself, yet he controls the lowering and raising of Ms. 
head, the bending and straightening of Ms body, Ms advancing 
and retreating, his slow and rapid movements ; everything 

1 An egg-shaped porcelain wind instrument with six to eight holes^ 
blown through the apes—giving a whistling sound. Another explanation 
is that it was struck like a hell, 
a It gave a sound like children crying. 

8 It has 60, 25, 16, or 6 silken strings. 

4 Very characteristic of Chinese music in which rhythm often pre- 
dominates over every other element of music. 

6 ITuxnished with buttons tied to strings on each side and twirled— now 

made like a tub with a handle in the middle and a clapper 

on the side, which hit when twirled. ^ , 

’ A hollow wooden image of an animal used to make musio by rmmmg 

a stick across its ridged back. „ 

• A wooden instrument. These instruments correspond to the per 

oussion instruments " in a modern orchestra. 

The District 
Gathering 
shows that 
the Way of 
the Kings is 
easy. 

256 THE WORKS OF HStlNTZE xx 

is discriminated and regulated. He exerts to the utmost 
all the strength of his body to keep time to the measures 
of the sounds of the drum and bell, and has no rebellious 
heart. All his purposes are summed up and earnest. 

When ^ I watched the district ^ gathering, I know that the 
Way {Tao) of the Kangs is very easy.® 

The host in person goes * and invites the guests and 
their attendants ; and all the guests follow him. When they 
arrive at the gate,® the host makes an obesiance to the guests 
together with their attendants, and all the guests enter ; 

^ This section, is part of Book XLIII of the Booh of JtUes, and is prefaced 
there by the words, “ Confucius said It seems displaced in Bfetintze, as 
it barely mentions the subject of music, and comes after a series of para- 
graphs which are of doubtful authorship. It also interrupts the course of 
the argument in the Booh of Bites. See min gly it was a separate pamphlet ; 
the compiler of the Booh of Rites took it to be from Confucius, and added it 
to that classic ; another editor, possibly Liu Hsiang, took it to be from 
Hfliintze, and added it to his works. Considerations of style seem to show 
that it is not from Hstintze’s pen. It has been included here because of its 
intrinsic interest, sbowing how Hsuntze’s doctrine of Li worked in actual 
practice. 

> Anciently the largest territorial division of the state, containing ’ 
nominally 12,600 families and presided over by a prefect. This is a descrip- 
tion of the triennial district gathering, under the superintendence of the 
Prefect himself. In the principal school or college of the district he assembled 
the gentlemen of accomplishments and feasted them ; at the same time 
selecting, especially from among the younger men, those who were to be the 
most useful to him in various departments of government service. 

8 This district gathering probably represented ancient customs and 
ceremonies, especially because it was held in the country, which is naturally 
conservative. 

* To the houses of the guests, when everything is ready, to lead the 
principal guest to the feast — still a Chinese custom. 

* The outer gate of the place where the feast is to be held. 

267 

ON mm 

thus the meaning of the distinctions between noble and inferior 
are exhibited. 

Thrice they bow, and arrive at the steps. After the 
precedence has been thrice offered to them, the guests ascend 
and bow. When the host presents the guests with wine,^ 
and receives wine from them in return,^ the ceremonies of 
deolinmg and yielding are numerous ; but towards the 
attendants the ceremonies are fewer. The host goes to greet 
all the guests ; they ascend and receive wine. Kneeling, 
they offer some in sacrifice ; they rise and drink it ; but 
without pledging the host in return, they descend— thus the 
opulence and simplicity of the ceremonies are distinguished.® 

The chorus enters, ascends, sings three pieces, and 
the host ofiers them wine. The reed organists enter, play 
three pieces, and the host offers them wine. After an interval, 
the chorus sings three pieces, then they perform three pieces 
together. The musicians announce that the music is ended, 
and go out. Two men raise their horn goblets. Then they 
appoint a presiding officer to see that everything is done 
correctly, Thus I know they can be harmonious and joyful, 
and yet not be disorderly. 

The guests pledge the host ; the host pledges the 
attendants ; the attendants pledge all the guests ; the young 

^ The wine was not made from grapes, but from some cereal, possibly rice. 

* The ceremony is as follows ; The host pours out wine and oilers it to 
the guests. The guests respond and the host again replies. The guests urge 
the host to drink. This is done to throe guests only. With the attendants 
the urging to drink is omitted. Towards the guests at large the pledge to 
the host is omitted. So the ceremony is both made fulsome and simple. 

® The proper distinction is made between the different parties by tb© 
multitude or paucity of observances paid to them. 

S 

\6S THE WORKS OE HSt)NTZE xx 

and old pledge eacE other according to their age ; finally 
they pledge the keepers of the vases and the cup-washers. 
Thus I know that they can show brotherly deference to their 
elders, and not neglect any one. 

After this they descend and take ofi their shoes, ^ then 
re-ascend, sit down, and drink goblets of wine without any 
limit as to number. The festival of drinking wine, if in the 
mornmg, does not use up the morning ; if in the evening, 
neither does it use up the evening. When the guests leave, 
the host bows and escorts them away. The ceremonies now 
come to an end. Thus I know that they can enjoy the feast 
without confusion. 

The noble and inferior are thus exhibited ; the opulence 
and simplicity of the ceremonies are distinguished ; they 
are harmonious and joyful without disorder ; they show 
brotherly deference to their elders and do not neglect anyone ; 
they enjoy the feast without confusion — ^those five character- 
istics are enough to correct one’s person and pacify a state. 
When that state is peaceful, the country will be peaceful. 
Hence I say : When I watch the district gathering, I know 
that the Way (Too) of the Kings is very easy.®* 

^ A custom like that of tlie modern Japanese. 

2 There is another paragraph added to this book, a criticism of a dis- 
ordered and erring generation's oustoras. Since it does not belong to the 
subject of the book, and seems spurious, I have omitted it. 

BOOK XXI 

THE REMOVAL OE PREJUDICES 

Evexytliing that men sufier is from being prejudiced ^ 1 

by one false thing : and so the great principles are hidden from All evil is 
XT. ® , from beiBg 

tnem. (xood government consists m retummg to the prejudiced. 

principles of the Classics ; other doubtful principles lead 
into error. In the world there are not two Ways (Tao ) ; 
the Sages had not two minds. But now the dukes have a 
strange 2 government; the hundred schools of philosophy 
have strange doctrines ; so that right and wrong are uncertain, 
good and bad government are uncertain. The result of 
sincerely following a wrong doctrine is that although the 
prince of an erring country or the member of an erring school 
of philosophy seeks to be right, yet ho considers himself 
the judge of right and wrong. He is averse to the Way 
(Tao), 3 and in error, and others mislead him to follow the 
doctrines that he follows. He keeps his practices to himself 
and only fears that others will hear of his evil acts. 

He is partial to his own ideas, and inquires into strange 
arts ; and only fears that others will hear of the good qualities 

1 Lit., “ blinded,” or “ beclouded ”, from a word meaning “ to cover 
and screen ”, and so throughout this chapter. The subject and text of 
this book is a reference to Analecta XVII, vii, inhere Confucius speaks of 
the six “ hecloudiuga Hshntze, however, does not follow Confucius' 
classification of the things that hinder a man from knowing the truth, 
but has his owm classification. 

2 Unorthodox, unlike that of ancient times, 

* The Confuoian doctrines as found in the Classics, 

260 

THE WOKKS OE HSt^NTZE 

XXI 

of Ids beliefs.^ Thus bis government departs from right 
principles, and bis overvaluation of himself is not checked. 
Is not this being prejudiced by one false thing and losing 
just the thing for which he is seeking ? If a person does not 
pay attention, when white or black is in front of his face, 
his eyes will not see it ; when somebody beats a drum 
thunderously beside him, his ear will not hear it How much 
more the man who purposely causes his senses to dis- 
2 regard things ? Of those men who follow a principle 
(Too), the prince who brings his country into disorder 
is at one extreme of evil ; the man of an erroneous 
school of philosophy is at the other extreme of evil — 
isn’t it too bad I 

Anything What brings prejudice ? Desire can bring prejudice ; 

that can bring prejudice ; the beginning can bring prejudice ; 

prejudice, ixe end can bring prejudice ; distance can bring prejudice ; ‘ 
nearness can bring prejudice ; the profound can bring 
prejudice ; the superficial can bring prejudice ; the ancient 
can bring prejudice ; the present can bring prejudice. Every- 
thingthat is unorthodox cannot help from bringing prejudice — 
this is the universal affliction of the mind. 

Ex^ples of lu ancient times examples of some princes who were 
prejudiced were Chfie of the Hsia dynasty, and Chou of the 
Yin dynasty. Chfie was prejudiced by Mo-hsi and Sze- 
kuang,® and did not know Kuan Lung-feng.^ So his mind 
was misled and his actions were thrown into confusion. 

^ Keeping the good to himself. 

“ Two oonoubines. 

^ Prime minister. 

XXI 

THE EEMOVAL OF PEEJUDICES 

261 

Chou was prejudiced by Ta-M^ and Eei-lien,® and did not 
know Wei Tjze-Ch‘i.® So his mind was misled and his actions 
were thrown into disorder. Hence all the officials lost their 
loyalty and sought their own ends ; the people hated his 
evil and rejected him, The worthy and the good left and 
retired into private life. This is how he lost the country 
and made vain the name of his dynasty in the ancestral 
temple. Ch'ie died at Mt. Tmg * ; Chou’s head was tied g 
to the crimson pennon.® He was not able to judge men, 
and no one admonished him. This is the misfortune which 
comes from being prejudiced. 

T‘ang the Completer established himself by observing 
what Ch‘ie of the Hsia dynasty had done, therefore he made 
his mind the ruler of his actions and carefully controlled 
them. This was why he was able for a long period to employ 
Yi Yin ® and did not depart from the right Way (Too). This 
is why he took the place of the kings of the Hsia dynasty 
and held the empire. King Wen observed Chou of the Yin 
dynasty, therefore he made his mind the ruler of his actions 
and carefully controlled them. This is why he could con- 
tinuously use Lii Wang,"^ and did not depart from the right 
Way [Tao). This is why he took the place of the kings of 
the Yin dynasty and held the empire. None of the worthies 

1 A oonoubine. 

2 An official. 

« Half-brother ; upright and opposed Chou ; later founded the feudal 
state of Sung ; 1112-1079 B.a. 

Far from, the capital. 

® He was decapitated and his head tied to a pennon. 

• His prime minister. 

’ His prime minister. 

262 

THE WORKS OE HSOKTZE 

XXI 

Examples 
good and 
ministers 
ofSioials. 

of distant parts of the coiuitry failed to cotmt it an honour 
to come to them ^ ; hence their ^ eyes saw perfect colours ; 
their ears heard perfect sounds ; their mouths tasted perfect 
flavours ; they themselves lived in a perfect palace ; their 
names received the perfect appellation.® When they were 
bom the whole empire sang; when they died all on the 
continent wept. This is what is called the extreme of 
exaltation. The ode says : 

“ The phoenix is dancing livelily ; 

Its wings are like a shield ; 

Its voice is lOce a flute ; 

Both male and female are present ; 

They delight the Emperor’s heart ” — 
this is the happiness of not being prejudiced.® 
of • Of ancient officials who were prejudiced there were Tang 
Yang ^ and Hsi Ts‘i.® Tang Yang was prejudiced by his 
desire for power, and so he drove out Tai-tze.® Hsi Ts‘i 
was prejudiced by his desire for a dukedom, and so had 
4 Sung-seng ’ condemned to death. Tang Yang was 
killed in Sung ; Hsi Ts‘i was killed in Tsin : they expelled 

^ Referring to these good emperors. 

3 The appellation of Emperor. 

^ Quotation from a lost ode. The phoenix was a fabulous bird which 
only came to earth when there was a Sage. In the time of Yao these felicitous 
birds were thought to have come to build nests in his palace garden. 

Tang Yang was an official of King K'ang of the state of Sung. He 
advised his king to kill officials right and left in order to make himself 
feared. 

® Hsi Ts'i was a son of Duke Hsien of the state of Tsin (676-661 B.o.) 
by a concubine. He had the heir of the dukedom killed. 

• The prime minister of the state. 

’ Older brother of Hsi Ts'i. 

XXI THE EEMOVAL OE PEEJUDICES 263 

a ■wortjh.y prime minister and jiad a filial older firotlier con- 
demned to deatli. They snfiered punishment by death, 
but did not know that this was the misfortune which comes 
from being prejudiced. For from ancient times .imtil the 
present day there never has been anyone who was avaricious, 
mean, rebellious, striving for power, and was not in danger 
of disgrace and destruction, Pao Shou, Ning Ts‘i, and 
Hsi P'eng ^ possessed the qualities of humanity and wisdom, 
and were not prejudiced, so they could support Kuan Chung,^ 
and their reputation, fortune, happiness, and emoluments 
were equal to that of Kuan Chung. Duke Chao and Lii 
Wang ® possessed the qualities of humanity and wisdom 
and were not prejudiced ; hence they were able to support 
Duke Chon, and their reputation, fortune, happiness and 
emoluments were equal with that of Duke Chou, It is said ; 
Eecognizing the worthy is what is meant by having clear 
perception ; supporting the worthy is what is meant by being 
a man of ability. The happiness of the person who strives 
to do this and forces himself to do it will certainly last long — 
this expresses my meaning. This is the happiness of not 
being prejudiced. 

In ancient times the travelling scholars were prejudiced— Examples of 
these were the erring schools of philosophy. Micius * 5 

philosophers, 

^ Officials of Ts'i under Kuan Ohung. 

3 Prime minister of Ts‘i under Duke Huan ; one of the great model 
prime ministers. 

3 Officials of King Wen. 

* Advocated that utility was the criterion of right and wrong — 
utilitarianism. He hold that the ruler and ruled should work together, 
and neglected the distinctions of class by which the ruled should serve the 
ruler. 

264 

THE WOEKS OE HStNTZB 

XXI 

was prejudiced towards utility and did not know the elegancies 
of life. Sungtze^ was prejudiced towards desire and did 
not know virtue. Shentze ^ was prejudiced towards law, 
and did not know the worthy man. Shentze ® was prejudiced 
towards power and did not know wisdom. Hueitze ^ was pre- 
judiced towards words and did not loiow reality. Chuangtze ® 
was prejudiced towards Nature, and did not know man. 
Eor if we consider life {Tao) from the standpoint of utility, 
it will merely ho seeking for profit. If we consider life (Tao) 
from the standpoint of desire, it will merely he seeking for 
satisfaction. If we consider life (Tao) from the standpoint 
of law, it will merely he an art. If we consider life (Tao) 
from the standpoint of power, it will merely he convenience. 
If we consider life (Tao) from the standpoint of words, it 

^ Believed that desires naturally seek little, and so by giving 

rein to them they would he controlled, 

* 1)31 Taught that there can be many worthies in a government, 
but only one prince ; a state can get along without worthy officials, but 
not without a prince, i.e. with law there can bo good government even if 
there arc no worthy officials. Hence there is no necessity for incentives for 
officials, such as honouring the worthy and employing the able. 

® ^ not the same as the preceding. This philosopher is only 
mentioned in this one place by Hsuntzo. He was from Honan ; he was the 
prime minister of Marquis Chao of the state of Han (358-333 b.o.). “ When- 
ever the worthy get power and ability, they control their inferiors by law ; 
when the ruler does not know men of authority and ability, he waits for 
one who has the talent and wisdom, and then only is there good govern- 
ment." Ho believed that the ruler should only delegate his power to a 
man of talent and wisdom. 

* Leader of the Neo-Mioians. He stressed dialectic, and often reasoned 
from mere words, instead of from principles, 

* Taught that good and bad government were the results of the law of 
cause and effect, and did not know that it rested with human efforts. He 
himself refused to take high office, oven when it was offered him. 

XXI THE BEMOVAL OF PBEJHDICES 265 

will merely be dialectic. If we consider life {Too) from tbe 
standpoint of Nature, it will merely be cause and effect. 

These different presentations are all one aspect of life (Tao). 

Now the right Way of life (Tao) is constant and includes 
all changes ; one aspect is insufficient to express the whole. 

Those who have partial knowledge perceive one aspect of 
the Way (Tao), but they cannot Imow its totality. So they 
think it sufficient, and gloss things over. On the one hand 
they confuse themselves, and on the other they mislead others. 

The rulers prejudice their inferiors ; the inferiors prejudice 
their superiors. This is the calamity which comes from being 
prejudiced and hindered from knowing the truth. 

Confucius possessed the qualities of benevolence (J en) Conluoius. 
and wisdom, and was not prejudiced ; hence his scholarship 
and mastery over all teachings were sufficient to make him 
equal with the ancient Edngs". He possessed the whole 6 
of the right Way (Tao) ; he brought it to people’s notice, 
and he used it ; he was not prejudiced nor unable to carry 
it out. Hence liis virtue was equal with that of Duke Chou ; 
his reputation is abreast of that of the three Kings ^ ; this 
is the happiness which comes from not being prejudiced. 

The Sage knows the afflictions which befall the mind 
and sees the calamities which come from being prejudiced criterion, 
and hindered from knowing the truth. Hence he 
considers neither desice nor hate, neither beginning nor 
end, neither nearness nor distance, neither the universal 
nor the superficial, neither the ancient nor the present. 

He is equally able to dispose of all things, and keeps the 

1 Yu, T‘ang and Wen and Wu (Won and Wu are counted as one). 

266 

THE WOBKS OE HSttrSTTZE 

XXI 

balances level. ^ For this reason all tbe sects are not able 
to prejudice Mm, nor do they confuse Ms perception of tbe 
organizing principles of life. 

Tte^crUenon 'Wbat can be considered to be tbe weight used in the 
balances ? ^ It is the Way (Tao),^ Hence one’s mind dare 
not be ignorant of the right {Tao). If one’s mind is ignorant 
of the right {Too) then it cannot will to do the right (Tao\ 
and can only will to act contrary to the right {Tao), What 
naan desires to obtain license to do what he does not will, 
and to proMbit what he wills ? If he selects men according 
to a mind wMch does not will to do right (Tao), then he 
will necessarily be like vicious (un-Tao) men, and not be 
like virtuous {Too) men. If he discusses virtuous {Tao) 
men with vicious (un-Tao) men according to a mind which 
is unwilling to do right {Tao ) — ^this is the origin of disorder.^ 
Then how is he to know the right {Tao) % When a man’s 
mind Imows the right {Too), then only can he will to do the 
7 right (Too). When he can will to do the right {Tao), 
then only can he do the right {Tao) and abstain from doing 
the wrong (not-Tao). If he picks men according to a min d 
which is willing to do the right {Too), then he will be lilce 
virtuous {Too) men and unlike vicious {\m-Tao) men. To 

^ He rightly judges the value of things. 

® The "weight on the balances against which things are weighted, i.e. 
the standard of weight or truth. The instrument implied here is the 
steelyard, which has a movable bob used to balance the article to be weighed. 
Lit., “ What is called the bob f " 

3 The right way of life, or Tao. Tao may take the connotation of any of 
the words, “ right,” “ way,” or “ life iFor Hshntsae Tao is defined by 
Zt and Ti. 

* Bad government, calamity, erroneous doctrine. 

XXI 

THE REMOVAL OF PREJUDICES 

267 

discuss the -wicked (not-Tao) with virtuous (Too) 
men according to a mind willing to do the right (Tclo) is 
the important thing in good goveinment. What harm is 
there in not knowing -virtuous men 1 The important thing 
in good government is knowing virtuous {Tao) men. 

How can a person know the right {Tcto) ? By the mind. How know 
How does the mind know ? By emptiness, unity or con- ® 
centration, and unperturhedness. The mind never ceases Emptiness, 
to store away impressions, yet there is that which may he 
called emptiness.^ The mind has always a multiplicity,^ tion. 
yet there is that which may be called a unity.® The mind Unperturbed- 
is always in motion, yet there is that which may be called 
quiescence or unperturbedness.* 

A man from birth has the capacity to Imow thmgs ; this Emptiness, 
capacity to know things has its collected data ® ; these 
collected data are what are meant by stored away impressions. 

Moreover he has that which may be called emptiness. That 
which does not allow what is already stored away to injure 
that which is about to be received is called the mind s 
emptiness. The mind from birth has the capacity for Unity 
knowledge ; this Imowledge contains distinctions ; these 
distinctions consist of at the same "time perceiving more than 
one thing. To perceive more than one thing at the same time 
is plurality. Yet the mind has that which may be called a 
unity. That which does not allow that impression to harm 

1 receptiveness to new impressions, laok of prejudioe. 

2 Multiplicity of objects of tbe mind. 

3 unity of mind or concentration. 

‘ gp, the quality of not being disturbed by emotion. 

® The apperceptive mass, or the items of memory. 

268 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

XXI 

tills impression is called tlie mind's unity When the mind 
Unperturbed- sleeps, it dreams ; when it takes its ease, it indulges in reverie ; 

when it is nsed, it reflects. Hence the mind is always in 
motion. Yet it has that which may be called tinpertiirbedness. 
That which does not permit dreams ^ to disturb one’s 
knowledge is called the mind’s unperturbedness.® 

If a person is seeking for the right way of life (Tao), but 
true great, does not Imow it, he should make his mind empty, unifled, 
and unperturbed, and act in that way. Cause Mm who is 
seeking for the Way {Tao) to make his mind empty, and then 
8 he can receive it ; cause him who is serving the right 
{Tao) to make Ms mind unified, and when Ms mind is unified, 
he can do the right in its entirety ; cause Mm who desires 
the right {Too) to make Ms mind unperturbed ; when Ms 
mind is impeitobed, he can arrive at the truth. He who 
perceives the right {Tao) and gets at the truth of it, he who 
perceives the right {Too) and does it, can be said to embody 
the right {Tao). He who makes Ms mind empty, unified, 
and imperturbed can be said to follow right principle and 
to be illustrious in virtue. There is nothing visible wMch 
does not disclose its qualities to him ; there is nothing that 
he sees which he cannot discuss ; m discussing he never errs. 
He sits in Ms chamber and sees the world ; he lives in the 
present and discusses the ancient and the distant. He 
looks through all things and sees their nature ; he investigates 
good and bad government and arrives at their laws.* He 

1 Lit., which means both ** unity " and “ concentration ”, 

2 Unrealities. 

® Or “ passionlessness ”. 

* How to got good and avoid bad government. 

XXI THE EEMOVAL OE PEBJIIDICES 269 

understands the whole of Heaven and Earth, and regulates 
all things ; he governs according to the great principle and 
the universe is rectified. He is very great — ^who knows 
his limits ? He is very splendid — ^who knows his virtue ? 

His character is very intricate — ^who knows its form? He 
is brilliant, equal with the sun and moon ; his greatness 
fills the whole world. This is what is meant by being a 
truly great man. 

The mind is the ruler of the body and the master of the The mind 
spirit. It gives commands and all parts of the body obey, must be 
It itself makes prohibitions ; it itself gives commands ; 
it itself makes decisions ; it itself makes choices ; it itself 
causes action ; it itself stops action. The mouth can exert 
itself forcibly, and make the silent speak; the body can 
exert itself forcibly and make the bent straight ; the mind 
cannot exert itself forcibly and change one perception ; 
if it does this, then it would be in error and must resign 
its lordship. Hence I say ; The mind must bear what 9 
it chooses. It cannot prevent the results of its action 
appearing of themselves. The mind’s objects are confused concentrated, 
and extensive ; its essence is a unity. The ode says : unperturbed. 

“ I pick and pick the mouse ears,^ 

But I cannot fill my shallow basket. 

Alas for the man of my heart ! 

I have let him go to his place among the 
ofiS^cial ranks of Chou.” ® 

1 Burr-weed. 

3 Booh of Odes^ I, i, iii, 1. This ode speaks of a wife who could not even 
fill her shallow basket with weeds because of sorrow for her absent husband. 

270 

THE WOEKS OE HStftTTZB 

XXI 

A shallow basket is easy to fill ; mouse-ears are easy to 
get ; but she caimot do it because her miud is wandering to 
her husband among the Chou officials. Hence I say : When 
the mind is divided, it possesses no knowledge ; when it 
is upset, it is not quick-witted ; when it is wandering, it 
is in doubt. But when it is not so, it can be used to help 
investigate and all things can be embraced and known. 

Concentra- A person who fits into his niche is admirable. A person 
cannot be of two sorts, so the wise man picks one sort and 
concentrates on it. The farmer may be expert on the farm, 
but he cannot be considered a farm-sage ; the merchant 
may be expert at the market, but he cannot be considered 
a market-sage ; the workman may be expert with tools, 
but he cannot be considered a tool-sage. There are men 
who do not have these three kinds of ability, but who can 
cause these three businesses to be properly governed. We 
say that they are expert in the principles of life (Tao), not 
10 expert in things. The man who is expert with things 
judges one thing by another thing ; the man who is ejcpert 
in the principles of life (Tao) comprehends ail things and 
judges them. Hence the superior man concentrates on the 
principles of life {Tao\ and uses them to assist in investigating 
things. When a man concentrates on the principles of life 
(Tao)^ he can be correct ; when he uses them to assist in 
investigating things, he can get at the truth ; when he 
investigates and discusses according to an upright mind, 
he can put all things in their proper place.^ 

^ He makes no mistakes . 

XXI 

THE REMOVAL OE LBEJUDICES 

271 

In ancient times wlien Shim governed, the coimtry, he 
did not need to issue proclamations, nevertheless all things 
were brought to a prosperous issue.^ He dwelt in unity of 
mind and was solicitous of it — his glory was full and running 
over. He cultivated the subtleties of tbia unity — ^it gave 
him glory, but men did not know why. Hence the Classic 
of the Way (Too) says®: "The carnal mind is anxious; 

! the virtuous (Tao) mind is subtle.” If a man becomes as 

! intelligent as a superior man, only then can he know the 

I sources of anxiety ® or subtlety. 

The mind of man is like a tub of muddy river water * : Unporturbed- 
j place it upright and do not jar it, and the muddiness 

I will sink to the bottom, and the clear water will be on top ; tub of water. 

I then it will be clear enough to mirror the beard and eyebrows, 

; and to show the condition of the complexion. But if a little 

! wind crosses its surface, the mud at the bottom rises and 

^ the clear water at the top is disturbed, until a person cannot 

, see in it whether he is standing upright ! The mind is like 
[ that. Hence if it is guided by principle and nourished by 

’! purity, nothing can overturn it. Then it is sufficient to 

determine right and wrong, to decide what should be disliked 
and what suspected. But if a little thing leads the mind 
astray, on the one hand this man's aplomb is changed 
and on the other hand his mind is turned upside down ; 
then he is not even able to decide matters in general. 

‘ ^ Ho was able to use worthy officials who did all things well. 

I * This sentence is now in the JBook of History, II, n, ii, 16 , and forms part 

of the advice Shun gives Yu. 

’ Or danger. 

* Lit., *' water " ; he refers to the river water used everywhere in China 
which is muddy but settles upon standing. 

272 

THE WORKS OP HStlNTZE 

XXI 

Conoentrs Por tliere were many who lilted to write, but tradition 
on^ e^rt of Ts‘an CMe ^ as concentrating on it and making 

each sort, it Hs speciality. There were many who liked agriculture, 
but tradition gives only Hou Tsi ** as concentrating on it 
and making it his specialty. Many liked music, but tradition 
gives only K*uei ® as concentrating on it and making it his 
speciality. Many liked justice (Yi), but tradition gives only 
Shun as concentrating on it and making it his speciality,* 
Ch‘ui ® made the bow and Pou Yu ® made arrows, but Yi ^ 
was expert at archery. Hsi Chung ® made the carriage 
and Hsiang Tu originated the team of four horses, but Ts'ao 
Fu was expert at driving. Prom ancient times imtil to-day 
there have not been two men who could be said to be experts, 

Unpertur^d- Tzentze ® said : If in a room a person watches whether 

ness — control , . , , « n -r 

of the he can bit a rat, how can he sing with me ? In a cave 

12 'there was a man whose name was Ch^i.^^ He was fond 
emotions. pondering and loved thinking. But when the desires 

of the ear or eye came to him, they destroyed his train of 
thought ; when he heard the sound of mosquitoes or gnats, 

1 The historiographer of Hwangti, who is supposed to have invented 
writing. 

® Shun's Minister of Agrioultui'e, later made god of agriculture. 

® Shim’s Director of Music. 

* Because of his determinedly just and right attitude to his father and 
older brother in spite of their actions. . 

“ Shun’s Minister of Works, who improved* the bow. 

® Unknown. 

’ A famous archer and rebel in the Hsia dynasty, ca. 2169 n.a. 

® Improved the carriage j lived in the time of Yu, 

® A famous disciple of Confucius. 

Because his attention is divided. 

Unknown. Probably a hypothetical ease. 

XXI 

THE REMOVAL OF PREJUDICES 

273 

it disturbed bis concentration. So be sbmined tbe desires 
of tbe ears and eyes and got away from tbe noise of mosquitoes 
and gnats, and lived at leisure, thinking in quietude, and 
tben tbougbt to become wise. Wben snob a man thinks 
about virtue (J en) ^ iu this fashion, can be be said to have 
abstruse knowledge ^ Mencius was afraid of disgrace 
and divorced bis wife — this can be called being forced to 
act thus. Yiutze ^ scorched bis palm to prevent nodding — 
this can be called repressing oneself ; it does not come 
up to love of thinking. When a person shuns tbe desires 
of tbe ears and eyes and wben tbe sound of mosquitoes and 
gnats disturbs his concentration, this can be called anxiety ; 
it cannot be called abstruse knowledge. For be who has 
abstruse knowledge is tbe Wise Man.* Why should tbe 
Wise Man need to be forced or repressed or anxious 1 ® For 
what is foul is visible without ; what is pure is visible within. 

Tbe Sage gives reign to bis desires and satisfies bis passions, 13 
nevertheless be is controlled by principle ; so why need be The Sage, 
be forced or repressed or anxious ? For tbe acting out of 
tbe right Way {Tao) by tbe benevolent (Jew) man is without 

^ Attempts to think out virtue for himself. Jen is here that virtue 
which springs from within as contrasted to an external standard of virtue. 

^ Implying the answer, No. The term hero translated “ abstruse 
knowledge ”, is the same translated “ subtle ” in, the quotation from 
the Classic of the Way above. 

® A disciple of Confucius. Because of his eagerness to keep awake to 
study he placed a hot coal so that if he should nod he would burn 
himself. 

* Lit., ^ ; a Sage, but of the second grade ; the Wise Man has reached 

the wisdom of a Sage ; the Sage has both wisdom and character. This 
is the only place where Hsuntze mentions the 

® With the Sage, love of study of the Tao comes of itself. 

THE WORKS OE HSMTZE 

XXI 

Unoleainefla 

invalidates 

judgments. 

274 

efioit ^ ; the performance of the right Way {Too) by the 
Sage is without forciug himself. The thoughts of the 
benevolent (Jen) man reverence the thoughts of the Sage. 
To rejoice at this is the way (Tao) of the man of a 
controlled mind. 

Whenever in observing things there is doubt and the 
mind is uncertain, then things are not- apprehended clearly. 
When my thoughts are unclear, then I cannot decide whether 
a thing is so or is not so. "When a person walks in the dark, 
he sees a stone lying down and takes it to be a crouching tiger ; 
he sees a clump of trees . standing upright and takes them 
to be standing men. The darkness has perverted his clear- 
sightedness. The drunken man crosses a hundred-pace 
wide aqueduct and takes it to be a half-step wide ditch ; 
he bends down his head when going out of a city gate, taking 
it to be a small private door — ^the wine has confused his 
spirit. "When a person sticks his finger in his eye and looks, 
one thing appears as two ; when he covers his ears and listens, 
a tiny sound is taken to be a big noise — ^the circumstances 
have confused his senses. So in looking down from 
a mountain, a cow looks like a sheep ; but whoever wants 
a sheep does not go down and lead it away — ^the distance 
has obscured its size. In looking from the foot of a mountain, 
a ten-fathom tree looks like a chop-stick ; but whoever 
wants a chop-stick does not go up and break it ofi — ^the 
height of the mountain has obscured its length. WTien the 

^ ^ aon-action, Laotze’s famous term. This paragraph is an 

expansion of what is implied in Confucius’ saying of himself, “ At seventy, 
I could give rein to the desires of my heart, hut without transgressing the 
rule.” Analects, II, iv, 6. 

XXI 

THE REMOVAL OE PREJUDICES 

276 

water moves, the shadows dance ; men cannot decide whether 
they are beautiful or ugly — ^the state ‘of the water is confused. 

"When the blind man lifts up his head and looks, he does not 
see the stars ; people do not because of that decide whether 
there are or are not any stars — ^the man is misled by his blind- 
ness. If there were a man who would make judgments 
under such circumstances, he would be the moat stupid 
person in the world. This stupid man in making judgments 
would be using doubtful premises to make decisions. When 
he uses doubtful premises to make decisions, he could not 
be correct. If he could not be correct, how could he be 
'without fault 1 

South of the mouth of the Hsia river ^ there was a man 14 
called Chiian Chuh-liang.® In disposition he was stupid jg^eing spirits 
■ and very fearful. When the moon was bright, he was walking 
in the dark. He bent down his head and saw his shadow, them, 
and thought it was a devil following him. He looked up 
and saw his hair and thought it was a standing ogre.® He 
turned around and ran. "When he got to his house he lost 
his breath and died. Wasn’t that too bad? Whoever 
says there are demons,^ it must be because they make that 
judgment when they are suddenly startled or at a time when 
they are not sure or confused. This is when people think that 
a thing exists but it does not exist, or that it does not exist 
but it does exist, and in these circumstances make a judgment. 

1 In northern Shensi ; sonth of this river would he the heart of ancient 
China, It is a veiled reference to ancient Ohinu, 

» Unknown. A hypothetical instance ? 

3 A kind of demon, ^ i. ...» 

* The spirits of the dead are primarily meant by but by extension 

all spirits are included in the argument. 

276 

THE WORKS OK HStJNTZB 

XXI 

For when a person has been affected by dampness and con- 
tracted rheumatism, and when the rheumatic beats the drum 
and boils a suckling pig,^ then there will necessarily be 
the waste resulting from a worn out drum and a lost pig, 
but he will not have the happiness of recovery from his sickness. 
So although he is not south of the mouth of the Hsia river, 
he is no different from that man. 

Soieatifio That wherewith a person knows the nature of man ^ also 
oRnnew^e enables him to know the laws of the material world. If 
he seeks to know the laws of the material world by using 
fruitless. that wheiewith he knows the nature of man, there is nothing 
to hinder him ; but in a lifetime he cannot go all over them. 
In studying these laws, although he lived a myriad years, 
it would not be enough for his to embrace the changes 
of all things — ^he would be the same as a stupid man. 

16 Though he studied imtil he was old and his children grown, 

he would be the same as a stupid man. If he did not know 

his mistake, he could be truly called a failure. For the true 

student studies resolutely until the end. 

Completion "VVhat is the end ? The end is until there is no deficiency, 
of knowledge 

only gained "What may he called until there is no deficiency ? ” The 
Way (Too) of the Sage-Kmgs. The Sage fulfils the duties 
of the natural relationships ; the King fulfils the ideal of 
which ia^he government. When both are fulfilled, it is sufficient to make 
Sow/edge. ^ culmination of the world. Hence the student 
takes the Way (Tad) of the Sage-Kings as the judgments of 
an authority ; he. takes the government of the Sage-Kings 
as his law. He makes their methods his methods, in order 

*• An offering to the spirits to cure him. 

* The mind. 

XXI 

THE EEMOVAL OF PREJUDICES 

277 

to seek to be in the same class with them ; he strives to 
be like them and imitates their character. To strive for 
this Way (Tao) is the duty of every scholar ; to become of 
a class with this is to be almost a superior man. He who 
knows this Way (Tao) is the Sage. For although a man 
has knowledge, unless he cares for this Way (Too), he is 
as bad as a robber. Although he is brave, unless he maintains 
this Way (Too), he is as bad as a thief. Although he is 
skilled at investigation, unless it is to distinguish this Way 
(Tao), he is as bad as a rebel. Although he has many abilities, 
unless it is to cultivate his powers to this Way, he is as bad 
as a sharper. Although he has fine debating powers, unless 
it is to speak of this Way (Tao), he is a garrulous talker. 

It is said : There are two kinds of people in the world : Way of 

the Wrong criticizing the Bight, and the Right criticizing the * 

the Wrong. That is to say, those who agree with the 
practices of the Kings, and those who do not agree with the Wrong, 
practices of the Kings. In this country there are those who 
do not take this Way (Tao) for their standard ; can such 
people distinguish right and wrong, or try ^ the crooked and 
the upright ? If this were the case, that the Wrong 16 
were to distinguish right and wrong, if the Wrong were to 
try^ the crooked and upright, if the Wrong were to dis- 
criminate good and bad government, if the Wrong were to 
regulate the ways (Tao) of men, although they had the ability 
to do so, it would be of no benefit to men ; it could not fail 
to injure men. If, like the upright, they were to correct 
evil speech and examine strange arguments, they would 
confuse right and wrong ; like the strong they would practise 
^ In court. 

278 

THE WOEKS OF HSONTZE 

XXI 

The 

secretive 

prince. 

extortion and their mouths would be greedy of gain ; they 
would he shameless and allow outrageous acts ; they would 
be without uprightness, and disdainful in manner ; they 
would make wanton decisions and benefit only those close 
to them ; they w6uld not love courtesy ; they would not 
respect the rules of proper conduct {Li) and temperateness ; 
they would love to overthrow others — ^this theory produces 
a disordered age and wicked men. Then theories of govern- 
ment for the country would become many. It is said : The 
superior man despises splitting words and considering that 
to be investigation, talking about things and considering 
that to be discrimination. The superior man despises 
shallow Icnowledge and violent aspirations, whatever does 
not agree with the rule of the King — ^this expresses what I 
mean. To do that ^ is of no benefit in getting things done ; 
to seek it is of no benefit in obtaining what one wants ; worry 
and distress over it is of no good. Then reject it and discard 
it. Do not allow it to hinder yourself; do not permit it 
in your breast for an instant. Neither desire it in the past 
nor grieve for it in the future ; do not be anxious for it nor 
hold to it in your mind. Resolve upon your action at the 
moment ; when the afiair comes, respond to it ; when the 
situation arises, adapt yourself to it ; whether there be 
good or bad government, you will be illustrious and wise. 

!)« !iH * * 

17 The 2 prince who is open and above-board does not consider 

^ Such a wrong theory of government as above spoken of. 

* This paragraph may have been added later ; it does not pursue the 
argument of this chapter ; it is possibly spurious, but in Hsuntze's vein, 
and an expansion of what he says elsewhere. 

XXI THE EEMOVAL OF PREJTIDIOES 279 

that lie succeeds by being secretive or fails through, letting 
things be known. The secretive ^ prince does not consider that 
he succeeds by making things manifest or fails by being 
retired.^ Hence slander comes to the ears of the prince who 
is secretive, and straight talk is imknown to him ; small- 
minded men come near to him and superior men kept 
distant. The ode says : 

“ To think that to be obscure is to be wise, 

Is because you are as secretive as a fox ” ^ 
this speaks of the ruler being in the dark and the subordinates 
being dangerous to him. Straightforward talk comes to 
the prince who is open and slander is unlmown to him ; 
superior men come near to him, and little-minded men keep 
distant. The ode says : 

“ Below he is illustrious ; 

Above It is awe-inspiring ’’ ^ 

this speaks of the ruler being illustrious and the subordinates 
being influenced accordingly. 

^ Wlio keeps his plans secret and his person inaccessible. 

® Keeping away from the people and being secretive. 

* yrom an ode now lost. 

* BooJeofOdes, III, i, ii, 1. The word translated "illustrious ”, means 

literally “bright”; that for “ awe- insiji ling ”, means “glowing 

hot “ He ” refers to King Won, the founder of the Chou 
dynasty : “ It ” refers to Heaven, who gave King Wen the Decree of 
Heaven whereby he was enabled to develop his state to the leadership of 
the empire. The meaning is that although King Wen was illustrious, it 
was because of the superior illustriousness of Heaven, who nourished and 
influenced King Wen. The ode is in praise of King Wen and his wife. 

BOOK XXII 

ON TEE BECTIFICATION^ OF TERMS « 

Wheix the later Kings ® formed the terminology, in the 
names of ptmishments they followed the Shang dynasty, 
in the titles of nobility they followed the designations of 
the Chon dynasty,* and in ceremonial terms they followed 
the Ritual (Li).^ In the case of miscellaneous names given 
to things they followed the established customary designations 
of the Chinese people. Because of them, when people of 
distant districts with difierent custom^i indirectly meet, 
they can communicate. 

In miscellaneous psychological terms the essential factor 
at birth is man’s original nature. That which at birth is terms deSe 
produced by the concord of the Yin and Ycmg, whose essence 
is suitable for the stimulus and response relation, which is 
not produced by training, hut exists spontaneously, is called 
original nature. The love, hate, joy, anger, sorrow, and 
pleasure of original nature are called the emotions. When 
the mind selects from among the emotions by which it is 
jj^Qved — ^this is called reflection. "When the mind reflects 
and can act accordingly — this is called ac<juired traming. 

1 Por this phrase, of. Analects, XH, iii. Hsfintze has here taken up a task 
left by Confucius — ^the rectification of terms. 

’ * Or names, and so throughout this book. 

8 The great Kings of the Chou dynasty. “ King " in this hook (and 
often elsewhere) means a righteous King or Sage. 

* The founders of the Chou dynasty apportioned fiefs and gave the titles 
of nobility according to those previously current in the state of Chou. 

8 Yang Xiiang explains the Ritual as the /-Xt. 

282 

THE WORKS OF HStlNTZE 

xxa 

2 When reflection is practised and a man’s powers are 

trained, and tlien only is it formed— tliis is called acquired 
character. To act for the sake of righteous gain is what 
is meant by having a proper occupation. To act correctly 
according to justice (Y'i) is good conduct. That in man 
by which he knows is called knowledge ; that knowledge 
which corresponds to reality is called wisdom. That in 
man which can be carried out is called his ability. That 
which corresponds to what really can be done is called ability. 
An injury to original nature is called a defect. What one 
meets at the moment is called destiny. These are 

miscellaneous psychological terms ; these are terms fixed 
by the later Kings. 

The benefit i?or when the Kings had regulated names, when they had 
fixed terms and so distinguished realities, and when this 
make the principle (Tao) ^ was carried out and hence their will was 

ySous ; everywhere Imown, they were careful to lead the people and 

thero^ll be unified. Therefore distinguishing words, 

disorder. and making unauthorized distinctions, thus confusing the 
correct nomenclature, ^ causing the people to be in doubt 
and bringing about much litigation was called great wicked- 
ness.® It was a crime like that of using false credentials or 
false measures.^ Fox their people did not dare to make 

^ The principle of regulating terms. 

® Especially in litigation. It seems that Teng Sili or others made trouble 
by sophistically making distinctions in the legal terms of what was punishable 
as certain crimes. 

® This statement is echoed in the Li-Ki, Book III, iv, 1C, “ Those who 
distinguished words or corrupted the laws, who confounded the terminology 
and made unauthorized distinctions . , . were put to death." 

* Crimes punishable by law. 

xxn ON THE EECTIFIOATION OF TERMS 283 

strange terms a pretext for confusing the correct nomenclature, 
hence their people were guileless. Since they were guileless, 
they could easily be moved to action ; smoe they were easily 
moved to action, they produced achievements. Since 3 
their people did not care to make strange terms a pretext 
for confusing the correct nomenclature, they were united 
in virtue (Too) and law~abidingness, and respectful in following 
orders. In this way their example spread. Their example 
spread and they produced achievements — ^this was the 
extreme of good government. This was the benefit of being 
careful in preserving the terms which had been agreed upon. 

Now the Sage-Kings are dead, terms are carelessly preserved, a new King 
strange nomenclature arises, terms and realities are confused, 
and what is right and wrong is not clear, so that even an official three onteria. 
who guards the laws or a scholar who chants the Classics 
is all confused. Should a King arise, he would certainly 
follow the ancient terms and reform the new terms. Then 
he could not but investigate the reason for having terms, ^ 
together with the means through which similarities and 
differences are found, and the fundamental principles in 
applying terms to things. 

That various forms, when absent, are understood by others, i. The ^ea8o^ 
is because in the case of difierent things, terms and realities 
are mutually bound together.^ When the distinction between 
noble and base ® is not evident, when similarities and 

1 Each of these three criteria is iater explained by the text. 

* A difficult sentence which can be variously translated. It seems to 
moan that by the use of a name or term, the image of an absent article can 
be called up in another person's mind. 

® Different social classes. 

284 

THE WORKS OK HStJKTZE 

xxn 

Tama mark difierences are not distinguished, in this situation a man’s 
4 mind would certainly suffer from the misfortune of not 
Mon^etw^n ^^^^standing, and a person’s occupation would certainly 
noble and suffer from the calamity of being hindered or of failure, 
dfffere^! account the man who has knowledge separates 

what is different ; he regulates nomenclature in order to 
point out the reality, on the one hand in order to make plain 
the noble and base, and on the other to distinguish similarities 
and differences. When the distinction between the noble 
and base is evident and similarities and differences are 
distinguished, under those circumstances a man’s mind will 
not suffer from the misfortune of not understanding, and 
his occupation will not suffer from the calamity of being 
hindered or of failure. This is the reason for having terms. 
rfSooTOring 'w^hat means are similarities and differences found ? 

flimilarities The means are the senses given by Nature. Whenever 
J^erencea— anything is judged to be the same sort or the same emotion, 
aenses it is because the perception of the senses given by Nature 
is that the thing is the same. Hence for example, the reason 
that similarities are universally recognized to be such every- 
where is because their agreed upon names have become 
universal, and so they can be recognized. Form and colour 
are distinctions made by the eyes. “ Clear ” and “ confused ” 
sound, harmony, musical time, and other sounds ^ are 
distinctions made by the ear. Sweet and bitter, salty and 
fresh, peppery and sour, and other flavours are distinctions 
made by the mouth. Perfumes and smells, fragrant and 
putrid, the smell of fresh meat and fetid smells, the smell 

^ Koisea ? 

xxn ON THE RECTIFICATION OF TERMS 286 

of the mole-cricket ^ and the smell of decayed wood, and 
other smells are distinctions made by the nose. Pain and 5 
itching, cold and heat, smooth and rough, light and heavy, 
are distinctions made by the body. Doing things from a 
iiMng to do them and forcing oneself to do things ; joy and 
anger, sorrow and pleasure, love, hatred, and desire are 
distinctions made by the mind. 

The mind also gives meaning to impressions.^ It gives the mind ; 
meaning to impressions, and only then, by means of the ear, to 

sound can be known ; by means of the eye, forms can be impreBsiona. 
known. But the giving of meaning to impressions must 
depend on the senses given by Nature, each noting® its 
particular kind of sensations, and then only can knowledge 
be had. When the five senses ^ note something but do not 
comprehend it, and the mind tries to give it a meaning 
but has no explanation; nobody would differ, everyone 
would call tbis ignorance. These are the means by which 
smdlarities and differences are foimd. 

Then in accordance with that, names are given to things. 
"When things are alike, they are named alike ; when 
difierent, they are named differently. When a simple 
term ® would be sufficient to convey the meaning, a simple 
term is used ; when a simple term is insufficient, then a 
compound term® is used. When simple and compound 
^ A term, from the Ritual. 

• Tung 0hung-8hu gives this unusual meaning to this character. Of. 

48 5i. + H S«. p- sss. 

* The figure is that of a Chinese storekeeper, who sits in the hack of the 
store and records each transaction as it occurs. 

3. The 
fundamental 

6 

principles in 
applying 
terms to 
things — 

The terms 
should 
express the 
meaning. 

* Ear, eye, nose, mouth, and body. 

‘ A term composed of one character only, e.g. “ horse ”. 

• A term composed of two or more characters, e.g. “ white horse 

286 

THE WOEKS OF HStlNTZE 

xxu 

concepts do not conflict, tlien the general term ^ may be 
•used ; although it is a general term, there is no harm in using 
it. The person who apprehends diflerent realities uses 
different terms for them ; hence he who refers to different 
realities should never nse other than different terms ; thus 
there could not be any confusion. Likewise he who refers 
to the same reality should never use other than the 
same term. 

Glasses of For although all things are manifold, there are times 

terns. 'vv^hen we wish to speak of them all, so we call them “ things 
“ Things ” is the most general term. We press on and 
generalize ; we generalize and generalize still more, until 
there is nothing more general ; then only we stop. There 
are times when w^e wish to speak of one aspect, so W'-e say 
“ birds and beasts “ Birds and beasts ” is the greatest 
classifying term. We press on and classify ; we classify 
and classify still more, imtil there is no more classification 
to be made, and then we stop. 

There are no terms assuredly appropriate of themselves. 

agreement. There was an agreement and things were named. When 
the agreement had been made and had become customary — 
that is called an appropriate designation. That which is 
different from what is agreed upon is called an inappropriate 
designation. Terms have no corresponding realities 
appropriate of themselves. There was an agreement “ 

^ The class or common term, e.g. “ horse 

* Hsflntze says nowhere who agreed ; the Kings simply ratified a general 
agreement. But the Kings probably only fixed such terms as those of 
nobility and ceremony ; this convention that the Kings fixed the terms is 
extended to all terms by a literary fiction. 

xxn ON THE BECTIEICATION OE TERMS 287 

and things were named ; when the agreement had been made 
and had become customary— these were called terms 
appropriate to realities. But terms are really felicitous ; 
when a term goes to the point, is easily understood 
and is not contrary to the reality— this is called a 
felicitous term. 

There are things which have the same form but two places ^ ; 
or they may have dilferent forms but the same place. ^ When 
things can be separated, when their forms are alike but 
their places different, although they may be indistinguishable 
— ^they are called two realities. When the form changes, 
but the reality cannot be separated, though it looks different,® 
we call it transformation. When there is transformation 
but no separation — ^these are called one reality. By this 
method realities are investigated and their number is deter- 
mined. This is the fundamental thing in regulating terms, 
j "When a later King fixes terms, he must investigate these 
1 matters. 

i “To * receive an insult is no disgrace ” ® ; “a Sage does 
' not love himself ” ® ; “to kill robbers is not to kill 

1 E.g. two similar horses in difierent places. 

* E.g. grub and moth, young and aged person. 

* Different as the grub and moth look different, hut are the same insect. 
Here he is dealing with differences of time ; above with difEerenoes in 
Bpaoe. 

* Here Hslintze proceeds to apply these logical distinctions to con- 
temporary philosophy and make a classification of fallacies. 

‘ Cf. p. 206 f . A teaching of Sungtze. 

* A teaching of Yangtze or Chuangtze — ^it is the opposite of the saying 
quoted by Hu Shih, op, cit. Probably the argument is that the Sago 
love men (in Chinese ^ means “ others " as well as “ men ") hence not 
himself. Hu Shih quotes the Neo-Mician ^ ^ 

7 

One or two 
realities 7 

Three types 
of fallacies 
illustrated. 
1 . 

288 

THE WOEKS OE HStOSTTZE 

xxii 

men these are fallacies in the use of terms with the result 
of confusing the terms. Investigate the reason for having 
terms, observe of what sort the terms are, and then you 
will he able to stop this confusion. " Motmtains and abysses 
are on the same level,’’ ^ “ the desires seek to be few,” ® 
“the flesh of domestic animals is not included in what is 
considered good tasting ; the great bell is not included in 
music ” ^ — ^these are fallacies in the use of realities with 
the result of confusing the terms. Investigate the means 
through which similarities and differences are fo\md, and 
see what fits the reality, and then you will be able to 
8 stop this confusion. “ Even if you do not go and 
see, the centre pillar exists,” ® “ an ox-horse is not a 

does not abstract from oneself ; oneself is included in the number of those 
who are loved : if oneself is among those who are loved, then one will love 
himself ; and the natural order will be to love oneself and love men 
(others).’* But this argument is not the same as the quotation of Hshntze 
here ; it seems rather to be a rebuttal of it. The aphorism quoted by Hsfintze 
would seem to come more naturally from Yangtze. 

^ A teaching of the Neo-Micians, found in ^ jj^, “ Bobbers 

are people (or men). ... To love robbers is not to love the people. Not to 
love robbers is not failing to love people. To kill robbers is not to kill 
people (or men).” In this passage the word for ” men *’ or “ people ” is one 
and the same, and the argument turns on two meanings of it. 

2 A teaching of Huei SMh, the Neo-Mician. Gf. ^ ^ ^ 

“ Heaven is as low as Earth, mountains and streams are level *' — explained 
since the earth is round, there is no absolute up or down. Of, ^ ^ ^ 

A i(H. p- 231- 

* A teaching of Sungtze. Of. p. 209 f. 

* Possibly a teaching of the Neo-Mioians, Yang Liang ascribes it to Mioius, 
but it has not been traced. 

® I have given the best translation I could for a oryptio phrase which po 
Chinese commentator pretends to understand j I do not know who advocated 
the Berkeleian subjectivism against which such a proposition would be 
directed. 

XXII ON THE RECTIEICATION OE TEEMS 289* 

horse ’’ these are fallacies in the use of terms -with the result 
of confusing the realities. Investigate the agreements about 
terms ; use what these agreements acquiesce in, set yourself 
against what they refuse to countenance, and then you will 
be able to stop this confusion. 

All heretical doctrines and flagitious teachings which The. wise 
are impudently fabricated and which depart from the correct tC^o^by 
doctrine (Tao) can be classed among these three fallacies, 

- , ^ ^ tlOHB ftHQ. 

Hence the wise princes, knowing to which class they belonged, punishmenta. 
did not dispute about them. So the people were easily 
unified in the right Way (Tao), although the princes could 
not make them understand all the reasons for things. Hence 
the wise princes dealt with the people by authority, and 
guided them to the right way (Tao ) ; they explained things 
in their proclamations, gave statutes in wise maxims, and ' 
restrained them by punishments. Hence their people 
were transformed into the right Way (Tao) as by magic. 

Why should they use dialectic 1 

Now the Sage-Kings are dead, the country is in disorder, Namea, 
wicked doctrines have arisen, the princes have no power 
to compel the people to do right, and no punishment to dialectic, 
prevent them from following wrong, and so there is dialectic. 

^ An argument based on an improperly formed term, ** ox-horse The 
Neo-Mioion says : “ That an ox-horse is not an ox is ibe same 

as sa3dng it is ; both can be said ” ; and the T' says : 

“ Hence it is said, that an ox-horse is not an ox should be denied ; that 
an ox-horse is an ox should also be denied. Then whether it is affirmed 
or denied, the statement ‘ that an ox-horse is an ox should be denied 
should also be denied. Eor an ox is nob two nor is a horse two, but an 
ox-horse is two. Then an ox is not a not-ox, and a horse is not a not-horse, 
but an ox-horse is ot an ox and not a horse. So there is no difficulty. 

290 

THE WOKKS OE HStJNTZE 

XXII 

WEen tlie reality is not understood, its name is given ^ ; 
when its name is given and the thing is not understood, 
it is designated ; when it is designated but not understood, 
then it is explained ; when the explanation is not understood, 
then dialectic ^ comes into use. Hence the name, designation, 
explanation, and dialectic are the great refinements which 
make things usable and the primary things in the business 
of being a King. 

Literature, The use of a term is to know the reality when one hears 
the term. The beauty of terms is to string them together 
and make literature. When both the utility and the beauty 
names, of terms are secured, that is called knowing terms.. Terms 
9 or names are that wherewith we designate many realities, 
speech, Speech is terms which combine many realities in order to 
express one idea. In dialectic and explanation people should 
separate realities from terms in order to make known the 
the Tao. law (Too) of what one should do or should not do. Designa- 
tion and giving names is the use of dialectic. Dialectic 
and explanation is that whereby the mind delineates the 
Way {Too), The mind is the master-workman of the Way 
(Tao).® The true Way {Tao) is the regular and necessary 
principles which make order and good government. 

The benefit When a person’s mind accords with the Way {Tao) ; when 
with* his teaching accords with his mind ; when his speech accords 
Way. 'v^^ith his teaching ; when he rectifies terms and so designates 

realities ; when terms are founded on realities and are imder- 
stood ; when he discriminates difeences and does not make 

1 To aid in understanding the doubtful article. 

* Disputation, debate. * 

® Since its commands rule the personality and cause it to follow the Way, 

XXII ON THE BECTIEIOATION OE TEEMS 291 

mistakes ; when he classifies tHngs without doing them any 
violence ; then he can listen to discussions and tell if they 
accord with a polished style ; he can argue and exhaust 
all possible reasoning ; by means of the right Way {Too) 
he can distinguish wickedness as the plumb-line rules between 
crooked and straight. For this reason unorthodox doctrines 
cannot confuse him ; all the schools of philosophy cannot 
escape him. 

To have the wisdom of having heard everything, but not Tho^'diaieotio 
the maimer of an impetuous braggart; to be doubly good 
and generous, but without the air of boasting of his virtue ; 
when his teachings are carried out, the country is upright ; 
when his teachings are not carried out, he is still wise in 
the Way {Too) but retires into private life — ^this is the dialectic 
of the Sage. The ode says : 10 

I “ Amiable and courtly, 

I Pure as a sceptre of mace or jade, 

I Of honourable reputation and great hopes, 

I My joyous young prince, 

You are the bond of the empire ” — 
this expresses what I mean.’- 

He has the moderation that comes from politeness * ; The dialectic 
I he obeys the principles of the elder and younger ; he does not or Suj^rbr^ 
speak of what is shunned or forbidden ; he does not utter 
imprecations ; he speaks from a benevolent [Jen) heart ; 
he listens with a receptive mind ; he disputes in a fair spirit ; 

^ Booh of Odes, III, n, viii, 6. A congratulatory ode addressed to the 
young King Ch'ong, son of King Wu. The purport of this quotation is 
that the Sage will have these -virtues. 

> Lit,, “ declining honours and giving the precedence to others.” 

292 

THE WORKS OK HStNTZE 

XXII 

he is unmoved by the criticism or praise of the multitude ; 
he does hot pervert the ears and eyes of the onlooker ; he 
does not corrupt the power of people of rank ; he does not 
take pleasure in repeating the speech of the depraved^; 
hence he is able to dwell in the right Way {Tao) and not err ; 
he may be oppressed but cannot be forced to act wrongly ; 
it may bring gain, but he will not depart from the right ; 
he respects fairness and uprightness and despises vulgar 
striving— this is the dialectic of the scholar or superior 
man. The ode says : 

“ The long night is endless ; 

My ever-flowing thoughts are nimble ; ' . ' 

They do not disesteem the ancients ; 

They do not vary from'the rules of proper conduct 
(Li) and justice (Yi ) ; 

What care I for people’s talk 1 ” — 
this expresses what I mean.® 

The Speech of the superior man is deep but yet refined, 
Man. reaching down to people’s understanding but yet systematic, 

making distinctions but yet having unity. He corrects 
his words and makes his speech appropriate, in order to 
make clear his meaning. The terms he uses and his speech 
are the messengers of his meaning. When they are sufficient 
to be understood, he stops. To use them wrongly is wicked- 
, ness. Therefore when his words are sufficient to point 
out the reality, and his speech is sufficient to make his 
11 end manifest, he stops. In anything more than that, he is 
called slow of speech. This is what the superior man rejects 

^ Heretics. 

® A lost ode. 

XXII ON THE KECTIEICATION OF- TERMS 293 

and the stupid man picks up and considers as his treasure. 

For the speech of the stupid man is hasty and coarse, or 
else mysterious and unsystematic, habhling and buhblkg.i 
He sophisticates his words and makes his speech mysterious, 
but has no depth to his meaning. Hence he travels- far but 
does not come to any goal ; he works hard but without- result ; 
he desires but does not obtain renown. Reflect on the speech 
of the wise man and it is easily understood ; carry it out- . 
and you will easily be at peace ; hold to it and you. will be 
easily established ; bring it to accomplishment and yOu 
will certainly obtain your desire, and not meet with what 
you hate ; but the stupid man is the opposite of this. The 
ode says : 

“ Were you an imp or a water-bow, 

I Then you would be beyond reach, 

I But when a person can be seen face to face and eye to eye, 

It does not take forever to see through him. 

I have made this good song 
; To show how very shifty you are ” — 

this e35)reBses my meaning.® 

* + * * % 

Every doctrine of self-control which depends on the removal is 
of desire has no way of guiding the desires and is hampered control 
by the presence of desire. Every doctrine of self-control 

i 

i 1 Like boiling water. 

: 3 A fabulous creature, said to lie bid. in tbe sand at tbe bottom of a 

stream, and when the shadow of anyone on the bank appears in the water, 
to spurt sand at it, after which the person is sure to die. 

^ jSoo/a of Odes, II, v, v, 8. This cde bewails and exposes a slanderer 
who had been a friend. 

294 

THE WORKS OF HStJNTZE 

XXII 

which waits for the lessening of desires has no way to curb 
the desires and is hampered by the numerousness of desires. 
The presence or absence of desire is one class of phenomena ; 
it is one of the elements of human nature, not the result 
of self-control or of disorderly conduct : the numerousness 
or fewness of the desires is a different class of phenomena ; 
it depends on the strength of the emotions, not on self-control 
or disorderly conduct. Desire does not depend on whether 
attainment is possible, but the person who seeks for anything 
12 follows after what is possible.’- That desire does not 
depend on whether attainment is possible is received 
from Nature ; that the person who seeks for anything follows 
after what is possible is brought about by the mind.^ That 
which is received from Nature is one thing — desire ; it is 
controlled by the many desires of the mind, and certainly 
can hardly be compared with what Nature originally gave 
man,® What men desire most is life, and what they hate 
most is death. Yet there are men who follow after life and 
find death — ^it is not because they do not desire life and 
desire death; it is because they cannot live and can die. 
For if a person’s desire overpasses what his actions can 
obtain, the mind renounces it. If what the mind assents 

^ The contrast is between the faculty of desire, which is part of original 
human nature and does not consider the possibility or impossibility of its 
objects, and the particular desires, which arc restricted by the mind to 
objects that are possible of attainment. 

* The commentator Yang Liang catches the essence of Hsiintze’s teaching 
exactly, “ Human nature naturally has desires ; the mind is their con- 
troller." This sentence has found its way into tho text in some editions, 
and is quoted by Hu Shih as original with Hsiintze. 

* A corrupt sentence, the translation of which is doubtful. 

f, XXII ON THE RECTIEICATIOK OF TERMS 296 

I to is in accordance with moral law, although the desires are 
I many, what harm are they to self-control ? When a person’s 
desires are weak but his actions are extravagant, the mind 
j has caused it. If what the mind assents to deviates from 
the moral law, then although the desires be few, how would 
that stop disorderly conduct 1 Hence self-control and 
disorderly conduct depend on the assent of the mind, not 
on the desires of the affective nature. If you do not seek 
for self-control where it is,^ and instead seek for it where 
it is not, 2 although you say, “ I have it,” you have lost it. 

Human nature is the production of Nature ; the emotional The Way is 
nature is the essence of human nature ; desires are the to d^l wTtiT 
reactions of the emotional nature. The emotional nature desire, 
cannot escape from assuming that what a person desires 
can be had. The starting point of wisdom must be to consider 
the desires necessary, but to guide them. Fox although 
a person be a doorkeeper,® his desires cannot be 13 
removed. Although he were the Emperor, his desires cannot 
he completely fulfilled.'* Although desires cannot be 
removed, their pursuit can he temperate. Although the 
desires cannot he completely fulfilled, a person who seeks 
for it can he as if almost completely satisfied ; although 
desire cannot he removed, if what he wants cannot he 
obtained, the person who refleota will desire to restrain 
his pursuit. If the man who knows the Way (Tao) obtains 

i In tho mind. 

“ In the emotions. 

^ A very lowly station. 

' * The text here has a sentence which interrupts and disagrees with the 
argument and is probably a gloss : " Although desires cannot be completely 
fulfilled, they can be almost completely fulfilled.*’ 

296 

THE WOEKS OE HSHHTZE 

xxu 

Elimination 
of desire is 
fruitless. 

Actions 

should 

correspond to 
the standard 
of the Way. 

power and wealth, lie can come near to satisfying all 
Ms desires ; if lie loses power and wealth, ho can come 
near to satisfying all Ms desires ; if he loses power and wealth, 
he can restrain Ms pursuit — there is notMng else in the world 
that is better than this I 

No one fails to follow what he deems possible and reject 
what he deems impossible — there is notMng better than 
this in knowing the Way (Too). But none of those who do 
not follow the Way {Too) do this. Suppose there were 
a man who liked the south country ; but although it was 
great, yet he desired it ; and he disliked the north, but 
although it was small, yet he disliked it ; would it be probable, 
because he could not obtain all of the south, that he 
would leave the south and go north ? What people of to-day 
desire is much, but yet they desire it ; what they hate is\ 
little, but yet they hate it. Can it be that because they ! 
cannot obtain all they desire, that they leave the Way (Tao) * 
whereby they obtain what they desire and take what they 
hate ? ^ Therefore follow what agrees with the Way {Too ) ; 
how could this bring loss and cause disorderly conduct 1 
Desert what does not accord with the Way (Too ) ; how could 
it bring gain and self-control ? Hence a wise man is only 
concerned about the Way (Too). What the minor schools 
of pMlosophy wish for in their much-prized theories will 
all fail. 

Men never get what they desire unadulterated ; in rejecting 
what they hate, it never goes away unmixed. Hence men's 

, ^ He implies that the Coniuoion othio enables one to satisfy bis desires 
by making tbe individual temperate ; wMlo other pbiloaophies wbicb try 
to eliminate desires are going against human nature and fail. 

XXII ON THE RECTIFICATION OF TERMS 297 

actions should always correspond to the standard. "When 14 
the steelyard 1 is not held properly, a heavy article 
will cause it to swing up high and people will think it is light ; 
a light thing will cause the steelyard to hang down low, and 
people will think it is heavy. In this way people are misled 
about weights. When the standard ^ is not right, calamity 
is mixed with desire and people think it is happiness ; or 
happiness is mixed with hatred, and people think it is calamity. 

In this way, too, people are misled about calamity and 
happiness. The Way {Tao) is the correct standard ^ in ancient 
times and in the present. If you depart from the Way (Tao) 
and pick your own inner standard, then you will not know 
what calamity or happiness takes for a pretext to delude you. 

If a trader barters one thing for one thing, people say, following the 

“ He has neither loss nor gain,” If he barters one for two, Way is all 
^ gam. 

people say, “ There is no loss, but a gain,” If he barters 
two for one, people say, “ There is no gain, but a loss.” The 
schemer gets as much as he can ; the man who plans takes 
all that he can : no one will exchange two for one because 
they know the art of evaluating things. To start following 
the Way (Too) is like exchanging one for two ; how can there . 
he a loss ? To leave the Way (Tao) and pick one’s own inner 
standards is like exchanging two for one ; how can there 
be any gain ? Such a man will exchange the desire of a 
hundred years for the dislike of one moment, because he does 
not know the art of evaluating things. 

^ Everythtag in China is weighed on the steelyard and ways of cheating 
are eommon. The steelyard may ho ]’nst hut held improperly, and so false 
weights occur ; or the iron bob which is used to balance the object to be 
weighted may be of incorrect weight, and false weight will be indicated. 

* Lit., “ the correct steelyard bob.'' 

298 

THE WOKKS OF HSflNTZE 

XXII I 

Attempts to Moreover tlie person who has tried to see into man’s hidden L 
dl parts, and put himself hard at work to investigate it, knows \ 

failure, that there is no one who in their purpose despises moral | 

principles, who does not value material things ; and that there | 

is no one who does not externally value material things i 

and is not inwardly anxious ; and that there is no one whose | 

actions deviate from moral principles who is not in dangerous ! 

circumstances ; and that there is no one who is in dangerous | 

circumstances who is not inwardly fearful. When the mind 1 

is anxious and fearful, though the mouth be holding meat, | 

it will not recognize the flavour thereof ; though the ears I 

hear bells and drums, they will not recognize the sound 
thereof ; though the eyes behold fine embroidery, they will ' 

not know the pattern thereof ; though the clothes be light ; 

and warm, and he be sitting on a rush or fine bamboo mat, ; 

the body will not recognize the comfort thereof ; for he may 
enjoy the goodness of all things, yet he cannot be contented. 

15 If he gains a respite and contentment, his anxiety 
and fear nevertheless do not leave him. For though he 
be enjoying the goodness of all things, yet he is greatly 
anxious; though he be absorbing the benefit of all things, yet he 
gains great injury. Thus fares he who seeks material things. 

Is food life ? Is porridge old age 1 For he desires to foster 

his desires, but indulges his emotions ; he desires to foster 

his nature, but he endangers his body ; he desires to foster 

his enjoyment, but he attacks his mind ; he desires to foster 

his fame, but he disorders his actions. Although this sort 
of man be made a marquis and called a prince, he would be 
no whit diflerent from a common man or a robber ; although 
he were to ride in a nobleman’s coach or wear a crown, he 

xxn ON THE RECTIFICATION OF TERMS 299 

woiild be no wHt difeent from a footless cripple. Then 
he could well be called one who makes himself the servant 
of material things. 

If the heart is tranquil and contented, though the colours inner con. 
be below the ordinary, they can nourish the eyes; though 
sounds be below the ordinary, they can nourish the ears ; poor oiicum- 
coarse food and vegetable soup can nourish the taste ; coarse 
cotton^ clothes and coarse hemp sandals can noiuish the 
body ; a straw hut for a house, reed screens for doors, straw- 
beds, ancient plain stands and mats ^ can nourish the form. 

For a person may be without the goodness of all things, 
yet he can foster his enjoyment ; he may be without a position 
of high rank, but he can foster his fame. If such a man were 
■ given the empire, it would mean much for the empire, but 
it would mean little for his contentment and joy. Thus 
he could be called one who makes his personality important 
and makes material things his servants. The® superior 
man is cautious about untried doctrine, actions which have 
not been previously seen, and plans which have been unheard 
of among people. 

^ In China every gentleman wears silk, 

® Like that used by the Japanese to-day for eating and sitting. 

® This last sentence may be spurious. Of. Doctrine of the Meant 3. 

BOOK XXIII 

I THE NATUEE OE MAN IS EVIL 

Tiie nature of man is evil ; Hs goodness is only acquired 1 
training. TKe original nature of man to-day is to seek for 
gain. If tliis desire is followed, strife and rapacity results, hence 
and courtesy ^ dies. Man originally is envious and naturally 
kates otkers. If tkeae tendencies are followed, injury and 
destruction follows ; loyalty and faithfulness are destroyed, 

Man originally possesses the desires of the ear and eye; 
lie likes praise and is lustful. If these are followed, impurity 
and disorder results, and the rules of proper conduct (Li) 
and justice (Yi) and etiquette® are destroyed. Therefore 
to give rein to man’s original nature, to follow man’s feelings, 
inevitably results in strife and rapacity, together with 
violations of etiquette and confusion in the proper way of 
doing things, and reverts to a state of violence. Therefore 
the civilizing influence of teachers and laws, the guidance 
of the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice ( Yi) is absolutely 
necessary. Thereupon courtesy results ; public and private 
etiquette is observed; and good government is the con- 
sequence. By this line of reasoning it is evident that the 
nature of man is evil and his goodness is acquired. 

^ Lit, “ deoliniag and yielding," ^ ^ ; if an honour is offered 
you, make a show of declining it ; if you are asked to take the precedence 
make a show of yielding it to others — still the standard procedure in China. 

^ * Lit,, “ the beauty of priyate and public etiquette." 

302 

THE WORKS OF HStJNTZE 

xxm 

Crooked Crooked wood needs to undergo steaming and bending i 

conform to tbe carpenter’s rule ^ ; then only is it straight. : 

the Sages Blunt metal needs to undergo grinding and whetting : then • 
trained man's , . , _ • . t y /• , . I 

nature by Li only IS it sharp. The original nature of man to-day is evil, j 

and Yi. needs to undergo the instruction of teachers and laws, I 

then only will he be upright. He needs the rules of proper | 
conduct (Li) and justice (Ft), then only will there be good % 
government. But man to-day is without good teachers and 'i 
laws ; so he is selfish, vicious, and unrighteous. He is without | 
the rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice (Ft), so there is ! 
rebellion, disorder, and no good government. In ancient times j 

the Sage-Kings knew that man’s nature was evil, selfish, j 

2 vicious, unrighteous, rebellious, and of itself did not i 

bring about good government. For this reason they created ? 

the rules of proper conduct (Xt) and justice ( Ft) ; they ,J 

established laws and ordinances to force and beautify the | 

natural feelings of man, thus rectifying them. They trained t 

to obedience and civilized men’s natural feelings, thus guiding j 

them. Then good government arose and men followed J 

the right Way (Too). Now the people who are influenced \ 

by good teachers and laws, who accumulate literature and I 

knowledge, who are led by the rules of proper conduct (Xt) 
and justice (Ft) become superior men. Those who give 
rein to their natural feelings, who take joy in haughtiness, i 

and break the rules of proper conduct (Xt) and justice (Ft), j 

become small-minded men. By this line of reasoning it | 

is evident that the original nature of man is evil, and his ' 

goodness is acquired. 1 

Mencius^ Mencius says, “ The fact that men are teachable shows | 

^ An instrument used to atraigkten crooked wood. ^ 

XXIII 

303 

THE HATUEE OE MAH IS EVIL 

that their original nature is good.” I reply : This is not so. 
This is not understanding the nature of man, nor examining 
the original nature of man^ nor the part played hy aoQi^uired 
elements. Whatever belongs to original nature is the gift 
of Nature. It cannot he learned. It cannot be worked for. 
The Sage'-Kings brought forth the rules of proper conduct 
(Iz) and justice (Vz). Men learn them and gain ability ; 
they work for them and obtain results in the development 
of character. What cannot be learned and cannot be worked for, 
what is in the power of Nature only is what is meant by original 
nature. That which can be learned and which gives men 
ability, which can be worked for and which brings results 
in the development of character, whatever is in the power 
of man is what is meant by acquired character. This is 
the distinction between original nature and acquired character. 
Now according to the nature of man, the eye has the power 
of seeing and the ear has the power of hearing. However, 
when a person sees a thing, his quickness of sight is not 
outside of his eye ; when he hears, his quickness of hearing 
is not outside of his ear. It is evident that quickness of 
sight and quickness of hearing cannot he learned.^ Mencius 
says : Now the original nature of man is good ; all have 
lost and destroyed their original nature, hence it is evil. 
I reply : When he says this, he is greatly mistaken. Now 
considering the nature of man, as soon as he is bom, he would 
already have grown away from his first estate, he would 
already have grown from his natural disposition. He would 
already have lost and destroyed it. By this line of reasoning 

^ i.o,, that they are innate. Heiintze ia struggling to express the 
concept of “ innate 

304 

THE WOEKS OE HStJNTZB 

XXIII 

Evil 

tendencies 
are innate ; 
virtue is 
against 
nature. 

it is evident that the original nature of man is evil and his 
goodness is acq[Tiired. 

The doctrine that man’s original nature is good implies 
that without growing away from his first estate, he becomes 
admirable ; without growing away from his natural dis- 
position, he becomes beneficial. To say that man’s original 
nature is admirable, his heart and thoughts are good, is the j 
same as to say that the power of seeing is not apart from the ? 
eye and the power of hearing is not apart from the ear.^ 

3 So we say, if there is an eye, there is the power of seeing ; 
if there is an ear, there is the power of hearing. Now the 
nature of man is that when he is hungry, he desires repletion ; 
when he is cold, he desires warmth ; when he labours, he 
seeks rest. This is man’s natural feeling. But now when i 

a man is hungry and sees food, he dares not rush in ahead of « 

others ; instead the eater yields to others. "When working, ! 

he dares not seek rest, instead he works for others. The 
son yielding precedence to his father, the younger brother 
yielding to his older brother ; the son working for his father, 
the younger brother working for his older brother — ^these 
two kinds of actions are contrary to original nature and 
antagonistic to natural feeling. Nevertheless there is the 
doctrine {Tao) oi filial piety, the etiquette of the rules of 
proper conduct (J^i) and justice (Ti). If a person follows his 
natural feelings, he has no courtesy ; if he has courtesy, j 

then it is antagonistic to his natural feelings. By this line - 

of reasoning it is evident that man’s original nature is evil \ 

and his goodness is acquired. I 

It is to say that goodness is innate and natural. 

xxm THE NATURE OF MAN IS EVIL 

306 

A q^uestioner may say : If man’s original nature is 
tLen whence come the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice acquired 
( Yi) % In answer I say : All rules Of proper conduct (Li) 
and justice (Yi) come from the acquired training of the Sage, 
not from man's original nature. The potter ^ pounds and 
moulds the clay and makes the vessel— but the vessel comes 
from the potter’s acquired skill, not from the potter’s innate 
character. The workman hews a piece of wood and makes 
a vessel ; but the vessel comes from the workman’s acquired 
training, not from his innate character. The Sage gathers 
together ideas and thoughts, and becomes skilled by his 
acquired training, so as to bring forth the rules of proper 
conduct (Li) and justice (r-i), and originate laws and regula- 
tions. So the rules of proper conduct (Li), justice (Yi), 
laws and regulations come from the acquired Imowledge 
of the Sage, not from man’s original nature. 

The eye desires colour, the ear desires sound, the mouth 
desires flavours, the heart desires gain, the body desires 
pleasure and ease : these all come from man’s original nature 
and feelings. Give man a stimulus and they come forth 
of their own accord ; they do not need to be taught to man 
before they can come forth. But if a man is stimulated 
and the virtue we are seeking cannot of itself come forth, 
if it needs to wait to be taught and then only can come forth 
—this is what is meant by an acquired characteristic. 

.This is the distinction between original nature and acquired 4 
characteristics, the evidence of their dissimilarity.^ So the 

1 This example and language is taken from the Tao Teh Ohing, sect. 11. 

* Of. Laotze, Tao Teh Ohing, sect. 18. “ When the great Principle (Too) 
is lost itiere is benevolence {Jen) and justice ( 7i ) ; knowledge and wisdom 

306 

THE WORKS OP HSOHTZB 

XXIII 

Sages influenced men’s nature and establislxed acquired 
training. WKen acquired training tad arisen, the rules 
of proper conduct {Li) and justice (Yi) were evolved, laws 
and regulations were made. Hence the rules of proper 
conduct {Li)y justice (Yi), laws, and regulations were brought 
forth by the ' Sages. The Sage has his original nature iu 
common with ordinary people ; he is not diflerent from ; 
ordinary people in this respect. He is diflerent and superior : 
to ordinary people in his acquired training. ; 

Man’s ve^ j-fc jg the original nature and tendency of man to desire 
good comes gain and to seek to obtain it. If brothers have property and 
are to divide it, if they follow their original nature and 
evil. feelings of desiring gain and seeking to obtain it, thus they 

will mutually thwart each other and endeavour to seize 
the property. But reform them by the etiquette of the ^ 
rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi), and they will 
be willing to yield to outsiders. So by following the original 
nature and feelings, brothers will quarrel; influence them 
by the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi), and 
they will yield to strangers. Every man’s desire to be good 
is because his nature is evil. So if he is mean, he wants 
to be generous ; if he is in circumscribed circumstances 
he wants unhampered circumstances ; if he is poor, he wants 
to be rich ; if he is in a low social position, he wishes to 
be in an honourable position ; if he has it not within himself, i 

appear, and there is great acquired training.” Hsttntzo and Laotze differ | 
in that Iiaotze supposes man was anciently perfect, but has deteriorated ; 1 

hence we must return to the ancient practices and to its simplicity. Hsiintze \ 
supposes man had always been innately evil, but under the influence of the } 
ancient Sage-Kings, he was developed to a state of goodness now unrealized 
because of the lack of a Sage to influence the people. ; 

XXIII THE NATUBE OE MAN IS EVIL 

307 

lie inevitably seeks it from without. Fox if he were rich, 
he would not desire wealth ; if he were in a high position, 
he would not want more power. If he has it within his 
power, he would certainly not seek it from without. By 
■ this line of reasoning we see that men’s desire to he good 
comes from his original nature being evil. 

Now the original nature of man is really without the Bebeliion 
rules of proper conduct (Zi) and justice (Yi), hence he come from^' 
strives to learn and seeks to have it. By his original nature 5 
he does not know the rules of proper conduct (Zi) and justice 
(Tt), hence he thinks and reflects, and seeks to learn these 
i principles. Then only are they developed. So man is 
naturally without the rules of proper conduct (Zi) and justice 
(Ti), he does not know the rules of proper conduct (Zi) and 
justice If man is without the rules of proper conduct 

and justice (Y^), there is disorder ; if he does not know 
the rules of proper conduct (X^) and justice (7^), there is 
rebellion. So these virtues are evolved. Then rebellion 
and disorder are within man himself. By this line of reasoning 
^ it is evident that the original nature of man is evil and hia 
goodness is an acquired characteristic. 

Mencius says, '‘The nature of man is good.” I reply :Mah fa 
' This is not so. In whatever age or place on earth, in ancient ® ^ ® 

i times or in the present, men have meant by goodness true 
principles and just government. They have meant by evil 
partiality, a course bent on evil, rebellion, and disorder. 

This is the distinction between goodness and evil. Now 
if we sincerely consider the nature of man, is it firmly 
established in true principles and just government? If 
I so, then what use are the Sage-Kings ? What use are the 

308 

THE WORKS OR HStMTZE 

xxin 

The Saga- 
Kings 
reformed 
man. 

■Without the 
authority of 
the prince 
there would 
he universal 
disorder. 

rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice {Yi) % Although 
there were Sage-Kings, the rules of proper conduct (Li) 
and justice (Tt), what could they add to true principles 
and just government ? 

Now that is not the situation. Man’s nature is evil. 
Anciently the Sage-Kings knew that man’s nature was 
evil, that it was partial, bent on evil, and corrupt, rebellious, 
disorderly, without good government, hence they established 
the authority of the prince to govern man ; they set forth 
clearly the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) 
to reform him; they established laws and government 
to rule him ; they made punishments severe to warn him ; 
and so they caused the whole country to come to a state 
of good goveTnment and prosperity, and to accord with 
goodness. This is the government of the Sage-Kings, the 
.reforming influence of the rules of proper conduct (Li) and 
justice (Yi), 

Now suppose we try to remove the authority of the prince, 
and be without the reforming influence of the rules of proper 
conduct (Li) and justice (Y^) ; suppose we try to remove 
the beneficent control of the laws and the government, 
and be without the restraining influence of punishments. 
Let us stand and see how the people of the whole country 
would behave. If this were the situation, then the strong 
would injure the weak and roh him ; the many would treat 
cruelly the few and rend them. The whole country would 
be in a state of rebellion and disorder. It would not take 
an instant to get into this condi tion . By this line of reasoning, 
it is evident that the nature of man is evil and that his goodness 
is acquired. 

309 

xxin THE NATUBE OE MAN IS EVIL 

The man who ia versed in the .ancient times certainly H man', 
sees its evidences in tte present ; he who is versed in the 
principles of 'Nature can certainly give evidence of their ^ 

I efieot upon man. Every debater prizes dietinctiong g® . 

j and has evidence to support them. So he can sit down 
I and discuss them ; he can rise and establish them ; he can 
■ act and esdiibit them. Now Mencius says : Man's nature 
j is good. This is without discrimination or evidence. A 
person can sit and discuss it, but he cannot rise and establish 
it ; he cannot act and exhibit it. Isn’t this extraordinarily 
erroneous 1 Eor if man’s nature were good, then we could 
do away with the Sage-Kings ; we* would put au end to 
the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (V^). But if 
man’s nature is evil, then we should follow the Sage-Kings 
and prize the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi), 

Eor tho carpenter’s square and rule are produced because 
there is crooked wood ; the plumb-line arose because tbings 
were not straight ; princes were established, the rules of 
proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) became evident because 
; naan’s nature is evil. By this line of reasoning, it is evident 
i that the nature of man is evil and his goodness is acquired, 
j Straight wood does not need to undergo the action of the 
carpenter’s rule in order to he straight ; its nature is straight, eyil because 
Crooked wood does need to undergo the action of the 
carpenter’s rule. ; it needs to be steamed and then only will loiom. 
it be straight, because its nature is crooked. Now the 
nature of man is evil ; he needs to undergo the government 
of the Sage-Kings, the reforming action of the rules of proper . 
conduct (Li) and justice (Yi), then good government and 
order will issue, and actions will accord with virtue. By 

310 

THE WORKS OE HSOHTZE 

xxin 

this line of reasoning it is evident that the nature of man 
is evil and his goodness is acquired. 

hi and^ 7i questioner may* say : Even if the rules of proper conduct 

man's original {Li) and justice (Yi) are accumulated acquired training, 
nature. from man’s nature. For the Sage-Kings could 

bring them forth. In reply I say : This is not so. The 
potter pounds and moulds the clay and brings the piece 
of pottery into being ; then from clay there comes to be 
pottery. Can it be that this is the potter’s nature 1 The 
worlanan hews a piece of wood and brings a vessel into being ; 
thus from wood there comes to be a vessel. Can it be that 
this is the worlonan’s original nature ? Now the relation of 
the Sage to the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) 
is the same as that of the potter and the clay ; he brings 
them into being ; thus the rules of proper conduct (Li) and 
justice (Yi) are accumulated acquired training. How can 
they be the original nature of man ? The nature of all men, 
of Yao and Shun, of Ch‘ie and Chih is the same. The nature 
of the superior man and of the little-minded man is the 
same. Now do we use the rules of proper conduct (Zi) and 
justice (Yi) to make men’s nature ; do we accumulate 
acquired training for that purpose ? Then why do we 
prize Yao and Yu ? Why do we honour the superior man ? 
What we prize in Yao, Yu, and the superior naan is that 
they could reform their original nature and create acquired 
training.' When their acquired training was created, they 
brought forth the rules of proper conduct (Li) and justice 
7 (Y^). Thus the relation of the Sage to the rules of 
proper conduct (Li) and justice (Yi) and accumulated acquired 
training is the same as that of the potter and the clay : he 

xxm 

THE NATURE OE MAN IS EVIL 

311 

brings tbe pottery into being. By this line of reasoning 
bow can tbe rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice {Yi) 
and accumulated acquired training be of man's nature ^ 

Wbat was low about Cb'ie, Chib and the -little-minded man 
was that they followed their nature and acted according 
to their inclinations : they took joy in haughtiness and the 
result was that they were avaricious for gain, striving and 
grasping. Hence it is evident that the nature of man is 
evil and his goodness is acquired. 

Heaven was not partial to Tsen/ Ch‘ien,2 and Hsiao Yi,® nor Humaa 
did it neglect the common multitude. Then why are Tsen, the 

Chden, and Hsiao Yi alone truly and perfectly jBlial, and 
why do they alone have the nanae of special filiality 1 The 
reason is that they observed the rules of proper conduct 
{Li) and justice (Yi) to the utmost extent. Heaven was 
not partial to the people of Ts‘i ^ and Lu,® nor did it neglect 
the people of Ts‘in.® But the people of Ts‘in are not as good 
in the righteous relation between father and son and in the 
proper reserve between husband and wife, as are the people 

^ TsentzB, the most important of the immediate disciples of Confucius. 
Has teachings stress filial piety. With this saying compare Laotze : “ Heaven 
treats men like straw dogs " — ^treats all alike. 

* Min Tze-Oh'ien, another famous disciple of Confucius. 

® Heir-apparent of one of the sovereigns of the Shang dynasty. 

* The cultivated feudal state which produced Duke Euan and Kuan 
I Chung. 

} ® The cultivated state which produced Confucius ; these were two centres 

• of Chinese culture. 

® The more barbarous state which was later to con<iuer the whole of 
China ; elsewhere it is criticized hy Hattntze for its lack of refinement and 
scholarship. 

312 

THE WOBKS OE HStJNTZE 

xxiu 

The man on 
the street has 
the power of 
knowing and 
practising 
virtue and of 
heooming a 
Sage. 

of Ts*i and Ln in filial piety and reverential respect.^ Why 
is tliis ? Tile reason is that tlie people of Ts'in follow tiieir 
feelings and original nature, take pleasure in kauglitiness, 
and are remiss in observing tke rules of proper conduct 
(Li) and justice (Yi). How can it be that their nature could 
be difierent ? 

" The man on the street can become a Yu ” ^ — ^how about 
that ? What gave Yu the qualities of Yu was that he 
carried into practice benevolence (Jen), justice (Yi), obedience 
to the laws, and uprightness. If so, then there is the means 
of knowing and practising benevolence (Jen), justice (Fi), 
obedience to law, and uprightness. Moreover, every man 
on the street has the nascent ability of knowing the principles 
of benevolence (Jen), justice (Yi), obedience to law, and 
uprightness, and the means whereby he can carry out the 
principles of benevolence (Jen), justice (Fi), obedience to 
law, and uprightness. Thus it is evident that he can become 
a Yu, 

Now are the qualities of benevolence (Jen), justice (Yi), 
obedience to law, and uprightness definitely without the 
possibility of being known or of being carried out 1 If so, 
then even Yu could not have known benevolence (Jen), 
justice (Yi), obedience to law and uprightness, nor could he 
have been able to be benevolent (Jen), just (F-t), law-abiding, 
or upright. Then is the man on the street definitely without 
the power of knowing benevolence (Jen), justice (Yi), 

^ Reverent respeotfulness is the attitude which should exist between 
husband and wife. 

* A saying found in Mencius, VI, n, ii, I. 

313 

xxni THE NATURE OE MAN IS EVIL 

obedience to law, and uprightness, and definitely without 
the ability to be benevolent {Jen\ just (Yi\ law-abiding, 
and upright ? Then the man on the street, on the one hand, 
could not know the righteous relation between father and 
son, nor on the other hand could he know the standard 
of correctness of prince and minister. Now that is not so. 

Every man on the street can on the one hand know 3: 
the righteous relation between father and son, and on the 
other hand he can know the standard of uprightness of 
prince and minister. Thus it is evident that the man on 
the street possesses the power of knowing and the ability 
: to practise these virtues. Now if the man on the street 
uses his power of Imowledge and his ability of acting on • 
the nascent ability of knowing benevolence [Jen) and justice 
, {Yi) and the means of becoming so, then it is clear that 
he can become a Yu ; if he concentrates his mind on one 
I purpose, if he thinks and studies and investigates thoroughly, 
j daily adding to his knowledge and retaining it long, if he 
accumulates goodness and does not stop, then he will become 
as wise as the gods, a third with Heaven and Earth. Eor 
: the Sage is the man who has attained to that state by 
accumulative efiort. 

A person may say : The Sage attains to that stage by Everyone has 
j cumulative efiort, but not everyone can cumulate his 

efforts : why is that 1 I reply, He has the capability, but Sage, but not. 
he does not use it. Eor the small-minded man can become it. 

a superior man, but he is not willing to become a superior 
man ; the superior man can become a small-minded man, 
but he is not willing to become a small-minded man. It 
* is not impossible for the small-minded man and the superior 

THE WORKS OF HSttNTZB 

xxni 

3U 

man to exchange places nevertheless they* do not exchange 
places. There is the possibility, but they do not use it, 
Jor it is true that the man on the street can become a Yu, 
but it is probably not true that the man on the street has 
the ability to become a Yu. Although he does not have the 
ability to make himself a Yu, that does not destroy the 
possibility that he could become a Yu. It is perfectly 
possible that he could govern the whole country, yet he 
may never have the ability to govern the whole country. 
It is never an impossibility that the labourer, the artisan, 
the farmer, and the merchant might exchange professions, 
yet they never can exchange professions. By this line of 
reasoning a person could probably not be able to be so 
and so ; yet although he could not, it does not remove the 
possibility of his becoming so and so. Then there is a great 
difference between whether a person has the ability and 
whether he has the possibility of being so and so. Thus the 
impossibility for them to exchange places is evident. 

* He * ♦ * 

Yao ^ asked Shun, How are the passions of man ? ” 
Shun answered, “ The passions of man are far from beautiful. 
Why do you ask % When a man has a wife and children, 
his filial duty to his parents decreases ; when sensual desires 
are satisfied, then faithfulness between friends decreases ; 
when his desire for noble title and high salary is satisfied, 
then his faithfulness towards his prince decreases. Man’s 

^ The remainder of the book diaousses other subjects and does not seem 
to be part of Hsuntze’s concatenated discussion of human nature ; it may 
be spurious, but it is in Hsiintze's manner. 

xxm 

THE NATUBB OF MAN IS EVIL 

316 

passions ! Man’s passions are far from beautiful I Wby 
do you ask ? Only tbe Worthy is not thus. 

iie 9ic * 

' There are those who have the knowledge of the Sage ; 9 
there are those who have the knowledge of the scholar or ^ 

superior man ; there are those who have the knowledge of the Sag^ the 
’ the small-minded man, and there are those who have the 

knowledge of the menial. To be able to speak much, polished smaU-minded 
! and in order, to discuss a matter for a whole day ; through 
{ a thousand turns and changes, altogether to be discussing 
I only one subject — ^this is the wisdom of the Sage. To speak 
j little, but to the point and sparingly, coherently, and according 

I to rule, as if a thread ordered the speech— this is the wisdom 
I of the scholar or superior man. His speech is flattering, 

I and his actions are rebellious, his actions and doings are far 
j wrong — ^this is the knowledge of the little-minded man. 

‘ With sharp retorts and triflingly clever, but without 10 
! concatenation, with great cleverness in out of the way know- 
i ledge, 1 but without real usefulness, practised in quickly 
! making many distinctions but not going to the point, not 
caring for right or wrong, not considering error or truth, 
having for an object to overcome his opponent — ^this is the 
knowledge of a menial. 

There is superior courage, mediocre courage, and inferior 
courage. He who dares to stand erect for the best Way there 
is in the world, who dares to act out the meaning of the 
Way {Tao) of the former Kings, who on the one hand will not 
follow a prince who governs wrongly and on the other hand 
will not follow a people who would govern wrongly ; who when 

1 Fortune telling, etc. 

316 

THE WORKS OF HStiNTZE 

xzin 

there is ‘benevolence {Jen) ^ will not consider poor emolument 
a bar, nor when there is no benevolence (J en) will he consider ‘ 
riches an attraction,® who when the country recognizes his 
talents, desires only that the country should rejoice with 
him, and who when the country does not recognize him, he 
will stand alone ® between Heaven and Earth and not 
11 fear — ^he is a man of superior courage. Respectful of 
the rules of proper conduct (Li) and of few desires, stressing 
the attainment of fidelity and laying no store by goods or 
wealth ; when a worthy man comes, being willing to resign 
and advance him ; but when an unworthy man is in office, 
daring to expel and remove him — ^this is courage of medium 
grade. Laying no store by his character but thinking wealth 
important, rejoicing in trouble and spreading it widely, 
evading the consequences of his actions, not caring for right 
or wrong, unstable in character, having for his object getting 
the best of others— this is courage of inferior character. 

* >|e * « 

Fan-jo and Chii-shu were famous bows of antiquity. But 
if they had not been put in frames for straightening, they 
could not have been straight of themselves. The Ts^ung 
of Duke Huan, the Ch^ueh of Duke T‘ai, the Lu of King Wen, 
the Fu of Prince Ghuang, Ho-lu’s Kan-chiang, Mo»hsie, 
Chii-ch^ueh, P‘i-lu : these were renowned swords of ancient 
times. But if they had not been ground, they could not 
have become sharp ; if somebody had not laboured on them, 

^ In the character of the ruler. 
* To taking office. 

® I’or his principles. 

XXIII 

317 

THE NATURE OF MAN IS EVIL 

they could not have cut. Hua, Liu, Cli‘i, Chi, Hsien-H, 
Lu-er : these were all famous horses of antiquity. But 
on the one hand they needed the control of a bit and reins, 
and on the other they needed the fear of the whip. Add 
to that the driving of Ts‘ao-fu,i and then they could do the 
thousand U in one day. Thus although a man has fine 
natural qualities and knows how to discuss, he needs to seek 
a virtuous teacher and serve him as a disciple ; he needs 
to pick out good friends and attach himself to them. When he 
obtains a virtuous teacher and serves him as a disciple, 
then what he hears is the Way (Too) of Yao, Shun, Yu, 
and T‘ang. When he obtains good friends and attaches 
himself to them, then what he sees is conduct according 
to loyalty, faithfulness, reverence, and humility. His 
character daily advances in benevolence (Jen) and justice 
(Yi), and imconsciously he grows like those people. Now 
if he should live with people who are not virtuous, then what 
he would hear would be cheating, maliciousness, falseness, 
and hypocrisy. What he would see would be impurity, 
boasting, excesses, erroneous doctrine, and conduct that is 
avaricious of gain. His character would advance towards 
deserving capital punishment, and unconsciously he would 
become like these people. It is said : If you do not know 
a person, look at his friends. If you do not know the prince 
of a state, look to the right and left. Follow that and it 
will be sufidoient ! Follow that and it will be sufficient ! 

^ A famous legendary driver. 

A GLOSS ^ 

Critics say: “Hsun Ch'ing® was not as great as 
Confucius.” THs is not so. Hsun CK'ing was harassed 
by disordered times, and constrained by severe circum- 
stances ; when on the one hand there were no worthy 
lords ® and on the other there was the aggression of Ts'in,^ 
The rules of proper conduct {Li) and justice (Yi) were not 
I observed, and the humanking and correcting influence of good 

i teaching was not carried out. The virtuous {Jen) were 

! removed from office and restrained, and the whole country 

I was in darkness. Good conduct was completely cut into ; the 

! feudal nobles had subverted everything. At this time the 

wise were not given the opportunity to reflect, the able 
were not given the chance to rule well, and the worthy were 
not given the opportunity to be used.® Hence princes were 
blinded and had no vision ; worthy men were obstructed 
j and did not receive office. Consequently Hsun Chflng, 

I who cherished the heart of a Sage, but which could not 

I express itself as such,® hid it under a manner of feigning 

1 Probably by a disciple of Hsiintze. Pound in ^ HI "L ^ H “p 

m m 

* Hsiintze. Here too ^ is used for ^ in the surname. 

* Who would give Hniintze control over his state to try out hia theories 
I of government. 

* The state which finally gobbled up the whole of China, 
j ‘ In high office. 

j • A Sage should, like Yu and Shun, become emperor. 

I 

320 

THE WORKS OF HSONTZE 

to be mad, and so appeared to tbe country to be stupid.^ 
Tbe ode says : 

He was wise and sage, 

Yet be bad to protect bis life ” — 
this expresses my meaning. This is wby bis reputation was 
not bright, not many disciples came to bim, and bis glory 
was not widespread. 

To-day tbe student can get tbe discourses and teacbings 
wbicb Hsun Gb*ing left behind, which are sufficient to be 
tbe pattern and exemplar of human usages, which will make 
superhuman bim who observes them, and correct bim who 
has been in error. Consider bis goodness and character 
and you will see that Confucius did not surpass bim. But that 
generation did not investigate carefully and said, ‘‘He is 
not a Sage.” What was there to do ? Tbe country was not 
well governed and Hsun Cb'ing missed bis time. His virtue 
was like that of Yao and Yu, but bis generation knew it but 
little ; be did not use artful tricks and people misunderstood 
"him. His wisdom was not brilliant ; be followed tbe Way 
(Too) * and acted uprightly, so that be could be tbe funda- 
mental principle of life. 

Alas ! A Worthy ! Fit to be an emperor I Tbe world ® 
did not recognize bim, but admired Cb'ie and Chou. They 
killed tbe worthy and tbe good. Pi-kan * was disemboweled 

^ The disciple's explanation of why Hshntze, who had all the virtue, 
which aooording to theory should have made him emperor, failed to advance 
■to that post. Cf. //., p. 282. 

* The Confuoian doctrine. 

* Lit., Heaven and Earth. 

* Cf. note 13, p. 217. 

A GLOSS 

321 

of his heart ; Confucius was arrested at K'uang ^ ; Chieh-yii 
fled from the world ; the Viscount of Chi ® had to pretend 
to be mad; T'ien-shang® caused a rebellion; Ho-lu * 
presumed to be powerful. Those who did evil became 
prosperous ; the good suflered from calamity. 

To-day the critics likewise do not investigate the facts, 
but credit only his reputation. The times had changed; 
what means had his fame of being bom ? He had no 
opportimity of ruling ® ; how could his merit have been 
brought to perfection ® ? His will was cultivated ; his virtue 
was great ; who can say that he was not a Worthy ? 

1 Cf, Andleots, IX, v. 

* Of. note 1, p. 218. 

» Posaibly T‘ien Ho who dispossessed the dynasty of Kiang on the 
throne of Ts'i, 386 b.o. 

* Ruler of Wu, 614-496 b.o, He usurped the title of King. 

« No opportunity of being tho prince of a state, where ho could dis- 
tinguish himself and raise his state to the leading position in the empire . 
The fit reward for virtue was thought to be the fame of rule. 

* I.e. glorious rule. 

CHINESE INDEX AM) GLOSSARY 

References are to the book and folio of the Chinese edition of Wang 

Hsien Ch'ien, ^ ^ that numbering is indicated by the heavy 

numerals in the margin of this translation, "a" and "b *' refer to the verso 
and recto sides respectively of the Chinese folio or page, “e” indicates 
that this character is found in an emendation of the text accepted for this 
translation. “ G " refers to the “ Gloss ” added at the end of the book. 

Some special meanings, which these characters sometimes take in 
Hstintze’s writings, are added. 

Radical 1. — 

^ I, 4b, 6n, 6 a, b, 8b, 9a, 12a j 
11, ICb, 17b, 20a, 2U, 23a ; 

IV, 17a, 18b, 22b, 23b, 24a ; 

V, 4a, 7a, b ; VI, 14a ; VII, 24a, 

26a, b, 26a ; VIII, iB, 2 b, 6a, b, 
10b, 11b, 12a, 13b, 14b, 16a, b, 
17a, 18a, b, 19a, 20b, 2U, 22b ; 
IX, 3b, 4b, 9b, 11a, b, 12a, b, 
13a, 16a, b, 17b, 18a ; XV, 1 b, 
2 b, 3a, 9b, 10b, 12a, (XIX), 14b j 
XVIX, 16b, 17a, 19b, 20a; 

XVIII, iB, 2 b, 4a, 6a, b, 9a, 11b, 
12a, 17a,' 18a; XIX, 3 a, 4b, 
6 a, b, 6a, 9a, b, 10b, 12a, 14a, b, 
16b, Z0A, b; XX, 1b; XXI, 
1a, b, 6b, 6a, 7a, b, 8a, 9b, 10a, 
llA, 13 b, 14b, 16a; XXII, 2b, 
3a, 7a, 8a, 9a, 12a, 14a, b; 
XXIII, 6 b, Sa, 9b, 12a. Con- 
centration or unity. See Doctrine 
of the Mean, xx, 8. Legge trans- 
lates by singleness. 

Radical 2. J 

I, iB, 3 b, 4b, 8a; V, 3b, 4a, 
8 a ; VIII, -Ca, 7b, 18b, 2U;. 
IX, lA, 3 a, 4b, 10a, b, 17a, 18b ; 
XV, 1b; XVII, 14a, 19b; 
XVin, 2 b, 8a, llA, 12 b, 14a, 
16a; XIX, 2 a, 8a, b, 9a, 12b, 
14b, 19a, b ; XX, 1b, 2a ; XXI, 

6 a, 11b, 13a, 16b; XXH, 12b; 
XilOn, 4 b, 10a, IIa. Proper ; 
contrasted with wicked. 
Radical 6, 

fL n, 14a, 16a, 16a, 18a, 22a ; 
IV, 16b, 19a, 21a; V, 2 a, 3b, 
7a; VII, 12b, 13b; Vm, 7b,' 
8a, IIa, b, 13a, 17a, 19b, 21b ; 
IX, 2a, 3b, 11b, 12b, 14b, 16b ; 
XV, 4b, 10a, 11a, 12a ; XVI, 
llB ; XVII, 12a, 14a, 16a, 17b, 
19b, 20a; XVni, 1 b, 3a, 4a, 
5b, 6a, b, 13a, 14a, b, 16a, 18a ; 
XIX, lA, 7 a, b, 19a, 20a; XX, 
lA, 2 a, b, 3a, b, 4a, 6b ; X!^ Id, 
2a, b, 4b, 6b, 6a, b, 7b, 8b, IIa, 
13b, 16a, b; XXII, 2 b, 3a, 6a, 
7a, b, 8a, b, 9b, 11b, 12b, 13b, 
16a ; XXin, 1 b, 2a, 6a, b, 10b ; 
Q 24a, b. lU-govemed and 
calamitous, general disorder ; 
anarchy, decadent. 

Radical 7. ^ 

I, 6 a, 9a; V, 4a, 6a, b, 7a ; 
VII, 26a, 28a; Vm. 11b, 20b, 
21 a, 22b; IX, 8 a ; XV (XIX), 
14b; XVII, 12 a; XVIH, 17a; 
XIX, 3b, 7a ; XX, 6 a ; XXI, U. 
9a, b, 16b; XXn, 7 a, 10a; 
XXIII, 3a. Wandering mind; 
see Doctrine of the Mean, xxvi, 7. 

m 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Radical 9. ^ 

I, 10b, 12a; II, ISbo, 23b; 
IV, 18a, 20a, 22a, 23b; V, 2a, 
4a; VII, 24b, 27b, 28a; VIII, 
6a, 9a, 18b, 19b ; IX, 7b, 8a, 
17b ; XV, 2a, b, 3a, 4a, 11a, b, 
12a ; XVm, 16b ; XXI, 4a, 6b, 
12a, 13a; XXn, 10a; XXm, 
7b, 8a, 10b, 12a ; O 24a. Patornal 
benevolence; see XV, 11. 

^ IV, 16n, 23 b; Vtl, 24a, 26a; 
vm, 14b, 16b, 19a, 22a, 23a; 
IX, 4b, 6a, b, 6b, 7a, b, 16b ; 
XI, 14b ; XV, 2a, 4a, b* 11b ; 
XVin, 2a, b, 3a, 6b. 7a, b, 10b, 
llA, B, 16 a; XIX, 3b, 9b, 10b, 
20b ; XXI, In ; XXII, 16a ; G 
24a. Marquia. 

^ n, 16a, 18b ; IV, 12b, 17a, b ; 
Vn, 26b, 26a, 28a; VIII, 6a, 
9b ; IX, 7b ; XV, 6a, 9a ; XVI, 
11b; XVII, 20b; XIX, 2a, 
21b ; XX, 4b ; XXIII, U, 8b, 
llA, 12 a ; G 24b. 

^ I, 2b; II, 20a; IV, 18a, b, 
19a; V, IB, 3b, 9a; VI, 14b; 
vm, 6a, Ha, 16b, 17a, b, 19a, 
20b, 21a ; IX, 14b, 16a, b, 17b, 
18b ; XVm, lA, 2 a, 3b, 4a, b, 
6a, 6b, 8a, 12a, 13a, b, 16b; 

XIX, 7b, 21b; XX, 2b, 3a, 
6b; XXI, 6b; XXII, 1a, b, 
6b ; XXIII, 10b. 

II, 13b, 14a, b, 17b, 20a; 
rV, 16b, 17b, 19a, 22b; VI, 
14b; VII, 24b; VIII, 4Ae, 6a, 
10a, 11b, 13a, 21b, 22a; IX, 
4b, 6a, 7a, 14a, b, 16a, b, 16a, 
17b, 18a, b; XV, 11b, 12a; 
XVn, 16a, 17b; XVIII, 3a, 
16a; XIX, 10b, 14a, 19a, 22a; 

XX, 2b, 3a, 6a; XXI, 16b; 
G 24b. Self-onltivation, 

jijg I, 6a; IV, 19a; VIII, 6b ; 
IX, 13a, 15a, 18a; XVII, 12a, 
14b ; XVIII, 3b, 7a, 8b, 9b, 13a ; 

XIX, 7a, Ha, b, 18a, 20a, b; 

XX, 6a; XXI, 3a. Perfect. 

^ IV, 19Ae ; VIII, 17b ; XVHI, 
8b ; XIX, 7b, 14a, b ; XX, 3b • 
XXII, IB, 2a; XXIII, lA, B, 
2 a, 3a, b, 4a, 6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, 
12a. Acquired cliaractor(i8tio). 
See XXII, 1. 

^ I, 10a, 11b; II, 19a, 22b; 
vm, lA, 3 a, 6a, 16a, b, 17a, b, 
18b, 19a, 22a; XVIII, 16a; 
XIX, 3a, e, 18a; XX, 2b; 
XXII, 3a. a Confuoian literatus ; 
its opposite is 

Radical 12. 

^ 11, 17b, 24a; IV, 16b, 16a, 
20a, 23b; V, 1b, 2a, b; VH, 
23b, 24a, 26a ; VIII, lA, b, 2a, 
3b, 4a, 8a, 14a, b, 16a, 16b, 21b, 
22a ; IX, iB, 3 a, 4b, 7b, 16a, b, 
18a ; XI, 12a, 14b ; XV (XIX), 
12a; XVII, 18b; XVIII, 1b, 
9a, 11a, 14a ; XXI, 2b, 4a, 6a ; 
xxii, 3a, 10a, b; xxin, 
Hb. jbuke. 

^ IV, llB ; XV, title, 1 a, b, 2a, 
3a, 4a, 10a, Ha, b, 12a, (XIX) 
12b, 13a, b ; XX, 2b. 

Radical 18. u 

^ I, 8a ; IV, 16a, 22a, b, 23a, b ; 
V, 6a ; VI, 14a, 16a ; VII, 23a ; 

VIII, 4b, 7b, 9a, 11a, 12b; 

IX, lA, 2 a, 3b, 12a, b ; X, 1a, 
2a; XI, 14b; XV (XIX), 13a, 
14a; XVn, 13a, 20b; XVHI, 
3a, b, 9b, 14a, 16b, 16a, a ; 
XIX, lA, 3 a, 14b, 19a; XXI, 
16b, 16a; XXII, 4a, 8a ; 
XXni, IB, 2a, 4b, 6a. Social 
division, social distinotions ; 
function, 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSAET 326 

^1| I, IB, 3a, 6a, 13a ; II, 16a, 16a, 
17a, 18a, 23a j IV, llB. 13 b, 14a, 
16a, b, 17a, 18b, 19a, 23a ; 
V, 6a; VI, 13b; VII, 24b, 
26a; VIII, 6a, 10b, 17a; IX, 
12a, 16a ; X, 2a ; XV. 1b, 2a, 
3a, 6a, 9b, (XIX), 12b, 13a; 
XVUI, lA, B, 3a, 8b, 14a, b, 16a ; 

XIX. 3a, 6a, 22a; XX, 6b; 
XXI, 4a, 6a, 16b, 18a ; XX^I, 2a, 
10a, b, 16a ; XXIII, lA, B, 2 b, 
3b, 4a, b, 7a, 11b, 12a. Servioe- 
ablonoea ; BucoeBsful. 

IV, 23a; VIII, iB, 14 b, 
16b, 17a, 18a, b ; IX, 3b, 8a, b, 
12b, 16b, 17b, 19b; X, 1b; 
XI, 14a, b ; XV, 9a, 10a ; XVII, 
19a; XVIII, 6b, 7a, b, 8a, b, 
9a, 16a ; XIX, lA, 7 b, 19a, 21b ; 

XX, lA, 3 b, 4a, b; XXI, 8b, 
10a, 13a, 16a, b, 16b; XXU, 
2b, 3b, 4a, 7a, 12a; XXIII, 
2a, 4a, 11b. 

to fall; restless, unquiet; its 
opposite ip ^ or ^1). 

JlP V, lA ; Vni, 3^, 6a ; IX, 1b ; 
XV, lA, B, 2a, 4b, 9a, 10a, i1a, 
b; XVIII, 16a, Q 24a. 

Kadical 28, 

^ XVn, 13b; XXI, 8b; XXm, 
8a. 

Eadioal 30, p 

^ I, 8a, b, 4b ; n, 14b ; IV, 17b, 
23a; V, 1b; Vn, 28a; VIH, 
6b, 8a, 10a, b, 16b, 17a; IX, 
2a, 4a, 16b, 17a, b ; X, 1b ; 
XV (XIX), 12a; XVn, 19a ; 
XIX, 14b, 16b, 17b; XX, 2a ; 
XXI, 3a, 4a, 6a, 11b; XXn, 
title, lA, b, 2b, 3a, b, 4a, 6a, b, 
7a, b, 8a, b, 9a, 10b, 11a, 
16a, b ; XXni, 7a ; G 24A, 
B. Term ; concept ; nomen- 
clature. 

Eadioal 19. ^ 

^ I, 6b, 6a ; V, 2a, 7b ; VI, 14a, 
16a; VII, 27b, 28a ; VIII, 12A, 
16a; IX, 4a, 6b, 8A, b, 14b, 
16a, 16a, 17a, 19a; X, 1b, 2a; 
XV, 4b, 9b, 10a, (XIX), 12a ; 
XVII, 13b, 14a, b, 16b, 19a; 
XVIII, IB, 6a ; XIX, 14a, 16a, 
B, 19b; XXII, 3a, e, 11 a; 
G 24b. Work ; merit of the 0. 

EadicaZ 26. p 

^ IV, 16a, b, 16b, 17a, 18a, 19a ; 
V, 4b; VII, 26b, 27a, b; VEH, 
10b, 21b ; IX, 6a, b, 16b, 17a, 
19a, b ; XV, 4a, b ; XVII, 19a ; 
XVin, IB, 2a, 14a, b; XIX, 
3a. 7b,20a; XX, 2b, 3b ; XIQ, 
4a, 10a, b, 12b, 13a; XXII, 
14b, 16a. Uneasy, anxiety, 
insecure, tottering, threatening 

^ I, U, B, 2b, 3a, 4a, b, 6a, 6a, b, 
8b, 9b, 11b, 12b, 13b ; II, 14a, 
17b, 18a, 20b, 21b, 22b, 28a, b, 
24a ; IV, 12b, 13a, b, 14a, 17a, 
B, 18b, 19a, 22b; V, 1b, 3b, 
6b, 7a, 8b, 9a; VT, 14b, 16b; 

VII, 23b, 24b, 27a, b, 28a, b; 

VIII, 2a, 3b, 6a, 6a, b, 7a, b, 
8a, b, 9b, 10a, b, 11b, 16b, 21a, 
B, 22b, 23a; IX, 3a, b, 4a, b, 
6a, 10b, 11a, b, 12b, 18a, b; 
X, 1b; XI, 14a, b; XV, U, 
B, 2a, b, 3b, 4a, b, 8b, 10a, 11a, 
b; XVI, 11b; XVU, 14a, b, 
16b, 16a, e, 18b; XVJH, 2b, 
3a, b, 16b ; XIX, iB, 3a, B, 7b, 
8b, 9a, b, 12a, ISa, 14a, 19a, b, 
20a, 21b; XX, 1b, 2b, 3a, b, 
4b; XXI, 1b. 2a, b, 8b, 10a, b, 
16a. 16b, 17a; XXU, 8a, b, 
lOA. B, lU, 16A, 16a; XXm, 
2a, 6a, b, 6a, b, 7b, 8a, b, 9a, 
10b, llA, 12 a ; G 24a. 

326 CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSAHY 

^ IV, 16a, 3 ; IX, 6 a, 12b, 14a; 
16a; XV, 9b, 40a, (XIX) 
13b; XVU, 19a; XVIII, 16a; 
XX, 2b; XXII, 2b, 6b, 6b, 
8 a, b, 9a. 

^ I, 3A, 6 a, 7b, 12a; II, 13b, 
14a, b, 16b, 22b; IV, 11 b, 17b. 
21b; V, iB, 2 a, 8a, 9a; VII. 
26b, 26a, b ; VIII, 6 a, 11a, 12a* 
13b, 16a, 21a ; IX, 2 a, 3a, 9a* 
12b, 19b ; XV, 1b, 4a, 9a, 10a, 
llA, B; XVn, 19b; XVIII, 
6 b, 8b, 11b, 12a, b, 17a ; XIX, 
9a, 18a, 20a; XX, iB, 2 b, 3a, 
B, 4a; XXI, 12a, 14a; XXII, 
6 b, 7a; XXIII, 1a, b, 2a, B, 
Sa, 4b, 6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, 8a, 12a ; 
G 24a, b. 

Iladical 32. 

I, 2a, 4b, 8b, 13b; IV, 11b; 
vn, 26a ; VIII, 8 a, 6a, 16a, b, 
17a, 19a, 21a; IX, 3b, 6a, b, 
9b, 10b, 11a, b, 13a; XV, 1b; 
XVn, ISA, 14b, 16a, b, 16b, 17a, 
18b ; XVin, 6b, 7a, 14a ; XIX, 
3a, B, 4b, 7a, 8a, 14a, b, 18b, 19a, 
B ; XX, 3a, 4b ; XXI, 2b, 8b ; 
XXIII, 8a, 10b; G 24b. 

Radical 33. 

-±; I, 4b, 7b, 11b; II, 18a, 20a, 
21b; rV, 13 b, 14a, 16b, 23b; 
V. 3b, 4a, 8b ; VIII, 8 a, b, 11b, 
22a, b, 23a ; IX, 1b; 4a, 6a, B6 , 
6 b, 11b, 18a, b ; XI, 14b ; XV, 
IB, 4b, 6a, 10a ; XVIH, 8 b, 11b, 
16a, b ; XIX, 3b, 8a, 0a, b, 
10 b, 2Ib; XXI, 16a ; XXII, 
10b; XXIII, 9a. Officer; 
baron. 

Radical 37. ^ 

16b, 23b; VIII, 16b, 22a; 
IX, iB, 6 a ; XI, 14b ; XV, lOA ; 
XVni, II A, 16a, b; XIX, 3 b, 
9b, 10b, 20b. High official; 
groat officor. 

^ •— XIX, 6 a, 7a.. Primifeire* 

^ I, 2a, 8b, 12a, 13a; . II, 
18b, 19a, b, 23a ; IV, 16a, b* 
20 a, 21a, 22a, 23a, .24a ; V, 1 b. 
3a, 4a, 7a; VE, 12b, 13b, 14a; 

VII, 23b, 24a, b, 26a, b, 27b, 28a ; 

VIII, lA, B, 2 a, b, 6a, b, 6a, 9a, 
10a, b, 13b, 14a, b, 16b, 16a, b* 
17a, 19a, 2U, 22a; IX, 2a, 
3b, 6b, 7a, 8a, 10b, 11 a, b, 
12a, b, 13a, 16b, 17a, b, 18a; 
X, IB; XI, 14b; XV, 1b, 2a, 
10a, llA, 12 a, (XIX), 12a, 14b; 
XVI, 11b; XVII, title. 12 a, 
B, 13a, b, 14a, b, 16a, b, 16a, b, 
17a, 18b, 19a, b ; XVIII, 2a, b, 
3a, b, 4a, b, 6a, 6b, 8b, 9a, b, 
11b, 12a, b, 13b, 14a, 16b, 16a, 
18a; XIX, iB, 3 a, b, 4b, 7a, 
B, 8a, 9b, 10b, i4A, B, ISu, 19 a, 
B, 20a, b; XX, 2a, b, 3a, 4b, 
6b ; XXI, 1a, 3a, 6a, b, 8b, 10a, 
16a, B, 18b; XXII, 4a, 6a, 8b, 
9b, 12a, b, 13a. 16b; XXIII, 
2a, e, 6a, b, 7a, 8a, b, 10a, 
B ; G 24a, b. 

II, 23b, 24a ; VIII, 2a ; IX, 
6 a, Hb, 18a, 19a; XV, 2a, 
lU ; XVIII, 2 a, 4a, 14a ; XXI, 
8 b ; XXII, 10a ; XXIII, 1a, b, 
4b, 6b, 7a, 

Radical 39. 

and other names of Confucius, 
I, 3Ae; II, 14a; V, 1b, 2b; 
VT, 16a; VII, 23a, 24b, 27a; 

VIII, 4a, 14a, 17a; IX, 4d ; 
XVIII, 13b; XXI, 6 b; G 
24a, b. 

^ IV, 16a ; VII, 26a ; VHI, 6 a ; 

IX, 4a, 123, 16a; XV, lA, 4 a, 
8 b; XIX, 10b, 11 a, 13a, 18a, 
21a; XXI, 4a; XXIH, 3a, 
7a, 8b. 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSABY 

327 

I, title, 1 a, b, 2a, 3a, 7b, 
8a, b, 9b, 10a, I2a, b ; II, 2U, 
22a, b ; V, lA, B, 3 a, 8b ; VIII, 
8b, 17a, 19b, 21a, 23a ; IX, 1b, 
XVIII, 12b, 18a; XIX, 8a; 
XX, 3b, 4a, 6b; XXI, 16a; 
XXII, 10a; XXIII, 2a, b, 6a, 
8a ; G 24a. 

Radical 40. H-* 

^ I, 2b, 7b, 10a; n, 18 a, 22a, b, 
23b ; IV, lU, 13b, 16a, b, 17a, 
B, 18a, 19a, 20a, 22a, b; V, 
8b ; VI, 13b; VII, 23b, 26a, b, 
27a ; Vni, 10b, 11b, 19a, 21a, 
B, 22a, b, 23a; IX, 1b, 4a, 6a, 
9b, 10b, 14b, 16a, b, 16b, 17a, 
18a, b, 19a, b ; XV, 4a, b, 9a, 
10b, 11a; XVI, 11b; XVII, 
17b ; XVIII, IB, 2a, b, 3a, 11a ; 
B, 14a, b ; XIX, 2b, 3a, b, 7b, 
llB, 19a, 20a, 2Zbj XX, 2a, 
B, 6b; XXI, 13b, XXII, lU, 
14b ; XXIII, 2a, 7a, b ; G 24b. 
Comfort ; its opposite is 

^ I, 13a ; V, 2a ; VI, 16a ; VUI, 
5a, 7a, 16b; IX, U, 9a, 16a; 
XV, Ob; XVIII, 8b, 9a; XX, 
1b; XXI, lU, 13a, 14Ae; 
XXII, 2b, 6b, 7a. Determine ; 
^ make judgments. 

4g^XVII, 13a, 18b; XIX, 7b; 

XXI, 8a, lOA, llA, 16 b, 16b; 

XXII, 3b, 7a, 14b; XXIII, 
2a, 8a; G 24a, b. Arrive 
at tlie truth. 

Radical 42. /J> 

/h A 8b ; n, 14 a, 17b ; IV, 12b, 
13a, b, 14a, 17a, b, 18b. 19a; 
V, IB ; Vn, 24b ; VUI, 8a, 21a, 
B; IX, 3b; XVII, 16b, 16a, b; 
XVIII, 4b, 6a, 16b; SIX, 7b ; 
XX, 3b; XXI, 17a; XXIH. 
2a, 6b, 7a, 8a, 9a. The mean- 
minded man. 

Radical 60. fj] 

^ VI, iiA, (XIX) 14 b; xvm, 
Hb ; XXI, 3b ; G 24a. 
gij) II, 14a, 17b, 22a, b; 

rV. 19 a, b ; Vm, 6 b, 19b, 20a, 
B ; IX, 10a, Ub, 13b, 14b, I6a, 
b; XV, 10b, (XIX), 13b; XVI, 
11a ; XVIII, 3a, b, 16a, 18a; 
XIX, 3a, b, 21b; XX, 2a, b; 
XXI, 9b, 16a; XXm, 1b, 2a, 
12a. 

II, 16a; IV, 16a, b, 18a, b, 
19a; vn, 28a; VIH, 21b; 
IX, 6b, 7b; XV, 4b, Ua, 12a; 
XVEI, 12A, 16b, 17a, 20a; 
XVIII, 2a; XIX, 3b; XXI, 
6b. Ordinarily, regular principle. 
Radicals!. ^ 
n, 22 b; IV, 16a; V, 4a; 
VIII, 2a, 4b, 6a; IX, 4a, Ub, 
12b, 16a; XV, 2b; XX, 1b, 
4a,Sa,b; XXn, 10a; XXHI, 
3a, 4a, b. fraternal duty; 
reverence to elders. 

Radical 69. ^ 

5^ I, 7a, 8b; IV, 13b; V, iB, 2 b, 
6a; VIII, 6a; XVI, lUj 
XVII, 13b; XVIII, 6b, 7b, 9b. 
16a, 17b; XIX. 17b, 22b; 
XX, 1a; XXI, 3a, 8a, b, lU; 
XXn, 3a, 4a, 6a, 16a, b. Body. 

Radical 60. 

^ 1, 8b ; V, 2b ; VIH, 18b„ 16a ; 
IX, 13a; XV, IB, 10a; XXI, 
10a, b, 11a, 12a, b. Abstruse 

g I, 4b, 6a, 8a. 13a; IV. 16b, 
18a ; VII, 26a, 28a ; VIII, 7a, 
10a, Ha. 22b; IX, 2a, 8a, b, 
8b, 16a; X, 2a; XV, 2b, HB; 
XVII, 10a; XVIII, 2a, 3a, 6a, 
8b, 9a, 16a ; XIX, Sbo ; XX, 3b, 
4a; XXI, 2a, 6Ae, Oa, 8b; 
XXII, 9B ; G 24a, b. 

S38 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSAEY 

Badioal 61. 

I, 6a, 6a, b, 8b, 12b, 13a; 
n, 14 a, 16b, 17b, 18a, B; IV, 
19b j V, 1b; VII, 24b, 28a; 
Vm, 16b, 21b; IX, 7a, 17a ; 
X, 1b; XV, 2b; XVI, lU; 
XVII, 16a; XVIII, 9b ; XIX, 
9b, 11a; XX, iB, 2b, 3a, b; 

XXI, 1a, b, 2b, 3a, b, 6a, b, 
7a, b, 8b, 9a, b, 10b, 11a, 13a, 
16b ; XXII, iB, 6 a, b, 9a, 10a, 
12a, b, 14b, 16a; XXIII, 2b, 
3b, 8a, 12a ; G 24a, b. Mind. 

■jg I, 6a, 10a ; II, 16a, 17a, b, 21b, 
22a, 23b; IV, 16a, b; V, 2b, 
3a, 8b; VI, 16a; VII, 27b, 
28a; VIII, 6a, llBe, 13n, 17 b, 
21a, B, 22a, b; XV, 2a; XVI, 
11a; XVII, 14b, 16 a, 16a; 
XVIII, 9b, 16a ; XIX, 21a, 
b ; XX, iB, 3a, 6b ; XXI, 7a ; 

XXII, 2b, 3b, 4a, 10b, 11a, 
14B;XXni,8A; 0243. 

n, 14 a, 18b; IV, 17b; VH, 
28a; VIII, 6a, 11a; XI, 12a; 

XVI, 11b; XIX, 9b, 10b, 11a, 
B, 21a, b; XXI, 2b; XXHI, 
1a, 8b, 12a. 

I, 12b ; 11, 17b ; IV, 14b ; 

V, 2a; Vtn, 6a; XV, 10b; 

XVII, 19a, b; XIX, 8a, 11b, 
18b, 21a, b ; XXI, 8a, 12a, b, 
13a; XXII, 10b; XXIH, 3b, 
6a, 8a, 

^ II, 21a; IV, 17a, b, 18a; 

VI, 13b; VIII, llB, 20b, 21a, 
22a ; IX, 18a ; X, Ue ; XVIII, 
8b, 14a; XIX, 3a, 14a, b; 
XX, lA ; XXI, 14b ; XXII, 1b, 
2b, IZbo, 12b, 13a, 15a ; XXIII, 
title, lA, B, 2a, b, 3a, b, 4a, b, 
6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, b, 12a, Original 
nature ; it is contrasted with 

^ I, 7b; II, 14a, 22b, 24a; IV, 
13a, b, 17a, b, 18b; V, 1b, 
2b, 3a, 6a; VII, 24a; VIH, 
lA, 2a, 6b, 8a, 16a, 17b, 21b; 
IX, lA, 3b, 6b, 18a; X, 1b, 2a ; 
XV, 4a, 9a, Ha; XVIj Ha; 
XVII, 13b, 16b, i7A, 21 a; 

XVIII, 2a, 3a, 4a, 6b, 6a, 8b, 
9b, 14b, 16a, 17b; XIX, U, 
3b, 7a, 12a, 0, 13a, 22a; XX, 
lA, 2d, 3a, 4a; XXI, iB, 2a; 
6a, 8b, Hb, 12a, 13a, 16a; 
xxn, iB, 6 a, 8b, Ha, 12a, 
13a, b, 14a; XXni, title, U, 
B, 2a, b, 6, 3a, 4b, 6a, b, 6a, 
B, 7a ; G 24b. Ugly. 

m II, 18b, 22a; IV, 21a, 23a; 
V, 7a, b; VI, 13b; VIIJ, 7a, 
lOA, 11b, 20b, 21a, 22a ; IX, 
18a; XV, 4a; XVt, Hb; 
XVII, 13b, 14a, b, 19b ; 

XVIII, 14b, 17a, b, 18a ; 

XIX, 3a, 7a, 8b, 12b, 13a, b, 
14a, 18a, 19b, 20a, 21a, b; 

XX, lA, 2a, b, 3b ; XXI, 8b, 9a, 

13a; xxn, 1 b, 4a, 7b, 9Ae; 
Hb, 12b, 16a; XXIII, 1b, 2a, 
3a, b, 4a, b, 7a, b, 8b, Ha. 
For the se & XXII, 1. 

JgJ XX, lA, 2b, 3a; XXII, 1b; 
XXni, 3b. Stimulus. 

^ XI, 14a; XV, 6a. 11a, 14a; 
XIX, 12A, 18b, 21b; XXH, 
6a, 7a. 

I, 12b ; II, 16a, 16b ; IV, 16b, 
16b, 17a, b, 21b, 22a, b; VII, 
27a; VIII, Hb, 16b; IX, 6a, 
7b; XV, 4a, 9b; XVII, 13a, 
14b, 16a; XVIII, 4a, 9b, 14a, 
16a, 17a ; XIX, 8a, 13a ; XXI, 
16a; xxn, IB, 2a, Ha, 13a; 
XXin, 3b, 6a; G 24a. To’ 
cogitate; deep thinking; calm 
deliberation. 

329 

CHINESE inde:s: and clossaby 

^ I, 13a; to, 26a; VIII, 3a, 
6a, 7a, 10a, 11b, 14a, 16b, 18b : 
IX, 8a; XVI, llAj XVII, 12A, 
19a, b; XVIII, lA, 14 b, 16b, 
17b; XIX, 7b; XX, 2b, 3a; 
XXI, 16b; XXn, iB, 12 b; 
XXIII, 3a, 6b. Beaotion. 
Badioal 62. 

I, 6a, b, 13a ; II, 16B,r 21 b ; 

IV, 17b, 19a ; VI, 13b, 14b, 16a ; 
VII, 24b, 26a; VHI. 1a, b, 2a, 
14a, 16b, 20a, 21a; X, 1b; 
XV, lA, 3 a, 4a, 8b, 9a, b ; XVII, 
13a, b, 19b; XVIII, 16b, 18a ; 
XIX, 6 a, 6b, 11a, b, 12a, 16b, 
19a, 20b, 21b, 22b; XX, 1b, 
3a, 4a ; XXI, 3a, 6a, 10a, 16b, 
17a; XXn, 1 a, 2a, b, 3a, 6b, 
7a, 8b, Ha, 12a; XXIH, 2a, 
3b ; G 24a, b. 

Radical 66. 

^ I, 2a, 4Be ; II, 16b ; VH, 24a ; 
Vin, iB, 18a, 28a; IX. 1a, b, 
16a, 16a, 17b ; XVin, 12a, b ; 
XIX, 2b, 20a; G 24a. 

II. 18b; IV, 12b; VU, 24a, 
26b, 28a ; IX, 4a, 7a ; XV, 9b, 
10a; XVI, lU; XVII, 16a; 
XIX, 3a, 9a, b, 10a, 12a, 16b, 
17b, 21b, 22b ; XX, 1b ; XXI, 
16b ; Xinn, 7 a, 12a. Attentive. 

m I, 7b, 10b, 12b; IV, 16b; 

V, 4b, 6a, 7a; VII, 24a; Ylll, 
11b; IX, 3b, 4b, 8b, 13b; X, 
lA; xvn, 16a, b; XIX, 10a, 
llA ; XX, 6b ; XXI, 6b ; XXH, 
3a, 7a, 11b, 14a, b. 

Radical 67. ^ 

I, 8a; II, 23Be; IV, 16b, 
21a; V, IB, 3a, Oa, 8b, 9a; 

VI, 18b, 14b; VII, 24b, 26a; 
VIIJ, iB. 2 a, 13a, 14a; IX, 1b, 
8b, IpB, 11 A, 16 b, 16b ; 

XV, lU; xvn, 16b, 18b; 
xvni, 9b, 13b, 18a; XIX, Ib, 
3a, 6a, 6a, B, 7a, b, 8b, ‘9b, IQii 
11b, 12a, b, 13a, b, i4A, 16 b, 
18a, 19a, b, 20a, b, 21b, 22a, 
b; XX, U, b, 2a, 6b ; XXI, 3a, 
6a ; XXII, lA, 8 b, 0b ; XXHT , 
iB, 2 a, 3a, 4b, 7Ae, 9 a, 11a. 
Sense of beauty. 

Radical 72. Q 

g , II, 16a, b; rV, 16b, 17b; 
V, 9a ; Vin, 2a, 7b, 16b ; IX, 
16b ; XVni, Ib, 2a, b, 9a, 16b ; 

XIX, 8a, 18a, 22b; XX, 2b, 
3a, b, 4b, 6a, b ; XXI, 8b, 9a, 
Ha; XXn, 3a, 6b, 8a, 11a, 
14a, b. 

I, 6a, 6a, b, 11b, 13b ; ll, 21 b ; 
IV, 16b, 17b; V, 4a, 7a; Vl, 
14a ; Vm, 2 a, 3a, 8a, 10b, 11a, 
13a, 17b, 18a, 19b, 21a; IX, 
3b, 6a, 7b, 8a, 13a; X, 2a; 
XV, 3a, 4a, 9a, 10a, (XIX) 14a ; 
xvn, 13a, 16a. 17a, 18p, 20a; 
XVtn, Ib, 2a, 3a, b, 8b, 14b, 16a, 
17b; XIX, 7a, 9a, 12b, 16b, 
16a, b, 17b, 21b; XX, 3a, b, 
4a, 6b; XXI, 4a, 8a, b, 10b, 
llA, 12 b, 13b, 14a, 17a; XXII, 
3a, b, 4a, 8a, 9b, 14a, b ; XXIU, 
Ib, 2a, b, 3a, 6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, 
B, 8a, b ; G24a. Wise ; virtuous, 
^ I, Ib; IV, 14a; VH, 26a; 
vm, 2a, 16b ; IX, 16b, 17a, b, 
18a, b, 19a; XV, 3b, 11a; 
XVin, 3a, 6a, 16a; XIX, 7B; 

XX, 2a ; XXni, IB, 6b ; G 24a. 
Aggressive, tyrannous. 

Radical 73, Q 

^ I, 7b, 8a, 9b, 10a, 11a; II. 
24a; IV, 22a, b; VH, 24a; 
vm, 13b, 17a, 18a; IX, 4a; 
xvn, 18 a, 21a ; XVIII, 2a, 6b ; 
XIX, 163; XXI, llA. The 
JSook of Uisiory, 

330 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSABY 

Radical 74. 

^ V, 2a ; XIX, 19a, 20b ; XXH, 
U, 4a, 8b. 9a, 10a; XXIU, 
11a. Equivalent to which is 

equivalent to /g-, comprehend. 
Radical 75. 7|c 

;2[5: VII, 24A ; VIII, 3a, 6a, 19b ; 
IX, 4a, 11b, 16b, 19a; XV, 
IB. 4n, llA, 12 a; XVI, 11b; 
XVII, 12a, b, 17a; XVIII, 1b, 
6b ; XIX, 3a, b, 4b, 6a. 7a, 14a ; 
XX, 2b, 3b ; XXI, 6b ; XXIII, 
6b, 8a. The fundamentals for 
life. 

m I, 8a, 0b ; 11, 17b, 18b, 19a ; 
IV, 16b, 22a, b, 23a ; V, 8b, 
9a; VII, 23a; VIII, 6b, 10a, 
13a, b, 16b ; IX, 9b, 10b, 15a, 
16a; XV. IOb, Ha, b; XVII, 
13b; XVIII, 8a, 11b; XIX, 
3a, 12a, b, 21b ; XX, title, 
lA, B, 2 a, b, 3a, b, 4a, b, 6a, b ; 
XXI, 3b, 11a, 13a; XXII, 1b, 
6a, 7b, 16a, b; XXHI, 10b. 

M I, 13a; VI, 14a; VII, 27b ; 
IX, 17b; XV, 9b, 10a; XVII, 
19a; XVIII, 4a; XXI, 3b, 
4a; XXII, 10a, 13b, 14a, 

Standard. 

Radical 76. ^ 

^ I, 12b; II, 14a, 20a, 24a ; 
IV. 12a, 13b, 16a, 17a, b, 18b, 
21a, b, 23a; V, 3b, 6a, 6b, 7a; 
Vn, 27 b; VIII, 8b, 11b, 21b; 
IX, 3b, 4a, 6b, 8a, I7a ; X, 1a, b ; 
XV, 9a, b, 11a ; XVtll, 17a, b, 
18a; XIX, 1a; XX, 2a, 3b; 
XXI, 2a, 3b, 4a, 6a, 6a, 12a, b, 
13a; XXII, 6a, 6a, b, 7b, 11b, 
12a, b, 13a, b, 14a, b, 16a; 
XXIII, lA, 3A, 4a, b, 8b, 10b. 

Radical 77. jfc 
I, 2b, 4b, 10b ; II. 14a, 22a, 
B ; IV, 17b, 19b, 22Ae ; V, 1b ; 

VIII, 4a, 6a, 6b, 12a, 17a, 22a ; 

IX, IB, 16a, 17b; XI, 14a; 

XV, 9b; XVII, 14b; XVm, 
title, iB, 16 b ; XX, 1b, 2a, 
B, 3b ; XXI. IB, 10a, Ha. 14a. 
16b, 16a; XXII. title, 2 a, b, 
3a, 8a, 9a, b, 10b, 14a ; XXOI, 
In, 2 a, 6a. b, 7b. 8a. 11a; 

a 24 a. 

Radical 78. ^ 

m I, 3a, 13a ; IV. 14a, IOb, 17b ; 
V, 2a, 3a; VIII, 17a; IX, 1b. 
19a; XV. 10a, 11b; (XIX), 
13a; XVII, 16a, 17a; XVIII. 
4a, 6b, 6a, 8b, 9b, 16a; XIX, 
2b, 3a, 9a. b, 10b, 11b. 12a, 
14b, 16b, 17b, 18a, b. 22b ; XX, 
6b; XXI, 2b, 3a, 14a; XXII, 
llB, 12A. 

Radical 79. 

^ VII, 23a, 26a ; VIII, iB, 6 a, 
16b, 17a, 18a; IX, 11b, 12b; 
XI, 14a; XV, 9b, 10a, (XIX), 
13b, 14b i XVIII, 6a, b, 6a, 18a ; 
XIX, 8b, 18a, 19b ; XX, 6a, b ; 
XXII, 7a; G24b. Simplification. 

Radical 81. 

fch IV, 16a; VII, 26b; VIII, 
6a, 10a, b, 16a; XVHI, 1b; 
XXII, 4a; G 24b. It 4* w 
equivalent to )]|^ 

Radical 86, 7 JC 

^ I, 8a, b, 9b, 11b; 11, 21b, 
22a, b, 24a ; IV, 13a, i6B, 
16 a, 19a, b; V, 6a, 8b; VI. 
14b; Vm, 3a, 6a, 8a, 11b, 
17a, 18a, b, 19b, 20a. b, 22b; 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

331 

IX, 3a, b, 8a, 9a6, 10a, 16a, 
17b; XI, Ub; XVIII, Ub, 
16b ; XIX, 8 a, 18a, 21b ; XXI, 
16a; XXII, 3a; XXIH, 1b, 
2a, 3b, 4a, 6a, b, 7b, 9b ; G 24a. 
A sot of principles ; obedience 
to law ; to imitate. 

^ II, 14n, 16 a, 16a, b, 17b ; IV, 
16b, 16a, 17b, 21a; V, 7a; 
VI, 13b, 16a; VIII, 6 b. 7b, 8a, 
9a, 11a, 13b, 20b, 22b0 ; IX, 
2a, 3a, 11a, 14b, 16a; X, 1b ; XI, 
14b ; XV, 4b, (XIX), 12a, 14b ; 
XVI, 11 b; XVII, 12 a, 13a, b, 
14a, b, 15a, 18b, 10b, 20a; 
XVIII, iB, 6 a, b, 6a, b, 9a, 13a, 
14a, 18a ; XIX, 3a, b, 7b, 9a, 14b, 
19b, 20a; XX, 1b, 3a. b, 4b, 
6 b ; XXI, lA, B. 3 a, 7a, 8b, 9b, 
10 a, 13a, 16b, 16a, b ; XXII, 3a, 
9a, 11b, 12b, 13b; XXIII, 1 b, 
2a, 6a, b, 6a, b ; G 24a. Woll> 
govornod and prosperous; self- 
control. 

Radical 96. 

3P I, 2A, 10b; II, 17b, 24a; 

IV, 13a, b, 16a, 20a, 22a, 23a ; 

V, In, 2b, 6a, b, 7a, 8b; VI, 
16a ; Vn, 24b, 25a ; VIII, U, 
B, 2a, 3a, b, 6a, 6a, 8a, lln, ISn, 
14 a, b, 16b, 17a, b, 18a, b, 
22 b, 23a ; IX, 1 b, 2a, 3b, 6a, 
6 a, b, 7b, 8a, b, 9a, 10a, 11a, 
12b, 13a, 16b, 17a, 18a, 19b; 
XI, title, 14b ; XV, 1a, b, 2a, 
4 a, b, 8b, 10a, b, 11 a, 12a; 
(XIX), 12 a; XVII, 16b, 16a, 
18b, 19b, 21a; XVIII, 2 a, b, 
3A, B, 6a, b, 7b, 8a, b, 12b, 13a, 
14 a, 16 a, b, 18a; XIX, I A, 
3b, 10b, 16b, 19a, b, 20a, b, 
21b ; XX, lA, B, 2 a, b, 3b, 6a, B ; 

XXI, 3a, 6b, 6a, 16a, b» J 

XXII, lA, 2 b, 3a, 7a, 8b ; XXIII, 
IB, 6 a, b, 6a, 10b, 11a ; G 24a. 
To rule as lawful’ King. 

Radical 104, ^ 

IV, 13b. Defective. 

Radical 108. m 

^ I, 12b ; rV, 19a, 23b ; VII, 
24a; VIII, 13b. 2Ia, 22a; 
IX, 16a; XVII, 19a, b; XVin, 
3b, 9b ; XIX, 7a, 8b, Oa, b, 14a, 
16a, 18b, 19b; XX, 1a, 4b; 
XXI, 6 a, b, 8a, 9b, 16a ; XXD, 
9b, 13a, b. RuUy expressed. 

Radical 109. g 

it I, iB. 2 b, 3b; II, 16a; IV, 
12b, 20a; V, 3a, 4a; Vin, 
16a; XVin, iB, 3 b. 6b, 16b; 
XIX, 7b, 20a; XX, U; XXI, 
16b, 16a, 17a; XXII, 9b; 
XXni, IB, 6 a, 10a. 

II, 20a, 21a; IV, 13a, 16a. 
20a ; V, 1 a, b, 2b, 3a, 4a, bo ; 

VIII, 6 b, 7a, b, 8a, 10b, Ua; 

IX, IB, 3b, 9b, 14b, 16b, 17b, 
18a, b, 19b ; X, 1b ; XV, 10 b ; 
XVn, 13b, 16b, 17b; XVIH, 
lA, 6 a, 16a; XIX, lA, 7 a, b, 
8b, llA, 13 a, 19a, b ; XX, 3a, b ; 
XXI, 2b, 4a, 6a, 16a, b ; XXH. 
4a, 6a, 10b ,* XXin, 4b, 6b, 
8 a, b. 

Radical 113. 

S* I, 2b, 6a ; II, 17b ; VIII, 13b, 
21a; IX, llA, 13 a; XV, 10a, 
11a; XVII, 13b. 18b ; XVin, 
11b; XIX, 2b6, Ub, 17b; 
XXI, 8 b, 13b ; XXII, 8 b ; 
XXIII, 8a; G 24a. ^ PJ 

gods, human spirit ; godlike. 

■jSg I, 2b ; vn, 26a ; XVII, 14a ; 
XXI, 3e, 4a, b, 6a, 14a ; XXII, 
14a ; G 24b. 

332 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

I, 2jb, 4b, 6a ; II, 17b, 23ao ; 
VII, 26a ; X, IB, 2a ; XVII, 12A, 
13a, 14a; XVin, 14a; XXI, 
3a, 4a, 6b, 6a ; XXII, 4a, 14a ; 
XXIII, llA. 

m I, 7b, 8a, 9b, 10a, b, 11a, b ; 
II, 16a, b, 17b, 18b, 22a, b; 

IV, 10a, 22a, b, 23a; V, 6a, 

8b ; VI, 16a ; VIH, 3a, 6a, 6a, 
11b, 13b, 16b, 17a, 18a, b, 
21a, 22a; IX, 1b, 2a, 3b, 4a, 
B, 6a, 8a, 11a, b, 12b, 16a ; 
X, 2a; XI, 14a, b; XV, 4b. 
(XIX), 12a; XVI, 11b; 

XVII, 17b, 18b, 19a, 20a; 

XVIII, 3a, 9b; XIX, title, 
lA, B, 8a, b, 6b, 7a, b, 8a, b, 
9a, 11a, 12a, b, 13a, 14a, b, 

16b, 17b, 18a, b, 21a, b; XX, 
2a, b, 3a, b ; XXI, 16b ; XXII, 
lA, 10b ; XXIII, iB, 2a, 3a, b, 
4a, b, 6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, b, 1|a; 
G 24a. The rules of proper con- 
duct; a sense of what is proper. 
Not merely overt acts, but 
includes feelings and emotions, 
see II, 22. A metaphysical 
principle, see XIX, 7. Human 
emotion expressed and beautified 
so as to become a pattern for all, 

Badiealll6. ^ 

^ I, 6a, b, 7b ; 11, 22b ; IV, 18b, 
19a, 21a j Vn, 24b; VIII, 
10a, 17b, 20b, 21a; IX, 1b, 
llA, 17b, 18a, b; XVII, 16a, 
18b; XVIII, 3a; XIX, 4b, 
9a, 20a, 2lAe ; XX, 4b ; XXI, 
IB, 6a; XXII, 2a; XXIII, 
2a, 3b, 6b, 7a, 8a. Practise ; 
self-cultivation. 

Hadical 116. ^ 

II, 16a, 18a, b, 20a, 22b, 23b ; 
IV, 16a, 17b, 21a, 22a ; V, 4a ; 
VII, 26a, 28a ; VIII, 3a, b, 9b, 

llA, 16b, 17a; IX, 3b, 4a: 
X, iB, 2a ; XIX, 8a, I8b, IOa ; 
XX, 3b; XXI, 14b; XXII, 9b, 
11a; XXIII, 10b. Out of 
office ; the contrary of 

Eadioal 118, 

II, 16a, 17a; IV, 18a, 21b j 
V, 6a, 8b ; VII, 23b, 24a, 26a, 
27a; VIII, 2n, 6a, 11b, 13b, 
18b ; IX, 4a. B, 17b ; XV, 4b ; 
XVI, llA, b; XVII, 12a, 10a; 
XIX, 2b, 7a, 11a, b, 12b, 18a, b, 
19a, 21a, b ; XX, Ia, b, 4b, 6a, 
B ; XXI, 16b ; XXII, 2b, 10a, 
llB, 13a; XXIII, 6b. Self- 
restraint ; what is fitting to the 
ciroumstanoes, equivalent to ; 
accord. 

If VIII, IB, 2a, 14a; IX, 19a; 
XVIII, 2a, b. Position, rank ; 
equivalent to 

Eadioal 119. 

II. 18b; XVII, 13a; XXI, 
9b, 10a, 11b, 12a, b, 13b ; XXII, 
1b, 10b. Concentration . 

Eadioal 120. 

^ IV 20a, 22a; VT, 16a; VII, 
28a; VIII, 13a, 18b, 22a; 
IX, 11b; XV, 12a, (XIX), 
13a, b; XX, 3b; XXI, 16a. 
^ general principles. 

^ I, 3a; IX, 7a, 12b. Line of 
succession run out. 

^ I, 7b, 9b, 10b; VII, 28a; 
VIII, 3b ; IX, 3b ; XX, 3b ; 
XXr, 6a, 8b, 10b ; XXII, 9a. 

P I, 8a; VI, 16a; XXII, 10a; 
G 24a. ||?| unifying principle. 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSABT 

333 

Kadioal 123, ^ 

^ I, 7b, 10b, 12a; II, 16a, 17b, 
18a, b, 22a, 24a ; IV, 14a, ISa* 
16a, 18a, 19a, 20a, 22a, 23a; 
V, 2a, 8b ; VI, 16a ; VII, 26a, 
28a; VIII, 2a, b, 3a, 6a, 6ai 
9a, 17a, 18a, b, 19b, 21a ; IX, 
1b, 3b, 7b, 8a, 11a, b, 12a, b» 
17b; X, 1b; XV, 4b, 11a, 
B, e, 12 a ; XVI, lU, b ; XVIL 
17b, 18b, 19a; XVHI, 3a, 8b, 
9b, 16a, b; XIX, 1a, 3a, 9a, 
llB, 12a, 13a, 17b, 18a, 21b ; 
XX, IB, 6a; XXI, llA; XXII, 
2a, 10b, 11a; XXni, iB, 2a, 
3a, b, 4a, b, 6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, b, 
8a, 12a ; G 24a. Class riglits and 
thoir rocognition ; equivalent to 
St#caio£Tilviy, 

I, 4b, 13a; IX, 12a, b, 17b; 
X, IB, 2a ; XV, 9b ; XVII, 20b. 
21a; XVIII, 14a, 17b ; XIX, 
18a, b, 19a, b ; XXI, 2b. l?orm 
a social organization. 

Radical 128. 

|g I, 6a, 7b ; II, 21b, 22a ; IV, 
13a, b, 22b ; V, 6a, b, 7b ; 
VII, 26a, 27b, 28a; VIII, 8a, b, 
12a, 13b, 19b, 21a; IX, 12b, 
13a, 17b; XVII, 13b, 14a; 
xvm, 2b, 3b, 6a, 8b, 9a, 13a, 
16a, b ; XIX, 8a, 9a, 14b, 18a, 
19a, 21b; XX, 2b; XXI, U, 
6a, 13a, 16a ‘ XXn, 3 a, 7a, 
8b, 9b; XXni, IB, 2a, 3a, b, 
4a, 6a, b, 6a, b, 8a, 9b; 
G 24a. 

^ IV, 16b, 23b; VIII, 11a; IX, 
IB, 3a; X, 2a; Xt 12a, 14b; 
XV, 10a ; ,xvn, l^A, B ; xvni, 

6A, 1219, 16a. Beaponsibilities. 

RodicallSO. ^ 

]|g I, 3a, b, 6b, 6b, 10a, 13^; 
II, 14a, 18b, 24A; IV, 16b, 
17 A, B, 18a, 22b, 23a, b ; V, 4a ; 
VII, 23b, 24a, b, 26a, b, 27b; 
Vni, IB, 2a, 3a, 6b, 7a, 8a, b, 
10b, 11a, 12b, 16a, b, 17a, b, 
18a, 19b, 20a, 21b, 32a; IX, 
1a, b, 3a, b, 4a, 6b, 8b, 9b, 12a, 
B, 14b, 16b, 17b, 18a ; X, 1b; 
XI, 12a; XV, IB, 4b, 9b. 
(XIX), 13b; XVn, 12a, b, 18a, 
B, 19b; XVin, 3a, b, 6a, 6a, 
B, 8b. 9b, 12a, b, 13b, 14a, 16a, 
16b; XIX, lA, 7a, b, 8a, Ua, 
14a, b, 18b, 19a. 20a, 21a, b ; XX, 
1a, 6a, b ; XXI, 3a, 4a, 5b, 7a, 
9b, 10b, 11b, 12a, b, 13b, 14b, 
16b, 16b; XXn, 1b, 2a, 7b, 
8a, 9b, 10a, 14b, 16a; XXHI, 
2a, 3b, 6b, 7b, 8a, b, 10a, lU, b; 
G 24a, b. Ability, contrasted 
with. 

Radical 131. ^ 

g V, 3b; VI, 14b; VII, 24a; 
Vni, 2a, 3a, b, 11a, 16b, 19a, 
22b ; IX, 6a, 7b, 11b, 17b. 18b ; 
X, 1b; XI, 12a, 14a i XV, 1b, 
2a, b, 4b, 9b, 18b » 

XVn, 18b; XVni, 4b, 6b; 
XIX, 9b, 10b, ilA, 21a; XX, 
iB ; XXI, 2b, 3b ; XXin, 7b, 
8a. Vassal. 

Radical 139. 

A I, llB, 13 a; V, iB, 2 b; VH, 
28a; IX, 8b; X, 2a; XVIH, 
9b, 17b; XIX, 13a; XX, 3a; 
XXI, 3a; XXII, 4a, 9b, 16a; 
XXm, U, 3b ; G 24a. Sights, 
what the eye sees, as ^ is 
what the ear hears ; complexion. 

334 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

Radical 140. jRp 

M IV, 22a; V, 7a; VII, 26b; 
Vin, 3a, 7a, 12a, 13b, 16b, 18b, 
19a; IX, 9a, IlA, B, 12a, b, 
13a, 16b; X, 1a; XVI, lU ; 
XVII* 13b, 14b, 18a, ISb, 20a; 
XVIII, 16b ; XIX, 7a, 14a, b ; 
XX, IB, 4b ; XXI, 2b, 6a, 8a, b, 
9b, 10a, 14b; XXII, 1a, 6a, 
14b, 16a, b ; XXIII, 9b. ft, 
all things between heaven and 
earth. 

Radical 141. 

j® VIII, iB, 7b, 10a; XVII, 14a; 
XVIII, 11b; XIX, 16b; XXI, 
2b, 7a, b, 8a. Emptiness. 

Radical 144. ^ 

II, 16b, i7B, 18b; IV, 18a; V, 
Id ; VII, 26b, 26a, b, 27a, b, 28a ; 
VIII, 17a; XV, IB, 9a, 10a; 
XIX, 16a, 18a; XX, lA, B, 
2a; XXI, 1b, 2b, 6b, 6a; 
XXIII, 8a ; G 24a. Principles ; 
art. 

Radical 146. ^ 

^ IX, 11a; XIX, llA, 12b, 13b, 
18b, 21b; XX, 2b; XXIX, 
13b ; XXIII, 8b. Little ; con* 
trasted with j!||. 

Radical 147. M. 

I, IB ; VIII, 6b; XIX, 7b, 8a. 
^ II, 14a ; rv, 12 b, 13a, 17a, b ; 
V, 3b, 6b; VIII, 4b; IX, 2a, 
7a, 8a, 12b, 18a, b; XI, 12a, 
14a; XV, iB, 3b, 11b; XVII, 
18b ; XVIII, 2a, 4a ; XIX, 6a, 
9b, 11a, 12a, b, 18a, b, IQa, 
20b, 21b; XX, IB, 6a; XXIII, 
8b. Cherish regard for. 

Radical 149. ^ 

^ and other names of the Book of 
Odes. I, 2b, 0b, 8a, 9b, 10a, 
llA, 12a; II, 14a, 16b, 22b; 
rv, 22 a, b, 24a; V, 4n; VII, 
26a; VIII, 6a, 8a, 10b, 11a, 
13b, 17a, 18a, 21b; IX, lU, 
14a; XV, 4a, 10b, 11b ; XVII, 
16a, b ; XVIII, 2a, 12b ; XIX, 
9a, 14b, 19b; XX, 1a, b; 
XXI, 3a, 9a. 17a; XXII, 10a, 
B, llA; G 24a. *Sh.Q Book of Odes. 

U II, 18a; IV, 13a; V, 8b; 

VII, 23a; VIII, 3b, 9b, 10a, 
11a; IX, 17a; XI, 12a; XV 
(XIX), 14a; XVIII, 1b; XIX, 
7b ; XX, 3b ; XXI, 1b ; XXHI, 
6a. 

Radical 164, ^ 

g II, 14a, 23a; rv, 17 b; V, 4a, 
8a ; VII, 24b, 26b, 27a, b, 28a ; 

VIII, Cb, 7a, 11a, 18b ; IX, 1a, 
2a, 4a, 8b, 10b, 12b, 17b; XT, 
12a; XV, 4n; XVIII, 4a, 
14a, 18a; XXI, 2b, 4a, 6a ; 
XXm, 8b, Ha, 12a; G 24a, 
B. Morally worthy. 

II, 19a; IX, 3b, Hb, 18b, 19a ; 
XI, 12a, 14a ; XV, 4b ; XVII, 
20b ; XVIII, 2a, 4a ; XIX, 1b, 
8b, 9b, 12n, 13 a, 18a ; XX, 
2b, 5a, b ; XXI, 16b ; XXH, 
3b, 4a, 10b; XXIII, 4b, 7a. 
Esteem lightly. 

Radical 168. ^ 

^ I, 4b, 8b, 11b ; II, 14a, b, 18a, 
20a, 22a, b; IV, 12b, 13a, 17b; 
V, 2b, 3a, 9a; VII, 26b, 26a ; 

VIII, 8a, 10a, b, 11a, 14a, 17b ; 

IX, 1b, 6a, 16a, 18b, 19a; 
XVni, 4a; XX, 3b, 6b; XXI, 
3a, 4a, 9b, 16a; XXIII, 10a, 
11a, 12a; G 24a. Character. 

CHINESE INHEX AND CLOSSABY 

335 

Rudicaim. ^ 

m n, 22 a ; IV, 17b, X8b ; V, 3a, 
6a, b, 6a; VI, 14b; VIII, 8b, 
Hb; IX, 16a; XI, 14b; XV 
(XIX), 12a, 13b; XVIH, 1b, 
3b, 16b, 17b ; XIX, 14b, 19b ; XX, 
lA, 6 a, b ; XXI, 16a, b ; XXH, 
2b, 4a, 8a, B, 9a, b, 10a, b; 
XXIII, 6a. Make distinctions. 

Hit 11b; II, 20b; IV, 12b; 

Y , 8b; VI, 16a; VIII, 6b, 8a, 
9a, 11a, 20a; XVII, 18b; 

XXI, 16b; XXni, 12a. 

Dialectic. 

jttl,llB; IV, 14a, 19a; VI, 16b; 

VII, 28a I Vin, 10b; XIX, 
3a; XX, 6a; XXI, 6a, b, 8b, 
16a, b; XXII, 2b, 3a, 8a, 9a, 
10a, b, 11a; XXIII, lA, B, 3 a. 
^ courtesy, declining and 
yielding *ati honour . 

Badical 161. 

^ I, 6a; II, 23a; IV, 13b, 

16a, 16b, 17a, ’ 

VIII, 10b, 21b; XVIII, 14b, 
16a, b, 16a, b ; XX, 2b ; XXI, 
4a; XXII, 7a. 

Badical 162. ^ 

^ 11, 19a, b; Vni, 6b; XV, 
10b ; X^HDII, 6b ; XIX, 12a. 
Successful. 

^ I, 2b, 6a, 8a, 11a, b; II, 17a» 
B, 18b, 20a. 21b, 23a, 24a; 
TV 17a, 18b, 20a, 22a, 2Sb; 
V 1A.B 6a,7a,b; VII, 26a. b, 
26a, 27b, 28a; VHf, 1a, 3a. 
B, Ga, 7a, lOA, llA, B, 13 a, b, 
14a, 16b, 19b, 22b ; IX, 2a, b, 
6a. 6 Ae, B, 7 a, b, 8a, 9b, 12b, 
ifiB 16 a* X, 1a; XV, 1b, 2a, 
il’s! 9a, (SaX), 12a, b, 13B, 
UA.B! X7II, 13a, 16^ n*. 
19 b, 20a, b, 21a; XVIH, 1a, 

B, 2a, 3a, b, 4b, 6a, 8b, 11b, 13a, 
B, 16b ; XIX, 3b, 8a, b, 9a, b, 
10b, 12a. 13a, 16a, 18a, 19b, 
20b, 21b; XX, lA, B, 2a, 3a, 
B, 4b, 6a, b ; XXI, Ia, b, 2a, 3a, 
6a, b, 6a, b, 7a, b, 8a, 9b, 10a, b, 
13a, 16a ; XXII, 2b, 3a, 8a, b, 
9a, b, 10a, 11b, 12b, 13a, b, 14a, 
B ; XXIII, IB, 2a, 3a, 10a, 12a ; 
G 24a. Way, physical or spiritual, 
good or evil, the Confuoian Way 
or Doctrine ; method ; morality ; 
consider. 

^ I, IB ; II, 23a, b, 24a ; IV, iSA, 
17 b; VIII. 22b; IX, 3a, 8a. 
9a, 16b; XV, 9a, 11a; XVIII, 
4a, 12a, 13a, 16a, 17a, 18a; 
XIX, llB, 18b, 19a; XX, 2e; 
XXI, llA, 13b; XXn, 9b, 
12a, b; XXIII, 2b, 4a, 6a; 
G 24a, 

Badical 163. ^ 

I, 4b, 7b ; IV, 13b, 16b, 20a, 
23a; V, 3a, 8a; VI, 12b; 
VII, 26b; VIII, 3a, 17a; IX, 
16a; XV, 3a; XVIX, I6a; 
XVm, 6b, 7b, 16a, 18a ; XIX, 
18b ; XX, IB, 2b, 4b ; XXI, 16b ; 
XXII, 8a, 9b; XXIII, 6a, 6b, 
7b, 11b, 12a. 

Radical 170. ^ 

IX, 16b; XVn, 13b, 16a, 16b, 
17A; XIX, 14b. 

% I, 9b, 10a, 11b ; II, 14a, 23b ; 
VII, 24b, 27b; Vm, 3a, 6a, 
llB, 17a, 18a, 20b, 22b; IX, 
4a,16a,17b; XI, lU; XV, 4b; 
XVIH, 9a, 15b; XIX, 3b, 6a, 
7a, 8b, 9a, b, 11b. 

20b ; XX, 6b ; 

Maenify, exalt, embellish, its 

HE. 

reference. 

CHINESE INDEX AND GLOSSARY 

m 

^ IX, 16b ; XVII, 13b, 16a, 16b ; 
XIX, 14b. 

^ II, 22b ; IV, 16b ; VII, 23b, 
27a ; IX, 19a ; XV (XIX), 13b ; 
XVII, 17a, 19a; XVIII, 1b, 
4a; XIX, 12b; XX, 2b, 5b; 
XXI. 17a; XXIII, IB, 6a. 
Bent on evil ; difficult to fathom. 
^ malignant feelings. 

Badicall73. ^ 

^ V, 2a; VII, 23ao, b, 24a; 
IX, 6a, b, 6b, 7b, 8a, 16b, 18b, 
19b ; XI, title. Lord Protector. 

Badical 174. ^ 

I, 8b; II, 16a; VII, 26a ; 
IX, 4a, 18a ; XX, lA ; XXI, 7a, 
B, 8a, 12a ; XXII, 9a. Unper- 
torbodness ; see Analects, II, 
xxi ; Great Learning, i, 2. 

Radical 181. 

^ I, 4b, 8a, 12a ; II, 22a ; V, 3a, 
8a; VI, 16n; VIII, 13a, 10b, 
18a, b, 22a; IX, 3a, 8a, 11a; 

XVII, 14a; XVni, 6a; XIX, 
3a, 14a, 19b; XXI, 9b, 16a; 
XXII, 4a, 6a, 8a, 9b, 10a, HA, 
B, 12a ; XXin, 9b, 10a. 

Analogy ; come near the truth ; 
imitate, equivalent to m; 
speoios, olasslfioations ; make to 
fit the situation ; classify by 
analogy. 

Radical 184. 

^ IV, 18n, 20a; VHI, 3a, Ha; 

IX, 1b, 3b, 9a, 10b, 12b, 13a, 
14b, 16a, 17b; X, Ib, 2a; 
XV, 10b; XVII, 12a, b, 13b, 
14a, b; XVIII, 11 A, b; XIX, 
1a, b, 2a, b, 3a, 20a; XX, 6b, 
10a, 11a; XXII, 6a, 16a, b. 
Educate and noxirish ; essentials 
of life. 

Radical 188. ^ 

f| II, 18b, 21b, 23b; IV, 13b» 
16a, b, 18b, 20a; IX, 17b; 

X, lA ; XVII, 16b, 19b ; XVHI, 
13b, 17a; XIX, Ib, 14b; XXI, 
6b, 8a ; XXII, 4a, 6a, 14b, 
16b; XXIII, 3b. Deportment; 
embody. 

Works by Prof, A, FOR KB on Chinn and 
Chinese Philosophy, 

Bliithen chinesischer Dichtung. 

Aus dev Zeit der Han-und Secbs Dynastien, 2. Jahrhundert v. Chr. 
bis zum 6. Jahrliundert n, Chr, 

Magdeburg 1899, A. u. B. Babers Verlag. 

Schih-ko chi-chin. 

Chinese text of the above, Peking 1899 {out of p’int). 

Lun Heng^, 

Part I, Philosophical Essays of Wang- Ch‘ung. 

Berlin 1907, Greorg Beimer, Yerlag. 
(Out of print: appeared first in three parts in the “ Mitteilungen 
des Seminars fiir Orientalische Sprachen,’* Berlin). 

Part II, Miscellaneous Essays of Wang Ch‘ung. 

Berlin 1911, Georg Beimer, Yerlag. 

Yang Chu’s Garden of Pleasure (The Wisdom of the 
East Series). London 1912, John Murray. 

Me Ti des Sozialethikers und seiner Schuler philo- 
sophische Werke. 

Berlin 1922, Vereinigung wissenschaftlioher Yerleger. 

Yamen und Presse. 

Handbuch der chinesischen Schriftspraohe, 2 vols. 

Berlin 1911, Georg Beimer, Yerlag. 

Katalog des Pekinger Tripitaka der Kdniglichen 
Bibliothek zu Berlin. Berlin 1916, Behrend & Co. 

Die Vdlker Chinas. Berlin 1907, Karl Curtiua Yerlag. 

Indische Mdrchen und ihre Bedeutung fiir die vergei- 
chende Marchenforschung. 

Berlin 1911, Karl Gurtius Yerlag. 

Chinesische Mystik. Berlin 1922, Knri Cunim Veria«. 

Der Ufsprung der Chinesen auf Qrutid ihrer alten 
Bilderschrift. Hamburg 1925, L. Frioderichsen & Co. Vcrkg. 

To be issued in Autumn, 192S. 

Indian Serpent-Lore 

OB 

The Nagas in Hindu Legend and Art 

I3Y 

• J. Pxi. A^OGEL, rii.n., 

Trofessor of Sanskrit and Indian Archceolotjy in the Universiti/ 
of Leyden, Holland, 

Late Suyeriniendent, Arclueological Survey of India. 

WITH THIRTY PLATES. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO. 

41 GREAT RUSSELL STREET 
LONDON, W.C. 
ii 

PROBSTHAIN’S LIST OF ORIENTAL PUBLICATIONS 

THE 

Philosophy of Human Nature 

(HSINa LI) BY CHU HSI. 

TRANSLATED EEOM THE CHINESE, WITH NOTES, 

BY 

J. PERCY BRUCE, M.A., D.Lit. 

Two Volumes. 

Vol, I. Introduction. Oi-iu Hsi and His Masters. 

Or. 8vo., pp. xvi — 336. 24s. 

Vol. 11. Translation. Tub Philosophy of Human Hatubb. 
Or. 8vo., pp. xvi — 444. 36s. 

Pehing and Tientsin Times . — The two volumes, translation and intro- 
duction, cannot but form one of the most valuable contributions to Sinology 
of recent years. 

Times Literary Sn^ilement, — Mr. Bruce’s translation is the first serious 
and extensive attempt to introduce Sung Philosophy to Europe. His 
translation is careful and exact, and he has earned the gratitude of all who 
study the history of Chinese thought. 

Chinese Recorder . — For those who keenly desire to know better the 
Chinese mind, and to gauge the value of China’s spirituaJ inheritance, it 
will be of deep interest and great usefulness. 

Dr. Lionel Giles . — The books selected for translation constitute an 
independent treatise in themselves, and may be said to represent the finest 
flower of Chinese philosophy. All the difficulties have been triumphantly 
surmounted by Mr. Bruce, who must now he recognised as taking a very 
high place indeed among living Sinologues. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 

41 GREAT RU3SELL 5TRBET, LONDON, W.C. 

THE I-Ll, or Book of Etiquette and Ceremonial. 

Translated from the (Ihineso, witli Introduction, Notes, 
Illustrations, and Plans, by John BXit, 

2 Volumes. Grown 8vo. 1917. 30s. 

Journal of the North Chma Branch l'j-ob«ihai»'s Orlnnlnl Horinsis a wall- 

concoiveO ami tuHtofully producerl anrioa «»f lioctka. The (‘ovor, paper, printing, and 
general arrangoinent ifl excellent. The iinbHHherK dcacrvn ev<<j*y praise. The issue of 
the I-Li hi 2 volumes is nu event in sinology. The slutlent (»f (’hinese must ever be 
grateful to Dr. Rteolo for the production of this laliorioUb work, which will lie of great 
help to those who follOM" him. 

Hirth Anniversary Volume, Presented to Priedrich 
Hirtli, Profesaor of (IbiueaG, Oohimbia University, New 
York, in Honour of liis Seveuity-liflh Birthday, by his 
Friends and Admirers. 1923. Net £3 I5s. 

Tho work containa 2S original and scholarly ooubribulioiis dealing with 
the Professor’s particular specialities, and will ever be a work of the first 
order of Chinese and Central Asian studies. The vohnno is provided witlr 
’ ' ‘ ’ map of China at the time of the Hsia Dynasty, 

oldest-known sample* of Chinese T’ictorial eirt, 
« Ferguson, Agnes E. Meyer, B, Schindler, Sir 

, M. Walloser, C. IC. Wilson, etc. 

Burlington Magassine, June, i 0.3d.- -Mention has been made that no 
fewer than twenty-seven writers contribute to the pages of the massive book 
under review, and it may be said truly that many of the articles are of 
sufficient importance each to merit a review to itself. But space does not 
allow of more, except to advise every serious student of Asiatic subjects to 
read a symposium of soholarship worthy of the distinguished sinologue to 
whom it is dedicated. 

NIZAMI: The Haft Paikar, or Life of King: Bahram 
Our, and the Seven Stories told by his Seven 
Queens. Translated from the Persian, with full 
Commentary, by 0. E. Wilson. Two Volumes. Or, 8vo. 
1924. 32s. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 
iv 

A Brief History of Early 
Chinese Philosophy 

BY 

Dr. D. T. SUZUKI. 

Grown 8vo. 1914. 8s. 6d. 

Expository Times.—The authorities on the philosophy or religion of the 
Chinese arc so few that one offers a welcome at onoe to a scholarly 
Japanese who has made a real study of the subject. The title is too 
modest, and the work is all clear and competent. 

The World-Conception of the Chinese. Their 

Astronoinicalj Cosmological, and Physico-Thilosophical 
Speculations. By Prof. Alfrkd Forke, Growji 8vo., 
pp. xiv, 300. 1925. Spring, 1925. 

Tliis is the first attempt at a systematical d 
on original sources. A great deal has been 
general, but much work^remains to^^be don 

«u rit.n!-, he understood, unless we 
■ - ■ which the moral forces 

In Preparation* 

Kanshin’s (Chien-ch^n’s) Voyage to the East, 

A.D. 742-754. By Aomi-no Mabito Genkai (a.u. 779). 
Translated by Prof. J. Takakusu. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 

PROBSTHAIN’S ORIENTAL SERIES, 

Vol. I, The Indian Craftsman, by A. K. Cuomamswauiy. Outof]}nnt 

Vol. 11, Buddhism as a Relig:ion: its Hihtohk’ati Dkvklopment 
and ilB PitKHJCNt’-uAY Condition, by H. Ilacltjiiaim. fac, 'I’houl. Hvo, up. 320. 

1011). 16b. 

' T T* ‘ " , .:i , ■' h of tli« History of 

. ; . ■ ' . ■ .maisra— V, Eastorn 

. ■ . . ■ ■. ' : Tho only complete 

work on liuiiUJiism. 

Vols. in and IV, The Masnavi, by .ralalu NTDin liuini. Book II, 

branalntod for the llrsL timo into Kritrlisli rroso by rrofcHsor C. W. Wilson. 2 Vols. : 
Vol. T. TrnriHlation from till) I'orsian ; Vol, II, Cominonliiry. Hvo. liUO. uobSOs, 
‘‘■Wilson's niiclitiimo fast wiirtUcsho Hoboraotzurif; in voroin mil seinon ICrlanloruiigsu 
liisBt Koinon, abor luu'h Koinrn Wiinsch uubofrii'iHgt."— JVr loUwi, Vol. IT, 292. 

Vol. V, Essays; Indian and Islamic, by fi. Khmhi Bukhsli, M.A., 

Oxou. Hvo, pp. ‘iO.'i. 1911. nebHs. ImI. 

Vol. VI, Bactria, Lho History of a Forgotton Empire, by H. G. 

Kawlinson, M.A, X.E.H. Hvo, pp. xxiii, KJH, with 2 iiiiipH and ."j plates. 1912. 

not 10s. 6d. 

Vol. VII, A Brief History of Early Chinese Philosophy, by D. T. 

Suauki, Tokyo TJnivorsity. Hvo, pp. 200. 1914. nob Hs. 6d. 

Vols. VIII and IX, The I-Li, or Book of Etiquette and Ceremonial. 
TranslaUjd from bho ChiniMO, with liitroducLlon, NotoH, llhislrationB and IdaiiH, by 
John Stoolo, M.A., D.Lit. 2 vols. Crown Hvo, 1917. not .%«. 

Journal of tlio North China Hraueh K.A.H. : I’robslhain'H Oriontul Korius is a woll- 
■ . ■ ' 1 ' ' . ' - . The eovor, paper, printing, and 

."■ ■ ■ . : ■ ■■ losnrvo ovory praise. Tho issue of tho 

' ! ■ . • ■ • . tmlont of (Jhinoso must over bo grnte- 

work, which will bo of groat holp to 

Vol. X, Chu Hsi: Philosophy of Human Nature {Tiding Li) translated 
from tho Chineao with full ConimciiLary, hy J. !•'. Hruce, Jt.A., D.Lit. Hvo. pp. xvi, 
444^1922. netSGs. 

I . ■ ‘‘ ■ ■ ..... Mr. lirutie, 

. ■ I • ■ • . . ■ ■ . ■ . offorfl to the 

Vol. XI, Introduction to Chu Hsi and the Sung School of 
Philosophy, by J, P. Bruce, M.A., D.Lit. 8vo, pp. xii, 386. 1923. 

24s. 

Vols. XII and XIII, Nizami: The Haft Paikar or Life of King Bahrd,m 
Gur, and tho Sovon Stories told by his Sovou Q-ueons, Traufllabcd from the Persian, 
with full Oomraontary by (), 15, Wilson. 2 vols. Crown Hvo, 1924, 328, 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLI5HERS 

vi 

Vol. XIV, The World-Conception of the Chinese: Their Astro- 
nomical, Cosmoloffical, and I’hysico-Philoaophical Speculationt,, by Prof. Alfred 
Forke, 8vo., pp, xiv, 300, 1925. Spriuff. 1925. 

The first .syatomatical digest of Chinese Natural Philosophy based on original sources. 

Armstrong (B. G., MA., Ph.D.). Light from the East; Studies in 

Japanese Confucianism. 8vo, pp- 324, with Phitca. 1014. neb 168. 

Ashvaghosa. The Awalcening of Faith in the Mahajana Doctrine, 

Ohineso Text and English Translation by T. llichurcl. 8vo, pp. xxv, 45, 46, paper 6s.; 

cloth, 7s. 6d. 

Asia Major. Journal devoted to the Study of the Languages, Arts and 
Civilisation of the Far East and Central Asia. Subscription Vol. I in 4 parts, £3 Ss. 
Ball (J. Dyer). Bhythms and Bliymes in Chinese Olhnes. A Lecture on 
Chinese Poetry and Poets. 8vo, pp. 46. 1907. 38. 6d. net. 

Five Thousand Years of .Tolin Chinaman. 8vo, pp. 33, v. 1906. Ss. 

Banerjee (J.). Hellenism in Ancient India. Svo, pp. 344. 1920. 

not 168. 

Bergen (Eev. P. D.). The Sages of Shantung; Confucius and Mencius. 

(Eeprint). pp. 24. 1913. not3B- 

Brunnert and Hagelstrom. Present-day Political Organisation of 

China. Eoy. 8vo, pp. Ixxx. 572. 1912. ' net ^3 3s. 

Burgess (Jas.). The Ancient Monuments, Temples and Sculptures, 
with Ilescriptivo Notes and Eof erencos. Vol. IT, Mediaeval Monuments, with 170 fine 
plates of famous Hindu Monuments. 1911. not ±14 

Tho work illustrates Indian Art, History and Mythology, beginning with Bodh Gaya 
and Amaravati. It formH a record of the various styles of Indian ArcliiLeotui’e. 

Burma Research Society Journal. Vols. I-XIV, Bvo and 4to. 

Bangoon. 1911-21. oaoh part sold at 7b. 6(1, 

• ■ ‘ Arclueology, I'hilology, 

El- 

Pt, 

loraUiro in Burmese and 

With 

Bushell (S, W.). Inscriptions in the Juoheu and Allied Hevipts 
plate. 8vo, pp. 34. 

Chinese Architecture. Eepriut, with plates. 8vo. 1905. 3s. 

Carter (C.). Sinhalese-English Dictionary, pp. 10-806. Calf. 1924.. 

Catalogue of an Exhibition of Chinese Applied Art, Bronzes, 

Porcelains, Jades. Embroideries. Carpets. Lacqw &c., ImW 

Manchester Art Gallery, 1913, with Introduction by Vra. Burton. 4to, pp. 104, 
with 17 plates. 1913, 

Chalfant (Eev.F. H.), Ancient Chi ne.se Coinage. Illustrated, (BeprintL 

pp. 21. 1913. t nr 1 I 

Charpeiitier (J.) Uttavadhyayana Sutra : being the First Mulasutra 
of the Svotambara Jains. Priikrit Text in Sanskrit ch^aeters. Indited, with Intro- 
duebion. Critical Notes, and a Commentary, 8vo, pp. 409. 3922. net 

Chun (Woon Young) Chinese Economic Trees. Koy. 8vo, pp. xxvii. 309, 

ix, with. 100 plates. 1923. ^ ' 

CoUins (W. P.). Mineral Enterprise in China. 8vo, pp. 410. With 

^ map and sketches. Second Edition, enlarged. 1922. not 328. 

Confucian Analects. 

See SzE Shoo. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 

Doctrine of the Mean, fiec S/.ic Shoo. 

Dore (IL). IteBetircIies into Chineae Su|)6ratitionH, English Translation by 
M, Kennolly, Vols. 1-7. each vol. 21 b. 

Adkins (J.). Opium, Historical Note, or the Poppy in China, in Chinese 
anil Kiit'liah. 8v(>, pi». vH, 60, 36, boards. IRSW. net Ss. 

Fitkin fG. M.). The Great Biver: the Story o£ a Voyage on the 
Yanfftze-Itiang. Hvo, in’. 5, 163. Illustrated. 1022. 18 b, 

Faber (E.). Chronological Handbook of the History of China, edited by 
r. Krunz. Hoy, Hvo, i)i>. xvi, il.'jO, lialf-ealf. 1002, 218. 

Systematical Digest of the Doctrines of Confucius, Second Edition. 

UD. 137, boards. 1903, Os. 

Fletcher (W. J. B.). Gems of Chinese Ver.se, translated into English 
Vorse. Roy. 8vo, pp. 2-19. 1019. 7». 6d. 

More Gems of Chinese Poetry, Chinese Text, with English Translation 

undNofcoH. Roy. 8VO.PP. m 1023. 7 b. 6d. 

For.''\lh 'D. r ' J. •' , '1 '■ ^ Province of China, in some of its 

■ • 1 ■■ ■ to BhanLuinr. 4Ui, pp. viii, 427, with 

246. 

Foster (Mrs English-Chinese Pocket Dictionary, in the Mandarin 

Dialect. Third ISdition, 16 ino. pp. viii, 184, hiilf-calf . 11X33. not 10s. 

Geological Survey of China, Details on Aiiplication. 

Gilbertson (G. W.), The Balochi Language: a Grammar and Manual, 
8vo, pp, 14, 312. 1928. i6s. 

Giles (H. A.). Gems of Chinese Literature. Second Edition, revised 
and onlargod. 4to, pp, xiv, 287. 1923. Ml 12b. 

Goodrich (Ch.). Pocket Dictionary, CliinesG-English and Pekingese 
Syllabary. 16 mo, pp. vil, 237. 70, Imlf-calf, Fourth KiliLicui. 1904. net 128. 

Great Learning. See Szifl Siioo. 

Hirth (Pr.). Scraps from a Oolluetor’s Note-Book; being Note.s on some 
Chinoso Painters of the Preaenb Dynasty, Appetuliros on aoino Old Mastera and Art 
Historians, Plutoa, 8yo. pp. 136. 1905. nctlSi. 

Native Sources for the History of Chineso Pictorial Art. English 

Version by A. E. Meyer, with Index of Artistis, Authors and Hooks. 8vo, pp. 28. 
1917. nob 8s. 6d. 

Hosie (Sir Alexander). On the Trail of the Opium Poppy; a Narrative 
of Travel in the Chief Opium-producing Provinces of Cliina. 2 vola., 8vo, with Plates 
and Maps. 1014. not 258. 

The work records the observations of an Orionlal traveller of wide oxiwrlence upon the 

places, people, products, Indusbrleu, and trades. 

Hsu Shih-Chang ('President of China). China after the War, 8vo. 
lip. 164. 1022. not lOs. Gd. 

Hu 5hih. Development of Logical Method in Aivoicnt China. 1922. 

6s. 

Jouveau Debrueil (G.). Palhwa Antiquities. Vol. I, 8vo, pp. 76. 
With 32 Plates. 1916. nob 78. Bd. 

Kashmir Sanskrit Series. Text and Studios, Nos. 1"24. net £6. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO„ ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 

viii 

Kern (H.)< Manual of Indian Buddhiam, Barge 8vo, pp, 149. 

not 168, 6d. 

Kliene (Oh.). Anglo-Chinese Calendar for 250 years (1761-2000). 4to, 
half -calf. 1906. net £2 lOs, 

Ku Hung Ming, Tlie Story of a Chinese Oxford Movement. 8vo, pp, 
29-125. 1912, 10s. 6<i. 

Laffitte (M. Pierre). General View of Chinese Civilisation and of the 
Kelafcions of the West with Ohina. 8to, pp. vii, 127, 1887. 78. 6d. 

Banning (G.). Old Porces in New China: an Effort to exhibit the 
Fundamental Holationship in Cliina and the West in thoir true Light. 8vo, pp. x, 
409, with a map showing the natural resourccB of China, 1912. not 128, 6d. 

Li Ung Bing. Outlines of Chinese History. 8vo, pp. iv, 644, and Index, 
pp. 20, with coloured raap.s and illustrations. 1914. 24b. 

Lockhart (J. H. Stewart). The Currency of the Farther East, from the 
Earliest Times up to the Proaont Day. 3 vols., including one of Plates. 1805-96. 

£3 33, 

Macdonell (A. A.). Vedie Grammar. Large 8vo, pp, 466. 1910. 

not 30a. 

Vcdio Mythology. Large 8vo, pp. 190. 1897. net 16s. 

Macgowaii T-- r ’ Tl''^>ry of China: Histoiy of the Empire 

• » : ■■ Second Edition. 8vo, pp, xi, 651, half-calf. 

J.UUU. net £1 lOs. 

Mateer (Kev. 0. W.). A Course of Mandarin Lessons, based on 
Idiom. Ilcvised Edition. 4to, pp. Iv, 786, half -calf. 1906, £2 lOs. 

a short course of Primary Lessons in Mandarin (intended as an 

Introduction to the above work). 4to, pp. Iv, 79, half -calf. 1907. 10a. 6(1. 

Mayers (Pr. Wm.). Treaties between the Empire of China and the 
Foreign Pow’ers. New Edition, cloth. 1906. net 25s. 

The Chinese Government : a Manual of Chinese Titles, categorically 

arranged and explained, with an Appendix, Third Edition, roy. Hvo. revisod by 
a, M. H. Playfair, half-calf. 258. 

Mayers (W. F.)* Chinese Beader’s Manual, 8vo, pp. 16, 444. Eeprint. 
1924. 

Mencius, Works of. See Sze Shoo. 

Modern Indian Artists. The Art of Kshitindra Nath Mazumdar, by 
0. C. Gangoly, Vol. I, with 5 coloured plates and 21 photogravures, bound In Parch- 
ment and art paper. 192.3. 

Vol. II, Asit Kumar Haidar, by J. H. Cousins and 0. C. Gangoly, 

, with 4 coloured plates and 24 photograATires, bound in parchment and art paper. 

Morgan (Evan). A Guide to Wenli Styles and Chinese Ideals : _ 

Edicts, Koolamations, Memorials, Lottos. Documents. bWmorcml 

Chinas Taxt, Vtl. Miah Tranataton and KaU». 8va, 
vocabulary of 46 pp., and Index, cloth. 1912. 

Owen (Prof. G.}. The Evolution of Chinese Writing. 8vo, 

Perlmann (S. M.), Hassinim (the Chinese) : Chinese Life, Manners 
anT Cuatorafl, Culture and Creeds, Government System and Trade, with an APi^udrx, 
Se Jews in China. In Hebrew. 8 yo, doth. 1911. 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 

ix 

Perlniann (H. M.), Tlie Jews in China, pp. 24. 1909. net 9s. Od. 

Pharmacopoeia of Japan, transhitcid fi-nni' the, Japanese into Englisli, 
Fourtli Ilovisetl lilition. 8vo, m>. 'Ifi'i, Imlf-calf. ^2 108. 

Playfair (G. M, H,). The CitioH and Towns of Chinn: a Googvnphical 
Dictionary. Socoiicl IWlLion, larKo five, pp. 80, 58*2, 1010, nelS2s. 

Poletti (P.). A d ~—.r * 

the TlariicalH and f' . ■ ■ ■ ' ■ ■ ■ . : 

chanu'UirH, with . >. .. 

Hyutom and tho r • ■ ■ . . . ' ■ " . • : 

Hpollinti. Hvu, cloth, PI), cvi, :}()7, iintl a JdHt of Uadicala. J4KJ1. not 18 b, 

Railways of China, The* 8vo, pp. 2B, with map. 3 b. 

Renier (C. E.). Beading.s in Economiee for China. 8vo, pp. 10“68S. 

1923. aiB. 

Reminiscences of a Chinese Official, llevelations of Ofilcial life 

unilor tho Manclnis. lioy. Hvo, pp, 168. 1922. 8a. 6cl. 

Richard. Comprehensive Geography of the Cliineso Empire. 8vo, 
with Map, cloth. 1901. not 2l8. 

Richard (T.). Guide to Bucldhahood : : 1 ' -.'f; ‘nese 

Buddhiam, Iranalatod from tho Chinoac (£ ■ > i i 1907, 

6d. 

Ridge (W. Sheldon), China, 1911*12. Governmont Changes and 
National MovomonlH. With TnuiHlalion of tho Rtalo Dociunonta rotating fchoroto, 
8vo, pp. 80-57. 0g, 

Rudd (H. F.). Chinese Moral Sentinicmta before Confucius: a Study in 
tho Origin of Klhioal YalnationH. Hvo, tip. hi. 2‘2l. 1914, lOa. 6d. 

.Saussure (L. de), Originea de I’Afitronomie Chinoise. Hoy. 8vo, 
pp. *138, niustraled. 1922, not 30s, 

PHorometrie et le Systems Cosmologique des Chinois. 4to, pp. 18, 

with 22 IllustrabionB. 1919. not 28. 6d. 

Le Syat6me Astronomique des Chinoia. 8vo.' Illustrated. 1922. 

not 128. 6d. 

Schindler (B-). Development of the Chinese Conceptions of Supreme 
Bolngs. Koy. 8vo, pp. 71. 192;). 4 b. 

Silacara. Discourses of Gotamo the Buddha, translated from the Pali 
of the Majjhima Nlkayo. 2 voIh,, roy. 8vo, clf)th. 1912-13, not 15s. 

Smith (A. H.). Proverbs and Common Sayings from the Chinese, 
with Observations tm Oliinoso Things in Goneral. Now anil Revised Edition. 
8va, pp. vii, 374, xs, half'oalf. liXld. not 20s. 

Soothill {W. E.), The Student’s Four Thousand Chinose Charaotors. 
and Gonera! Pocket Dictionary, Third Edition, Hvo, pp. 36, 428, cloth. 1909. 

not 128, 

Sowerby (A. De G.). The Naturalist in Manchuria. With photographs 
and sketchoa. Yol. I, Travel and Exploration. 4to, pp. xiv, 847. 1922. .£2 2 b. 

Stuart (G. A.). Chinese Materia Medica. Hvo, pp. SfiS, vi. 1911. 21a. 

Sumangala (S.). A Graduated Pali Course, with Pali-Engliah 
Vocabulary. 8vo, cloth, 1913. neb 15 b. 

Sutta-Nipata (The). Pali Text, edited in Devandgari Characters, with 
Introduction and Notes in English by P. Y. Ilapat. Hvo, pp, 37, 212. 1924. 12 b. 

PROBSTHA^IN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 

Sze 5hoo. The Pour Books : Works of Menoiiis> Doctrine of the Mean, 
Confucian Analects, Groat Learning. Cloth, Chinoso Text, -with English Trans- 
lation and Notes. 128. 

Visser (Dr, M. W.j. The Dragon in China and Japan. Eoy. 8vo, 
pp. xii, 242. 1913. 14a! 

Vitale (Baron G-.). Chinese Polklore : Pekingese Bhynies, Pirst collected 

and edited with Notes and English Translation. 8vo, pp. xvii, 220, Pekiug, 
1096. neb 23s. 

Chinese Merry Tales, collected and edited in Chine.so : a First Beading 

Look for Students of C'olloauial Chinese. Second Edition, 8vo, pp. viii, 118. 
Peking, 1908. net 15s. 

Wagel (S. B,). Finance hi China. 8vo, pp, 503. 1914. 36s. 

Chinese Currency and Banking. 8vo, pp, 457. 1915. 36s. 

Wei (F. C, M.). Political Principles of Iilencius. 8vo, pp. 8, 99. 1916. 

7s. 6d. 

Werner (E, T. 0.). Chinese Ditties. 4to, pp. 66. 1922. 6s. 

Whitney (D. W.). Sanskrit Grammar, including both tlie Classical 
Language and tlie Older LiulecLs of Veda and Brulmiaua, 8vo, pp. 25, 5,>L 
i'ifth Edition. 1924. IGs. 

Wieger (Dr. L.). Chinese Characters: their Origin, Etymology, 
History, Classiheation, Bignifleation. A thorough Study from Chine.se Documents, 
8vo, 2 Tols. 1915. ’ lieiiriniinQ. 

Moral Tenets and Customs in China: Texts in Chinese, with 

English Translation. llhiatraLud. 8vo, pp, C04. not BUs. 

Williams (C. A. S.). A Manual of Chinese Metaphor. Chinese Text, 
with English Translation, 8vo, pp. .829. 1920, Itis. 

Wylie (A.). Notes on Chinese Literature. (Beprint.) Boy 8vo, pp. 
40-307. 1923. . 308. 

2;immer (G. F.). Engineering of Antiquity and Technical Progress in 
Arts and Crafts. 8vo, pp. 89. With 56 Illustrations. 1913. net 7s. 6d, 

In preparation. 

H5UNTZEJ The Aristotle of China. Translated from the 
Chinese, together with a Treatise on Ancient Confucianism as 
developed in the philosophy of Hsuntze, by Hoimer H. Dubbs. 
(Probsthain’s Oriental Series.) 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS 
xi 

CHINESE GRAMMARS AND DICTIONARIES. 

Edkins (J.'l. Grammar of Collociuial Gliinose (Shanghai Dialect), 8vo, 

10a, 

Giles (H.). How to Begin Chinese ; Hundred and Heeond Hundred Best 
Cliaractoi'S. eadi vol. 4a. 

Mateer (G. W.). A Course in Mandarin Tjchsouk, haR(?d on Idiom, with 
Index. 2 vola., 4to. 10(16. £& lOa. 

A Short Course of 3h-imary Lesson.s in Mandarin. 4to, pi). 79. 1907, 

108. 6d. 

Primer in the Mandarin Dialect, containing LesBons and Vocabularies 
(CliineBO and Homan Charafitors). pp. ano. 1B87, 15a. 

Yates (M, T.). Pirst LessouB in Chinese (Shanghai Dialect), pp. 151. 
1904. 7fl. 6d, 

Abridged English-CIiinese Dictionary (05,000 Words and Phrases), 
pp. 14.(1. 208. 

Chang Tieh Min. Chinesc-Knglifdi Dictionary, pp. 364. 1922, lOs, 6d. 

Dixon and Chan Chi Lan Dictionary of Idiomatic Kngli.sh Phrases, with 
('hini'HO EqniTuUnilH, pp, .555, 30. 19'23. 16s. 

Eastlake (1?. W,). Auglf)-ChineHO ConverBational Dictionary for Study 
find Rnforonce, pp. 610. 1021. Ga. 

Foster (Mrs. A.). Englisli and Chinese Pochot Dictionary in the Mandarin 
IHalftcb. Ilalf-cnlf. 19JG. 8a, 

OhineBO and Homan flluu'uc'torH. 

Goodrich (C. H.). Pocket Dictionary, Ohiiiese-Hnglish and Peking 
Hyllabavy. 16 pp. 237, 70. 1004. 128. 

Lee Yu Wen. New Chinese -English Dictionary (10,000 Words and 5,000 
Plii'asos). pp. 8.32, 1921. 32 b. 

Chincatj and Homan Oliai'ncters. 

MacQillivray (D.). Mandarin Ponianized Dictionary of Chinese, pp. 1145, 
linlf-ealf. 1018. .£3 3 b, 

Modern English-Chinese Dictionary, with Appendix, pp. 1631. 

1923. 14s. 

Morgan (E.). Chinese New Terras and Expressions, with English Trans- 
labiou. pp. 206. 1913. 6b. 

Tho Chinese Speaker. Headings in Modern Mandarin-Cliinese, with 

Engliali Tranalnbion an<l Annolationa, and Vocabulary. Hr, 4bo, pp. 6, 403. 1916. 

24b. 

Soothill (W. E.). Student’s 4,000 Chinese Characters and Pocket 

DicLionary, pp. .36, 428. 1909. 128. 

Poletti (P.). Chinese and English Dictionary according to Badioals and 
Snb-Hadicnla, Now I'lnlarjjod Edition, witb Pronunciation in tho Pokinir Dialoob. 
pp. 307, clolh. 1001. las. 

TzHi Yuan. Chinese Dictionary, in Chinese only. 2 big vola,, cloth, 
1922. 308. 

The most complele Ohinoao dictionary, iudiaponaablo to ovory atiidonl and aeholar, 
Wells Williams (S.). Syllabic Dictionary of the Chinese Language, re- 
nrranaud accordina bo Wado. Hoy. 8vo, half-calf, 1909. SOs, 

Zia (H. L. and o.}. English-Ohinese Handy Dictionary. iip. 1696. 
1021. lOs; 

'i 

I 

t 

PROBSTHAIN & CO., ORIENTAL PUBLISHERS