Cine Tha Loeb y 

VIJNANABHAIRAVA TANTRA 

(Simplified Practical Approach) 
BY V. RAVI 
A MANBLUNDER PUBLICATION 

© Copyright with the author 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in 
retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written 
permission from the author, except for brief passages quoted in reviews or 
critical articles. 

Date of publication: November 17, 2012 

Published by: 
Manblunder publication Chennai, India. 
Web: www.manblunder.com Email: ravi@manblunder.com 

PREFACE 

Vijianabhairava is Trika and tantra Scripture, wherein Siva teaches His 
Consort Sakti, one hundred and twelve methods of contemplations to realize 
Him. As far as Trika Philosophy is concerned, it uses many complicated 
Sanskrit words and unless one understands the meaning of technical Sanskrit 
words in detail, it could be difficult to understand the full glory of this great 
Scripture. A sincere attempt has been made in this book to avoid all 
complicated words and make the teachings of Siva as simple as possible. The 
main idea of this book is to discuss about one hundred and twelve 
contemplations in very simple terms, without loosing sight on the focus of 
this sacred Scripture. All these contemplations can be easily practiced at 
home. 

The entire text is in the form of divine conversation between Siva and Sakti. 
Sakti asks Her Lord Siva and gets clarifications on some of Her doubts and 
that is how this ancient Scripture has come into existence. The text has one 
hundred and sixty three aphorisms. Mind is the only factor in God 
realization. When a practitioner is able to dissolve his mind into the supreme 
consciousness of Bhairava, he becomes Bhairava himself. Tantra is based on 
the principle of accepting one as himself. In yoga one has to dissolve himself 
into That. The aim of both tantra and yoga are the same, realising the Self 
within, but the path taken by both are different. For practicing tantra, one 
need not have extensive knowledge. Understanding certain technical terms 
are necessary to achieve rapid progress. In yoga one has to fight against the 
principles of nature but in tantra one continues to remain with the nature. 
However, practice is important in both. 

As far as possible, Sanskrit alphabets have been avoided and are used only in 
a very few places. 

However, [AST (International Alphabet for Sanskrit Transliteration) format 
is used through out the book, so that original glory of Sanskrit pronunciation 
is not lost. The basic idea of the book is to explain the teachings ofSiva in 
simplest terms possible and the book does not dwell at length about Trika 
Philosophy. 

V. RAVI 
November 17. 2012 

INTRODUCTION 

Vijhanabhairava Tantra is a very ancient treatise that elucidates methods for 
God realisation. It does not talk about ritualistic principles but lays stress on 
foundational consciousness to realize Brahman. It describes methods to 
merge human consciousness with Divine Consciousness or the individual 
consciousness with cosmic consciousness. It is one of the rare collections of 
Kashmiri Saivism. Kashmiri tradition names the Absolute Reality as 
Bhairava. Combination of three alphabets bha + ra + va forms the word 
Bhairava. Each of these three alphabets means three different acts of God. 
bha means sustenance of the universe, ra means dissolution of the universe 
and va means manifestation of the universe. Vijfiana is the knowledge about 
the highest state of consciousness. It is the nirvikalpa stage (the stage where 
mind is free of any changes) where the mind is confined to the Brahman, 
where the discrimination between subject and object is dissolved. To achieve 
this stage there are four impediments. They are lethargy, distraction, 
resentment and lower level of bliss (bliss of Brahman is the highest bliss). 
Lower level of bliss is temporary and the highest level of bliss is perpetual. 
Bliss is the experience of inexplicable happiness. Therefore it is apparent that 
in order to realize Bhairava, one has to transcend these four impediments of 
the mind. The treatise does not explain in philosophical jargons but instead, 
approaches the core subject of Self-realization with practical applications. 
Thus Vijfianabhairava becomes different from other scriptures. Siva Himself 
provides practical training to realize Bhairava (Siva) through one hundred 
and twelve types of yogic techniques. The treatise does not invest time in 
analysis but plunges straight into practice. 

Brahman, the absolute freedom and un-afflicted pure consciousness is 
revealed in the form oficcha, jiana and kriya known as desire, knowledge 
and action, the functional causes for creation. Subject object differentiation 
arises only due to the change in the level of consciousness. One’s awareness 
plays an extremely important role in Self-realization. Vijianabhairava Tantra 

teaches practical methods to develop one’s awareness. The entire treatise 
deals with dharana-s (fixed concentration of the mind) or attentiveness for 
which concentration is important. It is a process by which mind is trained to 
concentrate on a particular spot. Vijhanabhairava deals only with yogic 
science and to a certain extent metaphysical science and not on philosophy. It 
is a science, because at every stage one can put to test all the one hundred and 
twelve techniques. This treatise is found in Rudra Yamala, one of the very 
ancient tantra Sastra-s. 

The entire text is in the form of divine conversation between Siva and Sakti. 
Sakti asks Her Lord Siva and gets clarifications on some of Her doubts and 
that is how this ancient scripture has come into existence. The text has one 
hundred and sixty three aphorisms. Mind is the only factor in God 
realization. When a practitioner is able to dissolve his mind into the supreme 
consciousness of Bhairava, he becomes Bhairava himself. Tantra is based on 
the principle of accepting one as himself and to go beyond and in yoga one 
has to dissolve himself in That. The aim of both tantra and yoga are the same, 
realising the Self within, but the path taken by both are different. For 
practicing tantra, one need not have extensive knowledge. Understanding 
certain technical terms are necessary to achieve rapid progress. In yoga one 
has to fight against the principles of nature but in tantra one continues to 
remain with the nature. However, practice is important in both. 

If the teachings of Vijnanabhairava are followed, one can surely understand 
the changes that happen within. If a particular technique suits a person, he 
does not remain the same person. His perception becomes different. His 
spiritual evolution begins to happen within. All the techniques are simple and 
easy to follow, as Siva Himself is the Guru here. 

INTRODUCTORY VERSES (Verses 1 to 23) 

Vijianabhairava opens with a question asked by Bhairavi (Sakti, Consort of 
Bhairava or Siva to 

Bhairava seeking further clarifications on Rudra Yamala. Vijfanabhairava is 
one of the chapters in Rudra Yamala. Sakti specifically tells Siva that She 
knows about trikabheda from Rudra Yamala. Trikabheda 1s the philosophy 
of sakta school of thought. Trika means three and bheda means difference. 
The differences conceived by them are para, parapara and apara. Para 
(discussed in detail in Lalita Sahasranama nama 366) means the highest 
form. This form is transcendent, beyond and outside the ordinary range of 
human experience or understanding. This form is considered as the Supreme 
and is full of energy. In order to manifest, it loses its supremacy and becomes 
parapara, the mediocre level of supremacy. It further loses its strength at the 
exact time of manifestation becomes apara, loses its supremacy and is 
manifested. These three stages are known as Siva, Sakti and nara (jivatman 
or man). To understand this better, para is Siva, parapara is Sakti and apara is 
jiva. In the state of Siva (para) both knowledge and action are blended in 
equal proportion. In the stage of Sakti only knowledge is predominant and in 
the stage of apara (human level) only action is predominant. This is known as 
trikabheda. 

Bhairavi proceeds to ask further questions. Bhairavi wants to know the 
following: 

1. The real nature of alphabets (In Sanskrit a to ksa); 

2. nine divisions of mantras; 3. The potency of the vowel-less mantra that 
energises the chakras (of kundalini). 

In order to understand these questions one should be familiar with the terms 
used by Bhairavi. The first question is about the real nature of the alphabets. 
These alphabets give rise to objects. The original verse says sabda- 
rasikala.Sabda-rasi means the fifty one alphabets of Sanskrit. Kala means the 

kinetic energy of the divine or the Vimarsa form of the Brahman. Brahman 
has two aspects. Prakasa is the self-illuminating Brahman without attributes 
and is just a witness. The other aspect of the Brahman is Vimarsa form, 
which is the kinetic force of creation. Prakasa is Siva and Vimarsa is Sakti. 

The second question is about nine divisions of mantras. Mantras are the 
products ofSabda Brahman 

(the source of all alphabets). It can be said that mantras are made of letters 
originated from Sabda 

Brahman. The nine forms of mantras areSiva, Sadasiva, Isvara, Vidya Maya, 
Kala, Niyati, Purusa and Prakrti. Prakrti is Nature and Purusa is the 
individual soul. These nine play their well-defined roles both in creation and 
in destruction. These nine are known as navdtma-bheda or the different 
stages of the soul. These nine principles or tattva-s are represented by nine 
letters and they are h, r, ks, m, |, v, y,n,snum. The soul seeking liberation has 
to cross each of these states to realize Supreme Siva, the ultimate source of 
creation. When a soul understands Siva well, the soul becomes Self-realized. 
Birth happens when para becomes parapara and then to apara (Supreme, 
mediocre and lower orSiva, Sakti and man). It is the process of Siva 
becoming Sakti and then to man. One (Siva) becomes many (both sentient 
and insentient beings). This process of involution ceases at some point of 
time and goes back toSiva to remain with Him, with no more rebirth. After 
merging unto Him, the soul does not undergo further evolution and 
dissolution. By gaining knowledge and through its experience, it realizes the 
source of its origin, Siva. This process is known as Self-realisation. 

There is another aspect of this interpretation. The sound originates and 
undergoes different processes. It all begins with OM. One has to concentrate 
on the chanting (with sound) of OM, simultaneously concentrating on the 
movement of one’s breath. During the process of both inhalations and 
exhalations, breath stops at a point both inwardly and outwardly. The next 
stage is where OM is chanted without sound and during this stage, breathing 
is suspended. In this suspended stage of breath, one reaches the soundless 
stage of sound, the subtle form of sound. The next stage is where one 
identifies himself with Sakti, the kinetic force of creation. Sakti is also 
known as the Brahman, but with attributes and maya. Sakti is realised by a 

sort of pseudo bliss. When this pseudo bliss diffuses from one’s physical 
body, which is the penultimate stage of realisation, he moves to the final 
stage where Siva and Sakti unite. The Brahman with attributes (Sakti) and the 
Brahman without attributes (Siva) become one, the Self-illuminating 
Brahman. There is no form here and one is not separate from Siva, the 
omnipresent and omnipotent. These states are known as 1. Akara, 2. Ukara, 
3. Makara (these three together called nada. A + U + M=OM), 4. Bindu, 5. 
Ardhachandra, 6. Nirodhika, 7. Sakti, 8. vyapini, 9. Samana and finally 10. 
Unmani. In the stage of unmana the soul merges with Siva and becomes one 
with Siva. Unmana is the supramental power ofSiva known as Sakti, who is 
beyond mind and time and is immeasurable. 

The third question of Bhairavi is about the vowel-less mantra that energises 
all the energy centres in the path of kundalini. She is keen to know the power 
about chakras. She is asking Siva whether such energy originates from 
vowel-less bija ha. This vowel-less ha is known as prana- kundalint. When 
the spine is energised through activation of chakras, that energy thus 
generated is called prana sakti, which is self-created. 

Bhairava answers these questions subsequently, but not before Bhairavi seeks 
further clarifications. Siva begins his first technique in verse 26. The first 25 
verses lay a strong foundation to understand 112 dharana-s thoroughly. 

Bhairavi now wants to know whether para is compatible with apara. Since 
para stage cannot be complex in nature, can it be differentiated in the form of 
mantras or bodily forms? Bhairava clarifies the doubts of Bhairavi. Bhairavi 
is the disciple and Bhairava is Her guru. Husband is the Guru and His 
Consort is His disciple. It becomes obligatory on the part of a Guru to dispel 
the doubts of his disciples. There are two aspects to Guru-disciple 
relationship. Only a self-realized person can be a proper Guru. Disciples have 
to have total faith in their Guru. Guru’s job does not end by mere initiation of 
mantras. He has to impart knowledge of the Brahman to his disciples. The 
Guru has to set in motion his own consciousness, with the consciousness of 
his disciple. Guru guides his disciple from the initial process of initiation to 
final liberation of his disciple. A Guru activates the power of kundalini by 

entering into the energy body of his disciple. This is generally done when the 
Guru asks his disciple to sit with him for meditation. 

Para is the ulterior, because it is the supreme. Totality of manifestation 
appears in three forms — gross (sthiila), subtle (suksma) and ulterior (para). 
Nature of para can also be interpreted as the expansion of the Brahman 
(Siva) in the form of aham (I am), the essential form ofSakti. A-para is the 
other extreme of para. In the stage of apara (nara), manifestation of the 
gross materialistic world happens. The highest form of divine is Bhairava 
(para). His differentiating power is a-para (nara) and His differentiating cum 
non-differentiating power is pardpara (Sakti). Why Bhairavi wants to know 
about the compatibility of para with a-para orSiva with a living being? 
Probably She could have perceived that this compatibility is connected to the 
process of creation. Para is undoubtedly the supreme among the three. Para 
or the Brahman cannot be attained either by mantras or by forms. Therefore, 
Bhairavi wants to know the real form of Her Guru cum Consort Bhairava. If 
the real identity of the Brahman is known, it is easier to attain Him. The 
question of Bhairavi could lead not only to Siva, but to the entire universe as 
well. After all, She is the embodiment of supreme knowledge, hence She 
formulates questions that leads to understanding of the Brahman and His 
actions. Bhairavi’s questions can be arranged like this: 

1. What is the reality of Bhairava ? 

2. What is this universe ? 
3 . What is the central point of this universe? 

4. Can time and space be transcended? 
5. What is formless form? 

Now Bhairava begins to clarify the doubts of Bhairavi. In the course of His 
clarifications, He declares one hundred and twelve techniques. One can 
choose any one of the one hundred and twelve techniques that suits him 
most. There is no ritual involved, in any of these techniques. Highest form of 
concentration is required to practice these techniques. One has to keep his 
consciousness pure. To have pure consciousness, thoughts need to be pure. 

Ultimately, it is the mind that establishes connection between jivatman 
(apara) and Paramatman (para). Bhairava begins by saying that Her question 
is about the essence of tantras. There is a difference between tantrasastra and 
yogasastra. Both tantra and yoga lead to Self-realisation, but the path that is 
to be traversed is quite opposite to each other. Yoga says that one should 
fight against one’s nature but tantra accepts what you are. In yoga one has to 
transform oneself to realise the Brahman. But tantra does not advocate such 
transformation but it emphasises on concentration. Tantra does not care for 
senses and it cares only for the mind. Vijhanabhairava is a tantra. 

Bhairava says that answers to Her questions are understandable only by the 
enlightened. Still he was willing to share with His disciple, His wife. Guru 
decides that His disciple is fit enough to receive the knowledge of the 
Brahman. The knowledge of the Brahman expounded by Brahman Himself is 
considered as highly secretive in nature. Siva is all set to share His secrets 
with His Sakti. Bhairava says “The mantras and forms are only for the sake 
of writing and understanding them and is not worth the time. Bhairava is 
neither the forms nor mantras. These are the effects of maya and deceptive in 
nature. They are like dreams.” In the opening statement itself,Siva rules out 
nine forms and fifty one alphabets. These descriptions are used for those who 
are still associated with rituals. Ritual is miles away from Reality. Rituals are 
only introduction to spirituality and one cannot continue to dwell only on the 
introduction. If ritual is considered as introduction, then liberation is 
conclusion. The process of spirituality is like education. One has to progress 
from lower class to higher class by thoroughly understanding the subjects 
taught in the lower class. If one is not able to understand the subject taught, 
then he is not allowed to go to the next higher class. Without understanding 
the significance of rituals, one cannot proceed to the next higher stage of 
spiritual knowledge. The transition has to be firm but gradual. 

Bhairava tells Bhairavi that his descriptive form is only for the ignorant who 
meditates on forms. 

They have confused mind that functions in opposite direction. They are 
associated only with rituals. 

Bhairava says that those who indulge in meditation with forms are ignorant. 
We are taught by Upanisad-s that self effulgent Brahman has no form. If He 

has form, then He loses his omnipresence and omnipotent nature. An object 
can exist only at certain place. A single object cannot prevail all over the 
universe at the same time. It cannot control the functions of the universe by 
being present in a particular place. The rituals have been prescribed for 
immature people. They are immature because, they still get engrossed in the 
effects of duality. They do not consider that Self and the self are the same. 
Bhairava says that in reality He is neither navatma (Siva, SadaSiva, ISvara, 
Vidya Maya, Kala, Niyati, Purusa and Prakrti) nor the alphabets, nor 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra or their Sakti-s (powers). He is not concerned with the 
chakras nor His energy is in the form of Sakti (na ca Saktisvariipakah). 
Bhairava says that He is well beyond all such descriptive terms that are 
meant only for the ignorant and for the beginners of spirituality. Rituals are 
like toys to kids, whose attention are drawn towards toys. Without toys they 
do not know what a toy is. Through toys, various shapes and forms are taught 
to the young. A toy of a lion makes a kid to understand how a lion looks like. 
The same principle applies to the beginners of spirituality. Rituals are 
prescribed only for them. A form is given to the Brahman through rituals to 
make the ignorant understand the concept of divinity. A boy does not remain 
in the same class and goes up to the higher class. In the same way, an 
ignorant is expected to move forward in the spiritual path, leaving behind the 
rituals that were pursued till now. 

Bhairava now proceeds to disclose His true nature. (Quoted statements are 
not literal translation) ‘I am beyond time, space and shape. There is no 
specific place or designation for me. My real nature cannot be explained as it 
is beyond explanation. My form cannot be delineated nor my place defined.’ 
The statement of Bhairava implies that He is beyond and outside the ordinary 
range of human experience or understanding. He transcends anything and 
everything that the universe is aware of. Ordinary range of human experience 
because, the higher range of human experience is bliss attained through 
knowledge. Self-realisation happens only beyond the higher range of human 
experience. It happens only when the mind is quietened. When the mind is 
quietened, intelligence gets purified and refined. At that time he understands 
that there is no Siva, no Kailaga, noSakti, nothing, simply nothing. The mind 
devoid of ego, remains unaided by senses is unaware of various influences, 
multitude of energies and interactions. The mind becomes unaided by senses 

only if it is devoid of ego, the “I ness. Bhairava says that the stage of 
nothingness or void is filled with bliss, where the duality is completely 
obliterated. This stage of nothingness is filled with Bhairavi who is nothing 
but Bhairava Himself. This state cannot be explained but can be experienced 
through bliss. The worshipper merges into the worshipped. The duality 
obliterates into “That” and there exists only “That”. The practitioner 
continues to exist but he exists as “That’’. In this stage, who is to be 
worshipped, as there is no differentiation between subject and object? If there 
are two persons present, one can pay reverence to the other, but there is no 
second here. This stage is known as the stage of impeccable fullness. 
Bhairava chooses two words, “Bhairavi and Bhairavatmanah (Consciousness 
of Bhairava)”. There is no difference between these two.Siva and Sakti are 
not two different entities. They are one. They are not even Siva-Sakti aikya 
(union). They are known as Siva. That is whyLalita Sahasranama nama 998 
addresses Her as Sri Siva. 

This highest state is called Bhairavi in tantra sastra-s. The verse 17 says “para 
pararupena paradevi’’. 

Para, the highest, pararupena, the highest form and paradevi, She is That 
Devi or She is That. She is Bhairava in preternatural form. The reason of 
citing Bhairavi as the Supreme is due to the fact that real Bhairava is 
incomprehensible. Therefore, Bhairavi is the highest form that one can think 
of. Since Bhairava is not attainable, Bhairavi is called as Bhairava as well. 
Tantras advocate worshipping Bhairavi because tantra is a science and it does 
not take cognisance of inexplicable and inconceivable things. Bhairava is 
inexplicable. Self-realization happens at the level of Bhairavi and nobody 
knows what happens beyond Bhairavi. The human incapableness, unable to 
transcend Bhairavi, calls Bhairavi as Bhairava. 

Bhairava continues by saying that there is ‘no difference between Sakti and 
Siva’. Sakti is nothing but the possessor of Siva’s energy. Feminine gender is 
Sakti and masculine gender is Siva. This is the only difference between the 
two. Bhairava transcends everything by remaining supremely eminent. He 
has the intent to surpass anything but abides in unperceivable superiority of 
Sakti. Therefore, Sakti or Bhairavi is the divine energy of Siva. It is now 
apparent that without Siva, Sakti cannot exist. Instead of acting directly, Siva 

has channelised his divine energy to Sakti . That is why She is known as para 
(the supreme Siva) Sakti (Parasite). The original verse uses the word a-bedha 
which means no difference. Therefore, Sakti is totally owned bySiva 
endowed with all His energies. Bhairava says that energy of fire is not 
different from the fire itself. Fire produces different energies such as heat, 
light, etc. But they are not considered as different from the burning fire. The 
one who identifies himself with Sakti automatically becomes Siva. This non- 
distinguishable state is reached because the practitioner has identified himself 
with Sakti and there is nothing else he needs to do, to attain Siva, as attaining 
Siva is not something different from attaining Sakti. Bhairava addresses 
Bhairavi as “Siva priye” (one who loves Siva) and says that the rays of the 
sun are not different from the sun itself or the light of the lamp is not 
different from the lamp itself. Sun is known only through its rays and lamp is 
known only through its light. Light is synonymous with sun and lamp. When 
light is there, it is called day and when light is not there it is called as night. 
When light prevails, it implies that sun is the cause for the light. The source 
of the light is known only through the light. In the same way Siva is known 
only through Sakti. The source of energy, Siva is known only through the 
energy of Sakti. The objects are realised through light, the source of which is 
the sun. Without light, objects cannot be realized. In the same way the 
universe is realised through Sakti, the source of which is Siva. Had Siva told 
Sakti the following, this explanation could have been avoided. ‘You are not 
different from me. You and I are the same. You are my energy. I have 
transferred all my energies to you. Even after transferring all my energies to 
you, I remain the Supreme. I cannot be transcended at all. People can know 
me only through you. They cannot perceive me separately. Though you are 
inseparable from me, you can never become me. You are part of me and Iam 
not part of you.’ 

Now Bhairavi needs following clarifications. 

1. Whose emblem is the trident? Trident is held by Siva with three prongs. 
These prongs mean the three exclusive acts of divine, iccha (volition), 
jhana (wisdom) and kriya (actions). 

2. Who wears the garland of skulls? Of course it is Bhairava. Skulls signify 
the supreme consciousness. 

3. How that para state can be realized that is devoid of time and space and is 
beyond explanation? Here She wants to know the true identity of the 
Absolute. She wants this to be explained in a easily understandable way. 

4. How Bhairavi becomes the mouth of Bhairava? 

Siva can be attained only through Parasakti. How Bhairavi can nurture any 
doubt that needs clarification? Is She not part of Siva? Yes, She is Siva 
Himself. But then, why Bhairavi is seeking answers from Siva? She is not too 
concerned about Her questions, as She knows the answers. But being the 
universal mother, She is concerned about humanity. She wants the universe 
to learn these techniques. She knows that Siva will not give direct replies to 
these questions. She also knows that Siva is going to expound one hundred 
and twelve types of dharana-s. Dharana is a part of meditation where mind 1s 
fixed. Siddhis are attained only if dharana or concentration, meditation and 
samadhi happen in unison. Siva is going to answer only through techniques 
of dharana. Pataficali calls these three as antaranga which means internal. 
The transition from external to internal begins with dharana. The transition to 
spirituality happens here. Siva does not answer the questions of Bhairavi. 
Instead, He unfolds the one hundred and twelve techniques of dharana-s to 
the universe. The teaching happens at the practical level. 

DHARANA VERSES 
(Verses 24 to 137) 

Now Bhairava answers Bhairavi by expounding 112 types of pragmatic and 
proficient skills through concentration. From now on, each verse deals with a 
dharana. It is not necessary that one should follow all the 112 dharana-s. One 
can choose any one or more than one of the dharana-s that suits him best. For 
making a choice, one should understand all the 112 types of awareness or 
dharana-s. 

Dharana 1 

During normal breathing, breath goes in (inhalation) and goes out 
(exhalation). During inhalation, the breath enters our body through trachea to 
the lobes of the lungs and reaches the end points of the lobes. These end 
points meet the heart and the diaphragm. Visualise this point. Medically this 
area is known as cariodphrenic pleural sinuses. The air that we breathe in 
goes up to this point making an impact on the heart and the diaphragm. The 
movement of the diaphragm helps kundalini to ascend. At the end of 
inhalation the air stands still for a fraction of a second before it makes a U 
turn ( in fact itis V turn, as we do not get a point in U) to commence its 
exhalation process. Once exhalation is completed and before the 
commencement of inhalation, the air stands still for a few second before it 
commences its inhalation process. Normally inhalation begins at twelve 
inches from the tip of the nose. Observe this stillness of breath, the state of 
breathlessness. This may not be possible immediately, but with persistent 
practice this becomes possible to realize these two stillness points. 

When these points of stillness are realized, one realizes the state of Bhairava. 
In other words, Self realisation happens. 

Dharana 2 

This is the continuation of the previous one. At the end of inhalation and 
before the commencement of exhalation and after that momentary stillness, 
the breath takes a V turn and commences its exhalation process. Observe this 
exact point of V turn, the point where the return (exhalation) begins. There 
Bhairava is realized at that point. If one is able to concentrate on the points 
that Bhairava mentions, such awareness cleanses the path of kundalint, the 
central canal of the spinal cord. The cleansing happens due to the vibratory 
effect of the awareness. 

Dharana 3 

This skill activates the susumna nadi or the central canal of the spinal cord. 
This skill involves in knowing the point of fusion of in-breath and out-breath. 
This fusion happens around the point of return that has been discussed in 
dharana 2. This point of fusion is where neither inhalation nor exhalation 

happens. While fixing awareness here, the entire intellection ceases to function 
as awareness is fixed on the point of fusion and not on the worldly connections. 
The awareness becomes so strong that his thoughts are destroyed and he 
becomes thoughtless. His consciousness is fixed inwardly and his external 
connection through senses is sealed. During this process, sushumna becomes 
activated. In dharana 2, susumna is cleansed by mere concentration. In this 
dharana, susumna is activated by the stage of thoughtlessness (nirvikalpa). In 
this stage, one realizes Bhairava. 

Dharana 4 

When inhalation is made, exhalation does not happen immediately and when 
exhalation is made inhalation does not happen immediately. Either breath is 
retained for a moment or one is without breath for a moment. It is called 
kumbhaka. Breath is the source of energy for the body to survive and hence it 
is called prana, the vital energy. Without prana physical body cannot continue 
to exist. On many occasions, one could have noticed that he could have 
momentarily entered the state of death out of fear when his breath stops for a 
moment. When someone is flying and the aircraft develops serious technical 
snag, he becomes breathless when he hears the announcement made by the 
flight commander. Though he continues to exist, his consciousness for a 
moment becomes un-conscious. He becomes unaware of himself and the 
surroundings. He becomes thoughtless. For effective functioning of the mind, 
pranic energy is required. When the required supply of prana is suspended, the 
mind also becomes thoughtless. During the stage of thoughtlessness, the 
individual self ceases to exist due to lack of prana and merges into Bhairava. 
The ignorance of duality paves way for the knowledge of Reality. This dharana 
does not refer to forced holding of breath (kumbhaka). When this dharana is 
practiced in the stage of thoughtlessness, Bhairava is realized. It happens on 
its own. 

Dharana 5 

It is a well known fact that p rana or vital force of life known as kundalini 
rests in perineum, where muladhara chakra is situated. Kundalini, the subtlest 
form of prana energy is situated in muladhara chakra. Kundalini can be made 
to ascend only by means of consciousness. Certain other methods may also 

be necessary like bandha-s and mudra-s. When one fixes concentration on 
any object, the object becomes highly energised. If one fixes his 
consciousness on the base chakra, kundalini begins to leave its place of 
domicile (perineum) to reach higher chakras. When it reaches higher chakras 
Self-realization happens gradually, or in other words Bhairava is realized. 
When kundalini ascends, it appears like a lightning that is full of vibrant 
energy. It is not necessary that kundalini should ascend chakra after chakra. 
In some exceptional cases, it ascends like a rocket from muladhara straight to 
sahasrara. The realisation always happens at sahasrara. In this verse Bhairava 
says that one should merely concentrate on muladhara. Rest of the process of 
realization unfolds automatically. 

Dharana 6 

In the earlier verse Siva said that one should concentrate on miladhara and 
the process of realizing Bhairava happens at sahasrara. In this verse, Siva 
says that the self illuminating kundalini should be meditated from lower 
chakras towards the higher chakras. From muladhara it goes to navel chakra, 
heart chakra, aja chakra to culminate at sahasrara where the realization 
happens. The divine yoga (yoga means union) takes place here by the union 
of Sakti and Siva. Kundalini is considered as feminine energy and Siva as the 
static masculine energy. Siva Siitra-s say that Sakti is Vimarésa and Siva is 
Prakasa. 

There is distinct difference between the previous verse and this verse. 
Previous verse speaks about kundalint blasting in a fraction of second to 
reach sahasrara. This verse says that kundalini ascending one chakra after 
another. If kundalini blasts happens, it could lead to certain complications. It 
is possible that one could become unconscious for long or even become 
insane. For a scenario referred in dharana 5, one should prepare his body to 
withstand the impact of the blast, though it is not possible to know the timing 
of such blast. Such blast happens only if one has good karmic account. This 
dharana mentions about normal kundalini practice. 

The most important point of realising the Self is the third eye or ajfia chakra. 
The pineal gland that is behindajnia chakra chakra can also be called as the 

gland of divinity. Recent scientific studies have said that the pineal gland 
responds to light. The pineal gland can be said to be the location of soul and 
this soul gets connected to the cosmos through an orifice insahasrara. This 
connection is established through a subtle illuminative cord known as ‘silver 
cord’. If one is able to concentrate on the third eye by inwardly focussing the 
biological eyes on aja chakra (pineal gland), kundalini becomes manifest 
with all the potential energy. A fully activated ajna chakra transforms 
visualised affirmations into reality. Here, he will not aspire for material 
prosperity, as he is gradually distancing himself from desires, bondage and 
attachments. However, he continues to live a normal life by partaking in 
normal activities. 

Dharana 7 

In the previous verses, Bhairava had spoken about realising Him. Now He 
explains the methods of being with Him. There are twelve focal points and 
each of these points is identified with a Sanskrit vowel. The study based on 
the vowels becomes too elaborate and hence dispensed with in this 
discussion. Only practical applications have been taken for discussions. 
These focal points are located in different parts of human body. These areas 
roughly represent the chakras (psychic-mystical centres). Following are the 
twelve centres. 1. Organs of procreation (marginally away from the 
perineum). 2. Muladhara chakra or base chakra. 3. Svadhisthana chakra. 4. 
Manipura chakra or navel chakra. 5. Heart chakra or anahata. 6.Visuddhi 
chakra or throat chakra. 7. Palate (through a cavity in the upper palate, the 
kundalini moves upwards.) 8. The third eye or aja chakra. 9. Lalata, the 
central point of the forehead. (This is just above the aja chakra.) 10. 
Brahmarandra, an orifice at the top of the head. The area in which this orifice 
is situated is sahasrara. 11. Sakti, the out of body energy. This exists outside 
the gross body and finally 12. Vyapini (all pervading). This is where the 
spiritual journey ends. At this stage, the man is not different from the 
Supreme Creator, Siva or Bhairava. When one is able to fix his 
consciousness on these twelve places by moving his kundalini from perineum 
and merging it with the cosmos that exists outside gross body, he merges 
with Siva, the Supreme. This happens in fifth stage of consciousness known 
as turyatita. 

Dharana 8 

Having filled the whole body with pranic energy (the energy generated by 
prana or breath when it enters the body), it removes thoughts from the mind. 
Mind can be freed from thoughts for a moment or even longer when one’s 
concentration is fixed on ajna chakra or the third eye. But this is possible 
only if the breath is suspended during that moment. Suspending the breath 
does not mean holding the breath called kumbhaka. Suspension means 
sudden stoppage of the breath for a moment or more, irrespective of 
inhalation or exhalation happening. When concentration is fixed on the ajna 
chakra, exactly at the same time suspend the process of breathing, 
synchronising it with the process of concentration. During this 
synchronisation process, the pranic energy gets converted into the energy of 
consciousness, wherein Bhairava is realized. The converted energy of 
consciousness moves above the sahasrara to the fourth stage of consciousness 
known as turya stage. This means one’s 

consciousness moves out of the body as turya is 12" above the top of the 
head. This is possible only when point of attention is fixed on ajna chakra 
accompanied with suspended breathing. Rest of the process happens 
automatically. 

Dharana 9 

One has to meditate on the five tanmatra-s as void. Tanmatra-s are sensory 
perceptions. The five tanmatra-s are sound, touch, sight, taste and smell. 
They are subtle in nature and are the products of sensory organs that 
originated from the five basic elements. For example, smell is realized 
through nose whose origin is element air. These tanmatra-s being subtle in 
nature cause deep influence in the mind. Subtle is always more powerful than 
gross. We are able to see the sun in its gross form. But we are not able to see 
its subtle form, its rays. Rays that are subtle in nature are more powerful than 
the sun itself, though the latter is only a product of the former. It is always 
better to think positively than dwelling on the negativities. Thoughts (subtle) 
are more powerful than actions (gross). Thinking bad of somebody causes 
more karmic affliction than physically hurting him. Subtle state of soul is 
more powerful than the gross form of the body. Without the influence of the 

sensory perceptions, the mind cannot function. Man cannot live without an 
active mind. Too much of sensory influence on the mind causes addiction. 
Bhairava says that one should fix his concentration on these tanmatra-s as 
void. In other words, the effect of the senses should be nullified by 
visualising that the effect of the senses such as sound, touch, etc (tanmatra-s) 
on the mind, is nothing. This is also known as Sunya meditation where 
consciousness stands disconnected from tanmatra-s. In fact, Patafijaliyoga 
sutra-s begin by referring to this verse by saying that controlling impulses 
lead to conquering of the mind. Bhairava is realized in this inviolable void. 
To put it in simple terms, ignore tanmatra-s and this do-not-care attitude 
makes your longing for Bhairava firmer. 

Dharana 10 

Concentration is the focal point of entire Vijfanabhairava. Patafyali calls this 
as dharana. If one fixes his awareness on anything, be it Sunya (void), a wall, 
or a worthy person (a yogi), the energy that is generated from that level of 
consciousness (awareness) merges into Bhairava. This verse refers to three 
centres — void, wall and a worthy person. If we analyse these three, void is 
nothingness, no subject and no object; only nothingness or emptiness. The 
second one is wall, a lifeless object and the third one is a person in his gross 
form. Fixing consciousness on an object establishes a two way 
communication between the subject (the practitioner) and the object. When 
one fixes his awareness on an ignorant man, he also becomes ignorant. When 
one fixes his consciousness on the Brahman, he also becomes Brahman. 
These references mean nothingness, immovable and movable. There cannot 
be anything beyond these three. The object of concentration is not as 
important as the quality of concentration is. Only when the quality of the 
concentration is high, two way communication is established, otherwise it 
remains as one way only. This dharana is categorised under saktopaya, where 
the mind is in the process of awakening. 

Siva Siitra-s mention about three stages of mind — anavopaya (rested mind), 
saktopaya (awakened mind) and Sambavopaya (dissolved mind). 

Dharana 11 

One has to concentrate within the skull by disconnecting his consciousness 
from the external world. He should keep his eyes closed. Bhairava uses the 
word kapala in this verse. Kapala means the skull bone or cranium and the 
brain is situated inside the cranial cavity. The gland of divinity, the pineal 
gland is situated here just behind aja chakra. If one practices to fix his 
consciousness inside the skull, the pineal gland gets activated paving the way 
for the higher spiritual experience. If consciousness is fixed within the 
cranium, aja chakra and sahasrara automatically get opened one after 
another. During this process, if one is able to visualize a bright light, the 
pineal gland gets activated much faster as it responds to light. The word 
kapala means the union of Siva and Sakti. Their cosmic union takes place in 
sahasrara, leading to enlightenment. 

There are two important aspects in this verse. The first one is concentrating 
within the cranium and the second one is closing the eyes. Concentrating on 
the cranium or fixing one’s awareness inside the cranium is to activate the 
spiritual eye. Once the spiritual eye is activated, sahasrara automatically gets 
opened establishing a direct link between the self and the cosmos. Closure of 
eyes 1s recommended to disconnect external world, making the consciousness 
as pure as possible. Eyes should be closed as mildly as possible as pressure 
applied on the eyes could affect the optic nerves. 

If one trains his biological eyes to look within through the third eye, his 
consciousness gets purified. Purification of consciousness means, 
elimination of all thoughts by fixing his consciousness on the self- 
illuminating Brahman or Bhairava within. 

Dharana 12 

Currently Siva teaches kundalini meditation. After having taught about the 
awareness on cranium, Siva proceeds to explain about the susumna or the 
spinal cord. He uses the word madhyanddi. There is a central canal in the 
spinal cord through which ParaSakti, in the form of subtle kundalini energy 
moves up and down. Siva means this central canal as madhyanadi. This nadi 

or canal is compared to a fibre of a lotus stalk that is extremely subtle. The 
entire spinal cord is to be concentrated to activate it. Activation of susumna 
means that individual consciousness is being taken over by the divine 
consciousness. If this change in perception of consciousness does not take 
place, it signals that the susumna 1s not activated. Bhairava is revealed by 
Parasakti during this process. In this stage there is absolutely nothing, no 
mantras, no consciousness, literally nothingness except Bhairava and 
Bhairava alone. The individual consciousness stands merged with the 
Supreme consciousness, the Absolute. 

The important aspect of this verse is the level of concentration on the subtle 
canal of the spinal cord. If one is able to fix his concentration on this subtle 
canal, rest unfolds on its own. In spirituality, the level of concentration is 
very important. If one could develop the ability to concentrate, he can make 
significant progress in spirituality. 

Dharana 13 

By plugging the seven openings in our head by using fingers of the palms and 
inwardly focusing on the ajna chakra, a light in the form of the moon can be 
seen. When one fixes his concentration on this light, it fades out and merges 
into nothingness. In that light, Bhairava is realized. The visibility of the light 
is only the starting point of absorption. When the light fades out, our 
consciousness should continue to remain engrossed in Bhairava. In the initial 
stages, this may appear to be difficult. 

This practice is known as mahayoni mudra. Close the ears with thumbs, eyes 
with index fingers, two nostrils with middle fingers and place the ring fingers 
on the upper lip and the small fingers on the lower lip. Now all the seven 
openings in the head are closed and all the organs of perception (hands are 
rested, mouth, eyes, nostrils and ears) are plugged. This enables the mind to 
concentrate on the ajfia chakra. Behind the ajfa chakra, the pineal gland is 
located. This gland is known as the gland of divinity. When consciousness is 
fixed on the ajna chakra, the vibration of consciousness activates the pineal 
gland. 

If the concentration is fixed on the ajna chakra, a moon like light appears. 
The index fingers are to be placed at one inch from the outer corners of the 
closed eyes. The index fingers can be comfortably placed on the bony 
support to the eyebrows (known as superciliary arch), lightly pressing the 
upper eye lids (more on this discussed in the next verse). The position of 
fingers is important in seeing the moon like light. First, the light will be dim, 
and then it becomes powerful and finally fades away. Concentration on the 
ajna chakra is to be fixed by focusing the eye balls on the ajna chakra. Undue 
pressure should not be applied on the eye balls, as this could damage optic 
nerves. Initially, the light may not appear due to the following reasons. The 
wrong positioning of the index fingers on the eyes. In such situations, the 
position of the index fingers can be moved slightly, either up and down or 
side wards. The second possibility is that pupils of the eyes may not be 
focussing on the ajna chakra. The focus should be exactly on the meeting 
point of the eyebrows. Third possibility is lack of 

concentration on this point. If all these three issues are taken care of, the light 
is bound to appear after a minute or two. The closure of the organs of 
perception and fixing concentration on aja chakra should happen 
simultaneously. 

The light that appears is known as bindu. In this bindu, Bhairava is realized. 
Regular practice of this skill activates sahasrara. In this situation, the 
vibratory energy, on reaching the pineal gland splits into two parts. One part 
traverses upwards to the sahasrara and another part reaches the back head 
chakra, the point just above the ajiia chakra at the back of the head. If this 
happens, all the lower chakras will be automatically activated. 

Dharana 14 

When the eyes are so pressed by applying mild pressure (as referred in the 
previous verse), and making small movements the light appears like the flame 
of fire known as tilak. One should meditate on the upper point of the flame 
also known as bindu at the top of the head (sahasrara) and in the heart (anahata 
chakra). The verse says that the flame like light appears when the pupils of 
the eyes are shaken up. Simultaneously meditating on both sahasrara and 
anahata is important. A link between sahasrara and anahata can be visualized 

for this purpose. One will be absorbed into Jaya or inward focusing of 
consciousness on the light where Bhairava is realised. During this stage, 
thought process is annulled, as the entire consciousness is fixed on the flame, 
sahasrara and anahata. What is important to master this skill is inward 
focusing of consciousness and suitable movement of the eye balls using the 
index fingers. 

Dharana 15 

One hears the sound of anahata (Sabda Brahman) in his ears, when his deep 
consciousness is fixed on the Brahman. Since the external sound is blocked 
by placing the thumbs on the ears, the sound of anahata. also known as Sabda 
Brahman is realized from within. This sound is caused by internal vibration 
at heart chakra. The sound could be of any type, such as the sound of a 
musical instrument, sound of a conch, sound of water, sound of a bell, sound 
of a bee, etc. Someone could also hear the sound of OM. Since the sound is 
so subtle, the highest level of concentrations is required to absorb the sound. 
Please use the search engine at the top of this site to know more on Sabda 
Brahman. This internal sound arises from susumna that gets activated 
through prana (breath). In fact, this 1s the sound of kundalini as She alone 
traverses through susumna. When he fixes his consciousness on this sound, 
he forgets the material world and gets absorbed in the Brahman. 

This sound cannot be heard in the first few practice sessions. Intense 
amount of concentration is required to listen to this sound. It should also 
be noted that nowhere, usage of mantras or yogic exercises is 
recommended but what is advocated is the highest form of consciousness. 
Absorption happens only when the level of consciousness is pure (devoid 
of any external influence). 

Dharana 16 

Siva for the first time in Vijfianabhairava, addressees his consort as Bhairavi 
in this verse. Siva says that by reciting OM for three matra-s duration and 
meditating on the void caused at the end of the third matra, Siva is realised. 
One miatra is the time taken for one wink of eyes, approximating to a second. 

There are three types of pranava-s. One is the regular ‘OM’ that is associated 
with Vedas and known as known as Vedic pranava. The second one is Siva 
Pranava hum. The third pranava is hrim which is also known as maya 
pranava. Hrim is also known as maya bija. There is a difference between Siva 
Pranava and maya pranava. Recitation of hrim or pranava produces good 
results for the self and recitation of hum or Siva pranava produces all-round 
auspiciousness or the auspiciousness of the society. When jum is recited, evil 
forces are driven away, which means eradication of all obstructions. Maya 
pranava is different from Sakti pranava. Sakti pranava is im (kamakala). Siva 
says that one can recite any of these three pranava-s. But one has to fix his 
consciousness in the void created by the gap between two consecutive 
recitations. It is important that one should recite any of these pranava-s using 
three matra-s. It should be pronounced as ‘OMMM’ prolonging the recitation 
of m. Another important point that is to be noticed here is that instead of 
concentrating on the ending of OM, one has to concentrate on the void 
created at the end of recitation. There will always be a void between in breath 
and out breath, which has been discussed earlier. In the same way the 
consciousness is to be fixed on the void or stillness or silence or sinya at the 
end of one OM or any other pranava-s. 

Sage Patafyali says in his yoga sutra-s (aphorisms) (1.37) tasya vacakah 
pranavah which means ‘that word is pranava’. Pranava is the sound of 
Brahman. There is no difference between OM and the Brahman. Brahman in 
the form of sound is OM and therefore manifestations of OM and the 
Brahman are not different. Brahman can be named as OM or Siva or Sakti, or 
Jesus or Allah or Visnu. Brahman has nothing to do with these forms, as He 
is beyond attributes. The difference between OM and other manifested forms 
is that the former is manifestation of sound (sabdha Brahman) and the latter 
is manifestation of form. 

Dharana 17 

Siva, after discussing about three types of Sabda-s, proceeds to discuss the 
ways of realising Him through other mantras. Mantras are repeated and this is 

called japa. During this process, when the first count ends the next count 
starts. During the recitation of mantra, energy is built up before exact time of 
delivery of mantra. The exact delivery happens after a few fractions of a 
second once the energy is completely gathered for its delivery. Most of the 
times, this happens unconsciously. In mantra japa, this process happens 
consecutively. Before the process of energy build up happens and at the end 
of drain of the entire built up energy after delivery of mantra, there is void. In 
this void Siva is realized. 

In most of the verses of Vijnanabhairava, Siva directs that one should fix his 
consciousness in void. This is the main idea of Zen meditation. In Zen 
meditation abstractedness happens layer after layer finally leading to void 
and this is known as downing. 

Dharana 18 

When one listens attentively to the music coming out of musical instruments 
(like guitar, flute) in a concert, at the end of the concert, the music would be 
reverberating. This reverberation happens in his mind, in which period his 
sensory organs stand disconnected from his mind. His consciousness is 
absorbed in the reverberating sound of music. During this absorption, 
Bhairava is realised. This is a typical example of disconnecting senses and 
fixing consciousness on a subject. Such should be the kind consciousness to 
realize the Brahman. But the reverberation of sound is not possible if the 
concert is attended without focusing his attention (awareness is 
consciousness) on the music. Such is the type of consciousness one requires 
to realize Siva. 

Dharana 19 

By uttering pinda mantras from their gross to subtle forms, vibration 
originates and in the process of vibration, Siva is realized. Uttering means the 
gross level of the letters to subtle level of the letters. First pinda mantras are 
to be recited aloud and later on only mentally. This is known as the process 
of gross (aloud) to subtle (mental). Such mental recitations cause subtle 
vibrations, establishing s subtle link between mantras and the concerned 
deity, whose mantra 1s recited causing centring or focussing of one’s 

consciousness on the devata. Recitation of mantras without establishing this 
link is of no use. Pinda mantras comprise of those letters that do not have 
vowels in the formation. For example bija sauh* is a pinda mantra. Though it 
has vowel a, it becomes silent while pronouncing. There are nine such letters 
and they are h, s, r, ks, m, 1, v, y;num known as navatma. Generally mantras 
have two parts. The first letter forms the soul and the rest form the body. 

OM though not a pinda mantra, is treated as a pinda mantra as it has both 
vowels (a,u) and consonants (m). Pinda mantras should not have any vowels. 
But Saiva philosophy approves pranava, the supreme mantra as pinda mantra. 
When OM is recited from its gross form to subtle form, it ends with ‘m’. A 
begins from naval, U is added at the heart chakra and M is added at the 
mouth. Up to this, OM is gross. When OM traverses beyond this point, it 
loses it grossness and becomes subtle in nature. When it loses its gross form, 
OM gets transferred to subtle form and proceeds from bindu, ardhachandra, 
rodhini, nada, nadanta, Sakti , vyapini, samana and unmana. Unmana, the 
final point of subtle sound ends at sahasrara, where an active mind becomes 
passive. Beyond this point nothing exists (shunya or void) and in this void 
Siva is realized. 

*Formation of sauh. This is known as It is the formation of third Brahma 
with the fourteenth vowel, next to lord of vowels. Omtat-sat consists of three 
symbolic Brahmas. Om is the first Brahma, tat is the second Brahma and sat 
is the third Brahma. Fourteenth vowel is ah (also known as visarga). Lord of 
vowels is am. ah (the fourteenth vowel) is placed next to am. Out of sat, sa in 
combination with ah forms sauh. (Para-trisika-vivarana — verses 9 and 10) 

Dharana 20 

If one contemplates stnya (void) in all directions of his body without any 
thoughts, he experiences everything as sinya. Two factors are to be taken 
into account simultaneously. First is the visualisation of void in all directions 
and second is to still the mind. When void is visualised in all directions, mind 
can be stilled without any efforts. When there is nothing around, mind also 
becomes still. First step is to feel the presence of the body and next step is to 
visualize Stnya from all sides. Finally, body also gets dissolved in emptiness 
that prevails all over. In that emptiness or Stinya, Siva is realized. Why Siva 

is realized in Sinya? Brahman is omnipresent and can only be realized. He 
cannot be seen as He is formless. When there is nothing else present, Siva 
who is omnipresent is realized in the void. This process is called 
sunyatisiinya. It can be compared to purnatiptirna (purna means complete or 
total). Both refer to Brahman. 

Dharana 21 

The void that was contemplated all around should now be contemplated 
above and below the body only. Now the body is placed between two voids. 
When we try to feel our body, it goes missing between two areas of void. 
This skill purely depends upon one’s ability to contemplate voidness above 
and below the body. This ability again depends upon one’s consciousness. 
The matter (body) gets dissolved into emptiness and there is emptiness all 
round. The energy of sinya from both sides leads to bodiless situation. The 
mass of the body dissolves into Sstinya. In that total voidness, Siva is realized. 

Dharana 22 

This verse gives importance to void. One should simultaneously contemplate 
void on both upper and lower sides of the body and in the middle of the heart 
(said to be the place of soul). If he contemplates like this, his consciousness 
becomes free of all vilkalpa-s (vikalpa means alternatives). In this state of 
nirvikalpa (absence of vikalpa-s) Bhairava is realized. This refers to the 
repeated contemplation of pure thought construct (vikalpa) of oneself being 
essentially Siva or the Supreme ‘I’ consciousness. Thoughts apply immense 
pressure on the mind causing a phenomenon called forced thinking. When 
the mind is devoid of thoughts, reality is exposed. 

Dharana 23 

Contemplate that the body is seated on nothingness or void. This 
contemplation leads to thoughtless mind or nirvakalpa state. This verse is a 
continuation of the previous verse. Previous verse mentioned about 
thoughtless body. This verse goes further and says that one should 
contemplate that he is seated on void. Now, not only void is contemplated 
inside the body, but also outside the body as well. This leads to a thoughtless 

stage of mind which is known as nirvikalpa stage. This is the beginning stage 
of samadhi. This is the stage where sudden emergence of Siva consciousness 
happens without any mental or any other extraneous aids in a fraction of a 
second. Realization always happens this way. 

Upaya means to reach any state or condition or approach. There are three 
types of upaya-s. Siva Siitra-s are based on these three types of upaya-s. In 
this context,upaya-s mean the three level of consciousness. Simbhavopaya is 
the highest level of consciousness where Self-realization takes place. The 
next lower level of upaya is Saktopaya a stage prior of Simbhavopaya. The 
third is anavopaya, the lowest level of consciousness connected to self. Apart 
from the three, there is one more upaya known as anupaya. In this stage, 
realisation happens on its own without any upaya-s. 

Dharana 24 

Siva knows that contemplating void all-round is difficult. He now gives 
alternate methods. Siva address His consort as lustrous eyed. If visualising 
total void (both inside and outside his body) is not possible, one should 
contemplate that beneath his skin there is void. Body provides shapes and 
forms. If visualization is done this way, his consciousness becomes limitless 
(not limited by flesh and blood). By practice, the contemplation of siinya 
becomes firm and he enters nirvikalpa samadhi. 

The state of thoughtlessness is known as nir-vikalpa samadhi, the egoless state. 
Mind reaches the state of suspended animation. Patafjali says in his YogaSutra 
(1.18) that “nir-vikalpasamadhi is attained by constant practice of cessation of 
all mental activity, in which mindstuff retains only the unmanifested 
impressions.” 

For further reading: Samadhi literally means joining or combining with. 
During meditation all kinds of thoughts cease to exist. Once this is achieved, 
single pointed concentration sweeps in, to centre on the primary object of 
intense concentration. The feeling of extreme happiness known as bliss is 
realized, which is not the end but only a beginning. After having reached the 
highest stage of bliss, the level of blissfulness starts to decrease and 
ultimately fades away altogether. Now the mind reaches the stage of 

equanimity. Further consolidation of single-pointed focusing takes place. At 
this stage bliss is totally dissolved and body sensations are lost. Void or 
Sunya begins to unfold as the object of meditation. Finally he is absorbed into 
nothingness or void. This is the highest stage of meditation called nirvikalpa 
samadhi that 1s attainable only by determination, dedication and intense 
commitment. Such absorptions could be either internal or external depending 
upon where one’s concentration is fixed. It is important that one should 
decide in the initial stages of practicing meditation whether to fix his purest 
form of consciousness either internally or externally. Either way, the ultimate 
result remains the same. 

Dharana 25 

One should fix his awareness on the external skin of his body visualising 
sunya beneath. This is on the lines of previous verse only. Skin is the limiting 
factor for the body. When this limiting factor is mentally dissolved, he 
becomes part of cosmos, where Siva alone prevails. When he merges his 
consciousness with Siva Himself, which is the ultimate stage of meditation, 
he needs to do nothing more. This is how Saktopaya leads to Sambhavopaya. 
This is the process ofSakti leading to Siva. This process is also discussed in 
Lalita Sahasranama 727Sivajiiana pradayint. 

Dharana 26 

It is often said ‘look within’. Siva explains where to look within. He says that 
one should concentrate in the inner space between the two halves of the 
heart. But he uses the word padma which means lotus. Now the confusion 
arises whether it is the biological heart or the heart chakra. The biological 
heart is not positioned in the centre of the body. Further in the biological 
heart there is no empty space. The heart chakra is located in the centre of the 
body in the spinal cord. Katha Upanisad (II.1.12) madhya atmani tistati which 
means Brahman is in the centre of the body. There is no space in the 
biological heart. Therefore, it is obvious that Siva refers to anahata chakra 
only. Siva says that one should concentrate on the heart chakra by inwardly 
focussing the senses to attain the highest stage of blessedness. 

Dharana 27 

When one fixes his consciousness in dvadasanta at all times, the wandering 
of his mind will get dissolved over a period of time. Dvadasanta is the term 
normally associated with kundalint meditation. Generally the term means 
twelve finger lengths. For example the distance between the tip of the nose to 
sahasrara is twelve finger lengths. The cosmic energy is drawn by the orifice 
in the sahasrara from twelve finger length level. Exchange of energy between 
the body and cosmos takes place at twelve finger length from the top of the 
head. One’s energy is radiated through different chakras situated in the body. 
In general, dvadasanta means twelve finger lengths between any two points. 
In this context, dvadasanta means sahasrara. Siva says that one should fix his 
consciousness in sahasrara while performing all routine activities. If this is 
practiced regularly, Siva is realized. The next verse also refers to dvadasanta. 

{ There are different interpretations for dvadasanta. According to other 
interpretations, it also means 1.void or Siinya. 2. The spinal cord. 3. It could 
also mean the pineal gland situated at twelve inches from brahmarandhra. 
According to the latest findings, it is believed that the pineal gland is the 
place where the soul resides. } 

Dharana 28 

If one repeatedly fixes his consciousness in any of the dvadasanta-s (possibly 
meaning navel chakra upwards. The distance between one’s navel chakra and 
anahata chakra is twelve finger lengths),Siva says that his mind gets fixed. 
As per this verse, one should hold his awareness repeatedly on the same 
place, twelve inches away from the body. The consciousness should be fixed 
outside the body, where one does not have any sensory afflictions. This verse 
says that apart from performing routine karmas by using his mind, he should 
also hold his higher level of consciousness away from the body uninfluenced 
by senses. As long as one’s consciousness is within the body, sensory 
afflictions are bound to happen. After a few days of practice, he will feel as if 
he is born afresh. 

{There are two possibilities in such a situation. Either the consciousness 
alternates between two stages (with the body and without the body) or his 

consciousness is split between performing actions on one side and meditation 
on the other side. But in the initial stage of this practice, this perfection may 
not be possible leading to lower level of efficiency in working environment. 
But once this stage is attained, the efficiency level turns out to be very high. } 

Dharana 29 

Visualise that one’s entire body from the tip of the toe is burnt by kalagni 
(the fire of Rudra. Sri Rudram 2). This visualisation is said to purify the 
body. Kalagni of Rudra is capable of destroying all physical and mental 
impurities. Since the purity of both body and mind is necessary to realize 
Him, Bhairava says that such visualisation is necessary. The same type of 
visualisation is cited in Sri Vidya navavarana pija. Why it is said so? Krsna 
answers this in Bhagavad Gita (III.37) “It is desire begotten of the element of 
rajas, which appears as wrath. It is insatiable and grossly wicked. Know this 
to be the enemy in this case.” This 1s the significance of showing arti while 
performing rituals. When sins and impurities of body and mind are burnt, 
what remains is only the pure consciousness where Siva is realized. For Siva- 
realisation, purity of thought, mind and body are the most essential factors. 

Dharana 30 

The previous verse said that one should visualise that his entire body is burnt 
by kalagni. This verse says that one should visualise that the entire universe 
is being burnt by kalagni. Siva recommends such visualisations not only for 
the purpose of purity of mind and body, but also for single pointed focus 
without any distractions. When the visualisation is completed to the last piece 
of the universe, Siva reveals Himself. 

Practically, it is difficult to visualise the universe burning, whereas it is easier 
to visualise our own body burning. Siva does not jump from corporal self to 
the transfinite universe. It should be understood that transition between the 
two verses (52 and 53) should be gradual. When one is experienced in 
offering his body to kalagni, he should first begin by visualise burning tiny 
objects before him and gradually proceed to the ultimate visualisation of 
burning the universe. Persistent practice makes things happen over a period 
of time. 

Dharana 31 

Meditate the elements of one’s own body or the universe merge one after 
another and at the end where there is nothing remaining to merge, Bhairavi is 
revealed. As already discussed there are three types of upaya-s. Sambhavopaya 
pertains to mind (consciousness) and Saktopaya pertains to gross matter. This 
verse talks about Saktopaya as it involves body. This is a process where gross 
matters merge among themselves that gradually merges into subtle, subtler and 
subtlest. Brahman is the subtlest of all. This process is known as vyapti, which 
means invariable concomitance, an occurrence, or existence together or in 
connection with one another. Vyapti can be further explained as the knowledge 
that is derived from the knowledge of an invariable relation between what is 
perceived and what is derived. We can take fire and smoke as an example. 
Smoke is the result of fire and when smoke prevails, fire has to be there. This 
is called invariable concomitance. 

When a gross matter prevails (gross body made up of sensory organs), there 
has to be subtle elements such as mind, intellect and ego (antahkarana or 
internal psychic organs). One has to meditate that his gross form dissolves 
into subtler (Aamakala) form and finally into subtlest (kundalint) form of 
Sakti . When this happens, Sakti is revealed in the form of Parasakti (para 
means supreme). When Paragakti reveals Herself, She will also reveal Siva in 
due course. Only Parasakti can reveal Bhairava or without realising Bhairavi, 
Bhairava cannot be realised. 

This verse talks about different state of consciousness such as active, dream, 
deep sleep, turya and turyatita. In the lowest level of consciousness, normal 
actions are performed. Mergers take place in the middle levels of 
consciousness and realisation takes place in the highest level of 
consciousness, where ‘I’ ness ceases to exist and you are lost as an 
independent entity. 

Dharana 32 

If energy of prana is meditated upon both as gross and subtle at dvadasanta 
and mentally entering into it, he stands liberated. Dvadasanta is twelve inches 
outside a particular place in the body. Mostly this is used in kundalini 

meditation. Meditation on dvadasanta points is used only in the upper three 
chakras (anahata visuddhi and aja) and sahasrara. Breathing should be deep 
and slow with sound. (Breathing with sound makes the kundalini ascend). If 
one breathes fast, the breathing will be shallow, leading to lesser intake of 
oxygen and consequent diminished energy level. One has to fix his 
awareness in any one of the above mentioned dvadasanta points, the points 
outside the body. In the initial stages of this meditation, one has sit in his 
normal meditative posture. Whichever posture is convenient to the 
practitioner that is the best suited posture for him. After sometime, during 
this meditation, one could lose his consciousness mildly. At that point of 
time, lie down flat without altering the quality of breathing or modifying the 
level of consciousness. A stage of drowsiness will engulf the practitioner. 
This is known as induced sleep state. From induced sleep state, he could 
move his consciousness to next higher level, the dream state. Now he dreams 
whatever he desires to dream. Though he continues to remain in the stage of 
awakening, he enters the dream state and beyond, up to the final level of 
turya. 

During the entire practice, one should not stop making sound of breath. 
During this process, a conscious mind transforms into unconscious state. This 
type of meditation is considered as one of the highest level of meditations. 
One should choose a place without any disturbance. It is important to note 
that when one is able to manipulate his level of consciousness to higher 
frequencies, which invariably happens at the highest level of meditation, one 
should not be disturbed. Any sudden sound or touch could be calamitous. It 
should be remembered that in this meditation, consciousness is fixed in 
dvadasanta, twelve inches away from gross body. During such types of 
meditation, even someone enters his aura field, it also could cause irreparable 
damage, as in these stages, one’s aura expands phenomenally. 

Dharana 33 

One should meditate that the entire universe consisting of three stages, gross, 
subtle and subtlest. Mind dissolves successively into the next stage, till there 
is nothing left in the mind to dissolve and at this point it dissolves into pure 
consciousness. Sakti is known as mahavidya, made up of three aspects of 
spiritual truth. Possibly this is the reason for using a triangle for representing 

Sakti. The three aspects are nara (man), the gross; Sakti, the subtle; and Siva, 
the Supreme. 

According to Para-trisika-vivarana (another Trika Scripture), the universe 
comprising of both subjective and objective aspects is the ontogeny of 
Svatantrya (freedom) Sakti. It is also said that 

Siva is the sole possessor of Sakti and the entire phenomenal manifestation is 
the varied form of His Svatantrya Sakti also known as His sovereign autonomy 
or Paravak. This sovereign autonomy is made up six forms known as sadadhva, 
wheresad means six and adhva means path. sadadhva is again divided into two 
before getting divided into six. The two major divisions are subjective side and 
objective side known asvacaka and vacya. She Herself explains thus. “I", the 
same Paravak Devi unseparated from Siva (vacya) and sastra (vacaka) form 
the world and its referent. This Paravak becomes Parasakti. Therefore Sakti is 
none other than Supreme Divine Consciousness which is not an abstract idea 
throbbing conscious power or energy, which but living and 

is known as ParaSakti, and constantly pulsating as “I’’, or Paravak, the sound 
and speech and their meaning. This explanation is provided to emphasise that 
gross divides into subtle, subtler and subtlest. Only the subtlest can transcend 
the mind to become purest form of consciousness. A practitioner starts his 
spiritual path by reciting verses aloud, then he gets initiated into mantra japa 
and finally he meditates to know the subtler things of life and starts enjoying 
the bliss. When he continues to dwell in bliss, he realises subtlest Brahman 
and ultimately merges with Him and thereafter he continues to exist in 
Brahman. He loses his individual identity. He merely represents Brahman. 

According to this verse, one should refine his mind by dissolving gross 
matters into subtle matters. While doing so he, he attains the pure knowledge 
to realise Siva. His citta, the individual consciousness transforms into citi, the 
universal consciousness (Pratyabhijnahrdayam (the secret of Self- 
ralisation),sutra 13). He now enters the stage of samadhi, where he realises 
Bhairava. 

Dharana 34 

If one meditates on the path leading to the Reality, that prevails through out 
the universe, at the end of the path, one gets spiritual awakening. The verse 
uses the word Saiva. Saiva does not merely mean the followers of Siva. 
Saivaism is the outcome of Saivagama. Agama means a traditional doctrine 
or precept, collection of such doctrines, sacred work, or anything handed 
down and fixed by tradition. Though agama-s do not differ largely from the 
Vedas, they are however sprinkled with tantric 

treatises as well. Agama-s elaborately discuss on final liberation and hence 
can be compared with Upanisad-s. There are opinions that 4gama-s counter 
the teaching of Upanisad-s. Saivagama teaches the methods of worshiping 
Siva. Siva 4gama-s do not segregate Sakti as a different entity. For example 
Siva and Sakti are referred as Prakasa and Vimarsga forms, the one without 
the other become ineffectual*. 

Siva is omnipresent. Based on the discussion (*) above,Siva alone cannot 
prevail as He becomes ineffectual without Sakti. Siva has not much of work. 
All the time He remains as a witness. 

The Prakaga form ofSiva along with the Vimarsa form of Sakti are to be 
contemplated. The awakening happens only at the end of the spiritual path. 
Spiritual path proceeds from gross to subtle. Spiritual path means one’s 
ability to refine and purify his consciousness. Realisation happens only in the 
purest form of consciousness. Reality is a process where gross gets dissolved 
into subtle. When gross material world is dissolved in the subtle forms of 
Prakasa and Vimarsa, spiritual awakening happens. When this happens, for 
him everything is Siva and Siva alone. He does not see anyone other than 
Siva. 

Dharana 35 

The ultimate stage for a soul is its absorption into Siva. This absorption also 
called liberation or salvation is for the soul and nothing to do with the body. 
Soul takes different forms from its origin to its obliteration. Here, the 
absorption has to happen through one’s mind. Mind is the unique feature of 
human beings and liberation of the soul can happen only during human birth. 

To attain salvation, one has to meditate that universe is void. When he 
meditates on the void, his mind also becomes void. When the mind becomes 
void, it merges into the Supreme Void. His pure consciousness gets ready to 
merge with Siva consciousness. 

The mind can be made as void only if it becomes devoid of thoughts 
pertaining to the past, present and future. In other words the mind has to be 
trained to transcend time. 

Dharana 36 

This verse gives additional inputs to practice previous dharana. Take any 
vessel. Within the walls of the vessel, void prevails (the element ofakasa or 
ether). He sees nothing inside the vessel though in reality, air exists inside the 
vessel. Concentrate on the interior of the vessel, where no gross object 
prevails. Eyes are to be kept open so that concentration is fixed on the empty 
space inside the vessel. 

{Concentration can be fixed by keeping the eyes either open or closed. 
Concentration means single pointed focus of the mind. In the initial stages, 
dharana will be more effective when the eyes are kept open as the eyes can 
be trained to focus on a point. Focusing is the most important factor in 
realisation. } 

When concentration is fixed on the inner void of the vessel, his individual 
consciousness will be absorbed into the universal consciousness that prevails 
inside the vessel. Even when the eyes are kept open, eyes do not see 
anything. I am a man (individual consciousness) now consciousness). 
becomes I am Siva (universal 

Dharana 37 

Go to a place where there are no trees, no mountains, no housing units, 
nothing at all. He will see only a vast stretch of land. He will not see any 
objects. He has nothing to see. He has no option except to look into the vast 
stretch of Stnya or void. 

Though there is no major difference between the previous verse and this 
verse, except the size of the vastness. Now the mind is trained to concentrate 
on the expanded vastness. A vessel has restricted voidness as opposed to the 
expanded voidness referred here. In both the cases, the experience of 
absorption will be the same. When the mind is trained to focus on void, the 
mind loses its power of cerebration. Thought construct arises only if choices 
are made available to the mind. A choice less mind becomes thoughtless. In 
the thoughtless stage of the mind, Bhairava is realised. 

Dharana 38 

In this verse, choice is made available to the mind. He has to take two objects 
and concentrate at a point between the two objects. After sometime, the 
objects will vanish into the focal point. Immediately after this dissolution, the 
two objects will be visible again. He has to go through the process again 
wherein the objects dissolve into the focal point. When the concentration 
becomes intense, he will observe that his breathing has considerably slowed 
down. Breathing becomes erratic and faster only if the mind is engaged with 
thoughts. 

{ Making the mind thoughtless is a very important step in meditation. There is 
no point in looking into the past, as the past is gone. There is no use of 
looking into the future, as none can foresee the future. If one is able to live in 
the present moment, mind can be easily controlled. The controlled mind can 
be realised by noticing the breathing. } 

Dharana 39 

There are two objects in his front. He has to concentrate on one object. When 
he continuously fixes his consciousness on this object, he becomes one with 
the object after some time. The objective consciousness merges with his 
subjective consciousness and forms the universal consciousness. Though the 
second object is present he has not yet moved his concentration to the second 
object. In the gap between the formation of universal consciousness and 
shifting of his concentration on the second object, Siva is realised. These 

types of concentrations make him to merge his individual consciousness with 
universal consciousness, the cosmos. 

The previous verse said that he should not concentrate on either of the 
objects. This verse says that he should concentrate on one of the objects and 
become one with it before shifting his concentration on the other. This verse 
lays emphasis on the gap between the realisation of universal consciousness 
while concentrating on the first object and the beginning of the individual 
concentration on the second object. When he merges with universal 
consciousness while concentrating on the first object, he realises the bliss. He 
realises all pervadingSiva and he knows that he is not different from Siva. He 
realises that his pure consciousness manifests as Siva. 

Abhinava Gupta says in his famous Tantraloka(1.83) “It is said that the 
atman, full of Sivamrta (ambrosia of Siva) is called bliss.” 

Dharana 40 

One has to contemplate that the whole universe is filled with Consciousness. 
During this contemplation, mind should be free of thoughts. Instead of the 
universe, the aspirant can also meditate that his body is full of 
Consciousness. When perfection is attained, Supreme Awakening happens. 
Consciousness is nothing but awareness. Consciousness is the most important 
factor for living. There are different levels of consciousness. The lowest level 
of consciousness is the mundane consciousness and the highest level of 
consciousness is the Divine consciousness, which can also be expressed as 
illuminating Bhairava Consciousness. 

There is direct connection between consciousness and the mind. 
Consciousness can be purified or refined only through one’s mind with no 
way of controlling it with external aids. 

Dharana 41 

By merging inhalation and exhalation, equivalence can be realized. 
Equivalence means realizing all as Bhairava, the true feeling of realizing His 
omnipresence. When inhalation is done, it stops at a point inside the body 

and from the same place, exhalation begins. Inhalation is prana and 
exhalation is apana. This happens inside the body. Similar point is there 
outside the body. When the air exhaled reaches a particular point outside the 
body, inhalation starts from the same point outside the body. Thus, there are 
two points, one inside the body and the other outside the body. These two 
points are called external dvadasanta and internal dvadasanta. Dvadasanta 
means twelve finger length (dvadasa 

— twelve; anta—limit or boundary). As far as the internal contemplation is 
concerned, one can visualize a point in third eye chakra or heart chakra. The 
point which is twelve inches above sahasrara is also known as dvadasanta, 
where out-of-body experience is realized. 

When one meditates on either of these two points, externally or internally, a 
condition arises wherein both inhalation and exhalation stops for a few 
seconds and a void is created, in which one realizes equivalence. For him, the 
entire universe appears as Bhairava. 

Dharana 42 

When one visualizes that his own body is filled with his own spiritual bliss, 
he is able to identify himself with the Supreme Bliss. His own spiritual bliss 
is the bliss that is not identified with any of the external objects but the 
essence of his inner divinity. 

The aspirant has a choice. Either he can contemplate his own body filled with 
bliss or the whole universe is filled with bliss, as explained in verse 63. The 
point to be noted here is that contemplation should be made on his own bliss 
and not on the Divine Bliss. Obviously, he cannot contemplate on the Divine 
Bliss, as he has not yet experienced the same. Contemplation here means 
affirmation. This means that he has to visualize that his body or the universe 
is already filled with his own bliss and not being filled with His bliss. With 
practice, he is able to unite his bliss with Supreme Bliss, the Bliss of 
Bhairava. 

Dharana 43 
When one fixes his concentration on any event that is happening before him, 
his mind becomes free of all other thoughts. For example, if one witnesses a 

sporting event fixing his complete attention on either of the teams, his mind 
does not think about anything else, except the event happening before him 
and the team concerned. During this state, his mind becomes devoid of all 
other thought processes and in this state, Bhairava is realized. When a person 
is able to fix his consciousness on any event or any scene before him, 
because of the high level of concentration, he enters into the state of Supreme 
Bliss. 

Generally, this can be experienced if one visits places of worship. When one 
fixes his concentration on the idol of the deity, for some time, his mind is 
disconnected from the external world. His mind is freed of all other thoughts 
and his entire concentration is only on the idol. As a result of this high level 
of concentration, he becomes one with that form of the idol or he becomes 
That. In this state, all dualities are dissolved and there remains only the idol. 
The subject and object become one; perceiver and the perceived become one. 
As a result, he enters into a thoughtless state of trance or nirvikalpa samadhi, 
which could last only for a few seconds. During this state, his kundalini 
ascends automatically to ajfia or sahasrara. At the time of exiting from this 
state, tears will roll down his eyes and he will have bouts of goose bumps. 
Goose bumps generally bring down the kundalini, which is a natural process. 
During this trance, he realizes Bhairava. There is also another interpretation 
which says that if one’s armpit is tickled by somebody, in that laughter 
Bhariava is realized. This is based on the usage of word kuhana in the verse. 

As has already been discussed, it is the quality of the meditation that matters 
and not the duration of the meditation. For a high quality meditation, ten 
minutes duration is more than sufficient. Any thought process is associated 
only with the material world. When the mind becomes devoid of thought 
process, there prevails Bhairava, as He is omnipresent. Black board is an 
ideal example. When the letters written on the black board are erased, there 
remains only the black board. When the letters are present on the black 
board, at that time, apart from the black board, letters are also present. In 
other words, black board is always present, but only the letters change. 
Letters are the thought processes and the black board is Bhairava. 

Dharana 44 

{Additional information: Vijfanabhairava reveals the various methods of 
dharana to realize Bhairava, that is Siva. There are 112 methods of dharana 
revealed by Vijhanabhairava. Dharana not only means concentration, but also 
includes breath movement. Unless concentration and breath movement work 
in tandem, purpose of meditation will never be achieved. As a result of 
attaining perfection attained in dharana, pratyahara happens on its own. 
Steady and slow movement of breath indicates the calmness of the mind. If 
the mind is turbulent, one can bring the mind under control by resorting to 
slow and deep breathing through both the nostrils. Wherever concentration is 
mentioned, it means that one should either hold his breath at that point or 
visualize breathing (both inhalation and exhalation) on that point.} 

By closing the sensory organs, prana begins to ascend through the central 
canal of the spinal cord and this can be realized through tingling sensations at 
different chakras in the spinal cord. At the time of feeling the tingling 
sensation, one can realize Bhairava. 

Prana is used for all actions of the body. For example, for seeing, hearing, 
walking, etc prana is required. If the organs of perceptions are closed, there is 
no work for prana. Prana cannot remain idly. Since there is no work for 
prana, it begins to ascend through susumna (spinal cord) from muladhara to 
brahmarandhra at sahasrara. Brahmarandhra is an orifice at the top of the 
head in sahasrara through which gross body draws prana from the cosmos. 
For Yogis, the soul escapes through this orifice at the time of death. Out of 
body experience 1s realized only if one’s consciousness goes past this orifice, 
only to come back again. If the consciousness does not comeback, it means 
death. 

Idle prana awakens the kundalini from the perineum and makes her to ascend 
through the spinal cord. When the kundalini ascends, generally it ascends in 
stages crossing every chakra and piercing all the three granthi-s, known as 
knots. This natural movement of kundalini is known as crawling. The sudden 
movement of kundalini to the top of the head is known as blasting of 
kundalini. Blast happens in rare cases and is highly dangerous. Mostly this 

happens during accidental falls. The right way to meditate on kundalini is to 
gradually make her ascend through various chakras. When kundalini ascends 
through various chakras, one can feel her movement through the spine, as if 
an ant is crawling in the spine. If one’s attention is fixed on this sensation, 
during that time, Bhairava can be realized. During this process, dharana and 
pratyahara happen one after another, leading to trance. Pratyahara is the 
withdrawal of senses resulting in dissolution of the material world. During 
this trance, Bhairava is realized. 

From this verse, one can understand that the quality of meditation is more 
important than the duration of the meditation. For attaining perfection in 
meditation, one has to first focus the mind on any one object and over a 
period of time, the mind gets trained to focus. As long as any thought 
prevails in the mind, perfection in meditation can never be achieved. This can 
be achieved only through practice. One should also remember that before 
realizing the Self, Bliss is a natural prelude. 

Dharana 45 
This verse is interpreted in two different ways. 

During the state of blissfulness, if one fixes his concentration on the navel 
chakra, which is also known as manipuraka chakra and the heart chakra also 
known as anahata chakra, he enters the state of blissfulness. The first two 
chakras are ignored here and the verse subtly talks about the two higher 
chakras mentioned here. The effect of kundalint will be felt only if she enters 
manipuraka and goes beyond it. The lower two chakras, muladhara and 
svadhisthana are associated only with the normal states of consciousness, 
whereas, the higher chakras from maniptraka are associated with higher 
states of consciousness. Further, even without practicing kundalini 
meditation, kundalini will hover around these two lower chakras if one is 
religiously inclined. Religious practices are generally associated with these 
two lower chakras. 

Manipuraka chakra is associated with fire element and anahata chakra is 
associated with the element air. These two chakras are derived from the 
usage of words vahni and vayu purnam in this verse. Vahni means fire and 
vayu purnam means full of air. Therefore, it is construed that these two words 
mean these two chakras subtly. If one is able to fix his consciousness on the 
susumna connecting these two chakras, one will be able to move away from 
the mundane level of consciousness to the higher level of consciousness. 
During this time, one enters into the state of bliss. This practice is in 
continuation of the previous verse. 

But, there is another interpretation, which is more logical than the previous 
one. This interpretation is based on the usage of words vahni and visa. Vahni 
is taken to mean the power of will or iccasakti and visa is taken to mean the 
power of knowledge or jfanasakti. This verse says that one should fix his 
consciousness on the point of meeting of these two Sakti-s. That is, when one 
travels on the line of iccasakti he will reach the end point of iccasakti. At the 
end of iccasakti, jnanasakti begins. The point of concentration should be on 
the point whereiccasakti ends and jfanaSakti begins. This is the point where 
all the actions end and the divine or higher knowledge begins to dawn. Since 
the cessation of the entire actions take place at this point, concentrating on this 
point leads to bliss and ultimate realization. The state of bliss experienced here 
is compared to the bliss arising out of the union of Siva and Sakti. Their union 
takes place at sahasrara, as a result of which ambrosia is secreted and drips 
down to the throat. 

Dharana 46 

During orgasm, complete absorption takes place between the two, when all 
other thoughts are annihilated and they enter the state of thoughtlessness. 
Even the presence of the partner who triggered the orgasm is not realized. 
This is described here as the state of Bliss. One can experience Bliss only if 
his or her mind becomes thoughtless and in this state, if one is able to unite 
his consciousness with the Divine Consciousness, he or she could enjoy the 
Bliss. When the mind becomes thoughtless, Divine Consciousness 
automatically pervades it. 

During conjugation, kundalini automatically gets activated and reaches aja 
chakra where two subtle nadi-s ida and pingala join susumna, the central 
canal in the spine. This is the point where mind initiates the process of 
purification and attempts to get into the path of divinity. This is the point 
where the individual consciousness attempts to enter into the Supreme 
Consciousness. Tantra Scriptures mostly dwell on this aspect. The pleasure 
of the gross body gets into subtle body where individual mind and ego are 
embedded. As a result of this pleasure, mind, intellect and ego are completely 
dissolved and every part of the body experiences the Bliss. At the state of 
experiencing the Bliss, there exists only the Bliss and nothing else, including 
the mind. Transcending the mind is called the state of turya. 

When awareness is fixed at ajfia chakra during orgasm, one can feel the 
ascension of kundalini on its own. This is not without reasoning. Kundalini, 
situated in the perineum gets activated due to the intense heat and energy and 
moves up towards higher chakras. Pressure cookers work on this principle. 

This verse says that during the state of thoughtless arising at the time of 
orgasm, Bliss can be experienced. The ultimate aim of any practice is to enter 
the state of Bliss. It should be understood that the verse only explains the 
state of Bliss and does not say that this is the path to experience the Bliss. 
Divine Bliss can be experienced by uniting one’s individual consciousness 
with the Supreme Consciousness. 

Orgasmic pleasure which is described in this verse as the Bliss is not 
perpetual. The perpetual Bliss can be experienced only if self and Self are 
united. Tantra is a very dangerous path to pursue without understanding the 
various intricacies and subtleties. 

Dharana 47 

Even in the absence of a partner, bliss can be attained by remembering the 
moments of conjugal pleasure. This verse is an extension of the previous 
verse. The previous verse spoke about a partner. This verse says there is no 
need for a partner to enjoy bliss. Dwelling on those thoughts are enough to 

trigger the Bliss. In other words, this verse subtly conveys that if one is able 
to unite his consciousness with that of Siva, one can experience Bliss. 

It can also be explained that energy of Sakti uniting with the consciousness of 
Siva causes the Bliss. 

This is also known as divine union. Based on this principle, Sakti is defined 
as kinetic in nature and 

Siva as static in nature. The one who is able to unite Sakti and Siva in his or 
her mind is called a Yogi. During the perfect union, as defined in the 
previous verse, all dualities are dissolved and there exists only Siva in the 
form of Bliss, where kinetic aspect is only inherent but not visible. This is 
known as spiritual orgasm and generally happens only outside the physical 
body, a few inches above sahasrara. This is the point where not only Siva is 
realized, but the entire universe is realized. One’s individual consciousness 
becomes universal consciousness during this state. 

Dharana 48 

One will experience great joy while meeting a relative after a long time. 
While experiencing this joy, one should focus on this joy till he experiences 
the Bliss. The point driven home in these verses is fixing of one’s awareness 
during a particular act or incident. It is also to be understood that joy after 
persistent focusing manifests as Bliss; a sad incident cannot cause Bliss. 

Happiness has two aspects, one at the time of first experience and second at 
the time of recollecting the incident leading to joy. If one is able to 
concentrate on either of these, one can experience the Bliss. 

This is the reason for many becoming speechless on seeing a person very 
dear to their hearts after a long gap. Tears roll down due to the state of Bliss 
unfolding. 

Dharana 49 

When one experiences happiness while eating or drinking, he should 
meditate on that joy which results in Bliss. Meditate on the joy means taking 
forward that joy or remaining in that joy. When he immerses himself in that 
joy, he is absorbed in that joy which transforms into Bliss. 

Generally it is said that stomach should be empty while meditating. But this 
verse overrides this principle, as Bliss can happen at any time, even without 
meditation. There are two kinds of Bliss. The first one is induced during 
perfect meditation. The second one happens on its own without any reason. 
For example, on seeing a sage, on visiting a place of worship, Bliss unfolds 
on its own. Bliss also unfolds when the energy level is very powerful in 
certain places. 

Dharana 50 

When a yogi becomes absolved in music or a song, he becomes joyous as his 
total awareness is fixed on the song or music. He becomes engrossed in the 
music, as he fixes his entire awareness on the music, and as a result of this, 
his mind is totally pervaded by the joy aroused by the music. When he carries 
forward this single pointed awareness, he becomes one with the Self. 

Bhajans and discourses are the appropriate forums to experience this. When 
someone is immersed into a discourse, he forgets his surroundings and fixes 
his consciousness on the discourse. He is able to visualize that he is 
personally present at the scene narrated during the discourse. He realizes that 
the scenes, as described in the discourse happen before him. Some devotional 
songs are also capable of making a person to enter into a trance. 

This is a typical instance of a person transcending his mind and getting 
absorbed into that experience, the state of turya. 

Dharana 51 

When the mind is satisfied on certain object or event, let the mind be fixed 
there itself. As a result of fixing continued awareness on the particular object 
or event, Bliss unfolds. 

Amongst many activities that happen in our lives, only few activities are 
done with involvement. Because of this involvement, mind gets focused 
on a particular activity and as a result of this one feels the joy, which 
manifests as Bliss. 

The point driven home in these verses is absolute concentration on a 
particular act or object. When the awareness, which is also known as 
consciousness, is fixed without distractions, mind is totally pervaded by that 
particular act or object. During this state, all other mundane thought 
processes are annihilated and consciousness is fixed only on that act or 
object. This leads to ecstasy, which can be realized only by the mind. Mind is 
the only tool available to us to experience the Bliss. 

Dharana 52 

This is a very important verse and be realized by everyone in normal course 
of life. 

One has gone to bed. He is about to sleep but not actually entered into the 
state of sleep. At the same time, he is not fully awake. He is neither sleeping 
nor awake. He is in the midpoint between these two states. During this state 
Sakti reveals Herself. During this state, all thoughts processes are annihilated 
as the mind is about to enter into the state of losing consciousness for sleep. 

This state can be observed by everyone by default. The same state repeats 
while one is about to wakeup. This can be better explained through this flow 
chart. 

Active state going to bed mid point state dream state deep sleep state 
dream state (reversal of the process begins here) mid point state getting 
up from bed active state. 

Mid point is the state that is being described in this verse. Not only divine 
visions, but also divine commune happens in this mid point state. If one 
learns to concentrate on this mid point, which may not last long (may be a 
minute), one can surely have divine indecipherable commune and hazy 
visions. This can be perfected with practice. 

Dharana 53 

Look into the sky that appears in different colors (VIBGYOR) due to the 
effect of the sun. Alternative, one can look into a lamp or light. Whatever is 
the point of gazing, one has to focus on it with absolute concentration. When 
the awareness on the sun or light is intent, one is able to realize the 
illuminating 

Self. In other words, the Self will have that kind of illumine at the 
microcosmic level. At the macrocosmic level, the illumination will be several 
times brighter and is beyond human comprehension. 

There is one specific dharana, which is often advised to increase 
concentration. Light a candle. Fix your consciousness on the light of the 
candle. Then close the eyes. You can see the light of the candle within for a 
few seconds. This practice not only helps in improving one’s focus, but also 
helps in kundalini meditation. Particularly, this kind of concentration helps 
in making the kundalini ascend from ajnacakra. 

Dharana 54 

At the time of perceiving the universe through yogic practice, five mudra-s 
discussed below are disclosed and as a result of which, Bhairava is revealed. 

The five mudra-sare karankini, krodhana, bhairavi, lelihana and khecart. 
Mudra means joyous and mudra refers to the various finger and body 
gestures. Certain postures of the body or finger gestures cause peace and 
happiness in the mind. They accelerate the pace of reaching the state of 
Bliss. 

Karankini is the mudra related to the highest knowledge. The yogi looks at 
everything as skeleton. Gross bodies are built on skeletons. Karank means 
skeleton. When flesh and blood are destroyed, what remains is the skeleton. 
Practicing this mudra causes detachment from the objects. Detachment is not 
a simple process, as the mind looks for something repeatedly that it has 
enjoyed for a long time. This is known as addiction. Perceiving the world as 
skeleton leads to detachment from addictive objects as one realizes that 
finally only the ugly looking skeletal body remains. This mudra is possible 

only through perception and hence, is associated with knowledge. Anything 
that works on the mind is knowledge. 

The second mudra is known as krodhana mudra. Krodhana means anger. 
When one is in the state of anger, his entire body system gets tensed, 
breathing becomes shallow and as a result of which, his mind loses its 
saneness. The result is emotional outbursts, where one is prevented from 
using his sane mind. From this one can understand that mudra simply does 
not mean body or finger gestures, but also a lot to do with one’s mind. When 
an aspirant perceives the material world without passion and anger, he 
understands the true reality of the material world, which is nothing but 
Bhairava, as the universe is pervaded by His Consciousness. 

The third mudra is bhairavi mudra, where one looks outwardly with his 
biological eyes without blinking and his consciousness is turned inwardly 
towards his mind. In spite of his looks at the objects, his inner mind is not 
associated with the act of looking through biological eyes. The term 
biological eye is used because there is a subtle eye known as third eye or 
inner eye at ajhacakra. During this mudra, though biological eyes are active, 
the impressions received through the sensory organ viz. biological eyes are 
not passed on to the mind, as the mind is actively associated with the inner 
eye. Those who have perfectly learnt this mudra attains supernatural powers. 
This mudra is useful to withdraw the external world or the material world 
into the inner Self. This bhairavi mudra is not the one that is mentioned in 
Hatha Yoga. 

The fourth one is lelihana mudra and is associated with taste. Lelihana means 
movement of the tongue hurriedly. For example, while tasting a sweet, one 
opens his mouth and begins to taste the first piece of the sweet and at that 
time his entire awareness is fixed on the taste with the aid of active tongue. 
Sometimes, some sort of subtle vibrations also happen during this first taste. 
When an aspirant perceives this moment as the nature of Supreme 
Consciousness, he enters the state of Bliss, as what he perceives is Bhairava, 
the Supreme Consciousness. 

The fifth and the last one is khecart mudra. The one that is described here is 
fixing consciousness in the open space known as akasa. Generally this is 
practiced as explained in Hatha Yoga. One has to lift the tip of his tongue 
and roll it back so that it can touch the upper palate. During this practice, 
consciousness should be placed in ajfia cakra. During this state, one 

generates high amount positive energy which can be used to heal others. But, 
the khecart mudra described here is not the one discussed in Hatha Yoga. In 
this verse, khecarl mudra refers to the fixation of one’s consciousness on 
akasa to become one with the Supreme Consciousness. During this state, the 
Yogi’s consciousness is not different from Siva Consciousness or Universal 
Consciousness. 

At the time of spontaneous perception of the universe through these 
fivemudras karankini,krodhana, bhairavi,lelihana and “"°" @uzg fe fa, 
Teo, sedis , as welalo""* wash "Consciousness is revealed. 

During meditation, when these five mudras are used, one understands the 
pervasion of the Self in the form of the universe. In other words, he 
understands the omnipresence nature of Siva, the Supreme Consciousness. 
Mudras are generally used to activate a particular part of the body and to 
increase the psychic energy and to eliminate the excess energy generated in 
the body. Excessive psychic energy leads to blockades and needs to be 
grounded, i.e. passed on to the Mother Earth. Instead, this energy can be used 
to heal others also. It is difficult to find people with higher energy levels and 
they should not waste their energy and should use their divine energy to heal 
others. 

Karankini mudra is viewing the universe as a skeleton (karanka means 
skeleton). This mudra is only a perception and is related to the higher levels 
of spiritual knowledge. The Yogi looks at the universe as something that is 
dissolved into akasa, where alone there is stillness. Nothing moves in the 
akasa. When the Yogi looks at the universe as a skeleton, he looks at the 
cause of the universe, the Supreme Consciousness. It is like our skeletal 
bodies forming the basis of our shapes and forms. Without the skeletal body, 
muscles and nerves alone cannot fully form a body. Further, when the Yogi 
looks at the universe as skeleton, he becomes devoid of attachments and 
desires, as one cannot develop attachment to a skeleton. This is known as the 
source of knowledge, because the Yogi looks for the cause than the effect. 
This is the spiritual knowledge. 

Krodhana mudra is releasing muscular and nervous tensions from the body. 
In this mudra, facial muscles are contracted, mouth and eyes are wide open 
and he fixes his awareness on the mantra he recites. In that mantra, Siva 
reveals Himself to him. Only those Yogi-s, who have attained mantra siddhi 
can use this mudra. Krodha means anger and in the present context it is not 
used to mean anger, but refers to the mystical mantra. It can be inferred that 
the mantra is OM. 

B hairavi mudra is where one keeps his eyes wide open without blinking and 
looks externally, but his consciousness is fixed internally. He has to fix his 
breathing on the point where he fixes his consciousness within. Fixing breath 
on any part of the body is possible by synchronizing breath and concentration 
on the same place. Breath cannot get fixed on a particular place, but this has 
to be visualized, as practiced in kundalini meditation. The bhairavi mudra 
discussed here is not related to the one discussed in Hatha Yoga, which is 
about the placement of palms. Here, it is about fixing consciousness within, 
though he looks at the external world through his sensory organs. This is one 
of the mudras that can lead to trance. 

Lelihana mudra is where the Yogi considers universal consciousness as his 
own consciousness, where all dualities are dissolved. 

Khecari mudra is considered as one of the important mudras. It is derived 
from the world khecara meaning roaming in the sky. What is described here 
is the same as explained in Hatha Yoga (III. 36 54), turning the tongue 
backwards and placing it on the upper palette. The one who has attained 
perfection will not have disease and he is freed from hunger, thirst, etc. When 
this is perfected in the proper way, (pushing the tongue and touching the 
hanging soft palette is the ultimate perfection) spirituous liquor is secreted 
and on processing it at the throat chakra, gives a disease free life. It also 
activates ajhacakra and back head cakra and in the process activates the 
pineal gland, the gland of divinity. This also helps in activating the sahasrara. 
The only deterrent factor of this mudra is the amount of heat it generates in 
the body during practice. One has to consciously make efforts to reduce this 
heat by consuming a lot of water, milk, curd, fresh fruits and vegetables. This 
mudra is highly helpful in making the kundalini ascend towards ajfia cakra 

and above. The secretion of ambrosia, having the consistency of honey and 
drifting into the throat can be realized distinctly. By practice, one can collect 
this ambrosia in the throat chakra, which stores and distributes this nectar 
appropriately to the body system. If it enters the digestive system, the 
ambrosia will not be of any use and will be simply wasted. While healing 
others, one has to necessarily keep his/her tongue in khecart mudra, which 
causes the generation of powerful pranic energy. 

Dharana 55 

Sit on a soft cushion with one buttock and keep hands and legs in a relaxed 
state. During this practice, the mind becomes calm. Rajasic and tamsic 
qualities of the mind are annihilated and 

sattvika quality alone prevails in the mind during this posture. Keeping hands 
and legs in relaxed state means folding them in interlocking position, but with 
ease. However, the choice of keeping the arms and legs is left to the comfort 
level of the practitioner. The only precondition is that there should be no 
tension or stiffness in arms and legs and one should sit with one buttock on a 
cushion. While sitting in this posture, one’s individual consciousness merges 
into Supreme Consciousness. 

Dharana 56 

By sitting comfortably, raise both the arms and lock the two palms on top of 
the head fixing consciousness in the armpits. During this state, the mind 
becomes calm. This posture is often seen in temples. In temples, one could 
fix his consciousness on the consecrated idol. At home, one has to fix his 
consciousness in the armpits. During kundalini meditation, if kundalini is not 
properly ascended, it leads to energy congestion in armpits, leading to 
shoulder problems. Armpits have vacuum within. 

Dharana 57 

Fix awareness on an external object without blinking (like bhairavi mudra 
explained above) the eyes, the mind is fixed on that object and during this 
state, he enters the state of Siva. This 1s based on the fact that when the mind 

is fully pervaded only by that object, rest of the thoughts are annihilated and 
the mind becomes calm and composed. The object on which on fixes his gaze 
should not be far away from him and should be three dimensional; for 
example, a flower or an idol and not a picture. 

Dharana 58 

This verse is in continuation of khecari mudra, discussed earlier. Use kecahri 
mudra, wide open the jaws, but ensure that lips are closed. Recite the 
alphabet ‘ha (é)’ mentally. In a perfect khecari 

mudra , one can feel the pulsation at ajfia cakra. If the pulsation is not felt, 
one has to move the tip of the tongue here and there to find the exact place 
where the sensation in the aja cakra is felt. This is the point where one 
should practice khechari mudra. ‘ha’ here refers to harnsa mantra. During this 
posture, one can listen to the subtle hissing sound of the breath passing 
through this place. If the ears are closed, the sound can be clearly heard. 
Concentrate on this sound, where mind is deactivated totally by annihilating 
all thought processes, peace alone prevails in the mind. This is known as the 
pure mind where, Self is realized. It is important to note that Self can be 
realized only in a thoughtless state of the mind. 

Dharana 59 

While sitting or lying down, visualize your body is hanging from thin air 
without any support. Since the contemplation is on the floating of the body, 
all other thoughts are annihilated and in the process impressions in the mind 
are removed. 

Mind by default strays through old memories or heeds to the inputs received 
from sensory organs. If the mind is made to abstain from both these 
situations, it becomes tranquil and quiet. In order to do this, mind is to be 
engaged in an activity that is not connected to these two, memories and 
sensory organs. Hence several alternatives are suggested in Vijhanabhairava 
to keep the mind engaged and the same time to keep it calm and composed. 

In a very peaceful state, the mind forgets about the embedded impressions of 
the past. 

Dharana 60 

By swinging the body slowly the mind becomes tranquil. The swing of the 
body can be due to the vehicle in which he travels or he can himself make the 
body to swing. When the body swings, the mind becomes calm. The aerobic 
exercises are typical examples. During these exercises, the mind remains 
absolutely pure on account of two factors; first, due to the deep breathing and 
second due to the concentration on the movements of the body. It should be 
always remembered that one should take more time in exhaling than the time 
taken for inhalation. Suppose one counts up to 10 for inhalation, it is better to 
exhale by counting 15 to 20. This practice always keeps the mind calm. Ina 
calm mind, if Self is contemplated, He is realized easily. 

Dharana 61 

By sitting comfortably, look at the blue sky (meaning without clouds) 
without blinking and without moving the body, you attain the nature of 
Bhairava. When the concentration is fixed on the vastness of akasa, the 
vastness of Bhairava is realized. This is because, he becomes one with the 
vastness of akasa and as Bhairava is inexplicable vastness, you are able to 
realize Bhairava. The realization lasts for a few seconds and this is how 
realization happens in the initial stages. During the stage of fixing 
consciousness on akasa, the aspirant becomes one with the vastness of akasa. 
When consciousness becomes devoid of any thought processes, which is also 
known as pure consciousness, in that state, Bhairava is realized. 

Dharana 62 

The yogi who visualizes the vast akasa as the essence of Bhairava till akasa 
is dissolved in his aja cakra and becomes visible as illuminating Light in 
aja cakra. Consequently, the entire universe gets absolved in that Light. 

This is almost an extension of the previous verse. There are two possibilities 
for contemplation. One is to visualize the skull as wide open so that the entire 

—*n- 

akasa gets into that opening and enters aja cakra. The other option is to 
visualize that the akasa enters into the body through the orifice at top of the 
head known as brahmarandra. The cosmic energy can be drawn into the body 
by using this orifice, by perfect visualization. The other area where one can 
draw cosmic energy is medulla, the back head. If one stands in the early 
morning sun exposing his back head and brahmarandra directly towards the 
sunlight and visualize drawing of energy through these two places, one can 
easily notice the entry of cosmic energy into the body. Cosmic energy keeps 
a person in perfect health. 

Dharana 63 

A yog! is aware of all the three states of consciousness — active, dream and 
deep sleep states. Dualities prevail in active state; impressions of the active 
state appear as dreams in dream state and in the deep sleep state there exists 
only darkness, as the mind becomes totally inactive. Beyond these normal 
states of consciousness, is the state of turya, the fourth state of consciousness, 
where all dualities are annihilated. In the state of turya, Bhairava alone exists. 
This state is filled with splendorous Light of Bhairava. In this state of turya, 
all the three previous states exist. Paramarthasara (verse 35) explains this. 
“The waking state is the state of differentiation of the universe (visva). The 
dream state is the state of splendour due to that Light (tejas). The third state 
of consciousness, deep sleep state is the state of knowledge (prajiia) and the 
fourth state turya is beyond all these.” 

In the state of turya, there exists Bhairava alone in the form of splendorous 
Light. This can be realized by experiencing inexplicable Bliss. The level of 
Bliss is always an indicator of one’s level of emancipation. All the aspirants 
do not realize Him in the same way and experiencing the level of Bliss is an 
indicative factor for self-evaluation. The level of spirituality cannot be 
evaluated by anybody else except the aspirant himself and by a Guru (not by a 
guru). 

Dharana 64 

One has to contemplate on the darkness of the night during waning fortnight 
of the moon, where pitch dark alone prevails. If he turns to any side, he will 

notice only pitch darkness, not even some ray of light at a distance. This is 
possible only during new moon day (amavasya). At that time, if he 
contemplates on the darkness around, he attains the state of Bhariava. In other 
word, he perceives the omnipresence of Bhairava in the darkness. This 
contemplation will have a direct effect in developing quality consciousness, 
which becomes capable of modifying the mind. 

This verse is based on the principle that the breath is predominant in either of 
the nostrils at a given time. If one is able to balance the breath equally in both 
the nostrils at the same time, his susumna gets activated. The intensity of the 
meditation varies according to the phase of moon. Mind will not be as pure as 
it should be, during new moon and full moon days. 

Dharana 65 

One has to close his eyes and contemplate on the induced darkness in front. It 
is not the natural darkness discussed in the previous verse. It is called 
induced darkness because darkness is not natural and spontaneous. There is 
darkness because of closing the eyes. The act of closing the eyes is 
inducement. During this practice, visibility of material world is blocked and 
as a result the mind is rested. It is not mere closing of eyes that can make the 
mind to rest. When the eyes are closed, one has to concentrate on the 
darkness. Only during the perfect concentration on the darkness, mind is 
rested. If the perfect concentration is not practiced, mind continues to be 
active through the inputs received from sensory organs such as ears, etc. 
When the mind is actively contemplating on something, all other sensory 
inputs of the mind are blocked. Only during this state of the mind Bhairava 
can be realized. 

Dharana 66 

When the function of a sensory organ is affected either naturally or by 
practice, the aspirant enters into the state of void, wherein he realizes the 
Self. Reference to eyes and ears is implied in this verse, as they are the most 
potent of all the sense organs. 

There is a yoni mudra where ears and eyes are plugged using fingers. When 
this mudra is perfected, one could listen to the subtle sound of OM within. 
This sound is due to the friction caused by air during inhalation and 
exhalation. This sound cannot be heard unless one explores for the sound 
within. During this state, the idea of duality is lost and the aspirant becomes 
one with Siva, the Self. Meditation is not something wherein one should sit 
erect by closing the eyes. Meditation is a perpetual process of exploration of 
within. At the end of the exploration, one can realize the Self pervading his 
mind. When Self pervades the mind all other thought processes are 
annihilated. 

Dharana 67 
When one recites ‘a’ (,,) without bindu (a dot above,, making it as ,,) or visarga 

(inclusion of two dots one above the other at the end of an alphabet orbija. 

Visarga of , iS ;,), the highest knowledge for realizingSiva dawns on him. 

This verse subtly coveys the state of holding breath either within or outside 
the body, which is known as kumbhaka. When , is recited, during the 

recitation one inhales (but mostly one tends to inhale during the recitation 

of,;). In the same manner, when ,, is 

recited one tends to exhale, which can be clearly noticed. This inhalation and 
exhalation happens automatically due to the 

involuntary system of the body. When 3f alone is recited, there will not be 
much movement of breath when compared to the recitation of af and at:. This 
state is very close to the state of kumbhaka. In the state of kumbhaka, Siva 
illumines at aja cakra. The effect of inhalation and exhalation is realized 
only at aja cakra. When ajfia cakra is opened and activated, one need not 
worry about any of the lower chakras. 

During holding the breath, one’s consciousness does not stray and stay fixed 
on the act of holding breath. Hence both internal (antar kumbhaka) and 
external or bahya kumbhaka are recommended for advanced aspirants. 
Rhythm of breath and kumbhaka varies from person to person. But, the ideal 
practice for the beginners is the ratio of 1:1:1 Gnhalation — holding— 
exhalation) to 16:64:32 for the advanced practitioners at the level of yogi-s. 
The best practice is that the time taken for exhalation should be as long as 
possible when compared to inhalation. Holding the breath purely depends 
upon one’s capacity to hold. If one attempts to cross the inherent system of 
the body to hold, it could lead to serious health issues. 

Dharana 68 

When one recites an alphabet with a free mind with his awareness fixed on 
the visarga of an alphabet (example,,), he comes into contact with the Self. 

The previous verse said that one should not concentrate on bindu and visarga. 
But this verse says that one should concentrate on the visarga. The difference 
lies in kumbhaka. The previous verse subtly conveyed that one should fix his 
awareness on kumbhaka and this verse says that one should fix his 
consciousness on exhalation. While reciting visarga, exhalation happens 
automatically. Again, while reciting an alphabet with visarga, for example ;,, 

—*n- 

the concentration should be on the ajfia cakra and on 

the breath. One can mentally connect exhalation to the ajfia cakra. If this is 
practiced, ajfia cakra will become fully activated, paving way to reach the 
higher levels of spirituality. Without activating ajiia cakra, higher spiritual 
realms may not be possible. In many people, either due to the depth of love 
for Him or Her (typically there is no difference between the Two and it is 
only our perception that alone matters), aja cakra gets activated on its own. 

Dharana 69 

One should meditate on his own self as the boundless sky (akasa). When this 
meditation is perfect without any distraction, Goddess Sakti reveals Herself 

in the form of Power of Pure Consciousness. The verse says citih saktih 
svarupam darsayettada 

Sods oH &: ae wa: a dca This means that Sakti reveals Herself 

in the form of consciousness in his mind, devoid of any other thought 
constructs. The word citih saktih is important in this verse. Sakti reveals 
Herself to the aspirant in the form citi Sakti, which refers to the power of 
consciousness of Siva, that brings about the manifestation of the universe and 
this Power of Siva is known as Sakti. She is the dynamic energy of Siva and 
She alone brings forth the world process. 

The subtle conveyance of this verse is that one should erase all the 
impressions in the mind making the mind as pure and as boundless as the 
sky. If the aspirant is able to visualize his own form as the sky, the creative 
and dynamic aspect of Siva is revealed to the aspirant in the form His own 
power known as Sakti. 

Dharana 70 

If one shallowly pricks his body with a sharp object and if he concentrates on 
the point of pricking, he reaches the pure state of Bhairava. We have to 
admire the simplicity with which Bhairava teaches Bhairavi. The concept is 
simple. When there is a prick in the body (not amounting to injuring the 
body; it should be only a light and shallow prick), our entire concentration 
get focussed only on the point on which a prick was made, due to light pain 
in the body. During this state, all other thought processes are relegated to the 
background. When one fixes his awareness on a particular object, in that 
object Bhairva is revealed. 

This is the significant point to notice. Bhairava is neither someone with some 
form or other nor different from us. He is nothing but single pointed 
awareness, which is called consciousness. Unafflicted, unpolluted, unaffected 
and single pointed awareness is consciousness and this consciousness is 
Bhairava. Only to achieve this state, meditation is practiced. This can be 

attained either in a minute or in a span of time lasting to several years, 
depending upon the ability of the practitioner. 

Dharana 71 

Visualize that one’s body does not have antahkarana known as inner psychic 
organs consisting of mind, intellect and ego. Some are of the opinion 
(particularly advaita philosophy) that consciousness is also included in this. 
Since consciousness is the Supreme Self, according to Trika philosophy, it is 
excluded in antahkarana. When antahkarana is absent, one becomes devoid 
of all thought processes. When mind is absent, intellect and ego cannot exist, 
as both of them need mind to operate. Ultimate in spirituality can be attained 
only if the mind is purged and purified. Only through the mind, realization of 
the Self happens. 

Dharana 72 

M aya is a deceptive principle and this is the primary cause for duality. Maya 
has five coverings through which, it causes illusion and they are known as 
kaficuka-s. Kaficuka means covering and maya unfolds illusion through these 
five coverings. The five coverings arekala,vidya,raga,kala and niyati and they 
cause limitation on action, knowledge, attachment, time and place. They 
cause limitation on the omnipotence, omniscience, completeness, eternity and 
omnipresence ofSiva. Because of these limitations, one is not able to realize 
the true nature of the Self within, as maya deceptively projects the infinite 
Self as the limited self. As a result, one enters into the state of duality 
thinking that he is different from the Supreme Self within. When one is Siva, 
maya extends her tentacles of delusion makingSiva within appear as the 
limited soul. In reality, He always remains infinite and full with the five 
qualities viz omnipotence, omniscience, completeness, omnipresence, 
limitation on eternity and 

One has to transcend m aya to understand and realize the Glory of Siva 
within. Because of the illusion caused by maya we tend to treat Him as 
different from us and continue to seek Him elsewhere, thereby wasting the 
most precious time in human life. When one is able to understand the effects 
of maya and isolate Her, Siva is revealed. This happens only due to the Grace 

of Sakti. This is the reason for saying that She alone can impart the 
knowledge of Siva, says Lalita Sahasranama 727. The seeker of Siva 
becomes Siva Himself after She imparts knowledge about Siva and She 
Herself reveals Siva to him. 

Dharana 73 

Every person will have some desire or other. The origin of all such desires is 
the sensory inputs to the mind. When eyes see an apple, it causes impression 
in the mind about the apple. Mind by default succumbs to the sensory inputs 
and the mind looks for an apple, causing a desire. When one’s intellect and 
will power are strong enough, he can overcome desires. This state is 
normally explained as ‘man in control of the mind’. In such a state the 
wisdom and willpower of man prevails. If a person does not have these two 
significant qualities, he succumbs to the pressures of the mind and this state 
is known as ‘mind in control of the man’. Having understood that desires 
originate from the mind, one has to control the mind by intellect and 
willpower. An idle mind always gives room for various types of desires and 
many such desires cannot be accomplished in a normal way of life. When 
unachieved desires become too potent, they afflict the quality of a person. 

According to this verse, desires are to be eliminated at the time of their 
germination in the mind. They should not be allowed to grow. Desires are the 
results of sensory inputs from the material world. In order to annihilate a 
sprouting desire, the mind is to be turned inwards, concentrating on the Self 
within. When this is practiced, sprouting desires will lose their strength and 
ultimately perish. Looking within is known as spirituality. Pursuing spiritual 
path has all the good qualities in shaping up a perfect personality. Such a 
person not only shines in the spiritual world, but also in the material world. 
He commands respect from the society and becomes one of the great 
achievers. 

Dharana 74 

This verse explains the benefits of practicing the principles laid down in the 
previous verse. When a person does not have desires or knowledge, what sort 
of a person he is? When a person is without desire, he has crossed the first 

step in spirituality with ease. But in addition to desire, the verse has also 
included knowledge. But knowledge in this verse refers to the knowledge of 
the material world. There are two types of knowledge. One is the knowledge 
about material world and the other is the knowledge about the Self. 
Knowledge about the material world is attained through sensory organs and 
experience. But the knowledge about the Self is difficult to attain and is 
generally taught through a Guru. Again, spiritual knowledge is not the 
religious knowledge, which is generally gained through various rituals. True 
spiritual knowledge is about the Self, which can be imparted only by a Guru 
who has already realized the Self. Though books and other materials can 
provide only the basic inputs, one to one interaction with a Guru alone can 
make one’s spiritual knowledge absolute. 

This verse says that without the desire as explained in the previous verse and 
without the knowledge of the material world as explained in this verse, one 
becomes the essence of the Self. He can with authority and confidence say 
that “I am Brahman” or “I am Siva”. This affirmation is possible for him as 
his individual consciousness, predominated by his ego, has merged into the 
Supreme 

Consciousness. During this merger, his mind, intellect, consciousness and 
ego shed their identities and become One with the Self. Shedding their 
identities happens before the merger and not during the merger. One’s 
consciousness has to be pure before merging with the Self. Practically 
speaking, this state was pre-existing in him and only now he has realised this 
truth and this is known as Self realization. 

Dharana 75 

What one has to do, if he could not control his mind in spite of his best 
efforts? Controlling the mind here means controlling his desires and material 
knowledge derived from sensory inputs. He has to fix his mind on uprising 
desire and the related knowledge, treating both of them as the Self. At the 
perfect point of treating them as the Self, he realizes the Self within. The 
emphasis of this verse is on the effectiveness of the awareness. 

Many spiritual aspirants are unable to succeed because of the ineffectiveness 
of their awareness. Awareness is also known as consciousness. When one 
practices fixing his awareness on a particular point, say an object or even a 

dot on a wall, at the point when his awareness becomes highly focused on 
that object or point, all other thought processes are totally annihilated and his 
entire awareness, also known as his consciousness is fixed only on the point 
of his concentration. Assume that point as the Self and realizing that point 
without distraction, (as all other thought processes are annihilated because of 
the intensity of the concentration) is known as Self-realization. 

This verse says that when one is unable to eliminate desires and material 
knowledge, concentrate on them instead and at the time of highest level of 
concentration, Self is realized. 

Dharana 76 

In this verse, Bhairava addresses Bhairavi as “Sivah priye” which means 
fond of Siva. Bhairavi (Sakti) is always fond of Bhairava (Siva) and they 
are not two different personalties. They are one and each one of them is 
inherent in the other. 

What is the cause of knowledge? It is nothing, says this verse. No knowledge 
has either a cause or a base. When there is no cause or base for knowledge, 
then it implies that the knowledge is deceptive (maya) in nature. It is 
deceptive because it is not real. Unless there is a cause, there cannot be any 
effect. Since there is no cause, this knowledge is useless. This knowledge is 
not spiritual knowledge. Spiritual knowledge is not deluded; it gives 
knowledge about the Reality. It alone leads to the Self. Spiritual knowledge 
has both cause and effect. Cause is the need to realize the Self (for cessation 
from transmigration) and the effect is the Self itself (goal of life). 

This verse says that one has to understand this point thoroughly and 
contemplate on this reality, and he then realizes the Self at the point of perfect 
contemplation. It is perfect contemplation because, the knowledge of “I” 
consciousness (individual self) is to be merged into “universal consciousness” 
which is also known as “Siva consciousness”. Unless this union between the 
individual self and the Universal Self is complete, Siva realization is not 
possible. The union of individual consciousness and Siva Consciousness is 
known as yoga. Yoga means union. 

Dharana 77 

There is no difference in the Self that is present in all the beings. Self is 
omnipresent. Only It’s outer covering in the form of gross bodies differ. The 
outer covering could be a plant, insect, animal or human. Only the gross 
bodies differ and not the souls within. The soul within is known as the 
essence as the other types of bodies are formed around this essence. This is 
called Consciousness, the Supreme Self. In order to attain this 
Consciousness, one has to focus his consciousness, instead of diversifying it. 
If one asks where to focus, this verse says just focus on any one thing and 
there Self is realized. 

This verse can be better explained through Siva Sitra (1.1) Caitanyamatma, = 

eTdiI dAr* 

Caitanya means Consciousness and dima refers to the Self. Caitanyam is 
derived from the word cetana (q 5). Both caitanya and cetana mean only 

consciousness. To be more precise, cetana 

is the conscious being (individual consciousness) and Caitanya is the 
Universal Consciousness. Caitanya =Siva + Sakti, while mere Cit or 
Consciousness is onlySiva asPrakasa or Self illuminating light. As Atmd has 
Power apart from Light (without power, It becomes inert), the word used is 
Caitanya (Siva and Sakti) and not Cit (Siva), in order to denote both Siva and 
Sakti and not Siva alone, who is referred as the Brahman in Advaitavedanta. 
Svatantrya is Gnanda Sakti’, the energy of bliss of Siva. Citsakti, the energy of 
Consciousness and dnanda Sakti, the energy of bliss ofSiva are inseparable In 
other words Siva and Sakti are inseparable. Cetana also means visible or 
conspicuous. The entire universe emerges (becoming visible or conspicuous) 
from Caitanya, which has two sides, one is gross and the other is subtle. 
Gross is made up of names and forms and the subtle is made up of 
antahkarana, the inner psychic apparatus, which comprises of mind, intellect 
and ego (according to advaita, consciousness forms a part of antahkarana). 
Gross forms give direct experience and the subtle forms give internal 

experience. This is how the universe appears. How is Caitanya related to 
Atma? The purest form of Caitanya is Atmd (Siva), the Self. 

Dharana 78 

When one is able to make his mind pure by practicing to look within, even if 
his mind is afflicted with lust, anger, greed, delusion, arrogance and jealousy, 
the different emotional states of the mind, he can disconnect his mind from 
these qualities. All the emotional states arise due to the afflicted mind; the 
mind gets afflicted because of some external factors. Factors could be an 
object or an action. Before the mind bursts out due to these afflictions, one 
has to look within, to find out the cause of these afflictions and stay put on 
the points of origin of the afflictions. This should be done before these 
adversities erupt in the forms words or actions. The point of origin is the one 
where sensory inputs are made in the mind. Once the inputs get embedded in 
the mind, it is difficult to remove them. One has to act before the impressions 
are formed. Mental impressions can cause irreparable damage to the 
character of a person. 

If one is able to look within at the times of turbulence in his mind, spiritual 
energy is generated and become more and more powerful and begins to 
pervade his mind, resulting in the annihilation of the causes of these 
emotional states. Depending upon the intensity and ability to look within, 
spiritual energy transforms into bliss, a state of inexplicable joy, when Siva is 
realized. 

Dharana 79 

If one contemplates the universe as if it is the work of a magician, or a piece 
of painting or a fugacious object, one experiences the Bliss. The work of a 
magician is illusionary and does not long last. In the same way, the universe 
and its objects are created by Siva, only to last for a short duration. A man 
lives in this world for a short duration and during his existence, he is afflicted 
with desires, attachments, pride, prejudice, etc without bothering to look at 
the Reality of Siva. Through this verse, Bhairava says that one should not 
waste this human birth, which itself is a gift by Him. The entire universe is 
only fugacious in nature and any thought contrary to this reality is only 

illusionary. When one understands through the requisite knowledge that the 

objective world, realised through his senses is not permanent, he realizes the 
Truth and as a result he feels the inner joy and happiness. This is the way to 

liberation. 

Dharana 80 

Bhairava explains to Bhairavi that one should not get attached to either 
pleasure or pain. There is midpoint between these two and one should try to 
know this midpoint. Pleasure and pain are the products of mind and its 
modifications, known as antahkarana (mind, intellect and ego). 

Mind is always susceptible to the inputs from sensory organs. Sensory organs 
provide inputs to the mind from the material world. If one sees an object it is 
only the mind that decides whether it is beautiful or not. What appears as 
beautiful to him may not be beautiful to another person. This is decided by 
one’s mind. All minds are not the same, as the mind is influenced by one’s 
intellect and the level of ego. When the ego is not powerful enough, it is 
better for realizing the universal brotherhood. Too much of ego makes a 
person to isolate himself from the reality, as his ego acts as a powerful barrier 
in realizing the Truth. Presence of powerful ego is self destructing even in 
material life. 

Life is guided not only by one’s own karmas, but also by the karmas of 
people around him. Karmas are self made through previous births. Happiness 
and sadness are part of life as no one does only good, throughout his life. 
When there is happiness, there is bound to be sadness. When food is 
consumed, the remains have to be excreted. It is a natural process. Therefore, 
in order to understand this reality, one should not become too much elated 
during his happier moments, as the sadder moments could be in the offing 
and vice versa. Life is like a wheel, causing ups and downs throughout. 
When one becomes too happy, his mind will not become refined to face 
adversities. On the contrary, if one lives at the midpoint between the two 
extremes, neither happiness nor sorrow will affect him too much. For such a 
person, emotional swings will never be there. If a person’s mind is not 

influenced by emotions, he can easily enter the state of Bliss, as he truly 
understands the Reality. 

Dharana 81 

Bhairava does not teach His Consort Bhairavi the normal course of yoga in 
Vijnhana Bhirava. It is the essence of all the teachings, as the teacher 1s the 
Supreme Brahman Siva and the student is not only His Consort, but also His 
independent Power, who alone can make one realize Siva for liberation. 
None of the Scriptures can be compared to Vijfiana Bhirava, as they are 
authored by human sages and saints. But Vijiiana Bhirava is authored by the 
Creator Himself out of His compassion to the humanity and His willingness 
to offer liberation. This is known as His Grace. 

One should not give importance to his body, as everybody is bound by size 
and shape. One can have only limited vision through his sensory organs, in 
this instant case, biological eyes. When one sees the world through his eyes, 
his realization is limited to the extent of his limited vision. Therefore, it is 
apparent that the limiting factor is one’s body and its associated sensory 
organs. Sensory organs, by default cause too many thought processes in the 
mind making the mind impure. If one frees himself from the factors of 
limitation (sensory organs), he can affirm that he is omnipresent. His 
individual consciousness becomes one with cosmic consciousness. His 
individual identity limited by his ego is destroyed and becomes one with 
vastness of the universe. When he affirms at this state that “I am 
everywhere’, he truly feels his presence everywhere. Affirmation is one of 
the important factors in Self-realization. Affirming with a crowded mind will 
not serve the purpose of affirmation. When affirmations are made, the mind 
should be pervaded only by that affirmation alone and this paves the way for 
Bliss and ultimate realization,as the emphasis on “I” gets dissolved and 
emphasis on “everywhere” becomes more resolute. 

There are two preconditions for realization. One is the purity of the mind, 
which is paramount. Another factor is universal love in its nascent form, love 
and compassion for others. Perfection in spirituality can easily be attained if 
these two are strictly adhered to. This can be practiced by making 

affirmations before commencing meditation. A perfect meditation is the one, 
where the mind becomes devoid of material thoughts and fully pervaded by 
love for others. Effect of such meditation will be inexplicable happiness and 
joy. This is the yardstick to measure one’s depth of meditation. 

Knowledge of a specific object is called special knowledge with reference to 
that particular object. 

Dharana 82 

This verse refers to the knowledge of a pot. A pot is realized as a pot because 
of two factors; one is the knowledge about the pot and two by using one’s 
consciousness or awareness. Here, knowledge about the pot is on limited 
plane, restricted to the pot and the one who looks at the pot. In other words, 
this knowledge is limited to the perceived object and the perceiver. The 
knowledge is limited because the perceiver’s knowledge is limited only to the 
extent of the pot. 

If the perceiver replaces the pot with that of the universe, his awareness on 
the pot becomes universal. His restricted consciousness now becomes 
unrestricted, as he switches his consciousness from a limited object to the 
vastness of the universe. As long as the aspirant restricts his awareness either 
to his own self or to any particular object or objects, his consciousness is 
restricted. Restricted consciousness means restricting his consciousness to 
certain chosen objects or persons. This leads to desires and attachments. On 
the contrary, if he fixes his consciousness on the vastness of the universe, he 
too becomes universal. When the same universe is perceived as Siva and 
Sakti, his consciousness becomes unrestricted and attains purity. Only the 
purity of consciousness can lead to Self-realization, as duality is dissolved 
during this practice. 

Dharana 83 

Perception is always related to the subject and the object, which in turn are 
interrelated. When there is an object, the process of understanding that object 
is the subject. When an object exists, subject also has to exist, as they are 

interrelated. In the case of the pot discussed above, pot is the object and its 
realization is the subject. General human tendency is to restrict this subject- 
object relationship to different types of objects. For example buying a home, 
a car, etc. wherein subject-object relationship is based on the objects such as 
a home or a car. 

But, a yogi thinks differently. He fixes his awareness on the subject and not on 
the object. He fixes his attention on the act of seeing not on the object that is 
seen. If he fixes his consciousness on the object, then his consciousness gets 
restricted by time and space, as every object is susceptible to modifications 
and ultimate destruction. But the subject always remains the same. As long as 
one stays in the material world, he sees different objects in his daily life, which 
is a natural phenomenon. But the yogi merely fixes his consciousness on the 
act of seeing, which is the subject. He becomes a witness only to act of seeing 
not getting himself involved with the objects in anyway. That is why he is able 
to consider the entire world as Siva and Sakti. For him, objects do not make 
any difference as he never fixes his awareness or consciousness on the objects, 
which alone leads to desires and attachments. As long as he remains as a 
witness to the act of perception, his consciousness is not bound by time and 
space. His consciousness becomes ultimate realization. universal, which leads 
to Bliss and 

Dharana 84 

This verse says that a physical body is not necessary for perfect meditation. 
In the dream state body is irrelevant, as the dream unfolds only in the arena 
of the mind. In the state of deep sleep, even the mind stops functioning. But 
in all the four states, consciousness prevails. In the deep sleep state, one’s 
consciousness prevails in association with the subtle body and in the fourth 
state of consciousness viz. turya, consciousness prevails along with the 
causal body. Irrespective of the nature of body, consciousness prevails 
perpetually. If the consciousness is not present, the very existence of a being 
is purposeless, which is medically known as the coma stage. 

If an aspirant looks at this consciousness not only from his own perspective, 
but also from others perspective, he enters the state of universal 
consciousness, the state of Bhairava. The practice is a simple contemplation. 

Look at the world from everybody’s point of view. In other words, one has to 
look at the world through the consciousness of others, including that of 
insects, birds and animals. This is all pervasive consciousness or the Supreme 
Consciousness of Bhairava. This is also known as omnipresence. Crossing all 
the barriers of limitations, such as time and space, leads to universal 
consciousness, which is also known as Bhairava Consciousness. He becomes 
Bhairava. 

Dharana 85 

Detach the mind from all the supports, both external and internal, that it 
enjoys and make it free of vikalpa-s (diversities). During this state of the 
mind, Bhairava is realized. Mind gets its afflictions both from external and 
internal sources. External afflictions are related to objects such as hearing 
sound, act of seeing, smelling, tasting, etc through the respective organs of 
perception such as ears, eyes, etc. Organs of perception always cause 
impressions on the mind making the mind impure and afflicted. As long as 
the organs of perceptions are active, this process cannot be stopped. These 
impressions do not simply lie dormant in the mind, but cause confusion 
leading to the generation of multiple thought processes. Thought processes in 
turn lead to desires, attachments, imagination and all sorts of dualities such as 
pleasure and pain and these are known as internal afflictions, as they function 
from within. The source of all internal afflictions is only the external 
afflictions. But for the organs of perception, both external and internal 
afflictions of the mind are not going to be there. 

The root cause of both these afflictions is the organs of perception. One 
should not fall victim to their ploy. The inherent nature of either the organs of 
perception or the mind cannot be modified, but it is for one’s willpower to 
overcome their ploy. By using one’s willpower, one can control the effects of 
organs of perception on the mind. One can still see, hear, smell and eat; but 
one should not get addicted to the effects seeing, hearing, smelling, eating 
and touching. It is only the addiction that causes desires and attachments. 
This is explained as the support to the mind, which is the cause for vikalpa-s. 
In a mind that is freed from both external and internal support, it becomes 
pure and serene, where Siva can be realized. As long as cerebrations remain 

in the mind He cannot be realized, as during cerebrations mind is pervaded 
by dualities. 

Dharana 86 

Siva is already present in all the beings and a man can know this Truth (the 
presence of Siva within) through his mind. Mind is His gift to mankind and 
hence it is said that only in human birth, one can attain liberation. A simple, 
yet efficacious affirmation, is adequate enough, to realize Him within. His 
true identity is concealed through the effect of maya. 

This verse uses three of His exclusive qualities. The verse says, “sarvajfiah 
sarvakarta ca vyapakah paramesvarah Hagl «:: Magi «19% ” which means 
Supreme Siva is omniscient,aua: uaR: 

omnipotent and omnipresent. Though these qualities are naturally present in 
all the human beings, these qualities are not realized due to the effects of 
maya. In order to overcome this delusion that has pervaded the mind as 
discussed in the previous verse, one has make an affirmation “I am Siva” (I 
am That or Aharn Brahmasmi or Sivoham). A truthful and powerful 
affirmation is the one which is made through a pure and un-afflicted mind as 
discussed in the previous verse. If this affirmation is repeatedly done, one 
day this affirmation becomes a reality and Bhairava is realized. 

Dharana 87 

Bhairava says to Bhairavi, “Just like waves arise from water, flames from fire 
and rays of light from the sun, different aspects of the universe arise from 
Me.” The entire Vijhanabhairava Tantra is in the form of conversation 
between Siva and Sakti. Waves are the inherent quality of water; flames and 
heat are the inherent quality of fire; and rays of light are inherent in sun. 
Waves cannot exist independently without water and they are inherent part of 
water. Similarly, the manifested world cannot exist without Siva. The source 
of entire creation is Siva. But for Him, the manifested universe that is visible 
to our eyes is not possible. This fact applies to both macrocosmic and 
microcosmic levels. Macrocosmic level is the objective world and 

microcosmic level is the human mind. The end result of contemplating this 
reality in association with the affirmation discussed in the previous verse 
leads to His realization within. 

Dharana 88 

When the body is continuously put into strenuous activities, the energy level 
of the body gets depleted, as a part of natural process, and the body is no 
longer able to move about and therefore, opts to rest and recoup the spent 
energy. During this recuperation process, the mind does not think about 
anything and becomes blank and in that state of mind, spiritual realization 
can take place. It is said that when yogis become tired, they resort to this 
meditation. During this process of recuperation of physical energy, if one 
makes effort to convert the surging energy into spiritual energy using one’s 
mind, in that spiritual energy Bhairava can be realized. The emphasis lies on 
effort of converting the surging energy to spiritual energy, which if done 
properly leads to the state of trance. 

When the body is stressed and tired, the mind also becomes fatigued and 
thoughtless, which is the right frame of the mind to contemplate Him within. 

Dharana 89 

This verse is in continuation of the previous verse. Because of the fatigued 
and thoughtless state of the mind, the mind becomes tranquil. Similarly on 
account of inability to understand a particular thing in its right perspective, 
the mind is overpowered by total confusion and as a result of which, the mind 
ceases to function. When a person is unable to take a decision on a particular 
matter, he repeatedly thinks about the possible right decision and as a result 
of which, the mind becomes over worked and ceases to function. It is like 
blowing up of a fuse. When the mind ceases to function, it becomes lucid and 
during this state of the mind, if one focuses his entire consciousness, 
Bhairava is realized. 

The central point of Bhairava realization is to fix one’s awareness which is 
called consciousness. During the active state of the mind, one is conscious of 
many things that he comes across. This is the state of diversified 

consciousness. His awareness at this state is diversified on many things and 
not focused. On the contrary, if one can focus his consciousness on Him, 

irrespective of his mental state, he will be able to realize Bhairava. Advaita 
explains this state as sthitaprajna, the one with a calm and composed mind. 

Dharana 90 

Siva tells Sakti that He is going to reveal about the state of kaivalya. If the 
eyes are fixed without blinking, the state of kaivalya will arise. When one 
closes his ears, organs of procreation and excretion and meditates on the 
inner sound, he enters into the state of eternity of the Brahman. 

This skill (dharana) consists of two verses. Both these skills deal with 
absolute awareness and hence clubbed together. In the first one, one has to 
focus his eyes within without blinking. While doing so, external objects get 
vanished and his consciousness gets fixed within, thereby disconnecting the 
external world from his consciousness and this consciousness is pure 
consciousness which is prerequisite to His realization. This can be compared 
to our sleep patterns. There are two types of sleep patterns. The first one is 
REM (Rapid Eye Movement) where eyes move rapidly during sleep and this 
sleep is not the state of deep sleep. This is the state where we have our 
dreams. Therefore, when the eyeballs move, the level of sleep is not deep. 
The other one is NREM (Non Rapid Eye Movement), during which state one 
enters the state deep sleep. Therefore, the movement of eye balls is directly 
related to the level of one’s mental state and hence Siva says that eyes should 
not be blinked. Because of his pure consciousness, he enters the state of 
kaivalya, which is comparable to the term moksa in advaita philosophy. This 
is an advanced version of Bhairvai mudrd explained in the verse 77. 

During the advanced state of a good meditation, the meditator gets 
disconnected from the material world and his consciousness gets fixed on the 
Self within. No meditation will be effective, unless one learns to look within, 
either at the heart chakra or at the third eye chakra. 

The next verse also dwells on the same level of concentration by looking 
within and the only change is that instead of closing the eyes, one has to 
close organs of hearings, procreation and excretion. While doing so, one has 

to look for the divine sound within. The verse says that such a sound is 
without vowels and consonants. Since there cannot be a word or sound 
without vowels or consonants, the sound referred in this verse is the point 
from which vowels and consonants originate and this point is known as 
bindu, which is a dot, the true form of Siva, from which alone everything else 
originated. Therefore, this verse implies that by doing so, one can connect his 
consciousness with Siva and become one with Him. One has to look for this 
bindu in the heart chakra. 

While ears can be closed with the help of fingers, lowers organs can be 
closed by mula bandha, vajroli mudra (sahajoli mudra for women) and asvini 
mudra. Certain asana-s and bandhas are different for women. These mudras 
do a lot of good, if practiced daily under the able guidance of a yoga master. 
Mudras and bhandas are significantly different from normal yogic asana-s 
and hence, choosing the right master is important. One to one interaction is 
necessary while learningmudras and asana-s, as in the case of mantra 
initiation. 

Dharana 91 

By standing near a deep well (with a proper hold) one has to look into the 
depth of the well. After a few moments, one will feel a sort of giddiness and 
during this state, one becomes free of other thoughts and when other thoughts 
are eradicated, Siva is realized. 

This verse should not be taken on the face value, because if one stands near a 
deep well he could fall into the well. The subtle conveyance is about the 
importance of focusing one’s thoughts on a particular object or place. While 
fixing one’s eyes on a particular object, naturally other thought processes are 
dissolved. When one concentrates within, depending upon the intensity of the 
concentration, all other thoughts automatically get dissolved. This is like a 
lamp dispelling darkness in a room. 

Dharana 92 

This is a wonderful verse. The verse says that irrespective of where the mind 
goes, either externally or internally, there is Siva, underlining the 
omnipresence of Siva. This is meant for those who are not able to focus their 
minds in anyway. Some people sit for meditation, let us say for 10 minutes or 
20 minutes, or so. During the entire period of meditation, their thoughts never 
get focussed even for a few seconds. Though they are perfect in postures, 
breath control, bandhas, mudra-s, etc, still they cannot control the mind. 
Since Siva is so compassionate, He says, “Don’t bother about controlling 
your mind. I am omnipresent and I am available to you all the time. 
Wherever your mind flutters, there I am! But remember to think about me” 
(used, only to explain). 

Controlling the mind can be perfected only by practice. Short duration and 
increased frequency of meditation always helps. 

Dharana 93 

This verse takes forward the concept of the previous verse. Whatever is seen 
or observed through sensory organs is nothing but the universal 
consciousness, the exclusive quality ofSiva. When He pervades throughout 
the universe, obviously whatever the objects that we see is also Siva. The 
inputs from the sensory organs to the mind are only about Him. This is the 
situation where all dualities are dissolved, as what one sees is only Siva and 
nothing else. 

A mirror is taken as an example here. A mirror simply reflects the objects 
before it and there is no difference between the objects reflected by the 
mirror and the objects themselves. Siva is the mirror and the objects that get 
reflected in the mirror, is the universe. Therefore, the universe is within Him 
and is projected outside (manifested) as the objective universe. In reality, 
there is no difference between the objects and the objects projected in the 
mirror. This further goes to prove the omnipresence nature of Siva. 

Whatever one perceives therefore is nothing but Siva and this assertion leads 
to the state of Bhairva. 

Dharana 94 

Bhairava explains that He can be realized in petty things that we do in our 
normal life, once again proving His true omnipresence. Sneezing is an 
involuntary act. During sneezing, an act that lasts for a few seconds, we 
never think about anything else except involving ourselves in the act of 
sneezing. Similarly, while we are terribly hungry, our entire concentration 
goes around satiating our hunger and other thought processes get annihilated. 
Another instance cited in this verse is our curiosity. When some strange 
things happen around us, we are curious to know about those things and 
during which time, we forget about our eternal worries (worries are eternal in 
a human life as long as ego continues). When other thought processes are not 
present, due to His omnipresent nature, He is realized. As long as other 
thought processes are present, the mind becomes impure and as a result, 
one’s consciousness remains at the mundane level. When the mind becomes 
free of thought processes, mind attains purity and as a result, his 
consciousness also attains purity. Consciousness cannot be focussed unless 
the mind is purified. Hence it is said that one can attain liberation only 
through the mind. 

One has to recollect some incident from his past experience or recollect an 
object and stay attuned with that experience or object firmly, detaching his 
body from the mind. During this time, he loses his body consciousness as he 
is totally occupied with a particular past experience. For example, one can 
think about school days, school buildings, etc. When the mind gets focussed 
on the school, the vision of the past unfolds, such as his teachers, friends, 
class rooms, etc. Though the body remains here, he totally forgets the 
existence of his body. With no bodily experience and with his consciousness 
fixed in a past experience, which also fades away after a few moments, flow 
of supreme Consciousness takes place, where Siva is realized. 

This a typical example of out of body experience. Though it is not mentioned 
in the verse, it can be said that instead of associating with some past 
experience, one can contemplate on his or her favourite divine form and when 

the contemplation is perfect, one can experience (it is only an experience) the 
presence of the deity in flesh and blood. This contemplation is only for the 
beginners. When contemplation is perfect and absolute, body consciousness 
would be lost completely and when the body consciousness is lost, “I” 
consciousness gets annihilated and when “I consciousness is annihilated, 
there is no need for the mind to get influenced by ego. 

Dharana 95 

When an object is seen, the sight of the object is formed in the mind. Apart 
from the sight, the mind also acquires knowledge about the object. For 
example, if one sees an apple, sensory organ eyes pass on the impressions 
about the apple to the mind and also provides knowledge about the apple, 
like its taste, colour of its pericarp, pulp, etc. 

Now, one has to practice like this. Now that the sight and knowledge about 
the apple have caused impressions in the mind, one has to learn to remove 
these impressions in the mind. The more one wants to remove the 
impressions the mind, by default it will not remove those impressions that 
easily. On the contrary, mind will be bombarded with more powerful 
thoughts. This is going to be a tough practice, but repeated practice 
ultimately leads to perfection. When the impressions about the apple are 
completely removed, what remains in the mind is void. Since there is no 
impression in the mind whatsoever, he enters the state of blissfulness. 

This verse also speaks about Bhairavi mudra. The message conveyed is the 
importance of looking within. Unless one attains complete perfection to look 
within, irrespective of opening or closing his eyes, no significant progress 
can be achieved in any type of meditation. 

Dharana 96 

It is only Sakti, the independent power of Siva, known as His svatantrya Sakti 
alone can reveal the essential nature of Siva. That is why Sakti worship has 
become very popular and widely followed. There are several tantras that 
provide ways and means to attain Her and many of these tantras are told to 
Sakti by Siva, including this Vijianabhirava Tantra. Siva taught all the sacred 

tantras to Her by remaining as Her GURU. She is worshipped through these 
tantras, in the way Siva taught. But unfortunately, His teachings have 
undergone several modifications for convenience, yielding no results today. 
Her divine vision is directly related to the depth of one’s love for Her. Mere 
devotion is not enough to have Her darsan (ocular perception). There is a 
stage beyond extreme devotion which is known as Love for Her. When 
devotion metamorphoses into love, there She is realized and when She is 
realized, She reveals the ever effulgent Siva and here ends one’s spiritual 
journey and the purpose of this life is achieved. 

Lalita Sahasranama 727 says that She alone can impart the knowledge of 
Siva and the interpretation of this nama is given below: 

Siva-jiana-pradayinig WgId-“:lol-oig weloft 

She imparts the knowledge of Siva, the Ultimate. Siva jfiana (knowledge) 
means the knowledge of the 

Brahman, which is also known as the Supreme knowledge. To know Siva, 
one should first know His Sakti, who alone is capable of leading a person to 
the Brahman or Siva. Ramayana says ‘wind can be realized through 
movements, fire can be realised through heat and Siva can be realized only 
through Sakt?.’ It can also be said that Siva is the source of knowledge for 
Her. 

It is said Sarh kararn caitanyam which means that Siva is both jfiana and 
kriya. He is the sovereign, pure free will in knowledge and action. Based 
upon this principle, Siva Siitra-s opens by saying caitanyamatma. Caitanyam 
means consciousness of the highest purity and knowledge. There is no 
difference between Brahman and the highest form ofconsciousness. But how 
Sakti alone is capable of unravelling Siva? This is answered by Siva Siitra 
(1.6) again which says that by meditating on Sakti, the universe disappears as 
a separate entity thereby unveiling Self illuminating Siva. The process of 
such happening is described in Spanda Karika (1.8) (another treatise of 
Kashmiri Saivism) which says ‘the empirical individual cannot ward off the 
urge of desires. But entering the energetic circle of the Self (Siva), he 

becomes equal to that Self.’ The seeker of Siva becomes Siva himself. This is 
known as Siva jfiana and She imparts this kind of Supreme knowledge. 

It is also said that Siva cannot be attained without first realising Sakti. She 
alone can lead one to Siva. Siva is inaccessible directly. Unless She chooses 
to impart the required Supreme knowledge, none can realise Siva. Hence, 
She is called Siva- jfiana-pradayini. 

Dharana 97 

When a person contemplates on a particular object with absolute awareness, 
other impressions in the mind are annihilated making the mind fully occupied 
with that particular object. During this state, one experiences inexplicable 
happiness. At the time of activation of this happiness, even that object 
disappears leading to absolute purity of the mind and there exists only a void 
in his mind where Sakti and Siva are realized. 

The emphasis of this verse is on the purity of the mind, which alone leads to 
realization. This is further explained through the next verse. 

Dharana 98 

Purity or impurity arises only through status of the mind. Either purity or 
impurity has nothing to do with the gross body, but is related directly to the 
subtle body viz. the mind and the emerging thought processes. When one 
thinks good, all bad impressions are relegated and when one thinks bad, all 
good thoughts are relegated. Bad thoughts are several times powerful than 
good thoughts and once evil thoughts get embedded in the subconscious 
mind, it is almost not possible to remove them. Hence it is said that one has 
to keep a good company. Spiritual discourses and soul stirring music vastly 
help in preventing the mind from wavering. Thought processes are generated 
in the mind only due to the wandering of the mind and this happens when the 
mind is either idle or not effectively put into use. 

As far as this verse is concerned, it says that purity or impurity does not 
matter as long as the mind is perpetually fixed on Siva Consciousness. This is 
the state where all dualities are annihilated and when dualities are 

annihilated, there remains only Siva. “I’’ consciousness is dissolved andSiva 
Consciousness alone prevails in this state. 

This concept is further explained in the next verse. 

Dharana 99 

Siva prevails everywhere as He is omnipresent and even a spiritual novice 
says “I’’, he knowingly and unknowingly means only Siva. If this 
understanding is put into practice, he attains the state of non dualism where 
omnipresence Siva is realized. 

The verse says that one need not spend precious time in performing rituals 
and sacrifices. Who is being sought after through these rituals is omnipresent. 
Though everyone knows this reality, many fail to convince themselves and 
go forward in seeking Him in a fixed place. This lack of conviction is called 
ignorance or avidya in spiritual parlance. Instead of wasting time on invoking 
Him through rituals, one has to repeatedly affirm His omnipresence and these 
affirmations bear fruit one day and at that moment, He is realized. 

This reality is carried forward in the next verse. 

Dharana 100 

Dualism leads nowhere and there is no logical conclusion in dualism. It is 
like two rails of a railway track, one being jivatman and another being 
Paramatman, which never meet. Rituals and sacrifices come under dualism 
and they lead only to obscurity. 

On the other hand, dualism leads to liberation, where one becomes Bhairava 
Himself. If a person considers and treats both his enemies and friends with 
the same mental attitude, his mind experiences happiness as duality is 
dissolved. 

In one’s life honour and dishonour are bound to happen. One cannot be 
happy always and similarly one cannot be sad all the time. Dualities always 
work in cycles, with ups and downs. If one has trained his mind to treat both 
honour and dishonour; success and defeat or grace and disgrace with the 

same mentality, he always remains in the state of happiness, an exclusive 
quality of Bhairava and ultimately he becomes Bhairava Himself (i.e. he 
attains liberation). 

The idea behind this verse is that Bhairava is free of dualities and when one 
wants to become Bhairava, he has to have the same qualities as that of 
Bhairava. 

Dharana 101 

Likes and dislikes, attachment and hatred are emotional dualities. Dualities in 
any form will not transform even the best of devotees as Bhairava. There is a 
central point or a dot between the two opposites placed at the extreme ends. 
One has to concentrate and fix his awareness on this bindu point, where 
Bhairava prevails. Concentrating on this bindu point is known as 
brahmabhava (absorption into Bhairava). 

Dharana 102 

When one contemplates all those that cannot be seen, realized, beyond 
human perception, void, etc, at the time of intense contemplation, Bhairava is 
realized. Any object beyond human perception such as void is devoid of 
tattva-s. Every perceivable object is bound by tattva-s (principles) and when 
an object or a being is bound by tattva, it or he has a shape and form. When 
one looks beyond shapes and forms, an exclusive attribute of Bhairava, at 
that time, He is realized. At the time of realization, the ever effulgent 
Consciousness is realized in the form of flashes of Light. One can reach this 
state only if the mind as a whole is made dysfunctional. 

This can be easily practiced in daily life. Sit quietly, forget about breath, etc. 
Contemplate on some familiar object. After a few minutes of intent 
contemplation, the object will disappear and you enter into a state of quick 
and successive trances and during this state, the mind becomes thoughtless 
and becomes dysfunctional. With persistent practice, one can see light in 
different shapes and forms such as stars, moon, etc. 

Dharana 103 

One should fix his consciousness on the space, for example the vastness of 
the sky which appears as boundless and without support. When his 
concentration becomes intent and perfect, he gets absorbed into the purity 
and vastness of the sky. During this state, his mind becomes totally 
dysfunctional and he becomes one with the vastness of the sky, without 
boundaries, without impurities, etc and this is realization. 

Realization is a simple process, though appearing to be complicated. 
Realization has to happen only through the mind and therefore, mind should 
be made pure by purging all thoughts related to the material world. This is 
possible if one fixes his awareness on a boundless and pure object such as 
sky or even some form of his or her favourite god or goddess. When the 
awareness becomes intent, he or she gets absorbed into that form of god or 
vastness of the sky and during this state he or she does not even realize the 
existence of his/her mind. This is a simple contemplation, and if practiced, 
one can reach a reasonably perfect state in less than a month. 

Dharana 104 

The mind by nature is bound to move towards various objects (extravert). For 
example, when an apple is placed on a table the mind moves towards the 
apple, causing various agitations in the mind. The awareness about the apple 
gets intensified with every passing minute. Instead of intensifying the 
awareness on apple, one has to move his awareness away from the apple, the 
moment he sees the apple. When the attention is moved away from the apple, 
for a few moments, before the mind could get fixed on something else, the 
mind becomes without support and remains completely purified. Purification 
of the mind is possible only if there is no agitation in the mind. 

In God realization, the mind acts in three different ways. 
1 . The mind is controlled with the support of breathing, postures, mudras, 
etc. 

2. The second state, the mind is cleansed with the help of the mind and will 
power. During this state, the mind is fully pervaded by pure consciousness, 
which is also known as Bhairava. It is like cleaning the flour. When the dirt 

is removed, purity of the flour is seen. When the impressions of the mind are 
removed, purity of the mind is revealed, which is nothing but Bhairava 
Himself. 

3. The third state, the mind becomes totally non-existent or dysfunctional and 
this is the stage where one experiences trance. There is no question of purity 
or impurity here. 

Ultimately, God realization totally depends upon one’s ability to manoeuvre 
his mind. 

Dharana 105 

Bhairava means fear, terror, formidable, etc. Bhairava is explained in Siva 
Sutra (1.5) which says that 

Bhairava is realized as the effulgent Light in a fraction of a second. There are 
many interpretations for 

Bhairava. There are two types of explanations. One is Para Bhairava which 
refers to Paramasiva, the 

Supreme. Another is Apara Bhairava which means Siddhas, who always stay 
connected with the Supreme Self. Bhairava also means the consolidation of 
all the energies of the universe; it is the essence of all energies and later 
manifest as different energies such as air, water, beings, etc. 

Bhairava is not only prakasa but also vimarsa. This verse says that repeatedly 
reciting “Bhairava” as a mantra japa, he becomes one with Him. 

Mantra japas are used only to control the mind. Now it has become a habit 
to recite mantras mechanically without even contemplating the form given 
in the dhyana verses. Unless the reciter, the object of recitation (Bhairava 
here) and the mantra (recitation of Bhairava) are unified, nothing can be 
achieved by reciting any mantras. 

Dharana 106 

When affirmations are made, such as “I am That” or “I am Siva” or “I am 
Sakti’, etc during such affirmations, the mind listens to those powerful 
affirmations. Generally affirmations work effectively when someone affirms 

about what cannot be perceived by him. If affirmation is made about a known 
object, then the mind becomes confused and agitated because its inability to 
concentrate on the object as a whole. It is said, “To believe in the things you 
can see and touch is not belief at all; but to believe in the unseen is a triumph 
and a blessing (Abraham Lincoln).” This triumph and blessing is nothing but 
Siva realization. 

Such affirmation works directly on the mind and purges all other impurities 
that got deposited in the mind due to the effects of worldly life. When the 
mind is cleansed, the affirmations work on the mind by fully pervading it. 
The pervasion becomes absolute when the affirmation also becomes absolute. 
This is where realisation happens. Realization could happen in a fraction of 
second or could last long as a trance, and during this trance, realization 
happens. 

Dharana 107 

Sometimes, mere recitation of a name (or mantra japa) may not work. Even if 
one recites mantra “Bhairava” repeatedly, he may not be able to fix his 
consciousness on Bhairava. For those, this verse describes the qualities of 
Bhairava. Contemplate on the qualities of Bhairava such as “eternal, 
omnipresent, without support and all pervading” and mediate on these 
qualities put together. With the intensity of meditation, these qualities are 
realized and as these qualities belong exclusively to Bhairava, ultimately 
Bhairava is realized. Realization is always achieved through a series of 
processes. 

Dharana 108 

The universe is like a magic show without any reality. It is illusory and 
deceptive. It is like a dream, without any purpose. If one understands this 
reality and mediates on this reality, he enters blissful state. Realization happens 
only at the end of blissful state. 

Dharana 109 

There cannot be any activity in the changeless Self, which does not undergo 
any modifications. When there is no activity or modifications, how can there 

be knowledge about that changeless Self? The verse says, “atmano 

99 

NIrVikarasya gran goag ware a 

which means that Self does not undergo changes; it always remains eternal 
and immutable. Therefore, when we say knowledge, it refers only to the 
knowledge of the material world. When we call the knowledge about the 
material world as knowledge, then what is the knowledge about the inner 
Self. It is no knowledge at all or the negation of knowledge about the 
material world. When the soul is not outside, then it is inside. There are only 
two sides to our body. One is outside our body and another is inside of our 
body. When the soul is not outside, it has to be inside. What is outside can be 
seen and understood and what is within is to be visualized and realized. 
Former leads to transmigration and the latter leads to liberation. 

When knowledge about the external world and the actions that take place are 
unreal (the reality is deluded bymaya), then it is void. Where there is no 
action in the Self, obviously it has to be void as nothing is there to change in 
void. Whatever the changes that we see belong to the changes that happen on 
and for the empirical individual and not on the Self. By contemplating on this 
reality, one enters the state of bliss. 

Dharana 110 

“T am free both from bondage and liberation” says the liberated one. Bondage 
and liberation are dualities, hence limited by time and space. Only the 
ignorant are bound by dualities and consequent delusion. They consider the 
image of the sun in water as the real sun, not knowing that what they are 
seeing is only a reflection. Bondage and reflection arise due to the wild 
imagination of buddhi or intellect. In reality, Pure Consciousness is the Self, 
which alone is Self-illuminating and which alone is real. All that we see is 

only the Self, the all pervasive, which is wrongly perceived as the material 
world. But He alone exists everywhere in different shapes and forms. 

Dharana 111 

When we live in the material world, we experience pleasure and pain due to 
sensory organs. Sensory organs gather material inputs from the material 
world and pass on to the mind which becomes susceptible to the dualities of 
pleasure and pain. As long as we exist, we will continue to have pleasure and 
pain. One has to understand that pleasure and pain is a duality concealing the 
true nature of the Self and he has to set all types of dualities aside to remain 
with the Self, all the time. 

Dharana 112 

Whatever we see is revealed to us by the knowledge of the Self which is 
known as jana, which 1s different from the mundane knowledge discussed 
earlier. This jnana is very simple. The principle of this jfana has three aspects 
in realizing the Self. One is the knower, who wants to know the Self; the 
second is the object of knowing, the Self; and the third is jana, through 
which the knower, the object of knowing and the path of knowing should 
become homogenous. When the knower and the known are the same Self, 
there is no question of inherent impurity in anything. All are pure by nature 
and it is only the mind that bounds a person with dualities and when he is 
bound by dualities, he experiences impurities such as pleasure and pain. His 
pure inherent nature gets bound by time and space. Knowing this process is 
realization. 

CONCLUDING VERSES 
( Verses 138 to 163) 

“O! My dear one! When the mind, individual consciousness, vital force 
(pranasakti) and the bound self (ego) get dissolved, the state of Bhairava 
described so far appears” concludes Bhairava. Bhairava uses the word cetana 
to mean conscious individual, the one who perceives and he cannot perceive 
without cetana, which is unconditioned form of consciousness in its 
functional state. 

The verse explains these four as manasa m,cetana,Sakti and atman (mind, 
consciousness, pranic energy and soul). These four are called catustaya (four 
fold). If one wants to know the state of 

Bhairava, one has to leave the catustaya aside. By ignoring mind, awareness, 
breathing and ego (individual and bound soul is considered as ego), one can 
realize the true state of Bhairava. This is the ultimate stage one can reach by 
attaining spiritual knowledge, the higher level of knowledge as opposed to the 
worldly knowledge. Call the sun as sun is worldly knowledge and calling the 
sun as the Self is the spiritual knowledge. It is the perception that matters. 
This stage can be attained only in the state of annihilated mind. As long as the 
mind is active, the rest three also become active, thereby preventing 
realization. 

Vijfianabhairava has 112 dharana-s and the 112"dharana was disclosed by 
Bhairava to Bhairavi in the 138" verse. In all, Vijianabhairava Tantra has 
163 verses. The last 25 verses are in the form of concluding remarks and they 
are summarised here. 

Bhairava speaks to Bhairavi now. “Bhairavi! I have explained the112 ways to 
quieten the mind and if any one of them is followed, he becomes a wise man. 
By sincerely practicing any one of these 112 dharana-s, the practitioner 
becomes Bhairava himself. He can attain anything in the world. His (the 
yogi, who has attained perfection) blessings become true and if he curses that 
also will become true. His words become too powerful. (Such realized 
persons generally do not curse. But sometimes, if they are infuriated, they do 
curse and their curse become a reality. This is like hitting a ball on a wall that 
comes back immediately) My dear Wife! They are freed from old age and 
death. They are endowed with siddhis (astamasiddhi-s as described by sage 
Patafijali. These siddhis cannot be attained and can only be conferred through 
the Grace of Siva and Sakti). Such a person is loved and adored by all yogis 
and becomes their chief. He gets liberated in this birth itself; however he 
continues to perform his duties like any other person. However, they are not 
affected by karma. Whatever actions they perform will not have karmic 
impressions. (This stage is called jtvanmukta. They do not declare 
themselves as jivanmukta-s. They do teach disciples, not in groups but 
through one to one interaction. It is very important to understand that the path 

of spiritual realization cannot be done in groups. Unless there is one to one 
interaction between the Guru and the disciple, nothing can be learnt usefully. 
These realized persons never teach in groups and always choose their 
disciples. There should be no monetary considerations while teaching 
spirituality.)” 

Now Bhairavi, the Divine Mother seeks some clarifications from Bhairava, 
the Supreme Lord. “If this is the essence of reality (understanding and 
realising the Self within and getting liberated in this birth itself, etc), then 
what is the purpose of recitations (hymns, japas, etc) and in whose favour 
such recitations (mantra japas) are done. Who will be worshipped for 
gratifications and who will make these worships? And in whose favour the 
oblations are made (referring to ritual fire worships)?” The doubt arises in the 
Supreme Goddess (only for the purpose of others knowing) about ritualistic 
worships such as mantra japas and fire rituals. The question is about the 
performance of rituals when liberation is available through the mind. When 
liberation is available for free, why should one invest his time and money on 
materialistic worships? This is the question that lingers in our minds. 

Supreme Lord Bhairava answers this most pertinent questions raised by the 
Supreme Goddess on our behalf. “O! Beautifully eyed Goddess! Rituals are 
meant for beginners (beginners of spiritual pursuit who continue to be 
ritualistic) and these worships are gross in nature (worshipping different 
forms of gods and goddesses). Contemplation of the Highest Reality is the 
true nature of japa (mundane recitation of mantras). Perpetual contemplation 
of the Self within is true japa. (Counting and reciting certain mantras at the 
prescribed timings is not japa. It is only the initial process in spiritual 
realization. From this, one has to move quickly to the next stage. 
Contemplating on the Supreme Self within, known as I consciousness, where 
all other thought processes are annihilated and individual consciousness is 
fixed on Him is the next stage. This is the state where consciousness becomes 
without support, either from sensory organs or from antahkarana. Awareness 
about multiple objects while contemplating on the Supreme Self is known as 
relational consciousness, where awareness is fragmented and fixed on more 
than one object during contemplation. This relational contemplation is to be 
totally avoided.) The real sound of mantra should come from within (anahata 

sound — the sound of OM). One should meditate with absolute awareness, 
without any distractions on the formless Supreme Self, which is without any 
support (everything rests on Him and He never rests on anyone). 
Meditation is not a cognitive process wherein a form of god is visualized 
with face, hands, legs, etc (with a form). Worship does not mean external 
worship of offering flowers and eateries. True worship is meditating with a 
pure mind without any thought processes on the Supreme Void and during 
a perfect contemplation like this, one gets absorbed into the Supreme Self 
(the dissolution of mind here is known as nirvikalpa samadhi). If one 
practices with firm faith, any one of the 112 methods of meditation, he 
grows day by day in spiritual life until he reaches that stage of spiritual 
satisfaction. A true oblation is where, all the elements and senses (organs 
of senses and organs of actions) along with the mind are offered into the 
fire of Supreme Consciousness (connecting all the senses and antahkarana 
into Bhairava, the Supeme). The ladle used in these oblations is ones 
individual consciousness. visualised 

(Individual consciousness becomes Supreme Consciousness only when 
individual consciousness is aligned with Supreme Consciousness through a 
purified mind.) 

“O! Parvati ! Supreme Goddess! (He addresses Her as Parama Isani) The true 
sacrifice is characterised by Bliss (the state of inexplicable and extreme state 
of happiness) and during the state of Bliss, all his sins are destroyed. (Sins 
get destroyed only during perfect contemplation where the contemplator 
himself becomes Bhairava and not otherwise.) Physical visits to holy places 
are not holy pilgrimages. Absorption into the Sakti of Rudra is the greatest 
contemplation. There cannot be any other worship other than this because, 
who is to be satisfied? (There is none to be satisfied in shapes and forms as 
God does not exist in shapes and forms. The subtle question is “When I am 
there within you, whom else you are going to satisfy?”’) There cannot be any 
worship in non-dualism (since Self and self are the same and this knowledge 
translates into mental affirmation “I am Siva”). True sacred bath is the 
absorption into one’s own Self, which is full of independence, bliss and 
consciousness (can be compared to satcitananda). When there is non-duality, 
where is the question of worship with offerings such as incense sticks, 

flowers, food offerings, etc? When the worshipper and the worshipped are 
the same what is the need for these offerings? (Any form of external 
worships is not approved by Bhairava.) 

“Inhalation and exhalation happen on its own, thereby awakening the 
Kundalini energy, which goes up the spine and She is to be worshiped in 
susumna, the central canal of the spinal cord. This is true ksetra (pilgrimage 
centre). She is the experience that happens in the mind and She is also 
beyond human experience (immanent and transcendent). (Dualism gradually 
gets dissolved along with the gaining of potency by Kundalini. It is like the 
growth of a girl to womanhood. Kundalini does not become potent in the 
initial stages, but attains potency over a period of time. The increase in 
potency is directly related to the depth of contemplation, nature of life, food 
habits and above all practice.) 

The one who perpetually stays connected with Parasakti, the Goddess 
Kundalini (Parasakti, the 

Goddess Kundalini are the same) enters the state of supreme bliss, and in this 
state he attains Bhairava. (Siva can never be attained directly. It is only through 
Parasakti, the Supreme Siva can be attained. Once Siva is attained, there is 
nothing left for him and he is never born again. The knowledge about Siva is 
sovereign in nature and none can impart that knowledge except Parasakti and 
thus, She becomes his Guru. In reality there is nothing in that Supreme 
Knowledge and this is known as void. When one becomes Siva due to 
realization, he does nothing and becomes like a moving object, unconcerned 
and unattached with the material world.) In a day (day and night consisting of 
24 hours), a person inhales and exhales 21,600 times and this is the true mantra 
(ha at the time inhalation and sa at the time of exhalation. The continuous 
concentration on these subtle sounds gives rise to the inherent mantra ‘soham’ 
and this is known as a-japa, which means no japa. When the japa is happening 
inwardly and perpetually, where is the necessity of other mantra japas? 21600 
breaths are meant for normal human beings. If one attempts to reduce this 
number— by slow breathing and by holding the breath both internally and 
externally— it not only increases the life span, but also helps in concentration 
during meditative sessions.) 

“O! My dear Bhairavi! The Supreme Goddess! I have explained to you 
(upper case y is not used because She is now addressed by Siva) the most 
precious and sacred teaching which leads to immortal state (liberation) and 
this should not be revealed to someone who is not worthy of this sacred 
teaching. This should be taught only through a Guru (not guru). One should 
learn from this teaching that all material things are impermanent and this 
sacred and secretive knowleldge alone is permanent. One can even choose to 
die but the quest for final liberation should never be given up.” Finally 
Bhairavi thanks Bhairava, “O! Supreme Lord Sankara! I fully understand and 
I am now satisfied (satisfaction arises due to the impartation of Pure 
Knowledge). This day I have understood the essence of Rudrayamala Tantra 
(This is a Tantric Scripture which contains the highest level of teachings of 
Siva about the union of Siva and Sakti) and about the core of all types of 
energies.” 

After having said this, Sakti embraces Siva. This embrace is to signify that 
those who have read, understand and practice Vijhanabhairava become one 
with Siva. 

ok ok ok ok 

festa ea II 

[|vijhana bhairaval| 

oft <eqara | 

Sri devyuvaca | 

ad ta AAT Ud Saga ATH | 
Raventeu aricaefaarret: il 2 Il 

Srutam deva maya sarvam rudrayamalasambhavam | 
trikabhedamaSesena saratsaravibhagasSah || 1 || 

seme a Pigat A Gara: TAR 
feb SU arddt ca eq! 2 II 
adyapi na nivrtto me samSayah paramesvara | 
kim rupam tattvato deva Sabdarasikalamayam || 2 || 

feb aT aT Hed AAT | 
fafarttefsra ar feb ar sifhaaTAAII 3 I 
kim va navatmabhedena bhairave bhairavakrtau | 
trisirobhedabhinnam va kim va Saktitrayatmakam || 3 || 

TrefegHe aft fer aesrelf referer: | 
Ushleodtech AT fh aT gfe UHI ¥ II 

nadabindumayam vapi kim candrardhanirodhikah | 
cakrarudhamanackam va kim va Saktisvarupakam || 4 || 

UTE: Aha AGRA AT YA: | 
URraT ate Taare ae fewer it I 
paraparayah sakalamaparayasca va punah | 
paraya yadi tadvatsyatparatvam tad virudhyate || 5 || 

a fe auifasies tenes at ada 
Uxed fseheted st Geheted F AG AAI Gl 
na hi varnavibhedena dehabhedena va bhavet| 
paratvam niskalatvena sakalatve na tad bhavet|| 6 || 

Ware pe A are Pete fee Aer 

prasadam kuru me natha nihSesam cinddhi samsayam | 

zg Jara | 

bhairava uvaca | 

SY AY AA YS AAAI SAF MA 91 
sadhu sadhu tvaya prstam tantrasaram idam priye || 7 || 

Teas we aut pereana St 
Ofecnfscdehel SU Fay WeAN SAA CI 
guhantyatamam bhadre tathapi kathayami te | 
yatkiNcitsakalam rupam bhairavasya prakirtitam || 8 || 

de HARA che fasts Mehotlerad | 
ATEREMa da We RATA 8 II 
tad asarataya devi vijneyam Sakrajalavat| 
mayasvapnopamam caiva gandharvanagarabhramam || 9 || 

MTeay wrdgagiat farsa tsar | 
chact afttar Yar facrctteat HATA! 20 II 
dhyanartham bhrantabuddhinam kriyadambaravartinam | 
kevalam varnitam pumsam vikalpanihatatmanam || 10 || 

Tea AF AAT MTeaeTi Ve FT AA: | 
a aren far tal FF waka I-82 II 

tattvato na navatmasau Sabdarasir na bhairavah | 
na casau trisira devo na ca Saktitrayatmakah || 11 || 

arafeegrat arity 4 aesrelfretferenr: | 
q Uppal FT Whe STH: Il 82 II 

nadabindumayo vapi na candrardhanirodhikah | 
na cakrakramasambhinno na ca Saktisvartpakah || 12 || 

auggadtat fe vat seth steenr: | 
ATgulachdcad UGTA SaledAil 23 1 
aprabuddhamatinam hi eta balavibhisikah | 
matrmodakavatsarvam pravrttyartham udahrtam || 13 || 

fecepretcheralyehT eaite afa tot | 

AUCEAMRITAT AHA UAT: Il BY Il 
dikkalakalanonmukta desoddeSavisesint | 
vyapadestumaSakyasav akathya paramarthatah || 14 || 

HATA MeT ferent HART | 
Tae VRATART At ALATA: | BS II 

antahsvanubhavananda vikalponmuktagocara | 
yavastha bharitakara bhairavi bhairavatmanah || 15 || 

dq agg aeddl aa fase feryyRory 
vdfad we aed &: Uoe: HY Geaafa 2 ell 
tad vapus tattvato jheyam vimalam viSvapuranam | 
evamvidhe pare tattve kah pujyah kasca trpyati || 16 || 

Vdfaen Azaey aan UA | 
Ol Ue UeeSUyy UR edt WeAfaril 9 II 
evamvidha bhairavasya yavastha parigiyate | 
sa para pararupena para devi prakirtita || 17 || 

arfcharfhadh age ae: Adar fra: | 
AA AGAMA CATURT AFH: UTA: IN CII 
SaktiSaktimator yadvad abhedah sarvada sthitah | 
atas taddharmadharmitvatpara Saktih paratmanah || 18 || 

7 aex alfeant fhe aafafearr fasted | 
hdet TAA ATA URAISAA Wart ll 88 II 
na vahner dahika Saktir vyatirikta vibhavyate | 
kevalam jhanasattayam prarambho'yam praveSane || 19 || 

meray sats ASAT | 
deret frat eareatet AesA SeheAd | 20 11 
saktyavasthapravistasya nirvibhagena bhavana | 
tadasau Sivarup! syatSaivi mukham ihocyate || 20 || 

Beureticat CTORT FRU ARH 
mad fefesmmic aga aera fea: HA 28 1 

yathalokena dipasya kiranair bhaskarasya Ca | 
jhayate digvibhagadi tadvac caktya Sivah priye || 21 || 

oft Ceqara | 

Sri devyuvaca | 

caed ACTS HUAHPA yO | 
feregrprea gear wT AaTeeaStay Il 22 MI 
devadeva trisulanka kapalakrtabhusana | 
digdesakalasunya ca vyapadeSavivarjita || 22 || 

MAM AAT ALA TTA | 
he GUAR He aA UT cf HAW Ade 
aa wea oe aft aura we ARTI 231 

yavastha bharitakara bhairavasyopalabhyate | 
kair upayair mukham tasya para devi katham bhavet| 
yatha samyag aham vedmi tatha me bruhi bhairava || 23 || 

Jara | 

bhairava uvaca | 

wed Urol yet stat feraafcar aeteaee | 
suraeaqsert woe AAT PAA: Hv II 

urdhve prano hyadho jivo visargatma paroccaret| 
utpattidvitayasthane bharanad bharita sthitih || 24 || 

Avdlseay see a faaeparttadarc| 
Fear Arar, Axles AeA FG: | AG II 
maruto'ntar bahir vapi viyadyugmanivartanat| 
bhairavya bhairavasyettham bhairavi vyajyatevapuh || 25 || 

J aot a fake ofthe Aer fread | 
Pfiecuaa wet aa ALawSTAT I All 

nirvikalpataya madhye taya bhairavarupata || 26 || 

spire ear arf ofa ar wer aa 
dard MRAATATS QTERAT Bea: WATT I 219 1 
kumbhita recita vapi purita va yada bhavet| 
tadante Santanamasau Saktya Santah prakaSate || 27 || 

PFet feeb UT ATT RAI SAAT AHA | 
Farathat feucenrt sored ARES: Il 22 
amulatkiranabhasam suksmatsuksmataratmikam | 
cintayettam dvisatkante Syamyantim bhairavodayah || 28 || 

Seeded afsaqury Ulich HATSHAA| 
aed Hfag Bradae, Het Aelea: Il 3311 

udgaccantim taditrupam praticakram kramatkramam | 
urdhvam mustitrayam yavattavad ante mahodayah || 29 || 

Pg etch PRN GraMeevreda | 
Ce eAURIA Yaka Hada: fa: Il 30 1 

kramadvadasakam samyag dvadasaksarabheditam | 
sthulasuksmaparasthitya muktva muktvantatah Sivah || 30 || 

qaqa qatat wget yao gar 
Pifdcnet AA: eat Gated GAT: Il 32 I 

tayapuryasu murdhantam bhanktva bhruksepasetuna | 
nirvikalpam manah krtva sarvordhve sarvagodgamah || 31 || 

faraugiar Fade HUSct: TST | 

AAA STae WT Weal Sed AFL 321 
Sikhipaksais citrarupair mandalaih Sunyapancakam | 
dhyayato'nuttare Sunye praveso hrdaye bhavet|| 32 || 

Sqalq Haig Ua party falar 
Qrd ed Ue UTA tag HAT ARH|TI! 33 I 
IdrSena kramenaiva yatra kutrapi cintana | 
sunye kudye pare patre svayam lina varaprada || 33 || 

HUTATAR Fat ART FS Alfetarerea: | 
PHU HAT cleus] STAAL II 3¥ Il 
kapalantar mano nyasya tisthan militalocanah | 
kramena manaso dardhyatlaksayetlasyam uttamam || 34 || 

AAAs! Hee PASTAS TAT | 
TATA CAT AAT ta: WAIT I 34 1 
madhyanadi madhyasamstha bisasutrabharupaya | 
dhyatantarvyomaya devya taya devah prakaSate || 35 || 

PSA Ware ARaArd | 
g® feral halel cit dred UAT PAS: I 3 GI 
kararuddhadrgastrena bhrubhedad dvararodhanat| 
drste bindau kramal line tanmadhye parama sthitih || 36 || 

OTAa: aaa ena cletchrsplr | 
fare feared gad Aad Araat Aa: Il 301 
dhamantahksobhasambhutasuksmagnitilakakrtim | 
bindum sikhante hrdaye layante dhyayato layah || 37 || 

sled UAH suerte GRagd | 
greqselfor FOTIA: UA Seer Teaa i 32 Il 

anahate patrakarne'bhagnaSabde sariddrute | 
Sabdabrahmani nisnatah param brahmadhigaccati || 38 || 

WOTaeaPeMctedied ITAA CL | 
QT UAT MERA TATA UI ARTI 33 11 
pranavadisamuccaratplutante Sunyabhavanat| 
sunyaya paraya Saktya SUnyatam eti bhairavii || 39 || 

Tea Healy quiey Yate aquraad | 
IAAT MAMA SA IAT: YAM AAI Yo ll 
yasya kasyapi varnasya purvantav anubhavayet| 
sunyaya Sunyabhuto'sau Sunyakarah puman bhavet|| 40 || 

qaariearareay chy Hr: | 
Sada: Weaed ULAR AIAN ¥ 2 II 
tantryadivadyasabdesu dirghesu kramasamsthiteh | 
ananyacetah pratyante paravyomavapur bhavet|| 411 || 

fqusHAeT GAA Veraviwat JI 
ad-gfegaterd: Matera wee Fala: il ¥2 1 
pindamantrasya sarvasya sthulavarnakramena tu | 
ardhendubindunadantah Sunyoccarad bhavec civah || 42 || 

Proce Udicach Brae sade feat | 
Pfdcaaan ae faery Wadd il ¥3 Il 
nijadehe sarvadikkam yugapad bhavayed viyat| 
nirvikalpamanas tasya viyatsarvam pravartate || 43 || 

FES Fas BITS Ma a: | 
QRRAUATAT MAT AAT ASTM YY II 
prstaSUnyam mulasunyam yugapad bhavayec ca yah | 
Sariranirapeksinya Saktya SUnyamana bhavet|| 44 || 

FET FAS CL ATA RTA 
aru ffdacdcar Pfdcrcuteae ad: Il ¥4 Il 

prstaSUnyam mulasunyam hrccunyam bhavayetsthiram | 
yugapan nirvikalpatvan nirvikalpodayas tatah || 45 || 

Tet Bada ators faTaa| 
Pifdercd fafdercat fdas uyre ll ¥ & II 
tanudese Sunyataiva ksanamatram vibhavayet| 
nirvikalpam nirvikalpo nirvikalpasvarupabhak || 46 || 
ad tend aed ferearcdt HAterct | 
faaTadaae AA ATSAT AT FART AFI Yo II 

sarvam dehagatam dravyam viyadvyaptam mrgeksane | 
vibhavayettatas tasya bhavana sa sthira bhavet|| 47 || 

tern cafaurg fafa fafe-adai 
a fefoue, seat ART Ca HAAHMT AAAI ¥ CII 
dehantare tvagvibhagam bhittibhutam vicintayet| 
na kifcid antare tasya dhyayann adhyeyabhag bhavetl|| 48 || 

eerrehiat Pretaret: UTS AT: | 
ada: FAT OS AAPAATATLI! ¥3 Il 
hrdyakase nilinaksah padmasamputamadhyagah | 
ananyacetah subhage param saubhagyamapnuyat|| 49 || 

add: TIM Fleet Fatal | 
GOTGR Gd Aracaeay Wadd il 4o Il 

sarvatah svaSarirasya dvadaSante manolayat| 
drdhabuddher drdhibhutam tattvalaksyam pravartate || 50 || 

Oa aU Ga aA Glad FA: fA 
Ufdarot afturgde detarod fede AAT 42 II 
yatha tatha yatra tatra dvadasante manah ksipet|| 
pratiksanam ksinavrtter vailaksanyam dinair bhavet|| 51 || 

AIA Hleadale StU LqHA YR 
weey fafaaae sed MAMAS Tal AIT I 4? I 

kalagnina kalapadad utthitena svakam puram | 
plustam vicintayed ante Santabhasas tada bhavet|| 52 || 

Var Ve SMTeae aref eatcar feed: | 
ATI: GS: GRATE: UAT ALI 43 Il 
evam eva jagatsarvam dagdham dhyatva vikalpatah | 
ananyacetasah pumsah pumbhavah paramo bhavetl|| 53 || 

wade OMTal ahd Gergen aI 
axa aria Frere eatcdied Asa TTI GY II 
svadehe jagato vapi suksmasuksmatarani ca | 
tattvani yani nilayam dhyatvante vyajyate para || 54 || 

fot a geet xifth earcar GTeariree | 
Olde ead AA Ach: MATA STATAATLI 44 II 
pinam ca durbalam Saktim dhyatva dvadasagocare | 
pravisya hrdaye dhyayan muktah svatantryamapnuyat|| 55 || 

yateaieetyr feleaachAatts RATA 
Qo qeATI Brae Het AANAA: I 4 EI 

bhuvanadhvadirupena cintayetkramaso'khilam | 
sthulasuksmaparasthitya yavad ante manolayah || 56 || 

wey aay fayey wsedy qed: | 
Hequihaa ard We Aca ASteas: Il GV II 
asya sarvasya viSvasya paryantesu samantatah | 
adhvaprakriyaya tattvam Saivam dhyatva mahodayah || 57 || 

faery va Aerefa grag fafaeada 
aad Ff Fal cist AAS AeA AISA &C II 
visvam etan mahadevi Sunyabhutam vicintayet| 
tatraiva ca mano Iinam tatas tallayabhajanam || 58 || 

Paes sey fie aera fafaac 
Tees AeA TAT Tea AAA AIT I 4S I 

ghatadibhajane drstim bhittis tyaktva viniksipet| 
tallayam tatksanad gatva tallayattanmayo bhavet|| 59 || 

AgamMRPneest ff ARfada 
fact are are gaferor: weal &o Il 
nirvrksagiribhittyadidese drstim viniksipet| 
viline manase bhave vrttiksinah prajayate || 60 || 

SAAR AAA AW Arca AeA BATAA| 
Qed T Go Geka AeA ATA WAI &3 Il 
ubhayor bhavayor jnane dhyatva madhyam samasrayet| 
yugapac ca dvayam tyaktva madhye tattvam prakaSate || 61 || 

aid ach feel fa Aa Adie Tet | 
der a-aeaures facmacafa ATA II &2 I 

bhave tyakte niruddha cin naiva bhavantaram vrajet| 
tada tanmadhyabhavena vikasatyati bhavana || 62 || 

ud ¢é fara fe ore at oh aTaaa | 
aos faifdcncds AAT OATES: I &3 Il 
sarvam deham cinmayam hi jagad va paribhavayet| 
yugapan nirvikalpena manasa paramodayah || 63 || 

AYGI ASUS AraL AT SRL Ste: | 
ant GacafaaAaqeaayoAI &Y I 

vayudvayasya sanghattad antar va bahir antatah | 
yog! samatvavijhanasamudgamanabhajanam || 64 || 

Ud Sead aT Cae Ae 
graced wea AIT && Il 

sarvam jagatsvadeham va svanandabharitam smaret| 
yugapatsvamrtenaiva paranandamayo bhavet|| 65 || 

herd VAN Gel Va Aer | 
aaele Aereat OF aed WHITH &EII 

kuhanena prayogena sadya eva mrgeksane | 
samudeti mahanando yena tattvam prakaSate || 66 || 

Udatalaelt UOT eAaT Tt: | 
focicreasicdcrana vad UA AAI! Gl 
sarvasrotonibandhena pranasaktyordhvaya Sanaih | 
pipllasparsavelayam prathate paramam sukham || 67 || 

aex fasen aet g fad qe feta 

haet AAW aT GRA FST I GCI 
vahner visasya madhye tu cittam sukhamayam ksipet| 
kevalam vayupurnam va smaranandena yujyate || 68 || 

afhaqAa Ss eee MATA MAA AHA | 
UGH TRAIT ARS TATRA, SAT H&S II 
Saktisangamasanksubdhasaktyavesavasanikam | 
yatsukham brahmatattvasya tatsukham svakyam ucyate || 69 || 

eau le: SIT ARTA: | 
MATA SH Caf wae AACA: |I 190 II 

lehanamanthanakotaih strisukhasya bharatsmrteh | 
Saktyabhave'pi devesi bhaved anandasamplavah || 70 || 

ae Fela utd ge at sed Feet 
HASH Sed AA Teese, HAT ATI 9 Il 
anande mahati prapte drste va bandhave cirat| 
anandam udgatam dhyatva tallayas tanmana bhavet|| 71 || 

OO Mepdleaa ala spATOT | 
Wade, ARATACAT ASA At Adal 92 II 
jagdhipanakrtollasarasanandavijrmbhanat| 
bhavayed bharitavastham mahanandas tato bhavet|| 72 || 

rare favarearersqa etch alc: | 
OAS AAAs AARSSe, TAIT II 03 II 

12 

gitadivisayasvadasamasaukhyaikatatmanah | 
yoginas tanmayatvena manortdhes tadatmata || 73 || 

Oa OA AAS, GRY AAS AA aR 
da da Weed GAA Il © II 

yatra yatra manas tustir manas tatraiva dharayet| 
tatra tatra paranandasvarupam sampravartate || 74 || 

SAMTATS PSTa OTE TEPER | 
STAT ATA TAT TT Set Hep I 94 II 
anagatayam nidrayam pranaste bahyagocare | 
savastha manasa gamya para devi prakaSate || 75 || 

AUT FACTUAL SATeHIRt eettep | 
GfOe Fraga aatd CaTHSUA WATT Il 9 & I 
tejasa suryadipader akaSe Sabalikrte | 
drstir nivesya tatraiva svatmarupam prakaSate || 76 || 

aXSthvay Hla Axear cesar | 
aaat gfScnret F URranita: WTR I o'9 II 
karankinya krodhanaya bhairavya lelihanaya | 
khecarya drstikale ca paravaptih prakasate || 77 || 

Wale fthutchs serorel Persea | 
Pere aaa gat Ue Gort Alay AFI 92 II 
mrdvasane sphijaikena hastapadau nirasrayam | 
nidhaya tatprasangena para pUrna matir bhavet|| 78 || 

sufedsaet GRA ag Heaelepfordt | 
HAAN HA: Hd MAA ACAI 8 I 

upaviSyasane samyag baht krtvardhakufcitau | 
kaksavyomni manah kurvan Samamayati tallayat|| 79 || 

QASUy way eee sfe ares a 
afer Perene Aa: eal fed Asta Co II 

sthularupasya bhavasya stabdham drstim nipatya ca | 
acirena niradharam manah krtva Sivam vrajet|| 80 || 

qegre Srrkare aed fata daar 
Blea AAG HA da: Wed Weta il C2 Il 
madhyajihve spharitasye madhye niksipya cetanam | 
hoccaram manasa kurvams tatah Sante praliyate || 81 || 

are srt fercar frerene feast 
waded Fata fat erorrcefforarat Hac C2 II 
asane Sayane sthitva niradharam vibhavayan | 
svadeham manasi ksine ksanatksinasayo bhavetl|| 82 || 

Ue FARA A AT SSAA! 
Waited AMS Ure the ecearsaTYaTeL I C3 1 

calasane sthitasyatha Sanair va dehacalanat| 
praSante manase bhave devi divyaughamapnuyat|| 83 || 

arena PAH Ua Heal aff fA 
MAT Aeaoe aa AR AGL SATYAM C¥ II 
akasam vimalam pasyan krtva drstim nirantaram | 
stabdhatma tatksanad devi bhairavam vapur apnuyat|| 84 || 

od ated faacady Aeacds Maal | 
aad Aaa Aaa SATA C4 I 
linam murdhni viyatsarvam bhairavatvena bhavayet| 
tatsarvam bhairavakaratejastattvam samaviset|| 85 || 

ferfsasl std Scena Serene TA: YA: | 
fart Het SO AAAI CII 
kifcij jAatam dvaitadayi bahyalokas tamah punah | 
visvadi bhairavam rupam jhatvanantaprakasabhrt|| 86 || 

var Ud Sfianai purge Fe 
AAA Uda SU Ad wa Vesa | Csi 

evam eva durnisayam krsnapaksagame ciram | 
taimiram bhavayan rupam bhairavam rupam esyati || 87 || 

vay va fratearat At qos: | 
Ware Fed SUA HTgay aHat Aral CCI 
evam eva nimilyadau netre krsnabhamagratah | 
prasarya bhairavam rupam bhavayams tanmayo bhavet|| 88 || 

ae peasy Areas aT Ptr: | 
UfaeeaSs et AAA Wen | C8 I 
yasya kasyendriyasyapi vyaghatac ca nirodhatah | 
pravistasyadvaye Sunye tatraivatma prakaSate || 89 || 

afecufeent U Haak sat Aer! 
sefe af Gear AMT: GA So II 
abindumavisargam ca akaram japato mahan | 
udeti devi sahasa jnhanaughah paramesvarah || 90 || 

auhea afentea Pranic AM He 
Prreneo fads wygle Te] SATA 82 Il 
varnasya savisargasya visargantam citim kuru | 
niradharena cittena sprsed brahma sanatanam || 91 || 

COMTAR CATH cara fete sarge | 
Prersrar fete: aifeh: Tae |QhAAT|d Il 2 I 
vyomakaram svamatmanam dhyayed digbhir anavrtam | 
nirasraya citih Saktih svarupam darSayettada || 92 || 

ferfoae, ag faftrenct cleoreeanttar ad: | 
aad dat Gara Fed Ae AA: Il 83 Il 
kifcid angam vibhidyadau tiksnasucyadina tatah | 
tatraiva cetanam yuktva bhairave nirmala gatih || 93 || 

ferdtelra-apfe Ana FATA TEA She | 
felcpeurara ares fenced Sfserat Aarcil Sy Il 

cittadyantahkrtir nasti mamantar bhavayed iti | 

15 

vikalpanamabhavena vikalpair ujjhito bhavet|| 94 || 

Arar fealtett ATA chalet: chert FAA 
SoG Gea HAA A BAL ASTI BI 
maya vimohini nama kalayah kalanam sthitam | 
ityadidharmam tattvanam kalayan na prthag bhavetl|| 95 || 

afidtent aycraactery a4 Ae 
Ud Ud Aga ade arg cacti 8 
jhagiticcam samutpannamavalokya Samam nayet| 
yata eva samudbhiuta tatas tatraiva Ilyate || 96 || 

Gal HAS Alea AA AT HEL Tansy J 
Adds AMMA Aes THAT AFL V9 I 
yada mamecca notpanna jnanam va kas tadasmi vai | 
tattvato'‘ham tathabhttas tallinas tanmana bhavet|| 97 || 

SHA BA oid fad Frat! 
MAG GUA TAA AAT FATS MAA 3C II 
iccayamathava jnane jate cittam nivesayet| 
atmabuddhyananyacetas tatas tattvarthadarsanam || 98 || 
Pa ado a Perey, VATA | 
add: PUPA tae Vara fa: Pa S31 

nirnimittam bhavej jhanam niradharam bhramatmakam | 
tattvatah kasyacin naitad evambhavi Sivah priye || 99 || 

gat adeay Asst af saa 
Wag THA GAA Aaa AGG GA: Il Zoo Il 
ciddharma sarvadehesu viseso nasti kutracit| 
ataSca tanmayam sarvam bhavayan bhavajij janah || 100 || 

HAH ae ASA ATTA | 
Seg MRA a Heal PaaAARIA | 308 I 

kamakrodhalobhamohamadamatsaryagocare | 
buddhim nistimitam krtva tattattvamavasisyate || 101 || 

soos faa aed at frarpHtac 
WAG A Mad: AAA ULI Y FAlEA: | oR 
indrajalamayam viSvam vyastam va citrakarmavat| 
bhramad va dhyayatah sarvam pasyataSca sukhodgamah || 102 || 

a fad Pfade gd 4 gel ar feed 
Fee aaa AeA feb aeaH Aer Il 303 II 
na cittam niksiped duhkhe na sukhe va pariksipet| 
bhairavi jhayatam madhye kim tattvamavasisyate || 103 || 

faera Putéeei adareife arae 
goa AAT Geal aafaoar Get Addl ox I 
vihaya nijadehastham sarvatrasmiti bhavayan | 
drdhena manasa drstya nanyeksinya sukhi bhavet|| 104 || 

Uclel Ge F faasy Seal AT AAA | 
aa adi STH Aaa Sf AAT: Il YOK 
ghatadau yac ca vijnanam iccadyam va mamantare | 
naiva sarvagatam jatam bhavayan iti sarvagah || 105 || 

Teienafarea: aaa aderear | 
alta ¢ faststshee Grae Aaa 80 & Il 
grahyagrahakasamvittih samanya sarvadehinam | 
yoginam tu viSeso'sti sambandhe savadhanata || 106 || 

wae saarhksit dfarayqarad | 
aden TARY Baa ATT FEAR ASTI Yor II 
svavad anyaSarire'pi samvittimanubhavayet| 
apeksam svaSarirasya tyaktva vyap! dinair bhavet|| 107 || 

PRTG AA: peal face a feleperaal | 
aelHuRaT Hed Fal ATAPAT Il 307 II 

niradharam manah krtva vikalpan na vikalpayet| 
tadatmaparamatmatve bhairavo mrgalocane || 108 || 

da: Wiel FT ATT: ULAR: | 
a varé aera sia areata flat Adil 2081 
sarvajnah sarvakarta ca vyapakah paramesvarah | 
sa evaham Saivadharma iti dardhyac civo bhavet|| 109 || 

TAAGTHAA TSX SATA ASAT: WHT Xa: | 
AAa Aeqetar fayqusrat fayfean: i % gol 
jalasyevormayo vahner jvalabhangyah prabha raveh | 
mamaiva bhairavasyaita visvabhangyo vibheditah || 110 || 

YA Ura WRT ARAH, Ale UTAATL| 
entaaifeferAul Uet Fouad AMT! 222 Il 

bhrantva bhrantva Sarirena tvaritam bhuvi patanat| 
ksobhaSaktiviramena para sanjayate dasa || 111 || 

AIRE AYATS MEAISAMAPY FeAAIA AT | 
oTahaara ated Ad TY: | 3221 
adharesv athava'saktya'jhanac cittalayena va | 
jatasaktisamavesaksobhante bhairavam vapuh || 112 || 

Saray SHH fe guy GR] aerRASA| 
haes Tad Pelt AAA: TATA: I 8 8 3 I 
sampradayam imam devi Srnu samyag vadamyaham | 
kaivalyam jayate sadyo netrayoh stabdhamatrayoh || 113 || 

usald afar: heat atitar ava a1 
srepdedt ware fate Te] PATA 8 2 ¥ II 
sankocam karnayoh krtva hyadhodvare tathaiva ca | 
anackamahalam dhyayan vised brahma sanatanam || 114 || 

puilech Ferid fercatate feterorrel | 
aftcoad: Geb Gee Faas: BHAI 884 

kupadike mahagarte sthitvopari nirtksanat| 
avikalpamateh samyak sadyas cittalayah sphutam || 115 || 

aa GA Hal Unf Ae} aATKaARs iA ATI 
da aa fara ATU Healers UTA I 8 2 EI 
yatra yatra mano yati bahye vabhyantare'pi va | 
tatra tatra Sivavastha vyapakatvatkva yasyati || 116 || 

OF UMaAOT das asad feat: 
dee THA card facta ARATHATII 2 21911 
yatra yatraksamargena caitanyam vyajyate vibhoh | 
tasya tanmatradharmitvac cillayad bharitatmata || 117 || 

edad We atch TER AT WIG S| 
pdectyeled sea SAMI 8 II 

ksutadyante bhaye Soke gahvare va ranad drute | 
kutuhaleksudhadyante brahmasattamay! dasa || 118 || 

aegy Harty ge aah Hae aot 
AI Pea Heal WAR WY: I 888i 
vastusu smaryamanesu drste deSe manas tyajet| 
svaSariram niradharam krtva prasarati prabhuh || 119 || 

aaa aegh Rarer ek aff Radda 
asl a fedafed efa garerat Ada 8 20 
kvacid vastuni vinyasya Sanair drstim nivartayet| 
taj jhanam cittasahitam devi SUnyalayo bhavet||120 || 

Waele fares areal sad Ale: | 
OT afeh: wast Pa HAMA Aa: Wa I 322 I 

bhaktyudrekad viraktasya yadrsi jayate matih | 
sa Saktih Sankari nityam bhavayettam tatah Sivah || 121 || 

aedeae dea AAAETY TAT | 
aL Ud HAT care fafeatsh wareafet i 32211 

vastvantare vedyamane sarvavastusu Sunyata | 
tam eva manasa dhyatva vidito'pi prasamyati || 122 || 

ferfotroaty aT Bet Wifes: BT Bee: ayaa | 
4 Ufa aye Ta Pfdenca: Get waa 32311 
kificijjhair ya smrta Suddhih sa Suddhih SambhudarSane | 
na Sucir hyaSucis tasman nirvikalpah sukht bhavet|| 123 || 

ada Fat Aa: AAAs arith Ta: | 
AT deufdechor Utsedtergar Aa: il 82¥ II 

sarvatra bhairavo bhavah samanyesv api gocarah | 
na ca tadvyatirektena paro'stityadvaya gatih || 124 || 

aa: wat 7 Ast a Bal Arash: II 
Te: URGUicafata atest Get AIA 824M 

samah Satrau ca mitre ca Samo manavamanayoh || 
brahmanah paripUrnatvatiti jAatva sukht bhavet|| 125 || 

J Buy Madera + Ty Haar fer 
aTeutatyct Het sey Waa 82 I 

na dvesam bhavayetkvapi na ragam bhavayetkvacit| 
ragadvesavinirmuktau madhye brahma prasarpati || 126 || 

ae adel Ue HM] GL TS Ue AMT | 
aad ARaH MT Tart SHAAN: Il 3201 
yad avedyam yad agrahyam yac cunyam yad abhavagam | 
tatsarvam bhairavam bhavyam tadante bodhasambhavah || 127 || 

fret Peis et earch peratfostd | 
STS Ha: Hear FrercHrai AATFARlAI 32 I 
nitye niraSraye SUnye vyapake kalanojjhite | 
bahyakase manah krtva nirakaSam samaviSet|| 128 || 

OA OA Fat Oil Gada Aca | 
GRasIMARIA PARA Tat AFA 82 

20 

yatra yatra mano yati tattattenaiva tatksanam | 
parityajyanavasthitya nistarangas tato bhavet|| 129 || 

WaT Ad cated Bdal arent s feet | 
Sha Avaeeey Gadd rear FAA: 1 330 1 
bhaya sarvam ravayati sarvado vyapakokhile | 
iti bhairavaSabdasya santatoccaranac civah || 130 || 

we Fay sare ulus: | 
Pee Hat if AGUA SAT 232 Il 

aham mamedam ityadi pratipattiprasangatah | 
niradhare mano yati taddhyanapreranac camt || 1371 || 

Raat ag Pret crocnen enter: | 
Tear] WA aUt ATA HATA SAP: Il 332 
nityo vibhur niradharo vyapakascakhiladhipah | 
sabdan pratiksanam dhyayan krtartho'rthanurupatah || 132 || 

aH SKaTIAA Se GAAS | 
feb aa Soe Sie leurs TH Avid il 333 
atattvam indrajalabham idam sarvamavasthitam | 
kim tattvam indrajalasya iti dardhyac camam vrajet|| 133 || 

scat Pda Fq aH aa a a fhe 
MAGA HSA St: BIA $e GATLI 23¥ Il 
atmano nirvikarasya kva jnanam kva ca va kriya | 
jhanayatta bahirbhava atah sunyam idam jagat|| 134 || 

44 ae J ate 4 alaetar faster: | 
Oldferay SAH Feex Tet Sq fata: Il 234i 
na me bandho na mokso me bhitasyaita vibhisikah | 
pratibimbam idam buddher jalesv iva vivasvatah || 135 || 

Shedghtch Ud Pae:aea saa | 
Saieael GIST TTA: TATA aA 234 

21 

indriyadvarakam sarvam sukhaduhkhadisangamam | 
itindriyani santyajya svasthah svatmani vartate || 136 || 

MAW ch Te AAOTCAT WehT RTCA: | 
Ube Vata taeda 2a faarerd i 830 11 
jnanaprakasakam sarvam sarvenatma prakasakah | 
ekam ekasvabhavatvatjhanam jneyam vibhavyate || 137 || 

AMS Gaal ihe BHT Aft TEA 
gar ford ufaitor tat te ARE AG: Il 83 
manasam cetana Saktir atma ceti catustayam | 
yada priye pariksinam tada tad bhairavam vapuh || 138 || 

PRAHA MAT MAA Sch GAA: | 
glamataeh ef Gol Aca AMAL GA: | 3381 
nistarangopadesanam satam uktam samasatah | 
dvadasabhyadhikam devi yaj jhatva jAanavij janah || 139 || 
aa dehdh Gol stad Ad: MAGA | 
aa elf HAL MMUTTSHIE: Il 8YO II 

atra caikatame yukto jayate bhairavah svayam | 
vaca karoti karmani Sapanugrahakarakah || 140 || 

SRTARATAL Ue ats forarferpornteara: | 
asa frat ef adtercenrfera: i 2¥ 8 Il 
ajaramaratam eti so'nimadigunanvitah | 
yogininam priyo devi sarvamelapakadhipah || 141 || 

otea aft feacniset pda sift 4 fercad 

jivann api vimukto'sau kurvann api na lipyate | 

sf} edt Sara 

Sri devi uvaca | 

22 

se Ofe agy ta UAT ARAL B¥2I 

idam yadi vapur deva parayasca mahesvara || 142 || 

VIHA TA cht TAY ch: | 
eared al Here youd Hy Jef 8¥3 Il 

evamuktavyavasthayam japyate ko japasca kah | 
dhyayate ko mahanatha pUjyate kasca trpyati || 143 || 

Bad HW aT Slat UT: HeI a feb HUAI 
huyate kasya va homo yagah kasya ca kim katham | 

aft Aa Jared 

Sri bhairava uvaca | 

UGTA Uishar STEN Leis Vs ATTA g¥¥ II 

esatra prakriya bahya sthulesv eva mrgeksane || 144 || 

Wot Ya: US Ard ATT ATA FS aT 
OU: AISA qa ATat AAT GTA SST: Il BYE II 
bhuyo bhuyah pare bhave bhavana bhavyate hi ya | 
japah so'tra svayam nado mantratma japya Idrsah || 145 || 

ear f@ faggen afex Perper Persrat 
Trt ehkraqaSeMleneyll Yell 
dhyanam hi niscala buddhir nirakara nirasraya | 
na tu dhyanam Sariraksimukhahastadikalpana || 146 || 
Oot ATA 4 Gaal aT fa: fea ger 
Pifdercd Aereatty UT Osi Slaxlel AA: Il YY 

puja nama na puspadyair ya matih kriyate drdha | 
nirvikalpe mahavyomni sa puja hyadaral layah || 147 || 

atadafhed atedeld feare fer! 
URATEHIRAT TA FCA AA AGA BY II 

23 

atraikatamayuktisthe yotpadyeta dinad dinam | 
bharitakarata satra trptir atyantapurnata || 148 || 

Feared sel Ferafawarecha | 
Bad AAT Gel F SAL AAAI YS II 
mahasunyalaye vahnau bhutaksavisayadikam | 
huyate manasa sardham sa homas cetanasruca || 149 || 

OMTSa UA GPL HA-eeraTTT | 
SOOT ATAU AOTC UTA I 4 II 
yago tra parameSani tustir anandalaksana | 
ksapanatsarvapapanam tranatsarvasya parvati || 150 || 

Va UHSATA AceAAA, ATSAT UT 
HTM AT AA CHT UST HI TAA 84:8 

rudraSaktisamavesas tatksetram bhavana para | 
anyatha tasya tattvasya ka puja kasca trpyati || 151 || 

Wdaahaaarane: Taran fe Ada: | 
STA ARIAS CATH: STAAL SRA 242 Il 
svatantranandacinmatrasarah svatma hi sarvatah | 
avesanam tatsvarupe svatmanah snanam tritam || 152 || 

a ves Youd cathe tel aT ORT: | 
ag Ysten: ad: O Uden: Fa OSTA 843 Il 
yair eva pujyate dravyais tarpyate va paraparah | 
yascaiva pUjakah sarvah sa evaikah kva pujanam || 153 || 

aotcront festsy stta seer spleereple: | 
CVaTAT GT Aeledt UeataA TAT 3 4¥ I 
vrajetprano visej jiva iccaya kutilakrtih | 
dirghatma sa mahadevi paraksetram parapara || 154 || 

FRAT TA FSA ASG S eae | 
ToT CT SAAS: UAL ARTATYATALI 344 II 

24 

asyamanucaran tisthan mahanandamaye'dhvare | 
taya devya samavistah param bhairavamapnuyat|| 155 || 

yeaa fear walt qearedenfaarte: | 
oul cea: GARE: FAUT Sorat BS: 84K 
ake 

aweor afeaiha senor Aa VI 
eteaay Hest fat cafe Fae: 18 4 & Il 

japo devyah samuddistah sulabho durlabho jadaih || 156 || 
variation 

sakarena bahiryati hakarena viset punah | 
hamsahamsetyamum mantram jivo japati nityasah ||156]| 

scacHitd cf warydy SaAA| 
Ua td HIT VARA J Harel 24091 

ityetatkathitam devi paramamrtam uttamam | 
etac ca naiva kasyapi prakasyam tu kadacana || 157 || 

Ue Get HX SAH TSuT|a: | 
Pfdacaadt ¢ ary SacI 3421 
parasisye khale krure abhakte gurupadayoh | 
nirvikalpamatinam tu viranam unnatatmanam || 158 || 

WH Teahey ade ffsarscpa | 
OAT MSA YS ea: AARHSITHAI 843 Il 
bhaktanam guruvargasya datavyam nirviSankaya | 
gramo rajyam puram deSah putradarakutumbakam || 159 || 

BAH YaST TET Va TTT | 
fen UTA afeaee af fey UR Se AA 
DoT aft Werdea 4 ea URATAAAI 2&0 II 

sarvam etatparityajya grahyam etan mrgeksane | 

25 

kim ebhir asthirair devi sthiram param idam dhanam | 
prana api pradatavya na deyam paramamrtam || 160 || 

sft edt Sara 

Sri devi uvaca | 

edad Aled URAL SHRI 
VRTTAAAART ARAMA 8&2 I 
devadeva mahadeva paritrptasmi Sankara | 
rudrayamalatantrasya saramadyavadharitam || 161 || 

adafmHurari ead MAA aI 
SUeaMteat eft Hud aM fMaeT Fil 2&2 1 
sarvasaktiprabhedanam hrdayam jnatamadya ca | 
ityuktvanandita devi kanthe lagna Sivasya tu || 162 |