Chuang TzO 

Mystic, Moralist, and Social Reformer 

TRANSLATED FROM THE CHINESE 

BY 

HERBERT A. GILES 

H. B. M.'s Consul at Tarn sin 

London 
BERNARD OUARITCH 

1889 

CONTENTS, 

Page 

Introduction v 

Note on the Philosophy of Chuang Tzu, by Canon Moore . . . xviii 

CHAPTER I— Transcendental Bliss i 

„ II — The Identity of Contraries 12 

,, III — Nourishment of the Soul 33 

,, IV — Man among Men 38 

„ V — The Evidence of Virtue Complete 56 

„ VI — The Great Supreme 68 

I „ VII — How TO Govern 91 

„ VIII — Joined Toes 99 

„ IX — Horses' Hoofs 106 

„ X — Opening Trunks no 

„ XI — On Letting Alone 119 

„ XII — The Universe 135 

XIII— The Tao of God 157 

,, XIV — The Circling Sky 173 

„ XV — Self-Conceit 190 

,, XVI — Exercise of Faculties 195 

,, XVII — Autumn Floods 200 

„ XVIII — Perfect Happiness 220 

,, XIX — The Secret of Life 229 

iv Cojitents 

Page 

CHAPTER XX— Mountain Trees 245 

„ XXI— T'lEN Tztj Fang 261 

XXII — Knowledge travels North 276 

XXIII — Keng Sang Ch'u 294 

XXIV— Hsu Wu KuEi 311 

XXV— Tse Yang 335 

,, XXVI — Contingencies 352 

,, XXVII — Language 363 

„ XXVIII — On Declining Power 370 

,, XXIX — Robber Che 387 

„ XXX — On Swords 407 

,, XXXI — The Old Fisherman 413 

„ XXXII— LiEH Tzu 423 

,, XXXIII — The Empire 437 

Index 455 

Errata and Addenda 466 

Introduction. 

C HUANG TZU^ belongs to the third and fourth 
centuries before Christ. He lived in the feudal 
age, when China was split up into a number of States 
owning a nominal allegiance to the royal, and weakly, 
House of Chou. 

He is noticed by the historian Ssii-ma Ch'ien, who 
flourished at the close of the second century B.C., as 
follows : — 

Chuang Tzii was a native of Meng.^ His per- 
sonal name was Chou. He held a petty official 
post at Ch'i-ylian in Meng.^ He lived contempo- 
raneously with Prince Hui of the Liang State and 
Prince Hsuan of the Ch'i State. His erudition was 
most varied ; but his chief doctrines are based upon 
the sayings of LagJTzu.* Consequently, his writ- 
ings, which extend to over 100,000 words, are mostly 
allegorical.^ 

1 Pronounce Chwongdza. 

2 In the modern province of An-hui. 

^ Hence he is often spoken of in the book language as " Ch'i-yiian." 
■* Pronounce Lowdza. The lo7C' as in allotv. See p. vii. 
^ Of an imaginative character, in keeping with the visionary teachings 
of his master. 

b 

vi Chiiang Tzii 

He wrote The Old Fisherman, Robber Che, and 
Opeiiing Trunks, with a view to asperse the Con- 
fucian school and to glorify the mysteries of Lao 
Tzu.^ Wei Lei Hsii, Keng Sang Tzit, and the like, 
are probably unsubstantial figments of his imagina- 
tion.^ Nevertheless, his literary and dialectic skill 
was such that the best scholars of the age proved 
unable to refute his destructive criticism of the 
Confucian and Mihist schools.^ 

His teachings were like an overwhelming flood, 
which spreads at its own sweet will. Consequently, 
from rulers and ministers downwards, none could 
apply them to any definite use.^ 

Prince Wei of the Ch'u State, hearing of Chuang 
Tzu's good report, sent messengers to him, bearing 
costly gifts, and inviting him to become Prime 
Minister. At this Chuang Tzu smiled and said 
to the messengers, " You offer me great wealth 
and a proud position indeed ; but have you never 
seen a sacrificial ox ? — When after being fattened 
up for several years, it is decked with embroidered 
trappings and led to the altar, would it not willingly 
then change places with some uncared-for pigling .-* 
. ..... Begone ! Defile me not ! I would 

rather disport myself to my own enjoyment in the 

1 See chs. xxxi, xxix, and x, respectively. 

2 The second of these personages is doubtless identical, though the 
name is differently written, with the Keng Sang Ch'u of ch. xxiii. The 
identity of the first name has not been satisfactorily settled. 

3 See p. 17. 

* This last clause is based upon a famous passage in the Lun Yii : — 
The perfect man is not a mere thing ; i.e., his functions are not limited. 
The idea conveyed is that Chuang Tzu's system was too far-reaching to be 
practical. 

Introduction vii 

mire than be slave to the ruler of a State. I will 
never take office. Thus I shall remain free to 
follow my own inclinations." ^ 

To enable the reader to understand more fully the 
writings of Chuang Tzu, and to appreciate his aim and 
object, it will be necessary to go back a few more hundred 
years. 

In the seventh century B.C., lived a man, now commonly 
spoken of as Lao Tzii. He was the great Prophet of 
his age. He taught men to return good for evil, and to 
look forward to a higher life. He professed to have 
found the clue to all thinofs human and divine. 

He seems to have insisted that his system could not be 
reduced to words. At any rate, he declared that those 
who spoke did not know, while those who knew did not 
speak. 

But to accommodate himself to conditions of mortality, 
he called this clue TAO, or The Way, explaining that the 
word was to be understood metaphorically, and not in a 
literal sense as the way or road upon which men walk. 

The following are sentences selected from the indis- 
putably genuine remains of Lao Tzu, to be found scattered 
here and there in early Chinese literature : — 

All the world knows that the goodness of doing 
good is not real goodness. 

When merit has been achieved, do not take 
it to yourself. On the other hand, if you do not 
take it to yourself, it shall never be taken from you. 

By many words wit is exhausted. It is better 
to preserve a mean. 

1 See p. 434- 
b 2 

L^ 

viii CJuuDi^r Tzit 

<b 

7 Keep behind, and you shall be put In front. 

Keep out, and you shall be kept in. 

What the world reverences may not be treated 
with irreverence. 

Good words shall gain you honour In the market- 
place. Good deeds shall gain you friends among 
men. 

He who, conscious of being strong, Is content 
to be weak, — he shall be a cynosure of men. 

The Empire is a divine trust, and may not be 
ruled. He who rules, ruins. He who holds by 
force, loses. 

Mighty is he who conquers himself. 

He who Is content, has enough. 

To the good I would be good. To the not-good 
I would also be good, in order to make them good. 

If the government Is tolerant, the people will be 
without guile. If the government is meddling, 
there will be constant infraction of the law. 

Recompense injury with kindness. 

The wise man's freedom from grievance is 
because he will not regard grievances as such. 

Of such were the pure and simple teachings of Lao 
Tzu. But it is upon the wondrous doctrine of Inaction 
that his claim to immortality is founded : — 

Do nothing, and all things will be done. 

I do nothing, and my people become good of 
their own accord. 

Abandon wisdom and discard knowledge, and 
the people will be benefited an hundredfold. 

The weak overcomes the strong, the soft over- 
comes the hard. All the world knows this ; yet 
none can act up to it. 

Introduction ix 

The softest things in the world override the 
hardest. That which has no substance enters 
where there is no fissure. And so I know that 
there is advantage in Inaction. 

Such doctrines as these were, however, not h'kely to 
appeal with force to the sympathies of a practical people. 
In the sixth century B.C., before Lao Tzu s death, another 
Prophet arose. He taught his countrymen that duty to 
one s neighbour comprises the whole duty of man. 
Charitableness of heart, justice, sincerity, and fortitude, — 
sum up the ethics of Confucius. He knew nothing of a 
God, of a soul, of an unseen world. And he declared 
that the unknowable had better remain untouched. 

Against these hard and worldly utterances, Chuang Tzii 
raised a powerful cry. The idealism of Lao Tzu had 
seized upon his poetic soul, and he determined to stem 
the tide of materialism in which men were being fast 
rolled to perdition. 

He failed, of course. It was, indeed, too great a task to 
persuade the calculating Chinese nation that by doing 
nothing, all things would be done. But Chuang Tzii 
bequeathed to posterity a work which, by reason of its 
marvellous literary beauty, has always held a foremost 
place. It is also a work of much originality of thought. 
The writer, it is true, appears chiefly as a disciple insisting 
upon the principles of a Master. But he has contrived to 
extend the field, and carry his own speculations Into regions 
never dreamt of by Lao Tzii. 

It may here be mentioned that the historian Ssti-ma 
Ch'ien, already quoted, states in his notice of Lao Tzu 
that the latter left behind him a small volume in 5,000 

X Chuang Tzu 

and odd characters. Ssu-ma Ch'ien does not say, nor 
does he give the reader to understand, that he himself had 
ever seen the book in question. Nor does he even hint 
(see p. V.) that Chuang Tzu drew his inspiration from a 
book, but only from the " sayings " of Lao Tzu. 

Confucius never mentions this book. Neither does 
Mencius, China's *' Second Sage," who was born about 
one hundred years after the death of the First. 

But all this is a trifle compared with the fact that 
Chuang Tzu himself never once alludes to such a book ; 
although now, in this nineteenth century, there are some, 
happily few in number, who believe that we possess the 
actual work of Lao Tzti's pen. It is, perhaps, happier 
still that this small number cannot be said to include 
within it the name of a single native scholar of eminence. 
In fact, as far as I know, the whole range of Chinese 
literature yields but the name of one such individual 
who has ever believed in the genuineness of the so-called 
Tao-Te-CIiiiig} Even he would probably have remained 
unknown to fame, had he not been brother to Su 
Tung-p'o.^ 

Chuang Tzu, indeed, puts into the mouth of Lao Tzu 
sayings which are now found in the Tao-Ti-Ching, mixed 
up with a great many other similar sayings which are 
not to be found there. But he also puts sayings, which 
now appear in the Tao-Te-Cking, into the mouth of 

1 The Canon of Tao^ and of Te, the exempHfication the reof. See 
p. I5. I have discussed the claims of this work at some length in T7ie 
Remains of Lao Tzu: Hong Kong, 1886. 

2 The brilliant philosopher, statesman, poet, &c., of the Sung dynasty 
(a.d. 1036-1101). 

Introduction xi 

Confucius (p. 275) ! And even into the mouth of the 
Yellow Emperor (pp. 277-278), whose date is some 
twenty centuries earlier than that of Lao Tzii himself! ! 

Two centuries before the Christian era, an attempt was 
made to destroy, with some exceptions, the whole of 
Chinese literature, in order that history might begin anew 
from the reign of the First Emperor of united China. 
The extent of the actual mischief done by this " Burning 
of the Books " has been greatly exaggerated. Still, the 
mere attempt at such a holocaust gave a fine chance to 
the scholars of the later Han dynasty (a.d. 25-221), who 
seem to have enjoyed nothing so much as forging, if not 
the whole, at any rate portions, of the works of ancient 
authors. Some one even produced a treatise under the 
name of Lieh Tzu, a philosopher mentioned by Chuang 
Tzu, not seeing that the individual in question was a 
creation of Chuang Tzu's brain ! 

And the 7"^^- Zk^-OzV^^ was undoubtedly pieced together 
somewhere about this period, from recorded sayings and 
conversations of Lao Tzu.^ 

Chuang Tzu's work has suffered in like manner. Several 
chapters are clearly spurious, and many episodes have 
been interpolated by feeble imitators of an inimitable 
style. 

The text, as it now stands, consists of thirty-three 
chapters. These are a reduction from fifty-three, which 

1 A curious parallelism will be found in Supernatural Religion, vol. i, 
p. 460 ; — 

"No period in the history of the world ever produced so many 
spurious works as the first two or three centuries of our era. The name 
of every Aposde, or Christian teacher, not excepting that of the great 
Master, was freely attached to every description of religious forgery." 

xii Chuang TzU 

appear to have been in existence in the fourth century a.d.' 
The following is the account given in the Imperial Cata- 
logue of the first known edition : — 

Chuang Tzii, with Commentary, in lo books. By 
Kuo Hsiang of the Chin dynasty (a.d. 265-420). 

The Shik-shuo-ksin-yu^ states that Kuo Hsiang 
stole his work from Hsiang Hsiu.^ Subsequently, 
Hsiang Hsiu's edition was issued, and the two were 
in circulation together. Hsiang Hsiu's edition is 
now lost, while Kuo H slang's remains. 

Comparison with quotations from Hsiang Hsiu's 
work, as given in Chuang Tzu Explained, by Lu 
Te-ming, shows conclusive evidence of plagiarism. 
Nevertheless, Kuo Hsiang contributed a certain 
amount of independent revision, making it impossible 
for us to regard the whole as from the hand of 
Hsiang Hsiu. Consequently, it now passes under 
the name of Kuo Hsiang. 

Since Kuo Hsiang's time, numberless editions with 
ever-varying interpretations have been produced to delight 
and to confuse the student. Of these, I have chosen six, 
representative as nearly as possible of different schools of 
thought. Their editors are : — 

I. — Kuo Hsiang of the Chin dynasty, [a) As given 
in the Skih Tzii Cltiian Shu, or Complete Works of the 
Ten Philosophers, {b) As edited by Tan Yiian-ch'un, of 
the Ming dynasty, with his own valuable notes. 

2. — Li) Hui-ch'ing of the Sung dynasty. 

1 On the authority of the I-wcn-chih. 

" A work of the fifth century a.d. 

3 Of the Han dynasty. Mayers puts him a Uttle later, viz., a.d. 275. 

Introdtidion xiii 

3. — Lin Hsi-yi of the Sung dynasty. 

4. — Wang Yi) of the Sung dynasty. Son of the famous 
Wang An-shih. 

5. HsiNG Tung, a Taoist priest of the Ming dynasty. 

6. — Lin Hsi-chung, of the Ming and Ch'ing dynas- 
ties. 

Where there is a consensus of opinion, I have followed 
such interpretation without demur. But where opinions 
differ, I have not hesitated to accept that interpretation 
which seemed to me to be most in harmony with the 
general tenor of Chuang Tzu's philosophy. And where 
all commentators fail equally, as they sometimes do, to 
yield anything at all intelligible, I have then ventured to 
fall back upon what Chuang Tzu himself would have 
called the "light of nature." Always keeping steadily in 
view the grand precept of Lin Hsi-chung, that we should 
attempt to interpret Chuang Tzu neither according to Lao 
Tzu, nor according to Confucius, nor according to Buddha, 
but according to Chuang Tzu himself. 

Of the thirty-three existing chapters, the first seven are 
called " inside " chapters, the next fifteen " outside," and 
the remaining eleven " miscellaneous." 

The meaning of " inside " and " outside " is a matter of 
dispute. Some Chinese critics have understood these 
terms in the obvious sense of esoteric and exoteric. But 
it is simpler to believe with others that the titles of the 
first seven chapters are taken from the inside or subject- 
matter, while the outside chapters are so named because 
their titles are derived casually from words which happen 
to stand at the beginning or outside of each. 

xiv Chuaiig Tzu 

Compared with the " miscellaneous," these latter seem 
to have been classed together as elucidating a single 
principle in terms more easy of apprehension ; while the 
" miscellaneous " chapters embrace several distinct trains 
of thought, and are altogether more abstruse. The 
arrangement is unscientific, and it was probably this which 
caused Su Tung-p'o to decide that division into chapters 
belongs to a later age. He regards chaps, xxix-xxxii as 
spurious, although Ssu-ma Ch'ien alludes to two of these 
as Chuang Tzu's work. It has indeed been held that the 
inside chapters alone (i-vii) are from Chuang Tzu's own 
pen. But most of the other chapters, exclusive of 
xxix-xxxii, contain unmistakable traces of a master hand. 
Ch. xvii, by virtue of an exquisite imagery, has earned 
for its author the affectionate sobriquet of " Chou of the 
Autumn Floods." 

Chuang Tzu, it must be remembered, has been for 
centuries classed as a heterodox writer. His work was 
an effort of reaction against the materialism of Confucian 
teachings. And in the course of it he was anything but 
sparing of terms. Confucius is dealt with in language 
which no modern literate can approve. But the beauty 
and vigour of the language are facts admitted by all. He 
is constantly quoted in the great standard lexicon which 
passes under the name of K'ang Hsi. 

But no acquaintance with the philosophy of Chuang 
Tzu would assist the candidate for honours at the com- 
petitive examinations which are the portals to official place 
and power. Consequently, Chuang Tzu is studied chiefly 
by older men, who have retired from office, or who have 
been disappointed in their career. Those too who are 

Introduction xv 

dominated by a religious craving for something better 
than mortality, find in his pages much agreeable solace 
against the troubles of this world, with an implied promise 
of another and a better world to come. 

It has been publicly announced that translations of Lao 
Tzu and Chuang Tzu are to appear among the Sacred 
Books of the East} 

Now to include the Tao-Ti-Chingm such a series would 
be already a doubtful step. Apart from spuriousness, it 
can only by a severe stretch of courtesy be termed a 
" sacred book." It undoubtedly contains many of Lao 
Tzu's sayings, but it also undoubtedly contains much that 
Lao Tzu never said and never could have said. It illus- 
trates rather that period when the pure Tao of Lao Tzu 
began to be corrupted by alchemistic research and gropings 
after the elixir of life. It was probably written up in self- 
defence against the encroachments of Buddhism, in those 
early days of religious struggle when China was first 
flooded with the "sacred books" of the West. It is not 
seriously recognised as the Canon of ancient Taoism. 
Among the Taoists of to-day, not one in ten thousand has 
more than heard its name. For modern Taoism is but a 
hybrid superstition, — a mixture of ancient nature-worship 
and Buddhistic ceremonial, with Tao as the style of the 
firm. Its teachinofs are farther removed from the Tag 
of Lao Tzu than Ritualism from the Christianity of 
Christ. 

As to Chuang Tzu, his work can in no sense be called 
" sacred." Unless indeed we modify somewhat the 

' The China Review, vol. xvi, p. 195. 

xvi Chuang Tzu 

accepted value of terms, and reckon the works of Aristotle 
among the " sacred " books of the Greeks. Chuang Tzii 
was scarcely the founder of a school. He was not a 
Prophet, as Lao Tzii was, nor can he fairly be said ever 
to have been regarded by genuine Taoists as such. 

When, many centuries later, the light of Lao Tzu's real 
teachings had long since been obscured, then a foolish 
Emperor conferred upon Chuang Tzii's work the title of 
Holy Canon of Nan-hua) But this was done solely to 
secure for the follies of the age the sanction of a great 
name. Not to mention that Lieh Tzu's alleged work, and 
many other similar forgeries have also been equally 
honoured. So that if works like these are to be included 
among the Sacred Books of the East, then China alone will 
be able to supply matter for translation for the next few 
centuries to come. 

Partly of necessity, and partly to spare the general 
reader, I have relegated to a supplement all textual and 
critical notes involving the use of Chinese characters. 
This supplement will be issued as soon as possible after 
my return to China. It will not form an integral part of 
the present work, being intended merely to assist students 
of the language in verifying the renderings I have here 
seen fit to adopt. As a compromise I have supplied a 
kind of running commentary, introduced, in accordance 
with the Chinese system, into the body of the text. It is 
hoped that this will enable any one to understand the 
drift of Chuang Tzu's allusions, and to follow arguments 
which are usually subtle and oft-times obscure. 

' In A.I). 742. 

In trodiiction x v i i 

Only one previous attempt has been made to place 
Chuang Tzu in the hands of English readers.^ In that 
case, the knowledge of the Chinese language possessed by 
the translator was altogether too elementary to justify 
such an attempt.^ 

HERBERT A. GILES. 

1 The Divine Classic of Nan-hiia. By Frederic Henry Balfour, 
RR.G.S., Shanghai and London, 1881. 

2 One example will sufifice. In ch. xxiii (see p. 309) there occurs a 
short sentence which means, "A one-legged man discards ornament, 
his exterior not being open to commendation." 

Mr. Balfour translated this as follows : — " Servants will tear up a 
portrait, not liking to be confronted with its beauties and its defects." 

Note on the Philosophy of Chaps, i-vii. 

By the Rev. AUBREY MOORE, 

Tutor of Keble and Magdalen Colleges, Oxford ; Hon. Canon of Christ Church, &c. 

The translator of Chuang Tzu has asked me to append a note on the 
philosophy of chs. i-vii. It is difficult to see how one who writes not only 
in ignorance of Chinese modes of thought, but with the preconceptions of 
Western philosophy, can really help much towards the understanding of 
an admittedly obscure system, involving terms and expressions on which 
Chinese scholars are not yet agreed. But an attempt to point out 
parallelisms of thought and reasoning between East and West may be of 
use in two ways. It may stimulate those who are really competent to 
understand both terms in the comparison to tell us where the parallelism 
is real and where it is only apparent ; and it may help to accustom 
ordinary readers to look for and expect resemblances in systems in which 
an earHer age would have seen nothing but contrasts. 

There was a time when historians of Greek philosophy used to point out 
what were considered to be the characteristics of Greek thought, and then 
to put down to " Oriental influence " anything which did not at once agree 
with these characteristics. How and through what channels this " Oriental 
influence " was exercised, it was never easy to determine, nor was it 
always thought worthy of much discussion. In recent times, however, 
a greater knowledge of Eastern systems has familiarised us with much 
which, on the same principle, ought to be attributed to " Greek influence." 
And the result has been that we have learned to put aside theories of 
derivation, and to content ourselves with tracing the evolution of reason 
and of rational problems, and to expect parallelisms even where the circum- 
stances are widely different. 

One instance may be worth quoting in illustration. We used to be 
told that the Greek mind, in its speculation and its art, was characterised 
by its love of order, harmony, and symmetry, in contrast with the monstrous 
creations of the Oriental imagination, and the " colossal ugliness of the 
Pyramids"; and it was said with reason that the Aristotelian doctrine ot 

Note on the Philosophy of Chaps, i-vii. xix 

" the mean " was the ripe fruit of the practical inquiries of the Greeks, 
and was the ethical counterpart of their artistic development. But in 
1 86 1 we were introduced by Dr. Legge to a Confucianist work, attributed 
to Tzu Tzii, grandson of Confucius and a contemporary of Socrates, 
and entitled T/ie Doctrine of the Meati} which is there represented as 
the true moral way in which the perfect man walks, while all else go 
beyond or fall short of it. Yet even those who discovered the doctrine 
of the Trinity in the Tao-Te-Ching have not, we believe, suggested 
that Aristotle had private access to the Li Chi. 

We may then, without bringing any charge of piracy or plagiarism 
against either, point out some parallels between Chuang Tzu and a great 
Greek thinker. 

Chuang Tzii's first chapter is mainly critical and destructive, pointing 
out the worthlessness of ordinary judgments, and the unreality of sense 
knowledge. The gigantic Rukh, at the height ot 90,000 //, is a mere 
mote in the sunbeam. For size is relative. The cicada, which can just 
fly from tree to tree, laughs with the dove at the Rukh's high flight. For 
space also is relative. Compared with the mushroom of a day, P'eng Tsu 
is as old as Methuselah ; but what is his age to that of the fabled tree, 
whose spring and autumn make up 16,000 years? Time, then, is relative 
too. And though men wonder at him who could " ride upon the wind 
and travel for many days," he is but a child to one who " roams through 
the realms of For-Ever." 

This doctrine of "relativity," which is a commonplace in Greek as it 
is in modern philosophy, is made the basis, both in ancient and modern 
times, of two opposite conclusions. Either it is argued that all sense 
knowledge is relative, and sense is the only organ of knowledge, therefore 
real knowledge is impossible ; or else the relativity of sense knowledge 
leads men to draw a sharp contrast between sense and reason and to turn 
away from the outward in order to listen to the inward voice. The one 
alternative is scepticism, the other ideaHsm. In Greek thought the 
earliest representatives of the former are the Sophists, of the latter 
Heracleitus. 

There is no doubt to which side of the antithesis Chuang Tzii belongs. 
His exposure of false and superficial thinking looks at first like the 

1 In 1885 this treatise was republished by Dr. Legge in its place as 
Bk. xxviii of the Li Ki or Li Chi (Sacred Books of the East, vols, xxvii, 
xxviii), with a new title The State of Equilibritim and Llannotiy. But the 
parallelism with the Aristotelian doctrine is as obvious as ever. 

XX Chitang Tzu 

destruction of knowledge. Even Socrates was called a Sophist because of 
his destructive criticism and his restless challenging of popular views. 
But Chuang Tzii has nothing of the sceptic in him. He is an idealist and 
a mystic, with all the idealist's hatred of a utilitarian system, and the 
mystic's contempt for a life of mere external activity. " The perfect man 
ignores self ; the divine man ignores action ; the true sage ignores reputa- 
tion " (p. 5). The Emperor Yao would have abdicated in favour of a 
hermit, but the hermit replies that " reputation is but the shadow of reality," 
and will not exchange the real for the seeming. But greater than Yao 
and the hermit is the divine being who dwells on the mysterious mountain 
in a state of pure, passionless inaction. 

For the sage, then, life means death to all that men think life, the 
life of seeming or reputation, of doing or action, of being or individual self- 
hood. This leads on to the " budget of paradoxes " in chap. 11. As in 
the moral and active region we escape from the world and self, and are able 
to reverse and look down upon the world's judgments, so in the speculative 
region we get behind and beyond the contradictions of ordinary thinking, 
and of speech which stereotypes abstractions. The sage knows nothing 
of the distinction between subjective and objective. It exists only 
ex analogia hominis. " From the standpoint of Tao " all things are one. 
People " guided by the criteria of their own mind," see only the contra- 
diction, the manifoldness, the difference ; the sage sees the many 
disappearing in the One, in which subjective and objective, positive and 
negative, here and there, somewhere and nowhere, meet and blend. For 
him, "a beam and a pillar are identical. So are ugliness and beauty, 
greatness, wickedness, perverseness, and strangeness. Separation is the same 
as construction : construction is the same as destruction" (pp. 19-20). 
The sage " blends everything into one harmonious whole, rejecting the 
comparison of this and that. Rank and precedence, which the vulgar 
prize, the sage stolidly ignores. The universe itself may pass away, but 
he will flourish still" (p. 29). "Were the ocean itself scorched up, he 
would not feel hot. Were the milky way frozen hard he would not feel 
cold. Were the mountains to be riven with thunder, and the great deep 
to be thrown up by storm, he would not tremble" (pp. 27-28). 

Si fractus illabatur orbis, 
Impavidum ferient ruinse. 

He is " embraced in the obliterating unity of God," and passing into the 
realm of the Infinite finds rest therein (p. 31). 

It is impossible in reading this chapter on "The Identity of Contraries " 
not to be reminded of Heracleitus. The disparagement of sense knowledge, 

Note on the Philosophy of Chaps, i-vii. xxi 

and the contempt for common views is indeed equally marked in 
Eleaticism, and there is much in Chuang Tzia which recalls Parmenides,^ 
so far as the contrast between the way of truth and the way of error, the 
true belief in the One and the popular belief in the Many, is concerned. 
But it seems to me that the " One " of Chuang Tzu is not the dead Unit 
of Eleaticism, which resulted from the thinking away of differences, 
but the living Unity of Heracleitus, in which contraries co-exist. 
Heracleitus, indeed, seems to have been a man after Chuang Tzu's own 
heart, not only in his obscurity, which won for him the title of 6 ctkoteivoc, 
but in his indifference to worldly position, shown in the fact that, like the 
Emperor Yao, he abdicates in his brother's favour {Diog. Laert. ix. i), 
and in his supercilious disregard for the learned like Hesiod and Pytha- 
goras and Xenophanes and Hecataeus,^ no less than for the common 
people^ of his day. 

"Listen," says Heracleitus, "not to me, but to reason, and confess the 
true wisdom that ' All things are One.' "^ " All is One, the divided and 
the undivided, the begotten and the unbegotten, the mortal and the im- 
mortal, reason and eternity, father and son, God and justice."^ " Cold is 
hot, heat is cold, that which is moist is parched, that which is dried up is 
wet."6 " Good and evil are the same."'' " Gods are mortal, men im- 
mortal : our Ufe is their death, our death their life."^ " Upward and 
downward are the same."^ "The beginning and the end are one."^^ 
" Life and death, sleeping and waking, youth and age are identical."^! 

This is what reason tells the philosopher. "All is One." The world 
IS a unity of opposing forces (TraXtrrpojroe ap/jtopir) k6(tjxov OKUxnrep XvpaQ 
Kul ToEov).'^^ " Join together whole and not whole, agreeing and different, 
harmonious and discordant. Out of all comes one : out of one all.''^' 
" God is day-night, winter-summer, war-peace, repletion-want. "^^ The 
very rhythm of nature is strife. War, which men hate and the poets would 
banish, " is the father and lord of all."!^ But " men are without under- 
standing, they hear and hear not,"^^ or " they hear and understand not."i7 

1 See the fragments in Ritter and Preller's H/sf. Phil. Grcec. § 93 and 
§ 94 A. B. Seventh edition. " Heracl. Eph. Rell. Bywater, xvi. 

2 oxXoXoi^opog 'UpaKXeiroc. Tmion ap. Diog. Laert. ix. i. 

* OuK kfxiv dtXXa tov \oyov itKovalivTaq ojiokoyitiv aocpoi' iirri ev Travra tJi'ai. 
Heracl. Eph. Rell. i. 5 Hippolytus Ref. haer. ix. 9. 

^ Heracl. Eph. Rell. xxxix. 7 Ibid., Ivii. 

^ Ibid.., Ixvii. ^ Ibid.., Ixix. ^'^ Ibid., Ixx. ^^ Ibid., Ixxviii. 

12 Ibid., xlv. 13 /^/^.^ lix. u jhid,^ xxxvi. 15 /^/^.^ xliv. 

16 Ibid., iii. 17 Ibid., V. 

xxii Chuang Tzu 

For they trust to their senses, which are " false witnesses."^ They see 
the contradictions, but know not that " the different is at unity with 
itself. "2 They cannot see the "hidden harmony, which is greater than 
the harmony which is seen."^ For they live in the external, the common- 
place, the relative, and never rise above the life of the senses. " The sow 
loves the mire."* *' The ass prefers fodder to gold."" And men love their 
" private conceits " instead of clinging to the universal reason which 
orders all things," and which even the sun obeys.^ 

Of the fragments which remain to us of Heracleitus, the greater number 
belong to the region of logic and metaphysics, while Chuang Tzu devotes 
much space to the more practical side of the question. He not only 
ridicules those who trust their senses, or measure by utilitarian standards, 
or judge by the outward appearance ; — he teaches them how to pass from 
the seeming to the true. The wonderful carver, who could cut where the 
natural joints are,^ is one who sees not with the eye of sense but with his 
mind. When he is in doubt he "falls back upon eternal principles"; 
for he is " devoted to Tao " (chap. iii). There is something of humour, 
as well as much of truth, in the rebuke which Confucius, speaking pro 
hac vice as a disciple of Lao Tzii, administers to his self-confident follower 
who wanted to *' be of use." '* C\xM\vzX% fasting ; — not bodily fasting, but 
the fasting of the heart." Tag can only abide in the life which has got 
rid of self. So the Duke of She is reminded that there is something 
higher than duty,^ viz., destiny^ the state, that is, in which conscious obe- 
dience has given way to that which is instinctive and automatic. The 
parable of the trees (pp. 50-53), with its result in the survival of the good- 
for-nothing, is again a reversal of popular outside judgments. For as the 
first part of the chapter had taught the uselessness of trying to be useful, 
so the last part teaches the usefulness of being useless. And the same 
thought is carried on in the next chapter, which deals with the reversal of 
common opinion as to persons. Its motto is : — Judge not by the appear- 
ance. Virtue must prevail and outward form be forgotten. The loath- 
some leper Ai T'ai To is made Prime Minister by the wise Duke Ai. The 

1 Heracl Eph. Rell. iv. 2 /^/^.^ xlv. 3 /^/^,^ ^Ivii. 

* Ibid., liv., and notes. ^ Jlnd., li. 6 /^/^^ ^ci, xix. 

^ Ibid., xxix. 

^ Cf. Plat. Phaedr. 265 : KaT apdpa p irecpvKet' Kni fitj ein'^^EipEiv Karayrvvai 
fitpog fiijdey KaKov fxayei'pov rpoTro) ^pwyLtfj'oc. 

^ C/. Herbert Si)encer's well-known paradox, — "The sense of duty or 
moral obligation is transitory, and will diminish as fast as moralisation 
increases." — Data of Ethics, p. 127. 

Note on the Philosophy of Chaps, i-vii. xxiii 

mutilated criminal is judged by Lao Tzii to be a greater man than Con- 
fucius. For the criminal is mutilated in body by man, while Confucius, 
though men know it not, by the judgment of God is TrcTrrjpw^tj'oc Trpoc 

aptTi]v. 

This protest of Chuang Tzu against externality, and judging only by 
the outward appearance, might easily be translated into Christian language. 
For Christianity also teaches i?iwardness, and, in common with all 
idealism, resents the delimitation of human life and knowledge to " the 
things which are seen." In its opposition to a mere practical system like 
Confucianism, Taoism must have appealed to those deeper instincts of 
humanity to which Buddhism appealed some centuries later. In prac- 
tice, Confucianism was limited to the finite. Action, effort, benevolence, 
unselfishness, — all these have a place in it, and their theatre is the world 
as we know it. Its last word is worldly wisdom ; not selfishness, but an 
enlarged prudentialism. To the Taoist such a system savours of " the 
rudiments of the world." Its " charity and duty," its " ceremonies and 
music," are the "Touch not, taste not, handle not," of an ephemeral 
state of being, and perish in the using. And the sage seeks for the 
Absolute, the Infinite, the Eternal. He seeks to attain to Tao. 

It is here that we reach (in chaps, vi, vii) what properly constitutes the 
mysticism of Chuang Tzii. Heracleitus is not a mystic, though he is the 
founder of a long line, which through Plato, and Dionysius the Areopagite 
and John the Scot in the ninth century, and Meister Eckhart in the 
thirteenth, and Jacob Bohme in the sixteenth, reaches down to Hegel. 
Heracleitus despises the world and shuns it ; but he has not yet made 
flight from the world a dogma. Even Plato, when in a well-known 
passage in the Theaetetus,' he counsels flight from the present state of 
things, explains that he means only " flee from evil and become like God." 
Still less has Heracleitus got so far as to aim at self-absorption in God. 
In Greek thought the attempt to get rid of consciousness, and to become 
the unconscious vehicle of a higher illumination, is unknown till the time 
of Philo. Yet this is the teaching of Chuang Tzu. " The true sage 
takes his refuge in God, and learns that there is no distinction between 
subject and object. This is the very axis of Tag" (p. i8). Abstraction 
from self, then, is the road which leads to Tao (chap. vi). The pure 
of old did not love life and hate death. They were content to be j^assive 
vehicles of Tag. They had reached the state of sublime indifference, 

^ Tlieaet. 176. A. ^10 kiCl ireipdcrdai ■^pij EyOirSe EKelfre (pEvysii' o ti 
ra^KTra . ^uy// de oi^ioiwrriQ Of(p /caret to dufaroy . ojuoiwcnQ oe CiKaioi' kul omor 
^lETCi (Ppon'](TSUic ytrinQai. 

xxiv Chuartg Tzu 

they had become " oblivious of their own existence." Everything in 
them was spontaneous ; nothing the result of effort. " They made no 
plans ; therefore failing, they had no cause for regret ; succeeding, no cause 
for congratulation " (p. 69). "They cheerfully played their allotted parts, 
waiting patiently for the end." They were free, for they were in perfect 
harmony with creation (p. 71). For them One and not One are One: 
God and Man. For they had attained to Tao, and Tao is greater than 
God. " Before heaven and earth were, Tao was. It has existed without 
change from all time. Spiritual beings draw their spirituality therefrom ; 
while the universe became what we see it now. To Tag the zenith is not 
high, nor the nadir low ; no point of time is long ago, nor by lapse of 
ages has it grown old" (p. 76). The great legislators obtained Tao, and 
laid down eternal principles. The sun and moon, and the Great Bear 
are kept in their courses by Tao. 

" Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong ; 
And the most ancient heavens, through thee, are fresh and strong." 

He who would attain to Tao must get rid of the thought of " charity 
and duty," of " music and ceremonies," of body and mind. The flowers 
and the birds do not toil, they simply live. That is Tao. And for man 
a state of indifference and calm, the dropa^m not of the sceptic but of 
the mystic, a passive reflecting of the Eternal, is the ideal end. " The 
l)erfect man employs his mind as a mirror. It grasps nothing, it refuses 
nothing. It receives but does not keep. And thus he can triumph over 
matter without injury to himself" (See p. 98.) 

It would of course be presumption to attempt to assign a meaning to Tao, 
and still more to discover an equivalent in Western thought. But it may 
be lawful to say that Heracleitus often speaks of Aoyoe as Chuang 
Tzii speaks of Tao. It is Necessity [avayKr]), or Fate {elfiapiiirr]), or 
Mind {yvujur)), or Justice (Aikti). In nature it appears as balance and 
equipoise ; in the State as Law ; in man as the universal Reason, 
which is m him but not <?/ him. Sometimes it is identified with the 
mysterious name of Zeus, which may not be uttered;^ sometimes Hke 
the 'AfayKr) of the Greek poets, it is supreme over gods and men. If 
it is hard to say what is the relation of Tao to God, it is not less hard to 
define the relation of Aoyoe to Zeus. To speak of Chuang Tzii and 
Heracleitus as pantheists is only to say that, so far as we can translate 

^ Herad. Eph. Rell. Ixv. 

Note on the Philosophy of Chaps, i-vii. xxv 

their language into ours, that name seems less inappropriate than Theist 
or Deist. But it is doubtful whether the distinction between Pantheism 
and Theism would have been intelligible to either philosopher, and certain 
that if they could have understood it, they would have denied to it reality. 
Both held the immanence of the Eternal Principle in all that is. Both 
taught that the soul is an emanation from the Divine, and both, though in 
very different degrees, seem to teach that a life is perfect in proportion as it 
becomes one with that from which it came, and loses what is individual 
in it. 

In Chuang Tzu, as in all mystics, there is an element of antinomianism. That 
"good and evil are the same," may contain a deep truth for the sage, but 
" take no heed of time, nor of right and wrong" (p. 31) is, to say the least, 
dangerous teaching for the masses. The mystic's utterances will not bear 
translation into the language of the world, and to take them au pied de la 
lettre can hardly fail to produce disastrous results. This is why antino- 
mianism always dogs the heels of mysticism. And this may perhaps 
help to explain the debased Taoism of to-day. But of this I know 
nothing. 

It would be interesting to know whether in the undisputed utterances 
of Lao Tzii (/. e. putting on one side the Tao-Te-Chifig), Quietism and 
the glorification of Inaction are as prominent as they are in Chuang Tzu. 
One would be prepared a priori to find that they are not. Lao Tzu was 
born at the end of the seventh century B.C., and was, therefore, some fifty 
years older than Confucius, with whom in 517 b c, he is said to have had 
an interview.^ By the time of Chuang Tzti, who was possibly contemporary 
with Mencius, and therefore some two or three centuries after Lao Tzu, 
Confucianism had become to some extent the established religion of China, 
and Taoism, like Republicanism in the days of the Roman Empire, became 
a mere opposition de salon. Under such circumstances any elements of 
mysticism latent in Lao Tzii's system would develop rapidly. And the an- 
tagonism between the representatives of Lao Tzu and Confucius would pro- 
portionately increase. But philosophy does not become mystical and take 
refuge in flight until it abandons all hope of converting the world. When 
effort is useless, the mind idealises Inaction, and seeks a metaphysical 
basis for it. For mysticism and scepticism flourish in the same atmo- 
sphere though in different soils, both, though in different ways, implying 
the abandonment of the rational problem. The Sceptic, the Agnostic 
or Positivist of to-day, declares it insoluble, and settles down content to 

Chuang Tzu, chap, xiv, p. i82-i< 

xxvi Chttang Tzil 

take things as they are ; the mystic retires into himself, and dreams of a 
state of being which is the obverse of the world of fact. 

The triumph of Confucianism in the centuries which intervened between 
Lao Tzii and Chuang Tzii would account for the antagonism between 
Taoism and Confucianism as we find it. But it fails to account for the way 
in which Confucius is sometimes represented as playing into the hands of 
Taoism. On p. 85 i. n. the translator explains it as a literary coup de main. 
Dr. Chalmers, quoted by Dr. Legge,i says that both Chuang Tzu and Lieh 
Tzii introduced Confucius into their writings "as the lords of the Philis- 
tines did the captive Samson on their festive occasions, ' to make sport for 
them.' " But there is not a hint of this given in the text, though 
throughout one long chapter (chap, iv) we find Confucius giving a Taoist 
refutation of Confucianist doctrines when defended by his own pupil 
Yen Hui. It might seem like an attempt to draw a distinction 
between Confucius and Confucianism, though elsewhere Confucius is 
ridiculed as wanting in sense. 

May not the explanation be as follows ? — 

(i.) Lao Tzii and Confucius were probably much nearer to one another 
philosophically than the Taoism of Chuang Tzu and the Confucianism 
of Mencius. The passages in which Confucius talks Taoism would, on 
this hypothesis, represent a traditional survival of their real relations to 
one another. The episode of Confucius' visit to Lao Tzii " to ask about 
the Tao," would, whether it records a fact or not, tend in the same 
direction. 

(ii.) From the first we may assume that the one took an ideal, the 
other a practical and utilitarian view of Tao "the Way"; Confucius 
finding it in social duties and the work of practical life, Lao Tzii in the 
hidden and the inward, the " interior life," as Christian mystics would call 
it. Thus the historian Ssu-ma Ch'ien^ says, " Lao Tzu cultivated the 
Tao and virtue, his chief aim in his studies being how to keep himself 
concealed and unknown. Seeing the decay of the dynasty he withdrew 
himself out of sight, and no one knows where he died." 

(iii.) The divergence between the two views, the ideal and the actual, 
the mystical and the practical, would increase with time, each intensifying 
the other by opposition and reaction, until the practical won its way to 
security, and the mystical got left out in the cold, perhaps persecuted, 
certainly suspected, and treated as heterodox, and naturally retaliating by 
scornful criticism of the dominant view. When this stage is reached, 

Encycl. Met., Art. " Lao Tzu." - Quoted by Dr. Legge, he. cif. 

Note 071 the Philosophy of Chaps, i-vii. xxvii 

Mencius regards Lao Tzu as a heresiarch, while Chuang Tzii often treats 
Confucius with contempt and ridicule. For " the Way that is walked 
upon is not the Way," and " the Tao which shines forth is not Tao" 
(p. 25). But Confucianism being " established," the Taoists are now 
"dissenters," and not being strong enough to disestablish Confucianism 
become more and more mystical, and content themselves with a policy 
of protest. 

If there is little direct evidence for this theory as to the relations of 
Taoism and Confucianism, there is a curious parallel in Western thought. 
\\Tien Plato was known only in a neo-Platonic disguise, and Aristotle 
judged by the Organon, it was possible for partisans to represent the two 
philosophers as typical opposites, and to assume that " every one is born a 
Platonist or an Aristotelian," forgetting that Aristotle was Plato's pupil, 
and both were followers of Socrates. Later on, when Aristotelianism 
became " established " as the Christian philosophy, Platonism, which 
survived in the more mystical schoolmen, fell under suspicion, and not 
unfrequently justified the suspicion by developing in the direction of 
Pantheism. It was not till the thirteenth century that the world appealed 
from Platonists and Aristotelians to Plato and Aristotle, and discovered 
that the divergent streams flowed from neighbouring springs. Such an 
appeal, it is to be feared, is hardly possible in the case of Lao Tzii and 
Confucius, especially as the authenticity of the Tao-Te-Chingis still in 
controversy among Sinologues. 

My object, however, in this note, which has grown out of all propor- 
tion, was not to suggest a theory as to the possible relations of Lao Tzii 
and Confucius, but to point out what seemed to be a remarkable 
parallel between the teaching of Chuang Tzii and Heracleitus. In doing 
this I have accepted Mr. Giles's translation as an ultimate fact, for the 
simple reason that I do not know a single Chinese character. So far, 
therefore, as the translation prejudices or prejudges questions of Chinese 
scholarship, I must leave the defence to the translator. It is also possible, 
and more than possible, that my Western preconceptions may have 
biassed my judgment of Chuang Tzu's philosophical teaching. Recent 
attempts^ to draw a parallel between the life of Gautama and the life of 

1 E.g. Mr. Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia, and still more Professor 
Seydel's Das Evangelium von Jesu in seinen Verhiiltnissen zu Buddha- 
Sage und Buddha-Lehre. On the other side of the question, cf. Dr. 
Kellogg's The Light of Asia and the Light of the World. London, 
1885. And an article in the Nineteenth Century for July, 1888, on 
Buddhism, by the Bishop of Colombo. 

xxviii Ckuang Tzii 

Christ have shown how easy it is unconsciously to read between the lines, 
and find .parallelisms where they do not exist. If I have been guilty 
in the same way, then, with Socrates in the Republic, I say, " I can 
but suffer the penalty of ignorance ; and that penalty is, to be taught 
by those who know." 

A. L. M. 

Chuang Tzu. 

CHAPTER I. 

Transcendental Bliss. 

Argument: — Space infinite — Time infinite — Relativity of magnitudes, 
physical and moral — The magnitude absolute — Usefulness as a test 
of value — The usefulness of the useless. 

IN the northern ocean there is a fish, called the 
Leviathan, many thousand li in size. This 
leviathan changes into a bird, called the Rukh, 
whose back is many thousand li in breadth. With 
a mighty effort it rises, and its wings obscure the 
sky like clouds. 

At the equinox, this bird prepares to start for the 
southern ocean, the Celestial Lake. And in the 
Record of Marvels we read that when the rukh 
flies southwards, the water is smitten for a space of 
three thousand li around, while the bird itself 
mounts upon a typhoon to a height of ninety 
thousand //, for a flight of six months' duration. 

Just so are the motes in a sunbeam blown aloft 
by God. For whether the blue of the sky is its 
real colour, or only the result of distance without 

2 Chuang Tzii 

end, the effect to the bird looking down would be 
just the same as to the motes. 

Distance being relative. The rukh at an altitude 
of 90,000 li (three li to a mile) is no more than a 
mote in a sunbeam a few feet from the ground. 

If there is not sufficient depth, water will not 
float large ships. Upset a cupful into a small hole, 
and a mustard-seed will be your boat. Try to float 
the cup, and it will stick, from the disproportion 
between water and vessel. 

So with air. If there is not a sufficient depth, 
it cannot support large birds. And for this bird a 
depth of ninety thousand // is necessary ; and then, 
with nothing save the clear sky above, and no 
obstacle in the w^ay, it starts upon its journey to 
the south. 

A cicada laughed, and said to a young dove, 
" Now, when I fly with all my might, 'tis as much 
as I can do to get from tree to tree. And some- 
times I do not reach, but fall to the ground mid- 
way. What then can be the use of going up ninety 
thousand // in order to start for the south ? " 

He who goes to Mang-ts'ang, 

A short distance into the country. 

taking three meals with him, comes back with his 
stomach as full as when he started. But he who 
travels a hundred // must grind flour enough for 
a night's halt. And he who travels a thousand 
// must supply himself with provisions for three 
months. Those two little creatures, — what should 

CAP. I.] Transcendental Bliss 3 

they know? Small knowledge has not the compass 
of great knowledge any more than a short year has 
the length of a long year; 

How can we tell that this is so ? The mush- 
room of a morning knows not the alternation of day 
and night. The cljrysalis knows not the alter- 
nation of spring and autumn. Theirs are short 
years. 

But in the State of Ch'u there is a tortoise 
whose spring and autumn are each of five hundred 
years' duration. And in former days there was a 
large tree which had a spring and autumn each of 
eight thousand years' duration. Yet, P'eng Tsu 

The Methusaleh of China. His age has not been 
agreed upon by Chinese writers, but the lowest 
computation gives him a life of eight hundred years. 

is still, alas ! an object of envy to all. 

It was on this very subject that the Emperor 
T'ang 

B.C. 1766. 

spoke to Chi, as follows : — " At the barren north 
there is a great sea, the Celestial Lake. In it there 
is a fish, several thousand li in breadth, and I 
know not how many in length. It is called the 
Leviathan. There is also a bird, called the Rukh, 
with a back like Mount T'ai, 

China's most famous mountain, situated in the 

province of Shantung. 

and wings like clouds across the sky. Upon a 
typhoon it soars up to a height of ninety thousand 

B 2 

4 Chuang Tzit 

li, beyond the clouds and atmosphere, with only the 
clear sky above it. And then it directs its flight 
towards the south pole. 

"A quail laughed, and said: Pray, what may 
that creature be going to do ? I rise but a few 
yards in the air, and settle again after flying around 
among the reeds. That is the most I can manage. 
Now, where ever can this creature be going to ?" 

The repetition of this story, coupled with its quota- 
tion from the Record of Marvels, is considered to 
give an air of authenticity to Chuang Tzu's illus- 
tration, which the reader might otherwise suppose to 
be of his own invention. 

Such, indeed, is the difference between small and 
great. Take, for instance, a man who creditably 
fills some small office, or who is a pattern of virtue 
in his neighbourhood, or who influences his prince 
to right government of the State, — his opinion of 
himself will be much the same as that quail's. The 
philosopher Yung laughs at such a one. He, if the 
whole world flattered him, would not be affected 
thereby, nor if the whole world blamed him would 
he lose his faith in himself. For Yung can dis- 
tinguish between the intrinsic and the extrinsic, 
between honour and shame, — and such men are 
rare in their generation. But even he has not 
established himself. 

Beyond the limits of an external world. His 
achievements are after all only of the earth, earthy. 

There was Lieh Tzu again. 

A personage of whom nothing is really known. 

CAP. I.] Transcendental Bliss 5 

He is considered by the best authorities to have been 
of Chuang Tzu's own creation. This, however, did 
not prevent some enterprising scholar, probably of 
the Han dynasty, from discovering a treatise which 
still passes under Lieh Tzii's name. 

He could ride upon the wind, and travel whither- 
soever he wished, staying away as long as fifteen 
days. Among mortals who attain happiness, such 
a man is rare. Yet although Lieh Tzu was able 
to dispense with walking, he was still dependent 
upon something. 
Sc. the wind. 

But had he been charioted upon the eternal fitness 
of Heaven and Earth, driving before him the 
elements as his team while roaming through the 
realms of For-Ever, — upon what, then, would he 
have had to depend ? 

That is, nourished upon the doctrines of inaction, 
the continuity of life and death, etc., which will be 
dealt with in later chapters. 

Thus it has been said, "The perfect man ignores 
self; the divine man ignores action ; the true Sage 
ignores reputation^ 

His — for the three are one — is a bliss "beyond all 
that the minstrel has told." Material existences melt 
into thin air ; worldly joys and sorrows cease for him 
who passes thus into the everlasting enjoyment of a 
transcendental peace. 

The Emperor Yao 

B.C. 2356. His reign, coupled with that of Shun 

6 Chuang Tzii 

who succeeded him, may be regarded as the Golden 
Age of China's history. See p. 8. 

wished to abdicate in favour of Hsii Yu, 
A worthy hermit. 

^ saying, " If, when the sun and moon are shining, 
you persist in lighting a torch, is not that a mis- 
application of fire ? If, when the rainy season is at 
its height, you still continue to water the ground, 
is not this a waste of labour? Now, sir, do you 
assume the reins of government, and the empire will 
be at peace. I am but a dead body, conscious of my 
own deficiency. I beg you will ascend the throne." 
" Ever since you, sire, have directed the adminis- 
tration," replied Hsii Yu, " the empire has enjoyed 
tranquillity. Supposing, therefore, that I were to 
take your place now, should I gain any reputation 
thereby ? Besides, reputation is but the shadow of 
reality ; and should I trouble myself about the 
shadow? The tit, building its nest in the mighty 
forest, occupies but a single twig. The tapir slakes 
its thirst from the river, but drinks enough only to 
fill its belly. To you, sire, belongs the reputation : 
the empire has no need for me. If a cook is un- 
able to dress his funeral sacrifices, the boy who 
impersonates the corpse may not step over the 
wines and meats and do it for him." 

This illustrates rejection of reputation by the true 
Sage. See ch. vii. 

Chien Wu said to Lien Shu, 
Both fictitious personages. 

CAP. I.] Transcendental Bliss 7 

" I heard Chieh Yu utter something unjustifiably 
extravagant and without either rhyme or reason. 

This was an individual, named Lu T'ung, who feigned 
madness in order to escape an official career. For 
his interview with Confucius, see ch. iv, ad fin. 

I was greatly startled at what he said, for it seemed 
to me boundless as the Milky Way, though very 
improbable and removed from the experiences of 
mortals." 

"What was it?" asked Lien Shu. 

" He declared," replied Chien Wu, " that on the 
Miao-ku-she mountain 

Which is as fabulous as the story. 

there lives a divine man whose flesh is like ice or 
snow, whose demeanour is that of a virgin, who 
eats no fruit of the earth, but lives on air and dew, 
and who, riding on clouds with flying dragons for 
his team, roams beyond the limits of mortality. 
This being is absolutely inert. Yet he wards off 
corruption from all things, and causes the crops to 
thrive. Now I call that nonsense, and do not 
believe it." 

''Well," answered Lien Shu, "you don't ask a 
blind man's opinion of a picture, nor do you invite 
a deaf man to a concert. And blindness and deaf- 
ness are not physical only. There is blindness and 
deafness of the mind, diseases from which I fear 
you yourself are sufl"ering. The good influence 
of that man fills all creation. Yet because a 

8 Chiiang Tzit 

paltry generation cries for reform, you would have 
him condescend to the details of an empire 1 

Not seeing that the greater contains the less. 

** Objective existences cannot harm him. In a 
flood which reached to the sky, he would not 
be drowned. In a drought, though metals ran 
liquid and mountains were scorched up, he would 
not be hot. Out of his very dust and siftings 
you might fashion two such men as Yao and 
Shun. And you would have him occupy himself 
with objectives !" 

Illustrating the inaction of the divine man. 

A man of the Sung State carried some sacri- 
ficial caps into the Ylieh State, for sale. But the 
men of Ylieh used to cut off their hair and paint 
their bodies, so that they had no use for such 
things. And so, when the Emperor Yao, the 
ruler of all under heaven and pacificator of all 
within the shores of ocean, paid a visit to the 
four sages of the Miao-ku-she mountain, on re- 
turning to his capital at Fen-yang, the empire 
existed for him no more. 

This illustrates the rejection of self by the perfect 
man. Yao had his eyes opened to the hollowness 
and uselessness of all mortal possessions. He ceased, 
therefore, to think any more of himself, and per 
consequens of the empire. 

Hui Tzu 

A celebrated schoolman, contemporary with and 

CAP. 1.] Transcendental Bliss 9 

antagonistic to Chuang Tzii. For an account of his 
theories, see ch. xxxiii. 

said to Chuang Tzu, "The Prince of Wei gave me 
a seed of a large-sized kind of gourd. I planted it, 
and it bore a fruit as big as a five-bushel mea- 
sure. Now had I used this for holding liquids, it 
would have been too heavy to lift ; and had I cut 
it in half for ladles, the ladles would have been ill 
adapted for such purpose. It was uselessly large, 
so I broke it up." 

" Sir," replied Chuang Tzu, " it was rather you 
who did not know how to use large things. There 
was a man of Sung who had a recipe for salve for 
chapped hands, his family having been silk-washers 
for generations. Well, a stranger who had heard 
of it, came and offered him 100 oz. of silver for 
this recipe ; whereupon he called together his 
clansmen and said, 'We have never made much 
money by silk- washing. Now, we can make 100 oz. 
in a single day. Let the stranger have the recipe.' 

" So the stranger got it, and went and informed 
the Prince of Wu who was just then at war with 
the Yiieh State. Accordingly, the Prince used it 
in a naval battle fought at the beginning of winter 
with the Yiieh State, the result being that the 
latter was totally defeated. 

They suffered from chapped hands, while their 
rivals of the Wu State were protected by their 
patent salve. 

The stranger was rewarded with territory and a 
title. Thus, while the efficacy of the salve to cure 

10 Chuang Tzii 

chapped hands was in both cases the same, its 
application was different. Here, it secured a title; 
there, a capacity for washing silk. 

" Now as to your five-bushel gourd, why did 
you not make a boat of it, and float about 
over river and lake? You could not then have 
complained of its not holding anything ! But I 
fear you are rather woolly inside." 

Like it. This, of course, is a sneer. Hui Tzu 
could not see that the greatness of a thing depends 
upon the greatness of its application. 

Hui Tzu said to Chuang Tzu, '' Sir, I have a 
large tree, of a worthless kind. Its trunk is so 
irregular and knotty that it cannot be measured 
out for planks ; while its branches are so twisted 
as to admit of no geometrical subdivision what- 
ever. It stands by the roadside, but no carpenter 
will look at it. And your words, sir, are like 
that tree ; — big and useless, not wanted by any- 
body." 

" Sir," rejoined Chuang Tzu, " have you never 
seen a wild cat, crouching down in wait for its 
prey ? Right and left it springs from bough to 
bough, high and low alike, — until perchance it 
gets caught in a trap or dies in a snare. On the 
other hand, there is the yak with its great huge 
body. It is big enough in all conscience, but it 
cannot catch mice. 

The adaptability of a thing is oft-times its bane. 
The inability of the yak to catch mice saves it from 
the snare which is fatal to the wild cat. 

CAP. I.] Transcendental Bliss 1 1 

" Now if you have a big tree and are at a 
loss what to do with it, why not plant it in the 
domain of non-existence, 

Beyond the limits of our external world. Referring 
to the conditions of mental abstraction in which 
alone true happiness is to be found. 

whither you might betake yourself to inaction by 
its side, to blissful repose beneath its shade ? 

*' Why does the horizon hold me fast, with my joy 
and grief in this centre ? " — Emerson. 

There it would be safe from the axe and from 
all other injury ; for being of no use to others, 
itself would be free from harm." 

Illustrating the advantage of being useless. That 
which is small and useful is thus shown to be inferior 
to that which is large and useless. 

12 

CHAPTER II. 

The Identity of Contraries. 

Argument: — Contraries spring from our subjective individuality — Identity 
of subjective and objective — The centre where all distinctions are 
merged in One — How to reach this point — Speech an obstacle — 
The negative state — Light out of darkness — Illustrations. 

TZU CH'I of Nan-kuo sat leaning on a table. 
Looking up to heaven, he sighed and became 
absent, as though soul and body had parted. 

Yen Ch eng Tzu Yu, who was standing by 
him, exclaimed, "What are you thinking about 
that your body should become thus like dry 
wood, your mind like dead ashes ? Surely the 
man now leaning on the table is not he who was 
here just now." 

" My friend," replied Tzu Ch'i, " your question 
is apposite. To-day I have buried myself. . . . 
Do you understand ? . . . Ah ! perhaps you only 
know the music of Man, and not that of Earth. 
Or even if you have heard the music of Earth, 
you have not heard the music of Heaven." 

" Pray explain," said Tzii Yu. 

" The breath of the universe," continued Tzu 
Ch'i, " is called wind. At times, it is inactive. 
But when active, every aperture resounds to the 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 13 

blast. Have you never listened to its growing 
roar ? 

" Caves and dells of hill and forest, hollows 
in huge trees of many a span in girth ;— ^ 
these are like nostrils, like mouths, like ears, 
like beam-sockets, like goblets, like mortars, like 
ditches, like bogs. And the wind goes rushing 
through them, sniffing, snoring, singing, sough- 
ing, puffing, purling, whistling, whirring, now 
shrilly treble, now deeply bass, now soft, now 
loud ; until, with a lull, silence reigns supreme. 
Have you never witnessed among the trees such 
a disturbance as this ? " 

"■ Well, then," enquired Tzu Yu, '' since the 
music of earth consists of nothing more than 
holes, and the music of man of pipes and flutes, 
— of what consists the music of Heaven?" 

" The effect of the wind upon these various 
apertures," replied Tzu Ch'i, " is not uniform. 
But what is it that gives to each the individu- 
ality, to all the potentiality, of sound ? 

" Great knowledge embraces the whole : 

Sees both "the upper and under side of the medal 
of Jove " at once. 

small knowledge, a part only. Great speech is 
universal : 

Speech, according to Chuang Tzii's ideal, always 
covers the whole ground in question, leaving no room 
for positive and negative to appear in antagonism. 

small speech is particular. 

14 Chiiang Tzii 

" For whether when the mind is locked in 
sleep or whether when in waking hours the 
body is released, we are subject to daily mental 
perturbations, — indecision, want of penetration, 
concealment, fretting fear, and trembling terror. 
Now like a javelin the mind flies forth, the arbiter 
of right and wrong. 

Thus recognising contraries. 

Now like a solemn covenanter it remains firm, the 
guardian of rights secured. 

Adhering to an opinion formed. 

Then, as under autumn and winter's blight, comes 
gradual decay, a passing away, like the flow of 
water, never to return. Finally, the block when 
all is choked up like an old drain, — the failing 
mind which shall not see light again. 

" Joy and anger, sorrow and happiness, caution 
and remorse, come upon us by turns, with ever- 
changing mood. They come like music from 
hollowness, like mushrooms from damp. Daily 
and nightly they alternate within us, but we 
cannot tell whence they spring. Can we then 
hope in a moment to lay our finger upon their very 
Cause ? 

" But for these emotions / should not be. But 
for me, they would have no scope. So far we can 
go ; but we do not know what it is that brings them 
into play. 'Twould seem to be a soitl ; but the clue 
to its existence is wanting. That such a Power 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 15 

operates, is credible enough, though we cannot see 
its form. It has functions without form. 

As will be gathered later on, Chuang Tzu conceives 
of the soul as an emanation from God, passing 
to and from this earth through the portals of Life 
and Death. 

" Take the human body with all its manifold 
divisions. Which part of it does a man love best ? 
Does he not cherish all equally, or has he a pre- 
ference ? Do not all equally serve him ? And do 
these servitors then govern themselves, or are they 
subdivided into rulers and subjects ? Surely there 
is some soul which sways them all 

" But whether or not we ascertain what are the 
functions of this soul, it matters but little to the soul 
itself. For coming into existence with this mortal 
coil of mine, with the exhaustion of this mortal coil 
its mandate will also be exhausted. To be harassed 
by the wear and tear of life, and to pass rapidly 
through it without possibility of arresting one's 
course, — is not this pitiful indeed ? To labour 
without ceasing, and then, without living to enjoy 
the fruit, worn out, to depart, suddenly, one 
knows not whither, — is not that a just cause 
for grief? 

"What advantage is there in what men call not 
dying ? The body decomposes, and the mind goes 
with it. This is our real cause for sorrow. Can 
the world be so dull as not to see this ? Or is it I 
alone who am dull, and others not so ? 

1 6 Chuang TzU 

" If we are to be guided by the criteria of our 
own minds, who shall be without a guide ? 

The mind should be a tabula rasa, free from all 
judgments or opinions of its own as to the external 
world, and ready only to accept things as they are, 
not as they appear to be. 

What need to know of the alternations of passion. 

As above described. 

when the mind thus affords scope to itself? — verily 
even the minds of fools ! Whereas, for a mind 
without criteria 

As it should be. 

to admit the idea of contraries, is like saying, / 
went to Yileh to-day, and got there yesterday. 

One of Hui Tzii's paradoxes. See ch. xxxiii. 

Or, like placing nowhere somewhere, — topography 
which even the Great Yii 

The famous engineer of antiquity (b.c. 2205), who 
drained the empire of a vast body of water and 
arranged its subdivision into nine provinces. 

would fail to understand ; how much more I ? 

" Speech is not mere breath. It is differentiated 
by meaning. Take away that, and you cannot say 
whether it is speech or not. Can you even dis- 
tinguish it from the chirping of young birds ? 

" But ho\v^ can Tag be so obscured that we speak 
of it as true and false '> And how can speech be 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 17 

so obscured that it admits the idea of contraries? 
How can Tag go away and yet not remain ? 

Being omnipresent. 
How can speech exist and yet be impossible ? 
See p. 13. 

" Tag is obscured by our want of grasp. Speech 
is obscured by the gloss of this world. 

I.e. by the one-sided meanings attached to words 
and phrases. 

Hence the affirmatives and negatives of the Con- 
fucian and Mihist schools, 

Mih Tzu was a philosopher of the fourth century 
B.C., who propounded various theories which were 
vigorously attacked by the Confucianists under 
Mencius. We shall hear more of him by-and-by. 

each denying what the other affirmed and affirming 
what the other denied. But he who would recon- 
cile affirmative with negative and negative with 
affirmative, 

The "union of impossibilities," which Emerson 
credits to Plato alone. 

must do so by the light of nature. 

I.e. Have no established mental criteria, and thus 
see all things as ONE. 

" There is nothing which is not objective : there 
is nothing which is not subjective. But it is im- 
possible to start from the objective. Only from 

'\' 

1 8 Chuaiig Tzii 

subjective knowledge is it possible to proceed to 
objective knowledge. Hence it has been said, 

By Hui Tzu. 

' The objective emanates from the subjective ; the 
subjective is consequent upon the objective. This 
is the Alternation Theory! Nevertheless, when 
one is born, the other dies. When one is possible, 
the other is impossible. When one is affirmative 
the other is negative. Which being the case, the 
true sage rejects all distinctions of this and that. 
He takes his refuge in God, and places himself in 
subjective relation with all things. 

It was to this end that Tzu Ch'i " buried himself." 

"And inasmuch as the subjective is also objec- 
tive, and the objective also subjective, and as the 
contraries under each are indistinguishably blended, 
does it not become impossible for us to say whether 
subjective and objective really exist at all ? 

What is positive under the one will be negative 
under the other. Yet as subjective and objective 
are really one and the same, their positives and 
negatives must also be one and the same. 
It is as though we were to view them through a 
kind of mental Pseudoscope, by which means each 
would appear to be the other. 

" When subjective and objective are both with- 
out their correlates, that is the very axis of Tag. 
And when that axis passes through the centre at 
which all Infinities converge, positive and negative 
alike blend into an infinite One. Hence it has 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 19 

been said that there is nothing like the light of 

nature. 

Probably an allusion to Lao Tzu's " Use the light 
that is within you to revert to your natural clearness 
of sight." We should then be able to view things 
in their true light. See Tao-Te-Cliijtg\ ch. Hi., and 
The Remains of Lao TzU, p. 34. 

" To take a finger in illustration of a finger not 
being a finger is not so good as to take something 
which is not a finger. To take a horse in illustra- 
tion of a horse not being a horse is not so good as 
to take something which is not a horse. 

" So with the universe and all that in it is. 
These things are but fingers and horses in this 
sense. The possible is possible : the impossible is 
impossible. Tao operates, and given results 
follow. Things receive names and are what they 
are. They achieve this by their natural affinity for 
what they are and their natural antagonism to 
what they are not. For all things have their own 
particular constitutions and potentialities. Nothing 
can exist without these. 

These last few sentences are repeated in ch. xxvii. 
ad init. 

" We can never know anything but phenomena. 
Things are what they are, and their consequences 
will be what they will be."— 7. S. Mill. 

" Therefore it is that, viewed from the stand- 
point of Tao, a beam and a pillar are identical. 
The horizontal with the vertical. 

So are ugliness and beauty, greatness, wickedness, 

c 2 

20 Chuaiig Tzic 

perverseness, and strangeness. Separation is the 
same as construction : construction is the same as 
destruction. Nothing is subject either to construc- 
tion or to destruction, for these conditions are 
brought together into One. 

" Only the truly intelligent understand this prin- 
ciple of the identity of all things. They do not 
view things as apprehended by themselves, sub- 
jectively ; but transfer themselves into the position 
of the things viewed. 

Avoiding the fallacious channels of the senses. 

And viewing \ them thus they are able to compre- 
hend them, nay, to master them ; — and he who can 
master them is near. So it is that to place oneself 
in subjective relation with externals, without con- 
sciousness of their objectivity, — this is Tao. But 
to wear out one's intellect in an obstinate adher- 
ence to the individuality of things, not recognisi'ng 
the fact that all things are One, — this is called 
Three in the Morning T 

" What is Three in the Morning?'' asked Tzu Yu. 

" A keeper of monkeys," replied Tzu Ch'i, *' said 
with regard to their rations of chestnuts that each 
monkey was to have three in the morning and four 
at night. But at this the monkeys were very angry, 
so the keeper said they might have four in the 
morning and three at night, with which arrange- 
ment they were all well pleased. The actual 
number of the chestnuts remained the same, but 
there was an adaptation to the likes and dislikes of 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 21 

those concerned. Such is the principle of putting 
oneself into subjective relation with externals. 

" Wherefore the true Sage, while regarding con- 
traries as identical, adapts himself to the laws of 
Heaven. This is called following two courses at 
once. 

He is thus prevented from trying to v/alk through 
walls, etc., as later Taoists have professed themselves 
able to do, of course with a view to gull the public 
and enrich themselves. "God," says Locke, "when 
he makes the prophet, does not unmake the man." 
So Carlyle in his essay on Novalis : — "To a Trans- 
cendentalist, matter has an existence but only as a 

Phenomenon It is a mere relation, or rather 

the result of a relation between our living souls and 
the great First Cause." 

" The knowledge of the men of old had a limit. 
It extended back to a period when matter did not 
exist. That was the extreme point to which their 
knowledge reached. ^ 

" The second period was that of matter, but of 
matter unconditioned. 

By time or space. " Being, in itself," says Herbert 
Spencer, " out of relation, is itself unthinkable." 
Principles of Psychology, iii. p. 258. 

" The third epoch saw matter conditioned, but 
contraries were still unknown. When these 
appeared, Tao began to decline. And with the 
decline of Tag, individual bias arose. 

" Have then these states of falling and rising 
real existences ? Surely they are but as the falling 

22 Chtiang Tzu 

and risingof Chao W^n's music, — the consequences 
of his playing. 

Chao Wen played the guitar. Shih K'uang 
wielded the bdton. 
To keep time. 

Hui Tzu argued. Herein these three men excelled, 
and in the practice of such arts they passed their 
lives. 

" Hui Tzu's particular views being very different 
from those of the world in general, he was corre- 
spondingly anxious to enlighten people. But he 
did not enlighten them as he should have done, 

By the cultivation and passive manifestation of his 

own inward light. 

and consequently ended in the obscurity of the 

* hard and white.' 

Hui Tzii regarded such abstractions as hardness and 
whiteness as separate existences, of which the mind 
could only be conscious separately, one at a time. 

Subsequently, his son searched his works for some 
clue, but never succeeded in establishing the prin- 
ciple. And indeed if such were possible to be 
established, then even I am established ; but if not, 
then neither I nor anything in the universe is 
established 1 

" Therefore what the true Sage aims at is the 
light which comes out of darkness. He does not 
view things as apprehended by himself, subjec- 
tively, but transfers himself into the position of the 
things viewed. This is called using the light. 

" There remains, however, Speech. Is that to be 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 23 

enrolled under either category of contraries, or not? 
Whether it is so enrolled or not, it will in any case 
belong to one or the other, and thus be as though it 
had an objective existence. At any rate, I should 
like to hear some speech which belongs to neither 
category. 

Contraries being disposed of, there remains the 
vehicle Speech, i.e. the actual terms in which it is 
stated that contraries have ceased to be. 

" If there was a beginning, then there was a time 
before that beginning. And a time before the time 
which was before the time of that beginning. 

" If there is existence, there must have been non- 
existence. And if there was a time when nothing 
existed, then there must have been a time before 
that — when even nothing did not exist. Suddenly, 
when nothing came into existence, could one really 
say whether it belonged to the category of existence 
or of non-existence ? Even the very words I have 
just now uttered, — I cannot say whether they have 
really been uttered or not. 

I.e. The words in the text, denying the existence of 
contraries. 

" There is nothing under the canopy of heaven 
greater than the tip of an autumn spikelet. A vast 
mountain is a small thing. Neither is there any 
age greater than that of a child cut off in infancy. 
P'^ng Tsu himself died young. The universe and ^^ 
I came into being together ; and I, and everything 
therein, are One. 

" If then all things are One, what room is there 

V 

24 Chuaiig Tzu 

for Speech ? On the other hand, since I can utter 
these words, how can Speech not exist ? 

" If it does exist, we have One and Speech=two ; 
and two and one=three. From which point onwards 
even the best mathematicians will fail to reach : 

Tao. 
how much more then will ordinary people fail ? 

" Hence, if from nothing you can proceed to 
something, and subsequently reach three, it follows 
that it would be still more easy if you were to start 
from something. To avoid such progression, you 
must put yourself into subjective relation with the 
external. 

" Before conditions existed, Tao was. Before 
definitions existed. Speech was. Subjectively, we 
are conscious of certain delimitations which are, — 
Right and Left 

Relationship and Obligation 
Division and Discrimination 

Emulation and Contention 
These are called the Eight Predicables. 
Not, of course, in the strict logical sense. 

For the true Sage, beyond the limits of an external 
world, they exist, but arc not recognised. By the 
true Sage, within the limits of an external world, 
they are recognised, but are not assigned. And so, 
with regard to the wisdom of the ancients, as 
embodied in the canon of Spring and Autnmn, 

Confucius' history of his native State. Now one of 
the canonical books of China. 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 25 

the true Sage assigns, but does not justify by argu- 
ment. And thus, classifying he does not classify ; 
arguing, he does not argue." 

" How can that be ? " asked Tzu Yu. 

" The true Sage," answered Tzu Ch'i, *' keeps 
his knowledge within him, while men in general set /- 
forth theirs in argument, in order to convince each 
other. And therefore it is said that in argument he 
does not manifest himself. 

Others try to establish their own subjective view. 
The true Sage remains passive, aiming only at the 
annihilation of contraries. 

" Perfect Tao does not declare itself. Nor does ^ 
perfect argument express itself in words. Nor does ,(^ 
perfect charity show itself in act. Nor is perfect 
honesty absolutely incorruptible. Nor is perfect 
courage absolutely unyielding. 

" For the Tao which shines forth is not Tao. 
Speech which argues falls short of its aim. Charity 
which has fixed points loses its scope. Honesty 
which is absolute is wanting in credit. Courage 
which is absolute misses its object. These five are, 
as it were, round, with a strong bias towards 
squareness. Therefore that knowledge which stops 
at what it does not know, is the highest know- 
ledge. 

*' Who knows the argument which can be argued 
without words ? — the Tao which does not declare 
itself as Tao ? He who knows this may be said to 
be of God. To be able to pour in without making 
full, and pour out without making empty, in igno- 

26 Chumig Tzii 

ranee of the power by which such results are 
accomplished, — this is accounted Light.'' 

Of old, the Emperor Yao said to Shun, " I 
would smite the Tsungs, and the Kueis, and the 
Hsu-aos. Ever since I have been on the throne I 
have had this desire. What do you think ? " 

" These three States," replied Shun, " are paltry 
out-of-the-way places. Why can you not shake off 
this desire ? Once upon a time, ten suns came out 
together, and all things were illuminated thereby. 
How much more then should virtue excel suns ? " 

Illustrating the use of "light." Instead of active 
force, substitute the passive but irresistible influence 
of virtue complete. The sun caused the traveller to 
lay aside his cloak when the north wind succeeded 
only in making him draw it tighter around him. 

Yeh Ch'iieh asked Wang I, 

A disciple and tutor of remote antiquity. Said to 
have been two of the four Sages on the Miao-ku-she 
mountain mentioned in ch. i. 

saying, " Do you know for certain that all things 
are subjectively the same ? " 

" How can I know?" answered Wang I. " Do 
you know what you do not know ? " 

" How can I know ? " replied Yeh Ch ueh. "But 
can then nothing be known ? " 

" How can I know?" said Wang I. "Never- 
theless, I will try to tell you. How can it be 
known that what I call knowing is not really not 
knowing, and that what I call not knowing is not 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 27 

really knowing ? Now I would ask you this. If 
a man sleeps in a damp place, he gets lumbago and 
dies. But how about an eel ? And living up in a 
tree is precarious and trying to the nerves ; — but 
how about monkeys ? Of the man, the eel, and 
the monkey, whose habitat is the right one, abso- 
lutely? Human beings feed on flesh, deer on 
grass, centipedes on snakes, owls and crows on 
mice. Of these four, whose is the right taste, 
absolutely ? Monkey mates with monkey, the 
buck with the doe ; eels consort with fishes, while 
men admire Mao Ch'iang and Li Chi, 

Beauties of the fifth and seventh centuries B.C., re- 
spectively. The commentators do not seem to have 
noted the very obvious anachronism here involved. 

at the sight of whom fishes plunge deep down in 
the water, birds soar high in the air, and deer 
hurry away. 

For shame at their own inferiority. 

Yet who shall say which is the correct standard of 
beauty? In my opinion, the standard of human 
virtue, and of positive and negative, is so ob- 
scured that it is impossible to actually know it 
as such." 

" If you then," asked Yeh Ch ueh, " do not know 
what is bad for you, is the Perfect Man equally 
without this knowledge ? " 1 

" The Perfect Man," answered Wang I, " is a 
spiritual being. Were the ocean itself scorched 
up, he would not feel hot. Were the Milky Way 

28 Chuang- Tzil 

<b 

frozen hard, he would not feel cold. Were the 
mountains to be riven with thunder, and the great 
deep to be thrown up by storm, he would not 
tremble. In such case, he would mount upon the 
clouds of heaven, and driving the sun and the 
moon before him, would pass beyond the limits of 
this external world, where death and life have no 
more victory over man ; — how much less what is 
bad for him ? " 

Chii Ch'iao addressed Chang Wu Tzu 
A disciple and tutor of antiquity. 

as follows : — " I heard Confucius say, ' The true 
sage pays no heed to mundane affairs. He neither 
seeks gain nor avoids injury. He asks nothing at 
the hands of man. He adheres, without question- 
ing, to Tao. Without speaking, he can speak ; 
and he can speak and yet say nothing. And so 
he roams beyond the limits of this dusty world. 
These,' added Confucius, ' are wild words.' 

Han Fei Tzu tells us that Lao Tzu, whose doctrines 
Confucius seems to be here deriding, said exactly 
the opposite of this ; viz : " The true Sage is before- 
hand in his attention to mundane affairs," i.e. "takes 
time by the forelock." Neither utterance, however, 
appears in the Tao-Tc-Ching. See The Remains 
of Lao TzU, p. 44. 

Now to me they are the skilful embodiment of 
Tag. What, Sir, is your opinion ? " 

" Points upon which the Yellow Emperor 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 29 

doubted," replied Chang Wu Tzu, '' how should 
Confucius know ? 

Lao Tzu and the Yellow Emperor have always 
been mixed up in the heads of Taoist writers, albeit 
separated by a chasm of some two thousand years. 
Confucius is here evidently dealing with the actual 
doctrines of Lao Tzu. 

You are going too fast. You see your ^<g^,^ 
and expect to hear it crow. You look at your 
cross-bow, and expect to have broiled duck before 
you. I will say a few words to you at random, and 
do you listen at random. 

'' How does the Sage seat himself by the sun 
and moon, and hold the universe in his grasp? 
He blends everything into one harmonious whole, 
rejecting the confusion of this and that. Rank 
and precedence, which the vulgar prize, the Sage 
stolidly ignores. The revolutions of ten thousand 
years leave his Unity unscathed. The universe 
itself may pass away, but he will flourish still. 

" How do I know that love of life is not a 
delusion after all ? How do I know but that he 
who dreads to die is not as a child who has lost 
the way and cannot find his home ? 

'' The lady Li Chi was the daughter of Ai Feng. 

A border chieftain. 

When the Duke of Chin first got her, she wept 
until the bosom of her dress was drenched with 
tears. But when she came to the royal residence, 
and lived with the Duke, and ate rich food, she 

u 

J 

30 Chtiang Tzil 

repented of having wept. How then do I know 
but that the dead repent of having previously 
clung to life? 

** Those who dream of the banquet, wake to 
lamentation and sorrow. Those who dream of 
lamentation and sorrow wake to join the hunt. 
While they dream, they do not know that they 
dream. Some will even interpret the very dream 
they are dreaming ; and only when they awake do 
they know it was a dream. By and by comes the 
Great Awakening, and then we find out that this 
life is really a great dream. Fools think they are 
awake now, and flatter themselves they know if 
they are really princes or peasants. Confucius and 
you are both dreams ; and I who say you are 
dreams, — I am but a dream myself. This is a 
paradox. Tomorrow a sage may arise to explain 
it; but that tomorrow will not be until ten 
thousand generations have gone by. 

" Granting that you and I argue. If you beat 
me, and not I you, are you necessarily right and I 
wrong? Or if I beat you and not you me, am I 
necessarily right and you wrong ? Or are we both 
partly right and partly wrong? Or are we both 
wholly right and wholly wrong ? You and I cannot 
know this, and consequently the world will be in 
ignorance of the truth. 

" Who shall I employ as arbiter between us ? If 
I employ some one who takes your view, he will 
side with you. How can such a one arbitrate 
between us ? If I employ some one who takes my 

CAP. II.] The Identity of Contraries 31 

view, he will side with me. How can such a one 
arbitrate between us ? And if I employ some one 
who either differs from, or agrees with, both of us, 
he will be equally unable to decide between us. 
Since then you, and I, and man, cannot decide, '-^ 
must we not depend upon Another ? 

Upon God, in whose infinity all contraries blend 
indistinguishably into One. 
Such dependence is as though it were not depend- 
ence. We are embraced in the obliterating unity of 
God. There is perfect adaptation to whatever may 
eventuate ; and so we complete our allotted span. 

" But what is it to be embraced in the obliterat- 
ing unity of God ? It is this. With reference to 
positive and negative, to that which is so and that 
which is not so, — if the positive is really positive, 
it must necessarily be different from its negative : 
there is no room for argument. And if that which 
is so really is so, it must necessarily be different 
from that which is not so : there is no room for 
argument. 

** Take no heed of time, nor of right and wrong. 
But passing into the realm of the Infinite, take 
your final rest therein." 

Our refuge is in God alone, the Infinite Abso- 
lute. Contraries cannot but exist, but they should / 
exist independently of each other without antagonism. 
Such a condition is found only in the all-embracing 
unity of God, wherein all distinctions of positive and 
negative, of right and wrong, of this and of that, are 
obliterated and merged in One. 
Herbert Spencer says, "The antithesis of subject 

32 Chuang Tzu 

and object, never to be transcended while conscious- 
ness lasts, renders impossible all knowledge of the 
Ultimate Reality in which subject and object are 
united." Principles of Psychology, i. p. 272. 

The Penumbra said to the Umbra, " At one 
moment you move : at another you are at rest. 
At one moment you sit down : at another you get 
up. Why this instability of purpose?" *' I de- 
pend," replied the Umbra, " upon something 
which causes me to do as I do ; and that some- 
thing depends in turn upon something else which 
causes it to do as it does. My dependence is like 
that of a snake's scales or of a cicada's wings. 

Which do not move of their own accord. 

How can I tell why I do one thing, or why I do 
not do another ? " 

Showing how two or more may be the phenomena 
of one. 

Once upon a time, I, Chuang Tzii, dreamt I was 
a butterfly, fluttering hither and thither, to all 
intents and purposes a butterfly. I was conscious 
only of following my fancies as a butterfly, and 
was unconscious of my individuality as a man. 
Suddenly, I awaked, and there I lay, myself again. 
Now I do not know whether I was then a man 
dreaming I was a butterfly, or whether I am now a 
butterfly dreaming I am a man. Between a man 
and a butterfly there is necessarily a barrier. The 
transition is called Metempsychosis. 

Showing how one may appear to be either of two. 

33 

CHAPTER III. 

Nourishment of the Soul. 

Argument :—lAie too short— Wisdom unattainable— Accommodation 
to circumstances— Liberty paramount— Death a release— The soul 
immortal. 

1\ /r Y life has a limit, but my knowledge is with- 
^^^ out limit. To drive the limited in search 
of the limitless, is fatal ; and the knowledge of 
those who do this is fatally lost. 

In striving for others, avoid fame. In striving 
for self, avoid disgrace. Pursue a middle course. 
Thus you will keep a sound body, and a sound 
mind, fulfil your duties, and work out your al- 
lotted span. 

Prince Hui's cook was cutting up a bullock. 
Every blow of his hand, every heave of his 
shoulders, every tread of his foot, every thrust 
of his knee, every whshh of rent flesh, every 
chhk of the chopper, was in perfect harmony, — 
rhythmical like the dance of the Mulberry 
Grove, simultaneous like the chords of the Ching 
Shou. 

Commentators are divided in their identifications 
of these ancient morcea-ux. 

D 

34 Chuang Tzu 

"Well done!" cried the Prince. "Yours is 
skill indeed." 

" Sire," replied the cook ; " I have always de- 

/ voted myself to Tao. It is better than skill. When 

I first began to cut up bullocks, I saw before me 

simply luhole bullocks. After three years' practice, 

I saw no more whole animals. 

Meaning that he saw them, so to speak, in sec- 
tions. 

And now I work with my mind and not with my 
eye. When my senses bid me stop, but my mind 
urges me on, I fall back upon eternal principles. 
I follow such openings or cavities as there may 
be, according to the natural constitution of the 
animal. I do not attempt to cut through joints : 
still less through large bones. 

For a curious parallelism, see Plato's Phcrdrus, 265. 

" A good cook changes his chopper once a year, 
— because he cuts. An ordinary cook, once a 
month, — because he hacks. But I have had this 
chopper nineteen years, and although I have cut 
up many thousand bullocks, its edge is as if fresh 
from the whetstone. For at the joints there are 
always interstices, and the edge of a chopper 
being without thickness, it remains only to insert 
that which is without thickness into such an 
interstice. 

These words help to elucidate a much-vexed pas- 
sage in ch. xliii of the Tao-Te-Ching. See The 
Remaiiis of Lao Tzii, p. 30. 

CAP. III.] Nourishment of the Soul 35 

By these means the interstice will be enlarged, 
and the blade will find plenty of room. It is thus 
that I have kept my chopper for nineteen years as 
though fresh from the whetstone. 

*' Nevertheless, when I come upon a hard part 
where the blade meets with a difficulty, I am all 
caution. I fix my eye on it. I stay my hand, and 
gently apply my blade, until with a hwah the part 
yields like earth crumbling to the ground. Then I 
take out my chopper, and stand up, and look 
around, and pause, until with an air of triumph I 
wipe my chopper and put it carefully away." 

" Bravo ! " cried the Prince. " From the words 
of this cook I have learnt how to take care of my 
life." 

Meaning that which informs life, sc, the soul. 

When Hsien, of the Kung-wen family, beheld a 
certain official, he was horrified, and said, *' Who is 
that man ? How came he to lose a foot ? Is this 
the work of God, or of man ? 

" Why, of course," continued Hsien, " it is the 
work of God, and not of man. When God brought 
this man into the world, he wanted him to be 
unlike other men. Men always have two feet. 
From this it is clear that God and not man made 
him as he is. 

It was by God's will that he took office with a view 
to personal aggrandisement. That he got into 
trouble and suffered the common punishment of loss 
of feet, cannot therefore be charged to man. 

D 2 

36 Chuang Tzii 

" Now, wild fowl get a peck once in ten steps, a 
drink once in a hundred. Yet they do not want to 
be fed in a cage. For although they would thus be 
able to command food, they would not be free." 

And had our friend above kept out of the official 
cage he would still have been independent as the 
fowls of the air. 

When Lao Tzu died, Ch'in Shih went to mourn. 
He uttered three yells and departed. 

A disciple asked him saying, " Were you not our 
Master's friend?" 

" I was," replied Ch'in Shih. 

" And if so, do you consider that a sufficient ex- 
pression of grief at his loss ? " added the disciple. 

" I do," said Ch'in Shih. " I had believed him 
to be the man of all men, but now I know that he 
was not. When I went in to mourn, I found old 
persons weeping as if for their children, young ones 
wailing as if for their mothers. And for him to 
have gained the attachment of those people in this 
way, he too must have uttered words which should 
not have been spoken, and dropped tears which 
should not have been shed, thus violating eternal 
principles, increasing the sum of human emotion, 
and forgetting the source from which his own life 
was received. The ancients called such emotions 
the trammels of mortality. The Master came, 
because it was his time to be born ; he went, because 
it was his time to die. For those who accept the 
phenomenon of birth and death in this sense, 

CAP. III.] Notirishinent of the Soul 2!7 

lamentation and sorrow have no place. The 
ancients spoke of death as of God cutting down a 
man suspended in the air. The fuel is consumed, 
but the fire may be transmitted, and we know not 
that it comes to an end." 

The soul, according to Chuang Tzu, if duly- 
nourished and not allowed to wear itself out with 
the body in the pursuits of mortality, may become 
immortal and return beatified to the Great Unknown 
whence it came. 

38 

CHAPTER IV. 

Man Among Men. 

Argument: — Man must fall in with his mortal environment — His virtue 
should be passive, not active — He should be rather than do — Talents 
a hindrance — But of petty uselessness great usefulness is achieved. 

A7EN HUI went to take leave of Confucius. 

A disciple of the Sage. Also known as Tzu Yiian. 

" Whither are you bound ?" asked the Master. 

" I am going to the State of Wei," was the 
reply. 

"And what do you propose to do there?" con- 
tinued Confucius. 

" I hear," answered Yen Hui, " that the Prince 
of Wei is of mature age, but of an unmanageable 
disposition. He behaves as if the State were of no 
account, and will not see his own faults. Conse- 
quently, the people perish ; and their corpses lie 
about like so much undergrowth in a marsh. They 
are at extremities. And I have heard you. Sir, 
say that if a State is well governed it may be 
neglected ; but that if it is badly governed, then we 
should visit it. 

In the L7m Vic, Confucius says exactly the opposite 
of this. 

CAP. IV.] Man Among Men 39 

The science of medicine embraces many various 
diseases. I would test my knowledge in this 
sense, that perchance I may do some good to that 
State." 

"Alas!" cried Confucius, "you will only 
succeed in bringing evil upon yourself For Tao 
must not be distributed. If it is, it will lose its 
unity. If it loses its unity, it will be uncertain ; 
and so cause mental disturbance, — from which 
there is no escape. 

"The sages of old first got Tao for themselves, 
and then got it for others. Before you possess this 
yourself, what leisure have you to attend to the 
doings of wicked men ? Besides, do you know 
what Virtue results in and where Wisdom ends ? 
Virtue results in a desire for fame ; Wisdom ends 
in contentions. In the struggle for fame men crush 
each other, while their wisdom but provokes rivalry. 
Both are baleful instruments, and may not be 
incautiously used. 

" Besides, those who, before influencing by their 
own solid virtue and unimpeachable sincerity, and 
before reaching the heart by the example of their 
own disregard for name and fame, go and preach 
charity and duty to one's neighbour to wicked 
men, — only make these men hate them for their 
very goodness' sake. Such persons are called evil 
speakers. And those who speak evil of others are 
apt to be evil spoken of themselves. That, alas ! 
will be your end. 

" On the other hand, if the Prince loves the good 

40 CImang Tzu 

and hates the bad, what object will you have in 
inviting him to change his ways ? Before you have 
opened your mouth to preach, the Prince himself 
will have seized the opportunity to wrest the victory 
from you. Your eye will fall, your expression fade, 
your words will stick, your face will change, and 
your heart will die within you. It will be as 
though you took fire to quell fire, water to quell 
water, which is popularly known as ' pouring oil on 
the flames.' And if you begin with concessions, 
there will be no end to them. Neglect this sound 
advice, and you will be the victim of that violent 
man. 

" Of old, Chieh murdered Kuan Lung Feng, and 
Chou slew Prince Pi Kan. Their victims were both 
men who cultivated virtue themselves in order to 
secure the welfare of the people. But in doing 
this they offended their superiors ; and therefore, 
because of that very moral culture, their superiors 
got rid of them, in order to guard their own 
reputations. 

Chieh and Chou are the two typical tyrants of 
Chinese history. 

'' Of old, Yao attacked the Ts'ung-chih and 
Hsii-ao countries, and Yii attacked the Yu-hu 
country. Homes were desolated and families de- 
stroyed by the slaughter of the inhabitants. Yet 
they fought without ceasing, and strove for victory 
to the last. These are instances known to all. 
Now if the Sages of old failed in their efforts 
against this love of fame, this desire for victory, — 

CAP. IV.] Man Amojtg Men 41 

are you likely to succeed ? But of course you have 
a scheme. Tell it to me." 

'' Gravity of demeanour," replied Yen Hui, " and 
dispassionateness ; energy and singleness of pur- 
pose,— will this do ? " 

" Alas ! " said Confucius, " that will not do. If you 
make a show of being perfect and obtrude yourself, 
the Prince's mood will be doubtful. Ordinarily, he 
is not opposed, and so he has come to take actual 
pleasure in trampling upon the feelings of others. 
And if he has thus failed in the practice of routine 
virtues, do you expect that he will take readily 
to higher ones ? You may insist, but without 
result. Outwardly you will be right, but in- 
wardly wrong. How then will you make him 
mend his ways?" 

" Just so," replied Yen Hui. " I am inwardly 
straight, and outwardly crooked, completed after 
the models of antiquity. 

" He who is inwardly straight is a servant of God. 
And he who is a servant of God knows that the Son 
of Heaven 

The Emperor. 

and himself are equally the children of God. Shall 
then such a one trouble whether man visits him 
with evil or with good ? Man indeed regards him 
as a child ; and this is to be a servant of God. 

(i) Children are everywhere exempt. — This is the 
first limb of a threefold argument. 

" He who is outwardly crooked is a servant of 

42 Chiiang Tzu 

man. He bows, he kneels, he folds his hands ; — 
such is the ceremonial of a minister. What all 
men do, shall I dare not to do ? What all men do, 
none will blame me for doing. This is to be a 
servant of man. 

(2) The individual is not punished for the faults of 
the community. 

*' He who is completed after the models of 
antiquity is a servant of the Sages of old. 
Although I utter the words of warning and take 
him to task, it is the Sages of old who speak, and 
not I. Thus my uprightness will not bring me 
into trouble, the servant of the Sages of old. — 
Will this do?" 

(3) The responsibility rests, not with the mouth- 
piece, but with the authors of the doctrines 
enunciated. 

" Alas ! " replied Confucius, " No. Your plans 
are too many, and are lacking in prudence. How- 
ever, your firmness will secure you from harm ; but 
that is all. You will not influence him to such an 
extent that he shall seem to follow the dictates of 
his own heart." 

"Then," said Yen Hui, " I am without resource, 
and venture to ask for a method." 

Confucius said, ''FAST Let me explain. 

You have a method, but it is difficult to practise. 
Those which are easy are not from God." 

" Well," replied Yen Hui, " my family is poor, 

CAP. IV.] Man Ainoiig Men 43 

and for many months we have tasted neither wine 
nor flesh. Is not that fasting ? " 

'' The fasting of religious observance it is," 
answered Confucius, *' but not the fasting of the 
heart." 

" And may I ask," said Yen Hui, " in what con- 
sists the fasting of the heart ? " 

" Cultivate unity," replied Confucius. 

Make of the mind as it were an undivided in- 
divisible ONE. 

" You hear not with the ears, but with the mind ; 
not with the mind, but with your soul. 

The vital fluid which informs your whole being ; 
in fact, " with your whole self." 

But let hearing stop with the ears. Let the work- 
ing of the mind stop with itself. Then the soul 
will be a negative existence, passively responsive 
to externals. In such a negative existence, only' 
Tag can abide. And that negative state is the 
fasting of the heart." 

" Then," said Yen Hui, *' the reason I could not 
get the use of this method is my own individuality. 
If I could get the use of it, my individuality would 
have gone. Is this what you mean by the negative 
state ? " 

" Exactly so," replied the Master. " Let me tell 
you. If you can enter this man's domain without 
offending his amour propre, cheerful if he hears 
you, passive if he does not ; without science, with- 

44 Clmaiig Tzii 

out drugs, simply living there in a state of com- 
plete indifference, — you will be near success. It is 
easy to stop walking : the trouble is to walk with- 
out touching the ground. As an agent of man, it 
is easy to deceive ; but not as an agent of God. 
You have heard of winged creatures flying. You 
have never heard of flying without wings. You 
have heard of men being wise with wisdom. You 
have never heard of men wise without wisdom. 

Wise of God, without the wisdom of man. 

" Look at that window. Through it an empty 
room becomes bright with scenery ; but the land- 
scape stops outside. Were this not so, we should 
have an exemplification of sitting still and running 
away at one and the same time. 

An empty room would contain something, — a para- 
dox like that in the text. 

" In this sense, you may use your ears and eyes 
to communicate within, but shut out all wisdom 
from the mind. 

Let the channels of your senses be to your mind 
what a window is to an empty room. 

And there where the supernatural 

Something which is and yet is not, like the landscape 
seen in, and yet not in, a room. 

can find shelter, shall not man find shelter too ? 
This is the method for regenerating all creation. 

By passive, not by active, virtue. 

CAP. IV.] Man Among Men 45 

It was the instrument which Yii and Shun em- 
ployed. It was the secret of the success of Fu 
Hsi and Chi Chii. Shall it not then be adopted by 
mankind in general ? " 

Who stand much more in need of regeneration than 
such worthies as were these ancient Emperors. 

Tzu Kao, Duke of She, 
A district of the Ch'u State. 

being about to go on a mission to the Ch'i State, 
asked Confucius, saying, " The mission my 
sovereign is sending me on is a most important 
one. Of course, I shall be received with all due 
respect, but they will not take the same interest in 
the matter that I shall. And as an ordinary person 
cannot be pushed, still less a Prince, I am in a 
state of great alarm. 

" Now you. Sir, have told me that in all under- 
takings great and small, Tao alone leads to a 
happy issue. Otherwise that, failing success, there 
is to be feared punishment from without, and with 
success, punishment from within ; while exemption 
in case either of success or non-success falls only 
to the share of those who possess the virtue 
required. 

I.e. those to whom the issue, as regards their own 
reward or punishment, is a matter of the completes! 
indifference. 

The term virtue, here as elsewhere unless specially 
notified, should be understood in the sense of ex- 
emplification of Tag. 

46 Chiiang Tsu 

" Well, I am not dainty with my food ; neither 
am I always wanting to cool myself when hot. 
However, this morning I received my orders, and 
this evening I have been drinking iced water. I 
am so hot inside. Before I have put my hand to 
the business I am suffering punishment from 
within ; and if I do not succeed I am sure to suffer 
punishment from without. Thus I get both 
punishments, which is really more than I can bear. 
Kindly tell me what there is to be done." 

" There exist two sources of safety," Confucius 
replied. " One is Destiny : the other is Duty. A 
child's love for its parents is destiny. It is in- 
separable from the child's life. A subject's allegiance 
to his sovereign is duty. Beneath the canopy of 
heaven there is no place to which he can escape from 
it. These two sources of safety may be explained 
as follows. To serve one's parents without refer- 
ence to place but only to the service, is the acme of 
filial piety. To serve one's prince without reference 
to the act but only to the service, is the perfection 
of a subject's loyalty. To serve one's own heart 
so as to permit neither joy nor sorrow within, but 
to cultivate resignation to the inevitable, — this is 
the climax of Virtue. 

" Now a minister often finds himself in circum- 
stances over which he has no control. But if 
he simply confines himself to his work, and is 
utterly oblivious of self, what leisure has he for 
loving life or hating death ? And so you may 
safely go. 

CAP. IV.] Man Ammig Men 47 

" But I have yet more to tell you. All inter- 
course, if personal, should be characterised by 
sincerity. If from a distance, it should be carried 
on in loyal terms. These terms will have to be 
transmitted by some one. Now the transmission 
of messages of good- or ill-will is the hardest thing 
possible. Messages of good-will are sure to be 
overdone with fine phrases ; messages of ill-will 
with harsh ones. In each case the result is 
exaggeration, and a consequent failure to carry 
conviction, for which the envoy suffers. Therefore 
it was said in the Fa-yen, 

Name of an ancient book. 

' Confine yourself to simple statements of fact, 
shorn of all superfluous expression of feeling, and 
your risk will be small.' 

" In trials of skill, at first all is friendliness ; but 
at last it is all antagonism. Skill is pushed too far. 
So on festive occasions, the drinking which is in 
the beginning orderly enough, degenerates into riot 
and disorder. Festivity is pushed too far. It is 
in fact the same with all things : they begin with 
good faith and end with contempt. From small 
beginnings come great endings. 

" Speech is like wind to wave. Action is liable 
to divergence from its true goal. By wind, waves 
are easily excited. Divergence from the true goal 
is fraught with danger. Thus angry feelings rise 
up without a cause. Specious words and dishonest 
arguments follow, as the wild random cries of an 

48 Chuang Tzii 

animal at the point of death. Both sides give way 
to passion. For where one party drives the other 
too much into a corner, resistance will always be 
provoked without apparent cause. And if the 
cause is not apparent, how much less will the 
ultimate effect be so ? 

" Therefore it is said in the Fa-yen, ' Neither 
deviate from nor travel beyond your instructions. 

" Travel beyond your instructions," is literally, 
" urge a settlement." 

To pass the limit is to go to excess.' 

"To deviate from, or to travel beyond instruc- 
tions, may imperil the negotiation. A settlement 
to be successful must be lasting. It is too late to 
change an evil settlement once made. 

" Therefore let yourself be carried along without 
fear, taking refuge in no alternative to preserve 
you from harm on either side. This is the utmost 
you can do. What need for considering your 
obligations ? Better leave all to Destiny, difficult 
as this may be." 

It is passing strange that this exposition of the 
, laissez-aller inaction doctrine of Tag should be placed 

^ in the mouth of Confucius, who is thus made in some 

measure to discredit his own teachings. The com- 
mentators, however, see nothing anomalous in the 
position here assigned to the Sage. 

Yen Ho 

A philosopher from the Lu State. 

CAP. IV.] Man Among Men 49 

was about to become tutor to the eldest son of 
Prince Ling of the Wei State. Accordingly he 
observed to Chii Poh Yu, 

Prime Minister of the Wei State. 

" Here is a man whose disposition is naturally 
of a low order. To let him take his own un- 
principled way is to endanger the State. To try to 
restrain him is to endanger one's personal safety. 
He has just wit enough to see faults in others, but 
not to see his own. I am consequently at a loss 
what to do." 

" A good question indeed," replied Chii Poh Yii, 
" You must be careful, and begin by self-reforma- 
tion. Outwardly you may adapt yourself, but 
inwardly you must keep up to your own standard. 
In this there are two points to be guarded against. 
You must not let the outward adaptation penetrate 
within, nor the inward standard manifest itself 
without. In the former case, you will fall, you 
will be obliterated, you will collapse, you will lie 
prostrate. In the latter case, you will be a sound, 
a name, a bogie, an uncanny thing. If he would 
play the child, do you play the child too. If he 
cast aside all sense of decorum, do you do so too. 
As far as he goes, do you go also. Thus you will 
reach him without offending him. 

** Don't you know the story of the praying mantis? 
In its rage it stretched out its arms to prevent a 
chariot from passing, unaware that this was be- 
yond its strength, so admirable was its energy ! 

E 

50 Chtiang Tzil 

Be cautious. If you are always offending others 
by your superiority, you will probably come to 
grief. 

" Do you not know that those who keep tigers 
do not venture to give them live animals as food, 
for fear of exciting their fury when killing the 
prey? Also, that whole animals are not given, 
for fear of exciting the tigers' fury when rending 
them ? The periods of hunger and repletion are 
carefully watched in order to prevent such out- 
bursts. The tiger is of a different species from 
man ; but the latter too is manageable if properly 
managed, unmanageable if excited to fury. 

" Those who are fond of horses surround them 
with various conveniences. Sometimes mosquitoes 
or flies trouble them ; and then, unexpectedly to 
the animal, a groom will brush them off, the result 
being that the horse breaks his bridle, and hurts 
his head and chest. The intention is good, but 
there is a want of real care for the horse. Against 
this you must be on your guard." 

A certain artisan was travelling to the Ch'i State. 
On reaching Ch'ii-yuan, he saw a sacred // tree, 

A worthless species of oak. 

large enough to hide an ox behind it, a hundred 
spans in girth, towering up ten cubits over the 
hill top, and carrying behind it branches, many 
tens of the smallest of which were of a size 
for boats. Crowds stood gazing at it, but our 
artisan took no notice, and went on his way with- 

CAP. IV.] Man Among Men 51 

out even casting a look behind. His apprentice 
however gazed his fill, and when he caught up 
his master, said, " Ever since I have handled an 
adze in your service, I have never seen such a 
splendid piece of timber as that. How was 
it that you, sir, did not care to stop and look 
at it?" 

" It's not worth talking about," replied his 
master. " It's good for nothing. Make a boat of 
it, — 'twould sink. A coffin, — 'twould rot. Furni- 
ture,— 'twould soon break down. A door, — 'twould 
sweat. A pillar, — 'twould be worm-eaten. It is 
wood of no quality, and of no use. That is why 
it has attained its present age." 

When the artisan reached home, he dreamt that 
the tree appeared to him in a dream and spoke 
as follows : — " What is it that you compare me 
with ? Is it with the more elegant trees ? — The 
cherry-apple, the pear, the orange, the pumelo, 
and other fruit-bearers, as soon as their fruit 
ripens are stripped and treated with indignity. 
The great boughs are snapped off, the small ones 
scattered abroad. Thus do these trees by their 
own value injure their own lives. They cannot 
fulfil their allotted span of years, but perish pre- 
maturely in mid-career from their entanglement 
with the world around them. Thus it is with 
all things. For a long period my aim was to 
be useless. Many times I was in danger, but 
at length I succeeded, and so became useful as 
I am to-day. But had I then been of use, I 

E 2 

5 2 Chiiang Tzu 

should not now be of the great use I am. More- 
over, you and I belong both to the same category 
of thines. Have done then with this criticism of 
others. Is a good-for-nothing fellow whose dangers 
are not yet passed a fit person to talk of a good-for- 
nothing tree ? " 

When our artisan awaked and told his dream, 
his apprentice said, '' If the tree aimed at useless- 
liess, how was it that it became a sacred tree ? " 

Which of course may be said to be of use. 

" What you don't understand," replied his 
master, " don't talk about. That was merely to 
escape from the attacks of its enemies. Had it 
not become sacred, how many would have wanted to 
Cut it down ! The means of safety adopted were 
different from ordinary means. 

In order to reach the somewhat extraordinary goal 
of uselessness. 

and to test these by ordinary canons leaves one far 
wide of the mark." 

Tzu Ch'i of Nan-poh 

Said to be identical with the individual mentioned 
at the beginning of ch. ii. 

was travelling on the Shang mountain when he saw 
a large tree which astonished him very much. A 
thousand chariot teams could have found shelter 
under its shade. 

" What tree is this ?" cried Tzu Ch'i. " Surely it 

CAP. IV.] Man A7no7ig Men 53 

must have unusually fine timber." Then looking 
up, he saw that its branches were too crooked for 
rafters ; while as to the trunk he saw that its 
irregular grain made it valueless for coffins. He 
tasted a leaf, but it took the skin off his lips ; and 
its odour was so strong that it would make a man 
as it were drunk for three days together. 

" Ah ! " said Tzu Ch'i. " This tree is good for 
nothing, and that is how it has attained this size. 
A wise man might well follow its example." 

And so escape danger from his surroundings. 

In the State of Sung there is a place called 
Ching-shih, where thrive the beech, the cedar, and 
the mulberry. Such as are of a one-handed span 
or so in girth are cut down for monkey-cages. 
Those of two or three two-handed spans are cut 
down for the beams of fine houses. Those of seven 
or eight such spans are cut down for the solid sides 
of rich men's coffins. 

To this day, the very best kinds of wood are still 
reserved for the " planks of old age." 

Thus they do not fulfil their allotted span of years, 
but perish in mid-career beneath the axe. Such is 
the misfortune which overtakes worth. 

For the sacrifices to the River God, neither bulls 
with white cheeks, nor pigs with large snouts, nqr 
men suffering from piles, were allowed to be used. 
This had been revealed to the soothsayers, and these 
characteristics were consequently regarded a?; inaus^ 

54 C/iULDig Tzu 

picious. The wise, however, would regard them as 
extremel}' auspicious. 

Readers of Do7i yuan will recollect how the master's 
mate had reason to share his view. 

There was a hunchback named Su. His jaws 
touched his navel. His shoulders were higher than 
his head. His hair knot looked up to the sky. 
His viscera were upside down. His buttocks were 
where his ribs should have been. By tailoring, or 
washing, he was easily able to earn his living. By 
sifting rice he could make enough to support a 
familv of ten. 

In all of which occupations a man would necessarily 
stoop. 

When orders came down for a conscription, the 
hunchback stood unconcerned among the crowd. 
And similarly, in matters of public works, his 
deformity shielded him from being emploved. 

On the other hand, when it came to donations 
of grain, the hunchback received as much as three 
chung, 

An ancient measure of uncertain capacity. 

and oi firewood, ten faggots. And if physical 
deformity was thus enough to preser\-e his body 
until its allotted end, how much more would not 
moral and mental deformity avail ! 

A moral and mental deviation would be still more 
likely to condemn a man to that neglect from his 
fellows which is so conducive to our real welfare. 

CAP. IV.] Man Among Men 55 

When Confucius was in the Ch'u State, the 
eccentric Chieh Yli passed his door, saying, " O 
phoenix, O phoenix, how has thy virtue fallen ! — 

By thus issuing forth out of due season. 

unable to wait for the coming years or to go back 
into the past. 

When you might be, or might have been, of use. 
The idea conveyed is that Confucianism was un- 
suited to its age. See Lun-yii, ch. xviii. 

If Tao prevails on earth, prophets will fulfil their 
mission. If Tao does not prevail, they will but 
preserv^e themselves. At the present day they will 
but just escape. 

" The honours of this world are light as feathers, 
yet none estimate them at their true value. The 
misfortunes of this life are weighty as the earth 
itself, yet none can keep out of their reach. No 
more, no more, seek to influence by virtue. Beware, 
beware, move cautiously on ! O ferns, O ferns, 
wound not my steps ! Through my tortuous 
journey wound not my feet ! Hills sufter from the 
trees they produce. Fat burns by its own com- 
bustibility. Cinnamon trees furnish food : there- 
fore they are cut down. The lacquer tree is felled 
for use. All men know the use of useful things ; 
but they do not know the use of useless things," 

i^ 

56 

CHAPTER V. 

The Evidence of Virtue Complete. 

Argument : — Correspondence between inward virtue and outward influence 
— The virtuous man disregards externals — The possession of virtue 
causes oblivion of outward form — Neglect of the human — Cultiva- 
tion of the divine. 

IN the State of Lu there was a man, named 
Wang T'ai, who had had his toes cut off. His 
disciples were as numerous as those of Confucius. 
Ch'ang Chi 

One of the latter. 

asked Confucius, saying, "This Wang T'ai has 
been mutilated, yet he divides with you. Sir, the 
teaching of the Lu State. He neither preaches nor 
discusses ; yet those who go to him empty, depart 
full. He must teach the doctrine which does not 
Jind expression in words ; 

The doctrine of Tao. These words occur in chs. il 
and xliii of the Tao-Tc-Ching. See TJic RetJiains 
of Lao Tzii, p. 7. 

and although his shape is imperfect, his mind is 
perhaps complete. What manner of man is 
this ? " 

*' He is a prophet," replied Confucius, "whose 

CAP. v.] The Evidence of Virtue Complete 57 

instruction I have been late in seeking. I will 
go and learn from him. And if I, — why not 
those who are not equal to me ? And I will take 
with me, not the State of Lu only, but the whole 
world." 

" The fellow has been mutilated," said Chang 
Chi, " and yet people call him Master. He must 
be very different from the ordinary run. But how 
does he use his mind in this sense ?" 

" Life and Death are all powerful," answered 
Confucius, " but they cannot affect //. 

The mind, or soul, which is immortal. See ch. iii. 

Heaven and earth may collapse, but that will 
remain. If this is found to be without flaw, it will 
not share the fate of all things. It can cause other 
things to change, while preserving its own consti- 
tution intact." 

'* How so ? " asked Chang Chi. 

" From the point of view of difference," replied 
Confucius, " we distinguish between the liver and 
the gall, between the Ch'u State and the Yiieh 
State. From the point of view of sameness, all 
things are one. Such is the position of Wang 
T'ai. He does not trouble about what reaches him 
through the senses of hearing and sight, but directs 
his whole mind towards the very climax of virtue. 
He beholds all things as though one, without 
observing their discrepancies. And thus the dis- 
crepancy of his toes is to him as would be the loss 
of so much mud," 

58 CJmang Tzii 

" He devotes himself in fact to himself," said 
Ch'ang Chi, "and uses his wisdom to perfect his 
mind, until it becomes perfect. But how then is it 
that people make so much of him ? " 

His virtue being wholly, as it were, of a selfish 
order. 

** A man," replied Confucius, " does not seek to 
see himself in running water, but in still water. 
For only what is itself still can instil stillness into 
others. 

"The grace of earth has reached only to pines 
and cedars ; — winter and summer alike they are 
green. The grace of God has reached to Yao and 
to Shun alone ; — the first and foremost of all crea- 
tion. Happily they were able to regulate their own 
lives and thus regulate the lives of all mankind. 

" By nourishment of physical courage, the sense 
of fear may be so eliminated that a man will, single- 
handed, brave a whole army. And if such a result 
can be achieved in search of fame, how much more 
by one who extends his sway over heaven and 
earth and influences all things ; and who, lodging 
within the confines of a body with its channels of 
sight and sound, brings his knowledge to know 
that all things are one, and that his soul endures 
for ever ! Besides, he awaits his appointed hour, 
and men flock to him of their own accord. He 
makes no effort to attract them." 

That men thus gather around him is the outward 
sign or evidence of his inward virtue complete. 

CAP. v.] The Evidence of Virtue Complete 59 

Sh^n T'u Chia had had his toes cut off. Sub- 
sequently, he studied under Poh Hun Wu Jen at 
the same time as Tzu Chan of the Cheng State. 
The latter said to him, "When I leave first, do 
you remain awhile. When you leave first, I will 
remain behind." 

Tzu Ch'an was a model minister of the sixth century 
B.C. Under his guidance the people of the Cheng 
State became so virtuous that doors were not locked 
at night, nor would any one pick up lost articles left 
lying in the road. He was hardly likely to be 
ashamed of walking out with a mutilated criminal. 

Next day, when they were again together in the 
lecture-room, Tzu Ch'an said, " When I leave first, 
do you remain awhile. When you leave first, I 
will remain. I am now about to go. Will you 
remain or not ? I notice you show no respect to a 
Minister of State. Perhaps you think yourself my 
equal ? " 

" Dear me ! " replied Shen T'u Chia, *' I didn't 
know we had a Minister of State in the class. 
Perhaps you think that because you are one you 
should take precedence over the rest. Now I have 
heard that if a mirror is perfectly bright, dust and 
dirt will not collect on it. That if they do, it is 
because the mirror was not bright. He who 
associates for long with the wise will be without 
fault. Now you have been improving yourself at 
the feet of our Master, yet you can utter words like 
these. Is not the fault in you ? " 

"You are a fine fellow, certainly," retorted Tzu 

6o Chttang Tzii 

Chan, " you will be emulating the virtue of Yao 
next. To look at you, I should say you had 
enough to do to attend to your own short- 
comings ! " 

A sneer at his want of toes. 

" Those who disguise their faults," said Shen 
T'u Chia, " so as not to lose their toes, are many 
in number. Those who do not disguise their faults, 
and so fail to keep them, are few. To recognise 
the inevitable and to quietly acquiesce in Destiny, 
is the achievement of the virtuous man alone. He 
who should put himself in front of the bull's-eye 
when Hou I 

A Chinese Tell. 

was shooting, would be hit. If he was not hit, it 
would be destiny. Those with toes who laugh at 
me for having no toes are many. This used to 
make me angry. But since I have studied under 
our Master, I have ceased to trouble about it. It 
may be that our Master has so far succeeded in 
purifying rne. At any rate I have been w^ith him 
nineteen years without being aware of the loss of ' 
my toes, Now you and I are engaged in studying 
the internal, Do you not then commit a fault by 
thus dragging me back to the external ? " 

At this Tzii Chan began to fidget, and changing 
countenance, begged Shcn T'u Chia to say no 
more. 

There was a man of the Lu State who had been 

CAP. v.] The Evidence of Virtue Complete 6i 

mutilated, — Shu Shan No-toes. He came walking 
on his heels to see Confucius ; but Confucius said, 
"You did not take care, and so brought this mis- 
fortune upon yourself. What is the use of coming 
to me now ? " 

*' In my ignorance," replied No-toes, " I made 
free with my body and lost my toes. But I come 
with something more precious than toes which I 
now seek to keep. There is no man, but Heaven 
covers him : there is no man, but Earth supports 
him ; — and I thought that you, sir, would be as 
Heaven and Earth. I little expected to hear these 
words from you." 

" I must apologise," said Confucius. " Pray 
walk in and let us discuss." But No-toes walked 
out. 

"There!" said Confucius to his disciples. 
" There is a criminal without toes who seeks to 
learn in order to make atonement for his previous 
misdeeds. And if he, how much more those who 
have no misdeeds for which to atone ? " 

No-toes went off to Lao Tzu and said, " Is 
Confucius a sage, or is he not ? How is it he has 
so many disciples ? He aims at being a subtle 
dialectician, not knowing that such a reputation is 
regarded by real sages as the fetters of a criminal." 

" Why do you not meet him with the continuity 
of life and death, the identity of can and can not!' 
answered Lao Tzu, "and so release him from these 
fetters ? " 

" He has been thus punished by God," replied 

62 Chuang Tzu 

No-toes. " It would be impossible to release 
him." 

A sneer at Confucius. No-toes himself had only 

been punished by man. 

Duke Ai of the Lu State said to Confucius, " In 
the Wei State there is a leper, named Ai T'ai T'o. 
The men who live with him like him and make no 
effort to get rid of him. Of the women who have 
seen him, many have said to their parents, Rather 
than be another man's wife, I would be his 
concubine. 

" He never preaches at people, but puts him- 
self into sympathy with them. He wields no 
power by which he may protect men's bodies. He 
has at his disposal no appointments by which to 
gratify their hearts. He is loathsome to a degree. 
He sympathises, but does not instruct. His know- 
ledge is limited to his own State. Yet males and 
females alike all congregate around him. 

" So thinking that he must be different from 
ordinary men, I sent for him, and saw that he was 
indeed loathsome to a degree. Yet we had not 
been many months together ere my attention was 
fixed upon his conduct. A year had not elapsed 
ere I trusted him thoroughly ; and as my State 
wanted a Prime Minister, I offered the post to him. 
He accepted it sullenly, as if he would much rather 
have declined. Perhaps he didn't think me good 
enough for him ! At any rate, he took it ; but in 
a very short time he left me and went away. I 
grieved for him as for a lost friend, and as though 

CAP. v.] The Evidence of Virtue Complete 63 

there were none left with whom I could rejoice. 
What manner of man is this ? 

" When I was on a mission to the Ch'u State," 
replied Confucius, " I saw a litter of young pigs 
sucking their dead mother. After a while they 
looked at her, and then they all left the body and 
went off. For their mother did not look at them 
any more, nor did she any more seem to be of their 
kind. What they loved was their mother ; not the 
body which contained her, but that which made the 
body what it was. 

" When a man is killed in battle, his arms are 
not buried with him. 

He has no further use for weapons. 

A man whose toes have been cut off does not 
value a present of boots. In each case the func- 
tion of such things is gone. 

"The concubines of the Son of Heaven do not 
cut their nails or pierce their ears. 

For fear of injuring their persons. 

He who has a marriageable daughter keeps her 
away from menial work. To preserve her beauty 
is quite enough occupation for her. How much 
more so for a man of perfect virtue ? 

Who should trouble himself only about the Internal. 

" Now Ai T'ai To says nothing, and is trusted. 
He does nothing, and is sought after. He causes 
a man to offer him the government of his own 
State, and the only fear is lest he should decline. 

64 Chuang Tzu 

Truly his talents are perfect and his virtue without 
outward form ! " 

"What do you mean by his talents being per- 
fect ? " asked the Duke. 

" Life and Death," replied Confucius, " exist- 
ence and non-existence, success and non-success, 
poverty and wealth, virtue and vice, good and evil 
report, hunger and thirst, warmth and cold, — these 
all revolve upon the changing wheel of Destiny. 
Day and night they follow one upon the other, and 
no man can say where each one begins. There- 
fore they cannot be allowed to disturb the harmony 
of the organism, nor enter into the soul's domain. 
Swim however with the tide, so as not to offend 
others. Do this day by day without break, and 
live in peace with mankind. Thus you will be 
ready for all contingencies, and may be said to have 
your talents perfect." 

*' And virtue without outward form ; what is 
that ? " 

" In a water-level," said Confucius, " the water 
is in a most perfect state of repose. Let that be 
your model. The water remains quietly within, 
and does not overflow. It is from the cultivation 
of such harmony that virtue results. And if virtue 
takes no outward form, man \\\\\ not be able to 
keep aloof from it." 

Mankind will be regenerated thereby, in the same 
way that evenness is imparted by the aid of water 
to surfaces, although the water is all the time closed 
up and does not overflow. 

CAP. v.] The Evidence of Virtue Cojuplefe 65 
Some days afterwards Duke Ai told Min Tzu, 
One of Confucius' disciples. 

saying, " When first I took the reins of govern- 
ment in hand, I thought that in caring for my 
people's lives I had done all my duty as a ruler. 
But now that I have heard what a perfect man is, I 
fear that I have not been succeeding, but foolishly 
using my body and working destruction to my 
State. Confucius and I are not prince and 
minister, but merely friends with a care for each 
other's moral welfare." 

A certain hunchback, named Wu Ch'un, whose 
heels did not touch the ground, had the ear of Duke 
Ling of Wei. The Duke took a great fancy to 
him ; and as for well-formed men, he thought 
their necks were too short. 

Another man, with a goitre as big as a large 
jar, had the ear of Duke Huan of Ch'i. The Duke 
took a great fancy to him ; and as for well-formed 
men, he thought their necks were too thin. 

Thus it is that virtue should prevail and outward 
form be forgotten. But mankind forgets not that 
which is to be forgotten, forgetting that which is 
not to be forgotten. This is forgetfulness indeed ! 
And thus with the truly wise, wisdom is a curse, 
sincerity like glue, virtue only a means to acquire, 
and skill nothing more than a commercial capacity. 
For the truly wise make no plans, and therefore 
require no wisdom. They do not separate, and 
therefore require no glue. They want nothing, and 

66 Chuang Tzii 

therefore need no virtue. They sell nothing, and 
therefore are not in want of a commercial capacity. 
These four qualifications are bestowed upon them 
by God and serve as heavenly food to them. And 
those who thus feed upon the divine have little 
need for the human. They wear the forms of men, 
without human passions. Because they wear the 
forms of men, they associate with men. Because 
they have not human passions, positives and nega- 
tives find in them no place. Infinitesimal indeed 
is that which makes them man : infinitely great is 
that which makes them divine ! 

Hui Tzu said to Chuang Tzu, " Are there then 
men who have no passions ? " 

Chuang Tzu replied, " Certainly." 

"But if a man has no passions," argued Hui 
Tzu, "what is it that makes him a man ? " 

" Tao," replied Chuang Tzu, "gives him his 
expression, and God gives him his form. How 
should he not be a man ? " 

" If then he is a man," said Hui Tzu, " how can 
he be without passions ? " 

" What you mean by passions," answered Chuang 
Tzu, " is not what I mean. By a man without 
passions I mean one who does not permit good 
and evil to disturb his internal economy, but 
rather falls in with whatever happens, as a matter 
of course, and does not add to the sum of his 
mortality." 

The play of passion would tend to create conditions 
which otherwise would not exist. 

CAP. v.] The Evidejice of Virtue Complete 67 

" But whence is man to get his body," asked 
Hui Tzii, '* if there is to be no adding to the sum 
of mortality?" 

This is of course a gibe. Hui Tzu purposely 
takes Chuanor Tzii's words a double entente. 

" Tao gives him his expression," said Chuang 
Tzu, ** and God gives him his form. He does not 
permit good and evil to disturb his internal 
economy. But now you are devoting your intelli- 
gence to externals, and wearing out your mental 
powers. You prop yourself against a tree and 
mutter, or lean over a table with half-closed eyes. 

God has made you a shapely sight, 

Yet your only thought is the hard and white.'' 

Chang Tzii puts his last sentence into doggerel, 
the more effectively to turn the tables against Hui 
Tzii, whose paradoxical theories he is never tired of 
ridiculing. See ch. ii. 

F 2 

68 

CHAPTER VI. 

The Great Supreme. 

A rgume ft f:— The human and the divine— The pure men of old— Their 
qualifications— Their self-abstraction— All things as one— The known 
and the unknown— Life a boon— Death a transition— Life eternal 
open to all — The way thither — Illustrations. 

HE who knows what God is, and who knows 
what Man is, has attained. Knowing what 
God is, he knows that he himself proceeded there- 
from. Knowing what Man is, he rests in the 
knowledge of the known, waiting for the know- 
ledge of the unknown. Working out one's allotted 
span, and not perishing in mid career, — this is the 
fulness of knowledge. 

God is a principle which exists by virtue of its 
own intrinsicality, and operates spontaneously, 
without self-manifestation. 

It is in the human that the divine finds expression. 
Man emanates from God, and should therefore be 
on earth, in this brief life of ours, what God is for 
all eternity in the universe. 

Herein, however, there is a flaw. Knowledge is 
dependent upon fulfilment. And as this fulfilment 
is uncertain, how can it be known that my divine 
is not really human, my human really divine ? 

Not until death lifts the veil can we truly know 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 69 

that this life is bounded at each end by an immor- 
tality to which the soul finally reverts. 

" Heaven from all creatures hides the book of Fate, 
All but the page prescribed, their present state." 

We must have pure 7ne7t, and then only can we 
have pure knowledge. 

" Pure " must be understood in the sense of tran- 
scendent. 

But what is a pure man ? — The pure men of old 
acted without calculation, not seeking to secure 
results. They laid no plans. Therefore, failing, 
they had no cause for regret ; succeeding, no cause 
for congratulation. And thus they could scale 
heights without fear ; enter water without becom- 
ing wet ; fire, without feeling hot. So far had v/ 
their wisdom advanced towards Tao. 

" The world-spirit is a good swimmer, and storms 
and waves cannot drown him." — Emerson. 

The pure men of old slept without dreams, and 
waked without anxiety. They ate without dis- 
crimination, breathing deep breaths. For pure 
men draw breath from their uttermost depths ; the 
vulgar only from their throats. 

" Uttermost depths" is literally " heels," but all the 
best commentators take the sentence to mean that 
pure men breathe with their whole being, and not as 
it were superficially, from the throat only. 
This passage is probably responsible for the trick 
of taking deep inhalations of morning air, practised 

70 Chuang Tzu 

(not without scientific foundation) by the followers of 
the debased Taoism of modern times. Other tricks 
for prolonging life, such as swallowing the saliva 
three times in every two hours, etc., are more open 
to adverse criticism. See the T'ai-Hsi-Ching. 

Out of the crooked, words are retched up like 
vomit. If men's passions are deep, their divinity 
is shallow. 

The pure men of old did not know what it was 
to love life or to hate death. They did not rejoice 
in birth, nor strive to put off dissolution. Quickly 
come, and quickly go ; — no more. They did not 
forget whence it was they had sprung, neither did 
they seek to hasten their return thither. Cheerfully 
they played their allotted parts, waiting patiently 
for the end. This is what is called not to lead the 
heart astray from Tao, 

By admitting play of passion in the sense con- 
demned in ch. V. which would hinder the mind from 
resting quietly in the knowledge of the known. 

nor to let the human seek to supplement the divine. 

But to wait patiently for the knowledge of the 
unknown. 

And this is what is meant by a pure man. 

Such men are in mind absolutely free ; in de- 
meanour, grave ; in expression, cheerful. If it is 
freezing cold, it seems to them like autumn ; if 
blazing hot, like spring. Their passions occur like 
the four seasons. 

Each at its appointed time. 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 7 1 

They are in harmony with all creation, and none 
know the limit thereof. 

These last few words occur in the Tao-Te-Ching, 
ch. Iviii. See The Remains of Lao Tzu, p. 40. 
Also, with a variation, in ch. xxii of this work. 

And so it is that a perfect man can destroy a king- 
dom and yet not lose the hearts of the people, 
while the benefits he hands down to ten thousand 
generations do not proceed from love of his fellow- 
man. 

Whatever he does is spontaneous, and therefore 
natural, and therefore in accordance with right. 

He who delights in man, is himself not a perfect 
man. His affection is not true charity. 

Charity is the universal love of all creation which 
admits of no particular manifestations. 

Depending upon opportunity, he has not true 

worth. 

True worth is independent of circumstances. It 
is a quality which is always unconsciously operating 
for good, and needs no opportunity to call it into 
existence. 

He who is not conversant with both good and ^ 
evil is not a superior man. 

The good, to practise ; the evil, to avoid. 

He who disregards his reputation is not what a 
man should be. 

As a mere social unit. 

72 Chttang Tzu 

\ He who is not absolutely oblivious of his own 
existence can never be a ruler of men. 

Thus Hu Pu Hsieh, Wu Kuang, Poh I, Shu 
Ch'i, Chi Tzii Hsii Yii, Chi To, and Shen T'u Ti, 
were the servants of rulers, and did the behests of 
others, not their own. 

A list of ancient worthies whose careers had been 
more or less unsuccessful. Of the first and second 
little is known, except that the ears of the latter 
were seven inches lonof. 

The third and fourth were brothers and are types 
of moral purity. Each refused the throne of their 
State, because each considered his brother more 
entitled thereto. Finally, they died of starvation on 
the mountains rather than submit to a change of the 
Imperial dynasty. More will be heard of these two 
later on. 

The fifth smeared his body all over with lacquer, 
so that no one should come near him. Of the 
sixth, nothing is recorded ; and of the seventh, only 
that he tied a stone around his neck and jumped 
into a river. See the Fragmenta at the end of the 
works of Shih Tzii. 

The pure men of old did their duty to their 
neighbours, but did not associate with them. 

Among them, but not of them. 

They behaved as though wanting in themselves, 
but without flattering others. Naturally rectan- 
gular, they were not uncompromisingly hard, They 
manifested their independence without going to 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 73 

extremes. They appeared to smile as if pleased, 
when the expression was only a natural response. 

As required by the exigencies of society. 

Their outward semblance derived its fascination 
from the store of goodness within. They seemed 
to be of the world around them, while proudly 
treading beyond its limits. They seemed to desire 
silence, while in truth they had dispensed with 
language. 

See ch. v. 
They saw in penal laws a trunk ; 

A natural basis of government, 
in social ceremonies, wings ; 

To aid man's progress through life. 

in wisdom, a useful accessory ; in morality, a guide. 
For them penal laws meant a merciful administra- 
tion ; social ceremonies, a passport through the 
world ; wisdom, an excuse for doing what they 
could not help ; and morality, walking like others 
upon the path. 

Instead of at random across country. At such an 
early date was uniformity a characteristic of the 
Chinese people. 

And thus all men praised them for the worthy lives 
they led. 

For what they cared for could be reduced to one, 
and what they did not care for to one also. That 
which was one was one, and that which was not 

74 Chuang Tzu 

ONE was likewise one. In that which was one, 
they were of God ; in that w^hich w^as not one, they 
w^ere of Man. And so between the human and the 
divine no conflict ensued. This was to be a pure 
man. 

Life and Death belono^ to Destiny. Their 
sequence, Hke day and night, is of God, beyond 
the interference of man, an inevitable law. 

A man looks upon God as upon his father, and 
J loves him in like measure. Shall he then not love 
that which is greater than God ? 

►S"^:. Tao. 

A man looks upon a ruler of men as upon some one 
better than himself, for whom he would sacrifice his 
life. Shall he not then do so for the Supreme 
Ruler of Creation ? 

Sc. Tao, the omnipresent, omnipotent Principle 
which invests even God himself with the power and 
attributes of divinity. 

The careful student of pure Taoism will find how- 
ever that the distinction between Tao and God is 
sometimes so subtle as altogether to elude his 
intelligence. 

When the pond dries up, and the fishes are left 
upon dry ground, to moisten them with the breath 
or to damp them with spittle is not to be compared 
/ with leaving them in the first instance in their 
native rivers and lakes. And better than praising 
Yao and blaming Chieh would be leaving them both 
and attending to the development of Tao. 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 75 

Tao gives me this form, this toil in manhood, 
this repose in old age, this rest in death. And surely 
that which is such a kind arbiter of my life is the 
best arbiter of my death. 

A boat may be hidden in a creek, or in a bog, safe 
enough. 

The text has "or a mountain in a bog," which taken 
with the context seems to me to be nonsense. Yet 
all the commentators labour to explain away the 
difficulty, instead of making the obvious change of 
"mountain" into "boat," to which change the forms 
of the two Chinese characters readily lend them- 
selves. In over two thousand years of literary 
activity, it seems but rarely to have occurred to the 
Chinese that a texius receptus could contain a 
copyist's slip. 

But at midnight a strong man may come and carry 
away the boat on his back. The dull of vision do 
not perceive that however you conceal things, small 
ones in larger ones, there will always be a chance of 
losing them. 

The boat is figurative of our mortal coil which cannot 
be hidden from decay. 

But if you conceal the w^hole universe in the whole 
universe, there will be no place left wherein it may 
be lost. The laws of matter make this to be so. 

To have attained to the human form must be 
always a source of joy. And then, to undergo 
countless transitions, with only the infinite to look 
forward to, — what incomparable bliss is that ! 

76 Chtiang Tzu 

Therefore it is that the truly wise rejoice in that 
which can never be lost, but endures alway. 

The soul which as Tao, is commensurate only with 
time and space. 

For if we can accept early death, old age, a 
J beginning, and an end, 

As inseparable from Destiny, — already a step in the 
right direction. 

why not that which informs all creation and is of 
all phenomena the Ultimate Cause ? 

The long chain of proximate causes reaches finality 
in Tag. Here we have the complete answer to such 
queries as that propounded to the Umbra by the 
. Penumbra at the close of ch. ii. 

Tao has its laws, and its evidences. It is devoid 
both of action and of form. It may be transmitted, 
but cannot be received. 

So that the receiver can say he has it. 

It may be obtained, but cannot be seen. Before 
heaven and earth were. Tag was. It has existed 
without change from all time. Spiritual beings 
drew their spirituality therefrom, w^hile the universe 
became what we can see it now. To Tag, the zenith 
is not high, nor the nadir low ; no point in time is 
long ago, nor by lapse of ages has it grown old. 

To the infinite all terms and conditions are relative. 

Hsi Wei obtained Tao, and so set the universe 
in order. 

A legendary ruler of remote antiquity. In what 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supre^ne 77 

sense he set the universe In order has not been 
authentically handed down. 

Fu Hsi obtained it, and was able to establish 
eternal principles. 

The first in the received list of Chinese sovereigns 
(b.c. 2852). This monarch is said to have invented 
the art of writing and to have taught his people to 
cook. 

The Great Bear obtained it, and has never erred 
from its course. The sun and moon obtained it, 
and have never ceased to revolve. K'an P'i ob- 
tained it, and established the K'un-lun mountains. 

The divinity of the sacred mountains here men- 
tioned. 

P'ing I obtained it, and rules over the streams. 
Chien Wu obtained it, and dwells on Mount T'ai. 
See ch. i. 

The Yellow Emperor obtained it, and soared upon 
the clouds to heaven. 

The most famous of China's legendary rulers 
(b.c. 2697). He is said among other things to 
have invented wheeled vehicles, and generally to 
have given a start to the civilisation of his people. 
Some of Lao Tzu's sayings have been attributed to 
him ; and by some he has been regarded as the first 
promulgator of Tao. 

Chuan Hsu obtained it, and dwells in the Dark 
Palace. 

A legendary ruler {b.c. 2513), of whose Dark Palace 

nothing is known. 

78 Chuang Tzit 

Yii Ch'iang obtained it, and fixed himself at the 
North Pole. 

As its presiding genius. 

Hsi Wang Mu obtained it, and settled at Shao 
Kuang ; since when, no one knows ; until when, 
no one knows either. 

A lady, — or a place, for accounts vary, — around 
whose name innumerable legends have gathered. 

P eng Tsu obtained it, and lived from the time of 
Shun until the time of the Five Princes. 

From 2255 to the 7th century B.C. See ch. i. 

Fu Yiieh obtained it, and as the Minister of Wu 
Ting 

A monarch of the Yin dynasty, B.C. 1324. 

got the empire under his control. And now, 
charioted upon one constellation and drawn by 
another, he has been enrolled among the stars of 
heaven. 

Nan Po Tzu K'uei 

Probably the individual mentioned in chs. ii. and iv. 
said to Nu Yii, 

By one authority said to be a woman. 

" You are old. Sir, and yet your countenance is like 

that of a child. How is this?" 

Nil Yii replied, " I have learnt Tao." 

" Could I get Tao by studying it ? " asked the 

other. 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme yg 

" I fear not," said Nu Yii. " You are not the 
sort of man. There was Pu Liang I. He had all 
the qualifications of a sage, but not Tao. Now I 
had Tao, though none of the qualifications. But 
do you imagine that much as I wished it I was able 
to teach Tag to him so that he should be a perfect 
sage ? Had it been so, then to teach Tao to one 
who has the qualifications of a sage would be an 
easy matter. No, Sir. I imparted as though with- 
holding ; and in three days, for him, this sublunary 
state had ceased to exist. 

With all its paltry distinctions of sovereign and 
subject, high and low, good and bad, etc. 

When he had attained to this, I withheld again ; 
and in seven days more, for him, the external world 
had ceased to be. And so again for another nine 
days, when he became unconscious of his own 
existence. He became first etherealised, next pos- 
sessed of perfect wisdom, then without past or 
present, and finally able to enter there where life [^ 
and death are no more, — where killing does not 
take away life, nor does prolongation of life add 
to the duration of existence. 

In Tag life and death are One. 

In that state, he is ever in accord with the exigen- 
cies of his environment ; 

Literally, there is no sense in which he is not 
accompanying or meeting, destroying or construct- 
ing. That is, in spite of his spiritual condition as 
above described, he can still adapt himself naturally 

V 

8o Chitang Tzii 

to life among his fellow-men. The retirement of a 
hermit is by no means necessary to the perfection 
of the pure man. 

and this is to be Battered but 7tot Bruised. And 
he who can be thus battered but not bruised is on 
the way to perfection." 

"And how did you manage to get hold of all 
this ? " asked Nan Po Tzu K'uei. 

" I got it from books," replied Nii Yu ; " and 
the books got it from learning, and learning from 
investigation, and investigation from co-ordination, 
Of eye and mind. 

and co-ordination from application, and application 
from desire to know, and desire to know from the 
unknown, and the unknown from the great void, 
and the great void from infinity ! " 

Four men were conversing together, when the 
following resolution was suggested : — "Whosoever 
can make Inaction the head, Life the backbone, and 
Death the tail, of his existence, — that man shall be 
admitted to friendship with us." The four looked 
at each other and smiled ; and tacitly accepting the 
conditions, became friends forthwith. 

By-and-by, one of them, named Tzu Yu, fell ill, 
and another, Tzu Ssu, went to see him. " Verily 
God is great ! " said the sick man. " See how he 
has doubled me up. My back is so hunched that 
my viscera are at the top of my body. My cheeks 
are level with my navel. My shoulders are higher 
than my neck. My hair grows up towards the sky. 

CAP. VI.] The Great Sitpreme 8i 

The whole economy of my organism is deranged. 
Nevertheless, my mental equilibrimn is not dis- 
turbed." So saying, he dragged himself painfully 
to a well, where he could see himself, and con- 
tinued, "Alas, that God should have doubled me 
up like this ! " 

'' Are you afraid ? " asked Tzu Ssu. 

" I am not," replied Tzu Yti. ** What have I to 
fear ? Ere long I shall be decomposed. My left 
shoulder will become a cock, and I shall herald the 
approach of morn. My right shoulder will become 
a cross-bow, and I shall be able to get broiled duck. 
My buttocks will become wheels ; and with my 
soul for a horse, I shall be able to ride in my own 
chariot. I obtained life because it was my time : 
I am now parting with it in accordance with the 
same law. Content with the natural sequence of 
these states, joy and sorrow touch me not. I am 
simply, as the ancients expressed it, hanging in the 
air, unable to cut myself down, bound with the 
trammels of material existence. But man has ever 
given way before God : why, then, should I be 
afraid ? " 

"What comes from God to us, returns from us to 
God." — Plato. 

By-and-by, another of the four, named Tzu Lai, 
fell ill, and lay gasping for breath, w^hile his family 
stood weeping around. The fourth friend, Tzu Li, 
went to see him. '* Chut ! " cried he to the wife 
and children ; " begone 1 you balk his decomposi- 
tion." Then, leaning against the door, he said. 

82 Chuang Tzii 

" Verily, God is great ! I wonder what he will 
make of you now. I wonder whither you will be 
sent. Do you think he will make you into a rat's 
liver 

The Chinese believe that a rat has no liver. 

or into the shoulders of a snake ? " 

" A son," answered Tzu Lai, " must go whither- 
soever his parents bid him. Nature is no other 
than a man's parents. 

The term " Nature " stands here as a renderingr of 
Yin and Yang, the Positive and Negative Principles 
of Chinese cosmogony, from whose interaction the 
visible universe results. 

If she bid me die quickly, and I demur, then I am 
an uniilial son. She can do me no wrong. Tao 
gives me this form, this toil in manhood, this 
repose in old age, this rest in death. And surely 
that which is such a kind arbiter of my life is the 
best arbiter of my death. 

" Suppose that the boiling metal in a smelting- 
pot were to bubble up and say, ' Make of me an 
Excalibur;' I think the caster would reject that 
metal as uncanny. And if a sinner like myself 
were to say to God, ' Make of me a man, make of 
me a man;' I think he too would reject me as 
uncanny. The universe is the smelting-pot, and 
God is the caster. I shall go whithersoever I am 
sent, to wake unconscious of the past, as a man 
wakes from a dreamless sleep." 

Tzu Sang Hu, Meng Tzu Fan, and Tzu Ch'in 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 83 

Chang, were conversing together, when it was 
asked, " Who can be, and yet not be ? 

Implying the absence of all consciousness. 

Who can do, and yet not do ? 

By virtue of inaction. 

Who can mount to heaven, and roaming through 
the clouds, pass beyond the limits of space, obli- 
vious of existence, for ever and ever without end ? " 

The three looked at each other and smiled ; and 
as neither had any misgivings, they became friends 
accordingly. 

Shortly afterwards Tzu Sang Hu died ; where- 
upon Confucius sent Tzu Kung 

One of his chief disciples. 

to take part in the mourning. But Tzii Kung 
found that one had composed a song which the 
other was accompanying on the lute, 

Strictly speaking, a kind of zitha, played with two 
hammers. 

as follows : — 

Ah ! Wilt thou come back to us, Sang Hu ? 
Ah ! Wilt thou come back to us, Sang Hu ? 
Thou hast already returned to thy God, 
While we still remain here as men, — alas ! 

Tzu Kung hurried in and said, " How can you 
sing alongside of a corpse ? Is this decorum ? " 
The two men looked at each other and laughed, 

G 2 

84 Chuang Tzil 

saying, " What should this man know of decorum 
indeed ? " 

Not the outward decorum of the body, but the 
inward decorum of the heart. 

Tzu Kung went back and told Confucius, asking 
him, " What manner of men are these ? Their 
object is nothingness and a separation from their 
corporeal frames. 

Various commentators give various renderings of 
this sentence, — mostly forced. 

They can sit near a corpse and yet sing, unmoved. 
There is no class for such. What are they ?" 

" These men," replied Confucius, " travel beyond 
the rule of life. I travel within it. Consequently, 
our paths do not meet ; and I was wrong in send- 
you to mourn. They consider themselves as one 
with God, recognising no distinctions between 
human and divine. They look on life as a huge 
tumour from which death sets them free. All the 
same they know not where they were before birth, 
nor where they will be after death. Though 
admitting different elements, they take their stand 
upon the unity of all things. They ignore their 
passions. They take no count of their ears and 
eyes. Backwards and forwards through all eternity, 
they do not admit a beginning or end. They stroll 
beyond the dust and dirt of mortality, to wander 
in the realms of inaction. How should such men 
trouble themselves with the conventionalities of 
this world, or care what people may think of them ? " 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 85 

" But if such is the case," said Tzu Kung, 
" why should we stick to the rule ? " 

" Heaven has condemned me to this," replied 
Confucius. " Nevertheless, you and I may perhaps 
escape from it." 

" By what method ? " asked Tzu Kung. 

" Fishes," replied Confucius, " are born in water. 
Man is born in Tag. If fishes get ponds to live in, 
they thrive. If man gets Tag to live in, he may 
live his life in peace. 

Without reference to the outward ceremonial of this 
world. 

Hence the saying, ' All that a fish wants is water ; 
all that a man wants is Tag.' '^ 

It is of course by a literary coup de madn that 
Confucius is here and elsewhere made to stand 
sponsor to the Tao of the rival school. 

" May I ask," said Tzu Kung, '* about divine 
men ? 

" Divine men," replied Confucius, " are divine to 
man, but ordinary to God. Hence the saying that 
the meanest being in heaven would be the best 
on earth ; and the best on earth, the meanest in 
heaven." 

" Man is a kind of very minute heaven. God is the 
grand man." — Swedenborg. 

Yen Hui said to Confucius, " When M^ng Sun 

Ts'ai's mother died, he wept, but without snivelling; 

Which the Chinese regard as the test of real sorrow. 

86 Chuang Tzu 

he grieved but his grief was not heartfelt ; he wore 
mourning but without howling. Yet although 
wanting in these three points, he is considered the 
best mourner in the State of Lu. Surely this is 
the name and not the reality. I am astonished at 
it." 

'' Meng Sun," said Confucius, " did all that was 
required. He has made an advance towards 
wisdom. 

Towards Tao, wherein there is no weeping nor 

gnashing of teeth. 

He could not do less ; 

Than mourn outwardly, for fear of committing a 
breach of social etiquette, in harmony if not in 
accordance with which the true Sage passes his life. 

while all the time actually doing less. 

As seen from the absence of those signs which prove 
inward grief. 

** Meng Sun knows not whence we come nor 
whither we go. He knows not whether the end 
will come early or late. Passing into life as a man, 
he quietly awaits his passage into the unknown. 
What should the dead know of the living, or the 
living know of the dead ? Even you and I may be 
in a dream from which we have not yet awaked. 

*' Then again, he adapts himself physically, 

To the ceremonial of the body. 

while avoiding injury to his higher self. 

Keeping his soul free from the disturbance of 
passion. 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 87 

He regards a dying man simply as one who is 
going home. He sees others weep, and he 
naturally weeps too. 

" Besides, a man's personality is something of 
which he is subjectively conscious. It is impos- 
sible for him to say if he is really that which he is 
conscious of being. You dream you are a bird, 
and soar to heaven. You dream you are a fish, 
and dive into the ocean's depths. And you cannot 
tell whether the man now speaking is awake or in 
a dream. 

"A pleasurable sensation precedes the smile it 
evokes. The smile itself is not dependent upon a 
reminding nudge, 

And just so was Meng Sun's outward expression of 
grief, — spontaneous, as being in harmony with his 
surroundings. 

Resign yourself, 

To your mortal environment, 
unconscious of all changes, 

Of life into death, etc. 

and you shall enter into the pure, the divine, the 
One." 

I Erh Tzu went to see Hsii Yu, ^' The latter 
asked him, saying, " How has Yao benefited you?" 

" He bade me," replied the former, " practise 
charity and do my duty, and distinguish clearly 
between right and wrong." 

" Then what do you want here ? " said Hsii Yu. 

88 Chtiang Tzii 

" If Yao has already branded you with charity 
and duty, and cut off your nose with right and 
wrong, what do you do in this free-and-easy, care- 
for-nobody, topsy-turvy neighbourhood ? " 
Of Tao. 

" Nevertheless," replied I Erh Tzu, " I should 
like to be on its confines." 

'' If a man has lost his eyes," retorted Hsii Yu, 
" it is impossible for him to join in the apprecia- 
tion of beauty. A man with a film over his eyes 
cannot tell a blue sacrificial robe from a yellow 
one. 

"Wu Chuang's disregard of her beauty," an- 
swered I Erh Tzu, " Chii Liang's disregard of his 
strength, the Yellow Emperor's abandonment of 
wisdom, — all these were brought about by a pro- 
cess of filing and hammering. And how do you 
know but that God would rid me of my brands, 
and give me a new nose, and make me fit to become 
a disciple of yourself?" 

" Ah ! " replied Hsii Yu, " that cannot be known. 
But I will just give you an outline. The Master I 
serve succours all things, and does not account it 
duty. He continues his blessings through count- 
less generations, and does not account it charity. 
Dating back to the remotest antiquity, he does not 
account himself old. Covering heaven, supporting 
earth, and fashioning the various forms of things, 
he does not account himself skilled. He it is 
whom you should seek." 
And he is Tag. 

CAP. VI.] The Great Supreme 89 

" I am getting on," observed Yen Hui to 
Confucius. 

The most famous of all the disciples of Confucius, 
admitted by the latter to have been as near per- 
fection as possible. 

" How SO? " asked the latter. 

" I have got rid of charity and duty," replied the 
former. 

" Very good," replied Confucius, '' but not 
perfect." 

Another day Yen Hui met Confucius and said, 
** I am getting on." 

" How so ? " asked Confucius. 

" I have got rid of ceremonial and music," 
answered Yen Hui. 

" Very good," said Confucius, " but not perfect." 

On a third occasion Yen Hui met Confucius and 
said, " I am getting on." 

" How so?" asked the Sage. 

" I have got rid of everything," replied Yen 
Hui. 

" Got rid of everything! " said Confucius eagerly. 
" What do you mean by that? " 

" I have freed myself from my body," answered 
Yen Hui. "I have discarded my reasoning powers. 
And by thus getting rid of body and mind, I have 
become One with the Infinite. This is what I 
mean by getting rid of everything." 

"■ If you have become One," cried Confucius, 
" there can be no room for bias. If you have 
passed into space, you are indeed without begin- 

90 Chiiang TzU 

ning or end. And if you have really attained to this, 
I trust to be allowed to follow in your steps." 

Tzu Yii and Tzu Sang were friends. Once when 
it had rained for ten days, Tzu Yii said, " Tzu 
Sang is dangerously ill." So he packed up some 
food and went to see him. 

In accordance with the exigencies of mortality. 
How Tzu Yii knew that his friend was ill is not 
clear. An attempt has been made by one com- 
mentator on the basis of animal magnetism, in which 
the Chinese have believed for centuries. 

Arriving at the door, he heard something between 
singing and lamentation, accompanied with the 
sound of music, as follows : — 

" O father ! O mother ! O Heaven ! O Man 1" 
These words seemed to be uttered with a great 
effort ; whereupon Tzu Yii went in and asked what 
it all meant. 

" I was trying to think who could have brought 
me to this extreme," replied Tzii Sang, " but I 
could not guess. My father and mother would 
hardly wish me to be poor. Heaven covers all 
equally. Earth supports all equally. How can 
they make me in particular poor ? I was seeking 
to know who it was, but without success. Surely 
then I am brought to this extreme by Destiny T 

" The word Fate, or Destiny, expresses the sense of 
mankind in all ages — that the laws of the world do 
not always befriend, but often hurt and crush us." — 
Emerson. 

91 

CHAPTER VII. 

How TO Govern. 

Argument : — Princes should reign, not rule — Rulers find their standards 
of right in themselves — They thus coerce their people into obeying 
artificial laws, instead of leaving them to obey natural laws — By action 
they accomplish nothing — By inaction there is nothing which they 
would not accomplish — Individuals think they know what the empire 
wants — In reality it is the empire itself which know best — Illustrations. 

YEH CH'UEH asked Wang I 
See ch. ii. 

four questions, none of which he could answer. 
Thereat the former was greatly delighted, 

For now he discovered that iofnorance is true know- 
ledge : — an explanation which I adopt only for want 
of a better. 

and went off and told P'u I Tzu. 

Of whom nothing definite is known. 

*' Have you only just found that out ? " said P'u 
I Tzu. " The Emperor Shun was not equal to T'ai 
Huang. 

A legendary ruler. For Shun, see ch. i. 

Shun was all for charity in his zeal for mankind ; 
but although he succeeded in government, he him- 
self never rose above the level of artificiality. Now 

92 Chtiang Tzil 

T'ai Huang was peaceful when asleep and Inactive 
when awake. At one time he would think himself 
a horse ; at another, an ox. 

So effectually had he closed all channels leading to 
consciousness of self 

His wisdom was substantial and above suspicion. 
His virtue was genuine indeed. And yet he never 
sank to the level of artificiality." 

He was a monarch after the pattern of Tao. 

Chien Wu meeting the eccentric Chieh Yii, the 
latter enquired, saying, "What did Jih Chung Shih 
teach you ? " 

Of the last nothing is known. The first two have 
been already mentioned in chs. i. and vi. 

" He taught me," replied Chien Wu, " about 
the laws and regulations which princes evolve, and 
which he said none would venture not to hear and 
obey." 

"That is a false teaching indeed," replied Chieh 
Yii. "To attempt to govern mankind thus, — as 
well try to wade through the sea, to hew a passage 
through a river, or make a mosquito fly away with 
a mountain ! 

" The government of the truly wise man has no 
concern with externals. He first perfects himself, 
and then by virtue thereof he is enabled to accom- 
plish what he wants. 

Passively, without effort of any kind. 

"The bird flies high to avoid snare and dart. 

CAP. VII.] How to Govern 93 

The mouse burrows down below the hill to avoid 
being smoked or cut out of its nest. Is your wit 
below that of these two creatures ? " 

That you should be unable to devise means of 
avoiding the artificial restraints of princes. Better 
than coercing into goodness is letting men be good 
of their own accord. 

T'ien K^n 

Of whom nothing is known. 

was travelling on the south of the Yin mountain. 
He had reached the river Liao when he met a 
certain Sage to whom he said, " I beg to ask about 
the government of the empire." 

"Begone!" cried the Sage. "You are a low 
fellow, and your question is ill timed. God has 
just turned me out a man. That is enough for me. 
Borne on light pinions I can soar beyond the car- 
dinal points, to the land of nowhere, in the domain 
of nothingness. And you come to worry me with 
government of the empire ! " 

But T'ien K^n enquired a second time, and the 
Sage replied, " Resolve your mental energy into 
abstraction, your physical energy into inaction. 
Allow yourself to fall in with the natural order of 
phenomena, without admitting the element of self, 
— and the empire will be governed." 

By virtue of natural laws which lead, without man's 
interference,, to the end desired. 

Yang Tzu Chii went to see Lao Tzu, and said, 
" Suppose a man were ardent and courageous, 

94 Clmang Tzii 

acquainted with the order and principles of things, 
and untiring in the pursuit of Tag — would he be 
accounted a wise ruler ? " 

" From the point of view of a truly wise man," 
replied Lao Tzu, " such a one would be a mere 
handicraftsman, wearing out body and mind alike. 
The tiger and the pard suffer from the beauty of 
their skins. The cleverness of the monkey, the 
tractability of the ox, bring them both to the tether. 
It is not on such grounds that a ruler may be 
accounted wise." 

" But in what, then," cried Yang Tzu Chli, " does 
the government of a wise man consist ? " 

" The goodness of a wise ruler," answered Lao 
Tzu, " covers the whole empire, yet he himself 
seems to know it not. It influences all creation, 
yet none is conscious thereof. It appears under 
countless forms, bringing joy to all things. It is 
based upon the baseless, and travels through the 
realms of Nowhere." 

The operation of true government is invisible to the 
eye of man. 

In the State of Cheng there was a wonderful 
magician, named Chi Han. He knew all about 
birth and death, gain and loss, misfortune and 
happiness, long life and short life, — predicting 
events to a day with supernatural accuracy. The 
people of Cheng used to flee at his approach ; but 
Lieh Tzu 

See ch. i. 

CAP. VII.] How to Govern 95 

went to see him, and became so infatuated that on 
his return he said to Hu Tzu, 

Who appears to have been his tutor. 

" I used to look upon your Tag as perfect. Now I 
know something more perfect still." 

" So far," replied Hu Tzu, " I have only taught 
you the ornamentals, not the essentials, of Tag ; 
and yet you think you know all about it. Without 
cocks in your poultry-yard, what sort of eggs do the 
hens lay ? If you go about trying to force Tag 
down people's throats, you will be simply exposing 
yourself. Bring your friend with you, and let me 
show myself to him." 

So next day Lieh Tzu went with Chi Han to see 
Hu Tzu, and when they came out Chi Han said, 
"Alas! your teacher is doomed. He cannot live. 
I hardly give him ten days. I am astonished at 
him. He is but wet ashes." 

And cannot burn much longer. 

Lieh Tzu went in and wept bitterly, and told 
Hu Tzu ; but the latter said, " I showed myself 
to him just now as the earth shows us its out- 
ward form, motionless and still, while production 
is all the time going on. I merely prevented him 
from seeing my pent-up energy 
Of Tag. 

within. Bring him again." 

Next day the interview took place as before ; but 
as they were leaving Chi Han said to Lieh Tzu, 
" It is lucky for your teacher that he met me. He 

96 Chnang Tzil 

is better. He will recover. I saw he had recupe- 
rative power." 

Lieh Tzu went in and told Hu Tzu ; w^hereupon 
the latter replied, " I showed myself to him just 
now as heaven shows itself in all its dispassionate 
grandeur, letting a little energy run out of my heels. 
He was thus able to detect that I had some. Bring 
him here again." 

Next day a third interview took place, and as 
they were leaving, Chi Han said to Lieh Tzu, 
" Your teacher is never one day like another. I can 
tell nothing from his physiognomy. Get him to be 
regular, and I will then examine him again." 

This being repeated to Hu Tzu as before, the 
latter said, " I showed myself to him just now in a 
state of harmonious equilibrium. Where the whale 
disports itself, — is the abyss. Where water is at 
rest, — is the abyss. Where water is in motion, — 
is the abyss. The abyss has nine names. These 
are three of them." 

Alluding to three phases of Tao as manifested at 
the three interviews above described, Tao being the 
abyss. 

Next day the two went once more to see Hu 
Tzu ; but Chi Han was unable to stand still, and in 
his confusion turned and fled. 

" Pursue him ! " cried Hu Tzu ; whereupon Lieh 
Tzu ran after him, but could not overtake him, so 
he returned and told Hu Tzu that the fugitive had 
disappeared. 

" I showed myself to him just now/' said Hu Tzu, 

CAP. VII.] How to Govern 97 

" as Tao appeared before time was. I was to him 
as a great blank, existing of itself. He knew not 
who I was. His face fell. He became confused. 
And so he fled." 

Upon this Lieh Tzu stood convinced that he 
had not yet acquired any real knowledge, and at 
once set to work in earnest, passing three years 
without leaving the house. He helped his wife to 
cook the family dinner, and fed his pigs just like 
human beings. He discarded the artificial and 
reverted to the natural. He became merely a shape. 
Amidst confusion. 

Of this material world. 

he was unconfounded. And so he continued to the 
end. 

By Inaction, fame comes as the spirits of the 
dead come to the boy who impersonates the corpse. 

See ch. i. In the old funeral rites of China, a boy 
was made to sit speechless and motionless as a 
corpse, for the reason assigned in the text. 

By Inaction, one can become the centre of thought, 
the focus of responsibility, the arbiter of wisdom. 
Full allowance must be made for others, while 
remaining unmoved oneself. There must be a 
thorough compliance with divine principles, with- 
out any manifestation thereof.. 

Non mihi res, sed me rebus, subjungere conar. 

All of which may be summed up in the one word 
passivity. For the perfect man employs his mind 
as a mirror. It grasps nothing : it refuses nothing. 

H 

98 Chua7ig Tzii 

It receives, but does not keep. And thus he can 
triumph over matter, without injury to himself. 

Without the wear and tear suffered by those who 
allow their activities free play. 

The ruler of the southern sea was called Shu. 
The ruler of the northern sea was called Hu. The 
ruler of the central zone was called Hun Tun. 

This term is generally used to denote the condition 
of matter before separation and subdivision into the 
phenomena of the visible universe. 

Shu and Hu often met on Hun Tun's territory, 
and being always well treated by him, determined 
to repay his kindness. 

They said, "All men have seven holes, — for 
seeing, hearing, eating, and breathing. Hun Tun 
alone has none. We will bore some for him." 

So every day they bored one hole ; but on the 
seventh day Hun Tun died: 

Illustrating the perils of action. "The empire," 
says Lao Tzii, " is a divine trust, and may not be 
ruled. He who rules, ruins. He who holds by 
force, loses." 

" Men's actions," says Emerson, " are too strong for 
them." 

With this chapter Chuang Tzii completes the out- 
line of his system. The remaining chapters are 
either supplementary to the preceding seven, or 
independent essays upon cognate subjects. 

99 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Joined Toes. 

Argument : — Virtues should be natural, not artificial; passive not active. 
[Chs. viii to xiii inclusive are illustrative of, or supplementary to, 
ch. vii.] 

JOINED toes and extra fingers are an addi- 
tion to nature, though, functionally speaking, 
superfluous. Wens and tumours are an addition 
to the bodily form, though, as far as nature is con- 
cerned, superfluous. And similarly, to include 
charity and duty to one's neighbour among the 
functions of man's organism, is not true Tao. 

The whole of this chapter is a violent tirade against 
the leading doctrines of Confucianism. 

For just as joined toes are but useless lumps of 
flesh, and extra fingers but useless excrescences, so 
are any artificial additions to our internal economy 
but harmful adjuncts to real charity and duty to 
one's neighbour. 

Which are the outcome of Tao. 

and are moreover prejudicial to the right use of 
intelligence. 

People with extra keenness of vision muddle 
themselves over the five colours, exaggerate the 
value of shades, and of distinctions of greens 

H 2 

100 Chtiang Tzu 

and yellows for sacrificial robes. Of such was 
Li Chu. 

Who could see a pin's point at a distance of i,ooo li. 
He is mentioned by Mencius. 

People with extra keenness of hearing muddle 
themselves over the five notes, exaggerate the tonic 
differences of the six pitch-pipes, and the various 
timbres of metal, stone, silk, and bamboo, of the 
Huang-chimg, and of the Ta-lil. Of such was 
Shih K'uang. 

The blind musician mentioned in ch. ii. The 
Huang -chung and the Ta-lil were two of the 
twelve bamboo tubes, or pitch - pipes, on which 
ancient Chinese music was based. Six were male 
or positive, and six female or negative. Hence 
they are spoken of collectively as six. 

People who graft on charity, force themselves to 
display this virtue in order to gain reputation and 
to enjoy the applause of the world for that which 
is of no account. Of such were Tseng and Shih. 

Tseng Shen, a famous disciple of Confucius, and Shih 
Yu, both noted for their high moral characters. 

People who refine in argument do but pile up \ 
tiles or knot ropes in their maunderings over the 
hard and white, the like and the unlike, wearing 
themselves out over mere useless terms. Of such 
were Yang and Mih. 

Yang Chu, a philosopher of the fourth century B.C., 
whose "selfish" system was condemned by Mencius; 
and Mih Tzu, already mentioned in ch. ii. 

CAP. VIII.] Joined Toes loi 

Therefore every addition to or deviation from 
nature belongs not to the ultimate perfection of all. 

Which is in Tao. 

He who would attain to such perfection never 
loses sight of the natural conditions of his exist- 
ence. With him the joined is not united, nor the 
separated apart, nor the long in excess, nor the 
short wanting. For just as a duck's legs, though 
short, cannot be lengthened without pain to the 
duck, and a crane's legs, though long, cannot be 
shortened without misery to the crane, so that 
which is long in man's moral nature cannot be cut 
off, nor that which is short be lengthened. All 
sorrow is thus avoided. 

Intentional charity and intentional duty to one's 
neighbour are surely not included in our moral 
nature. Yet what sorrow these have involved. 
Divide your joined toes and you will howl : bite off 
your extra finger and you will scream. In one case 
there is too much, in the other too little ; but the 
sorrow is the same. And the charitable of the age 
go about sorrowing over the ills of the age, while 
the non-charitable cut through the natural con- 
ditions of things in their greed after place and. 
wealth. Surely then intentional charity and duty 
to one's neighbour are not included in our moral 
nature. Yet from the time of the Three Dynasties 
downwards what a fuss has been made about them ! 
Those who cannot make perfect without arc, line, 
compasses, and square, injure the natural constitu- 

102 Chtiang Tzu 

tion of things. Those who require cords to bind and 
glue to stick, interfere with the natural functions of 
things. And those who seek to satisfy the mind of 
man by hampering with ceremonies and music and 
preaching charity and duty to one's neighbour, 
thereby destroy the intrinsicality of things. 

For such intrinsicality does exist, in this sense : — 
Things which are curved require no arcs ; things 
which are straight require no lines ; things which 
are round require no compasses ; things which are 
rectangular require no squares ; things which stick 
require no glue ; things which hold together require 
no cords. And just as all things are produced, 
and none can tell how they are produced, so do 
all things possess their own intrinsic qualities 
and none can tell how they possess them. From 
time immemorial this has always been so, without 
, variation. Why then should charity and duty to 
J one's neighbour be as it were glued or corded on, 
and introduced into the domain of Tag, to give 
rise to doubt among mankind ? 

Lesser doubts change the rule of life ; greater 
doubts change man's nature. 

How do we know this ? By the fact that ever 
since the time when Shun bid for charity and duty 
to one's neighbour in order to secure the empire, 
men have devoted their lives to the pursuit thereof. 
Is it not then charity and duty to one's neighbour 
which change the nature of man ? 
\ Therefore I have tried to show that from the 
time of the Three Dynasties it has always been the 

CAP. VIII.] Joined Toes 103 

external which has changed the nature of man. If 
a mean man, he will die for gain. If a superior 
man, he will die for fame. If a man of rank, he 
will die for his ancestral honours. If a Sage, he 
will die for the world. The pursuits and ambi- 
tions of these men differ, but the injury to their 
natures involved in the sacrifice of their lives is the 
same. 

Tsang and Ku were shepherds, both of whom 
lost their flocks. On inquiry, it appeared that 
Tsang had been engaged in reading, while Ku had 
gone to take part in some trials of strength. Their 
occupations had been different, but the result was 
in each case loss of the sheep. 

Poh I died for fame at the foot of Mount Shou- 
yang. 

See ch. vi. 

Robber Ch^ died for gain on Mount T'ai. 

Robber Che has a chapter to himself, from which, 
though spurious, it may be gathered that he was a 
very remarkable personage in his day. 
Mount T'ai has been mentioned in ch. i. 

Their deaths were not the same, but the injury to 
their lives and natures was in each case the same. 
How then can we applaud the former and blame 
the latter ? 

And so, if a man dies for charity and duty to his 
neighbour the world calls him a noble fellow; 
but if he dies for gain, the world calls him a 
low fellow. The dying being the same, one is 

I04 Chuang Tzu 

nevertheless called noble and the other low. But 
in point of injury to life and nature, the robber 
Ch^ and Poh I are one. Where then does the 
distinction of noble and low come in ? 

Were a man to apply himself to charity and 
duty towards his neighbour until he were the equal 
of Tseng or Shih, this would not be what I mean 
by perfection. Or to flavours, until he were the 
equal of Yii Erh. 

Probably identical with I Ya, the Soyer of China. 

Or to sounds, until he were the equal of Shih 
K'uang. Or to colours, until he were the equal of 
Li Chu. What I mean by perfection is not what 
is meant by charity and duty to one's neighbour. 
It is found in the cultivation of Tao. And those 
whom I regard as cultivators of Tao are not those 
who cultivate charity and duty to one's neighbour. 
They are those who yield to the natural conditions 
of things. What I call perfection of hearing is 
not hearing others but oneself. What I call per- 
fection of vision is not seeing others but oneself. 

A saying attributed by Han Fei Tzu to Lao Tzu : — 
" To see oneself is to be clear of sight." See The 
Remains of Lao Tzii, p. i8. 

For a man who sees not himself but others, takes 
not possession of himself but of others, thus taking 
what others should take and not what he himself 
should take. 

Multi sunt, qui urbes, qui populos habuere in 
potestate, paucissimi, qui se. 

CAP. VIII.] Joined Toes 105 

Instead of being himself, he in fact becomes some 
one else. And if a man thus becomes some one 
else instead of himself, this is a fatal error of which 
both the robber Che and Poh I can be equally 
guilty. 

And so, conscious of my own deficiency in 
regard to Tao, I do not venture at my best to \y/ 
practise the principles of charity and duty to my 
neighbour, nor at my worst to fall into the fatal 
error above-mentioned. 

io6 Chtiang Tzit 

CHAPTER IX. 

Horses' Hoofs. 

Argument : — Superiority of the natural over the artificial — Application of 
this principle to government. 

HORSES have hoofs to carry them over frost 
and snow ; hair, to protect them from wind 
and cold. They eat grass and drink water, and 
fling up their heels over the champaign. Such is 
the real nature of horses. Palatial dwellings are of 
no use to them. 

One day Poh Loh 

A Chinese Rarey, of somewhat legendary character. 

appeared, saying, *' I understand the management 
of horses." 

So he branded them, and clipped them, and pared 
their hoofs, and put halters on them, tying them up 
by the head and shackling them by the feet, and 
disposing them in stables, with the result that two 
or three in every ten died. Then he kept them 
hungry and thirsty, trotting them and galloping 
them, and grooming, and trimming, with the misery 
of the tasselled bridle before and the fear of the 
knotted whip behind, until more than half of them 
were dead. 

CAP. IX.] Horses Hoofs 107 

The potter says, " I can do what I will with clay. 
If I want it round, I use compasses ; if rectangular, 
a square." 

The carpenter says, " I can do what I will with 

wood. If I want it curved, I use an arc ; if straight, 

1)) 
ine. 

But on what grounds can we think that the 
natures of clay and wood desire this application of 
compasses and square, of arc and line ? Neverthe- 
less, every age extols Poh Loh for his skill in 
managing horses, and potters and carpenters for 
their skill with clay and wood. Those who govern 
the empire make the same mistake. 

Now I regard government of the empire from 
quite a different point of view. 

The people have certain natural instincts ; — to 
weave and clothe themselves, to till and feed them- 
selves. These are common to all humanity, and 
all are agreed thereon. Such instincts are called 
" Heaven-sent." 

And so in the days when natural instincts pre- 
vailed, men moved quietly and gazed steadily. At 
that time, there were no roads over mountains, nor 
boats, nor bridges over w^ater. All things were 
produced, each for its own proper sphere. Birds 
and beasts multiplied ; trees and shrubs grew up. 
The former might be led by the hand ; you could 
climb up and peep into the raven's nest. For then 
man dwelt with birds and beasts, and all creation 
was one. There were no distinctions of good and 
bad men. Being all equally without knowledge, 

iX 

io8 Chuang Tzit 

their virtue could not go astray. Being all equally 
without evil desires, they were in a state of natural 
integrity, the perfection of human existence. 

But when Sages appeared, tripping people over 
charity and fettering with duty to one's neighbour, 
doubt found its way into the world. And then with 
their gushing over music and fussing over cere- 
mony, the empire became divided against itself. 

Music and ceremonies are important factors in the 
Confucian system of government. 

Were the natural integrity of things left un- 
harmed, who could make sacrificial vessels ? Were 
white jade left unbroken, who could make the 
regalia of courts ? Were Tag not abandoned, who 
could introduce charity and duty to one's neigh- 
bour ? Were man's natural instincts his guide, 
what need would there be for music and ceremonies? 
Were the five colours not confused, who would 
practise decoration ? Were the five notes not 
confused, who would adopt the six pitch-pipes ? 

See chs, viii and x. 

Destruction of the natural integrity of things, in 
order to produce articles of various kinds, — this is 
the fault of the artisan. Annihilation of Tag in 
order to practise charity and duty to one's neigh- 
bour,— this is the error of the Sage. 

Horses live on dry land, eat grass and drink 

water. When pleased, they rub their necks 

together. When angry, they turn round and kick 

ip their heels at each other. Thus far only do 

CAP. IX.] Horses Hoofs 109 

their natural dispositions carry them. But bridled 
and bitted, with a plate of metal on their foreheads, 
they learn to cast vicious looks, to turn the head 
to bite, to resist, to get the bit out of the mouth or 
the bridle into it. And thus their natures become 
depraved, — the fault of Poh Loh. 

In the days of Ho Hsii 

A legendary ruler of old. 

the people did nothing in particular when at rest, 
and went nowhere in particular when they moved. 
Having food, they rejoiced ; having full bellies, 
they strolled about. Such were the capacities of 
the people. But when the Sages came to worry 
them with ceremonies and music in order to rectify 
the form of government, and dangled charity and 
duty to one's neighbour before them in order to 
satisfy their hearts, — then the people began to 
develop a taste for knowledge and to struggle one 
with the other in their desire for gain. This was 
the error of the Sages. 

The simplicity of style, and general intelligibility of 
this chapter have raised doubts as to its genuineness. 
But as Lin Hsi Chung justly observes, its sympa- 
thetic tone in relation to dumb animals, stamps it, 
in spite of an undue proportion of word to thought, 
as beyond reach of the forger's art. 

I lo Chttang Tzu 

CHAPTER X. 

Opening Trunks. 

Argument : — All restrictions artificial, and therefore deceptive — Only by 
shaking off such fetters, and reverting to the natural, can man hope 
to attain. 

THE precautions taken against thieves who open 
trunks, search bags, or ransack tills, consist 
of securing with cords and fastening with bolts and 
locks. This is what the world calls wit. 

But a strong thief comes who carries off the till 
on his shoulders, with box and bag to boot. And 
his only fear is that the cords and locks should not 
be strong enough ! 

Therefore, what the world calls wit, simply 
amounts to assistance given to the strong thief. 

And I venture to state that nothing of that which 
the world calls wit, is otherwise than serviceable to 
strong thieves ; and that nothing of that which the 
world calls wisdom is other than a protection to 
strong thieves. 

How can this be shown ? — In the State of Ch'i a 
man used to be able to see from one town to the 
next, and hear the barking and crowing of its dogs 
and cocks. 

So near were they. This sentence has been incor- 

CAP. X.] Opening Trunks 1 1 1 

porated in ch. lxxx of the Tao-Te-Ching. See The 
Remains of Lao Tzu, p. 50. 

The area covered by the nets of fishermen and 
fowlers, and pricked by the plough, was a square of 
two thousand and odd //. 

Of which three go to a mile, roughly. This state- 
ment is intended to convey an idea of prosperity. 

And within its four boundaries not a temple or 
shrine was dedicated, nor a district or hamlet 
governed, but in accordance with the rules laid 
down by the Sages. 
Yet one morning 

B.C. 481. 

T'ien Ch eng Tzu slew the Prince of Ch'i, and stole 
his kingdom. And not his kingdom only, but the 
wisdom-tricks which he had got from the Sages as 
well ; so that although T'ien Ch eng Tzu acquired 
the reputation of a thief, he lived as comfortably as 
ever did either Yao or Shun. The small States 
did not venture to blame, nor the great States to 
punish him ; and so for twelve generations his 
descendants ruled over Ch'i. 

Commentators have failed to explain away this last 
sentence. On the strength of an obvious anachron- 
ism, some have written off the whole chapter as a 
forgery; but the general style of argument is against 
this view. 

Was not this stealing the State of Ch'i and the 
wisdom-tricks of the Sages as well in order to 
secure himself from the consequences of such theft ? 

1 1 2 Chuang Tzu 

This amounts to what I have already said, 
namely that nothing of what the world esteems 
great wit is otherwise than serviceable to strong 
thieves, and that nothing of what the world calls 
great wisdom is other than a protection to strong 
thieves. 

Let us take another example. Of old, Lung 
Feng was beheaded, Pi Kan was disembowelled, 
Chang Hung was sliced to death, Tzu Hsii was 
chopped to mince-meat. 

The first two have been already mentioned in ch. iv. 
Chang Hung was minister to Prince Ling of the 
Chou dynasty. Tzu Hsli was a name of the famous 
Wu Yiian, prime minister of the Ch'u State, whose 
corpse is said to have been sewn up in a sack and 
thrown into the river near Soochow. 

All these four were Sages, but their wisdom could 
not preserve them from death. 

In fact, it rather hastened their ends. 

An apprentice to Robber Che asked him saying, 
" Is there then Tag in thieving ? " 

" Pray tell me of something in which there is not 
^ Tag," Che replied. " There is the wisdom by 
which booty is located. The courage to go in first, 
and the heroism of coming out last. There is the 
shrewdness of calculating success, and justice in 
the equal division of the spoil. There has never 
yet been a great robber who was not possessed of 
these five." 

Thus the doctrine of the Sages is equally indis- 

CAP. X.] Opening Trunks 113 

pensable to good men and to Chd. But good men 
are scarce and bad men plentiful, so that the good 
the Sages do to the world is little and the evil 
great. 

Therefore it has been said, 'Tf the lips are 
gone, the teeth will be cold." It was the thinness 
of the wine of Lu which caused the siege of 
Han Tan. 

The prince of Ch'u held an assembly, to which the 
princes of Lu and Chao brought presents of wine. 
That of Lu was poor stuff, while the wine of Chao 
was rich and generous. Because, however, the 
Master of the Cellar to the prince of Ch'u failed to 
get a bribe of wine from the prince of Chao, he 
maliciously changed the presents ; and the prince 
of Ch'u, displeased at what he regarded as an 
insult, shortly after laid siege to Han Tan, the chief 
city of Chao. 

It was the appearance of Sages which caused the 
appearance of great robbers. 

Drive out the Sages and leave the robbers alone, 
— then only will the empire be governed. As when ^ 
the stream ceases the gully dries up, and when the 
hill is levelled the chasm is filled ; so when Sages 
are extinct, there will be no more robbers, but the 
empire will rest in peace. 

On the other hand, unless Sages disappear, 
neither will great robbers disappear ; nor if you 
double the number of Sages wherewithal to govern 
the empire will you do more than double the profits 
of Robber Ch^. 

1 1 4 Chnang Tzii 

If pecks and bushels are used for measurement, 
they will also be stolen. 

There will simply be something more to steal. 

If scales and steelyards are used for weighing, they 
will also be stolen. If tallies and signets are used 
for good faith, they will also be stolen. If charity 
and duty to one's neighbour are used for rectifica- 
tion, they will also be stolen. 

How is this so? — One man steals a purse, and is 
punished. Another steals a State, and becomes a 
Prince. But charity and duty to one's neighbour 
are integral parts of princedom. Does he not then 
steal charity and duty to one's neighbour together 
with the wisdom of the Sages ? 

So it is that to attempt to drive out great 
robbers 

Who steal States. 

is simply to help them to steal principalities, charity, 
duty to one's neighbour, together with measures, 
scales, tallies, and signets. No reward of official 
regalia and uniform will dissuade, nor dread of 
sharp instruments of punishment will deter such 
men from their course. These do but double 
the profits of robbers like Che, and make it impos- 
sible to get rid of them, — for which the Sages are 
responsible. 

Therefore it has been said, " Fishes cannot be 
taken away from water : the instruments of govern- 
ment cannot be delegated to others." 

These words were uttered by Lao Tzii. So say 

CAP. X.] Opening Trunks 115 

Han Fei Tzu and Huai Nan Tzu. They have been 
incorporated in ch. xxxvi of the Tao-Te-Ching. 

In the wisdom of Sages the instruments of 
government are found. This wisdom is not fit 
for enlightening the world. 

Away then with wisdom and knowledge, and 
great robbers will disappear ! Discard jade and 
destroy pearls, and petty thieves will cease to exist. 
Burn tallies and break signets, and the people will 
revert to their natural integrity. Split measures 
and smash scales, and the people will not fight over 
quantities. Utterly abolish all the restrictions of 
Sages, and the people will begin to be fit for the 
reception of Tao. 

Confuse the six pitch-pipes, break up organs and 
flutes, stuff up the ears of Shih K'uang, — and each 
man will keep his own sense of hearing to himself. 

Put an end to decoration, disperse the five cate- 
gories of colour, glue up the eyes of Li Chu, — 
and each man will keep his own sense of sight to 
himself. 

Destroy arcs and lines, fling away square and 
compasses, snap off the fingers of Kung Ch'ui, — 

A famous artisan who could draw an exact circle 
with his unaided hand. 

and each man will use his own natural skill. 

Wherefore the saying, " Great skill is as 
clumsiness." 

Extremes meet. These words are attributed to Lao 
Tzu by Huai Nan Tzu, and are incorporated in 
ch. xlv of the Tao-Ti-CJiing. 

I 2 

1 1 6 Chuaug Tzii 

Restrain the actions of Tseng and Shih, stop the 
mouths of Yang and Mih, get rid of charity and 
duty to one's neighbour, — and the virtue of the 
people will become one with God. 

If each man keeps to himself his own sense of 
sight, the world will escape confusion. If each 
man keeps to himself his own sense of hearing, 
the world will escape entanglements. If each man 
keeps his knowledge to himself, the world will 
escape doubt. If each man keeps his own virtue 
to himself, the world will avoid deviation from the 
true path. 

Tseng, Shih, Yang, Mih, Shih K'uang, Kung 
Ch'ui, and Li Chu, all set up their virtue outside 
themselves and involve the world in such angry 
discussions that nothing definite is accomplished. 

Have you never heard of the Golden Age, — 

This question must be addressed to the reader. 

the days of Yung Ch eng, Ta T'ing, Poh Huang, 
Chung Yang, Li Lu, Li Hsii, Hsien Yuan, He Hsii, 
Tsun Lu, Chu Yung, Fu Hsi, and Shen Nung? 

Ancient rulers, several of whom have already been 
mentioned. 

J Then the people used knotted cords. 

As a means of intercommunication. The details of 
the system have not, however, come down to us. 

They were contented with what food and raiment 
they could get. They lived simple and peaceful 
lives. Neighbouring districts were within sight, 

CAP. X.] Opening Trunks 117 

and the cocks and dogs of one could be heard in ^^ 
the other, yet the people grew old and died without 
ever interchanging visits. 

In those days, government was indeed perfect. 
But nowadays any one can excite the people by 
saying, ** In such and such a place there is a Sage." 

Immediately they put together a few provisions 
and hurry off, neglecting their parents at home and 
their master's business abroad, filing in unbroken 
line through territories of Princes, with a string of 
carts and carriages a thousand // in length. Such 
is the evil effect of an exaggerated desire for know- 
ledge among our rulers. And if rulers aim at 
knowledge and neglect Tao, the empire will be 
overwhelmed in confusion. 

How can it be shown that this is so ? — Bows and 
cross-bows and hand-nets and harpoon-arrows, 
involve much knowledge in their use ; but they 
carry confusion among the birds of the air. Hooks 
and bait and nets and traps, involve much know- 
ledge in their use ; but they carry confusion among 
the fishes of the deep. Fences and nets and snares, 
involve much knowledge in their use ; but they 
carry confusion among the beasts of the field. In 
the same way the sophistical fallacies of the hard 
and white and the like and the unlike of schoolmen 
involve much knowledge of argument ; but they 
overwhelm the world in doubt. 

Therefore it is that whenever there is great 
confusion, love of knowledge is ever at the bottom 
of it. For all men strive to grasp what they do 

ii8 Chiiaiig Tzu 

not know, while none strive to grasp what they 
already know ; and all strive to discredit what they 
do not excel in, while none strive to discredit what 
they do excel in. The result is overwhelming 
confusion. 

Thus, above, the splendour of the heavenly 
bodies is dimmed ; below, the energy of land and 
water is disturbed ; while midway the influence of 
the four seasons is destroyed. There is not one 
tiny creature which moves on earth or flies in 
air but becomes other than by nature it should be. 
So overwhelming is the confusion which desire for 
knowledge has brought upon the world ever since 
the time of the Three Dynasties downwards ! 
The simple and the guileless have been set aside ; 
the specious and the false have been exalted. 
Tranquil inaction has given place to a love of 
disputation ; and by disputation has confusion 
come upon the world. 

119 

CHAPTER XL 

On Letting Alone. 

Argument: — The natural conditions of our existence require no artificial 
aids — The evils of government — Failure of coercion — Tao the refuge 
— Inaction the secret — The action of Inaction — Illustrations. 

THERE has been such a thing as letting 
mankind alone ; there has never been such 
a thing as governing mankind. 

With success. 
Letting alone springs from fear lest men's 
natural dispositions be perverted and their virtue 
laid aside. But if their natural dispositions be not 
perverted nor their virtue laid aside, what room 
is there left for government ? 

Of old, when Yao governed the empire, he 
caused happiness to prevail to excess in man's ^ 
nature ; and consequently the people were not 
satisfied. When Chieh 

See p. 40. 
governed the empire he caused sorrow to prevail 
to excess in man's nature ; and consequently the 
people were not contented. Dissatisfaction and 
discontent are subversive of virtue ; and without 
virtue there is no such thing for an empire as 
stability. 

Virtue, here in its ordinary sense. 

J 

1 20 Chiiang Tsil 

When man rejoices greatly he gravitates towards 
the positive pole. When he sorrows deeply he 
gravitates towards the negative pole. 

These "poles" are the male and female principles 
already alluded to on p. 82. Originally developed 
from the Great Monad, they became the progenitors 
of all creation. 

If the equilibrium of positive and negative 

In nature. 

is disturbed, the four seasons are interrupted, the 
balance of heat and cold is destroyed, and man 
himself suffers physically thereby. 

Because men are made to rejoice and to sorrow 
and to displace their centre of gravity, they lose their 
steadiness, and are unsuccessful in thought and 
action. And thus it is that the idea of surpassing 
others first came into the world, followed by the 
appearance of such men as Robber Che, Tseng, and 
Shih, the result being that the whole world could 
not furnish enough rewards for the good nor dis- 
tribute punishments enough for the evil among 
mankind. And as this great world is not equal to 
the demand for rewards and punishments ; and as, 
ever since the time of the Three Dynasties 

The legendary emperors Fu Hsi, Shen Nung, and 
Huang Ti, or the Yellow Emperor, already men- 
tioned. 

downwards, men have done nothing but struggle 
over rewards and punishments, — what possible 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 121 

leisure can they have had for adapting themselves 
to the natural conditions of their existence ? 

Besides, over-refinement of vision leads to 
debauchery in colour; over-refinement of hearing 
leads to debauchery in sound ; over-refinement of 
charity leads to confusion in virtue ; 

Here again the manifestation of Tao. See p. 45. 

over-refinement of duty towards one's neighbour 
leads to perversion of principle ; 

The eternal principles which are of Tao and not of 
man. 

over-refinement of ceremonial leads to divergence 
from the true object ; over-refinement of music 
leads to lewdness of thought ; over-refinement of 
wisdom leads to an extension of mechanical art ; 
and over-refinement of shrewdness leads to an 
extension of vice. 

As shown in the preceding chapter. 

If people adapt themselves to the natural con- 
ditions of existence, the above eight 

Vision, hearing, charity, duty to one's neighbour, 
ceremonial, music, wisdom, and shrewdness. 

may be or may not be ; it matters not. But if 
people do not adapt themselves to the natural 
conditions of existence, then these eight become 
hindrances and spoilers, and throw the world into 
confusion. 

122 Chuang Tzii 

In spite of this, the world reverences and 
cherishes them, thereby greatly increasing the 
sum of human error. And not as a passing 
fashion, but with admonitions in words, with 
humility in prostrations, and with the stimulus 
of music and song. What then is left for me ? 

Therefore, for the perfect man who is unavoid- 
ably summoned to power over his fellows, there is 
naught like Inaction. 

It is not according to the spirit of Tao that a man 
should shirk his mortal responsibilities. On the con- 
trary, Tao teaches him how to meet them. 

By means of inaction he will be able to adapt him- 
self to the natural conditions of existence. And 
so it is that he who respects the State as his own 
body is fit to support it, and he who loves the State 
as his own body, is fit to govern it. 

This last sentence is attributed by Huai Nan Tzu 
to Lao Tzu, and has been incorporated in the Tao- 
Te-Cking, ch. xiii. It is curious that Chuang Tzii 
should say nothing about its authorship, and perhaps 
even more curious that Kuo Hsiang, his editor and 
commentator of the fourth century a.d., should say 
nothing either about the claims of Lao Tzu or the 
Tao- Te- Ch ing. 

And if I can refrain from injuring my internal 
economy, and from taxing my powers of sight and 
hearing, sitting like a corpse while my dragon- 
power is manifested around, in profound silence 
while my thunder-voice resounds, the powers of 
heaven responding to every phase of my will, as 

^^ 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 123 

under the yielding influence of inaction all things 
are brought to maturity and thrive, — what leisure 
then have I to set about governing the world ? 

Some of this passage is repeated in ch. xiv. 

Ts'ui Chii 

A casual personage. 

asked Lao Tzu, saying, " If the empire is not to 
be governed, how are men's hearts to be kept in 
order ? " 

" Be careful," replied Lao Tzu, " not to interfere 
with the natural goodness of the heart of man. 
Man's heart may be forced down or stirred up. In 
each case the issue is fatal. 

" By gentleness, the hardest heart may be 
softened. But try to cut and polish it, — 'twill glow 
like fire or freeze like ice. In the twinkling of an 
eye it will pass beyond the limits of the Four Seas. 
In repose, profoundly still ; in motion, far away in 
the sky. No bolt can bar, no bond can bind, — 
such is the human heart." 

" Of old, the Yellow Emperor first caused charity 
and duty to one's neighbour to interfere with the ^ 
natural goodness of the heart of man. In con- 
sequence of which, Yao and Shun wore the hair 
off their legs in endeavouring to feed their people. 
They disturbed their internal economy in order to 
find room for charity and duty to one's neighbour. 
They exhausted their energies in framing laws and 
statutes. Still they did not succeed. 

124 Chuang Tzil 

" Thereupon, Yao confined Huan Tou on Mount 
Tsung ; drove the chief of San-miao and his people 
into San-wei, and kept them there ; and banished 
the Minister of Works to Yu Island. 

These words are quoted (with variants) from the 
Shti Ching or Canon of History. They refer to 
individuals who had misconducted themselves in 
carrying out the new regime. 

But they were not equal to their task, and through 
the times of the Three Princes 

The Great Yii, T'ang, and Wen Wang, founder of 
the Chou dynasty. 

the empire was in a state of great unrest. Among 
the bad men were Chieh and Che ; among the good 
were Tseng and Shih. By and by, the Confu- 
cianists and the Mihists arose ; and then came 
exultation and anger of rivals, fraud between the 
simple and the cunning, recrimination between the 
virtuous and the evil, slander between the honest 
and the dishonest, — until decadence set in, men fell 
away from their original virtue, their natures 
became corrupt, and there was a general rush for 
knowledge. 

"The next thing was to coerce by all kinds of 
physical torture, thus bringing utter confusion into 
the empire, the blame for which rests upon those 
who would interfere with the natural goodness of 
the heart of man. 

" In consequence, virtuous men sought refuge in 
mountain caves, while rulers of States sat trembling 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 1 25 

in their ancestral halls. Then, when dead men 
lay about pillowed on each others' corpses, when 
cangued prisoners and condemned criminals jostled 
each other in crowds, — then the Confucianists and 
the Mihists, in the midst of gyves and fetters, stood 
forth to preach ! 

Salvation from the ills of which they and their sys- 
tems had been the cause. 

Alas, they know not shame, nor what it is to blush ! 
" Until I can say that the wisdom of Sages is 
not a fastener of cangues, and that charity and 
duty to one's neighbour are not bolts for gyves, 
how should I know that Tseng and Shih are not 
the forerunners 

Lit. " sounding arrows," used by bandits as a signal 

for beginning the attack. 

of Chieh and Ch^ ? 

The meaning intended is that £'ood cannot exist 
without its correlative evi/. 

"Therefore I said, 'Abandon wisdom and dis- 
card knowledge, and the empire will be at peace.' " 
These words have been incorporated in ch. xix of 
the Tao-Te-Ching. The present rendering some- 
what modifies the view I expressed on p. 16 of The 
Remains of Lao Tzii. 

The Yellow Emperor sat on the throne for nine- 
teen years, and his laws obtained all over the 
empire. 

Hearing that Kuang Ch'eng Tzu 

Said by some commentators to be another name for 

126 Chtiang Tzii 

Lao Tzu, but if so, then it must have been Lao Tzii 
as he existed, an incarnation of Tao, before his 
appearance in the Confucian age. 

was living on Mount K'ung-t'ung, he went thither 
to see him, and said, " I am told, Sir, that you are 
in possession of perfect Tao. May I ask in what 
perfect Tao consists ? I desire to avail myself of 
the good influence of heaven and earth in order to 
secure harvests and feed my people. I should also 
like to control the Two Powers of nature 
The Yin and the Yang. See pp. 82, 120. 

in order to the protection of all living things. 
How can I accomplish this ? " 

" What you desire to avail yourself of," replied 
Kuang Ch eng Tzu, *' is the primordial integrity of 
matter. What you wish to control are the disin- 
tegrators thereof. Ever since the empire has been 
governed by you, the clouds have rained without 
waiting to thicken, the foliage of trees has fallen 
without waiting to grow yellow, the brightness of 
the sun and moon has paled, and the voice of the 
flatterer is heard on every side. How then speak 
of perfect Tao ? " 

The Yellow Emperor withdrew. He resigned 
the Throne. He built himself a solitary hut. He 
lay upon straw. For three months he remained 
in seclusion, and then went again to see Kuang 
Ch eng Izu. 

The latter was lying down with his face to the 
south. The Yellow Emperor approached after the 
manner of an inferior, upon his knees. Prostrating 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 1 27 

himself upon the ground he said, " I am told, Sir, 
that you are in possession of perfect Tao. May I 
ask how my self may be preserved so as to last ? " 

Kuang Ch'^ng Tzu jumped up with a start. "A 
good question indeed ! " cried he. " Come, and I 
will speak to you of perfect Tao. 

" The essence of perfect Tao is profoundly 
mysterious ; its extent is lost in obscurity. 

" See nothing ; hear nothing ; let your soul be 
wrapped in quiet ; and your body will begin to take 
proper form. Let there be absolute repose and 
absolute purity ; do not weary your body nor dis- 
turb your vitality, — and you will live for ever. For 
if the eye sees nothing, and the ear hears nothing, 
and the mind 

Lit, the heart. 

thinks nothing, the soul will preserve the body, 
and the body will live for ever. 

Not in the grosser worldly sense, but as a sublimated 
unit in eternity. 

" Cherish that which is within you, and shut off 
that which is without ; for much knowledge is a 
curse. Then I will place you upon that abode of 
Great Light which is the source of the positive 
Power, and escort you through the gate of Pro- 
found Mystery which is the source of the negative 
Power. These Powers are the controllers of heaven 
and earth, and each contains the other. 

Knowledge thereof is knowledge of the great mys- 
tery of human existence. 

128 Chuang Tzii 

" Cherish and preserve your own self, 

In accordance with the above. 

and all the rest will prosper of itself. 

The welfare of the people, the success of their har- 
vests, etc. 

I preserve the original One, while resting in har- 
mony with externals. It is because I have thus 
cared for my self now for twelve hundred years 
that my body has not decayed." 

The Yellow Emperor prostrated himself and 
said, " Kuang Ch eng Tzu is surely God " 

Whereupon the latter continued, " Come, I will 
tell you. That self is eternal ; yet all men think it 
mortal. That self is infinite ; yet all men think it 
finite.- Those who possess Tao are princes in this 
life and rulers in the hereafter. Those who do not 
possess Tao, behold the light of day in this life 
and become clods of earth in the hereafter. 

" Nowadays, all living things spring from the dust 
and to the dust return. But I will lead you through 
the portals of Eternity into the domain of Infinity. 
My light is the light of sun and moon. My life is 
the life of heaven and earth. I know not who 
comes nor who goes. Men may all die, but I 
endure for ever." 

"A mighty drama, enacted on the theatre of Infini- 
tude, with suns for lamps, and Eternity as a back- 
ground ; whose author is God, and whose purport 
and thousandfold moral lead us up to the ' dark with 
excess of light' of the throne of God." — Carlyle. 

I 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 129 

The Spirit of the Clouds when passing east- 
wards through the expanse of Air 

The term here used has also been explained to mean 
some supernatural kind of tree, over which we may 
imagine the Cloud-Spirit to be passing. 

happened to fall in with the Vital Principle. The 
latter was slapping his ribs and hopping about ; 
whereupon the Spirit of the Clouds said, "Who 
are you, old man, and what are you doing here ? " 

" Strolling ! " replied the Vital Principle, without 
stopping. 

Activities ceaseless in their imperceptible operation. 

*' I want to know something," continued the 
Spirit of the Clouds. 

"Ah ! " uttered the Vital Principle, in a tone of. 
disapprobation. 

" The relationship of heaven and earth is out of 
harmony," said the Spirit of the Clouds ; " the six 
influences do not combine, 

The positive and negative principles, wind, rain, 
darkness, and light. 

and the four seasons are no longer regular. I desire 
to blend the six influences so as to nourish all 
living beings. What am I to do ? " 

"I do not know!" cried the Vital Principle, 
shaking his head, while still slapping his ribs and 
hopping about ; " I do not know ! " 

So the Spirit of the Clouds did not press his 
question ; but three years later, when passing east- 
wards through the Yu-sung territory, he again fell 

K 

130 Chuang Tzii 

in with the Vital Principle. The former was over- 
joyed, and hurrying up, said, " Has your Holiness 
forgotten me ? " 

He then prostrated himself, and desired to be 
allowed to interrogate the Vital Principle ; but the 
latter said, " I wander on without knowing what I 
want. I roam about without knowing where I am 
going. I stroll in this ecstatic manner, simply 
awaiting events. What should I know ? " 

" I too roam about," answered the Spirit of the 
Clouds ; " but the people depend upon my move- 
ments. I am thus unavoidably summoned to 
power ; and under these circumstances I would 
gladly receive some advice." 

" That the scheme of empire is in confusion," said 
the Vital Principle, " that the conditions of life are 
violated, that the will of God does not triumph, 
that the beasts of the field are disorganised, that 
the birds of the air cry at night, that blight reaches 
the trees and herbs, that destruction spreads among 
creeping things, — this, alas ! is the fault of 
government.'' 

" True," replied the Spirit of the Clouds, " but 
what am I to do ? " 

" It is here," cried the Vital Principle, " that the 
poison lurks ! Go back ! " 

To the root, to that natural state in which by inaction 
all things are accomplished. 

" It is not often," urged the Spirit of the Clouds, 
" that I meet with your Holiness. I would gladly 
receive some advice." 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 131 

" Feed then your people," said the Vital Prin- 
ciple, " with your heart. 

By the influence of your own perfection. 
Rest in inaction, and the world will be good of 
itself. Cast your slough. Spit forth intelligence. 
Ignore all differences. Become one with the infinite. 
Release your mind. Free your soul. Be vacuous. 
Be Nothing ! 

*' Let all things revert to their original consti- 
tution. If they do this, without knowledge, the 
result will be a simple purity which they will never 
lose ; but knowledge will bring with it a divergence 
therefrom. Seek not the names nor the relations of 
things, and all things will flourish of themselves." 

" Knowledge is the knowing that we cannot know." 
Emerson. 

" Your Holiness," said the Spirit of the Clouds, 
as he prostrated himself and took leave, " has in- 
formed me with power and filled me with mysteries. 
What I had long sought, I have now found." 

The men of this world all rejoice in others being 
like themselves, and object to others not being like 
themselves. 

"The man, and still more the woman, who can be 
accused either of doing ' what nobody does,' or of 
not doing * what everbody does,' is the subject of as 
much depreciatory remark as if he or she had com- 
mitted some grave moral delinquency." Mill's Essay 
on Liberty y ch. iii. 

Those who make friends with their likes and do 

K 2 

132 Chuang TzH 

not make friends with their unlikes, are influenced 
by a desire to difl"erentiate themselves from others. 
But those who are thus influenced by a desire to 
differentiate themselves from others, — how will they 
find it possible to do so ? 

As all have similar ambitions, they will only be on 
the same footing as the rest. 

To subordinate oneself to the majority in order to 
gratify personal ambition, is not so good as to let 
that majority look each one after his own affairs. 
Those who desire to govern kingdoms, clutch at the 
advantages of the Three Princes without seeing the 
troubles involved. In fact, they trust to luck. But 
in thus trusting to luck not to destroy the kingdom, 
their chances of preserving it do not amount to one 
in ten thousand, while their chances of destroying 
it are ten thousand to nothing and even more. 
Such, alas ! is the ignorance of rulers. 

The above somewhat unsatisfactory paragraph con- 
demns those who strive to distinofuish themselves 
from, and set themselves up as governors of, their 
fellow-men. 

For, given territory, there is the great thing — 
Man. Given man, he must not be managed as if 
he were a mere thing; though by not managing him 
at all he may actually be managed as if he were a 
mere thing. And for those who understand that 
the management of man as if he were a mere thing 
is not the way to manage him, the issue is not con- 
fined to mere government of the empire. Such men 
may wander at will between the six limits of space or 

CAP. XI.] On Letting Alone 133 

travel over the continent of earth, unrestrained in 
coming and in going. This is to be distinguished 
from one's fellows, and this distinction is the 
highest attainable by man. 

The doctrine of the perfect man is to him as 
shadow to form, as echo to sound. Ask and it 
responds, fulfilling its mission as the help-mate of 
humanity. Noiseless in repose, objectless in 
motion, it guides you to the goal, free to come and 
free to go for ever without end. Alone in its exits 
and its entrances, it rivals the eternity of the sun. 

As for his body, that is in accordance with the 
usual standard. Being in accordance with the usual 
standard it is not distinguished in any way. But if 
not distinguished in any way, what becomes of the 
distinction by which he is distinguished ? 

Those who see what is to be seen, — of such were 
the perfect men of old. Those who see what is not 
to be seen,— they are the chosen of the universe. 

Spiritual sight carries them beyond the horizon 
where natural vision stops short. 

Low in the scale, but still to be allowed for, — 
matter. Humble, but still to be followed, — 

Rather than guided, 
mankind. Of others, but still to be attended to, — / 
affairs. Harsh, but still necessary to be set forth, — 
the law. Far off, but still claiming our presence, — 
duty to one's neighbour. Near, but still claiming 
extension, — charity. Of sparing use, but still to be 
of bounteous store, — ceremony. Of middle course, 
but still to be of lofty scope, — virtue. One, but 

134 Clmang Tzic 

not to be without modification, — Tao. Spiritual, 
yet not to be devoid of action, — God. 

In inaction there is action. 
Therefore the true Sage looks up to God, but 
does not offer to aid. He perfects his virtue, but 
does not involve himself. He guides himself by 
, Tao, but makes no plans. He identifies himself 
with charity, but does not rely on it. He extends 
to duty towards his neighbour, but does not store it 
up. He responds to ceremony, without tabooing it. 

Although really recognising only the ceremony of 

the heart which requires no outward sign. 
He undertakes affairs without declining them. He 
metes out law without confusion. He relies on his 
fellow-men and does not make light of them. He 
accommodates himself to matter and does not 
ignore it. 

Thus the action of the Sage is after all inaction, 
j While there should be no action, there should be 
also no inaction. 

Of a positive, premeditated character. 
He who is not divinely enlightened will not be sub- 
limely pure. He who has not clear apprehension of 
Tao will find this beyond his reach. And he who 
is not enlightened by Tao, — alas indeed for him ! 
J What then is Tao ?— There is the Tao of God, 
and the Tao of man. Inaction and compliance 
make the Tao of God : action and entanglement 
the Tao of man. The Tao of God is fundamental : 
the Tao of man is accidental. The distance which 
separates them is great. Let us all take heed 
thereto ! 

135 

CHAPTER XII. 

The Universe. 

Argument: — The preeminence ofTAO — All things informed thereby — 
The true Sage illumined thereby — His attributes — His perfection — 
Man's senses his bane — Illustrations. 

VAST as is the universe, its phenomena are 
regular. Countless though its contents, the 
laws which govern these are uniform. Many 
though its inhabitants, that which dominates them 
is sovereignty. Sovereignty begins in virtue and 
ends in God. Therefore it is called divine. 

The term here used has been elsewhere rendered 
" infinite." 

Of old, the empire was under the sovereignty of 
inaction. There was the virtue of God, — nothing 
more. 

Meaning, of course, Tag. In other words, all things 
existed under their own natural conditions. 

Words being in accordance with Tao, the 
sovereignty of the empire was correct. Delimita- 
tions being in accordance with Tao, the duties of 
prince and subject were clear. Abilities being in 
accordance with Tag, the officials of the empire 

136 Chiiang Tzu 

governed. The point of view being always in 
accordance with Tao, all things responded thereto. 

Under the reign of inaction, the natural prevailed 
over the artificial. (1) The sovereign could utter 
no cruel mandate. (2) Sovereign and subject each 
played his allotted part. (3) The right men were 
in the right place. (4) All things were as they 
were, and not as man would have them. 

/ Thus, virtue was the connecting link between 
God and man, while Tao spread throughout all 
creation. Men were controlled by outward circum- 
stances, applying their in-born skill to the develop- 
ment of civilised life. This skill was bound up 
with the circumstances of life, and these with duty, 
and duty with virtue, and virtue with Tao, and 

•^ Tao with God. 

Therefore it has been said, "As for those who 
nourished the empire of old, having no desires for 
themselves, the empire was not in want. They did 
nothing, and all things proceeded on their course. 
They preserved a dignified repose, and the people 
rested in peace." 

We are not told who said these words. They are 
not in the Tao-Te-Ching ; and yet if Lao Tzu did 
not utter them, it is difficult to say who did. 

The Record says, " By converging to One, all 
things may be accomplished. By the virtue which 
is without intention, even the supernatural may be 
subdued." ' 

How much more man? Kuo Hsiang says the 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 1 37 

Record was the name of a work ascribed to Lao 
Tzu. 

The Master said, " Tao covers and supports all 
things," — so vast is its extent. Each man should 
prepare his heart accordingly. 

This " Master " has been identified with both 
Chuang Tzii and Lao Tzu. 

" To act by means of inaction is God. To speak ^ 
by means of inaction is Virtue. To love men and 
care for things is Charity. To recognise the unlike 
as the like is breadth of view. To make no distinc- 
tions is liberal. To possess variety is wealth. And 
so, to hold fast to virtue is strength. To complete 
virtue is establishment. To follow Tao is to be 
prepared. And not to run counter to the natural 
bias of things is to be perfect. 

" He who fully realises these ten points, by stor- 
ing them within enlarges his heart, and with this 
enlargement brings all creation to himself. Such a 
man will bury gold on the hillside and cast pearls 
into the sea. He will not struggle for wealth, nor 
strive for fame. He will not rejoice at old age, nor 
grieve over early death. He will find no pleasure 
in success, no chagrin in failure. He will not 
account a throne as his own private gain, nor the 
empire of the world as glory personal to himself. 
His glory is to know that all things are One, and 
that life and death are but phases of the same 
existence ! " 

" Let man learn that he is here, not to work, but to 

1^8 C/llt(Ulir Tzu 

.b 

be worked upon ; and that, though abyss open 
under abyss, and opinion displace opinion, all are 
at last contained in the Eternal Cause." Efuerson. 

The Master said, " How profound in its repose, 
how infinite in its purity, is Tao ! 

"If metal and stone were without Tag, they 
would not be capable of emitting sound. And 
just as they possess the property of sound but will 
not emit sound unless struck, so surely is the same 
principle applicable to all creation. 

Meaning that all creation is responsive to proper 
influences, in accordance with Tag, if we only knew 
where to seek them. 

" The man of complete virtue remains blankly 
passive as regards what goes on around him. He 
is as originally by nature, and his knowledge 
extends to the supernatural. Thus, his virtue 
expands his heart, which goes forth to all who 
come to take refuge therein. 

His heart does not initiate the movement, but 
simply responds to an influence brought to bear. 

** W^ithout Tag, form cannot be endued with 
life. W^ithout virtue, life cannot be endued with 
intelligence. To preserve one's form, live out one's 
life, establish one's virtue, and realise Tag, — is not 
this complete virtue ? 

" Issuing forth spontaneously, moving without 
premeditation, all things following in his wake, — 
such is the man of complete virtue ! 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 139 

" He can see where all is dark. He can hear 
where all is still. In the darkness he alone can see 
light. In the stillness he alone can detect harmony. 
He can sink to the lowest depths of materialism. 
To the highest heights of spirituality he can soar. 
This because he stands in due relation to all things. 
Though a mere abstraction, he can minister to their 
wants, and ever and anon receive them into rest, — 
the great, the small, the long, the short, for ever 
without end." 

He is, as it were, a law of compensation to all 
things. 

The Yellow Emperor travelled to the north 
of the Red Lake and ascended the K'un-lun 
Mountains. Returning south he lost his magic 
pearl. 

His spiritual part, his soul. 

He employed Intelligence to find it, but without 
success. He employed Sight to find it, but with- 
out success. He employed Speech 

Also explained as " Strength." 

to find it, but without success. Finally, he 
employed Nothing, and Nothing got it. 

He did not employ Nothing to fi7id it. He only 
employed Nothing. 

" Strange indeed," quoth the Emperor, " that 
Nothing should have been able to get it ! " ^ 

Knowledge, sight, and speech, tend to obscure 

140 Chuang Tzu 

rather than illuminate the spiritual nature of man. 
Only in a state of negation can true spirituality be 
found. 

Yao's tutor was Hsii Yu. The latter's tutor was 
Yeh Chueh, and Yeh Chueh's tutor was Wang I, 
whose tutor was Pei I. 

Yao enquired of Hsii Yu, saying, " Would Yeh 
Ch'iieh do to be emperor ? I am going to get 
Wang I to ask him." 

"Alas!" cried Hsu Yu, "that would be bad 
indeed for the empire. Yeh Ch'iieh is a clever and 
capable man. He is by nature better than most 
men, but he seeks by means of the human to reach 
the divine. He strives to do no wrong ; but he is 
ignorant of the source from which wrong springs. 
Emperor forsooth ! He avails himself of the 
artificial and neglects the natural. He lacks unity 
in himself. He worships intelligence and is always 
in a state of ferment. He is a slave to circum- 
stances and to things. Wherever he looks, his 
surroundings respond. He himself responds to 
his surroundings. 

He is not yet an abstraction, informed by Tao. 

He is always undergoing modifications and is 
wanting in fixity. How should such a one be fit 
for emperor ? Still every clan has its elder. He 
may be leader of a clan, but not a leader of leaders. 
A captain who has been successful in suppressing 
rebellion, as minister is a bane, as sovereign, a 
thief." 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 141 

Yao went to visit Hua. The border-warden of 
Hua said "Ha! a Sage. My best respects to 
you, Sir. I wish you a long life." 

" Don't ! " replied Yao. 

" I wish you plenty of money," continued the 
border-warden. 

" Don't ! " replied Yao. 

" And many sons," added he. 

" Don't ! " replied Yao. 

** Long life, plenty of money, and many sons," 
cried the warden, " these are what all men desire. 
How is it you alone do not want them ? " 

" Many sons," answered Yao," are many 
anxieties. Plenty of money means plenty of 
trouble. Long life involves much that is not 
pleasant to put up with. These three gifts do not 
advance virtue ; therefore I declined them." 

" At first I took you for a Sage," said the 
warden, " but now I find you are a mere man. 
God, in sending man into the world, gives to each 
his proper function. If you have many sons and 
give to each his proper function, what cause have 
you for anxiety ? 

" And similarly, if you have wealth and allow 
others to share it, what troubles will you have ? " 

" The true Sage dwells like the quail 

At random. 
and feeds like a fledgeling. 

Which is dependent on its parents. 
He travels like the bird, leaving no trace behind. 

142 Chua7ig Tzii 

If there be Tao in the empire, he and all things 
are in harmony. If there be not Tao, he culti- 
vates virtue in retirement. After a thousand years 
of this weary world, he mounts aloft, and riding 
upon the white clouds passes into the kingdom of 
God, whither the three evils do not reach, and 
where he rests secure in eternity. What is there 
to put up with in that ? " 

Thereupon the border-warden went off, and Yao 

followed him; saying, " May I ask ," to which 

the warden only replied '* Begone ! " 

The style of the above episode varies enough from 
Chuang Tzu's standard to make its authorship 
doubtful. 

When Yao was Emperor, Poh Ch eng Tzu Kao 

Lao Tzu under a previous incarnation. See the 
Kuang Cheng Tzu of p. 125. 

was one of his vassals. But when Yao handed 
over the empire to Shun, and Shun to the Great 
Yii, Poh Ch eng Tzu Kao resigned his fief and 
betook himself to agriculture. 

The Great Yu going to visit him, found him 
working in the fields ; whereupon he approached 
humbly, saying, " When Yao was emperor, you, 
Sir, were a vassal ; but when Yao handed over the 
empire to Shun, and Shun to me, you resigned 
your fief and betook yourself to agriculture. May 
I enquire the reason of this ? " 

" When Yao ruled the empire," said Tzii Kao, 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 143 

" the people exerted themselves without reward 
and behaved themselves without punishment. 
But now you reward and punish them, and yet 
they are not good. From this point virtue will 
decline, the reign of force will begin, and the 
troubles of after ages will date their rise. Away 
with you ! Do not interrupt my work." And he 
quietly went on ploughing as before. 

The above episode is unmistakably spurious. 

At the beginning of the beginning, even Nothing 
did not exist. Then came the period of the 
Nameless. 

"The Nameless," says the Tao-T^-Ching, ch. i, 
"was the beginning of heaven and earth." See 
also ch. ii, ante. 

When One came into existence, there was One, 
but it was formless. When things got that by 
which they came into existence, it was called their 
virttte. 

Sc. that, by virtue of which they are what they are. 
See p. 45. 

That which was formless, but divided. 

I.e. allotted, 
though without interstice, 

Unbroken in continuity. 

was called destmy. 

Then came the movement which gave life, and 

144 CJmang Tzii 

things produced in accordance with the principles 
of life had what is called form. When form 
encloses the spiritual part, each with its own 
characteristics, that is its nature. By cultivating 
this nature, we are carried back to virtue ; and if 
this is perfected, we become as all things were in 
the beginning. We become unconditioned, and 
the unconditioned is great. As birds join their 
beaks in chirping, 

Unconsciously. 

and beaks to chirp must be joined, — to be thus 
joined with the universe without being more con- 
scious of it than an idiot, this is divhie virtue, 
this is accordance with the eternal fitness of 
things. 

Confucius asked Lao Tzu, saying, "There are 
persons who cultivate Tao according to fixed rules 
of possible and impossible, fit and unfit, just as 
the schoolmen speak of separating hardness from 
whiteness as though these could be hung up on 
different pegs. 

See p. 22. 

Could such persons be termed sages ?" 

" That," replied Lao Tzu, " is but the skill of 
the handicraftsman, wearing out body and soul 
alike. The powers of the hunting-dog involve it 
in trouble ; 

It is kept by man instead of being free. 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 145 

the cleverness of the monkey brings it down from 
the mountain. 

Into the hands of man. 

Ch'iu, what I mean you cannot understand, neither 
can you put it into words. 

Ch'iu was the personal name of Confucius. It is 
never uttered by the Confucianist, the term " a 
certain one " being usually substituted. Neither is 
it ever written down, except with the omission of 
some stroke, by which its form is changed. 

Those who have a head and feet, but no mind nor 
ears, are many. Those who have a body without 
a body or appearance of one^ and yet there they 
are, — are none. Movement and rest, life and 
death, rise and fall, are not at the beck and call of 
man. Cultivation of self is in his own hands. 
To be unconscious of objective existences and of 
God, this is to be unconscious of one's own per- 
sonality. And he who is unconscious of his own 
personality, combines in himself the human and 
the divine." 

Chiang Lii Mien went to see Chi Ch'^, 

Two obscure personages. 

and said, " The Prince of Lu begged me to instruct 
him, but I declined. However, he would take no 
refusal, so I was obliged to do so. I don't know if 
I was correct in my doctrine or not. Please note 
what I said. I told him to be decorous and thrifty ; 

146 Chnang Tzil 

to advance the public-spirited and loyal, and to have 
no partialities. Then, I said, no one would venture 
to oppose him." 

Chi Che sniggered and said, " Your remarks on 
the virtues of Princes may be compared with the 
mantis stretching out its feelers and trying to 
stop a carriage, — not likely to effect the object 
proposed. 

See ch. iv, where the same figure is used. 

Besides, he would be placing himself in the position 
of a man who builds a lofty tower and makes a dis- 
play of his valuables where all his neighbours will 
come and gaze at them." 

Attracting people by means not in accordance with 
Tao. 

''Alas! I fear I am but a fool," replied Chiang 
Lii Mien. " Nevertheless, I should be glad to be 
instructed by you in the proper course to pursue." 

" The government of the perfect Sage," explained 
Chi Ch'^, " consists ia influencing the hearts of the 
people so as to cause them to complete their 
education, to reform their manners, to subdue the 
rebel mind, and to exert themselves orte and all for 
the common good. This influence operates in 
accordance with the natural disposition of the 
people, who are thus unconscious of its operation. 
He who can so act has no need to humble himself 
before the teachings of Yao and Shun. He makes 
the desires of the people coincident with virtue, 
and their hearts rest therein." 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 1 47 

When Tzu Kung 

See ch. vi. 

went south to the Ch'u State on his way back to 
the Chin State, he passed through Han-yin. There 
he saw an old man engaged in making a ditch to 
connect his vegetable garden with a well. He had 
a pitcher in his hand, with which he was bringing 
up water and pouring it into the ditch, — great 
labour with very little result. 

"If you had a machine here," cried Tzu Kung, 
" in a day you could irrigate a hundred times your 
present area. The labour required is trifling as 
compared with the work done. Would you not 
like to have one ? " 

" What is it ? " asked the gardener. 

" It is a contrivance made of wood," replied Tzu 
Kung, " heavy behind and light in front. It draws 
up water as you do with your hands, but in a con- 
stantly overflowing stream. It is called a well- 
sweep." 

Still used all over China. 

Thereupon the gardener flushed up and said, " I 
have heard from my teacher that those who have 
cunning implements are cunning in their dealings, 
and that those who are cunning in their dealings 
have cunning in their hearts, and that those who 
have cunning in their hearts cannot be pure and 
incorrupt, and that those who are not pure and 
incorrupt are restless in spirit, and that those who 
are restless in spirit are not fit vehicles for Tao. 

L 2 

148 Chimng Tzii 

It is not that I do not know of these things. I 
should be ashamed to use them." 

At this Tzu Kung was much abashed, and said 
nothing. Then the gardener asked him who he 
was, to which Tzu Kung replied that he was a 
disciple of Confucius. 

" Are you not one who extends his learning with 
a view to being a Sage ; who talks big in order to 
put himself above the rest of mankind ; who plays 
in a key to which no one can sing so as to spread 
his reputation abroad ? Rather become uncon- 
scious of self and shake off the trammels of the 
flesh, — and you will be near. But if you cannot 
govern your own self, what leisure have you for 
governing the empire ? Begone ! Do not interrupt 
my work." 

Tzu Kung changed colour and slunk away, being 
not at all pleased with this rebuff ; and it was not 
before he had travelled some thirty // that he 
recovered his usual appearance. 

** What did the man w^e met do," asked a dis- 
ciple, " that you should change colour and not 
recover for such a long time ? " 

" I used to think there was only one man in all 
the world," replied Tzu Kung. 

Meaning Confucius. 

" I did not know that there was also this man. 
I have heard the Master say that the test of a 
scheme is its practicability, and that success 
must be certain. The minimum of effort with 

CAP. XII 

] The Universe 149 

the maximum of success, — such is the way of the 
Sage. 

The absurdity of attributing such doctrines to Con- 
fucius will be apparent to every student of the Sage's 
remains. 

" Not so this manner of man. Aiming at Tao, 
he perfects his virtue. By perfecting his virtue 
he perfects his body, and by perfecting his body 
he perfects his spiritual part. And the perfection 
of the spiritual part is the Tao of the Sage. 
Coming into life he is as one of the people, knowing 
not whither he is bound. How complete is his 
purity ? Success, profit, skill, — these have no place 
in his heart. Such a man, if he does not will it, he 
does not stir ; if he does not wish it, he does not 
act. If all the world praises him, he does not 
heed. If all the world blames him, he does not 
repine. 

Reminding us of the philosopher Yung of ch. i. 

The praise and the blame of the world neither 
advantage him nor otherwise. He may be called a 
man of perfect virtue. As for me, I am but a mere 
creature of impulse." 

So he went back to Lu to tell Confucius. But 
Confucius said, " That fellow pretends to a know- 
ledge of the science of the ante-mundane. He 
knows something, but not much. His government 
is of the internal, not of the external. What is 
there wonderful in a man by clearness of intel- 
ligence becoming pure, by inaction reverting to his 

150 Chuang Tzii 

original integrity, and with his nature and his 
spiritual part wrapped up in a body, passing 
through this common world of ours ? Besides, to 
you and to me the science of the ante-mundane is 
not worth knowing." 

It is only the present which concerns man. 
This last is an utterance which might well have 
fallen from the lips of Confucius. But the whole 
episode is clearly an interpolation of later times. 

As Chun Mang was starting eastwards to the 
ocean, he fell in with Yiian Feng on the shore of 
the eastern sea. 

These names are probably allegorical, but it is 
difficult to say in exactly what sense. 

" Whither bound ? " cried the latter. 

" I am going to the ocean," replied Chun Mang. 

" What are you going to do there ? " asked Yiian 
Feng. 

'* The ocean," said Chun Mang, '' is a thing you 
cannot fill by pouring in, nor empty by taking out. 
I am simply on a trip." 

You cannot do anything to the infinite. 

" But surely you have intentions with regard to 
the straight-browed people ? . . . , Come, tell me 
how the Sage governs." 

The straight-browed, lit. horizontal-eyed, people, 
are said by one commentator to have been " savages." 

" Oh, the government of the Sage," answered 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 151 

Chun Mang. '' The officials confine themselves 
to their functions. Ability is secure of employ- 
ment. The voice of the people is heard, and action 
is taken accordingly. Men's words and deeds are 
their own affairs, and so the empire is at peace. A 
beck or a call, and the people flock together from 
all sides. This is how the Sage governs." 

"Tell me about the man of perfect virtue," said 
Yuan Feng. 

" The man of perfect virtue," replied Chun 
Mang, " in repose has no thoughts, in action no 
anxiety. He recognises no right, nor wrong, nor 
good, nor bad. Within the Four Seas, when all 
profit — that is his pleasure ; when all share — that 
is his repose. Men cling to him as children who 
have lost their mothers ; they rally round him as 
wayfarers who have missed their road. He has 
wealth and to spare, but he knows not whence it 
comes. He has food and drink more than suffi- 
cient, but knows not who provides it. Such is a 
man of virtue." 

"And now," said Yiian Feng, "tell me about 
the divine man." 

" The divine man," replied Chun Mang, " rides 
upon the glory of the sky where his form can no 
longer be discerned. This is called absorption into 
light. He fulfils his destiny. He acts in accord- 
ance with his nature. He is at one with God and 
man. For him all affairs cease to exist, and all 
things revert to their original state. This is called 
envelopment in darkness." 

/ 

152 Chit an g Tzil 

Men Wu Kuei and Ch'ih Chang Man Chi were 
looking at Wu Wang's troops. 

The famous founder of the Chou dynasty, B.C. 
1 169-1 1 16. 

" He is not equal to the Great Yii," said the 
latter; and consequently "we are involved in all 
these troubles." 

" May I ask," replied Men Wu Kuei, " if the 
empire was under proper government when the 
Great Yii began to govern it, or had he first to 
quell disorder and then to proceed to government ?" 

" If the empire had all been under proper govern- 
ment," said the other," what would there have been 
for the Great Yii to do ? He was as ointment to a 
sore. Only bald men use wigs ; only sick people 
want doctors. And the Sage blushes when a filial 
son, with anxious look, administers medicine to 
cure his loving father. 

Because to need drugs, the father must first have 
been sick ; and this, from a Chinese point of view, 
is clearly the fault of the son. 

"In the Golden Age, good men were not appre- 
ciated ; ability was not conspicuous. Rulers were 
mere beacons, while the people were free as the 
wild deer. They were upright w^ithout being 
conscious of duty to their neighbours. They loved 
one another without being conscious of charity. 
They were true without being conscious of loyalty. 
They were honest without being conscious of good 
faith. They acted freely in all things without 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 153 

recognising obligations to any one. Thus, their 
deeds left no trace ; their affairs were not handed 
down to posterity. 

Rousseau, in Dit Contrat Social, thus describes 
society as it would be if every man was a true 
Christian : — "Chacun remplirait son devoir; le peuple 
serait soumis aux lois, les chefs seraient justes et 
moderes, les magistrats integres, incorruptibles, les 
soldats mepriseraient la mort, il n'y aurait ni vanite 
ni luxe." 

"A filial son does not humour his parents. A 
loyal minister does not flatter his prince. This is 
the acme of filial piety and loyalty. To assent to 
whatever a parent or a prince says, and to praise 
whatever a parent or a prince does, this is what the 
world calls unfilial and disloyal conduct, though 
apparently unaware that the principle is of uni- 
versal application. For though a man assents to 
whatever the world says, and praises whatever the 
world does, he is not dubbed a toady ; from which 
one might infer that the world is severer than a 
father and more to be respected than a prince ! 

" If you tell a man he is a wheedler, he will not 
like it. If you tell him he is a flatterer, he will be 
angry. Yet he is everlastingly both. But all such 
sham and pretence is what the w^orld likes, and 
consequently people do not punish each other for 
doing what they do themselves. For a man to 
arrange his dress, or make a display, or suit his 
expression so as to get into the good graces of the 
world, and yet not to call himself a flatterer ; to 

154 Chiiang Tzil 

identify himself in every way with the yeas and 
nays of his fellows, and yet not call himself one of 
them ; — this is the height of folly. 

" A man who knows that he is a fool is not a 
great fool. A man who knows his error is not 
greatly in error. Great error can never be shaken 
off; a great fool never becomes clear-headed. If 
three men are travelling and one man makes a 
mistake, they may still arrive at their destination, 
error being in the minority. But if two of them 
make a mistake, then they will not succeed, error 
being in the majority. And now, as all the world 
is in error, I, though I know the true path, am 
alas ! unable to guide. 

'' Grand music does not appeal to vulgar ears. 
Give them the ChS-yang or the Huang-hua^ 

The " Not for Joseph" and " Sally Come Up " of 
ancient China. 

and they will roar with laughter. And likewise 
great truths do not take hold of the hearts of the 
masses. And great truths not finding utterance, 
common-places carry the day. Two earthen in- 
struments will drown the sound of one metal one ; 
and the result will not be melodious. 

" And now, as all the world is in error, I, though 
I know the true path, — how shall I guide ? If I 
know that I cannot succeed and yet try to force 
success, this would be but another source of error. 
Better, then, to desist and strive no more. But if 
I strive not, who will ? 

CAP. XII.] The Universe 155 

" An ugly man who has a son born to him in the 
middle of the night will hurry up with a light, in 
dread lest the child should be like himself. 

'* An old tree is cut down to make sacrificial 
vessels, which are then ornamented with colour. 
The stump remains in a ditch. The sacrificial 
vessels and the stump in the ditch are very dif- 
ferently treated as regards honour and dishonour ; 
equally, as far as destruction of the wood's original 
nature is concerned. Similarly, the acts of Robber 
Che and of Tseng and Shih are very different ; but 
the loss of original nature is in each case the same. 

"The causes of this loss are five in number; 
viz. — The five colours confuse the eye, and the eyes 
fail to see clearly. The five sounds confuse the 
ear, and the ear fails to hear accurately. The five 
scents confuse the nose, and obstruct the sense of 
smell. The five tastes cloy the palate, and vitiate 
the sense of taste. Finally, likes and dislikes cloud 
the understanding, and cause dispersion of the 
original nature. 

" These five are the banes of life ; yet Yang and 
Mih regarded them as the summimi bonimi. 

As attainment of Tao. For Yang Chu and Mih 
Tzu, see chs, ii and viii. 

They are not my sitmmum bommi. For if men 
who are thus fettered can be said to have attained 
the siumnuni bomim, then pigeons and owls in a 
cage may also be said to have attained the siiiiimuni 
bo nun I ! 

156 Chiiang Tzu 

" Besides, to stuff one's inside with likes and 
dislikes and sounds and colours ; to encompass 
one's outside with fur caps, feather hats, the carry- 
ing of tablets, or girding of sashes — full of rubbish 
inside while swathed in magnificence without — 
and still to talk of having attained the siiminuni 
I bonimi ; — then the prisoner with arms tied behind 
him and fingers in the squeezer, the tiger or the 
leopard which has just been put in a cage, may 
justly consider that they too have attained the 
S2imnmm bomim ! " 

" L'homme," says Rousseau [op. ciL), " est ne libre, 
et partout il est dans les fers." 

This chapter, as it stands, is clearly not from the 
hand of Chuang Tzu. One critic justly points out the 
want of logical sequence in arrangement of argument 
and illustrations. Another, while admitting creneral 
refinement of style, calls attention to a superficiality 
of thought noticeable in certain portions. " Yet only 
those;" he adds, "who eat and sleep with their 
Chuang Tzus would be able to detect this." 

157 

CHAPTER XIII. 

The Tao of God. 

Argument: — Tao is repose — Repose the secret of the universe — 
Cultivation of essentials — Neglect of accidentals— The sequence of 
Tag — Spontaneity of true virtue — Tao is unconditioned — Tao 
cannot be conveyed — Illustrations. 

THE Tao of God operates ceaselessly; and all 
things are produced. The Tao of the sovereign 
operates ceaselessly ; and the empire rallies around 
him. The Tao of the Sage operates ceaselessly ; ^y 
and all within the limit of surrounding ocean ac- 
knowledge his sway. He who apprehends God, who 
is in relation with the Sage, and who recognises the 
radiating virtue of the sovereign, — his actions will 
be to him unconscious, the actions of repose. 

With him all will be inaction, by which all things 
will be accomplished. 

The repose of the Sage is not what the world calls 
repose. His repose is the result of his mental atti- 
tude. All creation could not disturb his equilibrium: 
hence his repose. 

When water is still, it is like a mirror, reflecting 
the beard and the eyebrows. It gives the accuracy 
of the water-level, and the philosopher makes it his 
model. And if water thus derives lucidity from 

i 

158 Chtiang Tzii 

stillness, how much more the faculties of the mind ? 
The mind of the Sage being in repose becomes 
the mirror of the universe, the speculum of all 
creation. 
^ Repose, tranquillity, stillness, inaction, — these 
were the levels of the universe, the ultimate per- 
fection of Tao. 

In the early days of Time, ere matter had assumed 
shape, it was by such levels that the spiritual was 
adjusted. 

Therefore wise rulers and Sages rest therein. 
Resting therein they reach the unconditioned, 
from which springs the conditioned ; and with 
the conditioned comes order. 

Meaning those laws which are inseparable from 
concrete existences. 

Again, from the unconditioned comes repose, and 
from repose comes movement, 

When once inner repose has been established, outer 
movement results as a matter of necessity, without 
injury to the organism. 

and from movement comes attainment. Further, 
from repose comes inaction, and from inaction comes 
potentiality of action. 

When inaction has been achieved, action results 
spontaneously and unconsciously to the organism. 

And inaction is happiness ; and where there is 
happiness no cares can abide, and life is long. 
^ Repose, tranquillity, stillness, inaction, — these 
were the source of all things. Due perception of 

CAP. XIII.] The Tao of God 1 59 

this was the secret of Yao's success as a ruler, and 
of Shun's success as his minister. Due perception 
of this constitutes the virtue of sovereigns on the 
throne, the Tao of the inspired Sage and of the 
uncrowned King below. Keep to this in retire- 
ment, and the lettered denizens of sea and dale will 
recognise your power. Keep to this when coming 
forward to pacify a troubled world, and your merit 
shall be great and your name illustrious, and the 
empire united into one. In your repose you will be 
wise ; in your movements, powerful. By inaction 
you will gain honour ; and by confining yourself to 
the pure and simple, you will hinder the whole 
world from struggling with you for show. 

To fully apprehend the scheme of the universe. 

Lit. : " the virtue of heaven and earth," meaning 
their inaction by which all things are brought to 
maturity. 

this is called the great secret of being in accord with 
God, whereby the empire is so administered that 
the result is accord with man. To be in accord 
with man is human happiness ; to be in accord with 
God is the happiness of God. 

Chuang Tzu said, " O my exemplar! Thou who 
destroyest all things, and dost not account it cruelty; 
thou who benefitest all time, and dost not account 
it charity ; thou who art older than antiquity and 
dost not account it age ; thou who supportest the 
universe, shaping the many forms therein, and 
dost not account it skill ; — this is the happiness of 
God ! " 

>^ 

i6o Chitang Tzii 

Therefore it has been said, " Those who enjoy 
the happiness of God, when born into the world, 
are but fulfilling their divine functions ; when they 
die, they do but undergo a physical change. In 
repose, they exert the influence of the Negative ; in 
motion, they wield the power of the Positive." 

See ante, chs. vi and xi. 

Thus, those who enjoy the happiness of God 
have no grievance against God, no grudge against 
man. Nothing material injures them ; nothing 
spiritual punishes them. Accordingly it has been 
said, " Their motion is that of heaven ; 

One of ceaseless revolution, without beginning or 
end. 

their repose is that of earth. Mental equilibrium 
gives them the empire of the world. Evil spirits 
do not harass them without ; demons do not trouble 
them within. Mental equilibrium gives them sove- 
reignty over all creation." Which signifies that in 
repose to extend to the w^hole universe and to be in 
relation with all creation, — this is the happiness of 
God. This enables the mind of the Sage to cherish 
the whole empire. 

For the virtue of the wise ruler is modelled upon 
the universe, is guided by Tao, and is ever occupied 
in inaction. By inaction, he administers the em- 
pire, and has energy to spare ; but by action he 
finds his energy inadequate to the administration of 
the empire. Therefore the men of old set great 
store by inaction. 

CAP. XIII.] TJie Tao of God i6i 

But if rulers practise inaction and the ruled also 
practise inaction, the ruled will equal the rulers, 
and will not be as their subjects. On the other 
hand, if the ruled practise action and rulers also 
practise action, rulers will assimilate themselves to 
the ruled, and will not be as their masters. 
Rulers must practise inaction in order to administer 
the empire. The ruled must practise action in 
order to subserve the interests of the empire. This 
is an unchangeable law. 

And one over which the commentators have ex- 
hausted not a little wit. At the end of the chapter, 
the reader will be able to draw his own conclusions. 

Thus, the men of old, although their knowledge 
did not extend throughout the universe, were not 
troubled in mind. Although their intellectual 
powers beautified all creation, they did not rejoice. 
Although their abilities exhausted all things within 
the limits of ocean, they did not act. 

Heaven has no parturitions, yet all things are 
evolved. Earth knows no increment, yet all things 
are nourished. The wise ruler practises inaction, 
and the empire applauds him. Therefore it has 
been said, "There is nothing more mysterious 

In its action, 
than heaven, nothing richer than earth, nothing 
greater than the wise ruler." Wherefore also it has 
been said, ** The virtue of the wise ruler makes him 
the peer of heaven and earth." Charioted upon the 
universe, with all creation for his team, he passes 
along the highway of mortality. 

M 

v^ 

1 62 Chuang Tzu 

The essential is in the ruler; the accidental in 
the ruled. 

Lit. the "root," and the "tip" of the branch, 
respectively. 

The ultima ratio lies with the prince ; representa- 
tion is the duty of the minister. 

Appeal to arms is the lowest form of virtue. 
Rewards and punishments are the lowest form of 
education. Ceremonies and laws are the lowest 
form of government. Music and fine clothes are 
the lowest form of happiness. Weeping and 
mourning are the lowest form of grief. These five 
should follow the movements of the mind. 

The ancients indeed cultivated the study of acci- 
dentals, but they did not allow it to precede that 
of essentials. The prince precedes, the minister 
follows. The father precedes, the son follows. The 
elder brother precedes, the younger follows. Seniors 
precede, juniors follow. Men precede, women 
follow. Husbands precede, wives follow. Distinc- 
tions of rank and precedence are part of the scheme 
of the universe, and the Sage adopts them accord- 
ingly. In point of spirituality, heaven is honourable, 
earth is lowly, Springand summer precede autumn 
and winter : such is the order of the seasons. In 
the constant production of all things, there are 
phases of existence. There are the extremes of 
maturity and decay, the perpetual tide of change. 
And if heaven and earth, divinest of all, admit of 
rank and precedence, how much more man ? 

CAP. XIII.] The Tao of God 163 

In the ancestral temple, parents rank before all ; 
at court, the most honom-able ; in the village, the 
elders ; in matters to be accomplished, the most 
trustworthy. Such is the order which appertains 
to Tao. He who in considering Tao disregards 
this order, thereby disregards Tao ; and he who in 
considering Tao disregards Tao, — whence will he 
secure Tao ? 

Therefore, those of old who apprehended Tao, 
first apprehended God. Tao came next, and then 
charity and duty to one's neighbour, and then the 
functions of public life, and then forms and names, 
and then employment according to capacity, and 
then distinctions of good and bad, and then dis- 
crimination between right and wrong, and then 
rewards and punishments. Thus wise men and 
fools met with their dues ; the exalted and the 
humble occupied their proper places. And the 
virtuous and the worthless being each guided by 
their own natural instincts, it was necessary to dis- 
tinguish capabilities, and to adopt a corresponding 
nomenclature, in order to serve the ruler, nourish 
the ruled, administer things generally, and elevate 
self. Where knowledge and plans are of no avail, 
one must fall back upon the natural. This is perfect 
peace, the acme of good government. Therefore it 
has been written, " Wherever there is form, there 
is also its name." Forms and names indeed 
the ancients had, but did not give precedence to 
them. 

Thus, those of old who considered Tao, passed 

M 2 

164 Chuang Tzii 

through five phases before forms and names were 
reached, and nine before rewards and punishments 
could be discussed. 

As given in the preceding paragraph. 

To rise per salttim to forms and names is to be 
ignorant of their source ; to rise per saltuni to 
rewards and punishments is to be ignorant of their 
beginning. Those who invert the process of dis- 
cussing Tao, arguing in a directly contrary sense, 
are rather to, be governed by others than able to 
govern others themselves. 

To. rise per saltiun to forms and names and 
rewards and punishments,, this is, to understand the 
instrumental part of goverment, but not to under- 
stand the great principle of government. 

Which is Tao. 

This is to be of use in the administration of the 
empire, but not to be able to admiuister the em- 
pire. This is to be a sciolist, a man of narrow 
views. 

Ceremonies and laws were indeed cultivated by 
the ancients; but they were employed in the service 
of the rulers by the ruled. Rulers did not employ 
them as a means of nourishing the ruled. 

From the beginning of this chapter, the argument 
has been eminently unsatisfactory^ 

Of old, Shun asked Yao, saying, " How does 
your Majesty employ your faculties ? " 

CAP. XIII.] The Tao of God 1 65 

" I am not arrogant towards the defenceless," 
replied Yao. " I do not neglect the poor. I grieve 
for those who die. I pity the orphan. I sympa- 
thise with the widow. Beyond this, nothing." 

" Good indeed ! " cried Shun, '' but yet not 
great." 

" How so?" inquired Yao. 

*' Be passive," said Shun, " like the virtue of 
God. The sun and moon shine ; the four seasons 
revolve ; day and night alternate ; clouds come and 
rain falls." 

" Alas ! " cried Yao, " what a muddle I have been 
making. You are in accord with God ; I am in 
accord with man." 

Of old, heaven and earth were considered great ; 
and the Yellow Emperor and Yao and Shun all 
thought them perfection. Consequently, what did 
those do who ruled the empire of old ? They did 
what heaven and earth do ; no more. 

When Confucius was going west to place his 
works in the Imperial library of the House of 
Chou, Tzu Lu 

The most popular of all the disciples of Confucius. 
In the striking words of Mr. Watters, " He was 
equally ready to argue, fight, be silent, pray for his 
master, and die with him. So It is very unfair in 
Dr. Legge to call him a kind of Peter, meaning of 
course Simon Peter, a man who lacked faith, courage, 
and fidelity, and who morever cursed and swore." — 
Guide to the Tablets in a Coifucian Temple. 
counselled him, saying, "I have heard that a 

1 66 . Ckuajig Tzii 

certain librarian of the Cheng department, by 
name Lao Tan, 

Or, as usually named in this work, Lao Tzu. 

" Cheng" appears to have been merely a distinctive 

name. 

has resigned and retired into private life. Now as 
you, Sir, wish to deposit your works, it would be 
advisable to go and interview him." 

" Certainly," said Confucius ; and he thereupon 
went to see Lao Tzu. The latter would not hear 
of the proposal ; so Confucius began to expound 
the doctrines of his twelve canons, in order to 
convince Lao Tzu. 

These twelve have been variously enumerated as 
(i) the Book of Changes, Parts i and ii, with the 
ten Wings. (2) The twelve Dukes of the Spring 
and Autumn, etc. 

" This is all nonsense," cried Lao Tzu, interrupt- 
ing him. " Tell me what are your criteria." 

" Charity," replied Confucius, " and duty towards 
one's neighbour." 

** Tell me, please," asked Lao Tzu, ''are these 
part of man's original nature ? " 

The question of an innate moral sense early occupied 
the attention of Chinese thinkers. 

"They are," answered Confucius. "Without 
charity, the superior man could not become what 
he is. Without duty to one's neighbour, he would 
be of no effect. These two belong to the original 
nature of a pure man. What further would you 
have ? " 

CAP. XIII.] The Tao of God 167 

"Tell me," said Lao Tzu, "in what consist 
charity and duty to one's neighbour ? " 

"They consist," answered Confucius, "in a 
capacity for rejoicing in all things ; in universal 
love, without the element of self. These are the 
characteristics of charity and duty to one's neigh- 
bour." 

"What stuff!" cried Lao Tzu. "Does not 
universal love contradict itself? 

If every one loves every one, there can be no such 
thing as love, just as absolute altruism only achieves 
the same result as absolute egoism. 

Is not your elimination of self a positive mani- 
festation of self? 

On the " Don't nail his ear to the pump " principle. 

Sir, if you would cause the empire not to lose its 
source of nourishment, — there is the universe, its 
regularity is unceasing ; there are the sun and 
moon, their brightness is unceasing ; there are the 
stars, their groupings never change ; there are 
birds and beasts, they flock together without vary- 
ing ; there are trees and shrubs, they grow up- y 
wards without exception. Be like these ; follow 
Tao ; and you will be perfect. Why then these 
vain struggles after charity and duty to one's 
neighbour, as though beating a drum in search of 
a fugitive. Alas ! Sir, you have brought much 
confusion into the mind of man." 

The drum similitude occurs again in ch. xiv. 

1 68 Chiiamy Tzii 

«b 

Shih Ch eng Ch'i 

Of whom nothing is known. 

visited Lao Tzu, and addressed him, saying, 
" Having heard. Sir, that you were a Sage, I put 
aside all thought of distance to come and visit 
you. Travelling many stages, the soles of my feet 
thickened, but I did not venture to rest. And now 
I see you are not a Sage. While rats feasted off 
your leavings, you turned your sister out of doors. 
This is not charity. Though you have no lack of 
food, raw and cooked, you are stingy beyond all 
bounds." 

At this Lao Tzu was silent and made no reply ; 
and the next day Shih Ch eng Ch'i came again and 
said, " Before, I was rude to you ; now, I am sorry. 
How is this ? " 

" I have no pretension," replied Lao Tzu, " to be 
possessed of cunning knowledge nor of divine 
wisdom. Had you yesterday called me an ox, I 
should have considered myself an ox. Had you 
called me a horse, I should have considered myself 
a horse. 

" For if men class you in accordance with truth, 
and you reject the classification, you only double 
the reproach. My humility is natural humility. 
It is not humility for humility's sake." 

Shih Ch'eng Ch'i moved respectfully away. 

Without allowing his shadow to fall on Lao Tzu. 
Bringing one foot up to the other only. Not 
venturing to let it pass as in ordinary walking. 

CAP. XIII.] The Tao of God 169 

Then he advanced again, also respectfully, and 
said, *' May I ask you about personal cultivation ?" 
Lao Tzu said, "Your countenance is a strange 
one. Your eyes protrude. Your jaws are heavy. 
Your lips are parted. Your demeanour is self- 
satisfied. You look like a man on a tethered 
horse. 

His body there, his mind elsewhere. 

You are too confident. You are too hasty. You 
think too much of your own powers. Such men are 
not trusted. Those who are found on the wrong 
side of a boundary line are called thieves." 

Lao Tzu said, " Tao is not too small for the 
greatest, nor too great for the smallest. Thus all 
things are embosomed therein ; wide indeed its 
boundless capacity, unfathomable its depth. 

** Form, and virtue, and charity, and duty to 
one's neighbour, these are the accidentals of the 
spiritual. Except he be a perfect man, who shall 
determine their place ? The world of the perfect 
man, is not that vast? And yet it is not able to 
involve him in trouble. All struggle for power, 
but he does not join. Though discovering nothing 
false, he is not tempted astray. In spite of the 
utmost genuineness, he still confines himself to 
essentials. 

To the root, not to the branch. 

" He thus places himself outside the universe, 
beyond all creation, where his soul is free from 

lyo Chitang Tsil 

care. Apprehending Tao, he is in accord with 
virtue. He leaves charity and duty to one's 
neighbour alone. He treats ceremonies and music 
as adventitious. And so the mind of the perfect 
man is at peace. 

"Books are what the world values as representing 
Tao. But books are only words, and the valuable 
part of words is the thought therein contained. 
That thought has a certain bias which cannot be 
conveyed in words, yet the world values words as 
being the essence of books. But though the world 
values them, they are not of value ; as that sense 
in which the world values them is not the sense in 
which they are valuable. 

" That which can be seen with the eye is form 
and colour ; that which can be heard with the ear 
is sound and noise. But alas ! the people of this 
generation think that form, and colour, and sound, 
and noise, are means by which they can come to 
understand the essence of Tao. This is not so. 
And as those who know, do not speak, while those 
who speak do not know, whence should the world 
derive its knowledge ? " 

The first half of this last sentence has been pitch- 
forked a pi'opos de bottes into ch. Ivi of the Tao- 
Te-Ching. See The Re mams of Lao Tzii, pp. 7 
and 38. 

Duke Huan. 

The famous ruler of the Ch'i State. Flourished 
7th century B.C. 

I 

CAP. XIII.] The Tao of God 171 

was one day reading in his hall, when a wheel- 
wright who was working below, 

Below the covered dais, termed " hall," which has 
an open frontage, in full view of which such work 
might be carried on. 

flung down his hammer and chisel, and mounting 
the steps said, ''What words may your Highness 
be studying? " 

*' I am studying the words of the Sages," replied 
the Duke. 

"Are the Sages alive?" asked the wheelwright. 

" No," answered the Duke; " they are dead." 

"Then the words your Highness is studying," 
rejoined the wheelwright, " are only the dregs of 
the ancients." 

" What do you mean, sirrah ! " cried the Duke, 
" by interfering with what I read ? Explain yourself, 
or you shall die." 

" Let me take an illustration," said the wheel- 
wright, " from my own trade. In making a wheel, 
if you work too slowly, you can't make it firm ; if 
you work too fast, the spokes won't fit in. You 
must go neither too slowly nor too fast. There 
must be co-ordination of mind and hand. Words 
cannot explain what it is, but there is some mys- 
terious art herein. I cannot teach it to my son ; 
nor can he learn it from me. Consequently, 
though seventy years of age, I am still making- 
wheels in my old age. If the ancients, together 
with what they could not impart, are dead and 

172 Chuang Tzu 

gone, then what your Highness is studying must 
be the dregs." 

This episode of the wheelwright is to be found in 
the works of Huai Nan Tzu, of the 2nd century B.C. 
He used it to illustrate the opening words of the 
Tao-Te-Ching ; and in The Remains of Lao Tzil, 
p. 6, it is stated that he stole it from Chuang Tzu 
without acknowledofment. 

When that statement was made I had not come to 
the conclusion, now forced upon me, that the above 
chapter is not from the hand of Chuang Tzu. As 
one critic remarks, the style is generally admirable ; 
but it is not the style of Chuang Tzu. 

173 

CHAPTER XIV. 

The Circling Sky. 

Argument: — The Ultimate Cause — Integrity of Tao — Music and Tao — 
Failure of Confucianism — Confucius and Lao Tzii — Confucius 
attains to Tag — Illustrations. 

[This chapter is supplementary to ch. v.] 

THE sky turns round ; the earth stands still ; 
sun and moon pursue one another. Who 
causes this ? Who directs this ? Who has leisure 
enough to see that such movements continue ? 

" Some think there is a mechanical arrangement 
which makes these bodies move as they do. 
Others think that they revolve without being able 
to stop. 

" The clouds cause rain ; rain causes clouds. 
Whose kindly bounty is this ? Who has leisure 
enough to see that such, result is achieved ? 

''Wind comes from the north. It blows now 
east, now west ; and now it whirls aloft. Who 
puffs it forth ? Who has leisure enough to be 
flapping it this way or that ? I should like to know 
the cause of all this." 

We are not told the name of this questioner. 
Wu Han Chao 

An ancient worthy. 

174 Chiiang Tzii 

said, "Come here, and I will tell you. Above 
there are the Six Influences 

The Ym and Yang principles, wind, rain, darkness, 
and light ; as in ch. xi. 

Some commentators read, the "Six Cardinal Points," i 
viz. : N., E., S., W., above, and below. 1 

and the Five Virtues. 

Charity, duty to one's neighbour, order, wisdom, and 
truth. 

If a ruler keeps in harmony with these, his rule is 
good ; if not, it is bad. By following the nine 
chapters of the Lo book. 

Containing a mystic revelation of knowledge in the 
form of a diagram,, supposed to have been delivered 
to one of the legendary rulers of China more than 
2,000 years before the Christian era. 

his rule will be a success and his virtue complete ; 
he will watch over the interests of his people, and 
all the empire will owe him gratitude. This is to 
be an eminent ruler." 

"A very round answer," says Lin Hsi Chung, "to 
a very square question." 

Tang, a high official of Sung, asked Chuang Tzu 
about charity. Chuang Tzu said, " Tigers and 
wolves have it." 

" How so?" asked Tang. 

" The natural love between parents and offspring," 
replied Chuang Tzii, — " is not that charity?" 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 1 75 

Tang then inquired about perfect charity. 
" Perfect charity," said Chuang Tzu, ** does not 
admit of love for the individual." 

It embraces all men equally. To love one person 
would imply at least the possibility of hating another. 
See also p. 167, where Lao Tzu refutes the doctrine 
of universal love, 

" Without such love," replied Tang, " it appears 
to me there would be no such thing as affection, 
and without affection no filial piety. Does perfect 
charity not admit of filial piety ?" 

" Not so," said Chuang Tzu. " Perfect charity 
is the more extensive term. Consequently, it was 
unnecessary to mention filial piety. It was not 
that filial piety was omitted. It was merely not 
particularised. 

" A man who travels southwards to Ying, 

Capital of the Ch'u State. 

cannot see Mount Ming in the north. Why ? 
Because he is too far off. 

" Therefore it has been said that it is easy to be 
respectfully filial, but difficult to be affectionately 
filial. 

The artificial is easier than the natural. 

But even that is easier than to become unconscious 
of one's natural obligations, which is in turn easier 
than to cause others to be unconscious of the 
operations thereof. 

I.e. to be filial without letting others be conscious 
of the fact. 

\J 

176 Chuang Tzii 

Similarly, this is easier than to become altogether 
unconscious of the world, which again is easier 
than to cause the world to be unconscious of one's 
influence upon it. 

Such is perfect charity, which operates without 
letting its operation be known, 

" True virtue does nothing, yet it leaves Yao and 
Shun far behind. Its good influence extends to 
ten thousand generations, yet no man knoweth it 
to exist. What boots it then to sigh after charity 
and duty to one's neighbour ? 

" Filial piety, fraternal love, charity, duty to 
one's neighbour, loyalty, truth, chastity, and 
honesty, — these are all studied efforts, designed to 
aid the development of virtue. They are only 
parts of a whole. 

" Therefore it has been said, * Perfect honour 
includes all the honour a country can give. Perfect 
wealth includes all the wealth a country can give. 
Perfect ambition includes all the reputation one 
can desire.' And by parity of reasoning, Tao does 
not admit of sub-division." 

Pei Men Ch'eng; _ 

I 

Of whom nothing is recorded. I 

said to the Yellow Emperor, " When your Majesty 
played the Han-cJiilL 

Name of a piece of music, the meaning of which is 
not known. 

in the wilds of Tung-t'ing, the first time I heard 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 177 

it I was afraid, the second time I was amazed, and 
the last time I was confused, speechless, over- 
whelmed." 

** You are not far from the truth," replied the 
Yellow Emperor. " I played as a man, drawing 
inspiration from God. The execution was punc- 
tilious, the expression sublime. 

** Perfect music first shapes itself according to a 
human standard ; then it follows the lines of the 
divine ; then it proceeds in harmony with the five 
virtues ; then it passes into spontaneity. The four 
seasons are then blended, and all creation is 
brought into accord. As the seasons come forth 
in turn, so are all things produced. Now fulness, 
now decay, now soft and loud in turn, now clear, 
now muffled, the harmony of Yin and Yang. Like 
a flash was the sound which roused you as the 
insect world is roused. 

By the warm breath of spring", 
followed by a thundering peal, without end and 
without beginning, now dying, now living, now 
sinking, now rising, on and on without a moment's 
break. And so you were afraid. 

" When I played again, it was the harmony of 
the Yin and Yang, lighted by the glory of sun and 
moon ; now broken, now prolonged, now gentle, 
now severe, in one unbroken, unfathomable volume 
of sound. Filling valley and gorge, stopping the 
ears and dominating the senses, adapting itself to 
the capacities of things, — the sound whirled around 
on all sides, with shrill note and clear. The spirits 

178 CJmang Tzit 

of darkness kept to their domain. Sun, moon, and 
stars, pursued their appointed course. When the 
melody was exhausted I stopped ; if the melody 
did not stop, I went on. 

The music was naturally what it was, independently 

of the player. 

You would have sympathised, but you could not 
understand. You would have looked, but you 
could not see. You would have pursued, but you 
could not overtake. You stood dazed in the 
middle of the wilderness, leaning against a tree 
and crooning, your eye conscious of exhausted 
vision, your strength failing for the pursuit, and so 
unable to overtake me. Your frame was but an 
empty shell. You were completely at a loss, and 
so you were amazed. 

"Then I played in sounds which produce no 
amazement, the melodious law of spontaneity, 
springing forth like nature's countless buds, in 
manifold but formless joy, as though poured forth 
to the dregs, in deep but soundless bass. Begin- 
ning nowhere, the melody rested in void ; some 
would say dead, others alive, others real, others 
ornamental, as it scattered itself on all sides in 
never to be anticipated chords. 

" The wondering world enquires of the Sage. 
He is in relation with its variations and follows the 
same eternal law. 

** When no machinery is set in motion, and yet 
the instrumentation is complete, this is the music 
of God. The mind awakes to its enjoyment with- 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 1 79 

out waiting to be called. Accordingly, Yu Piao 
praised it, saying, * Listening you cannot hear its 
sound ; gazing you cannot see its form. 

Yu Piao is said to have been one of the pre-historic 
rulers of China. Readers of the Tao-Te-Ching 
(ch. xiv) will here find another nail for the coffin 
of that egregious fraud. See The Reinains of Lao 
Tzii, p. 14. Also ch. xxii of this work. 

It fills heaven and earth. It embraces the six 
cardinal points.' Now you desired to listen to it, 
but you were not able to grasp its existence. And 
so you were confused. 

" My music first induced fear ; and as a con- 
sequence, respect. I then added amazement, by 
which you were isolated. 

From consciousness of your surroundings. 

And lastly, confusion ; for confusion means absence 
of sense, and absence of sense means Tao, and 
Tao means absorption therein." 

When Confucius travelled west to the Wei State, 
Yen Yiian 

The "John" among the disciples of Confucius. He 
closed a pure and gentle life at the early age of 32, 
to the inexpressible grief of the Sage. 

asked Shih Chin, 

Chief musician of the Lu State. 

saying, ** What think you of my Master?" 

"Alas!" replied Shih Chin, "he is not a 
success." 

N 2 

i8o Chuang Tzu 

" How so ?" enquired Yen Yiian. 

" Before the straw dog has been offered in 
sacrifice," replied Shih Chin, '* it is kept in a box, 
wrapped up in an embroidered cloth, and the augur 
fasts before using it. But when it has once been 
offered up, passers-by trample over its body, and 
fuel-gatherers pick it up for burning. Then, if 
any one should take it, and again putting it in a 
box and wrapping it up in an embroidered cloth, 
watch and sleep alongside, he would not only 
dream, but have nightmare into the bargain. 

The thing being uncanny. From which it would 
appear that the use of the straw dog was to induce 
dreams of future events. 

" Now your Master has been thus treating the 
ancients, who are like the dog which has already 
been offered in sacrifice. He causes his disciples 
to watch and sleep alongside of them. Conse- 
quently, his tree 

Beneath which he used to teach. 

has been cut down in Sung ; they will have none 
of him in Wei ; in fact, his chances among the 
Shangs and the Chous are exhausted. Is not this 
the dream ? And then to be surrounded by the 
Ch'^ns and the Ts ais, seven days without food, 
death staring him in the face, — is not this the 
nightmare ? 

" For travelling by water there is nothing like a 
boat. For travelling by land there is nothing like 
a cart. This because a boat moves readily in 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 1 8 1 

water ; but were you to try to push it on land you 
would never succeed in making it go. 

Be in harmony with your surroundings. 

Now ancient and modern times may be likened 
unto water and land ; Chou and Lu to the boat 
and the cart. To try to make the customs of Chou 
succeed in Lu, is like pushing a boat on land : great 
trouble and no result, except certain injury to one- 
self. Your Master has not yet learnt the doctrine 
of non-angularity, of self-adaptation to externals. 

" Have you never seen a well-sweep ? You pull 
it, and down it comes. You release it, and up it 
goes. It is the man who pulls the well-sweep, and 
not the well-sweep which pulls the man ; so that 
both in coming down and going up, it does not 
run counter to the wishes of the man. And so it 
was that the ceremonial and obligations and laws 
of the Three Emperors and Five Rulers did not 
aim at uniformity of application but at good 
government of the empire. Their ceremonial, 
obligations, laws, etc., were like the cherry-apple, 
the pear, the orange, and the pumelo, — all differing 
in flavour but each palatable. They changed with 
the changing season. 

" Dress up a monkey in the robes of Chou Kung, 
See ch. iv. 

and it will not be happy until they are torn to 
shreds. And the difference between past and 
present is much the same as the difference between 
Chou Kung and a monkey. 

1 82 Chuang Tzit 

" When Hsi Shih 

A famous beauty of old. 

was distressed in mind, she knitted her brows. An 
ugly woman of the village, seeing how beautiful 
she looked, went home, and having worked herself 
into a fit frame of mind, knitted her brows. The 
result was that the rich people of the place barred 
up their doors and would not come out, while the 
poor people took their wives and children and 
departed elsewhere. That w^oman saw the beauty 
of knitted brows, but she did not see wherein the 
beauty of knitted brows lay. 

In suitability to the individual. 
Alas ! your Master is emphatically not a success." 

Confucius had lived to the age of fifty-one with- 
out hearing Tao, when he went south to P'ei, to 
see Lao Tzu. 

Lao Tzu said, " So you have come, Sir, have 
you ? I hear you are considered a wise man up 
north. Have you got Tag ?" 

'* Not yet," answered Confucius. 

" In what direction," asked Lao Tzu, " have you 
sought for it?" 

" I sought it for five years," replied Confucius, 
" in the science of numbers, but did not succeed." 

"And then? . . . ." continued Lao Tzu. 

" Then," said Confucius, ** I spent twelve years 
seeking for it in the doctrine of the Yin and Yang, 
also without success." 

I 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 183 

'' Just so," rejoined Lao Tzu. " Were Tao some- 
thing which could be presented, there is no man 
but would present it to his sovereign, or to his 
parents. Could it be imparted or given, there is no 
man but would impart it to his brother or give 
it to his child. But this is impossible, for the 
following reason. Unless there is a suitable endow- 
ment within, Tao will not abide. Unless there is 
outward correctness, Tag will not operate. The 
external being unfitted for the impression of the 
internal, the true Sage does not seek to imprint. 
The internal being unfitted for the reception of the 
external, the true Sage does not seek to receive. 

Attempting neither to teach nor to learn. 

" Reputation is public property ; you may not 
appropriate it in excess. Charity and duty to one's 
neighbour are as caravanserais established by wise 
rulers of old ; you may stop there one night, but 
not for long, or you will incur reproach. 

" The perfect men of old took their road through 
charity, stopping a night with duty to their neigh- 
bour, on their way to ramble in transcendental 
space. Feeding on the produce of non-cultivation, 
and establishing themselves in the domain of no 
obligations, they enjoyed their transcendental inac- 
tion. Their food was ready to hand ; and being 
under no obligations to others, they did not put 
any one under obligation to themselves. The 
ancients called this the outward visible sign of an 
inward and spiritual grace. 

184 Chitang Tzii 

." Those who make wealth their all in all, cannot 
bear loss of money. Those who make distinction 
their all in all, cannot bear loss of fame. Those who 
affect power will not place authority in the hands of 
others. Anxious while holding, distressed if losing, 
yet never taking warning from the past and seeing 
the folly of their pursuit, — such men are the accursed 
of God. 

" Resentment, gratitude, taking, giving, censure 
of self, instruction of others, power of life and 
death, — these eight are the instruments of right ; 
but only he who can adapt himself to the vicissi- 
tudes of fortune, without being carried away, is fit 
to use them. Such a one is an upright man among 
the upright. And he whose heart is not so consti- 
tuted,— the door of divine intelligence is not yet 
opened for him." 

Confucius visited Lao Tzu, and spoke of charity 
and duty to one's neighbour. 

Lao Tzu said, " The chaff from winnowing will 
blind a man's eyes so that he cannot tell the points 
of the compass. Mosquitoes will keep a man awake 
all night with their biting. And just in the same 
way this talk of charity and duty to one's neighbour 
drives me nearly crazy. Sir I strive to keep the 
w^orld to its own original simplicity. And as the 
wind bloweth where it listeth, so let Virtue esta- 
blish itself. Wherefore such undue energy, as though 
searching for a fugitive with a big drum ? 
See p. 167. 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 185 

" The snow-goose is white without a daily bath. 
The raven is black without daily colouring itself. 
The original simplicity of black and of white is be- 
yond the reach of argument. The vista of fame and 
reputation is not worthy of enlargement. When the 
pond dries up and the fishes are left upon dry 
ground, to moisten them with the breath or to 
damp them with a little spittle is not to be compared 
with leaving them in the first instance in their 
native rivers and lakes." 

Repeated from ch. vi. 

On returning from this visit to Lao Tzii, 
Confucius did not speak for three days. A 
disciple asked him, saying, " Master, when you 
saw Lao Tzu, in what direction did you admonish 
him ? " 

"I saw a Dragon," replied Confucius, '' — a 
Dragon which by convergence showed a body, by 
radiation became colour, and riding upon the 
clouds of heaven, nourished the two Principles of 
Creation. My mouth was agape : I could not 
shut it. How then do you think I was going to 
admonish Lao Tzu ? " 

Upon this Tzu Kung remarked, " Ha ! then a 
man can sit corpse-like manifesting his dragon- 
power around, his thunder-voice heard though 
profound silence reigns, his movements like 
those of the universe ? I too would go and see 
him." 

More repetition, this time from ch. xi. 

1 86 Chtiang Tzu 

So on the strength of his connection with Confu- 
cius, Tzu Kung obtained an interview. Lao Tzu 
received him distantly and with dignity, saying in a 
low voice, " I am old. Sir. What injunctions may 
you have to give me ? " 

"The administration of the Three Kings and of 
the Five Rulers," replied Tzu Kung, " was not 
uniform ; but their reputation has been identical. 
How then, Sir, is it that you do not regard them 
as Sages ? " 

*' Come nearer, my son," said Lao Tzu. *' What 
mean you by not uniform ? " 

" Yao handed over the empire to Shun," replied 
Tzu Kung; "and Shun to Yii. Yii employed 
labour, and T'ang employed troops. Wen Wang 
followed Chou Hsin and did not venture to oppose 
him. Wu Wang opposed him and would not 
follow. Therefore I said not uniform^ 

" Come nearer, my son," said Lao Tzu, "and I will 
tell you about the Three Kings and the Five Rulers. 

" The Yellow Emperor's administration caused 
the affections of the people to be catholic. Nobody 
wept for the death of his parents, and nobody found 
fault. 

All loved each other equally. 

" The administration of Yao diverted the affec- 
tions of the people into particular channels. If 
a man slew the slayer of his parents, nobody 
blamed him. 

Filial affection began to predominate. 

1 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 187 

" The administration of Shun brought a spirit 
of rivalry among the people. Children were born 
after ten months' gestation ; when five months 
old, they could speak ; and ere they were three 
years of age, 

Including gestation. 

could already tell one person from another. And 
so early death came into the world. 

A veritable anti-climax, hopelessly unworthy of either 
Lao Tzu or Chuanor Tzii. 

"The administration of Yu wrought a change 
in the hearts of the people. Individuality pre- 
vailed, and force was called into play. Killing rob- 
bers was not accounted murder ; and throughout 
the empire people became sub-divided into classes. 
There was great alarm on all sides, and the Con- 
fucianists and the Mihists arose. At first the 
relationships were duly observed ; but what about 
the women of to-day ? 

Meaning that in the olden days men could not marry 
before thirty, women before twenty, whereas now the 
State is cursed with early marriages. Or, according 
to Dr. Legge's view of a famous passage in the 
Book of Rites, that formerly it was shameful in men 
and women not to be married at the age of thirty 
and twenty, respectively, whereas now the State is 
cursed with late marriages. 

" Let me tell you. The government of the 
Three Kings and Five Rulers was so only in name. 
In reality, it was utter confusion. The wisdom of 

1 88 Chuang Tzii 

the Three Kings was opposed to the brilliancy of 
the sun and moon above, destructive of the energy 
of land and water below, and subversive of the 
influence of the four seasons between. 
More repetition. See ch. x. ad fin. 
That wisdom is more harmful than a hornet's tail, 
preventing the very animals from putting them- 
selves into due relation with the conditions of 
their existence, — and yet they call themselves Sages! 
Is not their shamelessness shameful indeed ? " 
At this Tzu Kung became ill at ease. 

The whole of the above episode may without 
hesitation be written off as a feeble forgery. 

Confucius said to Lao Tzu, " I arranged the Six 
Canons of Poetry, History, Rites, Music, Changes, j 
and Spring and Autumn. I spent much time over 
them, and I am well acquainted with their purport. 
I used them in admonishing seventy-two rulers, * 
by discourses on the wisdom of ancient sovereigns 
and illustrations from the lives of Chou and Shao. 
Yet not one ruler has in any way adopted my sug- 
gestions. Alas that man should be so difficult to 
persuade, and wisdom so difficult to illustrate." 

'* It is well for you, Sir," replied Lao Tzu, " that 
you did not come across any real ruler of mankind. 
Your Six Canons are but the worn-out foot-prints 
of ancient Sages. And what are foot-prints ? Why, 
the words you now utter are as it were foot-prints. 
Foot-prints are made by the shoe : they are not the 
shoe itself. 

CAP. XIV.] The Circling Sky 189 

" Fish-hawks gaze at each other with motionless 
eyes, — and their young are produced. The male 
of a certain insect chirps with the wind while the 
female chirps against it, — and their offspring is 
produced. There is another animal which, being 
an hermaphrodite, produces its own offspring. 
Nature cannot be changed. Destiny cannot be 
altered. Time cannot stop. Tao cannot be ob- 
structed. Once attain to Tao, and there is nothing 
which you cannot accomplish. Without it, there 
is nothing which you can accomplish." 

For three months after this Confucius did not 
leave his house. Then he again visited Lao Tzu 
and said, " I have attained. Birds lay eggs, fish 
spawn, insects undergo metamorphosis, and mam- 
mals suckle their young. 

Lit. " when a younger brother comes, the elder 
cries," — from which may be inferred the meaning 
in the translation. 

The whole sentence signifies that every development 

proceeds according to fixed laws. It is useless to try 

to do anything. Nature is always self-similar. 

For a long time I have not been enlightened. And 

he who is not enlightened himself, — how should 

he enlighten others ? " 

Lao Tzu said, " Ch'iu, you have attained ! " 

"The style of this chapter," says Lin H si Chung, 
"gives it a foremost place among the 'outside' 
essays of Chuang Tzu. But the insertion of that 
dialogue between Confucius and Lao Tzu on charity 
and duty towards one's neighbour is like eking out a 
sable robe with a dog's tail." 

190 

CHAPTER XV. 

Self-Conceit. 

Argument : — Would-be sages — The vanity of effort — Method of the true 
Sage — Passivity the key — The soul and mortality — Re-absorption into 
the immortal. 

SELF-CONCEIT and assurance, which lead 
men to quit society, and be different from 
their fellows, to indulge in tall talk and abuse 
of others, — these are nothing more than personal 
over-estimation, the affectation of recluses and 
those who have done with the world and have 
closed their hearts to mundane influences. 

Preaching of charity and duty to one's neigh- 
bour, of loyalty and truth, of respect, of economy, 
and of humility, — this is but moral culture, affected 
by would-be pacificators and teachers of mankind, 
and by scholars at home or abroad. 

Preaching of meritorious services, of fame, of 
ceremonial between sovereign and minister, of due 
relationship between upper and low^er classes, — 
this is mere government, affected by courtiers or 
patriots who strive to extend the boundaries of 
their own State and to swallow up the territory of 
others. 

Living in marshes or in wildernesses, and passing 

CAP. XV. J Self-Conceit 191 

one's days in fishing, — this is mere inaction, affected 
by wanderers who have turned their backs upon the 
world and have nothing better to do. 
Exhaling and inhaling. 

The "breathing" theory. See ch. vi., adinit. 

getting rid of the old and assimilating the new, 
stretching like a bear and craning like a bird, — 

As these creatures are supposed to do in order to 
get good air into their systems. 

— this is but valetudinarianism, affected by pro- 
fessors of hygiene and those who try to preserve 
the body to the age of P eng Tsu. 

See ch. i. 

But in self-esteem without self-conceit, in moral 
culture without charity and duty to one's neigh- 
bour, ill government without rank and fame, in 
retirement without solitude, in health without 
hygiene, — there we have oblivion absolute coupled 
with possession of all things; an infinite calm 
which becomes an object to be attained by all. 

Such is the Tao of the universe, such is the 
virtue of the Sage. Wherefore it has been said, 
" In tranquillity, in stillness, in the unconditioned, 
in inaction, we find the levels of the universe, the 
very constitution of Tag." 

Almost verbatim from ch. xiii, p. 158, where the 
passage appears as part of Chuang Tzu's own text, 
and not as a quotation from any other author. 

Wherefore it has been said, ''The Sage is a 

192 Chuang Tzu 

negative quantity, and is consequently in a state 
of passivity. Being passive he is in a state of 
repose. And where passivity and repose are, there 
sorrow and anxiety do not enter, and foul influ- 
ences do not collect. And thus his virtue is 
complete and his spirituality unimpaired." 

Wherefore it has been said, *'The birth of the 
Sage is the will of God ; his death is but a modifi- 
cation of existence. In repose, he shares the 
passivity of the Yi)i ; in action, the energy of the 
Yang. He will have nothing to do with happi- 
ness, and so has nothing to do with misfortune. 

Each of which proceeds from the other in an endless 
chain. 

He must be influenced ere he will respond. He 
must be urged ere he will move. He must be 
compelled ere he will arise. Ignoring the future 
and the past, he resigns himself to the laws of 
God. 

" And therefore no calamity comes upon him, \ 
nothing injures him, no man is against him, no 
spirit punishes him. He floats through life to 
rest in death. He has no anxieties ; he makes no 
plans. His honour does not make him illustrious. 
His good faith reflects no credit upon himself. 

It is all God's, as part of the great scheme. 

His sleep is dreamless, his awaking without pain. 
His spirituality is pure, 

Without desires, 
and his soul vigorous. Thus unconditioned and 

1 

CAP. XV.] Self-Conceit 193 

in repose, he is a partaker of the virtue of 
God." 

Wherefore it has been said, " Sorrow and happi- 
ness are the heresies 

Evil influences. 

of virtue ; joy and anger lead astray from Tao ; 
love and hate cause the loss of virtue. The heart 
unconscious of sorrow and happiness, — that is 
perfect virtue. One, without change, — that is 
perfect repose. Without any obstruction, — that is 
the perfection of the unconditioned. Holding no 
relations with the external world, — that is perfec- 
tion of the negative state. Without blemish of any 
kind, — that is the perfection of purity." 

Wherefore it has been said, ''If the body toils 
without rest, it dies. If the mind is employed 
without ceasing, it becomes wearied ; and being 
wearied, its power is gone." 

Pure water is by nature clear. If untouched, it 
is smooth. If dammed, it will not flow, neither 
will it be clear. It is an emblem of the virtue of 
God. Wherefore it has been said, " Pure, without 
admixture ; uniform, without change ; negative, 
without action ; moved, only at the will of God ; — 
such would be the spirituality nourished according 
to Tag." 

Those who possess blades from Kan 
The Wu State. 

or Yueh, keep them carefully in their scabbards, 
and do not venture to use them. For they are 

o 

194 Chuang Tzil 

precious in the extreme. The spirit spreads forth 
on all sides : there is no point to which it does 
not reach, attaining heaven above, embracing earth 
beneath. Influencing all creation, its form cannot 
be portrayed. Its name is then Of-God. 

Such is man's spiritual existence before he is born 
into the world of mortals. 

The Tao of the pure and simple consists in 
preserving spirituality. He who preserves his 
spirituality and loses it not, becomes one with that 
spirituality. And through that unity the spirit 
operates freely, and comes into due relationship 
with God. 

Returning after its brief career on earth, to the 
eternity whence it came. 

A vulgar saying has it, "The masses value 
money ; honest men, fame ; virtuous men, resolu- 
tion ; and Sages, the soul." 

Thus, the pure is that in which there is nothing 
mixed ; the simple is that which implies no injury 
to the spirituality. And he who can keep the pure 
and simple within himself, — he is a divine man. 

It requires but scant acumen to relegate this chapter 
to the limbo of forgeries. Lin Hsi Chung thinks it 
is probably from the hand of the unknown artist who 
is responsible for ch. xiii. 

195 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Exercise of Faculties. 

Argument : — Tao unattainable by mundane arts — To be reached through 
repose — The world's infancy — The reign of peace — Government sets 
in — Tao declines — The true Sages of old — Their purity of aim. 

THOSE who exercise their faculties in mere 
worldly studies, hoping thereby to revert to 
their original condition ; and those who sink their 
aspirations in mundane thoughts, hoping thereby 
to reach enlightenment ; — these are the dullards of 
the earth. 

The ancients, in cultivating Tao, begat know- 
ledge out of repose. When born, this knowledge 
was not applied to any purpose ; and so it may be 
said that out of knowledge they begat repose. 
Knowledge and repose thus mutually producing 
each other, harmony and order were developed. 
Virtue is harmony ; Tao is order. 

Virtue all-embracing, — hence charity. Tao all- J 
influencing, — hence duty to one's neighbour. From 
the establishment of these two springs loyalty. 
Then comes music, an expression of inward purity 
and truth ; followed by ceremonial, or sincerity ex- 
pressed in ornamental guise. If music and 
ceremonial are ill regulated, the empire is plunged 

O 2 

196 Chuang Tzii 

into confusion. And to attempt to correct others 
while one's own virtue is clouded, is to set one's 
own virtue a task for which it is inadequate, the 
result being that the natural constitution of the 
object will suffer. 

Primeval man enjoyed perfect tranquillity 
throughout life. In his day, the Positive and 
Negative principles were peacefully united ; spiri- 
tual beings gave no trouble ; the four seasons 
followed in due order; nothing suffered any injury; 
death was unknown ; men had knowledge, but no 
occasion to use it. This may be called perfection 
of unity. 

All things, all conditions, were One. 

At that period, nothing was ever made so; but every- 
thing was so. 

By and by, virtue declined. Sui Jen 

The Prometheus of China, 
and Fu Hsi 

See ch. vi. 

ruled the empire. There was still natural adapta- 
tion, 

Of man to his surroundings. 

but the unity was gone. 

The tide of coercion had set in. 
A further decline in virtue. Shen Nung 

The inventor of agriculture, 
and Huang Ti 

The Yellow Emperor. See ch. vi. 

CAP. XVI.] Exercise of Faculties 197 

ruled the empire. There was peace, but the natural 
adaptation was gone. 

Again virtue declined. Yao and Shun ruled the 
empire. Systems of government and moral reform 
were introduced. Man's original integrity was 
scattered. Goodness led him astray from Tao ; 

But for goodness, evil could not exist. 

his actions imperilled his virtue. 

As opposed to inaction. 

Then he discarded natural instinct and took up 
with the intellectual. Mind was pitted against mind, 
but it was impossible thus to settle the empire. So 
art and learning were added. But art obliterated 
the original constitution, and learning overwhelmed 
mind ; upon which confusion set in, and man was 
unable to revert to his natural instincts, to the 
condition in which he at first existed. 

Thus it may be said that the world destroys Tao, 
and that Tao destroys the world. And the world 
and Tao thus mutually destroying each other, how 
can the men of Tao elevate the world, and how can 
the world elevate Tao? Tao cannot elevate the 
world ; neither can the world elevate Tao. Though 
the Sages were not to dwell on mountain and in 
forest, their virtue would still be hidden ; — hidden, 
but not by themselves. 

Those of old who were called retired scholars, 
were not men who hid their bodies, or kept back 
their words, or concealed their wisdom. It was 
that the age was not suitable for their mission. If 

198 Chuang TzU 

the aofe was suitable and their mission a success 
over the empire, they simply effaced themselves in 
the unity which prevailed. If the age was unsuit- 
able and their mission a failure, they fell back upon 
their own resources and waited. Such is the way to 
preserve oneself. 

Those of old who preserved themselves, did not 
ornament their knowledge with rhetoric. They did 
not exhaust the empire with their knowledge. 
They did not exhaust virtue. They kept quietly 
to their own spheres, and reverted to their natural 
instincts. What then was left for them to do ? 

Tao does not deal with detail. Virtue does not 
take cognizance of trifles. Trifles injure virtue ; 
detail injures Tag. Wherefore it has been said, 
" Self-reformation is enough." He whose happi- 
ness is complete has attained his desire. 

Of old, attainment of desire did not mean office. 
It meant that nothing could be added to the sum of 
happiness. But now it does mean office, though 
office is external and is not a part of oneself. That 
which is adventitious, comes. Coming, you cannot 
prevent it ; going, you cannot arrest it. Therefore, 
not to look on office as the attainment of desire, and 
not because of poverty to become a toady, but to be 
equally happy under all conditions, — this is to be 
without sorrow. 

But now-a-days, both having and not having 

Office, 
are causes of unhappiness. From which we may 

CAP. XVI.] Exercise of Faculties 199 

infer that even happiness is not exempt from 
sorrow. 

A reductio ad absurdum. 

Wherefore it has been said, " Those who over-esti- 
mate the external and lose their natural instincts 
in worldliness,-— these are the people of topsy- 
turvydom." 

We are left in the dark as to the authorship of the 
numerous quotations in this and the preceding 
chapter. It is, however, a point of minor impor- 
tance, neither chapter having the slightest claim to 
be regarded as the genuine work of Chuang Tzti. 

200 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Autumn Floods. 

Argument: — Greatness and smallness always relative — Time and space 

infinite — Abstract dimensions do not exist — Their expression is 

concrete — Terms are not absolute — Like causes produce unlike 

effects — In the unconditioned alone can the absolute exist — The only 

• absolute is Tao — Illustrations. 

[This chapter is supplementary to chapter ii. It is the most popular 
of all, and has earned for its author the sobriquet of " Autumn 
Floods."] 

IT was the time of autumn floods. Every stream 
poured into the river, which swelled in its 
turbid course. The banks receded so far from one 
another that it was impossible to tell a cow from a 
horse. 

Then the Spirit of the River laughed for joy that 
all the beauty of the earth was gathered to himself. 
Down with the stream he journeyed east, until he 
reached the ocean. There, looking eastwards and 
seeing no limit to its waves, his countenance 
changed. And as he gazed over the expanse, he 
sighed and said to the Spirit of the Ocean, " A 
vulgar proverb says that he who has heard but part 
of the truth thinks no one equal to himself. And 
such a one am I. 

" When formerly I heard people detracting from 

CAP. XVII.] Atitumn Floods 201 

the learning of Confucius or underrating the hero- 
ism of Poh I, 

See ch. vi. 

I did not believe. But now that I have looked 
upon your inexhaustibility — alas for me had I not 
reached your abode, I should have been for ever a 
laughing-stock to those of comprehensive enlighten- 
ment ! " 

The Spirit of a paltry river learns that the ripple of 
his rustic stream is scarcely the murmur of the 
world. 

To which the Spirit of the Ocean replied, " You 
cannot speak of ocean to a well-frog, — the creature 
of a narrower sphere. You cannot speak of ice to 
a summer insect, — ^the creature of a season. You 
cannot speak of Tao to a pedagogue : his scope is 
too restricted. But now that you have emerged 
from your narrow sphere and have seen the great 
ocean, you know your own insignificance, and I can 
speak to you of great principles. 

" There is no body of water beneath the canopy 
of heaven which is greater than ocean. All streams 
pour into it without cease, yet it does not overflow. 
It is constantly being drained off, yet it is never 
empty. Spring and autumn bring no change ; 
floods and droughts are equally unknown. And 
thus it is immeasurably superior to mere rivers and 
brooks, — though I would not venture to boast on 
this account, for I get my shape from the universe, 
my vital power from the Yin and Yang. In the 

202 Chttang Tzu 

universe I am but as a small stone or a small tree 
on a vast mountain. And conscious thus of my 
own insignificance, what is there of which I can 
boast ? 

" The Four Seas, — are they not to the universe 
but like puddles in a marsh ? The Middle King- 
dom,— is it not to the surrounding ocean like a tare- 
seed in a granary? Of all the myriad created things, 
man is but one. And of all those who inhabit the 
land, live on the fruit of the earth, and move about 
in cart and boat, an individual man is but one. Is 
not he, as compared with all creation, but as the 
tip of a hair upon a horse's skin ? 

" The succession of the Five Rulers, the conten- 
tions of the Three Kings, the griefs of the philan- 
thropist, the labours of the administrator, are but 
this and nothing more. 

►S^. ambition. 

Poh I refused the throne for fame's sake. Confucius 
discoursed to get a reputation for learning. This 
over-estimation of self on their part, was it not very 
much your own in reference to water ?" 

" Very well," replied the Spirit of the River, " am 
I then to regard the universe as great and the tip of 
a hair as small ? " 

" Not at all," said the Spirit of the Ocean. 
" Dimensions are limitless ; time is endless. Con- 
ditions are not invariable ; terms are not final. 
Thus, the wise man looks into space, and does not 
regard the small as too little, nor the great as too 

CAP. XVII.] Autumn Floods 203 

much ; for he knows that there is no limit to 
dimension. He looks back into the past, and does 
not grieve over what is far off, nor rejoice over what 
is near ; for he knows that time is without end. 

Space infinite has been illustrated by Locke by a 
centre from which you can proceed for ever in all 
directions. Time infinite, by a point in a line from 
which you can proceed backwards and forwards for 
ever. 

He investigates fulness and decay, and does not 
rejoice if he succeeds, nor lament if he fails.; for he 
knows that conditions are not invariable. 

Fulness and decay are the inevitable precursors of 

each other. 
He who clearly apprehends the scheme of existence, 
does not rejoice over life, nor repine at death ; for he 
knows that terms are not final. 

Life and death are but links in an endless chain. 
*' What man knows is not to be compared with 
what he does not know. The span of his existence 
is not to be compared with the span of his non- 
existence. With the small to strive to exhaust the 
great, necessarily lands him in confusion, and he 
does not attain his object. How then should one 
be able to say that the tip of a hair is the ne plus 
ultra of smallness, or that the universe is the ne 
plus ultra of greatness ? " 

These predicates are abstract terms, which are not 

names of real existences but of relations, states, or 

conditions of existences ; not things, but conditions 

of things. 

204 Chuang Tzii 

" Dialecticians of the day," replied the Spirit of 
the River, " all say that the infinitesimally small 
has no form, and that the infinitesimally great 
is beyond all measurement. Is that so? " 

" If we regard greatness as compared with that 
which is small," said the Spirit of the Ocean, 
" there is no limit to it ; and if we regard small- 
ness as compared with that which is great, it eludes 
our sight. 

That is, if we proceed from the concrete to the 
abstract. Given a large or a small thing, there is 
no limit to the smallness or greatness with which 
each may be respectively compared. i 

The infinitesimal is a subdivision of the small ; the 
colossal is an extension of the great. In this sense 
the two fall into different categories. 

" Both small and great things must equally 
possess form. The mind cannot picture to itself a 
thing without form, nor conceive a form of un- 
limited dimensions. The greatness of anything 
may be a topic of discussion, or the smallness of 
anything may be mentally realized. But that 
which can be neither a topic of discussion nor be 
realized mentally, can be neither great nor small. 

" Therefore, the truly great man, although he 
J does not injure others, does not credit himself with 
charity and mercy. 

These are natural to him. 

He seeks not gain, but does not despise his follow- 
ers who do. He struggles not for wealth, but does 

1 

\ 

CAP. XVII. J Autumn Floods 205 

not take credit for letting it alone. He asks help 
from no man, but takes no credit for his self- 
reliance, neither does he despise those who seek 
preferment through friends. He acts differently 
from the vulgar crowd, but takes no credit for his 
exceptionality ; nor because others act with the 
majority does he despise them as hypocrites. The 
ranks and emoluments of the world are to him no 
cause for joy; its punishments and shame no cause 
for disgrace. He knows that positive and negative 
cannot be distinguished, 

What is positive under certain conditions will be 
negative under others. These terms are in fact 
identical. See ch. ii. 

that great and small cannot be defined. 
They are infinite. 
" I have heard say, the man of Tao has no repu- 
tation ; perfect virtue acquires nothing ; the truly 
great man ignores self ; — this is the height of self- 
discipline." 

Clause 2 of the above quotation appears with varia- 
tions in ch. xxxviii of the Tao-Te-Ching. The 
variations settle the correctness of the renderino- 
already given in The Remains of Lao Tzii, p. 26. 
*' But how then," asked the Spirit of the River, 
" are the internal and external extremes of value 
and worthlessness, of greatness and smallness, to be 
determined ? " 

With no standard of measurement. 

" From the point of view of Tag," replied the 
Spirit of the Ocean, '' there are no such extremes 

2o6 Chtimig Tzu \ 

of value or worthlessness. Men individually value 
themselves and hold others cheap. The world 
collectively withholds from the individual the right 
of appraising himself. 

" If we say that a thing is great or small because 
it is relatively great or small, then there is nothing 
in all creation which is not great, nothing which is 
not small. To know that the universe is but as a 
tare-seed, and that the tip of a hair is a mountain, 
— this is the expression of relativity. 

" If we say that something exists or does not 
exist, in deference to the function it fulfils or does 
not fulfil, then there is nothing which does not 
exist, nothing which does exist. To know that east 
and west are convertible and yet necessary terms, — 
this is the due adjustment of functions. 

Any given point is of course east in relation to west, 
west in relation to east. Absolutely, it may be said 
that its westness does not exclude its easiness ; or, 
that it is neither east nor west. 

" If we say that anything is good or evil because 
it is either good or evil in our eyes, then there is 
nothing which is not good, nothing which is not 
evil. To know that Yao and Chieh were both good 
and both evil from their opposite points of view, — 
this is the expression of a standard. M 

" Of old Yao abdicated in favour of Shun, and the 
latter ruled. Kuei abdicated in favour of Chih, 
and the latter failed. 

Kuei was a prince of the Yen State, who was hum- 
bugged into imitating the glorious example of Yao 

CAP. XVII.] Auhmin Floods 2.Qri 

and abdicating in favour of his minister Chih. 
Three short years of power landed the latter in all 
the horrors of a general revolution. 

T'ang and Wu 
See ch. xii. 

got the empire by fighting. By fighting, Poh Kung 

lost it. 

A revolutionary leader who, on the failure of his 
scheme, ended his life by strangulation. See the 
Tso C/man, i6th year of Duke Ai. 

From which it may be seen that the rationale of ab- 
dicating or fighting, of acting like Yao or like Chieh, 
must be determined according to the opportunity, 
and may not be regarded as a constant quantity. 

" A battering-ram can knock down a wall, but it 
cannot repair the breach. 

This sentence has sorely puzzled all commentators. 

Different things are differently applied. 

" Ch'ih-Chi and Hua Liu could travel i,ooo li in 
one day, but for catching rats they were not equal 
to a wild cat. 

Two of the eight famous steeds of Muh Wang, a 
semi-historical ruler of old. 

Different animals possess different aptitudes. 

" An owl can catch fleas at night, and see the tip 
of a hair, but if it comes out in the daytime its 
eyes are so dazzled it cannot see a mountain. 
Different creatures are differently constituted. 

"Thus, as has been said, those who would have 
right without its correlative, wrong ; or good 

2o8 Chuang Tzit 

government without its correlative, misrule, — they 
do not apprehend the great principles of the uni- 
verse nor the conditions to which all creation is 
subject. One might as well talk of the existence of 
heaven without that of earth, or of the negative 
principle without the positive, which is clearly 
absurd. Such people, if they do not yield to argu- 
ment, must be either fools or knaves. 

" Rulers have abdicated under different condi- 
tions, dynasties have been continued under different 
conditions. Those who did not hit off a favourable 
time and were in opposition to their age, — they were 
called usurpers. Those who did hit off the right 
time and were in harmony with their age, — they 
were called patriots. Fair and softly, my River 
friend ; what should you know of value and worth- 
lessness, of great and small ? " 

It is therefore quite unnecessary to teach you where 
to fix the limits of that of which you know nothing. 

" In this case," replied the Spirit of the River, 
'* what am I to do and what am I not to do ? How 
am I to arrange my declinings and receivings, my 
takings-hold and my lettings-go ? " 

" From the point of view of Tao," said the Spirit 
of the Ocean, "value and worthlessness are like 
slopes and plains. 

A slope to-day may be a plain to-morrow. 

To consider either as absolutely such would involve 
great injury to Tag. Few and many are like giving 
and receiving presents. These must not be regarded 

CAP. XVII. J Autumn Floods 209 

from one side, or there will be great confusion to 
Tao. 

It would be unfair only to regard, from the receiver's 
standpoint, the amount given. The intention of the 
giver must also be taken into the calculation. 

Be discriminating, as the ruler of a State whose 
administration is impartial. Be dispassionate, as 
the worshipped deity whose dispensation is impar- 
tial. Be expansive, like the points of the compass, 
to whose boundlessness no limit is set. Embrace 
all creation, and none shall be more sheltered than 
another. This is the unconditioned. And where 
all things are equal, how can we have the long and 
the short ? 

" Tao is without beginning, without end. Other 
things are born and die. They are impermanent ; 
and now for better, now for worse, they are cease- 
lessly changing form. Past years cannot be recalled: 
time cannot be arrested. The succession of states 
is endless ; and every end is followed by a new 
beginning. Thus it may be said that man's duty to 
his neighbour is embodied in the eternal principles 
of the universe. 

All he has to do is to be. 

" The life of man passes by like a galloping 
horse, changing at every turn, at every hour. What 
should he do, or what should he not do, other than 
let his decomposition go on ? " 

" If this is the case," retorted the Spirit of the 
River, " pray what is the value of Tao ? " 

\y 

i^ 

2IO Chiiang Tzii 

"Those who understand Tao," answered the 
Spirit of the Ocean, " must necessarily apprehend 
the eternal principles above mentioned and be 
clear as to their application. Consequently, they 
do not suffer any injury from without. 

They never oppose, but let all things take their 
course. 

"The man of perfect virtue cannot be burnt by 
fire, nor drowned in water, nor hurt by frost or sun, 
nor torn by wild bird or beast. Not that he makes 
light of these ; but that he discriminates between 
safety and danger. Happy under prosperous and 
adverse circumstances alike, cautious as to what 
he discards and what he accepts ; — nothing can 
harm him. 

Plato taught that it was impossible to make a slave 
of a wise man, meaning that the latter by virtue of 
his mental endowment would rise superior to mere 
physical thrall. "A wise and just man," said he, 
•' could be as happy in a state of slavery as in a state 
of freedom." 

" Therefore it has been said that the natural 
abides within, the artificial without. Virtue abides 
in the natural. Knowledge of the action of the 
natural and of the artificial has its root in the 
natural, its development in virtue. And thus, 
whether in motion or at rest, whether in expansion 
or in contraction, there is always a reversion to the 
essential and to the ultimate." 

Those eternal principles which embody all human 
obligations. 

CAP. XVII.] Autumn Floods 211 

" What do you mean," enquired the Spirit of the 
River, '' by the natural and the artificial ?" 

" Horses and oxen," answered the Spirit of the 
Ocean, *' have four feet. That is the natural. Put 
a halter on a horse's head, a string through a 
bullock's nose, — that is the artificial. 

** Therefore it has been said, do not let the arti- 
ficial obliterate the natural; do not let will obliterate . 
destiny ; do not let virtue be sacrificed to fame. 
Diligently observe these precepts without fail, and 
thus you will revert to the divine." 

If man does not set himself in opposition to God, the 
result will be Tag. 

The walrus envies the centipede ; 

Its many legs and nimble gait, 
the centipede envies the snake ; 

Which moves without legs, 
the snake envies the wind ; 

Which moves far more quickly even without body, 
the wind envies the eye ; 

Which travels even without moving. 

the eye envies the mind ; 

Which can comprehend the whole universe, past and 
present alike. 

The walrus said to the centipede, " I hop about 
on one leg, but not very successfully. How do you 
manage all these legs you have ? " 

" Walrus" is of course an analogue. But for the one 

r 2 

212 Chuang Tzu 

leg, the description given by a commentator of the 
creature mentioned in the text applies with signifi- 
cant exactitude. 

" I don't manage them," replied the centipede. 
" Have you never seen saliva ? When it is ejected, 
the big drops are the size of pearls, the small ones 
like mist. They fall promiscuously on the ground 
and cannot be counted. And so it is that my 
mechanism works naturally, without my being con- 
scious of the fact." 

The centipede said to the snake, " With all my 
legs I do not move as fast as you with none. How 
is that ? " 

" One's natural mechanism," replied the snake, 
" is not a thing to be changed. What need have I 
for legs ? " 

The snake said to the wind, '* I can manage to 
wriggle along, but I have a form. Now you come 
blustering down from the north sea to bluster away 
to the south sea, and you seem to be without form. 
How is that ? " 

" Tis true," replied the wind, " that I bluster as 
you say ; but any one who can point at me or kick 
at me, excels me. 

As I cannot do as much to them. 

On the other hand, I can break huge trees and 
destroy large buildings. That is my strong point. 
Out of all the small things in which I do not 
excel I make one great one in which I do excel. 

CAP. XVII.] Autmnii Floods 213 

And to excel in great things is given only to the 
Sages." 

Everything has its own natural qualifications. What 

is difficult to one is easy to another. 

No illustration is given of the "eye" and "mind." 

"'Tis the half-length portrait," says Lin Hsi Chung, 

"of a beautiful girl;" — which is ingenious if not 

sound. 

When Confucius visited K'uang, the men of 
Sung surrounded him closely. 

This is a mistake. " K'uang" was in the Wei 
State, and it was by the men of Wei that Confucius 
was surrounded. 

Yet he went on playing and singing to his guitar 
without ceasing. 

'' How is it, Sir," enquired Tzu Lu, ** that you 
are so cheerful ? " 

See p. 165. Tzu Lu would have been the first to 
be cheerful himself. 

" Come here," replied Confucius, " and I will 
tell you. For a long time I have been struggling 
against failure, but in vain. Fate is against me. 
For a long time I have been seeking success, but in 
vain. The hour has not come. 

" In the days of Yaoand Shun, no man through- 
out the empire was a failure, though no one was 
conscious of the gain. In the days of Chieh and 
Chou, no man throughout the empire was a success, 
though no one was conscious of the loss. The times 
and circumstances were adapted accordingly. 

214 Chitaiig Tzii 

" To travel by water and not avoid sea-serpents 
and dragons, — this is the courage of the fisherman. 
To travel by land and not avoid the rhinoceros and 
the tiger, — this is the courage of hunters. When 
bright blades cross, to look on death as on life, — 
this is the courage of the hero. To know that 
failure is fate and that success is opportunity, and 
to remain fearless in great danger, — this is the 
courage of the Sage. Yu ! rest in this. My destiny 
is cut out for me." 

Shortly afterwards, the captain of the troops 
came in and apologised, saying, '' We thought you 
were Yang Hu ; consequently we surrounded you. 
We find we have made a mistake." Whereupon he 
again apologised and retired. 

Yang Hu was "wanted" by the people of Wei, and 
it appears that Confucius was unfortunately like him 
in feature. But the whole episode is clearly the 
interpolation of a forger. 

Kung Sun Lung 

A philosopher of the Chao State, whose treatise on 
the " hard and white " etc. is said to be still extant. 
See ch. ii. 

said to Mou of Wei, " When young I studied the 
Tao of the ancient Sages. When I grew up I 
knew all about the practice of charity and duty to 
one's neighbour, the identification of like and unlike, 
the separation of hardness and whiteness, and about 
making the not-so so, and the impossible possible. 
I vanquished the wisdom of all the philosophies. I 

CAP. XVII.] Atttumn Floods 215 

exhausted all the arguments that were brought 
against me. I thought that I had indeed reached 
the goal. But now that I have heard Chuang Tzu, 
I am lost in astonishment at his grandeur. I know 
not whether it is in arguing or in knowledge that I 
am not equal to him. I can no longer open my 
mouth. May I ask you to impart to me the 
secret ? " 

Kung Tzu Mou leant over the table and sighed. 
Then he looked up to heaven, and smiling replied, 
saying, " Have you never heard of the frog in the 
old well ? — The frog said to the turtle of the eastern 
sea, ' Happy indeed am I ! I hop on to the rail 
around the well. I rest in the hollow of some broken 
brick. Swimming, I gather the water under my 
arms and shut my mouth. I plunge into the mud, 
burying my feet and toes ; and not one of the 
cockles, crabs, or tadpoles I see around me are my 
match. [Fancy pitting the happiness of an old well 
against all the water of Ocean ! ] Why do you not 
come, Sir, and pay me a visit ? ' 

"■ Now the turtle of the eastern sea had not got 
its left leg down ere its right had already stuck fast, 
so it shrank back and begged to be excused. It then 
described the sea, saying, ' A thousand // would 
not measure its breadth, nor a thousand fathoms its 
depth. In the days of the Great Yii, there were nine 
years of flood out of ten ; but this did not add to 
its bulk. In the days of T'ang, there were seven 
years out of eight of drought ; but this did not 
narrow its span. Not to be affected by duration of 

2i6 CJmang Tzii 

time, not to be affected by volume of water, — such 
is the great happiness of the eastern sea.' 

To be impervious to external influences. 

" At this the well-frog was considerably aston- 
ished, and knew not what to say next. And for one 
whose knowledge does not reach to the positive- 
negative domain, 

Where contraries are identical. 

to attempt to understand Chuang Tzu, is like a 
mosquito trying to carry a mountain, or an ant to 
swim a river, — they cannot succeed. And for one 
whose knowledge does not reach to the abstrusest 
of the abstruse, but is based only upon such 
victories as you have enumerated, — is not he like 
the frog in the well ? 

"Chuang Tzu moves in the realms below while 
soaring to heaven above. For him north and south 
do not exist ; the four points are gone ; he is en- 
gulphed in the unfathomable. For him east and 
west do not exist. Beginning with chaos, he has 
gone back to Tag; and yet you think you are going 
to examine his doctrines and meet them with argu- 
ment ! This is like looking at the sky through a 
tube, or pointing at the earth with an awl, — a small 
result. 

The area covered by an awl's point being infini- 
tesimal. 

" Have you never heard how the youth of Shou- 
ling went to study at Han-tan? They did not learn 

CAP. XVII.] AtUimiJi Floods 217 

what they wanted at Han-tan, and forgot all they 
knew before into the bargain, so that they returned 
home in disgrace. And you, if you do not go away, 
you will forget all you know, and waste your time 
into the bargain." 

Kung Sun Lung's jaw dropped ; his tongue 
clave to his palate ; and he slunk away. 

Another spurious episode, as is evident from its 
general weakness, not to mention repetitions of 
figures and allusions taken from other chapters. 

Chuang Tzu was fishing in the P'u when the 
prince of Ch'u sent two high officials to ask him to 
take charge of the administration of the Ch'u State. 

Chuang Tzu went on fishing, and without turning 
his head said, " I have heard that in Ch'u there 
is a sacred tortoise which has been dead now 
some three thousand years. And that the prince 
keeps this tortoise carefully enclosed in a chest 
on the altar of his ancestral temple. Now would 
this tortoise rather be dead and have its remains 
venerated, or be alive and wagging its tail in the 
mud ? " 

*' It would rather be alive," replied the two 
officials, "and wagging its tail in the mud." 

** Begone ! " cried Chuang Tzu. '* I too will wag 
my tail in the mud." 

Hui Tzu was prime minister in the Liang State. 
Chuang Tzu went thither to visit him. 

Some one remarked, " Chuang Tzu has come. 
He wants to be minister in your place." 

2i8 Chita ng Tzic 

Thereupon Hui Tzu was afraid, and searched 
all over the State 

With warrants. 

for three days and three nights to find him. 

Then Chuang Tzu went to see Hui Tzu, and 
said, '* In the south there is a bird. It is a kind of 
phoenix. Do you know it ? It started from the 
south sea to fly to the north sea. Except on the 
wU'ftmg tree, 

Eleococca verrucosa. Williams. 

it would not alight. It would eat nothing but the 
fruit of the bamboo, drink nothing but the purest 
spring w^ater. An owl which had got the rotten 
carcass of a rat, looked up as the phoenix flew by, 
and screeched. 

To warn It off. 

Are you not screeching at me over your kingdom of 
Liang ? " 

Chuang Tzu and Hui Tzu had strolled on to the 
bridge over the Hao, when the former observed, 
" See how the minnows are darting about ! That is 
the pleasure of fishes." 

" You not being a fish yourself," said Hui Tzu, 
" how can you possibly know in what consists the 
pleasure of fishes ? " 

" And you not being I," retorted Chuang Tzu, 
" how can you know that I do not know ? " 

" If I, not being you, cannot know what you 

CAP. XVII.] Auhtmn Floods 219 

know," urged Hui Tzii, " it follows that you, not 
being a fish, cannot know in what consists the 
pleasure of fishes." 

" Let us go back," said Chuang Tzu, "to your 
original question. You asked me how I knew in 
what consists the pleasure of fishes. Your very 
question shows that you knew I knew. 

For you asked me how I knew. 
I knew it from my own feelings on this bridge." 

From my own feelings above the bridge I infer those 
of the fishes below. 

220 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
Perfect Happiness. 

Argument: — The uncertainty of human happiness — -What the world aims 
at is physical well-being — This is not profitable even to the body — 
In inaction alone is true happiness to be found — Inaction the rule of 
the material universe — Acquiescence in whatever our destiny may 
bring forth — Illustrations. 

[This chapter is supplementary to chapter vi.] 

IS perfect happiness to be found on earth, or not ? 
Are there those who can enjoy life, or not? If 
so, what do they do, what do they affect, what do 
they avoid, what do they rest in, accept, reject, like, 
and dislike? 

What the world esteems comprises wealth, rank, 
old age, and goodness of heart. What it enjoys 
comprises comfort, rich food, fine clothes, beauty, and 
music. What it does not esteem comprises poverty, 
want of position, early death, and evil behaviour. 
What it does not enjoy comprises lack of comfort 
for the body, lack of rich food for the palate, lack of 
fine clothes for the back, lack of beauty for the eye, 
and lack of music for the ear. If men do not get 
these, they are greatly miserable. Yet from the 
point of view of our physical frame, this is folly, h 

Physically we can, and most of us do, get along 
very well without these extras. 

CAP. XVIII.] Perfect Happiness 221 

Wealthy people who toil and moil, putting to- 
gether more money than they can possibly use, — 
from the point of view of our physical frame, is not 
this going beyond the mark ? 

Officials of rank who turn nio^ht into dav in their 
endeavours to compass the best ends ; — from the 
point of view of our physical frame, is not this a 
divergence ? 

Man is born to sorrow, and what misery is theirs 
whose old age with dulled faculties only means 
prolonged sorrow ! From the point of view of our 
physical frame, this is going far astray. 

Patriots are in the world's opinion admittedly 
good. Yet their goodness does not enable them to 
enjoy life ; 

Patriotism has been illustrated In China by countless 
heroic deeds, associated always with the death of the 
hero concerned. 

and so I know not whether theirs is veritable good- 
ness or not. If the former, it does not enable them 
to enjoy life ; if the latter, it at any rate enables 
them to cause others to enjoy theirs. 

It has been said, " If your loyal counsels are 
not attended to, depart quietly without resistance." 
Thus, when Tzu Hsii 

The famous Wu Ylian, 6th century B.C., whose 
opposition to his sovereign led to his own disgrace 
and death. 

resisted, his physical frame perished ; yet had he 
not resisted, he would not have made his name. Is 
there then really such a thing as this goodness, or not? 

222 Chttang Tzu 

K's> to what the world does and the way in which 
people are happy now, I know not whether such 
happiness be real happiness or not. The happiness 
of ordinary persons seems to me to consist in slav- 
ishly following the majority, as if they could not 
help it. Yet they all say they are happy. 

" The general average of mankind are not only 
moderate in intellect, but also in inclinations : they 
have no tastes or wishes strong enough to incline 
them to do anything unusual." Mill's Essay on 
Liberty. 

But I cannot say that this is happiness or that it is 
not happiness. Is there then, after all, such a thing 
as happiness ? 

I make true pleasure to consist in inaction, 
which the world regards as great pain. Thus it 
has been said, " Perfect happiness is the absence of 
happiness ; 

The non-existence of any state or condition neces- 
sarily includes the non-existence of its correlate. 
If we do not have happiness, we are at once exempt 
from misery ; and such a negative state is a state of 
" perfect happiness." 

perfect renown is the absence of renown." 

Now in this sublunary world of ours it is impos- 
sible to assign positive and negative absolutely. 
Nevertheless, in inaction they can be so assigned. 
Perfect happiness and preservation of life are to be 
sought for only in inaction. 

Let us consider. Heaven does nothing ; yet it 
is clear. Earth does nothing ; yet it enjoys repose. 

CAP. XVIII.] Perfect Happiness 223 

From the inaction of these two proceed all the 
modifications of things. How vast, how infinite is 
inaction, yet without source ! How infinite, how 
vast, yet without form ! 

The endless varieties of things around us all 
spring from inaction. Therefore it has been said, 
" Heaven and earth do nothing, yet there is nothing 
which they do not accomplish." But among men, 
who can attain to inaction ? 

Lin Hsi Chung condemns the whole of the above 
exordium as too closely reasoned forChuang Tzu, 
with his rugged, elliptical style. 

When Chuang Tzu's wife died, Hui Tzu went to 
condole. He found the widower sitting on the 
ground, singing, with his legs spread out at a right 
angle, and beating time on a bowl. 

"To live with your wife," exclaimed Hui Tzu, 
*' and see your eldest son grow up to be a man, and 
then not to shed a tear over her corpse, — this would 
be bad enough. But to drum on a bowl, and sing ; 
surely this is going too far." 

" Not at all," replied Chuang Tzu. " When she 
died, I could not help being affected by her death. 
Soon, however, I remembered that she had already 
existed in a previous state before birth, without 
form, or even substance ; that while in that uncon- 
ditioned condition, substance was added to spirit ; 
that this substance then assumed form ; and that 
the next stage was birth. And now, by virtue of a 
further change, she is dead, passing from one phase 

L^- 

224 Chiiang Tzu 

to another like the sequence of spring, summer, 
autumn, and winter. And while she is thus lying 
asleep in Eternity, for me to go about weeping and 
wailing would be to proclaim myself ignorant of 
these natural laws. Therefore I refrain." 

A hunchback and a one-legged man were looking 
at the tombs of departed heroes, on the K'un-lun 
Mountains, where the Yellow Emperor rests. Sud- 
denly, ulcers broke out upon their left elbows, of a 
very loathsome description. 

" Do you loathe this?" asked the hunchback. 

" Not I," replied the other, " why should I ? 
Life is a loan with which the borrower does but add 
more dust and dirt to the sum total of existence. 
Life and death are as day and night ; and w^hile 
y you and I stand gazing at the evidences of mortality 
around us, if the same mortality overtakes me, 
why should I loathe it ? " 

^ Chuang Tzu one day saw an empty skull, 
bleached, but still preserving its shape. Striking it 
with his riding whip, he said, "Wert thou once 
some ambitious citizen whose inordinate yearnings 
brought him to this pass? — some statesman who 
plunged his country in ruin and perished in the 
fray? — some wretch who left behind him a legacy 
of shame ? — some beggar who died in the pangs of 
hunger and cold ? Or didst thou reach this state 
by the natural course of old age ? " 

When he had finished speaking, he took the 

CAP. XVIII.] Perfect Happiness 225 

skull, and placing it under his head as a pillow, 
went to sleep. In the night, he dreamt that the 
skull appeared to him and said, " You speak well, 
Sir; but all you say has reference to the life of 
mortals, and to mortal troubles. In death there 
are none of these. Would you like to hear about 
death ? " 

Chuang Tzu having replied in the affirmative, the 
skull began : — " In death, there is no sovereign 
above, and no subject below. The workings of the 
four seasons are unknown. Our existences are 
bounded only by eternity. The happiness of a king 
among men cannot exceed that which we enjoy." 

Chuang Tzu, however, was not convinced, and said, 
" Were I to prevail upon God to allow your body 
to be born again, and your bones and flesh to be 
renewed, so that you could return to your parents, 
to your wife, and to the friends of your youth, — 
would you be willing?" 

At this, the skull opened its eyes wide and knitted 
its brows and said, " How should I cast aside 
happiness greater than that of a king, and mingle 
once again in the toils and troubles of mortality ? " 

Reminding us strangely of Hamlet. 

When Yen Yiian 

See p. 179. 

went eastwards to the Ch'i State, Confucius was sad. 
Tzu Kung arose and said, *Ts it, Sir, because Hui 

Yen Yuan's personal name. 

has gone east to Ch'i that you are sad ? " 

Q 

226 Chuang Tzii 

"A good question," replied Confucius. " There 
is a saying by Kuan Chung 

Prime Minister to Duke Huan of the Ch'i State, 
7th century B.C. 

of old which I highly esteem : ' Small bags won't hold 
big things ; short ropes won't reach down deep 
wells.' Thus, destiny is a pre-arrangement, just as 
form has its limitations. From neither, to neither, 
can you either take away or add. And I fear lest 
Hui, on his visit to the prince of Ch'i, should 
preach the Tao of Yao and Shun, and dwell on the 
words of Sui Jen and Shen Nung. The prince will 
then search within himself, but will not find. And 
not finding, he will doubt. And when a man doubts, 
he will kill. 

Lit. "he will die." But the verb " to die" is often 
used in the sense of "to make to die;" and this seems 
to be the only available sense here. 

" Besides, have you not heard that of old when a 
sea-bird alighted outside the capital of Lu, the 
prince went out to receive it, and gave it wine in the 
temple, and had the Chiu Shao 

Music composed by the legendary Emperor Shun. 

played to amuse it, and a bullock slaughtered to 
feed it ? But the bird was dazed and too timid to 
eat or drink anything ; and in three days it was 
dead. This was treating the bird like oneself, and 
not as a bird would treat a bird. Had he treated it 
as a bird would have treated a bird, he would have 

CAP. xviii.] Perfect Happiness 227 

put it to roost in a deep forest, to wander over a 
plain, to swim in a river or lake, to feed upon fish, 
to fly in order, and to settle leisurely. When the bird 
was already terrified at human voices, fancy adding 
music ! Play the Hsien ChHh 

Music of the Yellow Emperor. 

or the Chitt Shao in the wilds of Tung-t'ing, and 
birds will fly away, beasts will take themselves off, 
and fishes will dive down below. But men will 
collect to hear. 

See p. 244. 

" Water, which is life to fishes, is death to man. 
Being differently constituted, their likes and dis- 
likes are different. Therefore the Sages of the 
past favoured not uniformity of skill or of occupa- 
tion. Reputation was commensurate with reality ; 
means were adapted to the end. This was called a 
due relationship with others coupled with advantage 
to oneself." 

Several sentences of the above are clearly in imita- 
tion of parts of ch. ii. The whole episode is beyond 
doubt a forgery. 

Lieh Tzu, being on a journey, was eating by the 
roadside, when he saw an old skull. Plucking a 
blade of grass, he pointed at it and said, " Only you 
and I know that there is no such thing as life and 
no such thing as death. 

Lit. " that you have never died nor lived." 

Q 2 

228 Chuaitp- Tzii 

<^ 

Are you really at peace ? Or am I really happy ? 

Who can say whether what we call death may not 
after all be life, and life death ? 

" Certain germs, falling upon water, become 
duckweed. When they reach the junction of the 
land and the water, they become lichen. Spreading 
up the bank, they become the dog-tooth violet. 
Reaching rich soil, they become wu-tsu, the root of 
which becomes grubs, while the leaves comes from 
butterflies, or hsil. These are changed into insects, 
born in the chimney corner, which look like skele- 
tons. Their name is cliil-to. After a thousand 
days, the cJtil-to becomes a bird, called Kan-yil-kit, 
the spittle of which becomes the ssii-mi. The 
ssu-mi becomes a wine fly, and that comes from 
an i-lit. The hiiang-k' uang produces the chm-yu 
and the moit-jid produces the glow-worm. The 
yang-clii grafted to an old bamboo which has for a 
long time put forth no shoots, produces the c/img- 
ning, which produces the leopard, which produces 
the horse, which produces man. 

"Then man goes back into the great Scheme, 
from which all things come and to which all things 
return." 

Such is the eternal round, marked by the stages 
which we call life and death. 

Many of the names in the above paragraph have 
not been identified even by Chinese commentators. 
On all counts then they may safely be left where 
they are. 

229 

CHAPTER XIX. 

The Secret of Life. 

Argument :— The soul is from God — Man's body its vehicle — The soul 
quickening the body is life — Care of the internal and of the external 
must be simultaneous — In due nourishment of both is Tag. 

[This chapter is supplementary to chapter iii.] 

THOSE who understand the conditions of life 
devote no attention to things which life 
cannot accomplish. Those who understand the 
conditions of destiny devote no attention to things 
over which knowledge has no control. 

For the due nourishment of our physical frames, 
certain things are needful. Yet where such things 
abound, the physical frame is not always nourished. 
For the preservation of life it is necessary that there 
should be no abandonment of the physical frame. 
Yet where the physical frame is not abandoned, life 
does not always remain. 

Life comes, and cannot be declined. It goes, and 
cannot be stopped. But alas ! the world thinks 
that to nourish the frame is enough to keep life. 
And if indeed it is not enough, what then is the 
world to do ? 

Although not enough, it must still be done. It 
cannot be neglected. For if one is to neglect the 
physical frame, better far to retire at once from the 

230 Chtiang Tzu 

world. By renouncing the world, one gets rid of 
the cares of the world. The result is a natural 
level, which is equivalent to a re-birth. And he who 
is re-born is near. 
To Tao. 

But what inducement is there to renounce the 
affairs of men, to become indifferent to life ? — In 
the first case, the physical body suffers no wear 
and tear ; in the second, the vitality is left un- 
harmed. And he whose physical frame is perfect 
and whose vitality is in its original purity, — he is 
one with God. 

Mens Sana in corpore sano. 

Heaven and earth are the father and mother of 
all things. When they unite, the result is shape. 
When they disperse, the original condition is re- 
newed. 

As in the case of ordinary mortals . 

But if body and vitality are both perfect, this state 
is zd^^tdifit for translation. 

In the Biblical sense, as applied to Enoch. 

Such perfection of vitality goes back to the minister 
of God. 

" Vitality " is the subtle essence, the immaterial 
informing principle which, united with matter, ex- 
hibits the phenomenon of life. The term has 
already occurred in ch. xi. 

Lieh Tzu asked Kuan Yin, 

A sage who by some is said to have flourished five 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life 231 

or six hundred years before Lieh Tzu ; by others, 
to have been an immediate disciple of Lao Tzii, and 
to have been entrusted by him with the publication 
of the Tao-Te-Chi7ig. 

saying, " The perfect man can walk through solid 
bodies without obstruction. He can pass through 
fire without being burnt. He can scale the highest 
heights without fear. How does he bring himself 
to this ? " 

" It is because he is in a condition of absolute 
purity," replied Kuan Yin. " It is not cunning 
which enables him to dare such feats. Be seated, 
and I will tell you. 

" All that has form, sound, and colour, may be 
classed under the head thing. Man differs so much 
from the rest, and stands at the head of all things, 
simply because the latter are but what they appear 
and nothing more. But man can attain to formless- 
ness and vanquish death. And with that which is 
in possession of the eternal, how can mere things 
compare ? 

" Man may rest in the eternal fitness ; he may 
abide in the everlasting ; and roam from the 
beginning to the end of all creation. He may bring 
his nature to a condition of one ; he may nourish 
his strength ; he may harmonize his virtue, and so 
put himself into partnership with God. Then, when 
his divinity is thus assured, and his spirit closed 
in on all sides, how can anything find a passage 
within ? 

He is beyond the reach of objective existences. 

232 Chiiang Tzzi 

" A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though 
he may suffer, does not die. His bones are the 
same as other people's ; but he meets his accident 
in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of 
security. He is not conscious of riding in the cart ; 
neither is he conscious of falling out of it. Ideas 
of life, death, fear, etc., cannot penetrate his breast ; 
and so he does not suffer from contact with objective 
existences. And if such security is to be got from 
wine, how much more is it to be got from God. It 
is in God that the Sage seeks his refuge, and so he 
is free from harm. 

" An avenger does not snap in twain the mur- 
derous weapon ; neither does the most spiteful man 
carry his resentment to a tile which may have hit 
him on the head. And by the extension of this 
principle, the empire would be at peace ; no more 
confusion of war, no more punishment of death. 

*' Do not develop your artificial intelligence, but 
develop that intelligence which is from God. From 
the latter, results virtue ; from the former, cunning. 
And those who do not shrink from the natural, nor 
wallow in the artificial, — they are near to per- 
fection." 

When Confucius was on his way to the Ch'u 
State, he came to a forest where he saw a hunch- 
back catching cicadas as though with his hand. 

It is still the delight of the Chinese gamin to capture 
the noisy " scissor-grinder " with the aid of a long 
bamboo tipped with bird-lime. 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life 233 

** How clever you are ! " cried Confucius. " Have 
you any way of doing this ? " 

" Way," i.e. road, is the primary meaning of Tao. 

" I have a way," replied the hunchback. " In the 
fifth and sixth moons I practise balancing two balls 
one on top of the other. 

At the top of his pole. 

If they do not fall, I do not miss many cicadas. When 
I can balance three balls, I only miss one in ten ; 
and when five, then it is as though I caught the 
cicadas with my hand. My body is as motionless 
as the stump of a tree; my arms like dead branches. 
Heaven and earth and all creation may be around 
me, but I am conscious only of my cicada's wings. 
How should I not succeed ? " 

Confucius looked round at his disciples and said, 
" Singleness of purpose induces concentration of 
the faculties. Of such is the success of this hunch- 
back." 

Yen Yiian said to Confucius, " When I crossed 
over the Shang-sh^n rapid, the boatman managed 
his craft with marvellous skill. I asked him if hand- 
ling a boat could be learnt. * It can,' replied he. 
'The way of those who know how to keep you afloat 
is more like sinking you. They row as if the boat 
wasn't there.' 

" I enquired what this meant, but he would not 
tell me. May I ask its signification." 

" It means," answered Confucius, ** that such a 

234 Chiiajig Tzit 

man is oblivious of the water around him. He 
regards the rapid as though dry land. He looks 
upon an upset as an ordinary cart accident. And if 
a man can but be impervious to capsizings and 
accidents in general, whither should he not be able 
comfortably to go ? 

" A man who plays for counters will play well. 
If he stakes his girdle, 

In which he keeps his loose cash. 

he will be nervous ; if yellow gold, he will lose his 
wits. His skill is the same in each case, but he is 
distracted by the value of his stake. And every one 
who attaches importance to the external, becomes 
internally without resource." 

T'ien K'ai Chih had an audience of Duke Wei of 
Chou. The Duke asked him, saying, " I have 
heard that Chu Hsien is studying the art of life. 
As you are a companion of his, pray tell me any- 
thing you know about it." 

"I do but ply the broom at his outer gate," 
replied T'ien K'ai Chih ; " what should I know 
about my Master's researches ? " 

" Don't be so modest," said the Duke. " I am 
very anxious to hear about it." 

" Well," replied T'ien, " I have heard my master 
say that keeping life is like keeping a flock of 
sheep. You look out for the laggards, and whip 
them up." 

" What does that mean ? " asked the Duke. 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life 235 

" In the State of Lu," said T'ien, " there was a 
man named Shan Pao. He lived on the mountains 
and drank water. All worldly interests he had put 
aside. And at the age of seventy, his complexion 
was like that of a child. Unluckily, he one day fell 
in with a hungry tiger who killed and ate him. 

"There was also a man named Chang I, who 
frequented the houses of rich and poor alike. At 
the age of forty he was attacked by some internal 
disease and died. 

" Shan Pao took care of his inner self, and a tiger 
ate his external man. Chang I took care of himself 
externally, but disease attacked him internally. 
These two individuals both omitted to whip up the 
laggards." 

There is no particular record of the worthies men- 
tioned above. 

Confucius said, " Neither affecting obscurity, nor 
courting prominence, but unconsciously occupying 
the happy mean, — he who can attain to these three 
will enjoy a surpassing fame. 

** In dangerous parts, where one wayfarer out of 
ten meets his death, fathers and sons and brothers 
will counsel each other not to travel without a suffi- 
cient escort. Is not this wisdom ? And there 
where men are also greatly in danger, in the lists of 
passion, in the banquet hour, not to warn them is 
error indeed." 

Physical precautions are not alone sufficient. Man's 
moral nature equally requires constant watchfulness 
and care. 

236 Chuang Tzii 

The Grand Augur, in his ceremonial robes, 
approached the shambles and thus addressed the 
pigs :— 

*' How can you object to die ? I shall fatten you 
for three months. I shall discipline myself for ten 
days and fast for three. I shall strew fine grass, and 
place you bodily upon a carved sacrificial dish. 
Does not this satisfy you ? " 

Then speaking from the pigs' point of view, he 
continued, " It is better perhaps after all to live on 
bran and escape the shambles " 

" But then," added he, speaking from his own 
point of view, *' to enjoy honour when alive one 
would readily die on a war-shield or in the heads- 
man's basket." 

So he rejected the pigs' point of view and adopted 
his own point of view. In what sense then was he 
different from the pigs ? 

Even as a pig thinks of nothing but eating, so was 
the Grand Augur ready to sacrifice everything, life 
itself, for paltry fame. 

When Duke Huan was out hunting, with Kuan 
Chung as his charioteer, he saw a bogy. Catching 
hold of Kuan Chung's hand, he asked him, saying, 
''What do you see?" 

" I see nothing," replied Kuan Chung. But 
when the Duke got home he became delirious, and 
for many days was unable to go out. 

There came a certain Huang Tzu Kao Ngao of j 
the Ch'i State 

" A sage of the Ch'i State," — as the commentators 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life 237 

usually say when in reality they know nothing about 
the individual. 
and said, "Your Highness is self-injured. How 
could a bogy injure you ? When the vital strength 
is dissipated in anger, and is not renewed, there is 
a deficiency. When its tendency is in one direction 
upwards, the result is to incline men to wrath. 
When its tendency is in one direction downwards, 
the result is loss of memory. When it remains 
stagnant, in the middle of the body, the result is 
disease." 

"Very well," said the Duke, " but are there such 
things as bogies?" 

" There are," replied Huang. " There is the mud 
spirit Li ; the fire spirit Kao ; Lei T'ing, the spirit 
of the dust-bin ; P'ei O and Wa Lung, sprites of 
the north-east ; Yi Yang of the north-west ; Wang 
Hsiang of the water ; the Hsin of the hills ; the 
K'uei of the mountain ; the Pang Huang of the 
moor ; the Wei I of the marsh." 

The garb and bearing of the above beings are very 
fully described by commentators. 

" And what may the Wei I be like?" asked the 
Duke. 

"The Wei I," replied Huang, " is as broad as a 
cart-wheel and as long as the shaft. It wears purple 
clothes and a red cap. It is a sentient being, and 
whenever it hears the rumble of thunder, it stands 
up in a respectful attitude. Those who see this 
bogy are like to be chieftains among men." 

The Duke laughed exultingly and said, " The 

238 Chitaiig Tzii 

very one I saw I " Thereupon he dressed himself 
and sat up ; and ere the day had closed, without 
knowing it, his sickness had left him. 

The above episode teaches that the evils which 
appear to come upon us from without, in reality 
have their origin within. 

Chi Hsing Tzu was training fighting cocks for 
the prince. , 

Of Ch'i, says a commentator, i 

At the end of ten days the latter asked if they were 
ready. " Not yet," replied Chi ; " they are in the 
stage of seeking fiercely for a foe." 

Again ten days elapsed, and the prince made a 
further enquiry. " Not yet," replied Chi ; " they 
are still excited by the sounds and shadows of other 
cocks." 

Ten days more, and the prince asked again. 
" Not yet," answered Chi ; " the sight of an 
enemy is still enough to excite them to rage." | 

But after another ten days, when the prince again 
enquired, Chi said, "They will do. Other cocks 
may-crow, but they will take no notice. To look 
at them one might say they were of wood. Their 
virtue is complete. Strange cocks will not dare meet 
them, but will run." 

Illustratinof the value of internal concentration. 

Confucius was looking at the cataract at Lii- 
liang. It fell from a height of thirty/^;/, 

I jen = 7 Chinese feet. What the ancient Chinese 

J 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life i^f) 

foot measured, it is impossible to say. For the 
height of the cataract it will be near enough to say 
200 English feet. 

and its foam reached forty // away. No scaly, finny 
creature could enter therein. 
Meaning the rapids below. 

Yet Confucius saw an old man go in, and thinking 
that he was suffering from some trouble and de- 
sirous of ending his life, bade a disciple run along 
the side to try and save him. The old man emerged 
about a hundred paces off, and with flowing hair 
went carolling along the bank. Confucius followed 
him and said, ** I had thought, Sir, you were a 
spirit, but now I see you are a man. Kindly tell 
me, is there any way to deal thus with water ? " 

" No," replied the old man ; " I have no way. 
There was my original condition to begin with ; 
then habit growing into nature ; and lastly acqui- 
escence in destiny. Plunging in with the whirl, I 
come out with the swirl. I accommodate myself 
to the water, not the water to me. And so I am 
able to deal with it after this fashion." 

" What do you mean," enquired Confucius, " by 
your original condition to begin with, habit growing 
into nature, and acquiescence in destiny ? " 

" I was born," replied the old man, *' upon dry 
land, and accommodated myself to dry land. That 
was my original condition. Growing up on the 
water, I accommodated myself to the water. That 
was what I meant by nature. 
Habit is second nature. 

t/' 

240 Chuang Tzu 

And doing as I did without being conscious of any 
effort so to do, that was what I meant by destiny." 

Objective existences cannot injure him who puts 
his trust in God. 

[This episode occurs twice, with textual differences, 
in the works of Lieh Tzu, chs. ii. and viii.] 

Ch'ing, the chief carpenter, 
Of the Lu State. 

was carving wood into a stand for hanging musical 
instruments. When finished, the work appeared 
to those who saw it as though of supernatural 
execution. And the prince of Lu asked him, saying, 
" What mystery is there in your art ? " 

" No mystery, your Highness," replied Ch'ing ; 
" and yet there is something. 

''When I am about to make such a stand, I 
guard against any diminution of my vital power. I 
first reduce my mind to absolute quiescence. Three 
days in this condition, and I become oblivious of 
any reward to be gained. Five days, and I become 
oblivious of any fame to be acquired. Seven days, 
and I become unconscious of my four limbs and 
my physical frame. Then, with no thought of the 
Court present to my mind, my skill becomes con- 
centrated, and all disturbing elements from without 
are gone. I enter some mountain forest. I search 
for a suitable tree. It contains the form required, 
which is afterwards elaborated. I see the stand in 
my mind's eye, and then set to work. Otherwise, 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life 241 

there is nothing. I bring my own natural capacity 
into relation with that of the wood. What was 
suspected to be of supernatural execution in my 
work was due solely to this." 

To obliteration of self in the infinite causality of 
God. 

Tung Yeh Chi exhibited his charioteering skill 
before Duke Chuang. 

"Of Lu," says one commentator. But another 
points out that Yen Ho {infra) is mentioned in 
chapter iv. as tutor to the son of Duke Ling of 
Wei, which would involve an anachronism. 

Backwards and forwards he drove in lines which 
might have been ruled, sweeping round at each end 
in curves which might have been described by 
compasses. 

The Duke, however, said that this was nothing 
more than weaving ; and bidding him drive round 
and round a hundred times, returned home. 

Yen Ho came upon him, and then went in and 
said to the Duke, " Chi's horses are on the point of 
breaking down." 

The Duke remained silent, making no reply ; 
and in a short time it was announced that the 
horses had actually broken down, and that Chi had 
gone away. 

" How could you tell this ? " said the Duke to 
Yen Ho. 

" Because," replied the latter, " Chi was trying 
to make his horses perform a task to which they 

242 Chiiang Tzu 

were unequal. Therefore I said they would break 
down." 

Illustrating the strain which mortality daily puts 
upon the bodies and minds of all men. 

Ch'ui the artisan could draw circles with his hand 
better than with compasses. His fingers seemed to 
accommodate themselves so naturally to the thing 
he was working at, that it was unnecessary to fix 
his attention. His mental faculties thus remained 
ONE, and suffered no hindrance. 

To be unconscious of one's feet implies that the 
shoes are easy. To be unconscious of a waist im- 
plies that the girdle is easy. The intelligence being 
unconscious of positive and negative implies that 
the heart is at ease. No modifications within, no 
yielding to influences without, 

But always following a natural course. 

— this is ease under all conditions. And he who 
beginning with ease, is never not at ease, is uncon- 
scious of the ease of ease. 

Such is the condition of oblivion necessary to the 
due development of our natural spontaneity. ^ 

A certain Sun Hsiu went to the house of Pien 
Ch'ing Tzu 

Both unknown to fame. 

and complained, saying, " In peace I am not con-j 
sidered wanting in propriety. In times of troubh 

CAP. XIX.] The Secret of Life 243 

I am not considered wanting in courage. Yet my 
crops fail ; and officially I am not a success. From 
my village an outcast, I am an outlaw from my 
State. How have I offended against God that he 
should visit me with such a fate ? " 

" Have you not heard," replied Pien Tzu, *' how 
the perfect man conducts himself? He is oblivious 
of his physical organisation. He is beyond the 
reach of sight and hearing. He moves outside the 
limits of this dusty world, rambling transcen- 
dentally in the domain of no-affairs. This is called 
acting but not from self-confidence, influencing but 
not from authority. 

That is, acting not in consequeuce of self-confidence, 
but without reference to it ; sc. naturally. In- 
fluencing, not because of authority, but gaining 
authority because of natural influence. 

This quotation appears, though Chuang Tzu or 
whoever may be responsible for this episode does 
not say so, in chs. x. and li. of the Tao-Te-Ching. 

" But you, you make a show of your knowledge 
in order to startle fools. You cultivate yourself in 
contrast to the degradation of others. And you 
blaze along as though the sun and moon were under 
your arms. 

These last three sentences will be found verbatim 
in ch. XX. 

Whereas, that you have a whole body in a whole 
skin, and have not perished in mid career, dumb, 
blind, or halt, but actually hold a place among men, 

R 2 

244 Chuang Tzit 

— this ought to be enough for you. Why rail at 
God ? Begone ! " 

Sun Hsiu went away, and Pien Tzu went in and 
sat down. Shortly afterwards, he looked up to 
heaven and sighed ; whereupon a disciple asked him 
what was the matter. 

" When Hsiu was here just now," answered Pien 
Tzii, " I spoke to him of the virtue of the perfect 
man. I fear lest he be startled and so driven on 
to doubt." 

" No, Sir," answered the disciple. *' If he was 
right and you were wrong, wrong will never drive 
right into doubt. If, on the other hand, he was 
wrong and you were right, he brought his doubt 
with him, and you are not responsible." 

" Not so," said Pien Tzu. *' Of old, when a bird 
alighted outside the capital of Lu, the prince was 
delighted, and killed an ox to feed it and had the 
Chiu Shao played to entertain it. The bird, how- 
ever, was timid and dazed and dared not to eat or 
drink. This was treating the bird like oneself. 
But to treat a bird as a bird would treat a bird, you 
must put it to roost in a deep forest, let it swim in 
river or lake, and feed at its ease on the plain. 
Now Sun Hsiu is a man of small understanding ; 
and for me to speak to him of the perfect man is 
like setting a mouse to ride in a coach or a band of 
music to play to a quail. How should he not be 
startled ? " 

The above episode has already appeared in ch. xviii., 
ad Jin. 

245 

CHAPTER XX. 

Mountain Trees. 

Argument: — The alternatives of usefulness and uselessness — Tao a 
tertium quid — The human a hindrance to the divine — Altruism — 
Adaptation — Destiny — Illustrations. 

[This chapter is supplementary to chapter iv.] 

C HUANG TZU was travelling over a mountain 
when he saw a huge tree well covered with 
foliage. A woodsman had stopped near by, not 
caring to take it ; and on Chuang Tzu enquiring 
the reason, he was told that it was of no use. 

" This tree," cried Chuang Tzu, " by virtue of 
being good for nothing succeeds in completing its 
allotted span." 

When Chuang Tzu left the mountain, he put up 
at the house of an old friend. The latter was 
delighted, and ordered a servant to kill a goose and 
cook it. 

"Which shall I kill?" enquired the servant; 
" the one that cackles or the one that doesn't ? " 

His master told him to kill the one which did not 
cackle. And accordingly, the next day, a disciple 
asked Chuang Tzu, saying, " Yesterday, that tree on 
the mountain, because good for nothing, was to 
succeed in completing its allotted span. But now. 

246 Chuang Tzil 

our host's goose, which is good for nothing, has to 
die. Upon which horn of the dilemma will you 
rest ? " 

" I rest," replied Chuang Tzu with a smile, 
" halfway between the two. In that position, 
appearing to be what I am not, it is impossible to 
avoid the troubles of mortality ; 

The text is here doubtful, and commentators explain 
according to the fancy of each. When a Chinese 
commentator does not understand his text, he 
usually slurs it over. He never says " I do not 
understand." Chu Fu Tzu alone could rise to this 
height. 

though, if charioted upon Tao and floating far 
above mortality, this would not be so. No praise, 
no blame ; both great and small ; changing with 
the change of time, but ever without special effort ; 
both above and below ; making for harmony with 
surroundings ; reaching creation's First Cause ; 
swaying all things and swayed by none ; — how 
then shall such troubles come? This was the 
method of Shen Nung and Huang Ti. 

" If another guest had happened to arrive," says 
Lin Hsi Chung, " I fancy the chance even of the 
cackling goose would have been small." 

" But amidst the mundane passions and relation- 
ships of man, such would not be the case. For 
where there is union, there is also separation ; 
where there is completion, there is also destruction ; 
where there is purity, there is also oppression ; 

I 

CAP. XX.] Mountain Trees 247 

where there is honour, there is also disparagement : 
where there is doing, there is also undoing ; where 
there is openness, there is also underhandedness : 
and where there is no semblance, there is also 
deceit. How then can there be any fixed point ? 
Alas indeed ! Take note, my disciples, that such is 
to be found only in the domain of Tao." 

I Liao 

A sage of the Ch'u State. 

of Shih-nan paid a visit to the prince of Lu. The 
latter wore a melancholy look ; whereupon the 
philosopher of Shih-nan enquired what was the 
cause. 

" I study the doctrines of the ancient Sages," 
replied the prince. ** I carry on the work of my 
predecessors. I respect religion. I honour the 
good. Never for a moment do I relax in these 
points ; yet I cannot avoid misfortune, and conse- 
quently I am sad." 

" Your Highness' method of avoiding misfor- 
tune," said the philosopher of Shih-nan, ** is but a 
shallow one. A handsome fox or a striped leopard 
will live in a mountain forest, hiding beneath some 
precipitous cliff. This is their repose. They come 
out at night and keep in by day. This is their 
caution. Though under the stress of hunger and 
thirst, they lie hidden, hardly venturing to slink 
secretly to the river bank in search of food. This 
is their resoluteness. Nevertheless, they do not 

"248 Chuaug Tzic 

escape the misfortune of the net and the trap. But 
what crime have they committed ? 'Tis their skin 
which is the cause of their trouble ; and is not the 
State of Lu your Highness' skin? 1 would have 
your Highness put away body and skin alike, and 
cleansing your heart and purging it of passion, 
betake yourself to the land where mortality is not. 

Tao. 
" In Nan-yiieh there is a district, called Estab- 
lished-Virtue. Its people are simple and honest, 
unselfish, and without passions. They can make, 
but cannot keep. They give, but look for no 
return. They are not conscious of fulfilling obli- 
gations. They are not conscious of subservience to 
etiquette. 

Theirs is the natural etiquette of well-regulated 

minds. 

Their actions are altogether uncontrolled, yet they 
tread in the way of the wise. Life is for enjoy- 
ment ; death, for burial. And thither I would have 
your Highness proceed, power discarded and the 
world left behind, only putting trust in Tao." 

" The road is long and dangerous," said the 
prince. " Rivers and hills to be crossed, and I 
without boat or chariot ; — what then ? " 

" Unhindered by body and unfettered in mind," 
replied the philosopher, " your Highness will be a 
chariot to yourself." 

" But the road is long and dreary," argued the 
prince, " and uninhabited. 

This is a play on "where mortality is not," above. 

CAP. XX.] Mountain Trees 249 

I shall have no one to turn to for help ; and how, 
without food, shall I ever be able to get there ? " 

" Decrease expenditure ^ 

Of energy. 

and lessen desires," answered the philosopher, 
*' and even though without provisions, there will be 
enough. And then through river and over sea 
your Highness will travel into shoreless illimitable 
space. From the border-land, those who act as 
escort will return ; but thence onwards your High- 
ness will travel afar. 

" It is the human in ourselves which is our 
hindrance ; and the human in others which causes 
our sorrow. The great Yao had not this human 
element himself, nor did he perceive it in others. 
And I would have your Highness put off this 
hindrance and rid yourself of this sorrow, and roam 
with Tao alone through the realms of Infinite 
Nought. 

" Suppose a boat is crossing a river, and another 
empty boat is about to collide with it. Even an -^ 
irritable man would not lose his temper. But 
supposing there was some one in the second boat. 
Then the occupant of the first would shout to him 
to keep clear. And if the other did not hear the 
first time, nor even when called to three times, bad 
language would inevitably follow. In the first case 
there was no anger, in the second there was ; 
because in the first case the boat was empty, and in 
the second it was occupied. And so it is with man. 

250 Chuang Tzit 

If he could only roam empty through life, who 
would be able to injure him ? " 

Widi his mind in a negative state, closed to all 
impressions conveyed within by the senses from 
without. 

Pei Kung She, minister to Duke Ling of Wei, 
levied contributions for making bells. An altar 
was built outside the city gate ; 

For purposes of sacrifice. 

and in three months the bells, upper and lower, 
were all hung. 

The bell-chime consisted of a frame with bells swun^ 
on an upper and lower bar. 

When Wang Tzu Ch'ing Chi 

Minister to the rulinof House of Chou. 

saw them, he asked, saying, " How, Sir, did you 
manage this ? " 

"In the domain of one," replied She, "there 
may not be managing. I have heard say that which 
is carved and polished reverts nevertheless to its 
natural condition. And so I made allowances for 
ignorance and for suspicion. I betrayed no feeling 
when welcomed or dismissed. I forbade not those 
who came, nor detained those who went away. I 
showed no resentment towards the unwilling, nor 
gratitude towards those who gave. Every one sub- 
scribed what he liked ; and thus in my daily 
collection of subscriptions, no injury was done. — 

CAP. XX.] Mountain Trees 251 

How much more then those who have the great 

WAY ? " 

If my success was due to the simple principle 
above enunciated, what a success would result from 
Tag, which is the infinite extension of such principles 
into every phase of existence ! 

The Chinese word here used for " way," as a 
synonym of Tao, settles the original meaning of the 
latter in the sense of " road." Thus Lao Tzu is said 
to have explained that the Way he taught was not 
the way which could be walked upon. 

When Confucius was hemmed in between Ch'^n 
and Ts'ai, he passed seven days without food. 

The minister Jen went to condole with him, and 
said, " You were near, Sir, to death." 

" I was indeed," replied Confucius. 

" Do you fear death. Sir ? " enquired Jen. 

*' I do," said Confucius. 

" Then I will try to teach you," said Jen, '' the 
way not to die. 

"In the eastern sea there are certain birds, called 
the i-erh. They behave themselves in a modest 
and unassuming manner, as though unpossessed of 
ability. They fly simultaneously : they roost in a 
body. In advancing, none strives to be first; in 
retreating, none ventures to be last. In eating, 
none will be the first to begin ; it is considered 
proper to take the leavings of others. Therefore, in 
their own ranks they are at peace, and the outside 
world is unable to harm them. And thus they 
escape trouble. 

252 Chtiang Tzii 

" Straight trees are the first felled. Sweet wells 
are soonest exhausted. And you, you make a show 
of your knowledge in order to startle fools. You 
cultivate yourself in contrast to the degradation of 
others. And you blaze along as though the sun and 
moon were under your arms ; consequently, you 
cannot avoid trouble. 
See p. 243. 

'' Formerly, I heard a very wise man say, Self- 
praise is no recommendation. In merit achieved 
there is deterioration. In fame achieved there is 
loss. Who can discard both merit and fame and 
become one with the rest ? Tao pervades all things 
but is not seen. T£: 

This is "virtue," the expression of Tag. 
moves through all things but its place is not known. 
In its purity and constancy, it may be compared 
with the purposeless. Remaining concealed, 
rejecting power, it works not for merit nor for 
fame. Thus, not censuring others, it is not cen- 
sured by others. 

** And if the perfect man cares not for fame, why, 
Sir, should you take pleasure in it ? " 

" Good indeed ! " replied Confucius ; and forth- 
with he took leave of his friends and dismissed his 
disciples and retired to the wilds, where he dressed 
himself in skins and serge and fed on acorns and 
chestnuts. He passed among the beasts and birds 
and they took no heed of him. And if so, how much 
more among men ? 

An unquestionably spurious episode. 

CAP. XX.] Mountain Trees 253 

Confucius asked Tzu Sang Hu, 
See ch. vl. 

saying, " I have been twice expelled from Lu. My 
tree was cut down in Sung. I have been tabooed 
in Wei. I am a failure in Shang and Chou. I 
was surrounded between Chen and Ts'ai. And in 
addition to all these troubles, my friends have 
separated from me and my disciples are gone. How 
is this?" 

See p. 180. 

" Have you not heard," replied Sang Hu, " how 
when the men of Kuo fled, one of them, named Lin 
Hui, cast aside most valuable regalia and carried 
away his child upon his back ? Some one suggested 
that he was influenced by the value of the child ; — 
but the child's value was small. Or by the incon- 
venience of the regalia ; — but the inconvenience of 
the child would be much greater. Why then did 
he leave behind the regalia and carry off the 
child ? 

** Lin Hui himself said, * The regalia involved 
a mere question of money. The child was from 
God.' 

"And so it is that in trouble and calamity mere 
money questions are neglected, while we ever cling 
nearer to that which is from God. And between 
neglecting and clinging to, the difference is great. 

"The friendship of the superior man is negative 
like water. The friendship of the mean man is 
full-flavoured like wine. That of the superior man 

254 Chnang Tzii 

passes from the negative to the affectionate. That 
of the mean man passes from the full-flavoured to 
nothing. The friendship of the mean man begins 
without due cause, and in like manner comes to an 
end. 

" I hear and obey," replied Confucius ; and 
forthwith he went quietly home, put an end to his 
studies and cast aside his books. His disciples no 
longer saluted him as teacher; but his love for them 
deepened every day. 

On another occasion. Sang Hu said to him again, 
" When Shun was about to die, he commanded the 
Great Yu as follows : — Be careful. Act in accord- 
ance with your physical body. Speak in accordance 
with your feelings. You will thus not get into 
difficulty with the former nor suffer annoyance in 
the latter. And as under these conditions you will 
not stand in need of outward embellishment of any 
kind, it follows that you therefore will not stand in 
need of anything." 

Also an episode of doubtful audiorship. The com- 
mentators, however, have nothing to say against its 
genuineness. 

Chuang Tzu put on cotton clothes with patches 
in them, and arranging his girdle and tieing on his 
shoes, 

To keep them from falling off. 

went to see the prince of Wei. 

"How miserable you look. Sir ! " cried the prince. 
" It is poverty, not misery," replied Chuang Tzu. 

CAP. XX.] Mountain Trees 255 

" A man who has Tao cannot be miserable. / 
Ragged clothes and old boots make poverty, not 
misery. Mine is what is called being out of har- 
mony with one's age. 

" Has your Highness never seen a climbing ape ? 
Give it some large tree, and it will twist and twirl 
among the branches as though monarch of all it 
surveys. Yi and Feng Meng 

An ancient archer and his apprentice. 

can never catch a glimpse of it. 

" But put it in a bramble bush, and it will move 
cautiously with sidelong glances, trembling all over 
with fear. Not that its muscles relax in the face of 
difficulty, but because it is at a disadvantage as 
regards position, and is unable to make use of its 
skill. And how should any one, living under 
foolish sovereigns and wicked ministers, help being 
miserable, even though he might wish not to be so ? 

" It was under such circumstances that Pi Kan 
was disembowelled." 

See ch. iv. The above episode is too much even 
for Chinese critics, and has been condemned 
accordingly. 

When Confucius was hemmed in between Ch'^n 
and Ts'ai and had gone seven days without food, 
then, holding in his left hand a piece of dry wood 
and in his right hand a dry stick, he sang a ballad 
of Piao Shih. 

An ancient ruler. 

256 CJmang Tzii 

He had an instrument, but the gamut was wanting-. 
There was sound, but no tune. The sound of the 
wood accompanied by the voice of the man yielded 
a harsh result, but it was in keeping with the 
feelings of his audience. 

Yen Hui, who was standing by in a respectful 
attitude, thereupon began to turn his eyes about 
him ; and Confucius, fearing lest he should be 
driven by exaltation into bragging, or by a desire 
for safety into sorrow, 

As a result of hearing the song. 

spoke to him as follows : — 

" Hui ! it is easy to escape injury from God ; it 
is difficult to avoid the benefits of man. There is 
no beginning and there is no end. Man and God 
are one. Who then was singing just now ?" 

" Pray, Sir, what do you mean," asked Yen Hui, 
" by saying that it is easy to escape injury from 
God ? " 

" Hunger, thirst, cold, and heat," replied Con- 
fucius, " are but as fetters in the path of life. They 
belong to the natural laws which govern the uni- 
verse ; and in obedience thereto I pass on my 
allotted course. The subject dares not disregard 
the mandates of his prince. And if this is man's 
duty to man, how much more shall it be his duty to 
God?" 

" What is the meaning of difficult to avoid the 
benefits of man ? " asked Yen Hui. 

" If one begins," replied Confucius, " byadapta- 

CAP, XX.] Mountain Trees 257 

tion to surroundings, rank and power follow without 
cease. Such advantages are external ; they are not 
derived from oneself. And my life is more or less 
dependent upon the external. The superior man 
does not steal these ; nor does the good man pilfer 
them. What then do I but take them as they 
come ? 

" Therefore it has been said that no bird is so 
wise as the swallow. If it sees a place unfit to 
dwell in, it will not bestow a glance thereon ; and 
even though it should drop food there, it will leave 
the food and fly away. Now swallows fear man. 
Yet they dwell among men. Because there they find 
their natural abode." 

In the same way, man should adapt himself to the 
conditions which surround him. 

" And what is the meaning," enquired Yen Hui, 
" of no beginning and no end ? " 

** The work goes on," replied Confucius, " and 
no man knoweth the cause. How then shall he 
know the end, or the beginning ? There is nothing 
left to us but to wait." 

" And that man and God are One," said Yen 
Hui. " What does that mean ? " ^ 

" That man is," replied Confucius, " is from God. 
That God is, is also from God. That man is not 
God, is his nature. 

Sc. that which makes him man. 

The Sage quietly waits for death as the end. * 
Which shall unite him once aorain with God. 

o 

258 Chuang Tzu 

When Chuang Tzu was wandering in the park 
at Tiao-ling, he saw a strange bird which came from 
the south. Its wings were seven feet across. Its 
eyes were an inch in circumference. And it flew 
close past Chuang Tzu's head to alight in a chestnut 
grove. 

"What manner of bird is this?" cried Chuang 
Tzu. " With strong wings it does not fly away. 
With large eyes it does not see." 

Or it would not have flown so near. 

So he picked up his skirts and strode towards it 
with his cross-bow, anxious to get a shot. Just 
then he saw a cicada enjoying itself in the shade, 
forgetful of all else. And he saw a mantis spring 
and seize it, forgetting in the act its own body, 
which the strange bird immediately pounced upon 
and made its prey. And this it was which had 
caused the bird, to forget its own nature. 

And approach so close to man. 

This episode has been widely popularised in Chinese 
every-day life. Its details have been expressed 
pictorialjy in a roughly-executed woodcut, with the 
addition of a tiger about to spring upon the man, 
and a well into which both will eventually tumble. 
A legend at the side reads, — "All is Destiny !" 

" Alas ! " cried Chuang Tzu with a sigh, " how 
creatures injure one another. Loss follows the 
pursuit of gain." 

CAP. XX.] Mountain Trees 259 

Those who would prey on others are preyed upon 
in turn themselves. 

So he laid aside his bow and went home, driven 
away by the park-keeper who wanted to know what 
business he had there. 

For three months after this, Chuang Tzu did not 
leave the house ; and at length Lin Chii 

A disciple. 

asked him, saying, '' Master, how is it that you 
have not been out for so long ? " 

''While keeping my physical frame," replied 
Chuang Tzu, " I lost sight of my real self. Gazing 
at muddy water, I lost sight of the clear abyss. 
Besides, I have learnt from the Master as follows : 
— " When you go into the world, follow its 
customs." 

This saying is attributed, in uncanonical works, to 
Confucius. But if any one was "Master" to Chuang 
Tzu, it would of course be Lao Tzu. 

Now when I strolled into the park at Tiao-ling, I 
forgot my real self. That strange bird which flew 
close past me to the chestnut grove, forgot its 
nature. The keeper of the chestnut grove took 
me for a thief. Consequently I have not been 
out." 

When Yang Tzii 

Yang Chu. See ch. viii. 

s 2 

26o Chuang Tzu 

went to the Sung State, he passed a night at an 
inn. 

The innkeeper had two concubines, one beautiful, 
the other ugly. The latter he loved ; the former, 
he hated. 

Yang Tzii asked how this was ; whereupon one 
of the inn servants said, " The beautiful one is so 
conscious of her beauty that one does not think 
her beautiful. The ugly one is so conscious of 
her ugliness that one does not think her ugly." 

" Note this, my disciples ! " cried Yang Tzu. 
" Be virtuous, but without being consciously so ; 
and wherever you go, you will be beloved." 

26 1 

CHAPTER XXL 

T'lEN Tzu Fang. 

Argument: — Tao cannot be imparted in words — It is not at man's 
disposal — It does not consist in formal morality — It is an inalienable 
element of existence — Without it the soul dies — With it man is happy 
and his immortality secure — Illustrations. 

[This chapter is supplementary to chapter vi.] 

T 

'I EN Tzu Fang was in attendance upon 
Prince Wen of Wei. 

Whose tutor he was. 

He kept on praising Ch'i Kung, until at length 
Prince Wen said, *' Is Ch'i Kung your tutor ? " 

" No," replied Tzu Fang ; " he is merely a 
neighbour. He discourses admirably upon Tao. 
That is why I praise him." 

' Have you then no tutor?" enquired the Prince. 

" I have," replied Tzu Fang. 

" And who may he be ? " said Prince Wen. 

" Tung Kuo Shun Tzu," answered Tzu Fang. 

" Then how is it you do not praise him ?" asked 
the Prince. 

" He is perfect," replied Tzu Fang. " In ap- 
pearance, a man ; in reality, God. Unconditioned 
himself, he falls in with the conditioned, to his 

262 Chtiang Tzit 

own greater glory. Pure himself, he can still 
tolerate others. If men are without Tao, by a 
mere look he calls them to a sense of error, and 
causes their intentions to melt away. How could 
I praise him ?" 

Thereupon Tzu Fang took his leave, and the 
Prince remained for the rest of the day absorbed 
in silence. At length he called an officer in waiting 
and said, " How far beyond us is the man of perfect 
virtue ! Hitherto I have regarded the discussion 
, y of holiness and wisdom, and the practice of charity 
and duty to one's neighbour, as the utmost point 
attainable. But now that I have heard of Tzu 
Fang's tutor, my body is relaxed and desires not 
movement, my mouth is closed and desires not 
speech. All I have learnt, verily it is mere 
undergrowth. And the kingdom of Wei is my 
bane. 

Tag is not to be reached by the superficial 
worker, or by such as value the distinctions of this 
world. 

When Wen Po Hsiieh Tzu 

" A sage from the south," as the commentators say, 
anticipating the " Middle Kingdom " below. 

w^as on his way to Ch'i, he broke his journey in Lu. 
A certain man of Lu begged for an interview, but 
Wen Po Hsiieh Tzu said, *' No. I have heard that 
the gentlemen of the Middle Kingdom are experts 
in ceremonies and obligations, but wanting in 

CAP. XXI.] T'ie7i Tzii Fang 263 

knowledge of the human heart. I do not wish to 
see him." 

So he went on to Ch'i ; but once more at Lu, 
on his way home, the same man again begged to 
have an interview. 

"When I was last here," cried Wen Po Hsueh 
Tzu, " he asked to see me, and now again he asks 
to see me. Surely he must have something to 
communicate." 

Whereupon he went and received the stranger, 
and on returning gave vent to sighs. Next day 
he received him again, and again after the inter- 
view gave vent to sighs. Then his servant asked 
him, saying, ** How is it that whenever you receive 
this stranger, you always sigh afterwards ?" 

" I have already told you," replied Wen Po Hsiieh 
Tzu, " that the people of the Middle Kingdom 
are experts in ceremonies and obligations but 
w^anting in knowledge of the human heart. The 
man who visited me came in and went out as per 
compasses and square. His demeanour was now 
that of the dragon, now that of the tiger. He 
criticised me as though he had been my son. He 
admonished me as though he had been my father. 
Therefore I gave vent to sighs. 

When Confucius saw Wen Po Hsiieh Tzu, the 
former did not utter a word. Whereupon Tzu Lu 
said, " Master, you have long wished to see Wen 
Po Hsueh Tzu. How is it that when you do see 
him you do not speak ? " 

" With such men as these," replied Confucius, 

264 Chiiang Tzic 

v^ you have only to look, and Tao abides. There is 
no room for speech." 

See ch. v, ad init., on " the Doctrine which is not 
expressed in words." 

Yen Yiian 

See p. 179. 

asked Confucius, saying, " Master, when you go at 
a walk, I go at a walk. When you trot, I trot. 
When you gallop, I gallop. But when you dash 
beyond the bounds of mortality, I can only stand 
staring behind. How is this ? " 

" Explain yourself," said Confucius. 

" I mean," continued Yen Yiian, " that as you 
speak, I speak. As you argue, I argue. As you 
preach Tao, so I preach Tao. And by ' when you 
dash beyond the bounds of mortality I can only 
stand staring behind,' I mean that without speaking 
you make people believe you, without striving you 
make people love you, without factitious attrac- 
tions you gather people around you. I cannot 
understand how this is so." 

" What is there to prevent you from finding 
out ? " replied Confucius. " There is no sorrow to 
be compared with the death of the mind. The 
death of the body is of but secondary importance. 

Cf. ch. ii, " The body decomposes, and the mind 
goes with it. This is our real cause for sorrow." 

" The sun rises in the east and sets in the west. 

CAP. XXI.] T'ien Tzii Fang 265 

There is no place which he does not illuminate ; 
and those who have eyes and feet depend upon him 
to use them with success. When he comes forth, 
that is existence ; when he disappears, that is non- 
existence. 

" And every human being has that upon which 
he depends for death or for life. 

Mind, which rises with life and sets at death. 

But if I, receiving this mind-informed body, pass 
without due modification to the end, 

So that the mind perishes with the body. 

day and night subject to ceaseless wear and tear 
like a mere thing, unknowing what the end will be, 
and in spite of this mind-informed body 

Which should teach a higher lesson. 

conscious only that fate cannot save me from the 
inevitable grave-yard, — then I am consuming life 
until at death it is as though you and I had but 
once linked arms to be finally parted for ever ! Is 
not that indeed a cause for sorrow ? 

The motive of this involved paragraph is identical 
with that of Mr. Mallock's famous essay Is Life 
Worth Living f 

'' Now you fix your attention upon something in 
me which, while you look, has already passed away. 
Yet you seek for it as though it must be still there, 
— like one who seeks for a horse in a market-place. 

In the interim the animal has been sold. 

266 Chuang Tzil 

What I admire in you is transitory. Nevertheless, 
why should you grieve? Although my old self 
is constantly passing away, there remains that 
which does not pass away." 

The mind, which feeds and thrives upon change. 

Confucius went to see Lao Tzu. The latter had 
just washed his head, and his hair was hanging 
down his back to dry. He looked like a lifeless 
body ; so Confucius waited awhile, but at length 
approached and said, " Do my eyes deceive me, or 
is this really so ? Your frame. Sir, seems like dry 
wood, as if it had been left without that which 
informs it with the life of man." 

Chuang Tzu ( .-*) is here repeating himself 

" I was wandering," replied Lao Tzu, " in the 
unborn." 

Reflecting upon the state of man before his birth 
into the world. 

" What does that mean ? " asked Confucius. 

" My mind is trammelled," replied Lao Tzu, 
" and I cannot know. My mouth is closed and I 
cannot speak. But I will try to tell you what is 
probably the truth. 

" The perfect Negative principle is majestically 
passive. The perfect Positive principle is power- 
fully active. Passivity emanates from heaven 
above ; activity proceeds from earth beneath. The 
interaction of the two results in that harmony by 

CAP. XXI.] THen Tzii Fang 267 

which all things are produced. There may be a 
First Cause, but we never see his form. His report 
fills space. There is darkness and light. Days 
come and months go. Work is being constantly 
performed, yet we never w^itness the performance. 
Life must bring us from somewhere, and death 
must carry us back. Beginning and end follow 
ceaselessly one upon the other, and we cannot say 
when the series will be exhausted. If this is not 
the work of a First Cause, what is it ? " 

" Kindly explain," said Confucius, *' what is to 
jbe got by wandering as you said." 

" The result," answered Lao Tzu, " is perfect 
goodness and perfect happiness. And he who has 
these is a perfect man." 

" And by what means," enquired Confucius, 
" can this be attained ? " 

"Animals," said Lao Tzii, ''that eat grass do 

ynot mind a change of pasture. Creatures that live 

in water do not mind a change of pond. A slight 

:hange may be effected so long as the essential is 

untouched. 

*' Joy, anger, sorrow, happiness, find no place 

!n that man's breast ; for to him all creation is 

)ne. And all things being thus united in One, 

is body and limbs are but as dust of the earth, 

^nd life and death, beginning and end, are but as 

hight and day, and cannot destroy his peace. How 

jinuch less such trifles as gain or loss, misfortune 

or good fortune ? 

" He rejects rank as so much mud. For he 

268 Chttang Tzii 

knows that if a man is of honourable rank, the 
honour is in himself, and cannot be lost by change 
of condition, nor exhausted by countless modifica- 
tions of existence. Who then can grieve his heart ? 
Those who practise Tao understand the secret of 
this." 

" Master," said Confucius, " your virtue equals 
that of Heaven and Earth ; yet you still employ 
perfect precepts in the cultivation of your heart. 
Who among the sages of old could have uttered 
such words ? " 

"Not so," answered Lao Tzu. "The fluidity 
of water is not the result of any effort on the part 
of the water, but is its natural property. And the 
virtue of the perfect man is such that even without 
cultivation there is nothing which can withdraw 
from his sway. Heaven is naturally high, the earth 
is naturally solid, the sun and moon are naturally 
bright. Do they cultivate these attributes ? " 

Confucius went forth and said to Yen Hui, 
" In point of Tao, I am but as an animalcule in 
vinegar. Had not the Master opened my eyes, I 
should not have perceived the vastness of the 
universe." 

He who would concentrate himself upon life after 
death must first familiarise himself with life before 
birth. 

When Chuang Tzu was at an interview with 
Duke Ai of Lu, 

Who had then been dead 1 20 years. 

CAP. XXI.] T'ien Tzu Fang 269 

the latter said, " We have many scholars, Sir, in 
Lu, but few of your school." 

" In Lu," replied Chuang Tzu, " there are but 
few scholars." 

" Look at the number who wear scholars' robes," 
said the Duke. " How can you say they are few?" 

" Scholars who wear round hats," answered 
Chuang Tzu, " know the seasons of Heaven. 
Scholars who wear square shoes know the shape 
of Earth. 

According to ancient Chinese cosmogony, " Heaven 
is round : Earth is square." 

And scholars who loosely gird themselves are 
ready to decide whatever questions may arise. But 
scholars who have Tao do not necessarily wear 
robes ; neither does the wearing of robes necessarily 
mean that a scholar has Tao. If your Highness 
does not think so, why not issue an order through 
the Middle Kingdom, making death the punish- 
ment for all who wear the robes without having 
the Tag ? " 

Thereupon Duke Ai circulated this mandate for 
five days, the result being that not a single man in 
Lu dared to don scholars' robes, — with the excep- 
tion of one old man who, thus arrayed, took his 
stand at the Duke's gate. 

My Ming editor (a priest) says this was Confucius 
himself ! 

The Duke summoned him to the presence, and 
asked him many questions on politics, trying to 
entangle him, but in vain. Then Chuang Tzu said, 

270 Chtimig Tzii 

" If there is only one scholar in Lu, surely that is 
not many." 

It is unnecessary, says Lin Hsi Chung, to descend 
to anachronisms in reference to the eenuineness of 
this episode. 

Rank and power had no charms for Po Li Ch'i. 
7th century B.C. This story is alluded to by 
Mencius. 

So he took to feeding cattle. His cattle were 
always fat, which caused Duke Mu of Ch'in to 
ignore his low condition and entrust him with the 
administration. 

Shun cared nothing for life or death. He was 
therefore able to influence men's hearts. 

His parents even went so far as to try to kill him. 

Prince Yiian of Sung desiring to draw a map, 
the officials of that department presented them- 
selves, and after making obeisance stood waiting 
for the order, more than half of them already lick- 
ing their brushes and mixing their ink. 

One of them arrived late. He sauntered in 
without hurrying himself; and when he had made 
obeisance, did not wait but went off" home. 

The Prince sent a man to see what he did. He 
took off his clothes and squatted down bare-backed. 

" He will do," cried the Prince. " He is a true 
artist." ^ 

The commentators do not get much out of this 
episode. Lin Hsi Chung damns it as a forgery. 

CAP. XXI.] Tien Tzu Fang 271 

When Wen Wang was on a tour of inspection 
in Tsang, he saw an old man fishing. But his 
fishing was not real fishing, for he did not fish to 
catch fish, but to amuse himself. 

Wherefore, from the standpoint of Tao, he was 
the more likely to succeed. 

So Wen Wang wished to employ him in the 
administration of government, but feared lest his 
own ministers, uncles, and brothers, might object. 
On the other hand, if he let the old man go, he 
could not bear to think of the people being deprived 
of such an influence. 

Accordingly, that very morning he informed his 
ministers, saying, " I once dreamt that a Sage of 
a black colour and with a large beard, riding upon 
a parti-coloured horse with red stockings on one 
side, appeared and instructed me to place the ad- 
ministration in the hands of the old gentleman of 
Tsang, promising that the people would benefit 
greatly thereby." 

The ministers at once said, " It is a command 
from your Highness' father." 

" I think so," answered Wen Wang. " But let 
us try by divination." 

" It is a command from your Highness' late 
father," said the ministers, " and may not be dis- 
obeyed. What need for divination ? " 

So the old man of Tsang was received and 
entrusted with the administration. He altered 
none of the existing statutes. He issued no unjust 
regulations. And when, after three years, Wen 

272 Chuang Tzu 

Wang made another inspection, he found all 
dangerous organisations broken up, the officials 
doing their duty as a matter of course, while the 
use of measures of grain was unknown within the 
four boundaries of the State. There was thus 
unanimity in the public voice, singleness of official 
purpose, and identity of interests to all. 

So W^n Wang appointed the old man Grand 

Tutor ; and then, standing with his face to the north, 

An attitude of respect. Facing the south was the 

conventional position of a ruler. 

asked him, saying, " Can such government be 

extended over the empire ? " 

The old man of Tsang was silent and made no 
reply. He then abruptly took leave, and by the 
evening of that same day had disappeared, never 
to be heard of again. 

Yen Ylian said to Confucius, "If Wen Wang 
was unable to do this of himself, how was he able 
to do it by a dream ? " 

" Silence ! " cried Confucius : " It is not for you 
to criticise Wen Wang who succeeded in fulfilling 
his mission. The dream was merely to satisfy the 
vulgar mind." 

The whole episode is of course spurious. 

Lieh Yii K'ou 

Or Lieh Tzii. See ch. i. 
instructed Po Hun Wu Jen 

See ch. v. 
in archery. Drawing the bow to its full, he placed 

CAP. XXI.] T'ien Tzil Fang 273 

a cup of water on his elbow and began to let fly. 
Hardly was one arrow out of sight ere another was 
on the string, the archer standing all the time like 
a statue. 

''But this is shooting under ordinary conditions," 
cried Po Hun Wu Jen ; " it is not shooting under 
extraordinary conditions. Now I will ascend a 
high mountain with you, and stand on the edge of 
a precipice a thousand feet in height, and see how 
you can shoot then." 

Thereupon Wu Jen went with Lieh Tzu up a 
high mountain, and stood on the edge of a preci- 
pice a thousand feet in height, approaching it back- 
wards until one-fifth of his feet overhung the 
chasm, when he beckoned to Lieh Tzu to come on. 
But the latter had fallen prostrate on the ground, 
with the sweat pouring down to his heels. 

" The perfect man," said Wu Jen, " soars up to 
the blue sky, or dives down to the yellow springs, 
The infernal regions. 

or flies to some extreme point of the compass, 
without change of countenance. But you are 
terrified, and your eyes are dazed. Your internal 
economy is defective." 
You have not Tag. 

Chien Wu 
See ch. i. 
said to Sun Shu Ao, 

A famous minister of the Ch'u State. 

T 

274 Chttmig Tzii 

" Sir, you have been three times called to office 
without showing any elation, and you have been 
three times dismissed without displaying any 
chagrin. At first, I doubted you ; but now I notice 
that your breathing is perfectly regular. How do 
you manage thus to control your emotions ? " 

" I am no better than other people," replied 
Sun Shu Ao. " I regard office when it comes as 
something which may not be declined ; when it 
goes, as something which cannot be kept. To 
me both the getting and losing are outside my 
own self; and therefore I feel no chagrin. How 
am I better than other people ? 

" Besides, I am not conscious of office being 
either in the hands of others or in my own. If 
it is in the hands of others, my own personality 
disappears ; if in mine, theirs. And amidst the 
cares of deliberation and investigation, what 
leisure has one for troubling about rank ? " 

When Confucius heard this, he said, " The per- 
fect Sages of old ! — cunning men could not defeat 
them ; beautiful women could not seduce them ; 
robbers could not steal from them ; 

They were unmoved in the face of danger. 

Fu Hsi and the Yellow Emperor could not make 
friends of them. Life and death are great ; yet 
these gave them no pang. 

That would cause them to sacrifice truth. 

How much less then rank and power ! 

"The souls of such men pierced through huge 

I 

CAP. XXI.] THen Tzii Fang ori^ 

mountains as though they had been nothing; 
descended into the abyss without getting wet ; 
occupied lowly stations without chagrin. They 
filled the whole universe ; and the more they gave 
to others, the more they had themselves." 

These last words occur in chapter Ixxxi. of the 
Tao-Te-Ching. It is, to say the least, strange to 
find them here in the mouth of Confucius without 
a hint as to their alleged Taoistic source. 
The explanation is that when this episode was 
penned, that patchwork treatise which passes under 
the name of the Tao-Ti-Ching \i2iA not been pieced 
together. 

The Prince of Ch'u was sitting with the Prince 
of Fan. By and by, one of the officials of Ch'u 
said, " There were three indications of the destruc- 
tion of the Fan State." 

"The destruction of the Fan State," cried the 
Prince of Fan, " did not suffice to injure my 
existence. 

Which was already, by virtue of Tao, beyond the 

reach of mundane influences. 
And while the destruction of the Fan State did 
not suffice to injure my existence, the preservation 
of the Ch'u State will not be enough to preserve 
yours. 

You being without Tag. 
From this point of view it will be seen that while 
we Fans have not begun to be destroyed, you 
Ch'us have not begun to exist." 

A good specimen of the Fallacia A7npJiibolice. 

T 2 

276 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Knowledge travels North. 

Argument : — Inaction and Tao — The universe our model — Spontaneity 
our watchword — Omnipresence and indivisibility of Tao — External 
activity, internal passivity — Man's knowledge finite — Illustrations. 

[This chapter is supplementary to chapter vi.] 

WHEN Knowledge travelled north, across the 
Black Water, and over the Dark-Steep 
Mountain, he met Do-nothing Say-nothing and 
asked of him as follows : — 

" Kindly tell me by what thoughts, by what 
cogitations, may Tao be known ? By resting in 
what, by according in what, may Tao be ap- 
proached ? By following what, by pursuing what, 
may Tao be attained ?" 

To these three questions. Do-nothing Say- 
nothing returned no answer. Not that he would 
not answer, but that he could not. So when 
Knowledge got no reply, he turned round and went 
off to the south of the White Water and up the | 
Ku-chiieh Mountain, where he saw All-in-extremes, 
and to him he put the same questions. 

" Ha!" cried All-in-extremes, " I know. I will 
tell you " .. 1 

But just as he was about to speak he forgot , 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 277 

what he wanted to say. So when Knowledge got 
no reply, he went back to the palace and asked 
the Yellow Emperor. The latter said, " By no 
thoughts, by no cogitations, Tag may be known. 
By resting in nothing, by according in nothing, 
Tag may be approached. By following nothing, 
by pursuing nothing, Tag may be attained." 

Then Knowledge said to the Yellow Emperor, 
" Now you and I know this, but those two know 
it not. Who is right?" 

" Of those two," replied the Yellow Emperor, 
" Do-nothing Say-nothing is genuinely right, and 
All-in-extremes is near. You and I are wholly 
wrong. Those who understand it do not speak 
about it, those who speak about it do not under- 
stand it. 

These words occur in the Tao-Te-Chingy ch. vi. 
See also ante, p. 1 70. 

Therefore the Sage teaches a doctrine which does 
not find expression in words. 

See ante, ch. v. Also The Remains of Lao Tzit, p. 7. 

Tag cannot be made to come. Virtue cannot be 
reached. 

Virtue (Tl:), here the exemplification of Tag. 

Charity can be evoked. Duty to one's neighbour can 
be wrongly directed. Ceremonies are mere shams. 
" Therefore it has been said, ' If Tag perishes, 
then T£ will perish. IfT£: perishes, then charity 
will perish. If charity perishes, then duty to one's 
neighbour will perish. If duty to one's neighbour 

278 Chuang Tzu 

perishes, then ceremonies will perish. Ceremonies 
are but a showy ornament of Tag, while oft-times 
the source of trouble.' 

The above is from the Tao-Te-Ching, ch. xxxviii. 

It is interesting to note how the Yellow Emperor 

annihilates time by quoting a work not written until 

many centuries after his date. 

"Therefore it has been said, ' Those who prac- 
tise Tao suffer daily loss. If that loss proceeds 
until inaction ensues, then by that very inaction 
there is nothing which cannot be done.' 
Also in the Tao-Te-Chiiig, ch. xlviii. 

" Now, we are already beings. And if we desire 
to revert to our original condition, how difficult 
that is ! 'Tis a change to which only the greatest 
among us are equal. 

" Life follows upon death. Death is the begin- 
ning of life. Who knows when the end is reached? 
The life of man results from convergence of the 
vital fluid. Its convergence is life ; its dispersion, 
death. If then life and death are but consecutive 
states, what need have I to complain ? 

" Therefore all things are One. What we love 
is animation. What we hate is corruption. But 
corruption in its turn becomes animation, and 
animation once more becomes corruption. 

" Therefore it has been said. The world is per- 
meated by a single vital fluid, and Sages accordingly 
venerate One." 

" Tota formatio procedens ex nomine uno." Liber 
jfezirah,-"^. Bi. (Parisiis : G. Postello, 1552.) 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 279 

Then Knowledge said to the Yellow Emperor, 
" I asked Do-nothing Say-nothing, but he did not 
answer me. Not that he would not ; he could 
not. So I asked All-in-extremes. He was just 
going to tell me, but he did not tell me. Not 
that he would not ; but just as he was going to 
do so, he forgot what he wanted to say. Now I 
ask you, and you tell me. How then are you 
wholly wrong ? " 

" Of those two," replied the Yellow Emperor, 
" the former was genuinely right, inasmuch as he 
did not know. The latter was near, inasmuch as 
ht forgot. You and I are wholly wrong, inasmuch 
as we know.'' 

Tao is attained, not by knowledge, but by absence 
of knowledge. 

When All-in-extremes heard of this, he con- 
sidered that the Yellow Emperor had spoken 
well. 

" Spoken knowingly " gives the only chance of 
bringing out what is here a forced play upon words. 

The universe is very beautiful, yet it says 
nothing. The four seasons abide by a fixed 
law, yet they are not heard. All creation is 
based upon absolute principles, yet nothing 
speaks. 

And the true Sage, taking his stand upon the 
beauty of the universe, pierces the principles of 
created things. Hence the saying that the per- 

28o Chuang Tzu 

feet man does nothing, the true Sage performs 
nothing, beyond gazing at the universe. 

In the hope of attaining, by contemplation, a like 
spontaneity. 

For man's intellect, however keen, face to face 
with the countless evolutions of things, their death 
and birth, their squareness and roundness, — can 
never reach the root. There creation is, and there 
it has ever been. 

But the secret of life is withheld. 

The six cardinal points, reaching into infinity, 
are ever included in Tag. An autumn spikelet, 
in all its minuteness, must carry Tao within 
itself. There is nothing on earth which does not 
rise and fall, but it never perishes altogether. 

Nihilo nil posse reverti. 

The Yin and the Yang, and the four seasons, keep 
to their proper order. Apparently destroyed, yet 
really existing ; the material gone, the immaterial 
left ; — such is the law of creation, which passeth 
all understanding. This is called the root, whence 
a glimpse may be obtained of God. 

From this point, upon which the finger of man can 
never be laid, his mind may perhaps faintly discern 
the transcendent workings of that Power by which 
all creation is swayed; — "uncover those secret 
recesses where Nature is sitting at the fires in the 
depths of her laboratory." Swedenborg. 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 281 

Yeh Ch'iieh enquired of P'i I about Tag. 

For the former see ch. ii. Of the latter there is no 
record. 

The latter said, " Keep your body under proper 
control, your gaze concentrated upon One, — and the 
peace of God will descend upon you. Keep back 
your knowledge, and concentrate your thoughts 
upon One, — and the holy spirit shall abide within 
you. Virtue shall beautify you, Tao shall establish 
you, aimless as a new-born calf which recks not how 
it came into the world." 

While P'i I was still speaking, Yeh Ch'iieh had 
gone off to sleep ; at which the former rejoiced 
greatly, and departed singing, 

" Body like dry bone, 
Mind like dead ashes ; 
This is true knowledge. 
Not to strive after knowing the whence. 
In darkness, in obscurity. 
The mindless cannot plan ; — 
What manner of man is that ? " 

His mortal trammels had fallen off by his absorp- 
tion into Tag. 

Shun asked Ch'^ng, 
His tutor. 

saying, "Can one get Tag so as to have it for 
one's own?" 

" Your very body," replied Ch'eng, " is not your 
own. How should Tag be?" 

282 Chuang Tzu 

" If my body," said Shun, " is not my own, pray 
whose is it ?" 

" It is the delegated image of God," replied 
Ch eng. " Your life is not your own. It is the 
delegated harmony of God. 

The affinity of the Ym and Yang causes them, when 
in due proportions, to combine and produce life. 

Your individuality is not your own. It is the 
delegated adaptability of God. 

Providing the endless variety of shapes with an 
endless variety of complexion. 

Your posterity is not your own. It is the dele- 
gated exuviae of God. 

As God sends us into the world, so He wishes us 
to " increase and multiply." 

You move, but know not how. You are at rest, 
but know not why. You taste, but know not the 
cause. These are the operation of God's laws. 
How then should you get Tag so as to have 
it for your own ?" 

Cf. " Know ye not that your body is the temple of 
the Holy Ghost," etc. I, Corinthians vi. 19. 

Confucius said to Lao Tzu, " To-day you are 
at leisure. Pray tell me about perfect Tao." 

" Purge your heart by fasting and discipline," 
answered Lao Tzu. " Wash your soul as white as 
snow. Discard your knowledge. Tag is abstruse 
and difficult of discussion. I will try, however, to 
speak to you of its outline. 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 283 

" Light is bom of darkness. Classification is 
born of formlessness. The soul is born of Tao. 
The body is born of the vital essence. 
Existence springs from non-existence. 

"Thus all things produce after their kind. 
Creatures with nine channels of communication 
are born from the womb. Creatures with eight 
are born from the ^^g. 

Nature is always self-similar. 

Of their coming there is no trace. In their de-- 
parture there is no goal. No entrance gate, no 
dwelling house, they pass this way and that, as 
though at the meeting of cross-roads. 

''Those who enter herein become strong of limb, 
subtle of thought, and clear of sight and hearing. 
They suffer no mental fatigue, nor meet with phy- 
sical resistance. 

'' Heaven cannot but be high. Earth cannot 
but be broad. The sun and moon cannot but re- 
volve. All creation cannot but flourish. To do 
so is their Tao. 

" But it is not from extensive study that this 
may be known, nor by dialectic skill that this may 
be made clear. The true Sage will have none of 
these. It is in addition without gain, in diminution 
without loss, that the true Sage finds salvation. 

" Unfathomable as the sea, wondrously ending 
only to begin again, informing all creation with- 
out being exhausted, the Tao of the perfect man 
is spontaneous in its operation. That all creation 

284 Clmang Tzii 

can be infornicd by it without exhaustion, is its 
Tau. 

The 'X i\() of '\\\(). 

"In tlie Middle Kini^doni tliere are men who 
rccot;nise neither positive nor nej^^'itive. They 
al)ide l)etween heaven and earth. They act their 
part as mortals, and then return to the Cause. 

" From that stand] )oint, 

Of the Cause, sc. God, which is commensurate with 
infinity. 

life is but a concentration of the vital fluid, whose 
longest and shortest terms of existence vary by an 
inai)preeiable space, — hardly enoui;"h for the classi- 
hcation of Yao and Chieh. 

As good and had. See ch. iv. 

" Tree-fruits and plant-fruits exhibit order in 
their varieties; and the relationshii)s of man, though 
more difficult to be dealt with, may still be reduced 
to order. 

These havi! hcenclassified as follows : — 

1. S(wereion and Suhject. 

2. Husband „ Wife. 

3. r\aher ,, Son. 

4. Elder Brother ,, Younger Brother. 

5. Friend ,, Friend. 

The true Sai^e who meets with these, docs not 
violate them. Neither does he continue to hold 
fast by them. 

lie adapts himself to the exigencies of his ciivlron- 

nicnl. 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge tyaveh Norfh 285 

Adai)tation by arrangement is Tft. Spontaneous . 
adaptation is Tao, by whieh sovereigns flourish 
and princes succeed. 

" Man passes through this subkuiary life as a 
white horse passes a crack. Here one moment, 
gone the next. Neither are there any not equally 
subject to the ingress and egress of mortality. 
One modification brings life; then another, and 
it is death. Living creatures cry out ; human 
beings sorrow. The bow-sheath is slipped off; 
the clothes-bag is dro[)ped ; and in the confusion 
the soul wings its llight, and the body follows, 
on the great journey home I 

" The reality of the formless, the unreality of 
that which has form, — this is known to all. 
Those who are on the road to attainment care 
not for these things, but the people at large 
discuss them. Attainment implies non-discus- 
sion : discussion implies non-attainment. Mani- 
fested, Tag has no objective value ; hence silence 
is better than argument. It cannot be translated 
into speech; better then say nothing at all. This 
is called the great attainment." 

Tung Kuo Tzii asked Chuang Tzii, saying, 
"What you call Tag, — where is it?" 

" There is nowhere," replied Chuang Tzu, " where 
it is not." 

" Tell me one place at any rate where it is," said 
Tung Kuo Tzii. 

" It is in the ant," replied Chuang TzCi. 

286 Chuang Tzu 

"Why go so low down?" asked Tung Kuo 
Tzu. 

" It is in a tare," said Chuang Tzu. 

"Still lower," objected Tung Kuo Tzu. 

" It is in a potsherd," said Chuang Tzu. 

" Worse still ! " cried Tung Kuo Tzu. 

" It is in ordure," said Chuang Tzu. And Tung 
Kuo Tzu made no reply. 

"Sir," continued Chuang Tzu, "your question 
does not touch the essential. When Huo, inspector 
of markets, asked the managing director about the 
fatness of pigs, the test was always made in parts 
least likely to be fat. Do not therefore insist in any 
particular direction ; for there is nothing which 
escapes. Such is perfect Tao ; and such also is ideal 
speech. IVJiole, entire, all, are three words which 
sound differently but mean the same. Their purport 
is One. 

" Try to reach with me the palace of Nowhere, 
and there, amidst the identity of all things, carry 
your discussions into the infinite. Try to practise 
with me inaction, wherein you may rest motionless, 
without care, and be happy. For thus my mind 
becomes an abstraction. It wanders not, and yet is 
not conscious of being at rest. It goes and comes 
and is not conscious of stoppages. Backwards and 
forwards without being conscious of any goal. Up 
and down the realms of Infinity, wherein even the 
greatest intellect would fail to find an end. 

" That which makes things the things they are, 
is not limited to such things. The limits of things 

CAP. xxn.j Knowledge travels North 287 

are their own limits in so far as they are things. 
The limits of the limitless, the limitlessness of the 
limited, — these are called fulness and emptiness, 
renovation and decay. Tao causes fulness and 
emptiness, but it is not either. It causes renovation 
and decay, but it is not either. It causes beginning 
and end, but it is not either. It causes accumulation 
and dispersion, but it is not either." 

O Ho Kan was studying with Shen Nung under 
Lao Lung Chi. 

No record of the first and last. Shen Nune was a 
legendary emperor who invented agriculture. See 
p. 196. 

Shen Nung used to remain shut up, with his 
head on the table, absorbed in day-dreams. On one 
occasion, O Ho Kan knocked at the door, and 
entering said, " Lao Lung is dead ! " 

Thereupon Shen Nung, leaning on his staff, 
arose ; and flinging down his staff with a bang, 
smiled and said, " O my Master, thou knewest me 
to be worthless and self-sufficient, and thou didst 
leave me and die. Now I, having no scope for my 
vain talk, I too will die." 

When Yen Kang Tiao 

"A man of Tag." Co7nm. 

heard this, he said, " Those who exemplify Tao are 
sought after by all the best men in the empire. 
Now if one who has not attained to more Tao than 
the ten-thousandth part of the tip of an autumn 

288 Chtiang Tzu 

spikelet, is still wise enough to withhold vain talk 
and die, — how much more those who exemplify Tao? 
To the eye it is formless, and to the ear it is noise- 
less. Those who discuss it, speak of it as ' the 
obscure.' But the mere fact of discussing Tao 
makes it not Tao." 

At this the Empyrean asked Without-end, saying, 
" Do you know Tao ? " 

" I do not," replied Without-end; whereupon the 
Empyrean proceeded to ask Inaction. 

" I do know Tao," said Inaction. 

" Is there any method," asked the Empyrean, 
" by which you know Tao ? " 

" There is," replied Inaction. 

" What is it ? " asked the Empyrean. j 

"I know," answered Inaction, "that Tao may 
honour and dishonour, bind and loose. That is the 
method by which I know Tao." 

The Empyrean repeated these words to No-begin- 
ning, and asked him which was right, the ignorance 
of Without-end or the knowledge of Inaction. 

" Not to know," replied No-beginning, " is pro- 
found. To know is shallow. Not to know is 
internal. To know is external." 

Here the Empyrean broke in with a sigh, " Then 
ignorance is knowledge, and knowledge ignorance ! 
But pray whose knowledge is the knowledge of not 
knowing ?" 

" Tao," said No-beginning, " cannot be heard. 
Heard, it is not Tao. It cannot be seen. Seen, it 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 289 

is not Tao. It cannot be spoken. Spoken, it is 
not Tao. That which imparts form to forms is 
itself formless ; therefore Tag cannot have a 
name." 

Form precedes name. 

No-beginning continued, "He who replies to one 
asking about Tag, does not know Tag. Although 
one may hear about Tag, he does not really hear 
about Tag. There is no such thing as asking about 
Tag. There is no such thing as answering such 
questions. To ask a question which cannot be 
asked is vain. To answer a question which cannot 
be answered is unreal. And one who thus meets 
the vain with the unreal is one who has no physical 
perception of the universe, and no mental perception 
of the origin of existence, — unfit alike to roam 
over the K'un-lun peak or to soar into the Supreme 
Void." 

Light asked Nothing, saying, " Do you, Sir, 
exist, or do you not exist ? " 

But getting no answer to his question. Light set 
to work to watch for the appearance of Nothing. 

Hidden, vacuous, — all day long he looked but 
could not see it, listened but could not hear it, 
grasped at but could not seize it. 

See The Remains of Lao Tzu, p. 31. 

" Bravo! " cried Light. " Who can equal this ? I 
can get to be nothing. 

Darkness. 

u 

290 Chuang Tzii 

but I cannot get as far as the absence of nothing. 
Assuming that Nothing has an objective ex- 
istence, how can it reach this next stage ? " 

The man who forged swords for the Minister of 
War was eighty years of age. Yet he never made 
the slightest slip in his work. 

The Minister of War said to him, " Is it your 
skill, Sir, or have you any method ? " 

Any Tao ? — in its earlier sense of way of doing 
things. 

" It is concentration," replied the man. " When 
twenty years old, I took to forging swords. I cared 
for nothing else. If a thing was not a sword, I 
did not notice it. I availed myself of whatever 
energy I did not use in other directions in 
order to secure greater efficiency in the direction 
required. Still more of that which is never with- 
out use ; — 

Tao. 
So that there was nothing which did not lend its aid. 

Jen Ch'iu asked Confucius, saying, " Can wc 
know about the time before the universe existed ? " 

"We can," replied Confucius. " Time was of old 
precisely what it is now." 

At this rebuff, Jen Ch'iu withdrew. Next day 
he again visited Confucius and said, "Yesterday 
when I asked you that question and you answered 
me, I was quite clear about it. To-day I am con- 
fused. How is this ? " 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 291 

" Your clearness of yesterday," answered Con- 
fucius, " was because my answer appealed direct to 
your natural intelligence. Your confusion of to-day 
results from the intrusion of something other than 
the natural intelligence. 

You have passed from " simple apprehension " to 

"judgment." 
There is no past, no present, no beginning, no end. 

To-day will be the yesterday of to-morrow. 
To have posterity before one has posterity, — is that 
possible ? " 

Jen Ch'iu made no answer, and Confucius con- 
tinued, " That will do. Do not reply. If life did 
not give birth to death, and if death did not put an 
end to life, surely life and death would be no longer 
correlates, but would each exist independently. 
What there was before the universe, was Tao. Tag 
makes things what they are, but is not itself a 
thing. Nothing can produce Tao ; yet everything 
has Tag within it, and continues to produce it with- 
out end. 

In its offspring. 

And the endless love of the Sage for his fellow-man 
is based upon the same principle." 

Yen Yiian asked Confucius, saying, " Master, I 
have heard you declare that there may be no eager- 
ness to conform, no effort to adapt. If so, pray how 
are we to get along ? " 

Reach that condition which is only attained by 
adaptation to environment. 

u 2 

292 Chuang Tzu J 

" The men of old," replied Confucius, " practised 
physical, but not moral, modification. ' ^ 

They adapted themselves to the requirements of 
matter, while their hearts remained the same. 

The men of to-day practise moral, not physical 
modification. 

They allow their hearts to be influenced while 
resisting the exigencies of the external. 

Let your modification extend to the external only. 
Internally, be constant without modification. 

" How shall you modify, and how shall you not 
modify ? How reconcile the divergence ? — By not 
admitting division. 

I.e. ** by being constant without modification," says 
Lin Hsi Chung. 

" There was the garden of Hsi Wei, the park of 
the Yellow Emperor, the palace of Shun, the halls 
of T'ang and Wu. 

The allusion appears to be to schools of 
learning, like the Grove of Academus. See 
chs. vi, xii. 

These were perfect men ; but had they been taught 
by Confucianists and Mihists, they would have 
hammered one another to pieces over scholastic 
quibbles. How much more then the men of to-day ? 
"The perfect Sage, in his relations with the 
external world, injures nothing. Neither does any- 
thing injure him. And only he who is thus exempt 
can be trusted to conform and to adapt. 

CAP. XXII.] Knowledge travels North 293 

" Mountain forests and loamy fields swell my 
heart with joy. But ere the joy be passed, sorrow 
is upon me again. 

Familiarity destroys the charm, 

Joy and sorrow come and go, and over them I have 
no control. 

" Alas ! the life of man is but as a stoppage at 
an inn. He knows that which comes within the 
range of his experience. Otherwise, he knows not. 
He knows that he can do what he can do, and that 
he cannot do what he cannot do. But there is 
always that which he does not know and that which 
he cannot do ; and to struggle that it shall not 
be so, — is not this a cause for grief? 

" The best language is that which is not spoken, 
the best form of action is that which is without 
deeds. 

Then conformity and adaptation are not required. 

Spread out your knowledge and it will be found to 
be shallow." 

It will by no means cover the area of the knowable. 
" Read this chapter," says one critic, " and the 
Tripitaka and the Mahdydna will open out before 
you as beneath a sharp-edged blade." 

294 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Keng Sang Ch'u. 

Argument : — The operation of Tao is not seen — Spheres of action vary — 
Tag remains the same — Spontaneity essential — Tao can be divided 
but remains entire — It is infinite as Time and Space — It is uncon- 
ditioned— The external and the internal — Illustrations. 

AMONG the disciples of Lao Tzu was one 
named K^ng Sang Ch'u. He alone had 
attained to the Tao of his Master. He lived up 
north, on the Wei-lei Mountains. Of his attendants, 
he dismissed those who were systematically clever 
or conventionally charitable. The useless remained 
with him ; the incompetent served him. And in 
three years the district of Wei-lei was greatly 
benefited. 

One of the inhabitants said in conversation, 
" When Mr. Keng Sang first came among us, we 
did not know what to make of him. Now, we could 
not say enough about him in a day, and even a 
year would leave something unsaid. Surely he must 
be a true Sage. Why not pray to him as to the 
spirits, and honour him as a tutelary god of the 
land ? " 

On hearing of this, Keng Sang Ch'u turned his 
face to the south 

Towards the abode of Lao Tzii. 

CAP. XXIII.] Kdng Sang CJiu ■ 295 

in shame, at which his disciples were astonished. 
But Keng Sang said, " What cause have you for 
astonishment? The influence of spring quickens the 
life of plants, and autumn brings them to maturity. 
In the absence of any agent, how is this so ? It is 
the operation of Tao. 

" I have heard that the perfect man may be pent 
up like a corpse in a tomb, yet the people will be- 
come unartificial and without care. 

So powerful will be his influence. 

But now these poor people of Wei-lei wish to exalt 
me among their wise and good. Surely then I am 
but a shallow vessel ; and therefore I was shamed 
for the doctrine of Lao Tzu." 

The disciples said, " Not so. In a sixteen-foot 
ditch a big fish has not room to turn round ; but 
'tis the very place for an eel. On a six or seven-foot 
hillock a large beast finds no shelter, while the un- 
canny fox gladly makes its lair therein. Besides, 
ever since the days of Yao and Shun it has always 
been customary to honour the virtuous, advance 
the able, give precedence to the good and useful. 
Why not then among the people ol Wei-lei ? Let 
them do it, Sir." 

"Come here, my children," said Keng Sang 
Ch'u. " A beast big enough to swallow a cart, if it 
wanders alone from the hills, will not escape the 
sorrow of the snare. A fish big enough to gulp 
down a boat, if stranded on the dry shore will become 
a prey to ants. Therefore it is that birds and beasts 

296 Chitang Tzii 

love height, and fishes and turtles love depth. And 
the man who cares for himself hides his body. He 
loves the occult. 

There is a play here upon words. 

" As to Yao and Shun, what claim have they to 
praise ? Their fine distinctions simply amounted to 
knocking a hole in a wall in order to stop it up with 
brambles ; 

They had better have left the wall alone. 

to combing each individual hair ; to counting the 
grains for a rice pudding ! How in the name of 
goodness did they profit their generation ? 

" If the virtuous are honoured, emulation will 
ensue. If knowledge be fostered, the result will 
be theft. 

People will employ their knowledge against each 
other. 

These things are of no use to make people good. 
The struggle for wealth is so severe. Sons murder 
their fathers ; ministers their princes ; men rob in 
broad daylight, and bore through walls at high 
noon. I tell you that the root of this great evil is 
from Yao and Shun, and that its branches will 
extend into a thousand ages to come. A thousand 
ages hence, man will be feeding upon man ! " 
Nan Yung Ch'u 

A disciple. 

sadly straightened his seat and said, " But what is 
one of my age to do that he may attain to this ? " 

CAP. XXIII.] Kdng Sang Ch'ti 297 

" Preserve your form complete," said KengSang, 
"your vitality secure. Let no anxious thoughts 
intrude. And then in three years' space you may 
attain to this." 

" I do not know," said Nan Yung, " that there is 
any difference in the form of eyes ; yet blind men 
cannot see. I do not know that there is any 
difference in the form of ears ; yet deaf men cannot 
hear. I do not know that there is any difference in 
the form of hearts ; 

The seat of the intellect. 

yet fools cannot use theirs to any purpose. The 
forms are alike ; yet there is something which 
differentiates them. One will succeed, and another 
will not. Yet you tell me to preserve my form 
complete, my vitality secure, and let no anxious 
thoughts intrude. But so far I only hear Tag with 
my ears." 

"Well said!" cried Keng Sang; and then he 
added, " Small wasps cannot transform huge 
caterpillars. 

According to Chinese notions, the wasp has no 
young. It transforms a small caterpillar into the 
required offspring. 

Bantams cannot hatch the eggs of geese. The fowls 
of Lu can. Not that there is any difference in the 
hatching power of chickens. One can and another 
cannot, because one is naturally fitted for working 
on a large, the other on a small scale. My talents 

298 Chuang Tzii 

are of the latter order. I cannot transform you. 
Why not go south and see Lao Tzu ? " 

So Nan Yung took some provisions, and after a 
seven days' journey arrived at the abode of Lao Tzu. 

" Have you come from Keng Sang Ch'u?" said 
the latter. 

*' I have," replied Nan Yung. 

" But why," said Lao Tzu, "bring all these people 
with you ? " 

Meaning the questions he was going to ask. 

Nan Yung looked back in alarm, and Lao Tzu 
continued, " Do you not understand what I say?" 

Nan Yung bent his head abashed, and then 
looking up, said with a sigh, *T have now forgotten 
how to answer, in consequence of missing what I 
came to ask." 

He was so confused by Lao Tzu's question coming 
before he had had time to state his mission. 

" What do you mean ? " said Lao Tzu. 

" If I do not know," replied Nan Yung, " men 
call me a fool. If I do know, I injure myself. If I 
am not charitable, I injure others. If I am, I injure 
myself. If I do not do my duty to my neighbour, 
I injure others. If I do it, I injure myself. My 
trouble lies in not seeing how to escape from these 
three dilemmas. On the strength of my connection 
with Kcng Sang, I would venture to ask advice." 

"When I saw you," said Lao Tzu, " I knew in 
the twinkling of an eye what was the matter with 
you. And now what you say confirms my view. 

CAP. XXIII.] King Sang Cliti 299 

You are confused, as a child that has lost its 
parents. You would fathom the sea with a pole. 
You are astray. You are struggling to get back to 
your natural self, but cannot find the way. Alas ! 
alas ! " 

Nan Yung begged to be allowed to remain, and 
set to work to cultivate the good and eliminate the 
evil within him. At the expiration of ten days, 
with sorrow in his heart, he again sought Lao Tzu. 

" Have you thoroughly cleansed yourself? " said 

Lao Tzu. " But this grieved look There is 

some evil obstruction yet. 

" If the disturbances are external, 

Sc. sensual. 

do not be always combating them, but close the 
channels to the mind. If the disturbances are 
internal, do not strive to oppose them, but close all 
entrance from without. 

And the mind will recover itself. 

If the disturbances are both internal and external, 
then you will not even be able to hold fast to Tao, 
still less practise it." 

" If a rustic is sick," said Nan Yung, " and 
another rustic goes to see him; and if the sick man 
can say what is the matter with him, — then he is 
not seriously ill. Yet my search after Tao is like 
swallowing drugs which only increase the malady. 

Although really not so very far from Tao [sc. health) 
as evidenced by my being able to describe my 

300 Chuang Tzu 

complaint, which a man sick of some serious dis- 
ease is scarcely" able to do. 

I beg therefore merely to ask the art of preser\-ing 
life." 

"The art of pre5er\nng life," replied Lao Tzu, 
" consists in being able to keep all in One, 

Sc. Body and soul. See the Tao-Te-Ching, ch. x, 
where this idea has been reproduced. 

to lose nothing, to estimate good and evil without 
dixination, 

To know that each is bound up in the other. 

to know when to stop, and how much is enough, to 
leave others alone and attend to oneself, to be with- 
out cares and without knowledge, — to be in fact as 
a child. A child will cry all day and not become 
hoarse, because of the perfection of its constitutional 
harmony. 

Also reproduced in the Tao-Te-Chiyig, ch- Iv. 

It will keep its fist tightly closed all day and not 
open it, because of the concentration of its virtue. 
It \\'ill gaze all day without taking off its eyes, 
because its sight is not attracted by externals. Ir. 
motion, it knows not whither it is bound ; at rest, 
it is not conscious of doing amthing ; but uncon- 
sciously adapts itself to the exigencies of its en\-iron- 
ment. This is the art of preser\-ing life." 

'' Is this then the virtue of the perfect man ? 
cried Xan Yung. 

• Not so," said Lao Tzu. '* I am, as it were, bu. 
breaking the ice. 

CAP. XXIII.] K6ng Sang Cliu 301 

" The perfect man shares the food of this earth, 
but the happiness of God. He does not incur 
trouble either from men or things. He does not 
join in censuring, in plotting, in toadying. Free 
from care he comes, and unconscious he goes ; — 
this is the art of preserving life." 

** This then is perfection ? " inquired Nan 
Yung. 

" Not yet," said Lao Tzu. " I specially asked 
if you could be as a child. A child acts without 
knowing what it does ; moves without knowing 
whither. Its body is like a dry branch ; its heart 
like dead ashes. Thus, good and evil fortune find 
no lodgment therein ; and there where good and 
evil fortune are not, how can the troubles of mor- 
tality be ? 

" Those whose hearts are in a state of repose 
give forth a divine radiance, by the light of which 
they see themselves as they are. And only by 
cultivating such repose can man attain to the 
constant. 

" Those who are constant are sought after by 
men and assisted by God. Those who are sought 
after by men are the people of God ; those who are 
assisted by God are his chosen children. 

The stuff of which rulers are made. 

" To study this is to study what cannot be 
learnt. To practise this is to practise what cannot 
be accomplished. To discuss this is to discuss 
what can never be proved. Let knowledge stop 

302 Chuang Tzii 

at the unknowable. That is perfection. And for 
those who do not follow this, God will destroy 
them 1 

" Knowledge," says Emerson in his Montaigne, or 
the Sceptic, " is the knowing that we cannot know." 

" With such defences for the body, ever prepared 
for the unexpected, deferential to the rights of 
others, — if then calamities overtake you, these are 
from God, not from man. Let them not disturb 
what you have already achieved. Let them not 
penetrate into the soul's abode. For there resides 
the Will. And if the will knows not what to will, 
it will not be able to will. 

Inability to exercise the functions of will is Tao. 

" Whatsoever is not said in all sincerity, is 
wrongly said. And not to be able to rid oneself 
of this vice is only to sink deeper towards per- 
dition. 

''Those who do evil in the open light of day, — 
men will punish them. Those who do evil in 
secret, — God will punish them. Who fears both 
man and God, he is fit to walk alone. 

The term here used for " God " means strictly those 
*' spirits " which are the avenging emissaries of the 
Deity. 

Those who are devoted to the internal, 

To self-culture. 

in practice acquire no reputation. Those who are 
devoted to the external, strive for pre-eminence 

CAP. XXIII.] King Sang Ch'u 303 

among their fellows. Practice without reputation 
throws a halo around the meanest. But he who 
strives for pre-eminence among his fellows, he is as 
a huckster whose weariness all perceive though he 
himself puts on an air of gaiety. 

'* He who is naturally in sympathy with man, to 
him all men come. But he who forcedly adapts, 
has no room even for himself, still less for others. 
And he who has no room for others, has no ties. 
It is all over with him. 

** There is no weapon so deadly as man's will. 
Excalibur is second to it. There is no bandit so 
powerful as Nature. 

The interaction of the Positive and Negative prin- 
ciples, which produces the visible universe. 

In the whole universe there is no escape from it. 
Yet it is not Nature which does the injury. It is 
man's own heart. 

" Tao informs its own subdivisions, their suc- 
cesses and their failures. What is feared in sub- 
division is separation. 

From the parent stock of Tao. 

What is feared in separation, is further separation. 

So that all connection is severed. 

Thus, to issue forth without return, this is deve- 
lopment of the supernatural. To issue forth and 
attain the goal, this is called death. To be anni- 
hilated and yet to exist, this is convergence of the 
supernatural into One. To make things which 

304 Chiiang Tzu 

have form appear to all intents and purposes form- 
less,— this is the sum of all things. 

Man's final triumph over matter. 

" Birth is not a beginning ; death is not an end. 
There is existence without limitation ; there is 
continuity without a starting-point. Existence 
without limitation is Space. Continuity without 
a starting-point is Time. There is birth, there is 
death, there is issuing forth, there is entering in. 
That through which one passes in and out without 
seeing its form, that is the Portal of God. 

" The Portal of God is Non-Existence. All 
things sprang from Non-Existence. Existence 
could not make existence existence. It must have 
proceeded from Non-Existence, 

The idea of existence, independent of its correlate, 
cannot be apprehended by the human intellect. 

And Non-Existence and Nothing are One. 

If all things sprang from non-existence, it might be 
urged that non-existence had an objective existence. 
But non-existence is nothing, and nothing excludes 
the idea of something, making subjective and ob- 
jective nothings One. 

Herein is the abiding-place of the Sage. \ 

There where the matter of mortality shares the 
tenuity of the formless. 

" The knowledge of the ancients reached the 
highest point, — the time before anything existed. 

CAP. XXIII.] King Sang C/tu 305 

This is the highest point. It is exhaustive. There 
is no adding to it. 

" The second best was that of those who started 
from existence. Life was to them a misfortune. 
Death was a return home. There was already 
separation. 

'* The next in the scale said that at the beginning 
there was nothing. Then life came, to be quickly 
followed by death. They made Nothing the head, 
Life the trunk, and Death the tail of existence, 
claiming as friends whoever knew that existence 
and non-existence, and life and death were all One. 

" These three classes, though different, were of 
the same clan ; as were Chao Ching who inherited 
fame, and Chia who inherited territory. 

The fact of Inheritance was the same, but not the 
thing inherited, — by these men of Ch'u. 
There are various interpretations of this passage. 
No two commentators agree. 

" Man's life is as the soot on a kettle. 

Meaning, concentrated smoke. ■ 

Yet men speak of the subjective point of view. But 
this subjective point of view will not bear the test. 
It is a point of knowledge we cannot reach. 

Individual standards are fallacious. What Is subjec- 
tive from one point of view Is objective from another. 

" At the winter sacrifice, the tripe may be sepa- 
rated from the great toe ; yet these cannot be 
separated » 

Each carries away the characteristics of the whole. 

X 

3o6 Chuang Tzii 

He who looks at a house, visits the ancestral hall, 
and even the latrines. Thus every point is the 
subjective point of view. 

Or else he has not seen the house but only a part. 
Where then is the subjective point of view of the 
house, and by analogy, of the man ? 

" Let us try to formulate this subjective point of 
view. It originates with life, and, with knowledge 
as its tutor, drifts into the admission of right and 
wrong. 

In the abstract. 

But one's own standard of right is the standard, 
and others have to adapt themselves to it. Men 
will die for this. Such people look upon the useful 
as appertaining to wisdom, the useless as apper- 
taining to folly; upon success in life as honourable, 
upon failure as dishonourable. 

Not knowing the value of the useless, or perceiving 
that what is so at one time is not so at another. 

The subjective pqint of view is that of the present 
generation, who like the cicada and the young dove 
see things only from their own standpoint. 
See ch. i. 

" If a man treads upon a stranger's toe in the 
market-place, he apologises on the score of hurry. 
If an elder brother does this, he is quit with an 
exclamation of sympathy. And if a parent does so, 
nothing whatever is done. 

The child being part of himself. 

CAP. XXIII.] King Sang Ch'u 307 

"Therefore it has been said, ' Perfect politeness 
is not artificial ; 

Kuo Hsiang says this means treating others as 
oneself. Lin HsI Chung takes the " natural " or 
" spontaneous " view which is here adopted. 

perfect duty to one's neighbour is not a matter of 
calculation ; perfect wisdom takes no thought ; 
perfect charity recognises no ties ; perfect trust 
requires no pledges.' 

" Discard the stimuli of purpose. Free the mind 
from disturbances. Get rid of entanglements to 
virtue. Pierce the obstructions to Tao. 

" Honours, wealth, distinction, power, fame, gain, 
— these six stimulate purpose. 

" Mien, carriage, beauty, arguments, influence, 
opinions, — these six disturb the mind. 

Referring, of course, to the mien, carnage, etc. of 
others. 

" Hate, ambition, joy, anger, sorrow, pleasure, — 
these six are entanglements to virtue. 

" Rejecting, adopting, receiving, giving, know- 
ledge, ability, — these six are obstructions to Tao. 

The key to which is inaction. 

" If these twenty-four be not allowed to run riot, 
then the mind will be duly ordered. And being 
l|duly ordered, it will be in repose. And being in 
repose, it will be clear of perception. And being 
clear of perception, it will be unconditioned. And 
Ibeing unconditioned, it will be in that state of 

X 2 

3o8 Chuang Tzu 

inaction by which there is nothing which cannot 
be accomplished. 

" Tao is the sovereign lord of Te. 

Te is the " virtue " of spontaneity. 
Life is the glorifier of Te. 

By means of which it can be manifested. 
Nature is the substance of life. 

The code of which life is the embodiment. 

The operation of that nature is action. The per- 
version of that action is error. 

" People who know put forth physical power. 
People who know employ mental effort. But what 
people who know do not know is to be as the eye. 

Which sees without looking. 

** Emotion which is spontaneous is called virtue 
passive. Emotion which is not evoked by the 
external is called virtue active. The names of these 
are antagonistic ; but essentially they are in accord. 

All "virtue" should proceed from the real self, 
sc. from God. 

" Yi was skilled in hitting the bull's-eye ; but 
stupid at preventing people from praising him for 
so doing. 

See ch. v. 

The Sage devotes himself to the natural and neg- 
lects the artificial. For only the Perfect Man can 

CAP. XXIII.] King Sang CJiu 309 

devote himself profitably to the natural and arti- 
ficial alike. Insects influence insects ; 

So as to make others like themselves 

because insects are natural. When the Perfect 
Man hates the natural, it is the artificially natural 
which he hates. How much more man's alternate 
naturalness and artificiality? 

'* If a bird falls in with Yi, Yi will get it. Such 
is his skill. And if the world were made into a 
cage, birds would have no place of escape. So it 
was that by cookery T'ang got hold of I Yin, and 
by five rams' skins Duke Mu of Ch'in got Po Li 
Ch'i. But had these princes not been themselves 
successful at getting, they never would have got 
these men. 

Apocryphal stories both. I Yin was the successful 
and famous minister of the founder of the Shangf 
dynasty. For Poh Li Ch'i, see p. 270. 

"A one-legged man discards ornament, his 
exterior not being open to commendation. Con- 
demned criminals will go up to great heights 
without fear, for they no longer regard life and 
death from their former point of view. And those 
who pay no attention to their moral clothing 

Artificial virtues. 

and condition become oblivious of their own per- 
sonality; and by thus becoming oblivious of their 
personality, they proceed to be the people of God. 
"Wherefore, if men revere them, they rejoice 

3IO Chiiang Tzii 

not. If men insult them, they are not angered. 
But only those who have passed into the eternal 
harmony of God are capable of this. 

" If your anger is external, not internal, it will be 
anger proceeding from not-anger. If your actions 
are external, not internal, they will be actions 
proceeding from inaction, 

" If you would attain peace, level down your 
emotional nature. If you desire spirituality, 
cultivate adaptation of the intelligence. If you 
would have your actions in accordance with what is 
right, allow yourself to fall in with the dictates of 
necessity. For necessity is the Tao of the Sage." 

Do nothing save what you cannot help doing. 
The authorship of this chapter has been disputed. 
Lin Hsi Chung regards the question as by no means 
settled. 

311 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

Hsij Wu KuEi. 

Argionent : — Tao is passionless — Immorality of the moral — Obstructions 
to natural virtue — The evils of action — Too much zeal — The 
outward and visible — The inward and spiritual — Illustrations. 

H 

SU wu KUEI, introduced by Nu Shang, 

went to see Wu Hou of Wei. 
A hermit, a minister, and a prince, respectively. 

The Prince greeted him sympathisingly, and said, 
"You are suffering. Sir. You must have endured 
great hardships in your mountain life that you 
should be willing to leave it and visit me." 

" It is I who should sympathise with your 
Highness, not your Highness with me," answered 
Hsii Wu Kuei. " If your Highness gives free 
play to passion and yields to loves and hates, then 
the natural conditions of your existence will suffer. 

Internally. 

And if your Highness puts aside passion and 
abjures loves and hates, then your senses of sight 
and hearing will suffer. 

Externally. 

It is I who should sympathise with your Highness, 
not your Highness with me." 

312 Chiiang Tzu 

The Prince was too astonished to reply ; and 
after a while Hsii Wu Kuei continued, " I will try 
to explain to your Highness how I judge of dogs. 
The lowest in the scale will eat their fill and then 
stop, like a cat. Those of the middle class are as 
though staring at the sun. The highest class are 
as though they had parted with their own indi- 
viduality. 

*' But I do not judge of dogs as well as I judge 
of horses. I judge of horses as follows. Their 
straightness 

In running. 

must be that of a line. Their curve must be that of 
an arc. Their squareness, that of the square. Their 
roundness, that of the compasses. 

One commentator applies all this to the shape of 
the animals. 

These are the horses of the State. They are not 
equal to the horses of the Empire. The horses of 
the Empire are splendid. They move as though 
anxious to get along, as though they had lost the 
way, as though they had parted with their own 
individuality. Thus, they outstrip all competitors, 
over the unstirred dust, out of sight ! " 

The Prince was greatly pleased and smiled. But 
when Hsii Wu Kuei went out, Nii Shang asked 
him, saying, " What can you have been saying to 
his Highness? Whenever I address him, it is either 
in a pacific sense, based upon the Canons of Poetry ^ 
History, Rites, and Music; or in a belligerent 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil IVu Kuei 313 

sense, based upon the Golden Roster or the Six 
Plans of Battle. 

Ancient military treatises. 

I have transacted with great success innumerable 
matters entrusted |o me, yet his Highness has 
never vouchsafed a smile. What can you have been 
saying to make him so pleased as all this ? " 

" I merely told him," replied Hsii Wu Kuei, 
" how I judged of dogs and horses." 

" Was that all ? " enquired Nu Shang, incredu- 
lously. 

" Have you not heard," said Hsii Wu Kuei, " of 
the outlaw of Yiieh ? After several days' absence 
from his State, he was glad to meet any one he had 
known there. After a month, he was glad to meet 
any one he had even seen there. And after a year, 
he was glad to meet any one who was in any way 
like to his fellow-countrymen. Is not this a case of 
absence from one's kind increasing the desire to be 
with them ? 

'' Thus a man who had fled into the wilderness, 
where bishop-wort chokes the path of the weasel 
and stoat, now advancing, now stopping, — how he 
would rejoice if the footfall of a fellow-creature 
broke upon his ear. And how much more were he 
to hear the sound of a brother's, of a relative's voice 
at his side. Long it is, I ween, since his Highness 
has heard the voice of a pure man at his side ! " 

Hsii Wu Kuei went to visit the Prince. The 

314 Chiiang Tzu 

latter said, " Living, Sir, up in the hills, and feeding 
upon berries or satisfying yourself with leeks, you 
have long neglected me. Are you now growing 
old ? Or do you hanker after flesh-pots and wine ? 
Or is it that mine is such a well-governed State ? " 

'' I am of lowly birth," replied Hsii Wu Kuei. 
'' I could not venture to eat and drink your High- 
ness' meat and wine. I came to sympathise with 
your Highness." 

" What do you mean ? " cried the Prince ? 
" What is there to sympathise about ? " 

" About your Highness' soul and body," replied 
Hsii Wu Kuei. 

" Pray explain," said the Prince. 

" Nourishment is nourishment," said Hsii Wu 
Kuei. 

To a peasant as to a prince. 

" Being high up does not make one high, nor does 
being low make one low. Your Highness is the 
ruler of a large State, and you oppress the whole 
population thereof in order to satisfy your sensuali- 
ties. But your soul is not a party to this. The soul 
loves harmony and hates disorder. For disorder is 
a disease. Therefore I came to sympathise. How 
is it that your Highness alone is suffering ? " 

" I have long desired to see you," answered the 
Prince. " I wish to love my people, and by cultiva- 
tion of duty towards one's neighbour to put an end 
to war. Can this be done ? " 

" It cannot," replied Hsii Wu Kuei. " Love 
for the people is the root of all evil to the people. 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil IVti Ktiei 315 

Cultivation of duty towards one's neighbour in 
order to put an end to war is the origin of all fight- 
ing. If your Highness starts from this basis, the 
result can only be disastrous. 

Why try to "do" anything ? 

" Everything that is made good, turns out bad. 

The artificial is impermanent. 

And although your Highness should make charity 
and duty to one's neighbour, I fear they would be 
spurious articles. For the inward intention would 
appear in the outward manifestation. The adoption 
of a fixed standard 

I.e. of the personal standard of individuals. See 

PP- 305. 306. 
would lead to complications. And revolutions 
within lead to fighting without. Surely your 
Highness would not make a bower into a battle- 
field, nor a shrine of prayer into a scene of warfare ! 

This, of course, refers to the mind. 

" Have nothing within which is obstructive of 
virtue. Seek not to vanquish others in cunning, in 
plotting, in war. If I slay a whole nation and annex 
the territory in order to find nourishment for my 
passions and for my soul, — irrespective of military 
skill, wherein does the victory lie ? 

''What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the 
whole world, and lose his own soul ?" 

** If your Highness will only abstain, that will be 

3i6 Chnang Tzu 

enough. Cultivate the sincerity that is within your 
breast, so as to be responsive to the conditions of 
your environment, and be not aggressive. The 
people will thus escape death ; 

From oppression, 
and what need then to put an end to war ? " 

When the Yellow Emperor went to see Tao upon 
the Chu-tz'u Mountain, Fang Ming was his 
charioteer, Chang Yii sat on his right, Chang Jo 
and Hsi Peng were his outriders, and K'un Hun 
and Hua Chi brought up the rear. 

Commentators tear this passage to tatters. 

On reaching the wilds of Hsiang-cheng, 

The limit of the known. 

these seven Sages lost their way and there was no 
one of whom to ask the road. By and by, they fell 
in with a boy who was grazing horses, and asked 
him, saying, " Do you know the Chii-tz u Moun- 
tain ? " 

" I do," replied the boy. 

"And can you tell us," continued the Sages, 
" where Tao abides ? " 

" I can," replied the boy. 

" This is a strange lad," cried the Yellow Em- 
peror. " Not only does he know where the Chii- 
tz'u Mountain is, but also where Tag abides ! 
Come tell me, pray, how would you govern the 
empire ? " 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil Wu Kiiei 3 1 7 

" I should govern the empire," said the boy, 
"just the same as I look after my horses. What 
else should I do ? 

'' When I was a little boy and used to live within 
the points of the compass, 

In Vanity Fair. 

my eyes got dim of sight. An old man advised me 
to mount the chariot of the sun 

I.e. of Intelligence. 

and visit the wilds of Hsiang-ch'^ng. My sight is 
now much better, and I continue to dwell without 
the points of the compass. I should govern the 
empire in just the same way. What else should 
I do?" 

*' Of course," said the Yellow Emperor, '* govern- 
ment is not your trade. Still I should be glad to 
hear what you would do." 

The boy declined to answer, but on being again 
urged, cried out, "What difference is there between 
governing the empire and looking after horses ? 
See that no harm comes to the horses, that is all ! " 

Thereupon the Emperor prostrated himself before 
the boy ; and addressing him as Divine Teacher, 
took his leave. 

Divine Teacher means " inspired by God." The 
term used is that employed in modern times for the 
head or Pope of debased Taoism, often wrongly 
rendered as the " Master of Heaven." 

If schemers have nothing to give them anxiety, 

3i8 Chuang Tzu 

they are not happy. If dialecticians have not their 
premisses and conclusion, they are not happy. If 
critics have none on whom to vent their spleen, they 
are not happy. Such men are the slaves of objec- 
tive existences. 

Those who attract the sympathies of the world, 
start new dynasties. Those who win the people's 
hearts, take high official rank. Those who are strong 
undertake difficulties. Those who are brave en- 
counter dangers. Men of arms delight in war. 
Men of peace think of nothing but reputation. Men 
of law strive to improve the administration. Pro- 
fessors of ceremony and music cultivate deportment. 
Moralists devote themselves to the obligations 
between man and man. 

Take away agriculture from the husbandman, 
and his classification is gone. Take away trade 
from the merchant, and his classification is gone. 
Daily work is the stimulus of the labourer. The 
skill of the artisan is his pride. If money cannot 
be made, the avaricious man is sad. If his power 
meets with a check, the boaster will repine. Am- 
bitious men love change. 

Thus, men are always doing something ; inaction 
is to them impossible. They observe in this the 
same regularity as the seasons, ever without change. 
They hurry to destruction, dissipating in all direc- 
tions their vital forces, alas ! never to return. 

Chuang Tzu said, " If archers who aimed at 
nothing and hit something were accounted good 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil Wu Kuei 319 

shots, everybody in the world would be another 
Yi. 

See p. 308. 

Could this be so ? " 

" It could," replied Hui Tzu. 

"If there was no general standard of right in 
the world," continued ChuangTzu, " but each man 
had his own, then everybody would be a Yao. 
Could this be so ? " 

" It could," replied Hui Tzu. 

" Very well," said Chuang Tzu. " Now there 
are the Confucianists, the Mihists, the schools of 
Yang 

Yang Chu. See ch. viii. 

and Ping, 

Kung Sun Lung. See ch. xvii. 

making with your own five in all. Pray which of 
these is right ? 

" Possibly it is a similar case to that of Lu Chu ? 

Of whom there is no record. 

— A disciple said to him, ' Master, I have attained 
to your Tao. I can do without fire in winter: I can 
make ice in summer.' 

" * You merely avail yourself of latent heat and 
latent cold,' replied Lu Chu. ' That is not what I 
call Tao. I will demonstrate to you what my 
Tag is.' 

"Thereupon he tuned two lutes, and placed one 
in the hall and the other in the adjoining room. 

320 Chuang Tzu 

And when he struck the Knng note on one, the 
Ktmg note on the other sounded ; when he struck 
the chio note on one, the chio note on the other 
sounded. This because they were both tuned to 
the same pitch. 

" But if he changed the interval of one string, so 
that it no longer kept its place in the octave, and 
then struck it, the result was that all the twenty- 
five strings jangled together. There was sound as 
before, but the influence of the key-note was gone. Is 
this your case ? " 

" The Confucianists, the Mihists, and the follow- 
ers of Yang and Ping," replied Hui Tzu, "are just 
now engaged in discussing this matter with me. 
They try to overwhelm me with argument or howl 
me down with noise. Yet they have not proved me 
wrong. Why then should you ? " 

" A man of the Ch'i State," replied Chuang Tzu, j 
" sent away his son into the Sung State, to be a 
door-keeper, with maimed body, i 

Doorkeepers in ancient tim^ were, for obvious 
reasons, deprived of their feet. 

But a vase, which he valued highly, he kept care- 
fully wrapped up. 

Thus Hui Tzu sacrifices the greater to the less. 

" He who would seek for a stray child, but will 
not leave his home, is like to lose him. 

Thus restricted to his four antagonistic schools is 
Hui Tzu s search for Tao. 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil JVit Ktiei 321 

" If a man of Ch'u, who was sent away to be a 
door-keeper, began, in the middle of the night, when 
no one was about, to fight with the boatman, I 
should say that before his boat left the shore he 
would already have got himself into considerable 
trouble." 

A maimed man (Hui Tzu) should avoid quarrels. 
His own share of Tao is insufficient even for himself. 

Chuang Tzu was once attending a funeral, when 
he passed by the grave of Hui Tzu. Turning to 
his attendants, he said, " A man of Ying 
Capital of the Ch'u state. 

who had his nose covered with a hard scab, no 
thicker than a fly's wing, sent for a stone-mason to 
chip it off. The stone-mason plied his adze with 
great dexterity while the patient sat still and let 
him chip. When the scab was all off, the nose was 
found to be uninjured, the man of Ying never 
having moved a muscle. 

" When Yiian, prince of Sung, heard of this, he 
summoned the stone-mason and said, * Try to do 
the same for me.' 

" * I used to be able to do it Sire,' replied the 
stone-mason, ' but my material has long since 
perished.' 

j " And I too, ever since he perished, have been 
Without my material, having no one with whom I 
|can speak." 

A generous compliment to an old adversary. 

•' There was no one," says Lin Hsi Chung, " in all 

322 Chuang Tzu 

Chuang Tzu's generation who could understand 
him ; neither is there any one now, at this late 
date, any more than there was then." 

Kuan Chung being at the point of death, Duke 
Huan went to see him. 

See p. 226. 

" You are ill, venerable Sir," said the Duke, 
" really ill. You had better say to whom, in the 
event of your getting worse, I am to entrust the 
administration of the State/' 

" Whom does your Highness wish to choose ? " 
enquired Kuan Chung. 

" Will Pao Yu do ?" asked the Duke. 

Kuan Chung and Pao Yu are the " Damon and 
Pythias" of China. 

" He will not," said Kuan Chung. " He is pure, 
incorruptible, and good. With those who are not 
like himself, he will not associate. And if he has 
once heard of a man's wrong-doing, he never 
forgets it. If you employ him in the administration 
of the empire, he will get to loggerheads with his 
prince and to sixes and sevens with the people. It 
would not be long before he and your Highness fell 
out." 

" Whom then can we have ?" asked the Duke. 

" There is no alternative," replied Kuan Chung ; 
" it must be Hsi P eng. He is a man who forgets 
the authority of those above him, and makes those 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil IVu Kuei 323 

below him forget his. Ashamed that he is not the 
peer of the Yellow Emperor, 

In virtue. 

he grieves over those who are not the peers of 
himself. 

" To share one's virtue with others is called true 
wisdom. To share one's wealth with others is 
reckoned meritorious. To exhibit superior merit 
is not the way to win men's hearts. To exhibit 
inferior merit is the way. There are things in the 
State he does not hear ; there are things in the 
family he does not see. 

Purposely ignoring petty faults. 

There is no alternative; it must be Hsi P'eng." 

Of whom commentators give no further notice. 

The prince of Wu took a boat and went to the 
Monkey Mountain, which he ascended. When the 
monkeys saw him, they fled in terror and hid them- 
selves in the thicket. One of them, however, dis- 
ported himself carelessly, as though showing off its 
skill before the prince. The prince took a shot at it ; 
but the monkey, with great rapidity, seized the 
flying arrow with its hand. Then the prince bade 
his guards try, the result being that the monkey 
was killed. 

The skill of the poor monkey availed nothing against 
the cloud of arrows discharged by the guards. On 

Y 2 

324 Chiiang Tzii 

petit etre plus fin qtiun autre, mais on ne pent pas 
itre plus fin que tous les autres. 

Thereupon the prince turned to his friend Yen 
Pu I, and said, " That monkey flaunted its skill 
and its dexterity in my face. Therefore it has come 
to this pass. Beware ! Do not flaunt your su- 
periority in the faces of others." 

Yen Pu I went home, and put himself under the 
tuition of Tung Wu,. 

A professor of Tao. 

with a view to get rid of such superiority. He put 
aside all that gave him pleasure and avoided gain- 
ing reputation. And in three years his praise was 
in everybody's mouth. 

Tzu Chi of Nan-poh 

See ch. iv. 

was sitting leaning on a table. He looked up to 
heaven and sighed, at which juncture Yen Ch eng 
Tzu entered and said, " How, Sir, can such an 
important person as yourself be in body like dry 
w^ood, in mind like dead ashes ?" 

Instead of exerting yourself for the benefit of 
mankind. The speaker, says one commentator, 
was "a disciple." 

" I used to live in a cave on the hills," replied 
Tzu Chi. '' At that time, T'ien Ho, 

The famous founder of the later House of Ch'i. 

because he once saw me, was thrice congratulated 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil Wii Ktiei 325 

by the people of Ch'i. Now I must have given 
some indication by which he recognised me. 

As a Sage. 

I must have sold for him to buy. For had I not 
manifested myself, how would he have recognised 
me ? Had I not sold, how could he have bought ? 
"Alas ! I grieve over man's self-destruction. 

As reputation comes, reality goes. 

And then I grieve over one who grieves for another. 
And then I grieve over him who grieves over one 
who grieves for another ! And so I get daily farther 
and farther away." 

And become like dry wood, my soul absorbed into 
Tao. 

When Confucius went to Ch'u, the prince enter- 
tained him at a banquet. Sun Shu Ao stood up 
with a goblet of wine in his hand, and I Liao of 
Shih-nan poured a libation, saying, *' On such 
occasions as this, the men of old were wont to 
make some utterance." 

" Mine," replied Confucius, " is the doctrine of 
wordless utterances. Shall I who make no utter- 
ances, make utterance now ? 

" I Liao of Shih-nan played with his ball, and 
the trouble of two houses was arranged. 

A man of great strength who refused to aid in 
settling a State quarrel. He was a great ball 
player, — whatever that may have been. 

326 Chuang Tzil 

Sun Shu Ao remained quietly in repose, and the 
men of Ying threw down their arms. 

No one dared attack them, so powerful was the 
prestige of their minister. 

I should want a three-foot tongue indeed ! 

To achieve more by talk than these two achieved by 
inaction. 

" Theirs was the Tao of inaction. His was the 
argument of silence. Wherefore, for Te 

The manifestation of Tao. 
to rest in undivided Tao, 

By which all things are One. 
and for speech to stop at the unknowable,- — this is 
perfection, 

" With undivided Tao, Te cannot be coincident. \ 
The latter is multiform. 
No argument can demonstrate the unknowable, j 
Subdivision into Confucianists and Mihists only 
makes confusion worse confounded. 

" The sea does not reject the streams which flow 
eastward into it. Therefore it is immeasurably 
great. The true Sage folds the universe in his 
bosom. His good influence benefits all throughout 
the empire, without respect to persons. Born 
without rank, he dies without titles. He does not 
take credit for realities. 

But attributes it all to circumstances. 
He does not establish a name. 

For what he has done. 
This is to be a great man. 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsii Wu Kuei 327 

"A dog is not considered a good dog because he 
is a good barker. 

He must also bite. 

A man is not considered a good man because he 
is a good talker. How much less in the case of 
greatness } And if doing great things is not enough 
to secure greatness, how much less shall it secure 
virtue ? 

" In point of greatness, there is nothing to be 
compared with the universe. Yet what does the 
universe seek in order to be great .-* 

" He who understands greatness in this sense, 
seeks nothing, loses nothing, rejects nothing, never 
suffers injury from without. He takes refuge in 
his own inexhaustibility. He finds safety in 
according with his nature. This is the essence of 
true greatness." 

Tzu Chi had eight sons. He ranged them before 
him, and summoning Chiu Fang Yin, said to him, 
" Examine my sons physiognomically, and tell 
me which will be the fortunate one." 

" K'un," replied Chiu Fang Yin, " will be the 
fortunate one." 

** In what sense ? " asked the father, beaming with 
delight. 

"K'un," said Chiu Fang Yin, "will eat at the 
table of a prince, and so end his days." 

Thereupon Tzu Chi burst into tears and said, 
" What has my son done that this should be his 
fate ? " 

328 Chiiang Tzii 

" Eating at the table of a prince," replied Chiu 
Fang Yin, " will benefit the family for three gene- 
rations. How much more his father and mother ! 
But for you, Sir, to go and weep is enough to turn 
back the luck from you. The son's fortune is good, 
but the father's bad." 

" Yin," said Tzu Chi, " I should like to know 
what you mean by calling K'un fortunate. Wine 
and meat gratify the palate, but you do not say 
how these are to come. 

" Supposing that to me, not being a shepherd, a 
lamb were born in the south-west corner of my 
hall ; or that to me, not being a sportsman, quails 
were hatched in the north-east corner. If you did 
not call that uncanny, what would you call it ? 

" My sons and I do but roam through the uni- 
verse. With them I seek the joys of heaven ; with 
them I seek the fruits of earth. With them I 
engage in no business ; with them I concoct no 
plots ; with them I attempt nothing out-of-the- 
way. With them I mount upon the truth of the 
universe, and do not offer opposition to the exi- 
gencies of our environment. With them I accom- 
modate myself naturally ; but with them I do not 
become a slave to circumstances. Yet now the 
world is rewarding me ! 

" Every uncanny effect must be preceded by 
some uncanny cause. Alas ! my sons and I have 
done nothing. It must be the will of God. There- 
fore I weep." 

Shortly afterwards, when K'un was on his way 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsii IVu Kuei 329 

to the Yen State, he was captured by brigands. To 
sell him as he was, would be no easy matter. To 
sell him without his feet would be easy enough. 
So they cut off his feet and sold him into the Ch'i 
State, where he became door-keeper to Duke Chii 
and had meat to his dinner for the rest of his life. 

Commentators make terrible havoc here. 

Yeh Ch'iieh meeting Hsii Yu, said to him, 
" Where are you going ? " 

" Away from Yao ! " replied the latter. 

" What do you mean ? " asked Yeh Ch'iieh. 

" Yao," said Hsii Yu, ** thinks of nothing but 
charity. I fear he will become a laughing-stock to 
the world, and that in future ages men will eat one 
another. 

See p. 296. 

" There is no difficulty in winning the people. 
Love them and they will draw near. Profit them 
and they will come up. Praise them and they will 
vie with one another. But introduce something 
they dislike, and they will be gone. 

" Love and profit are born of charity and duty 
to one's neighbour. Those who ignore charity and 
duty to one's neighbour are few ; those who make 
capital out of them are many. 

** For the operation of these virtues is not dis- 
interested. It is like lending gear to a sportsman. 

With a view to share the game. 
Wherefore, for one man to dogmatise for the good 

330 Chuang Tzu 

of the whole empire, is like splitting a thing at a 
single blow. 

Without reference to method or the requirements of 
the case in point. 

" Yao knows that good men benefit the empire. 
But he does not know that they injure it Only 
those on a higher level than good men know this. 

" There are nincompoops ; there are parasites ; 
there are enthusiasts. 

" A man who learns from a single teacher, and 
then goes off exultant, satisfied with his acquire- 
ments though ignorant that there was a time when 
nothing existed, — such a one is a nincompoop. 

" Parasites are like the lice on a pig's back. They 
choose bald patches, which are to them palaces and 
parks. The parts between the toes, the joints, the 
dugs, and the buttocks, are to them so many com- 
fortable and convenient resting-places. They know 
not that one day the butcher will tuck up his 
sleeves and spread straw and apply fire, and that 
they will perish in the singeing of the pig. As they 
sow, so do they reap. This is to be a parasite. 

" Of enthusiasts. Shun is an example. Mutton 
does not care for ants ; it is the ants which care for 
the mutton. Mutton has a frowsy smell ; and 
there is a frowsiness about Shun which attracts 
the people. Therefore it was that after three 
changes of residence, when he came to the Teng 
district, he had some hundred thousand families 
with him. 

\ 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil JVu Kuei 331 

" Then Yao, hearing of his goodness, appointed 
him to a barren region, trusting, as he said, that 
Shun's arrival would enrich it. When Shun took 
up this appointment, he was already old, and his 
intellect was failing ; yet he would not cease work 
and retire from office. He was, in fact, an enthu- 
siast. 

" So it is that the spiritual man dislikes a crowd. 
For where there is a crowd there is diversity, and 
where there is diversity advantage does not accrue. 
He is therefore neither very intimate, nor very 
distant. He clings to virtue and nourishes a spirit 
of harmony, in order to be in accord with his 
fellow-men. This is to be a divine man. 

" Leave wisdom to ants. Strive for what fishes 
desire. 

To be left alone in the water. 

Leave attractiveness to mutton. Use your eyes to 
contemplate, your ears to listen to, your mind to 
consider, their own internal workings. For him 
who can do these things, his level will be that of a 
line, his modifications in due and proper season. 

" Therefore, the divine man trusts to the natural 
development of events. He does not strive to 
introduce the artificial into the domain of the 
natural. Accordingly, life is a gain and death a 
loss, or death is a gain and life a loss. 

According to circumstances. 

" For instance, drugs. They are characteristically 
poisonous. Such are Chieh-Keng, Chi-Yung, and 

332 Chuang Tzil 

SIiiJi-Ling. Circumstances, however, make of each 
a sovereign remedy. The list is inexhaustible. 

Chieh-Keng is the Platycodon grandiflorzwi. It is 
used by Chinese doctors as a tonic, astringent, and 
vermifuge. 

"When Kou Chien encamped with three thou- 
sand armed warriors at Kuei-ch'i, 

Leading the men of Wu to attack the Yiieh State. 

only Chung 

Wen Chung, minister of Yiieh. 

saw that defeat would be followed by a rally. Yet 
he could not foresee the evil that was to come upon 
himself. Wherefore it has been said, * An owl's 
eyes are adapted to their use. A crane's leg is of 
the length required. 'Twould be disastrous to 
shorten it.' 

This illustration has been used in ch. viii, p. loi. 

"Thus it has been said, 'The wind blows and 
the river suffers. The sun shines and the river 
suffers.' But though wind and sun be both brought 
into relation with the river, it does not really suffer 
therefrom. Fed from its source, it still continues 
to flow on. 

The Saee too has a source from which the nourish- 
ment of his soul is supplied. 

" The relation between water and earth is deter- 
minate. The relation between a man and his 
shadow is determinate. The relation between thing 
and thing is determinate. 

CAP. XXIV.] Hsil Wu Kuei 333 

"The relation between eye and vision is baneful. 

Because indeterminate. 

The relation between ear and hearing is baneful. 
The relation between mind and object is baneful. 
The relation between all kinds of capacity and man's 
inner self is baneful. If such banefulness be not 
corrected, disasters will spring up on all sides. 
Retrogression is hard to achieve, and success long 
in coming. Yet alas ! men regard such capacities 
as valuable possessions. 

" The destruction of States and the ceaseless 
slaughter of human beings result from an inability 
to examine into this. 

'' The foot treads the ground in walking; never- 
theless it is the ground not trodden on which makes 
up the good walk. A man's knowledge is limited ; 
but it is upon what he does not know that he 
depends to extend his knowledge to the apprehen- 
sion of God. 

" Knowledge of the great One, of the great 
Negative, of the great Nomenclature, of the great 
Uniformity, of the great Space, of the great Truth, 
of the great Law, — this is perfection. 

"The great One is omnipresent. The great 
Negative is omnipotent. The great Nomenclature 
is all-inclusive. The great Uniformity is all- 
assimilative. The great Space is all-receptive. The 
great Truth is all-exacting. The great Law is all- 
binding. 

"The ultimate end is God. He is manifested in 

334 Chtiang Tzil 

the laws of nature. He is the hidden spring. At 
the beginning, he was. 

Had an objective existence. 

This, however, is inexplicable. It is unknowable. 
But from the unknowable we reach the known. 

" Investigation must not be limited, nor must it 
be unlimited. 

It must be undertaken from the standpoint of the 
unconditioned. 

In this vague undefinedness there is an actuality. 
Time does not change it. It cannot suffer diminu- 
tion. May we not then call it our great Guide ? 

" Why not bring our doubting hearts to investi- 
gation thereof? And then, using certainty to dispel 
doubt, revert to a state without doubt, in which 
doubt is doubly dead ? " 

Doubt dispelled leaves conviction firmer still. 
Lin Hsi Chung says that this essay begins with the 
subtle to end in the abstruse. " The force of lan- 
guage," adds he, " can no farther go ! " 

335 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Tsl: Yang. 

Argument : — Influence of virtue concealed — The true Sage a negative 
quantity — The great, the small, the infinite — Crime and Capital — 
Rulers and their vices — What is Society? Predestination or Chance? 
Illustrations. 

WHEN Ts^ Yang visited the Ch u State, I 
Chieh 

An official of Ch'u. 

spoke of him to the prince ; but the latter refused 
an audience. 

Upon I Chieh's return, Tse Yang went to see 
Wang Kuo, 

A local Sage. 

and asked him to obtain an interview with the 
prince. 

" I am not so fitted for that," replied Wang Kuo, 
*' as Kung Yiieh Hsiu." 

A hermit. 

''What sort of a man is he?" enquired. Ts^ 
Yang. 

"In winter," said Wang Kuo, "he catches turtles 
on the river. In summer, he reposes in some 
mountain copse. If any passers-by ask of him, he 

336 Chuang Tzii 

tells them, ''This is my home." Where I Chieh 
could not succeed, still less should I. I am not 
equal even to him. 

" He is a man without virtue, but possessed of | 
knowledge. Were it not for an air of arrogance, he 
would be very popular with his superiors. But help 
without virtue is a hindrance. Shivering people 
borrowing clothes in the coming spring ! Hot 
people thinking of last winter's icy blast ! 

" The prince of Ch'u is dignified and severe. In 
punishing, he is merciless as a tiger. Only a very 
practised or a very perfect man could influence him. 

"The true Sage, when in obscurity, causes those 
around him to forget their poverty. When in I 
power, he causes princes to forget ranks and emolu- ' 
ments, and to become as though of low estate. He 
rejoices exceedingly in all creation. He exults to 
^ see Tao diffused among his fellow-men, while 
suffering no loss himself. 

Tao is a constant quantity. It can be shared, but 
cannot be divided. 

"Thus, although silent, he can instil peace ; and 
by his mere presence cause men to be to each other \ 
as father and son. From his very return to pas- 
sivity comes this active influence for good. So 
widely does he differ in heart from ordinary men. 
Wherefore I said, ' Wait for Kung Yiieh Hsiu.' 

"The true Sage is free from all embarrassments. 
All things are to him as One. Yet he knows not 
that this is so. It is simply nature, In the midst 

CAP. XXV.] Tse Yang 337 

of action he remains the same. He makes God his y^ 
guide, and men make him theirs. He grieves that 
wisdom carries one but a short distance, and at 
times comes altogether to a deadlock. 

" To a beauty, mankind is the mirror in which she 
sees herself. If no one tells her she is beautiful, 
she does not know that she is so. But whether she 
knows it or whether she does not know it, whether 
she hears it or whether she does not hear it, her joy 
will never cease, neither will mankind ever cease to 
take pleasure therein. It is nature. 

" The love of a Sage for his fellows likewise finds 
expression among mankind. Were he not told so, 
he would not know that he loved his fellows. But / 
whether he knows it or whether he does not know 
it, whether he hears it or whether he does not hear 
it, his love for his fellows is without end, and man- 
kind cease not to repose therein. 

"The old country, the old home, gladden a wan- 
derer's eyes. Nay, though nine-tenths of it be a 
howling wilderness, still his eye will be glad. How 
much more to see sight and hear hearing, from a 
lofty dais suspended in their very midst ! " 

The joy of the wanderer is as that of the mind 
returning to a consciousness only of itself 

Jen HsiangShih reached the centre and attained. 

The centre at which all Infinities converge. See 
p. 18. This individual was a legendary ruler of 
old. 

He recognised no beginning, no end, no quantity, 
no time. Daily modified together with his environ- 

338 Chiiang Tzu 

ment, as part of One he knew no modification. 
Why not rest in this ? 

To strive to follow God and not to succeed is to 
display an activity fatal to itself. How can success 
ever be thus achieved ? 

The true Sage ignores God. He ignores man. He 
ignores a beginning. He ignores matter. He moves 
in harmony with his generation and suffers not. 
He takes things as they come and is not over- 
whelmed. How are we to become like him ? 

T'ang appointed his Equerry, Men Yin Teng 
H^ng, to be his tutor, listening to his counsels but 
not being restricted by them. He got Tag for him- 
self and a reputation for his tutor. But the reputa- 
tion was a violation of principle, and landed him in 
the domain of alternatives. 

Instead of One. No ingenuity of commentator has 
here succeeded in making sense. 

As a tutor, Confucius pushed care and anxiety 
to an extreme limit. 
Yung Cheng Shih 

Lao Tzu's tutor. 

said, ** Take away days, and there would be no 
years. No inside, no outside." 

Prince Hui of Wei had made a treaty with 
prince Wei of Ch'i, which the latter broke. 

Thereupon prince Hui was wroth, and was about 
to send a man to assassinate him. But the Captain- 
General heard of this, and cried out in shame, 

CAP. xx^.] • Tsi Yang 339 

" Sire, you are ruler over a mighty State, yet you 
would seek the vengeance of a common man. 
Give me two hundred thousand warriors, and I 
will do the work for you. I will take his people 
prisoners, and carry off their oxen and horses. I 
will make the heat of the prince's mind break out 
on his back. Then I will seize his country, and 
he will flee. Then you can wring his neck as you 
please." 

When Chi Tzu heard this, he cried out in shame 
and said, ** If you are building a ten-perch wall, 
and when the wall is near completion, destroy it, 
you inflict great hardship on the workmen. 

Alluding to the corvie system of public works. The 
speaker was an official of Wei. 

Now for seven years the troops have not been 
called out. That is, as it were, your Highness' 
foundation work. Listen not to the Captain- 
General. He is a mischievous fellow." 
When Hua Tzu 

Also an official of Wei. 

heard this, he was very indignant and said, " He 
who argued in favour of punishing the Ch'i State 
was a mischievous fellow. And he who argued 
against punishing the Ch'i State was a mischievous 
fellow. And he who says that either of the above 
is a mischievous fellow, is a mischievous fellow 
himself." 

" Where then shall I find what to do? " enquired 
the prince. 

z 2 

340 Chuang Tsil 

" In Tao alone," said Hua Tzu. 
When Hui Tzu heard this, he introduced Tai 
Chin Jen to the prince. 

A Sage of the Liang State. For Hui Tzu, see p. 8. 

" There is a creature called a snail," said Tai 
Chin Jen. " Does your Highness know what I 
mean ? " 

" I do," replied the prince. 

" There is a kingdom on its left horn," continued 
Tai Chin Jen, "ruled over by Aggression, and 
another on its right horn, ruled over by Violence. 
These two rulers are constantly fighting for terri- 
tory. In such cases, corpses lie about by thousands, 
and one party will pursue the other for fifteen days 
before returning." 

"Whew! " cried the prince. " Surely you are 
joking." 

"Sire," replied Tai Chin Jen, "I beg you to 
regard it as fact. Does your Highness recognise 
any limit to space ? " 

" None," said the prince, " It is boundless." 

" When, therefore," continued Tai Chin Jen, 
" the mind descends from the contemplation of 
boundless space to the contemplation of a king- 
dom with fixed boundaries, that kingdom must 
seem to be of dimensions infinitesimally small ?" 

" Of course," replied the prince. 

" Well then," said Tai Chin Jen, " in a kingdom 
with fixed boundaries 

Meaning the then empire of the Chous. 

CAP. XXV.] Tse Yang 341 

there is the Wei State. In the Wei State there is 
the city of Liang. In the city of Liang there is a 
prince. In what does that prince differ from 
Violence ? " 

In his pettiness. 

" There is no difference," said the prince. 

Thereupon Tai Chin Jen took his leave, and the 
prince remained in a state of mental perturbation, 
as though he had lost something. 

When Tai Chin Jen had gone, Hui Tzu pre- 
sented himself, and the prince said, " Our friend is 
truly a great man. Sages are not his equal." 

" If you blow through a tube," replied Hui Tzu, 
" the result will be a note. If you blow through 
the hole in a sword-hilt, the result will be simply 
whssh. Yao and Shun have been belauded by 
mankind ; yet compared with Tai Chin Jen they 
are but whssh y 

When Confucius went to Ch'u, he stopped at a 
restaurant on Mount I. The servant to a man and 
his wife who lived next door, got up on top of the 
house. 

"Whatever is he doing up there?" asked Tzu 
Lu. 

" He is a Sage," replied Confucius, " under the 
garb of a menial. He buries himself among the 
people. 

So as to get into closer relation v/ith them. 

He effaces himself at the wayside. Fame, he has 

342 Chttang Tzii 

none ; but his perseverance is inexhaustible. 
Though his mouth speaks, his heart speaks not. 
He has turned his back upon mankind, not caring 
to abide amongst them. He has drowned himself 
on dry land. I think 'tis I Liao of Shih-nan." 

See p. 325. 

Tzu Lu asked to be allowed to go and call him ; 
but Confucius stopped him, saying, " No. He 
knows that I know what he is. He knows that I 
have come to Ch'u to recommend him to the 
prince. And he looks on me as a toady. Under 
the circumstances, as he would scorn to hear the 
words of a toady, how much more would he scorn 
to see him in the flesh ! How could you keep 
him ? " 

Tzu Lu went to see, but the house was empty. 

The border-warden of Ch'ang-wu said to Tzu 
Lao, 

Ch'in Lao, or Ch'in Chang, a disciple of Confucius. 

" A prince in his administrative details must not 
lack thoroughness ; in his executive details he 
must not be inefficient. Formerly, in my plough- 
ing I lacked thoroughness, and the results also 
lacked thoroughness. In my weeding I was ineffi- 
cient, and the results were also inefficient. By and 
by, I changed my system. I ploughed deep, and 
weeded carefully, the result being an excellent 
harvest, more than I could get through in a year." 

Chuang Tzii, upon hearing this, observed, "The 

CAP. XXV.] Tse Yang 343 

men of to-day in their self-regulation and their 
self-organisation are mostly as the Border-warden 
has described. They put their Godhead out of 
sight. They abandon their natural dispositions. 
They get rid of all feeling. They part with their 
souls, carried away by the fashion of the hour. 

" Those who lack thoroughness in regard to 
their natural dispositions suffer an evil tribe to 
take the place thereof. 

The physical senses. 

These grow up rank as reeds and rushes, at first 
of apparent value to the body, but afterwards to 
destroy the natural disposition. Then they break 
out, at random, like sores and ulcers carrying off 
pent-up humours." 

Poh Chii was studying under Lao Tzu. " Let us 
go," said he, " and wander over the world." 

One commentator says Poh Chii was a " criminal," 
probably from his sympathetic remarks in the con- 
text. 

" No," replied Lao Tzu, " the world is just as 
you see it here." 

But as he again urged it, Lao Tzii said, "Where 
would you go to begin with ? " 

" I would begin," answered Poh Chii, " by going 
to the Ch'i State. There I would view the dead 
bodies of their malefactors. I would push them to 
make them rise. I would take off my robes and 
cover them. I would cry to God and bemoan their 

344 Cliiiang Tzii 

lot, as follows : — ' O sirs, O sirs, there was trouble 
upon earth, and you were the first to fall into it ! ' 

" I would say, ' Perhaps you were robbers, or 
perhaps murderers?' .... Honour and disgrace 
were set up, and evil followed. Wealth was accu- 
mulated, and contentions began. Now the evil 
which has been set up and the contentions which 
have accumulated, endlessly weary man's body and 
give him no rest. What escape is there from this ? 

This might almost have come from The Curse of 
Capital (Aveling) or from one of Mr. Hyndman's 
discourses. 

" The rulers of old set off all success to the 
credit of their people, attributing all failure to 
themselves. All that was right went to the credit 
of their people, all that was wrong they attributed 
to themselves. Therefore, if any matter fell short 
of achievement, they turned and blamed them- 
selves. 

" Not so the rulers of to-day. They conceal a 
thing and blame those who cannot see it. They 
impose dangerous tasks and punish those who 
dare not undertake them. They inflict heavy bur- 
dens and chastise those who cannot bear them. 
They ordain long marches and slay those who 
cannot make them. 

" And the people, feeling that their powers are 
inadequate, have recourse to fraud. For when 
there is so much fraud about, 

In the rulers. 

CAP. XXV.] Tse Yang 345 

how can the people be otherwise than fraudulent ? 
If their strength is insufficient, they will have re- 
course to fraud. If their knowledge is insufficient, 
they will have recourse to deceit. If their means 
are insufficient, they will steal. And for such 
robbery and theft, who is really responsible ? " 

When Chu Poh Yii 

See p. 49. 

reached his sixtieth year, he changed his opinions. 
What he had previously regarded as right, he now 
came to regard as wrong. But who shall say 
whether the right of to-day may not be as wrong 
as the wrong of the previous fifty-nine years ? 

See p. 365. 

Things are produced around us, but no one 
knows the whence. They issue forth, but no one 
sees the portal. Men one and all value that part 
of knowledge which is known. They do not know 
how to avail themselves of the unknown in order 
to reach knowledge. Is not this misguided ? 

Men value the phenomena of which the senses make 
them conscious, but not the phenomena of the senses 
themselves. 

Alas ! alas ! the impossibility of escaping from 
this state results in what is known as elective 
affinity. 

Adaptation to the suitable ; being as one is because 
more adapted to that than to something to which 

34^ Chuang T::i( 

one is not adapted. See ch. ii, where this idea is 
first broached. 

Confucius asked the historiographers Ta T'ao, 
Poh Chang Ch'ien, and Hsi Wei, saying, " Duke 
Ling was fond of wine and given up to pleasure, 
and neglected the administration of his State. He 
spent his time in hunting, and did not cultivate the 
goodwill of the other feudal princes. How was it 
he came to be called LtJig ? " 

The name Lmg means "knowing," which may be 
taken in two senses. 

" For those very reasons," replied Ta T'ao. 

" The Duke," said Poh Chang Ch'ien, " had 
three wives. He was having a bath together with 
them when Shih Ch'iu, summoned by his High- 
ness, entered the apartment. Thereupon the Duke 
covered himself and the ladies. So outrageously 
did he behave on the one hand, and yet so respect- 
ful was he towards a virtuous man. Hence he was 
called Liiigy 

"When the Duke died," said Hsi Wei, " divina- 
tion showed that it would be inauspicious to bury 
him in the old family burying-ground, but auspi- 
cious to bury him at Sha-ch'iu. And upon digging 
a grave there, several fathoms deep, a stone coffin 
was found, which, being cleaned, yielded the fol- 
lowing inscription : — Posterity cannot be trusted. 
Ditkc Ling wit I seise this for /lis tomb. 

" As a matter of fact, Duke Ling had been 

CAP. XXV.] Tsi Yang 347 

named Ling long before. What should these two 
persons know about it ? " 

As evidenced by the inscription, the Duke had been 
so named long before, in the Book of Fate. 

Shao Chih asked T'ai Kung Tiao, saying, 
" What is meant by society ? " 

The first name signifies Small Knowledge, Of the 
second personage there is no record. 

" Society," replied T'ai Kung Tiao, '' is an agree- 
ment of a certain number of families and indivi- 
duals to abide by certain customs. Discordant 
elements unite to form a harmonious whole. Take 
away this unity and each has a separate indivi- 
duality. 

'' Point at any one of the many parts of a horse, 
and that is not a horse, although there is the horse 
before you. It is the combination of all which 
makes the horse. 

'' Similarly, a mountain is high because of its 
individual particles. A river is large because of 
its individual drops. And he is a just man who 
regards all parts from the point of view of the 
whole. 

"Thus, in regard to the views of others, he holds 
his own opinion, but not obstinately. In regard to 
his own views, while conscious of their truth, he 
does not despise the opinions of others. 

" The four seasons have different characteristics. 

348 CJniang Tzil 

but God shows no preference for either, and there- 
fore we have the year complete. 

With results which could not be otherwise achieved. 

The functions of the various classes of officials 
differ ; but the sovereign shows no partiality, and 
therefore the empire is governed. There arc the 
civil and the military ; but the truly great man 
shows no preference for either, and therefore their 
efficacy is complete. All things are under the 
operation of varying laws ; but Tao shows no 
partiality and therefore it cannot be identified. 

As the given part of anything. 

Not being able to be identified, it consequently 
does nothing. And by doing nothing all things 
can be done. 

" Seasons have their beginnings and their ends. 
Generations change and change. Good and evil 
fortune alternate, bringing sorrow here, happiness 
there. 

Nunc mihi, nunc alio, benigna. 

He who obstinately views things from his own 
standpoint only, may be right in one case and 
wrong in another. Just as in a great jungle all kinds 
of shrubs are found together ; or as on a mountain 
you see trees and stones indiscriminately mixed, — 
so is what we call society." 

" Would it not do then," asked Shao Chih, " if 
we were to call this Tao ? " 

" It would not," replied T'ai Kung Tiao. " All 

CAP. XXV.] Tsi Yang 349 

creation is made up of more than ten thousand 
things. We speak of creation as the Ten Thousand 
Things merely because it is a convenient term by 
which to express a large number. In point of out- 
ward shape the universe is vast. In point of influ- 
ence the Positive and Negative principles are 
mighty. Yet Tao folds them all in its embrace. 
For convenience' sake the bond of society is called 
great. But how can that which is thus conditioned 

By having a name. 

be compared with Tao ? There is as wide a 
difference between them as there is between a horse 
and a dog." 

" Whence then," enquired Shao Chih, '' comes 
the vitality of all things between the four points of 
the compass, between heaven above and earth 
beneath ? " 

"The Positive and Negative principles," answered 
T'ai Kung Tiao, " influence, act upon, and regulate 
each other. The four seasons alternate with, give 
birth to, and destroy one another. Hence, loves and 
hates, and courses rejected and courses adopted. 
Hence too, the intercourse of the sexes. 

" States of peril and safety alternate. Good and 
evil fortune give birth to one another. Slowness 
and speed are mutually exclusive. Collection and 
dispersion are correlates. The actuality of these 
may be noted. 

There is the name and the embodiment. 
The essence of each can be verified. There is 

350 Chiiang Tzu 

regular movement forward, modified by deflection 
into a curve. Exhaustion leads to renewal. The 
end introduces a new beginning. This is the law 
of material existences. The force of language, the 
reach of knowledge, cannot pass beyond the bounds 
of such material existences. The disciple of Tao 
refrains from prying into the states after or before. 
Human speculation stops short of this," 

"Chi Ch^n," said Shao Chih, " taught Chance ; 
Chieh Tzu taught Predestination. 

" Two Sages." Cotmn. 

In the speculations of these two schools, on which 
side did right lie ? " 

" The cock crows," replied T'ai Kung Tiao, 
" and the dog barks. So much we know. But the 
wisest of us could not say why one crows and the 
other barks, nor guess why they crow or bark 
at all. 

" Let me explain. The infinitely small is inap- 
preciable ; the infinitely great is immeasurable. 
Chance and Predestination must refer to the con- 
ditioned. Consequently, both are wrong. 

" Predestination involves a real existence. 

Of a God. 

Chance implies an absolute absence of any principle. 
To have a name and the embodiment thereof, — 
this is to have a material existence. To have no 
name and no embodiment, — of this one can speak 
and think ; but the more one speaks the farther off 
one gets. 

CAP. XXV.] Tse Yang 35 1 

" The unborn creature cannot be kept from life. 
So powerful is its " will to live." 

The dead cannot be tracked. From birth to death 
is but a span ; yet the secret cannot be known. 
Chance and Predestination are but a priori 
solutions. 

" When I seek for a beginning, I find only time 
infinite. When I look forward to an end, I see 
only time infinite. Infinity of time past and to 
come implies no beginning and is in accordance 
with the laws of material existences. Predestination 
and Chance give us a beginning, but one which is 
compatible only with the existence of matter. 

And not with the time before matter was. 

"Tao cannot be existent. If it were existent, it 
could not be non-existent. The very name of 
Tao is only adopted for convenience' sake. Pre- 
destination and Chance are limited to material 
existences. How can they bear upon the infinite ? 

" Were language adequate, it would take but a 
day to fully set forth Tao. Not being adequate, 
it takes that time to explain material existences. 
Tao is something beyond material existences. It 
cannot be conveyed either by words or by silence. 
In that state which is neither speech nor silence, its 
transcendental nature maybe apprehended." 

"With this essay in China," says Lin Hsi Chung, 
" what need to fetch Buddhist books from the 
West?" 

y 

352 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

Contingencies. 

Argument : — The external uncertain — The internal alone without harm — 
Life and death are external — The soul only is under man's control — 
Folly of worldliness — Illustrations. 

CONTINGENCIES are uncertain. Hence the 
decapitation of Lung Feng, the disembowel- 
ment of Pi Kan, the enthusiasm of Chi Tzu, the 
death of Wu Lai, the flights of Chieh and Chou. 

See pp. 40, 72. Wu Lai was an intriguing 
official who held office under the tyrant Chou Hsin. 

No sovereign but would have loyal ministers ; 
yet loyalty does not necessarily inspire confidence. 
Hence Wu Yiian found a grave in the river ; 

See p. 221. 

and Chang Hung perished in Shu, his blood, 
after being preserved three years, turning into 
green jade. 

No parent but would have filial sons ; yet filial 
piety does not necessarily inspire love. Hence 
Hsiao Chi sorrrowed, and Tseng Shen grieved. 

The first, prince of the House of Yin, was turned 
out of doors by his stepmother. The second, one of 
the disciples of Confucius and a rare pattern of filial 

CAP. XXVI.] Contingencies 353 

piety, grieved because his mother was too old to hit 
him hard enough. See p. 100. 

Wood rubbed with wood produces fire. Metal 
exposed to fire will liquefy. If the Positive and 
Negative principles operate inharmoniously, heaven 
and earth are greatly disturbed. Thunder crashes, 
and with rain comes lightning, scorching up the 
tall locust-trees. One fears lest sky and land should 
collapse and leave no escape. Unable to \\^ perdtt, 
the heart feels as though suspended between heaven 
and earth. 

So in the struggle between peace and unrest, the 
friction between good and evil, much fire is evolved 
which consumes the inner harmony of man. But 
the mind is unable to resist fire. It is destroyed, 
and with it Tao comes to an end. 

Chuang Tzu's family being poor, he went to 
borrow some corn from the prince of Chien-ho. 

"Yes," said the prince. "I am just about 
collecting the revenue of my fief, and will then 
lend you three hundred ounces of silver. Will 
that do?" 

At this Chuang Tzu flushed with anger and 
said, " Yesterday, as I was coming along, I heard 
a voice calling me. I looked round, and in the cart- 
rut I saw a stickleback. 

" 'And what do you want, stickleback?' said I. 

" * I am a denizen of the eastern ocean,' replied 
the stickleback. ' Pray, Sir, a pint of water to save 
my life.' 

2 A 

354 Chtiang Tzu 

" ' Yes,' said I. * I am just going south to visit 
the princes of Wu and Yiieh. I will bring you some 
from the west river. Will that do ? ' 

" At this the stickleback flushed with anger and 
said, * I am out of my element. I have nowhere to 
go. A pint of water would save me. But to talk 
to me like this, — you might as well put me in a 
dried-fish shop at once.' " 

The above episode is condemned by Lin Hsi Chung 
on the score of style. 

J^n Kung Tzu 

A young noble of the Jen State. Coinm, 

got a huge hook on a big line, which he baited with 
fifty oxen. He squatted down at Kuei-chi, and cast 
into the eastern ocean. Every day he fished, but for 
a whole year he caught nothing. Then came a great 
fish which swallowed the bait, and dragging the 
huge hook dived down below. This way and that 
way it plunged about, erecting the dorsal fin. The 
white waves rolled mountain high. The great deep 
was shaken up. The noise was like that of so 
many devils, terrifying people for many miles 
around. 

But when Jen Kung Tzu had secured his fish, he 
cut it up and salted it. And from Chih-ho east- 
wards, and from Ts'ang-wu northwards, there was 
none but ate his fill of that fish. Even among 
succeeding generations, gobemoiiches of the day 
recounted the marvellous tale. 

CAP. XXVI.] Contingencies 355 

To take a rod and line, and go to a pool, and 
catch small fry is a very different thing from catch- 
ing big fish. And by means of a little show of 
ability to secure some small billet is a very different 
thing from really pushing one's way to the front. 
So that those who do not imitate the example of 
J^n Kung Tzu will be very far from becoming 
leaders in their generation. 
Also spurious. 

When some Confucianists were opening a grave 
in accordance with their Canons of Poetry and 
Rites, the master shouted out, " Day is breaking. 
How are you getting on with the work ? " 

'* Not got off the burial-clothes yet," answered 
an apprentice. " There is a pearl in the mouth." 
Now the Canon of Poetry says — 
The greenest corn 
Grows over graves. 
In life, no charity ; 
In death, no pearl. 

So seizing the corpse's brow with one hand, and 
forcing down its chin with the other, these Confu- 
cianists proceed to tap its cheeks with a metal 
hammer, in order to make the jaws open gently and 
not injure the pearl ! 

The above, pronounced by Lin Hsi Chung to be 
spurious, is aimed at the Confucianists, who are 
ready to commit any outrage on natural feeling so 
long as there is no violation of the details of their 
own artificial system. 

2 A 2 

35^ Chuang Tzii 

A disciple of Lao Lai Tzu 
A sage of the Ch'u State, 
while out gathering fuel, chanced to meet Confucius. 
On his return, he said, "There is a man over there 
with a long body and short legs, round shoulders 
and drooping ears. He looks as though he were 
sorrowing over mankind. I know not who he 
can be." 

" It is Confucius ! " cried Lao Lai Tzu. " Bid 
him come hither." 

When Confucius arrived, Lao Lai Tzu addressed 
him as follows : — 

" Ch'iu ! Get rid of your dogmatism and your 
specious knowledge, and you will be really a supe- 
rior man." 

Confucius bowed and was about to retire, when 
suddenly his countenance changed and he enquired, 
" Shall I then be able to enter upon Tao ? " 

" The wounds of one generation being too much," 
answered Lao Lai Tzu, "you would take to your- 
self the sorrows of all time. Are you not weary ? 
Is your strength equal to the task? 

" To employ goodness as a passport to influence 
through the gratification of others, is an everlasting 
shame. Yet this is the common way of all, to lure 
people by fame, to bind them by ties of grati- 
fication. 

" Better than extolling Yao and cursing Chieh is 
oblivion of both, keeping one's praises to oneself. 
These things react injuriously on self ; the agitation 
of movement results in deflection. 

CAP. xxvi.j Contingencies 2>S1 

" The true Sage is a passive agent. If he suc- 
ceeds, he simply feels that he was provided by no 
effort of his own with the energy necessary to 
success." 

Prince Ylian of Sung dreamed one night that a 
man with dishevelled hair peeped through a side 
door and said, " I have come from the waters of 
Tsai-lu. I am a marine messenger attached to the 
staff of the River God. A fisherman, named Yii 
Ch'ieh, has caught me." 

When the prince awaked, he referred his dream 
to the soothsayers, who said, "This is a divine 
tortoise." 

" Is there any fisherman," asked the prince, 
'* whose name is Yu Ch'ieh ? " 

Being told there was, the prince gave orders for 
his appearance at court ; and the next day Yii 
Ch'ieh had an audience. 

"Fisherman," said the prince, "what have you 
caught ? " 

" I have netted a white tortoise," replied the 
fisherman, " five feet in semi-circumference." 

" Bring your tortoise," said the prince. But 
when it came, the prince could not make up his 
mind whether to kill it or keep it alive. Thus in 
doubt, he had recourse to divination, and received 
the following response : — 

Slay the tortoise for purposes of divination and 
good fortune will result. 

So the tortoise was despatched. After w^hich, 

358 Chuang Tzu 

out of seventy-two omens taken, not a single one 
proved false. 

" A divine tortoise," said Confucius, " can appear 
to prince Yuan in a dream, yet it cannot escape 
the net of Yii Ch'ieh. Its wisdom can yield 
seventy-two faultless omens, yet it cannot escape 
the misery of being cut to pieces. Truly wisdom 
has its limits ; spirituality, that which it cannot 
reach. 

"In spite of the highest wisdom, there are count- 
less snares to be avoided. If a fish has not to fear 
nets, there are always pelicans. Get rid of small 
wisdom, and great wisdom will shine upon you. 
Put away goodness and you will be naturally good. 
A child does not learn to speak because taught by 
professors of the art, but because it lives among 
people who can themselves speak." 

Hui Tzu said to Chuang Tzu, " Your theme, 
Sir, is the useless." 

" You must understand the useless," replied 
Chuang Tzu, " before you can discuss the useful. 

" For instance, the earth is of huge proportions, 
yet man uses of it only as much as is covered by 
the sole of his foot. By and by, he turns up his 
toes and goes beneath it to the Yellow Spring. 
Has he any further use for it ? " 

" He has none," replied Hui Tzu. 

" And in like manner," replied Chuang Tzu, 
" may be demonstrated the use of the useless. 

" Could a man transcend the limits of the 

CAP. XXVI.] Contingencies 359 

human," said Chuang Tzu, '' would he not do so ? 
Unable to do so, how should he succeed ? 

" The determination to retire, to renounce the 
world, — such alas ! is not the fruit of perfect wis- 
dom or immaculate virtue. From cataclysms 
ahead, these do not turn back ; nor do they heed 
the approach of devouring flame. Although there 
are class distinctions of high and low, these are but 
for a time, and under the changed conditions of a 
new sphere are unknown. 

In the transcendental state. 

" Wherefore it has been said, ' The perfect man 
leaves no trace behind.' 

" For instance, to glorify the past and to con- 
demn the present has always been the way of 
the scholar. 

Laudator temporis acti. 

Yet if Hsi Wei Shih and individuals of that class 

Sc. patriarchs. 

were caused to re-appear in the present day, which 
of them but would accommodate himself to the 
age? 

" Only the perfect man can transcend the limits 
of the human and yet not withdraw from the 
world, live in accord with mankind and yet suffer 
no injury himself. Of the world's teachings he 
learns nothing. He has that within which makes 
him independent of others. 

" If the eye is unobstructed, the result is sight. 
If the ear is unobstructed the result is hearing. If 

360 Chuang Tzu 

the nose is unobstructed, the result is sense of 
smell. If the mouth is unobstructed, the result is 
sense of taste. If the mind is unobstructed, the 
result is wisdom. If wisdom is unobstructed, the 
result is Te. 

" Tao may not be obstructed. To obstruct is 
to strangle. This affects the base, and all evils 
spring into life. 

"All sentient beings depend upon breath. If 
this does not reach them in sufficient quantity, it 
is not the fault of God. God supplies it day and 
night without cease, but man stops the passage. 

" Man has for himself a spacious domain. His 
mind may roam to heaven. If there is no room in 
the house, the wife and her mother-in-law run 
against one another. If the mind cannot roam to 
heaven, the faculties will be in a state of anta- 
gonism. Those who would benefit mankind from 
deep forests or lofty mountains are simply unequal 
to the strain upon their higher natures. 

It is for that reason they become hermits. 

" Ill-regulated virtue ends in reputation. Ill- 
regulated reputation ends in notoriety. Scheming 
leads to confusion. Knowledge begets contentions. 
Obstinacy produces stupidity. Organised govern- 
ment is for the general good of all. 

" Spring rains come in due season, and plants 
and shrubs burst up from the earth. Weeding and 
tending do not begin until such plants and shrubs 
have reached more than half their growth, and 
without being conscious of the fact. 

CAP. XXVI.] Contingencies 361 

" Repose gives health to the sick. Rubbing the 
eyelids removes the wrinkles of old age. Quiet 
will dispel anxieties. These remedies however are 
the resource only of those who need them. Others 
who are free from such ills pay no attention 
thereto. 

" That which the true Sage marvels at in the 
empire, claims not the attention of the Divine man. 
That which the truly virtuous man marvels at in 
his own sphere, claims not the attention of the true 
Sage. That which the superior man marvels at 
in his State, claims not the attention of the truly 
virtuous man. How the mean man adapts himself 
to his age, claims not the attention of the superior 
man. 

" The keeper of the Yen gate. 

Of the capital of the Sung State. 

having maltreated himself severely in consequence 
of the death of his parents, received a high official 
post. 

In reward for his filial piety. 

His relatives thereupon maltreated themselves, and 
some half of them died. 

In the vain endeavour to secure like rewards. 

" Yao offered the empire to Hsii Yu, but Hsii 
Yu fled. T'ang offered it to Wu Kuang, but Wu 
Kuang declined with anger. 

See pp. 6, 72. 

" When Chi T'o heard of Hsii Yu's flight, he 

362 Chuang Tzu 

took all his disciples with him and jumped into the 
river K'uan ; 

As a tribute to his eminent virtue. 

upon which the various feudal princes mourned for 
three years, 

They did not resign their fiefs at his example. 

and Shen T'u Ti had the river filled up. 

Fearing similar ill-advised acts. For names, see 
pp. 6, 72. 

" The raison dStre of a fish-trap is the fish. 
When the fish is caught, the trap may be ignored. 
The raiso7t detre of a rabbit-snare is the rabbit. 
When the rabbit is caught the snare may be 
ignored. The raison detre of language is an idea 
to be expressed. When the idea is expressed, the 
language may be ignored. But where shall I find 
a man to ignore language, with whom I may be 
able to converse ? " 

363 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

Language. 

Argument : — Speech, natural and artificial — Natural speech in harmony 
with the divine — Destiny — The ultimate cause — Purification of the 
soul — Illustrations, 

OF language put into other people's mouths, nine 
tenths will succeed. Of language based upon 
weighty authority, seven tenths. But language 
which flows constantly over, as from a full goblet, 
is in accord with God. 

The natural overflowings of the heart. 

When language is put into other people's mouths, 
outside support is sought. Just as a father does 
not negotiate his son's marriage ; for any praise he 
could bestow would not have the same value as 
praise by an outsider. Thus, the fault is not mine, 
but that of others. 

Who will not believe the original speaker. 

To that which agrees with our own opinions we 
assent ; from that which does not we dissent. We 
regard that which agrees with our own opinion as 
right. We regard that which differs from our 
opinion as wrong. Language based on weighty 
authority is used to bar further argument. The 

364 Chtiang Tzu 

authorities are our superiors, our elders in years. 
But if they lack the requisite knowledge and ex- 
perience, being our superiors only in the sense of 
age, then they are not our superiors. And if men 
are not the superiors of their fellows, no one troubles 
about them. And those about whom no one troubles 
are merely stale. 

Language which flows constantly over, as from 
a full goblet, is in accord with God. 

Embracing both positive and negative in One. 

Because it spreads out on all sides, it endures for 
all time. Without language, contraries are iden- 
tical. The identity is not identical with its ex- 
pression : the expression is not identical with its 
identity. Therefore it has been said. Language 
not expressed in language is not language. Con- 
stantly spoken, it is as though not spoken. Con- 
stantly unspoken, it is not as though not spoken. 

From the subjective point of view, there are 
possibilities and impossibilities, there are suit- 
abilities and unsuitabilities. This results from the 
natural affinity of things for what they are and 
their natural antagonism to what they are not. 
For all things have their own particular constitu- 
tions and potentialities. Nothing can exist without 
these. 

See p. 19. 

But for language that constantly flows over, as 
from a full goblet, and is in accord with God, how 
should the permanent be attained ? 

CAP. XXVII.] Language 365 

All things spring from germs. Under many 
diverse forms these things are ever being repro- 
duced. Round and round, like a wheel, no part of 
which is more the starting-point than any other. 
This is called the equilibrium of God. And he 
who holds the scales is God. 

Alluding to the Identity-philosophy, which means, 
in the words of Emerson, "that nature iterates her 
means perpetually on successive planes .... The 
whole art of the plant is still to repeat leaf on leaf 
without end." 

Chuang Tzu said to Hui Tzu, "When Confucius 
reached his sixtieth year he changed his opinions. 
What he had previously regarded as right, he ulti- 
mately came to regard as wrong. But who shall 
say whether the right of to-day may not be as 
wrong as the wrong of the previous fifty-nine 
years ? " 

See p. 345. 

" He was a persevering worker," replied Hui 
Tzu, "and his wisdom increased day by day." 

His conversion was no spasmodic act. 

" Confucius," replied Chuang Tzu, " discarded 
both perseverance and wisdom, but did not attempt 
to formulate the doctrine in words. He said, * Man 
has received his talents from God, together with a 
soul to give them life. He should speak in accord- 
ance with established laws. His words should be 
in harmony with fixed order. Personal advantage 

366 CJiuang Tzit 

and duty to one's neighbour lie open before us. 
Likes and dislikes, rights and wrongs, are but as 
men choose to call them. But to bring submission 
into men's hearts, so that they shall not be stiff- 
necked, and thus fix firmly the foundations of the 
empire, — to that, alas ! I have not attained.' " 

" From the above," says Lin Hsi Chung, " we may 
see that Hui Tzii, though skilled in winning debates 
was unskilled in winning hearts." 

Tseng Tzu held office twice. His emotions varied 
in each case. 

See pp. 100, 352. 

"As long as my parents were alive," said he, " I 
was happy on a small salary. When I had a large 
salary, but my parents were no more, I was sad." 

A disciple said to Confucius, " Can we call Ts^ng 
Tzu a man without cares to trouble him ?" 

Money being no object to him. 

" He had cares to trouble him," replied Confucius. 
" Can a man who has no cares to trouble him feel 
grief? His small salary and his large salary were 
to him like a heron or a mosquito flying past." 

Yen Ch'eng Tzu Yu said to Tung Kuo Tzu Chi, 

See p. 324. 

" One year after receiving your instructions I be- 
came naturally simple. After two years, I could 
adapt myself as required. After three years, I un- 

CAP. XXVII.] Language 367 

derstood. After four years, my intelligence deve- 
loped. After five years, it was complete. After six 
years, the spirit entered into me. After seven, I 
knew God. After eight, life and death existed for 
me no more. After nine, perfection. 

" Life has its distinctions ; but in death we are 
all made equal. That death should have an origin, 
but that life should have no origin, — can this be 
so ? What determines its presence in one place, 
its absence in another ? 

" Heaven has its fixed order. 
Visible to all. 
Earth has yielded up its secrets to man. But 
where to seek whence am I ? 

" Not knowing the hereafter, how can we deny 
the operation of Destiny ? Not knowing what pre- 
ceded birth, how can we assert the operation of 
Destiny ? When things turn out as they ought, 
who shall say that the agency is not supernatural ? 
When things turn out otherwise, who shall say that 
it is?" 

The various Penumbrae said to the Umbra, 
" Before you were looking down, now you are look- 
ing up. Before you had your hair tied up, now 
it is all loosed. Before you were sitting, now you 
have got up. Before you were moving, now you 
are stopping still. How is this ? " 

" Gentlemen," replied the Umbra, " the question 
is hardly worth asking. 

Ultimate causes being unknowable. 

368 C/ntang Tzii 

I do these things, but I do not know why. I am 
like the scaly back of the cicada, the shell of the 
locust, — apparently independent, but not really so. 
By firelight or in daylight I am seen : in darkness 
or by night I am gone. And if I am dependent on 
these, how much more are they dependent on some- 
thing else ? When they come, I come with them. 
When they go, I go with them. When they live, 
I live with them. But who it is that gives the life, 
how shall we seek to know?" 

Repeated, with variations, from ch. ii. 

Yang Tzu Chii 

See p. 100. 

went southwards to P'ei, and when Lao Tzu was 
travelling westwards to Ch'in, hastened to receive 
him outside the city. Arriving at the bridge, he 
met Lao Tzu ; and the latter standing in the 
middle of the road, looked up to heaven and said 
with a sigh, " At first, I thought you could be 
taught. I think so no more." 

Yang Tzu Chii made no reply, but when they 
reached the inn, handed Lao Tzu water for washing 
and rinsing, and a towel and comb. He then re- 
moved his own boots outside the door, and crawling 
on his knees into the Master's presence, said, " I 
have been wishing to ask for instruction, Sir, but 
as you were travelling and not at leisure, I did not 
venture. You are now, Sir, at leisure. May I 
enquire the reason of what you said ? " 

CAP. XXVII.] Lmigiiage 369 

*' You have an overbearing look," said Lao Tzu. 
"Who would live with such a man? He who is 
truly pure behaves as though he were sullied. He 
who has virtue in abundance behaves as thouQ^h it 
were not enough." 

These last two sentences occur in the Tao-Te-Cki'ng, 
ch. xH, and also in the works of Lieh Tzii as part of 
that author's own text. See The Reniains of Lao 
Tzii, p. 29. 

Yang Tzii Chii changed countenance at this, and 
replied, " I hear and obey." 

Now when Yang Tzii Chii first went to the inn, 
the visitors there had come out to receive him. 
Mine host had arranged his mat, while the land- 
lady held towel and comb. The visitors had given 
him up the best seats, and those who were cooking 
had left the stove free for him. But when he went 
back, 

After his Interview with Lao Tzu. 

the other visitors struggled to get the best seats for 
themselves. 

So changed was he in spirit. 

Lin Hsi Chung considers that this chapter should 
immediately precede what is now ch. xxxii, from 
which it has been separated by the interpolation of 
the four following chapters, all admittedly spurious. 

2 B 

370 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

On Declining Power. 

[Spurious.] 

YAO offered to resign the empire to Hsii Yu, 
but the latter declined. 

He then offered it to Tzii Chou Chih Fu, who 
said, " There is no objection to making me em- 
peror. But just now I am suffering from a trouble- 
some disease, and am engaged in trying to cure it. 
I have no leisure to look after the empire." 

Now the empire is of paramount importance. 
Yet here was a man who w^ould not allow it to 
injure his chance of life. How much less then 
would he let other things do so ? Yet it is only he 
who would do nothing in the way of government 
who is fit to be trusted with the empire. 

Those personages who have not been previously 
mentioned may be taken to be allegorical. g 

Shun offered to resign the empire to Tzu Chou 
Chih Poh. The latter said, " Just now I am 
suffering from a troublesome disease, and am 
engaged in trying to cure it. I have no leisure to 
look after the empire." 

CAP. XXVIII.] On DecliniJig Poiuev 371 

Now the empire is a great trust ; but not to 
sacrifice one's life for it is precisely where the man 
of Tao differs from the man of the world. 

Shun offered to resign the empire to Shan 
Chiian. Shan Chiian said, " I am a unit in the 
sum of the universe. In winter I wear fur clothes. 
In summer I wear grass-cloth. In spring I plough 
and sow, toiling with my body. In autumn I gather 
in the harvest, and devote myself to rest and enjoy- 
ment. At dawn I go to work ; at sunset I leave 
off. Contented with my lot I pass through life with 
a light heart. Why then should I trouble myself 
with the empire? Ah, Sir, you do not know me." 

So he declined, and subsequently hid himself 
among the mountains, nobody knew where. 

Shun offered the empire to a friend, a labourer 
of Shih Hu. 

** Sire," said the latter, " you exert yourself too 
much. The chief thing is to husband one's strength ; " 
— meaning that in point of real virtue Shun had not 
attained. 

Then, husband and wife, bearing away their 
household gods and taking their children with 
them, went off to the sea and never came back. 

When T'ai Wang Shan Fu was occupying Pin, 
he was attacked by savages. He offered them skins 
and silk, but they declined these. He offered them 
dogs and horses, but they declined these also. 

2 B 2 

372 Chuaug Tzu 

He then offered them pearls and jade, but these 
too they declined. What they wanted was the 
territory. 

" To live with a man's elder brother," said T ai 
Wang Shan Fu, 

Addressing his own people. 

"and slay his younger brother; to live with a man's 
father and slay his son, — this I could not bear to 
do. Make shift to remain here. To be my sub- 
jects or the subjects of these savages, where is 
the difference ? Besides I have heard say that we 
ought not to let that which is intended to nourish 
life become injurious to life." 

Alluding to the "territory." 

Thereupon he took his staff and went off. His 
people all followed him, and they founded a new 
State at the foot of Mount Ch'i. 

Now T'ai Wang Shan Fu undoubtedly had a 
proper respect for life. And those who have a 
proper respect for life, if rich and powerful, do not 
let that which should nourish injure the body. If 
poor and lowly, they do not allow gain to involve 
them in physical wear and tear. 

But the men of the present generation who 
occupy positions of power and influence, are all 
afraid of losing what they have got. Directly they 
see a chance of gain, away goes all care for their 
bodies. Is not that a cause for confusion ? 

In three successive cases the people of Yiieh had 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 373 

put their prince to death. Accordingly, Shou, the 
son of the last prince, was much alarmed, and fled 
to Tan Hsiieh, leaving the State of Yiieh without a 
ruler. 

Shou was at first nowhere to be found, but at 
length he was traced to Tan Hsiieh. He was, how- 
ever, unwilling to come forth, so they smoked him 
out with moxa. They had a royal carriage ready 
for him ; and as Shou seized the cord to mount the 
chariot, he looked up to heaven and cried, '' Oh ! 
ruling, ruling, could I not have been spared this?" 

It was not that Shou objected to be a prince. 
He objected to the dangers associated with such 
positions. Such a one was incapable of sacri- 
ficing life to the State, and for that very reason the 
people of Yiieh wanted to get him. 

The States of Han and Wei were struggling to 
annex each other's territory when Tzii Hua Tzu 
went to see prince Chao Hsi. Finding the latter 
very downcast, Tzii Hua Tzii said, *' Now suppose 
the representatives of the various States were to 
sign an agreement before your Highness, to the 
effect that although cutting off the left hand would 
involve loss of the right, while cutting off the right 
would involve loss of the left, nevertheless that who- 
soever would cut off either should be emperor over 
all, — w^ould your Highness cut? " 

" I would not," replied the prince. 

" Very good," said Tzii Hua Tzii. '' It is clear 
therefore that one's two arms are worth more than 

374 Chtiang Tzft 

the empire. And one's body is worth more than 
one's arms, while the State of Han is infinitely less 
important than the empire. Further, what you are 
struggling over is of infinitely less importance than 
the State of Han. Yet your Highness is wearing 
out body and soul alike in fear and anxiety lest you 
should not get it." 

'' Good indeed ! " cried the prince. '' Many have 
counselled me, but I have never heard the like of 
this." 

From which we may infer that Tzii Hua Tzii 
knew the difference between what was of importance 
and what was not. 

The prince of Lu, hearing that Yen Ho had 
attained to Tag, despatched messengers with 
presents to open communications. 

Yen Ho lived in a hovel. He wore clothes of 
coarse grass, and occupied himself in tending oxen. 

When the messengers arrived. Yen Ho went out 
to meet them ; whereupon they enquired, ''Is this 
where Yen Ho lives ? " 

" This is Yen Ho's house," replied the latter. 

The messengers then produced the presents ; 
but Yen Ho said, " I fear you have made a mis- 
take. And as you might get into trouble, it would 
be as well to go back and make sure." 

This the messengers accordingly did. When 
however they returned, there was no trace to be 
found of Yen Ho. Thus it is that men like Yen 
Ho hate wealth and power, 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 375 

Wherefore it has been said that the best part of 
Tao is for self-culture, the surplus for governing 
a State, and the dregs for governing the empire. 
From which we may infer that the great deeds of 
kings and princes are but the leavings of the Sage. 
For preserving the body and nourishing vitality, 
they are of no avail. Yet the superior men of to- 
day endanger their bodies and throw away their 
lives in their greed for the things of this world. Is 
not this pitiable ? 

The true Sage in all his actions considers the 
why and the wherefore. But there are those now-a- 
days who use the pearl of the prince of Sui to shoot 
a bird a thousand yards off. 

A wonderfully brilliant gem, of a " ten chariot " 
illuminating power. 

And the world of course laughs at them. Why ? 
Because they sacrifice the greater to get the less. 
But surely life is of more importance even than the 
prince's pearl ! 

Lieh Tzii was poor. His face wore a hungry 
look. 

A visitor one day mentioned this to Tzu Yang 

Prime Minister. 

of Cheng, saying, " Lieh Tzu is a scholar who has 
attained to Tao. He lives in your Excellency's 
State, and yet he is poor. Can it be said that your 
Excellency does not love scholars ? " 
Thereupon Tzu Yang gave orders that Lieh 

37^ Chuaiig Tzii 

Tzu should be supplied with food. But when 
Lieh Tzu saw the messengers, he bowed twice and 
declined. 

When the messengers had gone, and Lieh Tzu 
went within, his wife gazed at him, and beating her 
breast said, " I have heard that the wife and chil- 
dren of a man of Tao are happy and joyful. But 
see how hungry I am. His Excellency sent you 
food, and you would not take it. Is not this flying 
in the face of Providence ? " 

" His Excellency did not know me personally," 
answered Lieh Tzu with a smile. " It was because of 
what others said about me that he sent me the food. 
If then men were to speak ill of me, he would also 
act upon it. For that reason I refused the food." 

Subsequently, there was trouble among the people 
of Cheng, and Tzu Yang was slain. 

When Prince Chao of the Ch'u State lost his 
kingdom, he was followed into exile by his butcher, 
named Yiieh. 

On his restoration, as he was distributing rewards 
to those who had remained faithful to him, he came 
to the name of Yiieh. 

Yueh, however, said, " When the prince lost his 
kingdom, I lost my butchery. Now that the prince 
has got back his kingdom, I have got back my 
butchery. I have recovered my office and salary. 
What need for further reward ? " 

On hearing this, the prince gave orders that he 
should be made to take his reward. 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 377 

" It was not through my fault," argued Yiieh, 
" that the prince lost his kingdom, and I should 
not have taken the punishment. Neither was it 
through me that he got it back, and I cannot there- 
fore accept the reward." 

When the prince heard this answer, he com- 
manded Yiieh to be brought before him. But Yiieh 
said, " The laws of the Ch'u State require that a 
subject shall have deserved exceptionally well of his 
prince before being admitted to an audience. Now 
my wisdom was insuflicient to preserve this king- 
dom, and my courage insufficient to destroy the 
invaders. When the Wu soldiers entered Ying, I 
feared for my life and fled. That was why I 
followed the prince. And if now the prince wishes 
to set law and custom aside and summon me to an 
audience, this is not my idea of proper behaviour 
on the part of the prince." 

'' Yiieh," said the prince to Tzii Chi, his master 
of the horse, " occupies a lowly position ; yet his 
principles are of the most lofty. Go, make him a 
San Ching." 

'' I am aware," replied Yiieh to the master of the 
horse, " that the post of San Ching is more honour- 
able than that of butcher. And I am aware that 
the emolument is larger than what I now receive. 
Still, because I want preferment and salary, I 
cannot let my prince earn the reputation of being 
injudicious in his patronage. I must beg to decline. 
Let me go back to my butchery." 

And he adhered to his refusal. 

37^ CJmang Tzu 

Yiian Hsien dwelt in Lu, — in a mud hut, with a 
grass-grown roof, an apology for a door, and two 
mulberry-trees for door-posts. The windows which 
lio^hted his two rooms were no bieeer than the 
mouth of a jar, and were closed by a w^ad of old 
clothes. The hut leaked from above and was damp 
under foot ; yet Yiian Hsien sat gravely there 
playing on the guitar. 

Tzu Kung came driving up in a fine chariot, in a 
white robe lined with purple ; but the hood of the 
chariot was too big for the street. 

When he went to see Yiian Hsien, the latter 
came to the door in a flowery cap, with his shoes 
down at heel, and leaning on a stalk. 

" Good gracious ! " cried Tzii Kung, " whatever 
is the matter with you ? " 

*' I have heard," replied Yiian Hsien, "that he 
who is without wealth is called poor, and that he 
who learns without being able to practise is said to 
have something the matter with him. Now I am 
merely poor ; I have nothing the matter with me." 

Tzu Kung was much abashed at this reply ; upon 
which Yiian Hsien smiling continued, " To try to 
thrust myself forward among men ; to seek friend- 
ship in mutual flattery ; to learn for the sake of 
others ; to teach for my own sake ; to use benevo- 
lence and duty to one's neighbour for evil ends ; to 
make a great show with horses and carriages, — 
these things I cannot do." 

Tseng TzCi lived in the Wei State. His wadded 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 379 

coat had no outside cloth. His face was bloated 
and rough. His hands and feet were horny hard. 
For three days he had had no fire ; no new clothes 
for ten years. If he set his cap straight the tassel 
would come off. If he drew up his sleeve his elbow 
would poke through. If he pulled up his shoe, 
the heel would come off. Yet slipshod he sang the 
Sacrificial Odes of Shang, his voice filling the 
whole sky, as though it had been some instrument 
of metal or stone. 

The Son of Heaven could not secure him as a 
minister. The feudal princes could not secure him 
as a friend. For he who nourishes his purpose 
becomes oblivious of his body. He who nourishes 
his body becomes oblivious of gain. And he w^ho 
has attained Tao becomes oblivious of his mind. 

" Come hither," said Confucius to Yen Hui. 
''Your family is poor, and your position lowly. 
Why not go into official life ? " 

" I do not wish to," replied Yen Hui. " I have 
fifty acres of land beyond the city walls, which are 
enough to supply me with food. Ten more within 
the walls provide me with clothes. My lute gives 
me all the amusement I want ; and the study of 
your doctrines keeps me happy enough. I do not 
desire to go into official life." 

" Bravo! well said!" cried Confucius with beam- 
ing countenance. " I have heard say that those 
who are contented do not entangle themselves in 
the pursuit of gain. That those who have really 

380 CJmang Tzu 

obtained do not fear the contingency of loss. That 
those who devote themselves to cultivation of the 
inner man, though occupying no position, feel no 
shame. Thus indeed I have long preached. Only 
now, that I have seen Yen Hui, am I conscious of 
the realisation of these words." 

Prince Mou of Chung-shan said to Chan Tzii, 
" My body is in the country, but my heart is in 
town. What am I to do ? " 

" Make life of paramount importance," answered 
Chan Tzii, ''and worldly advantage will cease to 
have weight." 

" That I know," replied the Prince ; " but I am 
not equal to the task." 

'' If you are not equal to this," said Chan Tzii, 
" then it were well for you to pursue your natural 
bent. Not to be equal to a task, and yet to force 
oneself to stick to it, — this is called adding one 
injury to another. And those who suffer such 
two-fold injury do not belong to the class of the 
long-lived." 

Prince Mou of Wei was heir to the throne of a 
large State. For him to become a hermit among 
the hills was more difficult than for an ordinary 
cotton-clothed scholar. And although he had not 
attained to Tao, he may be said to have been on the 
way thither. 

When Confucius was caught between the Ch ens 
and the Ts'ais, he went seven days without proper 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 381 

food. He ate soup of herbs, having no rice. He 
looked very much exhausted, yet he sat within 
playing his guitar and singing to it. 

Yen Hui was picking over the herbs, while Tzu 
Lu and Tzii Kung were talking together. One of 
them said, " Our Master has twice been driven out 
of Lu. They will have none of him in Wei. His 
tree was cut down in Sung. He got into trouble 
in Shang and Chou. And now he is surrounded 
by the Ch'ens and the Ts'ais. Whoever kills him 
is to be held guiltless. Whoever takes him prisoner 
is not to be interfered with. Yet all the time he 
goes on playing and singing without cease. Is this 
the right thing, for a superior man to do ? " 

Yen Hui said nothing, but went inside and told 
Confucius, who laid aside his guitar and said with 
a loud sigh, " Yu and Tz'ii are ignorant fellows. 

These were their personal names. 

Bid them come, and I will speak to them." 

When they entered Tzii Lu said, ** We seem to 
have made a thorough failure." 

" What do you mean ? " cried Confucius. '' The 
superior man who succeeds in Tao, has success. If 
he fails in Tao, he makes a failure. Now I, holding 
fast to the Tao of charity and duty towards one's 
neighbour, have fallen among the troubles of a dis- 
ordered age. What failure is there in that ? 

** Therefore it is that by cultivation of the inner 
man there is no failure in Tao, and when danger 
comes there is no loss of virtue. It is the chill 

382 Chuang Tzii 

winter weather, it is frost, it is snow, which bring 
out the luxuriance of the pine and the fir. 

See Lim Yii, ix, 27. 

I regard it as a positive blessing to be thus situated 
as I am." 

Thereupon he turned abruptly round and went 
on playing and singing. 

At this Tzii Lu hastily seized a shield and began 
dancing to the music, while Tzii Kung said, " I had 
no idea of the height of heaven and of the depth of 
earth." 

The ancients who attained Tao were equally 
happy under success and failure. Their happiness 
had nothing to do with their failure or their success. 
Tag once attained, failure and success became mere 
links in a chain, like cold, heat, wind, and rain. 
Thus Hsii Yu enjoyed himself at Ying-yang, and 
Kung Poh found happiness on the hill-top. 

Whither he retired after a reign of 14 years. 

Shun offered to resign the empire to his friend 
Pei Jen Wu Tse. 

" What a strange manner of man you are ! " cried 
the latter. " Living in the furrowed fields, you 
exchanged such a life for the throne of Yao. And 
as if that was not enough, you now try to heap in- 
dignity upon me. I am ashamed of you." 

Thereupon he drowned himself in the waters of 
Ch'ing-ling. 

" But how about preservation of life ? " asks Lin HsI 
Chung with a sneer. 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 383 

When T'ang was about to attack Chieh, he went 
to consult with Pien Sui. 

'' It is not a matter in which I can help you," said 
the latter. 

" Who can ? " asked T'ang. 

" I do not know," replied Pien Sui. 

T'ang then went to consult with Wu Kuang. 

" It is not a matter in which I can help you," said 
the latter. 

" Who can ? " asked T'ang, 

" I do not know," replied Wu Kuang. 

" What do you think of I Yin ?" asked T'ang. 

" He forces himself," said Wu Kuang, " to put up 
with obloquy. Beyond this I know nothing of him." 

So T'ang took I Yin into his counsels. They 
attacked Chieh, and vanquished him. 

Then T'ang offered to resign the empire in favour 
of Pien Sui. But Pien Sui declined, saying, "When 
your Majesty consulted with me about attacking 
Chieh, you evidently looked on me as a robber. 

Who would steal territory. But men of Tao wage 
no wars. 

Now that you have vanquished him, and you offer 
to resign in my favour, you evidently regard me as 
covetous. I was born indeed in a disordered a^-e. 
But for a man without Tag to thus insult me twice, 
is more than I can endure." 

So he drowned himself in the river Chou. 

Then T'ang offered to resign in favour of Wu 
Kuang, saying, '' The wise plan, the brave execute, 
the good rest therein, — such was the Tag of the 

384 Chuaug Tzii 

ancients. Why, Sir, should not you occupy the 
throne ? " 

But Wu Kuang declined, saying, '' To depose a 
ruler is not to do one's duty to one's neighbour. 
To slay the people is not charity. For others to 
suffer these wrongs, while I enjoy the profits, is 
not honest. I have heard say that one should not 
accept a wage unless earned in accordance with 
right ; and that if the world is without Tao, one 
should not put foot upon its soil, still less rule over 
it ! I can bear this no longer." 

Thereupon he took a stone on his back and 
jumped into the river Lu. 

At the rise of the Chou dynasty there were two 
scholars, named Po I and Shu Ch'i, who lived in 
Ku-tu. 

One of these said to the other, " I have heard 
that in the west there are men who are apparently 
in possession of Tao. Let us go and see them." 

Meaning the men of Chou. 

When they arrived at Ch'i-yang, Wu Wang 

The writer meant Wen Wang, father of Wu Wang. 

heard of their arrival and sent Shu Tan 

Chou Kung. 

to enter into a treaty with them. They were to 
receive emoluments of the second degree and rank 
of the first degree. The treaty was to be sealed 
with blood and buried. 

CAP. XXVIII.] On Declining Power 385 

At this the two looked at each other and smiled. 
"Ah ! " said one of them, " this is strange indeed. 
It is not what we call Tao. 

" When Shen Nung ruled the empire, he wor- 
shipped God without asking for any reward. Some- 
times it was the law he put in force ; sometimes it 
was his personal influence he brought to bear. He 
was loyal and faithful to his people without seeking 
any return. He did not build his success upon 
another's ruin, nor mount high by means of 
another's fall, nor seize opportunities to secure his 
own advantage. 

" But now that the Chous, beholding the ini- 
quities of the Yins, have taken upon themselves to 
govern, we have intrigues above and bribes below. 
Troops are mobilised to protect prestige. Victims 
are slaughtered to give good faith to a treaty. A 
show of virtue is made to amuse the masses. 
Fighting and slaughter are made the means of 
gain. Confusion has simply been exchanged for 
disorder. 

*' I have heard tell that the men of old, living in 
quiet times, never shirked their duties ; but lighting 
upon troublous times, nothing could make them 
stay. The empire is now in darkness. The virtue 
of the Chous has faded. For the empire to be 
united under the Chous would be a disgrace to us. 
Better flee away and keep our actions pure." 

Accordingly, these two philosophers went north 
to Mount Shou-yang, where they subsequently 
starved themselves to death. 

2 c 

386 Chuang Tzil 

Men like Poh I and Shu Ch'i, if wealth and 
honour came to them so that they could properly 
accept, would assuredly not have recourse to such 
heroic measures, nor would they be content to 
follow their own bent, without giving their services 
to their generation. Such was the purity of these 
two scholars. 

387 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

Robber Che. 
[Spurious.] 

CONFUCIUS was on terms of friendship with 
Liu Hsia Chi, whose younger brother was 
known as " Robber Ch^." 

This is an anachronism. Liu Hsia Chi {or Hui) 
was a virtuous official of the Lu State. He flourished 
some 80 and more years before the time of Con- 
fucius. 

Robber Ch^ had a band of followers nine thou- 
sand strong. He ravaged the whole empire, 
plundering the various nobles and breaking into 
people's houses. He drove off oxen and horses. 
He stole men's wives and daughters. Family ties 
put no limit to his greed. He had no respect for 
parents nor for brothers. He neglected the worship 
of his ancestors. Wherever he passed, the greater 
States flew to arms, the smaller ones to places of 
safety. All the people were sore distressed. 

'*A father," said Confucius to Liu Hsia Chi, 
" should surely be able to admonish his son ; an 
elder brother to teach his younger brother. If this 
be not so, there is an end of the value attached to 
these relationships. 

2 c 2 

388 Chiiang Tzii 

" Now you, Sir, are one of the scholars of the 
age, while your younger brother is the Robber Ch^, 
the scourge of the empire. You are unable to teach 
him, and I blush for you. Let me go and have a 
talk with him on your behalf." 

" As to what you say, Sir, about fathers and elder 
brothers," answered Liu Hsia Chi, " if the son will 
not listen to his father, nor the younger brother to 
his elder brother, what becomes of your arguments 
then? 

" Besides, Ch^'s passions are like a bubbling 
spring. His thoughts are like a whirlwind. He is 
strong enough to defy all foes. He can argue until 
wrong becomes right. If you follow his inclina- 
tions, he is pleased. If you oppose them he is angry. 
He is free with the language of abuse. Do not go 
near him." 

Confucius paid no attention to this advice ; but 
with Yen Hui as charioteer and Tzu Kung on his 
right, went off to see Robber Che. 

The latter had just encamped to the south of 
T'ai-shan, and was engaged in devouring a dish of 
minced human liver. Confucius alighted from his 
chariot, and advancing addressed the doorkeeper as 
follows : — 

** I am Confucius of the Lu State. I have heard 
of the high character of your captain." 

He then twice respectfully saluted the door- 
keeper, who went in to announce his arrival. 

When Robber Che heard who it was, he was 
furious. His eyes glared like stars. His hair raised 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber CkS 389 

his cap from his head as he cried out, " What ! that 
crafty scoundrel Confucius of Lu ? Go, tell him 
from me that he is a mere word-mongerer. That he 
talks nonsense about Wen Wang and Wu Wang. 
That he wears an extravagant cap, with a thong 
from the side of a dead ox. That what he says is 
mostly rhodomontade. That he consumes where he 
does not sow, and wears clothes he does not weave. 
That his lips patter and his tongue wags. That his 
rights and wrongs are of his own coining, whereby 
he throws dust in the eyes of rulers and prevents 
the scholars of the empire from reverting to the 
original source of all things. 

Sc. Tao. 

That he makes a great stir about filial piety and 
brotherly love, glad enough himself to secure some 
fat fief or post of power. Tell him that he deserves 
the worst, and that if he does not take himself off 
his liver shall be in my morning stew." 

But Confucius sent in again, saying, " I am a 
friend of Liu Hsia Chi. I am anxious to set eyes 
upon your captain's shoe-strings." 

Anodier interpretation is " upon your captain's feet 
visible from beneath the screen." 

When the doorkeeper gave this second message. 
Robber Che said, ** Bring him before me ! " There- 
upon Confucius hurried in, and avoiding the place 
of honour stepped back and made two obeisances. 

Robber Che, flaming with anger, straddled out 
his two legs, and laying his hand upon his sword 

390 Chuang Tzii. 

glared at Confucius and roaring like a tigress with 
young, said, " Ch'iu ! come here. If what you 
say suits my ideas, you will live. Otherwise you 
will die." 

" I have heard," replied Confucius, *' that the 
world contains three classes of virtue. To grow up 
tall, of a beauty without compare, and thus to be 
the idol of young and old, of noble and lowly alike, 
— this is the highest class. To be possessed of 
wisdom which embraces the universe and can ex- 
plain all things, — this is the middle class. To be 
possessed of courage which will stand test and 
gather followers around, — this is the lowest class. 

" Now any man whose virtue belongs to either of 
these classes is fit to occupy the place and title of 
ruler. But you. Captain, unite all three in yourself. 
You are eight feet two in height. Your expression 
is very bright. Your lips are like vermilion. Your 
teeth like a row of shells. Your voice is like a 
beautiful bell ;^yet you are known as Robber Che. 
Captain, I blush for you. 

" Captain, if you will hearken to me I will go 
south for you to Wu and Yiieh, north to Ch'i 
and Lu, east to Sung and Wei, and west to Chin 
and Ch'u. I will have a great wall built for 
you of many // in extent, enclosing hamlets of 
many hundreds of thousands of inhabitants, over 
which State you shall be ruler. Your relations 
with the empire will enter upon a new phase. You 
will disband your men. You will gather your 
brothers around you. You will join in worship 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber Che 39 1 

of your ancestors. Such is the behaviour of the 
true Sage and the man of parts, and such is what 
the world desires." 

" Ch'iu! come here," cried Robber Ch^ in a great 
rage. "Those who are squared by offers and cor- 
rected by words are the stupid vulgar masses. The 
height and the beauty which you praise in me are 
legacies from my parents. Even though you did 
not praise them, do you think I should be ignorant 
of their existence? Besides, those who flatter to 
the face speak evil behind the back. Now all you 
have been saying about the great State and its 
numerous population simply means squaring me 
by offers as though one of the common herd. And 
of course it would not last. 

*' There is no State bigger than the empire. Yao 
and Shun both got this, yet their descendants have 
not territory enough to insert an awl's point. Tang 
and Wu Wang both sat upon the Imperial throne, 
yet their posterity has been obliterated from the face 
of the earth. 

Hardly in Chuang Tzu's time. 

Was not this because of the very magnitude of the 
prize ? 

'' I have also heard that in olden times the birds 
and animals outnumbered man, and that the latter 
was obliged to seek his safety by building his domi- 
cile in trees. By day he picked up acorns and 
chestnuts. At night he slept upon a branch. Hence 
the name Nest-builders. 

392 Chuang Tzu 

" Of old, the people did not know how to make 
clothes. In summer they collected quantities of fuel, 
and in winter warmed themselves by fire. Hence 
the name Provident. 

"In the days of Shen Nung, they lay down 
without caring where they were and got up without 
caring whither they might go. A man knew his 
mother but not his father. He lived among the 
wild deer. He tilled the ground for food. He wove 
cloth to cover his body. He harboured no thought 
of injury to others. These were the glorious results 
of an age of perfect virtue. 

** The Yellow Emperor, however, could not attain 
to this virtue. He fought with Ch'ih Yu at Cho-lu, 
and blood flowed for a hundred //. Then came 
Yao and Shun with their crowd of ministers. Then 
T'ang who deposed his sovereign, and Wu Wang 
who slew Chou. After which time the strong took 
to oppressing the weak, the many to coercing the 
few, In fact, ever since T'ang and Wu Wang we 
have had none other than disturbers of the peace. 

"And now you come forward preaching the old 
dogmas of Wen Wang and palming off sophistries 
without end, in order to teach future generations. 
You wear patched clothes and a narrow girdle, you 
talk big and act falsely, in order to deceive the 
rulers of the land, while all the time you yourself 
are aiming at wealth and power ! You are the 
biggest thief I know of ; and if the world calls me 
Robber Che, it most certainly ought to call you 
Robber Ch'iu. 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber CM 393 

" By fair words you enticed Tzu Lu to follow 
you. You made him doff his martial cap, 

Shaped like a cock's comb. 

and ungird his long sword, and sit a disciple at 
your feet. And all the world cried out that Con- 
fucius could stop violence and prevent wrong-doing. 
By and by, when Tzu Lu wished to slay the prince 
of Wei, but failed, and was himself hacked to pieces 
and exposed over the eastern gate of Wei, — that 
was because you had not properly instructed him. 

See the account in the Tso Chuan. 

" You call yourself a man of talent and a Sage 
forsooth ! Twice you have been driven out of Lu. 
You were tabooed in Wei. You were a failure in 
Ch'i. You were surrounded by the Ch ens and the 
Ts'ais. In fact, the empire won't have you any- 
where. It was your teaching which brought Tzu 
Lu to his tragical end. You cannot take care, in 
the first place, of yourself, nor, in the second place, 
of others. Of what value can your doctrine be ? 

'* There is none to whom mankind has accorded 
a higher place than to the Yellow Emperor. Yet 
his virtue was not complete. He fought at Cho- 
lu, and blood ran for a hundred //. Yao was not 
paternal. 

He killed his eldest son. 

Shun was not filial. 

He banished his mother's younger brother. 

394 Chttang Tzil 

The great Yii was deficient in one respect. 

He was wanting in natural feeling. When engaged 
in his great engineering work of draining the empire, 
he even passed his own door without going in to see 
his family. 

T'ang deposed his sovereign. Wu Wang van- 
quished Chou. Wen Wang was imprisoned at 
Yin Li. 

" Now these six worthies enjoy a high reputation 
among men. Yet a fuller investigation shows that 
in each case a desire for advantage disturbed their 
original purity and forced it into a contrary direc- 
tion. Hence the shamelessness of their deeds. 

" Among those whom the world calls virtuous 
were Poh I and Shu Ch'i. They declined the 
sovereignty of Ku-chu and died of starvation on 
Mount Shou-yang, their corpses deprived of 
burial. 

" Pao Chiao made a great show of virtue and 
abused the world in general. He grasped a tree 
and died. 

Tzu Kung, one of Confucius' disciples, is said to 
have scolded Pao Chiao so vigorously that the latter 
withered up into dead wood. 

'* Shen T'u Ti, when no heed was paid to his 
counsels, jumped into the river with a stone on his 
back and became food for fishes. 
See p. 72. 

" Chieh Tzu T'ui was truly loyal. He cut a slice 
from his thigh to feed Wen Wang. Afterwards, 
when Wen Wang turned his back upon him, he 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber Che 395 

retired in anger, and grasping a tree, was burnt to 

death. 

He took refuge in a forest, from which Wen Wang, 
anxious to recover his friend, tried to smoke him 
out! 

" Wei Sheng made an assignation with a girl 
beneath a bridge. The girl did not come, and the 
water rose. But Wei Sheng would not leave. He 
grasped a buttress and died. 

*' These four differed in no way from dogs and 
pigs going about begging to be slaughtered. They 
all exaggerated reputation and disregarded death. 
They did not reflect upon their original nature and 
seek to preserve life into the old age allotted. 

** Among ministers whom the world calls loyal, 
none can compare with Wang Tzii, Pi Kan, and 
Wu Tzu Hsii. The last-mentioned drowned him- 
self. Pi Kan was disembowelled. These two 
worthies are what men call loyal ministers ; yet, as 
a matter of fact, all the world laughs at them ! 

" Thus, from the most ancient times down to 
Tzu Hsii and Pi Kan, there have been none de- 
serving of honour. And as to the sermon you, 
Ch'iu, propose to preach to me, — if it is on ghostly 
subjects, I shan't understand them, and if it is on 
human affairs, why there is nothing more to be 
said. I know it all already. 

" I will now tell you a few things. The lust of 
the eye is for beauty. The lust of the ear is for 
music. The lust of the palate is for flavour. The 
lust of ambition is for gratification. Man's greatest 

39^ Chiiang Tzii 

age is one hundred years. A medium old age is 
eighty years. The lowest estimate is sixty years. 
Take away from this the hours of sickness, disease, 
death, mourning, sorrow, and trouble, and there 
will not remain more than four or five days a 
month upon which a man may open his mouth to 
laugh. Heaven and Earth are everlasting. Sooner 
or later every man has to die. That which thus 
has a limit, as compared with that which is ever- 
lasting, is a mere flash, like the passage of some 
swift steed seen through a crack. And those who 
cannot gratify their ambition and live through 
their allotted span, are men who have not attained 
to Tao. 

'* Ch'iu ! all your teachings are nothing to me. 
Begone ! Go home ! Say no more ! Your doctrine 
is a random jargon, full of falsity and deceit. It can 
never preserve the original purity of man. Why 
discuss it further? " 

Confucius made two obeisances and hurriedly 
took his leave. On mounting his chariot, he three 
times missed hold of the reins. His eyes were so 
dazed that he could see nothing. His face was 
ashy pale. With down-cast head he grasped the 
bar of his chariot, unable to find vent for his 
feelings. 

Arriving outside the eastern gate of Lu, he met 
Liu Hsia Chi, who said, " I have not seen you for 
some days. From the look of your equipage I 
should say you had been travelling. I guess now 
you have been to see Che." 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber CM 397 

Confucius looked up to heaven, and replied with 
a sigh, " I have." 

"And did he not rebuff you," asked Liu Hsia 
Chi, " as I said he would ? " 

*' He did," said Confucius. " I am a man who 
has cauterized himself without being ill. I hurried 
away to smooth the tiger's head and comb out his 
beard. And I very nearly got into the tiger's 
mouth." 

Tzu Chang asked Man Kou Te, 
Which means "Full of the Ill-gotten." 

saying, *' Why do you not practise virtue ? Other- 
wise, it is impossible to inspire confidence. And 
without confidence, no place. And without place, 
no wealth. Thus, with a view to reputation or to 
wealth, duty towards one's neighbour is the true 
key. 

As leading to reputation, which was what Tzu Chang 

wanted. 

If you were to discard all thoughts of reputation 
and wealth and attend to the cultivation of the 
heart, surely you would not pass one day without 
practising the higher virtues." 

" Those who have no shame," replied Man Kou 

Meaning himself. 

*' grow rich. Those who inspire confidence make 
themselves conspicuous. 

Meaning Tzii Chang. 

398 Chuang Tzii 

Reputation and wealth are mostly to be got out of 
shamelessness and confidence inspired. Thus, with 
a view to reputation or to wealth, the confidence of 
others is the true key. 

As leading to wealth, which was what Man Kou Te 
wanted. 

If you were to discard all thoughts of reputation 
and wealth, surely the virtuous man would then 
have no scope beyond himself." 
Beyond his own nature. 

" Of old," said Tzu Chang, " Chieh and Chou 
sat upon the Imperial throne, and the whole empire 
was theirs. Yet if you were now to tell any com- 
mon thief that his moral qualities resembled theirs, 
he would resent it as an insult. By such miserable 
creatures are they despised." 

'' Confucius and Mih Tzu, on the other hand, 
were poor and simple enough. Yet if you were to 
tell any Prime Minister of to-day that his moral 
qualities resembled theirs, he would flush with 
pride and declare you were paying him too high a 
compliment. So truly honourable is the man of 
learning. 

" Thus, the power of a monarch does not neces- 
sarily make him worthy ; nor do poverty and a low 
station necessarily make a man unworthy. The 
worthy and the unworthy are differentiated by the 
worthiness and unworthiness of their acts." 

" A petty thief," replied Man Kou Te, " is put in 
gaol. A great brigand becomes ruler of a State. 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber CM 399 

And among the retainers of the latter, men of virtue 
will be found. 

" Of old, Duke Huan, named Hsiao Poh, slew 
his elder brother and took his sister-in-law to wife. 
Yet Kuan Chung became his minister. 

" T'ien Cheng Tzu killed his prince and seized 
the kingdom. Yet Confucius accepted his pay. 
See p. III. 

"To condemn a man in words, yet actually to 
take service under him, — does not this show us 
practice and precept directly opposed to one 
another ? 

" Therefore it was written, ' Who is bad ? Who 
is good ? He who succeeds is the head. He who 
does not succeed is the tail.' " 

" But if you do not practise virtue," said Tzu 
Chang, " and make no distinction between kith 
and kin, assign no duties to the worthy and to the 
unworthy, no precedence to young and old, how 
then are the Five Bonds and the Six Ranks to be 
distinguished ? " 

Commentators are divided as to these Bonds and 
Ranks. One makes the former calendaric. Another 
considers that the five cardinal virtues and six ranks 
of nobility are meant. Of the latter there are only- 
five, but " sovereign " is added to patch the defici- 
ency. 

" Yao slew his eldest son," answered Man Kou 
T^. " Shun banished his mother's brother. Was 
there kith and kin in that ? 

"T'ang deposed Chieh. Wu Wang slew Chou. 

400 Chuang Tzu 

Was that the duty of the worthy towards the un- 
worthy ? 

" Wang Chi was the legitimate heir, but Chow 
Kung slew his elder brother. W^as that precedence 
of young and old ? 

" The false principles of the Confucianists, the 
universal love of the Mihists, — do these help to 
distinguish the Five Bonds and the Six Ranks ? 

" You, Sir, are all for reputation. I am all for 
wealth. As to which pursuit is not in accordance 
with principle nor in harmony with right, let us 
refer to the arbitration of Wu Yoh." 

" The mean man," said Wu Yoh, " devotes him- 
self to wealth. The superior man devotes himself 
to reputation. The moral results are different in 
each case. But if both would set aside their acti- 
vities and devote themselves to doing nothing, the 
results would be the same. 

" Wherefore it has been said, * Be not a mean 
man. Revert to your natural self. Be not a su- 
perior man. Abide by the laws of heaven.' 

"As to the straight and the crooked, view them 
from the standpoint of the infinite. 

All distinctions are thus merged. 

Gaze around you on all sides, until time withdraws 
you from the scene. 

"As to the right and the wrong, hold fast to 
your magic circle, 

At the centre of which all positives and negatives 
converge. See ch. ii, p. i8. 

CAP. XXIX,] Robber Chi 401 

and with independent mind walk ever in the way 
of Tao. 

" Do not swerve from the path of virtue ; do not 
bring about your own good deeds, — lest your 
labour be lost. Do not make for wealth ; do not 
aim at success, — lest you cast away that which links 
you to God. 

" Pi Kan was disembowelled. Tzu Hsii had his 
eyes gouged out. 

Better known as Wu Yuan. Seep. 112. He ex- 
pressed a wish to be buried on the road to the YUeh 
State that he might witness the defeat of the Wu 
State. Whereupon the prince of the latter State at 
once had him deprived of sight. 

Such was the fate of loyalty, 

'* Chih Kung bore witness against his father. 
Wei Sheng was drowned. Such are the misfortunes 
of the faithful. 

" Pao Chiao dried up where he stood. Shen 
Tzu would not justify himself. 

He would not defend himself against a charge of 
putting poison in his father's food. 

Such are the evils of honesty. 

" Confucius did not visit his mother. 

There is no authority for this statement. 

K'uang Tzu did not visit his father. 

By whom he had been turned out of doors. 

Such are the trials which come upon the upright. 

" The above instances have been handed down 
to us from antiquity and are discussed in modern 

2 D 

402 Chuang Tzii 

times. They show that men of learning em- 
phasized their precepts by carrying them out in 
practice ; and that consequently they paid the 
penalty and fell into these calamities." 

Discontent asked Complacency, saying, " There 
is really no one who does not either aim at repu- 
tation or make for wealth. If a man is rich, others 
flock around him. These necessarily take a sub- 
ordinate position, and consequently pay him court. 
And it would seem that such subordination and 
respect constitute a royal road to long life, comfort, 
and general happiness. How is it then that you. 
Sir, have no mind for these things ? Is it that you 
are wanting in wit ? Or is it that you are physi- 
cally unable to compete, and therefore go in for 
being virtuous, though all the time unable to 
forget ? " 

" You and your friends," replied Complacency, 
" regard all men as alike because they happen to be 
born at the same time and in the same place as 
yourselves. You look on us as scholars who have 
separated from humanity and cast off the world, 
and who have no guiding principle beyond poring 
over the records of the past and present, or in- 
dulging in the logomachy of this and that. 

"Were we to lead the mundane lives you do, 
it would be at the sacrifice of the very conditions 
of existence. And surely thus we should be wan- 
dering far from the royal road to long life, comfort, 
and general happiness. The discomfort of wretch- 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber Chi 403 

edness, the comfort of well-being, you do not refer 
to the body.. 

But to some external cause of which the body 
becomes subjectively conscious. 

The abjectness of terror, the elation of joy, you do 
not refer to the mind itself. You know that such 
things are so, but you do not know how they are 
so. Wherefore, though equalling the Son of 
Heaven in power, and with all the empire as your 
personal property, you would not be free from 
care." 

" Wealth," replied Discontent, " is of the greatest 
service to a man. It enables him to do good, and 
to exert power, to an extent which the perfect man 
or the true Sage could never reach. He can borrow 
the courage and strength of others to make himself 
formidable. He can employ the wisdom and coun- 
sels of others to add clearness to his own delibera- 
tions. He can avail himself of the virtue of others 
and cause it to appear as his own. Without being 
in possession of a throne, he can wield the authority 
of a prince. 

'' Besides, the pleasures of music, beauty, rich 
food, and power, do not require to be studied before 
they can be appreciated by the mind ; nor does the 
body need the example of others before it can enjoy 
them. We need no teacher to tell us what to like 
or dislike, to follow or to avoid. Such knowledge 
is instinctive in man. The world may condemn 
this view, but which of us is free from the taint ? " 

2 D 2 

404 Chuang Tzu 

"The wise man," answered Complacency, "acts 
for the common weal, in pursuit of which he does 
not overstep due limits. Wherefore, if there is a 
sufficiency, he does not strive for more. He has no 
use for more, and accordingly does not seek it. But 
if there is not a sufficiency, then he seeks for more. 
He strives in all directions, yet does not account it 
greed. If there is a surplus, he declines it. Even 
though he refused the whole empire, he would not 
account it honesty. To him, honesty and greed are 
not conditions into which we are forced by outward 
circumstances, but characteristics innate in the indi- 
vidual. He may wield the power of the Son of 
Heaven, but will not employ it for the degradation 
of others. He may own the whole empire, yet will 
not use his wealth to take advantage of his fellows. 
But a calculation of the troubles and the anxieties 
inseparable therefrom, cause him to reject these as 
injurious to his nature, not from a desire for 
reputation. 

" When Yao and Shun occupied the throne, there 
was peace. They did not try to be beneficent rulers. 
They did not inflict injury by doing good. 

They were simply natural, and good results fol- 
lowed. 

" Shan Chiian and Hsii Yu both declined the 
proffered throne. Theirs was no empty refusal. 
They would not cause injury to themselves. 

" In all these cases, each individual adopted the 
profitable course in preference to the injurious 

CAP. XXIX.] Robber Chi 405 

course. And the world calls them virtuous, 
whereby they acquire a reputation at which they 
never aimed." 

** It is necessary," argued Discontent, " to cling 
to reputation. If all pleasures are to be denied to 
the body and one's energies to be concentrated upon 
health with a view to the prolongation of life, such 
life would be itself nothing more than the prolonged 
illness of a confirmed invalid." 

" Happiness," said Complacency, "is to be found 
in contentment. Too much is always a curse, most 
of all in wealth. 

" The ears of the wealthy man ring with sounds 
of sweet music. His palate is cloyed with rich 
meats and wine. In the pursuit of pleasure, busi- 
ness is forgotten. This is confusion. 

" He eats and drinks to excess, until his breath 
ing is that of one carrying a heavy load up a hill. 
This is misery. 

" He covets money to surround himself with 
comforts. He covets power to vanquish rivals. But 
his quiet hours are darkened by diabetes and dropsy. 
This is disease. 

" Even when, in his desire for wealth, he has 
piled up an enormous fortune, he still goes on and 
cannot desist. This is shame. 

" Having no use for the money he has collected, 
he still hugs it to him and cannot bear to part with 
it. His heart is inflamed, and he ever seeks to add 
more to the pile. This is unhappiness. 

" At home, he dreads the pest of the pilfering 

4o6 Chuang Tzu 

thief. Abroad, the danger of bandit and highway- 
man. So he keeps strict guard within, while never 
venturing alone without. This is fear. 

" These six are the greatest of the world's curses. 
Yet such a man never bestows a thought upon 
them, until the hour of misfortune is at hand. 
Then, with his ambitions gratified, his natural 
powers exhausted, and nothing but wealth remain- 
ing, he would gladly obtain one day's peace, but 
cannot do so. 

"Wherefore, if reputation is not to be enjoyed 
and wealth is not to be secured, how pitiable it is 
that men should harass their minds and wear out 
their bodies in such pursuits ! " 

407 

CHAPTER XXX. 
On Swords. 

[Spurious.] 

OF old, Wen Wang of Chao loved sword-play. 
Swordsmen thronged his halls, to the number 
of three thousand and more. Day and night they 
had bouts before the prince. In the course of a 
year, a hundred or so would be killed or wounded. 
Yet the prince was never satisfied. 

Within three years, the State had begun to go to 
rack and ruin, and other princes to form designs 
upon it. Thereupon the Heir Apparent, Li, became 
troubled in mind ; and said to the officers of his 
household, '' Whosover shall persuade the prince to 
do away with these swordsmen, to him I will give 
a thousand ounces of silver." 

To this his officers replied, " Chuang Tzu is the 
man." 

Thereupon the Heir Apparent sent messengers to 
Chuang Tzu with a thousand ounces of silver, which 
he would not accept, but accompanied the messen- 
gers back to their master. 

" What does your Highness require of me," 

4o8 Chuang Tzic 

asked Chuang Tzu, " that you should bestow upon 
me a thousand ounces ? " 

" I had heard," replied the young prince, " that 
you were a famous Sage, and I ventured to send 
this money as a present to your servants. 

Merely a ceremonious phrase. 

But as you would not receive it, what more can I 
say? 

" I understand," answered Chuang Tzu, " that 
your Highness would have me cure the prince of 
his peculiar weakness. Now suppose that I do not 
succeed with the prince, and consequently with 
your Highness, the punishment of death is what I 
have to expect. What good would the thousand 
ounces be to me then ? " 

** On the other hand, if I succeed with the prince, 
and consequently with your Highness, the whole 
State of Chao contains nothing I could not have for 
the asking." 

" You must know, however," said the young 
prince, " that my father will only receive swords- 
men." 

" Well," replied Chuang Tzu, " I am a good 
swordsman myself." 

" Besides which," added the Heir Apparent, " the 
swordsmen he is accustomed to see have all dis- 
hevelled hair hanging over their temples. They 
wear slouching caps with coarse tangled tassels, 
and short-tailed coats. They glare with their eyes 
and talk in a fierce tone. This is what my father 

CAP. XXX.] On Swords 409 

likes. But if you go to him dressed in your 
ordinary scholar's dress, the result is sure to be 
disastrous." 

" I will accustom myself to the dress," replied 
Chuang Tzu ; and after practising for three days, 
he went again to see the young prince, who accom- 
panied him into his father's presence. 

The latter drew a sharp sword and awaited 
Chuang Tzu's approach. But Chuang Tzu, when 
he entered the door of the audience chamber, did 
not hurry forward, neither did he prostrate himself 
before the prince. 

"What have you to say to me," cried the prince, 
'* that you have obtained your introduction through 
the Heir Apparent ? " 

" I have heard," replied Chuang Tzu, " that your 
Highness loves sword-play. Therefore I have come 
to exhibit my skill." 

" What can you do in that line ? " asked the 
prince. 

" Were I to meet an opponent," said Chuang 
Tzu, " at every ten paces, I could go on for a thou- 
sand //without being stopped." 

" Bravo ! " cried the prince. " There is not your 
match in the empire." 

" When I fight," continued Chuang Tzu, " I 
make a show of being weak but push a vigorous 
attack. The last to start, I am the first to arrive. 
I should like your Highness to make trial of me." 

" Rest awhile," replied the prince. " Stay here 
and await orders. I will arrange a day for you." 

410 Chiiang Tzu 

Thereupon the prince spent seven days in trying 
his swordsmen. Some sixty of them were either 
killed or wounded, but at length he selected five or 
six and bade them attend in the audience-chamber 
with their swords. He then summoned Chuang 
Tzu and said, *' Now I will see what your swords- 
manship is worth." 

" I have been longing for this," replied Chuang 
Izu. 

" Does it matter to you," asked the prince, '* of 
what length your weapon may be ? " . 

" Not at all," replied Chuang Tzu. " I have 
three swords, of which I will ask your Highness to 
choose one. We will then proceed to the trial." 

" Which are your three swords ? " enquired the 
prince. 

" There is the sword of the Son of Heaven," said 
Chuang Tzu, " the sword of the Princes, and the 
sword of the People." 

"What is the sword of the Son of Heaven?" 
asked the prince. 

" The stone wall of Yen-ch'i is its point," replied 
Chuang Tzu. 

Some take " stone wall" as the name of a place. 

The mountains of Ch'i are its edge. Chin and Wei 
are its back. Chou and Sung are its hilt. Han and 
Wei are its sheath. It is enclosed in the four 
hordes of barbarians, wrapped in the four seasons, 
surrounded by the great ocean. It is made of the 
five elements. It is the arbiter of punishment and 

CAP. XXX.] On Swords 4 1 1 

reward. It operates under the influence of the Yin 
and the Yang. In spring and summer it is at rest. 
In autumn and winter it moves abroad. Push it, 
it does not advance. Raise it, it does not go up. 
Lower it, it does not go down. Whirl it around, 
it does not change position. Above, it cleaves the 
floating clouds ; below, it cuts through the density 
of earth. One flash of this blade, and the princes 
of the empire submit. Such is the sword of the Son 
of Heaven." 

At this the prince seemed absorbed in his reflec- 
tions. Then he enquired, saying, "And what is 
the sword of the Princes ? " 

"The wise and brave," replied Chuang Tzu, 
" are its point. The incorruptible are its edge. 
The virtuous are its back. The loyal are its hilt. 
The heroic are its sheath. You may push this 
sword too, it will not advance. Raise it, it will not 
go up. Lower it, it will not go down. Whirl it 
around, it will not change position. Above, it 
models itself upon the round heaven, in order to 
keep in harmony with the sun, moon, and stars. 
Below, it models itself upon the square earth, in 
order to keep in harmony with the four seasons. 
It adapts itself to the wishes of the people, in 
order to diffuse peace on all sides. One flash 
of this blade is like a roaring clap of thunder. 
Between the boundaries of the State there is 
not left one but who yields and obeys the 
command of his prince. Such is the sword of the 
Princes." 

412 Chuang Tzu 

" And the sword of the People ? " enquired the 
prince. 

" The sword of the People," replied Chuang Tzu, 
" has dishevelled hair hanging over its temples. It 
wears a slouching cap with coarse tangled tassel, 
and a short-tailed coat. It glares with its eyes and 
talks in a fierce tone. When it engages in conflict, 
above, it cuts off head and neck; below, it smites 
liver and lungs. Such is the sword of the People. 
It is like a game-cock. One day, its life is cut 
short, and it is of no more use to the State. 

" Now you, great prince, wield sovereign power, 
and yet you devote yourself to this sword of the 
People. I am truly ashamed of it." 

Thereupon the prince drew Chuang Tzu up on to 
the dais, and the attendants served food, the king 
three times assisting with his own hand. 

The prince each time received the dish from the 
attendants, handed it to Chuang Tzii, and then 
walked round to his own seat again. 

" Be seated, great prince," said Chuang Tzu, 
** and compose your mind. I have said all I have 
to say on swords." 

After this the prince did not quit his palace for 
three months, while the swordsmen, submitting to 
the new order of things, died in their own homes. 

One commentator says " killed themselves in their 
own dwellings." But if so, Chuang Tzii's influence 
was of small practical value as far as the swordsmen 
were concerned. They might as well have con- 
tinued their profession of arms. 

413 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

The Old Fisherman. 

[Spurious.] 

CONFUCIUS, travelling in the Black Forest, 
rested awhile at Apricot Altar. His disci- 
ples sat down to their books, and he himself played 
upon the lute and sang. 

Half way through the song, an old fisherman 
stepped out of a boat and advanced towards them. 
His beard and eyebrows were snowy white. His 
hair hung loose, and he flapped his long sleeves as 
he walked over the foreshore. Reaching firm 
ground, he stood still, and with left hand on his 
knee and right hand to his ear, listened. 

When the song was finished, he beckoned to Tzu 
Kung and Tzu Lu, both of whom went to him. 
Then pointing with his finger, he enquired, saying, 
" What is that man doing here ? " 

'* He is the Sage of Lu," replied Tzu Lu. 

" Of what clan ? " asked the old man. 

"Of the K'ung family," replied Tzu Lu. 

" And what is his occupation ? " said the old 
man. 

" He devotes himself," replied Tzu Lu, " to 

414 Chuang Tzu 

loyalty and truth. He practises charity and duty' 
towards his neighbour. He regulates ceremonies and 
music. He distinguishes the relationships of man. 
He is loyal to his prince above, a reformer of the 
masses below. Thus he will be of great service to 
the whole empire. Such is his occupation." 

" Is he a ruler of a State ? " asked the old man. 

" He is not," said Tzu Kung. 

" A minister ? " said the old man. 

" No," said Tzu Kung. 

Then the old man laughed and walked away, 
saying, " Charity is charity, yet I fear he will not 
escape the wear of mind and tear of body which 
imperil the original purity of man. How far, 
alas, has he wandered from the true path ! " 

From Tao. 

Tzu Kung went back and told Confucius, who, 
laying aside his lute, arose and said, " This man is 
a Sage ! " I 

Thereupon he followed the old man down the 
shore, catching him up just as he was drawing in 
his boat with his staff. Perceiving Confucius, the 
old man turned round to receive him, at which Con- 
fucius stepped back and prostrated himself twice 
before advancing. 

"What do you want, Sir?" asked the fisher- 
man. 

" Just now, venerable Sir," replied Confucius, 
"you left without finishing your remarks. In my 
stupidity I cannot make out what you mean. 

CAP. XXXI.] The Old Fishennan 4 1 5 

Therefore I have come in the humble hope of 
hearing any words with which you may deign to 
help me." 

"Well," said the old man, ''you are certainly 
anxious to learn." 

At this Confucius prostrated himself twice, and 
when he got up said, " Yes, I have been a student 
from my youth upwards until now, the sixty-ninth 
year of my age. Yet I have never heard the true 
doctrine, which I am now ready to receive without 
bias." 

" Like species follow like," answered the old man. 
" Like sounds respond to like. 

See p. 283, and the experiment of the two lutes, 

p. 319- 
This is a law of nature. I will now with your leave 
apply what I know to what you occupy yourself 
with, — the affairs of men. 

" The Son of Heaven, the princes, the ministers, 
and the people, — if these four fulfil their proper 
functions, the result is good government. If they 
quit their proper places, the result is unutterable 
confusion. When the officials mind their duties 
and the people their business, neither is injured by 
the other. 

" Barren land, leaky roofs, want of food and 
clothing, inability to meet taxation, quarrels of 
wives and concubines, no precedence between young 
and old, — such are the sorrows of the people. 

" Capacity unequal to one's duties, and inability 
to carry on routine work, absence of clean-handed- 

41 6 Chtiang Tzu 

ness, and carelessness among subordinates, lack of 
distinction and want of preferment, — such are the 
sorrows of ministers. 

"The Court without loyal ministers and the 
State in rebellion, the artisan unskilful and the 
tribute unsatisfactory, the periodical levees unat- 
tended and the Son of Heaven displeased, — such 
are the sorrows of the princes. 

** The two great principles of nature working 
inharmoniously, heat and cold coming at irregular 
seasons so that men and things suffer, the princes 
rebellious and fighting among themselves so that 
the people perish, music and ceremonies ill regu- 
lated, wealth dissipated, the relationships of man 
disregarded, the masses sunk in immorality, — such 
are the sorrows which fall to the share of the Son 
of Heaven. 

" But now you. Sir, occupying neither the more 
exalted position of ruler nor performing the subor- 
dinate functions of minister, nevertheless take upon 
yourself to regulate music and ceremonies and to 
distinguish the relationships of man, in order to 
reform the masses. Are you not travelling out of 
your own sphere ? 

" Further, men have eight blemishes, and there 
^ are four things which obstruct business. These 
should be investigated. 

" Meddling with matters which do not matter to 
/ you, is prying. 

** To push one's way in, regardless of neglect, is 
2 to be forward. 

CAP. XXXI.] The Old Fisherman 417 

" To adapt one's thoughts and arrange one's i 
words, is sycophancy. 

" To applaud a person, right or wrong, is ^ 
flattery. 

" To love speaking evil of others, is slander. r 

" To sever friendships and break ties, is mis- ^ 
chievousness. 

" To praise people falsely with a view to injure 7 
them, is malice. 

" To give ready assent with a view to worm out 
the wishes of others, good and bad alike, is to be a t 
hypocrite. 

" These eight blemishes cause a man to throw 
others into confusion and bring injury upon him- 
self. The superior man will not have him for a 
friend ; the enlightened prince will not employ him 
as his minister. 

" To love the conduct of great affairs, and to in- / 
troduce change into established order with a view 
to gain reputation, — this is ambition. 

" To strive to get all into one's own hands, and to 
usurp what should be at the disposal of others, — -^ 
this is greed. 

" To know one's faults but not to correct them, to 
receive admonition but only to plunge deeper, — this o' 
is obstinacy. 

" To suffer those who are like oneself, but as for 
those unlike not to credit them with the virtues ^ 
they really possess, — this is bigotry. 

" Such are the four things which obstruct busi- 
ness. And only he w^ho can put aside the above 

2 E 

4i8 CImang Tzti, 

eight and abstain from the above four is fit for 
instruction." 

At this Confucius heaved a sigh of distress. 
Then having twice prostrated himself, he arose and 
said, " Twice was I driven from Lu. I was tabooed 
in Wei. My tree was cut down in Sung. I was 
surrounded by the Ch ens and the Ts'ais. I know 
not what my fault is that I should have suffered 
these four persecutions." 

" Dear me ! " said the old man in a vexed tone, 
" How slow of perception you are. 

" There was once a man who was so afraid of his 
shadow and so disliked his own footsteps that he 
determined to run away from them. But the oftener 
he raised his feet the more footsteps he made, and 
though he ran very hard his shadow never left 
him. From this he inferred that he went too 
slowly, and ran as hard as he could without rest- 
ing, the consequence being that his strength broke 
down and he died. He was not aware that by 
> going into the shade he would have got rid of his 
! shadow, and that by keeping still he would have 
put an end to his footsteps. Fool that he was ! 

'' Now you occupy yourself with charity and 
duty to one's neighbour. You examine into the dis- 
tinction of like and unlike, the changes of motion 
and rest, the canons of giving and receiving, the 
emotions of love and hate, and the restraint of joy 
and anger. Yet you cannot avoid the calamities 
you speak of. 

" Reverently care for your body. Carefully pre- 

CAP. XXXI.] The Old Fisher man 419 

serve your natural purity. Leave externals to 
others. Then you will not be involved. But as it 
is, instead of improving yourself you are trying to 
improve other people. Surely this is dealing with 
the external." 

"Then may I enquire," said Confucius in a tone 
of distress, "what is the original purity?" 

" Our original purity," replied the fisherman, " is 
the perfection of truth unalloyed. Without this, 
we cannot influence others. Hence, those who 
weep to order, though they mourn, do not grieve. 
Those who assume anger, though violent, do not 
inspire awe. Those who affect friendship, though 
they smile, are not in unison." 

" Real mourning grieves in silence. Real anger 
awes without expression. Real friendship is unison 
without the aid of smiles. Our emotions are 
dependent upon the original purity within ; and 
accordingly we hold the latter in esteem. 

" If applied to human affairs, then in serving our 
parents we are filial, in serving our prince we are 
loyal, in the banquet hour we are merry, in the 
hour of mourning we are sad. 

" The object of loyalty is successful service ; of 
a banquet, mirth; of mourning, grief; of serving 
parents, gratifying their wishes. If the service is 
accomplished, it matters not that no trace remain. 

In the way of kudos to the accornplisher. 

If parents be gratified, it matters not how. If a 
banquet results in mirth, the accessories are of no 

2 E 2 

420 Chttang Tzu 

importance. If there be real grief in mourning, it 
matters not what ceremonies may be employed. 

" Ceremonial is the invention of man. Our 
original purity is given to us from God. It is as 
it is, and cannot be changed. Wherefore the true 
Sage models himself upon God, and holds his 
original purity in esteem. He is independent of 
human exigencies. Fools, however, reverse this. 
They cannot model themselves upon God, and have 
to fall back on man. They do not hold original 
purity in esteem. Consequently they are ever 
suffering the vicissitudes of mortality, and never 
reaching the goal. Alas ! you. Sir, were early 
steeped in deceit, and are late in hearing the great 
doctrine." 

Confucius, having again prostrated himself twice, 
arose and said, 

" It has been a godsend to meet you. Sir, to-day. 
Pray allow me to follow you as your servant, that 
I may benefit by your teaching. I venture to ask 
where you live that I may enter upon my duties 
and learn the great doctrine." 

" I have heard," replied the old man, " that if a 
man is a fit companion, one may travel with him 
into the uttermost depths of Tag. But that if he 
is not a fit companion, and does not know Tag, 
one must avoid his company, that no harm may 
befall. Excuse me, I must leave you." Thereupon 
he pushed off his boat, and disappeared among the 
reeds. 

" Yen Yuan then brought up the chariot, and 

CAP. XXXI.] The Old Fisherman 42 1 

Tzu Lu offered the hand-cord to Confucius. But 
the latter paid no attention. He waited until the 
ripples on the water had smoothed down and the 
sound of the punt-pole had died away, before he 
ventured to get up. 

Tzu Lu, who was at the side of the chariot, en- 
quired saying, " Master, I have been in your service 
now for a long time, yet never did I see you treat 
any man like this. In the presence of a ruler of 
ten thousand or a thousand chariots, I have never 
seen you treated other than with great respect, 
while you yourself would wear a haughty air. Yet 
before this old fisherman, leaning on his punt-pole, 
you cringe and bow and prostrate yourself twice 
before answering. Is not this too much? The 
disciples do not know what to make of it. Why 
this behaviour to an old fisherman ? " 

" Yu ! " cried Confucius, resting on the bar of 
the chariot ; " it is difficult to make anything of 
you. You have long studied ceremonies and duty 
to your neighbour, yet you have not succeeded in 
getting rid of the old evil nature. Come here, and 
I will tell you. 

" To meet an elder without respect is want of 
ceremony. To see a Sage and not to honour him, 
is not to be in charity with man. Unless you are 
in charity with man, you cannot humble yourself 
before a fellow-creature. And unless you can 
honestly do this, you can never attain to that state 
of original purity ; but the body will constantly 
suffer. Alas ! there is no greater evil than not to 

422 Chuang Tzic 

be in charity with man. Yet in such a plight, 
O Yu, are you. 

*' Further. Tao is the source of all creation. 
Men have it, and live. They lose it, and die. 
Affairs in antagonism thereto, fail ; in accordance 
therewith, succeed. Therefore, wherever Tao 
abides, there is the reverence of the true Sage. 
And as this old fisherman may be said to possess 
Tao, could I venture not to respect him } " 

423 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

LlEH Tzu. 

Argument: — Outward manifestation of inward grace — Its dangers — 
Self-esteem — Its errors — Inscrutability of Tao — Artificiality of Con- 
fucius— Tests of virtue — Chuang Tzii declines office — His death. 

W 

HEN Lieh Tzu 

Lith Yli K'ou, a name well known in connection 
with Tao. But it is extremely doubtful if such a 
man ever lived. His record is not given by the 
historian Ssu-ma Ch'ien, and he may well have 
been no more than an allegorical personage created 
by Chuang Tzii for purposes of illustration. It was 
however thought necessary under the Han dynasty 
to supply his " Works " ; and the treatise thus pro- 
vided still passes under his name, though generally 
regarded as a forgery. See pp. 4, 5. 

went to Ch'i, half way there he turned round 
and came back. Falling in with Poh Hun Wu 
Jen, the latter said, " How is it you are so soon 
back again?" 

" I was afraid," replied Lieh Tzu. 

" Afraid of what ? " asked Poh Hun Wu Jen. 

" Out of ten restaurants at which I ate," said 
Lieh Tzu, " five would take no payment," 

424 Chuang Tzu 

" And what is there to be afraid of in that ? " 
enquired Poh Hun Wu Jen. 

" The truth within not being duly assimilated," 
replied Lieh Tzu, "a certain brightness is visible 
externally. And to conquer men's hearts by force 
of the external is to induce in oneself a disregard 
for authority and age which is the precursor of 
trouble. 

" A restaurant keeper is one who lives by retail- 
ing soup. When his returns are counted up, his 
profit is but small, and his influence is next to 
nothing. But if such a man could act thus, how 
much more the ruler of a large State ? His bodily 
powers worn out in the duties of his position, his 
mental powers exhausted by details of administra- 
tion, he would entrust me with the government 
and stimulate me by reward. That is what I was 
afraid of." 

** Your inner lights are good," replied Poh Hun 
Wu Jen ; " but if you remain stationary at this 
point, the world will still gather around you." 

Contrary to Tag. 

Shortly afterwards Poh Hun Wu Jen went to 
visit Lieh Tzu, and lo ! his court-yard was filled 
with boots. 

Of the visitors come to hear him. These were left 
outside the door, in accordance with an ancient 
custom mentioned in the Book of Rites. See p. -^(iZ. 

Poh Hun Wu Jen stood there awhile, facing the 

CAP. XXXII.] Lieh Tzu 425 

north, his cheek all wrinkled by resting it on his 
staff. Then, without a word, he departed. 
Upon this being announced to Lieh Tzu, 

By the servant whose duty it was to receive guests. 

he seized his shoes and ran out barefoot. 
In his hurry. 

When he reached the outer gate, he called aloud, 
" Master ! now that you have come, will you not 
give me medicine?" 

" It is all over ! " cried Poh Hun Wu Jen. *' I 
told you that the world would gather around you. 
It is not that you can make people gather around 
you. You cannot prevent them from doing so. 
Of what use would my instruction be ? Exerting 
influence thus unduly over others, you are by them 
influenced in turn. You disturb your natural con- 
stitution, and are of no further account. 

None of your companions 
Warn you of this. 
Their paltry talk 
Is but poison to a man. 
They are not awake, not alive to the situation. 
How should one of these help you ? 
In the original, these lines rhyme. 

" The shrewd grow weary, the wise grieve. 
Those who are without abilities have no ambitions. 
With full bellies they roam happily about, like 
drifting boats, not caring whither they are bound." 

There was a man of the Cheng State, named 

426 Chuang Tzii \ 

Huan. He pursued his studies at a place called 
Ch'iu-shih. After three years only, he had gra- 
duated as a Confucianist ; and like a river which 
fertilises its banks to a distance of nine li, so did 
his good influence reach into three families. 

His father's, his mother's, and his wife's. 

He caused his younger brother to graduate as a 
Mihist. But inasmuch as in the question of Con- 
fucianism versus Mihism, 

The philosophy of Mih Tzu, who taught the doctrine 
of universal love, etc. See pp. 1 7, 440. 

the father took the side of the Mihist, at the end of 
ten years Huan committed suicide. 

Then the father dreamed that Huan appeared to 
him and said, " It was I who caused your son to 
become a Mihist. Why give all the credit to him 
who is but as the fruit of an autumn pine ? " 

Various interpretations of this simile are given : 
none satisfactory. E.g. (i) Like a dry cone. (2) 
Which another has planted and reared. 

Verily God does not reward man for what he 
does, but for what he is. 

I.e. for the natural, not for the artificial. 

And it was in this sense that the younger brother 
was caused to become a Mihist. 

He was naturally so inclined. 

Whereas a man who should regard his distinctive 
abilities as of his own making, without reference to 

;ap. XXXII.] Lieh Tzii 427 

pis parents, would be like the man of Ch'i who 
[dug a well and then wanted to keep others away 
[from it. 

Forgetting that God put the spring there in the first 
instance. 

Hence the saying that the men of to-day are all 
Huans. 

Wherefore it follows that men of true virtue are 
unconscious of its possession. How much more 
then the man of Tag ? This is what the ancients 
called escaping the vengeance of God. 

Which would be incurred by aping his goodness. 

The true Sage rests in that which gives rest, and 
not in that which does not give rest. The world 
rests in that which does not give rest, and not in 
that which does give rest. 

The natural and the artificial. 

Chuang Tzu said, " To know Tag is easy. The 
difficulty lies in the elimination of speech. To know 
Tag without speech appertains to the natural. To 
know Tag with speech appertains to the artificial. 
The men of old were natural, not artificial. 

" Chu P'ing Man spent a large patrimony in 
learning under Chih Li I how to kill dragons. 

To acquire Tag. There is no record of the persons 
mentioned. 

By the end of three years he was perfect, but there 
was no direction in which he could show his skill. 
Tag cannot be put into practice. 

428 Chuang Tzu ' 

"The true Sage regards certainties as uncer- 
tainties ; therefore he is never up in arms. 

In a state of mental disturbance. 

Men in general regard uncertainties as u,. ' mties ; 
therefore they are constantly up in To 

accustom oneself to arms causes one t( > arms 

1 ' "* 11 ?ltP 7\ s 

on every provocation ; and to trust to aiv.. "^.o 
perish. 

" The intelligence of the mean man does not rise 
beyond bribes and letters of recommendation. His 
mind is be-clouded with trivialities. Yet he would 
penetrate the mystery of Tao and of creation, and 
rise to participation in the One. The result is 
that he is confounded by time and space ; and that 
trammelled by objective existences, he fails to reach 
apprehension of that age before anything was. 

" But the perfect man, — he carries his mind back 
to the period before the beginning. Content to 
rest in the oblivion of nowhere, passing away like 
flowing water, he is merged in the clear depths of 
the infinite. 

" Alas ! man's knowledge reaches to the hair on 
a hair, but not to eternal peace." 

I 

A man of the Sung State, named Ts'ao Shang, 
acted as political agent for the prince of Sung at 
the court of the Ch'in State. When he went 
thither, he had a few carriages ; but the prince of 
Ch'in was so pleased with him that he added one 
hundred more. 

CAP. XXXII.] Lieh Tzii 429 

On his return to Sung, he visited Chuang Tzu 
and said, " As for living in poverty in a dirty- 
hovel, earning a scanty subsistence by making 
sandals, with shrivelled face and yellow ears, — this 
I could not do. Interviewing a powerful ruler, 
with a retinue of a hundred carriages, — that is my 
forte." 

" When the prince of Ch'in is sick," replied 
Chuang Tzu, "and he summons his physician to 
open a boil or cleanse an ulcer, the latter gets one 
carriage. The man who licks his piles gets five. 
The more degrading the work, the greater the 
number of carriages given. You, Sir, must have 
been attending to his piles to get so many car- 
riages. Begone with you I " 

"Not," says Lin Hsi Chung, "from the pen of 
Chuang Tzu." 

Duke Ai of Lu asked Yen Ho, saying, " Were I 
to make Confucius a pillar of my realm, would the 
State be profited thereby ? " 

" It would be most perilous ! " replied Yen Ho. 
" Confucius is a man of outward show and of 
specious words. He mistakes the branch for the 
root. 

Accessories for fundamentals. 

He seeks to impress the people by an overbearing 
demeanour, the hollowness of which he does not 
perceive. If he suits you, and you entrust him 

430 Chit an g Tzit 

with the welfare of the State, it will only be by 
mistake that he will succeed. 

This passage is variously interpreted. 

" To cause the people to leave the true and study' 
the false does not so much affect the people of 
to-day as those of coming generations. Wherefore i 
it is better not to have Confucius. | 

" The difficulty of governing lies in the inability 
to practise self-effacement. Man does not govern 
as God does. 

Regardless of self. 

" Merchants and traders are altogether out of 
the pale. 

Of Tao. 

Or if chance ever brings them within it, their rights 
are never freely admitted. 

" External punishments are inflicted by metal 
and wood. Internal punishments are inflicted by 
anxiety and remorse. Fools who incur external 
punishment are treated with metal or wood. 
Those who incur internal punishment are devoured 
by the conflict of emotions. It is only the pure 
and perfect man who can succeed in avoiding 
both." 

Confucius said, " The heart of man is more dan- 
gerous than mountains and rivers, more difficult to 
understand than Heaven itself. Heaven has its 
periods of spring, summer, autumn, winter, day- 

CAP. XXXII. J Lieh Tzu 431 

time and night. Man has an impenetrable exterior, 
and his motives are inscrutable. Thus some men 
appear to be retiring when they are really forward. 
Others have abilities, yet appear to be worthless. 
Others are compliant, yet gain their ends. Others 
take a firm stand, yet yield the point. Others go 
slow, yet advance quickly. 

" Those who fly to duty towards their neighbour 
as though thirsting after it, drop it as though 
something hot. Thus the loyalty of the superior 
man is tested by employing him at a distance, his 
respectfulness by employing him near at hand. 
His ability, by troublesome missions. His know- 
ledge, by unexpected questions. His trustworthi- 
ness, by specification of time limits. His integrity 
by entrusting him with money. His fidelity, by 
dangerous tasks. His decorum, by filling him 
with wine. His morality, by placing him in dis- 
reputable surroundings. Under the application of 
these nine tests, the inferior man stands revealed. 

" Cheng K'ao Fu, on receiving his first appoint- 
ment, bowed his head. On receiving his second 
appointment, he hunched his back. On receiving 
his third appointment, he fell upon his face, walk- 
ing away at the side of the path. 

Instead of in the middle as any blustering braggart 
would have done. 

Who would not try to be like him ? 

" Yet ordinary men, on their first appointment, 
become self-important. On their second, they give 

432 CJiuang Tzii 

themselves airs in their chariots. On their third, 
they call their own fathers by their personal names. 

As we should say, " by their Christian names." 
The term " fathers " includes uncles. 

Which of them can be compared with Ilsii Yu of 
old? 

" There is nothing more fatal than intentional 
virtue, when the mind looks outwards. 

Spontaneity is the essence of real virtue. 

For by thus looking outwards, the power of intro- 
spection is destroyed. 

" There are five sources of injury to virtue. 

Eyes, nose, mouth, ears, and thought. 

Of these, that which aims at virtue is the chief 
What is it to aim at virtue ? Why a man who 
aims at virtue practises what he approves and 
condemns what he does not practise. 

Compounds for sins he feels inclined to 
By damning those he has no mind to. 

" There are eight causes of failure, three certain 
elements of success. There are six sources of 
strength and weakness. 

" Beauty, a long beard, size, height, robustness, 
grace, courage, daring, — these eight, in which men 
surpass their fellows, are therefore passports to 
failure. 

" Modesty, compliance, humility, — these three 
are sure roads to success. 

CAP. xxxii.] Lieli Tzii 433 

" Wisdom manifests itself in the external. 
Whereby the internal suffers. 

Courage makes itself many enemies. Charity and 
duty towards one's neighbour incur many re- 
proaches. 

Three sources of weakness. 

" To him who can penetrate the mystery of life, 
all things are revealed. He who can estimate 
wisdom at its true value, 

Sc. at nothingr. 

is wise. He who comprehends the Greater Destiny, 
becomes himself part of it. 

Of the great scheme of the universe, seen and 
unseen. 

He who comprehends the Lesser Destiny, resigns 
himself to the inevitable." 

Referring to life as ordinarily regarded by mortals. 
Three sources of strength. 

A man who had been to see the prince of Sung 
and had been presented with ten chariots, was 
putting on airs in the presence of Chuang Tzu. 

" At Ho-Shang," said the latter, " there was a 
poor man who supported his family by plaiting 
rushes. One day his son dived into the river and 
got a pearl worth a thousand ounces of silver. 
The father bade him fetch a stone and smash it to 
pieces, explaining that he could only have got such 
a pearl very deep down from under the nose of the 
dragon, which must have been asleep. And he 

2 F 

434 Chuang Tzit | 

said he was afraid that when the dragon waked, 
the boy would have a poor chance. 

If found with it in his possession, 

" Now the State of Sung is deeper than a deep 
river, and the prince of Sung is fiercer than a 
dragon. To get these chariots, you must have 
caught him asleep. And when he wakes, you will 
be ground to powder." 

Some prince having invited Chuang Tzu to enter 
his service, Chuang Tzu said in reply to the envoy, 
" Sir, have you ever noticed a sacrificial ox? It is 
bedecked with ribbons and fares sumptuously. But 
when it comes to be slaughtered for the temple, 
would it not gladly exchange places with some 
neglected calf?" 

Quoted, with variants, by the historian Ssu-ma 
Ch'ien, in his biographical notice of Chuang Tzu. 
See Introduction. 

When Chuang Tzu was about to die, his dis- 
ciples expressed a wish to give him a splendid 
funeral. But Chuang Tzu said, *' With Heaven 
and Earth for my coffin and shell ; with the sun, 
moon, and stars as my burial regalia ; and with all 
creation to escort me to the grave, — are not my 
funeral paraphernalia ready to hand ? " 

And had he not hio^h honour } — 
The hillside for his pall ; 
To lie in state while angels wait 
With stars for tapers tall ; 

CAP. XXXII.] Lieh Tzu 435 

And the dark rock pines like nodding plumes 

Above his bier to wave, 
And God's own hand in that lonely land 

To lay him in the grave. 

The Burial of Moses (Mrs. Alexander). 

" We fear," argued the disciples, " lest the car- 
rion kite should eat the body of our Master"; to 
which Chuang Tzu replied, '* Above ground I 
shall be food for kites ; below I shall be food for 
mole-crickets and ants. Why rob one to feed 
the other? 

With this may be compared the reply of Diogenes 

on a similar occasion. When the old cynic asked 

to be left unburied, his friends objected that he would 

be eaten by dogs and birds. 

" Place my staff near me," said Diogenes, " that I 

may drive them away." 

" How will you manage that .'*" enquired the friends. 

" You will not be conscious." 

" What then will it matter to me to be torn by 

beasts," cried Diogenes, "if I am not conscious 

of it .? " 

" If you adopt, as absolute, a standard of even- 
ness which is so only relatively, your results will 
not be absolutely even. If you adopt, as absolute, 
a criterion of right which is so only relatively, your 
results will not be absolutely right. Those who 
trust to their senses become slaves to objective 
existences. Those alone who are guided by their 
intuitions find the true standard. So far are the 
senses less reliable than the intuitions. Yet fools 

2 F 2 

436 CJmang Tzil 

trust to their senses to know what is good for 
mankind, with alas ! but external results." 

As the genuine text of the Spring and Autumn ends 
with the appearance of the citi lin (or kilin) and the 
death of Confucius, so have disciples of Chuang Tzii 
agreed that the genuine text of Chuang Tzu comes 
to a fitting close at the death-bed of their great 
Master. 

The final chapter is but a summary of the whole, 
compiled by the early editors of the work. 

437 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 

The Empire. 

[Summary by early editors.] 

SYSTEMS of government are many. Each 
man thinks his own perfect. Where then 
does what the ancients called the system of Tag 
come in ? There is nowhere where it does not 
come in. 

It may be asked whence our spirituality, whence 
our intellectuality. The true Sage is born ; the 
prince is made. Yet all proceed from an original 
One. 

He who does not separate from the Source is 
one with God. He who does not separate from 
the essence is a spiritual man. He who does not 
separate from the reality is a perfect man. He who 
makes God the source, and Te the root, and Tag 
the portal, passively falling in with the modifica- 
tions of his environment, — he is the true Sage. 

These are but four different denominations of the 
ideal man. 

He who practises charity as a kindness, duty to 
one's neighbour as a principle, ceremony as a con- 
venience, music as a pacificator, and thus becomes 

} 

438 CJmang Tzu 

compassionate and charitable, — he is a superior 
man. 

We sink here to a lower level, though still a higfh 
one. The " superior man " is the ideal man of 
Confucian ethics. In him divinity finds no place. 

He who regulates his conduct by law, who re- 
gards fame as an external adjunct, who verifies his 
hypotheses, who bases his judgment upon proof, — 
such men rank one, two, three, four, etc. It is thus 
that officials rank. In a strict sense of duty, in 
making food and raiment of paramount importance, 
in caring for and nourishing the old, the weak, the 
orphan, and the widow, they all exemplify the 
principle of true government. 

Partly, if not wholly. This the dead level of ordi- 
nary mortality, still within the operation of Tao. 

Thus far-reaching was the extension of Tao 
among the ancients. 

The companion of the gods, the purifier of the 
universe, it nourishes all creation, it unites the 
empire, it benefits the masses. Illuminating the 
fundamental, it is bound up with the accessory, 
reaching to all points of the compass and to the 
opposite extremes of magnitude. There is indeed 
nowhere where it is not ! 

How it enlightened the polity of past ages is 
evidenced in the records which historians have 
preserved to us. Its presence in the Canons of 
Poetry, History, Rites, and Music, has been made 
clear by many scholars of Chou and Lu. It in- 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Empire 439 

forms the Canon of Poetry with its vigour, the 
Canon of History with its usefulness, the Canon 
of Rites with its adaptability, the Canon of Music 
with its harmonising influence, the Canon of 
Changes with its mysterious Principles, and the 
Spring and Autumn with its discriminations. 
Spread over the whole world, it is focussed in the 
Middle Kingdom, and the learning of all schools 
renders constant homage to its power. 

But when the world is disorganised, true Sages 
do not manifest themselves, Tao ceases to exist as 
One, and the world becomes cognisant of the idio- ^ 
syncrasies of the individual. These are like the 
senses of hearing, sight, smell, and taste, — not 
common to each organ. Or like the skill of various 
artisans, — each excellent of its kind and each useful 
in its turn, but not equally at the command of all. 

Consequently, when a mere specialist comes for- 
ward and dogmatises on the beauty of the universe 
the principles which underlie all creation, the posi- 
tion occupied by the ancients in reference to the 
beauty of the universe, and the limits of the super- 
natural,— it follows that the Tao of inner wisdom 
and of outer strength is obscured and prevented 
from asserting itself Every one alas ! regards the 
course he prefers as the infallible course. The 
various schools diverge never to meet again ; and 
posterity is debarred from viewing the original 
purity of the universe and the grandeur of the 
ancients. For the system of Tao is scattered in 
fragments over the face of the earth. 

440 Chuang Tzu 

Not to covet posthumous fame, nor to aim at 
dazzling the world, nor to pose as a benefactor of 
mankind, but to be a strict self-disciplinarian while 
lenient to the faults of others, — herein lay the Tao 
of the ancients. 

Mih Tzu and Ch'in Hua Li 

A disciple of Mih Tzu. 

became enthusiastic followers of Tao, but they 
pushed the system too far, carrying their practice 
to excess. The former wrote an essay Against 
Music, and another which he entitled Economy. 

To be found in the collection which passes under the 
name of Mih Tzu. 

There was to be no singing in life, no mourning 
after death. He taught universal love and benefi- 
cence towards one's fellow men, without contentions, 
without censure of others. He loved learning, but 
not in order to become different from others. Yet 
his views were not those of the ancient Sages, 
whose music and rites he set aside. 

The Yellow Emperor gave us the Hsien-cliih. 
Yao gave us the Ta-chang. Shun, the Ta-shao. 
Yii, the Ta-hsia. T'ang, the Ta-hu. Wen Wang, 
the Fi-yu7ig. Wu Wang and Chou Kung added 
the Wu. 

Famous musical compositions. 

The mourning ceremonial of old was according 
to the estate of each, and determined in proportion 
to rank. Thus, the body of the Son of Heaven 

J 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Empire 441 

was enclosed in a seven-fold coffin. That of a 
feudal prince, in a five-fold coffin. That of a 
minister, in a three-fold coffin. That of a private 
individual, in a two-fold coffin. But now Mih Tzu 
would have no singing in life, no mourning after 
death, and a single coffin of only three inches in 
thickness as the rule for all alike ! 

Such doctrines do not illustrate his theory of 
universal love; 

They betray a want of sympathy with human weak- 
nesses. 

neither does his practice of them establish the fact 
of his own personal self-respect. They may not 
suffice to destroy his system altogether ; though it 
is unreasonable to prohibit singing, and weeping, 
and rejoicing in due season. 

He would have men toil through life and hold 
death in contempt. But this teaching is altogether 
too unattractive. It would land mankind in sorrow 
and lamentation. It would be next to impossible 
as a practical system, and cannot, I fear, be re- 
garded as the Tao of the true Sage. It would be 
diametrically opposed to human passions, and as 
such would not be tolerated by the world. Mih 
Tzu himself might be able to carry it out ; but not 
the rest of the world. And when one separates 
from the rest of the world, his chances of develop- 
ing an ideal State become small indeed. 

Mih Tzu argued in favour of his system as 
follows : — Of old, the great Yu drained off the 

442 Chiiang Tzil 

flood of waters, and caused rivers and streams to 
flow through the nine divisions of the empire and 
the parts adjacent thereto, — three hundred great 
rivers, three thousand branches, and streams with- 
out number. With his own hands he plied the 
bucket and dredger, in order to reduce confusion 
to uniformity. 

Make all streams flow to the sea. 

until his calves and shins had no hair left upon 
them. The wind bathed him, the rain combed 
him ; but he marked out the nations of the world, 
and was in very truth a Sage. And because he 
thus sacrificed himself to the commonwealth, ages 
of Mihists to come would also wear short serge 
jackets and straw sandals, and toil day and night 
without stopping, making self-mortification their 
end and aim, and say to themselves, " If we cannot 
do this, we do not follow the Tao of Yii, and are 
unworthy to be called Mihists." 

The disciples of Hsiang Li Ch'in, 

A professor of Mihism. 

the followers of the five princes, Mihists of the 
south, such as K'u Huo, Chi Ch'ih, and Teng 
Ling, — all these studied the canon of Mih Tzu, 
but their disagreements and agreements were not 
identical. They called each other schismatics, and 
quarrelled over the " hard and white," the '' like 
and unlike," and argued over questions of " odd 
and even." Chii Tzu was their Sage, and they 
wanted to canonise him as a saint, that they might 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Empire 443 

carry on his doctrines into after ages. Even now 
these differences are not settled. 

Thus we see that Mih Tzu and Ch'in Hua Li, 
while right in theory, were wrong in practice. 
They would merely have taught mankind to vie 
with each other in working the hair off their calves 
and shins. The evil of that system would have 
predominated over the good. Nevertheless, Mih 
Tzu was undoubtedly a well-meaning man. In 
spite of failure, with all its w^ithering influences, he 
stuck to his text. He may be called a man of 
genius. 

But not a true Sage. 

Not to be involved in the mundane, not to 
indulge in the specious, not to be overreaching 
with the individual, nor antagonistic to the public ; . 
but to desire the tranquillity of the world in general 
with a view to the prolongation of life, to seek no 
more than sufficient for the requirements of oneself 
and others, and by such a course to purify the 
heart, — herein lay the Tao of the ancients. 

Sung Hsing and Yin W^n became enthusiastic 
followers of Tag. They adopted a cap, shaped like 
the Hua Mountain, as a badge. They bore them- 
selves with kindly discrimination towards all 
things. They spoke of the passive qualities of the 
heart as though they had been active ; and declared 
that whosoever could bring joy among mankind 
and peace within the girdle of ocean should be 
made ruler over them. 

They suffered obloquy without noticing the 

444 Chiiang Tzii 

insult. They preserved the people from strife. 
They prohibited aggression and caused arms to lie 
unused. They saved their generation from wars, 
and carried their system over the whole empire, to 
the delight of the high and to the improvement of 
the lowly. Though the world would have none of 
them, yet they struggled on and would not give 
way. Hence it was said that when high and low 
became tired of seeing them, they intruded them- 
selves by force. In spite of all this, they did too 
much for others, and too little for themselves. 

" Give us," said they, " but five pints of rice, and 
it will be enough." The master could not thus eat 
his fill ; but the disciples, although starving, did 
not forget the world's claims. 

This is not satisfactorily explained by any com- 
mentator. Kuo Hsiang says that these two men 
regarded the world as their " master." 

Day and night they toiled on, saying, " Must we 
necessarily live ? Shall we ape the so-called 
saviours of mankind ? " 

" The superior man," they say, " is not a fault- 
finder. He does not appropriate the credit of 
others. He looks on one who does no good to the 
world as a worthless fellow. He regards prohibi- 
tion of aggressive actions and causing arms to lie 
unused, as external ; the diminution and restraint 
of our passions, as internal. In all matters, great 
or small, subtle or gross, such is the point to 
which he attains." 

To be public-spirited and belong to no party, in 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Einpire 445 

one's dealings not to be all for self, to move with- 
out being bound to a given course, to take things 
as they come, to have no remorse for the past, no 
anxiety for the future, to have no partialities, but 
to be on good terms with all, — herein lay the Tao 
of the ancients. 

P eng Meng, T'ien P'ien, and Sh^n Tao, became 
enthusiastic followers of Tao. Their criterion was 
the identity of all things. , " The sky," said they, 
" can cover but cannot support us. The earth can 
support but cannot cover us. Tao can embrace all 
things but cannot deal with particulars." 

They knew that in creation all things had their 
possibilities and their impossibilities. Therefore 
they said, " Selection excludes universality. Train- 
ing will not reach in all directions. But Tag is 
comprehensive." 

Consequently, Sh^n Tao discarded all knowledge 
and self-interest and became a fatalist. 

It is about as difficult to apprehend Tag apart from 
fatalism as the omniscience of God apart from pre- 
destination. 
Passivity was his guiding principle. " For," said 
he, " we can only know that we know nothing, and 
a little knowledge is a dangerous thing. 

" Take any worthless fellow who laughs at man- 
kind for holding virtue in esteem, any unprincipled 
vagabond who reviles the great Sages of the world, 
and subject him to torture. In his agony he will 
sacrifice positive and negative alike. If he can but 
get free, he will trouble no more about knowledge 

y 

i/ 

44^ C/majig Tzii 

and forethought. Past and future will cease to 
exist for him, in his then neutral condition. 

** Move when pushed, come when dragged. Be 
like a whirling gale, like a feather in the wind, like 
a mill-stone going round. The mill-stone as an 
existence is perfectly harmless. In motion or at 
rest it does no more than is required, and cannot 
therefore incur blame. 

"Why? Because it is simply an inanimate 
thing. It has no anxieties about itself. It is never 
entangled in the trammels of knowledge. In motion 
or at rest it is always governed by fixed laws, and 
therefore it never becomes open to praise. Hence 
it has been said, ' Be as though an inanimate 
thing, and there will be no use for Sages.' 

" For a clod cannot be without Tao," — at which 
some full-blooded young buck covered the argu- 
ment with ridicule by crying out, " Shen Tao's 
Tao is not for the living, but for the dead ! " 

It was the same with T'ien P'ien. He studied 
sj under P eng Meng ; with the result that he learnt 
nothing. 

Tao cannot be learnt. 

P eng Meng's tutor said, " Those of old who 
knew Tao, reached the point where positive and 
negative ceased to exist. That was all." 

Now the bent of these men is one of opposition, 
which it is difficult to discuss. They act in every 
way differently from other people, but cannot escape 
the imputation of purpose. 

Which takes the place of spontaneity. 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Empire 447 

What they call Tao is not Tao ; and what they 
predicate affirmatively cannot escape being negative. 
The fact is that P'^ng M^ng, T'ien P'ien, and Shen -^ 
Tao, did not know Tao. Nevertheless they all had 
a certain acquaintance with it. 

To make the root the essential, to regard objective 
existences as accidental, to look upon accumulation . 
as deficiency, and to meekly accept the disposi- 
tions of Providence, — herein lay the Tao of the 
ancients. 

Kuan Yin and Lao Tzu became enthusiastic 
followers of Tao. 

For Kuan Yin, see p. 230. 

They based their system upon nothingness, with 
One as their criterion. Their outward expression ^ 
was gentleness and humility. Their inward belief 
was in unreality and avoidance of injury to all 
things. 

Kuan Yin said, "Adopt no absolute position. 
Let externals take care of themselves. In motion, ^ 
be like water. At rest, like a mirror. 

Receptive, but not permanently so. 

Respond, like the echo. 

Only when called upon. 

Be subtle, as though non-existent. Be still, as 
though pure. Regard uniformity as peace. Look 
on gain as loss. Do not precede others. Follow 
them." 

Lao Tzii said, " He who conscious of being 

44^ Chnang Tzu 

strong, is content to be weak, — he shall be 
a cynosure of men. 

This is quoted by Huai Nan Tzii as a saying by Lao 
Tzu, and appears in ch. xxviii of the Tao-Te-Ching. 
See The Remains of Lao Tzii, p. 21. 

" He who conscious of purity, puts up with dis- 
grace,— he shall be the cynosure of mankind. 

" He who when others strive to be first, contents 
himself with the lowest place, is said to accept the 
contumely of the world. 

" He who when others strive for the substantial, 
contents himself with the unsubstantial, stores up 
nothing and therefore has abundance. There he 
is in the midst of his abundance which comes to 
him without effort on his part. He does nothing, 
and laughs at the artifices of others. 

" He who when others strive for happiness is 
content with security, is said to aim at avoiding evil. 

Compare the Tao-T^-Ching, ch. xxii. 

" He who makes depth of fundamental impor- 
tance and moderation his rule of life, is said to 
crush that which is hard within him and temper 
that which is sharp. 

" To be in liberal sympathy with all creation, 
and not to be aggressive towards one's fellow-men, 
— this may be called perfection." 

O Kuan Yin ! O Lao Tzu ! verily ye were the 
true Sages of old. 

Silence, formlessness, change, impermanence, now 
life, now death, heaven and earth blended in one, 

CAP. xxxiii.] The Empire 449 

the soul departing, gone no one knows where : 
suddenly, no one knows whither, as all things go 
in turn, never to come back again ; — herein lay the 
Tag of the ancients. 

Chuang Tzu became an enthusiastic follower of 
Tag. In strange terms, in bold words, in far- 
reaching language, he gave free play to his 
thoughts, without following any particular school 
or committing himself to any particular line. 

He looked on the world as so sunk in corruption 
that it was impossible to speak gravely. There- 
fore he employed "goblet words" which apply in 
various directions ; he based his statements upon 
weighty authority in order to inspire confidence ; 
and he put words in other people's mouths in order 
to secure breadth. 

See ch. xxvii ad init. 
In accord with the spirit of the universe, he was at 
peace with all creation. He judged not the rights 
and wrongs of mankind, and thus lived quietly in 
his generation. Although his book is an extra- 
ordinary production, it is plausible and harmless 
enough. Although the style is most irregular, it 
is at the same time ingenious and attractive. 

As a thinker, he is endlessly suggestive. Above, 
he roams with God. Below, he consorts with those 
who are beyond the pale of life and death, who deny 
a beginning and an end. In relation to the root, 

The origin of all things, 
he speaks on a grand and extensive scale. In rela- 
tion to Tag, he establishes a harmony between man 

2 G 

^' 

450 Chuang Tzii 

and the higher powers. Nevertheless, he yields to 
the modifications of existence and responds to the 
exigencies of environment. His arguments are 
inexhaustible, and never illogical. He is far- 
reaching, mysterious, and not to be fully explored. \ 

It is impossible for a European critic to believe that 
Chuang Tzu penned the above paragraphs. See 
post, p. 454. 

Hui Tzu was a man of many ideas. His works 
would fill five carts. But his doctrines are para- 
doxical, and his terms are used ambiguously. 

He calls infinite greatness, beyond which there 
is nothing, the Greater One. He calls infinite 
smallness, within which there is nothing, the 
Lesser One. 

Recognising two absolute extremes. 
He says that that which is without dimensions 
measures a thousand //. 

On the principle that mathematical points, though 
themselves without dimensions, collectively fill up 
space. 

That heaven and earth are equally low. That 
mountain and marsh are equally level. 

It depends upon the point of view. 
That the sun at noon is the sun setting. 

To people living farther east. 

That when an animal is born, it dies. 

As regards its previous state it dies when leaving it 
for a new state. 

That the likeness of things partly unlike is called 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Empire 451 

the lesser likeness of unlikes. That the likeness of 
things altogether unlike is called the greater like- 
ness of unlikes. That southwards there is no 
limit, and yet there is a limit. That one can reach 
Ytieh to-day and yet be there before. That joined 
rings can be separated. That the middle of the 
world is north of Yen and south of Yiieh. 

It Is wherever the speaker is. The space between 
Yen and Yiieh is as zero compared with the infinite. 

That he loves all creation equally, just as heaven 
and earth are impartial to all. 

In covering and supporting all. 
Accordingly, Hui Tzu was regarded as a great 
philosopher and a very subtle dialectician ; and 
became a favourite with the other dialecticians of 
the day. 

He said that there were feathers in an tgg. 

Because on a chicken. 
That a fowl had three feet. 

The third being volition. 
That Ying was the world. 

As you cannot say it is not the world. 
That a dog could be a sheep. That a mare could 
lay eggs. That a nail has a tail. 

Names being arbitrary in all cases. 
That fire is not hot. 

It is the man who feels It hot. 
That mountains have mouths. 

As evidenced by echoes. 

2 G 2 

452 Chtiang Tzu 

That wheels do not press down the ground. 

Touching only at a point. 
That the eye does not see. 

It is the man. 

That the finger does not touch. That the utter- 
most extreme is not the end. That a tortoise is 
longer than a snake. 

Because longer lived ! 
That a carpenter's square is not square. 

Like Horace's whetstone which makes other things 
sharp, " exsors ipsa secandi." 

That compasses will not make a circle. 

It is the draughtsman. 

That a round hole will not surround a square 
handle. That the shadow of a flying bird does not 
move. That there is a moment when a swiftly- 
flying arrow is neither moving nor at rest. That 
a dog is not a hound. 

Two things cannot be identical unless even their 
names are the same. 

That a bay horse and a dun cow are three. 

Taken separately they are two. Taken together they 
are one. One and two make three. 

That a white dog is black. 

If his eyes are black. Part standing for the whole. 
That a motherless colt never had a mother. 

When it had a mother, it was not an orphan. 

CAP. XXXIII.] The Empire 453 

That if you take a stick a foot long and every day 
cut it in half, you will never come to the end of it. 

Compare " Achilles and the Tortoise," and the 
sophisms of the Greek philosophers. 

And such was the stuff which dialecticians used to 
argue about with Hui Tzu, also without ever 
getting to the end of it. 

Huan T'uan and Kung Sun Lung were of this 
class. By specious premisses they imposed on 
people's minds and drove them into false con- 
clusions. But though they won the battle in 
words, they did not carry conviction into their 
adversaries' hearts. Theirs were but the snares of 
the sophist. 

Hui Tzu daily devoted his intelligence to such 
pursuits, purposely advancing some preposterous 
thesis upon which to dispute. That was his charac- 
teristic. He had besides a great opinion of his 
own wisdom, and used to say, "The universe does 
not hold my peer." 

Hui Tzu makes a parade of his strength, but is 
devoid of any sound system. An eccentric fellow 
in the south, named Huang Liao, asked why the 
sky did not fall and the earth sink ; also, whence 
came wind, rain, and thunder. 

Hui Tzu was not backward in replying to these 
questions, which he answered unhesitatingly. He 
went into a long discussion on all creation, and 
talked away without end, though to himself he 
seemed to be saying very little. He supplemented 

454 Chuang Tzii 

this with most extraordinary statements, making 
it his chief object to contradict others, and being 
desirous of gaining fame by defeating all comers. 
Thus, he was never popular. Morally, he was 
weak ; physically, he was violent. His was a dark 
and narrow way. 

Looked at from the point of view of the Tao of 
the universe, the value of Hui Tzu may be com- 
pared with the efforts of a mosquito or a gadfly. 
Of what use was he to the world ? As a specialist, 
he might have succeeded. But to let him put 
himself forward as an exponent of Tao, would 
have been dangerous indeed. 

He would not however be content to be a 
specialist. He must needs roam insatiably over all 
creation, though he only succeeded in securing the 
reputation of a sophist. 

Alas for the talents of Hui Tzu ! He is ex- 
travagantly energetic, and yet has no success. He 
investigates all creation, but does not conclude in 
Tag. He makes a noise to drown an echo. He 
is like a man running a race with his own shadow. 
Alas! 

As to the genuineness of this concluding chapter, 
every one may form his own opinion. The question 
has been hotly fought, and great names could be 
mentioned on each side. Wang An Shih and Su 
Tung P'o both thought that it might well have come 
from the hand of Chuang Tzii. Lin Hsi Chung 
thought not, and on his side the majority of Western 
students will in all probability be ranged. 

455 

INDEX 

Accidentals, 162 

Achilles and the Tortoise, 453 

Action, 5, 266, 293 

Affirmative and Negative, 1 7 

Aggression, 340 

Ai, Duke, 62, 268, 429 

Ai Feng, 29 

Ai T'ai T'o, 62 

All-in-extremes, 276 

Alternation theory, 18 

Anger, 310 

Ants and Mutton, 330 

Apricot Altar, 413 

Archery, 60, 255, 272, 308, 309, 

318 
Argument, Futility of, 30 
Arms, Appeal to, 162 
Arms, Men of, 318 
Artificial, The, 147, 175, 210, 232, 

309 
Augur and the pigs, The Grand, 236 

Balancing balls, 233 

Bantams, 297 

Battered but not Bruised, 80 

Battering-ram, 207 

Battle, The Six Plans of, 313 

Beauty, 182, 260, 337 

Bells, Chime of, 250 

Bird, The strange, 258 

Bishop-wort, 313 

Black Forest, The, 413 

Black Water, The, 276 

Blades from Kan, 193 

Boats, 75, 249, 295 

Body, The human, 15 ; (without 

body) 145 
Body and soul parted, 12, 324 

Bogy, A, 236 
Books, 170 

Boots, (for the toeless) 63 ; (out- 
side door) 368, 424 
Border- warden. The, 141 
Breathing from the heels, 69 
Business, 133 
Butcher, The faithful, 376 
Butterfly, Chuang Tzu a, 32 

Canon of Confucianism, 166, 188, 

312, 438, 439 
Cataract, A, 238 
Caterpillars, 297 
Cats, 312 ; (wild) 10 
Centipede, The, 211 
Ceremonial, 89, 108, 121, 133, 162, 

195) 277, 318, 440 
Chance, 350 
Chan Tzu, 380 
Ch'ang Chi, 56 
Chang Hung, 112 
Ch'ang Hung, 352 
Chang I, 235 
Chang Jo, 316 
Chang Wu Tzii, 28 
Ch'ang Yii, 316 
Chao Hsi, 373 
Chao Wen, 22 
Chapped hands. Salve for, 9 
Charioteering, 241 
Charity, 88, 100, loi, 108, 114, 122, 

133. 277> 307 
Che, Robber, 103, 112, 120, 155, 

387 
Ch'ens and Ts'ais, 180, 251, 253, 

255, 380 
Che-yang, The, 154 

456 

ChitciJig Tzii 

Ch'eng, 281 

Cheng K'ao Fu, 431 

Cheng State, The, 59, 94 

Ch'i, Mt, 372 

Ch'i Kung, 261 

Ch'i State, The, 50, 65, no 

Ch'i-yang, 384 

Chi Ch'e, 145, 146 

Chi-yung, 331 

Chi T'o, 72, 361 

ChiTzu (i) 72, 352; (2) 339 

Chi Chen, 350 

Chi Ch'ih, 442 

Chi Chii, 45 

Chi Hsing Tzii, 238 

Chi Han, Magician, 94 

Chiang LU Mien, 145, 146 

Chieh, 40, 119, 383 

Chieh-keng, 331 

Chieh Tzu, 350 

Chieh Yii, 7, 55, 92 

Chien Ho, 353 

Chien Wu, 6, 77, 92, 273 

Chih, 206 

Ch'ih Chang Man Chi, 152 

Ch'ih Chi, 207 

Chih-ho, 354 

Chih Kung, 401 

Ch'ih Yu, 392 

Children, 299, 300, 301, 358 

Chin, Duke of, 29 

Chin State, The, 147 

Ch'in Hua Li, 440 

Ch'in Lao, 342 

Chin-shao, The, 226, 244 

Ch'in Shih, 36 

Ch'in State, The, 368 

Ch'ing, Carpenter, 240 

Ch'ing-ning, The, 228 

Ching-shih, 53 

Ching Shou, The, 33 

Ch'iu (Confucius), 145, 189 

Chiu Fang Yin, 327 

Ch'iu-shih, 426 

Chiu-yu, The, 228 

Cho-lu, 392 

Chou, 40 

Chou, River, 383 

Chou Kung, 181, 384 

Chrysalis, 3 

Chu Hsien, 234 

Chu Yung, 116 

Ch'u State, The, 3 et alt. pass. 

Chuan Hsii, 77 

Chuang, Duke, 241 

Chuang Tzii, 9, (and the butterfly) 
32; 66, 137, 159, 215, 216, 
(asked to take office) 217, 434, 
(and the fishes) 218, (death of 
wife) 223, (and the skull) 224, 
(and the geese) 245 ; 254, 258, 
268, (and Tao) 285, 318, (at 
Hui Tzii's grave) 321, (and the 
stickleback) 353, (and the use- 
less) 358, (on Confucius) 365 ; 
407, 427, (death of) 434, (his 
genius) 449 

Chui, 115, 242 

Chun Mang, 150 

Chung, 332 

Chung Yang, 116 

Chii Ch'iao, 28 

Chii Liang, 88 

Chii Poh Yii, 49, 345 

Ch'ii-to, 228 

Chii Tzu, 442 

Ch'ii Tzu, Mt., 316 

Chii Yiian, 50 

Cicadas, 2, 258, 306, (catching) 
232 

Class distinctions, 187 

Classification, 168 

Clouds and rain, 165, 173 

Cocks and dogs, 117, 350 

Cock-fighting, 238 

Coffins, 53, 441 

Cold, Latent, 319 

Colossal, The, 204 

Colour Sense, The, 99, 108, 115, 
121, 155 

Common-places, 154 

Complacency, 402 

Concentration, 34, 240, 300 

Conditioned, The, 158 

Confucius, 28, 38, 45, 55, 56, (and 
the leper) 62, 83, (and Lao Tzii) 
144, 166, 182, 184, 188, 266, 
282 ; 149, 179, 182, 201, (in dan- 
ger) 213, 251 ; 225, (on concen- 
tration) 232, 235, (at the cataract) 

Index 

457 

238; 253, 255, 263, 272, 274, 
282, 290, 291, 325, 338, 341, 

346, (and Lao Lai Tzu) 356 ; 

(changed his opinions) 365; 366, 

(and Robber Che) 387 ; 429 
Conscription, 54 
Cooks, 6, 33, 104 
Correlatives, 207, 208 
Corpse, (boy who impersonates) 6, 

97 ; (singing near a) 83 
Cunning, 315 
Crane's legs. A, loi, 332 
Criteria (of our minds), 16, (of 

Confucius), 166 

Dark, Seeing in the, 139 
Dark Palace, The, 77 
Dark-Steep Mt., The, 276 
Death. See Life and Death. 
Death of Chuang Tzii's wife, 223 
Destiny, 46, 64, 74, 90, 143, 189, 

Determinate relations, 332 

Dialecticians, 318 

Dimensions, 202 

Discontent, 402 

Discord and accord, 320 

Distance relative, 2 

Diversity, 331 

Divination, 357 

Divine Man, 7, 85, 151, 193, 331, 

361 
Divine Teacher, The, 317 
Do-nothing Say-nothing, 276 
Doctrine of Silence, 56 
Dogs, (straw) 180, (how to judge of) 

312, 327, (why they bark) 350 
Dog-tooth violet, 228 
Doorkeepers, 320, 329 
Doubts, 102, 117, 244, 334 
Dove, young, 2, 306 
Dragon, Lao Tzu a, 185 
Dragons, 214, 263 
Dragon-power, 122, 185 
Dream, Life a, 30, 86 
Dreamless sleep, 82, 192 
Dregs of knowledge, 172 
Drugs, 299, 331 
Drunken man. A, 232 
Duck's legs. A, TO I 

Duckweed, 228 
Dust-bin, Spirit of the, 237 
Duty, 46, 88, loi, 108, 114, 121, 
122, 133, 166, 277, 298, 307, 

367, 433 
Dying, No advantage in not, 15 

Ear, The, 333 

Earth, 161, 173, 223 ; (music of) 12 

Eel's habitat, The, 27, 295 

Ego, Whence the, 14 

Emotions, 308 

Empyrean, The, 288 

Energy, Hu Tzu shows his internal, 

96 
Enthusiasts, 330 
Essentials, 162 
Evil speakers, 39 
Excalibur, 82, 303 
Exhaling and inhaling, 191 
Existence and non-existence, 206, 

304 
External, The, 49, 82, 103, 156, 235, 

299. 302, 310, 315 
Extremes meet, 115 
Eye, The, 211, 333 

Fa Yen, The, 47 

Failure, Causes of, 432 

Fallacia amphibolise, 275 

Fame or Reputation, 5, 103 

Fan, Prince of, 275 

Fang Ming, 316 

Fasting, 42, 43, 282 

Father praising son, 363 

Fen-yang, 8 

Feng Meng, 255 

Fighting, 207, 315 

Fighting-cocks, 238 

Filial piety, 153, 175, 186, 361 

Finger, 19 

Fire eternal, 37 

Fire Spirit, The, 237 

Fire, Production of, 353 

First Cause, 246, 267 

Fisherman, 357 

Fishes, 114, 174, 185, 295, 296, 

ll'^^ 354; happiness of, 218 
Fish-hawks, 189 
Five Bonds, The, 399 

458 

Chuang Tzu 

Five Princes, 78 

Five Rulers, The, 186, 202 

Flattery, 153 

Fools, 154 

Foot, The, 333 

Footprints, 188 

Footsteps, Afraid of his, 418 

Forgetfulness, 65 

Form, 144, 297 

Forms and Name, 163 

Four Seas, The, 123, 151, 202 

Foxes, 247, 295 

Friendship, 253 

Frog of the Well, 201, 215 

Fu Hsi, 45, 77, 116, T96, 274 

Fu Yixeh, 78 

Fulness and decay, 203, 287 

Gain, 103 

Gambling, 234 

Geese, 297 

Gentleness, 123 

Glow-worm, 228 

Glue, Sticking without, 102 

God, I, 15, 31, 68, 82, 163, 257, 

282, 301, 2,?)2, 
Goitre, A large, 65 
Golden Age, 116, 152 
Golden Roster, 313 
Goose, The cackling, 245 
Gourd, Five-bushel, 9 
Government, (a curse) 92; 107, 114, 

T19. 123, 130, 132, 146; (by 

the true Sage) 151 ; 163, 164, 

186, 187,317 
Grand Augur, The, 236 
Grand Tutor, 272 
Grave, Opening a, 355 
Great Bear, The, 77 
Great truths, 154 
Great Yii, The, 16, 142, 152, 215, 

254 
Grief, Real, 85 

Han-ch'ih, The, 176 

Han-tan, 216, 217 ; (siege of) 113 

Han-yin, 147 

Happiness, (in inaction) 158, 159, 
(elements of) 220, 405, (of fishes) 
218, (and sorrow) 199, 221 

Hard and White, The, 22, 67, 100, 

117 
He Hsii, 116 
Hearing, Sense of, 99, 104, 115, 

121, 3ii» 333. 359 
Heart, Natural goodness of, 123, 

(the seat of intellect) 297 
Heat, Latent, 319 
Heaven, 161, 173, 223 
Hermaphrodites, 189 
Heron, 366 
Ho Hsii, 109 
Ho-shang, 434 
Horses, 19, 106, 209, 228, 285, 312, 

316, 347 
Hou I or Yi, 60, 255, 308, 309, 

319 
House, A, 306 
Hsi P'eng, 316, 322 
Hsi Shih knits her brows, 182 
Hsi Wang Mu, 78 
Hsi Wei, 76, 292, 346 
Hsi Wei Shih, 359 
Hsiang-ch'eng, 316 
Hsiang Li Ch'in, 442 
Hsiao Chi, 352 
Hsiao Poh (Duke Huan), 399 
Hsien of the Kung-wens, 35 
Hsien-ch'ih, The, 227 
Hsien Yiian, 116 
Hsin, The, 237 
Hsii (butterflies), 228 
Hsii-aos, The, 26, 40 
Hsii Wu Kuei, 311 
Hsii Yu, 6, 87, 140, 329, 361, 382, 

404, 432 
Hsii Yii Chi T'o, 73, 361 
Hu, 98 

Hu Pu Hsieh, 72 
Hu Tzii, 94 
Hua, 141 ; (Mt.) 443 
Hua Chi, 316 
Hua Lin, 207 
Hua Tzii, 339 
Huan (Confucianist), 426 
Huan of Ch'i, Duke, 65, 170, 236. 

322, 399 
Huan Tou, 124 
Huan T'uan, 453 
Huang-chung, 100 

Index 

459 

Huang-hua, The, 154 
Huang-k'uang, The, 22S 
Huang Liao, 453 
Huang Ti. See Yellow Emperor 
Huang Tzu Kao Ngao, 236 
Hui, Prince, 33, (of AVei) 338 
Hui Tzii, 8, 66, 217, 218, 223, 318, 

321, 341, 358> 361, 365. 450 
Hunchbacks, 55, 65, 224, 232 
Hun Tun, 98 

I, Mt., 341 

I Chieh, 335 

I-erh, The, 251 

I Erh Tzu, 87 

I Liao, 247, 325, 342 

I-lu, 228 

I Yin, 309, 383 

Immunity of Drunkards, 232 

Inaction, 80, 97, 122, 131, 134, 

136, 137, 158, 159. 160, 165, 

222, 288, 308, 318 
Infinite, One with the, 89 
Infinitesimal, The, 204 
Influences, The Six, 119, 174 
Instincts, 107 
Intelligence, 139 
Internal, The, 49, 122, 156, 235, 

299^302, 310, 315 
Intrinsicality, 102 
Irrigation, 147 

Jen, 251 

Jen Ch'iu, 290 

Jen Hsiang Shih, 337 

Jen Kung Tzu, 354 

Jih Chung Shih, 92 

Joy and sorrow, 293 

Kan, Blades from, 193 

Kan-yii-ku, 228 

Kao, 237 

Keng Sang Ch'u, 294 

Kings, The Three, 186 

Knotted Cords, 116 

Knowledge, (Great) 13 ; (of the 
ancients) 21, 161, 304; (limit to) 
302 ; (perfection of) 333 ; (a 
curse) 115, 118, 125, 129, 298; 

(from repose) 195 ; (shallowness 
of) 293; (personified) 276; (of 
the wherefore) 368 

Kou Chien, 332 

Ku, Shepherd, 103 

K'u Huo, 442 

Ku-tu, 384 

Ku-chiieh, Mt., 276 

Kuan Chung, 226, 236, 322, 399 

Kuan Lung Feng, 40, 112, 352 

Kuan Yin, 230, 447 

K'uang, 213 

Kuang Ch'eng Tzu, 125 

K'uang Tzu, 401 

Kuei, 206 

K'uei, The, 237 

Kueis, The, 26 

Kuei-ch'i, 332 

Kuei Chi, 354 

K'un, 327 

K'un Hun, 316 

K'un-lun Mountains, 139, 224, 289 

Kung Ch'ui the artisan, 115, 242 

Kung Poh, 382 

K'ung-t'ung, 126 

Kung Sun Lung, 214, 319, 453 

Kung Tzu Mou, 215 

Kung Yiieh Hsiu, 335 

Kuo, men of, 253 

Laggards, Whipping up the, 234 

Language, The best, 293 

Lao Lai Tzij, 356 

Lao Lung Chi, 287 

Lao Tzu (and No-toes), 61 ; 93, 
123, 137, 142 ; (and Confucius) 
144, 166; 168, 169, 182, 184, 
266, 282 ; (and Keng Sang Ch'u) 
294 ; (and Nan Yung), 298 ; (and 
Poh Chii) 343 ; (and Yang Tzu 
Chu) 368 ; (death of) 36 

Law, The, 133, 162 ; (men of), 318 

Laws of Nature, 135 

Lei T'ing, 237 

Leopard, The, 228, 247 

Leper, A, 62 

Leviathan, The, i, 3 

Li, 237 

Li to a mile, Three, 2 

460 

Chuang Tzu 

Li Chi, 27, 29 

Li Chu, 104, 115 

Li Hsii, 116 

Li Lu, 116 

Li tree, Sacred, 50 

Liang, City of, 341 

Liang State, The, 218 

Liao, River, 93 

Liberty, 36, 37 

Lichen, 228 

Lieh Tzu (his supernatural power) 
4, (and the magician) 94, (and 
the skull) 227, (and the perfect 
man) 230, (and archery) 272, 
(declines food) 375 ; 423 

Lien Shu, 6 

Life (art of) 234; (and death) 203, 
229, 291, 305 ; (a tumour) 84 ; 
(transitory) 209, 285 

Light (personified) 289, (of Nature) 

Likes and dislikes, 155, 156, 366 

Like and the Unlike, The, 100, 117 

Lin Chii, 259 

Lin Hsia Chi, 387 

Lin Hui, 253 

Ling of Chou, Prince, 112 

Ling of Wei, Prince, 49, 65, 250, 

346 
Lo Book, The, 174 
Long life, 141 

Love for the people, 314, 329 
Lu Chii, 319 
Lu State, The, 56, 113, 145, et ait. 

pass. 
Lu T'ung, 7 
Lun Yii, The, 382 
Lung Feng, 40, 112, 352 
Lutes, The two, 319 
Lii-liang, Cataract at, 238 

Magic Circle, The, 400 

Man (not a free agent) 145, (origin 

of) 228, (pre-eminent) 231 
Mang-ts'ang, 2 
Mankind, 133 
Man Kou Te, 397 
Mantis, The praying, 49, 258 
Mao Ch'iang, 27 
Map-making, 270 

Matter, 133 

Measures, 114, 115 

Mechanical, The, 147 

Men Wu Kuei, 152 

Men Yin Teng Heng, 338 

Meng Sun Ts'ai, 85 

Meng Tzii Fan, 83 

Mental criteria, 16 

Mental equilibrium, 160 

Metempsychosis, 32 

Methusaleh, A Chinese, 3 

Miao-ku-she Mountain, 7, 8 

Middle Kingdom, The, 202, 262, 

269, 284 
Mih Tzu, 17, 100, 116, 155, 292; 

(his works and doctrines) 440 
Min Tzu, 65 
Mind, The, (without body) 145, 211, 

264, 333 ; (function of) 97, 360 
Minister of War, 290 
Mirror, The mind a, 97, (mankind 

a) 337 
Modification, Physical and moral, 

292 
Monkeys, 20, 27,145, 181, 255, 323 
Monkey Mountain, The, 323 
Moon, The, 29, 165, 173 
Moses, Burial of, 435 
Mosquitoes, 184, 366 
Motes in sunbeam, i 
Mother-in-law and wife, 360 
Mou of Chung-shan, Prince, 380 
Mou of Wei, 214 
Mou-jui, The, 228 
Mourning, 162, 186 
Mu of Ch'in, Duke, 309 
Mud spirit. The, 237 
Muh Wang, 207 
Mulberry Grove, The, 33 
Murder, Origin of, 296 
Music and Ceremonial, 89, 100, 

108, 115, 155, 162, 177, 195,318, 

440 
Music of Heaven, 12, 13, 178 
Mutilation, 35, 56, 59, 61, 320, 

329 
Mutton and Ants, 330 

Names, 163 
Nameless, The, 143 

Index 

461 

Nan Po Tzu K'uei, 78 

Nan-yiieh, 248 

Nan Yung Ch'u, 296 

Nature, 189, 303 ; (habit second) 

239 
Natural, The, 102, 131, 144, 175, 

210, 232, 309 
Necessity, 310 
Negative, Positive and, 120, 127, 

266, 349 
Negative quantity, The Sage a, 192 
Neglect better than care, 74 
Nest-builders, The, 391 
Nincompoops, 330 
Nightmare, 180 
No-beginning, 288 
No-Toes, 61 

Non-existence, Domain of, 1 1 
Nose, Scab on the, 321 
Nothing, (as an existence) 23 ; (its 

success) 139, 143, 289 
Nil Shang, 311 
Nil Yii, 78 

O Ho Kan, 287 

Objective, The, 17, 18, 145 

Obstinacy, 360 

Office, Value of, 198, 434 

Officials, 221 

ONE, All things, 23, 73, 89, 128, 
136, 143' 250, 278, 281, 303, 333, 
336 ; (the Greater and Lesser) 

450 
One-legged men, 224, 309 
Owl's sight. An, 207, 332 

P'ang Huan, 237 

Pao Chiao, 394, 401 

Pao Yii, 322 

Parasites, 330 

Passions, 66, 311 

Passivity, 97, 138, 165, 192, 266 

Patriots, 208, 221 

Peace, Men of, 318 

Pearl in corpse's mouth, 355 

Pecks and bushels, 114 

P'ei, 368 

Pei I, 140 

Pei Jen Wu Tse, 382 

Pei Kung She, 250 

Pei Men Ch'eng, 176 
P'ei O, 237 
P'eng Meng, 445 
P'eng Tsu, 3, 78 
Penumbra and Umbra, 32, 367 
Perfect ambition, honour, &c., 176 
Perfect Man, The, 27, 97, 146, 151, 
169, 183, 210, 231, 295, 301, 

359 
Perfect music, 177 
Personality, Man's, 87 
Physical life, 230 
P'il, 281 

Pi Kan, 40, 112, 352, 395 
Piao Shih, 255 
Pien Ch'ing Tzii, 242 
Pien Sui, 383 
Pigs, 236, 286, 330 
Pin, 371 
Ping, 319 
P'ing I, 77 

Plains, Slopes and, 208 
Ploughing, 342 
Po Li Ch'i, 270, 309 
Poh Ch'ang Ch'ien, 346 
Poh Ch'eng Tzii Kao, 142 
Poh Chii, 343 
Poh Huang, 116 
Poh Hun Wu Jen, 59, 272, 423 
Poh I, 72, 103, 201, 384, 394 
Poh Kung, 207 
Poh Loh, 106 
Politeness, Perfect, 307 
Portal of God, 304 
Positive and Negative, 120, 127 

205, 266, 349 
Precedence, 162 
Predestination, 350 
Predicables, Eight, 24 
Prometheus, A Chinese, 196 
Provident, The, 392 
P'u I Tzii, 91 
Pu Liang I, 79 
Punishments, 124, 162 
Pure Man, The, 69, 72, (a) 313 
Purity, Absolute, 127 
Purpose, Discard, 307 

Quail, 4 

462 

Chiiang Tzu 

Rain, 165, 173 

Rarey, A Chinese, 106 

Rat's liver, 82 

Raven, Blackness of, 185 

Record of Marvels, The, i, 4 

Red Lake, The, 139 

Relations determinate, &c., 332 

Relativity, (of Distance) 2, (of 

Time) 3 
Repose, 127, 157, 158, 195 
Reputation, 5, 360 
Retired scholars, 197 
Rewards and Punishments, 162 
Rhinoceros, 214 
Rice-pudding, Grains in a, 296 
Riches, 141 
Right and Wrong, 244, 306, 345, 

366 
Rings, Joined, 45 1 
River God, 53, 200, 357 
Rivers perennial, 332 
Robber Che, 103, 112, 120, 155, 

387 
Robbers v. Sages, 113 
Robbery, Origin of, 296 
Round Squareness, 25 
Rukh, The, i, 3 
Rule of life, 84 
Ruler, The Wise, 161 
Rulers (of old) 344, (the Five) 186 
Rustic, The sick, 299 

Sacrifices, 6, 53, 305 

Sacrificial caps, 8 

Sage, The True, 146, 192, 326, 336 

Sages a curse, 108, 1T3, 117, 125 

Salve for chapped hands, 9 

San Ching, 377 

San-miao, 124 

San-wei, 124 

Sang Hu, 83, 253, 254 

Scales and Steelyards, 114 

Schemes, 317, 360 

Scholars' robes, 269 

Sciolist, The, 164 

Sea-bird, Arrival of a, 226, 244 

Sea-serpents, 214 

Seasons, The, 162, 165, 348 

Secret of existence, 280 

Self, 5, 145 

Senses, The, 20, 99, 100, 155, 311, 

343 . 
Sha-ch'iu, 346 
Shadow, Afraid of his, 418 
Shadow, Man and his, 332 
San Chiian, 371, 404 
Shan Pao, 235 
Shang Mountain, 52 
Shang-shen Rapid, The, 233 
Shao Chih, 347 
Shao Kuang, 78 
She, Duke of, 45 
Shen Nung, 116, 196, 226, 246, 

287, 385 
Shen T'u Chia, 59 
Shen T'u Ti, 72, 394 
Shen Yao, 443 
Shih Ch'eng Chi, 168 
Shih Chin, 179 
Shih Ch'iu, 346 
Shih-hu, 371 

Shih K'uang, 22, 100, 104, 115 
Shih-ling, 331 
Shih-nan, 247, 325, 342 
Shih Yii, 100, 116, 120, 155 
Shou (Prince of Yiieh), 373 
Shou-ling, The youth of, 216 
Shou-yang, Mt, 103, 385 
Shu, 98, 352 
Shu Ch'i, 72, 384, 394 
Shu Shan No-toes, 61 
Shu Tan (Chou Kung), 384 
Shun, The Emperor, 5 et alt. pass. 
Sight, Sense of, (its failure) 139 ; 

311,359 
Silence, Doctrine of, 56, 293, 325 
Sincerity, Cultivation of, 316 
Singing alongside a corpse, 83 
Six Influences, The, 129, 174 
Six Ranks, The, 399 
Skull (Chuang Tzii and the) 224; 

(Lieh Tzu and the) 227 
Sky, The, 173 
Slopes and plains, 208 
Smell, Sense of, 155, 360 
Snake, The (moves without legs' 

211 ; (its shoulders) 82 
Snail, The, 340 
Snow-goose, Whiteness of, 185 
Society, 347 

Index 

463 

Sons, 141 

Soot, Life as mere, 305 

Sophistry, 117; (of Hui Tzu) 45 1 

Sorrow, 199, 221, 293 

Soul, The, 14, 37, 57 

Soyer, A Chinese, 104 

Space, 202, 304, 340 

Speech, (Great) 13 ; (not mere 

breath) 16, 17, 22; (a surplus) 

23 ; (like wind to wave) 47 ; 

(failure of) 139; (no room for) 

264 
Spirit of the Clouds, 129 

„ ,, Ocean, 200 

„ „ River, 200 
"Spring and Autumn," 24 
Square and Compasses, loi, 263 
Ssu-mi, The, 228 
Standard of right, 306 
Standards must be absolute, 436 
Stars, The, 167 

Stealing purses, 114; (States) 114 
Stickleback, Chuang Tzu and the, 

353 
Stoat, The, 313 
Stone-mason's skill, A, 321 
Straight-browed people. The, 150 
Straw dog, The, 179 
Strength of no avail, 139 
Stupidity, 360 
Su, Hunchback, 55 
Subjective, The, 17, 18, 305, 306, 

364 
Success, Causes of, 432 
Sui Jen, 196, 226 
Summum bonum. The, 155 
Sun and Moon, 29, 165, 167, 173, 

243 
Sun Hsiu, 242 
Sun Hsiu Ao, 273, 325 
Sung Hsing, 443 
Sung State, The, 8, 9, 53 
Supreme Void, The, 289 
Swallow, Wisdom of the, 257 
Swords, Forging, 290; (the Three), 

410 

Ta-lii, 100 
Ta T'ao, 346 
Ta T'ing, 116 

T'ai, Mt., 3, 77, 103 

Tai Chin Jen, 340 

T'ai Huang, 91 

T'ai Kung Tiao, 347 

T'ai Wang Shan Fu, 371 

Talkers, 327 

Tan-hsiieh, 373 

T'ang, The Emperor, 3, 207, 215, 

292, 309. 361, 383 

Tag, 16; (axis of ) 18, 24; (perfect) 
25; (gives form) 75, 76, 79; 
(man born in) 85 ; (in everything) 
112; (in abstraction) 127; (of 
God and man) 134, 135, 137, 
138, 157, 163, 167; (capacity of) 
169, 182, 197 ; (eternal) 209 ; 
(how to reach) 277, 281 ; (is 
everywhere) 285, 288, 303, 316 
(and Te) 326 ; (functions of) 
438 ; (and fatalism) 446 

T'ai Hsi Ching, The, 70 

Tao-Te-Ching, The, 19, 34, 56, 71, 
III, 115, i22,'i25, 136, 143, 170, 
172, 179, 205, 231, 243, 275, 277, 

278) 30O) 369> 448 
Tapir, The, 6 
Taste, Sense of, 155 
Te (see Virtue), 45 
Teeth cold, 113 
Tell, A Chinese, 60, 255 
Teng Ling, 442 
Thieves, no, 169 
Thieving, Art of, 112 
Things, 231 
Thoroughness, 342 
Thought, 170 
Three in the Morning, 20 
Three Dynasties, loi, 118, 120 
Three Princes, 124, 132, 186, 202 
Tiao-ling, 258 
T'ien Ch'eng Tzu, or T'ien Ho 

III, 324 
T'ien K'ai Chih, 234 
T'ien Ken, 93 
T'ien P'ien, 443 
Tigers, 174, 214, 263 
Time, 189, 202, 291, 304 
Tit, The, 6 
Toes, 305, 306 
Tongue, A three-foot, 326 

464 

CJmang Tzii 

Topsy-turvydom, 199 

Tortoise, 3, 357 ; (ChuangTzu and 

the) 217 
Translation (as of Enoch), 230 
Travelling, 180 

Trees Useless, 10, 51, 52, 245 
Tripe, 305 

Tsang, Old man of, 271 
Tsang, Shepherd, 103 
Ts'ang-wu, 354 
Ts'ao Shang, 428 
Tse Yang, 335 
Tseng Shen, 100, 116, 120, 155, 

352, 366 
Tseng Tzu, 378 
Ts'ui Chii, 123 
Tsun Lu, 116 
Tsung, Mt., 124 
Tsungs, The, 26 
Ts'ung-chih, 40 
Tung Kuo Shun Tzu, 261 
Tung Kuo Tzu, 285 
Tung Kuo Tzu Chi, 366 
Tung-t'ing, 176, 227 
Tung Yeh Chi, 241 
Turtle of eastern sea, 215,296, 335 
Tzu Ch'an, 59 
Tzu Chang, 397 
Tzii Ch'i, 12, 52, 324, 327 
Tzu Ch'in Chang, 83 
Tzu Chou Chih Fu, 370 
Tzu Chou Chih Poh, 370 
Tzii Hsii or Wu Yiian, 112, 221, 

352, 401 
Tzu Hua Tzii, 373 
Tzu Kao, 45 
Tzu Kung, 83, 147, 185, 225, 378, 

381, 388, 413 
Tzti Lai, 81 
Tzu Lao, 342 
Tzu Li, 81 
Tzii Lu, 165, 231, 263, 342, 381 ; 

(death of) 393 ; 413 
Tzu Sang, 90 

Tzu Sang Hu, 83, 253, 254 
Tzii Ssu, 80 

Tzii Yang of Cheng, 375 
Tzu Yii, 80, 90 

Ugliness, 260 

Umbra and Penumbra, 32, 367 
Uncanny events, 328 
Unconditioned, The, 158, 209, 307 
Uniformity (of results), 186, 132, 

227, 331 
Universe, The, 19, 29, 161, 167, 

279, 290 
Universal Love, 167 
Untrodden ground, 333 
Useful and Useless, The, 11, 306, 

358 
Usurpers, 208 

Valetudinarianism, 191 
Vengeance not extended against 

things, 232 
Violence, 340 
Virtue (Te), 45, 133, 143, 151, 176, 

185, 252, 277, 308, 326, 360 
Virtue, Man of Perfect, 210 
Vision (Eye and) ^t^t^ ; (perfection 

of) 104, 139 
Vital Principle, The, 129 

Wa Lung, 237 

Walrus, The, 211 

Wang Hsiang, 237 

Wang I, 26, 91, 140 

Wang Kuo, 335 

Wang T'ai, 56 

Wang Tzu, 395 

Wang Tzu Ch'ing Chi, 250 

^'ar, 315, 318 

Wasps, 297 

Water, (Fluidity of) 268; (to men 

and fishes) 227 
Water-level, The, 64, 157 
Wealth, 221 ; (value of) 403 ; (evil 

of) 405 
Weasel, The, 313 
Weeding plants, 360 
Weeping, 162 ; (without snivelling) 

85 
Wei, Prince of, 9, 38, 254, 338 
Wei, Prince Wu of, 311 
Wei, The State of, 38, 49 
Wei of Ch'i, Prince, 338 
Wei of Chou, Duke, 234 
Wei I, The, 237 
Wei-lei Mountains, 294 

Index 

465 

Wei Sheng, 395, 401 

Weights and measures a curse, 114 

Well-sweep, A, 147, 181 

Wen of Wei, Prince, 261 

Wen Chung, 332 

Wen Po Hsiieh Tzii, 262 

Wen Wang, 273 

Wen Wang of Chao, 407 

Wheel of Existence, The, 228 

Wheelwright, The, 1 7 i 

Whole made up of parts, 347 

Wife, Mother-in-law and, 360 

Wigs, 152 

Wind, 173, 211, 332 

Wine, Thin, 113 

Winnowing, Chaff from, 184 

Wisdom a curse, 115, 121, 125, 

188 
Wisdom-tricks, 1 1 1 
Without-end, 288 
Wolves, 174 
Words, 170, 171 
Wu, Prince of, 9, 323 
Wu Chuang, 88 
Wu Ch'un, Hunchback, 65 
Wu Han Chao, 173 
Wu Kuang, 72, 361, 383 
Wu Lai, 352 
W^u Ting, 78 
Wu-tsu, 228 
Wu Tzu Hsii, 395 
Wu Wang, 152, 207, 292, 384 
Wu Yoh, 400 
Wu Yiian, 112, 221, 352, 401 

Yak, The, 10 

Yang-ch'i, The, 228 

Yang Chu, 100, 116, 155, 259, 318 

Yang Hu, 214 

Yang Tzu Chii, 93, 368, 369 

Yao, The Emperor, 5, et alt. pass. 

Yeh Ch'iieh, 26, 91, 140, 281, 329 
Yellow Emperor, The, 28, 77, 123, 

125, 139, 176, 196, 224, 246, 27^, 

277» 292, 316 
Yellow Spring, The, 358 
Yen Gate, The, 361 
Yen State, The, 329 
Yen Ch'eng Tzu Yu, 12, 324, 366, 

441 
Yench'i, 410 

Yen Ho, 48, 241, 374, 429 
Yen Hui or Yen Yiian, 38, 85, 179, 

225, 233, 256, 264, 272, 291, 

379. 381, 388 
Yen Kang Tiao, 287 
Yen Pu I, 324 
Yi, 60, 255, 308, 309, 319 
Yi Yang, 237 
Yin, Mountain, 93 
Yin and Yang, The, 82, 120, 126, 

177, 192, 201, 280 
Yin-li, 394 
Yin Wen, 443 
Ying, 451 

Ying, A man of, 321 
Ying-yang, 382 
Yii, The Great, 16, 142, 152, 215, 

254 
Yu Ch'iang, 78 
Yii Ch'ieh, 357 
Yii Erh, 104 
Yu-hu, 40 
Yu island, 124 
Yu Piao, 179 

Yiian of Sung, Prince, 270, 321 
Yiian Feng, 150 
Yiian Hsien, 378 

Yiieh State, The, 8, 9, 16, 313, 451 
Yung Ch'eng, 116 
Yung Ch'eng Shih, 338 
Yung, The philosopher, 4 

2 H 

466 

ERRA TA AND ADDENDA 

Page I, line 3 (from bottom), insert comma after " sunbeam." 
„ 49, line 2, Prince Ling is the same individual as the Duke Ling 
of pp. 65, 250, 346. 
[All such terms are, of course, arbitrary, being used 
merely as convenient equivalents of the Chinese 
titles in the text.] 
60, „ 13, For " Hou I " read " Hou Yi." [This for the sake 
of uniformity. &<? pp. 255, 308, &c.] 
„ 65, ,, 16, For "too short" read "too scraggy." 
,, 65, „ 20, For "too thin" read "too scraggy." 

72, „ 4, For " Chi Tzii Hsii Yii " read " Chi Tzu, Hsii Yii.' 
,, 170, ,, 3 (from bottom), After "Duke Huan." omit the full stop. 
„ 228, ,,14, For "glow-worm " read " fire-fly." 
,, 230, ,, 22, For " to the minister" read "to be the minister," 
„ 262, „ 22, For "Wen Po" read "Wen Poh." 
„ 270, „ 6, For " Po Li Ch'i " read " Poh Li Ch'i." 
,, 272, ,, 3 (from bottom), For " Po Hun " read " Poh Hun." 
„ 309, „ 12 For "Duke Mu " read "Duke Muh." 
„ 309, „ 12 For " Po Li Ch'i " read " Poh Li Ch'i." 
,, 314, last line, " Love for the people," &c. Compare p. 329, lines 
17 and 18, " There is no difficulty," <S:c. The con- 
flict between the meanings of these two passages 
has not been pointed out. The first passage is 
rendered by some commentators, " Not to be able 
to love the people is the," &:c. Neither rendering 
is quite satisfactory ; for reasons which would 
require quotations from the Chinese text. 

Errata and Addenda 467 

Page 324, lines 15 and 26, For "Tzu Chi" read "Tzu Ch'i." 
„ 327, „ 18 and 28, For "Tzu Chi" read "Tzu Ch'i." 
„ 328, line 7, For "Tzu Chi " read " Tzii Ch'i." 
„ 346, „ 5, After "Duke Ling," add "of Wei." 
„ 371, „ 17, For "Shih Hu"read "Shih-hu." 
,» 373> n 3, For "Tan Hsueh"read "Tan-hsiieh." 
„ 394, „ 8, For "YinLi"read "Yin-li." 

[These last three corrections mean that I have 
written names of places with a hyphen between 
the transliteration of the component Chinese 
characters, the names of meti with a capital letter 
to the transliteration of each of the Chinese cha- 
racters which go to make up the surname and 
personal name.] 

THE END. 

WVMAN AND SONS, PRINTERS GREAT QUEEN STREET, LONDON, W.C. 

in' THE SAME AUTHOR. 

Chinese Sketches. Pcath of an Emperor — l^liiiuctte — ^Cambling- 
Feng-shui — Opium — Pawnbrokers — Slang — Inquests, &c. &c. 

Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio. Translation of the 

Liao Choi. 2 vols. Svo. 

Historic China, and other Sketches. 

Gems of Chinese Literature. Containing Extracts from various 
Authors, tVom n.c. 500 to A.n. 1600. 

A Short History of Koolangsu. 

On Some Translations and Mistranslations in Williams' 
Syllabic Dictionary. 

Dictionary of Colloquial Idioms in the Mandarin Dialect. 

Chinese without a Teacher: Being a Collection of Easy and 
Useful Sentences in the Mandarin Dialect. With a ^'ocabulary. 
2nd Edition. 

Synoptical Studies in Chinese Character. 

Handbook of the Swatow Dialect. 

Record of the Buddhistic Kingdoms. Translated from the Chinese. 
With copious Notes. 

Two Chinese Poems : The San Tzii Ching, or the Trimctrisal 

Classic ; and the Ch'ien TZU Wen, or Thousand Character 
Essay. Metrically translated. 

From Swatow to Canton : An Overland Journey. 

A Glossary of Reference, on Subjects connected with the Far East. 
2nd Edition. 

The Remains of Lao Tzii. lions: Kong: 1SS6. 

BL1900.C5G46 

Chuang Tzu, mystic, moralist, and socral 

Princeton Theological Seminary-Speer Library 

1 1012 00009 8840