BANKEI ZEN 

Translations from the Record of Bankei 

Portrait of Bankei, said to be a self-portrait. Property of the 
Yakushi-in, Kawasaki. (Courtesy Daizo shuppan) 

BANKEI ZEN 

Translations from the Record of Bankei 

by PETER HASKEL 

Yoshito Hakeda, Editor 
Foreword by Mary Farkas 

GROVE WEIDENFELD 

New York 

The author wishes to acknowledge the cooperation of the 
First Zen Institute of America, New York. 

Copyright © 1984 by Peter Haskel and Yoshito Hakeda 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced 
in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means, including 
information storage and retrieval systems, without permission in 
writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote 
brief passages in a review. Scanning, uploading, and electronic 
distribution of this book or the facilitation of such without the 
permission of the publisher is prohibited. Please purchase only 
authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or 
encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your 
support of the author’s rights is appreciated. Any member of 
educational institutions wishing to photocopy part or all of the 
work for classroom use, or anthology, should send inquiries to 
Grove/Atlantic, Inc., 841 Broadway, New York, NY 10003 or 
permissions@groveatlantic.com. 

Published simultaneously in Canada 
Printed in the United States of America 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Bankei, 1622-1693. 
Bankei Zen. 
Translated from the Japanese. 
1. Zen Buddhism—Doctrines—Early works to 1800. 
1. Hakeda, Yoshito S. Il. Haskel, Peter, Ill. Title. 
BQ9399.E573E5 1984 294.3'927 83-81372 

eBook ISBN-13: 978-0-8021-9696-5 

Grove Press 
an imprint of Grove/Atlantic, Inc. 
841 Broadway 
New York, NY 10003 

Distributed by Publishers Group West 

www.groveatlantic.com 

TO MY TEACHER, YOSHITO HAKEDA, who spoke directly 
with the masters of long ago and taught me fo listen, this book is 
gratefully dedicated. 

CONTENTS 

List of Illustrations 

Foreword 
Preface 
Introduction 
SERMONS 

Part | 

QOpening_of the sermons 
Listen carefully 
Precepts 

The same old thing 

| don’t talk about Buddhism 

Meeting_masters: Dosha and Ingen 

I’m ready to be your witness! 

Growing_up deluded 

Thirty days in the Unborn 

Ask me and I'll tell you 

Don’t beat sleeping monks 

Mind reading 

Moving ahead/sliding_back 
Old wastepaper 
Self-centered-ness 

Bankei's Kannon 

Getting sidetracked 
Sel/f-power/other-power 

Dreams 

Everybody has the Buddha Mind 

Being living buddhas 

Servants, samurai, husbands and wives 

J 

e 

“Buddha” Magoemon 

Getting_angry 
Blindness and the Unborn 

Part II 

Now I’m going_to talk to the women 

Nothing _to do with rules 

Devices 

Plain speaking 

lliness and the Buddha Mind 

Being free in birth and death 

The original face 

Entrances 

Jo practice is hard 

The crow and the cormorant 
Let it be 
The lawsuit 

a Fp ff 

Looking _for enlightenment 

No delusion, no enlightenment 

Water and ice 
Stopping thoughts 
The mirror 

Fire is hot 

Be stupid! 

No such thing_as enlightenment 

Abide in the Buddha Mind 

When thoughts arise 

Letting things take care of themselves 

The dog and the chicken 

Parents 

Becoming_an expert at delusion 

The living Buddha Mind 

The “teetotaler” 

Sleeping and waking 

Sendai 

Letting_go 

Just as you are 
Not even a trace 

Kantaro’s question 

O: SE | 

The gambler 

Miracles 

A visiting monk 

Being/non-being 

Why are we born? 

The one who sees and hears 

Bereavement 

Blinding. your eyes 

Everything is smoothly managed 
HERG NO vai Gee 

The golden ball 

Women 

The merchant’s dream 

Using the three inches 
The great doubt 

Is this buddha? 
Layman Chozen 

The angry abbot 

When | first began to search 

My old illness 

Seven out of ten 

The monk Zeshin 

FROM THE GYOGO RYAKKI 

Suspicion 

Handling delinquents 

The missing paper 

POEMS 

Chinese Poems 

Letter to Yosen 

Letter to Rintei 

Letter to Lady Naga 

Instruction for the Layman Gesso 

“WORDS AND DEEDS’ (Miscellaneous Materials) 
Bankei’s childhood 

The priest’s Fudo 

At the post station 

Bankei faces death 

Among _the beggars 

The missing_coins 

The Confucians 
The rich man’s wife 

Heaven and hell 

From your own mouth 

Counting 

Soen’s special teaching 
Positive and negative 

Layman Gesso’s runny nose 

Bankei and the stingy monk 

The samurai's fan 
Bankei’s “no rules” 

Chokei’s seven cushions 

Nanryt’s place 

The rays of light 

As you are is it! 
Settei’s medicine 

Shopping _for the best 

The Confucian’s question 

Waste paper/clean paper 

Bankei's natural method 
Bankei’s night sermon 
The old tree 
Bankei and the blind man 
Hachiroemon 

NOTES 

TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

Portrait of Bankei 

Frontispiece 

Following page 

Bodhidharma, painted by Bankei 

“The Unborn,” calligraphy_by Bankei 

Medicines _and_ medicine box used by Bankei’s father and 
elder brother / Bankei’s meditation rock / Portrait of Tao-che 

Portrait of Bankei by Yamamoto Soken 
Views of the Rydmonji 
Statue of Umpo / Statuette of Sakyamuni 

Calligraphy by Bankei 

Street scene, from a seventeenth-century wood-block print 

Main gate of the Hdshinji 

FOREWORD 

These days many people travel hundreds or thousands of miles 
to see or hear Zen masters. Some meet them. Some study with 
them. Few have a chance to ask them: What shall | do with my 
anger, jealousy, hate, fear, sorrow, ambition, delusions—all the 
problems that occupy human minds? And how shall | deal with my 
work, my mother and father, my children, my husband or wife, my 
servants, my employers—the relations that make up human life? 
Can Zen help me? 

If the Zen Master Bankei were available for consultation at a 
nearby street corner today, he’d be saying much the same things he 
did to comfort and enlighten the parade of housewives, merchants, 
soldiers, officials, monks and thieves who sought guidance from him 
three centuries ago. 

Bankei, the enlightened human being, shares his own experience 
with us as a real person, speaking his own real words. The advice he 
gives strikes right to the heart. It is highly personal, not theoretical or 
abstract. The nature of human beings has changed very little through 
the centuries, despite numerous efforts to change it. Nor does it 
seem likely to be less full of passion, jealousy and hate in the next 
thousand years, here or in outer space. 

When Bankei had completed his spiritual training and monastic 
career, which included the founding of a number of temples and the 
training of innumerable monks and priests, his true concern was with 
the problems of ordinary people. He had wanted to share what he 
had discovered with his mother, his first audience, and, | believe, 
was finally able to do so before she died, a very old lady. He wants 
us to have it too. 

Peter Haskel has found Bankei’s real voice. In this fine work by a 
young translator who has lived intimately with Bankei for the last ten 
years and knows him through and through, we are brought smack 

into Bankei’s world. It seems to be no translation at all. Although all 
the tools of scholarship have been meticulously used, no traces of 
them mar the polish. 

No one needs to explain what Bankei means. His seventeenth- 
century metaphors and logic can be used or discarded without 
disturbing the substance of his teaching. What comes through is 
often just good hard common sense. Except for one thing: the 
Unborn Buddha Mind. Whether called by this name or any other, it is 
the heart of Zen as well as the core of Bankei’s teaching. Bankei’s 
approach shows that there is no need to be Japanese or imitate the 
Japanese to appreciate or acquire it. 

MARY FARKAS 
First Zen Institute of America 
New York City, April 1983 

PREFACE 

My first encounter with Bankei was in the fall of 1972. | had 
arrived at Columbia University two years earlier, hoping to study the 
history of Japanese Rinzai Zen, but my general coursework and the 
extreme difficulties of mastering written Japanese had left me time 
for little else. Now that | was finally to begin my own research, all that 
remained was to choose a suitable topic. Brimming with confidence 
and armed with a list of high-sounding proposals, | went to see my 
advisor, Professor Yoshito Hakeda. He listened patiently, nodded his 
head, and then, ignoring all my carefully prepared suggestions, 
asked me if | had considered working on the seventeenth-century 
Zen master Bankei. My disappointment must have shown. Although | 
had never actually read Bankei, | had a vague impression of him as 
a kind of subversive in the world of Zen, a heretical figure who didn't 
believe in rules, dispensed with koans and tried to popularize and 
simplify the deadly serious business of enlightenment. | was hoping 
to deal with a Zen master closer to the “orthodox” tradition, | tried to 
explain, perhaps one of the great teachers of the Middle Ages. “Take 
a look at Bankei’s sermons if you have a chance,” Professor Hakeda 
urged, “you may find them interesting.” My skepticism remained, 
however, and | did nothing further about Bankei, determined to find a 
more “respectable” topic of my own choosing. 

The following year, Professor Hakeda raised the subject of Bankei 
again, and, in spite of my obvious reluctance, pressed on me a small 
volume of Bankei’s sermons. “Try reading a few,” he said. 

Courtesy required that | at least glance over the text, and late that 
evening | turned to the first sermon and slowly began to read it 
through. What | found took me completely by surprise. Bankei’s 
approach to Zen was unlike anything | had ever imagined. Here was 
a living person addressing an audience of actual men and women, 
speaking to them in plain language about the most intimate, ordinary 

and persistent human problems. He answered their questions, 
listened to their stories, offered the most surprising advice. He told 
them about his own life as well—the mistakes he’d made, the 
troubles he’d had, the people whom he'd met. There was something 
refreshingly original and direct about Bankei’s fusho zen, his 
teaching of the “Unborn.” “Here it is,” Bankei seemed to say, “it really 
works! | did it, and you can too.” 

The further | read, the more entranced | became. The next three 
nights, | could barely sleep. When | returned to Professor Hakeda’s 
office, | told him about my experience. “You see,” he said, laughing, 
“| Knew that Bankei was for you!” 

On my next visit, | arrived with a partial translation of the first 
sermon and began to read through the text, with Professor Hakeda 
making comments and corrections as | proceeded. This was the first 
of many such meetings which continued for nearly ten years and of 
which this book is the result. The work is, in a real sense, a tribute to 
Professor Hakeda. Without his assistance, his unfailing patience, 
wisdom and encouragement, it would never have come into being. 

Among the others who contributed to the present work, Mary 
Farkas, Director of the First Zen Institute of America, deserves 
particular mention. She has generously given her time and attention 
to reviewing the manuscript at every stage, offering countless 
valuable suggestions. | am also deeply grateful to Professor Philip 
Yampolsky and the staff of Columbia’s East Asian Library for their 
expert assistance over the years, and to my colleague Ryuichi Abe, 
who participated in many of the translation sessions. Special thanks 
are due to Maria Collora, who kindly helped me in editing the English 
translation, and to Sandy Hackney and John Storm, who read 
through the completed text. Permission to use photographs included 
in the illustrations was graciously extended by the Tokyo publishing 
firms DaizO shuppan and Shunjusha and by Mrs. Hiroko Akao of 
Aboshi, Japan. Finally, | would like to express my appreciation to 
Hannelore Rosset, my editor at Grove, for the extraordinary care she 
has lavished on the manuscript. 

| have tried to offer Western readers a glimpse into Bankei’s 
singular world, using his own words and those of his disciples and 
descendants. The translations focus particularly on selections from 

the Sermons and the Hogo (Instruction), for, although a certain 
amount of repetition occurs in these works, they are our most vivid 
and authentic records of Bankei’s teaching. Also included are a 
series of Bankei’s letters, examples of his poetry, and a sampling of 
materials from various anthologies composed in Chinese after his 
death. The criteria that guided my selection in each area were purely 
subjective: | chose those items that seemed to me most interesting 
and colorful, those that illumined certain aspects of Bankei’s 
character and times or were otherwise simply charming in 
themselves. Responsibility for any oversight or errors, here and 
elsewhere in the book, is wholly my own. 

The earliest modern collection of Bankei’s teachings, the Bankei 
zenji goroku (Tokyo, 1942), edited by D. T. Suzuki in the Iwanami 
bunko series, has been largely superseded by two more recent 
editions that serve as the basis for the present translations. These 
are the Bankei zenji zenshd (Daizo shuppan, Tokyo, 1970), edited by 
the Japanese scholar Akao RyUji, and the Bankei zenji hogoshu 
(Shunjusha, Tokyo, 1971), edited by Fujimoto Tsuchishige. Fujimoto, 
a native of Bankei’s hometown of Aboshi, devoted a lifetime to 
collecting and publishing materials related to the Master and his 
teachings. All modern students of Bankei owe him a great debt. 

Shortly before this book was to go to press, Professor Hakeda 
passed away after a long and courageous bout with cancer. It was 
his lifelong desire to revive the true teaching of Buddhism in both 
East and West, and his entire career was a selfless testament to that 
endeavor. All of us who knew him will miss him sorely and will 
always treasure his memory. 

PETER HASKEL 
New York City 
September 1983 

SERMONS of the Zen Master BANKEI 

PART | 

Opening of the Sermons 

When the Zen Master Bankei Butchi Késai,1 founder of the 
Rydmonji2 at Aboshi in Banshi, was at the Great Training Period? 
[held] at the RyOmonji in the winter of the third year of Genroku,4 
there were 1,683 monks listed in the temple register.2 Those who 
attended included not only Sdtd and Rinzai® followers but members 
of the Ritsu, Shingon, Tendai, Pure Land, True Pure Land and 
Nichiren Schools,2 with laymen and monks mingled together, 
thronging round the lecture seat.2 One sensed the Master was truly 
the Teacher of Men and Devas? for the present age. 

At that time, the Master mounted the lecture seat and addressed 
the assembly of monks and laymen, saying: “We've got a big crowd 
of both monks and laymen here at this meeting, and | thought I'd tell 
you about how, when | was young, | struck on the realization that the 
mind is unborn. This part about ‘the mind,’ [though,] is something 
secondary. You monks, when you abide only in the Unborn, [will find 
that] in the Unborn, there’s nothing anyone needs to tell you, nothing 
you need to hear. Because the Buddha Mind is unborn and 
marvelously illuminating, it gets easily turned into whatever comes 
along. So, as long as I’m telling the lay people here not to change 
themselves into these different things that come their way and trade 
their Buddha Mind for thoughts, you monks may as well listen too!” 

Listen carefully 

The Master addressed the assembly: “Among all you people here 
today there’s not a single one who’s an unenlightened being. 
Everyone here is a buddha. So listen carefully! What you all have 
from your parents innately is the Unborn Buddha Mind alone. 
There’s nothing else you have innately. This Buddha Mind you have 

from your parents innately is truly unborn and marvelously 
illuminating. That which is unborn is the Buddha Mind; the Buddha 
Mind is unborn and marvelously illuminating, and, what's more, with 
this Unborn, everything is perfectly managed. The actual proof of this 
Unborn which perfectly manages [everything] is that, as you’re all 
turned this way listening to me talk, if out back there’s the cawing of 
crows, the chirping of sparrows or the rustling of the wind, even 
though you're not deliberately trying to hear each of these sounds, 
you recognize and distinguish each one. The voices of the crows 
and sparrows, the rustling of the wind—you hear them without 
making any mistake about them, and that’s what’s called hearing 
with the Unborn. In this way, all things are perfectly managed with 
the Unborn. This is the actual proof of the Unborn. Conclusively 
realize that what’s unborn and marvelously illuminating is truly the 
Buddha Mind, straightaway abiding in the Unborn Buddha Mind just 
as it is, and you're a living tathagata!2 from today forever after. 
Since, when you realize conclusively, you abide like this in the 
Buddha Mind from today on, my school is called the School of 
Buddha Mind.11 

“Well, then, while you're all turned this way listening to me talk, 
you don’t mistake the chirp of a sparrow out back for the caw of a 
crow, the sound of a gong for that of a drum, a man’s voice for a 
woman's, an adult’s voice for a child’s—you clearly recognize and 
distinguish each sound you hear without making any mistake. That’s 
the marvelously illuminating dynamic function. It’s none other than 
the Buddha Mind, unborn and marvelously illuminating, the actual 
proof of the marvelously illuminating [nature of the Buddha Mind]. 

“| doubt there’s anyone among the people here now who'd say: ‘I 
heard [what | did] because | was deliberately trying to hear it.’ If 
anyone says he did, he’s a liar. Wondering, ‘What’s Bankei telling 
us?’ all of you are turned this way, intent only on hearing what I’m 
saying; no one’s deliberately trying to hear the various sounds 
coming from out back. That’s why, when all of a sudden these 
sounds appear and you recognize and distinguish them, hearing 
them without any mistake, you’re hearing with the Unborn Buddha 
Mind. Nobody here can claim he heard these sounds because he’d 

made up his mind beforehand to listen for them when they were 
made. So, in fact, you're listening with the Unborn. 

“Everyone who conclusively realizes that what is unborn and 
marvelously illuminating is truly the Buddha Mind, abiding in the 
Unborn Buddha Mind, is a living tathagata from today forever after. 
Even ‘buddha’ is just a name given to traces that have arisen,/2 so, 
from the standpoint of the Unborn, it’s only a secondary matter, a 
peripheral concern. The man of the Unborn abides at the source of 
all buddhas. That which is unborn is the source of all things, the 
starting point of all things. There’s nothing more original than the 
Unborn, nothing prior to it. That's why, when you abide in the 
Unborn, you abide at the source of all buddhas; so it’s something 
wonderfully precious. There’s no question of ‘perishing’ here, so 
when you abide in the Unborn, it’s superfluous to speak about the 
Imperishable*® too. That’s the reason | only talk about the Unborn 
and don’t mention the Imperishable. What isn’t created can’t be 
destroyed, so since it’s unborn, it’s obvious it’s imperishable without 
having to mention it. Isn’t that so? 

“Of course, the expression ‘unborn and imperishable’4 has 
appeared here and there in the sutras and records from times of old 
—but not the actual proof of the Unborn. Everyone just learns the 
expression ‘unborn and imperishable’ and goes about repeating it; 
but when it comes to realizing conclusively and actually getting right 
to the heart of the matter, they haven’t any idea of what the Unborn 
is. 

“When | was twenty-six, | first hit on the realization that all things 
are perfectly managed with the Unborn, and, in the forty years since, 
I’ve taught everyone with the actual proof of the Unborn: that what 
you have from your parents innately is the Unborn Buddha Mind— 
the Buddha Mind which is truly unborn and marvelously illuminating. 
| was the first to teach this. I’m sure that even among you monks in 
the assembly now, and everyone else too, nobody’s heard of anyone 
before me who taught people with the actual proof of the Unborn— 
that the Buddha Mind is truly Unborn and marvelously illuminating. | 
was the first to teach this. If anyone claims he’s heard of somebody 
before me who taught people with the actual proof of the Unborn, 
he’s a liar! 

“When you abide in the Unborn, you're abiding at the source of all 
things. What the buddhas of the past realized was the Unborn 
Buddha Mind; and what buddhas in the future will realize is the 
Unborn Buddha Mind too. We today are living in the Degenerate Age 
of Buddhism,1® yet when there’s even one man who abides in the 
Unborn, the true teaching!® has been restored to the world. All of 
you, isn't it so? It certainly is! When you've conclusively realized this, 
then and there you'll open the eye that sees into men’s minds, and 
that’s why my school is called the Clear-Eyed School.1“ When the 
eye that sees into men is manifested, whenever it happens to be,1% 
that moment is the complete realization of the Dnarma.*2 | want you 
to know this. Whoever you may be, at that moment, you are my 
heir!” 

Precepts 

A certain master of the Precepts School22 asked: “Doesn’t your 
Reverence observe the precepts?” 

The Master said: “Originally, what people call the precepts were all 
for wicked monks who broke the rules; for the man who abides in the 
Unborn Buddha Mind, there’s no need for precepts. The precepts 
were taught to help sentient beings—they weren't taught to help 
buddhas! What everyone has from his parents innately is the Unborn 
Buddha Mind alone, so abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind. When you 
abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind, you're a living buddha here today, 
and that living buddha certainly isn’t going to concoct anything like 
taking the precepts, so there aren't any precepts for him to take. To 
concoct anything like taking the precepts is not what’s meant by the 
Unborn Buddha Mind. When you abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind, 
there’s no way you can violate the precepts. From the standpoint of 
the Unborn, the precepts too are secondary, peripheral concerns; in 
the place of the Unborn, there’s really no such thing as precepts. . . 

The same old thing 

“A certain teacher of Buddhism told me: ‘Instead of teaching the 
same old thing in your sermons day after day, you ought to throw in 
a few Buddhist miracle stories? once in a while and give people a 
refreshing change of pace.’ Of course, he could be right. | may be 
thickheaded, but provided something is really helpful to people, then, 
thickheaded or not, I’m not beyond memorizing one or two old 
stories if | put my mind to it. However, teaching this sort of thing is 
like feeding poison to sentient beings. And feeding people poison is 
something | certainly can’t do!” 

| don’t talk about Buddhism 

The Master further said: “I don’t teach people by quoting from the 
words of the buddhas and patriarchs.22 Since | can manage simply 
by dealing with people’s own selves, there’s no need on top of that to 
quote the words of the buddhas and patriarchs too. | don’t talk about 
Buddhism, and | don’t talk about Zen. There’s really no need to talk 
about these things. Since | can manage perfectly just by dealing with 
people’s own selves as they are right here today, there’s no need for 
me to talk about Buddhism, or Zen either. . . .” 

x w sd 

Meeting masters: Dosha and Ingen 

“Until the age of thirty, | continued to wear my jittoku22 robes 
without putting on a proper monk’s robe. When | was thirty, however, 
my teacher24 suggested | go to meet the Chinese Zen Master Désha 
Chdgen of Naninsan,22 who'd recently landed at Nagasaki. | decided 
to go, and my teacher told me: ‘Up to now you've been able to get by 

with your jittoku robes; but now that you’re going to call on a real 
Chinese monk, they won't do. As it’s also for the sake of the 
Dharma, from here on you’d better wear a proper monk’s robe, so go 
put one on and call on Dosha.’ 

“And that’s how, at the age of thirty, following my teacher’s advice, 
| put on a monk’s robe for the first time and went off to see Dosha. | 
immediately presented my understanding. Dosha sized me up at a 
glance and told me: ‘You have transcended birth and death!’ 

“Among the Zen teachers at that time, only Dosha was able, to this 
modest extent, to confirm for me my experience of enlightenment; 
but, even so, | wasn't fully satisfied. Now, looking back, today | 
wouldn’t even find Dosha acceptable. If only Dosha had gone on 
living till now, | might have made a better man of him. But he was an 
unlucky fellow and died young, to my great regret.” 

“When | was a member of Dosha’s assembly, an invitation was 
sent to China to [the Zen Master] Ingen.2° | was among those who 
consulted on this, and, fortunately, Ingen arrived in Japan while | was 
with Dédsha, landing at the harbor in Nagasaki.24 | went along to 
welcome him, but the moment Ingen stepped ashore from the boat, | 
realized he wasn’t a man of the Unborn, and that’s why | never 
studied with him.” 

I’m ready to be your witness! 

“All of you right now are extremely fortunate. When | was young, 
either there were no enlightened teachers about, or else, if there 
were, | just wasn’t lucky enough to meet them, and being from youth 
exceedingly thickheaded, | suffered unimaginable hardships. How 
uselessly | struggled! | can’t forget those wasted efforts, which have 
left a deep impression on me. | had to learn the hard way, from 
experience. That’s why, in my desire to have all of you attain 
complete realization of the Dharma in perfect comfort, at your ease, 
and without any useless struggle, | do my best to come out like this 

every day and urge you on. All of you should consider yourselves 
fortunate. Where could you ever find this sort of opportunity! 

“Although | didn’t intend to tell you about this—how when | was 
young | struggled uselessly thanks to my own thickheadedness—if 
among the young people here there’s anyone who struggles as | did, 
thinking it’s impossible to attain complete realization of the Dharma 
without doing so, why then I'll be to blame. So, although | didn’t 
intend to tell you, you young people listen carefully! Since, without 
struggling as | did, you can attain complete realization of the 
Dharma, first of all let me tell you about my own struggles, and that 
way you'll realize that you can attain complete realization without 
going and doing as Bankei did. While you listen, | want you to keep 
this in mind. Well, then, I'll begin, so pay close attention! 

“My father, whose original family name was Suga,2® was a ronin22 
from Shikoku22 and a Confucian. He came and settled in this area,24 
where | was born, but died while | was still a small child, leaving my 
mother to raise me. | was, according to her story, a naughty boy, and 
as leader of all the children in the neighborhood would get into 
mischief. However, my mother told me that from the time | was two 
or three I’d already developed a horror of death: when | cried, if 
someone made believe he were dying, or if | was told about 
someone's having died, I’d instantly dry my tears and even give up 
any mischief | happened to be engaged in. 

“Gradually | grew up. At the time | was young, Confucianism was 
very popular hereabouts, and my mother sent me to a teacher to 
learn to read the Great Learning aloud by rote.24 But when | came to 
the passage that states, ‘The Way of the Great Learning lies in 
illuminating the Bright Virtue,’22 | couldn’t make out what this Bright 
Virtue was, and, beset by doubt, puzzled over it for some time. 

“At one point, | went and questioned some Confucian scholars. 
‘What sort of thing /s this Bright Virtue?’ | asked them, ‘Just what is 
the Bright Virtue, anyway?’ But there wasn’t one of them who knew. 

“However, one of the Confucian scholars told me: ‘Difficult matters 
like this are the kind of things Zen monks understand, so go and ask 
a Zen monk. Even though with our mouths we can talk endlessly 
about the meaning of the words and letters in the Classics,24 when it 

comes to just what sort of thing the Bright Virtue is, we really have 
no idea.’ 

“Well, | thought, finding myself still in the dark, ‘so that’s how 
things are!’ But since there were no Zen monks hereabouts then, | 
had no chance to ask anyone. Nevertheless, then and there | 
resolved that somehow I'd realize the meaning of this Bright Virtue 
and tell my aged mother about it before she died. Even before 
realizing it myself, | wanted above all to communicate it to my mother 
who, being old, might die at any time. Hoping to resolve this matter 
of the Bright Virtue, | floundered about desperately, scurrying all 
over. A talk here, a lecture there—whenever | learned there was a 
sermon, no matter where it was, | hurried right off to hear it. 
Returning home, | reported to my mother anything significant | might 
have heard, but my question about the Bright Virtue was still 
unresolved. 

“Next, | made up my mind to visit a master of this Zen school. 
When | asked him about the Bright Virtue, he told me: ‘If you want to 
understand the Bright Virtue, do zazen*® and the Bright Virtue will be 
understood.’ 

“As a result, after this | immediately took up the practice of zazen. 
Here, I'd go into the mountains, eating nothing for seven or even ten 
whole days; there, I'd find some cliffs, and, seated on a pointed rock, 
pull up my robes, with my bare backside right against the stone, 
determined to meditate to the very end, even if it killed me, and 
refusing to leave my seat until | simply tumbled down. Since there 
was no way | could even ask anyone to bring me food, | often didn’t 
eat for days. But all | cared about was resolving the Bright Virtue, so 
| didn't mind that | was faint from hunger, and refused to let it bother 
me. Despite it all, though, | still couldn’t settle my question about the 
Bright Virtue. 

“After this, | returned to my native area, built a small hut for myself 
and went into retreat. At times, totally absorbed in practicing the 
nembutsu,=© | wouldn't lie down, night or day. 

“So | floundered about desperately, trying in every way, but my 
question about the Bright Virtue was still unresolved. Without much 
care for my life, I'd driven my whole body so mercilessly that the skin 
on my backside had become torn, with the result that | could only sit 

with the most painful difficulty. However, as | look back on it now, in 
those years | was still in fine fettle, and, in spite of everything, 
wouldn't lie down to rest for even a day. All the same, since | was 
suffering from the torn flesh on my backside, | had to sit on bundles 
of Sugihara2“ paper that I’d spread under me and replace one after 
another. Despite this precaution, blood issued constantly from my 
backside, and with the pain, it became difficult to sit, so that | 
sometimes had to spread wads of cotton and whatnot underneath 
me. Even with all that, | could pass an entire day and night without 
ever lying down. 

“The strain of those years finally caught up with me, and | became 
gravely ill. Without having settled my question about the Bright 
Virtue, I'd struggled with it tirelessly for a long time, enduring bitter 
hardship. My illness gradually worsened now, my body grew weak, 
and when I'd bring up phlegm, there’d emerge thumb-size gobs of 
bloody sputum that rolled along congealing into balls. Sometimes 
when I'd spit against the wall, the soutum was so heavy it rolled right 
down. At this time, everyone concerned about me said: ‘This simply 
won't do! You’ve got to rest and nurse yourself back to health.’ So, 
following their advice, | retired to my hut, taking on a manservant. 

“But gradually my illness reached a critical point, and for a full 
seven days | was unable to swallow any food and could get nothing 
down apart from some thin rice gruel. Because of this, | realized | 
was on the verge of death. ‘Ah, well,’ | said to myself, ‘there’s 
nothing to be done.’ But really | had no particular regret other than 
the thought that | was going to die without realizing my long- 
cherished desire. 

“Just then, | had a strange sensation in my throat, and when | spit 
against the wall, | noticed the sputum had congealed into a jet-black 
lump like a soapberry,2® rolling down the surface. After that, the 
inside of my chest felt curiously refreshed, and that’s when it 
suddenly struck me: ‘Everything is perfectly managed with the 
Unborn, and because up till today | couldn't see this, I’ve just been 
uselessly knocking myself out!’ Finally | saw the mistake I’d been 
making! 

“My spirit now felt clear and buoyant, my appetite returned, and | 
called to my servant: ‘| want to eat some rice gruel. Go and prepare 

it!’ My servant, meanwhile, thought this a strange request indeed for 
a man who until then had been on the very brink of death. “Thank 
heavens!’ he exclaimed, delighted, and hurried right off in confusion 
to prepare the gruel. In his hurry to feed me something, he promptly 
served the rice gruel, but what he fed me hadn't all been fully 
cooked. | didn’t even care, and went right ahead and devoured two 
or three bowlsful without any ill effects. After that, | gradually got well 
again and have lived to this day.22 So | realized my cherished desire 
after all, and explained things to my mother too before she passed 
away.*2 

“Ever since | realized that everything is perfectly managed with the 
Unborn, there hasn’t been a person in the land who could refute me. 
If only, when | was desperately floundering, there had been some 
man of realization who could have just told me right at the start, the 
way I’m doing now for you, | might have been spared my useless 
struggles; but there wasn’t any such person to be found, and with no 
one to tell me, | struggled long and hard, driving myself beyond all 
endurance. That’s why, even today, I’m still a sick man and can’t 
come out to meet with you as much as | would like. 

“At all events, once | realized the fact that everything is perfectly 
managed with the Unborn, | wanted to try to talk this over with 
someone. And while | was wondering whom to meet and discuss this 
with, my teacher#! told me: ‘In Mino,42 there’s a teacher named 
Gudo,2 who’s said to be a good man. He may be able to confirm 
your experience, so you'd better go try to speak with him.’ 

“Hoping to meet Gudo and speak with him, | followed my teacher’s 
instructions and set out to visit him in Mino, only to find that he 
wasn’t at home, being just then in Edo.“4 So, as it turned out, we 
never met, and | hadn't any chance to talk with him. 

“Having come all this way and not spoken to anyone, | decided 
that, rather than just going back with nothing accomplished, I'd visit 
the Zen teachers in the area. 

“’m_a Zen monk from Banshi,’22 | said when | met them, ‘and I’ve 
come here solely in hope of meeting you and receiving your 
teaching.’ 

“When the teachers had presented their instruction, | took the 
liberty of putting in a word myself. ‘I realize it’s impertinent of me,’ | 
told them, ‘but please excuse me when | say that, while I’m not 
ungrateful for the instruction you’ve given, | get a feeling as if 
someone were trying to scratch an itchy spot through my shoe. 
Unless you reach right in and scratch, you won't get to my real 
bones and marrow,*® and things won't be settled through and 
through.’ 

“Like the honest teachers they were, they told me: ‘Yes, it’s just as 
you say. Even though we're teaching others, all we do is memorize 
the words in the sutras and records and teach people what the old 
masters said. But, shameful though it is, we haven't actually realized 
enlightenment ourselves, so when we speak, our teaching is indeed 
like trying to scratch an itchy spot through your shoe—naturally, it’s 
never satisfying. You understand us well,’ they said, ‘you can’t be 
just an ordinary man!’ 

“So, without having managed to get anyone to confirm my 
experience for me, | returned home and went into retreat, shutting 
my door to the world. As | was observing the needs of the people 
then, considering the means to present my teaching and help to 
save them, | learned that [the Zen priest] Dosha had come from 
China, having arrived at Nagasaki, where he was staying. On my 
teacher’s instructions, | went to see Dosha, and when | told him what 
I’d realized, he declared: ‘You are a man who has transcended birth 
and death! So, only at Dosha’s did | finally receive some small 
confirmation of my enlightenment. At that time, it was hard to find 
anyone who could testify with certainty to my experience, and | had 
quite a lot of trouble. That’s why, thinking back now over what it was 
like for me, | come out like this every day to meet with all of you, 
ailing though | am.*2 If there’s anyone here now who’s experienced 
enlightenment—whoever he is—the only reason I’ve come out like 
this is so that | can be your witness. You people certainly are lucky! 
Since you have someone who can testify to your experience through 
and through, if there’s anyone here who’s been enlightened or who 
thinks he’s understood this matter, step forward and let's hear from 
you. I’m ready to be your witness! However, if there’s no one who's 

understood yet, listen to what | have to say, and realize conclusively. 

“Now, about what it means to realize conclusively that what is 
unborn and marvelously illuminating is truly the Buddha Mind: 
Suppose ten million people got together and unanimously declared 
that a crow was a heron. A crow is black, without having to be dyed 
that way, just as a heron is white*8—that’s something we always see 
for ourselves and know for a fact. So even if, not only ten million 
people, but everyone in the land were to get together and tell you a 
crow was a heron, you still wouldn't be fooled, but remain absolutely 
sure of yourself. That’s what it means to have a conclusive 
realization. Conclusively realize that what is unborn is the Buddha 
Mind and that the Buddha Mind is truly unborn and marvelously 
illuminating, and everything will be perfectly managed with the 
Unborn, so that, whatever people try to tell you, you won't let 
yourself be fooled by them. You won't accept other people’s 
delusions. 

“At the time | was young and first began to teach this true teaching 
of the Unborn, no one was able to understand. When they heard me, 
people seemed to think | was some sort of heretic or Christian,42 so 
they were frightened off, and no one would go near me. But in time 
they realized they were wrong and saw that what | was teaching was 
the true Dharma itself. Now, instead of my original situation where no 
one would even go near me, I’m swamped with people coming to 
see me, anxious to meet me and listen to my teaching, after me 
continually, so that they don’t leave me in peace even a single day! 
Things come in their own due time. 

“From time to time in the forty years I’ve been here,2 I’ve taught 
others this true teaching of the Unborn, and as a result this area has 
produced lots of people who are superior to teachers of Buddhism. 
So, for you people too, let the reward for your trouble in coming here 
all this way now be that you'll return home having experienced 
complete realization of the Dharma, thoroughly and conclusively 
realizing the principle of the Unborn without switching it for thoughts.” 

Growing up deluded 

“.. . What everyone has from his parents innately is the Buddha 
Mind alone. But since your parents themselves fail to realize this, 
you become deluded too, and then display this delusion in raising 
your own children. Even the nursemaids and baby-sitters lose their 
temper, so that the people involved in bringing up children display 
every sort of deluded behavior, including stupidity, selfish desire and 
the [anger of] fighting demons.2! Growing up with deluded people 
surrounding them, children develop a first-rate set of bad habits, 
becoming quite proficient at being deluded themselves, and turning 
into unenlightened beings. Originally, when you're born, you're 
without delusion. But on account of the faults of the people who raise 
you, someone abiding in the Buddha Mind is turned into a first-rate 
unenlightened being. This is something I’m sure you all know from 
your own experience. 

“Your parents didn’t give you any delusions whatever when you 
were born, no bad habits, no selfish desires. But afterward, once 
you'd come into the world, you picked up all different sorts of 
delusions, which then developed into bad habits, so that you couldn't 
help becoming deluded. That which you didn’t pick up from outside is 
the Unborn Buddha Mind, and here no delusions exist. Since the 
Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating, you’re able to learn things, 
even to the point of thoroughly learning all sorts of deluded behavior. 
[At the same time,] since it’s marvelously illuminating, when you hear 
this, you'll resolve not to be deluded, and from today on cease 
creating delusion, abiding in the Unborn Buddha Mind as it is. Just 
as before you applied yourself skillfully to picking up delusions and 
made yourself deluded, now you'll use the same skill to listen to this 
and stop being deluded—that’s what a splendid thing the Buddha 
Mind is. Listen and you'll realize the preciousness of Buddha Mind. 
Then, since there’s nothing that can take the place of this precious 
Buddha Mind, even if you want to be deluded, you won't be able to 
be anymore! 

“It's because you don’t realize the preciousness of Buddha Mind 
that you indulge in self-centeredness, creating delusions that do you 
harm. Yet those delusions are so precious to you that all of you 
actually want to become deluded, even at the risk of your own life! 

Foolish, isn’t it? Unable to withstand the base impulses produced by 
your selfish desires, you become deluded. With all delusions it’s the 
same. 

“Everyone insists that the way he likes to behave is his innate 
character, so he can't do anything about it. He'll never tell you how, 
actually, he indulges in self-centeredness because of his selfish 
desires, holding on to those kinds of behavior he likes; instead, he 
tries to sound clever and talk about how it’s all innate! To falsely 
accuse your own parents of something you never got from them is 
terribly unfilial. ls there anyone who’s born a drunkard, a gambler or 
a thief—who’s born with any sort of vice? No one’s born that way. 
Once you pick up a taste for liquor, it promptly develops into a 
drinking habit, and then, because of selfish desire, you find yourself 
unable to stop, without realizing you’ve become deluded. It’s only 
foolishness, so you’ve no cause to claim it’s innate and pass off the 
blame on your parents! 

“When you hear this, | want you all from today on to abide in the 
Unborn Buddha Mind just as it is—the Unborn Buddha Mind you 
have from your parents innately. Then, you won’t create delusions 
about anything, and, since no delusions will remain, you'll be living 
buddhas from today forever after. Nothing could be more direct! 
You've all got to realize this conclusively.” 

Thirty days in the Unborn 

“Everyone, do exactly as I’m telling you, and, following my 
instructions, start by trying to abide in the Unborn for thirty days. 
Learn to abide in the Unborn for thirty days, and from there on, even 
if you don’t want to—whether you like it or not—you’ll just naturally 
have to abide in the Unborn. You'll be a success at abiding in the 
Unborn! Since that which is unborn is the Buddha Mind, you'll be 
functioning with the Buddha Mind at all times. That way you'll be 
living buddhas here today, won’t you? So listen to my teaching just 
as if today you were all born anew and starting afresh. When you’ve 
got some fixed notion, you won't take in what you hear. Listen as if 
you were newly born right now and it will be like hearing my teaching 

for the first time. If you don’t have any fixed notion in your mind, at a 
single word you'll instantly understand and attain complete 
realization of the Dharma.” 

x x x 

Ask me and I'll tell you 

One day, the Master said: “I simply come out here like this each 
day to meet with you all; | haven't anything particular in mind | want 
to tell you. So if you’ve got anything to ask—whatever it is— 
everyone step right up and ask! Ask me and I'l tell you, no matter 
what it is. I’ve got nothing special in mind | want to say.” 

x x x 

“The Kappa” 

“.. . When | was young, there was a notorious thief in these parts 
called ‘the Kappa,’®2 a fellow on the order of Kumasaka Chohan,22 
who would boldly rob people on the highway, seizing their money. He 
had remarkable genius as a thief: when he caught sight of someone 
coming from across the way, he could tell exactly how much money 
he had on him and was never off by even a hair—that’s what a 
formidable fellow he was. However, one day he got himself nabbed 
and served a long term in the prison at Osaka. The years passed, 
and then, because he was such an expert as a thief, he found 
himself at an advantage and was spared execution to become an 
informer for the police.*4 Later, he was excused from being an 
informer as well and became a free man. Afterward, he learned to 
carve Buddhist images, becoming a maker of Buddhist statues and 
settling in Osaka, an expert now at carving buddhas. Completely 

reversing his former wicked state of mind, he devoted himself to 
salvation, and ended his days absorbed in chanting the nembutsu. 

“So, even such a notorious brigand as ‘the Kappa,’ once he’d 
reformed, ended his days in religious devotion. Where can you find 
anyone who steals because his karma is deep or his sins heavy? 
Stealing is the karma, stealing is the sin! If it weren’t for stealing, that 
sin and karma couldn't exist. Whether you steal or whether you don’t 
depends on the present state of your own mind, not on your past 
karma. And what I’m telling you now doesn’t go only for stealing. 
Generally speaking, all delusions are just the same as stealing. 
Whether you're going to be deluded or you're not going to, all 
depends on the present state of your own mind. When you're 
deluded, you're an unenlightened being; when you're not deluded, 
you're a buddha. There’s no special shortcut to being a buddha 
beyond this. Isn't it so? Everyone, realize this conclusively!” 

x * sd 

Don’t beat sleeping monks 

On the opening day of rdhatsu,22 the Master addressed the 
assembly: “In my place, our normal everyday life is meditation; so it’s 
not like everywhere else where they announce: ‘From today on, 
meditation!’ and everyone specially hurls himself into frantic 
practice.” 

The Master then went on to say: “Once, while | was in Dosha’s 
assembly,2° a monk was sleeping seated in meditation. Another 
monk there suddenly struck him, but | scolded him for doing this. 

“Why should you hit someone who's pleasantly sleeping?’ | said. 
‘When that monk is sleeping, do you think he’s a different person!’ 

“I’m not encouraging people to sleep, but to hit them because they 
do is terribly wrong. Here in my place now, | don’t allow that sort of 
thing. While I’m not encouraging people to sleep, | don’t hit them or 
scold them for doing so. | don’t scold or praise sleeping, and | don't 
scold or praise not sleeping. Whether people happen to be asleep or 

awake, just let them be as they are. When they’re asleep, they're 
sleeping in the Buddha Mind they were awake in; when they're 
awake, they're awake in the Buddha Mind they were sleeping in. 
When people are asleep, they're sleeping in the Buddha Mind; when 
they're awake, they’re awake in the Buddha Mind. They're always 
abiding in the Buddha Mind, and there’s not a moment when they're 
ever abiding in anything else. So it’s mistaken to think that when a 
person is asleep he turns into something different. If you believe that 
people abide in the Buddha Mind only when they're awake and that 
when they’re asleep they turn into something different, that’s not the 
ultimate truth, but an endless transformation. 

“You're all exerting yourselves trying to realize buddhahood, so if 
someone is sleeping, it’s wrong to beat him or scold him. What you 
all have from your parents innately is the Unborn Buddha Mind alone 
and nothing else, so instead of trying to realize buddhahood, always 
abide in that Unborn Buddha Mind. Then, when you're asleep, you're 
sleeping in the Buddha Mind, and when you're awake, you're awake 
in the Buddha Mind; you're always a living buddha, and there’s no 
time when you don’t remain a buddha. Since you’re a buddha all the 
time, there’s no other special buddhahood for you to realize. Rather 
than trying to become a buddha, nothing could be simpler than 
taking the shortcut of remaining a buddha!” 

Mind reading 

Someone asked: “Everybody says your Reverence has the power 
to read people’s minds.* Is it true?” 

The Master said: “In my school, we don't have such extraordinary 
things. And even if we did, since the Buddha Mind is unborn, we 
wouldn't use them. When I’m speaking to you, | deal with your own 
selves, SO you imagine I’ve got the power to read people’s minds. 
But | haven't any mind-reading powers. I’m just the same as all of 
you. When you abide in the Unborn, you're at the source of the 
supernatural powers of all the buddhas, and without even having to 
seek supernatural power, all things are perfectly managed and 
smoothly dealt with. In the true teaching of the Unborn, you can 

manage everything by dealing with your own self, without bringing in 
all sorts of extraneous matters.” 

Moving ahead/sliding back 

A certain man asked: “I’ve practiced as hard as | can, trying to 
advance without slipping back. But no matter what | do, the tendency 
to backslide is strong, and there are times when | regress. However 
much | try to advance, | only fall back again. How can | keep from 
regressing?” 

The Master said: “Abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind! When you 
do, you won’t need to bother about advancing or regressing. In fact, 
when you abide in the Unborn, trying to advance is to instantly 
regress from the place of the Unborn. The man of the Unborn has 
nothing to do with advancing or regressing, but always transcends 
them both.” 

Old wastepaper 

A certain monk said: “For a long time now I’ve been working on 
the koan ‘Hyakujo and the Wild Fox,’=2 but in spite of all my efforts, | 
still haven't solved it. | suspect this is simply because my practice 
isn’t pure. | beg your Reverence to instruct me.” 

The Master said: “Here in my place we don't engage in such 
studies of old wastepaper!®2 Since you haven’t yet realized that what 
is unborn and marvelously illuminating is the Buddha Mind, let me 
tell you, and then everything will be straightened out. So listen 
carefully to what | say.” 

The Master then presented his teaching of the Unborn, just as 
usual. The monk, having listened attentively, profoundly 
acknowledged it, and thereafter is said to have distinguished himself 
as an outstanding figure. 

Then, a monk who was [seated] nearby asked: “In that case, are 
the koans of the old masters useless and unnecessary?” 

The Master said: “The responses of the old masters were only to 
shut off questions from individual students by confronting them 
immediately, face to face;®2 they have no particular usefulness [in 
themselves]. There’s no way for me to say whether they're 
necessary or superfluous, helpful or useless.2! When people just 
abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind, that’s all there is to it, and there’s 
no longer any way they can be sidetracked. So abide in the Unborn! 
In your case, you’ve been so carried away in sidetracking yourself, 
it's made you deluded. So give it up, and since that which is unborn 
and marvelously illuminating is the Buddha Mind and nothing else, 
abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind!” 

Self-centeredness 

One day, the Master addressed the assembly: “All delusions, 
without exception, are created as a result of self-centeredness. 
When you're free from self-centeredness, delusions won't be 
produced. For example, suppose your neighbors are having a 
quarrel: if you’re not personally involved, you just hear what’s going 
on and don't get angry. Not only do you not get angry, but you can 
plainly tell the rights and wrongs of the case—it’s clear to you as you 
listen who's right and who’s wrong. But let it be something that 
concerns you personally, and you find yourself getting involved with 
what the other party [Says or does], attaching to it and obscuring the 
marvelously illuminating [function of the Buddha Mind]. Before, you 
could clearly tell wrong from right; but now, led by self-centeredness, 
you insist that your own idea of what’s right is right, whether it is or 
not. Becoming angry, you thoughtlessly switch your Buddha Mind for 
a fighting demon, and everyone takes to arguing bitterly with each 
other. 

“Because the Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating, the traces 
of everything you've done are [spontaneously] reflected. Its when 
you attach to these reflected traces that you produce delusion. 
Thoughts don't actually exist in the place where the traces are 
reflected, and then arise. We retain the things we saw and heard in 
the past, and when these come up, they appear as traces and are 
reflected. Originally, thoughts have no real substance. So if they're 
reflected, just let them be reflected; if they arise, just let them arise; if 
they stop, just let them stop. As long as you're not attaching to these 
reflected traces, delusions won't be produced. So long as you’re not 
attaching to them, you won't be deluded, and then, no matter how 
many traces are reflected, it will be just as if they weren’t reflected at 
all. Even if a hundred, or a thousand thoughts spring up, it will be just 
the same as if they never arose. It won’t be any problem for you—no 
thoughts to ‘clear away,’ no thoughts to ‘cut off.’ So understand this 
welll” 

Bankei’s Kannon 

The principal object of worship at the RyOmonji was a Kannon 
made by the Master.®2 Knowing this, when the Master was delivering 
a sermon, a monk from dshi®? stood leaning against a pillar and 
asked: 

“Is that image an old buddha or a new buddha?” 

The Master replied: “How does it look to you?” 

The monk said: “It looks to me like a new buddha.” 

The Master said: “If it looks to you like a new buddha, then it’s a 
new buddha, and that’s that; so what’s the problem? Because you 
haven't understood that what is unborn is the Buddha Mind, you 
come and ask this sort of useless thing, thinking that’s Zen. Rather 
than ask this kind of worthless stuff and disturb everyone, just keep 
quiet, take a seat, and listen carefully to what I’m saying.” 

Getting sidetracked 

A layman from Izumo presented himself for private instruction® 
with the Master and asked: “When one is enlightened like your 
Reverence, do the Three Worlds [of the past, present and future] 
really appear as if they were glimpsed in the palm of the hand?” 

The Master said: “What you asked me just now was whether, 
when one is enlightened like myself, the Three Worlds appear as if 
glimpsed in the palm of the hand; is that correct?” 

The layman said: “It is.” 

The Master said: “Is that question something you've been thinking 
over, or is it something that suddenly occurred to you just now to 
ask?” 

The layman said: “Well, | didn’t really form this question on the 
spur of the moment, but as I’ve been mulling it over and just 
happened to think of it now, | asked you about it.” 

The Master told him: “In that case, you needn't bother asking 
about my affairs. Your wanting to see the Three Worlds can wait. 
First, thoroughly examine your own self—what’s really essential right 
here and now. Until you’ve examined your own self, however much | 
tell you about how things look [to me], you won't be recognizing it, 
seeing it or settling it for yourself, so you won’t be convinced. And 
even if you did believe it, you still wouldn't be proving my words. 
Since you won't have seen the Three Worlds for yourself, it won’t be 
of any use to you. When you thoroughly examine your own self, 
you'll know for yourself both the visible and invisible. There won’t be 
any need for me to tell you, or for you to ask me. Without first of all 
thoroughly examining your own self—what’s really essential right 
here and now—you come asking me extraneous questions about 
whether or not the Three Worlds can be seen, all of which can easily 
wait. It’s just getting sidetracked, going off on a tangent; it’s all 
irrelevant to you, like counting up my money for me without having 
even half a cent of your own. First off, listen closely to what I’m 
saying, and when you've really acknowledged it, today everything 
will be settled for you once and for all! So pay close attention and do 
just as | tell you, following my _ instructions. When you've 
acknowledged what | say and realized it conclusively, you'll be an 
instant living buddha here today. As for your question about whether 

one can see the Three Worlds or not, you won't have to carry it 
around to distant places, chasing about all over and asking others. 
Simply realize your mistake, and you'll stop sidetracking yourself, so 
listen closely to what | say.” 

The Master then presented his teaching of the Unborn, just as 
usual. 

The layman, having heard it through, readily acknowledged it, and 
declaring, “How grateful | am!” withdrew. 

cd % x 

Self-power/other-power 

“My teaching isn’t concerned with either self-power or other- 
power:®© that which transcends both self-power and other-power, 
that’s what my teaching is about. Let me prove this to you: While 
everyone is turned this way to hear me saying this, out back there 
may be sparrows chirping, crows cawing, the voices of men or 
women, or the sighing of the wind. But, without your deliberately 
trying to hear every one of those sounds, each of them comes to you 
clearly recognized and distinguished. It’s not you doing the hearing, 
so it’s not a matter of self-power. On the other hand, since you can’t 
very well have someone else do your hearing for you, you couldn't 
call it other-power! So, that which isn’t concerned with self-power or 
other-power but transcends them both is what my teaching is about. 
Isn't that right? When you listen this way with the Unborn, you 
transcend whatever there is. And all the rest of your activities are 
perfectly managed like this with the Unborn too. For the man who 
functions with the Unborn, whoever he may be, all things are 
perfectly managed. So, whoever he is, the man of the Unborn isn’t 
concerned with either self-power or other-power, but transcends 
them both.” 

Dreams 

A monk asked: “When I’m sleeping soundly, | have dreams. How 
is it that we have dreams? I'd like your opinion on this.” 

The Master said: “When a person is sound asleep he doesn’t have 
dreams. When you have dreams, you're not sleeping soundly.” 

The monk was speechless. 

Everybody has the Buddha Mind 

The Master addressed the assembly:®4 “What | tell everyone is 
nothing but the fact that the Unborn Buddha Mind is marvelously 
illuminating. You're all endowed with the Buddha Mind, but since you 
don't know it, I’m telling you and trying to make you understand. 

“Well, then, just what does it mean that everybody has the Buddha 
Mind? All of you came from home with the express intention of 
hearing what I’ve got to say, so you’re supposed to be listening to 
the sermon. But, in the course of listening to my talk, if a dog barks 
outside the temple, you recognize it as the voice of a dog; if a crow 
caws, you know it’s a crow; if you hear the voice of an adult, you 
know it’s an adult; if you hear the voice of a child, you know it’s a 
child. What | mean is that when you all left your homes to come here 
to the temple, you did so precisely in order to hear me speak this 
way; you didn’t come with any preconceived idea that if, while | was 
talking, there were sounds of dogs and birds, children or grown-ups 
somewhere outside, you were deliberately going to try to hear them. 
Yet here in the meeting you recognize the noises of dogs and crows 
outside and the sounds of people talking; your eyes can distinguish 
red from white, and your nose tell good smells from bad. From the 
start, you had no deliberate intention of doing this, so you had no 
way to know which sounds, colors or smells you would encounter. 
But the fact that you recognize these things you didn’t expect to see 
or hear shows you're seeing and hearing with the Unborn Buddha 
Mind. If outside the temple a dog barks, you know it’s a dog; if a 
crow caws, you know it’s a crow. Even though you're not deliberately 
trying to hear or not to hear these different sounds, you recognize 
each one the moment it appears, and this is proof of the Buddha 

Mind, unborn and marvelously illuminating. This not deliberately 
trying to see or hear is the Unborn... . 

“| tell everyone how they're endowed with the Buddha Mind like 
this. From the time | was young, | devoted myself to realizing the 
Buddha Mind, going about everywhere engaging in religious 
practice, seeking out accomplished teachers and interviewing them, 
questioning them this way and that about my problem, but there 
wasn't one who could tell me what | had to know. The result was that 
| failed to get a clear understanding and struggled in all kinds of 
ways, doing zazen, living off in the mountains, punishing my body, 
but | was still in the dark about the matter of the Buddha Mind. Then, 
at last, when | was twenty-six, suddenly | hit on it, and ever since, 
I've been telling everyone how the Unborn Buddha Mind is 
marvelously illuminating, so that they can also understand. | doubt 
there are many people around who can give you this kind of detail! 

“As I’ve told you, | finally realized this Buddha Mind after long 
years of religious practice. But the fact that all of you can easily 
come to know the Buddha Mind right at this meeting, in perfect 
comfort, without engaging in religious practice or punishing your 
bodies, means that your affinity with buddhahood is far deeper than 
mine was, and makes you lucky people indeed, each and every one! 
Having discovered that the Unborn Buddha Mind is marvelously 
illuminating, I’ve taught this everywhere, and many have understood. 
Of course, this Unborn Buddha Mind isn’t anything | learned from my 
teacher—this Unborn is something | discovered for myself, and at 
every one of these meetings | teach according to my own realization. 
Since if | told it to you only once or twice you probably wouldn’t 
understand, | tell it to you again and again. So if you’ve got any 
question about anything, just ask me, and I'll speak to you some 
more.... 

“What is it | tell everyone? | only talk about the Unborn Buddha 
Mind you all intrinsically possess. The main thing is to realize this 
Buddha Mind. Originally, there isn’t anything evil in you; but from just 
one little slip, you switch the Buddha Mind for thoughts. Take a thief, 
for example: At first, he pinches a few trifles, and then thinks: ‘I got 
hold of these things without even having to put up any cash; I’m sure 
there’s no handier way [to make a living]! After that, he becomes a 

confirmed and reckless thief, is inevitably found out, collared, bound, 
jailed and [led off to be] crucified. But then, confronted with the 
punishment for his crimes, he forgets all about the evils he 
committed and rails against the innocent officials wno must carry out 
his execution, protesting that what he’s done doesn’t deserve such 
harsh treatment and that it's heartlessly cruel besides! Terribly 
mistaken, isn't it? This is how people switch their precious Buddha 
Mind for the realms of hungry ghosts and fighting demons—it all 
begins from one little slip. 

“| also have a temple in Kyoto, at Yamashina,®2 and when I’m 
staying there | go into the city every day. Awadaguchi® lies along my 
way, and at Awadaguchi is a place where criminals are crucified and 
their heads gibbeted before the prison gates. Having to pass by 
there frequently, I’d see this sort of thing from time to time. 

“In Edo, the Criminal Magistrate is a man named Lord Koide 
ozumi.2 I’m on friendly terms with him, and whenever I'd visit at his 
mansion, I’d see various criminals led out, confronted by the officers, 
bound and tied and put to the torture, suffering the most terrible 
agony. At that moment, these criminals quite forgot their own 
mischief was to blame and berated the officers, who were in no way 
at fault, as if it were all their doing. | often witnessed this. Afterwards, 
seeing how things were, I'd make sure | visited only on Official Days 
of Abstinence,“ as on these days such criminals weren’t brought to 
the mansion. This is an example of how, from one little slip, people 
thoughtlessly change the Buddha Mind for a hell-dweller. Everyone, 
grasp this clearly! When it comes to what you all have from your 
parents innately, there’s not a single thing you've got except the 
Buddha Mind. So take great care not to create delusions and bad 
habits, which result from self-centeredness and selfish desires that 
you do not have innately. It’s to illustrate this that I’ve told you about 
the criminals. ... 

“When your parents gave you life, there wasn’t a trace of selfish 
desire, bad habits or self-centeredness. But from the age of four or 
five you picked up the mean things you saw other people do and the 
bad things you heard them say, so that gradually as you matured, 
growing up badly, you developed selfish desire, which in turn 

produced self-centeredness. Deluded by this self-centeredness, you 
then proceeded to create every sort of evil. If it weren't for being 
centered on yourself, delusions wouldn't arise. When they dont 
arise, that’s none other than abiding in the Unborn Buddha Mind. 
Apart from this, there’s no buddha, so if there’s anything you people 
don't understand, come along and ask me, no matter what it is. 
There’s no need to feel any hesitation in asking about this. This is 
different from asking about worldly concerns of the moment—it’s a 
matter of eternity! So if you’ve got any doubts, better come ask me 
right now. | can’t be sure of meeting you all again, so take this 
opportunity to ask me about whatever puzzles you, and when you've 
thoroughly grasped how the Buddha Mind is unborn and marvelously 
illuminating, each of you will have his reward.” 

Having thus instructed the assembly, the Master mounted the altar 
platform” to perform the closing ceremonies, and when he had 
finished, he said: “I’m going back inside now. Today’s crowd was 
quite a big one, so, to avoid a rush, everyone please leave in an 
orderly fashion, and, above all, take your time going so there won't 
be any mishaps.” 

Being living buddhas 

“What has brought this vast throng here like this since daybreak, 
hoping to hear what I’ve got to say, is none other than the Unborn 
Buddha Mind. The way you've all gathered here since early this 
morning, unless you’d felt the sermon was something really unusual, 
you'd never have shown this sort of resolve. Well, then, among those 
of you who've come to this meeting, all those who’ve reached the 
age of fifty have lived for fifty years without realizing you had the 
Buddha Mind right within yourself, while those who are thirty have 
failed to realize this truth for thirty years up till today—you’ve all been 
passing the months and years in a daze. But at our meeting today 
when you thoroughly grasp that each of you has the Unborn Buddha 
Mind right within himself, from today on you'll live in the Buddha 
Mind and be living buddhas forever after. What I’m telling you all is 
simply to make you realize that the Unborn Buddha Mind is 

marvelously illuminating. When you've thoroughly realized this, from 
then on forever after you'll possess a buddhas body no different from 
Shaka’s and never again fall into the Three Evil Realms. However, 
even if you grasp the Unborn Buddha Mind when | explain it to you 
here like this, once you go back home, things you see and hear may 
start up your angry mind again. And then, even if it’s only a tiny bit of 
anger, your sin will be a million times worse than it was before you'd 
heard me tell you about the Unborn Buddha Mind! You'll switch the 
Unborn Buddha Mind you learned about now for hell-dwellers, 
beasts and hungry ghosts, transmigrating forever. 

“I’m sure there’s not a person present who objects to becoming a 
buddha. That's why I’m here preaching to you all. Grasp things 
clearly, and from today on you’re living buddhas. Even if | were to 
urge you all, ‘Forget about becoming buddhas—just fall into hell!’ | 
doubt there would be a single one of you who'd actually volunteer to 
go! The proof of this is that, in order to come to this meeting and 
hear my sermon, you roused yourselves in the dark of night, 
traveling here and jostling for space in this huge crowd, accepting all 
the hardships to listen to my talk. Isn’t it because you all wanted to 
become buddhas? Since you have this sort of resolve, from here on 
you should take great care in everything you do. ... 

“ ‘Just what sort of thing is this Unborn Buddha Mind?’ you're 
probably wondering. While all of you here are turned this way intent 
on hearing what I’m saying, if outside the temple there’s the barking 
of a dog or the cry of some tradesman peddling his wares, even 
though you’re not trying to hear these things in the course of the 
sermon, each of the different sounds is heard—the dog’s bark, the 
tradesman’s cry; that’s hearing with the Unborn, the dynamic 
function of the Buddha Mind. Let me give you an example. The 
Buddha Mind, unborn and marvelously illuminating, is like a bright 
mirror. A mirror reflects whatever is in front of it. It’s not deliberately 
trying to reflect things, but whatever comes before the mirror, its 
color and form are sure to appear. Likewise, when the object being 
reflected is removed, the mirror isn’t deliberately trying not to reflect 
it, but when it's taken away it doesn’t appear in the mirror. The 
Unborn Buddha Mind is just like this. It's natural that you see and 
hear things, whatever they are, when you deliberately try to see and 

hear them; but when you see and hear things that you hadn't 
Originally anticipated seeing or hearing, it's through the dynamic 
function of the Buddha Mind that every one of you has. That’s what’s 
meant by the Unborn Buddha Mind. Now that I’ve given you my 
instruction on the Unborn in such a way that all of you can 
understand, if after this you still don’t grasp it, then whether you’ve 
listened to one thousand sermons or ten thousand, it won’t make any 
difference. Even if it's only one sermon, the person who realizes this 
Buddha Mind that everyone intrinsically possesses is a living 
tathagata from that moment on! 

“To give you another example, suppose there’s someone traveling 
here to Marugame from Takamatsu,“ and he doesn’t know the way. 
There’s another person who does know it, and when the traveler 
asks him, he explains precisely what route to follow and, memorizing 
this thoroughly, the traveler goes just as he’d been told and arrives 
here without any problem. The same way, when you all grasp exactly 
what I’m saying now, from that moment on you'll abide in the Buddha 
Mind just as it is. On the other hand, if you fail to do so, it’s just as if 
you were able to learn the road to Marugame, but didn’t go as you'd 
been told and headed for some place else. That’s why you'd better 
listen closely to what | say. | can’t be sure I'll be back here again to 
talk to you; and even if you hear sermons somewhere else, | doubt 
there’s anyone who's going to make a special point of explaining to 
you how this Buddha Mind is unborn and marvelously illuminating. 
So if you think the sermon I’m giving makes sense, be on your guard 
to stop stirring up all kinds of thoughts, and put an end to your 
transmigrating. If you fail to realize buddhahood now, you'll never 
again be born into this human world, not even in ten thousand 
kalpas,“ so do your utmost to conclusively realize the Unborn 
Buddha Mind, and don't be deluded. Then, from today you men will 
be men abiding in the Buddha Mind, and you women will be women 
abiding in the Buddha Mind, all without being deluded. That's none 
other than buddhahood, none other than enlightenment. 

“| can tell you something about this matter of women’s Buddha 
Mind. | understand that women feel very distressed hearing it said 
that they can’t become buddhas. But it simply isn’t so! How is there 
any difference between men and women? Men are the Buddha 

Body,“2 and women are the Buddha Body too. You shouldn't 
entertain any doubts of this sort. When you thoroughly grasp the 
Unborn, then, in the Unborn, there’s no difference whether you're a 
man or a woman. Everyone is the Buddha Body. 

“You women, listen closely now. While, in terms of physical form, 
men and women are obviously different, in terms of the Buddha Mind 
there’s no difference at all. Don’t be misled by appearances! The 
Buddha Mind is identical; it makes no distinction between men and 
women. 

“Let me prove this to you. There’s quite a crowd of people here at 
this meeting, but when they hear the sound of a drum or a gong 
outside the temple, do you suppose the women mistake the sound of 
the gong for that of the drum, the sound of the drum for that of the 
gong? Do you really think there’s any difference between the way 
the men are hearing these things and the way the women hear 
them? There’s absolutely no difference at all. Now, everyone, is this 
true only for ‘men and women? In this hall we have young people 
and old, monks and householders, men and women, all here 
mingled together; but when it comes to hearing the sound of the 
gong or the drum, can you say the old people hear it this way, the 
young ones hear it that way? Can you tell the difference in the way 
the monks hear it, the way the lay people hear it, the way the men 
hear it, the way the women hear it? The fact that there’s no 
difference at all [proves that what’s involved] is none other than the 
One Identical Buddha Mind that everyone intrinsically possesses. So 
this talk about ‘men’s and women’s’ is nothing but names of traces 
produced by your thoughts. Before these traces get produced, in the 
realm of the Unborn, there’s nothing about ‘men’ or ‘women.’ And 
since that’s how it is, as there’s no difference between men’s Buddha 
Mind and women’s Buddha Mind, you shouldn’t harbor any such 
doubts. 

“Suppose you are staying continually in the Unborn, abiding in the 
Buddha Mind just as it is and forgetting any distinctions between 
men and women, when suddenly you see or hear something 
[disturbing], someone says nasty things about you, or thoughts of 
clinging and craving arise and you attach to them: you'll carelessly 
switch the Buddha Mind for thoughts, and then claim it’s because 

you're only a wretched woman, or some such thing. Without being 
deluded by your physical form, thoroughly grasp this One Way of the 
Unborn, and [you'll see that] not only men and women, but the 
buddhas of the past and those of the future are all the identical One 
Buddha Mind. There’s no reason that women should be a special 
case and not be able to realize buddhahood too. 

“If there really were some reason that women couldn’t become 
buddhas, just what do you think | would have to gain by deceiving 
you all, lying to you and insisting they can, misleading everyone in 
this big crowd? If it were a fact that women couldn't realize 
buddhahood, and | told you that they really could, deceiving every 
person here, I'd be sure to land in hell well before all of you! Just 
because | longed to realize buddhahood, from the time | was young | 
engaged in hard and painful practice; so now do you suppose I'd 
want to get punished for lying to you all and land up in hell? What I’m 
telling you is no lie. | want you ladies to grasp it clearly and, from 
here on, feeling fully assured, pass your days in the Unborn Buddha 
Mind.... 

“Even in evil people, the Unborn Mind isn’t missing. When you 
reverse their evil mind, it's none other than Buddha Mind. Let me tell 
you how even an evil person has the Buddha Mind: Suppose two 
men are traveling together from here to Takamatsu. One of them is 
evil and the other is good, but both of them, without thinking of good 
or evil, just walk along, chatting with one another about this or that 
as they go. If there’s something along the road, without either of 
them deliberately trying to see it, whatever there is on either side 
appears to both the eyes of the good man and to those of the bad. 
Suppose some horses or cows should come toward them: both the 
good man and the bad would move aside and make their way 
around. Even though they hadn't anticipated doing so, as they go 
along chatting together, both of them simply move aside to get 
through. If there’s some spot they have to leap across, both of them 
will take a leap; if there’s a river, they'll both ford it. Even though he 
hadn't planned to do so, the good man, as you'd expect, moves 
aside and makes his way past whatever obstacles he encounters. 
But while you might expect that the evil man wouldn't do exactly the 
same as the good one—ducking out of the way of things, leaping 

ditches and fording streams without any anticipation—what he does 
is, in fact, no different from what the good man does. 

“l’ve told you this as an example of how even an evil person is 
endowed with the Unborn Buddha Mind. Each of you too, up till now, 
has been an evil person, consumed by every sort of clinging and 
Craving, preoccupied with anger and rage, transmigrating and 
switching your Buddha Mind for fighting demons and hungry ghosts. 
But now that I’ve explained this Unborn Buddha Mind to you today, if 
you grasp it clearly, your own mind of clinging and craving, anger 
and rage will instantly become the Unborn Buddha Mind, and you'll 
never lose this Buddha Mind, not in ten thousand kalpas. Since you'll 
be abiding in this Buddha Mind, from today on you yourselves will be 
living tathagatas. But make no mistake; if you lose out on the 
Buddha Mind now, you won't attain buddhahood in ten thousand or 
even one hundred thousand kalpas, so you'd better grasp things 
clearly! 

“Even if your previously ingrained bad habits should lead you to 
attach to things that come your way, so that thoughts temporarily 
arise, the man who is secure in his faith will neither attach to nor 
reject these thoughts—in the twinkling of an eye he'll easily go right 
back to the buddhahood of the Unborn! Even with the buddhas and 
patriarchs, it wasn't that they were completely without thoughts from 
the start. But since they didn’t get involved with them and, just like 
little children, didn’t continue them any further, it was the same as if 
the thoughts didn’t arise. That's why they remained free from 
thoughts. 

“Now, when thoughts don't arise, the marvelously illuminating 
dynamic function of the Buddha Mind won’t manifest itself, so the 
arising of thoughts is, in fact, the dynamic function of the marvelously 
illuminating Buddha Mind. Both my explaining these things to you 
and your taking them in, too, are all due to everyone's having that 
which is marvelously illuminating within the Buddha Mind. Isn't this a 
direct and precious thing? To take something so precious, arouse all 
kinds of thoughts and with them create the Three Evil Realms of hell- 
dwellers, beasts and hungry ghosts, so that even right in this life 
you're pulled along by that [evil] karma—it’s really pitiful to think how 
people suffer like this, morning to night. So grasp this clearly, realize 

once and for all that dealing with everything by stirring up thoughts 
only makes you suffer; and, without switching your One Buddha 
Mind for thoughts that are not innately yours, pass your days always 
in the Unborn Buddha Mind. 

“I'll be going back inside now. Everyone please take your time 
leaving.” 

Servants, samurai, husbands and wives 

“.. When you observe the world at large, if there’s someone with 
a certain skill in which he excels, no matter what it is, everyone will 
praise him: ‘He’s really talented!’ they'll declare. But the bigoted 
person, on hearing this, will say: ‘Well, he may be good at this 
particular thing, but he’s also got such-and-such bad points. . .’ thus 
managing to denigrate even his abilities. There’s no two ways about 
it: that’s the bigotry of the arrogant evildoer, isn’t it? With people like 
this, if someone they’re partial to has a little talent, even if it’s talent 
no one else has ever heard of, they'll stand up alone and praise him 
to the skies. ‘Bravo!’ they exclaim, ‘Well done! A real virtuoso!’ You 
find lots of people like this. Isn’t that sort of thing terribly wrong? We 
should join gladly in praising those whom others praise, and, hearing 
of another’s happiness, we should rejoice just as if the happiness 
were our own. This is the way things ought to be. Such a person is 
an illumined man who doesn’t obscure the Buddha Mind. But if, in 
response to what you see and hear, there’s any arrogance or bigotry, 
you change the Buddha Mind with which you’re endowed for a hell- 
dweller. ... 

“When you leave behind your anger, clinging, craving and self- 
centeredness, even when it comes to your servants, you won't treat 
them harshly but will show them kindness. Just because you hire 
someone and pay him a salary is no reason to beat him or make him 
do unreasonable things! Even with your servants, you shouldn't think 
of them as separate or unrelated to you. Suppose right now your 
own son were being disobedient. If instead of your son disobeying 
you it had been an outsider, how incensed you'd be! But since you 
realize it’s your own son, you manage to put up with it, right? What's 

more, whatever sort of nasty thing you'd tell your own son to do, 
since it’s in the family he probably wouldn't resent it too much; but 
with a servant, who is unrelated to you, his resentment is bound to 
be different from your son’s. Scolding people heedlessly, flying into a 
rage—till now it’s all been a great mistake. Till now, you didn’t 
understand the principle behind this, so you just went along 
thoughtlessly, believing that anger and rage were the natural way of 
things in the human world. But now that you've heard about the 
Unborn Buddha Mind each of you has innately, from here on you’d 
better keep from doing it any harm. 

“It may seem to you somehow that I’m speaking like this at the 
request of the servants—but it really isn’t so! Even when it comes to 
a rude servant, no matter how bad he is, what I’m telling you all is 
not to lose your temper senselessly and harm the Buddha Mind. .. . 

“In the world, one finds certain kinds of men who do things 
halfheartedly. Unlike men, however, women are sincere. It’s true 
they're also more foolish than men in some ways. But when you tell 
them that by doing evil you fall into hell, they don’t doubt it in the 
slightest; and when you teach them that, while doing evil will land 
you in hell, doing good will make you a buddha, they wholeheartedly 
resolve to become buddhas, and their faith deepens all the more. 
When they hear what I’m teaching about the Unborn, their faith is 
roused, and that’s why women, being sincere, will realize 
buddhahood more readily than men with their phony cleverness. So 
make up your minds that you’re going to become buddhas now! 

“Everyone is probably thinking: ‘Here he is just telling us, “Watch 
out all the time—don’t lose your temper! don’t be greedy!” But if we 
were doing this and someone came along and remarked, “Why, what 
big fools these people are!” we surely couldn't bring ourselves to tell 
him, “Certainly, we are fools!” ‘ 

“Of course, such things do happen; but a person who calls another 
a fool, even when he’s not, is a fool himself. So with people like this, 
just let it go and don’t bother about it any further. 

“However, if a samurai were being addressed with such 
disrespectful talk, there’d be no question of his tolerating it. Let me 
give you an example. Nowadays there are lots of people who own 
high-priced ceramics—flower vases and Korean teabowls. | don’t 

own anything of this sort myself, but when | see the people who do, 
they take the ceramics and wrap them round and round with soft 
cotton and crepe and stick them in a box, which makes good sense. 
If a costly ceramic strikes against something hard, it’s sure to break, 
so to keep these ceramics from breaking by wrapping them in cotton 
and crepe is surely a judicious measure. The samurai’s mind is just 
like this. To begin with, samurai always place honor above all else. If 
there’s even a single word of disagreement between them, they can’t 
let it pass without calling it to account—such is the way of the 
samurai. Once a single word is challenged, there’s no going back. 
So a samurai always keeps the ‘hard’ parts of his mind under wraps, 
swathed in cotton and crepe, and from the start takes the greatest 
care to avoid ‘striking against’ abrasive people. Everyone would do 
well always to be careful about this. Once anyone has challenged his 
words, the samurai is bound to kill him. You’d better grasp this 
Clearly. 

“Then there’s the sort of killing that occurs when a samurai throws 
himself before his lord and cuts down an attacker. This serves to 
destroy evildoers and pacify the realm and constitutes the regular 
vocation of the samurai, so for a warrior this sort of thing is not 
considered to be murder. But to kill another simply scheming for your 
own personal ends, stirring up selfish desires as a result of self- 
centeredness—this is murder indeed. It shows disloyalty to your lord, 
unfiliality to your parents, and changes the Buddha Mind for a 
fighting demon. On the other hand, in circumstances when one must 
die for one’s lord, to fail to die, to run away and behave like a 
coward, is switching the Buddha Mind for an animal. Birds and 
beasts don't have the sort of intelligence people do, so they can't 
understand the proper way to act; they don’t know the meaning of 
honor and simply flee from place to place trying to stay alive. But 
when a samurai, similarly, fails to understand the meaning of honor 
and runs away, not even showing shame before his fellow warriors, 
that’s just like being an animal. 

“In Edo, | also have a temple, located in Azabu on the edge of 
the city. There was once a servant who’d been with me for quite 
some time and had developed a certain religious feeling. | suppose 
that as he constantly watched the behavior of the monks, this sort of 

thing had naturally occurred. It happened that one day, toward dusk, 
this man was sent on an errand by some of my students. His route 
led through the outskirts of the city, past certain areas with homes 
and others that were totally uninhabited. In these desolate spots, 
swordsmen would often lie in wait to test their blades on 
unsuspecting travelers,“ and with no one about after dark, it wasn’t 
safe to be there. But when the others tried to stop him, pleading, ‘It’s 
dangerous, don’t go!’ he refused to listen, and went off, telling them, 
‘Tl be back.’ 

“On his way home, the sun had gone down, and one of these 
streetcorner assassins happened to be waiting in his usual spot. He 
pushed deliberately into the servant, drew the sword at his side and 
exclaimed: “You touched me with your sleeve! | won't let you by!’ 

“The servant replied: ‘My sleeve did not touch you.’ 

“And then, without even thinking, he prostrated himself three 
times. Whereupon, strange to tell, the samurai sheathed the sword 
that was already poised to kill, and said: ‘Well, you’re a peculiar 
fellow! I'll let you off. Go on!’ 

“Thus, he managed to escape disaster. 

“Meanwhile, a merchant who just then chanced to be passing saw 
what was happening and ran for safety into an adjacent tea shop, 
taking furtive peaks at what was going on. As he waited there 
wondering, ‘Is he killing him now? Now is he going to kill him?’ the 
servant appeared before him. 

“You really had a narrow escape!’ said the merchant. ‘How'd you 
ever happen to think of bowing like that?’ 

“The servant told him: ‘I live in a temple, and the people there are 
always making three bows. Just now, | decided, “Well, if he’s going 
to kill me, let him kill me!” And, without even thinking, | just 
automatically made the usual three bows. “You’re a peculiar fellow,” 
he said, “I'll let you off. Go on!” And | was able to continue on my 
way.’ 

“That's what the servant told me. 

“Even this,’ | said to him, ‘even your escape from an inescapable 
predicament, when you come right down to it, was because you 
always kept your faith.’ And having heard how the heart of even a 

brutal wayside assassin was moved, I’m sure there isn’t anyone who 
can doubt the Buddhadharma. 

“As | travel about everywhere, | come across all sorts of different 
things. | also have a temple at 6zu in lyo,22 and | generally go there 
and spend some time each year. The Ozu temple is nothing like this. 
It's a huge structure. When I’m there, throngs of visitors pack the 
temple, and there’s one hall reserved for women and another just for 
men. In Ozu, we have four ushers—two for the women and two for 
the men—who give directions so there won't be any unseemly 
scrambling, and everyone listens respectfully. All the local country 
people come from two or three ri& around. 

“Once there was a fellow from Ozu who gave his daughter in 
marriage to a man whose home was in the countryside some two ri 
away. His mother lived with them, and a son was born, but the 
couple always got on badly and never ceased quarreling. Eventually, 
they had a terrible row, and the wife walked out, handing their only 
child to her husband and announcing that she was returning to her 
parents. 

“But the husband, clutching the child in his arms, declared: ‘If you 
go back to your parents, I'll throw this child in the river!’ 

“The woman said: ‘Fine! He’s your child, and now I'm letting you 
have him, so go ahead and throw him in the river, get rid of him if 
you want to—! don't care!’ 

“Then, the husband told her: “You may be going home to your 
parents, but you’re not taking back so much as a scrap of clothing or 
household belongings!’82 

“She replied: ‘Once I’m out of this house, | don’t care about that 
clothing and household stuff!’ And so saying, she left and set off for 
OZu. 

“Just then, she happened to notice a group of people on their way 
to hear my sermon, so instead of continuing to her parents, she 
joined the crowd and came to my temple. She listened carefully to 
what | said that day. Well, when my talk was over, everyone 
dispersed, and on the way home, this woman happened to meet a 
man who was a neighbor of her parents. 

“What's brought you here?’ he asked her. 

“She told him: ‘This morning my husband and | had a fight. I’d 
come this far when | noticed a crowd on their way to the temple. It 
looked as if there would be a sermon, and the happy thought came 
to me that this was a good opportunity and | ought to join them. So, 
instead of proceeding to my parents, | went along to the temple. 
Everything in the sermon today applied to me personally. | feel so 
terribly ashamed! My leaving my husband’s house today was due to 
my own wrongmindedness. My husband didn’t want me to go. He 
tried saying all kinds of things to me and, together with my mother-in- 
law, attempted to stop me, but | persisted in my senseless outrage 
and finally outraged my husband and mother-in-law as_ well. 
However, the sermon today made me see how wrong | was, so | 
won't be going back to my parents after all. From here, I'll return 
home to my husband and beg forgiveness for the wrong I’ve done, 
humble myself before them both and also tell them about this 
wonderful sermon; for unless | encourage them as well to take an 
interest in salvation, my having heard it won't be truly worthwhile.’ 

“The neighbor remarked: ‘How can you go back home alone after 
fighting with your husband and coming all this way? First, go to your 
parents’ place; then, I'll go back to your husband’s with you and see 
that your return works out all right.’ 

“No, no,’ the woman said, ‘it doesn’t matter how it’s going to work 
out. Since, after all, it was | who behaved badly, it’s up to me to make 
up to them both and see that everything comes right. Besides, if this 
wonderful sermon remained for my hearing alone, it wouldn't be 
worthwhile. When I’ve shared it with them both and encouraged 
them to take an interest in salvation, only then will my having heard it 
be truly meaningful.’ 

“As the two of them walked along speaking this way, they were 
overheard by the people around them coming from the temple. 

“What a remarkable person this woman is!’ they marveled. ‘Today, 
after hearing a single sermon, she repents her errors. What 
extraordinary behavior for a mere woman! This other person 
certainly spoke ignorantly. To try to dissuade her from going back 
alone, and to have him straighten things out for her return—what sort 
of business would that be! Since he’s from ozu, he must have heard 
that sermon over and over, but, still, what bad advice he hands out!’ 

“In this fashion, those who'd been able to hear what had happened 
rebuked the man, and told the woman who had announced that she 
was going home: ‘Your attitude really is admirable! Hurry home right 
away!’ 

“Yes, | will!’ she replied, and returned. 

“That day, I'd been invited to visit an Ozu clansman, and while | 
was there, a crowd of acquaintances came by. 

“Your sermon today caused a miracle!’ they told me, all of them at 
once blurting out this story. 

“Afterwards, | learned what happened when the woman went back 
to her husband. 

“Returning as she’d intended, she told them both:82 ‘Even though 
neither of you ordered me out, my own wrongheadedness made me 
go against your wishes and leave home. Yet, since my decision to 
return to my parents led me to Ozu, my leaving home today must 
itself have been the result of some karmic affinity with Buddhism. On 
my way, | met a crowd of people traveling to the temple, and, joining 
them, | went along. When | listened to the sermon, there wasn't a 
thing that didn’t apply to me personally. As | listened, | realized how 
wrong my own attitude had been, and instead of going on to my 
parents, | came straight home from the temple. It was my own 
wrongmindedness that made you both angry with me. From here on, 
l’ll obey you in everything, so if you’re angry with me now, go ahead 
and satisfy your anger—do anything to me you want! No matter how 
trying things may be for me, | won’t bear you any resentment at all, 
so | hope you'll both forgive me.’ 

“Like the honest folk they were, when they heard this, both 
husband and mother-in-law declared: ‘It was you who got yourself 
upset over nothing and ran out on your own, even though no one 
had told you to go. Now that you’ve realized you were mistaken and 
come back, how could we hold it against you!’ 

“So they were happy to have her back again, and everything 
turned out for the best. Thereafter, the woman was scrupulously 
obedient to her husband, with whom she lived in perfect harmony, 
and was respectful toward her mother-in-law as well, looking after 
the meals and telling them from time to time about the marvelous 
sermon she'd heard. Finally, she prevailed upon them both, so that 

while | was staying [in the area], the three of them would often come 
together to hear me. 

“For people who have an affinity like this with Buddhism to be 
freed of their quarrels and resentments by a single sermon—even if 
they're only ignorant folk without any sort of understanding— 
certainly shows a wonderful attitude, don’t you agree? I’ve been 
telling you this with the idea that if all of you, too, hear these things, 
you're sure to form an instant affinity of your own. Because the 
Buddha Mind is unborn and marvelously illuminating, even a mere 
woman, without any sort of understanding, can find herself relying on 
the Buddha Mind. So all you people as well, from here on, should 
constantly summon up your faith in order to abide in the Unborn 
Buddha Mind! 

“Today’s talk was long, and you’re probably all worn out, so let’s 
stop here. Everyone take your time leaving, and please come again 
tomorrow.” 

“Buddha” Magoemon 

“, . . Well, then, let me tell you something about the marvelous 
workings of the Buddha Mind. About thirty years ago there was a 
fellow who became a disciple of mine, [a merchant] who outdid 
everyone else in selling his goods, frequently turning a handsome 
profit, so that people all began to call him ‘Thief Magoemon.’&4 
Whenever he'd pass by, everyone would point to him and say: 
‘There’s that Thief Magoemon!’ Still, as he was clever at turning a 
profit, outdoing all the rest, later on things went well for him—he got 
himself a house, made money—and from that time on, he often 
came to my place. | told him: ‘If people are calling you an outrageous 
thief, something must be wrong. Particularly when someone who's 
coming regularly to this temple gets called such bad names by 
everyone and has everybody talking about him, there’s no two ways 
about it—its his own fault!’ 

“When I'd taken him to task like this, Magoemon said to me: ‘If | 
went to people’s places and stole things, or cut my way into their 
storerooms, I'd certainly feel ashamed; but I’m not stealing like that. 

And |’m hardly the only one around who’s making a profit in 
business. Besides, the people who are slandering me are mostly 
merchants themselves, but since they can’t turn a profit like | do, 
unfortunately you end up hearing bad things about me. After all, the 
whole point of doing business is to make a profit. . . .. And going on 
in this vein, he remained unconcerned. 

“Later on, | don’t know what came over him, but he turned his 
affairs over to his nephew and even distributed all the money he’d 
accumulated among his family, coming to me and asking to receive 
the tonsure. | told him: ‘If it were anyone else, there’d certainly be 
some question in my mind, but in your case, aS someone who's 
always had a bad reputation, it shows a splendid resolve.’ So saying, 
| made him a monk right away. 

“From then on, he gradually deepened his faith and became a 
man of faith. And what does this show? That what's called the 
Buddha Mind possesses a marvelously illuminating dynamic 
function. Not thirty days after this fellow had become a monk, 
everyone had already taken to calling him ‘Buddha Magoemon!’ 
That's how it goes, so | want you all to grasp this clearly. There’s 
nothing in the world so precious as the Buddha Mind. Since you're 
all trying to realize the Unborn Buddha Mind, you can’t get by without 
understanding this conclusively. | don’t go telling you: ‘It’s no good 
unless you perform this practice!’ ‘Observe the precepts!’ ‘Read the 
sutras and records!’ ‘Do zazen!’ Because the Buddha Mind is 
present in each one of you, there’s no question of my giving you the 
Buddha Mind. Listening closely to this sermon, realize the Buddha 
Mind that each of you has right within himself, and from today on 
you're abiding in the Unborn Buddha Mind. Once you’ve affirmed the 
Buddha Mind that everyone has innately, you can all do just as you 
please: if you want to read the sutras, read the sutras; if you feel like 
doing zazen, do zazen; if you want to keep the precepts, take the 
precepts; even if it’s chanting the nembutsu or the daimoku,® or 
simply performing your allotted tasks—whether as a samurai, a 
farmer, an artisan or a merchant®°—that becomes your samadhi.24 
All I'm telling you is: ‘Realize the Buddha Mind that each of you has 
from your parents innately!’ What's essential is to realize the Buddha 
Mind each of you has, and simply abide in it with faith. . . .” 

Like little children of three or four 

The Master instructed the assembly: “As you've all been hearing 
me say, everyone has the innate Buddha Mind, so all you need to do 
is abide in the Unborn just as it is. However, [following] the ways of 
the world, you get into bad habits in life and switch the Buddha Mind 
for the wretched realm of hungry ghosts with its clinging and craving. 
Grasp this thoroughly and you'll always abide in the Unborn Buddha 
Mind. But if, wishing to realize the Unborn, you people try to stop 
your thoughts of anger and rage, clinging and craving from arising, 
then by stopping them you divide one mind into two. It’s as if you 
were pursuing something that’s running away. As long as you 
deliberately try to stop your rising thoughts, the thought of trying to 
stop them wars against the continually arising thoughts themselves, 
and there’s never an end to it. To give you an example, it would be 
like washing away blood with blood. Of course, you might get out the 
original blood; but the blood after that would stick, and the red never 
go away. Similarly, the original angry thoughts that you were able to 
stop may have come to an end, but the subsequent thoughts 
concerned with your stopping them won't ever cease. 

“Well,” you may wonder, ‘then what can | do to stop them?’ Even if 
suddenly, despite yourself and wholly unawares, rage or anger 
should appear, or thoughts of clinging and craving arise, just let them 
come—don’t develop them any further, don’t attach to them. Without 
concerning yourself about whether to stop your rising thoughts or not 
to stop them, just don’t bother with them, and then there’s nothing 
else they can do but stop. You can’t have an argument with the 
fence if you’re standing there all alone! When there’s no one there to 
fight with, things can’t help but simply come to an end of themselves. 

“Even when all sorts of thoughts do crop up, it’s only for the time 
being while they arise. So, just like little children of three or four who 
are busy at play, when you don't continue holding onto those 
thoughts and don't cling to any [particular] thoughts, whether they’re 
happy or sad, not thinking about whether to stop or not to stop them 
—why, that’s nothing else but abiding in the Unborn Buddha Mind. 
So keep the one mind as one mind. If you always have your mind 

like this, then, whether it’s good things or bad, even though you're 
neither trying not to think them nor to stop them, they can’t help but 
just stop of themselves. What you call anger and joy you produce 
entirely yourself due to the strength of your self-centeredness, the 
result of selfish desire. Transcend all thoughts of attachment and 
these thoughts can’t help but perish. This ‘perishing’ is none other 
than the /mperishable. And that which is imperishable is the Unborn 
Buddha Mind. 

“At any rate, the main thing is always to be mindful of the Unborn 
Buddha Mind and not go cooking up thoughts of this or that on the 
ground of the Unborn, attaching to things that come your way, 
changing the Buddha Mind for thoughts. As long as you don’t waver 
in this, no thoughts will arise, whether good or bad, and so, of 
course, there won't be any need to try to stop them, either. Then, 
aren't you neither creating nor destroying? That’s nothing but the 
Unborn and Imperishable Buddha Mind, so you'd better grasp this 
clearly!” 

Getting angry 

“Looking around me, | see that we have an even larger crowd than 
usual this morning, so probably a lot of you didn’t hear the talk | just 
gave. All those who heard it should leave at this point and give their 
places to those who didn’t.” 

When those present had changed places and seated themselves, 
a certain man brought forward a question he wished to ask the 
Master. 

“In your sermons,” he said, “you always state that, getting into bad 
habits in life, we switch the Buddha mind for evil thoughts. Hearing 
you, | realize that doing this is wrong. Still, I'm a townsman, my 
business is trade, and things people say make me angry or annoyed. 
Inside me, | don’t harbor any evil thoughts of anger or annoyance, 
but other people often get me angry, whether it’s my wife and 
children or my servants. After hearing your sermon, | realized doing 
this was wrong and tried to put an end to it. But if | stop those angry 

thoughts, they only come up again, and there’s no end to them after 
all. What can | do, then, to stop them?” 

The Master replied: “The fact is, you want to get angry, so you’re 
getting yourself mad. If you hadn’t the least bad thought to begin 
with, no matter how much others provoked you, you surely wouldn't 
get angry. But if, in you, feelings of anger and annoyance have 
already been formed, then, even though [the other people] don’t set 
out deliberately to say things to make you mad, you get carried away 
by the force of your own self-centeredness, lose your temper and 
insist, ‘| don’t say anything that’s untrue or improper!’ Your thoughts 
create the karma of the Three Evil Realms, while your demonic mind 
torments you. This is the fiery cart®= of self and self-created karma. 

“Outside, hell, hungry ghosts, karma, demons and fiery carts 
simply don't exist. What’s more, to try to stop your rising thoughts, 
holding them back and suppressing them, is a bad idea. The original, 
innate Buddha Mind is one alone—it’s never two. But when you try to 
stop your rising anger, [your mind] is split between your angry 
thoughts and your thoughts of stopping them. It’s as if you’re chasing 
after someone who is running away, except that you’re both the 
runner and the one pursuing him as well! Let me give you an 
example of what | mean: You can busy yourself sweeping under a 
tree with thick [autumn] foliage; but since the tree’s leaves will keep 
scattering down from above, even if, for the moment, you manage to 
get things neatly swept away, more leaves will only come falling later 
on, won't they? In the same way, even if you stop your original 
thoughts of anger, the subsequent thoughts involved with the 
stopping of them will never come to an end. So the idea of trying to 
stop [your thoughts] is wrong. Since that’s how it is, when you no 
longer bother about those rising thoughts, not trying either to stop 
them or not to stop them, why, that’s the Unborn Buddha Mind. 
That's what I’ve been telling about just now in such detail. Weren't 

you listening? [If you weren’t,] it’s a shame!”®2 

Blindness and the Unborn 

A blind woman addressed the Master: “I have heard that one who 
is physically handicapped cannot attain buddhahood. |, as you see, 
am blind, and without the opportunity even to worship the image of a 
buddha, | feel that my being born a human has been truly in vain and 
that when | die I'll just sink into the Evil Paths. If there’s any way by 
which even one who is blind can be said to attain buddhahood, | beg 
you to instruct me.” 

The Master replied: “People do talk that way, but in the Unborn | 
speak of, there’s no distinction between being handicapped or not 
being handicapped. Even if you're blind, in the innate Buddha Mind 
itself there’s not the slightest difference. Do not doubt this! Just keep 
clear of clinging, anger and foolishness“2 and fully affirm these 
sermons I’ve been giving, abiding always in the Unborn Buddha 
Mind, and you'll attain buddhahood right in this life! 

“There was another blind woman, in Aboshi, who asked me the 
same sort of thing. When | told her what I’ve said to you now, she 
grasped it thoroughly, and from then on she completely changed and 
upheld the Unborn, telling me time and again: ‘Thanks to your 
instruction, I’ve now gained some understanding of the fact that | am 
unborn. How grateful | feel! Had | been able to see, thoughts of 
clinging and craving would have been roused by whatever | saw; | 
would have formed deep attachments, and how could this faith have 
appeared? Strangely enough, precisely because | was blind, | 
couldn't see the good and bad things of the world, so that such 
thoughts of attachment didn’t arise, and when | heard your sermon, | 
was able to place myself in the Unborn. It’s due entirely to my 
blindness!’ 

“Thus she became a person of faith. So grasp this clearly, and 
your religious practice will end up going even more smoothly than 
that of someone who could see!” 

When the Master had finished instructing her, this blind woman too 
exclaimed, “How wonderful! How marvelous!” 

It is said that, convinced of the truth of the Master’s words, she 
thoroughly acknowledged the Unborn Buddha Mind, assured beyond 
a doubt that even one who Is handicapped can realize buddhahood. 

Bodhidharma. Painted by Bankei. Property of the Ryomoniji. 
(Courtesy Shunjusha) 

sess KAR 
2 Re eS, + 
"ete 

Uh APPT Tey Beh joy “G35 
Bee erie cane aks, 

ae ey tet) a ee 
stn mye x 
Eas BETA ein the te 

“The Unborn” (fusho). Calligraphy by Bankei. Property of the 
Futetsufi, Aboshi. (Courtesy Daizo shuppan) 

Bankei’s meditation rock at Nonaka in Ako, the site of his 

enlightenment in 1647, described in the Sermons. (Courtesy 
Daizo shuppan) 

«& Sy 
@ o? a 
rf 
Aes F * 43 
“f 2 Se 
. * ‘- 
y ~~ 
4 Sr ae 

Portrait of Tao-che. Property of the Tafukuji, Usuki (dita 
Prefecture). (Courtesy Daizo shuppan) 

Medicines and medicine box used by Bankei’s father and 
elder brother. Property of the Gitoku-in, Aboshi. (Courtesy Daizo 
shuppan) 

Daghe iis 
re 

eee Serer yeas 

¥ suey 
_, eae Lo ae 

we he 

r 
* 

=P bt pam 
4) 
Pwr so LRA 

Re APH ery 
eh e BAR Rw SE 

fi» 
¥ 

SRP ME MAA wT 

’ 
a ee ee a a 

h¥ be 

Portrait of Bankei, by the painter Yamamoto Soken (n.d.). 
The portrait was commissioned by Bankei’s disciple Tairyo 

Sokyo (1638-1688). The san, or appreciatory verse, dated 
1677, is by Bankei’s colleague, the Rinzai Zen Master Kengan 
Zenetsu (1618-1696). (Courtesy Shunjusha) 

View of the Ryomonji, showing the principal temple 
buildings. The Fudo Hall stands directly to the right of the gate. 
To the left, are the bell (gong) tower, the main hall and, at the far 
left corner, the zendo, or meditation hall. (Courtesy Daizo 
shuppan) 

Entry to the RyOmonji. (Courtesy Shunjusha) 

Statue of Umpo, carved by Bankei. Dated 1669. Property of 
the Zuidji, Akao. (Courtesy Daizo shuppan) 

Statuette of Sakyamuni, carved by Bankei. Property of the 
Ryomonji. (Courtesy Shunjusha) 

Returning from the bath: street scene from Bankei’s period. 
A seventeenth century wood-block print reproduced in the 
Kottoshu (Compendium of Curios), an illustrated miscellany of 
popular manners and customs in the Tokugawa_ period, 

composed by the ukiyo-e artist and pulp writer Santo Kyoden 
(1716-1816). 

Calligraphy by Bankei. J/eft: “Transcend the buddhas, 
transcend the patriarchs.” center. “Ka!” (a shout, the cry of 
enlightenment). right: “The pine is straight, the brambles bent.” 
Property of the RyOmonji. (Courtesy Shunjdsha) 

Main gate of the Hoshinji, Marugame. (Courtesy Shunjusha) 

PART Il 

Now I’m going to talk to the women 

“| see we have a great many women here too at the meeting 
today. Women tend to anger easily and stir up delusions, even over 
quite trivial things. I’m going to talk to the women now, but I’m sure 
that what | say will be familiar to everyone. Well, then, I'll begin, so 
pay close attention. 

“For the most part, women usually busy themselves with sewing. If 
any of you ladies are busy sewing a kimono, or whatever, and 
someone happens along—an old woman, the nursemaid or whoever 
it might be—you'll probably start to talk. But when this happens, your 
sewing doesn’t get in the way and prevent you from hearing what’s 
said. And the conversation doesn’t get in the way and prevent you 
from sewing. Without dropping your work, you can easily hear what’s 
said and even respond appropriately—you can sew and listen too 
without neglecting anything. Isn’t that because the marvelously 
illuminating Buddha Mind is unborn, so that you can both sew and 
listen at the same time? On the other hand, suppose you happen to 
be sewing, or weaving, and the thread keeps breaking, the needle 
snaps, or you stitch things wrong. Whichever it is, at that moment 
you start to seethe with impatience and fly into a rage. Terribly 
foolish, isn’t it? How are you going to sew or weave properly when 
you're getting yourself angry? When you’re in the habit of losing your 
temper like that, the only result is that your needle snaps all the 
more, your thread breaks all the more! 

“If, when you got angry while you worked, things got done, while 
when you failed to get angry, your work fell behind, then you’d be 
well-advised to go ahead and get yourself angry everytime you had 
to do anything at all. But that’s simply not the way things are! In fact, 
just the reverse, when you get yourself angry while doing your work, 
the job doesn’t get done. On the other hand, when you don’t get 
mad, but keep a cheerful attitude and an even disposition, your work 
is certain to move along. However much you insist that your work 
gets done when you're angry, all you’re doing is changing the One 
Buddha Mind for a fighting demon while you work. So, it seems to 
me that getting angry and changing your precious Unborn Buddha 
Mind for a fighting demon is totally useless. By getting yourselves 
into a temper over worthless things, you become deluded, switching 
your Buddha Mind for a fighting demon, a foolish beast, a covetous 
hungry ghost, transmigrating through every sort of [base realm]. So | 
want you women to pay close attention! 

“There are some of you who employ others, keeping a great many 
errand boys and maids. Suppose one of these servants should be 
careless and accidentally break some valuable household object—a 
tea bowl or some such thing. Even though it’s hardly worth making 
such a fuss over, the blood rushes to your face and, flying into a 
rage, you attack them with unreasonable severity. No matter how 
valuable a tea bow! it is, it’s not as if they'd smashed it deliberately! 
When something is broken accidentally, there’s nothing more you 
can do about it. But in the meanness of your selfish desire, you 
rashly switch the precious Buddha Mind that you were born with for a 
fighting demon. Isn't this even more thoughtless than smashing a tea 
bowl? If you buy a tea bowl, you can always replace it. What’s more, 
between the tea you drink from a Korean tea bowl and the tea you 
drink from a tea bowl made in Imari, there’s no particular difference 
so far as flavor goes: either way, you’ve got everything you need for 
drinking tea. But once you've stirred up your anger, there’s no going 
back on it! 

“If you’ve clearly grasped what's involved in this business about 
the tea bowl, it goes without saying that with every other matter, too, 
i's just the same. So it’s obvious without my going into each 
particular case. In everything else, too, just keep from moiling things 

over and over in your mind, getting angry and turning into a fighting 
demon or a foolish beast, or turning into a hungry ghost because of 
your selfish desires, and that’s nothing but abiding naturally in the 
Unborn Buddha Mind. Realize the preciousness of the Buddha Mind, 
and even if you don’t want to, you'll find yourself having to abide in 
the Unborn! 

“What I’m telling you about not switching your Buddha Mind for the 
Three Poisons? is extremely important, so learn it well, and do your 
utmost not to switch your Unborn Buddha Mind for anything else.” 

The old nurse from Sanuki 

“Let me tell you about something in this connection. When | was 
giving a sermon at Marugame in Sanuki, everyone in town showed 
up in a huge crowd to listen. The lady of a samurai retainer came 
with a maidservant and her old nurse, and, after hearing my 
instruction, returned home. Later, this lady and her nurse came 
again, and this time the lady told me: 

“Before meeting your Reverence, my nurse was continually short- 
tempered and willful, ready to fly into a rage at the slightest thing. 
But ever since she heard your instruction that day, in spite of all the 
time that’s passed, she hasn't lost her temper once. What's more, 
she says only sensible things and doesn’t let her mind dwell at all on 
useless matters. The result is that | myself have now come to feel 
ashamed before this old nurse. She just seems to have completely 
grasped your Reverence’s teaching, and as | believe this to be 
particularly thanks to you, both she and | are truly grateful.’ 

“Even afterwards, when | happened to hear about her, everyone 
told me that she’d never again strayed into delusion. The Buddha 
Mind I’m speaking about is unborn and marvelously illuminating, so 
the person for whom everything is perfectly managed with the 
Unborn and for whom everything functions through the Unborn will 
open the eye that sees into men and conclusively realize that 
everyone is a living tathagata here today. Then, like the old nurse 
from Sanuki, he'll keep from being deluded any more and realize the 
preciousness of the Buddha Mind. It’s because all of you fail to 

realize the preciousness of the Buddha Mind that you stir up 
delusions about everything, even the most trivial matters, and remain 
unenlightened beings. Just keep from creating delusions, and you'll 
abide in the function of the marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind.” 

Nothing to do with rules 

“That’s why, in my place, I’m always telling everyone, ‘Abide in the 
Unborn Buddha Mind and nothing else!’ Other than that, I’m not 
setting up any special rules? and making them practice. All the 
same, since everyone got together and decided to practice for [a 
period of] twelve sticks of incense4 every day, | told them, ‘Go ahead, 
do whatever you like’; so I’m letting them practice every day for [a 
period of] twelve sticks of incense. But the Unborn Buddha Mind isn’t 
a matter of sticks of incense! When you abide in the Buddha Mind 
and don’t become deluded, then, without looking for enlightenment 
outside, you'll just sit in the Buddha Mind, just stand in the Buddha 
Mind, just sleep in the Buddha Mind, just get up in the Buddha Mind 
—just abiding in the Buddha Mind, so that in all your ordinary 
activities you function as a living buddha. There’s really nothing to it. 

“As for zazen, since za [’sitting’] is the Buddha Mind’s sitting at 
ease, while zen [’meditation’] is another name for Buddha Mind, the 
Buddha Mind’s sitting at ease is what’s meant by zazen. So when 
you're abiding in the Unborn, al/ the time is zazen; zazen isn't just 
the time when you’re practicing formal meditation. Even when you're 
sitting in meditation, if there’s something you've got to do, it’s quite 
all right to get up and leave. So, in my group, everyone is free to do 
as he likes. Just always abide at ease in the Buddha Mind. You can't 
simply remain sitting from morning till night, so do walking 
meditation® for one period; and you can’t just keep on your feet, 
either, so sit down and meditate for one period. You can’t very well 
do nothing but sleep, so you get up; and you can’t just keep on 
talking, so | let you practice meditation. But this has nothing to do 
with rules!” 

Devices 

“Generally speaking, Zen teachers nowadays instruct people by 
setting up rules or using devices. Believing that without devices they 
can't manage, behaving as if without them it’s impossible to instruct 
anyone, they’re unable to teach by simply pointing things out directly. 
To teach people [this way], unable to manage without devices, is 
‘devices Zen.’ 

“Others tell students pursuing this teaching that it’s no good unless 
they rouse a great ball of doubt® and succeed in breaking through it. 
‘No matter what,’ they tell them, ‘you've got to rouse a ball of doubt!’ 
They don’t teach, ‘Abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind!’ [but instead] 
cause people without any ball of doubt to saddle themselves with 
one, making them exchange the Buddha Mind for a ball of doubt. A 
mistaken business, isn’t it!” 

Plain speaking 

“In China too you have this sort of thing. As you can see in the 
records that have been brought to Japan, the true teaching of the 
Unborn long ago ceased to exist there, so that nowadays, even in 
China, men of the Unborn are not to be found, and that’s why no 
records that speak of the Unborn Buddha Mind have come to Japan. 

“When | was young and trying to uncover the Buddha Mind, | even 
made a serious effort at taking part in mondo“ [using Chinese 
expressions]. But later on, having come to a real understanding of 
things, | gave it up. Japanese are better off asking about things in a 
manner that’s suitable fo Japanese, using their ordinary language. 
Japanese are poor at Chinese, so in dialogues using Chinese 
[terms], they can’t question [teachers] about things as thoroughly as 
they might wish. When you put your questions in ordinary Japanese, 
there’s no matter you can’t ask about. So, instead of taking a 
roundabout way and knocking yourselves out trying to pose your 
questions in difficult Chinese words,® you’re better off freely putting 

them in easy Japanese, without exhausting yourselves. If there’s 
some situation in which the Dharma won't be completely realized 
unless you ask your questions using Chinese words, then it’s all right 
to use them. But since, after all, you can manage freely by asking 
your questions in ordinary Japanese, to ask them using difficult 
Chinese words is a clumsy way to go about things. So, all of you, 
grasp this, and whatever matter you take up, just deal with it 
smoothly by asking your questions without constraint, availing 
yourselves of the freedom of ordinary language. So long as you can 
deal with things smoothly, there’s nothing so handy as your own 
familiar, ordinary speech. 

“The reason Japanese monks are teaching laymen inept at 
Chinese using Chinese words that are hard for them to understand is 
that they themselves haven't settled the matter of the Unborn 
Buddha Mind, and evade people’s questions by using Chinese 
words that are hard for ordinary folk to grasp. On top of which, these 
[difficult expressions] are nothing but the dregs and slobber of the 
Chinese patriarchs! 

“When | was young, | determined that somehow I'd realize the 
marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind, and, even then, as | traveled 
about here and there, knocking at the doors of various teachers, | 
questioned them all in ordinary language and was able to manage 
perfectly, making myself easily understood after all. That’s how 
things were for me. So even though at the beginning | tried out this 
sort of thing, afterwards | gave it up as useless. I’m not particularly 
learned or erudite, so it’s a lucky thing | didn’t continue engaging in 
mondo using Chinese!” 

llIness and the Buddha Mind 

“With my only thought to find the Buddha Mind, | struggled 
fruitlessly, floundering desperately and dashing all over. But what 
happened was that | got myself ill and was laid up in bed for a long 
time, so that I’ve come to know a lot about sickness too. Being born 
into this world and having a body, we must expect to meet with 
illness. But when you conclusively realize the Unborn Buddha Mind, 

you don't distress yourself over the sufferings of illness: you clearly 
distinguish illness as illness, suffering as suffering. This is because 
the Buddha Mind, being originally unborn, has nothing to do with joy 
or suffering, the reason being that that which is unborn transcends 
thought. It’s when thoughts arise that you experience suffering and 
joy. The Buddha Mind doesn't attach to illness, it remains in the 
Unborn just as it is, so it doesn’t create suffering. If thoughts did 
arise from the place of the Unborn, there would be no way you could 
help creating suffering, attaching to your illness and changing the 
Buddha Mind. [But that’s hardly the case.] Even the successive 
sufferings of beings in hell, so far as the suffering itself is concerned, 
aren't any different. 

“Caught up in the suffering of attaching to your illness, you start 
thinking one thing and another: ‘I ought to be well by now. Maybe the 
medicine’s not right; perhaps the doctor’s no good... .’ and so on. 
Clinging to the [hope of] recovery, you switch the Buddha Mind for 
anguished thoughts so that the illness besetting your mind becomes 
worse than the original sickness. It’s as if you’re chasing after 
something that’s running away. Even as you gradually do recover 
your [physical] health, the mental sickness of chasing after [it] is 
gaining the upper hand. That’s what’s meant by attaching to things 
and making yourself suffer. 

“All the same, if there’s anyone who tells you he can undergo not 
only illness but every kind of suffering without feeling any pain, that 
fellow is a liar who still hasn’t realized the marvelously illuminating 
dynamic function of the Buddha Mind. If there’s anyone who tells you 
he feels absolutely no pain at all, | doubt he knows the difference 
between feeling pain and not feeling it. There’s simply no such thing 
as not feeling pain. Since the Buddha Mind is endowed with a 
marvelously illuminating dynamic function, not only illness but 
everything there is can be clearly recognized and distinguished. 
That's why, when you’re faced with the sufferings of illness, if you 
simply don’t get involved with them or attach to them, there’s nothing 
you won't be able to endure. So just go with the illness, and, if you’re 
in pain, go ahead and groan! But, whether you’re sick or you're not, 
always abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind. 

“However, you ought to realize that when, in response to the 
sufferings of illness, you become involved with thoughts, in addition 
to your illness, you suffer from changing the Buddha Mind for 
thoughts. That which is originally without thought is the Unborn 
Buddha Mind. Failing to realize the unborn [nature] of the Buddha 
Mind, you suffer and exchange it for thoughts. Then, no matter how 
much you claim you're not feeling pain, it’s just talking about your 
idea of being without pain, it's merely a notion based on thought. So 
you aren't free from suffering after all. The fact that such thoughts 
even arise shows that, having failed to realize conclusively the 
Buddha Mind that transcends birth and death, you’re suffering from 
birth and death.” 

Being free in birth and death 

“When it comes to the idea of being free in birth and death, people 
are apt to misunderstand. There are some who, beforehand, 
announce they’re going to die in a certain number of days, while 
others go so far as to express their intention to die, say, next year, in 
such-and-such a month and on such-and-such a day. When the time 
arrives, some of them, even though they’re not ill, die just as they 
said, while others put it off for another day, or a month, and then 
pass away. There are lots of people who consider this being free in 
birth and death. Not that | say this isn’t so. So far as freedom goes, 
they’re terribly free! But things of this sort are only a result of the 
strength of people’s ascetic practices, and often they haven't opened 
the Eye of the Way.2 Even among ordinary people, you frequently 
find this. While they may know [the time of their] death, they haven't 
yet opened the Eye of the Way, and that’s why | don’t accept this 
kind of thing. The man of the Unborn transcends birth and death. 

“Now, I’m sure you're all wondering just what it means to 
transcend birth and death. That which is unborn is imperishable; and 
since what doesn’t perish doesn’t die, it transcends birth and death. 
So, what / call a man who's free in birth and death is one who dies 
unconcerned with birth and death. What’s more, the matter of birth 
and death is something that’s with us all day long—it doesn’t mean 

only once in a lifetime when we confront the moment of death itself. 
A man who's free in birth and death is one who always remains 
unconcerned with birth and death, knowing that so long as we're 
allowed to live, we live; and when the time comes to die—even if 
death comes right now—we just die, [realizing] that when we die isn't 
of great importance. Such a person is also one who has conclusively 
realized the marvelously illuminating Unborn Buddha Mind. Talking 
and thinking about something like what hour of what day you're 
going to die is really narrow-minded, don’t you think? 

“Then there’s the idea that ‘birth and death are nirvana.’22 This 
again is something bound up with birth and death. [Everyone knows] 
the realm of birth and death is no different from the realm of nirvana, 
doesn't he? The reason [some people have to go and spell it out like 
this] is that they don’t realize the Buddha mind everyone has from 
his parents innately is here, today, perfectly managing all things with 
the Unborn. Wrapped up in words and letters, they search about, 
looking for some birth and death and nirvana outside, exchanging 
their Unborn Buddha Mind for notions of birth and death and nirvana, 
so that all day long they’re functioning in the realm of birth and death 
and haven’t even a moment’s peace. Pathetic, when you think of it! 

“Since the Buddha Mind is perfectly managing all things with the 
Unborn, it doesn’t Know anything about ‘birth and death’ or ‘nirvana.’ 
From the place of the Unborn, birth and death and nirvana too are 
just a lot of empty speculation. That’s why even for someone who up 
till just the other day had been involved in [the realm of] arising and 
ceasing, if from today on he fully realizes his mistake, and doesn't 
exchange the Unborn Buddha Mind for the Three Poisons or involve 
himself with birth and death or nirvana, he'll abide in the Unborn 
Buddha Mind. Then, when the time comes for the elements that 
compose his physical body to disperse, he'll just let them go, and die 
without any attachment. This is a man for whom birth and death are 
nirvana, a man who is free in birth and death.” 

The original face 

“What's called one’s ‘original face’! is also none other than the 

Unborn Buddha Mind. What you have from your parents innately is 
the Unborn Buddha Mind alone—there’s nothing else you've got 
innately. This is an expression left behind by a master of old in his 
attempt to make people realize the fact that the Unborn Buddha 
Mind is none other than one’s original face. Even what we call ‘father 
and mother’ are names of traces that have already arisen. The man 
who has conclusively realized the Buddha Mind abides at the source 
of father and mother, and that’s why we speak of [that which exists] 
‘before father and mother were born.’ This ‘before they were born’ is 
none other than the Unborn; so the Buddha Mind is the same as 
your original face... .” 

Entrances 

“Now about the Three Refuges:/2 for buddha, we take refuge in a 
particular buddha of our choosing; for Dharma, we take refuge in a 
particular Dharma; for sangha, we take refuge in a particular sangha. 
All | tell people about is the Buddha Mind, and that’s why I’m not 
necessarily limited to any particular school. Differences exist in the 
way schools formulate their particular doctrines and teach them to 
people; but the only reason teachings are established is to make 
people realize for themselves what it is they all intrinsically possess, 
the Buddha Mind they have from their parents innately. So when it 
comes to the establishment of various schools, as they’re all 
entrances to the Path of Buddha Mind, we call them ‘entrances to 
the teaching.’ 

“There are many of you monks gathered here from every quarter 
for this training period, so you probably belong to many different 
schools. But I’m sure that as you listen to the sermons I’m giving, 
there will be those who affirm what | say. There are bound to be 
others who won't affirm it, too, and for those of you in the assembly 
who don’t, so long as you keep from backsliding in your faith, 
somewhere or other the day will certainly come when you'll 

understand. When that happens, I’m sure you'll remember about me, 
so you'd better grasp what I’m saying.” 

To practice is hard 

“Even among those in the assembly now who acknowledge what | 
say, there are some who merely teach the Unborn with their mouths 
and don’t continually abide in the Unborn, people who only know 
about the Unborn, people of merely intellectual understanding. From 
the standpoint of the Unborn, intellectual understanding too is empty 
speculation, sO you can’t say such a person has conclusively 
realized the Unborn. When you come right down to it, this kind of 
approach is worthless. Even if you teach others about the Unborn, 
they won't realize it. And the reason they won't is that, to start with, 
you yourself haven't left everything to the Buddha Mind’s unborn and 
marvelously illuminating [activity]; you don’t Jive by the teaching or 
function with the Unborn at all times and in all things—you fail to 
practice it yourself and only teach what you know intellectually, so 
there’s no way others are going to acknowledge it. If you don’t truly 
acknowledge my sermon, truly practice it, truly manifest it, but just 
teach others what you've grasped intellectually, they can’t possibly 
realize it themselves. In the end, this only leads to blaspheming the 
Dharma. So, although people who've experienced some ‘realization’ 
will turn up from time to time, there hasn't yet been one who acts 
according to his realization in all his affairs right here and now. To 
understand is easy; to practice is hard.” 

The crow and the cormorant 

“That’s why, when it comes to my disciples in permanent residence 
at the temple, if they haven’t opened the Eye of the Way, if they lack 
the eye that sees into men, | forbid them to teach. If they are 
teaching like this, they’re only mimicking my words. As the saying 
goes, when a crow tries to imitate a cormorant, his black coloring 

may be the same, but once he’s in the water, he’s unable to function 
freely the way the cormorant does. In exactly the same way, just as 
the crow’s black coloring is like the cormorant’s, students who imitate 
the way | speak may be able to mouth things about the Unborn 
Buddha Mind. But since those whose eye hasn't opened to the 
marvelously illuminating [activity] of this Buddha Mind lack the eye 
that sees into men, when they have to respond to people’s 
questions, somehow they find themselves tongue-tied and can't 
function freely. It's the same as the crow when he gets in the water 
and can’t function freely the way the cormorant does. That’s why | 
strictly forbid my disciples to teach. It’s because, without knowing the 
Unborn, people just stay on the plane of understanding, of what’s 
seen or heard, felt or thought,12 and exchange the Buddha Mind for 
notions. This is what’s meant by delusion.” 

Let it be 

“The reason people misunderstand the difference between 
thoughts and delusions is that everyone imagines thoughts all exist 
at the bottom and arise from there; but originally there’s no actual 
substance at the ‘bottom’ from which thoughts arise. Instead, you 
retain the things you see and hear, and from time to time, in 
response to circumstances, the impressions created by these 
experiences are reflected back to you in precise detail. So when 
they’re reflected, just let them be, and refrain from attaching to them. 
Even if evil thoughts come up, just let them come up, don’t involve 
yourself with them, and they can’t help but stop. Isn’t this just the 
same as if they didn’t arise? That way, there won't be any evil 
thoughts for you to drive out forcefully, or any remorse about having 
had them. 

“Because the Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating, mental 
impressions from the past are reflected, and you make the mistake 
of labeling as ‘delusions’ things that aren’t delusions at all. Delusions 
means the anguish of thought feeding on thought. What foolishness 
it is to create the anguish of delusion by changing the precious 
Buddha Mind, pondering over this and that, mulling over things of no 

worth! If there were anyone who actually succeeded at something by 
pondering it all the way through, it might be all right to do things that 
way; but /’ve never heard of anyone who, in the end, was able to 
accomplish anything like this! So, pondering over things is useless, 
isn’t it? It’s utterly useless! The main thing is always to be careful not 
to stir up thoughts and change the Unborn Buddha Mind for a 
fighting demon, a hell-dweller, a hungry ghost, a beast, and the like. 
If you do, you won’t have another chance to be born a human, not in 
ten thousand or even one hundred thousand kalpas!” 

The lawsuit 

“Luckily, | happen to recall something in this connection, so let me 
tell you all about it. I’ve got a temple, the Fumonji,*4 at Hirado in 
Hizen province. Last year, when | was giving sermons at this temple, 
the people from three or four r#2 around came to listen, and we had 
as big a crowd as the one that comes to the Nyohdji/® in Ozu in lyo. 
[At this time,] there were two merchants from Hirado, an uncle and 
nephew, who were embroiled in a lawsuit. The uncle had filed a 
formal petition of complaint with the magistrate and was pressing it 
determinedly, but, whatever the nature of the suit, it proved a difficult 
one, and even the magistrate was hard put to resolve it and had 
become fed up with the whole affair. For three years the case 
dragged on, bitterly deadlocked. Meanwhile, having failed to reach 
any settlement, the uncle and nephew stopped exchanging visits and 
broke off all relations. 

“Then, one day, the uncle came to hear my sermon, and gradually 
became convinced by what he heard. 

“Truly,’ he considered, ‘up till now I’d never dreamed | was 
exchanging the Buddha Mind | have from my parents innately for a 
fighting demon, a hell-dweller, a beast or a hungry ghost! I’m sure 
there’s no greater unfiliality toward one’s parents! What’s more, a 
nephew is an intimate member of the family, just like one’s own son 
—it’s not as if he were a stranger. Yet, the truth is that, because of 
the baseness of my own desires, I’ve been indulging in self- 

centeredness, which isn't at a// innate, attached to worldly concerns. 
How could | ever let things come to this—uncle and nephew turned 
into mortal enemies, about to condemn themselves to transmigrate 
forever, dying and being reborn amid the Three Evil Realms!’ 
Reflecting like this, without even returning home, he went straight 
from where | was giving the sermon to see the magistrate and told 
him: ‘| have put your Honor to much trouble in this lawsuit with my 
nephew and am sincerely grateful for all you’ve done. However, 
today for the first time | heard the Venerable Bankei’s sermon, and 
I've realized my mistake. Misled by my own petty desires, with no 
shame about what people might say, | brought charges against my 
own nephew before your Honor, pressing them relentlessly, filled 
only with hatred and lacking any sympathy at all. Now that I’ve 
realized my error, | feel completely ashamed. Hearing the Venerable 
Bankei’s instruction, | was truly saved, so from here on I’m 
abandoning my lawsuit. | therefore humbly request your Honor to 
return to me the petition | gave you.’ 

“The magistrate readily agreed, and, filled with admiration, 
declared: ‘Truly, his Reverence’s superior virtue is not limited only to 
Buddhism but is able to manage worldly affairs and government as 
well! On your part, too, how extraordinary that you acknowledged his 
teaching, forgiving your nephew and abandoning the lawsuit.’ With 
these words of praise, he handed back the petition. 

“The uncle, having received the petition from the magistrate, first 
returned to his home, and then, placing the petition inside his robe, 
[went off to see] the nephew whom he hadn't visited for three years. 

“Since the uncle had come entirely on his own, putting aside his 
stubborn willfulness, he took the nephew completely by surprise. 

“Strange,’ he thought to himself, dumbfounded: ‘This uncle files a 
lawsuit against me for three years, severs all contact between us, 
doesn't pay a single visit, and now he comes to see me this way! 
Why? It certainly is hard to figure. What’s going on? It just doesn't 
feel right.’ 

“Still, there was his uncle, and, even while they might not have 
been on speaking terms, now that he had arrived and announced 
himself, there was no way the nephew could escape, so he told him: 

‘Welcome. Please come in.’ And while the nephew was thinking: ‘I 
wonder what he’s got to say?’ his uncle declared: 

“| realize my coming here must seem strange, but | had to tell you 
this: You and | are uncle and nephew, but, old as | am, I’ve acted like 
a child, setting myself against you who are young, wrongfully starting 
a lawsuit and breaking off all relations between us for three years. 
But today, after hearing the Venerable Bankei’s wonderful teaching, 
I’m completely ashamed of myself. I’ve behaved disgracefully in front 
of everyone, and now, filled with remorse, I’ve come here to offer my 
apologies, so please forgive me for the wrong I’ve done. And to 
prove to you that I’m not going to prosecute this lawsuit any further, 
today, as soon as | left the place where the Venerable Bankei was 
delivering his talk, | went straight to the magistrate, took back the 
petition I'd given him, and brought it here to show to you and set 
your mind at ease. Here, see for yourself!’ the uncle said, drawing 
the lawsuit from his robe. 

“Thinking, ‘Well, I'd never expected him to behave like such a 
model uncle!’ the nephew said: ‘What could be more wonderful! / 
was at fault for failing to accord you the respect due as my senior. 
I’ve truly violated Heaven’s will and feel completely ashamed. | have 
no parents now, so, whatever it was, it was my duty to ask your 
advice and accept your orders and instructions. Instead, my behavior 
has been unmentionable. Whatever you told me, it was my duty to 
obey you, without any protest, but | opposed you and drove you to 
file a lawsuit with the magistrate. To have acted like this was 
unmindful of the Way of Heaven, heedless of the gods and buddhas. 
There is nowhere | can hide my shame before my own dead father. 
Please forgive me! | quarreled and broke off relations with you, my 
respected uncle, and then, “once the ship was under way, there was 
no turning back,” no choice except to stop seeing one another till 
now. If the truth be told, it was for me to come to you and present my 
apologies. The fact that, in the end, it was you, my uncle, who came 
here and spoke to me like this shows the most shameless behavior 
on my part. How grateful | feel!’ So saying, he poured forth tears and 
declared: ‘In all our quarrels before, the fault was entirely my own, 
uncle, so | beg you to forgive me!’ 

“When the nephew had spoken, the uncle said: ‘No, no! Not at all! 
The fault is mine, and it’s / who ask for forgiveness. When one is 
young, as you were, it’s common, whoever it is, to act rashly, not 
knowing what’s good or bad, right or wrong in the world, not caring 
what others may think. But even though you weren't grown, | turned 
against you, believing you were a detestable character—and you 
too, in your turn, must have become convinced that / was behaving 
heartlessly, so that both of us nearly condemned ourselves to 
transmigrate forever, with no hope of escape, sunk in an eternity of 
accumulated sin! How ashamed | feel now when | think of it!’ 

“They didn’t stop at merely ending the lawsuit, but with each of 
them insisting like this on taking all the blame, they patched up their 
three years’ breach. The uncle lingered leisurely at the nephew’s 
house and was lavishly feasted before returning home; and later, the 
nephew put on his formal attire and returned the courtesy by going to 
visit his uncle. The result was that, after this, they became even 
closer to one another than they had been before the lawsuit. This 
sort of thing can really happen! 

“All who witnessed the sincere relationship between the uncle and 
nephew were amazed and deeply moved. Those in the neighboring 
towns who were conducting lawsuits of their own, on hearing about 
this, yielded to reason, gave way in their selfish insistence and went 
each and every one to withdraw the lawsuits they'd presented. Some 
seventeen petitions had been submitted to the magistrates, but, 
nevertheless, | understand that all seventeen were withdrawn. In 
fact, as someone from Hirado told me, this uncle had always been a 
thoroughly hard-nosed character—not at all the sort you'd expect to 
go to the nephew! But those who are hard-nosed will also give way 
easily. 

“Considering the whole matter of this lawsuit between the uncle 
and nephew, don’t you think it’s pathetic the way they became 
deluded as a result of their shameless selfishness toward one 
another and the strength of their self-centeredness, not even 
realizing that others were regarding them with scorn and speaking 
badly of them, making them the object of all kinds of talk? Of course, 
when it’s someone else’s suits and litigations, you can talk glibly 
about the rights and wrongs; but when you’re the one concerned, it’s 

not so easy! Because of selfish desire, to rationalize your own 
position just to get what you want, acting willfully and wrongfully, 
changing the precious Buddha Mind for desire and falling into the 
realm of hungry ghosts, obscuring the marvelously illuminating 
Buddha Mind and becoming a beast—this is the greatest unfiliality 
you can show your parents. 

“’m telling you people this sort of thing in the hope it will prove 
instructive to all of you too. The uncle’s having instantly given way 
and been saved when he heard a single sermon was also entirely 
due to the dynamic function you intrinsically possess, the precious 
Buddha Mind you have from your parents innately!” 

x * x 

Mu 

A monk who had gone to see the Master in private interview said: 
“| received the koan ‘J6shi’s Mu’ from a certain Zen teacher and 
worked at it for many years, applying myself single-mindedly, 
exerting all my strength, never leaving it from my mind even when 
moving my hands or feet; but, try as | did, | couldn’t solve it. What’s 
more, even though | drove myself so hard that afterward | was ill for 
quite some time, nothing special happened. In fact, on the contrary, | 
became a sick man, and, after a whole year of being exhausted by 
illness, gave up my work on the Mu koan. When | simply kept my 
mind like the empty sky, | felt remarkably easy in both mind and 
body, and gradually recovered my health. Today, then, I’m no longer 
working on the Mu koan, and, while | don’t feel I’ve solved it, since | 
always keep my mind like the empty sky, I’m quite content. Still, I'd 
very much like to receive your instruction.” 

The Master replied: “To put aside the koan Mu and keep your mind 
like the empty sky isn’t bad since it’s [at least] an expression of your 
own spiritual power. But, while it’s all right, it's hardly the ultimate. 
Since your Unborn Buddha Mind hasn't been realized, you can’t 
manage smoothly in your actual daily affairs. In exchanging it for 

something like ‘the empty sky,’ you're obscuring the marvelously 
illuminating Buddha Mind, and the result is, you lack the eye that 
sees into men. Unless you open the eye that sees into men, you're a 
blind man and won't be able to see into others. How about it? I’m 
sure the minds of others must be quite invisible to you.” 

The monk said: “Yes, it’s true.” 

The Master told him: “It’s only natural! So do as | say, thoroughly 
affirm what I’m telling you. When you accept what you’ve heard and 
conclusively realize it, then and there the eye that sees into men will 
appear, and you won't make any mistake about things. That moment 
is the complete realization of the Dharma.” 

The crows go kaa-kaa, the sparrows, chuu-chuu 

The Master addressed the assembly: “Just as always, every single 
day when | come out to talk, today too the crows go kaa-kaa, the 
sparrows, chuu-chuu, and | haven't anything different to say myself. 
All the same, when you really acknowledge this one word 
['unborn’],-8 you'll find everything is smoothly managed. 

“The proof of this is that, while all of you here are turned toward 
me, intent only on hearing my sermon and wondering, ‘What's 
Bankei going to say?’ you aren't trying either to hear or not to hear 
the cawing of the crows and the chirping of the sparrows out in back. 
But, even so, once they start to chirp and caw, you recognize and 
distinguish the crow’s kaa-kaa and the sparrow’s chuu-chuu. And it’s 
not only for crows and sparrows: everything here, when you perceive 
it with the Unborn, will be simultaneously distinguished, and you 
won't overlook even one thing in one hundred or one thousand. In 
the meanwhile, if a gong rings outside the temple, you know it’s a 
gong, if a drum sounds, you know it’s a drum. Your distinguishing 
everything you see and hear like this, without producing a single 
thought, is the marvelously illuminating dynamic function, the 
Buddha Mind that is unborn.” 

Two-thirds is with the Unborn 

“If you divided the day into three parts, you’d find that, of all your 
activities from morning till night, two-thirds would be managed with 
the Unborn. Yet, without realizing this, you imagine you operate 
entirely through cleverness and discrimination—a serious error 
indeed! As for the remaining third, unable to abide in the Unborn, 
you change your Buddha Mind for thoughts, attaching to things that 
come your way, so that even right in this life you’re creating fighting 
demons, creating beasts, creating hungry ghosts, and when your life 
comes to a close, you fall right into the Three Evil Realms. To believe 
the Three Evil Realms exist after you die is a great mistake, a bit of 
far-fetched speculation!” 

Looking for enlightenment 

“To exert yourselves in religious practice, trying to produce 
enlightenment by doing religious practices and zazen, is all wrong 
too. There’s no difference between the mind of all the buddhas and 
the Buddha Mind of each one of you. But by wanting to realize 
enlightenment, you create a duality between the one who realizes 
enlightenment and what it is that’s being realized. When you cherish 
even the smallest desire to realize enlightenment, right away you 
leave behind the realm of the Unborn and go against the Buddha 
Mind. This Buddha Mind you have from your parents innately is one 
alone—not two, not three!” 

cd w x 

No delusion, no enlightenment 

“You people all imagine you’d become buddhas now for the first 
time. But the Buddha Mind you have from your parents innately is 
unborn, so it has no beginning and no end. There’s not even a hair’s 
breadth of anything you can call delusion. So get it squarely in your 

minds that there’s nothing arising from inside. The main thing is 
simply not getting involved with the world of externals.42 That which 
isn’t involved with the world of externals is the Buddha Mind, and 
since the Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating, when you abide 
in this marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind just as it is, there’s no 
delusion, no enlightenment. Whether you're making a fist or running 
about, it’s all the unborn functioning of the Buddha Mind. What's 
more, if you're the least bit in a rush to become a superior person 
right away, you'll immediately go counter to the Unborn and leave it 
far behind. In the innate Buddha Mind, there’s neither joy, sorrow nor 
anger—nothing but the Buddha Mind itself, marvelously illuminating 
and distinguishing [all things]. 

“So, when you distinguish the things that confront you in the world 
of externals—joy, sorrow, anger, or anything under the sun—it’s the 
dynamic function of the marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind, the 
Buddha Mind you originally possess.” 

x x x 

Water and ice 

“Since the Buddha Mind each of you has innately isn’t ‘created,’ it 
doesn't contain even a speck of delusion. So anyone who says, ‘I’m 
deluded because I’m an unenlightened being’ is a terribly unfilial 
person slandering his own parents! In the Buddha Mind you have 
from your parents innately, the buddhas of the past and the people of 
the present are all one substance, with no difference between them. 
It’s just like the water of the ocean: In the depths of winter, the water 
freezes and turns to ice, assuming various forms—angular, or round; 
but when it melts, it’s all the one water of the ocean. When you 
realize the unborn nature of the Buddha Mind, that’s the water itself, 
just as it is, and you can freely dip your hands right in!”22 

Stopping thoughts 

“Since the Unborn Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating, it 
hasn’t so much as a hair’s breadth of any selfish bias, so it adapts 
itself freely, and, as it encounters different sorts of circumstances, 
thoughts sporadically pop up. It’s all right so long as you simply don't 
get involved with them; but if you do get involved with thoughts and 
go on developing them, you won't be able to stop, and then you'll 
obscure the marvelously illuminating [function] of the Buddha Mind 
and create delusions. On the other hand, since from the start the 
Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating, readily illumining and 
distinguishing all things, when you hate and loathe those deluded 
thoughts that come up and try to stop them, you get caught up in 
stopping them and create a duality between the one who is doing the 
stopping and that which is being stopped. If you try to stop thought 
with thought, there will never be an end to it. It’s just like trying to 
wash away blood with blood. Even if you succeed in getting out the 
original blood, you'll be left with the stain of the blood that came 
after.” 

The mirror 

“Since this Buddha Mind is unborn and marvelously illuminating, 
it's a thousand, ten thousand times brighter than a mirror, and there’s 
nothing it doesn’t recognize and distinguish. With a mirror, no sooner 
do the forms of things pass before it, than their reflected images 
appear. Because, from the start, the mirror is without conscious 
intention, it hasn’t any thought of rejecting or not rejecting the forms 
of things that come before it, no thought to remove or not to remove 
those images it reflects. This is the function of the shining mirror. We 
can’t help comparing the marvelously illuminating function of the 
Buddha Mind to a mirror, so I’m simply making the comparison. But 
the mirror doesn’t even come close—the Buddha Mind is a thousand 
times, fen thousand times more wonderful! 

“With the dynamic function of the marvelously illuminating Buddha 
Mind, every object that comes before your eyes is _ individually 
recognized and distinguished without your doing a thing. So, even 
though you’re not trying to do so, you recognize thousands of 
different impressions by sight or by sound. All these are things with 
form, but even those without form—the things in people’s hearts that 
can't be seen—are precisely reflected. Even with the different sorts 
of faces you encounter, their good or evil thoughts are reflected by 
the marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind. 

“Take the people assembled here, intent on listening to my talk: If 
someone happens to cough, you’re not making a deliberate effort to 
listen; but as soon as there’s coughing—even though you're not 
trying either to hear it or not to hear it—you can distinguish it well 
enough to say whether that cough just now came from a man or a 
woman, an old person or a young one. Or take the case of someone 
whom you last saw twenty years before: You haven’t seen him since, 
and then, by chance, you meet on the street and, prompted by this 
encounter, the events of twenty years before at once spring clearly to 
mind. How different this is from the function of the mirror!” 

Fire is hot 

“This sort of thing, your recognizing and distinguishing instantly 
and spontaneously whatever you see and hear, is the dynamic 
function of the Buddha Mind you have from your parents innately, the 
Buddha Mind, unborn and marvelously illuminating. 

“As another example of the unborn function of the Buddha Mind: 
When you're just there with no particular thought at all and someone 
puts a flame to your fingertips, you give a start, and, without thinking, 
automatically pull back your hand. This too is proof that the 
marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind is unborn and perfectly 
manages [everything]. On the other hand, to think, ‘That was a flame 
just now,’ and then realize, ‘It’s hot!’ and get angry with the fellow 
who burned you is to fall into the realm of secondary experience, 
deliberating after the fact.” 

Be stupid! 

“| tell my students and those of you coming regularly here to the 
temple: ‘Be stupid!’ Because you've got the dynamic function of the 
marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind, even if you get rid of 
discriminative understanding, you won't be foolish. So, all of you, 
from here on, be stupid! Even if you’re stupid, when you're hungry, 
you'll ask for something to eat, when you're thirsty, you'll ask for 
some tea; when it gets warm, you'll put on thin, light clothes, and 
when it’s cold, you'll put on more clothes. As far as your activities of 
today are concerned, you’re not lacking a thing!2* 

“With people who are clever, there are sure to be a great many 
shortcomings. To have transcended those clever people whom all 
the world holds in great esteem is what's meant by ‘stupidity.’ 
There’s really nothing wrong with being a blockhead! 

“When people say that someone is a clever fellow, | ask to meet 
him, and when | do and we have a chance to talk, it looks to me as if 
people in the world are praising an awful lot of foolishness. The fact 
is that those clever people acclaimed by the world are, from the start, 
deluded by their own cleverness. They distort the Buddha Mind and 
obscure its marvelously illuminating [dynamic function], considering 
other people as of no account, contradicting whatever they say, 
slighting and insulting them. Of course, since those they’re insulting 
are also amply endowed with the marvelously illuminating Buddha 
Mind, they aren't going to let themselves be slighted like that, so they 
get angry and answer right back, heedlessly pouring forth abuse. 
The true man’s ideal is to show kindness to those who are foolish 
and help those who are evil. To be recognized as a good man by the 
people of the world is precisely what makes being born a human 
being worthwhile. How can it be any good to earn yourself the 
reputation of a wicked person? 

“SO when you go back to your homes and meet your old 
acquaintances, you should have them wondering about you all: ‘How 

did Bankei teach them Buddhism, anyway? Why, they've come back 
even more stupid than before they left!’ 

“What I’m talking about isn’t the stupidity of stupidity and 
understanding. That which transcends stupidity and understanding is 
what / mean by stupidity!” 

Smoking 

“| know it’s something I’m telling you day after day, but don't get 
into bad habits! Bad habits occur when you attach to things that 
others do. These things become ingrained so that you can't get them 
out of your mind, and end up by forming bad habits. 

“Take smoking: Is there anyone who’s a smoker right from birth? 
No, indeed! Seeing others smoke, you imitate them, and then your 
smoking becomes ingrained and turns into a bad habit. Even when 
you're in the presence of important persons, or in places where 
smoking isn't allowed, you still have the urge to smoke, and all 
because you've got into the bad habit of being accustomed to smoke 
all the time. What's more, when you're thirsty and you smoke 
tobacco, it doesn’t quench your thirst; and when you’re starving, I’ve 
never heard that you could satisfy your hunger by smoking, either! 
Yet, despite the fact that it’s a completely worthless activity, once you 
happen to pick up smoking and make it a habit, it becomes 
something you just can’t stop. Through this one example, you can 
clearly understand every situation. So, even in small things, avoid 
creating bad habits and making yourself deluded.” 

x x x 

No such thing as enlightenment 

A monk who had come from Sendai in Oshi22 said: “Somewhere | 
seem to recall there being the expression, ‘The mind enslaved to 

physical form.’22 I’m anxious to accord with original mind at all times, 
but how should | practice in order to do this? Please instruct me.” 

The Master replied: “In my school, there’s no special form of 
instruction; and as for religious practice, there’s no particular way for 
doing that either. People fail to realize that right within themselves 
they’re fully endowed with the Buddha Mind they have from their 
parents innately, so they lose their freedom and talk about wanting to 
‘accord with original mind.’ When you've realized that the Buddha 
Mind you have from your parents is unborn and marvelously 
illuminating, your hands and feet will function freely, and that’s the 
working of the marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind which is 
unborn. 

“As proof that your Buddha Mind is unborn and freely functioning: 
When you came from Sendai having heard about Bankei, you 
traveled a long way; but as you stopped for the night here and there 
along the road, you weren't thinking continuously about me. In the 
daytime, you looked around at all the sights, and if you had traveling 
companions, you talked to them. But even though you didn’t walk 
along thinking about our meeting and deliberately keeping it in mind 
at every step of the way, in the end you arrived here at my place. 
This is what’s meant by the Buddha Mind being unborn and perfectly 
managing things. 

“Now, the herons you see in Sendai are white, without having to 
be dyed that way; and the crows, without being dyed, are black. And 
right here too, even though when you see them you're not 
deliberately trying to distinguish between the two, as soon as they 
appear before you, you know the white one’s a heron and the black 
one’s a crow. Without rousing a single thought, it’s all smoothly 
managed, isn't it?....” 

Then, the monk asked: “I find it impossible to control all my 
passions and delusions. What should | do? It’s simply proved too 
much for me, and | wish to receive your instruction.” 

The Master replied: “Your idea of wanting to control your passions 
and delusions is itself delusion, changing the Buddha Mind for 
delusion! Delusions don’t have any actual substance when they 
arise. In fact, they’re nothing but shadow figures, things you’ve seen 
and heard that pop up sporadically in response to circumstances.” 

Again, the monk questioned the Master: “What is enlightenment?” 

The Master replied: “There’s no such thing as enlightenment. It’s a 
completely extraneous pursuit. To realize conclusively that the 
Buddha Mind you have from your parents innately is unborn and 
marvelously illuminating—that’s enlightenment. Not realizing this 
makes you deluded. Since the Original Buddha Mind is unborn, it 
functions without thoughts of delusion or thoughts of wanting to be 
enlightened. As soon as you think of wanting to be enlightened, you 
leave the place of the Unborn and go counter to it. Because the 
Buddha Mind is unborn, it has no thoughts at all. Thoughts are the 
source of delusion. When thoughts are gone, delusion vanishes too. 
And once you've stopped being deluded, talking about wanting to 
attain ‘enlightenment’ certainly is useless, don’t you agree?” 

Abide in the Buddha Mind 

A monk asked: “My regular practice is to read the sutras and 
perform zazen. | feel these activities are meritorious and do them all 
the time. Should | now give them up as useless?” 

The Master replied: “Practicing zazen and reading the sutras is 
fine. Zazen is something that all monks who seek to draw the water 
of Shaka’s stream must practice and not despise. Daruma’s wall- 
gazing,24 Tokusan’s ridding himself of his sutras,2° Gutei’s raising his 
finger,2® Rinzai’s ‘katsu!2—even though these vary according to the 
different circumstances at the time and the particular manner of the 
teacher involved, they all just have to do with experiencing for 
yourself the One Unborn Buddha Mind. You don’t mistake the sound 
of a gong for that of a drum, the sound of a crow for that of a 
sparrow, the sound of a sparrow for that of a crow—all the sounds 
you hear are individually recognized and distinguished without your 
missing a single one. It’s the marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind 
that’s listening, the Buddha Mind which is unborn. The words of 
Rinzai’s Record28 and these things I’m telling you are exactly the 
same, there’s no difference between them. From here, the only 
question is whether or not you have faith. If you can’t abide in the 

Unborn Buddha Mind just as it is, and stir up different thoughts, 
regretting the past, worrying about the future, then, in just a day’s 
time, without even knowing it, turning and transforming, you'll have 
changed the Buddha Mind for passing thoughts, and you'll never 
have a moment's peace! 

“Now, you may be doing zazen and reading the sutras, but abide 
in the Buddha Mind that you have from your parents innately, just as 
it is, and realize the Unborn. If you practice zazen or read the sutras 
with some deliberate aim in mind, hoping to accumulate merit, or 
whatever, you'll only be changing the Buddha Mind for merit, or 
changing it for zazen and sutras! That’s how it is, so all you’ve got to 
do is acknowledge with profound faith and realization that, without 
your producing a single thought or resorting to any cleverness or 
shrewdness, everything is individually recognized and distinguished 
of itself. And all because the marvelously illuminating Buddha Mind 
is unborn and smoothly manages each and every thing.” 

When thoughts arise 

A novice of fourteen or fifteen asked: “When | practice zazen, 
thoughts seem to come up. What should | do about this?” 

The Master replied: “To distinguish and recognize each one of the 
different thoughts that arise—that’s none other than the dynamic 
function of the Buddha Mind. Because the Buddha Mind is unborn 
and marvelously illuminating as well, whatever things are retained in 
your mind rise to the surface. In the Buddha Mind, there arent any 
thoughts or ‘things’; so when you don't get yourself involved with 
them, don’t worry about trying to get rid of them or stop them, you'll 
just naturally accord with the Unborn Buddha Mind.” 

xm x x 

Letting things take care of themselves 

The Master instructed a monk who had come from Tamba:22 “To 
take the attitude that, having come all this way, you want to be sure 
and realize buddhahood now as quickly as you can is to be deluded 
by your consuming desire for buddhahood. This may seem like 
something perfectly fine and admirable, but it is, in fact, deluded. 
When it comes to me, | never even quote the words of the buddhas 
and patriarchs in the sutras and records. And if you want to know 
why, it’s because | can manage perfectly dealing with people’s own 
selves, so that’s all | talk to them about. 

“Your wanting to realize buddhahood as quickly as you can is 
useless to begin with. Since the Buddha Mind you have from your 
parents is unborn and marvelously illuminating, before even a single 
thought is produced, all things are recognized and distinguished 
without resorting to any cleverness. Without attaching to [notions of] 
‘enlightened’ or ‘deluded,’ just remain in the state where all things 
are recognized and distinguished. Let things take care of 
themselves, and whatever comes along will be smoothly managed— 
whether you like it or not! That’s the [working of the] Buddha Mind 
and its marvelously illuminating dynamic function. Like a mirror that’s 
been perfectly polished, without producing a single thought, with no 
awareness on your part, without even realizing it, each and every 
thing is smoothly dealt with as it comes from outside. Not 
understanding this, you people take all the credit and act as if you 
managed everything yourselves by means of cleverness! That’s why 
you can't help remaining deluded. If you clearly grasp that thought is 
something you produce yourself when you get involved with things 
that come along, and keep from switching [the Buddha Mind] for 
some ‘thing,’ why, that’s the basis of religious practice; and it’s also 
what's meant when we say that the Buddha Mind is unborn, our own 
intrinsic and marvelously illuminating dynamic function.” 

HOGO (Instruction) 

Duality 

A layman asked: “I’m grateful for your teaching of the Unborn, but | 
find that thoughts easily come up as a result of my ingrained bad 
habits, and when I’m distracted by them, | can’t wholeheartedly 
realize the Unborn. How can | put my faith totally [in the Unborn 
Buddha Mind]?” 

The Master said: “When you try to stop your rising thoughts, you 
create a duality between the mind that does the stopping and the 
mind that’s being stopped, so you'll never have peace of mind. Just 
have faith that thoughts don’t originally exist, but only arise and 
cease temporarily in response to what you see and hear, without any 
actual substance of their own.” 

(zenshu, p. 124.) 

The dog and the chicken 

A layman asked: “I have heard that thoughts of foolishness and 
ignorance lead to becoming a beast, so that one goes from darkness 
into darkness, unable to realize buddhahood. However, when a 
beast has no awareness it’s pathetic, it fails to realize that being the 
way it is is agony, so can’t it, after all, be perfectly content?” 

The Master replied: “Isn’t it lamentable to transform the Buddha 
Mind and Buddha Body everyone has innately into the agony of a 
hell-dweller, not even realizing how pathetic this is! For example, 
when you drive off and abuse the dog who stole your chicken the 
day before, the dog doesn't realize it’s because he stole the chicken, 
so when he meets with this abuse, he barks and howls in anguish. 
Being an animal, he can’t understand the law of cause and effect 
and has to go on suffering endlessly. Because human beings are 

endowed with bright wisdom, when they have the chance to meet a 
wise teacher they can readily attain buddhahood. A wonderful thing, 
isn’t it, having the good fortune to be born in a human body in which 
you may easily realize buddhahood? Just such a great matter stands 
right before your eyes. Don’t fritter away your time!” 

(zenshU, p. 125.) 

cd x x 

Farming with the Buddha Mind 

A farmer asked: “I’m short-tempered by nature and easily get 
angry. Because I’m a farmer, I’m wholly taken up with my chores and 
it's hard for me to realize the Unborn. How can | be in accord with 
the Unborn Mind?” 

The Master said: “Everyone has the Unborn Buddha Mind innately, 
so there’s no way you're going to be in accord with it now for the first 
time! To perform your work as a farmer single-mindedly is practicing 
the Unborn Mind. When you’re at work with your hoe, you may be 
speaking with someone at the same time, but even if you're 
absorbed in the conversation, it doesn’t interfere with your hoeing; 
and if you’re absorbed in hoeing, it doesn’t interfere with your 
carrying on a conversation. Even when you're angry, you can still go 
on hoeing, but since anger is the evil cause of becoming a hell- 
dweller, [your work] turns into a difficult and painful practice. When 
you do your hoeing without delusions like anger, [your work] will 
become an easy and joyful practice. This is the practice of the 
Buddha Mind, the practice of the Unborn and Imperishable.” 

(zenshu, pp. 125-126.) 

The travelers 

A monk asked: “I have heard that the masters of old reached great 
enlightenment through difficult and painful practice, and that it was 

through various sorts of difficult practice that the masters of our own 
day too attained complete realization of the Dharma. | can’t quite 
accept the idea that someone like myself can realize the Unborn 
Buddha Mind just as | am without engaging in religious practice or 
attaining enlightenment.” 

The Master said: “Suppose there’s a group of travelers passing 
through tall mountain peaks. Arriving at a spot where there’s no 
water, they become thirsty, and one of them goes off to search for 
water in a distant valley. After strenuously searching all over, he finds 
some at last and returns to give it to his companions to drink. 
Without making any strenuous efforts themselves, the people who 
drink the water can satisfy their thirst just the same as the one who 
did make such efforts, can’t they? [On the other hand,] those who 
harbor doubts and refuse to drink the water will have no way to 
satisfy their thirst. Because | didn’t meet with any clear-eyed men, | 
went astray and engaged in strenuous efforts till finally | uncovered 
the buddha within my own mind. So when | tell all of you that, without 
painful practice, you [can uncover] the buddha in your own minds, 
it’s just like [the travelers] drinking the water and slaking their thirst 
without having gone in search of the water themselves. In this way, 
when you make use of the Buddha Mind that everyone has, just as it 
is, and attain peace of mind without delusory difficult practice, that’s 
the precious true teaching, isn’t it?” 

(zenshU, p. 126.) 

Parents 

A nun from Izumo asked: “Both my parents are still living. How 
should | observe my filial duty toward them?” 

The Master replied: “There’s no particular manner in which one 
must express filiality. Simply abiding in the Buddha Mind you have 
from your parents innately, just as it is—this is the true practice of 
filiality. Failing to do this is what it means to be unfilial.” 

(zenshu, pp. 126-127.) 

Becoming an expert at delusion 

The Master addressed the assembly: “Originally, at birth, you were 
all without any sort of delusion. But, because of your bad upbringing, 
you turned the innate Buddha Mind into a first-rate unenlightened 
being, imitating and taking on all the delusions you saw around you 
and forming bad habits, so that you ended up becoming regular 
experts at delusion! It's because the Buddha Mind is marvelously 
[functioning] that you pick up all sorts of deluded [behavior] that then 
become second nature to you. Nevertheless, when, hearing about 
this sort of precious thing, you rouse your faith and resolve to keep 
from being deluded, right then and there you'll abide in the original 
Unborn, just as it is. So, its because the Buddha Mind is 
marvelously illuminating that you’re deluded; and it’s also because 
the Buddha Mind is marvelously illuminating that you're enlightened. 
Since you don't realize the preciousness of the Buddha Mind, you 
think the delusions that are harming you are treasures of great value. 
And you value these so highly, that you become deluded and throw 
your life away! Isn’t that thoughtless? Isn’t it foolish?” 

(zenshd, p. 127.) 

The living Buddha Mind 

The Master addressed the assembly: “For one who at all times 
conclusively realizes the Buddha Mind, when he goes to bed, he 
goes to bed with the Buddha Mind; when he gets up, he gets up with 
the Buddha Mind; when he stays, he stays with the Buddha Mind; 
when he goes, he goes with the Buddha Mind; when he sits, he sits 
with the Buddha Mind; when he stands, he stands with the Buddha 
Mind; when he sleeps, he sleeps with the Buddha Mind; when he 
wakes up, he wakes up with the Buddha Mind; when he speaks, he 
speaks with the Buddha Mind; when he’s silent, he’s silent with the 

Buddha Mind; when he eats rice, he eats with the Buddha Mind; 
when he drinks tea, he drinks with the Buddha Mind; when he puts 
on his clothes, he puts them on with the Buddha Mind. At all times 
he abides continually in the Buddha Mind, and there’s not a single 
moment when he isn’t in the Buddha Mind. He functions with perfect 
freedom in accordance with circumstances, letting things take their 
way. Just do good things and don’t do bad ones. If you pride yourself 
on [your] good deeds, however, becoming attached to them and 
abominating the bad, that’s going against the Buddha Mind. The 
Buddha Mind is neither good nor bad, but operates beyond them 
both. Isn’t that the living Buddha Mind? When you’ve conclusively 
realized this and haven't any doubts, then and there you'll open the 
eye that pene trates men’s minds. That's why my school is called the 
Clear-Eyed School.” 
(zenshd, p. 127.) 

The “teetotaler” 

A layman asked: “I don’t doubt that, originally, deluded thoughts 
don’t exist; but since the flow of my thoughts never stops for even a 
moment, it’s impossible for me to realize the Unborn.” 

The Master said: “When you came into this world, there was only 
the Unborn Buddha Mind. As you grew, however, you picked up the 
ignorant attitudes you saw around you, so that, as time passed, you 
got used to being deluded, and the deluded mind gained a free 
hand. Originally, in your innate self, thoughts don’t exist, so in the 
mind that affirms and has faith in its own unborn buddhahood, 
thoughts simply vanish. It’s like a man who’s fond of wine but gets 
sick from it and has to stop drinking. If he finds himself in a situation 
where wine is served, thoughts of wanting to drink may arise, but 
since he doesn’t drink, he neither gets sick nor drunk. He’s a 
‘teetotaler’ even while thoughts of drinking arise, and ends up a 
healthy man. Delusory thoughts are like this too. When you simply 
let them arise or cease, without either taking them up or rejecting 
them, then, before you know it, they’ll vanish in the Mind of the 
Unborn.” 

(zenshug, pp. 127-128.) 

Suppression is delusion too 

A monk asked: “I find it impossible to suppress all my defilements 
and delusions. What can | do to suppress them?” 

The Master replied: “Trying to suppress delusion is delusion too. 
Delusions have no original existence; they're only things you create 
yourself by indulging in discrimination.” 

(zenshU, p. 128.) 

Right now 

A visiting monk asked: “In your sermon the other evening, you 
stated that everyone innately possesses the Buddha Mind. While I’m 
grateful for your instruction, it seems to me that if everyone were 
endowed with the Buddha Mind, deluded thoughts couldn't arise.” 

The Master replied: “Right now as you're saying this, what 
delusions are there?” 

The monk prostrated himself three times and withdrew. 

(zenshU, p. 128.) 

Sleeping and waking 

A layman asked: “I admit that we see arid hear with the Unborn. 
But when we fall asleep, we’re unaware even of another person right 
beside us, so at that time we seem to lose the vital function of the 
Unborn.” 

The Master said: “What kind of loss is there? There’s no loss at all. 
You've simply fallen asleep.” 

(zenshU, p. 128.) 

Sendai 

A monk from Sendai? came and asked: “How can | realize original 
mind?” 

The Master answered: “Apart from the one who's asking me at this 
moment, there is no original mind. This original mind transcends 
thought, clearly distinguishing all things. And isn’t the proof of this 
that when | ask you about anything to do with Sendai, you’re able to 
answer without the slightest reflection?” 

(zenshU, p. 129.) 

The place of the Unborn 

A visiting monk asked: “If one truly realizes the Unborn, after the 
four elements of the physical body? have dispersed, will he be born 
again or not?” 

The Master replied: “In the place of the Unborn, the whole 
question of being born or not being born is irrelevant.” 

(zenshu, p. 129.) 

Letting go 

A layman said: “Some years ago, | asked you what | should do to 
stop wayward thoughts from arising, and you instructed me: ‘Let 
them just arise or cease as they will.’ But, since then, although I’ve 
taken your advice to heart, I’ve found it hard to let my thoughts just 
arise or cease like this.” 

The Master told him: “The reason you’re having difficulty is that 
you think there’s some special way to let your thoughts just arise or 
cease as they will.” 

(zenshU, p. 129.) 

Just as you are 

The Master addressed the assembly: “All of you should realize the 
vital, functioning, living Buddha Mind! For several hundred years 
now, [people in] both China and Japan have misunderstood the Zen 
teaching, trying to attain enlightenment by doing zazen or trying to 
find ‘the one who sees and hears,’ all of which is a great mistake. 
Zazen is just another name for original mind, and means to sit in 
tranquility with a tranquil mind. When you do sitting meditation, 
you're simply sitting, just as you are; when you do walking 
meditation, you're walking, just as you are. Even if your mouth were 
big enough to swallow heaven and earth, Buddhism couldn't be 
expressed in words. Those who do speak about Buddhism, for the 
most part, are only blinding people’s eyes. 

“In the mind you have from your parents innately, there isn’t even 
a trace of delusion. So when you fail to realize this and insist, ‘I’m 
deluded because I’m an unenlightened being,’ you're unjustly 
accusing your own parents as well! The buddhas of the past and the 
people of today are one. There’s no difference between them. Let 
me give you an example: When water from the ocean is ladled into 
different sorts of tubs and the weather turns cold, the water freezes, 
and, according to whether the tub is large or small, round or square, 
the ice will assume different shapes; yet when the ice melts, all the 
water is the same as the [water of the] ocean. Not knowing the living 
and functioning buddha, you think you'll become a buddha by 
accumulating the fruits of religious practice and_ realizing 
‘enlightenment,’ lost in error, going from darkness into darkness. 
Pathetic, isn’t it? | don’t teach about Buddhism, but when | talk to you 
just deal with all your wrong ideas.” 

(zenshu, p. 130.) 

Not even a trace 

A visiting monk asked: “I’m performing religious practice with the 
aim of realizing enlightenment. What do you think about this?” 

The Master said: “Enlightenment only exists in contrast to 
delusion. And since everyone possesses the substance of 
buddhahood, not even a trace of delusion exists. So what is it you 
need to realize?” 

The monk said: “That seems foolish to me. It was by realizing 
enlightenment that all the ancient sages, beginning with Daruma 
himself, experienced complete attainment of the Dharma.” 

The Master told him: “It’s by being ‘foolish’ that the tathagata 
saves sentient beings. To neither come nor go, but to remain just as 
you innately are, without allowing the mind to become obscured— 
this is what’s meant by tathagata. And such was the way with all the 
patriarchs of the past.” 

(zenshu, p. 130.) 

Kantaro’s question 

At one time the Master was staying at the Kannon temple at 
Kiyodani in lyo’s Kita district.4 The headman of the nearby village of 
Utsu,2 one Kantard, came regularly to study with him. Although 
Kantaro occasionally tried to stump the Master with difficult 
questions, the Master’s sharp and piercing response remained far 
beyond his reach. 

One day, Kantaro set out to visit Kiyodani in the company of 
Yoshino Yojizaemon.® On their way, he said to Yoshino: “Whenever | 
go to see him, the Master says: ‘Kantaro, have you come?’ I’m sure 
today will be the same as always. So, if the Master says, ‘Kantaro, 
have you come?’ I'll say, ‘Who could that fellow be?’ ” 

The two arrived at Kiyodani. The Master came and greeted 
Yoshino, but said nothing to Kantaro. After some time, Kantaro said: 

“Well, is your Reverence feeling all right?” 
The Master replied: “Who could that fellow be?” 
Kantaro, wholly at a loss, expressed his apologies. 
(zenshd, p. 131.) 

Josen 

The monk Jésené said: “I’m greatly troubled by [the problem of] 
death, and that’s why | come regularly to see your Reverence. | think 
that, for a human being, there is no matter of greater importance.” 

The Master said: “This spirit is the basis for the study of Buddhism. 
If you hold to it and don’t lose your determination, you'll be directly in 
accord with the Way.” 

[JOosen] asked: “What does it mean to realize buddhahood?” 

The Master replied: “Fully affirm what I’ve told you, have faith in it 
and harbor no doubts, and then you'll be realizing buddhahood.” 

Some time later, [JOsen] remarked: “Lately, | felt that my mind was 
vast and boundless as the sky, without being fixed anywhere. ‘This 
must be it!’ | thought, but, on reflection, | realized that | had better not 
tarry there.” 

The Master said: “That is your discrimination. Realize what is 
before discrimination.” 

On yet another occasion, Josen said: “I feel fortunate that my 
determination has been particularly strong of late.” 

The Master replied: “Such things too are bound to happen.” 

Once the Zen teacher Tairy6® said [to Jdsen]: “You seem to be 
earnest, but you’re always [repeating] the same thing.”2 

Josen said: “Not at all. It's simply something | never tire of 
hearing.” 

Just then, the Master came out and took his seat. “Whenever you 
have the chance to hear this,” he said, “it’s worth hearing, no matter 
how many times; so don't think it’s [just a repetition of] the same 

thing. When you feel something is valuable, then every time you 
hear it it’s valuable.” 

(zenshu, pp. 131-132.) 

The gambler 

In Aboshi there was a man named Hachirdbei. He said [to the 
Master]: “As a member of the True Pure Land Sect, | rely 
wholeheartedly on the Tathagata Amida, and knowing his saving 
grace to be certain, | recite the nembutsu of gratitude.” 

The Master replied: “If, praying for Amida’s saving grace, you 
constantly go around gambling and doing all sorts of evil things, 
that’s like cheating Amida.” 

At the time, this Hachirobei was a notorious gambler. Those 
present were all impressed. 

(zenshd, p. 132.) 

Miracles 

On another occasion, Hachirobei came and said: “The teachers of 
old performed all sorts of miracles. Can your Reverence perform 
miracles too?” 

The Master replied: “What sort of things were these ‘miracles?” 

Hachirobei said: “In Echigo, the founder of the True Pure Land 
Sect!2 had someone hold up a piece of paper on one side of the 
river, and when he took up his brush on the opposite bank, he 
perfectly inscribed the six characters namu amida butsu, so that to 
this day everyone speaks reverently of the ‘nembutsu that crossed 
the river.’ ” 

The Master laughed and said: “If that’s the sort of thing you mean, 
people who practice magic and the like can do even better! Really, to 
bring up the doings of such people in a place for the true teaching of 
Buddhism is [like] trying to compare dogs and cats to men.” 

(zenshU, p. 132.) 

A visiting monk 

Several visiting monks came, and at their interview with the Master 
each presented his understanding. Among them was one fellow who 
remained silent. The Master said: “Well, how about you?” 

The monk said: “As for me, when cold, | put on more clothes; 
when hungry, | take something to eat; when thirsty, | drink some hot 
water; other than that—nothing.” 

The Master said: “Well, in that case, can you tell the degree of 
understanding of the people who are here now?” 

The monk replied: “Certainly | can.” 

The Master said: “How does it look to you, then, the understanding 
of the people around you here?” 

The monk said: “You show me my understanding.” 

The Master replied: “Everything we’ve been discussing [shows] 
your understanding.” 

The monk prostrated himself three times and went off. 

(zenshd, p. 132.) 

Being/non-being 

A visiting monk came forward and declared: “It’s not in being, it’s 
not in non-being, it’s not in absolute emptiness.” 
The Master said: “Right at this moment, where is it?” 
Completely flustered, the monk withdrew. 
(zenshU, p. 133.) 

Why are we born? 

A layman asked: “If we’re endowed with the Buddha Mind, why is 
it we don’t remain buddhas, but are born and experience all sorts of 
suffering?” 

The Master said: “That you came to be born is your parents’ 
mistake.” 

(zenshU, p. 133.) 

The one who sees and hears 

A layman asked: “For years now I’ve entrusted myself to the 
teaching of the old masters, [trying to answer the question] Who is 
the one who sees and hears?’4 What sort of practice can | do to find 
‘the one who sees and hears’? I’ve searched and searched, but 
today | still haven’t found him.” 

The Master said: “Since my school is the School of Buddha Mind, 
there’s no duality between ‘the one who sees and hears’ and the one 
who searches [for him]. If you search outside, you'll never find him, 
even if you travel the whole world through. The One Mind, unborn— 
this is ‘the one’ that, in everybody, sees images in the eyes, hears 
sounds in the ears and, generally, when it encounters the objects of 
the six senses, reveals whatever is seen or heard, felt or thought, 
with nothing left concealed.” 

(zenshU, p. 133.) 

The woman afraid of thunder 

A woman asked: “I’m uncommonly frightened of thunder, and the 
moment | hear it, | feel awful and suffer miserably.12 Please teach 
me how | can stop being afraid like this.” 

The Master said: “When you were born, there was no sense of 
being afraid of things, there was only the Unborn Buddha Mind. 
Deluded notions of being afraid of things are phantoms of thought 
created after you were born. Thunder causes rain to fall on the world 
for the benefit of mankind; it’s not something that’s hostile to people. 

Your regarding that thunder as something to be afraid of is the doing 
of those phantoms of thought, it’s not due to anything outside. When 
you hear the thunder, you should have absolute faith in your own 
mind’s buddhahood.” 

(zenshd, p. 133.) 

Bereavement 

A woman questioned the Master: “I am miserable over the death 
of my child. If | even see a child the same age, it reminds me of him, 
and then all sorts of things fill my mind and my deluded thoughts go 
on and on. Please teach me.” 

The Master said: “When you recall things like this, it’s something 
you are doing. In the original mind, there’s not even a trace of 
different delusions. Have faith in what I’m saying, and you'll become 
a person who’s originally free.” 

(zenshu, pp. 133-134.) 

Blinding your eyes 

A visiting monk asked: “Is there any merit in practicing zazen?” 

The Master said: “Zazen isn’t to be despised, nor are reciting 
sutras, performing prostrations and so on. Tokusan used the stick, 
Rinzai uttered the katsu!, Gutei raised his finger and Daruma faced 
the wall—but, while different, all these were just the masters’ 
expedients, methods to confront particular situations and deal with 
the individual needs [of the students involved]. Right from the start, 
there have never been fixed rules. If you take these [temporary 
expedients] as invariable teachings, you'll be blinding your own eyes. 
Simply have firm faith in what | say, remaining as you innately are 
without making idle distinctions, just like when things are reflected in 
a mirror, and then there’s nothing in the world you won't penetrate 
through and through. Do not doubt!” 

(zenshu, p. 134.) 

Everything is smoothly managed 

A Zen monk from Tamba asked: “It’s my sincere desire on this 
occasion to realize buddhahood and become a perfect person in all 
respects. Please let me have your instruction.” 

The Master said: “You've come a long distance, but while these 
aspirations of yours are commendable, they’re all delusion. In 
original mind, there are no delusions, no aspirations. In the intrinsic, 
marvelously illuminating dynamic function, there aren't any 
aspirations at all, and yet everything is smoothly managed. Even 
wanting to attain buddhahood right away is something artificial. 
When you realize that you’re producing all aspirations yourself and, 
without getting involved with particular things, remain just as you 
innately are, your own intrinsic nature will be revealed.” 

(zenshu, p. 134.) 

Where do you go? 

A layman asked: “If you become a buddha, where do you go?” 
The Master replied: “If you become a buddha, there’s no place at 
all to go. You fill the vast universe“ to its very limits. It’s when you 
become any other sort of being that there are different places to go.” 
(zenshu, p. 134.) 

The golden ball 

Once the Master said: “Unlike the other masters everywhere, in 
my teaching | don’t set up any particular object, such as realizing 
enlightenment or studying koans. Nor do | rely on the words of the 
buddhas and patriarchs. | just point things out directly, so there’s 
nothing to hold onto, and that’s why no one will readily accept [what | 
teach]. To begin with, those who are wise and learned are obstructed 
by their own cleverness and calculation, so for them it’s impossible 

to accept. On the other hand, there are lots of ignorant women who 
can neither read nor write, who haven't any special ability and can't 
be pushed on to become Zen masters, but possess a truly heartfelt 
realization and don’t engage in intellectualizing.” 

He added: “Even if there’s no one who accepts it completely, my 
teaching is like a golden ball that's been smashed to pieces and 
scattered about, so that anyone who gets one piece has one piece of 
illumination, anyone who gets two pieces, two pieces of illumination, 
and so on, bit by bit, with no one who won't benefit according to his 
own portion [of attainment]. 

(zenshu, pp. 134-135.) 

Thinking 

A layman asked: “I’ve heard that your Reverence is able to see 
into people’s minds. Right at this moment, what am | thinking?” 
The Master said: “You're thinking precisely that.” 
(zenshu, p. 135.) 

Women 

A woman asked: “I’ve heard that because women bear a heavy 
karmic burden it’s impossible for them to realize buddhahood. Is this 
true?” 

The Master said: “From what time did you become a ‘woman?’ ” 

A woman said: “Because women bear a heavy karmic burden, 
they are forbidden from entering esteemed temples like Mount 
Koya!4 and Mount Hiei.”12 

The Master told her: “In Kamakura there’s a temple for nuns, 
and there men are forbidden.” 

(zenshu, p. 135.) 

The merchant’s dream 

When the Master was staying at the RyOmonji, a lay acquaintance 
of Zenko" from Omit came to the temple and remained for some 
time. At his first interview with the Master, he accepted the essentials 
of his teaching, and thereafter simply followed along with the others, 
listening to the Master’s sermons. 

Once, when the Master was receiving a group of new arrivals in 
the abbot’s quarters, this layman came forward and said: “My home 
is such-and-such a village in the province of Omi. Originally | was a 
ronin, and, taking what savings | had in gold and silver, | lent out 
money and grain to the people of the area and with the interest on 
these loans made my living. However, a little over ten years ago, | 
left my business to my son, and, building a retreat in my garden, 
devoted myself to performing zazen and reciting sutras. | also went 
to study with various Zen masters, practicing single-mindedly. Zenko 
is well-acquainted with these things. 

“However, last night, in a dream, | found myself back at home, 
reading sutras at the household shrine. Just then, a customer who 
had borrowed some rice came to pay his interest, and together with 
my son set about calculating the amount. In the midst of reading the 
sutras, | realized there was an error in their calculations, and just as | 
was telling them of it, | suddenly awoke from my dream. Thinking 
over this, [I realize] just how deep and difficult to destroy are the 
roots of karmic nature. What sort of practice can | do to destroy my 
basic sinfulness?” 

The layman was moved to tears by the strength of his feelings. 
Everyone present was impressed. 

The Master said: “Was this a good dream or a bad dream?” 

The layman replied: “A bad dream. It was for this that more than 
twenty years ago | abandoned all mercenary affairs to dwell in 
oneness with buddhadharma, in circumstances of purity and 
tranquility, far from the tumult of worldly life. This is the sort of thing | 

[would expect to] see in my dreams; yet I’m afraid the fact that what 
came to me were my old concerns of twenty years ago shows these 
things have permeated my innermost mind,*2 and that distresses 
me.” 

The Master said: “This is what’s known as being had by a dream.” 

The layman rose and prostrated himself. “Today for the first time,” 
he declared, “| have been freed from endless kalpas of birth and 
death!” And, reeling with joy, he went off. 

(zenshu, p. 136.) 

It’s fine just to feel that way 

A layman said: “| sometimes feel startled when I’m surprised by 
some sound, such as a clap of thunder. Is this because I’m not in 
control all the time? How can | guard against this so that, no matter 
what happens, | won’t feel startled?” 

The Master said: “If you feel startled, it’s fine just to feel that way. 
When you try to guard against it, you’re creating duality.” 

(zenshu, p. 136.) 

Using the three inches 

A monk asked: “Tokusan has his stick, Rinzai, his shout22—all the 
old masters employed the stick and the shout, but your Reverence 
doesn’t use them at all. How do you explain this?” 

The Master said: “Tokusan and Rinzai knew how to use the stick 
and the shout; | know how to use the three inches [of my tongue].” 

(zenshu, p. 136.) 

Koans 

A monk asked: “[Former masters] such as Engo and Daie2! used 
koans in teaching their students. How is it your Reverence makes no 
use of them?” 

The Master said: “How about the Zen teachers before Daie and 
Engo, did they use koans?”22 

(zenshu, p. 137.) 

The great doubt 

A monk asked: “The men of old declared that with a great doubt 
one will experience a great enlightenment. How is it your Reverence 
doesn't make use of the great doubt of the masters?” 

The Master replied: “As to what’s meant by ‘great doubt’: long ago 
when Nangaku22 went to see the Sixth Patriarch, he was asked by 
him, ‘What is it that comes thus?’ Nangaku was utterly flustered, but 
puzzling over this for eight years, [finally] answered: ‘As soon as you 
speak about a thing, you miss the mark.’ This is the real great doubt 
and great enlightenment. For example, when a monk loses his only 
kesa4 and, searching and searching, can’t put it out of his mind for 
even a moment—that’s real doubt! People nowadays go stirring up 
doubt just because they say the old masters did, so what they 
produce is an imitation doubt. Because this doubt isn’t genuine, they 
won't have any day of awakening. It’s just as if they were to search 
all over, thinking they'd lost something that had never been lost at 
all.” 

(zenshu, p. 137.) 

Is this buddha? 

[When the Master] was at the Gyokurydji22 in Mino, a layman 
came forward, gave a shout and demanded: “Is this buddha?” 

The Master took his fan and pressing it against the fellow’s head, 
[said]: “Do you know what this is?” 

The layman replied: “This is buddha.” 
Once more taking up his fan, the Master poked it into the layman’s 
cheek, saying: “You only know the name buddha.” 
Utterly taken aback, the fellow withdrew. 
(zenshu, p. 137.) 

Layman Chozen 

Choézen,2© father of the monk Jiton of the Osaka Kanzanji22 and 
[formerly] headman of the village of Taima in Washi,2® lived in 
retirement and was known as a longtime student of Zen. For many 
years he had been a follower of the Obaku Zen Master Ryukei22 and 
was famous as a lay Buddhist. He would also come frequently to 
visit the Master at the Kanzanji, but they knew each other so well 
that [the Master] had never engaged him in dialogue to actually test 
his understanding. Once when the Master was at the Jiz6ji in Kyoto, 
Chozen came to see him, and in the course of his visit, the Master 
said: “Well, Chozen, how is your practice?” 

Chozen replied: “I’ve been completing my practice in a rather 
extraordinary way: | regularly eat fish and meat, | drink wine, | 
gamble at go; | go to sleep, | get up—my world is free and easy and 
without constraint.” 

The Master said: “You probably won't listen, but let me tell you my 
style [of Zen].” And, so saying, he instructed [Chozen]. Chozen 
withdrew in silence and stayed the night, sharing the quarters of the 
monk Soboku,22 who reported that he seemed agitated the whole 
evening and had not slept at all. 

At that time, it was the turn of the Zen Master Boku6d2" to assume 
the abbacy of the headquarters temple,22 and the Master set off 
before daybreak to pay his respects. A servant came back with word 
that the Master would return at sundown. Just as Soboku and 

Chozen came out together to the entryway to meet him, the Master 
passed by, [going] directly into the abbot’s quarters and proceeding 
to the inner room, where he seated himself. Chozen immediately 
went before the Master and prostrated himself three times. 

The Master joined his palms and said: “! accept the bow [that 
acknowledges] the constant observance of religious abstention.°% 
This is the way it must be for one who takes refuge in the 
buddhadharma.” 

Once again Chozen prostrated himself three times. 

The Master said: “I receive the bow [that acknowledges] 
abstention from wine. This too is the way it must be, since it is the 
rule established by the Buddha.” 

Chozen said: “Master Reigan always praised you as a clear-eyed 
teacher, but | couldn't believe it. The men of old were like this, but | 
never dreamed that among the teachers of today there could be 
anyone whose eyes were clear. ‘Disgusting!’ | thought skeptically. 
Now I’ve seen how wrong | was, having met with this undreamed-of 
opportunity.” And, shedding tears, he became the Master’s disciple. 

Some time after this, when the Master was once again stopping at 
the Kanzanji, Jiton and Chozen came to see him, and Jiton humbly 
expressed his gratitude, saying: “Because of your Reverence’s kind 
instruction, Chozen has become a man of perfect freedom in all his 
daily activities.”34 

The Master said: “People all value enlightenment, but Chozen was 
lucky enough to destroy enlightenment and become a man of perfect 
freedom.” 

(zenshu, pp. 139-140.) 

The craftsman’s dilemma 

A layman asked: “I’m a founder by trade. When | make pots and 
kettles, eight out of ten have holes, but | patch them up and sell 
them, saying they’re perfect. This weighs on my mind. Is it a crime?” 

The Master said: “Are you the only one who does this sort of 
thing?” 

“Not at all,” he replied, “everyone else does exactly the same.” 

The Master asked: “Do you sell your wares at night?” 

The founder answered: “I sell in broad daylight.” 

The Master said: “The people who bought your things did so with 
their eyes open. If you were to sell your wares at night, claiming 
damaged pieces to be perfect, that would be criminal, but since it’s 
happening in broad daylight, these people shouldn't buy such things 
if they know they’re damaged. You needn't accuse yourself 
unnecessarily over this business.” 

(zenshu, p. 140.) 

The angry abbot 

One winter, during the training period at the Sanyiji in Bizen,2® 
laymen and monks from both Bizen and Bitchu2® assembled in large 
numbers on the days when the Master would appear to lecture. At 
Niwase“ in Bitchd was a large temple of the Lotus sect,28 whose 
eminent abbot was a scholar of great learning much revered by the 
parishioners. At that time, the Master's teaching was sweeping the 
area, and the abbot’s parishioners all went to hear him. The abbot, 
seething with indignation, told his congregation: “From what | hear, 
this Bankei is an uneducated fellow. If | go and put a difficult question 
to him, | can stymie him with just one word.” 

So saying, he went off one day to see the Master. He stood at the 
back of the assembly and in the middle of the Master’s talk shouted 
in a booming voice: “Everyone here accepts your sermon and 
believes it. [But] someone like myself doesn’t accept the essentials 
of your teaching. If a person doesn't accept them, how are you going 
to save him?” 

The Master raised his fan and said: “Come forward.” 

The abbot stepped before him. 

The Master said: “Now come a little closer.” 

The abbot moved forward again. 

The Master said: “How well you accept what | say!” 

The abbot, completely flustered, left without another word. 

(zenshu, p. 142.) 

cd x x 

When | first began to search 

Once the Master said: “When | first began to search for 
enlightenment, | wasn’t able to find a good teacher and, as a result, 
did all sorts of painful practices, pouring out my heart’s blood. 
Sometimes I’d forsake the company of men and go into seclusion; at 
other times I'd fashion a paper mosquito net and, sitting inside it, 
practice meditation; or else I’d shutter all the windows and meditate 
in my darkened room. Without permitting myself to lie down, I'd sit 
cross-legged until my thighs became inflamed with sores, the marks 
of which remained with me even afterward. At the same time, if | 
happened to hear a good teacher was to be found in some place or 
other, I’d set off at once to meet him. In this way | spent several 
years, and | think | may say there were few places in Japan that | 
didn’t leave my footprints. And all because | wasn’t able to meet an 
accomplished teacher! Once I'd hit on enlightenment, | realized for 
the first time that I'd been struggling uselessly all those years, and 
was able to achieve tranquility. | tell you all that, without any struggle, 
you can attain complete realization now right where you are, but you 
wont believe me because you're not truly serious about the 
Dharma.” 

(zenshu, p. 143.) 

All the difference of heaven and earth 

On another occasion, the Master said: “When it comes to the truth 
| uncovered when | was twenty-six? and living in retreat at the 
village of Nonaka®2 in Ak6 in Harima—the truth for which | went to 
see Dosha and obtained his confirmation—so far as the truth is 
concerned, between that time and this, from beginning to end, there 
hasn’t been a shred of difference. However, so far as penetrating the 
great truth of Buddhism with the perfect clarity of the Dharma Eye* 
and realizing absolute freedom, between the time | met Dosha and 
today, there’s all the difference of heaven and earth! All of you must 
have faith that this sort of thing can happen, and live in expectation 
of the day when you'll completely realize the Dharma Eye.” 

[Someone] asked: “Will the perfect clarity of the Dharma Eye be 
realized completely with time? Does one just attain it all at once?” 

The Master replied: “There’s no question of there being a 
particular [amount of] time. When the Eye of the Way is clear, without 
a single flaw, you'll have realized it completely. And your realizing it 
will be due to your earnest and single-minded cultivation.” 

(zenshu y pp. 143-144.) 

Watch where you’re going 

When |2 first met the Master, | received his teaching, but failing to 
gain a penetrating understanding, | said: “What your Reverence 
teaches is from the realm of the master. But for a fellow like me 
who’s never experienced great enlightenment, I’m afraid that 
reaching the master’s realm is going to be hard.” 

The Master told me: “If you want the Truth, you should do as | say. 
Students of the Way must first of all take care to watch where they're 
going. For example, if someone is going to Edo and learns he should 
travel east, after going one mile, he’s one mile closer, and so on for 
five and then ten miles, until finally he’s sure to arrive there. [But] if 
he mistakenly sets off to the west, even if it’s just a single step [at 
first], the more he exerts himself, the further from Edo he'll be.” 

(zenshu, p. 144.) 

The proof 

Once | asked the Master: “Is it helpful in studying the Way to read 
through the Buddhist sutras and the records of the old masters?” 

The Master said: “It all depends. If you rely on the principles 
contained in the sutras and records, when you read them, you'll be 
blinding your own eyes. On the other hand, when the time comes 
that you can dismiss principles, if you read [such things], you'll find 
the proof of your own realization.” 

(zenshu, p. 144.) 

True acceptance 

Once | asked the Master: “I’ve always been plagued by bad habits. 
Can | stop my bad habits by guarding against them at all times?” 

The Master said: “If you realize that originally there are no bad 
habits, what is there to stop?” 

| replied: “| accept that originally there are no bad habits and 
haven't any doubts on that score. All the same, my bad habits 
manifest themselves from time to time, and when | guard against 
them, this doesn’t happen. So, even if | thoroughly accept the fact 
that originally bad habits don’t exist, when it comes to my daily life 
practice, isn’t it still best to guard against them?” 

The Master said: “This is not true acceptance.” 

Now, ever since | have taken to heart the Master’s kind words, | 
have conclusively realized the actual manifestation of the truth. 

(zenshu, p. 145.) 

My old iliness 

On another occasion, | asked: “Since birth I’ve suffered from 
terrible spasms of pain in my stomach. When they occur, | have to 
stop eating entirely for several days, experience dreadful headaches 
and feel so miserable | can’t even put my hand out to straighten the 
pillow. Ordinarily when I’m feeling fine | forge dauntlessly ahead, 
ready to sacrifice life and limb for the sake of the Dharma, but, at 
times like this, just a touch of my old illness renders me helpless. 
When the pain is at its height, I'm weaker than ever. It’s as if my 
usual vigorous spirit were at the mercy of the wind. When | come up 
against my old illness, | feel completely devastated. I’m terribly 
distressed about this.” 

The Master said: “How is it once your health returns?” 

| replied: “When I’m well again, everything is back to normal.” 

The Master said: “Then that’s fine.” 

Thereafter, at all times, I’ve remained just as | am, beyond 
discrimination, free and easy and without constraint. 

[zensht, pp. 145-146.) 

Seven out of ten 

Once | questioned the Master: “For some time | have followed 
your Reverence, and for several years have been fortunate enough 
to serve at your side as attendant. When it comes to the essentials 
of your teaching, | have no doubts at all. However, what | find 
remarkable in observing your Reverence at close hand is that ‘The 
deeper | penetrate, the more solid you become; the more | look up, 
the higher you soar,’ so that | ceaselessly ‘sigh in admiration.’42 Your 
freedom in responding to the needs of students is so limitless that it 
seems as if one could never match it however many days and 
months passed. How can we [too] achieve perfection?” 

The Master said: “Zen students as a rule may grasp seven or eight 
things in ten, but are unable to get past [the remaining] two or three.” 

| said: “What is the way to get past?” 

The Master replied: “There is no way to get past.” 

| asked: “Seeing as there’s no way to get past and one is unable to 
do so, where can the fault be?” 

The Master remained silent for a time, and then replied: “When 
you come right down to it, it's because the desire [to realize] the 
great truth of Buddhism is weak.” 

(zenshu, p. 146.) 

The monk Zeshin 

The monk Zeshin“4 lived in religious retreat on Mt. Yoshino*® for 
many years, devoting himself solely to med itation [till] one day he 
suddenly awoke and forgot everything he knew. At a neighboring 
temple lived a venerable monk of the Soto school, and [Zeshin] went 
and presented his understanding, seeking the monk’s confirmation of 
his attainment. 

The monk said: “At the present time, the Zen Master Bankei is a 
clear-eyed teacher. Go study with him.” 

[Zeshin] then went immediately to the Kyoto Jizoji in Higashiyama. 
At that time, the Master was practicing in retreat, so that there was 
no one to receive [Zeshin] and present his request. Nevertheless, 
every day he would come and sit in meditation outside the temple 
gate, returning to Kyoto in the evening. When he had continued like 
this for thirteen days, the landlord at the inn questioned him about it. 
Zeshin told him everything, and the innkeeper directed him to visit 
the Zen Teacher Dokushd4® in Saga. Zeshin then went to meet 
Dokusho and presented his understanding. 

Dokusho said: “Preserve it with care!” 

That very day, [Zeshin] left [Kyoto] and returned to Yoshino. 
Several months had passed when he decided to set off [again] for 
the Jizoji. On his way, he learned that, just then, the Master was in 
Edo, so he went straightaway to the Korinji. The Master received him 
immediately, and Zeshin presented his understanding. 

The Master demanded: “The Ultimate!” 

Zeshin, at a loss, made a low bow. When this had been repeated 
three times, Zeshin said: “/s there an Ultimate?” 

The Master replied: “You don’t know how to use it.” 

Zeshin, once again at a loss, bowed deeply. After this had been 
repeated three times, Zeshin asked: “What is the way to use it?” 

Just at that moment, an uguisu“2 sang in the garden. The Master 
said: “When the uguisu sings, you hear it.” 

Zeshin, overcome with joy, prostrated himself three times. 

The Master told him: “From here on, never open your mouth 
needlessly.” 

At the end of the summer training period, the Master returned to 
the RyOmonji, and Zeshin followed him to the temple. Several days 
later, at a reception for newly arrived monks, Zeshin came forward 
and presented himself before the Master, but [the Master] ignored 
him. For three days [the Master] came out like this and for three days 
too Zeshin continued to present himself, but without a word from the 
Master. 

[One day,] when everyone had gone, the Master turned to Zeshin 
and said: “You're a lucky fellow. If you hadn't met me, you’d have 
surely become a boastful goblin!” 

Zeshin then begged to be admitted to the temple, and, at his 
request, received the name Ryoko. Afterwards, at the urging of the 
assembly, he took the name Daien. 

(zenshu, pp. 147-148.) 

FROM THE GYOGO RYAKKI 

Suspicion 

During the [Great Training Period at the RyOmonji], there was an 
incident in which some money was lost in the Fud6 Hall.t One day, 
when the Master ascended the lecture seat, a monk came forward 
and said: “| am such-and-such a person of . . . province and a 
student at the .. . temple. This winter | have been practicing in the 
Fudo Hall. A monk in the place next to mine lost his traveling money, 
and because | was in the seat beside his, suspected me of taking it. 
The rumor has spread through the entire hall, and | beg your 
Reverence to conduct an inquiry.” 

The Master asked: “Did you steal anything?” 

The monk replied: “At a unique religious gathering like this, such a 
shameless act would never even cross my mind!” 

The Master told him: “Then everything is all right.” 

The monk said: “Yes, but at this meeting, monks are gathered from 
all over Japan, and I’m worried that if there is no inquiry, I'll be given 
a bad name throughout the country. | beseech your Reverence’s 
kind understanding.” 

The Master said: “If there’s an inquiry, the guilty one will have to 
come out—is that all right too?” 

The monk then declared: “It’s | who have shown the very worst 
kind of shamefulness, being self-centered and arrogant in a case like 
this after I’d listened to your wonderful teaching every day!” And, 
shedding tears of gratitude, he withdrew. 

(zenshu, pp. 396-397.) 

Handling delinquents 

When the Master was in retreat at the Jizdji, Sekimon Osh6? of the 
Rydmonji sent [the monk] Tenkyd to call on him and inquire after his 
health.4 When he met the Master at the temple gate, Tenkyi 
delivered a message from Sekimon, saying: “At the RyOmonji are a 
number of novices who are remiss in their duties and rude in their 
behavior, upsetting the decorum of the temple. It was thought that if 
they were to go someplace else—the Nyohoji, perhaps, or the Korinji 
—they might change their ways, and | wished to ask your 
Reverence’s opinion.” 

When Tenkyu had spoken, the Master summoned Shuin, Sokaku 
and myself, and, repeating for us the gist of the message Sekimon 
had sent with Tenkyu, said: “What's known as a Zen temple is 
established precisely to bring together wicked fellows such as these, 
winning them over through personal contact and making them into 
good men. But, without any such attitude, completely lacking in 
compassion, you want to dispose of wrongdoers elsewhere, to have 
them go and create disturbance someplace else! Is a person like that 
fit to be abbot of a Zen temple? When one whose heart is without 
generosity or compassion becomes abbot of [my] temple, it is the 
beginning of the end for my teaching!” 

After this severe upbraiding, everyone, whether it was the abbot, 
the temple officers or the Master’s personal attendants, was afraid to 
complain to the Master about the behavior of the monks. 

(zenshu, p. 396.) 

The missing paper 

When the Master was in Shinyashiki® in Aboshi, he was unable to 
find a memorandum he needed. His attendants searched about 
everywhere, but they too failed to turn it up. Later, they discovered it 
at last. At that time, the Master scolded them, saying: “If you had all, 
right from the beginning, determined to find it, even if you tore the 
house down, it would have quickly turned up. But since you went 
about it half-heartedly, you were unable to locate it. While this memo 

is nothing of great importance, my having you search for it was to 
cultivate in you the sort of resolute attitude that you will carry with 
you through life. With a half-hearted frame of mind, you won't 
become even half a man!” 

Afterwards, when the Master was staying at the Oshiken,£ he was 
[preparing to] inscribe a Buddhist name® and found the brush to be 
missing. Although his attendants searched about in every possible 
way, they failed to turn it up, and this time, once again, he scolded 
them as he had before. 

(zenshu, p. 398.) 

POEMS 

Chinese poems 

Instructing the Assembly 

Chasing after words, pursuing phrases, when will you 
ever be done? 

You run yourself ragged amassing knowledge, 
becoming widely informed 

Self-nature is empty and illuminating, so let things 
take care of themselves 

There’s nothing else | have to pass on 
(zenshu, p. 496.) 

Impromptu Poem 

Not angry when abused, not happy when praised 

A great blockhead of the universe! 

Going along as circumstances carry me—north, south, 
east, west 

Without hiding my ugliness and clumsiness between 
heaven and earth 
(zenshu, p. 499.) 

Instructing a Confucian of Bizen 
It ranges over past and present, pervades the entire 
universe 
Look and it’s not to be seen, [but] call and it responds 
A stringless lute, a silent melody 
This has nothing to do with being a monk or a layman 
(zenshu, p. 497.) 

New Years 
What does it matter, the new year, the old year? 

| stretch out my legs and all alone have a quiet sleep 
Don't tell me the monks aren't getting their instruction 
Here and there the nightingale is singing: the highest 
Zen!4 
(zenshu, p. 498.) 

Instructions to a Confucian 

From the outset, the Great Way knows no distinction 
between worldly and 
transcendental 

Let Buddhism and Confucianism return to the source, 
and all differences cease to exist 

When you penetrate directly, beyond words and letters 

Going forward or backward, whatever you do creates a 
refreshing breeze2 
(zenshu, p. 497.) 

Instructing the Assembly 

Mind accords with all circumstances, yet doesn't arise 
or cease 

The sages of old praised this, calling it zazen 

Blind people wear out their cushions waiting for 
enlightenment 

Just like trying to make a mirror by polishing a brick 
(zenshu, p. 495.) 

Instructions to the Layman Gess63 in Response to his 

Questions on the Technique of 
the Lance 

The Great Function manifests itself without fixed rules 

Meeting each situation on its own terms, it’s never too 
soon, never too late 

Thrusting, retracting, advancing, retreating—it all 
takes place beyond the realm of 
thought 

When you’re in harmony with Mind, arms and legs 
operate on their own 

(zenshu, p. 496.) 

Japanese Poems 

The Preaching of Insentient Things 

In spring, the cherry blossoms 

In fall, the autumn leaves 

The various forms of nature, just as they are 
All of them, the words of the Law 

(zenshu, p. 515.) 

Impromptu Poem 

Good is awful 

Bad is awful 

And awful is awful too 

Tilings and events 

Are only the product of circumstances 

(zenshu, p. 516.) 

My Meditation Hut 

(This poem was probably composed while Bankei was still in his 
early teens, during the period after his expulsion from home by his 
elder brother in exasperation at Bankei’s repeated truancy from the 
local school. Eventually Bankei’s plight attracted the sympathy of an 
old family friend, Nakabori Sukeyasu, headman of the neighboring 
village of Shimomura.4 Sukeyasu had befriended Bankei’s father 
when he first arrived in the area as a masterless samurai, and he 
now erected a hermitage for Bankei on the mountain overlooking the 
Nakabori family home, where the young seeker became a frequent 
guest [see “Words and Deeds,” pp. 145-46]. Besides providing 
Bankei with a hospitable refuge while he struggled to resolve the 
questions that had driven him from the village school and into 
Buddhism, the hut evidently commanded a spectacular view of the 
Inland Sea and the Ejima Archipelago, which here directly faces the 
coastline. ) 

As | glance about 

The haze settles: 

Here revealed through dense mists 

Here through thin 

Spring daybreak over the Ejima Islands 
(zenshu, p. 515.) 

Song of Original Mind (Honshin no uta) 

(Bankei is said to have composed this series of verses in 1653 
when he was living in retreat in the mountains of Yoshino. Different 
versions and arrangements of the verses exist, and it is not known 
which represents the poem’s original form. One text states that 
Bankei composed the poem as instruction for the local children. 
Another gives the explanation that to combat a severe drought which 
afflicted the area, Bankei had the villagers, young and old alike, sing 
the verses as they danced at the local shrine. The result was a 
plentiful rainfall, and thereafter the performance of Bankei’s “rain 
song” became a local tradition. This account explains why the poem 
is also known as Amagoi-uta, “Praying-for-Rain Song,” and Odori- 
uta, “Dance Song.” It is, however, unclear why it sometimes appears 
under the title Usuhiki-uta, or “Milling Song,” a type of song sung 
while grinding flour.) 

Unborn and imperishable 

Is the original mind 

Earth, water, fire and wind® 

A temporary lodging for the night 
Attached to this 

Ephemeral burning house® 

You yourselves light the fire, kindle the 
flames 

In which you’re consumed 

Search back 

To the time 

When you were born 

You can’t remember a thing at all! 

Keep your mind as it was 
When you came into the world 
And instantly this very self2 

Is a living “thus-come” one® 

Ideas of 

What's good, what's bad 
All due to 

This self of yours 

In winter, a bonfire 

Spells delight 

But when summertime arrives 
What a nuisance it becomes! 

And the breezes 

You loved in summer 

Even before autumn’s gone 
Already have become a bother 

When you've got money 

You despise the poor 

But have you forgotten how it was 
Back when you were poor yourself? 

The money you amassed in life 
Amassed with a demonic heart 
You'll watch with horror and alarm 
Seized upon by hungry ghosts 

Throwing your whole life away 
Sacrificed to the thirst for gold 

But when you saw your life was through 
All your money was no use 

Clinging, craving and the like 
| don't have them on my mind 
That's why nowadays | can say 

The whole world is truly mine! 

Your longing for the one you love 
Is for the present time alone 

It only exists by reason of 

The past before she’d come along 

To recall someone 

Means you can’t forget 
Not to recall them 

That you never had forgot 

Thinking back over the past 

You find it was an evening’s dream 
Realize that, and you'll see 
Everything is just a lie 

Those who feel embittered by 

Life in this floating world of grief 

Anguish themselves, distress their minds 
Brooding over empty dreams 

Since, after all, this floating world 
Is unreal 

Instead of holding onto things in 
Your mind, go and sing! 

Only original mind exists 

In the past and in the future too 
Instead of holding onto things in 
Your mind, let them go! 

When you don’t attach to things 

The floating world will cease to be 
Nothing is left, nothing at all 

That’s what “living tathagata” means 

Having created 

The demon mind yourself 
When it torments you mercilessly 
You're to blame and no one else 

When you do wrong 
Your mind’s the demon 
There’s no hell 

To be found outside 

Abominating hell 
Longing for heaven 

You make yourself suffer 
In a joyful world 

You think that good 
Means hating what is bad 
What's bad is 

The hating mind itself 

Good, you say, 

Means doing good 
Bad indeed 

The mind that says so! 

Good and bad alike 

Roll them both into one ball 
Wrap it up in paper and then 
Toss it out—forget it all! 

Mysteries and miracles— 

There are no such things! 

But when you fail to understand 
The world’s full of weird happenings 

This is the phantom 

Who deceives 

Who makes us take the false world 
To be real 

Fame, wealth, eating and drinking, sleep 
and sensual 

delight— 

Once you've learned the Five 

Desires 

They become 

Your guide in life 

Notions of what one should do 

Never existed from the start 

Fighting about what's right, what’s wrong 
That's the doing of the / 

When your study 

Of Buddhism is through 
You find 

You haven't anything new 

Enlightenment and delusion too 
Never existed at the start 

They’re ideas that you picked up 
Things your parents never taught? 

If you think the mind 

That attains enlightenment 

Is “mine” 

Your thoughts will wrestle, one with 
the other 

These days I’m not bothering about 
Getting enlightenment all the time 
And the result is that 

| wake up in the morning feeling 
fine! 

Praying for salvation in the world to come 
Praying for your own selfish ends 
Is only piling on more and more 

Self-centeredness and arrogance 

Nowadays I’m tired of 

Praying for salvation too 

| just move along at my ease 
Letting the breath come and go 

Die—then live 

Day and night within the world 

Once you've done this, then you can 
Hold the world right in your hand! 

It’s the buddhas | feel sorry for: 
With all those ornaments they wear 
They must be 

Dazzled by the glare! 

Still too soon for you to be 

A buddha in the temple shrine 
Make yourself a Deva King22 
Standing at the gate outside! 

If you search for the Pure Land 
Bent upon your own reward 
You'll only find yourself despised 
By the Buddha after all! 

People have no enemies 
None at all right from the start 
You create them all yourself 
Fighting over right and wrong 

Clear are the workings of cause and effect 
You become deluded, but don’t 

know 

It’s something that you’ve done yourself 
That’s what’s called self-centeredness 

Grown used to the conditioned world 
Grown used to the world of 
transience 

When you become deluded like this 
You're the one who's losing out! 

The mind that’s not conditioned 
Is originally unborn 

What is conditioned doesn’t exist 
That is why there’s no delusion 

Though the years may creep ahead 
Mind itself can never age 

This mind that’s 

Always just the same 

Wonderful! Marvelous! 

When you’ve searched and found at 
last 

The one who never will grow old 
—“l alone!”11 

The Pure Land 

Where one communes at peace 
Is here and now, it’s not remote 
Millions and millions of leagues 
away 

When someone tosses you a tea bowl 
—Catch it! 

Catch it nimbly with soft cotton 

With the cotton of your skillful 

mind!42 

(zenshu, pp. 519-522.) 

LETTERS 

(The following letter from Bankei’s original teacher Umpo (1572- 
1653), together with Bankei’s reply, was reportedly written while 
Bankei was studying under Umpo’s heir Bokuo at the Sanyui in 
Bizen.) 

Having the opportunity to send a message, | am writing you this 
note. | trust you are keeping well. | myself am the same as ever, 
while the good people of Kariya and Nakamura? are untiring in their 
Zen study. As you know, this old monk stands alone on the summit 
of a solitary peak,2 and never quotes even a word of the buddhas or 
patriarchs. However, since you and Akashi2? have shown an earnest 
desire, | cannot do other than extend a helping hand and offer you 
some words of teaching, muddying things up with useless talk. 

Now that | have twenty or thirty people coming to the temple to 
practice zazen, | leave them on their own, and that way everyone 
feels at ease. If those who use “patriarchal Zen’4 and _ forcibly 
discipline their students were to hear what I’m doing, I’m sure they 
would consider me the enemy of all the buddhas in the three 
worlds!2 People may say the bright moon is falling into murky water, 
but if | can save one student or even half a student, shouldn't | count 
myself fortunate? 

| hope you will be able to return soon. 

With sincere regards, 
(Umpo) 

(Bankei replies:) 
Thank you for your letter. Nothing makes me happier than to learn 
that all is well with you. Everyone here in the temple, from the senior 
priests to the regular practitioners, is fine, so fortunately there is no 

need to concern yourself over us. As | learn from your letter, you 
have lately come down to work shoulder to shoulder with the people 
of the world in order to save them. This is truly wonderful and 
praiseworthy. 
| plan shortly to come and pay my respects to you. 
With sincere regards, 
(Bankei) 
(zenshu, pp. 319-320.) 

(Addressed to Bankei’s childhood friend Sasaki Nobutsugu,® this 
letter appears to be the product of a stay in Kyoto circa 1642. School 
seems to have remained a sore point with the young Bankei, who 
here professes little enthusiasm for his “academic studies,” which 
may well have included both Buddhist and non-Buddhist classics.) 

Twenty-second day of the fifth month (equivalent to late June in 
the present calendar) 

Lately my time has been completely taken up with work, but allow 
me to address you this brief message. | trust that all is well with you. 
| myself am fine. | thought this spring’ | might travel to Edo or 
perhaps even retire to the mountains; and although I'd already made 
up my mind to quit my academic studies, everyone said it would be a 
mistake for me to abandon them now and that at all costs | should go 
on with my work for another year or so—for the sake of the Dharma, 
they told me. So, in one way or another, they held me back, and | 
was obliged to stay on here and keep at my work. I’m doing fine and 
making good progress, so set your mind at ease. Since I’m already 
committed to this situation and can’t avoid spending another year or 
two at my studies, I’d appreciate your putting together some funds to 
carry me through this period. Next month I'll have to make my usual 
journey to Ako to visit Umpo, so | hope you'll give this matter your 
immediate attention. Nothing else in particular to add for now. 

Your servant, 
Y otaku 
(zenshu, p. 527.) 

(Bankei’s disciple Yosen, to whom this letter is addressed, was a 
sister-in-law of Sasaki Nobutsugu. She would have been about 
twenty years old in 1656, when the letter was probably composed, 
and remained a supporter of Bankei throughout his career.) 

Allow me to address you this brief message. Concerning your 
religious practice: as your thoughts haven't yet stopped, you must 
make every effort to rouse your faith, completely forgetting all 
thoughts, of every sort—thoughts of cherishing good and loathing 
evil, of loving or hating, of worldly affairs, of cherishing buddhahood, 
of loathing delusion or cherishing enlightenment. If nothing at all 
remains in your mind, then your religious practice is complete, so if 
you can come to this quickly, I'll be able to give you my 
acknowledgment. By assiduously rousing your faith, you'll quickly 
escape these delusions. When you have escaped them, I'll know it, 
and at that time I'll be able to give my acknowledgment to that one 
who has escaped. 

Respectfully, 
(Bankei) 
(zenshu, pp. 527-528.) 

(The following is a letter from Bankei to his disciple Rintei (1630- 
1702), addressed by her earlier religious name Ritei. Like Yosen, 
Rintei was a sister-in-law of Bankei’s patron Sasaki Nobutsugu. She 
became a nun in 1679, settling in a hermitage within the compound 
of her husband’s home. Bankei’s letter was composed sometime 
before 1691, when she assumed the name Ritei, and Akao has 
suggested a date in the early to mid—1660s. ) 

Having received your letter, allow me to address you this brief 
message. | hope you are all well. | myself am fine, so please rest 
assured. You are, | imagine, applying yourself diligently in your 
religious practice. Your constant strong desire to _ attain 
enlightenment right away, however, will make you deluded, so it’s 
essential that you give up this attitude and just remain without any 

sort of discrimination or understanding. Don’t hate the arising of 
thoughts or stop the thoughts that do arise; simply realize that our 
original mind, right from the start, is beyond thought, so that, no 
matter what, you never get involved with thoughts. Illuminate original 
mind, and no other understanding is necessary. However, if you 
become [attached to] the desire for illumination, then it will become a 
source of delusion. Only realize that, from the beginning, original 
mind is beyond thought, and don’t attach to your rising thoughts at 
all, whether they’re about good or evil, Buddhism or worldly matters, 
your own affairs or other people’s—whatever they are, just let them 
arise or cease as they will, and that way you'll naturally accord with 
original mind. Thoughts arise temporarily in response to what you 
see and hear; they haven't any real existence of their own. You must 
have faith that the original mind that is realized and that which 
realizes original mind are not different. 
Should you have any further questions, don’t hesitate to ask. 
Respectfully, 
(Bankei) 
(zenshu, pp. 530-531.) 

(This letter, probably dating from the mid—1670s, is addressed to 
Lady Naga, daughter of Bankei’s samurai patron Kato Yasuoki and 
wife of Lord Katd’s chief retainer Ohashi Shigeyoshi. Riky6, who 
seems to have been an elderly lady-in-waiting in the Ohashi family, 
had apparently sought to meet with Bankei to receive his guidance 
on how to confront her approaching death. Bankei, unable to see 
Rikyo, passed on this message to her via Lady Naga. The first part 
of the letter deals with unrelated material and has been omitted.) 

. . . On my way back this time, | won't have a chance to see 
anyone, so please convey my heartfelt regrets to Rikyo. Even for 
one who is young, life is uncertain at best, so for someone like Rikyo 
who is well-advanced in years it is all the more understandable to 
feel regret. Since | too am not only old, but ailing as well, it is very 
unlikely that | will be able to see her again. Nevertheless, since she 
is sincerely committed to the Dharma and _ is_ practicing 

wholeheartedly, I’m sure she will illuminate the principle of original 
buddhahood and become the sort of person who does not rely on 
the power of others. So my leaving for the capital is in no way a 
cause for such unhappiness on her part. This Dharma isn’t anything 
you can learn from someone else. Even if she did see me, it would 
not help. Please convey this message to her from me. 

Also, it keeps skipping my mind, but as Rikyo is old and prepared 
[to meet death] at any time, secure [in her faith], | think she should 
be sure to sew herself a seven-piece kesa,2 so that when death 
comes she'll be ready with it. They say: “When you [return] to your 
native place, deck yourself out in brocade.”2 Well, there’s no amount 
of brocade that can compare with wearing the kesa, so please tell 
her when she goes back to her native place to have on a seven- 
piece kesa. | think it’s wonderful that a woman is able to prepare a 
kesa for herself. 

If | go to the capital now, | probably won't have the chance to see 
Rikyo again, so please give her this message from me: At the time of 
death, there’s no need for any special state of mind. Just meet your 
end with the ordinary mind of zazen. Everybody's mind is the 
Buddha Mind, which is originally enlightened, so it’s not something 
that is “born” or that “dies”; it neither comes nor goes, but is eternal, 
unalterable buddhahood. Thus, it’s not a matter of your becoming a 
buddha now for the first time since you've been a buddha right from 
the start. That's why, instead of following other people’s spiritual 
guidance, it’s best to look to your own ordinary straightforward mind. 
Please tell her this for me. And since it’s the same for your Ladyship, 
and anyone else as well, don’t think that this is only for Rikyo. 

Respectfully, 
Bankel 
(zenshu, pp. 533-534.) 

Instructions for the Layman Gesso, given at his request 

(Bankei composed the following instructions on the art of combat 
for his disciple and patron Kato Yasuoki, daimyo of Ozu and an 

expert in the use of the yari, or Japanese lance. Although not 
specifically a letter, it has been included here.) 

In performing a movement, if you act with no-mind, the action will 
spring forth of itself. When your ki#2 changes, your physical form 
changes along with it. When you’re carried away by force, that is 
relying on “self.” To have ulterior thoughts is not in accordance with 
the natural. When you act upon deliberation, you are tied to thought. 
The opponent can then tell [the direction of] your ki. If you [try to] 
steady yourself by deliberate effort, your ki becomes diffuse, and you 
may grow careless. When you act deliberately, your intuitive 
response is blocked; and if your intuitive response is blocked, how 
can the mirror mind appear?“ When, without thinking and without 
acting deliberately, you manifest the Unborn, you won’t have any 
fixed form. When you are without fixed form, no opponent will exist 
for you in the whole land. Not holding on to anything, not relying 
onesidedly on anything, there is no “you” and no “enemy.” Whatever 
comes, you just respond, with no traces left behind. 

Heaven and earth are vast, but outside mind there is nothing to 
seek. Become deluded, however, and instead this mind becomes 
your opponent. Apart from mind, there is no art of combat. 

(Tomisusanshi, zenshu, p. 940.) 

“WORDS AND DEEDS” 
(Miscellaneous Materials) 

Bankel’s childhood 

From the time he started his schooling, the Master was occupied 
studying the Confucian classics at the Daigakuji1 This was not to his 
liking, and he was always returning home early. His elder brother 
Tadayasu2 rebuked him for this time and again, but the Master would 
not listen. On his way home, he had to cross the Ibo River.2 
Tadayasu commanded the ferryman: “If he comes back early, don’t 
take him across on any account!” One day, the Master was returning 
early, and the ferryman followed Tadayasu’s orders. The Master 
declared: “At the bottom of the river there must be solid ground!” He 
plunged right to the bottom, and, gasping for breath, managed to 
gain the opposite bank. 

One day, he said to himself: “l have no wish to study the 
Confucian classics, and when | go back to the house my older 
brother will only scold me again. Better for me to die—why should | 
cling to life?” Thereupon, he swallowed some poison spiders which 
were known to be absolutely lethal to men, filling his mouth with 
them, and, secluding himself in a small stone shrine,4 quietly awaited 
death. However, his luck still had not run out, and when dawn 
arrived, he emerged again. 

On the fifth day of the fifth month it was the time-honored custom 
for all the local boys to divide into teams that were spread out along 
the opposite banks of the river, letting fly a hail of pebbles to see 
which side would win. If the Master were on one side, his opponents 
on the opposite bank would scatter to escape his attack. He would 
never retreat until victory was his. 

(/tsujijo, zenshd, p. 411.) 

The priest’s Fudo 

The Fudo Hall [of the Ryomonji] is situated to the right of the 
temple gate. During the Kanei era,2 the abbot Jukin of the nearby 
Saihdjif owned a small statue of Fudd that had been carved by 
Kikai.2 Its length was scarcely four inches, and it was possessed of 
an exquisite spiritual presence. At this time, the Master was still very 
young. “How | wish | could have that!” he thought to himself. Jukin, 
however, prized the image highly and would not part with it. 

One day, the Master reflected: “If | pray, surely it will come to me. If 
my prayers have no effect, then Buddhism isn’t worth believing in, 
and even if | realized [the Dharma], what use would it be?” So, 
setting aside a period of thirty days, he worshipped with great 
devotion, praying single-mindedly for divine assistance. But the 
twenty-ninth day arrived without any result. Evening came, and a 
friend happened by to visit. During the course of their conversation, 
the Master explained the reason for his activities, and told his friend 
straight out that he could not believe in Buddhism. He had scarcely 
finished speaking when suddenly Jukin came and knocked at the 
door. The Master was surprised to see him there and greeted him, 
saying: “Why have you troubled yourself to visit me at this late 
hour?” Jukin said: “I am going to entrust to you this precious image. | 
felt a strong urging in the depths of my heart, and so [decided to 
come] immediately without waiting till morning.” He then drew the 
statue from his robe and gave it to the Master. In the Master’s mind, 
there arose an extraordinary feeling of determination, and he finally 
resolved to become a monk. 

(Ryomonji shiryaku, zenshd, pp. 587-588.) 

At the post station 

During the Master’s angya,2 he passed through the post station at 
Seki? in Mino. His feet exhausted, he hired a post horse to ride; but 

just then a valuable load of merchandise arrived, and the pack horse 
driver, seized with greed, pulled the Master rudely from the saddle 
and, setting the load of goods on top, went off. The Master sat down 
cross-legged beneath the eaves of the station, looking somewhat 
despondent. Attempting to console him, the dispatcher approached 
and said: “Monk, are you angry?” 

The Master replied: “For the sake of the One Great Matter!2 | went 
against my parents’ wishes, left my native place. And now I’ve got 
upset over one trifling thing! How | repent it!” He then rose and left. 

“From that moment on,” the Master used to say, “I severed the 
roots of anger.” 

Afterward, when the Master was teaching, whenever he passed 
through this post station all the local people would flock to pay him 
homage. At the station was a man named Seishitchi,1! who erected 
a hut for the Master and welcomed him there with offerings. Its 
traces remain to this day... . 

(Itsujijo, zenshd, p. 419.) 

Bankei faces death 

When the Master was on angya, he boarded a ferry at the town of 
Yamada in Omi.42 No other passengers were aboard. The boatman 
steered the ferry to the riverbank, and began to load on stacks of 
firewood. His movements were furtive, like a thief’s. The Master said: 
“Did you pay for that?” The boatman muttered: “Monk!” “Are you 
stealing it?” the Master asked. “Shut up!” the boatman told him. The 
Master said: “If you’re going to steal it, then kill me and steal it, but | 
can’t allow you to be a thief.” And so saying, he stopped the 
boatman, prepared to die if necessary. 

Ignorant though the fellow was, he yielded to reason, and, unable 
in the end to carry out his intention, pushed off the boat... . 

(Itsujijo, zenshd, p. 417.) 

Among the beggars 

On his return from Kaga,"2 the Master passed through Edo. 
Stopping at the Komagata shrine,“ he mingled with the throngs of 
beggars, cultivating his mind and disciplining himself in religious 
practice as he nurtured his enlightenment. It happened at that time 
that the officer in charge of Lord Matsuura Shigenobu’s!® stables 
was leading a horse, when it broke away. The horse charged 
through the streets, and crowds of people scrambled to stop it, but 
without success. Seeing this, the Master remarked: “The reason that 
horse won't be held is simply that the man and the horse are 
separate.” 

On his return, the officer reported these words to Lord Matsuura, 
who said: “I hear that Y6taku!® has come to these parts. Who else 
but he could have uttered these words!” 

He promptly sent someone who knew the Master to investigate, 
and, just as he had expected, it was he. [Lord Matsuura] then invited 
the Master to his mansion, and, erecting the K6td-an,“ installed him 
there. ... 

(/tsujijo, zenshd, pp. 417-418.) 

The missing coins 

At one time, the Zen Master Bankei was living in cruelly straitened 
circumstances at Seki-no-yama, in Mino.1® The villagers 
thereabouts, moved by his destitute condition, came to his aid and 
found him lodgings. At that time, the village headman discovered he 
was missing some ten ryé'2 from his money purse and immediately 
suspected Bankei of the theft. [Thereafter, assistance to Bankeil] 
began to dwindle away. 

Over a year passed, when, visiting the home of his son-in-law, the 
headman found that the missing money had been stolen in 
desperation by a woman. He then summoned Bankei and explained 
what had happened, expressing repentance and offering his 
apologies. Bankei calmly replied: “Very good, very good. However, 

this had nothing to do with me. Whether it was your suspecting me 
or my being under suspicion—right from the start, there was nothing 
to it. The whole thing just arose from notions.” 

(Zoku kinsei sdgo, zenshd, p. 477.) 

The Confucians 

When the Master was visiting the Sanydji in Bizen, all the local 
Confucians opposed Buddhism. They abominated the Master’s 
religious name and sought to humiliate him, coming to see the 
Master and debating with him for nearly three months. 

At the conclusion of the debate their ringleader, a certain 
Nakagawa, ended by calling Sakyamuni a parasite on the world. 

The Master asked: “How is it according to the Confucians?” 

[Nakagawa] replied: “Order the kingdom and instruct the people.” 

The Master said: “| have heard that he who would illuminate the 
Bright Virtue in the kingdom should first put his [own] household in 
order. He who would put his household in order should first cultivate 
himself. He who would cultivate himself, should first straighten his 
mind. He who would straighten his mind should first make his 
intention sincere.22 Now, in your case, what sort of intention is it 
you're seeking to make sincere, and with what mind are you doing 
this?” 

The fellow was dumbfounded. The Master laughed and said: “If 
you haven't yet understood the writings of [the sage of] Ro2! in the 
east, how can you possibly grasp the meaning of [Bodhidharma’s] 
coming from the west?”22 

[Nakagawa], totally flustered, withdrew. 

Thereupon, each of the Confucians, bringing with him his 
disciples, came to study Buddhism with the Master, even attending 
the Master’s zazen practice. 

One of them presented the Master with a poem: 

“The kite soars through the sky 
The fish sports in the sea—” 
The Patriarchs’ Zen!23 

The Master said: “How about your own Zen?” 
The Confucian could not reply. 
(Tomisusanshi, goroku, p. 139.) 

The rich man’s wife 

For certain reasons, the Master broke off relations with his elder 
brother Tadayasu. Tadayasu was on close terms with my great- 
grandfather Sukeyasu,24 and the two were just like relatives. 
Sukeyasu constructed a hermitage on the mountain above our family 
home, and, inviting the Master, had him settle there. Here, the 
Master had a place where he could carry on his meditation practice. 
The Master himself wrote out the name of the hermitage and placed 
it outside the entrance. Thus, he was a frequent visitor at our family 
home, which was just like his own house. After he became a priest, 
my family would often arrange vegetarian feasts and invite him. 

The wife of a certain rich man from Ikaba in Shiso622—whose name 
cannot be revealed here—was possessed by vicious greed and 
would take any advantage of others in her craving for wealth. Her 
appearance was like that of a yaksha.2® Her family remonstrated 
with her over this, but failed to sway her. All of them urged her 
repeatedly to attend the Master’s sermons, and finally she gave in 
and set off for Aboshi. 

That day the Master had accepted an invitation to a vegetarian 
feast at our family home, and when the feast had ended, he 
delivered a public sermon. This woman came and joined the 
meeting, listening reverently. The sermon had not yet finished when 
her expression grew soft and gentle, and it seemed as if she were a 
different person. Before the close of the sermon, she had 
transformed herself and become a buddha. She tearfully expressed 
her contrition, and the sins of her past melted away like frost and 
dew. She immediately had her name entered in the temple register, 
becoming a nun and living as one the rest of her days. In the devout 
remainder of her life, she has built herself a simple retreat, making 
offerings to the monks and nuns and remaining active to this day. 

My grandparents, my nursemaid and others personally witnessed 
these things and never tired of repeating them to me. “The Master’s 
room was narrow,” they declared, “but it was no different from the 
[site of the] sermon at the Vulture Peak!”22 

(Itsujij0, zenshd, p. 415.) 

The wolf 

Toward evening, the Master was returning to Aboshi from Shiso. A 
wolf stood in the roadway, and, spreading its jaws, confronted the 
Master. Looking into the wolf's mouth, he saw that a large bone had 
become lodged in its throat, and, inserting his hand, removed it. 
Overjoyed, the wolf submissively drooped its ears, wagged its tail 
and scurried off. Thereafter, when the Master traveled on this road, 
the wolf would always come and escort him to wherever he was 
going.... 

(Itsujijo, zenshd, p. 416.) 

The steward’s invitation 

When the Master was in Ozu, he received an invitation from a 
certain Fujioka,22 a minor official in the Stores Department. The date 
had been set, but on the day in question, another invitation arrived, 
this time from the daimyo of the province. The Master excused 
himself on account of his previous engagement. People were afraid 
of the daimyo’s [reaction]. But the Master said: “How can | divide my 
mind between high and low? Isn't this all the more so when a minor 
official has invited me? For days now he’s been anxiously 
concerning himself about this, personally seeing to the cooking and 
cleaning and other preparations. His intentions reveal a deep 
kindness. The daimyo can manage [such things] at a moment's 
notice, so why does it have to be just today?” 

When the daimyo learned of these words, he was greatly 
impressed. The words were the Master’s, the admiration, the 
daimyo’s. The daimyo was his Lordship Kato Yasuoki, a great man 
and a past master of the military arts, before whom even Yui 
Shdsetsu22 stood in awe. 

(Itsujijo, zenshd, pp. 438—439.) 

Heaven and hell 

Once the Master was asked by a monk: “Your Reverence always 
teaches that the worlds of paradise, heaven and hell, hungry ghosts 
and fighting demons are all in the mind and don't exist outside, etc. 
But in the Sutra, [the Buddha] says that if you travel westward across 
a billion buddha lands, there’s a region called Paradise, which is the 
manifestation of the Buddha Amida.22 Does that mean the Buddha is 
lying?” 

The Master said: “Who decided on that direction?” 

(Zeigo, zenshiU, p. 298.) 

From your own mouth 

A certain fellow asked about the words of the old masters. 

The Master said: “Understanding one phrase, puzzling over 
another, [and so on for] ten million words—there’s never an end to it. 
If you truly realize what I’m teaching, then from your own mouth 
wonderful words and marvelous phrases will come forth. Otherwise, 
what use are such things in [studying] the Way?” 

(Tomisusanshi, goroku, p. 138.) 

Genshin’s thousand buddhas 

The Master visited Katada?! and paid his respects at the 
“thousand buddha” altar.22 The buddhas were carved by the High 
Priest Genshin of the Eshinin.2° [The people of] this area gained 
their livelihood by fishing. Genshin began by erecting a hall and 
placing within it an image of Bud dha. He instructed the people, 
saying: “If all of you repeat [the name of] Amida“ with your mouths, 
then when you haul in the nets with your hands you'll be sure to get 
plenty of fish.” Now, even after all this time, things have remained 
unchanged, and this has become a local custom. When the Master 
returned to Yamashina,2° he said: “Genshin had the tremendous 
compassion of an Icchantika bodhisattva.2® He is truly worthy of 
admiration.” Everyone exclaimed: “The Master is indeed a kindred 
spirit of Gen-shin born into another age!” 

| have heard that at Kawachi2“ there are seven cremation grounds 
established by Gydgi Bosatsu.%® All four sides as well as the rocks 
[covering] the ground are carved with buddhas and dharani.22 
Gyogi’s last words were: “Anyone who receives cremation in these 
recesses, even those who have committed the five cardinal crimes 
and the ten evil acts,42 will be sure of reaching heaven and 
becoming a buddha.” This sort of enlightened activity and 
magnificent compassion is just like that of Genshin. 

Now we come to the phony teachers of Zen who are in fashion 
these days. When they hold forth on the records of the patriarchs, 
they abuse the buddhas and patriarchs, disdain the old worthies. 
Then they try to play upon the feelings of ignorant laymen, carrying 
on about the eight hot and cold hells, weeping right along with their 
audience and striking terror in their hearts. Or else they chatter about 
going to heaven and becoming buddhas and seduce their listeners 
[with talk of] the excellent rewards of accumulating merit, just like an 
actor cajoling a foolish child. But when you take a good look at 
what's really on their minds, it’s all grubbing donations and making a 
name for themselves. If anyone questions this, they say: “This is a 
skillful expedient [for teaching Buddhism].” The truth is, they 
themselves become guides on the road to hell, pulling down the 
ignorant masses. How pitiful they are! 

(/tsujijo, zenshd, p. 448.) 

Offerings 

The Master was going to send a shrine offering42 and, ordering 
fifty wax candles, had them placed in a box. The box was large, [but] 
when the Master opened it and looked inside, [he saw that] the 
bottom had been thickly spread with straw. He ordered this to be 
removed and then put in an additional fifty candles, filling up [the 
box]. 

He said: “Offerings are the true expression of sincerity. To indulge 
ostentatiously in empty show, to delight in false display, is utterly 
contrary to the intent of this old monk. From here on, you are never 
to do this!” 

Nowadays at funeral services they pile high the offerings, in the 
meantime filling up the bottom by tying together [bundles of] straw. 
Then they crown it all with gorgeous flowers and ask the director of 
the service to come and look. Even if another service is scheduled, 
they just go ahead and hold it without changing anything. They may 
go on like this for ten or even up to a hundred [services], until [the 
offerings] change color and start to disintegrate. Only then do they 
put in fresh ones! 

Confucius reviled those who made grave figures.42 But this 
business now is still worse. Among the Master’s followers, this is 
something that’s never done. As a rule, whether it was the 
[anniversary of] the buddhas or the patriarchs or that of an ordinary 
deceased, whenever he attended the ritual meal accompanying a 
service,“4 [the Master] would be sure the ceremonial vessels were 
filled and the offerings fresh. On such occasions he made no 
distinction between the food for the living and that offered [the 
deceased].... 

(/tsujij0, Zenshd, pp. 435-436.) 

Counting 

The attendant monk Jin asked: “In the past when your Reverence 
was single-mindedly practicing zazen, how many sticks of incense 
would you burn for the day and night?” 

The Master said: “When | was sitting the whole day through, | 
didn’t count the number of sticks of incense. | just considered one 
stick of incense as one day, and one stick of incense as one night.” 

Jin, in spite of himself, was left dumbfounded. 

(Tomisusanshi, goroku, p. 139.) 

Soen’s special teaching 

Among the Master’s disciples was the monk Soen.*2 His character 
was plain and true, independent, firm, dignified, and in his behavior 
no one could discern a single flaw. On the battleground of Dharma 
he was a valiant and accomplished hero. Yet the Master always 
admonished him for his aggressive outspokenness. Soen tended to 
thrust himself to the fore, and the Master would rebuke him and push 
him back. This only made Soen all the more determined to force his 
way to the front. Finally, he was expelled. Time and again he would 
return, expressing his contrition and rejoining the assembly. This 
occurred on several occasions. No one understood the reason for 
[the Master’s actions], but people speculated that he might be trying 
to temper the harshness [of Soen’s character], continually shuffling 
him this way and that as a compassionate means of instruction. 

During the Great Training Period held at the RyOmonji in the third 
year of Genroku, Soen became ill and was on the point of death. The 
Master [visited him] in the enjdd&® and spoke to him intimately, 
saying: “Ajari,#“ each day you live is a day to work for others.” 

Soen nodded and passed away. 

The others had never realized how great was the compassion of 
the Master’s words. 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 305.) 

Positive and negative 

A monk of the Shingon school questioned the Master: “In my 
school’s meditation on the letter a,4® there are two methods of 
meditation on the Unborn: the negative and the positive. Isn't this 
positive method what your Reverence is teaching?” 

The Master said: “Come over here.” 

The monk approached him. 

The Master shouted: “Which method is this?” 

The monk was utterly dumbfounded. The entire assembly was 
present and heard this, filled with amazement. 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 285.) 

Layman GessO’s runny nose 

Whenever the Layman Gesso got angry, his nose would start to 
run. He once asked the Master about this. The master told him: “ls 
snot any different from tears?” 

Thereafter, the Layman did not reveal in his demeanor whether he 
was pleased or angered.42 

(Tomisusanshi, goroku, p. 138.) 

The thief 

Among the multitude who arrived to attend the training period was 
a certain monk from Mino who was known to be a thief. Wherever he 
went he disrupted the assembly. There were seven or eight monks 
from the same area who were well acquainted with this and 
appealed to the local government official, saying: “This monk is an 
evildoer, known to people everywhere. Have someone get him to 
withdraw at once and nip this evil in the bud!” 

The official reported this to Sekimon, who conveyed the official’s 
words to the Master. 

The Master flushed with anger and declared: “At this time I’m 
conducting a training period at [people’s] request—and why do you 

suppose |’m doing this? It’s to alter the evil ways of evil men, to 
encourage the virtues of virtuous men, so that each person may 
thoroughly realize his wisdom body. To praise the upright and reject 
the wayward now would be totally opposed to my real purpose.” 

Sekimon was speechless, filled with shame and remorse. 

Word of the affair was bruited through the assembly, and all shed 
tears, moved by the [Master’s] deep compassion. At that time, the 
monk in question raised his voice and sorrowfully proclaimed: “Today 
| have received the compassion of a great teacher! From here on 
forever after | will cut off evil thoughts and devote myself to 
cultivating enlightened activity.” 

Thereafter, wherever he went, in whatever assembly he found 
himself, he was always known for his diligence. 

With the masters of Dharma nowadays, when a student isn’t to 
their liking, they painstakingly search for some tiny fault and then, 
even if he’s their own brother, turn him out without any warning just 
as if he’d been their worst enemy! On the other hand, if it’s someone 
who will be useful in promoting their own fame and fortune, even if 
he’s from a different line, they’ll embrace him and bring him right in, 
congratulating themselves on their cleverness. Without the mind of 
compassion, one will be arrogant as a demon or a yaksha. [This sort 
of thing] is to be firmly rejected and abhorred! Though |22 have been 
abbot at Rydzan®! for more than twenty years, | have never taken it 
upon myself to tyrannize the students, for the Master’s admonition 
still rings in my ears... . 

(Itsujijo, Zenshd, pp. 433-434.) 

Bankei and the stingy monk 

Among the Master’s disciples was the monk Tsuyd.24 He was a 
very meticulous fellow, but was excessively attached to trivial 
activities, picking up the remains of rice in the hulling room and 
gathering any greens he found floating in the stream. The Master 
forbade him to do this. Tsuyo tended to scour the store rooms and 
corridors for things, and there was nowhere he didn’t go. [In the end,] 

the Master expelled him. Tsuy6 asked Tairy622 to intercede for him 
and expressed his contrition, but though years passed, the Master 
would not pardon him. Finally, begging forgiveness, TsuyO was 
readmitted to the assembly. He came and prostrated himself before 
the Master. The Master smiled and said: “I haven’t seen you in quite 
a while. My, you've been getting old!” Everyone was greatly 
impressed with the excellence of the Master’s compassion. 

On reflection, one can see that, because of Tsuyo’s failings, the 
Master was instructing him, and that, throughout, his compassionate 
attitude had never changed. 

(Zeigo, zenshu, p. 378.) 

The samurai’s fan 

When the Master was at the Korinji, a samurai came to see him. 
Holding up his fan, the samurai said: “When it appears in the realm 
of being, this object is called a fan; yet originally it’s non-existent. Do 
you know what sort of thing it is at the moment it descends from 
Heaven?” 

The Master said: “I know.” 

The samurai asked: “What do you know?” 

The Master told him: “I know that | don’t know.” 

The samurai sighed admiringly, and declared: “The Great Sage 
himself said that ‘Knowledge is to say you do not know a thing when 
you do not know it.””22 

The Master shook his head and said: “That's not it at all.” 

(Zeigo, zenshu, p. 311.) 

Bankei’s “no rules” 

In the winter of the third year of Genroku, the Master held a 
training period at the RyOmonji. Over ten thousand people attended. 
Everyone said: “At this meeting they'll surely have to set up rules 

and regulations, exhort people in a booming voice and make the 
whole assembly quake with fear!” 

But everyone was calm and quiet, and no rules or regulations 
were imposed. 

Periodically, the Master would ascend the lecture seat and 
address the assembly, saying: “The originally existing Unborn—all of 
you, be sure you don’t conceal it from yourselves! This Unborn is like 
a great ball of fire: touch it and you'll be burned. | can speak about it 
for you now, but my words can’t exhaust it; | can use it, but I’ll never 
use it up. For me to exhort people, berating them harshly to frighten 
them into activity, is just a useless deception. It should never be 
done!” 

When the monks of the assembly heard this, all their doubts 
melted instantly away. 

(Zeigo, zenshu, p. 296.) 

Chokei’s seven cushions 

When the Master was at the Fumonji in Hirado in Hizen, the Zen 
Master and Abbot of the Kédaiji in Nagasaki2® came to see him. In 
the course of their discussion, the Abbot remarked: “In setting forth 
your instruction, you teach clearly and directly, cutting off all deluded 
views and not concerning yourself with religious practice. However, 
what about the story of Chokei and the seven cushions [he wore out 
doing meditation]?”22 

The Master said: “Your Reverence has got the story wrong. This 
Chokei spent twelve years going about studying successively with 
the Zen Masters Reiun, Seppo and Gensha, wearing out the seven 
cushions, but in spite of all that, he still hadn’t experienced any 
breakthrough. Then, one day, he rolled up the bamboo blind and 
suddenly realized enlightenment. At that moment, he composed a 
verse: 

What a difference! What a difference! 
Rolling up the blind, | see the world. 

If anyone asks me what teaching it is I’ve grasped 
I'll take my whisk and bash him in the mouth! 

Your Reverence, study up on this some more!” 

The Abbot, filled with admiration, bowed his head in assent. 
(Zeigo, zenshiU, p. 289.) 

The fencing master 

The Master was at the Korinji. When he ascended the lecture seat, 
a master of the martial arts approached him and said: “| have been 
practicing for quite some time. Once I’d grasped the knack of it, my 
hand responded perfectly to my mind, and ever since, when | 
confront an opponent, before even taking up my weapon, I’ve 
pierced through his very ‘bones and marrow.’ It’s like your 
Reverence’s having the Dharma Eye.” 

The Master told him: “You've certainly done your utmost in the 
martial arts. Now, attack me!” 

The samurai was suddenly at a loss. 

The Master said: “I’ve delivered my blow.” 

The samurai bowed his head and exclaimed in admiration: “How 
incredible! Your Reverence’s attack is swift as lightning, quick as a 
spark struck from flint. You have surpassed me. | humbly beg to 
receive from you the essentials of Zen.” More and more, his respect 
for the Master continued to grow. 

Generally, when the Master was in Edo, many samurai from the 
different schools of fencing would come to meet him. All received the 
Master’s single blow, and there was none who failed to respect and 
revere him. 

(Zeigo, zenshd, pp. 293-294.) 

Nanryu’s place 

When the Master was at the GyokuryUji in Mino, the Soto worthy 
Nanryi®2 took his fan and, pointing to his place, demanded: “Your 
Reverence, how come you're passing this place up?” 

The Master said: “Well, just what sort of place /s this?” 

Nanryu replied: “Unborn and imperishable.” 

The Master told him: “You're mistakenly caught up in words and 
names.” 

Raising his voice, Nanryi said: “Getting older and older,22 running 
to the east, running to the west—why are you going around 
bewitching lay men and women!” 

The Master replied: “When you use an evil eye, evil’s what you'll 
see.” Nanryu went off, but after a while he came forward and 
prostrated himself before the Master, expressing his profound 
gratitude. 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 307.) 

The rays of light 

... [At the Great Training Period held at the RyOmonji,] there was 
a certain monk who stepped forward and said: “| am chanting the 
Light Mantra.©2 | practice diligently, night and day, and my body emits 
rays of light. . . etc.” 

The Master scolded him, saying: “Those rays of light of yours are 
nothing but the flames of the evil passions consuming your body!” 

The monk meekly withdrew. 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 310.) 

As you are is it! 

When the Master was at the Nyohoji, he instructed the assembly, 
saying: “All of you are lucky indeed to have met with a teacher! 
Without having to wear out your straw sandals, to waste your 
strength [pursuing] flowers in the sky or [to engage in] difficult and 

painful practices, you [can] directly enter the true teaching. What 
good fortune! Don’t waste your time!” 

A monk who was present said: “All the same, there’s just one 
thing. Suppose, for example, someone wants to go out of the city 
and across the river: without using a boat, much less even taking a 
step, he'll never get anywhere.” 

The Master said: “As you are, right here at this moment, is it. 
There’s no getting anywhere or not getting anywhere. This is what’s 
meant by the teaching of sudden enlightenment. Hesitate and it’s 
lost; waver and it draws further and further away.” 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 311.) 

Settei’s medicine 

During the training period [held at the RyOmonji in the third year of 
Genroku], there were many sick monks. Several monks were 
assigned to nurse them under the supervision of Settei.£! Someone 
remarked: “These fellows are just lazy, pretending to be sick and 
getting a quiet rest. They ought to be punished and thrown out of the 
temple!” 

Settei said: “It's because they are weary of the meditation practice 
that they have come to this. This is indeed a grave illness, and | am 
treating it with the medicine of patience and compassion. [That way,] 
the day will surely come when they regain their well-being.” 

(Itsujijo, Zenshd, pp. 427-428.) 

Shopping for the best 

When the Master was at the Jizoji in Yamashina, he sent a monk 
into the city to buy some fine-quality paper. The monk had the 
disposition of Confucius’ disciple Tzu-kung,°4 and he privately 
evaluated the pros and cons [of the various papers] before making 
his purchase and returning. The Master told him: “No good,” and 

sent him back to make his selection again. The monk still would not 

abandon his attitude, and, painstakingly weighing the merits [of each 

variety], he once more made his purchase and returned. “Still no 

good,” the Master told him. By the third time this had happened, the 

monk realized his error and, prostrating himself, expressed his 

repentance. The Master said: “The first item you brought was fine.” 
(/tsujijo, Zenshd, pp. 429-430.) 

The Confucian’s question 

A Confucian asked: “If all the men in the world turned to 
Buddhism, entering the priesthood and abandoning their wives and 
children, I’m afraid the human race would cease to exist. What do 
you think?” 

The Master said: “Let’s wait until that human race has actually 
died out, and then I'll tell you.” 

The fellow meekly withdrew. 

(Tomisusanshi, goroku, p. 138.) 

Waste paper/clean paper 

The monk Rdézan®2 was stingy by nature. When, as a youth, he 
wiped the temple oil lamps, he used scrap paper. Seeing this, the 
Master said: “Why don’t you use clean paper?” Was the Master 
perhaps taking him to task for his stinginess? Thus, in the temples 
Rozan founded, even now they use clean paper to wipe the oil 
lamps. ... 

When the Master wrote large characters, he spread a clean sheet 
of paper underneath lest the ink should seep through. If, after [the 
paper] had been used once, someone [wanted to] use it once more, 
the Master wouldn't allow it, saying, “Don't use it again, or there may 
be someone else who will go and do the same.” 

As a rule, handkerchief paper that had been used once was not 
used over. [The Master] instructed that it should be disposed of. 

Even for toilet paper, new [paper] was always used... . 
(/tsujijo, zenshd, p. 447.) 

Bankets natural method 

Over thirteen hundred people participated in the [Master’s] training 
periods, not including those monks and laymen from outside the 
temple who came daily to join the assembly. The participants divided 
themselves among the halls, where they practiced either zazen or 
chanting. Without setting up any rules, each person just naturally 
pursued his own activity, practicing diligently and quietly so that it 
seemed as if there were no one in the room. 

These days, the Zen monasteries everywhere crowd together 
three or five hundred monks, regulating their schedule down to the 
minute, restricting their area of movement, virtually binding them 
hand and foot so that it’s just like going into a jail. If anyone commits 
even the slightest infraction, they beat him and throw him out, never 
showing the smallest forgiveness. Their prying and bullying are 
worse than a government official’s! The result is that, when the 
training periods finish, some people become ill, while others find 
themselves completely debilitated. Thus, the seedling is blasted 
before it can sprout, causing resentment among teachers and 
parents. 

This, then, is the sort of activity carried out nowadays by those 
who style themselves experts in the teaching of Zen. Alas! Feckless 
monks, bending whichever way the winds of fashion blow, unable to 
rise above the common herd—how pitiful they are! The men of old 
set up the barrier of death, opened the pit where [students] are 
buried alive. All these things, without exception, were done with a 
particular purpose in mind, but now people imitate them blindly in the 
false hope of producing the same result.£2 If a clumsy workman 
seizes the adze of the [man of] Ch’u, a lot of people are going to lose 
the tips of their noses!®© 

(/tsujijo, zenshd, p. 435.) 

Bankel’s night sermon 

When the Master was in his middle years and staying at the 
Chikurinken,®2 he delivered a sermon one evening®2 to two or three 
Zen monks. When his talk was finished, everything became quiet 
and still. Suddenly, with a shriek, a wild boar sprang from behind a 
mulberry tree. The Master laughed aloud. The monks were 
thoroughly startled. 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 307.) 

The old tree 

The Master erected the Kaiganji®2 on the site of an abandoned 
temple. While clearing the area, an old pine tree was found to be 
blocking construction. Everyone wanted to cut it down and remove it. 
The Master said: “The temple can be set up again [elsewhere, but] 
this old tree did not easily grow so tall and wide. Let it live and don't 
cut it down!” 

Alas! The true meaning of the Master’s love for what is old is not to 
be understood by clever monks. The worthies of long ago planted 
pine trees to beautify the temple grounds.“ As the saying goes: 
“The charming sights at a Zen temple: old monks and aged trees.” 

Let descendants in later generations take a lesson from [the 
Master’s] deeds and seek to emulate them! 

(/tsujijo, zenshd, p. 426.) 

Bankei and the blind man 

In Harima, in the town of Himeji, was a blind man who by hearing 
people’s voices could discern their innermost thoughts. . . . Once, 
hearing a man passing along a nearby street, singing as he walked, 
he remarked: “For someone without his head, he sings well.” 

The man’s wife and servants all laughed. “The mouth is in the 
head,” they told him, “so that proves you’re wrong!” 

“Just wait a while,” the blind man said. 

Singing again, the man returned. Suddenly there was the sound of 
a head being cut off. The attacker declared: “Il was going to cut him 
down before, but | saw he was on a mission for his lord, and so | 
waited.” 

This blind man always said: “In people’s words of congratulations, 
there is invariably a trace of sadness. In their expressions of 
condolence, there is always a note of delight. It’s the same with 
everyone. Yet when | hear Master Bankei’s voice, its tone never 
changes: with gain or loss, blame or praise, high or low, young or 
old, it's always the same, peaceful and calm. He has surely freed 
himself from ordinary vulgar mind!. . . .” 

(Itsujij0, Zenshd, p. 431.) 

Hachiroemon 

During the Master’s middle years, there lived in his native village, 
amid the dusts of the world, a farmer by the name of Hachiroemon.2 
He was on close terms with the Master and was a regular visitor at 
the temple. Wildly eccentric in his behavior, he was looked down 
upon by the local people. Yet the outlandish way he conducted 
himself with the Master utterly amazed them all. 

One day, the Master set out from town, and on his way, the two 
met. Hachiroemon said: “Your Reverence, where are you off to?” 
The Master replied: “I’m on my way to your village.” Hachiroemon 
asked: “Aren't you taking medicine for stomach pains?” The Master 
said: “Yes, | am.” Hachiroemon stretched out his palm and said: “l 
beg you for money to buy medicine.” The Master spit into his hand, 
and they both laughed heartily and went off. Their usual exchanges 
were of this sort. People were unable to tell just how much 
Hachiroemon knew. 

When the farmer was about to pass away, he pillowed his head in 
the Master’s lap. “l am dying on the battlefield of Dnarma,” he said, 

“so | suppose you haven’t any sort of word for me.” The Master told 
him: “Just pull down the defender!” Hachiroemon asked: “Your 
Reverence, do you approve my attainment?” The Master replied: “1 
find nothing wrong.” 

Weeping, his wife said: “My husband, you are a buddha! Won't 
you hurry and redeem my own poor ignorance?” 

The farmer told her: “Through all my activities I’ve manifested it 
fully, in speech and silence, movement and _ stillness—there’s 
nowhere I’ve failed to point out to you this essence of Mind. What 
can | do if you don’t understand?” 

(Zeigo, zenshd, p. 293.) 

NOTES 

SERMONS 

PART I 

1. “Beneficent Enlightened Wisdom,” an honorary title bestowed 

on Bankei by the Imperial Court in 1690. 

2. Bankei’s headquarters temple, located at his hometown of 

ID In |i& [uo 

i. 

Aboshi, in present-day Hyogo Prefecture. It was founded 
in 1661 by Bankei’s childhood friend Sasaki Nobutsugu 
and his brother Naomori (the reading of the names is 
uncertain), members of a wealthy merchant family of 
Aboshi and lifelong supporters of Bankei’s activities. 
Banshu is the on, or Chinese-derived reading for the old 
province of Harima, now included in Hyogo Prefecture. 
Though the temple’s name is often read Ryumoniji, 
RyoOmonji is the pronunciation given by the nun Yosho-in 
(see below, fn. 67) in a letter, and | have therefore 
adopted this as being closest to the original reading. 

. Zen temples regularly observe two ninety-day periods of 

intensive practice known as kessei or ango, the first in 
the spring and summer months, the second extending 
from fall to midwinter. Reference here is to the second of 

these, the winter retreat or to-ango. 

. 1690 according to the Julian calendar. 
. The roster of monks participating in the training period. 
. The Soto and Rinzai schools, founded during the Kamakura 

period (1192-1333), are the two principal sects of 
Japanese Zen. Though a Zen master of the Rinzai 
school, Bankei numbered many Soto monks among his 
followers. 

Japanese schools of Buddhism outside Zen: The Ritsu 

school, introduced during the Nara period (646-794), 
stressed observance of the Vinaya, or Buddhist precepts, 

the two hundred and fifty commandments obligatory for 
monks and nuns; the Shingon, or “mantra” school, was 
the school of Esoteric Buddhism founded by Kukai (Kobo 
Daishi, 774—835); the Tendai school, founded by Kukai’s 
contemporary Saicho (767-822), advocated _ the 
teachings of the Lotus Sutra, but was also deeply 
influenced by Esoteric Buddhism. Both the Pure Land 
(JOd6) school, founded by Honen (1133-1212), and the 
True Pure Land (Monto) school, founded by his disciple 
Shinran (1173-1262), are based on belief in the saving 
grace of the Buddha Amitabha (J: Amida), one of the 
“eternal” buddhas of the Mahayana pantheon. Because 
of Amitabha’s vow that he will aid all those who call his 
name to be reborn in the Pure Land, a kind of Buddhist 
paradise in the western heavens, both sects emphasize 
sincere repetition of the nembutsu, the invocation to 
Amitabha—Namu amida butsu! (“Praise to the Buddha 
Amitabha!”); the Nichiren school, like the Tendai, gives 
prime importance to the Lotus Sutra, but combines this 
with a militant belief in the messianic role of the school’s 
founder, Nichiren (1222-1282). 

8. The hoza or lecture seat in a Zen temple, generally placed in 
the hddo, or Dharma hall. 

. Teacher of Men and Devas is one of the ten epithets of the 
Buddha. Devas are divine beings, and the category 
includes, among others, virtuous men, sages and 
bodhisattvas (see below, fn. 51). 

10. A title of the Buddha, tathagata signifies a fully awakened 

being. 

11. Another name for the Zen school, implying that it transmits 

not scriptural teachings but the Buddha Mind itself. 

12. That is, the idea of “buddha,” of an enlightened being, 

belongs to the relative world of concepts. 

. See below, fn. 14. 

. Acommon expression in Buddhism, describing the original, 

eternal, unalterable nature of ultimate reality, which is not 

Ico 

| | 

born and does not perish, and which can neither be 
created nor destroyed. 

According to certain Buddhist theories, the history of the 
Dharma, the Buddha’s teaching, is divided into three 
periods. In the first, the period of the true teaching 
following the Buddha’s death, the Dharma is perfectly 
upheld in all respects; in the second, the period of the 
approximate teaching, only the outward forms of the 
Dharma are maintained—men practice but no longer 
have the capacity to realize enlightenment; in the last, the 
degenerate period of the teaching, which includes the 
present age, neither practice nor enlightenment remain 
but only the teaching itself. There are different 
calculations for the length of each period. Generally, the 
first is said to last five hundred years, the second, five 
hundred to two thousand years, and the last, ten 
thousand years. 

17. Another name for the Zen school. A “clear-eyed” man is one 

who has realized enlightenment. 

18. That is, even during the degenerate age. 

19. Hdjdju, a synonym for perfect enlightenment. 
20. The Ritsu school, mentioned above (see fn. 7). 
ral 

Inspirational Buddhist tales, generally containing 
supernatural elements. 

22. According to traditions probably evolved during the Tang 

dynasty (618-906), Zen (CH: Chan) is said to have had 
six Chinese patriarchs. 

23. A corruption of the word jikitotsu, meaning a monk’s robe. 

The jittoku was a half-length robe originally popular in the 
Heian period (794-1191) among lay Buddhist 
practitioners and priests living in seclusion. In Bankei’s 
day, it was also adopted by artists, doctors, haiku poets 
and various other groups whose members shaved their 
heads without being priests. 

24. Umpo Zensho (1572-1653), Bankei’s original teacher. See 

Introduction, p. xxiv. 

25. The Ming Zen Master Tao-che Ch’ao-yuan (J: Dosha 
Chogen, d. 1662). See Introduction, p. xxi. Nan-yuan- 
shan (J: Naninsan) was the site of Tao-che’s original 
temple, located in present-day Fukien province. 

26. For Yin-yuan (J: Ingen), see Introduction, p. xxi. Bankei is 
probably referring here to Yin-yuan’s disciple Mu-an 
Sheng-t’ao (J: Mokuan Shoto, 1611-1684), rather than to 
Yin-yuan himself. Bankei’s biography shows he was in 
Mino at the time of Yin-yUan’s arrival in 1654 but had 
returned to Tao-che’s assembly when Mu-an landed at 
Nagasaki in the following year to join his teacher. 
Fujimoto suggests the mention of Yin-yuan may have 
been an error by the editor or copyist. While it is possible 
that Bankei met Yin-yuan on his second visit to Tao-che 
in 1655, no firm evidence for this exists, and Bankei may 
simply have confused the teacher and his disciple in 
recalling events that had occurred some thirty-five years 
before. See Fujimoto Tsuchishige, Bankei kokushi no 
kenkyt (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1971), p. 168. 

27. Under the Tokugawa Shogunate, Nagasaki (capital of 
present-day Nagasaki Prefecture) was the only port of 
entry for foreigners—limited to Dutch and Chinese 
nationals—and the only city in which they were permitted 
to settle and establish businesses. 

28. Actually, Sugawara, an adopted name Bankei’s father 
received when he moved to the town of Hamada in 
present-day Hyogo Prefecture. 

29. A masterless samurai. Ronin were a common phenomenon 
in this period due to the dislocations following the victory 
of the Tokugawas in 1600. 

30. One of the five large islands that compose the Japanese 
archipelago. Bankei’s father and mother were both 
originally members of the Miyoshi clan of Awa, an old 
province included in present-day Tokushima Prefecture. 

31. Bankei is speaking at the Ryomonji in Aboshi. Hamada, 
where Bankei was born, presently constitutes a district 

= 

within Aboshi, now a ward of the city of Himeji in Hyogo 
Prefecture. In Bankei’s day, the three apparently 
comprised separate communities. 

. Originally a chapter of the Book of Rites (Li chi) the Great 
Learning became a cornerstone of the Chu Hsi brand of 
Sung Neo-Confucianism that constituted a kind of official 
orthodoxy in Tokugawa Japan. Because it was the 
shortest and among the easiest of the Confucian texts, 
students generally began their education with the Great 
Learning. The emphasis was on copying and recopying 
sections of the work, combined with what was known as 
sodoku, blind repetition and memorization of particular 
passages, reading off the characters without 
understanding the meaning of the text. 

. The opening lines of the Great Learning. The complete 
passage reads: “The Way of the Great Learning lies in 
illuminating the Bright Virtue, in loving the people and 
abiding in the highest good.” 

. That is, the Confucian Classics. 

. Literally, seated meditation. Zazen is practiced in most 
schools of Buddhism, but is a practice particularly 
identified with the Zen school. 

See above, fn. 7. At times, the nembutsu has been used by 
Zen monks as a form of meditation practice. 

A thin, soft paper produced in Bankei’s native province of 
Harima. 

The spherical fruit of a large deciduous tree found 
throughout Japan. 

By Western reckoning, Bankei was sixty-eight when this 
sermon was delivered, having experienced the realization 
he describes at age twenty-five. 

40. Bankei’s mother, who became a nun with the religious name 

BIS 
NO |— 

Myosetsu, died in 1680 at the age of ninety-one. 

. Umpo. See above, fn. 24. 

. An old province now included in Gifu Prefecture. 

. Gudo Toshoku (1579-1661), one of the leading Rinzai Zen 
masters of the early Tokugawa period. GudO was a 

member of the same teaching line as Bankei’s teacher 
Umpo, a line that leads to the famous eighteenth-century 
Zen master Hakuin Ekaku (1685-1769). 

44. The old name for Tokyo, which replaced Kyoto as Japan’s 

Ise 

capital during the Tokugawa period. 

. See above, fn. 2. 

. Kotsuzui. The pith or heart of the matter, the inner core of 
one’s being. Here, Bankei implies that the teachers won't 
be able to judge the true depth of his enlightenment 
experience. 

47. Bankei was in his late sixties when he delivered this sermon 

and was suffering, as he mentions here, from failing 
health, possibly a form of pulmonary tuberculosis. 

48. This statement recalls a passage in the 14th chapter of the 

19 

Chuang Tzu: “. . . Why all this huffing and puffing, as 
though you were carrying a big drum and searching for a 
lost child! The snow goose needs no daily bath to stay 
white; the crow needs no daily inking to stay black. .. .” 
(Translated by Burton Watson in The Complete Works of 
Chuang Tzu (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1968), p. 163. 

Spanish and Portuguese missionaries had _ introduced 
Christianity to Japan in the mid-sixteenth century. After a 
brief period of success, however, the new religion 
aroused the suspicion of the government and was 
brutally suppressed. Many converts were killed, others 
apostatized or went into hiding. The Shogunate’s 
determined efforts to root out covert Christians continued 
throughout the Tokugawa period and assumed something 
of the character of a witch-hunt. 

50. It is unclear precisely what Bankei means by this remark, as 

he was born in Hamada, the site of the RyOmonji, where 
this sermon is being delivered. Forty years previously, in 
1650, Bankei had returned to the area after his 
unsuccessful trip to Mino to consult Gudo Toshoku. At 
this time, he restored the hermitage at Nonaka, where he 
had experienced enlightenment, and “forty years” 

possibly refers to Bankei’s first teaching efforts in his 
native district, leading to the founding of the RyOmonji in 
1661. 

51. Buddhism frequently distinguishes ten different realms of 
existence. These are (in descending order) the realms of: 
buddhas—“enlightened ones”; bodhisattvas—potential 
buddhas, those who aspire to enlightenment, not for their 
own sake, but so that they may enlighten others; 
pratyeka buddhas and sravakas—classes of practitioners 
for whom enlightenment is realized primarily for oneself 
and not communicated to others; devas (see above, fn. 
9); men—sentient beings whose acts can determine their 
entry into any of the other realms; asuras—fighting 
spirits, demonic beings drawn from Hindu mythology; 
beasts—a joyless state of existence characterized by 
blind stupidity, a world ruled entirely by desire and lust 
where even parents and children will inflict harm on one 
another; hungry ghosts—beings condemned by their evil 
deeds to suffer constant hunger and thirst; and hell 
dwellers—the worst offenders, those whose evil deeds 
condemn them to lasting torment in any of a series of 
grotesque hells said to lie beneath the earth. The first 
four constitute the world of enlightenment, transcending 
the round of death and rebirth; the remaining six 
constitute the world of illusion through which the ignorant 
are condemned to transmigrate according to their good or 
evil karma—the accumulated fruits of their activities in 
this and previous lives. The last three, considered 
particularly odious, are known collectively as the Three 
Evil Paths, and are often combined with the asuras realm 
as the Four Evil Paths. While Bankei’s interpretation of 
the evil realms is often literal, he frequently treats them 
as psychological states as much as objective realities. 

52. The kappa is an imaginary creature who appears frequently 
in Japanese folklore. He has a face like a tiger, a beak, a 
body covered with scales and on his head a kind of 
concave saucer which, when filled with a small quantity of 

IR Ie 
& | 

water, gives him tremendous power. He is often said to 
lurk near bodies of water and lure animals, children and 
unwary travelers to their deaths. 

. A famous brigand of the twelfth century. 

. lt was customary for magistrates in Bankei’s period to recruit 
arrested criminals to serve as spies. Later, the practice 
was abandoned and regularly employed detectives were 
used. 

55. To commemorate the Buddha’s enlightenment, a week-long 

period of intensive meditation practice known as rohatsu 
is observed in Zen temples beginning on the first day of 
the twelfth month and culminating at dawn of the eighth 
day, when the Buddha is said to have experienced 
awakening on seeing the morning star. 

56. For Tao-che (J: Dosha), see above, fn. 25. As a young 

monk, Bankei had studied under Tao-che at his temple in 
Nagasaki (see Introduction, p. xxv). 

57. One of the six supernormal powers or functions of the 

buddha and bodhisattva. The other five are the powers of 
unlimited vision and unlimited hearing and understanding, 
the power to recall previous lives, the power to appear 
anywhere at will, and the power to cut off the stream of 
transmigration. 

58. One of the most famous Zen koans, the story appears in the 

thirteenth-century collection Wu-men kuan — (J: 
Mumonkan), “The Gateless Gate.” It concerns an old 
monk who, asked if an enlightened man is subject to birth 
and death, answered that he was not, and was 
consequently reborn as a wild fox for five hundred 
lifetimes. The monk is finally released when the Zen 
Master Po-chang Huai-hai (J: Hyakujo Ekai, 720-814) 
gives him the answer that an enlightened man is not blind 
to birth and death. In the Far East, the fox is known for 
his skill at dissembling, and “wild fox Zen” is a common 
epithet for those who falsely pretend to have experienced 
enlightenment. 

59. Bankei’s caustic remark here recalls a passage in the Lin-chi 

lu (J: Rinzai roku. See Introduction, p. xxxv): “... What are 
you looking for in these lands of dependent 
transformations! All of these, up to and including the 
Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of teachings, are just so 
much wastepaper to wipe off privy filth. . . .” (Translated 
in R. F. Sasaki, The Record of Lin-chi (Kyoto: The 
Institute for Zen Studies, 1975), p. 21.) 

60. The language Bankei uses here refers to the give-and-take 

of the Zen mondo (literally, “questions and answers’), 
also known as mondo shoryo, exchanges in which 
student and Zen master directly confront one another 
through words and actions, “testing and weighing” 
(shoryo) one another’s understanding. 

Because they were devised to deal with specific 
circumstances in the past and are no longer necessarily 
relevant. 

The Bodhisattva AvalokiteSvara, the embodiment of 
compassion toward the sufferings of sentient beings. 
Bankei’s Kannon remains the principal image, or honzon, 
of the RyOmonji and is one of many Buddhist statues 
Bankei sculpted during his lifetime. A number of his 
wood-carving tools are still preserved. 

63. The Chinese-derived reading for the old province of Mutsu 

(present-day Aomori Prefecture). 

. An old province now included in Shimane Prefecture. 

. Dokusan, the private interview with a Zen master which is a 
regular feature of Zen study. 

. A feature of Pure Land Buddhism is the belief that in the 
present degenerate age man can no longer attain 
enlightenment through his own efforts at religious 
practice, termed “self-power”’; his only hope is_ in 
complete reliance on the “other-power” of Amitabha’s 
saving grace (see above, fn. 7). 

67. A preface inserted in the text here reads: “Verbatim notes 

recording the sermons of the Zen Master Butchi Kosai as 

they were directly preached on the twenty-third day of the 
eighth month on the occasion of his crossing to the 
Hoshinji in Marugame, Sanuki, at the close of the eighth 
month of the third year of Genroku (1690).” Sanuki is the 
old province that now composes Kagawa Prefecture on 
the island of Shikoku. The Hoshinji was founded by 
Yosho-in (d. 1689), foster mother of Bankei’s patron 
Kyogoku Takatoyo (1655-1694), the daimyo of 
Marugame. It was at Yosho-in’s dying request that the 
sermons recorded here were delivered. Bankei’s visit to 
the Hoshinji, during which these sermons were given, 
preceded the Ryomonji training period by about a month; 
but, whatever the reason, the text has placed the Hoshinji 
sermons last. 

68. The Jizoji, a temple Bankei founded in 1664 in Yamashina, a 

section of the Higashiyama district of Kyoto. Bankei 
enjoyed the Jizojis quiet atmosphere, staying there 
whenever he was in Kyoto and spending several periods 
there in retreat. The temple no longer exists. 

69. An area in the Higashiyama district where the Tokaido, the 

old highway linking Edo and Kyoto, entered the city. 

70. Otherwise unknown. A letter from Lord Koide to Bankei is 

preserved at the RyOmonii. 

71. Certain “holy” days set aside by the government during 

which punishments were suspended. 

. Raiban, a platform placed before the temple’s main altar. At 
the beginning and close of his sermon, the teacher 
mounts the platform and performs aé_ series of 
prostrations. 

Shaka is the Japanese pronunciation of Sakya, the 
shortened form of Sakyamuni, “sage of the Sakyas,” the 
title of the historical Buddha Siddhartha Gautama 
(approximate dates: mid-sixth to early fifth centuries 
B.C.). The Sakyas were the North Indian tribe into which 
the Buddha was born. 

74. An important town of Sanuki province (see above, fn. 67), 

located some twelve miles east of Marugame. 

. A unit of cosmic time, developed in ancient India. The term 

kalpa suggests a virtually measureless infinity, the time, 
for example, in which a universe is born, decays and 
vanishes. 

76. The Buddha Body is the subject of numerous and frequently 

elaborate theories in Buddhism. Bankei’s meaning here, 
however, seems quite plain: namely, that both sexes 
intrinsically “embody” the enlightened mind. 

77. Ceramic bowls produced in Korea during the Yi dynasty 

(1392-1910) were prized in Japan as tea bowls for use in 
the tea ceremony. Their popularity is said to date from the 
Regent Hideyoshi’s (1536—1598) invasion of Korea, when 
examples of Korean ceramics first attracted the attention 
of many Japanese connoisseurs. As a result, Hideyoshi’s 
Korean campaign (1592-1598) is sometimes referred to 
as the “Pottery War.” The bowls Bankei refers to were 
treasured antiques dating from the sixteenth century. 

78. The KOrinji, one of Bankei’s leading temples, erected for him 

in 1678 in Tokyo’s Azabu district by Lord Kyogoku’s foster 
mother, the nun Yosho-in (see above, fn. 67). The 
Ryomonji, Korinji and Nyohoji (see below, fn. 80) 
constituted Bankei’s three major temples. Because of its 
connection with Lord Kyogoku’s family and its location in 
the capital, the Korinji was important in widening Bankei’s 
contacts among the daimyo, or feudal lords, and their 
samurai retainers, many of whom became his disciples. 
The Tokugawa government obliged the daimyo to 
maintain residences in the capital, where they were 
expected to live, generally in alternate years, and where 
their families remained as de facto hostages to the 
Shogunate on their return to their domains. 

79. A familiar practice in the Tokugawa period known as fsujigiri, 

literally, “street-corner killing.” A samurai anxious to test a 
new blade he had acquired would lurk in some deserted 

spot, waiting to attack whatever unfortunate pedestrian 
happened along. By law, a samurai was permitted to cut 
down any commoner who behaved disrespectfully toward 
him, so that, as in the present story, the killer might easily 
concoct some pretext for his attack, such as the claim 
that his intended victim had touched his sword or 
garments, technically considered capital offenses that 
could be punished on the spot. 

80. The Nyohdji, in the town of Ozu (or Osu) in lyo, an old 

Shikoku province now included in Ehime Prefecture. The 
temple was founded in 1669 by Bankei’s patron Kato 

Yasuoki (1618-1677), daimyo of Ozu, then a fief within 
lyo province. As seen here, fiefs are generally named for 

the castle towns such as Ozu in which the daimyo had 
their principal residences. 

. A ri (CH: //) is approximately two miles; hence, “two or three 

r’ here indicates a radius of some four to six miles. 
Presumably referring to items from the wife’s dowry. 

. That is, the husband and the mother-in-law. 

Magoemon is the merchant’s given name. 

Namu myoho rengeky Oo! (“Praise to the Sutra of the Lotus of 
the Wonderful Law!”), an invocation to the Lotus Sutra, 
recited in the Nichiren school (see above, fn. 7). 

86. The four classes that composed Tokugawa society, given in 

order of importance according to the Confucian-inspired 
social theory of the period. Note that Buddhist monks and 
nuns are not included in the categories. 

. The state of perfect oneness and concentration experienced 

in meditation. 

. A flaming cart that is said to carry sinners to hell and to 

serve as an instrument of their torment. 

. Judging by Bankei’s remarks, the townsman appears to 

have stayed on after the first lecture to present his 
question. 

. In Buddhism, clinging, anger and foolishness are often 

referred to collectively as the Three Poisons, the source 

of the evils that poison men’s minds. 

PART Il 

|— 

A well-known center for ceramics production in Saga 
Prefecture on the island of Kyushu. Imari was the 
ordinary household ware of Bankei’s period. 

. See above, Part |, fn. 90. 

. Kiku, the set of regulations governing every aspect of the 
monk’s life in the Zen monastery, from his conduct in the 
meditation hall to the way he removes his sandals. In 
Rinzai temples today, the kiku are generally posted on a 
board over the back entrance of the monks’ hall. 

In Buddhist temples in China and Japan, the length of 
meditation is traditionally computed according to the 
number of sticks of incense burned. A single stick of 
incense burns for approximately thirty minutes. Hence, 
Bankei’s students had decided to meditate for some six 
hours a day. 

. In Zen temples, the practice of sitting meditation, or zazen, is 
punctuated by periods of walking meditation known as 
kinhin. 

. An old Zen expression describing the state in which the 
student’s mind is totally obsessed with a_ particular 
problem, so that his whole being becomes the problem 
itself. The “ball of doubt” is often considered the prelude 
to the experience of satori, or enlightenment. 

. See above, Part, fn. 60. 

. “Chinese words” apparently refers to the Japanese reading of 
Chinese Zen expressions traditionally used by Japanese 
monks in the course of mondo. 

. The eye of wisdom, with which the bodhisattva is able to 
perceive the true state of all things and to save sentient 
beings. 

10. From the standpoint of enlightened mind, the realm of birth 

and death, of deluded sentient existence, is itself seen to 

Ido INO 

Le 

In 

I 

ICO IN 

Ico 

be the unborn and imperishable realm of nirvana. 

1. The subject of a popular koan, based on a story told about 

Huineng (638-713), the Sixth Chinese Patriarch of Zen. 
According to the story, Hui-neng secretly left his teacher’s 
temple after receiving from him the robe and _ bowl, 
symbols of the Patriarchal transmission. He was pursued 
and confronted by a jealous fellow monk, Hui-ming, who 
was then enlightened when the Sixth Patriarch asked 
him: “Without thinking of good or evil, right at this 
moment, what is your original face before your mother 
and father were born?” 

12. Upon entering Buddhism, one vows to take refuge in—to 

uphold and revere—what are known as the Three 
Jewels: the Buddha, the Dharma, or the Buddha's 
teaching, and the Sangha, the brotherhood of adherents. 

That is, limited to the functioning of the “six senses,” 

considered in Buddhism to be sight, hearing, smell, taste, 
touch and consciousness. 

14. A temple established in 1685 by Bankei’s patron Matsuura 

Shigenobu (1622-1703), daimyo of Hirado, a domain in 
Hizen province, now included in Nagasaki Prefecture. At 
Lord Matsuura’s request, Bankei became the temple's 
founder. The present Fumonji is on a different site. 

. That is, some six to eight miles. 
. See above, Part, fn. 80. 
A popular koan, often assigned to beginning students. 

According to the story on which it is based, the Zen 
Master Chao-chou Ts’ung-shen (J: JOshu JUshin, 778— 
897) was asked by a monk: “Does a dog have buddha- 
nature?” Chao-chou said: “Mu!” (CH: wu!) Literally, mu 
means “no,” but the koan student is generally urged to 
concentrate his entire being into the sound itself. 

Bankei implies that his speaking about the one word 

“unborn” is as constant for him as the sparrow’s chirp and 
the crow’s caw. Elsewhere, he refers more explicitly to 
the “one word ‘unborn.” 

19. By the “world of externals,” Bankei refers to all objective 
existence, including both inner and outer states of being; 
when perceived dualistically, these are all “outside” the 
Buddha Mind. 

20. That is, when the mind, like water, returns to its original, 
formless state, it becomes fluid, transparent, with nothing 
to obstruct its free flow. Bankei thus compares the mind, 
“frozen” into particular forms, to the water frozen in a tub 
or container which, when melted, allows the hand to 
reach in freely and scoop it up. 

21. This is similar to a passage in the “Discourses” section of 

the Lin-chi lu:“. . . What do we lack for our manifold 
activities today? . . .” See Sasaki, The Record of Rinzai, 
op. cit., p. 8. 

22. Sendai was the chief town of Rikuzen Province in northern 
Japan and is now included in Miyagi Prefecture. In 
Bankei’s day it was part of the old province of Mutsu, of 
which oshu is the Chinese-derived reading. 

23. A phrase from “The Return,” a well-known poem by the 
Chinese poet T’ao Ch’ien (371-427). 

24-27. The Japanese pronunciation of Bodhidharma, the semi- 
legendary Indian monk of the sixth century who is said to 
have brought Zen to China and is traditionally revered as 
the First Patriarch of Chinese Zen. He is said to have 
spent nine years in meditation facing a wall at the Shao- 
lin temple on Mt. Sung in modem Honan. Te-shan Hsuan- 
chien (J: Tokusan Senkan, 780/2—865) was a specialist in 
the Diamond Sutra, a short Mahayana scripture highly 
regarded in Zen, but after being enlightened, he burnt all 
the commentaries he had assembled. Chu-ti (J: Gutei, 
n.d.) is said to have been enlightened on seeing his 
master Tien-lung (J: Tenryu, d. 788) raise a finger, a 
practice that Chu-ti regularly repeated with his own 
students. Lin-chi I-hsuan (J: Rinzai Gigen, d. 866) is 
revered as the founder of the Lin-chi or Rinzai school of 
Zen. Katsul (CH: ho!) is the sound of a shout used by Zen 

monks. It is particularly associated with Lin-chi, who is 
frequently described employing it in the Lin-chi lu. 
28. See Introduction, p. xxxv. 
An old province now included primarily in the Kyoto 
municipal district, with some areas included in Hyogo 
Prefecture. 

NO 

HOGO (Instruction) 

. That is, the Buddha Mind. 

. See Sermons (ll), fn. 22. 

. Earth, water, fire and wind, which, according to Buddhist 
theory, are the four physical constituents of the body and 
of the universe itself. They represent, respectively, solid 
and liquid matter, heat and movement. 

. In present-day Ehime Prefecture. 

. Also located in Ehime Prefecture. Nothing more is known of 
Kantaro. 

. Nothing is known of him. 

. Bankei’s disciple Togaku Josen (d. 1726). 

. TairyO Sokyo (1638-1688), reputed to have been Bankei’s 
foremost disciple. 

. The remainder of this episode suggests that JOsen was 
repeating one of Bankei’s familiar statements about the 
Unborn. 

10. Shinran Shonin (see Sermons (I), fn. 7). Echigo, an old 
province now included in Niigata Prefecture, was the site 
of Shinran’s five-year exile by the Kamakura Shogunate. 

11. “Who is the one who sees and hears?” is a koan that first 
became popular in Japan during the medieval period. 

12. Japanese folk wisdom holds that there are four things to be 
feared above all others: earthquake, thunder, fire and 
one’s father, in order of fearsomeness. 

13. Sanzen sekai. Literally, the three “thousand-fold” worlds 

(SKT: tri-sahasra-loka-dhatu). According to ancient Indian 

cosmology, the universe consists of three types of 

JO0 INO I> 

lon | 

Ico IN IO 

Ico 

interlocking worlds, the lesser, middle and greater, each a 
thousand times larger than the one preceding it. A 
thousand of our own universes comprise a single lesser 
world. In Buddhism, the expression signifies the entire 
universe and the limitless worlds it contains. 

14. The leading temple of the Shingon sect, founded by Kukai in 

15 

816 in what is today Wakayama Prefecture. 

. The headquarters of the Tendai sect, established in 788 by 

Saicho. Mt. Hiei is northeast of Kyoto, on the boundary 
between the Kyoto municipal district and Shiga 
Prefecture. 

Bankei is referring to the Tokeiji, a Rinzai temple in 

Kamakura (Kanagawa Prefecture), founded as a nunnery 
in 1286 by the widow of the Regent Hojo Tokimune 
(1251-1284). Women who wished to escape unhappy 
marriages could obtain a divorce by taking sanctuary 
here, even if their husbands followed in hot pursuit. The 
TOokeiji is now a temple for monks. 

17. Eimyo Zenko (1653-1716). Originally a Soto monk from omi, 

AIS 

he became a student of Bankei and eventually the heir of 
Bankei’s disciple Sekimon. ZenkoO was_ the fourth- 
generation abbot of the Ryomonji. 

. An old province now included in Shiga Prefecture. 
. Literally, the eighth, or dlaya consciousness. The Yogacara, 

or Consciousness Only School of Buddhism, posits eight 
types of consciousness, of which the eighth is the dlaya 
or storehouse consciousness containing the “seeds” of all 
thoughts and perceptions. The dalaya consciousness is 
said to be “perfumed” by impressions from outside, and 
only when these are exhausted does ultimate reality—the 
pure, unconditioned mind of Such-ness—appear. 

. The katsu!, referred to previously. 
. Yuan-wu K’o-ch’in (J: Engo Kokugon, 1063-1135) and Ta- 

hui Tsung-kao (J: Daie Soko, 1089-1163), Rinzai masters 
of the Sung dynasty who were key figures in the 
development of koan study in Zen. Yuan-wu is known 

primarily for the koan collection Blue Cliff Record (CH: Pi- 
yen lu). His disciple Ta-hui advocated a_ vigorous, 
dynamic, non-conceptual approach to koan_ study, 
emphasizing particularly the koan Mu. The leading lines 
of Japanese Rinzai Zen today trace their descent from 
Yuan-wu and his heirs. 

2. Bankei’s question is rhetorical: “Since the Zen teachers 

before the Sung dynasty (960-1280) didn’t use koans,” 
he asks, “why do | have to?” Although Yuan-wu and Ta- 
hui were leading early exponents of Koan Zen, the actual 
use of koans probably predates them. Nevertheless, 
Bankei is accurate in observing that Koan_ study 
represented a later development and was not employed 
by the majority of masters of the so-called golden age of 
Chinese Zen in the Tang (618-906) and Five Dynasties 
(907-960) periods. 

23. Nan-yueh Huai-chang (J: Nangaku Ejo, 677-744). A disciple 

of the Sixth Patriarch, referred to previously. The episode 
mentioned by Bankei appears in the Ching-te ch’uan-teng 
lu (The Ching-te Era Record of the Transmission of the 
Lamp), a collection of Zen biographies completed in 
1004. 

24. The stole worn over the Buddhist priest’s robe. It is draped 

over the left shoulder and gathered under the right 
armpit. The kesa’s color and size may vary according to 
the sect and the particular occasion for which it is worn. 

25. A temple in the village of Hitaki in Gifu Prefecture. Bankei 

held a training period there in 1692. 

. Otherwise unknown. 
. The Kanzanji is a Rinzai temple, originally located in the city 

of Osaka and now moved to another site in the Osaka 
municipal district. Jiton (n.d.) was the disciple of the 
Kanzanjis abbot Reigan Sokei (d. 1696), who had 
studied with Bankei under Dosha and became his 
traveling companion afterward. Bankei was a frequent 
visitor at the temple. 

28. In present-day Nara Prefecture. 

Ss 
es: 

\S°) 

a2. 

29. The Obaku sect Zen Master Rytikei Shdsen (1602-1670). 

Though he served as abbot of the Myoshinji, Ryukei 
abandoned his position in the Myoshinji line to become 
the disciple of the Ming Zen Master Yin-yuan, referred to 
previously. 

. Bankei’s disciple Keio Soboku (d. 1691). 
. Bokuo Sogyu (d. 1694), successor of Bankei’s original 

teacher Umpo. 

The Myoshinji. Umpo and his disciples Bokuo and Bankeli 
were members of the Shotaku-ha, a Myoshinji teaching 
line founded by the Zen Master Toyo Eicho (1429-1504). 
The Myoshinji annually rotated its abbacy among the Zen 

masters of its principal lines. Bokuo assumed the abbacy 
in 1671, and Bankei, in 1672. 

33. Joshgjiin. To dedicate oneself to a life of constant religious 

practice, abjuring all worldly impurities. In Japan, the 
expression shojin may refer specifically to the avoidance 
of meat-eating, and certain Buddhist temples are famous 
for their shojin ryori, or vegetarian cuisine. 

34. A well-known expression from the Lin-chi lu, sometimes 

translated as “a man of no affairs,” or “a man who has 
nothing to do.” It describes the free and easy spirit of the 
enlightened man, who has_ no_ problems, no 
entanglements, nothing further to seek. Having realized 
that originally, just as he is is buddha, there is nothing 
more for him to bother about. 

Bizen is an old province now included in Okayama 
Prefecture. In the winter of 1689-1690, Bankei held a 
brief training period at the Sanyuji, a temple in the town of 
Okayama in southwestern Bizen. 

36. A neighboring province to Bizen, also now included in 

Okayama Prefecture. 
Now an area of Okayama city, referred to above. 

. The school of Nichiren, previously mentioned. 

Referring to Bankei’s initial experience of enlightenment in 
1647, described in the Sermons. 

40. Bankei’s retreat in Ako, in present-day Hyogo Prefecture. It 

was here that Bankei spent two years of grueling practice 
before realizing enlightenment. 

. The eye which illumines all things. 
. “I? here and in the sections that follow refers to Bankei’s heir, 

Itsuzan Sonin (or Sojin, 1655-1734), the compiler of the 
Hogo. 

. A quotation from the Analects, in which Yen Yuan praises 

his teacher Confucius. 

44. The former religious name of Bankei’s disciple Daien Ryoko 

(1624-1706). 

. A mountainous district in present-day Nara Prefecture. See 

Introduction, p. xxvi. 

46. Dokushd Shden (1617-1694), a monk of the Obaku school, 

who became a Dharma heir of Yin-yuan. His temple was 
located in Saga, west of Kyoto. 

47. A Japanese nightingale. 

FROM THE GYOGO RYAKKI 

|— 

INO 

I& loo 

In 

. Fudo (SKT: Acala) is a wrathful Buddhist deity particularly 

popular in Japan. The Ryomonji’s Fudo Hall was erected 
in 1676. 

. Osho is a general term of respect for Buddhist monks, similar 

to “Reverend,” but may have the added meaning of 
teacher or abbot. Sekimon Somin (1642-1696) was a 
Dharma heir of Bankei who became the third abbot of the 
Ryomonji. 

. Tenkyd Shihaku (d. 1722). A disciple of Bankei. 
. A letter of this period (1692) addressed to Bankei from Lord 

Kyugoku’s wife indicates that Bankei was suffering from 
pains in the feet which prevented him from standing. 

. That is, Itsuzan Sonin, the compiler of the present work. The 

others are Bankei’s disciples Reigen Shuin (1653-1718) 

and Taikei Sokaku (d. 1719). These three, sometimes 
referred to as the “three jisha (attendants),” served as 
Bankei’s close attendants during his last years. 

. Located in Hamada, referred to previously. 

. Asub-temple on the grounds of the Nyohdji. 

. This refers to the religious name assigned by a Buddhist 
priest, who customarily writes out the characters of the 
name himself. Buddhist names are given to both monks 
and laymen on particular occasions, such as joining the 
priesthood or becoming a lay disciple. 

ICo IN I> 

POEMS 

j— 

. The Tang dynasty monk Tsung-mi (780-841) divided Zen into 
five different grades leading from the lowest to the 
“highest” truth, which consisted in realizing one’s original 
buddhahood. 

An expression used in Zen to describe the world of 
enlightenment. 

. The religious name of Bankei’s disciple Kato Yasuoki, daimyo 

of Ozu. See also Bankei’s advice to the Layman Gesso 
on the art of combat, pp. 138-139. 

. Now the town of Mitsu in Hyogo Prefecture. 

. The four physical constituents of the body. See Hogo, fn. 3. 

. The Lotus Sutra compares the life of sentient beings in the 
world of delusion to the situation of children at play in a 
burning house, oblivious to the flames about to consume 
them. 

. “Self (J: m/) here includes both mind and body. 

. Tathagata. See Sermons, Part 1, fn. 10. This verse includes a 
kind of play on words between the expressions “. . . as it 
was when you came into the world” and “thus-come one” 
(a literal translation of the term tathagata), which contain 
the same characters in different order. 

. That is, which are not innate. 

10. J: Nido. Twin guardian demons of ferocious mien, often 

placed at the entrance to Buddhist temples in Japan. 

IN 

(ee) 

ID 1 | 

ICO IN 

— |coO 

Bankei implies that rather than trying to become a “shrine 
buddha’ wrapped in sanctity, the student should manifest 
the dynamic spiritual power symbolized by the Deva 
Kings. Suzuki Shosan (1579-1655), another Zen master 
active during the early Tokugawa period, was known for 
urging his students to imitate the attitude of the Deva 
Kings rather than practice a quiet introspective form of 
meditation. See Introduction, p. xx. 

11. That is, original mind is not something that exists outside, 
but your own true identity. On another level, this implies 
that, for the enlightened, true self alone remains, with all 
dualism dissolved, as in the Buddha’s supposed 
pronouncement at birth: “In heaven and on earth, | alone 
am to be revered!” 

12. Bankei is apparently addressing his audience here: “] am 
passing you my precious teaching,” he seems to say; 
“accept it, don’t miss your chance! It is fragile as a rare 
tea bowl, so receive it with your ‘soft,’ resilient mind. 
Receive it stiffly and it will smash and come to nothing.” 

LETTERS 

. Hamlets in Ako, the site of Umpo’s temple, the Zuidji. 

. Umpo is probably referring to an expression that appears in 
the Linchi lu, “The man on the summit of a solitary peak” 
The actual meaning of this phrase is uncertain, but in 
Japan it has some times been interpreted as a metaphor 
for the enlightenment of the pratyeka buddha in contrast 
with that of the Mahayana bodhisattva—the realm of 
“tathagata Zen” as opposed to that of “patriarchal Zen,” 
referred to below. Umpo’s use of these expressions is 
somewhat ironic, and what he seems to be affirming, 
above all, is an attitude of determined independence. 

. Unidentified. 

. The term “patriarchal Zen” became popular during the Sung 
dynasty to describe the method of sudden and complete 
enlightenment reputedly transmitted by the patriarchs of 

IN I> 

I [oo 

Zen, beginning with Bodhidharma. This was contrasted 
with the “gradual” approach of progressively eliminating 
defilements, which was dubbed “tathagata Zen.” 

5. The buddhas of the past, the buddhas of the present, and the 
buddhas who are yet to come, /.e., all enlightened beings. 

6. See Introduction, p. xxvii. 

7. Following the text in Bankei kokushi no kenkyu, p. 102. 

8. A traditional Buddhist death robe made from seven pieces of 
material. 

9. Apparently a popular saying. The actual meaning seems to 
be that when you go back to your hometown you should 
put on all your finery—that is, after you’ve made it, go 
back to the village and show off; but Bankei has given the 
expression an interesting twist. 

10. Ki (CH: ch’) is a kind of vital force, the dynamic physical 
manifestation of mind. The concept of ki remains 
important in many Chinese and Japanese martial arts. 

11. That is, the mirror mind which clearly reflects all things. 

“WORDS AND DEEDS” 

1. A temple of the Pure Land sect in Bankei’s native village of 
Hamada. Early education for boys in pre-modern Japan 
frequently occurred at such terakoya, or temple schools, 
classrooms set up in the local Buddhist temple where 
young men were taught the basics of reading and writing. 
Bankei reportedly studied at the Daigakuji together with 
his friend and future patron Sasaki Nobutsugu, but 
disliked the course of study and eventually dropped out. 
See Introduction, pp. xxiii. 

2. Tadayasu (d. 1661), Bankei’s older brother, had become head 
of the family after his father’s death, succeeding to his 
medical practice. 

A river located in what is now Hyogo Prefecture. 

These were traditional stone shrines containing alcoves in 
which images and gravestones could be placed, the 
alcoves being frequently large enough to accommodate a 

3. 
4. 

person. Bankei’s abortive suicide attempt described here 
was said to have occurred at the family temple, the 
Hamada Saihdji. Bankei’s father was buried at the 
Saihoji, which had been originally restored by Bankei’s 
middle brother Juden (n.d.), a Pure Land priest. The 
stone shrine of the story is still preserved at the temple. 

1624-1643. Fujimoto suggests the events described here 

occurred in 1636, when Bankei would have been 
fourteen. 

. For the Saihoji, see above, fn. 4. Jukin was the teacher of 
Bankei’s middle brother, the Pure Land Priest Juden. 

. See Sermons, Part, fn. 7. Because of Kukai’s fame in Japan, 
as both a religious teacher and calligrapher, works of art 
were frequently attributed to him. According to a legend 
still current in Bankei’s native area, the statue was of 
Kannon rather than Fudo. 

. Angya, “traveling by foot,” is the pilgrimage during which the 
Zen monk leaves his teacher’s temple and _ travels, 
practicing Zen and visiting various masters to test and 
broaden his understanding. See Introduction, p. xxiv. 

. A town in present-day Gifu Prefecture. 

10. That is, enlightenment. 

11. A pack-driver from Seki who reportedly took Bankei on his 

unsuccessful journey to visit the Zen Master Gudo in 
1648. He subsequently returned with Bankei and erected 
a hut for his use in Seki’s Kitta district. 
12. Omi is an old province, included in present-day Shiga 
Prefecture. 
. An old province included in present-day Ishikawa Prefecture. 
. A Buddhist shrine belonging to the Asakusadera, a well- 
known Tendai temple in Tokyo. Its principal image is a 
horse-headed Kannon. The episode related here is said 
to have occurred during Bankei’s visit to Edo in 1655, 
when he was thirty-three. According to contemporary 
descriptions of Edo, colonies of beggars and other social 
outcasts had established themselves in the Asakusa and 

In 

ID 

IN 

|Co 

— |CO 

15 

Shinagawa districts of the city. They were formed into a 
guild of sorts, with a chief for each district who reported in 
turn to a general commander of all the city’s beggars. 

. See Introduction, p. xxvi. 

. That is, Bankei. 

. A hermitage established for Bankei by Lord Matsuura in a 
suburban mansion that served as_ his principal 
headquarters. Lord Matsuura later erected a temple on 
the site, the Tenshoji. 

. In present-day Gifu Prefecture. 

. An old unit of Japanese coinage. 

. Bankei quotes a passage from the opening of the Great 
Learning. 

. Lu (J: Ro), the state in which Confucius was born, located in 
present-day Shantung Province. 

. That is, the truth of Zen, which Bodhidharma is said to have 
carried from India to China. 

. The opening lines of the Confucian’s poem derive from the 
Mean (Chung-yung), which, like the Great Learning, was 
a Classic particularly revered by Neo-Confucianism. The 
verse is said to express the manner in which all living 
things delight in manifesting their own inborn natures. 

Nakabori Sukeyasu (n.d.), headman of the village of 
Shimomura, was an old family friend, having originally 
assisted Bankei’s father in settling in the Aboshi area. 
See Introduction, p. xxiv. Sukeyasu was the great- 
grandfather of Daitei Zenkei (d. 1788), compiler of the 
Itsujijo, from which this episode is drawn. 

. Now the town of Yamazaki in Hyogo Prefecture. 

. Aman-eating demon of fearsome aspect. 

Mount Grdhrakuta, where the Buddha is said to have 
delivered the Lotus Sutra. 

. Fujioka Kenshitchi (n.d.), a minor official serving under Lord 

Kato. He was assigned to look after Bankei during his 
visits to Ozu. 

29. A renowned military strategist of the early Tokugawa period. 
He died in 1651. 

30. The monk is quoting a famous passage in the Amitabha 

sutra, a popular text in Pure Land Buddhism. 

. A town in present-day Shiga Prefecture. 

. A type of altar consisting of multiple Buddhist images 
grouped together, often miniature images of a particular 
Buddha, such as Amitabha. The altar in question is a 
famous attraction of the Jogodo, a temple in what is 
today Otsu city in Shiga Prefecture. 

(942-1017). An early devotee of Pure Land Buddhism. The 
Eshinin was the name of his retreat at Yokawa on Mt. 
Hiei, the headquarters of the Tendai school. 

That is, the nembutsu (see Sermons, Part, fn. 7). 

The Jizoji, Bankei’s temple in Kyoto, mentioned previously. 

A bodhisattva who himself becomes an icchantika, one who 
is incapable of realizing enlightenment, in order to save 
those who are irredeemable. 

An old province in what is now the Osaka municipal district. 

(668-749). A popular early Japanese Buddhist practitioner. 
He was greatly revered by the Emperor Shornu (r. 724— 
749), who conferred on him the title “bosatsu,” or 
bodhisattva. 

39. Along with mantra (J: shingon), dharani constitute the 
sacred formulas that play an important role in Buddhist 
practice and ritual. Generally speaking, dharani are 
longer, mantra shorter, but the expressions are often 
used synonymously. Although particularly associated with 
Esoteric Buddhism, mantra and dharani became familiar 
features of Chinese Buddhism generally. They became 
popular in Chinese Zen temples during the Sung and 
Yuan dynasties and similarly found their way into the Zen 
monasteries in Japan, where many are still included in 
the liturgy. 

40. The five cardinal crimes are patricide, matricide, killing an 
arhat (a class of enlightened beings), disrupting the 

ISB 
NO |— 

Ie 
su 

ISI ES 
Ich LS 

harmony of the Sangha, and shedding the blood of a 
buddha. The ten evil acts are killing, stealing, lechery, 
lying, being double-tongued, speaking in jest, slander, 
covetousness, anger and foolishness. 

41. Buddhist scriptures describe the tortures endured by sinners 

condemned to eight hot and eight cold hells. 

Nusa, Shinto offerings, generally made of rope, cloth or 
paper. In this case, Bankei is apparently sending a gift of 
candles to a local shrine. 

43. Figures buried with the dead. In the Mencius, Confucius is 

quoted as saying that the use of these figures led to the 
pernicious practice of burying alive retainers’ to 
accompany their deceased lord to the grave. 

44. Toki, the meal offered to Buddhist monks on the occasion of 

a funeral service. 

45. A close disciple of Bankei, YUho Soen died during the early 

Ais 

part of the RyOmonji training period of 1690, at which this 
sermon was delivered. His age at death is unknown. 

. The hospital quarters for sick monks in a Zen temple. 
. The Japanese pronunciation of the Sanskrit word acarya, 

meaning teacher or master. In Zen, it is often used simply 
as a respectful term of address for monks. 

48. In Shingon Buddhism, the letter a symbolizes the eternal 

underlying reality of the universe, personified as the 
cosmic Buddha Mahavairocana. This is expressed in the 
formula ajihompusho, “[That which is symbolized by] the 
letter a is originally unborn.” 

Gesso was the religious name of Bankei’s samurai patron 
Kato Yasuoki, mentioned previously. Bankei’s reply 
seems to suggest that for a samurai like Lord Kato, it was 
as unseemly to give way publicly to anger as to tears. 

. The editor of the /tsujijo, Daitei Zenkei. 
. Ryozan is the “mountain name” for the Saishoji, Daitei’s 

temple in Edo. 

. A former student of Tao-che who later became Bankei’s 

disciple. His dates are unknown. 

53. TairyO Sokyo (1638-1688), reputed to have been Bankei’s 

foremost disciple. 

54. That is, at the moment it emerges from the undifferentiated 

absolute into the world of form. The language of the 
samurai’s question suggests the metaphysics of Neo- 
Confucianism, which was frequently taking the offensive 
against Buddhism, and particularly Zen, at this time. 

. A quotation from the Analects. “Confucius said: ‘Yu, shall | 
teach you what knowledge is? To say that you know a 
thing when you do know it and say that you do not know 
a thing when you do not know it—this is knowledge.” Yu 
was Confucius’ pupil, also Known as Tzu-lu (542-480 
B.C.). 

56. Probably Jingen Jisho (d. 1689), sixth-generation abbot of 

the Kodaiji, a Soto temple in Nagasaki. 

57. Chr’ang-ch’ing WHui-lung (J: Chokei Eryo, 854-932). 
Becoming a monk at age thirteen, he studied under Ling- 
yun Hui-tsung (J: Reiun Esht, n.d.) and subsequently 
visited the Zen Master Hsueh-feng I-ts’un (J: Seppo 
Gison, 822-908) and Hsueh-feng’s heir Hsuan-sha Shih- 
pei (Gensha Shibi, 835-908). Despite all his studies, 
however, he failed to resolve his questions about Zen. 
Even after many years of effort and wearing out seven 
meditation cushions, understanding still eluded him till, 
suddenly, raising a bamboo shade, he experienced 
enlightenment and succeeded to Hsueh-feng’s teaching. 

. Unidentified. 

. Apparently referring to a passage in the Chao-chou lu, the 
record of the Tang dynasty Zen Master Chao-chou 
Ts’ung-shen, referred to previously. “Shu-yu remarked: 
‘Getting older and older—why don't you find a place to 
settle down?’ Chao-chou asked: ‘Where can | settle 
down?’ Shu-yu said: ‘Getting older and older and he 
doesn’t even know where to settle down!” 

60. The monk is probably a follower of the Shingon school, 

which is especially associated with the Light Mantra. 

KA 
On 

Sle 
IO {OO 

CEL: 

Practice of the mantra is said to endow one with a 
mystical radiance capable of dispelling all evils and 
obstructions. 

Bankei’s disciple Settei Kiryd (d. 1701). 

62. Tzu-kung (c. 520-450 B.C.) is said to have continually 

compared the relative merits of persons or of things. 

63. ROzan Genni (d. 1740). He studied under Bankei and later 

became a Zen master in Bankei’s line. 

These expressions apparently express the dramatic 

character of the demands that the Zen teacher places on 
his students as he destroys the deluded self. The 
expression “burying alive” appears in the Lin-chi lu. 
“Everywhere else they use cremation,” exclaims Lin-chi, 
“but here | bury them alive all at once!” (Sasaki, op. cit., 
p. 29). In Japan, the Soto Master Tsugen Jakuryo (1322-— 
1391) is said to have had a pit dug at the entrance to the 
monks’ hall before which he would examine students 
seeking admission to the temple. Those unable to reply 
he would hurl into the pit, which became known as the 
“pit where men are buried alive.” 

65. Hsiao p’in (J: kohin), “To imitate the knitting of the brows.” A 

Chinese expression referring to Hsi Shih, a famous 
beauty of the sixth century B.C. who, when ill, knit her 
brows, enhancing the charm of her face and inspiring the 
homely women of the village to imitate her in the false 
hope of making themselves beautiful as well. 

66. Referring to a story in the 24th chapter of the Chuang Tzu. 

Chuang Tzu tells of a certain plasterer who, finding a 
speck of plaster on the tip of his nose, would summon his 
friend, Carpenter Shih, and have him remove it with 
successive strokes of his adze, an operation which Shih 
performed without leaving so much as a scratch on the 
plasterer’s nose. 

67. A hermitage within the grounds of the RyOmonji. Bankei took 

up quarters there during the original construction of the 
temple. 

68. Yawa. An evening lecture delivered by the teacher at a Zen 

temple. 
A now defunct temple founded by Bankei in what is 
presently the town of Mitsu in Hyogo Prefecture. 

70. Referring to a passage in the Lin-chi lu. Seeing Lin-chi 

planting pine trees, his teacher Huang-po asked him: 
“Why plant all those pines deep in the mountains?” Lin- 
chi said: “First of all, to provide the temple with a nice 
setting; secondly, to provide a model for later 
generations.” 

71. Nothing is Known of Hachiroemon. 

Translator’s Notes 

SERMONS 

Apart from occasional letters and a small number of poems, 
Bankei himself wrote almost nothing in the entire course of his 
career. The sermons provide virtually our only first-hand knowledge 
of Bankei’s Zen. The Master, however, reportedly forbade his 
disciples to record his teachings, and of the many sermons he 
delivered, only a small portion survive. These consist primarily of two 
sets of sermons from the year 1690: a series of talks delivered in 
early autumn at the Marugame Hoshinji, and portions of another 
series of lectures from the dai kessei, or Great Training Period, held 
that winter at the RyOmonji in Bankei’s hometown of Aboshi. For the 
most part, then, what remains to us is one segment of the sermons 
Bankei delivered during one year toward the close of his life. 

Various transcripts of the sermons exist, but in general we know 
nothing of their authors’ identities or of the circumstances in which 
they were recorded. The sole exception is the so-called Miura MS, a 
transcript of the Hoshinji sermons by one Miura Tokuzaemon, an 
otherwise unknown samurai retainer of Bankei’s patron Kyogoku 
Takatoyo, the lord of Marugame. According to the foreword to the 
manuscript, Miura attended Bankei’s sermons at the Hoshinji on 
behalf of his aged mother, who was bedridden with illness. 
Interrupting his regular duties at the castle, he beseeched the 
temple’s priests to allow him a place close to the Master and came 
faithfully each day to make a record of Bankei’s talks, which he then 
passed on to his mother. Overall, variations exist among the different 
manuscripts, but most, like the Miura text, appear to be genuine 
verbatim notes of Bankei’s sermons, supplemented at times by 
reconstructions of his talks and of his dialogues with individuals who 
approached him during the assemblies. 

The sermons have been grouped in two parts, following the Akao 
and Fujimoto editions, which form the basis for the present 
translation. Part_| consists of two sections, the first recording 
sermons delivered at the RyOmonji during the Great Training Period 
of 1690, the second, sermons delivered at Marugame in the same 
year. Part Il contains materials derived from a manuscript in the 
possession of the Futetsu-an, a convent established near the 
Ryomonji by Ryoun Jokan (1633-1698), a former haiku poet who 
became Bankei’s leading female disciple. The sermons in Part Il are 
often quite distinct from those in any of the other Bankei 
manuscripts, and it has been suggested that they were not delivered 
on the same occasions as the lecturers in Part |. It is possible, 
however, that they too belong to the talks delivered at the Ryomonji 
in 1690. In her dairy, Jokan notes that Bankei delivered some sixty 
sermons at the 1690 training period, and it seems natural to assume 
that different people recorded sermons delivered on different days, 
accounting for the variety of sermons in the collections. 

For convenience sake, selections follow the divisions of the texts 
given by Akao, but it should be borne in mind that such divisions are 
assigned by the various editors and are absent from the original 
manuscripts. Certain portions of the text stand out as discrete and 
coherent units, but at times it is unclear whether a particular passage 
represents a continuation of the material preceding it or is merely an 
isolated fragment, drawn from the same sermon or from some other 
sermon. 

Ellipses of three dots at the opening of selections indicate that 
foregoing material has been omitted; ellipses of four dots at the close 
of selections or paragraphs indicate that succeeding material has 
been omitted. Where entire sections from the Akao text have been 
removed, three asterisks appear at the close of selections. Although 
a complete translation of both the Sermons and the Hdgo had been 
prepared, considerations of space and cost prevented publication of 
the entire manuscript, and it was thought best to concentrate on 
particular selections. The captions supplied for these and other 
materials throughout the book are my own. 

In the Tokugawa period, only one collection of Bankei’s sermons 
was published, appearing in 1758. This text provided the basis for 
the version of the sermons edited by D. T. Suzuki in 1942 for the 
Iwanami bunko series, but because it contained certain problems, 
the lwanami text has since been superseded by two editions of the 
sermons based largely on manuscripts preserved in the temples 
founded by Bankei. These appear in the aforementioned Bankei 
zenji hogoshu, edited by Fujimoto Tsuchishige, and the Bankei zenji 
zenshu, edited by Akao Ryuji. The Fujimoto and Akao texts are very 
similar, and the present translation makes use of both, as well as of 
the Genshiken ganmokukan, a separate sermon text included by 
Fujimoto. Page references to the texts used for each selection 
appear on page 193. In every case, the choice of text was 
determined by a judgment of which version seemed most natural 
and most in keeping with Bankei’s regular speaking style. However, 
as the Akao text contains frequent interpolations from a wide variety 
of Bankei manuscripts, as well as certain items not found in the 
Fujimoto work, | have generally followed the sequence of materials 
in the Banke zenji zenshu. 

For the most part, | have included Akao’s interpolations from other 
manuscripts, apart from a few instances where they seemed 
repetitive, unrelated to or at variance with the text at hand. Although 
the original draft noted every major interpolation and every case in 
which the Fujimoto text was used in preference to the version in 
Akao, it was felt that such a format would be unnecessarily 
burdensome in a popular edition. 

A word about the language of the sermons: Bankei’s speaking 
style is simple and informal. He uses the everyday Japanese speech 
of his period, flavored at times with the dialect of his native province 
of Harima. Generally, he avoids technical Buddhist terms, except 
those readily familiar to his listeners, and his manner of expression 
tends to be relaxed and colloquial. It is important to remember that 
Bankei’s sermons were spontaneous talks. As such, they have a 
direct, living quality that lends them their peculiar vigor and charm, 
but they are not “literature” and were never intended to be read. In 
placing the sermons into English, | sought to reproduce Bankei’s 
distinctive tone and at the same time remain faithful to the original, 

aiming for a smooth translation of Bankei’s words, but not trying to 
make them sound “better” than they are. 

Ages are given as in the text. According to Japanese custom, one 
is considered a year old at birth, so that the age reckoned in Western 
terms is approximately one year less. Chinese names appear in their 
Japanese readings as Bankei would have pronounced them, as do 
all names from Indian sources. Only specialized Indian terms like 
“buddha” or “tathagata” are retained in the original. 

SERMONS: PAGE REFERENCES TO 
ORIGINAL TEXTS 

(Page references to the original texts employed in the 
translations follow each entry: BZZ Bankei zenji zenshu, BZK Bankei 
zenji hogoshut..) 

Opening of the sermons 
(BZZ:3, BZH:3) 

Listen carefully 
(BZZ:3—6, BZH:4—5) 

Precepts 
(BZZ:6, BZH:205) 

The same old thing 
(BZZ:7, BZH:7) 

| don’t talk about Buddhism 
(BZZ:8) 

Meeting masters: Dosha and Ingen 
(BZZ:11-12, BZH:172) 

I’m ready to be your witness! 
(BZZ:12-18, BZH12—-18, 175-190) 

Growing up deluded 
(BZZ:21-—22, BZH:200—202) 

Thirty days in the Unborn 
(BZZ:22—23, BZH:29) 

Ask me and I'll tell you 

(BZZ:25) 

“The Kappa” 
(BZZ:28, BZH:36) 

Don’t beat sleeping monks 
(BZZ:30-31, BZH:23-24) 

Mind reading 
(BZH:37) 

Moving ahead/sliding back 
(BZZ:31, BZH:37) 

Old wastepaper 
(BZZ:32, BZH:38) 

Self-centeredness 
(BZZ:32-33, BZH:38) 

Bankei’s Kannon 
(BZZ:33) 

Getting sidetracked 
(BZZ:33-34, BZH:129-—130) 

Self-power/other-power 
(BZZ:36) 

Dreams 
(BZZ:36) 

Everybody has the Buddha Mind 
(BZZ:37-42, BZH:47—-56) 

Being living buddhas 
(BZZ:42—50, BZH:56—67) 

Servants, samurai, husbands and wives 

(BZZ:50—57, BZH:67—80) 

“Buddha” Magoemon 
(BZZ:61-62, BZH:81—83, 87) 

Like little children of three or four 
(BZZ:63-64, BZH:89—90) 

Getting angry 
(BZZ:64—65, BZH:90—92) 

Blindness and the Unborn 
(BZZ:65-66, BZH:92—93) 

Now I’m going to talk to the women 
(BZZ:70—71, BZH:102—105) 

The old nurse from Sanuki 
(BZZ:71-72) 

Nothing to do with rules 
(BZZ:34—35, BZH:106—107) 

Devices 
(BZZ:35, BZH:107) 

Plain speaking 
(BZZ:72—73, 28-29; BZH:107—109) 

Illness and the Buddha Mind 
(BZZ:73-74, BZH:109—111) 

Being free in birth and death 
(BZZ:74—75, BZH:111-112) 

The original face 
(BZZ:75—76) 

Entrances 

(BZZ:76) 

To practice is hard 
(BZZ:76-77) 

The crow and the cormorant 
(BZZ:77) 

Let it be 
(BZZ:77-78, BZH:116-117) 

The lawsuit 
(BZZ:78-81, BZH:117-122) 

Mu 
(BZZ:84—85) 

The crows go kaa-kaa 
(BZZ:85) 

Two-thirds is with the Unborn 
(BZZ:85-86, BZH:132) 

Looking for enlightenment 
(BZZ:86) 

No delusion, no enlightenment 
(BZZ:88, BZH:135) 

Water and ice 
(BZZ:88-89, BZH: 136-137) 

Stopping thoughts 
(BZZ:89) 

The mirror 
(BZZ:90, BZH:137—138) 

Fire is hot 

(BZZ:90-91, BZH:138-—139) 

Be stupid! 
(BZZ:94—95) 

Smoking 
(BZZ:95—96, BZH:139—140) 

No such thing as enlightenment 
(BZZ:97—98, BZH:141—143) 

Abide in the Buddha Mind 
(BZZ:98-99, BZH:143-144) 

When thoughts arise 
(BZZ:99, BZH:144—145) 

Letting things take care of themselves 
(BZZ:100—101, BZH:147—148) 

HOGO (Instruction) 

The Butchi Kosai zenji hdgo (Dharma Instruction of the Zen 
Master Butchi Kosai) is a work in Japanese compiled in 1730 by 
Itsuzan Sonin (or Sojin, 1655-1734), one of Bankei’s foremost 
disciples. Itsuzan became a monk at age ten, studying under a 
succession of Zen masters before coming to Bankei sometime 
around 1680. In 1683 he became Bankei’s disciple and experienced 
enlightenment under him the following year. From 1688 till Bankei’s 
death in 1693, Itsuzan was the closest of Bankei’s personal 
attendants and in 1697 was made the Dharma heir of Bankei’s 
successor Setsugai. In later life, he became abbot of the Nyohoji and 
served a term as abbot of the Myo shiuji, receiving the Imperial title 
of Shinsho Jomyo Zenji (“Zen Master of True Nature Pure and 
Radiant’). 

Unlike the Sermons, the materials in the Hogo are not verbatim 
records of Bankei’s teachings but Itsuzan’s recollections of various 

talks, dialogues and encounters, which he set down in old age as a 
kind of pious tribute to his late teacher. Because of Itsuzan’s close 
connection with Bankei, the Hogo provides a valuable first-hand 
account of the Master’s teaching during the last decade or so of his 
career, and, though occasionally verging on hagiography, presents 
overall a lively and intimate picture of life in Bankei’s assembly. The 
materials from the Hogo are accompanied by several selections from 
the Kosai zenji gydgo ryakki (Brief Account of the Activities of the 
Zen Master Kosai), a companion collection by Itsuzan. 

“WORDS AND DEEDS” 

During the eighteenth century, a number of accounts dealing with 
Bankei were compiled by priests in the teaching lines of the various 
temples he had founded. Ironically, despite Bankei’s insistence on 
the importance of simple, ordinary Japanese language, these 
collections were composed entirely in literary Chinese and contain 
many technical Buddhist and Zen expressions. Aside from their 
complexity of style, it is often impossible to determine the accuracy 
of the information provided in these works, and it may be safest to 
consider them part of the “legend” of Bankei, a reflection of the way 
in which the Master came to be viewed in the period following his 
death. 

The selections translated here are drawn primarily from two such 
collections: the Shdgen kokushi itsujiio (Record of Anecdotes 
Concerning the National Teacher Shogen*) by Daitei Zenkei (d. 
1788), a Zen Master in Bankei’s teaching line; and the Zeigo 
(“Redundant Words”) by Bankei’s Dharma heir Sando Chijo (d. 
1749). Although it is doubtful that he ever studied with Bankei, Daitei 
was a member of the Nakabori family of Shimomura, grandson of the 
same Sukeyasu Nakabori who had enabled Bankei’s father to 
establish himself in Hamada and had later assisted the young 
Bankei when his brother expelled him from the family home. As 
Daitei tells us, since childhood he had listened to stories about 
Bankei from his nursemaids and grandparents, and was thus in a 

unique position to preserve many of the homelier details of the 
Master’s character and career. 

Sando ChijO was twenty-six at the time of Bankei’s death and 
eighty when he compiled the Zeigo in 1747. Sando records certain 
interesting episodes not found elsewhere, but his account is marred 
by vituperative attacks on the other collections and what seems a 
dogmatic insistence on Bankei’s place in the Myoshinji line, rejecting 
his enlightenment under Dosha and stressing his debt to Umpo. 

Other works represented in this section are the Tomi-susanshi, an 
extensive collection of materials relating to Bankei and the Nyohoji 
recorded by the temple’s abbot Gottan Sobi (n.d.) in 1798; and the 
Ryomonji shiryaku, a history of the RyOmonji compiled in 1700 by 
Bankei’s disciple Genmon Eigin (d. 1747), a nephew of Bankei’s 
friend and patron Sasaki Nobutsugu. 

INTRODUCTION* 

Even in his own day, Bankei’s Zen struck people as an anomaly, 
dramatically different from any religious teaching they had known 
before. At first, this alarmed them because they weren't sure that 
what he taught was even Buddhism, much less Zen, and there were 
severe penalties for associating with anyone professing Christianity 
or other “heretical” beliefs proscribed by the government. By the end 
of his career, however, Bankei had emerged as something of a 
celebrity. People trekked from every corner of Japan to hear his 
talks, and the overflow audiences had to be accommodated in 
separate shifts. His following embraced nearly every segment of 
Japanese society: samurai with their families and _ retainers, 
merchants, artisans, farmers, servants, even gamblers and 
gangsters, as well as monks and nuns of all the Buddhist sects, 
crowded the temples where he spoke. Most came to listen, to learn 
about Bankei’s unusual teaching, but others arrived with special 
problems, hoping to solicit his advice. Whether it was a monk with 
trouble meditating, a layman afraid of thunder, a farmer with a bad 
temper, or a local family feud, Bankei’s approach was essentially the 
same. Whatever the problem, for Bankei there was really only one 
solution: to deal with things on a wholly new basis—to let go, to be 
natural, to have faith in one’s real, “original” mind. He called this his 
teaching of the Unborn, or the Unborn Buddha Mind. Everyone has 
this unborn mind, Bankei said; it isn’t mysterious or remote, but here 
and now, functioning, alive, “marvelously illuminating and smoothly 
managing everything.” There’s no need to obtain the Buddha Mind 
since it’s been there all along. People only have to abide in it, to use 
it, to open their eyes. It was easy if they just knew how, and he was 
there to tell them. That was the message Bankei brought. 

In 1622, when Bankei was born, Japan had only recently emerged 
from a long period of turmoil. Contending warlords had rent the 

country throughout much of the sixteenth century, and the decisive 
victory of the Tokugawa forces and their allies in 1600 inaugurated a 
new and largely peaceful era that was to last over two and one half 
centuries and leave an indelible mark on much of Japanese life. 
Though claiming to follow the principles of Confucian ethics, the 
Tokugawa government was, in effect, a military dictatorship, and its 
primary concern was to maintain firm control over every area of 
Japanese society. A rigid class system was instituted, with the 
samurai, or warrior caste, at the top of the social order, followed by 
the farmers, craftsmen and merchants who formed the broad mass 
of the population. Social discipline was strict and enforced at every 
level through patterns of collective responsibility. Dissent was 
virtually unknown, and punishment, even for a samurai, could be 
swift and brutal. 

The Buddhist sects too were organized into authoritarian 
structures, each directly responsible to the government. Although 
Buddhism was under attack from Confucian officials who viewed the 
priesthood as parasitic and corrupt, the Tokugawa shoguns 
themselves remained important patrons, and throughout the 
Tokugawa period (1600-1867/1868) the government found the 
temples invaluable tools in its campaign to root out Christianity, 
which had been banned as a subversive foreign belief. As proof that 
they were not “secret Christians,” all Japanese families were 
required to maintain membership in a parish temple, whose priest 
regularly issued certificates attesting their support. A guaranteed 
source of income for the temples, the parish system proved a 
veritable windfall for Buddhism. The power of the parish priest to 
grant or withhold the required temple certificate, however, offered 
clear opportunity for abuse, and cases of extortion by unscrupulous 
clerics were not unknown. 

Like the other schools of Buddhism, the Zen sect benefited from 
the economic security provided by the parish system, but for many 
Zen monks, the early Tokugawa period was a time of crisis and 
intense self-examination. Though, materially, many of the temples 
had prospered during the years of civil war, the teaching of Zen itself 
had seriously declined. In the course of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries, Zen study had degenerated into a type of secret oral 

transmission strongly influenced by Esoteric Buddhism, and the 
result was a formalized and lifeless affair in which the experience of 
enlightenment had little or no part. The situation was the same in 
both the Rinzai and Soto sects, the leading schools of Japanese Zen 
founded during the Middle Ages. 

By the beginning of the Tokugawa period, a reaction had set in, 
and the secret oral transmission was gradually abandoned. 
Nevertheless, there was no general agreement on the best means to 
revive Zen in the new age. Different methods were proposed, and a 
dialogue of sorts continued in both sects throughout the seventeenth 
century. For many, the answer lay in a return to the past, a 
restoration of the teachings of the great Medieval founders. The Soto 
school, for example, sought to establish an identity based on the 
works of its founder Dogen Kigen (1200-1253), who had been 
relatively neglected during the late Middle Ages. In the Rinzai school, 
the center of revival was the Myoshinji, the great headquarters 
temple in Kyoto with branches throughout Japan. Here, no figures 
comparable to Dogen existed, and the retrospective impulse 
expressed itself in an enthusiasm for the original “koan” Zen that the 
early teachers of the line had received from Sung China.* This 
movement in the Myoshinji culminated in the teachings of the 
eighteenth-century master Hakuin Ekaku (1686-1769) and his 
disciples, who created the system of koan study still in use in 
Japanese Rinzai temples. Reverence for the sects’ founders was 
accompanied by a new emphasis on the purity of lines of 
transmission, the “silent transmission” of enlightenment from mind to 
mind across the generations that was considered a key feature of 
the Zen school. The transmission was usually witnessed by the 
teacher’s inka, or “seal of approval,” his written sanction of the 
student's enlightenment experience, and these documents were 
carefully preserved in many Japanese Zen temples. Both schools 
also witnessed a renewed interest in scholarship, which many felt 
could offer answers to the dilemmas of the present by providing 
suitable models from the past. 

There were some, however, who believed the problems 
confronting Zen too deep-rooted to be solved through such reforms, 

however well-intentioned. For these monks, what was lacking in 
contemporary Zen was the enlightenment experience itself. With 
Japanese Zen in decline for the last two hundred years, they argued, 
no enlightened masters remained to carry on the teaching; it was 
now up to the individual to enlighten himself and even to sanction his 
own experience. 

Such “independents,” men like Suzuki Shosan (1579-1655), Ungo 
Kiyo (1582-1659) and Daigu Sochiku (1584—1669), were primarily 
self-made masters, colorful individualists who owed little to their own 
teachers. Shosan came to Zen later in life, taking the tonsure after a 
successful career aS a samurai, but he continued to insist that the 
warrior’s role was better suited to Zen study than the priest’s. The 
only true Buddhism, Shosan declared, was realized in actual life, in 
the thick of battle or at work in the fields. He dismissed conventional 
Zen meditation practices and urged his students to discipline mind 
and body by imitating the fierce attitude of the NiO, the powerful 
guardian kings whose images flank the gates of Buddhist temples. 
Unlike Shosan, Ungo and Daigu were career priests who had 
already received their teachers’ sanction as Zen masters when they 
became disillusioned, renounced their previous achievements and 
set out once again in middle age on the search for enlightenment. 
Both succeeded, but entirely on their own and only after much 
hardship and struggle. Ungo’s teaching was strongly imbued with 
pietism, while Daigu’s was wildly eccentric; but, like Bankei, both felt 
that no qualified master existed in Japan to testify to their 
enlightenment and so were forced to confirm their realization for 
themselves. 

Other Zen monks, while acknowledging that Japanese Zen had 
grown stagnant, saw promise in the arrival of anew wave of Chinese 
teachers from the continent. Despite language difficulties—none of 
the newcomers spoke Japanese, and communication was mainly in 
writing*—masters like Tao-che Ch’ao-yuan (J: Dosha Chogen, d. 
1662) and Yin-yUan Lung-chii (J: Ingen Ryuki, 1592-1673) quickly 
attracted a wide following to their temples in the Chinese commercial 
colony at Nagasaki. Chinese Zen, however, had altered considerably 
since its introduction to Japan in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. 

The Ming dynasty (1368-1644) Zen of the Nagasaki temples 
contained many syncretic elements, and it was vigorously opposed 
by traditionalists, masters such as Gudo Toshoku (1579-1661) of 
the Myoshinji, wno saw themselves upholding the “pure” Zen of their 
temples’ founders. In the end, only Yin-yuan was successful in 
establishing his lineage in Japan, where it remains a minor branch of 
Japanese Zen known as the Obaku school,* remembered largely for 
its influence on painting and calligraphy and famous for its shgjin 
ryori, or Buddhist vegetarian cuisine. 

As even these limited examples make clear, Zen in seventeenth- 
century Japan was never monolithic, but a series of diverse and at 
times divergent streams, varied approaches to the problems of how 
to restore integrity to the teaching after two hundred years of 
protracted decline. While Bankei’s style of Zen was unique, he was 
distinctly a man of his time and shared many important features with 
his contemporaries. Even Bankei’s originality, his bold self- 
confidence and iconoclasm were themselves characteristic of certain 
strains in the Zen world of his day. 

Overall, however, Bankei’s Zen was essentially a personal 
development, and at the heart of the teaching of the Unborn lies 
Bankei’s own life story. Bankei himself referred to it frequently in 
addressing his audiences, urging them not to repeat his mistakes 
and reminding them how lucky they were to have the benefit of his 
own hard-won experience. 

Bankei was born in 1622 in Hamada, a district of the town of 
Aboshi, t¢ then a native port on Japan’s inland sea. His father was a 
Confucian, a ronin, or masterless samurai, from the island of 
Shikoku_t_. Through the aid of a village headman, Nakabori 
Sukeyasu, he was adopted into a local family and settled in Hamada, 
where he became a doctor, a popular occupation among former 
samurai. Bankei was the third of three sons, and when his father 
died in 1632, the eldest, Tadayasu, became head of the household. 
Bankei was always close to his mother, and remained devoted to her 
throughout his life, but, by all accounts, he and his older brother 
were temperamental opposites. Like his father, Tadayasu seems to 
have been a Confucian, a stern moralist with a conviction of the 

importance of serious study and obedience. By contrast, the young 
Bankei tended to be wild, unruly and defiant, a ringleader in any 
mischief and the village champion at rock fighting. 

The inevitable confrontation occurred when, at about age eleven, 
Bankei was sent for lessons at the neighborhood school. Almost 
from the start he rebelled against the lifeless character of the 
standard curriculum, which centered on rote memorization of the 
Great Learning (CH: Ta-hstieh), an important Confucian classic. As 
Bankei tells us in the Sermons, his curiosity was aroused by the 
opening words of the text: “The Way of the Great Learning lies in 
illuminating the Bright Virtue.” 

The Bright Virtue (CH: ming-te) is one of the key concepts of the 
Great Learning. It was often interpreted as a kind of dynamic intuitive 
moral sense that constitutes man’s intrinsic nature, and it is likely 
that Bankei received some such explanation on questioning the local 
Confucian scholars. But when he pressed them, no one actually 
seemed to know what the Bright Virtue was, and Bankei was left to 
puzzle out the problem for himself. Disappointed and consumed by 
doubts, he eventually began to avoid classes. Tadayasu was 
outraged at his brother’s refusal to continue his studies, and life at 
home became increasingly unpleasant. Bankei, however, had no 
intention of returning to the village school, and seeing no way out of 
his predicament, he reportedly concealed himself in the graveyard of 
the family temple and attempted suicide by swallowing a mouthful of 
poisonous spiders. Possibly he had been misled about the spiders’ 
deadliness, for the following day he found himself still very much 
alive and faced with the same unwelcome prospects at home. 
Tensions between Bankei and his brother continued to build, and 
Tadayasu finally expelled the young truant from the household. 

The questions aroused by the Great Learning continued to obsess 
Bankei, and after vainly consulting the Confucian scholars, his 
search led him finally to Buddhism. By age thirteen, Bankei had 
begun to study with the priest at the family temple, where his middle 
brother had become a monk, and the following year, his father’s old 
friend Nakabori Sukeyasu came to the rescue and constructed a 
small retreat for Bankei on the mountain behind the Nakabori family 
home. Bankei practiced alone here for a time, but, still tormented by 

doubts, soon resumed the quest for a suitable teacher. After briefly 
studying Esoteric Buddhism under a priest of the Shingon school, his 
search brought him to the Myoshinji-line Zen master Umpo Zensho 
(1572-1653) of the Zuidji in nearby Ako. Bankei was now sixteen 
and still driven by his questions about man’s original nature, 
questions he seems to have lumped collectively under the rubric of 
the Bright Virtue. Nevertheless, he had apparently decided that only 
Buddhism effectively confronted the sort of problems that concerned 
him, and of all the Buddhist sects he had tried, Zen seemed the most 
promising. Accordingly, in 1638 he received the tonsure from Umpo 
and became his disciple, with the religious name Bankei Yotaku. 

Virtually nothing is known of Umpo’s teaching, and, while always 
grateful for his kindness, Bankei does not appear to have held a high 
opinion of Umpo’s abilities as a Zen master. In 1641 Bankei left the 
Zuidji on a four-year pilgrimage, or angya, the period of travel and 
study that is a traditional part of the Zen monk’s training. But his old 
questions remained, and when he returned to Umpo in 1645, he 
withdrew to a hut in the nearby village of Nonaka and undertook a 
regimen of strenuous meditation practice. 

For two years Bankei now subjected himself to a series of grueling 
ordeals in a desperate effort to resolve his doubts once and for all, to 
uncover the truth about man’s intrinsic nature. Driven to the brink of 
death by hunger and exhaustion, success still eluded him, and in the 
spring of 1647, Bankei lay in his hut, ill and apparently dying, unable 
even to swallow the food his servant offered. 

One day, feeling something peculiar in his throat, he managed to 
summon the strength to bring up a dark ball of phlegm, spitting it 
against the wall. Suddenly the whole weight of his illness dissolved, 
and he realized the answer to his questions—that he’d had the 
answer with him all along, the innate mind that manages everything, 
naturally, effortlessly, just as it is. Summoning his astonished 
servant, he gulped down several bowls of half-cooked rice and was 
soon on the way to recovery. Bankei tells us that this was when he 
first realized the Unborn, but it is uncertain when he actually began 
to use this term. Possibly it was not until much later in his career, 
when he had already become a successful teacher. In any case, he 
rarely mentions the Bright Virtue again. 

In 1651, word came of the arrival of the Chinese master Tao-che 
Ch’ao-yuan at the Sufukuji, a temple founded by the Chinese 
merchant community in Nagasaki, and Umpo urged Bankei to pay 
Tao-che a visit. Tao-che spoke no Japanese, but he sized up Bankei 
immediately and informed him that his enlightenment, while genuine, 
was not yet complete. Bankei decided to join Tao-che’s assembly, 
and one evening experienced his second enlightenment while sitting 
in a darkened corner of the Sufukuji’s meditation hall. Presenting his 
realization to Tao-che, he demanded: “What about the matter of birth 
and death?” In reply, Tao-che wrote: “Whose birth and death is this?” 
Bankei extended both hands. Tao-che took up his brush again, but 
this time Bankei snatched it away and hurled it to the ground. The 
following day, Tao-che publicly announced that Bankei had 
completed his study of Zen and made him the tenzo, or temple cook, 
a position reserved for advanced students in a Zen monastery. 

Bankei stayed with Tao-che for approximately one year, receiving 
his inka. Nevertheless, in retrospect he recognized Tao-che’s 
limitations and lamented that, with no enlightened masters available, 
Tao-che was the best he could do under the circumstances. In 1652, 
Bankei returned to Harima, but his first attempts to teach were met 
with suspicion and hostility, and he spent the next year in retreat in 
the Yoshino Mountains. In this remote rural district, Bankei was 
warmly received, and it was probably here that he composed the 
poem known as the Song of Original Mind as a kind of informal 
instruction for the local people. Umpo was now in failing health, and 
returning to Ako the following winter, Bankei arrived only in time to 
attend his teacher’s funeral. 

In Nagasaki, meanwhile, trouble was brewing. Yin-yuan Lung-ch’i, 
a well-known Chinese master in Tao-che’s teaching line, had arrived 
in 1654, and his faction was attempting to displace Tao-che at the 
SUfukuji. Tao-che preferred to withdraw rather than risk a 
confrontation that could only prove embarrassing to everyone 
concerned, and Bankei and several other students set out to find 
another temple for their beleaguered teacher. Bankei’s mission was 
unsuccessful, but his activities on behalf of Tao-che introduced him 
to two daimyo, or feudal lords, who subsequently became his 
patrons and disciples: Matsuura Shigenobu (1622-1703), Lord of 

Hirado, and Kato Yasuoki (1618-1677), Lord of lyo. Bankei returned 
for a time to the Sufukuji, but relations with Yin-yuan’s group 
continued to deteriorate, and in 1658 Tao-che finally returned to 
China, bidding a tearful farewell to his Japanese pupils. 

Bankei, however, was now to become a Zen master in his own 
right. At Umpo’s dying request, his heir Boko SogyU (d. 1694) 
conferred inka on Bankei, who had not been present when Umpo 
died. This was a common procedure in Japanese Zen temples, and 
though, technically, it established Bankei as Boku0o’s heir, was simply 
a convenient device to recognize Bankei as Umpo’s descendant and 
to include him in the Shotaku-ha, Umpo’s branch of the Myoshinji 
teaching line. In 1659, in recognition of his new status, Bankei 
received advanced rank in the Myoshinji. Still something of the 
enfant terrible, he reportedly elicited objections from traditionalists for 
refusing to observe the conventions of the ceremony, which included 
the taking up of koans. 

Back in Hamada, too, things were changing for Bankei. He had 
long ago made peace with Tadayasu, who died in 1661, and in the 
same year a childhood friend from the village school, Sasaki 
Nobutsugu (1625-1686), joined his brothers in establishing a temple 
for Bankei in Hamada, the RyoOmonji, or Dragon Gate Temple. 
Originally ronin, like Bankei’s family, the Sasakis had settled in 
Hamada and become wealthy merchants, shipowners whose shop 
name Nadaya was famous throughout Japan. Together with their 
wives and children, the Sasaki brothers were among Bankei’s most 
loyal supporters and remained the RyOmonji’s principal patrons. The 
Ryomonji was only the first of many important temples Bankei 
received. As his fame spread, he acquired numerous followers 
among the upper ranks of the samurai—daimyo and their families, 
who vied for his visits and offered temples in their domains and in 
the capitals of Kyoto and Edo. * 

The following years found Bankei frequently in seclusion at one or 
another of the cloisters provided by his benefactors, practicing alone, 
instructing a select group of disciples, or nursing his recurrent illness. 
Bankei’s early struggles had taken a severe toll on his health, and in 
later life he was often in extreme discomfort, afflicted with chronic 

stomach spasms and fits of coughing that required intervals of quiet 
convalescence. Possibly, too, the retreats of the 1660s and 70s were 
opportunities for Bankei to continue the search for an appropriate 
method of instruction that led to his mature teaching of the Unborn. 
But on this our materials from the period are too scanty to permit 
anything more than speculation. 

In any case, the year 1679 marked a significant change in 
Bankei’s approach, with the emphasis shifting to collective practice 
and public sermons at large kessei, the traditional three-month 
periods of intensive meditation held at Zen temples in the winter and 
summer. From this time until his death, Bankei continued to conduct 
important training periods nearly every year, traveling to his various 
temples and sometimes delivering as many as three talks a day. 

Unfortunately, we know little of the actual details of practice at 
these kessei or at Bankei’s temples generally. In certain respects, at 
least, life in Bankei’s assemblies was apparently different from that in 
other teachers’ establishments. Bankei, for example, would not 
tolerate repressive behavior such as the beating or scolding that still 
characterizes training at many Zen temples; nor would he allow 
begging by his monks, though the practice was standard in Buddhist 
monasteries and entirely legal. Nevertheless, in common with most 
Zen monks, Bankei’s students observed daily periods of meditation 
and chanting, and Bankei himself, like other Japanese Zen teachers 
of the day, received students in private interviews, performed funeral 
and memorial services for his patrons and scrupulously upheld the 
Buddhist precepts in his personal life. All in all, what distinguished 
Bankei’s assemblies from those elsewhere seems to have been 
more a matter of atmosphere than one of procedure. 

Bankei’s later years were marked by constant travel between his 
various temples and patrons. In 1680, he suffered a severe loss with 
the death of his mother, who had become a Buddhist nun and retired 
to a convent not far from the RyOmonji. Bankei had always been 
fiercely devoted to his mother and insisted that what had originally 
driven him to realize enlightenment had been, above all, his desire to 
communicate the truth to her. 

In 1690, Bankei was at the height of his career. His teaching of the 
Unborn had won a vast and devoted following, and in addition to the 

numerous honors he had received at the Myoshinji, the Emperor 
now awarded him the personal title Butchi Kosai zenji, “Zen Master 
of Beneficent Enlightened Wisdom.” In the fall, Bankei was invited to 
deliver a series of public lectures at the Hoshinji in Marugame, the 
castle town of his daimyo patron KyOgoku Takatoyo (1655-1694), 
Lord of Sanuki. Later that year, he conducted the most famous of his 
training periods, a vast kessei at the Ryomonji, attended by nearly 
seventeen hundred monks of every sect, some traveling from as far 
as the Ryukyu Islands. Available space in the RyOmonji’s zendo, or 
meditation hall, was quickly exhausted, and temporary zendo had to 
be improvised to accommodate the flood of new arrivals. The kessei 
was funded and provisioned by the Sasaki brothers, but the crowd of 
monks grew so immense that the Sasakis panicked and vainly 
begged Bankei to turn away any further applicants. Despite these 
setbacks, the kesse/ proved a success and was marred only by the 
tragic death of Bankei’s close disciple Soden. During the kessei, 
Bankei delivered a total of sixty lectures, many of which were 
recorded by members of the audience, and these, together with the 
lectures recorded at Marugame earlier in the year, constitute the bulk 
of Bankei’s surviving sermons. 

By 1693, Bankei’s health had worsened, and, realizing that little 
time remained, the Ryomonji’s parishioners hastened to erect a 
pagoda for him, contributing their own labor to the project. Ordinary 
men and women, even grandfathers and nursing mothers, arrived to 
join in the effort, and at night, when their official duties were over, 
samurai would come to carry on the work by moonlight. That June, 
returning to the Ryomonji from a visit to Edo, Bankei became 
seriously ill. He managed to deliver a final three days of lectures, but 
his condition continued to worsen, and before the end of September 
he was dead. His ashes were divided chiefly between the RyOmonji 
and his other principal temple, the Nyohoji, erected in lyo by Lord 
Kato. In 1740, Bankei was awarded the posthumous Imperial title of 
Kokushi, or “National Master,” an honor accorded only six other 
teachers in the Myoshinji’s history. 

What was it that made Bankei’s teaching of the Unborn so popular 
in his time? Above all, perhaps, was the fact that the basics of 
Bankei’s Zen were clear and relatively simple. You didn’t have to be 
learned, live in a monastery or even necessarily consider yourself a 
Buddhist to practice them effectively. Nor did you have to engage in 
long and arduous discipline. True, Bankei himself had undergone 
terrible hardships before he realized the Unborn; but only, as he 
constantly reminded his listeners, because he never met a teacher 
able to tell him what he had to know. In fact, one could readily attain 
the Unborn in the comfort of one’s own home. It wasn’t necessary, or 
even advisable, Bankei insisted, to follow his own example. 

Bankei’s entire teaching can be reduced to the single admonition 
“Abide in the Unborn!” This was Bankei’s constant refrain. The term 
“Unborn” itself is a common one in classical Buddhism, where it 
generally signifies that which is intrinsic, original, uncreated. Bankei, 
however, was the first to use this term as the crux of his teaching. 
Rather than obtaining or practicing the Unborn, he says, one should 
simply abide in it, because the Unborn is not a state that has to be 
created, but is already there, perfect and complete, the mind just as 
it is. There isn’t any special method for realizing the Unborn other 
than to be yourself, to be totally natural and spontaneous in 
everything you do. This means “letting thoughts arise or cease just 
as they will,” and doing the same in regard to physical sensations, as 
Bankei indicates in his advice on illness (pp. 61-63) and in his 
instructions on the art of the lance (pp. 138-39). 

The mind, as Bankei describes it, is a dynamic mechanism, 
reflecting, recording and recalling our impressions of the world, a 
kind of living mirror that is always in motion, never the same from 
one instant to the next. Within this mirror mind, thoughts and feelings 
come and go, appearing, vanishing and reappearing in response to 
circumstances, neither good nor bad in themselves. Unlike the man 
of the Unborn, however, the impulsive person suffers from 
attachment. He is never natural because he is a slave to his 
responses, which he fails to realize are only passing reflections. As a 
result, he is continually “hung up,” entangled in particular thoughts 
and sensations, obstructing the free flow of the mind. Everything will 
operate smoothly, Bankei insists, if we only step aside and let it do 

so. He illustrates this to the members of his audience by pointing out 
that, even while engrossed in listening to his talk, they automatically 
register and identify everything else around them—the calls of crows 
and sparrows, the various colors and aromas, the different sorts of 
people in the room. No one is deliberately trying to do this; it simply 
happens. That, Bankei says, is how the Unborn functions. 

For Bankei, the important thing is letting go, breaking the mold of 
our self-centeredness (mi no hiiki) and bad habits (kiguse). These 
are familiar Japanese terms that Bankei used to describe the chief 
components of delusion. Self-centeredness is the basis of the false 
self. It is “ego” in the pejorative sense, the reflex that leads us to 
judge everything from a narrowly selfish viewpoint. What fuels and 
informs this attitude is bad habits, character flaws that, like self- 
centeredness, are the result of conditioning. We grow up imitating 
the people around us, Bankei says, and in the process acquire 
certain failings which finally become so ingrained that we mistake 
them for our real selves. Unlike the Unborn Buddha Mind, however, 
neither bad habits nor self-centeredness is innate; both are 
assimilated from outside after birth. When we become deluded, we 
temporarily forfeit the Buddha Mind we started out with, exchanging 
it for these learned responses. The moment this occurs, duality 
intervenes and we leave the original oneness of the Unborn to be 
“born” into particular states of being—as hungry ghosts, fighting 
demons, beasts or hell-dwellers—passing fitfully from one to the 
next, trapped in incessant transmigration. The only way out of this 
dilemma, Bankei maintains, is to go back the way we came, to return 
to the unconditioned, the uncreated, the unborn. 

“What we have from our parents innately is the Unborn Buddha 
Mind and nothing else’; “The Buddha Mind is unborn and 
marvelously illuminating, and with the Unborn everything is perfectly 
managed”; “Abide in the Unborn Buddha Mind!” These are the 
basics of Bankei’s Zen, his catechism of the Unborn. He explained 
them over and over in different ways, because he believed the truth 
of the Unborn was so simple, so straightforward, that anyone could 
grasp it. In this sense, Bankei’s Zen was truly popular. Other 
Japanese masters had taught lay audiences. But, in most cases, 
Zen as such was considered far too difficult for ordinary people, and 

Zen masters’ popular teachings, especially those directed to women, 
scarcely touched on Zen at all. Instead, teachers spoke in general 
terms, urging the merits of pious activity and discussing concepts 
from the Buddhist scriptures. Study of the “inner teachings” was 
generally confined to qualified monks and members of the upper 
classes and intelligentsia who could follow to some extent the 
difficult Chinese of the imported Zen texts. 

Bankei’s position was just the reverse. He maintained that the 
essence of Zen itself was perfectly plain and direct, and that any 
person with an open mind could be made to understand. You didn't 
need to be widely educated or adept at classical Chinese. That sort 
of thing only got in the way. In fact, the Unborn could best be 
explained using simple, everyday language. Any other approach was 
just deceptive. To teach Zen, Bankei insisted, one had to go right to 
the core, to divest oneself of everything extraneous—all the 
gimmicks, the technical jargon, the exotic foreign usages. 

This was Bankei’s principal objection to the koan. Though its 
origins are obscure, koan Zen was largely a development of the 
Sung dynasty, when it became popular for Chinese masters to 
assign their students particular kung-an (read as kdan in Japanese) 
or “public cases,” named for the model cases that served as 
guidelines in the Chinese courts of law. The Zen koans were brief 
and often paradoxical episodes drawn principally from the records of 
the earlier masters, especially those of the “golden age” of Zen in the 
T’ang (618-906) and Five Dynasties (907-960) periods. 

A monk asked Yun-men (862/4—949): “What is the Buddha?” 
Yun-men said: “A shit-wiping stick.” 
(Wu-men kuan, no. 21) 

A monk asked Chao-chou (778-897): “Why did the Patriarch 
come from the West?” (That is, what is the ultimate truth that 
Bodhidharma, the First Patriarch and semi-legendary founder of 
Chinese Zen, brought from India?) 

Chao-chou said: “The cypress tree in the garden.” 

(Wu-men kuan, no. 37) 

Under the teacher’s guidance, the student would strive to 
penetrate the problem presented by his case, generating a “great 
ball of doubt” as he puzzled over the koan, attempting to break 
through to enlightenment. Certain teachers compiled popular 
collections of koans that included responses to each case in the form 
of poems, comments and substitute answers. The most famous of 
these were the twelfth-century Blue Cliff Record (CH: Pi-yen lu, J: 
Hekigan roku) and the thirteenth-century Gateless Gate (CH: Wu- 
men kuan, J: Mumonkan). 

Introduced from China in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, koan 
study became a standard form of Zen practice in Japan. However, 
due in part to the prestige of continental culture, the koan collections 
with their associated poems and comments were preserved in the 
original Chinese. The problem was compounded by the language of 
the koan records themselves, which contained many obscure 
colloquial expressions, difficult phrases and specialized terms. 
Japanese students were expected not only to master these but to 
insert them in the rapid give-and-take of mondo, or Zen dialogues, 
and in their private interviews with the teacher. 

Inevitably, this created certain difficulties. The emphasis on such 
arcane foreign-language material was a serious impediment to 
practitioners of merely average intellectual ability and threatened to 
drain much of the spontaneity from the encounter between master 
and student. Yet, despite its drawbacks, the koan enjoyed enormous 
popularity in Japanese Zen, and remained an important feature in 
both the Rinzai and Soto sects. The very difficulty of negotiating the 
koan collections, the technical expertise required to decipher the 
original texts, made the Zen priesthood a kind of exclusive fraternity 
that included many specialists in literary Chinese. 

The nature of Bankei’s own experience of koan study is uncertain. 
It seems likely that he had some contact with koan Zen in his student 
days, and evidence indicates that he occasionally used koans for his 
own disciples. Judging by Bankei’s statements in the Sermons, 
however, he abandoned koans altogether in his later years. As 
Bankei saw it, the whole approach of koan Zen was hopelessly 
contrived. He rejected the need for familiarity with classical Chinese 
aS an unnecessary encumbrance, and rejected the koan itself as an 

artificial technique. The original koans, he argued, were not 
“models,” but actual living events. The old masters had simply 
responded to particular situations that confronted them, naturally 
accommodating themselves to the needs of the students involved. 
That was the business of any Zen teacher, to meet each situation on 
its own terms. There was no need to make people study the words of 
ancient Chinese monks when you could simply have them look at 
their own “cases,” the way in which the Unborn was at work here and 
now in the actual circumstances of their lives. This was what Bankei 
called his “direct” teaching, as opposed to koan practice, which he 
referred to disparagingly as “studying old waste paper.” The koan, 
said Bankei, was merely a device, and teachers who relied on it, or 
on any other technique, were practicing “devices Zen.” Why rely ona 
device, he argued, when you could have the thing itself? 

In this sense, Bankei was a traditionalist. He harked back to the 
Zen masters of the “golden age” before the triumph of the koan, 
masters like Lin-chi I-nsUan (J: Rinzai Gigen, d. 860), founder of the 
Rinzai school. Bankei insisted that his own teachings were the same 
as Lin-chi’s, and the many similarities between the Sermons and the 
Lin-chi lu (J: Rinzai roku), the record of Lin-chi’s teachings, suggest 
that the Chinese master may have been an important influence on 
Bankei’s Zen. 

Taken as a whole, however, Bankei’s teaching remains uniquely 
his own. Ironically, its failure to survive was probably due to the very 
qualities that made it so distinctive and so attractive to Bankei’s 
students: its close identification with Bankei’s own personality and its 
refusal to associate itself with particular procedures or techniques. 
Ultimately, “Hakuin Zen,” which revived and systematized koan study 
in Japan, swept the monasteries of the Rinzai school, even 
infiltrating the RyOmonji and the other temples of Bankei’s line. To 
Hakuin, Bankei’s freewheeling teaching of the Unborn was 
anathema, and he denounced it emphatically. But the twentieth 
century has seen renewed interest in Bankei’s Zen. The noted 
Buddhist scholar D. T. Suzuki (1886-1975) became the leading 
modern champion of Bankei’s teaching, hailing it as a refreshing 
antidote to the strictures of the koan method and ranking Bankei with 
Dogen and Hakuin as one of Japan’s three great Zen masters. 

Suzuki and other Japanese scholars began to compile and edit the 
records of Bankei’s teaching, many of which had lain forgotten in 
various provincial temples, and today Bankei is gaining popularity 
once again. 

Bankei’s continued appeal is easy to understand. Though his 
world was very different from our own, there is something 
contemporary in much of what he has to say. His sense of freedom, 
his humanity, his intimate approach to the ultimate problems in terms 
of people’s daily lives seem wholly attuned to the spirit of the present 
day. And when we turn to the pages of the sermons, Bankei is still 
there, still curiously alive and “marvelously illuminating.” 

* My principal source for the Medieval period has been 
Tamamura Takeji’s multi-volume Nihon zenshdshi ronshd (Kyoto: 
Shibunkaku shuppan, 1976—1981), while for the history of Tokugawa 
Zen, | consulted a variety of primary and secondary sources. The 
information on Bankei’s biography is based mainly on Fujimoto 

Tsuchishige’s Bankei kokushi no kenkyd (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1977). 

* The Sung Dynasty lasted from 960 till 1279. 

* The Japanese use Chinese characters in their written language, 
and most Buddhist monks and educated men of the Tokugawa 
period had at least some familiarity with written Chinese. 

*Obaku is the Japanese reading of Huang-po, the name of the 
mountain on which Yin-yUan’s Chinese temple stood in what is now 
Fukien province. 

t Today, Aboshi forms part of Himeji City in Hyogo Prefecture, 
but in Bankei’s day, it belonged to the old province of Harima. 

<= One of the four major islands that make up the Japanese 
archipelago. The others are Kyushu, Hokkaido, and the main island, 
Honshu. 

* The old name for Tokyo. 

* A posthumous title bestowed on Bankei by the Imperial Court in 
1740.