て や 2 ム か くる 介 <227 の 1 りら る の 全 6 2 の AR 狗 1 

THFBOOKO 

は 還 和 の プティ 2 う 

Nr 
ー ォ 
ー の 
W ニク 『 カ Ga 
ま ンジ デー 一 本 
。 - ーーー 
/ 人 ーー ビー 
M 
「 

AT/ 訂 NUR 
時 』 NN 
因り il 了 さ N 

72 | 放り ※ い 
『r ^、 NN 大 sy 

7 
スバ 

の / り //2 

/ 7// 

< 
が 

About Miyamoto: 

Miyamoto Musashi (c.1584-june 13 (apanese calendar: May 19), 1645), 
also kmown as Shinmen Takezo, Miyamoto Bennosuke, or by his 
Buddhist name INiten DQraku was a famous japanese samurai, and is 
considered by many to have been one of the most skilled swordsmen im 
history. Musashi, as he is often simply knmown, became legendary 
through his outstanding swordsmanship in numerous duels, even from a 
Very young age. He is the founder ot the Hyoho INiten Ichi-ryau or INiten- 
ryu style of swordsmanship and the author of The Book ot Five Kings, a 
book on strategy, tactcs, and philosophy that is stll studied today. 
Source: Wikipedia 

Note: This book is brought to you by Holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/a-book-of-fiVe-rings-by-miyamoto-musashi/ 
Strictly tor personal use, do not use this file for commercial DurDOSeS. 

Introduction 

1 have been many years traimmg in the Way of Strategy, called INi Ten 
Ichi Ryu, and now Ithink 1 will explain it in writing for the first tme. 

It is now during the first ten days of the tenth month in the twentieth 
year of Kanei (1645). 1 have climbed mountain Iwato of Higo in Kyushu 
to pay homage to heaver, pray to Kwannor, and kneel betore Buddha. 1 
am a warrior of Harima province, Shimmen Musashi INo Kami Fujrwara 
No Genshir, age sixty years. From youth my heart has been inchmed to- 
ward the Way of Strategy. 

My first duel was when 1 was thirteer, T struck down a strategist of the 
Shinto school one Arima Kihei. When 1 was sixteen 1 struck down an 
able strategist Tadashima Akiyama. When 1 was twenty-one 1 went up to 
the capital and met all manner ot strategists, never once faihng to win im 
many ComtestS. 

After that 1 went from province to provimce duehng with strategist ot 
Various schools, and not once failed to win even though 1 had as many as 
sixty encounters. This was between the ages of thirteen and twenty-eight 
or twenty-mme. When 1 reached thirty 1 1ooked back on my past. The pre- 
Vious victories were not due to my having mastered strategy. Perhaps tt 
was natural ability, or the order of heaven, or that other schools' strategy 
Was Imferior. 

After that 1 studied mornmg and evemmg searching for the principle, 
and came to realize the Way of Strategy when I was fifty. Simce then 1 
have Iived without following any partcular Way. Thus with the virtue of 
strategy 1 practice many arts and abihties - all thimgs with no teacher. To 
write this book 1 did not use the law of Buddha or the teachmes of Con- 
fucius, neither old war chronicles nor books on martial tactics. 1 take up 
my brush to explain the true spirit of this Ichi school as it is mirrored im 
the Way of heaven and Kwannon. The tme is the night of the tenth day 
of the tenth month, at the hour of the tger (3-5 a.m.) 

THE GROUND BOOK 

Strategy is the craft of the warrior. Commanders must enact the craft, 
and troopers should know this Way. There is no warrior in the world 
today who really understands the Way ot Strategy. 

There are various Ways. 1here is the Way of salvation by the law of 
Buddha, the Way of Confucius govermmg the Way of learnmmg, the Way 
of heahmg as a doctor, as a poet teaching the Way of Waka, tea, archery, 
and many arts and skills. Each man practces as he feels inchned. It is 
said the warrior's is the twofold Way of pen and sword, and he should 
have a taste for both Ways. 

Even if a man has no natural ability he can be a warrior by sticking as- 
siduously to both divisions of the Way. Generally speaking, the Way of 
the warrior is resolute acceptance of death. Although not only warriors 
but priests, womer, peasants and lowher folk have been knmown to die 
readily in the cause of duty or out of shame, this is a different thimg. The 
warrior is different in that studying the Way of Strategy is based on 
overcoming men. By victory gaimed in crossimg swords wrth individuals, 
or erjoiming battle with large numbers, we can attain power and fame for 
ourselves or our lord. This is the virtue of strategy. 

The Way of Strategy 

Im China and japan practtioners ot the Way have been known as 
masters of strategy . Warriors must learn this Way. 

Kecently there have been people gettnmg on in the world as strategists, 
but they are usually just sword-fencers. The attendants ot the Kashima 
Kantori shrines of the provimce Hitachi received instructon from the 
gods, and made schools based on this teaching, travehng from country to 
country instructmg men. This is the recent meaming of strategy. 

Im olden tmes strategy was Histed among the Ten Abilities and Seven 
Arts as a beneficial practice. It was certainly an art but as a beneficial 

Practice it was not hmited to sword-fencing. The true value of sword- 
fencimng cannot be seen within the confimes of sword-fencing techmique. 

If we look at the world we see arts tor sale. Men use equipment to sell 
their own selves. As if with the nut and the flower, the nut has become 
less than th flower. In this kind of Way of Strategy, both those teachimg 
and those learmmg the way are concerned with colouring and showing 
off their technique, trying to hasten the bloom of the flower. They speak 
of “This Dojo” and "That Dojo". They are lookimg for profit. Someone 
once said "Immature strategy is the cause of grief'. That was a true 
Say1n ら . 

There are four Ways in which men pass through Hfe: as gentlemem, 
farmers, artisans and merchants. 

The Way of the farmer. Using agricultural instruments, he sees springs 
through to autumms with an eye on the changes of season. 

Second is the Way of the merchant. The wine maker obtains his in- 
gredients and puts them to use to make his living. The Way of the mer- 
chant is always to Hive by taking profit. This is the Way ot the merchant. 

Thirdly the gentleman warrior, carryimg the weaponry of his Way. 

The Way of the warrior is to master the virtue of his weapons. lf a gen- 
tleman dishkes strategy he will not appreciate the benefit of weaponry, 
so must he not have a little taste for this? Fourthly the Way of the artisan. 
The Way of the carpenter is to become proficient in the use of his tools, 
first to lay his plans with a true measure and then perform his work ac- 
cording to plan. 1hus he passes through Hfe. These are the four Ways of 
the gentleman, the farmer, the artisan and the merchant. 

Comparing the Way of the Carpenter to Strategy 

The comparison with carpentry is through the connection with houses. 
Houses of the nobihty, houses of warriors, the Four houses, ruim ot 
houses, thriving of houses, the style of the house, the traditon of the 
house, and the name of the house. The carpenter uses a master plan of 
the building, and the Way of Strategy is simlar in that there is a plan of 
campaign. If you want to learn the craft of war, ponder over this book. 
The teacher is as a needle, the disciple is as thread. You must practice 
constantly. 

Like the foreman carpenter, the commander must know natural rules, 
and the rules of the country, and the rules of houses. This is the Way of 
the foreman. 

The foreman carpenter must know the architectural theory of towers 
and temples, and the plans ot palaces, and must employ men to raise up 

houses. The Way of the foreman carpenter is the same as the Way of the 
commander of a warrior house. In the construction of houses, choice of 
Woods is made. 

Straight un-knotted tmber of good appearance 1s used for the revealed 
pillars, straight Hmber with small defects is used tor the inner pillars. 
Timbers of the finest appearance, even if a Ittle weak, is used for the 
thresholds, hmtels, doors, and siding doors, and so on. Good strong Hm- 
ber, though it be gnarled and knotted, can always be used discreetly im 
construction. Timber which is weak or knotted throughout should be 
used as scaffolding, and later for firewood. 

The foreman carpenter allots his men work according to their ability. 
Floor layers, makers of sliding doors, thresholds and Imtels, ceihmgs and 
so on. Those of poor ability lay the floor joists, and those of lesser abilty 
carve wedges and do such miscellaneous work. せ the foreman knows 
and deploys his men well the fimished work will be good. The foreman 
should take into account the abilities and Himitatons of his mer, circulat- 
img among them and asking nothing unreasonable. He should know 
their morale and spirit, and encourage them when necessary. This is the 
same as the primciple ot strategy. 

The Way of Strategy 

Like a trooper, the carpenter sharpens his own tools. He carries his 
edulpmert in his tool box, and works under the directon ot his foreman. 
He makes columns and girders with an axe, shapes floorboards and 
shelves with a plane, cuts fime openwork and carvings accurately, giving 
as excellent a fimish as his skill wil allow. This is the craft of the car- 
penters. When the carpenter becomes skilled and understands measures 
he can become a toreman. 

The carpenter's attainment is, having tools which will cut well, to 
make small shrimes, writing shelves, tables, paper lanterns, chopping 
boards and pot-ids. These are the specialties of the carpenter. Thimgs are 
simnlar for the trooper. You ought to think deeply about this. 

The attainmment of the carpenter is that his work is not warpedL, that the 
joints are not misaligned, and that the work is truly planed so that it 
meets well and is not merely fimished in sections. This is essential. If you 
wart to learn this Way, deeply consider the thimgs written in this book 
one at a Hme. You must do sufficient research. 

Outline of the FiVe Books of this Book of Strategy 

The Way is shown as five books concermmg different aspects. These 
are (Ground, Water, Fire, Wind (traditiom), and Void (the illusionary 
nature of worldly thimgs) 

The body of the Way of Strategy from the viewpoint of my Ichi school 
is explained in the Ground book. It is difficult to realize the true Way just 
through sword-fencimng. Know the smallest thimgs and the biggest thimgs, 
the shallowest thimngs and the deepest thimgs. As it were a straight road 
mapped out on the ground, the first book is called the Ground book. 

Second is the Water book. With water as the basis, the spirit becomes 
jike water. Water adopts the shape ot its receptacle, it is sometmes a 
trickle and sometmes a wild sea. Water has a clear blue colour. By the 
clarity, thimgs of Ichi school are shown in this book. If you master the 
Principles ot sword-tencing, when you freely beat one mam, you beat any 
man in the world. The spirit of defeating a man is the same for ten mil- 
lion men. The strategist makes small things into big things, like buildimg 
a great Buddha from a one foot model. 1 cannot write in detail how this 
is done. The principle of strategy is having one thing, to know ten thou- 
sand things. Things of Ichi school are written in this the Water book. 

Third is the Fire book. This book is about fighting. The spirit of fire is 
fierce, whether the fire be small or big: and so it is with battles. The Way 
of battles is the same for man to man fights and for ten thousand a side 
battles. You must appreciate that spirit can become big or small. What is 
big is easy to perceive: what is small is difficult to perceive. In short it is 
difficult for large numbers ot men to change position, so their move- 
merts can be easily predicted. An individual can easily change his mind, 
so his movements are difficult to predict. You must appreciate this. The 
essence of this book is that you must traim day and night in order to 
make quick decisions. In strategy it is necessary to treat traimimg as part 
of normal Hfe with your spirit unchanging. Thus combat in battle is de- 
scribed in the Hire book. 

Fourthly the Wind book. This book is not concerned with my lchi 
school but with other schools of strategy. By Wind 1 mean old traditons, 
present-day traditions, and family traditions of strategy. Thus 1 clearly 
explain the strategies ot the world. This is tradition. It is difficult to know 
yourself if you do not know others. To all Ways there are side-tracks. If 
you study a Way daily, and your spirit diverges, you may think you are 
obeying a good Way but objectively it is not the true Way. If you are fol- 
lowing the true way and diverge a Hittle, this will later become a large di- 
Vergence. You must reahze this. Other strategies have come to be 
thought of as mere sword-fencimg, and it is not unreasonable that this 

should be so. The benefit of my strategy, although it includes sword-fen- 
cmg, hes in a separate principle. 1 have explained what is commonly 
meart by strategy in other schools in the Tradition (Wind) book. 

Fifthly, the book of the Void. By void 1 mean that which has no begim- 
mimg and no end. Attaining this principle means not attaining the prin- 
ciple. The Way ot strategy is the Way ot nature. When you appreciate the 
Power of nature, knowing rhythm of any situation, you will be able to hit 
the enemy naturally and strike naturally. All this is the Way of the Void. 
Iintend to show how to follow the true Way according to nature in the 
book of the Void. 

The Name Ichi Ryu Ni To (One school - two swords) 

Warriors, both commanders and troopers, carry two swords at ther 
belt. In olden tmes these were called the long sword and the sword: 
nowadays they are known as the sword and the compamion sword. Let it 
suffice to say that in our ]and, whatever the reasor, a warrior carries to 
swords at his belt. It is the Way of the warrior. 

"Nito Ichi Ryu" shows the adVantages of using both swords. 

The spear and the halberd are weapons which are carried out of doors. 
Students of the Ichi school Way of Strategy should train from the start 
wrth the sword and the long sword in either hand. This is a truth: when 
you sacrifice your life, you must make fullest use of Your weaporry. It is 
false not to do so, and to die with a weapon yet undrawn. 

If you hold a sword with both hands, it is difficult to wield it freely to 
left and right so my method is to carry the sword in one hand. This does 
not apply to large weapons such as the spear or halberd, but swords and 
compamion swords can be carried in one hand. It is encumbering to hold 
a sword in both hands when you are on horseback, when runmmg on un- 
even roads, on swampy ground, muddy rice fields, stony ground, orina 
crowd of people. To hold the long sword in both hands is not the true 
Way, for if you carry a bow or spear or other arms in your left hand you 
have only one hand free for the long sword. However, when it is difficult 
to cut an enemy down wrth one hand, you must use both hands. It is not 
difficult to wield a sword in one hand: the Way to learn this is to traim 
wrth two long swords, one in each hand. It will seem difficult at first, but 
everything is difficult at first. Bows are difficult to draw, halberds are 
difficult to wield: as you become accustomed to the bow so your pull 
will become stronger. When you become used to wielding the long 
sword, you will gain the power of the Way and wield the sword well. 

As T will explain in the second book, the Water Book, there is no fast 
way ot wielding the long sword. The long sword should be wielded 
broadly and the compamion sword closely. This is the first thimg to 
realize. 

According to this Ichi schooL you can win with a long weapor, and 
yet you can also win with a short weapon. In short, the Way of the Ichi 
school is the spirit of winmmg, whatever the weapon and whatever its 
SiZe. 

It is better to use two swords rather than one when you are fightmng a 
crowd, and especially if you want to take a prisoner. 

These things cannot be explained in detail. From one thing, know ten 
thousand thimgs. When you attain the Way of Strategy there will not be 
one thing you canmot see. You must study hard. 

The Benefit of the Two Characters Reading "Strategy" 

Masters of the long sword are called strategists. As for the other milit- 
ary arts, those who master the bow are called archers, those who master 
the spear are called spearmer, those who master the gun are called 
marksmer, those who master the halberd are called halberdiers. But we 
do not call masters of the Way of the long sword "]ongswordsmen", nor 
do we speak of companion swordsmen". Because bows, guns, SDearS 
and halberds are all warriors _ equipment they are certaimly part of 
strategy. To master the virtue ot the long sword is to govern the world 
and oneself, thus the long sword is the basis of strategy. The principle is 
"strategy by means ot the long sword". If he attaims the virtue of the long 
swordL, one man can beat ten men. Just as one man can beat ter, so a hun- 
dred men can beat a thousand, and a thousand can beat ten thousand. In 
my strategy, one man is the same as ten thousand, so this strategy is the 
complete warrior's craft. 

The Way of the warrior does not include other Ways, such as Con- 
fuciamism, Buddhism, certain traditions, artistic accomplishments and 
dancing. But even though these are not part of the Way, it you know the 
Way broadly you will see it in everythimg. Men must polish their partc- 
ular Way. 

The Benefit of Weapons in Strategy 

There is a tme and place for use of weapons. 

The best use of the companmion sword is in a confimned space, or when 
you are engaged closely with an opponent. The long sword can be used 
effectively in all situations. 

The halberd is inferior to the spear on the battlefield. With the spear 
you can take the initative: the halberd is defensive. In the hands of one 
of two men of equal abilty, the spear gives a little extra strength. Spear 
and halberd both have their uses, but neither is Very beneficial im con- 
fimed spaces. They cannot be used for taking a prisoner. They are essen- 
tally weapons for the field. 

Anyway, せ you learn mdoor'techniques, you will thimk narrowly 
and forget the true Way. Thus you wil have difficulty im actual 
emCOuTterS. 

The bow is tactcally strong at the commencement of battle, especially 
battles on a moor, as it iS possible to shoot quickly from among the 
spearmen. HHowever, it is unsatisfactory in sieges, or when the enemy is 
more than forty yards away. For this reason there are nowadays few tra- 
ditonal schools of archery. There is little use nowadays for this kind of 
skill. 

From inside fortfications, the gun has no equal among weaponSs. It is 
the supreme weapon on the field before the ranks clash, but once swords 
are crossed the gun becomes useless. One of the virtues of the bow is that 
you can see the arrows in fhight and correct your aim accordingly, 
whereas gunshot cannot be seen. You must appreciate the importance of 
this. 

just as a horse must have endurance and no defects, so it is with 
weapons. Horses should walk strongly, and swords and companion 
swords should cut strongly. Spears and halberds must stand up to heavy 
use, bows and guns must be sturdy. Weapons should be hardy rather 
than decorative. 

You should not have a favourite weapon. To become over-familiar 
with one weapon is as much a fault as not kmowing it sufficiently well. 
You should not copy others, but use weapons which you can handle 
Properly. It is bad for commanders and troopers to have hkes and dis- 
likes. 1hese are thimgs you must learn thoroughly. 

Timinmg in Strategy 

There is Hming in everything. Timing in strategy cannot be mastered 
writhout a great deal of practice. 

Timing is important in dancing and pipe or strimg music, for they are 
im rhythm only tming is good. Timing and rhythm are also involved im 
the military arts, shootmg bows and guns, and riding horses. In all skills 
and abihtes there is tming. There is also hming in the Void. 

There is hming in the whole jife of the warrior, in his thriving and de- 
cining, in his harmony and discord. Simnlarly, there is tming in the Way 

70 

of the merchant, in the rise and fall of capital. All things entail rising and 
falling thming. You must be able to discern this. In strategy there are Var1- 
ous Hming considerations. From the outset you must know the applic- 
able tming and the inapplcable thming, and from among the large and 
small things and the fast and slow tmings find the relevant Hming, first 
seeimg the distance Hming and the background Hming. This is the main 
thimg in strategy. It is especially important to know the background Hm- 
img, otherwise your strategy will become uncertain. 

You win battles with the Hming in the Void born of the tmng ot cun- 
mng by knowing the enemies tming, and thus using a Hming which the 
enemy does not expect. 

All the five books are chiefly concerned with hming. You must traim 
sufficiently to appreciate this. 

If you practce day and night in the above Ichi school strategy, your 
spirit will naturally broaden. Thus is large scale strategy and the strategy 
of hand to hand combat propagated in the world. This is recorded for the 
first tme in the five books of Ground, Water, Hire, Tradition (Wind), and 
Void. This is the way for men who want to learn my strategy: 

1.Do not thimk dishonestly. 

.The Way is in traimning. 

. Become acquaimted with every art. 

. Know the Ways of all professions. 

.Distnguish between gain and loss in worldly matters. 
.Develop intuitive judgement and understanding for everything. 
.Perceive those things which cannot be seen. 

.Pay attention even to trifles. 

.Do nothimg which is of no use. 

\ 〇 ら 〇 ひい 中 OO 〇 は う 

It is important to start by settimg these broad principles in your heart, 
and tram in the Way of Strategy. If you do not look at things on a large 
scale it will be difficult for you to master strategy. If you learn and attaim 
this strategy you wil never lose even to twenty or thirty enemies. More 
than anything to start with you must set your heart on strategy and earn- 
estly stck to the Way. You will come to be able to actually beat men im 
fights, and to be able to win with your eye. Also by traimmg You wll be 
able to freely control your own body, conquer men with your body, and 
wrth sufficient trainimng you will be able to beat ten men with your spirit. 
When you have reached this point will it not mean that you are 
imvimcible? 

77 

Moreover, in ]arge scale strategy the superior man will manage many 
subordinates dextrously, bear himselt correctly, govern the country and 
foster the people, thus preserving the ruler's disciphme. Hf there is a Way 
imvolving the spirit ot not being defeated, to help oneselt and gain hon- 
our, it is the Way of strategy. 

よ グ 

THE WATER BOOK 

The spirit of the INi Ten Ichi school of strategy is based on water, and this 
Water Book explains methods of victory as the 1ong-sword form of the 
Ichi school. Language does not extend to explaining the Way in detail, 
but it can be grasped intuitvely. Study this book: read a word then pon- 
der on it. If you interpret the meaning loosely you will mistake the Way. 

The primciples ot strategy are written down here in terms ot single 
combat, but you must think broadly so that you attain an understanding 
for ten-thousand-a-side battles. 

Strategy is different from other things in that you mistake the Way 
even a httle you will become bewildered and fall into bad ways. 

If you merely read this book you will not reach the Way of Strategy. 
Absorb the things written in this book.Do not just read, memorise or 1m- 
itate, but so that you reahze the principle from within your own heart 
study hard to absorb these thimgs into your body. 

Spiritual Bearing in Strategy 

In strategy your spiritual bearimg must not be any different from nor- 
mal. Both in fightimng and in everyday Hife you should be determined 
though calm. Meet the situation without tenseness yet not recklessly, 
your Spirit settled yet unbiased. BEVen when your spirit is calm do not let 
your body relax, and when your body is relaxed do not let your spirit 
slacken. Do not let your spirit be influenced by your body, or your body 
be influenced by your spirit. Be neither insuftficiently spirited nor over 
spirited. An elevated spirit is weak and a low spirit is weak. Do not let 
the enemy see your spirit. 

Small people must be completely familiar with the spirit of large 
people, and large people must be famihar with the spirit of small people. 
Whatever your size, do not be misled by the reactons of your own body. 
With your spirit open and unconstricted, look at things from a high point 
of view. You must cultivate your wisdom and spirit. Polish your 

73 

wisdom: learn public justce, distnguish between good and evil study 
the Ways of different arts one by one. When you cannot be deceived by 
men you wl have realized the wisdom of strategy. 

The wisdom ot strategy is different from other thimgs. On the battle- 
field, even when you are hard-pressed, you should ceaselessly research 
the primnciples ot strategy so that you can develop a steady spirit. 

Stance in Strategy 

Adopt a stance with the head erect, neither hanging down, nor lookimg 
up, nor twisted. Your forehead and the space between your eyes should 
not be wrinkled. Do not roll your eyes nor allow them to bhmk, but 
shightly narrow them. With your features composed, keep the Hme of 
your nose straight with a feehng of shghtly flaring your nostrils. Hold 
the Hme of the rear of the neck straight: instll vigour into your hairline, 
and in the same way from the shoulders down through your entire body. 
Lower both shoulders and, without the buttocks juttimg out put strength 
imto your legs from the kmees to the Hps of your toes. Brace your abdo- 
men so that you do not bend at the hips. Wedge your compamion sword 
im your belt agaimst your abdomen, so that your belt is not slack - this is 
called "wedgimg im. 

Im all forms of strategy, 1t is necessary to maintain the combat stance in 
everyday Hfe and to make your everyday stance your combat stance. 
You must research this well. 

The Gaze in Strategy 

The gaze should be large and broad. This is the twofold gaze 
"Perception and Sight". Perception is strong and sight week. 

In strategy it is important to see distant thimgs as it they were close and 
to take a distanced view of close thmgs. It is important in strategy to 
know the enemy 's sword and not to be distracted by insigmificamt move- 
ments of his sword. You must study this. The gaze is the same for single 
combat and for large-scale strategy. 

It is necessary in strategy to be able to look to both sides without mov- 
img the eyeballs. You cannot master this abihty quickly. Learn what is 
written here: use this gaze im everyday hte and do not vary it whatever 
happens. 

Holding the Long Sword 

7 人 4 

Grip the long sword with a rather floatimg feehnmg in your thumb and 
forefinger, with the middle fnger neither tght nor slack, and with the 
last two fimgers tight. It is bad to have play in your hands. 

When you take up a sword, you must feel intent on cutting the enemy. 
As you cut an enemy You must not change your grip, and your hands 
must not "cower". When you dash the enemy's sword aside, or ward 
off, or force it dowr, you must slightly change the feelhing in your thumb 
and forefinger. Above all, you must be intent on cuttmg the enemy in the 
way you grip the sword. 

The grip for combat and for sword-testmg is the same. There is no 
such thing as a man-cuttmg grip . 

Generally, 1 dishke fixedness in both long swords and hands. Fixed- 
ness means a dead hand. Phabihty is a hving hand. You must bear this im 
mund. 

Footwork 

With the Hps of your toes somewhat floatng, tread firmly with your 
heels. Whether you move fast or slow, with large or small steps, your 
feet must always move as in normal walking. 1 dishke the three walking 
methods know as umping-foof, floating-foot' and fixed-steps". 

So-called “Yin-Yang foot' is important in the Way. Yin-Yang foot 
means not moving only one foot. It means moving your teet left-right 
and right-left when cutting, withdrawing, or warding oftf a cut. You 
should not move on one foot preferentially. 

The Five Attitudes 

The five attitudes are: Upper, Middle, Lower, Right Side, and Left 
Side. These are the give. Although attitude has these five divisions, the 
one PurPose of all of them is to cut the enemy. There are none but these 
five attitudes. 

Whatever attitude you are im, do not be conscious of making the atHi- 
tude: thimk only of cuttmg. Your attitude should be large or small ac- 
cording to the situation. Upper, Lower and Middle attitudes are decisive. 
Left Side and Kight Side atttudes are fluid. Left and Kight attitudes 
should be used if there is an obstruction overhead or to one side. The de- 
cision to use Left or Right depends on the place. 

The essence of the Way is this. To understand attitude you must thor- 
oughly understand the middle attitude. The middle attitude is the heart 
of attitudes. If we look at strategy on a broad scale, the Middle attitude is 

9 

the seat ot the commander, with the other four attitudes following the 
commander. You must appreciate this. 

The Way of the Long Sword 

Knowing the Way of the long sword means we can wield with two fm- 
gers the sword we usually carry. If we know the path ot the sword well, 
we can wield it easily. Hf you ry to wield the long sword quickly you 
wl mistake the Way. To wield the 1ong sword well you must wield it 
calmly. 

If you ry to wield it quickly, hke a folding fan or a short sword, you 
will err by using "short sword chopping. You cannot cut down a man 
wrth a long sword using this method. 

When you have cut downwards with the longsword, Hft it straight up- 
wards: when you cut sideways, return the sword along a sideways path. 
Keturn the sword in a reasonable way, always stretching the elbows 
broadly. Wield the sword strongly. This is the Way of the 1ongsword. 

If you learn to use the five approaches of my strategy, you will be able 
to wield a sword well. You must train constantly. 

The Five Approaches 

1. The first approach is the Middle atttude. Confront the enemy with 
the point of your sword against his face. When he attacks, dash his 
sword to the right and ride' it. Or, when the enemy attacks, deflect the 
Point of his sword by hittmg downwards, keep your long sword where it 
is, amd as the enemy renews his attack cut his arms from below. This is 
the first method. 

The five approaches are this kind of thing. You must traim repeatedly 
usimg a long sword in order to learn them. When you master my Way of 
the long sword, you will be able to control any attack the enemy makes. 1 
assure you, there are no attitudes other than the five attitudes of the long 
Sword ot Ni To. 

2. In the second approach with the long sword, from the Upper att- 
tude cut the enemy just as he attacks. If the enemy evades the cut keep 
your Sword where it is and, scooping up from below, cut him as he re- 
news the attack. It is possible to repeat the cut from here. 

Im this method there are various changes in tming and spirit. You wil 
be able to understand this by training in the Ichi school. You will always 
win with the five long sword methods. You must train repetitively. 

3. Im the third approach, adopt the Lower atttude, anticipating scooP- 
img up. When the enemy attacks, hit his hands from below. As you do so 

76 

he may try to hit your sword down. Tf this is the case, cut his upper 
arm(s) horizontally with a feehmg of "crossing". This means that from the 
lower attitudes you hit the enemy at the instant that he attacks. 

You wil encounter this method often, both as a beginner and in later 
strategy. You must train holding a long sword. 

4. In this fourth approach, adopt the Left Side attitude. As the enemy 
attacks hit his hands from below. If as you hit his hands he attempts to 
dash down your sword, with the feehmg of hittng his hands, parry the 
path of his long sword and cut across from above your shoulder. 

This is the Way of the 1ong sword. Through this method you win by 
parrying the hme of the enemy's attack. You must research this. 

5. In the fifth approach, the sword is in the Right Side attitude. In ac- 
cordance writh the enemy s attack, cross Your long sword from below at 
the side to the Upper atttude. Then cut straight from above. 

This method is essential for knowing the Way of the long sword well. 
If you can use this method, You can freely wield a heavy long sword. 

1 cannot describe in detail how to use these five approaches. You must 
become well acquainted with my im harmony with the long sword" 
Way, learn ]arge-scale tming, understand the enemy 's long sword, and 
become used to the five approaches from the outset. You wil always wim 
by using these five methods, with Various tming considerations discern- 
img the enemy s spirit. You must consider all this carefully. 

The "Attitude No-Attitude" Teaching 

"Atttude No-Attitude' means that there is no need for what are know 
as long sword attitudes. 

Even so, attitudes exist as the five ways of holding the long sword. 
However you hold the sword it must be in such a way that it is easy to 
cut the enemy well in accordance with the situation, the place, and your 
relation to the enemy. From the Upper attitude as your spirit lessens you 
can adopt the Middle atttude, and from the Middle atttude you can 
ralse the sword a Httle im your techmique and adopt the Upper atttude. 
From the lower attitude you can raise the sword and adopt the Middle 
attitudes as the occasion demands. According to the situatior, if you turn 
your sword from either the Left Side or Kight Side attitude towards the 
centre, the Middle or the Lower attitude results. 

The primciple of this is called "BEBxishmng Attitude - Nonexistmg 
Attitude . 

The primary thing when you take a sword in your hands is your inten- 
ton to cut the enemy, whatever the means. Whenever you parry, hit, 

7Z 

spring, strike or touch the enemy's cuttmg sword, you must cut the en- 
emy in the same movement. It is essental to attain this. If you think only 
of hittng, springing, striking or touching the enemy, you will not be able 
actually to cut him. More than anything, you must be thinking of carry- 
img your movement through to cuttmg him. You must thoroughly re- 
search this. 

Attitude in strategy on a larger scale is called "Battle Array". Such att- 
tudes are all for winning battles. Fixed formation is bad. Study this well. 

To Hit the Enemy "In One Timing" 

"Im One Timing” means, when you have closed with the enemy, to hit 
him as quickly and directly as possible, without moving your body or 
settiimg your spirit, while you see that he is stll undecided. The tming of 
hittng before the enemy decides to withdraw, break or hit, is this Im 
One 1iming ". 

You must traim to achieve this Hming, to be able to hit in the Hming of 
ar imstart. 

The "Abdomen Timing of Two" 

When you attack and the enemy quickly retreats, as you see him tense 
you must feimt a cut. 1hen, as he relaxes, follow up and hit him. This is 
the "Abdomen Timimng of Two". 

It is very difficult to attain this by merely reading this book, but you 
will soon understand wrth a little instruction. 

No Design, No Conception 

Im this method, when the enemy attacks and you also decide to attack, 
hit with your body, and hit with your spirit, and hit from the Void with 
your hands, acceleratmg strongly. This is the "No Design, No Concep- 
tionm' cut. 

This is the most important method of hittimg. It is often used. You 
must train hard to understand it. 

The Flowing Water Cut 

The Flowing Water Cut' is used when you are strugghng blade to 
blade with the enemy. When he breaks and quickly withdraws rying to 
spring with his long sword, expand your body and spirit amd cut him as 
slowly as possible with your long sword, following your body Iike stag- 
nant water. You can cut wrth certainty せ you learn this. You must dis- 
cern the ememy's grade. 

78 

Contimuous Cut 

When you attack and the enemy also attacks, and your swords sprimg 
together, in one acton cut his head, hands and legs. When you cut sever- 
al places with one sweep of the long sword, it is the “Contimuous Cuf. 
You must practce this cut: it is often used. With detailed practice You 
should be able to understand it. 

The Fire and Stones 

Cut The Fires and Stones Cut means that when the enemy's long 
sword and your long sword clash together you cut as strongly as DOs- 
sible without raising the sword even a little. This means cuttmg quickly 
with the hands, body and legs - all three cuttmng strongly. If you traim 
well enough you will be able to strike strongly. 

The Red Leaves Cut 

The Red Leaves Cut [allusion to faling, dying leaves] means knocking 
down the enemy 's long sword. The spirit should be gettimg control of his 
sword. When the enemy is in a long sword attitude in front ot you and 
imtent on cuttmg, hittimg and parrying, you strongly hit the enemy s long 
sword with the Fire and Stones Cut, perhaps in the spirit of the “No 
Desien, No Conception' Cut. Hf you then beat down the point ot his 
sword writh a stcky feeimg, he will necessarily drop the sword. If you 
Practice this cut it becomes easy to make the enemy drop his sword. You 
must train repetitively. 

The Body in Place of the Long Sword 

Also the long sword in place of the body". Usually we move the body 
and the sword at the same Hme to cut the enemy. However, according to 
the enemy's cuttmg method, you can dash against him with your body 
first, and afterwards cut with the sword. If his body is immoveable, You 
can cut first with the long sword, but generally you hit first with the 
body and then cut with the 1ong sword. You must research this well and 
Practice hittimg. 

Cut and Slash 

To cut and to slash are two different thimgs. Cuttng, whatever form ot 
cutting it is, is decisive, with a resolute spirit. Slashing is nothing more 
than touching the enemy. Even if you slash strongly, and even the en- 
emy dies instantly, it is slashing. When you cut, Your spirit is resolved. 

79 

You must appreciate this. If you first slash the enemy's hands or legs, 
you must then cut strongly. Slashing is in spirit the same as touching. 
When you realize this, they become indistmguishable. Learn this well. 

Chinese Monkey's Body 

The Chinese Monkey's Body is the spirit of not stretching out your 
arms. The spirit is to get in quickly, without in the least extendimg Your 
arms, before the enemy cuts. If you are intent upon not stretching out 
your arms you are effectvely far away, the spirit is to go im with your 
whole body. When you come to within arm s reach it becomes easy to 
move your body in. You must research this well. 

Glue and Lacquer Emulsion Body 

The spirit of "Glue and Lacquer Emulsion Body" is to shck to the en- 
emy and not separate from him. When you approach the enemy, stick 
frmly with your head, body and legs. People tend to advance their head 
and legs quickly, but their body lags behind. You should stck firmly so 
that there is not the slightest gap between the enemy's body and your 
body. You must consider this carefully. 

To Strive for Height 

By 「to strive for height' is meant when you close with the enemy, to 
strive with him for superior height without cringing. Stretch your legs, 
stretch your hips, and stretch your neck face to face with him. When you 
think you have wor, and you are the higher, thrust in strongly. You 
must learm this. 

To Apply StHckiness 

When the enemy attacks and you also attack with the long sword, you 
should go in with a stcky feehmg and fix your long sword against the 
enemy S as You receive his cut. The spirit of stickimness is not hittmg Very 
strongly, but hittimg so that the long swords do not separate easily. It is 
best to approach as calmly as possible when hitting the enemy's long 
sword with stickiness. The difference between "Stckiness” and 
"Entanglement' is that stickimess is firm and entanglement is weak. You 
must appreclate this. 

The Body Strike 

The Body Strike means to approach the enemy through a gap in his 
guard. 1he spirit is to strike him with your body. Turn your face a httle 

20 

aside and strike the enemy 's breast with your left shoulder thrust out. 
Approach with the spirit ot bouncimg the enemy away, striking as 
strongly as possible in Hme with yout breathing. If you achieve this 
method ot closimg wrth the enemy, you will be able to kmock him ten or 
twenty feet away. It is possible to strike the enemy untl he is dead. Traim 
well. 

Three Ways to Parry His Attack 

There are three methods to parry a cut: 

First, by dashing the enemy 's long sword to your right, as if thrustmg 
at his eyes, when he makes an attack. 

Or, to parry by thrustmng the enemy's long sword towards his right eye 
wrth the feehmg of snipping his neck. 

Or, when you have a short "long sword”, without Worrying about Dar- 
ryimg the enemy's long sword, to close with him quickly, thrustmg at his 
face wrth your left hand. 

These are the three methods of parryimng. You must bear in mind that 
you ca always clench your left hand and thrust at the enemy s face with 
your fist. For this it is necessary to train well. 

To Stab at the Face 

To stab at the face means, when you are in confrontation with the en- 
emy, that your spirit is intent of stabbing at his face, following the hme of 
the blades with the point of your long sword. If you are intent on 
stabbing at his face, his face and body will become rideable. When the 
enemy becomes as if rideable, there are various OPDortumities for Win- 
mmg. You must concentrate on this. When fightmg and the enemy's body 
becomes as if rideable, you can win quickly, so you ought not to torget to 
stab at the face. You must pursue the value of this technmique through 
traiming. 

To Stab at the Heart 

To stab at the heart means, when fightmg and there are obstructons 
above, or to the sides, and whenever it is difficult to cut to thrust at the 
enemy. You must stab the enemy's breast without lettmg the point of 
your long sword waver, showing the enemy the ridge of the blade 
square-or, and with the spirit of deflectng his long sword. The spirit of 
this primciple is often useful when we become tred or for some reason 
our long sword will not cut. You must understand the applhcation of this 
method. 

ク 27 

To Scold "Tut-TUT'"" 

"Scold' means that when the enemy tries to counter-cut as you attack, 
you cournter-cut agaim from below as せ thrustmg at him, trying to hold 
him down. With very quick tming you cut scolding the enemy. Thrust 
up, Tut リ "and cut "TUT!" This tming is encountered tme and Hme 
again in exchange of blows. The way to scold Tut-TUT is to Hme the cut 
simultaneously with raising your long sword as if to thrust the enemy. 
You must learn this through repetitive practice. 

The Smacking Parry 

By smacking parry' is meant that when you clash swords with the en- 
emy, you meet his attacking cut on your long sword writh a tee-dum, tee- 
dum rhythm, smacking his sword and cuttng him. The spirit of the 
smackimg parry 1s not parrying, or smacking strongly, but smacking the 
enemy s long sword in accordance with his attacking cut primarily in- 
tent on quickly cuttnmg him. If you understand the Hming of smacking, 
however hard your long swords clash together, your swordpoint will not 
be knocked back even a little. You must research sufficiently to realhize 
this. 

There are Many Enemies 

"There are many enemnes”apples when you are fightmg one against 
many. Draw both sword and compamion sword and assume a wide- 
stretched left and right attitude. The spirit is to chase the enemies around 
from side to side, even though they come from all four directions. OD- 
serve their attacking order, and go to meet first those who attack first. 
Sweep youT eyes around broadly, carefully examnning the attackimg or- 
der, amd cut left and right alternately with your swords. Waitmg is bad. 
Always quickly re-assume your atttudes to both sides, cut the enemies 
down as they advance, crushing them in the direction from which they 
attack. Whatever you do, you must drive the enemy together, as it tyimg 
a hme of fishes, and when they are seen to be piled up, cut them down 
strongly without giving them room to move. 

The Advantage when Coming to Blows 

You can kmow how to win through strategy with the long sword, but it 
cannot be clearly explamed in writmng. You must practice diligently im 
order to understand how to win. 

クウ グ 

Oral tradition: "The true Way of Strategy is revealed in the long 
Sword.” 

One Cut 

You can win writh certainty with the spirit of "one cut'. lt is difficult to 
attain this if you do not learn strategy well. If you train well in this Way, 
strategy wl come from your heart and you will be able to win at wi 
You must traim diligently. 

Direct Commumnication 

The spirit of "Direct Commumicaton' is how the true Way of the Ni To 
Ichi school is received and handed down. 

Oral tradition: "Teach your body strategy." 

Kecorded in the above book is an outhme ot Ichi school sword-fightimg. 

To learn how to wm with the long sword in strategy, first learn the 
five approaches and the five attitudes, and absorb the Way of the 1ong 
sword naturally im your body. You must understand spirit and hming, 
handle the long sword naturally, and move body and legs in harmony 
with your spirit. Whether beatng one man or two, you will then know 
Values in strategy. 

Study the contents of this book, taking one item at a thme, and through 
fightimg writh enemies you will gradually come to know the principle of 
the Way. 

Dehberately, with a patent spirit, absorb the virtue of all this, from 
tme to Hme raisimng your hand in combat. Maintain this spirit whenever 
you cross swords with and enemy. 

Step by step walk the thousand-mile road. 

Study strategy over the years and achieve the spirit of the warrior. 
Today is victory over yourself of yesterday: tomorrow 1S Your victory 
over lesser men. INext in order to beat more skillful men, train accordimg 
to this book, not allowing your heart to be swayed along a side-track. 
Even if you kill an enemy, iit is not based on what you have learned it 
is not the true Way. 

If you attain this Way of victory, then you will be able to beat several 
tens of men. What remains is sword-fightimg ability, which you can at- 
tain in battles and duels. 

2 う 3 

THE FIKE BOOK 

In this the Hire Book of the Ni To Ichi school of strategy 1 describe fight- 
img as fire. 

Im the first place, people think narrowly about the benefit of strategy. 
By using only their fingertps, they only know the benefit of three of the 
five inches of the wrist. They let a contest be decided, as with the folding 
fam, merely by the span of their forearms. They specialise in the small 
matter of dexterity, learning such trifles as hand and leg movements 
wrth the bamboo practce sword. 

Im my strategy, the traimmg for kiliimg enemies is by way of many con- 
tests, fightmg for survival, discoverimg the meaning of hfe and death, 
learmmg the Way of the sword, judging the strength of attacks and un- 
derstanding the Way of the "edge and ridge" of the sword. 

You cammot proftit from small techniques partcularly when full armour 
is worn. My Way of Strategy is the sure method to win when fightimg for 
your Hfe one man against five or ten. 1here is nothing wrong wrth the 
principle "one man can beat ten, so a thousand men can beat ten thou- 
sand". You must research this. 〇 Of course you cannot assemble a thou- 
sand or ten thousand men for everyday trainimng. But You can become a 
master of strategy by traimimg alone with a sword, so that You can under- 
stand the enemy's strategy, his strength and resources, amd come to aP- 
preciate how to apply strategy to beat ten thousand enemies. 

Any man who wants to master the essence ot my strategy must re- 
search dihgently, traimmg morning and evening. Thus can he polish his 
skill become free from self, and realize extraordinary abihty. He wil 
come to possess miraculous DOWer. 

This is the practcal result ot strategYy. 

Depending on the Place 
Examine Your enVirommert. 

めど 】 

Stand in the sun: that is, take up an attitude writh the sun behind you. 
If the situation does not allow this, you must try to keep the sun on Your 
right side. In buildings, you must stand with the entrance behind you or 
to your right. Make sure that your rear is unobstructed, and that there is 
free space on your left, your right side beimng occupied with your side at- 
ttude. At might if the enemy can be seer, keep the fire behind you and 
the entrance to your right, and otherwise take up your attitude as above. 
You must look down on the enemy, and take up your attitude on shghtly 
higher places. For example, the Kamiza in a house is thought of as a high 
place. 

When the fight comes, always endeavour to chase the enemy around 
to your left side. Chase him towards awkward places, and try to keep 
him with his back to awkward places. When the enemy gets into an in- 
convemient position, do not let him look around, but conscientiously 
chase him around and pin him down. In houses, chase the enemy into 
the thresholds, Hmtels, doors, verandas, pillars, and so om, again not let- 
tmg him see his situation. 

Always chase the enemy into bad footholds, obstacles at the side, and 
so on, usimg the virtues of the place to establish predomnnant positions 
from which to fight. You must research and train diligently in this. 

The Three Methods to Forestall the Enemy 

The first is to forestall him by attacking. This is called Ken INo Sen (to 
set him up). 

Another method is to forestall him as he attacks. This is called Tai No 
Se (to watt for the initiative). 

The other method is when you and the enemy attack together. This is 
called Tai Tai No Sen (to accompany him and forestall him). 

There are no methods of taking the lead other than these three. Be- 
cause you can win quickly by taking the lead, it is one of the most im- 
portant things in strategy. There are several things involved in taking the 
lead. You must make the best of the situatior, see through the enemy 's 
spirit so that you grasp his strategy and defeat him. It is impossible to 
write about this in detail. 

777e 77s7 - Ke77 ん Jo Se77 

When you decide to attack, keep calm and dash in quickly, forestalhimg 
the enemy. Or you can advance seemingly strongly but with a reserved 
spirit, torestalling him writh the reserve. 

0) 

Alternatvely, advance with as strong a spirit as possible, and when 
you reach the enemy move with your feet a Httle quicker than normal, 
unsettliing him and overwhelming him sharply. 

Or, with your spirit calm, attack with a feehmg of constantly crushimg 
the enemy, from first to last. The spirit is to win in the depths ot the en- 
emy. These are all Ken No Sen. 

77e Seco77 - 了 7 の 7 Vo Se7 

When the enemy attacks, remain undisturbed but feign weakness. As 
the enemy reaches you, suddenly move away indicatmg that you intend 
to jump aside, then dash in attacking strongly as soon as you see the en- 
emy relax. This is one way. 

Or, as the enemy attacks, attack stll more strongly, taking advantage 
of the resultimg disorder in his hming to win. 

This is the Tai INo Sen principle. 

77e 7779- 了 77 了 27 Vo Se7 

When the enemy makes a quick attack, you must attack strongly and 
calmly, aim for his weak point as he draws near, and strongly defeat 
him. 

Or, if the enemy attacks calmly, You must observe his movements andL, 
wrth your body rather floatmg, join in with his movements as he draws 
near. Move quickly and cut him strongly. 

This is Tai Tai INo Sen. 

These thmgs cannot be clearly explaimned in words. You must research 
what is written here. In these three ways of forestalhng, you must judge 
the situation. This does not mean that you always attack first: but if the 
enemy attacks first you can lead him around. In strategy, you have et- 
fecthvely won when you forestall the enemy, so you must train well to at- 
tain this. 

To Hold Down a Pillow 

"To Hold Down a Pillow" means not allowing the enemy s head to rise. 

In contests of strategy it is bad to be led about by the enemy. You must 
always be able to lead the enemy about. Obviously the enemy will also 
be thinking of doing this, but he cannot forestall you if you do not allow 
him to come out. In strategy, you must stop the enemy as he attempts to 
cu も you must push down his thrust, and throw off his hold when he 
tries to grapple. This is the meaning of "to hold down a pillow". When 
you have grasped this principle, whatever the enemy tries to bring about 
im the fight you wl see in adVvance and suppress t. The spirit is too 

26 

check his attack at the syllable "at.… when he jumps check his jump at 
the syllable ju.… , and check his cut at cu.……. 

The important thing in strategy is to suppress the enemy s useful ac- 
tons but allow his useless actions. However, doing this alone is defens- 
ive. First, you must act according to the Way, suppressing the enemy Ss 
techmiques, foilimg his plans and thence command him directly. When 
you can do this you will be a master of strategy. You must traim well and 
research holding down a pillow". 

Crossing at a Ford 

"Crossing at a ford' means, for example, crossing the sea at a strait, or 
crossimg over a hundred miles ot broad sea at a crossimg place. 1 beheve 
this crossing at a ford'" occurs often in man's Hifetime. It means settmg 
sal even though your friends stay in harbour, knowing the route, know- 
img the soundnmess ot your ship and the favour ot the day. When all the 
conditions are meet, and there is perhaps a favourable wind, or a tal- 
windL, then set sail. If the wind changes within a few miles of your des- 
tmatior, you must row across the remaining distance without sail. 

If you attain this spirit, it apples to everyday Hfe. You must always 
think of crossing at a ford. 

Im strategy also it is important to "cross at a tord". Discern the enemy 's 
capabihty and, knowing your own strong ponts, “cross the ford” at the 
advantageous place, as a good captain crosses a sea route. If you succeed 
im crossing at the best place, you may take your ease. To cross at a ford 
means to attack the enemy's weak point and to put yourselft in an ad- 
Vantageous position. This is how to win large-scale strategy. The spirit of 
crossimg at a ford is necessary in both large- and small-scale strategy. 

You must research this well. 

To Know the Times 

"To know the thmes” means to know the enemy's disposition in battle. 
ls it flourishing or wammg? By observing the spirit of the enemy 's men 
and gettmg the best positiom, you cam work out the enemy s dispositon 
and move your men accordingly. You can win through this principle of 
strategy, fightimg from a position of advantage. 

When in a duel you must forestall the enemy and attack when you 
have first recognised his school of strategy, perceived his quahity and his 
strong and weak points. Attack in an unsuspectmng manner, kmnowing his 
metre and modulation and the appropriate hmung. 

ウブ 

Knowing the Hmes means, your abihty is high, seeimng right into 
thimgs. If you are thoroughly conversant with strategy, you will recog- 
mise the enemy s intentions and thus have many opportunities to wim. 
You must sufficiently study this. 

To Tread Down the Sword 

"To tread down the sword' is a primciple often used in strategy. First 
im large scale strategy, when the enemy first discharges bows and guns 
and then attacks it is difficult tor us to attack if we are busy loading 
powder into our guns or notching our arrows. The spirit is to attack 
quickly while the enemy is stll shootmg with bows or guns. The spirit is 
to win by treading down'" as we receive the enemy s attack. 

Im simngle combat, we cannot get a decisive victory by cuttmg, with a 
tee-dum tee-dum' feehng, in the wake of the enemy's attacking long 
sword. We must defeat him at the start of his attack, in the spirit of tread- 
img him down with the feet, so that he cannot rise again to the attack. 

"Ireading” does not simply mean treading with the feet. Tread with 
the body, tread with the spirit, and, of course, tread and cut wrth the 
long sword. You must achieve the spirit of not allowing the enemy to at- 
tack a second tme. This is the spirit of forestalhimg in every sense. Once 
at the enemy, you should not aspire just to strike him, but to chmg after 
the attack. You must study this deeply. 

To Know "Collapse" 

Everything can collapse. Houses, bodies, and enemies collapse when 
their rhythm becomes deranged. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy, when the enemy starts to collapse, you must 
Pursue him without lettmg the chance go. Hf you fail to take advantage of 
your enemies' collapse, they may recoVer. 

Im single combat the enemy sometmes loses Hming and collapses. If 
you let this opportunity pass, he may recover and not be so neghigent 
thereafter. Fix your eye on the enemy s collapse, and chase him, attack- 
img so that you do not let him recover. You must do this. The chasing at- 
tack is with a strong spirit. You must utterly cut the enemy down so that 
he does not recover his position. You must understand how to utterly cut 
down the enemy. 

To Become the Enemy 

"To become the enemy'” means to thimk yourself in the enemy 's posi- 
ton. In the world people tend to thimk of a robber trapped in a house as 

2 の 

a fortified enemy. However, it we think of becoming the enemy , we 
feel that the whole world is against us and that there is no escape. He 
who is shut inside is a pheasant. He who enters to arrest is a hawk. You 
must appreclate this. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy, people are always under the impression that 
the enemy is strong, and so tend to become cautious. But it you have 
good soldiers, and if you understand the principles of strategy, and 
you know how to beat the enemy, there is nothing to worry about. 

In single combat also you must put yourself in the enemy's position. If 
you think, “Here is a a master of the Way, who knows the principles of 
strategy , then you will surely lose. You must consider this deeply. 

To Release Four Hands 

"To release four hands" is used when you and the enemy are contend- 
img with the same spirit, and the issue cannot be decided. Abandon this 
spirit and win through an alternatiVe resource. 

Im large-scale strategy, when there is a four hands" spirit, do not give 
up - it is man's existence. Immediately throw away this spirit and wimn 
wrth a technmique the enemy does not expect. 

Im simngle combat also, when we thimk we have fallen into the "four 
hands" situation, we must defeat the enemy by changing our mind and 
applying a suitable technique according to his condition. You must be 
able to judge this. 

To Move the Shade 

"To move the shade" is used when you cannot see the enemy 's sDirtt. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy, when you cannot see the enemy's positiom, im- 
dicate that you are about to attack strongly, to discover his resources. It 
is easy then to defeat him with a different method once you see his 
TeSOUTCGS. 

Im simngle combat it the enemy takes up a rear or side atttude of the 
long sword so that you cannot see his intentior, make a feint attack, and 
the enemy wil show his long sword, thinking he sees your spirit. Pene- 
fiting from what you are showr, you can wim with certaimty. If you are 
negligent you will miss the tming. Kesearch this well. 

To Hold Down a Shadow 

"Holding down a shadow" is use when you can see the enemy's attack- 
img SDirtt. 

29 

Im large-scale strategy, when the enemy embarks on an attack, it you 
make a show of strongly suppressing his techmque, he will change his 
mind. Then, altering your spirit, defeat him by forestalhng him with a 
Void spirit. 

Or, in single combat, hold down the enemy's strong intention with a 
suitable tming, and defeat him by forestallimg him with this tming. You 
must study this well. 

To Pass On 

Many thimgs are said to be passed on. Sleepiness can be passed on, and 
yawning can be passed on. Time can be passed on also. 

Im ]argee-scale strategy, when the enemy is agitated and shows an in- 
chmation to rush, do not mind in the least. Make a show of complete 
calmmess, and the enemy wil be taken by this and wl become relaxed. 
When you see that this spirit has been passed on, you can brimng about 
the enemy s defeat by attacking strongly with a Void spirtt. 

Im single combat you can win by relaxing your body and spirit and 
ther, catchimg on to the moment the enemy relaxes, attack strongly and 
quickly, forestalhng him. What is know as "getting someone drunk' is 
similar to this. You can also infect the enemy with a bored, careless, or 
weak spirit. You must study this well. 

To Cause Loss of Balance 

Many thmgs can cause a loss of balance. One cause is danger, amother 
is hardship, and another is surprise. You must research this. 

Im large-scale strategy it is important to cause loss of balance. Attack 
without warning where the enemy is not expectmg it and while his spir- 
it is undecided follow up your advantage and, having the lead, defeat 
him. 

Or, in simngle combat start by making a show of being slow, then sud- 
denly attack strongly. Without allowing him space for breath to recover 
form the fluctuaton of spirit, you must grasp the opportunity to win. 
Get the feel of this. 

To Frighten 

Fright often occurs, caused by the unexpected. 

Im large-scale strategy you can frighten the enemy not just by what 
you present to their eyes, but by shoutmg, making a small force seem 
large, or by threatenmg them from the flank without warning. These 

30 

thimgs all frighten. You can win by making best use of the enemys 
frightened rhythm. 

Im simngle combat, also, you must use the advantage of taking the en- 
emy unawares by frightemimg him with your body, 1ong sword, or voice, 
to defeat him. You should research this well. 

To Soak In 

When you have come to grips and are striving together with the en- 
emy, and you realize that you cannot adVance, you "soak in'" and become 
one wrth the enemy. You can win by applying a suitable techmque while 
you are mutually entangled. 

In battles involving large numbers as well as in fights with small num- 
bers, you can often win decisively with the advantage of knowing how 
to "soak" into the enemy, whereas, were you to draw apart you would 
lose the chance to win. Kesearch this well. 

To Injure the Corners 

lt is difficult to move strong things by pushing directly, so you should 
JrJure the corners . 

Im large-scale strategy, it is beneficial to strike at the corners of the 
enemy s force. If the corners are overthrowr, the spirit of the whole body 
will be overthrown. To defeat the enemy you must follow up the attack 
when the corners have fallen. 

Im simgle combat it is easy to win once the enemy collapses. This hap- 
pens when you injure the corners” of his body, and thus weaken him. It 
is important to know how to do this, so you must research deeply. 

To Throw into Confusion 

This means making the enemy lose resolve. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy We can use our troops to confuse the enemy on 
the field. Observing the enemy 's spirit, we can make him think, "Here? 
There? Like that? Like this? Slow? Fast?". Victory is certaim when the en- 
emy 1s caught up in a rhythm which confuses his spirit. 

Im simgle combat we can corfuse the enemy by attackimg with varied 
techmiques when the chance arises. Feint a thrust or cut or make the en- 
emy think ou are going to close with him, and when he is confused you 
can easily win. This is the essence of fightimg, and you must research tt 
deeply. 

The Three Shouts 

7 

The three shouts are divided thus: before, during and after. Shout ac- 
cording to the situation. The voice is a thing of Hfe. We shout against 
fires and so or, against the wind and the waves. The voice shows energy. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy, at the start of battle we shout as loudly as pos- 
sible. During the fight the voice is low-pitched, shoutmg out as we at- 
tack. After the contest we shout in the wake of our victory. These are the 
three shouts. 

Im single combat, we make as it to cut amd shout "Ei!" at the same Hme 
to disturb the enemy, then in the wake ot our shout we cut with the 1ong 
sword. We shout after we have cut down the enemy - this is to anmoumce 
victory. This is called "sen go no koe" (before and after voice). We do not 
shout simultaneously with flourishing the long sword. We shout during 
the fight to get into rhythm. Kesearch this deeply. 

To Mingle 

Im battles, when the armnes are in confrontation, attack the enemy 's 
strong points and, when you see that they are beaten back, quickly sep- 
arate and attack yet another strong point on the periphery of his force. 
The spirit of this is hke a winding mountain path. 

This is an important fightmg method tor one man against many. Strike 
down the enemies in one quarter, or drive them back, then grasp the Hm- 
img and attack further strong points to right and left, as if on a winding 
mourntain path, weighing up the enemies disposition. When you know 
the enemies level attack strongly with no trace of retreating spirit. 

What is meant by mimghng "is the spirit of advancing and becoming 
engaged writh the enemy, and not withdrawing even one step. You must 
understand this. 

To Crush 

This means to crush the enemy regarding hum as beimg weak. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy, when we see that the enemy has few mer, or 
he has many men but his spirit is weak and disordered, we knock the hat 
over his eyes, crushing him utterly. If we crush Hightly, he may recover. 
You must learn the spirit of crushing as tt with a hand-grip. 

Im single combat if the enemy is less skilful than ourselt, his rhythm 
is disorgamised, or it he has fallen into evasive or retreating attitudes, we 
must crush him straightaway, with no concern for his presence and 
wrthout allowing him space for breath. It is essential to crush him all at 
once. 1he primary thing is not to let him recover his position even a Ittle. 
You must research this deeply. 

2 

The Mountain-Sea Change 

The mountain-sea” spirit means that it is bad to repeat the same thimg 
several tmes when fightng the enemy. 1here may be no help but to do 
something twice, but do not try it a third tme. If you once make an at- 
tack and fail, there is Hittle chance of success if you use the same ap- 
proach again. If you attempt a techmique which you have previously 
tried unsuccessfully and fail yet agaim, then you must change your at- 
tacking method. 

If the enemy thmks of the mountains, attack 1ke the sea: and if he 
thinks of the sea, attack like the mountains. You must research this 
deeply. 

To Penetrate the Depths 

When we are fightmg with the enemy, even when it can be seen that 
we can wm on the surface with the benefit of the Way, せ his spirit is not 
extHnguished, he may be beaten superficially yet undefeated in spirit 
deep inside. With this principle of penetratmg the depths" we can des- 
troy the enemy's spirit in its depths, demorahsing him by quickly chan- 
gimg Our SDirit. This often occurs. 

Penetratmg the depths means penetratmg with the long sword, penet- 
ratHing wrth the body, and penetratmg with the spirit. This cannot be un- 
derstood in a generalisation. 

Once we have crushed the enemy in the depths, there is no need to re- 
main spirited. But otherwise we must remain spirited. If the enemy re- 
maims spirited it is difficult to crush him. You must train in penetratmg 
the depths for large-scale strategy and also single combat. 

To Renew 

"To renew” apphes when we are fightmg writh the enemy, and an en- 
tangled spirit arises where there is no possible resolution. We must aban- 
don our efforts, think of the situation in a fresh spirit then win in the new 
rhythm. To renew, when we are deadlocked with the enemy, means that 
without changing our circumstance we change our spirit and wim 
through a different techmique. 

It is necessary to consider how “to renew” also applies in large-scale 
strategy. Research this dihgently. 

Rat's Head, Ox's Neck 

29 

"Kats head and oxs neck' means that when we are fightmg with the 
enemy and both he and we have become occupied with small pomts im 
an entangled spirit, we must always think of the Way of Strategy as be- 
img both a rat's head and an oxs neck. Whenever we have become preoc- 
cupied with small detail, we must suddenly change into a large spirit, in- 
terchanging large with small. 

This is one ot the essences of strategy. It is necessary that the warrior 
thimk in this spirit in everyday Hfe. You must not depart from this spirit 
im large-scale strategy nor in simgle combat. 

The Commander Knows the Troops 

"The commander knows the troops” apphes everywhere in fights im 
my Way of strategy. Using the wisdom of strategy, think ot the enemy as 
your own troops. When you think in this way you can move him at wi 
and be able to chase him around. You become the general and the enemy 
becomes your troops. You must master this. 

To Let Go the Hilt 

There are various kinds of spirit involved in lettimg go the hilt. There is 
the spirit of winmmg without a sword. There is also the spirit of holding 
the long sword but not winmmg. The Various methods cannot be ex- 
pressed in writing. You must train well. 

The Body of a Rock 

When you have mastered the Way of Strategy you can suddenly make 
your body hke a rock, and ten thousand things cannot touch you. This is 
the body of a rock. 

You wl not be moved. Oral tradition. 

What is recorded above is what has been constantly on my mind about 
Ichi school sword fencimg, written down as it came to me. This is the first 
tme T have written about my techniqgue, and the order ot thmes is a bit 
confused. It is difficult to express it clearly. 

This book is a spiritual guide for the man who wishes to learn the 
Way. 

My heart has been inchmed to the Way of Strategy from my youth on- 
wards. 1 have devoted myself to training my hand, tempering my body, 
and attaining the many spiritual attitudes of sword fencing. Hf we watch 
men ot other schools discussimg theory, and concentratimg on techniques 
wrth the hands, even though they seem skilful to watch, they have not 
the shightest true spirit. 

94 

Of course, men who study in this way thimk they are traimmg the body 
and spirit, but it is an obstacle to the true Way, and its bad influence re- 
mains for ever. Thus the true Way of Strategy is becomng decadent and 
dyimg out. 

The true Way of sword tencimng is the craft of defeatimg the enemy in a 
fight, and nothing other than this. If you attain and adhere to the wis- 
dom ot my strategy, You need never doubt that you wl win. 

う 5 

THE WIND BOOK 

In strategy you must know the Ways of other schools, so I have written 
about various other traditions of strategys in this the Wind Book. 

Without knowledge of the Ways of other schools, it is difficult to un- 
derstand the essence of my Ichi school. Looking at other schools we find 
some that specialise in techniques of strength using extra-long swords. 
Some schools study the Way of the short sword, known as kodachi. 
Some schools teach dexterity im large numbers of sword techmiques, 
teaching atttudes of the sword as the "surface' and the Way as the 
_mterior . 

That none ot these are the true Way 1 show clearly in the interior ot 
this book - all the vices and virtues and rights and wrongs. My Ichi 
school is different. Other schools make accomphshments their means of 
jivelihood, growing flowers and decoratively colouring articles in order 
to sell them. This is defimitely not the Way of Strategy. 

Some of the world 's strategists are concerned only with sword-fencing, 
and imit their training to flourishing the long sword and carriage of the 
body. But is dexterity alone suftficient to win? This is not the essence of 
the Way. 

1 have recorded the unsatisfactory point of other schools one by one in 
this book. You must study these matters deeply to appreciate the benefit 
of my INi To Ichi school. 

Other Schools Using Extra-Long Swords 

Some other schools have a hking for extra-long swords. From the point 
of view of my strategy these must been seen as weak schools. This is be- 
cause they do not appreciate the principle of cuttmg the enemy by any 
means. Their preference is tor the extra-long sword andL, relying on the 
virtue of its length, they think to defeat the enemy from a distance. 

Im this world it is said, “One inch gives the hand advantage", but these 
are the idle words of one who does not know strategy. It shows the 

36 

imferior strategy of a weak spirit that men should be dependent on the 
length of their sword, fightng from a distance without the benefit of 
Strategy. 

1 expect there is a case for the school in queston Hiking extra-long 
swords as part of its doctrine, but if we compare this to real hfe it 1S un- 
reasonable. Surely we need not necessarily be defeated if we are using a 
short sword, and have no long sword? 

It is difficult for these people to cut the enemy when at close quarters 
because of the length of the long sword. The blade path is large so the 
long sword is an encumbrance, and they are at a disadvantage compared 
to the man armed with a short compamion sword. 

From olden tmes it has been said: “Great and small go together.". So 
do not unconditionally dishke extra-long swords. What 1 dislike is the in- 
chinaton towards the long sword. If we consider large-scale strategy, we 
can think of large forces in terms of long swords, and small forces as 
short swords. Cannot few me give battle against many? There are many 
imstances of few men overcomung many. 

Your strategy 1s of no accourt it when called on to fight in a confimned 
space your heart is inchned to the long sword, or it you are in a house 
armed omly with Your companmion sword. 

Besides, some men have not the strength of others. In my doctrine, 1 
dislke preconceived, narrow Spirit. You must study this well. 

The Strong Long Sword Spirit in Other Schools 

You should not speak of strong and weak long swords. If you just 
wield the long sword in a strong spirit your cuttimg wil be coarse, and 下 
you use the sword coarsely you wil have difficulty in winmimg. 

If you are concerned with the strength of your sword, you wil try to 
cut unreasonably strongly, and will not be able to cut at all. It is also bad 
to ry to cut strongly when testmg the sword. Whenever you cross 
swords with an enemy you must not think of cuttmg him either strongly 
or weakly: just think of cuttmg and kiling him. Be intent solely upon 
kiling the enemy. Do not try to cut strongly and, ot course, do not think 
of cuttimg weakly. You should only be concerned with kiliing the enemy. 

If you rely on strength, when you hit the enemy s sword you will inev- 
itably hit too hard. If you do this, your own sword will be carried along 
as a result. Thus the saying, "The strongest hand wins", has no meaning. 

Im large-scale strategy, tt you have a strong army and are relying on 
strength to wim, but the enemy also has a strong army, the battle will be 
fierce. This is the same for both sides. 

9Z 

Without the correct principle the fight cannot be won. The spirit of my 
school is to win through the wisdom of strategy, paying no attention to 
trifles. Study this well. 

Use of the Shorter Long Sword in Other Schools 

Using a shorter long sword is not the true Way to wimn. 

Im ancient tmes, tachi and katana meant long and short swords. Men 
of superior strength in the world can wield even a long sword lightly, so 
there is no case for their hking the short sword. 1hey also make use of 
the length of spears and halberds. Some men use a shorter long sword 
with the intention of jumping in and stabbing the enemy at the un- 
guarded moment when he flourishes his sword. This inchmaton is bad. 

To aim for the enemy's unguarded moment is completely detensive, 
and undesirable at close quarters with the enemy. Furthermore, you Can- 
not use the method of jumping inside his defence with a short sword 
there are many enemies. Some men think that if they go against many 
enemies with a shorter long sword they can unrestrictedly frisk around 
cutting in sweeps, but they have to parry cuts contimuously, and eventu- 
ally become entangled with the enemy. This is inconsistent writh the true 
Way of StrategYy. 

The sure Way to win thus is to chase the enemy around in confusing 
manner, causimg him to jump aside, with your body held strongly and 
straight. The same principle applies to large-scale strategy. 1he essence 
of strategy is to fall upon the enemy in large numbers and brimg about 
his speedy downfall. By their study ot strategy, people of the world get 
used to coumterimg, evading and retreatimg as the normal thimng. They be- 
come set im this habit, so can easily be paraded around by the enemy. 
The Way of Strategy is straight and true. You must chase the enemy 
around and make him obey your spirit. 

Other Schools with many Methods of usinmg the Long Sword 

Placing a great deal of importance on the attitudes of the long sword is 
a mistaken way of thinking. What is known in the world as "attitude'" ap- 
phes when there is no enemy. The reason is that this has been a preced- 
ent simce ancient thmes, and there should be no such thing as "This is the 
modern way to do it "in duehng. You must force the enemy into incon- 
Vemiert situations. 

Attitudes are tor situatons in which you are not to be moved. That is, 
for garrisormimg castles, battle array, and so on, showing the spirit ot not 
beimg moved even by a strong assault. In the Way of duehng, however, 

239 

you must always be intent upon taking the lead and attacking. Attitude 
is the spirit of awaitimg ar attack. You must appreciate this. 

Im duels ot strategy you must move the opponent's attitude. Attack 
where his spirit is lax, throw him into confusion, irritate and terrify him. 
Take advantage of the enemy's rhythm when he is unsettled and you can 
wim. 

1 dishke the defensive spirit know as "attitude". Therefore, im my Way, 
there is something called "Atttude-No Attitude". 

Im large-scale strategy we deploy our troops for battle bearing in mimnd 
our strength, observing the enemy s numbers, and notmng the details of 
the battle field. This is at the start of the battle. 

The spirit of attacking first is completely different from the spirit of be- 
img attacked. Bearing an attack well with a strong attitude, and parryimg 
the enemy s attack well, is hke making a wall of spears and halberds. 
When you attack the enemy, your spirit must go to the extent of pulhng 
the stakes out of a wall and using them as spears and halberds. You must 
exammine this well. 

Fixing the Eyes in Other Schools 

Some schools maintain that the eyes should be fixed on the enemy's 
long sword. Some schools fix the eyes on the hands. Some fix the eyes on 
the face, and some fix the eyes on the feet, and so on. If you fx the eyes 
on these places Your spirit can become confused and your strategy 
thwarted. 

1 will explain this in detail. Footballers do not fix their eyes on the ba 
but by good play on the field they can perform well. When you become 
accustomed to something, you are not Hmited to the use of your eyeS. 
People such as master musiclans have the music score in front of their 
nose, or flourish swords in several ways when they have mastered the 
Way, but this does not mean that they fx their eyes on these thimgs spe- 
cifically, or that they make pointless movements of the sword. It means 
that they can see naturally. 

Im the Way ot Strategy, when you have fought many Hmes you wil 
easily be able to appralse the speed and position ot the enemy's sword, 
and having mastery of the Way you will see the weight of his spirit. In 
strategy, fixing the eyes means gazing at the man's heart. 

Im large-scale strategy the area to watch is the enemy's strength. 
"Percepton'” and sight' are the two methods ot seeing. Perception con- 
sists of concentratng strongly on the enemy's spirit, observing the 

29 

condition of the battlefield, fiximng the gaze strongly, seeing the progress 
of the fight and the changes of advantages. This is the sure way to win. 

In single combat you must not fix the eyes on the details. As 1 said be- 
fore, if you fix your eyes on details and neglect important things, Your 
spirit will become bewildered, and victory will escape you. Kesearch this 
principle well and train diligently. 

Use of the Feet in Other Schools 

There are various methods of using the feet: floatng foot jumping 
foot springing foot treading foot, crow s foot, and such nmble walking 
methods. From the point of view of my strategy, these are all 
unsatisfactory. 

1 dislike floatimg foot because the feet always tend to float during the 
fight. The Way must be trod firmly. 

Neither do 1 ke jumping foot because it encourages the habit of 
jumping, and a jumpy spirit. However much you jump, there is no real 
justification for it so jumping 1s bad. 

Springing foot causes a springimg Spirit which is indecisive. 

Treading footis a "waitng' method, and T especially dishke it. 

Apart from these, there are various fast walking methods, such as 
crow Ss foot and so on. 

Sometmes, however, you may encounter the enemy on marshland, 
swampy ground, river valleys, stony ground, or narrow roads, in which 
situations you cannotjump or move the feet quickIy. 

Im my strategy, the footwork does not change. 1 always walk as 1 usu- 
ally do in the street. You must never lose control of your feet. Accordimg 
to the enemy's rhythm, move fast or slowly, adjustng you body not too 
much and not too httle. 

Carrying the feet is important also in large-scale strategy. 1his is be- 
cause, 1f you attack quickly and thoughtlessly without knowing the 
enemy Ss spirit, your rhythm will become deranged and you will not be 
able to win. Or, i you advance too slowly, you wl not be able to take 
advantage ot the enemy's disorder, the opportunity to win will escape, 
and you will not be able to fimish the fight quickly. You must win by 
seizimg upon the enemy's disorder and derangement, and by not accord- 
img him even a little hope of recovery. Practice this well. 

Speed in Other Schools 

40 

Speed is not part of the true Way of Strategy. Speed implies that things 
seem fast or slow, according to whether or not they are in rhythm. 
Whatever the Way, the master of strategy does not appear fast. 

Some people can walk as fast as a hundred or a hundred and twenty 
miles in a day, but this does not mean that they run contimnuously from 
morning ll night. Unpracticed runmers may seem to have been runming 
all day, but their performamce 1s Door. 

Im the Way of dance, accomplished performers can sing while dancing, 
but when beginners try this they slow down and their spirit becomes 
busy. The "old pine tree" melody beaten on a leather drum is tranquil, 
but when beginners try this they slow down and their spirit becomes 
busy. Very skilful people can manage a fast rhythm, but it is bad to beat 
hurriedly. If you try to beat too quickly you wil get out of tme. Of 
course, slowness is bad. Keally skilful people never get out of tme, and 
are always dehberate, and never appear busy. From this example, the 
Principle can be seen. 

What is known as speed is especially bad in the Way of Strategy. The 
reasor for this is that depending on the place, marsh or swamp and so 
or it may not be possible to move the body and legs together quickly. 
Stll less will you be able to cut quickly if you have a long sword in this 
situation. If you ry to cut quickly, as if using a fan or short sword, You 
wl not actuallY cut even a Hittle. You must appreciate this. 

Im ]arge-scale strategy also, a fast busy spirit is undesirable. The spirit 
must be that of holding down a pillow, then you will not be even a Httle 
late. 

When your opponent is hurrying recklessly, you must act contrarily 
and keep calm. You must not be influenced by the opponent. Train dili- 
gently to attain this spirit. 

"Interior" and "Surface"in Other Schools 

There is no "interior”nor "surface'in strategy. 

The artistic accompHhshments usually claim inner meammg and secret 
tradition, and mterior' and gate”, but in combat there is no such thmg 
as fightmng on the surface, or cuttmg with the interior. When 1 teach my 
Way, 1 first teach by traimimg in techniqgues which are easy for the pupil 
to understand, a doctrine which is easy to understand. 1 gradually en- 
deavour to explain the deep primciple, points which it is hardly possible 
to comprehend, accordimg to the pupil's progress. In any evert, because 
the way to understanding is through experience, 1 do not speak of 
mterior' and gate . 

47 

Im this world, if you go into the mountains, and decide to go deeper 
and yet deeper, instead you will emerge at the gate. Whatever the Way, 
it has an interior, and it is sometmes a good thing to point out the gate. 
In strategy, we cannot say what is concealed and what is revealed. 

Accordingly 1 dishke passing on my Way through written pledges and 
regulations. Perceiving the ability of my pupils, 1 teach the direct Way, 
remove the bad influence of other schools, and gradually introduce them 
to the true Way of the warrior. 

The method of teaching my strategy is with a trustworthy spirit. 

You must traim diheently. T have tried to record an outhne of the 
strategy ot other schools in the above nine sections. 1 could now continue 
by giving a specific account ot these schools one by one, from the "gate" 
to the mterior', but 1 have intentionally not named the schools or their 
main points. The reason for this is that different branches of schools give 
different interpretations of the doctrines. In as much as men's opimions 
differ, so there must be differimg ideas on the same matter. Thus no one 
mam's conception is valid for any school. 

1 have shown the general tendencies of other schools on nimne points. If 
we look at them from an honest viewpoint, we see that people always 
tend to hke long swords or short swords, and become concerned with 
strength in both large and small matters. You can see why 1 do not deal 
with the "gates” of other schools. 

Im my lchi school of the long sword there is neither gate nor interior. 
There is no inner meaning in sword attitudes. You must simply keep 
your spirit true to realize the virtue of strategy. 

オク 

THE BOOK OF THE VOID 

The Ni To Ichi Way ot Strategy is recorded in this the Book of the Void. 

What is called the spirit of the void is where there is nothing. It is not 
imcluded in man's knowledge. Of course the void is nothingness. By 
knowing things that exist you can know that which does not exist. That 
is the vod. 

People in this world look at things mistakenly, and think that what 
they do not understand must be the void. This is not the true void. It is 
bewilderment. 

Im the Way ot Strategy, also, those who study as warriors think that 
whatever they canmot understand in their craft is the void. This is not the 
true Vo1d. 

To attaim the Way ot Strategy as a warrior you must study fully other 
martial arts and not deviate even a Httle from the Way of the warrior. 
With your spirit settled, accumulate practice day by day, and hour by 
hour. Polish the twofold spirit heart and mind, and sharpen the twofold 
gaze Derception and sight. When your spirit is not in the least clouded, 
when the clouds of bewilderment clear away, there is the true Void. 

Until you realze the true Way, whether in Buddhism or in common 
sense, you may thimk that things are correct and in order. However, it we 
look at thimgs objectively, from the viewpoint ot laws of the world, we 
see Various doctrimes departmg from the true Way. Know well this spirit, 
and with forthrightness as the foundation and the true spirit as the Way. 
Enact strategy broadly, correctly and openly. 

Then you will come to think of things in a wide sense and, taking the 
void as the Way, you will see the Way as void. 

Im the void is virtue, and no evil. Wisdom has existence, primciple has 
existence, the Way has existence, Spirit is nothimgness. 

Twelfth day ot the fifth month, second year of Shoho (1645). 
Teruro IMagonojo 

43 

SHINMEN MUSASHI 

どど と 】 

Loved this book ? 
Similar users also downloaded 

The Art of War, 5z77 7Z7 

The Art of War is a Chimese military treatise that was written durimg 
the 6th century BC by Sun Tzu. Composed of 13 chapters, each of which 
is devoted to one aspect of warfare, it has long been praised as the defin- 
itive work on mihtary strategies and tactics of its Hme. 
The Art of War is one of the oldest books on military strategy in the 
world. Itis the first and one of the most successful works on strategy and 
has had a huge influence on Eastern and Western military thinking, busi- 
ness tactics, and beyond. Sun Tzu was the first to recognize the import- 
ance of positioning in strategy and that position is atfected both by ob- 
jective conditions in the physical environment and the subjecttve opim- 
ions of compettive actors in that environment. He taught that strategy 
was not planmmeg in the sense of working through a to-do list, but rather 
that it requires quick and appropriate responses to changing conditons. 
Planning works in a controlled environment, but in a competitve 
enVironment 

Tao Te Chimg, 77oz7 

The Tao Te Ching is fundamental to the Taoist school of Chimese 
philosophy and strongly influenced other schools, such as Legalism and 
INeo-Confucianism. This ancient book is also central in Chinese religion, 
not only for Taoism but Chinese Buddhism, which when first introduced 
imto China was largely interpreted through the use of Taoist words and 
concepts. Many Chinese artists, including poets, painters, calligraphers, 
and even gardeners have used the Tao Te Ching as a source of inspira- 
ton. lts influence has also spread widely outside East Asia, aided by 
hundreds of translations into Western languages. 

The Prince, Azcco/0 4c/7zoe/77 

1 Principe (The Frince) is a pohtical treatise by the Florentimne publc 
servant and poltical theorist INiccolo Machiavelli. Originally called De 
Principatibus (About Principaltes), it was written in 1513, but not pub- 
lished untl 1532, five years after Machiavellis death. The treatise is not 
representative of the work published during his Hfetme, but it is the 
most remembered, and the work responsible for bringimg 
"Machiavelhan' into wide usage as a pejorative term. It has also been 
suggested by some critics that the piece is, in fact, a satire. 

45 

Beyond Good and Evil 77e の 7c7 W7 廊 e/77 7e7zsc7ze 

Beyond Good and Evil (German: Jenseits von Gut und BOse), subttled 
"Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future' (Vorspiel eimer Philosophie der 
ukunft), is a book by the German philosopher Friedrich INietzsche, first 
published in 1886. 
It takes up and expands on the ideas of his previous work, Thus Spoke 
arathustra, but approached from a more critcal, polemcal direction. 
Im Beyond Good and BvilL INietzsche attacks past philosophers for their 
alleged lack of critical sense and their blmd acceptance of Christian 
premises in their consideration ot morahty. The work moves into the 
realm beyond good and evil' in the sense of leavimg behind the tradi- 
tonal morahty which INietzsche subjects to a destructive critique in fa- 
Vour of what he regards as an affirmative approach that fearlessly con- 
fronts the perspectival nature of kmowledge and the perilous condition of 
the modern individual. 

The Einstein Theory of Relatvity, 九 e の 44777oo77 07e777 ン 

Whether it is true or not that not more than twelve persons in all the 
world are able to understand Binsteim's Theory, it is nevertheless a fact 
that there is a constant demand tor information about this much-debated 
topic of relatvity. The books published on the subject are so technical 
that only a person traimed in pure physics and higher mathematics is 
able to fully understand them. In order to make a popular explanation of 
this far-reaching theory available, the present book is published. 

The Republic, P/z7o 

The Republic is a Socratc dialogue by Plato, written in approximately 
380 BC. Itis one of the most influential works of philosophy and political 
theory, and Flato's best known work. In Plato's fictonal dialogues the 
characters of Socrates as well as various Athenians and foreigners dis- 
cuss the meaming of justce and examine whether the just man is happier 
than the umjust man by imagining a society ruled by philosopher-kings 
and the guardians. The dialogue also discusses the role ot the philosoph- 
er, Plato's Theory of Forms, the place ot poetry, and the inmortality of 
the soul. 

Siddhartha, 九 e77777777 万 esse 

Siddhartha is an allegorical novel by Hermann Hesse which deals with 
the spiritual journey of an Indian boy called Siddhartha during the Hme 

46 

of the Buddha. 

The book, Hesse's ninth novel was written in Germar, in a simple, yet 
powerful and 1yrical, style. It was first published in 1922, after Hesse had 
spernt some tme in India in the 1910s. It was published in the U.S. in 1951 
and became influential during the 1960s. 

The word Siddhartha is made up of tyo words in the Sanskrit ]anguage, 
siddha (gotten) + artha (meanmg or wealth). The two words together 
mean "one who has found meammg (of existence)” or he who has at- 
tained his goals". The Buddha's name, before his renunciation, was 
Prince Siddhartha Gautama, later the Buddha. In this book, the Buddha 
is referred to as (Gotama . 

Source: Wikipedia 

The Kama Sutra, 27S777777 

The Kama Sutra, is an ancient Imdian text widely considered to be the 
standard work on human sexual behavior in Sanskrit literature written 
by the Indian scholar Vatsyayana. A portion of the work consists of prac- 
tcal advice on sex. Kama means sensual or sexual pleasure, and sutra 
are the guidhnes of yoga, the word itself means thread in Sanskrit. 
The Kama Sutra is the oldest and most notable of a group of texts known 
generically as Kama Shastra). Traditionally, the first transmission of 
Kama Shastra or "Disciphne of Kama' is attributed to INandi the sacred 
bull, Shiva's doorkeeper, who was moved to sacred utteramce by over- 
hearing the lovemaking of the god and his wifte Parvat and later recor- 
ded his utterances for the benefit of mankind. 

The Book of Tea, KK7zo 〇 7 

The Book of Tea was written by Okakura Kakuzo in the early 20th cen- 
tury. lt was first pubhshed in 1906, and has since been repubhshed many 
Hmes. 
In the book, Kakuzo introduces the term Teaism and how Tea has af- 
fected nearly every aspect of japanese culture, thought, and Hfe. The 
book is accessibile to Western audiences because Kakuzo was taught at a 
young age to speak Englsh: and spoke it all his Hife, becoming proficient 
at commumicating his thoughts to the Western Mind. Im his book, he dis- 
cusses such topics as en and Taoismr but also the secular aspects of Tea 
and japanese life. The book emphasises how Teaism taught the japanese 
many thimgs: most importantly, simplcity. Kakuzo argues that this tea- 
imduced simplicity aftfected art and architecture, and he was a long-tme 
student of the visual arts. He ends the book with a chapter on Tea 

4Z 

Masters, and spends some Hme talking about Sen no Kikyu and his con- 
tribution to the Japanese Tea Ceremony. 

According to Tomonobu Hmamichi, Heidegger's concept of Dasein in 
Seim und Zeit was imspired 一 - although Heidegger remains silent on this 
ー by Okakura Kakuzo's concept of das-in-dem-Welt-seim (to be in the 
being of the world) expressed in The Book of Tea to describe huangzi's 
philosophy, which Imamichi's teacher had offerred to Heidegger in 1919, 
after having followed lessons with him the year before. 

The Call of Cthulhu 万 oog79 77 の 5 ooec7g7 

"The Call of Cthulhu" is one of H.P. Lovecraft's best-known short stor- 
ies. Written in the summer ot 1926, it was frst pubhshed in Weird Tales, 
February 1928. It is the only story written by Lovecraft in which the ex- 
traterrestrial entity Cthulhu himself makes a major apPpearance. 
It is written in a documentary style, with three independent narratives 
imked together by the device of a narrator discovering notes left by a de- 
ceased relative. The narrator pieces together the whole truth and disturb- 
img sigmificance of the information he possesses, illustrating the story 's 
frst ine: "The most merciftul thimg in the world, 1 thimnk, is the inabihty of 
the human mind to correlate all its contents. We hve on a placid island of 
ignorance in the midst of black seas of infimity: and it was not meart that 
we should voyage far.“ 

49 

49