Research Paper 

IER\ 

E-ISSN No : 2454-9916 | Volume: 2 | Issue: 12 | Dec 2016 

SRI AUROBINDO GHOSH'S PHILOSOPHY OF EDUCATION 

Anjana Rani 

Assistant Professor, D.A.V. College of Education, Abohar. 

Aurobindo Ghosh, the great educationist of India, is known by the name 
Aurobindo. Sri Aurobindo has set forth his philosophy in the life Divine. He 
bases his philosophy on the original Vedanta of the Upanishadas. He holds that 
intuition must be corrected by a more perfect intuition and never by a logical rea- 
soning. Realization of the sublime truth is the sum mum bonum of his philoso- 
phy, which can be achieved through intuition, spirituality, creativity, intellectual- 
ity, integral view of life being a superman and Gnostic individual. Sri 
Aurobi9ndo believes that earlier Vedanta represent and integral or balanced view 
of life. It implies healthy integration of God and the man or world, renunciation 
and enjoyment, freedom of the soul and action of nature, being and becoming, 
the one and many, Vidya and Avidya, knowledge and works, and birth and 
release. He says that fellowship between God and man generates in 'man' an idea 
of new birth and a new ideal of work. The fellowship with God can be achieved 
only by disinterested action in society, by never ending meditation, by self for- 
getting devotion and by feeling a kind of unity of all things in God. Sri Aurobindo 
is not a fatalist. He believes that man is the maker of his own destiny. Even hered- 
ity and environment are determined by the present and past actions of man. Man 
reaps the consequences not of his actions alone, but sometimes he shares the 
results of the action, of others and vice versa, because all existence is continuous. 
There is continuity between deferent births. On the whole the doctrine of karma 
is valid. Even the thoughts and feelings have their corresponding results, though 
action has the greatest amount of result, as life consists more of actions. More- 
over it is on actions that man exercises more control than on thoughts and feel- 
ings. To Aurobindo, Education of values was the most important. He believed 
that the best thing in man in his spirituality. He recommended that system of edu- 
cation which aimed at 

¢ Giving knowledge to the learner 

¢ Making the learner active 

¢ Making himacreative person 

¢ Andaboveall, he was in favour ofa national system of education. 

He always advocated that for good teaching learning by a student, his medium of 
instruction should be mother tongue. He also wanted that the ideals and methods 
of ancient India should be introduced in out system of education as best as possi- 
ble. He greatly emphasized that education must be concerned with (a) the man 
(b) the nation (c) the universal humanity. All this results into spiritual develop- 
ment. Aurobindo believes that education is to develop the pupil morally. Accord- 
ing to Sri Aurobindo only that education is true which helps the child to develop 
his intellectual and moral capacities to their higher limit. Without moral and emo- 
tional development, mental development becomes harmful to human progress. 
For the moral development of a pupil emotions, impressions or habits, nature of 
temperament are the three essential factors. To Sri Aurobindo, mind is the sixth 
sense. In must be perfectly trained to the highest possible limit, otherwise the edu- 
cation of the child will remain incomplete and one sided. Our mined should be 
reformed first before reforming the world. Education should aim at building the 
power of the mind. The utilization of the super mind for the development of an 
integrated human personality is the true aim of education according to Sri 
Aurobindo. In the teaching learning programme propagated by Sri Aurobindo, 
the place of the teacher is some what unique and is altogether different from the 
traditional. His job is not that of an instruction. The position of a teacher is of a 
guide, helper and stimulator. He is to enable the child to educate his self, to 
develop his own practical intellectual, moral and aesthetic capacities and to grow 
independently an organic being. It is the duty of the teacher to see that the six 
senses that sight, sound, taste, small, touch and mind are so trained as to make 
them as keen, subtle and sensitive as possible. Sri Aurobindo puts emphasis on 
intuitive power and says that an ideal and liberal teacher is he who encourages 
and welcomes this intuitive power in the pupil and allows the child to grow into 
the way of his own perfection. He has to eliminate the admixture of error, caprice 
or a biased imagination which may distort the perfect working of intuitive power. 

The best way to help the child is to put him on the right road to his own perfection 
and to encourage him to follow it. Inno way the child should be interfered within 
this process. The children should be encourage and directed to analyze their bad 

qualities and bad habits and cultivate good qualities and good habits. The child 
should be given an opportunity to put into action the moral impulses that arise 
within him. Qualities which from moral attitude of our young man are “the thirst 
for knowledge, the self-devotion, the purity, the renunciation of the Brahmin- the 
courage, ardour, honour, nobility, chivalry, patriotism of the kshatriya- the benef- 
icence, skill, industry, general enterprise and large open- handedness of vaisya- 
the self-effacement and loving service of the Shudhra”’. For developing this atti- 
tude it is essential to train our young man in the Aryan traditions. The teacher 
must be man of integrity. 

Sri Aurobindo was not only a great philosopher but an eminent educationist also. 
He should to mankind the way to the highest spiritual growth. As such, he is 
acclaimed as a great solace giver of the people. As a true philosopher he held that 
matter as well as spirit are to be look upon as real. His philosopher of education 
was based on spiritual faith, Brahmacharya and yoga practice. It should the way 
to the spiritual growth and fulfillment of a man to the fullest extent. As an Indian 
philosopher he devoted to Indian ideals, Indian values and Indian culture. He 
devoted to Spiritual advancement to the highest level. He views on education 
reveal that Sri Aurobindo was of the most eminent and distinguished philoso- 
phers and educationists of our country. 

REFERENCES 

1. Dutta.D. and Chatterjee.S.(1984) An Introduction to Indian Philosophy. Calcutta: Cal- 
cutta University Press. 

2. Jagdish Chand (2010) Philosophical Foundations of Education, Delhi: Anshah Pub- 
lishing House. 

3. K.K.Shrivastava (2003) Philosophical Foundations of Education, New Delhi: 
Kanishka Publishers. 

4. Keay, F.E. (1960) Ancient Indian Education: An enquiry into its origin, development, 
and ideas, New Delhi: Cosmo Publications. 

5. Lal, B. M. (2006) Educational Philosophy, New Delhi, Pragun Publications. 

6. Manju Mishra. (2009) Philosophical & Sociological Foundation of Education, New 
Delhi: Alfa Publications. 

7. Mukherji, R.K. (1969) Ancient Indian Education, New Delhi: Motilal Banarasi Dass. 

8. V.R. Taneja and S.Taneja (1985) Educational Thought and Practices, New Delhi: Ster- 
ling publishers. 

Copyright© 2016, IERJ. This open-access article is published under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License which permits Share (copy and redistribute the material in any 
medium or format) and Adapt (remix, transform, and build upon the material) under the Attribution-NonCommercial terms. 

International Education & Research Journal [IERJ] 

157