‘ALBERUNIS INDIA. 

AN ACCOUNT OF THE RELIGION, PHILOSOPHY, 
LITERATURE, CHRONOLOGY, ASTRONOMY, 
CUSTOMS, LAWS AND ASTROLOGY 
OF INDIA 
ABOUT A. D. 1030. 

EDITED ¢ 
IN THE ARABIC ORIGINAL 
BY 

Dr. EDWARD SACHAU, 

PROFESSOR IN THY ROYAL UNIVERSITY OF BERLIN. 

PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF HER BRITANNIC MAJESTY'S 
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA IN COUNCIL, 

LONDON, 
TRUBNER & Co, LUDGATE HILL. 

1887. 

ih 
a": i, ‘ 
r ib ge 4) 
hu 
Neciee 
A 
Le 
Gottingen, 

Druck der Dieterich’schen Univ.- Buchdruckerei. 
W. Fr. Kaestner. 

L 

Preface. 

§ 4. Indica Arabica. 

An Arabic book on Brahmanical India is a rarity in literature and al- 
most a contradiction in terms. It seems strange that an author who writes 
in the language of the Coran should command sufficient breadth of view to 
choose the Hindu world of thought as the favourite object of his studies and 
the theme of a book. The early Arabs knew admirably how to spread their 
faith sword in hand, how to conquer foreign countries and to colonize many 
of them, but. they never cared for archacological researches, for what had 
been in those countries before them. And indeed all that Muhammadan au- 
thors relate about the Antemuhammadan times of Egypt, Syria, Asia Mi- 
nor, Spain &c., is a mass of confusion and is, with very rare exceptions, to- 
tally devoid of historic interest. 'Tvaditions of this kind have only occasion~ 
ally a special merit of their own by allowing us a glance into the develop- 
ment of literary fiction and folklore, when the single threads of their web 
are untavelled by scholarly sagacity and laid open to inspection. Islam is to 
embrace the whole world, and all that was before Islam and all that is not 
Islam, is devil’s work condemned to all-eternity. The less therefore a Mus- 
lim minds it, the better for his soul. 

This ruling tendency of Islam is preeminently illustrated by the deeds 
of that Muhammadan prince in whose reign the present book was composed. 
The picture which Indian history draws of the great Mahmdd of Ghazna is 
all destruction of temples and idols. However, under the shadow of his vic- 

torious banner there was a quiet scholar at work, a hero in the camp of 

spiritual achievements who was not engaged in fighting the Hindus, but in 

trying to learn from them, to study Sanskrit and Sanskrit literature and to 

translate Sanskrit books into Arabic. Though convinced of the superiority 
a2 

L 

Iv 

of Islam, he admired the acuteness of the Indian mind and its productions 
in art and literature. Acting on the principle that those who want to meet 
the Hindus on the battle-ground of intellectual warfare and to deal with 
them in the spirit of justice and equanimity, must first learn all that is 
peculiar to them in manners and customs as well as in their general modes of 
thought, he produced a comprehensive description of Indian civilization, al- 
ways struggling to grasp its very essence and depicting it with due lights 
and shades as an impartial spectator. ‘The title of the book, the awkward- 
ness of which seems to arise from the. punctiliousness of a delicate conscience, 
runs as follows: »An accurate description of all categories of Hindu thought, as 
well those which are admissible as those which must be rejected i.e. wa 3 wos 
Kydon ob Nix! S Kyau Kio ope Aig Le pails’ & dysanll AF! cyt he! 

No doubt, much of the subject matter of the book, if not all, was per- 
fectly new to the Muhammadan readers of the time. But will it be able to 
teach something new about India also to the learned Europe of our century 
after the unparallelled progress which Sanskrit and Indian studies in general 
have made since the days of Sir William Jones? Apart from his own opi- 
nion, the editor is entitled to state that it was specialists, Sanskrit scholars, 
who never wearied in proclaiming the desirability of its being edited and 
translated. Ever since a few portions were made known, they have been 
largely and conscientiously used by Sanskrit scholars, who never, even when 
contradicting the author, denied him the deference due to a first rate autho- 
rity in historic matters. And we are inclined to believe that the fame and 
credit of Albérdni will greatly increase, after his immortal work has been 
now for the first time in its entirety and in the form in which it left his 
pen, laid before the learned world. 

A clear cut through the different strata of the earth’s crust teaches 
the geologist its origin, the history of its development, its past, its present 
and its future, In a similar way the work of Herodotus, the Germania of 
Tacitus and the Indica of Albérinf afford as it were a clear cut through the 
stratification of the Greek-Oriental, ‘leutonic and Indian civilizations of their 
times. If these authors show us what they found and how they found it, it is 
our task to investigate how it had attained to that stage and what was its sub- 
sequent development. When ‘Tacitus wrote, the ‘Teutonic tribes were still in 
very primitive conditions, they had not yet learnt from their Roman masters 
the art of making successful wars and of founding large states, and Irish 
and other missionarigs had not yet appeared among them, to sow the first 
seeds of Christian civilization. When Werodotus travelled in the east, the 
specific civilizations of both Egypt and Western Asia looked already back 
upon a long course ef national development which had extended over hun- 

“Aaveds and thousands of years, but they were on the eve of entering a period 
of decline, which preceded and prepared the way for the sway of the Greek 
mind over the Oriental world. 

Our Muhammadan author does not, like Tacitus, portray the infancy of 
a great nation, At his time the dome of Indian civilization had long ago been 
finished both at large and in every detail, its initial stages had long ago 
faded away from the memory of the nation. Like Herodotus in Babylonia 
and Egypt, Albérdat found in India an exotic civilization, as strange and 
marvellous as it was perfect in its way, but on the eve of being encroached 
upon: by foreign invaders. ‘Lhe time of Albérdni, that of the great Mahmud 
of Ghazna, is the end of the political independence of India, and the inau- 
guration of Muhammadan rule, in fact the beginning of a historic develop- 
ment which terminated in the establishment of British rule throughout the 
whole of the peninsula. Already before Mahmiud, foreign invaders had con- 
quered parts of India, but they again had in their turn been conquered by 
Indian civilization, so as to become Indians by the same process of assimila- 
tion by which the Bulgarians, originally a Turkish tribe, have become Sla- 
vonians and the great tribe of the Ghilzai in Afghanistan, who originally 
were Turks, have become Afyhans. The Muhammadans, however, remained 
in India what they were when they entered. Though adopting the language 
of their subjects and many of their customs, they remained in law and reli- 
gion foreigners to the country. India as sketched by Albérdni, is India at 
the close of its national existence. Its civilization was then essentially Brah- 
manical as it had come to be in a protracted struggle with Buddhism. Al- 
bérdnt does not know Indian Buddhism from personal experience, though it 
had not yet entirely sale tas from India and in some parts was still a po. 
litical power. 

The literary predecessors of Albérdni were a Greck diplomatist and 
Buddhist pilgrims from China. About 295 B. C. king Seleucus I. sent Mega- 
sthenes as an ambassador to king Sandrocottus or Candragupta in Patali- 
putra or Patna. ‘The envoy traversed nearly the whole breadth of northern 
India and seems to have had access to good sources of information. Unfor- 
tunately his countrymen were not prepared to do justice to his most excel- 
lent report, and it is mostly in consequence of this that only fragments of it 
have been transmitted to our age. Was it an initial stage of Indian civili- 
zation which Megasthenes saw and described? Hardly. Civilization in India 
goes back to a more remote antiquity. Certain parts of his account are evi- 
dently derived from Paurdnic sources and the Puranas are not considered as 
representing a primary stratum of Indian literature. 

Four hundred years before Albcrini, Hwen-Thsang, a Chinese monk, 

‘s 

Vi 

ravelled in India, and on his return compiled his book of travels from what 
he had seen and heard. His predecessors in this line had been Fa-Hian 
399—413 and Sung-Yun 502 A. D. These works are of great importance 
and have met with all the credit due to them, especially in questions of geo- 
graphy and history. Hwen-Thsang visited India in the years 629 to 645 
Ae Ly, 

Albérdni belongs to a much later period. He has not seen as much of 
the country as Megasthenes, and his travels are, in comparison with those 
of Hwen-Thsang, perfectly insignificant. ‘Though in this respect he cannot 
successfully compete with his predecessors, yet he excels them by most re- 
markable qualities of a very high order, which fully bear out the following 
estimate pronounced by one of the most distinguished Sanskrit scholars of 
our day: »Both the accounts left us by the Greeks and the Chinese pilgrims read, 
by the side of Berunis work, like children’s books or the compilations of’ uneduca- 
ted and superstitious men, who marvelled at the strange world into which they had 
fallen, but understood its true character very little*)«. 

The fragmentary condition of the Indica of Megasthenes does not admit 
of its being compared with the work of Albérini, but we may state that the 
latter certainly comprehends a much wider range of Indian subjects than 
Hwen-Thsang. It is an archaeological investigation, as this term is under- 
stood in our time. Alberuni did not only study the country and its inhabi- 
tants, but also its language and literature, and in doing so he had more and 
better sources of information at his disposal than either Megasthenes or Hwen- 
Thsang. Ie tells us that which he has seen himself, that which he has 
heard and, more extensively, that which he has read. Approaching his sub- 
ject with a mind trained by mathematical and philosophical studies, by the 
study of Aristotle and Plato, Ptolemy and Galenus, he investigates every sub- 
ject in the spirit of modern criticism, in such a manner as is sure to win 
him the admiration of modern scholarship. He is almost free from any su- 
perstition, he seems fondly devoted to his subject and he never spares any 
trouble or time for the purpose of carrying on his studies in general or for 
ascertaining the truth of any single fact in particular. He is, though a Mus- 
lim, able to sympathize with those heathen Hindu philosophers, and to approve 
their theorems. In order to curb Muhammadan haughtiness and self-com- 
placency, he never fails, when speaking of any dark feature in Hindu life, 
to contrast it with the savagery of old Arabian heathendom. ‘The author’s 
impartiality, which to many a Muslim may seem to exceed due limits, is such 
that the reader may peruse many pages of his book without even noticing 

1) G. Bithler in Triibner’s Record 1885 August p. 63. 

vo 

that the author is a Muslim. More than any thing else he loves truth, and 
is a stern adversary of untruthfulness and want of sincerity. Whilst he ne- 
ver unduly obtrudes his own personality in the learned discussions of his 
book, on certain occasions, when roused to moral indignation, he himself 
comes forward as a champion of the truth, a sharply cut character of a highly 
individual stamp, full of real courage and not refraining from dealing hard 
blows, when anything which is good or right seems to him to be at stake. 

If Muhammadans may with just pride consider the present book as a 
star of the first magnitude in the heaven of Arabian literature, Hindus may 
on their part acknowledge it as a particular favour of fortune, that a truth- 
loving and highly cultivated man has left them a picture of the civilization 
of their ancestors as it was in his time. ‘They will not agree with many 
details in his description, they will perhaps find their feelings ruffled by some 
of his criticisms, but at the same time they will readily admit that his only 
aim is to arrive at historic truth and to represent it sine wd ac studio, nor 
will they overlook the fact that on other occasions he speaks of their civili- 
zation in words of unconditional admiration. 

§ 2. Fate of the book in Europe. 

The book may be said to have a history of its own even prior to its 
publication. Referring the reader for more copious details to the treatise of 
Prince Baldassare: Boncompagni, Intorno all’ opera d'Albiruni sull’ India, Roma 
1869, we must briefly notice the fate which it has experienced in Europe. 

The Paris manuscript (Bibliothéque Nationale, Fonds Ducaurroy 22) entered 
the library 1816. 

It was not until 1839 that it attracted the attention of M. Reinaud. 

Soon afterwards, April 1843, 8. Munk promises to edit and translate 
the whole work. 

Reinaud publishes his »Fragments Arabes et Persans inédits relatifs a 
PInde« in the Journal Asiatique 1844—1845, and soon after as a separate pu- 
blication in 1845. ‘I'his treatise contains, besides other valuable materials, 
chapters 18, 40 and 49 of the Indica. 

M. Reinaud reads his »Mémoire géographique, historique et scientifique sur 
lInde« before the Institut in the years 1845 and 1846, and publishes it in 
1849. Its contents are almost exclusively drawn from the Indica. 

In Germany, Alexander von Humboldt was the first to direct public at- 
tention to the book in his Wosmos, 1847. 

In 1860, 13th October, Jules Mohl proposes to the Société Asiatique of 
Paris to charge Messieurs Woepcke and Mac Guckin de Slane with the edi- 

L 

Vii 

tion, and the former gives the first fruits of his labours on the book in his 
»Mémoire sur la propagation des chiffres indiens, Paris, 1863«. 

After Woepcke had died in 1864 and Munk had become blind and died 
in 1867, Mac Guckin de Slane, then already far advanced in years, under- 
took to carry out for the Société Asiatique the work which it had not been 
given to his predecessors to finish. Meanwhile, the course of my studies led 
me to Paris in the spring of 1872 and when one day collating the manu- 
script of the great chronological work of Albérdni, which I have since pu- 
blished (Chronologie Orientalischer Volker von Albérint, Leipzig, 1878) and trans- 
lated (The Chronology of Ancient Nations, London, 1879), 1 was accosted by a 
tall, venerable old gentleman of military appearance who gave me his name 
— it was de Slane — and proposed to me to undertake the edition of the 
Indica in his stead, as he believed himself to be to old too complete the task. 
At the same time he desired me to pledge myself by word of honour, that 
I should endeavour to bring out an edition of the Arabic original and _ its 
translation in some European language. I gave him my word, being well 
aware of the importance of the book and at the same time fecling honoured 
by the confidence of a man whom I esteemed as one of the greatest Arabic 
scholars the world has ever seen. 

At a meeting of the Société Asiatique, 12th April 1872, Jules Mohl pro- 
posed to the Société to abandon their long cherished plan of an edition of 
the Indica and to cede the work to me. ‘The proposition was carried. Mohl 
sent me the materials left by Woepcke’), and at the same time M. Schefer 
entrusted to me his manuscript, a treasure quite unique in its way. Thus 
it has come to pass that the confidence and the kindness of M.G. de Slane, 
Jules Mohl and Ch. Schefer have laid on my shoulders a burden the whole 
weight of which I did not realize when I charged myself with it. And cer- 
tainly if the work has been brought to a successful end, the learned world 
is before all indebted to the exceptional liberality of M. Chrétien Schefer, 
Membre de tInstitut, etc. My edition is little more than a reproduction of 
his manuscript and it would have been quite impossible for me to prepare 
it, if he had not, by leaving it entirely in my hands up to the present hour, 

1) These materials consist 

1. of the copy of some parts of the manuscript Schefer (fol. 3% 12%, fol. 39°40, 
fol. 44°46, fol. 84*— 1364); 

2. of some leaves containing certain tables of the Indica with a transliteration of 
the Indian words into Devanagari characters, the numbers, planets, months, zodiacal signs, 
the 7 earths and heavens, the dvipas; the manuscript of a treatise, published in the Mé- 
moires de lAcadémie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres tom. XVIII, p.331, and some 
slips of paper with various jottings. 

IX 

enabled me to refer to it over and over again in the long course of my 
labours. 

In a letter dated 8th April 1876, Her Majesty's India Office, I was in- 
formed that the Secretary of State for India in Council had sanctioned the 
grant of the necessary expenses for printing the Arabic original of the In- 
dica. By this new proof of the high-minded protection which Her Majesty's 
Indian Government has always accorded to any literary or scientific work 
connected with the interests of Her Indian subjects, every difficulty in the 
way of this publication was definitively removed. 

Fourteen years have elapsed since I received the Indica at the hands 
of de Slane, who died 1878 the 4. Aug. During the first part of this pe- 
riod I could only occasionally set hands to the work, as my time was taken 
up partly by previous literary engagements partly by the duties of my pro- 
fessoriate in the Universities of Vienna (1869-—-76) and Berlin (since easter 
1876). 

I must apologize to the reader for introducing my own person in the 
very first pages of the book. Its importance seemed to justify a short com- 
munication as to the fate which it has hitherto met in Europe, and the 
long delay of my publication requires a word of explanation and ex- 
cuse to all those who have taken a deep interest in my work and have 
never tired in urging me to labour on. Foremost among these friends were 
the Jate Edward Thomas and James Fergusson, and it will ever be a subject 
of painful regret with me, that it has not fallen to my lot to present them 
with the work which they so ardently desired to see finished. 

§ 3. When and where the book was written. 

When Alberuni wrote his Indica, his sovereign, king Mahmid, who 
had caused him to exchange his native country in Central-Asia for Afghanistan 
in the spring of A.H.4087), was no longer among the living, as throughout 
his book he attaches only such formulas of benediction to his name as are used 
in the case of deceased persons. His death had oceurred on Thursday 30th 
Apr A.D. 1030 <= A. H. 431, 25. Rabi’ 16, 

On the last page of the manuscript Schefer (fol. 1614) there is a note 
in Arabic which informs us that Alberuni had finished his autograph copy 
in Ghazna ist Muharram A. H. 423 = 19th December A. D. 1031, i.e. one 
year and a half after the death of Mahmud. Consequently the Indica must 
have been composed at some time between 30tt April 1030 and 19th Decem- 
ber 1031. 

1) Vide Chronologie Orientalischer Volker, Kinleitung p. XXXI. 

L 

‘his period of time is more narrowly limited by a statement of the 
author on page !fo, 20, where he says that the constellation of Ursa major in 
his time i. e. Sakakaéla 952, occupied the space between 11/s° Leo and 13 42° 
Virgo. ‘The year Sakakala, 952, corresponds to the time A. D. 1030, 8. March 
—1031, 25. Febr. i. e. the year following the death of Mahmdd. 

A further limitation is obtained from a passage on page \11, 9, where 
the author identifies the year in which he wrote with the year of Alexander 
1340. However, as the year A. D. 1030 corresponds to the year 1341 of 
the Seleucid era and not to 1340, this statement requires explanation. As 
the beginning or epoch of the Seleucid era is 18 October 312 B.C., on 1st 
January A. D. 1030 there had elapsed of this era 1340 complete years and 
three months, and on the 1st of October 1030 there had elapsed full 1341 years. 
If therefore Alberuni wrote after 18t October 1030, he could no longer iden- 
tify the current year with A. Alex. 1340. However, writing before 15 Octo- 
ber 1030, he was perfectly justified in calling the time in which he wrote, 
A. Alex. 1340, reckoning only complete years and dropping the fractions of 
a year from his calculation. 

By these considerations the fact is established that he composed the In- 
dica between 30% April and 30” September A. D. 1030. 

[t seems astounding that in so short a space of time Alberuni should 

have composed a book of considerable size, of the most exact research and 
written in a thoroughly polished style. It may fairly be supposed that he 
had written parts of the book at somé previous period and now simply re- 
produced them from earlier publications of his (e. g. the theological and phi- 
losophical parts’). Most likely also he had the astronomical and other tables 
ready at hand as a result of former studies and investigations, more particu- 
larly those requiring lengthy calculations. ‘Lastly, we have some reason to 
suppose that he could avail himself of the aid of very learned amanuenses. 

The summer in which Alberuni wrote (1030), was a very stormy time, 
aud every thing in the whole Ghaznavi empire which at that time compre- 
hended Persia, the western half of Central Asia, Afghanistan and parts of 
India, seemed to be tottering. When the storm began to threaten, Alberuni 
disappeared into the retirement of his study and buried himself in literary 
work, and when it had spent its rage, he hastened to bring it to a conclusion. 
It seems somewhat tempting to connect this fact with the political events of 
the time. 

Before dying (1030, 30% April), Mahmud by a formal declaration nomi- 
nates as his successor his son Mubammad who then resided in Balkh. ‘The 

1D) Gre us Gay PAU 

L 

XL 

new king marches to the capital, Ghazna, and arrives there after 40 days, 
i.e. about 9th June. 

His brother Mastid, who was just then far away in Ispahan, being 
about the same age as Muhammad, claims the succession in the western half 
of the empire. To this effect he writes to Muhammad, but gets a rude rebuff. 

‘Muhammad, in order to settle the dispute with his brother, sets out 
with his army from Ghazna in the direction of Herat and arrives on the first 
of Ramadan (2. Sept.) at a place called ‘Bakinabad. ‘There he remains during 
the month of the fast. But on 34 ShawwAl (4. Oct.), while drinking and 
carousing, he is attacked by his own soldiers and made a prisoner. ‘The 
leaders of the conspiracy were his uncle, the prince Yusuf, a brother of his 
father Mahmid and ‘Alf Khéshavand, a- favourite officer of Mahmid. ‘The 
conspirators hastened to meet Masid and to deliver the prisoner into his 
hands. 

Masid, after having settled his dispute with Ispahén, marches to Rai, 
Nishapuir and Herat. In the latter town he finds the conspirators, and there 
they meet with their doom. ‘Ali Khéshavand is killed at once, his uncle 
Yasuf thrown into prison and his brother Muhammad blinded. 

In the month Dhulkada (31 Oct.—29 Nov.) Masdd receives general ho- 
mage as the undisputed successor of his father. He spent the winter north 
of the Hindukush, stayed some time in Balkh and then entered the capital 
Ghazna A. H, 422 sth Jumada I. (ie. 3! June 1031). Masdd is the same 
king to whom Alberuni afterwards dedicated the greatest work of his life, 
called Al-Kdnin Al-Mas‘tdi, i. e. Canon Mas‘idicus. 

When the rumours of those events penetrated from afar into the study 
of our author, they do not seem to have produced a favourable impression 
upon his mind. It is’not a cheerful mood in which he writes. He is rather 
gloomy and desponding, rather inclined not to take the best view of doubtful 
matters. Was it sorrow over the sudden end of*a glorious reign, one of the 
most glorious periods in Eastern history, anxiety over the result of the pen- 
ding contest between the two rival princes; forebodings of coming evils which 
cast a shadow over the mind of Alberuni? Perhaps so. We cannot judge 
for certain, as he throughout his whole book grimly sticks to his subject 
without looking right or left, and only in rare instances favours us with side 
glances into contemporary history which we shall try to explain in an other 
place. He was 58 years of age, when he wrote the Indica, During 1% years, 
1017—-1030 A.D., he had been a witness of the unparallelled career of the 
great Mahmud whose exploits had opened a new chapter in the history of 
Islam and of India in particular. 

Alberuni calls the year in which he writes our year, in conformity with 

b2 

L 

x 

the general usage of the Arabic language. From this year must be distin- 
guished another year which he likewise calls our year, viz the gauge-or 
test-year which he uses as a gauge or test in all the chronological computa- 
tions of the book, and to which be reduces all the dates occurring in it, re- 
lating to both preceding and following times. It is also called Wis, i, e. 
our standard. Whilst in the first part of the book, until page !fo, the term 
our year means the time of the composition, in the latter part (on page f.* 
sqq:) it means this gauge year. The author has chosen it on grounds of 
technical chronology and has taken great pains in fixing it by expressing it 
in dates of the Hindu, Persian and Arabian eras. It is A. D. 1031, 25% Febr. 
a Thursday. 

The gauge-date is, it must be kept in mind, a day simply chosen for 
convenience and in no way connected with the time of the composition of 
the book. When the author wrote, it belonged to the future, falling indeed 
five months after he had finished his work. 

With regard to the place where Alberuni wrote, we have no direct in- 
formation. We can only refer the reader to the above-mentioned note at 
the end of the manuscript Schefer (vide p. 1x), which states that he had fi- 
nished his autograph copy im Ghasna. We may therefore conjecture, that 
the Indica was composed in Ghazna, at that time one of the largest capitals 
in Asia. In Ghazna he had plenty of opportunities of consulting Hindus 
of all description. In fact the Hindu population of the town must have 
been a very large one, consisting of indigenous Hindus of Kabulistan and 
prisoners of war as well as free men who were attracted towards the great 
centre of power and riches, in order to act there as servants, as artists 
and handicrafts men, building mosques and palaces for the Muslim con- 
queror, just as Greek architects had done for the Chalifs of the house 
Umayya in Damascus. Further there were soldiers and officers, men of po- 
litics, scholars and merchants, in short representatives of all castes and tribes, 
from nearly all parts of northwestern India 

But it was not only in Ghazna that Alberuni studied India. He tra- 
velled in India itself and probably stayed there many years. Reserviny the 
description of his study of Sanskrit for a later chapter, we shall here for 
want of more definite information limit ourselves to enumerating those places 
which, according to his own statement, he visited. Whether he lived and 
travelled in India in any official capacity or simply as a private man under 
the protection of the Ghazna government, is a question regarding which he 
leaves us entirely in the dark. ‘The towns which he has seen, besides Ghazna 
and Kabul, are the following : 

Gandt .s0+5, also called Ribdt al’amtr, 1. e. the station of the prince. Per- 

XU 

iidps it is Gandamak or some place in the neighbourhood. According to the 
Canon Masudicus it has long. 95° 50‘ and lat. 33° 40°. 

Dunpér jy3°, which I feel inclined to identify with Jalalabad. The Ca- 
non Masudicus (London Ms.) writes y45 and gives it long. 96° 25/ and lat 33° 45%. 

Lamghan, Peshévar, Waihand or Attok, Jailam, Siydlkote (Sdlkote), Lahore. 

Nandna, a fort on the mountain Balnaéth, a conspicuous mountain overhan- 
ging the Jailam and now generally called Tilla, v. Elliot, History of India LU, 
450, 451. According to Alberuni p.!1*,6 it had lat. 32°, according to his 
Canon Masudicus it had long. 98° 30/ and lat. 33° 10°. 

Mandakakér jSSd40, perhaps identical with the place Mandhikir y55_9di« 
likewise mentioned by Alberuni, has according to our author lat... ot? 604, 
and seems to have been a castle somewhere to the north of Lahore, ef. Elliot, 
l.c. I, 530; UJ, 129. According to Canon Masudicus which calls it the for- 
tress of Lahore, it has long. 99° 204 and lat. 31° 50’. The London Ms. 
writes y%S Xia, the Berlin ms. the same. 

Lastly Multan. 

Of all these places he has himself determined the latitude. Accordingly, 
the valley of the Kabul river and the Panjab are all that Alberuni has seen 
of India, as he himself states on page '", 8, that he, im the country of the 
Hindus, has not travelled beyond these places. So he has not seen Sindh nor 
Kashmir, but. on the southwestern frontier of the latter country he has seen 
two strong castles which he calls Rdjagirt and Lahr 44) (page |", 2. 3). Not 
knowing the position of Rajagiri, 1 may refer the reader with regard to La- 
har to Cunningham, who mentions a village Lahor, 3’/s miles north-east of 
Waihand and identifies it with Sdldtura, the birthplace of Panini (Ancient 
Geography of India p. 57). According to the Canon Masudicus the castle jl%»3 
in the mountains of Kashmir has long. 98° 20‘ and lat. 33° 10/ Rajagirt de- 
scribed in the same way, has long. 99° 55‘ and lat. 33° 20/7). 

In various places of his book Alberuni refers to the town of Mult&én in 
such a way as makes me think that he had a more intimate knowledge of 
this place than of the others, He gives on page|", 14 a note regarding 
the climate of Multan which he says he heard there from the inhabitants ; 
further a note about the beginning of the year as reckoned in Multan (page 
4, 16.17), and about a festival peculiar to the Hindu population of Mul- 
tan (p. Pf, 14; M-, 15—18). He knows the local history and topography of 
Multan (p. of, 1—6) and twice he quotes a scholar, a native of Multan, Dur- 
labha (p. Pv, 2; M, 8). 

1) Alberuni reckons in the Canon Masudicus the coast of the Atlantic Ocean as 
0° Jong. His longitude may he reduced to our longitude by comparing his statement 
about Kabul, which has according to him long. 95° 20‘ and lat, 33° 45’. 

7 

JXIV 

Finally we have to mention that according to his own words he has 
seen the Hindus beating a dram and blowing a shell, thereby announcing the 
time of the day, in a place which he calls Purshdr jy%,3. I do not know a 
place of such a name and suppose that he meant jbé,3, i. e. Peshavar. 

The high schools of Hindu science and learning, Kashmir and Benares. 
were in Alberuni’s times unapproachable for Muslims (page |, 12; of, 9). 

§ 4. The autor’s study of Sanskrit. 

Alberuni began his study of India by studying the language in order 
to gain access to the literature, a fact which will appear singular to all those 
who are conversant with the general current of the mind of Eastern nations 
and of their scholars in particular. Muhammadans, for instance born ‘lurks, 
will learn, besides their mother-tongue, also Arabic and Persian, but that a 
Muslim should take up the study of a foreign language outside the range of 
Islam, simply for scientific purposes, seems next to incredible. I do not 
know of any Arab who, learned literary Greek for the purpose of studying 
Greek literature, and it is perfectly certain that Averroes and Avicenna were 
totally ignorant of the language of Aristotle and Galenus. Although they 
made the most extensive use of Greek learning, they never thought of dra- 
wing from the fountain head, but contented themselves with mediocre Arabic 
translations of Syriac translations of the Greek originals. In this respect 
Alberuni is phenomenal in the history of Eastern civilization. In a_ spirit 
akin to that of modern times he tries to pull down the barrier-wall which 
in the shape of the difference of language has been erected between different 
nations, he endeavours to learn Sanskrit, and the difficulty of this enterprize 
will be appreciated by all those who undertake the same task in our time. 

With what success did he study Sanskrit? ‘'o me it seems quite im- 
possible that, without a grammar and dictionary to help him, he should have 
attained such a command over the language as to be able to read books on 
philosophy, astronomy and astrology by Patafijali, Varahamihira and Brahma- 
gupta and to translate them into Arabic, proprio Marte and without the help 
of learned Pandits. Such an extent and accuracy of linguistical knowledge 
may be acquired in our age, but we must not expect to find it in the Kast, 
at the beginning of the eleventh century. According to my opinion Alberuni 
spent much time on the study of the Indian language. He knows the pho- 
netic system both of the classical and vernacular dialects, and he is to some 
degree acquainted with the general features of the structure of Sanskrit, so 
that, for instance, he was able to translate lists of proper names of the Pu- 
ranas into Arabic by himself alone, though not without blunders. As a rule, 

XV 

however, he seems to have read Indian books with the aid of Pandits and 
to have written his translation simply from their dictation. On the other 
hand he may in the course of years and in the progress of his study have 
become able to control them to a certain degree, for he, no doubt, knew the 
meaning of many single words, particularly of all technical terms, and_ his 
inquisitive mind was attentive to all details of literary tradition, for instance 
to the metrical form of the books (cf. Chap. XIII) and to the deterioration 
of manuscripts through the negligence of the copyists. 

‘The following passages will serve to illustrate the subject of this 
chapter. 

In ch. I he relates that he stood to the Hindu astronomers in the re- 
lation of a pupil to his masters, being a foreigner among them, 1. ¢. not 
speaking their language. After he had learnt something, he turned the ta- 
bles upon them, and the pupil, being an accomplished mathematician and 
astronomer, began to teach his masters. ‘The Pandits are in utter amazement, 
they will not believe that he speaks from his own knowledge and press him 
to tell them from what Hindu master he had received such learning. Too 
proud to admit that a foreigner should rival them on their own ground, they 
declare him to be a sorcerer and call him in their language the sea and the 
water which surpasses vinegar in acidity (v. page MV, 2—7). 

He speaks of the difficulty of the study of the language, comparing it 
in this respect with Arabic. He complains of the fact that one and the same 
thing, e. gy. the sun, may be expressed by many different words, and that on 
the other hand one and the same word has many different meanings, so that 
he only can correctly translate it, who knows the context in which it occurs 
(v. page 1, 5—9; t, 3. 4). 

Treating of the sounds of the Indian language, he is aware that some 
of them are so peculiar that Muslims could not pronounce them and that 
some of them resemble each other to such a degree that Muslims in hearing 
could not distinguish between them (v. page 4’, 3—5). 

He teaches that in the Indian language the sounds h, kh and sh fre- 
quently interchange, as e. g. in the word barhu, barkhu, barshu = sky. varsha 
(page Sa’, che 

He further explains that the Hindus pronounce the d, © (he means 4) 
as a sound intermediate between d and r, in consequence of which the word 
Aryabhata has become Arjabharu (page Mt, 17. 18)?). 

He gives a perfectly clear description of the Hindu system of writing 
in Nagart characters (page »’, 5—8). 

1) Cf. his general notes on the phonetic changes of languages on page If{, 7 sequ. 

L 

XVI 

He makes on page %, 9 the following remark which seems rather odd 
at first sight: »They magnify the nouns in their language by the feminine gender 
as the Arabs magnify them by the diminutive forme The Arabs magnify the 
nouns in their language, i, e. give them a greater bulk, when putting them 
into the diminutive form, as e. g. the word chao represents a magnification 
in comparison with ys. Similarly, in the Indian vernaculars, nouns may 
be magnified by an 4, 7, @ being added at the end of them without an ac- 
companying change of signification. These vowels are contractions of the ori- 
ginally diminutive suffixes aka, ika, uka') and were mistaken by Alberuni 
for the same vowels which in other cases both in Sanskrit and vernacular 
denote the feminine gender. 
Throughout the whole book the author quotes numerous Indian words 
together with their equivalents in Arabic, and, as a rule, the reader will find 
his translations to be correct. I here only mention a few of them: 
cagkiw samhitd == that which is collected or put together p. vo, 10. 
wile jataka == nativity p. fa, 21. 
Sob Uribe manushyaloka*== the human world p. M4, 9. 10. 
ils stdmsu == having a cold ray p. Se, 2. 
Uints nisesa = lord of the night p. 4, 1. 
steed dvijesvara = lord of the Brahmins p. '4, 2. 
> eS Iuirmacakra = the circle of the tortoise p. Ifa, 12. 
crksal avyakta == something shapeless p. '., 2. 
eke vyakta == something having a shape p.', 8. 
yt! pS Aarmendriydni == the practical senses p. M, 1. 
nti Sabda -== that which is heard. 
U* sa sparsa == that wich is touched. 
Ga) Papa == that which is seen. 
uy) rasa = that which 1s tasted. 
MS gundha = that which is smelled, v. p. 4, 1—3%), 
Did Alberuni give these translations from his own knowledge or were 
1) Cf R. Hoernle, A comparative grammar of the Gaudian languages, § 195, 203, 205. 
2) In some instances, however, the. author’s translation is not, as in the examples 
here given, a literal one, but is rather a rendering of a specific Hindu notion by a cognate 
one of the Muslims. As a rule he translates moksha by Yo = salvation, liberation, 
than which there could hardly be found a more appropriate equivalent. But on p.™*, 21 
he explains moksha as x48\sJ! which is certainly wrong as far as the literal sense of the 
word is concerned. For moksha means liberation, and Kale means end, issue, recompense. 
However, Alberuni understands by x4d\eJ$ the last of days, the day of judgment, and this 
was for his readers i. e. Muhammadans the nearest possible approach to the idea con- 
veyed to the Hindu mind by the word moksha. 

‘“KVIUL 

they suggested to him by Hindu collaborators? There are two circumstances 
- which make me believe that they represent the author's own knowledge. 

First he says in the introductory words to the table on p. s0— 4: ot 
exhibit in this table all the words which I used to hear from them (i. e. he 
has not taken the table from a book), for it is a cardinal requisite for the un- 
derstanding of their astronomical books. And when I shall know the signification 
of the single nouns, I shall add them, if God permits.« Hence it follows that 
he did not know the meanings of those nouns when he first composed 
the table in question, but he must soon afterwards (I suppose before he fi- 
nished his autograph, i. e. before 18 Muharram A. H. 423), have learnt them. 
For in the manuscript, as we have it, to very many of the nouns, the mea- 
nings have been added, but not to all. If Alberuni had simply consulted a 
Pandit, he might at once have added translations of the whole of the nouns 
mentioned there, for every Pandit would have told him that bo> yamala means 
a pair, cer, rasmi a beam, gi I> jaldsaya a lake, Vs ishu an arrow, (yd bene 
mdsdrdham, half a mouth, GS ymgu, sahasrdmsu, having 1000 rays, pre bhiipa 
lord of the earth, &c. 

A second circumstance which proves to my mind that for most transla- 
tions of single words Alberuni himself is to be held responsible, is this, that 
some of them show blunders which no Pandit could ever have committed. 

The word ahargana i. e. sum of days == ahar + gana, is divided into ah 
== the days and argana == the sum (v. p. \se, 14, repeated on p. He, 21). 

In the word pardrdha, i. e. para +- ardha, he considers pardr as the first 
component part and gives it the meaning of heaven, instead of para (vy. p. 
a“, 11 where the reading of the ms. ,J;3 ought to have been retained). 

Finally, a Hindu Pandit would scarcely have explained milasthina as 
consisting of mila +- tiina (v. p. If, 9). 

The following mistakes gleaned at random from the whole work will 
furthermore confirm my opinion, that he has tried to explain Sanskrit texts 
by himself alone, and they will at the same time serve to show, with what 
degree of accuracy he was able to carry out his purpose. 

On p. 'i* the manuscript mentions as the kings, descendants of Indra, 
who will rule in- the 13th and 14th manvantaras 

LOK cnt and soUPA (cea oh 

In both cases the Sanskrit text has been wrongly interpreted. The former 
passage is citrasena-vicitrddyd, i.e. Citrasena, Vicitra and others. ‘The second 
urur-gabhtra-budhnyddyd, i.e. Uru, Gabhtra, Budhnya and others. These state- 
ments are given according to the Vishnupurana III, 1.2, of which I use the 
Bombay edition 1866. 

On p. tv in the table of the seven Rishis of the different manvan- 

c 

L, 

vo 
taras taken fara Vichupurdge ELT, 2, the word & 
seventh of the 12! manvantara. The text is topoddritirdyatichngah 
tutapodhanah, i. e. tapodhriti, dyuti, and another, ‘a 7% one, tapodhana. 
renders this by i 

o dm 

“ eo 
0943 , 2, Ss, 

mistaking iscdnyah for a proper name, and dropping seat real one tapodhana. 

The seventh Rishi of the 6t manvantara he calls ies where the text. 
has saptdsanniticarshayah. We has mistaken eneshau al == and the rishis for a 
proper noun. ‘in 3 

The fourth Rishi of the 5th manvantara is called ji, i. e. another == 
apara, mistaken for a noun in the verse Gtaneeiea 

The second Rishi of the 13 manvantara is called a age where a wie 
original has tatvadarst-ca, i.e. and Tatvadarsin. 

The sixth and seventh Rishis of the 24 manvantara are called eas and 
py. The original text is: virajascorvartvdmscanirmohddyds, i. e. Viraja, ‘Ur- 
vartoant, Nirmoha and others. Alberuni divided the verse thus: viraja-ascorvart- 
vdmésca-nirmoha, as it occurs on p. Sif, 11: Syas copa lerwil 5 

Further he reads asedrvart instead of ascorvart, nirmogha or ino instead 

of nirmoha. Cf. Vishnu Purana (Wilson-Hall), 2nd edition, vol. ILI, ch. IL page 
24 note. ; 
On p. So’ in an extract from the Brihatsamhita of Vardhamihira, Al- 
beruni gives the names of two countries as stile and were, which are mi- 
stakes for the three names: sdlva Slw + nipa si + wjjihdna wees. ‘The 
Sanserit runs as follows: sdlvantpojjihdna, v. The Brihat Saihita of Varaha- 
Mihira, edited by H. Kern, Calcutta 1865, ch. XIV, v. 2. 

On p. 'o4 in the same table, he writes awl and MLS instead of 
Daseraka and Vatadhdna. mn 

And further on pp. to and tov saa and aes instead of Meruka 
and Nashtardjya; cf..The Brihat Samhita, ch. XIV, v. 26 and 29. 

It is useless to produce more mistakes of this 4 ‘They are detected 
when e.g. the lists of proper names as given by Alberuni are compared. 
with his Sanskrit sources’). Most of these blunders are such as, according 
to my impression, were committed by Alberuni himself, not by Hindu colla- 

borators. 
After having thus examined the way in which Alberuni tried to read 

1) I shall give the results of this comparison in the notes to my translation. 

xix 

Sinscrit texts by himself alone, we shall now point out those passages , in 
which he directly refers to his Pandits. 

He relates that he endeavoured to collect Sanscrit books and to find 
people who understood them (p.'t, 8). I suppose he means Pandits who 
were able to explain them to him. 

Of particular interest are those passages which directly refer to his 
Pandits. Criticizing a certain class of traditions, he supposes that either the 
author in whose book they occur gives names devoid of any order, or that 
the copyists have introduced blunders into the text. »For, he continues, 
those who explained the translation to me (i. e. those who translated the book 
to him) knew the language thoroughly and were not known as people who would 
cheat to no purpose« (p. Mt, 16. 17). . 

On p.fi",9 he declares that a certain passage in the Veda, as it 
was read to him, is incorrect and with this incorrectness he charges the rea- 
ding translator, i.e. the Pandit who dictated the translation to him. 

On p. i, 8 he gives a list of the names of the Puranas as it was 
read to him from the Vishnu-Purana, i. e. dictated by his Pandit. 

After having given an extract of the Paulisasiddhanta of Pulisa he 
again charges the copyists or the translator with having made blunders (p. 
iY, 12; Ma, 8). The same suspicion he utters on p. in, 5 with regard to a 
passage of the Brahmasiddhanta of Brahmagupta. With these remarks of 
his we must compare p: vi", 21, where he speaks of Ais translation of the 
Paulisasiddhanta and Brahmasiddhanta. 

A more definite conclusion is arrived at in the case of the Brihatsa.n- 
hita of Vardhamihira. For on p. Iv, 16 he says: »we shall relate these 
things (from the Brihatsamhita) according to our transilation«*); and on p. oi, 8, 
after having quoted some verses from the same book, he expresses his 
suspicion, that the translator has made a blunder. ‘The translator is not Al- 
beruni himself, but the Pandit who dictated to him the meaning of the book 
which Alberuni expressed and edited in Arabic. 

§ 5, The author's work as a translator and his publications on 
Indian subjects. 

His work as a translater was a double one. He translated from San- 
skrit into Arabic and from Arabic into Sanskrit. He wants to give Muslims 
an opportunity of studying the sciences of India and on the other hand he 
feels called upon to spread Arabic learning among the Hindus. 

2 

Cr 

The books whick he translated into Arabie are these: 

Sdmkhya by Kapila, 

The book of Patanjali, 

Paulisasiddhdnta, 

Brahmasiddhdnta, both by Brahmagupta. The translation of these 

two books was not yet finished, when he wrote the Indica, vy. 
Deo, 2, 
Brihatsamhité , 
Laghujdtakam, the latter two by Vardéhamihira. 
Whilst writing the Indica, he was at the same time occupied with 
translating 
Huclid's Elements , 
Ptolemy's Almagest ani 
A treatise of his own on the construction of the astrolabe 
into Sanscrit Slokas. Probably he dictated the meaning to his Pandits and 
they moulded the words into Slokas (p. 1, 4—7) 

Further he expresses his wish to be able to make a new translation 
of the Paficatantram, as the existing version was not trustworthy (p. v4, 7). 

That his translations and publications on Indian subjects had gained 
him a certain reputation in India itself, seems to be indicated by the fact 
that Hindu astronomers and certain people in Kashmir proposed questions to 
him which he answered in special treatises, cf. Chronologie Orientalischer 
Volker von Alberuni, Kinleitung p. XLIV, nr. 11. 12. 

As a further illustration of his desire to propagate Arab learning amongst 
the Hindus is the fact that he wrote for a certain Sydvabala (?) of Kashmir 
a canon or a handbook of astronomy in the Arabic language, called, in imi- 
tation of the famous work of Brahmagupta. The Arabian Khandakhddyaka, 
vi p. Ps, 18, 14 

How many of the works which he was preparing whilst composing the 
Indica, have been finished, may he learnt from the catalogue of his publi- 
cations which he himself compiled five years later, viz. A. H. 427 = A. D. 
1035 and which is published in the Arabic original in my edition of his 
Chronology, in the introduction p. XL—XLVIII. In order to show the ex- 
tent of his Indian studies, we shall here enumerate all the numbers of this 
catalogue which seem to refer to Indian subjects. 

1) A treatise on the Sindhind, i. e. the Arabic version of the Siddhanta 
of Brahmagupta, which was then used by Muhammadan scholars. The title 
is paca Glam & opigt sbi, opmyll aly 

2) A new edition of the canon of Al-Arkand, the then current Arabic 
translation of the Khandakhddyaka of Brahmagupta. As this old translation 

XXI 

was unintelligible, he remodelled it, closely following the wording of the 
Sanskrit original. 

3) A book called Khaydl-alkusifain, on Hindu calculations of the eclip- 
ses; he mentions it in the Indica, on p. Ms, 13. 

4) A treatise on arithmetic and on the system of counting with the cy- 
phers of Sindh and of India. 

5) On the method of the Hindus in learning arithmetic. 

6) A treatise showing that the Arabian system regarding the degrees in 
numeration is more correct than that of the Hindus. 

7) On the rdsikas of the Hindus, i. e. the rule of three. 

8) On the samkalita or system of numbers. 

9) ‘Translation of the mathematical methods of the Brahmasiddhanta. 

10) Determination of the present moment of time according to Hindu 
chronology. 

11) A treatise on the determination of the fixed stars belonging to the 
single lunar stations, mentioned in the Indica on p. rrr, 24. 

12) Answers to questions proposed to him by Hindu astronomers. 

13) Answers to ten questions addressed to him from Kashmir. 

44) On the Hindu method of computing the length of life. 
15) Translation of the minor book on nativity (laghujdtakam) by Varaiha- 
mihira (v. p. XX). 
) Story of the two: idols of Bamiyan. 
) Story of Nilifar. 
18) ‘Translation of the Kalpaydra (?), a treatise on loathsome diseases. 
) A treatise on the next appearance of Vasudeva. 

20) ‘Translation of a book which comprehends all sensibilia and intelligi- 
bilia, by which I suppose the book Sdmkhya is meant. 

21) ‘Translation of the book of Pataijali on deliverance (moksha) from the 
fetters of material existence. 

22) A treatise on the cause of the halving of the equation (?) according 
to the school of the sindhind, i. e. the Brahmasiddhanta. 

In the same catalogue he speaks of his intention of continuing the 
translating of Indian books for which, as he himself says, he requires much 
time, a long life and good health. Probabily some more of the other works 
enumerated in this catalogue also refer either entirely or in part to Indian 
subjects, but as we only know the titles, not the books themselves, we shall 
refrain from conjectures. 

Alberuni had been in his second home, the Afghan-Indian empire of 
Mahmud, already thirteen years, when he wrote the Indica, viz. from 1017— 
1030 A.D. During this period he must have made a most diligent use of 

L 

XXL 

his time. If in our days a man began studying Sanskrit and Hindu lear- — 
ning with all the help afforded by modern literature and science, many a 
year would pass before he would be able to do justice to the antiquity of 
India to such an extent and with such a degree of accuracy as Alberuni has 
done in his Indica. 

§ 6. On the forms of the Indian words, both Sanskrit and 
vernacular, and their transliteration. 

Alberuni who knows the terminology of Hindu sciences so well, no- 
where mentions the words Sanskrit and Prdkrit. When speaking of the lan- 
guage of India or of the Hindus, he simply calls it Hindi xi (p. v4, 
8; 10, 1}. At the same time he is perfectly aware of the difference bet- 
ween the language of the books and that of common life (p. Mh, 17. 19), 
the classical language and the vernacular, that of scholars and edu- 
cated people and that of the crowd (p.1, 9—11; 40, 15; tv, 6; ', 1). In the 
classical language the day is called ue i.e. Skr. divasa, in common language 
used, ic. dimasu which is neither Pali (divaso) nor Prakrit (diaho) nor Sindhi 
(dimhu) nor Hindi din. 

As regards the transliteration of pure Sanskrit words, as they e. g. occur 
in his extracts from Sanskrit books, we must look upon them simply as ef- 
forts to render, by means of the Arabic alphabet, the pronunciation of San- 
skrit as accurately as he found it possible, viz. that identical pronunciation 
which he heard from the mouth of his Pandits and which of course may 
have greatly differed, as these men were natives either of Kabulistdn, or 
the Panjib, or Sindh or Kashmir, or the more eastern and southern parts of 
India. 

Another cause of differences in his system of transliteration is to be 
found in the fact that whilst he sometimes wrote the words according to oral 
tradition, on other occasions they were dictated to him from a book, when 
perhaps, if he had not at once caught the right pronunciation, he might 
have recourse to the manuscript itself and correct his transliteration in accor- 
dance with the manner in which the word was spelt there. 

Howewer, there still is a third class of peculiarities in his translitera- 
tion, showing differences from Sanskrit, which can only be explained by a 
certain negligence on the parts his Pandits. They seem, when reading or 
relating to Alberuni, to have mixed up colloquial or vernacular modes of 
pronunciation with their pronunciation of Sanskrit words. ‘This is much the 

XXII 

same, as if in the middle ages an Italian scholar read Latin with an Italian 
pronunciation. 

First we give some words which are transliterated differently in diffe- 
rent places. Alberuni gives on p. ‘* two lists of the names of the eighteen 
Purdnas, one (I) taken by ear from the mouth of people, i. ec. his Pandits, 
another (II) read or dictated to him from the Vishnu-Purana (III, 6 p. 66.67). 
Here the word matsya in written 

in I, in II, 
ef. Prakrit maceho. 
On p. to! the same word is written Um. 
The word bhavishya is written 
in I, in IT, 

The name Ydjnavalkya is written in two different ways: 
wh eile and wblsl>. 

Names which the author declares to be classical, and which neverthe- 
less show considerable deviations from the Sanskrit forms, are found e. g. 
on p.}v, Alberuni mentions the names of the months in the classical form, 
stating that hitterto he had used the vernacular ones. Nevertheless some of 
these names are not Sanskrit: 

1) parse, Skr. mdrgastrsha. The purely vernacular form which also oc- 
curs in the Indica is +», which seems a near relative of Sindhi mar ghiru. 

2) eaycle, Skr. bhddrapada, Of this word too we have in the Indica 
the purely vernacular pronunciation, viz. yl, cf. Sindhi badré. 

3) yam, Skr. jyaishtha. Further in a passage of the Vishnu-Purdna (LI, 6), 
the description of the various hells literally translated from Sanskrit into 
Arabic, there occur the following names : 

dlelge mahdjdla == Skr. mahdjvidia, 

Jksig: vahnijdla == Skr. vahnijvdla, 

U<yS ldrdbhaksha == Sky. ldldbhaksha. 

Of these three forms ldrabhaksha is perhaps a varia lectio for lalabhaksha, 
but the omission of v in Stele and Sls is decidedly an example of care- 
lessness in the Sanskrit pronunciation of Alberuni’s Pandits, a deviation to- 
wards vernacular speech. 

Alberuni, when speaking of Indian words, docs not always distinguish 
between Sanskrit and vernacular. So e.g. he explains Ors = 60 years. 
This is not the Sanskrit shashtyabda, but some vernacular equivalent (sha- 
dabdu?). On p. 'f, 9 he explains y= the place, meaning a Prakritic thdnam, 
vernacular thdnu (Hoernle, Comparative Grammar § 128 p. 72), not the Sanskrit 

L 

XXIV 
& 5 
sthdna, which in this case where the author speaks of the meaning of the 

word milasthdna (Multdn), would have been the correct form. 

The non Sanskritic or vernacular words occurring in the Indica may be 
divided into two groups: such as have passed through a Prakritic stage of 
development, and such as have not passed through such a phase, but must 
have been directly derived from Sanskrit’) The former of these two groups 
is represented by such words as 

o~ maccho (Vararuci UI, 40), Skr. matsya. 

dao! uppalo (Vararnci III, 1), Sky. utpala. 

Iris tandud = Sky. tantuka; cf. Sky. bhtruka == Pr. bhtrua; Skr. paryut- 
suka == Pr. pajjussua. 

Specimens of the latter class are: 

Qe (in G&e) madda = Skr. madhya; Pr. majjho. 

wT dditu (cf. Sindhi dditu) == Sky. dditya, Pr. diccho (2). 

jSld2 biddddharu, ef. Skr. vidyd, Pr. bijjd. 

I do not know of any Indian dialect which completely agrees with the 
vernacular words of the Indica. They probably belong to a dialect current 
about 1000 A.D. in the Kabul-valley and the conterminous parts of India, 
a dialect of which we have, as far as I am aware, neither epigraphic nor 
literary remains. The Prithirdj Rdsau by Chand Bardat was hitherto consi- 
dered the most ancient monument of Eastern Hindi, but its language is al~ 
ready essentially modern and we have no book-tradition in ancient Panjabi, 
Multanft or some more western form of Indian speech. 

One of the best tests for the examination of this particular vernacular 
dialect consists of the numerals (ordinals) from one to fiften, which occur 
twice in the table on p., Mo: 

as. cf. Sindhi barkhu 
bad =D bid 
aad 8 trid 
yo 4 cotho 
ee panjo 
waw 6 chahe 
ow 7 sate 
ol 8 atho 
on 9 nao 
eres 10 daho 

1) Both these groups occur in every Neo-Aryan vernacular of India, cf. J. Beames, 
J. R. A. 8. 1871, On the treatment of the nexus in the Neo-Aryan languages of India, 

p. 151, 152. 

XXV 
abit : , | yarho 
Blo 12 i barho 
S53 (Sori) 13 térho 
Broe 14 J codhé 
Gleag 15 pandrahe 

These numerals as well as a great many other words seem to show, as 

far as I have been able to compare Indian dialects, that the vernacular of 

Alberuni is more nearly related to Sindhi than to any other of the modern 
Neo-Aryan languages of India. 

Alberuni’s method of transliteration is of course not as systematic as 
the scientific ones of modern times’), and it is more imperfect than need be, 
especially in rendering the vowels. In order to make the Arabic alphabet 
more suitable for expressing the Indian phonetic system, he has introduced 

some innovations partly taken from the Persian usage of his time. So he 
uses 
w p by the side of » b 

S C » » » » ra J 

uw g » » » » wS k 
u3 0 " » » » he ceo 5 
3 th » » » » 3 2 

The latter two are of rare occurrence, 3 corresponding to Sanskrit j, ¢ and y, 
.3 to Sky. », which more frequently is rendered by ~ or ». 

Evidently Alberuni felt the want of a systematic rendering of all the 
different Indian sounds and wished to construct a system of his own, but we 
cannot judge to what degree he has been suce sessful therein. For unfortu- 
nately the only manuscript we have, is not consistent in this respect, writing 
sometimes y for b, & for k, g for j and wice versd 5 for g, ¢ fore and » for p. 
Quite as well as in Hindustani, the Indian sounds might have been expressed 
by the Arabic consonants, vowels and diacritic points. However, besides the 
just-mentioned confusion of characters in the manuscript Schefer, there is 
another circumstance which greatly impairs the effectiveness of its system of 
transliteration. 

At the time when the manuscript Schefer was copied, i.e. the twelfth 
century of the Christian era the modern way of writing Arabic, as regards 

1) He himself complains of the difficulties of transliteration on page 1, 13—15. 
2) Cf. Codex Vindobonensis sive liber fundamentorum pharmacologiae, ed. Selig- 

mann, Vienna 1859, Prolegomena, p. XXV. 
d 

L 

XXXVI 

consonants, vowels and points, which may be called the Naskhi-system, had 
not as yet been universally adopted. Orthography was in a state of transi- 
tion from the more ancient system, as found in manuscripts of the 4th, 5th 
and 6tb centuries of the Hijra, to the more modern one making its appea- 
rance in manuscripts since the latter half of the 6th century. And this sort 
of vacillation easily engenders ambiguity which in the Arabic words may be 
overcome by an accurate knowledge of the language, but which in Indian words 
of unknown origin is apt to cause difficulties. If the copyist had simply 
written (yw for s and U* for sh, there need not have been much uncertainty 
in the rendering of the Indian sibilants, but unfortunately he sometimes ex- 
presses, according to the more ancient system, sh by yw and s by (»') The 
consequence of this double system is that you never know for certain whe- 
ther uw is as or a sh. Yo distinguish ¢ from ¢, and ¢ from ;, he writes 
g and ~ according to the ancient system”). Happily the latter two ways of 
writing are not fraught with ambiguity for the deciphering of the Indian 
words, as ¢ and » do not occur in the Indian phonetic system. 

However, in spite-of these imperfections, the reader will find that on 
the whole the consonantal skeletons of the words are very trustworthy and 
offer a sufficient basis for their reconstruction, whilst the notation of the 
vowels does not reach the same standard. 

It will not be superfluons to draw the reader’s attention to the fact that 
the Indian words which Alberuni quotes from earlier Arabic publications or 
translations from Sanskrit are in many cases very corrupt, indeed sometimes 
to such a degree, that it is extremely difficult to trace them back to their 
Indian original. One example will suffice. ‘The word dharma (p.', 3) in 
the Buddhist trinity Buddha, dharma, sargha, although it was perfectly known 
to Alberuni and is explained by himself on p. ‘f, 2, he transcribes psx jharma, 
which would defy any attempt at identification. The apparent cause is that 
Alberuni quoted these words and the context in which they occur not di- 

1) Qw = SIN Kaw De 4, 14, Soabwadl ly, 3, gem 0 6, Gawd Py, 13, ails 9, 8, 
Wil $., 20. 

Un == Sh iN Ww Xw == Ld 4, 165 of, 135 aed == BPA by 17 5 mkdwme oo ARAMA 
©, 6: xSlitey == alae 4, 19. 

2) ¢ with a small ra under it == g not z in AXyel of 18, penal *, 2, saad tat, 4, 
Liked M4, 7, crebd Pal, 18. 
e=~é*. 6. In wwe == akak Ph 2 
- =o not z oF a 5 He, 19; pers 4, 4, Lgalkoml, Mf, 12. 

frequently stands in the place of z and é 

w 

i: 

MAVIL 

‘fectly from an Indian source, but from the Arabic book of Al-Erfnshahri, 
which, as he himself declares, was the principal and perhaps unique source 
of his information about Buddhistic subjects (cf. p. Stv, 17)’). 

Originally I had inserted in this place the description of the phonetic 

details of the authors transliteration, consisting of three chapters: the 
rendering of the consonants, the rendering of the vowels and notes on the 
terminations of some classes of nouns. It was, however, too extensive 
merely to form part ofa preface, and shall therefore be published in another 
place. 
In examining the Indian words as transliterated in the Indica, the rea- 
der will not overlook that certainly most of them have for the first time 
been introduced into Arabic by Alberuni, but not all, that a number of them 
were current both in Arabic and Persian long before his time, such as +o 
dvipa (dtp, divu), dae ndlikera, jes vihdra, s®9a0 devagriha, get a Buddhist = 
gramana, dws veda, “442 bhdrata &c. If Alberuni had been the first to trans- 
literate veda and bhdrata, he would have written 4; and ele, but in writing 
dw and lg he followed the Persian orthography which was in general use 

in the literature of his time. 

§ 7. On the manuscript Schefer and the other manuscripts. 

The only manuscript from which we have taken the text of our edition, 
one of the gems of the rich collections of Monsieur Schefer in Paris, was 
finished A. H. 554, Sunday, 4th Jumadé I i. e. 

A. D, 1159, 24% May. 
Thus between the writing of this copy and the composition of the book 129 
years have elapsed. The copyist does not mention his name nor does he 
relate from what original he copied”). 

He has written nearly the whole of the manuscript Schefer, but he has 
left lacunae, partly omitting single words, partly leaving whole pages in blank. 
These gaps have in part been filled up by a secunda manus, which is easily 
distinguished from the prima manus both by the much more modern character 
of the writing and by the fresher colour of the ink. 

The writer of this secunda manus has added the following note on the 

1) Therefore it would have been better to keep the reading of the manuscript 
and not to alter it into »9o. 

Note at the end of the manuscript. 
d2 

L 

RXV 

last page of the manuscript’): »It has been copied from a copy in the hand- 
writing of the author, God be merciful to him, and has been collated with 
it as carefully as possible. And the author had written at the end of it that 
he had finished it in Ghazna the 18t Al-Muharram, the beginning of the year 
423«. However we are bound to state that this second writer has done less 
for the copy that he claims in this note. He has compared the whole book 

with the autograph, which is proved by the notes of correction ~) and eve?) 
found every where in the margin, but he has never corrected the text where 
it was wrong, nor has he filled up all the lacunae. What he has done is 
this : 

1) Wherever there is a blank in the text indicative of a lacuna, he has 
added the letter ~b on the margin’). However he has not noticed all of them 
(v. e. g. on p. M4, 22), and sometimes he blunders in mistaking a space inten- 
tionally left open, for a lacuna, v. p. '4¥, 10 and PM, 10. 

2) He has tried to fill up the lacunae only in ch. 80, that on astrology, 
but in a manner which clearly shows that he did not understand the context. 
Such passages are Ma, 15; 4,3; Ml, 3.21. In the same chapter he has 
added the missing tables, i. e. all its tables with the exception of the 
first half of the first one. In the margin of the last of these tables he ex- 
pressly declares: »This table was not written in the original« *) (i. e. in the ma-~ 
nuscript Schefer). 

Lastly, he has added on the first page of the book two notes, the one 
stating that on the back of the original were written the words: »property 
of Abu Raihdn«, the other to this effect that the word Ghazna was written on 
the title-page’). 

As I understand the case, the history of the book has been this. ‘The 
autograph of Alberuni is the only copy which the copyist and collator had 
at their disposal. It has been complete with this exception that in some 

1) rhsall iS, KELaTy emylt Gomem Lip hag alll a7, Cabell B52 Ksund op poms} 
Le Bile cyaptiey UALS Rim gutta proll JOS Kipey Leia gs all Lost g 
2) Both words mean to say that in his correction the corrector had arrived at such 
and such a spot. 
3) Fol. 104,12; 11a, 13; 16a, 4.18; 324, 6; 97a, 20; 156a,16; 160a, 19. On fol. 40a, 
18 and 157), 21 such a gap in the text is marked by the letter |» in the margin. The let- 
ter -& probably means ,9lb 1. e. evident. What the letter cu» means, I do not know. 
A) Matt & bgaKe EW Le 

B) Jol Kans seb he aad byxXe 6 cglardt gl igs J and aS Wyle Gl Leos! 0558 
all! ‘Z, 

~ 

XXIX 

parts single words had become illegible either because they were rubbed out 
or because the paper had become worm-eaten. 

The writer of § i. e. manuscript Schefer copied the whole, leaving a 
blank only where he could not read a word. Besides, for some reason un- 
known to us, he omitted copying the last tables on p. *-* and *-f, Mo and M4, 
mre, M4 and My. 

Several centuries afterwards an Arabic scholar, into whose hands both 
books had fallen, compared the copy with the autograph. I do not venture 
to guess at what time or in what country he lived, but he seems to have 
taken a special interest in astrology, as he has bestowed most of his care on 
the astrological chapter 80. 

This discussion is of some importance in to far as it proves that the 
whole manuscript-tradition — for the two copies of Constantinopel and the 
Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris are reproductions of S — goes back to one and 
the same source, viz. to the autograph of Alberuni. 

Regarding the state of this autograph we have to offer a few remarks. 
When it was copied by prim. man. and collated by sec. man., the last leaves, 
I. suppose the leaves of one quire or Kurrds, were in such a confusion as 
entirely to disturb the context of the book. This has escaped the notice of 
both copyist and collator. Confusions of this kind generally arise from the 
back of a quire being rubbed through, and the quire being thereby reduced 
to single disconnected léaves (4 or 8 or 16), which in consequence will easily 
get out of their original order. 

That portion of the autograph manuscript which had fallen out of its 
proper sequence, is represented in S by page MH, 19—Mh, 117%). 

The confused state of the text strikes the attention of the reader from 
the fact that astrological and meteorological matters are huddled together in 
an impossible manner, and this confusion is proved to a certainty by a com- 
parison of the Laghujitaka and the Brihat-Samhita of Vardhamihira, since 
the text in question consists mostly of extracts from these two books, Guided 
chiefly by Varahamihira, I have reestablished the proper order. The fractu- 
res fit to eachother, but in one place something seems to have been lost. 

In order to complete our description of S we have to draw the attention 
of the reader to some notes on the titlepage, in which former possessors have 

recorded their names. 

1) For the details see the foot-notes to the text. Of the whole book the text of 
the last chapter is the least satisfactory. In a number of places the writing has 
been rubbed out and something else been written instead of it, places where the copyist 
probably was not certain how to read the original. 

XXX 

Thus in the year A. H. 865 Rabi" IL (= A. D. 1461 pawns: it was 
acquired by one ‘Ubaid-Allah Muhammad ibn “Umar. 

Perhaps it once belonged to the library of a Turkish Sultan, as there 
is a seal on the title page with a togrd. 

On the first fly-leaf there is an entry for a library in a modern Tur- 
kish hand. Besides, there occurs a small seal twice on fol. 3® and 1615, un- 
readable to me in both places. 

To the title of the book, as we have given it on p..1, a modern Tur- 
kish hand has added the following explanatory words graylgitlly wrlpaksdd Seed oye, 
i. e. regarding scientific subjects and chronology. 

No doubt, S is a manuscript of very rare merit, one of the most 
accurate I have ever known, and this single one proved much more 
useful to me than the three manuscripts which I used in editing the Chro- 
nology. ‘Ihe copyist did not perhaps understand Sanskrit nor any Indian 
vernacular, and possibly he was not quite able to follow the author into all 
the details of his astronomical computations, but we cannot deny him the 
testimony that he has with first rate diligence and accuracy, produced a copy 
of a book which, for any reader howsoever learned he may.be, is very 
difficult to understand, ‘Che text will in the main stand as it isin 8, though 
many a mistake may still lurk beneath its surface not perceived by myself, 
and it will in all probability not undergo many material changes in case 
more manuscripts should be found. 

Excellent as the manuscript is, it is not without blemishes, both blun- 
ders as well as lacunae which are indicated in the foot-notes to the text. 
In detecting them I have in many instances been aided by the comparison 
of the Sanskrit texts used by Alberuni. 

Besides S there are two more manuscripts of the book in Europe: 

1) That of the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris, Fonds Ducaurroy No, 22. 
It is on a fly-leaf of this manuscript that the book is called ois ayo, 18. 
Ta’ rtki-i-Hind, vy which it has hitherto frequently been quoted’). ‘This title 
is of no authority whatsoever, as Alberuni gives the title mentioned on p.1, 
exactly in the same wording in his autograph reproduced by S as in the 
catalogue of his own books (see my,.edition of the Chronology, Introduction 
p. XLV) 

2) "The manuscript in the library of the Mehemet Képriilii- _Medrese in 
Stambul, in the street called Divan Yolu, opposite the Tiirbé or mausoleum 
of Sultan Mahmid. ‘The latter manuscript I collated from beginning to end 
in the hot summer of 1873. 

1) Cf. Reinaud, DZémoire sur PInde p. 31 note 1. 

XXXI 

Both these manuscripts are copied from S, agreeing with it in every the 
most minute detail, but in many cases corrupted by the mistakes of the co- 
pyists who did not understand what they wrote. At first I intended to make 
use of them, thinking that their writers had perhaps read some of the Indian 
words better than I, but soon I became aware that I could entirely dispense 
with their help. For every thing in them which might at first sight appear 
as a varia lectio, is after a closer examination recognized simply as a blunder 
of the copyist. 

The geographical chapter 18 is also found in the Paris manuscript of 
the geography of Edrisi (marked with A in the translation of Jaubert). Rei- 
naud has compared it (see Fragments, p. XXXV), but with no useful result. 
It is directly or indirectly derived from 8. 

I have written to various parts of India, inquiring for other manuscripts, 
but have invariably received the answer, that the book is not known to 
exist there. Perhaps it will one day turn up in the libraries of Kabul, Kan- 
dahair or Herdt. And we can perfectly understand why Muhammadans had 
so very little interest in getting it copied. It is full of tales of idolatry 
and heathenish abominations, and a Muslim might think he jeopardized the 
eternal bliss of: his soul simply by reading it. On the other hand, the pu- 
rely scientific interest, which among the Muhammadans seems to have reached 
a sort of climax in Alberuni, began soon after his time to decline and to 
die away, never to awake again. It gave way to theological researches and 
discussions, in fact to those struggles from which resulted the foundation of 
Islamic orthodoxy about A. H. 500. 

»In this kind of research« Alberuni stood quite alone in his time, if we 
may believe his complaints (page It, 8.9). But soon after, things grew 
worse, the darkness of medieval times closing in upon the Muslim mind 
from all sides. All this readily explains why the Jndica was not much copied 
and why our whole manuscript-tradition of the book goes back, as we have 
shown, to one and the same source, to the autograph of Alberuni, repre- 
sented to us by the manuscript Schefer, the basis of this edition. 

§ 8. On the palaeographic charakter of the manuscript. 

The enormons geographic spread of the Arabic language has this conse- 
quence that its alphabet varies much both according to time and place. 
Arabic manuscripts of the 5 or 6 centuries from Ghazna and neighbouring 
parts seem to be very scarce in European collections, and I confess I have 
never seen any other but this. The characters are rather small, but 
perfectly clear, although they show a marked tendency towards the cursive 

L 

XXXIL 

‘owriting in which single letters are improperly connected and written in on 

single stroke’). There is no luxury of punctuation. The vowels are scarcely 
anywhere added except in the Indian words, and most frequently also the dia- 
critical points, distinguishing the several consonants from eachother, are omit- 
ted. ‘Therefore the punctuation as it appears in my edition, must entirely be 
put to my own account, not to that of the manuscript. 

Besides the palacographic details already mentioned on p. X XVI, we have 
further to state that the ¢ in the middle of the word, when connected both right 
and left, is written in two different forms, cf. aes p. *? col. 12 lines 12.17, 
geal Ht, 21. If it denotes the number three, the lower part of it is curtailed, -. 

The long 4 at the beginning of a word is expressed both by ') and 1. 

The TLashdid is frequently put above the vowel (cot xn page v, 4), but 
not always (oe toh, 12), 

The final cs is in most cases marked by two points above it (see Pa 425 
ws N41, st tv, 10, & Wy, 18.17, coatwSl Wv, 21). More rarely the dots are put 
under it, e.g. in & '4,6; s, 22 and elsewhere, 

In Indian words the Sukin is frequently added to denote the absence of 
a vowel. However, in a certain number of cases the copyist seems to have 
mistaken the Damma in Alberuni’s autograph (as is 3) for a Sukiin (9), So e. g 
the termination of the words ,b and al (page Ivi, 14, $s, 1) ought to be a Damma 
Gb and on but the manuscript has 5b and als Theoretically, of course, Sans- 
krit vdra and ayana may terminate without a vowel as in Hindi, or they may 
terminate in a short w as in Sindhi, but the overwhelming majority of 
all vocalised words throughout the whole book decides in favour of the 
latter pronuntiation. The same mistake of writing Damma instead of Sukdn 
I suspect also in jose Madura (instead of 5o-)s shots sisumdra (instead of jhentitt) 
eos namuci (instead of e«) &e. 

This mistake is to be accounted for by the fact, well known in Arabic 
palacography, that at certain times and in certain countries the signs Damma 
and Sukin were depicted in a way much to resemble eachother. Cf. for ex- 
ample, in the publications of the Palacographic Society, plates V1, VII and 
LX, dated A. D. 866, 990 and 974 (?). Most likely the handwriting of Al- 
beruni was such as to make it impossible for the copyist to distinguish bet- 
ween Damma and Sukdn in Indian words. 

Regarding the vowel-notation of the manuscript we must observe that 

1) The letters o, 5, » &c. are frequently connected with the following letters, 
} with a following J, and the letters , +» are moulded into one figure. 

L 

XXXII 

a) ; 
the kesra is frequently written from left to right, cf. »sa« meru 5> 4, sae 
abhira 77> 11 ait indu 55a 4, er devejya 55% 10, &c. This is not for 
the purpose of distinguishing between the different Indian vowels ¢, 1, € 
and ai, as the reader might feel inclined to suppose, but is simply an indi- 
‘vidual peculiarity of the writing of the copyist. 

On the orthography of the manuscript we need not enlarge here, as, 
for instance, the Alif otiosum at the end of Syed, AS. (in the singular), the 
various ways of expressing |,» and .s hamzata, and other things are peculia- 
rities common to Arabic manuscripts of all ages. 

As we have already said (on p. XX VI), the consonantal skeleton of the 
book deserves the highest praise. It is not faultless, as in certain cases can 
be proved to a certainty e. g. from the comparison of the Sanskrit texts. 
Whereever I felt called upon to correct the text, I have given the reading 
of the manuscript at the foot of the page. 

The writer has not bestowed the same care on the vowels as on the 
consonants (cf. p. XXXII). Not knowing the vowel-system of that Indian 
vernacular dialect which Alberuni heard and perhaps spoke, I could not do 
anything save reproduce the vocalization exactly as it is given in the manuscript. 
I have only taken away as perfectly superfluous a Fatha from a medial 4, 

oye bs , - 
writing j4 where the manuscript has jb. 

§ 9. On the Arabic language as used in the Indica. 

As regards the Arabic style of Alberuni in general, I must refer the 
reader to my introduction to the edition of his Chronology p. LXIX. All 
his sentences are very precise and most of them very short. The connection. 
of the sentences with eachother is very strict and bears a close relation to 
the method of geometry, as each sentence is so constructed as to fit closely 
on to the preceding one. The nature of his style seems to betray the ma- 
thematician by profession. When he wrote the Indica, he was 27 years older 
than when writing the Chronology. During all this time his style was conti- 
nually developing those qualities which were already. at that early period 
prominently characteristic, and which furnish unmistakable marks of a strong 
individuality. Much more than in the Chronology, the style of the Indica 
gives us the impression of being finished omnibus numeris, showing a high 
polish and a remarkable uniformity from beginning to end. His language is 
so condensed and at the same time so artistically constructed that you could 
scarcely anywhere take away a single word without destroying the whole 

sentence. 
e 

L 

XXX1V 

The difficulty of understanding the work does not so much lie in the 
words and in their construction as in the subject-matter, and in the peculiar 
way whereby the single ideas are linked together which sometimes requires 
some reading between the lines. Generally, a sentence which seems obscure 
at first sight receives the necessary light from the following passage or pas-, 
sages and I would give the same advice to the reader of the Indica as to a 
reader of Herodotus, not to stop in a difficult sentence or context, but at 
once to consult that which follows. A cause of much perplexity in this, as 
in most Arabic books, is the frequent use of the personal pronouns, Speak- 
ing of a person or a thing, the writer afterwards for a long time simply 
refers to it by he or she or it, leaving the reader to the necessity of guessing 
what is meant. 

It is perfectly certain that an author like Alberuni, in his academical 
education, passed through a course of Arabic grammar and that he knew it 
as well as any writer of his time, though he has not composed books on 
grammatical subjects. Nevertheless, here and there he takes liberties with 
grammar which much he characterized as medieval Arabic. For instance it 
seems to have been a misuse in the language of the mathematicians to con- 
nect the numbers 3—10 with the singular of the word Wa! == 1000, in direct 
opposition to the usage of the classical and also the modern vernacular lan- 
guage. Cf. call 8c instead of UIT Bye page Ih, 9.19; IM, 19; 14,19; I, 
13 Ih, 15. Cast RAS Hy, 7, Cast Read My, 19, CAN Read 14, 47 &c."). I explain 
this construction by a wrong application of the analogy of the construction 
of the numbers 3—9 in connection with the word xj == 100 in the singular 
number. 

A. second peculiarity in his construction of numbers is, that a numeral 
sometimes appears in the status constructus, although the second half of the 
‘Iddfa does not follow it immediately, as is required by grammar, but is se- 
parated from it by an intervening word. Cf. 

wise MLL, cil wv tll Lely wypSes 
on page If, 4.5. We exspect 
as 

Ge BS ot ash ls 

or, if the first cys is to be dropped, we expect 
se RLS, nil 

This construction is a sort of abbreviatidn. The word vj. which ought 
to be used twice, is used only once, but the grammatical government remains 
the same, as if it were used twice. Cf. further 

1) The same peculiarity has been referred to by Baron VY. v. Rosen in the Publi- 
cations of the Oriental department of the Imperial Russian archaeological society, Peters- 
burg 1886 p. 31. 32. (Russian). 

i I 

B ya bi it Sy RK eile 

on page w, 4; 
Lo yap Ramncing (gidle Labl Gye! 
on page w, 21; 
gio on page vs, 9 and (.H! on page 4,15. In all these cases the casus 
constructus is contrary to the rules of classical Arabic. 

It is an extension of this kind of construction, when the numeral ap- 
peares in the status constructus, although it is not followed by a genitive, but 
simply by an accusative necessitated by one of the numbers 11--99. See e. g. 
the following expression on page Se, 15: | 
We expect : 

Siw cytpthey Cam Rilrwatdy Rin cil 

We detect here the same tendency to abbreviation. Instead of iw and Kin, 

the word is used only once and at the end of the sentence, but its gram- 
matical influence is the same as if it were used twice. In fact, the accu- 
sative xi acts on the preeding cil, as if it were a genitive. Cf. gdb 
p- '4, 20, Ast p. bt, 14, 

In fractions sometimes the status constryctus is used where there does 
not follow a genitive but a preposition with a genitive, a construction which 
similarly occurs in Syriac. See e.g. elsyeh uy cli, instead: of eyes (p. S10, 24 
M4, 2); sda cals instead of at« cxss (p. 4, 6). ; 

Besides the medieval use of the accusative instead of the nominative’), 
there are some other harsh constructions chiefly of the numerals and of the 
word Ys = both weighing on the conscience of an Arabian grammarian, 
where the author seems to stand in much need of absolution from his more 
punctilious countryman Zamakhshart, 

The connection between a numeral (3—10.100) and its noun when de- 
fined, may be a fourfold one, viz. 

SSS Eds 

CA oy I 

Jey3t eabsl 

de)! eda, the latter two of which are the most frequent in the Indica. 

1) When using Indian words in the plural (pluralis sanus mase. gen.), he generally 
uses the accusative, v. qye,l) the Rishis, cya XJ} the Pitris, yt? J) the Brahmarshis &c. 
Rather exceptional i8 pyymal} i.e. the Vasus on p. Ifo, 18. 

e2 

XXXVI 

CE. prell gS op. ih, 3, é 
ASTy XS Karmal! op. iif, 24, 

Gua gral p. HF, 20, 

Uszll Regal == the seven Rishis on p. Mo, 8. 

onl, REGIE od ps NE, 17. 

Kaw Xted} == the centennium p. i", 8. 

In the manuscript Schefer as in many other manuscripts, in derivatives 
from roots tertiae infirmae the final ¢ with or without nunation is most fre- 
quently expressed by a long ¢ i. e. cs in conformity with the pronuntiation 
of the vernacular language, See e. g. ,galw} instead of lal pe wes, Day eres 
33 instead of eles Wa, 215 dle = Je MI, 16; re oe wdle 1,135 ssem = > 
Mo, 13; Fla = ele i, 19 &e. 

Further, the manuscript has 

ui instead of iat ps 19; 2; vt, 6, 
erie! instead of woh Bataal p. MP, Qi. 
phe LS 3 instead of pre G33 & p. Ifo, 3 : 
by a wrong application of the analogy of the numbers 11 and 
13 —19. 
asl Kew instead of clas Kewd p. ia, 7, 

dabw instead of Selw p. lal, 13. 

The damtr-alfasl is apparently used in a very free manner. See e. g. 
Hs 69 p. It, 22, xlawbyll 9 p. th, 8, Glaige 69 p. ils, 6, where classical grammar 
requires 2. 

As regards the words ~S and a , the short forms wt and I, 3! and e! 
are sometimes used instead of 025, bS, 9c), Let. 

It is my impression that for deviations from classical Arabic of the kind 
here described not only the writer of the manuscript Schefer, but also Albe- 
runi himself is to be held responsible. It is the classical language en négligé, 
as used by most medieval authors who did not pique themselves upon being 
very precise in matters of grammar. 

When Alberuni used the Arabic language to depict Indian civilization, 
he put it to such a test as no Arabian author has ever done before or after. 
He had, like Colebroke, Wilson and Lassen, to grapple with the difficulty 
of rendering all the subtleties of Hindu thought by corresponding terms of 
another language, and I venture to say that he has done so with complete suc- 
cess. Everyone who takes the trouble of following his train of thought, will 

XXXVII 

find that throughout the whole book there reigns a classical perspicuity which 
proves that he handled not only the subject, but also the language with a 
perfect mastery. In order to express new notions foreign to the Arabian 
mind, he either borrows Indian words using them in their original or in an 
Arabized form, or secondly he translates them into Arabic, or in the third 
place, if he cannot find an appropriate Arabic translation, he uses Arabic 
words, but in new significations which he assigns to them’). In this task 
he was greatly assisted by the enormous wealth of forms of Arabic inflection 
and their capability of expressing the very finest and most intricate nuances 
of thought, by the inexhaustible treasures of the Arabic dictionary and the 
wonderful elasticity of Arabic syntax. Alberuni directed the language into 
a new channel, where it might have undergone a new and peculiar deve- 
lopment of its own, but this development has not taken place. ‘The impulses 
given by Alberuni,’ who rises like a solitary rock in the ocean of Arabic li- 
terature, have not been taken up by subsequent generations, and the result 
was that his work soon became unintelligible to Muslim readers and was 
utterly neglected. He was too far in advance of his countrymen, and they 
have never tried to follow in his wake. 

The perusal of the Indica requires a certain familiarity with Arabic 
terminology as it occurs in books on theology, philosophy, mathematics, 
astronomy and astrology. On considering the question whether a glossary of 
rare or unknown words was to be added to this edition, I came to the con- 
clusion that it would be preferable to explain all the words which need an 
explanation, in the notes to my translation, as they are not sufficiently nu- 
merous to justify a special glossary being made of them. 

1) See his own principles on this subject on p. i", 2—6, 
As examples of Arabized Indian words we mention 
il, eat plur. walgss the daily revolution of a planet , derived by a Prikritic bhudti 
from Skr. bhukt?, ef. Suryasiddhinta Il, 27 note and p. ivi, 1; Ma, 4; Mf, 8. 9. 115 Me, 
9; P41, 18. 
2. Pyad plur. 25,9420 temple = Skr. devagriha p. fav, 18; Pai, 15. 
As examples of Arabic words with Indian Significations stamped upon them see 
1. Belo == amyita i.e. Ambrosia, the food of the Devas, p. 14,6; B25) Por, 9.10: 

Qo? 

2. ybadi == dnardtra or tithikshaya i.e. the difference between the lunar and civil 
years, cf. Stiryasiddhinta I, 40 note. 

L 

XXXVI 

Conclusion. 

Other subjects connected with the author and his book will form the 
introduction to the English edition. 

The last word of this preface in to be an expression of my deepest 
gratitude to all those who aided me in the course of my work. 

In the year 1873, when professor in the Imperial University of Vienna, 
I was enabled by the liberal support of the Imperial Austrian Government, — 
in particular by the Ministry of Public Instruction to travel to. Constantinople 
and to collate there the manuscript of the Mehemet Képriilii Pasha Library. 

It has already been stated on p. IX that it is to a grant of Her Bri- 
tannic Majesty's India Office that I am indebted for the means of printing 
this edition. In the India Office Sir Henry Rawlinson and Dr. Reinhold 
Rost have always during a long course of years accorded me their untiring 
assistance in furthering my literary plans. 

Under what obligation I am to Mr. Chr. Schéfer, Membre de l'Institut 
in Paris, the reader has already been told on p. VIII. 

Further I have, chiefly in the former stages of my work, applied for 
the explanation of single Indian words to several Sanskrit scholars and have 
invariably experienced their ready assistance. 

Prot. Ferdinand Wiistenfeld lent me the help of his learning and of 
his eyes, assisting me in reading the proofsheets from beginning to end. 

‘The transliteration of the Sanskrit alphabet which I use, is the following: 

Vowels: a@ @ 4 t7 ut m xt Lh 

Diphtongs: ¢ ai o aw 
Gutturals: k kh g gh t 

Palatals: ¢ ch j jh fi 
Singuals: ¢ th d dh on 
Dentals: t th d dh on 
Labials: p ph b bh m 
Semivowels: y xr 1 vy 

Sibilants; 8 sh 

Anusviira: 7 
Visarga: h. 

Berlin, February 1887. 

Edward 

C. Sachau. 

Table of contents. 

Introduction and table of contents . 

Chapter 1. 

” 

o7) 

» 

20. 

On the Hindus in general as an introduction ‘to our account of etn 
On the belief of the Hindus in God. . 

On the Hindu belief as to created things both intelligibilia oe hoe 
From what cause action originates and how the soul is connected. with 
matter 

On the state of the ‘souls ‘and their migration through the ‘world in 
the metempsychosis 

On the different worlds and. on “the plac es a retribution in ‘paradise 
and hell : 

On the nature of Liberation from the aa aa on re pat leading 
thereto . 

On the different icleaees of renter beitias: and < on then names 

On the castes, called colours and on the classes below them . . . 
On the source of their religious and civil law, on prophets and on the 
question whether single laws can be abrogated or not . . - 
About the beginning of idol-worship and a description of the aie 
dual idols . , 

On the Veda, the Purauas and otter er, at their nbtinnat erature 
Their grammatical and metrical literature . 

Hindu literature in the other sciences, astronomy, astrology bie. 
Notes on Hindu metrology, intended to facilitate the understanding 
of all kinds of measurements which occur in this book 

Notes on the writing of the Hindus, on their arithmetic and feintad 
subject, and on certain strange manners and custom of theirs 

On Hindu sciences which prey on the ignorance of people . : 
Various notes on their country, their rivers and their ocean. Itine- 
raries of the distances between their several kingdoms and between 
the boundaries of their country 

On the names of the planets, the signs ot the ie ihe ieaet sta- 
tions, and related subjects 

On the Brahminda. .... - 

Va 

sL 

» 

XL 

Description of earth and heaven according to the religious views of 
the Hindus, based upon their traditional literature . . . . . . 
Traditions relating to the pole . . . . - 

On mount Meru according to the belief of the dutiers of the Purdnas 
and of others . . . nian ; 
Traditions of the Purate reparittaye foeh of the seven Deivad 

On the rivers of India, their sources and courses .. . aaa 

On the shape of heaven and earth according to the Hindu aatronomens 

On the first two motions of the universe (that from east to west 

according to ancient astronomers and the precession of the equino- 

xes) both according the Hindu astronomers and the authors of the 

Puranas : 

On the definition of the: ten directions, : 

Definition of the inhabitable earth according to the Hindus 

On Lanka or the Cupola of the earth . 

On that difference of various places which we call ihe didanines of 

longitude 

On the notions of duraue ona fins in s weneeal and on the vention 

of the world and its oe ; 

On the various kinds of the day or nyethemeron and on any aad 

night in particular . : 

On the division of the nyehthemeron in minor pirtelen, of time 

On the different kinds of months and years 

On the four measures of time called mina . 

On the parts of the month and year Ata anit Fe 

On the various measures of time composed of suas ae life of 

Brahman included... ‘ 

On measures of time which are evureg: that che life of ‘Brahmas 

On the Saindhi, the interval between two periods of time, ae 

the connecting Buk between them . . areas ; , 

An explanation of Kalpa and Caturyuga, and a definition of sins in 

terms of the other. *. .'¢ « “so |. |. odie eee: Cie ees 

On the division of the Caturynga into Yugas and the different opi- 

nions regarding the latter. . . Sm RS sp pe ueS RNR, dO TS ice alidos 

A description of the four Yugas and of all that is expected to take 

place at the end of the fourth Yuga... .. . 

On the Manvantaras. . . . 

On the constellation of the Great Boa : 

On Narayana, his appearance et different times, and me names . 

On Vasudeva and the wars of Bharata 

An explanation of the measure of an akshauhini 

A summary description of the eras . : , 

On the star-cycles in a Kalpa and Caturyage : : 

An explanation of the terms adhimasa, dnaratra, and the Si 

as representing different sums of re 

On the calculation of ahargana in general i. e. the resolution of 

p. ir 

years and onthe into days, and vice versé the composition of years 
and months out of days . . . ere lis es p. FH 
Chapter 53. On the ahargana or the resolution af years ae months, atcovding 
to special rules which are adopted in the calendars for certain da- 
tes or moments of time . . . o ve 
54. On the computation of the mean sige “a uel tinct. 

p 
” ; Pp 
» 55. On the order of the planets, on their distances and their magitaes p. hms 
» 56. On the stations of the moon . p. Per 
» 57. On the heliacal risings of the ate are on eins ceremonies aid 
rites which the Hindus practice at such a moment . p. re4 
» 58. How ebb and flow follow eachother in the ocean . p. Pot 
» 59 On the solar and lunar eclipses . Pp. Pot 
2 60. On the Parvan. . . LON is p. Pow 
» 61. On the dominants of the different measures of time in 1 both religions 
and astronomical relations and on connected subjects Spa kot 
» 62. On the sixty years-samvatsara, also called shashtyabda. . . . p. fi 
63. On that which especially concerns the Brahmans and what they are 
obliged to do during their whole life... . p. Mv 

, 64. On the rites and customs which the other castes besides the Brah- 
mans, practice during their lifetime 

» 65. On the sacrifices : iwi he 

, 66. On pilgrimage and the visting of sacred. places ae sah 

Pp 
p 
Pp 
» 67. On alms, and how a man must spend what he earns Dy ah De Pvt 
» 68. On what is allowed and forbidden in eating and drinking . . . p. fv4 
» 69. On matrimony, the menstrual courses, embryos and childbed p. bw 
» 70. On lawsuits . : A ee p. hi 
» 71. On punishments and expiations ees Di Pre 
» 72. On inheritance and what claim the deceased person has on it p. Pal 
, 78 About what is due to the bodies of the living (i. e. about hipaa 
and suicide)... tl ey p. Par 
» 74, On fasting and the various Inds of it ee me ator Ne. Sheen ei 
» 75, On the determination of the fast-days . . . . . . . 1. e Pe Pad 
» 76. On the feasts and the festive days to come . . p. Fav 

» ~¢7. On days which are held in special veneration, on lucky and stntieky 
times, and on such times as are particularly favourable for acqui- 

Ping: in then ied Ie heaven. Gn gs te Mes et DM 
Re ee OREN a ee se a ee a ek ge AF 
» a. On the Yogas . . . p. Fi 
» 80. On the introductory iieinlee of Hinda natrofozy with a short de- 

scription of their methods of astrological calculations. . . . p. /b—Mba 

Index of words of Indian origin. . . 2... 1. 1 we we ee ee Pe PMP 40 

Cr 

Corrections. 

Page , 8 read xily» instead of tie, 

v, 10 » ke » » i 
My 19 » de » > — eagd 

‘ 

Waren » ee) 
Fr, 4 » aes » » Kame} 
00, 4; 4,12; 10, 4; IR, 12 read )5 instead of o% 
ov, J after pgwl there is a lacuna. 
I, 19 read slices oly ots S ales instead of alam oh role asly alas 
i note 5) 9,3 delendum. 
fo, 15 read (de instead of de 
i, 2 instead of Uwe the ms. hag Xmas 
vj, 20 » » &y! he » Kag,t 
w, 18 after gS there is a lacuna. 
P14 read tok instead of SJ (ms.). 
4, 5 » whi » » edit 
WP, 14» Poe » » Port. 
ifs second figure. Read > instead of jtasr 
Mo, 10 read des vl (ms.) instead of sey 3 
Poa, 7 ded The ms. has oS 
mr, 8 gets The ms. has (a 
Mea, 14 read \tsiga instead of mains 
M1, 16 instead of «} Cw the ms. has oy! 
MW, 16 read caskads instead of waked 
Mo 33 Ql) pataliputra, 
MPP sea == bhara. 
MMO egawhys vidasint, 
PPY gS == tara. 
MF. waa == cettham, not jitu. 

CL 

Additions to the Index. 

wring Me, add 289,1 — ail Mm, add 152,15 — oly Mr., add 131,6 — sys 
per, add 170, 5 — Srislorw aig Mr, add 293, 10 — rer, add 247,17 — 
um 800, 20 — doram 298,19 — sl, rdhu 312.5 — x 308, 1. 

Words of unknown pronuntiation. 

gist 309, 5 (-— Ayus?) 

gh! 314, 3 (== hutdsasut4h, Brihatsamhita XI, 11). 
dso 289, 14. 

wise 261, 20. 

ys KF pniz 809, 1. 

eS mais B08, 1. 

WS pS ns (secunda manus) 309, 3. 

AS 289, 10. ° 

caply 288, 19. 

claus (vyatipata) 301, 13. 

247,7.9; 262,13. 

ee? hayagriva 114, 5. crtle ch? ashtamdtras 59, 1. 
da? heli 105, 3. eo © himarasmi 105, 5. 
dking? hematdla 156,13. cK? himagu 105, 4. 
sXe? hemagiri 155, 11. 3o? hemagiri 124, 15. 
Ken? hemakita 124,15. ch? hemakiita 123,19. 
pXon? hemakiitya (?) 153,17. | Sorat himamaydkha 105, 5. 
ilen? hemalamba 266, 2. win? himavant 67,13; 123,6.7.18; 124, 
cys? hemna 105, 9. 3; 128,18,19; 181, 2; 147,4,8.18; 
rion? hemanta 180,19; 302,15; 305,9. 166,21; 159, 8; 288, 1. 

10. MP sindhu 267, 9. 
ests? haihaya 155,17. Sas dort? (— caitra) 287,18. 
er Po vy39 vajrabrahmahatya 281, 5. ost us? hamsapura 149, 8. 
erat ymity rasmiketu (?) 816, 9. S lewd? hamsamarga 131, 17. 
sitvy vimisra (?) 808, 1. ss%9% hotrin 49,15. 
25 258, 8. ys? hora 104,15; 178,21.22; 174,8; 807, 
Mgty utakhanda? 101,4; 129,6; 130, bs 3. 

163, 5. wrath? horddhipati 174, 3. 
Sb ekddasa 295, 19. 20. SrF gray? 15,17. 
SLAha v. SURES 114, 2. es? homa 62,8; 269,13. 
AN dy ekanakta 285, 7. os? hina 151,13; 156, 4; 315, 6. 

wks? hidaka (?) 152, 2. 

NB. This Index contains, besides Sanskrit and vernacular words, also 
a small number of words which in reality are neither Sanscrit nor vernacular, 
but wich the author misled by an erroneous interpretation, has taken for 

Sanscrit. 

News Aus nila 114, 6; 128,21; 273, 8. 
obs nflamulcha 181,12. 
| ad nemi (7) 8089. 

cya niyutam 84, 11. 
yah nivra 67, 9 
sol? 49, 10.15. 
» hara 67,14. 
95%) harahaura 149, 5. 
cra? harita 63, 15. 
po 128,15. 
wr? havya 197,13. 
pm% havishmat 197,10. 
cyte? havishmat 197,14. 15. 
cen? hasta 79,11. 
ums? hutdsa 265, 11. 
cya? hutisana 85, 20. 
Xd? arbuda (?) 161, 8. 
3» hari 126,16; 178,14; 188,12; 199, 
18. | 
b4,9 288,17. 
Uis3,9 harivarsha 124, 16. 
Usp? haripurusha 125,13. 
3 U2? harivamsaparvan 64, 21. 
| hy haryatman 199, 16. 
us? harsha 205, 5. 
cy? harshana 301,10. 
ho % 101,15. 
u&5b9 hiranydksha 114,13; 272, 8. 
>) 3% hiranyaroman 197, 9. 
UG,2 hiranydksha 54,19; 184, 3. 
s+ hiranmaya 124, 14. 
o»% haribhatta (?) 67,17. 
usw? hastin 67,15.20; 70,15. 

rat 

gy nalini 131,1.17. GL 
jolf nimar 99, 11. 

eo namuci 114, 2. 

Une mimesha 170, 14.14.17.18. 20.21; 

171, 2.4; 188, 10. 13. 
sad 99, 13. 

! 

cdi ananta (?) 261, 7. 

XAG nanda 86,18; 114, 9; 200,14.16.17. 

wie O45 nandipurana 68, 4. | 

exdia XG namdivishtha (sic) 157,14 col. 2. 

deF O43 nandagola 200,16; 276, 1. 

pes nandikesvara 45, 12. 

gs nandana 128,16; 265,18. 

cy 43 nandanavana 249, 13. 

ow Qs nandanavana (?) 122,1. 

ais 163, 6. 

vi nahusha 45, 13. 

» navan 86, 20. 

waits navatnsaka 307, 6. 

yy) 180, 3. 

AgsSys navakhandaprathama 147, 6; 
148, 2. 

SF pi553 navakhandavarga 149, 1. 

ieyd 267, 7. 

ws) navan 295, 17.18. 

dlya3 nepala 98,12.13.14. 

psd netra 85, 13. 

wha nairmika (?) 161, 7. 

uaws nicastha 305,14. 

sp nila 124,13. 

a3 nairrita 145,10; 146 fig.; 148 fig. ; 
155,12; 298,18. 

tind ni-rishabha (sic) 197, 6. 

cam? hasta 107,18; 148 fig., 243,15; | 9.5 206,15. 

#33 niscara (!) 197, 6. 

#5 naraka 118, 6. 

53 naraloka 29, 8. 

es narmadd 99,12; 128,12; 130, 18. 

sre narmadd 128,14. 

S35 nirmogha 194, 11. 

teaes nirmoha 197,17. 

UMigiwd nistrimsa 298, 12. 

seems nisclré 129, 8. 

ol&3 nishida 154, 6. 

Lwihi ve Cakdigl nihsvasa 172, 4. 

ples nisikara 173,15. 

wind 131, 12. 

MS ans nishprakampa 197,17. 

pees (ms. -Siy) niscara 197,15, 

43 nishadha 128,19; 124,8.15; 278, 
8. 

SUS43 nishkulida 114, 2. 

raed nisesa 106, 1. 

SS 3 nagarkot 180, 7; 207,12. 

ws nakha 88, 3. 

Si naga 86, 9. 

wS anagha (!) 197,15. 

3,55 nyagrodha 127,19. 

pei nakshatra 179,9; 232, 17.18. 

O¥ses3 nakshatramina 178,17; 179, 

4. 
wh .u< nakshatrandtha 106, 2. 
dS nalva 79, 12. 
8 nakula 201, 14. 
eS nagna 59, 1. 
oS nagnapama 154, 10. 
wi nalaka 151, 12. 
u*< nivaksha 133, 16. 
46* 

a 

56 nadi 170,6; 171, 4, 

a+y§ ndrimukha 155, 2. 

wl nasikya 151,13; 154,7. 

06 naga 44,18; 86,15; 128,20; 183,15; 
261, 4.5; 295,15; 296, 7. 

wo Sb ndgadvipa 148, 3. 

wy Sb ndga kulika 174, 21. 

eye Sb nigdrjuna 92, 20. 

pb ndgara 82, 11. 

pw Sb y. crews 148, 11. 

yap 6 nagarapura (?) 75, 4. 

Soew 5 128, 3. 

SplSU ndgaloka 29, 8. 

Sb ndlikera 153,12 col. 4. 

36 nalf 270, 15. 

p> ei ndmakarman 279, 4. 

si niva 306,1. 

ileal nydyabhasha 63, 18. 

usd nabhaga (?) 194,10. 

| end 265,11. 

JS nitala 113, 5. 

ws niyuta $4, 6. 

pies niyutam 84,5. 

wh nishadhd 128,14. 
> nikharva 83,16; 282,20. 
SIG nidigha 180,17. 
ddd V. a0 266, 12. 
nara 194, 7. 

cetlsi niramaya 194, 12. 
wy nripa 87,12. 

Y25 nyarbuda 838, 14. 
wKmi3 nirutsuka 197,17. 
o,3 nirriti 181,14; 262, 5. 

cy? “Siw nrisimhavana 166, 4. 

oe milika ( ) 11, 5 
ists4 maitreya 31, Ae 195, 4; 199, 4. 
is tee maitreyt 285, 21. | 

whats meghavan 155, 11. 

we meda (!) 152, 15. ‘ 

yaa mirut 101, 1. 

ore marici 77,15. 

oo meru 6,4; 121, 11; 128, 2.20; 183, 3. 
14.16; 134, 6.15; 185,3.17.19; 136,1. 
7.19; 187,15; 139,14.17; 140, 6; 142, 
3.10; 148,10; 144,10; 156, 7.22; 159, 
6.9; 162,11,13; 
168, 8; 242,16; 249,11; 267,7; 
4. 5. 

olaaa meshadi 180, 8. 

uses mesha 108,15. 

jing mewar 99, 9. 

wX4a megha 114, 7. 

dae mekala 151,12; 153, 8. 

usilese mimdimsa 63, 19, 

wy mina 108, 20. 

Sliga mainika 261, 16.17. 

pee 181,12. 

@leb nibhdga 197,14. 

wh nitha 252,10. 

cy b narayana 7,6; 46,2. 3; 52,1; 57%, 2; 
62,17; 63,7; 64,2; 84,2; 95,4; 99, 4. 
105,17; 120,21; 121, 4; 178,14; 188, 
14; 198,1.14.19; 199,9.18; 201,6; 265, 
3; 274, 20; 283, 2. 

3,5 narada 55,18; 63,10; 118,19; 1890, 
7; 249,14; 313,38. 

cerindji ndradaparvata 251, 16. 

iw narasimha 63, 3 184. 15. 

166, 7.19; 167,17; 
278, 

mp 

Us wee mahdrdshtradesa 99, 13. 

SoJ.ee maharloka 115, 11; 
Ohi 

Use mahisha 126,16; 165,20. 

use madhisha 150, 9. 

SlXgo mahdkdla 99, 8. 

sjLige 130, 4. 

jo4ge mahendra 154, 4. 

cygee muhuirta 119,16; 148,19.21; 144, 
Bie eC et weak. tO tia? PaULo. 174 49% 
172, 1. 21; 173, 2. 3 ff.; 184,19; 260, 
4. 6; 800,25; 302, 10; $13, 13.19.20. 
24. 

U*steg¢ mahoshnisha 114, 7. 

cgoe4 madhvi (?) 101, 12. 

see mahidhra 86, Lo. 

pouea mahendra 121, 6; 128, 

4, 

128, 16; 

4 maya 75, 13. 

| ty bodha 150,10. 

QBxSS.4 modakam-dehi 65, 16. 

$94 aay 

wee mausala 64,18. 

w&%« mushika 150, 5. 

Use moksha 34, 21; 269, 10. 

es) ta mokshadharma 64, 16. 

dye mila 107,11; 148, fig.; 149, 9; 244, 
7; 262, 5; 288, 9. 

vee multin 56,1.4.6; 58,16; 73,15; 
149, 8; 152, 6; 155,16; 159,75 168, 6; 
205,18; 206,16. 17; 207, 2; 229, 8; 
274, 14; 276, 2; 290, 15. 

wo ie millatrikona 304, 4; 305, 14. 

ystoo milasthana 11,4; 149, 9. 

119,10; 165, 

Cr 

208,14; 204,3.8.9.11.17. 21;-205, 1; 
209,19; 216,21; 217,14; 218,21; 219, 
1; 259, 21; 260, 7. 

agia mukha 102, 9. 

wrjsta manojava 194,9. 

sly? ipsa manushydhoratra 167, 1. 

edie mahdpadma 83,16; 84,8; 128,20; 
261, 12. 

cates mahdbhita 20, 15; 164, 6. 

Saslee mahivegd 128,18. 

wvsles mahdtavi 154, 5. 

Sie mab&tala 113, 7. 

ies mahdjambha 114, 5. 

dies mahdjvila 30,3. 

wee mahacthna 101, 16. 

sles mahddeva 27, 3.4; 45, 8.12; 46,4; 
56,14; 57,8.12; 68,4. 20; 68,5.10. 
11; 65,19; 75,19; 84,2; 87,3; 89, 
19; 146,4; 1738, 4.12; 188,14. 5.12: 
205,12; 252,9.14; 261,1; 264,13; 

274,1.3.4; 275,14.16; 2881; 289, 
8.14; 290,14; 294,15; 303,6; 315, 
D. 

pllee maharashtra 150, 8. 
yee mahfrnava 155,19, 
writlge mahdsaikha 84, 8. 
znitee mahavirya 194, 12. 
easier mahigriva 154, 3. 
Slee mahdikalpa 169, 2. 
yp 4a mahdgaurt 128,15. 
ust ee 113, 7. 
jess mahanadf (?) 128, 11. 
sete mahdnavami 288,10. 
orge mihiradatta (?) 75, 3. 
46 

a) 

she malipur (malayapuram) 98,6. LN 

tre Manas 21,2020) 2) 

cw manu 68,14; 64,3; 75,7; 87,9; 120, 
16.17; 186,3; 193,16; 194,1; 194,4; 
196, 25; 256, 2.7; 260,1; 265,2; 281, 
17. 

cr Muni 45,14; 86,11; 119, 6. 

rte Manittha 75,13. 

eve mufija 114, 12. 

di manda 105,14; 278,10. 

cp oie mand&kini 128, 11; 278,10. 

cya mandavahini 128, 9. 

Se mandaga 127,41. 

pe die 163, 6. 

JXie munda 150, 6. ‘ 

dA mandala 131, 20. 

ria 99, 12, 

pp grrio LOL, 3. 

ayri0 mandeha 126,20. 

shia margastrsha 107,10; 294,17. 

ds maigala 86,14; 105,6; 181, 3. 

oy Mia mangalavara 104, 5. 

siXin 818, 6. 

x4 margasirsha 106,16; 107,2; 181, 
14; 201,2; 206,16.17; 207,4; 285, 
18; 289,20. 

waskia maniketu 317, 7. 

sexta mongir, mudgagiri 98, 8. 

cnet manmatha 266,17. 

hike manvantara 7, 4; 61, 6; 120, 17; 
145,21; 182,9.10.12.21; 183,1; 185, 
10; 186,3.4.14; 187,10; 188,7; 189,5; 
193,15. 20; 194,1.3; 195,1.4.6; 196, 
25; 197,1.2 3.5; 198, 7.9; 199,10; 

yee Wa Sseecenstas 126, 15. 

sce mrigavyddha 247, 11, 

esr marukueca 156, 10. 

yes mrigasirsha 201, 5. 

pS, mrigasirsha 107,10; 148 fig. 
12; 248,7; 245, 2; 262, 5. 

gts, mrigalaichana 66,9; 252, 4. 

cy¢ maniman 155,10. 

oe maru 131,4; 152,3. 

ord ast marucipattana 154, 16. 

wo 1381, 6. 

ear marici 195, 16.18. 

MF ;2 mucukunda 114,18. 

wha mashaka (!) 160, 6 

eX maga 11, 2; a0 

K mriga 127,11. 

cv magha 107,15; 148 fig. ; 195,14; 196, 

3.8.11.13; 248,12; 
waX« mukta 154, 16. 
XK magadha 149.4; 150,10; 
widk« magadha 131,10. 
sxe makara 100, 8; 108, 
o1,x0 makarddi 189, 3. 
ds mala 212.17. 
do mala 150, 9. 

d malla (?) 152, 11. 
Ate malada 151,10. 
csybihe (sic) marvari (?) 82,12. 
pdhe 82,13 

awhede malaméfsa 212,17. 

sia malaya 123,16; 128, 6. 

+ malaya 154, 2. 

wes de malayaparvata 124, 5. 
es mleccha 10,7. 

262,10; 288,15. 
153, 7. 

7.9.18; 248, 5. 

ra (4 ! 

usa matsya 63, 12. 

dee mithil4 153, 9 

oe mithuna 108, 1.17. 

yo unmattavanti (?) 287,15. 

; 173, | oe matsya 68, 8. 

ees matsya 131,10. 
oln e~ matsyapurana 63,2; 80,5; 117,1; 
118, 2; 123,10; 125,10.20; 126, 21; 

127, 2.9.12; 128,18; 180,21; 1385, 
16; 142.10; 165, 20; 281,18; 232,24. 
26; 2388, 4; 261,14; 252,41: 273, 5; 
318, 2. 

uot vatsa 150,12. 

are 125, 13. 

Ur madhyadesa 82,10; 97,4; 125, 
1; 145,10; 148, 7. 

joe madra 155, 17. 

joe madura 149, 5. 

joe madhra (?) 152, 7. 

Syra madraka 156,17. 

gr 76, 20. 21. 

ude matsya 152.8, 

cyeow4 madhustidana 201,10. 

| 8S mudrakaraka 150,11. 

ode madhu 838,16; 197,10. 

cfr madhyamayus 309,17. 

orwra 273, 7 

+ madhu (?) 67,14.17. 21; 
70,13 71,5 

| muru 131,6; 194, 9. 

69,11.16; 

| | cr gal ya 124,16. 
| 

wy mrityu 199,12; 296, 24. 
Jue mritala 113, 8. 
| jlniie mrityusdra 174, 15. 

of 

12; 290.4; 291, 6. iy ydou yp! lavanasamudra 117, 3. 

XS mdgadha 127,11. cmt yy lavanamushti Wh, 21. 
srl magadha 197,18. eSiel lavatiga 159, 14. 
wX3 Jb malavartika 150, 4. dp 205,18. : 
isle mdlindya 154, 5. dl%J 162,19. | 
sie malava 124,13; 150, 3; 152, 4; 156, | x3l9,J 162, 19, 
18. yo%) lohAvar 101,3; 102,2; 129,6; 206, 
NJle mflava 82,141; 98,19; 999.11; 159, 15. 
iis <9 lohita 114, 3. 
waigdlo milyavant 124, 5. xy} lohita 129, 9. 
ome malydvant (?) 124, 7. «ry lohitya 153,15. 
wKasle 114, 14, Aj un%ed lohitanada 273, 12. 

cle mina 6,17; 79,5; 178.15; 179.9.19. | dt%>5 100,18; 102,10; 180,11. 
wri maindavya 75,9; 162,16; 155,13; | 9%) 163, 3. 

156, 8. Hd liksha 77, 7. 
ule manasa 75.6.7; 123,15; 127,11. | ex leya 108, 19. 
13; 185, 4; 278,13; 818, 10. sil matra 67,6 bis. 
Ki pwilo 290, 10. sl mathura 152, 9. 
cpt manasottama 127, 21. SJ sb madhyaloka 29, 9. 
S35 ile minushaloka 29, 9. | 25 madhava 201, 7. 
eile minahala 156, 2. le mdraka 155, 7, 
cyber 290, 10. cy mirgania 86, 5. 
cupile 290, 4. aS 114, 14. 
syg%le mathura 97,11; 99,5; 159, 8; 200, | sds, markandeya 27, 2; 68,10; 121, 
11,16; 201, 3; 205,7; 275,21; 286,7.| 1; 164,8; 172,10; 182,13; 187,13; 
10. 193.21; 204, 2 10; 282,20.21; 288,5. 
94%le maheya 105, 7. old 2S lo mirkandeyapurina 63, 6. 
BAS, md-udakam-dehi 65, 15. Ws cgje marikala 156, 10; 206,14,15. 
3 maheya 151, 3. ue masa 87,6; 182, 2. 
ble maya 174.14, gy>ybo masdrdham 86, 8. 
se mathara 155, 4. urlowia masavdsa 285,13. 
py mitra 106,16.17; 121,55; 173,6; 262, | ae misha 76,18; 77.5.9. 
2; 296,16. 'wWl magha 103,19; 106,18; 107, 14; 

SS 0 mitrikhya 258, 16. 181,16; 201,7; 263,17; 285,19; 287, 

Mon 

: GS lava 170, 12.13.14. 18. 20; 171, 2. 4; | wus ketu 194,12; 312,5.6; 318, 2. 

188 1018 Lif oftA 14,10; 19,14; 35,3; 36,12; 
wr litta (?) 152,10. 37,9; 88,15; 39, 7:12; 69,5; 107, 2. 
od! 100, 20. spay ra keturtipa 312,19 
&S laghu 66,13; 67,6: 70,21. Sbetaf ketumala 124,14. 
eS) likhita 68,15. sp kira 157, 5. 

c4yghJ 208, 4. tS kirata 157,17. 
ae laksha 88,14; 118,5.6; 142, 15.18.|J~S kerala 150, 14. 
ce lakshmana 204, 11. Was keralaka 154, 3. 

(esd lakshmi 27,3; 289,16. useS 289, 12. 

itt lamghdn 163, 5; 206, 16. | eammas’ 66, 8. 

wWleiS lampdka 152,4 col. 3. peas 114,16. 

eri) lampika 2°6, 16. erin’ Kesava (Vishnu) 183, 1. 4. 
(iJ lamghdn 130, 2. PrBsS kesadhara 156, 4. 

wh) litga 56,14; 58,16; 68,11; 89,19; | dso khesvara (kha-isvara) 173,12; 262, 

252,9.13. 4, 

oS lanka 6,11; 102,16; 133,18; 184,133; | »4.5 kesava 107,2; 201, 5. 
154,13; 157,1.9; 168,7.12; 159,3.6. | Xo 131,12. 
14.15.19; 160.2; 161,15; 162,10.13;| .%5 kaikaya 156, 12. 

186,10. ules kaildsa 124, 3.5; 156,20; 273, 9. 
Uspdlaksl 160, 4. AO ire 224.3) Ahr, 
ys? lahdr 102,3. wekss kaildvata 156,13. 
woo) 128,17. SL kilaka 266, 9. 
wy) locana 85, 13. UiptaS kitapurusha 124,16; 126,11. 
Sed loka 29, 7.12; 85,16; 114,20; 115, | us kendra 306, 2. 
5; 166,1; 231,17. S14 67, 8. 
SoJ'y3 lokdloka 118,10.21; 125,41; 142, | lata 73,12; 134,10.12.14; 140,14; 
13; 143,8. 300,19. 
rif) lokfnanda 75, 8. ge) hradini 181, 1.12. 
wrasys laukdyata 63,19. oy) 102, 13. 
Sind lokapdla 1238, 15. | H,9 lalabhaksha 30,8. 
SxS, lokakdla 206, 10. | no)S Litadesa 100, 15. 

SS wh55J laukikakdla 207, 2.3; 229,9. | ¢s)3 cf. lita 82,15 
os lavana 114, 3. ARS lay dlini 128, 5 

GI. 

Sy55 gaudaka 153, 4. 

pissy) gauragriva 152,14. 
yy kiirma 63, 12. 

ole pst kdrmapurdna 68, 3. 
h> eygS kilrmacakra 148, 12. 

oye kuru 64, 6; 87,4; 191, 2; 201, 5. 

igs cf. gauda 82,15. 

duueS Kosala 150, 3; 151,53 153,15. 
wrlwS kausalaka 153,12, 
ws kausik? 129, 8; 181,10. 
wes gokarna 79, 17. 

SoS vola 180, 8. 

sys kollagiri 154, 8. 

eS kulinda 149, 5. 

xS kaulava 195,17. 21; 296,16. 
yhyS kaumari 58, 1. 

ways gomatt 129, 8. 

wrayd 114, 6. 

dyes gomedha 117, 8. 
errdneyes comedhadvipa 12%, 8. 
wy kona 105, 14, 

ragslgs 289, 5 

warigS 114, 2. 

wXiyS konga 98, 6. 

AS kauninda 157,19. 

OAdsS conarda 164, 2. 

tins vovinda 150, 11. 

dS kohala 156, 5. 

Brod 174,13. 

MoS kapisthala 101, 2. 

gays 180,19. 

ols khydti 194, 7. 

dLS 298,18. 

steed kdvert 128, 8. 

176, 17. 185 183, 10. 12; 184, 19; 1, 
6; 280, 1.4; 2938,9; 295,48; 5297, 3, 
| XS kishkindha 102, 17. 
of ghana 67.14.17; 69, 163; 70,11; ‘1, 1. 
cheng? i shdaiae 204, 12, 
x4 kubd 129, 7. 
eo ghosha 152, 5. 
yx 298, 10. 
StS ghosha 157, 7. 
Xings khendu 87, 1. 
5 vo 86,17. 
slo gwalior 99, 1, 
ey ib ely 289, 20. 
ces kidpa (?) 152, 10. 
asl gupta 205, 6; 206, 2.6.21; 226,19. 
UW cans guptakdla 206, 6.21; 227, 4 
wie govinda 201, 8. 
caeS Kuta (?) 157, 11. 
eigS gautama 68,15; 197,113 199, 14. i 
coe’ koti 84, 11. 
edz (eS kotipadma 84, 6 
yolees godavari 99, 12. 
spldeS vodavart 128, 7. 
y3eS kodara (?) 152,12. 
y® gaurt 57,13; 261,24; 288.1; 289, 
20; 290, 4.5. 
» gaura 63,17, 
yh 273, 15. 
oy kavara 131, 3. 
= kaurpya 108, 16, 
lan y53 kitraparvata (?) 74, 20. 
gh 287,12; 288, 1. 
dS koti 45, 8; 88,14; 84, 1.2.3.53 118, 
| 5.6; 124,11; 142,17.48. 

Prof. 

pees ganardjya 1 54, 5, 

4S kunatha 157, 6. 

Bhd 82.) 14) 

ues kamsa 172,13; 200, 
201, 1; 288,13. 

gies kanashtharajya (sic) 157, 2. 

GS gangd 97,9.20; 101,16; 125, 20; 
126, 9.21; 129,7; 130,16.17.19.20. 
21: 131, 6.10; 182,15; 253.5; 256. 
8; 271, 7; 274,41. 3, 6.73 284, 4.12. 
163 298,16. 

was kanka 153,53 251,16; 314,17. 

wAS kanaka 165, 9; 314, 9. 

iS kanik (kanishka) 207, 13. 

wis ganakd 314, 16. 

‘84S’ gunakdra 217,19. 

pluitiS gangisdgara 98, 9; 130, 17. 

wis kankata 154,7. | 

wae WS kanishka-caitya 207,13. 

jie HAS ganyddvara 97, 14. 

¥ X45 99,2. 

ess kauikuma 314,12 

oS konkana 99,135 154,12. 

aes gangeya 99, 2. 

us 289, 7 

ad kanauj, kanydkubja 11,5; 79,35 82, 
10; 97, 4. 9. 20; 98,21; 99,5; 100,18. 
21; 130,16; 162, 21; 205, 8; 206,17; 
207,14; 267, 3. 

wn (?) 261, 26. 

jos agnidhra 197, 18. 

oS 206,13. 

ses ghat! 140,6; 141,13; 143,14; 169, 
16.19; 170,43 171, 4.7.8.115 172, 1; 

41.42.18, 19; 

| ended 128, 15. 

shes 208, 6. 

dAdeS kamandalu 57, 5. 

os gana 202,16. 

cy kanyd 108, 5 20. 

s (SUS gunakara (?) 298, 2. 

iS kumbha 108,10. 19. 

wralis 102,11. 

UsaaS kimpurusha 131, 8; 273, 8. 

dS kambala 114, 7; 128, 21. 

wrens 164, 6. Pe 

cy PAus kanthadhana 156, 14. 

MAS kuntala 150, 15. 

yes kufijaradari 155, 10. 

4S khanda 155, 7. 

aS gandha 21, 3. 

MAUS BOO, 18. 25. 

SmS vandakt 129, 9. 

wihuss khandakhadyaka 74,19; 161, 1; 
206, 4,6; 225,13; 226,15 227,45; 281, 
14; 241, 7.8; 242,255 245,93; 247, 3. 
9; 258, 19; 260,11; 290,16; 291, 19; 
300,14. 

Lys wis oS khandakhadyakatippa 75, 
2. 

ims iS kandakasthala 154, 5. 

cpus gandhamadana 124, 7.14. 

sd vandha 99, 16.19; 276, 21. 

Pras gandhara 156, 10. 

PAT gandharva 119,6; 128, 14.19; 
131,75 157,19; 273, 9. 

PydtS Kkhandava (?) 99,11. 

ws gundamak (?) 163, 4. 

°S kitunara 44,165 181, 7. 

14; Hanarede iOsei iota ke 
186, 3.11; 187, 4.10; 188, 7.18.19; 
193,16. 18. 20.21; 208, 14; 204, 8,11. 
19.21. 22; 208,13; 209,15: 21171. 9: 
5; 214, 7.8.21; 216,1.14.18; 217, 5. 
18% 220, 2.6% 299.41: 223, 5; 224,2; 
228,10; 280,7.9; 231,1.4.5; 282, 20. 
21.22; 236,19; 287,31; 259, 2.21. 

cys At kalpdhargana 185,14; 269, 2. 

cos kalpana 185,19. 

wf kuninda (?) 131, 3. 

Ses kaliyuga 166, 4; 187,18; 188.3; 
190, 20; 191, 2.6; 196,17; 199, 7. 
20; 203,16; 205,2; 210,1; 211,1; 
216,14; 217, 4; 219, 5. 8; 221, 16:) 
231, 4.5.6; 291, 7, 

S 208, 3. 

cows kalasi 79,5. 

wh kulikn 174,21; 175, 5. 

JAS kalikdla 208, 15; 205, 2 

KE cilott 101, 21. 

as culma 202,16. 

jee 261,21. 

oS kalinga 114, 3; 
153,16. 

aS curuka 156, 9. 

2 (v. glyS) 296, 16. 

cols Kulita 157.10 col. 1. 

sig kuldtalahada 155, 19. 

usS kulya 150, 3.14. 

tS kultra 108,17. 

peed Ent 128, 9 

a 127,9; 317, 4. 

45 * 

9 
7 

fo 

149, 4; 

150, 10; 

we kumuda 

seeoS kasmira 56,15; 100,21; 

eo kshatriya 45,17; Bh 3: 50, 9; 60, ae 

17; 123,12; 190,16; 191, 1; 195, 
4; 250,18; 268,14; 270,16; 278,15; 
279,5; 281,1.7.11; 284,11; 298,18; 
3038, 2. 4. 

stS kshatriya 249, 8. 

mi US kusadvipa 165, 21. 

WSS kishku 79,17. 

eXAS 181, 14. 

WKS Kkishkinda 161,4 col. 4; 154, 4. 

wiaidS kusumanaga 154, 9. 

101.5; 
157.6; 168,2.3; 169,17; 196, 5.23; 
206, 13.15.18; 258, 6; 276.1; 287, 
14; 289, 6.9; 800,14. 

cts kshana 170,95 171, 4. 

dha »“S kshetrapdla 58, 4. 

8S kshira 117,8; 142,18 

SS nsS kehirodaka 117, 4 

poses kaserumat 148, 6. 

Linas’ 291, 5 

> kukura 153, 8. 

N55 karkddi 180, 5 

chs gagana 85,2. 

J kala 76,19; 170,10.17.19.91; 
183,10.12; 186,19. 

171.4; 

|S kali 67.8; 187,17; 192,2; 199,7; ae 

15; 296.3. 

| els SW kalapagrama 131, 8. 

wre US 102,1. 

| hes kalyAnavarman 75,15. 

wl kalpa 7,1.10; 27,4; 83,9; 140.5; 141, 
10; 166,1.3; 169,1,10; 177,3.4. 9; 

C518 knirakshi 105, 7. 
89S krdragraha 302, 4. 
US krosa 79,12; 80,1. 
uts5 kartsha 151,11. 
cs. kuru 131, 9; 150, 4. 
ans kraufica 117, 6.7; 156, 4. 

> ess krauficadvipa 126, 20; 154,10. 

9-5 kroga 79,13; 80,3; 97, 21; 283.8.9. 

ss kriya 108, 15. 

was krita 187, 8; 188, 3. 

SeeliaS kritayuga 187,10.15.19; 188,6; 
190,14; 191, 5; 192, 4; 198,10; 199, 
5.20% 216215 219, 1. 

jewst5 Kshirasamudra 153, 16. 

eS grishma 180,16; 302,12; 805, 3.4. 

ehas’ 128,77. 

wer 156, 16. 

*S gaja 153, 12. 

wats gujarat 99, 4. 

wep gajakama 114,11, 

cams khastha 156, 5. 

wa kisadya 150,13. 

eyphind kinstughna 295,16; 296, 9. 

proms kusuma 67,16; 70,14; 71,2. 

plus kusumakara 180, 16. 

gxeomS kusumapura 84,5; 128,6; 162, 
13° 168,2; 170,6; 186, 21. 

csytms Kunhar 101, 12. 

US kusa 117. 5. 6: 126,13. 

ues kasha 167, 7. 

jes kushdra 117, 3. 

ws khasa 131, 8. 

ueS kasyapa 105,18; 121,6; 126, 2; 
145,20; 249,11; 251,10. 

Pot 

| ums krimisa 80, 7. 

Seas 128, 12. 

wo kirana 314, 2. 

we karna 64,10. 

wis karana 8,17; 74,16.18; 179,12; 
294,18.20; 295,12.13; 296, 1.2.11; 
297.2. 3. 7, 

wiS karndta 82:13; 164,4; 270, 7. 

Var oS karnftadesa 82, 14. 

wly «5 karana pata 75,6. 

ool wp karnapravarana 131,19; 151, 
12; 155, 8. 

WIS 53 «yS karanaparatilaka (?) 75, 4. 

WL 5 karanatilaka 75,3; 161, 5. 6; 
174,2; 206,7; 227,6; 281,14; 241, 
9; 299,13; 300, 2. 26. 

crS5F 270, 14. 

onljs> oy karanactddmani 75, 6. 

J oS karanasdra 75,4; 163, 2; 196,16; 
206,7; 229,15; 281,14; 241,7.8. 

ASS virinavara 164, 17. 

WI MS Ey 5 karanakhandakhddyaka 174, 
19. 

%S kudava 79, 4. 

%5 vraha 67,8; 302, 3. 

9S kora 98,1. 

2 kuravas 146, 4. 

op 156, 8. 

oS kshaya 266,17. 

»3 gaura 76, 19. 

o»5 krodhin 266, 6. 

5 krodha 266,17. 

yop kroda 174,17. 

yop 131, 5; 205.18. 

G. 

Por 

Sool S kritayuga 66,2.11: 289,18; 
5.8. 
wriS krittika 67,12; 174,19. 

291, 

|e (ef. Sindh khat) 101, 8, 
F101, 1, | 

e gaja 86,15. 

Ns, krittikaé 107,8; 145,21; 148 figure; és kuja 105, 6. 

243.5; 262, 3. 

Jui.5 kritamala 128, 6. 

wie OS chritamanda 117, 5. 

eis kritafijaya 199, 14. 

KASS 114, 7. 

is3,5 karatoyd 129,11. 

sev kricchra 285, 7. 

wx,95 kshudramina 156, 10. 

ye garuda (not 0,5) 55, 4: 68,12; 95, 4; 
114,12; 126,5.6; 175, 2. 

ys) kurura 126,13. 

wrt 181, 2. 

su,S Karaskara 161,12. 

ss karsha 77,17, 

ey krishna 80,15; 114,5; 127,8; 199, 
16.4 %. 

LX cyt S krishnapaksha 182, 4. 

est? cys krishna bhaumam 1138, 3. 

Suet 

JS varga 75,9; 172, 23; 192,2; 195,14; 
196.4. 7; 249,11; 266, 2; 312,15. 

ius S karkata 108,18. 

SS 261,10. 

wrigs S karkotaka 128,20; 261,12. 

SS Kurukshetra 159, 7; 162,13; 275, 
19. 

35 163, 1. 

es) karma 131, 21. 

S karman 164, 7. 

owl eS karmendriyfni 22, 1. 

45 

“5 krishnavaiddrya 154, 6. 

es kaccha 102, 9.11; 180, 6.12; 155.9. | 

ys kacchara 156, 20. 

= khajara 156,16. 

KS kucika 157, 9. 

sl kharjdrabhaga 99, 1. 

we kacchtya 151, 5. 

WS vadd 64,11, 

pS kadri 126, 2. 

ys kadara 267, 7. 

jos khadira 251, 2. 

wikS kadamba 1386, 15. 

> giri 156, 2. 

» guda 152,17. 

> kuru 153,6; 275,19. 

>» gara 295,18.22; 296, 20. al 

p guru 66,14; 67,6; 70,14; 71,1; 105, 
10; 173,13; 262,8. 

wilS kirdta 181, 9.13. 

x15 289, 3. 

SS karala 151,8 col. 2; 174,11; 298,11.. 

WS oraha 100,10. 

ws kripa 118, 8; 128,9.11; 197, 12. 

iS kravya 165, 8. 

ey kudava 77,10. 

'S karabha 79,18. 

| 9b,S garbhadhana 279, 1, 

| was karvata 1538, 3. 

«2S kharapatha 181, 15. 

wS kriti 88,4; 267, 9. 

| ,5 krita 85, 24. 

“AUS kaladjara 99, 1. 

Adil kalavrinta 267, 7. 

pows kAlodara (?) 181,13. 

eral kdlanemi 114,11. 

sl 114, 4, 

eS kama 67,15; 70,14; 71,4. 
vyehe¥ kAmyakavana 204, 14. 
zonk kimboja 155, 13. 

ess 154, 15. 

uel kafict 98,5; 102,13. 

jWauils gandhira 131, 5; 152, 3. 
2 Pi6 gindharva 43,17.19; 44,14; 148, 

9. 

ssi kanda 62, 5. 

cos kavana 129, 10. 

Ux kadphises, kadaphes 130, 1. 
pul gdyatri 71,16. 

ira kasyapa 197,11. 

yess kavitadhana (!) 156, 8. 
wad JS kapflaketu 316, 4. 

wus 131, 6.14. 

wy kapila 35,20; 63,17.18; 127, 8; 155, 

19; 164, 5; 166,2; 199, 5. 

MS kabandha 314, 18. 

dimers gabhastala 113, 6. 

erumgas gabhastimat 113, 6. 
pyteromges gabhastimdn 113, 6; 148, 2. 
uss) gabhira (?) 194,17. 

se kuvera 67,18; 258, 11. 

4S kutdra 58, 6. 

3s raktéksha (?) 266,17. 

wsaS kuttaka 74, 8. 

MS kuntala 151, 9. 

AUS ganda? 301, 6. 

oP 

js gandhara 101, 4. 

a5 kirdta 180, 3; 152, 5; 155, 6. 

saS krisa 192, 11. 

lS od 67, 9. 

6 kha 85,1; 169,10,12; 177,11.18; 316, 
8. 

 kavya 197, 8. 

Mus kdpishthala 158,14. 

griS kauverya 154,12 col. 3. 

cytllf kAtydyana 63, 15. 

as katantra 65, 9. 

gf 181, 4. 

wWS6 karttika 106,15; 107,8; 181.13; 
201, 16; 206,14; 250,17; 285,18; 
287,8; 289,14; 291,5; 294,18. 

S86 karttikeya 27, 3. 

I wKaaie’ kirmaneyaka 154, 11. 

uly kasi 150,2; 158, 7. 

ood 46 kdsyapapura 149, 8. 

erié kdshth4 170,17—-21; 188, 10. 
1. 

waw 5 lS kakutstha 286,17. 

wrAISE kAlarnsaka 246,19. 

ly gilava 197,12. 

jl 308, 17. 

ons kolavana 161, 4. 

wgl6 kdlatoyaka 152, 12. 

wk> JS kdlayukta 266, 15. 

cyte JS kAlayavana 205, 3. 

oes kAldjina 154, 14. 

i, 8 kdlardtri 174, 9. 

sz}, SS kdlardtri 298, 8. 

wWJ6 kdlaka 131, 4; 155, 13. 

welll kalakoti 153, 7. 

GL 

15; 284,10; 293,18; 3808, 5. 
siya sivaratri 290,14. 

Saye Surparaka 151, 3. 
og Surpakarna 153, 5. 
wh,4 Sdrasena 150, 8; 152, 13. 
es Soshini 174, 17. 

we XS Sokakrit 266, 6. 

de sila 57,12; 120,9; 801,14. 
ds Sabala savala 30, 5. 

copies 298, 4. 

watt,i Siladanta 114, 3. 

o> svamukha 156, 2. 

uy ddnya 83, 1; 128,11. 

wrintt Saunaka 38,2; 54,10; 61,1; 191, 

5; 274,19. 
wary sveta 273, 6. 
wad eat svetaketu 316, 7. 
Slolat sydmiaka 156,19 col. 4. 
cava dita 85, 8; 124,13. 
sis sitfrisu 105, 5; 106, 2. 
wryranis sitadidhiti 105, 5. 

eixeis sitarasmi 105, 4. 

SoS stains sitamaydkhamalin 264, 12. 

Less Sesha 114,19. 

laa seshiga 118,15. 

Opn Sailoda 273, 14, 

waglinksds Saila-suti-pati 264, 12. 
Noygé 130, 1. 

S358 130, 2. 

ese vimsea (sic) 197, 6. 

3 var (2) 207, 6. 

ely § vadavamukha 298, 4. 

resedd 810, 21, 
a8 kamarupa 98, 12, 

os 

fon) 

293, 3. 

dee Sukla 266, 2.. | 

UsXy We sukla paksha 182, 2. 

esz? MX Suklabhumi 113, 4. 

oX* Sakuni 128,13; 295, 24; 296.4, 

‘4 wghth Sishyahita vritti 65,10. 

dat salya 64, 10. 

MW sildtala 1138, 8. 

Js salaka 119, 14, 

wlth 101, 21. 

whi srihatta 98,11. 
Sol Sloka 61,12; 64, 7.14; 66,4; 71, 

12; 84,14. 

cles Svasint? 129,11. 

4 Savara 154,11. 

O,Sedo Smasrudhara 158,16, 
re sami 272,18. 

vet Sami? Samin? 170,16; 171.4. 
oSaet 101,12. 20. 

cy santanu 52, 10. 
wis Satkha 55,4; 63,15; 171, 9. 
writ satku 79,14; 88,16; 84, 8. 
UKs 114, 6. 

(eae Sankara 46, 4; 275,13. 
wyS84% Sritgakarna (?) 114, 2. 

xiv jiia 105, 8. 

peVbgiss Sanaiscara 104, 6; 105, 14. 
o% Siva 188,11.14.19; 266, 5. 

| Qalyte svapada 114, 3. 

cy Sobhana 301, 10. 

pot Sddra 49,12; 50, 6.20; 60,17; 123, 

12; 191, 7.18.19; 200,12; 205,16; 
249,9; 250,19; 270, 20; 271,3; 276, 
14; 277,38; 278,15.18; 279,6; 281, 

vert Sront 128, 12. : 

csp srt 56, 20; 57,175 205,19; 296,23. 

Skuzs sripdla 78, 9; 120, 8; 301, 3. 

erie us Sriparvata 124, 4. 

39> (g,% sridhara 201, 13. 

p+ipt srimukha 265, 6, 

U4? (sy Sriharsa 205, 5.6; 206, 5. 

pH sastra 316, 4. 

Ui sasin 85, 6; 258, 7. 

U4 sishya 61, 19. 

wails susdnti 194, 6. 

Seas sidupdla 78,17; 172,13. 

rindi Sasideva (?) 65, 9. 

deere sasidevavritti (2) 65, 9. 

4 sisira 180, 16; 302,17; 305, 11.12. 

UeSLi sasilaksha 252,2 3. 

bodied SiSumara 114,9; 120,14; 121,3. 

oe Sushmin 126, 20. 

Lk Jiva BOL, 7. 

(5% Saka 152, 8; 155, 10; 205, 5.14. 03 
206, 1.12; 267, 3. 

weak Sakti 188,13.16. 

wreck saktimant (?) 128, 13. 

ALS sakti 57, 9.10. 

ebrAXas Saktimdn (?) 123, 17; 128, 9. 

Xe sakra 181,13; 261,23; 262, 4. 

5S sukra 64,3; 105,12; 181, 8; 197,18; 

296,12; 801, 11. 

S54 sakrdnala 266, 11. 

ob sukravara 104, 6. 

SKS sakakdla 185, 5; 195,15.20; 206, 
Pod. Os 20s 200s 2, 0 BLO, 7s 230 
145 226,23 22753: 6.11119; 228,o- 
229, 9.16; 268,9.11; 267, 4; 292,8; 

Mo. 

(odd Oy 

Gr, 

Nailed gatdnika 38,1. 

y* satadru 129, 6. 

cst 303, 1. 

Uvsatd winds Satasiras 114,17. 

Ww Sos satakratu 198, 8. 

pues Satadru 129, 6; 130, 7. 

wetas Satamdna (?) 151, 10. 

e* Suci 194,17; 197,18. 

as sikhi 131, 21; 194, 7. 

eis saka 226,17. 

Ww 222, 5. 

zis satdyus 309, 3. 

Awd shashtyabda 8, 1; 205,11; 268,1.3. 
12. 

U4 satabhishaj] 107,16; 148 fig.; 244, 
13; 245,16; 246, 20; 262,11. 

pe stidra (?) 155, 4. 

ey P% sSuddhodana 191, 6. 

wo satam 838, 14. 

> sara 86, 1. 

cpl srdvana 103,17; 106,12; 107,14; 
201,135 250,16; 285,16; 287,35 288, 
8. 

| 

pail wi 293, 10. 

Ges SUrpa 77,18. 

ee ee sarvavarman 65, 9. 

wis saradhina 156, 19. 

5% Sarad 180, 19; 302,14; 805, 7.8. 
AP Ltt t 100,19. 

| eXip 197, 12 Vv. ed Ut, 

| Kis sringddri 124, 13. 

 Sarabha 99.14. 

jis. 98, 8. 

cptenw simantonnayana 279, 2. 
wr sneha 126, 20. 

prota senamukha 202, 16. 
pig Saintara 73,13. 

Minw sindhu (?) 194, 8. 
wikkiaw saindhava 82,13. 
pin Saindhava 131, 6, 
Sinw 256, 8. 

ust Ve cow 79, 2.45. 6. 
ill sAtdtapa (?) 63,14. 
wile sdtaka 156, 7. 

Ole Sarada 56,16. 

Sa sdrada 157, 8. 

Sle sika 117, 4. 8. 

wISLe sikata 65, 8. 

glad ls Sdkatiyana 65, 8. 
we lt Sdka-dvipa 125,19. 
ile sakvara 120, 14, 

ete SAlmala 117, 5.7. 

2 jotlit sAlmaladvipa 127, 2, 
vail sAnti 64,14; 194,13. 
wraile sintika 155,16. 

xls 194, 7, 

(sdk 278, 7, 

ow Vv. + Siva 63,10; 173, 4. 
uni Sabda 21, 1. 

tt Savara (?) 150,14. 

J» sibira (?) 158, 8. 

wt Sibika 154, 7.10. 

asi Subha 174,16; 301,10. 
w Ken subhakrit 266, 6. 

see CDY. 93? 292, 4. 

wae shat 86, 8. 

wai 28755. 

Uh 93 

sik yaw Siiryddri 154, 8, 

8 eo Stryaputra 105, 15. i 

Sw = ow silryasiddhanta 78,11. 

wlys~ sauramdna 178,17.19; 179,10. 

cys Suvarna 76,16; 77,9. 

or cy stivarnavarna 113, 9. 

est? cys” Suvarnabhumi 157, 12. 

sAd> yyy Suvarnadvipa 103, 2. 

Ageing susainbhavya 194, 8. 

Soaw Ve Spit 

whJyw Saulika 153, 5. 

‘wXJow Sttlika 152, 6; 156,14. 

eso soma 105, 4; 126,1.8; 173,12; 252, 
10. , 

ew saumya 105,8; 106,6; 148,2; 174, 
10; 181,14; 266,9. 

y¥ py Somavara 104, 5. 

wit ee SOmapurana 63, 5. 

ArAagw somadatta 119,17; 120, 3. 

Pore somasushma 199,16. 

855 egw somagraha 106, 1; 302, 3. 

ssa pus SoMAaMantra 250, 1. 

| lito somandtha 56,13; 77,2; 793.4; 
92,20; 100,15; 102,10; 180,13; 202, 
8; 252,10; 263, 5.12; 28%, 3. 

veto Saumya 43, 17. 

dustew 800, 14. 

waraw sita 131, 2. 

Usligw sitdingu 85, 7. 

Wig crm setubandha 102,15; 159, 1. 

evan setuka 150, 4 coil. 4. 

& 
stn 262.2 v. he 

So; sairindha 157, 11. 
ow sairikiria (7) 154,15. 

10; 258,2: 268, 8; 264,17; 274,15; 
294, 11; 312,14. 

exehiw sitmhikd 254, 8. 

dkiw Stiikhala? 76, 1. 

jgkiw simhala 155, 2. 

wri Siw 131, 3. 

ANiiw sananda 166, 2. 

oli riiw sanandanitha(?) 166, 2. 

pevmahw Sanaiscara Vv. SWhaiss 

glen sahadeva 201,13; 202, 4. 

csslew 293, 3. 

Usb song Sahasramsu 87, 7. 

owt Sahasram 83,14; 84, 10. 

cre Sahishnu 197, 10. 

Lutew 99, 3. 

ww svati 107, 20; 148 fig.; 244, 3; 245, 
16; 250,20; 261,12; 262,15, 289, 
Ue 

Sowlw svddidaka 117, 9. 

eryle svirocisha 194, 5. 

Ut>aylw svarocisha 194, 5. 

wageisty svayambhuva 120,19; 194, 4. 

ssbaw Sovnaoe 102,12. 

wXyy suptaka 64, 11, 

Slew saubhigya 301, 9. 

sag sauvira 149,5; 152,6; 155,16. 

Slaw sutdla 118, 4. 

Sow savitri 76, 4. 

wigw stitaka 179,15. 

gam suri 105,11. 

yew saura 105,15; 218, 4. 

cy 9! ga saurdhargana 216, 7. 

aoe sirya 73,19; 87,5; 105, 2. 

hoa od 

135 245, 2.20; 247,15; 264, 7; 256,| yp 128,15. 

piiw 101, 2. 

sew samvatsara 8,1; 121,5; 205,11. 
13; 206, 9.21; 263, 1.13; 264, 10; 
267, 3. 5. 

waiw samvarta 317, 22. 

jog eyeew samnyamani pura 135,17. 20.21. 

Aiw sindhu 129, 6; 131, 2.5; 149,5; 152, 
5; 155, 12.15; 267,9; 270, 6, 

iw samdhi 6,21; 183,21; 184,16.21; 185, 
38; 186, 8.15; 187,10. 15. 17.18. 20; 
188, 1. 7; 198,17; 204,21; 209,19; 217, 
1; 265,16; 269,14; 305,5.9.11.13; 
308,11.18; 317, 23. 

| oli sanidhi udaya 184, 1. 

cya Xtw samadhi astamana 184, 1. 
eli 102, 12. 
plw Aim sindhusdgara 130,12. 

| KiNiw sandamsaka (?) 30,17, 

MPrAAw siddhinta 169,2; 185,16; 246, 
18; 398,15. 

iw sangha (?) 20,3. 

iw Simba 108,19. 

iw sanaka 166, 2. 

wiw Satkha 154,15; 261,13. 

gh skiw satkupatha 181, 15. 

wil Siw sankranti 176, 9; 292, 3. 11; 
296, 12.14 ete. 

crt Sw sainkarshana 199, 18. 

wai sinhaladvipa 102,13; 116, 7. 

waghiw samhitt? 56,17; 75,10.12; 78,6; 
79,20; 148,13; 149,7.19; 152.9; 153, 
1.13.14; 164,1.12; 165,1.8.12; 156, 
1.19.21; 164,2; 195,11; 196,12; 283, 

Gr, 

Lada surenu 125, 12. 

gu 128, 7. 

st sukshetra (?) 197,14. 

esqe S,du svargabhimi 131, 14. 
cys) Siw svargarohana 64, 20. 
16529, 75 

99 

Syd svartloka 22, 
116,3.5; 199, 2. 

wrw 261, 7. 

oye Su sukhdpura 135,18. 20.24. 

se sagara 10,14; 273,16; 286,17. 

x sarkara 113, 5 

ow sukriti 197,14, 

w Sw sukrita 131,21. 

pow Sukarman 301, 12. 

ea sugtiva 74, 19. 

PosK sukshetra 194,13. 

dh 181, 6. 

jw 131, 2. 

em Sama 187, 3. 

Skew sumAla 114,12. 

Warew samnvarta 63,14. 

10. 
8b, 22. 

ew smriti 63,13; 178, 9; 187, 1 
5.6.7; 198.19; 256, 2.7.9. 

wi,ew samvartaka 251,17. 

ctlobew Silivahana (?) 65, 14. 

lacw sumanas 127, 9 

gedsw 147,20 (bis). 

crew Sumantu 61, 20. 

ertew samatata 1538, 

yoww samudra 85,16; 

sew Suma 153,2:; 261,16 

eXeew samuhaka (?) 131,18. 

ie cf. ust 292, 8. 

shaew sumedhas 197, 10. 
44% 

115, 10; 

4; 188, | 

Miy 

| 

\ 
} 

ge 202 5 

188, 11; 

488, 1. 7. 

| mile Sw sudhbarmatman 194, 14. 

oo surd 117, 5 
6 col. 3, 
“Suv surdshtra 155, 16. 

lw surdshtra a 

Sep? atte 267, 9 
soya es 262 
yw sirva (?) 128,14, 

sarpis 117, 6. 

sarvarit 266, 2. 
sarvadharin (!) 265,15. 
daw sarvatraga 194, 14. 
enFw sarvajit 265,15. 

bP sw sarvadharin 265, 15. 
does 273, 13. 

om sarayU 129, 7; 278, 13. 
law Saryati 194, 10. 

uv suvasé 128,11. © 

7; 2738,9. 

7; 258,13. 

| Adwow sarasvatl 251, 8. 

UOT 114, 5 

Aw 102,13; 103,11; 159, 2. 
| ypw saraytt 129, 7; 130,19. 

15; 174,7; 182,21 
294,14; 298, 1. 

i gay» Surejya 265, 5 

LAG siddh4nta 66,10; 78, 10.18; 74, : 
15.16; 79,14; 110,10; 188, 9; 172.1: 
211,15; 218, 8; 228, 2. 
SALPAw siddhantika 206, 7; 227, 18. 
Urilarw sandhyainsa 187, 15.17.18.20; 

cawow sarasvatl 129,7; 180,15. Bue 

aS srutayas? 75,19; 169,17. 21; 
205,12; 261, 1 

152. 

170, 

ww bist 79,2. 5. 6. 

otusw svayambhu 199, 12. 

com sattva 20,3; 199, 21; 308, 2.3.6. 

enw satya 75,13; 197,138. 

caw shashta 296, 21,22, 

vam sita 105,12. 

Jliw sutala 118, 8. 

irate tamasa (!) 194, 7. 

iw sutapas 197, 17. 

cndiw gatadyumna 194, 9. 

ow sattra 174, 12. 

al pha sthirarasi 305, 16/17. 

spew stri 64, 14. 

Sixx gitakdla 180, 14. 

ow sutala 113, 8. 

WSyliw satyaloka 115,14; 116, 3.4; 119, 
ty 

waskw stambha 197, 6. 

ou sutaya 197,16. 

wrkw saptama 295, 22, 23. 

seiw satya (7) 197,14. 

gu sahya 123, 17. 

ayts sedrvart (!) 197, 6. 

gee sukha 185, 16. 

rd siddha 45,15; 119,6; 123,21; 18%, 
17.18; 188,1; 301,12. 

ptldw saddsiva 183, 2.6.13.16. 

wid 128, 17. 

rw sudivya 194, 6. 

sgrw siddhapura 183,18; 134,13; 157, 

Oe 1 4s 

S Slow siddha-matrika 82, 8. 

srw siddha 301, 8. 

lnm siddhdrtha 266, 15. 

24 

me 

wraSlw siketa 153, 4. 

dlw silva 150, 6. 

coilw siyalkot 103, 6. 

csi salva 152, 17. 

ew siman 62,17. 

das plw sAmaveda 61,18; 62,16.18; 198, 
18; 303, 4. 

Ainlw simanta 208, 6. 

wilw simba 57, 6. 

cle esl sdmbapurina 63, 5. 

53 sslw sdmbapura 149, 8. 

Alyyyg lw simbapuruyatré 290, 15. 

wrilw 181,11; 292, 5. 

cSslw simmkhya 4,18; 14,20; 24,1; 31,7; 
32,3; 37,8; 40,6; 41,2; 45,1; 63, 
Ah 

sl 130, 2. 

why sdyaka 86, 4. 

slaw subdhu 197, 9. 

oye Sivapura 131, 5: 

cnw Savitri 105, 20;. 106, 9.14; 199, 
12. : 

waa saptan 86,12. 

linw savita 262,13. 

zw sphutdyus 309, 17. 

ust) wauw saptarshayah 195, 8; 197,3.5. 

iS can taptakumbha (?) 30, 2. 

yp Siprd 129, 11. 

ura sparsa 21, 2. 

Seip 128, 8. 

co Savana 197, 13. 

| 
stew 128, 7. 

2 len sabhd-parva 64, 8. 
woes subhdnu 265, 11. 

Gy 

any 194, 8. 

yz) Yaivata 194, 8. 

wip, raivataka 155,15. 

dea, revati, 107,19; 146,2.3; 148 fig.; 
178, 7; 186,10; 2338,6; 244,16; 245, 
2; 246,21; 262,14; 287,8; 288,19; 
316, 5. . 

wrdys, revanta 57,17. 

lj 287,13. 

wS5)3 jringa 165, 7 

ps yama 85,10; 157,12. 

cyXas yamokoti 133,17; 184, 5.13; 136, 
1B hoe. 2) 4. Ge 

weds 273, 6. 

MIM; 131, 5. 

wo; yuika 77, 7. 

S93 yoga 8,18; 298,19; 

lj 85 yogaydtra 75,17. 

pylw savitri 262, 13. 

299, 1. 

wn sdvarni 194, 11. 
cyl sivana 167, 1. 
or 9) ppl sivanthargana 216,12. 
o opt sivanamdna 178,17; 179.1. 14. 
gyPilw sAitavihana 65, 15. 
wrilw satyaka 194, 8. 
olw sadhya 301, 9. 
cybSolu sidhdrana 266, 9. 
yhw 54, 9. 
Jol lw sirdvalf 75, 15. 
iytw sdrpa 181,9. 
wail sirasvata 76,1; 151, 4: 
yw, lw SArasvata 199, 12, 
aij Sle 290, 3. 
ble sdgara 85, 22. 

lf 

273, 9. 

Fo. 

ATS, 267, 7. 

uy Tamana 150, 6. 

aay ramyaka 124, 14, 

“54, rinajyeshtha 199, 14, 

3, randhra (?) 86,19, 

eS, ranka 94, 12.15. 

uA?) 130,19. 

yyer?, 100, 16. 

2) rupa 21,2; 67,8; 85, 8. 

Kory Gry 288, 7. 8. 

wy, ripaka 151, 9 

| Ais, rodhakrit 266, 9. 

oy taucya 194, 16. 

x Tudhira (?) 30,14. 

dy taudra 174, 9; 181, 8; 266, 15; 816, 
5. : 

#9, rodha 29, 21. 

a rodhini 174,10. 

L395) rirdhvabahu ( (sic) 197, 9. 

Uy 131, 5 

yy) Taurava 29, 20. 

wy, romaka 78,19; 183,18. 

WLP Kw wKay, romakasiddhanta 73, 14. 

Jrie (ety) rumi(?) mandala 181, 20. 

toy 77, 3 ff. 

Ss rohini 107, 9; 148 fig.; 200,15; 233, 
6; 243,6; 247%, 7.9; 249,10.14.45; 
250, 2.5.20.21; 251,11.13; 252,6: 
262, 4; 286, 11.14; 287, 6; 289, 5 

uw, rohitaka 159,7; 162,14 

tdty raibhya (?) 194,16. 

“rtd, Talvata v. Gea, 194, 8. 

sy raibhya (?) 194, 16. 

ory Fenu 77,6. 

cst, rajan 207,14; 208,1. 

) ravi 85,12; 105,21; 106, 8; 173,15. 

, rity 180,11.15.17.18; 182, 5.6.7; 

302, 138. 

etPr5, ritadhdman 194, 15. 

sy ratha 202,17. 

oD rajas 20,3; 77, 6; 199,21; 303, 5. 7. 

@ ric 61, 21. 

oy rishabha 155, 4. 

pote oc, rakta-bhimi 113, 5. 

eX, rishisa 164,14 col. 4. 

3%) Tudra 46,4; 87,3; 178,4; 188, 12, 
15; 261, 3; 262,6; 272,12. 

sao) rudraputra 194, 14.15, 

Ai},9o, rudhirandha 30, 11. 

us) rasa 21,3; 67,14; 86,6; 92,15; 105, 
oi 

dilw, rasdtala 113, 9. 

ga, rasdyana 39,16; 92,14.18; 93,5.21. 

p45 vyalw, rasdyana tantra 74,18. 

uw, rishi 45, 14.16.17; 51,21; 68,6; 76, 
3.4; 201,19. 

wiv) rishabha 251, 15. 

whi. Udy rishya-sringa 197, 12. 

wKay 128, 9. 

JM, rishikulyd 128, 4. 

est, rasmi 85, 9. 

Ueshai) rishikesa 201, 14. 

Symadyy rishyamuka 154,13. 

Kus, rigveda 61, 6.18; 303, 6. 

waS, rakta 105, 7. 

GS, raktdmala 93, 11. 

re AS, rikshavant (?) 128,17; 128, 11. 

ere 

wWead devika 129, 7.. 

aS ga> devakirti 76,1. 

SeJet> devaloka 311,19. 

pean devamantrin 105,11. 

se dvipaka(?) 103, 3 ff. 

yo devagriha 191,11; 287,18; 289, 
15. 

pbs’ upto 108, 7. 

HbyF setd 103, 6. 

Ayge devejya 105, 10. 

sil, ratri 182, 1. 

usyelel, 102, 3. 

Wy gi, rajarshi 45, 17. 

cst}, 100, 21; 102, 2. 

syst) 99, 4, 

3, radha (?) 114, 8, 

es%;!, rAjadharma 64, 15. 

oss!) 801, 8. 

oil) Tajanya 156, 14. 

| satel rashtra 164,7; 157, 12. 

Uys, pragjyotisha 150, 5. 

ueiS], rikshasa 43,17.20; 44, 2.8.15; 

45,3; 114,6.9.11.14. 16.18; 128, 15. 

18; 124, 4; 204, 12; 266, 11. 

rama 46,14; 56,18; 58,16; 79,11; 

102, 16.20; 129, 5; 158,13; 159, 1. 2; 

160,3; 187, 12; 190,21; 199, 5; 204, 

12.13.16, 185 201.4. 

cals}, rdmayana 159, 2; 160,3; 204, 13. 

ral, 128,17. 

teal, rdmesvara 102,14,15, 

<> sl, rahu-cakra 146, 6. 

op! sel, 75, 5. 

‘ws! ravana 190, 21; 204,12. 

el 

Cr 

pee domba 49, 10.16. 

slo 101, 1. 

ez? dvipa 6,5; 80,6: 
a 

Ut,laso divdrsa 154, 17. 

luo divakara 105, 2. 

wradlesd devanika 194, 14. 

olga diptimat 197, 12. 

ered devaka 168, 2; 178.9; 186,1; 187, 
15. 

zo devala (?) 64, 3; 102, 6.10; 312,15. 

wagd daitya 114, 5. 11. 13.16.18; 118, 
19; 128,15; 124,1; 138,15; 186, 8; 
140, 8.9.15; 184, 3; 254,8; 256, 8; 
272, 7. 

pila daityantara (?) 183,16. 

plo wae daityaddnava 44, 12. 

m2 S20 dirghagriva 156, 15. 

uas So dirghakesa 156, 18. 

ow 0 dirghamukha 156,17. 

pPimgo desdntara 160,13; 161,16. 

enhXio dikshita 49,15. 

wrgad 92, 

a2 deva 44, 6.10; 45,6.8; 46,11; 76, 

5; 84,2; 128,14; 124,1; 125, 21; 

126, 6. 9; 127,20; 183,11.14; 186,7; 

168, 2.4.16; 180,16; 282, 2; 288, 9; 

251, 7; 202, 59.025 14097.149, 

20. 

“ 

wArdgto devapati 105, 11. 

carPs says devapurohita 105,10, 
920 daivata (?) 194,15. 

Geigzo deva + Vsthd 287, 9. 
(Aawond deva -- Vsvap 286, 19. 

wring pity evasreshta 194,15. 

ee 

116,18. 21; 133, 

e;%> dharma 20,3; 64,2; 121, 4; 145,18. 
21). ( i 

3*2 ps3? dharmaputra 194, 13. 

wih @%> dharmasavarni 194, 14. 

cy% dharmaéranya 152, 12, 

| alls 100, 20. 

| 929 dhanu 79,11; 1€8, 17; 806, 2. 

gy? dahana 85, 19. 

vy? dhanya 12%, 1. 

| s#90 dhanamjaya 199, 14. 

| euios dhanishtha 107,15; 145,22: 148 
fig.; 244,12; 245,91; 247, 5; 262,10; 
263, 15.17. 

wre9> 131, 4. 

sly 290, 12. 

| Bo 86, 14. 

re dasama 295,18. 19. 

'yga dhivara (?) 131,12. 

“ale dvapara 61,5; 76,3; 187, 8.17; 188, 
1.3; 190, 19,21; 199,6.7. 9.20; 205, 
4; 291.6. 

yhoo dvara (?) 101, 13. 

unalandsld 807, 10. 

(ito tvashtri 173,17. 

Blyo dvadasa 295, 20. 24. 

use 286, 2. 

Bor» 99, 7. 

0 tvashtri 106,19; 262,14; 265,14. 

iy? tvashtri 181, 6. 

rigs p90 65, 9, 

was divaspati 194,16. 
olga? 305, 17. 

9° 98,10. 

J 2 dasam 83, 14, 

wAto dushyanta 286,5, — 
Sat daseruka (?) 152, 3. 
So dis 87, 1. 

MSS 308, 9. 

y 

Uso daksha 27, 3; 63,14; 145,18; 194, 

2) 
x2 Usso dakshaputra 194, 15. 

ww4S0 takshaka 114,7; 123,20; 261,9. 

bs Uso dakshagola 180, 8. 
vysSo dakshina 145,10; 146, 7. 
cyto dakshindyana 180, 4.18. 
rato 272, 8. 

wate dilipa 286, 5. 

ug) 174,15. 

ume dimasa, divasa 182, 1. 

oo damana (?) 126, 20. 

peso 101, 4; 108, 16; 163, 5, 
pio dantura 153,13. 

gy dantin 86,16. 

ASS danda 156, 21; 250, 1. 
ado dundubhi 266,17. 

S39 dandaka 151, 4. 

cySrso dandakavana 155, 6. 
Orso 286,17. 

sso dhanainjaya 114, 4. 

cies dhatri 106,10. 14. 15; 265, 6. 

jbleo dhatri 178, 11. 

ples dhatri 119, 2. 

6 dhard 98,19; 99,8. 10. 11. 
cy dharant 85, 9. 

Jlos 99, 1. 

eS dhaman 197, 8. 

wep 

pt¢d,o tridhdman 199, 12. 

| ope) duryodhana 64, 10. 

yy dardura Lb4, 3. 

3,9 darada 131, 5. 

MAH, drishadvat! 129, 9. 
cx, dhrishta (7) 194, 10. 
yo durga 128,15; 151, 5. 
mS yo draikshana 76, 21 ff. 
4,0 durlabha 207, 2; 229, 8. 
wo durmati 266, 15. 

9 dramida 155,18. 

Ji,0 drihdla (?) 152, 9. 

? nyo 288, 20. 

Jy 130, 3, 

Y»,> dravida 102,13. 

py dravida 98, 5. 

(S9)° dravida 82, 14. 

Vio» dravidadesa 82,15. 

co? drona 64, 10.12; 77,12; 126, 15 
197,12; 199, 16; 202, 12.13; 261 

I #8. 

so SOL, 8, 

oso drekkdna 307, 5. 

dubws 308, 9. 

cand 79,11. 

wo dasra 85,10; 178, 8. 

to dis 85,21. 

eyo dasdrna 128, 12. 

ysaaed dasapura 154, 17. 

1S 12, 
pew od dasasahasra 84, 4, 
| wriyRid dasagitika 75,7; 193, 20. 

ole Ailes dhydnagrahddhyaya 74, 13. | yal us) dasalaksha 84, 4. 

wd dasaratha 56,18; 102,16; 158, 13; 

GL 

, 

bd 

? 

UR 

Gey dipdpa 131,21. 

bo divakara 76,1; 106,18. 

39 OS divyavarsha 182, 8. 

wad v. 36 20,19. 

Sy> wo divyayuga 187, 8. 

ume divasa 182.1. 

ily? wo divydhoratra 167,15. 

2d divya 20,19. 

wilweo divyatattva 75,10. 

‘aa dvipa 154, 4. 

crtea? dvaipdyana 199, 17. 

wo dyuti 197, 16. 

2 datto(-ni) v. Gti 197, 6. 

w> dyutimat 197,13. 

siaod dvijesvara 106, 2. 

oo dadhi 85, 24; 117, 7. 

plw oo dadhisdgara 74, 20; 11%, 
7. 

Arid dadhimanda 117, 6. 

to 212, 21, 

pelo 218, 1. 

glo dravina 251,17. 

wy dhruva 119,14; 120,18; darva 151, 
14 col. 4; darbha(?) 268, 8. 

sod durvasas 201,19. 

cet? darbha 267,17. 

wo dhriti 801, 13. 

xu), oo dhritarashtra 52,13. 

ead 0 dhritaketu 194, 12. 

Ay 187, 3. 

oo, dhritimat 197,17. 

pal 

> divya 168, 5.17; 185, 12.18; 186,16; | 4> jyaishtha 106,10; 181, 8; 201,11 ‘ 
187, 8,18; 188,9.10.14; 204, 4; 312, 

288, 6; 294,16. 
Julie 308, 13. 
mie 101,3.11.15; 129,6; 180,5; 168, 
oD. 
cee Jaimini 61, 20; 68, 19. 
Seon jimita 251, 17. 
gree 102,13. 
oye cina 181, 4; 157,18. 
wine jayanta 114,13; 286,12. 
cree) gee clranivasana 157,16. 
js khart 78, 13. 
wWwlsy was shat paficdsika 75,16, 
y™ khara 265, 15, 
w,> kharva 83,16; 84,11. 
we 86, 7. i 

| use khasha 158, 6 col. 2. 
> khadira 261, 1. 

| xP! V. yl 85, 9. 

wyld darva 157,14, 

| dyfo 298, 15. 

‘sel ddsameya 156, 14, 

sawlo ddsera(ka) 156, 7. 

cy lo désdrma 154, 8. 

whssts dikshinitya 151,14. 

lo damara 157,15. 

jeeald dmodara 201, 16. 

wito dinava 114,8; 127,20; 186, 8; 168, 
3. 

Silo danavaguru 105,13. / 

P> vio dana-dharma 64,15. 

| Kilo 99, 14, . 

pio dfinava 114, 2; 118,19; 124.1. 

uss8lo 174, 19. 

Se1:3, 

See ja 108, 15. 

So> yuga 147,18; 149, 9; 179,11; 185, 
10; 187,19; 188, 7. 8.20. 21; 189, 2. 
20; 192, 1.2.5; 199, 8; 203,15; 204, 
4.22; 211,4; 212,3; 218,11; 260, 2- 
891, 4.7.8.10.13. 14.16. 

Sem yooa 263, 11.12.16.18; 264, 5.14; 

266; 267, 2; 300, 26; 301, 1. 

9 
ba 

265; 
Pag in 

poise yogin 291,19. 

Je cola 154, 9. 

See caulya 150, 2. 

wJe> colika (?) 153, 9. 

ose yamund 97,12.20; 129,7; 130,16; 
152, 6; 200,17. 

us> yuvan 265, 6. 

wae jiva 105,10; 181, 15. 

Skyae jayapala 65,11; 208, 6. 

prea jivasarman 75,13; 78,11; 289, 
6°12. 

BLO ae jivaharant 174, 16. 

wae jita 108, 20. 

em caitra 103,19; 106,8; 107,2; 107, 
20; 181,6; 186,10; 201, 9; 206, 13. 
18; 20%, 4; 22 226, 11. 14.16; 
227,41; 263,7; 2860, 15.16; 286,18; 

wkd by 
287, 14.21; 291, 9.17; 294, 16. 

) 

etait 

wrtiom inom caitracashati 287, 21. 

Sam caitraka (?) 194, 5. 

cp ata caitragni 197, 8. 

wae jyeshtha 107,10; 148 fig.; 172,11; 
244.6; 245,5.16; 262, 4. . 

ia 39 

Cr 

erage candraparvata 273,10. 

Slay ri> candrabhdga 129, 6. 

Reyeces candrapura 153, 4. 

sayeim candravira (?) 205,12. 

gate candramina 178, 17; 
12. 

ose candand 129, 10. 

179, 2. 

ic 114, 6. 

Mis jangala 150, 7. 

Selim janaloka 115,12; 119,11; 166, 
Ais 

ole 77,16. 

yee chidra 86,18. 

lee 180, 5; 152, 6; 155,16. 

jae yava 76,19 ff.; 77,3.8. 

(ge jaya 265,17. 

SNe 298, 5. 

em caturtha 295, 19.20. 

—> jyoti (rdhdman) v. plo 197, 8. 

ye jyotisha 152, 11. 

evnigr jyotishmat 197,13. 

soe 103,16. 

So yaudheya 156, 17. 

Boos caturdasa 295, 22.24. 

yy> cola (?) 98,5; 102,14. 

crlys> cidimani 75, 20. 

| gis yojana 73,16; 80,2.17; 110,16.17. 
ba; 246,155 216, 55120215, 187,21; 
139,25), 380-35. PDs) PER 13. 45, 
17; 143,20.21; 144,1.2.3; 147, 7.49; 
148,7.9; 159,1.3. 4.10; 160, 10.16. 
19; 161,21; 205,21; 232,24. 26; 238, 

| 3.7.22.24; 234,1; 236, 11.14.16.18; 

wld ake jalapradinika 64, 12. 

wale 66, 8. 

wadthe jala-tantu 100,10. 

cnXl> jalaketu 816, 6; 317,9. 

ce jvalana 67,13.17.21; 69,8.10.13; 
70,12; 71,1; 85, 20. 

e> yama 57,18; 63,14; 135,18; 146, 
2.4; 178,16; 258,17; 262,16. 

ee cami 202,15, 

cp er jamadagni 197,11, 

de> yamala 85, 11. 

o> yamunad 159, 8; 162,11; 284,12. 

uye> yavana? 206, 3.4. 

cy Jina 57,14; 121,17. 

la gont (?) 77,18. 

oy 4> jandrdana 126, 19; 127, 2. 

wdc jambu 117, 3; 267, 9. 

av Grice jambudvipa 121,13; 
128,18; 147,17; 148, 2, 

pico 98,9. 

125, 9; 

Isic yajnopavita 89, 21, 

Ses calicika 155, 10. 

(SF4> yajnopavita 267, 15.18.19; 270, 
Ulead 

dic chandas 65, 21, 

JIdki> candila 49,10; 174, is; 19), 7; 
271, 7.9.12; 277, 16. 

y= candra 65.7; 85,6; 104, 21; 105, 
4; 106, 4; 213,3.4; 251,16. 

Trim 99,3, 

oy Phi candrihargana 216, 9. 

SPT yim candrabhagd 101, 3; 129,6; 130, 
9D. 

43 * 

md 

297, 4. ae 
ide yudishthira 172,9.16; 195, 14.21; | 
196, 3. 8: 201,13; 202,11,13; 204, 
13. 
Ui, cararasi 305,16. | 

stse carshayah (sic) 197,10. 

5S. caraka 76,3. 4; 77,12; 192,5. 

cya; jarmapattana 154, 3. 

dec carmadvipa 153,13. 

wX3 0. carmaranga 156, 14, 

SAK > carmakhandika 152, 1 col. 2. 

Aiac carmanvati 129,10. 

| era carmanvat! 128,17; 270, 6. 

Aay> yajurveda 61,18; 62, 4; 308, 

| vie 

gw> yasodd 200, 13.16.18. - 

xv Cashaka 171, 4. 

crrgen yasovati 156, 12. 

wae cashaka 169,20; 170, 5. 

o> jishnu 73,15; 133,20. 

swim cashaka 170, 10.17.20; 228, 6; 230, 
4. 

scam 192, 2; 199, 7. 

us&> cikitsd 179,16. 

wamik> yuktas-ta[tha] 197,18. 

se> cakra 55,4; 251,16. 

plow <> cakrasvdmin 56, 12.15; 252, 

1 

UAX> yaksha 43,17. 20; 44,2.15; 45,3: 
123,19; 131, 7. 

UkK> cakshu 131, 2. 4. 

se UX> cakshubhadra 261, 13. 

wSK> v, Arr 169, 20. 

ex> yajna 121, 4. 

Henze jita 197,18. 
une jatt 200,12. 

pla jatddhara 154,11. 

puldan jatisura 157, 5. 

p> jathara 153, 3. 

pm citra 107,19; 148 fig.; 173,17; 248, 
165 262,14. 

> chatra 306, 1. 

> cadur (?) 265, 17. 

Ait A> citrdigada 261, 6. 

duyt 128,13. 

ore citrabhanu 265,11. 

Sym to caturyuga 7,1.2.10; 166, 4179, 
11; 182,9; 185,12.13; 186,1.11; 187, 
7.9; 188.4.19.20; 189,2.6.16; 190,13; 
192, 5; 193, 18.20.21; 199,10; 208, 
14; 204, 4.9.16. 18. 20; 205,1; 208, 
13; 209,15—20; 210,41; 211, 4.2.5. 
19; 212,1,3; 214, 21; 216,18; 216, 
Pe 21 eh 3.18 218, 23 22I, 16; 

223, 4; 224, 2; 226, 6.7; 230, 7.9.17. 

18; 231.4; 236,19; 287,27. 28; 238, | 

Lis 291, 4. 9.10. 14; 
19 

y»> chittor 99, 9, 

260, 1; 

wit citrasdld 127,12. 

cate citrasena 194, 16. 

eS k> citrakdta 128,12; 154, 6. 
i> jituma 108,17. 

Gols 98,21. 

poS> jajemow 97, 21. 

sisi> 101, 2. 

Sy > (7) 99, 5. 

Kishe catushpada 295, 15; 296, 

292, 

Ma 

Hei tola 76,16; 77,5. 
| hades 102, 10. 

| 54 thohar 94, 8. 
yao 102, 5, 

syed tre'tovon ? 99, 2. 

sap tarpura /?) 151, 8. 

ep SS 158, 14. 

while jdtaka 48, 21; 75,13. 

3S wl> jétakarman 279, 3. 

gol> yddava 64,19; 201,17; 202, 6. 

AAS yo ybo (sic) dhruvaketu 316,10. 

ple jagara 113,9; 152, 7. 

Uxsisl> cikshusha 194, 9. 

wraisl> cikshusha 194, 9. 

WLSl> yajnavalkya 62, 7.9.10.13.15; 
285,21. 

PrAsl> jdlandhara 100, 20. 

el> ydmya 181, 6. 

sdlele 290, 9.13. 

ste cdmara 67, 8. 

o> yamuna 156, 14, 

dial> cAmunda 58, 3. 

| Sd» al> ydmyodadhi 154, 12. 

pale 174, 20. 

wy ele yajnavalkya 64, 3. 

gil> cfindra 65, 7; 105, 8. 

wi pil janujangha 194, 7. 

| dMil> jangala 152, 2. 

2S eygl> ydvana koti (?) 158, 13. 

| Kul cram cipitandsika 156, 5. 

| > yavasa (?) 131, 3. 

| cramPpcm 261, 10. 

| 

‘eys> yavana 73,19; 75,16; 114,9; 152, 

| °45 155, 6. 

Cr 

Pye 

“a3 trinetra 157,17. 

sid tritiya 295,18.19. 

URS, (55 294,1. 

Kam 6,5 293, 21. 

phd taskara 314, 11. 

Us tishya 187, 8. 

ATLAS 127, 2. 

d4,X3 takshasila 156,10. 

shy GS 75,18. 

OS tulddi 180, 9. 

3 tulad 78,15; 108, 7.15. 

cooks 98,11. 

waht 151, 6. 

# tamas 20,3; 118,13; 199, 21; 303, 
4. §&. 

umes 128,12. 

cd tumbavana 154,10. 

ead tumbura 151, 9. 

p43 tantra 74,15.16.17.18. 

ess dhanushmat (?) 156, 4. 

sy tantuka (?) 100,10. 

pois tuigabhadra 128, 8. 

co IMS timingilasana (?) 155, 7. 

cys4i tankana 154, 8. 

om tangana 157, 9, 

yi 98,13. 

heed 128,15. 

die taitila 295,18. 21; 296,19, 

Ss5 truti 170,12.13.16.17. jis ye Urge (St Tee 

4, 
ost 102, 6. 
cys tirana 265,11. 
ersiyt tvashtri 106,16; 259,12, 
45,3 taukshika 108,17. 
43 

gus trasaniya 174, 12. 
ia 128, 4, iar, 
Silja tripurantika 124, 5. 
i trivrit (2) 199, 14. 

<3 trivikrama 201, 11. 
gap tripurt 153,15. 

3 dhriti 88, 1. 

cyb>s trayyaruna 199, 14. 
vak>,5 trijagat 85, 17. 
Ski tiryagloka 29, 12. 
9,5 tridivé 181, 21. 

| SLs 128, 4, 

#3 trisirasl14, 8. 

JS,3 trikfla $5, 15. 

cS, turaganana 156, 22. 
wS J trikatu 85, 17. 
w 553 trigarta 152,3; 156, 21. 
wy ,5 triktita 124, 5. 

wp tarana 232, 16. 

| sl='5 tripaficdsat, cf. Sindht trevanjdha 
289,13. 
enckO5 294, 3. 

2,5 trayodasa 295, 21. 

953 98, 11. 

oop TULA. 

JSLim>s,t trilocanapdla 208, 6. 12. 

3-3 trayodasa 295, 22. 

2 s3 traipura 151, 6. 

wud treta 187, 8.16.21; 188, 3. 

S>las tretdyuga 126,11; 190,16. 21; 
199, 5.20; 204,11.14.15.17; 291, 6. 

rrisi tridiva 128, 13. 

OSL (5,5 307,13. 

crt 85,18. 

= 6 tilaka 92, 13. 

ia caste talikata 154,16. 
ol tilakuna (?) 152, 5. 
dt talahala 155, 16. 
pal tambiru 108, 16. 
li tamara 152, 6. 

os tamravarna 128, 6; 148, 1; 
Pk 

ol tomara (7) 131, 17. 

wi.Jab tamraliptika 150, 8. 

unali tamasa 151,10. 

whiXmali timasakilaka 814, 13. 

awmeli timasakflaka 312, 7. 

woke tamalipta 131,10. 

wrreheli timaliptika 158, 11. 

cn tamra (sic) 129, 9. 

wi sthina 149, 9. 

sib tina 100,16; 102, 12. 

xaii sthdnesvara 56, 12; 97,12; 100, 
20; 152,17; 153, 6; 159,8; 162,11.13. 
21; 168,15; 201,10; 252,13; 274,15; 
276,19. 

MS wast taptakumbha 30, ya 

y«ed tapasvin 197, 16, 

Sekai tapoloka 115,13. 

cys? tapana 85, 20. 

deed tapodhriti 197, 16. 

53 tapomiurti 197, 16. 

wad tithi 179, 2,14; 295,3; 298, 2. 

4x5 dhitapapa 129, 8. 

ees 005 tattvadarsi-ca 197,17. 

+5 tattva 22, 6; 88, 9. 

ors tithi 87,10. 

yg tukhara 131,4; 155,15. 

155, | i, 

weq 

git pisdca 43,17.20; 44, 4; 
312, 20. 

laa vaidikha 106, 9; 107, 8; 
201, 10; 263, 7; 285, 15; 
289,11; 291, 5; 204,17. 

pluins vaisvanara 85,19. 

Addis Vaishnavi 58, 2; 180, 20. 
crstsins vaisatpayana 61, 20. 
Eas vega 174, 13. 

wky vyakta 20, 8. 

was bhikshuka 82,16. 

cua? 128,12. 

Aylas 267, 7. 

vrwions vVenumatl 156, 7. 

154, 15. 
ule urs vedavydsa 199, 16. 
Mey phenagiri 155, 5. 

Xwins venumat! 129,11. 

sed dvitiya 295,17.18. 

we vend 128, 7. 14; 

oe vyaya 265,11. 
Soe 27 3, 8. 

| tz Pivara 197, 8. 

cyst? payoshni 128, 14. 

eens Vaivasvata 194, 10. 

wl tapt 128,14. 

e:* unl tipasdsrama 154,13. 
SG tdrakaksha 114, 8. 

56 tarakruti (?) 155, 6 

ose VSG tarkshyapurana 63, 6. 
#8 157,10; 232, 16. 

cs) tala 81,11. 

sal tikesvara (?) 102, 2; 206,15. 
Jb tala 79,19; 113, 3 ;.145, 10. 

181,7; 
288, 1.3; 

4 tha bhishmapaiicarAtr! 287,10. 

Cr 

45,7; 

gyted 180, 4. 

was Vedavat! 128,16. 

sida) vaidhrita 801, 14. 

wyru9 vaidhriti 
22, 

porns vedasmriti 128, 16. 

ers vidisd 128, 17. 

Vow vridika 151, 7. 

Use vaidesa 151, 2 

da veda 5,13; 14,6; 15,3; 19,16; 
42,20; 50,17; 

oe 176,12; 197,15 
199, 6. 3,9.17; 242, 163 
256, 1.8. 9; 268,3; 270,16; 271, 

18; 272, 6; are 
shins vedabihu 197, 9. 
crmhed vedasmriti 129, 9. 

cymhag vedasini 129, 10. 
side vedasri 197, 9. 
wolohes medhadhriti 197, 13. 
se paila 61,19. 
oye Viraficana 183, 3, 7. 
var 102, 10. 
Oye 174, 11. 
lore 16, th 
cytes? Virocana 198, 95 289, 17. 
Soa2 131, 9. 

quote Vaidirya 164, 14. 

Wail, cris vyastatrairagika 161, 8 

123,12; 
270, 
284, 

Us vaisya 49,4; 50,5; 60,17; 

155, 8; 249, 9; 250,19; 268,18; 
95 271,13 278,15; 279, 5.215 
0; 293, 18; 308, 3. 

288.5; 803, 1. 

mo 

30, 4 
60, 13.19; 68, 13.18; 
> 198,17; 
249, 8; 

A. 2 

aad vitasta 101,3 ; 

wea vokkaina 155,19. ie G (ea 
ing 275,17. 
aly. peukelaotis (?) 156, 12. 

Jy3 paurava 156, 19. 

299, 4.16.17; 300, 12.] ys) paulisa 73, 13; 183,93; 188, 5.11. 

os? Pavana 86,19. 

peigg pauindra 168, 55 314, 17. 
+e3 punarvasu 107, 12; 148 fig.; 233, 
6; 248, 9; 245,14; 262, 7; 286, 16; 
288, 14. 

SoPo2 290, 1. 

| extigg 290, 15. 

& vyaya 197,17. 

Sy bns vyadi 93, 1. 

uvtaa vydsa 50,18; 52,11.183 61,5; 63, 
15; 64, 3. 6; 65,1. 2; 81,18; 119, 7; 
172, 9.11.17; 178,9; 186,1; 195,4; 
197,12; 199, 6.10.17. 

JrXra onlas vyisamandala 119, 7. 

pasle vyighramukha 153, 17. 

ote vydkarana 65, 4. 

wlLaSlss BOO, 22. 24. 

wil vydghata 301, 9. 

ips dla: vydlagriva 164, 2, 

cyekilyy 128, 16. 

sua vipdsa 129, 6; 130, 6. 

pmsad Vaivasvata 135,16. 

129,65; 130,5; 289, 7. 

crag pita 127, 8. 

jaar viyat 85, 3. 

salina pitimaha 73,16; 183, 1. 
clyins 299, 3.16; 300,12.16.19. 
psq2 wee? pltabhimi 113, 6. 

poe 181,15 

Seng? bhimapdla 208, 7. 

gents bhimaratht 128, 7. 

DY) ara 131, 6. 

weags bhimasena 201,13. 

a bava 295,16. 20. 23; 296,12; 297, 7. 

dog pustaka 81, 16, 

ots2 pujjihanas 152, 2, 

#2 pushan 106, 16. 

on vodhu 166, 2. 

cx? bodhana 105, 8. 

yoo puru 194, 9. 

w5 $92 290, 11. ! 

93 plrva 145,11; 146,10; 250, 21, 

engtaeyyg purvabhadrapad’ 107,17; 120, 
10; 148 fig.; 244,14; 262, 12; 816, 5. 

Eb pirvaphalgunf 107,16; 146, 1; 
148, fig.; 244,14; 262,12; 266,18. 

bibs plrvashadha 107,12; 145, 22; 148 
fig.; 244, 8; 262, 6; 316, 5. 

UAD \y53 plirvadesa 82,15. 

U4y3 purusha 15,3; 19,19; 164, 8; 165, 
11; 169, 5.8.9; 177, 9.17.19; 182, 15; 
187,11; 193,21; 259, 20. 

sly? Uy5g purushdhoritra 169, 2. 

oye puru 194, 9. 

coe 131,18. 

y43,53 purandara 194,10. 

Aéy9¢ purnim’d 176, 7; 290, 21; 295, 23. 

oy53 paurava 157,15. 

Ug pausha 106,17; 181,15; 201, 6; 286, 
2; 287,11; 290,15 294, 16. 

eg pushya 107, 12.13; 243,10; 285,19. 

Uys pushan 106,15; 173.7; 181,17; 262, 

14. ; 

SS He wer 

Cr 

wry) Xe bhukti sphuta 295, 9. 

oi) gk bhuktyantara 295, 10. 

pda &Xeo bhukti madhyama 295, 9. 
waka bhavaketu 317, 12. 

SX bhagtratha 273, 16.20; 274, 5. 
de bhalla 157, 2. 

Juels bhillamala 73,15; 138, 20. 
ws 150, 5. 

tg pahlava 152,14, 

die vahnijvala 30, 16. 

Ag 287, 20. 

| sess bhipa 87, 13. 

ose ots 156, 9. 

S»J39¢2 bhuvarloka 22,165 115,9; 119, 6, 
US eyzy¢? bhuvanakoga 147, 3. 

»g bhuta 44, 4; 45, 8.13; 86, 2. 
942 bhautya 194, 17. 

)o2 S942 Dhitapura 156, 9 col. 4, 
33 bhautya 194,17. 

s*eiyes bhotesvara (?) 98, 14. 18; 101, 7. 
oot bhoja 151, 3. 

oot bhurja 81,13. 

see bhujaga 173, 5. 

cx*)5¢ bhurishena 194, 13. 
Syiego bhirloka 22, 16; 116, 2. 
vsyy¢3 bhuri 83,17. 

rw 45S'9e3 bhogaprastha 156, 16. 
cy 59¢2 bhogavardhana 151, 8. 
ert? bhaumya 194,17. 

levee bhaumya 105, 6. 

soerogs 99,11. 

crags 298, 21. 

eed bhishma 64,10. 

‘ase? bhima 208, 6. 

- s4slSlgs bhdgabhara (?) 217,19; 2938,1. 
2. 

wigs bhagavata 58, 20. 

Ste 178,18. 

ott? bhanu 105, 2; 106, 10. 
> yikes bhanuyasas (?) 74,183 75, 4. 

wastes 126,13, 

xly bhanu 87, 7. 

ss 288, 12. 

weLiles 99, 7.10. 

us: bhavishya 68,11. 

ures 98,11. 

oe bahudhdnya 265, 9. 

de bhattila 75,8; 300,14. 17. 

p42 bhadra 152, 8; 158, 3; 155, 13. 

uly bhadrasva 124,13. 

S6Hrxe bhadrakdra 150. 9. 

2 62,19. 

5b 543 bharadvaja 197, 14 ; 199,14. 

és 2 bharukaccha 154, 6, 

>> vahirgira 150,13. 

S»/5¢2 bhirloka 115,8; 119, 5. 

est? 261, 9. 

core? 258, 8, 

dst? bharanl 107, 21; 148 fig.; 248, 4; 
245, 16; 262, 16. 

go barygaza 100,16; 102,12; 180, 

18. 

ee bhaga 106, 13.15.18; 181,17; 262, 

11; 266,17. 

wakes bhagavati 57,3; 58,3; 287, 4. 21; 
288, 10. 

wrskgs bhagavant 63,10; 127, 7. 

ke bhukti 295, 9. 

were 

cs pandya 150, 13. 

fg 8d, 4. in 

cre vanardjya 157,16. 

ppttg 128, 5. e 

cy vanga 153, 17. 

Sika mufijdta? 75, 20. 

Sixty punyakdla 291,19. 20; 292, 1; 294, 
Pie ae Ane 

IM; piigala 66, 8.9; 266, 15. 

wikis pingalaka 156, 22. 

ist™43 vaiigeya 150, 2. 

crphedy (leg. cred) 817,16. 

ule? vanavdsi 99,2; 154, 9. 

Soda vanaugha 155, 12. 

a 131, 3. 

ueit¢es bhava 265, 6. 

Mile 103,15; 180, 7. 

Glas 100,17. 

sashes 82,12. 

yo? bhddrapada 106,13; 287, 5; 294, 
18. 

eagles bhadrapada 107,16; 172,12; 181, 
11; 200,15; 201,14; 206,13; 250, 
17; 285, 17; 286,13; 288, 15.17.19. 
21. 

oie bhara 78, 19. 

le bharata 7,7; 14,10; 56,15; 64, 6; 
65,1; 147, 4; 200,1; 208,16; 205,2; 
Q75,21; 277, 4. 

Uses Sls bhdratavarsha 124,15; 147, 4. 
17; 149,14. 

és sh; bhénukacchra 151, 2. 

+4) bhargava 64, 3; 105,12; 187,12. 

| tlgg 251,17. 

doty palola 157, 3. 

«oy puleya 151,7. 

Obes vimalabuddhi 75, 20. 

Syiges brdhmandbad 11, 4; 82,13; 100,18; 
162,18. 

gy? 185,19. 

wold; vdrdnast 98, 7. 

us vinadika 171, 4, 

wralts vindyaka 58, 5; 65, 1. 

22 vse Panaphara 306, 3. 

pobrty mufijadri 157,18. 

cg kse%y paiicdlan 181, 9. 

Sisev paiicaht (?) 295, 23. 

pis evs paficatantra 76, 7. 

3), ey paiicaratra (?) 287, 10.11. 

SAUPAW atx paiicasiddhantika 73, 17. 

wii ey paficasikha 166, 3. 

dehy 75,7; 128,13; 185, 4. 

silo gy palicamataras 21, Up 

AS ey paficanada 180, 7; 155, 2. 

crn? es paficahasta 194, 12. 

paeesy panchir 52,20; 130, 2. 

jetty 100, 19. 

ote paficama 295, 20. 21. 

potesy 102, 14.15. 

wiz vindhya 128,17; 124,5; 128,14; 

131,11; 153,14; 248, 5. 

diy pinda 252, 20. 

cis 303, 1. 

Siz pindiraka 261, 9. 

Waseda bandhujivaka $14, 3. 

jpwX8 vindusaras 273, 15. 

doadtg vindhyamuli 151, 2. 

nee 

ely plava 266, 2. 

wy balabhid (?) 265, 8. 

du balabandhu 194, 8. 

wily plavanga 266, 9. 

as valabhi 94, 7; 102,13; 205, 21. 

yeh balabhadra 74,17; 76, 2.10.14; 
110,20; 111,16; 120, 21; 121,17; 
122, 2; 128,8; 186,18; 187,5; 138, 
2.10; 140, 4; 141, 3.9; 162, 21; 200, 
13; 201,12; 236,14; 289,15; 291, 
19. 

Ak baladeva 57, 2. 

cre baladevapattana 155, 5. 

zy dv balirajya 289, 18. 

uly pulisa 73,19; 79,13; 80,15.21; 110, 
10; 183,9; 134,12; 188,9; 134,12; 138, 
9; 189,13; 160,19; 161,2; 162,14; 
170, 7; 172,1; 186,14.16.19; 189, 
12.16.17.18.19; 204,19. 20.21; 212, 
2; 215,18; 218,2.8.9; 228,1.8.12; 
225,6; 230,13; 233,24; 286,9; 237, 
27; 238, 1; 239, 3.11.15; 247, 7; 291, 
14; 293,1.3; 294,6; 299,16; 300, 
16. 

cwehs pulastya 195,16.19. 

DilPrAw Cw pulisasiddhanta 78, 13. 14; 
84,10; 188, 2; 169, 9. 

US plaksha 117, 4. 

dy phalgulu (sic) 156, 8. 

Aly vilambin 266, 2. 

) ity pulindra 150,15. 

| git pulinda 181, 9. 

a3 pulaha 195,17.19. 

nh pahlava (?) 131, 4. 

GL 

4; 182,13; 
193, 21; 
218, 3; 232,11.14; 233, 5; 252, 3; 
261, 16; 272,7; 285,21; 286, 11 

sa visve|devih] 173, 10; 262, 7. 

uilpty visvivasu 266, 6 

sys visvedevih 180,20; 181,9. 

cyyte 85, 4. 

yyy visvartipa 314,14. 

Sa Visvakarman 261, 27. 

j% vikarin 266, 2. 

oy 2 bhagapura 149, 8. 

eK 298, 24. 

er vikaca 314, 10. 

3@ vakra 105, 6; 251, 16:' 

ww vikrita 265,15. 

poe Vikrama 265, 9: 266, 11. 

wow,X vikramaditya 93, 1.16; 205, 5. 8 
9.11.14.17.19; 206,53; 267,1. 

uw paksha 69, 6. 8. 9.133 70,125 (B1915 

85,12; 182, 2. 6; 
weKs 300, 18.24, 
aX 102, 114 
XQ vighatika (?) 169, 20. 
dy bali 56.18; 62, ie; 

198, 9.155; 204,9; 274, 20; 
dy pala 77,10; 78,18, 

Je bala? 309, 1. 
wily paldsa 268, 8. 

260, 3; 302,16 

289, 17. 

cy palisini 128, 10. 
ws baldhaka 251,15. 
2% phillaur 100, 20. 
wt: vallabha 94, 7.16.17; 
206, 2.3.6. 
42 * 

205, 5. 20; 

ah 

187, 7; 190,17; 191, 16; 
194, 3.12; 199,17; 204, 2.10; 

114,18; 194,11; 

poise vishnucandra 73, 1 

13.16; 298, 1 
5y% visvadevah 180, 20. 
cya visasana 80, 9 
palates visvamitra 119,20; 164,15; 197%, 
Vk. 
witty visva’ 87, 8. 
sso pushkara 117, 9; 
261, 8. 
54) vasukra 61, 8. 22. 
wrt Kay pushkaradvipa 127,12.19; 142, 
4; 143, 18. 
dXy pushkala 127, 1. 
wa visalyakarana 126,15. 
om vishnu 19, 15; 28,19; 46,7; 56,19; 
57,6.7; 58,20; 68, 6.9.12.14; 108,17; 
106, 8.9.12; 107, 2; 114,19; 121, 6; 
126,10; 127,11; 181,10.15; 184, 9. 
11.14; 191, 20; 195,7; 197,15; 199, 
4.8; 201, 9; 254,8.9.10; 261, 2. 22. 
*2 cys vishnuputra 194, 13. 

127,15. 28h, 2; 

XY cyt Vishnupada 2738, 8. 
olt o#y vishnupurana 28,17; 29,18; 31, 
20; 61,5; 68, 7.8.13; 118.1; 115, es 
117, 2; 118,14; 124,4; 126, 12.19 21; 
127,7.10.18; 181, 20; 165, 21; 194, 3: 
195,35; 197,1; 199,4; 281,17; 253,18; 
268, 2.11; 269, 2 

2; 138, 441; 

189,14; 256, 3 

| urns, sissies (?) 89, 18. 

f° cys vishnudharma 27, 2; 38,1; 64, 
1; 105,17; 106,6; 107, 1.2; 120,21; 
144,6; 145,17; 164,7; 167,11; 168, 
14; 169,55. 174,21; 179,1.3.9; 181, 

tj. 99, 4.5.8; 100, 14.16. 

git Vajra 118, 7. 

Asi oa proshthapada (?) 265, 17. 

um vasu 145,19; 178,8; 197,13. 

lw Vasdketu 316, ee. 

whew vasati 156,13. 

wag vishti 297,13. 

eoeeg pascima 145,11; 146, 10. 

pve vasudeva 200,411.17. 

wwiomg vasishtha 65,15; 68,14; 73,19; 
110,195 Lhd, 2; 119,:18. 195.120, 1; 
134, 10.12; 140,14; 172,12; 195, 16. 
17.18; 197, 7.11; 199,12; 238,7; 249, 
pais 

AilPw wai vasishtha-siddhanta 73, 
12. 

views vasumant 156, 22. 

vaing vasanta 107,3; 180,16; 288, 6; 
302,17; 305, 2.13. 

gw vasu 86,13. 

Us pushya 146, 1; 148 fig.; 233, 6; 262, 
8. ‘ 

Us? visha 265, 9. 

gylaig pisdcaka (?) 128,13. 

Pa pisdca 128,19. 

upits 18, 2. 

Sls visikhd 107, 8; 145,21; 148 fig. ; 
196, 11.12; 244, 4; 245,14; 262, 16. 
Slay visila 113, 7; 114,9; 129, 8; 174, 

14, 
Stgaty pasupala 157, 4. 
wlswis pushpajati 128, 6. 

7; 138,21; 139,2.4; 140,2.6; 144, 
10; 142, 6; 160,19; 161,1.15; 170, 5; 
185, 20; 186,13.18.21; 187,14; 188, 
4; 189, 2.11.16.17.19; 193,173; 204, 
19.20; 206, 45 209,3.6.11.15; 210,6. 
9; 211, 1; 212, 1; 214,20; 216,18; 
218, 1; 223,195 225, 14; 228,105; 281, 
1. 4; 233, 245 238,1; 239,2.13.46; 
242,16; 246,13; 247, 3.9; 256, 10. 
20; 292,20; 294, 4. 7. 

5) P23 brahmaloka 116, 4.5. 

op brdhmana §,2.3; 251,95; 270,15; 271, 
etc.; 276,16; 277,16; 278,15; 279, 1. 
5.10. 20.21; 280,19; 281, 1.3.4.5. 7. 
10.14.15; 282,18; 284,11; 287,11; 
288, 3.5. 6.9.13; 289, 5; 290, 2.11; 
291,15; 298,18; 296, 13; 303, 6. 7. 

SbLAP.2 brahmanavata 162, 18. 

cise? brahmottara 131, 10. 

g‘ly 3 vadavimukha 138, 3.15; 136, 3; 
136, 8; 189,15.17; 140, 7; 142, 3; 
155,17; 159, 5; 166,19. 

clos? 180, 2. 

i.e vadavinala 253, 9. 

gy=ape Virocana 56,18. 

ose virodhin 265, 15. 

co abya priyavrata 195, 7. 

Sha prayaga 98,1; 284,13; 316, 6. 

cvs (?) preta 44, 5. prita 301, 7. 

waded priyavrata 120,17, 

simise 76, 1. 

U3 pariksha 38,1; 54,10. 

carta vishti 295 19.23.24; 296,24; 297, 

xp vartyas 301,14. 

4.15; 120,13; 121,13; 133,20; 136, Cr 

mr 

/ s49¢ bDhramara 247,21; 250, 9. 

wwunyas? paramaucastha (?) 805, 14. 

5»;3 pramoda 265, 2, 

wy varna 48, 21, 

wx? varuna 106,13.18; 121,5; 185,18; 
146, 4; 173, 16; 181, 16; 187, 12; 
248, 3; 258,13. 

uxb» varnasaé 128,16; 129, 9. 

se virificya 173,11; 295,19. 22; 296, 
22. 

jg puramdara 199, 4, 

sy. varsha 182, 7; 300, 20.25. 

lyiad ty varshavyatipdta 300, 20. 

2,3 purohita 268, 17. 

753 prahara 171, 7. 

95 prahlada 184, 8. 

cagenPss Vrihaspati 63,15; 64, 3; 105,10; 
199, 12, 

jk enn vribaspativara 104, 6. 

ol?52 brahmadi 259, 5. 

gy? brahmant 58, 1. 

Win brahmainda 638, 12; 108, 22. 23; 
109, 1.20; 110,9.19; 111, 3; 118, 
12. 

ode SY brahmdndapurana 63, 6. 

ose? brahmapura 157,13. 

ana Pp brahma-vaivarta 63,11. 

MAP» brahmadanda 314, 7. 

U%;? brahmarshi 45,16; 123,21. 

<y) & brahma-ripa 127, 19. 

or @ brahma-sivarni 194, 13. 

MAP 98,1. 

wrrgK? brahmagupta 71, 16; 73, 15.18. 
21; 74,18. 21; 80, 7.11; 84,16; 110, 

42 

vig varsha 182, 7; 802,10; 305, 5.6. ~ 

Usa vrisha 194, 14. : 

U%s vrishan 108, 16. 

ts purushdpura (2) 101, 4; 108, 16; 
130, 3; 163, 5; 207, 13. 

“Ade3 Uy? purushaparvata 124, 3. 

politss prasastadri 155,18. 

ey) Us parasurdma 191, 1. 

hire 131, 12. 

Sit,» varshakdla 108,12.14; 180,13.19; 
248, 20. 

only cyt prasnacuddmani 75,21. 

% vrishni 174,18, 

9 parasvadha 298, 20. 

se 171, 9. 

ép parigha 301, 6. 

3,9 barkhu 295, 16.17. 

Sy varaka 197, 8. 

2 vrika 150, 7, 

Sg purika 154, 9. 

S53 bhrigu 38,1; 105, 12; 146, 1; 
149, 3. 

Sse phanikara 154, 11. 

p&S 2 vrikavaktra 114, 12. 

42 8-3 bhriguputra 105, 13. 

“S53 prakriti 20, 9. 

So) Soy B11, 20. 

AS 53 vargottama 307,10. 

> 100, 9. 

whe pramathin 265, 9. 

| cyte, pramadin 266, 12. 

ols? pramana 178,15. 
Jy ps paramapada 204, 6. 

4,3 pramukha 194, 9. 

Sip prabhava 265, 2. 

3 vritta 70, 8. 9. 

3 prithu 146,4; 197, 8. 
plow Gs prithusvamin 162, 15. 
jo? pratimanjas 197, 14. 

ce pritand 202, 15.16. 

plow ghiyi.2 prithidakasvamin 76, 2. 

set prithivi 119, 7. 

A prathama 147, 14. 

i533 prathanga (?) 150, 14. 

wul>. prajdpati 48,17.19; 45,1.2.21; 

Mia 

4802050309) 6.99 3 282. 73 251, 8.10; 
254,13; 266,12; 256, 1. 2; 258, 5. 
93; 268 2; 26278; 276,13.15.17; 281, 
1; 296, 14; 301,12; 803,5; 314, 7. 

«sy @le brahmariipa 127,19. 

ML brahmanda 6, 1. 

> Py brahmaputra 194, 12. 

ole ey brahmapurfina 63, 7. 

ilo rw PS brahmasiddhanta 66,10; 73, 
14; 119,4.5; 188,21; 188,21; 178. 
8; 255, 20; 257, 1. 

76, 5; 145,18. 22; 180, 20; 199, 12; | 952 varahamihira 27,4; 56,17; 73,16; 

252, 6.8; 261, 25; 264, 11; 265, 2; 
314, 16. 

ples pariyatra 153, 9. 

wes prayuta 83,14. 

QS hop 311,20. 

Gee parjanya 106, 12. 

A> prayutam 84,5. 

er varsha 182, 7. 

ze Vrisha 153,11. 

ols, purushada 153,17. 

BPS 3 vrishabhadhvaja 153,15. 

%53 vriddhi 301, 7. 

593 206, 14. 

y>,3 vardhamana 1538, 13. 

ows pradyumna 57,7; 76,1; 199,18. 

wlo,3 paridhavin 266, 11. 

jp virajas 194,11; 197,10. 

433.3 parjanya 197, 9. 

WA3s) Ubss 124, 3. 

saweg prastha 77,10; 79, 3. 

tw prasthana 64,19. 

gh" vriscika 108,16. 

75,10.13.16; 77,6; 78,6.9; 79,9: 
LOS, °33 5 US8, 1: 184,44; 1389, 4; 
148,12; 149,1; 152,9; 164,2; 176, 
11; 184,20; 195,12; 196, 9.14.22; 
206, 7; 227,18; 288, 13; 236, 11; 
245, 2.8.20; 246, 6.17; 247,16; 249, 
11; 252,17; 264, 7.15; 255,9.11.14; 
206,3; 257,6; 258,2; 259, 6; 260, 2; 
263, 8; 274,15; 293, 10; 300,14. 25; 
B12, 6.14. 

ply? My brahmahoratra 168, 17. 

wastiglo prayascitta 179,16. 

257, 21; 258, 2. 

260, 7; 293, 

3 parvan 7, 20; 64,7; 
5 ff.; 259, 5— 8.12; 
18. 

werteg 67,14.17.21; 69, 7.12; 70,14; 71, 
1; 86,11; 296, 20. 

jf wage parvatamaru 131, 20. 

wr 

| 52 parivatsara 264, 10. 

eda parapadma 84, 6. 
py barbara 131,3.4; 155,5; 267, 9. 
mw 176,14, 

GL. 

Py 

DIRS 204, 2.11; 232,21; 301,11. 
+2 vijaya 265, 12. 

sila pratragira (?) 150, 13. WLS vijayanandin 75.3; 174,2; 227, 
os pardrdha 88, 9. 11.16.17. Be ean 

stS,!;3 pardrdhakalpa 169,9.10; 18,7. sy 301, 6. 

sy) pardsara 31, 21; 52, 11.16; 61,5. “IK pushkaldvatt 156, 12. 
75, 9.13; 178,9; 186, 2; 195,4; 197, | == vishuva 292, 4. 
12; 199,4.17; 249,11; 800, 16; 312, ) 2 buddha 67,14.16; 59,1; 76,20; 284, 

15. 2. 
dg 285, 9. X% budha 104, 21; 105, 8. 
doyle pragjyotisha 153, 14, Os buddhi 20, 3. 
Yl vardhamula 104, 14. jsidg vidyadhara 44,18; 131, 7. 

ose purana 5, 13; 6, 4. 5. 8's 20, tity fhe 30, bry 104, 5 
4; 45,3; 60,13; 62,21; 116,4; 119, | ners vidyujjihva 114, 14, 
13; 188, 21; 186,20; 142, 7; 184, 3; | od vidyut 20, 20. 

255,18; 257,3; 270,16. ‘3 vaidarbha 151, 3. 
ol prana 139, 6; 169, 21; 170.6: 171, | Us vatsa 152, 4. 

2. 45 EGR 35 197.6; cw vatsa 1538, 7. 
SS ola 186, 20. Very vidish 129, 10. 
ty varaha 63, 11. jbry 102, 14. 
ols tp varihapurana 63, 3. Pd 49, 10.17, 

es brahman 6,19.20; 14,3. 6; 26, 5; | ele vidhatri 106, 11; 119, 2. 
27,3; 35, 20; 38,3.9; 42,17. 205 43, | Pr 251,16. 
16.19; 45,1.2.18.21; 46,2; 47.291; | goliou, budhnyadya 194, 17. 
49,1; 55,18; 57, 8; 60,14; 61,1; 63, | ye»%Xe buddhodana 20,3; 191, 6. - 
9.10.13; 65,1; 74,17; 75,10; 76, d; padha 151,11; 214, 4. 
5; 84, 2; 109, 6. 8. 11; 120, 16; yd vidarbha 153, 6. 
121,1; 133,12; 164, 4.19.21; 165,1, edg padma 55,5; 63,9; 83,16; 84,8; 
5.8.10.11; 166,2; 168,19; 169,1.5.) 261, 11. 
6.7.9; 178,11; 177,9.16; 178, 7—9; | awlody padamasa 214, 4, 
182, 1.10.11.14—16; 183, 1.3.11.14; di pdy padma-tulya 1538, 16. 
185,21; 186, 1.2; 187,1.5.11; 188,18; | Glaady padmanabhi 201, 15. 
189,1; 191,5; 193,16; 194.1; 208, 7 284, 13. 

13; 204, 2.7; 216, 18. 20; 218, 9.) 3 para 83, 11. 

: Kay pavitra 267,17. 

co? Vivarna 181,13. 

wy? vaprakhdna (?) 101,11. 

us vaprivan 199, 14. 

evs? Vipascit 194, 5. 

yewnd Vivasvat 106, 10. 

ioe vivasvan 106, 11. 

o's: Ue bhavishyapurana 63, 7. 

eves vapushmat 197,15. 

Ue. vivamsa 126, 13. 

sz vibhd 185,16. 

cyPhens vibhiavari 135, 19-21. 

se vibhava 265, 2. 

wa: vitta (?) 105, 8. 

eng pautl 79, 4. 

wy patti 202,17. 

aabis pitdmaha 85, 5. 

(Sz) wag pattri 86, 5. ; 

yey pathesvara 150, 11. ‘ 

py pitar 43, 20; 173,7; 181, 10.16; 262, 
10. 

LK dy 288, 15. 

d,5 x pitriloka 116, 5; 418,11; [119,11; 
311, 20.: 

cyts*y pitaras 45,13; 116,1; 124,1; 168, 
3; 180,19. 

sil? csaptg pitrindm ahoratra 167, 3. 

craw vitasti 79,16. 

2 vitala 113, 4. 

sieges vittesvara 75,3; 196, 22. 

Lohse vicitradyd 194, 16. 

yrs bhojadeva 938, 19. 

sey vajra 57,10. 

522 vajra 120, 21; 164,7; 182,14; 193, 

wry 

| 

PULSE 128, 13. 
onl phalguna 107,16; 181,18; 201, 8; 

. 285,19; 290,11; 294,16. 

th valmiki 199,16. 

atl valmiki 204, 13. 

pb balava 295,17.20; 296, 14, 
dpb 128, 9. 

ens vamana 62,18; 63,12; 198,15; 199, 

4; 201, 12. 

ole ony vamanapurana 63, 4. 

ps Bauudyovee 99, 7. 

we vana 86, 1. 

wt vana (?) 152,10. 

ulail vanavasika 150, 7. 

vreily pdnipat 101, 1. 

Jlsly paficdla 64,12; 149, 4; 150,5; 153, 
oe 

gil pdndu 52, 10. 15; 64, 6. 8; 97, 
11; 152,16; 191, 2; 201,13; 204, 
13. 

ib pandava 86, 4. 

Seb pdndavakdla 208, 16; 205, 3. 

evilgadsh vanupadevasca (sic) 194,15. 

wile panini 65, 8. 

dy paniya 117, 9. 

calol vahlika (?) 152, 8. 

cy vahini 202, 16. 

cnldeth bdhud& (sic) 129, 8. 

ws pavant 131, 1.14. 

ub vayava 145 fig.; 146 fig.; 148 fig.; 
155, 12; 298, 12. 

pie ool vayavamantra 250, 1. 

ol. vivahapatala 75, 18. 

lin vivasvant (?) 105, 3. 

GL 

stb vardhi 58, 2. 

“le pdrata 155, 5. 

ijl parthiva 20, 19. 

oxyly partina 108, 20. 

seg Varicara 154, 2. 

Sy bharadva 152, 14, 

slyly pariyatra 123,17; 128,16; 129, 
deli. 

2) pdragava 155, 2. 

cy’ varuna 262,11. 

4a yyy Varunamantra 250, 1. 

sy barodé 102,11; 201, 4; 258,14. 

csyb 97.10; 98, 6.10; 180, 20. 

ote 128, 8. 

%opwisb vajasrava 199, 16. 

carwl 290, 2. 

pul vasudeva 7,7; 14,10; 19, 14; 26, 
17; 26,11.12.17; 39,1; 42,17; 45,3; 
50,1.19; 52,4; 59,7.11; 68, 10; 64, 
19.21; 78,17; 97,11; 107,1; 126,13; 
172,11.13.14.15.18.19; 178 8; 183, 
12; 199,7.18.19; 200,1.9.10.14. 1S; 
201, 2.4.12.14. 16.17. 19. 20; 202, 
2.12; 268,14; 271, 11.13; 275, 20; 
276,1; 288,19; 286, 7.9.14.19. 20/5 
287, 7. 8.11.18; 288, 10.12; 289, 2.6. 
fe 

wl vdsuki 114,17; 128, 20. 

o~b vasu 262,10. 

dhbly pdvaka 85,19. 

Sk vdka 150,10. 

cy y phalguna 106, 19. 

db pala 77,3 ff. 

JTL bdldgra 77, 7, 

Mo 

eval ishika 150,12. _ 

oly dy! ekapada 153,10. — 

crea hal ekavilocana 156,13. . 

osm wal ekacarana 157,10. 

ot! ekam 83,14. 

sya iddputra (?) 261, 11. 

cr! ayana 128, 4; 180, 1; 302, 7. 

jt aindra 65,7; indra 308, 7. 

wl indrdnt 58, 2. 

crn! ayutam 84, 11. 

5 wl pdpagraha 106, 1. 

wh vadha 152, 9. 

July pAtala 29, 9; 113,5.9; 199, 3; 272, 
14. 

x2 dg pataliputra (?) 98, 8. 

Ul pataijali (pdtaijala?) 4,19; 18,14; 
27,16; 34, 5.20; 37,20; 40, 3.12; 43, 
3; 45,11; 68,17; 92,18; 116, 1.45; 

» 117,1; 118,4; 119,12; 124,11; 231, 
17. 

ze vayu 63,8; 146, 4; 238,7; 262,15. 

ole ge vayupurana 20,17; 68,4; 80,7: 
95,7; 118,1; 114,1; 115, 4.7; 116, 
18; 119,15; 120,19; 124.6; 125, 11; 
128, 1.18; 185,15; 148,19; 144,4; 
147,17; 149,18; 150,3; 170,20; 281, 
22; 282,25; 238,2.4; 273,4; 318, 8, 

pet? tb pdshanabhiimi 113, 7. 

‘yb badara 155,17. 

sdls 76, 19. 

| phy para 128,17; 129,10. 

ab vara 104,3; 179,14. 

sh vardnast 75,3; 82,9; 275,10. 12. 
16. 

~~ shogh 290, 12. 

| ae odta 153,14 1 a Ve 
pds! audumbara 153,10. 
ysai0o) udandapuri 82, 16. 
hos) uddehika 162,15. 
J_ooh udyoga 64, 9. 

os) udayagiri 153, 2. 

veys) aurva 251,18, 

zoo! dinja 197, 6. 

sriagoyy) 98, 4. 

wp Ys! Urdhvakarna 153, 10. 
yo) uru 194, 17. 

oS»! uraga 131, 7. 

steay9! 98, 4. 

urbitys avasvdsa 172, 4. 

wp oy) ushtrakarna 131, 12. 
ike)! huvishkapura 101,14. 18. 
cots! usanas 38,3; 199, 12. 
wi Soh ugrabhuti 65,10. 
cuts! 298, 2. 

ile! 66, 9. 

e2} om 37, 2; 82, 16. 

Likes 102, 14. 

wy») tina 213, 4. 

pees) D14, 11. 

i3) dnaratri 7,11; 212,13; 218,4; 215, 

14> 291,12, 16; 294, 3. 

cy} pal irdvati 129, 6; airavata 318, 10. 

syJab irdvati 101,3; 130, 6. 
cstheeal ishtin 49, 14. 
pa isvara 183, 2. 6.13.15. 

aval Ivara 15,7; 87,4; 265, 9. 

cy) aisdna 145,13; 146,14; 148 fig.; 

156,21; 298, 6. 

aie 

dye! utpala 75, 5. 7. 21; 149,7; 169,17 

171, 1; 182, 21; 185, 8. 
ur Qo} upavdsa 285, 6. 
Ueelis! tamasa (?) 194, 7. 

SLIby! uttdanapdda 120,17; 121, 4. 

wish 194, 8. 

pis) uttara 145, 13; 146,14; 250, 21. 
cts! uttardyana 180, 2.15; 283, 20. 

5 

wrgsty ly) uttarabhadrapada 107,18; 148 
fig.; 178, 6; 244, 15; 245, 5.15; 247, 

5; 262,12; 265, 18. 

Xo 155) uttaraphalguni 107,16; 148 fig. ; 

243,14; 245,14; 262, 11. 

45) uttardshadha 107,13 ; 148 fig. ; 244, 

| 95 245, 14; 262, 7. 
| 25 34) uttarakuru 156, 9. 

245,13. 

prea uttaragola (?) 180, 8. 
ueiteis! uttaraminasa 273, 7. 
das iol uttaramarmada 151, 14. 
ws el utkriti 88, 5. 

MG! utkala 151,13; 153, 6. 
es) auttami 194, 6; 199,16. 
cys) uttamarna 151, 14. 
jy%o) uttamaujas 194, 13. 
popes) 131,16. 

ove) utsarpini 187, 2. 

waco) uccastha 806, 14. 

wees) ujjayint 93,1; 99,6.10; 129,11; 
149, 4; 154,16; 158,1.4; 159, 7. 9; 
16003015. 26K, 4.59 b62, 11. 24.116. 

18. 20; 316, 6. 

Mal MS io} uttarakhandakhadyaka 75, 1 ; 

rr 

cit} anka 82, 24, 

os) angdra 266, 17. 

ss! atgiras 63,14; 105,11; 146,1; 195, 
16.18; 265, 6. 

Mo ahgula 79, 10. 

di! anala 266, 11. 

ds anila 173,18. 

verti! ananta 118,15; 123,20; 149, 4, 

cai! dnarta 155, 4. 

Slats} dnandapdla 65,11; 208, 6.9. 

oi} 101,19, 

stokes! anhilvad, anahillapdtaka 73, 15; 
100,15; 205, 21. 

wrased} anutapata 131, 21. 

axl 126, 5. 

oki! anikini 202, 15. 

desi} dnila ? 124, 7. 

s} ahas 186,14; 215,21. 

jot 101, 1. 

slot 288, 8. 

gs! ahirbudhnya 173, 6; 233,7; 262, 
13. ; 

cp 9) ahargana 7,11.12; 179,15; 212,13; 
215, 20; 216, 4; 219,11; 226, 1.15: 
227,11.18 
19; 290,16. 

js} ahankdra 20, 11, 

5,59) ahordtra 182, 2, 

5393 asoka 288, 14. 

ull) amdvdsyd 176, 7; 290, 20. 

mel} amavasi 295, 15. 

sb) urvard (?) 85, 9. 

hima} upavaiva 153, 2. 

a2! upari 145, 10. 

41 * 

cyst afijana 153, 14. 

OJ! indu 73,19) 74, 21; 
262, 5, Paya 

oes} indra 43,17.19; 45,1.2.12; 54,12. 
14.17.19; 57,10; 65,7; 76,5; 106, 
13.14; 114,17; 120,2; 126,1.18; 
135,17; 146,4; 173,14; 180,17; 182, 
21; 198,16; 194, 4; 196, 26; 197, 
5; 199,12; 251,15; 262.1; 258, 9; 
265,9; 266,12; 286,8; 301,13; 31s, 
10. 

yoii andhra 150,9; 151, 10; 153, 8. 

co) indrégnf 173,13; 181, 7; 268, 
16. 

| Kasi! antarved! 108, 15. 

go} indradyumna 181, 15. 

ol ono, 5! indradyumnasara 131, 15. 

ceidy it antardvipa 148, 3; 156, 20. 

cogs} 181,17, 

apyrr3} 131, 6. 

coil indriyas 86, 3. 

cos} indriydni 21, 19. 

sail cf. aranda and eranda 76, 18 ff.; 
77,9. 

5 229,14; 231, 10.15; 258, | 35! anurddha 107,9; 114,8; 148 fig. ; 196, 

5.22; 244,5; 246,4; 262, 3; 286, 
18. 

3) anarta 151, 7. 

»;i! aniruddha 199,18. 

yet} argu (?) 113, 3. 

us) amsu 106,141.19. 

wKenit amsaka 67,9; 69,6.15.17.19. 

oteait amsuman 106, 8. 

KM aga 86,7; 153, 4. 

Sh Ts 105,46. 0 

Ast agnibafhu] 197,18. 
Usa ost agnivesa 76, 4. 
te cyt} agnijihva 114, 13. 
Fal cpl agnimukha 114, 8. 

rip 

gost asvavadana 158, 12. 

tA! asvattha 42,17; 158, 2; 272, 15. 
18. 

pets aSvatara 114,7; 123, 21. 

st dgneya 145, 9; 146, 8; 148 fig.; 153, | -5*! dsvayuja 106,14; 201,15; 294,17. 

14; 181, 7; 298, 25. 
comiSt agnitya 156,18. 
YS) agnidhra 197,15. 
Set agokiru 108, 17. 
Jt idd, id 118, 4. 
w0 ildvrita 124, 2. 
dt} alika 151,13. 
ygamedt 99, 12. 
gout umaddevi 27, 4. 
oo!) amardvati 135, 15. 20. 
93 Solel amaravatipura 135,17. 21. 
ea) amrita 131, 21; 174, 20. 
ea mleccha 165, 11; 271,10. 
gy) ana 170,16; 171, 4. 
i! ambhas 303, 3. 
= os) anuvatsara 264, 10. 
si} ambara, 85, 2; 156,16. 
SU 3) ambaratala 1138, 4.° 
vei! ambarisha 54, 11. 
sioui} ambashtha 153, 9. 
43} anuvisva 157,11. 
wil antya 83,16; 108, 20. 

i antara 86, 20. 

VS 5! antarikshya 199,14; 312,18. 

css 82,14. 

U5! andhradesa 82, 14. 
3 antyaja 49, 6. 

pus! antahsild 128, 15. 
3} antaka 173, 9. 

errs dsvayuja 107,20; 181,12; 250,17; 
285,17; 287,3; 288,9; 291, 6. 

Sy} asoka 288, 14. 

oot asvin 121, 5. 

dytf asvint 76, 5; 107,19; 148 fig.; 173, 
8; 186,10; 243, 3; 262,15; 266,15. 

wd} Sveta 124, 1. 

ss5) Atreya cf. (ss! 77,14; 78,1; 192, 
pia Ie 

wats} avanti 149, 4. 

|S} dvarta 317, 19. 

Staga 86, 9. 

uals ikasa 85, 1. 

Uns} 287, 14. 

i fkara 154, 14. 

oS) kratu 195,17. 19. 

wes} agastya 283, 6; 247, 6; 248, 3. 

ws emmes} agastyamata 64, 1. 

US) akshi 85,14. 

uss} ikshu 117, 4. 

SS akshara 81, 18. 

opwy OHSS ikshurasoda 117. 8. 

MS) ikshuld 128, 4. 

wJSt,a5) ikshvaku 194, 10. 

(GP,HSS akshauhini 7, 8; 87,4; 201,11. 
14; 202, 14ff.; 203, 4. 8. 9. 10. 11. 
cpl agni 49, 15; 68,10; 85,20; 121,6; 
173,10; 180,17; 181,13; 258,15; 261, 

19; 262, 3; 264,11; 303, 4. 

Gy 

ol OKs skandapurdna 68,5. ” 

casew asvamedha cf.’ canes 64,17; 271, 
20: 

Spb svitt 196,10. 

sou) LOL, 21. 

i 99, 3. 

us} isu 86, 3. 

ust asd 87, 2. 

jt dshadha 108,15; 106,11; 107, 12; 
180,13; 181,9; 201,12; 218,1; 249, 

on 21; 285,16; 286,18; 288, 8; 

pd Ue: 

Slat 1138, 6. 

post asvatthiman 64, 12; 
16; 202, 12. 

wit! ashtaka 290, 2. 

sx3"I scorvartvat (!) cf. csaybs 194, 
ne rs 

obs ascdnyah (!) 197,16. 

244,11; 262, 8. 

181, 10; 250, 

197,12; 199, 

npg pitt sravana 148 fig.; 
eels sravana 107, 14; 
20. 

vl (yap! dsramavisa 64,19. 

ci, Xa! sringavant 124, 1.3 
ors. srishena 73,14; 138,11; 189,14; 

256, 3. 
wait aSvin 85,11; 266, 14. 
Usa! Aslesha 107,14; 146,2; 148 fig. ; 
248,11; 245,16; 246, 15.20; 262, 9. 
wwii! asmaka 181,19; 151,6; 155,18. 
wrnett] asvamedha cf. crsew 204, 4. 
cpt uSanas 68.15. 
cel Adana 181, 12. 
Sls} ushnakdla 180, 14. 
41 

al asura 44, 8; 128,15 

8; 24 45,4. 16: 262, A ee 
aor ai a8. 
iss bo,! ardhanfgarf 82, 11. 
cys! 99, 8. 
S$ drki 105, 15 

SS arka 87, 6; 105, 2; 106,17; 264, ri 

S)) argha(?) 249, 4. 

43 S,) arkatirtha (?) 98, 4. 

coy! [abJargana 185, 14; 215, 21. 

oy! ahargana 160,20; 162,9.17; 
226,15.18; 227, 3. 

Jj} dryd (?) 69,1. 

wy) aruna 127, 8; 278,14; 314,15. 

wy)! arund 129, 9. 

206,5; 

cy! aranya 64, 8. 

wy) Aruni 197,15. 
e9M,) arundhat! 195,17. 
lot cf. Adhaka 77,11; 78, 8. 
ord, 278, 5 
wriP} arhant 57,16; 59,1. 
cxrshaditos! dravAambashtha (!) 155, 1 
oy) aror 100, 17; 130, 10. 
Solut 102, 12. 
want 105, 12. 

gus asipatravana 80, 15. 
eve! Asphujit 105, 13. 
cam! asita 105,14; 312,15; asthi 316, 3. 
diliel sthanabala (?) 808, 5. 

; zy seul strirdjya 156, 2. 

pstmt astagiri 155, 13 

; 166, 2; 168,15. 
9S Sionduel 114, 15, 

Aixwl skanda 57,8; 

7,8; 63, 1 
12, 

1; 69, 14; 222, 

11.17.18; 226,13; 287, 8.12.20; 228, 
3.5.9; 229,1.11; 280,1.2.6; 231,10; 
251,12; 286,14; 291,141.15; 294,7. 

syd} ddarsa 156,19. 

dad} adhomukha 80, 10. 

y) dra 105. 6. 

)) ari[meda] 152, 14. 

O:)) arbuda 84, 7, 

w,! arbudam 84, 11. 

cyrdong.} 157,13. 

! artha 86, 2. 

,! ashtan 86, 13. 

wS ashti 87, 11. 

843, 150, 4. 

wyle,!) drydvarta 205, 15. 

wriiele,| drydshtasata 75,8; 198,20. 

wsl>,} Arydvarta 82, 10. 

Ago) dryabhata 74,17; 75,1.8; 80,11. 
16; 84,4; 110, 21; 111,18; 121, 20; | 
Wee) 5.106085 DRS. O22 LEB at 20 
134,9.12; 188,9; 139,2; 140.14; 162, 
12.15; 168.2; 170,63, 186,14 4.18,21'; 
187,1; 188,4.9; 189,11—18; 193,19; | 
208,21; 209,5; 210,7.11; 211,16; | 
212,1; 219, 7; 256,3; 293, 2. 

pee! aryabhata 211, 17.19. 

wh>! dryaka 126,12. 

o>)! aryaman 106,9.12.19; 121, 5; 173, 
17; 262,11; 296,18. 

crm! arjuna 25,17; 26,5; 39,1; 42,17; | 
50,1.9; 59,7; 178,8; 201,138.18; 202, 
8; 271,13. 

glte,! drjundyana 156,17. 

yoy) Ardra 107,11; 148, fig.; 233, 6; 248, | 

Gr, 

mt. 

303, 5. 

g3} (gad8}2) dvaneya 105, 6. 

2 aja 178,5; 181,11. 

zoe! acarya 74,17. 

lo,>) dyurdd 309, 17. 

>! ayuta 83,14. 

piee! ayutam 84, 5. 

See! 273, 11 (bis). 

Poem) ayodhyd 98, 7. 

ose! 86, 5. 

SS adhas 145,10. 

ot! adi 85, 5, 

FE ld! idavatsara 264, 10. 

seo) udvatsara 264, 10. 

po} udbhira 151,11. 

ola! Adipurana 63, 2. 

oo} dtavya 150,13. 

cx} aditi 262, 7. 

wot dditya 56,2; 63,8; 87,5; 104, 21; 
105, 2.20; 145, 21. 

yk wo! adityavdra 104, 4. 

yy ool Adityaputra 105, 14. 

wlsg wl Adityapurdna 68,5; 80,6; 106, 
Goi; L282 1981s 115075 Lee. 3 
185, 18. 

2 Ot 101, 2. 

yo} atri 154, 17. 

yo! adri 86, 10. 

| ¥»,o! udruvaga 108, 19. 

go} adhishthana 101, 14.17; 289,8. 

two} adhimisa 7,11; 212,13,19; 213, 5. 
Ty eld, 3.105 280,15 216) 8.43, 15: 
21%. os SlS,45 21912. 230) 8. 12; 
221,15. 19; 222, 4. 20; 228. 2- 225, 

" 
‘, 

Index of words 

of Indian origin. 

The first number is that of the page, the second that of the line. 

constea! 98, 1. 

jiwless Abhdstala 1138, 3. 

et! abhijit 238, 5; 244,10; 245,18; 262.8. 

sat! abhira 150,11; 152,11; 164, 13; 
155, 9. 

esa! droxdtiuc 306, 3. . 

wKX! avyakta 20, 2. 

ww} ws atyashti 87,14, 

web oS ativahika 81,16, 

opti utpaldvatt (?) 128, 6. 

23 ot atidhriti 88, 2. 

esl attattaja 286,17. 

sil atri 68,15; 145,17; 195,16.19; 197,11. 

ws) atreya 152,13. 

WKS atiganda BOL, 11. 

ht atala 118, 3. 

ws} atindman 197,10. 

yy3 21 dtmapurusha 164, 8. 

wit 176, 7. 

295, 

ie fea 3 
Ow ces! atharvanaveda 61, 18; 62, 19; 

ws} ashtama 

wi dpas 178, 9; 262, 6. 

Sygaly) apdinmirti 197, 14, 

ws! apdna 172, 3. 

6 whe eat 186, 19. 

Seu! abhijit 172, 8.11. 12. 24, 23, 
A abdhi 85, 23. 

9 | dpaddharma 64,15. 

p! abhra: 85, 3. 

sf) apara 197, 9. 

wait! apardnta (2) 162,13. 

Ma) apardntaka 155, 15, 

V4,>,3) apratidhrishya 187, 14. 
imal dpastamba 68, 14, 

oi wl avasarpint 187, 2. 

usp! apsaras 44,15; 128,414.19; 124, 4, 

sgn 99, 2. 

oda} 150, 8. 

ml avama 224,1; 225,21; 226,9; 227, 
DOT A Beds Sel. 

wish avanti 154,16. 

aS abhi 157, 7. 

Ta 

Gr. 

cretilinall cre nepenslald Slaxal (gail iting pn mitt Sealy Leake pXetly LIAL & agiiy lo tdgs Chapter 80. 

obs G+ 8 55s pele ABA AS ye Lead gst ¥ pb Ripka JST KE yay [pte Cash 
Cy) OLE S XAT Ege Kay! Le Kyade GoW gly cll Lgbaly Key,! JLkly Xegsh jLaw St St 
wl Est clo LEB S Lely Caysall g IUbal Leas poy ol) Ras gtl Lealal se allt x3 

be GSs955 exe cy) Ra abo GLASS Jad Key, RAAT Joey otyanlly Glesvnll pijad All eatey ball 0 
wily Lede eyySe Bb bree Ub pdity be pies aiKin cranie Be Khe dd B yPo ay ALAR Kham culdll pari 
dq rtd wrpall 3 crs oly Le sper Jo G2,II CLS Sand yw SII Be Kejty RUS GLst 
shad LS Lorie oye aR OW ghd Gmecdt Ut OMS or tall pyladsa clesilly past GI ole gl 3 
Cipla 9 Ass yh gt GAD & ade lal Ler casey abe dy Zo ill Bt aadas ics lo 

IAD nod 235 mgd cyto rabatrd ltl mile ope oe Giptt NSS AB Ep mad sd GI US ya Py Siphal fe 
iy SI Lily Lgimios LAS aad St 
Sialic? lla!) & mpabls? nigh Rte OF) oped RLS sLinauad Land code 
plrareS) aligns (jm ee WH Ob B alll pairinin aiocy allay hal sit pV plaitld ale 2 Le 
Twdesey pool) 58 wie cw adh Ch aalltsl bl de SsSyll AF wkiigiomdy agions le 

Beer aly Aas’ Gall Le xilghos cnollasl D, a ants No 

11) Lines 1—11 stand on fol. 1598 1—11, the lines 12—15 on fol. 1614 9—12. Cf. note to 
page Fi, 19. 

Chapter 80. 

(tw itncs Ramedl 

pleco clamdl BS te Jay 
wai, 

Beedle quad} cae hide 
peel Rall jos le Jt 

pXob trols hed solely Y 

oS oslo Leth ey yge MS sygglocryyge 
colnbly ebylh de Go aigd 

cle vad se Sung 
rho Saw Keronlandd 

Oude) Krams} he dike 
hall Cp Mike wy ea 
Tyga Cryega WK) 

De Jray Spilly aple dry be dunia’ 
staty Spllh SW poll Less 

Oly Katt} Reawy Qauadt altins| 

aad pelea git Silt yas] 

* whKe eo Sia va (Oneal » pals 

prone daisy Bhd gay vrnKe] 
Caeedll cyallls saad roast 
werahm $35 Rabetl oye 

Rebs 93 Wahl ale 
ce iedt Rgoe cr 

ain) pails” ngs 

wept yes! 

eee enti ements. 

Phaidd avolas retts 
Bh erXey Yar! 
broly | 

read Bl ual tans sls 

m5S Aiey Boras Byasty 

QE egg Spats Sle 55 96 
slows) Wald 1 AR Goll 5! 

iw wordy splary 

I 

24) This whole table (fol. 1592) is written by the second hand. 

GL 

teen 

, “tas S Kalla Hob ee . Chapter 80, 
a, Peal da das 
spl eo! & alt | on | 
— Kama] $ dst ee Kem ve | | 
ee ie echt ge bal See oan) ose 
Dell Salas We Joy _ SySb aaa ast | TRS ; 
Ege) BBS, jae 00 he Jr} show! tomy GS at GAS tae Stas 

ws Sf 
~ ; “ Caroma cre 
x 5 : BOSS Crrnalintn WSLS} ole 100 
Dot SalAS he Jorg ox ee Beeieele is? Jby yg 8 ds 8 o 
© i te ks ae oi " 3 cobst erg hall og ry) Pe?) 
| doeys { 

STs Bos Kal andy < : see | 
BKLed Deanndety (uc ene x er ‘ 
coped glial sil Slo Calis = . se - en et} Ss 
ie Tee Ah MY ca xsi wie velba, faa 
B pits w unkes we CA eyaty| ete as 
Bad cathy pict gos! Lasts 

Bye ALS St opt 

(eer mtemranneenemnantenet 

Kabel! Ye To Gray telot uy! Kagaw Cline alll ot Sele hee 

“ ¥ : s Reere 
ede pylAlS Piety (wlAtl Dealt oe SoM winatlt & , gles SS 
Fey ytd!) Solty Raoul Gehl 2 nell at ; ; 
haw gas ah Seca, Sheds 
; ° spe des fps : 
cyt} ie) wb, bce 
*Rarnd) he Sry otal saa FR papbao!clowd igs alii] yy,le 

Oy ly) Sy ae wad | 

20) This whole table (fol. 158b) is written by the second hand. 

Chapter 80, 

Mio 

Lael SS viggll B Rin yo, 8h Xe Klay Castell Ake Rell glandl RAIS QF LAT pad a 
cr SolaSt CIE wyy5 mat 13S Lomgill Sh Fb) WA he Aol K Wyrm od le Klacigclly {Lal omitll cys 
oland he JS Jum ob ps oh fay Juoil cle Wy} VIE de Jo CIAL, costly Slat, wht Jt 
alike Gols 131 Se Lgulo whle NS) lalAXy rast ly Yule Ue JUS bl ual tit, xchat 

S HOSE Ty paclen UI Riganill LPS, Una dl crude Kedbedt endl CURL dS cle Lio,iee 
S8e ratte Eph crm pgm RKLE E MOI! crgplorole Uric pamdly mall Hoegee pad LS LO rgred 
SUP Olunilly @KEly blo aanle gS Seal My Ske of crnasit of Smit shown qabddtl add Rese At bit 
ABS fe So 99 be gio ootiwly colastt Gaagllall pli! agaishi *Lglot de EGA py, 
BH mlyill gle Solas ely ashes ob Leshst als st aus pel odd Spall SLIT & abs 23 

B aad SS, Ryall Litdray Kargath Lgdraty Lead! Gomis all ol yarsst salony S3LM Lgghe dary Je 

IART 9@ TAG) @ LIT LY Langs glad & aide craalll OF ope CnGlall ys alt (ball 

8) The words (glo he ctyam yew, stand on fol. 1619 lin. 8. The text continues on fol. 
158419, cf note to page mh lin. 19, : 

10) The words jo! Upisary till Liat} QI stand on fol. 1612 8.9 after the words Ltgarm egy 
Lghol dc (see this page 1 8) and before the words a sliaarad lead (sei (SeO p. Mr, 12), There seems 

to be a lacuna before x45) ot (piuasy, 

40 * 

mr 

Lgiidao 

ates * alt, Sol $ Sotto uy 
S. { ay So pel ) a ae dy ao Rey.) 
itl a ed is GN a) al 
; Goal ga AE eee 
«sbigd el os ae eeu ien 1S, 
olistl de Joe sr eis By 95 oh 
4 feels . ‘ ysl! KS WSS! Koya 
cphobls Kelst te Jou eit Qpellty Stent} LI 
zy Stall Soll! . woos &: wnat ated Syydee 
Ns : tor Ux? > Hy 
erally wash he Jove Sead, tas OT Veg — 
on seme ae dm tt As GN e Kaas} 5) yaas Sf phydd ! 
“gla eb bad Ad iia ls Spa eal sl data rey gt athe 
ar a as HAG 955 cjlpdl RAL yd 
okmist, sets tt hase aaa 
1p BIOS he Jy cles cae) el 
bath, alt ge Jay) Wey daly sey | 
J ~ 
Cpbly Kags he Joy) lest pram 3 one AE plat wis) | ie 
| 3 
Kaw mcd ly SLmdd) he Sore wid SIS Cy: © RSLS (you KSI Kaw tea 
Ss 
Kabios 48, (anh ooo! | 
~ 5 = ae i oy,! 
9 ss j i # 
“= va Soy — saga 3taad Leas en 4 oles 
“a5 $85 de Nos eee de Rahs wld} wed 
esis Bloeell Saat pe aie | 
wi oy, 
Ph de Sra padilly ymedtl Spm SIRES RaLes? 7 ah 
eh) 
= pe oS et eng 
jt ge Ly sents elgcall Xypaaae) gg Sah 
ae —- ee SESS EA (eee ied 
: i Liste ates &2 syabd Led os 3 
plstt Olah Je Jay AW ss ee pe BS alle 
Bad! oF Bysth STs eos! 
Slnttl, Sie oF de Joy aga S Kriled Bp Haass lo aa) 
ae Ve : SAall 3 Kay h, SLs, | 4 fecaglonsy 
Filly 543 835 de Jong Rpine Sl kent) || Mh 
Poy & el slycas'| ret sift 
: in te] le appear ana et 
sf | esha eyes oS eslozi 
; ee eet 
a ‘ : B Kemet All @ 3 AP! 
ola! mur d aol yet sual a 

1) On the margin of this page the note: \o¥ ¢ LpaKea yl bo 
19) This whole table, in the ms. fol. 160, is written by the second hand. 

12) GS 14) at 

2) yl} Jol om 8 

3) 04 

Chapter 80. 

Chapter 80. 

a 

cpillty eyall, Biya dies sf budlly Kelas CST che fis shoal) 8 cull 
wena wb SSN asl Sl ore Yo cyt WES cn sels GAIT Ky 2 NSB SLL abe” Hey Cops oon 
Op6 SEs CASH at SS eye ginny Amon Sle adh aad SE cw mgid Wore us? Sbelal) ales, S8 Cao,) 
BAAS pratt (git Wyadl Be (65 Se Cos! Guilty HE, BAS yyaall BeiRy Walia, Lay Aole ail aaXath 
BE lo sali syed allan’ love entity Kama Luke gb Cady gg he cal; yb #LO seb ali o 
SAB NAP sLicosl le Oyo! ela! WLI ode Makes Sy gals spat Weg opt ow rer’ oye at 
Lindl ccmaby I Re mdll Lal uot Lo} plans LEKI 8 by FILES Sort conns bie cyl DALE nga! 
CITT od GO ge Gad peptic LE opdlll ronal! (65 SIS! (Fras 5 Lond wad oyl'y 

2) up 5) yeh 6) grx3 added by the editor. 7) SIS 

40 

GL. 

 enbthyy STDS Gogh Co tlly wpa plUlall ok gh OUST Wot sh owl ob Gwlell J aby dss! Chapter 80. 

Langs 52 cytes pla WP ergko Lily BOS: Ay Lalste oot yf HOY! ead SKA) Beg wendy SLCHI 
cr pial LaS’y We RES, Upp ad Alally 52 hare g pede lly pgsell pices d agit sb, 
Les yall acs aad pha me eygAlall Syd ope LAIN ci he CID ye prattld WAS LoS 55 de Oadtgl | al 

ASH cyyheinn, Lally GEM rig She Le yy cra ad pulp ohh 9% 59281 nly ped col Golly welyy be 0 
eypaind eLiah eygBhSy RAS oD osS aha IS pease Laaal coat 32 BAILA oS byl enacny whey 
Lgallasly Lpitady LeSLCait qammsr Leake Khe Otc 9 ob mpia Dial shy CLL ctyit Po damnali 
Raall Byye he sdTly RE one ey Hyyar spall ltd Byras Spasll LW pby Lgsolyy 

Jase FEISS wyotin OSE GE otal eye gail Qe 1) Po etlle Laptlle My rol, 1600, 

Fm clash Zab eyphien pardon Ub) gw ath epiaiy SUA US Advolys Glib AD Absjepty I 

eleal hells S33 pl} cre po ptill ymmlall eras be Bs Lywiolys oye Kimll Jgnad tig 

NS p4b pyle Gaiglt FLT om DIS Gy held pralall clarcy Utamyl] paste ciety cLowll jI7ly sel 

my 

gtls Conhgld LD ata SUIS FREES Sy cceaezhil Le cation’ Gbhe spor oh bgamh re SigorSt 

ud ehixit B UN engKiow Gili 6d se Ph a SE BLA OUST (ob Gamitll pe exe Leta St poll midge & 
Lally USS che Gail Slaw <5 ley dreads emily gtilyt BS Al cod Le laptnt dey SOLS! to 

Leh ByakS hy Wrote eps compl LgdS (gladly Oppel Cady Rigall pity Ge Leslae J oh eine 

ust SS Bot sett Kladystth Letty GO gem SLY SES ow thi Al) QoyS) ye Heal Xela! 

badge jl Sly jortty Slat! hey lene wii tl GOS coe Kragill Lgtey a I cetrnsi, YO) Shy ebawdl 

Hiya OB CAL tyro he * ust Gny ea 988 GE cht A SE 4b adh ap cobs U9, Sl de Ladle 595 ues 
gate cilew of eplaladily Kab elithar yoo cg KaSlell cyloaill ol pthls ei gt (do eb 131 ltr. 

Ler Sth yp Lexile Ripe Lgahe Kh be pds cyl cues Whgly REAL ais cy cammald (Prats Popearen 

19) 5} 

Chapter:80. 

ms 
TS Lge Land cod D3 cop SI5 LegSIT OSI S exe NET ge OUT Le Sle chad paar Woda : 
Jol b Si phen cx play pel} clystial & pele b LYS Le ple als Mag & cod 
cypstia nl DUS, Pat ay daidttny YS Lag OMblbath gal ow MOE Coal Sho Bata cetyl by 
cept tose oh QSL SI yallh ay Y oyh atgne he gph dtinnsy Lolo ff JP H3pd} erty 3U 
Suet IP eyrsttiy ale S gap oh US 8 Mes yg of oyllaey 80531 cre cnn land il 0 . 
celiast Solis ye (shlibly pall oll of nist Lagnty od B Laat ob cya aill dl wrdig) 
cmt eee Bb clyamll sal & cyrrlaity CHdA, sad) ES cma ytgadll Syblie oye _ggithtl Lalion 9} 
cy omne IS gh cyly LIE LYE Gy pyle TM eaten eye ihe Waste cl pall gS Lubin US yh 
GFE yg Wars UE A gIUal) lee Roms city Cg aB bpktanay tye Kostte of 
6 All epee B spill AB Bab yg F cyPI) cre AE bond yh Lyre pailll ogi ISNy Khaidl oye be 
srt RE oh MG BT eyg KS hg GB IAS Gb he obi S oy8IS erp eygl rons 
priztly Kaplan raitly Kaniitin SAT eas Guedild esl gg sail LS egyslbte dbgM caked gyh etlball 
IRS aby B SRAM OM Gy) A Hiigie heyy Mids csytthlly Kewptta Oyllany Ki ist 
col Flu By RAS CS ernil Gupdll & AioLgd corayd $l RUS gf gblan JOT cnilf 
Sh pire BLA oye Alolog Kilezety CASLUT medlgbe param cypgladay © dln CS uprromst wilyd fo 
nett ol cyl IRE ob Bayt gy egl GAIT Gums: eheall gh KSLA Slnd Guess) om Sires ela 
cytilivey sail! cre Clall ea 3 A ASSLT Cde2 aloidd oye pO Ere Cyphty (GARD cya reejy jLnKIS y's 
de halo QoS east cally Mtl ye ole SY he Galo yay St yd Uypie Cyl, yo Gams 
Sodod cre Ras iW cssicill og 8 opal Losld het? mbe om poll Mage dyes Gy ostou 
DUIS, yl Dyy eye SyUlawy eso Yad Shays cre Umestl ob sractly cod sy coe pall ob BP Me 
8 ey pT be Site he cally Gudlaall glare Gembo ope csgi3 ep Chall Oey amy LAs & tail} 

19) Here follow the words (wollaJ} wlitil! ageixli ete. (v. page Mo, line 8). The words ee 
Oye wAclao eye ave found in the ms. on fol. 159b 10 (middle of the line) i. e. after the words 

pin, Bt Lisle Leiacas Les geil} p. Ma line 11, 

a 

cy ASST cee CyB oS! yoo de pybakal Jured Lily clawell Sita! Sas me wrylro lage o! Chapter80. ° 
SLI gill Ege wensl6 NSH Lgiiad My GUST of SOIT pgill cy Sl HSI Leds BY mei aloes? & 
cuadll Sh ees ALT oye adil plaids (cisitt LS gl pimp api b pdt Jayde era db aS 
SU) de Gglaiitl Juoed Gt, as Lagan cp Gals BS LOeLUSS Tb heyy F9;sh YW) RUAN clswt g 
cP U2y3t aye GTI coped ELI cysmanly Gegesll Gaus exe Shing be Sgdot & Lintt ss ELA 0 
TABLD went cly mating cgbatill (p86 Cagi,alt gb Lotysly Ugabict AGES O58 ot GGT exes od Eriol 
petal By Lagrel he patil onder en gdh; CULT gyil) S Wel, Sy Ye eatel Hy Lille de 
wales, 3 Sb SS M5, We! pd Gylaaitly Bol; nple pated Gb uyblaid ale earl ot Us, 
prin old G6 td pele Emad ooh IS cody eddyll Gale pe 90 Lenpace’y Kika pygiull aid 
LP ASB old gsby Hay pS LOST Ligio pM pyagatll (samy BOVE ALE cre Ys ephanll who he I 
sbybstly spill 82% Ob SI gS CFI Lit, lL ci LByhity SH ugly 13 anionn § LES 
de be & RELT LSS Lokay, Yiluail, lots ichodl Laid GSTS Bre sgt S excel [ily 
ylang aad cymtly pied hace eye easig’ B caw chee Sone Bm puis le JLte he XLII 75 ob! 
uriell Koud glad, art mols Yi a gbldl OIC By ab AN ALS oe mania let 
oddly CALS wrubiy mumald & CodJI, aad ais lag vot, cpt & Mee pill Lt to 
TNS He rol, pices eaeh ob grmdl amie d silly all mialis anal, 
wrclaal Ride pb RT ASI gw ch stl (Bap © pioytl aemel SHI] wall rots IK ube 
Bans! cms thiptt MI eioya 3 MI de dying G9 - all alee & aK WEty egal 
LghS syemlll Jaassnd upuS'y Rodd spam nbs sya eee & Lede 2 oN Crnaay 
Be Gly Le emind crctanlh hem Bah SV ysan OF kaglill 2H clas Brey a on te 
[rst alt ay rseland] tt rey Lena Lely gS MAS pall gis 308 gual & ya! 

3) batt} by the second hand. 8) 3h 14) jad array 20) 2 21) By the second hand. 

Chapter 80.cp3 i395 do hS nin Soot Scull 9% bial & PAE Hal on pS Jy BAe RL sold ob Sh ie 

Seidl ose anal amr ogliSl Late alyil RAL SI oss alt lame} cypinsly, Hpi o) alaalt 
gtd pS! Ul fill Reo BE pS thay ght * onde Sods & SLU, SoM coil! oldie Liss 
C599 De soll M gy cenkuad 13E GLUE Lely JUST, seit} one ty K coed he BypS OL woratill (sy wenkuad S31 
Li LOS he RJUaSS Cay5 Juad Dic grit clbet Silt eyatl cow elllatle Gmadll ope oly I 0 
can oven Sh of gl eke whey Gorse yf by REO he HA NSN SoS JU SS gy aw hal 
Ur EHS Il gb Region) andor d Gopias 73 Bort Sm on Jt oy! Leng pho atl bt dal Kio Bei 
So bape HAS non Ball conn} be BI 8535 oll (BBD (SBS cay oll zo) co yet ee asall 
Kiow ot J adh dol oye MA ee om Amt cst eSUbl rh std Kine Ladi pie Gast Ky Seed leg eguild 
E543) saws co pital Ws © pga Riso Dlo3 nn Sy Ket (GBD nad Jy pec Canady rrsyo My J. 
SoA ST anion S ytaty pM Co NII bully Galt tayo oF Whe oe co) 96 SS KU) SLA 
lant Lyla boy segitlly Ki shngs IIS rath Sol pe ako ker ope Tidy pills, pO be eaioml Le Seay 
ZisEel Maly ctLlall gion ogh situs AST oye ASL Comal gli bey sith Bh pies SI pail oye eat bo glk 73 ud 
whay oe Kadsa ol Gel GLI sail J IMEI gam el aitl Jute ged Lea eS, as tysll wallet E548 cw 
EI) oe sot coadl eo Kedead Kedlady ibe Alf reall *eopian eh Kio ened MF Juacdt Jo! eye fo 
costo (ls pti idl pike oi8l capil * iN ISSy xalt condi be BT candy S31 (ES (SEAT Cpe abt 
erage gl pUinw wAsiy cP de weal Jad pcawily Wah aul equal who CHS prin Kyhlal! 
Wrst cylaaitill om cepts dad MI cList S Kapiia il Glo) pena BetUS! gin Lat 
SF Be Bobs Surety GIS) 5 yA yarsry (533) cys meal Amc Sy AT oye gh} Gass 
BS glen, of ates lero of ata Sof ped alle go 15! USK! Ch 9% Aste Pe 
SBS ot leet, Eo Wy clawed mio sana apd G8 GUS tS oh ah pags oS Aine seags 

1) Added by the editor. 3) By the second hand. On the margin 4) ered 

: ron 

Bis ab OS Lead (GAT IST analys Hiliy apilly, ands zrtla spthe aly sche goles a5») Chapter 80. 

om of ols Gols enbatedll om ol oly daded Awl om oh ob bee cymel Bt ane Rill on 

Unowe of GB lade boy! dh ane witle on Juitty a6 ASI alt & Lily Guat Lo aro! 

ceo! he HEite wales 2 Rope he who pail Sere oy elo gale Lamia calf csly Lamy 

AS gSll Lglyaasen eslitand cermciy AKI Lge LIE aS eKH yg alt ea, M capil LSS IAP yas ISIy 0 
Latbiiy Opseanll slau #8 amd icish alg sly oI si oh Map seagd of atiduc cans oh adap of Kdntt S Aig 
BRAS ily Cus) poll d cyglll Lede wasttll Yardy LAS Spmmll eo pall S eypllls Lee patil, mail 
1S Longe gg NSH glldall Jas By aA) uP vilam he mall scr ony K cand ted ow dot eabill 

spi oR Gp SA Ky yD rast’y eo banal RAREST Cot gland conrmcly Raila HUT ty ler, 
oS 131 Selly cle, 1S Gy 15) Lesh xILLall Jruass’y ASSL cptislall cntaatt GUS AF Ceasar exe pill rey Aad Se 
pall Joa GAN WO 3! eygrejad Jraleall Cob Apdlydl passe Lhe IA, x ycell sila iw By Bo wllys ay, 13 
SAIN HAN lity yblogmly QAM yh SST palslty cgLbrpnSle ipiall cyl ISS eslally piles gay) 1S oyWf 15 
ninyay 29 coe 99 Keay! KALE SLES 99 jority egrrssh rT oKll as” Dy Selita (comity Keabell 48 
SI phate delall Ciao) S Eyl Lead leaal Gordry Wyatt SLAG US ytdh ob 8,P pT MS be Slat § 

cyt Gillall Spi AP Sua’ [Lgie al Plas] meth span GS Tp po ROLE salll cyySn Codomalt cabiatl fo 
C9 ob mambo WS le ad Leis upslope ups ay! osllaes cg ttt) 5S) LBS Gy) ad agele 
SW ced Reh st wgAl Lol wyatt ne BUDE lang GE val! Uae po till Lei Po mad Gass! 
a) Gs) apt om ptity win b O,Ulaaly Sully Kabally sheitl RELeslT Ste Juasr'y Xribylt sl 
ees op Vom Ctuaidl & oyeaall Laaad Juasty Les uulll Leal Sh amie a3 plot he sat who 

coe Kaz 3h BGM Loh abs, oleic St AL) Chaiog pgeanig LAgt xlLtall yygKi By Spaw’Il 3 (ugly I 

BOE est LES eyghay aul, 1K easton gh ap D whys wllendly ly gets primal! 

6) BS a> 15) The words in brackets are written by the second hand. 20) Sic. 

Pov 
Be rail, Coasdly ceyally ST yLT sel ops pL! hoe Rigid Lele ll Juodt 2 whey 
Ngeenll Leboly ale SI At copall pm Legkizy cacalin & prrill, gpl Kew Fane LITO # aac 
BS AE or SoSN Hadlly Keb om od S eyghs gral! Giaas gol GY Kala alt yO (cours 
3 WUSy aiid 4% railal Germ Lagi dem acd ihe SIN caps mall gel cyt atll cre mcs) pyyihe 
Leiner clileno brie gomd gll LY loss 8 wuss Y, Ko (goudly GIS J Skelly GUS co plt o 
oh Popgale vo St said Xgl nade ly SA nays Leladte KEIM LOS LIN, wLibslys dual eh esalltd 
gertllcr Worhae Kal clat 2 SS yale Le emiiry AS (S580 LD segs ki me Ns gh RASA LY oat Soh oe ane 
ee cyt seal Rigi mall cctithe AE or pam MO Myll he apd GIS wade & cocdlh abut 
cee 55K oye palit watt Woo geile Qakitie cit Bom SoS wall cout Gephlatl pengail 
DAF os! gall cr Uap ill errgall Ups -nay Gulanditeo cgay liptelsN IF eLoybest bel gh 55) 
zit) BS ye Bogen Kali Chu! LSLiasl TPH rns Kile he lett pamtito AIS (gSio wall alSh eye 
he) GUS ray e paopll WS Khelil D935 ogg paell wall cette cg ot, zt be Myst he 
SS op ESS om srazall yg py! Lyallesy Unie ors} ete eit Le sh GILG Css iy 
Lead Umtand GUI copall lily Rema H,Pzlly Xepaw O,Ulaaly Kribed cg siathally [glite hel slp t Rana 
Kewas be sly KaSlad (sally Kaw oan) 3 shel Knacd call Jat ew 8030 cypSy Aah yy SAL La ato 
OF py *( G91 igh clay lh lla Jim Bd oy Klos elenll ema cath duo Bog Kmad srry 
OS NShy psf pblica Logs alsa oF AIS gf MGT 22) Leet one Lead onoe2 Bo Rakai oye cil Stas 9 es} 
gored) Syd GE QF BANE nanding Amys gear Lagan gs lily Lau cot) Syd Bt Rit aden Legsang 
aumalce (iy Aind gully bi &) spits GOL cds wing o * anal, nde crt) om sb Gate hadlly Lots 
FBS (he xmaln cguy add ily BS ebyt RAS wile of amsle ends atey cgublly Bs hees seul gf 
sie eS melyrol yd doldeTy Rt all sULctal lily © daly ce S ole oa Ss ee Sy Vy 

2) ar 16) E>) sy added by the editor. 19) an, 

39* 

m4 

ail cr dels Keyes aeeaane csi ngldy Yo 3} unas cot wes wldets ist BS yo,3I 3? silt weal) oye Lead Chapter 80. 
pbs Obs ugsinay vl cst (902 Ge, S sy LT Loalglt Cisailly sims! Hoag 3b delall 
€ olSna RUST ST ay cod Leaks boy 

Jull, 
pylons] 

Hoc Se 
oivly Gua 

oo, 
Kealally rst, 

lpSly glass! 
hilly 
sly wees 
yy 
einem 
Slamdd Sy 

plUbally elit Lt stain 
sal} oss 3 jevul, 

ibis 3 pyeedil 
clall es 

S8\en (eSeNe 

bey 95 SoS Casas 

f2)! 

a seo y 

fe dy Ae 

Ake iyo b sli}, 

ca 

; te : 53h at wbaaiss 
Pier rere 2553! Guat 
5) u 
al dacs pShass cgile ey 
ee | cowl aly | 
daw | 
| 

Bo ge ote lol ermirvinss Mimyos Gomes Lyactily womorass ALO» Gaming! mbiitly Spdally 

ehaaddly us, dao | 
ebudl cent, | 

Neat ced 

§. 

Liew 9 Lud eSlelalte rolind! M1 colLATAS yamnts So mains Ol ASAT 5S Ladd Ode at @ sgl fo 

an wat, J, ul e 

cs! Ulm AMAL adh Cggcunty dash 

& Ulmatity theth clest Li Uginmmis Laity 

coapetts Zz nytt Pizscy LoS cyaadl Syomt Sot 3 | wimioy by Lea legal’ cst gleraord coms} Sy oys ‘badd sh ual, 

The table on this page is written by the second hand, 

39 

fous what, uel a ae Laas ye Seg Key hyde ST ce Chapter 80. 

r 

ae 1‘ ae ie ee MS Ax Load €. oh ay uo} gist oF i é ceentlatten! Ladys tena) Sas Rady : 
a all Ua edd PAS & Lizios Abn K Knega sll eevyaor s/s) Bald Landy patie Last Ul eal Setinn Widetad 

Stee ye 
° 
fo 
Fit eg ay | ae Ra c. 
et pI ee 5 Sow ue Be oS | i} WV is 
| | ; 
added , = ‘ | 331 | Y “ie 
faye aks (SPO Otan es . ordi) tees a er 
| | aot Dns 
wolf n | & G 
16 tedl oad Sees “hs ‘ ‘ : 
aA ete aid ‘ | >| 
Hho} on 
Cr | pets G 
pid ee ay ew stil “hed, a8 £ ag kK 
alls Ulta | 
walt ding] tt | wet | sd) FL - 1. 1G ts to 
Seanad foes 

4) This table is written by a second hand, 13) Sic. 

Chapter 80. 

| ogee oT 

4 

an] 

= ee na fo Ae ‘ 

wl ml» 4 ‘ae F BER & 
é y eee es | ps 

Ppa EEG) Beh 

jee ee 
ie a l 

| | 

Ne ee ee ee ie 

G | “ — 
£ sacar ee | aN 4 He ny 
: ey “ss a a \ aaah 
¥ ¢ —~ | G . ren nyse ‘ i 
‘ ‘t; ‘3 6, we y te G 
NS BE) ELE tee 
e i re et root c 
(a areal a ae az ace 
Flee | ae esl ie 
elt} ) ob | See eet ee 
|* “Le 
| es if re re 
| c eas ae ‘ | is i 
as ~ ‘ ie. nad ty | :s i g & £ ‘ i (v4 

= 
ao 

{ 
qos 

{¢- 

Sete Ay 

4? 

Tess 
Seite eye 

ie 

mp 
3 

| So tcag os 

m4 *Y “iy a 
Ss 

z 

aa 

os 

<i s: 

lit isx ¢ 

<6 

xe 

IM isx 

in PAO ee 

% 

it 

ox 

me % 

cenit & glx, WIA S shui eS ond CHT Lag, St o> getty olaell B craigs Syke § Las Uo sil 

Had LUD egts Lely LPlgat of 90 Lagabeh Slay Srstt IAS & Xaddiall al op Lagta ply Adina’ 

Holgcads ON» f. 
LDbgtand (8 SAKES Laila DEG aad omit Ob geen Kelasll Loliwe eS) cpl 2th pyglase api Sad 
AKI F Rigggles Vy Gmail) pithally sail eomtstll sedilty play wile Ugiligied dud Oly yyy tl ods a 

BS lant cha Sh yd Ld Sb pglel! Rabat Lodane cords S * yyy eins eel coe BT aad oh lees (Beat yb 

8) This table is written by a second hand. 

13) yp pleas 

sa de xe! 351g nabean G) Sh plead golll cyyo dat! bevel an VI Lb Chapter so, 
ie ee on Kh Slot G 1 Ub ys pat ldo! Be all pul # MNyds ole chs SIAL SS ope acetyl 
BUS, US pgaw cmc sailly 8,9; By CG RAMI SHS Dy LIL oon Lge ¥F BLbaall eypomaty ELS aes 
us ails La Sig dS” uke 4 le uniale maddy gripe 3 ee) cng ee (BLbSb ayes 

wena : | 1 pan nt 
| ble 19 f ae ole ; 
PIE (Ee SIG elZlele} 4 
bes esc l ere 
Cee og he eed ie 
Se ee Ge aCe ce ce eat ee & 
2) vain PA An ia 
Ct OS or Rae Re ae ie ar 
» fe G hu h. rs Rich My, 
i a ‘; Rater on 
ie — g | — . | 
ammii emeie sene AL = J 
Ane Sa ee yn Be ae shall b Latgte 50, 
EE PES ECE LE Gowan EY) 
ol ae eee 
G i ae i ( a aa 
ete bet ieee ey eye |” cor 
| ls deel t | 
E | | Fe : } FS) O23) SS) Om 
el filele | Se 1 Galt al S| = 
EL ULE] ig 8) ee 
Pe RLM ne le 
esize te Ee | okey GG | P| 
Gee EE) BEES eb) 
EEE) | oe P| 
oh & | a + & | 
% | on ( a ts C | ee | y 
£18 Pie & EE =| Be — 
oN b¢ | 
G pod " oe lee ’: iar 
j | id ike aes a € ; 
E| & EEE EES e o 
u a 

LSoleet Lely yamSAll gab cor Sprnle Byliy ley pb (FEUD SE ys 
eSoASS 19 8 @s Slee 

ied 

53] 

3 

5 

t 
- 

fruse >; 

ee 

doigia 

° 
if | Basel ee 4 | ot? oe) if parece: % Me 
nace earns en revenammemnree | | pacar owes enamine : 
h a 4 aoe .> ida 
4: Po aT i) = be % USI » 
Se ore er a | | pe 
a 2 I, j : rg) 
3 P53 aS (i aw cs) S rye 5 
4d ys} aa 5 lus je 14 yo 
5) Se pre a 
2 % 
3 #13 | 

Chapter 80, Lest maloaol S s,Lady ag sill a S allt aglyncl 55 3 Sh 
A de py plket § niet syle forges 9 sbontt whe gLuLaot J, 

Gast % Leia Pris Fe i ‘ids . Rian ; 
a Liss ba de iets lect aioe ui 
PALES IS oe La oie UB BS Te Mmty Bie oypXa le badT MAP cass GUS Bai Kore Shad SI ol Lod 

1) ergre 11) 

laly el sean anda i sell gia 
na el at ke a Bi of obs wt a ERIS ye I) path Salle Wf GH bagel 
" as} el pioee wand es phe ailen Lgaadis Xan cys y fotos Baath oot Kita Leake of; Rams bt St A 
a oh Ip Nene curbed sly wads cy sia jot aut wil oot ; 6 ob eg endl sail! proye 3h 0 
ee Be pe ajay alll eat de Chall pantie cometh crea Sond Sores be dua apes 3 Lytle aie 
Caos gape hans J3l Stal sitll I meal ey alidy Mex ASV SLM at cS cot wntgiltll coated mats! 
“bade Btmnd neal By oil gH80 38 sell) exes he coda ona be hiss pds Asay cyehalh ely! wordy) 
adel Prcdy lintens Gm wyo5'e duell bl Ms siphlall 448 plant (8 carhatly Pigctle cgarrdll erate 
ess bs gh La tly din ob pay ga to Hal gland Legennse” Ciel cattle oye ailh tntte crs 8 be 

( les Lal! tees Login (S8S VYaitiy, Kel KALE 8 ew odd cat EM edy -bydlt ( g58> zee Jdall 
wrby Callisly aban Cady SLM, Qolt yh Ladd Cy hag of cobuiys ary! ends EI pyeXad LO ast he 
abie obit pag!) 3 LPLitliny pdgmalll Slade sbigns WLS & JLAUT ako nel, Laquald Ay atleast 

wb seh aby a Legge passions a6 igs 8 claell ¢ AITOAT shingug Cgynotull dastems 

Ledecm bo ored S ashe ¢ 8 benga’ aw gould Ron Legitnas tilts Lesson gb Lagiine Untans $0 
AD gsm ty ttt oye Gad Ko be he Slab Ghatas Ode ty as by yall MN pgeml eel & elas S315 
abel KpSl4S ADL oT means 3 oy Poult Mees Shs Seped srolssit wis Laity bey Y953 4p ee bod by | 

; SIGS ELSI Gort Real aylanay Crys Leloty cosh cya ill caplio ¢ gece Bly la SS} sajlaee bel 

cir Bw wylaney Gl lain’ 98, SY edlatt, wll, ceo Hythe Gals, art Bayh vlarey 
nylasaty hatng I53 dud Ladyy ne Gmaldly Keys Lili, Zr Samy chal Khaw lazy ule gall te 
Kryo Behe ualdy alah Keil alpen, ALY Unrlandly Royd LS, Kad Be Gay hal Fagae 
Ca ad eplally tals Ry9 ype Waldy cil Read wlaney GLAS: ealully wally 
ARIAS LYS, Laie cylilly GILT Egemy epg SI Karly mat GA Syygtie By Legs phe Lis wy bases 
| FS be he SybKy OLATL ew Oly K Ws ehyg CAMBY Eglly pital (HB ry Hoe bg! uaa 
& elite e HS Ys | ht laag! oa eS 8)584 Baty Odds cr doty if ha, vot, ws yoga 69h 3 Po 

4) 8 added by a second hand. 

Chapter 79. eore mi 19 Shiu 8 baat Be Sle! . cyt bend re btemeaet) De aialigesting ois x 

cyuphonia Broly em & LPIaW oyajlone SK gel eyes cpylde de lea cxtyntl 

an 98 ely Pret ents 948 ane GISM (1S Pesta ers Uoosa es ss 138 “ee ° ‘ 
A ego LE emis cposth IAP ce Rlaaidl slylanbl ent clita! phe Sob } abla Jia uP het | 
ia prety Amr Liie Sly colsrlt g Slaita Sly clare St enby Jue dita hes Seth oneal ain coal ser ere 
wert A CU OT mat apgt co pedl DM pi gf pall GY Lame ST AB, cow pigiill yf Legal ull ob jbgatt 
gins Nels Kay oh SD sylomtl AL sh pmnitell fro he crell IAG & 4K ueahd aie oye *%S milly well 9 | 
PBS Sy aplladi tli pat Uslend 8 sallly mantll ae a Suede Lag ST cede) ouethy oa Sat wclye fy 
Bios (ald oy uly Gmail! aa ego pl) Goose Lalli Mim Smad he moe aye & ay ey8 ey pod! aa dt 
EN By Unplll who cabins Juul laoS & Jools sd BF madi Jae he aye ey AD Shae Ege 
Bo NSN INS cael) MS om of ob pail BI amg I ody BS TS AS GF us de Jt 
drofitonll cal tame St Day pllall 205 pyylall styicad cody C6 Gumtill ewe coe Gil alae Ss Coit Ste Ceaadlt 

CK 23h yy clos SH gb! By QUT rt Lame MT Jud exdgll GB Lela ow At alae gh glo 

o 
class & eye padll daa cna be iad Alyy Lill bes day dy Plage wats co) Olas S gaat dae ema Qa Gh 8 
ht (G359 ras 3 Lowe St crdgll 90% SGN! togastt cpXabd LELEES oy) Cras dy Plage cenltdll 55 

rms Lgriolee Leiag Let names Si3t 5 call wll cr bed a pty paald ey eye jel Ose? wy! Aas Lele” 
lito, Teall Jim ad Bahis GLI Lydtt Yin ery GLENS, coral & Lamy St crrtell ype Ugtlen 

39 Gets oreg be Juiokd Wudiwwe gf Lucle Legal & yyplall alpital wrby Gh Cyd Lowel cocdglt LY aamaiiay fe 
PhS} (5B p02 73 Kemaill Sm 9 eubyactt Ered Veins SH By Lyiole PASI E oh le Kamil p> 

9) So 

38* 

rip) AB prbiody onel pdhey acyl Kinase al E }: a 
en, oy ood . # 

tia \ ; smSya S wy! Ay bast Socket pital Blacoses { | 1 a * Fe e 

| ; saklae re 3 a, 

t 

ret wall Dele Fb Crag! RUS 95 GLUT Cod Cuagll if 
e Del wipes cylanil wl, che Gull jrutill Tedutte Sabine +. + } ne i 
al sd } Ase 

if 

f 

ais whe 8 lil! wail aly he seats ae Gi ky 3 3 
«ey ee lh Ske perc) SS Dmae xa is 3) as 

o : he nists gas Lgad lt SLAs Cael YW aces g@hen 3 Sel 

etl syle) hernll Soave miLKay oan wy o past 
SA opiiy Rag ddt GAY ary grag Oybad) Cawolall Usd 

PAI Relucy FLU, 

plier ore. cael (Srboe nRBAN Load acogtl Squat 
wr las} wr cmbast bb med Py Baan BNpd Aetged wad, dag 

cbt 55S So ohn 1d wlll Just lace 

Gud 

p> rt Lemke phi ot pilgamst amity 03 stn Oaho 37 (5.35 

tke Rw Cob Gy anh ANS 95 Frying why & pled aig 
OTe SS ethanss) prlay Kissy 5 AST, LPLOLD Sottay clowadd LY 

28 Uwe why & rel EAS 93 til aS Leal Cans 
UnAlS Sp2 wets he owllm Sle Ke is AS a, Gls 

craall Shel, GBI! xard St @rbar Jy CISL AGS asd Fe Kay Lindi Seiisy 

lyst gistienly igtshl ae) jet ea, Slaalt 3) AXSy prbas Sbbb Seay sad) 

55 SSL OMNES SEs nce ae eae a nt 

esis allo, jth J Stwly Rago3} es 3 ales 3.) ery wile aelle Kom Ari 

st2tl Sbely BA! Gay abeall rite, GALL BF 

c 
- 

era 

tat i 

ds Retemnse he sca srg 3 alo. vy atts Shad St) onal Gals 93 anal 

c¢ 

Les 

© Gye! ve 
AAP ree ape ior 

PAE ps} 

a] 

ion inne? 

Negba 

| Chapter 78. 

Chapter 73. 

yo SS ae vlad apace AW tech oan ie elatt “ale er se oe watt oo : 

Wd on JSS yt 95) oly cand call Cot nS! typ eal eB Ht 8S ! 
Ctehnkanll ¢ gaye Ipfiy dy RLGdn yt® Yale Ipke sland Gait § on pet Nims Lal 
cpr go Lulad Lend byl 3 Kasia [pio oye Kips” Jub MO Ml Gey Oeiglt Bt she LPynmit ig 
hardy claim Ade oe Ingedisl pil gy oT Lath baad od! g Bad) mts oye balls 1 
oyblass 73 BO [glia 2B Xmyssie KS Cnmatdll LoS} Kole! Byte Gas Si lp sana’ ae cs “ 
lel Bythe ASS xilcle Syow Gmail Ut Kyyall cole LAS PES Cus d he WS, 
cortinies Yo Mall oe Rasllalh aby Ltias! cyshae S nig! lly cents Py ermal 
Csi glade ap cygiding GAA Gola dey clot ais op a veh 
Cabo maniills ADSI dma MEET corrne SAT cyl REA sad Gueedisl Gps on to 
sed) 8 wade GS, HAS he ds, He he hho cyahd dS ho Us o Uae sanding colebaw 
plKE ST lst gli Y Le Lead aydb be Jade gai 5b glad (gS lgdl, Riles 
B® eoptll UST S ellos by aS Iall gio & ade en 

4) yas 

Age eel Bid oles Gy et 

ee aemcaemcn cum tte amen tpatnaennm a ey cente Sa minh A em 

peal AAS? nad EE ggd and wall iw OW IS | 
rth hat ly BST ged Lis? oy | 

sbilisy aah gy ja be 9S jo pS ped aad crit Siw QW ISI | 

Bylo Las? 4, | 

pew plod de Jay eeiacee od and crit Kae ol 10 
shawl! laos Y npse 9Py Ken) mad yas sat Jud alias Sy 

16) lS 22) Lacuna. 

hua 

Py 

3 a 
a 

| 

ha * 7 
phew Sl eeSs he Jou placa 948 and wail Xie of ISI on" ie 
“ ! [os | 2 a 
gael) aad ply aplall cy Li? 9, 

hewn SI blast} de Jou festlaxas 9 gi mas endl Siw wy 13) ee P 

Rada ST) Garand Reh gl sick yoy = é 

Fle Ay KOy)3 oT jt wSW od aad wall Kaw ehh LSI | , . 
ss eos 

noe eeeetenneneenennununeireenvemneneet 

a 

KLAN Rey, Wh coli LI 
plucd} Die tall, ch ydlty ' ii 
E91 nh Bay janll eo oll dle’ | ee 
ALL eH SF way Ih led Shyrcdianly e er etree 
* ‘ Kien C. 
peeke (oat, olill raga, ‘ ¥ 
Go 
Sot Shely 15S! as, Slats of 
BANOS Renan! cob UI 
sill JB Py 8ST mys LIS apis AEB ped md weil Kw 6 151] og 
tall RPT alt Eat By Rhewd! Rrgdh ole, RBA, veliy ota be lariat | 3 ce 

Pe 

fo 

Chapter 78. 

By eas De vite de Lgewdly (paldo ey y) oan} uti g $s ps of 
Kill reads cre Kywoly Lewaiey bey sre one Jurati wengedl he el Et be ae oe 7 wes oa Ley . 
PY band wate GUS SSBF Saal warped che Leal pani ooh cntedill ay deald & he, rele $ bs he 12, « o ie ae 

Oe Ralis re 

KE) 0 Cena sit, Koyo Bote wks ti od ait AE pga A scram oy bs ae pened Idee obs ur j 
cr rested) Loawy stad saad! Loawya yedons oy! beta Kardaglt Roly caitgall HP Sliat 8 castult aes : 

wily Ss s8iSly OLS! ay — Tu 9 Orlame Sh legates ona bo oad 4% edt viKl be BL ASCE Gre a 
wrgally Fe ake oth Lawall o oyly wajul FRE TG sal ally of Ob ake Bb gid Up eneelt 
Stil gall corde 15B Sodsth Lgceost ns Blowl peaisl & 3 att aL SU, osbeest one be chaos Usl sdit Laas Sohal te 

pamBall eras com golly oy aad coril coSIT At AST sbe yall aml OS ke Cro. Kad ail oii 

CU APT 9% 1S CAS ge asuas’ cr AST gacll ol gly Lsyleidl 90 oy RIB aduad oye ih 

ema tspweUin eee “ 08 Neemacemmnrerie 

HY have coli ct | Sew 3d} Cascais | ? ea tt Careadt 

bi et 

Kary cll wo} lars ST Sie de Leia dol, Ks et gy ee lo Lpat pmioes solely bla! Lecoss) Sylecm Sy Po 
€ Sal, HOLM Brod wes Lys xdLe! WAyedd Coane Comal be ns Laks by es Sore! 3 Lyme iret diay 
15) dosichon 

oe CEsMtalt galt é Sisth MAS, SUS them Um 9% ay eygatiiny Lagsse o5M’y VASE csi eal) Chapter 77. 

an 88 was MN Qe ale ahd ol atl hyett nSl le Wists Ab Ca¥ ya le heeds Loot 
of bi Creal oS ido! up 29) aay myx Sata lant Sy Lepatin pygKay end 5 

SoH FS Realtor ng Ae pt eSy bys JK Blam ory Lag 
Lena cps Kegel puhS oui TF Hi pabll ES coy Fa? 9 APS Kemet LT ue 
eb POF Kime py PA Rly Bgl al oySt ply Aig 0007 

SlKins umsly (apa 9 Pram BAS pay rae bad es isd} werdedlld Kalas Lb 4d4vr Lesass 

i] 

AAT coy TAPP coe PAA 9 14. & Mamgllall AUST om cna RPe Oe 5K alt MIS, 

SIGN ede lyll pal coe sthy penn Sy Rewgcsl Lyal Gammds Le Coby IT cya eKrmadhll egal 5, 
wgtin AS BSS LoAly py esta Ladin SLA Kein miay YaST he Pyoo esliaS and eyyp pina Odell JB 
Sdey HST wolyd sabe (geloallh yoy eh aoly Getty oluais Ty Hg! cabs! cp 
PEON ally Bib) sat Stall oc conn cori! clamlly itn msll GyBo cn dlally glalalt ye — LS 99 le 
erpamall Soa AAS by CuhIS aylithy Le Flay (yonz LI aes cps Rial Qobdad Golpd Sarit, ail) GUS & 

a 

teal oye Doty K exe BAN yall yp DUS ge opi, lae WhO Gy Ragslh ay XB ALM IS guolee Ut fo 

Umdtantly cxASbyy Crear sot B obadll om oly Keys eile pyall Utoas ska Cs redt cre Opals Gas! 

k ols ws BL pwd i pail es! cP) Ad UT 5 3 = AAI cohaad up coe) Ryesiry ay lene Chapter 718. 

wetcdy cya pthtty Kemi ce Dahd proms! Rasehladby cypXlS Ley Copail) gall U6 Cepltast ope I laiie tact Laie oly 

bad 
; 

cs theres pal ely iy aS rho gS Fy bed Aoty K cre SoM ceaedl cw MUS Lab comnow Let Listy 
TAN 3 ysXS I Lei Rem pe RL ouatly Siay,! WOES phate St yo By Coes Sy Spe egos be gala) BML oy3 
BE psa cowl cate SL pesill SH cory peudes be Leas hats less ALS Y Leattgn St KES cpp WADI, Bye i 

Eihust Dsl Kenw PrrC, Lee hubby bail x gam Lede role K Cb Comey Leityyd capans 

PS Sy HUD NAD ue (6b Pra Ligaatitonl My © ylddylT sul Leddy glamall a pte sll Gast 99 

3) Sic. 

Ltt) 
(MEIN 3s 

Chapter 77. SY xy dant Gals te MUS JAt ale Bic he pymibl his 

Metres 

syle Leap vio wyLZLXS ng Sag amet AgamyT diay nee lei Lass bev gL 

SER oye Laiite cyl 9% Umhe sh, che aw solemn oy? corde! US we Let coil we 
CEMA cn yd be (cls nos he pail pamtitg v1 elall he oNgig Hoey & Slalb cipsagy hs | 
ESAT B inyriogn ARs Le canst oe Jl nabe eolabstly uo caiinas Eilat 0 

BAT cro SGA cyally ahyuadll B wall Ri Kasbyw greiaail ath OY ddsLo etd 222 asiy | 
Kandlawlly Radial od om zthe Keaby shigtt ore ope nthe Riabal Kom gS Gwonatell Syke Dy 
Zac) SF macs SUT rio qlydlty cyst Get Or cyapthally KeSlally wadill ot eye cya ptindly 
aad on aly aig) Bt Sue coy ae ope sly My cyst Sle Cale egy! Kyl 
om Oph YD oxss Shalt S iy sme CUSy ymalll § eV, Leylindl (HF8S RE Le Guattll shad 
CD CPAP AMS Le ad MLE om yg rt S cp dSI Lslset alana § Glay Dall abd of Appin lo SH agdiyel to 
Eben GAS she Bila LUN yo,I8 elae salra tava; Lente peillly Gaal Winans” Lidy calySIt oly 
MNS pads Laity Sola caigdt & copa! VLacct gamit yp hitii pion beak Sh bags mpaalie’ ope 
ST Beh Gipg Wily aSSads By Lagabe ygio” MS GE 2AS, oy 2p2 UB yoydty Gas 
Hpanllh Moa Cyl cigly hasnt & bpmnKll Kembia ce ogXs D eyly Cheanlll Ke Leas 
TT UT Maa, able ope Spade TS sad pho oy oblall pgall gare (BES giry Cd, oh Ul I 
Sid (53 igen Rallate Jilia HIS pyall USB gh Go wall St ad ly slyly lig 

ops 

ely ilS Lphiasty LESty SAKE LRA, eit Ril CBS he rund Gaol! Sliss! 

cobs! cor cyl GA GE OEM WHO Gy Legsdlady ond SOLA patty ge chute Crass! 

clans JUIN wrdy 9Py D5 0 wily St aay ere! Jp! 

uss post aaa ym Ane iy) 

Ro gely cop telen pe Lats madd Bw ST dt endydt 12 200 op gad Giphll pe Go ale 1S eh 

Cent Kaw winds My gphhad Av} iid ds! uw BUS! Abs 5 ust »! Siow 4 le chal ¢ 

Mody LgHIED Er Lyxads leg ‘ ae ae sty iis ta es 

et (ARR) 4/0 4 3/44 
ea eekal al o| >is als 
23 cores J} * 45 So 4/4 BY a|3 

a ge re a 

Lands! Lagensty (umithll Kind ealilT cantly Ase agerd ¢ yam 

& oles Kyedl 

G5 
SUNK un Usaig fey Po us wdtas bo Lg bP eseerd) on za} me conrad wast wb} files 

cyyenlty 

pel SB KIT 2 98 aphe amniis scbtiy Lethaad di J oval mad epee gAlT ordell 49 

ny ments hall bli gaatliag IFT ope Mv 9 Quel SSD Gamer nil Bed gal 

Kahu he Kose sion lib Ligmd 151 Gb 5% on csi, urs wrmdy SEI ope bel okay sie 2 at 

os be Js ip A Saat eat ies oral Uf Saye os Assy aici inal Chaptiea9. 
Me Wolds and ano Ste) co Laas} abut cyt Raupatoa EygXa be Lgday uhS ga Somme 

Dal ag sb edt By te 
or eidlly mab de wb 

$0 

aad bey waht 6S ny os a Dd ay etl eer one ote wrggh? 3 vis 

ffl bai 

Chapter 77. slUSL alas Lin RAGS elsad} pete wetyel asl ons oped 

Stritw’S) Ute yp xnajgs RKP de xsi g day 3 Suit u gate! ops BT de gad 

Ladto Logad ee waXee pthels St pes Linas Logit Laagt LS Ody RAs ade Gra ‘rete gh 3 go 

dT dee g kay TT WGA MSI tess Led Gh aS Had oll uy! lene, chat SL» 
Say6 con poll pyall eyebS Nebo Igve) maly seed, gruie obsey willie gal Bs seb 0 
Baby eared cn the CAI pgedly filed SO nab Tle pn pth uaa dt pols Jpop 5 JED aety | 
sowsll ce Ast Kail gb BAL Ley Regione colfyatl slonk Oleat @ cb lo ley ewpsls joo 
foga al Sib aad dgrbs Lt YS Sih Lead OMS WA yg yl Lib coslasll ps KS 
SHAKE corto chase ott Soh ng Opec lrge ASS Soh Upllgeet ops pki ail esl gio 
Ratghlas) oS p> shoe ob waggk?yy ie GY mumble sl, as wis Bwyd , Sh AS s Lea teal be 

elity ' of Mee Kawlad! yagi ot. (ie ta see Bead mandiad asthe (3 ow 44 Fo. 

werad silly heblh isan Les es) Slai S$ 2 why Mo AP da net ply iY rae Fi laas Pe ) 
Cgdluae Sub a phe NALS! dF Ep ADt Me beta S) he wks oye Al hay gra yloitl 3 

java hints Kpseghtast Dye se eb Gy ac) ko ie aly Gos sdk tous Slo» ad 
py WHotteseets ail ably ToT FTA aulect yagity Ola Feses aad rmaill sepiiy fo 

ee &) dhrASS sho cp oS, ASN eb, Sf (he sic west , al prety PosaPPa, Pir 

gee lS tse. Laity Comrgll elyitendSl cysey ciaze Sel oye ozs SV dem ct fries’ ok, 3t (s0lad 

cod he) Lead act oi: by Vy ea aa’ am sh Bh ay Ska Ub ay Sl ae) : 

aby wt pts SKE & 4 ipvai cn a xls (Fa A aw snd} bell BS yqaw AS yali Semml cyt Ss a3! aly i 

Leib iBT NAS on cyg SF Radial olye ST SST Gh aL Vy Grilwilly pally PRT, Nieaaell oye 

37* 

sa ay 8 Sox nt ose att wien slaw! Age Leash aud GlaiimS) gay Chapter 76. 
ple Bue ash yn? & cgtare we gh eels Slat hae > os Jusidle ee Sle ope eetltl 
Blogs cee aoe & oy aalaist prepa cratadt Patty BLS HL lel sds cytes > ° 
‘elt who chy ie wale gash Leg ppbuctsl ig rlae crd,2 1S dom seylt Sal & Badlady Kle ell Gtel ep 
cee ds eal IA aby tl Oiled oLbh sanill Shamiistly cxbluvcally WSSgI1 sity wlasdl widoas “is 
era Role Uses Rola Ud, iow (gab Gals Sealll a) usted bo Ode wyneeelly gems * gad) 9@ st 
BS yleadll aad dy aPbile Lett ST NAD oe Mio gay colye ean aad cypeneselay 2LLt ELC 

pos Rolo kad wosea dn cytlele Last a Shes, KS pail usted Kw Oo tines | weds paddles Kable cp SI 

° 

Pe Oe 2 

eyrule (Seb 5) Cyr Aw KOT ol dnd cy es oS ya used cylly cw cnlal} eaisly xi dew SS alll, 
Cie (6b yas Rad cy dtge TSS Least city dds! cosony sland Ope allyiitwd by Reb ops by io 
sively pie KawdLnll By Leal 2th sgl usta Raslilh oe Le MN Les eyprtzty aPlilee role op lads 
ots ebay caaladl aplt wey eygalis Sy yedrteriny chal) glo gaolge rs Aya 

Aygg ctben (coms ae eglidelh ogg, —Kualty cqamdly 5,99 aad eggs Eig coamet eypptiaelly Saat to 

prmsicte fawks thet) Unasidedy ils nis vy Reger wo AD smtp La! Cyndy meal! PER es 

PUI 50 Sod (ls cle gall IAP wendy 945 et Kewilll ope Ge Ay ot Cotes Ho ho Slal 

Fda seamdls colss Sf 1» Kefaal,! els dt & SE & Syiinll UY BUSS 49, r 4o J Lgxacts iy sraz Xvoll} Chapter 77. 
5b QESW Ugalh Seats cobine crams abil 6b Juolics pbsst hth olaiS Yd Ringel! Swysitls 
crlatel Kaldell USS cpap plat (5 Keel albee asd Es S) SAAT copay amide! Garang tgs) ie fy 

cppitny eca Ny cLatll 8 allt yyid Lisle Legit Legrnany Slaiiiw tly glac>I per ciel aaisguy 

8) all 17) wb 

ail Sal oy pith (wolaall pyatly bien as 95 aord JI 

cS SSby Cablonet aginas ygaitlad mipnalars eshaquadl Lend ea wis 

OF Oh bgt MEAled cry ad Leb 2dlee GF cymes scl sohds Seaaitl! Loony, wel onto e 
WyBL cae WO opp otIATLE pyidlly Aslgiiy mie SUAS Lg see sas de rts LPAI » oh leis 
gp RAN eed bans oye sendy (gems Ur «5? Cs BS Gl Inssy bendelly: giooll ne I 

nthe ew sulin gANl ty ol’ why iaty edas GM Gutl in dugg ue hail (65 oye US 

Who spat Kaeb SS Clyw Ode 6d GI Land primer Sy nine cb alll De nds 55 ail ghee 
Slonsist A DUS eyyemniad cnetrall cya gb tole odaen sles cetindy DUS S25 camacey KAS past @ ae 
ors x ypbaits doo sims abil ge Gt LOS py 98 JIM on SMI pgully end gpoly 
EP epson GOuaill OL PAT BM ey aty Epilly IeattT (sIyob copclaiie Sazll fo 
Res eet yl arsany Noell pattie Go poge K o5 Garball OURS Up cyasiKs withed (ody jlyidl hues St 
AS ae Sy pall IOP 68 Raw JF Rapldl Gey Cod Uapasth LLL pyre sas or dy Ege Ie wl ig 
Listed 9 gb eb Bh gles mE S 6b yh All eyzizn dhe lal co! ahs be cern ba : 
pol dpb shonidl Iyidiy elblyncdl Lyatl Laie ST aii 13 cel IAS (6b, ylasST MS alive 
Send & ogra Leal so pals ela Me oy cardi (les corms sthe - CAL prally Opal Miss 

HAY pSOuarzy Mal Solo ppedbing Lyi Loar, (ows de Kunal 358 EOS ee eyensiiy cede pall lad 

37 

iF al ow i sine Pew wr Ala A ole, 
ed + oy x Lae = cia ~ 8 20) 20k or SaaS pb Kaede 
pia’ os aa) iB, be ae ole me a ost Be rocei Meh lntesed cad Uae. 

me A‘ i un st eon RP alt Citta, Myrrate nay pens Ngee Sond leaniad cgoiy (thie! 
i” ent slma be lady Salt ney ade sll a gay 8 35h esesbs el clk 

‘otal at oils pf Slain dy dlySt de ade cs, LT wens xual! UW Lat et ably ashy 

a shou eon eordine iL een cals pn Syte A pil, yA om Al pall dy MP 
ay het cect ete Stat SY aad exe Hot B ywSb epics stl weal cadlilen ul) nae be ve 
pian Gib ds: call oe Ubida Ladys Gade th wis pyliy Lai dle Sony WAR cyplitiy wris: cab rrall 

peal el 9h Cbg cypasdliay ad qyessbas Coley One Uslall ST ya, ail 
pipiaally eld) (ofp Ryall Qe aad GOK Age pte Gudlual (ely KeyLaall ui ald alerted 

oo Bs aially cr! 28. Lgsealaw (pd obs Spi cst Mad atl cys cise lwaal a) Sility Spill Ooge 

ot aoe GN pg) iaad Col GAKa sty soremy sede Silat! pile cha sill Soi MST eas oles fo 

cr AEN pally Leng sche Kannash £LSY atnl yb buatigd plaice Sh wala eyyha gill AP pail ys 

A yp i com Salis cs? ufone ul Raaaad wpudiidy cil eye) uyry Shamall 34,9 Ase wg dles 

Ha UE ail ite coat tbtae eatally all Uegle ets in atts wll Wh 8 Leddy 

pray egy coos way les eye CWLal gall cybdaaily cghuniily Lgikasd colastl St lay cyte shoal : 
cysdolitny sad yyhmsts 53F Saye used Kam (cd sadill fyi and coach Ay Chill pgadig and fe | 

eengyohen cr the GOLA pally dell vklog hash Canamy tlanl] wriniy POV) hana! Rpsdll Gqustl 

Ud 

al3} ys a. Rent de! bil ao XagyS} Lo. oul: 

hd Gta 4% glo awl datas Ka8 hig on eal Sls sul 

Chapter 75. 

OF 181 gerd by oan pal ie cil en Sasi pty adding uc 
vray RES oye peitll IAP om ltt galls pyne oad Sete! Cn 

gills Lashed Qe a8 cll Gat gr Gunilla! ao Ses ge yah tol tl 
BPoy Spier g ylld gh 1S ell 19 By testy abe ale gms el # bal oe 

ddd Cb Ls ad, Sy Chaaadl cpali gall cya” Klay ht A! ue oo thy sida wy atau . 

cr parva LAST ogi ngs SLAM ST ays, Spall yh IS di & coy a aba othe 

csielts sade Cans! Canad! eye phe (sole abs aby & eas cre mabey gtd sh os! eine: shady “8, 
git tis lbs Ra NS eal Py Kyat LALA ay Lael yb all bt 
meth petals gyno God cre mdlonll cody PRD czy lads 3 RPM all oypplads Lenil us penta! Leyes Bi, 
BE peed psa 136 cthaly gt plat eye Spy Cormay ShaegSh pypd slams pe Sle cps me (eo 
Chapter 76. F5Sy Fits Oraadl oem Mele SF alls staal oF Coat go +3; ches obs g - @ dail 
Khe sb aay WAS) cower paaddS JOS ue vine oye ALA epally pghrtpSly abana! oss be 
Las mB comands 2 agighe ghoT cst melo gAXD, a Aled! ahh uy ail Pala dal GB to 
FSS sly coybs Dabo aryy Blind Spal LS GULP dyans o! Lixe OF clr ids elas bss : 
Prat eypdsse Y wed Wr ARG (30,1 dba pF AU TAS fy Lidice 8,5RIW 9 Le Key Bl , Lest. 
Reve yp nin midds Botd he AAP ypeaist sare LD count seadbsl eye phe GOL mya [Ghote Sy 
Satis pestis sletll Uple aetna’ (cb yylats MAS, ue 9p Royo MI cst ees yf LS 
SUS pally Uhargl cyt eles! Le cgeertlyy Rigg!) ays PBL elanill One 98s OLE hud past (Oo 
CAIUS gad ly (Bovarty Kab owls cimnBes aaolt iby ne gy wudiom ciao usted BA on ciashally 

3B) a5 dia 10) sstocas 13) ‘i, 

hoe | a) eu ge ae wa ss Chapter 74, 

oO i oe uh me ae 5h sad hn hs ne Lill by mrirudly Lgnid de 
os wt Ge dgall & 3s) as 2 Rint te ut a k CUS ove ede RKTLULI low ens 

ntwatt etal chen SAS capes Ob agitolt Glas crtlicy Gayl all US vole so 0 Chapter 75. 

Seal BSW oye 8K on cel ual) ope pia sl cr} rte att phe J we 
peale ae On wrnaiiy Nghedi agul ayy Kal pres ig AY ala Je rGhF bora reas 6 3B 05T eal 
Lah coat a Bs Mbys sas Ware pedals Best Lee wtadiloay mghhens cllylallé 4 Laas 
RELA Kyle he pyall SA pliag lehgle syle Wiiy ue 3 MIS boalel atgio tly mgale DS aglem fe ) , 
Poy Nghe g 1ST alll GI pO ext GUS by LOS KD gly Reazll RWP Lo ald peamas 
8 Las bad XS ually what end ‘end ee oe dea SS codraaad) we elas} pyast 3 $ al; Live we eis Py 
A, ot enous ex) asst Ladle yen} Farce as (geass S Klas pind sho Bs pode pdt! RAO (yo 
(Gy S Lemditty cpiomll Bbty xlart aang APD, Bb palilly ade pyall [OF gr dnl 
Pe) es! Laan! ppp lat & dads Bye rdw fay ke SI pret) on egsty PAC3}) Spin wlan is to 
eb Pree) up Gaal waa op ae gol esas! & Ss latt palw 95 umes sing Spa 8 ws t3f 
Igdliy Re cmmnS tS Kaw gio os La HST, ST had coe eghF aad pall Shely wen ayo 
unl Reads ope yh ury Siw A (ata ») MS 6 ae ae) pte gdlem yall cy aie 3 rape he 
shh cn valley oS ary pee bBo alll hry clandll Gt ibly Cgphstly Uhewlly sill Lend Garzonl 

US Kaka! Cady St lyon F Rltexe pial RLS wyatt wady sileb hes |. oh 995 3h i estes Bi ae, a 
Shas! psa pi4o3 ) I 5%, evils utes ust es Any andl lead , liga y Radbyive i was gia ae lye nh i 
psedl & Uglesre ray cod esas tS Lgfisenaty wi ae Riewaa WS oles} oy yh es poe) é Gas) 
xelel xls oT toll on Behe B nrgsans ANT SAO Ae geicS! ge fhas od! Ula als eal se 
aly Ol cyodadisy colall Xxy dgadt ahi S ppall IAS Ol,3 cysbaia 3 «xy Lead fags oe ta 
Sele ISN plell SE gilt Juaaly lily slant JU {LAT Jools ISly sLanall i an 
Wy att ret de | alae Jz A Sr eil uals $y cotledl igdill,’ Kolawelt, Ksuas} Su weanySlgs “ 
Lemacrty XL ral § BOS, SE eKin Wrote hile sdol,t by eet a ie hi, duos ue Aa 
ot uate 13ly ue J Myal hol dle Juoly hs, cath mms SU ing ee 

deaths Dba bo él al Shae wy! pre fen) th ds Chaar wy Xxd.9 Wh pas sd Seared hot 3 Veh 

13) asec 20) Cad} 

om vy dot al é peas me on as ee “25h ih, Be se oS Leake (sand 
oo te 8 SUSY! or Ge Sn amass sake Shae adh alias sie Cito selity Kyles Roo yoy d 
‘ aes a 4 Sle GN) ye pF cep endl RL Cait crtigd led pa e MUS dys ype emits d els 
a) gbell Se a iho, St SI | BLES Bad dag WE wom d Gath jm Uy eusytel allt & oI 

A gets Rody sath gb aj Milos, clas QOse up Hae epsis Ailnee ue csdt 9! 

in ale 4? Ube ath Slt Wb xbolill soy cl SI a yop gt hap ectia badly, alyaas 

pnt gh tia UeLile ore nas JL LO JoYy 28S oh Pred Gaitl DUS jga2 Yo pal 

apa Kelis tal Ss cae Capt) cathe hen Cerys, im aSlanal Uyiay CRA 45 ahd ce lion ol 
PRU Ren GleasSh ape cso! Lens re pon all Leola gd asthe Co gg 

Spas pail bo yo,3h SSS yb poe ab Sorel KAP ho dial Lt SS bet lanl LS aes 

Lgdndaenay eh pgenitl whAlS Mis By SAL Feit wh diny Lyon d Lobanai! dost! Ld oS (Ao, oat 
Be poy pectonl Gb erpsligall ROL & lags Cob Gap) (cas Koy TUT ale Mt wgamdtly yyy pte 
ce Gam Ley Lace Kiglh LyigSe do egal b mem cggilin pctlaml Pelael cytniag Si pslland 
‘Vtdp be Syhsbasal ad SeISY anand ch dub Mand Jutis gl ASI Cited I Rigmdly bt iar JE ARS ig 

dtodd Sst qi? etd cy) tet Sally Le mom & cyt hill tien Ut Least Joe GSI Lam gl 

epee Pose UE ploait Leeheile plyall & 5 eel sland Galil jhmn BY Lis pint eft GB ate 

ByyAd WAwassiy Bch! sf dive sos) othr 3 US dhe pialall une dlanal oP jegnalle Yronsia Bead Leda cmmad bilge 

o 

*. Chapter 74. 

” 

Lesbo gh tl pay hal 9,2 US de IyiKay (nest 

Re pany (otdlitay WM Kem, of Righe of pioy ye Bot Lede 

weed IW eth cndlbnall Sem oe Josey dl 

SUB ve e438 Gol de cys St lL U oa utr 

SH BLAIS Que play tt Xie Ys IghiXS am ool JE oe Bt 
enna Fgh de tyldsas! edily wal (5 . : 
gr ifaw Gy) Sgt Yo gp WE sche ot, tare 

Ames, bagay My yas! les wlSS sie Conn oe 

DUIS, LSU W gk d AMy im 33.518 Wy shew BF pond 
es iat JSST rie Galas gt By eylani hit Ley ia ales 3 re fi 

SPS KS DSI vy gladdt of Lat phedl SI fa ons pit a 

OSE op Se urtlen bit S yw he a> omer POX Caan & Rens ¥ A 

Strub 5 DUS 3 Gell Grnio ed A al sy) ty msalalh bub o iy 

ce co baad seid Gre Lead! Cail} & cyt 53 ee Exe) ei Hip o- ain kale cu 
Sle APS IAP Sty eaartly aL aad vs! & Slatin, glee oe aad eae ik pan | 
12) Ls : 

36 * 

i ale i Bla § 5 Pais, aoe aa feat yess rf sis oak Une 3 tide is 

ce “se oe Mlb yaald Lidyy wat ee Stoll Sie en SAI oA ely cantal ge A yb 0 

Sam 928 SoS Kell en SoBe ce a Syl BS aia wean Dall ghd LAs Saceae Wh 

Bids eal es cor thes mally ine cgolst} eel uo shiny B & lyie (jouaiity Lead qerlag Rolqio Bttnes 

a i Sb pone Riswd) ohat nats Hyatt 5 salt a) ees ide Liza Leda ygguttlh ww dlaw & oly 8; Ba path 
os rhe amy Ligh Cylyll yl og Ueilaatil, xSplin corualill Avy Khwall ReLS 3 ole Ws al yy 
poadadl ash phn ch satin Gennl np cry SE Ady yf yl Kioall mhO Gyo slansll hitaly yjely I 

WeFaes cyl Hythe cad Co Aalt gyn LSS Lee gale Capp Rial! ah Jol op Lely loge Rigi he est 

SS the 95 granle Reaad pea WC ample pyyaaag clam Udydise LARt op 5b 5 mets hast Ob cs95 
eile ol pom b shal) Spe 05,008 any um Dell SI game Wight conde oe pl bythe gl 
Kay cpr Lead eygXe cgome Ub Lill Sgom Xadldl obit & (db elas & bl sw jl ake Cand dy 
pray Load Randl abaaed ye oly K eye eas yl LQG eye cyl aiid had AS ab By Khir} xislt to 
WAP vite & B Rige nie cohs'ly emcth end 8 15) wrap ohll dy six Abell IAP & yyy 
oA be plalall oy pga K amen pte (golstt pgall egy Ob Bley gait’ ala apul govaks old 

BOSH MI platiy Vy Kinndt ll Sylo GIS walrday oyPp2 canny db! mae P05 BrSNy Lands 

cr gtae Load Ugh! clamncmd anil Polanel (6b laa Wy srw (6d carnal! (5™ cs? @* Chapter 73, 
SLR My Leal gioglt Ziti Ue) KbyiKa cs ylwall & cli oy clan! UF ehAT Godt Rea IM 

Keg MS amy lm BF glilie MW aganbils boar, IyLah by LAS LAS By SgSle EWS Lead eyes phts 

21) yet 

om yatta Yael GI de wlan’ sf and 62 Ep we 

ae 
Pent Reed NE ae 

Chapter 72. Sie Sail & eee ets yet Sy Atel oye cating Lit ob 
24 cyt! be aay Led GB RUSE SE Le Lede clanill Logit esi 3 a he 

Whee on Wile obs gungll oi 8 Lake pth ee Gt 8 gb Oh cae 8 ds 

bl de yh thst oy Lents GFA oI LS kore St ty ete bie ta eal 3 ig 

eral ALS thyww alle Gdhao eye of ayy bat Lgqaaiis Casts) Je wrath eygids enale la lehnes 

NES % Kyi S Juadly edie K ge as BSN colaiall MAS, ley) tL 

PH oe del Sly oS Ch hel weber Godt on Cay Sh Gols bal OSS) coal oye sal, shake 3 2 rae 

36 aon 

el ul das cau, pa Ben iy 2 ah 44 ta ee ee Ogun par as pes yh whe “Ohektee 70. 
naan A "3 Bote WAS gy) harely WOK cont yt alias Xaidladly Sudha RCL sheet 
| re ‘nrcies! WP apts wag By m8 ote A Bole oy % gs) 056 aad adetiley .83 Komnch 
Vlas ue A eyell OS wie Sil) yaad KXLY of iwanth dls priaal Wa pttl ruioga SS pranadt 
or wl ab i yay the ell (a tL i Crain Kana xt ILS Ladlsy all Lode 0 
SUBST Ge naslgg Le Soleus lj IF J GL geoye yh HAP ciysy Kink oy pl JOK 
Vols Sl, REI, (nails dd atone che gains alle he oyljall deine Leia oe 4 
$A Mallar olay aon a ody WE & ayy be pence coutiy AT chap fasts Rylan 

MAY 2D 

5 & wbabdio Rigel JS 5905 cgew Dedga all who cists SIT cyjold oye IM Bole GW gst add 
& eb *aule als Vly Kadball WF [gst dole Leload cys 8,9 DIOS Kadlel Lead ceeds bs 
lel goa BF Lge Uhst Gh yt al wy Yat oh Kill peyay Gud Kabas jou} As 
UH cris Geter med Sal BS de riety erogdy Godt OK Qe at Wre tys cas yl 
Lehast saoty KEBice KialS LOSS BFS colle Lest coLaslt hol wr Reagye 83,9 gym 
ALT Chytell $ le eyo st at ly ca 3 ohbs gem Chapter 71. 
cote Wal Maat YS oe SAIS BS, aS le Kida Ugid Rit vat Sl age che waa Stat Slie fo 
cgbaalte sab srall sey ee AS oe OS! bY EnXey ylolabl! Cuolé cals | ybeaiill 
Soho Sg PAST Leite gil Rawle Syamad LAT LOT ly Hho Spa cond Dy aube 
Prades REA ce WIS pins DALAM ptalailannd said ty boymlly runt oad megs 
BUS By RPA SI gaa Load wl si, SUSI yal os SS Bs Aig USS Reload Say 
Slag By Rebtel tyaamll cg LY Aa guattln he Kalgall Nasco agit em ope SUT shud et 
pty Bt Byeatd SLANT sal coe gall Le pladll coe Prag pA31 My sep Sanall Loo wer wed whlS 

10) gayle 

Chapter 69, aad qlise aT Jad Y USly ye PSU 5 crue lil ve eat sa . 

i 

cristae semi Quel ow gal dt tut Sugino UT easy Sead US o | 

W pay csaiet So pi Sle cans cls pty Hel ut eal obs ‘i : , t 
& Noe Be BeiT coy ug A cleat SIAN ual bog 9/5 6B come os ole cata 

ste Kanade randy sth * GST silly Kyles oP rad yySd oli chy of ae 1 iy Oe ay %s , 
st on Spel BAIS clio ly Op dst Ge pymat dal yaad op aud om galt an 
Pris lee at sbislh alill lage excell of xaubadt & oot wily xO wigladl, we 
cbs LS Parse SI aly Eby Sy i 6k KL I g aadlely Lesid lt dul Sagaaal by ne 
puoSS copay SKS Soll ¢ OF etfs Se on nh 8S ae Kall 8 yt 9 ely | 
Bias cPolem weSohe Clip DUS pads cyl So ey Pre gga stn > sens tails saa oY ] ” i 
cr Mell OG AY aie ot be Egaeyy SULT cesmas aad ogo Olaall “ Kampiy Loy OA! 
Chapter 70. e BUS lie oye Ket RLF aul! slaty xa Maas Mae ey (SAK, A ally, Syed 
ell opel MBS) agke CUI e cyt LR) lh alll plat Colo & 
oy! MS eds & dail op Pore S Jot Jy AAS pasts Opgtisl® OK A oy aad RE RAAT, alo’ 
SA el seb on dle DUS Holey Ks} elalizy Prasnd _ioldl Ate Bye APLASS Ne of eae 
Stair ly (samy Sh ob spline oes Qwlady HaidLell g cobdell IYALuTy all Suse 
Ago coonedl SAN gh Rigel Rah oye FOL gE yl Kage coo Ualil slaty Wh La Hiigidt bLizus 
ery culall Garret ge hyed KEP he wail LiLSS al gil agle mahiiy SOU QI ad aay 
sleds cn 5 Kan she one doit reals att slay pr salle giillad Copel shila Com By whic 
oF reall WAP Syby he anode Le Slesl KSLed Coslans be diet eles un ald GOW cat & wh RP pil t 
Gos Met spas 3 ole GK oh 8 elyih 5 59% ord opal eal) ciglh male yoy 

5) ast 13) os 

ROLE, bias, said i Ms cel set g o Aig 2 le oF on el, sash rida cay by psu Cimper oo 
“aby Sal fo de pi eos on o Res) ee orp Reh H rb Naat win EO) om 
je oT 3, | Bull @ Pat de tas Santo (nal il | pyeey Aad RP Lsell pallnd mpSLLY pyle) wiles 
ay Lened os! BS gels’! jen ¥ wore Hey Kell amass Hho Bhal nad cyphe LaSly ot begins Ls Ys 
3 Wels on Ab spt ol ded ae) Gb YI aol SS oneal ne Gt Ys Uemds coe Raalan 0 
sls y Wyats Seal iad Cele why ens on GAEL wp? oy! BM aele op" 255! igh ler ey! 
oF as Leone Sela Hash cated ost Lol cyasel XO one Bo eogtd oy! Lal curahd Leseys cole 151 f,tt Lity 
OR EM Sole clad Stony coe Wor tha lide dS cote LEY Lawl ath 9p Lyn 
23) MEK 151 OFS cigs gh SUT HW ese esas ote So coats psd Hp ge Lac Zent opal of 
| OF by EH on death GSLEM Gf Prim PLS cypililly clgbasing (91 Kila b 
Baal gral lal LY Keldidwd he coor be lob aad isd Live jaunt gtd Qu8S! cre Gamndll & deal 
Ejay Rabdico Soe Ab) Le Lily ol wrss cygilgaly Hlay cl cy chal dls CVSS OTy!y O53 
Slush Aslate oh M ap sll S WAKE Lagiling tilde KR encdl ering eal Ep called bt! 
Am Clandll BE Css cor mgidy ROLLY eli, GA dhine pt AUS Soja? OMgSI S Rallgte clas Rannd 
cr daly hi igen BAS, Oodle pis shaale US sly Leas! eg Pal pKa sim coliialall fo 
Sob yyhay Atlee iy5 Sb om 2 gts gl I Sn Yo eine Lads atin & 2530 gy) wliglall Jot 
6 aly DIAS dss WW UP, Wie oP all Heal wail GE ST Eyed PIE Rib Qt bymia 
SHAT SE conpehey Yo aiglads FAIS td Jo gyly Leis BAAS He Hoe oh Soni 
cobeily dot LYN Key ST 40 (Galisly logs pile iw Kio Sb woh Sb yonstt lly € ptt cat 
werhnisle dag, St obs wraaiiil ISB Roast Ahine Leib MOS Gall Lead Jur pyle? Lead at tt t 
de etoy Kia He 9P Laity Gans: Gna US 56 post gis alatis 3 oly Lgilait hoy cx,¢b 

12) Ul 

_ Chapter 68. 

Linally ‘obs Slot o> 
oF etsate JF My aol Gas ape plist Lpaasy al p 
ghee hava Sayles ney om ait Wrst Jad ays bo ‘ 

Lemar caty DiLially Le 

Kalle cylin} JbpAlh Guckiy sds ol eae 

Kabyle caplll Rm be SLES, SLEYI Suis Ladd pdse a sbea 8 mg ‘i iB Kala 
Mam LS pet awlish edd bu SASL penis 73 B Lge ot Lay osyb solienhcat, 

AMS Sol nat Hat St ot cane 8 ol J SE aol al 

MAE 5 BLA alae che Atty SAI By nile poh Gaps eta Laity Rael gan soy 

relies Aad cos US 5) W ale Ne be mph ob wrong Leu dias: fo 

cplaw baal wie pw) GJS we St, Slrims chp coer beat Lec ili aii van Fi if wi 

Chapter 69. ay om net dia gle Yue Fomecel umleatt SaSt Shaly ae stl 3 a! 
 oladll de dust Ge | 

olsast & Camas! exes ait wlgesld oe dein} 3 eel eH ot gl t 
Amy pic vac slab plansly. into gta Fe) sais ebpaal he 1g om i 

10) Lacuna, 

17) ere) ¢ 

ob Spaite te i eaten aha «sesh Joos g é es aod B09 ea hagbuas, 
— aaall o 3A lay Xouall & FIM Seeds siren sated SF ad Ms cytdeb! — Chapter 67. 

wae x 2h oe male Spee Ze du Jets Vo gia! be oye W Raely Arie Ri dalt 
aT tte gl Ala spe co of Junay ly OE athe do Lams Spa S Spgs? che eho! 
| oe “obdul Be Bh dolly cet of GOS! woke Cot ale slob Sed) pcs wy! aad o 
PS ope te ond pel Yh Riyadh op mines Dds te Py pleat aims x0, 
ws asl vime ala 8 asa yy? oPyalh oye Bos 0b be Jy wlth tall wth 
By ee att cytelas Ls Leos Pert & (553 MS KE daa! Feed ad Sod cre mbde RadwT Ope 
: Jt olAS (Biddy xB GOLaxy oy) ELIT Al dy arth tel BLEU § pad os xls 
Lad uypXe byt aoa sia exe tity gill IAP he Gad oe ot Lead a oyySKty be 
sh GAS RRL Lily yl yh Ball way KAvall gaye ve cll Ralily Jel yyy hal &) 
eins Le gUriy cpio Bald dis! oye pats Y Le aie 51 frat WP LESIF gs, 55le oS 
Head, ard malo SU Gal, he Kepogll Bobs! write xedly prs’ ped JUL JU LS} Lely 
Sled oye yobslly UM § cow auth onl, he Gut pat ln Sol de yond Ht Chapter 63, 
Calls Higillly, (shod!) do 99 LS GUL ppale Hptest Lol g xia! Gybinbly Jo 
RPh dl Lrognat WSS le anand cot A} K Pigg sty aad crPeddy aU YS cya gts Galill 
Ce gibi) Kill (igs oP cyond SUK cbygadsS cLST oye PL) call ay qh galas 
Bad) he BLS sda wd t . Bh Unaty Und eye MBE Noms Eom rgd Uplay (Gables ple 
MPs VBA Eye? vgheasl Yams db Gatill ahumaly (Fist GLI wash WO de at wf 13ty 
KA, Sy slabs, sally ishanl! co LLL GB hpi) ARS anil IST ColoLall ye eal fe 

Esp rb losilly sadluanll Lyre Kapally KAT salalty howdle ymaelyasly LAIST ig wr 

Chapter 66. oabel ! ee bolas ae sible 

Lealty paill BaF 8 BIRESS Le ab 

ppm ates WAP Leleel eye qyedll elind KAKA jlastsel Qt os 

Poly Wi ayadi de aps ee Oaglly B60 a ge 8 
Cpl dey Platic eng nglleT ad agaili ol he yyy Ka Rast ey ae ASyaghy ad 
Pal and Shand comity Why dds ost Ht Aig he BKe anidy Syl pst whilw (yf clots Le 

Pe Rim Ung adga Bey ails Byatt 3 wash Kal olf Ps et Eoweny 3 OPFR ¢ chal, 

SRisy Halal aie ade cays ALi AST ASH dl ag’ sins Keslall easly 7 oles ue 
Pls Unb) a ro A all a ln dey Jul a Soa das of 

Heng coastal flr ol MI OMA ge LSS Lend alga Y iWaitey wucliie & oy ‘hiliy oh seine Be : 

A ad ais cyl Pha cyl many 5 Bing OMS hy Sis cry eleie oly also Ub whe on uals 

Clee AES Odell gil dee pith Hypo de naive lylem dy ets [gia es 

TOT; LoS ey yy 5S 2)! cst shes 5 Leeming: ptt i clase Btw usa aha 

Sadly Set Guas (gadh dale ually nal 2/58 comms RretT wpb SLesrell dues Bet Ke 

SP ydl cypsruill ayadle ly pity ast 038 Upad cpadmll WOLD, aay pre 

3) Soyo 3) poe 

35 * 

ant | ees sally volun Le56 ail afle Ohepter 60. 
eau is om Oe wise x sei W syle aghe wle se om Gb mia Ute xis 

ls ani be Radgy piolga whol aphe diy, Wot igh Ay tently AcE iy GRAS. coe 
nomad Lops IK, A B> poles 19 dla boalaitiy, cots OSS on qaiay chal he Ml 
plas be * a anal oye Kadllawyl Xamtll coool ime Conky ablanly Kelrd ata KSI 9 o 
a a silly RE ASH Pipa pllbe ad cle Wsely tdhall un uhlids Iyety wala! 
ik ds BS s,lgas sb | bbe wala ddl & Eyl gis Ligko Xd, on; tle coAlt gull tio 
| “Be Lae expt Malin tl dS jay Jonas Al Lala Ouest duns Khwak trons puvoge 
Wap ple pSve om Lebphne ei Leber coe Shad Upithe aoe Napa Lia Inna Logi, 15H Lin’ 
 entlycm & RTT Ad Lapd pl boryo US rg rm ligh He lrg! HAs fe 
apd Bla cetyl} ome Land CGT areydl Le cypher 3 dreslt Rel one Splat chew he Copal 
Wyatt UL yy ST say dS HS aS pi oS wleyo paddy HLF Sgt LET pais 
Lgake Spits aot pat Bt SST. om Mead Ackall Sey cle nll GS Sapo pale Omit Uy 
Semi aad cy hans UB cgbitetly «ples It killin Hy dojad JjLal 
cophenditay aes ope OAg) walls Lago Byles ob pe Ple wagon Be x U2;% 2 13h fo 
colo Cdl endo ohh Ra KUT Grolaeth Slaw slae Hyb5 aanw cy) cygids ade 
Sob eygloiiag Lalor Sqiia db Lia Aowly Aste & Slaxedl oye indy DS Qed and JLaxedt 
Lal pyghe hywaslls Gola dt Lgittty eUoett GS Golast cayls Lb cpa ail ial 9 cal St I 
ABU high Kom LOLS cry5 dy sly Cdl S op!y Gai of Lead dale at gla 
cpa mapas ey! St aletigae leg DML! Jy 5S pW US So ay Gaby all Phe oye Bost fe 

Vpichialy calill coo cgolmnill coe digas lo Sajal CIS ay chad Ladd GI UCT US By Weal G9! S 

5) depawst 

rival) pdily Leg mis Hgglall L det » 
sul, (jst Pray Kdully Pa) de FOuatay 

cb db ally oan Sym BOL St! G 

ehsogn LO polit Oem 9% y WAP! open 

26 

GE OD cys U2p OuS Sem O 
LS ee do Te Lua) J 
Dae am Undlas ops ae Slat ei a 

Wald pba ey Miso om Kile Labs & ioe ee eet 
shee pellyth ayams pigem 3 Iplacry mgilKe 1yb sorb dane nah aa bas ls Sail 

Kad oot DWhe WU IRD Jeaad ow eg 8 pbed$ sul 985 1,50 Yo,3l on te 
DUP pity Syrine HS Hybd gtd SALI uaa 3 bby et! Sia oe , 

6) ol 18) (gdy added by the editor, 

ed lel) his : ele is "Chapa 

a bale Cat fas a oh 6 oh BUN onde Le Sat Leth 3 
ce a & es ess Sey WAS UME En uae Land yy K as CPS opts AT & de 6 pnsd 
oC yell etl % glstaly soluall § clea 3! de acto uss Lote Righ aly GTO coud 

os — wh oe aa cry bez WS LIS aster Les pais slat & Ke HU waksind solo, 

dal Lage Quads Legkta U Logie Abe cyl Hyd cléy ad Ly enilas SSS) [toss alill t, 

ebay Haya Go, ST de dle o> Daetll 0.8 on mina ye oodles U8T, opsey Ohad 

: wd th Leo cory saclga Kilas mail yoy Slit nad Une rmlo WiKal Py grail aia 

pipttlly SESS bd on eatelony eonngs Lelb LAM Lily shot (Fadl) Bs U2,31 ols & 
 Upahe eandaall mpalnd Lyte urstly Uyak che Splatt suo Loouiisl Lid, aul! (io, Sh Sily St 

| Rea yg Xd Gy prdaall de reds cig atl eae B eacbly LiKe EAS weil, Eyes fo 
cysht BE glanld MWY [gale neds ile de ideal! QTd TF cuphill BP ieeakige plat 
wa Py WT colaglally RHE nll hyd hilaad eahil cyl gad Lgl Sy ad plo gis alaol 
ab SUS cjlnlll GRU) Least ake wasrd hadll Les pekd (cedd Beis MI yal Ba ope Lill 
shall che Noho 7B ged Lbs pgyallon & yt WyLidue Xd dilod CalBT Et yd 

Lopher xa5K0 gall Lyclety Leogs tyltsty Lyestuol clog By mtr cypll uge wukLd te 

gol yh SyLaje esl S ge Bagadl Lghrogiiy agin Melrsait ASL shady otal) Udy tas? len Chapter 66. 

8) geal 

Chapter 64. 

cet SA poy Lplilh Sl 3 cagh Le pyieglt ot} ox! 

i WAP Halt ast ice copay a Bei poe 

Pine Lighe Garey Sbanill ead SLuall, ST al Kabyandl a as sya 8 ut i : 
: ja 

Chapter 65. oitine es SST OS Oh? er | ai SB dw angle we Hat jaa ibe a af 
ates WS Ugaang he yal Yam shail & Casey Lge oy Ih ey js oh de 

ppolab 68 Shedd! & Gol eS (Slim Ibs oh ohh oa si aa 

“eBoy Lgxatd Oyictly ilo rat pe 233 Mall & kom Lnll salah Sed wrneel Jeo Soh | 
MeSyy ede LUN yal Sead Lytle RPL sy US ab ce beall tals Alas) okt git ade ool : . 
5) As, 

Abs, ie My we ss dle | Be 

i. Ys Kid cada th oer) ner rene) eos avec i. wo ne 
$e 8 ow Gall, gat wie 3 pul, why ‘igstiag dl Spas at 
sadist Spe 3 Lead ate Yo patall & Lee ist Bot Ra ena Vay) Splat 
CIB BAB acta Lede yl) Wey le I jLiet GB BSA oy ely bo Reo ull, 

ae pery ot ios Oadesty ial Joe coy plata athe! vs) paee Und egby Jail ods t. 
uy pot Oy Ledge cy Prall Junta JH yay cyt Gass pall LAL adnalaiy pion be ste lag oP : “He 
wb eee! wbds und xis eo VS ally SOL sts SST grape yh mene 3 Jul hes op | 
Kamat Gail xale ojy wlactith Led piolglt Slav coms Ligne’ ll miogll oS, : 
ET less pS F come 2h Whas Quoly gly pgilly Imaal @ coledl) cya tial 
Spa & pred I oye cyte } aed lend Aw @ 3b usted apolar Sym eariz lo Chapter 64, 
Lond oy gly UL all B Le Saray Lal igflty auleg Yo Aohadig hay fils ald eats Ut 
158 phe Joliay Ualill Cyepamtg Lilie ale YOU Jui Lead deer Got esotell ge US 

Bye wath. phorio! is whtss Lawl, a 2 es ealatt LSS& on fo5 is ae WS ee 

edt Me By 088 Soll Olas yet on lst ¥ gy! Cada Ott Gly anne allel 

Ci wut rents Lol 

SD OES geam B Hola Spill Liat Eales op eh ue ” sie 3 
PART WS conll Latah KUT LIS andl gat pital oot tt ue cae de re 
oj wads Lily #450, ast KS W Leal) piss 9, edt who pst wt Slat on st 2 ye edi 

ris) 

gla nih alt Capany Cbg ah & Sal wpbe fad aul Shae St Ll asta $ " 
frst pixlat of, I $d x Kededls ¥ sagdad) dis wie peat 3 Sp Rie 3& oem mers ; clans 

j } ” 

se Ja he it al $8 ol 3 Pil dats oss 

Me MY, iy zie Api Kaban Pai , 8 oka de ancl oihy a ue 

ns ; sel doles Lede pai RS A aol pu bye ote des bat leit ould ash 

« jlast wil da Bogan Jl i ues LBs JB Whele yore gh mare op gl te 

oat whe Jos as cot de cymes 3s cnehells Kanal dt ill cr edd GUN eomiild Lily 
‘Ubag Y gl he emit dally RAPIAS LCI wali coped JEL g Slew ab Sl) sudo eygeniw 
Lele sgl OS aly 25351 ol al joa Ys andl on HEL Abr Gate Sa up AST jell & wala 
Hey de Y pS nay Lad da mall Jay lay 25's KP ath abel con UT atl cys Kay Syd gush 
. Sohlh cg Soong Laly Lill oprat S eye aad Jura bo Gums aah cgdess RIND cor Lely 8.3} fo 
Ft Se p29 S eygXe Ss WS ball ope KOLS oS coklall B ate cll pat oye ball 
ure Nlaltaly oh ay ST cs Maton Beh up ly Lag allay Bh Sete eyaahll yal Leas 
i ° / 
co cies sets Leleit 3 pyle Matthey GLARE BUI & why Gay gst al DeFeet 

Land Crates Laity A, sll ope Leledting be Comms Byplecs! od & LENT OY Quast 

well ealeclt LE Cadlboaty Stall ope gd spat pghs oe Sohal! ey Prndt ashe mats Lede da St By wall fe 
Bees uns VSS nce sLvo'S oh on hall hoe) 

wphe aos? ib bb clad, eoly ally 

_ Chapter 62, 

34; ) Sd has Beawy fig © MSS ures he ail ss So on 

Wak eb Tide be aoe ust 
Me git ln 99 Saw cia tl Weds 

Leagd pgielo Rahiie wail St Srolcy agingil Uae jlatty wal clout Lead aerngw ide bo 
pip Oely Aely alae & exrbarely IML Leelee BALAI Kaguatdl Kal fipsiy 

Chapter 63. sale Cases cst (ads Lond Bw whe! ality and shed G ai a! pots Slant 

SEIT ped SEB plans Key D pita ake clan gam Cgica Dar uyPalt pe Sheds yf spe ore 
Lgab adh akmorty agle cliobell assay aganit Phat all eaten iwlall Kind 99 

Lash 9%» (spe cn Langs Aigrdlitty hyp alamy yd 3 Lae plo le Lyslizely to 
aoe cae ST make SM gS astile ope KEL Gap3 oe dane CAlG Oe Cay} med eye Spiba 
ae tg AIS tie eds Gerad) padall 3 x3 pra sh? ues Kithadnce dltie KKomc banca 
Sr gab & Wa Ged aad Ondrl, QadT QUG Ege ables 3 RT plly cyaeil ay Ue ile 

aie mate J Lie UY G6 aie Yd acele (pid ob KT Rm anes yb Ril Bla I Ue sim ob 

34* 

x : ib as iI Xa aalioy 
pe ‘ fe] i ¢ 
wo 3 rm, st gest, est eye 

a 

ips (glist Sh 

; Wat! ancelaay ayaa 
. Seid ole 4% 
3 re phe SAN ust 

Hiker Muah Le gy, Vonks e Ty pM: dacmliay pyake 

on jesse Amo 9 Py 

2) rte? : 2) say? 12) whto.g 18) sii 

Chapter 62. 

re be 
Karan) eS | helt Aselyl! 
sss ues soletg, weld Sees 

Hirai iR de EEN 

LPlimiog iy [gall shen! 2 # alah clipart, wo Le pan! cpriinll pdomll eyed WUD 
WB Lgawl cope Rind ode shes otis le SLia he ais Gipllall opmey Ugre & lo 
ri © enghin i, eis” i wr Solas Leulxemt gto! pee’) 

10) = gs) 12) Shas it 14) galad 

Chapter 62. 

yee sigs un wad ee {jai 
Kaya SGLAD clo Gy} Lead OSy Rim 

BWAES wpioly cpilKe & amiad Kind col iw auld is colt bey xii ca a 
ley Kali Jilin wy Rel be ey SF SH GLC Gude La i 
(Fats oye 49 ae! cstAS oH F288 erehiOo Cpe Oey pKa scaah 288 on least fo 
SAAN Fapty Reta JLT AES whdy gD LaF snl pp ain Giyeb copthll 

urdw Be de ely ols Gia as’ If & bisa dhe ee my enti Pd Soha Sie 
Coy AXIS Byatt oye ehian ive eds SE Sede g liniog os, aa} a ele aly : 

Climo fray Krall wand asst Sts cergdll Irth Set & cpinall shrel b wore 

4) Laem 11) Ky . Oy We Ne ig 

4 Chapter 61. 

) ae my 5 oh : 
6 AST IAP & Llintos Sy oSyh nea el 

Rents hd seAST Gk Uneasy ‘a cats cy Lid res wile od ite, | 
CPS py LS & LS Jd Ide ‘o Ly,! vest on Liat we a : 

gor Bet 

pepe 

Sp AB NAS Lgtecas STS Gh) Re Le rey adil} 35! 
20) lst? - 26) engi? 

— ‘ia wit a eis ni eal a ia, a Lsprcist 0 
“3 uk, Heal ob uel yyy cola Shy! Likes dilb oys'y Cog ital! 
a (ae o es bey wb & el, X Ribay Spas wpe ey South yeast! auiuei 
a neh sal & well HOF xed wad be deal yd eyed F rig GI Soils cyt aS has 
dee ie aida de ele Jey oly on Rigi ele alll, abla Byrds Rima) IUD ge 
i ey oul vast Sina Hy Bbpee dua 1515 cilia byt ays he h 

«de Sia easy Geta (eaitily Payeace cn Land Iurdll 1I8 aKS gas Sl 

; eel ard pela! Bg (ily Fgh US SAL) de Dip BSS ayo oe GY. 

oo ght ley Kim Sy ay yg all eres oA pots NE ge cm WES eyes! em 

“gad, RSLS OY soll HOSS (549 Aho KABLST Lhe wa AS Eye Keyl COT ced Romi 

Sy cual ob clase csbaiial Jas M54 ayy SES alfa de ~ sf s Le eked yy fo 

Pe) Sew or cola bey aa a te BY titnd ASB} pos ope SLI} ey ae Ball ph, 
pred Sy SSB HAI, COSI Jude pitt - JP Limo de 295 8 bail! Joo 14 
PIM Kewaip Mole a6 Rebel) 5, 55 8 Vy erga aay els SUT Eye holo ald F, 

Gord CAA Key Lh mid Rays cps le amd Rergaell LT page GAPS Cyay phe Kamas he Sill ce 

9) ly added by the editor, 

Chapter 60, 150 es gat ee be ls wah 2 sill _ 

Jil, gg Lens ean unas ane ne é ot o ens won ve oF 
on iets Sy a yi pine ey tibia nt sl on os Aol bey 
Be ple amudl Dendly dat 05 sian oligo & steal pds toh ays Wo 
Oy SE Eble leith paypll be Obuda trey Shy gh npn, pohly ola a) 
AST Gant Laas gly ald additly bn ggansrt cy Lily xaliad Jute) Gas’ § wide Oe | 
Lain AS CASS cong Che Gy ele’ relly wipe Zl mel waka Iily Sb 5) 
dud gd Gmetill Jyh Jud SLastll LI LOU GW gee AT pioge b alps mans Jey 
eras glbpu!t ly lglglem deal acta SI aA GK Lily epatly weadt Caml 
AF wee oh ot enmerall cgithe Sh Leigkn GAIN (Gly cyly Shedtlly (a pfhll Ligonl to 
oh cls! (IS aS ugh tt whe oly dal Land Ohdjy ahh led KadLaa 

yyw lool ¢ OWS Ny igs Has 31 tals? tao de SHG py s Lge (gd gn ¥ axe Lorl,9 ce @ 

yews bey aialst aay gydslay Oust ¥ a 309 ce Kiln ig yball ae wabaLy wt 
ails slat esd ep Sh ashjeet Gauhsd HD ogra cslaglt Lily Lays Blow mbill 

pees Kens yy Ouie Sofia Kad ad ‘oS Bybgd Pe car 3 ls Vutownd de culeyatatt ou ytall cy 

33* 

mgt | as 

eed PAW re aR ne ini On ateaan: : as pos 
ey oa ah ext] ist |. & 

mann mens 

Ow? 

Poms | iM 
Slat! Groelao 

20m 

Erp oS je aid *lve oo! (iiloty Sola! (gilye me | 292 OC : 
f sl tf qamle 

wing vlall 2X3 eae os of 
cpl} y shal! JI sie Lua, aomely 

 pntllgad sel Oaniiy, Remy Canad ya Ks 

So jay cyly KA ondl Juatinsiy go sl oy 

‘ | 
rod 

eam teeaae an 

ie un ae on! AD uy! diWous’ BB mst aad ail gd wre zesty 

PAR AD sh apd et HNL he Ratt peaudlag pgrumad b Pret pity onions & guzll fe 
Fhe che Glatt amis 8 pF miogll Le patel ly Loi juclalt Je Shay Guaill oye 
55 US ye Gung B51 yaa! cane Gaal lady RAL Ging gab cla om od 
os XEle ys gtthty aad ST ol Gee coe (gill sed Fae ce GS Rendle est bey Myst odd 

N 

13) Plok 

beim ee Bae o> oh oat ee ene 5 
she Yo Lage mith Ct ofl seas ep de eae Ube 
come etl css tl gs CH ls Seal a dy BEE 
wel eS Ce ot nee Ga st ex? 69h he be keel g o a 3 Pid a 
Rawle Kad & PI un aide ws ell oye ons ae quay Seal or oe ws rds i 
Wily (PAI glaze! lyn Jal St HDT em ental pga Sa i “a 
cla 8 alt aes oe Key, Ges} fer SI viel, eos Jt Sel 5) net piss i : 
UAELM egSlys’ ep 2595 he Justond yh tenes lp Gye Go tpl ees! ai eo oo 
cleat wh, SEIN Bagi, dually nab iL gly etl vot 8 a 
uit} Kidoy Kuusll slabs afl Lally He crten 2 Ys Lipa a Latte ot + 
Gilet (HUlt ak & ays glob ds iva hoa ely eal) St Hho oF See 

el oh gm by WE By ee Gt Det ge Sle pat JE ADE al oul 

bread pthe ath my al SS ys oy CaS UBIG asbe peat lag whey oss eh to 
HB isle Soe cp pthey Regt ead Gott walds ily Led the Kaiaty wes 335 al ol 
Es Ure 182 coe eK ly Le Ally Hu creas 3 atin ly Lait ity ward tng 
rahe obs clad) HLS gab UCTS pill ly SyauiST lel! gs pasted ey & be ol dst 
138 cyl SLES ype all pee aad oye polill CiqunX Ol 2% spely evel ate high 
QS eg yh ANSI Go HF RSL TIL Curadll yoo fj Wily algd elo Lia Titel Pe 

Chapter 60. 28 coe Labet lay Sans 9S esKe, Lend gIh dorstt GI Gt SSB Uw o Hae ays tcl 
a 
5) Sara 29, 12, 14) Sl 

33 

a ' | all ve ili Se bs iy dio vist 0 opht 
Os ae of ay ale vst oe bs Oh dp dl dl Uae 4 5 dis, 
‘ ro U5 uid cx ve tool O! copie tlh deity Agamrly cndiipiil afls 
‘1st vin é OB syS MS (OL sloleey yess SAILS agin 19s G3 J ony ith on 

! Sayin whole yy lay eysaall Pd eUBY o Pt al shed bo 8 eer ck 20 
ce sh Po clam Bl nye me As Jlb3! be Kaho ies VAS Syanlll wd, 
shall cy Ge M de le guem pelo tall cpsadll et rah as 13 wren & cor JE Ady 
ee he ota Leet ead oly ip si pal co 9? Und oo! Gas bs tylebll g Gas ols buoy 
peng hae bb gaa GY yet! vibe 55 2D he, wal ae) Suet i dba bay to 

oe Oe Omnia 

Lgitlininds Leo LAS, pgad dhed all JB Gyn eiogll ie a ib aaa wy {ty cee ereSinny te 
“of wh KIL i shales Uy Gb nde lad Oh caper opeity abit 2 tS CE 2 
prod S PUT IDM Aer GAB, Danis erat all yalill Crab wld pill de Lots 
Lngigans wank cell a9 GiwaXal alt 3 phdie, een Bd fmol palilf bo5 J rtie 
Kal criyyale XAyaSt ei cole meitislgn ermal, eg 'csl) yo cqAUlall 242 cl, Geese 
walgbiall ops yal LaF aed atl GV cade Lgl cyan dpa yg ke ST erat gl olen fo 
cmeatill ype eg! at cry UEtByS While clam Letlyon Gmedill Jigme! die Leic Lingiy 
cot a LE Byyaell LOE Blam a) har of ot GUS he gestl Gt aed 3 o Lore Lidl & 
Biloy Wy Oust BILE ry KAS Haan Lgtlace St Calatlly igSh Sosy asd gf lay aes 
Ls Bly molec om AST pgalgnd Aig!) pyaar Ay Axe GM cyly watilley oe ArT 
JE be BI HOE werggkP o> Gylbl lay BEyraye KAT HMvy Dusty Judhe daa ieall te 
aioe daw luo gn Ris S OSs awle soty che Ley care abl dw ROL) oye Kent Vi 

11) Sfira 27, 14, 14) «st, 

Chapter 59. f 

Chapter 59. 

us dds Spey Ast HS on ue snk 
Lie LOlt 48S) aw 92 pnd Cigaas'y Nall § 50 90 Sh ose on os . 
Sate, By Gigill GaSle ox Unndl d Yo eakll Gale ep pall Son, eh oot 3 bey 
uss om galas coll Py pall ose JB ISI Ue ded be shared dealt ho ws o Le 
See on BSL Son 2 Ansty ot ib WS ate sl Sha & Sle Sy 0 : 
Alig LON lsh oye Kala Fin Oetmad cophll Ka ope Least ail GL eel iy bell | 
reds lng aduad sla} nie Sarteias wae 8 pabie caill ib O%y guialh g stmt jie . ve 

eee rdyamlll Gms S ltt CSD Gimttly, CBpalll ea glasit a oo diy rating und 

or Ale mole vm byl Ble iho om seh 2b Loe coast Balad gla Is on 
gb Yel cysdoticy Unt MS Gymlll Rarmd B ROS cya Rebel iy SL Leg esa tei 

GY US casas 6 Phy di wiseey Sent Ati KPa abl UL Spi rabbis Sal: 

pti 943 Spall cabo Lal 2D alt wld on Ram ot, al aunt se eke pat US Gal tt 

wall aly Mell All Nyaainy iB obit cwlall 5S UMS 265 stir Lillo Spall groye cys 
HIS or pT Lew 22h e ope 12, ently st ol elt Rip clyde g® Lally Ooi ad ARE ope 
3 ’ 
peti cy al Ay Vy gine xi8 lls ROIS lag all yd Ricans Sell Kap alist fo 
wely ta Baba Lae nie Lighin la he my asap (Be lo aS Od pn ola 3 2 
LAS ab agi Higlall WO Jul 5% crgnRP2 SM Lit So ay egy Ailly eSaaill Cane 
he Lame ool) Begg elias lll oye mal Guin tlle em gpa cgi RPI on gf 
LRAT BAB or oy9Kt ost egKall or GF eyly uolall Utley (GI Lid, Lema GE Genniill 
SPD Pls ow Usd ILE 8 ADL Tey conll eye aphe Ctl’ Flacae oh Le pty fh 
Alas JO} ygsrmy Cdl a5 Sst col, hid, ou or uned Goaalll ot cst cre Util ogo Gl 

12) .3t 

+ 

yaad 

Li sta sis y ¥L0 slat te mo Kagel see ow vy sliay me DUS Joly ass 
SI Load Kalil Kpody [gigi Kis Lalor all aryl wyplittyy Wreb caby OS 
APIS Gast emt Medill Shem Gb Lelie Ubsow ype ost egKty Uteaey Leal egg ht yh gt GadUT 

petty Cmmtdl spans’ 8S BS Gade ula Gia las § ne atl QO! OY o Chapter 59, 

3 Soin Apher Pyare aii’ i Lil) 9 Uma Cially Godt joo iI) Call St Lt 
wo GAT GF (ons ebelal) Gam GI wrghin OLS S 2812 Sle pttblme Wade lsh 
LAG cts Nyllew ul ope Bebiglt Syorysttal LES REM ily aK aly rgd thes ep 
BeLagll ce amills pithy algli Udo pghrlos sygaall 2 KKIDUL Lenttiio cuit} slong hdd aging fe 
BeLigSS Commmd Lace (ult usd nul jm prddundt Rel bd yaad ah cyt Lats Kiyiiy alylas 
SAP a hed HS ob SLs Uni dl g rad *UgigS agd woyihiil Bo ately X19 St Gaull Gly ill & cat 
plan Soul at cyacadll US Log Cal D Gh papities Wo glo Lam ope sraiaiy claw! dt eb Gopad 
Cpe certy SDI Shot cloud & reba Y oh GM OM Pe sal dy clowll & Cop ¥ duds 
Syed HAP goan ab ape Vdd oye ST Wy LEGIT LSSy th Gh. S Lady wd GP Yaey Sy 
Saab aled GUE oom cublt 6 J SE wilt dt I os ye 2hn eb Ube eco oll to 
Byts > Uallta ob wpa O32 Quads 1 UO Gye te cy SSS deadly Crm mist Sy 
dU sald GIRL IS LIS MT APS sly pall Gye pioye SM asld daly op US 
Y pl Sy Cub tt OS RASH aad yaad oly atlas a? By anand sleo¥t works 
cyatia 1g LPs maddy aml, cna land viol SUS wrmry ott of nyt Bhim oe JS) 9h Land Canhe 
8 obo bell eyphibitce ceeds eygSt eyt BW S:lalh GS beS op Yo cyapatdl co Lg Cranky MSP, 

J3t WIA, STh Kamin Gmail) init oy) ee ToL Limkia pail) eho 7 Way 

2) Lo rwlas 4) eal? 12) x35 [gas 

Chak 58, 

olaadSt Adi, asilo DUO Kadual} aad wily ae ee 3 pol “ pees we was 
crgaadt & dguall wh? IK Adall odly coe sl Spiyitl oa ds cusp os é vali : 
Urs Tie GO le cnr cst K nath eae ae an oliaye ae} wiioteal Baya 9 At 
hy ah cing’ tlass ho. coe Capnte Miagll Mall coniy chia wd aad Soutial, He ws ely : 
bh sal Lely Ball onde aaiglt KUL ony Land eyo tel Jpeers aus BhyLid! ios ay aly ‘ 
15 aMT SG mbiae LI yyiinay 8s yitle cts meth, July ge leh doth 
Lgslagh 32 EyaSan pra puaXstty mall hes Leda OUT ype imiicll Kado Ho at 
ppl Dhol pyyhe Lazgde oT Gb phe mew LD le wrdiivel by tes’ gis phat Slain umdall te 
sph Boys tcl by mings all g allay pyall S Lotisbyad pte Llp Unnyay Wher mal on 
IAP GI LIS, aS and coLdegan Logit [Py clegad Raanalall thal! fo rdien 2 eyly aSliailly 
ee liSetly Se AS on Sab pst gb gnaw 63 Coan oye Gagd Debate hyade of 52h 
Sillieg alate cye Lago LpiXen Am gpdanled cog enils It eeeGKS (sob Kalb eiope 
baad hd Hy [Sly aBjed Quad sll tle by Gupy poi! e Lak, git aot ciogsy Atlned to 
eS raed GUS, alan LAKE he wally rill GyoXd wpe 2A rund dally jlgat 
peShey oKaw XBle pe rgd Chie Jue Laity wtcdily nals ails Seog alyom sell cpiastl Late 
135 cloll tomy KUN GB pat” WSs ero! KFameciy Gilt Ghall ele glass KALE Gl este egtty 3 
deel eye bina Gently AGL 9 Lhe AST wie hoy Lt ate ld eptng rads gi! 
MS. st USS % Kier Cmald cLaSl Cpe Kehidl yyglo ly placadl & boro crass cogil ose te 
Lai) S1opiy gadss’ hey AnKS clad ope joes pT JLT Ie Je olan Slim Gf 

y a a ue oe a phe Kall ions ‘a des re He By i ey 

Lluis Les vast Bye Se Kids nae Bf SF RE hed Bh Sl opto A Was bs 
oS da Laag’ grunty wit yo aad yds pyads SAM Hiplate Let, Slim Goi! gy sTith 
ane ugh poill Jjlte & tly cpok ¥giay ago = Nggndd Lend 33 qlall Rade (sto 
sho le Hal eles Cenk 103 (ates pated cx Qh) F Gey cyl pill jhe ellen 
Mire od Gm Mal Minos aod pry ald alana Setar Kipmill Sale Agia’ Gel dh ales 
| oma sind ally aad g 9m, J oly des werglongs J Suid add nyo LSU ole led de pill pris 

len Bal Bye rads Sb 3 Ae gets Cita’ Gillen! LIGUE naill SS atial et Bn 

= 

By Bh roles ggd Gaclaall cilia sailll 42 pguny CHLiog 4% had oh! Ly rt 
wide ga M7 vel pmSy Beal Kile pity Bho Caw Kiw bade all 10) Opa? pet ald 
Cert deal plan Kem pe Upslne & pope acamd pity spit I UCL eoglt sit 

Hype og RAT LIE CML yay el ANS ae pA ap came prc Gb he Acaniy ridaill ego Sqastl 
GSS NEY aple lady ay atl shin’ aif eal te lj Lay GI meee od wcomany padlge SS 
A 
Sy Gm ph ler Sey ately wedle il MUS is alt 7S acela oye Lepmt Jbooy aizls to 
ay roots Uwhill & Lelie 5,6 st guaall gyro hast gh ules band SSy weld be ald oye 
oS Salat Qeta oh Geshall Ege Lorglee al FT USI Day atedo & 482 Sy caall Gis 
EAN cya Radsa Ribylam! of naka ail aia jdt Galil xiao UIT amily al due qh ole 
Halll Lenni panos Eo Awl, phakdy AO ALL ay kag 3} aiW,) olin) Lown 
He jbo on Bie Od usted RENTS cel CAM hers yey 3! cslar & are ei} AL) pest Raat oy Me 
ested U9y3 Upp jybelt Lough Eh & prize KEIM pyadey ate Co, No odD xasrill (pollae 

i? Romy39 50 wails ayswadl cit 

lye ity Le 

AS bgLly madd cority elyitadl Gal unr cowsl wnsl g 

NS tle phd GT hi few sb Res aU ce om pally 2H alae 
BU Baty Cpl sim tl ole i By 18 al ae vo 

Aang poglit ata Ooo» RGU che anata ad 
55 G gh DB chanel go tyflawiody xalt Nye ants dad, (oe. abt cas ne’ ha hol a 
JES craze SLI ele yl Lash ly able pte all By sol J LeStall aghe ee 

3) cola 

32” 

Leja ae ashy en ey ey bole bs os ; ine jon silavol RUS Jute ela, Cot Kislne 
ws 2 ons ist el ob es whe om US Sais Ula ola. Ciel ne Rash ansal 
ce) eo oe rely hee de Lilet 63 ie gan? oly leet oe ae calgeht ahd: ops osell 
a Onn A ere A et olath y Lessee cilia Lal Spas o- 
ob BP Males gt tly Haat MS 9552 coll es Lgie ainsi UG Karli Xegiogll soeall dt 
oe of spall Uipmeyl pol wAimony ee bet ee os east whey Blas [Pind dy tba wersel 
“vant! okaiSh Lett gubity pall Gall Utne ate abs hall pass ot ead aes, the 
Wilting See Uatay astenllthomll weal of rating ah cary sheet Gob cud, red plas ay ints 

cpl rs If ‘nce a aval het ¢ olls (ped a, Righe cP Sl Saw nr PRIS \. 

oe Pa polsuall eee LoS’ ay Lo 29 getcnd SsLil) walt cy 3 a eee peer 9 aol. Abbas 9} eilal 
Lesh sel a jbst cng 1S Raaaell & ey LAN) ut tal elowll Gulgbucad eal bo (Gaal & apd 
Cae! Le ylah ai pail gia he ltl cajiels PU SING IS, Judd clined dis sult eS ia 
any Lidlm oyPedt eygXe codll conde! & ety SE crak leat, eras Be te WS Jo (pets 

satis ath da yh XSite Agily stg Hasty (gelmally dpralh uslaly AS Tol Golaiil «Ut > to 
Lat gly cyit at sea & sll prs et, htt ul, wits Gt Slectll Saal bape ope All Gadi Gb Udy mal 

leie ait 2 ¢ ols iS 8 he Uw ee ynt & Rake Be ony cay aphe d pre ¢ Sythe Ram 3 Be Ep : 

Byes al pital Bren KOI all Slatlt spe? obiaball Qe ht on Goting GUIS ptacl oh a des Qed 

 Ugad Coder be Leake Sedo Sambo pad shout bbb he Gaas hls omits co pieall Bs ied wid 

gerald WL by AMey plKet SlLe Lad egigliibe cobyaw plXoet Lily cpslaaitilly jLnKi8} ope te 

Sy pdad ah aS LS Leioya TEE * 35's wygd PAD cyayhell OST alll yh 1S) LAT sed op 

1) (jie instead of de 21) prot, 

ples nue di 6 so vis mish Bia ro 3 yhha els fhe bh a Chapter 57. 

Chapter. BT. til hale FS db, Tet self 5) st b> (dass 

hme 399 oy? gil Ky & dud des plo cite Kaehe ’ * Ley sl git oe esas on 99 
LenKont by al Lgias AD Gery pLKON ge Ub Os allnd Liby aad of stad sy bia 
Oat eye SLs! Rem F callatly Ay, alll eagle At LET sed eye onal it & hus Moot lb 
ebm ililly Sb pangs 156 mab Mpa Doll sos KEES 2 paSl meds Sle tee pfs fe 

Logie yA Atty aacilly Syl! Cn Argued adllacly lata dole ul le BES oe A i rat a toll 
abel el eholl Ply Pett ce oXal be ea 3! lest é ee oKels yale ay 

_ Letim JUO LBs atl Spacly sl S siadle ipo 2edtl o eel Ms 4 $ os by | 
Les2ois 9S Lay 3 nets all elantis wigs wiall loll east F compel cory Ips i 

ER ST Kagania has og giolye tel 5 £4 MNS Pty paeibtl ALE Oy ago oni Event Leni a le 

9) cas 13) Oday 16) de 

32 

, a é te on ntl fart Je to ~ as pat lest a asi 3 ies USS) Ul) ati, 

Bee diet, Syl on sb Sa ot a Ube pls, Sopa tyldl op dat eon Cent, Uy 
Aims iy h Mijas dows 3 used} -Lylag!h ogy volt de pes) pbs cles! babs Aaag ay. 
be woe ale oie esis ssanal ce Gheill sbgladll ath 2 de ppl Desway Ould 5 8 

NS Ress AS | niet eal, S36 ota) pat ga to Ys SIs aie KS she wheat Gohad one exdtoe Sie 

oO 

tees ny Up rr) ene Or sta he pail bail, asi Les rhb alll Algo Lapke be 
ehySua, ayantly ols Laat Shaw we Suet a am wn a K we Sluaas hae (Ou ely (Ons) is Vs 

aie om Ans the 6 6 eytly OT o Leal, asl ope LPglag ale ugar gghb ib 

de towy¥! Ast, ia i ae Aa ike . 

jee Sst > Rhadomnds wos uw meas Chas an Laks, a shi ae on nase of an i 

SW AAS arsed ust fas) nibs eaggh? a lily (po) pda Ss | 9% * els r om a es oar 

iggy Clays Asm yptens Kol oyidl § miogss sled om Key? cities on 3 Jee oe a e 
cate! et & mazes ehgel om REO captty wom gd Kpileall (gail Py Staak certo soe Lacs 
GPU AS gD Reson 68 pnndidl CI cergsd Langenllo windy io,! oe aed es beng Slay = 
wet SN ga foblas} SAO Ryd 65 mma conhuare sb dd de pllbais wis ay wy 96 al on 
gilall nile sido, Cha s> Rhaadl oye Lraiiily = n/2 Wa eSiolt Kayo he of Kansted eds a Mi) ia 
gghb wis lis enemy> Ciel se SS cngtiw by Caras ands of AKO Cymandtind| eke 136 Cay be ge to 
sti JS Legeey lo CALC slag (gb Rlagptilh (ptslh Uae amas Lp! oS SBS yan 
Leal olaritt de thyaXI) acheyy phe 55 Lior & rsliisl Oty use ortelay a ag rill era uw i: 
Vpsisalé utile lt ISDE cblyay REN cy 3d GE ASE adyd ys pal ct Wear use rues oF Lamia : 
1S) ae Po%s! qnadlig, Pslanck Kad O29 Enoys sgAby duly mln Paella ne ae sal | 
RL agledt (,5 Oyu Bly clam) cspty, RHLS WIE end 55 poaall ae ws ds ep) ee ve 
REBT cil Sl DLstt nie Literal ay eatghi be UI Glide Leake sshadely s05) ¢prmedl be 8AS on y i 

0 at A Gab 

ay = sag 

. valle Saath ae lint une faatoe in is Ast ge 

2 ae Getty Saf _ aga or Pat tus codvadl Aleit 6 Ss 3 rr nl ppg esd 
et sles wane ws ea v uh wren Isl GE Bint} whe gl GUS Bat Y cpaptintly CoSLAN dat 
ces “ ts el oes uals, es “ idee Lgl oye Oy SE Gast 

oe a el lw toatl aly: Ab lk gbbyall iy cr Rayo Bethe pled & weep Ghyll an > fo. 

“saat tae seshaal “ ad er Bol Lass eyo pd} By yA eis aad asi} Ae Raw Rabe sleds 

Ras glaill east om SES yb & Pp & 2913 clus be tar rF Tell ebest, Chapter 57, 

ose bate Ree avon ws Pao gS ngs Sag nail a 3B phe Lot SONAS retomnye 
aaa hagond us cole Be Jobe £3 be (As o, HEINE Ray dl wep yd Kay atl who, dst 
: Urs cealaly ¥ jill Sail wat! ails Koryo Sptie elas egal) akbe nd Lowells 2 gaslle Sebel ‘, 

st Gt bean Fa) at (Beane Oy em RAMS AY Lend Piper uid Bethe way) Rablally Romyd Cyyrdhad Gory 

15) iil 

es i Wi re sh wha bs 

PU jak a pepdiincy be Showa Crplth xaly coh Lt 

ESbas ob LSS lamstl aad (jammed cylaell 5) Splatt sua hae 

Leg5sB SSF lly lamatl aad oylasll (Fmt huss ce dled ae o oN a ola le \ 
Lpilewg> oye staluaitiy dsLitl emis Ledly © LP Slaw Usbatt tie ey adie 3 oy ba so gt , 
SBy Lad lia & pgdc Ligxe Lea digs Aaa cn Qs eer ride Kapha Leils Lest d oe? ys en 

cos hab Aiaads oye] ot! Loa sl vtie As Wylie Jay lads slits oryl asses cst US ih as sagt 

AN 5s) Slats SR! misigg doy Ljloal Jjlie Kee Be ~ we = ne Jatt 

meee, tte na 

JN Gyg Kad adraiy ead redid? Soave c® aks Yio Xole es Lead kaw Ledwy é oe x e Lgalacomny louis Vi ie : 

Kamadly 9 Os 9 ot Lule, (Urn gate Coa ahah oF byte isles ate 

nt baal ars Ns ge Sil Sate! th aun gia del, F gg Kall 

sel do cilt eH Se Py al E¥ Oe il lt gy AL any sin 
WSL aks wll Rt Og tae as Ol, cect batt gels of Use) want Os, ey peer ve 
Cpttsly halal aad od lavall Rill OF TST Gua | $3 aH engRin 65 2% bd agle ty 
ALINE Syitly lbs SI os uu Sagal’ FI Ub Les? Aine US oy writiss JST 5 

3) Lay 17) ps! 

| pea 
hall at 

a awl 
| sa pull 
“eA SI lly See 
: ion 
Seg 
Jetiodt nat ANS he sad cyl} bal 

ans de ad coll lel Spe 
Oe Kodl ong py lil Lad Ost 

[EU SL So hob all atte ppc” 

alyoe 3}. 

a 

29) uh StS er bat | apie | 
Kaa! Seige 

Krall Call cally Sggss® ees 
elas Sheet | 

el [Ayes 9) 
~ aE 

ppb gonad gn Kame sLB) Keg By glall dats Segcs” Sey 

nin onaty | 
ry 

UP at She oS ga : sl yo,e 

oa Slants 

Fadia!) wth xo Xd nal} Slat 

sol SIS a be adc 

apt Rest ple 

al* 

boone atin : 
sett Uh wil oSenss Coa ie 

Sb olpetl sid edi Ma Mi is 3 Fay on ha Caos oh baseaelapeg ede LLP gills plas} 
: he ine (456 SUS ueele Ladi’ S) gisele 7B copy winery ReSLad dest ke JsLall ob cob tied Sie 
oa Rag} SLM opt do Comeyee ASI opted ace pKa eed As 3 heyy RO Ke be hos! [gies “3 
ly wel, Te de rien pyadl gb HS Cabal Xow oss Vl axaailin § AS) 3 Lassl lt nphe Cielaiy 

on 

“dae ob ot JAY on ey pga Km 9 gh AS gS moyen KS na Lib eRSUU XiaadS ache] ay xed (gd Jad dined bt 

a 

I>) 

» 4? 

PAU SHH Ct gt Pl Hil Ha Sie ga Hl sted he pnnlity (G58 AS KY SSH ce whey 
oe uh psa ‘ot lily 2 sd Bt (SBT es uy! Cale (abytb *yprglaa Lily LY LaF Bile cglatth Qt umd oy! Lob 
Sly alll Ga US voy ang pyle Waly path ¢ oh he aie glad le tad Kile glad he aXe pandlty 
Al gt age yun rsall cre gas be ope ga He cw (gd Kadball Gay pan unl «yl sell Gad! 9 Prndy 
egal Laity Gay Leadt ptinry hae Sila a TaS bee oye pth gibt Dy Sqractl ghals Rad os Tpit 
: vive el le slay sith ile (Gali? (gf b Wie aiadyly wlulgill LUST Jase 6 olgie th mle 
Ualemdy SiS rss cb Le Cement hel, Goselly Spall 65 Leases” probe waadd cyt ay mphisll eye gical to 

CHAP B Solroe 

: 8) ea oe wiplas 

eT ee 

een 

(Ae Rawal! yod Sell os mle sos er 

sie BAIS natell conga reining Raat sail ergs qoyio aib sh eS Slat radu : 

Sat hatte Al mall 8 8 alle AY Ot § Lily bytes cr? uss de rome ooh 
(FSS ysKad_ S37 LAL Ue Typo be By Bpthe Le LAS! Kew orslha (8 Stall 

GI extras Kena he GLall eany ni Osl4S oy 8pm whe thy args ges wb 

GAR Un GUS Wes cotsties Sey! ovate Bled om ally KES eailbengarcps 16) ; 
| Oy yi bély aad oy Vong iced pile; & le oyg3 LinPS gy 9 548 (i 

(sits Ants del inp 

aie ue; x1 Ss é Slt wl Jatt por + Ads aiid JES Gb Mot ye oy be eaters U9, 
gl ih LS oo! » us Sell ail | jab osha sail ds § bit bs cess pill ait de cee 
ont hash A Gat tee at de og rhaid aid (GFR D yb oh Sy gad gd 

i iss oily hse SS pga sui B dag! oly al GDh Gs) Gut (SSH: Yar bY Cast gi8Oy 0 
rE JAB ge af ac ge Rent 63 Laid ol gl Caso he lal Rwy WMI sym ny 
Wes Shall Lai od eyeXy olds jet bam WII G8 Laasly ra & Lealt lis ¥ wrt; Khead yo, 8h bd g 
PD al uals ey ce Lye eyyXy Suiall 5 En a be « w8 HAP ey Sarath dds ne cyphed Lead Leal 
gdh al cath A yh by cdaghlath LS (p58 — 208 Shall jail Lad ho flat emily a unsdt 

Mi hats 9 Sty Sua (9589 al eins GoM god eyig Le eadsth pmiisy a cugdh reso 3 ayiog egh rey be 
Gla pat Seah Jail Sly cxiatt SI abn os! zat ex (558 pill paall oe J § path Gt le 
BS add Lo a8 ia a Fine) sd x4lt plist 49, Jolealt jill one 8 Stu} lads 

REN bi, forh Guntll 8, Fas pail 3, foal Godt shod Gt Sb ST mioge all 73 ene te 

Sadat} ail! bos ose & GT IGe Gye a cobead yom ig oF VE) gig Uaaltib font fe 
3 agp oll USS LES Jara chend ond ow msalild ob JOall Gnaiill bd yiym he gail oui 
25) pplney (Mall tai (9380 zt Lamy sail} AUS D5 aad yin he eaisth audly an 
JS ES Onks Ges epSiy Mos Gel pb GL Gy antl) 25 eysye on yayil bi ot ais 13! 
showy Srath sail aby rm SI Lino Kemi S SOsal (noid ad ipl ug Had Moons - om bh axaldiiot 

og abet Ge Lyla oye Meets pyjysh jlediic oe ce G8 best at ob abst yIdall Gide LW 
aia waite Jul be mals 0 and U2)31 lad eye al 30 be Yale sh AAS pe Aighlany Op» jhad Byypaall 

3) eee) 5) (yaw 18) 5S 

erapter BB. 

27> se om Be Rad a ll GB 3 aT 

cls wi, badass &y papel Vpn’ fae ca! bi dy blart, Less Aly ar: 
LP ns mes? Sindy KS ctynidl cag re Lay cd pt all as 2 
Bho» Yo) 3 jh fi saauaiaes oa om Leeneoi ded das ils | 

AIA (sty Gb Mesh Ail de eS (gio Stor (g5b0 Kats” ar oie at il oes Ga 5 a5 Men 
Scrall ulad 3 pail 5! ware: ws os Lasai ose wot wks SB Lge slaty Sols se Se 

enh? 52 SE WIGS, al ioe (GIS By MFP & cyaadll co glal crs bogtan le ee lds el eis 
Kowal om WPy asd sb Gas oye he Bly lo pantly A Gad (3100 gy PEI S Sul eget eS 
ce Sal Lath Ne kewl Si ol yy cs LS’ sam gahs sl Bye, adorn I lps abt jtedie | Sees ae to 
OE or boat By godt bs CIs VALS wenygh?s JE PigPt NS Nanda Lislers & alt juall bid i8,al, 
Ue BSS eM jbb yeh BGI MEANS Sy Kat) Bball FFT tas HOP ay rere a 
$4) We oh cilia agli Lis pitt aS 38 Lootclh Le ly be patty leery ris ualst Shat! 
als while pe AILS go Ohya ees gill 9 Gall billy 

pldte oye shbie ae Cont ish Pim lb us 
ot OS pes Gdn Lyk! slice g45 col ah Ihe De Seo onailen sy Gh oe de eal : 
Vad alow cht eh SY 2,3} las oe KansS Srolt Lastt es St Dopscsh 56 Xumiy ASiigS LS by 2? 

17) » 21) e 

i 

same oSlse wel 821 51 ot Sea ai 

Keli i i cred 13) Bye ue 

Whos PIPPLY tye Be foot 

we wee ee +o otey KiLaAls ait de jolt 3! Syyhlal Pog Kana aXls wancs wise df Aisudy 

tae waa bee osm oe Boe ps une siLalt ASI erst ocd 

ected siya anal ad 
, 1 St 

44. Pe PoP PPS 

thf ad RHYME 
ay 

onoldy 

1 acsathheeeeemaeeentemetiaratetnaabeda biased een eaiorenaieinmnatemenerimtenttel Kemtamaaaeeaite 

fain ae EMM Soe. 
i} 
° 
; TALK leary 
payer 
Jove} 
| ateiameaeeetneieeendemeeiaeaiaaeteanieetiemetnimetimmmeeetenman taemamametemmemenanemenee ee 
abv 44nd , . ot Pvov4dt 
FqId4 

: bart 
=r anaetterietennenner nemesis | shnesennevasnanenacnnsnmminnnusnnsanceen 
PLP Lore SPvivivl 4 
PvP od 

Patty 

‘<creeetnemcereem eEenn eenana URISNL SA pnpmynrnannttdedncecee: 

HESF iv ves 

Podad.oiP 

4) raga LT) BPP 63 17) sic. 29) sic. 

oe S$ 

Chapter 55. 

Lo, Las} bait ws SL bah fg 

a ae reir menor rertomeereerenrert soso 

osPP4 

fer 
bodtk My dy. 
PREPIP Raye 
FRM Yo P44 YEG 
VaR vons MAM 
Ivooodviy ” 

4ata FMM IR ay 
j 

p 
IPaatyg AtPY94 

APE IPE 
SIP ATIER AT 

TT ATTN CNT TLCS | /eHRSROLAROSN Hehe mNnhicR/eRRUR ER) PRE ieee anette 5S SnaIAqSTH RtNReNE RH 
ASPM AF ov v Fart 

OFSAwad 

vPafok 4 
Pobadtas IPv44avay 

PoPPaPreyy 

WE AP ha : 
LLC | mesuntinettnsussticnesssrnansisewinnssinshstvmsnineeen: oe Reece omen ' 
hed Podaadao. co! Ae calgdtt 

aye ose 

Lemewer 92 ik viP Ce we bad Bylo! & pail Us p99 Kelas Ao aa ob Birks alae 

9) PY44hS 28) ofy 

o's 

wip BE FIMAPY ST 1FO. Ranad syeASf Lt wAis shill Kuwdy Symi Kg fill anlady Ls Bp aLewll uyiqam 
poriis le Jie Les Liked Ady (0, 1 9 or AST dey are | MIPy he Elatt panty Po 8 Ses K wuls 
BASS Gracey Lead ual oe Holilh yyaKlt Ligtlt ls Lash sles Lis Liss! Je & aif de dvam le Lina, 
eh d clondl yspem GIA call Leal List all Jeol oy tthe asc BIS dae Sati As ne | 

ie 

Pr 

Po 

ia ocho whisper Kone: ol de Lead hot yb 
tile Sht sale yaks Sole aad Lage SLE eye ih crt aed pK CS NAS by dhadll oye 

~ ls ckeldI yon é LXene, hI 6 chaile BI pete! Fe MAT on ad ih 8 Iya! 

ast Bobs ee cp i Sesh ce Wt Lgl ga cuir ph at soot Shee a Keliall JOt ony Load glen o 

byeOS sell lh 4 Unpmnss jot aBDh ad ped eal dkse | Ute TIT ual oad eel ils tail) 

(Febsas JBla!t Keepin ahd Glonit SLall eylan Gar jload clad ssl, cM Cselncd LTS g 

Legad Legale sles ALRET thgle nadll GIs go KASAL Linco piaiiany pylidly eglile Gros oh g KEAIE xcs 
oF Ub lS Lead a8 Ne SS cya AKIN ILS Se ge LN NAD SWISS 3 ers oh glad pw 
pts Kaibidy X5la e515 *s9Taals sighed Hanan KELedwy LEIS ya piney *h om! HS Sls foo sama gale yo ina te 
cxindh eb Ty (GSE I GE PTA AM alt cnalydll ney dy Hoth ts a5) cenit Ooms ope dod ee 
GOT Fa LaNN US choo IME vee easly al Ad cy 9 St esl Gaeta hy mall res Sides cygleacnshy dll Oey ylalyd ee 
By ses ily tara a es ct Mash palncoricce per” dingo Jacl dha panned pain cr nal bl 

(ls ue, AE IEA Sy aaa A atiinin C6 pals wpb la tas’y lisgem pine Kamantd salt ld RigbAI Ln 
CAtISy ttl S rags mea pl LM aye EO ope gh al ge glb QI mem JST lel om ot (HII he all jo 0 fo 

ays nae lad Oi uo; (FE oye Tuas Sms = os} Suey yf cyly ela 29> cre BBS 

(FIED B BIS Crydan Giger the Koma RBA RGD crm? meg (GBD he wrewaby fa 

wrigio 135 890 Mg gala AT ey dh pal) DUS Koline 9Sy MIF oe. eaiseld sgl 

we i dk snghyp nin dy 99 ete ant lo st Spc oh A & woot J 
sisct Bo ecrsud Hl LEST pgbety moth DUS cyigm Lenewniy I vil ATMs cee ven te 

zi DB Brey Rielly LUE LOS Pre CASTLE RTH GF HAE Boo Cyigm or GW So ewes’ 

Fetne QI IPO Kyuad ag Bell whic AIT Lh Lal Kudo GaSplh CUS UE Relane 4o 

Py fall Had ei alt, he fall pombe HIT & ayo 1S} Spl) DUS Rolwwe (6 

CSAS & vlinions nl, cde OS Lim ttt) XS Gay tl pee cp rey 

10) rot 10) cas 

6 eye tag » oft 
8 Nowe 

4 

zon ls ier 
ses fof fy 
wr lag y vi 4) 

6 opty 14 

» 1.Fyv 

eos an4 

6 on jag PN 

pole 

HE eee 
OMe. 
MPa 

Pixcele a 

AFP eves 
Wieland 4 
Lh ah axa 

eats 

tr aa 
i Aeon 
LES oes 

Deets 

t 

Hewat tee 

his Bf eer 
prey keh pau 

S4Poe. 
HP eve 

Oaee 

Rilees So 

#V4006 

WOeese 

| capers 

? 

SVeeee 3 real coed 
144o00. | ve ia 
Pi hee ve 

P, 

16) viloe. 19) - 

Sy. nd} ate! o HOT jbo cyt Kl py ot ee cist ee it 

dere 9% arms ty Lodsy its eae: Lal, Unisiegs al om 

“ ys whem Ey vjbondS BT Xinng ) ate polite 3 Gl, oes ea ae) i Li, ut Sy i 

Hailed eso Keand srl, tothe BP sly KBLe Cubalty Linc cylin See cipelh 9758 ¢ o Doty : 

SST St leis dreds LIS IP S aglalle® oe ankle Lit, be IN, Crition oyblans, nee sty, 

ent a tl Sey Leal pall Sb Stl cas 5 tit a ay pia el 

pill engin LS Bb yePle Je meal es JIS & Gib Leia Se diy SLs lie 

IS G21 debe hb 1S Lallbe 5555 sail tints nage tua pully Ales [goles (BT 48 entll wast Kat y 
Duet S (cts pally Lallbe Lessmtog ¥ st sasSl clgie cut lilt Lgduad 2 # gta Sim mail onal Lena’ to 
Leall aie Celnell cy uaatill eon sali 6 LSB Wrst Lh aptly AUlt eurtes LS phe aist ZLatst aKes MAS 

AS ope Jonas! ad Sere Ky Gunn 

cP al OE a Nols ald Be Galeall prety 9 Ll Sly 
un baad fe» ws csdll, CATS A nam ne Sy mail crass gill JI cSt SE AN oe Wad BLS 

fo Lpolaxut AS, ws 3} wad oi i aslay 3 (bye oy pling 3,53 le 4% Styl Ra ue ee on ii 
Roykaao yoesesh CoS seats Se, geo! : 

cyl 2? Sho! aad “pes Boel! K3Loy ney gr} Kine & sight b i 
pheaa! tgs jam sit 

Orste > AE CoB EIS Cll phe Hie pruzilly Lamot wyeetiey p3y! oo 
auhes to oe dy *4094 Le sag iai 

ue, 3t bs pul S o) 533 O3s> wha Liars Las 
rie Lbs ob rig ie aele (Atl yo, Jide op 83 Ls Gundy SAAS LL be he Sesh Cams 
Hades font WayRPs? iss Mo ope If » O+F4 Wyy4 Wee wisek enn 
gt cite Lites sale (pie Sat oh JVI Cot atglamt nals cipding wt 55 lo coylt 

oly vhs ends Los Kody SuolalW Spal RUS LO GSH. 

eodmol ISE'o... ip 

ey! Ads Shred} who Po 

GS 

29) 4994 26) Wyyo 
30 

4 

Lal ee oe deni es ot Lisle Lycans ae pala Lexan (5) nie a wre & duds 
oa 3 als lait xSLatkty cant Sel oe cochll CALE § oy Bt «gua LEH Sid Kimll wbodunl he oT ioe d 
st Gla es! uneatal gl ae | Laas) andy XiLed ay Slelt waist S plity Open gles Xie eayb she coal: 
tuailnahs Past ng gsi 10 bade on sali ptt Santos gl He Up LOL cya LHS hd pmetST LT oa ope 0 
Lag! andy Jeon Wel chal alll 3 GEE Saal & Letty Lgslyiory LU) alm 22, Welnicy Gmaidall 81m Gy! 
“Salds USS lees Lemybb G08 yo)3 cnet Mp cals cloully gully elile U2,MT asdill & GW all 
Laced clench cede Beil B ald Gmail @ wrbty ell xtaball qubastt Mt Relist voyenll Ll 2 lie 
cabs une B cleat & Gob, gall IMS oye eoky pally Alt ey Gmail GB Ub Ride ne who, sb 
es ot UNS alllaglawy) So LS w,Lealh Kigkall pled! Aceh SIE S APS etl Ley shay 
dhe Vy ass CIF Lpetild yt Digby AST oly oh GAT Geadtld Gb pte MP9 ppt mle GI sy 
Wah Ladadl ede oeiels get at Arml RaSle SRI a0 Let LES Cott plat & Polaxel cyait Y 
Lay Baath SIS Ural be asl Gal Rae do erly 131 Gayalh ead aie OILY Kypsae Zul 
gn Kalle AS SoLT GN pyPO cgi cod dade gle Goal de thew phe of ponte” yale yd shi} @ 
AS lal gs As paca 1S adise he xad Quake LiKe glell 25 ale gus max cp hall pais unmddtt fo 
Wylaasey LeAll fh loslm wglXd Spo Lob pratly sll oy cyt eye (Gacha aah 99y uli Lemna | cows 
aus eyo Silt STS he giaiin PAKS aly cst gh sLowdl yaad Les AST DT lily aneall (8 
GAP Gy) CBE UI Lite ality Yo gga Yall slinn GE cK cab Least Lesnar SoLites RLS Stoll ag’ 
Ol Wage LOS SLE pod SS ad no WLU oli cys Leias Land olesdt, oral! de acy wyatt, tobjit 
tae oad eo poe Ga Gaye alge BD oS al Sued hand Y alt STI Gh pais UL RU JETS Galitgy ft 
wASt i AiSyle by py JE pl She gall & eka Co Wh aber SK, Fores Kaghee pad Cal ole Us Jud Cally 
giles U Lysche SI JY Uglle eo inh wal oJ Lesa ¥ AS whale 49 By al ih conalls 
cst ded Os Lally cya ail Unt OB epglanich ¥ MANE ST Judy LSM oye Waly Amal SY ily 
$59 MAS Lagilam Jide Gwiglly JIS Charo yall Lady oyigm * LEST Kem melt pm 5 GI ole ae 
Unt gb Had Shy athe 4h allt ee pall Hily Lekde ged Gmedll ee cyl HLT nig 8 Mud th hy cb to 
BAIS Cpe Fp pthe Khaw cn yg BOS cay dd GS chen ced ed AG Lal AS Tgllt UBS Lily ysgm Ciel eggs sit 

OSG 

24) all 

F Pal fal Poe we EE aye pamniiy ee au, 1) PIP PV one = el ae ete Aes 

chaso Ayko paltry 4 i, y Pv “sate ae vekaeaaxs) Sl oe ta es yy ol ‘hw aa 

LP apa toms LLRs rile eoeese)) Lats Val AMA off ae OF nee ann I oro het “90 wel ni yt 

ee} ogi Ot Gysat Lell WU,SS gil olan § Lily eQuod cybaiiall -hY By anbas okt Ay dott St $i aN 

Lames) oye LOG log KALA ,fy03 phd Genghia OT he somillly, Yay de ode § otyS Mi pula 
poT ous Qe one b cy Day Oy BLS LN Ledewly suylalh bl a Spall male Wl Lady Lega Der 
ye Bganct eyusl Jp5 & Laat pag) Vallis of ofp Suet Stedel (wie Lady Sa¥b cp. be gel 
“peep sind lagdt lb yb UE Whig Sy IMIS Rye @ whey had Sh 

way ls 3 OSB Yy Jpbs sylKe Cb SUG yo Hil, pads Reape (Geb WUT G% We Um GS Al yy lo 
Chapter 55.lgalact, olesl, st wrnis & Pe SLaaSl mAb cys be, Lg) mnths SLA IT SLany pty nds 
ads Bell oye Gaede Aid) Spit asmog be desily seid 20 eshed GY oe BIKE Cbelll 55 b pM OS 
Unesilly YoSt fai Cauad aie GoM oye cloud OE Gt ele ae B ded ase Rely Il ptal, els, ddA 
Jey B RRND pat 13 vot TS osltan LySyby call ays Stay SjLilly, eigs lilly ease! jie! 

SPS yy phil alent ene Liens pt grits aloud duals cabailly Lgbyd aeabaall 3 tad ly 2 te 
Lae Cyt SAS [gin Nell pglby 73 Wepe B lpm gS? UF yenaall ope ugh AB TY gt call ts a ide 
bre gy BIBS cy 8 gt Th ake LigSt ita A slo Ceteel igh lb nents SS Tally pyapaall lho ye gh SINS eit le 

3) veal tay 

\ » aS eS bol Bows ba cabal IAP hes copes” Chapter 63. 

MS ye Bo sd all pt lors! ne oe Lottie Outs & psy aad ot eu alas 

: | ate! he gly GF Ba St a Lil seth ees Gd pW tal Re et 

i oe y nih tity F laacny 9545 Raysly lope pte Kay sgath Kadady epitio eailKd Kast} WP oye! 
i Sgr 2 ela i gt FH gn Gal eH le Sp Fata Jat yt 

: an VAAY op bon pte Kamat oylualill eyy Bote! ambled! Kas oy8 alm Qe aii Jott Real visi lhe 

pills Raglan Sasser ob ab’ gh shot cull 131 AST AIT bleh cf rtied § OS aif Chapter 64. 
shalt rb jtooFt oye eae SN nde Kacolll oO Remay loot KM aad ph K kamd GB lephes ans 

PLalh mii Aad Piet oh OB! gh aselll oot d Some stor ob Gall ge Karol AG yas cyt lend | 
phe aot ghd SUN opal Bhd Lgall Less may whol oye a be ost edt yl Leedl Borge oh ca oll K de fe 
cSt make ered le dhe Rowdy ceil & (cl be yiady oat rae? beaks comes ai hh B he Ely be pemntiny 
Bip Dldy LWAn [E Day! be LY MASS (FIR oped aple warad Le de Arnly onion d SLI wpaas g 9° 
plate he Least ky 5S chlt yo 1M, © Bight oh oS LIS oF saanll Lamps aS olil eS 

Lael) once de IMM los che Lphe coll le pnd BALI Nyoth al cams LU all 9, oT 
Met oe 953 2 Pe gle WW pone 9 é 2) 5 

assy (§8B oSt MM Hey he cclag Le Sle Keeayh mantis 2 99 ee? Fal eo due Kaslll panty bo 
9 dds ott erase Lf Lerdas boy “ols ort Ae Ore IAG Qe BLL amy orto & Gast Gyo wus 
Somsicr oll de patstl Ready phe ail & Lye dt shod om Radial) & pied SY IAS, capllall Lome 
zlimly SALI otrcdt ope ot Salt 9Pe the tl fe Sy der eal pants he DIS JOD pemnid ale ale 65% 
Gls he SB Oda pganibe he DUS JOY pnd aghe pant Le le lal Rowdy cls & Lea BY coll Rae 
gph sele sews UB ail pein dhe QUST OLN panda ch AIT Rally edi gh OL! UslaBINTOO ey GLUT Sodadl 49 fr 

shred! a dig ) LU Kaas] Wilecol smash Leagl Japtaed hel pon XLl ror senayt Gd sllgtt Go ad ey) EIS, gilay vIool 

4) gyda 4) nets 5) Mr 10) Uist 16) it, 

Week or i e elas 
vee Ae athin baa ai del ot wie Aine 

Ct be yytett sygailt wh Le of; 151 Lillie us®® cyiggtiy Raw Usteay 

Ieee Lealits M4. awledt ate & 9 Mov! sega stain 

13 Linaiis 13) Aiton eo Sea ‘vp Rpeghlass pest tot 

vy i. ‘et, Ais iO} “ 
oP HEH pian Loh be LOST; maleated atl 10 he patel wns ra aghe. ot Nj Gla 
4n4 bale ob39 ane A>! s hiwitl wee 29 (ilk us? at on Rawolll lt feinp) Lesion on HN 

Rxioly claws x wr ere bo yaks, 44tP, ee) alin ha 

Ze VM De RASH pant Lometh Lo od le Shy HM HM he ngudy ate jaa! hee oe 
wards edt aod Udy AN att Ie pitt ney. oCeghtall ote sts JEST or [pally pylaaitil AC 
gt MeLo Sore nad le Neal oye Bde NE slaw oy gd bo Lobe allo dhe Shetty Tobit ays ots to 
iis att SLX on al ait > aclxe exe, cote aie Juam, Land ace lt Shand eT (527 Sb rods 
SID yoy HIVPIF LUE mace Royo TF 6 SDI anion pole KAS us? Aes HIM? UILtt 9, eet 
BAS ZA o-oo Rowdy Fan glad FFB aspiad WU! Lily tov gael xiao Fg 

jos 

Web le SS coleatsit coy alt,t le aiyy HHI Jodt d Seanell - wat he ots UB gw Ld cS, pha yh hs lug 

eran asl roid Syd wordy) yall) Lowy dSy ya Le PRET) urtaly Kailas day dua? toot LI Olly te 
4 ‘ t 5 < ‘ ated: ee % q 

5) els 17) }vPae 19) Sic instead of 184° 41/ 46”, 

“wel, sanded} she hae 4) dale ei tit, tas ookll oaal Lgad tay wall Kern me 

lines ee lh paces inlay italy Ls 45 Raslady boy Py Ragan Vg ontlde * idl OAS! Ardy 

sligus be IRE ive triad oF dake lass pie ed 8 Laghin! bas wy wren 3 awl a3 

{i 

si pest o aN Lena VF eo cats yluaiial of By #M oF 2st ve ue 

u epSt xulest g ai by LAB aphe xuioy pe ayes Kegladt La 45 KG 
cia dy IPs wo Balm call UGE eye alte Land @y 11 eye fo Lisle Lpxalls oy i os, 
iSley < som the ae un siptiasle oe ro I} poe ss AdgS} 2 Kaw Js oe ry OsPoOja ays do! 
bo make O}» ate wyp%ty ry & epall Vygis Lglancty vP haa (SAKP x45 Baldy Odin) 
rite & Rhll pio Lygedd aad add CoAT dress Sol Lt enema, ening Kile Raw BS eylardd Sel opr (xan 
be Aphe De wad & aa be eiyialy hedt ls woz wpe Ha ae Lewblys v 3 html oe viobe 
ste Ae! S anol ey & a dual che 3 S30 crane & elt the po a a ead colt pre) cht ore eras 
nds Sly wal Mandl Cody Raepllall ALO Ledl 6b collrad Get ope auaillb SL veh (hs Kpwily 
A ged wail 4) yt gucs Set IAS y's eqsm dl ce pyall Redle wrrnils epslnl wornilly daly Lybe 
Luagh aad lS AME he BAST; Sgt cyiptnsy Resin ce conad yma oye Leash Ramadd Lgilly 1,9 tev Eneamally 
JS es Hall py SAL cslaedt Spl cane be eyy Stn BLAM cpanel Kile yl iow SoU as seth Hd yy Lada 

wisi tia che shinny vcd Wrst Liagicn nmin iad L9liniay Moot Regtagll yyeitll pay H4¥0 

4)tsoto, = 6) ath MIFvid® 8) PeoPR 9) a4 

° 

¢ 

y 

Otte fie 

ee Tom eygX OF kdl ep iwi ry Lid 
Lady US oye aLigKn be che ytd ales & dell cor cgi) leg de wry pag ake nh it 

ASE Jurd IAD Raddy CX» aa aie. 4v4 domly Been tS yam bas o 

be de 3p ihe HS BLT Gytly ann aie alily JURE ero 130 85 ds Sy Laat! wd ; : 
HY gaital le de oip Tos § OSI pile enSlXe lalla SAL pal Oo Kaan oi le ei i 
BE O59 ASS Eby bo mpsole ST IK Le Lojy mulerl pei oo Par ds age! aM 4 . 

Si ss EL Noel itty, wnat cd kas Kapalll ALI Upham eyyKad aa ou ae i foal a 
Rail) ALA ye gaat LS Crattsd 78 oF collnts glial oll esa He Wh he EHeSH paul iF V aple i ) 
LDlinioy vis wyygits 10 glad ann SUCRE ym Uehams ih LAJIAL atten Cal acd om byt 58 «gli : 

xals Kuba! spat ore Sy 4h ap Be BLL donde 441 Aphe bjs hus & Proh Liapoy crilhe a. 

cig soe Laaat a Loli DAN seated CyyZhS p65 and Qygwall Gall UL PIP Al, on ¥F lve. cate epiptas 
be Gos B ely wim oe liSel nly b amity om x0 Jv1 apie 948 apd pyesdil Labs endl 3 

3B Wlinicy FF 4. Xaill LD anette’ old Glall Urying Laie Lina bo he peill ow eh fo. 
VPI sled 41.4 agle GOjy vIn wwe) gate Miss est POE! Lin irs enaione 
op Linas Me IF oy * 14 oh aah csty V4 pyleatill al3t BT evn ah 
Hp) ISD ds ood oll CHM IAF CEpllall 52,97 ud 2ST Coll cod ol ail ALi 
UA (6? Lemidy sie GS} ot cosh Lye alan’ ts ly Fiiv aia lily SUR po NAG gg 

sly HF eragdd Le 19035 xulert 25th ns ha he G2 be amily v gd Prot Gpooly Pe 
girs Oa! & Laglind Grol, riiKe S Rh le Roy pan Kill eee gill ake ip upall & pars 

13) P49S46 17) 14h 4oF 

29 * 

Satye pees ony xia Linas 0M A IRS SS yA SUE eady) wLS 

y oe 
oo sina a ae ifive a a3 Lagu 10M IM vo oly oe Laas Kamit riebs epost 

seed 6 |i isan Le REA ky ane cL een 

del nse oo Fay dale sai pe hol 8 oe aie ad liens 

: ean ah WT RE nab (cas 
Snayl chy eelnh Loligill Why ygllall Keghlal (LGV By TPP 09 cgiid Kall (LI on ¢ LN 
Lb N14 n GAIT oye Logins caasLSSt IAP frne Jud op moz2 guyh daly *eley¥ pga since dle 
es sire onlssl pyasl (Bil Pyne GupAll Kim Je Wlignd Wy Ifo tt Gdl omoe aul 
cre Kamath oP Lome Gd auloo! git pee w! Cire, By AS, Oro jad REL, Ceamiin eam aw hada Iason} 
635 & GAS 49> Quett Soy care Lad KM etilly Kanga’ Kimi pgliolen ds 5 25 

Lgule Ojo Ki & grate ugaeamd AF oF 91 hes QUST bed ps! CII! NST 4. Xu’ Mia AUSSI fo 
Sav Lgie (ily endo gomiin Kila ince 9Dy Slay Hythe pan Kian dio MS} Dy Aim} Uke cavy Kpilad 
vot AS | Er pi oflead Tdsh he pie, qilns xa} Syed ja gow ASL co DIS cys peril patel pia ginad 
OAV Ake (gtihiy Oprmdss dw Lake Aut UF pie Kaa,! Leake zie Kw & Lessaid cpmmill US, cw 
GAT I crags? Bry Lely 2,553 el avg, vill eye Qa bo > Ge 3} etl tho cxP! bey Sipe) pie liad 
bash sadiie sab OF A uiSy Kipiled Lewhe ype bw ianaian yemill Peas yl gly lelil Shs th 
Fa Kian shes ore cyslAlh gael SoM (B8lqe Kall slat GATS troy CALC yo his slyae call iS Ginall 

2) Liss 11) Sic. 

" situs oe Bs sea eladt (ciiasd Chapter 53. 

adbls .. ‘kh ee 

SS mda sly he Spt pie cr pel! & awlort poet Pa add 

| Ato You 
Chapter 53, = csi aula caléyd Bron pfsn ers Slo expimall Jale & a Sioa oF ol 

GES cyLeatill platy sanlest aKa Lead all east on Leltte! Cs A las, olny 3 rh a i 
[en Rahs Liddy be Pele ore 

aalbrs hol} (gavy > yak sols he 4 Raion gies Shnet St tele 

pcarsey LUKAS casi Ie 19 whabuus es S be By) while mailen; cn atelllae (gail uate 
pstae rele Oyo pine Ait 8 ELI Grioly ony ake Kale SKS GO wrsghP a JE ol Lah Oust of 

Samadi pI eared AV oe petell ope cr git be wake S59 Cpls 3 XR capeohy AL eB ope Rimall ¢ om 6 

FIFO he Lgldat jomly, Samacd uberis latte kee Qe Ojy AK! KASS ia le i 

nal wogatd oe La v4 che Lams pont 2 Romiisl & colea be ui, samy Sl op mati SY 

os oull sg coh ley Kalas} a 

mall oS Le Mov do gli Le aust 3 2 i i ep SS 

BEN oe yeaRitS ol Gail, woh 6d (cli Ley yLaaliilt etl za vee Se Lowy StS Li andl 3 BLN fly tamed} eps 
9) Ungalss 13) Pyaccvry : 

29 

AlN 985 il SS cla ie Wb otss) Led aaiB S Chapter 52, 
aa Lt a yo Nal Epa oath Sal Hel oy Spit ene 
pera Ug Ui go sally oil 98 mat BS) solatt Gb pila Ublgint 0 65 53 Ly Lghee 
Rear ea ds Smif alle I Juaidh IAP Karniy Uaslaat eras Kad ony le Jad Dy Xanghlo 
of oa fal GIS. ye Sap BAL Lei (LIF AIF ow HL For one MIS, ALO yLaiall alGt emus 0 
OWS Geet ghana (Lh os Pot Fal de eli Le prndly 00 wt glanll God 138 
Kmail WP Keay Kat aaladt Lit ea SSS Rime coos” BS wy esl!) Yo errs; 
Fe Terkel cAmTAIE Sadao! lh, Guana Gt psa emi Lgad All alert Uh gt 
pry OPI aazSI alll LET exe Quam bo gays 155 Ha ll US oye qyiiy KLM aualadt @lit Lt 
CE Rentll ualls Riad LO AP ye coal Sly 5H alad! (LGN ed Iva Ill he dally 
es gt de eal eal tl A Reh 2 Sm 

OS Hod al he gatrl bo Ligmis coved & lig nad (yy Xt i, RUD Kaw aS 

viet oil v4 of ipa GY cmadinld Rheglda!l che Lobos IT Foo HIF ove qyLuaial 

cya (Linas HH at APT ota: maslest Pd pt a lll he sehy le Licudy ofl! & LOLigyo, to 
HH Yv0 Py onf at pls he Linus i532 Reese last Bo vie Fh APY of cdiad Ry paallh oli! 
er LOS corle AB KG Cysdunll By Hol fa IM RSSB he giSTL LOLind, Kimath jgedh Dy 

XAOS sail lal S Winall Repl LY qrpcas os! 98s Cipling G55 Key Leash WA, cSt & YI 

aadledd yygat & LAE Grits ensign & pF be woody RAL Khephlalt LY he ell aanling 

23) eoorl cn ens 3 Lesage Ualitiy nuledd jyait = and KALI lll oll he gates le aemiize KALI Ye 
B sland UI GS Jus LAS GY WS, crimlly sypcill I piri Kaa) Kaameddl GLI aad Juasns 
Reale geh ehKM Ugsaiy Leki ung Le Jud g MLC Rheglbal lO Gt Lass Lgeaiy Lads pg Le Jus 

wil also! ues or (stolid (65 Ralsalt sik ye ge ingiancs 135 44 a4 af o o 

eke pymll yudesty ada Shits LAS pymlh ope H46h gba df gael Jai clavate Kol On 
Glatt, qvee, Sot pancegd ast, Cyst LPragy Moo ook say poets PM. wae be wha a 
3 aust WAP wins SLE yy git! Jory py cr Rholb Kyndall Ty IO abe ott i oy tit 
SL amily 2 23h on 2 be aid ioe ve hE lad poantitg ivi Wienalipeay! ution 

St Sym tem lt SI oe SEB WyymS’y LEW cp WUT bey manbodt pgp — ork? vk he ie nat 

she pyansill nto Ahad (Galle Ha AP alias glat By vd zh lad) syed he ecrend 
wot om Jet Unky SB peal ot REI ah pelt ily et ao, vas Sloe aah LPLinwd 138 Pak 
Cr zBly Bye aall KpmaddlT D xadadt seit he Kayamiill LIM Ct sy aldo (65 pga 
FREY sani peeve) ote Rar) (jy a ee we) split, SS LS Rlulty eo lgmlse 
HEV Ase va, jue malt Shate Kady spell (gb poh le Lal 1S 11 Mal F py | lo 

drall lity <— vee hehe ogandill Lily Pvt nds ip pall Ub pases gy I wpand” ena adag (dps 

Pat By boot... pated PAF 605 55 gil (Bax) Geb elise TST BS Row amtoy git 
Sqaol he eas o} STAs aahe Lapantio Jedd ope pail IAP 8 9S yh edie Bomsten (6d umm 
wine ad cial gATT peal pO Le fram anlar yyedd he RAL madill ge pamlid comsgi®ps 
PAST ploy pilKe § Keath plat eioes cglaiiall LY (gaplatt Ie joe hes ot Xe a cxmbass te 

BOM AY de GLI Koad 3 SF GLI ow gt La ally Mom HM he Zlall Rowdy 0.411 (65 

1b) PF recess 

we 

ek pee 8 Laas ae sae ox leet Sst cee Wo Ba Gud comiiy Pr @ladl exe caiity 0 
Wes host une She RAIS oly pull nll Sly Fat oP AIF eayleo eyudaall 31 Lag oye 
Spits ok a om Say ines net & ppl! obaall 9 borat Ub eelalss ul oft iol 

Me oe fal coheed ae ae wybgadse ED an get ON PS 
ee oly Unie on Prey Lew gS ol jaats IAP he Ligs’ iy oss! Pl tb | reo cal cybglaiz Leaat! ce? Gy b de J 

TP FAR 00, wee agile elit Fnate Hd) Raacae went Alf Sproat gw de dit 6, baad ri ems 

re (sylosia FOS, ‘4. ss Waa clpand Lead (phy) WUGG Esbgladay FM a. we on 
eniall Doty SSF Laty Oot 15; US Joo eglicpllall LPjlriiny coping XELAIS rail 
one gO REE) pqosts Hughald B Geadill Xiow 8p STF Gall, Rhrimll O will Rw 99s 

€ date Lae St Gi? cyt ce Aels K sty BEM yo clsuall pL eyes cob ytinall fo 
“Hythe (ob Mahe pyamill ap2th Gopiae Lott all ple Gojy SP. pylXS ub Vly Lay 3} 

oP th. cept canon wiaaall wplaglatar 4 iat Riguinia ANT, acted 14,.. dds 

err Ww a, Beak fehl Ligmds oP “s pty) Lig no 135 Gt eos (Be cybscav) Ady Fr, wally 
on ae Le linn RIS eye Sem pas yy ie SS eprint OAS Lingo 15 lubed * 2 

2) Sve Fah ito 4) te. 6) filwdl 12) sds 

BRN leh 

Os ‘b Py (Gaby bbe bs igor (yr pec rx} un ee qe oa 1 ce 

lows econ eas & yybadil! etal un i! val Ws WANs at oie wi ‘ae 

Ra ci 8 OOvld eye c, Taian ath 

wera pits} Cay ex) Lg btu! ¢ sig Bs Kelas Leades hy w! es Suu Ulan Kowal - ci laws ; 
un ay) Muss ty dP LF Mo, wee Baked vA & CM pleats oh Liye 131 (gee o 

fe” 40, . Lets Le habs Wy 4MP 449 Se ela (ps Oo! 3 BAP ba ply scan Hell sid . 

dy ahead Cot Oss} 29 So, fe a4" zr ret 3 xa pil ph npn sale ps we 

AS eel) pIABa oo Iv up 1 ds FP 40 ge F.0 i eal lane : 
Saobell Sob AS uae the Dot g ijl Kell LW Coy ia ale port sad’ sats HS! 136 : 
SI pegadan gal & eygoelicn igh sega Cyt homl cyan 6 Pld hdd be * amemiis} aot obaos), ee on 
Leib PLY Rae gine glaiill Lit sae cyyd Lest eb cod Bias wyhobly Ju INO ghdiy ls suulad to 
capbstin Ciel RAS S rtd eypsiag mil Sp eWy Sy cmcton oye wendlgl cals cen eye hdd mei cna eeni 3 
Sia Sly Lame St or ely S yyewiin vvild & hkw Sly FAL & LaweSly tbe & hex 
ral gadend Bed eo ayauziy Leste CT eytests wal Mads cow (Lt Laud ope Zsa TH, de 
UBS fe AOI wrens 158 Gail aS 99 CAPT yyeionll oye (lis le eet Roll} RaLal coludled! 
bv $F IMP aad eS gd GATT Lilli wetgs alling ngoe he Lanse Jet SAG copies #8 iaty cf eit se 5 Re 

PAF aa Mo FW eh Fal & Saavy3! Lis sioy 5 202 tied ys Aad dh95 8 Behe sana da oe RAMS Plizion 

14) kale msommils 

Jo Gl ay J ei 8 ep 81 Chapter 52. 
x wea yalits yal & theyll OY he cists 
Saw tet ke Rei ¢ cbse! oe heen Leia 

2 st siya oo Je “ Lipa sist Khel AGM & Lee L Lape 130 sesh 

ay: om Fad Ar oe & Shephialh Gos k co? rkty Girllall 9, Seg (claall o 
ae BS oe A oe ee opp eed wallgte AT he led Mh gd gl, eho, eal we 
oo Samy ge ly SHE. MW, os howe ’ysRaady RAL) weal un om UP (gta bo fawedl SE Cy apts 
a come 3 Gert Yo Lorazs Kah auleol yet cptad Yo he aia GL Cimio cyyrmiiyy Lowe 
om. ue & ass age Khem lat Lakers pgatnll Cpe (gicad bo Leas yoda iro Cnild & Xhgtt 
dat a Aigcdayt cp EPP Le nigomiiy ade bad thy be pygeaagy che Ast g Laglial fy 
CKgghlall Kreghlall LY! clans edt mioyll up Aipmailiyy “apd Lait! 520 crate Va he Alpomiis 3 
Lgie HAztadt xebed! feria crm ADS aabast syed he matt opt crrnd 15 ait elt Le they 

fol cya Hoo teed 4o eds CReioy jor cn NOPE 9 std ere mS’s ie) re 

Lene ols? fe wail $31 mill Sif adh coladlaat oo allan cata’) syed Charo aghe pant 138 
Bd el Leggs al alg je Lah elsall Lo din clin be Rud cyyKi Balad peal cge Br gx! nity gyn fo 

Lilie & mele pyaaill Limi 156 Halll AS Bt pganill Ramis’ aeaita shit sys” dt alt agherpymil 

oo er%4. eo ery Gly THE SY sauagd pte madt Pragy Hoo pmilly HM AL oh 

alts We Lo sF al, xual Cannan’ I cits Y Ge gia ood DENI males fe IAP Jue 

sevens 14 (gb cylltty oln Fa. Right ukeety cof Bete! gam Gt het ow cpiddall 
Mas Ge abe iiley GUS (63 ailaly pluie! id off, aghe yaad GL AF and gig gsall Saul f 

SAM iyell A Gb elaall plat ot pstted (65 whe lily C)8h aad Gy niall oy ast ial 6Lp3! 

7) Lacuna. 

CSrdigst pyland pgs WEE yl "Shy ral sin ptt Stott ge a 

i teen 

Sas sel Laid oi BT he mL b S55 neler! GGrlttonay se gh yl ue dst SS alle eee a Widen ; i | 
99 Je asd gAT rds SS aaleot yest ope (gunn Land alla) cnimll yeas yh als f Las AAD yd 
SAI AY all age le de yeh ih 1b nel gt le awl om fh le watesh dca 
ut ey 131 Kam? GOS owls! Caaxd Kyles’ gunlall aphe ay E102 8 bd, Ueitioty Oud edt 
a wn} io werham 13 rim! ogi Cyt 9% pgmmom hall ST Jue auliy dy exalt Say Kjos tunlodt bo 
ce Sap TSNy nba yell BT Rabine aut joes @ dnb ya gait De lat aby pall pai 
AE ED yet po HS sly Kail PLM ermal asd sete pal com gee be hy be he sy cats 
Klan auld} pl won ste pil Le Les Jad 3 XG Knell GM eaten Go yadtll op pena le Lgale Agsy 
KAT rail yesh Le Lowd RES awledl yegit & AREY LOS Lio 15H Bh Ie Sng eiimadtll «iB! gt 
13 awleo! segs ee pmaaiall aye eyes” 2 poiill ay ee | ie Kalo! ore lig yio Lo ee ae Re 
prs OS, Ripailll LIV & DUS, Gylbtl EA install eyes 99 Lean! p ae cy Lgl Kewl Lgad Lay io 

2) TASTIAT4 4) Sic. 10) S3t, 

287 

a dat we ob 6, ig ee ie ‘us ‘os i ode oly deals Cy syst 

Peace oid fF aly Aly Bandy | 14) oho stot yt we Lets SL Kewdill Orde yl and o 

| Bal Lispuny wate 5 LaadtiSt abt S luna ISly SPM val Py, ial) Leal Ler eysSeo 

‘eee rere 

tt, PRP PAT oye mm 400 < glees $a he ee vs. oo ots! om aad ity pad byt as 
| ance ude om 3! uae ciphlall By a} InP PY ove Sige se dob exe Raeghlalt oLadt Lee 
Bs Pg ot 2 ge sd lh Ly a a» Vag gall rages) slike lo ite 3% Le 

Laasdaniinceh at 

onemeee diame Wh Oy AK Wart He 3 Lea aiady Les 4.40 fe 

PH PPM Pus oe can SARS woe ieee dels dee aw d 3 He PH 14 ward Rea,} Qo Sym tee 
wantoge & gaia PV ANTE TH wns ygethll ow gakend sche (cial d Lespnd Lgl Jud tpi By 
elias (gD Oat gf oT HM By Specter & All amleal pet she g OS ripily 

4 vFo v.4 v0, vat nuked! ost oe ee Oy Sore sher & ymotdl og che Bhall pmntidy Lpaliie Lealé 

4a. ab, off PrP of, pend epals A hy shady * PY al ihe fo, vi, wat pets fe) goood as ras So 

qeghlall aalad cng le Jucad 9% oi Symyite pjbald & rol qyraly epilte § lyaras 8 pl Qs 
cn thas leak (LU) DUS, To FHT AP PL, ad Ripadll nals che Rell pm Mapai, 
Lig ud Sigg pr exe Kuolll pM By TEI FIM fol IP. ccliad HF LM 
(aa D gen! OD) LS onal Nay Fol, OFF HL, ely DoF Gal 44m plah at 
a3 re A i te (grain ol pgheey r= tt rot ue hit eee) totaly srnaand ced oie eNs) Fugy Lada f. 

8) fhatifvo44 15) PP4APvoMo.vievat 

pose eS_Us ket *} FR IME Add ake yao 

ye st pe AS ant PRPC oy a gl " 
eh ais AUS 8 Leaps i eo aa 

KmadisS AG¥t fe aaulest abt dass 73 

EET mili Koovi'd G Leap eps sae iss 2 wh ‘I Iv ofa oe oe , 

cn | VEY off cgliaay II Foo HME ove vo pigs cat AY ert oft FF ow r ae a 
el! 505 ve. Io fol > fol 4p cotest aap ie anid | obtt up wo pis? ails hall eu 
yee? bell Ri Loa LT ho ST oy ies)! ee caslad (Ligstl 131, Ls, seh . 

Ore Dy vv 14 4h or ots de il zy be ows Aawloo! dle bast ists aad la om 

crake} SH eRe Say cl SF Sisley Lose cre Ccacae be gy JF es + seal ols Kase cladast 

8 ebwiond GUIS ate giolll & all cyluatille aulasty cally Gmaitll pil Liainl aby ep S a 

£54 SI odet US G8 AK egy ake dol, i & lain Soe had be Sriod cyl joes Wem ce oy see 
BSS pal bade Ge Butt eA told an ih de do of 
SES Cnyill as: Lig 

4) SEPP EA. 9) PSAPIAPI ARIA 11) ovv 4 

28 

Ca ae 
jboss ASL & lel! Pr 

oe os a one lL posit se o sul ros \eale te syns Bile Kyl pgs ae oly 
a Be SPH LEAN cain enmsnn cob pad ell By Kemal pM alae os! GS SIS og 
: ei oe ul SA) Pp Iviase che joe bo prmdiy LD clark ll coe ASL oedall 
a ved GI opis os si Carell he das svat oll om gp U alll Rema 
: eo oi ce GattAll Oral 495 cov BPE! cyints UK & pcpaly hag iG ail 
otsual! cl on ee 4 east Sat PLO oye SL 985 Months he atelt emis Li 
oe, lel at coe wale celal Kpepllalh LM hace cst wyS ST exile glen’ 5ST LE eye yal 
eal ¢ yB pend aad Log cyy Ke Vy Lee hata ly mala a el iy om Giga Gland te 
opie whut eh Cab halt Whe Gre Sige Sat gh Speer Sot oh ls Ssh oe RRS BLK ginal 
Cae FeV ued wen de dag ot chy BAH Lead Suh Gras esl cySth ST eoads oye slant Io 
ne sche lag idl sigh US Gold Sue al Oplas Lighes KALI wD ope geil RB—e ght cyt Tt oS 
J} on Sly ULAT Wie alilee (gill git, for SiKRiby rigs Kia SI Jatt tbe 
Hanan as pln aS Hota Lg us ade (giollh GI LIE Ay wragt a enih de My 
i tie es Wences, (3b ncaa Ugh hi Feria cogil Why TovEWIvelAteceee bgalll has? 
Pha pe Si} 985 SABIAN py BI Ginga abt BS LES pit CsI) ol oy ope SF 9® SII Crate 

Lisio wey Ae) dthay 4PIMHon, xa sylirel Kang} Sym S ols By oe phe out uy Gal dy 

Chapter 51. 

“" oS shred who ne ie bs, is 

spell ol Kail GT pylasy Canal Leal @ yds & Cetppaey ve geet nes she wt C 
aie ALL on tT 158 LBypec aaah jai Un Jase Hobs pe wall wes Leet oy be st : 
iy KALI aalasl yge bY LEY uedll ype Ramady aunlast op Soy cosh Sab i : 
erin Ash a tal SP path AA enlace Yall de Ll oF gl erin sgt fe bye 
LPrEby GF Cred & KapdS Cpe Craitil Bo Kanohlall lealt .@ aly sephbat} woes Leis sUassn 
AUpb! soull 52 chai WG, plat) ass [pia Ode Gal df plies xj Sal, on pie 
Xp paid} fa co Ball Kpeghbalt DY jLealis Komad he | of Rive os as ae vase uch, te 

Lit Pe aa ay a foie leo fe ihe uel a pias 

Frolvwn Sayadil OMT pana age Ps ualill Ligins SRAM orally ee sud pybaaiial “ 
Mase sly oS 91 Jue Fee Wieilinns Lagd Ugall cls glial Kiva! Sprot why H4vM lati ally te 

Lelmam ct sip Kemal old} Abe § 5,0 os Gyling Sole Oty eight cS'o bd 90 ly olds 

8) ast 17) (Prary 20) ye 

on ee ne casizh ih ee) wont on noe 8 pe uly GI NY O53 Llt Lalas 
> one Jail 98 Wel gore Mb de mall ge Bea ola sl Saye Ab lt 
co soe cele ab alld ohigs o weal Is} le Noah al call B Yamtill hognd Broly Rem 
tell gts copBs nee Bo ln Sages Jub dana oS BS yh be Sy WH IK 
fails ie ro Lg phd AI somidd Khaw Bb Lol IAS cadlll pa gatt Kawi ic LAST Kamnattll 
| 8 xt at aye cnt wind Gy) pphed the KAS auledt o Rinnll gets patad cqtiatl ony all te 
yy CB KLIS auladt opi Cy St cod Ip pene RAS Kismd sana Lge alt BAST AT pect gs 

OPE sae cot RU. salt sgt Uy ofa Fee coe an cogd RAUF met 

ity 

Les Lote 

ce Uh Lalit jlo ae 3 bis. on 5 cals i seeyo 138 Hot Pees. aadeo! gibt Py Lagins be Juiais 
swuleSt ogi pbile M1ePI44-< eee call ply 100 OP. cevvenn LgSB (matt! 

Tiers ts 9 Leda UR Dredd che lions Slrott Jahis bio,t f5t, fyyittcccosy fo 

WAIT abby lh yoest cm deely Bo vince Upall cw umetell yotit ope Bele I ea,Las 

Kayallly Krepllally Kjmmadh oliS eye ely K pnd Wy cortl Lgalily alert spe on oly My 

et ANS Ll pets NL Ray Lend gilt pliSh ore Poe be yh CAL alert yogi do 2K 

LHOPIT cg PH 9 gan Lago roby K patio fon yg Xd Ripadll ly WH yy Kamat La 
& wryghPp ha gh odd ean a 1G, FI eye MAM 9 Me yy XR8 gagllalt Uy Fy 

omer reid still yy getty ahaPeess edd git oe Serre 3 nly aple le lily aad SydTly Gall 

AD) odMr sce 19) of} 20) 1.4Pe 

Chapter 51... oP Bip Lalo aah, ju Ligh ~ 
By erglmem B63 ps aSlSh Gmsily spell lard pliy 
38 pl sian Geohlal) ye Soadll Lill oles Cot ote ae rj 

nails Ul, 5, ce pers edict ad ding We deg S13 aad 

TILT cys 8pm cyyttby Lote Lane cyyramy erty SELLS Lad cpa tn > ging Slaths ab 
Fuvit ome Flot 9 Wv4 malady lege pls ene Ma 

Juss sah Pai: peta ss sks en VAG, Gludl o Lise als — “ * ut 

0S Osi UASE 27 Ghd ALaxe TS Jitall Liw,s wie ae (ge ous, 3 ove = 

oO Whee gopll 3 med! ILE wii! Opeb pS Any Be pli US wy de ell 

Ceel Ce UGS coe set 8 rye SE tall os ob exe oe BH pm 99 epic case ene oh Yo : 
C569 or SS ato i ll 3s cl ne ae ot ln gu a 

tt, cre yee Sve) ey xlxd. Rocks Lome malay wh ae OSS Sido vo ie oa i 
sett MS Gb ST MY , 

eee tes” (SI NS} JLT GY Ws, pee, 

SN oe SW pga) § Qe GL SW Sh Jot oe SUIT oye Us? way CoAT Spt JURY hay Fe 

PSH eid 8 oA Grey JU place de Led, ail Klgall GILES Heong Why Gallidl 

*) qstomind (Sic) instend of set a5 17) Blank in the ms. (gy added. by the editor. 
21) ag pian ¥ 

ovwom nd 

Pea aes} 
PRPPRY unig 
Gna ly a past 
SvdPvel. ; : Oybos 
PAE shh 
vel MAA 5,935 
SEYO4F 

So 

aa wigs wel Jet on sot aaa | lis, SU, lsh alaot af pai & Li Chapter 1. 
cil) gate one be painits Si Kb hae ihm) gyi aye gti Jo) Skis By pialled Kemmis nina g 
iS Noth pine RIS alah Kw prasad coe Spall habs ay Sylad roty sa pial) BIS Moye DF 138 to 
phe RUS UGS Re RalY ad Re Rial ISN sab cys a gamill Kimy HULLS yal Juss bey ft 
ag wr Satll 9P Joty malas SAL! Gl pest Lead iy Alt Kind gions tgp elgg 
pReLGW Le epdanll ogi Ode (glint cubed ope set WAP cae US a eps 3b Gt he 
ee salad! «caved Call & Lily 
ee By alytr> Jud ale i 
has 65 5 3 als oe alah Gels new Lagi ait ce tl Pt NSSy aed CoAT et & Leng! 

15) gp added by the editor. 

ene TURIN 1 
OAPSoM4R Yan 
FqPSP Rv oP 
PPP AP KoA 
Petotiao I 
PrAcasP 440. 
Pivih hy 4. 

vevadtvlet 

thvvl do Sh 

Pas 

‘ovvel rhea 

ee 

Lak Sealy 
OP PEPPY ee 

MP4 APR eee 
SPV iedieaey 
MYER P esas 
Vo PP AN ewe 
IFY4o dF... 

tvittve. . 

ee 

rqePP. 

Depot 

“TRY Ode 

Pi 

Ra 

ee 

ovP4ot4 

PRY 

rere 
rer pet 

PRO4aP 

a ed 
| 

Chapter 50. 

Faat.o 
Paakhh4 
ove {ode 
PPR SS 
Pee eye 
RSA 

PPA4 APA 

Wd 449n | 

MAF PPS 

vel PM ad 

1F 4049 
$F 4049 
es 

POPP eel ha 

PPPP Toe. 

Le cs o0t pile pyfih jail Rolom 
are 7h dash Bal ie yxSs 52 

ne a 
os 
4p Ae PHErRdPoo 
i il ere red tn oes mo une 1, 
aie Yor vittParrar 
' : Fone 
Ong ‘ay AP4YOUIPAR 

PSEe Rembrd PCE. 

IF4O 99H 

nt an | 

1 Pisiainrs 

eae 

do Bon BASH IS US gSPy te ob phe pie phe Ugeskr cy ¥s sta 26,24 A) whe, lo 
tre on ee NSP Jae WAST BI BLS dyer 8 RED Made > Gln He N98) LP oe 
Hepple cisbiad & ayy KI BLES 5 samKy aK} le Kodhopie nthe sy dys $3 Hh 49 ofa da ee : 
7 Leg) Osta Spdem DIS Lintog Ny willy SUG ASW S OW Ushy OMym RES Uymsier byl vif at oe 
; ¢ Les Doel) a Let taal Olt G8 A erie exe gly of Aci ce 

17) cals 

27 

. ar wot shad aren wat Jot pa ae pu ele eye Kt aul dus 

a ay wus 13 sf sae o ul a seul 3 Bola Ranging, wnat spij9 SI LK SS im 0 
pon a3 Shas oh See gone 2 st "8 Guat 491, way dbs spe dial Spel ex 
Je oat sSniglh Lt esi, emrnee: wan Shanes aialy Brel Kha pasta pte GUST Ri 3 dees 
ent — he Oa come 96th neta) Kamalt ee By JU gas cornell ehlS . 
- plas, ial Jat or wwamew ab KigGSt Ryle S Laginy Say dyes” paeth achat a SLAS! cp 
ob oat ae) cenit ols Hyd Klay lee, [gmrcg Lwyb FEST Karas whithir carded gb cylol et 

IAP $y grat hols 2 ts yh ay) IE dramas’ Li Madly eerie US ge ofdsal DUS *S Umaly HS haw S 

rots SS OS 1st taal 3 (ey © UE Slgdomn sd AAT OyWy ata al Cy cm crebunel! yatertT ast — Chapter 50. 

Bel death ae dal go Rmate® ab FL ST Eg gh gals Lait on yh Cp rydry GALS ope 
silat Y RAT loo) GAS pl & Ugde Dols MW yghad Lat,Dhymy Leilene! ca Kamazgll Shacedt ala 
HENS Logins Licey nied mule be cpdy being Lind bilo Bstyll Riley cpmmasdy gay! Kin & ygaadll he Wimll 
Bhat IE UGS spat ol ergy Pa GeSuad eye 99 ph Gd MA ce 8 pb clan IS er 998 Cast hs2 ema 
(FS op ast jhe aasuad) gees Glatt ob bel on GS folll & ste be mags Ubdaxe oS un gs! 
Jerald Ree ce rma! at pyllnted GE Late} he plo, LaLSF poy Golmm & Dey Ab Comte paull 
wrggh? ps Kory a; Go AS eh wilge Leta lned (ply yl SM Guay Lyd sill Be daze ASI at 
Jars IAP by al Wahi Bh QS pls 2 SS Ke US w SIG BUS wPigmy ll Eol Jool S MAS eye 
© Shas all elt olay blagd WS enae 

4) enas 10), Wal} 11) wad 

dwed 

Chapter 49, ines By AHS", May 2 a ane oval 

ale wassll oye byl pall peliol & Und ¢ Ms oe dpe mtd yh Oy Meta on ost ow we, ; 
piss Lik . Lolato JLAe Roy Se wads *Uaee}s lass\laxaa x ee & x al ce don *. 

HiGieblea? 

ae Malle ¢ kS? cylonil fae poland pomlly RSy ganihiilly Lill oe UI ST) Ss ae “y 
& digs GI Yo bad! Ge Wore bn we! gb AIT cllay Jub RAoLiby Lamnita auoboll ds be . ; 
stile Byyilly Haat Ase SLE My pylilaice Lyall & alll grated plBS eyes cyphPlania cert ya 

fetta nple igSglt de cuorry W955) Kald S dey clipe he crit DUS Gy) wrmew GI Le maha pg! «65 be boyd 
bees cane UMS SUS polices oA Lat aul Gomis dtl yoy dis prices wm obs cues a 

Sy Ae oye UST FP anni Lad anlad of,! ally Lears LOB yd srs! bo lam & ral gust oe cn w! : 
GP AAS plead Jy REE WLS le DUS by bil eng be ho ST a, ae Vga Whats pylandl god Suse Leal ta 

BD eyka Ay sad oS sh, Ray We OT pp wpm Ee 595 Cp GAT yy ay LdLaSW Il SS a ele, 

& Miss Gide (gist SI glad Gam Fe wales USL GacKo OF pall SU gasp Ladd KL ng 

che DESY pte LS RKLL oolll LT gunay ASS JE be oly ay hedge OLsUl amy US Uae KU UI ned 

aSuaily KELLN SN ugedly KILN oye wlgSt ois sash JL ale pye allnd GAS AS ap lasle mpincy pinll 
Ling BSE Cian Sem coe heady BOLL cyl math play maope QS ngiee che pt d dds Gaels 

maid crew he sladialy JS Los sill JF s Mem 1A eis Js tpt SAD AU JF Kl cyl Atady 
3 che psd F Shits SLY oye Fag lt Slew (ja alt yds dy ht wrnasl Us Lest bY dem J Bjlia Ay 
DEY al NS Geb eg Jase aie ASO be DM he op @ LH iil were aly ele 7 oe 
GBS (oA Lhygd sult las slawy & A; 558 8 Yate cide p> aud ssrly DiS td ete ; 
cepted GL Leg Crduad Lally cgi RKTT thkh Comat be Gt sajalt Su toh bt to 

sgh MS Spade Kh WAS ge bl GUS JE ate aatole ed Caly b welds Jail IDS yah Sty 

5) (em; 7) oor 

"Chapter 49. 

Ra ge Ble | Li) Re 36 oF Bato 6 al “4 prt? 2) Ca Ub 
hy ‘aa ite asiboas es re) malty ony Cay SRR gs See uae oubs 
oe a eo eo Pan tes dat iia EB csc pat ptm pst eis th bins 0 
a rane ; oo datos es aul vir J Sas Lash 99 shh i parts Wor JiXRéy Ian 
a rer wo ih a pols 1B bw oF aa ol 49h) dase ey gui htt 
| os ‘ol oes Aedis yn ee KSLigand Lyall Ugesbaatnd GQ colanglt Ui Kyganill za yal 
ens Use XBL Fe nga Hl Re crit cyeag Ong flees © pA AHad gy! pyXt wit LoS pgitieasl & 
ee pes 8 Ipilichle year! pub cst SKS pl vga LWA; KIle Ay rat B Ipholy Lops 5 Kale 
aha ash Ly Lgstikiray Rinall Aa UyBliical and giSbicel yAtiyy a Be (geist ana Jt BIKSI WS oye 
ibs Ril ths IB yy Bl Po (Get pal Intent om GF UaBls C938 coe 8) 8 shat of dl Mane Mae i 
om Glo af Westin eBjBy wengSley set cm deste adil Rall iS JOT ob ety ser 
Sra 3h Cogpadibl & pig I> Lith gibtfl AST sedi exe Lelpstita aM c5,la unis 2st Unt best chon 
srbOrly phys Orem ST SI AE ole yy Boab ogKmet or Slo an JOS ara 92 BAYA KILL ce bo 
crpoke dye 9 enseng US & etiparie lid del KatS oly ten Latina reeyhi BAA ye Lgdgcstity 
IS SoS pybiles SOL Gly sgidia clas l Ade ope Rial cyysstts IyiW’ wgily 7S hele ddl sty gS SAS GS 
Wass WAG & hall wooed by Cpar clarel emLasl Je Pyitdlos saaids jot sl, Bh byhitity aL pein Dive 
Ble ea) Bs Leap gl Kia § tino By che KIL che sola eye Lead bo het ce RES pad ASI, bS Gly 

SKK ke LgSemacs 3 4 ais, 44 ats! ‘ret Sysiidg vy raad $31 afy Lead SIKRiiy Kgl) 8 ie cxuny Me 

* 

SLY col etn 2 4164 oly SW Srsgs eg SSB Sg gil KILL pgthry! bli pin & FPP gh Gh Masts yh 

1) wok. 

Caylee sense ery SLAW 49 Her Sens on 

wb, ts Sola kiy LP Std cra led MT 
Soi cm Raglanlt BF Lgitas be paras 953} Jualiy yf a3 
8495, sili Uartundy abl, cubic coe ep Guiting ares 

rina: 

ole Ky ea pheraety Cis Oey ahs Sy Ka! he ve nF ale 3 

bie cots Lgl KAW & adgs nage rer yay ahi us) é ne 

Kewl Roy Ola gks mayb DUS yg Xe Gata PR 90, wide wpa 

Las FoF ASH dat Syntype gle Sot LCE alpina Lente system past $ 

Eretebiad 15) and (pila G dot, eri § Ob! St Ady hice” yl Karyn ule A A ee 

de Laie Sith (Ba Ms Io wolady ye Slte 948 SRE 90s (5 ps 

bcs agghe slam, xlawbeld & wale T SiBime mom ds pact cm su ons (iy Adondl a us be to 

Pcl Lit, Luo Ka all PE) cr maddy Bygaaall Rude Eye J a 
abt wole,Xs Quai BPS ce bed cre alas PUT gh UE Odds 93 Go ate W3ks sell a 

a 

Sw roms? rtd gb Gol Keldy lie one Goto S tumlay abd, “2 & , 
BAL LARAYs al SUT ole Ks eal) soft Wyble meta eyacll Roly A gly a 

AL ab lity ead Sow 9h Lily JUL Guead adt Cobh (Fat DetRe Cg agll sLidaot wl pal Moy 
avi H gye solic alt ¢ 08 is> ots o» Sef slolgsh Ride oye Kavgdm By auly Riyde che. a 

20) oj 

she ol oe Os ames ane 
ol pore. od 50 Liyladty & b le gl past (a> Byyay DS raaatics alot urs Js wailfo 
clyattt who olde MY Uh Ody lynn 65 le GIF 181 JS od gaall Ks jhe Gly ott! 

4 title VIP AFA IPE Liniany SUI oliio,s coc es BS Phe pe cre gall Gh Lede guins RAL HL 
“Lang 495 Topripr giull Atle on VAVETEAIMT Leal AK gh gO) tye cre 
yi. pale Sr Shi oi SSL hy cpl Bs on hae BIg ol ald alll Jy > 
pedsSle BB p92 gti IS gb Lead Banal Rimll SLeciel pny wt sot A ST RAL fe 
ED by Spr biasy cyoptiny HAS eelul cy she iin glad pip ull Rin he (gine OS pHa ober G 
Jidame Unis], Ere Sts eal “LS! Cites ply MB1 cyndit drado erly hy JOS cyiptialle 
Byline & gily ot RS ag Lit erihony Gill § wrloy pydlilyy ply Garde Uist Penal ee 
Soh bly, Oyoraill (8 Lenily aad ceil HyySU) Sige dh [9G dalagss wrarad UB cgyiKas 

! Ka bs - ce ANY alg) ce toe VW GU: dol Upelins ST, Keyl guads Aol cre fo 

TaIBAt PY is Litt a ne ur inalis ISB LEM at ose yy St cpaltas ST dy 
ce esly lds dpm see cory 82 Soho glow suioley yy! 3! Cn Bal ance ol aah Ps 
Lig us Me peed ol d or urhe ws ave cot gras che UK sho, chat ee 

3) gid = 7) HY bowmraPatvr = 12) at 12) ¢I 13) Kaadls 20) bast 

Chapter 48. 

lsh Key,t @ Kid ot Ory . 
Bothy ait oe yma SS tables oS heh 

TAPMTM Ryd clS I Xe ce gwWlill ly Mlb awh Utd 9 
MoMA. Gydlty NLU oy Uglting Mave ca, e s 

Unbally Golgate Hasdl eye Soph 3 ol 

Aly raid, dhasl) Leia HEMP ve OpaSN sta Lash 

Chapter 49. Shad, agile: fa bus rake GoeAST Suva ars 

wart L65 Uat pias Phe ys Tee tsb cy’ Lgl Sh hate & pyy laos ii te abs 
4 295 cpp ally cyldlh ope iee SN Leday mad y= GAT pyle Sida SS gay Ga Wee ae oll - 
” iby 8 gly 04 ogre Uedt GE aby col SE ctnty ade eis wat Sol Leas ad eyes sd} to 
9 Ky rally Oley Gn wendy oe SMourily Lpiay dys aus & epiat billy » val oe 

cx® Sead yp acZll Lphidinld LOL: Loy bySB) SS cyl Loy dew site Ud Raolixa eube 

wors' Late ob Sprdzad Kile yt Kaew g LO,bst Sled! sell Ri Sod SLUT est Ups aad ots Pas : 

OS eral nga coygritl 5 tall Slaw oye Cray MUD errands ol plially Sle oye 

apt Hw OE iw ow Bb Lah ake a az, lal wh Alas dal past label J ans 

r) 

7) sic. 8) Jor.4. 10) 4erey 11) whys 

26 * 

es oa ois ea ere) ay least ole hay bon weadasl Lgils Bh af Late Clty 

Di on Ve me List Lge os ry Mee Cas? Unt pike Dy a9 PAN pyladd aoyd LOS ore 

ae 3 gil Jad Wphonry Sade} Remli MY Myr OAE onsth 65 pg) HATS Y Uy! Aigcrly whey ipa ay ab J, 
| Cae ge ae ghee se Juibicnls haem ceils gy UF ST es fel, ost pglitid gaol 

Aes on tel C3992 Or Earns yd yPy aha WS ys doanliy nip! ably Leaks Broly Sui 

JABS IS eye Ga Sy yh gl RDA atch SLs atsh ccna ATT yyyd Pol GE cxala emp adgdng el 
GPS) frbe 6 BSL DT & eo HI SI ay Sy HIS BS arb nie Ipiitenly em NOS felis Chapter 4s. 

By Gia et de ee Bo oh was Ue nts ab shal Wy akesl ote ep opts J to 

M peliom Sig Mtn WIS he AF Bo pls de od iy GF WAS de eh Jy 2b HY de cgi 

Sha Upiginn ypailgall wally LZ, Slatll 6b gill 8 Oty i wry K ty Gay HA Qe 

DIS Jud So Wed, er Sab ald egneee Ulely Kateth Rinne Unplliiie Pris YEO eye Joly Skill 

LeSbgee: rnmshe Ueley Sede Shp oye Gals GBplall Aap Udy Uyxhe OE par GAL Cemadgdt Leoout 
Kindly SLD (gddbly Gy all Uni nial rd Loos! Lins! (pire Gnbaatat Gy ¥ crpadlaalt bola’ Uyay fe 

silo Cparigd,) Lge oylX Uo) Qe RELL! Juste USS ge Ke tials Yale Yas! of), 

Chapter 47, i831! Af & Dedll Ne om Bis wh he aba Get 
axalbs -akie eds Leipsstthy meas oat et Kg aly 
dada wyyGle LI Valoy erabl sao OM veal 3 7 

yh ald ad ygby ut r wkety sad 

stn oo Be ay9F Tol ky CLesKand joked 3 

peahe ost gst ai! fly Re IyKle le paar 2d Pets 

mdb FS 2 AT 3 ASSN, Kan Ste pe gba gt A 

BS Syladd cndnall hls Jit Haglan! te 2 relly Se 

SLADE S CAE on Ol, K AS Boe sey slay 

Ye eget on paid Ryo eotel am olsiwi & Rp 
lla BS on Worle IF rcsinnly BSyAS phe Ryilad Sodby (grass LK L 

OBsh HE antl ea rach) aL St ot ndeey xandd (oped gdhenl 
Uivmendds oaobgmy reel ozo penal, TEAS Kmasd My grily f 
girdon ham Sol capil mgapaceo GOST Karu wgaey IMiy 

(Get Ay sa@bokt QS GAS Gm BBS az ng) duos le Ut aaghes 
Kiherdy 90 olay up Qt gare Ainm tpaild Kua dt BydSt sae | : 

MIB sade UE coin sdt QMS oye elit he Syst Sogony Kiaall plF Sud Kanscdl yeu ls xl 
let MISS ks ag Kidl> Wyre Rade Ena emall epatly Omaall UST sary! oni Akay de 
Oud> ee lS was Pot caked oF ibs Nilpady pawl Bpcdte radi? (cawes 291; ay 
WHS gro gow GS cram JI, LSIS cap go lo dhilas & SUB ap Solu Ae ye 29131 Slow fe a 

LS sital Sal conallnn GIS ads US lihay Oath HiT GIS usrians yb ely aly (yoeas aidyal ad eaxal 

ae ee J iniy o aly us e oe os eee ae coun alt Byyuo he BASS UL cad be 

wie on Py ttm nd Get att cpr siumad ayy@le hey dys Log BOLE ope By HALT ye Ane! 

REN Uige Saks nage oO wie on SE Oh ONS ye eke et shay ilyll ols} eae 

ge SSB wrerks Ul My gs) A LL, LOSS Jott My werrtey 51 IGT sell dros or Ler Set 

Fa og st cplidl gloat & wras Ls aly B pSolh de yl SUSY ellie at Uist Ou) Key; 
om Ln iss ell 8 ey die & nH, ole or Spm Liaadll cyl! wail tralaw Jo 

“ayer cn Ga 29> ame 25 OH Ce, giall Saige poy Col S9SGAS A aley wil aS,ory lil 

Unb th M RAB ey egal pees bb iby Lghody 3 Ql OE sigh slaty yg 0) Leghets 

ze a Keio glt gmc et b sada Sy ceaaPdy slog § eoylbad hs Ip At ot6 oth Joy 

ipl asl ce nah Be mabe LK wanry Kay nas JK; WLS pal de Gat glbly acts! Joe I phat os} 

Bohs dat Spa oS Ke eb gn WS wy LEN Le (alall & ead gh ors east he ales SUE ade cre ft 

wigcrles Soricall Cale upey Ke,Laal! Us alate gital Li! 5jlad JUS ony ea sia & lease mizg 

2) Legal» 

; B sly Geil BN wel, nb Uasy » 

AAS ng Wry Ridog Ley ab ab ol ee ll cote at 

sands Lead eying aetyd leit alol Nyt oye pit 
sy Relea Sore" oh, bye & dpetiad dy lal 

ae hed (whi Bygn & palod Sy Leal gles 

BADy wr? ey 3! lat te ony >) hsaceal ds as ie ae i soel 

A 

cls SF onda eth gp haaly on a 3 was! oF ib. 3 B elec! 
Lead ALAS ated Ot Least xady er of ys} ee 23a ae weed alt gad. & 3 a 

Vaan wy SF = Etna Sliced Loa rey apeare) Pee Je 3} Pee epi oi Sith yy dual 

16) sdpw5y 19) st, 

Heal 

, " iy o — A sad Bld) on cn! phy cin met 

i anes 

| apis tulao' ee pl Shel 3 bSb WS & Ustad he Rigi) a3e Oa Gand! ony 

el oi Dually SL NaS, Lge la gland Ose Jatins AT egal Al cayip Jl 

ae OU ce etl 6 Gp Serdns AS de exgalltns (Jia ase xan Rado Bt ss) 
Byy0 B23 AT Se ptmaithe Ll tile ay ersrpaiine cpl h US Synaie’ apis Initia 131 
OU Jo BT ey aie MIMS aes i AON Mle ge ley Hy pay BATT nd oF onl to i 

ou oD) sh OS 208 unt ein Hil glad be whe Ml) Obl de b 2% 
: il guvstl on Say LS 8 KAA ond EB oral, lylly Call Lew 7 1d 
Be a iyi lns oft. oS ie a gl Sed de Alt 59 laa "= eyes Chas plow cy oyu usted 
eps py hake Sa ag Ce ng po WL gp oe lb ile a HO 

ae a le dds Sdiad ody che aban! elt Gabby dys ras’s Ka be adh SU Lead Umnett DL Eye Be 
(Raha ABS Gaesth alll 2 SF AL aida cochang ehbell Lexor SES Cpa B23 edbr5 ntl poy 

16) wren 18) ig 

ee ob Aahe ¢ oe 

ileus igi cei all ures ue naKe eS Die cuoe waa 
38 att Lain SY eth oly wry wet Sgt lds bedoy alyh ays’ ancasd OX! op Reel une A uly’ dole 
“gla daioge ‘aks Whe il Jee BS bs ly Ee & 40h 2 Laas! Greasy weed prt! we. 

» Linas, a luo’ we KUBO (tly ols ae ee cola Spade 8 AIS. Fl ABS Both ean cil yo cae eshjall te 
; a pled Gla phe Ulingstcke ,sidelios plo dts eye ABO romney pghadly pe OAS LI Uengitsl a aad 3 
| egal Slag ler JAS engin 8 HLL Citlec Canal payitll BS Sle pald lth cy Bio ond, 
Ss Load LPep lay Lisle; 5B senabg dll Rergan baad UF ABy CHL) Ke SY aka A ab ygl} ST awl hay aia Lincs 
oh he oy baad Kamat rdny waar J & Reo Ldie (ss my Hal RD Pars bed allariy 

° 

o> Ri en RS Lgwndeti> wr is Lables pia ashes ian cremaylo Une bho (gas pm (gta 239 

Be ols be 98> Juotl gland AF) SRE ope Gallty yl Maelo pal ange Baap Gad GL KF le GS Ex} 
* ST epthe he BIA pet Hinses Gal) be pay Fg eodl pine TF Tes Ssh ge Raw HOST Bayh ol 
apian Swot Sod Lhd Ly esope yy call Cogs doh} Lis (jaad caliy esoea DNS, LMphts bey oop pide 
| FGI etal Lieut pgleay 9 gypsies easly cope Rin ob Leake Holyglh cormd gb “ITT she & 

‘ec icy ith Saany Ri Hohe iSly pila S ely pl wha came yey Sly Regd! he te 
GUS lage pxaptitn paatl ny Kin Rams aay! B dilly oll Ys paid urd Gam 3 yy Hey All B= 
ey lye Em NSIS oe Uti) Seal fo Labial 15fy Lad hiss & 4 yl Barats 5212 one 
jpSSES pegged & gg MB Kw Role Spall UGS iad lay RT Bb prditian ped JO yy Nido He 
Lgl GL SW aatzy hag ooh Real, ede cpp a Py Cibo gyp pate UA SEL ol BI ad GLUT oy! 

decay (0) eSYel ehbaas Co Oy Zab KB ool yy ejty RABI wales ego hel ail faa OLY S cyyrditing wgie To 

Lit Pelarash LUT AN gyghrcnay cat S ogd CLS Jrahs RKSLLS SRL Lah (ind cobigy RFU CaiTp bo IS ald I rsh 

1 gud 2) 8) tes B) Sees 10) Sic 12) Ll 17) 19) cat 20) gale 

Spsolld cob ARS oye alee FUL pithy Slaw LAS cyl 

Chapter 45. 

rt83) Verh told, f,ily est oo ay Ui Racpanall 3 
LoLadb .yartt ‘seh hgck i sokeddl (6 

oe ae le oe “ whP carga! ve ince or Rage 
ASIST wh9y phe Lhe 39 xmbay pth Se 90 tay the cet 4 ee , 

teoyndl cya Und eel Kinny REO cya he Selig Sl pe Mss <9 HOLS yr the cola f wri at 

Vd 18) coe gh | oN ik A 

he pa ex Unad dit 

crtaytt sata! sted 
Alay hytligs dia au 

entity ot? Qube hil Camis 

gran grad 

dass csrpbett 572 [ome Alll Ju) wil 

gttles | ot Pe 

, 
So 
jase 

\. 

= G fF a 

‘to 

{ 

es 

£ 

eis gale Ball pS wally Ups eats 
cts Pro! Sly bs. J IB, 

Ul ADDI salt J kegels he ® Uae of Ble” & >= 

Wht Lge cy¥ shapers Lelt Lge bts’ a Ja a 

ee ASSP 

Chapter 44. 

Riles, wast wes (As wis wyskad ce opens gt} ag rive pay a ¥ a Satish os, 
AB ly AN aoe 545 ties Up gins le bbl eye pO ogdty lif dy My e te 

tent 
% hi 

17) Cosa | te ee eae 

25 

ie | oo) a ey sat celal a wtile wildo, ar de Jui neon: ss 
Oe . |e Ray At ley Sb ws Za, Glatt ues ually obslitty 
: as o oe pgXub St seta EH>E Kelalt cralisy heat pK abel! easly all Blue 
ae, south, i oe MSS Bu eel gt ohm bey @ ata he alll neled 5 Dani, ld saw go 

shall Kaas spall $ alsa gh Ud) Jon, east Jb pales cell de yay wl old & yt 
gh Bh Ma dT GS nth ye Ut By sed Aout rey eeilh Metall Ord, db (alt 
gm & Untill ne SoB crepbh & eash LgH Sits By ad .n5 FST uate pe HAlaze Lily RAW Toit fo 
: Eee wis § pled RAL) mas! enilly Sell Pris Lerwle Sloe 89Lb ne clunll : 
pind Mane yoytly igtll chant cgaast’ ¥ pdt Sat Gaede (jell fe le pay pelts 
Je Kaye RES pad Gh By Syd ob Qed d adel of Lh ayer LLP ope AEE lh ny RUSS 
Ve | A sl BE RNS a LRT, lions Const gad Legdge ST yy Mage Linas cypthnny Nail 
eels a SUBS Gil, Klamnie pat pS tle iad) idl ley QP nist yo til Us 
‘ petelis SLEW spu de Prints Lelot Kis, ott alae Gb ei BF Jus coat LOS elena 

12) abl 17) dle 

Chapter 48. 

go | ai a wala Uygie 

dys & lily 6 ans os! we ily ods! a 

glsitel cn Jenill Ones yaySh atl IP Endy uly “dhe 
rbd! DUS (cow Whale J 88 UndH cubladt ¢ 

ayS ameul Slot aDt S) 2lje c 8 pit adh o | 

Opp! Lo aad cya siedl Bas Sead (GBI S abba tes 
Kabrotl, whygll Slrims ii enol 

thexe Ys Ugs dts} us! sheet CO) pada! pes wayne AS Riedl ~_ we 

wisih UM Ry Vepaalll ak me oe wos daa é 9 vt oe & ve } 

| a ane oe td y staph BLM jyeuall 

s ies aos de leans wane Lipelulte re wee ¥ 5! gent crt Eh Slgew 
dine Kaalo unable canal goliss pple Eb lI nila akin’ 

hls 5 ye falas at wl ie 
ot | pas de otee Ww rt aad Jl LAKH gS agin war en Ssh gh Oot UI ml d 
5 ayt ST onal hts cam oa titag sll Ps U3) cradle! Unaalsl olas 
One on ae a bhi ad rad A DIS, the Kegy! LIB Bora eyo sis xi} Wh plalll = le be 

| * ongel or 1 ame PUSS est Umtbmagd cg rllaetrall gt Uyadead cg? Unbl Bam cst! 
a € he} 9% cio’ coh umd co? ObteT cot Onpaegelliel cpt eaak le co? Urpalldog ot Uebel oth 
Blip Belly, KSwally BS vidly qeaadtle etl Realall cyt gid Uy ster & IS up Kuy,5 Xgl 

Rags! pally chy) Keay! Ub gd Obed oye Go delay Soh ad aes SRM veo y pall 

se oes os a 3 ohana allan OS Vadlity 3 hdd gare db in ud esglatly ple *S9F fo 

a, iplgAlt Leads dity aslans Gareys Golatill he PO uy & be de We) pda LoS oiid!, 

. GUAT y shad DIS NelQLAS Gy) pad coe OLAS Lalay cyloasth Mat pdb LI outs 

© ARS By Hhy9h Laide atte lil Chuaitiny Raglan Bewd es ait ga sled del & ey wl dl 
oo EK 99 Att 585 Sh dy Kin Hla yg SAM OLS le de peal LA Jas bo galats 

cyaly JB cg ly Joke Ryan Last bas orn Del pt ly pat ow Sl} Hlal xls oN 

1) Lagal’ 11) Sic 15) wal 

Chapter 42. 

Lead yguaiind Kyacdl 5 Guyandt Mie ddGy alg 4 shins sen sleds ae Suet 
porate Ona ‘iby Reyes stb » ol Leiiice® on cs Leak Yo Les oe & bt see ‘ ut 
rd, 6 rphoy dea)! ds us! withiass lngas oe dsl a ee - noe me sla Soe af 

nT wa 4 
Chapterag, al bend Kei yald Cask” Lexsf, al & aaah ¥ pode BR 3 oy Uo vel Ny « eo 
Ley Wily Rae} Sy Kadallh F ALES cas cep Piyd ce Lesbeas gh oT SH wn a 9 

bee jrelfetirasd Toes heshi 

isl A ae wr Pe eras i oes eset chs SUS KIS, 
eats a a as a ay il tas Leth a ees) oe ersh?s 
fs von wai wa oe a Sh Jud lo he Space 058 leg lily JS olan allt, coycm ope 0 
et 2 sata eae at ps eit Hote Set 
ee phan de lap ghee 3 wail ep Hi on gg parl GI de UBL Ay i 
aan Je IBA st yh mb ILE A en pls tae 

*4,,, id Sie see, Ne woe (ead fans cae SO Gand “eae dis bad 

lily PRR cc. Qatill Chama Tae ed hans RAMU cH gieny Toa are let Gems be 
cyl RO Sean Lecaty Rimnciona Lecany cila? Wve cplile Stje V sled J adb Ube ye Be be 
Shot slase aS lgie xiqny aaaiily cypthly hw (cited Lamy, Lede Lally Sool emaigls Said Grey cot 
cerbacd wflo & Bloat em dels Fp yo B phe Lah gid Leis Leash mally ewnrer My ay) gies qybaiiil 

batill Suck Lgmmach Sars Lele jy! 21 Whe GB WN cptianlt rae ath gle WO Gry wy eth pe 

cas Lat Bandy Gl Lay Lgamnte cypdinll oe Lealtd gel Race] ia mods cpr Rallye Lygans pglaaitill ne 5} lo 
ght ae 1,0) om sly Rake ate US Ey us! shen Sh Jase be ad Quah abaad gly Ua J als US Oey 
Sy Raby Ouclilll B ged ITB soraiiall Go! det om Cyyah AN apa ALAS oe (ATG ane go 
Wb, Linking upton Bled po ce IOP Kgl Sud cgi be hea gh OLS GS expill ex Spl Le only Joe 

My thee Xs! 12 paaad #44 n ls a worse AY ae Ral Rammcng haw * Lend Appia pia 

a epee 

VAs coe Gy eS dcly dem suv & Suter we ee PENG V4 boas ig) & Lg2 40 

1) vibes 3) WPaane eee 5) isola 9) Pose 19) cytes 19) eral 21) PEA V4 

Chapter 41. 

i ja Le 

Des: Leah sais oh LOLs 
Chapter 42. 
9D egies GS remo Js MGS oye Lend Le Sdy 

waa xbleol Kayyly os xalucl Kelty julyo pear 

cigdl wha Side weed yy of dott oye Sak aaghiia 2 ail Bias dh AAS o a ait sli 
Ri *SST Key 8 yb (ghee seu was. oy! crys? 92 SB, caySeal 985 Ana el esl anit 
By Fa. Rhy GRSPOw RiLagiby Ot ame Ri Kaleayls Oye lea. é 

*USt FB was Os mh, shady ULI chi shal Susy Se ee Khaw * ONT Ras 4 Den 

Dyorliy 3 tals ens Ad, buts tte v2 Mal iff. et cre Ohne ahi } 

net ors 

wri Ps , ra4 cee Odd hanes we hae s+ Jase Dany ni we doty ve 1 Aa: toe oe 

9) Yptne gost 8) uneien 14) cal} 16) Vall 16) gil 17) ae 

24 * ae 

Nay eitd pall ss yah pe rhe e. yo 

ale, Ain Pe eee i sul wut g 
Lally nae Ha o ‘isonet dus Kym Ker (yyeqany doh 

eons Keashs jet. Waaee | up fenpesseul pot ee Kamas) S eyyroonry dol wyKo 

wie on tll tT lon eta de ie NUE 

ake Liesogs, rol a Js! fos bhaxgs 136 ym op retyy Wore he dy) wre Ey5Ke 

oa wt ios L galas cain Calas Granld cyanea cd baad GIRS, Dy stir (comm 
Se ae “edb LAS Speniae All lS Bay Leng Site Quad cl Lebnd er (oth LAS} Ling Ls 
Lathe Slot lately ADI pgnin Coal biel gutta ash G8 anal Ugaaey WoL al 

cob! Ae ity KA eo pylltly nme rat Ula Leeiee cst pil Ys gy, Yeaesn Leh Bine> 

feds by peice pill ch pbk Aedes a pli BSS OS, crtimlly 6,50 warhol Lait tit whe 

ls On Lindl asnctl) eocalie AAD PIMP once sptany fovvilifo- AS pike pe pike 
ailolgtrioly caagiPe col he af Wo, 6,5 Ti Ripne Wed late by dpm cory 
eS Uadyy Wrap enennn Fell gr site LS, Ody onkyy pealll AgemT ie ly andy te 

on Qrte a ibid BAS Gy) pyled rdw oye yeh Milsty 3 LYS 3 Gia Satie sthe Rags! oye fo 

“eh 3 rly 15 dy FiMofotense Cwlatl fumiy TeTeee Qo Grd Spiny 

AS, JOT OPTIFPP,, sal Gamer Calf pl eygXtd lovvilve,. Ut Rpephlall dye ate 

illite @ ace £3 Abs ate enyyROyy WULKES ater op Cade ley Agog HT oe Lad Det dy cbehyetal 

LIK ash uly ie Ue pgg RLM ylatis lowillve,, wis dese hi gi olagt Je ois 
jet Fda dell Citas eps «rie dees ql ikitly lotoF ahs... hie Gu pll ug Xi te 

(orp Py MaKald & pain al LSB yynemd cre gdt rgreyT SS by enaghPyy te Legsitibe allt on sl 

14) ast 20) ag 21) ult 

Chapter 41. 

* 

ios, acl eg 
A part Ae Samal 1S 

ett 

Chapter ALG ALS 

or 

Laoal JE AB eyed UE paall IO GSE oh Cott og wae 

12) epire Lett, 18) MPaMt.Jto. ee 

" el St ot Sy 

LE nhee 
; tee Saas suas ale KP p2 GAS gOdall egy va ur bes oly Ie 

eb a Say ss Kye Raglic US ada on? ality le Qt ole abs 20 

a Be load ov Kasbell AP BoP ed wl JE gKe BS ots GI lw! de age? yay a 
dhe % Gost hye de 3 Obetg dea AS cinyb Leia 2? leapicg Lgl itl dng fo | 

a & Iyheos be os! i Lag “58 wisll G J pbrid 9M wiatlre d ally 5% KSly a> ol 

al en girs 8% Uo! 8 Sag a stl} Al nad hc Sine! ad B By sled SF (pas 

4 ae & nie St Las Let gel ue aes Bil Syl yt LI Eygelae’ apie cypaclly cnilde athe, 

| Ube! says 3, iS Bol cyyee Legie dels F oles cyplasty 3 $l Je bepipheionad 

At ela amd joins Jy July leat ab ar A Kelaall daha oe8 49.9 Ll Kelw fa 

on g.ih9 Riise us rotll pm soe cya cards 25 prin (al y@ Lay aie Gybb Adw & Gale! 

HL) ate Sasso bom cal’ obey jlo as, 
AP cyphts Boat Golly ET SS Wa! om oid gs 
Lpia pets ae SB oeasy cn $ os 

hsp pe Gt MS, erty co re SS 9 on whe, 
AEH By iin Kile ety sidlen 985 03 5 By i 
By Ki Hla winty rR od By Ri Xba erence 

res too ofe oth eae wyhe coli “ah oe Lys Vieew 

oov tot va oS4 ae plea gn oO dep ptigl seit * * ve anes fe 

Chapter 40, d#!} ore LET ne Lad Godt 9 Cott ine Bia >I oh Say se rene 

4) urdu! she ations 5) Poheese 7) uysingd 10) 12) Cal 10) gals 10) uxtls 
10) wid} 11) gdh 18) Ppt IE VIP Yon So ata voo ove | 

o Lc een seh at yd anal dpe dd 
! walou Lb waka} ea whe ie Upp 6 za a cones Rpamact -yolal Khaw oP $i, itawy 

oe une shaw wt the wily oy we eds R50 hw cbt ae ot Haw yang Ria, apis & 

iy Bide oe ts ah gels bs Raa adl jot 3 dliss, Late kad LIU ¥ Som sie RAS 

: ‘pale ores Sailas as 3 oll as Elany Baad pga cabo Legsrager 3 Kieron ehldy 
aN Oi ate aby Lys cores Soa Lat De Myd Rin pygSt Ue | Lieso Hypilly Silechish 6, 

peo as will lay ox wal wren cyst ua pad Aphw ope Kin Kale Kil one 8 SylB 3 the pyyilady 
whan pasha eye Mb e90 cyte es dy OLS! LAS & Kyle vlile bo his, ¢ phan LSS 
whPy Rian Bale lpi omen Ri a Lal’ cyt ptt Klean IS al be ales Pho U5 9? GN Gt sg 
gh RAS hay eleaet he Me cre eS Gay Wb adhd Fig aS Lily ad dual akan Udyyyc) jlgs BALLS fo 

Galen! Lesbian of plait mire gi boy Ply poe he duads lend b « Ulan St La np dat 

he oh SU etl de Reg aes wyatt clead cyoSchy pgb Py fowl aley eelall aie 35 Ul 

shes bed Noddy cya tl slewdt GAS Myoled GLUl Ie Jie J} taal 156 agit jhtna aiyo Aol, 

“cpt FF GUMy ntl MH Lastly ne Orally JUS pglralln giogt Id ohred! Ipgloy 
poles & pgidcsl Leas oe meaKly Spdpad CaaS Aad gna Sparsd Wels ees che Laat Lead te 

cotta Spilade, epi AS pe 9® ibe GSI asd so san US hd UWlHSIT oye RES pyall 

8) atl, 11) yyienally 

Chapter 39. 

ry 

Uldw it LiLait Leiaty osc 

heady GIL giiotly LAE ene Lead 

Y Chanter 37. 

: las ses pt ess tle ot ss aga a hha re Bi cual gl hed dd, Usd 
: edt AS Sahat s Halon Sh east pend DN gist wel ge shee LS Jal 

betel 5h prbyall a) cod al SKS Uys ae ed, and) USS) oon) Kh adsl plab ee he 0 
ee Jatt ee oe es api elle laagl pamiiday clas me) cnshiill rob yeglal oniaaill wade xelell 
| mille pies B ete peas nba SM oAP Slut d Ly} ope Lg a Y haladl yt ret Gael Rend shea 
bs USS (ent gh ane a nes a) il ot Shae Lah pana ed stot cotien called shee (gSIE Sys 
Loft ud fos ide elage chy crrrewll UK: ots) DIE mentite eayhzatl abot gl) cst OSL Least camp 

a les Aiglt o Sh bgadl Rogamie Lastyb eeorts tLidisty tale cimally earl By Xianll Squad 

rs 

Onn ergo ae dite , con Al, ke , Lega eas yews eee cl ca? Uredmetll OI Rio) (raarad! 

wy! GAR eH/y Fehewel) Oh dors Se i‘ Ranta Leak, ir Wes ylewle osealee Ohara) é madads (s ws Be ie 
gS et on can StXsioa Lelt pel Kaa} Oot, KE Rid BIS cyprtng Coliag (0)! odor 2 
Ctwall co) SCAT lat, alas Col JGuw Slat 

eb nae polly sddt | w, on | FA 
Cas . 5 
> ” pled bag’, sloul 3 
Shewt (Pa hoa b) i A 
-_e 
a fl 
econ 316 oy) ob! | 
eats (yb grad wit aimed seal Ned 2 Rea, 
Bon fulah weaaereecivsetee| | as DPN RaSs2 lino. Roary eee Wel (WARIS Tne endear 
Sixt ce | wean 
DRA Sea RS ae i | Breet eet * 
# sdyntbs eoeom wee.-we) ie 

inp Bo epi cially Kenomil alslia pail lai ve yg perce 
Kaz he BAM whP cnswd 8 Aad sadll loot dhe Gall al 

wh waleyao ols Mosel [en Flv Upseyll> trply toys 

Wweok gps lbvoh 5 iad otek iReciny RELAIS Saas rth ok BUS op Qua 

Ono! Slattery plate dy esleakl all con paren ley Sal wee 
all 9% Be rns tyled ele ot nO Sad Bp — ils ae \u 

ys 

cota YS Se Gb US Ty cpemlly sdbly lelmo pts Leh I iis de omy 
slain Sy Sradill B SIO 29% Io COLL al Sh loll he SF vty Mel i, 

ested roms Legit l Kain Ling! Kiwwlb yyalialh Lai he guaady pamilig ay all iy nally Rewdlia 

3) MP ota PHT os o,f. ot 

23* 

sett oe is 83 Se ist Chapter 35. 

rane ae we gar tin ald, *LAS SI UE oe Abs Ut pby pS IS 
Raw be > at aw 9S all Aa ica ands # Lamiiy Phd Rae ogo inti oe i Ah ey 
gee ae Mo ble? Pa haba ew Heald on} pidul JS Oss 22 : | : 
pb Sat las oss a dad albey Pst 2 Dsl ed Gal G oe CARE ess sala cst ules | 
La ib iat rely B90 poh ws me cenalyl ye Bde Khaw RIS Egil rms) Ladly QS Ie 
ier yi oe gd orlrs Leia Updos pres Ke eye gil BI gia fend oliyy Bie Mle Shogo S 
en Lgahs'ts Lgegal la Ly! Tod Ledions RE gy Qg Latle jab wtls: Yar WAG Waa Lal 
slam & Syduatey pal) oye Whe homes cyl aids GPUS om dust Lal, tan ab ese! 899 cabal ils 
8 pas § ALst py Xp) Oda Sol ue os patiat) King uo B55 Cr dh ciel oO CHLOI aly (Spl 

ag Bay Nt whey MA 69 lees GE Cyl Coes SET sey M oolalt 3 of to chapterse. 
wis fa) on Pa a Lenaluy MK tacsaiiry Lgl (Be ae cpr DH a gre ct tepiag LOSS 
yt FAK, SAB sh ele tary Ephlall Cot cle cyslon Camas JAM Est slaw Bo grill § 
KEL dey ahedile CALL oat LI Guad WB BAS Le 99 99 pgs Lee dole K oe oyho cobalt us! 
Rill Gt phe Dis cybyym LE clea ritiy Up pat Laced Jol Spepklall bilo Lema crtmaly 
| we sais Hike wand 158 ce PVs los ove Kmadey ELRS Kyegllast a“ Kaanatos Vs 

6) dS 6) amy 7) mig 16) Larva, 20) _ 21) ites 21) Mahon 

Ld a sal Jette se 2 jy 

ode). 2 WO GY cygdld ogo pail plik 
ie phtall rie ont Leal Comnatill cgitilhy bai 
on Leas Wygest om Seed oy 

res > 1. Vov ve Melly 

Pea htt ope endl cg jlasol Kad keg bul 

al os I$ AP AVE tay inal vn 

Hvalld ow (191 9 FAP Speghtalt Lgality a Ale 

Nils As + on Py HOHE IM cheght alt Leality ope: os 

ini otal ye sno! Kier doy ak sel 

sit GUT LST Sly OY ST, OaTY SHY eile 
¥ ped Umsall 5 bad 5 Uf F xapicl Aiea ees pte IHPy wath os 
BAL col wpa Fymale Jsvb mal all x Kadgsall Sag neal Hy 

2) ptt 18) Hv 15) PY IMIRIP 20) Raptall or Kazaa 2 

Alkeb yah bel: un “chapers 35. 
y dope Ba, Lgils Kinulall sian | 
St Be Saal ooh se 

| e Se ntl ino ee on ats 
is we ged Wes the 98 eat Ba LS on of glo sha! 
on Kenll é dian w nee st wnead gle aeisy3 SLadtin Ne alelyl clace 3! cyanea iglly 
| es Set use er! Une nach yy etn om witty mall al) syed Rial 
pki ate Cents mal Hn i Pe al ol cal Key ho DS, unit Siw 
oe isest exe) > gute atts om pte pall ytd olecinty © eit Kime mes eye edly | 
pt Shy ae te oy Shay met or al dy IS hats spp Cy crrmane Stalicantly Ugsirinn ope 
fox Ales} Ge 5 a seity meee cr idlde jeaht aalety ply al AF eggs Mall Gh de d Gb 
ras} Of Bee on 48 9 «la So3 cx KSI pypKe yh jg Ady Opel Ed VOM) Gaal on 
| pele Ligic Phares eran Wo Skye! rag ay acleisls ijl eladl ope Mae peanly ghia clade Sh nay 
seinslll, Pret gb gollast wielny cSiLKre pail pom S ReMlally ygAll Lagad cypXty Del laa! Legenl 8 to 
fad ep JSh eh yh stl cw Ryelll Kath LNT apne yl 29> aS cole wls crtiglante ST co! 
SAgh oy last allt Je Nay Balt MS Us eF Ode cd Lede AST Gail Gy! pire Kamadt he lish; 9} pine 
vel ob8) God soll Ging ngs deal Jal ene Us Lames ip cpt’ gpd phe Kua Lhe gate pain 
| we Katlom Lbalt idling cp wtatrs Sal (gb BAL oO oolas 3 1A, Oph pb S aogho ons ol 
es aa yb dol, Wi gi Wade Ebel ends ¥ BS Cyl ge IM AS 151 RBS ALA FF, 
wig $k Ys whe ee dy Blo ih BOP geet Giaad (od tad Ky IN obo Ral rte (65 Gapviad LLall 

3) Soll 20) The word xi,39 added by a later hand. 

wy —— eee 
| 

a4 iff Iv . . 4 

mcelamsbensipeen tant Siren eersenes| pretation ive senso psncinh fl epmadesss ses ccinhe 

“| 

Chapter 35. 

peidly spt! & Qodlas Lidiy sgSdly GhatT gest amity bast 73 S Sie sg tod se 

eusth ‘Ss 33 yb} is} dey 4 Glitty oe B alt ge 

de aley ax S plaid bse tina atlas nts Sl al 

ne 

eubel Fao RON oh ikaw ” 4 
lalw 3 Lgl KE SE cond Kam colath By ITS Re & 0:90 opis GLY b 55 OF 
‘2 

1) Lest 2) abl 

belly sy 4 ly! 
YA 95 2) | oo 
lb 5d K Hebe 59% 2h rela 

tad 

emia) ele 99> yas! | 
Sty APLC 985 Utne te 

ptt Galo 9Po umd 
wight dhe 405 wal (ay 
Jatt 99% oS 

Lilt} Pho Po shiv 
TOS A enem lao 9Py pans 
copia ope 
cothb oP 9 
maids 99) ASN gy SUS 

ital 

wight elke 525 nae | srl Grrl yy yh 

o> wAcmlio 9M» ptlso | f pete 
eral om Jui eer 

poet oy essKap pO byt meme @ oT wlebaal by) 65 Peake MH igs ye clebl 
pele Kagand cobbanll (6b LT cygaiins OF Sah ull eyysSchy Vo aia Lest cyglaby ¥ 
Lespews serail bai eS coll SLait GP DUSy gall coelaalh JLecal, , 

Barganea Relat! wail W$y foal oor mK 

rs 

“nile opel ws oe as Ht wlelaally ae as Nunes ie wager sf 
| ee o> & of i sya Bs ge ue Stat CyB SSY pate Rance jg all Poona edt yh Gy Y eye pe cya 
io Ue yh Seype de ¢ of 8 25 {cruel slyly yhghteas Jags REST Gino BE 8 de 

3 be es veel hail 8 6 I sider ge d (poles JE AS, oleh jlgaSt fuaal yy SRL pwd Wore 
ope rot he ah gpl JE Oss Stel ge GS 05 MS ee mod Cb yb tl wrygee J, 
: rill bats Coe ee seul B gh Bl gadanh ye cd Leaal Clas By hams SHAK cindy ogo TAO, Cr aer 
an & oh estins D CS e eerdy ot Oe Lacy! Sdy cong lay 44 car Opal raid) ali & ablarily 
sain NSP oye aha cyl glad exe nal aaidpdy Oe eb oly eh il Bd B Natio, dS ead ogi! Sg yarn Jas 
 eallb Jus LS ong alan gdp alan LIDS gem on Jb nipay HAE bt why eran 
pF Msn oy ah WS Web com glapall ore 9M sari JE sy SoG eRe F enit WL to 
gen ee BY dS Rode OF ley At Sythe aig jal oy! ey B shoe! Vp way 
pi aiaty LE aud crmnls & Oyedly ALY aad one Pte pdEll (pang log opto canis & mbes siniwls 
Sy cpr Salad LY St soley paral op ol SH (Ber aly Bry} ASE Nyole MILE pal yy saranl 

Ay heyy ota ermal) DEE pel oredl joloy pol Skb gt df aS sy mol Bye de ttl) egttld gare 

paves yl Wace dase Lidaay be ocsth cpmaly cjg SAM agree [gs nak, ioe RSW I ye KB ge, RRO de te 

BAM (2,8 Sygteld dea 2 IS} ab Byww yng cxr cdl Wives he Laagl pity sbeit) ranad he ally seul o 
cede DEN de erie tt oye Baal} TTF Leds) ad yy yb ase digt 2b LlMy plat Gd als es 

Bed pa LLM 6) STS oye Pelee § Ko i Bast Joes sew de dol ow nied § eyghry yy4@ ert 

A) néamiod 

cd ae Klas & ase, lela) he ode Gl Ragimall wleludd ig lee” he al sr bi ot 
Jb & 058 cytd) Lai Leads) tyke ISPS Mall gd wpboriie pas gall 3 Hlade G! eyyee pe ds sels hee 
ws si vid Kogall cleus nek he Loyal (syst dds sans bie “ b jest oe 

8) Leib pgs’ 
92* 

non 58s be tbe tt 
Aes a ane A ent onde a gh scat 

; es inanad DoS “6 wha! 
bo ea etl Bee lel om (gates HSS WLI! op sys RSvall Jl ey emlldcedl 33, 
| a ha mia ety I a BBS 0 25 cS oon Je ee (Re Lt 

1e lal ds 6B cou SY mice 99 ATI IOS phe Gud 9 K nol J com Low be 
Lgtannly cotta ene at Lan ena CBS Be 9M Lad WME Leads B HEL SF olal RAS Kem 
ob tilts Paths pelt is LEI cll cx Kew} KASS 9%y Lyd Lpldanly ood 

| Baw at dom esl Bo yy otie atl G8 Wh HS gins tam Us 

pay thes Ramat alert or US cypflse, pS wiy8 UU alece! ght Uiiae ore 8 Uae oA on 

gdopm & BGT, Keio Aol, KF RUG colwllh we ofrel dees cre ptiey (uild alert un fo 

Ho Gh oP BV poall Spit Mood cyl Lely RRS S oljy wenesthe Last om oP petit 493 ally 

ym (cow petscny oy) LIS Mlb Ft iy Mandi pad Ghat (igh ob ely yd aie piles 

BS on nd od Be eS om usitl Utne So Ubne phe ana cont Vy enti’ pil aber 

tls ens My ent gulls aie Worle Ho pyall BAAS cm sie Kw ow Sng BF dam on ptiay 

et ee take ete Ete enh to Uae on fe 
“aby lo Sb Sasa Ao UI Pat pn at tt By onl Soyits F Hy F tet rye Fo! ob 

6) Ges = 72 asl 11) (gAlwi 17) Here and in the following places tle> 21) ts 

Leda gt o> tater ge suo pain eas day at 

Chapter 34. 

17) List 

22 

: he aie ost ven ele me ‘) Heont who wie le Kaindidl oye Copel 

AP a pat nme at eb te ole Lela gala wit 

oy wis ae bei eo wee Why BTS) ate Lgrey st aij lyty eo ope KasGrcall ,Lus 
oo se ts Ue sn Cn Le Ded Gave why om Abts La as Som aly 

Gow Nodes ons abot Ai bash ee gland AL IS gee OS Cot or ote uly alt 

pal hele » vies pol slinc! & as Plaga indll Cedtnts aF,5d En Pi Chapter 33, 

aie ato wiuad sine KS bio cp le He oP Prato Aig tay linic Holalty dont! 3 

“og Wie le a otal antics pyally aigas lpia Civadll WIS QF MI Ry on Wage JI 
shail seit pee Xedle beies Be 4® had So Gera YayMl he pphne WEF HOU Gmanll to 

ee 3 ii EKLaLt Aig! agamety ehyscardl Lad (5b cS pyle (HAM LT KELL HW Gybigks ¥ 

oe ais foul bys seed and Cgphans DUALS enfants Lei Sddel xyjloll col lath ebay yl 

As cuigles at unenlyLata opel eal Ug Ue Hof pt oe OIA eblas gt 

: elon om WS bo dest prem cine Legid dlacedl gay SW yivlae 3 ale WIS Lest 
1end oh Lgiale 9 chytw it De (ys Lawe Aine Leis Lae Wylie Ao abe px ip leit chet 

99> shed he phe Digit ihe sLetlly mas) Leto t 9? Sell Frey (BEB) exe Yamtsd p ghlo oP Lett Trnay 

2) talon 

de Lad Right} Spam Kem oye prdall Y Oporell | 
ewalalt MY be jl bah Sal lt la le 

Uy a3 cts Riual} & Py deals UM oa} es dulye eal a ems 

ove 

gr Ps a a 

wilKe dI pli J Soy Rot aydh Lats, sbLantt bale wh 
esl elas lal MI apilas Joo Jett wold JOH 8 Statt leet 

jraadt elyst clascmt a oneaaty usb Jt ately acl 
iy ygill Sos 23 ay Ghstiy amis Grell Gabcadt Laden Go Jail & Sie 
Bees date warding shall ope concn Ala! BH LN GT ugha oe dy or ett ue ks 

4) Lacuna. 10) syhns 17) Las} 

ee “dal sta is aver BS AL clegplall & Kapalall Gormme ope of Lay plasty suelo cps 

bis a Wyle aad Le gl aad cap S jLed abvad n NAPs vee dns Unda eps Slee pop jhollay 

yale eal ee sab A ype dual Mhaaiy Tatars Legere che oletlly ong iy, lef 
cs Ossie sont sluts ot dele ggpall Kol inl Sibe e el ESH hag ON Ail! yy Sand Uae sat 

Vent S51 Guailly cleat dt dlaiad! on 9 » o a 

Eres pot TT de BOvaill mparions S US aidy pill be» om $ slay 
sry c patlAidl erty & peal! Kidsal! ual dS Joo coiheal be 
Kepm ygemd 2 gD Goyal KLE (ps al rpbesy exit pate 
peyh (pull ae coe als. ad AS eal hg See 

sly eI Liha, tyyo jor (ib all SLR! bat 3 i 
cyphe Ody (GSU a5 LS ILS ala ast’ oe he Ll col asa’ (gs , 
nell eoldsh 156 ab Sed yp X SS, (8h ens shes! Gand Ab ene eye he 

Si 

18) Ugenblany 

Kani be 3 die 

- 

rs A jes cee i i> 3 palill Suef pds 8 
eer) Alas alt Se A aS Sig ally Gantt aad o 
os Hemel goa ene uh cyalee 99 real pI hpeiy Jb, alas fe ably 
! a A at batt rs 5 98 BONS) ene ern ewey whee o> ols 
: 3 ja ote pis i aA ys ate BL Gb mole peas GR yas JB 
: oss ie a ul wth Vpcwd uiglly aah Ae) aes KB Gosh be de Leste Ket Kaas 3 
he as ee PO sloy Jpsill S41 , Odiilh jhe ae Poth dees yt sl cyan cyloglt | 
oo Suing las tees MB OW ARA gash jae Boo Gy! che ade BLU) claxd Pod ogre sas 
A ores aint ERYES ab oyy Ky le Lard sie anes LST SAP .d Measlil 
| eat Hata oy ying Lal st Fon bla (BSL eyyina bends BOL pS CF mpil) Le as UY 
Gee wygiesan UA, val Zl Lead vole JI Dy ged yyien Lead lads Shoot, 
lon oi! pelos’ untlaall, dem And ght Ll erie (5 liad Lt nidl Ju ctl, RGUAT St fo 
Wybos (qgdt neti "he stad (jwolanlo cob epbSU8l Spi IAD UYibse LT pmpitn) Umesledd (phe Ul 
ide Ugle, Gil by bale tylagte TF clans WWylest hale pa Lind Sh Byat Peal US clonic 
hah aay de Laadel he sLiilly (GAD Gt Lede Gad ied Gatche Glo ALalt gw LiLs*l Lean 
RS eyshally HLT oa Png MUN al Sod Lyle vobian Pp bas oP Lally eS pill eytope mals 
olyih sie Lyset Land & ey ce STN hel Kgl GSH Upslont pablo ame om Goll dt 
nad Pin Sell GV A bas Le spuale Wy Kym Fg YILCA! Shay UgSGo! gh elnina 

16) yf 19) vy ds 

de Legian sted Uayey ¥ pS whesd 
Blyaw! ey BOT eed Yoe Gl jbo os eS ub 
cy Wehnad Sew gy aR hoy 

Pe} 

Se 

iat 

ante ASEH ey esau Mba SS SoA Sil bX ven ue ni 

Godt Joa ee BF Ses Sell peg aso? YS on 55 sa sins xe Jet nist y a = 

cep masllaglaw ss w! cemids 2B Kw yeRiy aids he Pom ail yer os Sot pas ¥ a eons 

1) upKasl> 5) syd 1) bat 

21+ 

bl on at a8 jut! oS bo tag 

hee lela scl con opel es Lge 3: 

ape V y ie aly y sth ao $3 ea ass TP os go adinio ar wie Ble, WATT 
ees) BA Sl pA 8 mle Gilly ell Uae Gage on Laie Gow le de Gh Mab 
he Sp oot sts witinPay Rally rteal Katou Be pes ei a werd) ats one Jae cits 
ey! TV us 3 be gpm res sd tine deel A delat ot Rennes ei 31 ISS pry BO;kd) Seely 
“oy BS eKAS eye jt! Bas ee phadll Rae Rae FASS GF cyglots Ut ABT 10, Soypoml 
635 ane Sol ois} we ws ighe (B32 ch eye deal 99s Unka e AUK cneeal Mae de 
wpling Lely ee! alli lL Wgd haem cyphers Ele aad optolall cy be Quad col ease pb rep lo 
we aw oe >» - okasbe) Bly, ob l Xap) neal Gore oh DUI Gus SS ds alld (5b eget 
es “i cab Wdceed cyt ly Spm Lenny shel Regt ai OUST oye ab Ke B agit} 3 ol B 
ye? ones hits uses) 2,8 UI Npige By SL gio ty Bygiaall eras ovest om Ub Jie 
bp) By aeldell S5y Riabdy leg Fypplicy Kayy8 Bypadll yaye ly Kidd Neyyrthen Gonds 
wnetits Keg) Db nes! Ue om Clesyll d ane (Fall, epol Uist Billy cabal mae adh slycw 3) ub 
THT A vases HF pois Uae Gl pull pres S5p © Cota llth (gb ell Leal bie 

6) Lacuna. 18) cyaptrey ytd 19) eytytney 

Lady WAS hot dapat ae. ipew ladys has Wve 
the iw mB e pb ab ata! tot hie 

C5 ES ARLE Ply © Teg cyan say 99 
(yuladitl Ket CLT & etyat aS Se ne a oe 
We abo 3 Lally AK udt BS all uose nae 
oF 151 ait and apie cot ill, eiotell seamidly Cal nt 
SIS Gy Gf adapby cya) Reg eye ISH eye SE PO Byte 
Gams ye WAS Raye Laas Po xiks oe die gio eit : 
DIS, uals Gaileisty dg tt 1h ops me Co? Lailixe JA) aby 
epi La ce ph yo ANT att TF chad Nb vols ann WM Bg 

hea wo oust (B69 on ssi & aXBy Eng mee we dooms ore soi ib il oe 

Paes ust rout oe dees DS, Chit Leake a ie elf ee : a milly 
Ur Rati ol Stal UB paw gh aad pale Go ppiol ile Pua ent 1A dt phe Ay cud. ps dy : 

Oe Ow le Oe! 

gd ELL ee Ree CRS tot oa Leja pase oie ay d shpat 9, 05S is esl iste 
Puy be pais pmiliy eit (gb khghh Uuiniy hae! de dljay quan od? on bo Jot i ~ | 

REGIS Le ELAN paaliry GOI! yd Cbigm cab Umoyall one be jad Goss 3 login Mal Kaa ee 

> wor 

Bi? Vabias SB yySt jae M1 (GBM, yet shale ow eoyall one le duos ao te Jy las okay | be 
CHES cghaad SUB apy be LgSt TOlbby xantcanth bist) eyyKad GLI! pe sh Hal sla geo» ee on 

9) yh 

21 

' elas nas ad as yaks} (bse Sab ote ‘s! soy (Bend Biya s ues! Bdgdeet sles neal 

pn Pa de jut wnentiy pad slamedls Soil stom & eins wags OLA cng be juas 
ee Js atl glBI any de ole ol tb al fh puns ow high ALS Gade lr 

Bas Pa oye 3 hake ops ght Sadat Cals Syaaiil} ALS OS ade Sooty ge shad 9! 

SG dat a 9 ge ee SE et Os copia ait tied Bilan te 

! Fare youl co BA V2yS Sym agall sya KS want be ST awed eadball one 

ae el big dh TOAS enggX?,2 Akos THee cpehy Deke aif he VOKW ce bags stall ws 
Hall 4 GLb egth CUE 3B ournll Khe Gi Tos ASI oy byes dla Mall Lge eh, Kit, 

Ubeh yilasl Kandy O14 LP 995 Slt Kagihleie Nell Gh fete nals sail yoyd! bs 

Lally Lops volo Lend cy 
; praicoall cmswdd he oat cordy Cid ond Load an ne 

Sf Be 

PASS QE seein HE QT Be eel OA ep wsill 

LE exes) Ghabst dla 3 SS Bg. Unes! Rigas gra ute 
was he Let Lanai em ste, Sem ab Li Laat! uml “35 Bile on 
Lozat alse, Lait, Byars Lgad} ASeY) or Riajl By fl} BAP fer Bit Le 

Lees ob Let (jpllas Late pt atiw he Sling Kali whe! all LN . 

15h rans KGS coh MGB aia i. ail alse 

pS4A or eta G! Ky gly edad Oa 95! WA Base om Perc es a s 
oi Raabe Ube Ugh bles dye Cay ad gb ily sady Oney ay Ledgls Sp 

ie APs} Bol CA Latin i IL Unie Eyorhriay pol} Sura hdorly Iya Seondil ' 

ees ou shee 9d st Sah a 
oe aie er se cob A ore os 395 vad) mide Brel ales ome bead LO St eyqeie 

sel ty) i els pos ose bho b ceo oil 925 Op GAKIS (pend (SyHhl! Ainarmy Wp opt pb, 
Syyo oll the a; 

i) ro 

Letom & Kay Spall Iolo IR Ass Spatre Lily 
& Bary Stee & eyXayy cleiw lt LS de 
Ah ep 89,58 le Soy Lyi blile & sy adhiny Leg ta | 
ros ts Key ond Gb de Leas woasily ghia 
popl Shem opr dll OY Nyhe atilly yoo haa 
Yes Cty pygll SLD Wy cplemlandl she Galpin 
Saab (sal pan Soph pte may iiae Slash do] a 
or UES dds cy 55 LS chia BE Je os%t ol e| 
seipling She ASI ersgll 8 yeh cope LS du ce | 
Wel Aol dy o,f comd Rinne aad owt & a) si knot, us in 
Kalas pound Cg Vy KG LST ig! US & jl : 
SARE ily, Lgie ott Alb wogll Ke 92 os 

81S Ly om ol ml KS Gl tll Sy al cdeist 
shawls BIE aah ae pms Gly sl yy spl eee 
wkd} ow uel. AP I Ady Ad dally go il Ione 
CAAT NAS hey Rahal asd Kaw ghidly 50 wd wKlss | - i a pe ie 
sy) WE yy goa bale Las) ost phe og! oe. nal wold hg ae | ‘ 
yas) Whaad Shy rl & Lidpadlasa, Ys tye tl on tr mre ee 
. P Patel Ae 
ptia SI ats ld Giozall & ily XL plane sat LE yy ntl 95 st 

Cr 329 Wad Byatt So Gb Spiilly wars’ o Gs 
RE cprdad HLH Lily Kolinadl Jl one ead KaSLast ef St 

* 

} idly ASS one wee 
Ue atone OF oa Sad 

he 

fo 

soit ipl be a 

Kiaayl ua 

Ate ols 
Dig am frarapRhow oe GSTS ® cgtdhdly} 

-? 
-o 

dist Muy S> 
Pop Soe ! ef ek, 

Shelly capt une le Bs 

soe meemmeararncevnten arnanenl 

teryll Sob isl are Sp 

ao eich pnb Je sh tate nie 

Ce ddicell * at 

ose Asi ergrios on Suatl epi] 
ty 

° 

8 col. 3) ,jWouns 

Sei) Py slanidl 
eh 30) 

fecas engl orci tll BP pst dhy 

el F ela wlnsae ae ie 
hernghow oe atl SP pad, eee ee po 

wine 

lf 

Da P<) sah age aed 

ue 

ai hae 
Ie itivcinae 
i 

het ve Ribena, 
Assatiaettaeh 

Rta ie eh 
pana 

‘ ai 

ao sy 

Kab 

Rea Cnt 

| ttt & oe 

Ley 
Sn 

+ ty 

RK Klay OS | 

BL de ely 
‘ols Pod 

fo 

Chapter 29. 

“seh 3 Bold, asa oul si 3 at 3 
A oss we Fang BF ge uate eae 

oy Drabus fea ahs el of 

SLAs H Upsets Yay 1A thet gob seid I Liga acy Fn de 1 sah 

28 ca Od we a 

ON uo Cia lista Lege Kenn 
ot9h,3 ay we $29 pK, YK o) Blass Wud} 

ae 

‘wpb 

me ART lb eb as Ne sit ulisé Stay s 

Chapter 29. UteS epinte ES Ae Gaal oy cer ds at) bs “eral oat Pa 6 
Sykes Read ee parks comnow td Clea Cgewls weil get eu or Byath wt ol ay oe 
wnbidy Beat yy? ial rl atale aly oll # ype who Joly rises Boe of e o : 
US ye dS K yee Leads gl gLRIS) gemill Col Byy OSS (grt ad Ka gall we 
KLEE epyigm SH capil LY SLedtll oye Sygebl open 5ST Mh daly oye Led sat gua | 
3 Sop2 Bhat Ol ext lye glatin ae Sled bel Jud dt 8 cua? I Lalo 
BH cyySe Sallis Poa coe AAG Sos he Iwl> ypHlctt @ pall Uglol Qt assutly Lasgie 
cyte So teat gions 3 pgelab sli, Poh xblans 2 cad) RCI 3, LT Rand ct eS Sb 
ples rely UT cyt Det ST Byatt MS Le Gund ins Y (aT Sgt Rid, OF Lge lass! ole 
2 Feed 5 ging! HES madd Sold cll agily Laiot Lit Leys origlt oliceld tas gs Yes) Lbs 
wetthae BS ile cyt Ugad ts LEMS MS Sb ro Aw Lull db abit g LIKG Yo Kalas oe Halas Las 
Aizg Konil BD eonpen Lely Ely Eh hal ans! S Oigly wel’ (se)S1 JOS Gh abd coe pple 
Pyntty Kail WNP Sol Boalt ews cypKad Woy Lenal Lge rel Yes} cygews SD UGS col fo 
C Lede cohrlemtts qomlils pile & Pos Xie dbs XIE Rows qyyXts Ley BKM IS eysomtis 
csi cAI obinay sist Calas Ccrant Gud Gale Samy (yl lyd gBo SLX be Jide esl zt ds 
29s sis Slash wninPy liiatty lett agazliy ag, SI cy Pri EysXiy cypiblitiy 
Leret SI eyye Gill moves cyigm FEIT Kem algboy Hole gLsr Lge Leg’ plat Remy pyle 
PT LB xto SEL AKO Kemal aaluil Baer sLign acu gamed JS Khe ope 3 les Lg 
Rabid! US oy} Pras Widery 9 io ia 2 3 ST Lei Slate spill png Rlampatl xebasl g 

19) cast 

19* 

ie ny Linalat ye ga be oF Ale ase Gi » ou) us a ae wee 
edode & Pliny agidlas bb) (835 & bed! ousu VWplacmy 6 doa Sida he 

ppell ey GRA gh Ar dnalle 
up tilKay ad arid gilt 
epi cx Lapa 2B typall 
THAT eyledt Gp a4d cori fe 
dog d} he yl33! sey 
eS) seb) gyn BAST 
Gr ors? GAT dat de 
at pS ORL MS pitt J 
cpl & stl enall wy Genel) oa cre mall cell qrolno bot 155 allie cyedlT IS qo, df fo 
GRAM 92 STF ced qerlaad Slay pill one be SI cotits REA WP op Bt ly 
WAP hey Sbeddll S ojllae yualFly saill cable ymmstlS rallilly jens SLU call rtmbany 
nad ccadt gill pyatll Rese chooks ly pgall ple BS Sadly SLU ull § Woo, LUT ILS 3 ceed st dace 

BUS ced Lede Cn ny GLP np si chet Buk st 2 ay 
Laity gry toa? Land tymacinr 3 wpib ate Gy osole = Hal bee Bald! 

oe) oe le ous ya ot ty 
ae Lensly ot Jubal seul oe a my! 
GO Slo Gerlh ler 8 Reid ally « wey : 
eh Ser es 
Ut aLialgs Y0y85 sb ogXed_ sh i, ahs 
Logan sl Ah) be be | 
lnPye sf Yyne Ua 9 F1 pel Jar cry Vey Lig tale ph a Ld yh fo . 
AIS & BNI shiny AB; Juss aeiggl al cypsamiy Lams! Last al peal” 
oly BAL, BAT oleth 2555 Ghedll op list ue sill ron ey 2 a) tPS cht 
Btn ledlh 9s 999 29) walonss 49 gli U0 J} vad Jy fail Laie ad Odes LeSlas oka 
8S PAS y eygnd cgewet Spats” Hog) LOSE Gus ceed HSN eats oles J 5% ails ¢ ow 
AS gil & mess Gy! byl Kaba AO oe POT CIS ill BOs ope py Korey LsLest o! ae Yoh 
LOS Sua da oly pm Git > pills Sty Ja ga Ucledl ldo iggy 
stale eaidion Seta Je Wy ill ogsh OUbaey litle Jie he Sy wale col oo pits 

13) 14) 15) qyKab clyyy be Lt oleglgs 
19 

“a oF ee ae ae uy wes 13h Oy he vi pola ge ull | og} of la 
a es 3 ns joey sae dst Lens) aow oF vas ij Kergnees ie. tal R294 oy! ST fe 
of Ist 3 US ge 5, o> G23} on Sills pest he Spibe Land erst Gib Bytemdl & 
B33 py SIS SST Ugh Fo AN BL Dane ego Maes de all pict Js 

(ee aol, a he Beet UF ply WAS gpm & DIS mals all op fori es oo Ral 
7 on oF gS Sy DE ole yall Lily Lopes 3 abit cy Bylaw) igs weralySlS yb 
“rke nal) Casey cemlll galt wall yobs atid wate Lote gall LAt gt KL gyy0 fo 
gill) ce enh Oped “my ut cess det ure GapISG Cured} LI Lid 0} Cbly HOU) ole 
ae sling het dud be k ene Loornd alts Le Lente alse be Lyte Gh crams lly hall ds Chapter 28. 
Sy LOS cayew IS ole LEI placed) bbagit piel walgst agus g 
wpe) who bylast ay ison 3 lite rAplh 9 opeeyll Sheedy deems of (Hel) etully Goyal! Su, 
"hae Rahat Gal Lglaay & AFp5 Ip Olds @ cam coblgs wigs Klean g SI Ria 

plat Ups eoaluam Sell AY wadscl $y Listy Byly I,lanty Lingy stygy lala! al wlio lorcet J 

12) os2 81) (all 

Be elo $31 UH aS 53 aGall pedity Leng! lhe ws 

8 yw whens Gea Fhe 3ST gd gil) pte dy 

“ bs mail 9 3 ips at 131 ou Sia Kt Sida ge aati hae 
Shei ox Aly yo & ve cr ey eles é A at yt or oeST oe p98 oot 
se en) ee cm Wye ty lores Dal isles, gist anilon said Dy sole J Syl, 

o> wy 

ht HS GF hy paella 1H cul oe Lag 3 egitdl C98 IS) sates Soot ade Lass 3 

o 

i a one “eygonnis Lal) yo pthen el Hou Be CyyXed Gey oe Cthd Ep tej Kelew 

et oe ily le Gieet Saks Lert pnd eet! Mar SF Fleccs 

ul 136 , oy’ “osm nue a9! Hythe dypS Remd dgtt gall & ymadidl ¢ oobp’s 
sui ones Rely oe ay Aaya of Sall ou Cs) ptt he casos SLs} at 
ob lg pa : digi tell Sas o S eget & Sep! who Gi ,lacl J! is 

a o we est tty ees) oe ley Yass 3 el we Gala! etal Kall & RAIL amy th 

: a Boe of 5 Ha Sala) UY aa ae LRT pe Ly isles (gobi Sal) ylasls enced 

of 18) yang 15) eemacey «= 17) SS 17) eg 

4) glisa 18) yah 2 ge 

OCA eS een | 
o Com ene jal yea ad ae . 06 ceauaate wS oot 

yet in rt : e 

bau Ue. ast ‘ st ced us cries nals 5 uae 3 ue Corll enpghP 
| fe we LK Ent) wy}o $36 4 ie pauls othe ee) 8 aioyll WAP shine bit mad 
Oe RGU of, U , bias BEAL Rpm conAbily Leo adnes comely REGAL Waitin LABS sLesll Soren 
apes, th 8 ps TSN os ot Lan GW op da de Kelly Lutte was ay Linhate 
we GB bide HASLAM puihcuek Bry B vats Sy Oygs I TT Kaya REST DP Los 
yl} sist Fate pi ht pally BT proms ccd Leas! Sis ope SS, WAS Legs Ka 
- “ Ws el Sie de Bp RS idl = Sh SLioly Broly Bg Gell ge Blame 
Ney sash Leas’ st ae Sy Ke SU 99. Leas o> cps css Codd) yb wha seul Kem LHS (5 erp 
x2 Uals Lewd openly Yay 8 SN tal, gS W cats Agaryln OY aale ecm! Syd 
ne cneadl pe wemids coeadl Lb sbumadl ose Lelags RESUS Gb wil Ri) pth cre etal Water got fo 
wes ad Ws Leib) LG hast b Leal eent 4 Bl push CE gab bal coe atalL la 1s Lol 
“eall ty Yale eats 13) CLstaaly Ried ws OTT Ws US Haolie Gb tga ue 
Lgglael BEY VHS all Khadalall pad gic apediccll 8s go lpole SS) Spout Lt w Lays 
ae cot or jBla> belo jae US Le ped Yo UID Cpe camyld sydd EXfow wAil pyle Leib 
As wyheal AD Kips old At age GLU lade cipal gaily LOU Lyi aman: Lett > te 
weigtlly spill 6 KALE SgcSI oye Ugh he Yo e a CB SIASy pms cg ligXe yal 

fi 

pall Rem un Joa Ide & bls 6 ee : 

shell eye 
les ops Jusens Ledty thw do lena Lo 
Ueedt sled! sade SASH en 

wanna 23 BtsSydy 5d 

sSLwadst sh rc le Sa ie 3 

Chapter 27. 

Kgerell KAS” all gsi Lg) Lots alt ast OI aig Pe os a ow 
gira grelys Baz ole cxendl dT banal gyn ne Koad 

3 Rss piclyll GO one bed om bid Gall 9x cyte} BS ea Lang oa 

G3 LS HS oan aml 
Sl dh wel bi gh AA See 

odes ata Be ae fled ym OSD 

de da oO 54 kono S ceihee eat | 

| Hoarty!) Keyl Gt leds JUS ile oe o 

20) on lege UpRattly Khaw ow 93> 1D opp 
aes cl Lu, Fie Game, 
oe DUS op Linked tho ABS Gail 
oe ok aie wi ast of bids hes Bi PhP Land Le gyal macht SI 
Golly i. oh Hoddalt EL who on heel asl Utriaty KILUA oo Qt Lilt Kind che 
“ise Io Tibet ged salads Sy poll oye iaell lad ily Rodice nab OR A ly ela 08 
; Aes we US cg Laity, aavgd Caabont uo eyly Cant Yo padi BEF (epi patie 
yoy! “| omy Se8 lily, cya wait Ries dy AS oh Lett ¥ Lily Slpcudl! sing 
en 2s ISP Jyh tes LEST enlatind oySy 3 91 lio | Vg! yl a eae nals LeKanes sll 6 
| setbeh ere om Lest bt SUIT Ups) Glinyn LS, Rigane 35,5} Jo 2531 Gul lo 
WH eyAt 9 Bll Ay 1 be pK Ble Logs Yo le SS 5) i mgd 9S all, 
ate 3 eh Rabe shoudl Som Sh dole LS jotlad Bs Gtias ductal 631, enitsd dhe 
gH Last tl o slay be AS 8H syst Le Bs sat S eyySF cyl egKet Y Led Unga obi Byun 
Kaede Byiall § UGSXS Lgie sus! Spiny ogKa} Lonel & KF 2 gly Hale DISS IE jolt BE yt Kee 
eid aad Xeojled} xt yee sits GATT Knell lhe Codlne om} Luna! 495 U2,SF cy Kaw Late © glist t. 
Ce ath RS atl al ht ie idl O} OPO Pe b eng J wollte! be Lan! 

1) Sie. 

Chine 26. 

cy pres or) Brawl sseutia aie 

ae deol! ieee & a 
atsngte ve yoy 

wiogdl, 1 29 paahl Sh pgled UE eg 

BBLS yoiAl) gS 151 25> gay aly ogo 

PEP I 905 Ld Qe onto 9%» Lb Zine 

PRPs aK apd Gd Gl de ese 

3) ist 18) pracy Lily Uta Hing 

18 

a 

ae jie se as en ree iho pei. a ends betas deal prices: ald: Ppasee 

as att St eyttin 8 cod & ae dust loo 8353 bh the Sas) agidle peo.» 
| Seed a8 Le gl s ey Saal lle opi ab sling BS 5d Byladd G) yl ILL Sy 
whe Jini 89 eye spt rash Ledety slevall Lamy & yo. 4S GI ins elakall G3) craykP,n Sis 
ree 0 on wos hs Ye. sh Bs daa ise on OO Al ucilhey duh Ge, eels? Kane grab 
Slat lab 3 Ls Land Ugalde ilysa Aydt Sy sleell gi cyyaaaittd Legher ie hy troly Lgilem 
8S oh 8 oa sul erie bs. cies Jil Gro bo Cent alll ab coiy latitn, L.A 1, 
Se elgis Ama Ma bee op tage Lael JS whl Prat (Min Se hemals Spin io SI ys 
| .. Gest BS Sym LEM RGU willy ually jleAty LSI, sles JUS SI 291 
an ve all bate Aa Sy kan St SSlas 53 ppglly copes WL 5 Jk gy! Ke Ys 
Mine cogiledly Sal US JOE madd Min SIS. ob dots K hs dot Loptimlls ORT pall PS Jet 
Banke lite 8 SSF tll Seal psaadl be lai py Side he Bill Sym panna fo 
UBS ade ba umes (YB sat uaa Yy Wo! Janis SS Jide lo atone gd oy 
ached LS sled WAP. ob poh 1K ek hed 8 clally ier od maar op 
ev} ol bh pall deal SB Unetlodilly ud St GLO) yiolo sly, Kenceuall eile. X50 
eo daisy, wal gas Ir) Klee sratn csey I cyl 9 LYSly TES he ust 
o ss SS or el ppd thistle eb Jee oH SS sleet panty cgahlh gpiolelt ohh St he 

dope shh pally shila gb 890 ke oP aie sales cgudlly oll} Lowy (68 u2ySI G5 Iybouo 

8 S5 NS ely ANI WSS ul ee 
(joKaly LAM lawhe a5 BS Lihat qosll wl wt 

sty) ont lend Laas! a ee 7 sib 

BS Had ds cnatill wail 138 oe Sym yy0F SToly 
WW Slo soe cyolee b dull dily Revd Salt Gus 
got coabens dad ised hey syedelyal ce Kaykéy yy Taw Qe 

10) pybeley 13) pdt 

_ : a By a ste oe bs, aed ih De rn) 8 ee 9 cable ob oi) ware a 

ey, 

: : ’ dl who oe ue gl sia ay slew) gst Seis oa ay Yh coblanstt 

a ie le eas ou spub ly Gol Salle peP zo Bprtimna elev shally =U, 

ke os of 135 al he Gy Gatonis urtes garry) eee by SLES lw pie Ati 

1 me 12s sya & dell Sole wha g shal Solo godly dull! casas Gin « cartes & 

: 1b 0,3! on eros Kd Jy Ande WOLF Y ligmKl gles) MAS, yrs de 9 
cyeadsty LS (GES! he Cabailly syne ition SLA 3 Uisgal canny alow 9S ual Hh xd Copa Y fo 

Ba eh te unl eee ge jlatt Whee Uatsty Locals Gaby it Ut Url ene 

ssh con aad me & od cabal) SH Cop SHE wepiehly Slat see cr HE Leh oF om 

i Abaih sles (ee 03! ws Unghes bey YoySty shawl RAS (od mphapl whee cater US (5 

as ds} xiuath Lgiowais ll Kinet) hs (goloe By ckowll cpr gigth Wie We sass sie 
al vat J sy nal ods — eraqilly duiasit gS D gyly Gatlll Sl cpr Legalise leg I 

“Bon 

cee mld sil zl Pee Les YW Comal By aall ne cash ily sSygl¥ Slaw sllly sll) cys 

e's JS x5 dud loud 
cl tele aut ay i vale 

pyeetl Lgivad by Shedd ttle abpdy REL 
& eth BTU ch al Sli end Aine Bagh 

col Least Lowell 98 Cesena Uy ayle erry 

sh bSL gepiy albatts pall gos ve ib 
Bly ence Geil bOI LS gee Ga! a 3a 
a vei Kloyacaw oe v 

BeLeall eythn cop enagkPos J, ne : 

Tilly ell ued cyan aly yah ye g wis 

1) KS oS y 

: 7 oer i au, vise pedal Ree on Sg3! ott S 
: of ole, ‘Slash she 3 Atay on mode g SIGE pattie ab hey 995 alas | 
: pt 3 yn ui jas sptelt gtklh Gr pala be BF Ghaails Mind 3 ws 
8 x as aad nye ee salt, ‘aay uaa Aad phil (pat ee i aillda (olll, alia 
bus, * spe oh on sp eT dle : ony Batt AY cr Kom be gy99 Po AAS glow d Gada 
oe crak Jl kip whats er (SE Sah ly as th Rint) ye yd US Sql 
3 tsa Oe gael a gly k ‘alas xe 3 uk (GE RAS colt Sty LL ges Gb to 
ii el pds, Khagsell woblanctl AS Uae alas! Sty Jes ce Kail S cyyslaiae Lg peill 
. 3 dl o yeene ely Plaidy cyaaiy meliaty Spitlly tall Qatt cyprglind RaelCSSt 
oye vies on ie o> mele Pile Je RUAN, (gaduail mEiySlS PyaZ ey Del apie pgm 
LBs ual ie jad us reed ous! de cat pial Weed pogi sald olds Le, ol 
Pes. air’ ¢ AS 9B (conte Ade Lead Ady $y Sb Jyod! Gd, ala Ep oie ts 

: pore ona “Bled Lda XN XS Ue) Ty ejliddina Pie Alally clowdl Gt dedi auhe 

5) aygleo 13) Sttra 79, 24. 13) Sira 28, 38. 

em 

Qdiety Ona Cos 
sein Kas Ae tale uh 

Bi Rw oe 

qaual wl eae oy beige ae 

rele See 

rr was whAL ss ao 

- Oe Dee 

son cel ep wd che pt ogi 
6) sean 16) eyolyns 

17* 

Hi tonto cine toss ate st od 

) 1 re mee se pee) Lisle ee seb etal | al fe eictan ef ym 

Sapo jas nis wernew go x65 lade laay eg!) dis wonetanl NSH bef Slat os ApS tl Sladen 
oe any Les or tee riley hie Kap jl ther CRP ogg ah WIS AR uae Z jay 

ee WS eb Lams cyt | UDO oh. LoS ill Juicd 1ST ning oye mndl Jigs fo 
Bag de Bo gH He Stat BS Aa coy tes phe hres cling (i oot 
ae se Ss ise ayhd Gane une bts dalRS ie phe! sul a ¢ chet puts 
rot ot j a on wal au 3 pas pill BI sagt de Digs Sp Jue on Sb Svs 8 
wa ayn ele 3s ole ous 94 aL. ale SAS ale Bhyny Usgem ern cor cers coLagn Sl 

3 awe a pty wh de AA Soh He OG) BF ag aig otal guy eg h Ob op fe 
Beall ed ae at a tiple eae lel OS el ola er & duds uo! 

Ww as 

os pee se iss "ae 

4 Se 
ean! coh oy 5 ee oe oe eye dass conn cee 
bil ices eo dee oe * « | ¢ « 
dead ¢ wt Ave ee nS ots pls , 
acai DANE AVC IBN HONG ape ger Ag iti | 
a ht eres slat. 
fo 

: cyt 3 otly eps Cseodhas | oe 
el | style 

dy Sod wmakagee 5ly nal, bohu 

iy 

Lai 5 Lead “es As ena? SUP on a Lgile Fund Gaiam 3 Epes HBS lye cle ole oe b Ss 

gol cys eee 8 Lede of ls Woy rot Klan SLT oy) dell Uo,h as oS oid ali Waa Jy 

oe o5a8 roe ay BLS a iy sie OND ja SSja ae S ast U2)b jaaxi iy (glum, ist peeee Yayle f. 

14) tis 16) (wis 18) Gud Gai 18) (sip 

sity JL ole aa grb de lens wets Si 
CS a) Ea) tb om moh b plat 
Nyy bacdte Iyie’ Sats ty : Kanal} i omtlost 28,9 alll oye 

Aga Ov kai 22 ie a cite Si he 
erat Uialita ish lw Law pian ease js ole & be de Les 

a * 

Unie Jum aaet ste boise ela ye Re sel oe ox 

Daly IS prt cgLiKle nis (ody cyl eg ype ahh aber ool aly Mowe noles ae J 
ostest Yo pl Pate sa Sy y og, US SAS Ge Extisi Yo St om nePlye 988 Baw “GST pp 

Uw bitiooly i: = me? cya tea bo nga measly Sh gigceea Vy *, on 3p oe be) Ge uate * pes y 

2) oe 0) 2818.49) ae ay eae LR ey 

# as ane alll beak ae 

. 

a he oF é pul, Ren 5x ae 28 oxi ne GoM ME Joly SE dy Sys 
| ontlen J ip elke gah Kay SI olyld! weedy Soa S dye tins A pailayy ell 
a “ele Deyl ptes olka ele Oo! ole opty de onde Syme USS Po pygist: Ye 
a Lead ete Fealest} Bagel 2 A Pocky Cyn oee mols As Uhilgy B inks one y 
e least, zay3e caelys sbeily ASTyss Sher hyd Kamm Jae Ole ow d & de 

Cd) 

Caasienoe, xkclw Uys Ram} som K rl > ¢ ofl Role Kham Kagd} wad eee used 

— 

o 

ow evens Ue cows 3 sais Spa SS Galasvand) Soi. 2 ee sol haces gl! Estas 

‘oe Avene oo Y bail GUE rw Leads ss Bll By Madd Lid aby BY aciKiny i 

ie cd Lalas wad hy yt co ibe cog Uealbe one baadl post ASUS osu 

ts ote omens Khaw aT Bt pole dots k ne cytil S 33 nt) ¢ ws oe e 
be as bo As ae His Goins Kemal J Baal 2 2 6 adh i eyed oo wngad Cldistast f, 

eile td stab skeet eglel SS Yoag. Leet ley RS eg rtd 8 jLeily Phe old ILE ule ave 

: 19) cast 19) wos 20) a> Ais,s 

poll Hh call etl 

Big matty Laid posh AD Adgmnis Lasts nant i 

chi ty 

9) cand Caz 15) lly added by the editor. 19) aw 

neon we es vs seas oss Mi ii wag deo 

abate: Sh bes li Jo 2 ae & lg owl d fon dds 
ue eo y Jas aba jAOUall whdy «RALL oyom Bat io eri yidly Riad cys BSS 
a i hcoupadl oh of Wydus? aya 4 3 fly Yo le, 3 at Ro sll SURLY gen te 
oe bss she eae ase Det Jars Laken St BI ad Cail joke 0b Jory HL’ ates 
ee ie dU a bull ih 1s De wold he Sig Range 25g Fos coe ees WS, 
chats Lai jSitigly ently 5 4h oe albed egy Unt gs iernd DULL Liginny ssuly jl 
Suns sxe Latins ll (dba nad ae mae cote So leks fuuay ublle 

| ae Wales HL Laginsy pouty, RiP Ciphandy Kis crithee Slim xagism coy lo 
Saket ‘, uaa bits dels as Bas Aig} daslt cr ray be Ags 6 ty Be Ud adas's 

CON eas ols Csptsl SI ibbgad mpi cram 13h GB athe 2 le dic oye Chaitinl gic 
"get sie abe amy Bit sca & pie ; ed Bey has , ab oye ob Khas! ns aclte 5) 

$ valle es hei & nals adual coer Aes voter glo de ge pw Sf ay 
aba chew bas o usp muna 3 based creBl ope Lille ho coll apis sailors (0, WI fe 

Lintgs Aceu ot i tals ye Lanyitl arte de IGS Lanse sly pF cenntles ose Ast 

wee 

# ) uw dias 

ine : 

Chapter 23. od beaaly elglame oss SSS! Gls ne i ere) tr oe baa * 39 pal : 
ed jad bao hell glad adee solr Lead heal’, tows ayes dt eas! ds ie deal a : 
AMS GB pad Jui oI ght 28 or ose etl lS 8 Waly LIAN he he LS 7 
M38 hail toe yee &, ciel pps SAD cops welom os vw Nahe ae 2 ighiby High as cet 
Jee cyt aS gles ghd SS aSty dat 10 pe ho SIA eels aar se bal cy elm is deal : 
95 Abad ooae Maem os) ppnow om CoAT) Xgemsh las by eet ds} ov ows det | 
rey comad Seed IAPs eyiye cre EST wate? he daze Sail sam ill 8 ch» wise de Oye ayy a 
fire aly Gi Whalby yrgels crea caereml Col cso} Vo Andy sca 256 agLset cng Lely pal : ue 
Bowie ASS of Uigce phere Bly lace Sb Pras oud dots cy Poadh ieellah bic et bo. a 
JIE 8 guiae S ASl ued AE leg con BGI med cuttcll IB Le os EOLA ell ba i en 
crs RPL all egg’ Uooaeh Leda Eyal eyed Rag Aslam & plell Syl oo a AS os sasha 
RELA I yd Eyl! Doial QI gpl Gad oll Bal gic gl ABS oyyll 1 sa 
nad so MP ese mailed op pho Ko Meer ogs ir Ma SEO bey yin er Ba 
Lrzamdl pgalestty PMS Pyiteay mad ales! cm LEaKans Ranier Kaa cySlome aaby iyhe Re) 
Seas ey Sh atler & erst duos cndle Goge shes mb ly emad seed micm on bal at) l : 

de »6 

phe ings Welenly plbbe Ja 2 Miia pam one ducts slPly Slalt abso 2, 

BAS (gas! XG US Leal JUSS alyly D4 LAS, pb gn 
Unis, andy Litto alall ales wad Leds meet Soc phlaadl Lily cwlill bgiXnns gh | : 
Biking LBS Lying Gams WPS Rely CaP) GARE Leas Uy clits 

hylan BLS KASS wht Gel Resell Ugtld, slyuly voli wo 

dee betas old Crt Pray Qw miKane lS ac ouoslo dud Lpiay pil ear 

21): sae 

Bp AR PT Bi ose & 
Tr Bg Beg ee al G Kuna re a or Sand ore mes Sap) yay PGA : | nt iM 
om ce) ey Nan MSs FARE ey wats ah TSE do ott ee : a 
oie Kea FFF Ms act ye a 

sin Le out ‘ uk dent tbo te i 

Toten] Me one oe Ne ioe 
wie ob, vo vo ak ener de eigen | Fora, pa ~ 3 Lesa nang Kile yet 

bets Sn 
Lagay wins o id vl ath of be 

ree gh baa + aaa we de ae ¢ wf 

oft re Vinal ee cate eit ts 

SLI o 

etile 

. 53) ot Bae veal! WAS v se alll tine ae 

wn DE a eS Oe eee : : es 

MS Gb yet MMU I gm oto gt phe a 
M33 att tie Joie apeel op BUD os ee {sts of Moles at Why Khe wb pl 

Jam cyt MS cates yd ES Sty Jud he, ca ‘Bw GUS Gua may sass Lal onthe 8 Gaal * 
395 cata d one Mam i) prem om (sl Desel Glas ts Seat sl ot oie Sot 
near je Gmntd het Os eying om BST wade? le Ou Y ail sap ill & ee yr de Voyal 
Ridpe Vole GB Keb wrens cama one! Col Cssot Vo sali he xb aylsl ons? baile ws 
loamy B55 oh bigs sy thw LOSb Pdie amid ucts olslh Raglaa tidie pee We 

IS gat EOS at Jud a he a BLN aad crac JB be GS) Sule clink | Leseo oe h | 

cyto RP aT egg yaasl Lea BAT op Ray SI seSlge bull Rey! 95 boul oe | om Kadleal 
RELB Iy Oya eyglt Opiad ell expt GAA? egg shes gia oss ahs ors #) (plats 
Bad SP sas mmaahey cp pho No 11-00 9¢5 Uo, wine eo les cine Dives 
money pnpalesby PMS Priay ocd onaslony ol exe LpaKans Kald Kans cy Lane dado ue sel 
ShaSo} aS ler & Yael Seow Guile (sos alyomy uns yp wenad aed mie cn Lie! aby to 
she Pings Lylenly pllas She 2 Mie gow on duets els Asst iio 2 ; 
BBS (past OLS US Leall JLSI Oe st. Hly Os lA, OK amu | 
Umais!) maby Ledto elt uphes enki? Leis orae Spor pli Lele ats Aton es So 
si DAS Uday Lnsenly PAS maby Gadd! yk Lgies kes zh 

rhe GSS RASS ude ell tmewdl Lgilwy, tbewly be) ou ye 
aco Leimy OBS et 15 by as hiand cys} kt aonb ad ‘li Posi * ar 

21) jae 

16 * 

Sate ie ae mores abu hu is 5 abe! ull. oes a re V pahnd 2 pes (ae GB 
es PIR B ry a oxket nile Laas} cal ow na Agseyh terilcist be 

To, area Diy bie é ae 3 G nd TB a Eo ta coat IP Hah ladly Fn 
Bi so St Rew e perce mb Ome de be Mads TPP ab de Kagumtiy 
| “Oa Ode 8 3 wipe oF OF * sams PRR a 5 AK endl all he 
Gye DUS, 8 ak dl la megan FONT, pall Jal 3 Ls saty He oh 
deel oe fee Honttile pul sinc viel 
a ue om Led val 6 35th ypu a 
wed age 2 2 jel tbe de an 
om Oe oll jo on ds esi a 

oft 4 a Ga ene sus wi I3ly 

a oe ban ves BS op vats apse gt 

oe a Uae} eh ad aioe! a, Gd be aes Gua 

15) gale 

pul reaks J pe use! ce Ca 

wylo Ub bees Las of o> PGi 

iNet 

isd Sil bs LS le Jot oe “Eh eat to 
7 Lidl 

Abed onad ait Sp Aes yle Pam cp alt ool 
SILT ys Agra JS xsled ee Ute jbo Ladle xT x 

16 

oo sila: eh ily 5 Me Jt of gt SI a Sis aa ties ns sb as ol os “cht | 
al sss ott & Pi es ky va he iat sige gab fans guall gt 
ey eRe ics a a nab st te Jit Andon create all Sesto? cygailoroslly ust 
“gba ol Vyas, CORB, d) aha Que of WM gla Abell Jue Jad SUS | aby List Sto LS 
sit on LAL om pla any on Yar & G) x Jaen Qgitiy Lied Liz brie avg SledSt 0 
Cisne MS mele i US Sem wos Deas ye Ye Yas Lr chal on idl Real & GJ 
Ragged plat 3 see Wry, Hild wal eM} lad 8 cyte RE ur are hide ol posi Ys 
ghee coe Laisa (FLAS bile Aaall § selay ah "Spat py MB Cell ew abad 9 le 
& aul 8 tS} ddd, 2 4 cyteltnta iigll clo quball Kuss 4% ig Adecwnn Sage 
Based gh DUlaall ALS SB Glgad! Sy asd SB ytd ga! by slay 2 era tibysy | 
elds) he peal Ste Hee on Sue cendy GLORIA Cody Chpnd oS Cot Unpllad 
Palatine JR LP Live aSto’s apbagay uo Gull iS op Alley os YAU malar 
het zat 6d ceSle eylenm RAP de agai g Aigly Kaall 5 Sda eark Po Legll Wb coms 
CE sell anal 9 NAP sLantith Cobly Kasim Lach asadh Liaal Comte 995 Lb Apes 
splalaiSH GUS ps8 pli Sy planasll Ja (pile ing Reslitin Laginty Leann Km sbill neal fo 
wren GA 3Po cr smells, toe ogg IS etd cgyiaaiy Aad md piel OM OIT LL Shs Gy 
aly heed) MES! AM Shs) Sy cia AST ebid (yal jhroy pidke aoul) Kagil 
coke ips Les LK cas tellt ahah de Bult aed oo asl Sigal ye CSLAS ul atid mys sew! cyl 
Shell Sas call ol glee cl Be CA che ae B cling Ginill pl Be rgnizlow hie & veel 
USGS pole § Jos gil xetdl Jie he Wistad Galil! Lota Ycslblis mp Klysye Dy Calaill Jy te 

Si, cal) Mgt) rgaly 3! cy 9? gall se wy) Senhed ch we LS he plo Lge abog see ally Lehna' o8 

8) Slaps 9) Sew 11) badd 13) Jey} missing. 18) Gy 21) - 

eae 

sob He cot Wg Ls 

oper OUI inal pg Sh oro 
625} Mb ning alt Lila st phi ae at le 

Lib igi Sy Ga Case all aglel, ne watins 
ibid votes? wendy OSs! lo atl Ligh vee wt si 
HI WSS ye Ui daly BI at ae (Gb hd | 
RIT ponmly ab Liolacal Caunid Lgxacel SAN phe US Lee apie 

hie f Hi vi 

1) wall 11) Sy) pice 14) yo a 

ae oO 
ie ro hs te as! fa oe 5 : 
: "lela Wt 85 Lyndale fen ey oe ree Dds vole Gall Rolle y 

: oe owl Ge bis 7 joo Ml 9 SiS FF de Waal 

: . hen ols Wye ve ae + ass ay Bae wroly I ered) cyyia, SS LeBpby 
oh wee ae Ys ne Le al a al Y sym Sylys chal ltt 5% Alay sheully fe 

oii ete a dle LgSoiy *h tab ono thdy el SyyF osu 

“Rel did om Need teens 7 dy bul ae ont le Lgabar «ecw sl ol 

deh We Ue ie Jo yes es Wal ag) 68 Jains OO th basin ss jam ans 

diol tale yo wae es ads csi! WP Jed ae (oylnd cyets Bul, olgxs * Zl, I Bobs 

a cm (voy das nly ANS eeadif Laagh (cwcly cnaileysl! Wie Rabies Sided cowl Ras to 
oat ways ply wl ae hs ams he Lgeoms (alall co, M od Sly Lele O55 

: i sos Gael padhas hugh dang DIL, Lg cslalan 9 Lng Ail yy? Lenbasty 8a 
& or wll oe Lo riiay dx: wl = ye SY St Lglot} de mies St cette Le JL, 
spl lay ca) gue or Lg on GPL ay 8, Leal los,» vest Sb os ce) tne trol, 
“ el Ay ob Je Leibio com eens pike IS jally REIL SY lay Lgeaed ate MEST asd I 

Li acm 9%» aii (Stl ye = s) [Cond sacl ee cubagrd Ene Baio wo} Gos! 

yee yon 18) , Lsui missing. 14) cast, 19) ca 

exe ou me Pees we oi penny ‘nih Ship Syn Sot 018 ads Dy a 
ot ust cal gaucth Sat! Jams Lays Uphest Sele cab alt & eenarw sinsLaad Ss 
! r le Wes 5p) im Litas % 33st bis oli wrian Ladhen Sol Pys Seria oh anbe qaetell 0 
4s, saciihaa dus nay ot be 4 Ladhedd ae ay ne eh souls aa calqcwlly, gpm on, 

cone slog us ba) mee Soe 5! sy ety ms plage Loamaiiy yes, Lguams pad 

Huhne Lgahe oF os ey 3h Glee seat pees) Rem or dg] sabe ott eleionats Lendl do St ybiaw Suita’ 
pias yl ane IAD hes iplall Laas! padiome 251 yo)3T MS hes sylall yo,! ul bey 55 bey as | 

vel on daly K oy oo! 3 Hay de Fegan JLo Sey Tj thall Kmnglall (BEIT Oe ow AEly k 

obra! Uys dhe Lagi doy J jaolie Moat ay tanend aus sll Gel amin on nieio & sh) ino yymmit! 

Bodh st yh 15g Fv. XSplaxth pl Wa) Rhee cnill tet, pslaaiplt YoySt wail 155 2 05S 295 

Lea aa Jeu Rha wail’, ity Leagh KHGLAAL Kaden!) Let them coil Wrote (clawell yo,b 

ghee! exis oan Ble gay! whey cgdll, Will aile er oh dort ol yods 
($5) yy ane LglgLis (etom Whadt SS de Ma ae one WIS Khactey fo Poe - 
MP J dy SU glee sat oto PVT: ev eee Athy last ther 63 Globe gl 
wh de hae oh Seed LEN) he Ob Ratan Res Sh on Rgeaal by Ri LMS cyyS of HH al 
mat sand Lily mp tonsr be poss ets, 853 hey nant Dual aid peje} x 63 Ke 

eas pal Ld, ot ue oly Ms Lees & stand | pl 8 NJ is) tae beat & 
Bike uta Iyde 3 aie Line lo 

7) gd > 7) erg lRiawny 

f 

Aisi 
ARS 

eae 

Sig eh mena oie i 

; "OSes oy ee # gus Bs ye 
Lento ile ile unr) Gays 
a “a wala! Calo 

0 

eee pee Cu es werd? cp | 2 
Os Url oe Yate WaSo Yeolenid wes 
Was al dei ratte ec Sina 

aa pee, : nae Re 3, aslo qe 

ums, wn aa jeu) oe a wend re 
ca etl Ld relly penta! € ene Slew 

“site ys) ee gah GA on 
pase whale waa ums, cm Lends 

” ie Ge 

Ry Me Sen a bes ut; Lt} 3 a uae A 

ao earls csadt bendy — cyithe Lents 

aliie Le cygadlinnll (gS Sy sly Res) gO Solo yd ctamily (SLsball gral! Clpendl yy2)M phity tr 

used} Bein eae one age — te poche cael} a 

a0 me yO? 

hr “ ean 3, _— as Yo > ea 3 on vost eae §,9Us)} 

2) 5319 ode 2) SUR BY 5) eye 11) pial 23) wd = 

t Go,3t 

= 

sf 

1 yo,St 

sh.3 

Bs a) 
Jlilga 5 ne ig 
+ %. ‘ 

ais Kpeate ror MS en nar oe heal Rams ee be oi a0 will, Oyen gid 

ell is wel on shah oes ree oe ie soled Slag} ») nb gal Spo3I on RRL daa (pace 

li a GS uy set Ine wath Ghdgseyll em ely Bde pos) gibal lunged 

wlan the as Lay pour ty xj Oubelylt pal a tot (FEL pow SE SS eat Ais mb,e (iam oye be 

| 4 ut Uh pach IS Sad abltly ning Ke SUB dlp J Ebel amb Sah Ge de & 

| Stok US Las x84 2p HAA Shed Aes eal G8 gael) Spee pom ily by alte 
othe pth Rall waball GUS [pie Oot db Leta ely ite K sh alas K 

oo pues jae BASE Vy Khas tad slash das gh FARM y Baetll Quan ,l4oy shelly 

| poe Ny paadle aa SI) oye Syaoget gil sheds ailt abyt Rem oo old & by Ladys to 
 nbayae pad BAU he ees Sei Raab gant G ob Wyle g plamidt yb of cgakw St 
ya de Ugh Olas Ye eyes ST cetlnl ope d Quam be JydSt S giolun BAIb Wy KIL 
oe ae St de elpenlls ve,5 on "Ely K duos bis lel ges al oly or) we 
te Mo aaa BY pal om egies ogee! ai ales cyo catyrwdl weASLKd ueetll eluael ope 

6 LRAT Shy Coat all be 

Stn s 

ak) Balacll oye Lecamae . 18) ely. 

wtih, Wee T et we Gels a ‘ ab : oN 

Chapter 21. ae bilirtc acai Spe bled Se S389 6 

eco labels IT Sf eo 

gsm Les} SS ya,II & ae. OS lal! Rem 

ia satin foes pees de Le Lou aay! ae ay ur holo eaiaads Laiona 
Ba cn re) ssl} (3) enmita J eases ee > de sigs i 3 ons, al 

of 1 a es das! Salus at sand Azicy Bis! é pe, ey saa dds Ene WlPAw o 
“Wty vt 3st sell era ons Les coldd pms By eae Lath naalath g LT Gas Sl 
co aH SD pes 8 Laws 3! is bs oa Ce wens eo uasdt IAG & bab eat 
: aA & paul 8 pilin Fe a he in ma) s spas hy batons & neko le 
ext ra wildy J ise US g K SSty dpsepe pp GI Hhyy mad cs} dla Bg rianll 

“ya AK 5) wile & ly se elacsh wpsho By PM! WEE GY LK Wy ATT Bel SWI I. 

” eo Ko 93 abel endy Soldall sho Land Gerilld clowlly grado slilly skit, (0,31 Hla “8 

atl SSN ola Ue gach BT ab HE 99H hay = pnd Ge lgis ynatll plat 

goals palatal by oly 85 Lee oy) eb wig Dy Legle aell clad ly 155 gil 

o£ Me Rall & Ughery thew Leap BSSpAll Ky salgadl Qt Juaall AO jLGh ane yaks LP Sly oly 
cuit os cide dba (th as YF gh gt ely eli asl S sit eiogll & Leigs lo 

1 ay dls obi Q ovveP Paces By zoldl jhol yet syst wall J 

UB pagall WKS cjg why Tavifelitecssosee Rakes MPs. 

ls Sahn Cis soa ASN NA glas sbAB! nds SS be Wily ash & yyS hey ¢e Roland! cye yyjge yhoo 

apace: gol Qs GS eet eye syle shared! sd, WIL dors! VilPs Gy} SB 358 wring 
Us, Lyte wars de ou 3 Ob sani Naa hae! whe acs Lind Ji 116 amd pagel Lely, te 

dea Toel Sig, lly plaal § USES Al Jolit er 25) met WY pail gatih Lelas 

2) rot 8 sh 11) 59 

tsa ab ceil ash All ly bs a : 
Lgaiuad At eye shoudl oe Pla Lene epths cae | 
aly Uae) op les cast wall Sls 248, - 

LE SA oUt Oy on Lglldy gd Slike shee! x 

BS ah xg 253 ail ce aS a on onal -— . 

gibaes 
sectinsy gle qT hes (cee is pane le Dal piri i 
pyran AlAs” uh) Sebo Fairey ell! ne att oa ats ra 4 

iy ol sein ner ually ee a suse ert ie it ppv oe u 

ps wile ee RS J Syst hs usyt os BF yy [ ness Se ‘Chapter 20, 

Oe EO an 

“Al Fabs are BSN cind Rpm eye oh BOK ge Muisy ally Ply dug 9 ae ae 

ee ed 

Del 

| bee o tie aus & se ani 2 sa 

We TANTRA AEE 

be 

$o 

_ Chapter 19. 

roel So a nt cto ay 
P| 3 ©) cto tS wy oy ) co tngt LT S cg dt sll} of M3, cobgbylt i ce 

4) ras 8) OS 10) Sage 12) Ss 

18) st 18) AK 19) Ls} 20) Galea 
4 

vos! co % Coa ! dae Se ~ pees Rad . PE) apis 

captially ee os tae wn ony RY hana 3 63) pant SUNS JAS fe 
: | oe oat agi é 5s us dAly!y fat ust unels ppal cigs bady BE ASTI gt ce 
| es eh 2s pen ts ya Sy ppall Sy em poe LL eygKed Repel leben!) WS & gyphrriuns 
| 7 med ok 5 exall 2 jlo, opens digit Gly ney 5 Spauay (8) Qydadll WS oxe he Leal, 
Sonal hl FA) epilesolye exe Mat Ly © Pyyeer Gupho® WAP, HS he Gis Lapin? Jat jLeill bal 
otiles;, vay 8 erly wl rerent de & zl ead bean! ores si Ihgzy 90 Relat egpemt mlb to 
cee de oles ste ratnse Qe rel ci sll 0 erin Une et le ent! Rell g alps & 

Maal) 9 sus3i Uys Le pall - con Bah LS Dag 8 ad GS eh pall thy Dols clswall us 
orem Wide 3b Nee Roy ees |b vig yee rd» ijyabl wid Gigs Ropgal colelandis Jayedd SI des 
via calinall cael Fim GAIN GB ea uly lagi Sle oye copes MS piles & na 

yall Re) jess ‘ righ ued das, ee @8)) on eomady wants wld lows} § So dst ly eats 
ofl oy ont a Hale on well msl aT ope AIT JS 95K ae ore STS gill, Kanwar oad 
| - eRasanll STEAD. cat ep ote SOFIA Ud Baad oye 

8) amd: 6) Saki 10) cyaptnsdly 21) die Gn etdls 

Myas yl Lead Holally paots nada IAP Joy Lilet dy exllad bei pase 
ote eaHS Spams Lol Ural walled pace lua = & i Sh 

Ciiptee 19. 

7) Lacuna. 19) yo 

ee pies, ans Ais San ae 

a by ad we oe talds olor ats she ‘om Bing les) pst Syd on Lach 
: ges % ye a sal splat, ab au eal xls oe lage cya Ory lay Aa cy® sot 
ale bes o) S83 sslesst oe tire! ge Fetes SLd be Slade Ree on ddesl Ye)! Sok is 
wid us le rey (Rc jor ne ay esis A 6 dad yoy) or 
a eal jode iibaally Kyl 9 Cathy oly we dona Ls uy) aM) Kasei gcst (pital 
Soo ie up og ests ¢ Call meth 99 plo sits Sut Bg cw Mahdy Cols And pgfan ries st 
ed y ah saya | eee on a ul wiglty Usk ol allaily xyytdh ltt ia tyr 9? Lely oul 
* eS ogaiclyry bea gael Baan seul nee yy Slt Cast dary Uys Reayhth JSuetaS SUSIE 
ies Ll eyyamac> sttelys dt Seno erie sap Leowls (Helagll & cymalr meds Mes Sy tebaging, 

cygth wralads Me pie Ray) oliogw dy Row Usable IuUT pee Yes Sly the *Lis aks bly phe Lisl 

a 3 

Ry) iol Bema 281i My Kim ssbgur Gly gyyannd cylin Ty cygAlt oot Ss enya & olud LIB 
Byoey aiddiow Bays Bo cainiRior katy alte Lat (ote H0599 F 6B ah Byam Leads ob 09! 
shiner pagal, 13 spilt fast TB liony wow WAI Al ge penal he alias gle poe ad eS Ay ole ly 
gh dy ela Ah Heal ow ae oxy) “al bl lat om laes se LESH alll & Lagingy Ged w fo 
Pe ie hes ou! Lain Simlaina Slam eS oP GAM Kalb LI opto cys pl) ves ted gst alas 
“Rae pallet wad lla po pga K tle p52 wall Jum By OES ipl ps ate Laws 
—yalasll BY eanry enrde ISB Gilt de Lest alpen sattall 590 at! Uo,3t hi Jot Lye ars, 
HES KE paah (nti wy RS Leh Pring Lethon Li tl Kaolst dole WS & oS Lede hoes pyle 
ys Ue cl ja ORB Ldasl ado cm ois Leake a8) 5H) A ko lalla Le? che pl, Kipze fy 
Be 13D op Gh gb erlang enrol Slcalt cadusijly Lgclacnt I baie gs erseloot Lene ailas, 

9) 11) e 13) epr. pag. %, 5.6. 11) 15) st 14) 15) satral 

Chapter 18. 

es Kama yy ty ae Key)! ghey dt, Ooh ca the 

Lgl deny Mle Slee Ly onare 227 de Ue pac 

de B gill eile Je worl SoS AT le ene ge 

hate ai I Leiveh ly Lagad Seis ed sett teat as SS sth 

enaall cst eneles hace Leeyls wh 9 Hal oh oe by Bes —e : 
HLKaigh aby dt ae Seed ene 

way pein obyolies cnet DT pytnd Byam Me ey haadiy yeht Sly ie oF of soa : 
Oss, geval dc Lats Khe a8 cal al ue shasta QS a mtilwds Untlity ene ee 

2) sai 3) 5) sh 

Ny is Labs pew 2 a jes we socks sats eins be wide quatiy SII tie de JpbI 0 
 beut ode sas eke oagll se 3 erat Dex aS pad bass ade tidy lye 

te hoes’ daly Sa ow? Saas ob 43 ob Lut Sar) jest ol KS ma oy shat KAS. Ra dlng 

oe ee he on btm ms Son oe gente on kat Cibyac Leag! 
Bo ata Ls osha te sadly deo Jas uri ada Gps} ERAS albly ole signin Carlis cysts 
at be he Jaye G80 > i Licaly FSiIS cis lebe ME come clone Kanyadl 2,Leit I 
ne dl pe cel dol ool ddels sornatind Kanes 9) ey i] had Widigy US Sng (pe Dor 
Ud, 3a iB BAGS} oF SSH ppan cri Mgy Atay aha! de Mixiay osits B alee gis 
gle BE OUI SY Le ype MARI Onde toad be Lele Shag Byes ARH NS Lido AS Uh 
SN cipitly ently Land alt cm Gil ily a4 LES be Qt Spas Geada gents ME AT ttanyy ale 
aS dl id ys atlas cm pga helanll he cobiagan dy. cygita wshplest Rigas fo 
a wth 9 at's cy ath oye detest de > pypaigte Gist Sy FOy> contd Lema 
oo he guna re icky canis ons baad Blas eran pthe Kamnce Slax Sly ype cyltlye 
Sbatibl gst ace ne Sega ae Slay My yp sitet Byyaadll Seigag dt Adanll abe Raat ed Lead BLY 
ie: shee, Mod he 9% whe Miles ouy Ny cygamn> AP Lit SS pall gs! Weld Beste 
dd BY Gogill 9523 ithe Sly ae piled pdnll Ais SATIS dad OPS My ptgili aby pt 
westll ws coi me cunetien Hanae sands SI SLA gst ging RpSlad (5,5 a dt TB he RS 

10) Gk 16) or jyxido 16) ait;3 20) or oJ 

Lady cys Liy Lgl?! Leb ay pyagite 8 lone a 

i) ae $)4Ph0 >) zs sygPbe we aiid js (yr) at 

cr os sihoik AI Fons! orp at anand ote. o tie 

3) wid 4 und ilo wits dhawtt eee 59) oe ae scx Si, ol 

be Hato onsets body Let eyqeejus what ane ea 
2sab § OSSE OSS crit Lal) SS ope Land eats Wb ya el Uy 

BBS els, sivas Uy abd od} wguas cance Lad, LEI cyl alas fo al wey Js 
BU Sym Raldy rig yah pS 038 waa OE crabs, wd aps) Lets eottey co asst 

SI eS Dely piso RSE Kd Shy RUS oy eles 96d ambie JIB gal ved ae de 

g w Py ‘ > t AR ai 
ely of stil Lib doy ad YY Qegetl miogll oye jibsva slincy righ sac x55 gil cr hte, 

1) sya 5) wy hom so) OF woe do Fol 5) sal ay 6) ee) ! 8) PAP 
10) res! 11) BsfAyes 11) Originally hs, corrected. into pid 

13* 

4 a a a seal Ms on baal fe nL I ah a tee oan bl Ugiay 

a one deobat de sess By pee t ast xe bly pe La eas BF AN Less: 

a ds oe a Lelats a oS! Uals alt aLilatt ge ea pat bell le ale o 
de ae e oh om Bast Jal «LP, BT 4% ont iyS Sy oy! Migla aty eytls 

aN appt Poste rfl ehh 3s wares Samat spe SN mie 8 GE ptel ail 
ae ae by cyozthe Fe ay 3, yes owes aes Bb NT MN Capit cane oye 
JS) § BAT Le plalF Oy pimns® ppg 99 Wy xl mys Sly phe Ren 

Xe dl emis Kmade pind bp Bike (sy A iad ene dhe zoiF eg Lely « goes le 
| ote ole do Lally cigs coms a8 cyalad le 9 pte MUS wonge AL dl Byte ngs 
“Slgad REM gd paula ley oll SS a Outall oa Sbne dt flat AIT Yue Ye rl pygl 
erate Slgad St bw aly Spits Ps ipbeld Slasital oye pala at Glas US ew ope aes SSy 
Lis woul ak ud a ad ls, lays GAs & pings dS dlgas om gh ily Syuve wi tSt los 

crmodt Unb e® or Sludh Bourse chest on pat oly Js Ble lia, aad byaedl che fo 
glyd Hila de Ugas ill HLS Le Leake Jud fale SLIP tne leat cor cirbeth one bead 
sab SUP 6h, aSl nis piel seb he DIS dap SUBST JOS, SLSH plasn olKy GIA dose 
maby wrladl Quo Soh * chadegne Regelall Laks on yam dxdt I IS Lemie GB cael “eat eles 
hog ddgsl 2) Css ATS my LEMS cyoetne cgtlanll Kyat Un) St akan Bygially (SiShy alll ssi 

cy ole Lead Sozilly Ar orally eal 3)lp_jLerall SUIS seydied yy GS Stl, elo cast 
Lair pyglld GPL HOE TT oot he ciptetly (Syst ra Lend Laael pi er © amyl 

3) 4) 11) gat 6) cpr. pag. bt, 13. 18) Kay)! 18) piraiygay 

Te 

Chapter 18. SI Byoytt LAL LOLS Sy 

ESy KILL) Klay cot Ups Ledpnty gif Oily 

coe» (etctly GpAdl Ae crt Landy Soalla poset une heats 

Sprdgdly Lgapd cod Leia imal Ue)ly khel Sl Baler ed 

mrctes cma! GUS Gt de dul Se or Odell dlp gto ey oh 
tie yd opin Bland JL pos Onn Ce os ‘ 

ig E> wat LOI tse Kobo cps Lead SLi} seo SAN Sls ly im 

cr Kepace? glad Brame Malt a KtLall gygamnse 78 os a pe ast wo aly bp 

ped SU lai be DS ends bike Sty ole SI Riley W LSM pasa & Ll Bem ye he 
BSs oye Sp ome leat yet YW cod cr DSS GI Dhigm Jpiby byhe lj o amis a 
B vo Gol Staal Kay) cowl ll op dele Vy Lots pth atl Le ws “a> dl Sinaloa ie 

On Bm 

12) pw 12) cyapitney 21) past 

13 

ad! or 3 ee Me oe eal var id Us 

: senlaines ae BB Pod ¢ o” ae ylee is e dpa gree gull iho § Chapter 18. 
Se ane ues ogy at 3 Last sian & yes ei oe Be 

“whe ox ab ipilate! eat 90, hha wal al al cstdy Hag tilly © 
on thee ote ae 3 Le: & SU ID? shoe ess ol & be ante 8, qrntt 
Bei 35 hs oll alot wy Wat xg em Ul - ore Cede aldbee dy ms 
wie Kalaiio ad vLelly cplae o%> onal J stay Seailt psu pole dt edit 8 Lad! * 
© whet BG Ze Lop obliga fanll Mey ually gllbalh 2 on 51 49 Lal 
csyhge os 38 ose? wil & sloLy deity Gell Cuuaill g paul jbo ab ald let SSNS 
jebast des hoot gilia Leia al) pill Jue, Pie un edd! Clee cyadt al! 6 
Gti gals beige be all & CLEVE pol on Bal Sua 12 & WS esp) Cela th 
6 7G Sth Cauadll & Lily Le Syd cyleV eal wo cpp Lond and Hl Uj) bed Uyb eabts to 
IADy salt bysdty ade cibacl cyral Lede ciptth 8 2 MIS Goo Glatt yd dees 
Cres cgawead Odigll ay! cgSlag Le QS ake piss oyas'y assis Lo oh aad le qual Jie! As Sons ou 
Laoyse Laude) g Oey Lead ab 548 UW thake ails The Spall b jyald WIS Oey 
chines ybidduy dul F Shy dilly pall Je sls pal YF G/Atl on Jpbll do 
LOSS iced Pe Leds xa, KS ,by els Rada sly ols sls sty clo) oy pelo cybaals f. 
eye tert a SS shest Lee gree eee uy csybpd tons CrlilLaaity Kile 95 aye 

gecbytill Sud MS Lyd! Slaw eyep sySdul Dist Lergice cys bey Lanse Syl ell DUS cya Orig 

1) eke 

diye dey ap citbe egamnda sl; es wid mgnang nda ite is i 
aS lb (6 Line eyanke csi, alt weg ST wamony opats oad a Alall 3. ust ue ge 
prteny ery Wal? Lina So olalall Kent I (pcan! Lady ela wpe al ae Joy wes oltiy nay 
eprint quad Kad Le pabull Ny dadd oy Gir Abe Ay Waele § wis 131 font Oo | 

Be SoS} 5d bo cgySt cams ¢ Ray St cr Rab Jy shitty sla she cyt Pleo a bya yy 3 whe 

att ads all Aids? wiit 3} oe Sead (PUL Ab yun op Ulam 2 pane my eps WS? hal te 
3B slash Unt IS SS costed hS SIL agle eggs, glAll figs bse oe So, 

Lgbyms Gt mpecany F5l all WAST, clatl ro bt pel Ab cylacalllly Cody Vb nail Lat 
MT he obsilty ca dilly Mugerll Hee and Price rol he grslalt LPosiiy Sl pa@lcge | : 
BIAS! Real, Loh, 131 cL oye Gmeitl By JUL ve & IAS Lays as oot : 

Eh yl SI ENS (anaes & cpl B woliss . wy Bh gy 3 el ynas eri peaks leat 
pL S clib Sualt ity! vsir Sally Unit golino dy Kb Bo Xaaall ope pyKaih jini r 

eRe Lead Sib yaa! Os pd whP, Lae k wl euiss ed Ndly Ondl a Upigrmond 

Mew 

i) 

on oes : ude out rr ny oo sat coe whamibig o oho! 1 ee 
| aa) a 3 ng Oe dl nts Ys le ae 9 A ob UB alts Jost fost 
ae te sake a aha es clits abt Kayo je Jes oe aaah SS DAL SB andy 
ha a dea ¢ Mts dehy Veds penis bed 2x5 cyrus AS elt obs Hines Lpka 0 broly ® 
orb, $5 US cones) 1S ae ha ata LU (5 le pad Be aig phat 8 yl dl al 
iy Kal Riga dle 2 & pypthtyy «Hall UG yy Lead pons" Jessly joa o9 pall aul 
98 Bok coos cols ext Beg any Slr cy ROaall Rada IU gae Sey Gh ak § aaah ss 
wEi0y oA SUB gyal Sy LOO nynns le ade SLE Jo Cia) nie CSS Joemd gol leptill Mle oye 
Sly GIs) Opt Laalt Sh st ae Letyy mad stil) Jett oly ae Qesd ade Boyd scgdhy Sees! be 
sind jer iy nal SO cau Lage’ ray UST Spud Bh ah ts AS) dled ay Sty Jer 
cell uth gt tll st dae le oof Sy AN Lap ily aenol glad, Klin} Liam adhe 
ss nace Nogd LPAU eel I okey agll piel be aia cspiitly Ibo! Ppebly LUsh 
SU mahazind Se igs le Salt GUS yo Ley Ca yttiniy Lenlaits Rob Uglle St crodley wris 
Aysiaah ah Rm wile gttunly 9jf0 QI He he alas? Oeuall cure dT dy Oven Lele ables: Has yal fo 
weplo A! Led solic iS 2 agle pil She mado aad ot erly poloy ball Joist be 
cake eraad ssl, dd u wile cyan & oUll GRA eas Sigal A Sddy 8, pail 
glial! g rzeys be ass) b eye GS SI ah lied wa pty ard he dlp alas elit! 
by Lady gcans cy) HLT IAP he etsiehe SUS Los> on Rhian chctlally Oleell xy ash 
sD) & egSUill che RKniy gad Raplawll: des us powell Jdaall glaall ey the jis al ce,ad Lal te 

Suid pS Kae ost Gamal cgi all cogads I le dh RAREST hal gS cynadall Gullit ISO tay 

(SOs saya ess 

LGA yun eS Lely wriicen 8 ais’ ee dy baat alls ah ees) iy! ce i Sseeplt 
AWA) Roni Ba Ee yi Hiyaye cyyitll WO Sita Cds ae si ent olad msi obed} el 1 i 
Lesa! Lagitisy alas, cyxxth 1 aad Loge Zo yhmidT poy ont é salt ee Ree on bie | | 
(POTS Aaled Amat Kul, LUT calol sig dT gol BAS! Lis ety 3s siya eet deta zt 
waitin! Uroyty© cs andy Grow (giles Meds Egtall Uke oe ps Halll pm nese ss) cael 
LS pelt Lb adsth oy sly ste codll Su Byboe ay slaty ea ruall apts oe ces 
& J,Uad aft, 9 ghee ao Abt grvalal Sy oh St ONS cya vote exe Rape n Lea o 
Sed MG Bat host stold Legislan! chal Gb apad ope cpt Wy eared dal vbueal a 
Ht G0 9? 95p LIS tholh DLE GLI vate Sigal edgy KEI US LLY date lS 
wate cng hess wing, ob (om WN dl Lene 9p tyygidin LAS Syblh IAP 8 des $b A) gee | 
BSH fo SF Mold Ob de pars Lisle; & Ugxhe call Sle Kuaad LP9 Kine & ey) Carat de” : : 
Khe aad May Jb loa bene iy ape oluas!, JuslS! pad tlylaiene Seiye ull bs Kalas f, 

9) glast Pol 

al fl sie o ane wis chasal stat sits elgsdt Sa and nie! e leas Chapter eid 
a sheaalil seb y 3 iy pl. sdats, a8 en who § ot scabs Usapl Chena id 
| ol os Aina onal» Sunt NW ems SB age LOTy abs Jyhas pS Laalfot sa 3 wy fon 
: aha gh seth eaieall sal ne rigll Yass Ay ciolall ee on W 58 L9s Luis Kad Solis 
Spi ons! Bb eee of ie de Leda Shas jab DUsy a eobell d am de lgans Os Lol, Eo 
sable uiyahe sat ppd etal whith Ct mere as crdperana WERT cre Nhy ay cpa gis SLi! oyn 
vase Jr Sy gawall qilttonty ao Stet ye ot bs xele pglal> G9 and * lastly 
ay ade salad} baal omad oye slated} ulzels ELAEST yal sladell eybathe craw oxe el gst 
as pith De cottons mt ptt ni sad) AD sh Lily pla sys deh hecre Jul pile 4 phe 
plsely hedll Sb GAIN ere Qed gL lens, FA! Bye 8 ohm ale padichys GY biel gly t 
rig Ree gr d (ges A LIA Lele om Une) cre copioaiin LUST S cypher’ Kelsall who 
eis BW clad gh cslonah of olbirall coe Late eygerst dual Col dy bend mei he bel 
epee, mesh Lend yepti® Dd gil 5% (jhlall eraitriy bse malCilly Anas gio eoml 
pouch go egslny Alpsoondy A Oeil} aR! AS clad Shey Bird cs? tls Chuva japlal Bt 
LB FSS itagot Gans bly nelars Ald de dyypaiia Kelinal 9, Uy AI AD eye (Fadia No 
tyycn Gm ups sabill JI lal mele pail OS poids db LSuall aed abot Ll) op 
clit plas J latly Udbal be tilly Calg d WSy cepts Ohogad coe eit tt Sle & 
cnn egilty 39 OMEN snare Wel GI Jesily oye pda Lend Lim Ady S Udy highs knast Laiolt 
Ladd a3 eye wSliiad ij Vo bsby Lees alagh wn S951 VB abe dt (cdatds IP erms (sid 
oy CLirgen pisge cm willy dead coon KALB er cgeyFE Lat IIE S cyayTAM exe fh 

wy By Ria Bile coe eras HH Lasley pide J wrges Fob vane dhe ladys LUT be Ispaw ad 

7) Sout 

_ Chapter 16. 

corsa Sy Gasiega wlieatls EN gigas (8 
mas, nes 3 Borie had ai ol 

255 189 Jal on lemme Gad hs Ss eu 
ml, Boaalte cyst Zply RUS ss 5 Unsilly, way dl poy 

aie is chad ao Sl et 

trols ae cles de sii plate, ae ale de o ie al : 
oll exe ppsbdlye (5 

Chapter 17. 

oe connie del 8 aria sienna & ull 

adi 58 a en ne ae wpibsiny we ses piety cypttlihiiy 0 

ie jew e om” usteall \gae oe bb 3 omits o stenall weal clsil cone Bh aly 

: ves dag iki « 6248 alaalh wed Gh * had o aunlbe,d ills pe sie Pie JSS Sh coal 
alli, 25 cp MRK, BATS LED el ory aaa ¥ alt 5s spony ala 

ee a Use 2h) Ents belogS 15by passa Copalt Lge bas rail ne slewt cyyebinis 

esa dexill fous, intents Lagaeng calli pad ee agin wait wrerliig UK! Lt ian , 

ole fl coo xalel AI piss Kose & just! one cst cal 95 dS de Jlw ft 

eau) hata eyplodizn Wlngll wis Mh cod leet Lage esl All MggSt getty Gaal lrmely Line 
ntl Razgh one Lead call gidastsl cyyathty E255 pibilly pylagBt cpr asl sbl eile 
Bygaall whO Jos iad Si cg Raa Kiaad Ut 

detee ne DS 6! Le! oe 
aie gel bo S31 Ub bonte 
eset Bish Raz, } 9% 
. dem Beat Ge ogi 4 
ened < Sr? yyielitiy bab 

cor eaedy 99 De than bas 
Waly Sane yaad Sous} 

7) pees 15) Asterisks mark the words written in the original with red ink. 

: uae 

etlicly ath oye Lath cyl Sit Lesh all LN actnandy wal eink ana wer 
ISB * yobs Ue) Rilo Shi csi iy say LAI ing, aah Sas per A ne 

cyplaiy Kavolell yoo yaa Wola pede Zits Us ¥ TS aL § Osts Sell hee al. 3! ibast 
folost ely padlt dbs Gist Ko db gall Lola iuty Leew als xy oe 8 jb, 2 jet 

HAGE seinsl6 134 Seal blab eaoeepin plalall era and ba at reett Sy aso dae be wie i‘ 
A (Feel de seFS) expasdicg Gyadlly Seaill dyy Solis ung desi eae lias — | 

sha A sigs st vee — hae wea * ~ Se om o 

290m 

dust pul dug LS BI xi, cyboil Lge 58 ¥ Joka} ma ie ial tds ae ot 
GU eyptnions jbarally oneal! dh GL Just eyliy BIH Ft (gulistll Lda medi 
carbons aalT JB Mea dont S cypSiady pLOSS JUS Squall cw Kiglila By gual Bhat Ge 
Both eget LAS Gigb AD ers oe weal (95d tantly ll Lat telall & eygttis eggs 13 te : 
elanill soda Pa53 cncliy slant Joy USSG olget d yeti ol, b GaSlasly KSI 
BE gt shin JEM Gel dy poliall b APA pailydy Syymilly yidilly oLeeall oye 
LES 55 ygtytiy atliiy Atl ae aay 5 plithy UAtdy comio pple LMS pypplll 
ls gett 8 capt gin s2lbe tl Bygie 9P%y KR yp hamty SUI 5s tepanll otitis bis 3& 
or peblast SBI Bill py bay semll & ISI eyyesity SILI one cg be bao te 
IS Alt cyppadisiaty oye SI Gad ys? rani (sila he Spsctm (ciuall GpSb cyy dias edt qld 

5) sayy 12) oy dane 19) Lat 

12 

'y 

= ot 
| os 

| 
{ 

| 
| 
| 
| 
2 

-“o- 

oS lgdec Slee BI gyopthally Kort Bo 4 

Bdle lad IAP 3 rst IAP 85 gles, ed a ‘. 

athe cmpeny Miily Lend 
RL CLL A 

SKIL Gad, gale 
aot EA’ ah Boos 

“i 

Bye gy) yidl heh 

PAA ghiad og Aol KS a aidl 6b ‘ge 

sled 39 KT 
Flemds sri} 

SyH CAL cogil HTS RAN lag plat Jig | 
UL ealstty Myati oJ ce 

oP “sis tly Bp jal ad 3 

9) yP5IS vlog! 15) .y¥,3 added by the editor. 

vou 

f ow Rareath ss 

: Seas oe ta La a cea van pase | ae 
Ripa yas ed de phe sala ¢ a Las Kea Leake Genie a} Raalatt uses Kama d 

) be be Piles ny oy daales Ae Kel dis he Sa 
Pees aia Lead cole x cette aus Ua lets cay i ie ¥ coddty Syos? al Ue agsQuast Up 
ca ene ay ae ly en al sigma Fhe JSF HB 53h Y SBA "Gate on I 
Bp ala) Gy gst KALA MGS Keslanld cyaiet SamSkandl oydgnd Semel Ht cyiigal 9h yl SI 
brie a aeegll had alt & pS dhptal lity c pdsall yrdt S le he ores ley sibel} 
at! wpalaiy meld pei bla cr pohly BOL) cr Lead POLE KgKe game Lend Ride ale dy 
Kegiopa lA ais lone wily BOS ye abllny & loser esl Ipeliot 156 ollie 
Biome Raf Ola) some yd FE OLS fe ore LU byeing OS neil cinta of Keie d ore Mi fo 
Dols 99 ae Je ais Ny cind rely Loi Gf! BOI IST wrgyhP oa JE Leal st ow Jeans be eat 
“9 BH Caps bb LG a gty Gaal oles tl 99 JX eet eyes geile 2,36 
| uel 8 tin ated Gri Le QOH reds! Sy ras! oly phe BSD! yey shea shen deal 
geal sha yh Ley URED aLeodT ead Le cently sity pails Je Sb eahte 

8) phy Ge 10) ae 10) apm LD ites 

ava 16. i) 

. 

" Ohabiel 16. 

a tlows} Neko ied Si oothdy Ms C3 52 oss x2 ol os Pale Ys wlaed! ve Nas ft we st 
Sort WLP Cd be ced ‘pte MialM MY ett elpad Us in 

| | ge os 
(ee | sua [edie] vet | we | : 

Leh ,5 Uma! gS er) ceow pos Kewl ON a Blye ey es meron? is! Lost nibs sively Ly 
*2 Glows 8 Last he Rybgs gdb al Laas yg Ke ae “ Leioy By alice welwadk ret olan 4 - 

Laity ead Sot GLI ISS B wei iy 2 pbeot! pyall mad KaFpll UT ASH GP ple Sy pall oge 

 prtans cb Letty Gull lols oe ysl Hed Shaw Last elie gall oe eysh Ct Lb! colt te 

1) le added by the editor. 8) ralo 10) Giuas 11) 5%» yios 18) 9 

ta, 

‘ oe ’ ae us Ne a stone oe Das Sins ne aigecilly abt Glo 
os whiad P ats Last Leahey lat Lbs oe ow Kelby wld Lod 5 585 pst Pave) 

“ail toa cal oe heal en etl Leda wpddt ore pads he ill Ligkoel pads Sle o 
| des Gs relat omy bs (3 eS GUST Baty Cowell pir pd wrod oY 
Brel Le y8 pba ff Miyyicy Snail Jia ging tosh cys rely SKI slant Heli 
ni Ley Spleen (ghd Pete ygetitl DA Ub encl.eh pail Hist Radle p48 st 
ce ee sya pets 39> coms cod drer they Leloh (oI peat 
Sa Coty Cll Laagl claay atler cod col ae be By Khel! lawl, et UO of I 
Fb Gad (oh co bli9,) (gong LS aertay ait pall Wud ucla S35 corny Lae Leos! Iplle 
& eile topbSt op WS ray dindl od Gomy avila Ba ity Lgie cojt x33 
cs? OE Sy Spall By beter Uf sae SeLadt gt inl Cyt (gd sSble 
S99 EP BIT coP csptily why Slmall GgF cypty al Bai Laie ial paw oly 
Spl Beeb St AD re ool wists UH Fw He? Lt 
SalS 99 GGT ppb PLS GALI gittiay cell LS yO ypidsf & Abdus 
Bybee Bye D Laity etd er Unale GY pa! Bye who, dls all owls Liles! pyigXit} 
cos Hie ole GS Cant US AK ADE Optald ke all pall agzpiclt go dyad al 
Pn 53 Leyla GK, Vy Sai af had Ledyy all GySly X.2KI) ange Ha,ycll 
Gh Lag WOR Canigd & Ugg che mast LoS Ln ee Lent tbe DE cnet Lanny east f 
on Spiele eget alesis Golly it cchucy lat 6B, OS peels d ALE Cin. ye 

rele al iat wks, Sal i stan 
bate tae abs My Las Le i Nyy al » 

OD We 

Sa LSS ae aes Kyles aed & * Gott (gd 

ease billy als (ol pa ghd Spinich § Pode BLS Aig 398 uw told 
wpe : 
mis Leake ost Sas us Oe Laeaiiae eiwol ols beso es wo 

at 

weil Lgdlniiy Rhett xlawle & Lats Lerma & rin’ oo 3 wi on | 

pos Ae MS site oa taylac e det at : a ae ao i das Rety 
phe Rin SKE} ahs * yao Uma oy a Ae Gat, hy an diss os B5s re 
ae Ve 

B) cal 7) Stra 6, 91, 8) yds 15) byihe 19) yo 

G 

A ms) aie oss Fie ie Shy eel Ebb piedls cot parealt cca . 

ie Liyp as on oily ol oF 3 Saal Kies JS dettr esige (gree Ide ble! g 
DIOS (pels 2s cu pie Chang Uhlle Mig gals Gb paged pramsdll ay, wey GI lilt Gam 
3 malite| bs it ¥1ibecet aia 2a) b yyS OMI ohana hey gy jee Cilait ols Lie 
as J8 “ply a ee oi iigce FS Ob chy ov gid pladll Slkal RAS AST Le SIAM! 90 

°o 

oa on be pion Lay tt Bo LAN Goce cyigr FSG Led gly oT dy il} SLdel wuts 
erty SP pan SLA glist onl Ipilad Po Slit cs eyly eed MAS, all Stal RRS polly J 

erbo cus hil [natn KAS GW UL ayihall OS G1 yy AT Mole Doh al eral Uae ody 

| Roby Bye B py bey whe lai Loetay Ig Ball who MI dete! Kens veo Mt 8 K kya 
raed) pa Mid ctl op Body! oe Shem Ki he BF syshadd hom mana rot 90} eyyXad eoctstl em 
ait ayle bdgcie gery CrP eraghP yp Key new cr he OT ty Cyyegaw ce Steel Both ong Legs 

S531 gill GE 10. ST by Fone cygXt uplad GT mires & ny LF MPM yall Gos 

25 awd ce AST Dd Sy Sly coe pyaydity Kile oye Neg pikes Kenwy RUS MY) XotgS Ramil canis 

(oteligy ApmLa gyyd Kill sold & et US GLI Spit Gt Rae op Neg the Reg ope 

o 

LM Rely Spent AO Suetond 255 Gwrhy Lely Xelell ga, he Aujle RUS LI ASN ST Kymall g 
Sy Agasesh coly cm eh 9% Le grand coe GBS Leng Sy ASly ope Hoe cp jay BALI 
5 eae GF GMA oye PIT aS yb ys ping alm ITI anal si tT eps Gmnitie 

dds ea Lait w bod pysgom ds todd Pees * Lest zo) ue 

# pavdases Qh CMM. oes g SMSO) ical ik Ryall jut 

matel be Sy I1o. 2 by Ivy saul pauand MYeeoe ($852 cybglanas fs 

eeAgeny cot SOradnng LE oLciiy vpntio egilurms wigloglas cye Lilet 5S S ot outs ay Chapter 16. 

4.) bh ‘oh? 

Chapter 15. Psa i ne NS 
Sh aes ole at Jess 3121 
ot ys al a, Le. oat 

cued cst oud @ yo) 3 Raa)!» wand [ral studs aS »Py ad ee Wot yo) a pa oo) 
“ast ho un voll, Lay 5 S yg ne} es Ey Kantor AS ere) Lama ostle elall Lash read on 
Celnall Gully 353 GUIS ppl slave oySt ul IAS brs dull ¢ Sly ST: sas, ue sohe : 

999 Shih cypy Aly MGI GB Lasiel cya pthsey bays} ny psbulaiie gly Ml, ept,d SIV ies, V¥p5 Gh padbodue & 
cyst gaat lly pgs ales LOS Legale SLbIL wlyall nde aad eypomns Let S Gat eabeob (nlalll bo 
eer) cetney ce, be Rabies gibt, RUT Oe aes per bee) Spo ony be ye tit, jut Vad a 
sath Un mes obs eySoF SI ony Lagdng Oseal sou lg} Onl St paint oc Gua GJS ALS Lely 

cating Laging bo aay oy olga Sl cms cclamell Gal, clad Lily seid gilts Duin ead usin ad ed et : 7 
ald pnw LESS NEDSS ad La wOdzal of Rall cad sto Lah Rails marlio cyphs heey Aus ee 

mad 22003) clauy Gyby Ker Sob & Kw ROL Gos em engin LS ope plssdl Ie do : ca 
why rem] *caslanita clauueld US de alesis whith ards a randl aiiil Sibel Lyle dilly |e 

2) 6) cenm 18) w,5 21): cigylonka 

: oo cit woe at eat on sh Ane ee wy ne ame o or ee us te se 
gail g esis nits eo ‘ots pot elds Ro snes. (aile sas) ust (geste gles wll 6 i 

| uss. on Pie als uae esl de eal! ss Spl Uy BEne ad on xalasall J) Lls, taal 3 
ae Wyo cypslady Sle ade Litt ue ald sl ests 9,0 6 pee BS eyyha Sb de Be ail & Ipaliss Ay 0 
[aid het engtin on OT geese 3 tl Jk, fio 3 Lahadlioe ¢ ur dadlde BUS Lyyew 5) Pee 
ge on aK ELASt oye Ugad pate! le Ae ches oh dt poe! Lgasing SIDS LgXewy Fae \9 jas Bygde 
peak ssulaup Anadis subg hs Fone be Ae oygha Ly oF ty pl See Iie, le, F nda Regt JS 2 ioe 
Ko ill Leah 2 ined Gb 88ha oye Sle Kay Mijas Las Suite Ly fel Lis I, Let 
ey cr TS le Sade @ Lely Phd WHO camels RK g Lat ty LA! by D0 crass 1. 
UB wha wierw bo he jacldill whel ppiaare Sraaaiti WE gene YS cygwin Raat gd She cre And leo 
wakes on? WF kayl WT omy Kayly wmgs WS Sel OS og by Bey! 
GB patilly RaW yall gy 8 cg 9 aithe phe Kl Os! ples ol cree IP dado jE one 
ciples glu ddell egaslenrs € dhe ey9XF cygny Kaded GE PMT AL GW oe de eo ym Sep! 
Lead waged Cooleny ald Lede gsljall catuniy Lapladly 9,3 he cjullall Rxpete bles Sub fo 
MWS rnin & yyety Btw athe Glas! he oye nthe} TB ephall Ramah ump squad TF Kamas LI eysgll ole 
Sing ASI! TF Byhe Qt aie Syialy es ake GOS ysl gts DHT og! GF ada Sod il 
esi as BASS A el Dy oh) FIED LK dey pd ae Sybil etal ly nee Lead ah 
Nall pyidy siAll 3 05S gat je Loomd cyipil & sludite gly ay duran! cya el Cay 
wd enka ba Wed yy by siMy hy Fcgzethe Hoe KEle alt eygladla med dh coil cow duole 90% te 

cyt SF yt Be A! means S cage: Slakell sdleel Ute wEly RES KE pxb AIG alll Lily © gli SI pet oe 

9) u 17) lpdety 20) cp he 

“Obapter 15. 

Lagan & 

LIT IAS Saad cgay e5y 985 55T Load lel Hy ays ie Ae noid | 

ave SUG dens 

Karle i a uses cry Low's CHES tae 

ergs Keay Ky ns iS Saad Ko wyS dhe Rasled Ls sao, 3 tly lo cng as) Lh 

Kagsl} Kill ore UW apKoln be gsbish s? on Ue OLS dy Fuse 8) ae Ks me 

uals Spo UBS J INP GO Lyset all shyt slow Shad Nw SH ailot lay pylon ce ails! nae 

OPS NLD rag OHS Cow GI ssl JEST wyglits Le eeswa ortiea 3 cll Lisle; Jot is 

wts> Kinks xs . wlohe 55,0 of .7 ¥3yh a dhady Wo cet Rha ca le 

reed oS Resto eS hy Kay ,ty de oy” cp Karty oe oH? op o> aS Oe a 
bo pt we best, Fp cya» wr? \e,) Kay 'y \e,7 (opna on Raby iH ) i i: 

8h; oe BF La mad Gall alt uygladion Leng! IML by whol! 2 Labisre ai Wh Lexa sgl lees 

3 chy jbddey, clio * 

crttsts sila Ll male pie Kw at MB ogy Juste Bptiny fle Lill maby VUite pte Kaya 

Dre 3} LUNE mA Gy9Ks ool BH LEO epapsty Kamasdy ccilla Lill Gunde LPyo pike Kmasd ac D8 cpp We 

8) pil £) Kuler 18) wet 

ae Rope ta an sh had ots et! é ets ae adpahiiy Oye 99> bac lacas 

; ces iy eit by sow Jsiy3t cn Saal o> Ub Jae cSt dee Gord Gael sel 
Oy, Ji an 9s oes un ioe wheels oid cae dol apa cp Ast Sly OST Ep o 
eas fe we AST Sy By SH bell on eygid pale Gpall UY Kal al GLK LAP 
Baady Alas AK UOdie yp al) 38> BAS hy GS Rees on hel EMS g S (sdety Lobe Les 
“cg? A naa alt Ranh ing apt tell Kw Lily Kha ath 9 MALI, RawylT ee OO 236 
ike ST Byechll Spams ci} gb OSL (glint DAKAS Ovo aad aise ob aio S gil 
Se Gee 
bel Gilad eye Sylae p58 As a)ad Lag aie ye Je A ly Lad Ligh yf Sy Kili L Ohapter 18 
aaiol 1S auill cole pad eEctly GLasdl gd palate arent pW Ida g 19,55 
cyjpll WB Laglas amilan 1 cniy atay bo Juiad cyicy DUdLy eidglls Lely amie ore gered GAM! dt 
Od eghjae St dat list Lali (g8M AIST opie atjlye nde MEN Ryo ce SUT AS deer ad 
Losdls St Les cami Ge KALiS® Legal’ omy Bdgrree Leas! welBll LOpgus'y KdrAS ag PT9 
Aigcing Slide aad cyghrsonsy Grice cat Legale oh Lgalae IS osliall pygize lp Wag rery 0 
ye aa Bdge La iy J Lidlnsal old Le abd allie Xp abd Ach,! RBIS Ccrmcs eye 
 pbtsly Guide che, ee ee cee A ested Lo US Raga eying EPH S exe cylon meter 
35839 Gs Kaas! we re By sitle pire Riw vyygmd Do clidle comiiy pthe Lal yi et icmt 
Bo wdly Seal Ko #S wy So Rw gm Jo se Kay) sat Ky a ered 8 
HRs BW See gm Pot Coil HF atthe 11 yyy WS pydb coke Rey) dly fe 
Chass yy Liha ade gyLASl os) Sone syhediie cys ikon [Sho piso LLL cye sew BM cowcly ayphe Potten aly 
EM MN cyt ial gms SUN cde SSO cope Raamdld LE wile clisal Ramacey Kamas GER cable 66 
Adina) nis and CupgBil) Gagang SUL OF) Gans GIKS manne gay deity SLERS Jha pid cya telly 

Rin ADs de A irae dike 9? he claitl who o Rail Notes yma Xomle! oss Tg pad} DS ned 
19) be 21—24) From cotwdy till 3,0) note on the margin. 

a 
saber cull cst Ey STAB, Copanchlll “hob uy 
rile re scot clon oh Las” 73 , 
Whitaker hime Kasgict Kamlall on hei 5, ! 
SLi ph eg yell ay ola ag aemelue He ieee 

illest ase 

Ny Kal alt 3 ee Jot sya bh wloet on re 

eis alll sh ce LS Wrall gay ppnaars Gaia Su be 
peed td LAS Aadledd WL ds ped BY UP aol GF erally deals nar AS > 5 
WALASs Rawle Khivad MI pera oy AM oo Gy abe col ay jst st Sahl a 
en Lgie lino IS Made crrailigall dll ost one dpe KEI ox oil k 3 ele aha at 
Soy GUS aS by Leas! Yad 6 Aderiniy? GLAS Wlaal! SLL csyrmasdy aw haley 

FAAS Kad dy *ayols AES eunzilly Guat do ly OS ae 

sales Of ky Ropanded Lgadonl pow CAS ho Dy Pn las Jually es Una Lead 2 
melee Onadl she canitl ale cst only big Sikty AIL Crcley Ole RSLS ay a 

Ip A Le petal cry dhasl the cant pls Mle isl ene eytieg WSs Rida Sat 

5) juo%e 8) Moles 8) Lacuna. 

10* 

Chapter 14. 

i ae - ae a sea mole cult ‘ bo are) Capi us tell} Yoo ,0 3 + 
# sh rishi Gas roe sell blur! GH re es colobandl (<8 ailshity 
hs & gg beri sbo Sei i Gale e eo see! oul iy eb ? ain cata SF st 

etal ality att tor Pat a Ake ores bo es cblall 65 Slate Sl ann Qe de Gal 5% 
Vi Gl ee esas poll y bah coblnm (gd WB URN yal dS Kore 3 wrlllas cots b 

bah Gots play Gomes aol Seg olathe lst yo ef wii, 
58 WY cypisy Hay} WIS olaplaall SUS (3 p83 oldedt wldle (5 OF 
2 ee sy coed BABY Gedlall aad ot. htt Pole KIL yp rthally elt, 
ga Vy SLY cael a oP wall Lat be gh cploty olanstl warts hoball GY LAP » Sol 
Uy ad Oh a BT gawd SLA n Rady oye Last Le Ky cols pay ReaLinall wD oye F.6d Stans 10 
of Laaily Lean ash clit sLind gy 5’ ly Jualalt dy ans pail sling Sai OB oS 
cs aa om AS yoseehds Agsted exe AEly Ie Pha CS Py OLR clea rel q jlet P wplab 
wersgSPealy Sool ST capa gy Uy ab oS ie sila AS gal) LS Umer séaly 
paphaw Gy) MY: ater Case 6d cation PAS Cael oye g gil pul Py AMS Gy 

a wr ee cst bees sf show Listy J daehi MF» eawld = sls So bwdd whew bay Ine Je gett f. 

cal) dened ms lis plalall foil syhedh mS’ cnryKP pt Coen SAGs gle GAS ust cathagyys OUT doe ¥ 

18) ate 22 gly 

Chapter 14. 

Peden. dtd Xf Uses colis Ses A>) of wins vse Ua BV a ue 

wo pl gh Spe BS 

wteplants Land Cwlill Rae ei Jui 8 Jee oe ge 

ALE HL AiKW IH Lpiloly Dita Rie cre dinall mds LT Goyemisa SPD ee oe i 
spats OMB Mts al by epubaetl slae wuglt dl oan sled dhany pb Sy Gly : 
pe hw Syleh eid Code pylon ung land Qe Sela Kagra 3 ioe or wrighhs he Sy ne lo | 
Php KF By py 9s GT GAN ST lgetalh adel ed’ Sapam obidunly Migs 
nal BLURS aly Rant dle Le welgionl matt cuseety SAIL ats alow Fl we lies 
ATP Raald Gb Cry SPpo Satie 13 Loorad Kail! eeaaits partly ama dt Graal abl Slay ge ie i | 
Xedinadl cl cote Letty cenitiamy Leday whe ee ony Mis Ait gee or Late 
Quast Ay SUS Gon ual a> gla ed Hall Eye aly y wiles! ¥ Leas dey tH 

enw fd pdly Ledece i Ae d oy ©) sat E ip wrgyX Poa) Lge’ pikes! as) gc} x RS rond elt ah ay 

16) Lacuna. 

10 

aya stad bs ase o pike nt ane ate 2 onlolase oS aoe Mast So (clamyll 3 

ane, on nee pels meniel Leis Lpbgosh pte hd I. 
olga Sokadty atlXe & del! 9h cyl Bel eygeemn wakeae M3 
Jas'y Goonll dus B Spine glawegSly clams cspwedl pened ge 
b cveadl SUAS TS pulgraty Laglle he ote crabldt ome bead 
Leghiratiy cones 8 calads Cs somal oss Cgtnmeell ails 

oF coz! gee oy desl sharel & oléall GY, lo 

rm Boys cy) 39> Kydleddl 9% Lend Says! Amz oF gS} Oda my 

YW ALALA odko cAlal je, 
elas de HV 985 ST yg de Ld yy Roda Gel! Gy! 
% BASS, KB VW syySAL ULES Ue ellbl dy «adit 63 

Bik Fie ally Boral! Sued on USUI Yo Merde Le Ihe 

Spl Cetelhe GB piste dll dot d pyyPdhe LS bd cr Unghil le Le cypaisally ate 

Chapter 13. 

PSs tN adnll, << << <il nes | 
Neslatl) <elax ae ea llc I<l << Il 

<< << << << II< I< II< I<] I<I < 3 ihe 

Ke << << <c II< I<] I< I<1 I<] < one Ae Se 
eae <x ce ce MMMM <I Ile 1 < 3 8 ian ie ite 2 

; be GUS idk 
WS Wroly Foyt eyMt wks on all Quis ale Gail She is Jato ~ Sts cea 

Kahle RSLS Not on PrDNy Ng eslally Uaks Lend Gudlodly, ne a xe, Kael orc a nal 
chsh Slyetal Kaas hed coy cerry! ob ert hes wb eS) lw a ‘Saas cial by res te | 
Dre Linosd SS nlm, 93 9% HulS 9 raiidtt cspldeet Jet es Y ergyh Py oF use 8 ae 

FF GAS dled! ol xeyh desl Cing> ore Jil, ppaticy Key! nid We ae ce 
PLT Spe lm aunt Jongh a wags MH SLUG HE Leg) uossall Sib ke be dil de 
Be mip Lame TAS! Spree dealt edt G8 # | f| I es bo eas 13 oi 

ve deny! 3)! $3 oy ys BLpmwe RAS Le maby BrmSy Khas Kawi hoy} ur us ‘hes. web 
wlatyos3t bos deat d of be Jao ail key W de ds A PELE / A] est 

‘ 3) I<I I<I instead of <I< <I< 4) I<I I<! instead of << <|< 

ne fe o fofo lolo ofo. 
dee i 

Wal eee (el 

Lu) o aay died Lga8,) agli, 
| sh | Paden “9 coon 8 Ugllca 
Hoi ae ite © wy x 

* 

¥ sa, ate oe ety Mil << fl Se Go ME Gb ALT Uy 

a ce oss ‘ads onal 9 ssbKd ty che ure dra? ody <<Il<<< 
oe pstutly WN I<I << Uy a oe Umdbundl al <| lIl< << 

<1< MINK << coh amt pf cally HIN <Il I< gle con 

Ute 5 witladd << [<< I< I<] < 5 Oe he rd (BK gaulille 

oO 
ies Ua 5 whe (gilel, << <Il I< fol << Ky ee oh wor 
ee ve ot AU, << I<I Ne H< [<< come opie 

oe She een oh wrteg phe walltlly HIN I< << [<< I<< grime 

ented qa Cid GK come phe zilstly <Il << Hi< I<t I< 

uA past up uyay phe wildly I<< << <I I< <I I< 3 Goh 
Oy eee oS oh erg UK pis ons <e << <|I IIl< <I< “lene on 

a Ma a ha : 

<< (AX 
Kellad gin Oly Kolbas 9% Jot eat sd 
ndlundd by LEH et Oo SFG) geal, walla 
slaw § slo Klatt WhO erbar 138 Ware igs Yo gai : 
43h << <I I< ae 
ReSlsh << [1< I<] <I] <<* en 136 
sult << el] << “ 
tall << I< I<] <Il I< 

1) ¢s,}? 2) BAks Lpalansly 
18) Kila << II< I<I <{1 < 

FRR STN AER SRNR ITEM EORTC I RETESET A CRE PRAT AD FEE 

ata NtoAend | 

ais | ov fis 

| 
{ 
{ 
i 
{ 
} 
H 
} 
{ 
t 
| 
i 
| 
' 

t 

} 
} 
| 
{ 
{ 
1 

went be cba, ants op) GUAT g apal Bh 
UB Wet, Rell & Lage rely k of ob 

ly HIT GAO SIS wenly pantald SY bie Aly pos i 
che I< et} Casas 99, Use << clay b & ae 

enki 9s ee Hl Ory» ye Laas wens ett csl Certs aH wt at sl 

sl lS <1< hall csl came [<< hal Lovet! 1b w Wyo ws ob > Rhaladl 

ore wih ile Cr whinge <<< es - ce 

12)1< — 16) lacuna. 16) <1 19) ie. y 
9% 

. bu k 3s Aly vail 3 ods ys ia oF y weil a ee é ee Sy sel haa ol Chapter 13. 
oe eter ote ig!) a en Woe det ow a plas ¥ Le Sat pllasy, Combis 
ce spl wostese Us a Bolts os) es canal cytes sline fy5oa3 3 vyle ais he 
na eet AS Kae on al skal Land WS ob las pits meske BSly athe conlgen 
Pris wed ned le tall ee cle ball ts de a Lange ashe CS, Reino & male (ghastly 0 
Strat LSS ase guaiy ales si coe path GY Gall ese pdt 3 oBghis Lele cy lbeinad 
evuall whe cpstienl cx aly pede abats ally yystomrtannd Byte g BUS Letts age Sy 
a pea era IS LPpgitly Bath lal! IP & wlowll quills wales JR oh 
de ghbl as deli Uy Ky GS, CII 2 Ly a Leal Yop pl eH 
Se mtioase citys gisd cage Ulu & Wiloow Fa d BO BILAN (p> pad he Sy Lge 5ps8 Ne 
“ Gopdt Oda & euaygias Py ROLES oad dle! ateasl, qmail Le Gite Sh MIS go gaerad 
1 gbyyall Ble B Speelly Fla! Un gienally AF} ot dad ype it 
se oT Ay BAAS 9y KS goons MAS mgtslas gh KET ere shonell ge sl 3s Js3K 
ans ye gust SH xiKr Gong SUS Caeto xBt areal Bailing daitll oe 5S creel 
AS cyl bea bye Sad gill Lgilaly SdARLY elie Letting Xgl Leagl cerns be ptbose Bo fo 
Sytal) de AES GO alto Lekade Us hel cane Mall, CARES Sle cgfiginl 2 Ut dl 
cries Saha pg gacet Sally bis Testa SS de Sisto Uma aly Tbe nal dot gl! 
clade (ge Rallye Balt Whe gram om PET Ue wi g DKS Lilly Lisogse 3 crmmnll 
sionge Whew sll By lal Blu & MS Katy yuitle ome pee HA cyrlle hata 
Lap ALES xcie dhe DSW he Gracey Ughe RUM sole be Gy RL ST Rinks wll te isha} te 

iad Ling, wihd navies daly dhitho MUS DOAG LUE Joa g Reateel ot tll olgith OLiAS Yy 

Lamy Had ReLoadll KyLeDt REST ST gs 

Ladle; 3 3 sleds ee of atl io a et a 

ae newly peSghe dol cb bell he 

a & ‘“ i cian tls 

Sgt gal a“ B Lyrrdy LAS Brains nites slaty ab cob oy bal eae 

8) gypily? 14) gyPlglew, 
9 

DE chaning sabi le cs, oe oF ne s6 13h Haley ven el a Bey 
.) waa bee eb LK ats vey at ne Yo Ab bess i ob X= cypted mel @ 
sl oe 353) cy wh ost oF sof val ca & Ble op ule te ole 
: OR ae vg es fabs Bde oo 8 pk at st, cee iu pt fides pGS! WG ot 

ole ROW, dsl, 25 ba jhe 585 wy! Kpililly wll He sh Galerm de 
edly SUBD olasaSl gy SySah Raslihy ABE dy KLE oI Le aul 9s 
Pas one 2 Qa Rially etl opt cas Ratbelly GyPall ayy? Heclelly pass | 
agin tally 5.21 gy DE Mawlitly SIN Jab nay ely SBN Io Les LS on 
dito: phe Ruled, Ueto! dads JLRIly Mode yay? gd LEE eat cue Lal Jd 495 
phe Ryibilly mt iptilaty pglolad Ranks ge Slums] ey Udy Rie ME GL aly SLLF gliaw 9% 
cot pilsell Jew 8 dol Call pypythny Key! eile phe KD y clnill plas 9% ssi 
i vl wobrall whys 3 PP yhoo Debbi hs P95); plonsh Kaas 9% Giphil to 
he sal ly Lei yr Gals hd 2 PPL os entetells oa: posal wty3 & 9,99 
Cs Mall dh all Lgake csolizy Abell Sooeh With go Rhyl SIT ol oF gentl 
" jeus Pp doug sre Kolb, Ula ie all gal S SASS Lames APL ally yaa WS 
85 Po oling she KasloShy eget SS coh * Leh ppitl athe Kelanlly pti Read yale 
ia pie “al BAO pling KASS gist plyRll 4M (Poy aha phe teal, she) Gb oF 
Fyn sands a elas! heal fiolya AMET IAD Bo Conral lac! Lend oa UID cgoud cg ol Grol, 

ay ale (18) GF asl 21) plea added by the editor. 

295 RUS b> eS Uy 9% Ole au le hee 2 ee 

SS 9% ole Lies Abell RSL Reaalall 495 ola. Pi ot » | 

ote PN bl shphy Pla By LSI SY aes ee ay Lai re oe ae 
J 25 oil AMG PlecHlatad oeebuledte pole poe 

Kul sly sadlge Bye Hype Oy Kal eadist one &e ke be 98 et 
had) calad vgs iP epthe Te oP Sl oS SKenll sl uate on of i 

Po exatall Pp sLigh Le Bhally salySt 8 Soa oe ett 9gh C2p< ‘sal iy ey ole oto 4 

ale lS te LYON oe Uo} Gb, JULI, ogi! b> pul . te ail 3 os oo a 
Yost bb gd Wel, ey ig yal & det aie while ies, seo ees sigh os 4 i | 

ced ow Mad UBM BI jaan Gigs? ally nponitiy Sha b dal Utlenl Jey Leia niall sl, A : 
ac lall Whey meh ASS & Sesh she wails) Whey Aall ne 8 yt he orien 5 a ie 

18) Udlgasl 

ae a at | ao Dae ‘Sag a taal ~ se a ae les tae Slaly Relew lal 
uae Quy uy calls aie ayall xs US babi Sipe Ys Pers ee 
| | at ce to Gp SSS cnee Mies itl gpl Race a) nin (jit Nad ed un ot ale 
| : oF i, Slaais fore 3 cerrces esthll jt Shel on WS 3 be ms Wt 8 ke Jy Wake 
ee slaw, idm ol) Aye} on jody play aelae oie Gf dlatle GI wt & Jods 
sya acid Leal nye pall LX arnt ell Set oy so Lglatonts 9,5 el ps? Be by pid ale oye ho 
as acne AD ue Lagd Sls ub Lalas BAL cg (yo died Bays eles 
ls we allt i, de aaa) adap shtl dels ef UIs eyed Uh USL platy ttas ene S |e 
judd KilylawS! WY Qe ad, af ts end acs’ aye Rawes amy: el} ing Grdill plate pal 
wore shins SIN pall & pall 8 orley Lem bb le he sith crents piel cp Biljbou’S} wheat 
is ods lath quiats jist Ay clb3l ag thi Ay mag dW Ody of Dele ob Uv aSyll 
ancl Gel8 Sigg malas cy LpSeany, cyrtrnd) dacs lis wh & ae BUS JB Ub, anitale be ds ee a 
Poco neil hay ad Le (glass Uglte ye Yar > 85,8 ple cpr mad Le ga IS Ke, ita '0 
cel Ul ays Shs ms Uy east as,o 8 GLbot Jo sel all exit al Slascly lpia Que pled 
ve Al nat cgay a hal Kagb g® plan GB ceew dap Teale vysvs Igiay bly ly Sy 
eos CECE RE Bap ole 
et un ASE eye Ally eS! ceed or Uma! Jake 943 cyistl Uaby © yh be ssal ore of ae 
& amd vee ey wr bey nll & palols halt crits? Luagl wade Ret wad tall Kady ae haa cy 1 as in 

KRKT ay mile — thew Baws Lo 5 Sy me Ryduosd gals pail} Joi! ols tem coll sal} Lal 

5) 3,34? 

mens 

“Chapter 12. a asa es 4 ie saath & Pe 

babe ena ds ih 5a fon - lake de a s na 

he oko Kath ae) hid saad 3 BP let o seth oor 
olAd Slows ty ay he OS bled ot & Radon’ coe Gf wie Blast » 

Nomi sumiil ama KYO pyhyyd wo zalt a mt ies he K} Hee endl 
os, LD al setdy ROI B aces je ural ied (Gatel tele we or Lat 
potaall ye olawdll ast yytall 3S 1G, Saar gh * Kina g or a4 sagike us be ae 
coh pede ee} dlls Spe all dots ge paslivis lees JM Shand bill ds ds Sas uly 
BylBy esl Ui et ate yet neil Partie & MS GS epee rele gladly ska te 

J vs Snags Sty Dagoly dusyjrs dead, 2 bs ran xalal ines 3 

ght By AL gla nis de Py olf ale ot Oot, aot, & plas iadush ‘es ee) 
cot det OG gs Ta S pM ela) Ow Broly My Chien vou hittee R - 

Z Sse 236 Ley gow Saas” ‘a seu ashe sh Si gy ells os he 

8) ss 15) Lacuna, 

bs AGG aol, mp oa ola ‘phi tl oF be, “Chapter 11. 

i a a a 3b exited west Gas sy wont ai Schel pd he Awad Ouse Ty 

ae a pe! dl lat oad Seip Bl piv Uy nalia & Rw Qs plucSt 2th 
ee) RET kw he edlls abs CoS, 5. ene Ds 
“as ad ba 2 rove Se gittd BSS samai 3 I dal vb ola eabey tacitly Load 0 
Metts asus xall DAG KO al Jone peru iely S nlbgaay) lay dest, 

hikeadt cones ose ul Ls os eds Gass elise ny SS ye Kadbigal fon i pape) al 
Bien. 

t iba Hype Kady gye ake 55 mi xg LU ale V be che gialld oy) sya Vn Ade gay Lid pling ls KyiLony gl 
Rylwlly pid 9 xOS} who Jo} evritsrrad at pls id diy Jena, Did ama un slabs 

‘ 

sain ee a wrk Jo! wevnaied | Sly pOwal! Babddl Bad oly Masel. oS At worlost ot 
fatga Ke Uo ditt Gece Jy RAIN amily el ete ce gl 

y Silas aol oe Kadld Load isl, 38 wasoke op SUS cd Aiwdl dt les ered tach 

ppmanmerr lon 

Salll wears Tasty dar SSS Crs @ishall SOLS ake suas IS ye Uopele Chapter 12, 

By alin hoa ed ce bled aN MM yaad WS oy pple Gaal Ub lal spmit dy 

oO SB yore ce pgeans ASL matey lead CIS arpaleriy samt Teese cb sat eye dS fo 
nipalaiy JASN, ball aoey he Kisliy apilee & Spats exe DUS coy iby tie Jed BS pam 
. alk She eg Se usa doe VF crest) ply maples A pha 6) at cy Aaledad cubs 
; cshowlll felakts satlad Afodt SS ED pS} xkedd Pret de ots eve ws 5 Sits x Ubalis cy) x8 sad 
| cebdindty coletlly cppamatly Arsh craPsitbe cerpsisitty Badly sabe Sys cymes 

Read niga So Uumty UES ast ols Fgh Getyil Lat Untsy guluall Ge sila te 
ret tpl Guill blak of Bol; schist, hill Foye pyym sed leh safle aid 

- Shi oe in au We a a eG: 

rays Holly Rida! (Fabs op uot GUS QT Likeaily Xepall 9} aun lols? (ie, i 
pts XL, pgdles xehb § b Pye LWdte gypdads sguall g dds Qe rey! Peace .) le : | 
sLewly pig dearay dy S} Ladd onoy meds pS cyglamnn oadill g sadlgadl wail My aenl wow 
Legbial AOS caling dhe cola co Fete dydt xladh yuo 2 SI Sulla ? ity ws it 4 
DISS Wyss ogiig! Bt Lelinad LAS op Gpal ewe US, volpall By diay o cca Leaps ld 
celaed ce de athe Gaby atl lis ce Reh ST ULI B Sydly egg dls! ees) & ay vl Ped 
B Sag’) GB wold lalinol * yoda So clit x_fSt nd aad o al coat BT 
be SOT aS sayy BU! OF Qe obeetall pbiel lb Tot 16 13) AU ah eu 
Uptele Sip dg paling KSLAL xagitlT SLD rtylaadl ong Lend alla PR bil > oe) ' 
SI AK itady Elma cn eS 9y Byrcbatll ore Undated gles & cy bl es ee $ 

6) A blank in the ms. 18) (es) 2 

8* 

. NS ws ty oe at 4 a we) exe 8s ui Tyee gee Chapter 11. 
, aM obaa tas oe) ee Je AP> ol tends a or, Del Kay! GIDE cathe ly | 
lai) ok toys dialer ly meg smdlst water Llp dnt Paty Badd ene! 
wig tptia aegll g SY saadll Get Iba cadis’ UD sadlen (da! cael cya! B cyst sane 
i past BAP Kole Aity Cp ati bes dal po) cod gland! Gos de det Unt) auld duals Lily o 
© Byhia Lyaslaoh pole pLuo paste Uellady cidhisted coljLill Gmnalastly plas dh tie 
AM os cus Lead yates Ay Opt Ay Lege giliall bile Wb Lge & CALE Lady Lilie’ 
Sb pRelS mamys ye aval} Jae gS woke memar gt Syl! Hebe or unls 
“a Srolsdy dual ppbaad & Liss Oh ples gt be: ie cS Lagabe oth gly Guadly XedLudl 
wo Seat Deandis volisoly KADLill & cB Myo ailay practi nasliay pane vyastiaity Ugly ouam Lmmediall Se 
is) Se Sigel b 25 lb Ue sks Kaye wane dlaad ol ey pas a AI Ze gall aa eds 
Cagis Maal A gh atlam & Loe aye SI sige AS oyle xihal KIO (5 ,S3! he antia do 
 nematay eth om Lac yh Blyth det ox yall al wy Gey CHAPS Auiglany 
“Rat, Sah aneeleo GOH: VP Leslandy Ebel Shey until 9981 adtpe G8 onlall oe a> 
MB v9yet Vache: ty imal, cy, Sl DME Jatsle SSeS toby Cell, auth to 
wrbladal SUS on ghll Ose ply aval oh KS MAS, Lad Gf glie pio ub 558 
Ma ype LRA ANS (gaa Ch amnadd cortgdl janet Gh det eye Shahid Ca Se ay seal ee, ce 9? 
 aesity magh Lad dis coe ge Utul elaty abe cially xis Hy OB ay pal gf ll GF 
Lh Ba GB on a Kdmy prs Kab at A erin Sela xt 8l pywell Kably apadl exrigll 
2p ill Hb sales Bypialy Guest cst Ke BBS ymedll Byyialy emile HA Moye Eyal fe 
ebatld GB egsrenis etandil om cll plbbe giles oH Erase yet) upbiar 018} 

20) 33,3 

AES ol Bi ae %y “ wash 
ee sl ve a Liss Raul asi ae un © 

wie YS SPs el 2 88 sty hl on i he 

lait ea) 1S Vaal ys aa5l, eal Ue aoe gol Dae ie a alae jee 

Soit eons LoS Wy dy JIS and, hes Kuaiie AML Line siolee pio Ream Janis LIAS 

‘y 

Lpasiog 9% pie wadky yy ail sa} de kab sh omty Lan an walt 13 Snell, Me 

Avo Ny 

erly xtlasl, agro ors’ ob ELE ull os om ito Uy apie he a a 

mW LAL acid! ngSh alte de Lull iobeill UX he avant thy et to 

Nya Amp) cpm Lye bli alam Ol ST ny Bq oy Grit unl a a a 

1 Umedisl gp ends aay Copamell XIE wins’ ddl Capt Bygacy nial, ne ently vs 
Larsen (lt saad’ paltry Ope white SS cnpale che cigll hhe go plioy wait ont 
PFS aobeill Cd See at PT mecll peitoy glans aly cmd gel, oot peli 

tit Leake yee che Khia Oly (piel lie (SSI Cakthe elon yh ers ie ae 

ered calee ts che gly aaat dt ¥ Sunes Sled) hol Glad Lackle . otis wae d Seb se a 

21) Slaw sa 

ges Cy we ait one obi bash kadas & ae Sete Langa ans es) wot 
ol one oss TihFRr peels o Ls Bhay oll Js i Sk si} gs soot 

Sh pall ds ua Le Rani Sloaily Lede eam bh Bs wadett Boh US ALAN oye email 

ay asad tie 3 02 le ol A A 8 chal Ul sal Bo Gane toate o « 0 

al ws Ra ule oe pl ah lll he taal fll cenlyiad LS pele Qetane SLO Ay 

foc 5M pall Joy Leale pila oh de edt on (Ard p08 9Py Akay heme, Addu ids 
as Katt ol! WSL DAS ye garda! alll av”, Spelt ea Jt! hy sel ae eal a Due td leaky JS 
weer) leko Loy spit Lila! Wty USS asad ty dkag Boyt Cals ne IRE hy SoSH walt 
a tee egy Etec cpt Rh Mlle Gym MSG) e Lash kal Bl eb cady pis J. 
BU, Uke Yo Shy clpgld Bord go Leake RADI ly Cad Bestel! Gt oe cud dl debs 
ee vldiinay odd Ke Gele cst plow Kee Crm Leave iy Ralee Pris tail Migray cohol 
ccabegu ely par KSjk2 pludall & cia GST 4% Glad jfaddte ope ABN ard duo cp yy K=VLuI 
Uals xmicrya & colitga pad scoring CRA vyqaall whe cetondy gncles aide Bye 92 oh 
ah cretion Byawnt LE guess HE by Gy tt AS Eye BSA eagles fll doe all InJ8 AE ply Xe fo 
i Cle $3 oF Haiisy ola, Dyk (crewed tht paiva Rowe phy Shae ocr Raval) Cpe RAMS 
Bygall Gy) se UE aad cyst le Khaw he yet ple he 8 exghin GUS Uy 

(ad Leno! cyte Kile Kalas} ea) Cos ib ded ri) 2 id Cy? es) wis jas Klee h 

ott 5S Lay) gh Lydd ytd plas cos! hele *Lyilady aibe cel WIS he cy Hodis LP ast aia} Biol 

BFR ae’ ld FON 1S athe Gb ust shal ayo BAR ash al ae Chey ft 

Lagi spall by Rigi LGW Kast Sy Lagan RT By he gf APS Sore KyiLAIh by Lew gral 

19) Gylasy 20) caval here and throughout the book instead of val 4H x \gecomld 

Chapter 11. 

etd J Oye de leakiy 2 illo, Det had 4 
wai ue Git As Gp a jo Reale § Loa Oi) wall’ 

places * ell, LAS ‘’ aaa i Js He ve 

Shaaxs Lande behot x ie Ladd) sited ye whe baad 3 xaas} ok avi wit A 
S) un ly cone i 

Care 

ps3 wralasl sy Bache waa, Lo Mays ASB ad 

cyte hyd Ugvansy Liknoy Lad dul ey! Caled Lqwany peo yh S24 , oF eo 4 
59 al KS IS cont th yal Gb Lag lncoly Cyl aoe cay sels RGM om 
ATLAS ee Iueds RA pmiard Leal GW 3} ane Lian dle! wins f 

wan te Bs Bid (Goede nalid Auer cp Jy sl, 3 Syealth Mt ba? bg handy nee: 

Unlidl GolsF Jide Qe Uy) Yast 156 hie slike Y Bo wl SiS unals on ony wa 

4) Som— RAILS & 9) trf,5b IL) Leake 

Ww whee Us a wel al tual Chapter 11. | 
1 igual als oe vols etsy ° Aes ess! bity va oh he : 
a path io “ab ely eet ee we vets S38 wyilysy Rr ans Oe A 
: cs oe nas nnd 25 om syed gpull de pes ue ot it ing J ols J 

? ale hoes ey Sy ey sable wigs whe wSylll WE wt “dK bial 0 

ae om Byes! uss “ oe Juste Bes) ae heals es ae Gl eat ad a alt 

: i oF Se haan sal cal! is wn wlegll Lgcagale, us lo #\s sloll es 

a ee un | als chal td Gey cal at a wtladd IAS é egidl al bls sake * Ags bo Kalk 

a da} sole ot ghia sib * eww Riou ysl (Gaius 4 ehyy polly Sas wb eile >! yards 
J ia St wRdgdh 9 Code be paral!) ws Cyd yell 05440 Eye Shea’ gles at Pot lave Se 

| Bes leit & Oy, ee Es whe WSL coe JE it met we RAAT Ere gan band ps8 

; ae st, Rent umes) it Bye d opal ad de’ Be yb Les grsmilly Boleal 

i dlawSls, clei cn RUDE be er Kity Kays Cow ab nalol aXybed at fy bo hw Ses 

Just Lgahe BBL cyamcm Belial! & God Gt ast JE usals gh de Se Call creed A 
& erbiam id Litt Uh RU SE Wynd ow de chia SUSE ARK Uy aie aides ppee Uozitll 0 

warhol une ras} ermal sl is) Bolaed! ope (gderade Laity lead be EAP vy paees, XASs 

pale AS Uh st OAL Sb ag a> cenit cd Gelb 3 xd on Ala} K yast SE ghia tol 

© ARUN SST pe Change GSI MIT S, 2% 255 Cre Bell HAO Grad CAS op asl Ot Bh ealae 

: Meas US AG aS HS cenaal SE rst JE play Re eel ni ST ley lst (SG,%, Ju 
tlh cre SBE pelt REPU adc LIM oye AS epay Geo al Ail Ogans? a ST yt ud OS AALlN JE te 

coms! Lith De Lam cred be LES, bty crams Holasdt he Iuttly Lyiadt ye uezel (ps Rae cys Lily ob 

8) Aig! 9) Sw 

Chapter 1 0. ra Io, 

Stale Mases Sl! ge me ade a) 2us 
enh “iss hte “SLA aa ad a A gh saab wad 

Mes il be eh oo} tale yo Oa opel oye net Be 
Jd plies eA ALAN oe tea SB ako el nt Yet 

eneten 

Le Woo sag Nytide &) adalat Jy 

eril GB logtids egh by ahs. Ay dedtole 15h vals o xe 

ee 

as Solas ewe. & ls a * hiss lads Rowe liiy) erite ssid 

WRAP Sooke KAilalt 73 csybaadll, Opeallf Klaally anni e oo uy a 39 op 

ep Cody slat gvikad Ryall} Rea Kao! xake all we oa By yo ere! od Jat wks le te nee ie 

SUA; coecky ype ole Ag jaally Git tay del sie nab aa Be 

lait oye Relindd OLS palo pine obeat he weelalt et Ra be, tole & a deri | 

AN cogil (gM Gayhill (3 eteglans UT Kade colt Kegselt Xie 2al & Bie ssn, ada oe 

Lewy wiley Lenelyry Leslemd crramly yale soliim ile csastll Wy Ge el So o a 
wherhe synced went lelatass ww ISS os 3 Leb cn ural ae Lea a Heine ate 

B) Spat ss 11) rel Sic. On the margin ew ie Saws 

2 Ms a ey 7 tek ape oy, sya west is = sya eth 9? Chapter 10. 

: pe ot oe 2 esi pis | Wo Jess Last LS lee hed Uy cgiell al on est Gee Ys 
| gate att sais Lesa be Sagal dusa d sae xeldt wenndy cylo Bolanlly ¢ pill Ob & 

; Ss sist} my wy eyes al tot ed Lemke we iat shat aS Ore pes: 

S 

ie os mill § ot lady cutiaht pl deg colts! Jost ey i celal gel asc 
Prins brie gst 99 LoS Korg Kitt SY cys & PT rhe em Laas ublined KIS et le iG, 
(Stim coset ead Abe 9S ool de bygd ISI Syst) MASH she BAA abe Un BU 
oo nice ee 3 one he ae eS, oe ws! Pood sb Lait osu Feeney Ay 

aur sain le sale O93 Gans eed AL tel Goje all MIS, Gtk a MW Lyme Qarily 

> 

on amas nals tS, salud un s pata ws pil na us anon Shams apa) pss teat prayer) pl ps} 

3 elas gb ee yee edie, tphine RXelo enlsus a Kragll (yad,a Whos! 
Ke rte all gtny Lend RT de Regs Ke GGL, OFF GY AS, SLES, eyysth fo 
Leorly Wyse adi, Regh cubed! lged Kinder GS Oli thy GI eee S dy bet vel, 
Kile on wad Hib Gly Las) oye, ibe bast de 5 Ot S Lee SS am Mandl oye 
sini cyil AS LS, cqplyy Quolall Whe aah Giot, Ball ile Lamlid AM japan 
de gy Laie Qeysd RAO g gill GAP LS prt! ge US on DES thels grea 
clot Dl wygirgtia sams 8 SM ngeity Kael cn BOL SLES arte Gd Sole glee f 

pest coh BdS! cl Lede Ging he Lecuol> & Gyn! CS po Bod! N56 JSF BAoly Slab de 

1) hb; 17) rma 

pe Bol Raul! yoga Bey pe ait fon io er) ne 

ME Eye ph JSF Ymaaledll eioly Qe crete ait xSLakt Ke, 3 5s 3 cost a vei wh ot Ae 
shes powlag ST OT poets drone Sra! ale Mla bial six} Lemicy, 3 Nod ae. of alt i : 
mst ASI pmacm leg erly SI olynall he shea on poland kts Lely, Hels 

Kes poy Lad Lu 1A cp Kyla wdlall g ies JB ag 31 ne xls te ay 

Blas Vydenad Roeycktil) Krogdic eye we Ely Bach} Feared gik veenpinde Ligh! 

Lait asad * Speed well Leash J Kaden Lt whadll eps prbl lt sus, IU ge Se 

Wd, chery dlie st 1 Sima lydasciale waslalt As A oy cern 2a, . 

aie des Pa) Sho py thes 6 gales xgS3I ciples pads 3 asl gai fon es Cane ata 

(hei \ 

Bal ssl sob dat be oye Uae et ile ent gle ahast tas 

a ola oe Laie Le ol ce ee pas ew > kaha at Regs) ig aoe doles 

i xeMall Sasha ae whe oo oles ane ie asiassl Shee pat ell grew 0 
Ge o be fe ast x glans Ghat karl 8 at sont ale aiyaal) Lisi 
oe 58 ie ae alt tole Gi fie rc ol WS toh! Go pt Jb Mills say de wed Ist 

a ae — ust of tae abe whe cae! Mab ol lo I sell Le HES} Wty allel Jo 

i ae) denis BAS Bey gull rage b plas Lol guded GUS he alt Leste py} leat Sey 

SY plakO By Ure Cod Gada RIL, (UDI Catlya GL arTh Alby plarstly Relewill be |e 
ll le yep ZB KIB IE NO wly Knily Uy Sb ib we dds 3 otal) Su,» 
wld, Dilly cel ea phic) xed) whe Jus oe ent Ca KB ge 
eu prathase oF Shealy pepinel oye chloytiany St oesrbly tylast ona Le diye 
dls, Sl all of sb ual Cage Lb Gesell csv sad Celt SUBS IAS op ust ie eh 
wpSel gubil ye Wis Kye wets MT, ea cheb ad clild, Juill dia te 
ina a cnn SUH cobdiglalt oP Gye sl ee 99 cyaad Sydbict nib yotst Lily cal vhhe 
cobiilall Site GOMES Th wade cyyBhsssth By a led cre Laid pike, V le is'y RP sat 
come) Ge cnlas Jgd IAG dds 2 sath al cabar $3) Stl gh ciety 
or sad ve fous! pL? ¥ yalste dsb wn a 3 estat 3 Gal Kia cele 
Sb comii: HUlst Ty ham ae os sBLXtL, he a. i) ee yds a “ond 

= Chaya a. 

i es Listy tole & ead! wlanblt ets Ww an, 

One Ow 

ae lege 3 cyan Vows’ ie Skee oa sl * ae 

oe ‘oa cP witty oy led Comsst Lill, Claw outs Rao 

pro Wty ogish wll trot, ju Rad at $36 ale 4 Akad a tt falta ow bo 
vy ia 53 ev,9 PKs aia: KS i wis SSty. ea ol ce at oF - as to ‘ 

ih? cp de ae etd Ys BAS de racgpen) 3 Alas Leis sii cr Bele cas a 

38 pe us Ge luke! Gyiii, ot ptha oe Sia £1 al hue 3 Sof of} waka 

sol ioe cote lo bro Srl, Kenad 8 an es allas JSS add ei ol ay ee 

4) Lacuna. 16) ,Xisn 17) PMpkty 

+ 

iS APM 0 

ae Ce | mynd ee ott (A total any (si Lindi Ryall Lyne @ 

oe! Lebseo ah we 

oe onl op Se daa (atone Rabies Lemlo ane oe ee ud iv Tgise Loy 

~— 

ila 6 é b @ least soa th te in det und ail Ae ex Chapter 9. 

Bie 

a soytl Me. sl ws a at ase Gus oe ett 3 BUOY gle Re ply 

eidael) ot ty ere yen os pos he et bites wed ee coty dt Skt OS 
Ru es “bs ie onl ¢ edt ghacnh x23} ass cylel it ad ai aiid ile Gudlas cpr endl ST SS I 
obine Un inal US pegalexot pine cyyipan mgtobina, eel) Shai) Jolt XS) Guaki 
eb & ox Lig Unions ata BIAS cyosbisiy ¢ iletlly g sla) ce Uabglhion Colas 
sidings RK, A we oni Bias) pyle 3 aed weed Be bo» Relivo of eer baal! be 
e a Spd oe ts ahs os Bab ot KGS Kass SOY mh wei dds o uci Sols Sh Sty! 
: LoS, & yl slaaly sgh ree, wliilal} Kywen unt hha wry de hab oye srtio,t fo 
ial pla whl, onicttls Abi Lexis & pyedell Gbyly cyl nil Kidwy Domitly 
: ae hewdel abil jad Laie Wraly KS cule de lied, 3 ginal glyilly 
yatehe ae gh Mlntady lg) SS py! amillf plo SEAT IA Ye gf le Ke Ulan 
dS ego Leal! & ae, aoe cyypill SURI, RaasN) BL ay att Jpllay HL? I Glewilly 
crs atin Mb plast spill SH RBUS cygs Letagundy Gt Laas? go) Go ebd 30! 

wd, dadlyll Goh ole Grmdll REE cor Ledpoinay cyl esl wort eel cypame Po paw 

1) Gaal 

ae ueygamedh pbs} 53 be ee: coke at as ne cies i schon ) 

pursl Whos View beens! * ae (Oye emt . os! oe h) ht oa ae t, Uma) ue ay Rh + cypsledy § wile pe 

Dats Line. ot epi on sail Ye le de vlblolt é Logieg. dt, Keni Se out oe 
Rawls» ohAtt Rays we slat, land enw behind ra atid 53 Sho Bad ve sola ou all 

doy Jetty watt ue BARS ad urs ons i Un. beat wri et Hd oe | Sit ) oh 
oo OBS atte S on WP Las aa ohhe cnpabiatas ¢ kel ust c be june 

of a> WATLe Py LyXle ureles sl al Frydtes de Shiot ote fae Lainie ade 3 oe 
dt reall GST Eis old Rao padi & SB yeah Bye he sunsis res lhe (aie 
IY ond axl plall 4 ighd Anhing aia potty oy) Aeymy Ode umole Ws Kod ele o} 
BGUEN ney do Oa de upslialails Ge oy KUT pe isles J Sis wets Sigua 
crags ese & lbs Sling & Prlth & dF SAD Sltaly sll gy¥ xit be DS Cry past} 
Lely Gul se} die bOs G3 KES cyil cs SAll a mele Gngy sal b Matas ua ¥ l Late dai 3 to 
PIN GAA le cahag bce jak why sO sh ltall MS A Umtolige OGL be | 
GAIT nie pgtiiond Vo ABST Gull Lhe ogst ght ally ngs Onset astitiy nib ol olblt 3 _ 
Gath She Sud) Mage vabl ebyerrall relia ee Lins) 95 cnlill alsa (y/bll SG 
Shobha ye MA & Crai Cry gesvall cpa stl, ga a Lett wid Po 

WAP oth yyRialall ene Cou’ ey wrap epailo ss prey Sasle Vol mall gpaatd Wgly fe 

alt he plcig osha) ait RITE opis 8 ch etilh CLS at aes Cob OLB GLAS pindity Sta Likront 

13) Text in disorder. 

coli Slate & arte, s1a33! i Stine oie gis ake ss sei Dis kegalall Bt sline 

i Is » aSloal Ae aa pole eee bleed pe ue ae ont Lay, gett Alall pba! 
i Oo is obs by Poleat ae Us, Leds ss aes Lalas eu a Kanata ELST, Slmall © 

: ag pebaees WAS aah ents HS us Las ng Slad! wie dea BM qyllly gta 

hat Co pave Poy 4 Je 3s! (ast apidl bal IAPs pty purer) BH pye PAST whet Yo 

Pout tl pee é i a Pt yg Pd bel 

1 Ode x eas of om le Nas oely Post Lemay yam om eae UM cop cottly wll 
was % woul Neg 553s catind RE SN Lend Ky gt Xaloslle pal acy he UE Qwestll, ball |. 

bie ie Spall woe ¥ le meade Spiga MACUL Lee bite all sao Rib & pehisbl om 

ests ually LS welinl eng crear 1S UB nyglaet ge Mund ales ge put! galKin 

Un & ot oy le plas wed) KKM Sogw tpl west Limd Ady wat} Sj athe & 

el, sy Las ASS glad Riad Railyastl alin oye aad Ola 9? le Ua} sla le (gh am 
onmialie HS $3 ds, yall G> of acalb Ge oS cals pS) nha ey Alt opal f0 

grill oy (Ft Wa GS SUB vat SLE pce Cisags gl ogled Gt abs B abl WS S 

Unis Sglie tla Ugg! ade yd Mery REST gh 9M reall Reali, ate pods gill 

coe gigit de Leitjsh LIST Slow Sy nem Clg dd GY Qeablte Kamat pyfytegl Wd sey 

Lng Bad Udy oT Okt 8 Lad dt mabe SypAKt Wott ene Leads Unpdalle Psd jyacll 
tly Quel g® Lally dednns Gmtly aioe cose OS Kewl & ahs GaghKe BIS heimdt 9® IAM ct Shad te 

nil eee cglaed d cystlaiee Mee d rly all cng; & eryleie JA St oF bast Eg oy! 

11) &XSuby 

deely GUS By abel Ego dnd GUS Lb ns a ‘haut abi sls 1 a 8 ob oUt 

pal 35 Gmadyll ST Gly Glodund abi an ss — sled ae Ate if 

it syreolliiny cay Ons uP; agpintud jel coe Spee gee aN lee aa Ra ileal oat 
Agi sy MIS de , paist, Lidl a Ad be de rer aye Jb usall »? awy caplet wal to 
qt Nip LP cond Pell cote Leal Ub, ree as as yo Ga 4 
RESVU gye usa athens he cyadlt LX P eyetiye Lego cxh US Guay Uy gly ee BAS Leal : ‘ 

Land Sopeeyll pails Ve oye Minn Ma SS meded Gimahd gia RCSD mdb cS lll cetmes 

“ 

ilomly deagsl GI LAME Le Le joaadi Ub BU cast Bye By @Hre de ob PSK, lity Cae. 
XS spi Jg¥ CALAN Capi and Gly Khel, Rpilendall GLA Coe Leeda ones BSL Gye 

sy Slgwly eegho= say A,9 send baadh> eB} gill de md wpe La owl Rupees ope pon Bad Le Aye 

19) bawe, babs 

a SP edly Cao Kadsoty ial} Chapter 8. 

edly va) oe ook) Sl aah” 

ay nak é a vans oe le dau saa le is eel ens Leas sist 

oe aly, ia hoa, ae ee 3 %, uy Se 5 Se é on ale ectals 6 
Wb or $ eases cor Shae oe cM aka Sh meee 8 3S anally cytaasel St ait! 
gh 8 asl ally, sy} Slits Ee _Luatina a Linge ath op pgs one bw 
— Alall Bae ts) BS weniale jas Mb 18 GS US on ree Loci gal (Ciena 
eal 8 ds ol bed! ate Sus83) 1P Uy eee 58 @ gis Ys exes! 3 pos ly Waite nis ‘ 
etl REL: 2 nad sed KSLA capilogg!l Unliel eg yyendl ome bead pelt Las aad add dy te 
mab Gyblashll Saomd 3 Kededhll 96 entioys yh ME by Digll pgicliadcely Slat! Ryml 
oe oF Oy gSho cemgd db Ramp Rese ope Kew bdl) & GUS (oly Frio Vainio Lnth 
we pete Ral pd} we ches Ball (godly ddgll Rl’ wile up K mprowd do eric Sao 
Gt Cl) pps A. tia ings By metas esa elaiita IF leyes CTU 
eee bint nts yy A BRIN yh a Urpeal agshod ceeeng KML Coded one GLEwy 0 
claw glad hed chs wl S38 Lists We be UnlAll Bye ho As 4 
ae Phedh *Lgiaad & phon) Syyiay Ugie “ask ord iad & Unt Hy 8 ent ionl 
gp om J ier ise Pe sly 2 ner Bye de By SUF Uni aa Hye 
on unt Lend cl tails hia} Gall g Ribaily Soxt Gall & 3 xX) sald | Pp 
My ak capil ames sales? Shetty roll Rit who fJb gid a els} mh t 

2) Boly 17) ska, staal 

cal aii enka jos ell 

etl ie BI p> 
ry eb up 3! 

ait 

Chapter 8. weateuly (poms ulial S$ - em oe * 3 wl ‘cll x oy : 
Land alt Licmlaiony aigichss Y uhtlely o shod cope anditad by (gate de Wars oo o we a 

whawlaS} JB xia utilw Why & be XS BS, Lb o's} HP ae wy a} epeutl eae Poa nhas f 

BoM E qgailoaglh & WS Lplliod pas! JB Ueelily Waal glast ontint a ee 

Pha B Xadles cprailony gl Lpie pts Real gd Lyotit Oi atl 3 wityasde cena) bol 
Lgdeg elitrngy CmsrS Ty» phim ee : tgties wens pb 

iy AEs E43 ie LEY Ac! Kiln ILD aby en rites gs Komnansi> ste 

PLS wrgl>s3 yo a2 GAKP rs, slew rae oy hentea 3 tt toe poke Whe e 

oe grail) BSS ygiisty ata eget Lab pg hos tee 8 ts a a 
fe Caddell could 131 Sol elit! ow ds3) GAS Lek b gaudy Sy ies colatly Bat en 

9) Sura 2, 68. 1) cas 

6* 

ot) eho ial a id, 
| 3 eee lait tie $% slo 
a alat be oO Cony yy % ike 9 ec a Lyele FF ay gpo Oe WS 
as oe eli sya cia Les Ss wet sts di El fe Sis egbiive om sidaae 
eae ee lel) novi bid thai vy last é alite paid feu e J ris Kilt cps (gad be 0 
ae til Spall js + cre S cool oe at the Keslna pal Lao Jy Sas 

ae ly 

oe ne until hb o f yoked Kepslalt el Leskot $36 ae de * dy 333 he wash! 

ul oe eae ly Legaitaa Le, a nsawn ae: one te OY Gt) ead East S36 

) Cee as and St tit ‘ee HrandY yogatads Slang Stony (gal eels (ps 
ty “oth ott Lge date Susi ge Et in) ssanuonait duadt Riblen: casas WS! Loly Xeash t6 

RADU! edu wile (ght rth ymbdgsal SBy akanadbey Jeomatl g yA) exe Got Cat cst 3 Usb 

cenit alate’ St ud KALA paty alo oll, molt, WY Gl call bs 

Ws spell, RAL jot Wblyad alist Lalita! Jus Has sabi pe ale (sll 

uel & si cw etl ab Raadb sylics't ay saldiced esd Badlell wal we Bad Ase Ay egic 
clovdl 9s its nF Lghol Risky Ss Ggladdb Elad3! GS Ne jlo Sly ola 3 SLAW fo 

dS o nad QS Kapibll 3 Odell aS, Ue oP xidee go? wlaill ual jlo Las 

Pura: Raps Bo Ft te 8955 garb SB Ale! & PIs die cease gay! Js 

: ph OS Dall b Leipinds plall & Lebo poyll Ruder 19) ly ie shed 

oe oeat & ailing Les called (30, wntgds ges ‘bet cable Be leyldé 
ubltty ENS! Lglpaadin Jaap Lgdly plat} leds BUN oP on Pls eemgailld LaSayny Ue 

rity Cindy UeKunbey Lebdbiterl,, call} spit Palney ceaeitlly upryll Le ols 

T) Aas, 17) Qpttl 

p pais “Chapter fe) oe 

a Pale Hy ALI last & itll oo 

; as : ) oe Sil eA ee eye Re all olay 3 . 

bes asia BAbgbicm Ab ya ys pall pee 

ype aso Y GUI Jb oP be gio 1s 
cSpail Uae GS sb mune lelll gg 3 wie é 
BUI, Meh gle Regal oye gyms RAL atl 
patel \o3 ge oe ald bie ea eet aes 

amioye & ches 3 ech 

in, ana digest e e vast all A 

1) Sara 18,83. 7) Wie 

ha Syn ay tote _ ul a & a poll g ani B cag a 
Shut irs agin ayy oe eee oe go os ae’ Baad he Bdle ee a 
ae dus vost wha oF Jauly whos KAS ad lel} She adds sabia 
: em » cl ett yl Me Ore cil oll uy Lessee indldlh geil! oars 42 had 
“gana Slut Gold} a, d eloe Gerd Ged REI Oh clack J) Me Gniill o 
Ble Sue esl) Oo) deh os masetl JS jueast ellasst Me cpl ojeXs 3 DSS SOS 8 
eo) ee Ladys pte aes eae Jim iy Legis om by loreal ie ey cols as 
ae Rye K5,Ng0 pod ol sh hha dds gl dt ae lead kes fda Bolt Sissies 
als Udo pas Udy Lt tp ath RSL GS eo Kad Comaly LS pty F Leilyeo Odie 
KobsNy Ba S Gyars Pe SM and colina dail clad! omy coe MEAS land oy MI SUE 1 
Uy equal SHasT ase UBT SS pyyKes phaall SU cli Kemeabll gall Ulaasl JI 
Sake) (aad ayelivay awe ond oyna? alyd pA Le EL Agdy she Joly Wu g 
Say BY cphilly SEAN oLagtadd clash dled hort woh gd RAIS: ope AILS 
ae Tae Bll ela ye Nass “3 healt cotole do ab 3 Whigial os WodSt to 
cae} ake Q) SUBST he 08 yeh hattve pat and dilitiy SLi oye (Gils KXdiedS 
whee che KIL KL pao Rect Bg plac dh Gb Goll ey BEY oI) ares 
SiSU> Lighe wrdyy Alb mean oye Mey d Ke ori Kabel Ny IID ce ai lth amen S 
Ligle Va.05 grad bd dbo writ) gp GMS hag Prot oy Ue daub Ipwles Sibgaall oe 
cre wer Pdo FAdye ot walagld esa Xd Bah wndalad ans ced yd evan — te 

a) Udo Gh QLad al Sod G Nglby ,9 AB ABT [Sly ARS poy all eral GyKy Bld he ads 

sti Ile Ha Ua A be 

Bb o} last aad Dado dl se ste dats 
whiall Bole 6% cod dst pou Shon 
Lagahl 87 eyyXa gt dob eS anil 3 esis 
Solaeds eam Udy BoLemtt I aad id 
Kade Bases Wires Sphually qual) 

CPsAby Semill cye gasll ela ee epee alls 

pha SAH lh dln Yt Oe 
pil SIS gh 9 ale fot Lad ate J 
aghery dye Comike SDV rales oped Ul 

i 

nee Daioh 

k i fe ae Be ye 

oF 

is - ee tal & a la Tey ui d ola Pi ay Gb ba One hes wt oar pubes . 
oy Mae i a) Be coal Sis axes a eet & 3 ey Js a Ce bd esl Gade ce ea 

” tel bells at Iyorsel Jes welin, Spotl ibe bide u di BH amad Ket fe 

: ae 4 om aa. waz shay an ata oy al ean ce (8 wall bi 

3 oe ane Fob pay: oa xialed Le nae Pe ee beled Kis Ueyinz Sal | 
i . ic ya os tet Kole de jay, ok he; & esis Melo sym SA fs 
. Coa 4 ia oe ons Bho viel aes Koes lal cp Lins B dad OS. corns to : 
a obo al Segall pe Ue cst ne glad ol ita aad hay Ssh 4s 

be as sab aihy of aid tage ales PE ee as ea a 

plain ae spat iyi KH By Sts call Soll & apa tke le oN i 

ls ba eo gla, ¥ ost ca} wel ¢ cyt HE sui Loy Jasin shins oe My 

asa aby ed 

i | iss a Cae? sh de eee. vod 

cual wey eye MS) Cad ly olate 

Mt Lill cuatedy Shel 3 ait iyasiant Ut 

2) bes Bl Aiad Wels 

*yoled he peie Xe ee Dob, erty alas 

ahi 

id Didier JB Ob, ceke 1S Yost pais ene 

GST ih RS, ye pel Ate Ga, BAS 9 

wall ie bb ele ash Hise saa 1st 

Ss is shi sia an a S alt abla a aes bani anid ashes 
tr lel ate ss i, he Pa an Laianll das 2 uae uhes Cony RKSMUL daldng O 

by dal rss cht de oo dell de 3 S Jo5t SAL gs sea Spill SishS Oe Rykably 
| 7 sarily Jess Aly, pe eye BB Goyhtall Sho ne el spi er be Serle 
: a eel oF shai Bal Yh Aad Ouest dase Satlall Spell 29> SyypakW Joadt jLoaly 
: : plist, oh ontends 6st sly & ol Gea 3 Ge Bet Slam ye Utladl Gad on ghetal 
tien xellatiby, ot Kea owe gralle gao cantly cand slully gi gl Lage! GI le aie 
: 2s dels at ae mats pone ition slit J slyost fe ste ee Shia he mat 
Ay weld Ode cep YOIS! Sig Rar Lind’ WLS by cieastl Bromyll MY Galt, Uodid! ebb 
RL AUR gd vance het! Ah <lGAM Ue: at xt oe cg Meeeal ake als. eal oe 
On NE or Age UlMedH cge lS 1d, guy Med Nga GSS yeast Sball clpall yi 
ce Ctatdh Abell & ehedoe YB ST) GF Leash asd hol Stee GR debt cap bo Gy! aabed fo 
casts get cic 3 haath whe phos he yAiig WP ale Sot MS USS) oluail AEC ey 
| u a gy odd 3 Surat} Leie Joie Bail 8.58) Mads ob oom 5d GAN IAP Jed, Laghioat, 
who Lk fa ESA OLS oye wicy Leia bo Matas Lally seme WM ogg 9 eit, colt 
: | ely cl . Lily rstoll wedbill & Ll oj Ladle BSA!) Glass! 2 Lil Sighlall lest 9 
Leyte al 2 slvaléll i -aaally CRIS Kisoy Regalo Lal sad Ao Lead Cpiidll Oagaly RMoLAlh Bramall fe 

bis % Geet 4 erhXs By jis Bat &: tke alee d LY ka>|, Rot eo All BAS Aa Alprols eva 
* 

eee aah onal witdely uls sast hiss! LS 

85Vplt xe Jy eles dhs oleh (Drool xcegl RLS re) ‘s 

19 OS eles ep oleh GLUT, axa, 

a 

Soroglly, ely) 15H eygakeds cya Rll ali) Sas! 

8) asa 

a : Boonie ibe sed nee iat lal oat ae det ra Bes sy sae Chaar 1. 

: ee Les lay. usis ee oy chosen ype i! Us SKA! a sh iw oye 
ee ae a! enti leis ential gyal cb eLailly pk Rm cn ladle, Kopel 
ails x ad soll en oe ees Koel! Rigdio de ee hoy tt 4? sds Va 

ea po ofl A van a Helden gd 558 ohal hs Sy fairly ole us chtglebh *Loaks, o 
" dandy JEAN ory ana so, elitiod poe a sau aa 21, \ alt of ee a MRI Le pat 
a he Moka as weld Hall Hho Ge cry Shar ee ae 8 ates Aly: Ue 
Wi on nek ue re adbaea ») Su pst fis ea phadsl Rrdlad de saxert gues Radrad 
7 wis cokes GE sig cn crea on eS ye Ae GS Orel Aalld on cgeesll Kydes 

gilt Hak O59 Bye Sun Bsn ee Ay Glen beets yet (e's 
HBS Xa! de onal om cell Unledly pont f oe om Cadell Gal dty CT ST Ue pyRacttl 
een voli oh shag Colblanl! clelait cyalitly pgaellos ehivgy stl Eye gtlamdly aklo 
eee at or mid XS 8) plain SI Jroy Is! a & Ryall wt lat lhe jte Ye 
Par ses 5 ak hadiiy ended! ber (gs wists 5 wad Menke cops Y Redd Glos, al 

mie pated LIS he AS 13R ight cell ccsybaall Quslil adie pps dens Yo cyigSilly case to 
Sonali Klaas sat Jali Khon Leal slaiiSh Rina LOY! cadlye S cuphlall JI ss 
waisll Gyn we hse 3h YW tly codt oletje selst opast Ye ols jot’ xailidl 
cone PITS Saal tly glegh ns cols terse Uys xbla Ty jeadill ols iy; sail 
olally ial sts Lande onal wil g tl plat, ELewSt ye Ugad wylAstunly clei 

‘Lge pygemety Udall YolZall eleld S Qerily IB be tgs Wrote Lad yy hd ae dpdall te 

RagLAL) gion Copal Rese AST cnbymnll B sdbs I ole Lioat cypaveg Bay ReSladl cst GAS a Rowell 

“B) Laks, 

| Chapter 6. 

iilgloy sy | } a) ay piel Ms wh 3 
ais wal oI ee ies ca . 

RAST ei Rad ikaw SAS past Dene 

coi oe fo Ler ead) ta 
of om Si is GAM Rog Say RT 

ur Talidy pede weit 196 plot 3 ve 
(GE acy oak ly Sua 

hea 

ural AS Le Lye ede bles Jas 

MAS by ed 9? be Jel 3,53) Reuyfiss ue de i ae 

x 

: cysaid what he Soe le moe 

Chapter 7 

ue & ley Jeralt jlebl Chapter 6. 

mth ‘ en of cane a sles pleat l ie ssl vat ee Pec aa 
ohh Ss3h dota Geel on! Ws waa) eee une! ida FUG! eo ysHlh o 
cunlety msn ee wtS jis st as cane Ve Us Gan “4 oh st Say Glad oh Glows nanag 
cS) la oe os yal oe eal 8 ils wy) deal cali on posal AY Sle au yang dls 
a ua uss hay aides io,5 yyeine: ol Unlall Uady pull whey a i) Uae ops srr 
os ih ees pons wiry Juss eae Aa de csttty. os Si puna Ur Ail 4% 
NCE Growl Guna et Gundy Gaal ah abs UY loyalty ptt 1 
ae al Aol, J & pala) my iogissre pled cy! dl cod MRR Aggy ah clas d 

srt wf ast aa cy a aml v6 Ass! 8 cnasleadl ost Ae ' ws Abo et Fs at asks 

> Unseltes CHS QS gb gal alte liga clue! cabal MT pmait willl Gnas 5, 

é wietl al mars, ats ws Bot Untill oye, ald (Hoy! Ont yb lis b bla 
Oye re yess Gadd ease Gmhal ony Al tygyie Ue Lease antl bas oll to 

4 mv Unt oe Ute At eyes ULE OSU pntil a wry) AB Gybdll oleay lil 

vi ws de lash Und DO gS Wands $8 3 oF ysl cre og Lend de RA RUjlee oles 

Dems Lag! tank ee wuss Spi Yo SU LEDS weld Lge aes Rad lyst whe B stad sail 

| oe walk il sw Luvst gh! & Ebb, exh leteat all tenet spall ety 
: last ers ON ceamally saat (which & era Gpirlly SW ne J Gnd on dba All 

: : sell SY Volo FO) dt alt o Shy * lost, Badly GIN (ulin gid ale 

8) shy 10) Lacuna. 21) slr, 21) df) 

Chapter 6. 

uy Wicd aaficnl) nib (ds oh 2d, big | 

alg Basle 98 hale Sue ental Bgl all Rigilae 
adie de Mae spall em yh opel Gb 
hor oO Jy nell ge Reap Oey Lily) nal pa ell 3 O, x 
Sebalh oul of sii oe h 

Hou dda yl on ai pe) di 

ela ul wolas ded Qulsitl, Unilaidt iy Lyi ae a my ele 
Kec yn tae Ugighag 3 Reda pes) Y i ¥ st ba gy 
co! ore ets) UME de, Galyw Le Gas! ey oF Say G2 ok oh eee) & es : 
IAS) KASE yma Gyo gots caddl ginal a ie ies Kd oF ae vist ose i 
BT OS & coe ped Ome le eb sycts OG By oa, Eau @ s : a 
Spey oe gaat Gl 6 Wana LB got Masih 99 eit ten i! gd ait ) 
cpa & Leh S52 oh ples & Unie imaalal side} Last Mendy and dda oie 
fasts Comes Ugh LT See ee doll om tty Met 8 sii ool dat Migs yess te : 
ayumi SbLIT come Oe poliall em bel (gat 23, SS Uyald LE Ladly, com a 
cy aw Bs iil @ SiO iw aad ot cca os de ase > ay epee ois a ‘ 
At ily pale Ml 23} Jad ony ened! om aio ial Lil ail 3 bite : 
Jat BS Reine ds poll yd Lyslatil n [eats Vy wall ds Sil iz Pie . 
castes oh cobee oh call dla whee cas le tet ons bing! Lal? SOS ogy eld Salt te . 
Mel ge pbally ae cr seh janet DUS Gy aglerb a olitadly mie & yo, of Als he i. 

es. 

sat 3 ale lett dem wit eh 

sik ls a commer 
wae “abel Oat oe ol, i steal ah ell, veh namie hand oss %y asad | 

aN M “siyb sisi, Saly Gps Set a cant oo ne le as »} o 

ne 

oe 8 2 aa se 3 ed ually ali eee be ob ate oll, Kendell (olil} 

lst tae cba 4 ot Me A on se, fw om Lehadi iano LY 
ed pa 3 cones Syed, phen Je oily stil wan stasis 

A id ot ast wile $ Leal we b pbs code ott ue Hee mls Pra 
ee egos ally hays ores bee if lane ol Liew 3} Loo sh bad gh 3th. 

| Sil po, dt wer bil pel ebistly pilimly Peat 

ash alsa cry slitwdll ,b3h > lm» capes B pall sosiing roll! 

ahatiad has pote oddly lb nla coped ott csdlly Kelaall plot S 

colig ype Gl ad duanll baths oil, a BM cygatdy alle & lea 
cistent Bh mat LUST ably ayity SN yyiag Ailes Keay slantlly Slot Io 

vce) cgtaally er Seeeey Us bt aan Muss, etait Jueley Skisally 

1h eri dS) oye Sas) tho Gore Laity cebirdiw St saaae Pr gM eit 

ce Coils ipiland 3 columis LS gl} xlawlell Cosa cre tate Sled} Cw Pore 

epi pam Lyahe salle sid (oy 3 Glial oledlT ge spoil) obLb Les 
 llally, Wiha Lge Sebo ybacs claill § SSptly Reatall pam Qe Be fh 

whoo Auytell cye blast! le 3} alee cod Yo Reatall Sav he Ba hom 

cia ew 

Chapter 6. peigons xis! cy fy sf e/ol pete cig We. $ a So fase Sal 
jim Qe Aled had Blawlyy Jang gle AT RUS! ows ity “Aas a Lee ae 
OyS ob Laas cacuney pig 9% clas pos coh dis pia Aull al Pe 
Uisiley oS Hole coumtd and cys Godt Lowest Ul, ae Jet a bly’ wee Ly ( 
Sins Lied lta Maly yal Jey AWS ay Gull sl ol I 
BAS» pos Lagin Xomly be wile Dard Be Cammy Kay wae Bova Leslstad op dealt ae 
WrlK ci cans ST aS pig LF pall oh SM LI Sow oye polly Cell oye Boye” 
TS RAT yh MT rabid Yrolsusl & pot o8c5 (pL pat len cle Lats Py : 
cree el de ad bss Kalmah Cailye Ue MS Kealtl caite Uypol Un oyvs de 
Hs PAKS lee om Lusyes) Lely Glially Gigi Chet Gye SOLE jodie gail Ul lo 
clas, lL & dct kgm oo Leal! Ocilall, mille Jol & Qedite Liat a riled 

Lenalanly Ugilinay wlaiger OAS ey SKi lit Ker cp Po Celmill Kite gle ol df 
PS Le win Sy LA pyyiledy KySlad LE Chea cyte & dade Tet Lee Hid JK! Grortas 
SS cooper Gh Cezgrully Lgl cyplalty oth OPLett, dl htt GI J8 as 

Fis SB, pogale sasbly Colill (Selim Lorolty (Fe pate pA Dilan Oldest on oy, te 

4) 3 Ut eos Perhaps a lacuna between cs and Lal, 9) whe 

“chapter 

ces aia s Cay %, Le i ee Lens Ry et oe pel one db atl 
ey Hi See gal wiasdle Sa a 3 dally wa es is odd ob ge Bye Lgl 
pe i nce Js ile Agtldues nial Leal aus gh hey ess St Lgsliby gle o 

: i is Saat wladtt Site he ane exeatel ISI gall, By rKz Lyy5 lakd Lally, Kal 
est, Nat cot Uh. ald De asthe st sige ile sf abel oyisy muni 3 
 Lagab tats wt? 55 ley sLadds eles gale sled eygiseuy shila! Sylay mgd +6) cyymlirn 
Lend pemie 3) yh Guat & abst aya Sqbpee Sonstl syle Iy51d agit YS 
Lisi MS outer NAP B igs Cullen cygailigall GK XS, EL oper J, 
Laos) pia 3 Gwhal I USO cn pati nid cyl Fea Juss & FOS gst gdb GES Sg 
& cypia ht Sythe Gye LOI Ege yy slash oll oe LEM EggKy Livle |e 3s 
Les ceed DUS Csydy sLotll Eyry pid ybuall BK Gwitdy 058 Gael & Lemaild lym tt 
ABS EyySS IF cally Ball Rrra Leyrary ap Pyeng Amd ebay JLedstt Lio, 
Laan ST Ame elit all im ade fag Bo Aare om gH de Ul BF peat oo UeiKer 9 lo 
Aly os gil cot oF 3 fe Kipiasl! 3 YS b> Y HU, sesh aes e295 Lgilss 
& Udit GY ool! gly & Uebel b Sd5 ne Linked (wald OSS Qmditd cri 151 JS, 
& dipial Sgoliel Od Las tof, 1S Golilly Reams Sypralt ohO Gg mad yl ded & page 
wigs VyiKy arpinn yh coll pS Whe eral ee ty Fdsy Slesi3 IAP agalol quail 
Cwkiggs 8p Oendd BF pana cyl hed Unda athe UL FAS bell Rall 10S ylemill fe 

5D eygSS gh eemed Spree SALE yh dy RHEL GnBille hold eslymnilly pda} 

qrblee wpe dU is Voile eo ashe is Sy i 
dol BG) nailesst 15d ote site deo oe on bo “eal eos s 
pSlgr pple cod UAS0s MT cm BeLaglt pt Mpa sles o a, ; 
Hep Ww apts Ilr CAS Spills aldt he ty & ; sole aia “play 
ye MR MS REL BLT ye Wye is Gull as les eu bt nc oe : 
peplie apsopaned SUBN cso iBT Sl on unlabee aval or let seh 
who Sad SoH Ost S slinms’ le jm SAP dy Caeser Lis phe ee wast a 
S85 hs MN pgin gawlisll My sell yal Dede ett op ch dle he # oe 
Kani at alive 9,23) 3 Lily Coe Y Gupdald GI Ipoke Ld iba ¢ iat “hye pe é 
ent bile be & wail yo Fay le whe Hy UW Hea Gye 
Juki A Rigo nid Col SLB LES Sool Gynt By Gel dat 2 BT UpAill table coe 
Gye AS Laas JE Ab eats F Ugalde LST Gy deo Lg Koh, YRS ed GST eye Leidl 
bad Xigd) lars Igalag Dy pthall gm dp Leahy toatl Oni coe go) Riba! 
Lie whe shall Bye coll’ gly Bye chhe Gaim Lal Lally coped we Ll Leaten : 
Wy Wolo MS Lala ula! SI Yeysry ty saabl lgad Crroruly et ot Leille yer 4 Io 
Hes bbs sho S at Met te ow me adil Jide GC) dad Oss tcl, GLA S 
ytd yy lod ce slasiudly Cll thas Gl ane plo be ab o88 car & 
Lily alle fe slit) *al lop ate Coolest i cralaiil ain fl ba 3B oddly 
Sola) & putt jrtic Und Gada 05,51 GIT clopergll Gulted G Woyeyd sbLet 
or wher 131 cost Se eyght Vir Jotul! JE Ramlly Gysall b Kptll Syypaiy pail te 
wera bo coms SSE asus SE PASTE gh ples altel Gutsy eCecdl 9 (Tl, sgt! : 

3) egntnhs 4) 3.2 Sé missing. On the margin -b 18) &) Ley missing. On 
the margin 

4.* 

| 8 COA ORES Re 

Ha 

he ah %, veal on . Lo La % CG. wettaw Y KGS RHE BS Je Chapter B. 

as we oot gill eur ¢ 8 yan Wy Osage D opt pitt > ty) ese vodh wail gly 
© gD DY Lb 2 UB scab cytes CK cre OY mal Oe eae I enna dylye XS solani 

3 Phy cule ial MAIS INES ey! A dE Lead Ally yall Ease mie 0 
Gell ath pylen tin Chas Lead sil ail, Al (Glew Ala puddin 425 oS 

wraisiny Leis! cabs Od Lane oh Liat 4 pXd Kame o Sty ¥ ar AS rgall prs Lt SB» asked 

 ecedlaly YW elit xe wys ey FSI Gay Coma pda pl ans, Libs ule 
Rad Gta A poe & adye Uke wih TyS py ey) ey aoey A) Kewl cenqdl dhe oye AEs 
welb yi Xai jasll elo cye Se Nye Ge Plusb LAS Lecye Lyle pelle i Go |. 
Sybet spas elfe geval whe che GSI GUN We GT pail pel UB Kyeall Idd 
Uett UE yh perl By eal Gagead OS, KALE Oued Lit Alb Qgua st be 
cla pele’ ake he Gly ath (tial Je ab asl 39 LAA at, b OeteU 
BLP Ib Crops! Gms gr GLY Pyad LAST LI Opes AL, ile ont ye oj! le lig Sy 
SO Sal B Fast, yl bo a ee + 2M SL 8 ote Bede $0 
gall dys he vel Sede gh St called B cote She Yo axkeglae & add ASL, 
Led rX wri! Lea wrmwald WE xt wail sSLlt ee unbill ead ss FST padwwl J 
wolgmstl nartaity Ley caraneid Lele d sea Liat SLel ils hela} Lei) crib, Kole 
cnkony platy Leis uadis ld db Lend cobpmsll OF eri dal wad, 156 Lens 
CoH) pjlod Leaps Syed) GUS § edlenslt pyalectt Uys, Wyend corley Leal! fe 

Aas) 92 (Wlill Juait Liass Jy pith Kopala Bp Kad 21S) phat 6d Ld SW wal 

7) es 7) Mayo 15) 81,5 

Chapter 5. | wll as Cy ebsath Siialy ote 
jas ¥ tials Red ws ha dt Slain 8201 do 
Mast ee Stor Bly ShetD! Eye Legis Me é a eat BOL 
cept Gag Rabi SLas3t a 

or en oY ital 
Ie KAS, KAS) § wlelostt poles pep dala des eres: 

His Maul) a> os UI vo, Sas’ Waldly ntl) corades quale ise dane of a pall 9 
ip Ui9ds “sa gs cys bits Mase eemith bokeHY HN) spi om ‘Suh oad 

BSL Gye Wolitialy Dats F Lpalady LEIS Chpth Laisa pla 2 le gels pasa . 
LOBLe & lly Gngme? & Juasslly Wye & cial) prey Leila Lesbo ae 

ND ac 

BSE eral! M odoxtly Sloaitl, M85) ibty Slas 3} praia, bbJI. hetay, Lee wee 

xa as oka x33. ee 

Usitiy WS Ux aio (Byte WS sbedMy Os ye povesavael hol le Ode phe Bolen om fo. 

eure on Ca mer or yg) yf Linke (jaliny Sdoly stieis Saliably, Mindy Jat 

Be KOE yey gadul JB ad Pad wma oF Wo 3 els 

Vo Giga, Lew py Yo Sana meat phe Licga (gala) cleaidl eaiS gt orball oe le, Soa 
jas de Glasl d odes Ll, egaxe Yy Kelle ae ply Ml Gb ane gory J bbs owls | 
Syalt 3 ast eye Lolgie gh xy 3 TL, GLAS OF Hyaball co hed ‘ 
rey CALE LM Yy BOYy ge F Opmyt A Gadd Gh de cor daily cagll dd ete J 

aren ‘Lest gue pale or vase & yy! jet 
: Ugs ee en Saratally Foon xixutt a Bessy coils 
tla as db aly be wet Jae de subs pe lath Sai patil 

lint el otal a ot eae deal pune Lad dle Lghot cp hol, Ky 0 
ie a) bom iad Be oe ol ott wn Sais eb Ue piety Lees Casts 
ota - ives pe tal 8 tl Jee Side he aie Migs ad a mill Sh NAAT Cwtha 
call gait Zo a i paen Seds eyes yma Ob RS or uyeel, Lopal 13, 
on apt Uilual as gle ae hey apiece ob aesptl US M7 Klett on (Beda 
he shoudl ge Siti) alt le Sina nbd Sida Gt Ind’ 6 pphad Shh RL Lae sae 

"Be Led on Dlydh KALA Kegarge ol Foylyl & gece! 1G tel, Kiissy alle 

° 

yada AS milly idly cal dt & aly Uy wb Kerwy ony Ue» clay 
Lge elas le aL! Jaslt § wlll ods! 106 yglth Goat copw BUS S Sy Y 

sive de Loh eat pct CAGES Riglerg CAA Capi ce RLY lS apes 
& pats selo eo eaboctl Lilly Kell abd, Gabsdh oro cgpled eLs*3} fo 
Date (atlas Mit! lesen sot! Qe Sym & Usa ery SU STS sul 

ypy dea abt Xd ua v Pry (ssa! AS a2 phig bo Bib gion Ed axils i en 

LWsoey cle?! She. & & GRE! Oke coe tas! st ence K AS Shed Bi 

4s pe oegltilly unalaall lat sled WAST LUG wat Gris pilell g onli 
whe 3 wlstag 2 gh Hig! KLSUT ple grwlid) DUS Kiopgall Radle Cll, Sait uadll M, 
Kloet Gipllatl Band 2 ble SF 2 1S) Gata GI IE pgb Wetlee un Oar Ay Lee 

38 ae on 3 ie ae us a apt 4. 

Chapter 5. 

Chapter 4. oe dat ene a Us foto ul as a 

Lady. intact): da Repub a & Bilis pe Pie oe | ay Yo 
alt CAR orld Gea ee gt aot ole) GSS! Kee on toh, lest in By 0 
i Liye unsll colai¥l hedd Gaull 9@ fed taaetl, oamath Loli, Las leas : ae 
wet or poet 5% GAT unit Lo Lely SLA Llib sas wh hl on Jad Ce | : 
om Be egKell keel coe Lend le Gaga ball ty BLL Kopel po 3 le dest ay a 
Lpinlinag Kile iroby * Wypaitn clad elrsly cola} way & Untill oS 35, et | : 
& OSE Lyne le HPLAe le Godl dard boa weme lad Juaty Juay ks Beh an 
els pail ne Us gd cf 3b Ugly gu Loay ST dey Lely Wise) Malin git 
Baas) Ee yand Ke copie Olally solHt pac Lyna ural SF ROL end ob jist 
Ly Dales Lead yo corm Lael wiley Leale pbs alle xi) Site Ge Jedll 
de ob RTH ge pole bit pa mall ny J Byles, Ladiilt Lely slid coe egrmal el padl 
lee by (jap de KIS Ale ty uitle op AX cst Bisa Lagad & paly Hahdgsl ee 
Slyet AS UF EMA Gye qo ie Basil, Ligilers 8M wats ead Kg on | 
Be glalalh mas Lgleds Slell aol ssl} Oo obs crete & de We bd Los relat) & Pie 
semsedl satd oad sad cys shall gad) Ay adsy slattety aad pat ue glolalls souk} pout ad JL 
gee hel BOL aaa ayy BOLL gas CoAT Tooth Mae Blah who, hatha cO};3) Jueilt ie 
pst he cams eyaipdt Su aed ibe male ay Ob, ogeeb me or Mindvel (jadaall gue at 

cer F Giga Oe NS he ayby oft Lalit (SH 6,8 15h onal Gy) ag) SUS loll doar oye 

9) (Spgntiy 11) Upisluas 

oe ocr who ee ay He a se e pat Se batty abet ish Obst oF 

| eo Labs wal, Wy wlelel Gytiay eaipaill 29% clinnio Yowily, Kaduey 
: call use KEM Sqead vail, lly eblall JeeyTh tity UAE, HORE 

 Raalally, a gual out, oa Loach KEN nds @ eypptnty Rane whe cal py duall 
a tae x all as} My BS, AB Gelsely Kamal Sl pobially Rawat clgetly Salles 0 
a Rane} de! ey ee uslee SB MS, Lgnle Byiaite 3,leally XS KLE) puly RATT 
ea ea sully Balj tls wep Rx isa yds dail pyr talls 
jis BOUL Lesa (Blaiy det aw So GEL Sluis Gb ett 

by ol Cath Hyley and Seadh Seory day VW ate iad F esbyastl Gyre cm Wervell RAHM 

Y yy) Ril Chas J Ly, Rbl> Wt KEIGS BOLE eye Rd leg Lestdy Whole Jaally Gnititt coh Sones be 

reskid sgn Lede oP le ke ELEY py Sy silt 90 Codd a LS BURAAD HOLA TH UGS pls 
Leglzialy Lug lis gixal Liguiiive (a pad de LK 13h alll, GB og Le RENT 
5B knead) GK py laaiall -sLally jul una bead elell aang Lagu gt Satlaglh SI 

pond egg Wray uth Glad Vy naLaILS cn Lyz aiKend urtatalll grok Legis doy K cli 

cls) Bp Letag!! LS Jia BS LS Leste untill Eb oy SIM, pe dlly 10 

Ash yew Wy dng Solyintin ol ger Ale & Ragan least ep REAL 
da Ld Gite wath Ugahe Gmail gps Xigha) BOGE polisdl un RASS) NAAR Choy 
Kyquaa vlge gh LgitSls? Je kipaia be he b irmly (6% mnild Spa globally ols! 

yall “Bh 3S tags Asae chomdl Lphe roly KS cast Leslie de Heerr Tub! S 

Lead GSS ope Ul hiMy SOU) op ea iy Kall Kiabid) gla exbas 16 Fr. 

hails settle prt, Ul on Lead At on Lely tly (Sarl pllaedt os 

19) ile! 19) aia 

Chapter 3. 

Chapter 4 

Chapter 3. 

ie 

Py ded Slowed eos sad eae Uephay Kaa 
apmmig oil) 9P> suthy jo) Landy, Lodi rN oe et bene ¢ er 

Ly Sailanast Oye ioely dey pyadill oO» ad usp Semin ol a ca : 
milly Lyi caltiay JUlly Komadt colatadst yes sind le at es iy om nah seid 
gy} cribs Seomallly les Lowly eyglle Lage erislls al» ae lgie wis js» 

cridlinall pole uogeanl SB beta silly eeu} ot eye lay ov sd Ne 

SE LS Karns STA ey cme Cqiad cyte ott Raanll oss els ol 
Sule aS (GLAU wlrert lout Kise Kenw eggs KA SI Gh sai o tne 

RAWLS Jlbl of, F Salas B wmsadsd Shy rv ySt) ns Yall Roles we 3} a ee a : 
cals Leatin USS, WCRI cylite de entje [St all eet oy) dua Sbsle ae | 
urs: By al hike y ceil Lphtadd phe wld Cmiloroids gets Ag ge asl 
Lely whey AWW! Xo Eye geil LSKAI kind XBL nilerygo ot bs 
peed oh FARSU Ke cyt poll op mares wn aes Sos ridin) oy ySlS Le Jepiall Bo flaa jyay 
Saal yal! K cas aut cm ally ees pelalls cosh ple Goth eanlls colle 
ceria) LAST SS lly MU gilts yall cobglo, cm gow UM sult St petalt ee sSbt ly ny fo 
Sled Kaas polinll wanidy aad ost walels crgamy Yoydt dt palatly pyle, aa 
whadl Gt Ds, Glatt 9% ay) Oyrasl gl Ua jrolst Gl dai 2 toad a moll d 
Brel BBN ope LAS Core LL Lam Cant GI ist py bditl, GI GS aia gyi og dis 
geod! Qe gb dst gem Kamae Cwlestls Umeh lam cleactle Real, + SS che 
woo he lgipad sol) dco nay ydlh pl AIT pally nal a im 

Lgleomd A yas Kanade Succ KT Kadleasly cor ae pom eellll ate Uli a baal 

15) Lacuna ? 19) edt 

oo Jeu bl oe walt uy Laie eaclas,) Guow Leakey eili Chapter 3. 
 Leghont ju o sab CAS (gd WIS ba & iyo SL ass ea 
999 Oy Xie aay Lyi pydede 8, o! bates 3 os aoe 
2 dilly ally) ott Ldn dnslos, eet es ae cplly “Saal Lik 
| ey SLi, Olunill Lgro ne yy RAIL, eLlly east \giva XiLiuey Lily 
bed lewd we she ahs! ellgedd AT XML, Galt St pSlally SSL IAN AgM Gens! i 
QO Kels BOUL Late yylegll Ree coe YB laadh Gets Nh Kee eye a ittdy 
exe users Spastl cst aad Leigana wei8 doit cua Spill, yypcll, nal 
SS gh WSs pn Bh SAD 3 BE Yy 52 8 jail BUy BOSH Lyall 
anulall WWplity eco,d3 pate Gey b Lagaret Gnale aleall S soll Upiky, Rill) |. 
cme) dhe BOUT GI het ce cahaally hos Biy KebelS cp ablictitly KGS Lgigcwnty 
Se pall meant idl WL TH gyghe F jally Lede LLC Lat FASE yall 
Sa K GY rl we cdasteds de delbtndy Mle MS qllty Keel 
poli! 2 Mell 3 SUISSE coldeceplly abst coms Leatly cea al grea Updw Joslin 
gaint US sh Spee cave UayMy sUlly jist, gala slow meil, de Po Ramet fo 
wpa ell aN) aid nie etal St emsdh pe dad rtd be dt LS yee Yo 
wh ede & oh ole cl do GLEN! pL bot sy eS apy Qe Wymyll who ly 
GOUT Upberey Lee hb GoM wast Bd ool Phe cls slowlle guysly lily vo, 
eps lay sh Uyhalagy am St last elt doygall Lt Bs ih Ae 
dy AS SIS Uw LOd Gpllo tlh oS Gmatils Salt By Sa ell, madll 4% I 
pedir SoSlny Uyld tape police! who, clehtlas Yo Lys sdiss wbgbdt tow, 3 B least 

8) ep 4) Lgia Ly 36 

¥yliy Lut Uta whens Lae dal pa oh aa oe ob Ca abs a 
gyal) ald RAGLAN, 6 QR ype eh gle Gh ole “isi Ry Got Soh 5 
coats Op Gh alae pF Ole all Ihe 3 pth ile remy as Bio 

AS a pug me Case UL wlybly tcrty Listy walgily sl, ies | pat ee xe ue 
KESF OlmedY pyghal> pili’y chin shal Sy (gtit Vy £3 japell tal g nels ges a 

Kplinall mpwallf plait #yyo Vy ms Selo Jo Bybs iialay ogttey ¥ welll ¢ gis, 

Kheamlld op rKabl * ged Karmais! SLY cepa Lady Broly pein hy rol» aie we sepa 
Lovligh expo Luly USS Lotash 5Lill Hadlell CySUtt LID, Lge ow comme Cl Relat 
ose aghl opr GolySl, amie stl nic TS unlil Maca aver pth or wel RY sett 

jaall cyassletiy LLL S ygbds BLT G28 d of ur Ke ether Uberti ho 1 

Yy Khanaal) SgmUh ly OM, SLietly Rly cyt Leosit Sb ygfSL 
AA gS) mde U abd 8 OS gly etasldbes peele Find WS & GLA ge opis 
rely eect I BI Semel & pyyiPdha mtd ddly mks! odTt 90, ail abi Ips, By 
ig lat apart (sadist ie Lob Ry opal! GUTS Solis gedul 8 poss be ta he 

Ley 16 abers pgakiil ale alemy Leake gylyncth imal Lies) amid arm cyte Gite 
Sard syfdhe 39 be he Legacy atl, dul Gao tie dels JS ks alee Resins Beets 

UU & yb ate Sydle ally thes elyatt Me & Unley GS ele SoB sydil lay 

HS ads IAS Kew lall aw LS ISUT patie CML Lad) int Ler sell HS als 
Foye uniisl coping BE (FabUS LI sya ot cpp lies cnt bes <p IS exe gyre ad Fats 

hal quilts Upsets trast at Lede cygrt Yo Ogmell S Cth Led came hergll tinay t 

gato seam Ueber clo ms IL pled ais pill Wey asl hele Lely Lerhe nets 

1) I. Chron. 22, 9.10. 7) Scoles or csled or (ilks or poles CO tle 9) pbs 

ax 

Gt 

) alae obeist mi ee 8h at a iam le says ape de xyohe Yast Gi Chapter 3. 
oll be sigh pubes 4) bags ‘ol Syl Kapa & oldhal Isle € plant) aout 
Bet a ab i Iya Gyles 3 tgenall clad ad cn Durer ley Ragll & GI bres 
‘ ; wy) ie aad i) Wry SU Cyy eanall Gap Lob Wet de (glia je 
9s Geplisy oll Sed" ulal Cy SIs patel Be GE leer £9 ME Gall do 
” eu be * menue! MS aot! aa ee dSe load G! Gebel wel WLS 3 
hs Oui as o cribs SUN spas by eyyeeld lath dake Bs ah ON 
: RayeAll 5 St Vl Dyk Kell plac Kaygadl S coon RGU ar FRET Rolie Sob 
of oe JU he Was, el WS jy ploodtl pS bwably alld gygd be ¥ Bolus ei gbam 
cpl Aly * hs ceed gal ead FLAT RIN rad, 4% az yyalll GP Kaa WE op pads |e 
Jgi Ay plvodt volne & Cuaileall Gad de Lak cyt} ® cybndd yey! dem foil 
che MGds BO cohT Cry ctad pinoy Mar pine Boling all Gyyrany Sy Sait el ots 
Slain hy rst gt} GAA Ley ROU Le asta of Att wie dha amy 
Bpially ¥ys¥l md GARG, CyLiKy well Qe shelby Letryt clanh tet! ygall de 
cop ltedt ce Dealt atyy ly all Lyle Kral & cel, AT SP Lage cron F pw! oe te 
Libel GyySt Go Dee UM wks Gyall RA Ne bey Khagasll Glee cge (de WUpy 
det 3 op a Un Gbadlt phe be ple iy Apu Seblisth on Riad with Ue 
ith, Golaid NN are emse OM gee tly pple Khe ye cb 98 ott with 
& GAT GLb Nodads yh slot & sdyadls pte GSS gad sad MY np cen Jy male pally Gmail 
WAS BST go algdiy LIS pndsy tasty mast Bt PIS ail gall amid 35d Pty *slendl Pe 
Bw & OE SBS oneal Gy WO rey 1S Le csbaill emmy Fall gh nS add oye | 

5) Genesis 6, 4. 6) Hiob 1,65; 2,1. 7) Exodus 7, 1. 7) Psalm 82, 1. 
10) Kay. 20) Matthew 6, 9. 20) John 20,17. 21) Luke 22, 69. 

© Aydt sald de Gopadt Kee co ellay Ulbaly, jLawlty Slat at ay cose he Baht a 

sacle one ae é ae By # 
LS onal ee oe aa Velo dS thet oF Bs bikes & | 
Hla lead LS Rea yin Uy meget wy eit a 
npbandy dd beau Wee uait B Sait Kelie out ro ot | 
* WD pal cipal cowl S$ uA, pdt Late Saks oh ond ge : uv | 
a en KF alarst eens tht} calalt rsleab 3 ob J ie an ae 
ae) 3 me TS JB al Gs 9 SBA RU 2 i ay a | ee oa 

or ebe Whe Pcs sixth al esl ost coal ah a Spt bh om 
in ISS IS ayy igh See nat Ke eel tee om BO ale ye 

umepll Ble ALF Ay OL Kmd) bist Lyroms OT gy dee ’ “pal sa de 
WS) GNI cent Sy Mall gyd pdt Qt Lede Likay eXtAMe plat agai a ba 
Las Lendl S Kewpancsitt plan's he Keli pend cypaten essiboe’ of Oldest a co 
jNyrsolad Upshe pull IAP Sgmtgl igiiell Phel é Ines US 18 on wr SAS ade to 
Ustalle US pupe d WS, ASUS add GOA Le dt get, ‘AGH gee O) pa i 
ABS AM GY TS Glandt Gonna Lead yh Cnmarabiiad ooh S im Ail gh gl elit és é 
cost OE all 3) Sale ate ST pipe dy qed olde RMN om Mile alee GY ‘ 
CuSad real IAP My Lhe ward cyt cosy Ulomit wrod cyl one cast me wal rae : 
alles hid Lyne cyst Maly RA my giomniy GY ew OW db Got 4 BEIT o» ak 
Let coo all Galatea Grey Gipall RAG Wb isl ISI LB ptt ogee is 

3) bijiw 5) Wo 6) pala} 12) Lgamait, 18) el is wanting in SPC. 
20) Lobty 

i v5 bn Aha go FD 
at orl uA Ke or nthe 38 ‘yah Vy Meh BW ae Go Gb 3 old 
a tt a es oo ‘ii ” ee om Lal Was. es nab Ait LeSlaec’d toad Ly dt shel 

cae b aig ® Kbps Js NAS, 6 tats So} rebel 99 Gal GG Jab SUSW wdymmyd o 
gh PS LD RK Cae a Layee yma (cow Cety KGET Kbps ve 

a sik as Si patants ene al bee Ae ately re ee la 
rae usell ae te fat ous rs Las? 3 ploy aghe al duo (aalt ae ooh Latest pila 
a Lars palate (Aol 1) clad} ess Neb is 5 Sgro cy Wd fora gol pal rr) 

«spel ali) <ctoas gdb (ab jae putt lho AST cewely Cdgaatl cn da spaby be 
oN elit yee bad pe soot nhl! hk dol, Suu deeall vy a df Syn MAS, 
| canal! oy et Solis (yn mead hs oles} mA pales med Righsio SIpob aiolest (,? gins 
pide Ladle! Gs die Le sly LG GLE Le Lee Lguthxe Sod} shel) Qt acalxs 
us? we tpl» ee asl Radgaas} Meal wArds an} shD, so a 
un hc ash} al Uses aa gl asm le ont Shane gd qaansihs ul, 
Sa SI ye tolls le UyhPlioad Ladd Gpelill ype Juiail yd wlelival a Jo Gath play a 
cetne Reybadly jhas th I cllinal) pgistlas Bryc ontams npllh 1y8d ote 

Lalis Lal TH eyullenit cgaa: bead US gs! Uipamaioids. Uxpatahiind Go} dS us Bf. 

whe Goel Gi cums KALI biel sind LST Laglh cngllce yal Jit ie LK 

10). ices Giles 

Chapter 2. wrsset by jet byt "sli i St Ls Shy me om Gils os | 
GB unball 29 KEM yo ST Wy Ub La 3 slat wy oe gull Legserc! 
Bh, xp Doyo Alall GB ole 59 helwt ayy dB Br oe sen KG a Rone : 
eas mtd egeel WB alacant aphhosh Cams (gas om py yh hm bee Soda ve Last i 
aK peilt G) aad GSI US, Gigall oye RSs hake By jhenlt del ge wt a 
Sues) Qe Le cylyal LAs be cng heli coh dE wall 6 Spy tui hg Ley Su ee 
BAS Sgbuay Mbed all b mpoled dpb Wed @ilel 22 ORAL (oeiill oye ntl! Shey es | : 
Syconedl ys Agi sign lo Bye uaa ® whens byly mei deh ete ola pelt at i) 
Lad dab mal pe Lead yma) de ee, Yo 8 Sa a a sed er Uae en ii 5s) ee i 4 
din Jus¥Hh wntlist paige BI igh cy Uebedl MAb bighe® Gt Pielgub Myuil ahah nal By pie 
cP Bal iys's sl mag os LADY gts UM Sl 8 ale Dag US wrens Ly 
fgvea oesle® unas Gh an aga B senceay MOS alga 
ovoid nae ail Tye Ago IS plllay TF lw) whine ye le adpge! Rai glad alll 
Sylag aS3 whyd St pepbrerdh Anrsilly aneihall Relow jolted Klaas) (gadio’ Lt wags Ay flag Bs | 
aiblet ye sbinKe lo uity Apraitl, Orstll oye dled pibol whe Une (8 Lael shin’ cal to 
oMals uel pally paul oy LL Gb pele lint KLE ayle ae T go Jesh 
Boyonge Pin Keds) cot Dt Ao Saly pball JUS pre Blke one Will abeand oR!) oye juuail 

Chapter 3. § Pole SS k 2 Samoan d PIS ioe le he plall bla ag) eye 2 gal whibll 3 ROLE, 

gym Kegan gad KEE apcst Jud cyilingll dS GI Ramastly Kakiadd cobdgcrgtt 
ley S BSygH Unni by 2 Gajhild Guomin P AST eslew T Po RSSI enblal Pr 
wii, me rsd wplysahad "7 mpaanal * mmiialand s dyaodlill » # suha Dupe 

2) SL 9) Gast 10) Gust = * 12) S shows a blank space between the words 
mein and cahgill, On the margin , There is no blank in PC. (21) eyphates ? 
O1) jyugdatalass, 

* 

: bine e Sis sv 3 le Ue ade ae SB 0 
anh dn dn Iyocdaly Igdzh Ply heap dS! doe 
aa w “ 338 out ince Gand JS polar tt xi 2 
ls al sale as ws oo vb Gp Sle cols 3% wont 
¢ ett bs Le es ell Wee staal dla Leaks Ryblylly fait aioe 2 

: qa Be get wan Tred ene eee Lead lee LS on bp 8p LaF ALES st | 
‘ohoal Car wn Bina) ais Yy ube dais ual Y ibys * Jptiay 803) foe ae on 
ee by atdhly Rénall whe dhe ob ales ct Mele (Ue on Is waphel OF wlre ot 
‘ La Baal Sm ccd dad Leo WAP, wiley me ame sig Sst Qual oye gebal 
tly ri a oles J 3 fealall gtesuls Gulil) AST KIN IAP (65 Uy gel be all * \iasst 

a Mss Sat BS be ow AB GY Gas oS ct Sm on tlds eta sit watiio to 
us Ae ed 1S) on petits Langan nad jolie 3 om tid sole eS aadycog 
ie Lan 925 rel whe aiait ones dost ty Wee Ay hid us Leb! cs! Sobsee Ap CHepalall 
rid GS aed ema Ee Ut WS Rall AL! oot all Gare gi es alsry lila ast 
Ree of tt SS sel om etiblegy ala yt pele cen o? oh me Fey 1S) gelatt 

dl SEY pl Selall, dadlt U5 ais J dana) SB lw GLE Coby GOT Oger fe 
his ei co il 9 ga aD He at Uy eb at unl eb JB Os 

10) vy 1) qggttn o! «© 14) PO iat S Qa 17) ps 19) Sib 

- Chapter 

w 

sab tin oo | ikea aes 

oi oil oF Sins hee Hae ail . 

Chapter 2. ctlbced Lal ails a a oe aut 

KEV LIKee Gh gB Mla IE ple ILS! F ged Lele 6 Bl nen ws , ‘ sate asl o a 

2) se 5) Lawaitiie 15) nixdols 2) ia 

i 5 on Se 3 b aS jae * sy os gst! cm es 
| . | ite de cyl es att & domly Yan) “ye Legs 
Pry ae lll Al eb a he Hal ab us LAL Gl ed | 
De Cae meant oe ot nes ‘ely pealas plod} doles (65 meas pwold on orig 
oo wrely he pills ji #3; Gl rs by Gb gasvadl ¥ payed abi BESS rpang 

i! fh al ash mine cat WS cat Raw Ml 158 Cpesligall o> ais Vihst) hol 
heute aoe : “yall sybaty billy wasn} geesil ols csjead GY Rélell yo KGLSH fo 

hats ay’ Rae gist whe 3 tle CL iw MSS he Gra SP slly ded oye Mphed 151 

: ph aay Lgl Jo phe nt Hat Kath Joh Glu’ (gabt cial ala 3 Rell Gost ci gees oe 

iS yal wn gi allt asall de ds GA oe eel at me gst gm He Slal 

ohh val vy Igtnty pail) spay ot aodl mle (9 St pls Gold pel I ave 
peetee nie Lead Lyla lation ESN LED wolepione yay OL Og de'y SOdaall pK op ply te 

elas in ind ee ptea lo Al lo BI ppin Sub oP Lead Bh mers ge Onli pan 

9) sated ore 10) de 

Chapter 1 (is pha (gyda yy ie sant cic, | 

& MS (oes sLESL give eliay op 4 xessh de ee Bb a plas be oe Lae 
tySLe yam oath lit I Dat Admll sloy dull ogre Syl ont walt 3 ob evn reas i 
ot Geka 3 sells 8h AB Se ol | a was ety Kile) Hh s ae 
Shs eids eh UALS a Leggy ape lg ce Lyi 8b igh le oe bes 
Phldis cratind — Syyigativa Sromy Wygthe BLD ag ty bro lo POSy S caamrledt cn deen. oe 
DOB! Ge pbtrhe Colemel gan MS gh dy Upland ye Aeliall, slat KLE Je ica. 

Karlads! plXorwl eo Laglldely cowy'thy sida cre whies Oral) malt Quaz Yerae dl dit, sheath 

mead * egal LOSS Glyn! GIS Oomdy WRI. Kavluamll Gatese Gaile gaece ga bead 
wires) Le Go,3t S ydides pil WS, al cho ¥ slo (pebby Red ne BUS! | RSLS Lilly, 
cypabstad ergs be ait hell Bo egithss’ ab} cyaddt dy Polen, peal uot &o preeen weil UnLitt By bo 
sluall 3 Li Aly wed aa be a raelel do emlesit mtb gestiy Totes 
tt OAT Sy tila |, ne V5) 3 5 3) epi gil Re) Prat oye CRAKS age alPl ae ce a 
Iphgseot Cagby ylat om coo A ob ales WyShe- wo! ret Ge lle Prat (HAY ¢ ols Ups Kaw 
Fhe meal ce temas Prat Wylalldy lygtlew gil oly By KEW wyttan ty cel 
KP aST plants sale Ce oeibant DET 201, Wd MEAT Cpe KUL whee Soins 2 pglilel r. 

alydid came Ld Rawbiad acre Prat he Lead *Seilily poled d tharse Ul alt Py crailinall Gy) dpiy 

13) pyxlalv 16) gyyapatraitiy 21) Syalily 

oF 

eho Les 

hea hn chal, igh a eis sles Shandll yygh Sei 
Yala _ oe 3 tes 3 oe ena ox mle 

‘ eat be ‘tose lu Je is! ys gl Ap We Lgoms 3 
ae 8 mes Bue, wie eae pate Fie Le HSI cm Soh Cle pls YW Rigln 0 

ay Poe om - goal rey a om ab att Leet od UTI, SIAR csp Le metas Pldl 

an alse a ay iss Lig 3 aAalLS cy peerinns 3 Hill 5% onl Rigid Lily dyin whey 
a | jhe Legale Hilly ale he Ldpal le cp Mindy race Rem cy Ryldey RWbory 
c alt Babs J 8 Lea) Gurl lay LS Hasty oh) cle 8 pe 9 il 
eas Shey B grinds La 2 pind BI Luo ot ted ad AS) gle Uioa! cre Sod gd (pila Ie 
ae Lig agilidls 193552 yt Soh > wloledty py & Lidpdalas mgsl Lging ckegles it! 
Willae US tamed oO wail ly Gretel) Gnke at loll, Kibedll UY Linamniy, LTD, 
Be OD agi gho nor! (ah bie ibis 9 Py pgraineg Lg dete KS pseltve Pauls wa Bl erry hy Udiae Lend 
mY Sl lish Goate Kaw cam wrag Khe Unie cals Luo) op duced dl ge Oy 
sp Bpiuly Sedat] Gayl May) cre gerd Ug Garedaly Riad!) aple coals ag Jl gee 
* eas at pe Mai Lage opal 1A GUT gsIb MLS, Las he B= wl 
yh Baabally LAT & ob) Lacy Gagagan, J Susy igs Liga J SI adngw GS ales 
wil dy Pd op dell UY Ost P RP agin Lass BAe he Kiindll Mgoell x5,01 
wendtdys oS cyl bi pehed he pAb) & PLAT Opa LD jrorlly alatt, Unde ylulS 
wil Petts by GamlicnS ic aipcd Henmlyy Kewl SI ply oy alone dl yet 

16) coXmd cpr. of, 13, 20) crmlys 

Chapter 1. 

Uubsy > 
ti etch Prapitiy oily ba 3 tt a Sua 2 ae 
2 lily 4 

Kenic ly eae 8 sine > as el 

ett al 

W 

Sid eae os leh Lelia Lgl ius fae ia Uighe ain 

ii 

6) galaws 6) kanaria cpr. {¥, 5. 

Rode 9 

“Table of 
contents. 

ce i Llbtty eallath ow yyy cll S| ew : 

| i atly wa Wheels Goals stat of 
eee 3 |g ; 
ae ~ : HET, cligtall 3 
: . ” : CNL UE Se | Land conmadl (ylins Lagoa & | 
Se) ( Polmel b leo ily whee it erie Go db) F 
Leetyily plnall &| re 
i | ‘ ptyall ar mei & | ae 
Sane ee ae chsily olsett J _ 
ee lel lass Xigalty Kupsitl, Hopmmtl coldly seball ob d | je 
ee wi 633) pe 
Le ely} 53 3! ts 
aa gb AF ELATy pgaAl pH YI BOUT pele! 3d) 
. @Ub piled wUSs 

Table of | 
i contents 

ae 

Bis prey yy rfc 

TCR I AO AY EISEN ATR 

ee aie vse 2 
| pial alee dae 
— Bakke 28h ow spall are 

2) Ray oyall 5% KS SS 

ae wre be Juas “7 seh lll ba tb Saad 

sgelaait allel om pga ge pale 
- crdually syett tbvel 
: : gle: Gene gal Rayst_ poll 
: | Linally 4d) goles 

Pipe pe HORS BN egal om She u 
eae a Pip pe de dunia le 
xaas3 aalhijuolll ay Oaw 66 

contents 

t 

pS pam Ju 

© A SM SSS Saal 
: Am) Cor Ghent Lae Fgite sya ee 

WS Maly pill Say gorlly estes 

vin ee abs ne bs 

y “othe o> wie oe 3s uy oa hdl a “ 
Ma Sas oa ual © hy cox) 92> wlitkel g¢5 al} ic nelw ehitily (jot 
2 oe Gas oe rele BSipl Kalin eyed g& olav ae Quad Ge Wass Le 
MG Lee calling W a Adel) (abies ae Met) pS Oy HK Lis 
Juait baad bee A atid (gait Tos cyl pptbndld GE aging RW) Laypaid fo 

Wir 

a hie Os nf SI ‘Rae ps gas GAs Jd) Sy renal wiladlyry agahs' 3) oF marlyns 

FYI, del U6 5 mime on stl we bd csjbatll sive neds} Kabpal 
ey 2 ae Slew Kelp niccumenh iis Golet § Ost gels Gel 3 sal ey 

tow ne ei Spot PS! Lagat Stile Goin rell bb, ox nts vale & ey 

Me Se ae 3 Pmt cyt Legke rks IE GS gerbe meet gad cp? Pollel te 
ea orglyal wamsed IPs Hall Knthe Gyles ebleIt s 

Ca 

Be wiley Sly He Glad ll Gt atles 

Cost db JUN pS, ly clolitely Lgl Uinnas J Lotdally yp Sed Ud 

2) Gospel of St. Matthew 10, 28. 20) Ughes 
' i* Eu ae aes 
cai : 
‘if 

ol hee y eu _ ve oe al ee ha wad aelgest 
fo lize o Woreis, Era) ole or Gh bp lout pot Jolt, slat 
ae al 3 ae bs oo es HESS Les ral Spelt WII Sl pr 
a ne of wala ot SEF ges Sy gad BL pled LS gil gd tpn om Geil 
oe ; *IQUS, Wael bye de hil jevall Julie Kayla! Bolel) G Speed yell 
i (gh eat de alll al ales peel glist pyaestl Ke ow AY Ged 

IE (syd [Pua o} ais LSS xmice ay plinad amd mad Oral GAS gal oye 

oe co ceraaitlly Sygathst ate co DS FSIS yh pgbeey 250S,6 aad sjyhl xadicr 

: : wilde 985 0 pitas I Ae pts Me Beh oe nF cr ctv 
te OD Ute Rie 1 Ow sald sh SIO ep dled de eaelall Gb JU fo 

ve NA he nik ‘Lib Bic aX ony ¢ ite Aart) cg Laiiive ! gerbst Beling 
Wem aie ns? cry Rapala Ch Cantey UI pAUI EhO cn Sy sad Os choke 

Land atl, So 9gh REP mr XB lngiled of Wham fotS oly cpt eel lil 5% 

¥ bore op de! SS SIS oh we tylatied 156 Gg¥t Lez! nay ealandl i 
ets) is gral Soest 99 Guuall Samat GAL Gils, enassittl op te 

Sas Mlk pila ake gall Jy FpKadsl de ol GAIL dab ab aad ge Sha! 

10) Lega, 18) QS 19) slide = 21) Shira 4, 1B4: SyigS Vyiel cgadSt Lead b 
mals epi llyst ot Kail Le oy al shavgse tamil cyalys