GREAT 

MEDIEVAL 

THINKERS 

AVICENNA 

JON 

McGINNIS 

AVICENNA 

AVICENNA 

Jon McGinnis 

OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

2010 

OXFORD 

UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Oxford University Press 
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further 
Oxford University’s objective of excellence 

in research, scholarship, and education. 

Oxford New York 
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi 
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi 
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto 

With offices in 
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece 
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore 
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam 

Copyright © 2010 Oxford University Press, Inc. 

Published by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016 

www.oup.com 
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

McGinnis, Jon. 
Avicenna / Jon McGinnis. 
p.cm. 
ISBN 978-0-19-533147-9; 978-0-19-533148-6 (pbk.) 
1. Avicenna, 980-1037. 2. Philosophy, Islamic—History. I. Title. 
B751.Z7M4 2010 
181'.5—dc22 2009016862 

135798642 

Printed in the United States of America 

on acid-free paper 

To Celina, 
My other great passion 

SERIES FOREWORD 

Many people would be surprised to be told that there were any great medi- 
eval thinkers. If a great thinker is one from whom we can learn today, and 
if “medieval” serves as an adjective for describing anything that existed 
from (roughly) the years 600 to 1500 AD, then, so it is often supposed, 
medieval thinkers cannot be called “great.” 

Why not? One answer often given appeals to ways in which medieval 
authors with a taste for argument and speculation tend to invoke “authori- 
ties,” especially religious ones. Such invocation of authority is not the stuff 
of which great thought is made—so it is often said today. It is also fre- 
quently said that greatness is not to be found in the thinking of those who 
lived before the rise of modern science, not to mention that of modern 
philosophy and theology. Students of science are nowadays hardly ever 
referred to literature earlier than the seventeenth century. Students of 
philosophy in the twentieth century have often been taught nothing about the 
history of ideas between Aristotle (384-322 BC) and Descartes (1596-1650). 
Contemporary students of theology are often encouraged to believe that 
significant theological thinking is a product of the nineteenth century. 

Yet the origins of modern science lie in the conviction that the world is 

a convic- 

open to rational investigation and is orderly rather than chaotic 
tion that came fully to birth, and was systematically explored and developed, 
during the middle ages. And it is in medieval thinking that we find some of 

Vill SERIES FOREWORD 

the most sophisticated and rigorous discussions in the areas of philosophy and 
theology ever offered for human consumption—not surprisingly, perhaps, if 
we note that medieval philosophers and theologians, like their contemporary 
counterparts, were often university teachers (or something like that) who par- 
ticipated in an ongoing worldwide debate and were not (like many seventeenth-, 
eighteenth-, and even nineteenth-century philosophers and theologians) people 
working in relative isolation from a large community of teachers and students 
with whom they were regularly involved. As for the question of appeal to au- 
thority: it is certainly true that many medieval thinkers believed in authority 
(especially religious authority) as a serious court of appeal; and it is true that 
many people today would say that they cannot do this. But as contemporary 
philosophers are increasingly reminding us, authority is as much an ingredi- 
ent in our thinking as it was for medieval thinkers (albeit that, because of 
differences between thinkers, one might reasonably say that there is no such 
thing as “medieval thought”). For most of what we take ourselves to know 
derives from the trust we have reposed in our various teachers, colleagues, 
friends, and general contacts. When it comes to reliance on authority, the 
main difference between us and medieval thinkers lies in the fact that their 
reliance on authority (insofar as they had it) was often more focused and ex- 
plicitly acknowledged than it is for us. It does not lie in the fact that it was 
uncritical and naive in a way that our reliance on authority is not. 

In recent years, such truths have come to be recognized at what we might 
call the “academic” level. No longer disposed to think of the Middle Ages as 
“dark” (meaning “lacking in intellectual richness”), many university depart- 
ments (and many publishers of books and journals) now devote a lot of their 
energy to the study of medieval thinking. And they do so not simply on the as- 
sumption that it is historically significant, but also in the light of the increasingly 
developing insight that it is full of things with which to dialogue and from 
which to learn. Following a long period in which medieval thinking was thought 
to be of only antiquarian interest, we are now witnessing its revival as a contem- 
porary voice—one with which to converse, one from which we might learn. 

The Great Medieval Thinkers Series reflects and is part of this exciting 
revival. Written by a distinguished team of experts, it aims to provide substan- 
tial introductions to a range of medieval authors. And it does so on the as- 
sumption that they are as worth reading today as they were when they wrote. 
Students of medieval “literature” (e.g., the writings of Chaucer) are currently 
well supplied (if not oversupplied) with secondary works to aid them when 

reading the objects of their concern. But those with an interest in medieval 

SERIES FOREWORD 1X 

philosophy and theology are by no means so fortunate when it comes to 
reliable and accessible volumes to help them. The Great Medieval Thinkers 
Series therefore aspires to remedy that deficiency by concentrating on medieval 
philosophers and theologians, and by offering solid overviews of their lives and 
thought coupled with contemporary reflection on what they had to say. Taken 
individually, volumes in the series will provide valuable treatments of single 
thinkers, many of whom are not currently covered by any comparable vol- 
umes. Taken together, they will constitute a rich and distinguished history 
and discussion of medieval philosophy and theology considered as a whole. 
With an eye on college and university students, and with an eye on the general 
reader, authors of volumes in the series strive to write in a clear and accessible 
manner so that each of the thinkers they write on can be learned about by 
those who have no previous knowledge about them. But each contributor to 
the series also intends to inform, engage, and generally entertain even those 
with specialist knowledge in the area of medieval thinking. So, as well as sur- 
veying and introducing, volumes in the series seek to advance the state of 
medieval studies both at the historical and the speculative level. 

Nobody seriously concerned with medieval philosophy and theology, 
whether done from the Islamic, Jewish, or Christian perspective, can afford 
to ignore Avicenna (Ibn Sina). Born at the end of the tenth century in what 
is now modern day Uzbekistan, Avicenna became a profound influence not 
only on Islamic thinking but also on that of Jews (such as Maimonides) and 
Christians (such as Thomas Aquinas). If a great thinker is one whose 
thought can be assimilated and developed by people of very different intel- 
lectual traditions, then Avicenna was, without doubt, a great thinker. 

In the present volume, Jon McGinnis provides a detailed introduction to 
all of the issues on which Avicenna wrote. He puts Avicenna into his his- 
torical intellectual context (Greek and Islamic). He also explains how Avi- 
cenna thought on topics such as logic, physics, psychology, metaphysics, 
politics, and medicine (Avicenna has often been said to be the founder of 
modern medicine). Professor McGinnis aims to provide philosophers, his- 
torians of science, and students of medieval thought with a starting point 
from which to assess the place, significance, and influence of Avicenna and 
his philosophy within the history of ideas. He does so very well, and his 
book should prove to be extremely useful to anyone concerned with medi- 

eval thinking in general, and with Islamic thinking in particular. 

Brian Davies 

PREFACE 

When I first began the present work, I took as my model the excellent vol- 
umes in this series by John Marenbon and Peter Adamson on Boethius and 
al-Kindi respectively. What I admired most about their works was both the 
careful analysis of the philosophical arguments and the concise nature of 
the texts. This seemed the right approach: One could pick up their books 
and in a very short time have some genuine sense of the philosophical 
thought of Boethius or al-Kindi. Moreover, unlike the concern that Marenbon 
and Adamson raised about whether their figures were “great medieval 
thinkers,” I had no such problem, for I think I can say with complete con- 
fidence and without prejudice that Avicenna is indeed a great medieval 
thinker (especially if we understand “medieval” as strictly a chronological 
designation). Thus, my task seemed relatively clear: Present the high points 
of Avicenna’s philosophical system and do it concisely. 

This turns out to be easier said than done. Nearly three hundred works 
have been attributed to Avicenna. Moreover, even if one limits oneself to 
Avicenna’s philosophical encyclopedias, he wrote no less than three (extant) 
summas, whose content, organization, and presentation can at times differ 
significantly. Additionally, recent scholarship has begun making a case that 
Avicenna’s thought underwent an evolution, and so the problems of dating 
his works (even the encyclopedias) and determining what are his “mature” 

views arise. In order partly to address this last issue, I decided to focus 

xX PREFACE 

primarily on Avicenna’s philosophical system as it appears in his most ex- 
tensive and well-known encyclopedic work, the Cure (ash-Shifa@’), albeit in 
places drawing significantly on his other extant encyclopedias—particu- 
larly the Salvation (an-Najat), and to a lesser extent Pointers and Reminders 
(al-Isharat wa-t-tanbihat) as well as his Canon of Medicine (Oaniin fi t-tibb). 
Unfortunately, this meant that I gave rather short shrift to Avicenna’s 
shorter specialized treatises as well as his Discussions (Mubdahathat) and 
Glosses (Ta‘ligat), even though I recognize that these works frequently 
have a more fully developed presentation of certain technical and tricky 
points. Also because of this self-imposed limit, I have thought it prudent 
not to take up the issue of intellectual development, not because I deny that 
it occurred or that it is not important, but because in the end | think that 
presenting a roughly unified Avicennan system of thought as it is appears 
predominantly in the Cure will be more useful for those readers who are 
interested primarily in getting some initial sense of Avicenna’s overall 
philosophy as well as providing a starting point for scholars who want to 
explore systematic developments in his thought. 

Even limiting myself to the Cure, however, presented problems, for 
what one quickly discovers is that Avicenna is indeed a systematic thinker, 
weaving and interlacing a few very basic concepts, ideas, and arguments 
throughout a legion of diverse philosophical topics and problems. Conse- 
quently, in order to appreciate some move he makes, for example, in meta- 
physics, one must first understand the problem that he is addressing, which 
might have arisen initially in physics or medicine. Similarly, the value of 
some Avicennan notion, which might seem peculiar or even gratuitous— 
such as his doctrine of the Giver of Forms, which is virtually unique to his 

system—can be fully grasped only by seeing how it provides him with a 

single solution to a score of seemingly diverse philosophical problems that 
in fact Avicenna reveals to have a common ailment and so require a com- 
mon cure. Moreover, often one cannot properly appraise Avicenna’s philo- 
sophical contribution without first understanding the historical context and 
problematic to which he is responding. In short, what I had hoped to be a 
relatively concise presentation of Avicenna’s philosophical system quickly 
grew into a somewhat lengthy tome as I tried to provide the necessary 
pieces needed to get some sense of the beautiful and, were it possible, 
almost seamless mosaic that is his system. I can only hope that the present 
work does justice to the systematic nature of Avicenna’s unique philosoph- 

ical mind. 

PREFACE XU 

Despite the need in places to give an extended discussion of Avicenna’s 
own thought and context, I still wanted to keep this volume relatively short. 
It is for this reason that I have not addressed the secondary literature in a 
way that some might find adequate, and for this I can only beg the reader’s 
indulgence. I additionally should confess that there are certain Avicennan 
scholars that I have simply been reading and being enriched by since my 
graduate school days, and their astute insights and observations have simply 
become blended in my mind with the very thought of Avicenna himself. In 
this category are those scholars who have pioneered and advanced the field 
of Avicennan studies: Herbert Davidson, Thérése-Anne Druart, Amélie 
Marie Goichon, Dimitri Gutas, Ahmad Hasnawi, Jules Janssens, Michael 
Marmura, and Yahya Michot. As often as not their thought has simply 
become my own. So, if their names do not appear as frequently as they 
ought in my notes, my only defense is to say that imitation is the sincerest 
form of flattery. I genuinely owe them a great intellectual debt. 

Ina related vein, it is also my pleasant responsibility to acknowledge the 
numerous organizations and individuals who have contributed in varying 
ways to my understanding of Avicenna and the completion of this work. 
Among the institutions, I would like to acknowledge, first, the University 
of Missouri Research Board for providing me with financial support for a 
semester off to write. Additionally, I would like to thank the Center for 
International Study at UM-St. Louis for the significant travel support that 
they have provided me in past years that has allowed me to present my 
work on Avicenna at conferences both here and abroad. I am also very 
grateful for the support of my department, which not only graciously 
granted me research leaves, but also has allowed me to teach some pretty 
arcane courses on Avicenna. Beyond the local level, I was blessed with two 
National Endowment for the Humanities Fellowships and a membership 
at the Institute for Advance Study (Princeton, NJ), all of which allowed me 
to focus on various aspects of Avicenna’s thought. 

At the individual level, there are the numerous scholars and students 
who have willingly (or perhaps not so willingly) spent countless hours talk- 
ing with me about Avicenna, reading earlier drafts of chapters and papers, 
attending and responding at conference presentations that I have given, 
and in general just giving of themselves. I particularly want to thank Peter 
Adamson and David C. Reisman whom I got to know when we were all 
still graduate students and with whom I have been having ongoing dia- 
logues since that time. I also am exceptionally grateful for the willingness of 

XIV PREFACE 

senior scholars—such as Idit Dobbs-Weinstein, Thérése-Anne Druart, 
Lenn Goodman, Dimitri Gutas, Jules Janssens, Yahya Michot, and Richard 
C. Taylor—for listening and talking with me about Avicenna. Also, I have 
been blessed by a number of scholars in my hometown of St. Louis with 
whom I have been able to discuss finer points of medieval and Arabic phi- 
losophy, particularly Asad Ahmed of Washington University in St. Louis 
and Eleonore Stump of St. Louis University. I was particularly pleased to 
have an opportunity to teach a class jointly with Professor Stump on Aquinas 
and the Arabs during which I feel that I may have learned more than anyone 
else in the class. A special “obrigado” also goes out to my Brazilian col- 
league and friend Tadeu Verza, who meticulously went through an earlier 
version of this book. His keen sight and insight certainly saved me from 
making a number of errors. I further want to acknowledge the countless 
number of undergraduate and graduate students who enrolled and posi- 
tively contributed to courses that I have deliberately created to try out some 
of the material presented in this book. It speaks highly of the genuine intel- 
lectual curiosity of the UM-St. Louis students that those courses were always 
full and the questions always thought provoking. In particular, however, 
I would like to note four such students for their relentless enthusiasm and 
piercing questions, comments, and observations: Joe Brutto, Josh Hauser, 
Stuart Reeves, and Dan Sportiello. Sue Bradford Edwards did a beautiful 
job creating the map specifically for this volume. I am also grateful to Brian 
Davies for providing me the opportunity to contribute a volume on Avi- 
cenna to the Great Medieval Thinkers Series, and his comments on an early 
draft of this work. Finally, I want to thank my family: my wife for seeing 
that I got the time to work on this project; my boys for seeing that I got 
enough play time away from this project. 

CONTENTS 

1. Avicenna’s Intellectual and Historical Milieu 3 
2. Logic and Science 27 

Natural Science 53 

Psychology I: Soul and the Senses 89 
Psychology II: Intellect 117 

Oy I er 

Metaphysics I: Theology 149 

7. Metaphysics II: Cosmology 178 
8. Value Theory 209 

9g. Medicine and the Life Sciences 227 
to. The Avicennan Heritage 244 
Appendix 1 255 

Appendix 2 256 

Appendix 3. 257 

Appendix 4 258 

Notes 259 

Bibliography 279 

Index 293 

AVICENNA 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND 
HISTORICAL MILIEU 

Historical Background: From 

Athens to Baghdad 

Ex nihilo nihilo fit: Nothing comes from nothing, and Avicenna and his 
philosophy are no exception. Indeed, multiple influences were at work in 
the formation of his thought. In this chapter, I consider a few of these influ- 
ences so as to provide a general backdrop against which to situate the intel- 
lectual and political-historical milieu within which Avicenna worked.’ To 
this end, I begin the odyssey that was Avicenna’s life with a brief look at the 
Greek scientific and philosophical course curriculum being taught at the 
Academies in Athens and Alexandria, which in turn became the standard 
regimen of study for those practitioners of falsafa, that is, the Arabic philo- 
sophical tradition that saw itself as the immediate heir and continuation of 
a Neoplatonized Aristotelianism. I then consider the reception and appro- 
priation of this Greek scientific and philosophical heritage into Arabic, 
which in its turn also offers an opportunity to consider the Islamic political 
situation just prior to and during the time of Avicenna. In addition to the 
Graeco-Arabic scientific tradition, Avicenna also took inspiration from in- 
fluences indigenous to the culture in which he lived. These include, but are 
certainly not limited to, the religion of Islam itself and particularly its phil- 

osophical-theological articulation (kalam), the Persian Renaissance, and of 

4 AVICENNA 

course mathematical, scientific, and philosophical developments that were 
being done in Arabic as well. Once having provided this background, I 
turn to the life and works of Avicenna himself and the political turmoil of 
the region that haunted him and constantly forced him to be on the move 
throughout his life. 

The Greek Milieu 

While Avicenna was born outside of Bukhara in what is now modern-day 
Uzbekistan in 980 of the Common Era, a significant part of his story begins 
some 1,300 years earlier in Athens. For it is the fourth century BCE Greek 
philosopher, Aristotle, and his works on logic, science, and philosophy that 
would provide the starting point for much of Avicenna’s own unique vision 
of philosophy.” Indeed, it was the works of Aristotle—ordered and sup- 
plemented by later thinkers—that provided what might be called the school 
curriculum for most philosophers working in the late Hellenistic world— 
whether in the academy at Athens until it was closed in 529 CE or thereaf- 
ter in the academy at Alexandria.’ Moreover, most philosophers working in 
the earlier medieval Islamic period up to the time of Avicenna received 
their philosophical and scientific training following this curriculum.’ Thus, 
I should look at it in some detail. 

The first element of the Greek Academic course curriculum in Athens 
and Alexandria was logic. The logic segment began with the Isagoge of 
Porphyry (ca. 232—ca. 305 CE), which, as its name implies (it literally means 
“introduction”) introduces the uninitiated to certain key concepts in 
Aristotle’s logic, namely, genus, difference, species, property, and accidents, 
the so-called five predicables or most basic pieces of informative data from 
which scientific and philosophical propositions are built. After the /sagoge, 
the student took up the logical works of Aristotle himself, beginning with 
the Categories, with its substance-accidents ontology, and going through his 
works on deductions generally (the Prior Analytics) and scientific deduc- 
tions or demonstrations specifically (the Posterior Analytics), all the way 
through to the Rhetoric and Poetics, topics that were seen as part of logic’s 
propaedeutic nature. (Although strictly speaking mathematics was viewed 
as a theoretical science standing between physics and metaphysics, it, like 
logic, was also viewed as sharpening the promising philosopher’s mind and 
training him to think abstractly. Here, however, it was not Aristotle but 

Euclid (ca. 325-ca. 270 BCE) and his Elements of Geometry that provided 

BLACK SEA 

Baghdaw 

Medina 

HIJAZ 
° Mecca 

& 
S 

Jurjan 

KHURAZAN 
° Rayy o 
*Hamadhan Nishapur 

° Isfahan 

4 
% 
p. 
% 
oS 
qe 

ARABIAN SEA 

< <2, ia haa ie, 

2, 

QAITIW TVOIIOLSIH GNV TVOLOATIALNI S VNNAXOIAV 

S 

6 AVICENNA 

the preliminary and primary training.) The main reason for starting one’s 

intellectual training with logic was that it was seen as a tool 

an organon— 
for undertaking the exploration of the world and/or organizing one’s find- 
ings about it, both activities that lie at the very heart of science and philoso- 
phy. 

Indeed, whether one calls it “science” or “philosophy,” the goal of these 
enterprises was a deeper understanding (Gk. epist@mé, Ar. ‘ilm, Lat. scientia) 
of the world in which we live and our place in it. To the ancient and medi- 
eval mind, such understanding involved two criteria: one, knowing the 
causal explanation for some given phenomenon, and, two, knowing that 
that explanation is a necessary one (as opposed to merely being an 
accidental one). Aristotle himself identifies four causes that must be discov- 
ered if one is to provide a complete causal explanation of a given phenom- 
enon. One must identify (1) the material cause, (2) the formal cause, (3) the 
efficient cause, and (4) the final cause. The matter might be thought of as 
whatever has the potentiality to become a certain natural kind or be acci- 
dentally modified in some way, such as the wood that might make up a 
desk, bed, chair, or the like; form is that by which something actually is the 
sort of thing that it is, such as the bedlike structure that shapes and informs 
the wood so that it is a bed; the efficient cause is that which explains a given 
form’s coming to be in the matter in which it comes to exist, so, for example, 
the carpenter, who imposes the bedlike structure on the wood; and finally, 
the final cause is that end or good that the efficient cause intends from or 
for the form-matter composite, such as, in the case of the bed, to provide a 
comfortable and safe place to sleep. Of course, most cases of genuine scien- 
tific explanation are not as jejune as the example just given. Instead, the 
whole causal structure of most scientifically interesting cases is considerably 
more complex and so more difficult to uncover. Still, this was the ideal that 
most philosophers sought: to understand, in a rich and complete sense, the 
very causal structure of the cosmos. 

To this end, Aristotle’s Physics provided the most basic and general con- 
cepts for understanding natural or physical things, that is, things that in 
some way change or move owing to some internal principle. Such general 
concepts include nature, motion or change, place, time, and the like. The 
course curriculum follows up this general discussion of natural things with 
Aristotle’s De Caelo, which is an investigation into the makeup and motion 
of the heavens. The heavens were themselves thought to be of a different 
material kind than the things that make up the Earth, for, to the ancient 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 7 

and medieval mind, the heavens from the Moon and beyond were thought 
to involve perfectly regular circular motion, unlike the erratic, primarily 
rectilinear motions—such as rising and falling—that typify the movements 
here on Earth. The quite sketchy account of the De Caelo was significantly 
supplemented with the astronomical works of Ptolemy (ca. 100-ca. 175 
CE), and particularly his Admagest, which provided the basic planetary hy- 
pothesis (albeit modified and corrected for accuracy) up until the time of 
Copernicus. After treating the heavens, the student would study Aristotle’s 
On Generation and Corruption, which provides a general discussion of the 
makeup of the sublunar realm with its specific emphasis on the generation 
and corruption of those things that we find around us. This general discus- 
sion was in turn followed by an investigation of inanimate natural things, 
which Aristotle treated in his Meteorology. The natural sciences conclude 
with Aristotle’s psychological and biological works. It was Aristotle’s De 
anima that provided the most basic and general concepts associated with an 
investigation of living things, such as the soul (Gk. psuché, Ar. nafs, Lat. 
anima), which was viewed as simply that principle of animation that ex- 
plains why living things perform those functions unique to them as living 
things. A study of the De anima was then followed by the parva naturalia of 
Aristotle, which is a series of shorter works on nature, that deal with in- 
creasingly more specific topics in the life sciences. As with astronomy, much 
of Aristotle’s biological and anatomical works were later supplemented and 
sometimes corrected by the voluminous writing of the second-century phy- 
sician Galen (ca. 129-199 CE), particularly for those students who would 
go on to pursue medicine. Still, having said that, the Galenic corpus (and 
indeed medicine more generally) never fully came to be incorporated into 
the ancient and medieval course curriculum in the way, say, Ptolemy’s as- 
tronomical writings, were. 

Next on the curriculum was the science of metaphysics, literally “that 
which is after physics.” Here, the student would read both Aristotle’s Meta- 
physics and additionally the writings of Plato. In fact, at least during the late 
antique period, it was primarily the Platonic corpus, especially as read 
through the lens of Plato’s later interpreters such as Plotinus (204-270 CE) 
and Proclus (411-485 CE), that provided the core texts for the student of 
metaphysics. In part owing to this Platonic, or more exactly Neoplatonic, 
understanding, metaphysics, which Aristotle had envisioned as a science of 
being qua being, was reenvisioned as theology or the study of immaterial 

beings. In fact, as will become clear when I consider Avicenna’s metaphysical 

8 AVICENNA 

system,’ it was only when he rediscovered that Aristotle’s Metaphysics was 
intended to provide a science of being qua being, which subsumed theology 
as one of its proper subtopics, that he came to understand and fully appreci- 
ate Aristotle’s contribution to this science. 

Even then Avicenna remained impressed by at least two Neoplatonic 
elements that were to feature prominently in his own metaphysical system 
as well as those of medieval philosophers writing in Arabic more generally. 
These were the notions of the One and emanation. The Neoplatonic One, 
which loosely might be viewed as the divinity, is absolutely and completely 
simple. In fact, the One is the principle or cause of all unity in the cosmos. 
As such, it is also the source of being or existence, for already as early as 
Plato and Aristotle, a thing’s being or existence was viewed as closely linked 
with the unity inherent in it. Here, just think of a cloud of chalk particles, 
which neither is nor exists as a piece of chalk, but only becomes one insofar 
as the particles have been brought together to form a unified whole. Conse- 
quently, given that the One is the principle of unity coupled with the notion 
that to be or to exist is to be unified, the One must also be the ultimate prin- 
ciple of being and existence itself. As for the One itself, it is beyond or above 
being and existence. So much so, argued the Neoplatonists, that the very 
existence or being of the cosmos overflows or emanates from the One: first 
in the form of Intellect, from which then emanates the World Soul—that 
is, the animating principle of nature and the cosmos, analogous to the soul 
in a human—and the world then emanates from the World Soul. 

Ironically, despite the influence that Neoplatonists such as Plotinus and 
Proclus played on the formation of the falsafa tradition, Aristotle was most 
often credited with their innovations while they stood in the proverbial 
shadows. This is in no small part due to the fact that in the medieval Arabic- 
speaking world the two primary works in which much of the Neoplatonic 
metaphysical machinery was laid out were falsely ascribed to Aristotle.° 
Thus, for example, the Arabic redaction of large sections of Plotinus’s En- 
neads \V-VI went under the title The Theology of Aristotle (Uthiilijiya), 
while a redaction of Proclus’s Elements of Theology—which in Arabic was 
titled the Pure Good (al-Khayr al-mahd) and subsequently became the Latin 
Liber de Causis (“The Book of Causes”)—was believed to come from the 
pen of Aristotle. In addition to these two pseudepigrapha, numerous Neo- 
platonic philosophers commented on the Aristotelian corpus and read into 
Aristotle’s text Neoplatonic doctrines. These commentaries were in turn 

translated together with the works of Aristotle into Arabic. Given these 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 9 

false ascriptions and the (Neoplatonic) commentary tradition that grew up 
around Aristotle’s works, it is no wonder that many subsequent thinkers in 
the medieval Islamic world thought that Aristotle actually authored these 
Neoplatonic innovations. The net effect of this confusion was that by the 
time that the Arabic Aristotle reached Avicenna, he had been thoroughly 
Neoplatonized. 

The study of metaphysics, whether Aristotelian or Platonic, was then 
followed by ethics, which drew upon Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics as well 
as a number of Plato’s dialogues and the ethical writings of the Stoics, such 
as the Enchiridion of Epictetus (ca. 35—ca. 135 CE). Ethics, as Aristotle him- 
self says at the beginning of the Nicomachean Ethics,’ is itself subordinate to 
the science of politics. Here, it was not Aristotle that provided the basis of 
political studies but again Plato, both in the Greek- and Arabic-speaking 
worlds. In fact, only the first (or at most the first two) books of Aristotle’s 
Politics were translated into Arabic, whereas it seems that both Plato’s 
Republic and Laws were available in Arabic translation (or at the very least 
they were thoroughly summarized and explained in Arabic). This fact is 
notable in itself since, in general, most of the Platonic dialogues were not 
translated into Arabic, which may perhaps be owing to the high literary 
and even poetic style of Plato’s writings, which makes it often difficult, if 
nigh impossible, to capture in translation. Instead, most frequently only 
philosophical synopses of Plato’s works were available. As for why Plato’s 
Republic may have appealed more to the medieval Muslim intellectual than 
Aristotle’s Politics, the most obvious reason is that Plato’s Philosopher-King 
can with relative ease be interpreted as either a Prophet-Lawgiver, such as 
Muhammad, or an ideal Caliph, as in Sunni Islam, or an Imam, as in Shiite 
Islam. 

This brief summary should hopefully provide the reader with a sense of 
the basic curriculum that was being taught at the end of the classical period 
of Greek philosophy. In general, and to summarize, the works of science 
and philosophy covered by the curriculum included texts on logic, natural 
philosophy (such as physics and biology), mathematics and astronomy, met- 
aphysics, and then readings in practical philosophy (such as ethics and poli- 
tics). Moreover, it was this curriculum that would be translated into Arabic 
and make up the educational basis for those thinkers, such as Avicenna, 
working in the falsafa or Arabic philosophical tradition. Thus, I should 
now turn to the Arabic translation movement and the general scientific and 

philosophical environment it created within the medieval Islamic world. 

10 AVICENNA 

The Arabic-Islamic Milieu 

Certainly, one of the great achievements of the human intellectual spirit 
was the Arabic translation movement.® Over the course of about one hun- 
dred years, virtually the entire Greek scientific and philosophical corpus 
was either translated or summarized into Arabic, and it was certainly in 
large part owing to the presence of this body of knowledge in Arabic trans- 
lation that made possible Avicenna’s own unique philosophical synthesis. 
The movement, which roughly occurred during the tenth century, had its 
intellectual center in Baghdad, the newly established religious and political 
capital of Islam. A brief account of the history leading up to the translation 
movements and key figures in it will offer one a glimpse into the sociopo- 
litical situation immediately prior to Avicenna’s own times, and so it is to 
that history that I now turn. 

After the death of Muhammad in 632, the political and religious lead- 
ership of Islam passed through a number of Caliphs, literally “successors.” 
The first four of these successors—the so-called Rashidin or rightly 
guided Caliphs—had their power base in the Hijaz on the Arabian 
Peninsula. They were then followed by the Umayyad Caliphs, who were 
centered in Damascus and remained in power in the East from 661-750. 
In a series of battles between 749-750, Abi I-‘Abbas (r. 749-754) 
wrenched control from the Umayyads, setting up his own dynasty, the 
“Abbasids, which, at least in name, continued until the mid-thirteenth 
century. It was Abt |-“Abbas’s immediate successor, al-Mansir (r. 754- 
775), who, on 30 July 762, laid the first foundation stone for the new 
“Abbasid capital, Baghdad, and it would be at Baghdad 
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers run close to each other—that the Arabic 

situated where 

translation movement would find its headwaters. Here, Greek, Persian, 
and even Indian sciences mixed with the study of Arabic grammar and 
literature, or adab, as well as Islamic law (figh), and Islamic speculative 
thought (kalam) all coming together to form falsafa, the Arabic-Islamic 
philosophical tradition of which Avicenna would be one of its most 
significant representatives. 

Even while consolidating his power, al-Mansiir was also initiating the 
translation of foreign philosophical, scientific, and literary works, including 
Sanskrit astronomical tables, Persian tales and fables, and, of course, Greek 
texts such as Ptolemy’s A/magest and the logical writings of Aristotle. Still, it 
was under the Caliph al-Ma’miin (r. 813-833) that the Arabic translation 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU Il 

movement truly hit its stride, and the first Arabic philosopher, al-Kindi (ca. 
800-ca. 870), emerged.’ The contribution of al-Kindi to the development of 
the falsafa tradition comes from no less than three fronts. First, he assisted 
in the translation of Greek scientific and philosophical texts, not, it would 
seem, by himself actually undertaking any translation from the Greek, but 
by advising about the content and assessing the philosophical sense of the 
translations as well as suggesting works that should be translated. Second, 
he also ardently supported the so-called foreign sciences against certain 
Muslim theologians and intellectuals who were challenging their usefulness 
and value. Thus, ina very real way he helped to ensure the continuation and 
preservation of the Greek scientific and philosophical tradition within the 
medieval Islamic world. Third, and arguably most important, al-Kindi be- 
gan to appropriate and to formulate the newly translated Greek learning 
into an Arabic-Islamic philosophical worldview, and, while perhaps not as 
well known as the philosophical systems of his successors, such as al-Farabi 
and Avicenna, al-Kindi’s philosophical vision nonetheless did set the agenda 
and present modes of argumentation that would come to typify falsafa. 

Also at about the time that al-Kindi was at his peak, so too was the great 

Nestorian Christian translator Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809-877) and his circle, 
which included his son Ishag ibn Hunayn (d. ca. g10), a nephew Hubaysh 
and disciple ‘IsA ibn Yahy4. The output of this handful of men was im- 
mense, and had to number many hundreds of translated works if not more. 
(Hunayn himself translated around a hundred texts by Galen alone.) In ad- 
dition, they revised many earlier cumbersome translations both for reada- 
bility and content and helped to establish what would become the standard 
Arabic philosophical vocabulary. It was thus primarily these few men who 
provided the basic textual sources that would become the groundwork for 
falsafa. While the translation movement certainly continued on after 
Hunayn and his group by such thinkers as the Nestorian Christian Aba 
Bishr Matta (d. 940) and the Jacobite Christian Yahya ibn ‘Adi (d. 974),"° 
much of the subsequent translation activity merely involved revising al- 
ready existing translations. 

In addition to the inestimable value of all of these translators in preserv- 
ing and continuing Greek scientific and philosophic thought, many of these 
translators also contributed to the development of falsafa in their own right, 
themselves writing numerous independent medical and _ philosophical 
works and commentaries. Indeed, many of these translators, along with 

other luminaries of the time, were part of the circle of philosophers known 

I2 AVICENNA 

collectively as the Baghdad Peripatetics, which was a loose affiliation of 
Aristotelians who would meet to read and discuss philosophy together. Be- 
cause of their own philosophical and scientific interests, these thinkers, in 
conjunction with translating the Aristotelian corpus, as well as other works, 
often expounded and questioned that corpus too; so, for example, Hunayn 
produced a series of sixteen questions on Aristotle’s cosmological work, the 
De Caelo, while Abi Bishr Matté and Yahya ibn “Adi commented on 
Aristotle’s logical, physical, and metaphysical writings. 

Arguably the most outstanding commentator and philosopher among 
the Baghdad Peripatetics was al-Farabi (ca. 870-ca. 950). This was certainly 
Avicenna’s opinion, who in general considered the Baghdad Peripatetics to 
be rather pedestrian thinkers, again with the notable exception of al-Farabi. 
While Avicenna’s assessment of the rest of these philosophers is open to 
question, his high praise of al-Farabi is certainly warranted. Al-Farabi’s 
renown in logic was so complete that it earned him the moniker “the sec- 
ond teacher” (al-mu ‘allim ath-thani ), second that is only to Aristotle him- 
self. In addition, to commenting and expounding on the logical works of 
Aristotle, al-Farabi also made an epitome of Aristotle’s Physics as well as 
writing a small treatise on the intentions of the Metaphysics (Fi aghrad), 
which proved to be invaluable to Avicenna’s own understanding of that 
science; al-Farabi’s interests in Aristotle even included a long commentary 
on the Nicomachean Ethics, which unfortunately is no longer extant. 

Still, perhaps al-Farabi’s greatest contribution to the history of falsafa 
was that he was a system builder. Unlike so many of the earlier philoso- 
phers working in Arabic, who contented themselves with merely com- 
menting on the works of earlier Greek philosophers, al-Farabi wanted to 
organize the huge body of knowledge available to him into a synthetic 
whole, showing the dependence of all things on a First Cause, God, fol- 
lowed by the hierarchy that exists within the created order, and the place of 
humans as well as their moral and/or political obligations within that hier- 
archy. Two Alfarabian synthetic works are his The Principles of the Opinions 
of the Inhabitants of the Perfect State (Mabadi’ ara’ ahl al-madina |-fadila) and 
The Principles of Existing Things (Mabadi’al-mawjidat), both of which out- 
line a metaphysical system in which the sciences of physics, psychology, eth- 
ics, and politics all find their place.” Avicenna would carry on this spirit of 
system building—but at an encyclopedic level that does not merely present 
the various philosophical and scientific theses but strenuously argues for 

and defends those positions. 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 13 

While up to this point I have stressed the Greek philosophical and scien- 
tific traditions to which Avicenna would be heir, his worldview also included 
purely Islamic and Arabic elements as well. The most obvious influence is 
that of Islam itself as represented in the Qur’an and the sayings of the 
prophet Muhammad (sing. hadith). While the Qur’an never aspires to be a 
philosophical textbook that lays out arguments in syllogistic fashion, it, 
nonetheless, makes a number of claims that fall within the domain of 
subjects that ancient and medieval philosophers treated. Such claims in- 
clude that God exists and has certain divine attributes, as, for example, be- 
ing alive, knowing, powerful, and having a will; that there is but one God; 
that God created the cosmos; that there is an afterlife; and, of course, 
numerous dicta concerning how one should act (ethics) and interact with 
others (politics). No Muslim philosopher could simply ignore these claims; 
rather, he needed to incorporate or reinterpret them into his philosophical 
system. In fact, Avicenna frequently goes to great lengths to reinforce the 
idea that his philosophical system is really nothing more than the theoretical 
articulation of Islam itself. 

Additionally shaping the world that surrounded Avicenna would have 
been the various schools of Islamic law (fig) and Islamic dialectical or specu- 
lative discourse (kalam), both of which provided their own interpretation of 
Islam, and sometimes interpretations quite at odds with the falsafa tradition. 
More like Judaism than Christianity, Islam frequently prizes right practice, 
or orthopraxy, more highly than (or at least as a necessary element of) right 
belief, or orthodoxy. In fact, in theory all one needs to believe to be a Muslim 
is the Shahdda, or profession of faith: “There is no god but God (Allah), and 
Muhammad is the messenger of God.” Consequently, the lawyer (fagih) and 
judge (gadi) who interpret divine law (Shari ‘@) as revealed in the Qur’an and 
sayings of the prophet have always had a more important place in the Islamic 
world than the theologian. At least among Sunni Muslims, four legal schools 
(sing. madhhab), all of which were considered equally valid, had emerged by 
Avicenna’s time: These were the Hanifi, Maliki, Shafi ‘I, and Hanbali schools. 
Whatever the school it was often the job of lawyers to extend the application 
of the law to those cases not explicitly dealt with by the Shari‘a. As a result 
Muslim lawyers developed rules of (analogical) reasoning (giyds) that were in 
places quite different from Aristotelian logic. It would in fact seem that Avi- 
cenna received his first taste of logic from studying law, for he mentions in his 
autobiography that while still a young adolescent he had become quite adept 

at legal questioning and refutation. 

14 AVICENNA 

Among the so-called Islamic sciences, however, it was kalam that exercised 
and challenged those working within the falsafa tradition most.” While kalam 
is frequently translated as “theology” or more expansively as “Islamic specula- 
tive theology,” it is as much of a philosophical worldview as falsafa was. 
Whereas falsafa favored the logical system of Aristotle, the mutakallimiin (that 
is, proponents of kalaém) saw Aristotelian logic, at least initially, as little more 
than Greek grammar, and thus preferred their own Arabic grammatical cat- 
egories and analogical reasoning. While kalam preferred an ontology of atoms 
and accidents, falsafa favored continuous magnitudes, that is, ones that are 
potentially divisible infinitely. Despite obvious differences between the two 
traditions, both were nonetheless interested in roughly the same sets of issues 
and questions and their answers frequently even shared common intuitions. 
In this respect perhaps the greatest difference between the two was in their 
own perceptions of themselves and each other: The proponents of falsafa saw 
themselves as adopting, adapting, and generally extending the Graeco-Arabic 
philosophical and scientific tradition, while the advocates of kalaim envisioned 
themselves as promoting a way of thought intimately linked with the Arabic 
language and the Islamic religion. 

By the time of Avicenna there were broadly two general schools of kalam: 
the Mu ‘tazilites and the more traditionally inclined Ash‘arites (there were 
additionally the Maturidis who fell loosely between the two, or, if anything, 
inclining slightly toward the Ash‘arites). The Mu‘tazilites rejected a literal 
reading of the Qur'an, and maintained that it had to be read through the lens 
of what logic and reason require. Thus, for instance, while the Qur’an as- 
cribes a number of attributes to God, such as having sight, hearing, power, 
will, and others, the Mu'tazilites argued that if taken at face value these as- 
criptions would undermine divine unity, uniqueness, and simplicity (tawhid); 
for if there are distinct attributes in God and each one of them is divine, then 
there would be multiple divine things, all equally deserving of being a divin- 
ity. Remember, however, that the Muslim confession of faith adamantly as- 
serts that there is but one God. For the same reason, the Mut tazilites argued 
that the Qur'an, despite its claims for itself, could not literally be the word of 
God but had to be created;”* for if it were not created, then it too would have 
to be eternal and so worthy of being a god. Another doctrine in need of re- 
interpretation, or so the Mu'tazilites believed, was that of divine determin- 
ism, which reserved all power and all causality for God. Here, the Mu‘ tazilites 
argued that if God were to cause every act including human acts of voli- 

tion, such as to sin or to submit to God, then divine justice would 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 15 

be jeopardized; for surely God could not punish or reward us based upon 
what God himself does. While the political heyday of the Mu'tazilites was 
during the Caliph al-Ma’miin and his immediate successors, who tried to 
impose Mu‘tazilism as religious orthodoxy, it was during Avicenna’s own 
time in the work of “Abd al-Jabbar (935-1025) in Rayy, whom Avicenna most 
likely knew,’ that Mu‘tazilism reached its full intellectual maturity, even if 
politically it had waned. 

Even then Mu‘tazilism never seemed to have a broad theological appeal, 
and thus in response to what was viewed as the Muttazilites’ overly rational- 
istic interpretation of Islam, certain traditionalists staunchly maintained a 
quite literal understanding of the Qur’an even in the face of what reason 
purportedly demanded. Although this traditionalist movement is most fre- 
quently associated with the name of Ahmad ibn Hanbal (780-855), it would 
be the more moderate vision of al-Ash‘ari (d. 935) that would come to domi- 
nate theology, at least in Sunni Islam. For unlike Ibn Hanbal, who completely 
distrusted reason and logic, al-Ash‘ari had originally been trained as a 
Muttazilite and appreciated the value of reason and logic, particularly in re- 
futing the deficiencies he found in the Mu'tazilite system; however, unlike 
the Mu‘tazilites, al-Ash‘ari also thought that there were limits to the applica- 
tion of reason beyond which it simply could not go. Those limits, he argued, 
were reached when it came to things divine. Concerning these issues one 
simply had to rely on what was revealed about God in the Qur’an. Thus, al- 
Ash‘ari affirmed those attributes ascribed to God as well as the Qur’an’s be- 
ing the uncreated word of God. Also, while God does in fact will and create 
every event here on Earth, we nonetheless, according to al-Ash‘ari, acquire 
(kasb) responsibility for those actions, good or bad, that are done through us. 
These doctrines, maintained al-Ash‘ari, simply have to be accepted without 
asking how (bila kayf). By the time of Avicenna, falsafa too had come under 
the criticism of Ash‘arite theologians, and particularly by the judge and very 
able theologian al-Baqillani (d. 1013), whose critique of the philosophers 
would only be rivaled by the great Ash‘arite theologian al-Ghazali (d. 1111) 
some hundred years later. 

While Ash‘arite theology came to dominate in Sunni Islam, Mu‘ta- 
zilite thought never completely died out among Shiite intellectuals, who 
always seemed somewhat more receptive to philosophical speculation. Ad- 
ditionally, one form of Shiite Islam, namely, that of the Isma‘ilis, would 
have a profound effect on the intellectual climate of Avicenna’s time. By the 
beginning of the tenth century the Isma‘Ili leader ‘Ubayd-Allah al-Mahdi 

16 AVICENNA 

(910-934) conquered a stretch of North African and founded the Fatimid 
dynasty. Sixty years later the Fatimid army took control of Egypt and 
founded their new capital, Cairo, from which they sent missionaries 
throughout the “Abbasid caliphate proclaiming their Isma‘Ili theology, 
which was replete with intellectually subtle philosophical argumentation. 
One of the tools used by these Ismaili missionaries was a series of philo- 
sophical treatises, over fifty in all, that were written collectively by a group 
of men who referred to themselves simply as the Brethren of Purity (¢khAwain 
as-safa’). The Treatises of the Brethren of Purity wove Ismia‘ili theology to- 
gether with Aristotelian and Neoplatonic elements as well as Neopy- 
thagorean thought. Avicenna himself testifies to knowing this Isma‘ili 
thought and quite possibly these treatises as well, although he is also quick 
to add that he was not convinced by their arguments. 

Finally, perhaps the greatest source of inspiration for Avicenna would 
have been the general air of scientific and intellectual inquiry that perme- 
ated the environment in which he found himself. Thus, the young Avicenna 
undertook a series of correspondences with the greatest polymath and com- 
parative scholar of the time, al-Biriini (973—c. 1050). Avicenna was also an 
immediate contemporary of the greatest optical theorist in the medieval 
Islamic world, Ibn al-Haytham (965-1039) of Cairo, with whom Avicenna 
shared a similar optical theory. Moreover, in addition to knowing the tradi- 
tional Greek mathematical sciences of geometry and arithmetic, Avicenna 
was also versed in Indian arithmetic and the new science of algebra, both of 
which he incorporated into the mathematical sections of his encyclopedic 
work, the Cure, in a way that set him apart from other philosophers work- 
ing before him.? He was a contemporary of the great Persian poet Firdawsi 
(c. 939-1020), who through his epic The Book of Kings virtually single- 
handedly revived Persian as a language of high literature and culture, while 
Avicenna’s own The Book of Sciences (Daneshname-yi ‘Ala7) was the first 
work of philosophy written in Persian following the Islamic conquest of 
the East. In short, Avicenna was very much a product and part of his time, 
and it is to the specifics of his life that I now turn. 

Avicenna’s Life and Works 

Like that of few others (and even fewer philosophers), Avicenna’s life has 
all the elements for a best-selling novel: There is political intrigue, battles, 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 17 

imprisonment, harrowing escapes, alleged poisonings, drinking parties, 
and (if one is to believe Avicenna’s biographer) lots of sex. One knows these 
details about Avicenna’s life because at the bequest of one of his students, 
al-Jaizjani, Avicenna dictated a brief autobiography of his early life, and 
thereafter al-Jizjani chronicled the events from the time of their meeting 
up to his master’s death.'® 

Avicenna’s Early Life 

About fifty years before Avicenna’s birth the ‘Abbasid Empire began to col- 
lapse, even if the ‘Abbasids retained the titular title “Caliph” long thereaf- 
ter. In 945 Shiite Btryids captured Baghdad and made the “Abbasid Caliph, 
al-Mustakfi (r. 944-946), a virtual puppet ruler. The fall of Baghdad was fol- 
lowed by the ever-increasing fragmentation of the empire with various 
generals, petty lords, and the like carving it up into a number of local au- 
tonomous states, albeit often ostensibly showing homage to the ‘Abbasid 
Caliph. One such dynasty was that of the Samanids who controlled the re- 
gion of Khurdasan. It was under the last great Simanid Amir, Nth ibn 
Mansiir (r. 976-997), that Avicenna’s father served as governor of the 
village of Kharmaythan, one of the more important villages around 
Bukhara. While we are only told that his father was a man from Balkh, one 
of the four capitals of Khurasan, two sources tell us that his mother’s name 
was Sitara. 

The couple made their home in the small village of Afshana, which lay 
at the outskirts of Kharmaythan, where in 980 they were blessed with their 
first child, Aba ‘Ali |-Husayn ibn Sina, the “Avicenna” of Latin medieval 
fame. Sometime after the birth of Mahmiid, Avicenna’s younger brother of 
five years, the family moved to Bukhara proper, where teachers of both the 
Qur’an and Arabic literature were found for the young Avicenna. He was 
clearly something of prodigy, for he recounts that by the age of ten he had 
memorized the entire Qur’an as well as many works of Arabic literature. 
He also had even begun studying both Indian arithmetic with a local veg- 
etable seller and Islamic law with the Hanafi jurist, Isma‘ll az-Zahid. At 
the age of ten he was given a private tutor, one Aba‘Abd Allah an-Natili, 
with whom he first began the philosophical course curriculum outlined 
earlier. Even before that, however, Avicenna had had a taste of philosoph- 
ical thought, for he tells us that he would listen in as Isma@‘ili missionaries 

spoke about the soul and intellect with his father, and, while he understood 

18 AVICENNA 

their arguments, he was not convinced by them, even though, he says, both 
his father and brother were. 

Stull, it was with an-Natili that Avicenna began his formal philosophical 
training, and it was an-Natili who encouraged Avicenna’s father to steer his 
son toward only academic pursuits. The teacher and pupil began with Por- 
phyry’s /sagoge, and in fact Avicenna even impressed his tutor by independ- 
ently verifying the definition of genus as that which is predicated of many 
species in answer to the question, “What is it?” doing so in a way that was 
completely new to an-Natili. Avicenna then went on and completed the 
course on logic, reading the primary and secondary texts mostly on his own, 
since apparently his tutor simply could not grasp the subtleties of logic. Also 
with an-Natili, Avicenna read Euclid’s Elements and Ptolemy’s Almagest, al- 
though again according to Avicenna it was in fact he who taught the teacher 
and an-Natili who was the student. 

At some point after completing the Almagest, an-Natili departed from 
Bukhara and Avicenna took up reading natural philosophy and philosoph- 
ical theology (//ah7yat) by himself as well as continuing his study of law and 
beginning the study of medicine. He tells us that at this time he was sixteen 
and that he spent the next year and half returning to logic and all parts of 
philosophy. Now, however, he studied these sciences in earnest, compiling 
for himself notecards on which he formalized all the arguments he came 
across, listing the premises, conclusions, and implications. During this time 
he remarks that he never slept an entire night through, but, like a child 
with a comic book, he would pour over philosophical texts by candlelight, 
and even when sleep did overtake him he would see the philosophical prob- 
lems in his dreams. He continued in this way until the sciences of logic, 
natural philosophy, and mathematics were so deeply rooted within him 
that he understood them, he says, as far as was humanly possible. 

Having reached this point in his self-education, Avicenna took up read- 
ing Aristotle’s Metaphysics; however, he confesses that the intent of that 
work completely eluded him. In fact, he read the Metaphysics forty times to 
the point of memorizing it and yet he could make no sense of the text, and 
so he gave up on it altogether as being simply incomprehensible. As luck 
would have it, however, at about the same time that he was giving up on the 
Metaphysics, he happened to be in the bookseller’s quarter where a man 
came up to him with al-Farabi’s The Aims of Aristotle’s Metaphysics.” While 
Avicenna initially dismissed the small five-page treatise, the seller was per- 

sistent, saying that he was selling the book on consignment and that the 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 1g 

owner was desperate for money and that he would take a mere three 
dirhams.'® Avicenna reluctantly agreed, and once home he quickly read 
through the short work. Almost immediately, he says, the intention of the 
Metaphysics became clear to him and he was so grateful that the very next 
day he gave much in alms to the poor in order to show his gratitude to God. 

While studying these philosophical sciences, Avicenna, as I noted, had 
also taken up medicine, which he mastered in a very short time, claiming 
that it is one of the easier disciplines. His study of medicine even extended 
to caring for the sick so as to gather practical clinical experience that could 
not be acquired through mere books. His knowledge of medicine must 
have been quite good, for he says that distinguished doctors would read 
medicine under him even though he was still a very young man. There 
would seem to be some element of truth to this boast, for at about the age of 
seventeen and a half Avicenna was called in to advise a number of court 
physicians about an illness from which the Amir Nth ibn Mansir was 
suffering. 

The advice must have been helpful, since Nath ibn Mansir recovered 
and took Avicenna into his service. While at court, the young Avicenna 
asked permission to browse the palace library. The library consisted of 
many rooms, each one of which was dedicated to a different science. More- 
over, each room was filled with chests of books, many of which, Avicenna 
tells us, he had never heard of before or saw thereafter. From then until he 
was eighteen he read and mastered these books, claiming that upon reach- 
ing that point of his life he hit upon the basic elements of his own philo- 
sophical system, and while his understanding of those elements may have 
matured over time, he claims that he added nothing substantively new to 
them. By the age of twenty-one, Avicenna’s knowledge of the sciences had 
certainly become locally well known; for he was asked to write a compila- 
tion of these sciences for one Abt |-Hasan ‘Aridi, which he gave the title 
Prosodic Wisdom (al-hikma |-‘aradiya), a pun on ‘Aridi’s name, which 
means “prosodist” (the work also goes under the name Compendium). The 
lawyer Abi Bakr al-Baraqi also asked Avicenna to comment on the books 
of science that he had read, the result of which was the twenty-volume The 
Sum and the Substance (al-Hasil wa-l-mahsial); he also wrote for al-Baraqi 
The Saintly and the Sinful (al-Birr wa-l-ithm). 

Sometime after that 

reports have it in the year 1002 at the age of 
twenty-two—Avicenna’s father died, and Avicenna took one of the ad- 
ministrative posts in Bukhara. By this time Samanid power had all but 

20 AVICENNA 

vanished from the region, and so Avicenna tells us, in what would 
become a leitmotif of his life, that “necessity forced him to leave” Bukhara 
for Gurganj in Khwarizm, now the modern town of Kunya Urgench in 
northern Turkmenistan. In the garb of a lawyer, he was presented to the 
Amir “Ali ibn Ma’miin (r. 997-1009) and was found a position at a modest 
monthly salary. 

Before or around 1012, necessity again forced Avicenna to flee, now for 
the court of Amir Qabiis (r. 978-1012) in Jurjan on the Caspian Sea. His 
flight took him through Nasa, Baward, Tis, Samanqan, and Jajarm at the 
extreme limits of Khurasan before ultimately reaching his destination. Leg- 
end has it that the necessity in question was the Sultan Mahmiid of Ghazna 
(r. 998-1030), the virtual founder of the Turkish Sunni Ghaznavid dynasty, 
whose lands extended to nearly all of the present territory of Afghanistan 
and the Punjab.'” The story goes that Mahmiid requested that Amir 
Ma’min send to him a number of scholars to adorn the new Ghaznavid 
court. The scholars in question included al-Birtini and Avicenna among oth- 
ers. While al-Biriini and most of the others (reluctantly) agreed to go, Avi- 
cenna feared the Sultan’s ruthless treatment of anything that even hinted 
at unorthodoxy. Thus, he and a Christian scholar, Abt Sahl al-Masihi, with 
whom Avicenna was apparently quite close, chose to flee. The story contin- 
ues that on the fourth day the two were caught in a sandstorm, becoming 
completely lost in the desert, and that al-Masihi finally died of heat expo- 
sure. Avicenna himself carried on, traveling through the various cities 
noted until finally reaching Jurjan. While nothing precludes the tale’s har- 
rowing flight across the desert, a matter of dates suggests that it may not 
have been in order to flee the clutches of Mahmiid. For al-Biriini, again one 
of the scholars who did agree to go to the Ghaznavid court, puts the date of 
his departure at 1017, five years after the death of Qabiis, who died in the 
winter months of 1013. Whatever the case, the flight was for naught, for in 
1012, when Avicenna would have arrived in Jurjan, the Ghaznavids had 
already seized Qabiis and imprisoned him in one of his own fortresses, 
where he died. 

Again on the run, Avicenna fled north to Dihistan near the border of 
Khwarizm, where he fell gravely ill. Upon recovering from his illness, 
Avicenna must have felt that the situation was safe enough to return to 
Jurjan, and so he did. It was here, at the age of thirty-two, that he met his 
disciple Abi ‘Ubayd al-Jaizjani, who would remain by Avicenna’s side for 

the rest of his master’s life chronicling the events that he witnessed. 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 21 

Avicenna’s Later Life 

Avicenna’s time in Jurjan, which could not have been more than three years, 
was apparently uneventful although productive. One Abi Muhammad ash- 
Shirazi, of whom we know very little other than that he had a great appre- 
ciation for the sciences, purchased a house for Avicenna to live in. It was 
here that Avicenna composed his Middle Summary on Logic (al-Mukhtasar 
al-awsat al-mantiq), The Origin and Return (al-Mabda’ wa-l-ma Gd), Com- 
plete Astronomical Observations (ar-Arsad al-kulliya), The Summary of the Al- 
magest (Mukhtasar al-Majisti), and many shorter treatises. Most notably, 
perhaps, it was during his time in Jurjan that Avicenna began his monu- 
mental Canon of Medicine (Oaniin fi t-tibb). Avicenna’s Canon distills into a 
relatively small handbook the medical knowledge of the Greeks, such as 
the voluminous works of Galen, and the new discoveries of physicians 
working in the Arabic-speaking world, such as Abii Bakr ar-Razi (ca. 864— 
ca. 930), as well as Avicenna’s own contributions to medicine. 

It would seem that some time before 1015 the lure of a rich patron 
finally enticed Avicenna to leave Jurjan for the mountain country (ard 
al-jabal), or what was known at the time as Persian Iraq, which makes up 
the central regions of modern Iran. Here Avicenna would remain for the 
rest of his life traveling between, sometimes fleeing from, the region’s ma- 
jor cities such as Rayy, outside of modern-day Tehran, Qirmisin, which is 
modern Kirmanshah, Hamadhan, and Isfahan. In this first instance, the 
lure came from Rayy, the largest of the mountain country capitals, to where 
Avicenna and his disciple moved when the nominal ruler of that city, the 
Biiyid Majd ad-Dawla (ca. 997-1029) was suffering from melancholia or 
what we would call major depression—which at the time was identified 
with an excessive buildup of “black bile” (Gk. melan |black] + cholé [bile]). 
Avicenna presented letters, presumably commending his medical expertise, 
to the actual power of the city, Majd ad-Dawla’s mother (d. 1028), who 
simply went by the title “the Lady,” and was then taken into her service. 

whom I men- 

Sometime around t1o15, the Sultan Mahmiid of Ghazna 
tioned when recounting Avicenna’s flight to Jurjan—did in fact seem to 
have requested that Avicenna be sent to him so as to grace his court. 
Avicenna, feeling justifiably threatened by these advances, left Rayy first 
for Qazwin, west of Rayy, and then for Hamadhan in the midwest part of 
Iran at the foothills of the Alvand Mountain, where it would appear that he 

once again took up service for the Lady. 

22 AVICENNA 

While in Hamadhan, Avicenna became acquainted with its ruler, 
the Biyid Shams ad-Dawla (r. 997-1021), who was suffering from colic. 
Avicenna was able to cure him successfully and thereafter became one of 
his boon companions. In fact, Avicenna even accompanied the Amir on one 
of his military expeditions. Upon returning to Hamadhan, the Amir made 
Avicenna his vizier. Unfortunately, troops, apprehensive of the new vizier 
and their standing, rebelled against Avicenna, surrounding his house, ran- 
sacking his goods, throwing him in prison, and even demanding that Shams 
ad-Dawla execute him. The Amir refused to have Avicenna killed, but was 
willing to banish him, which in the end involved nothing more than 
Avicenna’s hiding himself away in an acquaintance’s home for forty days. 
Upon suffering another bout of colic, Shams ad-Dawla called upon his 
old friend to cure him again, apologizing profusely, and even restoring 
Avicenna to the position of vizier. Avicenna agreed and this time he seems 
to have been accepted. 

Between 1016 and 1021, while still in Hamadhan, al-Jizjani asked his 
master to comment on the works of Aristotle, and although Avicenna 
refused, he did agree to set out what he considered to be correct among all 
of the sciences. The result was that he began writing the “Physics” of his 
monumental work the Cure (ash-Shifa’), while also continuing to work on 
the Canon. The Cure was envisioned as an encyclopedia of science and 
philosophy consisting of all the theoretical sciences: nine books on logic, 
eight on natural philosophy, four on mathematical sciences, and one on 
metaphysics, whose final section also provides Avicenna’s treatment of 
issues ethical and political. In the Cure Avicenna wove together the Greek 
course curriculum and indigenous Islamic influences seen in the previous 
sections so as to form an intellectual tapestry that was Avicenna’s own 
unique philosophical system. 

While serving as Shams ad-Dawla’s vizier, Avicenna apparently spent 
his mornings writing and then spent the rest of the daylight hours attend- 
ing the Amir with matters of state. In the evening he would meet with his 
students, one reading from the newly completed pages of the Cure 
and another from those of the Canon, with Avicenna explaining and an- 
swering questions. The lessons were then followed by an almost certainly 
riotous symposium, replete with singers of varying classes, and wine, all 
with which Avicenna and his students busily occupied themselves. As a 
somewhat lurid aside, since most professional singers at this time were 

female slaves, and slave girls were viewed as being at their master’s sexual 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 23 

disposal,” Avicenna’s soirees probably involved a good bit of “adult en- 
tertainment,” which would be consistent with al-Jazjani’s own observa- 
tion that Avicenna had an insatiable sexual appetite. 

Sometime around 1021, Shams ad-Dawla set out on another military 
expedition, but was again overcome by his old colic as well as other ail- 
ments. He died in that year while in retreat. Power ultimately past to his 
son “Ali ibn Shams ad-Dawla, who, at the request of his troops and the 
court, asked Avicenna to continue on as vizier. Avicenna, apparently not as 
impressed with the son as he had been with the father, delicately refused 
the offer and then began secret negotiations with the governor of Isfahan, 
“Ala ad-Dawla (d. 1041/42). During this time Avicenna secluded himself in 
the home of a druggist and busied himself with writing the Cure, complet- 
ing over the course of two days an entire outline of the work, which he then 
began fleshing out, writing at a startling rate of some fifty folio pages a day. 
During this time he completed, with the exception of the book on animals 
(corresponding with Aristotle’s biological works), the rest of the Cure’s 
books on natural philosophy, its metaphysics, and even started writing the 
sections on logic. Becoming suspicious of Avicenna’s communiqués with 
“Ala ad-Dawla, the political powers in Hamadhan instigated a search for 
him, whereupon finding him they imprisoned him in the castle of Fardajan 
some fifty miles away, where he remained for four months, during which 
time he wrote The Guidance (al-Hidéya) and a philosophical allegory Alive 
son of Awake (Hayy ibn Yaqzan). 

As it so turns out, ‘Ala’ ad-Dawla attacked Hamadhan in 1023, bringing 
that city to its knees and forcing the prince and his vizier, who had had 
Avicenna imprisoned, to flee to the safety of Fardajan. Upon ‘Ala’ ad- 
Dawla’s withdrawal from Hamadhan, the prince and vizier returned, 
bringing Avicenna with them, now redoubling their efforts to entice him 
into their service. During this time in Hamadhan, Avicenna stayed with a 
Shiite friend, to whom he dedicated a work on Cures of the Heart (al-Adwiya 
l-qalbiya)—a work whose opening sections provide a wonderful account 
and practical suggestions for dealing with certain mental or emotional dis- 
orders, which were thought at that time to be more closely associated with 
the heart than the brain—all the while Avicenna also continued to work on 
the logic of the Cure. 

Apparently the situation in Hamadhan became unbearable, and so 
disguised as a Sufi along with his brother and al-Jizjani and two slaves, Avi- 

cenna and his party sneaked out of that city heading southeast for 

24 AVICENNA 

Isfahan and the court of ‘Ala@ ad-Dawla. Upon reaching Isfahan, Avicenna 
was greeted warmly, provided with a well-furnished place to stay in the city’s 
district of the dome, and finally, al-Jizjani tells us, the master received the 
respect that he so richly deserved. While in Isfahan, Avicenna completed the 
logical works of the Cure, as well as the mathematical books: geometry, arith- 
metic, astronomy, and music (which, with its emphasis on harmonics and 
proportions, was included within the mathematical guadrivium). Thus, only 
the biological work of the Cure remained to be written. Avicenna finally 
completed it while accompanying ‘Ala@ ad-Dawla on a campaign against the 
city of Sabtr Khwast, to the west of Isfahan and south of Hamadhan. Since 
“Ala ad-Dawla undertook multiple expeditions against Sabir Khwast, this 
would put the completion of the Cure at 1027, the traditional dating,” or 
perhaps as late as 1030, for which there is also good evidence.” Also during 
this campaign, Avicenna composed another, shorter, encyclopedia of philoso- 
phy and science, the Salvation (an-Najat), which while drawing upon many 
of Avicenna’s earlier works—such as The Shorter Summary on Logic, which 
he had written while still in Jurjan—in places also shows evidence of being 
every bit as, if not more, mature than the thought of the Cure. Other works 
Avicenna wrote while in Isfahan include: the Fair Judgment (al-Insaf ), and, 
though only fragments are extant, al-Jiizjani tells us that it was originally 
twenty volumes treating approximately 28,000 questions derived from Aris- 
totelian and pseudo-Aristotelian texts; a Persian philosophical encyclopedia 
for his patron “Al@ ad-Dawla, which has come to be called the Book of Sci- 
ence for ‘Ala’ ad-Dawla (Daneshnime-yi ‘Ala’7), and was the first philosophi- 
cal work written in Persian following the fall of the old Persian Sassanian 
Empire; Pointers and Reminders (al-Ishaérat wa-t-tanbihat), which is yet 
another philosophical encyclopedia that merely provides key premises 
and main philosophical conclusions, while frequently leaving the actual 
construction of the arguments to the reader (while it is likely that this 
work was completed when in Isfahan, an earlier Hamadhan date has also 
been suggested);”" the single volume work, the Easterns (al-Mashriqi yin), 
which like Fair Judgment exists only in a fragmentary form, and which 
purportedly gave Avicenna’s own philosophy without commenting on 
the tradition; and finally, while in Isfahan Avicenna completed the Canon 
of Medicine. 

Far from spending all of his time in Isfahan with ink and paper at hand, 
Avicenna also quickly became one of the Amir’s confidants and a member 

at court. Indeed, every Friday the Amir held a literary salon that included 

AVICENNA’S INTELLECTUAL AND HISTORICAL MILIEU 25 

scholars who were experts in all the arts and sciences and by whom, al- 
Jazjani brags, Avicenna was never outclassed. Although, he relates, there 
was one evening when an expert in the Arabic language, Abii Mansir al- 
Jabban, openly criticized Avicenna’s knowledge of Arabic, protesting that, 
while Avicenna was a philosopher and physician, his remarks about philol- 
ogy showed that he was not literate in that subject. Loath to accept such a 
criticism, Avicenna began plotting a very elaborate joke on the philologist. 
He immersed himself in the study of philology, Arabic grammar, and rare 
words, sending as far away as Khurdasan for all the best works on the sub- 
ject. At the end of three years he had mastered the subject such that few 
were his equal. He then wrote three odes in different styles of Arabic, brim- 
ming with rare and arcane words, which he had bound together and had 
the volume purposefully distressed so as to look aged. Avicenna then 
brought the Amir in on his little joke and asked him to present the volume 
to al-Jabban with the story that the Amir had found the work while hunt- 
ing in the desert and could al-Jabban explain it to them. Al-Jabban was 
nonplussed as he tried to work his way through the lines and began invent- 
ing things to cover up his ignorance, at which point Avicenna chimed in 
quoting philological authorities by page and line to explain the odes. Real- 
izing that he had been made the butt of a joke, al-Jabban publicly apolo- 
gized to Avicenna. 

Together with his love for a good laugh—admittedly at somebody else’s 
expense—Avicenna was a bon vivant, enjoying all the pleasures that life 
has to offer whether intellectual or physical. I have noted that he held 
drinking parties well into the night, preferring food, drink, and compan- 
ionship over sleep. When asked about his excesses, Avicenna purportedly 
said, “God, Who is exalted, has been generous concerning my external and 
internal powers, so I use every power as it should be used.” 

One can, however, only burn the proverbial candle at both ends for so 
long. Eventually Avicenna’s lifestyle caught up with him, and probably 
sometime around 1034 he found himself afflicted with colic; for it was most 
likely in this year that the Ghaznavid army fought ‘Ala ad-Dawla at Karaj, 
forcing ‘Ala’ ad-Dawla to retreat to Idhaj south of Isfahan. Not wanting to 
be left behind, Avicenna tried to cure himself of his intestinal complaint by 
administering enemas to himself, sometimes as many as eight times in one 
day. The result was that he developed ulcers and even began suffering sei- 
zures. His situation only deteriorated when, wanting to be done with the 

colic, he ordered a small measure of celery seed to be added to the enema to 

26 AVICENNA 

expedite its effect. One of the physicians assisting him, either intentionally 
or unintentionally (al-Jiizjani is not sure), added more than twice the 
amount that Avicenna had prescribed, and the result was that it caused 
Avicenna to suffer internal bleeding. Avicenna’s already declining condi- 
tion was then further exacerbated when a slave, who, al-Jiizjani alleges, 
was stealing from Avicenna, overdosed with opium an electuary that Avi- 
cenna was taking to help with the seizures. Avicenna collapsed and had to 
be carried back to Isfahan on a stretcher once it was safe to return. 

At home, Avicenna continued to administer to himself, but no sooner 
was he able to walk than he presented himself to ‘Ala’ ad-Dawla ready for 
political life again. Moreover, he also once again took up his old habits of 
sensual excess. Al-Jiizjani says that Avicenna never completely returned to 
his former state of health but spent the next four or so years suffering re- 
lapses followed by partial recoveries. In late spring of 1037, ‘Ala ad-Dawla 
set out for Hamadhan with his old friend accompanying him, when Avi- 
cenna was once again seized by his recurring complaint. By the time they 
reached Hamadhan, Avicenna was all but a corpse, and realizing that death 
was inevitable, he ceased treating himself. Avicenna passed from this world 
at the age of 58 in Hamadhan where one can still visit his tomb, a monu- 

ment to one of the truly great intellectual spirits. 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 

Introduction 

Logic for Avicenna is primarily a tool for scientific discourse and discovery. 
It can perform its function, however, only if there is some connection 
linking the objects of logic, namely, the universal predicables such as, for 
example, genus, difference, and species, with the objects of which the prac- 
titioner of a given science has immediate access, namely, concrete particu- 
lars and their causal interactions. Establishing that there is a close association 
between the objects of logic and science is a necessary part of Avicenna’s 
philosophic enterprise, inasmuch as Avicenna requires that the premises 
used in logic and the conclusions derived from them accurately capture the 
way that the world itself is. In this chapter, I focus primarily on how Avi- 
cenna envisions the relation between logic and the sciences. Thus, I do 
not deal with the technical points of Avicenna’s syllogistic, that is to say, 
Avicennan logic considered as a formal language, except insofar as that is 
necessary for understanding how Avicenna sees logic as a tool of science.’ 
One technical point, however, is worth noting here about Avicenna’s sys- 
tem of logic: “Every proposition in Avicenna’s system is either temporal- 
ized or modalized; there is no proposition which directly captures the 
non-modalized assertoric proposition used in introductory accounts of the 

. . . 2 . 
categorical syllogistic.”” So, for example, an assertoric statement such as 

27 

28 AVICENNA 

“(Every) human is a rational body” is only the implicit way of stating 
“(Every) possible human is necessarily a rational body.” This fact, I believe, 
reflects Avicenna’s conviction that the basic ontological structure of the 
world is inherently modal. In other words, everything, from the lowliest 
mote to the divinity itself, is either necessary or possible in itself, a point that 
I turn to in depth in chapters 6 and 7. 

For now, however, I begin by sketching what might be thought of as 
Avicenna’s metatheory of logic, which underlies his philosophy of science 
and theory of knowledge (‘/m). Here I consider how Avicenna supports his 
scientific realism and the theoretical foundation that he provides for the 
relation between logical notions (such as genus and difference) and the ob- 
jects of scientific inquiry. Additionally, I look at the role that Avicenna has 
logical notions play in the scientific enterprise. After a brief consideration 
of how Avicenna divides the sciences, I turn to two of the most important 
logical tools that the medieval scientist and philosopher used, namely, defi- 
nitions and demonstrations, and their relation to causes. In the final section 
of this chapter, I take up Avicenna’s discussion of some of the empirical 
methods employed by the scientist for acquiring knowledge of definitions 
and the first principles of demonstrations, at least as those methods appear 

in his logical works. 

The Relation between Logic and Science 

When one considers the relation between logic and science, one may view 
logic as standing to science in the way that language, or perhaps better syn- 
tax, stands to a body of thought. Avicenna certainly seems to endorse such 
a view when he writes, “The relation of this field of study [that is, logic] to 
inner reflection, which is called ‘internal reasoning’ is like the relation of 
grammar to the explicit interpretation, which is called ‘external reasoning, 
and like the relation of prosody to the poem” (Introduction, 1.3, 20.14-16). 
In this respect logic is a tool @/a) that guarantees a certain precision in sci- 
entific reasoning and even safeguards science against the introduction of 
hidden assumptions and formal fallacies. 

Considered as such, logic, for Avicenna, is essential to a proper and 
scientific understanding of our world; however, in order fully to appreci- 
ate logic’s role in the scientific enterprise, one must first understand what 

Avicenna means by “scientifically understanding a thing.” “Science” or 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 29 

“scientific knowledge or understanding” translates the Arabic ‘idm, which 
itself is the common Arabic translation of the Greek epistémé. For Avi- 
cenna, scientific knowledge involves two aspects: first, conceptualizing 
(tasawwur) what is meant when either a term, premise, or even inference 
or syllogism is presented, and second, verifying (tasdiq, literally “truth- 
making”) what one is conceptualizing.’ Avicenna describes these two as- 

pects thus: 

Something is scientifically understood (yu Zamu) in two respects: One of 
them is that it is conceptualized only, such that if it has a name and [the 
name] is uttered, then what [the name] means is exemplified in the 
mind, regardless of whether it is true or false, such as when “man” or 
“do such and such” is said, for when you attend to the meaning of that 
which you are discussing, then you have conceptualized it. The second 
is verification together with the conceptualization, and so, for example, 
when you are told that “all white is an accident,” then from this not only 
do you conceptualize the meaning of this statement, but also you verify 
that it is such. As for when you have doubts whether or not it is such, you 
still have conceptualized what is said (for you do not have doubts about 
what you have neither conceptualized nor understood); however, you 
have not verified it yet. All verification, then, is together with a concep- 
tualization, but not conversely. In the case of what this [statement] 
means, the conceptualization informs you that [both] the form of this 
composite [statement] and that from which it is composed (like “white” 
and “accident”) occur in the mind, whereas |in| verification, this form’s 
relation to the things themselves occurs in the mind, that is, [the form in 

the mind] maps unto (mufabiga) [the things themselves] (Introduction, 
1.3, 17.7-17). 

Conceptualization, on the one hand, simply involves understanding the 
meaning or intention (ma ‘nd) of a word or a statement or even how state- 
ments work together to form an inference, with no reference to whether 
that term refers, or the statement is true, or the inference is sound. In veri- 
fication, on the other hand, not only does the conceptualization of the 
meaning of a word or form of a statement or inference occur in the mind, 
but also the object of the conceptualization must map onto or “correspond” 
with the thing itself. 

Bearing in mind Avicenna’s distinction between conceptualization and 
verification let me tentatively distinguish the discipline of logic from the 

sciences: Logic and the objects of logic, such as genus, difference, and 

30 AVICENNA 

species (the so-called second intelligibles), focus primarily on that aspect of 
knowledge that concerns conceptualization and the objects of concep- 
tualization, whereas science and the objects of science, such as extramental 
things and their causal relations, concern that aspect of knowledge that 
involves verification. 

As for what the objects of conceptualization are, Avicenna mentions 
definitions, definite descriptions, exemplars, and the signs or terms of things 
(Introduction, 1.3. 18.5). Most frequently, these objects of conceptualization 
are composite in nature. Thus, one first must conceptualize the simple or 
singular terms from which the more complex is composed in order to un- 
derstand fully the sense of the term or statement in question (/ntroduction, 
1.4, 21.1-22.12). For Avicenna, following Porphyry’s Isagoge, the most logi- 
cally basic or simple terms are universals represented by the genus (jins), 
difference (fasl), species (naw ‘), property (kAdssa), and accident (‘avad), the 
so-called predicables.° So, for example, when one conceptualizes the term 
“human” one might recognize that what is meant by it is a composite of the 
simpler or more logically basic concepts, “animal” and “rational.” Here, 
“animal” represents the genus, namely, that which is common to several 
individuals varying in species (Introduction, 1.9), and “rational” represents 
the difference, namely that which specifies among the generically common 
things what kind of animal human specifically is (Introduction, 1.13). Jointly, 
the genus and difference constitute the definition of the species “human.” 
Similarly, one might conceptualize that humans have the capacity to laugh, 
where “the capacity to laugh” is a property of humans in that it is something 
unique to humans even though it does not make up part of the definition of 
“human.” Also, one might conceptualize that “walking” or “black” might 
belong to humans, where “walking” and “black” are neither constitutive of 
the definition of human nor unique to humans, but are accidents of, that is, 
something nonessential to, a human. The propositions composed from the 
singular terms falling under these universal divisions are in turn constructed 
into syllogisms or, ideally, demonstrations, which are then used within the 
sciences. 

Although later I shall need to clarify how Avicenna believes that the 
universal predicables—genus, species, difference, property, and accident— 
as well as the propositions, and then syllogisms composed from them, relate 
to the extramental world, let me now explain how he considers them as 
they exist in conceptualization and how the conceptualization of them is 

related to logic. To do this I must first consider a topic that might initially 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 31 

seem to have more to do with metaphysics than logic, namely, essences 
(mahiyat), a topic, let me hasten to add, that is a recurring theme through- 
out Avicenna’s thought. Still, since Avicenna himself introduces essences in 
his logical works in order to explain the relation between logic and the sci- 
ences, I consider this topic here as well. In his Introduction to the Cure, 

Avicenna writes about essences: 

The essences of things might be in the concrete particulars of the things 
or in conceptualization, and so they can be considered in three ways. 
[One] is the consideration of the essence inasmuch as it is that essence 
without being related to one of the two [ways] of existence [that is, either 
in the concrete particulars or conceptualization] and whatever follows 
upon it insofar as it is such. [Two] it can be considered insofar as it is in 
concrete particulars, in which case certain accidents that particularize its 
existing as that follow upon it. [Three] it can be considered insofar as it is 
with respect to conceptualization, in which case certain accidents that 
particularize its existing as that follow upon it, as, for example, being a 
subject and predicate, and also, for example, universality and particular- 
ity in predication, as well as essentiality and accidentality in predication, 
for being essential and being accidental are not in things existing in the 
external [world] by way of predication, nor is something [in the external 
world] a logical subject (mubtada’) and a logical predicate (khabar), nor a 
premise, a syllogism, and the like (Introduction, 1.2, 15.1-8). 

For now I concentrate on Avicenna’s view of essences as they exist in con- 
ceptualization. He tells us that when one conceptualizes the essences of 
things, those essences acquire certain accidental features inasmuch as they 
are conceptualized, and that these accidental features need not belong to 
those essences considered either in themselves or as existing in concrete par- 
ticulars. One of the things that accidentally occurs to essences during con- 
ceptualization is that they may be conceptually divided into a part that is a 
logical subject and a part that is a logical predicate; for example, in the 
definition of “human,” one might consider “human” as the logical subject 
and “rational animality” as something predicated of that subject. Moreover, 
Avicenna tells us that during conceptualization essences may be considered 
as something universal or something particular, although, as will be seen, 
essences considered in themselves are, for Avicenna, paradoxically neither 
universal nor particular. 

For Avicenna, logic, at least inasmuch as it is relevant to the various sci- 

ences, is related to essences precisely insofar as it considers those essences as 

32 AVICENNA 

existing in conceptualization together with the accidental features that 

accrue to essences when they are conceptualized. Avicenna, thus, continues: 

Now, when we want to think discursively (natafakkara) about things 
[that is, syllogistically] and know them, we must necessarily take them in 
conceptualization, in which case they necessarily happen to have states 
that involve the conceptualization. So, we must necessarily consider the 
states that they have in conceptualization, especially when we want to 
come to know things by way of discursive reasoning that were unknown, 
where that [proceeds] from things that are known. Inevitably, things are 
unknown and likewise known only in relation to the mind. Now, the 
state and accident that they happen to have so that we [can] move from 
what is known about them to what is unknown about them is a state and 
accident that they happen to have with respect to conceptualization, even 
if what belongs to them in themselves is also something existing together 
with that. Thus, it is necessary that we know these states: their quantity, 
quality, and how they are considered in this accidental [way]. . . . This 
kind of investigation is called the science of logic, namely, the investiga- 
tion into the aforementioned things inasmuch as from them it leads to 
making the unknown known as well as what is accidental to them inas- 
much as they are only like that (Introduction, 1.2, 15.9—-16.12). 

Logic, inasmuch as it is a tool of the sciences, concerns essences along with 
the accidental features that follow upon their being conceptualized, and 
then ordering what is known in such a way that one can move from prior 
knowledge to a new knowledge about something, which was originally not 
known. Logic considered as a science in itself, however, is primarily inter- 
ested in the accidental features that occur as a result of being conceptual- 
ized, such as being a logical subject or predicate, universal or particular, and 
the like. That is because it is the accidental features following upon concep- 
tualization that allow logic to classify things under one of the five afore- 
mentioned universal predicables; to construct definitions and propositions 
from those predicables; and then to arrange those propositions so that they 
form valid syllogisms that allow one to move from the knowledge con- 
veyed in those propositions to conclusions that convey something that had 
previously been unknown. 

I have now considered how Avicenna envisions logic’s relation to con- 
ceptualization, but this relation raises the deeper question for him about 
how logic is related to scientific knowledge in its fullest sense, that is, 

knowledge involving both conceptualization and verification. To put the 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 33 

same point slightly differently, the question is “How do the objects of 
logic—namely, second intentions, which at least for Avicenna are purely 
mental objects—relate to the objects that the sciences investigate, namely, 
things in the world and their causal interactions?” In fact, the problem is 
even more acute; for Avicenna is a realist inasmuch as for him the goal of 
philosophical and scientific inquiry is ultimately a type of necessary cer- 
tainty (yaqgin) about the way the world in fact is.” Thus, if one cannot be 
certain that the objects of logic and the conclusions derived from logic actu- 
ally capture the way the world really is, then logic, for all the precision in 
reasoning it might bring, would fail to be an adequate tool for doing sci- 
ence. If logic is to play a role in the scientific enterprise, as Avicenna believes 
that it does, then there must be some bridge, or common element, linking 
the universal predicables treated in logic with the concrete particulars of 
immediate experience. 

In order to answer this deeper question concerning the relation of logic 
and science, Avicenna returns to his account of essences. Recall that for 
him essences exist either in conceptualization or in concrete particulars. 
Inasmuch as an essence exists externally in concrete particulars, it has ac- 
cidents different from those that follow upon its existing in conceptualiza- 
tion. More precisely, these accidents, at least in the case of the physical and 
natural kinds that we see around us here on Earth, follow upon the es- 
sence’s existing in matter,’ and by existing in matter, that essence becomes 
the essence of some concrete particular, as, for example, the essence of hu- 
man that belongs to me. Among the accidents that follow upon an essence’s 
existing in matter are such things as, for example, walking, being white, 
having this particularly bodily configuration, coming to be at this particu- 
lar place and time, and the like. In this respect, the essence of human, for 
example, that exists in individuals such as Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 
exists as a particular owing to the material conditions necessary for the 
existence of those individuals. Perhaps the most significant difference 
between the essence existing in matter and the essence existing in the 
mind, and so conceptualized, is that in the latter case the essence exists as 
something universal or general, whereas in the former case it exists as 
something particular or individuated. 

In addition to essences’ being considered as they exist either in concrete 
particulars or in conceptualization, Avicenna also believes that they can be 
considered merely in themselves. Considered in themselves, essences for 

Avicenna are neither universal nor particular, but potentially one or the 

34 AVICENNA 

other. Thus, Avicenna says, “The animal in itself is a certain thing (ma ‘nd)— 
whether as something existing in concrete particulars or something concep- 
tualized in the soul—but in itself it is neither general nor particular” (Intro- 
duction, 1.12, 65.11-12). Despite the apparently paradoxical nature of claming 
that essences considered in themselves are neither universal nor particular, 
Avicenna believes that to assert otherwise leads to absurdities. To make his 

point he presents the following dilemma. 

If [animal] in itself were general [that is, universal]—so that animality is 
general because it is animality—then necessarily no animal is an indi- 
vidual; rather, every animal is something general. Again, if the animal— 
because it is animal—were an individual, then only a single individual 
[animal] would be possible, namely, that animal that animality requires, 
and it would be impossible that any other thing is an animal. (Introduc- 
tion, 1.12, 65.12—16) 

The first horn assumes that animal is something essentially universal, that 
is to say, animal in itself would be the animality common to many animals. 
As such, being an animal would apply only to many animals, and so para- 
doxically being an animal could not apply to any animal taken singularly. 
In other words, given the assumption that animal in itself is necessarily and 
essentially universal and so holds only of many animals, and no animal 
taken individually is many animals, no individual animal could essentially 
be an animal, which Avicenna takes to be absurd. The second horn assumes 
that animal in itself is essentially particular and as such is not applicable to 
many, just as being the individual Socrates is not applicable to many. As 
such, being an animal would apply only to a single individual and anything 
other than that individual animal would not be an animal essentially, which 
again Avicenna finds absurd. Therefore, he concludes that to make animal 
in itself either universal or particular leads to absurd consequences. Thus, 
animal in itself cannot be either universal or particular. Since the argument 
can be generalized to any essence considered in itself, essences in them- 
selves are neither general nor particular. 

In fact, it is precisely because essences in themselves are potentially both 
universal and particular that logic is applicable to the scientific enterprise. 
That is because logical reasoning, which involves mental existents, maps 
onto scientific understanding, which involves extramental existents, pre- 
cisely because the objects of logic and science are partially identical for 

Avicenna inasmuch as the essences of things considered in themselves are 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 35 

common to both types of existence. That follows because when, through a 
process of abstraction (which I discuss more thoroughly in chapter 4), one 
strips away various accidental features that follow upon essences inasmuch 
as they exist, either in the mind or the concrete particulars, and then one 
considers merely the essences in themselves, what exists in the mind exactly 
equates with what exists in the world. In a very real sense it is the exact 
same thing in the mind and in the world, namely, an essence in itself. The 
essence in itself, then, provides the link between the world as it is and the 
world as we conceptualize it, guaranteeing that the two in very important 
ways are identical. 

Let me briefly summarize the most salient points thus far. For Avi- 
cenna essences exist in either one of two ways: They may exist in con- 
crete particulars, that is to say, extramentally, or they may exist in con- 
ceptualization, that is to say, mentally. Although essences always and 
only exist according to one of these two modes of existence, both modes 
have something in common, namely, the essence considered in itself, 
which bridges the gap between the extramental and the mental. So, for 
example, the essence of animal may exist as instantiated in concrete par- 
ticulars or it may exist as an intelligible in the mind, and yet, despite the 
difference between these two ways that animal might exist, both modes 
of existence have in common the essence of animal considered in itself. It 
is this commonality that guarantees that in salient ways the objects of the 
intellect map onto things in the world. Logic as a tool used in the sci- 
ences is for Avicenna concerned primarily with those accidental features 
that accrue to essences considered inasmuch as they are conceptualized. 
These features involve: the logical classification of things into subjects 
and predicates, as well as into genera, species, and the like; the various 
logical modes that hold of propositions formed from these predicables,” 
as, for example, being universal or particular, essential or accidental, 
necessary or possible, always or sometimes, and the like; and likewise the 
valid inferential structures that hold between propositions so as to lead 

to necessary conclusions. 

The Division of the Sciences 

In contrast with logic, the sciences are not concerned with the conceptual 
accidents that follow upon essences existing in the mind; rather, the sciences 

are concerned with the true natures (haga 7g) of things as those things 

36 AVICENNA 

exist in the world. Consequently, in the Introduction, Avicenna divides the 
sciences according to the various ways that things can be said to exist. The 
first division Avicenna makes is between “things that either do not exist as 
a result of our choice and action and those that do exist as a result of our 
choice and action (Introduction, I.2, 12.6—5)."! Those things over which we 
have no control belong to the theoretical sciences, while those over which 
we do have control belong to the practical sciences. Thus, the theoretical 
sciences seek knowledge simply for knowledge’s sake, whereas the practi- 
cal sciences seek knowledge for the sake of action. 

Avicenna further divides theoretical sciences according to whether the 
object of the science (1) exists necessarily mixed with or involving motion or 
(2) is not necessarily mixed with motion. Those things that exist necessarily 
with motion Avicenna again divides into (1.a) those that neither can exist 
nor be thought of independent of motion and (1.b) those things that, al- 
though necessarily existing together with motion, can nonetheless be 
thought of as independent of motion. Those things that neither subsist nor 
are conceived without motion, (1.a), must furthermore exist with matter, 
claims Avicenna, since matter is required if something is to undergo mo- 
tion or change. For example, a concrete particular animal cannot exist 
without flesh and blood, which is the matter from which there is an animal, 
and similarly one cannot conceptualize what an animal is without consider- 
ing flesh and blood—one simply is not thinking of an animal if one is con- 
ceptualizing a bloodless and fleshless thing. In contrast, other things can be 
conceptualized without matter, (1.b), for example, square-ness, even though 
the actual existence of a square for Avicenna requires matter. The natural 
sciences study, (1.a), those existents that are necessarily mixed with motion 
and that neither can subsist nor be conceptualized without matter. Those 
existents, (1.b), that can be conceptualized without matter, even though 
they are necessarily mixed with motion and never subsist without matter, 
are the subject of the mathematical sciences. 

In addition to the objects of the natural sciences and mathematical sci- 
ences, there are, (2), those things that are not necessarily mixed with motion. 
Some of these are necessarily separate from matter and motion, such as 
God and immaterial substances in general (what Avicenna calls “Intel- 
lects,” which are akin to what we might think of as angels), while others 
can but need not be mixed with motion, such as being, unity, multiplicity, 
and causality. Although one might expect Avicenna to mark off two theo- 

retical sciences given the difference he notes within this division, he in fact 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 37 

subsumes all things whose existence does not require motion under the 
single science of metaphysics, which simply studies being qua being, a point 
to which I return in more detail in chapter 6. 

In short, for Avicenna, there are three major branches of theoretical sci- 
ences: the natural sciences, the mathematical sciences, and the science of 
metaphysics. These divisions correspond respectively with whether the ob- 
jects investigated by the science must necessarily subsist as well as be con- 
ceptualized together with motion and matter; necessarily subsist together 
with matter and motion but need not be conceptualized as such; or need 
neither subsist nor be conceptualized together with matter and motion. 

As for the practical sciences, Avicenna’s comments are brief. He divides 
them according to the various spheres of human actions, whether at the 
state, home, or individual level (Introduction, 1.2, 14.11-15). Thus, city man- 
agement or generally politics concerns the concerted actions of a general 
human populace with shared interests. Home management (that is “eco- 
nomics” in the literal sense) concerns the concerted actions of a private 
group of humans with shared interests. Finally, ethics is concerned with the 
concerted actions of the single individual with respect to the flourishing of 

his or her own soul. 

Theoretical Science and the Search 
for Causes: Definitions 

Avicenna’s overt interests lie with the theoretical sciences. The goal for 
Avicenna of these sciences, and what they all share in common, is that they 
aim at a type of certainty or certitude (yagin) about the way the world is or 
why, given the actual makeup of the world, it must be as it is.’ For Avicenna 
the only way such certitude about the world can be obtained is through 
discovering the causes of and causal interrelations among things. Thus, 
while it is definitions that one conceptualizes, it is that the definitions reflect 
the true causal natures of things in the world that makes the definitions 
true, that is to say, the true causal natures of extramental things are the 
verifiers or truth-makers (tasdiq) of one’s definitions of those things. Simi- 
larly, while it is syllogisms that can lead one from what is known to knowl- 
edge of what was initially unknown, it is only when they map onto or 
mirror actual causal relations in the world that they are sound and that 

there is a verification of them. The theoretical sciences for Avicenna are 

38 AVICENNA 

concerned, then, with various kinds of existents, but even more specifically 
with the relations of causes to existence. In the case of things that have 
causes, the sciences are interested in uncovering those causes, whereas, 
should it turn out that something exists that has no cause, such as God, one 
would be concerned with it primarily as it is a cause of the existence of other 
things. Given the centrality of causality to Avicenna’s conception of science 
and knowledge, I consider, first, the relation of causes to definitions, and 
then in the next section the relation of causes to syllogisms. 

Avicenna says of scientific definitions that “the primary aim in defining 
is to indicate by the expression the essence of the thing” (Introduction, 1.9, 
48.3—4). Now, in the case of something absolutely simple or a singular term, 
Avicenna realizes that it cannot be defined in terms of essential or constitu- 
tive elements more basic than the very thing that is being defined. In these 
cases, one must appeal to relationships, accidents, concomitants, and neces- 
sities that belong to the thing in order to explain it. In contrast, Avicenna 

continues: 

If the account of the thing is something composed of [other] accounts, 
then it has a definition, namely, the statement that is composed of the 
accounts from which its essence occurs so that its essence occurs. Because 
the essential factors (dhatiyat) most proper to the thing are either its ge- 
nus or its difference ... the definition must be composed of the genus and 
the difference. So, when the proximate genus and the differences that 
follow it are present, then the definition occurs from them, as in our de- 
fining human as “rational animal.” In the case where the genus has no 
name, [defining] is equally accomplished by means of the definition of 
[the genus itself], as, for example, if there were no word for animal, then 
[the definition of human] would be accomplished by the definition of 
[animal], namely, a body possessing a sensate soul, to which “rational” is 
then attached. The same holds on the part of the difference. (Introduction, 
I.9, 48.13—-49.2) 

Definitions, then, are for Avicenna, statements composed of a genus and 
difference that indicate a thing’s essence. The genus, Avicenna defines, as 
“that which is said of many things varying in species in answer to the ques- 
tion, ‘What is it?’” (ibid., 49.1314); however, since the species is defined by 
reference to the genus, Avicenna realizes that there is at least the appear- 
ance of a circular definition. Thus, at the end of his chapter in the Introduc- 
tion on the genus, he says that “species” can be replaced in the definition of 

the genus, in which case genus is defined as “that which is said of many 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 39 

things varying in true natures, essences, and essential forms in answer to 
the question, “What is it?’” (ibid., 53.13—-14). 

The difference is the second essential element of a thing’s definition; 
however, Avicenna observes that logicians have recognized three different 
sorts of differences: the general difference, the proper difference, and the 
strict difference (Introduction, 1.13). A general difference is some distin- 
guishing trait that might belong to something, x, at one time and so differ- 
entiate x from y, but that at another time might belong to y. For example, 
one might differentiate Peter from Paul at one time by saying, “Peter is the 
one sitting” and then later distinguish Paul from Peter, by saying, “Paul is 
the one sitting,” where “sitting” is a general difference. A proper difference 
is some necessary accident”® predicated of one sort of thing that differenti- 
ates it from another sort of thing, and since “the differentiation occurs by 
means of an inseparable accident belonging to what is differentiated by it, 
there never ceases to be a differentiation proper to it” (ibid., 73.9-10). Avi- 
cenna gives the example of humans’ having “thin hair covering” (bad 
l-bashara), for having a (relative) thin hair covering, for example, always 
differentiates a human (even a hirsute one) from, say, an orangutan. 

Neither the general nor proper differences are elements in the definition 
of some natural kind; rather, only the strict difference is used in forming a 

scientific definition. Avicenna writes of it: 

The difference said in the strict sense constitutes the species, namely, it is 
that which when joined with the nature of the genus constitutes a species 
and thereafter whatever necessarily follows on or is accidental to [the dif- 
ference] necessarily follows on or is accidental to [the species]. So, it is 
something essential to the nature of the genus constituting a species in 
existence, namely, it fixes, divides, and individuates [the nature of the ge- 
nus], for example, like the rationality belonging to human. This differ- 
ence is differentiated from all the other things that are together with it in 
that it is that which primarily encounters the nature of the genus and so 
makes it determinate and divides it; and [in| that the rest of those attach to 
that general nature only after this [difference] has encountered [the genus] 
and divides it. Thus, [that general nature] is prepared for the necessity of 
what necessarily follows upon it and the concomitance of what is con- 
comitant with it, for they necessarily follow it and are concomitant with it 
only after the specification. This is like rationality’s belonging to human; 
for after the potency [or “faculty” called the “rational soul” is joined with 
the matter—and so at that time the animal becomes rational—|the ani- 
mal] is prepared to receive scientific and technical knowledge, such as 

40 AVICENNA 

navigation, husbandry, and writing. It is also prepared to wonder and so 
to laugh at oddities and to cry and to feel embarrassment and to do the 
other things that belong to being human. It is not the case that any one of 
these things was joined with animality in the mind first, and then on ac- 
count of that the animal came to be prepared in order that it be rational; 
rather, the universal preparation and the universal human potency are 
that by which [the animal] is called “rational,” whereas these latter are its 
nurslings and dependents. You know that by the least amount of reflec- 
tion. Also, you can discover that were it not that some initial potency is 
something prepared to distinguish and to understand, which already be- 
longed to the human, then [the animal] would not have these latter par- 
ticular preparations. That potency is called “reason” and so by it one 
becomes rational. This is the difference that essentially constitutes the na- 
ture of the species. (Introduction, 1.13, 74.11-75.9) 

Avicenna goes on and technically defines the strict difference much as he 
defined genus, namely, as “the universal singular said of the species in 
answer to the question, “What kind of thing is it in itself within its genus?’” 
(ibid., 76.8-9). The sciences again are primarily, although not exclusively, 
concerned with identifying those features of things that correspond with 
strict differences rather than the other types of differences. 

As a general rule, since definitions are supposed to capture the way 
things actually are in the world, the elements constituting the definition of 
the species must indicate positive causal factors belonging to things rather 
than negative aspects." Thus, Avicenna explicitly contradicts Porphyry, 
arguing that negative differences are not constitutive of a definition, but 
rather follow upon a consideration of the positive causal features that do in 

: ‘ ‘ 5 < : ; , 
fact constitute the thing itself.’ “Negations,” Avicenna maintains: 

are concomitants belonging to things relative to a consideration of cer- 
tain (positive) accounts that do not belong to [the things]. So, [for exam- 
ple], “irrational” is something intellectually understood by considering 
rational, in which case the species, its (positive) account, and its differ- 
ence that belongs to it are in the thing itself, and thereafter it is entailed 
of it that it is not described by anything else. (Introduction, 1.13, 79.35) 

Predicating a negation, such as “irrational,” of something, then, is subse- 
quent on a consideration of those features or causal factors that actually 
belong to a thing. In other words, a negation is predicated of something just 
in case some positive account, such as “rational,” fails to belong to that 

thing.”° 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE AI 

The constitutive elements that go into making a definition, namely, the 
genus and difference, then, must for Avicenna be positive factors that mir- 
ror real features of the world. There is also an important corollary that can 
be drawn from Avicenna’s point about the use of negations in defining the 
essences of things, namely, if something that purportedly has an essence 
cannot be defined in terms of positive factors, then, in fact, what one is 
conceptualizing is a vacuous concept. (This point becomes important when 
Avicenna attacks the notion of a void in his Physics, for, as will become clear, 
a key element in his critique of that notion is that no scientifically adequate 
definition can be given for a void in positive terms, and thus the name 
“void” does not refer.) 

The positive features in the world with which genus and difference cor- 
respond are for Avicenna a thing’s material and formal causes respectively. 
Stull, Avicenna argues that one cannot simply identify the logical notions of 
genus and difference with the material and formal causes that exist in ex- 
ternal concrete particulars. Indeed, doing so, observes Avicenna, has led to 

philosophical confusion. He relates two cases of such confusion. 

One of the greatest causes of confusion concerns how animal is a cause of 
the human’s being corporeal, given what we have claimed about that, for 
as long as the human is not corporeal, then, neither is it an animal. Or, 
how is [animal] a cause of the human’s having sensation, when as long as 
the human does not have sensation, then neither is it an animal, because 
corporeality and sensation are both causes of the existence of animal? As 
long as something does not exist, then the existence of whatever depends 
upon it does not exist. Also, when the account of the soul is joined with 
the account of body, such that it is the composite of the two that is an 
animal, not just one of them, then how can the body be predicated of the 
animal? In that case, it would be just like predicating the single thing of 
the two. Similarly, how can being animate be predicated of the animal, 
in which case it would be just like predicating the single thing of the 
two? (Book of Demonstration, 1.10, 49.4-10) 

Here, Avicenna notes two puzzles. The first puzzle arises from the fact that 
Avicenna believes that being an animal is a cause, of, and so prior to, the 
human’s body, but if one considers the logical relations between “animal” 
and “body” it would seem that “body” is the cause, and so prior to “animal,” 
for “animal” is defined as “a body having sensation,” where “body” func- 
tions as the genus and “having sensation” functions as the difference. 

“Body” and “having sensation,” then, seem to be explanatory and so prior 

42 AVICENNA 

to the species “animal” rather than animal’s somehow being their cause. In 
the second puzzle, since again “animal” is defined as “a body having sensa- 
tion,” to predicate “body” of “animal” is logically equivalent to saying “sen- 
sate body is body.” In this case the concern is that a certain whole, namely, 
“sensate-body,” is being identified with a part, namely, “body,” whereas a 
whole clearly cannot be identical with one of its parts. 

The puzzles are resolved, claims Avicenna, once one distinguishes the 
body qua matter from the body qua genus, and similarly once one distin- 
guishes sensation qua form and sensation qua difference.” In general, the 
distinction between matter/form and genus/difference concerns whether 
what is signified is taken in an exclusive way or nonexclusive way respectively. 
I focus primarily on Avicenna’s discussion of body qua matter and body qua 
genus, although similar remarks can be made about form and difference. 

The body as matter is for Avicenna body insofar as only length, breadth, 
and depth are signified and nothing else. It is, as it were, that which has 
bare corporeality. Any other qualifications are additional to the body as 
matter. In this respect, one might think of the body qua matter as the thin- 
nest possible account of what it is to be a body, for, as will be seen in the next 
chapter, being three-dimensional is for Avicenna the hallmark of being a 
body. In contrast, the body considered qua genus is an account that signifies 
not only three dimensions, but also, according to Avicenna, every other pos- 
sible description or account that one might associate with the term “body” 
when one conceptualizes various corporeal things. Indeed, Avicenna in- 
vites his reader to include within the meaning of “body,” understood as 
genus, every possible account compatible with being a body, even if those 
accounts might mutually exclude one another in reality, such as being ani- 
mate or inanimate, sensate or insensate, and rational or irrational. In this 
respect, one might think of the body qua genus as the thickest possible 
account of body that is still compatible with the notion of body. 

Given this distinction between matter and genus (and the analogous one 
for form and difference), Avicenna claims that “whatever is in the sense of 
the matter or the form is simply not predicated and is not taken as middle 
terms in their essence and definition, but as causes are taken as middle 
terms," namely, in the way we shall explain latter” (Book of Demonstration, 
I.10, 49.12-14). He argues for this point thus: 

Since the body in the first sense [that is, as matter] is a part of the substance 
composed of body and the forms that are posterior to the corporeality 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 43 

that is in the sense of matter, it is not something predicated, because that 
whole is not some abstract substance possessing only length, breadth, and 
depth. This second [that is, body as genus], however, is something predi- 
cated of whatever is a composite of matter and form, whether one form or 
a thousand, among which will be [having] three dimensions. Thus, [the 
body qua genus] is predicated of what is composed of corporeality (which 
is like matter) and soul, because the whole of that is a substance. (Book of 
Demonstration, 1.10, 50.4-8) 

Body qua matter, and similarly sensation qua form, cannot be predicated of 
animal since both are constitutive parts or elements that jointly cause the ani- 
mal, and so stand to the animal as constitutive or essential parts stand to the 
whole. Thus, to predicate body qua matter or sensation qua form of the ani- 
mal is tantamount to making the part equivalent to the whole, which it obvi- 
ously is not. In contrast, when one considers the body qua genus, one considers 
body in its thickest sense and as such it contains every possible account that is 
included in one’s conceptualization of body. In other words, for Avicenna the 
logical notion of a genus implicitly contains all the ways that the genus can be 
differentiated and so implicitly contains all of its species. It is precisely because 
body qua genus does implicitly contain the species “animal” that “body” can 
be predicated of “animal,” for such predication is similar to saying that the 
whole includes one of its parts. A similar account holds for difference as well. 

Although Avicenna believes that one must distinguish the causal no- 
tions of matter and form from the logical notions of genus and difference, 
I noted in the first section of this chapter that he also insists that there is, 
nonetheless, a close relation between them as well, for he believes that the 
causal elements in the essences of concrete particulars furnish the content of 
the universal predicables conceptualized in the mind. It is precisely because 
one has discovered, for example, that animal body and rationality are the 
matter and form respectively of the essence of concrete particular humans 
that the essence of human conceptualized in the mind in terms of the genus 
“animal” and the difference “rationality” provides the scientific definition 
of “human” as “rational animal.” In other words, because the logical order- 
ing mirrors the causal ordering, logical definitions in terms of genus and 
difference map onto the true natures of thing, and thus can function as 
proxies in logical inferences. Since any given determinate kind existing in 
the physical world has certain material and formal causes, the effect of this 
mirroring of the ontological ordering by the logical ordering is that that 

kind must likewise have a definition in terms of the logical counterparts of 

44 AVICENNA 

matter and form, namely, in terms of genus and difference. Avicenna ob- 
serves, “These differences, though trivial in themselves, are useful in the 
sciences, and should not be undervalued” (Book of Demonstration, 1.10, 
52.22). How they can be useful becomes clear in the next chapter when I 

consider one of Avicenna’s refutations of the existence of a void. 

Theoretical Science and the Search 
for Causes: Demonstrations 

A second aspect of Avicenna’s theory of science concerns how causes are 
related to the syllogism and more specifically to the demonstrative syllo- 
gism (burhan), which according to Avicenna is “a syllogism constituting 
certainty,” (Book of Demonstration, 1.7, 31.11). As such it begins with neces- 
sary and certain premises from which is deduced not only that the conclu- 
sion is the case, but also that the conclusion cannot not be the case (ibid., I.7, 
31-7-8). The demonstrative syllogism, then, makes clear the necessity or 
inevitableness obtaining between the subject matter designated by the syl- 
logism’s major and minor terms. 

Avicenna divides demonstrative knowledge itself into two categories de- 
pending upon the type of demonstration employed. Thus, he distinguishes 
between what came to be known in the Latin tradition as the demonstration 
propter quid, that is, the demonstration giving “the reason why” (6urhan 
lima) or simply the demonstration-why, and what was known as the dem- 
onstration guia, that is, the demonstration giving “the fact that” (burhan 
al-inna), or simply the demonstration-that.”” The demonstration-that is fur- 
ther divided into two subspecies: a demonstration-that which leads from 
one correlative effect to another correlative effect, called an “absolute dem- 
onstration-that” (burhdn al-inna ‘ald l-itliq), and a demonstration-that 
which leads from an effect to the cause, called an “indication” (dalz/). 

Concerning the two types of demonstration-that, Avicenna suffices 
himself with providing definitions and examples of both. Thus, the abso- 
lute demonstration-that “accords with the existing middle term’s neither 
being a cause nor an effect of the major’s existing in the minor; rather, [the 
middle term| is something related to or coextensive with [the major term| 
in relation to its cause, where [the middle term] accidentally accompanies it 
or something else simultaneous with it in the nature” (ibid., I.7, 32.7-10). 
He gives the following syllogism as an example: Whoever exhibits cloudy 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 45 

viscous urine is feared to have encephalitis; this individual (who is suffering 
from a fever) has exhibited such symptoms; thus, this individual is feared to 
have encephalitis. In this case, notes Avicenna, neither the symptoms nor 
having encephalitis is the cause or the effect of the other; rather, they are 
both effects of some unstated cause, which Avicenna identifies with the 
motion of heated humors toward the head and their evacuation from it. 
What is important to note about the absolute demonstration-that is that 
even though the syllogism neither proceeds from nor leads to a cause, there 
nonetheless is a necessary, natural causal relation between the two terms, 
namely, they both are effects of some common cause, even if that cause is 
not made explicitly clear in the syllogism. Had there been no such causal 
relation, and the two terms had been merely coincidental accidents, then 
there would have been no demonstration. 

The second of the two demonstrations-that, namely, an indication, “ac- 
cords with [the middle term’s] existing as the effect of the major’s existing in 
the minor” (ibid., I.7, 32.10). Here Avicenna provides several examples. For 
instance, every recurring tertian fever is a result of bile’s putrefaction; the 
individual has a recurring tertian fever; therefore, his fever is a result of bile’s 
putrefaction. Similar examples are given concerning the Moon’s relative po- 
sition in relation to the Sun and the Moon’s various phases; the Moon’s being 
eclipsed when it passes between the Earth and the Sun; and wood’s burning 
when put into contact with fire. What is common to all of these examples is 
that one starts from some effect and then concludes to the effect’s cause. 

Demonstration in the most proper sense according to Avicenna is the dem- 
onstration-why. This demonstration is a syllogism “that gives the cause with 
respect to both issues [namely, that such and such is the case as well as why such 
and such is the case], such that [the syllogism’s] middle term is like the cause 

2 
, and so 

that verifies (tasdiq) the major’s belonging to the minor (or its denial) 
it is a cause of the major’s belonging to the minor (or its denial)” (ibid., 1.7, 
32.5-7). In his examples of the demonstration-why, Avicenna returns to his 
earlier examples used in clarifying an indication, but now he converts the ex- 
amples such that the middle term is the cause of the effect. So, for example: 
Whoever suffers from a putrefaction of bile owing to the congestion of bile 
and the pores’ being obstructed is suffering from a recurring tertian fever; this 
individual is suffering from such putrefaction of the bile, therefore, this indi- 
vidual is suffering from a recurring tertian fever. Here, the major premise 
should be understood as a definition of “tertian fever,” namely, as a “putrefac- 

tion of bile” (genus) brought about by “a congestion and obstruction of the 

46 AVICENNA 

pores” (difference), where these are the causes of a tertian fever. In short, the 
demonstration-why, like the demonstration-that, inherently involves neces- 
sary, natural, causal relations. Unlike the demonstration-that, however, the 
demonstration-why makes clear exactly what that causal relation is. 

As Avicenna’s examples suggest, he believes that there is an inherent 
relation between demonstrations and causes; for demonstrations make clear 
the causes of a given phenomenon, while a knowledge of a phenomenon’s 
causes guarantees necessary, perpetual certainty, which Avicenna takes to 
be the goal of scientific knowledge. In fact, argues Avicenna, this certitude 
is ensured only when one comes to know the causes of the phenomenon. As 
for defending the existence of such causal relations, in a very real sense Avi- 
cenna simply takes the reality of natural causality for granted as part of his 
realism. Indeed, for Avicenna to deny natural causal relations (as certain 
Islamic speculative theologians in fact did) would make the events in the 
world matters of mere happenstance and arbitrary and so would leave un- 
explained the manifest regular and orderly occurrence of events. In effect, 
for Avicenna to deny causal relations would undermine the very possibility 

of science understood as an investigation and explanation of the world’s 
2 

order, a position that Avicenna simply will not countenance.” 

To summarize this section briefly, for Avicenna the goal of science is to 
obtain a type of certitude about the way the world is. One way such certi- 
tude can be reached is through demonstrations, that is, sound syllogisms, 
which provide necessary and eternal knowledge. In order to provide such 
knowledge, maintains Avicenna, the propositions used in demonstrations 
must mirror the actual causal relations in the world, ideally by direct causal 
relations, as in the case of demonstrations-why, or at the very least involv- 
ing indirect causal relations, as in the two cases of demonstrations-that. In 
subsequent chapters (especially chapters 3 and 7), I discuss the various types 
of causal relations investigated in scientific research, but for now the most 
important ones are formal and material causation, since it is these causes 

that are reflected in the definitions that give the essence of a thing. 
Acquiring the Definitions and First 
Principles of Science 

As has been seen, demonstrations can provide certitude according to Avi- 

cenna because they reflect the actual causal structure of the world; however, 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 47 

like Aristotle before him, Avicenna denies that everything can be demon- 
strated (Book of Demonstration, I1.1). That is because, argues Avicenna, who 
is himself following Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, 1 3, such a position would 
require that in order to know anything, either one must have gone through 
an infinite number of demonstrations (for the principles of any demonstra- 
tion would then themselves need to be demonstrated ad infinitum) or one 
has given a circular demonstration (for one and the same premise would 
have to be a principle and conclusion of itself to stop the regress). Both al- 
ternatives Avicenna complains would undermine the practice of science 
itself. In order to avoid either of these two outcomes, Avicenna maintains 
that demonstrative knowledge must proceed from prior knowledge or the 
so-called first principles of a science. These first principles are the existence 
claims and definitions of a given science and are not demonstrated within 
the science itself—though in some cases, although not all, they may be 
demonstrated in a “higher science.” Instead, relative to a given science, its 
first principles must simply be posited by that science without demonstra- 
tion (Book of Demonstration, 1.12, 58.14—17). 

Avicenna frequently states throughout the Book of Demonstration that a 
discussion of how the first principles of a science are acquired belongs prop- 
erly to the science of psychology, for an account of how one acquires such 
principles for Avicenna ultimately involves describing the various (proper- 
functioning) psychological and cognitive processes involved in human 
thought, as well as any natural posits required to explain what we as human 
cognizers in fact do. Indeed, in chapters 4 and 5, I consider in some detail 
the psychology underlying Avicenna’s theory of concept formation and the 
acquisition of scientific knowledge. For now, however, I merely focus on 
Avicenna’s discussion of two possible methodologies for acquiring first 
principles, namely, induction, or, more specifically, certain criticisms and 

Sa ebaaeee F , ; i . 23 
limitations Avicenna imposes on its use, and methodic experience. 

Induction 

While like Aristotle before him Avicenna takes a staunchly empirical ap- 
proach to the sciences (or at least the natural sciences),”’ it is on the subject 
of induction, which is frequently considered a cornerstone of empiricism, 
that Avicenna most notably parts way with Aristotle and his epistemology 
and philosophy of science. Here it should be noted that the conception 

of induction with which Avicenna takes issue is not the naive notion of 

48 AVICENNA 

induction that simply involves making a generalization from a limited 
number of observations; rather, Avicenna is critiquing a technical Aristote- 
lian notion of induction (Gk. epagogé, Ar. istigra’), which I discuss more 
fully below. This technical Aristotelian sense of induction involves, not 
only generalizations, but also a formal syllogism, and is intended to estab- 
lish the first principles of a science. In contrast with Aristotle, Avicenna is 
overall skeptical of the merit of induction as an adequate tool for scientific 
inquiry (at least as Aristotle presented induction in Prior Analytics, II 23). 

Avicenna describes induction in the following lackluster terms: 

When the particular instances [of the first principle] are considered in- 
ductively, they call the intellect’s attention to the belief of the universal; 
however, the induction that proceeds from sensory perception and the 
particulars in no way makes belief of a universal necessary, but only 
draws attention to it. For example, [when] two things both touch a third 
thing, but not each another, they require that that [third] thing is divisi- 
ble. This aforementioned claim, however, may not be something estab- 
lished in the soul as well as it is sensibly perceived in its particular 
instances, which the intellect does notice and believes. (Book of Demon- 
stration, III.5, 161.1418) 

For Avicenna, induction is at most merely a pointer that draws one’s atten- 
tion to the pertinent facts surrounding some state of affairs. Induction, 
then, does not make clear what the cause of that state of affairs is or even 
that there must be a cause. Although Avicenna’s reservations toward induc- 
tion might incline one to think that he is being anti-empirical in his 
approach to science, such an assessment would be wrong. 

Both in the Book of Demonstration (1.9) and the Book of Syllogism (1X.22), 
Avicenna lays out what he finds problematic about induction. Induction as 
described by Aristotle in his logical works has two elements: One involves 
the sensible content of induction, and the other the rational structure of 
induction, namely, the syllogism associated with induction. If Aristotelian 
induction is to provide one with the necessary and certain first principles of 
a science, then the necessity and certainty of the conclusion of an inductive 
syllogism must be due either to its sensory element or its rational element. 

Avicenna begins his critique of induction by first noting that the pur- 
ported necessity and certainty that induction is supposed to provide about 
causal relations cannot be known solely through induction’s sensory ele- 

ment, for, in good empirical fashion, Avicenna recognizes that the necessity 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 49 

of a causal relation and the certainty about it are not direct objects of sensa- 
tion. If the necessity and certainty are due to induction’s rational compo- 
nent, continues Avicenna, the syllogism associated with induction should 
not be question begging. Yet, complains Avicenna, in the scientifically in- 
teresting cases of induction one of the premises of the inductive syllogism is 
always better known than its conclusion, and so the induction is neither 
informative nor capable of making clear a first principle of a science. 

Let us consider Avicenna’s argument for this last claim. At [X.22 in the 
Book of Syllogism, Avicenna claims that induction in fact is successful in 
those cases where its divisions are exhaustive, as, for example, when animal 
is divided into mortal and immortal, or rational and irrational. The diffi- 
culty arises when one uses some other type of division that does not involve 
contradictory pairs. So, to take an example from Aristotle’s Prior Analytics, 
II 23, assume one divides long-lived animals into horses, oxen, humans, and 
the like, and then one wants to use this premise to make clear inductively 
the cause of these animals’ longevity. Thus, one might reason (as Aristotle 
in fact did) as follows: 

1. all horses, oxen, humans, and the like are gall-less (major premise); 

2. long-lived animals are horses, oxen, humans, and the like (minor 
premise); 

3. therefore, long-lived animals are gall-less. 

Avicenna’s earlier point concerning exhaustive division was that the induc- 
tion works only if one can be certain that one has correctly identified all 
and only long-lived animals in the minor premise. One could be certain of 
this identification, Avicenna however maintains, only if one knew what it 
is about this set of animals that guarantees that they and only they are the 
long-lived ones, but this knowledge would simply be to know the cause of 
these animals’ longevity, the very premise one wanted to make clear. Thus, 
it cannot be induction’s rational element, at least in the scientifically inter- 
esting cases of induction, that explains the purported necessity and cer- 
tainty of its conclusion; for, complains Avicenna, the syllogism is question 
begging. 

The necessity and certainty required by scientific knowledge, then, can- 
not arise from either induction’s sensory or rational elements. Again, Avi- 
cenna is not dismissing Aristotelian induction outright; it certainly has its 
place in science for him as a means of drawing one’s attention to pertinent 

facts. Still, if induction is intended to establish the facts about some causal 

50 AVICENNA 

relation and so provide the first principle of a science, Avicenna contends 

that it simply fails. 

Methodic Experience 

Avicenna instead wants to replace the technical Aristotelian notion of in- 
duction with his own conception of methodic experience (tajriba), which 
like induction has both a sensory and rational, or syllogistic, component. 
Unlike induction, however, methodic experience does not purport to ex- 
plain why, that is, what the causal relation is between two terms of a first 
principle, but only to identify that there is a causal relation between those 

terms. 

[Methodic experience] is not like induction, for induction, in chancing 
upon the particulars, does not occasion universal certain knowledge, 
even if it might be something drawing attention [to it], whereas me- 
thodic experience does. Indeed, methodic experience is like the observer 
and perceiver seeing and sensing that certain things belong to a single 
kind upon which follows the occurrence of a given action or affection. 
So, when that is repeated numerous times, the intellect judges that this is 
an essential feature belonging to this thing that is not some mere chance 
occurrence, since that which is by chance does not occur always. An ex- 
ample of this is our judgment that a magnet attracts iron, and that scam- 
mony purges bile. (Book of Demonstration, H1.5, 161.20—162.3) 

In methodic experience, there is the regular observation that two things 
always occur together without any falsifying evidence to the contrary. The 
regularity of the observation provides the basis for a hidden syllogism, 
claims Avicenna, namely that whenever two things always occur together 
without any falsifying instance there must be a cause relating those two 
things, and since these two things regularly occur together, there must be a 
cause relating them. So, for example, one always observes a magnet’s at- 
tracting iron. Given the regularity of this occurrence, there must be some 
causal relation, maintains Avicenna, that exists between the magnet’s at- 
traction and the iron, otherwise the attraction would not always occur. Avi- 
cenna’s general idea is that if there were absolutely nothing linking two 
regularly joined events or things to one another, then the laws of probabil- 
ity would dictate that the two should on occasion not occur together, which 

is contrary to observation. Methodic experience has not explained what this 

LOGIC AND SCIENCE 51 

causal relation is, but it has established that there is such a relation. Thus, 
given the fact that propositions obtained from methodic experience must 
involve some causal relation between the terms, such propositions, claims 
Avicenna, can still be used as first principles of a science in order to explain 
other phenomena. 

As for the knowledge acquired through methodic experience, Avicenna 
is quite insistent that although the knowledge so obtained is necessary, the 
necessity in question is only conditional necessity and applies only to the 

domain under which the examination was made. 

[Methodic experience] does not provide absolute universal syllogistic 
knowledge, but only conditional universal [knowledge], that is, this thing 
that is repeated to the senses adheres to its nature as an ongoing thing 
with respect to the domain in which it is repeated to the senses (unless 
there is an obstacle). Thus, [the knowledge] is universal with this condi- 
tion but not absolutely universal. (Book of Demonstration, 1.9, 46.20-23) 

It is because knowledge of the first principles acquired through methodic 
experience is limited to the domain under which the examination took 
place that Avicenna further warns us that in light of new empirical data one 
may need to revise one’s claims. For example, he considers the case of the 
scientist who has repeatedly observed that on administering scammony 

there is always an accompanying purging of bile. 

We also do not preclude that in some country a disposition and special 
attribute are associated with scammony not to purge (or there is absent in 
it a disposition and special attribute); however, it is necessary that our 
judgment based upon methodic experience is that the scammony com- 
monplace to us and perceived [before us], either from its essence or from 
the nature in it, purges bile (unless it opposed by an obstacle). (ibid., I.9, 
48.4—7) 

Thus, the only thing that one can legitimately conclude from methodic 
experience, according to Avicenna, is that those varieties of scammony that 
have been tested always lead to this expected result; however, should new 
varieties of scammony become available that do not conform to the earlier 
findings, the initial hypothesis must be revised, and of course this point can 
be extended to all cases of knowledge acquired through methodic experi- 
ence. In the end, while it is true that Avicenna was critical of the notion 
of induction that he inherited and wanted to replace it with his own 

conception of methodic experience, his conception of methodic experience 

52 AVICENNA 

is perhaps closer to our own understanding of what induction is than the 
earlier account of it that he wanted to replace. 

To conclude this chapter, for Avicenna scientific knowledge involves 
two facets: conceptualization and verification. Logic treats those universal 
features of essences that follow upon their being conceptualized and so ex- 
isting in the mind, whereas the various sciences focus on verification, 
namely, discovering and making clear those causal relations among es- 
sences inasmuch as they exist concretely in the world. The two most impor- 
tant logical tools used in the various sciences are for Avicenna definitions 
and demonstrations, both of which are closely related to the causes sought 
in the various sciences. Thus, the genus and difference that constitute a 
definition reflect, but are not wholly identical with, the material and formal 
causes of a thing’s essence, while the middle term of a demonstration either 
expresses, or in some sense is connected with, the causal relation linking the 
terms of a demonstration. In his works specifically dedicated to philosophy 
of science, Avicenna outlines a number of methods that the scientist uses to 
discover these causal relations. What should be emphasized about these 
methods, as well as about Avicenna’s general attitude toward science, are 
the strong empirical or naturalistic elements as opposed to so-called rational 
or a priori elements. In the next chapter, I consider how Avicenna uses a 
number of the logical points developed in his Book of Demonstration to 
tackle and to resolve problems in natural philosophy, that is, the science of 

physics. 

NATURAL SCIENCE 

Introduction 

In the previous chapter I looked at Avicenna’s division of the sciences. I ob- 
served there that for Avicenna natural philosophy includes those sciences that 
investigate things that are mixed with motion. Broadly, the natural sciences 
can be divided further into those that investigate inanimate things, as, for 
example, the sciences of cosmology and meteorology, and those that investi- 
gate animate things, as, for example, the sciences of biology and psychology. 
In subsequent chapters, I shall treat various issues proper to certain of these 
special physical sciences. In the present chapter, however, I focus on Avicen- 
na’s discussion of the most general principles of natural things, that is, those 
principles assumed by all of the special physical sciences. To this end, I begin 
by looking at Avicenna’s enumeration and account of the principles of nature, 
that is, the causes required for there to be motion, regardless of whether it is 
the motion of something animate or inanimate. After considering the princi- 
ples of nature, I turn to Avicenna’s analysis of motion and certain purported 
necessary conditions needed if there is to be motion, such as place, void, time, 
and the continuum as well as Avicenna’s arguments against atomism. I then 
quickly consider Avicenna’s theory of may/, or inclination, and its role in his 
dynamics, and conclude with his account of substantial change, the elements, 

and his initial introduction of a “Giver of Forms.” 

53 

54 AVICENNA 
The Principles of Nature 

At the start of Avicenna’s Physics, he reiterates that the subject of natural 
science is “perceptible body from the perspective of being subject to change” 
(Physics, 1.1, 7.78). Natural science at its most general level investigates the 
principles of such bodies: first those causes that account for the body’s being 
a body, and then any additional causes (if there are any) that might be 
needed to explain the change or motion in those bodies. 

In most general terms, a “natural body” is for Avicenna any substance in 
which one can posit the three dimensions length, breadth, and depth (Physics, 
I.2, 13.4-6). A natural body must have both that which explains its being 
susceptible to or potentially having three dimensions (as well as potentially 
having any subsequent specifications, attributes, or the like) and that which 
explains its actually having three dimensions (and again any subsequent 
specifications, attributes, or the like).' Of these two aspects of natural bod- 
ies, that is, their being susceptible to and then their actually having dimen- 

sions, Avicenna writes: 

In the view of [the natural philosopher], these most deserve to be called 
“principles.” They are two: The first is like the wood of the bed, and the 
other is [like] the form and shape of bed-ness in the bed. What is like the 

wood of the bed is called, according to various considerations, “prime 

66 66 

matter,” “subject,” “matter,” “constituent,” and “element,” while what is 

like the form of the bed-ness is called “form.” (Physics, I.2, 13.15-14.1) 

Form and matter, for Avicenna, constitute the “internal principles” for the 
existence and subsistence of natural bodies. 

Again, the general science of physics wants to analyze its concepts into 
the most basic terms used in explaining the physical world. Thus, form and 
matter here need to be analyzed in terms of the simplest accounts required 
for the existence of a natural body. As for the form, this is the form of cor- 
poreality, which is that form that explains the natural body’s actually hav- 
ing dimensions. Avicenna says of the form of corporeality that it is either 
prior to all other generic, specific, and accidental forms that might inform 
matter, or it is joined with them and is not separate from them. The distinc- 
tion that Avicenna is drawing here is the same one he drew in his logical 
works between body qua matter and body qua genus, for one can consider 
body either as possessing only tri-dimensionality, in which case the form 

of corporeality is prior to all other forms, or as encompassing all forms 

NATURAL SCIENCE 55 

compatible with being a body, one of which is the form of corporeality. In 
either case, it is clear that whatever holds of corporeality likewise holds of 
natural bodies. In other places in his Physics and Metaphysics, Avicenna 
mentions other features that follow upon the form of corporeality, such as 
being divisible, localized, measurable, and even impenetrable, all of which 
correspondingly belong to natural bodies. 

The most general account of matter employed by the natural philoso- 
pher is that of “first matter” or “prime matter” (Aayald, the Arabic translit- 
eration of the Greek hu/é). It, as its name implies, is the first or most basic 
matter from which composite or more complex material things are built, 
or, in other words, it is what is in potency to being any of the various kinds 
of physical things that we see around us. Avicenna says of it, “when consid- 
ered in itself without being related to anything else [prime matter] is found 
to be in itself devoid of these [generic, specific, or accidental] forms in actu- 
ality, while, nonetheless, having the character of receiving this [or that] 
form or joining with it” (Physics, 1.1, 14.4-5). This is not to say, and 
Avicenna is adamant on this point, that matter is ever wholly stripped of 
form subsisting on its own. “It is not something actually existing except for 
when the form is present, in which case it exists actually through the form. 
If it were not the case that the form departs from it only with the arrival of 
another form that substitutes for it and takes its place, then matter would 
actually cease to be” (ibid., I.1, 14.12-14). The reason why Avicenna believes 
that the matter would cease to be if it lacked a form is that for him the form 
explains the actual existence belonging to a thing, whereas the matter ex- 
plains a thing’s potential existence, where “potentiality” is understood as 
preparedness to receive a form that is different from the form presently 
existing in the thing. Thus, if matter were ever wholly devoid of all forms, 
it would not actually be anything, that is, it would not exist, since any actual 
existence it has must come from a form. (When I consider Avicenna’s ac- 
count of creation in chapter 7, I consider his arguments for associating matter 
with potentiality more fully.) 

Form and matter, then, are those internal principles that constitute a natu- 
ral body. The natural body qua natural body also has additional principles 
inasmuch as it is subject to generation and corruption or change in general. 
One of these, which Avicenna acknowledges is not a “principle” in the strict 
sense, is privation. Avicenna’s reservations about calling privation a principle 
almost certainly stem from his own understanding of what a principle is, 

namely, “anything that already has a completed existence in itself (whether 

56 AVICENNA 

from itself or another) and from which the existence of another thing occurs 
and subsists by it” (Salvation, “Metaphysics,” 1.12, 518.8—10). This under- 
standing of what a principle is arises from his conception of science as an 
attempt to uncover those positive causal factors that underlie the apparent 
order one sees in the world. Privation as a type of negation, then, would 
seem incapable of mapping onto anything in the world, and so strictly speak- 
ing cannot be a cause or play any real positive role in causal processes. Still, 

continues Avicenna, whatever else one might think, it must be conceded that: 

privation is a condition with respect to something’s being either subject 
to change or perfection. [That is] because if there were no privation, it 
would be impossible for there to be things subject to change and perfec- 
tion; rather, the [same] perfection and form would always be present. 
Hence, to the extent that something truly is subject to change and perfec- 
tion it requires a preceding privation, whereas privation, in that it is a 
privation, does not require the presence of change and perfection, in 
which case the elimination of privation necessitates the elimination of 
what is subject to change and perfection as such, whereas the elimination 
of what is subject to change and perfection does not necessitate the elim- 
ination of privation. So, in this way privation is prior and so is a princi- 
ple, if a principle is whatever must exist, no matter how so, in order that 
some other thing exists, but not conversely. (Physics, I.2, 17.9-14) 

Here, Avicenna, following Aristotle upon whose account of the principles 
of nature Avicenna’s own relies heavily, explains the obvious fact that 
change requires a preceding privation or lack. For if something already 
possesses some trait, and so is not lacking it, it cannot change so as to ac- 
quire that trait. For example, if something is black, it cannot change so as to 
become black, since it already is black. Privation, then, is something from 
which change or motion proceeds, and so in that respect might be thought 
of as a principle of change. In the end, however, Avicenna, unlike Aristotle, 
prefers to think of privation not as a principle of change, but merely as 
something needed for change (muta ilayhi), which is joined to prime mat- 
ter considered as potentiality. Thus, he writes the following of the privation 

investigated in the natural sciences: 

The form is different from the privation in that the form is in itself an 
essence that adds to the existence belonging to the prime matter, whereas 
the privation does not add to the existence that belongs to prime matter. 
Instead, prime matter is associated with [privation] as its state of being 

NATURAL SCIENCE 57 

correlated with this form, when [that form] does not exist, but the poten- 
tiality to receive it does. This privation is not absolute privation, but 
rather a privation that has some manner of existing. It is a privation of 
something concurrent with a configuration and a disposition for [that 
thing] in a determinate matter. So, [for example], human does not come 
out of what is wholly not-human; rather, it comes out of what is not- 
human in something that is receptive to [being] human. So, generation is 
by way of the form not the privation, whereas corruption is by way of the 
privation not the form. (Physics, I.2, 18.13-17) 

Thus, the privation in question is not something absolutely nonexistent, but is 
a relative nonexistence correlated with the potentiality inherent in matter. 

In addition to form and matter (the so-called internal principles) as well 
as privation, Avicenna also includes two further natural causes that are re- 
quired if a natural body is to undergo change, perfection, generation, or the 
like. These are the so-called external principles, namely, the efficient and 
final causes. These principles are called “external” for two reasons. First, 
unlike matter and form, they need not be immediately present in the natural 
body for its continued existence and subsistence, but are only required inas- 
much as the natural body is undergoing some type of motion or change. 
Second, although Avicenna, following Aristotle, believes that frequently the 
immediate efficient and final causes reduce to the nature of the body, or, 
more precisely, the natural body’s formal cause, the remote or ultimate effi- 
cient and final cause refer to something external to the natural body, namely, 
God, who, for Avicenna, is beyond the purview of natural philosophy. 

Here Avicenna believes that a brief aside is warranted, for unlike Aristotle 
who made God, or more precisely the Unmoved Mover, the apex of the 
natural philosopher’s investigation, Avicenna clearly believes that a discus- 
sion of God as the First Principle of all natural things must await metaphysics. 
The reason that he gives for this deviation from Aristotle is that natural 
philosophy investigates those things possessing natures and so subject to 
change and motion. The First Principle inasmuch as it is the cause of every- 
thing possessing a nature cannot itself possess a nature; for “if the [First] 
Principle were to possess a nature, it would then either be a principle of it- 
self—which is absurd—or something other than it would be [its] efficient 
principle—which is a contradiction. Given that this is the case, the natural 
philosopher has no way to investigate it, since it is not in any way mixed with 
natures” (Physics, I.2, 16.6—8). In short, the natural sciences do not investigate 

every efficient and final cause, but only those possessing natures. 

58 AVICENNA 

As for Avicenna’s general characterization of the efficient and final 

causes, he describes them thus: 

The efficient cause is what imprinted the form belonging to bodies into 
their matter. So, it is through the form that the matter came to subsist, 
and from the two [together] there came to subsist the composite that acts 
through its form and is affected through its matter. The final cause is 
that for the sake of which these forms were imprinted into matters. 
(Physics, 1.2, 15.6-9) 

Later in the Physics, Avicenna develops his account of these causes as they 
apply to natural science. Thus, concerning the efficient cause he adds that 
“the efficient cause among natural things is said of the principle of motion 
in another different from it qua other,’ where I mean by ‘motion’ here any 
emergence from a potency in the matter into act. This principle is the cause 
of the other’s transformation and its being set into motion from potency 
into act” (Physics, I.10, 48.14-15). Avicenna further explains what he means 
by “in another different from it” with an example common since Aristotle, 
namely, of a doctor healing him or herself, for a doctor is not healed inasmuch 
as he or she is a doctor, but inasmuch as he or she is in need of some cure 
and so is a patient. As a patient, however, he or she is being considered as 
other than a doctor. 

Avicenna’s discussion of the final cause, at least in the Physics, is brief. Of 
it he says, “the final cause is the thing for the sake of which the form is 
present in the matter, namely, the real or supposed good, for in any produc- 
tion of motion that proceeds essentially and not accidentally from an agent, 
[that agent] desires what is a good in relation to itself—sometimes what is 
really [good] and sometimes what is supposedly [good], since either it is 
such or [at least] is supposed to be such” (Physics, 1.10, 52.14—16). 

In one sense it is obviously the case that the efficient cause causes the exist- 
ence of the final cause. Still, there is for Avicenna another sense in which the 
final cause precedes and, in fact, is the cause of the causality of the efficient 
cause. Although Avicenna mentions this point in his Physics ([.11, 53-10-12), 
he says it must await its full clarification in First Philosophy. Thus, to antici- 
pate that discussion, in the “Metaphysics” of the Salvation, he writes: 

The end comes to exist later than the effect, but it is prior to the rest of 
the causes in thingness (shay’7ya). There is a difference between the 
thingness and the existence in concrete particulars, for the account [of 
what something is] has an existence in concrete particulars and in the 

NATURAL SCIENCE 59 

soul and is something common [to both]. That common thing, then, is 
the thingness. The end, insofar as it is a thing, is prior to the rest of the 
causes and is the cause of the causes inasmuch as they are causes, while 
insofar as it is something existing in concrete particulars it may come 
later. (Salvation, “Metaphysics,” 519.16-520.4) 

The notion of “thingness” here seems to be the idea of an essence consid- 
ered in itself, or at least closely related to it, which was already encountered 
in the previous chapter.” Thus, Avicenna’s point is that although the final 
cause, at least among natural things, is the last thing to receive a concrete 
existence outside of the intellect, the essence of the final cause considered in 
itself must be prior and then exist in the intellect so as to cause the efficient 
cause to produce some effect or end, since the desire for the end is what 
moves the efficient cause to act. In slogan form, then, the final cause is the 

cause of the causality of the efficient cause. 

Avicenna’s Analysis of Motion 

Again, for Avicenna natural science is the study of perceptible bodies inas- 
much as they are subject to motion. Thus, the heart of Avicenna’s general 
physics involves a careful analysis of motion and the conditions necessary 
for motion. In this section, then, I consider Avicenna’s conception of the 
form of motion, followed by his analysis of circular and rectilinear motion. 
In the next section, I turn to his treatment of certain conditions thought to 
be necessary for motion. For the most part, Avicenna follows or defends an 
Aristotelian account of these issues. Still, frequently he augments what 
Aristotle had to say in light of later criticisms that were leveled against 
Aristotle’s positions. Also, in certain cases, most notably his analysis of 
motion itself, the philosophical tradition surrounding Aristotle’s Physics 
played out in ways that required Avicenna to go well beyond Aristotle’s 
own account of motion. It is primarily these innovative elements in Avicenna’s 

natural philosophy that are the focus of the following sections. 

Avicenna’s General Analysis of Motion 

Aristotle in his PAysics (IIL 1, 201a10—11) had defined motion (Gk. kinésis, 
Ar. haraka) as “the entelekheia of what is potential insofar as it is such.” 

60 AVICENNA 

What was to become a major issue among Aristotle’s Greek commentators 
was how to understand the enigmatic entelekheia in this definition of mo- 
tion, a term, which it seems that Aristotle himself coined.’ For the moment 
I shall leave it untranslated, and just note that it can mean either “actual- 
izing” (progressive aspect) or “actualized” (completed aspect). As a means 
of clarifying this notion, these later Hellenistic commentators appealed 
to Aristotle’s additional comments in the De Anima (II 1), where Aristotle 
distinguished between first and second entelekheiai.’ The distinction is 

between, for example, one who knows a language, but is not currently 

using it—a first entelekheia—and one who is currently using a language—a 
second entelekheia. 

With respect to motion, there was universal agreement that its second 
entelekheia refers to the final end or state of perfection reached at the termi- 
nation of the motion, whereas its first entelekheia refers to the intermediate 
state of the moving thing between its initial state of potentiality and its final 
state of perfection, that is, its second entelekheia. Still, there were diver- 
gences within the commentary tradition as to how a first entelekheia re- 
ferred to this intermediate state. Some argued that a first entelekheia must 
refer to a progression or process through the intermediary magnitude to- 
ward some end or perfection. Others argued that a first entelekheia must 
refer in some sense to the completed actuality of some partial end or perfec- 
tion. In other words, the dispute in the ancient world was over whether 
entelekheia is itself a process term or not. If entelekheia is a process term, 

then it is clear how Aristotle’s definition of motion 

again the entelekheia 
of what is potential insofar as it is such—describes a process. Alas, it de- 
scribes a process by assuming a process term in the definition, whereas 
Aristotle’s definition of motion is intended to provide the most basic 
account of what a process is, and so should not presuppose a process. If 
entelekheia is not a process term, then Aristotle’s definition avoids circularity, 
but it is no longer clear how it describes a process, since a completion or 
perfection is the end of a process, not a process itself. 

The above roughly presents the philosophical debate surrounding Aris- 
totle’s definition of motion as it reached Avicenna. Following the Arabic 
translation of Aristotle’s Physics, Avicenna defines motion as “the first per- 
fection (kamal) belonging to what is in potency inasmuch as it is in potency” 
(Physics, I.1, 83.5). Clearly, the Arabic translation of entelekheia by “perfec- 
tion” already biases an Arabic-speaking philosopher toward a non-process 

understanding of this term, which indeed is how Avicenna understands the 

NATURAL SCIENCE 61 

definition. Thus, against the process interpretation of entelekheia Avicenna 
argues, as certain earlier commentators had, that the definition of motion is 
intended to provide the natural philosopher with the most basic account of 
what a process is. As such, one’s definition of motion can not employ, either 
explicitly or implicitly, some other process term, for “passage,” “proces- 
sion,” “traversal,” and the like—which had been used by certain earlier 
philosophers to explain motion—are all synonyms for motion, complained 
Avicenna (Physics, 11.1, 83.14—15). In addition, such terms refer to a particu- 
lar kind of motion, namely, exchange of place, and yet for Avicenna and 
the entire Aristotelian tradition, there are other kinds of motion as well, 
such as change of quantity or change of quality. Consequently, concluded 
Avicenna, to define motion in terms of a process is either to give a synonym 
for “motion” or to define the more general in terms of the more specific 
(ibid., 83.1517). In either case, the purported definition for Avicenna lacks 
explanatory power, and so is to be rejected as a proper scientific or 
philosophical definition. 

Given his understanding of entelekheia, the issue for Avicenna was to 
explain how Aristotle’s definition of motion in fact describes a process. In- 
deed, solving this problem led Avicenna to perhaps his most novel physical 
innovation, namely, the suggestion that there must be motion at an instant, 
an idea that was unheard of among Aristotle’s earlier Greek commenta- 
tors.’ Avicenna argued thus: Motion’s definition, following Aristotle, is the 
(first) perfection of what is potential as potential. The first perfection in 
question can refer either to the perfection of the moving thing as something 
extending across a continuous intermediate magnitude or to its perfection 
at various posited intermediate points in the magnitude. In other words, 
motion might refer either to the perfection of the moving thing in the whole 
intermediate magnitude stretching from beginning to end considered in 
toto or to the perfection of that moving thing in one intermediary point 
after another. 

For Avicenna it is simply impossible that motion, as it exists in the world, 
should be the perfection of something extending across the whole interme- 
diate magnitude; rather, motion understood as something extended only 

exists as such in the mind, not in the world. Thus, Avicenna writes: 

If by “motion” one means the continuous thing intellectually understood 
to belong to that which undergoes motion [stretching] from start to end, 
then what is being moved simply does not have that while it is between 

62 AVICENNA 

the starting and end points. Quite the contrary, supposedly it has oc- 
curred in some way only when what is moved is at the end point, but this 
continuous intelligible thing has ceased to exist there and so how can it 
have some real determinate existence? The fact is that this thing is not 
really something that itself subsists in concrete particulars. It leaves an 
impression on the retentive imagination only because its form subsists in 
the mind by reason of the moved thing’s relation to two places: the place 
from which it departs and the place at which it arrives. Alternatively, it 
might leave an impression on the retentive imagination because the form 
of what is moved, which occurs at a certain place and has a certain prox- 
imity and remoteness to bodies, has been imprinted upon it. Thereafter, 
by [the moving thing’s] occurring at a different place and having a differ- 
ent proximity and remoteness, it is sensibly perceived that another form 
has followed [the first]. In that case, one becomes aware of two forms 
together as a single form belonging to motion. [Motion so understood], 
however, does not determinately subsist in reality as it does in the mind, 
since it does not determinately exist at the two limits together and the 
state that is between the two has no subsistent existence. (Physics, II.1, 
84.1-8) 

Avicenna’s point becomes clearer with an example. If one considers the 
motion of a ball between two spatially separated places, x and y, the ball’s 
motion is never fully actualized as some continuous extension that at any 
moment completely stretches from x to y, in the way that the spatial dis- 
tance between x and y exists as fully actual all at once. Instead, during the 
motion the ball exists at one spot along the spatial interval and then ceases 
to exist at that spot, only to exist in another spot, and so on. Only after the 
motion is completed does an idea of the motion as extending through the 
interval come to exist in the mind, but of course the motion has ceased at 
that point. 

The first option, namely that motion refers to the perfection of the mov- 
ing thing in the whole intermediate magnitude stretching from beginning 
to end considered in toto, is again impossible (at least as an account of mo- 
tion as it exists in the world as opposed to the mind). Thus, motion, Avi- 
cenna argues, must refer to the perfection of the moving thing in one inter- 
mediary point after another, albeit only as existing at an intermediary point 
for an instant. 

Avicenna, thus, understands the notion of a first entelekheia in Aristotle’s 
definition of motion as a moving body’s actually being at some intermedi- 

ary point along the distance covered only for an instant. The challenge before 

NATURAL SCIENCE 63 

Avicenna is to explain how the moving body could be actually at an inter- 
mediary point in such a way that its being at that point implies neither that 
the moving body is at rest at that point nor that the distance and time 
involved in the motion are atomic. 

The former concern, namely that the moving body would be at rest at 
that point, arises from the following considerations. Arriving at some point 
is different from leaving that point. Consequently, if a mobile actually 
comes to be at some intermediary point, there must be an instant at which 
the mobile comes to be at that point and a different instant when it leaves 
that point. Now, if time is continuous, that is, one can continually take 
smaller and smaller periods of time, as Avicenna believes, and the continu- 
ity of time entails that between any two instants there is a period of time 
(for between any two points on a continuum there is an infinity of potential 
points), then there must be a period of time during which the moving ob- 
ject would be at rest at the point, namely, the time between the instant that 
it arrives and then the instant that it leaves that point. The real problem 
arises for Avicenna since he also thinks that the space traversed is continu- 
ous as well. Consequently, there must be a potentially infinite number of 
points along the traversed space, each at which the mobile would purport- 
edly be at rest for some (imperceptibly) short period of time. In that case, 
however, traversing any finite continuous magnitude, if the mobile actually 
comes to be at all the intermediary points, would take an infinite period of 
time, which obviously is false. For infinitely many short periods of time 
(even imperceptibly short periods of time) add up to an infinitely long 
period of time. 

One can avoid this conclusion if one makes space or time (or both) 
atomic, that is, if one holds that any finite spatial or temporal magnitude is 
a composite of minimal spatial or temporal units, which themselves have 
some positive, indivisible extension. In that case, any finite spatial or tempo- 
ral magnitude would be composed of only a finite number of atomic parts 
at which the mobile need be, and indeed certain Islamic speculative theolo- 
gians had done just this. Such an option, however, was not open to Avi- 
cenna, since, as will be seen later,!” he vehemently opposed and argued 
against atomism in any form. 

Avicenna addresses this apparent dilemma by observing that since spa- 
tial points do not have extremities, they cannot have a distinct extremity 
where the mobile can be said to have arrived at the spatial point and a dif- 
ferent one where the mobile can be said to have left that point (Physics, II.1, 

64 AVICENNA 

84.10-14). Consequently, maintains Avicenna, there does not need to be a 
distinct temporal point corresponding with when the moving object has 
come to be at some intermediate spatial point and then another distinct 
temporal point when it has ceased to be at that spot, for again the spatial 
point itself has no such extremities or limits with which the temporal points 
must correspond. Therefore, the moving thing need not be at some spatial 
point for more than an instant, and so it does not remain at rest there. 

It is the moving thing’s being at some posited intermediate point only 
for an instant that Avicenna ultimately identifies with the very form of mo- 

tion itself. 

This is the form of motion existing in the moved thing, namely, an inter- 
mediacy between the posited starting and end points inasmuch as at any 
limiting point at which it is posited it did not previously exist there nor 
will it exist there afterwards, unlike [its state at] the points at the two 
extreme limits. So, this intermediacy is the form of motion and is a 
single description that necessarily entails that the thing is being moved 
and simply does not change as long as there is something being moved. 
(Physics, 11.1, 84.12—14) 

Again, since any intermediary point at which the moving thing is posited 
to be during its motion does not itself have extremities, then a fortiori an 
intermediary point cannot have extremities that are reached earlier and 
then later, for a point simply has no extremities. Consequently, Avicenna 
assures us, there do not have to be distinct instants of arriving and depart- 
ing that correspond with purported extremities of the intermediary point. 
The moving thing literally is at the intermediary point only for an instant. 
Clearly, however, whatever is at some point only for an instant necessarily 
is in motion, and it is this intermediateness that Avicenna makes the very 
form of motion itself. Thus, the extramental reality of motion for Avicenna 

comes down to there being motion at a point for only an instant. 

An Analysis of Circular and 

Rectilinear Motion 

The above is Avicenna’s most general analysis of motion; however, in addi- 
tion to this general analysis Avicenna also undertakes a special analysis of 
rotational or circular motion as opposed to rectilinear motion. Unlike Aris- 

totle, who treated circular and rectilinear motion as two species of motion 

NATURAL SCIENCE 65 

with respect to the category of place, Avicenna sees the two types of motion 
as generically different: Rectilinear motion belongs to the category of place, 
whereas circular motion belongs to the category of position. This diver- 
gence from Aristotle becomes important when I consider Avicenna’s dis- 
cussion of place, and so I should consider it briefly now. 

Avicenna gestures at the distinction between the two kinds of motion 
when he considers what at first glance seems to be an issue tangential to his 
analysis of motion. At Physics I.1, Avicenna notes that every motion neces- 
sarily requires a point from which it begins, or a terminus a quo (ma minhi), 
and a point at which it ends, or a terminus ad quem (md ilayh1). The terminus 
a quo is the initial state of actuality with respect to some accident, such as 
the place where it is, that changes with respect to the moving object. The 
terminus ad quem is the final state of actuality that is realized at the comple- 
tion of the motion. For example, when the ball moves from some spot, x, to 
a different spot, y, x is its initial state of actuality, or its terminus a quo, and y 
is its final state of actuality, or its terminus ad quem. 

An apparent problem arises, however, if one requires that every motion 
has a terminus a quo and terminus ad quem, for such a requirement would 
seem to preclude the continual motion of the heavens, especially if one be- 
lieves, as Avicenna did, that this motion is everlasting both into the past and 
the future. The heavens for Avicenna simply never were actualized at some 
initial terminus a quo from which they began to move, nor will they ever 
come to some terminus ad quem at which they will realize a final state of 
actuality. If, however, having these two termini is a necessary condition of 
motion, then the heavens could not move, certainly not eternally at any 
rate, as Avicenna himself believed along with the majority of philosophers 
working within the Aristotelian tradition. 

In order to resolve this puzzle, Avicenna draws on a distinction that has 
already been encountered, namely, between a first and second perfection or 
actuality, which he used in explaining Aristotle’s notion of entelekheia in the 
definition of motion. Again, the “first perfection” refers to the intermediate 
state or states of the motion considered from its initial beginning point to its 
final ending point, whereas “second perfection” refers to the end of the 
process at which the moving object ultimately realizes its final actuality and 
perfection. Avicenna now uses this distinction to draw a correlative distinc- 
tion between two types of potency: potency proximate to act and potency 
remote from act (PAysics, II.1, 91.9-92.4). The proximate potency of a moy- 

ing object during its motion is any intermediate point in the motion at 

66 AVICENNA 

which one can posit the thing’s actually coming to be at that point for an 
instant and so not resting there. In short, it is the potentiality that is actual- 
ized by the motion’s first perfection. In contrast, the remote potency of a 
moving thing is that final point at which it actually comes to rest, and so it 
is the potentiality that is actualized by the motion’s second perfection. For 
example, in a ball’s continual motion over a distance, xyz, a proximate po- 
tency is actualized when the ball is actually at y, albeit only for an instant, 
whereas its remote potency is actualized only when it comes to rest at z. In 
this case, y is not some point in the motion where the ball actually comes to 
rest; rather, the ball is simply posited as having actually passed over y at 
some posited instant during the motion. 

In certain motions, Avicenna continues, the termini a quo and ad quem 
can be one and the same point, albeit they are not simultaneously termini a 
quo and ad quem, but only so at two distinct instants. The motion he clearly 
has in mind is circular motion or rotation. Thus, if one now imagines a 
ball’s rotating in the same place instead of rolling across a distance, a com- 
plete rotation occurs when some posited point on the ball returns to where 
it began. Furthermore, if one imagines the ball’s making several rotations, 
some point on the ball will return to its initial position several times, while 
continuing on without coming to rest at that position. The position of that 
posited point, then, functions as the terminus a quo and terminus ad quem in 
proximate potency during the ball’s rotation. 

Given this analysis, Avicenna explains in what sense the heavens’ mo- 
tion has a terminus a quo and terminus ad quem, namely, as some position, 
which is posited as a matter of convention, to which some point on the ce- 
lestial sphere can be in proximate potency. For example, astronomers posit 
being directly overhead as the position by which to calculate a sidereal day, 
where a sidereal day is defined as the length of time between the Sun’s be- 
ing directly overhead and its subsequently returning to that overhead posi- 
tion. What is important about Avicenna’s analysis is that he has made clear 
how the heavens can move without needing to posit spatially distinct 
termini a quo and ad quem, as is required by rectilinear motion. 

In effect, circular motion or rotation, for Avicenna, needs to be analyzed 
differently from rectilinear motion. With rectilinear motion, on the one 
hand, an object moves from one spatially distinct place to another spatially 
distinct place, and so there must be a spatially distinct terminus a quo and 
terminus ad quem. With circular motion, on the other hand, an observer 

posits some point, as a matter of convention, and then the relative position 

NATURAL SCIENCE 67 

of that point functions as both termini a quo and ad quem, albeit it is not si- 
multaneously both, but at different instants. Consequently, on Avicenna’s 
analysis, circular motion needs no spatially distinct absolute or natural 
points or locations by reference to which one defines or describes the mo- 
tion, as is demanded by rectilinear motion. Although Avicenna’s sharp dis- 
tinction between rectilinear and circular rotation may seem unimportant 
now, it will be vital later when he addresses a significant problem that arose 
within Aristotelian natural philosophy concerning the placement and 
apparent motion of the heavens. 

The Conditions Necessary for Motion 

In the first section of this chapter I considered the necessary principles that 
Avicenna believes are involved in producing motion or change in a natu- 
ral body. In addition to those principles of nature, Avicenna, following 
Aristotle, thinks that there are other necessary conditions required for 
motion, such as place, time, and the continuous. Strictly speaking, these are 
not principles of natures, but they do represent certain accounts that must 
be clarified if the natural philosopher is to provide a complete analysis of 
motion, which, again, is the proper subject of physics. Unlike Avicenna’s 
account of the form of motion, which represents a truly creative moment in 
the history of science, his treatment of the conditions necessary for motion, 
are, for the most part, a defense and development of traditional Aristotelian 
natural philosophy. Yet, his defense of Aristotle frequently involves innova- 
tions that set Avicenna apart from his predecessors. It is with an eye to these 

novel elements that I now proceed. 

Place 

Like Aristotle before him, Avicenna defines the place (akan) of a thing as 
the innermost, unmoving limit of a containing body (Physics, I.9, 137.8-9). 
Unfortunately, there is something problematic about this account of place, 
which the late Neoplatonic thinker John Philoponus (ca. 490-570) would 
vehemently criticize. Philoponus’s objection takes the form of a dilemma. 
Either the outermost heavens have a place or they do not.'' On the one hand, 
if the outermost heavens do have a place, then, given Aristotle’s definition 

of place in terms of a containing body, there must be a body outside of the 

68 AVICENNA 

heavens that contains them, but for Aristotle and virtually the entire Aristo- 
telian tradition, the universe is finite beyond which there is nothing and so 
there is nothing outside of the heavens that could contain them. On the other 
hand, if the heavens do not have a place, then it seems impossible to explain 
their apparent diurnal or daily motion, for according to Aristotle, and ac- 
cepted by the entire Greek Aristotelian tradition, there are only three kinds 
of motion: motion with respect to the categories of quantity, quality, and 
place. It seemed an observable fact, at least to the ancient and medieval as- 
tronomer, that the heavens in their daily motion do not change either quan- 
titatively or qualitatively. Thus, given the apparent fact that the heavens do 
move, they must move with respect to place, but in this horn of the dilemma 
one assumes that they have no place, and so a fortiori they cannot move with 
respect to place. In short, concluded Philoponus, Aristotle’s account of place 
as the innermost limit of a containing body is simply inadequate. 

Avicenna defends Aristotle’s preferred account of place in terms of an in- 
nermost limit of a containing body. Ironically, however, he does so by invok- 
ing his un-Aristotelian position that there is a generic difference between 
circular and rectilinear motion, which was noted earlier. More specifically, 
Avicenna denies that there are only three kinds of motion. Instead, he main- 
tains that there must be four kinds: motion with respect to the categories of 
quantity, quality, place, and also (unlike Aristotle and the earlier Aristotelian 
tradition) position, with motion with respect to position defining circular mo- 
tion or rotation (Physics, 1.3, 103.8-105.13). Given Avicenna’s earlier analysis 
of rotational motion as falling under the category of position, he can now 
deny that the cosmos has a place and still can explain its apparent motion, for 
instead of moving with respect to place, the cosmos moves with respect to 
position. Thus, Avicenna goes between the horns of Philoponus’s dilemma. 

Although Avicenna’s solution to Philoponus’s objection at first glance 
might appear to be ad hoc, one sees that on closer inspection it provides a 
solution to a deeper physical problem. Philoponus’s specific problem was 
“How could the outermost celestial sphere undergo motion with respect to 
place if it has no place with respect to which it changes?” Avicenna realizes 
that this problem is endemic to any object that rotates in the same place, for 
how could any rotating object undergo motion with respect to place given 
that in rotation there is no change of place in the sense of moving from one 
spatially distinct place to another spatially distinct place? Circular motion or 
rotation for Avicenna, then, not only requires a different analysis from that 

of rectilinear motion, but also it requires an entirely different categorization 

NATURAL SCIENCE 69 

as to what generic kind of motion it is. Thus, by introducing positional mo- 
tion, Avicenna is not merely providing a solution to Philoponus’s problem 
in order to save Aristotle’s preferred account of place, but he is augmenting 
Aristotle’s thought in a much needed way if there is to be a complete analy- 

sis of all types of motion. 

The Void 

Another issue closely associated with that of place is that of the void, for 
certain pre-Socratic philosophers had argued that the void must exist if 
there is to be motion, while certain proponents of kalam had maintained 
that there must be a void in order to provide God with an empty place in 
which to create. Aristotle, in some of his most technical argumentation, 
turned the tables on the pre-Socratic advocates of a void and claimed that 
far from allowing for the possibility of motion, the existence of a void would 
absolutely preclude motion. Like Aristotle, Avicenna too thinks that the 
void cannot exist; however, where Aristotle argued for this thesis solely on 
the basis of a series of “physical” arguments, Avicenna offered, in addition 
to physical arguments, a new “conceptual” proof against the existence of 
the void (Physics, 11.8, 123.7—-126.6), which takes advantage of a number of 
the logical considerations seen in the previous chapter." Avicenna’s argu- 
ment attempts to show that it is impossible to provide an adequate and 
rigorous philosophical definition of what the void is. Yet, as I noted in the 
previous chapter, for Avicenna any natural thing that exists must have a 
corresponding definition framed in terms of genus and difference, other- 
wise it is just a vain intelligible or fictional object. 

The general structure of Avicenna’s conceptual argument against a void 
is quite simple. He takes as his major premise one of the conclusions that 
has already been encountered in chapter 2, namely, if something in the 
physical world actually exists, then one can provide a definition of that 
thing in terms of genus and difference. Conversely, if one cannot provide a 
definition for some purportedly natural phenomenon in terms of a genus 
and difference, then that term for Avicenna does not refer, and, in fact, the 
concept is simply an empty one.'? Avicenna, then, exhaustively considers 
the various ways one might provide a definition of the void and argues that 
they are all wanting. Given the impossibility of providing a scientifically 
adequate definition of void, Avicenna concludes that the expression “void” 

does not refer to anything actually existing in the physical world. 

70 AVICENNA 

Let me provide some of the details of his argument. Avicenna begins by 
noting that the name “void” cannot just mean “absolutely nothing,” for if 
that were the case, there would be no dispute, since if void is absolutely 
nothing, then it does not exist. The void, should it exist, must be something. 
In fact, observes Avicenna, the advocates of the void assign to it certain 
positive properties, such as being extended and measurable. Thus, they 
themselves must take void to be “something.” 

Assuming that the void does possess extension and measurability, contin- 
ues Avicenna, it does so either essentially or accidentally. If the properties of 
extension and measurability belong to the void essentially, then the void is 
essentially quantity, and indeed three-dimensional quantity. In that case, 
void would have the very same definition as quantity. Avicenna criticizes 
this suggestion by noting a point that has already been seen when discussing 
the principles of nature, namely that tri-dimensionality is itself the very form 
of corporeality, which itself initially imprints and configures matter, and so 
makes matter a natural body (Physics, I.2, 13.4—15.5, and II.7, 120.15—122.8)." 
Thus, if the very essence or nature of void were that of quantity, and so that 
of tri-dimensionality, then, according to Avicenna’s argument, the void 
would necessarily imprint and configure matter and thereby produce a natu- 
ral body. Clearly, however, the proponents of the void would deny that the 
void actively imprints the bodies that pass through it, for void is thought to 
be something passive, which bodies simply move through, not something 
that in some way constitutes or acts on bodies. Thus, the void’s definition 
cannot for Avicenna be identified essentially with the definition of quantity. 

Thus, the void must possess extension and measurability accidentally, in 
which case the void might either be an accident or a substance accidentally 
possessing extension and measurability. Avicenna does away with the sugges- 
tion that the void might be an accident accidentally possessing extension and 
measurability by simply observing that if the void were an accident, then it 
could no longer play the role for which it was intended, namely, as that which 
bodies enter and move through. That is because no body enters and moves 
through an accident, and yet, asserts Avicenna, the proponents of the void 
think that bodies do enter and move through the void (Physics, 1.8, 124.4-6).” 

Avicenna next considers the suggestion that void is a substance to which 
extension and measurability accidentally belong. If void falls under the genus 
“substance,” Avicenna observes, it could have as its differences either (1) 
something that exists in a substrate, or (2) something that does not exist in 

a substrate (Physics, II.7, 124.716). The distinction Avicenna seems to be 

NATURAL SCIENCE 71 

marking here is between a material substance and immaterial substances. On 
the one hand, if the void is a substance that exists with its substrate, which 
would be matter, then should the matter not exist, neither would the void 
exist. Of course the proponents of void think that the void exists, whether it is 
occupied by matter or not. On the other hand, “not existing in a substrate” 
cannot be a difference of the genus substance that would constitute the defini- 
tion of void, for as noted in the previous chapter a negation cannot function 
as a difference in definitions.'° Thus, for Avicenna some positive factor must 
function as a difference in the strict sense required by a definition, if there is 
to be a scientifically and philosophically adequate definition of the void. 
Although Avicenna suggests a number of possible candidates to which the 
advocates of void may try to appeal in order to provide a proper definition of 
void (Physics, 11.8, 125.9—-126.6), in the end all of these suggestions for Avicenna 
either fail to mark a difference between other substances (and so are not strict, 
definition-making differences) or they are negations (and so, again, fail 
Avicenna’s criteria for definition-making differences). 

Avicenna ultimately sums up his conceptual argument against the void 
thus: “This division between a [three-dimensional| interval in matter and 
an interval not in matter [that is, a void] is not a division by means of a 
species-making difference; rather, it is a division by means of some con- 
comitant accidents external to the constitution of the interval as a species” 
(Physics, 11.8, 126.4-6)./” In other words, no adequate definition can be given 
of what a void interval, as opposed to the interval filled by a natural body, 
would be. Thus, given Avicenna’s position that if something exists in the 
physical world, one can provide a definition of it in terms of genus and dif- 
ference, and yet nothing can adequately function as the void’s difference in 
such a definition, Avicenna concludes that the notion of void is, like its 
name, a vacuous concept. Again, this is not Avicenna’s only argument 
against the void. Indeed, he rehearses many of Aristotle’s own physical ar- 
guments, albeit frequently with his own unique flair. Stull, this argument 
does show how Avicenna’s conception of the general relation between logic 

and science can be used in the specific sciences. 

Time 

Avicenna, much along the lines of Aristotle, defined time as “a magnitude 
belonging to circular motion with respect to priority and posteriority” 

(Salvation, “Physics,” II.9, 231). Unlike Aristotle, however, Avicenna begins 

72 AVICENNA 

his temporal account with an explicit positive proof for the reality of time. 
Here it is worth noting that neither Aristotle nor subsequent Aristotelians 
prior to Avicenna attempted explicitly to prove the existence of time. Yet 
given that at Physics IV 10 Aristotle himself had presented a number of 
arguments for why one might deny the reality of time and then did not 
follow up these criticisms with explicit responses, such a proof for the real- 
ity of time would seemingly have been a desideratum. Avicenna’s proof, 
then, offered a much needed addition to the tradition. 

Avicenna’s proof assumes the reality of motion and certain empirical 
kinematic facts about our changing world, and then goes on to show that 
one could not explain these facts unless time is real.'* Given that the subject 
matter of natural science is natural bodies inasmuch as they are subject to 
motion or change, Avicenna takes the existence of motion as a fact, while 
the various kinematic facts Avicenna takes as simply matters of empirical 
observation. The first one is that every motion involves a certain rate of 
fastness or slowness; one might say a rate of displacement or velocity. Given 
this feature of motion, the following additional facts need explaining main- 

tains Avicenna: 

1. If two moving objects have the same velocity and start and stop 
together (that is, simultaneously), then they traverse the same 
distance. 

2. Iftwo moving objects have the same velocity and both end together, 
yet the first begins before the second, then the second traverses less 
distance than the first. 

3. If two moving objects have different velocities and start and stop 
together, then the slower moving object traverses less distance than 
the faster moving object. 

Given these facts, two more facts become apparent. Thus, on the basis of (1) 
and (3), Avicenna observes that: 

4. Any moving object that has some designated velocity also has a 
certain “possibility” (¢mkdn) to traverse a certain determinate 
distance, where a beginning and ending can be marked off with 
respect to that possibility. 

Also on the basis of (2), it follows that: 

5. Iftwo moving objects have the same designated velocity, and yet the 
first begins moving before the second, but they both end together, 

NATURAL SCIENCE 73 

then the second has less of this possibility and so traverses less 
distance. 

In the case of (5), the possibilities of the two moving objects to traverse a 
distance are not equal in magnitude; rather, the whole of the possibility of 
the second moving object is congruent or corresponds with only a part of 
the possibility of the first. 

Although Avicenna avoids using overtly temporal terms in his presen- 
tation of these facts, their explanation becomes clearer if one introduces 
such language. So assume two people out for a stroll at a pace of 4 mph. 
For Avicenna there is associated with this velocity a certain possibility to 
cross four miles. This possibility is itself determined by the beginning and 
ending of the motion. Thus, let one person start walking at, for example, 
12:00, while the second begins at 12:15, with again both moving at a veloc- 
ity of 4 mph. Now, let them both end their motions at 1:00. Clearly, the 
possibility that the second person has for moving over a distance is less 
than the possibility that the first has. Still, continues Avicenna, the possi- 
bility of the second is congruent with or maps onto a part of the possibility 
of the first, namely, with three-fourths of the first’s possibility in the exam- 
ple. Consequently, this possibility associated with motion can be more or 
less, and as such it must be a certain magnitude or measure, which is re- 
lated to the distance covered by the motion at a given velocity.” For exam- 
ple, a certain possibility, namely one hour, corresponds exactly with the 
walk of a person moving uniformly at 4 mph. once he or she has covered 
four miles. 

Avicenna’s argument thus far has shown, first, that a certain possibility 
that is associated with motion (by which he clearly is intending time) must 
exist if one is to explain certain kinematic phenomena about our world, 
and, second, that this possibility is a certain magnitude. Avicenna now ar- 
gues that this magnitude cannot be the magnitude of the moving body, that 
body’s velocity, or the distance over which the body moves. 

This possibility is, in fact, something divided, and whatever is divided is 
either a magnitude or possesses a magnitude. Hence, this possibility is 
not lacking a magnitude, and its magnitude must either be the magni- 
tude of the distance or some other magnitude. If it were the distance, 
things equal in distance would be equal in this possibility, but this is not 
the case, and so it is some other magnitude. Next, either it is the magni- 
tude of what is moved or it is not. It is not, however, the magnitude of 

74 AVICENNA 

what is moved, otherwise the greater the moved thing is the greater it 
would be in this magnitude, but that is not the case. Therefore, it is nei- 
ther the magnitude of the distance nor the magnitude of what is moved. 
It is also known that that magnitude is neither the very motion itself nor 
the velocity. [That follows] since motions, in that they are motions, agree 
in being motion. Also, motions [frequently] agree in velocity, while dif- 
fering with respect to this magnitude. Likewise, they frequently differ 
with respect to velocity, while agreeing with respect to this magnitude. 
So, a magnitude belonging to a possibility has been established to exist, 
where [that possibility] occurs with motions between the prior and the 
posterior—the occurrence of which requires a delimited distance—that 
is neither the magnitude of what is moved nor the distance nor is it 
motion itself. (PAysics, H.11, 156.3-11) 

That the possibility in question cannot be the distance is obvious for 
Avicenna, since if this magnitude were the distance, then any two motions 
over the same distance would, by assumption, agree in the possibility re- 
quired to cover the distance. In other words, two moving things would 
cover the same distance in the same time regardless of their velocities. That 
follows since the magnitude sought, which in fact is time, is by hypothesis 
assumed to be identical with the distance, and the ensuing result of such an 
identification is, observes Avicenna, clearly gainsaid by the fact that a given 
distance can be traversed more quickly or slowly depending upon the ve- 
locity. The magnitude in question, continues Avicenna, cannot be the bulk 
or magnitude of the moving object, since if they were one and the same, 
then the greater the (temporal) magnitude, the greater the size of the mov- 
ing object, again a patently false conclusion. Clearly, the magnitude sought 
is not simply motion itself, for any two motions considered simply as mo- 
tion agree, that is, they both are the perfection of a potentiality as such, and 
yet clearly the possibility in question can vary. Finally, this magnitude can- 
not be identified with the velocity of the moving object, says Avicenna, for 
if it were, then any two moving objects agreeing in velocity would always 
cover the same distance, which again is clearly false in the case where one 
moving object begins later than another, while they both stop together. The 
possibility or magnitude in question, Avicenna announces, is simply what 
people call “time” (Physics, II.11, 156.17). Thus, given the reality of motion 
and the various facts one observes about moving bodies, time must exist, 
which is what Avicenna wanted to prove. Not only does Avicenna’s explicit 

proof for the reality of time make up for a deficiency in Aristotle’s and other 

NATURAL SCIENCE 75 

thinkers’ earlier discussions of time, but also, when I turn to Avicenna’s 
cosmology in chapter 7, his unique construal of time as a possibility be- 

comes quite important. 

Avicenna’s Critique of Atomism and 
His Account of the Continuous 

I have already mentioned that for Avicenna motion, time, and space, are 
continuous. In this respect, Avicenna was in direct opposition with atomic 
theories of motion, time, and space that were prevalent in the medieval 
Arabic-speaking world, particularly among Islamic speculative theolo- 
gians.”” Thus, I should consider some of his reasons for rejecting atomism 
as well as his defense against certain historical problems associated with the 
idea of a continuum. 

I consider only two of Avicenna’s arguments for rejecting atomism: one 
concerning the impossibility of explaining how an aggregate of indivisible 
atoms could give rise to a perceptible body, and the other arising from cer- 
tain geometrical considerations.’ The notion of an atom, which Avicenna 
rejects, is that of a minimal, positive extension or magnitude that is not only 
physically indivisible but also conceptually indivisible. Should such indivis- 
ible parts exist, Avicenna wants to know how they could be aggregated so 
as to result in a body such as the ones that we perceive around us. Such ag- 
gregation could take place by atoms’ being either (1) in succession, (2) con- 
tiguous, (3) interpenetrating, or (4) continuous with one another. Avicenna 
does not believe (1), succession, is a serious contender, since if indivisible 
parts were only in succession there would be void spaces between them and 
so there would not result the seemingly continuous bodies, which one per- 
ceives and are the focus of the discussion (Physics, III.4, 189.13-14). One can 
further add that since Avicenna has shown that the notion of void space is 
meaningless, the suggestion that there are indivisible parts with void space 
between them is likewise meaningless. 

As for explaining the aggregation of indivisible parts into a body by con- 

tiguity, continuity, or interpenetration, Avicenna writes: 

When [purportedly indivisible atoms] are aggregated according to either 
continuity or contiguity, then each one of them is divisible into what is 
occupied and what is unoccupied, what is being touched and what is not 
being touched, according to what we explained in the preceding chapters. 

76 AVICENNA 

If they do not interpenetrate, then when one of them, x, contacts another, 
y, and then a third one, z, comes into contact with one of the two, [for 
example, y,|, then necessarily z is hindered from contacting x by the in- 
termediacy of y’s contact. In that case, each one essentially confers to the 
contact what the other had not—this is self-explanatory. So, the interme- 
diate object, y, is divisible. If they are in contact completely, then they 
interpenetrate. In that case, a magnitude is not increased by their aggre- 
gation, and so whenever they are aggregated they would be like the unit, 
which has neither length, nor breadth, nor depth. Since these indivisible 
parts do not aggregate in such a way that a body is thereby composed of 
them, the body is not reducible to them. Thus, the division of bodies does 
not terminate at parts that cannot be divided by any type of division, and 
the same holds for all other magnitudes (I mean surfaces and lines). 
(Physics, HI.4, 189.14-190.3) 

Here Avicenna has one imagine three purportedly physically and concep- 
tually indivisible atoms, x, y, and z, aggregated so as to form a body. So 
one might think of something like the following. 

x | y Z 

Avicenna observes that the atom must be at least conceptually divisible in 
either the case of contiguity—where, when in contact, the limits of each of the 
atoms remain distinct—or the case of continuity—where, when in contact, 
the two atoms share a common limit. That follows since if y is separating x 
and g, such that x and z are not in contact with each other, then y must have a 
limit that is in contact with x, and that limit must be distinct from its limit that 
is in contact with z. Consequently, y, which was purportedly conceptually 
indivisible, is conceptually divisible into its two limits, which, Avicenna points 
out, is a contradiction. Should one argue that y does not have distinct limits 
that separate x from z, then nothing in principle prevents x from occupying 
the same space as y and similarly for z. In this case there is interpenetration; 
however, interpenetration, insists Avicenna, is incapable of explaining how 
the aggregation of atoms results in a perceptible body. One could add a hun- 
dred, ten thousand, even a million such atoms, all interpenetrating, and they 
would only ever be the size of one imperceptible atom. Consequently, con- 
cludes Avicenna, since it is a matter of observation that perceptible bodies 
exist, and yet an atomic theory countenancing indivisible parts cannot explain 

how such bodies exist, the theory is empirically inadequate. 

NATURAL SCIENCE vei 

The second of Avicenna’s arguments against atomism shows that atom- 
ism is at odds with our best mathematical theories, since it cannot even ap- 
proximate the Pythagorean theorem, the most well-proven theorem in all 

of mathematics. 

In fact, the existence of indivisible parts would necessarily entail that 
there be no circles, nor right triangles, nor many other [geometrical] fig- 
ures. ... [For example] when two sides of a right triangle are each ten 
units, then the hypotenuse is the square root of two hundred, which [ac- 
cording to the present view] would either be an absurdity that does not 
exist, or it is true, but parts would be broken up, which [according to the 
present view] they are not. (Physics, III.4, 190.8-11) 

Here, for the sake of presentation, consider a 3x3 square of space suppos- 
edly formed from indivisible atoms and then consider a right triangle con- 

structed on that purportedly atomic space, such as the following. 

According to the Pythagorean theorem, the sum of the square of the two 
legs of the atomic triangle should equal the square of its hypotenuse. In the 
case of atomic space, however, since the number of atomic units that make 
up the hypotenuse is equally three atomic units like the legs, one has 3* + 37 
= 3°, or 9 + 9 = 9, which is patently false. Atomic space, then concludes 
Avicenna, cannot even approximate the Pythagorean theorem. Moreover, it 
does no good to say that the diagonals of the supposedly atomic units are 
longer than their sides, since the atom is supposedly the smallest unit pos- 
sible. Thus, if the diagonal of the supposed atomic unit is greater than one 
of its sides, it would be greater by an amount less than the smallest possible 
unit, which, Avicenna notes, is absurd. 

Given these arguments, and several others, Avicenna rejects atomism in 
favor of theories of continual motion, time, and space; however, he also 
recognizes that the notion of a continuum has its own share of philosophi- 

cal problems that need to be addressed. Historically, perhaps the most 

78 AVICENNA 

pressing problem was Zeno’s (in)famous dichotomy paradox, framed in 
terms of a potentially infinite number of halfway points that a continuum 
seems to presuppose. 

Zeno had argued that in order to move from one point to another 
point on a continuous magnitude one must first reach the halfway point. 
Yet before one can reach that halfway point one must reach a point half- 
way to it, and so on ad infinitum. Consequently, one could never cover a 
continuous space, for the motion would involve traversing an infinite 
number of half-distances, but traversing the infinite was thought to be 
impossible. 

Aristotle gave his solution to this paradox at Physics, VII 8 in a notori- 
ously difficult passage, but the general strategy of his response is something 
like this. In a continuous magnitude there is a potentially, but not actually, 
infinite number of points. Any of the potential infinity of points along the 
continuous magnitude becomes actualized only if the object moving along 
the magnitude stops at that potential point and so makes it actual. Conse- 
quently, although the continuous magnitude is the sort of thing that can 
accidentally be divided at any number of points or half-distances by the 
moving object’s stopping at that potential point, essentially and of itself the 
continuous magnitude does not for Aristotle have an actually infinite 
number of points or half-distances in it, and so an infinite is not traversed. 
Thus, Zeno’s paradox never arises. 

Unfortunately, such a solution is not open to Avicenna, for it has been 
seen that on his analysis of motion the actuality mentioned in the definition 
of motion (where again the definition of motion is “the actuality (or perfec- 
tion) of what is potential as potential”) refers to a moving thing’s actually, 
not merely potentially, being at the various intermediate points in the con- 
tinuum during the motion, albeit only as existing at a given intermediary 
point for an instant. Despite the differences in their analyses of motion, 
Avicenna adopts a variant of Aristotle’s solution to Zeno’s paradox, though 
with a very Avicennan twist. 

He begins by clarifying the notion of continuous magnitude that is at 

stake in Zeno’s paradox, saying: 

It is like what happens when we imagine or posit that a line that is actually 
one has two parts, where we distinguish one [part] from the other by posit- 
ing, and in that way a limit is distinguished for it, being the very same limit 
of the other part. . .. Each one of the two [parts], however, exists in itself 
only as long as there is the positing, and so when the positing ceases, there 

NATURAL SCIENCE 79 

no longer is ¢his and that [part]; rather, there is the unified whole not actu- 
ally having a division in it. Now, if what occurs through positing were to 
be something [really] existing in the thing itself and not by positing, then 
the existence of an actually infinite number of parts would be possible (as 
we shall explain), but this is absurd. (Physics, III.2, 182.6-10) 

The heart of Avicenna’s claim here is that, as with Aristotle’s account, there 
never is an infinity of actualized points in a continuous magnitude; rather, 
a point becomes actualized in the magnitude, according to Avicenna, only 
by an act of positing or supposition. 

Although in the present passage Avicenna speaks only of “positing” or 
“supposition” (fard), he adds later that pointing (sara) at a spot, or touch- 
ing (mumassa), or being parallel with (muwdazah) the spot likewise actualize 
points in the magnitude (Physics, III.3, 184.6-16). Since, for Avicenna, the 
moving object actually does successively touch all of a continuum during a 
continuous motion, and at any instant during the motion the moving object 
must actually be at some point on the continuum, an actually infinite 
number of points must be actualized on Avicenna’s view.” What is impor- 
tant, however, and what Avicenna repeatedly reminds his reader, is that the 
various points, which are in some way indicated or touched, do not have 
any actual or independent existence in the magnitude itself. Whatever ac- 
tual existence they might have exists only as long as the acts or states of 
positing, touching, and the like are occurring, whereas the actualized exist- 
ence of any point completely ceases once these various states or acts them- 
selves cease. Thus, for Avicenna there is no time at which an actualized 
infinity of points simultaneously exists during a continuous motion, even 
though the moving object has actually, and not merely potentially, been at 
all the points. What is important to note is that Avicenna, unlike many of 
his predecessors in the Aristotelian tradition, happily allows the possibility 
of traversing a (potential) infinite. This concession, and his arguments for 
it, will become even more important when I consider Avicenna’s position 

concerning the eternity of the world in chapter 7. 

Avicenna’s Dynamics: Inclination (May/) 

Up to now I have focused on concepts in what might be considered the 
kinematics of Avicenna’s natural philosophy. If one turns to his dynamics, 

then the key concept is certainly that of mayl, which one might tentatively 

80 AVICENNA 

render as “inclination.”” With varying degrees of caution, it has been 
claimed that Avicenna’s theory of inclination foreshadows certain salient 
features of Newtonian mechanics.” In this section, I want to look at Avi- 
cenna’s notion of mayl and argue that in fact his theory of inclination is, like 
much of his natural philosophy, an extremely sophisticated and original 
application of Aristotelian points and not a precursor to a modern quanti- 
fied dynamics. 

Avicenna never rigorously and systematically analyzes may/ in the way 
he does other central concepts in his natural philosophy. Indeed, from the 
scattered passages concerning mayl one would be hard pressed to elicit a 
single univocal account of it. Avicenna speaks of “natural-inclination,” 
“forced-inclination” (or “impressed-power”) as well as “psychic-inclination.” 
Moreover, under “natural-inclination” some inclinations produce circular 
motions, whereas others rectilinear motions. It is natural and forced incli- 
nations as they appear in Avicenna’s Physics that I want to consider here. 

In his Book of Definitions, Avicenna defines “inclination” as “a quantity 
by which the body offers resistance to whatever prevents [the body] from 
moving ina given direction.”” He develops the idea of inclination’s resist- 
ance or repulsion of a body in his Physics, where he observes that the 
existence of inclination can be verified empirically by the fact that either a 
moving thing repels what obstructs it or what obstructs it needs to exert 
some power to oppose the moving thing (Physics, IV.8, 298.4-5). Let me give 
two examples of Avicenna’s point, which make clear these two different sorts 
of inclination, namely, natural- and forced-inclination. First, if one holds 
a stone, one experiences the stone’s exerting a certain downward force on 
the hand that tries to push the hand out of the way. Conversely, one is aware 
of exerting a certain force on the stone in order to prevent it from its down- 
ward path. Avicenna designates the force exerted by the stone’s natural 
downward motion its “natural-inclination.” In general, Avicenna envisions 
“natural inclination” as corresponding with Aristotle’s notion that the an- 

cient natural elements 

earth, water, air, and fire—as well as the compos- 
ites of these elements, naturally tend toward their proper places, namely, 
up, down, or to the middle.” Now, consider another example: Imagine the 
same stone’s being tossed, for example, horizontally, and someone’s catch- 
ing it. As in the first example, at the moment one catches the stone, one 
again feels a force pushing against the hand as well as the need to exert a 
certain force to keep the stone from continuing on its trajectory; however, 

now the force is not experienced as vertical or downward, but as horizontal 

NATURAL SCIENCE 81 

or to the side. Avicenna designates the force that is in a direction different 
from the stone’s natural downward inclination “forced-inclination” or “im- 
pressed power,” an idea most frequently associated with the Neoplatonic 
philosopher, John Philoponus. 

Avicenna further asserts that if a body is displaced from some initial 
resting place and continues on to some given terminus, then there must be 
a cause that is continuously connected with the body during its motion to 
that terminus. Furthermore, this cause must depart from the initial resting 
place along with the body. This cause, which Avicenna identifies with incli- 
nation, is related to, or perhaps proportional with, the force needed to dis- 
place the body from some initial resting place and the force that the body 
has to resist or repel what opposes it (Physics, IV.8, 298.4-1 8)” 

Avicenna further maintains that the determinate quantity of inclination 
in a moving body can vary at different instants during the motion.” It is 
because the inclination in the body varies at different instants during the 
motion that the body’s motion accelerates or decelerates, where the varia- 
tions in the body’s inclination at different instants are a function of the 
body’s proximity and remoteness, presumably, from either its natural place 
in the case of natural inclination, or its projector in the case of forced-incli- 
nation. As an object approaches its natural place, according to Avicenna, its 
natural inclination increases and so there is acceleration, whereas decelera- 
tion occurs in projectile motion because the forced inclination wanes the 
farther the object is from its projector inasmuch as the resisting power of 
the medium exhausts the impressed power. 

Perhaps one of the most modern sounding aspects of Avicenna’s theory 
of inclination comes when he discusses what would happen if there were 
projectile motion in a void, should a void exist, that is, when there is no 
resistance. Again, recall that Avicenna denies the existence of a void. 
Among his “physical” arguments against its existence is one that invokes 
his notion of inclination. His argument in simplest terms is that if the void 
were to exist, then, given the nature of forced inclination, a projectile shot 
ina void would continue on its trajectory without ceasing or deviating from 
its course, which certainly seems to anticipate some important features of 
the modern notion of inertia. 

In the first part of his proof, Avicenna argues against the notion of im- 
pressed power or inclination developed by Philoponus. The latter had 
argued that inclination is self-exhausting and so during the course of a 

projectile’s motion the impressed power or inclination would ultimately 

82 AVICENNA 

expend itself. Thus, for Philoponus, even in a void, if something were 
projected in it, the projectile would finally come to rest. In contrast, 

Avicenna argues: 

Ifin the void the projectile is forcibly moved as a result of some power, [the 
motion] must continue without ever abating or being interrupted. [That 
follows] because when the power is in the body, it either remains or there 
[comes to be] a privation of its existence (ta‘damu). If it remains, then the 
motion would continue perpetually. If there is a privation of its existence, 
or it even weakens, its privation or weakening is either from a cause or 
owing to itself. The discussion concerning privation will provide you the 
way to proceed with respect to weakening. It is impossible for the priva- 
tion of [the power’s] existence to be owing to itself, for whatever necessarily 
is a privation of existence owing to itself cannot exist at any time. If its 
privation is by a cause, then that cause is either in the moved body or in 
something else. If [the cause of the privation of the motion] is in the moved 
body, and at the beginning of the motion it had not actually been causing 
that [privation], but in fact had been overpowered, and then later became 
a cause and dominated, then there is another cause for its being such, in 
which case an infinite regress results. If the cause is either external to the 
body or cooperates with the cause that is in the body, then the agent or co- 
operative cause acts either by direct contact or not. If it acts by direct con- 
tact, then it is a body that is directly contacting the projectile, but this cause 
would not exist in a pure void. Thus, the forced motion would neither 
abate nor stop in the pure void. If it does not act by direct contact but is 
something or other that acts at a distance, then why did it not act initially? 
The counterargument is just like the argument concerning the cause if it 
were in the body [that is, it leads to an infinite regress of causes]. It is most 
appropriate, instead, that the continuous succession of opposing things is 
what causes this power to decrease and corrupt, but, unless the motion is 
not in a pure void, this is impossible. (Physics, II.8, 133-6-134.1) 

Here Avicenna argues against the suggestion that inclination or impressed 
power is self-expending, for if a projectile does come to rest, reasons 
Avicenna, then there must be some cause of its coming to rest. The cause of 
the cessation of the projectile’s motion must be either (1) internal or (2) external 
to the impressed motion. On the one hand, if it is internal to the impressed 
motion itself, then one and the same impressed motion is both the cause 
of the production and the cessation of the projectile’s motion. In this case, 
one and the same thing would be the cause of contradictory effects, which 

Avicenna finds to be absurd. If, on the other hand, the cause of the projectile’s 

NATURAL SCIENCE 83 

coming to rest is external, then either, (2a), that cause exists within the void 
itself or, (2b), it exists outside of the void. It cannot, (2a), exist within the void 
itself, argues Avicenna, for the void by definition is devoid of anything that 
could act as such a cause. If, (2b), the cause is external to the void (call the 
cause, x), then, Avicenna asks, why did x cause the cessation of the projec- 
tile’s motion when it did rather than not initially preventing it? If something 
else, y, causes x to produce the cessation when it does, then one is on the road 
to an infinite regress. Given that all the possibilities for the cessation of an 
impressed motion in a void have been exhausted and all come up wanting, 
Avicenna concludes that if there is a void, then projectile motion within it 
must be conserved and so endure infinitely. 

Such an argument certainly seems to anticipate some important features 
of inertia. First, it suggests that in the absence of a force, an object continues 
moving uninterrupted on account of its forced inclination. Second, Avi- 
cenna’s same argument is applicable to deviations in the projectile’s trajec- 
tory ina void, in which case the motion should continue ina rectilinear line. 
Third, the same argument would apply as well to the projectile’s mean 
speed. The similarities between Avicenna’s notion of inclination and New- 
ton’s notion of inertia, however, are more apparent than real, which be- 
comes evident once Avicenna’s argument is taken within its broader 
context and not just the immediate issue of criticizing the idea of a self- 
exhausting inclination. 

The broader context is again Avicenna’s attempt to show that there is no 
void, where the above argument establishes the major premise in that proof, 
namely, if there were a void, then a finite impressed power could produce 
an infinitely enduring motion. If Avicenna were to have anticipated the 
modern notion of inertia, then he would have needed to implicitly assume 
the antecedent of this conditional, namely, the (hypothetical) possibility of a 
void; however, the issue of the possible existence of the void is the very one 
at stake. Avicenna, in fact, maintains that the existence of a void is impos- 
sible precisely because the consequent is impossible, namely that motion 
could be perpetually conserved in a void. 

His reasoning for denying the possibility of the conservation of motion in 
a void is that if there were a void, and given the non-self-expending nature 
of inclination, then if a finite agent, such as myself, were to shoot an arrow 
into a void, I could produce an infinite effect, namely, the infinitely enduring 
motion of the arrow in the void. Although Avicenna is extremely reticent 

about assigning determinate ratios or correspondences among mover, 

84 AVICENNA 

mobile, time, and distance, the one ratio he adamantly holds is that if one of 
these factors is finite, then they all must be finite (Physics, IV.15, 333.3-9). For 
Avicenna it is simply impossible that a finite agent can produce an infinite 
effect,” but such an infinite effect would be possible if a void were to exist. 
Thus, this argument, far from affirming some principle approaching the 
modern notion of inertia, once understood in its broader context, explicitly 

opposes the doctrine of the conservation of motion in a void. 

Substantial Changes and the Elements 

Most of the previous discussions concerned Avicenna’s account of motion, 
that is, changes in the categories of quality (alterations), quantity (augmen- 
tations and diminutions), place (rectilinear motions), and position (rota- 
tions). Inasmuch as all of these changes occur with respect to some accident 
belonging to a substance, they may be called “accidental changes.” For Avi- 
cenna, following the Aristotelian tradition, there is also a further type of 
change, namely, with respect to the category of substance, or what is simply 
called “substantial change.” Substantial changes involve the coming into 
being of a new substance from another, whether of the same kind, as when 
an offspring is produced, or of a different kind, such as in elemental 
changes, as when water is heated and becomes steam (which to the ancient 
and medieval mind was tantamount to water’s becoming the element air). 
Unlike accidental changes, which always take a period of time to occur, 
substantial changes, according to Avicenna, do not take any time, but occur 
all at once. In other words, when a substance of kind A becomes a substance 
of kind B, then that change must occur at an instant. The reason that Avi- 
cenna gives for why accidental changes can occur over a period of time, 
while substantial changes cannot, is that in accidental changes the substance 
bearing the accident remains throughout the change, and so can act as the 
subject of the newly emerging accident (Physics, II.3, 98.9—100.18). In the 
case of substantial change, however, if some initial substance, A, were to 
cease to be and no new substantial form were to come and inform the prime 
matter that had been underlying substance A, the prime matter, as noted, 
would for Avicenna simply cease to exist (for it is form that is causally 
explanatory of any actual existence that the prime matter might have). 
Consequently, if substance A’s transition to B were to take some time, there 

would not really be a change of A. That is because substance A would be 

NATURAL SCIENCE 85 

corrupted, and so cease to exist, after which there would be a period of time 
when neither A nor B exists, and then substance B would, as it were, mi- 
raculously be generated out of nothing. Thus, if anything, substance B 
would have come into being from nothing, but it would not be true that it 
came to be from substance A. If one maintains that some other substance, 
C, came to be during the time that A was changing to B, then the same 
question can be applied to C: Does it come to be instantaneously with the 
cessation of A, or does it too come to be over a period of time? Since this 
same question can be asked ad infinitum for any further intermediary sub- 
stances, and with each change some actually new substance must come to 
be, if substantial change were gradual, it would involve an actually infinite 
number of specifically different substances coming to be; however, main- 
tains Avicenna, there is not an actual infinity of different kinds or species. 
Therefore, he concludes, substantial change must occur all at once. 

Sull, Avicenna is aware that there are cases where it appears as if the 
change from one kind of substance to another is gradual, such as when sperm 
and ovum come together and seemingly gradually become, for instance, a 
human. What in fact occurs in these cases, maintains Avicenna, is that a cer- 
tain underlying substance undergoes certain accidental alterations, as, for 
example, changes in how hot or cold or wet or dry it is. These accidental 
changes, which again take time, are preparatory for the substantial change in 
that they gradually alter the underlying matter so as to make it suitable for a 
new substantial form that is then impressed instantaneously upon the prop- 
erly disposed matter such that a new kind of substance is originated. 

Here a brief discussion about the ancient and medieval understanding of 
the elements and elemental change up to the time of Avicenna will help ex- 
plain his introduction of perhaps one of the most novel features of his natural 
philosophy, psychology, and even to a certain extent, his metaphysics, namely, 
his appeal to a Giver of Forms (wahib as-suwar), which is an immaterial sub- 
stance or Intellect that bestows substantial forms on properly prepared matter. 
According to Aristotelian elemental theory—and, indeed, a position extend- 
ing back at least as early as the pre-Socratic philosopher Empedocles—there 
are four basic elements: earth, water, air, and fire.’ Here earth, water, air, and 
fire should be viewed as the ancient and medieval analog to the modern ele- 
ments making up our periodical table. As such, ancient and medieval scien- 
tists considered elemental earth, water, air, and fire not to be the garden vari- 
ety instances of these that we experience around us—which, in fact, were 

thought actually to involve a mixture of all four of the ancient elements 

86 AVICENNA 

with one element preponderating—rather, elemental earth, water, air, 
and fire were taken to be the pure, unmixed instances of these. 

The elements themselves are in turn associated with two primary quali- 
ties taken from two sets of contrary qualitative powers: hot/cold and wet/ 
dry. Thus, the element earth is associated with the primary qualities of cold 
and dry; water with cold and wet; air with hot and wet; and, finally, fire 
with hot and dry. Each of these qualities is in turn associated with certain 
very basic powers: acting on in the case of hot, being acted on in the case of 
cold, while wet has the power to receive and dry the power to retain. At 
least to this point, Avicenna is in agreement; however, Aristotle, and virtu- 
ally all of those working within the Aristotelian tradition up to Avicenna,*! 
additionally identified an element’s substantial form with the ratio of the 
mixture of the element’s two primary qualities. Thus, the very substantial 
form of earthy substances, for example, is to have a predominance of the 
qualities cold and dry. So, the greater the extent that cold and dry dominate 
in something, the more earthlike that thing is, whereas earth in its ideal 
state would have only cold and only dry with no admixture of hot and wet 
tempering these primary qualities. 

Given this identification of an element’s substantial form with its mixture 
of primary qualities, Aristotle and those following him explained substantial 
changes among the elements with seeming ease. Inasmuch as the primary 
qualities inherent in an element act on other elements (for example, the ele- 
ment fire heats other elements), sufficient changes in one element’s primary 
qualities can ultimately reach a point where the mixture of the effected ele- 
ment’s primary qualities no longer has a ratio commensurate with being an 
element of that kind. In that case, there would be a substantial change. So, for 
example, if water, a cold-wet mixture, is heated to a point that hot dominates 
the cold, there comes to be a new mixture, namely, a hot-wet one, which 
again is identified with the element air, and indeed when one vigorously heats 
water, it becomes steam, which is like air. Similarly, on the traditional Aristo- 
telian view, when the same water is cooled, the cooling begins to affect the 
element's fluidity, namely, its wet quality, and so the water becomes increas- 
ingly dryer, as it were, and thus more like a cold-dry mixture. Indeed in its 
frozen states, water does exhibit many of the features of the element earth: It 
is solid and even somewhat powdery if it is cold enough. 

Despite the philosophical elegance and explanatory power of this Aris- 
totelian account of elemental change, Avicenna believes that it was funda- 

mentally flawed inasmuch as it identified an element’s substantial form 

NATURAL SCIENCE 87 

with its proportion of hot/cold and wet/dry, which, Avicenna rightly notes, 

a : 32 . 
are qualities and so accidents of a substance.” Thus, Avicenna argues: 

The commentators become confused about that because they should distin- 
guish between [substantial] forms and accidents referring to the distinction 
between the natural forms belonging to those bodies and their qualities. Be- 
cause they believe that either all or some qualities are certain [substantial| 
forms of these bodies (even though they are susceptible to intensification and 
diminution), their best representative advocates a system where the qualities 
of [the bodies] are preserved, while the force is abated, and so the bodies are 
potentially unmixed. (Generation and Corruption, 6, 127.18-128.4) 

Avicenna, then, continues that what one ought to believe about the relation of 

qualities to the substantial forms of the elements is virtually the opposite: 

Each one of the elements has a substantial form by which it is what it is 
and upon which certain perfections follow from the categories of quality, 
quantity, and where [that is, the category of place] and from which each 
body can be specified by [(1)] a certain coldness and heat due to the form 
as well as a certain dryness and moistness due to the matter joined to the 
form, [(2)] a certain natural measure of quantity, and [(3)] a natural rest 
and motion. (Generation and Corruption, 6, 129.15—130.1) 

The problem Avicenna is raising against the traditional Aristotelian 
account of elemental change is this: Qualities, contra Aristotle and 
many of his commentators, cannot be identified with substantial forms, 
because qualities are accidents, and accidents are ontologically posterior 
to their subjects. The simple fact, asserts Avicenna, is that the substan- 
tial form is that by which the subject subsists, and on this point Aristotle 
agrees. So, the substantial form is ontologically prior to the accidents 
that subsist in that substance as their subject. Consequently, if elemental 
substantial forms were identical with their primary qualities, Avicenna 
complains, they would be both ontologically prior and posterior to 
themselves, which is absurd. In other words, Aristotle has put the pro- 
verbial cart before the horse. Accidents, even primary ones, Avicenna 
notes, presuppose the existence of a substance, and the substance itself 
presupposes the existence of the substantial form. In short, the tradi- 
tional Aristotelian account of the nature of elemental substantial forms, 
complains Avicenna, involves circular causation: Qualities purportedly 
causally explain the substantial forms, but the substantial forms caus- 

ally explain qualities. 

88 AVICENNA 

Avicenna’s own account concerning elemental, and indeed all substan- 
tial change, is that natural efficient causes, such as the elements’ own pri- 
mary qualities, can affect the qualities of the matter and so prepare the 
matter for a new substantial form. They cannot, however, educe that form 
from the previously existing matter otherwise it would again make sub- 
stantial forms dependent upon accidental qualities, where in fact, main- 
tains Avicenna, just the reverse is the case. Since natural efficient causes, 
which affect only a natural substance’s accidental features, cannot bestow a 
new substantial form on the prepared matter, there must be something out- 
side of the natural order of the four elements that does so, an entity that 
Avicenna dubs the Giver of Forms. The Giver of Forms—which, as will 
be seen in chapter 5, Avicenna also identifies with the Active Intellect of 
his psychology—is not God, but the lowest of the immaterial Intellects in 
Avicenna’s spiritual hierarchy of which I shall have more to say in chapter 7. 

For Avicenna, the Giver of Forms acts much like a natural force. It con- 
tinuously emanates the various species forms that make up our world with 
a regularity that is akin to a nature, albeit that emanation is still a volitional 
act according to Avicenna, and so is not strictly speaking the result of a 
nature (Physics, 1.5, 30.6-16). These emanated species forms, then, are al- 
ways present, as it were, albeit they observably manifest themselves only 
when there is a properly disposed material recipient. In this respect, the 
emanation of the Giver of Forms might be likened to radio waves that are 
all around us yet not heard, while the preparatory role of natural efficient 
causes is like tuning a radio. The radio is gradually tuned, but once it is 
tuned to a given station, the radio wave, as it were, instantaneously pro- 
duces a sound in the radio, which on the present analogy is comparable to a 
new substance. What is important to note is that most of the work involved 
in producing a new substance, in fact, is undertaken by those terrestrial 
causes that prepare the matter by heating, cooling, drying, and moistening 
the prior substance, just as most of the work in changing the radio station 
involves turning the radio’s knob. With the introduction of an immaterial 
substance, let me conclude my discussion of Avicenna’s general account of 
natural philosophy. Avicenna returns to many of the principles and con- 
cepts presented in his general account of natural science when he turns to 
issues in other sciences, such as metaphysics and specific natural sciences, 

such as psychology, which is the subject of the next chapter. 

PSYCHOLOGY I 

Soul and the Senses 

Introduction 

For Avicenna, as well as most ancient and medieval philosophers, philo- 
sophical psychology is one of the special sciences of physics or natural phi- 
losophy. The reason for this classification becomes clear once one recalls 
that for Avicenna the proper subject of natural philosophy generally is 
body, inasmuch as it undergoes motion or change. As for the proper subject 
of psychology, Avicenna identifies it with ving bodies, inasmuch as they 
undergo and perform those activities, that is, motions and changes associ- 
ated with a living thing, such as self-nourishment, growth, reproduction, 
and in the cases of higher life forms, sensation, locomotion, and even ra- 
tional thought. In short, psychology treats a subset of natural bodies, 
namely, animate bodies, and it is for this reason that ancient and medieval 
natural philosophers subsumed psychology under physics as one of its so- 
called subaltern sciences. 

In this chapter, I first look at Avicenna’s discussion of the cause of the 
activities associated with a living body, which he identifies with the soul, as 
well as those life activities themselves. After very briefly discussing Avicenna’s 
comments on the powers of the vegetative soul, I focus on the powers of the 
animal soul. I begin with his discussion of perception via the external senses, 

namely, the well-known senses of hearing, sight, smell, touch, and taste, with 

89 

go AVICENNA 

a particular focus on the power of vision and the role he sees light playing 
in vision. I then turn to the so-called internal faculties or senses that Avi- 
cenna identifies. As a first pass, internal faculties or senses for Avicenna 
include, for instance, those acts of sensory perception that do not require 
the immediate presence of an externally sensible object for that perception, 
such as remembering some past event, or imagining some future one, or 
even dreaming of a pink elephant. Also, the internal faculties include in- 
stances of sensory acts that involve the awareness of something (perhaps) 
external that is not immediately perceived by the external senses, like, for 
example, one’s awareness that time has passed (time’s passing is certainly 
not directly seen, heard, or the like) or perceiving that some food is good to 
eat (it might have a particular smell or visual appearance but these are dif- 
ferent from recognizing that it is good to eat). Here, I look at the criteria 
by which Avicenna deduces his list of the various kinds of internal facul- 
ties with a particular focus on the compositive imagination and cogitative 
faculty. An understanding of Avicenna’s conception of sight and light as 
well as the roles of these internal senses, helps pave the way for appreciat- 
ing his account of the human intellect and its proper act of cognition, as 
well as his account of self-awareness, which are the subjects of the next 

chapter. 

Soul and Life 

For Avicenna, as has been noted, sciences are concerned with uncovering 
and investigating the causes of various phenomena. Consequently, the sci- 
ence of psychology is primarily interested in the cause (or causes) belonging 
to living bodies that explains that set of activities unique to them as living. 
Thus, in I.1 of the Psychology of the Cure, Avicenna begins by pointing out 
that it is simply a matter of empirical observation that certain bodies sensi- 
bly perceive and move about voluntarily, as well as taking in nourishment, 
growing, and reproducing. These activities, he continues, cannot belong to 
them simply inasmuch as they are bodies, for otherwise all bodies would 
manifest these activities, which they clearly do not. A stone may be split in 
two or fall to the ground, but no one would say that in such cases it has re- 
produced or moved around of its own will. Given this difference between 
the natural activities of different kinds of bodies, living bodies must have 

some other principle or cause in addition to their mere corporeality. It is 

PSYCHOLOGY I gi 

this principle for Avicenna that explains why those bodies perform these 
very activities that distinguish them from nonliving bodies. The cause or 
principle “out of which these activities issue and, in short, anything that is a 
principle for the performance of any activities that do not follow a uniform 
course devoid of volition,” Avicenna concludes, “we call ‘soul’ (nafs)” (Psy- 
chology, 1.1, 4.5—7). 

While Avicenna has introduced the notion of the soul very early, it is 
important to note that his conception of the soul, at least as presented here, 
is not a metaphysically loaded one. It is merely a tag to indicate that thing 
or things, whatever it or they might be, that living bodies have that nonliv- 
ing bodies lack and on account of which the living bodies do those activities 
that define them as living. Any of the religious or metaphysical biases one 
might have about the term “soul” need to be left behind at this point. It may 
turn out that, in fact, the soul (or at least some souls) can, for example, sur- 
vive the death of the body, receive eternal blessing or punishment, and the 
like, but such positions require independent demonstrations, and cannot 
simply be inferred from the fact that souls, understood as animating princi- 
ples, exist. For, as Avicenna insists, “for now, we have established the exist- 
ence of something that is a principle only of what we have stated [namely, 
it is a cause of various activities associated with being alive] and [then only| 
in the sense that it has a particular accident” (Psychology, 1.1, 4.10-11). The 
accident in question is that the soul has a certain relation to the body, since 
“relation” is understood as one of the traditional Aristotelian categories of 
accidents. In other words, the foregoing proof that souls exist tells one noth- 
ing about what Avicenna calls “the substance of the soul” and what belongs 
to the soul in itself, but only that it is something related to the body that 
explains the activities in question. In this respect, Avicenna emphasizes that 
he has merely established that there is a certain mover for the activities of a 
living body but not what that mover is (ibid., I.1, 5.2-3). 

Avicenna’s focus thus far, and indeed a focus that continues throughout 
his Psychology, is on the activities, motions, and changes associated with be- 
ing alive. In Avicenna’s time, just as today, philosophers, psychologists, and 
biologists alike were hesitant to give a simple definition of life. Instead, they 
preferred to give a list of activities or functions by which one can identify a 
living thing. In broad strokes, Avicenna, following Aristotle, divides this 
list into three general sorts of activities (Psychology, “preface,” 1): those ac- 
tivities associated with the most basic life forms, namely, plants, and in- 

clude the activities of self-nourishment, growth, and reproduction; those 

g2 AVICENNA 

activities associated with higher life forms, namely, animals, and include, as 
a minimum, sensation (at least touch, which could register pleasure and 
pain), while in higher animals would encompass all of the senses as well as 
the activity of volitional motion; and finally, that activity or function that 
ancient and medieval natural philosophers viewed as setting humans off 
from brute animals, namely, understanding or intellection (‘aql).' The pos- 
session of a vegetative soul, then, explains why plants are able to nourish 
themselves, grow, and reproduce. The possession of an animal soul not only 
encompasses all of the activities definitive of plant life, but also explains 
why animals can perform the various activities unique to them. Finally, 
possession of the human soul explains all of the aforementioned lower ac- 
tivities, plant and animal alike, as well as the proper human activity of 
thought. 

In his smaller encyclopedic work, the Salvation, Avicenna explains that 
the soul belonging to a living thing is dependent, in large part, upon the 
elemental mix that makes up the natural body of the living thing (Salvation, 
“Psychology,” 1, 318.2-4). As noted in the previous chapter, for Avicenna 
there are four basic elements: earth, water, air, and fire. The element earth, 
recall, was associated with the qualities of cold/dry; water with cold/wet; air 
with hot/wet; and finally fire with hot/dry. Each of these qualities is in turn 
also associated with certain very basic powers: acting on in the case of hot, 
being acted on in the case of cold, while wet has the power to receive and 
dry the power to retain. It was believed, then, that the more well balanced 
the elemental mixture constituting a body, the larger the range of activities 
that that body can potentially perform. 

The elemental mix then is preparatory for the body’s having the soul 
that it does (and thus for performing the activities that are definitive of 
whatever species of life to which it belongs); nonetheless, it is the soul ac- 
cording to Avicenna that completes and perfects the body with respect to its 
species. Consequently, he argues that since the soul belongs to the given 
body, and indeed perfects the existence of that body such that it is actually a 
specific plant or animal, the soul must belong to the very subsistence of that 
body (Psychology, 1.1, 5.3-6). In other words, the soul must be related to the 
body as one of its inherent causes, namely, either that principle by which it 
is in potency (that is, the material principle of the body) or that principle by 
which the potency is made actual (that is, the formal principle of the body). 
Again, the elemental mixture associated with a body explains the potential 

range of activities that belong to it. So, there can be no doubt, says Avicenna, 

PSYCHOLOGY I 93 

that the body is that through which the living thing is what it is potentially. 
Now, if the soul likewise were merely something by which a living body is 
what it is potentially, then the soul would not in fact complete and perfect 
the living thing insofar as it is plant or animal. That is because it is not 
merely potentially being able to perform the various activities that com- 
pletes and perfects the plant or animal but actually being able to perform 
those activities. Hence, if the soul only explained the living body’s potential 
capacity to perform the activities associated with life—in other words, if 
the soul were simply the material principle of the body—there would need 
to be yet another principle that explains the actual capacity to perform 
those activities. Yet, as has been seen, the soul is the very principle that 
explains the actual performance of those activities. Thus, the soul cannot 
be the material principle of a living body. Therefore, concludes Avicenna, 
the soul “is a form, or like a form, or like a perfection (Ramal)” (Psychology, 
I.1, 6.1). 

In fact, Avicenna is hesitant to identify the soul with form, as Aristotle 
in fact did (De anima, I] 1, 412a19-20). In the end, Avicenna prefers to think 
of the soul as a perfection of the natural body rather than a form. In part, 
this preference reflects Avicenna’s adherence to what in fact was the ca- 
nonical Aristotelian definition of the soul, which Avicenna repeats: “The 
soul is the first perfection of a natural body possessed of organs that per- 
forms the activities of life” (Psychology, I.1, 12.6-8).” The distinction be- 
tween first and second perfection, which was already encountered when 
considering Avicenna’s definition of motion, reappears here in his use of 
“first perfection” to define the soul. In this context, Avicenna writes: “The 
‘first perfection’ is that by which the species actually becomes a species, like the 
shape that belongs to the sword. The ‘second perfection’ is whatever comes 
after the thing’s species, such as its activities and passions, like the act of 
cutting that belongs to the sword” (ibid., I.1, 11.7-10). In short, the use of 
“first perfection” in the definition is to emphasize that the soul is what com- 
pletes and perfects the body. The soul is that which gives the body the ac- 
tual powers to perform those activities definitive of being alive even when 
the living thing is not actively performing those activities—as, for example, 
when the animal is asleep and so not sensing or moving—whereas the sec- 
ond perfection is the actual performance of those activities. 

Still, there were additional philosophical and historical reasons that also 
influenced Avicenna’s preference for taking the soul to be more properly a 

perfection rather than a form. For Avicenna, following certain earlier 

94 AVICENNA 

philosophers,’ the very essence and existence of a form is spoken of in rela- 
tion to matter.’ Form makes matter determinately exist. Hence, while it 
would be wrong to say that the matter causes the existence of the form, a 
form for Avicenna cannot exist independently of matter, for again the form 
essentially informs matter (ibid., I.1, 7.2-6). Consequently, if the soul were 
simply the form of the body, the presumption would be that it could not 
exist separate from the body, yet this was a question that Avicenna wanted 
at least to leave open. Moreover, there were no less than two philosophical 
traditions flowing into Avicenna’s own discussion of the soul: the Aristotelian 
one, which views the soul as the very form of an organic body, as well as the 
Platonic or Neoplatonic tradition, which sees the soul as an immaterial 
substance distinct from the body that merely uses the body in the way, for 
example, a charioteer uses a chariot.’ Here again, Avicenna wants to keep 
these two alternatives alive. Given these concerns, Avicenna plumps for the 

use of “perfection” when defining the soul. That is because: 

While every form is a perfection, not every perfection is a form. For the 
ruler is a perfection of the city, and the captain is a perfection of the ship, 
but they are not respectively a form of the city and form of the ship. So 
whatever perfection that is itself separate is not in fact the form belong- 
ing to matter and in the matter, since the form that is in the matter is the 
from imprinted in it and subsisting through it (Psychology, I.1, 6.13—17). 

In fact, as I note later, one of the characteristics that distinguishes Avicenna’s 
psychology from that of most other medieval thinkers working within the 
Aristotelian tradition is his advocacy of a substance dualism in the case of 
the human soul or intellect. In other words, for Avicenna the human body 
and soul are two distinct substances, one material the other immaterial. 
For, again humans have in Avicenna’s mind a unique activity that defines 
them as humans, namely, rational thought, and in book V, he will argue 
that this activity can only be accounted for if the human intellect is an im- 
material substance. 

Despite his substance dualism in the case of humans, Avicenna is keenly 
aware that even between a human’s body and his or her soul there exists a 
very close relationship. In fact, with the exception of the last book of his 
Psychology, most of Avicenna’s psychological work is dedicated to the pow- 
ers of the souls with respect to bodily functions, such as the external and 
internal senses, both of which absolutely require a body, and altogether 
cease with the destruction of the body. As has already been seen, Avicenna 

PSYCHOLOGY I 95 

classifies these powers, or faculties (sing. gaa), into three basic sorts: those 
associated with the vegetative soul, those associated with the animal soul, 
and finally those associated with the human soul. 

Although I consider some of these activities in more detail later, I should 
at least gesture at them here to provide a general introduction to Avicenna’s 
psychology. Again, Avicenna identifies the activities associated with the 
vegetative soul with self-nourishment, growth, and reproduction. The first, 
and most general, divisions of the powers associated with the animal soul 
are those powers that bring about motion and perception. Motive powers, 
in turn, might be such as to provide the individual with an incentive to 
move, whether inasmuch as the individual desires something (the appetitive 
faculty), or fears/is angered by something (the irascible faculty). Additionally, 
motive powers include the power distributed throughout the muscles and 
nerves that actually produces motion in the animal, and thus moves it toward 
the desired object in the case of appetite and causes it to flee or fight in the 
cases of fear and anger. The animal’s power of perception is also of two 
sorts: external perception and internal perception. Finally, the human or 
rational soul, which is also called “intellect,” is likewise of two sorts: the 
practical and the theoretical intellect. As an image to help grasp the relation 
between the practical and theoretical intellects, Avicenna likens them to 
two faces of the human soul: the one worldly, the other, as it were, other- 
worldly. For the practical intellect is turned downward toward the man- 
agement of the body, being influenced by the body and material needs and 
desires, while the theoretical intellect is turned upward toward the higher 
principles and causes, which are the source of all knowledge and under- 
standing (Psychology, 1.5, 47.14—-18; Salvation, “Psychology,” 4, 332.8-13). 

Despite the great diversity of powers associated with living things, 
Avicenna sees them all as closely interrelated, indeed even forming a hier- 
archy. It would be best, he says, if one thinks of each of the lower souls as 
being a condition for what follows. In fact, suggests Avicenna, one might 
take the vegetative soul as a genus for animal souls, and animal soul as a 
genus for the human soul (Psychology, 1.5, 40.4-13). Moreover, there is for 
Avicenna a relation of “ruler and ruled” found among them. Thus, the theo- 
retical intellect rules the practical intellect, which in turn rules the internal 
senses. The internal senses are served by the external senses, which provide 
the former with their contact and raw data about the world. These percep- 
tive powers themselves are served by the motive or moving powers, where 

the inciting powers rule over the powers that produce motion. The powers of 

96 AVICENNA 

the vegetative soul are in their turn subservient to the powers of the animal 
soul. Finally, among the vegetative powers, the power of reproduction is 
followed in nobility by the power of growth, which is itself followed lastly 
by the power of self-nourishment. 

The Vegetative Soul and 

the External Senses 

The Vegetative Soul 

My comments concerning Avicenna’s views about the vegetative soul are 
short because Avicenna’s own account is short, consisting, in the Cure, of 
one single small chapter at the opening of his discussion of the external 
senses (Psychology, 1.1). In general, Avicenna argues that one must assign 
plants and animals the powers or faculties of the vegetative soul because 
one sees them nourishing themselves, growing, and reproducing. They 
simply could not do these acts if they did not have the powers to do them. 
The three powers are seen to be distinct from one another since one ob- 
serves that plants and animals may manifest one of the powers while not 
manifesting another (save nutrition, which, as noted when discussing the 
hierarchy of the soul’s power, is the most basic of all life activities). Thus, for 
example, reproduction is different from self-nourishment, since while an 
infant clearly has the power to nourish itself and grow, it does not yet have 
the power to reproduce. Similarly, a decrepit or even fully mature plant or 
animal may stop growing, while not lacking the power of self-nourishment, 
and thus these powers must be distinct too. 

In general, the nutritive power involves the taking in of food or nutri- 
ment, and then the body’s breaking it down into something like itself, 
which is then followed by the transmission of the usable nutriment so as 
to replace what the body has used up. In the case of growth, the aliment 
has the potential to extend between two adjoining parts of the various 
organs, muscles, and the like and causes them to move apart and so settle 
between those bodily parts, in which case the size of the body expands. 
This expansion, says Avicenna, is not haphazard but ideally is directed 
toward reaching the plant or animal’s perfection of growth, that is, a mag- 
nitude that falls within the proper range of size and shape relative to 

whatever species it is. 

PSYCHOLOGY I 97 

In the case of reproduction, Avicenna continues, that power separates 

off a part of the parent body, namely, the seed in the case of plants, or se- 
6: , : 

men, whether male or female,’ in the case of animals. The reproductive 

power, then, inheres in that part. When the matter and place are prepared 

to receive that part—as, for example, a fertile womb in the case of semen— 
and that part possessing the reproductive power comes to be present there, 
the power begins to perform its function. For Avicenna, the proper func- 
tion of the reproductive power is strictly speaking simply to prepare the 
matter for the soul that will then complete and perfect the living thing with 
respect to its species. In other words, the reproductive power merely brings 
about a body whose elemental mixture is suitable for a soul of the same 
kind as the parent. It does not produce or educe the species soul by which 
there actually is an individual of that species. The actual infusion or im- 
pressing of the soul into the body comes to be, according to Avicenna, 
through that immaterial principle that he dubs the “Giver of Forms” (wahib 
as-suwar), which was mentioned in the last chapter. I shall have more to say 
about the Giver of Forms, which Avicenna also identifies with the “Active 
Intellect,” in the next chapter and again in chapter 7. 

Perception and Abstraction 

Like the powers of the vegetative soul, Avicenna has little to say about the 
various motive powers that belong to the animal. In the case of the motive 
power that produces motion, certainly the reason for Avicenna’s rather su- 
perficial treatment of it in the Psychology is that it more fittingly belongs to 
a discussion of anatomy and physiology. As for the powers that incite mo- 
tion, namely, the appetitive and irascible faculties, they are intimately 
wound up with the powers of perception (dak). Thus, it is perception that 
is for Avicenna the most significant activity of animals (and even to a cer- 
tain extent of humans, for it is intellectual perception that is our proper 
function). Given the importance of perception to Avicenna’s overall psy- 
chology, it is important for one to consider his understanding of this activity 
in some depth. 

According to Avicenna, all perception “is nothing but taking in the form 
of the perceptible in one way or another” (Psychology, II.2, 58.2-3). More 
precisely, perception involves, in the case of perceiving material objects, the 
percipient individual’s being impressed by either the form (séra) or con- 

notational attribute (ma ‘n@) of that object (or even the thing itself [dha] or 

98 AVICENNA 

essence in the case of intellectually perceiving, although for the moment I 
shall set aside such perception). 
Most animal perception, then, has as its object either a form or connota- 

tional attribute, the two of which Avicenna is very careful to distinguish. 

Form is something that both the internal and external senses perceive, 
but the external sense perceives it first and then relays it to the internal 
sense... . The connotational attribute is something that the soul per- 
ceives from the sensible without the external senses first perceiving it 
(Psychology, 1.5, 43.6-11). 

The example Avicenna gives in the Psychology of perceiving the form is a 
sheep’s perception of a wolf. The sheep sees the color and shape of the wolf; 
it smells the wolf; it hears its growling; and if it is not careful it feels the 
wolf’s weight upon it. All of these are perceptible features that follow upon 
the wolf's form, and are all immediately perceived by the sheep’s external 
senses. Via the external senses this data is then perceived by the sheep’s in- 
ternal senses. Thus, for instance, all the data from the external senses is fed 
into the internal sense of fantasia, the so-called common sense (Aiss mush- 
tarak). Avicenna’s use of “common sense,” a notion that can be traced back 
at least as far as Aristotle, as is much of Avicenna’s discussion thus far 
concerning sensation, should not be confused with sound judgment or 
wisdom; rather, it is that internal sense faculty that brings together all the 
disparate pieces of sensory information into a unified sensible experience, 
in this case a unified wolf-perception. Should the sheep survive its encoun- 
ter with the wolf, the form of this unified wolf-perception is in turn stored 
in the retentive imagination (kAayal) or form-bearing faculty (awa 
musawwira). In short, the sensible form is immediately perceived by the 
external senses and only then, through their intermediacy, perceived by 
the internal senses. 

In contrast, the connotational attribute is perceived only by the internal 
senses and not at all by an external sense, despite the fact that the connota- 
tional attribute is there in the sensible object. So, returning to the sheep 
example, when it encounters the wolf, one of the things that it perceives is 
that the wolf is dangerous. Clearly, the perceived danger presented by the 
wolf is not some color, shape, smell, or the like belonging to the wolf, and 
yet there is some feature or features about the wolf that the sheep’s internal 
senses recognize and by which it perceives the wolf as a threat. Other exam- 

ples of connotational attributes given by Avicenna in such works as the 

PSYCHOLOGY I 99 

Physics are time, space, and motion. In all of these examples, the connota- 
tional attribute is some nonsensible feature (in the sense of not directly per- 
ceived by the external senses) that nonetheless belongs to and is conveyed by 
material things, and so insofar as it is nonsensible it must be perceived only 
internally. 

Given Avicenna’s distinction between forms and connotational at- 
tributes, it should be no surprise that he distinguishes different kinds of 
perception. There is perception performed by the external senses, which 
has just been considered, namely, seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, and 
touching. There is the perception of the internal senses, such as imagining, 
as well as the perceptive operation of the estimative faculty, which I discuss 
shortly. There is likewise the intellect’s perception of universal concepts or 
intelligibles (sing. ma gil), such as humanity as opposed to a particular 
human, a form of perception that is the human’s proper act of understand- 
ing. While the distinction between forms and connotational attributes goes 
some of the way toward showing what specifically differentiates the vari- 
ous kinds of perception, it is the degrees of abstraction (tajrid) involved in 
the particular perceptive acts that Avicenna explicitly uses to distinguish 
the different kinds of perception (Psychology, II.2, 58-61). 

In its most general sense, abstraction for Avicenna involves extracting 
the form, connotational attribute, or even intelligible species from matter.” 
Avicenna also describes abstraction as peeling away the material concomi- 
tants—such as having a certain quantity, quality, or even having spatial and 
temporal locations—that are the hallmarks of natural bodies studied by 
both general physics and psychology. Indeed, as was seen in chapter 2, the 

essences of natural things considered in themselves—which in a very real 

sense are the proper objects of animal perception—are particularized by 
their presence in matter, and can be conceptualized only insofar as one ig- 
nores, sets aside, or in someway disregards the accidents that follow upon 
matter. The various degrees of abstraction simply are the various degrees of 
grasping essences in themselves independent of matter and their relation to 
matter.* 

Thus, in sensation, the sensible object, Avicenna observes, is not wholly 
abstracted from the matter itself (Psychology, I.2, 59.11-14). This is clear 
from the fact that in order for one to perceive sensibly a given material ob- 
ject, the sensible perception requires the very presence of that object. Once 
the object is removed from the sensory field, the correlative sensation ceases. 

Thus, while in sensation there is spatial separation between the perceived 

100 AVICENNA 

material object and the sense organ, the material object must nonetheless 
remain within the sense organ’s immediate field of operation if the percep- 
tion is to continue. 

Avicenna next observes that between sensation and the act of the reten- 
tive imagination there is a higher degree of abstraction, and so a different 
kind of perception (ibid., 59.14—60.10). In the case of imagination, the im- 
agined object is abstracted from the very matter of the object itself and so 
can be perceived even in the absence of the material object. Still, the imag- 
ined object is not fully abstracted from the concomitants or accidents of 
matter, “since the form that is in the retentive imagination depends upon 
the sensible form and on a certain quantification, qualification, and posi- 
tion” (ibid., 60.46). In other words, an animal cannot produce an image or 
picture in the imagination that does not have some imagined size, shape, 
color, and position of its part, all features, as noted in chapter 2, that follow 
upon matter. Thus, even though imagination, unlike sensation, can operate 
in the absence of a material concrete particular, it still has a very decided 
connection with matter. 

The degree of abstraction between the retentive imagination and the 
estimative faculty is even greater (ibid., 60.10—-61.5). That is because, as has 
been seen, the estimative faculty for Avicenna perceives the nonsensible as- 
pects of material things (or even the imaginable aspects, in the sense of 
forming a picturelike image). Examples of the objects of the estimative fac- 
ulty are, again, things like the sheep’s perception of danger, our perception 
of space, motion, and time, and here, Avicenna further adds, one’s percep- 
tion that certain things are good or not good.” 

The final degree of abstraction, where all associations with matter and 
its accidents are removed, occurs in the case of intellectual perception, 
which is discussed more fully in the next chapter. To sum up before turning 
to Avicenna’s discussion of the external senses, that activity that defines 
animals and humans alike is perception. Perception, as Avicenna observes, 
can be of different kinds that are distinguished by the degree to which 
the perceptible object is abstracted from matter and the concomitants of 

matter. 

The External Senses 

Again the most basic or rudimentary act of perception is sensation. In gen- 

eral, for Avicenna all sensation involves a certain power or faculty, which is 

PSYCHOLOGY I IOI 

arrayed in a corresponding sense organ, and in the act of sensation that 
sense organ is impressed by a sensible form proper to that power (Salvation, 
“Psychology,” 3, 323.8-10). So, for example, according to Avicenna, the fac- 
ulty of hearing is a power arrayed in the nerve dispersed on the surface of 
the ear canal, which is disposed so as to perceive “the form of what is trans- 
mitted to it from the air’s oscillation between what causes [the air] to vibrate 
and what receives [that] vibration, [with] the air so oscillating that it pro- 
duces sound” (Psychology, 1.5, 42.1-3). When hearing occurs, the eardrum 
is impressed by these oscillations of the air and vibrates in harmony with 
them. It is this affection of the eardrum, namely, its vibrating at the same 
frequency as the oscillating air, that Avicenna identifies with hearing. 

As for smell, Avicenna identifies it with “a faculty, [which is] arrayed in 
the two appendages in the anterior part of the brain resembling two nip- 
ples, that perceives what is transmitted to it by the air in the nasal passages, 
such as the odor present in the vapor mingled with [the air] or the odor 
imprinted in it through alteration by an odoriferous body” (ibid., 42.5—9). 
As one might expect, Avicenna locates taste on the nerves spread through- 
out the tongue, where the sensation of taste occurs when the chewed sub- 
stance begins to dissolve and the sensible forms of tastes found in it mingle 
with the salivary fluids so as to effect the tongue (ibid., 42.9-11). 

To this point, much of Avicenna’s accounts concerning the mechanics 
and chemistry of the various senses should not to be too unfamiliar to mod- 
ern readers. The situation changes in the case of the sensation of touch, for, 
whereas it is common for us to identify touch with a single sense modality, 
Avicenna has doubts as to whether it is a single, unified modality. He, in- 
stead, thinks that the term “touch” (Jams) encompasses four different sorts 
of sensation (ibid., 42.11-43.1). These are for Avicenna the categorically 
different sensations of (1) hot and cold, (2) wet and dry, (3) hard and soft, 
and finally (4) rough and smooth. The reason that one often thinks that 
touch is a single faculty, argues Avicenna, is that all four of the powers come 
together ina single organ, namely, they are arrayed in the nerves of the skin 
and flesh of the entire body. Like the other sense modalities, however, the 
various senses of touch involve the perception of what comes into contact 
with the body and causes an alteration of the bodily temperament and 
elemental configuration, such as, for example, the hot/cold and wet/dry 
features that in a sense are constitutive of the body’s elemental mixture. 

The final faculty of sensation is vision, which I treat more fully in 

the next section. In summary form, however, this faculty is for Avicenna 

102 AVICENNA 

arrayed in the so-called hollow nerves—or what we would today call the 
“optical nerves.” Vision occurs when the visible forms are impressed upon 
the vitreous humor in the optical nerves. More precisely, according to 
Avicenna, the visible forms are the sensible images of bodies possessing 
color that are transmitted through actually transparent bodies, such as air 
or water, to the surface of the eye by means of radiant light, and then from 
there excite the vitreous humor. 

To sum up, then, for Avicenna every case of perception by one of the 
external senses involves some material object’s transmitting a sensible form 
or sensible species of itself to the relevant sense organ. That sensible form, 
then, impresses itself on the correlative sense organ, where the correspond- 
ing act of sensation is nothing more than that organ’s being so impressed. 
Since this manner of perception involves something’s coming from without 
and impressing itself znto the sense organ, Avicenna adopts what has his- 

torically been termed an “intromission model or theory of perception.” 

Vision 

Avicenna thinks that it is obvious in the cases of taste, touch, smell, and 
hearing that they occur according to the intromission model of perception, 
again, the theory that claims that perception involves something’s coming 
from without and entering into the perceiver and impressing itself on the 
sense faculty. In the case of vision, however, Avicenna observes that there 
have been differences of opinion: Some saying (Aristotle and Avicenna 
among them) that, as with the rest of the senses, vision too occurs according 
to the intromission model, whereas others advocated what has been called 
an extramission model of vision." 

According to the extramission model of vision, seeing takes place not by 
something’s entering the eyes, but by something’s exiting from the eyes, 
whether it be some sort of ray, as the mathematical models of Euclid and 
Ptolemy assumed, or an optical pneuma or spirit that purportedly alters the 
surrounding air so as to make it usable as a tool by the animal’s visual system, 
as the materialistic model of the Stoics and the physician Galen required. 
While the extramission theory of vision might seem odd to us today, it had 
some apparent advantages over the intromission theory that made it a real 
contender in at least the ancient and early medieval periods. First, one 

does not have to countenance specterlike sensible forms being transmitted 

PSYCHOLOGY I 103 

through the air or other medium. Second, if perception is nothing more 
than the reception of a sensible form, as the intromission model of percep- 
tion maintains, and the intervening air or water between a given sensible 
object and a perceiver are also receiving the sensible form, it seems that, 
based upon the intromission model’s own principles, the air or water should 
likewise perceive those forms.” Sucha problem obviously does not arise for 
the extramission theory. Third, and arguably the most significant reason 
for adopting the extramission model, is that it allowed for an elegant math- 
ematical explanation of a number of problems related to visual perspective, 
as, for example, why an object appears smaller the farther it is away from 
the perceiver. So, for example, Ptolemy in his Optics, maintained that a 
visual flux emanates from the eye so as to form a cone. The introduction of 
a cone, then, allowed Ptolemy to apply simple geometrical theorems and 
explanations to physical problems associated with vision, such as, again, 
explaining the relative size of objects seen at different distances, as well as 
several other such phenomena. In this instance, he simply lays it down that 
the smaller the angle through which an object is seen, the smaller the object 
appears. Thus, consider the diagram presented in figure 4.1. Let the object 
EF initially be seen at some distance such that it forms the angle BAC. 
Next, let EF be moved to a further distance and call it E’F’. In this case, 
E‘F’ is now seen through the smaller angle DAC. Given this situation, 
Ptolemy simply claimed that since the angle DAC is smaller than the angle 
BAC when FF is further away, E’F’ (again that is EF at the farther dis- 
tance) in fact appears smaller, just as we perceive it. 

Despite the advantages that an extramission theory might bring, Avicenna 
ardently defended the intromission model of vision. In fact, so much so that 
he dedicates the whole of book HI of his Psychology to developing his own 

version of the intromission model of vision as well as presenting and severely 

FIGURE 4.1. 

104 AVICENNA 

criticizing opposing theories. The major proponent of the intromission 
theory in the ancient world was Aristotle; however, Avicenna’s own adher- 
ence to that theory is not due to any slavish devotion to Aristotle, since in 
many respects Avicenna’s theory of vision and its accompanying theory of 
light are radically different from Aristotle’s. Indeed, Dag Hasse” has 
brought to our attention the fact that Avicenna’s mature theory of light— 
which is closely connected with his theory of vision—is not at all the stand- 
ard Aristotelian account, where light is understood as the state or affection 
of the medium when that medium is transparent.” 

Avicenna, instead, has other reasons for preferring the intromission 
theory. First, it gives a symmetry or simplicity of explanation to his overall 
account of how external sensation works, and indeed, to how all the various 
kinds of perception work, internal sensation and intellection included. Sec- 
ond, Avicenna’s own variety of the intromission theory represents what 
might be thought of as the cutting edge of optical theory of his time.” 
Third, and finally, for virtually all ancient and medieval cognitive theorists 
alike, human cognition is modeled on one’s model of vision. A number of 
the innovations that Avicenna introduces in his theory of vision are in no 
doubt motivated by a desire to accommodate certain novel features of his 
own account of how intellectual perception works. Having said that, let me 

turn to Avicenna’s optical theory. 

Avicenna’s Theory of Light and 
the Transparent 

In a move that anticipates modern optical theories, Avicenna intimately 
joins his theory of vision with a theory of light. Thus, book HI of his Psy- 
chology begins, “We now should discuss vision, but discussing it requires 
discussing light, the transparent, and color, as well as how the connection 
between sensation and the visible object of sensation occurs” (Psychology, 
IIL.1, 91.1-3). What immediately follows in the first chapter of this book is 
an in-depth discussion of the vocabulary of light. Avicenna begins by not- 
ing that as a matter of linguistic convention the Arabic terms daw’, nar, and 
shu@* are often used interchangeably, all roughly corresponding with 
“light.” For the purposes of discussing vision, however, he wants to assign 
each term a technical meaning. In the present context Avicenna says that he 
is not particularly concerned with shu @‘, a term that one can safely translate 

as “ray,” and which I discuss more thoroughly later. Instead, here he focuses 

PSYCHOLOGY I 105 

on daw’ and niir. The first term, daw’, one might render as “luminous 
light.” Luminous light is that which is observed when one considers lumi- 
nous bodies like the Sun or fire without taking into account the light’s color, 
as, for example, its being yellow, white, or red. Such light belongs essen- 
tially to luminous bodies, and it is by that luminous light that those bodies 
themselves are essentially visible. He next defines nar as “the thing that 
radiates (yasta ‘“) from [the body having luminous light], and is then imag- 
ined to fall upon bodies, in which case [this type of light] will appear white, 
black, or green” (ibid., III.1, 91.8—9). For present purposes, one can term 
this kind of light “radiant light.”” 

Having provided general descriptions of luminous light and radiant 
light, he now approaches them from a different angle, namely, the bodies to 
which they belong. He notes that there are two classes of bodies. On the one 
hand, there are those bodies that when positioned between a would-be- 
perceiver and a luminous body, such as fire, hinder the perceiver from see- 
ing the luminous body behind them. They are what one might term 
“opaque bodies.” On the other hand, there are also those bodies, like air and 
water, which do not hinder one from seeing a luminous body that is posi- 
tioned behind them. Such bodies are, Avicenna notes, “transparent” 
(shaffaf ). Opaque bodies are again of two kinds: those that are themselves 
luminous, and those that are not. So, for example, a wall of fire, which is a 
luminous body, can just as effectively prevent one from seeing some light 
on the opposite side of it as a brick wall. The class of bodies that are self- 
luminous can be seen of themselves and need nothing further to be seen 
except that the body between them and the perceiver be a transparent one. 
Nonluminous, opaque bodies, however, cannot be seen merely given a 
transparent medium but need something else. Avicenna identifies nonlu- 
minous, opaque bodies with “colored objects,” which, if they are to be seen, 
need the radiant light of a luminous body in addition to a transparent 
medium. 

Up to this point most of what Avicenna has had to say about light, while, 
certainly going beyond Aristotle and the Aristotelian tradition more gener- 
ally, is not at odds with that tradition. Where Avicenna’s position is at odds 
with the Aristotelian account concerns the states of potentiality and actual- 
ity of transparent and colored objects. On the traditional Aristotelian the- 
ory, color is in a sense always actualized. It is only the medium, according 
to Aristotle, that is sometimes potentially transparent, and so actually dark, 

while at other times actually transparent and so light. That is because in 

106 AVICENNA 

Aristotle’s technical sense, light simply is the state of the actually transpar- 
ent medium as such. Thus, for Aristotle a colored object fails to produce 
sight in a properly situated perceiver, not because there is no actual color in 
the object, but because the tool, namely, the medium, by which color acts 
upon the perceiver, is not in a proper state, that is to say, the medium is not 
at that time actually transparent and so light. Stated another way, the 
potentially transparent, that is, the dark, acts as an obstacle that prevents 
vision. In short, on the traditional Aristotelian model, color is always 
actualized, whereas it is only the medium that is in either a state of poten- 
tial or actual transparency. 

In contrast, for Avicenna, media, such as air and water, are strictly 
speaking always actually transparent, whereas it is color that might either 

be in a state of potentiality or actuality. Thus, he writes: 

Don’t suppose that white, red, and the like actually exist in the bodies in 
the way that they are seen but that the dark air prevents the vision of it, 
for the air itself is not dark. What is dark is only that which itself receives 
the radiant light, whereas the air itself (even if there is nothing luminous 
in it) does not hinder the perception of that which receives the radiant 
light nor does it conceal the color when it exists in something (Psychology, 
III.1, 93.6—11). 

He continues that in the absence of a luminous or radiant light one simply 
imagines that the air is dark. In that situation, because no light, luminous or 
radiant, is present, there is nothing stimulating one’s visual system. Thus, it 
is not that one is “seeing” darkness; rather, one is simply not seeing at all. 
Avicenna likens this case to either being blind or having one’s eyelids closed. 
Now, while Avicenna follows the Aristotelian tradition and occasionally 
speaks of the “potentially transparent,” he is equally clear that a medium’s 
becoming actually transparent does not involve any alteration in the me- 
dium itself. Instead, it involves an alteration or motion in another, either by 
some luminous body’s moving into a given place or a radiant light’s falling 
onto a colored object. 

As for the term “color” (lawn), in its proper sense, Avicenna continues, it 
refers to the phenomenal colors, white, red, green, and so on, namely, the colors 
as we see them. One is simply using the term “color” equivocally, says 
Avicenna, if “color” is meant to refer to “various dispositions that are in the 
bodies, which when they receive luminous light, one of them comes to be 
something that we see as white and another as red” (ibid., III.1, 94.10-12). 

PSYCHOLOGY I 107 

Instead, in those bodies that are not luminous, and so not visible in themselves, 
a radiant light coming from a luminous body must fall upon them and blend or 
mix with the potential color or disposition in the body. The resultant of this 
mingling of radiant light and potential color is for Avicenna what one, then, 
perceives as the actual perceptible color (Psychology, HI1.3, 103). 

Sometimes Avicenna speaks of the actual color that emanates from 

the illuminated body—which again is the combination of radiant light 

and potential color—as itself “luminous light” (daw’), but since he al- 
most as frequently also uses the term “ray” (shu @‘), I shall use this latter 
term in order to avoid possible confusion. Thus, at Psychology, II1.7, he 

says that a ray is what connects (7ttisa/) the visible form or sensible species 

in the perceived object—namely, actual color—with the visual system of 
some perceiver in order that the object “might project its sensible image 
(shabah) to the [perceiver]|” (Psychology, I11.7, 142.4—-5). Also at Psychol- 
ogy, IIl.1, where Avicenna initially discussed light terms, he there de- 
fined “ray” as “the thing that is imagined, as it were, to well-up [from 
colored bodies], cloak their color, and then emanate (yufidu) from them” 
(ibid., III.1, g1.10-12). Avicenna more frequently expresses this sense of 

a ray’s welling up and emanating from the body by saying that light has 
been reflected (én Tkas) from the body.'° 

Refutation of the Extramission Theory 

Certainly one of the more historically important aspects of Avicenna’s opti- 
cal theory is his thoroughgoing criticism of the extramission theory of vi- 
sion, which I mentioned at the beginning of this section, a criticism, I might 
add, that exploits his innovative thoughts about the nature of light and rays. 
Thus, returning to Avicenna’s understanding of visual rays, he additionally 
claims that when one sees some visible object, the rays, which convey the 
object’s sensible image, form a cone, whose base is at the sensible object and 
whose vertex is at the back of the crystalline humor that forms part of the 
eye. The sensible image projecting from the visible object affects the eye at 
the surface of the crystalline humor, rather than at the back of it where the 
vertex of the visual cone has fallen. Consequently, the sensible image affects 
the eye at a section of this visual cone, such as, the arc AB in figure 4.2. He 
next asserts that, “if the angle [at which the sensible image falls upon the 

surface of the crystalline humor] is larger because the thing is nearer, the 

108 AVICENNA 

FIGURE 4.2. 

section is greater and the sensible image in it is greater, whereas if the angle 
is smaller because the thing is farther away, the section and sensible image 
that is in it are smaller” (Psychology, III.5, 124.17—19). In effect, Avicenna’s 
theories of light and color and the optical rays formed from their mixture 
allow him to appropriate what was seen as perhaps the greatest strength of 
the extramission theory, namely, its introduction of a visual cone that pro- 
vided for the application of mathematical explanations to various problems 
of perspective. The real difference between Avicenna’s intromission model 
and the earlier extramission model is that while the mathematicians had 
thought that the rays emanate from the eyes of the perceiver, Avicenna 
maintains that rays of light emanate or are reflected from the visible objects 
themselves and then impinge upon the visual system. 

Having shown that his account has at least equal explanatory power as 
the extramission theory purportedly does, he goes on to argue that in fact 
the extramission theory cannot even take advantage of the very geometrical 
analysis that was thought to be its greatest strength. Avicenna argues thus: 
If vision involves a ray that purportedly emanates from the eyes and it 
comes into contact with a visible object, where the perception of that object 
results from the contact of that ray, then, when that ray extends to where 
the visible object is, one should in fact perceive the visible object according 
to how big the object actually is. That follows, maintains Avicenna, because 
the perceiver is in actual contact with the whole of the object according to 
its actual size via the ray emitted from the perceiver’s eye. So, for instance, 
when there are similarly sized objects that are at different distances, the 
perceiver should not see them as appearing either smaller or larger just as 
one would not feel them as either smaller or larger even if one touched the 
very same object at a further distance. Moreover, if the extramission theo- 

rists claim that something comes back down the visual ray such that vision 

PSYCHOLOGY I 109 

takes place in the visual system of the perceiver, then, complains Avicenna, 
the emanation of rays from the eyes is redundant, since one needs merely 
posit, as Avicenna himself has done, that rays emanate from the visible object, 
either owing to the object itself in the case of a luminous body, or owing to rays 
reflected from the object in the case of a colored object. In short, Avicenna’s 
intromission theory is just as empirically adequate as the extramission one, 
while also being the simpler scientific explanation. 

Certain physical absurdities, notes Avicenna, also result from the 
extramission theory. For example, among the things that one sees are the stars 
of the outermost heavens. Consequently, any animal capable of such vision, 
were the extramission theory correct, would need to be able to produce 
enough optical pneuma or visual flux to form a cone that extends to the 
outermost celestial sphere. This optical cone that is purportedly produced 
by the animal, Avicenna hastens to add, would at its base take in nearly one 
whole hemisphere of the heavens. Thus the animal, whose size when com- 
pared with that of the heavens is negligible, would be required to produce 
a staggering amount of optical pneuma or visual flux every time it peaks 
at the heavens. Additionally, this cone would have to be formed virtually 
instantaneously with the opening of the eyes. Moreover, mocks Avicenna, 
in the case of the Galenic account—where the optical pneuma alters the air 
so as to transform it into a tool or organ of sight—it should be that when 
many viewers are gathered together the amount of optical pneuma is of a 
larger quantity and so everyone’s sight should be sharper, or, at the very 
least, those of poor eyesight should see better. Avicenna finds the conse- 
quences of the extramission model simply beyond credulity. In the end, he 
concludes, the purported mathematical and naturalistic explanations that 
initially made the extramission model seem attractive simply are not there.!” 

To finish up Avicenna’s theory of vision, let me briefly consider his views 
concerning the physiology of vision (Psychology, 11.8, 151-154). I have al- 
ready noted that, for Avicenna, vision requires that the sensible image of a 
visible object be conveyed through a transparent medium via rays emanat- 
ing from the visible object itself. These rays, which apparently emanate in 
all directions, again form a cone relative to a properly functioning visual 
system in a perceiver that is facing the visible object, where the vertex of 
that cone falls at the back of the crystalline humor, which makes up part of 
the eye. Once this sensible image impinges upon the eye, it stimulates or 
impresses itself on the crystalline humor; however, there is not vision at this 

point, Avicenna insists, since if there were, there would be two distinct 

110 AVICENNA 

sensible images in the two eyes, and the single visible object would be seen 
as two. Instead, the sensible image is transferred via a conveying pneuma 
(rahy'® along the optical nerves, to the optic chiasma (sa/zb), at which there is 
then vision. 

After reaching the optic chiasma, the sensible image impressed in the 
pneuma is then conveyed to the anterior ventricle of the brain where it is 
again impressed upon the common sense—which is one of the internal 
senses that I shall take up in more detail in the next section. It is in the com- 
mon sense that there occurs “the perfection of vision” (Psychology, III.8, 
152.8), as Avicenna calls it. After the sensible image appears in the common 
sense, it passes on to the retentive imagination, also called the form-bearing 
faculty, which is arrayed behind the anterior ventricle of the brain where 
the image is stored until it is called up by the estimative faculty. At the time 

that the image is needed, Avicenna writes: 

[The estimative faculty] opens up the cerebellar vermis (diida) by remov- 
ing what is between the two porous appendages (which [just] are the 
cerebellar vermis) and [the form that is in the retentive imagination] con- 
joins with the pneuma harboring the estimative faculty by means of the 
pneuma harboring the faculty of the compositive imagination (which in 
humans is called the cogitative [faculty]). The form that is in the reten- 
tive imagination is then imprinted onto the pneuma of the estimative 
faculty, and the faculty of the compositive imagination, which serves the 
estimative faculty, conveys what is in the retentive imagination to it 
(Psychology, III.8, 153.10-14). 

In the next section, I consider the various internal faculties mentioned in this 
passage in more detail. For now, however, this should give one at least a sense 
of how Avicenna sees data derived from vision, and indeed the external 
senses in general, being internalized and then stored in the brain. 

Before turning to the internal senses, let me quickly sum up the most 
salient points of Avicenna’s optical theory. Light is of two types. There is 
luminous light, which belongs to certain bodies like the Sun and fire, and 
by which these bodies are visible in themselves. Additionally, there is radi- 
ant light, which radiates from luminous bodies and mixes with the poten- 
tial colors of certain other types of bodies. Thereafter the mixture of radiant 
light and potential color forms a ray that is reflected from the visible object. 
When this ray is connected with a perceiver who is facing the visible object, 
a sensible image of the visible object projects toward the perceiver and is 

seen as actual color, and therein there is vision. 

PSYCHOLOGY I II 
The Internal Senses 

Certainly one of Avicenna’s main contributions to the science of psychology 
is his exploration and mapping of the so-called internal sense faculties. 
Indeed, many of the various operations that Aristotle had previously 
subsumed under the single internal sense of phantasia, Avicenna would dis- 
ambiguate in a principled way. Moreover, despite the fact that Avicenna, as 
will become clear, is a dualist when it comes to the human intellect and 
body (that it to say, he believes that the intellect is an immaterial substance 
wholly distinct from the material substance of the body), he, nonetheless, 
assigns a large portion of our daily cognitive operations to the internal 
senses, and even grants that the activities of certain internal senses are at 
least preparatory for the intellect’s operation.” 

Avicenna identifies five internal senses: (1) the common sense (Aiss mush- 
tarak), also sometimes called fantasia; (2) the retentive imagination (kAayal), 
which he also terms the form-bearing faculty (géwa musawwira); (3) the 
compositive imagination (mutakhayyila), which in humans is transformed 
into the cogitative faculty (gd#wa mutafakkira) when it is being used by the 
intellect; (4) the estimative faculty (g#wa wahmiya); and finally (5) memory 
(dhikr). Avicenna’s identification of these five internal powers is not hap- 
hazard but is the result of three distinct principles of faculty differentiation 
(Psychology, 1.5, 43.1-44.3): (1) the principle of differentiation between dif- 
ferent cognitive objects; (2) the principle of differentiation between recep- 
tive and retentive powers; and (3) the principle of differentiation between 

active and passive powers. 

The Principles of Faculty Differentiation 

The first principle, namely that faculties are differentiated on the basis of 
different cognitive objects, is one with a prestigious pedigree going back at 
least as far as Plato.” Still, Avicenna’s application of this principle is unique 
because of his distinction between forms and connotational attributes, 
which was seen when considering one of the ways that Avicenna distin- 
guished external from internal senses. To repeat some of that discussion 
again, forms, for Avicenna, are those objects of perception that are immedi- 
ately grasped by the external senses and then, through the intermediacy of 
the external senses, are perceived by the internal senses. Connotational 

attributes, in contrast, are in no way perceived by the external senses but 

112 AVICENNA 

only immediately by the internal senses, as, for example, perceiving that a 
wolf is dangerous, or that time has passed, or even that something is good 
or not good. In short, connotational attributes are nonsensible features in- 
herent in material objects. Based on this principle of faculty differentiation 
Avicenna, then, distinguishes between the power of common sense (or fan- 
tasia), which perceives sensible forms, and that of the estimative faculty, 
which perceives connotational attributes. 

The next principle of faculty differentiation involves the differences 
between receptive and retentive faculties. Avicenna bases this principle upon 
another one that is familiar within the Aristotelian psychological tradition, 
namely that a single power cannot both receive and retain its proper object. 
The reason for this limitation on a single power is that ultimately the inter- 
nal senses are for Avicenna physiological faculties or powers harbored in the 
brain. In other words, they are corporeal. As such they have definite powers, 
qualities, and even limitations based upon the elemental makeup of that 
part of the brain where they are harbored. So, for example, when a given 
internal sense receives its proper object, that object impresses itself onto the 
internal sense. Being impressed, however, requires that the sense organ’s 
compositional makeup have a certain degree of fluidity or malleability, 
which for the ancient and medieval scientists would be due to a predomi- 
nance of elemental water existing in that organ. In contrast, what explains 
some impression’s being retained and being stable is the qualitative dryness 
of the organ, which according to ancient and medieval chemistry is ex- 
plained by a predominance of elemental earth in the organ. Hence, if the 
same organ were both to receive and to retain its proper object, it would 
simultaneously have to be predominantly wet and dry. Since these are con- 
trary qualities, a single power’s both receiving and retaining its proper ob- 
ject would involve a physical absurdity. Consequently, concludes Avicenna, 
different faculties must be assigned to these different functions: The common 
sense, as noted, receives the sensible forms, while the retentive imagination 
retains them, and similarly the estimative faculty receives the connotational 
attributes, while memory retains them. 

The final principle distinguishes those faculties that are passive (and so 
are merely acted upon by their proper objects) and those faculties that are 
active (and so in some way manipulate their proper objects). To state the 
same point slightly differently, passive faculties merely perceive their 
proper objects as those objects present themselves, while an active faculty 

can alter what has been presented to the animal so that it has a perception 

PSYCHOLOGY I 113 

of something new and/or different from what in fact was perceived. For 
example, my common sense can only perceive the coffee in my cup as tepid 
and slightly burnt, but I can imagine it as piping hot and fresh. Using this 
principle, Avicenna thus distinguishes the compositive imagination (which 
can separate and recombine the retained forms and connotational attributes 
into new objects of internal sensation) from the common sense and estima- 
tive faculties (both of which merely receive and are impressed by forms and 

connotational attributes). 

The Internal Senses 

Based upon the best anatomical research of his time,”' Avicenna placed the 
common sense in the anterior ventricle of the brain. Its function, as has 
been seen, is to receive all the forms imprinted on the external senses, which 
are then conveyed to the common sense. It is in the common sense that the 
distinct sensory input of each of the external senses is unified into an inte- 
grated sensible experience. It is because of this faculty that, for example, 
I experience the brown-colored, warm, hot-wet, coffee aroma, and flavor 
with the accompanying slurping sound when I drink it, as a single, unified 
coffee experience. 

After the forms of the external senses are unified in the common sense, 
the form of that integrated, sensible experience is conveyed to the retentive 
imagination and stored there until the compositive imagination needs it. Be- 
cause the retentive imagination bears the sensible forms, it also sometimes 
goes by the more descriptive name, “the form-bearing faculty.” This faculty, 
Avicenna tells us, is arrayed behind the anterior ventricle of the brain. 

Avicenna locates the estimative faculty at the back of the medial ventricle.” 
Its function, as has been noted, is to perceive the connotational attributes, 
which again are not perceptible to the external senses, but which are nonethe- 
less in particular sensible objects. Avicenna also thinks that the estimative 
faculty frequently controls the compositive imagination’s function of com- 
bining and dividing sensible forms and connotational attributes, a point to 
which I return momentarily. In all animals, other than humans, the opera- 
tion of the estimative faculty is for Avicenna that animal’s highest function. 
Indeed, even in humans it is the estimative faculty that undertakes most of 
our day-to-day interactions with the world around us. Thus, as Avicenna 
repeats frequently in his psychological works, it is the estimative faculty 

that perceives things like the goodness or pleasantness of some object, as 

I1l4 AVICENNA 

well as the harmfulness or ire-inciting properties of some experience. Thus, 
in all animals, humans included, it is the estimative faculty that, for exam- 
ple, recognizes that some ripe piece of fruit is good, or some individual is 
desirable as a mate. This information is in turn conveyed to the appetitive 
faculty that incites the motive faculty to move toward the fruit, the poten- 
tial mate, and the like. Moreover, since in his PAysics Avicenna also includes 
things like time and space as objects of the estimative faculty, it seems rea- 
sonable to conclude that for him this faculty aids in the animal’s maneuver- 
ing toward the desired object. So, for example, I have presented Avicenna’s 
explanation as to why the greater the distance an object is from the per- 
ceiver the smaller it appears; however, appearing as small or large on one’s 
visual field is different from appearing as farther or nearer away, even if the 
latter is explanatory of the former. Yet it is knowing or estimating the dis- 
tance from an object that is important for moving toward that thing. Inas- 
much as the estimative faculty perceives things like spatial relations, it 
would seem that Avicenna envisions it as interpreting two-dimensional 
visual data as the three-dimensional space in which the animal actually 
finds itself and through which it has to move. Thus, the animal perceives 
that its immediate experience is not, for example, of a small berry immedi- 
ately in front of it but of a medium-sized apple at a distance. In short, the 
estimative faculty is what sets the appetitive and irascible faculties into ac- 
tion, and then plays an important role in guiding the animal’s motion to- 
ward or away from some given thing, which, again, for most animals are 
their most important animate activities. 

The faculty of memory, which is arrayed in the posterior ventricle, has 
for Avicenna the function of retaining the insensible connotational at- 
tributes in particular objects perceived by the estimative faculty. Avicenna 
likens the relation between memory and the estimative faculty to the rela- 
tion between the retentive imagination and the common sense. 

The final faculty of animal souls is that of the compositive imagination, 
which, when under the control of the human intellect, goes by the name 
“cogitative faculty.””* As noted, Avicenna locates this faculty in the medial 
ventricle of the brain at the cerebellar vermis. Concerning it, Avicenna 

writes: 

We know with certainty that it is natural for us to combine and separate 
parts of sensibles objects with other parts, not according to the form that 
we found in them externally nor even affirming that some of them exist 

PSYCHOLOGY I I 15 

or do not. Thus, in us there must be some faculty by which we do 
that. This [faculty], when the intellect is using it, is called the “cogitative 
[faculty],” while when the animal faculty is using it, it is called the 
“compositive imagination” (Psychology, IV.1, 165.19—166.4). 

The compositive imagination is thus characterized for Avicenna by its 
power “to combine and separate parts of sensible objects with other parts.” 
While such combining and separating can give rise to such fantastical im- 
ages as paisley elephants with wings, it is neither limited to such outlandish 
images nor even merely pictorial images. It is in fact this faculty by which 
the animal may see itself in the future sating some desire, whether for food, 
a mate, or the like. It is likewise that faculty by which one imagines how 
certain foods would taste together. It, moreover, gives rise to dreams, 
whether daydreams or sleeping dreams. Indeed, in humans it is that faculty 
that vocalizes the words that one hears when one is engaged in internal 
discourse, and, as one might guess, it also imagines certain shapes, figures, 
or other images that one might use when trying to solve problems in math- 
ematics or even other practical sorts of issues. 

As for the compositive imagination’s activity, it sometimes acts inde- 
pendently, and so is not controlled by anything else, while at other times it 
can be brought into the service of either the estimative faculty or the human 
intellect. In its free state, its activity of combining and separating sensible 
images is random and haphazard. Indeed, one might not even be aware 
that one is combining and separating such images, as, for example, when 
one has been daydreaming and only later becomes actively conscious that 
his or her mind has been wandering. Deborah Black describes this faculty 
in its free state thus: “In its absolute and uncontrolled state, then, the com- 
positive imagination is characterized by incessant activity. That is, by its 
nature [the compositive| imagination composes and divides images and in- 
tentions continually and, as one would say now, subconsciously.” When 
the estimative faculty takes control of the compositive imagination, it puts 
it to use in order to imagine possible courses of action that are in some way 
beneficial to the animal: what to use as shelter, or how to obtain some food, 
or how to attract a mate. It is precisely because the animal’s estimative fac- 
ulty takes control of the compositive imagination and has it imagine possi- 
ble courses of action that Avicenna believes that the estimative faculty is the 
highest function of the brute animal, for imagining courses of action is the 

closest thing to rational thought that nonhuman animals can do. 

116 AVICENNA 

In humans, the compositive imagination can additionally come under 
the control of the intellect, and when it is under the control of the intellect, 
it becomes the cogitative faculty.” To be clear, it is zo¢ that humans have the 
cogitative faculty in lieu of a compositive imagination; rather, the cogitative 
faculty is a special name given to the human’s compositive imagination only 
when it is being controlled by the human intellect. The activity (or motions) 
of the cogitative faculty is, for Avicenna, preparatory for the operation of 
the intellect. For instance, if one is presented with a geometrical problem, 
one might imagine a diagram in one’s mind’s eye, or one might literally talk 
through a problem in the form of an internally vocalized dialogue. Whether 
one imagines figures that one then divides, rotates, draws line through, and 
the like, or one internally vocalizes the propositions of an argument that 
one is considering, these, and activities like them, are all operations of the 
compositive imagination. Indeed, they must be since they all involve sensi- 
ble representations inasmuch as they are internally seen, heard, or the like, 
and thus have not been completely abstracted from the concomitants of 
matter. At the instant that one has the “aha” experience, however, that is to 
say, one perceives the explanation that solves the problem with which one 
is wrestling, then there is an activity of the intellect. The intellect and its 

operations, however, are the topic of the next chapter, to which I now turn. 

PSYCHOLOGY II 

Intellect 

Introduction 

I have noted that Avicenna’s general approach in the Psychology is to iden- 
tify different activities that characterize the various kinds of living things, 
and then to consider the nature of the cause of those activities, namely, the 
soul. The activity that sets humans apart from all other animals is, accord- 
ing to Avicenna, who is himself following a long philosophical tradition, 
understanding or the possession of scientific knowledge (%/m). Thus, writes 
Avicenna, “The property most specific to the human is to conceptualize the 
universal, intellectually understand connotational attributes completely ab- 
stracted from all matter . . ., and to arrive at a knowledge of what is un- 
known from what is intellectually known such that there is verification and 
conceptualization (tasdiq wa tasawwur)” (Psychology, V.1, 206.11-13). Since 
these activities are proper to the intellect, it is the possession of an 
intellect that sets humans apart from all other animals. As one brief point of 
clarification, while I follow Avicenna and speak of the (human) intellect, 
strictly speaking the intellect is a power or faculty of the human soul. Thus, 
whatever turns out to be true of the nature of this intellectual faculty is so 
because it holds true of the human soul itself. 

As I mentioned in the previous chapter, Avicenna identifies two aspects 

of the human intellect: the practical intellect (gl Gmil) and the theoretical 

Li7 

118 AVICENNA 

intellect (agql Glim or agl nagari). The practical intellect is concerned with 
the welfare of the body and bodily interactions that are the results of delib- 
eration. It is what determines what is right, wrong, and permissible, and 
perceives the morally good and evil. As such, the practical intellect is par- 
ticularly involved in the formation of moral temperaments, and for that 
reason I defer discussing it until chapter 8. In this chapter I concentrate 
mainly on Avicenna’s account of the theoretical intellect, which in fact is 
Avicenna’s own primary concern when he discusses the intellect in the final 
book of his Psychology. To this end I begin with Avicenna’s account of the 
stages of intellectual development before turning to the nature of the 
human theoretical intellect. Concerning it, I focus first on Avicenna’s argu- 
ments for its immateriality, then its temporal origination, and also its incor- 
ruptbility, that is, its immortality. After discussing these topics, I turn to its 
relation to the Active Intellect and intellectual memory. I then take up 
Avicenna’s discussion of self-awareness (shu‘air b1-dh-dhat), and conclude by 

looking at his naturalistic account of prophecy. 

Stages of the Intellect 

In most basic terms, the theoretical intellect is something that can “be im- 
pressed by the universal forms abstracted from matter” (Psychology, 1.5, 
48.1-2). In other words, the theoretical intellect is that power that humans 
have that allows us to perceive the essences of things inasmuch as those es- 
sences are not particularized by material concomitants, such as quantitative, 
qualitative, spatial, or temporal determinations. When those essences al- 
ready exist separated from matter, that is to say, they have an immaterial 
existence, as in the cases of the so-called Intelligences and God, they are actu- 
ally intelligible in themselves. In the Psychology, which again is a work of 
natural philosophy, Avicenna is more concerned with a human’s knowledge 
of material things, which in a sense are the primary or at least first things 
known by us. According to Avicenna, the essences considered in material 
things are only potentially intelligible, and as such they must be abstracted or 
stripped of the particularizing accidents that follow upon their existing in 
matter. Only when they are considered without any particularity, and so are 
taken as universals, can the intellect conceptualize the essences of material 
things. In a general way, which I discuss more fully in what follows, the in- 

tellect’s act of perceiving the essence of a material thing involves the presence 

PSYCHOLOGY II T1g 

of an image in the compositive imagination. That image, when abstracted 
from all of its material concomitants or particularizing accidents, is illumi- 
nated by something analogous to light. Once so illuminated, the image casts 
an intelligible version of itself onto the theoretical intellect, which is im- 
pressed there. The abstracted intelligible’s being so impressed upon the the- 
oretical intellect is what Avicenna means by “intellectual perception.” 

Obviously, then, if the intellect is to perform its proper function of intel- 
lectual perception or intellecting, it must be the sort of thing that can be 
impressed and so receive intelligible forms. Depending upon the degree to 
which the intellect has received various abstracted forms, Avicenna assigns 
different names to it.' Thus, inasmuch as the human intellect is considered 
in absolute potentiality to any intelligible form, Avicenna, following a long 
tradition going back at least to Alexander of Aphrodisias, labels it the “ma- 
terial intellect” (‘agl hayilani), although it also sometimes goes by the title 
“potential intellect” (Psychology, 1.5, 48.18-49.5). The name “material intel- 
lect” is not applied because the intellect necessarily is material, but because 
it resembles prime matter, which is disposed to receiving any material form. 
So, in like manner the material intellect has no proper form of its own, but 
is disposed to receive any intelligible form. 

The first intelligibles impressed upon the intellect are “the primary in- 
telligibles” (ma qilat ald), namely, those objects of knowledge that are self- 
evident, as, for example, the so-called laws of thought, such as “anything is 
identical with itself,” or “something cannot simultaneously exist and not 
exist in all the same respects,” or “something either exists or does not exist” 
(ibid., 49.10-11). Avicenna himself gives as an example, “the whole is 
greater than the part.” The intellect considered only inasmuch as it is im- 
pressed with these primary intelligibles is called a “dispositional intellect” 
(aql bi-l-malaka) (ibid., 49.5—15). In this respect, then, the dispositional in- 
tellect might be thought of as the intellect possessed of the most basic infer- 
ence rules required for rational thought or discourse, without considering 
any content upon which those rules might be applied. So, for example, it 
would be like knowing that if p implies q, and p is the case, then q is the 
case, without considering any actual application of that rule, as, for exam- 
ple, knowing that if it is raining, then the streets are wet, and since it rain- 
ing, inferring that the streets are wet. 

When in addition to the primary intelligibles the human intellect pos- 
sesses some substantive information and content about the world and things 

in it, then it is called an “actual intellect” (aq b:-1-fi7) (ibid., 49.16—50.2). 

120 AVICENNA 

The actual intellect knows the definitions of things, and so intellectually 
perceives genera, differences, and species, as well as the properties and at 
least necessary accidents of some of the various species existing in the world. 
It is called “actual,” because it has acquired these intelligibles and so has 
access to them whenever it wants. 

Strictly speaking, both the dispositional intellect and the actual intellect 
refer to the human’s mere disposition to possess certain intelligibles, but not 
the actual use of those intelligibles. When the intellect has the intelligibles 
present before it and is actually considering them, and additionally it per- 
ceives—or perhaps is aware or conscious—that it is actually perceiving 
these intelligibles, it is in that state of actuality called the “acquired intel- 
lect” (‘agl mustafad) (ibid., 50.2-9). This intellect is called the “acquired in- 
tellect” because it must acquire, from another separate intellect, something 
that is like the intellectual version of acquired or luminous light, a point to 
which Avicenna returns in book V of his Psychology. 

This separate intellect that actualizes human intellects is the “Active (or 
Agent) Intellect” (‘gl fa‘al), which Avicenna seems to identify with the 
Giver of Forms (although never explicitly). For Avicenna, the Active Intel- 
lect is not some stage or power belonging to individual humans, but a sepa- 
rate substance in its own right that acts upon the human intellect to bring 
about intellectual perception. In fact, it is wholly unlike a human intellect 
in that it is not brought from a state of potentially intellecting to a state of 
actually intellecting; rather, from all eternity it is actually intellecting. Avi- 
cenna, following a long philosophical tradition, likens the role of the Active 
Intellect in cognition to that of the Sun’s in vision. Before turning to the 
Active Intellect and the act of intellectually perceiving, however, I should 
first consider in some detail Avicenna’s account of the nature of the human 

theoretical intellect. 

The Immateriality of the 
Theoretical Intellect 

Again, the theoretical intellect is for Avicenna that sort of thing that can be 
impressed so as to receive intelligible objects. Moreover, the essence of a 
material thing is intelligible, contends Avicenna, only to the extent that it 
has been completely abstracted from those particularizing characteristics 

that are the concomitants of matter, for example, having a particular shape, 

PSYCHOLOGY II I21 

size, sensible color, location, and so on. Once the essence has been stripped 
of all the particularizing characteristics, there is a universal, and it is pre- 
cisely because of the intelligible object’s universality that it must be immate- 
rial. Hence, if there is to be intellectual perception, the theoretical intellect 
must be something capable of receiving or being impressed by immaterial, 
intelligible forms, or what we might simply call “concepts.” Consequently, 
the immediate question before Avicenna is whether the theoretical intellect 
could perform this function, namely, of receiving or being impressed by 
immaterial concepts, if it were material. He argues that it cannot, and so 
concludes that if the theoretical intellect is to perform its proper function, it 
must be an immaterial substance in its own right. 

One of Avicenna’s demonstrations for the intellect’s immateriality (Psy- 
chology, V.2, 210.6—214.5), and certainly his most developed proof, starts 
with the assumption that the material intellect—again that part of the soul 
in which concepts come to reside or to inhere—is a material body. The as- 
sumption is a part of a reductio ad absurdum style argument, where Avi- 
cenna argues that every way of conceiving the intellect as material precludes 
its receiving immaterial intelligibles, and so precludes the very act that the 
intellect is supposed to explain. Avicenna begins thus: If the material intel- 
lect were some faculty or power of a corporeal organ, like the brain, then 
that corporeal organ or body must either be (1) indivisible or (2) divisible; 
this division exhausts all possibilities. 

If the body, which is purportedly associated with the intellect, is indivis- 
ible, then it must either (1.a) have no extension (and so is a point) or (1.b) 
have some extension (and so is an atom). Now, a point, Avicenna tells us, is 
a certain termination of a divisible magnitude and as such a point has no 
existence independent of that magnitude (ibid., 210.7—15). In like fashion, 
whatever inheres in a point does so by inhering in the magnitude of which 
that point is a limit. So, for example, one might say that a certain color in- 
heres in some point on a table because the surface of the table is colored, and 
the point is a limit of the table’s surface. Therefore, if an intelligible object 
were to inhere in the intellect as in a point, it could do so only if it also in- 
hered in a divisible magnitude that is limited by that point. Consequently, 
the answer to whether intelligibles could inhere in a point depends upon 
whether they could inhere in a divisible magnitude, that is, option (2) listed 
above, and so Avicenna defers discussion of this point until then. 

Before that, however, he turns to option (1.b), namely, the suggestion that 

the receptacle of one’s intelligible objects or concepts is an atom, that is, an 

I22 AVICENNA 

indivisible yet extended magnitude. I have already noted in chapter 3 that he 
has a number of arguments to show that atoms, understood as conceptually 
indivisible minimal magnitudes, are impossible.’ In the Psychology (V.2, 
210.15—-211.13), he briefly rehearses one of those arguments. Assume that 
three atoms are in contact with one another so as to form a line ABC. Either 
B separates A from C, such that A does not touch C, or A does touch C. If B 
separates A from C, such that none of A touches C, then the purportedly 
conceptually indivisible atom, B, can be divided into the side touching A and 
the side touching C, in which case what is indivisible would be divisible, 
which is a contradiction. If B does not separate A from C, and so A touches 
C, then atoms would interpenetrate one another so as to form a magnitude 
no greater than a single atom; however, it was assumed in this case that they 
formed a three-atom line, and so there is again a contradiction. Atoms, Avi- 
cenna concludes, cannot exist, and so a fortiori, the material intellect cannot 
be an atom. Thus, the intellect cannot be associated with an indivisible mag- 
nitude, whether that magnitude is punctiform or atomic. 

Avicenna now considers option (2), which takes the receptacle of one’s 
concepts, again, the material intellect, to be a body of some divisible magni- 
tude. Whatever inheres in a divisible magnitude, Avicenna notes, is at least 
accidentally divisible as well. For example, color becomes divided acciden- 
tally when the surface of a table in which that color inheres is itself divided. 
If an intelligible object were localized in some divisible material organ, 
such as part of the brain, then should that part of the brain be divided into 
two parts, the intelligible object likewise would be divided accidentally into 
two parts. These two purported parts of the divided concept, observes 
Avicenna, must be either (2.a) similar or (2.b) dissimilar (ibid., 211.18-19). 

The purported two parts of the intelligible object cannot be similar (2.a), 
argues Avicenna, because were one to recombine them so as to make a 
whole, the whole would be no different from the part, and yet a whole is 
different from a part (ibid., 211.19-212.9). One cannot say that the whole 
intelligible object is bulkier or larger than either of the purported similar 
parts; for if the combination of the parts of the intelligible object involved 
an increase in size, shape, or number, then the intelligible object itself would 
have to be something material, for size, shape, or number are concomitants 
of matter, but a concept is intelligible for Avicenna precisely because it is 
immaterial. 

If (2.b), the two parts of an immaterial intelligible object are dissimilar, 

and that dissimilarity cannot be explained by reference to material 

PSYCHOLOGY II 123 

concomitants, then these dissimilar parts must correspond with the parts of 
a definition, namely, genus and difference. So, for example, consider the 
concept of humanity. It can conceptually be divided into animal (a genus) 
and rational (a difference). Avicenna lists a number of absurdities that fol- 
low upon this hypothesis (ibid., 212.12—213.15). For instance, assuming that 
the receptacle for concepts is a divisible (nonatomic) magnitude, it would be 
continuous, and, as I noted in chapter 3, continuous magnitudes for Avicenna 
are potentially divisible infinitely.’ Consequently, the intelligible object 
purportedly inhering in a continuous magnitude would have a potentially 
infinite number of genera and differences. Avicenna takes it as an estab- 
lished fact, however, that essential genera and differences are not infinite, 
but finite. In a similar vein, Avicenna argues that since merely imagining a 
division of the organ cannot produce new genera and species in it in the 
way that merely imagining and positing a point can produce a potential 
division in a body, all the genera and differences would need to be actually 
present in that part of the brain. Consequently, complains Avicenna, the 
intelligible object purportedly inhering in a continuous magnitude not only 
would have a potentially infinite number of genera and differences, but also 
an actually infinite number of them. Another absurdity is to assume that we 
initially imagined the division of the organ (and so the accidental division 
of the concept) as running horizontally such that, for example, the upper 
half corresponds with the generic aspect of the concept and the lower half 
with the difference. Now imagine the division as running vertically: Either 
there is a half-genus and half-difference (whatever that might mean), or 
one can make genera and differences run around in the brain at the whim 
of how one decides to divide the organ purportedly harboring the faculty of 
the theoretical intellect. Given the number of absurdities that Avicenna 
finds following upon the assumption that an intelligible object can be acci- 
dentally divided into dissimilar parts, he rejects this option too. Since a con- 
cept existing in a divisible magnitude must be divisible accidentally into 
either similar or dissimilar parts, and yet both options lead to absurdities, 
Avicenna concludes that the intellect cannot be associated with a divisible 
magnitude. 

Avicenna now finishes his demonstration for the intellect’s immaterial- 
ity (ibid., 214.1-5): If the material intellect, that is, the receptacle of one’s 
concepts, were associated with some bodily organ, then again that body 
would have been either indivisible (and so either a point or an atom) or 

divisible (in which case accidentally divided concepts would have either 

124 AVICENNA 

similar or dissimilar parts). All options have led to absurdities. Therefore, 
the assumption that the intellect is in some way associated with a material 
body—again the very assumption that gave rise to those absurdities—must, 
Avicenna contends, be rejected. Therefore, ends Avicenna, the intellect 
must be an immaterial substance in its own right, and as such must be really 
distinct from the body." 

The Theoretical Intellect’s 
Temporal Origination 

Although for Avicenna the human intellect is an immaterial substance in 
its own right, he acknowledges that it initially needs the body for two 
things: one, to acquire the primary intelligibles, definitions, and other intel- 
ligibles that make up the content of conceptualization and verification; and, 
two, to explain the soul’s origination at the place and time it is originated. 
As for the first function that the body plays (Psychology, V.3, 221.14-223.10), 
while the human intellect is an immaterial substance, it still needs to use a 
body as a tool to reach its proper perfection, which is to perceive intellectu- 
ally the full range of intelligible objects. As I have noted, however, intel- 
lectual perception, at least initially, requires sensibly perceiving various 
particulars, a mode of perception that in fact does require a material organ. 
Only then, through a process of abstraction, does one come to acquire the 
corresponding intelligible, where the acquisition of that intelligible is itself 
aided by the functions of the estimative faculty and compositive imagina- 
tion, again faculties that require a bodily organ. Moreover, at least initially, 
the intellect, when engaged in cognitive activity, takes control of the com- 
positive imagination, which provides it with images related to certain prob- 
lems in order to help facilitate conceptualization. Having said this, Avi- 
cenna also hastens to add that once the intelligibles are acquired, the intellect 
has less and less need of the body in order to perform its proper function. In 
fact, the body can even become more of a distraction than an aide to the 
intellect’s activity. 

The second role that the body plays, according to Avicenna, is to act as 
an occasioning cause for the origination of the human soul. That is because, 
as I noted at the end of chapter 3, while the production of a new substance 
is ultimately owing to the Giver of Forms, such a production requires the 

initial preparation of the material so as to provide a suitable subject for the 

PSYCHOLOGY II 125 

new species form. In the case of the human soul, the prepared matter’s suit- 
ability is that it can be used as a tool by the intellect. 

Of course the body’s being the occasioning cause for the origination of 
a new human soul assumes that the human soul does not antedate an in- 
dividual’s body.’ Avicenna is quite adamant that in fact each individual 
human soul is something temporally originated (Aadith). He provides the 
following argument as proof (ibid., 223.11-227.10). Assume that a soul 
exists temporally prior to the body. In that case, there could either be (1) 
numerically many souls, or (2) one numerically single soul. Now, begins 
Avicenna, if souls are numerically many prior to their being in bodies, 
their multiplicity is due to either (1.a) their essence and form or (1.b) that 
which receives that essence and form, namely, the matter or body. Since 
the essence and form of a thing specifies what is one and the same in 
species—for example, rational animality in the human species—the pur- 
portedly preexisting human souls could not be many owing to their 
essence alone, argues Avicenna, for, again, this is one and the same for all 
humans. Thus, option (1.a) must be rejected. As for option (1.b), namely 
that what differentiates multiple human souls purportedly existing prior 
to their existence in a body is just the body in which they exist, is patently 
self-stultifying, for one is considering those souls supposedly before they 
exist in bodies. Thus, Avicenna concludes that if the human soul’s exist- 
ence precedes the existence of the body, it could not do so as numerically 
many souls existing prior to the body. 

Alternatively, perhaps the purportedly preexisting human soul is nu- 
merically one and the same soul for each and every human. In that case, 
continues Avicenna, then either (2.2) two embodied souls would be two 
parts of numerically one and the same soul or (2.b) numerically one and the 
same soul would exist in two different bodies. In other words, in the first 
option there is some overarching “iiber-soul,” part of which exists in my 
body, for example, and part of which exists in yours, whereas in the second 
case, this “iiber-soul” has no parts, but exists wholly in you and me. Now, if 
(2.a) two souls were two parts of numerically one and the same soul, then, 
argues Avicenna, the soul must be divisible into either (2.a.i) quantitative 
parts or (2.a.b) nonquantitative parts such as the human soul’s animality 
and rationality, which one might call the soul’s “constitutive elements.” In- 
sofar as the human soul is immaterial, as Avicenna has argued, it can have 
no quantitative parts, and so option (2.a.1) fails, whereas if (2.4.11), namely, 

the soul is divided into its constitutive elements, then the soul of one human, 

126 AVICENNA 

would, for example, be animal but not rational, and vice versa for the other 
soul, a conclusion that is clearly false. Hence, concludes Avicenna, two souls 
cannot be two parts of numerically one and the same soul. 

The assumption (2.b) that numerically one and the same soul could exist 
in two different bodies likewise leads to certain absurdities, says Avicenna. 
For instance, any particular act that belongs properly to the soul inasmuch 
as it is immaterial, and so cannot be explained by appeal to the body, would 
have to be shared by any individual humans sharing one and the same im- 
material soul. So, for example, anything that one individual intellectually 
perceives—where intellectual perception is again the proper activity of the 
intellect alone, and qua intellectually perceiving takes place wholly inde- 
pendent of the body—would likewise have to be intellectually perceived by 
all who are sharing that intellect. That is because all of the intellectually 
perceiving individuals would share one and the same intellect on the present 
assumption, and so all would be impressed by the same intelligible. In other 
words, whatever one person knows, everybody should know, a conclusion 
that is obviously false, for some individuals clearly know things that others 
do not. The assumption that gave rise to this absurdity, namely that nu- 
merically one and the same soul could exist in two different bodies, thus, 
must also be rejected. 

To sum up, if the human soul were to preexist the appearance of a prop- 
erly disposed body, there would have to be either numerically many preex- 
isting souls or only numerically one and the same soul—these exhaust the 
possible options—and yet, maintains Avicenna, both suggestions lead to 
absurdity. Avicenna thus concludes that each properly disposed body capa- 
ble of being used as a tool by an intellect must have originated for it a hu- 
man soul at the moment the matter is so prepared to receive that soul. In 
short, the human soul, even though it is an immaterial substance, has a 
temporal origination just like the individual substantial forms of all other 

natural things. 

The Immortality of the Human Intellect 

Having explained that the intellect must be an immaterial substance dis- 
tinct from the body, but that, unlike other immaterial substances—such as 
the Intelligences and the divinity, which have existed eternally—the human 
soul must be temporally originated, Avicenna takes up in Psychology, V.4 the 

PSYCHOLOGY II 127 

issue of whether the human soul is immortal in the sense of being capable of 
surviving the corruption of the body.° He begins by observing that if the 
corruption of one thing, x, entails the corruption of another, y, then x and y 
must be dependent upon (ta‘a/luq) each other in one of three ways (Psychol- 
ogy, V.4, 227.14—-17): (1) x and y may be codependent or equivalent with 
respect to existence (mukafi’ fi l-wujiid) (such as in the essential relation 
between a concave and convex curve or the accidental relation of being 
“next to”); (2) x may be essentially prior to y, and so x is a cause of y; or (3) x 
may be essentially posterior to y, and so x is an effect of y. 

Avicenna quickly dismisses the suggestion that the immaterial intellect 
and material body are codependent upon each other or equivalent with 
respect to existence except in an accidental way (ibid., 227.17—228.2). He 
argues thus: If they are codependent, the codependence again must be 
either essential or accidental. On the one hand, if the codependence were 
essential, then neither the soul nor the body taken alone would be a sub- 
stance in its own right, but rather only together would they form a single 
substance. In other words, the body and human intellect, even if conceptu- 
ally distinct, would have to be essentially and actually the same substance, 
similar to the way that a single line can be both a concave and convex line 
depending upon how it is considered. The body and intellect taken 
together, however, cannot form a single substance or be essentially and ac- 
tually the same, for the intellect is essentially an immaterial substance, while 
the body is essentially a material one, and being immaterial is essentially 
opposed to being material. Thus, the human intellect and body cannot 
depend upon each other essentially. 

On the other hand, if the codependence were merely an accidental rela- 
tion, such as “being next to or in,” then, although the destruction of one of 
the relata would bring about the destruction of the relation between the 
two, its destruction need not entail the destruction of the other relatum. So 
just as if one house is next to another and then is destroyed, it does not fol- 
low that the second house has also been destroyed, so likewise even if the 
intellect has an accidental codependence upon a body, it does not follow 
that the destruction of the body entails the destruction of the intellect. 

Next Avicenna considers the suggestion that the body and soul are re- 
lated such that the body is the cause of the soul (ibid., 228.3—230.4). In that 
case, he continues, the body must be either the human soul’s (a) material, (b) 
efficient, (c) formal, or (d) final cause. Insofar as the human soul is an immate- 

rial substance, it has no material cause and so option (a) cannot be the case. 

128 AVICENNA 

Next, matter, according to Avicenna, is wholly inert and as such only acts 
through the form presently informing it. Thus, body qua material does not 
itself act, but what does not act cannot be an efficient cause, and so the body 
cannot be the efficient cause of the soul. Hence option (b) fails to be the case. 
As for the formal cause, it is that which accounts for the activities of a thing, 
but as has been noted repeatedly it is the soul that accounts for the human’s 
animate activities, and as such the human soul or intellect has a better right 
to be a formal cause of the body than the other way around. Consequently, 
option (c) must be false. Similarly, the final cause is the end for which a 
thing functions or that for the sake of which a thing acts. As has been noted, 
however, the body functions strictly for the sake of the activity of the intel- 
lect, which is the human’s proper end. So, again the intellect is more fittingly 
the final cause of the body than vice versa. Thus, Avicenna rejects option 
(d). Since the body cannot stand to the intellect in any of the traditional 
causal ways, either as matter, form, agent, or end, the body, Avicenna 
concludes, cannot be essentially prior to the soul. 

If the soul is essentially (though not temporally) prior to the body, says 
Avicenna, then were it corrupted, the body would be corrupted. From that 
fact, however, it does not follow that if the body is corrupted, the human 
soul is corrupted. Still, it might turn out that the corruption of the body 
indicates the corruption of the human soul, especially if there is no other 
way to explain the corruption of the body except by the corruption of the 
soul (ibid., 230.5—231.2). So, consider, for example, the proverbial saying 
“Where there is smoke there is fire.” Fire (or some other form of combus- 
tion) is essentially prior to smoke and indeed the cause of the smoke. Con- 
sequently, should one not see the fire, but sees the smoke, one is assured that 
a fire is present and, conversely, when one no longer sees the smoke, there 
is a presumption that the fire has been extinguished. Perhaps, then, the 
body is essentially posterior to the human soul in the way that smoke is 
posterior to the fire such that when the body fails to perform the activities 
associated with life, one can presume that the cause of those activities has 
also passed away. 

Such an inference would be valid, maintains Avicenna, if and only if the 
body has no principles unique to it alone that can explain the body’s own 
corruption. The body, so claims Avicenna, in fact does have principles 
unique to it that can and do explain its corruption, namely, it elemental 
composition and humoral mix. More exactly, as I have noted before, ac- 

cording to the best science of the time complex bodies are composites of the 

PSYCHOLOGY II 129 

four elements, fire, air, water, and earth, which themselves form the four 
humors of animal bodies: blood, phlegm, yellow and black bile, all of which, 
in the case of animals, are combined by an innate animal heat. The nature 
of heat, Avicenna however notes,” ultimately brings about dissolution and 
transformation. Consequently, the human body must eventually corrupt 
owing to its very elemental and humoral nature. In contrast, since this ele- 
mental composition and humoral temperament follow solely upon the 
body’s materiality, such corruptive causes cannot apply to an immaterial 
substance such as an intellect. Thus, while the living body must corrupt 
owing to its very nature, the principles that bring about its corruption, 
namely, possessing an innate heat, simply cannot apply to the immaterial 
human intellect. 

Thus, concludes Avicenna by way of summary, the corruption of the 
body would entail the corruption of the soul only if the body exists code- 
pendently with it, or it is either a cause or essential effect of the soul. Since 
none of these types of dependence relations applies to the relation between 
body and soul, the death of the body need not entail the destruction of the 
human soul.* Consequently, Avicenna finishes, the soul can and does sur- 
vive the body’s death, continuing to carry on an intellectual existence wholly 
disassociated from the body, an existence that Avicenna identifies with true 
blessedness (sada) and the afterlife, which I consider in chapter 8. 

Although Avicenna believes that the above argument shows that the 
soul can survive the death of the body, it does not necessarily show that 
the human soul is something incorruptible in itself. In other words, while 
the destruction of the body need not entail the death of the human soul, 
perhaps there are principles unique to the human intellect itself that could 
explain its corruption, in which case it would not be immortal. Thus, to cut 
short this kind of objection, Avicenna offers a proof for the human soul’s 
incorruptibility reminiscent of arguments found in Plato’s Phaedo and 
Plotinus’ Enneads.’ 

Avicenna’s version of the argument runs as follows (ibid., 231.3—233.5): 
That which has both an actuality and potentiality must be a form-matter 
composite, for it is the form that explains x’s being actually F, while the mat- 
ter explains its being potentially not-F, that is, potentiality necessarily inheres 
in matter. Now, if something that has the actuality of persisting or enduring 
is potentially corruptible, then it must, while actually persisting or enduring, 
have the potentiality to not continue to endure but to corrupt. Consequently, 

if the human intellect were corruptible, then while it is actually persisting or 

130 AVICENNA 

enduring, it would have the potentiality of not persisting or enduring. In 
that case, however, the intellect would necessarily be something material, for 
inasmuch as it has a certain potentiality, that potentiality requires matter in 
which to inhere.!” As has been noted, Avicenna has forcefully argued that 
the human intellect is not material, but immaterial. He thus concludes that 
the human intellect is not corruptible. Simply stated, for Avicenna, some- 
thing is susceptible to corruption if and only if it is a composite of form and 
matter, whereas, if something is not linked to matter in any respect, then 
that thing is incorruptible. Once Avicenna adds this further premise con- 
cerning the nature of corruptibility, his argument for the immateriality of 

the soul is in effect an argument for its immortality as well. 

The Active Intellect 

Up to this point Avicenna has been speaking about the substance of the 
human intellect: What its nature must be in order to perform its proper 
function, its origination and, in some sense, its destiny. At book V.5 of the 
Psychology he turns to the very activity of the human intellect itself: What is 
required for that activity and how it occurs. More specifically, he addresses 
how our material intellect emerges from a state of potentially knowing cer- 
tain things to a state of actually knowing those things. This emergence, 
Avicenna believes, requires a separate intellect that is always actual and 
never potential, which he identifies with the Active or Agent Intellect (ag/ 
fa «ql).'' While the whole of Avicenna’s discussion and vocabulary concern- 
ing the role of the Active Intellect is reminiscent of Aristotle’s own discus- 
sion in De anima, III 5 and that of subsequent Greek- and Arabic-speaking 
commentators, Avicenna’s own novel understanding of many of the key 
concepts used to explain the Active Intellect, such as his conception of light 
and vision, make his view uniquely his own. 

Concerning the need for the Active Intellect and its role in bringing the 
human intellect from a state of potentially knowing to one of actually 

knowing, Avicenna writes: 

The human soul is at one time potentially intellecting and thereafter 
comes to be intellecting actually. Now, whatever emerges from potency 
to act does so only by means of a cause in act that brings about its emer- 
gence. So, in the present case there is a cause that brings about our souls’ 
emergence from potency to act with respect to the objects of intellection. 

PSYCHOLOGY II 131 

Since it is the cause providing the intellectualizing forms (suavar ‘agliya), 
it is nothing but an actual intellect in whom the principles of the intel- 
lectualizing forms are separate (Psychology, V.5, 234-9-13). 

The general thrust of Avicenna’s argument here is that whatever goes from 
a state of potentiality to one of actuality requires some cause. Thus, since an 
individual human soul does go from a state of potentially intellecting when 
it does not know some particular thing to one of actually intellecting once 
it comes to know that thing, there must be some cause for this actualization. 
Avicenna identifies this cause with the Active Intellect. 

More specifically, Avicenna tells us that the Active Intellect provides one 
with the intellectualizing forms, which one can safely assume to be wholly 
free of material concomitants (for being separated from matter is the hall- 
mark of anything intellectual). Moreover, since the Active Intellect pro- 
vides the intellectualizing forms separated from matter, it must of itself 
already possess those forms immaterially, for if it needed to abstract or 
separate those forms from matter, the Active Intellect itself would only pos- 
sess them potentially. In that case, there would need to be yet another 
cause explaining the actualization of the potentially intelligibles in the 
Active Intellect itself. Avicenna stops the regress by maintaining that the 
Active Intellect is an actual intellect that already possesses all the intelligi- 
bles, primary or otherwise, not as potential but as actual (and so wholly 
without any trace of materiality). 

Having established the need for the Active Intellect to explain human 
intellection, as well as suggesting what the nature of the Active Intellect is, 
Avicenna turns to a description of how the Active Intellect affects one so as 
to bring about intellectual perception. In a discussion that hearkens one 
back to Plato’s Republic” and Aristotle’s De anima,’ Avicenna likens the 

role of the Active Intellect to sunlight and human intellection to vision. 

|The Active Intellect’s| relation to our souls is that of the Sun to our vision. 
Now, just as the Sun is actually visible in itself and through its radiant light 
(nadir) it makes actually visible what is not actually visible, so likewise is the 
state of this intellect vis-a-vis our souls. |That] is because when the intel- 
lectual faculty reviews the particulars that are in the retentive imagination, 
and the aforementioned Active Intellect radiates its light into us [and] 
upon them, the things separated from matter and its concomitants are al- 
tered and impressed upon the rational soul. [“Being altered” is here] not in 
the sense that [the particulars] themselves are transferred from the com- 
positive imagination to our intellect, nor [is “being impressed” in the sense 

132 AVICENNA 

that the connotational attribute immersed in the [material] concomitants— 
which in itself and with regard to its very being is separate [from matter |— 
makes something like itself. Quite the contrary, [“being altered” and 
“being impressed” are in the sense that reviewing [the particulars] pre- 
pares the soul in order that the thing separate from matter [coming] from 
the Active Intellect [that is, again, the intellectualizing forms] emanates 
upon them. Discursive thought and selective attention are then certain 
motions that prepare the soul to receive the emanation. [This] is like [how] 
middle terms prepare [the soul] to receive the conclusion in the most con- 
vincing way, although the first is according to one way and the second ac- 
cording to another, as you will come to know. So when a certain relation to 
this form falls to the rational soul by means of the Active Intellect’s radiant 
activity, then from [the relation] there comes to be in [the human soul] 
something that in one way is of the genus of [the form] and in another way 
is not. Just like when luminous light falls on colored objects, it produces 
from them an impression on the visual system that is not in every way 
[reduced] to their sum, so likewise the images that are potentially intelligi- 
ble become actually intelligible—not themselves but what is acquired from 
them. In fact, just as the impression of the sensible forms conveyed by 
means of luminous light is not itself those forms, but rather something re- 
lated to them that is engendered by means of the luminous light in the re- 
cipient facing [the light], so likewise when the rational soul reviews those 
forms in the retentive imagination and the radiant light of the Active In- 
tellect comes into a type of contact with them, then they are prepared so 
that from the luminous light of the Active Intellect they come to be the 
abstract version of those forms free from [material] taints within [the ra- 
tional soul] (Psychology, V.5, 234.14-236.2). 

Again, while the light imagery and use of vision as a model for explaining 
intellectual perception are not new to Avicenna—indeed almost every phi- 
losopher up to his time had used the same language—I hope to show that 
Avicenna’s novel understanding of the various key concepts, which I dis- 
cussed in chapter 4 concerning light and vision, make his account of intel- 
lectual perception uniquely his own. 

First, and as a preliminary remark, lurking behind the above passage is 
Avicenna’s own theory of essences. Recall that while essences can be consid- 
ered in themselves, they only ever exist either as concrete particulars, and so 
possess certain accidents and forms that follow on their being in matter, or 
they exist as conceptualized, and so possess certain accidents and forms that 

follow on their being in the intellect. 

PSYCHOLOGY II 133 

Second, as humans, the starting point for our intellectual perception of 
the essences of natural things comes from first sensibly experiencing those 
essences as they exist in the material things around us that make up our 
world. Later, Avicenna says that in principle the intellect could encounter 
only a single individual of a given kind in order to have all it needs concern- 
ing the essential features of that kind (Psychology, V.5, 236.10-237.11). That 
is because the essence is what is common to all tokens of a given type. Con- 
sequently, there is nothing essentially different that belongs to Paul, for 
example, that does not also belong to Peter inasmuch as they are humans; 
experiencing different individuals of the same kind does not increase the 
number of essential features that the intellect can access. Still, even if cer- 
tain rare individuals need encounter only a single individual of a kind in 
order to grasp what is essential to that kind, human cognition (even of this 
rare kind) must begin in some way with encountering material, sensible 
things. 

Stull, in this very act of perceiving the world around us by means of the 
external senses, there is for Avicenna already, as I have noted, a degree of 
abstraction from matter. Through the various stages of the abstractive 
process more and more of the material concomitants are stripped away 
from those essences. At their most abstracted state while still being sensible, 
those essences exist in the images that are housed in the retentive imagina- 
tion and are manipulated by the compositive imagination. This image in 
the compositive imagination is a potential intelligible in its most proximate 
form to actuality. It is at this point that the human intellect can take control 
of the compositive imagination, turning it into the cogitative faculty. The 
subsequent manipulation of the image takes the form of separating and 
dividing the humors in the brain in which the sensible image is impressed, 
and it is through this activity of the compositive imagination that the 
human soul is prepared to receive the Active Intellect’s emanation so as to 
turn the potentially intelligible object in the brain into an actually intelligi- 
ble object impressed upon the intellect. 

Third, at the final stage of abstraction, that is, when all the material 
concomitants are stripped from the essence, the intellect selectively attends 
to the essential features of the essence of the thing as that essence exists 
in the compositive imagination. Again, in the compositive imagination, 
the essence is embedded in a particular image, or, what Avicenna calls 
elsewhere, a “vague individual” (shakhs muntashir) that can be “thought to 
be of any existing individual of that genus or single species” (Physics, I.1, 

134 AVICENNA 

I 1.5-6)."" When the intellect abstracts the essence from the vague individual, 
it is simply selectively attending to that kind’s essential features and so 
setting to one side those accidental features that belong to the essence as a 
result of its existence in matter. 

Once the human intellect has abstracted the essence, the essence is no 
longer existing as a concrete particular, for all the accidents that follow 
upon being in matter and that particularize its existing as a concrete 
particular have been removed. Again, however, essences for Avicenna 
always and only exist either as concrete particulars or as conceptualized. 
Thus, when all the material accidents have been set to one side, that is, 
when the essence has been properly prepared, the essence must acquire 
those intellectualizing forms that particularize it such that it exists 
as conceptualized. Here, Avicenna intends by “intellectualizing forms,” 
I contend, just those intelligible accidents that he mentioned in the 
Introduction of the Cure.” Examples of such conceptualizing accidents 
or intellectualizing forms would include universality and particularity 
in predication as well as essentiality and accidentality in predication."° 
It is because the intelligible impressed on the human intellect has 
acquired the intellectualizing forms that the human intellect is called 
at this stage the “acquired intellect.” 

One is now led toa fourth point: namely, how Avicenna understands the 
illumination and vision vocabulary used to explain intellectual perception. 
As one might expect, his analogy with light and vision draws heavily upon 
his own theory of these ideas. Here there are a number of points of similar- 
ity, and, since again Avicenna wants to model his theory of cognition on his 
theory of vision, it will be useful to consider some of the more important 
comparisons. 

So to begin with the most obvious point of comparison: The Active In- 
tellect is likened to the Sun, and just as the Sun is both luminous in itself as 
well as being a source of radiant light, so the Active Intellect, as one of the 
immaterial substances, is intelligible in itself as well as being a source of 
intelligibility for human intellects.” 

Second, as with the Sun, there radiates from the Active Intellect an ana- 
logue of radiant light in the form of intellectualizing forms. The intellectu- 
alizing forms mix with the potentially, but not actually, intelligible object 
found in the human soul, that is, with the sensible image in the imagination 
abstracted from all of its material concomitants. Once the intellectualizing 

forms mix with the potentially intelligible essence, the essence comes to be 

PSYCHOLOGY II 135 

actually intelligible. In this respect, there is a comparison between the func- 
tions of the Sun’s radiant light and the Active Intellect’s emanation. That is 
because, according to Avicenna, it is only by a radiant light’s mixing with 
potential color that there comes to be actual color, just as it is only by the 
intellectualizing forms’ mixing with the potentially intelligible that there 
comes to be something actually intelligible in the material intellect. Here, 

the eye—or more exactly the optic chiasma—would be the analogue of the 
material intellect. 

A third point of comparison is the need for a certain type of alteration 
and preparatory motion in both cognition and vision. Again, sensible forms 
stored in the imagination are potentially intelligible in the way that certain 
bodies in the absence of a luminous body are potentially colored. In the case 
of the potentially colored object, the required motion is locomotion: either 
moving some light to where the object is, or moving the object to where the 
light is. In its cognitive counterpart, the motion involves the cogitative 
faculty’s combing and dividing the forms in the retentive imagination— 
literally a kind of motion—either as those forms manifest themselves as 
images or the linguistic counterparts thereof. 

Here there is now a fourth and I believe final point of comparison. The 
actually intelligible object—that is the abstracted essence mixed with the 
emanation from the Active Intellect—then impresses itself upon the mate- 
rial intellect. There is now intellectual perception. The point of comparison 
is that intellectual perception, which again is a type of being impressed, 
occurs in just the way that the sensible image impresses itself on the eye 
when there is vision. For, as Avicenna says, what comes to exist in the 
material intellect, while being of the same genus as the form in the retentive 
imagination, cannot simply be reduced to that form any more than what 
comes to exist in the eye, namely, the sensible image conveying a body’s 
color, can be reduced to that body’s various dispositions that are identified 
with potential color. The intelligible species is only efficacious when there 
is a mixture of the potentially intelligible and the intellectualizing forms or 
accidents emanating from the Active Intellect, just as color is only effica- 
cious when there is a mixture of potential color and the radiant light of a 
luminous body. 

In addition to Avicenna’s comparison of the Active Intellect with the 
Sun and their respective roles in intellectual and sensible perceptions, there 
is also a decided likeness between the operations that Avicenna assigns to 

the Active Intellect and the Giver of Forms. Indeed, all evidence suggests 

136 AVICENNA 

that Avicenna saw the Active Intellect and the Giver of Forms as two names 
for a single entity. Thus, it should not be too surprising that the role that 
Avicenna assigns to the Giver of Forms in substantial generation has a psy- 
chological counterpart in the role of the Active Intellect in intellection. 
Thus, as I noted in chapter 3, natural efficient causes, according to Avi- 
cenna, play a preparatory role in substantial change. They do this by bring- 
ing about alterations in the hot and cold and wet and dry composition of 
some matter. When the material has been sufficiently prepared by these 
alterations, the Giver of Forms, with absolute consistency, emanates or 
impresses into the prepared matter a new substantial form or essence. 

Similarly, when the various human sensory faculties first externally and 
then internally perceive the in-mattered essence, they alter the impressed 
essence, whether by abstraction or combining and dividing. In other words, 
operations occurring in various bodily organs prepare the potentially intel- 
ligible object (which again is just the in-mattered essence) for an emana- 
tion from the Active Intellect. Once the potentially intelligible object has 
been sufficiently prepared by these alterations, the Active Intellect, again 
with absolute consistency, emanates the intellectualizing forms that make 
the potentially intelligible actually intelligible. The actual intelligible then 
impresses itself onto the human intellect and there is intellectual percep- 
tion. Just as qualitative changes in some matter cannot educe a new species 
form, so likewise bodily alterations of a material, particular, and poten- 
tially intelligible object cannot educe an immaterial, universal, and actu- 
ally intelligible object. In both cases, something outside the natural order is 
required. 

It is also because the Active Intellect doubles as the Giver of Forms that 
Avicenna “appears to combine two incompatible concepts in one doctrine: 
either the intelligible forms emanate from above or they are abstracted 
from the data collected by the senses, but not both.”’* Despite the seeming 
incompatibility, for Avicenna both claims are in fact true. That is because the 
intelligible object is a combination of an essence and the intellectualizing 
forms or accidents, both of which emanate from the Giver of Forms-cum- 
Active Intellect as a single emanation. 

Let me try to provide a fuller explanation of this last point. A general 
principle of Avicenna’s philosophical system is that whatever is received is 
received according to the mode of the receiver. In other words, limitations 
belonging to that which is being acted upon or receiving a given form re- 

strain the forms that an agent can impose upon the recipient; for example, 

PSYCHOLOGY II 137 

while a carpenter (agent) might possess the knowledge and equipment to 
give some suitable material (recipient) the form of a chair, he or she cannot 
shape water (at least not while it is in its liquid form) into a chair, while he 
or she can impose that form onto wood. Similarly, when the emanated in- 
telligible essences encounter suitably disposed matter, the matter can re- 
ceive only the essences themselves, not the intelligible or intellectualizing 
forms or accidents, which require an immaterial recipient. The intellectu- 
alizing forms or accidents, then, are not received when essences inform the 
matter in the generation of new substances, for again the reception of what 
is intelligible occurs only in the case where the recipient is immaterial. 
Humans in the act of sensibly perceiving in turn receive these essences 
together with the accompanying material accidents and concomitants that 
have become associated with them through their existence in matter. It is 
precisely because humans do receive the essences together with the material 
accidents and concomitants that the process of abstraction is required. When 
the material accidents and concomitants are stripped away, however, the 
essences are then themselves prepared to re-receive the intelligible accidents 
that are again being emanated by the Active Intellect-cum-Giver of Forms. 
Therefore, in a very real sense human intellectual perception is for Avicenna 
nothing more than the reception of an emanation from the Active Intellect/ 
Giver of Forms, even though the reception of that emanation could not 

occur without sensation, abstraction, and a lot of activity in the brain. 

Intellectual Memory 

Not only has Avicenna been able to provide a single model of how vision 
and intellection occur—indeed even a single account of how all perception 
works—but his introduction of the Active Intellect has also provided him 
with a single model for explaining two seemingly disparate phenomena: 
substantial change and human cognition. Moreover, the introduction of the 
Active Intellect as a separate intellect, which is always actually intellecting, 
offers Avicenna a solution to another problem, namely, how to explain in- 
tellectual memory as opposed to remembering images, which can be stored 
in the brain. 

The philosophical issue is this: If the intelligible is only actually intelligi- 
ble inasmuch as it is stripped of all material concomitants, and so wholly 

immaterial, then once one has come to know some intelligible, where is it 

138 AVICENNA 

retained when one is not actually thinking it? On the one hand, an actual 
intelligible is unlike sensible forms and connotational attributes that can be 
stored in parts of the brain, for a material organ, as has been seen, cannot 
receive something immaterial so as to retain it. Thus, intelligible objects 
cannot be stored somewhere in the brain when they are not actually being 
thought. On the other hand, if they are retained in the human intellect it- 
self, they would be impressed there, but to be impressed by an intelligible is 
just the intellectual perception of that intelligible. In other words, if the 
intelligibles were stored in the human intellect itself, one would always ac- 
tually be thinking those intelligibles. Such a conclusion is clearly false, since 
most people reading this were probably not thinking, for example, of the 
concept “aardvark” but now may have gone from potentially intellecting 
an aardvark to actually intellecting one. 

Avicenna’s solution to this problem is to claim that the Active Intellect is 
the storehouse of the intelligibles, for it is always intellecting all the essences 
of things found in our world. As such it assures that they remain always actu- 
ally intelligible even if no particular human is presently intellecting them. 

As for accessing those intelligibles, Avicenna tells us that once one has 
actually come to know something (¢a‘allum) one has a perfect disposition or 
preparedness to conjoin with the Active Intellect in order to retrieve the 
intelligibles stored there. 

Coming to know something is seeking the complete disposition (ist dad) 

for conjunction so that from it there is the intellection that is simple, and 

then from it the forms are emanated, being separated in the soul by 
means of discursive reasoning. So the disposition before coming to know 
something is deficient, whereas the disposition after coming to know 
something is complete. Consequently, it is characteristic of knowing some- 
thing that when what is connected with the sought intelligible comes to 
mind, and the soul turns to look—where “looking” is to return to the 

principle that gives intellection [namely, the Active Intellect|—there is a 

conjunction with it. There then emanates from it the power of abstract 

intellection (gaéwa l-‘agl al-mwjarrid) that follows the emanation that 
produces separation. When [one] turns away from it, [the power] re- 
cedes, in which case that form comes to be in potency, however, a potency 

in close proximity to act. So, initially coming to know something is like 

treating the eye, but then when the eye is healthy, whenever it wants it 

looks at something from which a given form is taken, while when it 
turns from that thing, that [thing] comes to be in potency proximate to 
act. Now, so long as the human soul taken [more] generally [than just the 

PSYCHOLOGY II 139 

intellect] is in the body it cannot receive the Active Intellect all at once, 
and instead its state is as we said (Psychology, V.6, 247.3-15). 

Avicenna’s general idea is relatively clear, even if perhaps his language here 
is not. Once, through a process of abstraction and selective attention, one 
has stripped away the concomitants from the potentially intelligible (where 
the potentially intelligible is just the vague individual in the imagination) a 
certain disposition or aptitude is brought to perfection in the particular 
human to conjoin with the Active Intellect and to see that intelligible there. 
The initial abstractive process would be like healing or cleansing an eye so 
that it can now see, where the damaged eye is analogous to the deficient 
disposition of the intellect. Once healed, the eye need not see some given 
thing, although it can potentially see it. Should the healthy eye, however, 
turn toward that thing (and assuming the object is illuminated), the eye 
actually sees it. Likewise, once an intelligible has been acquired, there exists 
a potential that had not existed before to perceive that intelligible, what 
Avicenna calls “the perfect disposition.” Furthermore, analogous to some- 
one’s turning toward a visible object, when there is brought to mind something 
connected with some previously acquired intelligible, that intelligible is 
intellectually perceived. 

Clearly for Avicenna, once the human soul is free of the body it is able to 
access the intelligibles in the Active Intellect immediately and without any 
intermediary image. In contrast, as long as the human soul is in an embodied 
state, I suspect that Avicenna thinks (although it is not clear) that one still 
needs some image to access the intelligibles stored in the Active Intellect. In 
other words, when the intellect calls up the image, it has the perfect disposi- 
tion to see the essential characteristics embedded in that image—that is, the 
intellect, as it were, knows what to ignore and not take into account in the 
image—and so is able to conjoin with the Active Intellect at will. Thus, for 
example, when I mentioned “aardvark” earlier, one sees the word on the 
page and perhaps either sees an image or hears the linguistic counterpart 
(which again for Avicenna is an image in the imagination) and is thus 
carried to the corresponding intelligible stored in the Active Intellect. 

There is some textual basis for my suspicion: 

[T]he power really belongs to the soul by which it [can] intellect 
whatever it wants. So, when it wants, it conjoins [with the Active 
Intellect] and the intelligible form emanates into it, where that [intel- 
ligible] form is in fact the acquired intellect and the former power is 

140 AVICENNA 

the actual intellect in us inasmuch as we can [perform] the act of the 
intellect. The acquired intellect is the actual intellect insofar as it is 
perfect, whereas the conceptualization of objects of the compositive 
imagination is a return of the soul to the storehouse of the sensible objects: 
The first [that is, the acquired intellect] looks upward, while the later 
[that is, the actual intellect] looks downward. So, if it becomes free 
of the body and the accidents of the body, then in that case it can 
completely conjoin with the Active Intellect, and there it encounters 
intellectual beauty and eternal pleasure, as we will discuss in its place 

(ibid., 247.20-248.8; emphasis added). 

The sense of this passage appears to be that while in the body, our actual 
intellect still accesses the images in the compositive imagination. Through 
the intermediacy of these images the actual intellect conjoins with the 
Active Intellect, which illuminates those images in us so as to perfect and 

transform the intellect into the acquired intellect. 

Self-Awareness: Identification of the Act, 
Agent, and Object of the Intellect and 
“Becoming the Thing Known” 

While for Avicenna virtually all of the human’s initial intellectual activity 
begins with the perception of the essences of things that require matter for 
their existence, the human intellect’s highest perfection comes in knowing 
immaterial substances, that is, essences that do not require matter for their 
existence. While Avicenna consistently says that immaterial substances 
are intelligible in themselves inasmuch as they do not require a process of 
abstraction in order to be made intelligible, he also recognizes that for us 
humans they are frequently the last things to be intellectually perceived. 
Indeed, many humans may never intellectually grasp them at all. 
Avicenna insists that the inability to conceptualize such substances is not 
owing to anything about those substances in themselves, but owing to the 
soul’s (accidental) association or connection with matter. For just as the in- 
ability to gaze upon the Sun is not owing to something about the Sun that 
prevents it from being seen—in fact it, more than anything else, is visible— 
but owing to the weakness of the material makeup of the eye, so likewise 
one’s being associated with a body distracts one from knowing the immate- 

rial substances (Psychology, V.5, 237.16-238.17). 

PSYCHOLOGY II I4!i 

Perhaps it is because the human soul is at the lowest wrung of the hierarchy 
of immaterial substances that for Avicenna one may have an easier time 
conceptualizing oneself as immaterial than grasping the separate Intellects 
and the divinity. Even then Avicenna concedes that recognizing that one is an 
immaterial substance is hard enough. When one perceives oneself intellectu- 
ally, however, there is literally a type of intellectual perception that is different 
in kind from the intellectual perception of anything else. That is because in 
self-awareness “the soul conceptualizes itself, and in so doing makes itself the 
act of the intellect, an intellect, and an object of the intellect” (Psychology, V.6, 
239.78). In other words, in conceptualizing oneself as an immaterial sub- 
stance one is engaged in the intellect’s proper act, namely, intellectual percep- 
tion. Also, inasmuch as one is actively and presently intellecting, the intellect 
is at the level of the acquired intellect, namely, the intellect’s perfect state. 
Finally, since the intellect has itself as its object, the intellect is thinking about 
itself thinking. Thus, in conceptualizing oneself as an immaterial substance 
there is for Avicenna a complete identification of act, agent, and object. 

This identification of act, agent, and object of intellection does not occur 
when one intellectually perceives the essences of other things, asserts Avi- 
cenna, since in those cases the human intellect is not the very thing per- 
ceived. Moreover, he continues, in knowing other things, the intellect does 
not, indeed cannot, even become the thing known so as to bring about the 
intellectual identification of act, agent, and object. In this respect, Avicenna 
is expressly rejecting a tradition that has its origins in Aristotle’s De anima," 
although Avicenna himself points to Porphyry as its primary proponent 
(ibid., 240.3-6).” Joseph Owens, when speaking of this idea in Aristotle, 

sums up the position that Avicenna wants to reject nicely: 

You are the things perceived or known. Knower and thing known... 
become one and the same in the actuality of cognition. From the strictly 
epistemological standpoint, this thoroughgoing identity of knower and 
thing known is the most important and fundamental tenet in the Aristo- 
telian conception of knowledge.”" 

While Owens believes that the reason most people are resistant to this doc- 
trine is that “they do not like the idea of being a brown cow or a big bad 
wolf just because they are seeing those animals or thinking about them,” 
Avicenna rejects the idea on purely philosophical grounds.” 

His criticism, which employs intuitions that were already present in his 

. : 93 . : 
argument for instantaneous substantial change,” is directed against the 

142 AVICENNA 

more general position that anything can truly be said to become another so 
as to become numerically identical with it. Given this general conclusion, 
he can quickly show that there is no meaningful sense in which the intellect 
becomes the thing intellected, save in self-awareness, when knower, object 
known, and the act of knowing are numerically identical. 

The general argument begins as follows (ibid., 239.16-240.3): When an 
initial thing, x, changes into another thing, y, then either x (1) continues to 
exist after the change or (2) x ceases to exist. If (1), x continues to exist after 
the change, then either (1.a), y also exists, and so y exists together with x, or 
(2.b), y does not exist. If (1.a), x and y exist together, then they are two things, 
not one. Consequently, there is not an identification of intellect and object 
of intellection. If (1.b), y does not exist after the change, and yet x became 
y, x became something nonexisting, which Avicenna finds utter nonsense 
(for the assumption is that x has changed, not that it has been annihilated). 
For the same reason one does not have to consider the logically possible but 
equally absurd proposition that neither x nor y remains after the change. 

Thus, one is left with (2): x does not continue to exist after the change 
but y does. There are, maintains Avicenna, two related problems that 
plague this suggestion: the first general, the second related to the soul spe- 
cifically. First, the more general complaint is that if x has ceased to exist, 
then in what meaningful sense has something nonexisting become another? 
There has been a cessation of one thing and the origination of another, but 
not one becoming the other. One can make sense of a pot’s becoming hot or 
some underlying matter’s becoming a new substance, but in both cases there 
is an underlying thing that initially was the other thing potentially, and it 
was that underlying thing that remains throughout the change that be- 
comes the other. On the present assumption, however, the intellect ceases to 
be what it is and becomes the thing known; there is no underlying thing. 

Second, the concern specific to the intellect (ibid., 240.8—241.4) is that the 
species form or essence—which the intellect is purportedly to become—is 
what actualizes a substance such that it is the kind that it is. The form in 
itself simply is the actuality of a thing, and as such the form has no potenti- 
ality. It is the recipient or underlying thing or matter in which there is po- 
tentiality. Thus, if the intellect were to take on the species form of wolf 
when it intellects wolf, to use Owens’s example, there would be the actual- 
ity of the wolf, and no longer any potentiality. In that case, the intellect 
would no longer be able to become any other form. If one maintains that the 

intellect somehow retains its potential to receive other forms and essences 

PSYCHOLOGY II 143 

despite its being a certain actuality qua becoming a given form, then one 
and the same thing would be something receiving and not receiving, which, 
Avicenna notes, is clearly a contradiction. 

In the end, Avicenna finds the whole suggestion of the soul’s becoming 
the thing known incomprehensible, and prefers his own account of intel- 
lectual perception. Only in the case of self-awareness is there for humans 
any genuine identification of intellection, intellect, and what is intellected, 
although Avicenna intimates, in anticipation of his own account of the 
Necessary Existent in itself, that perhaps some other entity can know all 
things simply by knowing itself. 

Self-Awareness: The Nexus of Conscious 
Experience and the “Flying Man” 

In self-awareness, thinks Avicenna, one consciously reflects on oneself as an 
object of intellection. As such, self-awareness might be thought of as a 
second-order awareness: being aware of oneself as an object of awareness. 
Avicenna, however, also identifies a more basic or primitive form of 
self-awareness that he believes is essential not only to the intellect but also 
to the human soul more generally. This primitive self-awareness is the 
subconscious awareness of the J that accompanies all of one’s actions and 
conscious experiences, underlying and unifying them.” It is for Avicenna 
our awareness of the very substance of our soul considered independently 
of its relation to the body and bodily activities. It is one’s self (dhat). 

That there is such a nexus where all of one’s conscious experiences— 
whether of external or internal sensibles, desires, anger, intellectual percep- 
tion, or the like—come together is evidenced for Avicenna by the fact that 
the various faculties do affect one another. Thus, sight may bring about 

are not what 

desire, and yet light and color—the proper objects of vision 
is desired. Hunger may cloud the ability to think straight, and yet the intel- 
lect has no organ such as to experience appetites. A simple daydream might 
distract one from esteeming some danger immediately in front of oneself, 

and yet sensible forms—whether externally sensed or internally imag- 

ined—are not objects of the estimative faculty but only connotational at- 
tributes are. Despite the fact that these activities are all diverse and do not 
share a common instrument, one meaningfully says things like “When J 

saw it, J knew what it was and J desired it, and / then began thinking how 

144 AVICENNA 

I could get it.” Simply stated there is some single subject of all of these dis- 
parate experiences, namely, the /. Moreover, for Avicenna, inasmuch as | 
am aware of having any experience, I am aware that J am the one having it; 
for Avicenna this level of self-awareness is the most basic. 

The question that Avicenna now asks is whether this nexus of one’s ex- 
periences—in a real sense one’s self—is the body or some part of the body, 
or, as Avicenna himself believes, not a body at all. Avicenna offers three 
arguments to support his contention that one should not identify the self or 
I with the body. The first one is reminiscent of his argument that the ani- 
mating principle of living things cannot be the body as such, otherwise all 
bodies would be alive (Psychology, V.7, 254.1-6). Analogously, he then ar- 
gues that it cannot belong to the body as such to be a nexus of experiences, 
otherwise all bodies—whether a brain, bone, or big toe—would gather into 
themselves conscious experiences, a conclusion that Avicenna takes to be 
manifestly false. Thus, it cannot belong to the body as such to be a nexus of 
one’s experiences; rather, being a nexus must be some perfection belonging 
to the body. The perfection of the body simply is, as Avicenna had argued 
at the very beginning of the Psychology, the soul.”” 

Second, this nexus is again that which receives and unifies all of one’s 
experiences (Psychology, V.7, 254.6-20). Among these experiences, however, 
is intellectual perception. Now, as Avicenna had argued at Psychology V.2, 
the recipient of intelligibles must be immaterial. For the same reason, then, 
that which receives and unifies one’s intellectual perceptions must be im- 
material. Therefore, concludes Avicenna, the nexus of experiences is im- 
material, namely, it is the soul and not the body. 

At this point, Avicenna considers an objection: If immaterial intelligi- 
bles need an immaterial substratum to receive them, then why should those 
experiences associated with matter—whether as sensed, imagined, or the 
like—not require a material substratum to receive them? Avicenna’s re- 
sponse is that while powers in an immaterial substance may spread out 
from it so as to use bodies as instruments, material things cannot receive 
immaterial things. In general, the response, which is not as developed as 
one might hope, seems to be that while it has been shown that intellectual 
perceptions can only be received in an immaterial receptacle, it has not been 
demonstrated that the other kinds of perceptions must be received only in 
a bodily organ. Assuming the unity of our conscious experience, however, 
the presumption is again that all of our experiences are gathered together in 

a single nexus. Consequently, given that it has been demonstrated that one 

PSYCHOLOGY II 145 

class of experiences necessarily requires an immaterial recipient, whereas 
there is no demonstration that the rest cannot be gathered together there as 
well, the nexus of our experiences, Avicenna concludes, is immaterial. 
Thus, while one may not know what the mechanism is that permits mind- 
body interaction, the onus of proof is, contends Avicenna, on those detractors 
who think that such interaction cannot take place.” 

Avicenna begins his third and final argument (Psychology, V.7, 255.1- 
257.17) that if what is most truly the J were a body, it would be either the 
whole of the body or some part of the body, such as a bodily organ like the 
brain or heart. Now, the / cannot be the whole of the body qua whole, for 
one can lose part of one’s body, like an arm or leg, in which case that origi- 
nal whole no longer exists, and yet the J remains. (In fact, Avicenna believes 
that there are intuitive reasons for thinking that even if one lost the whole 
of one’s body the J would still remain, a point to which I shall return 
shortly.) 

The / also cannot be merely some part of the body or some organ like the 
brain, continues Avicenna, for while one is always aware of oneself, one 
only becomes aware of one’s organs after some empirical investigation or 
being taught about those organs. In that case, before being made aware of 
whatever organ or bodily part one might want to identify with the self, how 

can one be said to be self-aware? Certainly, the newborn infant is at some 

primitive level aware “J am hungry”—and it is because he or she is aware 
of being hungry that he or she cries. Yet just as obviously, the infant is 
wholly ignorant of having organs. If one identifies the self with a bodily 
organ, complains Avicenna, our infant, for example, would be aware of 
something of which he or she is not aware, but these are two mutually 
exclusive states. 

Clearly, this argument is the weakest of the three, for while Commis- 
sioner Gordon, for example, may be aware that the person in front of him 
is Bruce Wayne, he might not at all be aware that Batman is in front of him, 
despite the fact that Bruce Wayne is identical to Batman. Still, this last ar- 
gument does provide Avicenna with another opportunity to repeat his fa- 
mous “Flying Man” thought experiment.” He initially presented it in book 
I.1 of the Psychology, when raising the issue of what the substance of the 
soul might be like considered in itself and independent of the activities it 
produces in the body and the effects of those activities. 

The setup of the thought experiment is simple enough: Imagine that a 

human—for example, Adam or Eve—was created all at once, not in Eden 

146 AVICENNA 

but floating in air or in a void. Moreover, our flying man’s sight is veiled, 
the environment is totally devoid of sounds, odors, or tastes, and he is ad- 
ditionally splayed out so that no parts of his body are having sensory contact 
with other parts. Even given complete sensory deprivation, Avicenna 
believes that the individual would still affirm his or her existence. Thus, he 
concludes that one cannot identify what is most truly one’s self, the /, with 
one’s body. 

Again as an argument for the immateriality of the self, such a thought 
experiment is wanting; however, Avicenna never intended it as an argu- 
ment for the immateriality of the self. Instead, as he himself repeatedly says, 
he is merely trying to point us in the right direction or to prime our intui- 
tions about the very nature of the self or J (Psychology, 1.1, 15.19-16.2). 

To see this, let me up approach Avicenna’s thought experiment, as it 
were, backward. Instead of imagining an Adam or Eve totally unaware of 
any experiences except of themselves (if this is even possible), consider 
yourself with all your experiences, whether sensations, memories, concepts, 
or the like. Now imagine yourself in some “Freaky Friday” episode, where 
you find yourself, for example, in my body. In other words, it is your mem- 
ories, thoughts, personality, or, in general, mental life, experiencing the 
world through a body different from the one you in fact have, namely, 
mine. Would you say, “J have your experiences!” or “J am in your body!”. 
If you find yourself saying, “Jam in your body!” then you share Avicenna’s 
intuition at a very basic level. 

Now, imagine that you can retain all of those experiences, save any sen- 
sible sensations. In effect, imagine yourself in a disembodied state and 
moreover unable to access the external world in any way, while still having 
all of your memories and concepts. Again, would you say, “J have no body!” 
or “I have no memories and concepts” or conversely “A ghost has my mem- 
ories and concepts!” Again, if you said, “J have no body!” you share Avi- 
cenna’s intuition. 

Again, imagine that one by one your memories are removed until only 
your concepts or universal ideas are left. So, for example, you would still 
know that all humans are animals, except there is no accompanying image 
of a human. Again, if in such a case, you find yourself saying, “J have no 
memories!” (even if you think that this is a depleted version of yourself), 
you are still sharing Avicenna’s intuition about the nature of the self or J. 

Finally, imagine that one by one you are stripped of your concepts ending 
finally with the concepts of “thing” and then “existence” itself. At which 

PSYCHOLOGY II 147 

point in this stripping process could you no longer say, “J am something” or 
“T exist”? For Avicenna, it is only when your very existence is removed that 
the J ceases. 

Again, as Avicenna himself repeatedly says, the “flying man” thought 
experiment is not an argument as such to show that one should identify 
oneself with an immaterial soul rather than the body; he feels that he can 
demonstrate the immateriality of the human intellect without appealing to 
such fantasy-style arguments. Still, he does want to use it as a tool so that 
one can think rightly about what he believes that we humans are. The J is 
most truly us regardless of whether there is any bodily input—at least this 

is the intuition that Avicenna wants us to have. 

Prophecy 

I conclude this chapter with Avicenna’s account of prophecy, which itself 
relies on many of the psychological notions put forth thus far.’ Whereas 
today we tend to think of prophecy, veridical dreams, and the like as out- 
side the scope of scientific inquiry, Avicenna did not. He, like all of those 
around him, took such events as factual phenomena, and as such they are 
for him just as open to scientific scrutiny and in need of scientific explana- 
tion as any other natural phenomenon. Indeed, far from considering proph- 
ecy and the like as supernatural or a divine gift conferred upon whomever 
God wills, Avicenna viewed these phenomena as natural and as such re- 
quiring a natural explanation. He found such an explanation in psychology 
(Psychology, V.6, 248.9—250.4). 

For Avicenna, as has been seen, a human comes to know and to under- 
stand something when the intellect receives the intelligible object or 
concept of that thing. As such, the human intellect has a certain natural 
disposition to receive concepts, where this disposition varies between 
individuals: Some individuals just do not “get things,” while others do, 
some get things faster, some slower. When this capacity or disposition to 
get things is strong, Avicenna terms it “insight” or “intuition” (Aads) (ibid., 
248.1213). 

The person with insight is, with relative ease, able to make initial con- 
tact or conjunction with the Active Intellect, which again brings about in- 
tellectual perception. In fact, continues Avicenna, for some people their 

insight is so intense that it is as if they know everything on their own 

148 AVICENNA 

without being taught those things. Moreover, they recognize these things 
almost immediately. In these very few individuals with the highest level 
of insight—which Avicenna identifies with prophets—their insight so 
abounds that it overflows and deluges their compositive imaginations in the 
form of visions and voices. 

From a modern point of view this feature may be the most arresting one 
about Avicenna’s conception of prophecy, since he sees it is a wholly natural 
phenomenon. As such, it is not God who chooses the prophet (or at least not 
directly); rather, it is the properly prepared or disposed human soul that 
explains why someone has prophetic revelation. Moreover, recall that it is 
the elemental mix or humoral temperament that occasions the production 
of the soul suitable to that body. Thus, in a certain sense it is the elemental 
mix or humoral temperament that explains the prophet’s disposition to 
receive the soul that he or she does, and so made possible that he or she is a 
prophet. This prophetic soul Avicenna also calls the “sacred intellect” (‘ag 
quds1). 

What the sacred intellect intellectually perceives (as well as hears and 
sees in imaginative forms) is in fact the universal causal order (or some 
representation thereof), what Avicenna frequently terms “the order of the 
good.” For Avicenna this involves the prophet’s conjoining with the Active 
Intellect and obtaining the middle term of a syllogism, where again middle 
terms are the logical counterparts of the causes found in the world.” Thus, 
inasmuch as the prophet possesses the middle terms or causal explanations, 
he or she has genuine scientific knowledge. 

Inasmuch as his or her compositive imagination is flooded with images 
representing this scientific knowledge, the prophet is able to convey to the 
masses through these images and metaphors truths about the order of the 
good, that is, the divine universal order, which most people would not oth- 
erwise have grasped or done so only after arduous scientific investigation. 
Avicenna says that the prophet “blazes with insight” (V.6, 249.19—20) and so 
wholly grasps the necessary causal order inherent in the world, his or her 
immediate place in that order, and how that causal order must inevitably 
play out in the future, thus suggesting how prophets can predict future 
events. 

This causal order, now not limited to merely natural things but extend- 
ing to existence as such, makes up an important part of the subject matter 
of the science of metaphysics as Avicenna envisions it, and it is to that sub- 

ject that I now turn. 

METAPHYSICS I 

Theology 

Introduction: The Subject Matter of 
Metaphysics 

With the introduction of an immaterial intellect, Avicenna has in a very real 
sense moved beyond the science of physics, for again the proper subject of 
natural philosophy is movable body, whereas the intellect as has been noted is 
not a body. Instead, the investigation of immaterial substances, according to 
Avicenna, belongs to the science of metaphysics. Now there can be no doubt 
that ina very real sense Avicenna’s metaphysics is in many respects the culmi- 
nation and crowning achievement of his philosophical system. Avicenna 
himself certainly thought as much. But what is metaphysics as a science? To 
be more exact, what is the proper subject of the science of metaphysics?’ The 
proper subject of logic, according to Avicenna, is the secondary intelligibles 
such as genus, difference, and species inasmuch as these can be traced back to 
the primary intelligibles, namely, the universals of the various kinds like 
horse-ness and humanity, whose individual and particular instances actually 
exist in the world. The proper object of natural philosophy is again material bodies 
insofar as they are subject to motion. The proper subject of mathematics 
is quantity, whether a magnitude or number, albeit quantity considered inde- 
pendent of any particular matter, regardless of whether the quantity in 

question actually exists or does not exist materially. 

149 

150 AVICENNA 

What then is the proper subject of metaphysics? In the end, Avicenna 
identifies metaphysics’ proper subject matter with that which exists inas- 

much as it exists 

an account that readers of Aristotle’s Metaphysics T will 
recognize, for there Aristotle says, “there is a science that studies being qua 
being”; however, before concluding as much Avicenna had to address the 
claims of two other candidates that had become popular contenders by his 
time for the title of the proper subject of metaphysics. These are that meta- 
physics properly studies either (1) God or, in some way or other, (2) causes 
more generally. 

One can certainly understand why God (or, more generally, immaterial 
beings) may have such a claim to being the proper subject of metaphysics, 
for if natural philosophy treats material bodies, while mathematics treats 
the features of material bodies considered independent of their matter, then 
metaphysics, one might naturally presume, should treat things, such as 
God, that are actually immaterial. While Avicenna happily concedes that 
God and God’s existence are issues treated in metaphysics, he adamantly 
denies that the existence of God is the proper subject of metaphysics (Meta- 
physics, 1.1, 3.16-4.19). 

His argument for this position presupposes a certain conception of the 
nature of a science. All sciences, according to Avicenna following Aristotle,* 
must begin from certain presuppositions that cannot be demonstrated in 
the given science, but have to be taken without demonstration. Such pre- 
suppositions must simply be posited, or, perhaps demonstrated in some 
higher science. These presuppositions include among other things the ex- 
istence claims of the given science, namely, those things that the science has 
to assume to exist in order to proceed at all. The first thing posited among 
these existence claims is the existence of the proper subject matter of that 
science. So, for example, physics does not attempt to demonstrate that there 
are bodies subject to motion or change. It simply takes such bodies for 
granted, whereas it is only in a higher science, namely, metaphysics, that 
there is a demonstration why there are such bodies. 

Given this conception of the relation between the existence claims of a 
given science and that science’s proper subject matter, Avicenna argues that 
if God were the proper subject of metaphysics, then the existence of God 
could not be demonstrated, at least not within the science of metaphysics; 
rather, either it would not be demonstrable at all or it would necessarily be 
demonstrated in some other science. As for God’s existence being indemon- 

strable, that would be either because the divinity’s existence is self-evident 

METAPHYSICS I I51 

or it is something that simply cannot be demonstrated. Avicenna considers 
it obvious that God’s existence is not self-evident,’ nor does he think that 
one should despair of finding a demonstration that God exists, for he be- 
lieves that he himself has discovered one.’ As for whether the existence of 
God can be demonstrated in another science, if so, then that science would 
have to be either logic, natural philosophy, mathematics, or one of the prac- 
tical philosophies such as ethics or politics, but none of these, in fact, estab- 
lishes that God exists, or so asserts Avicenna. 

At this point, one might complain (and Averroes later would) that in 
Aristotle’s Physics (VIII 5), Aristotle had proven that there is an Unmoved 
Mover, which certainly many philosophers had and would in the future 
identify with God. In fact, Avicenna himself felt like he had also demon- 
strated the existence of an Unmoved Mover in his own Physics (IV.15) using 
a proof much like that of Aristotle. While Avicenna was convinced that 
physics could demonstrate that there is indeed some first, unmoved cause of 
motion, he did not think that one was justified in identifying this cause 
with God. Avicenna himself identified this Unmoved Mover with the im- 
material substance (or Intelligence) associated with the outermost sphere of 
the heavens, but not God. At best, this entity is the cause of the motion of 
our cosmos, but not of the very existence of the cosmos itself. In contrast, 
God (at least as Avicenna understood that term) is the very cause of all ex- 
istence itself. Thus, Aristotle’s Unmoved Mover fails to meet Avicenna’s 
criteria for Godhood. What Avicenna contended was needed was not a 
“physical proof” for God’s existence, which he believed was incapable of 
demonstrating that God exists, but a “metaphysics proof” for God’s exist- 
ence.’ Later I consider Avicenna’s metaphysical proof for the existence of 
God, for now, however, suffice it so say that no other science, physics in- 
cluded, had, to Avicenna’s mind, adequately demonstrated the existence of 
the cause of existence itself, and so proven that there is a true divinity. 

Returning to the original point, God cannot be the proper subject of 
metaphysics because, again, a science does not prove the existence of its 
proper subject matter, but merely assumes or posits it. Consequently, if 
God were the subject matter of metaphysics, either there would be no dem- 
onstration of God’s existence (but there is) or some other science would 
demonstrate it (but they do not). Hence, concludes Avicenna, the only sci- 
ence in which the existence of God could be demonstrated is metaphysics, 
and so God is not the proper subject of that science, even though metaphysics 
does investigate the divinity and the divine attributes. 

152 AVICENNA 

The second suggestion that Avicenna rejects is that the subject of meta- 
physics is causes. Avicenna identifies four ways that such a suggestion might 
be understood (Metaphysics, 1.5, 5.1-6.18): the proper subject matter of met- 
aphysics is (1) causes insofar as they exist; (2) causes considered simply inas- 
much as they are causes, that is, causality as such; (3) the causality proper to 
each of the four so-called Aristotelian causes, namely, the material, formal, 
efficient, and final causes; and (4) the interrelation between the four causes, 
namely, the whole causal complex, such as a form-matter composite acting 
for some end. As for suggestion (1), namely that metaphysics’ proper sub- 
ject is causes insofar as they exist, Avicenna does in fact believe that meta- 
physics examines their existence; however, since there are other existing 
things as well that it considers, one should not merely limit the proper subject 
of metaphysics to some subset of existents, namely, causes. 

In a similar vein, he has a set of arguments directed against (2), namely 
that the subject of metaphysics is causality as such, which equally applies to 
suggestions (3), the causality of the four causes, and (4), the interrelation 
between the four causes. First, included among the topics that metaphysics 
treats are such notions as the universal and particular, actuality and poten- 
tiality, as well as necessity and possibility, but these notions are not proper 
to causes alone but equally apply to whatever exists. Thus, the subject of 
metaphysics is broader than causality simply understood. 

Second, at best empirical observations show that there are constant con- 
junctions (muwafaga) between events, such as when one touches fire to cot- 
ton, which is then followed by the cotton’s burning. Sensation, however, 
neither does nor can establish that some actual causal relation or causality 
exists between two things; rather, it is the metaphysician who demonstrates 
the existence of causality. Thus, for the same reason that God could not be 
the subject matter of metaphysics, neither can causality be the unique sub- 
ject matter of metaphysics, argues Avicenna, for again a science cannot 
demonstrate the existence of its own proper subject. Thus, inasmuch as 
causality understood in most general terms cannot be the subject matter of 
metaphysics, neither can the specific causes and a fortiori the causal com- 
plexes composed of the specific causes be the subject matter of this science. 

As for determining metaphysics’ proper subject matter, Avicenna begins 
by listing the various topics and issues treated within metaphysics, and then 
asks what all of these things share in common (Metaphysics, 1.2). That com- 
mon factor will then be the subject of metaphysics. Thus, included among 

the particular issues that metaphysics investigates is, as has been noted, God 

METAPHYSICS I 153 

and causes more generally (however construed). Additionally, the science 
of metaphysics establishes various principles assumed by the other lower 
sciences. Moreover, metaphysics treats substances whether, material or im- 
material, as well as the so-called accidents enumerated in Aristotle’s Catego- 
ries, inasmuch as the ten categories indicate, as it were, various kinds or 
modes of existence. Furthermore, metaphysics determines the status of 
mathematical objects: Do they exist in physical bodies, or only in the mind, 
or is there a Platonic realm of mathematical Forms where they exist? Also, 
metaphysics again considers the universal and particular, actuality and po- 
tentiality, as well as necessity and possibility. Inasmuch as one or the other 
of these notions happens to apply to a given existent, and inasmuch as an 
existent happens to be described by one of these notions, these notions indi- 
cate what might be thought of as akin to proper accidents of existence. 

When one considers this summary of some of the topics falling within 
the domain of metaphysics, Avicenna believes that it becomes clear that the 
only thing that they all share in common, and so is the subject matter of 
metaphysics, is that they are existents. Thus, concludes Avicenna, “it is the 
existent qua existent that is the primary subject of this science” (Metaphysics, 
I.2, 10.2). 

To try to treat Avicenna’s detailed and rich discussions of all of these 
topics, and others as well, in one, or even two chapters, would be impossi- 
ble. Instead, let me begin with a very brief outline of how the Metaphysics 
from Avicenna’s monumental work the Cure holds together overall. Then, 
in the remainder of this chapter and the next, I shall focus on two central 
metaphysical topics that bring together a number of points from through- 
out Avicenna’s metaphysical system, as well as his philosophical system 
more generally. These two issues are God (or, to be more exact, Avicenna’s 
Necessary Existent) and Creation (or, again to be more exact, possible 
existents). 

To begin, Avicenna’s general project in the Metaphysics is to recast the 
text of Aristotle’s own Metaphysics in such a way as to fulfill the canons of a 
demonstrative science as set forth both by Aristotle in the Posterior Analytics 
and Avicenna himself in his Book of Demonstration.’ To this end, book I of 
Avicenna’s Metaphysics, as has been seen, lays out his conception of meta- 
physics as a science whose proper subject matter is existence qua existence. 
As such, existence is investigated first with respect to the kinds or divisions 
of existence, which Avicenna identifies with Aristotle’s ten categories 

(roughly books II-III of Avicenna’s Metaphysics). Second, metaphysics 

I 54 AVICENNA 

inquires into the proper accidents of existence—that is, those states that 
may or may not apply to existence—which again include such states as pri- 
ority, posteriority, potentiality, actuality, universals, particulars, cause, and 
effect (books [V—VII). Third, the first causes—and most specifically the 
Necessary Existent—represent the high point of metaphysical inquiry 
(books VIH-IX). Additionally, since, as Aristotle had noted,® “one” is said 
in as many ways as “being,” Avicenna considers a subclass of ontology, 
which has been rightly termed “henology” (after the Greek Aen “one” and 
logos “account”).’ This study of unity and plurality, that is, henology, paral- 
lels the above-mentioned three areas of metaphysical investigation but now 
from the perspective of the “one” and the “many.” Thus, the divisions and 
kinds of one and many are considered intermingled throughout Avicenna’s 
discussion in books H—HI, whereas the proper accidents of the one and 
many receive an independent treatment in book VII. The studies of exist- 
ence qua existence and unity then come back together in books VIHI-IX, 
where Avicenna treats the pure unity, God. Finally, the last book (book X, 
and the last chapter of book LX) discusses the “hereafter” and a human’s 
ultimate end as well as “God’s commandments” by which humans should 
live while here on Earth. 

Again it would be impossible to cover all of these issues in any substan- 
tive way.” Instead, in the remainder of this chapter and the next one, 
I consider two closely related topics: Avicenna’s theology and cosmology. In 
order to appreciate Avicenna’s contribution to these two subjects, however, 
one must briefly consider the history of how philosophers had viewed God’s 
relation to the cosmos, for this issue raises a cluster of core philosophical 
problems that Avicenna’s metaphysical system attempts to address.'' This 
brief history is then followed by a look at Avicenna’s modal ontology, and a 
closer investigation of the Necessary Existent and the divine attributes. In 

the next chapter, I concentrate on possible existents and the created order. 

A Brief History of the First Cause’s 

Relation to the Cosmos 

Certainly as early as Plato, if not before, Greek philosophers were discuss- 
ing the issue of God’s causal relation to an eternal effect, namely, an eternal 
cosmos. In the Timaeus, a self-avowedly mythical account of the origin and 

makeup of the cosmos, Plato says that initially the material that would 

METAPHYSICS I 155 

make up the world as we now know it was in a state of chaos lacking any 
order or structure. The demiurge (loosely, Plato’s equivalent to the Crea- 
tor), out of its own goodness, wanted to make this chaotic matter good like 
itself. So looking to the paradigms, which might be identified with the 
Platonic realm of the Forms, the demiurge imposed form upon matter and 
so produced order. 

Two things should be noted about Plato’s account. First, inasmuch as the 
demiurge imposes form onto matter, one can consider it an efficient cause 
of the cosmos’ current existence. Second, taken literally the Timaeus ac- 
count implies that there was a time when there was chaos after which the 
demiurge imposes form on matter. Consequently, one can understand Plato 
to mean that the world as we know it with its present structure and order 
came to exist at some definite moment in the finite past before which this 
cosmos, informed as it currently is, did not exist. 

This literal interpretation of Plato’s Timaeus, however, was already be- 
ing challenged as early as the time of Speusippus and Xenocrates, Plato’s 
immediate successors at the Academy, for they argued that the demiurge 
stood in a causal, rather than temporal, relation to the cosmos. Conse- 
quently, on their interpretation of Plato, the cosmos is generated in the 
sense of being dependent upon the demiurge as upon an efficient cause, and 
yet the cosmos is eternal. 

In response to Speusippus and Xenocrates, Aristotle seriously chal- 
lenged the view that anything could be both generated, that is, the effect of 
an efficient cause, and eternal. Thus, at De Caelo, I 11-12, he distinguished 
various senses of “generable/ungenerable” (Gk. genéton/agenéton) and 
“imperishable/perishable” (phtharton/aphtharton), with the most basic 
senses understood in terms of “possibility” and “impossibility” (dunaton/ 
adunaton), for only if something is possible is it capable of generation. Aris- 
totle next appealed to what are sometimes called temporal frequencies or a 
statistical model in order to explain the modal terms “necessity,” “possibil- 
ity,” and “impossibility.” More specifically, according to Aristotle, at least in 
the De Caelo, if something exists for all time, it is necessary; if it exists at 
some time, but not at another time, it is possible; and if it exists at no time 
ever, it is impossible.” 

Aristotle, then, argued against the thesis that something is generable 
and yet eternal based upon this analysis of possible and impossible. The 
details need not bother us, since his general move is relatively straightfor- 

ward: If something is generable, and so causally dependent upon another as 

156 AVICENNA 

its efficient cause, then its existence must be possible; however, if it is pos- 
sible, then, given the temporal frequency account of possibility just sketched, 
there is a time when it does not exist. Clearly, if there is a me when it does 
not exist, then it is not eternal. Therefore, concludes Aristotle, whatever is 
generated, and so dependent upon an efficient cause, cannot be eternal. 
If Plato had maintained that the cosmos is both the effect of an efficient 
cause and eternal, as Speusippus and Xenocrates suggested, then, according 
to Aristotle’s argument, Plato’s thesis is simply incoherent. 

In contrast, Aristotle’s God (or more exactly his Unmoved Mover) is not 
an efficient cause of the cosmos’ existence at all, but only a final cause that 
explains why the cosmos is eternally changing and always undergoing mo- 
tion. In more detail, as a corollary of his De Caelo argument as well as on the 
basis of other arguments, Aristotle held that the existence of the cosmos it- 
self, understood as a form-matter composite, must be necessary and as such 
it does not need an efficient cause for its existence. In other words, for 
Aristotle, there never has been some time when the forms and matter that 
make up our cosmos did not exist. Thus, they, and the composite of them, 
namely, the cosmos, do not need some efficient cause to explain their exist- 
ence. Instead, what needs to be explained, at least according to Aristotle, is 
what causes the motion found in our independently existing cosmos, which 
he did by appealing to his Unmoved Mover qua ultimate object of desire. 
To this end, he claimed that the heavens desire to imitate or to be like (to the 
extent that that is possible) the wholly actual and eternal Unmoved Mover. 
They do this by perpetually rotating in place, which is as close as a moving 
thing, like the heavens, can come to being like the wholly actual, unchang- 
ing, and eternal Unmoved Mover. Let me repeat: Aristotle’s Unmoved 
Mover is not an efficient cause of either the universe’s existence or its mo- 
tion. It is only a final cause inasmuch as it is the object of desire that an 
eternally existing universe through its perpetual motion strives to imitate 
(to the extent that that is possible)."? 

Quickly, to sum up the situation as Aristotle understood it, if the exist- 
ence of the cosmos is eternal and so necessary, God can stand to it only as its 
final cause. Conversely, if God is the efficient cause of its existence, the cos- 
mos must have had a temporal beginning at some time in the finite past. 
The question then is whether the cosmos had a temporal beginning or has 
existed eternally. In Physics VII, Aristotle himself provided a number of 
arguments that the world must be eternal based upon his analysis of such 

physical notions as motion and time. 

METAPHYSICS I 157 

For example, time, as Aristotle defined it, is the measure of motion inso- 
far as the motion is marked off into before and after (Physics, IV 10, 
219b1-2). So, for example, time stands to motion analogously to the way 
that spatial measurements, such as a meter or foot, stand to distance, space, 
or length. Thus, on Aristotle’s account of time, there can no more be a time 
without a motion than there could be some spatial measurement without 
there being some distance that is able to be measured. Neither spatial meas- 
urements, such as one meter, nor temporal measurements, such as one year, 
can exist independently of the thing that is being measured. Consequently, 
if one assumes that there had ever been a time when there was no motion, 
one would have committed oneself to the position that there is a motion, 
which time is measuring, when there is no motion, an obvious contradic- 
tion. If motion exists, however, then there must exist what is undergoing 
motion, namely, a body, which is nothing more than a form-matter com- 
posite. Therefore, Aristotle concludes, there has never been a time that a 
form-matter composite, namely, the cosmos, has not existed, to assume 
otherwise leads to contradiction. 

In addition to Aristotle’s physical proofs, later philosophers such as the 
Neoplatonist Proclus (412-485 CE)—who, unlike Aristotle, thought that 
God was both the final and efficient cause of the existence of the cosmos— 
offered further arguments for the cosmos’ eternity, not based upon physical 
notions, but upon the divine nature. For example, Proclus argued that if 
God changed from not creating the world to creating it, this would make 
God subject to change.” Proclus, as well as thinkers before him, found a 
number of reasons why ascribing change to God is undesirable either from 
a philosophical or theological perspective. First, it was maintained that 
whenever something changes, there must be some cause of that change. 
Consequently, if God began to create after not having created, there would 
be something acting upon God that caused God to change from not creat- 
ing to creating. God, however, is thought to be the First Cause, that is, the 
Cause of causes, and so, should God change, there would be a cause before 
the First Cause, which is a contradiction. 

Second, according to Proclus, it is solely on account of divine goodness that 
God causes the existence of the cosmos. Hence, if the cosmos had a temporal 
creation in the finite past, then either there was a time when God was not good 
and so did not create, or a time when God was impotent and could not create 
what his goodness demanded. Either option is sacrilegious. In short, God 
seemingly cannot change. Consequently, if God creates (that is, if God is the 

158 AVICENNA 

cosmos’ efficient cause), then he must create as long as he exists, but God exists 
eternally, and so God’s creation, namely, the cosmos, must exist eternally. 

Arguments such as these for the cosmos’ eternity coupled with Aristotle’s 
analysis of the relation between the existence of the cosmos and the nature of 
God’s causality, gave rise to perhaps one of the most significant challenges for 
most subsequent philosophers working in both the classical Greek- and me- 
dieval Arabic-speaking worlds. The challenge was that most of these think- 
ers not only found the arguments for the eternity of the world convincing, but 
also maintained that God is both final and efficient cause of the cosmos. Yet 
again these two theses run afoul of Aristotle’s De Cae/o argument. That argu- 
ment again in its simplest form is this: Whatever exists through an efficient 
cause is possible, and if something is possible, then, according to the temporal 
frequency model of modalities, there is a time when it does not exists. If there 
is a time when something does not exist, however, it cannot be eternal. Con- 
sequently, if the cosmos were dependent upon God as its efficient cause, it 
apparently could not be eternal. It would seem that these later philosophers 
wanted to eat their proverbial cake and have it too. 

Moreover, there was a further difficulty facing those philosophers who 
wanted to make God both efficient cause and final cause of the cosmos. All of 
them affirmed God’s absolute simplicity and unity, and yet it is not immedi- 
ately clear how an absolutely simple being can be the source of two distinct 
and different forms of causality, final and efficient. In other words, for these 
thinkers, there is absolutely no composition in God. Thus, for example, God 
cannot be material, since matter can be divided into parts from which the 
whole is composed. Similarly, attributes such God’s power, wisdom, love, and 
the like could not refer to different aspects of God, for then there would need 
to be some cause that explains how these different attributes come together to 
form the single entity that is God. Yet, as has been argued, God is the First 
Cause and so nothing causally acts upon the divinity. Now being a final cause 
seems to be quite distinct from being an efficient cause. So, for example, the 
desire to have a child, which is a final cause, is distinct from the act of pro- 
creation, which is the efficient cause (even if the two causes act together and 
complement each other in generating a child). Thus, the question that arose 
was, “How should one reconcile absolute divine simplicity with God’s being 
both a final and efficient cause of the cosmos’ existence, again given that the 
final and efficient causes involve distinct forms of causality?” 

So, here is a brief history of perhaps the most pressing set of problems 
for late Greek- and early Arabic-speaking metaphysicians. First, most of 

METAPHYSICS I 159 

these thinkers wanted to affirm that God is the efficient cause of the cosmos 
and that the cosmos is eternal. Yet, if the cosmos is eternal, then it has ex- 
isted for all time, and according to the preferred account for explaining 
modalities, if something has existed for all time, it is necessary. What is 
necessary, however, does not need an efficient cause. In short, how can one 
make God the efficient cause of an eternal effect in light of the temporal 
frequency model for explaining modalities like possibility and necessity? 
Second, even if one can show how God is the efficient cause of an eternal 
effect, one needs also to show how an absolutely simple God, who is one in 
every respect, is both the efficient and final cause of the cosmos, for efficient 
and final causality appear to require distinct factors in the divinity to ex- 
plain them. In short, what single factor could account for God’s being both 

final and efficient cause of the cosmos’ existence? 

Avicenna’s Modal Ontology 

Perhaps the easiest way to diffuse the first challenge—namely, to explain 
how God can be the efficient cause of an eternal effect in light of the tem- 
poral frequency model of modalities—is simply to jettison the temporal 
frequency model itself. Still, the model had a decided allure for many, if not 
most, of the philosophers working during the pre-Avicennan time of the 
Islamic classical period.” 

This was due in no small part to the fact that most early Arabic-speaking 
philosophers were logicians, and from the point of view of logic temporal 
frequencies are attractive, since they provide a semantics for the otherwise 
uninterpreted modal logic of Aristotle’s Prior Analytics. So, just as today 
certain logicians find “possible world” talk attractive since they can explain 
the modal operators necessary, possible, and impossible in terms of true in 
all possible worlds, some possible world, and no possible worlds respec- 
tively,'° so these medieval logicians explained these notions respectively in 
terms of existing at all time (and so necessary), at some time while not at 
another time (and so possible), and at no time (and so impossible). In short, 
identifying modalities with temporal frequencies allowed the medieval lo- 
gician to treat modal operators as metalinguistic quantifiers. 

Moreover, the temporal frequency model was not only attractive to 
early Arabic-speaking logicians but also to natural philosophers and 

metaphysicians, since it allowed them to reduce the rather opaque notions of 

160 AVICENNA 

natural necessity, possibility, and impossibility to the relatively transparent 
notion of time. Although we today might not find the notion of time any 
clearer than modalities, this was certainly not the case for the ancient and 
medieval philosophers. Aristotle in his Physics (IV 11) had provided a careful 
analysis of time and ultimately identified it, as already has been noted, with 
a certain measure of motion. Moreover, Aristotle had submitted motion to 
an equally rigorous analysis and identified it with the actuality of potential 
as such (Physics, HI 1), where “actuality” and “potentiality” were considered 
perhaps the two most basic notions within Aristotle’s entire system. In short, 
reducing modalities to temporal frequencies explained what ultimately 
grounds them in the physical world, namely, the act/potency relations inher- 
ent in the world. Thus, while simply divorcing the temporal frequency model 
from one’s metaphysics might be the simplest way to address the initial chal- 
lenge, it apparently comes at the cost of explanatory power with respect to 
one’s account of modalities. What was needed was a thorough rethinking of 
the nature of modalities. This is precisely what Avicenna provides. 

As one might expect from Avicenna’s understanding of the subject mat- 
ter of metaphysics, he begins his metaphysical investigation at book I.5 of 
the Metaphysics of the Cure with an indication that something exists 
(mauyiid) and what the divisions of existence (wujiid) are. (Here, I should 
note that Avicenna takes mawyiid and wujid in their most general connota- 
tion, that is, Avicenna is not concerned with a particular existing thing, such 
as humans, or even a specific mode of existence, such as being a substance; 
rather, in metaphysics he again is concerned only with existence as such.) 

That something exists and that there is existence, he begins, is the first 
thing impressed upon the soul and simply cannot be doubted (Metaphysics, 
Ls, 22.11-12; and Salvation, “Metaphysics,” 1.4, 396).'’ Trying to demon- 
strate that there is existence or that something exists, he argues, is a fool’s 
errand, since all demonstrations proceed from things better known than 
and prior to the conclusion (ibid., 23.1-15). Thus, if one assumed that there 
were anything better known than and prior to existence itself, one would 
be committed to the existence of that thing itself, and so would have to 
assume its existence, but existence is the very thing that one was attempt- 
ing to demonstrate. In short, for Avicenna, any proof that there is existence 
is inherently circular. Similar remarks hold for the notion of “thing” 
(shay’). 

He next identifies the necessary (wajib) and the possible (mumkin) with the 

primary conceptual divisions of existence itself (wajid) (ibid., 27.18-28.15)."* 

METAPHYSICS I 161 

In other words, insofar as anything exists for Avicenna, it exists either neces- 
sarily or possibly. Consequently, since the necessary and the possible are 
ways of considering existence, then just as there is nothing more primitive 
by which one could define or prove the existence of existence itself, so like- 
wise there is nothing more primitive by which one could define necessary 

and possible existence. Thus, he writes: 

Virtually everything that has reached you from the ancients concerning 
how to explain [the “necessary,” “possible,” and “impossible”] requires 
[you to do so] circularly. That is because ... when you want to define the 
possible, you take either the necessary or the impossible in its definition, 
and there is no other way but that. [Similarly] when you want to define 
the necessary you take either the possible or impossible in its definition 
(Metaphysics, 1.5, 27.19-28.3). 

The notions of necessity, possibility, and impossibility, then, must be prop- 
erly basic, that is, they do not depend upon any other notions to explain 
them, and so can only be defined in terms of one another. 

Asa brief aside, while in the Metaphysics Avicenna does not mention the 
temporal frequency model for analyzing modalities, which seemingly 
makes time more basic than the modalities themselves, this omission is un- 
doubtedly because Avicenna had in his Physics, as I noted,” analyzed time 
in terms of possibility: Time is a certain possibility corresponding with the 
possibility of the moving object to cover a given distance when moving at a 
given speed. Thus possibility is for Avicenna more basic than time, and so 
it is ultimately possibility that explains time and temporal frequencies, not 
the other way around. 

To help sharpen the distinction between necessity and possibility, Avicenna 
introduces the language of “through itself” (b:-dhatihi, sometimes also trans- 
lated “in itself”) and “through another” (:-ghayrihi) (Metaphysics, 1.6). At least 
one reason for introducing the “through itself” and “through another” 
vocabulary is that it provides Avicenna a way to distinguish different nuances 

of necessity. For there is a difference between saying that something is neces- 

sary in the sense that it simply cannot not exist—as, for instance, the existence 

of God is supposed to be—and saying that something is necessary ona certain 

condition—as, for example, given that two sets of two apples exist, then nec- 
essarily there exist four apples, although it is certainly possible that one or 
both of the sets of apples had not existed, in which case the four apples would 

not have existed. 

162 AVICENNA 

Not only does Avicenna use the “through itself” and “through another” 
vocabulary to draw this distinction, but also to show how and why these 
two conceptions of necessity, again absolute versus conditional necessity, are 
opposed, if not outright contradictory, as well as filling out what it means to 
be a possible existent (ibid., 30.11—19). So, for example, if something, x, were 
necessary though itself but also necessary through another, y, then should, 
owing to y’s nonexistence, x not exist, something purportedly necessary 
through itself, namely x, would not in fact be necessary through itself, an 
obvious contradiction. Alternatively, continues Avicenna, if y could fail to 
exist and yet x, which again is also purportedly necessary through y, contin- 
ued to exist, then the existence of that which is necessary through another 
is not, in fact, at all necessary through that other, which Avicenna notes is a 
patent contradiction. 

Moreover, for Avicenna, what is necessary through another, as opposed 
to necessary through itself, is in fact that which is possible through itself 
(ibid., 31.1-12). He argues thus: Should that other not exist (let it be y), then 
the existence of what is necessary through the other (and let it be x) would 
be impossible through itself, necessary through itself, or possible in itself, 
which exhausts the various ways one might consider x in or through itself. 
If, on the one hand, x’s existence is impossible in itself, then, since what is 
impossible in itself cannot exist, whether the other exists or not, x, which is 
by assumption necessary through another, simply could not exist. Again, 
however, it was assumed that it does exist through another, namely, y. 
Hence, there is a contradiction. If, on the other hand, when y did not exist, 
x’s existence were necessary through itself, then x would not be necessary 
through y, since x exists without y; however, it is assumed that x is necessary 
through y. So again there is a contradiction just like the one noted when 
considering why something cannot be both necessary through itself and 
through another. It remains then that what is necessary through another 
must be something possible in itself. 

Despite the fact that Avicenna takes both necessity and possibility as 
primitive when it comes to defining the other, there is a sense, Avicenna 
notes, that necessity is in a way prior, namely, inasmuch as necessity indi- 
cates an emphasis on existence, whereas possibility has some association 
with nonexistence inasmuch as what is possible might not exist (Metaphysics, 
I.5, 28.16-18). Thus, inasmuch as nonexistence in no way enters the concept 
of necessity, and existence is better known than nonexistence, necessity has 

a certain conceptual priority. Thus, argues Avicenna, whenever something 

METAPHYSICS I 163 

actually exists or is presently occurring it is in some way or another neces- 
sary (although perhaps not necessary through itself). 

His argument for this thesis begins by considering the state of existence 
when something is merely possible and then the state when it is actual (Sa/- 
vation, “Metaphysics,” 1.3, 548). When that thing is merely possible, it is in 
a state of possible existence. When, however, that possibility has been actu- 
alized, there is a change in that thing’s state of existence: What was once not 
actual now exists as actual. Now, begins Avicenna, the existence of that new 
(actual) state might be one of impossible existence, possible existence, or 
necessary existence. This exhausts the ways something might be said to ex- 
ist. Clearly, the new state is not one of impossible existence, since the exist- 
ence is now actualized. As for possible existence, inasmuch as the possible 
existence is itself what has changed the new state cannot also be one of pos- 
sible existence. For in that case, there would have been no change in the 
state of existence, and yet that is exactly what did change. Thus, it remains, 
concludes Avicenna, that when anything possible in itself actually exists, 
the state of its existence is necessary, albeit necessary through another. 

So, for example, I presently have a library pallor, and so any tan I might 
presently be said to have exists only possibly; however, should I spend my 
summer vacation at the beach, my possible tan would become an actual tan. 
Now, the existence of that tan cannot be impossible, since I will actually 
have a tan. Furthermore, it cannot remain existing as only a possible tan, 
because that would be for the tan to exist as it did before I went to the beach. 
Thus, inasmuch as the actualized tan exists, and that actual existence can- 
not be impossible or possible, it must be necessary. Whatever actually exists, 
concludes Avicenna, is necessary in some sense, whether necessary through 
itself or necessary through another. 

Thus, existence, according to Avicenna, can be thought of in three con- 
ceptually distinct ways: (1) that whose existence is necessary through itself, 
(2) that whose existence is possible through itself, and (3) that whose exist- 
ence is possible through itself, but necessary through another (that is, what- 

ever is contingent but presently existing). 

The Necessary Existent in Itself 

The next step in Avicenna’s analysis of the modal structure of existence is to 

provide an in-depth investigation of both necessity and possibility, starting 

164 AVICENNA 

with the notion of the necessary through itself. Before considering his anal- 
ysis, I should say that I find nothing like an Anselmian ontological-style 
argument for the existence of God in Avicenna.” Consequently, I think 
that the question of whether there is anything necessary through itself is for 
Avicenna a genuinely open one. At this point of his inquiry, he is merely 
considering the various conceptual divisions of existence, and it could turn 
out that one of those conceptual divisions, such as the necessary through 
itself, is empty. 

Having said that, if something necessary through itself should exist, 
then, according to Avicenna there could be only one such existent (Meta- 
physics, 1.7; Salvation, “Metaphysics,” I.4). The general argument for his 
claim is that if there were two necessary existents, there would be that 
aspect that they share in common, namely, necessary existence, and that 
aspect by which they differ (for if there truly were more than one, then 
there must be something that distinguishes zhzs one from that one). Thus, if 
there were two necessary existents, each would be a whole composed of 
conceptually distinct parts. Now, a whole subsists through its parts, and the 
parts are other than the whole. Consequently, were the necessary through 
itself composed of conceptually distinct parts it would be necessary through 
another, namely, its parts. Since, as has been noted, it is a contradiction to be 
necessary through itself and necessary through another, Avicenna con- 
cludes, the assumption that there could be two necessary existents is false. 
If there is a necessary existent, then there can be only one. 

Similarly, it cannot be the case that two things possible through them- 
selves jointly become something necessary through itself (Metaphysics, 1.6, 
32.4-34.6). In other words, it cannot be the case that one thing, x, is the 
cause of another thing, y, where y is in turn the cause of x such that, while x 
and y are both possible in themselves, %,, is necessary in itself. The reason 
that Avicenna gives is that inasmuch as x is the cause of y, x must be essen- 
tially (even though not necessarily temporally) prior to y, and conversely, y 
inasmuch as it is the effect of x is posterior to x. Consequently, if x is both 
cause and effect of y, x must be both prior and posterior to y. Avicenna tells 
us, however, that it is a contradiction for a given thing to be both prior and 
posterior to one and the same thing, for to be prior to that thing is not to be 
posterior to it. Thus, that which exists necessarily through itself cannot be a 
composite of two subsisting entities. 

Neither can the necessary through itself be some composite of internal 

constitutive principles, such as form and matter, or genus and difference, or 

METAPHYSICS I 165 

the like (Metaphysics, 1.7; Salvation, “Metaphysics,” II.5). That is because, as 
has already been seen, wholes or composites exist through their parts, but 
again parts are other than the whole. From this conclusion it is also obvious, 
argues Avicenna, that something necessary through itself must be wholly 
immaterial, for, as I noted in chapter 3, matter requires form, but the neces- 
sary through itself cannot be a form-matter composite. In short, concludes 
Avicenna, if there is something that is necessary through itself, it must be 
absolutely unique, utterly simple, and wholly devoid of any composition. 

Avicenna’s project thus far has been to analyze existence into its most 
basic modal structure, namely, the conceptual categories of necessary exist- 
ence and possible existence. Now, inasmuch as the world exists, it cannot be 
that both of these conceptual categories are empty, for something clearly 
exists. Instead, the question is whether there really are existents corresponding 
with both categories of existence. 

It is fairly obvious that there are things that are possible through them- 
selves while necessary through another, for all of us are in some way, for 
example, dependent upon the organs and limbs that constitute us, the pres- 
ence of oxygen, and the like. The more pressing question is whether the 
category of necessary existence through itself is an empty one. In order to 
address this question, Avicenna develops an argument, which appeals 
almost exclusively to his modal metaphysics just outlined. The demonstra- 
tion, which is a form of the cosmological argument, is in fact a wholly new 
proof for, in effect, the existence of God and God’s relation to whatever is 
possible in itself (Salvation, “Metaphysics,” II.12, 566-568). | 

The argument begins with the obvious fact that something exists. Given 
that for Avicenna existence’s basic conceptual divisions are the necessary 
through itself and the possible in itself, if what exists is necessary through 
itself, there exists something necessary through itself, and the argument is 
done. 

If the existing thing is possible in itself, then Avicenna has us consider it 
along with every other actually existing thing that is possible in itself, 
whether there be a finite or infinite number of such things. In other words, 
consider the mereological sum or whole (jumia) of all and only actually 
existing things that are possible in themselves. Since this whole is itself an 
existing thing, then, given Avicenna’s ontology, it either must exist neces- 
sarily through itself or possibly through itself. The whole of all things pos- 
sible through themselves, argues Avicenna, cannot be something existing 

necessarily through itself, for that which is necessary through itself does not 

166 AVICENNA 

exist through another. Yet, as has already been seen, wholes exist through 
their parts. Thus, if the whole of all things possible through themselves 
were necessary through itself, then something necessary through itself 
would be necessary through another, which Avicenna points out is a con- 
tradiction. 

So this whole must be something possible through itself, but since this 
whole actually exists, then, given Avicenna’s analysis of actual existence, it 
must be necessary through another. Now, continues Avicenna, this other 
can be either internal or external to the whole. If it is internal, and so is a 
part of the whole, then that part itself must exist either necessarily through 
itself or possibly in itself. Whatever is internal to the whole of all and only 
things possible in themselves could not exist necessarily through itself, 
since, again, only things possible in themselves are included within the 
whole. Thus, something would be both necessary through itself and possi- 
ble in itself, which is a contradiction. If this part were possible in itself, then 
since the existence of the whole itself is through that part, and so all the 
parts within that whole are through it, that part’s existence would be 
through itself. In that case the part would be necessary through itself, but 
this part was assumed to be possible in itself, and so there is again a contra- 
diction. Thus, the existence of the whole of all things possible in themselves 
must be through something external to that whole, but all possible existents 
are included within the whole, and so this external thing cannot be possible 
in itself. The only other division of existence, concludes Avicenna, is that 
which exists necessarily through itself, and therefore, something necessary 
through itself exists.” 

There are a few things to note about this argument. The first thing is 
that if one sets aside the modal metaphysics underlying it, then the argu- 
ment is extremely modest in the premises it requires. Avicenna assumes 
something about sets or mereological sums, namely that they subsist 
through their members, but such a claim seems to be almost true by defini- 
tion. Thus, the argument’s most ontologically or physically robust claim is 
simply that something exists. 

Second, Avicenna goes on to end his argument by pointing out a sub- 
sidiary conclusion, namely that there cannot be an infinite number of actu- 

ally existing simultaneous causes. He argues thus: 

Things existing possibly terminate in a cause existing necessarily, in 
which case not every [effect] that exists as something possible has 

METAPHYSICS I 167 

simultaneously with it a cause that exists as something possible. Hence 
an infinite number of causes existing at a single time is impossible (Salva- 
tion, “Metaphysics,” II.12, 568.12-13). 

In other words, the proof shows that a causal chain whose members are all 
simultaneously actual must terminate at its two ends, namely, the possible 
effect on the one side, and the Necessary Existent on the other. 

There are two points of interest about this subsidiary conclusion. One is 
that unlike other cosmological proofs for the existence of God, Avicenna’s 
argument nowhere requires as a premise that an actual infinite is impossi- 
ble; rather, Avicenna’s version in fact proves this claim. The other point is 
that inasmuch as one identifies the cosmos with the sum of all actually exist- 
ing possible things assumed in the argument, Avicenna’s Necessary Exist- 
ent turns out to be the efficient cause of the cosmos’ existence, for it is the 
Necessary Existent itself that ultimately explains why everything else 
exists. Thus, in addition to providing an argument for the existence of 
something necessary in itself, which might be identified with the divinity, 
Avicenna has also shown that the Necessary Existent is the efficient cause 
of the cosmos. Moreover, since Avicenna takes possibility as properly basic, 
and not explained in terms of temporal frequencies, he has successfully 
blocked Aristotle’s De Caelo argument. Whether the cosmos is eternal is an 
issue I take up in the next chapter, but for now just note that Avicenna has 
successfully countered the initial objection, namely that whatever is possi- 
ble, and so requires an efficient cause to exist, cannot exist eternally, for that 
objection rested squarely on a temporal frequency analysis of modalities, 
which is absent in Avicenna’s metaphysics. 

Third, since in Avicenna’s modal ontology there is only necessary exist- 
ence and possible existence, and since something actually exists only if it is 
necessary, then the final end or perfection of all things existing possibly in 
themselves is to exist as necessary. In other words, what everything desires 
is actual existence or, to be more precise, the proper perfection of its exist- 
ence. As noted, however, whatever actually exists is necessary according to 
Avicenna’s ontology. Thus, within Avicenna’s framework, what everything 
desires is necessary existence. Therefore, inasmuch as Avicenna’s Necessary 
Existent is that which is necessary through or in itself, it is the ultimate 
object of desire for all things possible in themselves. In Aristotelian terms, 
Avicenna’s Necessary Existent is that which all other existents want to 

imitate. Still, since things possible through themselves cannot be necessary 

168 AVICENNA 

through themselves, they achieve their final perfection by imitating the 
necessary through itself the only way that they can, namely, by being neces- 
sary through another. Whatever else one might think about this argument 
today, it would have satisfied the ancient and medieval mind in showing 
that, and how Avicenna’s Necessary Existent is a final cause for the exist- 
ence of the cosmos. 

Finally, when considering Avicenna’s conceptual analysis of the neces- 
sary through itself, it was seen that what exists through itself had to be one 
and wholly simple. One now sees that Avicenna’s Necessary Existent 
through itself is an efficient and final cause for the cosmos’ existence solely 
in virtue of the single factor of being necessary through itself. There is no 
need to refer to conceptually distinct factors within it to explain its appar- 
ently different modes of causation. Thus, Avicenna has successfully safe- 

guarded the Necessary Existent’s absolute simplicity. 

The Divine Attributes 

Avicenna identifies the Necessary Existent’s primary attribute (fa) with its 
necessary existence. Besides the fact of the Necessary Existent’s existing 
necessarily, Avicenna believes that all other attributes by which it is de- 
scribed, in fact, indicate either certain negations of imperfections or rela- 
tions that created things have to the Necessary Existent. Why Avicenna 
holds such a position is relatively clear if one remembers that one of the 
most pressing philosophical issues for Avicenna and his philosophical the- 
ology is to preserve divine simplicity. Negations do not require multiple 
positive factors existing in the divinity, while one and the same simple thing 
might be described in numerous ways relative to other things. In short, the 
divinity could have multiple negative and relative attributes and yet still 

remain wholly simple. 

The Necessary Existent’s Primary Attribute 

Before turning to these negative and relational attributes, let me consider 
the primary attribute of necessary existence, and particularly in what sense 
this attribute might be said to “essentially” belong to the Necessary Existent. 
In the Metaphysics (VUI.4), Avicenna wavers between saying that the 

METAPHYSICS I 169 

essence of the Necessary Existent is its (necessary) existence and simply 
denying that the Necessary Existent has any essence at all. 

The reason for this is that, as I noted in chapter 2,3 an essence can be 
considered in isolation from any given mode of existence. In other words, it 
can be considered without reference to the particular mode of existence in 
which it exists, whether in a concrete particular or in conceptualization, or 
as a particular or a universal, or the like. In fact, Avicenna tells us in the 
Metaphysics that an essence considered in itself, as, for example, horse-ness 

or equinity, is: 

nothing at all save horse-ness. Indeed in itself it is neither one nor many, 
nor something existing in either concrete particulars or in the soul, nor is 
it in any of that either potentially or actually such that [that] would enter 
into horse-ness. |The essence of horse-ness considered in itself] is in fact 
nothing but horse-ness (Metaphysics, V.1, 149.11-14). 

When one considers this notion of essence as applied to the Necessary Existent, 
it then becomes clear why Avicenna is not happy with identifying the Nec- 
essary Existent’s essence with its existence. Essences are considered in ab- 
straction from any determinate existence, and yet the Necessary Existent 
simply cannot be considered independent of existence. Thus, on the one 
hand, one is able to consider horse-ness without thinking of it either as ex- 
isting in some particular horse or as some intellectual depiction of the logi- 
cal genus “animal” and the logical difference “neighing.” On the other 
hand, in contrast, to consider the Necessary Existent independent of its 
particular mode of existence, namely, necessary existence through itself, is 
simply not to consider the Necessary Existent at all. In short, one cannot 
consider the Necessary Existent independent of its existence, whereas the 
essence of a given thing can be considered independent of that thing’s mode 
of existence. Therefore, in a very real sense the Necessary Existent cannot 
have an essence. 

Still, one can also understand why Avicenna is sometimes tempted to 
identify the Necessary Existent’s essence with its necessary existence, for in 
that case it becomes obvious why the Necessary Existent is a self-explaining 
entity. To make this last point, let me briefly step out of Avicenna’s own 
system of modal metaphysics, and instead speak in contemporary terms of 
a “possible-world” ontology. According to possible-world semantics, some- 
thing is possible just in case it exists in at least one possible world, whereas 

it is necessary if it exists in all possible worlds. Now consider the mere 

170 AVICENNA 

possibility that a necessary being exists. If such a being is in fact possible, 
then there is one world in which a being that exists in all possible worlds 
exists; for to be a necessary being is, according to a possible-world ontology, 
to be a being that exists in all possible worlds. In that case, however, if it is 
even possible that a necessary being exists, it necessarily exists, for it exists 
in all possible worlds, which is just to be necessary. So, what explains a nec- 
essary being’s actual existence in this world is that there is simply no possi- 
ble world, of which the actual world is one, in which a necessary being does 
not exist. 

Analogously, for Avicenna, should one understand the Necessary Exist- 
ent’s essence as identical with its existence, it turns out that it exists simply 
on account of what it is. That it exists is not merely some brute fact about 
the world but something fully self-explaining given the very essence of this 
entity.” So, for example, consider someone, like Aristotle, who takes the 
existence of the forms and matter that make up the cosmos as a brute fact 
that cannot be explained (even if their undergoing motion can). Avicenna 
can argue that his system is preferable to Aristotle’s, since his can explain 
something that Aristotle’s cannot, namely, why forms and matter exist at 
all, for, as has been seen, inasmuch as they exist possibly in themselves they 
depend upon the Necessary Existent as their efficient cause. If Aristotle 
were to complain that this is just to replace one unexplained thing’s exist- 
ence, such as the forms and matter that make up the cosmos, with another 
unexplained thing’s existence, namely, the Necessary Existent, Avicenna 
can say, “No. The Necessary Existent is self-explaining in a way that the 
cosmos is not, for the Necessary Existent is the sort of thing that cannot 
not exist, whereas the cosmos considered in itself is something that could 
possibly not exist.” 

This is not special pleading on Avicenna’s part. That is because while 
existence is not included within the essence of those possible things that 
make up the cosmos—there is nothing about horse-ness that requires that 
the cosmos be populated by that species of thing—existence is necessarily 
included in the “essence” of the Necessary Existent, for what it is to be such 
a thing is to exist necessarily through itself. Thus, in a very real sense Avi- 
cenna’s system has a greater explanatory power than that of Aristotle’s. To 
sum up, whereas for Avicenna the Necessary Existent cannot strictly speak- 
ing have an essence (for an essence can be considered independent of exist- 
ence), loosely speaking it does inasmuch as its “essence” is its necessary 

existence. 

METAPHYSICS I 171 

The Necessary Existent’s Other Attributes 

At Metaphysics, VIII.6, Avicenna considers the attribute of perfection 
(kamal). The perfection of a thing, as Avicenna and most medieval thinkers 
understood that term, refers to whatever completes (¢#@mm) that thing with 
respect to its existence. So, for example, the perfection of an acorn is that it 
comes to exist as an oak tree, and the perfection of a human is that one ac- 
tualizes one’s intellect. In the case of the Necessary Existent, since it lacks 
nothing of its existence or the perfection of its existence (for otherwise it 
would not be necessary through itself in every way), it must be absolutely 
perfect. In fact, not only is it perfect since it has all the existence that can 
belong to it, it is, argued Avicenna, above perfection ( fawga t-tamam), since 
it has such a superabundance of existence that all other existing things have 
their existence from it (Metaphysics, VIII.6, 283.10-14). 

Also, the Necessary Existent is the pure good (khayr mahd), for, in gen- 
eral, the good is whatever is desired (ibid., 283.15—-1 8). As noted, however, 
everything desires its own existence or the perfection of the existence proper 
to it, and in Avicenna’s system the existence in question is necessary exist- 
ence. Thus, since everything desires necessary existence, there is a real sense 
in which the Necessary Existent is that which everything desires and so it is 
the highest good. Furthermore, good is said of that which provides a thing 
with its existence, perfection, and good qualities (ibid., 284.8-11). Thus, 
since the Necessary Existent is the ultimate source of all necessary existence, 
perfection, and good, it is again the truest good. 

In addition to these attributes, which in fact are all just different ways of 
considering the Necessary Existent’s primary attribute of necessary exist- 
ence, it has certain negative and relational attributes. The most obvious one 
is that it is incorporeal, which follows from Avicenna’s earlier analysis of 
necessary existence in itself. That is because if the Necessary Existent were 
material, it would also require a form to actualize that matter, and thus it 
would be a composite of form and matter. Yet, as Avicenna has strenuously 
argued, the Necessary Existent is absolutely simple. 

Given the immateriality of the Necessary Existent, Avicenna goes on to 
argue that it must be an intelligible, an intellect, and indeed the very act of 
intellecting (ma ‘gil, ‘agl, Gqil) (ibid., 284.17-287.2). While at first glance one 
might think that these attributes are distinct from mere necessary existence, 
Avicenna argues that they not. They are in fact entailed by the Necessary 

Existent’s immateriality, which again followed from its necessary existence. 

172 AVICENNA 

Avicenna’s argument begins by drawing upon a thesis that he had 
defended in the science of psychology.”° There Avicenna had argued that 
what prevents a thing’s being an actual intelligible object is its association 
with matter and the concomitants of matter. Consequently, the more 
abstracted or separated from matter something is, the more intelligible 
that thing becomes; for it is the concomitants of matter that restrict the 
object to being sensible, imaginable, and the like, and prevent its being im- 
pressed upon the intellect, and so being actually intelligible. Thus, what- 
ever through itself is separate from matter is essentially intelligible, that is, 
it is an object of the intellect. Now, the Necessary Existent is essentially im- 
material, and so separate from matter. Thus, the existence of the Necessary 
Existent is something essentially intelligible. 

Avicenna next identifies intellect with that thing that has something 
essentially intelligible. In other words, only intellects are the sort of things 
that have intelligible objects. Since, as has been seen, the Necessary Existent 
has its existence essentially, and, as just noted, its existence is something 
essentially intelligible, the Necessary Existent essentially has something 
essentially intelligible, and as such must be an intellect. 

As for its being its very act of intellection, Avicenna observed in his Psy- 
chology” that for an intellect to have an intelligible object is simply identical 
with the act of intellection. So, it follows that the Necessary Existent is es- 
sentially its act of intellection. It is worth noting that the Necessary Existent 
is essentially the act of intellecting, the intellect, and what is intellected. In 
the Necessary Existent these three are numerically one and the same; there 
is absolutely no multiplicity in the Necessary Existent. That is because all of 
these are essentially the same and ultimately reduce to its existing necessarily 
through itself. 

Other (relational) attributes describing the Necessary Existent, such as 
power, volition, munificence, and being a creator, I shall consider in the 

next chapter when discussing the possible existence and the created order. 

The Necessary Existent’s Knowledge 
of Particulars 

The question of to what extent, if at all, the divinity, however understood, 
knows particular individuals such as you or me, goes back at least as far as 

Aristotle, who had argued that the only object suitable and worthy of the 

METAPHYSICS I 173 

Unmoved Mover’s contemplation, is the Unmoved Mover itself? As for 
what is below it, it neither is concerned with them nor even knows them. 

Unlike Aristotle, Avicenna accepts that in a very special sense the Neces- 
sary Existent does know particular individuals within the created order; 
however, its knowledge of these particulars, and indeed its knowledge gen- 
erally, is wholly unlike and incomparable with the way that possible existents 
know things (ibid., 287.3-290.17; Salvation, “Metaphysics,” II.18—19).”’ So, 
for instance, we only know things as a result of those things acting upon us so 
as to produce intellectual perception. In stark contrast, for Avicenna, it is the 
Necessary Existent’s very knowledge of things that produces those things 
themselves. 

To make this point, Avicenna, as part of reductio ad absurdum style argu- 
ment, has us assume that the Necessary Existent intellectually perceives 
things through things in the way that we do. In that case, either the Neces- 
sary Existent’s intellectual act is accidental to it or is essentially identical with it. 
If the Necessary Existent intellects accidentally, it is not necessary in every way, 
for what is accidental to a thing is not something necessary. The Necessary 
Existent, however, is necessary in every way. So, the Necessary Existent must 
be essentially identical with its act of intellecting. Now, if something intel- 
lectually perceives on account of things, that is, if it intellects things by being 
impressed by them, then those things stand to the intellectual act as causes of 
it. Nothing, however, stands to the Necessary Existent as its cause, for then 
the Necessary Existent would not be necessary through itself, but that is 
exactly what it is. Therefore, concludes Avicenna, the Necessary Existent 
cannot intellectually perceive things through things as we do. 

As for its knowledge of particulars or individuals, for Avicenna, strictly 
speaking, the Necessary Existent only knows itself. Still, inasmuch as it 
knows itself it knows that it is the principle of all existing things right down 
to the individuals. Thus, the Necessary Existent knows individuals inas- 
much as it knows that to which its causal efficacy extends. In general, 
Avicenna argues as follows (Metaphysics, VIII.6, 288.5—13): The Necessary 
Existent knows itself completely and so knows itself as the principle or 
cause of all that exists. If, however, one completely knows a cause, one must 
also know all the effects of that cause. Therefore, inasmuch as the Neces- 
sary Existent is the ultimate cause of all things and completely knows itself 
as such, it must know all things, whether they be the causes that interact 
with one another or the effects that ultimately result from those interac- 

tions, which would include the individuals that come to exist actually. 

I 74 AVICENNA 

Be that as it may, Avicenna also believes that there are a number of ways 
in which it is simply false to say that the Necessary Existent knows particu- 
lars. First, the Necessary Existent is wholly outside of the temporal order, 
for time, according to Avicenna, is a certain possibility measuring the 
motion of a changing thing, whereas no possibility or change belongs to the 
Necessary Existent. Inasmuch as the Necessary Existent is outside the tem- 
poral order, it does not know particulars as temporal phenomena or events, 
that is, as things that are currently present, or past, or future to him; rather, 
it knows particulars simply as (eternally) present (ibid., 287.10-14). 

In other words, the Necessary Existent cannot know particulars that are 
changing through time as they are changing. That is because if one knows 
some changing thing as it is changing, one must first know that thing as 
possessing one nonexistent state and then as possessing some existing state. 
Now, if at one moment the Necessary Existent knows that something pos- 
sesses a nonexistent state, and then at another moment knows that it pos- 
sesses some existing state, it must have undergone some form of change, for 
to know something as existing is the contradictory of knowing it as nonex- 
isting. In other words, the Necessary Existent cannot simultaneously know 
that one and same thing both possesses some existing state while not pos- 
sessing that very same state. Hence if the Necessary Existent knew chang- 
ing things as they are changing, there necessarily would have been a change 
in it, namely, the change from knowing that some state does not exist in the 
thing to now knowing that that state does exist. The Necessary Existent, 
however, does not undergo change, for a thing changes for some end, which 
is a good that perfects it. Yet, as has already been seen, the Necessary Exist- 
ent is absolutely perfect and even above perfection. Thus, concludes Avi- 
cenna, the Necessary Existent cannot know changing things as they are 
changing; rather, it knows them in one eternal act of knowing itself as their 
cause. 

Similarly, the Necessary Existent does not know particulars insofar as 
they are corruptible or undergoing corruption. Here Avicenna observes 
that if something is perceived as corruptible, then it must be perceived as 
joined to matter, for Avicenna explained in the science of physics” that 
something undergoes corruption only insofar as it is material. As he ex- 
plained in his psychology,” however, if something is perceived as joined to 
matter, then it is perceived either through sensation or imagination but not 
by the intellect. Sensation and imagination, however, require a material 

organ, for example, eyes and other suitable sensory apparatuses, as well as a 
gs > Pp. > y' y Pp ? 

METAPHYSICS I 175 

brain. Consequently, if the Necessary Existent perceived something as cor- 
ruptible, that is, it sensibly perceived it, it would require a material organ to 
do so. Again, though, the Necessary Existent is wholly immaterial, and 
so has no material organs. Therefore, Avicenna concludes, the Necessary 
Existent does not perceive anything as undergoing corruption. 

After considering the ways that the Necessary Existent cannot be said to 
know particulars, one might feel that Avicenna has sorely limited the Nec- 
essary Existent (which in many ways Avicenna wanted to identify with the 
God of Islam), for surely we humans can and do know things in these ways. 
Thus, the complaint goes: If we have the power to do certain things, 
shouldn’t the Necessary Existent also have the power to do those things? 
Avicenna’s response is that our need to perceive particulars as temporal and 
changing rather than in a simple and eternally present intellectual percep- 
tion is not owing to some perfection belonging to us, but owing to certain 
privations inherent in us. Since the Necessary Existent has no privation, it 
does not need to know particulars in the various ways mentioned. In fact, 
it could only know them in the lesser way that we do, if it were to cease 
being necessary through itself, which it cannot. To put Avicenna’s point 
crassly but vividly, we can defecate, whereas the divinity cannot; however, 
no one considers this “inability” a limitation on the part of God. In the same 
way, for Avicenna, that the Necessary Existent does not know particulars 
as temporal and changing is not a limitation on its knowledge; it does not 
know them in that way precisely because it is above needing such base 
processes. 

Instead, argues Avicenna, the Necessary Existent knows particulars in 
two ways (ibid., 288.14—290.17). First, it knows those particulars that are 
alone in their species, as many medieval philosophers and theologians 
believed was true of the Sun, all the planets, as well as the Intelligences or 
angels. In other words, some species, call them “terrestrial species” such as 
humanity and horse-ness, are said of a number of individuals all of whom 
make up the concrete instantiation of that species at any given time, and at 
different times different individuals are the concrete instances of that species. 
Other species, call them “celestial species” such as the host of angels, always 
have at any given time one and the same individual as the concrete instantia- 
tion of their species. The reason for this is that for entities that have abso- 
lutely no association with matter, only the form can distinguish them (for 
again they have no matter that could individuate them). Thus, immaterial 
things can only be individuated by different species forms, each species of 

176 AVICENNA 

which has only one member. In this case then, inasmuch as the Necessary 
Existent knows itself to be the cause of all the various species, it knows the 
one and only individual falling under one of the celestial species. 

Second, the Necessary Existent knows individuals among the terrestrial 
species inasmuch as the individuals are a result of universal causal laws. 
Avicenna’s preferred example of such knowledge is knowledge of an 
eclipse, for once one knows what an eclipse is, as well as the speed and posi- 
tion of the planets, one can predict and so know every individual eclipse. 
So, for example, imagine some hapless but brilliant astronomer, who from 
birth was locked away in a windowless tower without clock or calendar 
and was never allowed to leave. Instead, our astronomer spent all of his 
time studying star charts and calculating the various theoretical motions of 
the Sun, Moon, and planets. Such an individual may well know the number 
of eclipses that occur in a given period of time, where they would be seen on 
Earth as well as the time between them, and yet, since he does not know 
what time or day it is, he would not be aware whether any eclipse is or is not 
presently occurring now. In a certain respect, the Necessary Existent’s 
knowledge of corruptible and temporal events is like our poor astronomer’s, 
although whereas the astronomer’s knowledge, given that he is human, is 
impoverished, the Necessary Existent’s knowledge, as I have mentioned, is 
not, but instead is absolutely complete. 

In many respects, the image that Avicenna has in mind of the way that 
the Necessary Existent knows temporal and corruptible things without 
knowing them as such is like that of Laplace’s so-called demon. In fact, 

Laplace’s observation is germane here. He wrote: 

We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its past 
and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain moment would 
know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of 
which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to sub- 
mit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the 
movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest 
atom, for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future 
just like the past would be present before its eyes.” 

Laplace’s sentiment echoes one that Avicenna himself made some 800 years 
earlier: “The Necessary Existent intellects everything only universally; never- 
theless, no individual thing escapes its notice, ‘not even the weight of an atom, 

whether in the heavens or on Earth, escapes his notice’ (Our@n 10:61)” 

METAPHYSICS I 177 

(Metaphysics, V1.8, 288.2-3). Since the Necessary Existent knows itself, it 
knows itself as the ultimate cause of all that exists, and thus knows the causal 
order of all possible things. Consequently, the Necessary Existent knows the 
entire order of all possible things and their relationships vis-a-vis one another, 
not as unfolding, as it were, but all at once. In the next chapter, I shall consider 
in more detail the order of things possible in themselves, as well as the reasons 
Avicenna believes that this order has proceeded eternally from the Necessary 
Existent, and thus why he believes that the world has existed eternally. 

METAPHYSICS II 

Cosmology 

Introduction: The 
Historical Background 

In the last chapter I presented a complex of problems that faced ancient and 
medieval philosophers concerning God’s relation to the world. Of this com- 
plex of issues, the primary one treated in the last chapter involved showing 
Avicenna’s solution to the problem of how God could be both the final and 
efficient cause of the world and still be simple. Additionally, many (though 
by no means all) of these philosophers also wanted to show that the cosmos 
was eternal. I noted two classical arguments for why one might hold this 
position. One was that of Proclus, who maintained that if, in the finite past, 
there were some first moment of creation, then there would be a time when 
God was not creating (and so would not have been a creator) and then a 
time when God was creating (and so becomes a creator). This change in 
God—which it was argued results from affirming a temporal creation— 
undermines divine immutability, a position that most philosophers and 
theologians did not want to give up. Similarly, I gave one of Aristotle’s 
physical proofs based upon his analysis of time and motion. That argument 
ran thus: If there were some first moment in the finite past when the cos- 
mos began moving, nothing moving prior to that moment, then there 

would be a time when there was no motion. Time, however, is just the 

178 

METAPHYSICS II 179 

measure of motion. Thus, to say there is a time when there is no motion 
is tantamount to saying there was a measured motion when there was no 
motion at all, a patent contradiction. 

A premise common to both of these arguments is that if there were a first 
moment of creation, there would be a preceding time, either during which 
God is not creating or during which there is no motion. At least by the late 
classical period, however, this premise was called into question. The main 
line of objection for certain Christian and Muslim defenders of a temporal 
creation was that the sense of such seemingly temporal terms as “before” and 
the use of the past tense “was,” both prominent features that these arguments 
exploit, need not indicate a preexisting time at all. Instead, argued these later 
critics, time is itself part of the created order. As such, it could not have tem- 
porally preexisted creation, and instead is created along with the cosmos. 

These critics then maintained that Aristotle and Proclus’s proofs simply 
beg the question when they assert that the sense of “before” in the phrase 
“before creation” must refer to a temporal “before.” Such language, it was 
argued, merely means that God is ontologically prior to the world in the 
way that a cause might be ontologically prior though not temporally prior 
to an effect. So, for example, while waving a hand is clearly not temporally 
prior to the movement of a ring on the hand, the hand’s motion is causally 
prior to the ring’s motion inasmuch as it is the hand’s motion that causes the 
ring to move and not vice versa. At the very least one sees such thinkers as 
Augustine! and Philoponus” in the West and al-Ghazali’ in the East raise 
this sort of objection. In fact, even Avicenna himself, who defends the cos- 
mos’ eternity, mentions this as a serious objection worthy of consideration.’ 

Still, there were other arguments that did not seem to require the ques- 
tionable premise that there must be a time before creation. Aristotle again 
provides one such argument based upon his own careful investigation 
of coming to be and generation (genesis). So, for example, at Physics 1.7, 
Aristotle famously analyzed coming to be in terms of three principles: (1) 
an underlying thing (hupokeimenon), namely, matter, (2) a certain privation 
in that underlying thing corresponding with the absence or privation of 
some form, and finally (3) the new form that comes to be as a result of the 
generation. So, for example, if a quantity of water comes to be hot, there 
must be the water, which is the underlying thing that undergoes the change, 
an initial privation or absence of heat (for if the water were already hot it 
could not qua hot become hot), and finally the form, that is to say, the heat 

that comes to be in the water. 

180 AVICENNA 

Using this analysis of coming to be as his starting point, Aristotle then 
argued for the eternal existence of forms and matter as follows:° The cos- 
mos itself is a composite of matter and forms. Thus, if God were to generate 
the existence of the world, he would have to generate matter and forms; 
however, as has already been seen, for Aristotle every instance of coming to 
be or generation requires an underlying thing that undergoes the change, 
namely, the matter, as well as the forms that come to be and pass away. 
Hence, in order for there to be the generation of matter and forms, matter 
and forms would already have had to exist, which is clearly a contradiction. 
Thus, the initial assumption, namely that the form-matter composite that is 
the cosmos was generated at some finite time ago must be false. Therefore, 
concludes Aristotle, the cosmos has existed eternally. 

The response to such an argument is simply to distinguish between the 
sort of temporal coming to be implicit in Aristotle’s theory of generation, 
where the generation comes to be from some preexisting stuff, and “genu- 
ine creation” in which God creates ex nihilo, and thus nothing other than 
God is ontologically prior to creation such that it would exist or subsist 
independently of God’s creative act. Interestingly, such a distinction, while 
quickly disarming Aristotle’s generation argument for the eternity of the 
world, was not only favored by those who believed that the cosmos had a 
temporal creation in the finite past, but also virtually all of those thinkers 
who maintained that the divinity stood to the cosmos as its efficient cause, 
regardless of whether they thought that the cosmos had existed eternally 
or not. Thus, another argument in the eternalist’s arsenal seems to lack 
the demonstrative nature that both ancient and medieval philosophers and 
scientists sought. 

Proponents of the cosmos’ temporal creation were not merely on the 
defense, but also actively argued that the idea of an eternally existing 
cosmos ran afoul of certain entrenched doctrines concerning the infinite. 
Perhaps the staunchest critique of Aristotle and the doctrine of the world’s 
eternity was the Christian Neoplatonist, John Philoponus (ca. 490—-570).’ 
Philoponus’s critique of this Aristotelian position ironically used Aristotle’s 
own principles concerning the infinite against him. The principles Philo- 
ponus used are the seemingly self-evident claims that an actual infinite? is 
impossible, an infinite cannot be traversed, and nothing is beyond or 
greater than an infinite.’ Philoponus had two main lines of objection: One, 
an eternal world would entail that an actual infinite has come to exist and 

so an infinite has been traversed, and, two, there would be sets of infinities 

METAPHYSICS II 181 

of different sizes, and so there would be sets larger than that beyond which 
there is nothing more.” 

The first of Philoponus’s arguments takes the following form: If the 
world were eternal, as Aristotle and others believed, then it would entail 
that there has been an infinite number of past days. Now, if during this 
infinity of days, one human per day, for example, were born, then an actually 
infinite number of humans would have come to exist. It does not matter 
that they do not all exist right now, continued Philoponus, since the number 
of humans who have existed must be actually infinite. Aristotle himself, 
however, had said that not even number considered separately could be 
infinite.'' Moreover, criticized Philoponus, the cosmos’ past eternity is 
incompatible with the dictum that an infinite cannot be traversed, for an 
eternally existing cosmos would have gone through an infinity of days (as 
well as things generated during those days), but again traversing the 
infinite is impossible absolutely according to Aristotle and others. 

Philoponus’s second complaint was that if the cosmos were eternal, 
there would be varying sizes of infinities. Indeed the infinite would be 
susceptible to increase. For example, if the cosmos’ existence were extended 
infinitely into the past, then the Sun, Moon, and all the planets would have 
orbited the Earth an infinite number of times (at least based on ancient and 
medieval cosmology, which has the Earth at the center of the universe). 
Saturn, however, makes an apparent rotation around the Earth once 
approximately ever thirty solar years; Jupiter once every twelve solar years; 
Mars once every two solar years, and the Sun, of course, once every year. 
Consequently, the Sun, for example, must have made thirty times as many 
apparent rotations around the Earth as Saturn has. Thus, asks Philoponus, 
“If it is not possible to traverse the infinite once, then how is it not beyond 
all absurdity to assume ten thousand times the infinite, or rather the infi- 
nite an infinite number of times?” The challenge that this paradox 
presents, then, is to explain how one is to make sense of different “sizes” of 
infinities. 

Despite the ferocity of Philoponus’s polemics, many of those medieval 
philosophers writing in Arabic, such as Avicenna, still held that the cosmos 
was eternal. Thus, at least one major project for these medieval thinkers 
was either to revise or to reinvent arguments for the world’s eternity that 
could address the objections to the proofs for the world’s eternity as well as 
responding to the criticisms that it is impossible that the world’s eternity be 
consistent with long-held beliefs about infinity. 

182 AVICENNA 

In both his physics and metaphysics, Avicenna undertakes this project. 
In many respects Avicenna’s “new” arguments for the world’s eternity are 
variants of the classical proofs for that thesis, except that Avicenna adds 
new modal premises that allow him to address the objections mentioned 
head-on. To appreciate these new arguments, I need first to present in some 
depth Avicenna’s conception of possibility and what exists possibly in itself, 
as well as considering how Avicenna envisions the most basic modes of pos- 
sible existence, namely, substances and accidents, with a particular empha- 
sis on forms and matter. The reason for emphasizing forms and matter is 
that in Avicenna’s ontology, like Aristotle’s before him, substances are prior 
to accidents. Moreover, the conceptually most basic kinds of substances, 
from which particular substances, like earth, oaks, humans, and so forth 
are composed, are forms and matter. After discussing the formal and mate- 
rial causes, I then turn to Avicenna’s notion of causality generally. Upon 
completing this investigation of the makeup of the realm of possible exist- 
ence, one will be in a position to appreciate Avicenna’s new modal argu- 
ments for the world’s eternity and his response to the criticism against that 
thesis. This chapter, then, concludes with a section on the Necessary Exist- 
ent’s relation to possible existence as exemplified in Avicenna’s unique twist 

on the Neoplatonic theory of emanation. 

Creation and Possible Existence in Itself 

As I have noted in the previous chapter, for Avicenna all things possible in 
themselves ultimately depend upon the Necessary Existent for their own ac- 
tual existence, or, as Avicenna would have it, their own necessary existence, 
albeit an existence necessary only through another. So, ina real sense all things 
possible in themselves when actualized are ultimately the creation of the 
Necessary Existent. Avicenna, however, distinguishes two forms of creation: 
what one might call “atemporal creation” (¢bda@), or creation absolutely, and 
“temporal creation” (Audith), or coming to be.? In atemporal or absolute 
creation nothing precedes the creative act except the being of the Creator, 
who is only ontologically, not temporally, prior to the creation. Avicenna’s 
notion of atemporal creation is one of genuine creation ex nihilo, and so is 
unlike Aristotle’s notion of generation, which required preexisting forms 
and matter. In this respect, Avicenna’s notion of atemporal creation is sensi- 

tive to the complaint of the temporal creationists when they say that the 

METAPHYSICS II 183 

world’s being created after not existing need not imply that there was a 
time before creation. Still, there is also nothing about Avicenna’s notion of 
absolute or atemporal creation that precludes the Creator from creating 
eternally. Hence, there is nothing that requires that there be some first mo- 
ment in the finite past when the Creator began creating. As for temporal 
creation or, more exactly, coming to be, it involves some sort of motion, or 
change, and the coming to be at some time of something after it was not. So, 
for example, virtually all the events that we experience around us involve 
coming to be—I came to exist after not existing; you are reading this sen- 
tence after not having read it, and the like. Thus, our world (or at least the 
world of sublunar physics in Avicenna’s mind) inherently involves coming 
to be. 

In order to answer the question of whether the cosmos in general has 
existed eternally or had a temporal beginning in the finite past, Avicenna 
undertakes an analysis of the possible existents that make up the cosmos, an 
analysis, I might add, that was arguably the most thoroughgoing investiga- 
tion of possibility in the ancient and medieval world.'* The primary focus 
of Avicenna’s analysis is on the possibility of those things involving coming 
to be, and with a particular eye to whether forms and matter, considered 
absolutely, as well as motion and time, must be eternal or could have had a 
temporal beginning. Still, much of what he has to say about the nature of 
possibility equally applies to the possibility of atemporally created things, 
such as for Avicenna the immaterial Intelligences. 

In book I].1 of his Metaphysics, Avicenna begins by considering two divi- 
sions of existence found among the things that are possible in themselves 
though necessary through another (Metaphysics, U.1, 45.9-13). The first 
division includes those things that exist in another—call that other the 

“subject” (mawdé‘)—and cannot exist separate from that subject, even 

though they are not themselves (material or formal) parts of the subject. 
The second includes those things that do not exist in another in this way. 
The first class consists of the so-called accidents 

namely, quantity, quality, 
position, relation, when, where, possession, action, and passion—while the 
second class is that of substances. 

Assuming this simple division, Avicenna has us consider the possible 
existence (mumkin al-wujitd or ja 1z al-wujiid) in itself considered merely as 
possible, and thus considered independent of any necessary existence it 
might have derived from another. He then asks whether possible existence 

in itself is either something subsisting in itself, and so a substance in its own 

184 AVICENNA 

right, or something inhering in a subject or substrate (Physics, III.11; Meta- 
physics, IV.2). 

Avicenna denies that possibility is a substance in its own right on the 
basis that substances do not essentially involve relations (ghayr mudaf)— 
nothing else is needed to complete, perfect, or understand them as sub- 
stances—whereas possibilities are always correlative and so always require 
something else if they are to be intellectually understood—for at least two 
related things are needed to complete one’s understanding of any relation 
(Physics, 111.11, 233.4-5; Metaphysics, 1V.2, 136.16-17). Avicenna makes this 
point about relation clearly at Metaphysics, I1I.10, where he explains that a 
relation (dafa) is some essence, such as fatherhood, or being a sibling, that 
belongs to a given thing and can be intellectually perceived only by refer- 
ence to (dil-qiyas ilé) something else.” So, for example, a father, according 
to Avicenna, really has some aspect, fatherhood, that belongs to him, where 
the notion of fatherhood is relational inasmuch as it can be understood only 
by reference to having an offspring. 

Thus, when one says, “x has the possibility of coming to be F” or even 
some blanket statement like “possibility exists,” one understands it only by 
reference to understanding what F is (or some necessary, that is, actual ex- 
istence) and then recognizing the absence of F (or that necessary existence) 
in x (Physics, 1.11, 233.56). Now, the argument continues, if possibility in 
itself were a substance, then it would have all the traits of a substance, and 
so substance and possibility would either both involve relations or both 
would not, but clearly that is not the case. So, for example, if one takes sub- 
stances, such as humans, horses, oak trees, and the like, nothing more is 
needed to complete or perfect what this substance is or what is understood 
by it. To say, “This (pointing to a particular tree) is an oak (or more gener- 
ally, a substance)” is a complete thought. In contrast, possibility is under- 
stood always and only relative to something; to say, “This (pointing to an 
acorn) is a possibility” is incomplete without some further reference, 
whether implicitly or explicitly, to that for or of which it is a possibility, 
namely an oak (or, for that matter, lunch for a squirrel, or ammunition for 
a slingshot, and so on). That is because an acorn is not possibly a human, a 
horse, or the like, but only possibly an oak. More generally, there is nothing 
that is just a possibility in the way there can be just a substance; rather, it is 
always a possibility for ... whatever. 

Moreover, continues Avicenna, possibility cannot be the substance-cum- 

relation, that is, the substance-relation complex. That is because possibility, 

METAPHYSICS II 185 

Avicenna insists, is simply the relative absence of some necessary existence. 
In other words, possibility is the privation or absence of some presently and 
actually existing thing. In contrast, the substance-relation complex is pre- 
cisely something presently and actually existing. Thus, Avicenna concludes, 
possibility is not a substance in its own right, and consequently it must exist 
in a substrate. 

Ina very real sense, the core of Avicenna’s analysis of possibility in itself 
is contained in his notion of possibility’s being a certain privation or absence 
(‘adam) relative to some necessary or actual existence, and so I should linger 
over it. Again, Avicenna has strenuously argued that there can only be 
one thing whose existence is necessary through itself, namely, the Necessary 
Existent. Everything else when it actually exists, though necessary through 
another, is merely possible in itself. Now, what distinguishes possible ex- 
istents from the Necessary Existent could be either that they possess some 
positive aspect, which would then be some form of necessary existence that 
the Necessary Existent lacks, or they lack some necessary existence that the 
Necessary Existent possesses. 

Clearly, no possible existent can possess some necessary existence that the 
Necessary Existent lacks, since the Necessary Existent of itself is that which 
lacks no necessary existence. In other words, it lacks nothing that would 
perfect its existence. Thus, that by which possible existents are distinct from 
the Necessary Existent is their absence or privation of some necessary exist- 
ence, for any necessary existence that they have is in imitation of the Necessary 
Existent. Perhaps one model, then, by which to understand Avicenna’s point 
about possibility—one, however, that Avicenna himself does not use—is to 
think of a “chain of being”! 

absolute and genuine nonexistence (/a@ wujitd) with varying degrees of pri- 

6 

extending from the Necessary Existent to 

vation or absence of some necessary existence in between. In this case, to be 
some species of possible existence in itself, then, is simply to lack some nec- 
essary existence and so to fall somewhere below the Necessary Existent on 
the chain of being while not being absolutely nonexistent. 

As for why such and such a degree of privation should correspond with 
such and such a species of possible existence—such as being an Intelligence 
like the Active Intellect, or being a human, or being an oak tree—Avicenna 
is adamant that there can be no cause that explains this (Metaphysics, V1.1, 
197.9-198.7). Certainly, there is a cause for why such a possible existent has 
whatever degree of necessary existence it has when it actually exists, namely, 

the Necessary Existent and any intermediary causes between it and the 

186 AVICENNA 

Necessary Existent. Also, those things that come to be after not having ex- 
isted for some time have causes for both their coming to be necessary when 
they do and not existing before that time, namely, the prior absence and 
then presence of the cause or causes of their necessary existence. Still, none 
of these are a cause for the privation or absence of the necessary existence 
that makes some possible existent the very kind that it is. 

Does such a position mean that Avicenna thinks that possible existence 
stands alongside of necessary existence as a principle of creation? No. 
Avicenna constantly emphasizes, as I noted in both chapters 2 and ca 
that a principle is some positive causal factor that actively plays a role in the 
creation or change of a thing. A privation or absence of existence is nothing 
positive or active. It is merely something required if there is to be creation 
or change.’* So, for example, it is impossible for x to change into F if it 
already is F, and so the privation of F is required for that particular change. 
That privation, however, is not some coprinciple acting alongside of the 
efficient cause to bring about the effect. 

Similarly, it is impossible for the Necessary Existent to create something 
that is of itself necessary through itself (for something created, and so neces- 
sary through another, cannot become necessary through itself). Thus, what- 
ever is created must lack some necessary existence inasmuch as it is part of 
the created order, and as such the privation or absence of existence, reasons 
Avicenna, is required by any act of creation. Is privation something in some 
sense? Yes. But it is not some existing thing that is a coprinciple alongside 
of the Necessary Existent acting to bring about the created order. At the 
end of this chapter, I shall return to this point. For now, however, it is 
enough to note that for Avicenna whatever exists possibly through itself, 
whether it is created atemporally or temporally, has through and of itself 
only the privation or absence of some necessary existence. Whatever neces- 
sary existence it has, it ultimately has through the Necessary Existent. 

Stl, one might object that Avicenna’s analysis of possibility makes pos- 
sibility too independent of the deity. Indeed, according to certain Islamic 
speculative theologians, the grounds for and explanation of possibility 
(istita@‘a) is in fact the power (gudra) of an agent, for a thing is possible, so they 
maintained, only if the agent has the power to do or create it.’ To clarify this 
suggestion more I should note that most Islamic speculative theologians 
were occasionalists and as such reserved all causal efficacy or agency for God 
alone.”” Thus, the position of many Islamic theologians was that something 

is possible just in case God could do it. 

METAPHYSICS II 187 

Avicenna’s response is to observe that God’s power does not extend to 
what is impossible, but only to what is possible (Physics, H1.11, 233.10-234.1; 
Metaphysics, 1V.2, 139.13-140.6). Consequently, it does not speak ill of the 
divine power that God cannot make something that, for instance, involves a 
contradiction. Power, rather, is always referred to what is possible in itself. 

Given that power has as its proper scope the possible in itself, Avicenna 
argues against explaining possibility in terms of power thus: If, as the theolo- 
gians maintained, something is possible just in case God has the power to do 
that thing, then when one says that God is omnipotent and so has the power 
to do everything that is possible (a seemingly meaningful statement), all one 
is really saying is that God has the power to do everything that God has the 
power to do (a trivially true and thus vacuous statement). In a similar vein, if 
possibility is identical with the power of an agent, Avicenna continues, then a 
manifestly false statement, such as “I (Jon) have the power to do whatever is 
possible” turns out to be in fact a true statement, for I (Jon) do have the power 
to do whatever I have the power to do. In short, complains Avicenna, if pos- 
sibility can be reduced to the power of an agent, one should be able to replace 
one term, whether “power” or “possibility,” with the other salva veritate, and 
so preserve the truth value of any statement in which one or the other term 
appears, but in fact one cannot. In effect, ends Avicenna, without some inde- 
pendent notion of possibility, God’s omnipotence itself becomes vacuous, 
since everything has the power to do whatever it has the power to do. 

In then end, Avicenna maintains that possibility is merely the relative 
absence of some necessary existence. Whatever necessary existence a cre- 
ated thing has, it ultimately has from the Necessary Existent; whatever it 
lacks with respect to necessary existence it has through itself. Thus, in a 
very real sense when the Necessary Existent causes what is possible in itself 
to be necessary, it is creating ex nihilo, if by ex nihilo one means creating 

from no actually existing prior thing. 

The Possibility of What Comes 
to Be, Matter, and Forms 

The Possibility of Coming to Be 

In the preceding section, I considered Avicenna’s general analysis of possibil- 

ity as it applies to both what is atemporally and temporally created. Now, 

188 AVICENNA 

I turn specifically to Avicenna’s analysis of the possibility belonging to what is 
temporally created, that is, the creation of things that come to be after not 
having existed (Physics, HI.11, 232.15-233.3; Metaphysics, 1V.2, 136.9-138.8; 
Salvation, “Metaphysics,” 1.17, 536). Avicenna notes that whatever comes to be 
(Addith) must be either temporally or ontologically preceded by the possibility 
of its coming to be, for if there were no possibility for its coming to be, argues 
Avicenna, then its coming to exist as actual would be impossible. From the 
preceding section, one has seen Avicenna’s arguments for why the possibility 
of coming to be could not be a substance in its own right. Thus, this prior pos- 
sibility for coming to be must, according to Avicenna, inhere in a substrate. 

This substrate can be either immaterial—whether uncreated, namely, 
the Necessary Existent, or a created immaterial being such as an Intellect— 
or material. I have already noted one of Avicenna’s reasons for denying that 
the possible in itself is related to the Necessary Existent as its power, for 
such a suggestion, argued Avicenna, renders the notion of omnipotence 
vacuous. Sprinkled throughout Avicenna’s corpus, one finds further rea- 
sons as well. For example, the Necessary Existent can in no way be a sub- 
strate or subject of something that is distinct from its very being. That is 
because the simplicity of the Necessary Existent would then be jeopard- 
ized, for there would be the Necessary Existent qua substrate and that thing 
that purportedly inheres in the Necessary Existent. Consequently, given 
that possible existence is clearly distinct from necessary existence, the 
Necessary Existent cannot both be absolutely simple, which Avicenna has 
argued that it is, and the substrate of possible existence. 

It remains then that if possibility in itself inheres in an immaterial sub- 
strate, it would have to be one that is created and so possible in itself, such 
as a human intellect, or the Active Intellect, or the like. If that intellect is 
something that comes to be, like the human intellect, then the possibility of 
its coming to be must precede its actually coming to be. In that case, one 
finds oneself faced with the initial question: In what does the possibility of 
that intellect that comes to be inhere? 

Avicenna next considers whether the possibility of coming to be could 
inhere in an intellect that is atemporally created, such as the Giver of Forms 
or Active Intellect (Metaphysics, IV.2, 13984-139,1). Avicenna grants that 
such an intellect does have the potential (g#wa) to produce the species 
forms of things that come to be after not having existed. So, for example, 
the Giver of Forms bestows the species forms that make up the various 

natural kinds here in the sublunar world. Still, continues Avicenna, the 

METAPHYSICS II 189 

Giver of Forms must either be producing these forms always or producing 
them at some times and not at others. If, on the one hand, it comes to pro- 
duce them at some time after not having produced them, then one again 
has a case of something coming to be, namely, its producing some forms 
after not having produced them. In that case, the possibility of that produc- 
tion preceded its coming to be, and one again finds oneself at the begin- 
ning: In what does the possibility of producing some form after not pro- 
ducing it inhere? On the other hand, if the Giver of Forms is always 
producing the forms that make up the various kinds of thing in the sublu- 
nar world, then its influence is constant, and there is no explanation of why 
a given thing that came to be (call it x) had not previously existed, given 
that the Giver of Forms was producing «’s form even when x was not exist- 
ing. In short, there has to be yet some other factor than merely the produc- 
tion of forms to explain x’s coming to be after not having existed. 

To sum up quickly: Since the possibility of what comes to be is not a 
substance, Avicenna argues that it must inhere in some substrate. That 
substrate could be either immaterial or material. It has already been noted 
why an immaterial intellect alone is not enough to explain the possibility 
of something’s coming to be after not having been. Given that such pos- 
sibility exists, and that it is not self-subsistent, but subsists in a substrate, 
and that this substrate cannot solely be something immaterial, Avicenna 

concludes: 

We ourselves call the possibility of existence the potentiality of existence, 
and we call that which underlies the potentiality of existence in which there 
is the potentiality of the existence of the thing a “subject,” “prime matter,” 
“matter,” and the like, on account of many different considerations.” Thus, 
matter precedes whatever comes to be (Metaphysics, IV.2, 140.15-17).” 

When considering possibility in itself, it was seen that it is a certain relative 
notion, namely, the privation or absence of some necessary existence. It was 
also seen that it requires some substrate. While in the case of things that are 
atemporally (or eternally) created that substrate might be an immaterial 
intellect, in the case of those things that change from not having actually 
existed to actually existing, namely, those things that make up the sublu- 
nar realm in which we find ourselves, the substrate of their possibility is 
for Avicenna matter.”’ Thus, a full understanding of possibility, at least as 
Avicenna understands it, requires an analysis of the matter in which the 

possibility of temporally coming to be inheres. 

190 AVICENNA 

Matter and Form 

I have already noted that for Avicenna there is among possible existents a 
division between those things that never exist separate from a subject, even 
though they are not themselves (material or formal) parts of the subject, 
namely, accidents, and those things that do not exist in a subject, namely, 
substances. Of these two classes, Avicenna argues, substances are ontologi- 
cally prior. He reasons thus (Metaphysics, I1.1, 45.913): Inasmuch as some 
accident exists in a subject, that subject too must be either an accident or a 
substance. Since Avicenna believes that it is impossible that some determi- 
nate thing, such as a wren, a robin, or the like, should have an infinite 
number of subjects presently existing in it, the series must terminate with 
that which itself is not in a subject. As has been seen, for Avicenna it is 
substance that is not in a subject. Consequently, the series of accidents 
terminates at a substance, which is the ultimate grounds for the rest of those 
things in the series, and so substance is causally prior to accidents. 

Again, then, a substance is that which does not exist inseparably from a 
subject and is nota part of the subject; however, Avicenna also distinguishes 
between a subject (mawdi‘) and a substrate or locus or receptacle (all vari- 
ous translations of the Arabic mahall) (Metaphysics, 11.1, 46.18-47.10). A 
subject, on the one hand, he tells us, is that which subsists in itself inasmuch 
as it has been specified to some determinate species, and as such is a cause 
for the subsistence of those things inhering in the particular instance of that 
species. A substrate, on the other hand, is anything in which something 
inheres or is established, and, through that thing, the substrate comes to be 
in some state. In this respect, then, a substrate, locus, or receptacle is more 
general than a subject, since while things may inhere in either a subject or 
a substrate, a subject must already subsist as some species of thing, such as a 
human or a horse, while such a specified existence need not be the case with 
respect to a substrate. 

Bearing this distinction in mind, Avicenna claims that both matter and 
forms—in the strict sense of species forms,” such as the form of humanity 
or equinity (and so not accidental forms, such as the form of heat)—are 
both substances. Matter clearly is a substance on the present definition since 
it is not in another, as in a subject, but is the ultimate substrate of all mate- 
rial forms. Equally clear is that the immaterial forms of the Intelligences 
are not ina subject and so are substances. As for the various material species 

forms that are in a substrate, namely, species forms such as those of human, 

METAPHYSICS II Igt 

horse, oak tree, and the like, they are not strictly speaking in a subject, since 
the matter only exists as specified, and so as a subject, owing to the presence 
of that very species form existing in it. As for the composites of matter and 
some species form, for Avicenna they too are substances, since they are 
the subjects of the various accidents or accidental forms that exist in that 
composite. 

Although material species forms require matter as that in which they 
inhere, matter also requires species forms in order to subsist. In fact, argues 
Avicenna, matter can never be completely devoid of some form or other, 
a thesis we saw him merely assert in his PAysics, but now he demonstrates. 
While at Metaphysics, 11.3 he provides a number of arguments for this the- 
sis, the general move is this: If matter—again understood as the most basic 
substrate underlying all forms—were ever completely stripped of every 
form, then it would be something completely devoid of any magnitude; for 
magnitude is an accidental form belonging to a substance. Moreover, mat- 
ter could not occupy any space, or be continuous and divisible, since all of 
these states follow upon some quantitative or positional form. While an 
existence separate from these quantitative and positional states might be 
fitting for an immaterial substance, they would, in effect, render matter as a 
substance nil. In the end, argues Avicenna, if matter is to subsist at all, it 
requires some species form qua species form (Physics, 1.2, 14.1-15.5; Meta- 
physics, 1.4). In other words, the subsistence of matter does not depend 
upon any particular species form, such as that for dolphins, orangutans, or 
maples; it just needs some species form or other. Consequently, inasmuch as 
matter depends upon forms, forms are the cause of matter’s subsistence. 

As for the subsistence of the forms themselves, clearly the cause of their 
subsistence cannot be the matter, argues Avicenna, for such a state of affairs 
would involve circular causation. That is because the actual existence or 
subsistence of matter is, as has just been seen, the effect of a form, and an 
effect that subsists through some cause cannot be the cause of its own cause’s 
subsistence (Metaphysics, 11.4, 70.11-16). The cause of the forms’ subsistence 
is instead for Avicenna that entity that bestows the various species forms 
onto the properly prepared or disposed matter, namely, the Giver of Forms. 
Finally, with respect to the subsistence of composite substances, such as this 
particular human or that particular dog, it is the form and matter together 
that are the causes for its existence. 

Quickly to recapitulate, the possibility of something’s coming to be after 

not having been is for Avicenna a relational notion: It refers to the relative 

1g2 AVICENNA 

absence of some necessary existence. Inasmuch as this possibility is rela- 
tional, it requires some substrate in which to inhere. Avicenna identifies 
this substrate, at least in the case of things that come to be after not having 
been, with matter. Matter, again, is a substance (for it is the substrate of all 
species forms), and so can function as a substrate for the possibility of what 
comes to be. Still, it is a substance whose existence is tenuous and requires 
some species form to make it subsist. Without some form or other matter 

would fall into nonexistence along with the possibility inherent in it. 

Causality 

Before turning to Avicenna’s arguments for the eternity of the cosmos, I 
still need to consider the notion of causality at work in his philosophical 
system, for not only will such a discussion round out Avicenna’s under- 
standing of the cosmos, but certain features of his notion of causality are 
also central to one of his arguments for the world’s eternity. 

In addition to form and matter, Avicenna, following a long Aristotelian 
tradition, identifies two further causes: efficient cause (or the agent) and 
final cause (or the end) (Metaphysics, V1.1; Salvation, “Metaphysics,” I.12). 
Avicenna again defines the formal cause as that part of a subsisting thing by 
which that thing actually is what it is, while the material cause is that part 
of a subsisting thing by which that thing potentially is what it is and in 
which the potentiality of its existence resides.”° The final cause or end is that 
for the sake of which the existence of something distinct from the cause is 
realized. As for the efficient cause or agent, Avicenna defines it as that 
which provides or bestows some existence essentially distinct from its 
own.” 

Avicenna additionally distinguishes between the “natural efficient 
cause,” and what might be termed the “metaphysical efficient cause.” The 
natural efficient cause merely produces motion, whether with respect to the 
category of quantity (as in the case of augmentation or diminution such as 
growing or deteriorating in size), or quality (as in alteration such as heating 
and cooling), or place (such as locomotion), or position (such as rotating in 
place). In contrast, the metaphysical efficient cause produces existence or 
being itself, either by producing existence absolutely (as in the case of the 
Necessary Existent) or producing the various species forms that give a 

specific existence to matter (as in the case of the Giver of Forms). Natural 

METAPHYSICS II 193 

efficient causes then are efficient causes in the sense that they bring about 
the existence of certain motions or changes in some material subject or sub- 
strate. As such, natural efficient causes play the role of preparatory causes 
that dispose and prepare the matter by either moving it to some suitable 
place or altering certain qualitative features of the matter, rendering it re- 
ceptive to the influence of a metaphysical efficient cause, which in its turn 
bestows the species form by which the substance is the kind that it is. 

According to Avicenna’s conception of causation, when the entire causal 
complex actually exists, that is, there actually is suitably disposed matter 
and a metaphysical efficient cause imparting a given form for some good, 
the effect of this causal complex cannot but occur. In other words, for 
Avicenna there can be no temporal gaps between so-called essentially or- 
dered causes and their effects. Here, an “essentially ordered cause” is any 
cause that the particular effect essentially depends upon right now in order 
to exist, as, for example, I depend upon the form of humanity informing 
matter right now if I am to exist at this moment as a human. In this respect, 
my dependence upon form and matter for my existence is, for Avicenna, 
different from my dependence upon my so-called temporally ordered 
causes, like, for example, my dependence upon my father and mother for 
my existence. Essentially ordered causes must exist simultaneously with 
their effect, whereas temporally ordered causes need not. 

One argument that Avicenna gives in his smaller encyclopedic work, 
the Salvation, for this thesis (namely that essentially ordered or meta- 
physical causes must exist simultaneously with their effects) comes from 
his notion of necessity (Salvation, “Metaphysics,” II.1). One characteristic 
of necessity is that its opposite implies a contradiction. Thus, assume a 
certain proposition. If that assumed proposition entails a contradiction, 
then the initial proposition’s opposite must be necessary. Such a situation 
holds for all modes of necessity, including what is necessary through 
another at the time that it actually exists. That is because one cannot, 
without contradiction, assume that something, when it is necessary 
through another, does not actually exist, since this is to assume that 
something, when it actually exists, does not actually exist. 

In like fashion, argues Avicenna, to assume that causes do not necessitate 
their effects leads to an explicit contradiction. Here, an example will make 
the point. From repeated observations, Avicenna believes that one can infer 
that fire has the active causal power to burn, and that cotton has the passive 

power to be burned. So, let fire, and all the active causal powers required 

194 AVICENNA 

for burning, be put in contact with cotton along with all the passive causal 
powers required for being burned. Now assume that the expected effect, 
the burning of the cotton, does not occur. In this case either one of two 
things could explain why the cotton is not burning. Either that which has 
the active causal power to burn, namely, the whole complex of requisite 
active causal powers, does not have the active causal power to burn, which 
is clearly a contradiction—for all of the requisite active causal powers can- 
not simultaneously have and not have the active power to burn. Or, mutatis 
mutandis, that which has the passive causal power to be burned, namely, the 
whole complex of requisite passive causal powers, does not have the passive 
causal power to be burned, and there again is a contradiction. In general 
terms, then, the assumption that the effect is not necessitated by its causes 
when all the causes are present leads to an explicit contradiction; however, 
in that case, concludes Avicenna, its opposite must be necessary, and so 
causes must necessitate their effects. 

In a similar vein, Avicenna also believes that the efficient cause of a 
thing’s existence must exist simultaneously with its effect and must con- 
tinue to exist as an efficient cause as long as the effect exists. Now, it is com- 
mon to think that the efficient cause is only required to bring something 
into existence. Thus, one might believe that once a given thing comes to 
exist it no longer needs an efficient cause but can subsist on its own—as, for 
example, the parents are efficient causes of their offspring, and yet the off- 
spring, once born, continue to exist even should the parents pass away. 

Avicenna in contrast argues that such a conception of the efficient cause 
is misguided. He reasons thus (Metaphysics, V1.1, 198.8—9.16): After some- 
thing, x, comes to be (Audath), it exists, and, according to Avicenna’s modal 
ontology, that continued existence is either one of (I) possible existence (and 
so is necessary through another) or (II) necessary existence. As for (I)— 
again that x’s continued existence after coming to be is merely possible 
existence—prior to x’s coming to exist the only thing that one could really 
or truthfully say about x is that x does not exist. In other words, x considered 
prior to its coming to be is nothing more than the absence or privation of 
some necessary or actual existence, which again is just what it means to 
exist possibly in itself. Consequently, if x’s existence after it comes to be 
remains mere possible existence in itself, there has been no change in the 
mode of existence attributed to x; it still remains as only possibly existing. 
Yet the mode of x’s existence is exactly what changes when x comes to be 

after not having been. Moreover, inasmuch as possible existence is related to 

METAPHYSICS II 195 

nonexistence, possible existence cannot be the cause of x’s continued exist- 
ence after x comes to be, for nonexistence, even relative nonexistence, can- 
not, for Avicenna, cause anything. 

If, (II), x’s continued existence is necessary, then it is either (II.a) neces- 
sary through itself or (II.b) necessary through another. Obviously, x’s contin- 
ued existence, which came to be after not having been, is not (II.a) necessary 
through itself, for inasmuch as it came to exist after not existing, x is some- 
thing whose existence is possible in itself. Nothing for Avicenna can simul- 
taneously be necessary in itself and possible in itself, nor, as was argued in 
the previous chapter, can something be a necessary existent through itself 
and through another.”* Hence, if x’s continued existence is necessary, it must 
be (IL-b) necessary through another. That other, Avicenna goes on, might be 
(II.b.1) the very act of coming to be, (II.b.2) some attribute belonging to the 
essence of x, or (II.b.3) something distinct from x. The very act of coming to 
be (II.b.1) cannot be that other that is presently causing x’s continued neces- 
sary existence, since the very act of x’s coming to be ceased once x actually 
comes to exist. What does not exist, which in this case is the coming to be of 
x, cannot presently exist as the cause of x’s continued necessary existence. 

If that other by which x continues to exist is some attribute of x’s own 
essence (II.b.2), then that attribute, inasmuch as it exists, is (according to 
Avicenna modal ontology) either (II.b.2.1) necessary in itself or (II.b.2.11) 
necessary through another. Now, if (II-b.2.1) one of the attributes of x’s 
essence is that it is necessary in itself, then x’s existence would be necessary 
in itself (for it would have necessary existence essentially). Again, however, 
x is something existing possibly in itself but is necessary through another. 
If (II.b.2.11), the attribute comes to exist together with the coming to be of x, 
then the initial question can be asked of the attribute, “Is that attribute’s 
continued existence one of necessary or possible existence?” and one finds 
oneself in an explanatory circle. Thus, (II-b.3), x’s subsistence, that is, its 
continued existence once it comes to exist after having not existed, must be 
due to some cause distinct from x. For Avicenna, then, the proximate (met- 
aphysical) efficient cause for the subsistence of species forms—namely, 
those forms that make up the simple and composite substances of the sublu- 
nar realm—is the Giver of Forms, whereas the remote and ultimate cause 
sustaining the existence of the entire universe of things possible in them- 
selves is the Necessary Existent. One now has all the elements to under- 
stand Avicenna’s arguments for the eternity of the world, and in fact why 

he thinks it is irreligious to think otherwise. 

196 AVICENNA 

Avicenna’s Modal Arguments for 

the Eternity of the World 

Avicenna presents various arguments for the eternity of the world both in 
his PAysics (I.11) and his Metaphysics ([X.1). In general, all of his argu- 
ments are variations on proofs that had been formulated in the Greek 
world, except all are now given a uniquely Avicennan stamp. Thus, the 
first of his arguments that I consider is based upon Aristotle’s argument 
that generation requires matter and forms, except now Avicenna begins 
with his analysis of possibility that has been discussed. Avicenna’s second 
argument draws upon Aristotle’s proof from the nature of time, but now 
exploiting Avicenna’s own analysis of time in terms of possibility. Finally, 
the last argument is a version of Proclus’s argument drawn from the nature 
of the creator, but in this case Avicenna appeals to his own conception of 
causality, which, as has just been seen, is heavily imbued with his modal 

ontology. 

The Modal Proof from the Nature 
of Temporally Created Things 

Avicenna’s first argument is a reductio-style argument (Physics, III.11, 
232.14-230.12; Metaphysics, 1X.1, 300.7-302.10; Salvation, “Metaphysics,” 
II.22, 604-608). Here he assumes that the cosmos came to exist at some 
finite time in the past “before” which there was only God. (He leaves open 
the possibility that “before” here might be taken in a nontemporal sense.) 
Stull, before the cosmos came to exist, its existence, which includes the sub- 
lunar realm of material species forms and matter, had to be possible in 
itself. If the existence of the cosmos were not possible in itself, then it would 
have to be either necessary in itself or impossible in itself. Inasmuch as the 
cosmos has purportedly come to be after not having been, it cannot be 
necessary in itself. Also, it cannot be impossible in itself, since what is 
impossible never exists, and the cosmos clearly exists. 

Thus, since the existence of the cosmos—understood as a composite of 
both immaterial and material forms as well as the matter in which material 
forms inhere—is something possible in itself, that possibility, asserts 
Avicenna, must precede the coming to be of the cosmos. Moreover, when 
considering the possibility of existents that temporally come to be after 

having not existed, such as individual animals, plants, and the like, it was 

METAPHYSICS II 197 

noted that possibility is not a substance in its own right, but requires some 
substrate. It was further noted that matter must be that substrate for those 
existents that temporally come to be. Consequently, assuming that the 
cosmos—again understood as the composite of forms and matter—were 
temporally created in the finite past, matter, Avicenna observes, would 
have existed prior to its own creation, which is absurd. 

Moreover, matter, as Avicenna has argued, cannot subsist considered 
merely as the indeterminate substrate of what might possibly exist; rather, 
matter needs some species form through which it subsists, the cause of 
which is ultimately traced back to the Necessary Existent. Thus, should the 
cosmos have been created in the finite past, forms also would have had to 
have existed prior to their creation, which, again, is absurd. In short, the 
possibility to create the world exists only as long as the matter exists, and 
the matter actually exists only when it is being in-formed. The possibility of 
the cosmos’ existence, however, maintains Avicenna, has eternally existed. 
Thus, the form-matter composite, which is the cosmos itself, has eternally 
existed, albeit eternally dependent upon the Necessary Existent as its ulti- 
mate (metaphysical) efficient cause. What is important to note about 
Avicenna’s version of Aristotle’s argument is that while it makes the forms 
and matter that make up our cosmos everlasting, and so the cosmos has 
always existed, unlike Aristotle’s earlier argument it also makes the forms 
and matter of the cosmos eternally dependent upon the Necessary Existent 

as their efficient cause. 

The Modal Proof from the Nature of Time 

Avicenna’s second modal proof for the eternity of the world is derived from 
the nature of time (Physics, I.11, 238.15—-39.8; Metaphysics, 1X.1, 304.8- 
307.6; Salvation, “Physics,” II.9, 228-230). Time for Avicenna, as I noted 

G 

when considering his temporal theory,” corresponds with the possibility to 
traverse longer distances or a greater number of rotations when two things 
move at the same rate of speed. Now, again as part of a reductio-style argu- 
ment, Avicenna assumes that the universe is temporally finite—for example, 
it was created 10,000 years ago (where a “year” corresponds with a single 
apparent solar rotation as we would measure it now). In this case, it still 
would have been possible, maintains Avicenna, for the Necessary Existent 
to have created a greater number of solar rotations than it purportedly did, 

for example, 20,000 rotations. (Since Avicenna identifies the Necessary 

198 AVICENNA 

Existent with God he thinks it would be sacrilege to deny otherwise.) 
Moreover, continues Avicenna, it could have been possible for the Neces- 
sary Existent to create the extra 10,000 possible rotations such that 20,000 
solar rotations would have elapsed up to the present day. Simply put, there 
is the possibility for the universe to have undergone a longer motion in the 
past than it purportedly has. 

If, however, there is a possibility for the Necessary Existent to have cre- 
ated a greater number of solar rotations than it purportedly did, there must 
have been a time when the Necessary Existent was not creating the world. 
For again on Avicenna’s analysis of time, time is just the possibility for uni- 
formly moving objects to cover greater distances or more rotations. In other 
words, assuming that Avicenna’s analysis of time is correct, simply affirm- 
ing the existence of some possibility for certain earlier rotations, and so the 
possibility of a longer motion, is to affirm the existence of time. There is no 
illicit modal shift here. Inasmuch as one is a modal realist and believes that 
possibilities exist as real features of the world, and time corresponds with 
a certain possibility itsel/—a premise that, as was seen in chapter 3, fol- 
lowed from certain basic kinematic facts—then the inference from the 
existence of this real possibility, to time’s real existence is a valid one. 
Consequently, within Avicenna’s framework, he is completely justified 
in arguing that given the mere possibility that the cosmos could have 
undergone changes and motion longer than it purportedly has, and that 
the possible length of these changes could be indefinitely large, then time 
must have always existed reaching into the infinite past and will always 
exist reaching into the infinite future inasmuch as time corresponds and in 
fact is for Avicenna identical with the very possibility for these indefinitely 
long motions. 

Given this conclusion, Avicenna can now repeat Aristotle’s proof for the 
eternity of the world from time but again with his modal twist. That argu- 
ment was that if there were a first moment in the finite past when the 
cosmos either began to move or was created, there would have been a time 
before that purported first moment. Whereas Aristotle simply took this 
premise as some undemonstrated first principle, Avicenna has provided an 
independent proof for it from his modal analysis of time. Avicenna then 
observes that when there is a time, there must also be a motion, for motion 
is the very subject in which time inheres and has its existence. If there is 
motion, however, there must be something undergoing the motion, namely, 

a form-matter composite, which again Avicenna identifies with the cosmos 

METAPHYSICS II 199 

itself. Consequently, if one assumes that the cosmos—again a composite of 
forms and matter—were created at some moment in the finite past, one 
would be committed to the existence of forms and matter, when forms and 
matter purportedly did not exist. The conclusion is absurd, so the assump- 
tion that gave rise to it, namely that the cosmos was created in the finite 
past, concludes Avicenna, must likewise be absurd. Avicenna concludes 
that even though it is true that the cosmos is causally dependent upon the 
Necessary Existent, and so the Necessary Existent is the creator of the uni- 

verse, the divinity has from all eternity been creating it. 

Proof from the Nature of Causation and 
the Necessary Existent 

Again Avicenna’s third argument is a variant of Proclus’s proof, namely 
that, since the divinity creates from its eternal goodness and that goodness 
never changes, it has been eternally creating (Metaphysics, X1.1, 302.11- 
304.6; Salvation, “Metaphysics,” I1.23, 609-612). Recall that by the time of 
the medieval Islamic period, thinkers on both sides—whether for or against 
an eternal creation—wanted to make God both the final and efficient cause 
of the cosmos’ existence. Again, however, on Avicenna’s analysis of causa- 
tion, the effect must be necessitated simultaneously with the existence of 
the effect’s complete cause. For Avicenna there simply are no temporal gaps 
between a complete complex of essentially ordered, or metaphysical, causes 
and its effect. Thus, if the Necessary Existent exists, whatever proceeds 
from it as its effect must also exist. Were it the case, then, that the Necessary 
Existent were to exist and yet the cosmos were not to exist, the Necessary 
Existent could not be the complete efficient cause of the cosmos given 
Avicenna’s account of causality. 

In that case, continues Avicenna, something else, x, which completes the 
causal complex, must have come to exist that previously had not existed, as, 
for example, a will to create. Whatever x might be, it either comes to be in 
the Necessary Existent itself or not. If it does not come to be in the Neces- 
sary Existent itself, then the question concerning the cause of x’s coming to 
be still stands, for the Necessary Existent is assumed to be the complete 
cause of all things, and x supposedly came to be after not having been. If x, 
whatever it is, comes to be in the Necessary Existent, then the Necessary 
Existent has changed, and has come to have some existence that it did not 

previously have. The Necessary Existent, as Avicenna has argued frequently, 

200 AVICENNA 

exists necessarily in every respect, so it cannot change in any way. Thus, this 
option is false. Simply put, inasmuch as the Necessary Existent is the eter- 
nally unchanging complete cause of the cosmos’ own necessary existence, 
and since effects must exist simultaneously and together with their com- 
plete causes, the cosmos, maintains Avicenna, must exist eternally as some- 
thing necessary through the Necessary Existent. 

With these three arguments, one sees Avicenna rehabilitating certain 
classical arguments for the eternity of the world, however, doing so in such 
a way as to avoid the objections raised against their classical predecessors. 
Thus, none of Avicenna’s arguments presupposes that there was a time 
before creation. In fact, Avicenna’s second argument, far from presuppos- 
ing that there has always been time, provides a proof for that claim. Similarly, 
unlike Aristotle’s argument based upon his analysis of generation, and the 
assumption that generation presupposes forms and matter, Avicenna’s vari- 
ant starts from the even more basic notion of the very possibility of there 
being generation and coming to be. Similarly, Avicenna’s final argument 
draws heavily upon his modal ontology for its conception of both causality 

and the divine nature. 

Infinity and the Possibility of an 
Eternal World 

Despite Avicenna’s Herculean efforts, until he can counter the absurdities 
that Philoponus raised against the notion of an infinitely extended past, the 
temporal and eternal creationists’ positions are, at best, at a standstill. Again, 
the objections that Philoponus presented followed upon certain strongly 
held intuitions about infinity, such as it cannot be traversed and that there 
cannot be an actual infinity. Philoponus, as I noted, had two lines of criti- 
cism: One, an eternal world would entail that an actual infinite has come to 
exist and so an infinite has been traversed and; two, there would be sets of 
infinities of different sizes, and so sets larger than that beyond which there 
is nothing more. 

Philoponus, like many others, took it as simply self-evident that an infi- 
nite could not be traversed. In stark contrast, Avicenna, as far as 1 am aware, 
nowhere outright denies that an infinite can be traversed absolutely.” 
Instead, when Avicenna mentions the impossibility of traversing the infinite 

at all, it is always in a qualified way: An infinite cannot be traversed in a 

METAPHYSICS II 201 

finite period of time.” Without this qualification, Avicenna sees no problem 
with traversing an infinite, again provided that there is an infinite amount 
of time to do so. In fact, in his Metaphysics as part of a response to Philo- 
ponus, he quite explicitly maintains that not only is it possible to traverse an 

infinite temporal causal chain, but, in fact, it is necessary. 

We do not preclude an infinite [number of] ancillary and preparatory 
causes, one [temporally] preceding the other. In fact, that must necessar- 
ily be the case, since each temporally created thing has become necessary 
after not having been necessary because of the necessity of its cause at 
that moment . . . and its cause also having become necessary. So with re- 
spect to particular things, there must be an infinity of antecedent things 
by which the actually existing causes necessarily come to be certain actual 
causes of [the particulars] (Metaphysics, V1.2, 202.7—10). 

In this passage Avicenna is explaining why a given temporal event or thing 
comes to be at the time that it does and not earlier, where the reason is that 
the matter was only prepared to take on a new form at that time.” As such, 
there must have been temporally prior causes that prepared the matter, but 
of course those temporally prior causes are also temporal events or things, 
which themselves need temporally prior causes, and so on ad infinitum. 
Thus, according to Avicenna, an infinite number of temporally prior pre- 
paratory causes must have been traversed. 

While for all intents and purposes Avicenna’s claim here is nothing 
more than a restatement of Philoponus’s original objection that an eternal 
past would entail the traversal of an infinite, the onus of proof has changed. 
Since Avicenna believes that he has demonstrated that the cosmos is eter- 
nal, and so an infinite has been traversed (albeit it has had all the infinite 
time in the past to do so), he is now challenging Philoponus and those of 
like mind to demonstrate that the traversal of an infinite is impossible. If 
they cannot, and one, like Avicenna himself, is willing to accept that in an 
infinite amount of time an infinite can be traversed, then one of Philo- 
ponus’s objections collapses. 

Recall, however, that Philoponus had a follow-up objection, namely that 
the traversal of an infinite, even if all the members are not currently present, 
still entails that an actually infinite number has been realized, and an actual 
infinite, no matter how construed, is impossible, or at least Philoponus 
would have one believe. In the Physics (I.11, 238.3-15), Avicenna responds, 
complaining that Philoponus fails to appreciate the distinction between 

202 AVICENNA 

“each one” (kull wahid) and “whole” (Rull). So, for example, while it is true 
that each one of the parts of a thing is a part, it is false that the whole of that 
thing is a part. Similarly, contends Avicenna, while it is possible that each 
one of an actual infinite has existed, it need not be possible for the whole of 
that infinite to exist as a whole. 

In fact, using the each one/whole distinction, Avicenna argues that the 
whole of all past events is not, as it were, collected together into an actually 
existing set (jumla) (ibid., 237.13-238.2).”° At best, he observes, they have 
been collected together in some intellectual depiction (was fal-‘agl). A col- 
lection in an intellectual depiction, however, is only equivocally like a col- 
lection existing in reality or extramentally, which is a genuine set, for the 
collection of all animals as a logical notion existing in the intellect, Avi- 
cenna points out, is “decidedly not the set of them [existing extramentally]” 
(ibid., 238.2). Of course, if something does not exist, then it is inappropriate 
to say that it is actually any thing, at least in any proper sense of “actual.” 
Thus, concludes Avicenna, it is simply unforgivable to speak of the set of 
past events as actually infinite, for no such set exists. 

Using the same strategy, Avicenna further addresses Philoponus’s objec- 
tion about the rotations of the planets and greater and smaller infinities (ibid., 
236.14-237.12). Again, there is no actually existing infinite set of rotations; 
rather, Avicenna reminds us that they are said to be infinite in that “whatever 
number our estimative faculty imagines to belong to the motions, we find a 
number that was before it” (ibid., 237.2). As for the whole set of rotations, that 
does not exist. Now, continues Avicenna, notions such as “more” and “less” as 
well as “finite” and “infinite” either apply or do not apply to nonexistent 
things. If they do not apply to nonexistent things, then the objection disap- 
pears, whereas if such terms do apply, then, chides Avicenna, they must equally 
apply to the infinity of future rotations that will occur. Since most defenders of 
the world’s past temporal creation, in fact, conceded that future time will be 
infinite, they find themselves, as it were, hoisted on their own petard. 

In the end, Avicenna believes that all the arguments against the eternity 
of the world, based upon certain presumed absurdities following on the 
notion of infinity, depend upon undemonstrated intuitions that we have 
about the infinite.” Since Avicenna believes that he has truly demonstrated 
the eternity of the world, he is willing to set aside all of these undemon- 
strated assumptions about the infinite. In this respect, Avicenna, like Cantor 
centuries later, should be praised for recognizing that deeply entrenched 
intuitions about infinity can be demonstrated to be simply wrong. 

METAPHYSICS II 203 
The Emanation of the Cosmos 

In this chapter and the preceding one I have considered how Avicenna 
envisions the Necessary Existent in itself as both the final and efficient 
cause of the existence of an eternally enduring cosmos. Before turning to 
the emanation schema that Avicenna develops to explain the “causal 
mechanism” by which the Necessary Existent creates the cosmos, I should 
briefly mention how he (and indeed virtually all thinkers working dur- 
ing the ancient and medieval period) envisioned the topography of the 

cosmos. 

Emanation and the Cosmos 

For those working within the classical physics and astronomy of Aristotle 
and Ptolemy respectively, the Earth is roughly at the center of the uni- 
verse.” The sublunar realm includes the four elements earth, water, air, 
and fire, where these elements are understood in terms of their various rec- 
tilinear motions. So, for example, the element earth tends down toward the 
center, while the element fire tends up toward the sphere of the Moon, with 
water and air moving ina straight line toward places intermediate between 
those of earth and fire. 

Since the Moon, Sun, planets, and stars were believed to move not recti- 
linearly but circularly, it was thought that they involved some yet different 
material or element, the so-called quintessence or ether. These celestial 
spheres (sing. falak) were in their turn thought to rotate approximately 
around the Earth. The number of celestial spheres is finite, since most me- 
dieval thinkers argued that the space of the cosmos is itself finite, ending 
with the outermost celestial sphere. The number of spheres included that of 
the Moon, those of the two inner planets, Venus and Mercury, the Sun, and 
the rest of the observable, outer planets, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. In addi- 
tion to the planets there was the sphere of the fixed stars and the outermost 
sphere, which was needed to account for the procession of the equinox. 
Further spheres were postulated as needed in order to account for such 
phenomena as retrograde motion.” 

Now, just as in the sublunar realm, the circular motion of these celestial 
bodies does not belong to them qua (ethereal) body. Instead, each celestial 
sphere needs some proximate mover, which, Avicenna concludes, after a 

lengthy discussion (Metaphysics, UX.2), cannot be merely the nature or form 

204 AVICENNA 

of the celestial body but must be a soul. In addition, Avicenna argued that 
associated with each of the celestial sphere-soul composites there is also a 
completely immaterial Intellect or Intelligence that is the cause of the soul 
and the celestial body. Any given Intellect is itself produced by whatever 
Intellect is causally above it, with all the Intellects forming a causal chain 
that terminates with the Necessary Existent as the ultimate cause of every- 
thing below it. 

As for how the Necessary Existent causes the existence of what is under 
it, Avicenna appeals to the Greek Neoplatonic theory of emanation or over- 
flowing (fayadan). According to the emanationist schema, there overflows 
from whatever is perfect a certain secondary activity. For example, light 
emanates from the Sun, and heat emanates from fire; light and heat are not 
identical with the Sun and fire but are the effects of the Sun and fire given 
what the Sun and fire are. Unfortunately, the analogy is not exact: All of 
these examples are of natural or physical processes, which occur as a matter 
of natural necessity, whereas emanation in the case of the Necessary Exist- 
ent proceeds, according to Avicenna, and as I shall explain soon, voluntar- 
ily. Thus, in the case of the Necessary Existent, since for Avicenna it is not 
merely perfect but above perfection, necessary existence itself proceeds 
from it, albeit voluntarily. 

Since the Necessary Existent is absolutely simple, however, Avicenna 
does not think that it can be the direct or immediate cause of the necessary 
existence belonging to all the various Intellects and different kinds of pos- 
sible existents below it (Metaphysics, 1X.4, 328.5-330.4). That is because in- 
asmuch as these possible existents represent different kinds of created 
things there would have to be different causal facets in the Necessary Exist- 
ent to explain the multiplicity of diverse things proceeding from it, were it 
the direct and immediate rather than ultimate cause of all of the various 
existents below it. Instead, argues Avicenna, from something absolutely 
one only one thing comes. Still, all the complexity that is in the cosmos is in 
the Necessary Existent but again in a unified and noncomposite way. So, 
while the following analogy is far from exact, the noncomposite complexity 
of the Necessary Existent might be likened to the kernel of an acorn that, 
although it is homogenous throughout, nonetheless contains all the com- 
plexity and information that manifests itself in the various and diverse 
aspects of the mature oak tree. 

Still, the problem of explaining how the Necessary Existent can be the 

ultimate cause of the apparent multiplicity in the cosmos remains. For if the 

METAPHYSICS II 205 

first Intellect that proceeds from the Necessary Existent is one, then, given 
Avicenna’s principle, what proceeds from it should also be one. The emana- 
tionist schema, then, seemingly cannot explain how it is that from one ema- 
nated Intellect there can emanate three things: the Intellect below it, as well 
as its own associated soul, and the celestial sphere (for such an emanation 
appears to violate the dictum that from one only one proceeds). The situa- 
tion only becomes that much graver when one tries to explain how the mul- 
tiplicity of the sublunar realm came to be. 

Avicenna’s modal ontology yet again provides him with a neat solution 
to this problem of medieval cosmology. From the Necessary Existent there 
emanates for Avicenna the Intellect associated with the outermost celestial 
sphere. This Intellect must itself already be composite, for it is something 
possible in itself but necessary through another. Now, continues Avicenna, 
when this Intellect contemplates the Necessary Existent, there emanates 
from that first Intellect another Intellect—let this second Intellect be the 
one associated with the fixed stars. In addition to contemplating the Neces- 
sary Existent, the first Intellect also contemplates itself, but, as has already 
been seen, it is something composite consisting of its own possible exist- 
ence and the necessary existence it has from another. Thus, according to 
Avicenna’s own unique emanative scheme, when the first Intellect con- 
templates itself as something merely possible in itself, there emanates from 
it a certain celestial body, whereas when it contemplates itself as necessary 
through another, it emanates that celestial body’s soul. This process contin- 
ues at the level of the second Intellect. Now, however, the second Intellect 
contemplates its relation to the first Intellect and the Necessary Existent. 
This emanative process continues cascading downward with new Intel- 
lects, souls, and celestial bodies being produced until it reaches the Active 
Intellect or Giver of Forms, which is the Intellect that produces the Moon 
and lunar soul. 

At this level, the Active Intellect or Giver of Forms, with its associated 
degree of possible existence and so privation, is simply incapable of emanat- 
ing a single unified existent. Instead, a multiplicity of forms overflows from 
it that are incapable of subsisting on their own as the immaterial intellects 
do, and so these forms require matter in the way discussed earlier. That 
such a multiplicity should result is almost entailed by Avicenna’s analysis of 
possibility in terms of the absence or privation of necessary existence, and 
the close association that the Neoplatonizing Aristotelian tradition finds 

between existence and unity. For as there is a greater and greater falling 

206 AVICENNA 

away from or absence of necessary existence so there would be for ancient 
and medieval thinkers a greater and greater loss of unity. Still, as for why 
the loss of unity should lead to multiplicity where it does, there can be for 
Avicenna no causal explanation. That is because at this point one reaches 
the possible existents that are forever coming to be, and, as we have seen 
Avicenna argue, there is no cause for why a certain degree of privation 

should correspond with the possible existent with which it does. 

Emanation and the Necessary Existent 

As for why the Necessary Existent should create the cosmos, Avicenna is 
adamant that it simply cannot be because of some cause other than the Nec- 
essary Existent itself. Thus, at book IX.4 of the Metaphysics of the Cure 

Avicenna states: 

It is impossible that [the Necessary Existent in itself] should in any way 
have some principle or cause—whether [the cause be] that from which, 
concerning which, by which, or for the sake of which—such that it 
would exist on account of a certain given thing. Because of this, it is 
impossible that the being of the cosmos should result from [the Neces- 
sary Existent in itself] in a way that there would be some intention 
(gasd)—like our intention—for its generating the cosmos and for [the 
cosmos’ | existence such that [the Necessary Existent in itself] intends [its 
generation] for the sake of something other than itself (Metaphysics, IX.4, 
326.1013). 

The reason why Avicenna believes that the Necessary existent cannot in- 
tend the creation of the cosmos is because it would introduce multiplicity 
into the divinity, a pitfall, as has been noted, that Avicenna goes to great 
lengths to avoid. He enumerates the multiplicity that intention would en- 
tail thus (ibid., 326.1416): First, there will be something in the Necessary 
Existent that is the cause of its intending, namely, its knowledge that the 
intention is necessary, desirable, or there is some good in it; second, there 
would be the act by which the intention is acquired; third, and finally, there 
would be that which is acquired by acting for that intention. All of this 
Avicenna believes is simply absurd, given that the Necessary Existent is 
absolutely simple. 

Thus, Avicenna concludes that the Necessary Existent does not intend 
(qasd) the existence of the world, but he is also quick to add that neither 
does that which proceeds from the Necessary Existent proceed by nature, 

METAPHYSICS II 207 

that is, by necessity. Avicenna’s general argument at this point is to assert 
that there are two conditions that guarantee that a given act is ot by nature: 
One is that there is a recognition (ma‘rifa) on the part of the agent that it is 
performing that act, and the other is that the act involves the consent (ridé) 
of the agent. 

First, argues Avicenna, the Necessary Existent obviously recognizes that 
the existence of the cosmos emanates from it, since it exists as a pure intel- 
lect intellecting itself, as seen in the last chapter. Thus, there is nothing 
about its existence that it does not know or recognize. Second, continues 
Avicenna, the created order emanates from the Necessary Existent with its 
consent because consent, according to Avicenna, occurs (1) when one knows 
what proceeds from oneself, and (2) when there is nothing that hinders or 
interferes with that procession. Consequently, since, as has been seen, the 
Necessary Existent knows what proceeds from itself, and nothing causally 
acts on it so as to interfere with what proceeds from it, emanation, that is, 
divine efficient causality, must for Avicenna be at the consent of the Neces- 
sary Existent. Consequently, he concludes, the emanation of existence from 
the Necessary Existent is not by nature but through divine will or volition 
(irada). 

While there is certainly something paradoxical in saying that while the 
Necessary Existent does not intend the creation of the cosmos, it nonethe- 
less wills it, the paradox, at least for Avicenna, is merely one of semantics. 
For Avicenna, there is a distinction between intention (gasd) and volition 
(iraida), namely, the contrast between the way that humans will or intend 
something because we need some good other than ourselves, and the way 
that the Necessary Existent wills something, where nothing is willed 
or wanted except for the good that is the very existence of the Necessary 
Existent.” To elaborate this point, Avicenna insists that the good that the 
Necessary Existent knows and wills in its emanative act is nothing other 
than its very self or very being, in Arabic its dhdt. In other words, it knows 
itself as the Necessary through itself; it knows that it is good; and knowing 
that it is good, it wills its existence. Here, Avicenna is just reiterating in a 
different way the claim that I noted in the previous chapter: The Necessary 
Existent is a self-explaining entity. 

Now, according to Avicenna, in knowing itself the Necessary Existent 
knows, in one simple intellectual perception, the order of the good with 
respect to existence (nizam al-khayr fi l-wujiid) (ibid., 377.9). Moreover, to 
know this good is for the Necessary Existent to will this good, for again to 

208 AVICENNA 

will is for Avicenna just to act knowingly and not be hindered from so 
acting. Indeed, it is this knowledge of itself as the pure good that is the 
cause of the existence of whatever it knows. Finally, the existence of what it 
knows in no way completes, perfects, or benefits the Necessary Existent; 
rather, maintains Avicenna, it is only the created existence, which results 
from the Necessary Existent’s knowing itself, that is completed, perfected, 
and benefited. In the human act of intending or willing, in contrast, there 
is always (1) some external good willed or intended, (2) willing so as to act 
for that good, and (3) the benefit or enhancement for oneself acquired from 
that good. In the divine act of willing, however, there is no external good 
that the Necessary Existent wills for its own sake. There is no separate act 
of willing the good that is distinct from knowing that good. Finally, there 
is no benefit that the Necessary Existent acquires as a result of its emanating 
the existence of the cosmos. The created order alone is the sole recipient of 
any acquired good. Creating the cosmos thus in no way makes the Neces- 
sary Existent better. Its creative act is for Avicenna a purely (indeed the only 
truly) altruistic act. 

As for the order of the good as it manifests itself here on Earth, whether 
through divine providence or how we interact with others, or even our 

individual ultimate good or end, these are all issues for the next chapter. 

VALUE THEORY 

Introduction 

Unlike such theoretical sciences as physics and metaphysics about which 
Avicenna has much to say, he has relatively little to say explicitly about such 
practical sciences as ethics and politics. In fact, in his monumental philo- 
sophical encyclopedia, the Cure, he dedicates no independent volume to 
issues in value theory, and instead contents himself with six chapters at the 
end of his Metaphysics. In those chapters, mixing elements from Plato, 
Aristotle, and Islam itself, Avicenna deals with the proper good of the human 
understood in terms of the hereafter, discusses the virtuous city, developing 
it against the backdrop of his own emanative scheme, gives an account of 
the philosopher-prophet that is reminiscent of Plato’s philosopher-king, 
and then finally provides what might be thought of as a philosophical inter- 
pretation of the religious dictates of Islam. In his psychological works he 
additionally treats in a passing fashion the formation of morals, and there 
are other bits and pieces concerned with issues in value theory sprinkled 
throughout the corpus of his work as well. Thus, providing a systematic 
account of Avicenna’s conception of practical philosophy presents some- 
thing of a challenge for his interpreters. 

The scarcity of explicit writings on practical philosophy in Avicenna’s 

system, however, is not due to any lack of interest on his part for this area of 

209 

210 AVICENNA 

thought. Instead, I contend, it is owing to his conception of the human 
good, both at the individual level (ethics) and at the level of human interac- 
tions (politics). Like many ancient and medieval thinkers, Avicenna’s pri- 
mary philosophical concern, when it came to ethical and political issues, 
was with what a flourishing or happy life (sa‘a@da, which translates the 
Greek eudaimonia) is, and how to achieve such a life, where such a life 
would, of course, be the good life. Avicenna says about the good (kAayr) that 
in general it “is that which everything desires, and what everything desires 
is either existence or the perfection of existence as such” (Metaphysics, V1- 
II.6, 283.15-16). He immediately follows up this unrestricted claim, follow- 
ing Aristotle,’ with the caveat that “the good is what everything desires 
with respect to the definition of [its kind| and by which its existence is com- 
pleted” (ibid., 284.1, emphasis added). Thus, for Avicenna a proper under- 
standing of what the human good is depends upon what the proper perfec- 
tion or existence of the kind human is. 

In his Psychology, it was noted that the highest and most perfect activity 
of a human is that of the intellect. Avicenna further differentiated the hu- 
man intellect into the practical intellect and the theoretical intellect, the 
activity of the practical intellect being subordinate to that of the theoretical 
intellect. Consequently, by Avicenna’s lights the proper good of the human 
is to perform that function or operation that is the human’s most complete 
or perfect activity, namely, to theorize and to contemplate, and particu- 
larly to contemplate the best and most noble thing, namely, the Necessary 
Existent. 

Given that Avicenna believes that the proper perfection of humans is to 
theorize, he would have seen his various works on the theoretical sciences 
as providing his reader, or at least the intellectually gifted reader, with the 
wherewithal to attain his or her proper end or good qua human. Baldly 
stated, it would seem that Avicenna views the practical life as part and par- 
cel of the theoretical one, or, to be more exact, the contemplative life simply 
is the perfection and completion of the life aimed at in the practical philoso- 
phies. Stull, the full fruition of the contemplative life does not come to be in 
the here and now according to Avicenna, but in the hereafter. In a very real 
sense then, ethical theory, understood as the philosophical investigation of 
the proper end or good of humans, is for Avicenna a continuation of meta- 
physics; for humans only find their highest good once free from the distrac- 
tions of the body such that in that state they are able to contemplate fully 
and completely the divinity. 

VALUE THEORY 211 

To help explain Avicenna’s position concerning our ultimate destiny 
and the role of practical philosophy in achieving that end, I again in this 
chapter return to Avicenna’s distinction between the theoretical and practi- 
cal intellect, now paying special attention to the formation of our moral 
temperaments and their role in helping us to achieve our proper perfection. 
Since Avicenna believes that the proper formation of these temperaments 
and the life of the human species require communal association, I also con- 
sider what might be thought of as Avicenna’s political theory, which at its 
core has the Avicennan counterpart to the Platonic “Philosopher-King,” 
namely, Avicenna’s “Prophet-Lawgiver.” Once completing this back- 
ground, I turn to Avicenna’s conception of the return or afterlife (ma‘ad) 
and the pleasures and pains that one might expect to experience there de- 
pending upon the life one has lived here. I then conclude with Avicenna’s 
account of providence and his general theodicy, that is, his account of why 

evil exists in a world created by a wholly good God. 

The Practical Intellect and 

Moral Temperaments 

In chapter S I noted that for Avicenna the true nature of the human self 
cannot be identified with the human body. The self is in fact for him im- 
material. Still, the human self has close ties to the body, for the appearance 
of a suitable body occasions the Giver of Forms to produce a human soul 
whenever it does. Moreover, Avicenna is insistent that the intellect initially 
needs the body in order to acquire those potential intelligibles that allow it 
to perform its proper activity and so perfect itself. Thus, while we should 
not identify ourselves with our body, our initial dependence and indeed 
ultimate management of the body are crucial to our flourishing as humans 
(Psychology, 1V.5, 221.12-223.10). In fact, Avicenna contends, humans, or 
more exactly human souls, possess a unique position in the cosmos because 
of this relation. The human soul, Avicenna tells us, is, as it were, Janus- 
faced, looking both toward the immaterial realm of intelligibles and the 
material realm of the body: 

The human soul, though one substance, has a relation and reference to 
two sides, one below it and one above it, and for each side there is a fac- 
ulty through which the connection between it and that side is ordered. 
The practical faculty, then, is the one that the soul possesses for the 

212 AVICENNA 

connection with the side below it, that is, the body and its maintenance. 
The theoretical faculty is the one that the soul possesses for the connec- 
tion to the side above it, to be affected by it, learn from it, and receive 
from it. So, it is as though our soul has two faces, one directed to the 
body—and this is the one that must not endure any effect of a type 
entailed by the body’s nature—and another one directed to the lofty 

principles—and this is the one that must always be receptive to and 
affected by what is there. It is from the lower side that the moral disposi- 
tions (akAlaq) are produced, whereas it is from the higher side that the 

sciences are produced (Psychology, 1.5, 47.8-18). 

What Avicenna here terms “the lower side” is in fact the practical intellect, 
which manages and directs the activities of the body required by our bodily 
existence and interactions with the physical world. 

The appropriate ethical actions and social interactions are in turn “de- 
termined by reflecting on what is required by customary opinions specific 
to [those activities|” (ibid., 45.20). These bodily activities, Avicenna contin- 
ues, might be relative to our appetitive faculty, the compositive imagina- 
tion, and the estimative faculty,” or even the intellect itself. In relation to the 
appetitive faculty, the practical intellect gives rise to various socially appro- 
priate human emotions, such as shame or modesty as well as laughter and 
weeping relative to given situation, whereas when the practical intellect is 
joined with the compositive imagination or estimative faculty it gives rise to 
a knowledge of those arts, crafts, and occupations (such as medicine, car- 
pentry, farming, and the like) by which we manage and control the ever- 
changing world in which we live (ibid., 46.3—8). 

It is with respect to itself together with the theoretical intellect that for 
Avicenna the practical intellect touches on the truly ethical; for the practi- 
cal and theoretical intellect acting in unison give rise to the beliefs associ- 
ated with practical actions that are the widespread common opinions, as, 
for example, lying and oppression are bad, and the application of those 
widespread common opinions to particular situations (ibid., 46.9-15). 
While Avicenna is quick to remark that such moral dicta are not at the 
level of first principles, he does think it important to note that they arise as 
a result of the theoretical intellect’s reflecting upon the widespread mores 
and conventions of a society, mores and conventions, as will be seen, that 
are initially imposed by a lawmaker-prophet. Thus, the moral judgments 
can and do function like general rules by which one might flourish in a 

society. The practical intellect in turn takes these general moral claims and 

VALUE THEORY 213 

applies them to the particular day-to-day cases with which we find our- 
selves confronted in order to determine whether to proceed or to avoid 
some particular line of action, whether the action is beneficial or harmful, 
as well as whether the particular action is morally good or bad (Psychology, 
V.1, 206.1 1—209.13). 

In fact, claims Avicenna, the formation of one’s moral temperaments 
(sing. khulqg) is based upon whether the practical intellect does or does not 
successfully act in accordance with these moral judgments in a particular 
case when there are bodily desires opposing those judgments (Psychology, 
1.5, 46.15-47.7; Salvation, “Psychology,” 3, 330-332). Vices then result when 
the bodily passions dominate the practical intellect, and one ignores the 
course dictated by reason, whereas moral virtues occur when bodily desires 
are subordinated to the practical intellect and reason. Thus, for example, 
one has the vice of dishonesty when one regularly ignores the dictum “lying 
is bad” because one has some desire to acquire some apparent bodily good 
or avoid some possible harm, whereas one has the virtue of honesty when 
one avoids lying regardless of the personal loss or affliction caused by fol- 
lowing that dictum. For Avicenna, then, vice is a decided deficiency of the 
proper human perfection, namely, the activity of the intellect, for in acting 
viciously one rejects the conclusions of the human intellect in preference for 
irrational bodily desires. 

As for the nature of the moral temperaments, Avicenna begins his own 
analysis by initially following the position of Aristotle as presented at Ni- 
comachean Ethics, 1 1-6. Thus, Avicenna identifies moral temperament 
with “a disposition [or habit (malaka)| by which certain actions readily orig- 
inate from the soul without prior deliberation” (Metaphysics, 1X, 7, 354.7). 
In similar Aristotelian fashion, Avicenna also asserts that one should act 
upon the mean (tawassut) between two contrary moral temperaments 
(namely, between an excess and deficiency), not simply to do moderate ac- 
tions without acquiring a moderate disposition, but precisely in order to 
acquire a moderate disposition. Now, like Aristotle before him, Avicenna 
holds that excesses and deficiencies are in fact vices; however, he addition- 
ally maintains that they are the necessary results of our animal faculties, 
and thus of our being in a body. Consequently, the reason one should want 
to acquire a moderate disposition, maintains Avicenna, is in order that one 
might “transcend the conditions that tie [us to the body] and preserve the 
proper state of the rational soul, while so preparing [the rational soul] to go 

beyond and transcend [the body]” (ibid., 354.16—17). 

214 AVICENNA 

In this respect, Avicenna is less like Aristotle and more like Plato’s Soc- 
rates of the Phaedo (64a): One lives the virtuous or moderate life as a prac- 
tice for death and dying, where “death” is understood as the separation of 
the soul from the body. Also like Plato before him, Avicenna justifies this 
position by appealing to what should be our proper desire, namely, the 
perfection or completion of ourselves as humans, where again for Avi- 
cenna that perfection is the act of our rational faculty, namely, intellectual 
activity. It is precisely because the body constantly distracts one and pulls 
one away from this activity that Avicenna sees bodily desires and needs as 
vices: They prevent one from achieving his or her full perfection as a hu- 
man. Therefore, to the extent that a moderate disposition trains us to ig- 
nore or at least not to give into bodily desires, such a life prepares one for 
the separation of the soul from the body. It is only in the disembodied state 
for Avicenna that the properly prepared soul is able to perform its proper 
perfection most fully, and only then truly flourish and be ultimately 

happy. 

The “Philosopher-Prophet” and Laws 

Avicenna is aware that there is a decided tension between the proper per- 
fection of the human, which involves the soul’s disassociating itself from 
the body so as to contemplate completely the Necessary Existent, and the 
soul’s function of managing the body as well as its reliance on the body in 
order to acquire the potential intelligibles needed for its proper perfection. 
It is perhaps because of this tension that humans differ from other animals 
in that humans can only truly live well and flourish within a community, 
where all members work together for one another’s mutual benefit. While 
other animals too may live a communal life, what marks human communi- 
ties off from those others species is for Avicenna the specialization of tasks 
among its members. Thus, not all humans perform the same jobs in their 
communities, but one grows vegetables, another bakes, one sews, and yet 
another makes the tools, and so on (Metaphysics, X.2, 364.7-12). The fact 
that humans do perform specialized tasks rather than everyone performing 
every task, made the formation of cities necessary, argues Avicenna in a 
sentiment echoing Plato before him, for the various individuals performing 
their specialized tasks needed to congregate in well-defined areas where 

they could enjoy the benefits of one another’s labor.’ 

VALUE THEORY 215 

Since the existence and survival of humans requires working together 
for their mutual benefit and engaging in business transactions (mu‘amala), 
just laws governing such transactions are, maintains Avicenna, essential 
(ibid., 364.16—365.12). He moreover believes that in order for these laws to 
be just and fair for all, they cannot merely be the result of private opinions 
(for there is the risk that individuals will disagree and prefer their own 
good to the communal good). Since laws governing human associations and 
interactions aid in the existence and survival of the human species as well as 
being necessary for the individual human in order that he or she reaches his 
or her proper perfection, these laws make up part of the overall order of the 
good that exists in the cosmos. As such Avicenna thinks it is simply impos- 
sible that divine providence (‘“ndya ald), properly understood as the Neces- 
sary Existent’s willing itself and so willing the order of the good,” would not 
provide the very basis of these laws necessary for human existence and sur- 
vival, namely, by providing divine lawgivers in the form of prophets. 

In chapter 5, I gave Avicenna’s account of prophecy and how the prophet, 
owing to the perfect state of his or her soul, almost immediately and, as it 
were, without being taught recognizes the order of the good, namely, the 
divine causal order. Moreover, the prophet also sees this order in the form 
of images that he or she then uses to convey the divine will to others. 

At the very heart of prophetic law are, Avicenna tells us, certain beliefs 
about the Necessary Existent or God. Thus, for example, we must believe 
that God exists and has created us; that God is absolutely one (that is, that 
“there is no god but God”); that God is all powerful and all knowing; that 
we must obey God; and that God has prepared for us an afterlife, heaven 
for those who obey, hell for those who do not (Metaphysics, X.2, 365.13-17). 
Beyond this relatively simple set of religious beliefs, the prophet does not 
speak, says Avicenna, since those of weaker intellects may not be able to 
grasp the various doctrinal issues associated with the true nature of God, 
such as God’s immateriality and the like (ibid., 365.18—366.8). 

Since individuals with a prophetic soul are few and far between, contin- 
ues Avicenna, the prophet must also impose certain obligations upon the 
people that are to be performed regularly in order to help the people re- 
member what the prophet has demanded that they believe. These obliga- 
tions in part take the form of acts of worship (Metaphysics, X.3, 367-370). 
The first such act of worship, which is to be performed daily and indeed 
several times a day, says Avicenna, is prayer to God. Such prayer focuses the 

mind on God and the afterlife, the contemplation of which is the proper 

216 AVICENNA 

perfection of humans. Moreover, to help us break the ties that bind us to our 
bodies and hinder our proper function, the prophet imposes further acts of 
worship, such as fasting, giving of one’s own material goods to those less 
fortunate, as well as undertaking the difficulties of pilgrimage. All of these 
acts of worship not only help us remember the laws given by the prophet, 
but also, continues Avicenna, they better prepare us to disassociate our- 
selves from the distractions of our body and so focus our full attention on 
God. Here it is certainly worth noting that Avicenna has in effect repro- 
duced and validated the five so-called Pillars of Islam: the Shahada or Mus- 
lim profession of faith (“there is no god but God”), prayer, alms, fasting 
(during Ramadan), and the Hajj, that is, pilgrimage to Mecca. 

In fact, Avicenna warns us, unless these actions are accompanied by 
knowledge of, and indeed a desire for greater knowledge of, God, the mere 
nonreflective performance of them becomes nothing more than a tawdry 
business transaction (mu @mala) (Pointers and Reminders, namat 9, 199). 
Thus, for example, religious asceticism that is unaccompanied by contem- 
plation of God, complains Avicenna, is actually a form of hedonism, since 
the ascetic is merely foregoing the pleasures of this life in hope of greater 
pleasures in the next. Similarly, merely performing prayers, pilgrimage, 
and the like without these acts being accompanied by contemplation re- 
duces their performer to a lowly wage earner, working in this life in order 
to earn material gain or goods in the next. Those who truly benefit from 
worship are only those individuals who perform these actions in the full 
knowledge that they do them, not for the sake of physical pleasures in the 
next world, but in order to acquire a greater understanding of God, which 
only reaches its full perfection in the hereafter. 

In addition to the doctrinal creed and acts of worship, the prophet also 
sets laws for the social interactions of the community. To this end, Avi- 
cenna, in a division reminiscent of Plato’s Republic, has the prophet- 
lawgiver mark off three groups within the city: the rulers, craftsmen, and 
guardians (Metaphysics, X.4, 370.8—9). This ranking, he believes, helps 
ensure that every member of the society is assigned some place and role in 
the city lest anyone be idle, for the laws must preclude unemployment and 
idleness, which Avicenna believes to be among the greatest evils for the city. 
In like fashion, the lawmaker prohibits those professions, such as gambling 
and usury, in which property is transferred without a mutual exchange of 
benefit, for Avicenna sees in such professions a type of idleness in that they 

do not involve honest toil (ibid., 371.9—18). 

VALUE THEORY 217 

The lawmaker must also prescribe laws concerning marriage, which Avi- 
cenna sees as one of the most important social institutions (ibid., 372.1-374.5). 
So, for example, marriage almost always results in the progeny that perpetu- 
ate the species, which is part of the order of the good. Moreover, children are 
more properly brought up, continues Avicenna, when both parents are in- 
volved. Similarly, whereas the lawmaker must allow for divorces, divorces 
should not be easily obtained, argues Avicenna, because “of the things tied to 
the public good, love is the most significant, and the bonds of love occur only 
through affection, and affection occurs only through long association” (ibid., 
372.11-13). In general, Avicenna reproduces, commends, and validates much 
of the law set down by Muhammad in the Qur’4n, as providing the proper 
religious creed, acts of worship, and the laws governing social interactions 
required to maximize the odds and numbers of individuals realizing their 

proper perfection as humans through the contemplation of God. 

The Afterlife (Ma‘ad) 

I have briefly considered Avicenna’s account of the practical intellect and 
moral temperaments, which might be seen as constituting his ethical theory, 
followed by his view of the lawgiver-prophet and laws, which might be seen 
as constituting his political theory. While discussing these issues I have 
regularly made reference to Avicenna’s position that the human’s ultimate 
perfection, namely, the contemplation of the Necessary Existent or God, 
only completely occurs in a disembodied state in the afterlife. Thus, I should 
now turn to Avicenna’s conception of the afterlife and the pleasures and 
pains therein. 

In the Psychology, Avicenna had argued that not only is the human intel- 
lect essentially immaterial and so capable of existing separate from the 

body, but also that only in a disembodied state can the intellect fully and 

completely perform that action most proper to it—namely, contemplation 
and particularly contemplation of the Necessary Existent. In this respect 
there is a very real sense in which humans are natural things, but ones with 
a supernatural end. Avicenna is also equally aware that few would find 
a life devoid of any bodily pleasures—during which one everlastingly 
contemplates the order of the good as it emanates from the Necessary 
Existent—as a desirable end. To put it bluntly, for most people copulating 

certainly appears more desirable than contemplating. 

218 AVICENNA 

Avicenna is quite aware of the discrepancies between what he thinks he 
can demonstrate about a human’s highest good and the way that things 
might appear now. Thus, in order to justify his conclusion he provides an 
analysis of pleasure in the hope of convincing us that the intellectual pleas- 
ures of the afterlife are simply unimaginable to the embodied mind, in just 
the same way that an eunuch cannot truly imagine sexual pleasures, or the 
child cannot imagine why adults do not prefer to spend their hours in juve- 
nile games (Metaphysics, 1X.7, 349.1-6). 

Pleasure (/adhdha) is according to Avicenna “a perception and attain- 
ment vis-a-vis the perceiver of a certain perfection and good as such” (Pointers 
and Reminders, namat, 8, 191). Now, what perceives is the animal’s various 
perceptive faculties. Thus, there are pleasures associated with each of the 
various external and internal senses as well as the appetitive and irascible 
powers or faculties. So, for example, there are the pleasures associated with 
a caress (touch), good food (taste), a fragrant odor (smell), a beautiful sound 
or sight (hearing and seeing), but there are also the pleasures of daydream- 
ing (imagination or the estimative faculty), satisfying a hunger or need 
(appetitive faculty), or vanquishing a foe (irascible faculty). Avicenna makes 
similar comments about pain (alam), which parallel pleasure: “Pain is a per- 
ception and attainment vis-a-vis the perceiver of a certain imperfection and 
evil” (ibid.). Since all of the perceptive faculties have a corresponding pleas- 
ure and pain, reasons Avicenna, the human’s faculty of intellectual percep- 
tion must also have corresponding intellectual pleasures and pains. 

Despite the fact that all the various pleasures share a certain formal sim- 
ilarity as given in the definition, they nonetheless, continues Avicenna, dif- 
fer in how they are related to one another. Some pleasures are for him of a 
higher order than others. In other words, not all pleasures are alike; some 
are more pleasant than others. To help us consider how to rank the various 
pleasures, Avicenna provides a list of criteria for measuring them (Mera- 
physics, 1X.7, 348.15-18). These criteria are of two types: those that involve 
the pleasures associated with perfection, and those involving the pleasure 
itself. 

Thus, in the first category one criterion is that the more complete and 
excellent the associated perfection, the more pleasant the related pleasure. 
So, for example, while a piece of bread may take the edge off the appetite of 
a starving teenager and so be judged a pleasure, a full pizza that sates both 
his or her stomach and pallet is more pleasurable. Second, the greater the 

number of associated perfections, the greater the pleasure; for instance, a 

VALUE THEORY 219 

dinner consisting of a single dish may be pleasant, but a banquet consisting 
of numerous delicacies is even more so. Third, the more enduring the as- 
sociated perfection, the greater it is. Thus, while a short-lived fling may be 
pleasant, a long-lasting loving relation is certainly more so. Fourth, the 
more fully one reaches and is absorbed by the perfection, the more pleasant 
it is. So, an example might be like the differing degrees of pleasure one 
takes in two books, one being merely amusing, while the other is truly en- 
thralling.° As for those criteria related to the pleasure itself rather than its 
correlative perfection, Avicenna begins with the perfection and excellence 
of a given action. So, for example, while one who is playing chess may take 
pleasure in winning, even if dishonestly, all things being equal it would be 
more pleasant to win fairly. Second, and finally, the more intensely a pleas- 
ure is perceived the more pleasurable it is, which seems to go without 
saying. 

Armed with this set of criteria, Avicenna then undertakes a comparison 
between bodily pleasures in toto and the intellectual pleasure to be experi- 
enced in the afterlife (ibid., 350.8—351.6). He begins by describing what this 

state is like: 

The perfection proper to the rational soul is to become an intelligible 
universe.’ [In other words] there is impressed into [the rational soul] the 
form of the cosmos, the cosmos’ intelligible order, and the good emanated 
upon it starting from the Cause of the cosmos followed by the high rank- 
ing absolutely immaterial substances and then the immaterial substances 
associated with bodies through the celestial bodies, their configurations, 
and powers until the entire configuration of existence is completely con- 
tained within [the soul] itself (Metaphysics, [X.7, 350.8-11). 

Inasmuch as this perfection takes in the whole of existence and particularly 
the cause of all existence, namely, the Necessary Existent or God, there 
could be no perfection that is more complete and excellent. In similar fash- 
ion, continues Avicenna, since the whole of existence is going to encompass 
all perfections, the number of perfections associated with intellectual 
pleasure is going to be greater. Also, the afterlife is everlasting, and so the 
duration of pleasure in our disembodied state is incomparable with the 
short-lived pleasures experienced during our bodily existence. As for being 
absorbed by the perfection, the intellect, its act, and its object all become 
one, whereas the superficial pleasures of the body involve contact and so 

involve some form of duality. Avicenna goes on and notes that since the 

220 AVICENNA 

intellect is the most perfect and excellent faculty of the human, the pleas- 
ures associated with it are going to be the most perfect and excellent ones as 
well. Finally, with respect to the intensity of intellectual pleasure, Avicenna 
provides a description of it that is simply replete with double entendre. “It 
will get a complete feel of the object of perception, stripping it totally of the 
accessories that are only accidentally included in its account, and then pen- 
etrating the very ins and outs of the object of perception” (ibid., 351.3—5). 
Under every criterion laid down for judging between pleasures, Avicenna 
assures us that intellectual pleasures come out on top. The only reason that 
we do not recognize intellectual pleasure here and now, or at best only get 
a hint of it, is because either our body impedes or distracts us from it, or we 
are steeped in vice and immoderation, which again is owing to our embod- 
ied state (ibid., 351.7—13). 

Such a state of happiness, Avicenna reminds us, is reserved for those 
capable of intellectual and rational activity who have actively striven to un- 
derstand God and God’s creation as completely as they could. In contrast, 
he continues, hell and misery await those who, while capable of such intel- 
lectual activity, have chosen not to strive after such knowledge or have op- 
posed such knowledge, either simply denying the existence of God and the 
order of the good outright, or dogmatically clinging to opinions that oppose 
the truth (ibid., 353.79). Again, recall that for Avicenna pain is a percep- 
tion and attainment of a certain imperfection and evil. When these irreli- 
gious souls are separated from the body they will perceive that they do not 
have that perfection proper to humans as intellectual beings. Hence, they 
perceive in themselves an imperfection and lack of a proper good, but to 
perceive an imperfection and lack of a proper good is just for Avicenna to 
be in pain. For the damned, the pain will be directly proportional to the 
pleasure that the blessed experience. “That then is the misery and punish- 
ment with which a fire that tears [you] apart and a blistering cold that 
freezes [you to your| marrow pale in comparison” (ibid., 352.6—7). 

As for the souls of simpletons and those who never understood what 
their proper perfection as humans is, Avicenna believes that if they have 
lived moderate lives, lives presumably following the dictates set down by 
the prophet, then the separation of their souls from their bodies will be 
relatively easy (ibid., 356.1-18). Since they have been habituated to set aside 
the passions of the body, Avicenna thinks that through God’s mercy they 
will come to a state of comfort and rest, not feeling the intense pleasures of 

the truly blessed but also feeling no pain. As for those simple-minded souls 

VALUE THEORY 221 

who behaved viciously in this life and gave themselves over to excess and 
deficiency, they will find themselves still tied to bodily desires. Since they 
have no body to satisfy these desires, they will remain forever unfulfilled 
and so these souls will be pained in the hereafter. 

Avicenna additionally suggests that what he has heard from certain 
other scholars might be true (ibid.), and if so it would allow for bodily 
pleasures and pains of a certain sort in the afterlife despite the separation of 
body and soul. The suggestion is that these separated souls may in some 
way be able to take celestial material as the subject of certain soul-activities 
that require a body like the activities of imagining and dreaming. The idea 
is that the simple-minded soul, vicariously using a celestial body, will imag- 
ine that it has a body, and, through such an imagined body, it will experi- 
ence all the pleasures or torments that the individual learned about from 
the Qur’an or other sacred scriptures. In other words, it would seem that 
Avicenna is imagining a Cartesian demonlike scenario, where there is pro- 
duced in the souls of simpletons the phenomenal experiences of a physical 
heaven or hell replete with bodily pains or pleasures even though there are 

no extramental places corresponding with these experiences. 

Providence and Evil 

At Metaphysics, 1X.6, Avicenna begins his account of divine providence 
(‘indya) with the observation that the Necessary Existent does not create the 
cosmos for our sake or, for that matter, for the sake of any created thing. 
The reason he gives for his position—the details of which he had provided 
earlier at Metaphysics, 1X.3—is, in quite general terms, that when some 
agent acts for the sake of a given thing, x, then x stands to the agent as a final 
cause, which is a certain good that improves or completes the agent. Conse- 
quently, if the Necessary Existent were to create the cosmos for the sake of 
created things, then its creating the cosmos would make the Necessary Ex- 
istent better or more complete than it would have been should it not have 
created. Of course, as Avicenna never grows weary of reminding us, there 
is no good proper to the Necessary Existent that it does not have of itself or 
essentially. Therefore, it can neither create the cosmos for the sake of, nor 
be concerned about, the created ordered (Metaphysics, [X.6, 339.46). 

Stull, Avicenna hastens to add, the obvious manifestations of order and 

design in both the heavens and here on Earth are clear indications of the 

222 AVICENNA 

presence of a divine providence. For providence, he tells us, is “the First 
[Cause’s] knowing through itself that according to which the order of the 
good exists and that [the First] is essentially the cause of the good and per- 
fection commensurate with possible [existence] and that [the First] consents 
to it in the way noted earlier” (ibid., 339.8-10).° In other words, in that the 
Necessary Existent wills itself, it wills the order of the good. In that we are 
part of that order, all that we need for our good and perfection is contained 
within the order of the good emanating from the Necessary Existent. Sim- 
ply put, all created things are amply provided for by the Necessary Exist- 
ent’s emanative or creative act even though that act is not for the sake of 
anything other than the Necessary Existent itself. 

Avicenna begins addressing the issue of the presence of evil in our world, 
and so its presence in the order of the good itself, by making a number of 
observations about evil. First, “evil” (sharr), he points out, is said in many 
ways (ibid., 339-13—40.17).. For instance, one refers to a deficiency or imper- 
fection in a thing as an evil, such as ignorance or physical deformity. Such 
evil might be thought of as internal to the thing. Evil might also refer to 
something external to the thing, where the evil consists in one’s being aware 
or perceiving either the presence or absence of a cause that inflicts the evil. 
Thus, for example, one who is freezing perceives the absence of a fire (or 
other suitable heat source) as an evil, while one trapped in a burning house 
perceives the presence of fire as an evil. 

Second, following in a long line of Neoplatonic thinkers, Avicenna sees 
evil as having no positive existence or reality of its own. Instead, evil is 
properly an absence or privation of some good or existence. Third, and 
closely related to the last point, Avicenna adds that not just any privation or 
absence is an evil, but only a privation of some perfection required by the 
nature of the thing, where the perfections in question are grounded in the 
very species and nature of the thing (ibid., 340.11-12). Thus, there is noth- 
ing evil about the fact that a rock cannot see. Only in something of which 
sight is one of the perfections and goods of that kind of thing is the absence 
of sight and blindness an evil. 

Fourth, and as a corollary of the last point, there is for Avicenna nothing 
that is simply absolute, pure evil; rather, like the notion of good, evil is al- 
ways either relative to the kind of thing suffering the evil, or relative to 
some particular situation. In fact, to the extent that evil is understood as a 
privation of some good or perfection, and being or existence itself is a perfec- 

tion or good, absolute privation could only refer to absolute nonexistence. 

VALUE THEORY 223 

Consequently, since Avicenna’s analysis of the Necessary Existent entails 
that it is not even possible that the Necessary Existent not exist, and so nec- 
essarily something must exist, absolute evil itself has to be impossible. 

This point leads Avicenna to a fifth observation: Anything whose exist- 
ence is at its ultimate perfection, and so has no potency in it, cannot be 
touched by evil. Now, as seen in chapter a Avicenna believes that 
potency requires matter as its bearer or subject. Thus, none of the higher 
Intelligences can suffer any evil according to Avicenna, for they are 
wholly immaterial. Only the material things found in the sublunar 
realm can experience evil, and they suffer evil precisely because they are 
things that temporally come to be and change. In other words, things here 
in the sublunar world are not the sorts of things that come to be, fully real- 
izing their proper perfection. Instead, they acquire their perfection 
through a process of change. Thus, evil, understood as a privation of some 
good or perfection proper to the kind, may befall temporally changing 
things precisely because of the kind of things that they are, namely, things 
that temporally come to be and possess a potentiality for some good or 
perfection. 

Given Avicenna’s third observation—namely that any particular evil is 
always relative to a certain kind and that evil is confined to natural kinds, 
namely, things that undergo change—Avicenna can go part of the way to- 
ward explaining why natural evil appears in the order of the good emanat- 
ing from the Necessary Existent or God. (Natural evil, which also goes by 
the name “surd evil” is like, for example, a fire started by lightening. It is to 
be contrasted with an evil that is the result of willful agent, as, for example, 
the evil associated with a fire started by arson.) In the case of external, natu- 
ral things that are apprehended as causes of evil, the explanation is fairly 
straightforward (ibid., 340.18—343.14). When something x causes some per- 
ceived harm in y or prevents y from receiving some good, x can be consid- 
ered either in itself or relative to its effect on y. 

When x is considered merely in itself or essentially as the kind of thing 
that it is, then its performing the functions characteristic of its kind is a 
good or perfection of x. So, for example, when fire burns, it is being a good 
instance of its kind. Likewise, when it rains or snows and a fire is put out, 
the water is being a good instance of its kind. That things should be good 
instances of their kinds in fact contributes to the order of the good. There- 
fore, natural things considered in themselves or essentially are not evil 

but good. 

224 AVICENNA 

When, however, x is considered relative to y, and x either prevents y 
from obtaining some good or removes some good from y, then x is consid- 
ered an evil relative to or accidentally to y. Thus, when someone is burned 
by a fire, the fire is perceived as a cause of evil relative to the one burned, for 
certainly if that same person were freezing the fire would be perceived as a 
good. Conversely, if rain were to prevent a freezing person from starting a 
fire, the impediment to and absence of the fire would be perceived as an 
evil. Inasmuch as x is considered relative to y, and relations are accidental, 
x’s being a cause of some evil for y is accidental. In short, what Avicenna 
wants us to recognize is that none of the various things that make up the 
natural order is essentially a cause of evil or an evil cause. Considered in 
themselves and essentially, they are all good. Natural or surd evil resulting 
from external causes, then, is an accidental consequence of natural things 
performing their necessary and proper activities. Thus, it cannot be said 
that the Necessary Existent or God creates evil essentially or per se, but only 
as a necessary consequence of creating good. 

As for the existence of the so-called internal evils, such as physical de- 
formity, Avicenna returns to the principles of causation discussed in both 
his Physics and Metaphysics (ibid., 344.14-347.12). Again, there are two or- 
ders of causes for things that come to be temporally: one, the natural, acci- 
dental causes that prepare the material to receive a given species forms, as, 
for example, changing the qualities of hot/cold and wet/dry in a thing, and, 
two, a metaphysical, essential cause of that species form itself, namely, the 
Giver of Forms. 

Now, as a matter of purely natural causation, two causal chains may 
intersect such that one interferes with another that is preparing the matter, 
and so adversely affect the matter such that it does not properly or com- 
pletely receive the species form when it is bestowed. So, for example, Avi- 
cenna believes that within the mother’s womb the mixture of male and 
female semen is warmed and so prepared for the reception of a given form. 
Moreover, if during this period the mother, as a result of a natural causal 
chain, came down with a fever, the excess heat could very well adversely 
affect fetal development. In that case, the naturally affected matter may not 
completely receive the species form. As a result the child would be 
deformed. Nothing is essentially the cause of the deformity; rather, it is only 
the accidental conjunction of two causal series that produced the evil. Again, 
one sees that the Necessary Existent or God does not create evil essentially 

or per se; rather, it results as a necessary consequence of its creating good. 

VALUE THEORY 225 

Unfortunately, Avicenna says very little about moral evils, that is, willful 
acts of harm or evil. He does say, however, that such evils arise only when 
some individual has personally decided upon such a line of action (ibid., 
341.17-342.3). The individual, however, has personally decided upon that 
line of action, not because he or she is a human or a soul, but because the 
individual has been habituated and has a moral temperament disposing 
him or her to desire some apparent good that is expected to result from that 
act. Such faulty judgment, as noted, results when the practical intellect does 
not overcome its state of being in matter but succumbs to the body’s natural 
desires. Thus, insofar as the Necessary Existent is the ultimate cause for the 
existence of the human species, and it is not in virtue of being human that 
moral evils exist but owing to immoral personal decisions on the part of 
individual humans, the Necessary Existent is not for Avicenna the cause of 
moral evil. In this respect, then, it seems that Avicenna must adopt some 
form of compatibilism, for, as just noted, he believes that we are moral 
agents and we are responsible for our actions, and yet he also maintains that 
this moral responsibility can be reconciled with the type of causal determin- 
ism he endorses. 

Still, one might complain that it is the very fact that the Necessary Exist- 
ent created a world in which there exist things that can inflict and be sub- 
ject to evil that there is any evil at all. Certainly it seems possible that God 
or the Necessary Existent could have created a world better than this one by 
creating a world free of evil. While Avicenna concedes that the Necessary 
Existent could have created a world free of evil, he denies that it would be 
a better world (ibid., 343.1-8). His argument for this conclusion is that no 
world like the present one, in which there are temporal, changing, physical 
things, can be free from the kind of accidental evils already mentioned. 
These again are the necessary results of there being things that exist in time, 
are material, and need to undergo change in order to perfect themselves. 

As for why such species are subject to evil, when discussing Avicenna’s 
conception of possibility, I noted that he adamantly denies that there can be 
a cause for why a given degree of privation along the chain of perfection or 
necessary existence should correspond with whatever species of possible 
existence that it does. In other words, there neither is nor can be a cause for 
why the members of certain species come to exist only after having not 
existed, and thus require matter for their coming to be. There is no cause 
for why these members do not eternally exist at their ultimate perfection, 

and thus must undergo change to realize their proper perfection. As a 

226 AVICENNA 

corollary, for Avicenna there simply can be no cause of the fact that certain 
species of possible existents are subject to evil, for that is just to ask what is the 
cause of their being subject to time, change, and the limitations of matter. 

Consequently, since for Avicenna it is impossible for the species of indi- 
viduals that make up the sublunar realm to exist without evil’s existing, the 
Necessary Existent could create a world free of evil only if it created a world 
devoid of all the species subject to time, change, and the limitations of mat- 
ter. While such a world would indeed have no evil in it, it would, Avicenna 
notes, also lack all the goods and perfections that only exist in temporally 
changing things. Now, if by a “better” world one means a world with a 
greater amount of good realized in a greater number of species, then, for 
Avicenna, a world in which evil can exist is, ironically, better than a world 
where it cannot. Thus, while as far as I can see Avicenna never commits 
himself to this world’s being “the best of all possible worlds,” it is better 
than a world in which evil is rendered impossible. 

Again, in general Avicenna has little to say explicitly about issues in 
value theory. Still, I hope to have shown that it is also false to say he was not 
concerned at all with political and ethical issues. Instead, I believe, he saw 
himself as so integrating these issues into every aspect of his philosophical 
system that a volume or two explicitly dedicated to them was perhaps su- 
perfluous. Moreover, since much of his discussion related to political and 
ethical issues involves providing a theoretical framework for understand- 
ing and justifying Islamic religious practices, he may well have seen the 
Qur’an and the traditions of the prophet Muhammad as providing the 

practical application of his own ethical and political theories. 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 

Introduction 

As well as being one of the greatest Muslim philosophers of the medieval 
period, Avicenna was also known as the “Prince of Physicians.” His Canon 
of Medicine was the standard medical textbook in Europe well into the sev- 
enteenth century (and even beyond) and still remains a source of authority 
among groups of traditional healers in the Middle East. In outline, the 
work consists of five books, including a general discussion of the scientific 
background to medicine and anatomy, an account of the therapeutic prop- 
erties of substances used in medicine, a book devoted to specific or localized 
ailments, and another book to more general diseases, such as fever, that 
affect the whole body, and finally a treatise on pharmacology. In general, 
Avicenna derives his system of medicine from that of the Graeco-Roman 
physician Galen (129-200 CE)—who himself took Hippocratic medicine 
as his starting point. Avicenna additionally augments his Greek medical 
and anatomical sources with developments made by physicians in Islamic 
lands, such as those of Abi Bakr ar-Razi (the Latin Rhazes; 865-925 or 932) 
and ‘Ali ibn al-‘Abbas al-Majiist (the Latin Haly Abbas; d. ca. ggo). Still, 
when it comes to the philosophical underpinnings of medicine, Avicenna is 
more apt to defer to Aristotle than to the physicians themselves when there 

is disagreement. 

227 

228 AVICENNA 

While it is true that Avicenna’s system of medicine in the main is 
derivative, namely, an amalgamation of Aristotle, Galen, and others, it 
would be wrong on that account to dismiss it as not being of historical, 
philosophical, and scientific interest and importance in its own right. First, 
Galen’s own medical and philosophical corpus extends to twenty volumes 
in its modern edition, which itself does not include some treatises that are 
only extant in Arabic translation. Consequently, given the extent of his 
writings, mastering Galen’s corpus was a tedious and painstaking enter- 
prise for the medieval physician. Moreover, since few physicians would be 
able to possess the complete Galenic opera, they were often without any 
practical reference work of medicine. Thus, Avicenna’s comparatively 
short five-volume Canon of Medicine was a godsend for later physicians, 
whether as an introductory textbook for those just beginning to study the 
art of medicine or as a relatively concise and easily manageable handbook 
of the best medicine at the time for the seasoned doctor. 

A second point of importance about Avicenna’s medical writing is that 
when Galen himself was writing, the Neoplatonized Aristotelianism that 
would emerge in Alexandria as the dominant philosophical system during 
the Middle Ages in the Islamic world had not yet been developed. Indeed, 
Aristotelianism at Galen’s time was in genuine competition with such phil- 
osophical schools as Skepticism, Stoicism, and Middle Platonism. Galen 
himself in fact preferred Stoic materialism as the underlying physics for his 
medical theory, a theory, one might add, that viewed the human soul as a 
subtle material substance and so was diametrically opposed to the immate- 
rialist view that Avicenna espoused in his psychology. As a consequence, in 
Avicenna’s day there was something of a scientific crisis at least for philoso- 
phers, for the best medicine of the time was based on a materialism that was 
at odds with what was believed to be the best physical and psychological 
theories of the time. It is thus no wonder that a continuing theme in Avi- 
cenna’s medical writing was to retain as much of Galen’s humoral medical 
theory as was possible, while protecting Avicenna’s own preferred doctrine 
of an immaterial human intellect from Galenic subversion.” 

A third important aspect of Avicenna’s medical theory, which is closely 
related to the last point, becomes obvious to anyone who reads Avicenna’s 
Canon, for one cannot but be impressed with how well-integrated Avicen- 
nan medicine is within the overall scientific and philosophical system that 
he developed. Time and time again, Avicenna easily resolves thorny techni- 

cal issues in medicine simply by referring the reader to his philosophical 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 229 

discussions in his works on physics, biology, and even metaphysics. The 
importance, then, of the Canon, and indeed Avicenna’s medical writings 
more generally, is that it formed an integral part of a medieval worldview 
that incorporated and explained virtually every area of human intellectual 
pursuit. 

In the next few sections, I consider, first, where Avicenna envisions 
medicine within his general classification of the sciences. Next, I present 
the general principles of the humoral medicine that Avicenna adopts, and 
then discuss Avicenna’s views about health and the causes of disease or 
malady more generally. I conclude by considering a concrete issue of a 
medical-philosophical nature treated in Avicenna’s writings, namely, a 
problem associated with embryonic development and specifically whether 
it occurs gradually, as observation seems to suggest, or in stages, as theory 
seems to dictate. This problem was itself entwined with another: the an- 
cient and medieval medical debate over the status of female semen— 
namely, the issue of what the female contributes to the physical makeup of 
the offspring. 

The Classification of Medicine 

as a Science 

In chapter r I considered the ancient and medieval course curriculum that 
Avicenna would have inherited from his Greek predecessors. While this 
course curriculum—which at least for the natural sciences closely paral- 
leled the physical writings of Aristotle—initially provided merely a peda- 
gogical classification of the sciences, later thinkers viewed it as pointing to 
a much deeper reality. Not only was the course curriculum of Aristotle’s 
texts viewed as a classification of all the sciences, but also that classification 
was more importantly thought to represent the very structure of the cosmos 
itself.’ So, for example, it was thought that the sciences are divided into 
those whose purpose is to produce some action (the so-called practical 
sciences) and those whose goal is knowledge for knowledge’s sake without 
regard for action (the so-called theoretical sciences); such a division would 
seem to cut reality at its joints. Similarly, it was thought that there could be 
only three basic kinds of theoretical sciences—physics, mathematics, and 
metaphysics—precisely because beings or existents came either as immate- 

rial (the purported subject of metaphysics at least in the later Hellenistic 

230 AVICENNA 

period) or as material, where the material ones can be further considered ei- 
ther independently of their material conditions (the objects of mathematics) 
or they cannot be so considered (the objects of physics or natural philosophy); 
again, an apparently clean and exhaustive division of what exists. Of course, 
under these theoretical sciences there are also further subaltern sciences as 
they were termed. So, for example, psychology, which treats the subclass of 
living physical things falls under physics, and under psychology there is 
zoology, which treats the subclass of living things that are animals (as op- 
posed to plants). 

The science of medicine presents a unique problem: While it is clearly 
concerned with action, namely, the production of health and the curing of 
disease, and so one might think of it as a practical science, it just as obvi- 
ously has a strong theoretical aspect that seems suited to its being one of the 
subaltern sciences falling under a physical science such as biology. 

It is certainly to Avicenna’s credit that instead of turning a blind eye to 
the classification of medicine, and indeed its ontological status, he attempted 
to fit it into his overall scientific schema. At the opening of his Canon, Avi- 
cenna defines medicine as “the science from which one comes to recognize 
the states of the human body on the part of health and the loss thereof in 
order to preserve the health as something realized as well as recovering it 
when lost” (Canon, “Volume One,” I.1.1, 29.6—7). As such, medicine is for 
Avicenna one of the mixed sciences—like, for example, engineering, which 
mixes both the science of geometry and the art of building—and thus med- 
icine has both a theoretical and practical component. 

As for medicine’s practical element, Avicenna does not, in fact, identify 
it with the actual treatment of the patient; rather, it is “the division of the 
science of medicine in which the training provides an opinion (ra’y), where 
that opinion is associated with an explanation of how to treat [the patient]” 
(ibid., I.1.1, 29.920). In other words, Avicenna sees medicine inasmuch as it 
is a practical science as involving the construction of practical syllogisms 
that lead to opinion and not certainty or necessary knowledge. Still, such 
syllogisms must rest on certain theoretical definitions, propositions, and the 
like, and it is medicine’s theoretical division that provides at least some of 
these starting points. 

Avicenna identifies medicine’s theoretical component with one of the 
subsidiary branches (far‘7) of the science of physics (“On the Divisions of 
the Theoretical Science,” 87-88). Other such subsidiary physical sciences 

include astrology, physiognomy, dream interpretation, talisman making, 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 231 

the art of incantations, and alchemy. While today we might find the inclu- 
sion of medicine alongside of so many pseudosciences odd, if not outright 
belittling, it is important to note that Avicenna would not have viewed any 
of the aforementioned sciences as necessarily pseudosciences. Take astrol- 
ogy, for example. Avicenna believed that the movements and position 
of the heavens (the subject of the science of astronomy), directly affect the 
elemental composition and temperamental makeup of things in the sublu- 
nar realm, a position articulated as early as Aristotle and held by virtually 
every philosopher in the ancient and medieval world up to and through the 
time of Avicenna. Moreover, inasmuch as the heavenly motions purport- 
edly influence one’s temperamental makeup, they would also determine 
one’s overall psychological disposition, which in its turn affects the choices 
that one makes and ways one acts. In short, according to Avicenna’s own 
view of physics and psychology, and indeed the best science at the time, the 
motions of the heavens do influence our life and actions. Consequently, 
Avicenna could and did happily accept that in principle there could be a 
science of astrology that is a subsidiary of physics; however, he also adds the 
caveat that in practice there is no such science, at least not in the proper 
sense of “science” as Avicenna understood it. 

His reason for this caveat is that the notion of science that he adopts es- 
sentially involves having necessary knowledge. In the case of astrology, 
there simply are too many factors and precision calculations that need to be 
made in order to attain the required necessity. Consequently, for Avicenna, 
the astrologer can at best have only probable and approximate knowledge, 
which, to Avicenna’s mind, would not have been science properly speaking. 
It is probably for the same reason that Avicenna relegated medicine to a 
subsidiary science of physics; for since so many factors come to play in hu- 
man health (let alone the specific factors of any given individual), at best all 
the physician can hope to achieve is probability and approximation. Still, in 
principle medicine could impart necessary knowledge, even if not in prac- 
tice, and consequently for Avicenna it is one of the branches of theoretical 
physics. 

Inasmuch as medicine is for Avicenna a subsidiary science falling under 
physics, it merely posits and does not attempt to prove those scientific prop- 
ositions demonstrated in the sciences that stand above it. In fact, Avicenna 
chastises physicians such as Galen and others, with their materialist basis 
for medicine, who dabbled in higher natural sciences and yet were unqual- 

ified to do so. Thus, maintains Avicenna, the physician must simply take as 

232 AVICENNA 

first principles the number and nature of the elements, what the most basic 
natural causes are, and the like. Still, it is up to the doctor to determine and 
investigate all the claims proper to medicine itself, such as what health and 
disease are; to identify the various so-called humors and vital spirits or 
pneumas; to determine the kinds of diseases and their nature; and so on. In 

the next sections I shall consider some of these points in more detail. 

The Theoretical Basis of Medicine 

Since theoretical medicine is a science for Avicenna, and all sciences aim to 
uncover the underlying causes of their proper subject, medicine seeks to 
understand the causes of health and disease (Canon, “Volume One,” I.1.11, 
30-32). Moreover, since medicine is a physical science, the physician seeks 
the same causes as those sought by the natural philosopher, namely, the 
material, efficient, formal, and final causes, and particularly for medicine, 
those that are conducive to health or disease. The most immediate material 
causes are the human body and the various organs and pneumas or vital 
spirits that make it up; next are the humors, which I shall discuss shortly; 
and then ultimately the elements. The formal causes that medicine seeks 
are bodily temperaments (miza@j), powers or faculties (gi#wa) of the body, 
and bodily structures or compositions (¢arkib). Efficient causes in medicine 
are anything that produces changes in or preserves the states of the human 
body, which can range from food and drink, to sleep or lack thereof, cli- 
mate, place of residence, and the like. Finally, the final cause of medicine is 
to recognize the actions, the powers or faculties required for those actions, 
and the pneumas or vital spirits that harbor those powers. The physician 
additionally posits as first principles, albeit ones demonstrated in higher 
physical sciences, that elements, temperaments, humors, powers or facul- 
ties, and pneumas exist as well as what their numbers are, and perhaps 
where they are localized. In the rest of this section, I shall consider these 
principles individually in more detail. 

As for the elements (sing. rzkm), I have noted that following a long tradi- 
tion Avicenna recognizes four: earth, water, air, and fire (ibid., I.2, 33-34). 
Avicenna, again following Aristotle, likewise associated with each element 
two primary qualities, one of which is active, the other passive, namely, hot/ 
cold (active qualities) and wet/dry (passive qualities). In general, hot was 

thought to diffuse and separate, while cold draws things together, whereas 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 233 

the quality of wetness is what receives impressions, while dry preserves im- 
pressions. Through natural causal interactions, including the motion of 
heavenly bodies, these four simple elements mix together in varying pro- 
portions that give rise to composite bodies of various temperaments (or 

mixtures). 

‘Temperaments (sing. 772@7)—again the mixtures of varying proportions 

can either be well 

of the four elements and their accompanying qualities 
balanced, such that the various primary qualities nearly balance each other 
off, or not well balanced (ibid., I.3.1, 35-40). From among all the various 
natural kinds, maintains Avicenna, the temperament associated with the 
human species is the closest one to a near perfect balance. By this, Avicenna 
does not mean that the human temperament in a fully developed human is 
some homogeneous state throughout (even if it initially started out as a ho- 
mogeneous mix). In fact, as Avicenna will claim, the various organs that 
make up the fully developed human body are of very different tempera- 
ments, as, for example, the brain is predominately cool, while the heart is 
hot, the liver wet, and bones dry (ibid., 1.3.11, 41-42). Also, some of the var- 
ious humors are hotter and others cooler, some drier while others wetter. 
Thus, when Avicenna speaks of the human temperament as being the most 
well balanced, he means that in the fully developed human the quite differ- 
ent qualities of all of these organs, humors, and the like average each other 
out as it were. 

Additionally, he notes that a natural kind’s temperament should not be 
imagined as some exact point on a scale; rather, the temperament associated 
with a certain natural kind involves a fixed range of hot/cold and wet/dry 
combinations that are conducive to that natural kind and only beyond 
which that temperament and its associated kind cease. Within this range, 
which Avicenna seems to envision as a continuum, there is a potentially 
infinite number of varieties, and Avicenna warns the physician that, “he 
must recognize that each individual [human] requires a temperament 
proper and unique to him or her that no one [else] can have in common” 
(ibid., 1.3.1, 37.23-24). This is probably one of the reasons why Avicenna 
feels that medicine can only lead to opinion rather than certainty, for it can 
only provide knowledge of what generally holds for the range of tempera- 
ments associated with being the kind human rather than the individual and 
exact temperament of a particular patient. 

The individual temperaments come to be when the male and so- 

called female semen (we would now think of it in terms of an ovum) 

234 AVICENNA 

come together, where the various qualities associated with the individual 
temperament might be affected by such factors as the initial qualities of 
the individual parents’ semen, the temperature of the womb and men- 
strual blood, which now becomes nutriment for the embryo, even the 
qualities produced by the motion of the heavens at the time that the two 
semen mix. In very general terms, Avicenna likens the initial stages of 
embryonic development to that of cheese making (ibid., I.5.11, 63.11- 
64.11). The semen first begins churning until it gives rise to a drop of 
blood. That blood then clots forming what might be thought of as the 
zygote. From that blood clot there then comes to be the heart, which 
Avicenna, following Aristotle in opposition to Galen, identifies with the 
primary organ. 

After the initial blood forms in the heart, continues Avicenna, there is 
the differentiation of the remaining humors, followed by the organs, and 
then the rest of the limbs, and the vital spirits or pneumas, all differing with 
respect to their particular temperaments. In all, Avicenna, following the 
accepted medical tradition, recognizes four humors (sing. RAi/z): blood, 
phlegm, yellow bile, and so-called black bile (ibid., 1.4.1, 47-53). Like the 
elements from which they ultimately derive, the humors too are typified by 
the predominance of the two sets of primary active and passive qualities. 
Thus, as already noted, blood, the first humor formed, is hot and wet. 
Phlegm, which Avicenna considered to be imperfectly matured blood, is 
prominently a cold/wet mixture. Yellow bile is of a hot/dry temperament 
and is formed from the froth or foam of the blood as it is heated in the 
heart, while cold and dry characterize black bile, which Avicenna identifies 
with the sediment of normal blood. 

Once there are the various humors, the organs and vital spirits or pneu- 
mas come to be (ibid., 1.3—4, 35-57; “Cures of the Heart,” §§ 1-2, 172-175). 
In general, Avicenna thinks that all of the humors consist of both finer at- 
tenuated parts, which are associated with hot and dry qualities inherent in 
the various humors, and those cold/dry parts that are coarser and “earthy.” 
The coarser parts become differentiated into the various bodily organs, 
while the finer portions become the vital spirits that animate those organs. 
So, for example, the heart was believed to be a hot/dry organ, and, indeed, 
the ultimate source of all the innate heat in the body, and so it is the ultimate 
source of the pneumas. The liver is of a hot/wet temperament, and as such it 
is that from which all the remaining organs originate. The brain is a cold/ 

wet organ in which the external and internal senses are arrayed as I have 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 235 

already explained in chapter 4. The nerves, which are the conduits of the 
vital spirits or pneumas, are cold and dry in makeup. The remaining organs, 
tissues, muscles, ligaments, skin, bone, hair, and the rest are as well all 
formed from those mixtures or combinations of the primary qualities 
proper to each specific one. 

Vital spirits or pneumas (sing. r#h) function in ancient and medieval 
medicine much in the way that neural firings operate in modern physiol- 
ogy, whether it be transferring information from the sense organs to the 
brain, bringing about muscle movement, or the like. According to Avi- 
cenna, just like the heart is the first organ from which all the other organs 
ultimately spring (albeit through the intermediacy of the liver), there is ini- 
tially one (primary) pneuma that is the origin of three further types of pneumas: 
the vegetative, reproductive, and animal spirits. In more detail, Avicenna 
believes that vital spirit or pneuma has its initial origin in the heart, and then 
from the heart it is dispersed to the liver, where it takes on a hepatic tempera- 
ment and so can perform the vegetative functions of self-nourishment and 
growth; to the generative organs, where it acquires their temperament in or- 
der to perform the actions required for reproduction; or to the brain, where it 
is cooled and moistened, allowing it to bring about those activities proper to 
animals, namely, sensation and motion. 

Hopefully the foregoing provides a very general background to the 
underlying theory of Avicennan medicine and the technical tools at the 

disposal of its practitioner. 

Health and Malady 

I have already noted that for Avicenna “medicine is the science from which 
one comes to recognize the states of the human body on the part of health 
and the loss thereof in order to preserve the health as something realized as 
well as recovering it when lost” (Canon, “Volume One,” I.1.i, 29.6—7, my 
emphasis). Thus, now I should consider how Avicenna understands health 
(hha) and, its opposite, malady (marad). “Health,” Avicenna says mimick- 
ing Galen, “is the disposition of the human body with respect to its tem- 
perament and structure such that all of [its] actions [or functions; Ar. af@l| 
proceed from it in a sound and unimpaired way,” (ibid., II.1.11, 142.10-11). 
Malady, in contrast, is the unnatural state or disposition opposite of health 
that “essentially impairs [the human body’s] action [or function] necessarily 

236 AVICENNA 

and primarily, whether it be an unnatural temperament or unnatural struc- 
ture [or composition]” (ibid., IT.1.1, 141.8-9). 

While there is in effect only one way to be healthy, namely, to be func- 
tioning naturally and properly, there are several ways, observes Avicenna, 
in which one’s actions or functions can be impaired such that one is said to 
have a malady (ibid., II.1.11, 142-143). In very general terms, however, Avi- 
cenna classifies maladies as either simple or composite, where a malady is 
simple just in case only a single temperament or structure is impaired, while 
it is composite when two or more such impairments come together to give 
rise to a single condition, which Avicenna seems to associate most com- 
monly with swellings or tumors (waram). The simple maladies Avicenna 
divides further into three kinds: disorders of the temperaments, which run 
to some sixteen different sorts; disorders of structure or composition, such 
as deformities, obesity, additional fingers, and such; and finally, injuries, 
such as cuts, broken bones, or, in general, some loss of continuity in the or- 
gans, limbs, tissues, and such. 

Drawing heavily upon Galen’s etiology and causal language, Avicenna 
introduces three causes of health and malady broadly construed: antecedent 
causes, external causes (Gk. prokatarktic, Ar. badiya), and internal, or con- 
nected, causes (Gk. proegoumenic, Ar. wasila). Of these three Avicenna has 
the following to say: 

Antecedent and internal [causes] are alike in that they are both corporeal 
factors (I mean, either humoral, temperamental, or structural), whereas 
the external causes are factors outside of the substance of the body, 
whether due to outside bodies—for example, what comes from blows, 
heating the ambient air, or taking in hot or cold foods—or from the soul 
(for the soul is something else other than the body)—for example, what 
comes from anger, fear, and the like. The antecedent and external causes 
are alike in that sometimes there is some intermediary between them 
and the states [of health and malady], whereas the external and internal 
causes are alike in that sometimes there is not an intermediary between 
them and the aforementioned state. The antecedent causes are distinct 
from the internal causes in that the state does not immediately follow 
upon the antecedent causes, but instead between the two there are other 
causes closer to the state than the antecedent [causes]. The antecedent 
causes are distinct from the external [causes] in that they are bodily. 
Moreover, between the antecedent causes and the state [of health or mal- 
ady| there inevitably is an intermediary, while that is not necessarily the 
case with respect to external causes. There is absolutely no intermediary 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 237 

between the internal causes and the state, whereas that is not necessarily 
the case with respect to the external causes and in fact both are possible 
with respect to them. The antecedent causes are corporeal causes (I mean, 
humoral, or temperamental, or structural) necessitating the state in a 
non-primary way, I mean, they necessitate it through an intermediary. 
The internal causes are [also] corporeal causes that necessitate certain 
bodily states in a primary way, that is, without an intermediary. The 
external causes are non-corporeal causes that necessitate corporeal states 
in a primary as well as non-primary way (Canon, “Volume One,” II.2.1, 

152.8-153.4).” 

Avicenna then concludes his general comments on the causes of health and 
malady by identifying the six most important ones that the patient should 
consider in preserving his or her health, or the physician must take into ac- 
count in returning the patient to a state of health. These are (1) the ambient 
air, (2) the food and drink one takes in, (3) proper physical activity (haraka) 
and rest, (4) psychological activities, (5) getting enough sleep as well as not 
sleeping too much, and finally (6) evacuation and retention. 

These last six factors are what later Galenists would term the “non natu- 
rals,” all of which affect a human’s temperament by moderating or altering 
in some way the primary qualities of hot, cold, wet, and dry. Thus, when 
one breathes in air, it cools the humors in the heart, and consequently, if the 
ambient air is excessively cold or hot, it may reduce the natural hot quality 
of the vital spirits too much or not enough. Moreover, the air might be 
excessively moist and dry, thus affecting one’s temperamental balance. 

Physical activity or resting from physical activity clearly increases the 
vital heat that is the hallmark of life, but, ironically, this same vital heat 
breaks down the body and ultimately leads to its corruption, making an 
adequate amount of rest, which ultimately cools the body, also necessary. 
Sleep and wakefulness, which closely resemble rest and physical activity, 
also affect the body’s level of hot or cold: sleep cooling the body, wakeful- 
ness heating it. 

Psychological activity can also influence one’s temperament, argues Avi- 
cenna, particularly when the psychological activity involves remembering 
some past incidence or imaging some future one, especially when these 
mental images precipitate some emotional state. Thus, one might remem- 
ber some particularly embarrassing or acrimonious event in one’s life and 
feel flushed or hot under the collar, or imagine some frightening scenario 

such that one’s “blood runs cold.” 

238 AVICENNA 

Food and drink, Avicenna observes, might have some initial effect when 
they are first taken in while having an opposite (or at least a different) effect 
once fully digested. So, for example, wine, inasmuch as it is a liquid, ini- 
tially cools one who drinks it, but once it becomes digested it actually heats 
the blood, at least according the pharmacological theory at Avicenna’s time. 
Finally, proper retention followed by evacuation ensures that food and 
drugs that are ingested remain in the body long enough to be fully and 
properly digested so that the aliment can perform its function as well as 
seeing that waste material does not adversely affect the flow of the humors 
and functioning of the organs. 

In general, today we do not recognize the underlying causal explana- 
tions that ancient and medieval physicians associated with the various 
necessary factors or causes of health and disease. Despite that, one can still 
appreciate the overall goal (and frequently the efficacy) of these factors or 
causes in maintaining health. Indeed, living in a healthy climate, getting 
proper amounts of sleep, accompanied by a regimen of exercise and a well- 
balanced diet, as well as positive thinking and the like, are considered 
even today (or at least by my doctor) some of the most important factors in 

a healthy and well-balanced life. 

Between Physics and Medicine: The 

Case of Embryonic Development 

When discussing the classification of medicine as a science, I noted that it 
was one of the subsidiary sciences falling under physics. As such, medicine 
for Avicenna needs merely to posit those claims demonstrated in a higher 
physical science without trying to prove them or suggesting alternative 
principles. The question thus arises, “What should the physician do when 
medical or anatomical observation contravenes physical theory?” This was 
a serious issue, and all the more so since the undisputed authority in medi- 
cine, Galen, in places explicitly challenged Aristotle, the undisputed au- 
thority of physics (at least within the falsafa tradition in which Avicenna 
was firmly rooted). 

So, for example, Aristotle in his biological works had argued that the 
heart is the primary organ in that it is first formed and is the ultimate source 
and origin of the undifferentiated blood from which the remaining pri- 

mary organs—the liver and brain—and humors emerge. In stark contrast, 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 239 

Galen maintained that there is, in fact, no organ that is primary and first in 
a hierarchy; rather, the heart, liver, and brain are all on equal footing. 
Moreover, Galen contended that the liver, not the heart as Aristotle claimed, 
is the source of blood. 

While Avicenna ultimately sides with Aristotle, it is not because of a 
blind appeal to authority, but owing to a reasoned appeal to both theory and 
observation. Thus, he first presents Galen’s position and the theoretical jus- 
tification Galen gave for it, and shows how based upon theory the Galenic 
account is not necessary. Having shown that Galen’s position is not theo- 
retically necessary, Avicenna simply defers to the “accomplished anato- 
mists” (ashab at-tashrth al-muhagsiliin) who observe that in embryonic 
development “the heart is the first thing generated” (Book of Animals, III.1, 
44.12—13). 

Avicenna’s appeal to embryonic development ironically produces philo- 
sophical difficulties for him later; for, in chapter 3, I noted that for Avi- 
cenna substantial changes do not occur gradually, but rather happen all at 
once.’ Now when one considers the case of embryonic development, there 
is initially the semen (male and female for Avicenna), which, while poten- 
tially human, is not in fact substantially human. Consequently, when the 
human does come to be from the semen, there is a case of substantial change; 
however, on the basis of anatomical observation, it would seem that this 
transformation is gradual. Avicenna himself sets the empirical case against 
his position: “Since it is seen that the semen develops into an animal gradu- 
ally and that the seed develops into a plant gradually, it is imagined on ac- 
count of these [observations] that there is motion [that is, there is gradual 
substantial change]” (Physics, 11.3, 101.1). 

For Avicenna, just as Galen’s purely theoretical criticism of the pri- 
macy of the heart was not alone sufficient to undermine Aristotle’s ana- 
tomical observations, neither can a naive empiricism trump one’s best 
scientific theory. Instead, before observation can convict a theory, main- 
tains Avicenna, one must carefully examine, test, and analyze the data. 
One must investigate whether there are any factors not immediately per- 
ceptible that might be contributing to the observation. In short, one must 
approach the observations as a scientist and not merely as a layperson. 
Consequently, if the observation of the apparently gradual transformation 
of semen into an animal truly is to count against Avicenna’s thesis concern- 
ing substantial change, then this observation must be confirmed by the 
science of embryology. 

240 AVICENNA 

Since Avicenna was not only an outstanding philosopher but also an ac- 
complished physician and biologist, it should come as no surprise that in his 
major biological work, The Book of Animals (Kitab al-Hayawan), he dedi- 
cates an entire section ([X.5) to embryology.” The proper account of embry- 
onic development, claims Avicenna, is one of punctuated equilibrium. 
Once the observations about the semen’s development have been properly 
and scientifically scrutinized, Avicenna argues that they actually confirm 
rather than falsify his thesis about substantial change. This claim is subse- 
quently borne out in The Book of Animals: 

Concerning an analysis of the alterations of the matter of the fetus (janin) 
up to its completion, the first state is the churning (gabadiya) of the 
semen, which is the actuality of the formal power. The next state is the 
manifestation of the drop of blood in the uterine wall [or endometrium], 
and its continued dilation in the uterine wall. The third state is the 
alteration of the semen into a blood clot and after [this alteration], its 
alteration into the embryo (mudgha).’ Afterwards is its alteration lead- 
ing to the generation of the heart and primary organs, as well as its blood 
vessels, which is followed by the generation of the extremities [or limbs]. 
For each alteration, or two together, there is a period of time where [the 
developing thing] remains at rest in [that state] (The Book of Animals, 
IX.5, 172.3-8). 

Although it would be difficult to map Avicenna’s descriptive account of 
embryonic development point for point against our current knowledge of 
it, his observations do roughly approximate what modern embryologists 
now believe, especially if one limits oneself to naked-eye observations. So, 
setting aside the details, what is significant for the present purpose is the 
stages of the development that Avicenna observes. First, there is the initial 
substance, the semen (mind), which remains for a while, and then all at once 
a new substance appears, namely, the blood clot (perhaps like our notion of 
a zygote). Similarly again, after a while the blood clot or zygote is replaced 
by a new substance that comes to be all at once, in this case, the embryo. 
This state is followed by the generation of the various organs and limbs. 
Finally, the perfected animal itself comes to be, which is yet a different 
substance. The change from semen to animal, thus, according to Avicenna, 
takes place through a series of discrete substantial changes, not a continu- 
ously gradual process. 

Unfortunately, Avicenna’s language in this passage can be misleading. 

He speaks of “alteration” (ist7ha@la), which is the standard Arabic term for 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 241 

change with respect to quality, and thus implies gradual change. Indeed, as 
I shall point out later, Avicenna does believe that during each state there are 
a number of gradual (natural) qualitative changes; nevertheless, the trans- 
formation from state to state is not gradual, but punctuated. Later in The 
Book of Animals he states explicitly that the transformation from state to 
state involves discrete “leaps,” which I shall also discuss more fully shortly. 

The passage where he clarifies this point is made within the context of 
addressing another hotly debated question in the ancient and medieval 
world: “Do females produce an equivalent to male semen, and if so, what 
role does female semen play in procreation?” Aristotle had argued that the 
female’s role in procreation was wholly passive. The female according to 
Aristotle merely provides the matter for procreation, namely, the nutritive 
menstrual blood, which is tantamount to saying that the female makes no 
active contribution to the makeup of the offspring. Avicenna in opposition 
to Aristotle follows Galen, albeit with certain important modifications, and 
maintains that females do produce semen. (It should be noted that Avi- 
cenna’s agreement with Galen was facilitated by the fact that Avicenna 
drew upon the pseudonymous book X of Aristotle’s History of Animals in 
which there is mention of female semen.) 

According to Avicenna, then, females do produce something akin to se- 
men; however, he continues, the female semen does not possess a generative 
power in the way that male semen does. Instead, it possesses a power by 
which it affects the menstrual blood’s receptivity to the formative power of 
the male semen. The female semen imparts to the matter, that is, the men- 
strual blood, varying degrees of determinateness, which the male semen in 
turn structures or organizes, and so gives an even greater degree of deter- 
minateness. The stronger the female semen’s influence is on the matter, 
however, the greater is the degree of the matter’s determinateness. Under 
such conditions, the male semen has less of an opportunity to structure or 
organize the matter, and, vice versa, when the power of the female semen is 
lesser, the male semen has more of an opportunity. 

Let me suggest an example that, although not found in Avicenna, hope- 
fully will clarify his point. Clay is receptive to a number of different shapes 
or forms that the craftsman can impose upon it; however, if the clay is 
exposed to the Sun, then, to the degree that the Sun affects the clay and so 
hardens it, the clay becomes less pliable and so becomes less receptive to the 
number of forms that the craftsman can impose upon it. In our example, 

the clay would correspond with the menstrual blood or matter; the craftsman 

242 AVICENNA 

and the forms he or she imposes upon the clay correspond with the male 
semen and its formative power; and the Sun’s power to dry clay corresponds 
with the female semen’s power to affect or determine the menstrual blood. 
It should be noted that the Sun does not actively structure or impose form 
upon the clay, although it does positively affect the clay. Similarly, for Avi- 
cenna, neither does the female semen actively inform or structure the men- 
strual blood, although it does actively affect it. 

This lengthy prelude is necessary to understand Avicenna’s next point, 
which is directly relevant to the issue of whether embryonic development 
involves discrete, nongradual transformations as Avicenna’s own physical 
theory requires. Here, Avicenna is concerned with the interplay of the male 
and female semen on the matter and particularly the various stages where 
the matter either resists or is inclined toward the structuring or organizing 

of the male semen’s formative power. 

These individual resistances and inclinations [of the matter| are not un- 
mixed [that is, they are not gradual], but are punctuated (:khtilajiya, lit- 
erally “jerky”), as if each one of them were composed of motions; 
however, they are completed only together with a number of convulsions 
[or jerks]. Indeed, it is perceived that after each group of convulsions 
there is a certain [period of] rest (The Book of Animals, 176.17—19). 

Avicenna’s point here is that the matter undergoes several stages of prepa- 
ration such that it comes to be in varying degrees of receptivity to a form. 
These are in fact the natural (as opposed to metaphysical) qualitative 
changes that I have noted in previous chapters. The transformation from 
one stage to the next, however, does not according to Avicenna occur grad- 
ually but in discrete or punctuated leaps (RkAtilajat). In fact, although Avi- 
cenna does not mention it here, he is anticipating the metaphysical changes 
that occur through the emanation of the Giver of Forms once the matter 
has been properly prepared to receive a new substantial form. 

Indeed, this reading is confirmed if one returns to the passage in the 
Physics where Avicenna first considered the purported empirical refutation 

of his theory of nongradual substantial change. 

What one must know is that up to the point that the semen develops into 
an animal, other developments happen to it and between [these other 
developments] there are continuous alterations with respect to quality 
and quantity. Thus, the semen continues to be altered gradually, though 
it remains semen up to the point that the seminal form is displaced and 

MEDICINE AND THE LIFE SCIENCES 243 

it becomes a blood clot. [The blood clot’s] state up to the point that it is 
altered into an embryo is the same, and after it bones, a nervous system, 
veins, and other things that we shall not mention [come to be]. [The de- 
velopment continues] like this up to the point that [the developing thing] 
receives the form of life. Thereupon, it is altered and changed like this 
[that is, in stages] until it becomes viable and then is separated [from the 
parent]. Someone perceiving the transformation, however, imagines that 
this is a single process from one substantial form to another substantial 
form, and from that supposes that there is a motion with respect to the 
substance. That is not the case, and instead there are many motions and 
rests (Physics, II.3, 101.2—7). 

At each stage in embryonic development there are for Avicenna numerous 
accidental changes that only occur gradually. For instance, there may be 
changes in the bulk or shape of the substance. Similarly, there may be 
changes in the hotness, coolness, and dryness, or wetness of the substance. 
All of these changes, as has been noted, prepare or ready the matter of the 
currently existing substance. Once a sufficient number of gradual acciden- 
tal changes have occurred in the matter, the matter is capable of receiving a 
new substantial form all at once as an emanation from the Giver of Forms. 
The stages continue in this stepwise fashion until the developing thing re- 
ceives its ultimate substantial form. Thus, far from undermining Avicenna’s 
philosophical thesis, the development of the embryo, when carefully exam- 
ined and understood in its proper scientific context, actually supports it. 
While the above does not even scratch the surface of Avicenna’s medical 
and biological works, hopefully it provides one with a very general frame- 
work for thinking about how Avicenna envisions medicine and its relation 
to the life sciences specifically and physics more generally, as well as giving 
one a sense of how Avicenna juggled the needs for empirical adequacy and 

theoretical consistency in the sciences. 

IO 

THE AVICENNAN HERITAGE 

Introduction 

It would be difficult to overestimate the impact of Avicenna’s system of 
thought on the subsequent history and development of philosophy in both 
the East and the West. Avicenna, in an intellectual tour de force, combined 
the Neoplatonizing tendencies favored by al-Kindi and his circle with the 
Aristotelianism of al-Farabi and the Baghdad Peripatetics in a way that in- 
fused philosophy with new life, saving it from the intellectual pedantry 
from which it was becoming moribund. Additionally, Avicenna saw to it 
that his system accommodated, if not even explained, many of the primary 
religious phenomena and concerns of the Islamic society in which he lived, 
ensuring that his thought remained an influence (both as a source of inspi- 
ration and target of criticism) for Muslim scholars in multiple intellectual 
spheres even to this day. Moreover, it is not too much of an exaggeration to 
say that Avicenna’s synthesis of Graeco-Arabic philosophy, with concerns 
central to all three of the Abrahamic religions, helped facilitate and prepare 
Latin Europe for the reintroduction of the Aristotelian scientific tradition. 
As such, Avicenna’s thought played an important role in the reinvigoration 
of philosophy in Europe, as well as the formulation of Christian theology 
by such notaries as Thomas Aquinas and others. In the next few pages, I 

want, ever so briefly, to consider some of the more notable instances of 

244 

THE AVICENNAN HERITAGE 245 

Avicenna’s influence both on Judeo-Islamic philosophical theology and 

Christian scholasticism. 

Avicenna’s Heritage in the 

Judeo-Islamic World 

If the ability to incite careful and intense analysis and criticism is one of the 
signs of the significance and substance of an idea, the animate discussions 
that Avicenna produced throughout all levels of Muslim intellectual life in 
the generations immediately following him is ample testimony to his im- 
portance. Legally conservative Hanbalites felt the need to renounce him; 
aspiring new philosophers could only make a name for themselves if they 
first could show elements wanting within his system; Muslim theologians 
were at odds with whether to embrace or excommunicate him; but who- 
ever you were, you read Avicenna. While a full and complete study of 
Avicenna’s influence on the subsequent development of philosophy done in 

Islamic lands has yet to be written—and consequently much of my ensuing 

discussion is of necessity impressionistic—there can simply be no doubt 
a idl : 

that his influence was extensive. In order to provide at least some taste of 

that pervasiveness, I focus in this section on three later thinkers active in the 

Muslim and Jewish medieval world—al-Ghaziali, as-Suhrawardi, and 

Moses Maimonides—whose own thought Avicenna influenced in various 
ways. In the next section I shall consider Avicenna’s influence in the Chris- 
tian West. 

While numerous Muslim theologians wrote “refutations” of key points 
of Avicenna’s philosophy, perhaps none is better known, certainly not in the 
West, than that of the Ash‘arite theologian and mystic Abii Hamid al- 
Ghazali (1058-1111) and his The Incoherence of the Philosophers (Tahdfut 
al-falésifa). What is less well known is that before writing the Incoherence, 
al-Ghazali felt compelled to establish his philosophical credentials, which 
he did by writing The Intentions of the Philosophers (Magqasid al-falastfa). The 
Intentions, far from being an original work by al-Ghazili, turns out to be an 
Arabic translation of Avicenna’s own Persian Book of Science for ‘Ala’ ad- 
Dawla. The importance of this point is that already by the time of al- 
Ghazali, those active within the madrasas, or religious “colleges” in the me- 
dieval Islamic world were frequently identifying Avicenna’s philosophical 
system with philosophy plain and simple: To understand Avicenna was to 

2406 AVICENNA 

understand philosophy. In fact, it is not impossible that al-Ghazali wrote 
the Incoherence because he feared that Avicenna’s system might come to 
supplant Ash‘ari’s synthesis as the dominant philosophico-theological in- 
terpretation of Islam. 

Whatever the reason, al-Ghazali clearly perceived certain Avicennan 
doctrines as a threat. Thus, in the Incoherence, he presents twenty philo- 
sophical theses that, argues al-Ghazali, the philosophers falsely claim to 
have demonstrated when they have not. Of these twenty theses, however, 
he finds only three truly heretical: the assertion of the eternity of the world, 
the denial that God knows particular, changing, and temporally bound 
things (as, for example, your reading this sentence right now), and the 
rejection of a bodily resurrection. Interestingly, as noted, Avicenna goes to 
some pains in the Cure to explain how there might be at least something 
akin to a bodily resurrection; and his view about God’s knowledge of par- 
ticulars shares many features in common with al-Ghazili’s own position 
(even if there is a significant difference of emphasis). Thus, the real disa- 
greement between Avicenna and al-Ghazali(or at least those issues for 
which the latter reserves the most bile) comes over the question of the 
world’s past eternity: Avicenna holding that the cosmos’ existence must 
extend infinitely into the past, while al-Ghazali maintaining that there 
must be a first moment of creation in the finite past. 

As for the theses beyond these three, al-Ghazali can often be quite for- 
giving if not even conciliatory. So, for instance, al-Ghazali happily accepts 
most of what Avicenna’s has to say about the nature of the soul; he merely 
denies that Avicenna and others have demonstrated that the human soul is 
immortal. Here, as with other theses, al-Ghazali is not so insistent on re- 
jecting Avicenna’s conclusions as he is on rejecting the idea that there is no 
need for revelation to establish those conclusions. In fact, there is a growing 
body of scholarship that strongly suggests that al-Ghazali drew more heav- 
ily upon the philosophical system of Avicenna than he may have been will- 
ing to confess.* Instead of taking Avicennan ideas over unconditionally, 
however, al-Ghazali significantly modified them to meet the needs of his 
own interpretation of Islam. Such modifications frequently took the form 
of the obvious removal of those Avicennan doctrines that were clearly 
irreconcilable with a more traditional interpretation of Islam, such as 
Avicenna’s denial that the cosmos was temporally created. It also involved 
replacing the purely philosophical vocabulary of Avicenna’s system with 
Qur“anic and theological vocabulary and applying Avicennan concepts to 

THE AVICENNAN HERITAGE 247 

issues unique to the Ash‘arite system within which al-Ghazali himself 
worked. The overall effect of al-Ghazili’s efforts was to incorporate a fair 
amount of falsafa, as articulated by Avicenna, into kalam, while retaining 
Ash‘arite kalaém’s genuinely traditional Islamic stance. 

Similarly, Avicenna’s philosophy was to exert considerable influence on 
the thought of as-Suhrawardi (1154-1191), the founder of Illuminationist 
philosophy (Azkmat al-ishraq). At least three elements set off Illuminationist 
philosophy from other forms of falsafa: knowledge by presence, the so- 
called “primacy of essence” (asalat al-mihiya), and the acceptance of Pla- 
tonic Forms. Knowledge by presence is the doctrine that knowledge must 
ultimately be had immediately by direct (intellectual) contact, in some way, 
with the object of knowledge rather than through some intermediary 
mechanism. A central element in as-Suhraward?’s argument for knowledge 
by presence is his rejection of Aristotelian essential definitions given in 
terms of genus and difference; for, as-Suhrawardi argued in his logic, ulti- 
mately any knowledge of such definitions is circular. It is worth nothing 
that Avicenna in his own logic maintains that the essential features of a 
thing cannot be established either by demonstration or induction precisely 
because such proofs are inherently circular.’ As-Suhrawardt, then, is ex- 
tending Avicenna’s general argument concerning the acquisition of scien- 
tific first principles to the specific case of genus and difference in scientific 
definitions. 

As-Suhraward?’s thought is also characterized by his preference for “the 
primacy of essence” as opposed to the “primacy of existence” (asalat al- 
wujitd), which the Persian philosopher Mulla Sadr (ca. 1571-1640) would 
defend some four hundred years later” The essence-existence distinction, 
however, is one of the cornerstones of Avicenna’s own philosophy, certainly 
as he presents it in the Cure. Even if the distinction is already present in al- 
Farabi’s thought, it was Avicenna who thoroughly explored and developed 
it. In Avicenna’s philosophy, as I have suggested, essence and existence be- 
come the same in God (at least to the extent that God can be said to have an 
essence), namely, God’s essence—literally what it is to be God—is to be 
necessary existence. In things other than God, essence and existence, ac- 
cording to Avicenna, are distinct in that nothing other than God simply 
exists in virtue of what it is; rather, everything else other than God requires 
a cause in order to exist. Still, within Avicenna’s system neither existence 
nor essence has primacy save that everything is ultimately dependent for 

its existence upon the Necessary Existent. What as-Suhrawardi, and Mulla 

248 AVICENNA 

Sadra after him, have done is to emphasize basic elements already present, 
and prominently so, in Avicenna’s own system. 

Finally, while as-Suhrawardi expressly avows Platonic Forms in a way 
that Avicenna never did or would do, the difference between the two think- 
ers, at least in one important respect, is more one of semantics than content. 
As-Suhrawardi preferred to think of the Platonic Forms not as epistemo- 
logical entities but as immaterial substances, the so-called Intelligences of 
ancient and medieval thought.° This, Avicenna himself had already virtu- 
ally achieved when he argued that there must be a Giver of Forms in which 
the forms making up our earthly world reside as paradigms and from 
which they come to inform the sensible objects here on Earth. 

While this parallel has been noticed, it has also been claimed that as- 
Suhraward?’s position differed from Avicenna’s in that the latter only ac- 
cepted ten such immaterial intellects.’ In fact, Avicenna only conceded that 
there are ten immaterial intellects in the simplest cosmological model and 
that actually there are as many as required by one’s best astronomy. Where 
in fact the two thinkers differ is simply that as-Suhrawardi allows for there 
to be different immaterial substances of the same species only accidentally 
differing, a status that Avicenna reserves for immaterial human intellects 
alone, whereas all other immaterial Intelligences, he maintains, differ only 
according to species. 

None of my comments here are intended to suggest that Avicenna and 
as-Suhrawardi’s philosophical systems are the same. They are not. I merely 
want to emphasize as-Suhrawardi’s debt to Avicenna. In fact, Avicenna 
also owes a debt of sorts to as-Suhrawardi, for as-Suhrawardi, analogous to 
al-Ghazali before him, recast many of Avicenna’s philosophical concepts 
and terminology into light metaphors and the mystical language of the 
Sufis. The result was that Avicenna’s philosophy could be incorporated into 
another aspect of Islamic spiritualism, namely, Sufi mysticism. In fact, the 
incorporation was so complete that certain twentieth-century scholars, such 
as Henri Corbin and his school, have argued that there was already a mysti- 
cal element in Avicenna’s thought, albeit only explicitly presented in 
Avicenna’s work The Easterners, which is no longer extant in full. What- 
ever the case, there can be little doubt that Avicenna’s philosophy duly 
modified became ever more engrained in the philosophical framework of 
Muslim intellectual and spiritual thought. 

Avicenna likewise influenced the articulation of Jewish philosophical 

theology. While arguably the most important philosophical element in 

THE AVICENNAN HERITAGE 249 

Avicenna’s thought among later Muslim theologians was the distinction 
between essence and existence, a theme that runs throughout the Cure, 
among medieval Jewish theologians it appears to be Avicenna’s distinction 
between necessary existence and possible existence, which features promi- 
nently within the Salvation. The distinction was in fact taken over by no less 
a Jewish luminary than Moses ben Maimon, that is, Maimonides (ca. 1135— 
1204). So, for example, Maimonides’ third proof for the existence of God in 
the Guide for the Perplexed (II 1), which he erroneously attributes to Aristotle, 
is in fact a variation of Avicenna’s proof from possible and necessary exist- 
ence. Moreover, in that same proof Maimonides, using the same distinction, 
rehearses Avicenna’s own arguments for the uniqueness of the divinity and 
for God’s incorporeality and simplicity. 

More important, and in certain respects more interesting, is Maimo- 
nides’ use of Avicenna’s distinction in articulating to what extent God can 
be said to have attributes beyond necessary existence (Guide for the Per- 
plexed, 1 52). Avicenna’s own position, one may recall, was that one could 
positively affirm that God was the Necessary Existent. Other than this sin- 
gle positive attribute, all other attributes, maintained Avicenna, have to be 
either negative, such as “incorporeal,” or relational, such as “(ontologically 
or temporally) prior to.” Maimonides’ own distinctive negative theology is 
best seen as a give and take between himself and Avicenna, agreeing that, 
with the exception of the attribute of being God (that is, the Necessary 
Existent), one should attribute negative attributes of the divinity, while 
disagreeing with Avicenna that one could attribute relational ones to the 
divinity. 

Thus, according to Maimonides, other than the attributes of action— 
which in fact flow from and are identical with God’s necessary existence— 
the divinity can be described only in negative terms. In contrast with 
Avicenna, however, Maimonides disagreed that relational attributes 
should be ascribed to God, and does so, ironically, for purely Avicennan 
reasons. For Avicenna, there is no single category “existence,” of which 
necessary existence and possible existence are its species; rather, both are 
categorically different, only sharing the name “existence” in an equivocal 
sense. Maimonides merely observed that in order for two things to stand 
in any meaningful relation they need to be at least categorically alike. To 
say of a lime, for instance, that the green (category of quality) is brighter, 
or sourer, or larger, or the like than its size (category of quantity) is just 

nonsense. The nonsense becomes even more exacerbated the further 

250 AVICENNA 

removed the categories involved in the purported relation are; however, 
between necessary existence and possible existence not even existence is 
shared in common but is said equivocally. Thus, nothing of the created 
order, according to Maimonides, can stand in any relation to God such as 
to give rise to a relational attribute: Strictly speaking, for Maimonides, 
God is not before us, in us, with us, nor can any other relational attribute 
be assigned to God. 

In addition to drawing upon and adapting Avicenna’s necessary-possible 
existence distinction, Maimonides also took over, albeit in a qualified way, 
Avicenna’s account of prophecy. According to Avicenna, as noted, proph- 
ecy is not a supernatural phenomenon but a natural one, and as such is in 
need of a natural explanation. Within the framework of his psychology and 
particularly his accounts of insight (fads) and the internal sense faculty of 
the compositive imagination, Avicenna found just such an explanation. 
Avicenna’s prophet far from being individually chosen by God to be a vehi- 
cle of divine inspiration is merely a human who has insight to the superla- 
tive degree so as to be able fully and properly to grasp the inherent causal 
structure and order of the good found in the world. The prophet in turn 
can then imagine and explain this order in ways that capture the imagina- 
tion of others. Maimonides, in fact, accepted this natural explanation of 
prophecy, while also finding a place in it for God (Guide for the Perplexed, 
I 32). For, according to Maimonides, God can prevent one whose psycho- 
logical disposition is otherwise of such an excellent degree so as to qualify to 
be a prophet from in fact becoming a prophet. Again, let me repeat, my 
claim is not that Maimonides’ views are just those of Avicenna’s—they are 

not 

rather, I merely want to emphasize the influence that Avicenna had 

on the formation of Maimonides’ own unique thought. 

Avicenna’s Heritage in the 

Christian World 

As with the Arabic East, so with the Latin West, Avicenna’s thought was a 
source of inspiration, particularly at the onset of the High Middle Ages. At 
that time there began a movement to translate Greek and Arabic scientific 
works into Latin that equaled the earlier Arabic translation movement in 
its breadth.” At least one indication of the high regard in which early 

philosophers and translators in Europe, such as Dominicus Gundissalinus 

THE AVICENNAN HERITAGE 251 

(fl. 1150-1190) and his Jewish collaborator Ibn Daud (ca. 1110-1180), held 
Avicenna is seen in that his works were some of the first translated into 
Latin. 

Among the works of Avicenna translated were a fair bit of the Cure— 
including a little of the logic, about two-thirds of the general physics, and 
complete translations of other more specific works on natural philosophy, 
as well as the whole of the psychology and the metaphysics—the metaphys- 
ics of the Salvation, and, of course, The Canon.'! Avicenna’s Canon, with its 
handy compendium format, proved to be immensely popular in Europe, 
and continued to be a medical textbook at universities into the eighteenth 
century. It was his philosophy, however, that would have the most enduring 
effect, for it would influence (sometimes negatively, other times positively) 
some of the great Catholic theologians and philosophers of that time, such 
as Albert the Great, Thomas Aquinas, and Duns Scotus. 

So, for example, the foremost issue in scholastic natural philosophy in- 
volved the concept of motion, concerning which the question of in which 
Aristotelian category does it belong was of first most importance. Albert 
the Great (c. 1200-1280) gave the question the form in which it was most 
frequently dealt throughout medieval Europe: Is motion a flowing form 
(forma fluens) or the form of a flow (fluxus formae)? While the language is 
Albert’s own, he found the statement of the problem, as he himself says, in 
the Physics of Avicenna’s Cure. Unfortunately, owing to a faulty Latin trans- 
lation of a key passage—where Avicenna in fact articulated his theory of 
motion at an instant and then went on and developed his notion of a limit— 
and Albert’s own commentary on that passage, Avicenna’s own contribu- 
tion to this issue was not appreciated at least in the Latin West.” Still, it was 
Avicenna who raised the question that would stimulate so much discussion 
among Latin natural philosophers about the proper way to characterize 
motion. 

Moreover, the psychological work of Avicenna’s Cure, was second only 
to Aristotle’s in influencing Albert’s own psychological works. Thus, as a 
notable example, in Albert’s De homine, he cited Aristotle 280 times with 
Avicenna coming in close behind with some 230 citations.” In fact, it would 
seem that Albert preferred the way that Avicenna structured the science of 
psychology over that of Aristotle, as well as giving Avicenna pride of place 
when discussing the vegetative soul—that is, the principle associated with 
the functions of self-nourishment, growth, and reproduction—as well as 

the internal senses, such as imagination and memory. 

252 AVICENNA 

Perhaps of more importance in the long run was Avicenna’s influence 
on Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274), whose system of thought still makes up 
much of the philosophical theology of the Catholic Church and Christian 
apologetics more generally. Here it is important to note that in Thomas’s 
earlier works, he is much more willing to reference Avicenna by name ina 
positive way, whereas in his more mature works, such as the Summa Theo- 
logiae and commentaries on Aristotle, he prefers to mention Avicenna by 
name only when he is in disagreement with him. Such a seeming turn of 
opinion, I believe, is not so much because, as Thomas grew older, he came 
to reject the Avicennan elements that impressed him in his youth, but be- 
cause by then he had so thoroughly incorporated those elements into his 
own system of thought that they genuinely became his own. 

The most obvious case of such an appropriation is the real distinction 

between being (ens)—Avicenna would say existence—and essence (essentia). 
In fact, Thomas names one of his earlier opuscula, On Being and Essence (De 
ente et essentia), after the famous Avicennan distinction. In this work, if one 
sets aside the final chapter that discusses accidents, Avicenna is positively 
referenced more than any other philosopher, including Aristotle. Even if 
one includes the final chapter, where nearly half of the Aristotle references 
occur, Avicenna still ties Aristotle for the overall number of explicit positive 
references, thirteen in all. Even in Thomas’s later works where the 
Aristotelian actuality-potentiality distinction comes to predominate, he 
never fully discards Avicenna’s essence-existence distinction, as is clearly 
witnessed in Thomas’s account of divine simplicity and divine perfection at 
Summa Theologiae, part I, question 3 and 4, respectively. 

Even when Thomas is clearly at odds with Avicenna, such as on the 
subject of the cosmos’ past eternity, the former very much respects and even 
positively draws on his Muslim predecessor. Avicenna’s own position on 
this ever so delicate issue was that one can, in fact, demonstrate that God 
has been eternally creating the universe. Consequently, Avicenna believes 
that one can demonstrate that the world was not created at some first 
moment in the finite past. In contrast, Thomas denied that the cosmos’ 
eternity could be demonstrated, but he equally denied that its temporal 
creation could be demonstrated. According to Thomas, one knows that the 
cosmos has existed for a finite period of time solely on the basis of revela- 
tion. Thus, Thomas’s project was to show that purported demonstrations— 
whether for the eternal or temporal creation of the world—were not in fact 

demonstrative. 

THE AVICENNAN HERITAGE 253 

Thus, on the one hand, in a very positive way, Thomas consistently 
draws upon Avicenna when considering so-called demonstrations for the 
world’s temporal createdness in order to criticize those proofs." On the 
other hand, when he considered the arguments for the world’s eternity, 
Avicenna’s proof from necessity and possibility always appeared in Thomas’s 
catalogue of arguments. In fact, Avicenna’s proof is the premier argument 
for that thesis considered by Thomas in the Summa Theologiae (part I, ques- 
tion 46), as well as framing the topic in his On the Eternity of the World (De 
Aeternitate mundi), which, as the title indicates is dedicated to this issue. 
While further examples of Avicennan influence on Thomas could certainly 
be multiplied, these instances at least suggest the role that Avicenna played 
in the development of two of the more distinctive doctrines in Aquinas’s 
thought. 

Similarly, the place of Avicenna in the thought of that most subtle of 
scholastic thinkers, John Duns Scotus (1265/66—1308), is also beyond ques- 
tion. As early as 1927, the great historian of medieval philosophy, Etienne 
Gilson, recognized Scotus’s predilection for Avicenna, and enumerated 
three points where Duns Scotus takes Avicenna as his point of departure: 
(1) his understanding of what the proper object of the science of meta- 
physics is; (2) his conception of being; and (3) his closely related theory 
of common natures.” Concerning the first issue, as discussed in some 
detail, historically there was a problem of identifying the proper object 
of metaphysics: is it being qua being or God (or immaterial beings more 
generally)? I have already noted that for Avicenna it is existence as such; 
however, the thesis that God or immaterial beings represent the proper 
object of metaphysical inquiry was defended by the Muslim philosopher, 
Averroes (1126-1198), whose influence on Latin scholasticism through 
his Aristotelian commentaries was no less, and perhaps greater, than 
Avicenna’s own. Again Scotus followed Avicenna on this point, and indeed 
on this point Avicenna’s understanding came to be the predominate one 
among most metaphysicians up until today. 

Gilson’s points (2) and (3) can be treated together, given the close con- 
nection between essences and existence in Avicenna’s system and being and 
common natures in Scotus’s. Here at least one point of influence is Avicenna’s 
insistence that a proper understanding of God can only be attained though 
a careful analysis of existence itself, and, in like fashion, as Gilson notes, the 
whole of Scotus’s metaphysics is centered on the idea of being, since there is 

no other idea by which one could reach God.'° Even more evidence of the 

254 AVICENNA 

place of Avicenna in Scotus’s thought is the latter’s conception of common 
natures, where he explicitly and approvingly appeals to Avicenna’s remarks 
about essences in book V of the metaphysics of the Cure, namely, they 
simply are what they are. In other words, for example, the essence of a 
horse is just horse-ness, and as such it is neither one nor many, neither 
universal nor particular, a point that Avicenna makes repeatedly. 

Finally, more recently it has been observed that the theory of causality 
that lies at the heart of Scotus’s proof for the existence of God, particularly 
with its division of physical and metaphysical causation—is as close to Avi- 
cenna’s as a Christian philosopher of that time could be.!” As with the other 
philosophers I have considered, let me emphasize that Scotus’s thought is 
highly original and innovative while all the while being deeply indebted to 
many of the philosophical insights of his Persian predecessor. 

While this chapter on Avicenna’s subsequent influence is short (even 
shamefully so), hopefully it has provided the reader with some sense of the 
pervasiveness and far-reaching importance of Avicenna on later philoso- 
phers and theologians as well as the important place he holds in the devel- 
opment of both Eastern and Western worldviews. 

APPENDIX I 

Immateriality of the Intellect 

Intellect as receptacle 

of intelligibles 
Material Immaterial 
Indivisible _w| Divisible 
Extended Unextended Similar Dissimilar 
(Atom) (Point) Parts Parts (like 
those of a 
definition) 
Does not Whatever inheres in Parts will Multiple absurdities, e.g., 
exist a point does so not differ the definition would be 
accidentally by from the composed of an infinite 
inhering in a whole number of parts 
divisible body 

255 

APPENDIX 2 

Incorruptibility of the Intellect 

Assume that the human soul corrupts with 
the corruption of the body 

ee ee 

Related by Body Body 
coexistence causally causally 
prior to soul posterior to 
ae soul 
Essential Accidental 
Body and The Body Body has its 
soul would corruption stands to own 
be the same of one need soul as one principles of 
thing in not entail of the four corruption 
essence, the causes 
but the corruption 
body is of the other 
essentially 
material, 
while the 
soul is 
essentially : 
immaterial Efficient Material Formal Final cause: 
cause: cause: cause: soul body is for 
matter is soul is is form of the sake of 
inert immaterial the body the soul 

256 

APPENDIX 3 

Proof for a Necessary Existent 

The sum of 
all things 
possible in 
themselves 

Necessary 
in itself 

Through Internal cause 
another 
(contradiction) 

Necessary Possible in 
in itself itself 

Only what is Self- 
possible in necessitating 
itself in the set (contradiction) 

(contradiction) 

257] 

Possible in 
itself 

APPENDIX 4 

Proof for a Material Subject of Possibility 

Ontological foundation for 
the possible in itself 

Subsists in itself, and so is Subsists through 
a substance another as in a subject 

The existence of Immaterial Material 
possibility is subject subject 
essentially relational, 
while the existence 
of a substance is 

essentially 
nonrelational 

Created Uncreated 
immaterial immaterial 
subject subject 

Both General Particular 
ontologically argument argument 
prior and 
posterior | | 
Simplicity Omnipotence 
jeopardized made vacuous 

258 

NOTES 

CHAPTER I 

1. Two excellent surveys of both the philosophical and historical back- 
ground to Avicenna’s life are Afnan (1958), especially chapters 1-2, and Good- 
man (2006). Also see Avicenna (1974) for Avicenna’s own autobiography. 

2. Sull, the best study of Avicenna’s indebtedness to the Aristotelian philo- 
sophical tradition is Gutas (1988). 

3. While in the present introductory essay I focus more on the ancient 
course curriculum itself rather than the substantive philosophical and scientific 
issues treated by ancient thinkers, an overview of the content of some of those 
issues can be found in the Introduction to McGinnis and Reisman (2007). 

4. For a discussion of the later Greek course curriculum see D’Ancona 
(2005). 

5. See chapter 6, 150-53. 

6. For discussions of the fates and fortunes of Plotinus and Proclus, see 
respectively Adamson (2002) and Endress (1973). 

7. See Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 1 1-2. 

8. For a detailed study of the movement see Gutas (1998). 

g. For the life and thought of al-Kindi see Adamson (2007). 

to. Nestorian and Jacobite Christianity are best understood by reference to 
Chalcedonian Christology. The Chalcedonian formula is that within Jesus 
Christ there are two natures (one divine, one human), which are united into 
one person. In contrast, Nestorians maintain that Jesus Christ exists as two 

259 

260 NOTES TO PAGES 11-27 

persons: Jesus the man and Christ the Son of God, whereas Jacobites, who are 
a sect within Monophysitism, claim that Christ has only one nature, which is 
divine. 

11. A complete translation of The Perfect State is available in al-Farabi 
(1985); the first half of The Principles of Existing Things is available in translation 
in McGinnis and Reisman (2007), and most of the second half, Fauzi Najjar has 
translated in al-Farabi (1963). 

12. For a number of studies on kalaém see The Cambridge Companion to 
Classical Islamic Theology, ed. Winter (2008). 

13. The issue is not about a physical manifestation of the Qur’an in the 
form of a book that might be in front of someone, but of the Qur’an understood 
as a recitation of the very word of God. While there is some danger in compar- 
ing the Qur’an, literally “recitation,” with the logos (“word”) found at the be- 
ginning of John’s Gospel in the Christian Bible—“In the beginning was the 
word, and the word was with God, and the word was God” (John 1:1)—the 
comparison may help make the present debate more intelligible to contempo- 
rary readers. For just as certain Christological debates arose within Christianity 
about the relation of God to the “word,” understood as Christ, so analogous 
debates arose within Islam about the relation of Allah to the Qur’an: Mu tazilites 
taking the Qur’an to be part of the created order, while others took it to be part 
of the divine order, and even part of the very being of God. 

14. For one account of an “encounter” between Avicenna and ‘Abd 
al-Jabbar see Dhanani (2003). 

15. See R. Rashed (1984). 

16. See Avicenna (1974). 

17. For a translation of this work see either Bertolacci (2002), ch. 3 or 
McGinnis and Reisman (2007). 

18. A dirham was a coin usually between 10-13 g made up of an alloy of 
silver (7o percent) and copper, and so worth around $2 US. Thus, Avicenna 
would have paid between $5.50 and $8.00 for the book. 

1g. See Avicenna (1974), 124-125, fn. 43. 

20. See Mez (1995), 202 and 204. 

21. For this dating see Gutas (1988), 103-104. 

22. See Avicenna (1974), 132-133, fn. 89. 

23. See Goodman (2006), 38-39. 

24. See Gutas (1988), 140-141 for the later dating, and for the earlier dating 
see Michot (1997), 158-163. 

CHAPTER 2 

1. For those interested in the technical aspects of Avicenna’s logic, the fol- 
lowing English translations of some of his logical works are available: Avicenna 

NOTES TO PAGES 27-36 261 

(1971), (1973), and (1984). An excellent overview of Avicenna’s syllogistic can be 
found in Street (2002); and for his modal logic specifically, see Thom (2003), 
“Avicenna.” 

2. Street (2002), 132. 

3. For this seminal distinction in Arabic logic and theory of knowledge, see 
Black (1990), 71-78. 

4. Although Avicenna’s use of the Arabic tabaga, yutabiqu, mutabaqa in his 
account of verification or truth-making can be translated “to correspond,” it 
should not necessarily be equated with a modern “correspondence theory of 
truth,” although it may have certain similarities. 

5. Cf. Metaphysics, 1.2, 7. See Sabra (1980) for a complete discussion of the 
proper object or subject matter of logic. 

6. For a more complete discussion of Avicenna’s theory of universal, and to 
which my exposition here is much indebted, see Marmura (1979) and (1992). 

7. Superficially, this question appears to be the problem of the external 
world and the issue of whether it is even possible to have knowledge of the ex- 
ternal world. For if what is immediately known to us is only mental objects, 
what justification is there that extramental objects correspond with our mental 
objects, or even more strongly, what justifies that there is anything except the 
mental? In general, Avicenna seems to have very little patience for skeptical 
questions such as this one; for Avicenna, we simply do have knowledge of the 
external world. Thus, the important question for him is not whether knowl- 
edge of the external world is possible, but what is the explanation of the fact 
that we do have such knowledge. 

8. As will be seen later (50-51), for Avicenna the necessary certainty is, ide- 
ally, absolute necessary certainty; however, he also allows, and counts as genu- 
inely scientific knowledge, conditional necessary certainty. See McGinnis 
(20034), 323-324. 

g. For now I set aside the class of immaterial intellects, which Avicenna 
countenances. For clearly in the case of immaterial things, such as angels or 
what Avicenna prefers to call simply Intellects, what particularizes them can- 
not be matter. Instead, for Avicenna they are individuated by the fact that each 
one is the unique and only instance of its kind or species. Consequently, for 
Avicenna no two immaterial beings can be specifically the same. Instead, each 
constitutes its own species, and so they differ from one another in the way, for 
example, man, chimpanzee, horse, and the like differ specifically from one an- 
other. 

to. Again, the predicables are genus, difference, species, property, and accident. 

11. For a more thorough discussion of Avicenna’s division of the sciences, 
see Marmura (1980a) and Gutas (2003). For a general discussion of medieval 
theories of the division of the sciences, see Weisheipl (1978). 

262 NOTES TO PAGES 37-44 

12. See Avicenna (1966), I.1, 3-6 and I.7, 30-31. For a general discussion of 
certainty in medieval Arabic philosophy, and particularly in the thought of 
Avicenna’s immediate predecessor, al-Farabi, see Black (2006). 

13. A “necessary accident” is something that, while not making up the es- 
sence of the thing, nonetheless always accompanies that thing, as, for example, 
how being capable of laughter belongs to humans, and, perhaps, being extended 
belongs to color. 

14. This claim is not exactly correct, since Avicenna does recognize two 
cases where a negative term might function as a strict difference: one, where 
the negative difference establishes one single species exactly mirroring (naw ‘ 
muhassil bi-iza’i) the species constituted by the positive difference, as, for exam- 
ple, when the genus of rational numbers is divided into numbers that are divis- 
ible into two equal parts, namely, the “even,” and numbers that are not divisible 
into two equal parts, namely, the “odd”; and, two, when in a given language 
there is no positive term, word, or expression corresponding with the positive 
causal factor constituting the species, as, for example, if one is defining “plant,” 
which is a vegetative, living substance, but in the language there happens to be 
no term for “vegetative,” and so one would define plant as an insensate, living 
substance (Avicenna [1953], I.13. 78.15~-79.10). Barring these two rare cases, the 
constitutive elements of a definition cannot be negative terms. 

15. Cf. Porphyry (1975), 44-45 (Usagoge, 10, 9-19); here Porphyry claims 
that such negative differences as “immortal: and “msensate” are constitutive 
elements in the definitions of “god” and “plants” respectively. 

16. Avicenna’s treatment of negative terms is similar in certain salient ways 
to Quine’s analysis of them in Quine (1953), 7-9. Quine’s analysis is framed in 
terms of “descriptions,” whereas Avicenna’s is framed in terms of “positive 
accounts”; yet both would agree that the proper analysis of “x is not” is “each 
thing failed either to meet a certain description or to have a certain positive 
account.” 

17. A parallel discussion is found in Avicenna’s Metaphysics of the Cure, V.3. 
Also compare Thomas Aquinas, On Being and Essence, ch. 3. 

18. The “middle term” is the term that two premises forming a syllogism 
share in common, and that links the subject and predicate terms of the syllo- 
gism’s conclusion together. So, for example, in the syllogism: “Whatever is ma- 
terial is mortal, and all humans are material; therefore, all humans are mortal,” 
“material” is the middle term, since it is through it that one arrives at the 
conclusion, “humans are mortal.” 

1g. Avicenna is quite insistent that the certainty, and thus the necessity, in 
question in a demonstration is not merely the certainty or necessity of the con- 
clusion, for that the conclusion follows of necessity or with certainty is true of 

NOTES TO PAGES 44-61 263 

every valid syllogism, whether it is a demonstration or not. For Avicenna, the 
relevant certainty or necessity concerns the premises, and the certainty or neces- 
sity of the conclusion is in turn derived from the premises’ certainty or neces- 
sity. See Avicenna (1966), I.7, 31.11-18. 

20. Aristotle suggests this distinction at Posterior Analytics, 1 13, where he 
discusses the difference between understanding “the fact that” (¢o hot’) and “the 
reason why” (to dioti). 

21. The “major term” and “minor term” refer respectively to the predicate 
and subject terms of the conclusion of a syllogism. So, for example, in the syl- 
logism: “Whatever is material is mortal, and all humans are material; therefore, 
all humans are mortal,” “mortal” is the major term, while “humans” is the 
minor term; for “human” is the subject of the conclusion, while “mortal” is the 
predicate. 

22. I shall consider Avicenna’s account of causes in chapters 3 and 7. Addi- 
tional studies of his theory of causation include: Marmura (1984b), Bertolacci 
(2002), and Wisnovsky (2002). For a discussion of causality’s role in relation to 
medieval Arabic metaphysics in general, see Druart (2005). 

23. For a detailed discussion of Avicenna on induction and methodic expe- 
rience, see McGinnis (20034). (It should be noted that there I translated tajriba 
as “experimentation,” whereas I now believe that “methodic experience” might 
be more appropriate.) Also see Janssens (2004), which in important ways sup- 
plements and corrects my earlier work. 

24. Fora discussion of Avicenna’s general empirical methodology, and, more 
specifically, medieval Arabic physicians’ empirical attitude in relation to medi- 
cine, see Gutas (2003) and McGinnis (2008). Similar ground is covered, albeit with 
the intent of showing that Avicenna was a skeptic, in Nuseibeh (1981). 

CHAPTER 3 

1. Avicenna argues for this point at length at Metaphysics, II.2. 

2. For example, while a doctor might be the efficient cause of health in him 
or herself, he or she is so, not qua doctor but qua patient, and so other. 

3. Also see Wisnovsky (2000) and (2003), ch. 8. 

4. For a discussion of the commentary tradition surrounding this issue and 
the historical context it provides for Avicenna’s own analysis of motion, see 
Wisnovsky (2003), part I. 

5. Aristotle, De anima, II 1, 412a22-28. 

6. The Arabic translation of Aristotle’s definition is “motion is the perfec- 
tion of what is in potency in what is such.” 

7. For a translation and commentary of Avicenna’s analysis of motion, see 
Hasnawi (2001) and McGinnis (2006a). For a discussion Avicenna’ s view of 
motion at an instant in his dynamics, see M. Rashed (2005), 295-302. 

264 NOTES TO PAGES 62—73 

8. For a detailed discussion of Avicenna’s distinction between motion 
as it exists in the intellect and as it exists in the world, as well as an initial 
introduction to Avicenna’s conception of a motion at an instant, see Hasnawi 
(2001). 

g. Aristotle himself first raised this problem in a notoriously difficult pas- 
sage in Physics, VII 8, 262a19—263a3, which I shall consider again at 78-79. 

10. See 75-77. 

11. See Philoponus (1888), 565, 1-567, 7. 

12. Prior to Avicenna, al-Kindi had provided a conceptual, as opposed to 
physical, argument against the void as well. See al-Kindi (1950-1953), 109 and 
(1974), 63. Whereas al-Kind1’s remarks are given almost in passing, Avicenna 
provides a detailed and sustained argument. 

13. For a brief discussion of Avicenna’s account of vain intelligibles see 
269—70, fn. 16. For further studies of Avicenna’s position concerning nonexist- 
ent forms or “fictional beings,” see Michot (1984-1985) and (1987), and Black 
(1997). 

14. For a detailed analysis of Avicenna’s argument for this claim, see 
McGinnis (2006c). 

15. In fact, Avicenna has a more elaborate discussion than suggested here of 
why void cannot fall under the genus “accident” either as a constitutive acci- 
dent or a nonconstitutive accident. 

16. AsI noted (262, fn. 14), Avicenna does countenance the use of a negative 
difference in certain very limited cases, namely, in those cases where the use of 
a negative difference produces two and only two parallel species. 
If “not existing in a substrate” were such a negative difference, then there should 
be only one species of substance not existing in a subject, namely, void; however, 
for Avicenna and virtually the whole Arabic-speaking philosophical commu- 
nity, all the Intelligences are considered to be substances not existing in a sub- 
ject. (Although the difference for separate Intellects is often identified with the 
negative term, “incorporeal” or “immaterial,” there is also a common positive 
difference applied to them by medieval Arabic thinkers, namely, being “spirit- 
ual” (rihan7).) Therefore, “not existing in a substrate” taken alone fails to meet 
the necessary requirement for being a difference. 

17. It might be worth noting that Avicenna’s language here is the same lan- 
guage that he used to explain negative terms in his Introduction, where again 
one should recall that for Avicenna negations simply cannot function as differ- 
ences constitutive of a definition. 

18. For translations of Avicenna’s chapters on time and on the now as found 
in the Cure, see Shayegan (1999) and McGinnis (1999) and (2009). 

1g. Cf. Aristotle, Physics, IV 11, 219a10-30; Avicenna, Physics, II.11, 
157-4—7- 

NOTES TO PAGES 75-85 265 

20. For a detailed discussion of atomism in the medieval Arabic world, see 
Pines (1997), Dhanani (1994), and Sabra (2006). For atomic theories of time 
specifically and Avicenna’s criticisms of them, see McGinnis (2003b). 

21. For a complete translation of Avicenna’s discussion of atomism from 
the Cure, see Lettinck (1999). 

22. Avicenna makes this point explicitly about continuous alterations in 
at-Ta‘ligat, Avicenna (2000), 43-44: “When the white [thing] undergoes altera- 
tion into a black [thing], the alterations are infinite; however, they are not actual 
and those alteration do not exist simultaneously. Instead they are by way of 
being delimited (tahaddud) like the situation concerning motion.” The text’s 
tahaddud might alternatively be emended to tajaddud, in which case the text 
would read, “Instead they are by way of being renewed like the situation 
concerning motion.” 

23. To speak of “Avicenna’s dynamics” is a bit of an anachronism, since it 
was not until the late seventeenth century that dynamics came to be considered 
as a distinct field of study, and Avicenna, like most ancient and medieval natu- 
ral philosophers, indiscriminately mixed dynamic and kinematic concepts 
within his physics. 

24. The most outspoken in this respect is Sayili (1984); with much more 
reservation is Hasnawi (1984). Despite certain disagreements that I have 
with these authors, both articles are rich sources for understanding Avicenna’s 
theory of inclination. 

25. See Avicenna (1963), #45, 34. 

26. See Aristotle, Physics, VIII 4, 255b15. 

27. Itis unclear here whether Avicenna means that the resistive force resists 
whatever obstructs its path or it resists being displaced, although the context 
seems to favor the former. 

28. The following comes from Mudbdahathat, Avicenna (1995), §677. 

29. That is not to say that for Avicenna a temporally infinite series of finite 
agents extending into the future could not produce a temporally infinite effect; 
for example, according to Avicenna, humans have been procreating humans 
infinitely into the past and will continue to do so infinitely into the future. In 
this case, however, the infinite effect, namely, the infinite number of humans 
that has and will come to be, is due, not to a finite agent as such, but to the 
infinitely extended series of such agents, albeit that there exists such an infinite 
series is for Avicenna ultimately due to an infinite agent, God. 

30. That natural bodies consist of only four elements is true as far as terres- 
trial physics was concerned, that is, the world extending from the center of the 
Earth up to the sphere of the Moon. The sphere of the Moon and what is beyond, 
however, were thought to be composed of a fifth element, the so-called “ether.” 

266 NOTES TO PAGES 85-100 

According to Avicenna what distinguished ether from the elements associated 
with terrestrial physics is that the latter are defined by their inclination to move in 
a straight line, either upward or downward, whereas ether moves circularly 
rather than rectilinearly. 

31. There is some evidence that perhaps al-Farabi anticipated some of the 
key points of Avicenna’s position, namely, that something outside the natural 
order of forms and matter is needed to explain substantial changes; see McGinnis 
(forthcoming [a]). 

32. For an excellent discussion of the history of the problem that Avicenna 
is treating here and his own solution to it, see Stone (2008). 

CHAPTER 4 

t. Asone brief point of clarification, in this chapter and the next when I speak 
of “animals,” Iam referring specifically to the sublunar species and not those life 
forms that medieval philosophers associated with the so-called celestial spheres, 
which were thought to be animals inasmuch as they were believed to be animate. 
Hence, the act of the intellect is unique to the human animal so understood. 

2. Cf. Aristotle, “the soul is the first entelekheia of a natural organic body” 
(De anima, II 1, 412b4—6). Here the English “perfection” translates the Arabic 
kamal, which either it or the hendiadys kamal wa-fil (“perfection and act”), was 
Avicenna’s preferred locution for Aristotle’s entelekheia. 

3. Cf. al-Farabi (2007b), 84-85. 

4. In this respect al-Farabi and Avicenna differ from certain other phi- 
losophers, such as Aquinas in the Latin tradition; for Aquinas countenances 
subsistent immaterial forms, which he identifies with angels and perhaps 
even God, whereas al-Farabi and Avicenna prefer to call such beings 
(depending upon various considerations), souls, intellects, and even perfec- 
tions. 

5. Cf. Plato, Phaedrus, 246a—254e. 

6. The issue of “female semen” will be discussed more at 241-42; also see 
Musallam (1989) and (1990). 

7. The traditional account of abstraction emphasizes the role of the Active 
Intellect as opposed to the roles played by the individual human’s own intellect 
and sensory faculties of perception; for traditional accounts of abstraction, 
see Davidson (1992), ch. 4; Jabre (1984); and Nuseibeh (1989). For more recent 
accounts of abstraction, which emphasize the role of the human intellect in 
abstraction, see Hasse (2001) and McGinnis (2007b). 

8. Also see Sebti (2005), who observes that essences in themselves are common 
to the representations in the powers of sensation, imagination, and estimation. 

g. The Arabic khayr wa-sharr, which I have rendered “good or not good,” 
may also be understood as “good and evil.” It is not totally clear to me, however, 

NOTES TO PAGES 100-109 267 

whether “evil,” in the sense of a negative moral judgment, is what Avicenna has 
in mind here. For perceiving that such moral judgments, as gratuitous violence 
is wrong, in fact seems to be for him a more appropriate activity for the practi- 
cal intellect (see, for instance, Salvation, “Physics,” VI.3, 331.3-7). Perhaps, 
then, his example of the intellect’s grasping good and not good is meant to grasp 
examples such as one’s perceiving that ripe food is good to eat, while decaying 
meat is not good to eat. 

to. For a full account of the extramission and intromission theories of 
vision, see Lindberg (1976), esp. chs. 1-4 (passim). 

11. See Pasnau (1997), 49-60. 

12. See Hasse (2000), 108-119. 

13. For Aristotle’s account of vision, light, and the transparent, see his De 
anima, I. 7 and De sensu, 2-3. 

14. Indeed Avicenna’s optical theory, as will be seen, is in many salient ways 
like that of Avicenna’s contemporary Ibn al-Haytham (965-1039), the Alhazen 
of Latin fame. For an introduction to the theory of Ibn al-Haytham, see Lind- 
berg (1976), ch. “Alhazen and the New Intromission Theory of Vision,” and 
the translation and commentary of Ibn al-Haytham’s Optics by Sabra in Ibn 
al-Haytham (1989). The Latin translation of Ibn al-Haytham’s Optics, De aspec- 
tibus, is in places markedly different from the Arabic; for a translation and 
commentary of the Latin see Smith (2001). 

15. It is certainly worth noting that Ibn al-Haytham also distinguished 
two types of light nearly corresponding with Avicenna’s division here: lights 
that radiate from self-luminous bodies and accidental lights that are ac- 
quired by bodies that are not self-luminous; see Ibn al-Haytham (1983) and 
(1989), Book I, ch. 3, esp. sections 21 and 87-88. The similarities between the 
two great thinkers become even greater when one compares their theories 
about rays radiating from the illuminated object (not the eye as the intromis- 
sion theorists had it) so as to form a visual cone that falls upon the eye 
and projects a sensible image of the visible object to the visual system of the 
perceiver. 

16. Hasse criticizes John Blund’s interpretation of Avicenna on the grounds 
that Blund makes Avicenna’s rays “somehow participate in the formation of an 
image in the eye by traveling themselves” (Hasse [2000], 124). According to 
Hasse, the sensible images “are transmitted instantaneously by the translucent 
medium” (ibid). To me it seems that Hasse is forcing an Aristotelian under- 
standing onto Avicenna, and that Blund’s understanding is quite possibly the 
correct one. 

17. For a more thorough presentation of Avicenna’s refutation of not only 
mathematically inspired extramission theories of vision, but also the Galenic 
extramission theory, see Lindberg (1976), 43-52. 

268 NOTES TO PAGES I10—131 

18. Raf, translated here as “pneuma,” but which might also be rendered as 
“(vital) spirit,” is discussed more fully in the chapter on Medicine (234-35). For 
now suffice it to say that it is a very fine material substance that is the immediate 
or proximate cause of the various animal activities, such as motion and percep- 
tion. Pneuma—and it comes in different varieties—functions like the ancient 
and medieval analogue of electrical impulses and neural firings, whether in the 
brain, muscles, or elsewhere. 

19. Much of this section is indebted to Black (forthcoming [b]) and Kaukua 
(2007). 

20. See, for instance, Plato’s Republic, 477B—478D. 

21. For the sources and limits of Avicenna’s anatomical knowledge, partic- 
ularly brain anatomy, see Hall (2004), §II. 

22. For in-depth studies of the estimative faculty in Avicenna, see Black 
(1993); Hasse (2000), §11.4; Hall (2006); and Kaukua (2007), ch. 3. 

23. For detailed studies of Avicenna’s account of the cogitative faculty, see 
Black (forthcoming [b]) and Gutas (2001). 

24. Black (forthcoming [b]), §2, “Imagination without Reason” (second 
paragraph). 

25. For a study of Avicenna’s account of discursive thought, which is the 
action of the cogitative faculty, see Adamson (20044). 

CHAPTER 5 

1. See Davidson (1992), 83-94 for an extended discussion of the following 
stages, and Druart (2000), 174-189. 

2. See 75-76 for Avicenna’s detailed version of the following argument. 
. See 77-79. 
. For a flowchart presentation of Avicenna’s demonstration see Appendix 1. 
. See Druart (2000), 261-264. 
See Davidson (1992), 103-116, and Druart (2000), 267-273. 
. See, for instance, Physics, 1.14, 73.1-7. 

CN AN BW 

. For a flowchart presentation of Avicenna’s demonstration see Appendix 2. 

g. See Plato, Phaedo, 102D—106D and Plotinus, Enneads, IV.7. 

to. I must confess that I am not certain whether Avicenna can help himself 
to this premise, for, as we have seen, according to him the material intellect has 
the potential to be impressed with intelligibles and it does so precisely because 
it is an immaterial substratum for concepts. 

11. For discussions of the Active Intellect, see Davidson (1992), 87-94 and 
Acar (2003). 

12. See Plato, Republic, V1, 507C—509C. 

13. See Aristotle, De anima, I 5. 

NOTES TO PAGE 134 269 

14. Avicenna’s discussion at Physics, I.1, 10.8-11.9 in Avicenna (2009)— 
during which he introduces the notion of a “vague individual” existing in 
the compositive imagination—is a rich supplemental source to the present 
discussion. 

15. See 31-32. 

16. The traditional reading of Avicenna maintains that the Active Intellect 
emanates a complete intelligible and not just intellectualizing forms or acci- 
dents when it brings about human understanding; see Davidson (1992), 83-94. 
In other words, on the traditional interpretation, when we know the concept 
“horse-ness,” for example, the universal form of horse-ness flows from the 
Active Intellect into the human intellect, not simply the accident(s) by which 
the abstracted image in the human brain is changed into a universal. Davidson 
himself, however, admits that this account does not fit with the analogy 
between the Active Intellect and the Sun (Davidson [1992], 93). 

Some evidence that only intellectualizing forms (rather than a complete in- 
telligible) are emanated from the Active Intellect in the case of cognition can be 
found in Avicenna’s small treatise “On the Soul” (“Fi n-Nafs”) in which he 
discusses the status of vain intelligibles or fictional objects, like a phoenix. Ac- 
cording to Avicenna there is no essence of a phoenix within the Active Intellect; 
for if there were, the Active Intellect cum Giver of Forms would have emanated 
the form of phoenix-ness down upon matter, and there would have existed a 
concrete particular instance of such a creature in the physical world. That is 
because for Avicenna every possible kind of thing that can exist does exist. This 
conclusion follows for him since every existing thing ultimately is the result of 
God’s goodness, where the divine goodness reaches the Earth, via the interme- 
diacy of a series of (Active) Intellects, through a cascading process of emana- 
tions—which are certain actions that necessarily (although perhaps voluntarily) 
ensue (/awazim) from God and these Intellects; see chapters 6 and 7 of the 
present volume for a further discussion. Thus, if a certain kind of thing fails to 
exist, it is because either God willed not to extend his goodness to it (which is at 
odds with God’s omnibenevolence) or something about that kind is not compos- 
sible with the order of the good (even if it is not immediately obvious why such 
a kind is impossible). In Avicenna’s own words: “Every thing that necessarily 
ensues from something existing in act must also exist in act. So if something 
impossible necessarily ensues from the Active Intellects, it must exist in act, but 
the conclusion is impossible. Thus, it remains that nothing impossible necessarily 
ensues from them nor do they intellectualize them” (“On the Soul,” 156). 

Thus, returning to the point of intellectualizing forms, since for Avicenna 
we can form a concept of a phoenix, and yet there is no essence of a phoenix in 
the Active Intellect (otherwise, again, there would actually exist concrete 
instances of them), we cannot receive from the Active Intellect the complete 

270 NOTES TO PAGES 134-148 

intelligible, phoenix-ness. Instead, or so I contend, we receive only those uni- 
versalizing forms that make the potentially intelligible image of the phoenix 
existing in our compositive imagination into something actually intelligible in 
our intellect. See Avicenna (1987) for the edition and a French translation by 
Michot of Avicenna’s treatise “On the Soul,” and Michot (1984-1985) for an 
English translation; for an excellent study of Avicenna’s account of fictional 
objects or vain intelligibles, with an alternative interpretation of them, see 
Black (1997). 

17. This isa point at which I have gestured earlier. It was a standard position 
among most medieval philosophers (at least those working within the Neopla- 
tonizing Aristotelian tradition) that since matter is what prevents intelligibility, 
anything immaterial must be intelligible in itself. Thus, in his Book of Demon- 
stration, III.5, 160, Avicenna writes: “Existing things are divided into two classes: 
beings intelligible in existence and beings perceptible in existence. Beings 
intelligible in existence are those that have neither matter nor any consequential 
accidents of matter. They are intelligible in themselves precisely because no 
operation is needed to make them intelligible, and because they cannot be 
perceived by the senses in any way.” Hence the fact that the Active Intellect is 
completely separate from matter guarantees for Avicenna that it is intelligible in 
itself. 

18. Hasse (2001), 39, which is an excellent survey of both the secondary 
literature on this problem and the primary Avicennan texts. 

1g. See, for instance, De anima, III 4, 429a16; III 5, 430a14; IH 7, 431a1 and 
431b 15-17. 

20. Avicenna specifically mentions Porphyry’s On the Intellect and the Intel- 
ligibles and On the Soul. For a brief discussion of these works see Adamson 
(2008), Appendix I. 

21. Owens (1991), 114. 

22. Ibid. 

23. See 84-85. 

24. For studies of Avicenna’s theory of self-awareness, see Black (forthcom- 
ing [a]) and Kaukua (2007). 

25. See go—94. 

26. For a discussion of Avicenna and the mind-body problem, see Druart 
(1988). 

27. For secondary literature on Avicenna’s “flying man,” see Marmura 
(1986) and Hasse (2000), 80-92. 

28. For more in-depth treatments, see the studies of Marmura (1964); 
Davidson (1992), 116-123; Hasse (2000), 154-174; and Gutas (2006a). 

29. For a discussion of fads, see Gutas (1988), 159-176 and (2001). 

30. See 44-46. 

NOTES TO PAGES 149-159 271 

CHAPTER 6 

1. For a detailed discussion of this issue, see Bertolacci (2007), esp. §2, 
“Avicenna.” 

2. Aristotle, Metaphysic, TV (1), 1003a21-22. 

3. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, 1 1; Avicenna, Book of Demonstration, 1.3. 

4. In this respect Avicenna does not have anything like a traditional onto- 
logical proof for the existence of God, although, as I shall suggest (169—70), 
he does believe that God’s existence is self-explaining. 

5. See 165-68. 

6. See, for example, Commentary on Lambda, Avicenna (1947), 23-24; 
Ta‘ligat, Avicenna (2000), 62; and the distinction was implied, though not ex- 
plicitly made, at Pointers and Reminders, Avicenna (1892), namat 4, fasl 29, 146- 
147. For a discussion of the historical context to this distinction, see Davidson 
(1987), 184-288 and Gutas (1988), 261-265. 

7. The following outline is drawn from Bertolacci (2006), which is a rich 
source for understanding the context and composition of Avicenna’s Metaphysics. 
8. Aristotle, Metaphysics, TV (T) 2, 1003b22—34 and VII (Z), 1040b16—-19. 

g. Bertolacci (2006), 164. 

10. Excellent monograph-length studies of Avicenna’s Metaphysics include 
Wisnovsky (2003); Acar (2005); and Bertolacci (2006). 

11. Robert Wisnovsky suggests an alternative set of historical issues, rooted 
in the Islamic intellectual milieu, that were at work in Avicenna’s metaphysical 
system building. I do not believe that the account presented below and Wis- 
novsky’s are incompatible; rather, they complement each other. See Wisnovsky 
(2003), especially Part II. 

12. Asa brief historical aside, most scholars consider Aristotle’s De Caelo a 
very early work and it is not clear whether Aristotle later in his career was com- 
mitted to the strict identification of temporal and alethic modalities, for he 
seems aware of two-sided possibilities in the modal logic of his Prior Analytics, 
and moreover, temporal frequencies are virtually absent from his accounts of 
modalities in the Metaphysics. Be that as it may, the identification of modalities 
with temporal frequency would take on a life of its own in both the late classical 
and early Islamic worlds. 

13. See Aristotle, Metaphysics, XT (A) 7, 1072a10ff. 

14. See, for instance, Proclus (2001), especially argument 1, from which the 
following discussion is drawn. 

15. For instance, Yahyé ibn ‘Adi (1989), esp. 79-80; a partial English trans- 
lation can be found in McGinnis and Reisman (2007). Still, al-Farabi at least 
suggested that modalities might be properly basic and intrinsic to the nature of 
things themselves, in which case they could not be analyzed into temporal 

272 NOTES TO PAGES 159-173 

frequencies, albeit he did not elaborate on and develop this point; see al-Farabi 
(1960), 98.25-100.25 and (1981), 92-96, as well as Adamson (2006), esp., 
180-186. 

16. See, for instance, Kripke (1963) and Plantinga (1974). 

17. For a discussion of Avicenna on the primacy of existence, see Marmura 
(1984a). 

18. See Bertolacci (2008). 

19. See 72-75. 

20. Having said this, I should note that some scholars do find at least an 
ontological style component to Avicenna’s argument. The strongest supporter 
of the ontological reading is Morewedge (1979). Others who see both an onto- 
logical and cosmological element are Johnson (1984) and Mayer (2001). My own 
view is that strictly speaking Avicenna’s argument is not an ontological one, 
even if it demonstrates that there is a self-explaining being. The hallmark of 
ontological-style arguments is that they assume only a priori premises, and so 
have no recourse to empirical experience. Now although Avicenna thinks that 
existence is one of the primary intelligibles, and so one would never remember 
a time when one did not know existence, it does not follow that such a concep- 
tion is innate or a priori; rather, for Avicenna, existence is the very first thing 
that we experience and so the very first thing that is impressed on the intellect. 
Thus, it seems to me that the argument is not strictly speaking an ontological 
type argument at all, since nothing is taken as a priori. Of course, if one means 
by “ontological” merely that Avicenna’s argument refers solely to existence or 
being as such without making reference to any physical facts about existence 
beyond the claim that something exists, then in this qualified sense his argu- 
ment is an ontological one. 

21. For the version of this proof in the Cure, see Marmura (1980b). Also see 
Davidson (1987), ch. IX. 

22. See Appendix 3 for a flowchart presentation of Avicenna’s argument. 

23. See 33-34. 

24. Iam grateful to Eleonore Stump for this point. 

25. Avicenna here is following a long tradition of philosophers that goes 
back at least as far as Plato. The view is that even should one desire something 
bad, one does not desire it insofar as the thing is bad, harmful, or the like, but 
inasmuch as it appears good. Thus, what is always desired is some perceived 
good; for what makes the thing desirable is that it will be pleasant, useful, 
satisfy some need, or the like, all of which belong to the desired object in virtue 
of its being good in some way. Avicenna’s account of good and evil will be 
discussed more fully in chapter 8. 

26. See chapter 4, 97-100. 

27. See 140-43. 

NOTES TO PAGES 173-185 273 

28. Aristotle, Metaphysics, XII (A) 9. 

2g. For discussions of Avicenna’s theory of the Necessary Existent’s knowl- 
edge of particulars see Marmura (1962), Acar (2004), and Adamson (2004b). 

30. See 55-57. 

31. See 99-100. 

32. See Laplace (1951), 4. 

CHAPTER 7 

1. See Augustine, The Confessions, book XI, chapters 10-28. 

2. See Philoponus (1963), 103-119; English translation in Philoponus (2005), 
78-87. 

3. Cf. al-Ghazali (1997), Incoherence of the Philosophers, Discussion 1, 
second proof, 30-36. 

4. See Physics, 1.12, 160-161, where he discusses the suggestion that “be- 
fore” and “after” need not be temporal particles, and Salvation, “Physics,” II.9, 
230, where he discusses the suggestion that the locution “it was not” need not be 
taken in a tensed sense. 

5. See 1g0ar3ff. 

6. Aristotle, Physics, VII I, 251a8—b10, where the argument is in terms of 
that which is capable of undergoing motion, namely, matter. Also see Aristotle, 
Metaphysics, VU (Z) 7-8. 

7. For an overview of many of Philoponus’s anti-Aristotelian theses, see 
Sorabji, ed. (1987). 

8. An actual infinity, very loosely, involves some definite or complete infi- 
nite quantity or number, all parts or members of which exist at the same time; 
although also see Bowin (2007) for a more complete discussion of Aristotelian 
infinity. 

g. Fora discussion and summary of Philoponus’s specific uses of the Aristo- 
telian doctrines of infinity against Aristotle, see Sorabji (1987), 170. 

10. Philoponus usually presents both arguments together as a couplet. See 
Philoponus (1963), I 3, 8.27-11.21 and XVIII 3, 619.3-620.19, as well as Philo- 
ponus (1987), fragment 132. 

11. Cf. Aristotle, Physics, TIT 5, 204b. 

12. Philoponus (1987), 146. 

13. See Janssens (1997) for a discussion of Avicenna’s conception of creation 
and his vocabulary concerning this topic. 

14. See Avicenna, PAysics, H1.11, and Metaphysics, TV.2. 

15. Metaphysics, III.10, 121.17-18; also see Marmura (1975) for a detailed 
discussion of Avicenna’s account of the relative. 

274 NOTES TO PAGES 186-190 

16. For a general discussion of the notion of a “Great Chain of Being,” see 
the now classic Lovejoy (1933), although Lovejoy does not mention Avicenna. 

17. See 40-41, 56. 

18. Interestingly, I believe that Avicenna would accept the claim that if the Nec- 
essary Existent had not created, there would be no privation or absence in Avicen- 
na’s relative sense, and so no possibility. Consequently, if the Necessary Existent had 
not created the world, the creation of the world would have been impossible. Still, 
for Avicenna this counterintuitive, if not absurd, conclusion results not because of 
his analysis of possibility, but because the antecedent—“if the Necessary Existent 
had not created”—is impossible, and from an impossible assumption anything fol- 
lows. For as will be seen later in this chapter (206-8), according to Avicenna, while 
the Necessary Existent creates voluntarily, it does so only on account of its excess of 
goodness. Thus, only if the Necessary Existent were good in some way other than 
(maybe even lesser than) it is, could it will not to create, and it is precisely this as- 
sumption that Avicenna takes to be impossible. 

19. For a discussion of their argument, see McGinnis (2006b), “Historical 
Background.” 

20. For now, see Fakhry (1958) for a study of Islamic occasionalism. 

21. Avicenna does not explicitly mention the Giver of Forms, but instead 
speaks of something separate (mufadriq), namely, separate from matter and so 
some Intelligence or other. 

22. At Physics, 1.2, 14.14-15.5 Avicenna lists the various considerations: “This 
matter, inasmuch as it potentially receives a form or forms, is called its ‘prime 
matter’; and, inasmuch as it is actually bearing a form, it is called in this [book] its 
‘subject.’ (The sense of ‘subject’ here is not the sense of subject we used in logic, 
namely, as part of the description of substance, for prime matter is not a subject in 
that sense at all.) Next, inasmuch as it is common to all forms, it is called ‘matter’ 
and ‘stuff [lit. ‘clay’]. It is also called an ‘element’ because it is resolved into [ele- 
ments] through a process of analysis, and so it is the simple part receptive of the 
form as part of the whole composite, and likewise for whatever is analogous. It is 
also called a ‘constituent’ because the composition begins from it in this very sense, 
and likewise for whatever is analogous. It is as though when one begins from it, 
it is called a ‘constituent,’ whereas when one begins from the composite and ends 
at it, then it is called an ‘element, since the element is the simplest part of the 
composite.” 

23. See also Salvation, “Metaphysics,” 1.17, 536. 

24. For a flowchart presentation of Avicenna’s demonstration see Appendix 4. 

25. In Avicenna’s technical vocabulary, the Arabic séra (“form”) specifically 
identifies that form that makes some particular thing the specific species that it 
is, whereas the term Aaya (also “form,” “configuration,” or perhaps even 

NOTES TO PAGES 192-212 275 

“exterior appearance”) is used for the formal factor that explains a given acci- 
dental state of a particular thing. 

26. For a fuller discussion, see Bertolacci (2002). 

27. Metaphysics, V1.1, 194. See Wisnovsky (2002) and Richardson (2008), ch. 1. 

28. See 162. 

29. See 73-74. 

30. Itis worth nothing that in the whole of the Physics of the Cure Avicenna 
mentions the traversal of an infinite only (as far as I can see) three times: once 
with the qualification that the infinite cannot be traversed in a finite period of 
time (III.4), once when presenting the argument and position of Aristotle (III.8), 
and then again in the same place to distance himself from the proposition that 
an infinite cannot be traversed. 

31. Even this seemingly self-evident claim Avicenna felt compelled to prove 
rather than to take as self-evident. He did so by considering the proportional ratios 
of a number of different interrelated factors associated with motion, such as the 
force impressed by the mover, the weight of and resistance to the moved object, as 
well as the time, distance, and speed of the motion. His general strategy was then to 
show that if any one of these variables is set at <, then the others would either like- 
wise go to ~ or to o. Thus, an infinite distance’s being traversed in some (positive) 
finite period of time contradicts the proportionalities that Avicenna felt that he had 
demonstrated to exist between the various arguments of the functions that he has 
considered. See, for example, the Physics of the Cure, II.10 and IV.15. 

32. Avicenna provides the details at Physics, II.11, which are only implicit 
in the quotation cited from the Metaphysics. 

33. Aristotle (Physics, III 8, 208a20—21) seems to hint at Avicenna’s response, 
which also has some similarities with Simplicius’s response, even though it does 
not seem as if Simplicius’s commentary on the PAysics was available in Arabic. 
See Simplicius (1882), 494.14-495.5- 

34. See Marmura (1960) and McGinnis (forthcoming [b]). 

35. Aristotle had placed the Earth exactly in the center, whereas Ptolemy 
had placed it slightly off center to help bring theoretical calculations in line 
with the observed phenomena. 

36. For a more thorough discussion of the Ptolemaic astronomical model 
that informed most medieval thinkers, see Kuhn (1957),“Ptolemaic Astron- 
omy,” 64-72. 

37. See Taligat, Avicenna (2000), 16-17. 

CHAPTER 8 

1. Cf. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, | 6. 
2. See 144-47. 

276 NOTES TO PAGES 214-245 

3. For a discussion of these various faculties see chapter 4, 95, 113-16. 

4. Cf. Plato, Republic, II, 369B—372B. 

5. See chapter 7, 207-8. 

6. The Arabic gives the superlative of the verbs for “to reach” and “to ob- 
tain” (awsal and ahsal). Marmura in his translation of the Metaphysics (Avi- 
cenna [2005]) renders the criterion in question thus, “that whose perfection is 
more accessible to it and more readily realized for it” (Metaphysics, 1X.7, 348). 
I have preferred to understand this somewhat oblique criterion in terms of 
being absorbed by the pleasure only because this seems to be the sense in which 
Avicenna understands it when he returns to it during his analysis of intellectual 
pleasure (Metaphysics, 1X.7, 350-51). 

7. While the Arabic could be read as “an intellectual knower,” Avicenna is 
probably drawing on the so-called Theology of Aristotle, which in fact is a redac- 
tion of parts of Plotinus’s Enneads, where the notion of intelligible universe or 
world is used; see, for example, Enneads, IV.7.vi. 

8. See 207 for Avicenna’s understanding of “consent” in this context. 

g. For a study of Avicenna’s theory of evil see Belo (2007), 38-51. 

10. See 187-89. 

CHAPTER 9 

t. See Galen (1821-33); for a list of titles by Galen at least known in the 
medieval Islamic world, see Meyerhof (1926). 

2. See Hall (2004), SII. 

3. See 4-9. 

4. See Gutas (2003), 146. 

5. For Avicenna’s developed thoughts on astrology, see Avicenna (2006). 

6. While there is an English translation of book I of the Canon of Medicine 
(Avicenna [1999]), it should be used with due care since it was made from the 
Latin, which does not always follow the Arabic. 

7. See 84-85. 

8. Also see Kruk (2002), §5, where she touches on the chapter discussed 
below, and Musallam (1990), 33-34. 

g. Or, perhaps, Avicenna has in mind the neurula stage of the embryo. 

CHAPTER 10 

1. Todate the best general survey, of which I am aware, of Avicenna’s subsequent 
influence in the East is Gutas (2002) in Avicenna and His Heritage (Janssens and De 
Smet, eds. [2002]). In fact, this collection contains numerous articles relevant to situ- 
ating Avicenna within the broader history of philosophy. For a general discussion 
of Avicenna influence on the East and West, also see Janssens (2006a). 

NOTES TO PAGES 245-254 277 

2. See Janssens (1986). 

3. See, for example, Frank (1992), Griffel (2006), and al-Akiti (2004) for 
Avicenna’s influence on al-Ghazall. 

4. Cf. 49. 

5. For an excellent survey of Mulla Sadra’s philosophy, see Rahman (1975). 

6. See as-Suhrawardi (1999), “Translators’ Introduction,” xxi. 

7. See as-Suhrawardi (1999), “Translators’ Introduction,” xxvii. 

8. See Corbin (1960) and Nasr (1996). For a criticism of their position, see 
Gutas (2000). 

g. For an excellent survey of Maimonides’ place in philosophy within the 
Islamic world, see Broadie (1996), and for a cautious study of Avicenna’s influ- 
ence on Maimonides, see Dobbs- Weinstein (2002). 

10. Fora general discussion of this movement, see Lindberg (1978). 

11. For a complete list of Avicenna’s works available in Latin translation, 
see the introduction to D’Alverny (1994). 

12. See McGinnis (2006a). 

13. See Hasse (2000), 62. Hasse’s survey is also an excellent source for the 
overall reception and influence of the psychological part of Avicenna’s Cure in 
Europe. 

14. Here see McGinnis (2007a) and Gossiaux (2007). 

15. See Gilson (1927). 

16. Ibid., section II, especially, 100-101. 

17. See Druart (2002). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Acar, Rahim. (2003). “Intellect versus Active Intellect: Plotinus and Avicenna.” 
In Reisman, Before and After Avicenna, 69-87. 
. (2004). “Reconsidering Avicenna’s Position on God’s Knowledge of 

Particulars.” In McGinnis, Interpreting Avicenna, 142-156. 

. (2005). Talking about God and Talking about Creation: Avicenna’s and 
Thomas Aquinas’ Position. Leiden, E. J. Brill. 

Adamson, Peter. (2002). The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the “Theology 
of Aristotle.” London: Gerald Duckworth & Co. 

. (20044). “Non-Discursive Thought in Avicenna’s Commentary on the 

Theology of Aristotle.” In McGinnis, Interpreting Avicenna, 87-111. 

. (2004b). “On knowledge of particulars.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian 

Society 105: 257-278. 

. (2006). “The Arabic Sea Battle: al-Farabi on the Problem of Future 
Contingents.” Archiv fiir Geschichte der Philosophie 88: 163-188. 

. (2007). Al-Kind7. Great Medieval Thinkers Series. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

. (2008). “Porphyrius Arabus on Nature and Art: 463F Smith in Con- 

text.” In Studies on Porphyry, ed. George Karamanolis and Anne Sheppard. 
London: Institute of Classical Studies. 

Adamson, Peter and Richard. C. Taylor, eds. (2005). The Cambridge Companion 
to Arabic Philosophy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 

279 

280 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Afnan, Soheil. (1958). Avicenna, His life and Works. London: George Allen & 
Unwin. 

AL-Akiti, M. Affi. (2004). “The Three Properties of Prophethood in Certain Works 
of Avicenna and al-Ghazall.” In McGinnis, Interpreting Avicenna, 189-212. 

Aquinas, Thomas. (1968). On Being and Essence, 2nd, rev. ed. Translated by Ar- 
mand Maurer. Medieval Sources in Translation, v. 1. Toronto: Pontifical Insti- 
tute of Medieval Studies. 

Avicenna. (1892). Al-Isharat wa-t-tanbihat (Pointers and Reminders). Edited by J. 
Forget. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

. (1947). Commentary on Lambda. In Aristii ‘nda |-‘Arab, ed. “Abd ar- 

Rahman Badawi. Cairo: Maktabat an-Nahda al-Misriya. 

. (1951). Avicenna on Theology. Translated by Arthur J. Arberry. The 

Wisdom of the East series. Westport, CT: Hyperion Press. 

. (1952). Shifa@’, al-Mantiq, Kitab al-Oiyais (Book of Syllogism). Edited by S. 

Zayed and I. Madkur. Cairo: The General Egyptian Book Organization. 

. (1953). Shifa’, al-Mantiq, Madkhal (Introduction). Edited by I. Madkir. 

Cairo: The General Egyptian Book Organization. 

. (1959). Shifa ?, at- Tabi iyat, Kitab an-Nafs (Psychology). In Avicenna’s De 

Anima (Arabic Text): Being the Psychological Part of Kitab al-Shifa’. Edited 

by Fazlur Rahman. London: Oxford University Press. 

. (1963). Kitab al-Hudid. In Livre des Définitions. Edited and translated 

by A. M. Goichon. Cairo: Publication de l'Institut Frangais d’Archéologie 

Orientale du Caire. 

. (1966). Shifa@’, Kitab al-Burhan (Book of Demonstration). Edited by 

‘Abd ar-Rahman Badawl, 2 ed. Cairo: Association of Authorship, Trans- 

lation & Publication Press. 

. (1969). Shifa’, at Tabi Tyat, al-Kawn wa-l-fasid (Generation and Corrup- 
tion). Edited by Mahmud Qasim. Cairo: The General Egyptian Book Or- 
ganization. 

. (1970). Shifa’, at Tabi iyat, al-Hayawén (Book of Animals). Edited by 
‘Abd al-Halim Muntasir, Sa‘td Zayed, and ‘Abdallah Isma‘il. Cairo: The 
General Egyptian Book Organization. 

. (1971). Avicenna’s Treatise on Logic: Part One of Danesh-Name Alai. 
Translated by F. Zabech. The Hague: Matinus Nijhoff. 
. (1973). The Propositional Logic of Avicenna: a Translation from al-Shif 2: 

al-Qiyas, with Introduction, Commentary and Glossary. Translated by Nabil 
Shehaby. Dordrecht and Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Co. 

———.. (1974). The Life of Ibn Sina, A Critical Edition and Annotated Transla- 
tion. Edited and translated by William Gohlman. Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 281 

. (1983a). Avicenna’s Tract on Cardiac Drugs. Translated by Hakeem 
Abdul Hameed. Karachi: Hamdard Foundation Press. 

. (1983b). Shifa?, at Tabi tyat, as-Sama‘ attabit (Physics). Edited by S. 
Zayed. Cairo: The General Egyptian Book Organization. 

. (1984). Remarks and Admonitions, Part One: Logic. Translated by Shams 
Inati. Wetteren: Universa Press. 

. (1985). Najat (Salvation). Edited by M. T. Danishpazhth. Tehran: 
Danishgah-yi Tihran. 

. (1986). “Fi aqsam al-‘ultim al-‘aqliya” (“Divisions of the Theoretical 

Sciences”). In Tis‘rasa il f7 l-hikma wa-at-tabi iat, ed. Hasan ‘ Asi, 83-94. 
Beirut: Dar al-Qabis. 

. (1987). “Risala f1 n-Nafs” (“Treatise on the Soul”). Edited and French trans- 
lation by J. (Y.) Michot. In ““L’Epitre sur la disparition des formes intelligibles 

vaines aprés la mort’ d’Avicenne,” Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale 29: 152-170. 
. (1995). Mubahathat (Discussions). Edited by M. Bidarfar. Qum: 
Intisharat-i Bidar. 

. (1996). “Al-Adwiya |-galbtya” (“Cures of the Heart”). In al-Mabda’ wa-l- 
ma‘ad, Mi‘rajnama, al-Adwiya |-galbiya. Council for publishing the precious 

works in the Central Library and Documentation Center of Astan Quds Ra- 

zavi, publication nos.: 1-3. Mashhad, Iran: Astan Quds Razavi. 

. (1999). The Canon of Medicine. Adapted by Laleh Bakhtiar from the 

translations of O. Cameron Gruner and Mazar H. Shah. Great Books of 

the Islamic World. Chicago, IL: KAZI Publications. 

. (2000). At-Taligat (Glosses). Edited by ‘Abd ar-Rahman Badawi. 

Qum: Markaz-i Intisharat-i Daftar-i Tablighat-i Islami-i Hawzah-i 

‘Tlmiyah-i Qum. 

. (2002). Al-Oainiin fi tTibb. Edited by Sa‘id al-Husam. Beirut: Dar al- 

Fikr. 

. (2005). Shifa’, Kitab Ilahiyat (Metaphysics of the Healing). Translated by 
Michael E. Marmura with Arabic edition. Provo, UT: Brigham Young 
University Press. 

——.. (2006). Réfutation de lastrologie. Edited and translated by Yahya 
Michot. Beirut: Les editions Albouraq. 

. (2009). Shifa’, at-Tabityat, as-Sama‘ at-tabit (Physics of the Healing). 

Translated by Jon McGinnis with Arabic edition. Provo, UT: Brigham 

Young University Press. 

Belo, Catarina. (2007). Chance and Determinism in Avicenna and Averroes. \s- 
lamic philosophy, theology and science, v. 69. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

Bertolacci, Amos. (2002). “The Doctrine of Material and Formal Causality in 
the [ahiyyat of Avicenna’s Kitab Sifa’.” Quaestio 2: 125-154. 

282 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

. (2006). The Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in Avicenna’s Kitab al- 
Sifa’: A Milestone of Western Metaphysical Thought. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

. (2007). “Avicenna and Averroes on the Proof of God’s Existence and 
the Subject Matter of Metaphysics.” Medioevo 32: 61-97. 

. (2008). “‘Necessary’ as Primary Concept in Avicenna’s Metaphysics.” In 

Conoscenza e contingenza: nella tradizione aristotelica medievale, ed. Stefano 
Perfetti, 31-50. Pisa: ETS. 

Black, Deborah L. (1990). Logic and Aristotle’s ‘Rhetoric’ and ‘Poetics’ in Medieval 
Arabic Philosophy. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

. (1993). “Estimation (Wahm) in Avicenna, The Logical and Psycho- 

logical Dimensions.” Dialogue 32: 219-258. 

. (1997). “Avicenna on the Ontological and Epistemic Status of Fictional 
Beings.” Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione Filosofica Medievale 8: 425-453. 
. (2006). “Knowledge (“/m) and Certitude (yagin) in al-Farabi’s Episte- 
mology.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 16: 11-45. 

. (forthcoming [a]). “Avicenna on Individuation, Self-Awareness, and 
God’s Knowledge of Particulars.” In PAilosophical and Theological Explo- 
rations in the Abrahamic Traditions, eds. R. Taylor, I. Omar, D. Twetten. 
Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press. 

. (forthcoming [b]). “Rational Imagination: Avicenna on the Cogitative 
Power.” In the proceedings of the conference on Philosophical Psychology 
in Arabic and Latin Aristotelianism, Universidad Panamericana, Mexico 
City, May 2008. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

Bowin, John. (2007). “Aristotelian Infinity.” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 
32: 233-250. 

Broadie, Alexander. (1996). “Maimonides.” In Nasr and Leaman, History of 
Islamic Philosophy, 725-738. 

Corbin, Henry. (1960). Avicenna and the Visionary Recital. Translated by Willard 
R. Trask. Bollingen Series, v. 66. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 

D’Alverny, Marie-Thérése. (1994). Avicenna Latinus, Codices. Louvain-la- 
Neuve and Leiden: E. Peeters and E. J. Brill. 

D’Ancona, Cristina. (2005). “Greek into Arabic: Neoplatonism in translation.” 
In Adamson and Taylor, The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, 
10-31. 

Davidson, Herbert. (1987). Proofs for Eternity, Creation and the Existence of God 
in Medieval Islamic and Jewish Philosophy. New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

. (1992). Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on Intellect. New York and 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Dhanani, Alnoor. (1994). The Physical Theory of Kalam: Atoms, Space, and Void 
in Basrian Mu'tazili Cosmology. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 283 

. (2003). “Rock in the Heavens?! The Encounter between ‘Abd al- 
Jabbar and Ibn Sina.” In Reisman, Before and After Avicenna, 127-144. 
Dobbs-Weinstein, Idit. (2002). “Maimonides’ Reticence toward Ibn Sina.” In 

Janssens and De Smet, Avicenna and his Heritage, 281-296. 

Druart, Thérése-Anne. (1988). “The Soul and Body Problem: Avicenna and 
Descartes.” In Arabic Philosophy and the West, ed. Thérése-Anne Druart, 
27-49. Washington, DC: Center for Contemporary Arab Studies, George- 
town University. 

. (2000). “The human soul’s individuation and its survival after the 

body’s death: Avicenna on the causal relation between body and soul.” 
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 10: 259-273. 

. (2002). “Avicenna’s Influence on Duns Scotus’ Proof for the Existence 
of God in the Lectura.” In Janssens and De Smet, Avicenna and his Heritage, 
253-266. 

. (2005). “Metaphysics.” In Adamson and Taylor, The Cambridge Com- 
panion to Arabic Philosophy, 327-348. 

Endress, Gerhard. (1973). Proclus Arabus, Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio 
Theologica in arabischer Ubersetzung. Beirut and Wiesbaden: Steiner Verlag. 

Fakhry, Majid. (1958). Islamic Occasionalism, and Its Critique by Averroés and 
Aquinas. London: Allen and Unwin. 

Al-Farab1. (1960) Alfarabi’s Commentary on Aristotle’s Tlept Hepunverac. Edited 
by Wilhelm Kutsch and Stanley Marrow. Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique. 

. (1963). The Principles of Existing Things [most of Part 2, under the title 

“The Political Regime” ]. Translated by Fauzi Najjar. In Medieval Political 

Philosophy, A Sourcebook, ed. Ralph Lerner and Muhsin Mahdi. Ithaca, 

NY: Cornell University Press. 

. (1981). Al-Farabi’s Commentary and Short Treatise on Aristotle's De 

Interpretatione. Translated by F W. Zimmermann. Oxford: Oxford Uni- 

versity Press (for The British Academy). 

. (1985). The Principles of the Opinions of the Inhabitants of the Perfect 

State. Edited and translated by Richard Walzer. Oxford, UK: Oxford Uni- 

versity Press; reprinted, Great Books of the Islamic World, 1998. 

. (2006). The Aims of Aristotle’s Metaphysics. Translated by Amos Bertol- 

acci. In Bertolacci, The Reception of Aristotle’s Metaphysics in Avicenna’s 

Kitab al-Sifa’, ch. 3. 

. (2007a). The Aims of Aristotle’s Metaphysics. Translated by Jon McGinnis 

and David C. Reisman. In McGinnis and Reisman, Classical Arabic 

Philosophy. 

. (2007b). The Principles of Existing Things [Part 1]. Translated by Jon 

McGinnis and David C. Reisman. In McGinnis and Reisman, Classical 

Arabic Philosophy. 

284 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Frank, Richard M. (1992). Creation and the Cosmic System: Al-Ghazali and 
Avicenna. Abhandlungen der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
Heidelberg: Carl Winter, Universitatsverlag. 

Galen. (1821-33). Claudii Galeni Opera omnia. Edited by C. G. Kiihn. Leipzig: 
Repographischer Nachdruck der Ausgabe. 

Al-Ghazall. (1997). The Incoherence of the Philosophers. Translated by Michael 
E. Marmura with Arabic edition. Islamic Translation Series. Provo, UT: 
Brigham Young University Press. 

Gilson, Etienne. (1927). “Avicenne et le point de départ de Duns Scot.” Archives 
d’ Histoire doctrinale et Littéraire du Moyen Age 2: 89-149. 

Goichon, Amélie Marie. (1937). La Distinction de l’Essence et de l’Existence 

d'apres Ibn Sind (Avicenne). Paris: Desclée de Brouwer. 

. (1938). Lexique de la Langue Philosophique D’Ibn Sina (Avicenne). Paris: 
Desclée de Brouwer. 

. (1939). Vocabulaires Comparés D’Aristote et D’Ibn Sina: Supplément au 
Lexique de la Langue Philosophique D’Ibn Sina (Avicenne). Paris: Desclée 
de Brouwer. 

Goodman, Lenn. (2006). Avicenna, updated edition. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press. 

Gossiaux, Mark D. (2007). “Thomas Aquinas on Infinite Multitudes and the 
Eternity of the World: A Reply to Massey.” Divinatio 26: 205-228. 

Griffel, Frank. (2006). “The Introduction of Avicennian Psychology into the 
Muslim Theological Discourse: The Case of al-Ghazali (d. 11r1).” In 
Pacheco and Meirinhos, Intellect et Imagination dans la Philosophie 
Meédiévale, 571-582. 

. (2009). Al-Ghazali’s Philosophical Theology. Oxford: Oxford University 

Press. 

Gutas, Dimitri. (1988). Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to 
Reading Avicenna’s Philosophical Works. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

. (1998). Greek Thought, Arabic Culture: The Graeco-Arabic Translation 

Movement in Baghdad and Early ‘Abbasid Society (2nd—4th/8th-1oth centuries). 

London and New York: Routledge. 

. (2000). “Avicenna’s Eastern (‘Oriental’) Philosophy, Nature, Contents, 

Transmission.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 10: 159-180. 

. (2001). “Intuition and Thinking: The Evolving Structure of Avicenna’s 
Epistemology.” In Wisnovsky, Aspects of Avicenna, 1-38. 

. (2002). “The Heritage of Avicenna: The Golden Age of Arabic Philoso- 
phy, 1000—-ca. 1350.” In Janssens and De Smet, Avicenna and his Heritage, 
81-97. 

. (2003). “Medical Theory and Scientific Method in the Age of Avi- 
cenna.” In Reisman, Before and After Avicenna, 145-162. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 285 

. (2006a). “Imagination and Transcendental Knowledge in Avicenna.” 
In Montgomery, Arabic Theology, Arabic Philosophy, 337-354. 

. (2006b). “Intellect without Limits: The Absence of Mysticism in Avi- 
cenna.” In Pacheco and Meirinhos, Intellect et Imagination dans la Philoso- 

phie Médiévale, 351-372. 

Hall, Robert E. (2004). “Intellect, Soul and Body in Ibn Sina: Systematic Syn- 
thesis and Development of the Aristotelian, Neoplatonic and Galenic 
Theories.” In McGinnis, Interpreting Avicenna, 62-86. 

. (2006). “The ‘Wahm’ in Ibn Sina’s Psychology.” In Pacheco and Meir- 

inhos, Intellect et Imagination dans la Philosophie Médiévale, 533-549. 

Hasnawi, Ahmad. (1984). “La Dynamique D’Ibn Sina (La notion d“‘inclination’: 
mayl).” In Etudes sur Avicenne, ed. J. Jolivet and R. Rashed, 103-123. Paris: 
Société d’édition Les Belles Lettres. 

. (2001). “La définition du mouvement dans la Physique du Sifa’ 
d’Avicenne.” Arabic Science and Philosophy 11: 219-255. 

Hasse, Dag Nikolaus. (2000). Avicenna’s De Anima in the Latin West: the Forma- 
tion of a Peripatetic Philosophy of the Soul, 1160-1300. Warburg Institute 
Studies and Texts vol. 1. London and Turin: The Warburg Institute and 
Nino Aragno Editore. 

. (2001). “Avicenna on Abstraction.” In Wisnovsky, Aspects of Avicenna, 
39-72. 

Ibn al-Haytham. (1983). Kitab al-Manazir, Books I-III. Edited by A. I. Sabra. 
Kuwait: The National Council for Culture, Arts and Letters. 

. (1989). Kitab al-Manazir, Books I-III (Optics). Translated by A. I. Sabra. 

Studies of the Warburg Institute, vol. 40, i. London: The Warburg Institute. 

Inati, Shams. (1996). “Ibn Sina.” In Nasr and Leaman, History of Islamic 
Philosophy, 231-246. 

Jabre, Farid. (1984). “Le sens de abstraction chez Avicenne.” Mélanges de 
lUniwersité St. Joseph de Beyrouth 50: 281-310. 

Janssens, Jules. (1986). “Le Danesh-Nameh d’Ibn Sina: un texte a revoir?” Bul- 
letin de philosophie médiévale 28: 163-177. 

. (1991). An Annotated Bibliography on Ibn Siné (1970-1989): Including 

Arabic and Persian Publications and Turkish and Russian References. Leuven: 

Leuven University Press. 

. (1997). “Creation and emanation in Ibn Sina.” Documenti e Studi sulla 

Tradizione Filosofica Medievale 8: 455-477. 

. (1999). An Annotated Bibliography on Ibn Sina: First Supplement (1990- 
1994). Textes et Etudes du Moyen Age, v. 12. Louvain-la-Neuve: Fédéra- 
tion Internationale des Instituts d’Etudes Médiévales. 

. (2004). ““Experience’ (tayriba) in Classical Arabic Philosophy (al-Farabi 
— Avicenna).” Quaestio 4: 45-62. 

286 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

. (2006a). “Ibn Sina, and his heritage in the Islamic world and in the 
Latin West.” In lon Sina and his Influence on the Arabic and Latin World. 
Variorum Collected Studies Series. Aldershot, UK and Burlington, VT: 
Ashgate. 

. (2006b). “The Notions of Wahib al-Suwar (Giver of Forms) and Wahib 

al-‘aql (Bestower of Intelligence) in Ibn Sina.” In Pacheco and Meirinhos, 

Intellect et Imagination dans la Philosophie Médiévale, 551-562. 

Janssens, Jules and Daniel De Smet, eds. (2002). Avicenna and His Heritage, Acts 
of the International Colloquium, Leuven-Louvain-la-Neuve, September 
& September 11, 1999. Leuven: Leuven University Press. 

Johnson, S. A. (1984). “Ibn Sina’s Fourth Ontological Argument for God’s 
Existence.” Muslim World 74: 161-171. 

Kaukua, Jari. (2007). Avicenna on Subjectivity: A Philosophical Study. Jyvaskyla, 
FI: Jyvaskyla University Printing House. 

Kennedy-Day, Kiki. (2003). Books of Definition in Islamic Philosophy: The Limits 
of Words. London and New York: RoutledgeCurzon. 

AlL-Kindi. (1950-1953). Fi/-falsafa l-iild (On First Philosophy). In Ras@il al-Kindt 
al-falsaf tya. vol. 1. Edited by Muhammad Abii Rida. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr 
al- ‘Arabi. 

—.. (1974). Al-Kindi’s Metaphysics: A Translation of Yaqub Ibn Ishaq al- 
Kind7’s Treatise “On First Philosophy.” Translated by Alfred L. Ivry. Al- 
bany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Kripke, Saul. (1963). “Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic.” Acta Philo- 
sophica Fennica 16 (1963): 83-94. 

Kruk, Remke. (2002). “Ibn Sina On Animals: Between the First Teacher and 
the Physician.” In Janssens and De Smet, Avicenna and his Heritage, 
325-341. 

Kuhn, Thomas. (1957). The Copernican Revolution: Planetary Astronomy in the De- 
velopment of Western Thought. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Laplace, Pierre Simon. (1951). A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities. Translated by 
Frederick Truscott and Frederick Emory. New York: Dover Publications. 

Lettinck, Paul. (1999). “Ibn Sina on Atomism, Translation of Ibn Sina’s Kitab 
al-Shifa@’, al-Tabi ‘iyyat 1: al-Sama‘ al-at-tabi%, Third Treatise, Chapter 3-5.” 
Al-Shajarah 4: 1-51. 

Lindberg, David. (1976). Theories of Vision from al-Kindi to Kepler. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

——.. (1978). “The Transmission of Greek and Arabic Learning to the 
West.” In Lindberg, Science in the Middle Ages, 52-90. 

Lindberg, David, ed. (1978). Science in the Middle Ages. Chicago: University of 
Chicago. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 287 

Lovejoy, Arthur O. (1933). The Great Chain of Being: The Study of the History of 
an Idea. The William James Lectures Delivered at Harvard University. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Marmura, Michael E. (1960). “Avicenna and the Problem of the Infinite 
Number of Souls.” Mediaeval Studies 22: 232-239. Reprint in Marmura, 
Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 171-179. 

. (1962). “Some Aspects of Avicenna’s Theory of God’s Knowledge of 
Particulars.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 82: 299-331. Reprint 
in Marmura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 71-95. 

. (1964). “Avicenna’s Theory of Prophecy in the Light of Ash‘arite 
Theology.” In The Seed of Wisdom: Essays in Honour of T. J. Meek, ed., 
W. S. McCullough, 159-178. Toronto: Toronto University Press. 
Reprint in Marmura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 197-216. 

. (1975). “Avicenna’s Chapter ‘On the Relative,’ in the Metaphysics of the 
Shifa’.” In Essays on Islamic Philosophy and Science, ed. George F. Hourani, 
83-99. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

. (1979). “Avicenna’s Chapter on Universals in the Lsagoge of the Shifa’.” 
In Islam Past and Present Challenge: Studies in Honour of W. M. Watt, ed. T. 
Welch and P. Cachia, 34-56. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Re- 
print in Marmura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 33-59. 

. (1980a). “Avicenna on the Division of the Sciences in the Isagoge of his 
Shifa’.” Journal of the History of Arabic Science 4: 239-251. Reprint in Mar- 
mura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 1-15. 

. (1980b). “Avicenna’s Proof from Contingency for God’s Existence in 
the Metaphysics of the Shifa@’.” Mediaeval Studies 42: 337-352. Reprint in 
Marmura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 131-148. 

. (1984a). “Avicenna on Primary Concepts in the Metaphysics of the 
Shifa’.” In Logos Islamikos: Studia Islamica in honorem Georgii Michaelis 
Wickens, ed. R. Savory and D. A. Aguis, 219-239. Toronto: Pontifical 
Institute of Mediaeval Studies. Reprint in Marmura, Probing in Islamic 
Philosophy, 149-169. 

. (1984b). “The Metaphysics of Efficient Causality in Avicenna (Ibn 
Sina).” In Marmura, Islamic Theology and Philosophy: Studies in Honor of 
George F. Hourani, ed. M. E. Marmura, 172-187. Albany, NY: State Uni- 
versity of New York Press. 

. (1986). “Avicenna’s ‘Flying Man’ in Context.” The Monist 69: 383-395. 
Reprint in Marmura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 181-195. 

. (1992). “Quiddity and Universality in Avicenna.” In Studies in 
Neoplatonism, vol. 5, ed. Parviz Morewedge, 77-87. Albany, NY: State 
University of New York. Reprint in Marmura, Probing in Islamic Philosophy, 
61-70. 

288 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

. (2005). Probing in Islamic Philosophy: Studies in the Philosophies of Ibn 
Sina, al-Ghazali and Other Major Muslim Thinkers. Binghamton, NY: 
Global Academic Publishing. 

. (2008). “Some Questions regarding Avicenna’s Theory of the Temporal 

Origination of the Human Rational Soul.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 
18: 121-138. 

Mayer, Toby. (2001). “Ibn Sina’s ‘Burhan al-Siddigin’.” Journal of Islamic Stud- 
1es 12: 18-39. 

McGinnis, Jon. (1999). “Ibn Sina on the Now: Text and Commentary.” American 
Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 73: 73-106. 

. (20034). “Scientific Methodologies in Medieval Islam: Induction and 

Experimentation in the Philosophy of Ibn Sina.” Journal of the History of 
Philosophy 41: 307-327. 

. (2003b). “The Topology of Time: An Analysis of Medieval Islamic 
Accounts of Discrete and Continuous Time.” The Modern Schoolman 81: 
5-25- 

. (2006a). “A medieval Arabic analysis of motion at an instant: the 

Avicennan sources to the forma fluens/fluxus formae debate.” British Journal 
for the History of Science 39: 189-205. 
. (2006b). “Occasionalism, Natural Causation and Science in al- 

Ghazali.” In Montgomery, Arabic Theology, Arabic Philosophy, 441-463. 

. (2006c). “A Penetrating Question in the History of Ideas: Space, 
Dimensionality and Interpenetration in the Thought of Avicenna.” 
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 16: 47-69. 

. (2006d). “Positioning Heaven: the Infidelity of a Faithful Aristote- 
lian.” Phronesis 51: 140-161. 

. (2007a). “Aquinas’ Arabic Sources on the Age of the Universe: A 
Response to Gerald J. Massey.” Divinatio 26: 191-204. 

. (2007b). “Making Abstraction Less Abstract: The Logical, Psycho- 
logical, and Metaphysical Dimensions of Avicenna’s Theory of Abstrac- 

tion.” Proceedings of the American Catholic Philosophical Association 80: 
169-183. 

. (2008). “Avicenna’s Naturalized Epistemology and Scientific Methods.” 
In The Unity of Science in the Arabic Tradition, ed. S. Rahman, T. Street, H. 
Tahiri, 129-152. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

. (forthcoming [a]). “Natural Knowledge in the Arabic Middle Ages.” In 
Wrestling with Nature: From Omens to Science, ed. Peter Harrison, Ronald L. 
Numbers and Michael M. Shank. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

. (forthcoming [b]). “Avicennan Infinity: A Select History of the Infinite 

through Avicenna.” Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione Filosofica Medievale. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 289 

McGinnis, Jon, ed. (2004). Interpreting Avicenna: Science and Philosophy in Medi- 
eval Islam. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

McGinnis, Jon and David C. Reisman, trans. and ed. (2007). Classical Arabic 
Philosophy: An Anthology of Sources. Indianapolis and Cambridge: Hackett 
Publishing Co. 

Meyerhof, Max. (1926). “New Light on Hunain Ibn Ishaq and his Period.” Isis 
8: 685-724. 

Mez, Adam. (1995). The Renaissance of Islam. Translated by Salahuddin Khuda 
Bakhsh and D. S. Margoliouth. 3rd edition with new typesetting. New 
Delhi, India: Kitab Bhavan. 

Michot, Jean [Yahya] R. (1984-1985). “Avicenna’s ‘Letter on the Disappearance 
of the Vain Intelligible Forms after Death’.” Bulletin de Philosophie 
Meédiévale 26-27: 94-103. 

. (1986). La destinée de ’-homme selon Avicenne: Le retour 4 Dieu (ma‘ad) 
et l'imagination. Louvain: Aedibus Peeters. 

. (1987). 
la mort’ d’Avicenne,” Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale 29: 152-170. 

666 

LEpitre sur la disparition des formes intelligibles vaines aprés 

. (1997). “La réponse d’Avicenne 4 Bahmanyéar et al-KirmAnt: Présen- 
tation, traduction et lexique arabe-frangaise de la Mubéhathat II.” Le 
Muséon 110: 143-221. 

Montgomery, James E., ed. (2006). Arabic Theology, Arabic Philosophy. From the 

Many to the One: Essays in Celebration of Richard M. Frank. Leiden: 

Peeters. 

Morewedge, Parviz. (1979). “A Third Version of the Ontological Argument in 

the Ibn Sinian Metaphysics.” In Islamic Philosophical Theology, ed. P. 

Morewedge, 188-222. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Musallam, Basim. (1989). “Avicenna: §X, Biology and Medicine.” In Encyclo- 

paedia Tranica, ed. E. Yarshater, 3: 94-99. Boston: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul. 

. (1990). “The Human Embryo in Arabic Scientific and Religious 
Thought.” In The Human Embryo, Aristotle and the Arabic and European 
Traditions, ed. G. R. Dunstan, 32-46. Exeter: University of Exeter Press. 

Nasr, Sayyed Hossein. (1996). “Ibn Sina’s ‘Oriental philosophy’.” In Nasr and 
Leaman, History of Islamic Philosophy, 247-251. 

Nasr, Sayyed Hossein and Oliver Leaman, eds. (1996). History of Islamic 
Philosophy. London and New York: Routledge. 

Nuseibeh, Sari. (1981). “Avicenna: Medicine and Scepticism.” Koroth 8,.,: 
9-20. 

. (1989). “Al-“Aql al-Qudsi: Avicenna’s Subjective Theory of Knowl- 

edge.” Studia Islamica 69: 39-54. 

290 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Owens, Joseph. (1991). “Aristotle and Aquinas on Cognition.” In Aristotle 
and His Medieval Interpreters, ed. Richard Bosley and Martin Tweedale. 
Calgary, Canada: The University of Calgary Press. 

Pacheco, Maria Candida and José Francisco Meirinhos, eds. (2006). Intellect et 
Imagination dans la Philosophie Médiévale. vol. 1. Turnhout, Belgium: 
Brepols. 

Pasnau, Robert. (1997). Theories of Cognition in the Later Middle Ages. Cam- 
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Philoponus, John. (1888). In Aristotelis Physicorum libros tres priores [et] 
quinque posteriors commentaria. Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca, 
vols. 16-17. Edited by Hieronymus Vitelli. Berlin: typis et impensis Georg 
Reimer. 

. (1963). De Aeternitate Mundi contra Proclum. Edited by H. Rabe. 

Leipzig: Teubner, 1899; reprinted Hildesheim, Georg Olms Verlagsbuch- 

handlung. 

. (1987). Philoponus, Against Aristotle on the Eternity of the World. Trans- 

lated and compiled by Christian Wildberg. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 

Press. 

. (2005). Against Proclus’ On the Eternity of the World 7-5. Translated 
by M. Share. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

Pines, Shlomo. (1997). Studies in Atomism. Jerusalem: The Magnes Press, The 

Hebrew University. 

Plantinga, Alvin. (1974). The Nature of Necessity. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Porphyry. (1975). Isagoge. Translated by E. W. Warren. Medieval Sources in 
Translation, vol. 16. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies. 
Proclus. (2001). On the Eternity of the World (de Aeternitate Mundi). Edited and 
translated by Helen S. Lang and A. D. Macro. Berkeley: University of 

California Press. 

Quine, W. V. O. (1953). “On What There Is.” In From a Logical Point of View, 
1-19. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Rahman, Fazlur. (1975). The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra (Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi). 
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 

Rashed, Marwan. (2005). “Natural Philosophy.” In Adamson and Taylor, The 
Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, 287-307. 

Rashed, Roshdi. (1984). “Mathématiques et Philosophie chez Avicenne.” In 
Etudes sur Avicenne, ed. J. Jolivet and R. Roshdi, 29-39. Paris: Société 
d’édition les Belles Lettres. 

Reisman, David. C., ed. (2003). Before and After Avicenna: Proceedings of the First 
Conference of the Avicenna Study Group. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

Richardson, Kara. (2008). “The Metaphysics of Agency: Avicenna and His 
Legacy.” Ph.D. diss., University of Toronto. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 291 

Sabra, Abdelhamid I. (1980). “Avicenna on the Subject Matter of Logic.” Journal 
of Philosophy 77: 746-764. 
. (2006). “Kalam Atomizing as an Alternative Philosophy to Helleniz- 

ing Falsafa.” In Montgomery, Arabic Theology, Arabic Philosophy, 199-272. 

Sayili, Aydin. (1984). “Ibn Sind and Buridan on the Dynamics of Projectile Mo- 
tion.” In [bn Sind, Dogumunun Bininci Yili Armagan1, ed. Aydin Sayih, 
141-160. Ankara: Tiirk Tarih Kurumu. 

Sebti, Meryem. (2005). “Le statut ontologique de limage dans la doctrine 
avicennienne de la perception.” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 15: 
109-140. 

Shayegan, Yegane. (1999). “The Healing: On Time.” In An Anthology of 
Philosophy in Persia, ed. S. H. Nasr and M. Aminrazavi, vol. 1, 241-250. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Simplicius. (1882). In Aristotelis Physicorum. Edited by H. Diels. Berlin: typis et 
impensis Georg Reimer. 

Smith, A. Mark. (2001). Alhacen’s Theory of Visual Perception, 2. vols [with a 
translation from the Latin of Ibn al-Haytham’s Optics, De aspectibus|. 
Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society. 

Sorabji, Richard. (1987). “Infinity and the Creation.” In Sorabji, PAiloponus and 
the Rejection of Aristotelian Science, 164-178. 

Sorabji, Richard, ed. (1987). Philoponus and the Rejection of Aristotelian Science. 
London: Duckworth. 

Stone, Abraham. (2001). “Simplicius and Avicenna on the Essential Corporeity 
of Material Substance.” In Wisnovsky, Aspects of Avicenna, 73-130. 

. (2008). “Avicenna’s Theory of Primary Mixture.” Arabic Science and 
Philosophy 18: 99-119. 

Street, Tony. (2002). “An Outline of Avicenna’s Syllogistic.” Archiv fiir Geschichte 
der Philosophie 84: 129-160. 

Strohmaier, Gotthard. (1999). Avicenna. Munich: C. H. Beck. 

As-Suhraward1. (1999). The Philosophy of Illumination. Edited and translated 
by John Walbridge and Hossein Ziai. Islamic Translation Series. Provo, 
UT: Brigham Young University Press. 

Thom, Paul. (2003). Medieval Modal Systems: Problems and Concepts. Ashgate 
Studies in Medieval Philosophy. Aldershot, UK and Burlington, VT: 
Ashgate. 

Weisheipl, James A. (1978). “The Nature, Scope, and Classification of the 
Sciences.” In Lindberg, 461-482. 

Winter, Tim, ed. (2008). The Cambridge Companion to Classical Islamic Theology. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Wisnovsky, Robert. (2000). “Notes on Avicenna’s Concept of Thingness 
(Sayiyya).” Arabic Sciences and Philosophy 10: 181-221. 

292 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

. (2002). “Final and Efficient Causality in Avicenna’s Cosmology and 
Theology.” Quaestio 2: 97-123. 

. (2003). Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer- 
sity Press. 

. (2005). “Avicenna and the Avicennian Tradition.” In Adamson and 
Taylor, The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy, 92-136. 

Wisnovsky, Robert, ed. (2001). Aspects of Avicenna. Princeton, NJ: Markus 
Wiener Publishers. 

Wood, Rega and Michael Weisberg. (2004). “Interpreting Aristotle on mixture: 
problems about elemental composition from Philoponus to Cooper.” Studies 
in History and Philosophy of Science 35: 681-706. 

Yahyé ibn ‘Ad1. (1989). “Establishing the Nature of the Possible.” In Carl Eh- 
rig-Eggert, “Yahya Ibn ‘Adi: tiber den Nachweis der Natur des Mégli- 
chen, Edition und Einleitung.” Zeitschrift fiir Geschichte der arabisch-islam- 
ischen Wissenschaften 5: 63-97. 

INDEX 

“Abd al-Jabbar, 15 

absence see privation 

abstraction (tajrid), 35, 99-100, 
118-119, 124, 133-134, 137, 139, 
266 n.7 

Abiul-‘Abbas, ro 

Abt Bakr al-Baraqji, 19 

Abt Bakr ar-Razi, 21, 227 

Abt Bishr Matta, 11-12 

Abil-Hasan al-‘Ariidi, 19 

Abt Mansur al-Jabban, 25 

Abt Muhammad ash-Shirazi, 21 

Abi Sahl al—Masihi, 20 

Abi ‘Ubayd al-Jizjani, 20, 23, 25-26 

accidents, 87, 153, 183, 190, 262 n.13 

accidents, particularizing, 31-33 

acquired intellect see intellect, 
acquired 

Active Intellect (‘aq/ fa‘Gl), 88, 97, 
120, 130-140, 147-148, 185, 188, 
205, 269 n.16 

Active Intellect, sun analogy, 131-135 

293 

actual intellect see intellect, actual 

actual/actuality, 55, 60, 65, 78, 84, 92, 
160 

afterlife (maGd), 129, 217-221 

agent see cause, efficient 

aggregation, 75—76 

‘Ala’ ad-Dawla, 23-26 

Albert the Great, 251 

Albert the Great, De homine, 251 

Alexander of Aphrodisias, 119 

‘Ali ibn al-“Abbaas al-Majisi, 227 

“Ali ibn Ma’min, 20 

“Ali ibn Shams ad-Dawla, 23 

alteration (istihala), 84-85, 136, 192, 
240-241, 265 n.22 

Aristotle, 4, 6-10, 47-49, 57, 59-60, 
67-69, 71-72, 78, 80, 85-86, 91, 
104-106, III, 130, 141, 150, 
155-157, 159-160, 170, 172-173, 
178-181, 196, 198, 203, 209, 213, 
227, 231, 234, 238-239, 241, 263 
n.20, 264 n.g, 275 0.30, 275 n.33, 
n.35 

294 INDEX 

Aristotle, Categories, 4, 153 

Aristotle, De Anima, 7, 60, 93, 
130-131, 141, 268 n.13, 270 n.19 

Aristotle, De Caelo, 6-7, 12, 155-156, 
158, 167, 271 n.12 

Aristotle, History of Animals, 241 

Aristotle, Metaphysics, 7-8, 12, 18-19, 
150, 153, 271 n.12, n.13, 272 n.28 

Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 9, 12, 
213, 275 n.I 

Aristotle, On Generation and 
Corruption, 7 

Aristotle, Physics, 6, 12, 61, 72, 
156-157, 160, 179, 264 n.g, 273 n.6, 
275 1.33 

Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, 4, 153, 
263 n.20 

Aristotle, Prior Analytics, 4, 47-49, 
159, 271 n.12 

asceticism, 216 

Ash‘arites, 14-15, 246-47 

astrology, 230-231 

atomism, 63, 75-77, 121-122, 265 
n.20, 1.21 

attributes, divine, 168-172 

Ahmad ibn Hanbal, 15 

Augustine, 179 

Averroes, 151 

Avicenna, life of, 16-26 

Avicenna, references to book titles by 
Avicenna are only to books either 
explicitly mentioned in the text or 
directly quoted 

Avicenna, Alive son of Awake, 23 

Avicenna, Book of Definitions, 80 

Avicenna, Book of Science for ‘Ala’ 
ad-Dawla, 24, 245 

Avicenna, Canon of Medicine, 21-22, 
24, 227-230, 235-237, 251, 276 n.6 

Avicenna, Commentary on Lambda, 
271 0.6 

Avicenna, Compendium see Prosodic 
Wisdom 

Avicenna, Complete Astronomical 
Observations, 21 

Avicenna, Cure, 16, 22-24, 251, 249 

Avicenna, Cure, Book of Animals, 
239-242 

Avicenna, Cure, Book of Demonstra- 
tion, 41-45, 48, 50-52, 153 

Avicenna, Cure, Book of Syllogism, 
48-49 

Avicenna, Cure, Generation and 
Corruption, 87 

Avicenna, Cure, Introduction, 28-29, 
31-32, 34, 36, 38-40 

Avicenna, Cure, Metaphysics, 153, 
160-161, 169, 176, 184, 189, 196, 
201, 206, 219-222, 224 

Avicenna, Cure, Physics, 22, 41, 
54-58, 60-62, 64-65, 73-79, 82, 
I14, 151, 196, 224, 242-243, 251, 
275 1.30, N.31, 0.32 

Avicenna, Cure, Psychology, go-91, 
93-94, 97-98, 101, 104—108, 110, 
T14—115, 117-118, 130-132, 
138-141, 172, 211-213, 277 n.13 

Avicenna, Cures of the Heart, 23, 234 

Avicenna, Discussions, 265 n.28 

Avicenna, Easterners, 24, 248 

Avicenna, Fair Judgment, 24 

Avicenna, Glosses, 265 n.22, 275 0.37 

Avicenna, Guidance, 23 

Avicenna, Middle Summary on Logic, 
21 

Avicenna, “On the Divisions of the 
Theoretical Sciences”, 230 
Avicenna, “On the Soul”, 269 n.16 
Avicenna, Origin and Return, 21 
Avicenna, Pointers and Reminders, 24, 
218, 271 n.6 
Avicenna, Prosodic Wisdom, 19 
Avicenna, Saintly and the Sinful, 19 
Avicenna, Salvation, 24, 249 
Avicenna, Salvation, Metaphysics, 

58-59, 166-167, 251 

Avicenna, Salvation, Physics, 24, 71 

Avicenna, Salvation, Psychology, 92 

Avicenna, Shorter Summary on Logic, 
24 

Avicenna, Sum and the Substance, 19 

Avicenna, Summary of the Almagest, 
21 

al-Baqillani, 15 

al-Biriini, 16, 20 

Black, Deborah, 115 
Blund, John, 267 n.16 

body, 42-43, 54 
Brethren of Purity, 16 

Cantor, Georg, 202 

causality, 152, 192-195, 199-200, 224 

cause, antecedent, 236-237 

cause, connected see cause, internal 

cause, efficient, 6, 57-59, 155, 158, 
167, 186, 192-195, 232 

cause, efficient (metaphysical), 88, 
192, 194-195 

cause, efficient (natural), 88, 192-193 

cause, external, 236-237 

cause, final, 6, 57-59, 156, 158, 
167—168, 192, 232 

cause, formal, 6, 41-44, 54-56, 84, 
93-94, 97-99, 156, 170, 180, 
189-192, 197, 232, 242, 274 n.25 

cause, internal, 236-237 

cause, material, 6, 41-44, 54-55, 84, 
156, 170, 180, 189-192, 197, 232, 
241-243, 274 n.22 

cause, proegoumenic see cause, 
internal 

cause, prokatarktic see cause, 
external 

causes, essentially ordered, 166-167, 
193, 199 

causes, four, 6, 127-128, 152, 192 

certainty (yaqin), 33, 37, 44, 261 n.8, 
262 n.12, n.1g9 

INDEX 295 

“chain of being”, 185, 273 n.16 

cogitative faculty see imagination, 
compositive 

color, 105-106, 135 

common sense (hiss mushtarak), 98, 
I10-113 

concept see intelligible 

conceptualization (tasawwur), 29-32, 
37) 99, 117, 124 

cone, visual, 103, 107-109, 267 n.15 

connotational attribute (ma‘nd), 
97-99, TII~114 

constant conjunction, 152 

continuum, 63, 77-79 

Corbin, Henri, 248 

corporeality, 41-43, 54-55, 70 

creation, 153, 157-158, 178, 180, 
182-183, 186, 188, 196-200, 253, 
274 n.18 

creation, kinds of, 180, 182-183 

crystalline humor, 107, 109 

definition, 30, 37-44, 69, 71 

Demuurge, 155 

demonstration, 44-46 

determinism, 14-15 

dichotomy paradox, 78-79 

difference (fasl), 30, 39-44, 69, 71 

dispositional intellect see intellect, 
dispositional 

Dominicus Gundissalinus, 250 

dynamics, 79, 265 n.23 

each one/whole distinction, 202 

eclipse, 176 

elements (earth, water, air, and fire), 
80, 85-87, 92, 112, 129, 232-233 

emanation, 8, 88, 107, 132—33, 135-137, 
182, 203—208, 242-243, 269 n.16 

embryonic development, 234, 238-243 

Empedocles, 85 

end see cause, final 

entelekheia, 59-61, 265 n.2 

296 INDEX 

Epictetus, 9 

Epictetus, Enchiridion, 9 

essence (ma@hiya), 31-35, 38, 56, 58-59, 
99, 118, 132-134, 137, 169, 247 

estimative faculty (wahm), 99-100, 
I1O—I15, 124, 143, 202, 212, 218, 
266 n.g 

eternity of the world, 155-158, 
178-183, 196-200, 246, 252 

Euclid, 4, 18, 102 

Euclid, Element of Geometry, 4, 18 

evil (sharr), 222-226, 266 n.g 

existence (wujid), 153, 160-163, 183, 
2475 253 

faculty (guwa), 95, 232 

faculty differentiation, 111-113 

falsafa, 3, 8-16, 238, 247 

fantasia see common sense 

al-Farabi, 11-12, 18, 244, 266 n.4, 271 
n.I5 

al-Farabi, Aims of the Metaphysics, 
12,18 

al-Farabi, Perfect State, 12, 260 n.11 

al-Farabi, Principles of Existing 
Things, 12, 260 n.11 

fictional object see intelligible, vain 

figh, 10, 13 

Firdawsi, 16 

flying man argument, 145-147 

form see cause, formal 

forma fluens/fluxus formae, 251 

form-bearing faculty (g#wa musawwira) 
see imagination, retentive 

Galen, 7, 11, 102, 109, 227-228, 231, 
234-239, 241, 276 n.I 

genus (sins), 18, 30, 38, 41-44, 69, 71 

al-Ghazall, 15, 179, 245-247 

al-Ghazali, Incoherence of the 
Philosophers, 245-246, 273 n.3 

al-Ghazali, Intention of the 
Philosophers, 245 

Gilson, Etienne, 253 

Giver of Forms (wahib as-suwar), 53, 
85, 88, 97, 124, 135-137, 188-189, 
IGI—192, 195, 205, 211, 224, 
242-243, 247, 269 n.16, 274 n.21 

God, 12-15, 38, 57, 150-151, 157-159, 
167, 175, 186-187, 215, 224-225, 
247, 271, 1.4 

good (khayr), 58, 171, 174, 193, 
207-208, 210, 266 n.g 

good, order of, 148, 207, 215, 217, 
222-223, 269 n.16 

goodness, divine, 157, 171, 207-208 

happiness (sa Gda), 129, 210, 214, 
217-221 

Hasse, Dag, 104, 267 n.16, 277 n.13 

health (s:4Aa), 235-238 

heart, as primary organ, 238-239 

humors (blood, phlegm, yellow and 
black bile) (Azz), 129, 233-234, 
238 

Hunayn ibn Ishaq, 11 

I, the, 143-147 

Ibn Daud, 251 

Ibn al-Haytham, 16, 267 n.14, n.15 

‘lm see science/scientific knowledge 

imagination, compositive (mutakhay- 
yila), LLO-111, 113-116, 124, 133, 
135, 140, 148, 269 n.14, n.16 

imagination, retentive (kAayal), 62, 
98, 100, 110-113, 133, 135 

inclination (may/), 53, 79-84 

individuation, principle of, 125, 
175-176, 261 n.g 

induction, 47-52 

infinite, 63, 78-79, 84-85, 123, 
166-167, 180-181, 200-202, 265 
n.29, 273 n.8, 275 n.31 

infinite, traversing of, 79 , 180-181, 
200-201, 275 1.30 

innate (vital) heat, 129, 234, 237 

insight (hads), 147-148, 250 

intellect (@q/), 95, 117-148, 172 

intellect, acquired (‘aq/ mustafad), 
120, 134, 139-141 

intellect, act of, 92, 100 

intellect, actual (gl bi-I-fil ), 
I1g—120 

intellect, becoming identical with the 
thing known, 141-143, 171-172 

intellect, dispositional (‘@q/ bi-l- 
malaka), 119-120 

intellect, immateriality of, 120-124 

intellect, immortality of, 126-130 

intellect, incorruptibility of see 
intellect, immortality of 

intellect, material (‘ag/ hayilant), 119, 
121-123, 130, 135 

intellect, practical, 95, 117-118, 
210-214, 225 

intellect, temporal origination of, 
124-126 

intellect, theoretical, 95, 117-130, 
210, 212 

intellectual memory, 137-140 

intelligible (ma gil), 99, 119, 121, 
134-135, 137, 172, 268 n.10, 269 
n.16 

intelligible, vain, 69, 264 n.13, 269 
n.16 

intention (gasd), 206-207 

intuition see insight 

Ishaq ibn Hunayn, 11 

Isma‘il az-Zahid, 17 

Isma “ilis, 15-17 

Jacobite Christianity, 11, 259 n.10 
John Duns Scotus, 253-254 

kalam, 3, 10, 13-15, 247 

INDEX 297 

al-Kindi, 11, 244, 259 n.g, 264 n.12 

Laplace’s demon, 176 

laws see Sharia 

Liber de causis see Proclus, Elements of 
Theology 

light, 104-107, 131-132, 134-135, 267 
n.15 

logic, relation to science, 27-35 

Majd ad-Dawla, 21 

malady (marad), 235-236 

al-Ma’mtn, 10, 15 

al-Mansur, 10 

marriage, 217 

material intellect see intellect, material 

matter see cause, material 

Mahmid (brother of Avicenna), 17, 
23 

Mahmid of Ghazna, 20-21 

Maturidis, 14 

medicine, 229-235, 238 

memory (dAzkr), 111-112, 114 

mereological sum, 165-166 

metaphysics, proper subject matter 
of, 149-153 

methodic experience, 50-52 

middle term, 42, 44-45, 52, 132, 148, 
262 n.18 

Moses Maimonides, 245, 249-250 

Moses Maimonides, Guide for the 
Perplexed, 249-250 

motion (Aaraka), 59-64, 72, 78, 93, 
263 n.6 

motion in a void, 82-83 

motion, celestial, 65, 67-68 

motion, circular, 64-68 

motion, instantaneous, 61-64 

motion, kinds of, 68, 84 

motion, projectile, 81-84 

motion, rectilinear, 64-68 

Muhammad (Prophet), 9-10, 12, 217, 
226 

298 INDEX 
Mulla Sadra 247-248 
Mustakfi, al— 17 
mutakalliman see speculative 
theologians 

Mut tazilites, 14-15, 260 n.13 

al-Natili, 17-18 

Necessary Existent, the (wajib 
al-wujud), 163-177, 185-188, 
197-200, 204—208, 210, 215, 
221-222, 224-225, 247, 274 n.18 

Necessary Existent, attributes of see 

attributes, divine 

Necessary Existent, identity of 

essence and existence, 168-170 

Necessary Existent, knowledge of 

particulars, 172-177 

Necessary Existent, proof for, 

165-166 

Necessary Existent, as self-explaining, 

168-170 

Necessary Existent, simplicity of see 

simplicity, divine 
necessity (wujub/darira), 159-163 
necessity, conditional, 51 
negations, 40-41, 56, 71, 262 n.14, 264 
n.16 
negative theology, 171, 249-250 
Neoplatonism, 8-9, 94, 204-205, 222 
Nestorian Christianity, 11, 259 n.10 
Newton, 83 
non-naturals (Galenic medicine), 
237 
Nuh ibn Mansi, 17-18 

One, the, 8 

ontological argument, 271, n.4, 272 
n.20 

optic chiasma, 110, 135 

Owens, Joseph, 141-142 

pain (alam), 192, 218, 220 

perception (drak), 97-99 

perfection, kamal 60-62, 65-66, 
93-94, 171, 266 n.1 

perspective, visual, 103, 107-108 

Philoponus, John, 67-69, 81-82, 
179-181, 200-202, 273 n.g 

philosopher-king, 9, 209, 211, 
214-217 

phoenix, 269 n.16 

place (makdan), 67-69 

Plato, 8-9, 94, 111, 129, 154-155, 209, 
214 

Plato, Phaedo, 129, 214, 268 n.g 

Plato, Phaedrus, 266 n.5 

Plato, Republic, 9, 131, 216, 268 n.20, 
n.12, 276 n.4 

Plato, Timaeus, 154-155 

pleasure (ladhdha), 218-220 

Plotinus, 7-8, 129, 259 n.6, 268 n.9, 
276 n.7 

Plotinus, Enneads, 8, 129, 268 n.9, 276 
n.7 

Plotinus, Theology of Aristotle see 
Enneads 

pneuma (rth), 102, t0g—110, 232, 
234-235, 268 n.18 

Porphyry, 4, 40, 141, 262 n.15, 270 n.20 

Porphyry, Isagoge, 4, 18, 30 

Porphyry, On the Intellect and the 
Intelligibles, 270 n. 20 

possibility (‘«mkan/jawaz), 155, 
159-163, 182-189, 191-192, 
196-197, 225, 274 n.18 

possible worlds, 159, 169-170 

potentiality (gu@wa), 55, 57, 65-66, 
92-93, 160, 188-189 

power (qgudra), 186-188 

predicables, universal, 4, 30, 32, 149 

principle, 47, 55-56, 186 

principles of nature, 54-59 

principles, acquisition of, 46-52 

privation (‘adam), 55-57, 175, 
184-186, 189, 225, 274 n.18 

Proclus, 7-8, 157, 178-179, 196, 199, 
259 n.6 

Proclus, Elements of Theology, 8 

Proclus, Pure Good see Elements of 
Theology 

prophecy, 147-148, 250 

prophet see philosopher—king 

providence (Zndya), 207-208, 215, 
221-22 

Ptolemy, 7, 10, 18, 102-103, 203, 275 
n.35 

Ptolemy, Almagest, 7, 10, 18, 21 

Ptolemy, Optics, 203 

Pythagorean theorem, 77 

Qabis, 20 

qualities, primary (hot/cold, wet/ 
dry), 86, 92, 232-234, 237 

Quine, W.V.O. 262, n.16 

Qur’an, createdness of, 14-15, 260 
n.13 

relation, g1, 184 

science/scientific knowledge, 6, 
28-30, 37-38, 44, 117, 150, 231 

science, relation to logic, 27-35 

sciences, division of, 35-37, 53, 
229-230 

self-awareness, 141, 143-147 

semen, female, 97, 233-234, 239, 
241-242 

senses, external, gg—102, 174-175 

senses, internal, 111-116, 251 

Shahada, 13, 216 

Shams ad-Dawla, 22-23 

Shar @, 13, 215-217 

simplicity, divine, 8, 158, 164-165, 
168, 204 

Sitara, 17 

Socrates, 214 

soul (nafs), 7, 91-96, 117, 204, 228 

INDEX 299 

soul, animal, 91-92, 95-96 

soul, vegetative, 92, 95-97 

species (naw), 30, 38-40, 85, 93 

speculative theologians, 14-15, 46, 63, 
69, 75 

Speusippus, 155-156 

statistical model see temporal 
frequencies 

Stoics, 9, 102 

Stump, Eleonore, 272 n.24 

subject (mawdi ‘), 183, 190, 274 
n.22 

sublunar realm, 7, 183,188—189, 203, 
223, 265 n.30 

substance, 87, 153, 184, 190 

substance dualism, 94, 126-127, 
144-145; also see intellect, 
immateriality of 

substantial change, 84-88, 239-240, 
242-243 

substantial form, 86-88, 243 

substrate (mahall), 188-190 

as-Suhrawardi, 245, 247-248 

supralunar realm, 7, 203-204 

tawhid see simplicity, divine 

temperament, humoral (m/zaj), 101, 
129, 148, 231-235, 236 

temperaments, moral, 118, 211, 213, 
217, 225 

temporal frequencies, 155, 158-161, 
167, 271 N.12, N.15 

termini a quo and ad quem, 65-67 

thingness (sha’iya), 58-59 

Thomas Aquinas, 244, 251-253, 262 
n.17, 266 n.4 

Thomas Aquinas, On being and 
Essence, 252, 262 n.17 

Thomas Aquinas, On the Eternity of 
the World, 253 

Thomas Aquinas, Summa 
Theologiae, 252-253 

300 INDEX 

through itself/through another 
distinction, 161-163 

time, 63, 71-75, 157, 160, 178-179 

time as possibility, 72-74, 161, 
197-199 

translation movement, Arabic 
10-12 

transparent, 105-106 

tri-dimensionality, 42-43, 54, 70 

“Ubyd-Allah al-Mahdi, 15 
Unmoved Mover, 57, 151, 156, 173 

verification (tasdiq), 29, 37, 45, 117, 
124, 261, n.4 

vision, IOI—110, 134—135, 267 n.15, 

vision, extramission theory of, 
102-103, 107-110 

vision, intromission theory of, 
102—104, 108—109, 267 n.15 

vital spirit see pneuma 

void, 41, 69-71, 82-84 

volition (‘ra@da), 207 

whole/each one see each one/whole 
distinction 

Wisnovsky, Robert, 271 n.12 

wolf-sheep example, 98 

World Soul, 8 

Xenocrates, 155-156 

Yahya ibn ‘Adi, 11-12, 
271 1.15 

Zeno’s paradox see dichotomy paradox