SESS 
SSS SES 

& 
Oe RES 

<8 > 
SRE SSE 

SEAL ESL LEE ELL 
iy poe gis 
OLE Tage 

ANTE 

SELLE 
BAD KEEL, 
SLIPS EIII ISLS SD YS SII 
Rot LEK A LEAL LAE ELS 
PPI ALS LIES Oe, oF, 
TPN EI I 
SAAS GS ee 
Fe ES 
aes 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 

https://archive.org/details/owb_KR-444-542 

_ 
THE “SUMMA THEOLOGIC 

: ’ = 
~? 
. 
a. 
@ ; 
7 
® . 
4, ‘ 
. . 
. 
. . 2 
~ 
s 
- 
* 
‘ ™ “ 
ad 
: 
e* 4 
/ 
° : 
‘ 
vw 
. 
’ 
: : ’ 
; , . : : 
." 7 y 7 , 
- = . 
a>. ——— 
: . ” 
@ . 

- 
. 
' 
6 
: 
' | 
‘ 
AY + 
. 
, 
> 
J . 
* . 
: 
~ . ' 
. o 
i ” 
s . 
; of" ; ; 
> : “- 
Pay a 
‘; Te a ae 
. “ty my (NJ 
» Lh me © 
. 4 as ‘ 
' * vy cae: aa 
oe 0 Ret Kiet sie 
x.y es 
« oe | Reis 
‘ 

NIHIL OBSTAT: 
G, Hi JOvcEe ors. 

Censor deputatus, 

IMPRIMATUR: 
Epm, Can. SURMONT, 

Vicarius generalis. 

WESTMONASTERII, 
Die 18% Januarti, 1926. 

| di THE ie 
“SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 

OF 

ST THOMAS AQUINAS 

PART III. . 
(QQ. XXVII.—LIX.) 
(16) 
LITERALLY TRANSLATED BY 
FATHERS OF THE ENGLISH DOMINICAN 
PROVINCE 

SECOND AND REVISED EDITION 

LONDON 
BURNS OATES & WASHBOURNE LTD. 

PUBLISHERS TO THE HOLY SEE 

Made and Printed in Great Britain 
’ 

hd 
oe. 

; ‘ 
“et 

ST. THOMAS AND THE IMMACULATE 
3 CONCEPTION 

EDITORIAL NOTE 

Tue privilege of the Virgin-Mother of God and the supreme 
prerogative of her Son may be seen from the following 

_ diagram: 

THE LAW AND COURSE OF ORIGINAL SIN. 

Under the Law. 

All descendants 
from Adam. 

| Law ; privilege of Immaculate 

Partially exempt from the 

Conception. 

The Blessed Virgin. 

| 

Spring from Adam materially and semin- | Springs from Adam 
all 

y- 

The body lies (not under the “guilt, but) | 
under the effects of original sin. 

The stricken 
dispositively 
causes the soul to 
contract the guilt | 
| of original sin. 

The soul at the mo- 
ment of union with | 
the body contracts | 
the stain. 

| All contract 
| debt and stain. 

i 

to destroy the stain 
contracted. 

“body |’ 

The soul at ieee mo- 

both Mary contracted the 

| All need a Redeemer Mary needed a Ke- 

The stricken body | 
would have dis- 
positively caused ; 
the soul to con- 
tract the guilt of 
original sin. 

ment of union with 
the body was pre- 
vented by the in- 

fusion of grace 
from contracting 
the stain. 

His body lay under 

No preventive grace 

Wholly exempt from the Law ; 

iraculous Conception. 
° 

nee 
Our Blessed Lord. 

materially, not 
seminally (Q. xxxi., 
As i); 

neither guilt nor ef- 
fects of original sin. 

The body being en- 
tirely free, could 
not transmit the 
stain to His soul. 

needed. 

debt, but not the 
stain. 

Jesus Christ con- 
tracted neither 
debt nor stain. 

deemer to prevent 
her from contract- 
ing the stain. 

Jesus Christ is not re- 
deemed, but the 
Redeemer. 

Vv 

vi EDITORIAL NOTE 

It will thus be seen how accurately St. Thomas speaks 
of the flesh or body of our Blessed Lady. For it should 
be remembered that, according to St. Thomas, the human 
body is animated in succession by (1) a vegetative, (2) a 
sensitive, and (3) a rational soul. Hence his assertion that 
the flesh of the Blessed Virgin was conceived in original sin 
(Q. XIV., A. 3 ad 1) means that the body of the Blessed 
Virgin, being descended from Adam both materially and 
seminally, contracted the bodily defects which are con- 
veyed by seminal generation, and are the results of the 
privation of original justice (Q. LXIX., A. 4 ad 3). Before 
animation, therefore the body of the Blessed Virgin would 
not be infected with the guilt of original sin, because 
privation of grace can only be in that which is the subject 
of grace—viz., the rational soul. Nevertheless, before 
animation the body of the Blessed Virgin, being seminally 
descended from Adam, was such that it would have been 
the means of transmitting the taint of original sin to the 
rational soul at the very first instant of animation, unless 
the grace of the Redeemer intervened and sanctified her 
soul im that selfsame instant, thus redeeming her and pre- 
venting her from contracting the guilt of original sin. 

Why, then, does St. Thomas say that because the Blessed 
Virgin was not sanctified before animation, therefore she 
could be sanctified only after animation ? 

Such a conclusion would hold if it were a question of 
the order of Nature: a thing must be before it is such (prius 
est esse quam esse tale); and therefore the soul must be, 
before it is sanctified. But if St. Thomas held for a pos- 
teriority of time, no matter how short, we ask how it was 
that he did not perceive the fallacy of the argument, since 
it might be neither before nor after, but in the very instant 
of, animation. 

The question is answered thus :— 

St. Thomas as a Doctor of the Church and in matters which 
were not then de fide, is a witness to the expression of the 
faith of his time. Hence his line of argument coincides 
with, because it follows, that of St. Bernard, Peter Lombard, 

EDITORIAL NOTE Vii 

Alexander of Hales, Albert the Great, St. Bonaventure. It 
was not likely that St. Thomas would differ from the great 
masters of his time, who failed to understand that the grace of 
redemption might at the same time be one of preservation 
and prevention. Nor is it likely that St. Thomas had any 
reliable information about the movement* in progress at 
that time towards a belief in the Immaculate Conception. 
No doubt he knew something of it, but the names of its 
promoters would have weighed little with him as against 
those of Bernard, Albert, Peter, Alexander, and Bonaven- 
ture. And it must not be forgotten that among those who 
upheld the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, not a 
few ascribed the privilege as being absolute and not one of 
preservation and Redemption. Hence it is that St. Thomas 
insists on two things—(1) that the Mother of God was 
redeemed, and (2) that the grace of her sanctification was a 
grace of preservation. And, be it remarked in conclusion, 
these two points, so much insisted on by St. Thomas, are 
at the very basis of the Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate 
Conception. 

* Principally in England, where, owing to the influence of 
St. Anselm (1109), the doctrine was maintained by Eadmer (1137), 
Nicolas of St. Albans (1175), Osbert of Clare (1170), Robert 
Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln (1253), William of Ware (1300), 
who was the master of Duns Scot (1308). 

t# 

QUESTION 
XXVII. OF 

XXVIII. OF 
XXIX. OF 
XXX. OF 
XXXI. OF 

XXXII. OF 
XXXII. OF 

 *‘MXXIV. OF 

*, 

XXXV. OF 

XLIII. OF 
XLIV. OF 
XLV. OF 
XLVI. OF 
XLVII. OF 
XLVIII. OF 
XLIX. OF 
L. OF 

CONTENTS 

TREATISE ON CHRISTOLOGY 

THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN 
THE VIRGINITY OF THE MOTHER OF GOD - 
THE ESPOUSALS OF THE MOTHER OF GOD = 
THE ANNUNCIATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. - 

THE MATTER FROM WHICH THE SAVIOUR’S ‘BODY 
WAS CONCEIVED - - - - ms 

THE ACTIVE PRINCIPLE IN CHRIST’S CONCEPTION - 
THE MODE AND ORDER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION 
THE PERFECTION OF THE CHILD CONCEIVED < 
CHRIST’S NATIVITY - a - u 
THE MANIFESTATION OF THE NEWLY BORN CHRIST 
CHRIST'S CIRCUMCISION” - 2 = é 
THE BAPTISM OF JOHN” - E a 2 

THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST 
CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE - - “ 
CHRIST’S TEMPTATION - s = = 

CHRIST’S DOCTRINE - - ~ = 

THE MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST IN GENERAL 

(CHRIST’S) MIRACLES CONSIDERED SPECIFICALLY 
CHRIST’S TRANSFIGURATION : 2 ps 
THE PASSION OF CHRIST - = s ie 
THE EFFICIENT CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION - 
THE EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION” - - 
THE EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION - = 

THE DEATH OF CHRIST - 2 rs z 
ix 

105 
124 

156 
169 

201 
214 
225 

253 

297 
311 
323 
SEW 

x 

QUESTION 

CONTENTS 

LI. OF CHRIST’S BURIAL - - = . 

LII. OF CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL 

LIII. 
LIV. 
LV. 
LVI. 
LVII. 
LVIII. 

LIX. 

OF CHRIST’S RESURRECTION - - - 
OF THE QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN - 
OF THE MANIFESTATION OF THE RESURRECTION 

OF THE CAUSALITY OF CHRIST’S RESURRECTION | 

OF THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST - - 

OF CHRIST’S SITTING AT THE RIGHT HAND OF 
FATHER “ = = - ~ 

OF CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER - - 

TREATISE ON CHRISTOLOGY 

THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 

THIRD PART. 

QUESTION XXVII. 

OF THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. 
(In Six Articles.) 

AFTER the foregoing treatise of the union of God and man 
and the consequences thereof, it remains for us to consider 
what things the Incarnate Son of God did or suffered in 
the human nature united to Him. This consideration will 
be'fourfold. For we shall consider (1) Those things that 
relate to His coming into the world; (2) Those things that 
relate to the course of His life in this world; (3) His de- 
parture from this world; (4) Those things that concern His 
exaltation after this life. 

The first of these offers four points of consideration: 
(x) The Conception of Christ; (2) His Birth; (3) His Circum- 
cision; (4) His Baptism. Concerning His Conception there 
are some points to be considered: (1) As to the Mother who 
conceived Him; (2) as to the mode of His Conception; 
(3) as to the perfection of the offspring conceived. 

On the part of the Mother four points offer themselves 
to our consideration: (1) Her sanctification; (2) her vir- 
ginity; (3) her espousals; (4) her annunciation, or prepara- 
tion for conception. 

Concerning the first there are six points of inquiry: 
(1) Whether the Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, was sancti- 
fied before her birth from the womb? (2) Whether she 
was sanctified before animation? (3) Whether in virtue 

Ill. 2 I 

Q. 27. Art.t THE ‘“ SUMMA THEOLOGICA nh 2 

of this sanctification the fomes of sin was entirely taken 
away from her? (4) Whether the result of this sanctifica- 
tion was that she never sinned? (5) Whether in virtue of 
this sanctification she received the fulness of grace? 
(6) Whether it was proper to her to be thus sanctified ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE BLESSED VIRGIN WAS SANCTIFIED BEFORE HER 
BIRTH FROM THE WOMB ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Blessed Virgin was not 
sanctified before her birth from the womb. For the Apostle 
says (1 Cor. xv. 46): That was not first which ts spiritual, but 
that which is natural ; afterwards that which ts spiritual. 
But by sanctifying grace man is born spiritually into a 
son of God, according to Jo. i. 13: (who) are born of God. 
But birth from the womb is a natural birth. Therefore the 
Blessed Virgin was not sanctified before her birth from the 
womb, 

Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says (Ep. ad Dardan.): The 
sanctification, by which we become temples of God, ts only of 
those who are born again. But no one is born again, who 
was not born previously. Therefore the Blessed Virgin was 
not sanctified before her birth from the womb. 

0bj. 3. Further, whoever is sanctified by grace is cleansed 
_ from sin, both original and actual. If, therefore, the 
Blessed Virgin was sanctified before her birth from the — 
womb, it follows that she was then cleansed from original 
sin. Now nothing but original sin could hinder her from 
entering the heavenly kingdom. If therefore she had died 
then, it seems that she would have entered the gates of 
heaven. But this was not possible before the Passion of 
Christ, according to the Apostle (Heb. x. 19): We have 
(Vulg., having) therefore a confidence in the entering into the 
Holies by His blood. It seems therefore that the Blessed 

Virgin was not sanctified before her birth from the 
womb. 

3 OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 1 

Obj. 4. Further, original sin is contracted through the 
origin, just as actual sin is contracted through an act. But 
as long as one is in the act of sinning, one cannot be cleansed 
from actual sin. Therefore neither could the Blessed Virgin 
be cleansed from original sin as long as she was in the act 
of origin, by existence in her mother’s womb. 

On the contrary, The Church celebrates the feast of Our 
Lady’s Nativity. Now the Church does not celebrate 
feasts except of those who are holy. Therefore even in 
her birth the Blessed Virgin was holy. Therefore she was 
sanctified in the womb. 

I answer that, Nothing is handed down in the canonical 
Scriptures concerning the sanctification of the Blessed Mary 
as to her being sanctified in the womb; indeed, they do not 
even mention her birth. But as Augustine, in his tractate 
on the Assumption of the Virgin, argues with reason, since 
her body was assumed into heaven, and yet Scripture does 
not relate this; so it may be reasonably argued that she 
was sanctified in the womb. For it is reasonable to believe 
that she, who brought forth the Only Begotten of the Father 
full of grace and truth, received greater privileges of grace 
than all others: hence we read (Luke i. 28) that the angel 
addressed her in the words: Hail full of grace ! 

Moreover, it is to be observed that it was granted, by 
way of privilege, to others, to be sanctified in the womb; 
for instance, to Jeremias, to whom it was said (Jer. i. 5): 
Before thou camest forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee ; 
and again, to John the Baptist, of whom it is written (Luke 
i. 15): He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost even from hs 
mother’s womb. It is therefore with reason that we believe 
the Blessed Virgin to have been sanctified before her birth 
from the womb. 

Reply Obj. 1. Even in the Blessed Virgin, first was that 
which is natural, and afterwards that which is spiritual: 
for she was first conceived in the flesh, and afterwards 
sanctified in the spirit. 

Reply Obj. 2. Augustine speaks according to the common 
law, by reason of which no one is regenerated by the sacra- 

Q. 27. Art.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 4 

ments, save those who are previously born. But God did 
not so limit His power to the law of the sacraments, but that 
He can bestow His grace, by special privilege, on some 
before they are born from the womb. 

Reply Obj. 3. The Blessed Virgin was sanctified in the 
womb from original sin, as to the personal stain; but she 
was not freed from the guilt to which the whole nature is 
subject, so as to enter into Paradise otherwise than through 
the Sacrifice of Christ; the same also is to be said of the 
Holy Fathers who lived before Christ. 

Reply Obj. 4. Original sin is transmitted through the 
origin, inasmuch as through the origin the human nature 
is transmitted, and original sin, properly speaking, affects 
the nature. And this takes place when the offspring con- 
ceived is animated. Wherefore nothing hinders the off- 
spring conceived from being sanctified after animation: for 
after this it remains in the mother’s womb not for the pur- 
pose of receiving human nature, but for a certain perfecting 
of that which it has already received. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE BLESSED VIRGIN WAS SANCTIFIED BEFORE 
ANIMATION ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that the Blessed Virgin was 
_ sanctified before animation. Because, as we have stated 
(A. I), more grace was bestowed on the Virgin Mother of God 
than on any saint. Now it seems to have been granted to 
some, to be sanctified before animation. For it is written 
(Jer. 1. 5): Before I formed thee in the bowels of thy mother, I 
knew thee : and the soul is not infused before the formation of 
the body. Likewise Ambrose says of John the Baptist (Com- 
ment. in Luc. i. 15): As yet the spirit of life was not in him 
and already he possessed the Spirit of grace. Much more there- 
fore could the Blessed Virgin be sanctified before animation. 
Obj. 2. Further, as Anselm says (De Concep. Virg. xviii.), 
it was fitting that this Virgin should shine with such a purity 

5 OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr.2 

that under God none greater can be imagined : wherefore it 
is written (Cant. iv. 7): Thou art all fair, O my love, and 
there is not a spot in thee. But the purity of the Blessed 
Virgin would have been greater, if she had never been 
stained by the contagion of original sin. Therefore it was 
granted to her to be sanctified before her flesh was ani- 
mated. 

Obj. 3. Further, as it has been stated above, no feast is 
celebrated except of some saint. But some keep the feast 
of the Conception of the Blessed Virgin. Therefore it seems 
that in her very Conception she was holy; and hence that 
she was sanctified before animation. 

Obj. 4. Further, the Apostle says (Rom. xi. 16): If the 
root be holy, so are the branches. Now the root of the 
children is their parents. Therefore the Blessed Virgin 
could be sanctified even in her parents, before animation. 

On the contrary, The things of the Old Testament were 
figures of the New, according to r Cor. x. 11: All things 
happened to them in figure. Now the sanctification of the 
tabernacle, of which it is written (Ps. xlv. 5): The most 
High hath sanctified His own tabernacle, seems to signify 
the sanctification of the Mother of God, who is called God’s 
Tabernacle, according to Ps. xviii. 6: He hath set His taber- 
nacle in the sun. But of the tabernacle it is written (Exod. 
xl. 31, 32): After all things were perfected, the cloud covered 
the tabernacle of the testimony, and the glory of the Lord filled 
it. Therefore also the Blessed Virgin was not sanctified 
until after all in her was perfected—viz., her body and soul. 

I answer that, The sanctification of the Blessed Virgin 
cannot be understood as having taken place before anima- 
tion, for two reasons. First, because the sanctification of 
which we are speaking, is nothing but the cleansing from 
original sin: for sanctification is a perfect cleansing, as 
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xii.). Now sin cannot be taken 
away except by grace, the subject of which is the rational 
creature alone. Therefore before the infusion of the rational 
soul, the Blessed Virgin was not sanctified. 

Secondly, because, since the rational creature alone can 

- Q.27, Art.2, THE “ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 6 

be the subject of sin; before the infusion of the rational 
soul, the offspring conceived is not liable to sin. And thus, 
in whatever manner the Blessed Virgin would have been 
sanctified before animation, she could never have incurred 
the stain of original sin: and thus she would not have 
needed redemption and salvation which is by Christ, of 
whom it is written (Matt. i. 21): He shall save His people 
from their sins. But this is unfitting, through implying 
that Christ is not the Saviour of all men, as He is called 
(rt Tim. iv. 10). It remains, therefore, that the Blessed 
Virgin was sanctified after animation. 

Reply Obj. 1. The Lord says that He knew Jeremias 
before he was formed in the womb, by knowledge, that is 
to say, of predestination: but He says that He sanctified 
him, not before formation, but before he came forth out of 
the womb, etc. 

As to what Ambrose says—viz., that in John the Baptist 
there was not the spirit of life when there was already the 
Spirit of grace—by spirit of life we are not to understand 
the life-giving soul, but the air which we breathe out 
(respiratus). Or it may be said that in him as yet there 
was not the spirit of life, that is the soul, as to its manifest 
and complete operations. 

Reply Obj. 2. If the soul of the Blessed Virgin had never 
incurred the stain of original sin, this would be derogatory 
to the dignity of Christ, by reason of His being the universal 
Saviour of all. Consequently after Christ, who, as the 
universal Saviour of all, needed not to be saved, the purity 
of the Blessed Virgin holds the highest place. For Christ 
did not contract original sin in any way whatever, but was 
holy in His very Conception, according to Luke i. 35: The 
Holy which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of 
God. But the Blessed Virgin did indeed contract original 
sin, but was cleansed therefrom before her birth from the 
womb. This is what is signified (Job iii. 9) where it is 
written of the night of original sin: Let it expect light—+.e., 
Christ—and not see 1t—(because no defiled thing cometh into 
her, as is written Wisd. vii. 25), nor the rising of the dawning 

— 

ie OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 3 

of the day, that is of the Blessed Virgin, who in her birth 
was immune from original sin. 

Reply Obj. 3. Although the Church of Rome does not 
celebrate the Conception of the Blessed Virgin, yet it 
tolerates the custom of certain churches that do keep that 
feast; wherefore this is not to be entirely reprobated. 
Nevertheless the celebration of this feast does not give us 
to understand that she was holy in her conception. But 
since it is not known when she was sanctified, the feast of 
her Sanctification, rather than the feast of her Conception, 
is kept on the day of her conception. 

Reply Obj. 4. Sanctification is twofold. One is that of 
the whole nature: inasmuch as the whole human nature is 
freed from all corruption of sin and punishment. This 
will take place at the resurrection. The other is personal 
sanctification. This is not transmitted to the children 
begotten of the flesh: because it does not regard the flesh 
but the mind. Consequently, though the parents of the 
Blessed Virgin were cleansed from original sin, nevertheless 
she contracted original sin, since she was conceived by way 
of fleshly concupiscence and the intercourse of man and 
woman: for Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i.): All 
flesh born of carnal intercourse ts sinful. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE BLESSED VIRGIN WAS CLEANSED FROM THE 
INFECTION OF THE FOMES ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Blessed Virgin was 
not cleansed from the infection of the fomes. For just as 
“the fomes, consisting in the rebellion of the lower powers 
against the reason, is a punishment of original sin; so also 
are death and other corporeal penalties. But the Blessed 
Virgin was subject to these penalties. Therefore the fomes 
was not e: tirely removed from her. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (2 Cor. xii. 9): Power ts 
made perfect in infirmity, which refers to the weakness of 

Q.27. Artr.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 8 

the fomes, by reason of which he (the Apostle) felt the 
sting of the flesh. But it was not fitting that anything 
should be taken away from the Blessed Virgin, pertaining 
to the perfection of virtue. Therefore it was unfitting that 
the fomes should be entirely taken away from her. 

Obj. 3. Further, Damascene says (De Fid. Orth. iii.) that 
the Holy Ghost came upon the Blessed Virgin, purifying her, 
before she conceived the Son of God. But this can only 
be understood of purification from the fomes: for she com- 
mitted no sin, as Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. xxvi.). 
Therefore by the sanctification in the womb she was not 
absolutely cleansed from the fomes. 

On the contrary, It is written (Cant. iv. 7): Thou art all 
fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee! But the 
fomes implies a blemish, at any rate in the flesh. Therefore 
the fomes was not in the Blessed Virgin. 

I answer that, On this point there are various opinions. 
For some have held that the fomes was entirely taken away 
in that sanctification whereby the Blessed Virgin was 
sanctified in the womb. Others say that it remained as 
far as it causes a difficulty in doing good, but was taken 
away as far as it causes a proneness to evil. Others again, 
that it was taken away as to the personal corruption, by 
which it makes us quick to do evil and slow to do good: 
but that it remained as to the corruption of nature, inas- 
much as it is the cause of transmitting original sin to the 
offspring. Lastly, others say that, in her first sanctifica- 
tion, the fomes remained essentially, but was fettered; and 
that, when she conceived the Son of God, it was entirely 
taken away. In order to understand the question at issue, 
it must be observed that the fomes is nothing but a certain 
inordinate, but habitual, concupiscence of the sensitive 
appetite; for actual concupiscence is a sinful motion. Now 
sensual concupiscence is said to be inordinate, in so far as 
it rebels against reason; and this it does by inclining to 
evil, or hindering from good. Consequently it is essential 
to the fomes to incline to evil, or hinder from good. Where- 
fore to say that the fomes was in the Blessed Virgin without 

9 OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 3 

an inclination to evil, is to combine two contradictory 
statements. 

In like manner it seems to imply a contradiction to say 
that the fomes remained as to the corruption of nature, 
but not as to the personal corruption. For, according to 
Augustine (De Nup. et Concup. i.), it is lust that transmits 
original sin to the offspring. Now lust implies inordinate 
concupiscence, not entirely subject to reason: and therefore, 
if the fomes were entirely taken away as to personal cor- 
ruption, it could not remain as to the corruption of nature. 

It remains, therefore, for us to say, either that the fomes 
was entirely taken away from her by her first sanctification 
or that it was fettered. Now that the fomes was entirely 
taken away, might be understood in this way, that, by the 
abundance of grace bestowed on the Blessed Virgin, such a 
disposition of the soul’s powers was granted to her, that the 
lower powers were never moved without the command of 
her reason: just as we have stated to have been the case 
with Christ (Q. XV., A. 2), who certainly did not have the 
fomes of sin; as also was the case with Adam, before he 
sinned, by reason of original justice: so that, in this respect, 
the grace of sanctification in the Virgin had the force of 
original justice. And although this appears to be part of 
the dignity of the Virgin Mother, yet it is somewhat deroga- 
tory to the dignity of Christ, without whose power no one 
had been freed from the first sentence of condemnation. 
And though, through faith in Christ, some were freed from 
that condemnation, according to the spirit, before Christ’s 
Incarnation, yet it does not seem fitting that any one 
should be freed from that condemnation, according to the 
flesh, except after His Incarnation, for it was then that 
immunity from condemnation was first to appear. Conse- 
quently, just as before the immortality of the flesh of Christ 
rising again, none obtained immortality of the flesh, so it 
seems unfitting to say that before Christ appeared in sinless 
flesh, His Virgin mother’s or anyone else’s flesh should be 
without the fomes, which is called the law of the flesh or of 
the members (Rom. vii. 23, 25). 

Q.27. Arr.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 10 

Therefore it seems better to say that by the sanctification 
in the womb, the Virgin was not freed from the fomes in 
its essence, but that it remained fettered: not indeed by 
an act of her reason, as in holy men, since she had not the 
use of reason from the very first moment of her existence 
in her mother’s womb, for this was the singular privilege 
of Christ: but by reason of the abundant grace bestowed 
on her in her ganctification, and still more perfectly 
by Divine Providence preserving her sensitive soul, in a 
singular manner, from any inordinate movement. After- 
wards, however, at the conception of Christ’s flesh, in which 
for the first time immunity from sin was to be conspicuous, 
it is to be believed that entire freedom from the fomes 
redounded from the Child to the Mother. This indeed is 
signified (Ezech. xliii. 2): Behold the glory of the God of Israel 
came in by the way of the east—t.e., by the Blessed Virgin— 
and the earth—t.e., her flesh—shone with His—t.e., Christ’s 
—majesty. 

Reply Obj. 1. Death and suchlike penalties do not of 
themselves incline us to sin. Wherefore though Christ 
assumed them, He did not assume the fomes. Consequently 
in order that the Blessed Virgin might be conformed to her 
Son, from whose fulness her grace was derived, the fomes 
was at first fettered and afterwards taken away: while she 
was not freed from death and other such penalties, 

Reply Obj. 2. The infirmity of the flesh, that pertains 
to the fomes, is indeed to holy men an occasional cause of 
perfect virtue: but not the sine qua non of perfection: and 
it is quite enough to ascribe to the Blessed Virgin perfect 
virtue and abundant grace: nor is there any need to attribute 
to her every occasional cause of perfection. 

Reply Obj. 3. The Holy Ghost effected a twofold purifica- 
tion in the Blessed Virgin. The first was, as it were, prepara- 
tory to Christ’s conception: which did not cleanse her from the 
stain of sin or fomes, but rather gave her mind a unity of 
purpose and disengaged it from a multiplicity of things 
(cf. Dionysius, Div. Nom. iv.), since even the angels are said 
to be purified, in whom there is no stain, as Dionysius says 

II OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 4 

(Eccl. Hier. vi.). The second purification effected in her 
by the Holy Ghost was by means of the conception of Christ 
which was the operation of the Holy Ghost. And in respect 
of this, it may be said that He purified her entirely from 
the fomes. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER BY BEING SANCTIFIED IN THE WOMB THE BLESSED 
VIRGIN WAS PRESERVED FROM ALL ACTUAL SIN ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that by being sanctified in the 
womb the Blessed Virgin was not preserved from all actual 
sin. For, as we have already stated (A. 3), after her first 
sanctification the fomes remained in the Virgin. Now the 
motion of the fomes, even if it precede the act of the reason, 
is a venial sin, albeit extremely slight, as Augustine says 
in his work De Trinitate.* Therefore there was some venial 
sin in the Blessed Virgin. 

Obj. 2. Further, Augustine (Qg. Nov. et Vet. Test. lxxiii., 
on Luke ii. 35: Thy own soul a sword shall pierce) says 
that the Blessed Virgin was troubled with wondering 
doubt at the death of Our Lord. But doubt in matters of 
faith is a sin. Therefore the Blessed Virgin was not pre- 
served from all actual sin. 

Obj. 3. Further, Chrysostom (Hom. xlv. in Matt.) expound- 
ing the text: Behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without, 
seeking thee, says: It 1s clear that they did thts from mere vain 
glory. Again, on Jo. ii. 3: They have no wine, the same 
Chrysostom says that she wished to do them a favour, and 
raise herself in their esteem, by means of her Son: and perchance 
she succumbed to human frailty, just as did His brethren when 
they said: ‘ Manifest Thyself to the world.’ And a little 
further on he says: For as yet she did not believe in Him 
as she ought. Now it is quite clear that all this was sinful. 
Therefore the Blessed Virgin was not preserved from all sin. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. xxxvi.): 
In the matter of sin, it is my wish to exclude absolutely all 

* Cf. 2 Sent. XXIV. 

Q. 27. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 52 

questions concerning the holy Virgin Mary, on account of the 
honour due to Christ. For since she conceived and brought 
forth Him who most certainly was guilty of no sin, we know 
that an abundance of grace was given her that she might be in 
every way the conqueror of sin. 

I answer that, God so prepares and endows those, whom 
He chooses for some particular office, that they are rendered 
capable of fulfilling it, according to 2 Cor. iii. 6: (Who) hath 
made us fit ministers of the New Testament. Now the 
Blessed Virgin was chosen by God to be His Mother. There- 
fore there can be no doubt that God, by His grace, made 
her worthy of that office; according to the words spoken 
to her by the angel (Luke i. 30, 31): Thou hast found grace 
with God: behold thou shalt conceive, etc. But she would 
not have been worthy to be the Mother of God, if she had 
ever sinned. First, because the honour of the parents 
reflects on the child, according to Prov. xvii. 6: The glory of 
children ave thety fathers: and consequently, on the other 
hand, the Mother’s shame would have reflected on her Son. 
Secondly, because of the singular affinity between her 
and Christ, who took flesh from her: and it is written 
(2 Cor. vi. 15): What concord hath Christ with Belial ? 
Thirdly, because of the singular manner in which the Son 
of God, who is the Divine Wisdom (1 Cor. i. 24) dwelt in 
her, not only in her soul but in her womb. And it is 
written (Wisd. i. 4): Wisdom will not enter into a malicious 
soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins. 

We must therefore confess simply that the Blessed Virgin 
committed no actual sin, neither mortal nor venial; so that 
what is written (Cant. iv. 7) is fulfilled: Thou art all fair, 
O my love, and there is not a spot in thee, etc. 

Reply Obj. 1. After her sanctification the fomes re- 
mained in the Blessed Virgin, but fettered; lest she should 
be surprised by some sudden inordinate act, antecedent to 
the act of reason. And although the grace of her sanctifica- 
tion contributed to this effect, yet it did not suffice; for 
otherwise the result of her sanctification would have been 
to render impossible in her any sensual movement not 

13 OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 5 

preceded by an act of reason, and thus she would not have 
had the fomes, which is contrary to what we have said above 
(A. 3). We must therefore say that the above mentioned 
fettering (of the fomes) was perfected by divine providence not 
permitting any inordinate motion to result from the fomes. 

Reply Obj. 2. Origen (Hom. xvii. in Luc.) and certain 
other doctors expound these words of Simeon as referring 
to the sorrow which she suffered at the time of Our Lord’s 
Passion. Ambrose (in Luc. ii. 35) says that the sword 
signifies Mary’s prudence which took note of the heavenly 
mystery. For the word of God ts living and effectual, and 
more piercing than any two-edged sword (Heb. iv. 12). 

Others again take the sword to signify doubt. But this 
is to be understood of the doubt, not of unbelief, but of 
wonder and discussion. Thus Basil says (Ep. ad Optim.) 
that the Blessed Virgin while standing by the cross, and ob- 
serving every detail, after the message of Gabriel, and the 
ineffable knowledge of the Divine Conception, after that won- 
drous manifestation of miracles, was troubled in mind : that 
is.to say, on the one side seeing Him suffer such humiliation, 
and on the other considering His marvellous works. 

Reply Obj. 3. In those words Chrysostom goes too far. 
They may, however, be explained as meaning that Our 
Lord corrected in her, not the inordinate motion of vain 
glory in regard to herself, but that which might be in the 
thoughts of others. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER, BY HER SANCTIFICATION IN THE WOMB, THE 
BLESSED VIRGIN RECEIVED THE FULNESS OF GRACE? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that, by her sanctification in 
the womb, the Blessed Virgin did not receive the fulness or 
perfection of grace. For this seems to be Christ’s privilege, 
according to Jo. i. 14: We saw Him (Vulg., His glory) as 
the Only Begotten (Vulg., as it were of the Only-Begotten) full 
of grace and truth. But what is proper to Christ ought not 
to be ascribed to some one else. Therefore the Blessed 

Q.27. Arr.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 14 

Virgin did not receive the fulness of grace at the time of her 
sanctification. 

Obj. 2. Further, nothing remains to be added to that 
which is full and perfect: for the perfect is that which lacks 
nothing, as is said Phys. iii. But the Blessed Virgin received 
additional grace afterwards when she conceived Christ; for 
to her was it said (Luke i. 35): The Holy Ghost shall come 
upon thee: and again, when she was assumed into glory. 
Therefore it seems that she did not receive the fulness of 
grace at the time of her first sanctification. 

Obj. 3. Further, God does nothing useless, as is said De 
Calo et Mundo i. But it would have been useless for her 
to have certain graces, for she would never have put them 
to use: since we do not read that she taught, which is the 
act of wisdom; or that she worked miracles, which is the 
act of one of the gratuitous graces. Therefore she had not 
the fulness of grace. 

On the contrary, The angel said to her: Hatt, full of grace 
(Luke i. 28); which words Jerome expounds as follows, in 
a sermon on the Assumption (cf. Ep. ad Paul. et Eustoch.): 
Full indeed of grace: for to others it 1s given in portions ; 
whereas on Mary the fulness of grace was showered all at once. 

I answer that, In every genus, the nearer a thing is to 
the principle, the greater the part which it has in the effect 
of that principle, whence Dionysius says (Cal. Hier. iv.) 
that angels, being nearer to God, have a greater share than 
men, in the effects of the Divine goodness. Now Christ is 
the principle of grace, authoritatively as to His Godhead, 
instrumentally as to His humanity: whence (Jo. i. 17) it 
is written: Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. But the 
Blessed Virgin Mary was nearest to Christ in His humanity: 
because He received His human nature from her. There- 
fore it was due to her to receive a greater fulness of grace 
than others. 

Reply Obj. 1. God gives grace to each one according to 
the purpose for which He has chosen him. And since 
Christ as man was predestinated and chosen to be predesti- 
nated the Son of Godin power . . . of sanctification (Rom. i. 4), 

15 OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 5 

it was proper to Him to have such a fulness of grace that it 
overflowed from Him into all, according to Jo. i. 16: Of 
His fulness we have all received. Whereas the Blessed Virgin 
Mary received such a fulness of grace that she was nearest 
of all to the Author of grace; so that she received within 
her Him who is full of all grace; and by bringing Him forth, 
she, in a manner, dispensed grace to all. 

Reply Obj. 2. In natural things at first there is perfection 
of disposition, for instance when matter is perfectly disposed 
for the form. Secondly, there is the perfection of the form; 
and this is the more excellent, for the heat that proceeds 
from the form of fire is more perfect than that which dis- 
posed to the form of fire. Thirdly, there is the perfection 
of the end: for instance when fire has its qualities in the 
most perfect degree, having mounted to its own place. 

In like manner there was a threefold perfection of grace 
in the Blessed Virgin. The first was a kind of disposition, 
by which she was made worthy to be the mother of Christ: 
and this was the perfection of her sanctification. The 
second perfection of grace in the Blessed Virgin was through 
the presence of the Son of God Incarnate inher womb. The 
third perfection of the end is that which she has in glory. 

That the second perfection excels the first, and the third 
the second, appears (1) from the point of view of deliver- 
ance from evil. For at first in her sanctification she was 
delivered from original sin: afterwards, in the conception of 
the Son of God, she was entirely cleansed from the fomes: 
lastly, in her glorification she was also delivered from all 
affliction whatever. It appears (2) from the point of view 
of ordering to good. For at first in her sanctification she 
received grace inclining her to good: in the conception 
of the Son of God she received consummate grace con- 
firming her in good; and in her glorification her grace was 
further consummated so as to perfect her in the enjoyment 
of all good. 

Reply Obj. 3. There is no doubt that the Blessed Virgin 
received in a high degree both the gift of wisdom and the 
grace of miracles and even of prophecy, just as Christ had 

Q. 27. Art.6 THE ‘““SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 16 

them. But she did not so receive them, as to put them 
and suchlike graces to every use, as did Christ: but accord- 
ingly as it befitted her condition of life. For she had the 
use of wisdom in contemplation, according to Luke ii. 19: 
But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart. 
But she had not the use of wisdom as to teaching: since 
this befitted not the female sex, according to 1 Tim. il. 12: 
But I suffer not a woman to teach. The use of miracles did 
not become her while she lived: because at that time the 
Teaching of Christ was to be confirmed by miracles, and 
therefore it was befitting that Christ alone, and His dis- 
ciples who were the bearers of His doctrine, should work 
miracles. Hence of John the Baptist it is written (Jo. 
x. 41) that he did no sign ; that is, in order that all might 
fix their attention on Christ. As to the use of prophecy, it 
is clear that she had it, from the canticle spoken by her: 
My soul doth magnify the Lord (Luke i. 46, etc.). 

SIxTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER AFTER CHRIST, IT WAS PROPER TO THE BLESSED 
VIRGIN TO BE SANCTIFIED IN THE WOMB ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was proper for the 
Blessed Virgin, after Christ, to be sanctified in the womb. 
For it has been said (A. 4) that the Blessed Virgin was 
sanctified in the womb, in order that she might be worthy 
to be the mother of God. But this is proper to her. There- 
fore she alone was sanctified in the womb. 

Obj. 2. Further, some men seem to have been more 
closely connected with Christ than Jeremias and John the 
Baptist, who are said to have been sanctified in the womb. 
For Christ is specially called the Son of David and of 
Abraham, by reason of the promise specially made to them 
concerning Christ. Isaias also prophesied of Christ in the 
most express terms. And the apostles were in converse 
with Christ Himself. And yet these are not mentioned as 
having been sanctified in the womb. Therefore it was not 

17 OUR LADY’S SANCTIFICATION Q. 27. Arr. 6 

befitting that either Jeremias or John the Baptist should be 
sanctified in the womb. 

Obj. 3. Further, Job says of himself (xxxi. 18): From 
my infancy mercy grew up with me ; and it came out with me 
from [my mother’s] womb. Nevertheless we do not for this 
reason say that he was sanctified in the womb. Neither 
therefore are we bound to say that Jeremias and John the 
Baptist were sanctified in the womb. 

On the contrary, It is written of Jeremias (Jer. i. 5): 
Before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee. 
And of John the Baptist it is written (Luke i. 15): He shall 
be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s womb. 

I answer that, Augustine (Ep. ad Dardan.) seems to speak 
dubiously of their (Jeremias’ and John the Baptist’s) sancti- 
fication in the womb. For the leaping of John in the womb 
might, as he says, signify the great truth—viz., that the 
woman was the mother of God—which was to be made known 
to his elders, though as yet unknown to the infant. Hence 
in the Gospel it is written, not that the infant in her womb 
believed, but that it ‘leaped’: and our eyes are witness that 
not only infants leap but also cattle. But this was un- 
wonted because it was in the womb. And therefore, just as 
other miracles are wont to be done, this was done divinely, in 
the infant ; not humanly by the infant. Perhaps also in this 
child the use of reason and will was so far accelerated that 
while yet in his mother’s womb he was able to acknowledge, 
believe, and consent, whereas in other children we have to watt 
for these things till they grow older; this again I count as a 
miraculous result of the divine power. 

But since it is expressly said (of John) in the Gospel that 
he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s 
womb ; and of Jeremias, Before thou camest forth out of the 
womb, I sanctified thee ; it seems that we must needs assert 
that they were sanctified in the womb, although, while in 
the womb, they had not the use of reason (which is the 
point discussed by Augustine); just as neither do children 
enjoy the use of free will as soon as they are sanctified by 
baptism. 

Tie2 2 

Q.27. Arr.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 18 

Nor are we to believe that any others, not mentioned by 
Scripture, were sanctified in the womb. For such privileges 
of grace, which are bestowed on some, outside the common 
law, are ordered for the salvation of others, according to 
1 Cor. xii. 7: The manifestation of the Spirit 1s given to every 
man unto profit, which would not result from the sanctifica- 
tion of anyone unless it were made known to the Church. 

And although it is not possible to assign a reason for 
God’s judgments, for instance, why He bestows such a grace 
on one and not on another, yet there seems to be a certain 
fittingness in both of these being sanctified in the womb, 
by their foreshadowing the sanctification which was to be 
effected through Christ. First, as to His Passion, according 
to Heb. xiii. 12: Jesus, that He might sanctify the people by 
His own blood, suffered without the gate: which Passion 
Jeremias foretold openly by words and by symbols, and 
most clearly foreshadowed by his own sufferings. Secondly, 
as to His Baptism (1 Cor. vi. 11): But you are washed, but 
you are sanctified ; to which Baptism John prepared men 
by his baptism. 

Reply Obj. 1. The Blessed Virgin, who was chosen by 
God to be His Mother, received a fuller grace of sanctifica- 
tion than John the Baptist and Jeremias, who were chosen 
to foreshadow in a special way the sanctification effected 
by Christ. A sign of this is that it was granted to the 
Blessed Virgin thenceforward never to sin either mortally 
or venially: whereas to the others who were thus sanctified 

‘it was granted thenceforward not to sin mortally, through 
the protection of God’s grace. 

Reply Obj. 2. In other respects these saints might be 
more closely united to Christ than Jeremias and John the 
Baptist. But the latter were most closely united to Him 
by clearly foreshadowing His sanctification, as explained 
above. 

Reply Obj. 3. The mercy of which Job speaks is not the 
infused virtue; but a certain natural inclination to the act 
of that virtue, 

QUESTION XXVIII. 

OF THE VIRGINITY OF THE MOTHER OF GOD. 
(Im Four Articles.) 

WE now have to consider the virginity of the Mother of 
God; concerning which there are four points of inquiry: 
(1) Whether she was a virgin in conceiving? (2) Whether 
she was a virgin in His Birth? (3) Whether she remained 
a virgin after His Birth? (4) Whether she took a vow of 

virginity ? 
First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE MOTHER OF GOD WAS A VIRGIN IN CONCEIVING 
CHRIST ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Mother of God was not: 
a virgin in conceiving Christ. For no child having father 
and mother is conceived by a virgin mother. But Christ 
is said to have had not only a mother, but also a father, 
according to Luke ii. 33: Hts father and mother were wonder- 
ing at those things which were spoken concerning Him: and 
further on (48) in the same chapter she says: Behold I and 
Thy father (Vulg., Thy father and I) have sought Thee sorrow- 
ing. Therefore Christ was not conceived of a virgin mother. 

Obj. 2. Further (Matth. i.) it is proved that Christ was 
the Son of Abraham and David, through Joseph being 
descended from David. But this proof would have availed 
nothing if Joseph were not the father of Christ. Therefore 
it seems that Christ’s Mother conceived Him of the seed 
of Joseph; and consequently that she was not a virgin in 

conceiving Him. 
19 

Q. 28. Art.t THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 20 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written (Gal. iv. 4): God sent His 
Son, made of a woman. But according to the customary 
mode of speaking, the term woman applies to one who is 
known of aman. Therefore Christ was not conceived by a 
virgin mother. 

Obj. 4. Further, things of the same species have the same 
mode of generation: since generation is specified by its 
terminus just as are other motions. But Christ belonged 
to the same species as other men, according to Phil. ii. 7: 
Being made in the likeness of men, and in halit found as a 
man. Since therefore other men are begotten of the 
mingling of male and female, it seems that Christ was be- 
gotten in the same manner; and that consequently He was 
not conceived of a virgin mother. 

Obj. 5. Further, every natural form has its determinate 
matter, outside which it cannot be. But the matter of 
human form appears to be the semen of male and female. 
If therefore Christ’s body was not conceived of the semen of 
male and female, it would not have been truly a human 
body; which cannot be asserted. It seems therefore that 
He was not conceived of a virgin mother. . 

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. vii. 14): Behold a virgin 
shall conceive. 

I answer that, We must confess simply that the mother of 
Christ was a virgin in conceiving: for to deny this belongs 
to the heresy of the Ebionites and Cerinthus, who held Christ 
to be a mere man, and maintained that He was born of 
both sexes. 

It is fitting for four reasons that Christ should be born of 
a virgin. First, in order to maintain the dignity of the 
Father who sent Him. For since Christ is the true and 
natural Son of God, it was not fitting that He should have 
another father than God: lest the dignity belonging to God 
be transferred to another. 

Secondly, this was befitting to a property of the Son 
Himself, who is sent. For He is the Word of God: and 
the word is conceived without any interior corruption: 
indeed, interior corruption is incompatible with perfect 

21 OUR LADY’S VIRGINITY = Q.. 28. Art. 1 

conception of the word. Since therefore flesh was so 
assumed by the Word of God, as to be the flesh of the Word 
of God, it was fitting that it also should be conceived without 
corruption of the mother. 

Thirdly, this was befitting to the dignity of Christ’s 
humanity in which there could be no sin, since by it the 
sin of the world was taken away, according to Jo. i. 29: 
Behold the Lamb of God (i.e., the Lamb without stain) who 
taketh away the sin of the world. Now it was not possible 
in a nature already corrupt, for flesh to be born from sexual 
intercourse without incurring the infection of original sin. 
Whence Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i.): In that 
unton—viz., the marriage of Mary and Joseph—the nuptial 
intercourse alone was lacking: because in sinful flesh this 
could not be without fleshly concupiscence which arises from 
sin, and without which He wished to be conceived, who was 
to be without sin. 

Fourthly, on account of the very end of the Incarnation 
of Christ, which was that men might be born again as sons 
of*God, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, 
but of God (Jo. i. 13)—1.e., of the power of God—of which 
fact the very conception of Christ was to appear as an 
exemplar. Whence Augustine says (De Sanct. Vurg.): 
It behoved that our Head, by a notable miracle, should be born, . 
after the flesh, of a virgin, that He might thereby signify that 
His members would be born, after the Spirit, of a virgin Church. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Bede says on Luke i. 33: Joseph is 
called the father of the Saviour, not that he really was His 
father, as the Photinians pretended: but that he was con- 
sidered by men to be so, for the safeguarding of Mary’s 
good name. Wherefore Luke adds (ili. 23): Being, as at 
was supposed, the son of Joseph. 

Or, according to Augustine (De Cons. Evang. u1.), Joseph 
is called the father of Christ just as he ts called the husband 
of Mary, without fleshly mingling, by the mere bond of marriage : 
being thereby united to Him much more closely than uf he were 
adopted from another family. Consequently that Christ was 
not begotten of Joseph by fleshly union is no reason why Joseph 

Q.28. Arr.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 22 

should not be called His father ; since he would be the father 
even of an adopted son not born of his wtfe. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Jerome says on Matth. i. 18: Though 
Joseph was not the father of Our Lord and Saviour, the order 
of His genealogy is traced down to Joseph—first, because 
the Scriptures are not wont to trace the female line in genealogies : 
secondly, Mary and Joseph were of the same tribe ; wherefore 
by law he was bound to take her as being of his kin. Like- 
wise, as Augustine says (De Nup. e¢ Concup. i.), tt was 
befitting to trace the genealogy down to Joseph, lest tn that 
marriage any slight should be offered to the male sex, whitch 
ts indeed the stronger: for truth suffered nothing thereby, 
since both Joseph and Mary were of the family of David. 

Reply Obj. 3. As the gloss says on this passage, the word 
‘“mulier.’.is here used instead of ‘ femina,’ according to the 
custom of the Hebrew tongue : which applies the term signtfy- 
ing woman to those of the female sex who are virgins. 

Reply Obj. 4. This argument is true of those things 
which come into existence by the way of nature: since 
nature, just as it is fixed to one particular effect, so it is 
determinate to one mode of producing that effect. But as 
the supernatural power of God extends to the infinite: just 
as it is not determinate to one effect, so neither is it de- 
terminate to one mode of producing any effect whatever. 
Cons quently, just as it was possible for the first man to be 
produced, by the Divine power, from the slime of the earth, 
so too was it possible for Christ’s body to be made, by 
Divine power, from a virgin without the seed of the male. 

Reply Obj. 5. According to the Philosopher (De Gener. 
Amimal. 1., i1., lv.), in conception the seed of the male is not 
by way of matter, but by way of agent: and the female 
alone supplies the matter. Wherefore though the seed of 
the male was lacking in Christ’s conception, it does not 
follow that due matter was lacking. 

But if the seed of the male were the matter of the foetus 
in animal conception, it is nevertheless manifest that it is 
not a matter remaining under one form, but subject to 
transformation. And though the natural power cannot 

23 OUR LADY’S VIRGINITY = Q. 28. Arr. 2 

transmute other than determinate matter to a determinate 
form; nevertheless the Divine power, which is infinite, can 
transmute all matter to any form whatsoever. Conse- 
quently, just as it transmuted the slime of the earth into 
Adam’s body, so could it transmute the matter supplied 
by His Mother into Christ’s body, even though it were not 
the sufficient matter for a natural conception. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST'S MOTHER WAS A VIRGIN IN HIS BIRTH ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objectton 1. It would seem that Christ’s Mother was not a 
virgin in His Birth. For Ambrose says on Luke ii. 23: 
He who sanctified a strange womb, for the birth of a prophet, 
He tt is who opened His Mother’s womb, that He might 
go forth unspotted. But opening of the womb excludes 
virginity. Therefore Christ’s Mother was not a virgin in His 
Birth. , 

Qbj. 2. Further, nothing should have taken place in the 
mystery of Christ, which would make His body to seem 
unreal. Now it seems to pertain not to a true but to an 
unreal body, to be able to go through a closed passage; 
since two bodies cannot be in one place at the same time. 
It was therefore unfitting that Christ’s body should come 
forth from His Mother’s closed womb: and consequently 
that she should remain a virgin in giving birth to Him. 

Obj. 3. Further, as Gregory says in the Homily for the 
Octave of Easter,* that by entering after His Resurrection 
where the disciples were gathered, the doors being shut, 
Our Lord showed that His body was the same in nature but 
differed in glory: so that it seems that to go through a 
closed passage pertains to a glorified body. But Christ’s 
body was not glorified in its conception, but was passible, 
having the likeness of sinful flesh, as the Apostle says (Rom. 
viii. 3). Therefore He did not come forth through the 
closed womb of the Virgin. 

* xxvi. in Evang. 

Q. 28. ArRr.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 24 

On the contrary, In a sermon of the Council of Ephesus 
(P. III., cap. ix.) it is said: After giving birth, nature knows 
not a virgin: but grace enhances her fruitfulness, and effects 
her motherhood, while in no way does it injure her virginity. 
Therefore Christ’s Mother was a virgin also in giving birth 
to Him. 

I answer that, Without any doubt whatever we must 
assert that the Mother of Christ was a virgin even in His 
Birth: for the prophet says not only: Behold a virgin shall 
conceive, but adds: and shall bear a son. This indeed was 
befitting for three reasons. First, because this was in keep- 
ing with a property of Him whose Birth is in question, 
for He is the Word of God. For the word is not only con- 
ceived in the mind without corruption, but also proceeds 
from the mind without corruption. Wherefore in order to 
show that body to be the body of the very Word of God, 
it was fitting that it should be born of a virgin incorrupt. 
Whence in the sermon of the Council of Ephesus (quoted 
above) we read: Whosoever brings forth mere flesh, ceases to 
be a virgin. But since she gave birth to the Word made flesh, 
God safeguarded her virginity so as to manifest His Word, 
by which Word He thus manifested Himself: for neither 
does our word, when brought forth, corrupt the mind ; nor 
does God, the substantial Word, deigning to be born, destroy 
virginity. 

Secondly, this is fitting as regards the effect of Christ’s 
‘Incarnation: since He came for this purpose, that He might 
take away our corruption. Wherefore it is unfitting that 
in His Birth He should corrupt His Mother’s virginity. 
Thus Augustine says in a sermon on the Nativity of Our 
Lord: It was not right that He who came to heal corruption, 
should by His advent violate integrity. 

Thirdly, it was fitting that He who commanded us to 
honour our father and mother should not in His Birth lessen 
the honour due to His Mother. 

Reply Obj. 1. Ambrose says this in expounding the 
evangelist’s quotation from the Law: Every male opening 
the womb shall be called holy to the Lord. This, says Bede, 

25 OUR LADY’S VIRGINITY Q. 28. Arr. 2 

ts said in regard to the wonted manner of birth ; not that we 
are to believe that Our Lord in coming forth violated the abode 
of her sacred womb, which His entrance therein had hallowed. 
Wherefore the opening here spoken of does not imply the 
unlocking of the enclosure of virginal purity; but the mere 
coming forth of the infant from the maternal womb. 

Reply O87. 2. Christ wished so to show the reality of His 
body, as to manifest His Godhead at the same time. For 
this reason He mingled wondrous with lowly things. Where- 
fore, to show that His body was real, He was born of a 
woman. But in order to manifest His Godhead, He was 
born of a virgin, for such a Birth befits a God, as Ambrose 
says in the Christmas hymn. 

Reply Obj. 3. Some have held that Christ, in His Birth, 
assumed the gift of subtlety, when He came forth from the 
closed womb of a virgin; and that He assumed the gift of 
agility when with dry feet He walked on the sea. But this 
is not consistent with what has been decided above (Q. XIV.). 
For these gifts of a glorified body result from an over- 
flow of the soul’s glory on to the body, as we shall ex- 
plain further on, in treating of glorified bodies (Supple., 
Q. LXXXII.): and it has been said above (Q. XIII., A. 3 ad 
I; Q. XVI, A. 1 ad 2) that before His Passion Christ 
allowed His flesh to do and to suffer what was proper to tt 
(Damascene, De Fid. Orth, iii.): nor was there such an 
overflow of glory from His soul on to His body. 

We must therefore say that all these things took place 
miraculously by Divine power. Whence Augustine says 
(Sup. Joan., Tract. 121): To the substance of a body in which 
was the Godhead closed doors were no obstacle. For truly 
He had power to enter in by doors not open, in whose Birth 
His Mother’s virginity remained inviolate. And Dionysius 
says in an epistle (Ad Caium iv.) that Christ excelled man 
in doing that which is proper to man: this 1s shown in Hts 
supernatural conception, of a virgin, and im the unstable 
waters bearing the weight of earthly feet. 

Q. 28. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 26 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S MOTHER REMAINED A VIRGIN AFTER HIS 
BIRTH ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Mother did not 
remain a virgin after His Birth. For it is written (Matth. 
i. 18): Before Joseph and Mary came together, she was found 
with child of the Holy Ghost. Now the Evangelist would 
not have said this,—before they came together,—unless he 
were certain of their subsequent coming together; for no 
one says of one who does not eventually dine, before he dines 
(cf. Jerome, Contra Helvid.). It seems, therefore, that the 
Blessed Virgin subsequently had intercourse with Joseph; 
and consequently that she did not remain a virgin after 
(Christ’s) Birth. 

Obj. 2. Further, in the same passage (Matth. i. 20) are 
related the words of the angel to Joseph: Fear not to take 
unto thee Mary thy wife. But marriage is consummated 
by carnal intercourse. Therefore it seems that this must 
have at some time taken place between Mary and Joseph: 
and that, consequently she did not remain a virgin after 
(Christ’s) birth. 

Obj. 3. Further, again in the same passage a little further 
on (24, 25) we read: And (Joseph) took unto him his wife ; 
and he knew her not tll she brought forth her first-born Son. 
Now this conjunction ti// is wont to designate a fixed time, 
on the completion of which that takes place which pre- 
viously had not taken place. And the verb knew refers 
here to knowledge by intercourse (cf. Jerome, Contra 
Helvid.); just as (Gen. iv. 1) it is said that Adam knew his 
wife. Therefore it seems that after (Christ’s) Birth, the 
Blessed Virgin was known by Joseph; and, consequently, 
that she did not remain a virgin after the Birth (of Christ). 

Obj. 4. Further, first-born can only be said of one who 
has brothers afterwards: wherefore (Rom. viii. 29): Whom 
He foreknew, He also predestinated to be made conformable 

27 OUR LADY’S VIRGINITY = Q. 28. Arr. 3 

to the image of His Son ; that He might be the first-born among 
many brethren. But the evangelist calls Christ the first- 
born by His Mother. Therefore she had other children 
after Christ. And therefore it seems that Christ’s Mother 
did not remain a virgin after His Birth. 

Obj. 5. Further, it is written (Jo. ii. 12): After this He 
went down to Capharnaum, He—that is, Christ—and His 
Mother and Hts brethren. But brethren are those who are 
begotten of the same parent. Therefore it seems that the 
Blessed Virgin had other sons after Christ. 

Obj. 6. Further, it is written (Matth. xxvii. 55, 56): 
There were there—that is, by the cross of Christ—many 
women afar off, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, minister- 
ing unto Him; among whom was Mary Magdalen, and 
Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the 
sons of Zebedee. Now this Mary who is called the mother of 
James and Joseph seems to have been also the Mother of 
Christ; for it is written (Jo. xix. 25) that there stood by 
the cross of Jesus, Mary His Mother. Therefore it seems 
that Christ’s Mother did not remain a virgin after His Birth. 

On the contrary, It is written (Ezech. xliv. 2): This gate shall 
be shut, 1t shall not be opened, and no man shall pass through 
it ; because the Lord the God of Israel hath entered sn by it. 
Expounding these words, Augustine says in a sermon (De 
Annunt. Dom. iii.): What means thts closed gate in the House 
of the Lord, except that Mary 1s to be ever inviolate? What 
does tt mean that ‘no man shall pass through tt,’ save that 
Joseph shall not know her? And what 1s this—' The Lord 
alone enters in and goeth out by it,’ except that the Holy Ghost 
shall impregnate her, and that the Lord of angels shall be born 
of her? And what means this—‘ wt shall be shut for ever- 
more, but that Mary is a virgin before His Birth, a virgin in 
His Birth, and a virgin after His Birth ? 

I answer that, Without any hesitation we must abhor the 
error of Helvidius, who dared to assert that Christ’s Mother, 
after His Birth, was carnally known by Joseph, and bore 
other children. For, in the first place, this is derogatory 
to Christ’s perfection: for as He is in His Godhead the 

Q. 28. Arr.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 28 

Only-Begotten of the Father, being thus His Son in every 
respect perfect, so it was becoming that He should be the 
only-begotten son of His Mother, as being her perfect 
offspring. 

Secondly, this error is an insult to the Holy Ghost, whose 
shrine was the virginal womb,* wherein He had formed the 
flesh of Christ; wherefore it was unbecoming that it should 
be desecrated by intercourse with man. 

Thirdly, this is derogatory to the dignity and holiness of 
God’s Mother: for thus she would seem to be most un- 
grateful, were she not content with such a Son; and were 
she, of her own accord, by carnal intercourse to forfeit that 
virginity which had been miraculously preserved in her. 

Fourthly, it would be tantamount to an imputation of 
extreme presumption in Joseph, to assume that he attempted 
to violate her whom by the angel’s revelation he knew to 
have conceived by the Holy Ghost. 

We must therefore simply assert that the Mother of God, 
as she was a virgin in conceiving Him and a virgin in giving 
Him birth, so did she remain a virgin ever afterwards. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Jerome says (cont. Helvid., i.): Although 
this particle ‘ before’ often indicates a subsequent event, yet 
we must observe that it not infrequently points merely to some 
thing previously in the mind : nor ts there need that what was 
in the mind take place eventually, since something may occur 
to prevent its happening. Thus if a man say: ‘ Before I 
dined in the port, I set sail,’ we do not understand him to 
have dined in port after he set sail: but that his mind was 
set on dining in port. In like manner the evangelist says: 
Before they came together Mary was found with child, of the 
Holy Ghost, not that they came together afterwards: but 
that, when it seemed that they would come together, this 
was forestalled through her conceiving by the Holy Ghost, 
the result being that afterwards they did not come together. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i.): 
The Mother of God is called, (Joseph's) wife from the first 

a * eae Spiritus Sancti (Off. B. M. V., Ant. ad Benedictus 
iB), 

29 OUR LADY’S VIRGINITY = Q. 28. Arr. 3 

promise of her espousals, whom he had not known nor ever 
was to know by carnal intercourse. For, as Ambrose says 
on Luke i. 27: The fact of her marriage is declared, not to 
insinuate the loss of virginity, but to witness to the reality of 
the union. 

Reply Obj. 3. Some have said that this is not to be under- 
stood of carnal knowledge, but of acquaintance. Thus 
Chrysostom says* that Joseph did not know her, until she 
gave birth, being unaware of her dignity: but after she had 
given birth, then did he know her. Because by reason of her 
child she surpassed the whole world in beauty and dignity : 
stnce she alone in the narrow abode of her womb received Him 
whom the world cannot contain, 

Others again refer this to knowledge by sight. For as, 
while Moses was speaking with God, his face was so bright 
that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold it ; so 
Mary, while being overshadowed by the brightness of the 
power of the Most High, could not be gazed on by Joseph, 
until she gave birth. But afterwards she is acknowledged 
by Joseph, by looking on her face, not by lustful contact. 

Jerome, however, grants that this is to be understood of 
knowledge by intercourse; but he observes that before or 
until has a twofold sense in Scripture. For sometimes it 
indicates a fixed time, as Gal. ili. 19: The law was set because 
of transgressions, until the seed should come, to whom He 
made the promise. On the other hand, it sometimes indicates 
an indefinite time, as in Ps. cxxii. 2: Our eyes are unto the 
Lord our God, until He have mercy on us ; from which it is 
not to be gathered that our eyes are turned from God as 
soon as His mercy has been obtained. In this sense those 
things are indicated of which we might doubt if they had not 
been written down; while others are left out to be supplied by 
our understanding. Thus the evangelist says that the Mother 
of God was not known by her husband until she gave birth, 
that we may be given to understand that still less did he know 
her afterwards (Adversus Helvid. v.). 

* Opus imperf. in Matth., Hom. 1: among the spurious works 
ascribed to Chrysostom. 

Q. 28. Art.4. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 30 

Reply Obj. 4. The Scriptures are wont to designate as 
the first-born, not only a child who is followed by others, 
but also the one that is born first. Otherwise, if a child 
were not first-born unless followed by others, the first-fruits 
would not be due as long as there was no further produce :* 
which is clearly false, since according to the law the first- 
fruits had to be redeemed within a month (Num. xviii. 16). 

Reply Obj. 5. Some, as Jerome says on Matth. xii. 49, 50, 
suppose that the brethren of the Lord were Joseph’s sons by 
another wife. But we understand the brethren of the Lord to 
be not sons of Joseph, but cousins of the Saviour, the sons of 
Mary, His Mother's sister. For Scripture speaks of brethren 
in four senses ; namely, those who are united by being of the 
same parents, of the same nation, of the same family, by common 
affection. Wherefore the brethren of the Lord are so called, 
not by birth, as being born of the same mother; but by 
relationship, as being blood-relations of His. But Joseph, 
as Jerome says (cont. Helvid., ix.), is-rather to be believed 
to have remained a virgin, since he is not said to have had 
another wife, and a holy man does not live otherwise than 
chastely. 

Reply Obj. 6. Mary who is called the mother of James and 
Joseph is not to be taken for the Mother of Our Lord, who 
is not wont to be named in the Gospels save under this 
designation of her dignity—the Mother of Jesus. This Mary 
is to be taken for the wife of Alpheus, whose son was James 
the less, known as the brother of the Lord (Gal. i. 19). 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER THE MOTHER OF GOD TOOK A VOW OF VIRGINITY ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Mother of God did not 
take a vow of virginity. For it is written (Deut. vii. 14): 
No one shall be barren among you of either sex. But sterility 
is a consequence of virginity. Therefore the keeping of 
virginity was contrary to the commandment of the Old 

* Jerome, Adversus Helvid. x. 

31 OUR LADY’S VIRGINITY = Q. 28. Arr. 4 

Law. But before Christ was born the Old Law was still 
in force. Therefore at that time the Blessed Virgin could 
not lawfully take a vow of virginity. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. vii. 25): Con- 
cerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord; but I — 
give counsel. But the perfection of the counsels was to take 
its beginning from Christ, who is the end of the Law, as the 
Apostle says (Rom. x. 4). It was not therefore becoming 
that the Virgin should take a vow of virginity. 

Obj. 3. Further, the gloss of Jerome says on I Tim. v. 12, 
that for those who are vowed to virginity, tt is reprehensible 
not only to marry, but also to desire to be married. But the 
Mother of Christ committed no sin for which she could be 
reprehended, as stated above (Q. XXVII., A. 4). Since 
therefore she was espoused, as related by Luke (i. 27), it 
seems that she did not take a vow of virginity. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Sanct. Virg. iv.): 
Mary answered the announcing angel: ‘How shall this be 
done, because I know not man? She would not have satd 
this unless she had already vowed her virginity to God. 

I answer that, As we have stated in the Second Part 
(II.-II., 0. LXXXVIII., A. 6), works of perfection are more 
praiseworthy when performed in fulfilment of a vow. Now 
it is clear that for reasons already given (AA. I, 2, 3) vir- 
ginity had a special place in the Mother of God. It was 
therefore fitting that her virginity should be consecrated to 
God by vow. Nevertheless because, while the Law was in 
force both men and women were bound to attend to the 
duty of begetting, since the worship of God was spread 
according to carnal origin, until Christ was born of that 
people; the Mother of God is not believed to have taken 
an absolute vow of virginity, before being espoused to 
Joseph. although she desired to do so, yet yielding her own 
will to God’s judgement. Afterwards, however, having taken 
a husband, according as the custom of the time required, 
together with him she took a vow of virginity. 

Reply Obj. 1. Because it seemed to be forbidden by the 
law not to take the necessary steps for leaving a posterity 

Q.28. Artr.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 32 

on earth, therefore the Mother of God did not vow virginity 
absolutely, but under the condition that it were pleasing to 
God. When, however, she knew that it was acceptable to 
God, she made the vow absolute, before the angel’s Annun- 
ciation. 

Reply Obj. 2. Just as the fulness of grace was in Christ 
perfectly, yet some beginning of this fulness preceded in 
His Mother; so also the observance of the counsels, which 
is an effect of God’s grace, began its perfection in Christ, 
but was begun after a fashion in His Virgin Mother. 

Reply Obj. 3. These words of the Apostle are to be under- 
stood of those who vow chastity absolutely. Christ’s Mother 
did not do this until she was espoused to Joseph. After her 
espousals, however, by their common consent she took a 
vow of virginity together with her spouse. 

TE 

QUESTION XXIX. 

OF THE ESPOUSALS OF THE MOTHER OF GOD. 
(In Two Articles.) 

WE now consider the espousals of God’s Mother: concerning 
which two points arise for inquiry: (1) Whether Christ 
should have been born of an espoused (virgin)? (2) Whether 
there was true marriage between Our Lord’s Mother and 
Joseph ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE BEEN BORN OF AN 
ESPOUSED VIRGIN ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
been born of an espoused virgin. For espousals are ordered 
to carnalintercourse. But Our Lord’s Mother never wished 
to have carnal intercourse with her husband; because this 
would be derogatory to the virginity of her mind. There- 
fore she should not have been espoused. 

Obj. 2. Further, that Christ was born of a virgin was 
miraculous, whence Augustine says (Ep. ad Volus. cxxxvii.): 
This same power of God brought forth the infant's limbs out 
of the virginal womb of His inviolate Mother, by which in the 
vigour of manhood He passed through the closed doors. If 
we are told why this happened, tt will cease to be wonderful ; 
if another instance be alleged, it will no longer be unique. 
But miracles that are wrought in confirmation of the Faith 
should be manifest. Since, therefore, by her Espousals this 
miracle would be less evident, it seems that it was unfitting 
that Christ should be born of an espoused virgin. 

{1..2 33 3 

Q.29 Art.1 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 34 

Ovj. 3. Further, the martyr Ignatius, as Jerome says on 
Matth. i. 18, gives as a reason of the espousals of the Mother 
of God, that the manner of His Birth might be hidden from the 
devil, who would think Him to be begotten not of a virgin but 
of a wife. But this seems to be no reason at all. First, 
because by his natural cunning he knows whatever takes 
place in bodies. Secondly, because later on the demons, 
through many evident signs, knew Christ after a fashion: 
whence it is written (Mark i. 23, 24): A man with an unclean 
spirit . . . cried out, saying : What have we to do with Thee, 
Jesus of Nazareth? Art Thou come to destroy us? I know 

. Thou art the Holy One of God. Therefore it does not seem 
fitting that the Mother of God should have been espoused. 

Obj. 4. Further, Jerome gives as another reason, lest the 
Mother of God should be stoned by the Jews as an adulieress. 
But this reason seems to have no weight, for if she were not 
espoused, she could not be condemned for adultery. There- 
fore it does not seem reasonable that Christ should be born 
of an espoused virgin. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. i. 18): When as His 
Mother Mary was espoused to Joseph : and (Luke i. 26, 27): 
The angel Gabriel was sent. . . to a virgin espoused to aman 
whose name was Joseph. 

I answer that, It was fitting that Christ should be born 
of an espoused virgin; first, for His own sake; secondly, for 
His Mother’s sake; thirdly, for our sake. For the sake of 
Christ Himself, for four reasons. First, lest He should be 
rejected by unbelievers as illegitimate: wherefore Ambrose 
says on Luke 1. 26, 27: How could we blame Herod or the Jews 
tf they seem to persecute one who was born of adultery ? 

Secondly, in order that in the customary way His gene- 
alogy might be traced through the maleline. Thus Ambrose 
says on Luke iii. 23: He who came into the world, accord- 
ing to the custom of the world had to be enrolled. Now for 
this purpose, it is the men that are required, because they 
represent the family in the senate and other courts. The 

custom of the Scriptures, too, shows that the ancestry of the 
men 1s always traced out. 

oa OUR LADY’S ESPOUSALS Q. 29. ART) 1 

Thirdly, for the safety of the new-born child: lest the 
devil should plot serious hurt against him. Hence Ignatius 
says that she was espoused that the manner of His Birth 
might be hidden from the devil. 

Fourthly, that He might be fostered by Joseph: who is 
therefore called His father, as bread-winner. 

It was also fitting for the sake of the Virgin. First, 
because thus she was rendered exempt from punish- 
ment; that is, lest she should be stoned by the Jews as an 
adulteress, as Jerome says. 

Secondly, that thus she might be safeguarded from ill 
fame. Whence Ambrose says on Luke i. 26, 27: She was 
espoused lest she be wounded by the tll-fame of violated virginity, 
in whom the pregnant womb would betoken corruption. 

Thirdly, that, as Jerome says (loc. cit.), Joseph might 
administer to her wants. 

This was fitting, again, for our sake. First, because 
Joseph is thus a witness to Christ’s being born of a virgin. 
Wherefore Ambrose says (loc. cit.): Her husband is the more 
trustworthy witness of her purity, in that he would deplore 
the dishonour, and avenge the disgrace, were it not that he 
acknowledged the mystery. 

Secondly, because thereby the very words of the.Virgin 
are rendered more credible by which she asserted her 
virginity. Thus Ambrose says (loc. cit.): Belief in Mary's 
words is strengthened, the motive for a lewis removed. If she 
had not been espoused when pregnant, she would seem to have 
wished to hide her sin by a lie: being espoused, she had no 
motive for lying, since a woman’s pregnancy 1s the reward of 
marriage and gives grace to the nuptial bond. These two 
reasons add strength to our faith. 

Thirdly, that all excuse be removed from those virgins 
who, through want of caution, fall into dishonour. Hence 
Ambrose says (loc. cit.): It was not becoming that virgins 
should expose themselves to evil report, and cover themselves 
with the excuse that the Mother of the Lord had also been 
oppressed by ill-fame. 

Fourthly, because by this the universal Church is typified, 

Q. 29. Art.1 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 36 

which is a virgin and yet is espoused to one Man, Christ, 
as Augustine says (De Sanct. Virg. xii.). 

A fifth reason may be added: since the Mother of the Lord 
being both espoused and a virgin, both virginity and wed- 
lock are honoured in her person, in contradiction to those 
heretics who disparaged one or the other. 

Reply Obj. 1. We must believe that the Blessed Virgin, 
Mother of God, desired, from an intimate inspiration of the 
Holy Ghost, to be espoused, being confident that by the 
help of God she would never come to have carnal inter- 
course: yet she left this to God’s discretion. Wherefore 
she suffered nothing in detriment to her virginity. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Ambrose says on Luke i. 26, 27: Our 
Lord preferred that men should doubt of His origin rather 
than of His Mother's purity. For He knew the delicacy of 
virgin modesty, and how easily the fair fame of chastity is 
disparaged : nor did He choose that our faith in His Birth 
should be strengthened in detriment to His Mother. We must 
observe, however, that some miracles wrought by God are 
the direct object of faith; such are the miracles of the virginal 
Birth, the Resurrection of Our Lord, and the Sacrament 
of the Altar. Wherefore Our Lord wished these to be more 
hidden, that belief in them might have greater merit. 
Whereas other miracles are for the strengthening of faith: 
and these it behoves to be manifest. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (De Trin. iii.), the devil 
can do many things by his natural power which he is 
hindered by the Divine power from doing. Thus it may be 
that by his natural power the devil could know that the 
Mother of God knew not man, but was a virgin; yet was 
prevented by God from knowing the manner of the Divine 
' Birth. That afterwards the devil after a fashion knew that 
He was the Son of God, makes no difficulty: because then 
the time had already come for Christ to make known His 
power against the devil, and to suffer persecution aroused 
by him. But during His infancy it behoved the malice of 
the devil to be withheld, lest he should persecute Him too 
severely: for Christ did not wish to suffer such things then, 

37 OUR LADY’S ESPOUSALS ~~ Q.. 29. Art. 2 

nor to make His power known, but to show Himself to be 
in all things like other infants. Hence Pope Leo (Serm. in 
Epiph. iv.) says that the Magi found the Child Jesus small 
in body, dependent on others, unable to speak, and in no way 
differing from the generality of human infants. Ambrose, 
however, expounding Luke (loc. cit.), seems to understand 
this of the devil’s members. For, after giving thc above 
reason—namely, that the prince of the world might be 
deceived—he continues thus: Yet still more did He deceive 
the princes of the world, since the evil disposition of the demons 
easily discovers even hidden things : but those who spend their 
lives tn worldly vanities can have no acquaintance of Divine 
things. 

Reply Obj. 4. The sentence of adulteresses according to 
the Law was that they should be stoned, not only if they 
were already espoused or married, but also if their maiden- 
hood were still under the protection of the paternal roof, 
until the day when they enter the married state. Thus it is’ 
written (Deut. xxii. 20, 21): If... virginity be not found 
im the damsel ... the men of the city shall stone her to death, 
and she shall die; because she hath done a wicked thing in 
Israel, to play the whore in her father’s house. 

It may also be said, according to some writers, that the 
Blessed Virgin was of the family or kindred of Aaron, so 
that she was related to Elizabeth, as we are told (Luke 
i. 36). Now a virgin of the priestly tribe was condemned to 
death for whoredom; for we read (Lev. xxi. 9): If the daughter 
of a priest be taken in whoredom, and dishonour the name of 
her father, she shall be burnt with fire. 

Lastly, some understand the passage of Jerome to refer 
to the throwing of stones by ill-fame. 

SECOND ARTICLE". 
WHETHER THERE WAS A TRUE MARRIAGE BETWEEN MARY 
AND JOSEPH ? 
We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that there was no true mar- 
riage between Mary and Joseph. For Jerome says against 

Q. 29. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 38 

Helvidius that Joseph was Mary’s guardian rather than her 
husband. But if this was a true marriage, Joseph was truly 
her husband. Therefore there was no true marriage between 
Mary and Joseph. 

Obj. 2. Further, on Matth. i. 16: Jacob begot Joseph the 
husband of Mary, Jerome says: When thou readest ‘ husband ’ 
suspect not a marriage ; but remember that Scripture 1s wont 
to speak of those who are betrothed as husband and wife. But 
a true marriage is not effected by the betrothal, but by the 
wedding. Therefore, there was no true marriage between 
the Blessed Virgin and Joseph. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written (Matth. i. 19): Joseph, her 
husband, being a just man, and not willing to take her away* 
—i.e., to take her to his home in order to cohabit with her— 
was minded to put her away privately—i.e., to postpone the 
wedding, as Remigius expounds.t Therefore, it seems that, 
as the wedding was not yet solemnized, there was no true 
marriage: especially since, after the marriage contract, no 
one can lawfully put his wife away. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. ii.): 
It cannot be allowed that the evangelist thought that Joseph 
ought to sever his union with Mary (since he said that Joseph 
was Mary’s husband) on the ground that in giving birth to 
Christ, she had not conceived of him, but remained a virgin. 
For by this example the faithful are taught that if after mar- 
riage they remain continent by mutual consent, their union is 
stull and 1s rightly called marriage, even without intercourse of 
the sexes. 

I answer that, Marriage or wedlock is said to be true by 
reason of its attaining its perfection. Now perfection of 
anything is twofold; first, and second. The first perfection 
of a thing consists in its very form, from which it receives its 
species; while the second perfection of a thing consists in 
its operation, by which in some way a thing attains its end. 
Now the form of matrimony consists in a certain inseparable 
union of souls, by which husband and wife are pledged by 

* Douay Version: publicly to expose her. 
t Cf. Catena Aurea in Matth. 

39 OUR LADY’S ESPOUSALS _ Q. 29. Arr. 2 

a bond of mutual affection that cannot be sundered. And 
the end of matrimony is the begetting and upbringing of 
children: the first of which isattained by conjugal inter- 
course; the second by the other duties of husband and wife, 
by which they help one another in rearing their offspring. 

Thus we may say, as to the first perfection, that the 
marriage of the Virgin Mother of God and Joseph was abso- 
lutely true: because both consented to the nuptial bond, but 
not expressly to the bond of the flesh, save on the condition 
that it was pleasing to God. For this reason the angel calls 
Mary the wife of Joseph, saying to him (Matth. i. 20): Fear 
not to take unto thee Mary thy wife : on which words Augustine 
says (De Nup. et Concup. i.): She is called his wife from the 
jirst promise of her espousals, whom he had not known nor ever 
was to know by carnal intercourse. 

But as to the second perfection which is attained by the 
marriage act, if this be referred to carnal intercourse, by 
which children are begotten; thus this marriage was not 
consummated. Wherefore Ambrose says on Luke i. 26, 27: 
Be not surprised that Scripture calls Mary a wife. The fact 
of her marriage 1s declared, not to insinuate the loss of virginity, 
but to witness to the reality of the union. Nevertheless, this 
marriage had the second perfection, as to upbringing of the 
child. Thus Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i.): All the 
nuptial blessings are fulfilled in the marriage of Christ’s parents, 
offspring, faith and sacrament. The offspring we know to 
have been the Lord Jesus ; faith, for there was no adultery : 
sacrament, since there was no divorce. Carnal intercourse 
alone there was none, 

Reply Obj. 1. Jerome uses the term Ausband in reference to 
marriage consummated. 

Reply Obj. 2. By marriage Jerome means the nuptial inter- 
course. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Chrysostom says (Hom. i. super Matth.)* 
the Blessed Virgin was so espoused to Joseph that she 
dwelt in his home: for just as she who conceives in her 
husband’s house is understood to have conceived of him, so 

* Opus Imp. (supposititious). 

Q.29. Artr.2. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 40 

she who conceives elsewhere is suspect. Consequently suffi- 
cient precaution would not have been taken to safeguard 
the fair fame of the Blessed Virgin, if she had not the entry 
of her husband’s house. Wherefore the words, not willing 
to take her away are better rendered as meaning, not willing 
publicly to expose her, than understood of taking her to his 
house. Hence the evangelist adds that he was minded to put 
her away privately. But although she had the entry of 
Joseph’s house by reason of her first promise of espousals, yet 
the time had not yet come for the solemnizing of the wedding; 
for which reason they had not yet consummated the mar- 
riage. Therefore, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.): 
The evangelist does not say, ‘ before she was taken to the house 
of her husband,’ because she was already in the house. For it 
was the custom among the ancients for espoused maidens to 
enter frequently the houses of them to whom they were betrothed. 
Therefore the angel also said to Joseph: Feay not to take unto 
thee Mary thy wife ; that is: Fear not to solemnize your mar- 
riage with her. Others, however, say that she was not yet 
admitted to his house, but only betrothed to him. But the 
first is more in keeping with the Gospel narrative. 

QUESTION XXX. 

OF THE ANNUNCIATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE now have to consider the Blessed Virgin’s Annunciation, 
concerning which there are four points of inquiry: (1) 
Whether it was befitting that announcement should be 
made to her of that which was to be begotten ofher? (2) By 
whom should this announcement be made? (3) In what 
manner should this announcement be made? (4) Of the 
order observed in the Annunciation. 

‘ First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS NECESSARY TO ANNOUNCE TO THE BLESSED 
VIRGIN THAT WHICH WAS TO BE DONE IN HER? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was unnecessary to 
announce to the Blessed Virgin that which was to be done 
inher. For there seems to have been no need of the Annun- 
ciation except for the purpose of receiving the Virgin’s 
consent. But her consent seems to have been unnecessary: 
because the Virginal Conception was foretold by a prophecy 
of predestination, which is fulfilled without our consent, as a 
gloss says on Matth. i. 22. There was no need, therefore, 
for this Annunciation. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Blessed Virgin believed in the Incar- 
nation, for to disbelieve therein excludes man from the way 
of salvation; because, as the Apostle says (Rom. iii. 22): 
The justice of God (ts) by faith of Jesus Christ. But one needs 
no further instruction concerning what one believes without 

41 

Q. 30. Arr.r THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 42 

doubt. Therefore the Blessed Virgin had no need for the 
Incarnation of her Son to be announced to her. 

Obj. 3. Further, just as the Blessed Virgin conceived 
Christ in her body, so every pious soul conceives Him spiritu- 
ally. Thus the Apostle says (Gal. iv. 19): My little children, 
of whom I am in labour again, until Christ be formed tn you. 
But to those who conceive Him spiritually no announcement 
is made of this conception. Therefore neither should it have 
been announced to the Blessed Virgin that she was to con- 
ceive the Son of God in her womb. 

On the contrary, It is related (Luke i. 31) that the angel 
said to her: Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt 
bring forth a son. 

I answer that, It was reasonable that it should be announced 
to the Blessed Virgin that she was to conceive Christ. Furst, 
in order to maintain a becoming order in the union of the 
Son of God with the Virgin—namely, that she should be 
informed in mind concerning Him, before conceiving Him 
in the flesh. Thus Augustine says (De Sancta Virgin. iii.) : 
Mary is more blessed in receiving the faith of Christ, than in 
conceiving the flesh of Christ ; and further on he adds: Her 
nearness as a Mother would have been of no profit to Mary, 
had she not borne Christ in her heart after a more blessed 
manner than in her flesh. 

Secondly, that she might be a more certain witness of this 
mystery, being instructed therein by God. 

Thirdly, that she might offer to God the free gift of her 
obedience: which she proved herself right ready to do, 
saying: Behold the handmaid of the Lord. 

Fourthly, in order to show that there is a certain spiritual 
wedlock between the Son of God and human nature. Where- 
fore in the Annunciation the Virgin’s consent was besought 
in lieu of that of the entire human nature. 

Reply Obj. 1. The prophecy of predestination is ful- 
filled without the causality of our will; not without its 
consent. 

Reply Obj. 2. The Blessed Virgin did indeed believe ex- 
plicitly in the future Incarnation; but, being humble, she 

43 OUR LADY’S ANNUNCIATION Q. 30. Arr. 2 

did not think such high things of herself. Consequently she 
required instruction in this matter. 

Reply Obj. 3. The spiritual conception of Christ through 
faith is preceded by the preaching of the faith, for as much 
as faith is by hearing (Rom. x. 17). Yet man does not know 
for certain thereby that he has grace; but he does know 
that the faith, which he has received, is true. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE ANNUNCIATION SHOULD HAVE BEEN MADE BY 
AN ANGEL TO THE BLESSED VIRGIN ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Annunciation should 
not have been made by an angel to our Blessed Lady. For 
revelations to the highest angels are made immediately by 
God, as Dionysius says (Ca@l. Hier. vii.). But the Mother of 
God is exalted above all the angels. Therefore it seems that 
the mystery of the Incarnation should have been announced 
tg her by God immedidtely, and not by an angel. 

Obj. 2. Further, if in this matter it behoved the common 
order to be observed, by which Divine things are announced 
to men by angels; in like manner Divine things are announced 
to a woman by a man: wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor. xiv. 
34, 35): Let women keep silence in the churches ; ... but tf they 
would learn anything, let them ask their husbands at home. 
Therefore it seems that the mystery of the Incarnation 
should have been announced to the Blessed Virgin by some 
man: especially seeing that Joseph, her husband, was in- 
structed thereupon by an angel, as is related (Matth. i. 
20921); 

Obj. 3. Further, none can becomingly announce what he 
knows not. But the highest angels did not fully know the 
mystery of the Incarnation: wherefore Dionysius says 
(Cal. Hier. vii.) that the question, Who 1s this that cometh 

from Edom ? (Isa. |xiii. 1) is to be understood as made by 
them. Therefore it seems that the announcement of the 
Incarnation could not be made becomingly by any angel. 

Q. 30. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 44 

Obj. 4. Further, greater things should be announced by 
messengers of greater dignity. But the mystery of the In- 
carnation is the greatest of all things announced by angels to 
men. It seems, therefore, if it behoved to be announced by 
an angel at all, that this should have been done by an angel 
of the highest order. But Gabriel is not of the highest order, 
but of the order of archangels, which is the last but one: 
wherefore the Church sings: We know that the archangel 
Gabriel brought thee a message from God.* Therefore this 
announcement was not becomingly made by the archangel 
Gabriel. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke i. 26): The angel 
Gabriel was sent by God, etc. 

I answer that, It was fitting for the mystery of the Incarna- 
tion to be announced to the Mother of God by an angel, for 
three reasons. First, that in this also might be maintained 
the order established by God, by which Divine things are 
brought to men by means of the angels. Wherefore Diony- 
sius says (Cal. Hier. iv.) that the angels were the first to be 
taught the Divine mystery of the loving kindness of Jesus : after- 
wards the grace of knowledge was imparted to us through them. 
Thus, then, the most god-like Gabriel made known to Zachary 
that a prophet son would be born to him ; and, to Mary, how the 
Divine mystery of the ineffable conception of God would be 
realized in her. 

Secondly, this was becoming to the restoration of human 
nature which was to be effected by Christ. Wherefore Bede 
says in a homily (im Annunt.): It was an apt beginning of 
man’s restoration that an angel should be sent by God to the 
Virgin who was to be hallowed by the Divine Birth: since the 
first cause of man’s ruin was through the serpent being sent 
by the devil to cajole the woman by the spirit of pride. 

Thirdly, because this was becoming to the virginity of 
the Mother of God. Wherefore Jerome says in a sermon 
on the Assumption:} I¢ is well that an angel be sent to the 
Virgin ; because virginity is ever akin to the angelic nature. 

* Feast of Purification B.V.M., ix. Resp., Brev. O.P. 
t Ascribed to S. Jerome, but not his work. 

45 OUR LADY’S ANNUNCIATION Q. 30. Arr. 2 

Surely to live in the flesh and not according to the flesh is not 
an earthly but a heavenly life. 

Reply Obj. 1. The Mother of God was above the angels 
as regards the dignity to which she was chosen by God. 
But as regards the present state of life, she was beneath 
the angels. For even Christ Himself, by reason of His 
passible life, was made a little lower than the angels, accord- 
ing to Heb. ii. 9. But because Christ was both wayfarer 
and comprehensor, He did not need to be instructed by 
angels, as regards knowledge of Divine things. The Mother 
of God, however, was not yet in the state of comprehension: 
and therefore she had to be instructed by angels concerning 
the Divine Conception. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Assumption (De Assump. B.V.M.)* a true estimation of 
the Blessed Virgin excludes her from certain general rules. 
For neither did she ‘ multiply her conceptions’ nor was she 
“under man’s—i.e., her husband’s’—power (Gen. iii. 16), 
who in her spotless womb conceived Christ of the Holy Ghost. 
Therefore it was fitting that she should be informed of the 
mystery of the Incarnation by means not of a man, but of 
an angel. For this reason it was made known to her before 
Joseph: since the message was brought to her before she 
conceived, but to Joseph after she had conceived. 

Reply Obj. 3. As may be gathered from the passage quoted 
from Dionysius, the angels were acquainted with the mystery 
of the Incarnation: and yet they put this question, being de- 
sirous that Christ should give them more perfect knowledge 
of the details of this mystery, which are incomprehensible 
to any created intellect. Thus Maximusf says that there 
can be no question that the angels knew that the Incarnation 
was to take place. But it was not given to them to trace the 
manner of our Lord’s conception, nor how it was that He 
remained whole in the Father, whole throughout the universe, 
and was whole in the narrow abode of the Virgin. 

Reply Obj. 4. Some say that Gabriel was of the highest 

* Work of another author: among the works of S. Augustine. 
{¢ Maximus of Constantinople. 

Q. 30. Art.3. THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 46 

order; because Gregory says (Homil. de Centum Ovibus)*: It 
was vight that one of the highest angels should come, since his 
message was most sublime. But this does not imply that 
he was of the highest order of all, but in regard to the 
angels: since he was an archangel. Thus the Church calls 
him an archangel, and Gregory himself in a homily (De 
Centum Ovibus)+ says that those are called archangels who 
announce sublime things. It is therefore sufficiently credible 
that he was the highest of the archangels. And, as Gregory 
says (ibid.), this name agrees with his office: for Gabriel 
means ‘ Power of God.’ This message therefore was fitingly 
brought by the ‘ Power of God,’ because the Lord of hosts 
and mighty in battle was coming to overcome the powers of 
the air. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE ANGEL OF THE ANNUNCIATION SHOULD HAVE 
APPEARED TO THE VIRGIN IN A BODILY VISION ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the angel of the Annuncia- 
tion should not have appeared to the Virgin in a bodily vision. 
For intellectual vision 1s more excellent than bodily vision, 
as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii.), and especially more 
becoming to an angel: since by intellectual vision an angel 
is seen in his substance; whereas in a bodily vision he is 
seen in the bodily shape which he assumes. Now since it 
behoved a sublime messenger to come to announce the 
Divine Conception, so, seemingly, he should have appeared 
in the most excellent kind of vision. Therefore it seems that 
the angel of the Annunciation appeared to the Virgin in an 
intellectual vision. 

Obj. 2. Further, imaginary vision also seems to excel 
bodily vision: just as the imagination is a higher power 
than the senses. But the angel . . . appeared to Joseph in 
his sleep (Matth. i. 20), which was clearly an imaginary 
vision. Therefore it seems that he should have appeared 
to the Blessed Virgin also in an imaginary vision. 

* 34 in Evang. + Ibid. 

47 OUR LADY’S ANNUNCIATION Q. 30. Arr. 3 

Obj. 3. Further, the bodily vision of a spiritual substance 
stupefies the beholder; thus we sing of the Virgin herself: 
And the Virgin seeing the light was filled with fear.* But it 
was better that her mind should be preserved from being thus 
troubled. Therefore it was not fitting that this announce- 
ment should be made in a bodily vision. 

On the contrary, Augustine in a sermon (De Annunt. iii.) 
pictures the Blessed Virgin as speaking thus: To me came 
the archangel Gabriel with glowing countenance, gleaming robe, 
and wondrous step. But these cannot pertain to other than 
bodily vision. Therefore the angel of the Annunciation 
appeared in a bodily vision to the Blessed Virgin. 

I answer that, The angel of the Annunciation appeared in 
a bodily vision to the Blessed Virgin. And this indeed was 
fitting, first in regard to that which was announced. For 
the angel came to announce the Incarnation of the invisible 
God. Wherefore it was becoming that, in order to make 
this known, an invisible creature should assume a form in 
which to appear visibly: forasmuch as all the apparitions 
of, the Old Testament are ordered to that apparition in 
which the Son of God appeared in the flesh. 

Secondly, it was fitting as regards the dignity of the 
Mother of God, who was to receive the Son of God not only 
in her mind, but in her bodily womb. Therefore it behoved 
not only her mind, but also her bodily senses to be refreshed 
by the angelic vision. 

Thirdly, it is in keeping with the certainty of that which 
was announced. For we apprehend with greater certainty 
that which is before our eyes, than what is in our imagina- 
tion. Thus Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.) that the 
angel came to the Virgin not in her sleep, but visibly. For 
since she was receiving from the angel a message exceeding 
great, before such an event she needed a vision of great solemnity. 

Reply Obj. 1. Intellectual vision excels merely imaginary 
and merely bodily vision. But Augustine himself says 
(ibid.) that prophecy is more excellent if accompanied by 
intellectual and imaginary vision, than if accompanied by 

* Feast of Annunciation B.V.M., ii. Resp., Brev. O.P. 

Q. 30. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 48 

only one of them. Now the Blessed Virgin perceived not 
only the bodily vision, but also the intellectual illumination. 
Wherefore this was a more excellent vision. Yet it would 
have been more excellent if she had perceived the angel 
himself in his substance by her intellectual vision. But it 
was incompatible with her state of wayfarer that she should 
see an angel in his essence. 

Reply Obj. 2. The imagination is indeed a higher power 
than the exterior sense: but because the senses are the 
principle of human knowledge, the greatest certainty is in 
them, for the principles of knowledge must needs always be 
most certain. Consequently Joseph, to whom the angel 
appeared in his sleep, did not have so excellent a vision as 
the Blessed Virgin. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Ambrose says on Luke i. 11: We are 
disturbed, and lose our presence of mind, when we are con- 
fronted by the presence of asuperior power. And this happens 
not only in bodily, but also in imaginary vision. Wherefore 
it is written (Gen. xv. 12) that when the sun was setting, a 
deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a great and darksome horror 
seized upon him. But by being thus disturbed man is not 
harmed to such an extent that therefore he ought to forego 
the vision of an angel. First because from the very fact 
that man is raised above himself, in which matter his dignity 
is concerned, his inferior powers are weakened; and from 
this results the aforesaid disturbance: thus, also, when the 
natural heat is drawn within a body, the exterior parts 
tremble. Secondly, because, as Origen says (Hom. iv. in 
Luc.): The angel who appeared, knowing hers was a human 
nature, first sought to remedy the disturbance of mind to which 
aman 1s subject. Wherefore both to Zachary and to Mary, 
as soon as they were disturbed, he said: Feary not. For this 
reason, as we read in the life of Antony, zt is difficult to 
discern good from evil spirits. For if joy succeed fear, we 
should know that the help is from the Lord : because security 
of soul is a sign of present majesty. But if the fear with 
which we are stricken persevere, it is an enemy that we See. 

Moreover it was becoming to virginal modesty that the 

49 OUR LADY’S ANNUNCIATION Q. 30. Arr. 4 

Virgin should be troubled. Because, as Ambrose says on 
Luke i. 20: It is the part of a virgin to be timid, to fear the 
advances of men, and to shrink from men’s addresses. 

But others say that as the Blessed Virgin was accustomed 
to angelic visions, she was not troubled at seeing this angel, 
but with wonder at hearing what the angel said to her, for 
she did not think so highly of herself. Wherefore the 
evangelist does not say that she was troubled at seeing the 
angel, but at his saying. 

FouRTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE ANNUNCIATION TOOK PLACE IN BECOMING 
ORDER ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Annunciation did not 
take place in becoming order. For the dignity of the Mother 
of God results from the child she conceived. But the cause 
should be made known before the effect. Therefore the 
angel should have announced to the Virgin the conception 
of her child before acknowledging her dignity in greeting 
her. 

Obj. 2. Further, proof should be omitted in things which 
admit of no doubt; and premised where doubt is possible. 
But the angel seems first to have announced what the virgin 
might doubt, and which, because of her doubt, would make 
her ask: How shall this be done? and afterwards to have 
given the proof, alleging both the instance of Elizabeth 
and the omnipotence of God. Therefore the Annunciation 
was made by the angel in unbecoming order. 

Obj. 3. Further, the greater cannot be adequately proved 
by the less. But it was a greater wonder for a virgin than 
for an old woman to be with child. Therefore the angel’s 
proof was insufficient to demonstrate the conception of a 
virgin from that of an old woman. 

On the contrary, It is written (Rom. xiil. 1): Those that 
are of God, are well ordered (Vulg., Those that are, are ordained 
of God). Now the angel was sent by God to announce unto 

hy 22 4 

Q. 30. Art.4. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 50 

the Virgin, as is related Luke i. 26. Therefore the Annun- 
ciation was made by the angel in the most perfect order. 

I answer that, The Annunciation was made by the angel 
in a becoming manner. For the angel had a threefold 
purpose in regard to the Virgin. First, to draw her atten- 
tion to the consideration of a matter of such moment. 
This he did by greeting her by a new and unwonted salu- 
tation. Wherefore Origen says, commenting on Luke 
(Hom. vi.), that if she had known that similar words had been 
addressed to anyone else, she, who had knowledge of the Law, 
would never have been astonished at the seeming strangeness 
of the salutation. In which salutation he began by asserting 
her worthiness of the conception, by saying, Full of grace ; 
then he announced the conception in the words, The Lord ts 
with thee ; and then foretold the honour which would result 
to her therefrom, by saying, Blessed art thou among women. 

Secondly, he purposed to instruct her about the mystery 
of the Incarnation, which was to be fulfilled in her. This 
he did by foretelling the conception and birth, saying: 
Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, etc.; and by declar- 
ing the dignity of the child conceived, saying: He shail 
be great ; and further, by making known the mode of con- 
ception, when he said: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee. 

Thirdly, he purposed to lead her mind to consent. This 
he did by the instance of Elizabeth, and by the argument 
from Divine omnipotence. 

Reply Obj. 1. To a humble mind nothing is more astonish- 
‘ing than to hear its own excellence. Now, wonder is most 
effective in drawing the mind’s attention. Therefore the 
angel, desirous of drawing the Virgin’s attention to the 
hearing of so great a mystery, began by praising her. 

Reply Obj. 2. Ambrose says explicitly on Luke i. 34, that 
the Blessed Virgin did not doubt the angel’s words. For 
he says: Mary's answer is more temperate than the words of 
the priest. She says: How shall this be? He replies: 
Whereby shall I know this? He denies that he believes, since 
he denies that he knows this. She does not doubt fulfilment 
when she asks how it shall be done. 

51 OUR LADY’S ANNUNCIATION Q. 30. Arr. 4 

Augustine, however, seems to assert that she doubted. 
For he says (De Qq. Vet. e¢ Nov. Test. qu. li.): To Mary, in 
doubt about the conception, the angel declares the possibility 
thereof. But such a doubt is one of wonder rather than of 
unbelief. And so the angel adduces a proof, not as a cure for 
unbelief, but in order to remove her astonishment. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Ambrose says (Hexemeron v.): For 
this reason had many barren women borne children, that the 
virginal birth might be credible. 

The conception of the sterile Elizabeth is therefore ad- 
duced, not as a sufficient argument, but as a kind of figura- 
tive example: consequently in support of this instance, 
the convincing argument is added taken from the Divine 
omnipotence. 

QUESTION XXXI. 

OF THE MATTER FROM WHICH THE SAVIOUR’S 
BODY WAS CONCEIVED. 

(In Eight Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the Saviour’s conception. First, 
as to the matter from which His body was conceived; 
secondly, as to the author of His conception; thirdly, as to 
the manner and order of His conception. 

Concerning the first there are eight points of inquiry: 
(1) Whether the flesh of Christ was derived from Adam ? 
(2) Whether it was derived from David? (3) Of the gene- 
alogy of Christ which is given in the Gospels. (4) Whether 
it was fitting for Christ to be born of awoman? (5) Whether 
His body was formed from the purest blood of the Virgin ? 
(6) Whether the flesh of Christ was in the patriarchs as to 
something signate ? (7) Whether the flesh of Christ in the 
patriarchs was subject to sin? (8) Whether Christ paid 
tithes in the loins of Abraham ? 

First ARTICLE. 
WHETHER THE FLESH OF CHRIST WAS DERIVED FROM ADAM ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :-— 

Objection I. It would seem that Christ’s flesh was not 
derived from Adam. For the Apostle says (x Cor. xv. 47): 
The first man was of the earth, earthly : the second man, from 
heaven, heavenly. Now, the first man is Adam: and the 
second man is Christ. Therefore Christ is not derived from 
Adam, but has an origin distinct from him. 

Obj. 2. Further, the conception of Christ should have 
been most miraculous. But it is a greater miracle to form 

52 

53 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Arr.1 

man’s body from the slime of the earth, than from human 
matter derived from Adam. It seems therefore unfitting 
that Christ should take flesh from Adam. Therefore the 
body of Christ should not have been formed from the mass 
of the human race derived from Adam, but of some other 
matter. 

Obj. 3. Further, by one man sin entered into this world— 
t.e., by Adam—because in him all nations sinned originally, 
as is clear from Rom. v. 12. But if Christ’s body was 
derived from Adam, He would have been in Adam originally 
when he sinned: therefore he would have contracted original 
sin; which is unbecoming in His purity. Therefore the 
body of Christ was not formed of matter derived from 
Adam. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. ii. 16): Nowhere 
doth He—that is, the Son of God—take hold of the angels : 
but of the seed of Abraham He taketh hold. But the seed of 
Abraham was derived from Adam. Therefore Christ’s body 
was formed of matter derived from Adam. 
¢ I answer that, Christ assumed human nature in order to 
cleanse it of corruption. But human nature did not need 
to be cleansed save in as far as it was soiled in its tainted 
origin whereby it was descended from Adam. Therefore 
it was becoming that He should assume flesh of matter 
derived from Adam, that the nature itself might be healed 
by the assumption. 

Reply Obj. 1. The second man—+.e., Christ—is said to be 
of heaven, not indeed as to the matter from which His body 
was formed, but either as to the virtue whereby it was 
formed; or even as to His very Godhead. But as to matter, 
Christ’s body was earthly, as Adam’s body was. 

Reply Obj. 2. As stated above (Q. XXIX., A. I ad 2) the 
mystery of Christ’s Incarnation is miraculous, not as or- 
dained to strengthen faith, but as an article of faith. And 
therefore in the mystery of the Incarnation we do not seek 
that which is most miraculous, as in those miracles that 
are wrought for the confirmation of faith, but what is most 
becoming to Divine wisdom, and most expedient to the 

Q. 31. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 54 

salvation of man, since this is what we seek in all matters 
of faith. 

It may also be said that in the mystery of the Incarna- 
tion the miracle is not only in reference to the matter of 
the conception, but rather in respect of the manner of the 
conception and birth; inasmuch as a virgin conceived and 
gave birth to God. 

Reply 0bj. 3. As stated above (Q. XV., A. I ad 2), Christ’s 
body was in Adam in respect of a bodily substance—that is 
to say, that the corporeal matter of Christ’s body was de- 
rived from Adam: but it was not there by reason of seminal 
virtue, because it was not conceived from the seed of man. 
Thus it did not contract original sin, as others who are 
descended from Adam by man’s seed. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST TOOK FLESH OF THE SEED OF DAVID ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not take flesh 
of the seed of David. For Matthew, in tracing the genealogy 
of Christ, brings it down to Joseph. But Joseph was not 
Christ’s father, as shown above (Q. XXVIII., A. r ad 1 
and 2). Therefore it seems that Christ was not descended 
from David. 

Obj. 2. Further, Aaron was of the tribe of Levi, as related 
Exod. vi. Now Mary the Mother of Christ is called the 
cousin of Elizabeth, who was a daughter of Aaron, as is 
clear from Luke i. 5, 36. Therefore, since David was of 
the tribe of Juda, as is shown Matth. i., it seems that Christ 
was not descended from David. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written of Jechonias (Jer. xxii. 30): 
Write this man barren: . . . for there shall not be a man of his 
seed that shall sit upon the throne of David. Whereas of 
Christ it is written (Isa. ix. 7): He shall sit upon the throne 
of David. Therefore Christ was not of the seed of Jechonias: 
nor, consequently, of the family of David, since Matthew 
traces the genealogy from David through Jechonias. 

55 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Arr. z 

On the contrary, It is written (Rom. i. 3): Who was made 
to him of the seed of David according to the flesh. 

I answer that, Christ is said to have been the son especially 
of two of the patriarchs, Abraham and David, as is clear 
from Matth. i. 1. There are many reasons for this. First 
to these especially was the promise made concerning Christ. 
For it was said to Abraham (Gen. xxii. 18): In thy seed shall 
all the nations of the earth be blessed : which words the Apostle 
expounds of Christ (Gal. iii. 16): To Abraham were the 
promises made and to his-seed. He saith not, ‘ And to his 
seeds’ as of many ; but as of one, ‘ And to thy seed,’ which is 
Christ. And to David it was said (Ps. cxxxi. 11): Of the 
fruit of thy womb I will set upon thy throne. Wherefore the 
Jewish people, receiving Him with kingly honour, said 
(Matth. xxi. 9): Hosanna to the Son of David. 

A second reason is because Christ was to be king, prophet, 
and priest. Now Abraham was a priest; which is clear 
from the Lord saying unto him (Gen. xv. 9): Take thee 
(Vulg., Me) a cow of three years old, etc. He was also a 
prophet, according to Gen. xx. 7: He ts a prophet ; and he 
shall pray for thee. Lastly David was both king and 
prophet. 

A third reason is because circumcision had its beginning 
in Abraham: while in David God’s election was most clearly 
made manifest, according to 1 Kings xiii. 14: The Lord 
hath sought Him a man according to His own heart. And 
consequently Christ is called in a most special way the Son 
of both, in order to show that He came for the salvation 
both of the circumcised and of the elect among the Gentiles. 

Reply Obj. 1. Faustus the Manichean argued thus, in the 
desire to prove that Christ is not the Son of David, because 
He was not conceived of Joseph, in whom Matthew’s gene- 
alogy terminates. Augustine answered this argument thus 
(Contra Faust. xxii.): Since the same evangelist affirms that 
Joseph was Mary’s husband and that Christ’s mother was a 
virgin, and that Christ was of the seed of Abraham, what must 
we believe, but that Mary was not a stranger to the family of 
David: and that it is not without reason that she was called 

Q 31. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 56 

the wife of Joseph, by reason of the close alliance of thew 
hearts, although not mingled in the flesh ; and that the gene- 
alogy is traced down to Joseph rather than to her by reason 
of the dignity of the husband? So therefore we believe that 
Mary was also of the family of David : because we belteve the 
Scriptures, which assert both that Christ was of the seed of 
David according to the flesh, and that Mary was Hts Mother, 
not by sexual intercourse but retaining her virginity. For 
as Jerome says on Matth. 1. 18: Joseph and Mary were of the 
same tribe: wherefore he was bound by law to marry her as 
she was his kinswoman. Hence tt was that they were enrolled 
together at Bethlehem, as being descended from the same stock. 

Reply Obj. 2. Gregory of Nazianzum answers this objec- 
tion by saying that it happened by God’s will, that the 
royal family was united to the priestly race, so that Christ, 
who is both king and priest, should be born of both accord- 
ing to the flesh. Wherefore Aaron, who was the first priest 
according to the Law, married a wife of the tribe of Juda, 
Elizabeth, daughter of Aminadab. It is therefore possible 
that Elizabeth’s father married a wife of the family of David, 
through whom the Blessed Virgin Mary, who was of the 
family of David, would be a cousin of Elizabeth. Or con- 
versely, and with greater likelihood, that the Blessed Mary’s 
father, who was of the family of David, married a wife of 
the family of Aaron. 

Again, it may be said with Augustine (Contra Faust. xxii.) 
that if Joachim, Mary’s father, was of the family of Aaron 
(as the heretic Faustus pretended to prove from certain 
apocryphal writings), then we must believe that Joachim’s 
mother, or else his wife, was of the family of David, so long 
as we say that Mary was in some way descended from 
David. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Ambrose says on Luke iii. 25, this 
prophetical passage does not deny that a posterity will be born 
of the seed of Jechonias. And so Christ is of his seed. Neither 
is the fact that Christ reigned contrary to prophecy, for He 
did not reign with worldly honour ; since He declared : ‘ My 
kingdom 1s not of this world.’ 

= 

57 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION 9Q. 31. Arr. 3 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S GENEALOGY IS SUITABLY TRACED 
BY THE EVANGELISTS ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s genealogy is 
not suitably traced by the Evangelists. For it is written 
(Isa. liii. 8): Who shall declare His generation? Therefore 
Christ’s genealogy should not have been set down. 

Obj. 2. Further, one man cannot possibly have two fathers. 
But Matthew says that Jacob begot Joseph, the husband of 
Mary : whereas Luke says that Joseph was the son of Heli. 
Therefore they contradict one another. 

Obj. 3. Further, there seem to be divergencies between 
them on several points. For Matthew, at the commence- 
ment of his book, beginning from Abraham and coming down 
to Joseph, enumerates forty-two generations. Whereas 
Luke sets down Christ’s genealogy after His Baptism, and 
beginning from Christ traces the series of generations back 
to God, counting in all seventy-seven generations, the first 
and last included. It seems therefore that their accounts of 
Christ’s genealogy do not agree. 

Obj. 4. Further, we read (4 Kings viii. 24) that Joram 
begot Ochozias, who was succeeded by his son Joas: who 
was succeeded by his son Amasias: after whom reigned his 
son Azarias, called Ozias; who was succeeded by his son 
Joathan. But Matthew says that Joram begot Ozias. 
Therefore it seems that his account of Christ’s genealogy is 
unsuitable, since he omits three kings in the middle thereof. 

Obj. 5. Further, all those who are mentioned in Christ’s 
genealogy had both a father and a mother, and many of 
them had brothers also. Now in Christ’s genealogy Matthew 
mentions only three mothers—namely, Thamar, Ruth, and 
the wife of Urias. He also mentions the brothers of Judas 
and Jechonias, and also Phares and Zara. But Luke men- 
tions none of these. Therefore the evangelists seem to have 
described the genealogy of Christ in an unsuitable manner. 

On the contrary, The authority of Scripture suffices. 

Q. 31. Art.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 58 

I answer that, As is written (2 Tim. iii. 16), All Holy Scrip- 
ture is inspired of God (Vulg., All scripture inspired of God 
is profitable), etc. Now what is done by God is done in 
perfect order, according to Rom. xiii. 1: Those that are of 
God are ordained (Vulg., Those that are, are ordained of God). 
Therefore Christ’s genealogy is set down by the evangelists 
in a suitable order. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Jerome says on Matth. i., Isaias speaks of 
the generation of Christ’s Godhead. Whereas Matthew re- 
lates the generation of Christ in His humanity; not indeed 
by explaining the manner of the Incarnation, which is also 
unspeakable; but by enumerating Christ’s forefathers from 
whom He was descended according to the flesh. 

Reply Obj. 2. Various answers have been made by certain 
writers to this objection which was raised by Julian the 
Apostate; for some, as Gregory of Nazianzum, say that 
the people mentioned by the two evangelists are the same, 
but under different names, as though they each had two. 
But this will not stand: because Matthew mentions one of 
David’s sons—namely, Solomon; whereas Luke mentions 
another—namely, Nathan, who according to the history of 
the kings (2 Kings v. 14) were clearly brothers. 

Wherefore others said that Matthew gave the true gene- 
alogy of Christ: while Luke gave the supposititious gene- 
alogy; hence he began: Being (as it was supposed) the son 
of Joseph. For among the Jews there were some who 
believed that, on account of the crimes of the kings of Juda, 
Christ would be born of the family of David, not through the 
kings, but through some other line of private individuals. 

Others again have supposed that Matthew gave the fore- 
fathers according to the flesh: whereas Luke gave these 
according to the spirit, that is, righteous men, who are 
called (Christ’s) forefathers by likeness of virtue. 

But an answer is given in the Qq. Vet. ef Nov. Test.* to 
the effect that we are not to understand that Joseph is 
said by Luke to be the son of Heli: but that at the time of 
Christ, Heli and Joseph were differently descended from 

*. Part 1, qu. lvi.} part 2, qu. vi, 

f 

59 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 3r. Arr. 3 

David. Hence Christ is said to have been supposed to be 
the son of Joseph, and also to have been the son of Heli as 
though (the Evangelist) were to say that Christ, from the 
fact that He was the son of Joseph, could be called the son 
of Heli and of all those who were descended from David; 
as the Apostle says (Rom. ix. 5): Of whom (viz. the Jews) is 
Christ according to the flesh. 

Augustine again gives three solutions (De Qg. Evang. ii.), 
saying: There are three motives by one or other of which the 
evangelist was guided. For either one evangelist mentions 
Joseph’s father of whom he was begotten ; whilst the other gives 
either his maternal grandfather or some other of his later fore- 
fathers. Or one was Joseph’s natural father: the other ts 
father by adoption. Or, according to the Jewish custom, one 
of those having died without children, a near relation of his 
married his wife, the son born of the latter union being reckoned 
as the son of the former : which is a kind of legal adoption, 
as Augustine himself says (De Consensu Evang. ii., cf. 
Retract. ii.). 

* This last motive is the truest: Jerome also gives it com- 
menting on Matth. i. 16; and Eusebius of Czsarea in his 
Church history (I. vii.), says that it is given by Africanus the 
historian. For these writers say that Mathan and Melchi, 
at different times, each begot a son of one and the same wife, 
named Estha. For Mathan, who traced his descent through 
Solomon, had married her first, and died, leaving one son, 
whose name was Jacob: and after his death, as the law did 
not forbid his widow to remarry, Melchi, who traced his 
descent through Mathan, being of the same tribe though 
not of the same family as Mathan, married his widow, who 
bore him a son, called Heli;'so that Jacob and Heli were 
uterine brothers born to different fathers. Now one of 
these, Jacob, on his brother Heli dying without issue, mar- 
ried the latter’s widow, according to the prescription of the 
law, of whom he had a son, Joseph, who by nature was his 
own son, but by law was accounted the son of Heli. Where- 
fore Matthew says Jacob begot Joseph: whereas Luke, who 
was giving the legal genealogy, speaks of no one as begetting. 

Q. 31. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 60 

‘ 

And although Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv.) says that 
the Blessed Virgin Mary was connected with Joseph in as 
far as Heli was accounted as his father, for he says that 
she was descended from Melchi: yet must we also believe 
that she was in some way descended from Solomon through 
those patriarchs enumerated by Matthew, who is said to have 
set down Christ’s genealogy according to the flesh; and all 
the more since Ambrose states that Christ was of the seed 
of Jechonias. 

Reply Obj. 3. According to Augustine (De Consensu 
Evang. ii.) Matthew purposed to delineate the royal personality 
of Christ ; Luke the priestly personality : so that in Matthew's 
genealogy is signified the assumption of our sins by our Lord 
Jesus Christ : inasmuch as by his carnal origin He assumed 
‘the likeness of sinful flesh.’ But in Luke’s genealogy the 
washing away of our sins 1s signified, which is effected by 
Christ’s sacrifice. For which reason Matthew traces the gene- 
rations downwards, Luke upwards. For the same reason 
too Matthew descends from David through Solomon, 1n whose 
mother David sinned ; whereas Luke ascends to David through 
Nathan, through whose namesake, the prophet, God expiated 
his sin. And hence it is also that, because Matthew wished 
to signify that Christ had condescended to our mortal nature, 
he set down the genealogy of Christ at the very outset of his 
Gospel, beginning with Abraham and descending to Joseph 
and the birth of Christ Himself. Luke, on the contrary, sets 
forth Christ’s genealogy not at the outset, but after Christ’s 
Baptism, and not in the descending but in the ascending order: 
as though giving prominence to the office of the Priest in ex- 
plating our sins, to which John bore witness, saying : ‘ Behold 
Him who taketh away the sin of the world.’ And in the 
ascending order, he passes Abraham and continues up to God, 
to whom we are reconciled by cleansing and expiating. With 
veason too he follows the origin of adoption ; because by adop- 
tion we become children of God : whereas by carnal generation 
the Son of God became the Son of Man. Moreover he shows 
sufficiently that he does not say that Joseph was the son of 
Heli as though begotten by him, but because he was adopted 

6x1 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Arr. 3 

by him, since he says that Adam was the son of God, inasmuch 
as he was created by God. 

Again, the number forty pertains to the time of our 

present life: because of the four parts of the world in which 
we pass this mortal life under the rule of Christ. And 
forty is the product of four multiplied by ten: while ten is 
the sum of the numbers from one to four. The number ten 
may also refer to the decalogue; and the number four to 
the present life; or again to the four Gospels, according 
to which Christ reigns in us. And thus Matthew, putting 
forward the royal personality of Christ, enumerates forty 
persons not counting Him (cf. Augustine, Joc. cit.). But this is 
to be taken on the supposition that it be the same Jechonias 
at the end of the second, and at the commencement of the 
third series of fourteen, as Augustine understands it. Ac- 
cording to him this was done in order to signify that under 
Jechonias there was a certain defection to strange nations 
during the Babylonian captivity ; which also foreshadowed the 
fact that Christ would pass from the Jews to the Gentiles. 
* On the other hand, Jerome (on Matth. i. 12-15) says that 
there were two Joachims—that is, Jechonias, father and 
son: both of whom are mentioned in Christ’s genealogy, so 
as to make clear the distinction of the generations, which 
the evangelist divides into three series of fourteen; which 
amounts in all to forty-two persons. Which number may 
also be applied to the Holy Church: for it is the product 
of six, which signifies the labour of the present life, and 
seven, which signifies the rest of the life to come: for six 
times seven are forty-two. The number fourteen, which 
is the sum of ten and four, can also be given the same 
signification as that given to the number forty, which is the 
product of the same numbers by multiplication. 

But the number used by Luke in Christ’s genealogy 
signifies the generality of sins. For the number ten is shown 
in the ten precepts of the Law to be the number of righteousness. 
Now, to sin is to go beyond the restriction of the Law. And 
eleven is the number beyond ten. And seven signifies uni- 
versality: because universal time 1s involved in seven days. 

Q. 31. Art.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 62 

Now seven times eleven are seventy-seven: so that this 
number signifies the generality of sins which are taken away 
by Christ. 

Reply Obj. 4. As Jerome says on Matth. i. 8, 11: Because 
Joram allied himself with the family of the most wicked Jezabel, 
therefore his memory is omitted down to the third generation, 
lest it should be inserted among the holy predecessors of the 
Nativity. Hence as Chrysostom* says: Just as great was 
the blessing conferred on Jehu, who wrought vengeance on 
the house of Achab and Jezabel, so also great was the curse 
on the house of Joram, through the wicked daughter of Achab 
and Jezabel, so that until the fourth generation his posterity 
is cut off from the number of kings, according to Exod. xx. 5: 
I shall visit (Vulg., Visiting) the iniquity of the fathers upon 
the children unto the third und fourth generations. 

It must also be observed that there were other kings who 
sinned.and are mentioned in Christ’s genealogy: but their 
impiety was not continuous. For, as it is stated in the 
book De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test., qu. Ixxxv.: Solomon through 
his father’s merits 1s included in the series of kings; and 
Roboam .. . through the merits of Asa, who was son of his 
(Roboam’s) son, Abiam. But the impiety of those threet 
was continuous. 

Reply Obj. 5. As Jerome says on Matth. i. 3: None of the 
holy women are mentioned in the Saviour’s genealogy, but only 
those whom Scripture censures, so that He who came for the 
sake of sinners, by being born of sinners, might blot out all 
sin. Thus Thamar is mentioned, who is censured for her 
sin with her father-in-law; Rahab who was a whore; Ruth 
who was a foreigner; and Bethsabee, the wife of Urias, who 
was an adulteress. The last, however, is not mentioned 
by name, but is designated through her husband; both 
on account of his sin, for he was cognizant of the adultery 
and murder; and further in order that, by mentioning the 
husband by name, David’s sin might be recalled. And 

* Cf. Opus imp. in Matth., Hom. i., falsely ascribed to Chrysostom. 

_ t 4e., Ochozias, Joas, and Amasias, of whom St. Augustine asks 
in this Question LXXXV. why they were omitted by St. Matthew. 

63 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Art. 4 

because Luke purposes to delineate Christ as the expiator 
of our sins, he makes no mention of these women. But he 
does mention Juda’s brethren, in order to show that they 
belong to God’s people: whereas Ismael, the brother of 
Isaac, and Esau, Jacob’s brother, were cut off from God’s 
people, and for this reason are not mentioned in Christ’s 
genealogy. Another motive was to show the emptiness of 
pride of birth: for many of Juda’s brethren were born of 
hand-maidens, and yet all were patriarchs and heads of 
tribes. Phares and Zara are mentioned together, because, 
as Ambrose says on Luke iii. 23, they are the type of the 
twofold life of man: one, according to the Law, signified 
by Zara; the other by Faith, of which Phares is the type. 
The brethren of Jechonias are included, because they all 
reigned at various times: which was not the case with other 
kings: or, again, because they were alike in wickedness and 
misfortune. 

FouRTH ARTICLE, 

WHETHER THE MATTER OF CHRIST'S BODY SHOULD HAVE 
? BEEN TAKEN FROM A WOMAN ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the matter of Christ’s 
body should not have been taken from a woman. For the 
male sex is more noble than the female. But it was most 
suitable that Christ should assume that which is perfect 
in human nature. Therefore it seems that He should not 
have taken flesh from a woman but rather from man: just 
as Eve was formed from the rib of a man. 

Obj. 2. Further, whoever is conceived of a woman is 
shut up in her womb. But it ill becomes God, Who fills 
heaven and earth, as is written Jer. xxiii. 24, to be shut 
up within the narrow limits of the womb. Therefore it 
seems that He should not have been conceived of a woman. 

Obj. 3. Further, those who are conceived of a woman 
contract a certain uncleanness: as it is written (Job xxv. 4): 
Can man be justified compared with God ? or he that 1s born 
of a woman appear clean? But it was unbecoming that 

Q. 31. Art.4. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 64 

any uncleanness should be in Christ: for He is the Wisdom | 
of God, of whom it is written (Wisd. vii. 25) that no defiled 
thing cometh into her. Therefore it does not seem right that 
He should have taken flesh from a woman. 

On the contrary, It is written (Gal. iv. 4): God sent His Son, 
made of a woman. 

I answer that, Although the Son of God could have taken 
flesh from whatever matter He willed, it was nevertheless 
most becoming that He should take flesh from a woman. 
First because in this way the entire human nature was en- 
nobled. Hence Augustine says (QQ. lxxxili., gu. 11): It 
was suitable that man’s liberation should be made manzfest in 
both sexes. Consequently, since it behoved a man, being of the 
nobler sex, to assume, it was becoming that the liberation of 
the female sex should be manifested in that man being born of 
a woman. 

Secondly, because thus the truth of the Incarnation is 
made evident. Wherefore Ambrose says (De Incarn. vi.): 
Thou shalt find in Christ many things both natural, and super- 
natural. In accordance with nature He was within the womb 
—viz., of a woman’s body: but zt was above nature that a 
virgin should conceive and give birth: that thou mightest 
believe that He was God, who was renewing nature ; and that 
He was man who, according to nature, was being born of aman. 
And Augustine says (Ep. ad Volus. cxxxvii.): If Almighty 
God had created a man formed otherwise than in a mother’s 
womb, and had suddenly produced him to sight . . . would 
He not have strengthened an erroneous opinion, and made it 
impossible for us to believe that He had become a true man ? 
And whilst He ts doing all things wondrously, would He have 
taken away that which He accomplished in mercy ? But now, 
He, the mediator between God and man, has so shown Himself, 
that, uniting both natures in the unity of one Person, He has 
given a dignity to ordinary by extraordinary things, and 
tempered the extraordinary by the ordinary. 

Thirdly, because in this fashion the begetting of man is 
accomplished in every variety of manner. For the first 
man was made from the slime of the earth, without the 

65 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q.31. Arr. 4 

concurrence of man or woman: Eve was made of man but 
not of woman: and other men are made from both man and 
woman. So that this fourth manner remained as it were 
proper to Christ, that He should be made of a woman 

without the concurrence of a man. | 

Reply Obj. 1. The male sex is more noble than the female, 
and for this reason He took human nature in the male sex. 
But lest the female sex should be despised, it was fitting 
that He should take flesh of a woman. Hence Augustine 
says (De Agone Christ. xi.): Men, despise not yourselves : the 
Son of God became a man: despise not yourselves, women ; 
the Son of God was born of a woman. 

Reply Obj. 2. Augustine thus (Contva Faust. xxiii.) 
replies to Faustus, who urged this objection: By ”o means, 
says he, does the Catholic Faith, which believes that Christ 
the Son of God was born of a virgin, according to the flesh, 
suppose that the same Son of God was so shut up in His 
Mother’s womb, as to cease to be elsewhere, as though He no 
longer continued to govern heaven and earth, and as though He 
had withdrawn Himself from the Father. Butyou, Mancheans, 
being of a mind that admits of nought but material images, are 
utterly unable to grasp these things. For, as he again says 
(Ep. ad Volus., cxxxvii.), 1t belongs to the sense of man to 
form conceptions only through tangible bodies, none of which 
can be entire everywhere, because they must of necessity be 
diffused through their innumerable parts in vartous places... . 
Far otherwise is the nature of the soul from that of the body : 
how much more the nature of God, the Creator of soul and 
body! ... He ts able to be entire everywhere, and to be 
contained in no place. He 1s able to come without moving 
from the place where He was ; and to go without leaving the 
spot whence He came. 

Reply Obj. 3. There is no uncleanness in the conception 
of man from a woman, as far as this is the work of God: 
wherefore it is written (Acts x. 15): That which God hath 
cleansed do not thou call common—t.e., unclean. There is, 
however, a certain uncleanness therein, resulting from sin, 
as far as lustful desire accompanies conception by sexual 

III. 2 5 

Q. 31. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 66 

union. But this was not the case with Christ, as shown 
above (Q. XXVIII., A. 1). But if there were any unclean- 
ness therein, the Word of God would not have been sullied 
thereby, for He is utterly unchangeable. Wherefore Augus- 
tine says (Contra Quinque Hereses, v.): God saith, the Creator 
of man: What ts tt that troubles thee in My Birth? I was 
not conceived by lustful desire. I made Myself a mother of 
whom to be born. If the sun’s rays can dry up the filth in 
the drain, and yet not be defiled : much more can the Splendour 

of eternal light cleanse whatever It shines upon, but Itself 
cannot be sullted. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE FLESH OF CHRIST WAS CONCEIVED OF THE 
VIRGIN’S PUREST BLOOD ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection x. It would seem that the flesh of Christ was not 
conceived of the Virgin’s purest blood. For it is said in 
the collect (Feast of the Annunciation) that God willed that 
His Word should take flesh from a Virgin. But flesh differs 
from blood. Therefore Christ’s body was not taken from 
the Virgin’s blood. 

Obj. 2. Further, as the woman was miraculously formed 
from the man, so Christ’s body was formed miraculously 
from the Virgin. But the woman is not said to have been 
formed from the man’s blood, but rather from his flesh and 
bones, according to Gen. ii. 23: Thts now is bone of my 
bones, and flesh of my flesh. It seems therefore that neither 
should Christ’s body have been formed from the Virgin’s 
blood, but from her flesh and bones. 

Oly. 3. Further, Christ’s body was of the same species 
as other men’s bodies. But other men’s bodies are not 
formed from the purest blood but from the semen and the 
menstrual blood. Therefore it seems that neither was 
Christ’s body conceived of the purest blood of the Virgin. 

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.) 
that the Son of God, from the Virgin's purest blood, formed 
Himself flesh, animated with a rational soul. 

67 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Art. 5 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 4), in Christ’s concep- 
tion His being born of a woman was in accordance with 
the laws of nature, but that He was born of a virgin was 
above the laws of nature. Now, such is the law of nature 
that in the generation of an animal the female supplies the 
matter, while the male is the active principle of generation; 
as the Philosopher proves (De Gener. Animal. i.). But a 
woman who conceives of a man is not a virgin. And conse- 
quently it belongs to the supernatural mode of Christ’s 
generation, that the active principle of generation was the 
supernatural power of God: but it belongs to the natural 
mode of His generation, that the matter from which His 
body was conceived is similar to the matter which other 
women supply for the conception of their offspring. Now, 
this matter, according to the Philosopher (ibid.), is the 
woman’s blood, not any of her blood, but brought to a 
more perfect stage of secretion by the mother’s generative 
power, so as to be apt for conception. And therefore of 
such matter was Christ’s body conceived. 
¢ Reply Obj. 1. Since the Blessed Virgin was of the same 
nature as other women, it follows that she had flesh and 
bones of the same nature as theirs. Now, flesh and bones 
in other women are actual parts of the body, the integrity 
of which results therefrom: and consequently they cannot 
be taken from the body without its being corrupted or 
diminished. But as Christ came to heal what was corrupt, 
it was not fitting that He should bring corruption or dimi- 
nution to the integrity of His mother. Therefore it was 
becoming that Christ’s body should be formed not from the 
flesh or bones of the Virgin, but from her blood, which as 
yet is not actually a part, but is potentially the whole, as 
stated in De Gener. Animal. 1. Hence He is said to have 
taken flesh from the Virgin, not that the matter from which 
His body was formed was actual flesh, but blood, which 
is flesh potentially. 

Reply Obj. 2. As stated in the First Part (Q. XCIL., 
A. 3 ad 2), Adam, through being established as a kind of 
principle of human nature, had in his body a certain pro- 

Q.31. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 68 

portion of flesh and bone, which belonged to him, not as 
an integral part of his personality, but in regard to his 
state as a principle of human nature. And from this was 
the woman formed, without detriment to the man. But 
in the Virgin’s body there was nothing of this sort, from 
which Christ’s body could be formed without detriment to 
His mother’s body. 

Reply Obj. 3. Woman’s semen is not apt for generation, 
but is something imperfect in the seminal order, which, 
on account of the imperfection of the female power, it has 
not been possible to bring to complete seminal perfection. 
Consequently this semen is not the necessary matter of 
conception; as the Philosopher says (De Gener. Animal. 1.): 
wherefore there was none such in Christ’s conception: all 
the more, since, though it is imperfect in the seminal order, 
a certain concupiscence accompanies its emission, as also 
that of the male semen: whereas in that virginal conception 
there could be no concupiscence. Wherefore Damascene 
says (De Fide Orthod. iii.) that Christ’s body was not con- 
ceived semtnally. But the menstrual blood, the flow of 
which is subject to monthly periods, has a certain natural 
impurity of corruption: like other superfluities, which 
nature does not heed, and therefore expels. Of such 
menstrual blood infected with corruption and repudiated 
by nature, the conception is not formed; but from a certain 
secretion of the pure blood which by a process of elimination 
is prepared for conception, being, as it were, more pure 
and more perfect than the rest of the blood. Nevertheless, 
it is tainted with the impurity of lust in the conception of 
other men: inasmuch as by sexual intercourse this blood 
is drawn to a place apt for conception. This, however, 
did not take place in Christ’s conception: because this 
blood was brought together in the Virgin’s womb and 
fashioned into a child by the operation of the Holy Ghost. 
Therefore is Christ’s body said to be formed of the most 
chaste and purest blood of the Virgin. 

69 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Arr. 6 

S1xtH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BODY WAS IN ADAM AND THE OTHER 
PATRIARCHS, AS TO SOMETHING SIGNATE ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Body was in 
Adam and the patriarchs as to something signate. For 
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. x.) that the flesh of Christ was 
in Adam and Abraham by way of a bodily substance. But 
bodily substance is something signate. Therefore Christ’s 
flesh was in Adam, Abraham, and the other patriarchs, 
according to something signate. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is said (Rom. i. 3) that Christ was 
made... of the seed of David according to the flesh. But 
the seed of David was something signate in him. There- 
fore Christ was in David, according to something signate, 
and for the same reason in the other patriarchs. 

Obj. 3. Further, the human race is Christ’s kindred, 
danasmuch as He took flesh therefrom. But if that flesh 
were not something signate in Adam, the human race, 
which is descended from Adam, would seem to have no 
kindred with Christ: but rather with those other things 
from which the' matter of His flesh was taken. Therefore 
it seems that Christ’s flesh was in Adam and the other 
patriarchs according to something signate. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. x.) that in 
whatever way Christ was in Adam and Abraham, other 
men were there also; but not conversely. But other men 
were not in Adam and Abraham by way of some signate 
matter, but only according to origin, as stated in the First 
Part (0. CXIX., A. 1.,A.2 ad4). Therefore neither was 
Christ in Adam and Abraham according to something 
signate; and, for the same reason, neither was He in the 
other patriarchs, 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5 ad 1), the matter of 
Christ’s body was not the flesh and bones of the Blessed 
Virgin, nor anything that was actually a part of her body, 

Q. 31. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” = 70 

but her blood which was her flesh potentially. Now, 
whatever was in the Blessed Virgin, as received from her 
parents, was actually a part of her body. Consequently 
that which the Blessed Virgin received from her parents 
was not the matter of Christ’s body. Therefore we must 
say that Christ’s body was not in Adam and the other 
patriarchs according to something signate, in the sense that 
some part of Adam’s or of anyone else’s body could be 
singled out and designated as the very matter from which 
Christ’s body was to be formed: but it was there according 
to origin, just as was the flesh of other men. For Christ’s 
body is related to Adam and the other patriarchs through 
the medium of His mother’s body. Consequently Christ’s 
body was in the patriarchs, in no other way than was His 
mother’s body, which was not in the patriarchs according 
ta signate matter: as neither were the bodies of other men, 
as stated in the First Part (loc. ctt.). 

Reply Obj. 1. The expression Christ was in Adam according 
to bodily substance, does not mean that Christ’s body was a 
bodily substance in Adam: but that the bodily substance 
of Christ’s body—+z.e., the matter which He took from the 
Virgin—was in Adam as in its active principle, but not as 
in its material principle: in other words, by the generative 
power of Adam and his descendants down to the Blessed 
Virgin, this matter was prepared for Christ’s conception. 
But this matter was not fashioned into Christ’s body by 
the seminal power derived from Adam. Therefore Christ 
is said to have been in Adam by way of origin, according to 
bodily substance: but not according to seminal virtue. 

Reply Obj. 2. Although Christ’s body was not in Adam 
and the other patriarchs, according to seminal virtue, yet 
the Blessed Virgin’s body was thus in them, through her 
being conceived from the seed of a man. For this reason, 
through the medium of the Blessed Virgin, Christ is said to 
be of the seed of David, according to the flesh, by way of 
origin. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ and the human race are kindred, 
through the likeness of species. Now, specific likeness 

71 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Arr. 7 

results not from remote but from proximate matter, and 
from the active principle which begets its like in species. 
Thus, then, the kinship of Christ and the human race is 
sufficiently preserved by His body being formed from the 
Virgin’s blood, derived in its origin from Adam and the 
other patriarchs. Nor is this kinship affected by the matter 
whence this blood is taken, as neither is it in the generation 
of other men, as stated in the First Part (0. CXIX., A. 2 
ad 3). 

SEVENTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S FLESH IN THE PATRIARCHS WAS 
INFECTED BY SIN ? 

We proceed thus to the Seventh Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s flesh was not in- 

fected by sin in the patriarchs. For it is written (Wisd. vii. 
25) that no defiled thing cometh into Divine Wisdom. But 
Christ is the Wisdom of God according to 1 Cor. i. 24. 
Therefore Christ’s flesh was never defiled by sin. 
* Obj. 2. Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.) 
that Christ assumed the first-fruits of our nature. But in 
the primitive state human flesh was not infected by sin. 
Therefore Christ’s flesh was not infected either in Adam or 
in the other patriarchs. 

Obj. 3. Further, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. x.) that 
human nature ever had, together with the wound, the balm 
with which to heal it. But that which is infected cannot heal 
a wound; rather does it need to be healeditself. Therefore 
in human nature there was ever something preserved from 
infection, from which afterwards Christ’s body was formed. 

On the contrary, Christ’s body is not related to Adam and 
the other patriarchs, save through the medium of the 
Blessed Virgin’s body, of whom He took flesh. But the 
body of the Blessed Virgin was wholly conceived in original 
sin, as stated above (Q. XIV., A. 3 ad 1), and thus, as far 
as it was in the patriarchs, it was subject to sin. Therefore 
the flesh of Christ, as far as it was in the patriarchs, was 
subject to sin. 

\). 3r. Art.7 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 72 

I answer that, When we say that Christ or His flesh was 
in Adam and the other patriarchs, we compare Him, or His 
flesh, to Adam and the other patriarchs. Now, it is mani- 
fest that the condition of the patriarchs differed from that 
of Christ: for the patriarchs were subject to sin, whereas 
Christ was absolutely free from sin. Consequently a two- 
fold error may occur on this point. First, by attributing 
to Christ, or to His flesh, that condition which was in the 
patriarchs; by saying, for instance, that Christ sinned in 
Adam, since after some fashion He was in him. But this 
is false; because Christ was not in Adam in such a way that 
Adam’s sin belonged to Christ: forasmuch as He is not 
descended from him according to the law of concupiscence, 
or according to seminal virtue; as stated above (A. I ad 3, 
APG ada,O; XVG Ar Tad 2) 

Secondly, error may occur by attributing the condition 
of Christ or of His flesh to that which was actually in the 
patriarchs: by saying, for instance, that, because Christ’s 
flesh, as existing in Christ, was not subject to sin, therefore 
in Adam also and in the patriarchs there was some part 
of his body that was not subject to sin, and from which 
afterwards Christ’s body was formed; as some indeed held. 
For this is quite impossible. First, because Christ’s flesh 
was not in Adam and in the other patriarchs, according to 
something signate, distinguishable from the rest of his flesh, 
as pure from impure; as already stated (A. 6). Secondly, 
because since human flesh is infected by sin, through 
being conceived in lust, just as the entire flesh of a man is 
conceived through lust, so also is it entirely defiled by sin. 
Consequently we must say that the entire flesh of the 
patriarchs was subjected to sin, nor was there anything 
in them that was free from sin, and from which afterwards 
Christ’s body could be formed. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ did not assume the flesh of the human 
race subject to sin, but cleansed from all infection of sin. 
Thus it is that o defiled thing cometh into the Wisdom of God. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ is said to have assumed the first- 
fruits of our nature, as to the likeness of condition; foras- 

73 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 31. Arr.8 

much as He assumed flesh not infected by sin, like unto the 
flesh of man before sin. But this is not to be understood 
to imply a continuation of that primitive purity, as though 
the flesh of innocent man was preserved in its freedom from 
sin until the formation of Christ’s body. 

Reply Obj. 3. Before Christ, there was actually in human 
nature a wound—.e., the infection of original sin. But the 
balm to heal the wound was not there actually, but only 
by a certain virtue of origin, forasmuch as from those 
patriarchs the flesh of Christ was to be propagated. 

EIGHTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST PAID TITHES IN ABRAHAM’S LOINS ? 

We proceed thus to the Eighth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ paid tithes in 
Abraham’s loins. For the Apostle says (Heb. vii. 6-9) that 
Levi, the great-grandson of Abraham, paid tithes in Abraham, 
because, when the latter paid tithes to Melchisedech, he was 

¢yet in his loins. In like manner Christ was in Abraham’s 
loins when the latter paid tithes. Therefore Christ Himself 
also paid tithes in Abraham. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ is of the seed of Abraham accord- 
ing to the flesh which He received from His mother. But 
His mother paid tithes in Abraham. Therefore for a like 
reason did Christ. 

Obj. 3. Further, in Abraham tithe was levied on that which 
needed healing, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. x.). But all 
flesh subject to sin needed healing. Since therefore Christ’s 
flesh was the subject of sin, as stated above (A. 7), it seems 
that Christ’s flesh paid tithes in Abraham. 

Obj. 4. Further, this does not seem to be at all derogatory 
to Christ’s dignity. For the fact that the father of a bishop 
pays tithes to a priest does not hinder his son, the bishop, 
from being of higher rank than an ordinary priest. Conse- 
quently, although we may say that Christ paid tithes when 
Abraham paid them to Melchisedech, it does not follow that 
Christ was not greater than Melchisedech. 

Q. 31. Arr.8 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 74 

On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. x.) that Christ 
did not pay tithes there—i.e., in Abraham—for His flesh 
derived from him, not the heat of the wound, but the matter of 
the antidote. 

I answer that, It behoves us to say that the sense of the 
passage quoted from the Apostle is that Christ did not pay 
tithes in Abraham. For the Apostle proves that the priest- 
hood according to the order of Melchisedech is greater than 
the Levitical priesthood, from the fact that Abraham paid 
tithes to Melchisedech, while Levi, from whom the legal 
priesthood was derived, was yet in his loins. Now, if 
Christ had also paid tithes in Abraham, His priesthood 
would not have been according to the order of Melchisedech, 
but of a lower order. Consequently we must say that 
Christ did not pay tithes in Abraham’s loins, as Levi did. 

For since he who pays a tithe keeps nine parts to himself, 
and surrenders the tenth to another, inasmuch as the 
number ten is the sign of perfection, as being, in a sort, the 
terminus of all numbers which mount from one to ten, it 
follows that he who pays a tithe bears witness to his own 
imperfection and to the perfection of another. Now, to 
sin is due the imperfection of the human race, which needs 
to be perfected by Him who cleanses from sin. But to 
heal from sin belongs to Christ alone, for He is the Lamb 
that taketh away the sin of the world (John i. 29), whose 
figure was Melchisedech, as the Apostle proves (Heb. vii.). 
Therefore by giving tithes to Melchisedech, Abraham fore- 
shadowed that he, as being conceived in sin, and all who were 
to be his descendants in contracting original sin, needed 
that healing which is through Christ. And Isaac, Jacob, 
and Levi, and all the others were in Abraham in such a 
way so as to be descended from him, not only as to bodily 
substance, but also as to seminal virtue, by which original 
sin is transmitted. Consequently, they all paid tithes in 
Abraham—1.e., foreshadowed as needing to be healed by 
Christ. And Christ alone was in Abraham in such a manner 
as to descend from him, not by seminal virtue, but 
according to bodily substance. Therefore He was not in 

75 MATTER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION | Q. 31. Arr. 8 

Abraham so as to need to be healed, but rather as the balm 
with which the wound was to be healed. Therefore He did 
not pay tithes in Abraham’s loins. 

Thus the answer to the first objection is made manifest. 

Reply Obj. 2. Because the Blessed Virgin was conceived 
in original sin, she was in Abraham as needing to be healed. 
Therefore she paid tithes in him, as descending from him 
according to seminal virtue. But this is not true of Christ’s 
body, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s flesh is said to have been subject to 
sin, according as it was in the patriarchs, by reason of the 
condition in which it was in His forefathers, who paid the 
tithes: but not by reason of its condition as actually in 
Christ, who did not pay the tithes. 

Reply Obj. 4. The levitical priesthood was handed down 
through carnal origin: wherefore it was not less in Abraham 
than in Levi. Consequently, since Abraham paid tithes 
to Melchisedech as to one greater than he, it follows that 
the priesthood of Melchisedech, inasmuch as he was a 
figure of Christ, was greater than that of Levi. But the 
priesthood of Christ does not result from carnal origin, but 
from spiritual grace. Therefore it is possible that a father 
pay tithes to a priest, as the less to the greater, and yet his 
son, if he be a bishop, is greater than that priest, not through 
carnal origin, but through the spiritual grace which he has 
received from Christ. 

QUESTION XXXII. 

OF THE ACTIVE PRINCIPLE IN CHRIST’S CONCEPTION. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE shall now consider the active principle in Christ’s 
conception: concerning which there are four points of 
inquiry: (1) Whether the Holy Ghost was the active prin- 
ciple of Christ’s conception? (2) Whether it can be said 
that Christ was conceived of the Holy Ghost? (3) Whether 
it can be said that the Holy Ghost is Christ’s father accord- 
ing to the flesh? (4) Whether the Blessed Virgin co- 
operated actively in Christ’s conception ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF CHRIST'S CONCEPTION 
SHOULD BE ATTRIBUTED TO THE HOLY GHOST? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :-— 

Objectton 1. It would seem that the accomplishment of 
Christ’s conception should not be attributed to the Holy 
Ghost, because, as Augustine says (De Trin. i.), The works of 
the Trinity are indivisible, just as the Essence of the Trinity 
ts indivisible. But the accomplishment of Christ’s concep- 
tion was the work of God. Therefore it seems that it should 
not be attributed to the Holy Ghost any more than to the 
Father or the Son, 

Obj. 2. Further, the Apostle says (Gal. iv. 4): When the 
fulness of time was come, God sent His Son, made of a woman ; 
which words Augustine expounds by saying (De Trin. iv.): 
Sent, in so far as made of a woman. But the sending of 

the Son is especially attributed to the Father, as stated in 
76 

77 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION @Q. 32. Arr. 

the First Part (Q. XLIII., A. 8). Therefore His conception 
also, by reason of which He was made of a woman, should 
be attributed principally to the Father. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written (Prov. ix. 1): Wisdom hath 
butlt herself a house. Now, Christ is Himself the Wisdom of 
God; according to 1 Cor. i. 24: Christ the Power of God and 
the Wisdom of God. And the house of this Wisdom is 
Christ’s body, which is also called His temple, according 
to John ii. 21: But He spoke of the temple of His body, 
Therefore it seems that the accomplishment of Christ’s 
conception should be attributed principally to the Son, and 
not, therefore, to the Holy Ghost. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke 1. 35): The Holy Ghost 
shall come upon thee. 

I answer that, The whole Trinity effected the conception 
of Christ’s body: nevertheless, this is attributed to the 
Holy Ghost, for three reasons. First, because this is 
befitting to the cause of the Incarnation, considered on the 
part of God. For the Holy Ghost is the love of Father and 

«Son, as stated in the First Part (Q. XXXVII., A. 1). Now, 
that the Son of God took to Himself flesh from the Virgin’s 
womb was due to the exceeding love of God: wherefore it 
is said (John iii. 16): God so loved the world as to give His 
only-begotten Son. 

Secondly, this is befitting to the cause of the Incarnation, 
on the part of the nature assumed. Because we are thus 
given to understand that human nature was assumed by 
the Son of God into the unity of Person, not by reason of 
its merits, but through grace alone; which is attributed to 
the Holy Ghost, according to I Cor. xii. 4: There are diver- 
sities of graces, but the same Spirit. Wherefore Augustine 
says (Enchir. xl.): The manner in which Christ was born of 
the Holy Ghost... suggests to us the grace of God, whereby man, 
without any merits going before, in the very beginning of his 
nature when he began to exist was joined to God the Word, 
into so great unity of Person, that He Himself should be the 

Son of God. 
Thirdly, because this is befitting the term of the Incar- 

Q. 32. Art.1 THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 78 

nation. For the term of the Incarnation was that that man, 
who was being conceived, should be the Holy One and the 
Son of God. Now, both of these are attributed to the Holy 
Ghost. For by Him men are made to be sons of God, 
according to Gal. iv. 6: Because you are sons, God hath sent 
the Spirit of His Son into your (Vulg., our) hearts, crying: 
Abba, Father. Again, He is the Spirit of sanctification, 
according to Rom. i. 4. Therefore, just as other men are 
sanctified spiritually by the Holy Ghost, so as to be the 
adopted sons of God, so was Christ conceived in sanctity 
by the Holy Ghost, so as to be the natural Son of God. 
Hence, according to a gloss on Rom. i. 4, the words, Who 
was predestinated the Son of God, in power, are explained by 
what immediately follows: According to the Spirit of sanc- 
tification—t.e., through being conceived of the Holy Ghost. 
And the Angel of the Annunciation himself, after saying, 
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, draws the conclusion: 
Therefore also the Holy which shall be born of thee shall be 
called the Son of God. 

Reply Obj. 1. The work of the conception was indeed com- 
mon to the whole Trinity; yet in some way it is attributed to 
each of the Persons. For to the Father is attributed authority 
in regard to the Person of the Son, who by this conception 
took to Himself (human nature). The taking itself (of 
human nature) is attributed to the Son: but the formation 
of the body taken by the Son is attributed to the Holy 
Ghost. For the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Son, ac- 
cording to Gal. iv. 6: God sent the Spirit of His Son. For 
just as the power of the soul which is in the semen, through 
the spirit enclosed therein, fashions the body in the genera- 
tion of other men, so the Power of God, which is the Son 
Himself, according to 1 Cor. i. 24: Christ, the Power of God, 
through the Holy Ghost formed the body which He assumed. 
This is also shown by the words of the angel: The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee, as it were, in order to prepare 
and fashion the matter of Christ’s body; and the Power of 
the Most High—t.e., Christ—shall overshadow thee—that is 
to say, the incorporeal Light of the Godhead shall in thee take the 

79 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 32. Arr.2 

corporeal substance of human nature : for a shadow is formed 
by light and body, as Gregory says (Moral. xviii.). The 
Most High is the Father, whose Power is the Son. 

Reply Obj. 2. The mission refers to the Person assuming, 
who is sent by the Father; but the conception refers to 
the body assumed, which is formed by the operation of the 
Holy Ghost. And therefore, though mission and concep- 
tion are in the same subject; since they differ in our con- 
sideration of them, mission is attributed to the Father, but 
the accomplishment of the conception to the Holy Ghost; 
whereas the assumption of flesh is attributed to the Son. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (QQ. Vet. et Nov. Test. 
qu. 52): This may be understood in two ways. For, first, 
Christ's house is the Church, which He built with His blood. 
Secondly, His body may be called His house, just as it is called 
His temple. ... And what is done by the Holy Ghost ts done 
by the Son of God, because Theirs 1s one Nature and one Will. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT SHOULD BE SAID THAT CHRIST WAS CONCEIVED 
OF (‘DE’) THE HOLY GHOST? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that we should not say that 
Christ was conceived of (de) the Holy Ghost. Because on 
Rom. xi. 36: For of Him (ex ipso) and by Him, and in Him, 
are ail things, the gloss of Augustine says: Notice that he does 
not say, ‘of Him’ (de ipso), but ‘of Him’ (ex ipso). For 
of Him (ex ipso) are heaven and earth, since He made them : 
but not of Him (de ipso), since they are not made of Hts sub- 
stance. But the Holy Ghost did not form Christ’s body of 
(de) His own substance. Therefore we should not say that 
Christ was conceived of (de) the Holy Ghost. 

Obj. 2. Further, the active principle of (de) which some- 
thing is conceived is as the seed in generation. But the 
Holy Ghost did not take the place of seed in Christ’s con- 
ception. For Jerome says (Expos. Cathol. Fidet):* We do 

* Written by Pelagius. 

Q. 32. Art.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 80 

not say, as some wicked wretches hold, that the Holy Ghost 
took the place of seed: but we say that Christ's body was 
wrought—t.e., formed—by the power and might of the Creator. 
Therefore we should not say that Christ’s body was con- 
ceived of (de) the Holy Ghost. 

Obj. 3. Further, no one thing is made of two, except they 
be in some way mingled. But Christ’s body was formed of 
(de) the Virgin Mary. If therefore we say that Christ was 
conceived of (de) the Holy Ghost, it seems that a mingling 
took place of the Holy Ghost with the matter supplied 
by the Virgin: and this is clearly false. Therefore we 
should not say that Christ was conceived of (de) the Holy 
Ghost. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. i. 18): Before they 
came together, she was found with child, of (de) the Holy Ghost. 

I answer that, Conception is not attributed to Christ’s 
body alone, but also to Christ Himself by reason of His 
body. Now, in the Holy Ghost we may observe a twofold 
habitude to Christ. For to the Son of God Himself, who 
is said to have been conceived, He has a habitude of con- 
substantiality: while to His body He has the habitude of 
efficient cause. And this preposition of (de) signifies both 
habitudes: thus we say that a certain man is of (de) hts father. 
And therefore we can fittingly say that Christ was con- 
ceived of the Holy Ghost in such a way that the efficiency 
of the Holy Ghost be referred to the body assumed, and the 
consubstantiality to the Person assuming. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s body, through not being consub- 
stantial with the Holy Ghost, cannot properly be said to 
be conceived of (de) the Holy Ghost, but rather from (ex) 
the Holy Ghost, as Ambrose says (De Spir. Sanct. ii.): What 
ts from someone 1s etther from his substance or from his 
power: from his substance, as the Son who is from the Father ; 
from his power, as all things are from God, just as Mary 
conceived from the Holy Ghost. 

Reply Obj. 2. It seems that on this point there is a differ- 
ence of opinion between Jerome and certain other Doctors, 
who assert that the Holy Ghost took the place of seed in 

8x1 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION 0. 32. Arr. 3 

this conception. For Chrysostom says (Hom. i. in Matth.):* 
When God’s Only-Begotten was about to enter into the Virgin, 
the Holy Ghost preceded Him ; that by the previous entrance 
of the Holy Ghost, Christ might be born unto sanctification 
according to His body, the Godhead entering instead of the seed. 
And Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): God’s wisdom 
and power overshadowed her, like unto a Divine seed. 

But these expressions are easily explained. Because 
Chrysostom and Damascene compare the Holy Ghost, or 
also the Son, who is the Power of the Most High, to seed, 
by reason of the active power therein; while Jerome denies 
that the Holy Ghost took the place of seed, considered as a 
corporeal substance which is transformed in conception. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (Enchir. xl.), Christ is 
said to be conceived or born of the Holy Ghost in one sense; 
of the Virgin Mary in another:—of the Virgin Mary materi- 
ally; of the Holy Ghost efficiently. Therefore there was no 
mingling here. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

€ 
WHETHER THE HOLY GHOST SHOULD BE CALLED CHRIST’S 
FATHER IN RESPECT OF HIS HUMANITY ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Holy Ghost should be 
called Christ’s father in respect of His humanity. Because, 
according to the Philosopher (De Gener. Animal. i.): The 
Father is the active principle in generation, the mother supplies 
the matter. But the Blessed Virgin is called Christ’s Mother, 
by reason of the matter which she supplied in His concep- 
tion. Therefore it seems that the Holy Ghost can be called 
His father, through being the active principle in His con- 
ception. 

Obj. 2. Further, as the minds of other holy men are 
fashioned by the Holy Ghost, so also was Christ’s body 
fashioned by the Holy Ghost. But other holy men, on 
account of the aforesaid fashioning, are called the children 
of the whole Trinity, and consequently of the Holy Ghost. 

* Opus Imp. (supposititious). 
III. 2 6 

Q. 32. Art.3 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 82 

Therefore it seems that Christ should be called the Son of 
the Holy Ghost, forasmuch as His body was fashioned by 
the Holy Ghost. 

Obj. 3. Further, God is called our Father by reason of 
His having made us, according to Deut. xxxii. 6: Is not He 
thy Father, that hath possessed thee, and made thee and created 
thee? But the Holy Ghost made Christ’s body, as stated 
above (AA. 1,2). Therefore the Holy Ghost should be called 
Christ’s Father in respect of the body fashioned by Him. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchir. xl.): Christ was 
born of the Holy Ghost not as a Son, and of the Virgin Mary 
as a Son. 

I answer that, The words ‘ fatherhood,’ ‘ motherhood,’ and 
‘sonship,’ result from generation; yet not from any genera- 
tion, but from that of living things, especially animals. 
For we do not say that fire generated is the son of the fire 
generating it, except, perhaps, metaphorically; we speak 
thus only of animals in whom generation is more perfect. 
Nevertheless, the word ‘son’ is not applied to everything 
generated in animals, but only to that which is generated 
into likeness of the generator. Wherefore, as Augustine 
says (Enchir. xxxix.), we do not say that a hair which is 
generated in a man is his son; nor do we say that a man 
who is born is the son of the seed; for neither is the hair 
like the man nor is the man born like the seed, but like the 
man who begot him. And if the likeness be perfect, the 
sonship is perfect, whether in God or in man. But if the 
likeness be imperfect, the sonship is imperfect. Thus in 
man there is a certain imperfect likeness to God, both as 
regards his being created to God’s image and as regards 
His being created unto the likeness of grace. Therefore 
in both ways man can be called His son, both because he 
is created to His image and because he is likened to Him 
by grace. Now, it must be observed that what is said in 
its perfect sense of a thing should not be said thereof in 
its imperfect sense: thus, because Socrates is said to be 
naturally a man, in the proper sense of man, never is he 
called man in the sense in which the portrait of a man is 

83 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 32. Arr. 4 

called a man, although, perhaps, he may resemble another 
man. Now, Christ is the Son of God in the perfect sense 
of sonship. Wherefore, although in His human nature He 
was created and justified, He ought not to be called the Son 
of God, either in respect of His being created or of His 
being justified, but only in respect of His eternal genera- 
tion, by reason of which He is the Son of the Father alone. 
Therefore nowise should Christ be called the Son of the 
Holy Ghost, nor even of the whole Trinity. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ was conceived of the Virgin Mary, 
who supplied the matter of His conception unto likeness 
of species. For this reason He is called her Son. But as 
man He was conceived of the Holy Ghost as the active 
principle of His conception, but not unto likeness of species, 
as a man is born of his father. Therefore Christ is not 
called the Son of the Holy Ghost. 

Reply Obj. 2. Men who are fashioned spiritually by the 
Holy Ghost cannot be called sons of God in the perfect 
sense of sonship. And therefore they are called sons of 
God in respect of imperfect sonship, which is by reason of 
the likeness of grace, which flows from the whole Trinity. 

But with Christ it is different, as stated above. 

The same reply avails for the third objection. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE BLESSED VIRGIN CO-OPERATED ACTIVELY IN 
THE CONCEPTION OF CHRIST’S BODY ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Blessed Virgin co- 
operated actively in the conception of Christ’s body. For 
Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.) that the Holy Ghost 
came upon the Virgin, purifying her, and bestowing on her the 
power to receive and to bring forth the Word of God. But 
she had from nature the passive power of generation, like 
any other woman. Therefore He bestowed on her an active 
power of generation. And thus she co-operated actively in 

Christ’s conception. 

Q. 32. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 84 

Obj. 2. Further, all the powers of the vegetative soul are 
active, as the Commentator says (De Anima ii.). But the 
generative power, in both man and woman, belongs to the 
vegetative soul. Therefore, both in man and woman, it 
co-operates actively in the conception of the child. 

Obj. 3. Further, in the conception of a child the woman 
supplies the matter from which the child’s body is naturally 
formed. But nature is an intrinsic principle of movement. 
Therefore it seems that in the very matter supplied by the 
Blessed Virgin there was an active principle. 

On the contrary, The active principle in generation is 
called the ‘ seminal virtue.’ But, as Augustine says (Gen. 
ad lit. x.), Christ’s body was taken from the Virgin, only as 
to corporeal matter, by the Divine power of conception and 
formation, but not by any human seminal virtue. Therefore 
the Blessed Virgin did not co-operate actively in the con- 
ception of Christ’s body. 

I answer that, Some say that the Blessed Virgin co- 
operated actively in Christ’s conception, both by natural 
and by a supernatural power. By natural power, because 
they hold that in all natural matter there is an active prin- 
ciple. Otherwise they believe that there would be no such 
thing as natural transformation. But in this they are 
deceived. Because a transformation is said to be natural 
by reason not only of an active but also of a passive in- 
trinsic principle: for the Philosopher says expressly (Phys. 
vill.) that in heavy and light things there is a passive, 
and not an active, principle of natural movement. Nor is 
it possible for matter to be active in its own formation, 
since it is not in act. Nor, again, is it possible for any- 
thing to put itself in motion except it be divided into two 
parts, one being the mover, the other being moved: which 
happens in animate things only, as is proved Phys. viii. 

By a supernatural power, because they say that the mother 
requires not only to supply the matter, which is the men- 
strual blood, but also the semen, which, being mingled 
with that of the male, has an active power in generation. 
And since in the Blessed Virgin there was no resolution 

85 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 32. Arr. 4 

of semen, by reason of her inviolate virginity, they say that 
the Holy Ghost supernaturally bestowed on her an active 
power in the conception of Christ’s body, which power 
other mothers have by reason of the semen resolved. But 
this cannot stand, because, since each thing is on account of 
tts operation (De Cai. ii.), nature would not, for the purpose 
of the act of generation, distinguish the male and female 
sexes, unless the action of the male were distinct from that 
of the female. Now, in generation there are two distinct 
operations—that of the agent and that of the patient. 
Wherefore it follows that the entire active operation is 
on the part of the male, and the passive on the part of the 
female. For this reason in plants, where both forces are 
mingled, there is no distinction of male and female. 

Since, therefore, the Blessed Virgin was not Christ’s 
Father, but His Mother, it follows that it was not given to 
her to exercise an active power in His conception: whether 
to co-operate actively so as to be His Father, or not to co- 
operate at all, as some say; whence it would follow that 

«this active power was bestowed on her to no purpose. We 
must therefore say that in Christ’s conception itself she 
did not co-operate actively, but merely supplied the matter 
thereof. Nevertheless, before the conception she co- 
operated actively in the preparation of the matter so that 
it should be apt for the conception. 

Reply Obj. 1. This conception had three privileges— 
namely, that it was without original sin; that it was not 
that of a man only, but of God and man; and that it was a 
virginal conception. And all three were effected by the 
Holy Ghost. Therefore Damascene says, as to the first, 
that the Holy Ghost came upon the Virgin, purifying her— 
that is, preserving her from conceiving with original sin. 
As to the second, he says: And bestowing on her the power 
to receive—t.e., to conceive—the Word of God. As to the 
third, he says: And to give birth to Him—+.e., that she might, 
while remaining a virgin, bring Him forth, not actively, but 
passively, just as other mothers achieve this through the 
action of the male seed. 

Q. 32. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 86 

Reply Obj. 2. The generative power of the female is im- 
perfect compared to that of the male. And, therefore, just 
as in the arts the inferior art gives a disposition to the matter 
to which the higher art gives the form, as is stated Phys. i1., 
so also the generative power of the female prepares the 
matter, which is then fashioned by the active power of the 
male. 

Reply Obj. 3. In order for a transformation to be natural, 
there is no need for an active principle in matter, but only 
for a passive principle, as stated above. 

QUESTION X XXIII. 

OF THE MODE AND ORDER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the mode and order of Christ’s 
conception, concerning which there are four points of in- 
quiry: (t) Whether Christ’s body was formed in the first 
instant of its conception? (2) Whether it was animated 
in the first instant of its conception? (3) Whether it was 
assumed by the Word in the first instant of its conception ? 
(4) Whether this conception was natural or miraculous ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BODY WAS FORMED IN THE FIRST 
INSTANT OF ITS CONCEPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s body was not 
formed in the first instant of its conception. For it is written 
(Jo. ii. 20): Six-and-forty years was this Temple in build- 
ing ; on which words Augustine comments as follows (De 
Trin. iv.): This number applies mansfestly to the perfection 
of our Lord’s body. He says, further (QQ. Ixxxili., gu. 56): 
It ts not without reason that the Temple, which was a type of 
His body, is said to have been forty-six years in bualding : 
so that as many years as tt took to build the Temple, in so 
many days was our Lord’s body perfected. Therefore Christ’s 
body was not perfectly formed in the first instant of its 
conception. 

Obj. 2. Further, there was need of local movement for 
the formation of Christ’s body, in order that the purest 

blood of the Virgin’s body might be brought where genera- 
87 

Q. 33. Artr.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 88 

tion might aptly take place. Now, no body can be moved 
locally in an instant: since the time taken in movement 
is divided according to the division of the thing moved, 
as is proved Phys. vi. Therefore Christ’s body was not 
formed in an instant. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ’s body was formed of the purest 
blood of the Virgin, as stated above (Q. XXXI., A. 5). 
But that matter could not be in the same instant both 
blood and flesh, because thus matter would have been at 
the same time the subject of two forms. Therefore the last 
instant in which it was blood was distinct from the first 
instant in which it was flesh. But between any two instants 
there is an interval of time. Therefore Christ’s body was 
not formed in an instant, but during a space of time. 

Obj. 4. Further, as the augmentative power requires a 
fixed time for its act, so also does the generative power: 
for both are natural powers belonging to the vegetative 
soul. But Christ’s body took a fixed time to grow, like 
the bodies of other men: for it is written (Luke ii. 52) that 
He advanced in wisdom and age. Therefore it seems for the 
same reason that the formation of His body, since that, too, 
belongs to the generative power, was not instantaneous, but 
took a fixed time, like the bodies of other men. 

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral xviii.): As soon as 
the angel announced tt, as soon as the Spirit came down, the 
Word was in the womb, within the womb the Word was made 
flesh. 

"I answer that, In the conception of Christ’s body three 
points may be considered: first, the local movement of the 
blood to the place of generation; secondly, the formation 
of the body from that matter; thirdly, the development 
whereby it was brought to perfection of quantity. Of 
these, the second is the conception itself; the first is a 
preamble; the third, a result of the conception. 

Now, the first could not be instantaneous: since this 
would be contrary to the very nature of the local movement 
of any body whatever, the parts of which come into a place 
successively. The third also requires a succession of time: 

89 ORDER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 33. Art. 1 

both because there is no increase without local movement, 
and because increase is effected by the power of the soul 
already informing the body, the operation of which power 
is subject to time. 

But the body’s very formation, in which conception 
principally consists, was instantaneous, for two reasons. 
First, because of the infinite power of the agent—viz., the 
Holy Ghost—by whom Christ’s body was formed, as stated 
above (Q. XXXII., A. 1). For the greater the power of 
an agent, the more quickly can it dispose matter; and, 
consequently, an agent of infinite power can dispose matter 
instantaneously to its due form. Secondly, on the part of 
the Person of the Son, whose body was being formed. For 
it was unbecoming that He should take to Himself a body 
as yet unformed. While, if the conception had been going 
on for any time before the perfect formation of the body, 
the whole conception could not be attributed to the Son of 
God, since it is not attributed to Him except by reason of 
the assumption of that body. Therefore in the first in- 
«stant in which the various parts of the matter were united 
together in the place of generation, Christ’s body was both 
perfectly formed and assumed. And thus is the Son of God 
said to have been conceived; nor could it be said otherwise. 

Reply Obj. 1. Neither quotation from Augustine refers 
to formation alone of Christ’s body, but to its formation, 
together with a fixed development up to the time of His 
birth. Wherefore in the aforesaid number are foreshadowed 
the number of months during which Christ was in the 
Virgin’s womb. 

Reply Obj. 2. This local movement is not comprised 
within the conception itself, but is a preamble thereto. 

Reply Obj. 3. It is not possible to fix the last instant in 
which that matter was blood; but it is possible to fix the 
last period of time which continued without any interval 
up to the first instant in which Christ’s body was formed. 
And this instant was the terminus of the time occupied 
by the local movement of the matter towards the place of 
generation. 

Q. 33. Art.2. THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” go 

Reply Obj. 4. Increase is caused by the augmentative 
power of that which is the subject of increase: but the 
formation of the body is caused by the generative power, 
not of that which is generated, but of the father generating 
from seed, in which the formative power derived from the 
father’s soul has its operation. But Christ’s body was not 
formed by the seed of man, as stated above (Q. XXXI., 
A. 5 ad 3), but by the operation of the Holy Ghost. There- 
fore the formation thereof should be such as to be worthy 
of the Holy Ghost. But the development of Christ’s body 
was the effect of the augmentative power in Christ’s soul: 
and since this was of the same species as ours, it behoved 
His body to develop in the same way as the bodies of other 
men, so as to prove the reality of His human nature. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S BODY WAS ANIMATED IN THE FIRST 
INSTANT OF ITS CONCEPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s body was not 
animated in the first instant of its conception. For Pope 
Leo: says (Ep. ad Julian.): Christ’s flesh was not of another 
nature than ours; nor was the beginning of His animation 
different from that of other men. But the soul is not infused 
into other men at the first instant of their conception. 
Therefore neither should Christ’s soul have been infused 
into His body in the first instant of its conception. 

Obj. 2. Further, the soul, like any natural form, requires 
determinate quantity in its matter. But in the first instant 
of its conception Christ’s body was not of the same quantity 
as the bodies of other men when they are animated: other- 
wise, if afterwards its development had been continuous, 
either its birth would have occurred sooner, or at the time 
of birth He would have been a bigger child than others. 
The former alternative is contrary to what Augustine says 
(De Trin. iv.), where he proves that Christ was in the 
Virgin’s womb for the space of nine months: while the 

gt ORDER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 33. Arr. 2 

latter is contrary to what Pope Leo says (Serm. iv. in 
Epiph.): They found the child Jesus nowise -differing from 
the generality of infants. Therefore Christ’s body was not 
animated in the first instant of its conception. 

Obj. 3. Further, whenever there is before and after there 
must be several instants. But according to the Philo- 
sopher (De Gener. Animal. ii.) in the generation of a man 
there must needs be before and after : for he is first of all a 
living thing, and afterwards, an animal, and after that, a 
man. Therefore the animation of Christ could not be 
effected in the first instant of His conception. 

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): 
At the very instant that there was flesh, it was the flesh of the 
Word of God, it was flesh animated with a rational and in- 
tellectual soul. 

I answer that, For the conception to be attributed to the 
very Son of God, as we confess in the Creed, when we say, 
who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, we must needs say 
that the body itself, in being conceived, was assumed by 
the Word of God. Now it has been shown above (Q. VI., 
AA. I, 2) that the Word of God assumed the body by means 
of the soul, and the soul by means of the spirit—+.e., the 
intellect. Wherefore in the first instant of its conception 
Christ’s body must needs have been animated by the 
rational soul. 

Reply Obj. 1. The beginning of the infusion of the soul 
may be considered in two ways. First, in regard to the 
disposition of the body. And thus, the beginning of the 
infusion of the soul into Christ’s body was the same as 
in other men’s bodies: for just as the soul is infused into 
another man’s body as soon as it is formed, so was it with 
Christ. Secondly, this beginning may be considered merely 
in regard to time. And thus, because Christ’s body was 
perfectly formed in a shorter space of time, so after a shorter 
space of time was it animated. 

Reply Obj. 2. The soul requires due quantity in the matter 
into which it is infused: but this quantity allows of a cer- 
tain latitude because it is not fixed to a certain amount. 

Q. 33. Art.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 92 

Now the quantity that a body has when the soul is first 
infused into it is in proportion to the perfect quantity to 
which it will attain by development: that is to say, men of 
greater stature have greater bodies at the time of the first 
animation. But Christ at the perfect age was of becoming 
and middle stature: in proportion to which was the quan- 
tity of His body at the time when other men’s bodies are 
animated; though it was less than theirs at the first instant 
of His conception. Nevertheless that quantity was not 
too small to safeguard the nature of an animated body; 
since it would have sufficed for the animation of a small 
man’s body. 

Reply Obj. 3. What the Philosopher says is true in the 
generation of other men, because the body is successively 
formed and disposed for the soul: whence, first, as being im- 
perfectly disposed, it receives an imperfect soul; and after- 
wards, when it is perfectly disposed, it receives a perfect 
soul. But Christ’s body, on account of the infinite power of 
the agent, was perfectly disposed instantaneously. Where- 
fore, at once and in the first instant it received a perfect 
form, that is, the rational soul. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S FLESH WAS FIRST OF ALL CONCEIVED 
AND AFTERWARDS ASSUMED ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

‘ Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s flesh was first of 
all conceived, and afterwards assumed. Because what is 
not cannot be assumed. But Christ’s flesh began to exist 
when it was conceived. Therefore it seems that it was 
assumed by the Word of God after it was conceived. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ’s flesh was assumed by the Word 
of God, by means of the rational soul. But it received the 
rational soul at the term of the conception. Therefore it 
was assumed at the term of the conception. But at the 
term of the conception it was already conceived. Therefore 
it was first of all conceived and afterwards assumed. 

93 ORDER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION 0. 33. Arr. 3 

Obj. 3. Further, in everything generated, that which is 
imperfect precedes in time that which is perfect: which is 
made clear by the Philosopher (Metaph. ix.). But Christ’s 
body is something generated. Therefore it did not attain 
to its ultimate perfection, which consisted in the union with 
the Word of God, at the first instant of its conception; but, 
first of all, the flesh was conceived and afterwards assumed. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Fide ad Petrum, 
Xviii.):* Hold steadfastly, and doubt not for a moment that 
Christ's flesh was not conceived in the Virgin’s womb, before 
being assumed by the Word. 

I answer that, As stated above, we may say properly that 
God was made man, but not that man was made God : because 
God took to Himself that which belongs to man;—and 
that which belongs to man did not pre-exist, as subsisting — 
in itself, before being assumed by the Word. But if Christ’s 
flesh had been conceived before being assumed by the Word, 
it would have had at some time an hypostasis other than 
that of the Word of God. And this is against the very 

, nature of the Incarnation, which we hold to consist in this, | 
that the Word of God was united to human nature and to 
all its parts in the unity of hypostasis: nor was it becoming 
that the Word of God should, by assuming human nature, 
destroy a pre-existing hypostasis of human nature or of any 
part thereof. It is consequently contrary to faith to assert 
that Christ’s flesh was first of all conceived and afterwards 
assumed by the Word of God. 

Reply Obj. 1. If Christ’s flesh had been formed or con- 
ceived, not instantaneously, but successively, one of two 
things would follow: either that what was assumed was 
not yet flesh, or that the flesh was conceived before it was 
assumed. But since we hold that the conception was 
effected instantaneously, it follows that in that flesh the 
beginning and the completion of its conception were in the 
same instant. So that, as Augustinet says: We say that 
the very Word of God was conceived in taking flesh, and that 
His very flesh was conceived by the Word taking flesh. 

* Written by Fulgentius. + Fulgentius, loc. cit. 

Q. 33. Art.4 THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 94 

From the above the reply to the second objection is clear. 
For in the same moment that this flesh began to be con- 
ceived, its conception and animation were completed. 

Reply Obj. 3. The mystery of the Incarnation is not to 
be looked upon as an ascent, as it were, of a man already 
existing and mounting up to the dignity of the Union: as 
the heretic Photinus maintained. Rather is it to be con- 
sidered as a descent, by reason of the perfect Word of God 
taking unto Himself the imperfection of our nature; accord- 
ing to Jo. vi. 38: I came down from heaven. 

FouRTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST'S CONCEPTION WAS NATURAL ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s conception was 
natural. For Christ is called the Son of Man by reason of 
His conception in the flesh. But He is a true and natural 
Son of Man: as also is He the true and natural Son of God. 
Therefore His conception was natural. 

Obj, 2. Further, no creature can be the cause of a miracu- 
lous effect. But Christ’s conception is attributed to the 
Blessed Virgin, who is a mere creature: for we say that the 
Virgin conceived Christ. Therefore it seems that His con- 
ception was not miraculous, but natural. 

Obj. 3. Further, for a transformation to be natural, it 
is enough that the passive principle be natural, as stated 
above (Q. XXXII., A. 4). But in Christ’s conception the 
passive principle on the part of His mother was natural, 
as we have shown (zbid.). Therefore Christ’s conception 
was natural, 

On the contrary, Dionysius says (Ep. ad Caium Monach.): 
Christ does in a superhuman way those things that pertain to 
man : this is shown in the miraculous virginal conception. 

I answer that, As Ambrose says (De Incarn. vi.): In this 
mystery thou shalt find many things that are natural, and 
many that are supernatural. For if we consider in this 
conception anything connected with the matter thereof, 

95 ORDER OF CHRIST’S CONCEPTION Q. 33. Arr. 4 

which was supplied by the mother, it was in all such things 
natural. But if we consider it on the part of the active 
power, thus it was entirely miraculous. And since judge- 
ment of a thing should be pronounced in respect of its 
form rather than of its matter: and likewise in respect of 
its activity rather than of its passiveness: therefore is it that 
Christ’s conception should be described simply as miracu- 
lous and supernatural, although in a certain respect it was 
natural. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ is said to be a natural Son of Man, 
by reason of His having a true human nature, through 
which He is a Son of Man, although He had it miraculously ; 
thus, too, the blind man to whom sight has been restored 
sees naturally by sight miraculously received. 

Reply Obj. 2. The conception is attributed to the Blessed 
Virgin, not as the active principle thereof, but because 
she supplied the matter, and because the conception took 
place in her womb. 

Reply Obj. 3. A natural passive principle suffices for a 

, transformation to be natural, when it is moved by its proper 
active principle in a natural and wonted way. But this 
is not so in the case in point. Therefore this conception 
cannot be called simply natural. 

QUESTION XXXIV. 

OF THE PERFECTION OF THE CHILD CONCEIVED. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE must now consider the perfection of the child con- 
ceived: and concerning this there are four points of in- 
quiry: (1) Whether Christ was sanctified by grace in the 
first instant of His conception ? (2) Whether in that same 
instant He had the use of free-will? (3) Whether in that 
same instant He could merit ? (4) Whether in that same 
instant He was a perfect comprehensor ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS SANCTIFIED IN THE FIRST INSTANT 
OF HIS CONCEPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was not sanctified 
in the first instant of His conception. For it is written 
(x Cor. xv. 46): That was not first which ts spiritual, but that 
which 1s natural: afterwards that which is spiritual. But 
sanctification by grace is something spiritual. Therefore 
Christ received the grace of sanctification, not at the very 
beginning of His conception, but after a space of time. 

Obj. 2. Further, sanctification seems to be a cleansing 
from sin: according to I Cor. vi. 1m: And such some of you 
were, namely, sinners, but you are washed, but you are 
sanctified. But sin was never in Christ. Therefore it was 
not becoming that He should be sanctified by grace. 

Obj. 3. Further, as by the Word of God all things were 
made, so from the Word incarnate all men who are 

96 

97 PERFECTION OF THE CHILD Q. 34. Arr. 1 

made holy receive holiness, according to Heb. ii. rr: 
Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of 
one. But the Word of God, by whom all things were made, 
was not Himself made; as Augustine says (De Trin. i.). 
Therefore Christ, by whom all are made holy, was not 
Himself made holy. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke i. 35): The Holy which 
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God; and 
(John x. 36): Whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into 
the world. 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. VII., AA. 9g, 10, 12), 
the abundance of grace sanctifying Christ’s soul flows from 
the very union of the Word, according to Johni. 14: We saw 
His glory ... as 1t were of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full 
of grace and truth. For it has been shown above (Q. XXXIII., 
AA. 2, 3) that in the first instant of conception, Christ’s 
body was both animated and assumed by the Word of God. 
Consequently, in the first instant of His conception, Christ 
had the fulness of grace sanctifying His body and His soul. 
¢ Reply Obj. 1. The order set down by the Apostle in this 
passage refers to those who by advancing attain to the 
spiritual state. But the mystery of the Incarnation is 
considered as a condescension of the fulness of the Godhead 
into human nature rather than as the promotion of human 
nature, already existing, as it were, to the Godhead. There- 
fore in the man Christ there was perfection of spiritual 
life from the very beginning. 

Reply Obj. 2. To be sanctified is to be made holy. Now 
something is made not only from its contrary, but also 
from that which is opposite to it, either by negation or by 
privation: thus white is made either from black or from 
not-white. We indeed from being sinners are made holy: 
so that our sanctification is a cleansing from sin. Whereas 
Christ, as man, was made holy, because He was not always 
thus sanctified by grace: yet He was not made holy 
from being a sinner, because He never sinned; but He was 
made holy from not-holy as man, not indeed by privation, 
as though He were at some time a man and not holy; but 

TI 2 7 

Q. 34. Art.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 98 

by negation—that is, when He was not man He had not 
human sanctity. Therefore at the same time He was 
made man and a holy man. For this reason the angel 
said (Luke i. 35): The Holy which shall be born of thee. 
Which words Gregory expounds as follows (Moral. xviii.): 
In order to show the distinction between His holiness and ours, 
at is declared that He shall be born holy. For we, though we 
ave made holy, yet are not born holy, because by the mere con- 
dition of a corruptible nature we are tied.... But He alone 
is truly born holy who... was not conceived by the combining 
of carnal union. 

Reply Obj. 3. The Father creates things through the Son, 
and the whole Trinity sanctifies men through the Man 
Christ, but not in the same way. For the Word of God has 
the same power and operation as God the Father: hence 
the Father does not work through the Son as an instru- 
ment, which is both mover and moved. Whereas the 
humanity of Christ is as the instrument of the Godhead, 
as stated above (Q. VII., A. 1 ad 3; Q. VIII., A. r ad 1). 
Therefore Christ’s humanity is both sanctified and sanctifier. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST AS MAN HAD THE USE OF FREE-WILL IN 
THE FIRST INSTANT OF HIS CONCEPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ as man had not the 
use of free-will in the first instant of His conception. For a 
thing is, before it acts or operates. Now the use of free- 
will is an operation. Since, therefore, Christ’s soul began 
to exist in the first instant of His conception, as was made 
clear above (Q. XXXIII., A. 2), it seems impossible that He 
should have the use of free-will in the first instant of His 
conception. 

Obj. 2. Further, the use of free-will consists in choice. 
But choice presupposes the deliberation of counsel: for 
the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii.) that choice is the desive 
of what has been previously the object of deliberation. There- 

99 PERFECTION OF THE CHILD Q. 34. Arr. 2 

fore it seems impossible that Christ should have had the 
use of free-will in the first instant of His conception. 

Obj. 3. Further, the free-will is a faculty of the will and 
reason, as stated in the First Part (Q. LXXXIII., A. 2, 
Obj. 2): consequently the use of free-will is an act of the 
will and the reason or intellect. But the act of the intellect 
presupposes an act of the senses; and this cannot exist 
without proper disposition of the organs—a condition 
which would seem impossible in the first instant of Christ’s 
conception. Therefore it seems that Christ could not have 
the use of free-will at the first instant of His conception. 

On the contrary, Augustine says in his book on the Trinity 
(Gregory,—Regist. ix. Ep. 61): As soon as the Word entered 
the womb, while retaining the reality of His Nature, He was 
made flesh, and a perfect man. But a perfect man has the 
use of free-will. Therefore Christ had the use of free-will 
in the first instant of His conception. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), spiritual perfection 
was becoming to the human nature which Christ took, 
which perfection He attained not by making progress, but 
by receiving it from the very first. Now ultimate perfec- 
tion does not consist in power or habit, but in operation; 
wherefore it is said (De Anima i1., text. 5) that operation is a 
second act. We must, therefore, say that in the first instant 
of His conception Christ had that operation of the soul 
which can be had in an instant. And such is the operation 
of the will and intellect, in which the use of free-will consists. 
For the operation of the intellect and will is sudden and 
instantaneous, much more, indeed, than corporeal vision; 
inasmuch as to understand, to will, and to feel, are not 
movements that may be described as acts of an imperfect 
being, which attains perfection successively, but are the acts 
of an already perfect being, as is said, De Anima iii., text. 28. 
We must therefore say that Christ had the use of free-will 
in the first instant of His conception. 

Reply Obj. 1. Existence precedes action by nature, but 
not in time; but at the same time the agent has perfect 
existence, and begins to act unless it is hindered. Thus 

Q. 34. ARt.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 100 

fire, as soon as it is generated, begins to give heat and light. 
The action of heating, however, is not terminated in an 
instant, but continues for a time; whereas the action of 
giving light is perfected in an instant. And such an opera- 
tion is the use of free-will, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 2. As soon as counsel or deliberation is ended, 
there may be choice. But those who need the deliberation 
of counsel, as soon as this comes to an end are certain of 
what ought to be chosen: and consequently they choose at 
once. From this it is clear that the deliberation of counsel 
does not of necessity precede choice save for the purpose 
of inquiring into what is uncertain. But Christ, in the first 
instant of His conception, had the fulness of sanctifying 
grace, and in like manner the fulness of known truth; 
according to Jo. i. 14: Full of grace and truth. Wherefore, 
as being possessed of certainty about all things, He could 
choose at once in an instant. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s intellect, in regard to His infused 
knowledge, could understand without turning to phantasms, 
as stated above (Q. XI., A. 2). Consequently His intellect 
and will could act without any action of the senses. 

Nevertheless it was possible for Him, in the first instant 
of His conception, to have an operation of the senses: 
especially as to the sense of touch, which the infant can exer- 
cise in the womb even before it has received the rational 
soul, as is said, De Gener. Animal. ii., 3, 4. Wherefore, since 
Christ had the rational soul in the first instant of His con- 
ception, through His body being already fashioned and 
endowed with sensible organs, much more was it possible 
for Him to exercise the sense of touch in that same instant. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST COULD MERIT IN THE FIRST INSTANT OF 
HIS CONCEPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that Christ could not merit 
in the first instant of His conception. For the free-will 

- 

IOI PERFECTION OF THE CHILD Q. 34. Art. 3 

bears the same relation to merit as to demerit. But the devil 
could not sin in the first instant of his creation, as was shown 
in the First Part (Q. LXIII., A. 5). Therefore neither could 
Christ’s soul merit in the first instant of its creation—that 
is, in the first instant of Christ’s conception. 

Obj. 2. Further, that which man has in the first instant 
of his conception seems to be natural to him: for it is in 
this that his natural generation is terminated. But we 
do not merit by what is natural to us, as is clear from what 
has been said in the Second Part (I.-II., Q. CIX., A. 5; 
Q. CXIV., A. 2). Therefore it seems that the use of free- 
will, which Christ as man had in the first instant of His 
conception, was not meritorious. 

Obj. 3. Further, that which a man has once merited he 
makes, in a way, his own: consequently it seems that he 
cannot merit the same thing again: for no one merits what 
is already his. If, therefore, Christ merited in the first 
instant of His conception, it follows that afterwards He 
merited nothing. But this is evidently untrue. Therefore 
Christ did not merit in the first instant of His conception. 

On the contrary, Augustine* says: Increase of merit was 
absolutely impossible to the soul of Christ. But increase of 
merit would have been possible had He not merited in the 
first instant of His conception. Therefore Christ merited 
in the first instant of His conception. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), Christ was sanctified 
by grace in the first instant of His conception. Now, 
sanctification is twofold: that of adults who are sanctified 
in consideration of their own act; and that of infants who 
are sanctified in consideration of, not their own act of faith, 
but that of their parents or of the Church. The former 
sanctification is more perfect than the latter: just as act 
is more perfect than habit; and that which ts by ttself, than 
that which is by another.t Since, therefore, the sanctification 
of Christ was most perfect, because He was so sanctified 
that He might sanctify others; consequently He was 

* Paterius, Expos. Vet. et Nov. Test. s, iper-Exod. xl. 
¢ Aristotle, Phys. viii. P TOlH WT] tg A. 

Q. 34. Art.4. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 102 

sanctified by reason of His own movement of the free-will 
towards God. Which movement, indeed, of the free-will is 
meritorious. Consequently, Christ did merit in the first 
instant of His conception. 

Reply Obj. 1. Free-will does not bear the same relation 
to good as to evil: for to good it is related of itself, and 
naturally; whereas to evil it is related as to a defect, and 
beside nature. Now, as the Philosopher says (De Celo ii., 
text. 18): That which is beside nature is subsequent to that 
which is according to nature; because that which is beside 
nature is an exception to nature. Therefore the free-will of 
a creature can be moved to good meritoriously in the first 
instant of its creation, but not to evil sinfully; provided, 
however, its nature be unimpaired. 

Reply Obj. 2. That which man has at the first moment of 
his creation, in the ordinary course of nature, is natural 
to him; but nothing hinders a creature from receiving from 
God a gift of grace at the very beginning of its creation. 
In this way did Christ’s soul in the first instant of its creation 
receive grace by which it could merit. And for this reason 
is that grace, by way of a certain likeness, said to be natural 
to this Man, as explained by Augustine (Enchir. xl.). 

Reply Obj. 3. Nothing prevents the same thing belonging 
to someone from several causes. And thus it is that Christ 
was able by subsequent actions and sufferings to merit 
the glory of immortality, which He also merited in the first 
instant of His conception: not, indeed, so that it became 
thereby more due to Him than before, but so that it was due 
to Him from more causes than before. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS A PERFECT COMPREHENSOR IN THE 
FIRST INSTANT OF HIS CONCEPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was not a perfect 
comprehensor in the first instant of His conception. For merit 
precedes reward, as fault precedes punishment. But Christ 

103 PERFECTION OF THE CHILD Q. 34. Arr. 4 

merited in the first instant of His conception, as stated 
above (A. 3). Since, therefore, the state of comprehension 
is the principal reward, it seems that Christ was not a com- 
prehensor in the first instant of His conception. 

Obj. 2. Further, our Lord said (Luke xxiv. 26): Ought 
not Christ to have suffered these things, and so to enter into 
His glory? But glory belongs to the state of comprehen- 
sion. Therefore Christ was not in the state of comprehen- 
sion in the first instant of His conception, when as yet He 
had not suffered. 

Obj. 3. Further, what befits neither man nor angel seems 
proper to God; and therefore is not becoming to Christ 
as man. But to be always in the state of beatitude befits 
neither man nor angel: for if they had been created in 
beatitude, they would not have sinned afterwards. There- 
fore Christ, as man, was not in the state of beatitude in the 
first instant of His conception. 

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. lxiv. 5): Blessed ts he 
whom Thou hast chosen, and taken to Thee ; which words, 
‘according to the gloss, refer to Christ’s human nature, 
which was taken by the Word of God unto the unity of Person. 
But human nature was taken by the Word of God in the 
first instant of His conception. Therefore, in the first 
instant of His conception, Christ, as man, was in the state 
of beatitude; which is to be a comprehensor. 

I answer that, As appears from what was said above (A. 3), 
it was unbecoming that in His conception Christ should 
receive merely habitual grace without the act. Now, He 
received grace not by measure (Jo. iii. 34), as stated above 
(Q. VIL, A. 11). But the grace of the wayfarer, being 
short of that of the comprehensor, is in less measure than that 
of the comprehensor. Wherefore it is manifest that in the 
first instant of His conception Christ received not only as 
much grace as comprehensors have, but also greater than 
that which they all have. And because that grace was not 
without its act, it follows that He was a comprehensor in 
act, seeing God in His Essence more clearly than other 
creatures. 

Q. 34. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 104 

Reply Obj. 1. As stated above (Q. XIX., A. 3), Christ 
did not merit the glory of the soul, in respect of which He 
is said to have been a comprehensor, but the glory of the 
body, to which He came through His Passion. 

Wherefore the reply to the second objection is clear. 

Reply Obj. 3. Since Christ was both God and man, He 
had, even in His humanity, something more than other 
creatures—namely, that He was in the state of beatitude 
from the very beginning. 

* 

QUESTION XXXV. 

OF CHRIST#S NATIVITY. 
(In Eight Articles.) 

AFTER considering Christ’s conception, we must treat of 
His nativity. First, as to the nativity itself; secondly, as 
to His manifestation after birth. 

Concerning the first there are eight points of inquiry: 
(rt) Whether nativity regards the nature or the person? 
(2) Whether another, besides His eternal, birth should be 
attributed to Christ ? (3) Whether the Blessed Virgin is 
His mother in respect of His temporal birth? (4) Whether 
she ought to be called the Mother of God? (5) Whether 
Christ is the Son of God the Father and of the Virgin-Mother 
in respect of two filiations? (6) Of the mode of the Na- 
tivity. (7) Of its place. (8) Of the time of the Nativity. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER NATIVITY REGARDS THE NATURE RATHER THAN 
THE PERSON ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that nativity regards the nature 
rather than the person. For Augustine* says (De Fide ad 
Petrum): The eternal Divine Nature could not be conceived 
and born of human nature, except in a true human nature. 
Consequently it becomes the Divine Nature to be conceived 
and born by reason of the human nature. Much more, there- 
fore, does it regard human nature itself. 

Obj. 2. Further, according to the Philosopher (Metaph. v.), 
nature is so denominated from nativity. But things are 

* Fulgentius. 
105 

Q. 35. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 106 

denominated from one another by reason of some likeness. 
Therefore it seems that nativity regards the nature rather 
than the person. 

Obj. 3. Further, properly speaking, that is born which 
begins to exist by nativity. But Christ’s Person did not 
begin to exist by His nativity, whereas His human nature 
did. Therefore it seems that the nativity properly regards 
the nature, and not the person. 

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): 
Nativity regards the hypostasts, not the nature. 

I answer that, Nativity can be attributed to someone in 
two ways: first, as to its subject; secondly, as to its ter- 
minus. To him that is born it is attributed as to its sub- 
ject: and this, properly speaking, is the hypostasis, not the 
nature. For since to be born is to be generated; as a thing 
is generated in order for it to be, so is a thing born in order 
for it to be. Now, to be, properly speaking, belongs to 
that which subsists; since a form that does not subsist is 
said to be only inasmuch as by it something is: and whereas 
person or hypostasis designates something as subsisting, 
nature designates form, whereby something subsists. Con- 
sequently, nativity is attributed to the person or hypostasis 
as to the proper subject of being born, but not to the nature. 

But to the nature nativity is attributed as to its ter- 
minus. For the terminus of generation and of every nativity 
is the form. Now, nature designates something as a form: 
wherefore nativity is said to be the road to nature, as the 
Philosopher states (Phys. ii.): for the purpose of nature is 
terminated in the form or nature of the species. 

Reply Obj. 1. On account of the identity of nature and 
hypostasis in God, nature is sometimes put instead of per- 
son or hypostasis. And in this sense Augustine says that 
the Divine Nature was conceived and born, inasmuch as the 
Person of the Son was conceived and born in the human 
nature. 

Reply Obj. 2. No movement or change is denominated 
from the subject moved, but from the terminus of the 
movement, whence the subject has its species. For this 

107 CHRIST’S NATIVITY Q. 35. ART. 2 

reason nativity is not denominated from the person born, 
but from nature, which is the terminus of nativity. 

Reply Obj. 3. Nature, properly speaking, does not begin 
to exist: rather is it the person that begins to exist in some 
nature. Because, as stated above, nature designates that 
by which something is; whereas person designates some- 
thing as having subsistent being. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER A TEMPORAL NATIVITY SHOULD BE ATTRIBUTED 
TO CHRIST? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that temporal nativity is not to 
be attributed to Christ. For to be born ts a certain move- 
ment of a thing that did not exist before tt was born, which 
movement procures for tt the benefit of existence.* But Christ 
was from all eternity. Therefore He could not be born in 
time. 

« Obj. 2. Further, what is perfect in itself needs not to be 
born. But the Person of the Son of God was perfect from 
eternity. Therefore He needs not to be born in time. 
Therefore it seems that He had no temporal birth. 

Obj. 3. Further, properly speaking, nativity regards the 
person. But in Christ there is only one person. Therefore 
in Christ there is but one nativity. 

Obj. 4. Further, what is born by two nativities is born 
twice. But this proposition is false; Christ was born twice : 
because the nativity whereby He was born of the Father 
suffers no interruption; since it is eternal. Whereas inter- 
ruption is required to warrant the use of the adverb twice : 
for a man is said to run twice whose running is interrupted. 
Therefore it seems that we should not admit a double 
nativity in Christ. 

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod, iii.): 
We confess two nativities in Christ : one of the Father—eternal ; 
and one which occurred in these latter times for our sake. 

* Cf. Augustine, De Unit. Trin. xii. 

\ 

Q. 35. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 108 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), nature is compared 
to nativity, as the terminus to movement or change. Now, 
movement is diversified according to the diversity of its 
termini, as the Philosopher shows (Phys. v.). But, in Christ 
there is a twofold nature: one which He received of the 
Father from eternity, the other which He received from 
His mother in time. Therefore we must needs attribute 
to Christ a twofold nativity: one by which He was born of 
the Father from all eternity; one by which He was born 
of His mother in time. 

Reply Obj. 1. This was the argument of a certain heretic, 
Felician, and is solved thus by Augustine (Contra Felic., xii.). 
Let us suppose, says he, as many maintain, that in the world 
there 1s a universal soul, which, by tts ineffable movement, so 
gives life to all seed, that it is not compounded with things be- 
gotten, but bestows life that they may be begotten. Without 
doubt, when this soul reaches the womb, being intent on fashton- 
ing the passtble matter to its own purpose, it unttes itself to the 
personality thereof, though manifestly it is not of the same 
substance , and thus of the active soul and passive matter, one 
man 1s made out of two substances. And so we confess that 
the soul is born from out the womb ; but not as though, before 
birth, it was nothing at all in itself. Thus, then, but in a way 
much move sublime, the Son of God was born as man, just as 
the soul ts held to be born together with the body : not as though 
they both made one substance, but that from both, one person 
vesults. Yet we do not sav that the Son of God began thus to 
exist : lest it be thought that His Divinity is temporal. Nor do 
we acknowledge the flesh of the Son of God to have been from 
eternity : lest it be thought that He took, not a true human body, 
but some resemblance thereof. 

Reply Obj. 2. This was an argument of Nestorius, and it 
is thus solved by Cyril in an epistle:* We do not say that the 
Son of God had need, for His own sake, of a second nativity, 
after that which is from the Father : for it is foolish and a mark 
of ignorance to say that He who is from all eternity, and co- 
eternal with the Father, needs to begin again to exist. But 

* Cf. Acta Concil. Ephes., p. 1, cap. viii. 

109g CHRIST’S NATIVITY 0035: ARTy 3 

because for us and for our salvation, uniting the human nature 
to His Person, He hecame the child of a woman, for this reason 
do we say that He was born in the flesh. 

Reply Obj. 3. Nativity regards the person as its subject, 
the nature as its terminus. Now, it is possible for several 
transformations to be in the same subject: yet must they 
be diversified in respect of their termini. But we do not 
say this as though the eternal nativity were a transformation 
or a movement, but because it is designated by way of a 
transformation or movement. 

Reply Obj. 4. Christ can be said to have been born twice 
in respect of His two nativities. For just as he is said to 
run twice who runs at two different times, so can He be 
said to be born twice who is born once from eternity and 
once in time: because eternity and time differ much more 
than two different times, although each signifies a measure 
of duration. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE BLESSED VIRGIN CAN BE CALLED CHRIST’S 
MOTHER IN RESPECT OF HIS TEMPORAL NATIVITY ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Blessed Virgin cannot 
be called Christ’s mother in respect of His temporal nativity. 
For, as stated above (0. XXXII., A. 4), the Blessed Virgin 
Mary did not co-operate actively in begetting Christ, but 
merely supplied the matter. But this does not seem 
sufficient to make her His mother: otherwise wood might 
be called the mother of the bed or bench. Therefore it 
seems that the Blessed Virgin cannot be called the Mother 
of Christ. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ was born miraculously of the 
Blessed Virgin. But a miraculous begetting does not suffice 
for motherhood or sonship: for we do not speak of Eve as 
being the daughter of Adam. Therefore neither should 
Christ be called the Son of the Blessed Virgin. 

Obj. 3. Further, motherhood seems to imply partial 
separation of the semen. But, as Damascene says (De 

Q. 35. Art.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” IIo 

Fide Orthod. iii.), Christ’s body was formed, not by a seminal 
process, but by the operation of the Holy Ghost. Therefore 
it seems that the Blessed Virgin should not be called the 
Mother of Christ. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. i. 18): The generation 
of Christ was in this wise. When as His mother Mary was 
espoused to Joseph, etc. 

I answer that, The Blessed Virgin Mary is in truth and by 
nature the Mother of Christ. For, as we have said above 
(Q. V., A. 2; Q. XXXI., A. 5), Christ’s body was not brought 
down from heaven, as the heretic Valentine maintained, 
but was taken from the Virgin-Mother, and formed from her 
purest blood. And this is all that is required for mother- 
hood, as has been made clear above (QO. XXXI., A. 5; 
Q. XXXII., A. 4). Therefore the Blessed Virgin is truly 
Christ’s mother. 

Reply Obj. 1. As stated above (Q. XXXII., A. 3), not 
every generation implies fatherhood or motherhood and 
sonship, but only the generation of living things. Conse- 
quently when inanimate things are made from some matter, 
the relationship of motherhood and sonship does not follow 
from this, but only in the generation of living things, which 
is properly called nativity. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): 
The temporal nativity by which Christ was born for our sal- 
vation 1s, in a way, natural, since a Man was born of a woman, 
and after the due lapse of time from His conception : but it 
ts also supernatural, because He was begotten, not of seed, but 
of the Holy Ghost and the Blessed Virgin, above the law of 
conception. Thus, then, on the part of the mother, this 
nativity was natural, but on the part of the operation of 
the Holy Ghost it was supernatural. Therefore the Blessed 
Virgin is the true and natural Mother of Christ. 

Reply Obj. 3. As stated above (Q. XXXI., A. 5 ad 3; 
Q. XXXII, A. 4), the resolution of the woman’s semen is 
not necessary for conception; neither, therefore, is it re- 
quired for motherhood. 

- 

III CHRIST’S NATIVITY Q. 35. ART. 4 

FouRTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE BLESSED VIRGIN SHOULD BE CALLED 
THE MOTHER OF GOD? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Blessed Virgin should 
not be called the Mother of God. Forin the Divine mysteries 
we should not make any assertion that is not taken from 
Holy Scripture. But we read nowhere in Holy Scripture 
that she is the mother or parent of God, but that she is the 
mother of Christ or of the Child, as may be seen from Matth. 
i. 18. Therefore we should not say that the Blessed Virgin 
is the Mother of God. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ is called God in respect of His 
Divine Nature. But the Divine Nature did not first 
originate from the Virgin. Therefore the Blessed Virgin 
should not be called the Mother of God. 

Obj. 3. Further, the word God is predicated in common of 
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. If, therefore, the Blessed 
Virgin is Mother of God, it seems to follow that she was 
the Mother of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which cannot 
be allowed. Therefore the Blessed Virgin should not be 
called Mother of God. 

On the contrary, In the chapters of Cyril, approved in 
the Council of Ephesus (P. i., cap. xxvi.), we read: If anyone 
confess not that the Emmanuel ts truly God, and that for this 
reason the Holy Virgin ts the Mother of God, since she begot 
of her flesh the Word of God made flesh, let him be anathema. 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. XVI, A. 1), every word 
that signifies a nature in the concrete can stand for any 
hypostasis of that nature. Now, since the union of the 
Incarnation took place in the hypostasis, as above stated 
(Q. IL., A. 3), it is manifest that this word God can stand for 
the hypostasis, having a human anda Divinenature. There- 
fore whatever belongs to the Divine and to the human 
nature can be attributed to that Person: both when a 
word is employed to stand for it, signifying the Divine 
Nature, and when a word is used signifying the human 

Q. 35. Art.4 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 112 

nature. Now, conception and birth are attributed to the 
person and hypostasis in respect of that nature in which 
it is conceived and born. Since, therefore, the human 
nature was taken by the Divine Person in the very be- 
ginning of the conception, as stated above (Q. XXXIIL., 
A. 3), it follows that it can be truly said that God was con- 
ceived and born of the Virgin. Now from this is a woman 
called a man’s mother, that she conceived him and gave 
birth to him. Therefore the Blessed Virgin is truly called 
the Mother of God. For the only way in which it could be 
denied that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of God would 
be either if the humanity were first subject to conception 
and birth, before this man were the Son of God, as 
Photinus said; or if the humanity were not assumed unto 
unity of the Person or hypostasis of the Word of God, as 
Nestorius maintained. But both of these are erroneous. 
Therefore it is heretical to deny that the Blessed Virgin 
is the Mother of God. 

Reply Obj. 1. This was an argument of Nestorius, and it 
is solved by saying that, although we do not find it said 
expressly in Scripture that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother 
of God, yet we do find it expressly said in Scripture that 
Jesus Christ is true God, as may be seen I Jo. v. 20, and 
that the Blessed Virgin is the Mother of Jesus Christ, which 
is clearly expressed Matth.i.18. Therefore, from the words 
of Scripture it follows of necessity that she is the Mother of 
God. 

Again, it is written (Rom. ix. 5) that Christ is of the Jews 
according to the flesh, who 1s over all things, God blessed for 
ever. But He is not of the Jews except through the Blessed 
Virgin. Therefore He who is above all things, God blessed for 
ever, is truly born of the Blessed Virgin as of His mother. 

Reply Obj. 2. This was an argument of Nestorius. But 
Cyril, in a letter against Nestorius,* answers it thus: Just 
as when a man’s soul is born with its body, they are considered 
as one being : and if anyone wish to say that the mother of the 
flesh 1s not the mother of the soul, he says too much. Something 

* Cf. Acta Conc. Ephes., P. i., cap. ii. 

113 CHRIST’S NATIVITY Ong, Artis 

like this may be perceived in the generation of Christ. For the 
Word of God was born of the substance of God the Father: 
but because He took flesh, we must of necessity confess that in 
the flesh He was born of a woman. Consequently we must say 
that the Blessed Virgin is called the Mother of God, not as 
though she were the Mother of the Godhead, but because she 
is the mother, according to His human nature, of the Person 
who has both the divine and the human nature. 

Reply Obj. 3. Although the name God is common to the 
three Persons, yet sometimes it stands for the Person of the 
Father alone, sometimes only for the Person of the Son or 
of the Holy Ghost, as stated above (Q. XVI, A. 1; L, 
Q. XXXIX., A. 4). So that when we say, The Blessed 
Virgin 1s the Mother of God, this word God stands only 
for the incarnate Person of the Son. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER THERE ARE TWO FILIATIONS IN CHRIST ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

* Objection 1. It would seem that there are two filiations in 
Christ. For nativity is the cause of filiation. But in Christ 
there are two nativities. Therefore in Christ there are also 
two filiations. 

Obj. 2. Further, filiation, which is said of a man as being 
the son of someone, his father or his mother, depends, in 
a way, on him: because the very being of a relation consists 
in being referred to another ; wherefore if one of two relatives 
be destroyed, the other is destroyed also. But the eternal 
filiation by which Christ is the Son of God the Father 
depends not on His Mother, because nothing eternal depends 
on what is temporal. Therefore Christ is not His Mother’s 
Son by temporal filiation. Either, therefore, He is not her 
Son at all, which is in contradiction to what has been said 
above (AA. 3, 4), or He must needs be her Son by some 
other temporal filiation. Therefore in Christ there are 
two filiations. 

Obj. 3. Further, one of two relatives enters the eee 

lil, 2 

Q. 35. ARt.5 THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 114 

of the other; hence it is clear that of two relatives, one 
is specified from the other. But one and the same cannot 
be in diverse species. Therefore it seems impossible that 
one and the same relation be referred to extremes which are 
altogether diverse. But Christ is said to be the Son of the 
Eternal Father and a temporal mother, who are terms 
altogether diverse. Therefore it seems that Christ cannot, 
by the same relation, be called the Son of the Father and 
of His Mother. Therefore in Christ there are two filiations. 

On the contrary, As Damascene says (De Fide Orthod., iii.), 
things pertaining to the nature are multiple in Christ; but 
not those things that pertain to the Person. But filiation 
belongs especially to the Person, since it is a personal 
property, as appears from what was said in the First Part 
(OSX XXIL, Ag: O. XI As 2)e <fhereforethereits tart 
one filiation in Christ. 

I answer that, Opinions differ on this question. For 
some, considering only the cause of filiation, which is 
nativity, put two filiations in Christ, just as there are two 
nativities. On the contrary, others, considering only the 
subject of filiation, which is the person or hypostasis, put 
only one filiation in Christ, just as there is but one hypos- 
tasis or person. Because the unity or plurality of a rela- 
tion is considered in respect, not of its terms, but of its 
cause or of its subject. For if it were considered in respect 
of its terms, every man would of necessity have in himself 
two filiations—one in reference to his father, and another 
in reference to his mother. But if we consider the question 
aright, we shall see that every man bears but one relation 
to both his father and his mother, on account of the unity 
of the cause thereof. For man is born by one birth of both 
father and mother: whence he bears but one relation to 
both. The same is said of one master who teaches many 
disciples the same doctrine, and of one lord who governs 
many subjects by the same power. But if there be various 
causes specifically diverse, it seems that in consequence the 
relations differ in species: wherefore nothing hinders 
several such relations being in the same subject. Thus if 

II5 CHRIST’S NATIVITY Q. 35. ART. 5 

a man teach grammar to some and logic to others, his 
teaching is of a different kind in one case and in the other: 
and therefore one and the same man may have different 
relations as the master of different disciples, or of the same 
disciples in regard to diverse doctrines. Sometimes, how- 
ever, it happens that a man bears a relation to several in 
respect of various causes, but of the same species: thus a 
father may have several sons by several acts of generation. 
Wherefore the paternity cannot differ specifically, since the 
acts of generation are specifically the same. And because 
several forms of the same species cannot at the same time 
be in the same subject, it is impossible for several paternities 
to be in a man who is the father of several sons by natural 
generation. But it would not be so were he the father of 
one son by natural generation and of another by adoption. 

Now, it is manifest that Christ was not born by one and 
the same nativity, of the Father from eternity, and of His 
Mother in time: indeed, these two nativities differ specific- 
ally. Wherefore, as to this, we must say that there are 
various filiations, one temporal and the other eternal. 
Since, however, the subject of filiation is neither the nature 
nor part of the nature, but the person or hypostasis alone; 
and since in Christ there is no other hypostasis or person 
than the eternal, there can be no other filiation in Christ 
but that which is in the eternal hypostasis. Now, every 
relation which is predicated of God from time does not 
put something real in the eternal God, but only something 
according to our way of thinking, as we have said in the 
First Part (Q. XIII., A. 7). Therefore the filiation by which 
Christ is referred to His Mother cannot be a real relation, 
but only a relation of reason. 

Consequently each opinion is true to a certain extent. 
For if we consider the adequate causes of filiation, we must 
needs say that there are two filiations in respect of the 
twofold nativity. But if we consider the subject of filia- 
tion, which can only be the eternal suppositum, then no 
other than the eternal filiation in Christ is a real relation. 
Nevertheless, He has the relation of Son in regard to His 

Q. 35. Art.5 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 116 

Mother, because it is implied in the relation of motherhood 
to Christ. Thus God is called Lord by a relation which is 
implied in the real relation by which the creature is subject 
to God. And although lordship is not a real relation in 
God, yet is He really Lord through the real subjection of 
the creature to Him. In the same way Christ is really 
the Son of the Virgin-Mother through the real relation of 
her motherhood to Christ. 

Reply Obj. x. Temporal nativity would cause a real 
temporal filiation in Christ if there were in Him a subject 
capable of such filiation. But this cannot be; since the 
eternal suppositum cannot be receptive of a temporal re- 
lation, as stated above. Nor can it be said that it is 
receptive of temporal filiation by reason of the human nature, 
just as it is receptive of the temporal nativity; because 
human nature would need in some way to be the subject of 
filiation, just as in a way it is the subject of nativity; for 
since an Ethiopian is said to be white by reason of his 
teeth, it must be that his teeth are the subject of white- 
ness. But human nature can nowise be the subject of 
filiation, because this relation regards directly the person. 

Reply Obj. 2. Eternal filiation does not depend on a tem- 
poral mother, but together with this eternal filiation we 
understand a certain temporal relation dependent on the 
mother, in respect of which relation Christ is called the Son 
of His Mother. 

Reply Obj. 3. One and being are mutually consequent, as 
is said, Metaph. iv. Therefore, just as it happens that in 
one of the extremes of a relation there is something real, 
whereas in the other there is not something real, but merely 
a certain aspect, as the Philosopher observes of knowledge 
and the thing known; so also it happens that on the part 
of one extreme there is one relation, whereas on the part of 
the other there are many. Thus in man on the part of his 
parents there is a twofold relation, the one of paternity, the 
other of motherhood, which are specifically diverse, inas- 
much as the father is the principle of generation in one 
way, and the mother in another (whereas if many be the 

117 CHRIST’S NATIVITY Q. 35. ART. 6 

principle of one action and in the same way—for instance, 
if many together draw a ship along—there would be one 
and the same relation in all of them); but on the part of 
the child there is but one filiation in reality, though there be 
two in aspect, corresponding to the two relations in the 
parents, as considered by the intellect. And thus in one 
way there is only one real filiation in Christ, which is in 
respect of the Eternal Father: yet there is another temporal 
relation in regard to His temporal mother. 

SIxTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS BORN WITHOUT HIS MOTHER 
SUFFERING ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was not born 
without His mother suffering. For just as man’s death was 
a result of the sin of our first parents, according to Gen. ii. 17: 
In what day soever ye shall eat, ye shall (Vulg., thou shalt 
eat of it, thou shalt) die; so were the pains of childbirth, 

“according to Gen. ili. 16: In sorrow shalt thou bring forth 
children. But Christ was willing to undergo death. There- 
fore for the same reason it seems that His birth should have 
been with pain. 

Obj. 2. Further, the end is proportionate to the beginning. 
But Christ ended His life in pain, according to Isa. lili. 4: 
Surely ... He hath carried our sorrows. Therefore it seems 
that His nativity was not without the pains of childbirth. 

Obj. 3. Further, in the book on the birth of our Saviour* 
it is related that midwives were present at Christ’s birth; 
and they would be wanted by reason of the mother’s suffering 
pain. Therefore it seems that the Blessed Virgin suffered 
pain in giving birth to her Child. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (Sern. de Nativ.),t address- 
ing himself to the Virgin-Mother: In conceiving thou wast 
all pure, in giving birth thou wast without pain. 

I answer that, The pains of childbirth are caused by the 
infant opening the passage from the womb. Now it has 

* Protevangelium Jacobi, xix., Xx. { Supposititious. 

Q. 35. Art.6 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 118 

been said above (Q. XXVIIL., A. 2, Replies to Objections), that 
Christ came forth from the closed womb of His mother, and, 
consequently, without opening the passage. Consequently 
there was no pain in that birth, as neither was there any 
corruption; on the contrary, there was much joy therein 
for that God-Man was born into the world, according to 
Isa. xxxv. I, 2: Like the lily, it shall bud forth and blossom, 
and shall rejoice with joy and pratse. 

Reply Obj. 1. The pains of childbirth in the woman 
follow from the mingling of the sexes. Wherefore (Gen. 
ili. 16) after the words, im sorrow shalt thou bring forth chal- 
dren, the following are added: and thou shalt be under thy 
husband’s power. But, as Augustine says (Serm. de Assumpt. 
B. Virg.),* from this sentence we must exclude the Virgin- 
Mother of God; who, because she conceived Christ without 
the defilement of sin, and without the stain of sexual mingling, 
therefore did she bring Him forth without pain, without viola- 
tion of her virginal integrity, without detriment to the purity 
of her maidenhood. Christ, indeed, suffered death, but through 
His own spontaneous desire, in order to atone for us, not as 
a necessary result of that sentence, for He was not a debtor 
unto death. 

Reply Obj. 2. As by His death Christ destroyed our death,t 
so by His pains He freed us from our pains; and so He wished 
to die a painful death. But the mother’s pains in childbirth 
did not concern Christ, who came to atone for our sins. 
And therefore there was no need for His mother to suffer in 
giving birth. 

Reply Obj. 3. We are told (Luke ii. 7) that the Blessed 
Virgin herself wrapped up in swaddling clothes the Child 
whom she had brought forth, and laid Him in a manger. 
Consequently the narrative of this book, which is apocryphal, 
is untrue. Wherefore Jerome says (Adv. Helvid. iv.): 
No midwife was there, no officious women interfered. She was 
both mother and midwife. ‘ With swaddling clothes,’ says he, 
‘she wrapped up the child, and laid Him in a manger.’ 
These words prove the falseness of the apocryphal ravings. 

* Supposititious. } Preface of the Mass in Paschal-time. 

119 CHRIST'S NATIVITY Q. 35. ART. 7 

SEVENTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE BEEN BORN IN 
BETHLEHEM ? 

We proceed thus to the Seventh Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have been 
born in Bethlehem. For it is written (Isa. ii. 3): The law 
shall come forth from Sion, and the Word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem. But Christ is truly the Word of God. There- 
fore He should have come into the world at Jerusalem. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is said (Matth. ii. 23) that it is written 
of Christ that He shall be called a Nazarean ; which is taken 
from Isa. xi. 1; A flower shall rise up out of his root: for 
Nazareth is interpreted a flower. But a man is named 
especially from the place of his birth. Therefore it seems 
that He should have been born in Nazareth, where also He 
was conceived and brought up. 

Obj. 3. Further, for this was our Lord born into the world, 
¢that He might make known the true faith; according to 
Jo. xviii. 37: For this was I born, and for this came I into 
the world ; that I should give testimony to the truth. But this 
would have been easier if He had been born in the city of 
Rome, which at that time ruled the world; whence Paul, 
writing to the Romans (i. 8), says: Your faith is spoken of 
in the whole world. Therefore it seems that He should not 
have been born in Bethlehem. 

On the contrary, It is written (Mich. v. 2): And thou, 
Bethlehem, Ephrata... out of thee shall He come forth unto 
Me, that ts to be the ruler in Israel. 

I answer that, Christ willed to be born in Bethlehem for 
two reasons. First, because He was made... of the seed of 
David according to the flesh, as it is written (Rom. i. 3): 
to whom also was a special promise made concerning Christ ; 
according to 2 Kings xxiii. 1: The man to whom tt was ap- 
pointed concerning the Christ of the God of Jacob... sard. 
Therefore He willed to be born at Bethlehem, where David 
was born, in order that by the very birthplace the promise 

Q. 35. Art.7 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 120 

made to David might be shown to be fulfilled. The Evan- 
gelist points this out by saying: Because He was of the house 
and of the family of David. Secondly, because, as Gregory 
says (Hom. viii. in Evang.): Bethlehem is interpreted ‘ the 
house of bread.’ It is Christ Himself who said, ‘I amt he 
living Bread which came down from heaven.’ 

Reply Obj. 1. As David was born in Bethlehem, so also 
did he choose Jerusalem to set up his throne there, and to 
build there the Temple of God, so that Jerusalem was at 
the same time a royal and a priestly city. Now, Christ’s 
priesthood and kingdom were consummated principally in 
His Passion. Therefore it was becoming that He should 
choose Bethlehem for His birthplace and Jerusalem for the 
scene of His Passion. 

At the same time, too, He put to silence the vain boasting 
of men who take pride in being born in great cities, where 
also they desire especially to receive honour. Christ, on 
the contrary, willed to be born in a mean city, and to suffer 
reproach in a great city. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ wished to flower by His holy life, 
not in His carnal birth. Therefore He wished to be fostered 
and brought up at Nazareth. But He wished to be born at 
Bethlehem away from home; because, as Gregory says 
(loc. cet.), through the human nature which He had taken, 
He was born, as it were, in a foreign place—foreign not to 
His power, but to His Nature. And, again, as Bede says 
on Luke i. 7: In order that He who found no room at 
the inn might prepare many mansions for us in His Father’s 
house. 

Reply Obj. 3. According to a sermon in the Council of 
Ephesus :* If He had chosen the great city of Rome, the change 
im the world would be ascribed to the influence of her citizens. 
If He had been the son of the Emperor, His benefits would have 
been attributed to the latter’s power. But that we might acknow- 
ledge the work of God in the transformation of the whole earth, 
He chose a poor mother and a birthplace poorer still. 

But the weak things of the world hath God chosen, that He 

* PD Ailke, Ck purnce 

121 CHRIST'S NATIVITY Q. 35. ArT. 8 

may confound the strong (I Cor. i. 27). And therefore, in 
order the more to show His power, He set up the head of 
His Church in Rome itself, which was the head of the world, 
in sign of His complete victory, in order that from that city 
the faith might spread throughout the world; according to 
Isa. xxvi. 5, 6: The high city He shall lay low . . . the feet of 
the poor—t.e., of Christ—shall tread it down ; the steps of 
the needy—t.e., of the apostles Peter and Paul. 

EIGHTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WAS BORN AT A FITTING TIME ? 

We proceed thus to the Eighth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was not born at a 
fitting time. Because Christ came in order to restore liberty 
to His own. But He was born at a time of subjection— 
namely, when the whole world, as it were, tributary to 
Augustus, was being enrolled, at his command, as Luke 
relates (ii. 1). Therefore it seems that Christ was not born 
at a fitting time. 

Obj. 2. Further, the promises concerning the coming of 
Christ were not made to the Gentiles; according to Rom. 
ix. 4: To whom belong . . . the promises. But Christ was 
born during the reign of a foreigner, as appears from Matth. 
ii. 1: When Jesus was born in the days of King Herod. There- 
fore it seems that He was not born at a fitting time. 

Obj. 3. Further, the time of Christ’s presence on earth is 
compared to the day, because He is the Light of the world ; 
wherefore He says Himself (Jo. ix. 4): I must work the works 
of Him that sent Me, whilst it 1s day. But in summer the 
days are longer than in winter. Therefore, since He was 
born in the depth of winter, eight days before the Kalends 
of January, it seems that He was not born at a fitting 
time. 

On the contrary, it is written (Gal. iv. 4): When the fulness 
of the time was come, God sent His Son, made of a woman, 
made under the law. 

I answer that, There is this difference between Christ and 

Q. 35. Art.8 THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 122 

other men: that, whereas they are born subject to the re- 
strictions of time, Christ, as Lord and Maker of all time, 
chose a time in which to be born, just as He chose a mother 
and a birthplace. And since what is of God is well ordered 
and becomingly arranged, it follows that Christ was born at 
a most fitting time. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ came in order to bring us back from 
a state of bondage to a state of liberty. And therefore, as 
He took our mortal nature in order to restore us to life, so, 
as Bede says (Super Luc. ii. 4, 5), He deigned to take flesh at 
such a time that, shortly after His birth, He would be enrolled 
in Cesar’s census, and thus submit Himself to bondage for 
the sake of our liberty. 

Moreover, at that time, when the whole world lived 
under one ruler, peace abounded on the earth. Therefore 
it was a fitting time for the birth of Christ, for He ts our 
peace, who hath made both one, as it is written (Eph. ii. 14). 
Wherefore Jerome says on Isa. il. 4: If we search the page 
of ancient history, we shall find that throughout the whole 
world there was discord until the twenty-etghth year of Augustus 
Cesar : but when our Lord was born, all war ceased ; according 
to Isa. ii. 4: Nation shall not lift up sword against nation. 

Again, it was fitting that Christ should be born while 
the world was governed by one ruler, because He came to 
gather His own (Vulg., the children of God) together in one 
(Jo. xi. 52), that there might be one fold and one shepherd 
(TO sie TO): 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ wished to be born during the reign 
of a foreigner, that the prophecy of Jacob might be ful- 
filled (Gen. xlix. 10): The sceptre shall not be taken away 
from Juda, nor a ruler from his thigh, till He come that is to 
be sent. Because, as Chrysostom says (Hom. ii. in Matth.),* 
as long as the Jewish people was governed by Jewish kings, 
however wicked, prophets were sent for their healing. But 
now that the Law of God is under the power of a wicked king, 
Christ 1s born ; because a grave and hopeless disease demanded 
a more Skilful physician, 

* Opus Imperf., falsely ascribed to Chrysostom. 

123 CHRIST’S NATIVITY Q. 35. ART. 8 

Reply Obj. 3. As says the author of the book De Qq. 
Nov. et Vet. Test., Christ wished to be born, when the light 
of day begins to increase in length, so as to show that He came 
in order that man might come nearer to the Divine Light, 
according to Luke i. 79: To enlighten them that sit in darkness 
and tn the shadow of death. 

In like manner He chose to be born in the rough winter 
season, that He might begin from then to suffer in body 
for us. 

QUESTION XXXVI. 

OF THE MANIFESTATION OF THE NEWLY BORN CHRIST. 
(In Eight Articles.) 

WE must now consider the manifestation of the newly born 
Christ: concerning which there are eight points of inquiry: 
(x) Whether Christ’s birth should have been made known to 
all? (2) Whether it should have been made known to 
some? (3) To whom should it have been made known? 
(4) Whether He should have made Himself known, or 
should He rather have been manifested by others? (5) By 
what other means should it have been made known? 
(6) Of the order of these manifestations. (7) Of the star 
by means of which His birth was made known. (8) Of 
the adoration of the Magi, who were informed of Christ’s 
nativity by means of the star. 

FIRST ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BIRTH SHOULD HAVE BEEN MADE KNOWN 
TO ALL ? 

‘We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s birth should have 
been made known to all. Because fulfilment should cor- 
respond to promise. Now, the promise of Christ’s coming 
is thus expressed (Ps. xlix. 3): God shall come manifestly. 
But He came by His birth in the flesh. Therefore it seems 
that His birth should have been made known to the whole 
world. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (r Tim. i. 15): Christ came 
into this world to save sinners. But this is not effected save 
in as far as the grace of Christ is made known to them; 

124 

125 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 1 

according to Tit. ii. rz, 12: The grace of God our Saviour 
hath appeared to all men, instructing us, that denying un- 
godliness and worldly desires, we should live soberly, and 
justly, and godly in this world. Therefore it seems that 
Christ’s birth should have been made known to all. 

Obj. 3. Further, God is most especially inclined to mercy; 
according to Ps. cxliv. 9: His tender mercies are over all His 
works. But in His second coming, when He will judge 
justices (Ps. lxxiv. 3), He will come before the eyes of all; 
according to Matth. xxiv. 27: As lightning cometh out of the 
east, and appeareth even into the west, so shall also the coming 
of the Son of Man be. Much more, therefore, should His 
first coming, when He was born into the world according 
to the flesh, have been made known to all. 

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. xlv. 15): Thou art a 
hidden God, the Holy (Vulg., the God) of Israel, the Saviour. 
And, again (zb7d. lili. 3): His look was, as it were, hidden and 
despised. 

I answer that, It was unfitting that Christ’s birth should 
be made known to all men without distinction. First, 
because this would have been a hindrance to the redemption 
of man, which was accomplished by means of the Cross; 
for, as it is written (1 Cor. ii. 8): If they had known it, they 
would never have crucified the Lord of glory. 

Secondly, because this would have lessened the merit of 
faith, which He came to offer men as the way to righteous- 
ness; according to Rom. iii. 22: The justice of God by faith 
of Jesus Christ. For if, when Christ was born, His birth 
had been made known to all by evident signs, the very 
nature of faith would have been destroyed, since it is the 
evidence of things that appear not, as stated, Heb. xi. I. 

_ Thirdly, because thus the reality of His human nature 
would have come into doubt. Whence Augustine says (Ep. 
ad Volusianum cxxxvii.): If He had not passed through the 
different stages of age from babyhood to youth, had netther 
eaten nor slept, would He not have strengthened an erroneous 
opinion, and made tt impossible for us to believe that He had 
become true man? And while He is doing all things won- 

Q. 36. Art.2. THE ‘“‘ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 126 

drously, would He have taken away that which He accom- 
plished in mercy ? 

Reply Obj. 1. According to the gloss, the words quoted 
must be understood of Christ’s coming as judge. 

Reply Obj. 2. All men were to be instructed unto salva- 
tion, concerning the grace of God our Saviour, not at the 
very time of His birth, but afterwards, in due time, after 
He had wrought salvation in the midst of the earth (Ps. 
Ixxiii. 12). Wherefore after His Passion and Resurrection, 
He said to His disciples (Matth. xxviii. 19): Going . . . teach 
ye all nations. 

Reply Obj. 3. For judgement to be passed, the authority 
of the judge needs to be known: and for this reason it 
behoves that the coming of Christ unto judgement should 
be manifest. But His first coming was unto the salvation 
of all, which is by faith that is of things not seen. And 

therefore it was fitting that His first coming should be 
hidden. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BIRTH SHOULD HAVE BEEN MADE 
KNOWN TO SOME ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s birth should not 
have been made known to anyone. For, as stated above 
(A. i., ad 3), it befitted the salvation of mankind that Christ’s 
first coming should be hidden. But Christ came to save 
all; according to r Tim. iv. 10: Who is the Saviour of all 
men, espectally of the faithful. Therefore Christ’s birth 
should not have been made known to anyone. 

Obj. 2. Further, before Christ was born, His future birth 
was made known to the Blessed Virgin and Joseph. There- 
fore it was not necessary that it should be made known to 
others after His birth. 

Obj. 3. Further, no wise man makes known that from 
which arise disturbance and harm to others. But, when 
Christ’s birth was made known, disturbance arose: for it 
is written (Matth. ii. 3) that King Herod, hearing of Christ’s 

* 

127. THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 2 

birth, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Moreover, 
this brought harm to others; because it was the occasion of 
Herod’s killing all the male children that were in Bethlehem 

. from two years old and under. Therefore it seems un- 
fitting for Christ’s birth to have been made known to anyone. 

On the contrary, Christ’s birth would have been profitable 
to none if it had been hidden from all. But it behoved 
Christ’s birth to be profitable: else He were born in vain. 
Therefore it seems that Christ’s birth should have been 
made known to some. 

I answer that, As the Apostle says (Rom. xiii. 1) what ts 
of God is well ordered. Now it belongs to the order of Divine 
wisdom that God’s gifts and the secrets of His wisdom are 
not bestowed on all equally, but to some immediately, 
through whom they are made known to others. Wherefore, 
with regard to the mystery of the Resurrection it is written 
(Acts x. 40, 41): God... gave Christ rising again to be 
made mantfest, not to all the people, but to witnesses pre- 
ordained by God. Consequently, that His birth might be 
consistent with this, it should have been made known, not 
to all, but to some, through whom it could be made known 
to others. 

Reply Obj. 1. As it would have been prejudicial to the 
salvation of mankind if God’s birth had been made known 
to all men, so also would it have been if none had been 
informed of it. Because in either case faith is destroyed, 
whether a thing be perfectly manifest, or whether it be 
entirely unknown, so that no one can hear it from another; 
for faith cometh by hearing (Rom. x. 17). 

Reply Obj. 2. Mary and Joseph needed to be instructed 
concerning Christ’s birth before He was born, because it 
devolved on them to show reverence to the child conceived 
in the womb, and to serve Him even before He was born. 
But their testimony, being of a domestic character, would 
have aroused suspicion in regard to Christ’s greatness: and 
so it behoved it to be made known to others, whose eran 
could not be suspect. 

Reply Obj. 3. The very disturbance that arose when it 

Q. 36. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 128 

was known that Christ was born was becoming to His 
birth. First, because thus the heavenly dignity of Christ 
is made manifest. Wherefore Gregory says (Hom. x. 1m 
Evang.): After the birth of the King of heaven, the earthly 
king is troubled : doubtless because earthly grandeur 1s covered 
with confusion when the heavenly majesty ts revealed. 

Secondly, thereby the judicial power of Christ was fore- 
shadowed. Thus Augustine says in a sermon (30 de Temp.) 
on the Epiphany: What will He be like in the gudgement-seat ; 
since from His cradle He struck terror into the heart of a proud 
king ? 

Thirdly, because thus the overthrow of the devil’s king- 
dom was foreshadowed. For, as Pope Leo says in a sermon 
on the Epiphany (Serm. v.):* Herod was not so much troubled 
in himself as the devil in Herod. For Herod thought Him to 
be a man, but the devil thought Him to be God. Each feared 
a successor to his kingdom: the devil, a heavenly successor ; 
Herod, an earthly successor. But their fear was needless: 
since Christ had not come to set up an earthly kingdom, as 
Pope Leo says, addressing himself to Herod: Thy palace 
cannot hold Christ: nor is the Lord of the world content with 
the paltry power of thy sceptre. That the Jews were troubled, 
who, on the contrary, should have rejoiced, was either 
because, as Chrysostom says, wicked men could not rejoice at 
the coming of the Holy One, or because they wished to court 
favour with Herod, whom they feared; for the populace is 
inclined to favour too much those whose cruelty tt endures. 

And that the children were slain by Herod was not harmful 
to them, but profitable. For Augustine says in a sermon 
on the Epiphany (66 de Diversis): It cannot be questioned 
that Christ, who came to set man free, rewarded those who were 
slain for Him ; since, while hanging on the cross, He prayed 
for those who were putting Him to death. 

* Cf. Opus Imperfectum in Matth., Hom. ii., falsely ascribed to 
S. John Chrysostom. 

1z9 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 3 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THOSE TO WHOM CHRIST’S BIRTH WAS MADE 
KNOWN WERE SUITABLY CHOSEN ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that those to whom Christ’s 
birth was made known were not suitably chosen. For our 
Lord (Matth. x. 5) commanded His disciples, Go ye not into 
the way of the Gentiles, so that He might be made known to 
the Jews before the Gentiles. Therefore it seems that much 
less should Christ’s birth have been at once revealed to the 
Gentiles who came from the east, as stated Matth. ii. 1. 

Obj. 2. Further, the revelation of Divine truth should 

be made especially to the friends of God, according to 
Job xxxvii. (Vulg., xxxvi. 33): He sheweth His friend con- 
cerning 1t. But the Magi seem to be God’s foes; for it 
is written (Lev. xix. 31): Go not aside after wizards [magi], 
neither ask anything of soothsayers. Therefore Christ’s birth 
should not have been made known to the Magi. 
* 067. 3. Further, Christ came in order to set free the whole 
world from the power of the devil; whence it is written 
(Mal. i. 11): From the rising of the sun even to the going down, 
My name is great among the Gentiles. Therefore He should 
have been made known, not only to those who dwelt in the 
east, but also to some from all parts of the world. 

Obj. 4. Further, all the sacraments of the Old Law were 
figures of Christ. But the sacraments of the Old Law were 
dispensed through the ministry of the legal priesthood. 
Therefore it seems that Christ’s birth should have been 
made known rather to the priests in the Temple than to 
the shepherds in the fields. 

Obj. 5. Further, Christ was born of a Virgin-Mother, and 
was as yet a little child. It was therefore more suitable 
that He should be made known to youths and virgins than 
to old and married people, or to widows, such as Simeon 
and Anna. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. xiii. 18): I know whom 
I have chosen. But what is done by God’s wisdom is done 

III, 2 9 

Q. ao Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 130 

becomingly. Therefore those to whom Christ’s birth was 
made known were suitably chosen. 

I answer that, Salvation, which was to be accomplished by 
Christ, concerns all sorts and conditions of men: because, 
as it is written (Col. iii. 11), in Christ there 1s neither male 
nor female,* neither Gentile nor Jew, . . . bond nor free, and 
so forth. And in order that this might be foreshadowed 
in Christ’s birth, He was made known to men of all con- 
ditions. Because, as Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany (32 de Temp.), the shepherds were Israelites, the 
Magi were Gentiles. The former were nigh to Him, the latter 
far from Him. Both hastened to Him together as to the corner- 
stone. There was also another point of contrast: for the 
Magi were wise and powerful; the shepherds simple and 
lowly. He was also made known to the righteous as Simeon 
and Anna; and to sinners, as the Magi. He was made known 
both to men, and to women—namely, to Anna—so as to show 
no condition of men to be excluded from Christ’s redemption. 

Reply Obj. 1. That manifestation of Christ’s birth was a 
kind of foretaste of the full manifestation which was to 
come. And asin the later manifestation the first announce- 
ment of the grace of Christ was made by Him and His 
Apostles to the Jews and afterwards to the Gentiles, so 
the first to come to Christ were the shepherds, who were the 
first-fruits of the Jews, as being near to Him; and after- 
wards came the Magi from afar, who were the first-fruits of 
the Gentiles, as Augustine says (Serm. 30 de Temp. cc.). 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany (tbtd.): As unskilfulness predominates in the rustic 
manners of the shepherd, so ungodliness abounds in the pro- 
fane rites of the Magi. Yet did this Corner-Stone draw both 
to Itself ; inasmuch as He came ‘to choose the foolish things 
that He might confound the wise,’ and ‘ not to call the just, but 
sinners,’ so that the proud might not boast, nor the weak despair. 
Nevertheless, there are those who say that these Magi were 
not wizards, but wise astronomers, who are called Magi 
among the Persians or Chaldees. 

* Cf. Part I, Q. XCIIL, A. 6 ad 2, footnote. 

131 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Art. 4 

Reply Obj. 3. As Chrysostom says:* The Magi came 
from the east, because the first beginning of faith came from 
the land where the day is born ; since faith is the light of the 
soul. Or, because all who come to Christ come from Him 
and through Him: whence it is written (Zach. vi. 12): 
Behold a Man, the Orient is His name. Now, they are said 
to come from the east literally, either because, as some say, 
they came from the farthest parts of the east, or because 
they came from the neighbouring parts of Judea that lie 
to the east of the region inhabited by the Jews. Yet it 
is to be believed that certain signs of Christ’s birth ap- 
peared also in other parts of the world: thus, at Rome 
the river flowed with oil; and in Spain three suns were 
seen, which gradually merged into one.t 

Reply Obj. 4. As Chrysostom observes (Theophylact., 
Enarr. in Luc. ii. 8), the angel who announced Christ’s 
birth did not go to Jerusalem, nor did he seek the Scribes 
and Pharisees, for they were corrupted, and full of ill-will. 
But the shepherds were single-minded, and were like the 
,patriarchs and Moses in their mode of life. 

Moreover, these shepherds were types of the Doctors of 
the Church, to whom are revealed the mysteries of Christ 
that were hidden from the Jews. 

Reply Obj. 5. As Ambrose says (on Luke ii. 25): Jt was 
right that our Lord’s birth should be attested not only by the 
shepherds, but also by people advanced in age and virtue ; 
whose testimony is rendered the more credible by reason of 
their righteousness. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER: CHRIST HIMSELF SHOULD HAVE MADE HIS BIRTH 
KNOWN ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should have Him- 
self made His birth known. For a direct cause is always of 

* Hom. ii. in Matth. in the Opus Imperfectum, among the suppositi- 
tious works of Chrysostom. 7 
+ Euseb. Chronic. II., Olymp. 185. t Cf. ibid., Olymp. 184. 

Q. 36. Art.4 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 132 

greater power than an indirect cause, as is stated Phys. Viil. 
But Christ made His birth known through others—for 
instance, to the shepherds through the angels, and to the 
Magi through the star. Much more, therefore, should He 
Himself have made His birth known. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (Ecclus. xx. 32): Wisdom 
that is hid and treasure that is not seen ; what profit is there 
in them both? But Christ had, to perfection, the treasure 
of wisdom and grace from the beginning of His conception. 
Therefore, unless He had made the fulness of these gifts 
known by words and deeds, wisdom and grace would have 
been given Him to no purpose. But this is unreasonable: 
because God and nature do nothing without a purpose 
(D. Celoi.). 

Obj. 3. Further, we read in the book De Infantia Sal- 
vatoris that in His infancy Christ worked many miracles. 
It seems therefore that He did Himself make His birth 
known. 

On the contrary, Pope Leo says (Serm. xxxiv.) that the 
Magi found the infant Jesus in no way different from the 
generality of human infants. But other infants do not make 
themselves known. Therefore it was not fitting that Christ 
should Himself make His birth known. 

I answer that, Christ’s birth was ordered unto man’s 
salvation, which is by faith. But saving faith confesses 
Christ’s Godhead and humanity. It behoved, therefore, 
Christ’s birth to be made known in such a way that the 
proof of His Godhead should not be prejudicial to faith 
in His human nature. But this took place while Christ 
presented a likeness of human weakness, and yet, by means 
of God’s creatures, He showed the power of the Godhead in 
Himself. Therefore Christ made His birth known, not by 
Himself, but by means of certain other creatures. 

Reply Oly. 1. By the way of generation and movement we 
must of necessity come to the imperfect before the perfect. 
And therefore Christ was made known first through other 
creatures, and afterwards He Himself manifested Himself 
perfectly. 

133 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 5 

Reply Obj. 2. Although hidden wisdom is useless, yet 
there is no need for a wise man to make himself known at 
all times, but at a suitable time; for it is written (Ecclus. 
xx. 6): There is one that holdeth his peace because he knoweth 
not what to say: and there ts another that holdeth his peace, 
knowing the proper time. Hence the wisdom given to Christ 
was not useless, because at a suitable time He manifested 
Himself. And the very fact that He was hidden at a suit- 
able time is a sign of wisdom. 

Reply Obj. 3. The book De Infantia Salvatoris is apoc- 
ryphal. Moreover, Chrysostom (Hom. xxi. super Joan.) 
says that Christ worked no miracles before changing the 
water into wine, according to Jo. ii. 11: ‘ This beginning of 
miracles did Jesus.’ For if He had worked miracles at an 
early age, there would have been no need for anyone else to 
mantfest Him to the Israelites ; whereas John the Baptist says 
(Jo. i. 31): ‘ That He may be made mansfest in Israel ; therefore 
am I come baptizing with water.’ Moreover, 1t was fitting 
that He should not begin to work miracles at an early age. 

.For people would have thought the Incarnation to be unreal, 
and, out of sheer spite, would have crucified Him before the 
proper time. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BIRTH SHOULD HAVE BEEN MANIFESTED 
BY MEANS OF THE ANGELS AND THE STAR? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s birth should not 
have been manifested by means of the angels. For angels 
are spiritual substances, according to Ps. ciii. 4: Who maketh 
His (Vulg., makest Thy) angels, spirits. But Christ’s birth 
was in the flesh, and not in His spiritual substance. There- 
fore it should not have been manifested by means of angels. 

Obj. 2. Further, the righteous are more akin to the 
angels than to any other, according to Ps. xxxiil. 8: The 
angel of the Lord shall encamp round about them that fear Him, 
and shall deliver them. But Christ’s birth was not announced 
to the righteous—viz., Simeon and Anna—through the 

Q. 36. Art.5 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 134 

angels. Therefore neither should it have been announced 
to the shepherds by means of the angels. 

Obj. 3. Further, it seems that neither ought it to have 
been announced to the Magi by means of the star. For 
this seems to favour the error of those who think that 
man’s birth is influenced by the stars. But occasions of 
sin should be taken away from man. Therefore it was not 
fitting that Christ’s birth should be announced by a star. 

Obj. 4. Further, a sign should be certain, in order that 
something be made known thereby. But a star does not 
seem to be a certain sign of Christ’s birth. Therefore 
Christ’s birth was not suitably announced by a star. 

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. xxxii. 4): The works 
of God are perfect. But this manifestation is the work of God. 
Therefore it was accomplished by means of suitable signs. 

I answer that, As knowledge is imparted through a syllogism 
from something which we know better, so knowledge given 
by signs must be conveyed through things which are familiar 
to those to whom the knowledge is imparted. Now, it is 
clear that the righteous have, through the spirit of pro- 
phecy, a certain familiarity with the interior instinct of the 
Holy Ghost, and are wont to be taught thereby, without 
the guidance of sensible signs. Whereas others, occupied 
with material things, are led through the domain of the 
senses to that of the intellect. The Jews, however, were 
accustomed to receive Divine answers through the angels; 
through whom they also received the Law, according to 
Acts vii. 53: You [Vulg., who] . . . have received the Law by 
the disposition of angels. And the Gentiles, especially 
astrologers, were wont to observe the course of the stars. 
And therefore Christ’s birth was made known to the 
righteous—viz., Simeon and Anna—by the interior instinct 
of the Holy Ghost, according to Luke ii. 26: He had 
received an answer from the Holy Ghost, that he should not 
see death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord. But to 
the shepherds and Magi, as being occupied with material 
things, Christ’s birth was made known by means of visible 
apparitions. And since this birth was not only earthly, 

135 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 5 

but also, in a way, heavenly, to both (shepherds and Magi) 
it is revealed through heavenly signs: for, as Augustine 
says in a sermon on the Epiphany (cciv.): The angels in- 
habit, and the stars adorn, the heavens: by both, therefore, do 
the ‘ heavens show forth the glory of God.’ Moreover, it was 
not without reason that Christ’s birth was made known, by 
means of angels, to the shepherds, who, being Jews, were 
accustomed to frequent apparitions of the angels: whereas 
it was revealed by means of a star to the Magi, who were 
wont to consider the heavenly bodies. Because, as Chry- 
sostom says (Hom. vi. in Maith.): Our Lord deigned to call 
them through things to which they were accustomed. There 
is also another reason. For, as Gregory says (Hom. x. in 
Evang.) : To the Jews, as rational beings, it was fitting that 
a rational animal*—viz., an angel—should preach. Whereas 
the Gentiles, who were unable to come to the knowledge of God 
through the reason, were led to God, not by words, but by signs. 
And as our Lord, when He was able to speak, was announced 
by heralds who spoke, so before He could speak. He was mani- 

« fested by speechless elements. Again, there is yet another 
reason. For, as Augustinet says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany: To Abraham was promised an innumerable progeny, 
begotten, not of carnal propagation, but of the fruitfulness of 
faith. For this reason tt 1s compared to the multitude of stars ; 
that a heavenly progeny might be hoped for. Wherefore the 
Gentiles, who are thus designated by the stars, are by the rising 
of a new star stimulated to seek Christ, through whom they 
are made the seed of Abraham. 

Reply Obj. 1. That which of itself is hidden needs to be 
manifested, but not that which in itself is manifest. Now, 
the flesh of Him who was born was manifest, whereas the 
Godhead was hidden. And therefore it was fitting that 
this birth should be made known by angels, who are the 
ministers of God. Wherefore also a certain brightness 
(Luke ii. 9) accompanied the angelic apparition, to indicate 
that He who was just born was the Brightness of the Father’s 
glory. 

* Cf. Part I, Q. LI., A. 1 ad 2. ft Pope Leo. 

Q. 36. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 136 

Reply Obj. 2. The righteous did not need the visible 
apparition of the angel; on account of their perfection 
the interior instinct of the Holy Ghost was enough for them. 

Reply Obj. 3. The star which manifested Christ’s birth 
removed all occasion of error. For, as Augustine says 
(Contra Faust. ii.): No astrologer has ever so far connected 
the stars with man’s fate at the time of his birth as to assert 
that one of the stars, at the birth of any man, left tts orbit and 
made ‘its way to him who was just born : as happened in the 
case of the star which made known the birth of Christ. 
Consequently this does not corroborate the error of those 
who think there is a connection between man’s birth and the 
course of the stars, for they do not hold that the course of the 
stars can be changed at a man’s birth. 

In the same sense Chrysostom says (Hom. vi. in Matth.): 
It ts not an astronomer’s business to know from the stars those 
who are born, but to tell the future from the hour of a man’s 
birth : whereas the Magi did not know the time of the birth, so 
as to conclude therefrom some knowledge of the future ; rather 
was tt the other way about. 

Reply Obj. 4. Chrysostom relates (Hom. ii. in Matth.) that, 
according to some apocryphal books, a certain tribe in the 
far east near the ocean was in the possession of a document 
written by Seth, referring to this star and to the presents to 
be offered: which tribe watched attentively for the rising of 
this star, twelve men being appointed to take observations, 
who at stated times repaired to the summit of a mountain 
with faithful assiduity: whence they subsequently perceived 
the star containing the figure of a small child, and above 
it the form of a cross, 

Or we may say, as may be read in the book De Qq. Veet. 
et Nov. Test. qu. \xiii., that these Magi followed the tradition of 
Balaam, who said, ‘ A star shall rise out of Jacob.’ Where- 
fore observing this star to be a stranger to the system of this 
world, they gathered that it was the one foretold by Balaam to 
indicate the King of the Jews. 

Or, again, it may be said with Augustine, in a sermon on 
the Epiphany (ccclxxiv.), that the Magi had received a reve- 

137. THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 6 

lation through the angels that the star was a sign of the birth 
of Christ: and he thinks it probable that these were good 
angels ; since in adoring Christ they were seeking for salvation. 

Or, with Pope Leo, in a sermon on the Epiphany (xxxiv.), 
that besides the outward form which aroused the attention of 
their corporeal eyes, a more brilliant ray enlightened their 
minds with the light of faith. 

SIxTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BIRTH WAS MADE KNOWN IN A 
BECOMING ORDER ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s birth was made 
known in an unbecoming order. For Christ’s birth should 
have been made known to them first who were nearest to 
Christ, and who longed for Him most; according to Wisd. 
vi. 14: She preventeth them that covet her, so that she first 
showeth herself unto them. But the righteous were nearest to 

« Christ by faith, and longed most for His coming; whence it is 
written (Luke ii. 25) of Simeon that he was just and devout, 
watting for the consolation of Israel. Therefore Christ’s 
birth should have been made known to Simeon before. the 
shepherds and Magi. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Magi were the first-fruits of the 
Gentsles, who were to believe in Christ. But first the fulness 
of the Gentiles . . . come in unto faith, and afterwards all 
Israel shall be saved, as is written (Rom. xi. 25). Therefore 
Christ’s birth should have been made known to the Magi 
before the shepherds. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written (Matth. ii. 16) that Herod... 
killed all the male children that were in Bethlehem, and in all 
the borders thereof, from two years old and under, according 
to the time which he had diligently inquired from the wise 
men: so that it seems that the Magi were two years in 
coming to Christ after His birth. It was therefore un- 
becoming that Christ should be made known to the Gentiles 
so long after His birth. 

Q. 36. Arr.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 138 

On the contrary, It is written (Dan. ii. 21): He changes 
time and ages. Consequently the time of the manifestation 
of Christ’s birth seems to have been arranged in a suitable 
order. 

I answer that, Christ’s birth was first made known to the 
shepherds on the very day that He was born. For, as it is 
written (Luke ii. 8, 15, 16): There were in the same country 
shepherds watching, and keeping the night-watches over their 
flock. . . . And it came to pass, after the angels departed from 
them into heaven, they [Vulg., the shepherds] said one to 
another : Let us go over to Bethlehem . . . and they came with 
haste. Second in order were the Magi, who came to Christ 
on the thirteenth day after His birth, on which day is kept 
the feast of the Epiphany. For if they had come after a 
year, or even two years, they would not have found Him in 
Bethlehem, since it is written (Luke il. 39) that after they 
had performed all things according to the law of the Lord—that 
is to say, after they had offered up the Child Jesus in the 
Temple—they returned into Galilee, to thetr city—namely, 
Nazareth. In the third place, it was made known in the 
Temple to the righteous on the fortieth day after His birth, 
as related by Luke (ii. 22). 

The reason of this order is that the shepherds represent 
the apostles and other believers of the Jews, to whom the 
faith of Christ was made known first; among whom there 
were not many mighty, not many noble, as we read 1 Cor. 
i. 26. Secondly, the faith of Christ came to the fulness of 
the Gentiles ; and this is foreshadowed in the Magi. Thirdly 
it came to the fulness of the Jews, which is foreshadowed in 
the righteous. Wherefore also Christ was manifested to 
them in the Jewish Temple. 

Reply Obj. 1. As the Apostle says (Rom. ix. 30, 31): 
Israel, by following after the law of justice, 1s not come unto 
the law of justice: but the Gentiles, who followed not after 
justice, forestalled the generality of the Jews in the justice 
which is of faith. As a figure of this, Simeon, who was 
waiting for the consolation of Israel, was the last to know 
Christ born: and he was preceded by the Magi and the 

139 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 6 

shepherds, who did not await the coming of Christ with 
such longing. 

Reply Obj. 2. Although the fulness of the Gentiles came in 
unto faith before the fulness of the Jews, yet the first-fruits 
of the Jews preceded the first-fruits of the Gentiles in faith. 
For this reason the birth of Christ was made known to the 
shepherds before the Magi. 

Reply Obj. 3. There are two opinions about the apparition 
of the star seen by the Magi. For Chrysostom (Hom. ii. in 
Maith.)* and Augustine in a sermon on the Epiphany (cxxxi., 
CXXXli.), say that the star was seen by the Magi during 
the two years that preceded the birth of Christ: and then, 
having first considered the matter and prepared themselves 
for the journey, they came from the farthest east to Christ, 
arriving on the thirteenth day after His birth. Wherefore 
Herod, immediately after the departure of the Magi, per- 
cetving that He was deluded by them, commanded the male 
children to be killed from two years old and under, being 
doubtful lest Christ were already born when the star appeared, 

,according as he had heard from the Magi. 

But others say that the star first appeared when Christ 
was born, and that the Magi set off as soon as they saw the 
star, and accomplished a journey of very great length in 
thirteen days, owing partly to the Divine assistance, and 
partly to the fleetness of the dromedaries. And I say this 
on the supposition that they came from the far east. But 
others, again, say that they came from a neighbouring 
country, whence also was Balaam, to whose teaching they 
were heirs; and they are said to have come from the east, 
because their country was to the east of the country of the 
Jews. In this case Herod killed the babes, not as soon as 
the Magi departed, but two years after: and that either 
because he is said to have gone to Rome in the meanwhile 
on account of an accusation brought against him, or because 
he was troubled at some imminent peril, and for the time 
being desisted from his anxiety to slay the child, or because 
he may have thought that the Magi, being deceived by the 

* Opus Imperf. in Matth., falsely ascribed to Chrysostom. 

Q. 36. Art.7. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 140 

illusory appearance of the star, and not finding the child, as 
they had expected to, were ashamed to return to him: as 
Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. ii.). And the reason 
why he killed not only those who were two years old, but 
also the younger children, would be, as Augustine says in 
a sermon on the Innocents, because he feared lest a child 
whom the stars obey, might make himself appear older or 
younger. 

SEVENTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE STAR WHICH APPEARED TO THE MAGI 
BELONGED TO THE HEAVENLY SYSTEM ? 

We proceed thus to the Seventh Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the star which appeared 
to the Magi belonged to the heavenly system. For Augustine 
says in a sermon on the Epiphany (cxxii.): While God yet 
clings to the breast, and suffers Himself to be wrapped in humble 
swaddling clothes, suddenly a new star shines forth in the 
heavens. Therefore the star which appeared to the Magi 
belonged to the heavenly system. 

Obj. 2, Further, Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany (cci.): Christ was made known to the shepherds by 
angels, to the Magi by a star. A heavenly tongue speaks to 
both, because the tongue of the prophets spoke no longer. But 
the angels who appeared to the shepherds were really angels 
from heaven. Therefore also the star which appeared to 
the Magi was really a star from the heavens. 

Obj. 3. Further, stars which are not in the heavens but 
in the air are called comets, which do not appear at the birth 
of kings, but rather are signs of their approaching death. 
But this star was a sign of the King’s birth: wherefore the 
Magi said (Matth. ii. 2): Where is He that is born King of the 
Jews? For we have seen His star in the east. Therefore it 
seems that it was a star from the heavens. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Faust. ii.): It 
was not one of those stars which since the beginning of the 
creation observe the course appointed to them by the Creator ; 

? 

141 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 7 

but this star was a stranger to the heavens, and made tts appear- 
ance at the strange sight of a virgin in childbirth. 

I answer that, As Chrysostom says (Hom. vi. in Matth.), it 
is clear, for many reasons, that the star which appeared to 
the Magi did not belong to the heavenly system. First, 
because no other star approaches from the same quarter 
as this star, whose course was from north to south, these 
being the relative positions of Persia, whence the Magi 
came, and Judea. Secondly, from the time [at which it 
was seen]. For it appeared not only at night, but also at 
midday: and no star can do this, not even the moon. 
Thirdly, because it was visible at one time and hidden at 
another. For when they entered Jerusalem it hid itself: 
then, when they had left Herod, it showed itself again. 
Fourthly, because its movement was not continuous, but 
when the Magi had to continue their journey the star 
moved on; when they had to stop the star stood still; as 
happened to the pillar of a cloud in the desert. Fifthly, be- 
cause it indicated the virginal Birth, not by remaining aloft, 
but by coming down below. For it is written (Matth. ii. 9) 
that the star which they had seen tn the east went before them, 
until 1t came and stood over wheve the Child was. Whence it 
is evident that the words of the Magi, We have seen His star 
in the east, are to be taken as meaning, not that when they 
were in the east the star appeared over the country of Judea, 
but that when they saw the star it was in the east, and that 
it preceded them into Judea (although this is considered 
doubtful by some). ‘But it could not have indicated the 
house distinctly, unless it were near the earth. And, as 
he [Chrysostom] observes, this does not seem fitting to a 
star, but of some power endowed with reason. Consequently 
at seems that this was some invisible force made visible under 
the form of a star. 

Wherefore some say that, as the Holy Ghost, after our 
Lord’s Baptism, came down on Him under the form of a 
dove, so did He appear to the Magi under the form of a 
star. While others say that the angel who, under a human 
form, appeared to the shepherds, under the form of a star, 

Q. 36. Art.8 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 142 

appeared to the Magi. But it seems more probable that it 
was a newly created star, not in the heavens, but in the air 
near the earth, and that its movement varied according 
to God’s will. Wherefore Pope Leo says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany (xxxi.): A star of unusual brightness appeared to 
the three Magi in the east, which, through being more brilliant 
and more beautiful than the other stars, drew men’s gaze and 
attention : so that they understood at once that such an unwonted 
event could not be devoid of purpose. 

Reply Obj. 1. In Holy Scripture the air is sometimes 
called the heavens—for instance, The birds of the heavens 
[Douay—air] and the fishes of the sea. 

Reply Obj. 2. The angels of heaven, by reason of their 
very office, come down to us, being sent to minister. But 
the stars of heaven do not change their position. Wherefore 
there is no comparison. 

Reply Obj. 3. As the star did not follow the course of the 
heavenly stars, so neither did it follow the course of the 
comets, which neither appear during the daytime nor vary 
their customary course. Nevertheless in its signification it 
has something in common with the comets. Because the 
heavenly kingdom of Christ shall break in pieces, and shall 
consume all the kingdoms of the earth, and itself shall stand 
for ever (Dan. il. 44). 

EIGHTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS BECOMING THAT THE MAGI SHOULD COME 
TO ADORE CHRIST AND PAY HOMAGE TO HIM ? 

We proceed thus to the Eighth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was unbecoming that 
the Magi should come to adore Christ and pay homage to 
Him. For reverence is due to a king from his subjects. But 
the Magi did not belong to the kingdom of the Jews. There- 
fore, since they knew by seeing the star that He that was 
born was the King of the Jews, it seems unbecoming that 
they should come to adore Him. 

Obj. 2. Further, it seems absurd during the reign of one 

143. THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 8 

king to proclaim a stranger. But in Judea Herod was reign- 
ing. Therefore it was foolish of the Magi to proclaim the 
birth of a king. 

Obj. 3. Further, a heavenly sign is more certain than a 
human sign. But the Magi had come to Judea from the 
east, under the guidance of a heavenly sign. Therefore it 
was foolish of them to seek human guidance besides that of 
the star, saying: Where is He that 1s born King of the Jews ? 

Obj. 4. Further, the offering of gifts and the homage of 
adoration are not due save to kings already reigning. But 
the Magi did not find Christ resplendent with kingly 
grandeur. Therefore it was unbecoming for them to offer 
Him gifts and homage. 

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. lx. 3): [The Gentiles] 
shall walk tn thy light, and kings in the brightness of thy rising. 
But those who walk in the Divine light do not err. There- 
fore the Magi were right in offering homage to Christ. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3 ad 1), the Magi are 
the first-fruits of the Gentiles that believed in Christ; be- 
cause their faith was a presage of the faith and devotion of 
the nations who were to come to Christ from afar. And 
therefore, as the devotion and faith of the nations is without 
any error through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, so also 
we must believe that the Magi, inspired by the Holy Ghost, 
did wisely in paying homage to Christ. 

Reply Obj. t. As Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany (cc.): Though many kings of the Jews had been 
born and died, none of them did the Magz seek to adore. 
And so they who came from a distant foreign land to a 
kingdom that was entirely strange to them, had no tdea of 
showing such great homage to such a king as the Jews were 
wont to have. But they had learnt that such a King was born 
that by adoring Him they might be sure of obtaining from Him 
the salvation which 1s of God. 

Reply Obj. 2. By proclaiming [Christ King] the Magi 
foreshadowed the constancy of the Gentiles in confessing 
Christ even until death. Whence Chrysostom says (Hom. ii. 
in Matth.) that, while they thought of the King who was to 

Q. 36. Arr.8 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 144 

come, the Magi feared not the king who was actually present. 
They had not yet seen Christ, and they were already pre- 
pared to die for Him. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Epiphany (cc.): The star which led the Magi to the place 
where the Divine Infant was with His Virgin-Mother could 
bring them to the town of Bethlehem, in which Christ was born. 
Yet tt hid itself until the Jews also bore testimony of the city 
in which Christ was to be born: so that, being encouraged by 
a twofold witness, as Pope Leo says (Serm. xxxiv.), they might 
seek with more ardent faith Him, whom both the brightness of 
the star and the authority of prophecy revealed. Thus they 
proclaim that Christ is born, and inquire where; they believe 
and ask, as it were, betokening those who walk by faith and 
desire to see, as Augustine says in a sermon on the Epiphany 
(cxcix.). But the Jews, by indicating to them the place 
of Christ’s birth, are like the carpenters who built the Ark of 
Noe, who provided others with the means of escape, and them- 
selves perished tn the flood. Those who asked, heard and went 
their way: the teachers spoke and stayed where they were ; like 
te mulestones that point out the way but walk not (August., 
Serm. cclxxiit.). It was also by God’s will that, when 
they no longer saw the star, the Magi, by human instinct, 
went to Jerusalem, to seek in the royal city the new-born 
King, in order that Christ’s birth might be publicly pro- 
claimed first in Jerusalem, according to Isa. ii. 3: The Law 
shall come forth from Sion, and the Word of the Lord from 
Jerusalem ; and also in order that by the zeal of the Magi who 
came from afar, the indolence of the Jews who lived near at 
hand, might be proved worthy of condemnation (Remig., 
Hom. in Maitth. ii. 1). 

Reply Obj. 4. As Chrysostom says (Hom. ii. in Matth.):* 
If the Magi had come 1n search of an earthly King, they would 
have been disconcerted at finding that they had taken the 
trouble to come such a long way for nothing. Consequently 
they would have neither adored nor offered gifts. But since 
they sought a heavenly King, though they found in Him no 

* From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum. 

145 THE MANIFESTATION OF CHRIST Q. 36. Arr. 8 

signs of royal pre-eminence, yet, content with the testimony 
of the star alone, they adored : for they saw a man, and they 
acknowledged a God. Moreover, they offer gifts in keeping 
with Christ’s greatness: gold, as to the great King ; they offer 
up tncense as to God, because it 1s used tn the Divine Sacrifice ; 
and myrrh, which is used in embalming the bodies of the dead, 
ts offered as to Him who ts to die for the salvation of all 
(Gregor., Hom. x. in Evang.). And hereby, as Gregory 
says (ibid.), we are taught to offer gold, which signifies 
wisdom, to the new-born King, by the lustre of our wisdom 
in Hts sight. We offer God incense, which signifies fervour 
in prayer, tf our constant prayers mount up to God with an 
odour of sweetness; and we offer myrrh, which signifies 
mortification of the flesh, if we mortify the ill-deeds of the 
flesh by refraining from them. 

EPE2 

QUESTION XXXVII. 

OF CHRIST’S CIRCUMCISION, AND OF THE OTHER LEGAL 
OBSERVANCES ACCOMPLISHED IN REGARD TO 
THE CHILD CHRIST. 

(In Four Articles.) 

WE must now consider Christ’s circumcision. And since 
the circumcision is a kind of profession of observing the 
Law, according to Gal. v. 3: I testify . . . to every man 
circumcising himself that he is a debtor to do the whole Law, we 
shall have at the same time to inquire about the other legal 
observances accomplished in regard to the Child Christ. 
Wherefore there are four points of inquiry: (1) His circum- 
cision, (2) The imposition of His name. (3) His presen- 
tation. (4) His Mother’s purification. 

First ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE BEEN CIRCUMCISED ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
been circumcised. For on the advent of the reality, the figure 
ceases, But circumcision was prescribed to Abraham as a 
sign of the covenant concerning his posterity, as may be 
seen from Gen. xvii. Now this covenant was fulfilled in 
Christ’s birth. Therefore circumcision should have ceased 
at once. 

Obj. 2. Further, every action of Christ is a lesson to us;* 
wherefore it is written (Jo. xiii. 15): I have given you an 
example, that as I have done to you, so you do also. But we 
ought not to be circumcised; according to Gal. v. 2: If you 

* Innoc. III., Serm. xxii. de Temp. 
146 

147 CHRIST’S CIRCUMCISION Q 37. Arr. 1 

be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Therefore it 
seems that neither should Christ have been circumcised. 

Obj. 3. Further, circumcision was prescribed as a remedy 
of original sin. But Christ did not contract original sin, 
as stated above (Q. XIV., A. 3; Q. XV., A. 1). Therefore 
Christ should not have been circumcised. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke ii. 21): After eight days 
were accomplished, that the child should be circumcised. 

I answer that, For several reasons Christ ought to have been 
circumcised. First, in order to prove the reality of His 
human nature, in contradiction to the Manichean, who said 
that He had an imaginary body: and in contradiction to 
Apollinarius, who said that Christ’s body was consubstantial 
with His Godhead; and in contradiction to Valentine, who 
said that Christ brought His body from heaven. Secondly, 
in order to show His approval of circumcision, which God 
had instituted of old. Thirdly, in order to prove that He 
was descended from Abraham, who had received the com- 
mandment of circumcision as a sign of his faith in Him. 
Fourthly, in order to take away from the Jews an excuse 
for not receiving Him, if He were uncircumcised. Fifthly, 
in order by His example to exhort us to be obedient.* Where- 
fore He was circumcised on the eighth day according to 
the prescription of the Law (Lev. xii. 3). Sixthly, that 
He who had come in the likeness of sinful flesh might not 
reject the remedy whereby sinful flesh was wont to be healed, 
Seventhly, that by taking on Himself the burden of the Law, 
He might set others free therefrom, according to Gal. iv. 4, 5: 
God sent His Son... made under the Law, that He might 
redeem them who were under the Law. 

Reply Obj. 1. Circumcision by the removal of the piece of 
skin in the member of generation, signified the passing away 
of the old generation:} from the decrepitude of which we are 
freed by Christ’s Passion. Consequently this figure was not 
completely fulfilled in Christ’s birth, but in His Passion, 
until which time the circumcision retained its virtue and 

* Bede, Hom. x. in Evang. 
+ Athanas., De Sabb. et Circumcis. 

Q. 37. Art.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 148 

status. Therefore it behoved Christ to be circumcised as a 
son of Abraham before His Passion. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ submitted to circumcision while it 
was yet of obligation. And thus His action in this should 
be imitated by us, in fulfilling those things which are of 
obligation in our own time. Because there is a time and 
opportunity for every business (Eccl. vili. 6). 

Moreover, according to Origen (Hom. xiv. in Luc.), as we 
died when He died, and rose again when Christ rose from the 
dead, so were we circumcised spiritually through Christ: 
wherefore we need no carnal circumcision. And this is what 
the Apostle says (Col. ii. 11): Im whom [t.e., Christ] you 
are circumcised with circumcision not made by hand tn de- 
spoiling of the body of the flesh, but in the circumcision of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Christ voluntarily took upon Himself our 
death, which is the effect of sin, whereas He had no sin 
Himself, in order to deliver us from death, and to make us 
to die spiritually unto sin, so also He took upon Himself 
circumcision, which was a remedy against original sin; 
whereas He contracted no original sin, in order to deliver 
us from the yoke of the Law, and to accomplish a spiritual 
circumcision in us—in order, that is to say, that, by taking 
upon Himself the shadow, He might accomplish the reality. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
- WHETHER HIS NAME WAS SUITABLY GIVEN TO CHRIST ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that an unsuitable name was 
given to Christ. JT*or the Gospel reality should correspond 
to the prophetic foretelling. But the prophets foretold 
another name for Christ: for it is written (Isa. vii. 14): 
Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and His name 
shall be called Emmanuel ; and (ibid. viii. 3): Call His name, 
Hasten to take away the spoils ; Make haste to take away the 
prey ; and (ibid. ix. 6): His name shall be called Wonderful, 
Counsellor, God the Mighty, the Father of the world to come, 

149 CHRIST’S CIRCUMCISION = Q. 37. Arr. 2 

the Prince of Peace ; and (Zach. vi. 12): Behold a Man, the 
Orient is His name. Thus it was unsuitable that His name 
should be called Jesus. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (Isa. lxii. 2): Thou shalt be 
called by anew name, which the mouth of the Lord hath named 
[Vulg., shall name]. But the name Jesus is not a new name, 
but was given to several in the Old Testament: as may be 
seen in the genealogy of Christ (Luke iii. 29). Therefore it 
seems that it was unfitting for His name to be called Jesus. 

Obj. 3. Further, the name Jesus signifies salvation ; as 
is clear from Matth. i. 21: She shall bring forth a son, and 
thou shalt call His name Jesus. For He shall save His people 
from theiy sins. But salvation through Christ was accom- 
plished not only in the circumcision, but also in uncircum- 
cision, as is declared by the Apostle (Rom. iv. 11, 12). 
Therefore this name was not suitably given to Christ at His 
circumcision. 

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture, in which it 
is written (Luke ii. 21): After eight days were accomplished, 
that the child should be circumcised, His name was called Jesus. 

I answer that, A name should answer to the nature of a 
thing. This is clear in the names of genera and species, as 
stated Metaph. iv.: Since a name 1s but an expression of the 
definition which designates a thing’s proper nature. 

Now, the names of individual men are always taken from 
some property of the men to whom they are given. Either 
in regard to time; thus men are named after the Saints 
on whose feasts they are born: or in respect of some blood 
relation; thus a son is named after his father or some other 
relation; and thus the kinsfolk of John the Baptist wished 
to call him by his father’s name, Zachary, not by the name 
John, because there was none of his kindred that was called 
by this name, as related Luke 1. 59-61. Or, again, from 
some occurrence; thus Joseph called the name of the first- 
born Manasses, saying: God hath made me to forget all my 
labours (Gen. xli. 51). Or, again, from some quality of 
the person who receives the name; thus it is written (Gen. 
xxv. 25) that he that came forth first was red and hairy lke 

Q. 37. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 150 

a skin; and his name was called Esau, which is interpreted 
red. 

But names given to men by God always signify some 
gratuitous gift bestowed on them by Him; thus it was said 
to Abraham (Gen. xvii. 5): Thou shalt be called Abraham ; 
because I have made thee a father of many nations: and it 
was said to Peter (Matth. xvi. 18): Thou art Peter, and upon 
this rock I will build My Church: Since, therefore, this 
prerogative of grace was bestowed on the Man Christ that 
through Him all men might be saved, therefore He was 
becomingly named Jesus—t.e., Saviour: the angel having 
foretold this name not only to His mother, but also to 
Joseph, who was to be his foster-father. 

Reply Obj. 1. All these names in some way mean the same 
as Jesus, which means salvation. For the name Emmanuel, 
which being interpreted is ‘ God with us,’ designates the cause 
of salvation, which is the union of the Divine and human 
natures in the Person of the Son of God, the result of which 
union was that God 1s with us. 

When it was said, Call his name, Hasten to take away, etc., 
these words indicate from what He saved us—viz., from 
the devil, whose spoils He took away, according to Col. 
li. 15: Despotling the principalities and powers, He hath 
exposed them confidently. 

When it was said, His name shall be called Wonderful, 
etc., the way and term of our salvation are pointed out: 
inasmuch as by the wonderful counsel and might of the God- 
head we are brought to the inheritance of the life to come, in 
which the children of God will enjoy perfect peace under 
God thety Prince, 

When it was said, Behold a Man, the Orient is His name, 
reference is made to the same, as in the first—viz., to the 
mystery of the Incarnation, by reason of which fo the righteous 
a light is risen up in darkness (Ps. cxi. 4). 

Reply Obj. 2. The name Jesus could be suitable for some 
other reason to those who lived before Christ—for instance, 
because they were saviours in a particular and temporal 
sense. But in the sense of spiritual and universal salvation, 

I51 CHRIST’S CIRCUMCISION Q. 37. Arr. 3 

this name is proper to Christ, and thus it is called a new 
name. 

Reply Obj. 3. As is related Gen. xvii., Abraham received 
from God and at the same time both his name and the com- 
mandment of circumcision. For this reason it was custom- 
ary among the Jews to name children on the very day of 
circumcision, as though before being circumcised they had 
not as yet perfect existence: just as now also children re- 
ceive their names in Baptism. Wherefore on Prov. iv. 3, 
I was my father's son, tender, and as an only son in the sight 
of my mother, the gloss says: Why does Solomon call himself 
an only son in the sight of his mother, when Scripture testifies 
that he had an elder brother of the same mother, unless tt be 
that the latter died unnamed soon after birth? Therefore 
it was that Christ received His name at the time of His 
circumcision. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS BECOMINGLY PRESENTED IN 
THE TEMPLE ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was unbecomingly 
presented in the Temple. For it is written (Exod. xiii. 2): 
Sanctify unto Me every first-born that openeth the womb among 
the children of Israel. But Christ came forth from the 
closed womb of the Virgin; and thus He did not open His 
mother’s womb. Therefore Christ was not bound by this 
law to be presented in the Temple. 

Obj. 2. Further, that which is always in one’s presence 
cannot be presented to one. But Christ’s humanity was 
always in God’s presence in the highest degree, as being 
always united to Him in unity of person. Therefore there 
was no need for Him to be presented to the Lord. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ is the principal victim, to whom 
all the victims of the Old Law are referred, as the figure 
to the reality. But a victim should not be offered up for 
a victim. Therefore it was not fitting that another victim 
should be offered up for Christ. 

Q. 37. Art.3. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 152 

Obj. 4. Further, among the legal victims the principal 
was the lamb, which was a continual sacrifice (Vulg., holo- 
caust), as is stated Num. xxviii. 6: for which reason Christ 
is also called the Lamb—Behold the Lamb of God (Jo. i. 29). 
It was therefore more fitting that a lamb should be offered 
for Christ than a pair of turtle doves or two young pigeons. 

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture which relates 
this as having taken place (Luke ii. 22). 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), Christ wished to be 
made under the Law, that He might redeem them who were 
under the Law (Gal. iv. 4, 5), and that the justification of the 
Law might be spiritually fulfilled in His members. Now, 
the Law contained a twofold precept touching the children 
born. One was a general precept which affected all— 
namely, that when the days of the mother’s purification were 
expired, a sacrifice was to be offered either for a son or for 
a daughter, as laid down Lev. xii. 6. And this sacrifice was 
for the expiation of the sin in which the child was con- 
ceived and born; and also for a certain consecration of the 
child, because it was then presented in the Temple for the 
first time. Wherefore one offering was made as a holocaust 
and another for sin. 

The other was a special precept in the law concerning the 
first-born of both man and beast: for the Lord claimed for 
Himself all the first-born in Israel, because, in order to de- 
liver the Israelites, He slew every first-born in the land of 
Egypt, both men and cattle (Exod. xii. 12, 13, 29), the first- 
born of Israel being saved; which law is set down Exod. xiii. 
Here also was Christ foreshadowed, who is the First-born 
amongst many brethren (Rom. viii. 29). 

Therefore, since Christ was born of a woman, and was her 
first-born, and since He wished to be made under the Law, 
the Evangelist Luke shows that both these precepts were 
fulfilled in His regard. First, as to that which concerns 
the first-born, when he says (ii. 22, 23): They carried Him 
to Jerusalem to present Him to the Lord: as it is written in 
the law of the Lord, ‘ Every male opening the womb shall be 
called holy to the Lord.’ Secondly, as to the general precept 

153 CHRIST’S CIRCUMCISION QQ. 37. Art. 3 

which concerned all, when he says (ibid., 24): And to offer a 
Sacrifice accc’ding as it is written in the law of the Lord, a 
pair of turtle doves or two young pigeons. 

Reply Obj.t. As Gregory of Nyssa says (De Occursu Dom.): 
It seems that this precept of the Law was fulfilled in God in- 
carnate alone in a special manner exclusively proper to Him. 
For He alone, whose conception was ineffable, and whose 
birth was incomprehensible, opened the virginal womb which 
had been closed to sexual union, in such a way that after birth 
the seal of chastity remained inviolate. Consequently the 
words opening the womb imply that nothing hitherto had 
entered or gone forth therefrom. Again, for a special 
reason is it written ‘a male,’ because He contracted nothing 
of the woman's sin : and in a singular way is He called ‘ holy,’ 
because He felt no contagion of earthly corruption, whose 
birth was wondrously immaculate (Ambrose, on Luke ii. 23). 

Reply Obj. 2. As the Son of God became man, and was 
circumcised in the flesh, not for His own sake, but that He 
might make us to be God’s through grace, and that we might be 
circumcised in the spirit; so, again, for our sake He was 
presented to the Lord, that we may learn to offer ourselves to 
God.* And this was done after His circumcision, in order 
to show that no one who is not circumcised from vice ts worthy 
of Divine regard.t 

Reply Obj. 3. For this very reason He wished the legal 
victims to be offered for Him who was the true Victim, in 
order that the figure might be united to and confirmed by the 
reality, against those who denied that in the Gospel Christ 
preached the God of the Law. For we must not think, says 
Origen (Hom. xiv. in Luc.) that the good God subjected His 
Son to the enemy’s law, which He Himself had not given. 

Reply Obj. 4. The law of Lev. xii. 6, 8 commanded those 
who could, to offer, for a son or a daughter, a lamb and also a 
turtle dove or a pigeon : but those who were unable to offer a 
lamb were commanded to offer two turtle doves or two young 
pigeons.t And so the Lord, who, ‘ being rich, became poor 

* Athanasius, on Luke 11. 23. t Bede, on Luke ii. 23. 
t Bede, Hom. xv. in Purif. 

Q. 37. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 154 

for our [Vulg., your] sakes, that through His poverty we [you] 
might be rich,’ as is written 2 Cor. viii, 9, wished the poor 
man’s victim to be offered for Him: just as in His birth He 
was wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger.* 
Nevertheless, these birds have a figurative sense. For the 
turtle dove, being a loquacious bird, represents the preaching 
and confession of faith; and because it is a chaste animal, 
it signifies chastity; and being a solitary animal, it signifies 
contemplation. The pigeon is a gentle and simple animal, 
and therefore signifies gentleness and simplicity. It is also 
a gregarious animal; wherefore it signifies the active life. 
Consequently this sacrifice signified the perfection of Christ 
and His members. Again, both these animals, by the plaintive- 
ness of thetr song, represented the mourning of the saints 1n this 
life: but the turtle dove, being solitary, signifies the tears of 
prayer ; whereas the pigeon, being gregarious, signifies the 
public prayers of the Church.t Lastly, two of each of these 
animals are offered, to show that holiness should be not only 
in the soul, but also in the body. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT THE MOTHER OF GOD 
SHOULD GO TO THE TEMPLE TO BE PURIFIED ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Oljectton x. It would seem that it was unfitting for the 
Mother of God to go to the Temple to be purified. For puri- 
fication presupposes uncleanness. But there was no unclean- 
ness in the Blessed Virgin, as stated:above (QQ. XXVIL., 
XXVIII.). Therefore she should not have gone to the 
Temple to be purified. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (Lev. xii. 2-4): I/ a woman, 
having received seed, shall bear a man-child, she shall be 
unclean seven days ; and consequently she is forbidden to 
enter into the sanctuary until the days of her purification be 
fulfilled. But the Blessed Virgin brought forth a male 
child without receiving the seed of man. Therefore she 
had no need to come to the Temple to be purified. 

* Bede on Luke i. t Bede, Hom. xv., in Purif. 

155 CHRIST’S CIRCUMCISION Q. 37. Art. 4 

Od. 3. Further, purification from uncleanness is accom- 
plished by grace alone. But the sacraments of the Old Law 
did not confer grace; rather, indeed, did she have the very 
Author of grace with her. Therefore it was not fitting that 
the Blessed Virgin should come to the Temple to be purified. 

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture, where it 
is stated (Luke ii. 22) that the days of Mary’s purification 
were accomplished according to the law of Moses. 

I answer that, As the fulness of grace flowed from Christ 
on to His Mother, so it was becoming that the mother 
should be like her Son in humility: for God giveth grace to 
the humble, as is written James iv. 6. And therefore, just as 
Christ, though not subject to the Law, wished, nevertheless, 
to submit to circumcision and the other burdens of the Law, 
in order to give an example of humility and obedience; 
and in order to show His approval of the Law; and, again, 
in order to take away from the Jews an excuse for calumni- 
ating Him: for the same reasons He wished His Mother also 
to fulfil the prescriptions of the Law, to which, nevertheless, 
she was not subject. 

Reply Obj. 1. Although the Blessed Virgin had no un- 
cleanness, yet she wished to fulfil the observance of purifi- 
cation, not because she needed it, but on account of the 
precept of the Law. Thus the Evangelist says pointedly 
that the days of her purification according to the Law were 
accomplished; for she needed no purification in herself. 

Reply Obj. 2. Moses seems to have chosen his words in 
order to exclude uncleanness from the Mother of God, who 
was with child without receiving seed. It is therefore clear 
that she was not bound to fulfil that precept, but fulfilled the 
observance of purification of her own accord, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 3. The sacraments of the Law did not cleanse 
from the uncleanness of sin, which is accomplished by 
grace, but they foreshadowed this purification: for they 
cleansed by a kind of carnal purification, from the unclean- 
ness of a certain irregularity, as stated in the Second Part 
(nO. Cit, Als; O.°CIIL, ‘A. 2), “But the Blessed 
Virgin contracted neither uncleanness, and consequently did 
not need to be purified. 

QUESTION XXXVIII. 

OF THE BAPTISM OF JOHN. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE now proceed to consider the baptism wherewith Christ 
was baptized. And since Christ was baptized with the 
baptism of John, we shall consider (1) the baptism of John 
in general; (2) the baptizing of Christ. In regard to the 
former there are six points of inquiry: (1) Whether it was 
fitting that John should baptize? (2) Whether that bap- 
tism was from God? (3) Whether it conferred grace ? 
(4) Whether others besides Christ should have received that 
baptism ? (5) Whether that baptism should have ceased 
when Christ was baptized? (6) Whether those who re- 
ceived John’s baptism had afterwards to receive Christ’s 
baptism ? 
FIRST ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT JOHN SHOULD 
BAPTIZE ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

“Objection 1. It would seem that it was not fitting that 
John should baptize. For every sacramental rite belongs 
tosomelaw. But John didnotintroduceanew law. There- 
fore it was not fitting that he should introduce the new rite 
of baptism. 

Obj. 2. Further, John was sent by God .. . for a witness 
(Jo. 1. 6, 7) as a prophet; according to Luke i. 76: Thou, 
child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest. But the 
prophets who lived before Christ did not introduce any new 
rite, but persuaded men to observe the rites of the Law; 
as is Clearly stated Mal. iv. 4: Remember the law of Moses 

156 

157 THE BAPTISM OF JOHN Q. 38. ART. I 

My servant. Therefore neither should John haveintroduced 
a new rite of baptism. 

Obj. 3. Further, when there is too much of anything, 
nothing should be added to it. But the Jews observed a 
superfluity of baptisms; for it is written (Mark vii. 3, 4) 
that the Pharisees and all the Jews eat not without often wash- 
ing their hands; .. . and when they come from the market, 
unless they be washed, they eat not; and many other things 
there are that have been delivered to them to observe, the wash- 
ings of cups and of pots, and of brazen vessels, and of beds. 
Therefore it was unfitting that John should baptize. 

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture (Matth. 
ili. 5, 6), which, after stating the holiness of John, adds 
many went out to him, and were baptized in the Jordan. 

I answer that, It was fitting for John to baptize, for four 
reasons: 

First, it was necessary for Christ to be baptized by John, 
in order that He might sanctify baptism; as Augustine 
observes, super Joan. (Tract. xiii. in Joan.). 

Secondly, that Christ might be manifested. Whence 
John himself says (Jo. i. 31): That He, t.e., Christ, may be 
made manifest in Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with 
water. For he announced Christ to the crowds that gathered 
around him; which was thus done much more easily than 
if he had gone in search of each individual, as Chrysostom 
observes, commenting on St. John (Hom. x. in Matth.). 

Thirdly, that by his baptism he might accustom men to 
the baptism of Christ; wherefore Gregory says in a homily 
(Hom. vii. in Evang.) that therefore did John baptize, that, 
being consistent with his office of precursor, as he had preceded 
our Lord in birth, so he might also by baptizing precede Him 
who was about to baptize. 

Fourthly, that by persuading men to do penance, he 
might prepare men to receive worthily the baptism of 
Christ. Wherefore Bede* says that the baptism of John was 
as profitable before the baptism of Christ, as instruction in 
the faith profits the catechumens not yet baptized. For just 

* Cf. Scot. Erig. in Joan, iii. 24. 

Q. 38. Artr.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 158 

as he preached penance, and foretold the baptism of Christ, 
and drew men to the knowledge of the Truth that hath appeared 
to the world, so do the ministers of the Church, after instructing 
men, chide them for their sins, and lastly promise them forgive- 
ness in the baptism of Christ. 

Reply Obj. 1. The baptism of John was not a sacrament 
properly so called (per se), but a kind of sacramental, pre- 
paratory to the baptism of Christ. Consequently, in a way, 
it belonged to the law of Christ, but not to the law of 
Moses. 

Reply Obj. 2. John was not only a prophet, but more than 
a prophet, as stated Matth. xi. 9: for he was the term of the 
Law and the beginning of the Gospel. Therefore it was 
in his province to lead men, both by word and deed, to the 
law of Christ rather than to the observance of the Old Law. 
_ Reply Obj. 3. Those baptisms of the Pharisees were vain, 
being ordered merely unto carnal cleanliness. But the 
baptism of John was ordered unto spiritual cleanliness, since 
it led men to do penance, as stated above. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER THE BAPTISM OF JOHN WAS FROM GOD ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the baptism of John was 
not from God. For nothing sacramental that is from God is 
named after a mere man: thus the baptism of the New Law 
is not named after Peter or Paul, but after Christ. But 
that baptism is named after John, according to Matth. 
xxi. 25: The baptism of John. . . was it from heaven or from 
men ? Therefore the baptism of John was not from God. 

Obj. 2. Further, every doctrine that proceeds from God 
anew is confirmed by some signs: thus the Lord (Exod. iv.) 
gave Moses the power of working signs; and it is written 
(Heb. ii. 3, 4) that our faith having begun to be declared by 
the Lord, was confirmed unto us by them that heard Him, God 
also bearing them witness by signs and wonders. But it is 
written of John the Baptist (Jo. x. 41) that John did no 

159 THE BAPTISM OF JOHN Q. 38. ART. 2 

sign. Therefore it seems that the baptism wherewith he 
baptized was not from God. 

00j. 3. Further, those sacraments which are instituted 
by God are contained in certain precepts of Holy Scripture. 
But there is no precept of Holy Writ commanding the bap- 
tism of John. Therefore it seems that it was not from God. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. i. 33): He who sent me 
to baptize with water said to me: ‘He upon whom thou shalt 
see the Spirit,’ etc. 

I answer that, Two things may be considered in the bap- 
tism of John—namely, the rite of baptism and the effect of 
baptism. The rite of baptism was not from men, but from 
God, who by an interior revelation of the Holy Ghost 
sent John to baptize. But the effect of that baptism was 
from man, because it effected nothing that man could not 
accomplish. Wherefore it was not from God alone, except 
in as far as God works in man. 

Reply Obj. x. By the baptism of the New Law men are 
baptized inwardly by the Holy Ghost, and this is accom- 
plished by God alone. But by the baptism of John the 
body alone was cleansed by the water. Wherefore it is 
written (Matth. iii. 11): I baptize you in water; but. . . He 
shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost. For this reason the 
baptism of John was named after him, because it effected 
nothing that he did not accomplish. But the baptism of 
the New Law is not named after the minister thereof, 
because he does not accomplish its principal effect, which 
is the inward cleansing. 

Reply Obj. 2. The whole teaching and work of John was 
ordered unto Christ, who, by many miracles, confirmed 
both His own teaching and that of John. But if John had 
worked signs, men would have paid equal attention to 
John and to Christ. Wherefore, in order that men might 
pay greater attention to Christ, it was not given to John to 
work a sign. Yet when the Jews asked him why he bap- 
tized, he confirmed his office by the authority of Scripture, 
saying: I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, etc., 
as related, Jo. i. 23 (cf. Isa. xl. 3). Moreover, the very 

Q. 38. Art.3 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 160 

austerity of his life was a commendation of his office, 
because, as Chrysostom says, commenting on Matthew 
(Hom. x. in Matth.), it was wonderful to witness such 
endurance in a human body. 

Reply 07. 3. The baptism of John was intended by God 
to last only for a short time, for the reasons given above 
(A. 1). Therefore it was not the subject of a general com- 
mandment set down in Sacred Writ, but of a certain interior 
revelation of the Holy Ghost, as stated above. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER GRACE WAS GIVEN IN THE BAPTISM OF 
JOHN? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that grace was given in the 
baptism of John. For it is written (Mark i. 4): John was in 
the desert baptizing and preaching the baptism of penance unto 
remission of sins. But penance and remission of sins are 
the effect of grace. Therefore the baptism of John conferred 
grace. 

Obj. 2. Further, those who were about to be baptized by 
John confessed their sins, as related Matth. iii. 6 and Marki. 5. 
But the confession of sins is ordered to their remission, 
which is effected by grace. Therefore grace was conferred 
in the baptism of John. 

Obj. 3. Further, the baptism of John was more akin 
than circumcision to the baptism of Christ. But original 
sin was remitted through circumcision: because, as Bede 
says (Hom. x. in Circumcis.), under the Law, circumcision 
brought the same saving aid to heal the wound of original sin 
as baptism 1s wont to bring now that grace is revealed. Much 
more, therefore, did the baptism of John effect the remission 
of sins, which cannot be accomplished without grace. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. iii. 11): I indeed bap- 
tize you in water unto penance. Which words Gregory thus 
expounds in a certain homily (Hom. vii. in Evang.): John 
baptized, not in the Spirit, but in water: because he could not 
forgive sins. But grace is given by the Holy Ghost, and 

161 THE BAPTISM OF JOHN Q. 38. ART. 3 

by means thereof sins are taken away. Therefore the 
baptism of John did not confer grace. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2 ad 2), the whole 
teaching and work of John was in preparation for Christ: 
just as it is the duty of the servant and of the under-crafts- 
man to prepare the matter for the form which is accomplished 
by the head-craftsman. Now grace was to be conferred on 
men through Christ, according to Jo. i. 17: Grace and truth 
came through Jesus Christ. Therefore the baptism of John 
did not confer grace, but only prepared the way for grace; 
and this in three ways: first, by John’s teaching, which led 
men to faith in Christ; secondly, by accustoming men to 
the rite of Christ’s baptism; thirdly, by penance, preparing 
men to receive the effect of Christ’s baptism. 

Reply Obj. 1. In these words, as Bede says (on Mark i. 4), 
a twofold baptism of penance may be understood. One 
is that which John conferred by baptizing, which is called 
a baptism of penance, etc., by reason of its inducing men to 
do penance, and of its being a kind of protestation by which 
men avowed their purpose of doing penance. The other 
is the baptism of Christ, by which sins are remitted, and 
which John could not give, but only preach, saying: He will 
baptize you tn the Holy Ghost. 

Or it may be said that he preached the baptism of penance 
—1i.e., which induced men to do penance, which penance 
leads men on to the remission of sins. 

Or, again, it may be said with Jerome* that by the baptism 
of Christ grace is given, by which sins are remitted gratis ; 
and that what is accomplished by the bridegroom 1s begun by 
the bridesman—t.e., by John. Consequently it is said that 
he baptized and preached the baptism of penance unto remission 
of sins, not as though he accomplished this himself, but 
because he began it by preparing the way for it. 

Reply Obj. 2. That confession of sins was not made unto 
the remission of sins, to be realized immediately through 
the baptism of John, but to be obtained through subsequent 

* Another author on Mark i. (inter op. Hier.). 

GIT Et 

Q. 38. Art.4. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 162 

penance and through the baptism of Christ, for which that 
penance was a preparation. 

Reply Obj. 3. Circumcision was instituted as a remedy for 
origina! sin. Whereas the baptism of John was not insti- 
tuted for this purpose, but was merely in preparation for the 
baptism of Christ, as stated above; whereas the sacraments 
attain their effect through the force of their institution. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST ALONE SHOULD HAVE BEEN BAPTIZED 
WITH THE BAPTISM OF JOHN ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ alone should have 
been baptized with the baptism of John. For, as stated 
above (A. 1), the reason why John baptized was that Christ 
might receive baptism, as Augustine says (Super Joan., 
Tract. xiii.). But what is proper to Christ should not be 
applicable to others. Therefore no others should have 
received that baptism. 

Obj. 2. Further, whoever is baptized either receives some- 
thing from the baptism or confers something on the bap- 
tism. But no one could receive anything from the baptism 
of John, because thereby grace was not conferred, as stated 
above (A. 3). On the other hand, no one could confer any- 
thing on baptism save Christ, who sanctified the waters by the 
touch of His most pure flesh.* Therefore it seems that Christ 
alone should have been baptized with the baptism of John. 

Obj. 3. Further, if others were baptized with that bap- 
tism, this was only in order that they might be prepared 
for the baptism of Christ: and thus it would seem fitting 
that the baptism of John should be conferred on all, old 
and young, Gentile and Jew, just as the baptism of Christ. 
But we do not read that either children or Gentiles were 
baptized by the latter; for it is written (Mark i. 5) that 
there went out to him... all they of Jerusalem, and were 
baptized by him. Therefore it seems that Christ alone should 
have been baptized by John. 

* Mag. Sent, iv. 3. 

163 THE BAPTISM OF JOHN Q. 38. ART. 5 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke iii. 21): It came to 
pass, when all the people were baptized, that Jesus also being 
bapitzed and praying, heaven was opened. 

I answer that, For two reasons it behoved others besides 
Christ to be baptized with the baptism of John. First, as 
Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract iv., v.), if Christ alone 
had been baptized with the baptism of John, some would have 
said that John’s baptism, with which Christ was baptized, 
was more excellent than that of Christ, with which others are 
baptized. 

Secondly, because, as above stated, it behoved others to 
be prepared by John’s baptism for the baptism of Christ, 

Reply Obj. 1. The baptism of John was instituted not 
only that Christ might be baptized, but also for other 
reasons, as stated above (A. 1). And yet, even if it were 
instituted merely in order that Christ might be baptized 
therewith, it was still necessary for others to receive this 
baptism, in order to avoid the objection mentioned above. 

Reply Obj. 2. Others who approached to be baptized by 
John could not, indeed, confer anything on his baptism: 
yet neither did they receive anything therefrom, save only 
the sign of penance. 

Reply Obj. 3. This was the baptism of penance, for which 
children were not suited; wherefore they were not baptized 
therewith. But to bring the nations into the way of salva- 
tion was reserved to Christ alone, who is the expectation of 
the nations, as we read Gen. xlix. 10. Indeed, Christ for- 
bade the apostles to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles before 
His Passion and Resurrection. Much less fitting, therefore, 
was it for the Gentiles to be baptized by John. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER JOHN’S BAPTISM SHOULD HAVE CEASED AFTER 
CHRIST WAS BAPTIZED ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that John’s baptism should 
have ceased after Christ was baptized. For it is written 
(Jo. i. 31): That He may be made manifest in Israel, therefore 

Q. 38. Art.5 THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 164 

am I come baptizing in water. But when Christ had been 
baptized, He was made sufficiently manifest, both by the 
testimony of John and by the dove coming down upon Him, 
and again by the voice of the Father bearing witness to 
Him. Therefore it seems that John’s baptism should not 
have endured thereafter. 

Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. iv.): 
Christ was baptized, and John’s baptism ceased to avail. 
Therefore it seems that, after Christ’s baptism, John should 
not have continued to baptize. 

Obj. 3. Further, John’s baptism prepared the way for 
Christ’s. But Christ’s baptism began as soon as He had 
been baptized; because by the touch of His most pure flesh 
He endowed the waters with a regenerating virtue, as Bede 
asserts (Mag. Sent. iv. 3). Therefore it seems that John’s 
baptism ceased when Christ had been baptized. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. ili. 22, 23): Jesus... 
came into the land of Judea. . . and baptized: and John also 
was baptizing. But Christ did not baptize before being 
baptized. Therefore it seems that John continued to bap- 
tize after Christ had been baptized. 

I answer that, It was not fitting for the baptism of John 
to cease when Christ had been baptized. First, because, 
as Chrysostom says (Hom. xxix. tn Joan.), tf John had 
ceased to baptize when Christ had been baptized, men would 
think that he was moved by jealousy or anger. Secondly, 
if he had ceased to baptize when Christ baptized, he would 
have given His disciples a motive for yet greater envy. Thirdly, 
because, by continuing to baptize, he sent his hearers to 
Christ (ibid.). Fourthly, because, as Bede* says, there still 
remained a shadow of the Old Law : nor should the forerunner 
withdraw until the truth be made mantfest. 

Reply Obj. 1. When Christ was baptized, He was not as 
yet fully manifested: consequently there was still need for 
John to continue baptizing. 

Reply Obj. 2. The baptism of John ceased after Christ 
had been baptized, not immediately, but when the former 

* Scot. Erig., Comment. in Joan. 

165 THE BAPTISM OF JOHN Q.38. Arr. 6 

was cast into prison. Thus Chrysostom says (loc. cit.): 
I consider that John’s death was allowed to take place, and 
that Christ’s preaching began in a great measure after John 
had died, so that the undivided allegiance of the multitude 
was transferred to Christ, and there was no further motive 
for the divergence of opinions concerning both of them. 

Reply 07. 3. John’s baptism prepared the way not only 
for Christ to be baptized, but also for others to approach 
to Christ’s baptism: and this did not take place as soon as 
Christ was baptized. 

S1xTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THOSE WHO HAD BEEN BAPTIZED WITH JOHN’S 
BAPTISM HAD TO BE BAPTIZED WITH THE BAPTISM OF 
CHRIST ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that those who had been 
baptized with John’s baptism had not to be baptized with 
the baptism of Christ. For John was not less than the 
apostles, since of him is it written (Matth. xi. 11): There 
hath not risen among them that are born of women a greater 
than John the Baptist. But those who were baptized by 
the apostles were not baptized again, but only received the 
imposition of hands; for it is written (Acts viii. 16, 17) that 
some were only baptized by Philip in the name of the Lord 
Jesus: then the apostles—namely, Peter and John—laid 
their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. 
Therefore it seems that those who had been baptized by 
John had not to be baptized with the baptism of Christ. 

Obj. 2. Further, the apostles were baptized with John’s 
baptism, since some of them were his disciples, as is clear 
from Jo. i. 37. But the apostles do not seem to have been 
baptized with the baptism of Christ: for it is written (Jo. 
iv. 2) that Jesus did not baptize, but His disciples. Therefore 
it seems that those who had been baptized with John’s 
baptism had not to be baptized with the baptism of 
Christ. 

Q. 38. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 166 

Obj. 3. Further, he who is baptized is less than he who 
baptizes. But we are not told that John himself was bap- 
tized with the baptism of Christ. Therefore much less did 
those who had been baptized by John need to receive the 
baptism of Christ. 

Obj. 4. Further, it is written (Acts xix. I-5) that Paul... 
found certain disciples ; and he said to them: Have you re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost since ye believed? But they said to 
him : We have not so much as heard whether there be a Holy 
Ghost. And he said : In what then were you baptized ? Who 
said: In John’s baptism. Wherefore they were again bap- 
tized in the name of our (Vulg., the) Lord Jesus Christ. Hence 
it seems that they needed to be baptized again, because 
they did not know of the Holy Ghost: as Jerome says on 
Joel ii. 28 and in an epistle (lxix., De Viro unius uxoris), 
and likewise Ambrose (De Spivitu Sancto). But some were 
baptized with John’s baptism who had full knowledge of the 
Trinity. Therefore these had no need to be baptized again 
with Christ’s baptism. 

Obj. 5. Further, on Rom. x. 8, This is the word of fatth, 
which we preach, the gloss of Augustine says: Whence this 
virtue in the water, that it touches the body and cleanses the 
heart, save by the efficacy of the word, not because it is uttered, 
but because it is believed ? Whence it is clear that the virtue 
of baptism depends on faith. But the form of John’s 
baptism signified the faith in which we are baptized; for 
Paul says (Acts xix. 4): John baptized the people with the 
baptism of penance, saying : That they should believe in Him 
who was to come after him—that is to say, in Jesus. There- 
fore it seems that those who had been baptized with John’s 
baptism had no need to be baptized again with the baptism 
of Christ. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract v.): 
Those who were baptized with John’s baptism needed to be 
baptized with the baptism of our Lord. 

I answer that, According to the opinion of the Master 
(4 Sent., D. ii.), those who had been baptized by John without 
knowing of the existence of the Holy Ghost, and who based 

167 THE BAPTISM OF JOHN Q. 38. Art. 6 

their hopes on his baptism, were afterwards baptized with the 
baptism of Christ: but those who did not base their hope on 
John’s baptism, and who believed in the Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost, were not baptized afterwards, but received the 
Holy Ghost by the imposition of hands made over them by the 
apostles. 

And this, indeed, is true as to the first part, and is con- 
firmed by many authorities. But as to the second part, 
the assertion is altogether unreasonable. First, because 
John’s baptism neither conferred grace nor imprinted a 
character, but was merely in water, as he says himself 
(Matth. iii. rz). Wherefore the faith or hope which the 
person baptized had in Christ could not supply this defect. 
Secondly, because, when in a sacrament, that is omitted 
which belongs of necessity to the sacrament, not only must 
the omission be supplied, but the whole must be entirely 
renewed. Now, it belongs of necessity to Christ’s baptism 
that it be given not only in water, but also in the Holy 
Ghost, according to Jo. iii. 5: Unless a man be born of water 
and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. 
Wherefore in the case of those who had been baptized with 
John’s baptism in water only, not merely had the omission 
to be supplied by giving them the Holy Ghost by the im- 
position of hands, but they had to be baptized wholly anew 
tn water and the Holy Ghost. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. v.): 
After John, baptism was administered, and the reason why was 
because he gave not Christ's baptism, but his own... . That 
which Peter gave... and if any were given by Judas, that was 
Christ's. And therefore if Judas baptized anyone, yet were 
they not rebaptized.... For the baptism corresponds with him 
by whose authority it is given, not with him by whose mimstry 
it is given. For the same reason those who were baptized 
by the deacon Philip, who gave the baptism of Christ, were 
not baptized again, but received the imposition of hands 
by the apostles, just as those who are baptized by priests 
are confirmed by bishops. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says to Seleucianus (Ep. 

Q. 38. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 168 

cclxv.), we deem that Christ’s disciples were baptized etther 
with John’s baptism, as some maintain, or with Christ's bap- 
tism, which is more probable. For He would not fail to ad- 
minister baptism so as to have baptized servants through whom 
He baptized others, since He did not fail in His humble service 
to wash their feet. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.):* 
Since, when John said, ‘ I ought to be baptized by Thee,’ Christ 
answered, ‘ Suffer it to be so now’: tt follows that afterwards 
Christ did baptize John. Moreover, he asserts that this is 
distinctly set down in some of the apocryphal books. At any 
rate, it is certain, as Jerome says on Matth. ii. 13, that, as 
Christ was baptized in water by John, so had John to be bap- 
tized in the Spirit by Christ. 

Reply Obj. 4. The reason why these persons were baptized 
after being baptized by John was not only because they 
knew not of the Holy Ghost, but also because they had not 
received the baptism of Christ. 

Reply Obj. 5. As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix.), 
our sacraments are signs of present grace, whereas the sacra- 
ments of the Old Law were signs of future grace. Where- 
fore the very fact that John baptized in the name of One 
who was to come, shows that he did not give the baptism 
of Christ, which is a sacrament of the New Law. 

* From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum. 

QUESTION XXXIX. 

OF THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST. 
(In Eight Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the baptizing of Christ, concerning 
which there are eight points of inquiry: (1) Whether Christ 
should have been baptized? (2) Whether He should have 
been baptized with the baptism of John? (3) Of the time 
when He was baptized. (4) Of the place. (5) Of the 
heavens being opened unto Him. (6) Of the apparition of 
the Holy Ghost under the form of a dove. (7) Whether 
that dove was a real animal? (8) Of the voice of the 
Father witnessing unto Him. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT CHRIST SHOULD BE 
BAPTIZED ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not fitting for 
Christ to be baptized. For to be baptized is to be washed. 
But it was not fitting for Christ to be washed, since there 
was no uncleanness in Him. Therefore it seems unfitting 
for Christ to be baptized. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ was circumcised in order to fulfil 
the law. But baptism was not prescribed by the law. 
Therefore He should not have been baptized. 

Obj. 3. Further, the first mover in every genus is un- 
moved in regard to that movement; thus the heaven, which 
is the first cause of alteration, is unalterable. But Christ 
is the first principle of baptism, according to John i. 33: 

169 

Q. 39. Art.1 THE ‘‘'SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 170 

He upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and re- 
maining upon Him, He it is that baptizeth. Therefore it was 
unfitting for Christ to be baptized. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. iii. 13) that Jesus 
cometh from Galilee to the Jordan, unto John, to be baptized 
by him. 

I answer that, It was fitting for Christ to be baptized. 
First, because, as Ambrose says on Luke iii. 21: Our Lord 
was baptized because He wished, not to be cleansed, but to 
cleanse the waters, that, being purified by the flesh of Christ 
that knew no sin, they might have the virtue of baptism ; and, 
as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.), that He might be- 
queath the sanctified waters to those who were to be baptized 
afterwards. Secondly, as Chrysostom says (ibid.), although 
Christ was not a sinner, yet did He take a sinful nature and 
“the likeness of sinful flesh.’ Wherefore, though He needed 
not baptism for His own sake, yet carnal nature in others had 
need thereof. And, as Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat. xxxix.) 
Christ was baptized that He might plunge the old Adam entirely 
in the water. Thirdly, He wished to be baptized, as Augus- 
tine says in a sermon on the Epiphany (cxxxvi.), because 
He wished to do what He had commanded all to do. And this 
is what He means by saying: So it becometh us to fulfil all 
justice (Matth. iii. 15). For, as Ambrose says (loc. cit.), this 
ts gustice, to do first thyself that which thou wishest another 
to do, and so encourage others by thy example. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ was baptized, not that He might be 
cleansed, but that He might cleanse, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 2. It was fitting that Christ should not only 
fulfil what was prescribed by the Old Law, but also begin 
what appertained to the New Law. Therefore He wished 
not only to be circumcised, but also to be baptized. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ is the first principle of baptism’s 
spiritual effect. Unto this He was not baptized, but only 
in water. 

171 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST 9. 39. Arr. 2 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO BE BAPTIZED 
WITH JOHN’S BAPTISM ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection x. It would seem that it was unfitting for Christ 
to be baptized with John’s baptism. For John’s baptism 
was the baptism of penance. But penance is unbecoming to 
Christ, since He had no sin. Therefore it seems that He 
should not have been baptized with John’s baptism. 

Obj. 2. Further, John’s baptism, as Chrysostom says 
(Hom. de Bapt. Christi), was a mean between the baptism of 
the Jews and that of Christ. But the mean savours of the 
nature of the extremes (Aristot., De partib. Animal.). Since, 
therefore, Christ was not baptized with the Jewish baptism, 
nor yet with His own, on the same grounds He should not 
have been baptized with the baptism of John. 

Obj. 3. Further, whatever is best in human things should 
be ascribed to Christ. But John’s baptism does not hold 
the first place among baptisms. Therefore it was not fitting 
for Christ to be baptized with John’s baptism. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. ii. 13) that Jesus 
cometh to the Jordan, unto John, to be baptized by him. 

I answer that, As Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. xiii.): 
After being baptized, the Lord baptized, not with that baptism 
wherewith He was baptized. Wherefore, since He Himself 
baptized with His own baptism, it follows that He was not 
baptized with His own, but with John’s baptism. And this 
was befitting: first, because John’s baptism was peculiar 
in this, that he baptized, not in the Spirit, but only im 
water ; while Christ did not need spiritual baptism, since 
He was filled with the grace of the Holy Ghost from the 
beginning of His conception, as we have made clear above 
(Q. XXXIV., A.1). And this is the reason given by Chrysos- 
tom (loc. cit.). Secondly, as Bede says on Mark i. 9, He 
was baptized with the baptism of John, that, by being thus 
baptized, He might show His approval of John’s baptism. 

Q. 39. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 172 

Thirdly, as Gregory Nazianzen says (Ovat. xxxix.), by going 
to John to be baptized by Him, he sanctified baptism. 

Reply Obj. 1. As stated above (A. 1), Christ wished to 
be baptized in order by His example to lead us to baptism. 
And so, in order that He might lead us thereto more effi- 
caciously, He wished to be baptized with a baptism which 
He clearly needed not, that men who needed it might ap- 
proach unto it. Wherefore Ambrose says on Luke iii. 21: 
Let none decline the laver of grace, since Christ did not refuse 
the laver of penance. 

Reply Obj. 2. The Jewish baptism prescribed by the law 
was merely figurative, whereas John’s baptism, in a measure, 
was real, inasmuch as it induced men to refrain from sin; 
but Christ’s baptism is efficacious unto the remission of sin 
and the conferring of grace. Now, Christ needed neither 
the remission of sin, which was not in Him, nor the bestowal 
of grace, with which He was filled. Moreover, since He 
is the Truth, it was not fitting that He should receive that 
which was no more than a figure. Consequently it was 
more fitting that He should receive the intermediate baptism 
than one of the extremes. 

Reply Obj. 3. Baptism is a spiritual remedy. Now, the 
more perfect a thing is, the less remedy does it need. Con- 
sequently, from the very fact that Christ is most perfect, it 
follows that it was fitting that He should not receive the most 
perfect baptism: just as one who is healthy does not need a 
strong medicine. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WAS BAPTIZED AT A FITTING TIME ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was baptized at 
an unfitting time. For Christ was baptized in order that 
He might lead others to baptism by His example. But it 
is commendable that the faithful of Christ should be 
baptized, not merely before their thirtieth year, but even 
in infancy. Therefore it seems that Christ should not have 
been baptized at the age of thirty. 

173 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Arr. 3 

Obj. 2. Further, we do not read that Christ taught or 
worked miracles before being baptized. But it would have 
been more profitable to the world if He had taught for a 
longer time, beginning at the age of twenty, or even before. 
Therefore it seems that Christ, who came for man’s profit, 
should have been baptized before His thirtieth year. 

Obj. 3. Further, the sign of wisdom infused by God should 
have been especially manifest in Christ. But in the case 
of Daniel this was manifested at the time of his boyhood; 
according to Dan. xiii. 45: The Lord raised up the holy spirit 
of a young boy, whose name was Daniel. Much more, there- 
fore, should Christ have been baptized or have taught in 
His boyhood. 

Obj. 4. Further, John’s baptism was ordered to that of 
Christ as to itsend. But the end ts first in intention and last 
tn execution. Therefore He should have been baptized by 
John either before all the others, or after them. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke iii. 21): It came to 
pass, when all the people were baptized, that Jesus also being 
baptized, and praying ; and further on (23): And Jesus Him- 
self was beginning about the age of thirty years. 

I answer that, Christ was fittingly baptized in His thirtieth 
year. First, because Christ was baptized as though for the 
reason that He was about forthwith to begin to teach and 
preach: for which purpose perfect age is required, such as 
is the age of thirty. Thus we read (Gen. xli. 46) that Joseph 
was thirty years old when he undertook the government of 
Egypt. In like manner we read (2 Kings v. 4) that David 
was thirty years old when he began to reign. Again, 
Ezechiel began to prophesy im his thirtieth year, as we read 
Ezech. i. I. 

Secondly, because, as Chrysostom says (Hom. x. in 
Matth.), the law was about to pass away after Christ's bap- 
tism : wherefore Christ came to be baptized at this age which 
admits of all sins ; in order that by Hts observing the law, no 
one might say that because He Himself could not fulfil it, He 
did away with tt. 

Thirdly, because by Christ’s being baptized at the perfect 

Q. 39. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 174 

age, we are given to understand that baptism brings forth 
perfect men, according to Ephes. iv. 13: Until we all meet 
into the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, 
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fulness 
of Christ.. Hence the very property of the number seems 
to point to this. For thirty is product of three and ten: 
and by the number three is implied faith in the Trinity, 
while ten signifies the fulfilment of the commandments of 
the Law: in which two things the perfection of Christian 
life consists. 

Reply Oj. 1. As Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat. xl.), 
Christ was baptized, not as though He needed to be cleansed, 
or as though some peril threatened Him if He delayed to 
be baptized. But no small danger besets any other man who 
departs from this life without being clothed with the garment 
of incorruptibility—namely, grace. And though it be a 
good thing to remain clean after baptism, yet 1s 1¢ still better, 
as he says, to be slightly sullied now and then than to be alto- 
gether deprived of grace. 

Reply Obj. 2. The profit which accrues to men from Christ 
is chiefly through faith and humility: to both of which He 
conduced by beginning to teach not in His boyhood or 
youth, but at the perfect age. To faith, because in this 
manner His human nature is shown to be real, by its making 
bodily progress with the advance of time; and lest this 
progress should be deemed imaginary, He did not wish to 
show His wisdom and power before His body had reached 
the perfect age: to humility, lest anyone should presume 
to govern or teach others before attaining to perfect age. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ was set before men as an example 
to all. Wherefore it behoved that to be shown forth in 
Him, which is becoming to all according to the common 
law—namely, that He should teach after reaching the 
perfect age. But, as Gregory Nazianzen says (Orat. xxxix.), 
that which seldom occurs is not the law of the Church; as 
“neither does one swallow make the spring.’ For by special 
dispensation, in accordance with the ruling of Divine wis- 
dom, it has been granted to some, contrary to the common 

175 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Arr. 4 

law, to exercise the functions of governing or teaching; such 
as Solomon, Daniel, and Jeremias. 

Reply Obj. 4. It was not fitting that Christ should be 
baptized by John either before or after all others. Because, 
as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.),* for this was Christ 
baptized, that He might confirm the preaching and the baptism 
of John, and that John might bear witness to Him. Now, 
men would not have had faith in John’s testimony except 
after many had been baptized by him. Consequently it 
was not fitting that John should baptize Him before bap- 
tizing anyone else. In like manner, neither was it fitting 
that he should baptize Him last. For as he (Chrysostom) 
says in the same passage: As the light of the sun does not 
wait for the setting of the morning star, but comes forth while 
the latter ts still above the horizon, and by its brilliance dims 
tts shining: so Christ did not wait till John had run his 
course, but appeared while he was yet teaching and baptizing. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE BEEN BAPTIZED IN THE 
JORDAN ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
been baptized in the Jordan. For the reality should cor- 
respond to the figure. But baptism was prefigured in the 
crossing of the Red Sea, where the Egyptians were drowned, 
just as our sins are blotted out in baptism. Therefore it 
seems that Christ should rather have been baptized in the 
sea than in the river Jordan. 

Obj. 2. Further, Jordan is interpreted a going down. But 
by baptism a man goes up rather than down: wherefore it 
is written (Matth. iii. 16) that Jesus being baptized, forthwith 
came up [Douay, out] from the water. Therefore it seems 
unfitting that Christ should be baptized in the Jordan. 

Obj. 3. FurtHer, while the children of Israel were crossing, 
the waters of the Jordan were turned back, as it is related 

* From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum. 

Q. 39. Art.4. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 176 

Jos. iv., and as it is written Ps. cxiii. 3, 5. But those who 
are baptized go forward, not back. Therefore it was not 
fitting that Christ should be baptized in the Jordan. 

On the contrary, It is written (Mark i. 9) that Jesus was 
baptized by John in the Jordan. 

I answer that, It was through the river Jordan that the 
children of Israel entered into the land of promise. Now, 
this is the prerogative of Christ’s baptism over all other 
baptismiss that it is the entrance to the kingdom of God, 
which is signified by the land of promise: wherefore it is 
said (Jo. iii. 5): Unless a man be born again of water and 
the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. To 
this also is to be referred the dividing of the water of the 
Jordan by Elias, who was to be snatched up into heaven in 
a fiery chariot, as it is related 4 Kings ii.: because, to wit, 
the approach to heaven is laid open by the fire of the Holy 
Ghost, to those who pass through the waters of baptism. 
Therefore it was fitting that Christ should be baptized in 
the Jordan. 

Reply Obj. 1. The crossing of the Red Sea foreshadowed 
baptism in this—that baptism washes away sin: whereas 
the crossing of the Jordan foreshadows it in this—that it 
opens the gate to the heavenly kingdom: and this is the 
principal effect of baptism, and accomplished through Christ 
alone. And therefore it was fitting that Christ should be 
baptized in the Jordan rather than in the sea. 

Reply Obj. 2. In baptism we go up by advancing in grace: 
for which we need to go down by humility, according to 
Jas. iv. 6: He giveth grace to the humble. And to this going 
down must the name of the Jordan be referred. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says in a sermon for the 
Epiphany (x.): As of yore the waters of the Jordan were 
held back, so now, when Christ was baptized, the torrent of 
sin was held back. Or else this may signify that against 
the downward flow of the waters the river of blessings 
flowed upwards. 

4 
177 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Art. 5 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE HEAVENS SHOULD HAVE BEEN OPENED UNTO 
CHRIST AT HIS BAPTISM ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the heavens should not 
have been opened unto Christ at His baptism. For the 
heavens should be opened unto one who needs to enter 
heaven, by reason of his being out of heaven. But Christ 
was always in heaven, according to Jo. iii. 13: The Son of 
Man whois in heaven. Therefore it seems that the heavens 
should not have been opened unto Him. 

Obj. 2. Further, the opening of the heavens is understood 
either in a corporal or in a spiritual sense. But it cannot 
be understood in a corporal sense: because the heavenly 
bodies are impassible and indissoluble, according to Job 
xxxvii. 18: Thou perhaps hast made the heavens with Him, 
which are most strong, as tf they were of molten brass. In 
like manner neither can it be understood in a spiritual 
sense, because the heavens were not previously closed to 
the eyes of the Son of God. Therefore it seems unbecoming 
to say that when Christ was baptized the heavens were opened. 

Obj. 3. Further, heaven was opened to the faithful through 
Christ’s Passion, according to Heb. x. 19: We have [Vulg., 
Having] a confidence in the entering into the holies by the 
blood of Christ. Wherefore not even those who were bap- 
tized with Christ’s baptism, and died before His Passion, 
could enter heaven. Therefore the heavens should have 
been opened when Christ was suffering rather than when 
He was baptized. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke iii. 21): Jesus being 
baptized and praying, heaven was opened. 

I answer that, As stated above (A.1;,.Q. XXXVIIL, A. 1), 
Christ wished to be baptized in order to consecrate the 
baptism wherewith we were to be baptized. And therefore 
it behoved those things to be shown forth which belong to 
the efficacy of our baptism: concerning which efficacy 
three points are to be considered. First, the principal 

Hi. 2 12 

Q. 39. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 178 

power from which it is derived; and this, indeed, is a 
heavenly power. For which reason, when Christ was 
baptized, heaven was opened, to show that in future the 
heavenly power would sanctify baptism. 

Secondly, the faith of the Church and of the person 
baptized conduces to the efficacy of baptism: wherefore 
those who are baptized make a profession of faith, and 
baptism is called the sacrament of faith. Now by faith 
we gaze on heavenly things, which surpass the senses and 
human reason. And in order to signify this, the heavens 
were opened when Christ was baptized. 

Thirdly, because the entrance to the heavenly kingdom 
was opened to us by the baptism of Christ in a special 
manner, which entrance had been closed to the first man 
through sin. Hence, when Christ was baptized, the heavens 
were opened, to show that the way to heaven is open to the 
baptized. 

Now after baptism man needs to pray continually, in 
order to enter heaven: for though sins are remitted through 
baptism, there still remain the fomes of sin assailing us 
from within, and the world and the devils assailing us from 
without. And therefore it is said pointedly (Luke iii. 21) 
that Jesus being baptized and praying, heaven was opened: 
because, to wit, the faithful after baptism stand in need of 
prayer.—Or else, that we may be led to understand that 
the very fact that through baptism heaven is opened to 
believers is in virtue of the prayer of Christ. Hence it is 
said pointedly (Matth. iii. 16) that heaven was opened to Him 
—that is, to all for His sake. Thus, for example, the 
Emperor might say to one asking a favour for another: 
Behold, I grant this favour, not to him, but to thee—that is, 
to him for thy sake, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.).* - 

Reply Obj. 1. According to Chrysostom (ibid.), as Christ 
was baptized for man’s sake, though He needed no baptism 
for His own sake, so the heavens were opened unto Him 

as man, whereas in respect of His Divine Nature He was 
ever in heaven. 

* From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum. 

179 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Art. 5 

Reply Obj. 2. As Jerome says on Matth. iii. 16, 17, the 
heavens were opened to Christ when He was baptized, not 
by an unfolding of the elements, but by a spiritual vision: 
thus does Ezechiel relate the opening of the heavens at the 
beginning of his book. And Chrysostom proves this (Joc. 
cit.) by saying that if the creature—namely, heaven—had 
been sundered, he would not have said, ‘ were opened to Him,’ 
since what is opened in a corporeal sense is open to all. Hence 
it is said expressly (Mark i. 10) that Jesus forthwith coming 
up out of the water, saw the heavens opened ; as though the 
opening of the heavens were to be considered as seen by 
Christ. Some, indeed, refer this to the corporeal vision, and 
say that such a brilliant light shone round about Christ 
when He was baptized, that the heavens seeméd to be 
opened. It can also be referred to the imaginary vision, 
in which manner Ezechiel saw the heavens opened: since 
such a vision was formed in Christ’s imagination by the 
Divine power and by His rational will, so as to signify that 
the entrance to heaven is opened to men through baptism. 
Lastly, it can be referred to intellectual vision: forasmuch 
as Christ, when He had sanctified baptism, saw that heaven 
was opened to men: nevertheless He had seen before that 
this would be accomplished. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s Passion is the common cause of 
the opening of heaven to men. But it behoves this cause 
to be applied to each one, in order that he enter heaven. 
And this is effected by baptism, according to Rom. vi. 3: 
All we who are baptized in Christ Jesus are baptized in His 
death. Wherefore mention is made of the opening of the 
heavens at His baptism rather than at His Passion. 

Or, as Chrysostom says (loc. cit.): When Christ was bap- 
tized, the heavens were merely opened: but after He had 
vanquished the tyrant by the cross ; since gates were no longer 
needed for a heaven which thenceforth would be never closed, 
the angels said, not ‘ Open the gates,’ but ‘ Take them away.’ 
Thus Chrysostom gives us to understand that the obstacles 
which had hitherto hindered the souls of the departed from 

- entering into heaven were entirely removed by the Passion: 

Q. 39. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 180 

but at Christ’s baptism they were opened, as though the 
way had been shown by which men were to enter into 
heaven. 

SrxtH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT IS FITTING TO SAY THAT WHEN CHRIST WAS 
BAPTIZED THE HOLY GHOST CAME DOWN ON HIM IN 
THE FORM OF A DOVE? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it is not fitting to say that 
when Christ was baptized the Holy Ghost came down on 
Him in the form of a dove. For the Holy Ghost dwells in 
man by grace. But the fulness of grace was in the Man- 
Christ from the beginning of His conception, because He was 
the Only-begotten of the Father, as is clear from what has been 
said above (Q. VII., A. 12; Q. XXXIV., A.1). Therefore the 
Holy Ghost should not have been sent to Him at His baptism. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ is said to have descended into the 
world in the mystery of the Incarnation, when He emptied 
Himself, taking the form of a servant (Phil. ii. 7). But the 
Holy Ghost did not become incarnate. Therefore it is un- 
becoming to say that the Holy Ghost descended upon Him. 

Obj. 3. Further, that which is accomplished in our bap- 
tism should have been shown in Christ’s baptism, as in an 
exemplar. But in our baptism no visible mission of the Holy 
Ghost takes place. Therefore neither should a visible mission 
of the Holy Ghost have taken place in Christ’s baptism. 

. Obj. 4. Further, the Holy Ghost is poured forth on others 
through Christ, according to Jo. i. 16: Of His fulness we 
all have received. But the Holy Ghost came down on the 
apostles in the form, not of a dove, but of fire. Therefore 
neither should He have come down on Christ in the form of 
a dove, but in the form of fire. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke iii. 22): The Holy 
Ghost descended in a bodily shape as a dove upon Him. 

I answer that, What took place with respect to Christ 
in His baptism, as Chrysostom says (Hom. iv. in Matth.),* 

* T'rom the supposititious Opus Imperfectum. 

181 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Arr. 6 

ts connected with the mystery accomplished in all who were to 
be baptized afterwards. Now, all those who are baptized 
with the baptism of Christ receive the Holy Ghost, unless 
they approach unworthily; according to Matth. iii. 11: 
He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost. Therefore it was 
fitting that when our Lord was baptized the Holy Ghost 
should descend upon Him. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Augustine says (De Trin. xv.): It ts 
most absurd to say that Christ received the Holy Ghost, when 
He was already thirty years old: for when He came to be 
baptized, since He was without sin, therefore was He not without 
the Holy Ghost. For tf it is written of John that ‘he shall 
be filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother’s womb,’ what 
must we say of the Man-Christ, whose conception in the 
flesh was not carnal, but spiritual ? Therefore now—1.e., at 
His baptism—He designed to foreshadow His body—1.e., the 
Church—in which those who are baptized receive the Holy 
Ghost in a special manner. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Trin. ii.), the Holy 
Ghost is said to have descended on Christ in a bodily shape, 
as a dove, not because the very substance of the Holy Ghost 
was seen, for He is invisible: nor as though that visible 
creature were assumed into the unity of the Divine Person; 
since it is not said that the Holy Ghost was the dove, as 
it is said that the Son of God is man by reason of the union. 
Nor, again, was the Holy Ghost seen under the form of a 
dove, after the manner in which John saw the slain Lamb 
in the Apocalypse (v. 6): For the latter wision took place in 
the spirit through spiritual images of bodies ; whereas no one 
ever doubted that this dove was seen by the eyes of the body. 
Nor, again, did the Holy Ghost appear under the form of 
a dove in the sense in which it is said (1 Cor. x. 4): ‘ Now, the 
rock was Christ’: for the latter had already a created existence, 
and through the manner of its action was called by the name of 
Christ, whom it signified: whereas this dove came suddenly 
into existence, to fulfil the purpose of tts signification, and 
afterwards ceased to exist, like the flame which appeared in 
the bush to Moses. 

Q. 39. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 182 

Hence the Holy Ghost is said to have descended upon 
Christ, not by reason of His being united to the dove: but 
either because the dove itself signified the Holy Ghost, 
inasmuch as it descended when it came upon Him; or, again, 
by reason of the spiritual grace, which is poured out by God, 
so as to descend, as it were, on the creature, according to 
James i. 17: Every best gift and every perfect gift is from above, 
coming down from the Father of lights. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Chrysostom says (Hom. xii. in Matth.): 
At the beginning of all spiritual transactions sensible vistons 
appear, for the sake of them who cannot conceive at all an in- 
corporeal nature ; . . . so that, though afterwards no such thing 
occur, they may shape their faith according to that which has 
occurred once for all. And therefore the Holy Ghost de- 
scended visibly, under a bodily shape, on Christ at His 
baptism, in order that we may believe Him to descend in- 
visibly on all those who are baptized. 

Reply Obj. 4. The Holy Ghost appeared over Christ at 
His baptism, under the form of a dove, for four reasons. 
First, on account of the disposition required in the one 
baptized—namely, that he approach in good faith: since, 
as it is written (Wisd. i. 5): The holy spirit of discipline will 
flee from the deceitful. For the dove is an animal of a simple 
character, void of cunning and deceit: whence it is said 
(Matth. x. 16): Be ye simple as doves. 

Secondly, in order to designate the seven gifts of the Holy 
Ghost, which are signified by the properties of the dove. 
For the dove dwells beside the running stream, in order 
that, on perceiving the hawk, it may plunge in and escape. 
This refers to the gift of wisdom, whereby the saints dwell 
beside the running waters of Holy Scripture, in order to 
escape the assaults of the devil. Again, the dove prefers 
the more choice seeds. This refers to the gift of knowledge, 
whereby the saints make choice of sound doctrines, with 
which they nourish themselves. Further, the dove feeds 
the brood of other birds. This refers to the gift of counsel, 
with which the saints, by teaching and example, feed men 
who have been the brood—+.e., imitators—of the devil. 

183 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Arr. 6 

Again, the dove tears not with its beak. This refers to the 
gift of understanding, wherewith the saints do not rend 
sound doctrines, as heretics do. Again, the dove has no 
gall. This refers to the gift of piety, by reason of which 
the saints are free from unreasonable anger. Again, the 
dove builds its nest in the cleft of a rock. This refers to 
the gift of fortitude, wherewith the saints build their nest 
—4.e., take refuge and hope—in the death wounds of Christ, 
who is the Rock of strength. Lastly, the dove has a 
plaintive song. This refers to the gift of fear, wherewith 
the saints delight in bewailing sins. 

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost appeared under the form of a 
dove on account of the proper effect of baptism, which is 
the remission of sins and reconciliation with God: for the 
dove is a gentle creature. Wherefore, as Chrysostom says, 
(Hom. xii. in Matth.), at the Deluge this creature appeared 
bearing an olive branch, and publishing the tidings of the 
universal peace of the whole world : and now again the dove 
appears at the baptism, pointing to our Deliverer. 

Fourthly, the Holy Ghost appeared over our Lord at 
His baptism in the form of a dove, in order to designate 
the common effect of baptism—namely, the building up of 
the unity of the Church. Hence it is written (Eph. v. 25- 
27): Christ delivered Himself up... that He might present 
.. . to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, 
or any such thing . . . cleansing 1t by the laver of water in the 
word of life. Therefore it was fitting that the Holy Ghost 
should appear at the baptism under the form of a dove, 
which is a creature both loving and gregarious. Where- 
fore also it is said of the Church (Cant. vi. 8): One is my dove. 

But on the apostles the Holy Ghost descended under the 
form of fire, for two reasons. First, to show with what 
fervour their hearts were to be moved, so as to preach 
Christ everywhere, though surrounded by opposition. And 
therefore He appeared as a fiery tongue. Hence Augustine 
says (Super Joan., Tract. vi.): Our Lord manifests the Holy 
Ghost visibly in two ways—namely, by the dove coming upon 
the Lord when He was baptized ; by fire, coming upon the 

Q. 39. Art.7 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 184 

disciples when they were met together... . In the former case 
simplicity is shown, in the latter fervour... . We learn, then, 
from the dove, that those who are sanctified by the Spirit should 
be without guile ; and from the fire, that their simplicity should 
not be left to wax cold. Nor let it disturb anyone that the 
tongues were cloven .. . in the dove recognize unity. 

Secondly, because, as Chrysostom says (Gregory, Hom. 
xxx. in Ev.): Since sins had to be forgiven, which is effected in 
baptism, meekness was required ; this is shown by the dove: 
but when we have obtained grace we must look forward to be 
judged ; and this is signified by the fire. 

SEVENTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE DOVE IN WHICH THE HOLY GHOST APPEARED 
WAS REAL ? 

We proceed thus to the Seventh Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the dove in which the Holy 
Ghost appeared was not real. For that seems to be a mere 
apparition which appears in its semblance. But it is stated 
(Luke iii. 22) that the Holy Ghost descended in a bodtly shape 
as a dove upon Him. Therefore it was not a real dove, but 
a semblance of a dove. 

Obj. 2. Further, just as Nature does nothing useless, so 
neither does God (De Calo i.). Now since this dove came 
merely 1m order to signify something and pass away, as 
Augustine says (De Trin. ii.), a real dove would have been 
useless: because the semblance of a dove was sufficient for 
that purpose. Therefore it was not a real dove. 

Obj. 3. Further, the properties of a thing lead us to a 
knowledge of that thing. If, therefore, this were a real 
dove, its properties would have signified the nature of the 
real animal, and not the effect of the Holy Ghost. There- 
fore it seems that it was not a real dove. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Agone Christ. xxii.): 
Nor do we say this as though we asserted that our Lord Jesus 
Christ alone had a real body, and that the Holy Ghost appeared 

to men’s eyes in a fallacious manner: but we say that both 
those bodies were real. 

» 185 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Arr. 8 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. V., A. 1), it was un- 
becoming that the Son of God, who is the Truth of the 
Father, should make use of anything unreal; wherefore 
He took, not an imaginary, but a real body. And since 
the Holy Ghost is called the Spirit of Truth, as appears from 
Jo. xvi. 13, therefore He too made a real dove in which 
to appear, though He did not assume it into unity of per- 
son. Wherefore, after the words quoted above, Augustine 
adds: Just as it behoved the Son of God not to deceive men, so 
tt behoved the Holy Ghost not to deceive. But it was easy for 
Almighty God, who created all creatures out of nothing, to 
frame the body of a real dove without the help of other doves, 
just as it was easy for Him to form a true body in Mary’s 
womb without the seed of a man: since the corporeal creature 
obeys tts Lord’s command and will, both in the mother’s womb 
in forming a man, and in the world itself in forming a dove. 

Reply Obj. 1. The Holy Ghost is said to have descended 
in the shape or semblance of a dove, not in the sense that 
the dove was not real, but in order to show that He did not 
appear in the form of His substance. 

Reply Obj. 2. It was not superfluous to form a real dove, 
in which the Holy Ghost might appear, because by the 
very reality of the dove the reality of the Holy Ghost and 
of His effects is signified. 

Reply Obj. 3. The properties of the dove lead us to under- 
stand the dove’s nature and the effects of the Holy Ghost 
in the same way. Because from the very fact that the dove 
has such properties, it results that it signifies the Holy 
Ghost. 

EIGHTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS BECOMING, WHEN CHRIST WAS BAPTIZED 
THAT THE FATHER’S VOICE SHOULD BE HEARD, BEARING 
WITNESS TO THE SON? 

We proceed thus to the Eighth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was unbecoming when 
Christ was baptized for the Father’s voice to be heard bearing 
witness to the Son. For the Son and the Holy Ghost, 

Q. 39. Artr.8 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 186 

according as they have appeared visibly, are said to have 
been visibly sent. But it does not become the Father to be 
sent, as Augustine makes it clear (De Trin. ii.). Neither, 
therefore, (does it become Him) to appear. 

Obj. 2. Further, the voice gives expression to the word 
conceived in the heart. But the Father is not the Word. 
Therefore He is unfittingly manifested by a voice. 

Obj. 3. Further, the Man-Christ did not begin to be Son 
of God at His baptism, as some heretics have stated: but 
He was the Son of God from the beginning of His concep- 
tion. Therefore the Father’s voice should have proclaimed 
Christ’s Godhead at His nativity rather than at His 
baptism. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. iii. 17): Behold a votce 
from heaven, saying : This is My beloved Son in whom I am 
well pleased. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5), that which is accom- 
plished in our baptism should be manifested in Christ’s 
baptism, which was the exemplar af ours. Now the bap- 
tism which the faithful receive is hallowed by the invocation 
and the power of the Trinity ; according to Matth. xxviii. 19: 
Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Where- 
fore, as Jerome says on Matth. iii. 16, 17: The mystery of the 
Trinity 1s shown forth in Christ's baptism. Our Lord Him- 
self 1s baptized in His human nature ; the Holy Ghost de- 
scended in the shape of a dove: the Father's voice is heard 
bearing witness to the Son. Therefore it was becoming that 
in that baptism the Father should be manifested by a 
voice. 

Reply Obj. 1. The visible mission adds something to the 
apparition, to wit, the authority of the sender. Therefore 
the Son and the Holy Ghost who are from another, are said 
not only to appear, but also to be sent visibly. But the 
Father, who is not from another, can appear indeed, but 
cannot be sent visibly. 

Reply Obj. 2. The Father is manifested by the voice, only 
as producing the voice or speaking by it. And since it is 

he 

187 THE BAPTIZING OF CHRIST Q. 39. Art. 8 

proper to the Father to produce the Word—that is, to 
utter or to speak—therefore was it most becoming that the 
Father should be manifested by a voice, because the voice 
designates the word. Wherefore the very voice to which 
the Father gave utterance bore witness to the Sonship of 
the Word. And just as the form of the dove, in which the 
Holy Ghost was made manifest, is not the Nature of the 
Holy Ghost, nor is the form of man in which the Son Him- 
self was manifested, the very Nature of the Son of God, 
so neither does the voice belong to the Nature of the 
Word or of the Father who spoke. Hence (Jo. v. 37) our 
Lord says: Neither have you heard His—i.e., the Father’s— 
voice at any time, nor seen His shape. By which words, as 
Chrysostom says (Hom. xl. in Joan.), He gradually leads 
them to the knowledge of the philosophical truth, and shows 
them that God has neither voice nor shape, but is above all such 
forms and utterances. And just as the whole Trinity made 
both the dove and the human nature assumed by Christ, 
so also they formed the voice: yet the Father alone as 
speaking is manifested by the voice, just as the Son alone 
assumed human nature, and the Holy Ghost alone is mani- 
fested in the dove, as Augustine* makes evident. 

Reply Obj. 3. It was becoming that Christ’s Godhead 
should not be proclaimed to all in His nativity, but rather 
that It should be hidden while He was subject to the defects 
of infancy. But when He attained to the perfect age, 
when the time came for Him to teach, to work miracles, 
and to draw men to Himself, then did it behove His God- 
head to be attested from on high by the Father’s testimony, 
so that His teaching might become the more credible. 
Hence He says (Jo. v. 37): The Father Himself who sent 
Me, hath given testimony of Me. And specially at the 
time of baptism, by which men are born again into adopted 
sons of God; since God’s sons by adoption are made to 
be like unto His natural Son, according to Rom. viii. 29: 
Whom He foreknew, He also predestinated to be made con- 
formable to the image of His Son. Hence Hilary says (Super 

* Fulgentius, De Fide ad Petrum. 

Q. 39. Art.8 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 188 

Maitth. ii.) that when Jesus was baptized, the Holy Ghost 
descended on Him, and the Father’s voice was heard saying: 
‘This 1s My beloved Son,’ that we might know, from what was 
accomplished in Christ, that after being washed in the waters 
of baptism the Holy Ghost comes down upon us from on high, 
and that the Father's voice declares us to have become the 
adopted sons of God. 

QUESTION XL. 

OF CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE. 
(In Four Articles.) 

HAVING considered those things which relate to Christ’s 
entrance into the world, or to His beginning, it remains 
for us to consider those that relate to the process of His 
life. And we must consider (1) His manner of life; (2) His 
temptation; (3) His doctrine; (4) His miracles. 

Concerning the first there are four points of inquiry: 
(rt) Whether Christ should have led a solitary life, or have 
associated with men? (2) Whether He should have led 
an austere life as regards food, drink, and clothing? or 
should He have conformed Himself to others in these 
respects? (3) Whether He should have adopted a lowly 
state of life, or one of wealth and honour? (4) Whether 
He should have lived in conformity with the Law ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE ASSOCIATED WITH MEN, OR 
LED A SOLITARY LIFE? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
associated with men, but should have led a solitary life. 
For it behoved Christ to show by His manner of life not only 
that He was man, but also that He was God. But it is 
not becoming that God should associate with men, for it is 
written (Dan. ii. 11): Except the gods, whose conversation 
is not with men ; and the Philosopher says (Polit. i.) that he 
who lives alone is either a beast—that is, if he do this from 
being wild—or a god, if his motive be the contemplation of 

189 

Q. 40. Artr.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 190 

truth. Therefore it seems that it was not becoming for 
Christ to associate with men. 

Obj. 2. Further, while He lived in mortal flesh, it behoved 
Christ to lead a most perfect life. But the most perfect 
is the contemplative life, as we have stated in the Second 
Part (II.-II., Q. CLXXXII., AA. 1, 2). Now, solitudeis 
most suitable to the contemplative life; according to Osee 
ii. 14: I will lead her into the wilderness, and I will speak 
to her heart. Therefore it seems that Christ should have led 
a solitary life. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ’s manner of life should have been 
uniform: because it should always have given evidence of 
that which is best. But at times Christ avoided the crowd 
and sought lonely places: hence Remigius,* commenting 
on Matthew, says: We read that our Lord had three places 
of refuge : the ship, the mountain, the desert ; to one or other 
of which He betook Himself whenever he was harassed by the 
crowd. Therefore He ought always to have led a solitary 
life. 

On the contrary, It is written (Baruch iii. 38): Afterwards 
He was seen upon earth and conversed with men. 

I answer that, Christ’s manner of life had to be in keeping 
with the end of His Incarnation, by reason of which He 
came into the world. Now He came into the world, first, 
that He might publish the truth; thus He says Himself 
(Jo. xviil. 37): For this was I born, and for this came I into 
the world, that I should give testimony to the truth. Hence 
it was fitting not that He should hide Himself by leading 
a solitary life, but that He should appear openly and preach 
in public. Wherefore (Luke iv. 42, 43) He says to those 
who wished to stay Him: To other cities also I must preach 
the kingdom of God : for therefore am I sent. 

Secondly, He came in order to free men from sin; accord- 
ing to I Tim. i. 15: Christ Jesus came into this world to save 
sinners. And hence, as Chrysostom says, although Christ 
might, while staying in the same place, have drawn all men to 
Himself, to hear His preaching, yet He did not do so, thus 

* Cf. Catena Aurea, Matth. v. I. 

Igr CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE 0. 40. Arr. 1 

giving us the example to go about and seek those who perish, 
like the shepherd in his search of the lost sheep, and the phy- 
sictan in his attendance on the sick. 

Thirdly, He came that by Him we might have access to 
God, as it is written (Rom. v. 2). And thus it was fitting 
that He should give men confidence in approaching Him by 
associating familiarly with them. Wherefore it is written 
(Matth. ix. 10): I¢ came to pass as He was sitting . . . in the 
house, behold, many publicans and sinners came, and sat down 
with Jesus and His disciples. On which Jerome comments 
as follows: They had seen the publican who had been con- 
verted from a sinful to a better life: and consequently they did 
not despatr.of their own salvation. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ wished to make His Godhead known 
through His human nature. And therefore, since it is 
proper to man to doso, He associated with men, at the same 
time manifesting His Godhead to all, by preaching and 
working miracles, and by leading among men a blameless 
and righteous life. 

Reply Obj. 2. As stated in the Second Part (Q. CLXXXIL., 
A. 1; Q. CLXXXVIIL., A. 6), the contemplative life is, 
absolutely speaking, more perfect than the active life, 
because the latter is taken up with bodily actions: yet 
that form of active life in which a man, by preaching and 
teaching, delivers to others the fruits of his contemplation, 
is more perfect than the life that stops at contemplation, 
because such a life is built on an abundance of contempla- 
- tion, and consequently such was the life chosen by Christ. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s action is our instruction. And 
therefore, in order to teach preachers that they ought not 
to be for ever before the public, our Lord withdrew Himself 
sometimes from the crowd. We are told of three reasons 
for His doing this. First, for the rest of the body: hence 
(Mark vi. 31) it is stated that our Lord said to His disciples: 
Come apart into a desert place, and rest a little. For there 
were many coming and going: and they had not so much as 
time to eat. But sometimes it was for the sake of prayer; 
thus it is written (Luke vi. 12): It came to pass in those 

Q. 40. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” “192 

days, that He went out into a mountain to pray; and He 
passed the whole night in the prayer of God. On this Ambrose 
remarks that by His example He instructs us in the precepts 
of virtue. And sometimes He did so in order to teach us 
to avoid the favour of men. Wherefore Chrysostom, com- 
menting on Matth. v. 1, Jesus, seeing the multitude, went up 
into a mountain, says: By sitting not in the city and in the 
market-place, but on a mountain and in a place of solitude, 
He taught us to do nothing for show, and to withdraw yrom 
the crowd, especially when we have to discourse of needful 
things. 
SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS BECOMING THAT CHRIST SHOULD LEAD AN 
AUSTERE LIFE IN THIS WORLD ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was becoming that 
Christ should lead an austere life in this world. For Christ 
preached the perfection of life much more than John did. 
But John led an austere life in order that he might per- 
suade men by his example to embrace a perfect life; for it 
is written (Matth. iii. 4) that the same John had his garment 
of camel’s hair and a leathern girdle about his loins : and his 
meat was locusts and wild honey ; on which Chrysostom com- 
ments as follows (Hom. x.): It was a marvellous and strange 
thing to behold such austerity in a human frame : which thing 
also particularly attracted the Jews. Therefore it seems that 
an austere life was much more becoming to Christ. 

Obj. 2. Further, abstinence is ordained to continency; 
for it is written (Osee iv. 10): They shall eat and shall not 
be filled ; they have committed fornication, and have not ceased. 
But Christ both observed continency in Himself and pro- 
posed it to be observed by others when He said (Matth. 
xix. 12): There are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs 
for the kingdom of heaven: he that can take it let him take 
wt. Therefore it seems that Christ should have observed an 
austere life both in Himself and in His disciples. 

Oty. 3. Further, it seems absurd for a man to begin a 

193 ###*CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE Q. 40. Arr. 2 

stricter form of life and to return to an easier life: for one 
might quote to his discredit that which is written, Luke 
xiv. 30: This man began to build, and was not able to finish. 
Now Christ began a very strict life after His baptism, re- 
maining in the desert and fasting for forty days and forty 
nights. Therefore it seems unbecoming that, after leading 

_ such a strict life, He should return to the common manner 

’ of living. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. xi. 19): The Son of 
Man came eating and drinking. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. I), it was in keeping 
with the end of the Incarnation that Christ should not lead 
a solitary life, but should associate with men. Now it 
is most fitting that he who associates with others should 
conform to their manner of living; according to the words 
of the Apostle (xr Cor. ix. 22): I became all things to all men. 
And therefore it was most fitting that Christ should con- 
form to others in the matter of eating and drinking. Hence 
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xvi.) that John is described 
as ‘ neither eating nor drinking, because he did not take the 
same food as the Jews. Therefore, unless our Lord had taken 
it, tt would not be said of Him, in contrast, ‘ eating and 
drinking.’ 

Reply Obj. 1. In His manner of living our Lord gave an 
example of perfection as to all those things which of them- 
selves relate to salvation. Now abstinence in eating and 
drinking does not of itself relate to salvation, according to 
Rom. xiv. 17: The kingdom of God is not meat and drink. 
And Augustine (De Qq. Evang. ii., gu. 11) explains Matth. 
xi. 19, Wisdom is justified by her children, saying that this 
is because the holy apostles understood that the kingdom of 
God does not consist in eating and drinking, but in suffering 
indigence with equanimity, for they are neither uplifted by 
affluence, nor distressed by want. Again (De Doctr. Christ. 
iii.), he says that in all such things 7 7s not making use of 
them, but the wantonness of the user, that 1s sinful. Now 
both these lives are lawful and praiseworthy—namely, 
that a man withdraw from the society of other men and 

IIL. 13 

Q. 40. Art.2 "THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 194 

observe abstinence; and that he associate with other men 
and live like them. And therefore our Lord wished to 
give men an example of either kind of life. 

As to John, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xxxvil., 
sup, Matth.), he exhibited no more than his life and righteous 
conduct . . . but Christ had the testimony also of miracles. 
Leaving, therefore, John to be illustrious by his fasting, He 
Himself came the opposite way, both coming unto publicans’ — 
tables and eating and drinking. . 

Reply Obj. 2. Just as by abstinence other men acquire 
the power of self-restraint, so also Christ, in Himself and 
in those that are His, subdued the flesh by the power of 
His Godhead. Wherefore, as we read Matth. ix. 14, the 
Pharisees and the disciples of John fasted, but not the 
disciples of Christ. On which Bede comments, saying that 
John drank neither wine nor strong drink : because abstinence 
is meritoricus where the nature is weak. But why should our 
Lord, whose right by nature it 1s to forgive sins, avoid those 
whom He could make holier than such as abstain ? 

Reply Obj. 3. As Chrysostom says (Hom. xiii., sup. Matth.), 
that thou mightest learn how great a good 1s fasting, and how 
it is a shield against the devil, and that after baptism thou 
shouldst give thyself up, not to luxury, but to fasting—for this 
cause did He fast, not as needing it Himself, but as teaching 
us.... And for this did He proceed no further than Moses 
and Elias, lest His assumption of our flesh might seem in- 
credible. The mystical meaning, as Gregory says (Hom. xvi. 
‘im Evang.), is that by Christ’s example the number forty 
is observed in His fast, because the power of the decalogue 
ts fulfilled throughout the four books of the Holy Gospel: 
since ten multiplied by four amounts to forty. Or, because 
we live in this mortal body composed of the four elements, 
and by its lusts we transgress the commandments of the Lord, 
which ave expressed in the decalogue—Or, according to 
Augustine (QQ. Ixxxiii., gu. 81): To know the Creator and the 
creature 1s the entire teaching of wisdom. The Creator is the 
Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Now, the 
creature 1s partly invisible, as the soul, to which the number 

195 CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE Q. 40. Arr. 3 

three may be ascribed, for we are commanded to love God in 
three ways, ‘with our whole heart, our whole soul, and our 
whole mind’; and parily visible, as the body, to which the 
number four is applicable on account of its being subject to 
heat, moisture, cold, and dryness. Hence if we multiply 
ten, which may be referred to the entire moral code, by four, 
which number may be applied to the body, because it is the 
body that executes the law, the product is the number forty: 
in which, consequently, the time during which we sigh and 
grieve is shown forth. And yet there was no inconsistency 
in Christ’s returning to the common manner of living, 
after fasting and (retiring into the) desert. For it is becom- 
ing to that kind of life, which we hold Christ to have em- 
braced, wherein a man delivers to others the fruits of his 
contemplation, that he devote himself first of all to con- 
templation, and that he afterwards come down to the 
publicity of active life by associating with other men. 
Hence Bede says (loc. cit.) on Mark ii. 18: Christ fasted, 
that thou mightest not disobey the commandment ; He ate with 
sinners, that thou mightest discern Hts sanctity and acknowledge 
Hts power. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE LED A LIFE OF POVERTY IN 
THIS WORLD ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
led a life of poverty in this world. Because Christ should 
have embraced the most eligible form of life. But the most 
eligible form of life is that which is a mean between riches 
and poverty; for it is written (Prov. xxx. 8): Give me neither 
beggary nor riches ; give me only the necessaries of life. There- 
fore Christ should have led a life, not of poverty, but of 
moderation. 

Obj. 2. Further, external wealth is ordained to bodily 
use as to food and raiment. But Christ conformed His 
manner of life to those among whom He lived, in the matter 

Q. 40. Art.3 THE ‘‘'SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 196 

of food and raiment. Therefore it seems that He should 
have observed the ordinary manner of life as to riches and 
poverty, and have avoided extreme poverty. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ specially invited men to imitate 
His example of humility, according to Matth. xi. 29: Learn 
of Me, because I am meck and humble of heart. But humility 
is most commendable in the rich; thus it is written (1 Tim. 
vi. 17): Charge the rich of this world not to be high-minded. 
Therefore it seems that Christ should not have chosen a 
life of poverty. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. viii. 20): The Son of 
Man hath not where to lay His head : as though He were to 
say, as Jerome observes: Why desirest thou to follow Me for 
the sake of riches and worldly gain ; since I am so poor that 
I have not even the smallest dwelling-place, and I am sheltered 
by a roof that 1s not Mine? And on Matth. xvii. 26: That 
we may not scandalize them, go to the sea, Jerome says: This 
incident, taken literally, affords edification to those who hear it 
when they are told that our Lord was so poor that He had not 
the wherewithal to pay the tax for Himself and His apostles. 

I answer that, It was fitting for Christ to lead a life of 
poverty in this world. First, because this was in keeping 
with the duty of preaching, for which purpose He says that 
He came (Mark i. 38): Let us go into the neighbouring towns 
and cities, that I may preach there also : for to this purpose am 
I come. Now in order that the preachers of God’s word 
may be able to give all their time to preaching, they must 
be wholly free from care of worldly matters: which is im- 
possible for those who are possessed of wealth. Wherefore 
the Lord Himself, when sending the apostles to preach, 
said to them (Matth. x. 9): Do not possess gold nor silver. 
And the apostles (Acts vi. 2) say: It 1s not reasonable that 
we should leave the word of God and serve tables. 

Secondly, because just as He took upon Himself the death 
of the body in order to bestow spiritual life on us, so did 
He bear bodily poverty, in order to enrich us spiritually, 
according to 2 Cor. viii. 9: You know the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: that. . . He became poor for our [Vulg., your] 

197 CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE Q. 40. Arr. 3 

sakes, that through His poverty we [Vulg., you] might be 
rich. 

Thirdly, lest if He were rich His preaching might be 
ascribed to cupidity. Wherefore Jerome says on Matth. 
x. 9, that if the disciples had been possessed of wealth, 
they had seemed to preach for gain, not for the salvation of 
mankind. And the same reason applies to Christ. 

Fourthly, that the more lowly He seemed by reason of 
His poverty, the greater might the power of His Godhead 
be shown to be. Hence in a sermon of the Council of 
Ephesus (P. iii., c. ix.) we read: He chose all that was poor 
and despicable, all that was of small account and hidden from 
the majority, that we might recognize His Godhead to have 
transformed the terrestrial sphere. For this reason did He 
choose a poor maid for His mother, a poorer birthplace ; 
for this reason did He live in want. Learn this from the 
manger. 

Reply Obj. 1. Those who wish to live virtuously need to 
avoid abundance of riches and beggary, in as far as these 
are occasions of sin: since abundance of riches is an occasion 
for being proud; and beggary is an occasion of thieving 
and lying, or even of perjury. But forasmuch as Christ was 
incapable of sin, He had not the same motive as Solomon 
for avoiding these things.—Yet neither is every kind of 
beggary an occasion of theft and perjury, as Solomon seems 
to add (tbid.); but only that which is involuntary, in order 
to avoid which, a man is guilty of theft and perjury. But 
voluntary poverty is not open to this danger: and such was 
the poverty chosen by Christ. 

Reply Obj. 2. A man may feed and clothe himself in con- 
formity with others, not only by possessing riches, but 
also by receiving the necessaries of life from those who are 
rich. This is what happened in regard to Christ: for it 
is written (Luke viii. 2, 3) that certain women followed 
Christ and ministered unto Him of their substance. For, as 
Jerome says on Matth. xxvii. 55, It was a Jewish custom, 
nor was it thought wrong for women, following the ancrent 
tradition of their nation, out of their private means to provide 

Q. 40. Art.4 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 198 

their instructors with food and clothing. But as this might 
give scandal to the heathens, Paul says that he gave wt up: 
thus it was possible for them to be fed out of a common 
fund, but not to possess wealth, without their duty of preach- 
ing being’ hindered by anxiety. 

Reply Obj. 3. Humility is not much to be praised in one 
who is poor of necessity. But in one who, like Christ, is 
poor willingly, poverty itself is a sign of very great humility. 

FourtTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST CONFORMED HIS CONDUCT TO THE 
LAW ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not conform 
His conduct to the Law. For the Law forbade any work 
whatsoever to be done on the Sabbath, since God rested on 
the seventh day from all His work which He had done. But 
He healed a man on the Sabbath, and commanded him to 
take up his bed. Therefore it seems that He did not con- 
form His conduct to the Law. 

Obj. 2. Further, what Christ taught, that He also did, 
according to Acts i. 1: Jesus began to do and to teach. But 
He taught (Matth. xv. 11) that not all that which goeth into 
.the mouth defileth a man : and this is contrary to the precept 
of the Law, which declared that a man was made unclean 
by eating and touching certain animals, as stated Lev. xi. 
Therefore it seems that He did not conform His conduct 
to the Law. 

Obj. 3. Further, he who consents to anything is of the 
same mind as he who does it, according to Rom. i. 32: 
Not only they that do them, but they also that consent to them 
that do them. But Christ, by excusing His disciples, con- 
sented to their breaking the Law by plucking the ears of 
corn on the Sabbath; as is related Matth. xii. 1-8. There- 
fore it seems that Christ did not conform His conduct to 
the Law. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. v. 17): Do not think 

199 CHRIST’S MANNER OF LIFE Q. 40. Arr. 4 

that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets. Com- 
menting on these words, Chrysostom says: He fulfilled the 
Law, .. .in one way, by transgressing none of the precepts 
of the Law ; secondly, by justifying us through faith, which 
the Law, in the letter, was unable to do. 

I answer that, Christ conformed His conduct in all things 
to the precepts of the Law. In token of this He wished 
even to be circumcised; for the circumcision is a kind of 
protestation of a man’s purpose of keeping the Law, accord- 
ing to Gal. v. 3: I testify to every man circumcising himself, 
that he ts a debtor to do the whole Law. 

And Christ, indeed, wished to conform His conduct to 
the Law, first, to show His approval of the Old Law. 
Secondly, that by obeying the Law He might perfect it 
and bring it to an end in His own self, so as to show that it 
was ordained to Him. Thirdly, to deprive the Jews of an 
excuse for slandering Him. Fourthly, in order to deliver 
men from subjection to the Law, according to Gal. iv. 4, 5: 
God sent His Son ... made under the Law, that He might 
redeem them who were under the Law. 

Reply Obj. 1. Our Lord excuses Himself from any trans- 
gression of the Law in this matter, for three reasons. First, 
the precept of the hallowing of the Sabbath forbids not 
Divine work, but human work: for though God ceased on 
the seventh day from the creation of new creatures, yet He 
ever works by keeping and governing His creatures. Now 
that Christ wrought miracles was a Divine work: hence 
He says (Jo. v. 17): My Father worketh until now ; and I 
work. 

Secondly, He excuses Himself on the ground that this 
precept does not forbid works which are needful for bodily 
health. Wherefore He says (Luke xiii. 15): Doth not every 
one of you on the Sabbath-day loose his ox or his ass from the 
manger, and lead them to water? And farther on (xiv. 5): 
Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fall into a pit, and 
will not immediately draw him out on the Sabbath-day? Now 
it is manifest that the miraculous works done by Christ 
related to health of body and soul. 

Q. 40. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 200 

Thirdly, because this precept does not forbid works per- 
taining to the worship of God. Wherefore He says (Matth. 
xii. 5): Have ye not read in the Law that on the Sabbath-days 
the priests in the Temple break the Sabbath, and are without 
blame? And (Jo. vii. 23) it is written that a man receives 
circumcision on the Sabbath-day. Now when Christ com- 
manded the paralytic to carry his bed on the Sabbath-day, 
this pert:ined to the worship of God—+.e., to the praise of 
God’s power. And thus it is clear that He did not break 
the Sabbath: although the Jews threw this false accusation 
in His face, saying (Jo. ix. 16): This man 1s not of God, who 
keepeth not the Sabbath. 

Reply Obj. 2. By those words Christ wished to show that 
man is made unclean as to his soul, by the use of any sort 
of foods considered not in their nature, but only in some 
signification. And that certain foods are in the Law called 

unclean’ is due to some signification; whence Augustine 
says (Contra Faust. vi.): If a question be raised about swine 
and lambs, both are clean by nature, since ‘ all God’s creatures 
are good’ ; but by a certain signification lambs are clean and 
swine unclean, 

Reply Olj. 3. The disciples also, when, being hungry, they 
plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath, are to be excused 
from transgressing the Law, since they were pressed by 
hunger: just as David did not transgress the Law when, 
through being compelled by hunger, he ate the loaves which 
it was not lawful for him to eat. 

QUESTION XLI. 

OF CHRIST’S TEMPTATION. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s temptation, concerning 
which there are four points of inquiry: (1) Whether it was 
becoming that Christ should be tempted? (2) Of the 
place; (3) of the time; (4) of the mode and order of the 
temptation. 

FIRST ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS BECOMING THAT CHRIST SHOULD BE 
TEMPTED ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not becoming for 
Christ to be tempted. For to tempt is to make an experi- 
ment, which is not done save in regard to something un- 
known. But the power of Christ was known even to the 
demons; for it is written (Luke iv. 41) that He suffered them 
not to speak, for they knew that He was Christ. Therefore it 
seems that it was unbecoming for Christ to be tempted. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ was come in order to destroy the 
works of the devil, according to 1 Jo. iii. 8: For this pur- 
pose the Son of God appeared, that He might destroy the works 
of the devil. But it is not for the same to destroy the works 
of a certain one and to suffer them. Therefore it seems 
unbecoming that Christ should suffer Himself to be tempted 
by the devil. 

Obj. 3. Further, temptation is from a threefold source— 
the flesh, the world, and the devil. But Christ was not 
tempted either by the flesh or by the world. Therefore 
neither should He have been tempted by the devil. 

201 

Q. 41. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA”’ 202 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. iv. 1): Jesus was led 
by the Spirit into the desert to be tempted by the devil. 

I answer that, Christ wished to be tempted; first that He 
might strengthen us against temptations. Hence Gregory 
says in a homily (xvi. in Evang.): It was not unworthy of 
our Redeemer to wish to be tempted, who came also to be 
slain; in order that by His temptations He might conquer 
our temptations, just as by His death He overcame our 
death. 

Secondly, that we might be warned, so that none, however 
holy, may think himself safe or free from temptation. 
Wherefore also He wished to be tempted after His bap- 
tism, because, as Hilary says (Super Matth., cap. iil.): The 
temptations of the devil assail those principally who are sancti- 
fied, for he desires, above all, to overcome the holy. Hence 
also it is written (Ecclus. ii. 1): Son, when thou comest to the 
service of God, stand in justice and in fear, and prepare thy 
soul for temptation. 

Thirdly, in order to give us an example: to teach us, to 
wit, how to overcome the temptations of the devil. Hence 
Augustine says (De Trin. iv.) that Christ allowed Himself 
to be tempted by the devil, that He might be our Mediator in 
overcoming temptations, not only by helping us, but also by 
giving us an example. 

Fourthly, in order to fill us with confidence in His mercy. 
Hence it is written (Heb. iv. 15): We have not a high-priest, 
who cannot have compassion on our infirmities, but one tempted 
in all things like as we are, without sin. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Augustine says (De Civ. Det ix.): Christ 
was known to the demons only so far as He willed ; not as the 
Author of eternal life, but as the cause of certain temporal 
effects, from which they formed a certain conjecture that 
Christ was the Son of God. But since they also observed 
in Him certain signs of human frailty, they did not know 
for certain that He was the Son of God: wherefore (the 
devil) wished to tempt Him. This is implied by the words 
of Matthew (iv. 2, 3), saying that, after He was hungry, 
the tempter came to Him, because, as Hilary says (loc. cit.), 

203 CHRIST’S TEMPTATION QO. 4t. ART.2 

Had not Christ’s weakness in hungering betrayed His human 
nature, the devil would not have dared to tempt Him. More- 
over, this appears from the very manner of the temptation, 
when he said: Jf Thou be the Son of God. Which words 
Ambrose explains as follows (Im Luc. iv.): What means this 
way of addressing Him, save that, though he knew that the 
Son of God was to come, yet he did not think that He had come 
in the weakness of the flesh ? 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ came to destroy the works of the 
devil, not by powerful deeds, but rather by suffering from 
him and his members, so as to conquer the devil by righteous- 
ness, not by power; thus Augustine says (De Trin. xiii.) 
that the devil was to be overcome, not by the power of God, 
but by righteousness. And therefore in regard to Christ’s 
temptation we must consider what He did of His own will 
and what He suffered from the devil. For that He allowed 
Himself to be tempted was due to His own will. Wherefore 
it is written (Matth. iv. 1): Jesws was led by the Spinit into 
the desert, to be tempted by the devil ; and Gregory (Hom. xvi. 
in Evang.) says this is to be understood of the Holy Ghost, 
to wit, that thither did His Spirit lead Him, where the wicked 
spirit would find Him and tempt Him. But He suffered 
from the devil in being taken up on to the pinnacle of the 
Temple and again into a very high mountain. Nor 1s it 
strange, as Gregory observes, that He allowed Himself to be 
taken by him on to a mountain, who allowed Himself to be 
crucified by His members. And we understand Him to have 
been taken up by the devil, not, as it were, by force, but 
because, as Origen says (Hom. xxi. super Luc.), He followed 
Him in the course of His temptation like a wrestler advancing 
of his own accord. 

Reply Obj. 3. As the Apostle says (Heb. iv. 15), Christ 
wished to be tempted in all things, without sin. Now temp- 
tation which comes from an enemy can be without sin: 
because it comes about by merely outward suggestion. 
But temptation which comes from the flesh cannot be with- 
out sin, because such a temptation is caused by pleasure 
and concupiscence; and, as Augustine says (De C1v. Det xix.), 

Q. 41. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 204 

it 1s not without sin that ‘the flesh desireth against the spirit.’ 
And hence Christ wished to be tempted by an enemy, but 
not by the flesh. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE BEEN TEMPTED IN THE 
DESERT ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have been 
tempted in the desert. Because Christ wished to be tempted 
in order to give us an example, as stated above (A. 1). 
But an example should be set openly before those who are 
to follow it. Therefore He should not have been tempted 
in the desert. 

Obj. 2. Further, Chrysostom says (Hom. xii. in Matth.): 
Then most especially does the devil assatl by tempting us, when he 
sees us alone. Thus did he tempt the woman in the beginning 
when he found her apart from her husband. Hence it seems 
that, by going into the desert to be tempted, He exposed 
Himself to temptation. Since, therefore, His temptation is 
an example to us, it seems that others too should take such 
steps as will lead them into temptation. And yet this 
seems a dangerous thing to do, since rather should we avoid 
the occasion of being tempted. 

Obj. 3. Further, Matth. iv. 5, Christ’s second temptation 
is set down, in which the devil took Christ up into the Holy 
City, and set Him upon the pinnacle of the Temple: which 
is certainly not in the desert. Therefore He was not tempted 
in the desert only. 

On the contrary, It is written (Mark i. 13) that Jesus was in 
the desert forty days and forty nights, and was tempted by Satan. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. I ad 2), Christ of His 
own free-will exposed Himself to be tempted by the devil, 
just as by His own free-will He submitted to be killed by 
his members; else the devil would not have dared to ap- 
proach Him. Now the devil prefers to assail a man who 
is alone, for, as it is written (Eccles. iv. 12), if a man pre- 
vail against one, two shall withstand him. And so it was 

205 (CCHRIST’S TEMPTATION Q. 41. ART. 2 

that Christ went out into the desert, as to a field of battle, 
to be tempted there by the devil. Hence Ambrose says 
on Luke iv. 1, that Christ was led into the desert for the pur- 
pose of provoking the devil. For had he—i.e., the devil— 
not fought, He—i.e., Christ—would not have conquered.—He 
adds other reasons, saying that Christ in doing this set forth 
the mystery of Adam’s delivery from exile, who had been 
expelled from paradise into the desert, and set an example 
to us, by showing that the devil envies those who strive for better 
things. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ is set as an example to all through 
faith, according to Heb. xii. 2: Looking on Jesus, the author 
and finisher of faith. Now faith, as it is written (Rom. 
xX. 17), cometh by hearing, but not by seeing: nay, it is even 
said (Jo. xx. 29): Blessed are they that have not seen and 
have believed. And therefore, in order that Christ’s temp- 
tation might be an example to us, it behoved that men 
should not see it, and it was enough that they should hear 
it related. 

Reply Obj. 2. The occasions of temptation are twofold. 
One is on the part of man—for instance, when a man causes 
himself to be near to sin by not avoiding the occasion of 
sinning. And such occasions of temptation should be 
avoided, as it is written of Lot (Gen. xix. 17): Nesther stay 
thou in all the country about Sodom. 

Another occasion of temptation is on the part of the 
devil, who always envies those who strive for better things, 
as Ambrose says (loc. cit.). And such occasions of tempta- 
tion are not to be avoided. Hence Chrysostom says 
(Hom. v. in Matth.):* Not only Christ was led into the desert 
by the Spirit, but all God’s children that have the Holy Ghost. 
For it is not enough for them to sit idle ; the Holy Ghost urges 
them to endeavour to do something great: which is for them 
to be in the desert from the devil's standpoint, for no un- 
righteousness, in which the devil delights, is there. Again, 
every good work, compared to the flesh and the world, 1s the 
desert ; because it is not according to the will of the flesh 

* From the supposititious Opus Imperfectum. 

Q. 41. Arr.3 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 206 

and of the world. Now, there is no danger in giving the 
devil such an occasion of temptation; since the help of 
the Holy Ghost, who is the Author of the perfect deed, 
is more powerful* than the assault of the envious devil. 

Reply Obj. 3. Some say that all the temptations took 
place in the desert. Of these some say that Christ was led 
into the Holy City, not really, but in an imaginary vision; 
while others say that the Holy City itself—7.e., Jerusalem— 
is called a desert, because it was deserted by God. But 
there is no need for this explanation. For Mark says that 
He was tempted in the desert by the devil, but not that He 
was tempted in the desert only. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S TEMPTATION SHOULD HAVE TAKEN PLACE 
AFTER HIS FAST ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s temptation should 
not have taken place after His fast. For it has been said 
above (Q. XL., A. 2) that an austere mode of life was not 
becoming to Christ. But it savours of extreme austerity 
that He should have ate nothing for forty days and forty 
nights, for Gregory (Hom. xvi. in Evang.) explains the fact 
that He fasted forty days and forty nights, saying that during 
that time He partook of no food whatever. It seems, therefore, 
that He should not thus have fasted before His temptation. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (Mark i. 13) that He was in 
the desert forty days and forty nights ; and was tempted by 
Satan. Now, He fasted forty days and forty nights. 
Therefore it seems that He was tempted by the devil, not 
after, but during, His fast. 

Obj. 3. Further, we read that Christ fasted but once. 
But He was tempted by the devil, not only once for it is 
written (Luke iv. 13) that all the temptation being ended, 

* All the codices read majus. One of the earliest printed editions 
has magis, which has much to commend it, since St. Thomas is com- 
menting the text quoted from St. Chrysostom. The translation would 

run thus:—since rather is it (the temptati 
Ghost, who, etc. ( ptation) a help from the Holy 

207 CHRIST’S TEMPTATION Q. 41. ART. 3 

the devil departed from Him for a time. As, therefore, He 
did not fast before the second temptation, so neither should 
He have fasted before the first. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. iv. 2, 3): When He 
had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards He was 
hungry ; and then the tempter came to Him. 

I answer that, It was becoming that Christ should wish 
to fast before His temptation. First, in order to give us 
an example. For since we are all in urgent need of 
strengthening ourselves against temptation, as stated above 
(A. 1), by fasting before being tempted, He teaches us the 
need of fasting in order to equip ourselves against tempta- 
tion. Hence the Apostle (2 Cor. vi. 5, 7) reckons fastings 
together with the armour of justice. 

Secondly, in order to show that the devil assails with 
temptations even those who fast, as likewise those who 
are given to other good works. And so Christ’s tempta- 
tion took place after His fast, as also after His baptism. 
Hence Chrysostom says (Hom. xiii. super Matth.): To in- 
struct thee how great a good ts fasting, and how it 1s a most 
powerful shield against the devil; and that after baptism 
thou shouldst give thyself up, not to luxury, but to fasting ; for 
this cause Christ fasted, not as needing 1t Himself, but as 
teaching us. 

Thirdly, because after the fast, hunger followed, which 
made the devil dare to approach Him, as already stated 
(A. 1 ad 1). Now, when our Lord was hungry, says Hilary 
(Super Matth. iii.), 1t was not because He was overcome by want 
of food, but because He abandoned His manhood to tts nature. 
For the devil was to be conquered, not by God, but by the flesh. 
Wherefore Chrysostom too says: He proceeded no farther 
than Moses and Elias, lest His assumption of our flesh might 
seem tncredsble. 

Reply Obj. 1. It was becoming for Christ not to adopt 
an extreme form of austere life in order to show Himself 
outwardly in conformity with those to whom He preached. 
Now, no one should take up the office of preacher unless 
he be already cleansed and perfect in virtue, according to 

Q. 41. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 208 

what is said of Christ, that Jesus began to do and to teach 
(Acts i. 1). Consequently, immediately after His baptism 
Christ adopted an austere form of life, in order to teach us 
the need of taming the flesh before passing on to the office 
of preaching, according to the Apostle (1 Cor. ix. 27): 
I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection, lest perhaps 
when I have preached to others, I myself should become a 
castaway. 

Reply Obj. 2. These words of Mark may be understood 
as meaning that He was in the desert forty days and forty 
nights, and that He fasted during that time: and the words, 
and He was tempted by Satan, may be taken as referring, 
not to the time during which He fasted, but to the time 
that followed: since Matthew says that after He had fasted 
forty days and forty nights, afterwards He was hungry, thus 
affording the devil a pretext for approaching Him. And 
so the words that follow, and the angels ministered to Him, 
are to be taken in sequence, which is clear from the words 
of Matthew (iv. 11): Then the devil left Him—t.e., after the 
temptation—and behold angels came and ministered to Him, 
And as to the words inserted by Mark, and He was with 
the beasts, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xiii. in Matth.), 
they are set down 1. order to describe the desert as being 
impassable to man and full of beasts. 

On the other hand, according to Bede’s exposition of 
Mark i. 12, 13, our Lord was tempted forty days and forty 
nights. But this is not to be understood of the visible 
temptations which are related by Matthew and Luke, and 
occurred after the fast, but of certain other assaults which 
perhaps Christ suffered from the devil during that time of 
His fast. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Ambrose says on Luke iv. 13, the devil 
departed from Christ for a time, because, later on, he returned, 
not to tempt Him, but to assail Him openly—namely, at the 
time of His Passion. Nevertheless, He seemed in this 
later assault to tempt Christ to dejection and hatred of 
His neighbour; just as in the desert he had tempted Him 
to gluttonous pleasure and idolatrous contempt of God. 

209 CHRIST’S TEMPTATION Q. 41. ART. 4 

FourtTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE MODE AND ORDER OF THE TEMPTATION 
WERE BECOMING ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the mode and order of 
the temptation were unbecoming. For the devil tempts in 
order to induce us to sin. But if Christ had assuaged His 
bodily hunger by changing the stones into bread, He would 
not have sinned; just as neither did He sin when He multi- 
plied the loaves, which was no less a miracle, in order to 
succour the hungry crowd. Therefore it seems that this 
was nowise a temptation. 

Obj. 2. Further, a counsellor is inconsistent if he per- 
suades the contrary to what he intends. But when the 
devil set Christ on a pinnacle of the Temple, he purposed 
to tempt Him to pride or vain-glory. Therefore it was 
inconsistent to urge Him to cast Himself thence: for this 
would be contrary to pride or vain-glory, which always 
seeks to rise. 

Obj. 3. Further, one temptation should lead to one sin. 
But in the temptation on the mountain he counselled two 
sins—namely, covetousness and idolatry. Therefore the 
mode of the temptation was unfitting. 

Obj. 4. Further, temptations are ordained to sin. But 
there are seven deadly sins, as we have stated in the Second 
Part (I.-II.,Q. LXXXIV., A. 4). But the tempter only deals 
with three—viz., gluttony, vain-glory, and covetousness. 
Therefore the temptation seems to have been incomplete. 

Obj. 5. Further, after overcoming all the vices, man is 
still tempted to pride or vain-glory: since pride worms 
itself in stealthily, and destroys even good works, as Augustine 
says (Ep. ccxi.). Therefore Matthew unfittingly gives the 
last place to the temptation to covetousness on the moun- 
tain, and the second place to the temptation to vain-glory 
in the Temple, especially since Luke puts them in the reverse 

order. 
III. 2 14 

Q. 41. Art.4 THE ‘‘ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 210 

Obj. 6. Further, Jerome says on Matth. iv. 4 that Christ 
purposed to overcome the devil by humility, not by maght. 
Therefore He should not have repulsed him with a haughty 
rebuke, saying: Begone, Satan. 

Obj. 7. Further, the gospel narrative seems to be false. 
For it seems impossible that Christ could have been set on 
a pinnacle of the Temple without being seen by others. 
Nor is there to be found a mountain so high that all the 
world can be seen from it, so that all the kingdoms of the 
earth could be shown to Christ from its summit. It seems, 
therefore, that Christ’s temptation is unfittingly described. 

On the contrary is the authority of Scripture. 

I answer that, The temptation which comes from the enemy 
takes the form of a suggestion, as Gregory says (Hom. xvi. 
in Evang.). Now a suggestion cannot be made to everybody 
in the same way; it must arise from those things towards 
which each one has an inclination. Consequently the devil 
does not straight away tempt the spiritual man to grave 
sins, but he begins with lighter sins, so as gradually to lead 
him to those of greater magnitude. Wherefore Gregory 
(Moral. xxxi.), expounding Job xxxix. 25, He smelleth the 
batile afar off, the encouraging of the captains and the shouting 
of the army, says: The captains are fittingly described as 
encouraging, and the army as shouting. Because vices begin 
by insinuating themselves into the mind under some specious 
pretext : then they come on the mind in such numbers as to 
drag it into all sorts of folly, deafening it with their bestial 
clamour. 

Thus, too, did the devil set about the temptation of the 
first man. For at first he enticed his mind to consent to 
the eating of the forbidden fruit, saying (Gen. iii. 1): Why 
hath God commanded you that you should not eat of every tree 
of paradise? Secondly [he tempted him] to vain-glory 
by saying: Your eyes shall be opened. Thirdly, he led the 
temptation to the extreme height of pride, saying: You 
shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. This same order 
did he observe in tempting Christ. For at first he tempted 
Him to that which men desire, however spiritual they may 

2II CHRIST’S TEMPTATION Q. 41. ART. 4 

be—namely, the support of the corporeal nature by food. 
Secondly, he advanced to that matter in which spiritual 
men are sometimes found wanting, inasmuch as they do 
certain things for show, which pertains to vain-glory. 
Thirdly, he led the temptation on to that in which no 
spiritual men, but only carnal men, have a part—namely, 
to desire worldly riches and fame, to the extent of holding 
God in contempt. And so in the first two temptations he 
said: If Thou be the Son of God ; but not in the third, which 
is inapplicable to spiritual men, who are sons of God by 
adoption, whereas it does apply to the two preceding 
temptations. 

And Christ resisted these temptations by quoting the 
authority of the Law, not by enforcing His power, so as to 
give more honour to His human nature and a greater puntsh- 
ment to His adversary, since the foe of the human race was 
vanquished, not as by God, but as by man ; as Pope Leo says 
(Serm. 1. De Quadrag. 3). 

Reply Obj. 1. To make use of what is needful for self- 
support is not the sin of gluttony; but if a man do anything 
inordinate out of the desire for such support, it can pertain 
to the sin of gluttony. Now it is inordinate for a man who 
has human assistance at his command to seek to obtain 
food miraculously for mere bodily support. Hence the 
Lord. miraculously provided the children of Israel with 
manna in the desert, where there was no means of obtaining 
food otherwise. And in like fashion Christ miraculously 
provided the crowds with food in the desert, when there 
was no other means of getting food. But in order to assuage 
His hunger, He could have done otherwise than work a 
miracle, as did John the Baptist, according to Matthew 
(iii. 4); or He could have hastened to the neighbouring 
country. Consequently the devil esteemed that if Christ 
was a mere man, He would fall into sin by attempting to 
assuage His hunger by a miracle. 

Reply Obj. 2. It often happens that a man seeks to de- 
rive glory from external humiliation, whereby he is exalted 
by reason of spiritual good. Hence Augustine says (De Serm. 

Q. 41. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 212 

Dom. in Monte ii. 12): It must be noted that tt is possible 
to boast not only of the beauty and splendour of material things, 
but even of filthy squalor. And this is signified by the devil 
urging Christ to seek spiritual glory by casting His body 
down. 

Reply Obj. 3. It is a sin to desire worldly riches and 
honours in an inordinate fashion. And the principal sign 
of this is when a man does something wrong in order to 
acquire such things. And so the devil was not satisfied 
with instigating to a desire for riches and honours, but he 
went so far as to tempt Christ, for the sake of gaining 
possession of these things, to fall down and adore him, 
which is a very great crime, and against God.—Nor does 
he say merely, if Thou wilt adore me, but he adds, sf, falling 
down ; because, as Ambrose says on Luke iv. 5: Ambition 
harbours yet another danger within itself: for, while seeking 
to rule, 1t will serve ; 1t will bow 1m submission that 1t may 
be crowned with honour ; and the higher tt aims, the lower it 
abases ttself. 

In like manner [the devil] in the preceding temptations 
tried to lead [Christ] from the desire of one sin to the com- 
mission of another; thus from the desire of food he tried 
to lead Him to the vanity of the needless working of a 
miracle; and from the desire of glory to tempt God by 
casting Himself headlong. 

Reply Obj. 4. As Ambrose says on Luke iv. 13, Scripture 
would not have said that ‘all the temptation being ended, 
the devil departed from Him,’ unless the matter of all sins 
were included 1n the three temptations already related. For 
the causes of temptations are the causes of destres—namely, 
lust of the flesh, hope of glory, eagerness for power. 

Reply Obj. 5. As Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. ii.): 
It 1s not certain which happened first; whether the kingdoms 
of the earth were first shown to Him, and afterwards He was 
set on the pinnacle of the Temple ; or the latter first, and the 
former afterwards. However, it matters not, provided it be 
made clear that all these things did take place. It may be 
that the Evangelists set these things in different orders, 

213 CHRIST’S TEMPTATION Q. 41. ART. 4 

because sometimes cupidity arises from vain-glory, some- 
times the reverse happens. 

Reply Obj. 6. When Christ had suffered the wrong of 
being tempted by the devil saying, If Thou be the Son of 
God cast Thyself down, He was not troubled, nor did He 
upbraid the devil. But when the devil usurped to himself 
the honour due to God, saying, All these things will I give 
Thee, tf, falling down, Thou wilt adore me, He was exasper- 
ated, and repulsed him, saying, Begone, Saian: that we 
might learn from His example to bear bravely insults 
levelled at ourselves, but not to allow ourselves so much 
as to listen to those which are aimed at God. 

Reply Obj. 7. As Chrysostom says (Hom. v. in Maitth.): 
The devil set Him (on a pinnacle of the Temple) that He might 
be seen by all, whereas, unawares to the devil, He acted in such 
sort that He was seen by none. 

In regard to the words, ‘ He showed Him all the kingdoms 
of the world, and the glory of them,’ we are not to understand 
that He saw the very kingdoms, with the cittes and inhabstants, 
their gold and silver : but that the devil pointed out the quarters 
in which each kingdom or city lay, and set forth to Him in 
words thetr glory and estate.—Or, again, as Origen says (Hom. 
xxx. in Luc.), he showed Him how, by means of the various 
vices, he was the lord of the world. 

QUESTION XLII. 

OF CHRIST’S DOCTRINE. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s doctrine, about which 
there are four points of inquiry: (1) Whether Christ should 
have preached to the Jews only, or to the Gentiles also? 
(2) Whether in preaching He should have avoided the oppo- 
sition of the Jews? (3) Whether He should have preached 
in an open or in a hidden manner? (4) Whether He should 
have preached by word only, or also by writing ? 

Concerning the time when He began to teach, we have 
spoken above when treating of His baptism (Q. XXIX., 
A. 3). 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE PREACHED NOT ONLY TO 
THE JEWS, BUT ALSO TO THE GENTILES? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should have 
preached not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles. 
For it is written (Isa. xlix. 6): J¢ 7s a small thing that thou 
shouldst be My servant to raise up the tribes of Israel [Vulg., 
Jacob] and to convert the dregs of Jacob [Vulg., Israel]: behold, 
I have given thee to be the light of the Genttles, that thou mayest 
be my salvation even to the farthest part of the earth. But 
Christ gave light and salvation through His doctrine. There- 
fore it seems that it was a small thing that He preached to 
Jews alone, and not to the Gentiles. 

Obj. 2. Further, as it is written (Matth. vii. 29): He was 
teaching them as one having power. Now the power of 
doctrine is made more manifest in the instruction of those 

214 

215 CHRIST’S DOCTRINE Q. 42. ART. 1 

who, like the Gentiles, have received no tidings whatever; 
hence the Apostle says (Rom. xv. 20): I have so preached 
the [Vulg., this] gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I 
should butld upon another man’s foundation. Therefore 
much rather should Christ have preached to the Gentiles 
than to the Jews. 

06). 3. Further, it is more useful to instruct many than 
one. But Christ instructed some individual Gentiles, such 
as the Samaritan woman (Jo. iv.) and the Chananean woman 
(Matth. xv.). Much more reason, therefore, was there for 
Christ to preach to the Gentiles in general. 

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matth. xv. 24): I was not 
sent but to the sheep that are lost of the house of Israel. And 
(Rom. x. 15) it is written: How shall they preach unless they 
be sent? Therefore Christ should not have preached to the 
Gentiles. 

I answer that, It was fitting that Christ’s preaching, 
whether through Himself or through His apostles, should 
be directed at first to the Jews alone. First, in order to 
show that by His coming the promises were fulfilled which 
had been made to the Jews of old, and not to the Gentiles. 
Thus the Apostle says (Rom. xv. 8): J say that Christ... 
was minister of the oircumciston—4.c., the apostle and preacher 
of the Jews—for the truth of God, to confirm the promises 
made unto the fathers. 

Secondly, in order to show that His coming was of God; 
because, as is written Rom. xiii. 1: Those things which are 
of God are well ordered (Vulg., those that are, are ordained 
of God).* Now the right order demanded that the doctrine 
of Christ should be made known first to the Jews, who, by 
believing in and worshipping one God, were nearer to God, 
and that it should be transmitted through them to the 
Gentiles: just as in the heavenly hierarchy the Divine en- 
lightenment comes to the lower angels through the higher. 
Hence on Matth. xv. 24, I was not sent but to the sheep that 
are lost in the house of Israel, Jerome says: He does not mean 
by this that He was not sent to the Gentiles, but that He was 

* See Scriptural Index on this passage. 

Q. 42. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 216 

sent to the Jews first. And so we read (Isa. Ixvi. 19): I will 
send of them that shall be saved—t.e., of the Jews—to the 
Gentiles . . . and they shall declare My glory unto the Genittles. 

Thirdly, in order to deprive the Jews of ground for quib- 
bling. Hence on Matth. x. 5, Go ye not into the way of the 
Gentiles, Jerome says: It behoved Christ’s coming to be an- 
nounced to the Jews first, lest they should have a valid excuse, 
and say that they had rejected our Lord because He had sent 
His apostles to the Gentiles and Samaritans. 

Fourthly, because it was through the triumph of the cross 
that Christ merited power and lordship over the Gentiles. 
Hence it is written (Apoc. ii. 26, 28): He that shall overcome 
. . . Iwill give him power over the nations . . . as I also have 
received of My Father ; and that because He became obedient 
unto the death of the cross, God hath exalied Him ... that tn the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, ... and that every tongue 
should confess Him (Phil. ii. 8-11). Consequently he did not 
wish His doctrine to be preached to the Gentiles before His 
Passion: it was after His Passion that He said to His disciples 
(Matth. xxviii. 19): Going, teach ye all nations. For this 
reason it was that when, shortly before His Passion, certain 
Gentiles wished to see Jesus, He said: Unless the grain of 
wheat falling into the ground dieth, itself remaineth alone: 
but tf 1t die 1t bringeth forth much fruit (Jo. xii. 20-25); and 
as Augustine says, commenting on this passage: He called 
Himself the grain of wheat that must be mortified by the 
unbelief of the Jews, multiplied by the faith of the nations. 

‘Reply Obj. 1. Christ was given to be the light and salva- 
tion of the Gentiles through His disciples, whom He sent 
to preach to them. 

Reply Obj. 2. It is a sign, not of lesser, but of greater 
power to do something by means of others rather than by 
oneself. And thus the Divine power of Christ was specially 
shown in this, that He bestowed on the teaching of His 
disciples such a power that they converted the Gentiles 
to Christ, although these had heard nothing of Him. 

Now the power of Christ’s teaching is to be considered 
in the miracles by which He confirmed His doctrine, in the 

217 CHRIST’S DOCTRINE Q. 42. ART. 2 

efficacy of His persuasion, and in the authority of His words, 
for He spoke as being Himself above the Law when He 
said: But I say to you (Matth. v. 22, 28, 32, 34, 39, 44); 
and, again, in the force of His righteousness shown in His 
sinless manner of life. 

Reply Obj. 3. Just as it was unfitting that Christ should 
at the outset make His doctrine known to the Gentiles 
equally with the Jews, in order that He might appear as 
being sent to the Jews, as to the first-born people; so neither 
was it fitting for Him to neglect the Gentiles altogether, 
lest they should be deprived of the hope of salvation. For 
this reason certain individual Gentiles were admitted, on 
account of the excellence of their faith and devotedness. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE PREACHED TO THE JEWS 
WITHOUT OFFENDING THEM ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should have 
preached to the Jews without offending them. For, as 
Augustine says (De Agone Christ. xi.): In the Man Jesus 
Christ, a model of life is given us by the Son of God. But we 
should avoid offending not only the faithful, but even un- 
believers, according to 1 Cor. x. 32: Be without offence to the 
Jews, and to the Gentiles, and to the Church of God. There- 
fore it seems that, in His teaching, Christ should also have 
avoided giving offence to the Jews. 

Obj. 2. Further, no wise man should do anything that 
will hinder the result of his labour. Now through the dis- 
turbance which His teaching occasioned among the Jews, it 
was deprived of its results; for it is written (Luke xi. 53, 54) 
that when our Lord reproved the Pharisees and Scribes, they 
began vehemently to urge Him, and to oppress His mouth 
about many things ; lying in watt for Him, and seeking to 
catch something from His mouth, that they might accuse Him. 
It seems therefore unfitting that He should have given them 
offence by His teaching. 

Q. 42. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA us 218 

Obj. 3. Further, the Apostle says (1 Tim. v.14): An ancient 
man rebuke not ; but entreat him as a father. But the priests 
and princes of the Jews were the elders of that people. 
Therefore it seems that they should not have been rebuked 
with severity. 

On the contrary, It was foretold (Isa. viii. 14) that Christ 
would be for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence 
to the two houses of Israel. 

I answer that, The salvation of the multitude is to be 
preferred to the peace of any individuals whatsoever. Con- 
sequently, when certain ones, by their perverseness, hinder 
the salvation of the multitude, the preacher and the teacher 
should not fear to offend those men, in order that he may 
insure the salvation of the multitude. Now the Scribes 
and Pharisees and the princes of the Jews were by their 
malice a considerable hindrance to the salvation of the 
people, both because they opposed themselves to Christ’s 
doctrine, which was the only way to salvation, and because 
their evil ways corrupted the morals of the people. For 
which reason our Lord, undeterred by their taking offence, 
publicly taught the truth which they hated, and condemned 
their vices. Hence we read (Matth. xv. 12, 14) that when 
the disciples of our Lord said: Dost Thou know that the 
Pharisees, when they heard this word, were scandalized? He 
answered: Let them alone: they are blind and leaders of the 
blind ; and 1f the blind lead the blind, both fall into the pit. 

Reply Obj. 1. A man ought so to avoid giving offence, as 
neither by wrong deed or word to be the occasion of any- 
one’s downfall. But if scandal arise from truth, the scandal 
should be borne rather than the truth be set aside, as Gregory 
says (Hom. vii. in Ezech.). 

Reply Obj. 2. By publicly reproving the Scribes and 
Pharisees, Christ promoted rather than hindered the effect 
of His teaching. Because when the people came to know 
the vices of those men, they were less inclined to be preju- 
diced against Christ by hearing what was said of Him by 
the Scribes and Pharisees, who were ever withstanding His 
doctrine. 

219 x CHRIST’S DOCTRINE Q. 42. ART. 3 

Reply Obj. 3. This saying of the Apostle is to be under- 
stood of those elders whose years are reckoned not only in 
age and authority, but also in probity; according to Num. 
x1. 16: Gather unto Me seventy men of the ancients of Israel, 
whom thou knowest to be ancients . . . of the people. But if 
by sinning openly they turn the authority of their years 
into an instrument of wickedness, they should be rebuked 
openly and severely, as also Daniel says (xiii. 52): O thou 
that art grown old in evil days, etc. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE TAUGHT ALL THINGS 
OPENLY ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
taught all things openly. For we read that He taught 
many things to His disciples apart: as is seen clearly in the 
sermon at the Supper. Wherefore He said: That which 
you heard in the ear in the chambers shall be preached on the 
housetops.* Therefore He did not teach all things openly. 

Obj. 2. Further, the depths of wisdom should not be ex- 
pounded save to the perfect, according to 1 Cor. ii. 6: We 
speak wisdom among the perfect. Now Christ’s doctrine 
contained the most profound wisdom. Therefore it should 
not have been made known to the imperfect crowd. 

Obj. 3. Further, it comes to the same, to hide the truth, 
whether by saying nothing or by making use of a language 
that is difficult to understand. Now Christ, by speaking 
to the multitudes a language they would not understand, 
hid from them the truth that He preached; since without 
parables He did not speak to them (Matth. xiii. 34). In the 
same way, therefore, He could have hidden it from them 
by saying nothing at all. — 

On the contrary, He says Himself (Jo. xviii. 20): In secret 
I have spoken nothing. 

* St. Thomas, probably quoting from memory, combines Matth. 
x. 27 with Luke xii. 3. 

Q. 42. Art.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 220 

I answer that, Anyone’s doctrine may be hidden in three 
ways. First, on the part of the intention of the teacher, 
who does not wish to make his doctrine known to many, 
but rather to hide it. And this may happen in two ways— 
sometimes through envy on the part of the teacher, who 
desires to excel in his knowledge, wherefore he is unwilling 
to communicate it to others. But this was not the case 
with Christ, in whose person the following words are spoken 
(Wisd. vii. 13): Which I have learned without gutle, and 
communicate without envy, and her riches I hide not.—But 
sometimes this happens through the vileness of the things 
taught; thus Augustine says on Jo. xvi. 12: There are some 
things so bad that no sort of human modesty can bear them. 
Wherefore of heretical doctrine it is written (Prov. ix. 17): 
Stolen waters are sweeter. Now, Christ’s doctrine is not of 
error nov of uncleanness (x Thess. ii. 3). Wherefore our 
Lord says (Mark iv. 21): Doth a candle—+.e., true and pure 
doctrine—come tn to be put under a bushel ? 

Secondly, doctrine is hidden because it is put before 
few. And thus, again, did Christ teach nothing in secret: 
for He propounded His entire doctrine either to the whole 
crowd or to His disciples gathered together. Hence Augus- 
tine says on Jo. xvili. 20: How can tt be said that He speaks 
in secret, when He speaks before so many men? . . . especially 
if what He says to few He wishes through them to be made 
known to many ? 

Thirdly, doctrine is hidden, as to the manner in which 
it is propounded. And thus Christ spoke certain things 
in secret to the crowds, by employing parables in teaching 
them spiritual mysteries which they were either unable or 
unworthy to grasp: and yet it was better for them to be 
instructed in the knowledge of spiritual things, albeit 
hidden under the garb of parables, than to be deprived of 
it altogether. Nevertheless our Lord expounded the open 
and unveiled truth of these parables to His disciples, so 
that they might hand it down to others worthy of it; ac- 
cording to 2 Tim. ii. 2: The things which thou hast heard of 
me by many witnesses, the same command to faithful men, who 

221 CHRIST’S DOCTRINE Q. 42. ART. 3 

shall be fit to teach others. This is foreshadowed, Num. iv., 
where the sons of Aaron are commanded to wrap up the 
sacred vessels that were to be carried by the Levites. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Hilary says, commenting on the passage 
quoted, we do not read that our Lord was wont to preach at 
nighi, and expound His doctrine in the dark: but He says 
this because His speech is darkness to the carnal-minded, and 
Hss words are night to the unbeliever. His meaning, therefore, 
ts that whatever He said we also should say in the midst of 
unbelievers, by openly believing and professing it. 

Or, according to Jerome, He speaks comparatively—that 
is to say, because He was instructing them in Judea, which 
was a small place compared with the whole world, where 
Christ’s doctrine was to be published by the preaching of 
the apostles. 

Reply Obj. 2. By His doctrine our Lord did not make 
known all the depths of His wisdom, neither to the multi- 
tudes, nor, indeed, to His disciples, to whom He said (Jo. 
Xvi. 12): I have yet many things to say to you, but you can- 
not bear them now. Yet whatever things out of His wisdom 
He judged it right to make known to others, He expounded, 
not in secret, but openly; although He was not understood 
by all. Hence Augustine says on Jo. xviii. 20: We must 
understand this, ‘I have spoken openly to the world,’ as though 
our Lord had. said,‘ Many have heard Me’. . . and, again, tt 
was not ‘ openly,’ because they did not understand. 

Reply Obj. 3. As stated above, our Lord spoke to the 
multitudes in parables, because they were neither able nor 
worthy to receive the naked truth, which He revealed to 
His disciples. 

And when it is said that without parables He did not speak 
to them, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xlvii. in Maith.), 
we are to understand this of that particular sermon, since 
on other occasions He said many things to the multitude 
without parables.—Or, as Augustine says (De Qg. Evang., 
gu. xvii.), this means, not that He spoke nothing literally, 
but that He scarcely ever spoke without introducing a parable, 
although He also spoke some things in the literal sense. 

Q. 42. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 222 

FourtTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE COMMITTED HIS DOCTRINE 
TO WRITING ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should have com- 
mitted His doctrine to writing. For the purpose of writing 
is to hand down doctrine to posterity. Now Christ’s doc- 
trine was destined to endure for ever, according to Luke 
xxi. 33: Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words 
shall not pass away. Therefore it seems that Christ should 
have committed His doctrine to writing. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Old Law was a foreshadowing of 
Christ, according to Heb. x. 1: The Law has (Vulg., having) 
a shadow of the good things to come. Now the Old Law 
was put into writing by God, according to Exod. xxiv. 12: 
I will give thee two tables of stone, and the law, and the com- 
mandments which I have written. Therefore it seems that 
Christ also should have put His doctrine into writing. 

Obj. 3. Further, to Christ, who came to enlighten them that 
sit in darkness (Luke i. 79), it belonged to remove occasions 
of error, and to open out the road to faith, Now He would 
have done this by putting His teaching into writing: for 
Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. i.) that some there are 
who wonder why our Lord wrote nothing, so that we have to 
believe what others have written about Him. Especially do 
those pagans ask this question who dare not blame or blas- 
pheme Christ, and who ascribe to Him most excellent, but 
merely human, wisdom. These say that the disciples made 
out the Master to be more than He really was when they said 
that He was the Son of God and the Word of God, by whom 
all things were made. And farther on he adds: It seems 
as though they were prepared to believe whatever He might 
have written of Himself, but not what others at their discretion 
published about Him. Therefore it seems that Christ siiould 
have Himself committed His doctrine to writing. 

On the contrary, No books written by Him are to be found 
in the canon of Scripture. 

223 CHRIST’S DOCTRINE Q. 42. ART. 4 

I answer that, It was fitting that Christ should not commit 
His doctrine to writing. First, on account of His dignity: 
for the more excellent the teacher, the more excellent should 
be his manner of teaching. Consequently it was fitting that 
Christ, as the most excellent of teachers, should adopt that 
manner of teaching whereby His doctrine is imprinted on 
the hearts of His hearers; wherefore it is written (Matth. 
vii. 29) that He was teaching them as one having power. 
And so it was that among the Gentiles, Pythagoras and 
Socrates, who were teachers of great excellence, were un- 
willing to write anything. For writings are ordained, as 
to an end, unto the imprinting of doctrine in the hearts of 
the hearers. 

Secondly, on account of the excellence of Christ’s doctrine, 
which cannot be expressed in writing; according to Jo. 
xxi. 25: There are also many other things which Jesus dtd : 
which, if they were written everyone, the world itself, I think, 
would not be able to contain the books that should be wrttten. 
Which Augustine explains by saying: We are not to believe 
that in respect of space the world could not contain them: .. . 
but that by the capacity of the readers they could not be com- 
prehended. And if Christ had committed His doctrine to 
writing, men would have had no deeper thought of His 
doctrine than that which appears on the surface of the 
writing. 

Thirdly, that His doctrine might reach all in an orderly 
manner: Himself teaching His disciples immediately, and 
they subsequently teaching others, by preaching and writing: 
whereas if He Himself had written, His doctrine would 
have reached all immediately. Hence it is said of Wisdom 
(Prov. ix. 3) that she hath sent her maids to invite to the tower. 
It is to be observed, however, that, as Augustine says (De 
Consensu Evang. i.), some of the Gentiles thought that Christ 
wrote certain books treating of the magic art whereby He 
worked miracles: which art is condemned by the Christian 
learning. And yet they who claim to have read those books of 
Christ do none of those things which they marvel at His doing 
according to those same books. Moreover, it is by a Divine 

Q. 42, Art.4 THE ‘“ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 224 

judgement that they err so far as to assert that these books were, 
as it were, entitled as letters to Peter and Paul, for that they 
found them in several places depicted 1n company with Christ. 
No wonder that the inventors were deceived by the painters: 
for as long as Christ lived in the mortal flesh with His disciples, 
Paul was no disciple of His. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Augustine says in the same book: Christ 
ts the head of all His disciples who are members of His body. 
Consequently, when they put into writing what He showed forth 
and satd to them, by no means must we say that He wrote 
nothing : since His members put forth that which they knew 
under His dictation. For at His command they, being His 
hands, as it were, wrote whatever He wished us to read con- 
cerning His deeds and words. 

Reply Obj. 2. Since the Old Law was given under the 
form of sensible signs, therefore also was it fittingly written 
with sensible signs. But Christ’s doctrine, which is the law 
of the spirit of life (Rom. viii. 2), had to be written, not with 
ink, but wnth the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of 
stone, but in the fleshy tables of the heart, as the Apostle says 
(2 Cor. iii. 3). 

Reply Obj. 3. Those who were unwilling to believe what 
the apostles wrote of Christ would have refused to believe 
the writings of Christ, whom they deemed to work miracles 
by the magic art. 

QUESTION XLIII. 

OF THE MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST, IN GENERAL. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE must now consider the miracles worked by Christ: 
(1) In general. (2) Specifically, of each kind of miracle. 
(3) In particular, of His transfiguration. 

Concerning the first, there are four points of inquiry: 
(It) Whether Christ should have worked miracles? 
(2) Whether He worked them by Divine power? (3) When 
did He begin to work miracles? (4) Whether His miracles 
are a sufficient proof of His Godhead ? 

First ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE WORKED MIRACLES ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 
worked miracles. For Christ’s deeds should have been con- 
sistent with His words. But He Himself said (Matth. 
xvi. 4): A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a 
sign ; and a sign shall not be given tt, but the sign of Jonas the 
prophet. Therefore He should not have worked miracles. 

Obj. 2. Further, just as Christ, at His second coming, is 
to come with great power and majesty, as is written Matth. 
Xxiv. 30, so at His first coming He came in infirmity, accord- 
ing to Isa. liii. 3: A man of sorrows and acquainted with 
infirmity. But the working of miracles belongs to power 
rather than tu infirmity. Therefore it was not fitting that 
He should work miracles in His first coming. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ came that He might save men by 

Ii. 2 225 15 

Q. 43. Art.1 THE ‘“ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 226 

faith; according to Heb. xii. 2: Looking on Jesus, the author 
and finisher of faith. But miracles lessen the merit of faith; 
hence our Lord says (Jo. iv. 48): Unless you see signs and 
wonders you believe not. Therefore it seems that Christ 
should not have worked miracles. 

On the contrary, It was said in the person of His adver- 
saries (Jo. xi. 47): What do we; for this man doth many 
miracles ? 

I answer that, God enables man to work miracles for two 
reasons. First and principally, in confirmation of the doc- 
trine that a man teaches. For since those things which are 
of faith surpass human reason, they cannot be proved by 
human arguments, but need to be proved by the argument 
of Divine power: so that when a man does works that God 
alone can do, we may believe that what he says is from God: 
just as when a man is the bearer of letters sealed with the 
king’s ring, it is to be believed that what they contain ex- 
presses the king’s will. 

Secondly, in order to make known God’s presence in a 
man by the grace of the Holy Ghost: so that when a man 
does the works of God we may believe that God dwells in 
him by His grace. Wherefore it is written (Gal. ili. 5): He 
who giveth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you. 

Now both these things were to be made known to men 
concerning Christ—namely, that God dwelt in Him by 
grace, not of adoption, but of union: and that His super- 
natural doctrine was from God. And therefore it was most 
fitting that He should work miracles. Wherefore He Him- 
self says (Jo. x. 38): Though you will not believe Me, believe 
the works ; and (v. 36): The works which the Father hath given 
Me to perfect . . . themselves . . . give testimony to Me. 

Reply Obj. 1. These words, a sign shall not be given it, but 
the sign of Jonas, mean, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xiliii. 
im Matth.), that they did not receive a sign such as they sought— 
viz., from heaven: but not that He gave them no sign at 
all.—Or that He worked signs not for the sake of those whom 
He knew to be hardened, but to amend others. Therefore 
those signs were given, not to them, but to others, 

227. MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST Q. 43. Arr. 2 

Reply Obj. 2. Although Christ came in the infirmity of 
the flesh, which is manifested in the passions, yet He came 
in the power of God,* and this had to be made manifest by 
miracles. 

Reply Obj. 3. Miracles lessen the merit of faith in so far 
as those are shown to be hard of heart who are unwilling 
to believe what is proved from the Scriptures unless (they 
are convinced) by miracles. Yet it is better for them to 
be converted to the faith even by miracles than that they 
should remain altogether in their unbelief. For it is written 
(x Cor. xiv. 22) that signs are given to unbelievers—viz., 
that they may be converted to the faith. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WORKED MIRACLES BY DIVINE POWER ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1, It would seem that Christ did not work 
miracles by Divine power. For the Divine power is omni- 
potent. But it seems that Christ was not omnipotent in 
working miracles; for it is written (Mark vi. 5) that He could 
not do any miracles there—4.e., in His own country. There- 
fore it seems that He did not work miracles by Divine 
power. 

Obj. 2. Further, God does not pray. But Christ some- 
times prayed when working miracles; as may be seen in 
the raising of Lazarus (Jo. xi. 41, 42), and in the multiplica- 
tion of the loaves, as related Matth. xiv. 19. Therefore it 
seems that He did not work miracles by Divine power. 

Obj. 3. Further, what is done by Divine power cannot be 
done by the power of any creature. But the things which 
Christ did could be done also by the power of a creature: 
wherefore the Pharisees said (Luke xi. 15) that He cast out 
devils by Beelzebub the prince of devils. Therefore it seems 
that Christ did not work miracles by Divine power. 

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Jo. xiv. 10): The Father 
who abideth in Me, He doth the works. 

Gf, 2) COL, xi, 4. 

Q. 43. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 228 

I answer that, as stated in the First Part (Q. CX., A. 4), 
true miracles cannot be wrought save by Divine power: 
because God alone can change the order of nature; and this 
is what is meant by a miracle. Wherefore Pope Leo says 
(Ep. ad Flav. xxviii.) that, while there are two natures in 
Christ, there is one—viz., the Divine, which shines forth in 
miracles; and another—viz., the human,—which submits to 
insults ; yet each communicates tts actions to the other: in 
as far as the human nature is the instrument of the Divine 
action, and the human action receives power from the 
Divine Nature, as stated above (Q. XIX., A. 1). 

Reply Obj. 1. When it is said that He could not do any 
miracles there, it is not to be understood that He could not 
do them absolutely, but that it was not fitting for Him to 
do them: for it was unfitting for Him to work miracles 
among unbelievers. Wherefore it is said farther on: And 
He wondered because of their unbelief. In like manner it 
is said (Gen. xviii. 17): Can I hide from Abraham what I am 
about to do? and xix. 22: I cannot do anything till thou go 
tn thither. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Chrysostom says on Matth. xiv. 19, He 
took the five loaves and the two fishes, and, looking up to heaven, 
He blessed and brake :—It was to be believed of Him, both 
that He ts of the Father and that He is equal to Him. . 
Therefore that He might prove both, He works miracles now 
with authority, now with prayer ... in the lesser things, 
indeed, He looks up to heaven—for instance, in multiplying 
the loaves—but in the greater, which belong to God alone, He 
acts with authority ; for example, when He forgave sins and 
ratsed the dead. 

When it is said that in raising Lazarus He lifted up His 
eyes (Jo. xi. 41), this was not because He needed to pray, 
but because He wished to teach us how to pray. Wherefore 
He said: Because of the people who stand about have I said 
it : that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ cast out demons otherwise than they 
are cast out by the power of demons. For demons are cast 
out from bodies by the power of higher demons in such a 

229 MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST Q. 43. Art. 3 

way that they retain their power over the soul: since the 
devil does not work against his own kingdom. On the 
other hand, Christ cast out demons, not only from the 
body, but still more from the soul. For this reason our 
Lord rebuked the blasphemy of the Jews, who said that He 
cast out demons by the power of the demons: first, by 
saying that Satan is not divided against himself; secondly, 
by quoting the instance of others who cast out demons 
by the Spirit of God; thirdly, because He could not have 
cast out a demon unless He had overcome Him by Divine 
power; fourthly, because there was nothing in common 
between His works and their effects and those of Satan; since 
Satan’s purpose was to scatter those whom Christ gathered 
together.* 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST BEGAN TO WORK MIRACLES WHEN HE 
CHANGED WATER INTO WINE AT THE MARRIAGE FEAST ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objectton 1. It would seem that Christ did not begin to 
work miracles when He changed water into wine at the 
marriage feast. For we read in the book De Infantia Sal- 
vatoris that Christ worked many miracles in His childhood. 
But the miracle of changing water into wine at the marriage 
feast took place in the thirtieth or thirty-first year of His 
age. Therefore it seems that it was not then that He began 
to work miracles. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ worked miracles by Divine power. 
Now He was possessed of Divine power from the first mo- 
ment of His conception; for from that instant He was both 
God and man. Therefore it seems that He worked miracles 
from the very first. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ began to gather His disciples 
after His baptism and temptation, as related Matth. iv. 18 
and Jo. i. 35. But the disciples gathered around Him, 
principally on account of His miracles: thus it is written 
(Luke v. 4) that He called Peter when he was astonished at 

* Cf. Matth. xii. 24-30; Mark iii. 22; Luke xi. 15-23. 

Q. 43. Art.3 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 230 

the miracle which He had worked in the draught of fishes. 
Therefore it seems that He worked other miracles before 
that of the marriage feast. 

On the contrary, it is written (Jo. ii. 11): This beginning 
of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galtlee. 

I answer that, Christ worked miracles in order to confirm 
His doctrine, and in order to show forth His Divine power. 
Therefore, as to the first, it was unbecoming for Him to 
work miracles before He began to teach. And it was un- 
fitting that He should begin to teach until He reached the 
perfect age, as we stated above, in speaking of His baptism 
(Q. XXXIX., A. 3). But as to the second, it was right that 
He should so manifest His Godhead by working miracles 
that men should believe in the reality of His manhood. 
And, consequently, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xxl. im 
Joan.), tt was fitting that He should not begin to work wonders 
from Hts early years : for men would have deemed the Incar- 
nation to be imaginary, and would have crucified Him before 
the proper time. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Chrysostom says (Hom. xvii. in Joan.), 
in regard to the saying of John the Baptist, ‘ That He may 
be made manifest in Israel, therefore am I come baptizing 
with water,'—1t 1s clear that the wonders which some pretend 
to have been worked by Christ in His childhood are untrue and 
fictitious. For had Christ worked miracles from His early 
years, John would by no means have been unacquainted with 
Him, nor would the rest of the people have stood in need of a 
teacher to point Him out to them. 

Reply Obj. 2. What the Divine power achieved in Christ 
was in proportion to the needs of the salvation of mankind, 
the achievement of which was the purpose of His taking 
flesh. Consequently He so worked miracles by the Divine 
power as not to prejudice our belief in the reality of His 
flesh. 

Reply Obj. 3. The disciples were to be commended pre- 
cisely because they followed Christ without having seen Him 
work any miracles, as Gregory says in a homily (Hom. v. 
in Evang.). And, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xxiii. in Joan.), 

231 MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST Q. 43. Arr. 4 

the need for working miracles arose then, especially when the 
disciples were already gathered around and attached to Him, 
and attentive to what was going on around them. Hence it is 
added: ‘And His disciples believed in Him,’ not because 
they then believed in Him for the first time, but because 
then they believed with greater discernment and perfection.—Or 
they are called disciples because they were to be disciples later 
om, as Augustine observes (De Consensu Evang. ii.). 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE MIRACLES WHICH CHRIST WORKED WERE A 
SUFFICIENT PROOF OF HIS GODHEAD ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the miracles which Christ 
worked were not a sufficient proof of His Godhead. For it 
is proper to Christ to be both God and man. But the 
miracles which Christ worked have been done by others 
also. Therefore they were not a sufficient proof of His 
Godhead. 

Obj. 2. Further, no power surpasses that of the Godhead. 
But some have worked greater miracles than Christ, for 
it is written (Jo. xiv. 12): He that believeth in Me, the works 
that I do, he also shall do, and greater than these shall he do. 
Therefore it seems that the miracles which Christ worked 
were an insufficient proof of His Godhead. 

Obj. 3. Further, the particular is not a sufficient proof of 
the universal. But any one of Christ’s miracles was one 
particular work. Therefore none of them was a sufficient 
proof of His Godhead, by reason of which He had universal 
power over all things. 

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Jo. v. 36): The works 
which the Father hath given Me to perfect. . . themselves. . . 
give testimony to Me. 

I answer that, The miracles which Christ worked were a 
sufficient proof of His Godhead in three respects. First, as 
to the very nature of the works, which surpassed the entire 
capability of created power, and therefore could not be 

Q. 43. Artr.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 232 

done save by Divine power. For this reason the blind 
man, after his sight had been restored, said (Jo. 1x. 32, 33): 
From the beginning of the world 1t has not been heard, that 
any man hath opened the eyes of one born blind. Unless this 
man were of God, he could not do anything. 

Secondly, as to the way in which He worked miracles— 
namely, because He worked miracles as though of His own 
power, and not by praying, as others do. Wherefore it is 
written (Luke vi. 19) that virtue went out from Him and 
healed all. Whereby it is proved, as Cyril says (Comment. 
in Lucam) that He did not receive power from another, but, 
being God by nature, He showed His own power over the stck. 
And this is how He worked countless miracles. Hence on 
Matth. viii. 16: He cast out spirits with His word, and all 
that were sick He healed, Chrysostom says: Mark how great a 
multitude of persons healed the Evangelists pass quickly over, 
not mentioning one by one. . . but in one word traversing an 
unspeakable sea of miracles. And thus it was shown that His 
power was co-equal with that of God the Father, according 
to Jo. v. 19: What things soever the Father doth, these the 
Son doth also in like manner ; and, again (21): As the Father 
vaiseth up the dead and giveth life, so the Son also giveth life 
to whom He will. 

Thirdly, from the very fact that He taught that He was 
God; for unless this were true it would not be confirmed by 
miracles worked by Divine power. Hence it was said 
(Mark i. 27): What is this new doctrine? For with power 
He commandeth the unclean spirits, and they obey Him. 

Reply Obj. 1. This was the argument of the Gentiles. 
Wherefore Augustine says (Ep. ad Volustan. cxxxvii.): No 
suttable wonders, say they, show forth the presence of so great 
a majesty, for the ghostly cleansing whereby He cast out 
demons, the cure of the sick, the raising of the dead to life, if 
other miracles be taken into account, are small things before 
God. To this Augustine thus answers: We own that the 
prophets did as much... . But even Moses himself and the 
other prophets made Christ the Lord the object of their prophecy, 
and gave Him great glory. ... He, therefore, chose to do 

233 MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST Q. 43. Arr. 4 

similar things to avoid the inconsistency of failing to do what 
He had done through others. Yet still He was bound to do 
something which no other had done : to be born of a virgin, to 
rise from the dead, and to ascend into heaven. If anyone deem 
this a slight thing for God to do, I know not what more he can 
expect. Having become man, ought He to have made another 
world, that we might believe Him to be Him by whom the 
world was made? But in this world neither a greater world 
could be made nor one equal to it: and if He had made a lesser 
world in comparison with this, that too would have been deemed 
a small thing. 

As to the miracles worked by others, Christ did greater 
still. Hence on Jo. xv. 24: If I had not done in (Douay, 
among) them the works that no other man hath done, etc., 
Augustine says: None of the works of Christ seem to be 
greater than the raising of the dead : which thing we know the 
ancient prophets also did... . Yet Christ did some works 
“which no other man hath done.’ ... But we are told in 
answer that others did works which He did not, and which 
none other dtd... . Butto heal with so great a power so many 
defects and ailments and grievances of mortal men, this we 
vead concerning none soever of the men of old. To say nothing 
of those, each of whom by His bidding, as they came in His 
way, He made whole, .. . Mark satth (vi. 56): ‘ Whither- 
soever He entered, into towns or into villages or into ctttes, they 
laid the sick in the streets, and besought Him that they might 
touch but the hem of His garment: and as many as touched 
Him were made whole.’ These things none other did tn them ; 
for when He satth ‘In them,’ tt ts not to be understood to 
mean ‘ Among them,’ or ‘In their presence,’ but wholly ‘In 
them,’ because He healed them. ... Therefore whatever works 
He did in them are works that none ever did ; since if ever any 
other man did any one of them, by His doing he did tt ; whereas 
these works He did, not by thetr doing, but by Himself. 

Reply Obj. 2. Augustine explains this passage of John 
as follows (Tract. lxxi.): What are these ‘ greater works ’ 
which believers in Him would do? That, as they passed by, 
their very shadow healed the sick? For tt 1s greater that a 

Q. 43. Art.4. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 234 

shadow should heal than the hem of a garment... . When, 
however, He said these words, it was the deeds and works of 
His words that He spoke of: for when He said... ‘The 
Father who abideth in Me, He doth the works,’ what works 
did He mean, then, but the words He was speaking? . . . and 
the fruits of those same words was the faith of those (who be- 
lieved) : but when the disciples preached the Gospel, not some 
few like those, but the very nations believed. . . . (Tract. \xxii.). 
Did not that rich man go away from His presence sorrowful ? 
... and yet afterwards, what one individual, having heard from 
Him, did not, that many did, when He spake by the mouth 
of His disciples... . Behold, He did greater works when 
spoken of by men believing than when speaking to men hearing. 
But there ts yet this difficulty: that He did these ‘ greater 
works’ by the apostles; whereas He saith as meaning not 
only them: ...‘ He that believeth in Me’... Listen? 
... ‘He that believeth in Me, the works that I do, he also 
shall do’ :—first, ‘I do,’ then ‘he also shall do,’ because I 
do that he may do. What works—but that from ungodly he 
should be made righteous? . . . Which thing Christ worketh 
in him, truly, but not without him. Yes, I may affirm this 
to be altogether greater than to create* heaven and earth; .. . 
for ‘heaven and earth shall pass away’; but the salvation 
and justification of the predestinate shall remain. ... But 
also in the heavens . . . the angels are the works of Christ : 
and does that man do greater works than these, who co-operates 
with Christ in the work of his justification? . . . let him, who 
can, judge whether it be greater to create a righteous being than 
to justify an ungodly one. Certainly if both are works of equal 
power, the latter is a work of greater mercy. 

But there is no need for us to understand all the works of 
Christ, where He saith, ‘ Greater than these shall he do.’ For 
by ‘these’ He meant, perhaps, those which He was doing at 
that hour: now at that time He was speaking words of faith: 

. and certainly it is less to preach words of righteousness, 
which thing He did without us, than to justify the ungodly, 
which thing He so doth in us that we also do it ourselves. 

* The words /o create are not in the text of St. Augustine. 

235 MIRACLES WORKED BY CHRIST Q. 43. Arr. 4 

Reply Obj. 3. When some particular work is proper to 
some agent, then that particular work is a sufficient proof 
of the whole power of that agent: thus, since the act of 
reasoning is proper to man, the mere fact that someone 
reasons about any particular proposition proves him to be 
aman. In like manner, since it is proper to God to work 
miracles by His own power, any single miracle worked by 
Christ by His own power is a sufficient proof that He is 
God. 

QUESTION XLIV. 

OF (CHRIST’S) MIRACLES CONSIDERED SPECIFICALLY. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider each kind of miracle: (1) The 
miracles which He worked in spiritual substances. (2) The 
miracles which He worked in heavenly bodies. (3) The 
miracles which He worked in man. (4) The miracles which 
He worked in irrational creatures. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THOSE MIRACLES WERE FITTING WHICH CHRIST 
WORKED IN SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCES ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that those miracles were un- 
fitting which Christ worked in spiritual substances. For 
among spiritual substances the holy angels are above the 
demons; for, as Augustine says (De Trin. iii.): The treacherous 
and sinful rattonal spirit of life 1s ruled by the rational, pious, 
and just spirit of life. But we read of no miracles worked 
by Christ in the good angels. Therefore neither should He 
have worked miracles in the demons. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ’s miracles were ordained to make 
known His Godhead. But Christ’s Godhead was not to 
be made known to the demons: since this would have 
hindered the mystery of His Passion, according to 1 Cor. 
li. 8: If they had known it, they would never have crucified 
the Lord of glory. Therefore He should not have worked 
miracles in the demons. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ’s miracles were ordained to the 
glory of God: hence it is written (Matth. ix. 8) that the mults- 

236 

237 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ArT. 1 

tudes seeing that the man sick of the palsy had been healed 
by Christ, feared, and glorified God that gave such power to 
men. But the demons have no part in glorifying God; 
Since pratse is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner (Ecclus. 
xv. 9). For which reason also He suffered them not to speak 
(Mark i. 34; Luke iv. 41) those things which reflected glory 
on Him. Therefore it seems that it was unfitting for Him 
to work miracles in the demons. 

Obj. 4. Further, Christ’s miracles are ordained to the 
salvation of mankind. But sometimes the casting out of 
demons from men was detrimental to man, in some cases 
to the body: thus it is related (Mark ix. 24, 25) that a 
demon at Christ’s command, crying out and greatly tearing 
the man, went out of him; and he became as dead, so that 
many said: He ts dead ; sometimes also to things: as when 
He sent the demons, at their own request, into the swine, 
which they cast headlong into the sea; wherefore the in- 
habitants of those parts besought Him that He would depart 
from their coasts (Matth. viii. 31-34). Therefore it seems 
unfitting that He should have worked suchlike miracles. 

On the contrary, this was foretold (Zach. xiii. 2), where it is 
written: J will take away . . . the unclean spirit out of the earth. 

I answer that, The miracles worked by Christ were argu- 
ments for the faith which He taught. Now, by the power 
of His Godhead He was to rescue those who would 
believe in Him, from the power of the demons; according 
to Jo. xii. 31: Now shall the prince of this world be cast out. 
Consequently it was fitting that, among other miracles, He 
should also deliver those who were obsessed by demons. 

Reply Obj. 1. Just as men were to be delivered by Christ 
from the power of the demons, so by Him were they to be 
brought to the companionship of the angels, according to 
Coloss. i. 20: Making peace through the blood of His cross, 
both as to the things on earth and the things that are in heaven. 
Therefore it was not fitting to show forth to men other 
miracles as regards the angels, except by angels appearing 
to men: as happened in His Nativity, His Resurrection, and 

His Ascension. 

Q. 44. Art.r1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 238 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Civ. Det ix.): Christ 
was known to the demons just as much as He willed ; and He 
willed just as far as there was need. But He was known to 
them, not as to the holy angels, by that which ts eternal life, but 
by certain temporal effects of His power. First, when they 
saw that Christ was hungry after fasting they deemed Him 
not to be the Son of God. Hence, on Luke iv. 3, If Thou be 
the Son of God, etc., Ambrose says: What means this way of 
addressing Him? save that, though He knew that the Son of 
God was to come, yet he did not think that He had come 1n the 
weakness of the flesh? But afterwards, when he saw Him 
work miracles, he had a sort of conjectural suspicion that 
He was the Son of God. Hence on Mark i. 24, I know 
who Thou art, the Holy One of God, Chrysostom* says that 
he had no certain or firm knowledge of God’s coming. Yet 
he knew that He was the Christ promised in the Law, where- 
fore it is said (Luke iv. 41) that they knew that He was Chnist. 
But it was rather from suspicion than from certainty that 
they confessed Him to be the Son of God. Hence Bede 
says on Luke iv. 41: The demons confess the Son of God, 
and, as stated farther on, ‘they knew that He was Christ.’ 
For when the devil saw Him weakened by His fast, He knew 
Him to be a real man: but when He failed to overcome Him 
by temptation, He doubted lest He should be the Son of God. 
And now from the power of His miracles He either knew, 
or rather suspected that He was the Son of God. His reason 
therefore for persuading the Jews to crucify Him was not 
that he deemed Him not to be Christ or the Son of God, but 
because he did not foresee that he would be the loser by His 
death. For the Apostle says of this mystery (1 Cor. ii. 7, 8), 
which 1s hidden from the beginning, that ‘ none of the princes 
of this world knew tt, for tf they had known tt they would never 
have crucified the Lord of glory.’ 

Reply Obj. 3. The miracles which Christ worked in ex- 
pelling demons were for the benefit, not of the demons, 
but of men, that they might glorify Him. Wherefore He 
forbade them to speak in His praise. First, to give us an 

* Victor of Antioch. Cf. Catena Aurea. 

239 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART. 1 

example. For, as Athanasius says, He restrained his speech, 
although he was confessing the truth ; to teach us not to care 
about such things, although it may seem that what is said is 
true. For it is wrong to seek to learn from the devil when 
we have the Divine Scripture : besides, it is dangerous, since 
the demons frequently mix falsehood with truth.—Or, as 
Chrysostom* says: It was not meet for them to usurp the 
prerogative of the apostolic office. Nor was it fitting that the 
mystery of Christ should be proclaimed by a corrupt tongue, 
because pratse ts not seemly in the mouth of asinner.t Thirdly, 
because, as Bede says, He did not wish the. envy of the Jews 
to be aroused thereby.t Hence even the apostles are commanded 
to be silent about Him, lest, if His Divine majesty were pro- 
claimed, the gift of His Passton should be deferred. 

Reply Obj. 4. Christ came specially to teach and to work 
miracles for the good of man, and principally as to the 
salvation of hissoul. Consequently, He allowed the demons, 
that He cast out, to do man some harm, either in his body 
or in his goods, for the salvation of man’s soul—namely, 
for man’s instruction. Hence Chrysostom says on Matth. 
viii. 32 that Christ let the demons depart into the swine, 
not as yielding to the demons, but, first, to show... how 
harmful are the demons who attack men; secondly, that all 
might learn that the demons would not dare to hurt even the 
swine, except He allow them, thirdly, that they would have 
treated those men more grievously than they treated the swine, 
unless they had been protected by God's providence. 

And for the same motives He allowed the man, who was 
being delivered from the demons, to suffer grievously for 
the moment; yet did He release him at once from that 
distress. By this, moreover, we are taught, as Bede says 
on Mark ix. 25, that often, when after falling into sin we strive 
to return to God, we experience further and more grievous 
attacks from the old enemy. This he does, ether that he may 
inspire us with a distaste for virtue, or that he may avenge 

* Cyril of Alexandria, Comment. in Luc. 
+ Cf. Theophylact, Enarr. in Luc. 
t Bede, Expos. in Luc. iv. 41. 

Q. 44. Art.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 240 

the shame of having been cast out. For the man who was 
healed became as dead, says Jerome, because to those who are 
healed it is said, ‘ You are dead ; and your life is hid with 
Christ in God’ (Col. 111. 3). 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT CHRIST SHOULD WORK 
MIRACLES IN THE HEAVENLY BODIES ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was unfitting that 
Christ should work miracles in the heavenly bodies. For, as 
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv.), 1t beseems Divine providence 
not to destroy, but to preserve, nature. Now, the heavenly 
bodies are by nature incorruptible and unchangeable, as is 
proved De Celo i. Therefore it was unfitting that Christ 
should cause any change in the order of the heavenly bodies. 

Obj. 2. Further, the course of time is marked out by the 
movement of the heavenly bodies, according to Gen. i. 14: 
Let there be lights made in the firmament of heaven . . . and 
let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years. 
Consequently if the movement of the heavenly bodies be 
changed, the distinction and order of the seasons is changed. 
But there is no report of this having been perceived by 
astronomers, who gaze at the stars and observe the months, as 
it is written (Isa. xlvii. 13). Therefore it seems that Christ 
did not work any change in the movements of the heavenly 
bodies. 

Obj. 3. Further, it was more fitting that Christ should 
work miracles in life and when teaching, than in death: 
both because, as it is written (2 Cor. xiil. 4), He was crucified 
through weakness, yet He liveth by the power of God, by which 
He worked miracles; and because His miracles were in 
confirmation of His doctrine. But there is no record of 
Christ having worked any miracles in the heavenly bodies 
during His lifetime: nay, more; when the Pharisees asked 
Him to give a sign from heaven, He refused, as Matthew 
relates (xii. and xvi.). Therefore it seems that neither in 

241 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART, 2 

His death should He have worked any miracles in the 
heavenly bodies. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke xxiii. 44, 45): There 
was darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour ; and the 
sun was darkened. 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. XLIII., A. 4), it be- 
hoved Christ’s miracles to be a sufficient proof of His God- 
head. Now this is not so sufficiently proved by changes 
wrought in the lower bodies, which changes can be brought 
about by other causes, as it is by changes wrought in the 
course of the heavenly bodies, which have been established 
by God alone in an unchangeable order. This is what 
Dionysius says in his epistle to Polycarp: We must recognize 
that no alteration can take place in the order and movement 
of the heavens that is not caused by Him who made all and 
changes all by His word. Therefore it was fitting that Christ 
should work miracles even in the heavenly bodies. 

Reply Obj. 1. Just as it is natural to the lower bodies to 
be moved by the heavenly bodies, which are higher in the 
order of nature, so is it natural to any creature whatsoever 
to be changed by God, according to His will. Hence 
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxvi.; quoted by the gloss 
on Rom. xi. 24: Contrary to nature thou wert grafted, etc.): 
God, the Creator and Author of all natures, does nothing con- 
trary to nature: for whatsoever He does in each thing, that ts 
its nature. Consequently the nature of a heavenly body is 
not destroyed when God changes its course: but it would 
be if the change were due to any other cause. 

Reply Obj. 2. The order of the seasons was not disturbed 
by the miracle worked by Christ. For, according to some, 
this gloom or darkening of the sun, which occurred at the 
time of Christ’s passion, was caused by the sun withdrawing 
its rays, without any change in the movement of the heavenly 
bodies, which measures the duration of the seasons. Hence 
Jerome says on Matth. xxvii. 45: It seems as though the 
‘ greater light’ withdrew its rays, lest 1t should look on tts 
Lord hanging on the Cross, or bestow its vadiancy on the vm- 
pious blasphemers.—And this withdrawal of the rays is not 

III. 2 16 

Q. 44. Art.2 THE ‘‘'SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 242 

to be understood as though it were in the sun’s power to 
send forth or withdraw its rays: for it sheds its light, not 
from choice, but by nature, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv.). 
But the sun is said to withdraw its rays in so far as the 
Divine power caused the sun’s rays not to reach the earth. 
On the other hand, Origen says this was caused by clouds 
coming between (the earth and the sun). Hence on Matth. 
xXvii. 45 he says: We must therefore suppose that many large 
and very dense clouds were massed together over Jerusalem 
and the land of Judea ; so that it was exceedingly dark from 
the sixth to the ninth hour. Hence I am of opinion that, 
just as the other signs which occurred at the time of the Passion 
—namely, the rending of the veil, the quaking of the earth, 
etc.—took place in Jerusalem only, so this also: .. . or if 
anyone prefer, it may be extended to the whole of Judea, since 
it is said that ‘ there was darkness over the whole earth, which 
expression refers to the land of Judea, as may be gathered 
from 3 Kings xvit1. 10, where Abdias says to Elias: ‘ As the 
Lord thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom whither 
my lord hath not sent to seek thee :’ which shows that they 
sought him among the nations in the neighbourhood of 
Judea. 

On this point, however, credence is to be given rather to 
Dionysius, who is an eyewitness as to this having occurred 
by the moon eclipsing the sun. For he says (Ep. ad Polye.): 
Without any doubt we saw the moon encroach on the sun, he 
being in Egypt at the time, as he says in the same letter. 
And in this he points out four miracles——The first is that 
the natural eclipse of the sun by interposition of the moon 
never takes place except when the sun and moon are in 
conjunction. But then the sun and moon were in opposi- 
tion, it being the fifteenth day, since it was the Jewish 
Passover. Wherefore he says: For it was not the time of 
conjunction.—The second miracle is that whereas at the 
sixth hour the moon was seen, together with the sun, in the 
middle of the heavens, in the evening it was seen to be in 
its place—i.e., in the east, opposite the sun. Wherefore 
he says: Again we saw it—t.e., the moon—return super- 

243 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART. 2 

naturally into opposition with the sun, so as to be diametrically 
opposite, having withdrawn from the sun at the ninth hour, 
when the darkness ceased, until evening. From this it is 
clear that the wonted course of the seasons was not dis- 
turbed, because the Divine power caused the moon both 
to approach the sun supernaturally at an unwonted season, 
and to withdraw from the sun and return to its proper 
place according to the season.—The third miracle was that 
the eclipse of the sun naturally always begins in that part 
of the sun which is to the west and spreads towards the 
east: and this is because the moon’s proper movement 
from west to east is more rapid than that of the sun, and 
consequently the moon, coming up from the west, over- 
takes the sun and passes it on its eastward course. But 
in this case the moon had already passed the sun, and was 
distant from it by the length of half the heavenly circle, 
being opposite to it: consequently it had to return east- 
wards towards the sun, so as to come into apparent contact 
with it from the east, and continue in a westerly direction. 
This is what he refers to when he says: Moreover, we saw the 
eclipse begin to the east and spread towards the western edge 
of the sun, for it was a total eclipse, and afterwards ass 
away.—The fourth miracle consisted in this, that in a 
natural eclipse that part of the sun which is first eclipsed 
is the first to reappear (because the moon, coming in front 
of the sun, by its natural movement passes on to the east, 
so as to come away first from the western portion of the 
sun, which was the first part to be eclipsed), whereas in 
this case the moon, while returning miraculously from the 
east to the west, did not pass the sun so as to be to the west 
of it: but having reached the western edge of the sun re- 
turned towards the east: so that the last portion of the 
sun to be eclipsed was the first to reappear. Consequently 
the eclipse began towards the east, whereas the sun began 
to reappear towards the west. And to this he refers by 
saying: Again we observed that the occultation and emersion 
did not begin from the same point—i.e., on the same side of 
the sun—but on opposite sides. 

Q. 44. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 244 

Chrysostom adds a fifth miracle (Hom. lxxxviii. in Matth.), 
saying that the darkness in this case lasted for three hours, 
whereas an eclipse of the sun lasts but a short time, for tt ts 
soon over, as those know who have seen one. Hence we are 
given to understand that the moon was stationary below 
the sun, except we prefer to say that the duration of the 
darkness was measured from the first moment of occultation 
of the sun to the moment when the sun had completely 
emerged from the eclipse. 

But, as Origen says (loc. cit.), against this the children of 
this world object : How 1s 1t that such a phenomenal occurrence 
ts not related by any writer, whether Greek or barbarian ? 
And he says that someone of the name of Phlegon relates 
in his chronicles that this took place during the reign of 
Tiberius Cesar, but he does not say that tt occurred at the 
full moon. It may be, therefore, that because it was not 
the time for an eclipse, the various astronomers living 
then throughout the world were not on the look-out 
for one, and that they ascribed this darkness to some 
disturbance of the atmosphere. But in Egypt, where 
clouds are few on account of the tranquillity of the air, 
Dionysius and his companions were considerably astonished 
so as to make the aforesaid observations about this dark- 
ness. 

Reply Obj. 3. Then, above all, was there need for miracu- 
lous proof of Christ’s Godhead, when the weakness of human 
nature was most apparent in Him. Hence it was that at 
His birth a new star appeared in the heavens. Wherefore 
Maximus says (Serm. de Nattv. viii.): If thou disdain the 
manger, raise thine eyes a little and gaze on the new stay in 
the heavens, proclaiming to the world the birth of our Lord. 
But in His Passion yet greater weakness appeared in His 
manhood. Therefore there was need for yet greater miracles 
in the greater lights of the world. And, as Chrysostom 
says (loc. cit.): This is the sign which He promised to them 
who sought for one, saying: ‘ An evil and adulterous genera- 
tion seeketh a sign ; and a sign shall not be given it, but the 
sign of Jonas the prophet,’ referring to His Cross ... and 

245 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART. 3 

Resurrection. ... For tt was much more wonderful that 
this should happen when He was crucified than when He was 
walking on earth. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WORKED MIRACLES FITTINGLY ON MEN ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :-— 

Objectton 1. It would seem that Christ worked miracles 
unfittingly on men. For in man the soul is of more import 
than the body. Now Christ worked many miracles on 
bodies, but we do not read of His working any miracles 
on souls: for neither did He convert any unbelievers to 
the faith mightily, but by persuading and convincing them 
with outward miracles, nor is it related of Him that He made 
wise men out of fools. Therefore it seems that He worked 
miracles on men in an unfitting manner. 

Obj. 2. Further, as stated above (Q. XLIII., A. 2), Christ 
worked miracles by Divine power: to which it is proper to 
work suddenly, perfectly, and without any assistance. Now 
Christ did not always heal men suddenly as to their bodies: 
for it is written (Mark viii. 22-25) that, taking the blind man 
by the hand, He led him out of the town ; and, spitting upon 
his eyes, laying His hands on him, He asked him tf he saw 
anything. And, looking up, he said: I see men as tt were 
trees walking. After that again He laid His hands upon bs 
eyes, and he began to see, and was restored, so that he saw all 
things clearly. It is clear from this that He did not heal 
him suddenly, but at first imperfectly, and by means of 
His spittle. Therefore it seems that He worked miracles 
on men unfittingly. 

Obj. 3. Further, there is no need to remove at the same 
time things which do not follow from one another. Now 
bodily ailments are not always the result of sin, as appears 
from our Lord’s words (Jo. ix. 3): Netther hath this man 
sinned, nor his parents, that he should be born blind. It was 
unseemly, therefore, for Him to forgive the sins of those 
who sought the healing of the body, as He is related to have 
done in the case of the man sick of the palsy (Matth. ix. 2): 

Q. 44. Art.3 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 246 

the more that the healing of the body, being of less account 
than the forgiveness of sins, does not seem a sufficient 
argument for the power of forgiving sins. 

Obj. 4. Further, Christ’s miracles were worked in order to 
confirm His doctrine, and witness to His Godhead, as stated 
above (Q. XLIII., A. 4). Now no man should hinder the 
purpose of his own work. Therefore it seems unfitting 
that Christ commanded those who had been healed miracu- 
lously to tell no one, as appears from Matth. ix. 30 and 
Mark viii. 26: the more so, since He commanded others to 
proclaim the miracles worked on them; thus it is related 
(Mark v. 19) that, after delivering a man from the demons, 
He said to him: Go into thy house to thy friends, and tell 
them how great things the Lord hath done for thee. 

On the contrary, It is written (Mark vil. 37): He hath done 
all things well: He hath made both the deaf to hear and the 
dumb to speak. 

I answer that, The means should be proportionate to the 
end. Now Christ came into the world and taught in order 
to save man, according to Jo. ill. 17: For God sent not His 
Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world may 
be saved by Him. Therefore it was fitting that Christ, by 
miraculously healing men in particular, should prove Him- 
self to be the universal and spiritual Saviour of all. 

Reply Obj. 1. The means are distinct from the end. 
Now the end for which Christ’s miracles were worked was 
the health of the rational part, which is healed by the 
light of wisdom, and the gift of righteousness: the former 
of which presupposes the latter, since, as it is written 
(Wisd. i. 4): Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, 
nor dwell in a body subject to sins. Now it was unfitting 
that man should be made righteous unless he willed: for 
this would be both against the nature of righteousness, 
which implies rectitude of the will, and contrary to the very 
nature of man, which requires to be led to good by the free- 
will, not by force. Christ, therefore, justified man in- 
wardly by the Divine power, but not against man’s will. 
Nor did this pertain to His miracles, but to the end of 

247 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART. 3 

His miracles.—In like manner by the Divine power He 
infused wisdom into the simple minds of His disciples: 
hence He said to them (Luke xxi. 15): I will give you a 
mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries will not be 
able to resist and gatnsay. And this, in so far as the en- 
lightenment was inward, is not to be reckoned as a miracle, 
but only as regards the outward action—namely, in so far 
as men saw that those who had been unlettered and simple 
spoke with such wisdom and constancy. Wherefore it is 
written (Acts iv. 13) that the Jews, seeing the constancy of 
Peter and of John, understanding that they were illiterate and 
ignorant men . . . wondered.—And though suchlike spiritual 
effects are different from visible miracles, yet do they testify 
to Christ’s doctrine and power, according to Heb. ii. 4: 
God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders and divers 
miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost. 

Nevertheless Christ did work some miracles on the soul 
of man, principally by changing its lower powers. Hence 
Jerome, commenting on Matth. ix. 9, He rose up and followed 
Him, says: Such was the splendour and majesty of His hidden 
Godhead, which shone forth even in His human countenance, 
that those who gazed on tt were drawn to Him at first sight. 
And on Matth. xxi. 12, (Jesus) cast out all them that sold 
and bought, the same Jerome says: Of all the signs worked 
by our Lord, this seems to me the most wondrous,—that one 
man, at that t:me despised, could, with the blows of one scourge, 
cast out such a multitude. For a fiery and heavenly light 
flashed from His eyes, and the majesty of His Godhead shone 
in His countenance. And Origen says on Jo. ii. 15 that 
this was a greater miracle than when He changed water into 
wine, for there He shows His power over inanimate matter, 
whereas here He tames the minds of thousands of men.—Again, 
on Jo. xviii. 6, They went backward and fell to the ground, 
Augustine says: Though that crowd was fierce in hate and 
terrible with arms, yet did that one word, .. . without any 
weapon, smite them through, drive them back, lay them pros- 
trate: for God lay hidden in that flesh.—Moreover, to this 
must be referred what Luke says (iv. 30)—namely, that 

Q. 44. Art.3. THE ‘‘'SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 248 

Jesus, passing through the midst of them, went His way, on 
which Chrysostom observes (Hom. xlviii. in Joan.): That He 
stood in the midst of those who were lying in watt for Him, 
and was not seized by them, shows the power of His Godhead ; 
and, again, that which is written Jo. viii. 59, Jesus hid 
Himself and went out of the Temple, on which Theophylact 
says: He did not hide Himself in a corner of the Temple, as 
if afraid, or take shelter behind a wall or pillar ; but by Hts 
heavenly power making Himself invisible to those who were 
threatening Him, He passed through the midst of them. 

From all these instances it is clear that Christ, when He 
willed, changed the minds of men by His Divine power, not 
only by the bestowal of righteousness and the infusion of 
wisdom, which pertains to the end of miracles, but also 
by outwardly drawing men to Himself, or by terrifying or 
stupefying them, which pertains to the miraculous itself. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ came to save the world, not only by 
Divine power, but also through the mystery of His Incar- 
nation. Consequently in healing the sick He frequently 
not only made use of His Divine power, healing by way of 
command, but also by applying something pertaining to 
His human nature. Hence on Luke iv. 40, He, laying His 
hands on every one of them, healed them, Cyril says: Although, 
as God, He might, by one word, have driven out all diseases, 
yet He touched them, showing that His own flesh was endowed 
with a healing virtue. And on Mark viii. 23, Spitting upon 
his eyes, laying His hands on him, etc., Chrysostom* says: 
He spat and laid His hands upon the blind man, wishing to 
show that His Divine word, accompanied by His operation, 
works wonders : for the hand signifies operation ; the spittle 
signifies the word which proceeds from the mouth. Again, on 
Jo. ix. 6, He made clay of the spittle, and spread the clay 
upon the eyes of the blind man, Augustine says: Of His spittle 
He made clay,—because ‘the Word was made flesh.’ Or, 
again, as Chrysostom says, to signify that it was He who 
made man of the slime of the earth. 

It is furthermore to be observed concerning Christ’s 

* Victor of Antioch. 

249 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART. 3 

miracles that generally what He did was most perfect. 
Hence on Jo. ii. 10, Every man at first setteth forth good 
wine, Chrysostom says: Christ’s miracles are such as to far 
surpass the works of nature in splendour and usefulness.— 
Likewise in an instant He conferred perfect health on the 
sick. Hence on Matth. viii. 15, She arose and ministered to 
them, Jerome says: Health restored by our Lord returns wholly 
and instantly. 

There was, however, special reason for the contrary 
happening in the case of the man born blind, and this was 
his want of faith, as Chrysostom* says. Or as Bede ob- 
serves on Mark vill. 23: Whom He might have healed wholly 
and instantly by a single word, He heals litile by litile, to show 
the extent of human blindness, which hardly, and that only 
by degrees, can come back to the light: and to potnt out that 
each step forward in the way of perfection ts due to the help 
of Hts grace. 

Reply Obj. 3. As stated above (Q. XLIII., A. 2), Christ 
worked miracles by Divine power. Now the works of God 
are perfect (Deut. xxxii. 4). But nothing is perfect except 
it attain its end. Now the end of the outward healing 
worked by Christ is the healing of the soul. Consequently 
it was not fitting that Christ should heal a man’s body 
without healing his soul. Wherefore on Jo. vii. 23, I have 
healed the whole man on a Sabbath day, Augustine says: 
Because he was cured, so as to be whole in body ; he believed, 
so as to be whole in soul. To the man sick of the paisy it is 
said specially, Thy sins are forgiven thee, because, as Jerome 
observes on Matth. ix. 5, 6: We are hereby given to under- 
stand that ailments of the body are frequently due to sin: for 
which reason, perhaps, first are his sins forgiven, that the 
cause of the ailment being removed, health may return. Where- 
fore, also (Jo. v. 14), it is said: Sin no more, lest some worse 
thing happen to thee. Whence, says Chrysostom, we learn 
that his sickness was the result of sin. 

Nevertheless, as Chrysostom says on Matth. ix. 5: By how 
much a soul is of more account than a body, by so much 1s 

* Victor of Antioch. 

Q. 44. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 250 

the forgiving of sins a greater work than healing the body ; 
but because the one is unseen He does the lesser and more 
mantfest thing in order to prove the greater and more unseen. 

Reply Obj. 4. On Matth. ix. 30, See that no man know this, 
Chrysostom says: If in another place we find Him saying, 
‘Go and declare the glory of God’ (cf. Mark v. 19; Luke 
viii. 39), that ts not contrary to this. For He instructs us to 
forbid them that would praise us on our own account : but tf 
the glory be referred to God, then we must not forbid, but 
command, that tt be done. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WORKED MIRACLES FITTINGLY ON 
IRRATIONAL CREATURES ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ worked miracles 
unfittingly on irrational creatures. For brute animals are 
more noble than plants. But Christ worked a miracle on 
plants, as when the fig-tree withered away at His command 
(Matth. xxi. 19). Therefore Christ should have worked 
miracles also on brute animals. 

Obj. 2. Further, punishment is not justly inflicted save 
for fault. But it was not the fault of the fig-tree that Christ 
found no fruit on it, when fruit was not in season (Mark 
xl. 13). Therefore it seems unfitting that He withered 
it up. 

Obj. 3. Further, air and water are between heaven and 
earth. But Christ worked some miracles in the heavens, 
as stated above (A. 2), and likewise in the earth, when it 
quaked at the time of His Passion (Matth. xxvii. 51). There- 
fore it seems that He should also have worked miracles 
in the air and water, such as to divide the sea, as did Moses 
(Exod. xiv. 21); or a river, as did Josue (Jos. iii. 16) and 
Elias (4 Kings u. 8); and to cause thunder to be heard 
in the air, as occurred on Mount Sinai when the Law was 
given (Exod. xix. 16), and like to what Elias did (3 Kings 
XViii. 45). 

251 CHRIST’S MIRACLES Q. 44. ART. 4 

Obj. 4. Further, miraculous works pertain to the work of 
Divine providence in governing the world. But this work 
presupposes creation. It seems, therefore, unfitting that in 
His miracles Christ made use of creation: when, to wit, 
He multiplied the loaves. Therefore His miracles in regard 
to irrational creatures seem to have been unfitting. 

On the contrary, Christ is the wisdom of God (1 Cor. i. 24), 
of whom it is said (Wisd. viii. 1) that she ordereth all things 
sweetly. 

I answer that, As stated above, Christ’s miracles were 
ordained to the end that He should be recognized as having 
Divine power, unto the salvation of mankind. Now it 
belongs to the Divine power that every creature be subject 
thereto. Consequently it behoved Him to work miracles 
on every kind of creature, not only on man, but also on 
irrational creatures. 

Reply Obj. 1. Brute animals are akin generically to man, 
wherefore they were created on the same day as man. And 
since He had worked many miracles on the bodies of men, 
there was no need for Him to work miracles on the bodies 
of brute animals; and so much the less that, as to their 
sensible and corporeal nature, the same reason applies 
to both men and animals, especially terrestrial. But fish, 
from living in water, are more alien from human nature; 
wherefore they were made on another day. On them 
Christ worked a miracle in the plentiful draught of fishes, 
related Luke v. and Jo. xxi.; and, again, in the fish caught 
by Peter, who found a stater in it (Matth. xvii. 26).—As 
to the swine who were cast headlong into the sea, this was 
not the effect of a Divine miracle, but of the action of the 
demons, God permitting. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Chrysostom says on Matth. xxi. 19: 
When our Lord does any suchlike thing on plants or brute 
animals, ask not how it was just to wither up the fig-tree, 
since it was not the fruit season; to ask such a question 
ts foolish in the extreme, because such things cannot com- 
mit a fault or be punished: but look at the mtracle, and 
wonder at the worker. Nor does the Creator inflict any 

Q. 44. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 252 

hurt on the owner, if He choose to make use of His own 
creature for the salvation of others; rather, as Hilary says 
on Matth. xxi. 19, we should see in this a proof of God’s good- 
ness, for when He wished to afford an example of salvation 
as being procured by Him, He exercised Hts mighty power 
on the human body: but when He wished to picture to them 
His severity towards those who wilfully disobey Him, He 
foreshadows their doom by His sentence on the tree. This is 
the more noteworthy in a fig-tree which, as Chrysostom 
observes (loc. cit.), being full of moisture, makes the miracle 
all the more remarkable. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ also worked miracles befitting to 
Himself in the air and water: when, to wit, as related Matth. 
viii. 26, He commanded the winds, and the sea, and there 
came a great calm. But it was not befitting that He who 
came to restore all things to a state of peace and calm should 
cause either a disturbance in the atmosphere or a division 
of waters. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. xii. 18): You 
ave not come to a fire that may be touched and approached 
(Vulg., @ mountain that might be touched, and a burning 
jive), and a whirlwind, and darkness, and storm. 

At the time of His Passion, however, the vet] was rent, 
to signify the unfolding of the mysteries of the Law; the 
graves were opened, to signify that His death gave life to 
the dead; the earth quaked and the rocks were rent, to signify 
that man’s stony heart would be softened, and the whole 
world changed for the better by the virtue of His Passion. 

Reply Obj. 4. The multiplication of the loaves was not 
effected by way of creation, but by an addition of ex- 
traneous matter transformed into loaves; hence Augustine 
says on Jo. vi. 1-14: Whence He multiplieth a few grains into 
harvests, thence in His hands He multiplied the five loaves : 
and it is clearly by a process of transformation that grains 
are multiplied into harvests. 

QUESTION XLV. 

OF CHRIST’S TRANSFIGURATION. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE now consider Christ’s transfiguration; and here there 
are four points of inquiry: (1) Whether it was fitting that 
Christ should be transfigured? (2) Whether the clarity 
of the transfiguration was the clarity of glory? (3) Of the 
witnesses of the transfiguration. (4) Of the testimony of 
the Father’s voice. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT CHRIST SHOULD BE 
TRANSFIGURED ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not fitting that 
Christ should be transfigured. For it is not fitting for a 
true body to be changed into various shapes (figuras), but 
only for an imaginary body. Now Christ’s body was not 
imaginary, but real, as stated above (Q. V., A. 1). There- 
fore it seems that it should not have been transfigured. 

Obj. 2. Further, figure is in the fourth species of quality, 
whereas clarity is in the third, since it is a sensible quality. 
Therefore Christ’s assuming clarity should not be called a 
transfiguration. 

Obj. 3. Further, a glorified body has four gifts, as we 
shall state farther on (Suppl. Q. LX XXII.)—viz., impassi- 
bility, agility, subtlety, and clarity. Therefore His trans- 
figuration should not have consisted in an assumption of 
clarity rather than of the other gifts. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. xvii. 2) that Jesus 
was transfigured in the presence of three of His disciples. 

253 

Q. 45. Art.1 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 254 

I answer that, Our Lord, after foretelling His Passion to 
His disciples, had exhorted them to follow the path of His 
sufferings (Matth. xvi. 21, 24). Now in order that anyone 
go straight along a road, he must have some knowledge of 
the end: thus an archer will not shoot the arrow straight 
unless he first see the target. Hence Thomas said (Jo. 
xiv. 5): Lord, we know not whither Thou goest ; and how can 
we know the way? Above all is this necessary when hard 
and rough is the road, heavy the going, but delightful the 
end. Now by His Passion Christ achieved glory, not only 
of His soul, which He had from the first moment of His 
conception, but also of His body; according to Luke 
(xxiv. 26): Christ ought (Vulg., ought not Christ) to have 
suffered these things, and so to enter into His glory (?) To 
which glory He brings those who follow the footsteps of 
His Passion, according to Acts xiv. 21: Through many 
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. There- 
fore it was fitting that He should show His disciples the 
glory of His clarity (which is to be transfigured), to which 
He will configure those who are His; according to Phil. 
ili. 21: (Who) will reform the body of our lowness configured 
(Douay, made like) to the body of His glory. Hence Bede 
says on Mark viii. 39: By His loving foresight He allowed 
them to taste for a short time the contemplation of eternal joy, 
so that they might bear persecution bravely. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Jerome says on Matth. xvii. 2: Let no 
one suppose that Christ, through being said to be trans- 
figured, laid aside His natural shape and countenance, or 
substituted an imaginary or aerial body for His real body. 
The Evangelist describes the manner of His transfiguration 
when he says: ‘ His face did shine as the sun, and His gar- 
ments became white as snow.’ Brightness of face and white- 
ness of garments argue not a change of substance, but a putting 
on of glory. 

Reply Obj. 2. Figure is seen in the outline of a body, for 
it is that which is enclosed by one or more boundaries.* There- 
fore whatever has to do with the outline of a body seems to 

* Euclid, bk. i., def. xiv. 

255 CHRIST’S TRANSFIGURATION Q. 45. Art. 2 

pertain to the figure. Now the clarity, just as the colour, 
of a non-transparent body is seen on its surface, and 
consequently the assumption of clarity is called trans- 
figuration. 

Reply Obj. 3. Of those four gifts, clarity alone is a quality 
of the very person in himself; whereas the other three are 
not perceptible, save in some action or movement, or in 
some passion. Christ, then, did show in Himself certain 
indications of those three gifts—of agility, for instance, 
when He walked on the waves of the sea; of subtlety, when 
He came forth from the closed womb of the Virgin; of im- 
passibility, when He escaped unhurt from the hands of 
the Jews who wished to hurl Him down or to stone Him. 
And yet He is not said, on account of this, to be trans- 
figured, but only on account of clarity, which pertains to 
the aspect of His Person. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER THIS CLARITY WAS THE CLARITY OF GLORY ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that this clarity was not the 
clarity of glory. Fora gloss of Bede on Matth. xvii. 2, He 
was transfigured before them, says: In His mortal body He 
shows forth, not the state of immortality, but clarity like to 
that of future immortality. But the clarity of glory is the 
clarity of immortality. Therefore the clarity which Christ 
showed to His disciples was not the clarity of glory. 

Obj. 2. Further, on Luke ix. 27 (That) shall not taste 
death unless (Vulg., till) they see the kingdom of God, Bede’s 
gloss says: That 1s, the glorification of the body in an 1maginary 
vision of future beatitude. But the image of a thing is not 
the thing itself. Therefore this was not the clarity of 
beatitude. 

Obj. 3. Further, the clarity of glory is only in a human 
body. But this clarity of the transfiguration was seen not 
only in Christ’s body, but also in His garments, and in 

Q. 45. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 256 

the bright cloud which overshaded the disciples. Therefore 
it seems that this was not the clarity of glory. 

On the contrary, Jerome says on the words, He was trans- 
figured before them (Matth. xvii. 2): He appeared to the Apostles 
such as He will appear on the day of judgement. And on 
Matth. xvi. 28, Till they see the Son of Man coming in His 
kingdom, Chrysostom says: Wishing to show with what kind 
of glory He ts afterwards to come, so far as it was possible 
for them to learn it, He showed it to them tn their present 
life, that they might not grieve even over the death of their 
Lord. 

I answer that, The clarity which Christ assumed in His 
transfiguration was the clarity of glory as to its essence, 
but not as to its mode of being. For the clarity of the 
glorified body is derived from that of the soul, as Augustine 
says (Ep. ad Diosc. cxviii.). And in hke manner the clarity 
of Christ’s body in His transfiguration was derived from 
His Godhead, as Damascene says (Ovat. de Transfig.), and 
from the glory of His soul. That the glory of His soul did 
not overflow into His body from the first moment of Christ’s 
conception was due to a certain Divine dispensation, that, 
as stated above (Q. XIV., A. I ad 2), He might fulfil the 
mysteries of our redemption in a passible body. This did 
not, however, deprive Christ of His power of outpouring 
the glory of His soul into His body. And this He did, as 
to clarity, in His transfiguration, but otherwise than in 
a glorified body. For the clarity of the soul overflows into 
a glorified body, by way of a permanent quality affecting 
the body. Hence bodily refulgence is not miraculous in a 
glorified body. But in Christ’s transfiguration clarity over- 
flowed from His Godhead and from His soul into His body, 
not as an immanent quality affecting His very body, but 
rather after the manner of a transient passion, as when the 
air is lit up by the sun. Consequently the refulgence, 
which appeared in Christ’s body then, was miraculous: just 
as was the fact of His walking on the waves of the sea. 
Hence Dionysius says (Ep. ad Cat. iv.): Christ excelled man 
in doing that which is proper to man: this is shown in His 

257 CHRIST’S TRANSFIGURATION Q. 45. Art. 2 

supernatural conception of a virgin, and in the unstable waters 
bearing the weight of material and earthly feet. 

Wherefore we must not say, as Hugh of St. Victor* said, 
that Christ assumed the gift of clarity in the transfiguration, 
of agility in walking on the sea, and of subtlety in coming 
forth from the Virgin’s closed womb: because the gifts are 
immanent qualities of a glorified body. On the contrary, 
whatever pertained to the gifts, that He had miraculously. 
The same is to be said, as to the soul, of the vision in which 
Paul saw God in a rapture, as we have stated in the Second 
Part (II.-IT., 0. CLXXV., A. 3 ad 2). 

Reply Obj. 1. The words quoted prove, not that the clarity 
of Christ was not that of glory, but that it was not the 
clarity of a glorified body, since Christ’s body was not as 
yet immortal. And just as it was by dispensation that in 
Christ the glory of the soul should not overflow into the body, 
so was it possible that by dispensation it might overflow as 
to the gift of clarity and not as to that of impassibility. 

Reply Obj. 2. This clarity is said to have been imaginary, 
not as though it were not really the clarity of glory, but 
because it was a kind of image representing that perfection 
of glory, in virtue of which the body will be glorious. 

Reply Obj. 3. Just as the clarity which was in Christ’s 
body was a representation of His body’s future clarity, so 
the clarity which was in His garments signified the future 
clarity of the saints, which will be surpassed by that of 
Christ, just as the brightness of the snow is surpassed by 
that of the sun. Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxxi.) that 
Christ’s garments became resplendent, because in the height 
of heavenly clarity all the saints will cling to Him in the 
refulgence of righteousness. For His garments signify the 
righteous, because He will unite them to Himself, according 
to Isa. xlix. 18: Thou shalt be clothed with all these as with 
an ornament. 

The bright cloud signifies the glory of the Holy Ghost or 
the power of the Father, as Origen says (Tract. ui. on Matth.), 
by which in the glory to come the saints will be covered.— 

* Innocent III., De Myst, Miss., iv. 

III. 2 17 

Q. 45. Art.3. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 258 

Or, again, it may be said fittingly that it signifies the clarity 
of the world redeemed, which clarity will cover the saints 
as a tent. Hence when Peter proposed to make tents, @ 
bright cloud overshaded the disciples. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE WITNESSES OF THE TRANSFIGURATION WERE 
FITTINGLY CHOSEN ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection x. It would seem that the witnesses of the 
transfiguration were unfittingly chosen. For everyone is a 
better witness of things that he knows. But at the time 
of Christ’s transfiguration no one but the angels had as 
yet any knowledge from experience of the glory to come. 
Therefore the witnesses of the transfiguration should have 
been angels rather than men. 

Obj. 2. Further, truth, not fiction, is becoming in a witness 
of the truth. Now, Moses and Elias were there, not really , 
but only in appearance; for a gloss on Luke ix. 30, They 
were Moses and Elias, says: It must be observed that Moses 
and Ehas were there netther in body nor in soul; but that 
those bodies were formed of some avatlable matter. It ts 
also credible that this was the result of the angelic ministries, 
through the angels impersonating them. Therefore it seems 
that they were unsuitable witnesses. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is said (Acts x. 43) that all the prophets 
‘give testimony to Christ. Therefore not only Moses and 
Elias, but also all the prophets, should have been present 
as witnesses. 

Obj. 4. Further, Christ’s glory is promised as a reward to 
all the faithful (2 Cor. ili. 18; Phil. iii. 21), in whom He 
wished by His transfiguration to enkindle a desire of that 
glory. Therefore He should have taken not only Peter, 
James, and John, but all His disciples, to be witnesses of 
His transfiguration. 

On the contrary is the authority of the Gospel. 

I answer that, Christ wished to be transfigured in order to 

259 CHRIST’S TRANSFIGURATION QQ. 45. Arr. 3 

show men His glory, and to arouse men to a desire of it, as 
stated above (A. 1). Now men are brought to the glory 
of eternal beatitude by Christ,—not only those who lived 
after Him, but also those who preceded Him; therefore, 
when He was approaching His Passion, both the multitude 
that followed and that which went before, cried saying: 
‘ Hosanna,’ as related Matth. xxi. 9, beseeching Him, as it 
were, to save them. Consequently it was fitting that wit- 
nesses should be present from among those who preceded 
Him—namely, Moses and Elias—and from those who fol- 
lowed after Him—namely, Peter, James, and John—that in 
the mouth of two or three witnesses this word might stand. 

Reply Obj. 1. By His transfiguration Christ manifested 
to His disciples the glory of His body, which belongs to 
men only. It was therefore fitting that He should choose 
men and not angels as witnesses. 

Reply Obj. 2. This gloss is said to be taken from a book 
entitled On the Marvels of Holy Scripture. It is not an 
authentic work, but is wrongly ascribed to St. Augustine; 
consequently we need not stand by it. For Jerome says on 
Matth. xvii. 3: Observe that when the Scribes and Pharisees 
asked for a sign from heaven, He refused to give one ; whereas 
here, in order to increase the apostles’ faith, He gives a sign 
from heaven, Elias coming down thence, whither he had astended, 
and Moses arising from the nether world. This is not to be 
understood as though the soul of Moses was reunited to his 
body, but that his soul appeared through some assumed 
body, just as the angels do. But Elias appeared in his own 
body, not that he was brought down from the empyrean 
heaven, but from some place on high, whither he was taken 
up in the fiery chariot. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Chrysostom says on Matth. xvii. 3: Moses 
and Elias are brought forward for many reasons. And, first 
of all, because the multitude said He was Elias or Jeremias 
or one of the prophets, He brings the leaders of the prophets 
with Him ; that hereby at least they might see the difference 
between the servants and their Lord.—Another reason was... 
that Moses gave the Law... while Elias . . . was jealous 

Q. 45. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 260 

for the glory of God. Wherefore by appearing together 
with Christ, they show how falsely the Jews accused Him of 
transgressing the Law, and of blasphemously appropriating 
to Himself the glory of God.—A third reason was to show that 
He has power of death and life, and that He is the judge of 
the dead and the living ; by bringing with Him Moses who had 
died, and Elias who still laved.—A fourth reason was because, 
as Luke says (ix. 31), they spoke with Him of His decease 
that He should accomplish in Jerusalem—t.e., of His Passion 
and death. Therefore, 1m order to strengthen the hearts of 
His disciples with a view to this, He sets before them those 
who had exposed themselves to death for God’s sake: since 
Moses braved death in opposing Pharaoh, and Elias in 
opposing Achab.—A fifth reason was that He wished Hts 
disciples to imitate the meekness of Moses and the zeal of 
Elias.—Hilary adds a sixth reason—namely, in order to 
signify that He had been foretold by the Law, which Moses 
gave them, and by the prophets, of whom Elias was the 
principal. 

Reply Obj. 4. Lofty mysteries should not be immediately 
explained to everyone, but should be handed down through 
superiors to others in their proper turn. Consequently, as 
Chrysostom says (loc. cit.), He took these three as being superior 
to the rest. For Peter excelled in the love he bore to Christ and 
in the power bestowed on him; John in the privilege of 
Christ’s love for him on account of his virginity, and, again, on 
account of his being privileged to be an Evangelist; James 

‘on account of the privilege of martyrdom. Nevertheless 
He did not wish them to tell others what they had seen 
before His Resurrection; Jest, as Jerome says on Matth. 
XVii. 19, such a wonderful thing should seem incredible to 
them ; and lest, after hearing of so great glory, they should 
be scandalized at the Cross that followed; or, again, lest (the 
Cross) should be entirely hindered by the people ;* and in order 
that they might then be witnesses of spiritual things when they 
should be filled wath the Holy Ghost. 

* Bede, Hom. xviii. Cf. Catena Aurea. 
t Hilary, in Maith. xvii. 

261 CHRIST’S TRANSFIGURATION Q. 45. Arr. 4 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE TESTIMONY OF THE FATHER’S VOICE, SAYING, 
“THIS IS MY BELOVED SON,’ WAS FITTINGLY ADDED ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Oljectton 1. It would seem that the testimony of the 
Father’s voice, saying, This is My beloved Son, was not 
fittingly added; for, as it is written (Job xxxiii. 14), God 
speaketh once, and repeateth not the selfsame thing the second 
time. But the Father’s voice had testified to this at the 
time of (Christ’s) baptism. Therefore it was not fitting that 
He should bear witness to it a second time. 

Obj. 2. Further, at the baptism the Holy Ghost appeared 
under the form of a dove at the same time as the Father’s 
voice was heard. But this did not happen at the trans- 
figuration. Therefore it seems that the testimony of the 
Father was made in an unfitting manner. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ began to teach after His baptism. 
Nevertheless, the Father’s voice did not then command men 
to hear him. Therefore neither should it have so com- 
manded at the transfiguration. 

Obj. 4. Further, things should not be said to those who 
cannot bear them, according to Jo. xvi. 12: I have yet.many 
things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. But the 
disciples could not bear the Father’s voice; for it is written 
(Matth. xvii. 6) that the disciples hearing, fell upon their 
face, and were very much afraid. Therefore the Father’s 
voice should not have been addressed to them. 

On the contrary is the authority of the Gospel. 

I answer that, The adoption of the sons of God is through 
a certain conformity of image to the natural Son of God. 
Now this takes place in two ways: first, by the grace of 
the wayfarer, which is imperfect conformity; secondly, by 
glory, which is perfect conformity, according to 1 Jo. iii. 2: 
We are now the sons of God, and tt hath not yet appeared what 
we shall be: we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be 
like to Him, because we shall see Him as Hets. Since, therefore, 
it is in baptism that we acquire grace, while the clarity of 

Q. 45. Art.4. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 262 

the glory to come was foreshadowed in the transfiguration, 
therefore both in His baptism and in His transfiguration the 
natural sonship of Christ was fittingly made known by the 
testimony of the Father: because He alone with the Son and 
Holy Ghost is perfectly conscious of that perfect generation. 

Reply Obj. 1. The words quoted are to be understood of 
God’s eternal speaking, by which God the Father uttered 
the only-begotten and co-eternal Word. Nevertheless, it 
can be said that God uttered the same thing twice in a bodily 
voice, yet not for the same purpose, but in order to show 
the divers modes in which men can be partakers of the 
likeness of the eternal Sonship. 

Reply Obj. 2. Just as in the Baptism, where the mystery 
of the first regeneration was proclaimed, the operation of 
the whole Trinity was made manifest, because the Son In- 
carnate was there, the Holy Ghost appeared under the form 
of a dove, and the Father made Himself known in the 
voice; so also in the transfiguration, which is the mystery 
of the second regeneration, the whole Trinity appears—the 
Father in the voice, the Son in the man, the Holy Ghost in the 
bright cloud; for just as in baptism He confers innocence, 
signified by the simplicity of the dove, so in the resurrection 
will He give His elect the clarity of glory and refreshment 
from all sorts of evil, which are signified by the bright cloud. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ came to give grace actually, and to 
promise glory by His words. Therefore it was fitting at 
the. time of His transfiguration, and not at the time of His 
baptism, that men should be commanded to hear Him. 

Reply Obj. 4. It was fitting that the disciples should be 
afraid and fall down on hearing the voice of the Father, to 
show that the glory which was then being revealed sur- 
passes in excellence the sense and faculty of all mortal 
beings; according to Exod. xxxiii. 20: Man shall not see 
Me and live. This is what Jerome says on Matth. xvii. 6: 
Such is human frailty that it cannot bear to gaze on such great 
glory. But men are healed of this frailty by Christ when 
He brings them into glory. And this is signified by what 
He says to them: Arise, and fear not. 

QUESTION XLVI. 

THE PASSION OF CHRIST. 
(In Twelve Articles.) 

IN proper sequence we have now to consider all that relates 
to Christ’s leaving the world. In the first place, His Passion; 
secondly, His death; thirdly, His burial; and, fourthly, His 
descent into hell. 

With regard to the Passion, there arises a threefold con- 
sideration: (1) The Passion itself; (2) the efficient cause of 
the Passion; (3) the fruits of the Passion. 

Under the first heading there are twelve points of in- 
quiry: (1) Whether it was necessary for Christ to suffer 
for men’s deliverance? (2) Whether there was any other 
possible means of delivering men? (3) Whether this was 
the more suitable means? (4) Whether it was fitting for 
Christ to suffer on the cross? (5) The extent of His suffer- 
ings. (6) Whether the pain which He endured was the 
greatest? (7) Whether His entire soul suffered? (8) 
Whether His Passion hindered the joy of fruition? (9) The 
time of the Passion. (10) The place. (11) Whether it was 
fitting for Him to be crucified with robbers? (12) Whether 
Christ’s Passion is to be attributed to the Godhead ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS NECESSARY FOR CHRIST TO SUFFER FOR 
THE DELIVERANCE OF THE HUMAN RACE? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that it was not necessary for 
Christ to suffer for the deliverance of the human race. For 

the human race could not be delivered except by God, 
263 

Q. 46. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 264 

according to Isaias xlv. 21: Am not I the Lord, and there 
is no God else besides Me? A just God and a Saviour, there 
is none besides Me. But no necessity can compel God, for 
this would be repugnant to His omnipotence. Therefore it 
was not necessary for Christ to suffer. 

Obj. 2. Further, what is necessary is opposed to what is 
voluntary. But Christ suffered of His own will; for it is 
written (Isa. lili. 7): He was offered because tt was His own 
will. Therefore it was not necessary for Him to suffer. 

Obj. 3. Further, as is written (Ps. xxiv. 10): All the ways 
of the Lord are mercy and truth. But it does not seem 
necessary that He should suffer on the part of the Divine 
mercy, which, as it bestows gifts freely, so it appears to 
condone debts without satisfaction: nor, again, on the part 
of Divine justice, according to which man had deserved 
everlasting condemnation. Therefore it does not seem neces- 
sary that Christ should have suffered for men’s deliverance. 

Obj. 4. Further, the angelic nature is more excellent than 
the human, as appears from Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv.). 
But Christ did not suffer to repair the angelic nature which 
had sinned, Therefore, apparently, neither was it necessary 
for Him to suffer for the salvation of the human race. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. ili. 14): As Moses lifted 
up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son of man be lifted 
up, that whosoever believeth in Him may not perish, but may 
have life everlasting. 

-I answer that, As the Philosopher teaches (Metaph. v.), 
there are several acceptations of the word necessary. In 
one way it means anything which of its nature cannot be 
otherwise; and in this way it is evident that it was not 
necessary either on the part of God or on the part of man 
for Christ to suffer. In another sense a thing may be neces- 
sary from some cause quite apart from itself; and should 
this be either an efficient or a moving cause, then it brings 
about the necessity of compulsion; as, for instance, when a 
man cannot get away owing to the violence of someone 
else holding him. But if the external factor which in- 
duces necessity be an end, then it will be said to be neces- 

205 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46, Art. 

sary from presupposing such end—namely, when some 
particular end cannot exist at all, or not conveniently, 
except such end be presupposed. It was not necessary, then, 
for Christ to suffer from necessity of compulsion, either on 
God’s part, who ruled that Christ should suffer, or on Christ’s 
own part, who suffered voluntarily. Yet it was necessary 
from necessity of the end proposed; and this can be accepted 
in three ways. First of all, on our part, who have been 
delivered by His Passion, according to John (loc. cit.): The 
Son of man must be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him 
may not perish, but may have life everlasting. Secondly, 
on Christ’s part, who merited the glory of being exalted, 
through the lowliness of His Passion: and to this must be 
referred Luke xxiv. 26: Ought not Christ to have suffered 
these things, and so to enter into His glory? Thirdly, on 
God’s part, whose determination regarding the Passion of 
Christ, foretold in the Scriptures and prefigured in the 
observances of the Old Testament, had to be fulfilled. And 
this is what St. Luke says (xxii. 22): The Son of man indeed 
goeth, according to that which 1s determined ; and (xxiv. 44, 46): 
These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with 
you, that all things must needs be fulfilled which are written 
in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms 
concerning Me: for it is thus written, and thus 1t behoved 
Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead. 

Reply Obj. 1. This argument is based on the necessity of 
compulsion on God’s part. 

Reply Obj. 2. This argument rests on the necessity of 
compulsion on the part of the man Christ. 

Reply Obj. 3. That man should be delivered by Christ’s 
Passion was in keeping with both His mercy and His justice. 
With His justice, because by His Passion Christ made satis- 
faction for the sin of the human race; and so man was set 
free by Christ’s justice: and with His mercy, for since man of 
himself could not satisfy for the sin of all human nature, as 
was said above (Q. I., A. 2), God gave him His Son to satisfy 
for him, according to Rom. iii. 24, 25: Being justified freely 
by His grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 

Q.46. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 266 

whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through fatth 
in His blood. And this came of more copious mercy than 
if He had forgiven sins without satisfaction. Hence it is 
said (Ephes. ii. 4): God, who is rich in mercy, for His exceed- 
ing charity wherewith He loved us, even when we were dead in 
sins, hath quickened us together 1n Christ. 

Reply Obj. 4. The sin of the angels was irreparable; not 
so the sin of the first man (I., Q. LXIV., A. 2). 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THERE WAS ANY OTHER POSSIBLE WAY OF HUMAN 
DELIVERANCE BESIDE THE PASSION OF CHRIST ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that there was no other possible 
way of human deliverance besides Christ’s Passion. For our 
Lord says (Jo. xii. 24): Amen, amen I say to you, unless the 
grain of wheat falling into the ground dieth, itself remaineth 
alone ; but tf tt die, it bringeth forth much fruit. Upon this 
St. Augustine (Tract. li.) observes that Christ called Himself 
the seed. Consequently, unless He suffered death, He would 
not otherwise have produced the fruit of our redemption. 

Obj. 2. Further, our Lord addresses the Father (Matth. 
Xxvi. 42): My Father, if this chalice may not pass away but 
I must drink it, Thy will be done. But He spoke there of 
the chalice of the Passion. Therefore Christ’s Passion could 
not pass away; hence Hilary says (Comm. 31 in Matth.): 
Therefore the chalice cannot pass except He drink of tt, because 
we cannot be restored except through His Passion. 

Oj. 3. Further, God’s justice required that Christ should 
satisfy by the Passion in order that man might be delivered 
from sin. But Christ cannot let His justice pass; for it 
is written (2 Tim. ii. 13): If we believe not, He continueth 
fatthful, He cannot deny Himself. But He would deny 
Himself were He to deny His justice, since He is justice 
itself. It seems impossible, then, for man to be delivered 
otherwise than by Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 4. Further, there can be no falsehood underlying 

267 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 2 

faith. But the Fathers of old believed that Christ would 
suffer. Consequently, it seems that it had to be that Christ 
should suffer. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xiii.): We assert 
that the way whereby God deigned to deliver us by the man 
Jesus Christ, who is mediator between God and man, ts both 
good and befitting the Divine dignity; but let us also show 
that other possible means were not lacking on God’s part, to 
whose power all things are equally subordinate. 

I answer that, A thing may be said to be possible or im- 
possible in two ways: first of all, simply and absolutely; or 
secondly, from supposition. Therefore, speaking simply 
and absolutely, it was possible for God to deliver mankind 
otherwise than by the Passion of Christ, because no word 
shall be impossible with God (Luke i. 37). Yet it was im- 
_possible if some supposition be made. For since it is im- 
possible for God’s foreknowledge to be deceived and His 
will or ordinance to be frustrated, then, supposing God’s 
foreknowledge and ordinance regarding Christ’s Passion, it 
was not possible at the same time for Christ not to suffer, 
and for mankind to be delivered otherwise than by Christ’s 
Passion. And the same holds good of all things foreknown 
and preordained by God, as was laid down in the First Part 
(Q. XIV., A. 13). 

Reply Obj. x. Our Lord is speaking there presupposing 
God’s foreknowledge and predetermination, according to 
which it was resolved that the fruit of man’s salvation 
should not follow unless Christ suffered. 

Reply Obj. 2. In the same way we must understand what 
is here objected to in the second instance: If this chalice may 
not pass away but I must drink of it—that is to say, because 
Thou hast so ordained it—hence He adds: Thy will be done. 

Reply Obj. 3. Even this justice depends on the Divine 
will, requiring satisfaction for sin from the human race. 
But if He had willed to free man from sin without any 
satisfaction, He would not have acted against justice. 
For a judge, while preserving justice, cannot pardon fault 
without penalty, if he must visit fault committed against 

Q. 46. Art.3. THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 268 

another—for instance, against another man, or against the 
State, or any Prince in higher authority. But God has 
no one higher than Himself, for He is the sovereign and 
common good of the whole universe. Consequently, if He 
forgive sin, which has the formality of fault in that it is 
committed against Himself, He wrongs no one: just as 
anyone else, overlooking a personal trespass, without satis- 
faction, acts mercifully and not unjustly. And so David 
exclaimed when he sought mercy: To Thee only have I 
sinned (Ps. 1. 6), as if to say: Thou canst pardon me without 
injustice. : 

Reply Obj. 4. Human faith, and even the Divine Scrip- 
tures upon which faith is based, are both based on the 
Divine foreknowledge and ordinance. And the same reason 
holds good of that necessity which comes of supposition, 
and of the necessity which arises of the Divine foreknowledge 
and will. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THERE WAS ANY MORE SUITABLE WAY OF DE- 
LIVERING THE HUMAN RACE THAN BY CHRIST’S PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that there was some other 
more suitable way of delivering the human race besides 
Christ’s Passion. For nature in its operation imitates the 
Divine work, since it is moved and regulated by God. But 
nature never employs two agents where one will suffice. 
Therefore, since God could have liberated mankind solely 
by His Divine will, it does not seem fitting that Christ’s 
Passion should have been added for the deliverance of the 
human race. 

Obj. 2. Further, natural actions are more suitably per- 
formed than deeds of violence, because violence is a sever- 
ance or lapse from what 1s according to nature, as is said in 
De Calo ii. But Christ’s Passion brought about His death 
by violence. Therefore it would have been more appro- 
priate had Christ died a natural death rather than suffer 
for man’s deliverance. 

269 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 3 

Obj. 3. Further, it seems most fitting that whatsoever 
keeps something unjustly and by violence, should be de- 
prived of it by some superior power; hence Isaias says 
(lii. 3): You were sold gratis, and you shall be redeemed without 
money. But the devil possessed no right over man, whom 
he had deceived by guile, and whom he held subject in 
servitude by a sort of violence. Therefore it seems most 
suitable that Christ should have despoiled the devil solely 
by His power and without the Passion. 

On the contrary, St. Augustine says (De Trin. xiii.): There 
was no other more suttable way of healing our misery than by 
the Passion of Christ. 

I answer that, Among means to an end that one is the 
more suitable whereby the various concurring means em- 
ployed are themselves helpful to such end. But in this 
that man was delivered by Christ’s Passion, many other 
things besides deliverance from sin concurred for man’s 
salvation. In the first place, man knows thereby how much 
God loves him, and is thereby stirred to love Him in return, 
and herein lies the perfection of human salvation; hence 
the Apostle says (Rom. v. 8): God commendeth His charity 
towards us ; for when as yet we were sinners . . . Christ died 
for us. Secondly, because thereby He set us an example 
of obedience, humility, constancy, justice, and the other 
virtues displayed in the Passion, which are requisite for 
man’s salvation. Hence it is written (1 Pet. ii. 21): Christ 
also suffered for us, leaving you an example that you should 
follow in His steps. Thirdly, because Christ by His Passion 
not only delivered man from sin, but also merited justifying 
grace for him and the glory of bliss, as shall be shown later 
(0. SLVIUG, Av 1p Q. XLIX., AA..1, 5)... Fourthly, be- 
cause by this man is all the more bound to refrain from 
sin, according to 1 Cor. vi. 20: You are bought with a 
great price: glorify and bear God im your body. Fifthly, 
because it redounded to man’s greater dignity, that as man 
was overcome and deceived by the devil, so also it should 
be a man that should overthrow the devil; and as man 
deserved death, so a man by dying should vanquish death. 

Q. 46. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 270 

Hence it is written (1 Cor. xv. 57): Thanks be to God who 
hath given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. It 
was accordingly more fitting that we should be delivered 
by Christ’s Passion than simply by God’s good-will. 

Reply Obj. 1. Even nature uses several means to one 
intent, in order to do something more fittingly: as two 
eyes for seeing; and the same can be observed in other 
matters. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Chrysostom* says: Christ had come in 
order to destroy death, not His own, (for since He 1s ltfe itself, 
death could not be His), but men’s death. Hence 1t was not 
by reason of His being bound to die that He laid Hts body 
aside, but because the death He endured was inflicted on Him 
by men. But even tf His body had sickened and dissolved in 
the sight of all men, tt was not befitting Him who healed 
the infirmities of others to have His own body afflicted with 
the same. And even had He laid His body aside without any 
sickness, and had then appeared, men would not have believed 
Him when He spoke of His resurrection. For how could 
Christ’s victory over death appear, unless He endured it in 
the sight of all men, and so proved that death was vanquished 
by the incorruption of His body ? 

Reply Ob7. 3. Although the devil assailed man unjustly, 
nevertheless, on account of sin, man was justly left by God 
under the devil’s bondage. And therefore it was fitting 
that through justice man should be delivered from the devil’s 
bondage by Christ making satisfaction on his behalf in the 
Passion. This was also a fitting means of overthrowing 
the pride of the devil, who is a deserter from justice, and 
covetous of sway ; in that Christ should vanquish him and 
deliver man, not merely by the power of His Godhead, but 
likewise by the justice and lowliness of the Passion, as Augus- 
tine says (De Trin. xiii.). 

* Cf. Athanasius, Orat. De Incarn. Verb. 

271 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Art. 4 

FourRTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST OUGHT TO HAVE SUFFERED ON THE 
CROSS ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ ought not to have 
suffered on the cross. For the truth ought to conform to 
the figure. But in all the sacrifices of the Old Testament 
which prefigured Christ the beasts were slain with a sword 
and afterwards consumed by fire. Therefore it seems that 
Christ ought not to have suffered on a cross, but rather by 
the sword or by fire. 

Obj. 2. Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.) 
that Christ ought not to assume dishonouring afflictions. 
But death on a cross was most dishonouring and igno- 
minious; hence it is written (Wisd. 11. 20): Let us condemn 
Him to a most shameful death. Therefore it seems that Christ 
ought not to have undergone the death of the cross. 

Obj. 3. Further, it was said of Christ (Matth. xxi. 9): 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. But 
death upon the cross was a death of malediction, as we read 
Deut. xxi. 23: He ts accursed of God that hangeth on a tree. 
Therefore it does not seem fitting for Christ to be crucified. 

On the contrary, It is written (Phil. ii. 8): He became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 

I answer that, It was most fitting that Christ should suffer 
the death of the cross. 

First of all, as an example of virtue. For Augustine 
thus writes (QQ. Ixxxiii., gu. 25): God's Wisdom became 
man to give us an example in righteousness of living. But 
it is part of righteous living not to stand in fear of things 
which ought not to be feared. Now there are some men who, 
although they do not fear death in ttself, are yet troubled over 
the manner of their death. In order, then, that no kind of 
death should trouble an upright man, the cross of this Man had 
to be set before him, because, among all kinds of death, none 
was more execrable, more fear-inspiring, than this. 

Q. 46. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 272 

Secondly, because this kind of death was especially 
suitable in order to atone for the sin of our first parent, 
which was the plucking of the apple from the forbidden tree 
against God’s command. And so, to atone for that sin, 
it was fitting that Christ should suffer by being fastened to 
a tree, as if restoring what Adam had purloined; according 
to Ps. lxviii. 5: Then did I pay that which I took not away. 
Hence Augustine says in a sermon on the Passion:* Adam 
despised the command, plucking the apple from the tree: but 
all that Adam lost, Christ found upon the cross. 

The third reason is because, as Chrysostom says in a ser 
mon on the Passion (De Cruce et Latrone i., ii.): He suffered 
upon a high rood and not under a roof, 1n order that the nature 
of the air might be purified : and the earth felt a like benefit, 
for tt was cleansed by the flowing of the blood from Hts side. 
And on John iii. 14: The Son of man must be lifted up, 
Theophylact says: When you hear that He was lifted up, 
understand Hts hanging on high, that He might sanctify the 
aty who had sanctified the earth by walking upon tt. 

The fourth reason is, because, by dying on it, He pre- 
pares for us an ascent into heaven, as Chrysostom} says. 
Hence it is that He says (John xii. 32): If I be lifted up 
from the earth, I will draw all things to Myself. 

The fifth reason is because it is befitting the universal 
salvation of the entire world. Hence Gregory of Nyssa 
observes (In Christ. Resurr., Orat. i.) that the shape of the 
cross extending out into four extremes from their central point 
of contact denotes the power and the providence diffused every- 
where of Him who hung upon it. Chrysostomt also says 
that upon the cross He dies with outstretched hands in order 
to draw with one hand the people of old, and with the other 
those who spring from the Gentiles. 

The sixth reason is because of the various virtues denoted 
by this class of death. Hence Augustine in his book on 
the grace of the Old and New Testament (Ep. cxl.) says: 
Not without purpose did He choose this class of death, that He 

* Cf. Serm. ci. De Tempore. 
t+ Athanasius, vide A, IIL., ad 2. ¢{ Athanasius, ibid. 

273 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 4 

might be a teacher of that breadth, and height, and length, 
and depth, of which the Apostle speaks (Eph. iii. 18): For 
breadth 1s in the beam, which is fixed transversely above ; this 
appertains to good works, since the hands are stretched out 
uponit. Length is the tree’s extent from the beam to the ground ; 
and there 1t is planted—that is, it stands and abides—which 
ts the note of longanimity. Height is in that portion of the 
tree which remains over from the transverse beam upwards 
to the top, and thts ts at the head of the Crucified, because He 
ts the supreme desire of souls of good hope. But that part of 
the tree which is hidden from view to hold it fixed, and from 
which the entire rood springs, denotes the depth of gratuitous 
grace. And, as Augustine says (Tract. cxix. in Joan.): The 
tree upon which were fixed the members of Him dying was 
even the chatr of the Master teaching. 

The seventh reason is because this kind of death responds 
to very many figures. For, as Augustine says in a sermon 
on the Passion (loc. czt.), an ark of wood preserved the 
human race from the waters of the Deluge; at the exodus 
of God’s people from Egypt, Moses with a rod divided the 
sea, overthrew Pharaoh, and saved the people of God; the 
same Moses dipped his rod into the water, changing it from 
bitter to sweet; at the touch of a wooden rod a salutary 
spring gushed forth from a spiritual rock; likewise, in order 
to overcome Amalec, Moses stretched forth his arms with 
rod in hand; lastly, God’s law is entrusted to the wooden 
Ark of the Covenant; all of which are like steps by which 
we mount to the wood of the cross. 

Reply Obj. 1. The altar of holocausts, upon which the 
sacrifices of animals were immolated, was constructed of 
timbers, as is set forth Exod. xxvii., and in this respect 
the truth answers to the figure: but 7 ts not necessary for 
it to be likened in every respect, otherwise 1t would not be a 
likeness, but the reality, as Damascene says (De Fide 
Orthod. iii.). But, in particular, as Chrysostom* says: 
His head is not cut off, as was done to John; nor was He 
sawn in twain, like Isaias, in order that His entire and in- 

* Athanasius, Joc. cit. 
III. 2 18 

Q. 46. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 274 

divisible body might obey death, and that there might be no 
excuse for them who want to divide the Church. While, instead 
of material fire, there was the spiritual fire of charity in 
Christ’s holocaust. . 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ refused to undergo dishonourable 
sufferings which are allied with defects of knowledge, or 
of grace, or even of virtue, but not those injuries inflicted 
from without—nay, more, as is written Heb. xii. 2: He 
endured the cross, despising the shame. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xiv.), 
sin is accursed, and, consequently, so is death, and mor- 
tality, which comes of sin. But Christ’s flesh was mortal, 
‘having the resemblance of the flesh of sin’ ; and hence Moses 
calls.it accursed, just as the Apostle calls it sim, saying 
(2 Cor. v. 21): Him that knew no sin, for us He hath made 
sin—namely, because of the penalty of sin. Nor ts there 
greater ignominy on that account, because he said: ‘ He ts 
accursed of God.’ For, unless God had hated sin, He would 
never have sent His Son to take upon Himself our death, and 
to destroy it. Acknowledge, then, that it was for us He took 
the curse upon Himself, whom you confess to have died for 
us. Hence it is written (Gal. il. 13): Christ hath redeemed 
us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. 

FirtH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST ENDURED ALL SUFFERINGS ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did endure all 
sufferings, because Hilary (De Trin. x.) says: God’s only- 
begotten Son testifies that He endured every kind of human 
sufferings in order to accomplish the sacrament of His death, 
when with bowed head He gave up the ghost. It seems, there- 
fore, that He did endure all human sufferings. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (Isa. lii. 13): Behold My 
servant shall understand, He shall be exalted and extolled, and 
shall be exceeding high ; as many as have been astonished at 
Him (Vulg., thee), so shall His visage be inglorious among men, 

275 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 5 

and His form among the sons of men. But Christ was exalted 
in that He had all grace and all knowledge, at which 
many were astonished in admiration thereof. Therefore 
it seems that He was inglortous, by enduring every human 
suffering. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ’s Passion was ordained for man’s 
deliverance from sin, as stated above (A. 3). But Christ 
came to deliver men from every kind of sins. Therefore 
He ought to have endured every kind of sufferings. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. xix. 32): The soldiers 
therefore came : and they broke the legs of the first, and of the 
other who was crucified with Him ; but after they were come 
to Jesus, when they saw that He was already dead, they did 
not break His legs. Consequently, He did not endure every 
hiiman suffering. 

I answer that, Human sufferings may be considered under 
two aspects. First of all, specifically, and in this way it 
was not necessary for Christ to endure them all, since 
many are mutually exclusive, as burning and drowning; for 
we are dealing now with sufferings inflicted from without, 
since it was not beseeming for Him to endure those arising 
from within, such as bodily ailments, as already stated 
(Q. XIV., A. 4). But, speaking generically, He did endure 
every human suffering. This admits of a threefold accept- 
ance. First of all, on the part of men: for He endured 
something from Gentiles and from Jews; from men and from 
women, as is clear from the women servants who accused 
Peter. He suffered from the rulers, from their servants 
and from the mob, according to Ps. ii. 1, 2: Why have the 
Gentiles raged, and the people devised vain things? The 
kings of the earth stood up, and the princes met together, against 
the Lord and against His Christ. He suffered from friends 
and acquaintances, as is manifest from Judas betraying and 
Peter denying Him. 

Secondly, the same is evident on the part of the sufferings 
which a man can endure. For Christ suffered from friends 
abandoning Him; in His reputation, from the blasphemies 
hurled at Him; in His honour and glory, from the mockeries 

Q. 46. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 276 

and the insults heaped upon Him; in things, for He was 
despoiled of His garments; in His soul, from sadness, weari- 
ness, and fear; in His body, from wounds and scourgings. 

Thirdly, it may be considered with regard to His bodily 
members. In His head He suffered from the crown of 
piercing thorns; in His hands and feet, from the fastening 
of the nails; on His face from the blows and spittle; and from 
the lashes over His entiré body. Moreover, He suffered in 
all His bodily senses: in touch, by being scourged and 
nailed; in taste, by being given vinegar and gall to drink; 
in smell, by being fastened to the gibbet in a place reeking 
with the stench of corpses, which ts called Calvary ; in hear- 
ing, by being tormented with the cries of blasphemers and 
scorners; in sight, by beholding the tears of His mother and 
of the disciple whom He loved. 

Reply Obj. 1. Hilary’s words are to be understood as to 
all classes of sufferings, but not as to their kinds. 

Reply Obj. 2. The likeness is sustained, not as to the 
number of the sufferings and graces, but as to their great- 
ness; for, as He was uplifted above others in gifts of graces, 
so was He lowered beneath others by the ignominy of His 
sufferings. 

Reply Obj. 3. The very least one of Christ’s sufferings was 
sufficient of itself to redeem the human race from all sins; 
but as to fittingness, it sufficed that He should endure all 
classes of sufferings, as stated above. 

SIXTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE PAIN OF CHRIST’S PASSION WAS GREATER 
THAN ALL OTHER PAINS ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the pain of Christ’s Passion 
was not greater than all other pains. For the sufferer’s 
pain is increased by the sharpness and the duration of the 
suffering. But some of the martyrs endured sharper and 
more prolonged pains than Christ, as is seen in St. Lawrence, 
who was roasted upon a gridiron; and in St. Vincent, whose 

277 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 6 

flesh was torn with iron pincers. Therefore it seems that 
the pain of the suffering Christ was not the greatest. 

Obj. 2. Further, strength of soul mitigates pain, so much 
so that the Stoics held there was no sadness in the soul of 
a wise man; and Aristotle (Ethic. ii.) holds that moral virtue 
fixes the mean in the passions. But Christ had most per- 
fect strength of soul. Therefore it seems that the greatest 
pain did not exist in Christ. 

Obj. 3. Further, the more sensitive the sufferer is, the 
more acute will the pain be. But the soul is more sensitive 
than the body, since the body feels in virtue of the soul; also, 
Adam in the state of innocence seems to have had a body 
more sensitive than Christ had, who assumed a human 
body with its natural defects. Consequently, it seems that 
the pain of a sufferer in purgatory, or in hell, or even Adam’s 
pain, if he suffered at all, was greater than Christ’s in the 
Passion. 

Obj. 4. Further, the greater the good lost, the greater 
the pain. But by sinning the sinner loses a greater good 
than Christ did when suffering; since the life of grace is 
greater than the life of nature: also, Christ, who lost His 
life, but was to rise again after three days, seems to have 
lost less than those who lose their lives and abide in death. 
Therefore it seems that Christ’s pain was not the greatest 
of all. 

Obj. 5. Further, the victim’s innocence lessens the sting 
of his sufferings. But Christ died innocent, according to 
Jer. xi. 19: I was as a meek lamb, that is carried to be a 
victim. Therefore it seems that the pain of Christ’s Passion 
was not the greatest. 

Obj. 6. Further, there was nothing superfluous in Christ’s 
conduct. But the slightest pain would have sufficed to 
secure man’s salvation, because from His Divine Person 
it would have had infinite virtue. Therefore it would have 
been superfluous to choose the greatest of all pains. 

On the contrary, It is written (Lam. i. 12) on behalf of 
Christ’s Person: O all ye that pass by the way atiend, and see 
tf there be any sorrow like unto My sorrow. 

Q. 46. Arr.6 THE ‘“ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 278 

I answer that, As we have stated, when treating of the 
defects assumed by Christ (Q. XV., AA. 5, 6), there was 
true and sensible pain in the suffering Christ, which is caused 
by something hurtful to the body: also, there was internal 
pain, which is caused from the apprehension of something 
hurtful, and this is termed ‘sadness.’ And in Christ each 
of these was the greatest in this present life. This arose 
from four causes. First of all, from the sources of His 
pain. - For the cause of the sensitive pain was the wounding 
of His body; and this wounding had its bitterness, both 
from the extent of the suffering already mentioned (A. 5) 
and from the kind of suffering, since the death of the cruci- 
fied is most bitter, because they are piercec in nervous 
and highly sensitive parts—to wit, the hands and feet; 
moreover, the weight of the suspended body intensifies the 
agony; and besides this there is the duration of the suffer- 
ing because they do not die at once like those slain by the 
sword.—The cause of the interior pain was, first of all, all 
the sins of the human race, for which He made satisfaction 
by suffering; hence He ascribes them, so to speak, to Him- 
self, saying (Ps. xxi. 2): The words of my sins. Secondly, 
especially the fall of the Jews and of the others who sinned 
in His death, chiefly of the apostles, who were scandalized 
at His Passion. Thirdly, the loss of His bodily life, which 
is naturally horrible to human nature. 

The magnitude of His suffering may be considered, 
secondly, from the susceptibility of the sufferer as to both 
soul and body. For His body was endowed with a most 
perfect constitution, since it was fashioned miraculously 
by the operation of the Holy Ghost; just as some other 
things made by miracles are better than others, as Chry- 
sostom says (Hom. xxii. in Joan.) respecting the wine into 
which Christ changed the water at the wedding-feast. And, 
consequently, Christ’s sense of touch, the sensitiveness of 
which is the reason for our feeling pain, was most acute. 
His soul likewise, from its interior powers, apprehended 
most vehemently all the causes of sadness. 

Thirdly, the magnitude of Christ’s suffering can be esti- 

279 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 6 

mated from the singleness of His pain and sadness. In 
other sufferers the interior sadness is mitigated, and even 
the exterior suffering, from some consideration of reason, 
by some derivation or redundance from the higher powers 
into the lower; but it was not so with the suffering Christ, 
because He permitted each one of His powers to exercise its 
proper funciton, as Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.). 

Fourthly, the magnitude of the pain of Christ’s suffering 
can be reckoned by this, that the pain and sorrow were 
accepted voluntarily, to the end of men’s deliverance from 
sin; and consequently He embraced the amount of pain 
proportionate to the magnitude of the fruit which resulted 
therefrom. 

From all these causes weighed together, it follows that 
Christ’s pain was the very greatest. 

Reply Obj. 1. This argument follows from only one of the 
considerations adduced—namely, from the bodily injury, 
which is the cause of sensitive pain; but the torment of the 
suffering Christ is much more intensified from other causes, 
as above stated. 

Reply Obj. 2. Moral virtue lessens interior sadness in one 
way, and outward sensitive pain in quite another; for it 
lessens interior sadness directly by fixing the mean, as being 
its proper matter, within limits. But, as was laid down 
in the Second Part (I.-II., Q. LXIV., A. 2), moral virtue 
fixes the mean in the passions, not according to mathe- 
matical quantity, but according to quantity of proportion, 
so that the passion shall not go beyond the rule of reason. 
And since the Stoics held all sadness to be unprofitable, 
they accordingly believed it to be altogether discordant 
with reason, and consequently to be shunned altogether 
by a wise man. But in very truth some sadness is praise- 
worthy, as Augustine proves (De Civ. Det xiv.)—namely, 
when it flows from holy love, as, for instance, when a man 
is saddened over his own or others’ sins. Furthermore, 
it is employed as a useful means of satisfying for sins, accord- 
ing to the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. vii. 10): The sorrow 
that is according to God worketh penance, steadfast unto salva- 

Q. 46. Art.6 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 280 

tion. And so to atone for the sins of all men, Christ accepted 
sadness, the greatest in absolute quantity, yet not exceeding 
the rule of reason. But moral virtue does not lessen out- 
ward sensitive pain, because such pain is not subject to 
reason, but follows the nature of the body; yet it lessens it 
indirectly by redundance of the higher powers into the lower. 
But this did not happen in Christ’s case, as stated above 
(efi. XIVG Apt ad’ 24 OP ALY.) Ara 

Reply Obj. 3. The pain of a suffering, separated soul 
belongs to the state of future condemnation, which ex- 
ceeds every evil of this life, just as the glory of the saints 
surpasses every good of the present life. Accordingly, 
when we say that Christ’s pain was the greatest, we make 
no comparison between His and the pain of a separated 
soul. But Adam’s body could not suffer, except he sinned; 
so that he would become mortal, and passible. And, 
though actually suffering, it would have felt less pain than 
Christ’s body, for the reasons already stated. From all this 
ft is clear that even if by impassibility Adam had suffered 
in the state of innocence, his pain would have been less 
than Christ’s. 

Reply Obj. 4. Christ grieved not only over the loss of 
His own bodily life, but also over the sins of all others. 
And this grief in Christ surpassed all grief of every contrite 
heart, both because it flowed from a greater wisdom and 
charity, by which the pang of contrition is intensified, and 
because He grieved at the one time for all sins, accord- 
ing to Isa. lili. 4: Surely He hath carried our sorrows. But 
such was the dignity of Christ’s life in the body, especially 
on account of the Godhead united with it, that its loss, 
even for one hour, would be a matter of greater grief than 
the loss of another man’s life for howsoever long a time. 
Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii.) that the man of 
virtue loves his life all the more in proportion as he knows 
it to be better; and yet he exposes it for virtue’s sake. And 
in like fashion Christ laid down His most beloved life for 
the good of charity, according to Jer. xii. 7: I have given 
My dear soul into the hands of her enemies. 

281 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 7 

Reply Obj. 5. The sufferer’s innocence does lessen numeri- 
cally the pain of the suffering, since, when a guilty man 
suffers, he grieves not merely on account of the penalty, 
but also because of the crime, whereas the innocent man 
grieves only for the penalty: yet this pain is more intensified 
by reason of his innocence, in so far as he deems the hurt 
inflicted to be the more undeserved. Hence it is that even 
others are more deserving of blame if they do not com- 
passionate him; according to Isa. lvii. 1: The just perisheth, 
and no man layeth tt to heart. 

Reply Obj. 6. Christ willed to deliver the human race 
from sins not merely by His power, but also according to 
justice. And therefore He did not simply weigh what great 
virtue His suffering would have from union with the God- 
head, but also how much, according to His human nature, 
His pain would avail for so great a satisfaction. 

SEVENTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST SUFFERED IN HIS WHOLE SOUL ? 

We proceed thus to the Seventh Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not suffer in 
His whole soul. For the soul suffers indirectly when the 
body suffers, inasmuch as it is the act of the body. But the 
soul is not, as to its every part, the act of the body ; because 
the intellect is the act of no body, as is said De Anima iii. 
Therefore it seems that Christ did not suffer in His whole 
soul. ; 

Obj. 2. Further, every power of the soul is passive in 
regard to its proper object. But the higher part of reason 
has for its object the eternal types, to the consideration and 
consultation of which it directs itself, as Augustine says 
(De Trin. xii.). But Christ could suffer no hurt from the 
eternal types, since they are nowise opposed to Him. 
Therefore it seems that He did not suffer in His whole 
soul. 

Obj. 3. Further, a sensitive passion is said to be complete 
when it comes into contact with the reason. But there was 

Q. 46. Art.7 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 282 

none such in Christ, but only pro-passions ; as Jerome 
remarks on Matth. xxvi. 37. Hence Dionysius says in a 
letter to John the Evangelist that He endured only mentally 
the sufferings inflicted upon Him. Consequently it does not 
seem that Christ suffered in His whole soul. 

Obj. 4. Further, suffering causes pain: but there is no 
pain in the speculative intellect, because, as the Philosopher 
says (Topic. i.), there is no sadness in opposition to the pleasure 
which comes of consideration. Therefore it seems that Christ 
did not suffer in His whole soul. 

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. lxxxvii. 4) on behalf of 
Christ: My soul ts filled with evils : upon which the gloss 
adds: Not with vices, but with woes, whereby the soul suffers 
with the flesh ; or with evils—viz., of a perishing people—by 
compassionating them. But His soul would not have been 
filled with these evils except He had suffered in His whole 
soul. Therefore Christ suffered in His entire soul. 

I answer that, A whole is so termed with respect to its 
parts. But the parts of a soul are its faculties. So, then, 
the whole soul is said to suffer in so far as it is afflicted as 
to its essence, or as to all its faculties. But it must be 
borne in mind that a faculty of the soul can suffer in two 
ways: first of all, by its own passion; and this comes of 
its being afflicted by its proper object; thus, sight may 
suffer from superabundance of the visible object. In another 
way a faculty suffers by a passion in the subject on which 
it is based; as sight suffers when the sense of touch in the 
eye is affected, upon which the sense of sight rests, as, 
for instance, when the eye is pricked, or is disaffected by 
heat. 

So, then, we say that if the soul be considered with respect 
to its essence, it is evident that Christ’s whole soul suffered. 
For the soul’s whole essence is allied with the body, so that 
it is entire in the whole body and in its every part. Con- 
sequently, when the body suffered and was disposed to 
separate from the soul, the entire soul suffered. But if 
we consider the whole soul according to its faculties, speak- 
ing thus of the proper passions of the faculties, He suffered 

283 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 8 

indeed as to all His lower powers; because in all the soul’s 
lower powers, whose operations are but temporal, there was 
something to be found which was a source of woe to Christ, 
as is evident from what was said above (A. 6). But Christ’s 
higher reason did not suffer thereby on the part of its object, 
which is God, who was the cause, not of grief, but rather 
of delight and joy, to the soul of Christ. Nevertheless, all 
the powers of Christ’s soul did suffer according as any 
faculty is said to be affected as regards its subject, because 
all the faculties of Christ’s soul were rooted in its essence, 
to which suffering extended when the body, whose act it 
is, suffered. 

Reply Obj. 1. Although the intellect as a faculty is not 
the act of the body, still the soul’s essence is the act of the 
body, and in it the intellective faculty is rooted, as was 
shown in the First Part (Q. LXXVII., AA. 6, 8). 

Reply Obj. 2. This argument proceeds from passion on 
the part of the proper object, according to which Christ’s 
higher reason did not suffer. 

Reply Obj. 3. Grief is then said to be a true passion, by 
which the soul is troubled, when the passion in the sensitive 
part causes reason to deflect from the rectitude of its act, 
so that it then follows the passion, and has no longer free- 
will with regard to it. In this way passion of the sensitive 
part did not extend to reason in Christ, but merely sub- 
jectively, as was stated above. 

Reply Obj. 4. The speculative intellect can have no pain 
or sadness on the part of its object, which is truth con- 
sidered absolutely, and which is its perfection: nevertheless, 
both grief and its cause can reach it in the way mentioned 
above. 

EIGHTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST’S ENTIRE SOUL ENJOYED BLESSED 
FRUITION DURING THE PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Eighth Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s entire soul did 
not enjoy blessed fruition during the Passion. For it is not 

Q. 46. Art.8 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 284 

possible to be sad and glad at the one time, since sad- 
ness and gladness are contraries. But Christ’s whole 
soul suffered grief during the Passion, as was stated 
above (A. 7). Therefore His whole soul could not enjoy 
fruition. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii.) that, 
if sadness be vehement, it not only checks the contrary 
delight, but every delight; and conversely. But the grief 
of Christ’s Passion was the greatest, as shown above (A. 6); 
and likewise the enjoyment of fruition is also the greatest, 
as was laid down in the first volume of the Second Part 
(I.-II., Q. XXXIV., A. 3). Consequently, it was not 
possible for Christ’s whole soul to be suffering and rejoicing 
at the one time. 

Obj. 3. Further, beatific fruition comes of the knowledge 
and love of Divine things, as Augustine says (Doct. Christ. i.). 
But all the soul’s powers do not extend to the knowledge 
and love of God. Therefore Christ’s whole soul did not 
enjoy fruition. 

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): 
Christ’s Godhead permitted His flesh to do and to suffer 
what was proper to it. In like fashion, since it belonged to 
Christ’s soul, inasmuch as it was blessed, to enjoy fruition, 
His Passion did not impede fruition. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 7), the whole soul can 
be understood both according to its essence and according 
to all its faculties. If it be understood according to its 
essence, then His whole soul did enjoy fruition, inasmuch 
as it is the subject of the higher part of the soul, to which 
it belongs, to enjoy the Godhead: so that as passion, by 
reason of the essence, is attributed to the higher part of 
the soul, so, on the other hand, by reason of the superiol 
part of the soul, fruition is attributed to the essence. But 
if we take the whole soul as comprising all its faculties, 
thus His entire soul did not enjoy fruition: not directly, 
indeed, because fruition is not the act of any one part of 
the soul; nor by any overflow of glory, because, since Christ 
was still upon earth, there was no overflowing of glory from 

285 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Art. 9 

the higher part into the lower, nor from the soul into the 
body. But since, on the contrary, the soul’s higher part 
was not hindered in its proper acts by the lower, it follows 
that the higher part of His soul enjoyed fruition perfectly 
while Christ was suffering. 

Reply Obj. x. The joy of fruition is not opposed directly to 
the grief of the Passion, because they have not the same 
object. . Now nothing prevents contraries from being in 
the same subject, but not according to the same. And so 
the joy of fruition can appertain to the higher part of 
reason by its proper act; but grief of the Passion according 
to the subject. Grief of the Passion belongs to the essence 
of the soul by reason of the body, whose form the soul is; 
whereas the joy of fruition (belongs to the soul) by reason 
of the faculty in which it is subjected. 

Reply Obj. 2. The Philosopher’s contention is true because 
of the overflow which takes place naturally of one faculty 
of the soul into another; but it was not so with Christ, as 
was Said above. 

Reply Obj. 3. Such argument holds good of the totality 
of the soul with regard to its faculties. 

NINTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST SUFFERED AT A SUITABLE TIME ? 

We proceed thus to the Ninth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not suffer at a 
suitable time. For Christ’s Passion was prefigured by the 
sacrifice of the Paschal lamb: hence the Apostle says 
(rt Cor. v. 7): Christ our Pasch 1s sacrificed. But the paschal 
lamb was slain on the fourteenth day at eventide, as is stated 
in Exod. xii. 6. Therefore it seems that Christ ought to 
have suffered then; which is manifestly false: for He was 
then celebrating the Pasch with His disciples, according 
to Mark’s account (xiv. 12): On the first day of the wnleavened 
bread, when they sacrificed the Pasch ; whereas it was on the 
following day that He suffered. 

Q. 46. Art.9 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 286 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ’s Passion is called His uplifting, 
according to John iii. 14: So must the Son of man be lifted 
up. And Christ is Himself called the Sun of Justice, as 
we read Mal. iv. 2. Therefore it seems that He ought to 
have suffered at the sixth hour, when the sun is at its highest 
point, and yet the contrary appears from Mark xv. 25: It 
was the third hour, and they crucified Him. 

Obj. 3. Further, as the sun is at its highest point in each 
day at the sixth hour, so also it reaches its highest point 
in every year at the summer solstice. Therefore Christ 
ought to have suffered about the time of the summer sol- 
stice rather than about the vernal equinox. 

Obj. 4. Further, the world was enlightened by Christ’s 
presence in it, according to Jo. ix. 5: As long as I am in 
the world I am the light of the world. Consequently it was 
fitting for man’s salvation that Christ should have lived 
longer in the world, so that He should have suffered, not 
in young, but in old, age. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. xili. 1): Jesus, knowing 
that His hour was come for Him to pass out of this world to 
the Father ; and (Jo. ii. 4): My hour ts not yet come. Upon 
which texts Augustine observes: When He had done as much 
as He deemed sufficient, then came Hts hour, not of necessity, 
but of wll, not of condition, but of power. Therefore Christ 
died at an opportune time. 

I answer that, As was observed above (A. 1), Christ’s 
Passion was subject to His will. But His will was ruled 
by the Divine wisdom which ordereth all things conveniently 
and sweetly (Wisd. viii. 1). Consequently it must be said 
that Christ’s Passion was enacted at an opportune time. 
Hence it is written in De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test., qu. lv.: The 
Saviour did everything in its proper place and season. 

Reply Obj. 1. Some hold that Christ did die on the four- 
teenth day of the moon, when the Jews sacrificed the Pasch: 
hence it is stated (Jo. xviii. 28) that the Jews went not 
into Pilate’s hall on the day of the Passion, that they might 
not be defiled, but that they might eat the Pasch. Upon this 
Chrysostom observes (Hom. Ixxxii. in Joan.): The Jews 

287 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 9 

celebrated the Pasch then ; but He celebrated the Pasch on the 
previous day, reserving His own slaying until the Friday, when 
the old Pasch was kept. And this appears to tally with the 
statement (Jo. xiii. 1-5) that before the festival day of the 
Pasch ... when supper was done . . . Christ washed the feet 
of the disciples. 

But Matthew’s account (xxvi. 17) seems opposed to this; 
that on the first day of the Azymes the disciples came to Jesus, 
saying: Where wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat 
the Pasch ? From which, as Jerome says, since the fourteenth 
day of the first month ts called the day of the Azymes, when 
the lamb was slain, and when it was full moon, it is quite 
clear that Christ kept the supper on the fourteenth and 
died on the fifteenth. And this comes out more clearly 
from Mark xiv. 12: On the first day of the unleavened bread, 
when they sacrificed the Pasch, etc.; and from Luke xxii. 7: 
The day of the unleavened bread came, on which it was neces- 
sary that the Pasch should be killed. © 

Consequently, then, others say that Christ ate the Pasch 
with His disciples on the proper day—that is, on the 
fourteenth day of the moon—showing thereby that up to 
the last day He was not opposed to the law, as Chrysostom 
says (Hom. Ixxxi. in Matth.): but that the Jews, being 
busied in compassing Christ’s death against the law, put 
off celebrating the Pasch until the following day. And 
on this account it is said of them that on the day of 
Christ’s Passion they were unwilling to enter Pilate’s hall, 
that they might not be defiled, but that they might eat the 
Pasch. 

But even this solution does not tally with Mark, who 
says: On the first day of the unleavened bread, when they 
sacrificed the Pasch. Consequently Christ and the Jews 
celebrated the ancient Pasch at the one time. And as 
Bede says on Luke xxii. 7, 8: Although Christ who ts our 
Pasch was slain’on the following day—that is, on the fifteenth 
day of the moon—nevertheless, on the night when the Lamb 
was sacrificed, delivering to the disciples the mystertes to be 
celebrated of His body and blood, and being held and bound 

Q. 46. Art.9 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 288 

by the Jews, He hallowed the opening of His own immolation— 
that is, of His Passion. 

But the words (Jo. xiii. 1) Before the festival day of the 
Pasch are to be understood to refer to the fourteenth day 
of the moon, which then fell upon the Thursday: for the 
fifteenth day of the moon was the most solemn day of the 
Pasch with the Jews: and so the same day which John calls 
before the festival day of the Pasch, on account of the natural 
distinction of days, Matthew calls the first day of the un- 
leavened bread, because, according to the rite of the Jewish 
festivity, the solemnity began from the evening of the pre- 
ceding day. When it is said, then, that they were going 
to eat the Pasch on the fifteenth day of the month, it is to 
be understood that the Pasch there is not called the Paschal 
lamb, which was sacrificed on the fourteenth day, but the 
Paschal food—that is, the unleavened bread—which had to 
be eaten by the clean. Hence Chrysostom in the same 
passage gives another explanation, that the Pasch can be 
taken as meaning the whole feast of the Jews, which lasted 
seven days. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. iii.): 
‘It was about the sixth hour’ when the Lord was delivered up 
by Pilate to be crucified, as John relates. For it was not 
quite the sixth hour, but about the sixth—that is, it was after 
the fifth, and when part of the sixth had been entered upon 
until the sixth hour was ended—that the darkness began, 
when Christ hung upon the cross. It is understood to have 
been the third hour when the Jews clamoured for the Lord to 
be crucified : and tt is most clearly shown that they crucified 
Him when they clamoured out. Therefore, lest anyone might 
divert the thought of so great a crime from the Jews to the 
soldters, he says: ‘It was the third hour, and they crucified 
Him,’ that they before all may be found to have crucified Him, 
who at the thivd hour clamoured for His crucifixion. Although 
there are not wanting some persons who wish the Parasceve 
to be understood as the third hour, which John recalls, saying : 
“It was the Parasceve, about the sixth hour.’ For‘ Parasceve ’ 
ts interpreted ‘ preparation.’ But the true Pasch, which was 

289 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Art. 9 

celebrated in the Lord’s Passion, began to be prepared from 
the ninth hour of the night—namely, when the chief priests 
said : ‘ He is deserving of death.’ According to John, then, 
“the sixth hour of the Parasceve’ lasts from that hour of 
the night down to Christ’s crucifixion; while, according to 
Mark, it is the third hour of the day. 

Still, there are some who contend that this discrepancy 
is due to the error of a Greek transcriber: since the charac- 
ters employed by them to represent 3 and 6 are somewhat 
alike. 

Reply Obj. 3. According to the author of De Qq. Vet. et 
Nov. Test., qu. lv., our Lord willed to redeem and reform the 
world by His Passion, at the time of year at which He had 
created 1t—that is, at the equinox. It 1s then that day grows 
upon night ; because by our Saviour’s Passion we are brought 
from darkness to light. And since the perfect enlightening 
will come about at Christ’s second coming, therefore the 
season of His second coming is compared (Matth. xxiv. 32, 33) 
to the summer in these words: When the branch thereof 1s 
now tender, and the leaves come forth, you know that summer 
ts nigh: so you also, when you shall see all these things, know 
ye that tt ts nigh even at the doors. And then also shall be 
Christ’s greatest exaltation. 

Reply Obj. 4. Christ willed to suffer while yet young, for 
three reasons. First of all, to commend the more His 
love by giving up His life for us when He was in His most 
perfect state of life. Secondly, because it was not becoming 
for Him to show any decay of nature nor to be subject to 
disease, as stated above (Q. XIV., A. 4). Thirdly, that 
by dying and rising at an early age Christ might exhibit 
beforehand in His own person the future condition of those 
who rise again. Hence it is written (Eph. iv. 13): Until 
we all meet into the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of 
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the 

age of the fulness of Christ. 

Il. 2 

Q. 46. Art.10 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 290 

TENTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST SUFFERED IN A SUITABLE PLACE ? 

We proceed thus to the Tenth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not suffer in 
a suitable place. For Christ suffered according to His 
human nature, which was conceived in Nazareth and born 
in Bethlehem. Consequently it seems that He ought not 
to have suffered in Jerusalem, but in Nazareth or Beth- 
lehem. 

Obj. 2. Further, the reality ought to correspond with 
the figure. But Christ’s Passion was prefigured by the 
sacrifices of the Old Law, and these were offered up in the 
Temple. Therefore it seems that Christ ought to have 
suffered in the Temple, and not outside the city gate. 

Obj. 3. Further, the medicine should correspond with the 
disease. But Christ’s Passion was the medicine against 
Adam’s sin: and Adam was not buried in Jerusalem, but in 
Hebron; for it is written (Josh. xiv. 15): The name of Hebron 
before was called Cartath-Arbe : Adam the greatest in the land 
of (Vulg., among) the Enacims was laid there. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke xiii. 33): It cannot be 
that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. Therefore it was 
fitting that He should die in Jerusalem. 

I answer that, According to the author of De Qq. Vet. et’ 
Nov. Test., qu. lv., the Saviour did everything in its proper 
place and season, because, as all things are in His hands, so 
are all places: and consequently, since Christ suffered at 
a suitable time, so did He in a suitable place. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ died most appropriately in Jeru- 
salem. First of all, because Jerusalem was God’s chosen 
place for the offering of sacrifices to Himself: and these 
figurative sacrifices foreshadowed Christ’s Passion, which 
is a true sacrifice, according to Eph. v. 2: He hath delivered 
Himself for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odour 
of sweetness. Hence Bede says in a Homily (xxiii.): When 
the Passion drew nigh, our Lord willed to draw nigh to the 

291 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 10 

place of the Passion—that is to say, to Jerusalem—whither 
He came five days before the Pasch; just as, according to 
the legal precept, the Paschal lamb was led to the place of 
immolation five days before the Pasch, which is the tenth 
day of the moon. 

Secondly, because the virtue of His Passion was to be 
spread over the whole world, He wished to suffer in the 
centre of the habitable world—that is, in Jerusalem. Ac- 
cordingly it is written (Ps. Ixxili. 12): But God is our King 
before ages: He hath wrought salvation in the midst of the 
earth—that is, in Jerusalem, which is called the navel of the 
earth.* 

Thirdly, because it was specially in keeping with His 
humility: that, as He chose the most shameful manner of 
death, so likewise it was part of His humility that He did 
not refuse to suffer in so celebrated a place. Hence Pope 
Leo says (Serm. 1 in Epiph.): He who had taken upon Him 
self the form of a servant chose Bethlehem for His nativity and 
Jerusalem for Hts Passton. 

Fourthly, He willed to suffer in Jerusalem, where the 
chief priests dwelt, to show that the wickedness of His 
slayers arose from the chiefs of the Jewish people. Hence 
it is written (Acts iv. 27): There assembled together in this 
city against the holy child Jesus whom Thou hast anointed, 
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people 
of Israel. 

Reply Obj. 2. For three reasons Christ suffered outside 
the gate, and not in the Temple nor in the city. First of 
all, that the truth might correspond with the figure. For 
the calf and the goat which were offered in most solemn 
sacrifice for expiation on behalf of the entire multitude 
were burnt outside the camp, as commanded in Lev. xvi. 27. 
Hence it is written (Heb. xiii. 11): For the bodies of those 
beasts, whose blood is brought into the holies by the high-priest 
for sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, 
that He might sanctify the people by His own blood, suffered 
without the gate. 

* Cf. St. Jerome’s comment _ on Ezechiel v. 5. 

Q. 46. Art.11 THE “ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 292 

Secondly, to set us the example of shunning worldly 
conversation. Accordingly the passage continues: Let us 
go forth therefore to Him without the camp, bearing Hts 
reproach. 

Thirdly, as Chrysostom says in a sermon on the Passion 
(Hom. i., De Cruce et Latrone): The Lord was not wtiling to 
suffer under a roof, nor in the Jewish Temple, lest the Jews 
might take away the saving sacrifice, and lest you might think 
He was offered for that people only. Consequently, tt was 
beyond the city and outside the walls, that you may learn 
it was a universal sacrifice, an oblation for the whole world, a 
cleansing for all. 

Reply Obj. 3. According to Jerome, in his commentary on 
Matth. xxvii. 33, someone explained ‘ the place of Calvary’ 
as being the place where Adam was buried ; and that tt was 
so called because the skull of the first man was buried there. A 
pleasing interpretation indeed, and one sutted to catch the ear 
of the people, but, still, not the true one. For the spots where 
the condemned are beheaded are outside the city and beyond 
the gates, deriving thence the name of Calvary—that 1s, of the 
beheaded.’ Jesus, accordingly, was crucified there, that the 
standards of martyrdom might be uplifted over what was 
formerly the place of the condemned. But Adam was buried 
close by Hebron and Arbe, as we read in the book of Jesus 
Ben Nave. But Jesus was to be crucified in the common 
spot of the condemned rather than beside Adam’s sepulchre, 
to make it manifest that Christ’s cross was the remedy, not 
only for Adam’s personal sin, but also for the sin of the 
entire world. 

ELEVENTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO BE CRUCIFIED 
WITH THIEVES ? 

We proceed thus to the Eleventh Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem unfitting for Christ to have 
been crucified with thieves, because it is written (2 Cor. 
vi. 14): What participation hath justice with injustice? But 
for our sakes Christ of God is made unto us justice (x Cor. 

293 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Art. 11 

i. 30); whereas iniquity applies to thieves. Therefore it 
was not fitting for Christ to be crucified with thieves. 

Obj. 2. Further, on Matth. xxvi. 35, Though I should die 
with Thee, I will not deny Thee, Origen (Tract. xxxv. in 
Matth.) observes: It was not men’s lot to die with Jesus, since 
He died for all. Again, on Luke xxii. 33, I am ready to go 
with Thee, both into prison and to death, Ambrose says: Our 
Lord’s Passion has followers, but not equals. It seems, then, 
much less fitting for Christ to suffer with thieves. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written (Matth. xxvii. 44) that the 
thieves who were crucified with Him reproached Him. But 
in Luke xxiii. 42 it is stated that one of them who were 
crucified with Christ cried out to Him: Lord, remember me 
when Thou shalt come into Thy kingdom. It seems, then, 
that besides the blasphemous thieves there was another 
man who did not blaspheme Him: and so the Evangelist’s 
account does not seem to be accurate when it says that 
Christ was crucified with thieves. 

On the contrary, It was foretold by Isaias (lili. 12): And 
He was reputed with the wicked. 

I answer that, Christ was crucified between thieves from 
one intention on the part of the Jews, and from quite another 
on the part of God’s ordaining. As to the intention of 
the Jews, Chrysostom remarks (Hom. lxxxvii. in Matth.) that 
they crucified the two thieves, one on either side, that He 
might be made to share their guilt. But it did not happen 
so ; because mention ts never made of them ; whereas Hts cross 
ts honoured everywhere. Kings lay aside their crowns to take 
up the cross : on their purple robes, on their diadems, on their 
weapons, on the consecrated table, everywhere the cross shines 
forth. 

As to God’s ordinance, Christ was crucified with thieves, 
because, as Jerome says on Matth. xxvii. 33: As Christ 
became accursed of the cross for us, so for our salvation He was 
cructfied as a guilty one among the guilty. Secondly, as Pope 
Leo observes (Serm. iv. de Passione): Two thieves were 
crucified, one on His right hand and one on His left, to set 
forth by the very appearance of the gibbet that separation of 

Q. 46. Art.1r THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 294 

all men which shall be made in His hour of judgement. And 
Augustine on Jo. vii. 36 says: The very cross, if thou mark 
it well, was a judgement-seat: for the judge being set in the 
midst, the one who believed was delivered, the other who mocked 
Him was condemned. Already He has signified what He 
shall do to the quick and the dead ; some He will set on Hts 
right, others on His left hand.—Thirdly, according to Hilary 
(Comm. xxxiii. in Matth.): Two thieves are set, one upon Hts 
right and one upon His left, to show that all mankind ts called 
to the sacrament of His Passion. But because of the cleavage 
between believers and unbelievers, the multitude is divided into 
right and left, those on the right being saved by the justification 
of fatth—Fourthly, because, as Bede says on Mark xv. 27: 
The thieves crucified with our Lord denote those who, believing 
in and confessing Christ, etther endure the conflict of martyr- 
dom or keep the institutes of stricter observance. But those 
who do the like for the sake of everlasting glory are denoted 
by the faith of the thief on the right ; while others who do so for 
the sake of human applause copy the mind and behaviour of 
the one on the left. 

Reply Obj. r. Just as Christ was not obliged to die, but 
willingly submitted to death so as to vanquish death by 
His power: so neither deserved He to be classed with thieves; 
but willed to be reputed with the ungodly that He might 
destroy ungodliness by His power. Accordingly, Chrysostom 
says (Hom. |xxxiv. in Joan.) that to convert the thief upon 
the cross, and lead him into paradise, was no less a wonder 
than to shake the rocks. 

Reply Obj. 2. It was not fitting that anyone else should 
die with Christ from the same cause as Christ: hence Origen 
continues thus in the same passage: All had been under sin, 
and all required that another should die for them, not they for 
others. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (De Consens Evang. iii.): 
We can understand Matthew as putting the plural for the 
singular when he said the thieves reproached Him. Or it 
may be said, with Jerome, that at first both blasphemed Him, 
but afterwards one believed in Him on witnessing the wonders. 

295 THE PASSION OF CHRIST Q. 46. Arr. 12 

TWELFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S PASSION IS TO BE ATTRIBUTED TO HIS 
GODHEAD ? 

We proceed thus to the Twelfth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Passion is to be 
attributed to His Godhead; for it is written (x Cor. ii. 8): 
If they had known it, they would never have crucified the Lord 
of glory. But Christ is the Lord of glory in respect of His 
Godhead. Therefore Christ’s Passion is attributed to Him 
in respect of His Godhead. 

Obj. 2. Further, the principle of men’s salvation is the 
Godhead Itself, according to Ps. xxxvi. 39: But the salvation 
of the just ts from the Lord. Consequently, if Christ’s 
Passion did not appertain to His Godhead, it would seem 
that it could not produce fruit in us. 

Obj. 3. Further, the Jews were punished for slaying 
Christ as for murdering God Himself; as is proved by the 
gravity of the punishment. Now this would not be so if 
the Passion were not attributed to the Godhead. Therefore 
Christ’s Passion should be so attributed. 

On the contrary, Athanasius says (Ep. ad Epict.): The 
Word is impassible whose Nature is Divine. But what is 
impassible cannot suffer. Consequently, Christ’s Passion 
did not concern His Godhead. 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. II., AA. 1, 2, 3, 6), 
the union of the human nature with the Divine was effected 
in the Person, in the hypostasis, in the suppositum, yet 
observing the distinction of natures; so that it is thesame 
Person and hypostasis of the Divine and human natures, 
while each nature retains that which is proper to it. And 
therefore, as stated above (Q. XVI., A. 4), the Passion is 
to be attributed to the suppositum of the Divine Nature, 
not because of the Divine Nature, which is impassible, but 
by reason of the human nature. Hence, in a Synodal 
Epistle of Cyril* we read: If any man does not confess that 

* Act. Conc. Ephes. P.i., cap. 26. 

; 

Q. 46. Art.12 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 296 

the Word of God suffered in the flesh and was crucified in the 
flesh, let him be anathema. Therefore Christ’s Passion 
belongs to the suppositum of the Divine Nature by reason 
of the passible nature assumed, but not on account of the 
impassible Divine Nature. 

Reply Obj. 1. The Lord of glory is said to be crucified, not 
as the Lord of glory, but as a man capable of suffering. 

Reply Obj. 2. As is said in a sermon of the Council of 
Ephesus,* Christ’s death being, as it were, God’s death— 
namely, by union in Person—destroyed death; since He 
who suffered was both God and man. For God’s Nature 
was not wounded, nor did It undergo any change by those 
sufferings. 

Reply Obj. 3. As the passage quoted goes on to say: The 
Jews did not crucify one who was simply a man ; they inflicted 
their presumptions upon God. For suppose a prince to speak 
by word of mouth, and that his words are committed to writing 
on a parchment and sent out to the cities, and that some rebel 
tears up the document, he will be led forth to endure the death 
sentence, not for merely tearing up a document, but as de- 
stroying the 1mpertal message. Let not the Jew, then, stand 
in security, as crucifying a mere man ; since what he saw was 
as the parchment, but what was hidden under it was the im- 
pertal Word, the Son by nature, not the mere utterance of a 
tongue. 

TS PAL AConLO: 

QUESTION XLVII. 

OF THE EFFICIENT CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the efficient cause of Christ’s 
Passion, concerning which there are six points of inquiry: 
(I) Whether Christ was slain by others, or by Himself? 
(2) From what motive did He deliver Himself up to the 
Passion? (3) Whether the Father delivered Him up to 
suffer? (4) Whether it was fitting that He should suffer 
at the hands of the Gentiles, or rather of the Jews? 
(5) Whether His slayers knew who He was? (6) Of the 
sin of them who slew Christ. 

First ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WAS SLAIN BY ANOTHER OR BY HIMSELF ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection x. It would seem that Christ was not slain by 
another, but by Himself. For He says Himself (Jo. x. 18): 
No man taketh My life from Me, but I lay 1t down of Myself. 
But he is said to kill another who takes away his life. 
Consequently, Christ was not slain by others, but by Him- 
self. 

Obj. 2. Further, those slain by others sink gradually 
from exhausted nature, and this is strikingly apparent in 
the crucified: for, as Augustine says (De Trin. iv.): Those 
who were crucified were tormented with a lingering death. 
But this did not happen in Christ’s case, since crying out, 
with a loud voice, He yielded up the ghost (Matth. xxvii. 50). 
Therefore Christ was not slain by others, but by Himself. 

297 

Q. 47. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 298 

Obj. 3. Further, those slain by others suffer a violent 
death, and hence die unwillingly, because violent is Op- 
posed to voluntary. But Augustine says (De Trin. ivo)s 
Christ’s spirit did not quit the flesh unwillingly, but because He 
willed it, when He willed it, and as He willed it. Conse- 
quently Christ was not slain by others, but by Himself. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke xviii. 33): After they 
have scourged Him, they will put Him to death. 

I answer that, A thing may cause an effect in two ways: 
in the first instance by acting directly so as to produce the 
effect; and in this manner Christ’s persecutors slew Him 
because they inflicted on Him what was a sufficient cause of 
death, and with the intention of slaying Him, and the effect 
followed, since death resulted from that cause. In another 
way someone causes an effect indirectly—that is, by not 
preventing it when he can do so; just as one person is said 
to drench another by not closing the window through which" 
the shower is entering: and in this way Christ was the cause 
of His own Passion and death. For He could have pre- 
vented His Passion and death. Firstly, by holding His 
enemies in check, so that they would not have been eager to 
slay Him, or would have been powerless to do so. Secondly, 
because His spirit had the power of preserving His fleshly 
nature from the infliction of any injury; and Christ’s soul 
had this power, because it was united in unity of person with 
the Divine Word, as Augustine says (De Trin. iv.). There- 
fore, since Christ’s soul did not repel the injury inflicted 
on His body, but willed His corporeal nature to succumb 
to such injury, He is said to have laid down His life, or to 
have died voluntarily. 

Reply Obj. 1. When we hear the words, No man taketh 
away My life from Me, we must understand against My will : 
for that is properly said to be taken away which one takes 
from someone who is unwilling and unable to resist. 

Reply Obj. 2. In order for Christ to show that the Passion 
inflicted by violence did not take away His life, He pre- 
served the strength of His bodily nature, so that at the last 
moment He was able to cry out with a loud voice: and hence 

299 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 47, Arr.2 

His death should be computed among His other miracles. 
Accordingly it is written (Mark xv. 39): And the centurion who 
stood over against Him, seeing that crying out in this manner, 
He had given up the ghost, said : Indeed, this man was the Son 
of God. It was also a subject of wonder in Christ’s death 
that He died sooner than the others who were tormented 
with the same suffering. Hence John says (xix. 32) that 
they broke the legs of the first, and of the other that was crucified 
with Him, that they might die more speedily; but after they 
were come to Jesus, when they saw that He was already dead, 
they did not break His legs. Mark also states (xv. 44) that 
Pilate wondered that He should be already dead. For as of 
His own will His bodily nature kept its vigour to the end, 
so likewise, when He willed, He suddenly succumbed to the 
injury inflicted. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ at the same time suffered violence 
in order to die, and died, nevertheless, voluntarily; because 
violence was inflicted on His body, which, however, pre- 
vailed over His body only so far as He willed it. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST DIED OUT OF OBEDIENCE ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not die out of 
obedience. For obedience is referred to a command. But 
we do not read that Christ was commanded to suffer. There- 
fore He did not suffer out of obedience. 

Obj. 2. Further, a man is said to do from obedience what 
he does from necessity of precept. But Christ did not 
suffer necessarily, but voluntarily. Therefore He did not 
suffer out of obedience. 

Obj. 3. Further, charity is a more excellent virtue than 
obedience. But we read that Christ suffered out of charity, 
according to Eph. v. 2: Walk in love, as Christ also has 
loved us, and delivered Himself up for us. Therefore Christ’s 
Passion ought to be ascribed rather to charity than to 

obedience. 

Q.47. Arr.2, THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 300 

On the contrary, It is written (Phil. ii. 8): He became 
obedsent to the Father unto death. 

I answer that, It was befitting that Christ should suffer 
out of obedience. First of all, because it was in keeping 
with human justification, that as by the disobedience of one 
man, many were made sinners: so also by the obedience of 
one, many shall be made just, as is written Rom. v. Ig. 
Secondly, it was suitable for reconciling man with God: 
hence it is written (Rom. v. 10): We are reconciled to God 
by the death of His Son, in so far as Christ’s death was a 
most acceptable sacrifice to God, according to Eph. v. 2: 
He delivered Himself for us an oblation and a sacrifice to 
God for an odour of sweetness. Now obedience is preferred 
to all sacrifices; according to 1 Kings xv. 22: Obedtence 
ts better than sacrifices. Therefore it was fitting that the 
sacrifice of Christ’s Passion and death should proceed from 
obedience. Thirdly, it was in keeping with His victory 
whereby He triumphed over death and its author; because 
a soldier cannot conquer unless he obey his captain. And so 
the Man-Christ secured the victory through being obedient 
to God, according to Prov. xxi. 28: An obedient man shall 
speak of victory. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ received a command from the Father 
to suffer. For it is written (Jo. x. 18): I have power to 
lay down My ltfe, and I have power to take it up again : (and) 
this commandment have I received of My Father—namely, 
of laying down His life and of resuming it again. From 
which, as Chrysostom says (Hom. lix. in Joan.), it is not 
to be understood that at first He awaited the command, and 
that He had need to be told, but He showed the proceeding 
to be a voluntary one, and destroyed suspicion of opposition 
to the Father. Yet because the Old Law was ended by 
Christ’s death, according to His dying words, It ts con- 
summated (Jo. xix. 30), it may be understood that by His 
suffering He fulfilled all the precepts of the Old Law. He 
fulfilled those of the moral order which are founded on the 
precepts of charity, inasmuch as He suffered both out of 
love of the Father, according to Jo. xiv. 31: That the world 

301 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 47. Arr.2 

may know that I love the Father, and as the Father hath 
given Me commandment, so do I: arise, let us go hence— 
namely, to the place of His Passion:—and out of love of 
His neighbour, according to Gal. ii. 20: He loved me, and 
delivered Himself up for me. Christ likewise by His Pas- 
sion fulfilled the ceremonial precepts of the Law, which are 
chiefly ordained for sacrifices and oblations, in so far as 
all the ancient sacrifices were figures of that true sacrifice 
which the dying Christ offered for us. Hence it is written 
(Col. ii. 16, 17): Let wo man judge you in meat or drink, or 
in respect of a festival day, or of the new.moon, or of the 
sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body 
ts Christ’s, for the reason that Christ is compared to them 
as a body is to a shadow. Christ also by His Passion ful- 
filled the judicial precepts of the Law, which are chiefly 
ordained for making compensation to them who have 
suffered wrong, since, as is written Ps. Ixvili. 5: He paid 
that which He took not away, suffering Himself to be fastened 
to a tree on account of the apple which man had plucked 
from the tree against God’s command. 

Reply Obj. 2. Although obedience implies necessity with 
regard to the thing commanded, nevertheless it implies 
free-will with regard to the fulfilling of the precept. And, 
indeed, such was Christ’s obedience, for, although His 
Passion and death, considered in themselves, were re- 
pugnant to the natural will, yet Christ resolved to fulfil 
God’s will with respect to the same, according to Ps. xxxix. 9: 
That I should do Thy will: O my God, I have desired 1t. 
Hence He said (Matth. xxvi. 42): If this chalice may not 
pass away, but I must drink tt, Thy will be done. 

Reply Obj. 3. For the same reason Christ suffered out of 
charity and out of obedience; because He fulfilled even the 
precepts of charity out of obedience only; and was obedient, 
out of love, to the Father’s command. 

Q. 47. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 302 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER GOD THE FATHER DELIVERED UP CHRIST TO THE 
PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that God the Father did not 
deliver up Christ to the Passion. For it is a wicked and 
cruel act to hand over an innocent man to torment and 
death. But, as it is written (Deut. xxxii. 4): God ts faithful, 
and without any iniquity. Therefore He did not hand over 
the innocent Christ to His Passion and death. 

Obj. 2. Further, it is not likely that a man be given 
over to death by himself and by another also. But Christ 
gave Himself up for us, as it is written (Isa. lili. 12): He 
hath delivered His soul unto death. Consequently it does not 
appear that God the Father delivered Him up. 

Obj. 3. Further, Judas is held to be guilty because he 
betrayed Christ to the Jews, according to Jo. vi. 71: One 
of you 1s a devil, alluding to Judas, who was to betray Him. 
The Jews are likewise reviled for delivering Him up to 
Pilate; as we read in Jo. xvili. 35: Thy own nation, and 
the chief priests have delivered Thee up to Me. Moreover, as 
is related in fo. xix. 16: Pilate delivered Him to them to be 
cructfied ; and according to 2 Cor. vi. 14: there is no partict- 
pation of justice with injustice. It seems, therefore, that 
God the Father did not deliver up Christ to His Passion. 

On the contrary, It is written (Rom. viii. 32): God hath no} 
spared His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all. 

I answer that, As observed above (A. 2), Christ suffered 
voluntarily out of obedience to the Father. Hence in 
three respects God the Father did deliver up Christ to the 
Passion. In the first way, because by His eternal will He 
preordained Christ’s Passion for the deliverance of the 
human race, according to the words of Isaias (lili. 6): The 
Lord hath laid on Him the iniquities of us all; and again 
(verse 10): The Lord was pleased to bruise Him in infirmity. 
Secondly, inasmuch as, by the infusion of charity, He in- 

303 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 47. ART. 3 

spired Him with the will to suffer for us; hence we read in 
the same passage: He was offered because it was His own 
will (verse 7). Thirdly, by not shielding Him from the 
Passion, but abandoning Him to His persecutors: thus we 
read (Matth. xxvii. 46) that Christ, while hanging upon the 
cross, cried out: My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken 
Me? because, to wit, He left Him to the power of His 
persecutors, as Augustine says (Ep. cxl.). 

Reply Obj. 1. It is indeed a wicked and cruel act to hand 
Over an innocent man to torment and to death against his 
will. Yet God the Father did not so deliver up Christ, but 
inspired Him with the will to suffer for us. God’s severity 
(cf. Rom. xi. 22) is thereby shown, for He would not remit 
sin without penalty: and the Apostle indicates this when 
(Rom. viii. 32) he says: God spared not even His own Son. 
Likewise His goodness (Rom. xi. 22) shines forth, since by 
no penalty endured could man pay Him enough satisfac- 
tion: and the Apostle denotes this when he says: He de- 
livered Him up for us all ; and, again (Rom. ili. 25): Whom— 
that is to say, Christ—tsod hath proposed to be a propitiation 
through faith in Hts blood. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ as God delivered Himself up to death 
by the same will and action as that by which the Father 
delivered Him up; but as man He gave Himself up by a 
will inspired of the Father. Consequently there is no 
contrariety in the Father delivering Him up and in Christ 
delivering Himself up. 

Reply Obj. 3. The same act, for good or evil, is judged 
differently, accordingly as it proceeds from a different 
source. The Father delivered up Christ, and Christ sur- 
rendered Himself, from charity, and consequently we give 
praise to both: but Judas betrayed Christ from greed, the 
Jews from envy, and Pilate from worldly fear, for he stood 
in fear of Cesar; and these accordingly are held guilty. 

Q. 47. Art.4 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 304 

FouRTH ARTICLE. 

' WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO SUFFER AT THE 
HANDS OF THE GENTILES ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem unfitting that Christ should 
suffer at the hands of the Gentiles. For since men were to be 
freed from sin by Christ’s death, it would seem fitting that 
very few should sin in His death. But the Jews sinned 
in His death, on whose behalf it is said (Matth. xxi. 38): 
This is the heir; come, let us kill him. It seems fitting, 
therefore, that the Gentiles should not be implicated in 
the sin of Christ’s slaying. 

Obj. 2. Further, the truth should respond to the figure. 
Now it was not the Gentiles but the Jews who offered the 
figurative sacrifices of the Old Law. Therefore neither 
ought Christ’s Passion, which was a true sacrifice, to be 
fulfilled at the hands of the Gentiles. 

Obj. 3. Further, as related Jo. v. 18, the Jews sought to 
k1ll Christ because He did not only break the sabbath, but 
also said God was His Father, making Himself equal to God. 
But these things seemed to be only against the Law of the 
Jews: hence they themselves said (Jo. xix. 7): According 
to the Law He ought to die because He made Himself the Son 
of God. It seems fitting, therefore, that Christ should suffer, 
at the hands not of the Gentiles, but of the Jews, and that 
what they said was untrue: I¢ is not lawful for us to put 
any man to death, since many sins are punishable with death 
according to the Law, as is evident from Lev. xx. 

On the contrary, Our Lord Himself says (Matth. xx. 19): 
They shall deliver Him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and 
scourged, and crucified, 

I answer that, The effect of Christ’s Passion was fore- 
shown by the very manner of His death. For Christ’s 
Passion wrought its effect of salvation first of all among 
the Jews, very many of whom were baptized in His death, 
as is evident from Acts ii. 41 and iv. 4. Afterwards, by 
the preaching of Jews, Christ’s Passion passed on to the 

395 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q.. 47. Art. 5 

Gentiles. Consequently it was fitting that Christ should 
begin His sufferings at the hands of the Jews, and, after they 
had delivered Him up, finish His Passion at the hands of 
the Gentiles. 

Reply Obj. 1. In order to demonstrate the fulness of His 
love, on account of which He suffered, Christ upon the cross 
prayed for His persecutors. Therefore, that the fruits of 
His petition might accrue to Jews and Gentiles, Christ willed 
to suffer from both. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s Passion was the offering of a sacri- 
fice, inasmuch as He endured death of His own free-will 
out of charity: but in so far as He suffered from His perse- 
cutors it was not a sacrifice, but a most grievous sin. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (Tract. cxiv. in Joan.): 
The Jews said that ‘it 1s not lawful for us to put any man to 
death,’ because they understood that it was not lawful for them 
to put any man to death owing to the sacredness of the feast- 
day, which they had already begun to celebrate. Or, as 
Chrysostom observes (Hom. lxxxili. in Joan.), because they 
wanted Him to be slain, not as a transgressor of the Law, 
but as a public enemy, since He had made Himself out to 
be a king, of which it was not their place to judge.. Or, 
again, because it was not lawful for them to crucify Him 
(as they wanted to), but tostone Him, as they did to Stephen. 
Better still is it to say that the power of putting to death 
was taken from them by the Romans, whose subjects they 
were. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST’S PERSECUTORS KNEW WHO HE WAS? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s persecutors did 
know who He was. For it is written (Matth. xxi. 38) that 
the husbandmen seeing the son said within themselves: Tus 
is the heir ; come, let us kill him. On this Jerome remarks: 
Our Lord proves most manifestly by these words that the rulers 
of the Jews crucified the Son of God, not from ignorance, 

III. 2 20 

Q.47. Arr.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 306 

but out of envy: for they understood that it was He to whom 
the Father says by the Prophet : ‘ Ask of Me, and I will give 
Thee the Gentiles for Thy inheritance.’ It seems, therefore, 
that they knew Him to be Christ or the Son of God. 

Obj. 2. Further, our Lord says (Jo. xv. 24): But now 
they have both seen and hated both Me and My Father. Now 
what is seen is known manifestly. Therefore the Jews, 
knowing Christ, inflicted the Passion on Him out of hatred. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is said in a sermon delivered in the 
Council of Ephesus (P. iii., cap. x.): Just as he who tears up 
the imperial message is doomed to die, as despising the prince’s 
word ; so the Jew, who crucified Him whom he had seen, will 
pay the penalty for daring to lay his hands on God the Word 
Himself. Now this would not be so had they not known 
Him to be the Son of God, because their ignorance would 
have excused them. Therefore it seems that the Jews in 
crucifying Christ knew Him to be the Son of God. 

On the contrary, It is written (r Cor. ii. 8): If they had 
known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. 
And (Acts iii. 17), Peter, addressing the Jews, says: I know 
that you did it through ignorance, as did also your rulers. 
Likewise the Lord hanging upon the cross said: Father, 
forgive them, for they know not what they do (Luke xxiii. 34). 

I answer that, Among the Jews some were elders, and 
others of lesser degree. Now according to the author of 
De Qq. Nov. et Vet. Test., qu. lxvi., the elders, who were 
called vulers, Rnew, a$ did also the devils, that He was the 
Christ promised in the Law : for they saw all the signs in Him 
which the prophets said would come to pass : but they did not 
know the mystery of His Godhead. Consequently the Apostle 
says: If they had known it, they would never have crucified the 
Lord of glory. It must, however, be understood that their 
ignorance did not excuse them from crime, because it was, 
as it were, affected ignorance. For they saw manifest signs 
of His Godhead; yet they perverted them out of hatred 
and envy of Christ; neither would they believe His words, 
whereby He avowed that He was the Son of God. Hence 
He Himself says of them (Jo. xv. 22): If I had not come, 

307 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 47. Art. 5 

and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now they 
have no excuse for their sin. And afterwards He adds (24): 
If I had not done among them the works that no other man 
hath done, they would not have sin. And so the expression 
employed by Job (xxi. 14) can be accepted on their behalf: 
(Who) said to God : depart from us, we desire not the knowledge 
of Thy ways. 

But those of lesser degree—namely, the common folk— 
who had not grasped the mysteries of the Scriptures, did 
not fully comprehend that He was the Christ or the Son 
of God. For although some of them believed in Him, yet 
the multitude did not; and if they doubted sometimes 
whether He was the Christ, on account of the manifold 
signs and force of His teaching, as is stated Jo. vii. 31, 41, 
nevertheless they were deceived afterwards by their rulers, 
so that they did not believe Him to be the Son of God or 
the Christ. Hence Peter said to them: I know that you did 
it through ignorance, as did also your rulers—namely, because 
they were seduced by the rulers. 

Reply Obj. 1. Those words are spoken by the husbandmen 
of the vineyard; and these signify the rulers of the people, 
who knew Him to be the heir, inasmuch as they knew Him 
to be the Christ promised in the Law. But the words of 
Ps. ii, 8 seem to militate against this answer: Ask of Me, 
and I will give Thee the Gentiles for Thy inheritance ; which 
are addressed to Him of whom it is said: Thou art My Son, 
this day have I begotten Thee. If, then, they knew Him to 
be the one to whom the words were addressed: Ask of Me, 
and I will give Thee the Gentiles for Thy inheritance, it 
follows that they knew Him to be the Son of God. Chry- 
sostom, too, says upon the same passage that they knew Him 
to be the Son of God. Bede likewise, commenting on the 
words, For they know not what they do (Luke xxiii. 34), says: 
It is to be observed that He does not pray for them who, wnder- 
standing Him to be the Son of God, preferred to crucify Him 
rather than acknowledge Him. But to this it may be replied 
that they knew Him to be the Son of God, not from His 
Nature, but from the excellence of His singular grace. 

Q. 47. Art.6 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 308 

Yet we may hold that they are said to have known also 
that He was verily the Son of God, in that they had evident 
signs thereof: yet out of hatred and envy, they refused 
credence to these signs, by which they might have known 
that He was the Son of God. 

Reply Obj. 2. The words quoted are preceded by the 
following: If I had not done among them the works that no 
other man hath done, they would not have sin ; and then follow 
the words: But now they have both seen and hated both Me and 
My Father. Now all this shows that while they beheld 
Christ’s marvellous works, it was owing to their hatred that 
they did not know Him to be the Son of God. 

Reply Obj. 3. Affected ignorance does not excuse from 
guilt, but seems, rather, to aggravate it: for it shows that 
a man is so strongly attached to sin that he wishes to incur 
ignorance lest he avoid sinning. The Jews therefore sinned, 
as crucifiers not only of the Man-Christ, but also as of God. 

S1xTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE SIN OF THOSE WHO CRUCIFIED CHRIST WAS 
MOST GRIEVOUS ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the sin of Christ’s cruci- 
fiers was not the most grievous. Because the sin which 
has some excuse cannot be most grievous. But our Lord 
Himself excused the sin of His crucifiers when He said: 
Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do (Luke 
XXlii. 34). Therefore theirs was not the most grievous sin. 

Ovj. 2. Further, our Lord said to Pilate (Jo. xix. rz): 
He that hath delivered Me to thee hath the greater sin. But 
it was Pilate who caused Christ to be crucified by his minions. 
Therefore the sin of Judas the traitor seems to be greater 
than that of those who crucified Him. 

Odj. 3. Further, according to the Philosopher (Eth. v.): 
No one suffers injustice willingly ; and in the same place he 
adds: Where no one suffers injustice, nobody works injustice. 

309 CAUSE OF CHRIST’S PASSION = Q. 47. Arr. 6 

Consequently nobody wreaks injustice upon a_ willing 
subject. But Christ suffered willingly, as was shown 
above (AA. 1, 2). Therefore those who crucified Christ 
did Him no injustice; and hence their sin was not the most 
gTievous. 

On the contrary, Chrysostom, commenting on the words, 
Fill ye up, then, the measure of your fathers (Matth. xxiii. 32), 
says: In very truth they exceeded the measure of their fathers ; 
for these latter slew men, but they crucified God. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5), the rulers of the 
Jews knew that He was the Christ: and if there was any 
ignorance in them, it was affected ignorance, which could 
not excuse them. Therefore their sin was the most grievous, 
both on account of the kind of sin, as well as from the malice 
of their will. The Jews also of the common order sinned 
most grievously as to the kind of their sin: yet in one respect 
their crime was lessened by reason of theirignorance. Hence 
Bede, commenting on Luke xxiii. 34, Father, forgive them, 
for they know not what they do, says: He prays for them who 
know not what they are doing, as having the zeal of God, but not 
according to knowledge. But the sin of the Gentiles, by whose 
hands He was crucified, was much more excusable, since 
they had no knowledge of the Law. 

Reply Obj. 1. As stated above, the excuse made by our 
Lord is not to be referred to the rulers among the Jews, but 
to the common people. 

Reply Obj. 2. Judas did not deliver up Christ to Pilate, 
but to the chief priests who gave Him up to Pilate, ac- 

‘ cording to Jo. xviii. 35: Thy own nation and tk chef priests 
have delivered Thee up to me. But the sin of all these was 
greater than that of Pilate, who slew Christ from fear 
of Caesar; and even greater than the sin of the soldiers 
who crucified Him at the governor’s bidding, not out of 
cupidity like Judas, nor from envy and hate like the chief 
priests. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ, indeed, willed His Passion just as 
the Father willed it; yet He did not will the unjust action 
of the Jews. Consequently Christ’s slayers are not excused 

Q. 47. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 310 

of their injustice. Nevertheless, whoever slays a man not 
only does a wrong to the one slain, but likewise to God and 
to the State; just as he who kills himself, as the Philosopher 
says (Ethic. v.). Hence it was that David condemned to 
death the man who did not fear to lay hands upon the Lord’s 
anointed, even though he (Saul) had requested it, as related 
2 Kings 1. 5-14. 

QUESTION XLVIII. 

OF THE EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE now have to consider Christ’s Passion as to its effect; 
first of all, as to the manner in which it was brought about; 
and, secondly, as to the effect in itself. Under the first 
heading there are six points for inquiry: (1) Whether 
Christ’s Passion brought about our salvation by way of 
merit ? (2) Whether it was by way of atonement? (3) 
Whether it was by way of sacrifice? (4) Whether it was 
by way of redemption? (5) Whether it is proper to Christ 
to be the Redeemer? (6) Whether (the Passion) secured 
man’s salvation efficiently ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S PASSION BROUGHT ABOUT OUR SALVATION 
BY WAY OF MERIT? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Passion did not 
bring about our salvation by way of merit. For the sources 
of our sufferings are not within us. But no one merits or 
is praised except for that whose principle lies within him. 
Therefore Christ’s Passion wrought nothing by way of 
merit. 

Obj. 2. Further, from the beginning of His conception 
Christ merited for Himself and for us, as stated above 
(Q. IX., A. 4; Q. XXXIV., A. 3). But it is superfluous to 
merit over again what has been merited before. Therefore 
by His Passion Christ did not merit our salvation. 

Obj. 3. Further, the source of merit is charity. But 
311 

Q. 48. Art.r THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 312 

Christ’s charity was not made greater by the Passion than 
it was before. Therefore He did not merit our salvation 
by suffering more than He had already. 

On the contrary, On the words of Phil. ii. 9, Therefore God 
exalted Him, etc., Augustine says (Tract. civ. in Joan.): The 
lowliness of the Passion merited glory ; glory was the reward 
of lowliness. But He was glorified, not merely in Himself, 
but likewise in His faithful ones, as He says Himself 
(Jo. xvii. 10). Therefore it appears that He merited the 
salvation of the faithful. 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. VII., AA. 1, 9; Q. VIIIL., 
AA. I, 5), grace was bestowed upon Christ, not only as an 
individual, but inasmuch as He is the Head of the Church, 
so that it might overflow into His members; and therefore 
Christ’s works are referred to Himself and to His members 
in the same way as the works of any other man in a state of 
grace are referred to himself. But it is evident that whoso- 
ever suffers for justice’ sake, provided that he be in a state 
of grace, merits his salvation thereby, according to Matth. 
v. 10: Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice’ sake. 
Consequently Christ by His Passion merited salvation, not 
only for Himself, but likewise for all His members. 

Reply Obj. 1. Suffering, as such, is caused by an outward 
principle: but inasmuch as one bears it willingly, it has an 
inward principle. 

Reply Obj. 2. From the beginning of His conception Christ 
_merited our eternal salvation; but on our side there were 

some obstacles, whereby we were hindered from securing 

the effect of His preceding merits: consequently, in order 
to remove such hindrances, zt was necessary for Christ to 
suffer, as stated above (Q. XLVI., A. 3). 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s Passion has a special effect, which 
His preceding merits did not possess, not on account of 
greater charity, but because of the nature of the work, 
which was suitable for such an effect, as is clear from the 
arguments brought forward above on the fittingness of 
Christ’s Passion (Q. XLVI., AA. 3, 4). 

313. EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 48. Art. 2 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S PASSION BROUGHT ABOUT OUR SALVATION 
BY WAY OF ATONEMENT ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Passion did not 
bring about our salvation by way of atonement. For it 
seems that to make the atonement devolves on him who 
commits the sin; as is clear in the other parts of penance, 
because he who has done the wrong must grieve over it and 
confessit. But Christ never sinned, according to 1 Pet. ii. 22: 
Who did no sin. Therefore He made no atonement by His 
personal suffering. 

Obj. 2. Further, no atonement is made to another by 
committing a graver offence. But in Christ’s Passion 
the gravest of all offences was perpetrated, because those 
who slew Him sinned most grievously, as stated above 
(Q. XLVII., A. 6). Consequently it seems that atonement 
could not be made to God by Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 3. Further, atonement implies equality with the 
trespass, since it is an act of justice. But Christ’s Passion 
does not appear equal to all the sins of the human race, 
because Christ did not suffer in His Godhead, but in His 
flesh, according to 1 Pet. iv. 1: Christ therefore having suffered 
in the flesh. Now the soul, which is the subject of sin, is of 
greater account than the flesh. Therefore Christ did not 
atone for our sins by His Passion. 

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. lxviii. 5) in Christ’s 
person: Then did I pay that which I took not away. But he 
has not paid who has not fully atoned. Therefore it appears 
that Christ by His suffering has fully atoned for our sins. 

I answer that, He properly atones for an offence who 
offers something which the offended one loves equally, or 
even more than he detested the offence. But by suffering 
out of love and obedience, Christ gave more to God than 
was required to compensate for the offence of the whole 
human race. First of all, because of the exceeding charity 

Q. 48. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 314 

from which He suffered; secondly, on account of the dignity 
of His life which He laid down in atonement, for it was the 
life of One who was God and man; thirdly, on account of 
the extent of the Passion, and the greatness of the grief 
endured, as stated above (Q. XLVI, A. 6). And therefore 
Christ’s Passion was not only a sufficient but a super- 
abundant atonement for the sins of the human race; accord- 
ing to I Jo. ii. 2: He is the propitiation for our sins: and 
not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world. 

Reply Obj. 1. The head and members are as one mystic 
person; and therefore Christ’s satisfaction belongs to all 
the faithful as being His members. Also, in so far as any 
two men are one in charity, the one can atone for the other, 
as shall be shown later (Supplement, Q. XIII., A. 2). But 
the same reason does not hold good of confession and con- 
trition, because atonement consists in an outward action, 
for which helps may be used, among which friends are to 
be computed. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s love was greater than His slayers’ 
malice: and therefore the value of His Passion in atoning 
surpassed the murderous guilt of those who crucified Him: 
so much so that Christ’s suffering was sufficient and super- 
abundant atonement for His murderers’ crime. 

Reply Obj. 3. The dignity of Christ’s flesh is not to be 
estimated solely from the nature of flesh, but also from 
the Person assuming it—namely, inasmuch as it was God’s 
flesh, the result of which was that it was of infinite worth. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S PASSION OPERATED BY WAY OF 
SACRIFICE ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Passion did not 
operate by way of sacrifice. For the truth should correspond 
with the figure. But human flesh was never offered up in 
the sacrifices of the Old Law, which were figures of Christ: 
nay, such sacrifices were reputed as impious, according to 

315 EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 48. Art. 3 

Ps. cv. 38: And they shed innocent blood : the blood of their 
sons and of their daughters, which they sacrificed to the idols 
of Chanaan. It seems therefore that Christ’s Passion cannot 
be called a sacrifice. 

Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x.) that 
a vistble sacrifice is a sacrament—that is, a sacred sign—of 
an invisible sacrifice. Now Christ’s Passion is not a sign, 
but rather the thing signified by other signs. Therefore it 
seems that Christ’s Passion is not a sacrifice. 

Obj. 3. Further, whoever offers sacrifice performs some 
sacred rite, as the very word sacrifice shows. But those 
men who slew Christ did not perform any sacred act, but 
rather wrought a great wrong. Therefore Christ’s Passion 
was rather a malefice than a sacrifice. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. v. 2): He delivered 
Himself up for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an 
odour of sweetness. 

I answer that, A sacrifice properly so called is something 
done for that honour which is properly due to God, in order 
to appease Him: and hence it is that Augustine says (De 
Civ. Dei x.): A true sacrifice 1s every good work done in order 
that we may cling to God in holy fellowship, yet referred to 
that consummation of happiness wherein we can be truly 
blessed. But, as is added in the same place, Christ offered 
Himself up for us in the Passion: and this voluntary en- 
during of the Passion was most acceptable to God, as coming 
from charity. Therefore it is manifest that Christ’s Passion 
was a true sacrifice. Moreover, as Augustine says farther 
on in the same book, the primitive sacrifices of the holy 
Fathers were many and various signs of this true sacrifice, 
one being prefigured by many, in the same way as a single 
concept of thought is expressed in many words, in order to 
commend it without tediousness : and, as Augustine observes 
(De Trin, iv.), since there are four things to be noted im every 
sacrifice—to wit, to whom it is offered, by whom it ts offered, 
what is offered, and for whom it is offered—that the same one 
true Mediator reconciling us with God through the peace- 
sacrifice might continue to be one with Him to whom He 

Q. 48. Art.3. THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 316 

offered it, might be one with them for whom He offered it, and 
might Himself be the offerer and what He offered. 

Reply Obj. 1. Although the truth answers to the figure 
in some respects, yet it does not in all, since the truth must 
go beyond the figure. Therefore the figure of this sacrifice, 
in which Christ’s flesh is offered, was flesh right fittingly, 
not the fiesh of men, but of animals, as denoting Christ’s. 
And this is a most perfect sacrifice. First of all, since being 
flesh of human nature, it is fittingly offered for men, and 
is partaken of by them under the Sacrament. Secondly, 
because being passible and mortal, it was fit for immolation. 
Thirdly, because, being sinless, it had virtue to cleanse from 
sins. Fourthly, because, being the offerer’s own flesh, it was 
acceptable to God on account of His charity in offering up His 
own flesh. Hence it is that Augustine says (De Trin. iv.): 
What else could be so fittingly partaken of by men, or offered 
up for men, as human flesh ? What else could be so appro- 
priate for this immolation as mortal flesh? What else 1s 
there so clean for cleansing mortals as the flesh born in the 
womb without fleshly concupiscence, and coming from a vir- 
ginal womb? What could be so favourably offered and ac- 
cepted as the flesh of our sacrifice, which was made the body of 
our Priest ? 

Reply Obj. 2. Augustine is speaking there of visible 
figurative sacrifices: and even Christ’s Passion, although 
denoted by other figurative sacrifices, is yet a sign of some- 
thing to be observed by us, according to I Pet. iv. 1: Christ 
therefore, having suffered in the flesh, be you also armed with 
the same thought: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath 
ceased from sins ;: that now he may live the rest of his time in 
the flesh, not after the desires of men, but according to the will 
of God. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s Passion was indeed a malefice on 
His slayers’ part; but on His own it was the sacrifice of 
one suffering out of charity. Hence it is Christ who is 
said to have offered this sacrifice, and not the executioners. 

317. EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 48. Arr. 4 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S PASSION BROUGHT ABOUT OUR SALVATION 
BY WAY OF REDEMPTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Passion did not 
effect our salvation by way of redemption. For no one 
purchases or redeems what never ceased to belong to him. 
But men never ceased to belong to God according to 
Ps. xxili. 1: The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof : 
the world and all they that dwell therein. Therefore it seems 
that Christ did not redeem us by His Passion. 

Obj. 2. Further, as Augustine says (De Trin. xiii.): The 
devil had to be overthrown by Christ's justice. But justice 
requires that the man who has treacherously seized another’s 
property shall be deprived of it, because deceit and cunning 
should not benefit anyone, as even human laws declare. 
Consequently, since the devil by treachery deceived and 
subjugated to himself man, who is God’s creature, it seems 
that man ought not to be rescued from his power by way of 
redemption. 

Obj. 3. Further, whoever buys or redeems an object pays 
the price to the holder. But it was not to the devil, who 
held us in bondage, that Christ paid His blood as the price 
of our redemption. Therefore Christ did not redeem us by 
His Passion. 

On the contrary, It is written (1 Pet. i. 18): You were not 
redeemed with corruptible things as gold or silver from your 
vain conversation of the tradition of your fathers ; but with the 
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled. 
And (Gal. iii. 13): Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of 
the law, being made a curse for us. Now He is said to be a 
curse for us inasmuch as He suffered upon the tree, as stated 
above (Q. XLVI., A. 4). Therefore He did redeem us by 
His Passion. 

I answer that, Man was held captive on account of sin 
in two ways: first of all, by the bondage of sin, because 

Q. 48. Art.4 THE “ SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 318 

(Jo. viii. 34): Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin ; 
and (2 Pet. ii. 19): By whom a man ts overcome, of the same 
also he is the slave. Since, then, the devil had overcome 
man by inducing him to sin, man was subject to the devil’s 
bondage. Secondly, as to the debt of punishment, to the 
payment of which man was held fast by God’s justice: 
and this, too, is a kind of bondage, since it savours of 
bondage for a man to suffer what he does not wish, just 
as it is the free man’s condition to apply himself to what 
he wills. 

Since, then, Christ’s Passion was a sufficient and a super- 
abundant atonement for the sin and the debt of the human 
race, it was as a price at the cost of which we were freed 
from both obligations. For the atonement by which one 
satisfies for self or another is called the price, by which he 
ransoms himself or someone else from sin and its penalty, 
according to Dan. iv. 24: Redeem thou thy sins with alms. 
Now Christ made satisfaction, not by giving money or 
anything of the sort, but by bestowing what was of greatest 
price—Himself—for us. And therefore Christ’s Passion is 
called our redemption. 

Reply Obj. 1. Man is said to belong to God in two ways. 
First of all, in so far as he comes under God’s power: in 
which way he never ceased to belong to God; according to 
Dan. iv. 22: The Most High ruleth over the kingdom of men, 
and giveth it to whomsoever he will. Secondly, by being 
united to Him in charity, according to Rom. viii. 9: If 
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His. 
In the first way, then, man never ceased to belong to God, 
but in the second way he did cease because of sin. And 
therefore in so far as he was delivered from sin by the 
satisfaction of Christ’s Passion, he is said to be redeemed 
by the Passion of Christ. 

Reply Obj. 2. Man by sinning became the bondsman 
both of God and of the devil. Through guilt he had offended 
God, and put himself under the devil by consenting to 
him; consequently he did not become God’s servant on 
account of his guilt, but rather, by withdrawing from God’s 

319 EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 48. Arr. 5 

service, he, by God’s just permission, fell under the devil’s 
servitude on account of the offence perpetrated. But as 
to the penalty, man was chiefly bound to God as his sove- 
reign judge, and to the devil as his torturer, according to 
Matth. v. 25: Lest perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the 
judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer—that is, to the 
relentless avenging angel, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xi.). 
Consequently, although, after deceiving man, the devil, so 
far as in him lay, held him unjustly in bondage as to both 
sin and penalty, still it was just that man should suffer 
it. God so permitting it as to the sin and ordaining it as 
to the penalty. And therefore justice required man’s re- 
demption with regard to God, but not with regard to the 
devil. 

Reply Obj. 3. Because, with regard to God, redemption 
was necessary for man’s deliverance, but not with regard 
to the devil, the price had to be paid not to the devil, but 
to God. And therefore Christ is said to have paid the price 
of our redemption—His own precious blood—not to the 
devil, but to God. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER IT IS PROPER TO CHRIST TO BE THE REDEEMER ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it is not proper to Christ 
to be the Redeemer, because it is written (Ps. xxx. 6): Thou 
hast redeemed me, O Lord, the God of Truth. But to be the 
Lord God of Truth belongs to the entire Trinity. Therefore 
it is not proper to Christ. 

Obj. 2. Further, he is said to redeem who pays the price 
of redemption. But God the Father gave His Son in re- 
demption for our sins, as is written (Ps. cx. 9): The Lord 
hath sent redemption to His people, upon which the gloss 
adds, that is, Christ, who gives redemption to captives. 
Therefore not only Christ, but the Father also, redeemed us. 

Obj. 3. Further, not only Christ’s Passion, but also that 
of other saints conduced to our salvation, according to 

Q. 48. Art.5 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 320 

Col. i. 24: I now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up 
those things that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ, in 
my flesh for His body, which is the Church. Therefore the 
title of Redeemer belongs not only to Christ, but also to 
the other saints. 

On the contrary, It is written (Gal. iii. 13): Christ redeemed 
us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. But 
only Christ was made a curse for us. Therefore only Christ 
ought to be called our Redeemer. 

I answer that, For someone to redeem, two things are re- 
quired—namely, the act of paying and the price paid. 
For if in redeeming something a man pays a price which is 
not his own, but another’s, he is not said to be the chief 
redeemer, but rather the other is, whose price it is. Now 
Christ’s blood or His bodily life, which its 1m the blood, is 
the price of our redemption (Lev. xvii. 11, 14), and that life 
He paid. Hence both of these belong immediately to 
Christ as man; but to the Trinity as to the first and remote 
cause, to whom Christ’s life belonged as to its first author, 
and from whom Christ received the inspiration of suffering 
for us. Consequently it is proper to Christ as man to be 
the Redeemer immediately; although the redemption may 
be ascribed to the whole Trinity as its first cause. 

Reply Obj. 1. A gloss explains the text thus: Thou, O 
Lord God of Truth, hast redeemed me in Christ, crying out, 
‘Lord, into Thy hands I commend my spirit.’ And so 
redemption belongs immediately to the Man-Christ, but 
principally to God. 

Reply Obj. 2. The Man-Christ paid the price of our re- 
demption immediately, but at the command of the Father 
as the original author. 

Reply Obj. 3. The sufferings of the saints are beneficial 
to the Church, as by way, not of redemption, but of example 
and exhortation, according to 2 Cor. i. 6: Whether we be in 
tribulation, it is for your exhortation and salvation. 

321 EFFICIENCY OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 48. Art. 6 

‘ 
SIXTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST’S PASSION BROUGHT ABOUT OUR SALVATION 
EFFICIENTLY ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Passion did not 
bring about our salvation efficiently. For the efficient cause 
of our salvation is the greatness of the Divine power, ac- 
cording to Isa. lix. 1: Behold the hand of the Lord is not 
shortened that it cannot save. But Christ was crucified 
through weakness, as it is written (2 Cor. xiii. 4). There- 
fore, Christ’s Passion did not bring about our salvation 
efficiently. 

Obj. 2. Further, no corporeal agency acts efficiently except 
by contact: hence even Christ cleansed the leper by touch- 
ing him 7m order to show that His flesh had saving power, as 
Chrysostom* says. But Christ’s Passion could not touch 
all mankind. Therefore it could not efficiently bring about 
the salvation of all men. 

Obj. 3. Further, it does not seem to be consistent for the 
same agent to operate by way of merit and by way of 
efficiency, since he who merits awaits the result from some- 
one else. But it was by way of merit that Christ’s Passion 
accomplished our salvation. Therefore it was not by way 
of efficiency. 

On the contrary, It is written (x Cor. i. 18) that the word 
of the cross to them that are saved. . . 1s the power of God. 
But God’s power brings about our salvation efficiently. 
Therefore Christ’s Passion on the cross accomplished our 
salvation efficiently. 

I answer that, There is a twofold efficient agency—namely, 
the principal and the instrumental. Now the principal 
efficient cause of man’s salvation is God. But since Christ’s 
humanity is the instrument of the Godhead, as stated above 
(Q. XLIII., A. 2), therefore all Christ’s actions and sufferings 
operate instrumentally in virtue of His Godhead for the 

* Theophylact, Enarr. in Luc. 

Ill. 2 2I 

Q. 48. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 322 

salvation of men. Consequently, then, Christ’s Passion 
accomplishes man’s salvation efficiently. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s Passion in relation to His flesh is 
consistent with the infirmity which He took upon Him- 
self; but in relation to the Godhead it draws infinite might 
from It, according to I Cor. i. 25: The weakness of God is 
stronger than men; because Christ’s weakness, inasmuch as 
He is God, has a might exceeding all human power. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s Passion, although corporeal, has 
yet a spiritual effect from the Godhead united: and there- 
fore it secures its efficacy by spiritual contact—namely, by 
faith and the sacraments of faith, as the Apostle says 
(Rom. iii. 25): Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, 
through faith in H1s blood. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s Passion, according as it is com- 
pared with His Godhead, operates in an efficient manner: 
but in so far as it is compared with the will of Christ’s soul 
it acts in a meritorious manner: considered as being within 
Christ’s very flesh, it acts by way of satisfaction, inasmuch 
as we are liberated by it from the debt of punishment; 
while inasmuch as we are freed from the servitude of guilt, 
it acts by way of redemption: but in so far as we are recon- 
ciled with God it acts by way of sacrifice, as shall be shown 
farther on (Q. XLIX.). 

QUESTION XLIX. 

OF THE EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION. 
(In Stix Articles.) 

WE have now to consider what are the effects of Christ’s 
Passion, concerning which there are six points of inquiry: 
(1) Whether we were freed from sin by ‘Christ’s Passion ? 
(2) Whether we were thereby delivered from the power 
of the devil? (3) Whether we were freed thereby from 
our debt of punishment? (4) Whether we were thereby 
reconciled with God? (5) Whether heaven’s gate was 
opened to us thereby? (6) Whether Christ derived ex- 
altation from it ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER WE WERE DELIVERED FROM SIN THROUGH 
CHRIST’S PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that we were not delivered 
from sin through Christ’s Passion. For to deliver from sin 
belongs to-God alone, according to Isa. xliii. 25: I am He 
who blot out your iniquities for My own sake. But Christ 
did not suffer as God, but as man. Therefore Christ’s 
Passion did not free us from sin. 

Obj. 2. Further, what is corporeal does not act upon what 
is spiritual. But Christ’s Passion is corporeal, whereas sin 
exists in the soul, which is a spiritual creature. Therefore 
Christ’s Passion could not cleanse us from sin. 

Obj. 3. Further, one cannot be purged from a sin not yet 
committed, but which shall be committed hereafter. Since, 
then, many sins have been committed since Christ’s death, 

323 

Q. 49. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 324 

and are being committed daily, it seems that we were not 
delivered from sin by Christ’s death. 

Obj. 4. Further, given an efficient cause, nothing else is 
required for producing the effect. But other things be- 
sides are required for the forgiveness of sins, such as bap- 
tism and penance. Consequently it seems that Christ’s 
Passion is not the sufficient cause of the forgiveness of 
sins. 

Obj. 5. Further, it is written (Prov. x. 12): Charity 
covereth all sins ; and (xv. 27): By mercy and faith, sins are 
purged away. But there are many other things of which 
we have faith, and which excite charity. Therefore Christ’s 
Passion is not the proper cause of the forgiveness of sins. 

On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. i. 5): He loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in His own blood. 

I answer that, Christ’s Passion is the proper cause of the 
forgiveness of sins in three ways. First of all, by way of 
exciting our charity, because, as the Apostle says (Rom, 
v. 8): God commendeth His charity towards us : because when 
as yet we were sinners, according to the time, Christ died for 
us. But it is by charity that we procure pardon of our 
sins, according to Luke vii. 47: Many sins are forgiven her 
because she hath loved much. Secondly, Christ’s Passion 
causes forgiveness of sins by way of redemption. For 
since He is our head, then, by the Passion which He endured 
from love and obedience, He delivered us as His members 
from our sins, as by the price of His Passion: in the same 
way as if a man by the good industry of his hands were to 
redeem himself from a sin committed with his feet. For, 
just as the natural body is one, though made up of diverse 
members, so the whole Church, Christ’s mystic body, is 
reckoned as one person with its head, which is Christ. 
Thirdly, by way of efficiency, inasmuch as Christ’s flesh, 
wherein He endured the Passion, is the instrument of the 
Godhead, so that His sufferings and actions operate with 
Divine power for expelling sin. 

Reply Obj. x. Although Christ did not suffer as God, 
nevertheless His flesh is thé instrument of the Godhead; 

325 EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 49. Art. 2 

and thence it is that His Passion has a kind of Divine Power 
of casting out sin, as was said above. 

Reply Obj. 2. Although Christ’s Passion is corporeal, still 
it derives a kind of spiritual energy from the Godhead, to 
which the flesh is united as an instrument: and according 
to this power Christ’s Passion is the cause of the forgiveness 
of sins. 

Reply 06). 3. Christ by His Passion delivered us from our 
sins causally—that is, by setting up the cause of our de- 
liverance, from which cause all sins whatsoever, past, 
present, or to come, could be forgiven: just as if a doctor 
were to prepare a medicine by which all sicknesses can be 
cured even in future. 

Reply Obj. 4. As stated above, since Christ’s Passion 
preceded, as a kind of universal cause of the forgiveness of 
sins, it needs to be applied to each individual for the cleansing 
of personal sins. Now this is done by baptism and penance 
and the other sacraments, which derive their power from 
Christ’s Passion, as shall be shown later (Q. LXII., A. 5). 

Reply 0bj.5. Christ’s Passion is applied to us even through 
faith, that we may share in its fruits, according to Rom. 
iii. 25: Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through 
faith in His blood. But the faith through which we are 
cleansed from sin is not lifeless faith, which can exist even 
with sin, but faith living through charity; that thus Christ’s 
Passion may be applied to us, not only as to our minds, 
but also ‘as to our hearts. And even in this way sins are 
forgiven through the power of the Passion of Christ. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER WE WERE DELIVERED FROM THE DEVIL’S POWER 
THROUGH CHRIST'S PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that we were not delivered 
from the power of the devil through Christ’s Passion. For 
he has no power over others, who can do nothing to them 
without the sanction of another. But without the Divine 

Q. 49. Artr.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 326 

permission the devil could never do hurt to any man, as is 
evident in the instance of Job (i. and ii.), where, by power 
received from God, the devil first injured him in his posses- 
sions, and afterwards in his body. In like manner it is 
stated (Matth. viii. 31, 32) that the devils could not enter 
into the swine except with Christ’s leave. Therefore the 
devil never had power over men: and hence we are not 
delivered from his power through Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 2. Further, the devil exercises his power over men 
by tempting them and molesting their bodies. But even 
after the Passion he continues to do the same to men. 
Therefore we are not delivered from his power through 
Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 3. Further, the might of Christ’s Passion endures 

for ever, as, according to Heb. x. 14: By one oblation He 
hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. But deliver- 
ance from the devil’s power is not found everywhere, since 
there are still idolaters in many regions of the world; nor 
will it endure for ever, because in the time of Antichrist 
he will be especially active in using his power to the hurt 
of men; because it is said of him (2 Thess. ii. 9): Whose 
coming 1s according to the working of Satan, in all power, 
and signs, and lying wonders, and in all seduction of iniquity. 
Consequently it seems that Christ’s Passion is not the cause 
of the human race being delivered from the power of the 
devil. 
_ On the contrary, Our Lord said (Jo. xii. 31), when His 
Passion was drawing nigh: Now shall the prince of this 
world be cast out; and I, if I be lifted up from the earth, 
will draw all things to Myself. Now He was lifted up from 
the earth by His Passion on the cross. Therefore by His 
Passion the devil was deprived of his power over man. 

I answer that, There are three things to be considered 
regarding the power which the devil exercised over men 
previous to Christ’s Passion. The first is on man’s own 
part, who by his sin deserved to be delivered over to the 
devil’s power, and was overcome by his tempting. Another 
point is on God's part, whom man had offended by sinning, 

327 EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 49. Art. 2 

and who with justice left man under the devil’s power. 
The third is on the devil’s part, who out of his most wicked 
will hindered man from securing his salvation. 

As to the first point, by Christ’s Passion man was de- 
livered from the devil’s power, in so far as the Passion is 
the cause of the forgiveness of sins, as stated above (A. 1). 
As to the second, it must be said that Christ’s Passion freed 
us from the devil’s power, inasmuch as it reconciled us with 
God, as shall be shown later (A. 4). But as to the third, 
Christ’s Passion delivered us from the devil, inasmuch as 
in Christ’s Passion he exceeded the limit of power assigned 
him by God, by conspiring to bring about Christ’s death, 
Who, being sinless, did not deserve to die. Hence Augus- 
tine says (De Trin. xiii, cap. xiv.): The devil was vanquished 
by Christ’s justice: because, while discovering in Him nothing 
deserving of death, nevertheless he slew Him. And tt is cer- 
tainly just that the debtors whom he held captive should be 
set at liberty, since they believed in Him whom the devil slew, 
though He was no debtor. 

Reply Obj. 1. The devil is said to have had such power 
over men not as though he were able to injure them without 
God’s sanction, but because he was justly permitted to injure 
men whom by tempting he had induced to give consent. 

Reply Obj. 2. God so permitting it, the devil can still 
tempt men’s souls and harass their bodies: yet there is 
a remedy provided for man through Christ’s Passion, 
whereby he can safeguard himself against the enemy’s 
assaults, so as not to be dragged down into the destruc- 
tion of everlasting death. And all who resisted the devil 
previous to the Passion were enabled to do so through 
faith in the Passion, although it was not yet accomplished. 
Yet in one respect no one was able to escape the devil’s 
hands—.e., so as not to descend into hell. But after 
Christ’s Passion, men can defend themselves from this by 
its power. 

Reply Obj. 3. God permits the devil to deceive men by 
certain persons, and in times and places, according to the 
hidden motive of His judgements; still, there is always a 

Q. 49. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 328 

remedy provided through Christ’s Passion, for defending 
themselves against the wicked snares of the demons, even in 
Antichrist’s time. But if any man neglect to make use of 
this remedy, it detracts nothing from the efficacy of Christ’s 
Passion. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER MEN WERE FREED FROM THE PUNISHMENT OF 
SIN THROUGH CHRIST'S PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that men were not freed from 
the punishment of sin by Christ’s Passion. For the chief 
punishment of sin is eternal damnation. But those damned 
in hell for their sins were not set free by Christ’s Passion, 
because in hell there is no redemption.* It seems, therefore, 
that Christ’s Passion did not deliver men from the punish- 
ment of sin. ' 

Obj. 2. Further, no punishment should be imposed upon 
them who are delivered from the debt of punishment. But 
a satisfactory punishment is imposed upon penitents. Con- 
sequently, men were not freed from the debt of punishment 
by Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 3. Further, death is a punishment of sin, according 
to Rom. vi. 23: The wages of sin is death. But men still 
die after Christ’s Passion. Therefore it seems that we have 
not been delivered from the debt of punishment. 

. On the contrary, It is written (Isa. liii. 4): Surely He hath 
borne our iniquities and carried our sorrows. 

I answer that, Through Christ’s Passion we have been 
delivered from the debt of punishment in two ways. First 
of all, directly—namely, inasmuch as Christ’s Passion was 
sufficient and superabundant satisfaction for the sins of 
the whole human race: but when sufficient satisfaction has 
been paid, then the debt of punishment is abolished. In 
another way—indirectly, that is to say—in so far as Christ’s 
Passion is the cause of the forgiveness of sin, upon which 
the debt of punishment rests. 

* Office of the Dead, Resp. vii. 

329 EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 49. Arr. 3. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s Passion works its effect in them to 
whom it is applied, through faith and charity and the 
sacraments of faith. And, consequently, the lost in hell | 
cannot avail themselves of its effects, since they are not 
united to Christ in the aforesaid manner. 

Reply Obj. 2. As stated above (A. 1 ad 4, 5), in order to 
secure the effects of Christ’s Passion, we must be likened 
unto Him. Now we are likened unto Him sacramentally 
in Baptism, according to Rom. vi. 4: For we are buried 
together with Him by baptism into death. Hence no punish- 
ment of satisfaction is imposed upon men at their baptism, 
since they are fully delivered by Christ’s satisfaction. But 
because, as it is written (I Pet. ili. 18), Christ died but 
once for our stns, therefore a man cannot a second time be 
likened unto Christ’s death by the sacrament of Baptism. 
Hence it is necessary that those who sin after Baptism 
be likened unto Christ suffering by some form of punish- 
ment or suffering which they endure in their own person; 
yet, by the co-operation of Christ’s satisfaction, much 
lighter penalty suffices than one that is proportionate to 
the sin. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s satisfaction works its effect in us 
inasmuch as we are incorporated with Him, as the members 
with their head, as stated above (A. 1). Now the members 
must be conformed to their head. Consequently, as Christ 
first had grace in His soul with bodily passibility, and 
through the Passion attained to the glory of immortality, 
so we likewise, who are His members, are freed by His 
Passion from all debt of punishment, yet so that we first 
receive in our souls the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby 
our names are written down for the inheritance of immortal 
glory, while we yet have a passible and mortal body: but 
afterwards, being made conformable to the sufferings and 
death of Christ, we are brought into immortal glory, ac- 
cording to the saying of the Apostle (Rom. viii. 17): And 
if sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of God, and joint hesrs with 
Christ ; yet so if we suffer with Him, that we may be also 
glorified with Him. 

Q. 49. Art.4 THE ‘‘ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 350 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

, 
WHETHER WE WERE RECONCILED TO GOD THROUGH CHRIST S 
PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that we were not reconciled to 
God through Christ’s Passion. For there is no need of re- 
conciliation between friends. But God always loved us, 
according to Wisd. xi. 25: Thou lovest all the things that are, 
and hatest none of the things which Thou hast made. There- 
fore Christ’s Passion did not reconcile us to God. 

Obj. 2. Further, the same thing cannot be cause and 
effect: hence grace, which is the cause of meriting, does 
not come under merit. But God’s love is the cause of 
Christ’s Passion, according to Jo. lii. 16: God so loved the 
world as to give His only-begotten Son. It does not appear, 
then, that we were reconciled to God through Christ’s 
Passion, so that He began to love us anew. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ’s Passion was completed by men 
slaying Him; and thereby they offended God grievously. 
Therefore Christ’s Passion is rather the cause of wrath than 
of reconciliation to God. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. v. 10): We are 
reconciled to God by the death of His Son. 

I answer that, Christ’s Passion is in two ways the cause of 
our reconciliation to God. In the first way, inasmuch as 
it takes away sin by which men became God’s enemies, 
according to Wisd. xiv. 9: To God the wicked and his wicked- 
ness are hateful alike ; and Ps. v. 7: Thou hatest all the workers 
of iniquity. In another way, inasmuch as it is a most 
acceptable sacrifice to God. Now it is the proper effect of 
sacrifice to appease God: just as man likewise overlooks 
an offence committed against him on account of some 
pleasing act of homage shown him. Hence it is written 
(r Kings xxvi. 19): If the Lord stir thee up against me, let 
Him accept of sacrifice. And in like fashion Christ’s volun- 
tary suffering was such a good act that, because of its 

331 EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 49. Arr. 5 

being found in human nature, God was appeased for every 
offence of the human race with regard to those who are 
made one with the crucified Christ in the aforesaid manner 
(A. 1 ad 4). 

Reply Obj. 1. God loves all men as to their nature, which 
He Himself made; yet He hates them with respect to the 
crimes they commit against Him, according to Ecclus. xii. 3: 
The Highest hateth sinners. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ is not said to have reconciled us with 
God, as if God had begun anew to love us, since it is written 
(Jer. xxxi. 3): I have loved thee with an everlasting love ; 
but because the source of hatred was taken away by Christ’s 
Passion, both through sin being washed away and through 
compensation being made in the shape of a more pleasing 
offering. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Christ’s slayers were men, so also was 
the Christ slain. Now the charity of the suffering Christ 
surpassed the wickedness of His slayers. Accordingly 
Christ’s Passion prevailed more in reconciling God to the 
whole human race than in provoking Him to wrath. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST OPENED THE GATE OF HEAVEN TO US BY 
HIS PASSION ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not open the 
gate of heaven to us by His Passion. For it is written 
(Prov. xi. 18): To him that soweth justice, there 1s a faithful 
reward. But the reward of justice is the entering into the 
kingdom of heaven. It seems, therefore, that the holy 
Fathers who wrought works of justice, obtained by faith 
the entering into the heavenly kingdom even without 
Christ’s Passion. Consequently Christ’s Passion is not 
the cause of the opening of the gate of the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Obj. 2. Further, Elias was caught up to heaven previous 
to Christ’s Passion (4 Kings ii.). But the effect never 

Q.49. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 332 

precedes the cause. Therefore it seems that the opening 
of heaven’s gate is not the result of Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 3. Further, as it is written (Matth. iii. 16), when 
Christ was baptized the heavens were opened to Him. But 
His baptism preceded the Passion. Consequently the 
opening of heaven is not the result of Christ’s Passion. 

Obj. 4. Further, it is written (Mich. ii. 13): For He shall 
go up that shall open the way before them, But to open the 
way to heaven seems to be nothing else than to throw open 
its gate. Therefore it seems that the gate of heaven was 
opened to us, not by Christ’s Passion, but by His Ascension. 

On the contrary is the saying of the Apostle (Heb. x. 19): 
We have (Vulg., having a) confidence in the entering into the 
Holies—that is, of the heavenly places—through the blood 
of Christ. 

I answer that, The shutting of the gate is the obstacle 
which hinders men from entering in. But it is on account 
of sin that men were prevented from entering into the 
heavenly kingdom, since, according to Isa. xxxv. 8: It 
shall be called the holy way, and the unclean shall not pass 
over tt. Now there is a twofold sin which prevents men 
from entering into the kingdom of heaven. The first is 
common to the whole race, for it is our first parents’ sin, 
and by that sin heaven’s entrance is closed to man. Hence 
we read in Gen. ili. 24 that after our first parents’ sin God 
placed... cherubim and a flaming sword, turning every way, 
to keep the way of the tree of life. The other is the personal 
sin of each one of us, committed by our personal act. 

Now by Christ’s Passion we have been delivered not only 
from the common sin of the whole human race, both as to 
its guilt and as to the debt of punishment, for which He paid 
the penalty on our behalf; but, furthermore, from the per- 
sonal sins of individuals, who share in His Passion by faith 
and charity and the sacraments of faith. Consequently, 
then, the gate of heaven’s kingdom is thrown open to us 
through Christ’s Passion. This is precisely what the 
Apostle says (Heb. ix. 11, 12): Christ being come a high- 
priest of the good things to come... by His own blood entered 

333. EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 49. Arr. 5 

once into the Holies, having obtained eternal redemption. 
And this is foreshadowed (Num. xxxv. 25, 28), where it is 
said that the slayer* shall abide there—that is to say, in the 
city of refuge—wuntil the death of the high-priest, that ts 
anotnted with the holy oil: but after he is dead, then shall he 
return home. 

Reply 05j. 1. The holy Fathers, by doing works of justice, 
merited to enter into the heavenly kingdom, through faith 
in Christ’s Passion, according to Heb. xi. 33: The saints 
by faith conquered kingdoms, wrought justice, and each of 
them was thereby cleansed from sin, so far as the cleansing 
of the individual is concerned. Nevertheless the faith and 
righteousness of no one of them sufficed for removing the 
barrier arising from the guilt of the whole human race: but 
this was removed at the cost of Christ’s blood. Conse- 
quently, before Christ’s Passion no one could enter the 
kingdom of heaven by obtaining everlasting beatitude, 
which consists in the full enjoyment of God. 

Reply Obj. 2. Elias was taken up into the atmospheric 
heaven, but not into the empyrean heaven, which is the 
abode of the saints: and likewise Enoch was translated 
into the earthly paradise, where he is believed to live with 
Elias until the coming of Antichrist. 

Reply Obj. 3. As was stated above (Q. XXXIX.,, A. 5), 
the heavens were opened at Christ’s baptism, not for Christ’s 
sake, to whom heaven was ever open, but in order to signify 
that heaven is opened to the baptized, through Christ’s 
baptism, which has its efficacy from His Passion. 

Obj. 4. Christ by His Passion merited for us the opening 
of the kingdom of heaven, and removed the obstacle; but 
by His ascension He, as it were, brought us to the pos- 
session of the heavenly kingdom. And consequently it 
is said that by ascending He opened the way before them. 

* The Septuagint has slayer, the Vulgate, twnocent—t.e., the man 
who has slain without hatred and enmtty. 

Q. 49. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 334 

S1xTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER BY HIS PASSION CHRIST MERITED TO BE 
EXALTED ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It-seems that Christ did not merit to be 
exalted on account of His Passion. For eminence of rank 
belongs to God alone, just as knowledge of truth, according 
to Ps. cxii. 4: The Lord is high above all nations, and His 
glory above the heavens. But Christ as man had the know- 
ledge of all truth, not on account of any preceding merit, 
but from the very union of God and man, according to 
Jo. i. 14: We saw His glory ... as it were of the Only- 
Begotten of the Father, full of grace and of truth. Therefore 
neither had He exaltation from the merit of the Passion, 
but from the union alone. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ merited for Himself from the first 
instant of His conception, as stated above (Q. XXXIV., 
A. 3). But his love was no greater during the Passion 
than before. Therefore, since charity is the principle of 
merit, it seems that He did not merit exaltation from the 
Passion more than before. 

Obj. 3. Further, the glory of the body comes from the 
glory of the soul, as Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor.). 
But by His Passion Christ did not merit exaltation as to 
the glory of His soul, because His soul was beatified from 
the first instant of His conception. Therefore neither did 
He merit exaltation, as to the glory of His body, from the 
Passion. 

On the contrary, It is written (Phil. ii. 8): He became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross ; for which cause 
God also exalted Him. 

I answer that, Merit implies a certain equality of justice: 
hence the Apostle says (Rom. iv. 4): Now to him that worketh, 
the reward is reckoned according to debt. But when anyone 
by reason of his unjust will ascribes to himself something 
beyond his due, it is only just that he be deprived of some- 

335 EFFECTS OF CHRIST’S PASSION Q. 49. Arr. 6 

thing else which is his due; thus, when a man steals a sheep 
he shall pay back four (Exod. xxii. 1). And he is said to 
deserve it, inasmuch as his unjust will is chastised thereby. 
So likewise when any man through his just will has stripped 
himself of what he ought to have, he deserves that some- 
thing further be granted to him as the reward of his just 
will. And hence it is written (Luke xiv. 11): He that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted. 

Now in His Passion Christ humbled Himself beneath His 
dignity in four respects. In the first place as to His Pas- 
sion and death, to which He was not bound; secondly, as 
to the place, since His body was laid in a sepulchre and 
His soul in hell; thirdly, as to the shame and mockeries 
He endured; fourthly, as to His being delivered up to man’s 
power, as He Himself said to Pilate (Jo. xix. 11): Thou 
shouldst not have any power against Me, unless it were given 
thee from above. And, consequently, He merited a four- 
fold exaltation from His Passion. First of all, as to His 
glorious Resurrection: hence it is written (Ps. cxxxvili. I): 
Thou hast known my sitting down—that is, the lowliness of 
My Passion—and My rising up. Secondly, as to His 
ascension into heaven: hence it is written (Eph. iv. 9): 
Now that He ascended, what is it; but because He also de- 
scended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that de- 
scended 1s the same also that ascended above all the heavens. 
Thirdly, as to the sitting on the right hand of the Father and 
the showing forth of His Godhead, according to Isa. li. 13: 
He shall be exalted and extolled, and shall be exceeding high : 
as many have been astonished at him, so shall His visage be 
inglorious among men. Moreover (Phil. ii. 8) it is written: 
He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to 
the death of the cross: for which cause also God hath exalted 
Him, and hath given Hin a name which 1s above all names— 
that is to say, so that He shall be hailed as God by all; 
and all shall pay Him homage as God. And this is ex- 
pressed in what follows: That in the name of Jesus every 
knee should bow, of those that are in heaven, on earth, and 
under the earth. Fourthly, as to His judiciary power: for 

Q. 49. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 336 

it is written (Job xxxvi. 17: Thy cause hath been judged as 
that of the wicked, cause and judgement Thou shalt recover. 

Reply Obj. 1. The source of meriting comes of the soul, 
while the body is the instrument of the meritorious work. 
And consequently the perfection of Christ’s soul, which 
was the source of meriting, ought not to be acquired in 
Him by merit, like the perfection of the body, which was 
the subject of suffering, and was thereby the instrument of 
His merit. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ by His previous merits did merit 
exaltation on behalf of His soul, whose will was animated 
with charity and the other virtues; but in the Passion He 
merited His exaltation by way of recompense even on 
behalf of His body: since it is only just that the body, 
which from charity was subjected to the Passion, should 
receive recompense in glory. 

Reply Obj. 3. It was owing to a special dispensation in 
Christ that before the Passion the glory of His soul did not 
shine out in His body, in order that He might procure His 
bodily glory with greater honour, when He had merited it by 
His Passion. But it was not beseeming for the glory of His 
soul to be postponed, since the soul was united immediately 
with the Word; hence it was beseeming that its glory should 
be filled by the Word Himself. But the body was united 
with the Word through the soul. 

QUESTION L. 

OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the death of Christ; concerning 
which there are six subjects of inquiry: (1) Whether it was 
fitting that Christ should die? (2) Whether His death 
severed the union of Godhead and flesh? (3) Whether 
His Godhead was separated from His soul? (4) Whether 
Christ was a man during the three days of His death? 
(5) Whether His was the same body, living and dead? 
(6) Whether His death conduced in any way to our sal- 
vation ? 

First ARTICLE. 
WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT CHRIST SHOULD DIE ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not fitting that 
Christ should die. For a first principle in any order is not 
affected by anything contrary to such order: thus fire, 
which is the principle of heat, can never become cold. But 
the Son of God is the fountain-head and principle of all life, 
according to Ps. xxxv. 10: With Thee is the fountain of life. 
Therefore it does not seem fitting for Christ to die. 

Obj. 2. Further, death is a greater defect than sickness, 
because it is through sickness that one comes to die. But 
it was not beseeming for Christ to languish from sickness, 
as Chrysostom* says. Consequently, neither was it becoming 
for Christ to die. » 

Obj. 3. Further, our Lord said (Jo. x. 10): I am come 
that they may have life, and may have it more abundantly. 
* Athanasius, Ovat. de Incarn. Verbi. 

III. 2 337 ae 

Q. 0. Art.r THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” « 338 

But one opposite does not lead to another. Therefore it 
seems that neither was it fitting for Christ to die. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. xi. 50): It 1s expedient 
that one man should die for the people, . . . that the whole 
nation perish not: which words were spoken prophetically 
by Caiphas, as the Evangelist testifies. 

I answer that, It was fitting for Christ to die. First of 
all to satisfy for the whole human race, which was sen- 
tenced to die on account of sin, according to Gen. ii. 17: 
In what day soever ye shall (Vulg., thou shalt) eat of it, ye 
shall (Vulg., thou shalt) die the death. Now it is a fitting 
way of satisfying for another to submit oneself to the 
penalty deserved by that other. And so Christ resolved 
to die, that by dying He might atone for us, according to 
1 Pet. iii. 18: Christ also died once for our sins. Secondly, 
in order to show the reality of the flesh assumed. For, as 
Eusebius says (Orat. de Laud. Constant. xv.), tf, after dwell- 
ing among men Christ were suddenly to disappear from men’s 
sight, as though shunning death, then by all men He would be 
likened toa phantom. Thirdly, that by dying He might deliver 
us from fearing death: hence it is written (Heb. ii. 14, 15) 
that He communicated to flesh and blood, that through 
death He might destroy him who had the empire of death 
and might deliver them who, through the fear of death, were 
all their lifetime subject to servitude. Fourthly, that by 
dying in the body to the likeness of sin—that is, to its 
_ penalty—He might set us the example of dying to sin 
spiritually. Hence it is written (Rom. vi. 10): For in that 
He died to sin, He died once, but in that He liveth, He liveth 
unto God : so do you also reckon that you are dead to sin, but 
alive unto God. Fifthly, that by rising from the dead, 
and manifesting His power whereby He overthrew death, 
He might instil into us the hope of rising from the dead. 
Hence the Apostle says (x Cor. xv. 12): If Christ be preached 
that He rose again from the dead, how do some among you say, 
that there is no resurrection from the dead ? 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ is the fountain of life, as God, and 
not as man: but He died as man, and not as God. Hence 

S39 THE DEATH OF CHRIST Q. 50. Arr. 2 

Augustine* says against Felician: Far be it from us to sup- 
pose that Christ so felt death that He lost His life inasmuch 
as He is life in Himself ; for, were it so, the fountain of life 
would have run dry. Accordingly, He experienced death by 
sharing in our human feeling, which of His own accord He 
had taken upon Himself, but He did not lose the power of His 
Nature, through which He gives life to all things. 

Reply 0bj. 2. Christ did not suffer death which comes of 
sickness, lest He should seem to die of necessity from ex- 
hausted nature: but He endured death inflicted from with- 
out, to which He willingly surrendered Himself, that His 
death might be shown to be a voluntary one. 

Reply Obj. 3. One opposite does not of itself lead to the 
other, yet it does so indirectly at times; thus cold some- 
times is the indirect cause of heat: and in this way Christ 
by His death brought us back to life, when by His death 
He destroyed our death; just as he who bears another’s 
punishment takes such punishment away. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE GODHEAD WAS SEPARATED FROM THE FLESH 
WHEN CHRIST DIED ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the Godhead was sepa- 
rated from the flesh when Christ died. For as Matthew 
relates (xxvii. 46), when our Lord was hanging upon the 
cross He cried out: My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken 
Me? which words Ambrose, commenting on Luke xxiii. 46, 
explains as follows: The man cried out when about to expire 
by being severed from the Godhead ; for since the Godhead is 
immune from death, assuredly death could not be there, ex- 
cept life departed, for the Godhead is life. And so it seems 
that when Christ died, the Godhead was separated from 
His flesh. 

Obj. 2. Further, extremes are severed when the mean is 
removed. But the soul was the mean through which the 

* Vigilius Tapsensis. 

. 

Q. 50. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 340 

Godhead was united with the flesh, as stated above (Q. VI., 
A. 1). Therefore since the soul was severed from the flesh 
by death, it seems that, in consequence, His Godhead was 
also separated from it. 

Obj. 3. Further, God’s life-giving power is greater than 
that of the soul. But the body could not die unless the 
soul quitted it. Therefore, much less could it die unless 
the Godhead departed. 

On the contrary, As stated above (Q. XVI., AA. 4, 5), 
the attributes of human nature are predicated of the Son 
of God only by reason of the union. But what belongs to 
the body of Christ after death is predicated of the Son 
of God—namely, being buried: as is evident from the 
Creed, in which it is said that the Son of God was con- 
ceived and born of a Virgin, suffered, died, and was burted. 
Therefore Christ’s Godhead was not separated from the 
flesh when He died. 

I answer that, What is bestowed through God’s grace is 
never withdrawn except through fault. Hence it is written 
(Rom. xi. 29): The gifts and the calling of God are without 
repentance. But the grace of union, whereby the Godhead 
was united to the flesh in Christ’s Person, is greater than 
the grace of adoption whereby others are sanctified: also 
it is more enduring of itself, because this grace is ordained 
for personal union, whereas the grace of adoption is referred 
to a certain affective union. And yet we see that the grace 
of adoption is never lost without fault. Since, then, there 
was no sin in Christ, it was impossible for the union of the 
Godhead with the flesh to be dissolved. Consequently, as 
before death Christ’s flesh was united personally and hypo- 
statically with the Word of God, it remained so after His 
death, so that the hypostasis of the Word of God was not 
different from that of Christ’s flesh after death, as Damascene 
says (De Fide Orthod. iii.). 

Reply Obj. 1. Such forsaking is not to be referred to the 
dissolving of the personal union, but to this, that God the 
Father gave Him up to the Passion: hence there to forsake 
means simply not to protect from persecutors. Or else He 

341 THE DEATH OF CHRIST QQ. 50. Arr3. 

says there that He is forsaken, with reference to the prayer 
He had made: Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass away 
from Me, as Augustine explains it (De Gratia Novi Test.). 

Reply Obj. 2. The Word of God is said to be united with 
the flesh through the medium of the soul, inasmuch as it is 
through the soul that the flesh belongs to human nature, 
which the Son of God intended to assume; but not as though 
the soul were the medium linking them together. But it 
is due to the soul that the flesh is human even after the 
soul has been separated from it—namely, inasmuch as by 
God’s ordinance there remains in the dead flesh a certain 
relation to the resurrection. And therefore the union of 
the Godhead with the flesh is not taken away. 

Reply Obj. 3. The soul formally possesses the life-giving 
energy, and therefore, while it is present, and united for- 
mally, the body must necessarily be a living one, whereas 
the Godhead has not the life-giving energy formally, but 
effectively; because It cannot be the form of the body: 
and therefore it is not necessary for the flesh to be living 
while the union of the Godhead with the flesh remains,’ 
since God does not act of necessity, but of His own will. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IN CHRIST’S DEATH THERE WAS A SEVERANCE 
BETWEEN HIS GODHEAD AND HIS SOUL? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that there was a severance in 
death between Christ’s Godhead and His soul, because our 
Lord said (Jo. x. 18): No man taketh away My soul from Me: 
but I lay it down of Myself, and I have power to lay tt down, 
and I have power to take it up again. But it does not appear 
that the body can set the soul aside, by separating the soul 
from itself, because the soul is not subject to the power of 
the body, but rather conversely: and so it appears that it 
belongs to Christ, as the Word of God, to lay down His 
soul: but this is to separate it from Himself. Consequently, 
by death His soul was severed from the Godhead. 

Q. 50. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 342 

Obj. 2. Further, Athanasius* says that he is accursed who 
does not confess that the entire man, whom the Son of God 
took to Himself, after being assumed once more or delivered 
by Him, rose again from the dead on the third day. But the 
entire man could not be assumed again, unless the entire 
man was at one time separated from the Word of God: 
and the entire man is made of soul and body. Therefore 
there was a separation made at one time of the Godhead 
from both the body and the soul. 

Obj. 3. Further, the Son of God is truly styled a man 
because of the union with the entire man. If then, when 
the union of the soul with the body was dissolved by death, 
the Word of God continued united with the soul, it would 
follow that the Son of God could be truly called a soul. 
But this is false, because since the soul is the form of the 
body, it would result in the Word of God being the form of 
the body; which is impossible. Therefore, in death the soul 
of Christ was separated from the Word of God. 

Obj. 4. Further, the separated soul and body are not 

one hypostasis, but two. Therefore, if the Word of God 
remained united with Christ’s soul and body, then, when 
they were severed by Christ’s death, it seems to follow 
that the Word of God was two hypostases during such time 
as Christ was dead; which cannot be admitted. Therefore, 
after Christ’s death His soul did not continue to be united 
with the Word. 
- On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): 
Although Christ died as man, and His holy soul was separated 
from His spotless body, nevertheless His Godhead remained 
unseparated from both—from the soul, I mean, and from the 
body. 

I answer that, The soul is united with the Word of God 
more immediately and more primarily than the body is, 
because it is through the soul that the body is united with 
the Word of God, as stated above (Q. VI., A. 1). Since, 
then, the Word of God was not separated from the body at 

* Vigil. Tapsens., De Trin. vi. Bardenhewer assigns it to St. 
Athanasius: § 45, iii. The full title is De Trinitate et Spiritu Sancto. 

343 THE DEATH OF CHRIST Q 50. Art. 3 

Christ’s death, much less was He separated from the soul. 
Accordingly, since what regards the body severed from 
the soul is affirmed of the Son of God—namely, that it 
was buried—so is it said of Him in the Creed that He de- 
scended into hell, because His soul when separated from the 
body did go down into hell. 

Reply Obj. 1. Augustine (Tract. xlvii. in Joan.), in com- 
menting on the text of John, asks, since Christ is Word 
and soul and body, whether He putteth down His soul, for 
that He is the Word? Or, for that He ts a soul ? or, again, 
for that He ts flesh? And he says that, should we say that 
the Word of God laid down His soul, . . . it would follow 
that there was a time when that soul was severed from the 
Word—which is untrue. For death severed the body and 
soul: . . . but that the soul was severed from the Word I do 
not affirm. ... But should we say that the soul latd itself 
down, it follows that it is severed from itself : which is most 
absurd. It remains, therefore, that the flesh itself layeth 
down its soul and taketh it again, not by its own power, but 
by the power of the Word dwelling in the flesh: because, as 
stated above (A. 2), the Godhead of the Word was not severed 
from the flesh in death. 

Reply Obj. 2. In those words Athanasius never meant to 
say that the whole man was reassumed—that is, as to all 
his parts—as if the Word of God had laid aside the parts 
of human nature by His death; but that the totality of the 
assumed nature was restored once more in the resurrection 
by the resumed union of soul and body. 

Reply Obj. 3. Through being united to human nature, the 
Word of God is not on that account called human nature: 
but He is called a man—that is, one having human nature. 
Now the soul and the body are essential parts of human 
nature. Hence it does not follow that the Word is a soul 
or a body through being united with both, but that He is 
one possessing a soul or a body. 

Reply Obj. 4. As Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iii.): 
In Christ's death the soul was separated from the flesh: not 
one hypostasis divided into two: because both soul and body 

Q. 50. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 344 

in the same respect had their existence from the beginning in 
the hypostasis of the Word; and in death, though severed 
from one another, each one continued to have the one same 
hypostasis of the Word. Wherefore the one hypostasis of 
the Word was the hypostasis of the Word, of the soul, and of 
the body. For neither soul nor body ever had an hypostasis 
of its own, besides the hypostasis of the Word: for there was 
always one hypostasis of the Word, and never two. 

FouRTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS A MAN DURING THE THREE DAYS OF 
HIS DEATH ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was a man during 
the three days of His death, because Augustine says (De 
Trin, iii.): Such was the assuming (of nature) as to make God 
to be man, and man to be God. But this assuming (of nature) 
did not cease at Christ’s death. Therefore it seems that 
He did not cease to be a man in consequence of death. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix.) that 
each man is his intellect ; consequently, when we address 
the soul of Peter after his death we say: Saint Peter, pray 
for us. But the Son of God after death was not separated 
from His intellectual soul. Therefore, during those three 
days the Son of God was a man. 

Obj. 3. Further, every priest isa man. But during those 
three days of death Christ was a priest: otherwise what is 
said in Ps. cix. 4 would not be true: Thou art a priest for 
ever. Therefore Christ was a man during those three days. 

On the contrary, When the higher (species) is removed, 
so is the lower. But the living or animated being is a 
higher species than animal and man, because an animal is 
a sensible animated substance. Now during those three 
days of death Christ’s body was not living or animated. 
Therefore He was not a man. 

I answer that, It is an article of faith that Christ was truly 
dead: hence it is an error against faith to assert anything 

345 THE DEATH OF CHRIST Q. 50. Art. 4 

whereby the truth of Christ’s death is destroyed. Accord- 
ingly it is said in the Synodal epistle of Cyril:* If any 
man does not acknowledge that the Word of God suffered in 
the flesh, and was crucified in the flesh and tasted death in the 
flesh, let him be anathema. Now it belongs to the truth of 
the death of man or animal that by death the subject ceases 
to be man or animal; because the death of the man or animal 
results from the separation of the soul, which is the formal 
complement of the man or animal. Consequently, to say 
that Christ was a man during the three days of His death 
simply and without qualification, is erroneous. Yet it can 
be said that He was a dead man during those three days. 

However, some writers have contended that Christ was 
a man during those three days, uttering words which are 
indeed erroneous, yet without intent of error in faith: as 
Hugh of Saint Victor, who (De Sacram. ii.) contended that 
Christ, during the three days that followed His death, was 
a man, because he held that the soul is a man: but this is 
false, as was shown in the First Part (Q. LXXV., A. 4). 
Likewise the Master of the Sentences (iii., D. 22) held 
Christ to be a man during the three days of His death for 
quite another reason. For he believed the union of soul 
and flesh not to be essential to a man, and that for anything 
to be a man it suffices if it have a soul and body, whether 
united or separated: and that this is likewise false is clear 
both from what has been said in the First Part (Q. LXXV., 
A. 4), and from what has been said above regarding the 
mode of union (Q. II., A. 5). 

Reply Obj. 1. The Word of God assumed a united soul 
and body: and the result of this assumption was that God 
is man, and man is God. But this assumption did not 
cease by the separation of the Word from the soul or from 
the flesh; yet the union of soul and flesh ceased. 

Reply Obj. 2. Man is said to be his own intellect, not 
because the intellect is the entire man, but because the 
intellect is the chief part of man, in which man’s whole 
disposition lies virtually; just as the ruler of the city may 

* Act. Conc. Ephes., P. I., cap. xxvi. 

Q. 50, Art.5 THE ‘‘ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 346 

be called the whole city, since its entire disposal is vested 
in him. 

Reply Obj. 3. That a man is competent to be a priest is 
by reason of the soul, which is the subject of the character 
of order: hence a man does not lose his priestly order by 
death, and much less does Christ, who is the fount of the 
entire priesthood. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S WAS IDENTICALLY THE SAME BODY 
LIVING AND DEAD ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s was not identically 
the same body living and dead. For Christ truly died just 
as other men do. But the body of everyone else is not 
simply identically the same, dead and living, because there 
is an essential difference between them. Therefore neither 
is the body of Christ identically the same, dead and living. 

Obj. 2. Further, according to the Philosopher (Metaph. v., 
text. 12), things specifically diverse are also numerically 
diverse. But Christ’s body, living and dead, was specifically 
diverse: because the eye or flesh of the dead is only called 
so equivocally, as is evident from the Philosopher (De 
Anima ii., text. 9; Metaph. vii.). Therefore Christ’s body 
was not simply identically the same, living and dead. 

Ubj. 3. Further, death is a kind of corruption. But 
what is corrupted by substantial corruption after being 
corrupted, exists no longer, since corruption is change from 
being to non-being. Therefore, Christ’s body, after it was 
dead, did not remain identically the same, because death 
is a substantial corruption. 

On the contrary, Athanasi':s says (Epist. ad Epict.): In 
that body which was circumcised and carried, which ate, and 
toiled, and was nailed on the tree, there was the impassible 
and incorporeal Word of God: the same was laid in the tomb. 
But Christ’s living body was circumcised and nailed on 
the tree; and Christ’s dead body was laid in the tomb. 
Therefore it was the same body living and dead. 

347 THE DEATH OF CHRIST — Q. 50. Arr. 5 

I answer that, The expression simply can be taken in two 
senses. In the first instance by taking simply to be the 
same as absolutely ; thus that is said simply which is said 
without addition, as the Philosopher puts it (Topic. ii.): and 
in this way the dead and living body of Christ was simply 
identically the same: since a thing is said to be simply 
identically the same from the identity of the subject. But 
Christ’s body living and dead was identical in its sup- 
positum because alive and dead it had none other besides 
the Word of God, as was stated above (A. 2). And it is 
in this sense that Athanasius is speaking in the passage 
quoted. 

In another way simply is the same as altogether or totally : 
in which sense the body of Christ, dead and alive, was not 
simply the same identically, because it was not fotally 
the same, since life is of the essence of a living body; for 
it is an essential and not an accidental predicate: hence it 
follows that a body which ceases to be living does not 
remain totally the same. Moreover, if it were to be said 
that Christ’s dead body did continue /otally the same, it 
would follow that it was not corrupted—I mean, by the 
corruption of death: which is the heresy of the Gaianites, 
as Isidore says (Etym. viii.), and is to be found in the De- 
cretals (xxiv., qu. li.). And Damascene says (De Fide 
Orthod. iii.) that the term ‘ corruption’ denotes two things : 
in one way it 1s the separation of the soul from the body and 
other things of the sort ; in another way, the complete dissolving 
into elements. Consequently it is impious to say with Julian 
and Gaian that the Lord’s body was incorruptible after the 
first manner of corruption before the resurrection: because 
Christ's body would not be consubstantial with us, nor truly 
dead, nor would we have been saved in very truth. But in 
the second way Christ's body was tncorrupt. 

Reply Obj. 1. The dead body of everyone else does not 
continue united to an abiding hypostasis, as Christ’s dead 
body did; consequently the dead body of everyone else is 
not the same simply, but only in some respect: because it 
is the same as to its matter, but not the same as to its form. 

Q.50. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 348 

But Christ’s body remains the same simply, on account of 
the identity of the suppositum, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 2. Since a thing is said to be the same identi- 
cally according to suppositum, but the same specifically 
according to form: wherever the suppositum subsists in only 
one nature, it follows of necessity that when the unity of 
species is taken away the unity of identity is also taken 
away. But the hypostasis of the Word of God subsists 
in two natures; and consequently, although in others the 
body does not remain the same according to the species of 
human nature, still it continues identically the same in 
Christ according to the suppositum of the Word of God. 

Reply Obj. 3. Corruption and death do not belong to 
Christ by reason of the suppositum, from which suppositum 
follows the unity of identity; but by reason of the human 
nature, according to which is found the difference of death 
and of life in Christ’s body. 

SIXTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S DEATH CONDUCED IN ANY WAY TO OUR 
SALVATION ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s death did not 
conduce in any way to our salvation. For death is a sort of 
privation, since it is the privation of life. But privation 
has not any power of activity, because it is nothing positive. 
Therefore it could not work anything for our salvation. 

Ovj. 2. Further, Christ’s Passion wrought our salvation by . 
way of merit. But Christ’s death could not operate in this 
way, because in death the body is separated from the soul, 
which is the principle of meriting. Consequently, Christ’s 
death did not accomplish anything towards our salvation. 

Obj. 3. Further, what is corporeal is not the cause of 
what is spiritual. But Christ’s death was corporeal. There- 
fore it could not be the cause of our salvation, which is 
something spiritual. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iv.): The one 

349 THE DEATH OF CHRIST Q. 50. Arr. 6 

death of our Saviour, namely, that of the body, saved us 
from our two deaths, that is, of the soul and the body. 

I answer that, We may speak of Christ’s death in two 
ways, im becoming and in fact. Death is said to be im 
becoming when anyone from natural or enforced suffering 
is tending towards death: and in this way it is the same 
thing to speak of Christ’s death as of His Passion: so that 
in this sense Christ’s death is the cause of our salvation, 
according to what has been already said of the Passion 
(Q. XLVIIT.). But death is considered in fact, inasmuch 
as the separation of soul and body has already taken place: 
and it is in this sense that we are now speaking of Christ’s 
death. In this way Christ’s death cannot be the cause of 
our salvation by way of merit, but only by way of causality, 
that is to say, inasmuch as the Godhead was not separated 
from Christ’s flesh by death; and therefore, whatever befell 
Christ’s flesh, even when the soul was departed, was con- 
ducive to salvation in virtue of the Godhead united. But 
the effect of any cause is properly estimated according to 
its resemblance to the cause. Consequently, since death is 
a kind of privation of one’s own life, the effect of Christ’s 
death is considered in relation to the removal of the obstacles 
to our salvation: and these are the death of the soul and 
of the body. Hence Christ’s death is said to have de- 
stroyed in us both the death of the soul, caused by sin, 
according to Rom. iv. 25: He was delivered up (namely unto 
death) for our sins: and the death of the body, consisting 
in the separation of the soul, according to 1 Cor. xv. 54: 
Death is swallowed up in victory. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s death wrought our salvation from 
the power of the Godhead united, and not considered merely 
as His death. 

Reply Obj. 2. Though Christ’s death, considered im fact 
did not effect our salvation by way of merit, yet it did so 
by way of causality, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s death was indeed corporeal; but 
the body was the instrument of the Godhead united to Him, 
working by Its power, although dead. 

QUESTION LI. 

OF CHRIST’S BURIAL. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s burial, concerning which 
there are four points of inquiry: (1) Whether it was fitting 
for Christ to be buried? (2) Concerning the manner of 
His burial. (3) Whether His body was decomposed in the 
tomb? (4) Concerning the length of time He lay in the 
tomb. 

FIRST ARTICLE. 
WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO BE BURIED ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection x. It would seem unfitting for Christ to have 
been buried, because it is said of Him (Ps. Ixxxvii. 6): He ts 
(Vulg., I am] become as a man without help, free among the 
dead. But the bodies of the dead are enclosed in a tomb; 
which seems contrary to liberty. Therefore it does not 
seem fitting for Christ to have been buried. 

Obj. 2. Further, nothing should be done to Christ except 
it was helpful to our salvation. But Christ’s burial seems 
in no way to be conducive to our salvation. Therefore, it 
was not fitting for Him to be buried. 

Obj. 3. Further, it seems out of place for God who is 
above the high heavens to be laid in the earth. But what 
befalls the dead body of Christ is attributed to God by 
reason of the union. Therefore it appears to be unbecoming 
for Christ to be buried. 

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matth. xxvi. 10) of the 
woman who anointed Him: She has wrought a good work 

350 

351 GHRISTS; BURIAL OusieART at 

upon Me, and then He added (12)—/or she, in pouring this 
ointment upon My body, hath done it for My burial. 

I answer that, It was fitting for Christ to be buried. First 
of all, to establish the truth of His death; for no one is laid 
in the grave unless there be certainty of death. Hence we 
read (Mark xv. 44, 45), that Pilate by diligent inquiry 
assured himself of Christ’s death before granting leave for 
His burial. Secondly, because by Christ’s rising from the 
grave, to them who are in the grave, hope is given of rising 
again through Him, according to John v. 25, 28: All that 
are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God, .. . 
and they that hear shall live. Thirdly, as an example to 
them who dying spiritually to their sins are hidden away 
from the disturbance of men (Ps. xxx. 21). Hence it is said 
(Col. ili. 3): You are dead, and your life is hid with Christ 
in God. Wherefore the baptized likewise who through 
Christ’s death die to sins, are as it were buried with Christ 
by immersion, according to Rom. vi. 4: We are burned 
together with Christ by baptism into death. 

Reply Obj. 1. Though buried, Christ proved Himself free 
among the dead: since, although imprisoned in the tomb, 
He could not be hindered from going forth by rising again. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Christ’s death wrought our salvation, 
so likewise did His burial. Hence Jerome says (Super 
Marc. xiv.): By Christ’s burial we rise again ; and on Isa. 
liii. 9: He shall give the ungodly for His burial, a gloss says: 
He shall give to God and the Father the Gentiles who were 
without godliness, because He purchased them by His death 
and burial. 

Reply Obj. 3. As is said in a discourse made at the Council 
of Ephesus,* Nothing that saves man 1s derogatory to God ; 
showing Him to be not passible, but merciful : and in another 
discourse of the same Council:+ God does not repute anything 
as an injury which ts an occasion of men’s salvation. Thus 
thou shalt not deem God’s Nature to be so vile, as though It 
may sometimes be subjected to injuries. 

“YP, 1i,, Cap, 9. { [bid., cap. 10. 

Q. 5r. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 352 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WAS BURIED IN A BECOMING MANNER ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was buried in an 
unbecoming manner. For His burial should be in keeping — 
with His death. But Christ underwent a most shameful 
death, according to Wisd. ii. 20: Let us condemn Him to a 
most shameful death. It seems therefore unbecoming for 
honourable burial to be accorded to Christ, inasmuch as 
He was buried by men of position—namely, by Joseph of 
Arimathea, who was a noble counsellor, to use Mark’s expres- 
sion (xv. 43), and by Nicodemus, who was a ruler of the 
Jews, as John states (iii. I). 

Obj. 2. Further, nothing should be done to Christ which 
might set an example of wastefulness. But it seems to 
savour of waste that in order to bury Christ Nicodemus 
came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred 
pounds weight, as recorded by John (xix. 39), especially 
since a woman came beforehand to anoint His body for 
the burial, as Mark relates (xiv. 8). Consequently, this was 
not done becomingly with regard to Christ. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is not becoming for anything done to 
be inconsistent with itself. But Christ’s burial on the one 
hand was simple, because Joseph wrapped His body in a 
clean linen cloth, as is related by Matthew (xxvii. 59), but 
not with gold or gems, or silk, as Jerome observes: yet on 
the other hand there appears to have been some display, 
inasmuch as they buried Him with fragrant spices 
(Jo. xix. 40). Consequently, the manner of Christ’s burial 
does not seem to have been seemly. 

Obj. 4. Further, What things soever were written, especially 
of Christ, were written for our learning, according to Rom. 
xv.4. But some of the things written in the Gospels touching 
Christ’s burial in no wise seem to pertain to our instruction :— 
as that He was buried im a garden, . . . in a tomb which 
was not His own, which was new, and hewed out in a rock. 
Therefore the manner of Christ’s burial was not becoming. 

353 CHRIST’S BURIAL O. 51. Art. 2 

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. xi. 10): And His sepulchre 
shall be glorious. 

I answer that, The manner of Christ’s burial is shown to 
be seemly in three respects. First, to confirm faith in His 
death and resurrection. Secondly, to commend the devotion 
of those who gave Him burial. Hence Augustine says 
(De Civ. Det i.): The Gospel mentions as praiseworthy the 
deed of those who received His Body from the cross, and with 
due care and reverence wrapt it up and buried it. Thirdly, as 
to the mystery whereby those are moulded who are buried 
together with Christ into death (Rom. vi. 4). 

Reply Obj. 1. With regard to Christ’s death, His patience 
and constancy in enduring death are commended, and all 
the more that His death was the more despicable: but in 
His honourable burial we can see the power of the dying 
Man, who, even in death, frustrated the intent of His 
murderers, and was buried with honour: and thereby is 
foreshadowed the devotion of the faithful who in the time 
to come were to serve the dead Christ. 

Reply Obj. 2. On that expression of the Evangelist 
(Jo. xix. 40) that they buried Him as the manner of the Jews 
ts to bury, Augustine says (Tract. in Joan. cxx.): He ad- 
monishes us that in offices of this kind which are rendered to 
the dead, the custom of each nation should be observed. Now 
it was the custom of this people to anoint bodies with various 
spices in order the longer to preserve them from corruption.* 
Accordingly it is said in De Doctr. Christ. in. that in all such 
things, it 1s not the use thereof, but the luxury of the user that 
ts at fault ; and, farther on: what in other persons 1s frequently 
criminal, in a divine or prophetic person 13 a sign of some- 
thing great. For myrrh and aloes by their bitterness denote 
penance, by which man keeps Christ within himself without 
the corruption of sin; while the odour of the ointments 
expresses good report. 

Reply Obj. 3. Myrrh and aloes were used on Christ’s 
body in order that it might be preserved from corruption, 
and this seemed to imply a certain need (in the body): hence 

* Cf. Catena Aurea in Joan. xix. 
Hi 2 23 

Q. 51. Arr.2, THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 354 

the example is set us that we may lawfully use precious 
things medicinally, from the need of preserving our body. 
But the wrapping up of the body was merely a question 
of becoming propriety. And we ought to content ourselves 
with simplicity in such things. Yet, as Jerome observes, by 
this act was denoted that he swathes Jesus in clean linen, 
who receives Him with a pure soul. Hence, as Bede says 
on Mark xv. 46: The Church's custom has prevailed for the 
sacrifice of the altar to be offered not upon silk, nor upon dyed 
cloth, but on linen of the earth ; as the Lord’s body was buried 
in a clean winding-sheet. 

Reply Obj. 4. Christ was buried in a garden to express 
that by His death and burial we are delivered from the 
death which we incur through Adam’s sin committed in 
the garden of paradise. But for this was our Lord buried 
in the grave of a stranger, as Augustine says in a sermon 
(ccxlviii.), because He died for the salvation of others; and 
a sepulchre is the abode of death. Also the extent of the 
poverty endured for us can be thereby estimated: since 
He who while living had no home, after death was laid 
to rest in another’s tomb, and being naked was clothed 
by Joseph. But He is laid in a mew sepulchre, as Jerome 
observes on Matth. xxvii. 60, lest after the resurrection it 
might be pretended that someone else had risen, while the other 
corpses remained. The new sepulchre can also denote Mary’s 
virginal womb. And furthermore it may be understood 
_that all of us are renewed by Christ’s burial; death and 
corruption being destroyed. Moreover, He was buried in 
a monument hewn out of a rock, as Jerome says on Matth. 
xxvii. 64, lest, if it had been constructed of many stones, 
they might say that He was stolen away by digging away the 
foundations of the tomb. Hence the great stone which was 
set shows that the tomb could not be opened except by the help 
of many hands. Again, if He had been buried in the earth, 
they might have said: They dug up the soil and stole Him 
away, as Augustine observes.* Hilary (Comment. in Matth., 
Cap. XXxill.) gives the mystical interpretation, saying that 

* Cf. Catena Aurea, 

355 CHRIST’S BURIAL Q. 51. ART. 3 

by the teaching of the apostles, Christ is borne into the stony 
heart of the gentile ; for it is hewn out by the process of teaching, 
unpolished and new, untenanted and open to the entrance of 
the fear of God. And since naught besides Him must enter 
into our hearts, a great stone is rolled against the door. Further- 
more, as Origen says (Tract. xxxv. in Matth.): It was not 
written by hazard: ‘ Joseph wrapped Christ's body in a clean 
winding-sheet, and placed it in a new monument,’ and that 
“he rolled a great stone,’ because all things around the body of 
Jesus are clean, and new, and exceeding great. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S BODY WAS REDUCED TO DUST IN THE 
TOMB ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s body was reduced 
to dust in the tomb. For just as man dies in punishment of 
his first parent’s sin, so also does he return to dust, since 
it was said to the first man after his sin: Dust thou art, and 
into dust thou shalt return (Gen. iii. 19). But Christ endured 
death in order to deliver us from death. Therefore His 
body ought to be made to return to dust, so as to free us 
from the same penalty. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ’s body was of the same nature 
as ours. But directly after death our bodies begin to dis- 
solve into dust, and are disposed towards putrefaction, 
because when the natural heat departs, there supervenes 
heat from without which causes corruption. Therefore it 
seems that the same thing happened to Christ’s body. 

Obj. 3. Further, as stated above (A. 1), Christ willed 
to be buried in order to furnish men with the hope of rising 
likewise from the grave. Consequently, He sought likewise 
to return to dust so as to give to them who have returned 
to dust the hope of rising from the dust. 

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. xv. 10): Nor wilt Thou 
suffer Thy holy one to see corruption: and Damascene (De 
Fide Orthod. iii.) expounds this of the corruption which 
comes of dissolving into elements. 

Q. 51. Arr.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 356 

I answer that, It was not fitting for Christ’s body to 
putrefy, or in any way be reduced to dust, since the putre- 
faction of any body comes of that body’s infirmity of 
nature, which can no longer hold the body together. But 
as was said above (Q. L., A. 1 ad 2), Christ’s death ought 
not to come from weakness of nature, lest it might not be 
believed to be voluntary: and therefore He willed to die, 
not from sickness, but from suffering inflicted on Him, to 
which He gave Himself up willingly. And therefore, lest His 
death might be ascribed to infirmity of nature, Christ did 
not wish His body to putrefy in any way or dissolve no 
matter how; but for the manifestation of His Divine power 
He willed that His body should continue incorrupt. Hence 
Chrysostom says (Cont. Jud. et Gent. quod ‘Christus sit 
Deus’) that with other men, especially with such as have 
wrought strenuously, their deeds shine forth in their lifetime ; 
but as soon as they die, their deeds go with them. But it ts 
quite the contrary with Christ: because previous to the cross 
all 1s sadness and weakness, but as soon as He is crucified, 
everything comes to light, in order that you may learn it was 
not an ordinary man that was crucified. 

Reply Obj. 1. Since Christ was not subject to sin, neither 
was He prone to die or to return to dust. Yet of His own 
will He endured death for our salvation, for the reasons 
alleged above (Q. LI., A. 1). But had His body putrefied 
or dissolved, this fact would have been detrimental to man’s 
salvation, for it would not have seemed credible that the 
-Divine power was in Him. Hence it is on His behalf that 
it is written (Ps. xxix. 10): What profit is there in my blood, 
whilst I go down to corruption ? as if He were to say: If 
My body corrupt, the profit of the blood shed will be lost. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s body was a subject of corruption 
according to the condition of its passible nature, but not as 
to the deserving cause of putrefaction, which is sin: but the 
Divine power preserved Christ’s body from putrefying, just 
as it raised it up from death. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ rose from the tomb by Divine power, 
which is not narrowed within bounds. Consequently, His 

357 CHRIST’S BURIAL Q. 51. ART. 4 

rising from the grave was a sufficient argument to prove 
that men are to be raised up by Divine power, not only 
from their graves, but also from any dust whatever. 

FourtTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS IN THE TOMB DURING ONLY ONE 
DAY AND TWO NIGHTS ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was not in the 
tomb during only one day and two nights; because He said 
(Matth. xii. 40): As Jonas was in the whale’s belly three days 
and three nights : so shall the Son of man be in the heart of 
the earth three days and three nights. But He was in the 
heart of the earth while He was in the grave. Therefore 
He was not in the tomb for only one day and two nights. 

Obj. 2. Again, Gregory says in a Paschal Homily (Hom. 
xxi.): As Samson carried off the gates of Gaza during the 
night, even so Christ rose in the night, taking away the gates 
of hell. But after rising He was not in the tomb. There- 
fore He was not two whole nights in the grave. 

Obj. 3. Further, light prevailed over darkness by Christ’s 
death. But night belongs to darkness, and day to light. 
Therefore it was more fitting for Christ’s body to be in the 
tomb for two days and a night, rather than conversely. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iv.): There were 
thirty-six hours from the evening of His burial to the dawn of 
the resurrection, that is, a whole mght with a whole day, and a 
whole night. 

I answer that, The very time during which Christ remained 
in the tomb shows forth the effect of His death. For it 
was said above (Q. L., A. 6) that by Christ’s death we were 
delivered from a twofold death, namely, from the death 
of the soul and of the body: and this is signified by the two 
nights during which He remained in the tomb. But since 
His death did not come of sin, but was endured from charity, 
it has not the semblance of night, but of day: consequently 
it is denoted by the whole day during which Christ was in 

Q. 51. Art.4. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 358 

the sepulchre. And so it was fitting for Christ to be in the 
sepulchre during one day and two nights. 

Reply Obj. 1. Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iil.) : 
Some men, ignorant of Scriptural language, wished to com- 
pute as night those three hours, from the sixth to the mnth 
hour, during which the sun was darkened, and as day those 
other three hours during which it was restored to the earth, 
that is, from the ninth hour until its setting : for the coming 
night of the Sabbath follows, and if this be reckoned with tts 
day, there will be already two nights and two days. Now after 
the Sabbath there follows the night of the first day of the Sab- 
bath, that is, of the dawning Sunday, on which the Lord rose. 
Even so, the reckoning of the three days and three nights will 
not stand. It remains then to find the solution tn the custom- 
ary usage of speech of the Scriptures, whereby the whole ts 
understood from the part: so that we are to take a day and 
a night as one natural day. And so the first day is com- 
puted from its ending, during which Christ died and was 
buried on the Friday; while the second day is an entire 
day with twenty-four hours of night and day; while the 
night following belongs to the third day. For as the primi- 
tive days were computed from light to night on account of man’s 
future fall, so these days are computed from the darkness to 
the daylight on account of man’s restoration (De Trin. iv.). 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Trin. iv.; cf. De 
Consens. Evang. iii.), Christ rose with the dawn, when 
light appears in part, and still some part of the darkness 
of the night remains. Hence it is said of the women that 
when tt was yet dark they came to the sepulchre (Jo. xx. I). 
Therefore, in consequence of this darkness, Gregory says 
(Hom. xxi.) that Christ rose in the middle of the night, not 
that night is divided into two equal parts, but during the 
night itself: for the expression early can be taken as partly 
night and partly day, from its fittingness with both. 

Reply Obj. 3. The light prevailed so far in Christ’s death 
(which is denoted by the one day) that it dispelled the 

darkness of the two nights, that is, of our twofold death, as 
stated above. 

QUESTION LII. 

OF CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL. 
(In Eight Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s descent into hell; con- 
cerning which there are eight points of inquiry: (1) Whether 
it was fitting for Christ to descend into hell? (2) Into which 
hell did He descend? (3) Whether He was entirely in 
hell? (4) Whether He made any stay there? (5) Whether 
He delivered the Holy Fathers from hell? (6) Whether 
He delivered the lost from hell? (7) Whether He delivered 
the children who died in original sin? (8) Whether He 
delivered men from Purgatory ? 

FIRST ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO DESCEND INTO 
HELL ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not fitting for Christ 
to descend into hell, because Augustine says (Ep. ad Evod. 
cliv.): Nor could I find anywhere in the Scriptures hell 
mentioned as something good. But Christ’s soul did not 
descend into any evil place, for neither do the souls of the 
just. Therefore it does not seem fitting for Christ’s soul 
to descend into hell. 

Obj. 2. Further, it cannot belong to Christ to descend 
into hell according to His Divine Nature, which is alto- 
gether immovable, but only according to His assumed 
nature. But that which Christ did or suffered in His 
assumed nature is ordained for man’s salvation: and to 
secure this it does not seem necessary for Christ to descend 

359 

Q. 52. Art.1 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 360 

into hell, since He delivered us from both guilt and penalty 
by His Passion which He endured in this world, as stated 
above (Q. XLIX., AA. 1, 3). Consequently, it was not 
fitting that Christ should descend into hell. 

Obj. 3. Further, by Christ’s death His soul was separated 
from His body, and this was laid in the sepulchre, as stated 
above (Q. LI.). But it seems that He descended into hell, 
not according to His soul only, because seemingly the soul, 
being incorporeal, cannot be a subject of local motion; for 
this belongs to bodies, as is proved in Phys. vi., text. 32; 
while descent implies corporeal motion. Therefore it was 
not fitting for Christ to descend into hell. 

On the contrary, It is said in the Creed: He descended into 
hell : and the Apostle says (Eph. iv. 9): Now that He ascended, 
what is it, but because He also descended first into the lower 
parts of the earth? And a gloss adds: that is—into hell. 

I answer that, It was fitting for Christ to descend into 
hell. First of all, because He came to bear our penalty 
in order to free us from penalty, according to Isa. lili. 4: 
Surely He hath borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows. 
But through sin man had incurred not only the death of the 
body, but also descent into hell. Consequently, since it 
was fitting for Christ to die in order to deliver us from death, 
so it was fitting for Him to descend into hell in order to 
deliver us also from going downinto hell. Hence it is written 
(Os. xiii. 14): O death, I will be thy death ; O hell, I will be 
thy bite. Secondly, because it was fitting when the devil 
was overthrown by the Passion that Christ should deliver 
the captives detained in hell, according to Zach. ix. rr: 
Thou also by the blood of Thy Testament hast sent forth Thy 
prisoners out of the pit. And it is written (Col. ii. 15): 
Despotling the principalities and powers, He hath exposed 
them confidently. Thirdly, that as He showed forth His 
power on earth by living and dying, so also He might manifest 
it in hell, by visiting it and enlightening it. Accordingly 
it is written (Ps. xxiil. 7): Lift up your gates, O ye princes, 
which the gloss thus interprets: that is—Ye princes of hell, 
take away your power, whereby hitherto you held men fast 

361 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL Q. 52. Arr. 2 

in hell ; and so at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
not only of them that are in heaven, but likewise of them that 
are in hell, as is said in Phil. ii. ro. 

Reply Obj. 1. The name of hell stands for an evil of 
penalty, and not for an evil of guilt. Hence it was becoming 
that Christ should descend into hell, not as liable to punish- 
ment Himself, but to deliver them who were. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s Passion was a kind of universal 
cause of men’s salvation, both of the living and of the dead. 
But a general cause is applied to particular effects by means 
of something special. Hence, as the power of the Passion 
is applied to the living through the sacraments which make 
us like unto Christ’s Passion, so likewise it is applied to 
the dead through His descent into hell. On which account 
it is written (Zach. ix. 11) that He sent forth prisoners out 
of the pit, in the blood of His testament, that is, by the power 
of His Passion. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s soul descended into hell not by 
the same kind of motion as that whereby bodies are moved, 
but by that kind whereby the angels are moved, as was said 
in the First Part (Q. LIII., A. 1). 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WENT DOWN INTO THE HELL OF THE LOST ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ went down into the 
hell of the lost, because it is said by the mouth of Divine 
Wisdom (Ecclus. xxiv. 45): I will penetrate to all the lower 
parts of the earth. But the hell of the lost is computed 
among the lower parts of the earth, according to Ps. Ixii. 10: 
They shall go into the lower parts of the earth. Therefore 
Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, went down even into 
the hell of the lost. 

Obj. 2. Further, Peter says (Acts ii. 24) that God hath 
vaised up Christ, having loosed the sorrows of hell, as tt was 
impossible that He should be holden by it. But there are no 
sorrows in the hell of the Fathers, nor in the hell of the 

Q. 52. Art.2. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 362 

children, since they are not punished with sensible pain 
on account of any actual sin, but only with the pain of loss 
on account of original sin. Therefore Christ went down into 
the hell of the lost, or else into Purgatory, where men are 
tormented with sensible pain on account of actual sins. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is written (1 Pet. iii. 19) that Christ 
coming in spirit preached to those spirits that were in prison, 
which had.some time been incredulous : and this is understood 
of Christ’s descent into hell, as Athanasius says (Ep. ad 
Epict.). For he says that Christ's body was laid in the 
sepulchre when He went to preach to those spirits who were 
in bondage, as Petey said. But it is clear the unbelievers 
were in the hell of the lost. Therefore Christ went down 
into the hell of the lost. 

Obj. 4. Further, Augustine says (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv.): 
If the sacred Scriptures had said that Christ came into Abra- 
ham’s bosom, without naming hell or its woes, I wonder whether 
any person would dare to assert that He descended into hell. 
But since evident testimonies mention hell and tts sorrows, 
there 1s no reason for believing that Christ went there, except 
to deliver men from the same woes. But the place of woes is 
the hell of the lost. Therefore Christ descended into the 
hell of the lost. 

Obj. 5. Further, as Augustine says in a sermon upon the 
Resurrection: Christ descending into hell set free all the just 
who were held in the bonds of original sin. But among them 
was Job, who says of himself (xvii. 16): All that I have shall 
go down into the deepest pit. Therefore Christ descended 
into the deepest pit. 

On the contrary, Regarding the hell of the lost it is written 
(Job. x. 21): Before I go, and return no more, to a land that 
ts dark and covered with the mist of death. Now there is no 
fellowship of light with darkness, according to 2 Cor. vi. 14. 
Therefore Christ, who is the light, did not descend into the 
hell of the lost. 

I answer that, A thing is said to be in a place in two ways. 
First of all, through its effect, and in this way Christ de- 
scended into each of the hells, but in different manner. 

363 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL 9Q. 52. Art. 2 

For going down into the hell of the lost He wrought this 
effect, that by descending thither He put them to shame 
for their unbelief and wickedness: but to them who were 
detained in Purgatory He gave hope of attaining to glory: 
while upon the holy Fathers detained in hell solely on 
account of original sin, He shed the light of glory ever- 
lasting. 

In another way a thing is said to be in a place through 
its essence: and in this way Christ’s soul descended only 
into that part of hell’ wherein the just were detained; so 
that He visited them 7m place, according to His soul, whom 
He visited interiorly by grace, according to His Godhead. 
Accordingly, while remaining in one part of hell, He wrought 
this effect in a measure in every part of hell, just as while 
suffering in one part of the earth He delivered the whole 
world by His Passion. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, pene- 
trated to all the lower parts of the earth, not passing through 
them locally with His soul, but by spreading the effects of 
His power in a measure to them all: yet so that He en- 
lightened only the just: because the text quoted continues: 
And I will enlighten all that hope in the Lord. 

Reply Obj. 2. Sorrow is twofold: one is the suffering of 
pain which men endure for actual sin, according to Ps. 
xvli. 6: The sorrows of hell encompassed me. Another 
sorrow comes of hoped-for glory being deferred, according 
to Prov. xiii. 12: Hope that is deferred afflicteth the soul: 
and such was the sorrow which the holy Fathers suffered 
in hell, and Augustine refers to it in a sermon on the Passion, 
saying that they besought Christ with tearful entreaty. Now 
by descending into hell Christ took away both sorrows, 
yet in different ways: for He did away with the sorrows 
of pains by preserving souls from them, just as a physician 
is said to free a man from sickness by warding it off by 
means of physic. Likewise He removed the sorrows caused 
by glory deferred, by bestowing glory. 

Reply Obj. 3. These words of Peter are referred by some 
to Christ’s descent into hell: and they explain it in this 

Q. 52, Artr.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 364 

sense: Christ preached to them who formerly were unbelievers, 
and who were shut up in prison—that is, in hell—in spirit— 
that is, by His soul. Hence Damascene says (De Fide 
Orthod. iii.): As He evangelized them who are upon the earth, 
so did He those who were in hell ; not in order to convert 
unbelievers unto belief, but to put them to shame for their 
unbelief, since preaching cannot be understood otherwise 
than as the open manifesting of His Godhead, which was 
laid bare before them in the lower regions by His descending 
in power into hell. 

Augustine, however, furnishes a better exposition of the 
text in his Epistle to Evodius quoted above, namely, that 
the preaching is not to be referred to Christ’s descent into 
hell, but to the operation of His Godhead, to which He 
gave effect from the beginning of the world. Consequently, 
the sense is, that to those (spirits) that were in prison—that 
is, living in the mortal body, which is, as it were, the soul’s 
prison-house—by the spirit of His Godhead He came and 
preached by internal inspirations, and from without by the 
admonitions spoken by the righteous: to those, I say, He 
preached which had been some time tncredulous—t.e., not 
believing in the preaching of Noe—when they waited for 
the patience of God, whereby the chastisement of the Deluge 
was put off: accordingly (Peter) adds: In the days of Noe, 
when the Ark was being built. 

Reply Obj. 4. The expression Abraham’s bosom may be 
taken in two senses. First of all, as implying that restful- 
ness, existing there, from sensible pain; so that in this 
sense it cannot be called hell, nor are there any sorrows 
there. In another way it can be taken as implying the 
privation of longed-for glory: in this sense it has the char- 
acter of hell and sorrow. Consequently, that rest of the 
blessed is now called Abraham’s bosom, yet it is not styled 
hell, nor are sorrows said to be now in Abraham’s bosom. 

Reply Obj. 5. As Gregory says (Moral. xiii.): Even the 
higher regions of hell he calls the deepest hell... . For if 
relatively to the height of heaven this darksome air is infernal, 
then relatively to the height of this same air the earth lying 

365 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL Q.52. Arr. 3 

beneath can be considered as infernal and deep. And again 
tm comparison with the height of the same earth, those parts 
of hell which are higher than the other infernal mansions, may 
in this way be designated as the deepest hell. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER THE WHOLE CHRIST WAS IN HELL ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the whole Christ was not 
in hell. For Christ’s body is one of His parts. But His 
body was not in hell. Therefore, the whole Christ was not 
in hell. 

Obj. 2. Further, nothing can be termed whole when its 
parts are severed. But the soul and body, which are the 
parts of human nature, were separated at His death, as 
stated above (Q. L., AA. 3, 4), and it was after death that 
He descended into hell. Therefore the whole (Christ) could 
not be in hell. 

Obj. 3. Further, the whole of a thing is said to be ina 
place when no part of it is outside such place. Butthere 
were parts of Christ outside hell; for instance, His body 
was in the grave, and His Godhead everywhere. Therefore 
the whole Christ was not in hell. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Symbolo iii.): The 
whole Son is with the Father, the whole Son in heaven, on 
earth, in the Virgin’s womb, on the Cross, in hell, in paradise, 
into which He brought the robber. 

I answer that, It is evident from what was said in the 
First Part (0. XXXI., A. 2 ad 4), the masculine gender is 
referred to the hypostasis or person, while the neuter 
belongs to the nature. Now in the death of Christ, although 
the soul was separated from the body, yet neither was 
separated from the Person of the Son of God, as stated 
above (Q. L., A. 2). Consequently, it must be affirmed 
that during the three days of Christ’s death the whole 
Christ was in the tomb, because the whole Person was there 
through the body united with Him, and likewise He was 

Q. 52. Art.3 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 366 

entirely in hell, because the whole Person of Christ was 
there by reason of the soul united with Him, and the 
whole Christ was then everywhere by reason of the Divine 
Nature. 

Reply Obj. 1. The body which was then in the grave is 
not a part of the uncreated Person, but of the assumed 
nature. Consequently, the fact of Christ’s body not being 
in hell does not prevent the whole Christ from being there: 
but proves that not everything appertaining to human 
nature was there. 

Reply Obj. 2. The whole human nature is made up of 
the united soul and body; not so the Divine Person. Con- 
sequently when death severed the union of the soul with 
the body, the whole Christ remained, but His whole human 
nature did not remain. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s Person is whole in each single 
place, but not wholly, because it is not circumscribed by 
any place: indeed, all places put together could not com- 
prise His immensity; rather is it His immensity that em- 
braces all things. But it happens in those things which 
are in a place corporeally and circumscriptively, that if a 
whole be in some place, then no part of it is outside that 
place. But this is not the case with God. Hence Augus- 
tine says (De Symbolo iii.): It is not according to times or 
places that we say that the whole Christ 1s everywhere, as if 
He were at one time whole in one place, at another time whole 
in another : but as being whole always and everywhere. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST MADE ANY STAY IN HELL ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not make any 
stay in hell. For Christ went down into hell to deliver men 
from thence. But He accomplished this deliverance at once 
by His descent, for, according to Ecclus. xi. 23: It is easy 
im the eyes of God on a sudden to make the poor man rich. 
Consequently He does not seem to have tarried in hell. 

367 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL Q. 52. Arr. 4 

Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says in a sermon on the 
Passion (clx.) that of a sudden at our Lord and Saviour’s 
bidding all ‘the bars of iron were burst’ (cf. Isa. xlv. 2). 
Hence on behalf of the angels accompanying Christ it is 
written (Ps. xxili. 7, 9): Lift up your gates, O ye princes. 
Now Christ descended thither in order to break the bolts of 
hell. Therefore He did not make any stay in hell. 

Obj. 3. Further, it is related (Luke xxiii. 43) that our 
Lord while hanging on the cross said to the thief: This day 
thou shalt be with Me in paradise : from which it is evident 
that Christ was in paradise on that very day. But He was 
not there with His body, for that wasinthe grave. Therefore 
He was there with the soul which had gone down into hell: 
and consequently it appears that He made no stay in hell. 

On the contrary, Peter says (Acts ii. 24): Whom God hath 
raised up, having loosed the sorrows of hell, as tt was im- 
possible that He should be held by it. Therefore it seems 
that He remained in hell until the hour of the Resurrection. 

I answer that, As Christ, in order to take our penalties 
upon Himself, willed His body to be laid in the tomb, so 
likewise He willed His soul to descend into hell. But the 
body lay in the tomb for a day and two nights, so as to 
demonstrate the truth of His death. Consequently, it is 
to be believed that His soul was in hell, in order that it 
might be brought back out of hell simultaneously with His 
body from the tomb. 

Reply Obj. 1. When Christ descended into hell He de- 
livered the saints who were there, not by leading them 
out at once from the confines of hell, but by enlightening 
them with the light of glory in hell itself. Nevertheless 
it was fitting that His soul should abide in hell as long as 
His body remained in the tomb. 

Reply Obj. 2. By the expression bars of hell are understood 
the obstacles which kept the holy Fathers from quitting 
hell, through the guilt of our first parent’s sin; and these 
bars Christ burst asunder by the power of His Passion on 
descending into hell: nevertheless He chose to remain in 
hell for some time, for the reason stated above. 

Q. 52. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 368 

Reply Obj. 3. Our Lord’s expression is not to be under- 
stood of the earthly corporeal paradise, but of a spiritual 
one, in which all are said to be who enjoy the Divine glory. 
Accordingly, the thief descended locally into hell with Christ, 
because it was said to him: This day thou shalt be with Me 
in paradise ; still as to reward he was in paradise, because 
he enjoyed Christ’s Godhead just as the other saints did. 

FirtH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST DESCENDING INTO HELL DELIVERED THE 
HOLY FATHERS FROM THENCE ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ descending into 
hell did not deliver the holy Fathers from thence. For 
Augustine (Epist. ad Evod. clxiv.) says: I have not yet dts- 
covered what Christ descending into hell bestowed upon those 
righteous ones who were in Abraham's bosom, from whom I 
fail to see that He ever departed according to the beatific presence 
of His Godhead. But had He delivered them, He would 
have bestowed much upon them. Therefore it does not 
appear that Christ delivered the holy Fathers from hell. 

Obj. 2. Further, no one is detained in hell except on 

account of sin. But during life the holy Fathers were 
justified from sin through faith in Christ. Consequently 
they did not need to be delivered from hell on Christ’s 
descent thither. 
- Obj. 3. Further, if you remove the cause, you remove 
the effect. But that Christ went down into hell was due 
to sin which was taken away by the Passion, as stated 
above (Q. XLIX., A. 1). Consequently, the holy Fathers 
were not delivered on Christ’s descent into hell. 

On the contrary, Augustine says in the sermon on the 
Passion already quoted that when Christ descended into 
hell He broke down the gate and ‘iron bars’ of hell, setting 
at liberty all the righteous who were held fast through original 
sin. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 4 ad 2), when Christ 

369 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL Q. 52. Arr. 5 

descended into hell He worked through the power of His 
Passion. But through Christ’s Passion the human race was 
delivered not only from sin, but also from the debt of its 
penalty, as stated above (Q. XLIX., AA. 1, 3). Now men 
were held fast by the debt of punishment in two ways: first 
of all for actual sin which each had committed personally: . 
secondly, for the sin of the whole human race, which each 
one in his origin contracts from our first parent, as stated 
in Rom. y. Of which sin the penalty is the death of the 
body as well as exclusion from glory, as is evident from 
Gen. ii. and iii.: because God cast out man from paradise 
after sin, having beforehand threatened him with death 
should he sin. Consequently, when Christ descended into 
heil, by the power of His Passion He delivered the saints 
from the penalty whereby they were excluded from the life of 
glory, so as to be unable to see God in His Essence, wherein 
man’s beatitude lies, as stated in the Second Part (I.-II., 
Q. HII., A. 8). But the holy Fathers were detained in hell 
for the reason, that, owing to our first parent’s sin, the 
approach to the life of glory was not opened. And so, when 
Christ descended into hell He delivered the holy Fathers from 
thence. And this is what is written Zach. ix. 11: Thou also 
by the blood of Thy testament hast sent forth Thy prisoners 
out of the pit, wherein is no water. And (Col. ii. 15) it is 
written that deshoiling the principalities and powers, 1.¢., 
‘of hell, by taking out Isaac and Jacob, and the other 
just souls,’ He led them, i.e., ‘ He brought them far from this 
kingdom of darkness into heaven,’ as the gloss explains. 
Reply Obj. 1. Augustine is speaking there against such 
as maintained that the righteous of old were subject to 
penal sufferings before Christ’s descent into hell. Hence 
shortly before the passage quoted he says: Some add that 
this benefit was also bestowed upon the saints of old, that on 
the Lord’s coming into hell they were freed from they suffer- 
ings. But I fail to see how Abraham, into whose bosom the 
poor man was received, was ever in such sufferings. Conse- 
quently, when he afterwards adds that he had not yet dis- 
covered what Christ's descent into hell had brought to the 
ti, 2 24 

Q. 52. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 370 

righteous of old, this must be understood as to their being 
freed from penal sufferings. Yet Christ bestowed some- 
thing upon them as to their attaining glory: and in con- 
sequence He dispelled the suffering which they endured 
through their glory being delayed: still they had great joy 
from the very hope thereof, according to John viii. 56: 
Abraham your father rejoiced that he might see my day. And 
therefore he adds: I fail to see that He ever departed, according 
to the beatific presence of His Godhead, that is, inasmuch as 
even before Christ’s coming they were happy in hope, 
although not yet fully happy in fact. 

Reply Obj. 2. The holy Fathers while yet living were 
delivered from original as well as actual sin through faith 
in Christ; also from the penalty of actual sins, but not 
from the penalty of original sin, whereby they were ex- 
cluded from glory, since the price of man’s redemption 
was not yet paid: just as the faithful are now delivered 
by baptism from the penalty of actual sins, and from the 
penalty of original sin as to exclusion from glory, yet still 
remain bound by the penalty of original sin as to the neces- 
sity of dying in the body, because they are renewed in the 
spirit, but not yet in the flesh, according to Rom. viii. ro: 
The body indeed is dead, because of sin; but the spirit liveth, 
because of justification. 

Reply Obj. 3. Directly Christ died His soul went down 
into hell, and bestowed the fruits of His Passion on the 
saints detained there; although they did not go out as long 
‘as Christ remained in hell, because His presence was part 
of the fulness of their glory. 

SIXTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST DELIVERED ANY OF THE LOST FROM 
HELL ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did deliver some 
of the lost from hell, because it is written (Isa. xxiv. 22): 
And they shall be gathered together as in the gathering of one 

371 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL @Q. 52. Arr. 6 

bundle into the pit, and they shall be shut up there in prison : 
and after many days they shall be visited. But there he is 
speaking of the lost, who had adored the host of heaven, 
according to Jerome’s commentary. Consequently it seems 
that even the lost were visited at Christ’s descent into hell; 
and this seems to imply théir deliverance. 

Obj. 2. Further, on Zach. ix. 11: Thow also by the blood 
of Thy testament hast sent forth Thy prisoners out of the pit 
wherein is no water, the gloss observes: Thou hast delivered 
them who were held bound in prisons, where no mercy refreshed 
them, which that rich man prayed for. But only the lost are 
shut up in merciless prisons. Therefore Christ did deliver 
some from the hell of the lost. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ’s power was not less in hell than 
in this world, because He worked in every place by the 
power of His Godhead. But in this world He delivered 
some persons of every state. Therefore, in hell also, He 
delivered some from the state of the lost. 

On the contrary, It is written (Osee xiii. 14): O death, I 
will be thy death ; O hell, I will be thy bite : upon which the 
gloss says: By leading forth the elect, and leaving there the 
reprobate. But only the reprobate are in the hell of the lost. 
Therefore, by Christ’s descent into hell none were delivered 
from the hell of the lost. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5), when Christ de- 
scended into hell. He worked by the power of His Passion. 
Consequently, His descent into hell brought the fruits of 
deliverance to them only who were united to His Passion 
through faith quickened by charity, whereby sins are taken 
away. Now those detained in the hell of the lost either had 
no faith in Christ’s Passion, as infidels; or if they had faith, 
they had no conformity with the charity of the suffering 
Christ: hence they could not be cleansed from their sins. 
And on this account Christ’s descent into hell brought them 
no deliverance from the debt of punishment in hell. 

Reply Obj. 1. When Christ descended into hell, all who 
were in any part of hell were visited in some respect: some 
to their consolation and deliverance, others, namely, the 

Q. 52. Art.7 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 372 

lost, to their shame and confusion. Accordingly the passage 
continues: And the moon shall blush, and the sun be put to 
shame, etc. 

This can also be referred to the visitation which will 
come upon them in the Day of Judgement, not for their 
deliverance, but for their yet greater confusion, according 
to Sophon. i. 12: I will visit upon the men that are settled on 
their lees. 

Reply Obj. 2. When the gloss says where no mercy re- 
freshed them, this is to be understood of the refreshing of 
full deliverance, because the holy Fathers could not be 
delivered from this prison of hell before Christ’s coming. 

Reply Obj. 3. It was not due to any lack of power on 
Christ’s part that some were not delivered from every 
state in hell, as out of every state among men in this world; 
but it was owing to the very different condition of each 
state. For, so long as men live here below, they can be 
converted to faith and charity, because in this life men are 
not confirmed either in good or in evil, as they are after 
quitting this life. 

SEVENTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE CHILDREN WHO DIED IN ORIGINAL SIN WERE 
DELIVERED BY CHRIST? 

We proceed thus to the Seventh Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the children who died in 
original sin were delivered from hell by Christ’s descending 
thither. For, like the holy Fathers, the children were kept 
in hell simply because of original sin. But the holy Fathers 
were delivered from hell, as stated above (A. 5). Therefore 
the children were similarly delivered from hell by Christ. 

Obj. 2. Further, the Apostle says (Rom. v. 15): If by 
the offence of one, many died ; much more the grace of God 
and the gift, by the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, hath 
abounded unto many, But the children who die with none 
but original sin are detained in hell owing to their first 
parent’s sin. Therefore, much more were they delivered 
from hell through the grace of Christ. 

373 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL Q. 52. Arr.7 

0%). 3. Further, as Baptism works in virtue of Christ’s 
Passion, so also does Christ’s descent into hell, as is clear 
from what has been said (A. 4 ad 2, AA. 5, 6). But through 
Baptism children are delivered from original sin and hell. 
Therefore, they were similarly delivered by Christ’s descent 
into hell. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. iii. 25): God 
hath proposed Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in 
His blood. But the children who had died with only original 
sin were in no wise sharers of faith in Christ. Therefore, 
they did not receive the fruits of Christ’s propitiation, so 
as to be delivered by Him from hell. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), Christ’s descent 
into hell had its effect of deliverance on them only who 
through faith and charity were united to Christ’s Passion, 
in virtue whereof Christ’s descent into hell was one of 
deliverance. But the children who had died in original 
sin were in no way united to Christ’s Passion by faith and 
love: for, not having the use of free will, they could have no 
faith of their own; nor were they cleansed from original sin 
either by their parents’ faith or by any sacrament of faith. 
Consequently, Christ’s descent into hell did not deliver the 
children from thence. And furthermore, the holy Fathers 
were delivered from hell by being admitted to the glory of 
the vision of God, to which no one can come except through 
grace; according to Rom. vi. 23: The grace of God 1s life 
everlasting. Therefore, since children dying in original sin 
had no grace, they were not delivered from hell. 

Reply Obj. 1. The holy Fathers, although still held bound 
by the debt of original sin, in so far as it touches human 
nature, were nevertheless delivered from all stain of sin 
by faith in Christ: consequently, they were capable of that 
deliverance which Christ brought by descending into hell. 
But the same cannot be said of the children, as is evident 
from what was said above. 

Reply Obj. 2. When the Apostle says that the grace of 
God hath abounded unto many, the word many* is to be 

* The vulgate reads plures, i.e., many more. 

Q. 52. Artr.8 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 374 

taken, not comparatively, as if more were saved by Christ’s 
grace than lost by Adam’s sin: but absolutely, as if he said 
that the grace of the one Christ abounded unto many, just 
as Adam’s sin was contracted by many. But as Adam’s 
sin was contracted by those only who descended seminally 
from him according to the flesh, so Christ’s grace reached 
those only who became His members by spiritual regenera- 
tion: which does not apply to children dying in original sin. 

Reply Obj. 3. Baptism is applied to men in this life, in 
which man’s state can be changed from sin into grace: 
but Christ’s descent into hell was vouchsafed to the souls 
after this life, when they are no longei capable of the said 
change. And consequently by baptism children are de- 
livered from original sin and from hell, but not by Christ’s 
descent into hell. 

EIGHTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST BY HIS DESCENT INTO HELL DELIVERED 
SOULS FROM PURGATORY ? 

We proceed thus to the Eighth Article :— 

Objection x. It would seem that Christ by His descent 
into hell delivered souls from Purgatory;—for Augustine 
says (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv.): Because evident testimonies speak 
of hell and its pains, there 1s no reason for believing that the 
Saviour came thither except to rescue men from those same 
pains: but I still wish to know whether it was all whom He 

found there, or some whom He deemed worthy of such a benefit. 
Yet I do not doubt that Christ went into hell, and granted 
this favour to them who were suffering from its pains. But, 
as stated above (A. 6), He did not confer the benefit of 
deliverance upon the lost: and there are no others in a state 
of penal suffering except those in Purgatory. Consequently 
Christ delivered souls from Purgatory. 

Obj. 2. Further, the very presence of Christ’s soul had 
no less effect than His sacraments have. But souls are 
delivered from Purgatory by the sacraments, especially by 
the sacrament of the Eucharist, as shall be shown later 
(Suppl. Q. LXXI., A. 9). Therefore much more were 

375 CHRIST’S DESCENT INTO HELL Q. 52. Arr. 8 

souls delivered from Purgatory by the presence of Christ 
descending into hell. 

0dj. 3. Further, as Augustine says (De Penit. ix.), those 
whom Christ healed in this life He healed completely. 
Also, our Lord says (Jo. vii. 23): I have healed the whole 
man on the sabbath-day. But Christ delivered them who 
were in Purgatory from the punishment of the pain of loss, 
whereby they were excluded from glory. Therefore, He 
also delivered them from the punishment of Purgatory. 

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xiii.): Since our 
Creator and Redeemer, penetrating the bars of hell, brought — 
out from thence the souls of the elect, He does not permit us 
to go thither, from whence He has already by descending set 
others free. But He permits us to goto Purgatory. There- 
fore, by descending into hell, He did not deliver souls from 
Purgatory. 

I answer that, As we have stated more than once (A. 4 
ad 2, AA. 5, 6, 7), Christ’s descent into hell was one of 
deliverance in virtue of His Passion. Now Christ’s Passion 
had a virtue which was neither temporal nor transitory, 
but everlasting, according to Heb. x. 14: For by one oblation 
He hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And so 
it is evident that Christ’s Passion had no greater efficacy 
then than it has now. Consequently, they who were such 
as those who are now in Purgatory, were not set free from 
Purgatory by Christ’s descent into hell. But if any were 
found such as are now set free from Purgatory by virtue 
of Christ’s Passion, then there was nothing to hinder them 
from being delivered from Purgatory by Christ’s descent 
into hell. 

Reply Obj. 1. From this passage of Augustine it cannot 
be concluded that all who were in Purgatory were delivered 
from it, but that such a benefit was bestowed upon some 
persons, that is to say, upon such as were already cleansed 
sufficiently, or who in life, by their faith and devotion 
towards Christ’s death, so merited, that when He descended, 
they were delivered from the temporal punishment of 
Purgatory. 

Q. 52, Art.8 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 376 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s power operates in the sacraments 
by way of healing and expiation. Consequently, the 
sacrament of the Eucharist delivers men from Purgatory 
inasmuch as it is a satisfactory sacrifice for sin. But 
Christ’s descent into hell was not satisfactory; yet it 
operated in virtue of the Passion, which was satisfactory, 
as stated above (Q. XLVIII., A. 2), but satisfactory in 
general, since its virtue had to be applied to each individual 
by something specially personal (Q. XLIX., A. I ad 4, 5). 
Consequently, it does not follow of necessity that all were 
delivered from Purgatory by Christ’s descent into hell. 

Reply 0bj. 3. Those defects from which Christ altogether 
delivered men in this world were purely personal, and con- 
cerned the individual; whereas exclusion from God’s glory 
was a general defect and common to all human nature. 
Consequently, there was nothing to prevent those detained 
in Purgatory being delivered by Christ from their priva- 
tion of glory, but not from the debt of punishment in 
Purgatory which pertains to personal defect. Just as on 
the other hand, the holy Fathers before Christ’s coming 
were delivered from their personal defects, but not from 
the common defect, as was stated above (A. 7 ad 1; 
Q. XLIX., A. 5 ad 1). 

QUESTION LIII. 

OF CHRIST’S RESURRECTION. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider those things that concern Christ’s 
Exaltation; and we shall deal with (1) His Resurrection; 
(2) His Ascension; (3) His sitting at the right hand of God 
the Father; (4) His Judiciary Power. Under the first head- 
ing there is a fourfold consideration. (1) Christ’s Resur- 
rection in itself; (2) the quality of the Person rising; (3) the 
manifestation of the Resurrection; (4) its causality. Con- 
cerning the first there are four points of inquiry: (x) The 
necessity of His Resurrection. (2) The time of the Resur- 
rection. (3) Itsorder. (4) Its cause. 

First ARTICLE. 
WHETHER IT WAS NECESSARY FOR CHRIST TO RISE AGAIN ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not necessary 
for Christ to rise again. For Damascene says (De Fide 
Orthod. iv.): Resurrection 1s the rising again of an animate 
being, which was disintegrated and fallen. But Christ did 
not fall by sinning, nor was His body dissolved, as is mani- 
fest from what was stated above (Q. LI., A. 3). Therefore, 
it does not properly belong to Him to rise again. 

Obj. 2. Further, whoever rises again is promoted to a 
higher state, since to rise is to be uplifted. But after death 
Christ’s body continued to be united with the Godhead, 
hence it could not be uplifted to any higher condition. 
Therefore, it was not due to it to rise again. 

377 

Q. 53. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA” 378 

Obj. 3. Further, all that befell Christ’s humanity was 
ordained for our salvation. But Christ’s Passion sufficed 
for our salvation, since by it we were loosed from guilt and 
punishment, as is clear from what was said above (Q. XLIX., 
A. I, 3). Consequently, it was not necessary for Christ to 
rise again from the dead. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke xxiv. 46): It behoved 
Christ to suffer and to rise again from the dead. 

I answer that, It behoved Christ to rise again, for five 
reasons. First of all, for the commendation of Divine 
Justice, to which it belongs to exalt them who humble 
themselves for God’s sake, according to Luke i. 52: He hath 
put down the mighty from their seat, and hath exalted the 
humble. Consequently, because Christ humbled Himself 
even to the death of the Cross, from love and obedience to 
God, it behoved Him to be uplifted by God to a glorious 
resurrection; hence it is said in His Person (Ps. cxxxvlil. 2): 
Thou hast known, t.e., approved, my sitting down, 1.e., My 
humiliation and Passion, and my rising up, t.e., My glorifica- 
tion in the resurrection; as the gloss expounds. 

Secondly, for our instruction in the faith, since our belief 
in Christ’s Godhead is confirmed by His rising again, be- 
cause, according to 2 Cor. xu. 4, although He was crucified 
through weakness, yet He liveth by the power of God. And 
therefore it is written (1 Cor. xv. 14): If Christ be not risen 
again, then is our preaching vain, and our (Vulg., your) 
faith ts also vain : and (Ps. xxix. 10): What profit 1s there in 
my blood ? that is, in the shedding of My blood, while I go 
down, as by various degrees of evils, into corruption? As 
though He were to answer: None. ‘ For if I do not at once 
rise again but My body be corrupted, I shall preach to no 
one, I shall gain no one,’ as the gloss expounds. 

Thirdly, for the raising of our hope, since through seeing 
Christ, who is our head, rise again, we hope that we like- 
wise shall rise again. Hence it is written (1 Cor. xv. 12): 
Now tf Christ be preached that He rose from the dead, how 
do some among you say, that there is no resurrection of the 
dead? And (Job xix. 25, 27): I know, that is with certainty 

379 CHRIST’S RESURRECTION Q. 53. Art. 1, 

of faith, that my Redeemer, i.e., Christ, liveth, having risen 
from the dead; and therefore in the last day I shall rise 
out of the earth: .. . this my hope ts laid up in my bosom. 

Fourthly, to set in order the lives of the faithful: accord- 
ing to Rom. vi. 4: As Christ is risen from the dead by the glory 
of the Father, so we also may walk in newness of life: and 
further on; Christ rising from the dead dieth now no more ; 
so do you also reckon that you are dead to sin, but alive to 
God. 

Fifthly, in order to complete the work of our salvation: 
because, just as for this reason did He endure evil things 
in dying that He might deliver us from evil, so was He 
glorified in rising again in order to advance us towards good 
things; according to Rom. iv. 25: He was delivered up for 
our sins, and rose again for our justification. 

Reply Obj. 1. Although Christ did not fall by sin, yet He 
fell by death, because as sin is a fall from righteousness, 
so death is a fall from life: hence the words of Micheas vil. 8 
can be taken as though spoken by Christ: Rejotce not thou, 
my enemy, over me, because I am fallen: I shall rise again. 
Likewise, although Christ’s body was not disintegrated by 
returning to dust, yet the separation of His soul and body 
was a kind of disintegration. 

Reply Obj. 2. The Godhead was united with Christ’s flesh 
after death by personal union, but not by natural union; 
thus the soul is united with the body as its form, so as to 
constitute human nature. Consequently, by the union of 
the body and soul, the body was uplifted to a higher con- 
dition of nature, but not to a higher personal state. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ’s Passion wrought our salvation, 
properly speaking, by removing evils; but the Resurrec- 
tion did so as the beginning and exemplar of all good 
things. 

Q. 53. Ant.2. THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 380 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO RISE AGAIN ON 
THE THIRD DAY? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem unfitting that Christ should 
have risen again on the third day. For the members ought 
to be in conformity with their head. But we who are His 
members do not rise from death on the third day, since our 
rising is put off until the end of the world. Therefore, it 
seems that Christ, who is our head, should not have risen 
on the third day, but that His Resurrection ought to have 
been deferred until the end of the world. 

Obj. 2. Further, Peter said (Acts ii. 24) that 7# was 1m- 
possible for Christ to be held fast by hell and death. But 
so long as a man is dead he is held fast by death. There- 
fore it seems that Christ’s rising ought not to have been 
deferred until the third day, but that He ought to have 
risen at once on the same day; especially since the gloss 
quoted above (A. I) says that there ts no profit in the shedding 
of Christ’s blood, if He did not rise at once. 

Obj. 3. The day seems to start with the rising of the sun, 
the presence of which causes the day. But Christ rose 
before sunrise: for it is related (Jo. xx. 1) that Mary Mag- 
dalen cometh early, when tt was yet dark, unto the sepulchre : 
but Christ was already risen, for it goes on to say: And 
she saw the stone taken away from the sepulchre. Therefore 
Christ did not rise on the third day. 

On the contrary, It is written (Matth. xx. 19): They shall 
deliver Him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and 
crucified, and the third day He shall rise again. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1) Christ’s Resurrection 
was necessary for the instruction of our faith. But our 
faith regards Christ’s Godhead and humanity, for it is not 
enough to believe the one without the other, as is evident 
from what has been said (Q. XXXVI., A. 4; oyy LL-TEs 
Q. II., AA. 7, 8). Consequently, in order that our faith in 

381 CHRIST’S RESURRECTION Q.. 53. Art. 2 

the truth of His Godhead might be confirmed, it was neces- 
sary that He should rise speedily, and that His Resurrection 
should not be deferred until the end of the world. But to 
confirm our faith regarding the truth of His humanity and 
death, it was needful that there should be some interval 
between His death and rising. For if He had risen directly 
after death, it might seem that His death was not genuine, 
and consequently neither would His Resurrection be true. 
But to establish the truth of Christ’s death, it was enough 
for His rising to be deferred until the third day, for within 
that time some signs of life always appear in one who 
appears to be dead whereas he is alive. 

Furthermore, by His rising on the third day, the perfec- 
tion of the number three is commended, which is the number 
of everything, as having beginning, middle, and end, as is 
said in De Celo i. Again in the mystical sense we are 
taught that Christ by Hts one death (t.e., of the body) wnich 
was light, by reason of His righteousness, destroyed our two 
deaths (1.e., of soul and body), which are as darkness on 
account of sin; consequently, He remained in death for one 
day and two nights, as Augustine observes (De Trin. iv.). 

And thereby is also signified that a third epoch began 
with the Resurrection: for the first was before the Law; 
the second under the Law; and the third under grace. 
Moreover the third state of the saints began with the Resur- 
rection of Christ: for, the first was under figures of the Law; 
the second under the truth of faith; while the third will be 
in the eternity of glory, which Christ inaugurated by rising 
again. 

Reply Obj. 1. The head and members are likened in 
nature, but not in power; because the power of the head 
is more excellent than that of the members. Accordingly, 
to show forth the excellence of Christ’s power, it was fitting 
that He should rise on the third day, while the resurrection 
of the rest is put off until the end of the world. 

Reply Obj. 2. Detention implies a certain compulsion. 
But Christ was not held fast by any necessity of death, but 
was free among the dead : and therefore He abode a while in 

Q. 53. Artr.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 382 

death, not as one held fast, but of His own will, just so long 
as He deemed necessary for the instruction of our faith. 
And a task is said to be done at once which is performed 
within a short space of time. 

Reply Obj. 3. As stated above (Q. LI., A. 4 ad I, 2), 
Christ rose early when the day was beginning to dawn, to 
denote that by His Resurrection He brought us to the light 
of glory; just as He died when the day was drawing to its 
close, and nearing to darkness, in order to signify that by 
His death He would destroy the darkness of sin and its 
punishment. Nevertheless He is said to have risen on the 
third day, taking day as a natural day which contains 
twenty-four hours. And as Augustine says (De Trin. iv.): 
—The night until the dawn, when the Lord’s Resurrection was 
proclaimed, belongs to the third day. Because God, who made 
the light to shine forth from darkness, in order that by the grace 
of the New Testament and partaking of Christ's rising we 
might hear this—‘ Once ye were darkness, but now light 1n 
the Lord ’—insinuates in a measure to us that day draws tts 
origin from night: for, as the first days are computed from 
light to darkness on account of man’s coming fall, so these days 
are reckoned from darkness to light owing to man’s restoration. 
And so it is evident that even if He had risen at midnight, 
He could be said to have risen on the third day, taking it 
as a natural day. But now that He rose early, it can be 
affirmed that He rose on the third day, even taking the 
artificial day which is caused by the sun’s presence, because 

.the sun had already begun to brighten the sky. Hence it 
is written (Mark xvi. 2) that the women come to the sepulchre, 
the sun being now risen ; which is not contrary to John’s 
statement when tt was yet dark, as Augustine says (De 
Cons. Evang. iii.), because, as the day advances the more the 
light rises, the more are the remaining shadows dispelled. 
But when Mark says ‘the sun being now risen,’ it is not to 
be taken as if the sun were already apparent over the horizon, 
but as coming presently into those parts. 

383 CHRIST’S RESURRECTION Q. 53. ArT. 3 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST WAS THE FIRST TO RISE FROM THE DEAD ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ was not the first to 
rise from the dead, because we read in the Old Testament 
of some persons raised to life by Elias and Eliseus, accord- 
ing to Heb. xi. 35: Women received thety dead raised to life 
again: also Christ before His Passion raised three dead 
persons to life. Therefore Christ was not the first to rise 
from the dead. 

Obj. 2. Further, among the other miracles which hap- 
pened during the Passion, it is narrated (Matth. xxvii. 52) 
that the monuments were opened, and many bodies of the 
saints who had slept rose again. Therefore Christ was not 
the first to rise from the dead. 

Obj. 3. Further, as Christ by His own rising is the cause 
of our resurrection, so by His grace He is the cause of our 
grace, according to Jo. i. 16: Of His fulness we all have 
received. But in point of time some others had grace 
previous to Christ,—for instance all the fathers of the Old 
Testament. Therefore some others came to the resurrection 
of the body before Christ. 

On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. xv. 20): Christ ts 
risen from the dead, the first fruits of them that sleep ;—because, 
says the gloss, He rose first in point of time and dignity. 

I answer that, Resurrection is a restoring from death to 
life. Now a man is snatched from death in two ways: 
first of all, from actual death, so that he begins in any way 
to live anew after being actually dead: in another way, so 
that he is not only rescued from death, but from the neces- 
sity, nay more, from the possibility of dying again. Such 
is a true and perfect resurrection, because so long as a 
man lives, subject to the necessity of dying, death has 
dominion over him in a measure, according to Rom. viii. 10: 
The body indeed is dead because of sin. Furthermore, what 
has the possibility of existence, is said to exist in some 

Q. 53. Art.3 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 384 

respect, that is, in potentiality. Thus it is evident that the 
resurrection, whereby one is rescued from actual death only, 
is but an imperfect one. 

Consequently, speaking of perfect resurrection, Christ is 
the first of them who rise, because by rising He was the 
first to attain life utterly immortal, according to Rom. vi. 9: 
Christ rising from the dead dieth now no more. But by an 
imperfect resurrection, some others have risen before Christ, 
so as to be a kind of figure of His Resurrection. 

And thus the answer to the first objection is clear: because 
both those raised from the dead in the Old Testament, and 
those raised by Christ, so returned to life that they had to 
die again. 

Reply Obj. 2. There are two opinions regarding them who 
rose with Christ. Some hold that they rose to life so as 
to die no more, because it would be a greater torment for 
them to die a second time than not to rise at all. Accord- 
ing to this view, as Jerome observes on Matth. xxvii. 52, 53, 
we must understand that they had not risen before our Lord 
rose. Hence the Evangelist says that coming out of the 
tombs after His Resurrection, they came into the holy city, 
and appeared to many. But Augustine (Ep. ad Evod. clxiv.) 
while giving this opinion, says: I know that 1t appears to 
some, that by the death of Christ the Lord the same resurrection 
was bestowed upon the righteous as is promised to us in the end ; 
and tf they slept not again by laying aside thetr bodies, it remains 
to be seen how Christ can be understood to be ‘ the first-born of 
‘the dead,’ tf so many preceded Him unto that resurrection. 
Now tf reply be made that this is said by anticipation, so that 
the monuments be understood to have been opened by the earth- 
quake while Christ was still hanging on the cross, but that the 
bodies of the just did not rise then but after He had risen, the 
difficulty still arises,—how is it that Peter asserts that it was 
predicted not of David but of Christ, that His body would not 
see corruption, since David’s tomb was in their midst ; and 
thus he dtd not convince them, if David's body was no longer 
there ; for even tf he had risen soon after his death, and his 
flesh had not seen corruption, his tomb might nevertheless 

385 CHRIST’S RESURRECTION Q.53. Art. 4 

remain. Now it seems hard that David, from whose seed 
Christ is descended, was not in that rising of the just, if an 
eternal rising was conferred upon them, Also that saying in 
the Epistle to the Hebrews (xi. 40) regarding the ancient just 
would be hard to explain, ‘ that they should not be perfected with- 
out us,’ tf they were already established in that incorruption of 
the resurrection which is promised at the end when we shall be 
made perfect : so that Augustine would seem to think that 
they rose to die again. In this sense Jerome also in com- 
menting on Matthew (loc. cit.) says: As Lazarus rose, so also 
many of the bodtes of the satnts rose, that they might bear 
witness to the risen Christ. Nevertheless in a sermon for 
the Assumption* he scems to leave the matter doubtful. 
But Augustine’s reasons seem to be much more cogent. 
Reply Obj. 3. As everything preceding Christ’s coming 
was preparatory for Christ, so is grace a disposition for glory. 
Consequently, it behoved all things appertaining to glory, 
whether they regard the soul, as the perfect fruition of God, 
or whether they regard the body, as the glorious resurrec- 
tion, to be first in Christ as the author of glory: but that 
grace should be first in those that were ordained unto 

Christ. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST WAS THE CAUSE OF HIS OWN 
RESURRECTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It seems that Christ was not the cause of His 
own Resurrection. For whoever is raised up by another 
is not the cause of his own rising. But Christ was raised 
up by another, according to Acts ii. 24: Whom God hath 
raised up, having loosed the sorrows of hell : and Rom. viii. 11: 
He that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, shall quicken 
also your mortal bodies. Therefore Christ is not the cause 
of His own Resurrection. 

* Ep. ix. ad Paul. et Eustoch. Among the supposititious works 
ascribed to St. Jerome. 

III. 2 Z5 

Q. 53. Art.4 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 386 

Obj. 2. Further, no one is said to merit, or ask from 
another, that of which he is himself the cause. But Christ 
by His Passion merited the Resurrection, as Augustine says 
(Tract. civ. in joan.): The lowliness of the Passion is the 
meritorious cause of the glory of the Resurrection. Moreover 
He asked the Father that He might be raised up again, 
according to Ps. xl. 11: But thou, O Lord, have mercy on me, 
and raise me up again. Therefore He was not the cause of 
His rising again. 

Obj. 3. Further, as Damascene proves (De Fide Orthod. iv.), 
it is not the soul that rises again, but the body, which is 
stricken by death. But the body could not unite the soul 
with itself, since the soul is nobler. Therefore what rose in 
Christ could not be the cause of His Resurrection. 

On the contrary, Our Lord says (Jo. x. 18): No one taketh 
My soul from Me, but I lay it down, and I take tt up again. 
But to rise is nothing else than to take the soul up again. 
Consequently, it appears that Christ rose again of His own 
power. 

I answer that, As stated above (Q. L., AA. 2, 3) in conse- 
quence of death Christ’s Godhead was not separated from 
His soul, nor from His flesh. Consequently, both the soul 
and the flesh of the dead Christ can be considered in two 
respects: first, in respect of His Godhead; secondly, in re- 
spect of His created nature. Therefore, according to the 
virtue of the Godhead united to it, the body took back 

again the soul which it had laid aside, and the soul took 

back again the body which it had abandoned: and thus 
Christ rose by His own power. And this is precisely what 
is written (2 Cor. xiii. 4): For although He was crucified 
through our weakness, yet He liveth by the power of God. 
But if we consider the body and soul of the dead Christ 
according to the power of created nature, they could not 
thus be reunited, but it was eee! for Christ to be 
raised up by God. 

Reply Obj. 1. The Divine power is the same thing as the 
operation of the Father and the Son; accordingly these 
two things are mutually consequent, that Christ was raised 

387 CHRIST’S RESURRECTION = 9. 53. Arr. 4 

up by the Divine power of the Father, and by His own 
power. ; 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ. by praying besought and merited 
His Resurrection, as man and not as God. 

Reply Obj. 3. According to its created nature Christ’s 
body is not more powerful than His soul; yet according to 
its Divine power it is more powerful. Again the soul by 
reason of the Godhead united to it is more powerful than 
the body in respect of its created nature. Consequently, 
it was by the Divine power that the body and soul mutually 
resumed each other, but not by the power of their created 
nature, 

QUESTION LIV. 

OF THE QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN. 
(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the quality of the rising Christ, 
which presents four points of inquiry: (1) Whether Christ 
had a true body after His Resurrection? (2) Whether He 
rose with His complete body? (3) Whether His was a 
glorified body ? (4) Of the scars which showed in His body. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST HAD A TRUE BODY AFTER HIS 
RESURRECTION ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not have a true 
body after His Resurrection. For a true body cannot be 
in the same place at the same time with another body. 
But after the Resurrection Christ’s body was with another 
at the same time in the same place: since He entered among 
the disciples the doors being shut, as is related in John xx. 26. 
Therefore it seems that Christ did not have a true body after 
His Resurrection. 

Obj. 2. Further, a true body does not vanish from the 
beholder’s sight unless perchance it be corrupted. But 
Christ’s body vantshed out of the sight of the disciples as 
they gazed upon Him, as is related in Luke xxiv. 31. There- 
fore, it seems that Christ did not have a true body after 
His Resurrection. 

Obj. 3. Further, every true body has its determinate shape. 
But Christ’s body appeared before the disciples im another 
shape, as is evident from Mark xvi. 12. Therefore it seems 

388 

389 QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN Q. 54. Art. x 

that Christ did not possess a true body after His Resur- 
rection. 

On the contrary, It is written (Luke xxiv. 37) that when 
Christ appeared to His disciples they being troubled and 
frightened, supposed that they saw a spirit, as if He had not 
a true but an imaginary body: but to remove their fears 
He presently added: Handle and see, for a spirit hath not 
flesh and bones, as you see Me to have. Consequently, He 
had not an imaginary but a true body. 

I answer that, As Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iv.): 
that is said to rise, which fell. But Christ’s body fell by 
death; namely, inasmuch as the soul which was its formal 
perfection was separated from it. Hence, in order for it 
to be a true resurrection, it was necessary for the same body 
of Christ to be once more united with the same soul. And 
since the truth of the body’s nature is from its form, it 
follows that Christ’s body after His Resurrection was a 
true body, and of the same nature as it was before. But 
had His been an imaginary body, then His Resurrection 
would not have been true, but apparent. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s body after His Resurrection, not 
by miracle but from its glorified condition, as some say, 
entered in among the disciples while the doors were shut, 
thus existing with another body in the same place. But 
whether a glorified body can have this from some hidden 
property, so as to be with another body at the same 
time in the same place, will be discussed later (Suppl., 
Q. LXXXIII., A. 4) when the common resurrection will 
be dealt with. For the present let it suffice to say that it 
was not from any property within the body, but by virtue 
of the Godhead united to it, that this body, although a 
true one, entered in among the disciples while the doors 
were shut. Accordingly Augustine says in a sermon for 
Easter (ccxlvii.) that some men argue in this fashion: If 1# 
were a body ; if what rose from the sepulchre were what hung 
upon the tree, how could it enter through closed doors? And 
he answers: If you understand how, it 1s no miracle : where 
reason fails, faith abounds. And (Tract. cxxi. super Joan.) 

Q. 54. Art.1 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 390 

he says: Closed doors were no obstacle to the substance of a 
Body wherein was the Godhead ; for truly He could enter in 
by doors not open, in whose Birth His mother’s virginity 
remained inviolate. And Gregory says the same in a homily 
for the octave of Easter (xxvi. 7m Evang.). 

Reply Obj. 2. As stated above (Q. LIII., A. 3), Christ 
rose to the immortal life of glory. But such is the disposi- 
tion of a glorified body that it is spiritual, 1.e., subject 
to the spirit, as the Apostle says (xr Cor. xv. 44). Now in 
order for the body to be entirely subject to the spirit, it is 
necessary for the body’s every action to be subject to the 
will of the spirit. Again, that an object be seen is due 
to the action of the visible object upon the sight, as the 
Philosopher shows (De Anima ii.). Consequently, whoever 
has a glorified body has it in his power to be seen when he 
so wishes, and not to be seen when he does not wish it. 
Moreover Christ had this not only from the condition of 
His glorified body, but also from the power of His Godhead, 
by which power it may happen that even bodies not glorified 
are miraculously unseen: as was by a miracle bestowed on 
the blessed Bartholomew, that if he wished he could be 
seen, and not be seen tf he did not wish 1t.* Christ, then, is 
said to have vanished from the eyes of the disciples, not 
as though He were corrupted or dissolved into invisible 
elements; but because He ceased, of His own will, to be 
seen by them, either while He was present, or while He 
_was departing by the gift of agility. 

Reply Od). 3. As Severianus} says in a sermon for Easter: 
Let no one suppose that Christ changed His features at the 
Resurrection. This is to be understood of the outline of 
His members; since there was nothing out of keeping or 
deformed in the body of Christ which was conceived of the 
Holy Ghost, that had to be righted at the Resurrection. 
Nevertheless He received the glory of clarity in the Resur- 
rection: accordingly the same writer adds: but the semblance ts 
changed, when, ceasing to be mortal, it becomes immortal ; so 

* Apocryphal Historia A post. viii. 2. 
{ Peter Chrysologus: Seym. lxxxii. 

391 QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN Q. 54. Arr. 2 

that tt acquired the glory of countenance, without losing the 
substance of the countenance. Yet He did not come to 
those disciples in glorified appearance; but, as it lay in 
His power for His body to be seen or not, so it was within 
His power to present to the eyes of the beholders His form 
either glorified or not glorified, or partly glorified and 
partly not, or in any fashion whatsoever. Still it requires 
but a slight difference for anyone to seem to appear another 
shape. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST'S BODY ROSE GLORIFIED ?* 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It seems that Christ’s body did not rise 
glorified. For glorified bodies shine, according to Matth. 
xill. 43: Then shall the just shine as the sun in the kingdom 
of their Father. But shining bodies are seen under the 
aspect of light, but not of colour. Therefore, since Christ’s 
body was beheld under the aspect of colour, as it had been 
hitherto, it seems that it was not a glorified one. 

Obj. 2. Further, a glorified body is incorruptible. But 
Christ’s body seems not to have been incorruptible; because 
it was palpable, as He Himself says in Luke xxiv. 39: 
Handle, and see. Now Gregory says (Hom. in Evang. xxvi.) 
that what is handled must be corruptible, and that which 1s 
incorruptible cannot be handled. Consequently, Christ’s body 
was not glorified. 

Obj. 3. Further, a glorified body is not animal, but 
spiritual, as is clear from 1 Cor. xv. But after the Resur- 
rection Christ’s body seems to have been animal, since He 
ate and drank with His disciples, as we read in the closing 
chapters of Luke and John. Therefore, it seems that 
Christ’s body was not glorified. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Phil. ili. 21): He will 

* Some editions give this article as the third, following the order 
of the introduction to the question (see p. 388). But it is evident 

from the first sentence of the body of A. 3 (A. 2 in the aforesaid 
editions), that the order of the Leonine edition is correct. 

Q. 54. Art.2. THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 392 

veform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of Hts 
glory. 

I answer that, Christ’s was a glorified body in His Resur- 
rection, and this is evident from three reasons. First of 
all, because His Resurrection was the exemplar and the 
cause of ours, as is stated in 1 Cor. xv. 43. But in the 
resurrection the saints will have glorified bodies, as is written 
in the same place: It is sown in dishonour, tt shall rise in 
glory. Hence, since the cause is mightier than the effect, 
and the exemplar than the exemplate; much more glorious, 
then, was the body of Christ ii His Resurrection. Secondly, 
because He merited the glory of His Resurrection by the 
lowliness of His Passion. Hence He said (Jo. xii. 27): 
Now is My soul troubled, which refers to the Passion; and 
later He adds: Father, glorify Thy name, whereby He asks 
for the glory of the Resurrection. Thirdly, because as 
stated above (0. XXXIV., A. 4), Christ’s soul was glorified 
from the instant of His conception by perfect fruition of 
the Godhead. But, as stated above (Q. XIV., A. I ad 2), 
it was owing to the Divine economy that the glory did not 
pass from His soul to His body, in order that by the Passion 
He might accomplish the mystery of our redemption. 
Consequently, when this mystery of Christ’s Passion and 
death was finished, straightway the soul communicated its 
glory to the risen body in the Resurrection; and so that 
body was made glorious. 

. Reply Obj. 1. Whatever is received within a subject is 
received according to the subject’s capacity. Therefore, 
since glory flows from the soul into the body, it follows that, 
as Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor. cxviii.), the brightness or 
splendour of a glorified body is after the manner of natural 
colour in the buman body; just as variously coloured glass 
derives its splendour from the sun’s radiance, according 
to the mode of the colour. But as it lies within the power 
of a glorified man whether his body be seen or not, as 
stated above (A. I ad 2), so is it in his power whether its 
splendour be seen or not. Accordingly it can be seen 
in its colour without its brightness. And it was in this 

393 QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN Q. 54. Art.2 

way that Christ’s body appeared to the disciples after the 
Resurrection. 

Reply Obj. 2. We say that a body can be handled not only | 
because of its resistance, but also on account of its density. 
But from rarity and density follow weight and lightness, 
heat and cold, and similar contraries, which are the prin- 
ciples of corruption in elementary bodies. Consequently, 
a body that can be handled by human touch is naturally 
corruptible. But if there be a body that resists touch, and 
yet is not disposed according to the qualities mentioned, 
which are the proper‘objects of human touch, such as a 
heavenly body, then such body cannot be said to be handled. 
But Christ’s body after the Resurrection was truly made up 
of elements, and had tangible qualities such as the nature 
of a human body requires, and therefore it could naturally 
be handled; and if it had nothing beyond the nature of a 
human body, it would likewise be corruptible. But it had 
something else which made it incorruptible, and this was 
not the nature of a heavenly body, as some maintain, and 
into which we shall make fuller inquiry later (Suppl., 
QO. LXXXII., A. 1), but it was glory flowing from a beatified 
soul: because, as Augustine says (Ep. ad Dtoscor. cxviii.): 
God made the soul of such powerful nature, that from tts fullest 
beatitude the fulness of health overflows into the body, that 1s, 
the vigour of incorruption. And therefore Gregory says 
(loc. cit.): Christ’s body is shown to be of the same nature, but 
of different glory, after the Resurrection. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (De Civ. Det xiii.): After 
the Resurrection, our Saviour in spiritual but true flesh par- 
took of meat with the disciples, not from need of food, but 
because 1t lay in His power. For as Bede says on Luke 
xxiv. 41: The thirsty earth sucks in the water, and the sun’s 
burning ray absorbs it ; the former from need, the latter by tts 
power. Hence after the Resurrection He ate, mot as needing 
food, but in order thus to show the nature of Hts risen body. 
Nor does it follow that His was an animal body that stands 
in need of food. 

Q. 54. Art.3 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 3904 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST’S BODY ROSE AGAIN ENTIRE ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s body did not 
rise entire. For flesh and blood belong to the integrity of 
the body: whereas Christ seems not to have had both, for it 
is written (x Cor. xv. 50): Flesh and blood cannot possess 
the kingdom of God. But Christ rose in the glory of the 
kingdom of God. Therefore it seems that He did not have 
flesh and blood. 

Obj. 2. Further, blood is one of the four humours. Conse- 
quently, if Christ had blood, with equal reason He also had 
the other humours, from which corruption is caused in 
animal bodies. It would follow, then, that Christ’s body 
was corruptible, which is unseemly. Therefore Christ did 
not have flesh and blood. 

Obj. 3. Further, the body of Christ which rose, ascended 
to heaven. But some of His blood is kept as relics in 
various churches. Therefore Christ’s body did not rise 
with the integrity of all its parts. 

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Luke xxiv. 39) while 
addressing His disciples after the Resurrection: A spirit 
hath not flesh and bones as you see Me to have. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), Christ’s body in 
the Resurrection was of the same nature, but differed in glory. 
Accordingly, whatever goes with the nature of a human 
body, was entirely in the body of Christ when He rose 
again. Now it is clear that flesh, bones, blood, and other 
such things, are of the very nature of the human body. 
Consequently, all these things were in Christ’s body when He 
rose again; and this also integrally, without any diminution; 
otherwise it would not have been a complete resurrection, if 
whatever was lost by death had not been restored. Hence 
our Lord assured His faithful ones by saying (Matth. x. 30): 
The very hairs of your head are all numbered; and (Luke 
xxi. 18): A hair of your head shull not perish. 

395 QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN Q. 54. Arr. 3 

But to say that Christ’s body had neither flesh, nor bones, 
nor the other natural parts of a human body, belongs to 
the error of Eutyches, Bishop of Constantinople, who main- 
tained that our body in that glory of the resurrection will be 
impalpable, and more subtle than wind and airy: and that 
our Lord, after the hearts of the disciples who handled Him 
were confirmed, brought back to subtlety whatever could be 
handled in Him.* Now Gregory condemns this in the 
same book, because Christ’s body was not changed after the 
Resurrection, according to Rom. vi. 9: Christ rising from 
the dead, dieth now no more. Accordingly, the very man 
who had said these things, himself retracted them at his 
death. For, if it be unbecoming for Christ to take a body 
of another nature in His conception, a heavenly one for 
instance, as Valentine asserted, it is much more unbecoming 
for Him at His Resurrection to resume a body of another 
nature, because in His Resurrection He resumed unto an 
everlasting life, the body which in His conception He had 
assumed to a mortal life. 

Reply Obj. 1. Flesh and blood are not to be taken there 
for the nature of flesh and blood, but, either for the guilt 
of flesh and blood, as Gregory says (loc. cit.), or else for the 
corruption of flesh and blood: because, as Augustine says 
(Ad Consent., De Resur. C2vn.), there will be neither corruption 
there, nor mortality of flesh and blood. Therefore flesh accord- 
ing to its substance possesses the kingdom of God, accord- 
ing to Luke xxiv. 39: A spirit hath not flesh and bones, as 
you see Me to have. But flesh, if understood as to its cor- 
ruption, will not possess it; hence it is straightway added 
in the words of the Apostle: Neither shall corruption possess 
incorruption. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says in the same book: Per- 
chance by reason of the blood some keener critic will press us 
and say ; If the blood was in the body of Christ when He rose, 
why not the rheum? that is, the phlegm; why not also the 
yellow gall? that is, the gall proper; and why not the black 
gall ? that is, the bile, with which four humours the body ts 

* St. Gregory, Moral. in Job, xiv. 56. 

. 
Q. 54. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 396 

tempered, as medical science bears witness. But whatever 
anyone may add, let him take heed not to add corruption, lest 
he corrupt the health and purity of his own faith ; because 
Divine power is equal to taking away such qualities as tt wills 
from the visible and tractable body, while allowing others to 
remain, so that there be no defilement, i.e. of corruption, 
though the features be there; motion without weariness, the 
power to eat, without need of food. 

Reply Obj. 3. All the blood which flowed from Christ’s 
body, belonging as it does to the integrity of human nature, 
rose again with His body: and the same reason holds good 
for all the particles which belong to the truth and integrity 
of human nature. But the blood preserved as relics in 
some churches did not flow from Christ’s side, but is said 
to have flowed from some maltreated image of Christ. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S BODY OUGHT TO HAVE RISEN WITH ITS 
SCARS ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s body ought not to 
have risen with its scars. For it is written (1 Cor. xv. 52): 
The dead shall rise incorrupt. But scars and wounds imply 
corruption and defect. Therefore it was not fitting for 
Christ, the author of the resurrection, to rise again with 
scars. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ’s body rose entire, as stated above 
(A. 3). But open scars are opposed to bodily integrity, 
since they interfere with the continuity of the tissue. It 
does not therefore seem fitting for the open wounds to 
remain in Christ’s body; although the traces of the 
wounds might remain, which would satisfy the beholder; 
thus it was that Thomas believed, to whom it was said: 
Because thou hast seen Me, Thomas, thou hast believed 
(Jom: 20). . 

Obj. 3. Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iv.) 
that some things are truly said of Christ after the Resurrection, 

4 

397 QUALITY OF CHRIST RISING AGAIN Q.54. Art. 4 

which He did not have from nature but from special dispensa- 
tion, such as the scars, in ordev to make it sure that it was 
the body which had suffered that rose again. Now when 
the cause ceases, the effect ceases. Therefore it seems that 
when the disciples were assured of the Resurrection, He 
bore the scars no longer. But it ill became the unchange- 
‘ableness of His glory that He should assume anything 
which was not to remain in Him for ever. Consequently, 
it seems that He ought not at His Resurrection to have 
resumed a body with scars. 

On the contrary, Our Lord said to Thomas (Jo. xx. 27): 
Put in thy finger hither, and see "Ay hands ; and bring hither 
thy hand, and put it into My side, and be not faithless but 
believing. 

I answer that, It was fitting for Christ’s soul at His Resur- 
rection to resume the body withits scars. In the first place, 
for Christ’s own glory. For Bede says on Luke xxiv. 40 
that He kept His scars not from inability to heal them, 
but to wear them as an everlasting trophy of His victory. 
Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Det xxii.): Perhaps in that 
kingdom we shall see on the bodies of the Martyrs the traces 
of the wounds which they bore for Christ’s name: because tt 
will not be a deformity, but a dignity in them ; and a certain 
kind of beauty will shine in them, tn the body, though not of 
the body. Secondly, to confirm the hearts of the disciples 
as to the faith in His Resurrection (Bede, loc. cit.). Thirdly, 
that when He pleads for us with the Father, He may always 
show the manner of death He endured for us (Bede, loc. cit.). 
Fourthly, that He may convince those redeemed in His blood, 
how mercifully they have been helped, as He exposes before them 
the traces of the same death (Bede, loc. cit.). Lastly, that in 
the Judgement-day He may upbraid them with thetr just con- 
demnation (Bede, loc. cit.). Hence, as Augustine says (De 
Symb. ii.): Christ knew why He kept the scars in His body. 
For, as He showed them to Thomas who would not believe 
except he handled and saw them, so will He show His wounds 
to His enemies, so that He who is the Truth may convict them, 
saying : ‘ Behold the man whom you crucified ; see the wounds 

Q. 54. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 398 

you inflicted ; recognize the side you prerced, since it was 
opened by you and for you, yet you would not enter.’ 

Reply Obj. 1. The scars that remained in Christ’s body 
belong neither to corruption nor defect, but to the greater 
increase of glory, inasmuch as they are the trophies of His 
power; and a special comeliness will appear in the places 
scarred by the wounds. 

Reply Obj. 2. Although those openings of the wounds 
break the continuity of the tissue, still the greater beauty 
of glory compensates for all this, so that the body is not 
less entire, but more perfected. Thomas, however, not only 
saw, but handled the wounds, because as Pope Leo* says: 
It sufficed for his personal faith for him to have seen what he 
saw ; but 1t was on our behalf that he touched what he beheld. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ willed the scars of His wounds to 
remain on His body, not only to confirm the faith of His 
disciples, but for other reasons also. From these it seems 
that those scars will always remain on His body; because, 
as Augustine says (Ad Consent., De Resur. Carn.): I believe 
our Lord’s body to be in heaven, such as it was when He 
ascended into heaven. And Gregory (Moral. xiv.) says that 
if aught could be changed in Christ’s body after His Resurrec- 
tion, contrary to Paul’s truthful teaching, then the Lord after 
His Resurrection returned to death; and what foo! would 
dare to say this, save he that dentes the true resurrection of 
the flesh? Accordingly, it is evident that the scars which 

. Christ showed on His body after His Resurrection, have 
never since been removed from His body. 

* Cf. Append. Opp. August., Serm. clxii. 

QUESTION LY. 

OF THE MANIFESTATION OF THE RESURRECTION. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the manifestation of the Resur- 
rection: concerning which there are six points of inquiry: 
(1) Whether Christ’s Resurrection ought to have been 
manifested to all men, or only to some special individuals ? 
(2) Whether it was fitting that they should see Him rise ? 
(3) Whether He ought to have lived with the disciples after 
the Resurrection? (4) Whether it was fitting for Him to 
appear to the disciples 1» another shape? (5) Whether He 
ought to have demonstrated the Resurrection by proofs ? 
(6) Of the cogency of those proofs. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S RESURRECTION OUGHT TO HAVE BEEN 
MANIFESTED TO ALL ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Resurrection 
ought to have been manifested to all. For just as a public 
penalty is due for public sin, according to 1 Timothy v. 20: 
Them that sin reprove before all, so is a public reward due for 
public merit. But, as Augustine says (Tract. civ. 1m Joan.), 
the glory of the Resurrection is the reward of the humility of 
the Passion. Therefore, since Christ’s Passion was mani- 
fested to all while He suffered in public, it seems that the 
glory of the Resurrection ought to have been manifested 
to all. 

Obj. 2. Further, as Christ’s Passion is ordained for our 

399 

Q. 55. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 400 

salvation, so also is His Resurrection, according to Rom. 
iv. 25: He rose again for our justification. But what belongs 
to the public weal ought to be manifested to all. There- 
fore Christ’s Resurrection ought to have been manifested 
to all, and not to some specially. 

Obj. 3. Further, they to whom it was manifested were 
witnesses of the Resurrection: hence it is said (Acts ili. 15): 
Whom God hath raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses. 
Now they bore witness by preaching in public: and this is 
unbecoming in women, according to 1 Cor. xiv. 34: Let 
women keep silence in the churches: and x Timothy ii. 12: 
I suffer not a woman to teach. Therefore, it does not seem 
becoming for Christ’s Resurrection to be manifested first of 
all to the women, and afterwards to mankind in general. 

On. the contrary, It is written (Acts x. 40): Him God raised 
up the third day, and gave Him to be made mantfest, not to 
all the people, but to witnesses preordatined by God. 

I answer that, Some things come to our knowledge by 
nature’s common law, others by special favour of grace, 
as things divinely revealed. Now, as Dionysius says (Cal. 
Hier. iv.), the divinely established law of such things is 
that they be revealed immediately by God to higher persons, 
through whom they are imparted to others, as is evident 
in the ordering of the heavenly spirits. But such things 
as concern future glory are beyond the common ken of 
mankind, according to Isa. Ixiv. 4: The eye hath not seen, 
O God, besides Thee, what things Thou hast prepared for 
them that watt for Thee. Consequently, such things are not 
known by man except through Divine revelation, as the 
Apostle says (1 Cor. ii. 10): God hath revealed them to us by 
Hts spirit. Since, then, Christ rose by a glorious Resur- 
rection, consequently His Resurrection was not manifested 
to everyone, but to some, by whose testimony it could be 
brought to the knowledge of others. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s Passion was consummated in a 
body that still had a passible nature, which is known to 
all by general laws: consequently His Passion could be 
directly manifested to all. But the Resurrection was 

401 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q. 55. ArT. 1 

accomplished through the glory of the Father, as the Apostle 
says (Rom. vi. 4). Therefore it was manifested directly to 
some, but not to all. 

But that a public penance is imposed upon public sinners, 
is to be understood of the punishment of this present life. 
And in like manner public merits should be rewarded in 
public, in order that others may be stirred to emulation. 
But the punishments and rewards of the future life are not 
publicly manifested to all, but to those specially who are 
preordained thereto by God. 

Reply Obj. 2. Just as Christ’s Resurrection is for the 
common salvation of all, so it came to the knowledge of 
all; yet not so that it was directly manifested to all, but 
only to some, through whose testimony it could be brought 
to the knowledge of all. 

Reply Obj. 3. A woman is not to be allowed to teach 
publicly in church; but she may be permitted to give 
familiar instruction to some privately. And therefore as 
Ambrose says on Luke xxiv. 22, a woman 1s sent to them 
who are of her household, but not to the people to bear 
witness to the Resurrection. But Christ appeared to the 
woman first, for this reason, that as a woman was the first 
to bring the source of death to man, so she might be the 
first to announce the dawn of Christ’s glorious Resurrection. 
Hence Cyril says on Jo. xx. 17: Woman who formerly was 
the minister of death, is the first to see and proclaim the ador- 
able mystery of the Resurrection : thus womankind has procured 
absolution from ignominy, and removal of the curse. Hereby, 
moreover, it is shown, so far as the state of glory is con- 
cerned, that the female sex shall suffer no hurt; but if 
women burn with greater charity, they shall also attain 
greater glory from the Divine vision: because the women 
whose love for our Lord was more persistent,—so much so 
that when even the disciples withdrew from the sepulchre 
they did not depart,*—were the first to see Him rising in 
glory. 

* Gregory, Hom. xxv. in Evang. 

III, 2 26 

Q.55. Art.2 THE “ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 402 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING THAT THE DISCIPLES SHOULD SEE 
HIM RISE AGAIN ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem fitting that the disciples 
should have seen Him rise again, because it was their office 
to bear witness to the Resurrection, according to Acts iv. 33: 
With great power did the apostles give testimony to the Resur- 
vection of Jesus Christ our Lord. But the surest witness of 
all is an eye-witness. Therefore it would have been fitting 
for them to see the very Resurrection of Christ. 

Obj. 2. Further, in order to have the certainty of faith the 
disciples saw Christ ascend into heaven, according to Acts 
i. 9: While they looked on, He was raised up. But it was also 
necessary for them to have faith in the Resurrection. There- 
fore it seems that Christ ought to have risen in sight of the 
disciples. 

Obj. 3. Further, the raising of Lazarus was a sign of 
Christ’s coming Resurrection. But the Lord raised up 
Lazarus in sight of the disciples. Consequently, it seems 
that Christ ought to have risen in sight of the disciples. 

On the contrary, It is written (Mark xvi. 9): The Lord 
rising early the first day of the week, appeared first to Mary 
Magdalen. Now Mary Magdalen did not see Him rise; but, 
while searching for Him in the sepulchre, she heard from 
‘the angel: He is risen, He is not here. Therefore no one 
saw Him rise again. 

I answer that, As the Apostle says (Rom. xiii. 1): Those 
things that are of God, are well ordered (Vulg., Those that 
are, ave ordained of God). Now the divinely established 
order is this, that things above men’s ken are revealed to 
them by angels, as Dionysius says (Cal. Hter. iv.). But 
Christ on rising did not return to the familiar manner of 
life, but to a kind of immortal and God-like condition, 
according to Rom. vi. 10: For in that He liveth, He liveth 
unto God. And therefore it was fitting for Christ’s Resur- 

403 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q. 55. Art. 3 

rection not to be witnessed by men directly, but to be 
proclaimed to them by angels. Accordingly, Hilary (Com- 
ment. in Matth. cap. ult.) says: An angel is therefore the 
first herald of the Resurrection, that it might be declared out 
of obedience to the Father’s will. 

Reply Obj. 1. The apostles were able to testify to the 
Resurrection even by sight, because from the testimony of 
their own eyes they saw Christ alive, whom they had known 
to be dead. But just as man comes from the hearing of 
faith to the beatific vision, so did men come to the sight of 
the risen Christ through the message already received from 
angels. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s Ascension as to its term wherefrom, 
was not above men’s common knowledge, but only as to 
its term whereunto. Consequently, the disciples were able 
to behold Christ’s Ascension as to the term wherefrom, that 
is, according as He was uplifted from the earth; but they 
did not behold Him as to the term whereunto, because they 
did not see how He was received into heaven. But Christ’s 
Resurrection transcended common knowledge as to the 
term wherefrom, according as His soul returned from hell 
and His body from the closed sepulchre; and likewise as 
to the term whereunto, according as He attained to the life 
of glory. Consequently, the Resurrection ought not to be 
accomplished so as to be seen by man. 

Reply Obj. 3. Lazarus was raised so that he returned to 
the same life as before, which life is not beyond man’s 
common ken. Consequently, there is no parity. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST OUGHT TO HAVE LIVED CONSTANTLY WITH 
HIS DISCIPLES AFTER THE RESURRECTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ ought to have lived 
constantly with His disciples, because He appeared to them 
after His Resurrection in order to confirm their faith in 
the Resurrection, and to bring them comfort in their dis- 

Q. 55. ARt.3 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 404 

turbed state, according to Jo. xx. 20: The disciples were 
glad when they saw the Lord. But they would have been 
more assured and consoled had He constantly shown them 
His presence. Therefore it seems that He ought to have 
lived constantly with them. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ rising from the dead did not at 
once ascend to heaven, but after forty days, as is narrated 
in Acts i. 3. But meanwhile He could have been in no 
more suitable place than where the disciples were met 
together. Therefore it seems that He ought to have lived 
with them continually. 

Obj. 3. Further, as Augustine says (De Consens. 
Evang. iii.), we read how Christ appeared five times on the 
very day of His Resurrection: first to the women at the 
sepulchre ; secondly to the same on the way from the sepulchre ; 
thirdly to Peter; fourthly to the two disciples going to the 
town ; fifthly to several of them in Jerusalem when Thomas 
was not present. Therefore it also seems that He ought to 
have appeared several times on the other days before the 
Ascension. 

Obj. 4. Further, our Lord had said to them before the 
Passion (Matth. xxvi. 32):—But after I shall be risen again, 
I will go before you into Galilee ; moreover an angel and 
our Lord Himself repeated the same to the women after the 
Resurrection: nevertheless He was seen by them in Jerusalem 
on the very day of the Resurrection, as stated above (007. 3); 
also on the eighth day, as we read in John xx. 26. It seems, 
therefore, that He did not live with the disciples in a fitting 
way after the Resurrection. 

On the contrary, It is written (Jo. xx. 26) that after eight 
days Christ appeared to the disciples. Therefore He did 
not live constantly with them. 

I answer that, Concerning the Resurrection two things had 
to be manifested to the disciples, namely, the truth of the 
Resurrection, and the glory of Him who rose. Now in 
order to manifest the truth of the Resurrection, it sufficed 
for Him to appear several times before them, to speak 
familiarly to them, to eat and drink, and let them touch 

405 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q.55. ArT. 3 

Him. But in order to manifest the glory of the risen Christ, 
He was not desirous of living with them constantly as He 
had done before, lest it might seem that He rose unto the 
same life as before. Hence (Luke xxiv. 44) He said to 
them: These are the words which I spoke to you, while I was 
yet with you. For He was there with them by His bodily 
presence, but hitherto He had been with them not merely 
by His bodily presence, but also in mortal semblance. 
Hence Bede in explaining those words of Luke, while I was 
with you, says: that is, while I was still in mortal flesh, in 
which you are yet: for He had then risen in the same flesh, 
but was not in the same state of mortality as they. 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s frequent appearing served to 
assure the disciples of the truth of the Resurrection; but 
continual intercourse might have led them into the error of 
believing that He had risen to the same life as was His 
before. Yet by His constant presence He promised them 
comfort in another life, according to Jo. xvi. 22: I will see 
you again, and your heart shall rejoice ; and your joy no man 
shall take from you. 

Reply Ob7. 2. That Christ did not stay continually with 
the disciples was not because He deemed it more expedient 
for Him to be elsewhere: but because He judged it to be 
more suitable for the apostles’ instruction that He should 
not abide continually with them, for the reason given above. 
But it is quite unknown in what places He was bodily 
present in the meantime, since Scripture is silent, and His 
dominion is in every place (cf. Ps. cii. 22). 

Reply Obj. 3. He appeared oftener on the first day, be- 
cause the disciples were to be admonished by many proofs 
to accept the faith in His Resurrection from the very outset: 
but after they had once accepted it, they had no further 
need of being instructed by so many apparitions. Ac- 
cordingly one reads in the Gospel that after the first day 
He appeared again only five times. For, as Augustine 
says (De Consens. Evang. iii.), after the first five apparitions 
He came again a sixth time when Thomas saw Him ; a seventh 
time was by the sea of Tiberias at the capture of the fishes ; 

Q. 55. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 406 

the eighth was on the mountain of Galilee, according to Matthew ; 
the ninth occasion is expressed by Mark, ‘ at length when they 
were at table,’ because no more were they going to eat with 
Him upon earth ; the tenth was on the very day, when no longer 
upon the earth, but uplifted into the cloud, He was ascending 
into heaven. But, as John admits, not all things were written 
down. And He visited them frequently before He went up 
to heaven, in order to comfort them. Hence it is written 
(x Cor. xv. 6, 7) that He was seen by more than five hundred 
brethren at once; .. . after that He was seen by James ; of 
which apparitions no mention is made in the Gospels. 

Reply Obj. 4. Chrysostom in explaining Matth. xxvi. 32— 
after I shall be risen again, I will go before you into Galtlee, 
says (Hom. |xxxiii. in Matth.), He goes not to some far off 
region in order to appear to them, but among His own people, 
and tn those very places in which for the most part they 
had lived with Him; im order that they might thereby believe 
that He who was crucified was the same as He who rose again. 
And on this account He said that He would go tnto Galilee, 
that they might be delivered from fear of the Jews. 

Consequently, as Ambrose says (Expos. in Luc.), The 
Lord had sent word to the disciples that they were to see Him in 
Galilee ; yet He showed Himself first to them when they were 
assembled together in the room out of fear. (Nor ts there any 
breaking of a promise here, but rather a hastened fulfilling out 
of kindness)*: afterwards, however, when their minds were 
comforted, they went into Galtlee. Nor ts there any reason to 
prevent us from supposing that there were few in the room, 
and many more on the mountain, For, as Eusebiust says, 
Two Evangelists, Luke and John, write that He appeared in 
Jerusalem to the eleven only ; but the other two said that an 
angel and our Saviour commanded not merely the eleven, but 
all the disciples and brethren, to go into Galilee. Paul makes 
mention of them when he says (1 Cor. xv. 6): ‘Then He 
appeared to more than five hundred brethren at once.’ The 
truer solution, however, is this, that while they were in 

* Catena Aurea in Lucam, xxiv. 36. 
} Of Casarea. Cf. Migne, P. G., xxii. 1003. 

407 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION 0.55. Art.4 

hiding in Jerusalem He appeared to them at first in order 
to comfort them; but in Galilee it was not secretly, nor 
once or twice, that He made Himself known to them with 
great power, ‘showing Himself to them alive after His 
Passion, by many proofs,’ as Luke says (Acts i. 3). Or as 
Augustine writes (De Consens. Evang. iii.): What was said 
by the angel and by our Lord,—that He would ‘ go before them 
tnto Galilee,’ must be taken prophetically. For if we take 
Galtlee as meaning ‘ a passing,’ we must understand that they 
were going to pass from the people of Israel to the Gentiles, 
who would not believe in the preaching of the apostles unless 
He prepared the way for them in men’s hearts: and this is 
signified by the words ‘ He shall go before you into Galilee.’ 
But tf by Galilee we understand ‘revelation,’ we are to under- 
stand this as applying to Him not in the form of a servant, 
but in that form wherein He is equal to the Father, and which 
He has promised to them that love Him. Although He has 
gone before us tn this sense, He has not abandoned us. 

FourTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE APPEARED TO THE DISCIPLES 
‘IN ANOTHER SHAPE’ ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ ought not to have 
appeared to the disciples im another shape. For a thing 
cannot appear in very truth other than it is. But there 
was only one shape in Christ. Therefore if He appeared 
under another, it was not a true but a false apparition. 
Now this is not at all fitting, because as Augustine says 
(QQ. Ixxxiii., gu. 14): If He deceives He 1s not the Truth ; 
yet Christ is the Truth, Consequently, it seems that Christ 
ought not to have appeared to the disciples 1 another shape. 

Obj. 2. Further, nothing can appear in another shape 
than the one it has, except the beholder’s eyes be capti- 
vated by some illusions. But since such illusions are 
brought about by magical arts, they are unbecoming in 
Christ, according to what is written (2 Cor. vi. 15): What 

Q. 55. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 408 

concord hath Christ with Belial? Therefore it seems that 
Christ ought not to have appeared in another shape. 

Obj. 3. Further, just as our faith receives its surety from 
Scripture, so were the disciples assured of their faith in 
the Resurrection by Christ appearing to them. But, as 
Augustine says in an Epistle to Jerome (xxviii.), if but 
one untruth be admitted into the Sacred Scripture, the 
whole authority of the Scriptures is weakened. Conse- 
quently, if Christ appeared to the disciples, in but one 
apparition, otherwise than He was, then whatever they saw 
in Christ after the Resurrection will be of less import, which 
is not fitting. Therefore He ought not to have appeared 
in another shape. 

On the contrary, It is written (Mark xvi. 12): After that 
He appeared in another shape to two of them walking, as they 
were going into the country. 

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 1, 2), Christ’s Resur- 
rection was to be manifested to men in the same way as 
Divine things are revealed. But Divine things are revealed 
to men in various ways, according as they are variously 
disposed. For, those who have minds well disposed, per- 
ceive Divine things rightly, whereas those not so disposed 
perceive them with a certain confusion of doubt or error: 
for, the sensual man perceiveth not those things that are of the 
Spirit of God, as is said in rt Cor. ii. 14. Consequently, after 
His Resurrection Christ appeared in His own shape to some 
-who were well disposed to belief, while He appeared in 
another shape to them who seemed to be already growing 
tepid in their faith: hence these said (Luke xxiv. 21): We 
hoped that it was He that should have redeemed Isvael. Hence 
Gregory says (Hom. xxiii. in Evang.), that He showed Him- 
self to them in body such as He was in their minds: for, 
because He was as yet a stranger to faith in their hearts, He 
made pretence of going on farther, that is, as if He were a 
stranger. 

Reply Obj. x. As Augustine says (De Qq. Evang. ii.), not 
everything of which we make pretence is a falsehood ; but 
when what we pretend has no meaning then is it a falsehood. 

409 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q. 55. Art. 5 

But when our pretence has some signification, it is not a lie, 
but a figure of the truth ; otherwise everything said figuratively 
by wise and holy men, or even by our Lord Himself, would 
be set down as a falsehood, because tt is not customary to take 
such expressions in the literal sense. And deeds, like words, 
are feigned without falsehood, in order to denote something 
else. And so it happened here, as has been said. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iii.): 
Our Lord could change His flesh so that His shape really was 
other than they were accustomed to behold ; for, before His 
Passion He was transfigured on the mountain, so that His 
face shone like the sun. But tt did not happen thus now. 
For not without reason do we understand this hindrance in 
thetr eyes to have been of Satan’s doing, lest Jesus might be 
recognized. Hence Luke says (xxiv. 16) that thety eyes were 
held, that they should not know Him. 

Reply Obj. 3. Such an argument would prove, if they 
had not been brought back from the sight of a strange 
shape to that of Christ’s true countenance. For, as Augus- 
tine says (ibtd.): The permission was granted by Chnist, 
namely, that their eyes should be held fast in the aforesaid 
way, until the Sacrament of the bread ; that when they had 
shared in the unity of His body, the enemy’s hindrance may 
be understood to have been taken away, so that Christ might 
be recognized. Hence he goes on to say that ‘their eyes 
were opened, and they knew Him’ ; not that they were hitherto 
walking with their eyes shut; but there was something in 
them whereby they were not permitted to recognize what they 
saw. This could be caused by the darkness or by some kind 
of humour. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST SHOULD HAVE DEMONSTRATED THE TRUTH 
OF HIS RESURRECTION BY PROOFS ? 
We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that Christ should not have 

demonstrated the truth of His Resurrection by proofs. For 
Ambrose says (De Fide, ad Gratian. i.): Let there be no proofs 

Q. 55. Arr. 5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 410 

where faith is required. But faith is required regarding the 
Resurrection. Therefore proofs are out of place there. 

Obj. 2. Further, Gregory says (Hom. xxvi.): Faith has 
no merit where human reason supplies the test. But it was 
no part of Christ’s office to void the merit of faith. Conse- 
quently, it was not for Him to confirm the Resurrection 
by proofs. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ came into the world in order that 
men might attain beatitude through Him, according to 
Jo. x. 10: I am come that they may have life, and may have 
it more abundantly. But supplying proofs seems to be a 
hindrance in the way of man’s beatitude; because our Lord 
Himself said (Jo. xx. 29): Blessed are they that have not seen, 
and have believed. Consequently, it seems that Christ ought 
not to manifest His Resurrection by any proofs. 

On the contrary, It is related in Acts i. 3, that Christ 
appeared to His disciples for forty days by many proofs, 
speaking of the Kingdom of God. 

I answer that, The word proof is susceptible of a twofold 
meaning: sometimes it is employed to designate any sort 
of reason in confirmation of what 1s a matter of doubt :* and 
sometimes it means a sensible sign employed to manifest 
the truth; thus also Aristotle occasionally uses the term in 
his works.t Taking proof in the first sense, Christ did not 
demonstrate His Resurrection to the disciples by proofs, 
because such argumentative proof would have to be grounded 
on some principles; and if these were not known to the 
disciples, nothing would thereby be demonstrated to them, 
because nothing can be known from the unknown. And 
if such principles were known to them, they would not go 
beyond human reason, and consequently would not be 
efficacious for establishing faith in the Resurrection, which 
is beyond human reason, since principles must be assumed 
which are of the same order, according to 1 Poster. But 
it was from the authority of the Sacred Scriptures that 
He proved to them the truth of His Resurrection, which 

* Tull.) Topte: ii, 
1 Cf. Prior. Anal. ii.; Rhetor. i. 

411 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q.55. Art. 5 

authority is the basis of faith, when He said: All things must 
needs be fulfilled which are written in the Law, and in the 
prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Me: as is set forth 
Luke xxiv. 44. 

But if the term proof be taken in the second sense, then 
Christ is said to have demonstrated His Resurrection by 
proofs, inasmuch as by most evident signs He showed that 
He was truly risen. Hence where our version has by many 
proofs, the Greek text, instead of proof has rexnpuov, 1.€., an 
evident sign affording positive proof.* Now Christ showed 
these signs of the Resurrection to His disciples, for two 
reasons. First, because their hearts were not disposed so 
as to accept readily the faith in the Resurrection. Hence 
He says Himself (Luke xxiv. 25): O foolish and slow of 
heart to believe: and (Mark xvi. 14): He upbraided them 
with their incredulity and hardness of heart. Secondly, that 
their testimony might be rendered more efficacious through 
the signs shown them, according to 1 Jo. i. 1, 3: That which 
we have seen, and have heard, and our hands have handled 

. . we declare. 

Reply Obj. 1. Ambrose is speaking there of proofs drawn 
from human reason, which are useless for demonstrating 
things of faith, as was shown above. 

Reply Obj. 2. The merit of faith arises from this, that at 
God’s bidding man believes what he does not see. Ac- 
cordingly, only that reason debars merit of faith which 
enables one to see by knowledge what is proposed for belief: 
and this is demonstrative argument. But Christ did not 
make use of any such argument for demonstrating His 
Resurrection. 

Reply Obj. 3. As stated already (ad 2), the merit of 
beatitude, which comes of faith, is not entirely excluded 
except a man refuse to believe only such things as he can 
see. But for a man to believe from visible signs the things 
he does not see, does not entirely deprive him of faith nor 
of the merit of faith: just as Thomas, to whom it was said 
(Jo. xx. 29): ‘ Because thou hast seen Me, Thomas, thou hast 

* Cf. Prior. Anal. ii. 

Q. 55. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 412 

believed,’ saw one thing and believed another :* the wounds 
were what he saw, God was the object of His belief. But 
his is the more perfect faith who does not require such 
helps for belief. Hence, to put to shame the faith of some 
men, our Lord said (Jo. iv. 48): Unless you see signs and 
wonders, you believe not. From this one can learn how 
they who are so ready to believe God, even without behold- 
ing signs, are blessed in comparison with them who do not 
believe except they see the like. 

SIXTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER THE PROOFS WHICH CHRIST MADE USE OF 
MANIFESTED SUFFICIENTLY THE TRUTH OF HIS RESUR- 
RECTION ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that the proofs which Christ 
made use of did not sufficiently manifest the truth of His 
Resurrection. For after the Resurrection Christ showed 
nothing to His disciples which angels appearing to men 
did not or could not show; because angels have frequently 
shown themselves to men under human aspect, have spoken 
and lived with them, and eaten with them, just as if they 
were truly men, as is evident from Genesis xvili., of the 
angels whom Abraham entertained; and in the Book of 
Tobias, of the angel who conducted him and brought him 
back. Nevertheless, angels have not true bodies naturally 
united to them; which is required for a resurrection. Con- 
sequently, the signs which Christ showed His disciples were 
not sufficient for manifesting His Resurrection. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ rose again gloriously, that is, 
having a human nature with glory. But some of the things 
which Christ showed to His disciples seem contrary to 
human nature, as for instance, that He vanished out of their 
sight, and entered in among them when the doors were shut: 
and some other things seem contrary to glory, as for instance, 
that He ate and drank, and bore the scars of His wounds. 

* Gregory, Hom. xxvi. 

413 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q.55. Art.6 

Consequently, it seems that those proofs were neither suffi- 
cient nor fitting for establishing faith in the Resurrection. 
00j. 3. Further, after the Resurrection, Christ’s body 
was such that it ought not to be touched by mortal man; 
hence He said to Magdalen (Jo. xx. 17): Do not touch Me ; 
for I am not yet ascended to My Father. Consequently, it was 
not fitting for manifesting the truth of His Resurrection, that 
He should permit Himself to be handled by His disciples. 
Obj. 4. Further, clarity seems to be the principal of the 
qualities of a glorified body: yet He gave no sign thereof in 
His Resurrection. Therefore it seems that those proofs were 
insufficient for showing the quality of Christ’s Resurrection. 

Obj. 5.* Further, the angels introduced as witnesses for the 
Resurrection seem insufficient from the want of agreement on the 
part of the Evangelists. Because in Matthew’s account the angel 
is described as sitting upon the stone rolled back, while Mark states 
that he was seen after the women had entered the tomb; and again, ' 
whereas these mention one angel, John says that there were two 
sitting, and Luke says that there were two standing. Consequently, 
the arguments for the Resurrection do not seem to agree. 

On the contrary, Christ, who is the Wisdom of God, 
ordereth all things sweetly and in a fitting manner, according 
to Wisd. viii. I. 

I answer that, Christ manifested His Resurrection in two 
ways: namely, by testimony; and by proof or sign: and 
each manifestation was sufficient in its own class. For in 
order to manifest His Resurrection He made use of a double 
testimony, neither of which can be rebutted. The first of 
these was the angels’ testimony, who announced the Resur- 
rection to the women, as is seen in all the Evangelists: the 
other was the testimony of the Scriptures, which He set 
before them to show the truth of the Resurrection, as is 
narrated in the last chapter of Luke. 

Again, the proofs were sufficient for showing that the 
Resurrection was both true and glorious. That it was a 
true Resurrection He shows first on the part of the body; 

* This objection is wanting in the older codices, and in the text of 

the Leonine edition, which, however, gives it in a note as taken from 
one of the more recent codices of the Vatican. 

Q. 55. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 414 

and this He shows in three respects; first of all, that it was 
a true and solid body, and not phantastic or rarefied, like 
the air. And He establishes this by offering His body to 
be handled; hence He says in the last chapter of Luke (39): 
Handle and see ; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as you 
see Me to have. Secondly, He shows that it was a human 
body, by presenting His true features for them to behold. 
Thirdly, He shows that it was identically the same body 
which He had before, by showing them the scars of the 
wounds; hence, as we read in the last chapter of Luke (zbzd.) 
he said to them: See My hands and feet that it is I Myself. 

Secondly He showed them the truth of His Resurrection ‘ 
on the part of His soul reunited with His body: and He 
showed this by the works of the threefold life. First of 
all, in the operations of the nutritive life, by eating and 
drinking with His disciples, as we read in the last chapter 
of Luke. Secondly, in the works of the sensitive life, by 
replying to His disciples’ questions, and by greeting them 
when they were in His presence, showing thereby that He 
both saw and heard. Thirdly, in the works of the intellec- 
tive life by their conversing with Him, and discoursing on 
the Scriptures. And, in order that nothing might be wanting 
to make the manifestation complete, He also showed that 
He had the Divine Nature, by working the miracle of the 
draught of fishes, and further by ascending into heaven 
while they were beholding Him: because, according to 
Jo. ili. 13: No man hath ascended into heaven, but He that 
descended from heaven, the Son of Man who ts in heaven. 

He also showed His disciples the glory of His Resurrec- 
tion by entering in among them when the doors were closed: 
as Gregory says (Hom. xxvi. in Evang.): Our Lord allowed them 
to handle His flesh which He had brought through closed 
doors, to show that His body was of the same nature but of 
different glory. It likewise was part of the property of glory 
that He vanished suddenly from thetr eyes, as related in the 
last chapter of Luke; because thereby it was shown that it 
lay in His power to be seen or not seen; and this belongs to a 
glorified body, as stated above (Q. LIV., A. 1 ad 2, A. 2 ad 1). 

415 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q.55. Arr. 6 

Reply Obj. 1. Each separate argument would not suffice 
of itself for showing perfectly Christ’s Resurrection, yet all 
taken collectively establish it completely, especially owing 
to the testimonies of the Scriptures, the sayings of the 
angels, and even Christ’s. own assertion supported by 
miracles. As to the angels who appeared, they did not say 
they were men, as Christ asserted that He was truly a man. 
Moreover, the manner of eating was different in Christ 
and the angels: for since the bodies assumed by the angels 
were neither living nor animated, there was no true eating, 
although the food was really masticated and passed into 

_ the interior of the assumed body: hence the angels said to 
Tobias (xii. 18, 19): When I was with you ...I seemed 
indeed to eat and drink with you; but I use an invisible 
meat. But since Christ’s body was truly animated, His 
eating was genuine. For, as Augustine observes (De Civ. 
Det xiii.), tt ts not the power but the need of eating that shall 
be taken away from the bodies of them who rise again. Hence 
Bede says on Luke xxiv. 41: Christ ate because He could, not 
because He needed. 

Reply Obj. 2. As was observed above, some proofs were 
employed by Christ to prove the truth of His human nature, 
and others to show forth His glory in rising again. But 
the condition of human nature, as considered in itself, 
namely, as to its present state, is opposite to the condition 
oi glory, as is said in 1 Cor. xv. 43: It 1s sown in weakness, 
it shall rise in power. Consequently, the proofs brought 
forward for showing the condition of glory, seem to be 
in opposition to nature, not absolutely, but according to 
the present state, and conversely. Hence Gregory says 
(Hom. xxvi. in Evang.): The Lord mantfested two wonders, 
which are mutually contrary according to human reason, when 
after the Resurrection He showed His body as incorruptible 
and at the same time palpable. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (Tract. cxxi. super Joan.), 
these words of our Lord, ‘ Do not touch Me, for I am not 
yet ascended to My Father,’ show that in that woman there 1s 
a figure of the Church of the Gentiles, which did not believe in 

Q. 55. Art.6 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 416 

Christ until He was ascended to the Father. Or Jesus would 
have men to believe in Him, i.e., to touch Him spiritually, as 
being Himself one with the Father. For to that man’s inner- 
most perceptions He is, in some sort, ascended unto the F. ather, 
who has become so far proficient in Him, as to recognize in 
Him the equal with the Father . . . whereas she as yet believed 
in Him but carnally, since she wept for Him as for a man. 
But when one reads elsewhere of Mary having touched 
Him, when with the other women, she ‘came up and took 
hold of His feet,’ that matters little, as Severianus says 
(Chrysologus, Serm. Ixxvi.), for, the first act relates to figure, 
the other to sex ; the former is of Divine grace, the latter of 
human nature. Or, as Chrysostom says (Hom. ]xxxvi. im 
Joan.): This woman wanted to converse with Christ just as 
before the Passion, and out of joy was thinking of nothing 
great, although Christ’s flesh had become much nobler by rising 
again. And therefore He said: I have not yet ascended to 
My Father; as if to say: Do not suppose I am leading an 
earthly life ; for if you see Me upon earth, 1t 1s because I have 
not yet ascended to My Father, but I am going to ascend 
shortly. Hence He goes on to say: I ascend to My Father, 
and to your Father. 

Reply Obj. 4. As Augustine says ad Orostum (Dial. \xv. 
Qq.): Our Lord rose in clarified flesh ; yet He did not wish to 
appear before the disciples in that condition of clarity, because 
their eyes could not gaze upon that brilliancy. For if before 
He died for us and rose again the disciples could not look upon 
Him when He was transfigured upon the mountain, how much 
less were they able to gaze upon Him when our Lord’s flesh 
was glorified. It must also be borne in mind that after 
His Resurrection our Lord wished especially to show that 
He was the same as had died; which the manifestation of 
His brightness would have hindered considerably: because 
change of features shows more than anything else the differ- 
ence in the person seen: and this is because sight specially 
judges of the common sensibles, among which is one and 
many, or the same and different. But before the Passion, 
lest His disciples might despise its weakness, Christ meant 

417 MANIFESTATION OF RESURRECTION Q. 55. Arr. 6 

to show them the glory of His majesty; and this the bright- 

ness of the body specially indicates. Consequently, before 
the Passion He showed the disciples His glory by brightness, 
but after the Resurrection by other tokens. 

Reply Obj. 5. As Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. iii.): 
We can understand one angel to have been seen by the women, 
according to both Matthew and Mark, 1f we take them as 
having entered the sepulchre, that is, into some sort of walled 
enclosure, and that there they saw an angel sitting upon the 
stone which was rolled back from the monument, as Matthew 
says ; and that this ts Mark’s expression—‘ sitting on the 
right side’ ; afterwards when they scanned the spot where the 
Lord’s body had lain, they beheld two angels, who were at first 
seated, as John says, and who afterwards rose so as to be seen 
standing, as Luke relates. 

Ill. 2 27 

QUESTION LVI. 

OF THE CAUSALITY OF CHRIST’S RESURRECTION. 
(In Two Articles.) 

WE have now to consider the causality of Christ’s Resur- 
rection, concerning which there are two points of inquiry: 
(1) Whether Christ’s Resurrection is the cause of our resur- 
rection? (2) Whether it is the cause of our justification ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S RESURRECTION IS THE CAUSE OF THE 
RESURRECTION OF OUR BODIES? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Resurrection is 
not the cause of the resurrection of our bodies, because, 
given a sufficient cause, the effect must follow of necessity. 
If, then, Christ’s Resurrection be the sufficient cause of the 
resurrection of our bodies, then all the dead should have 
risen again as soon as He rose. 

Obj. 2. Further, Divine justice is the cause of the resur- 

‘rection of the dead, so that the body may be rewarded or 
punished together with the soul, since they shared in merit 
or sin, as Dionysius says (Eccles. Hier. vii.) and Damascene 
(De Fide Orthod. iv.). But God’s justice must necessarily 
be accomplished, even if Christ had not risen. Therefore 
the dead would rise again even though Christ did not. 
Consequently Christ’s Resurrection is not the cause of the 
resurrection of our bodies. 

Obj. 3. Further, if Christ’s Resurrection = the cause 
of the resurrection of our bodies, it would be either the 
exemplar, or the efficient, or the meritorious cause. Now 

418 

419 CAUSALITY OF RESURRECTION Q. 56. arr.1 

it is not the exemplar cause; because it is God who will 
bring about the resurrection of our bodies, according to 
Jo. v. 21: The Father raiseth up the dead: and God has 
no need to look at any exemplar cause outside Himself. 
In like manner it is not the efficient cause; because an 
efficient cause acts only through contact, whether spiritual 
or corporeal. Now it is evident that Christ’s Resurrection 
has no corporeal contact with the dead who shall rise again, 
owing to distance of time and place; and similarly it has no 
spiritual contact, which is through faith and charity, be- 
cause even unbelievers and sinners shall rise again. Nor 
again is it the meritorious cause, because when Christ rose 
He was no longer a wayfarer, and consequently not in a 
state of merit. Therefore, Christ’s Resurrection does not 
appear to be in any way the cause of ours. 

Obj. 4. Further, since death is the privation of life, then 
to destroy death seems to be nothing else than to bring 
life back again; and this is resurrection. But by dying 
Christ destroyed our death.* Consequently, Christ’s death, 
not His Resurrection, is the cause of our resurrection. 

On the contrary, On I Cor. xv. 12: Now if Christ be preached, 
that He rose again from the dead, the gloss says: Who 1s the 
efficient cause of our resurrection. 

I answer that, As stated in 2 Metaphysics, text 4: What- 
ever 1s first in any order, 1s the cause of all that come after it. 
But Christ’s Resurrection was the first in the order, of 
our resurrection, as is evident from what was said above 
(Q. LITI., A. 3). Hence Christ’s Resurrection must be 
the cause of ours: and this is what the Apostle says (1 Cor. 
xv. 20, 21): Christ is risen from the dead, the first-fruits of 
them that sleep ; for by a man came death, and by a man the 
resurrection of the dead. 

And this is reasonable. Because the principle of human 
life-giving is the Word of God, of whom it is said (Ps. 
xxxv. 10): With Thee ts the fountain of life : hence He Him- 
self says (Jo. v. 21): As the Father ratseth up the dead, and 
giveth life ; so the Son also giveth life to whom He will. Now 

* Preface of Mass in Paschal Time. 

Q. 56. Arr.1 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 420 

the divinely established natural order is that every cause 
operates first upon what is nearest to it, and through it 
upon others which are more remote; just as fire first heats 
the nearest air, and through it it heats bodies that are 
further off: and God Himself first enlightens those sub- 
stances which are closer to Him, aud through them others 
that are more remote, as Dionysius says (C@l. Hier. xili.). 
Consequently, the Word of God first bestows immortal life 
upon that body which is naturally united with Himself, 
and through it works the resurrection in all other bodies. 

Reply Obj. 1. As was stated above, Christ’s Resurrection 
is the cause of ours through the power of the united Word, 
who operates according to His will. And consequently, it 
is not necessary for the effect to follow at once, but accord- 
ing as the Word of God disposes, namely, that first of all 
we be conformed to the suffering and dying Christ in this 
suffering and mortal life; and afterwards may come to share 
in the likeness of His Resurrection. 

Reply Obj. 2. God’s justice is the first cause of our resur- 
rection, whereas Christ’s Resurrection is the secondary, and 
as it were the instrumental cause. But although the power 
of the principal cause is not restricted to one instrument 
determinately, nevertheless since it works through this 
instrument, such instrument causes the effect. So, then, 
the Divine justice in itself is not tied down to Christ’s 
Resurrection as a means of bringing about our resurrection: 
because God could deliver us in some other way than 
through Christ’s Passion and Resurrection, as already 
stated (Q. XLVI., A. 2). But having once decreed to 
deliver us in this way, it is evident that Christ’s Resur- 
rection is the cause of ours. 

Reply Obj. 3. Properly speaking, Christ’s Resurrection is 
not the meritorious cause, but the efficient and exemplar 
cause of our resurrection. It is the efficient cause, inas- 
much as Christ’s humanity, according to which He rose 
again, is as it were the instrument of His Godhead, and 
works by Its power, as stated above (Q. XIII., AA. 2, 3). 
And therefore, just as all other things which Christ did and 

421 CAUSALITY OF RESURRECTION Q. 56. Art. 1 

endured in His humanity are profitable to our salvation 
through the power of the Godhead, as already stated 
(Q. XLVIII., A. 6), so also is Christ’s Resurrection the 
efficient cause of ours, through the Divine power whose 
office it is to quicken the dead; and this power by its 
presence is in touch with all places and times; and such 
virtual contact suffices for its efficiency. And since, as was 
stated above (ad 2), the primary cause of human resurrection 
is the Divine justice, from which Christ has the power of 
passing judgement, because He is the Son of Man (Jo. v. 27); 
the efficient power of His Resurrection extends to the good 
and wicked alike, who are subject to His judgement. 

But just as the Resurrection of Christ’s body, through its 
personal union with the Word, is first in point of time, so 
also is it first in dignity and perfection; as the gloss says on 
I Cor. xv. 20, 23. But whatever is most perfect is always 
the exemplar, which the less perfect copies according to its 
mode; consequently Christ’s Resurrection is the exemplar 
of ours. And this is necessary, not on the part of Him 
who rose again, who needs no exemplar, but on the part 
of them who are raised up, who must be likened to that 
Resurrection, according to Phil. iii. 21: He will reform the 
body of our lowness, made like to the body of Hts glory. Now 
although the efficiency of Christ’s Resurrection extends to 
the resurrection of the good and wicked alike, still its 
exemplarity extends properly only to the just, who are made 
conformable with His Sonship, according to Rom. viii. 29. 

Reply Obj. 4. Considered on the part of their efficiency, 
which is dependent on the Divine power, both Christ’s 
death and His Resurrection are the cause both of the de- 
struction of death and of the renewal of life: but considered 
as exemplar causes, Christ’s death—by which He withdrew 
from mortal life—is the cause of the destruction of our 
death; while His Resurrection, whereby He inaugurated 
immortal life, is the cause of the repairing of our life. But 
Christ’s Passion is furthermore a meritorious cause, as 
stated above (O. XLVIII., A. 1). 

Q. 56. Art.2 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 422 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S RESURRECTION IS THE CAUSE OF THE 
RESURRECTION OF SOULS ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Resurrection is 
not the cause of the resurrection of souls, because Augustine 
says (Tract. xxiii. super Joan.) that bodies rise by His human 
dispensation, but souls rise by the Substance of God. But 
Christ’s Resurrection does not belong to God’s Substance, 
but to the dispensation of His humanity. Therefore, 
although Christ’s Resurrection is the cause of bodies rising, 
nevertheless it does not seem to be the cause of the resur- 
rection of souls. 

Obj. 2. Further, a body does not act upon a spirit. But 
the Resurrection belongs to His body, which death laid 
low. Therefore His Resurrection is not the cause of the 
resurrection of souls. 

Obj. 3. Further, since Christ’s Resurrection is the cause 
why bodies rise again, the bodies of all men shall rise again, 
according to 1 Cor. xv. 51: We shall all indeed rise again. 
But the souls of all will not rise again, because according 
to Matth. xxv. 46: some shall go into everlasting punishment. 
Therefore Christ’s Resurrection is not the cause of the 
resurrection of souls. 

Obj. 4. Further, the resurrection of souls comes of the 
forgiveness of sins. But this was effected by Christ’s 
Passion, according to Apoc. i. 5: He washed us from our 
sins in His own blood. Consequently, Christ’s Passion even 
more than His Resurrection is the cause of the resurrection 
of souls. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. iv. 25): He rose 
again for our justification, which is nothing else than the 
resurrection of souls: and on Ps. xxix. 6: In the evening 
weeping shall have place, the gloss says, Christ’s Resurrection 

is the cause of ours, both of the soul at present, and of the body 
in the future. 

423 CAUSALITY OF RESURRECTION Q. 56. Arr. 2 

I answer that, As stated above, Christ’s Resurrection 
works in virtue of the Godhead; now this virtue extends 
not only to the resurrection of bodies, but also to that of 
souls: for it comes of God that the soul lives by grace, and 
that the body lives by the soul. Consequently, Christ’s 
Resurrection has instrumentally an effective power not only 
with regard to the resurrection of bodies, but also with 
respect to the resurrection of souls. In like fashion it is 
an exemplar cause with regard to the resurrection of souls, 
because even in our souls we must be conformed with the 
rising Christ: as the Apostle says (Rom. vi. 4-11): Christ is 
risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also may 
walk in newness of life: and as He, rising again from the 
dead, dieth now no more, so let us reckon that we (Vulg., you) 
are dead to sin, that we may live together with Him. 

Reply Obj. 1. Augustine says that the resurrection of 
souls is wrought by God’s Substance, as to participation, 
because souls become good and just by sharing in the 
Divine goodness, but not by sharing in anything created. 
Accordingly, after saying that souls rise by the Divine 
Substance, he adds: the soul is beatified by a partici- 
pation with God, and not by a participation with a holy 
soul. But our bodies are made glorious by sharing in the 
glory of Christ’s body. 

Reply Obj. 2. The efficacy of Christ’s Resurrection reaches 
souls not from any special virtue of His risen body, but 
from the virtue of the Godhead personally united with it. 

Reply Obj. 3. The resurrection of souls pertains to merit, 
which is the effect of justification; but the resurrection of 
bodies is ordained for punishment or reward, which are the 
effects of Him who judges. Now it belongs to Christ, not to 
justify all men, but to judge them: and therefore He raises 
up all as to their bodies, but not as to their souls. 

Reply Obj. 4. Two things concur in the justification of 
souls, namely, forgiveness of sin and newness of life through 
grace. Consequently, as to efficacy, which comes of the 
Divine power, the Passion as well as the Resurrection of 
Christ is the cause of justification as to both the above. 

Q. 56. Axt.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 424 

But as to exemplarity, properly speaking Christ’s Passion 
and death are the cause of the forgiveness of guilt, by which 
forgiveness we die unto sin: whereas Christ’s Resurrection 
is the cause of newness of life, which comes through grace 
or justice: consequently, the Apostle says (Rom. iv. 25) 
that He was delivered up—i.e., to death—for our sins—.e., 
to take them away—and rose again for our justification. 
But Christ’s Passion was also a meritorious cause, as stated 
above (A. 1 ad 4, Q. XLVIII., A. 1). 

QUESTION LVII. 

OF THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s Ascension: concerning 
which there are six points of inquiry: (1) Whether it 
belonged for Christ to ascend into heaven? (2) According 
to which nature did it become Him to ascend? (3) Whether 
He ascended by His own power ? (4) Whether He ascended 
above all the corporeal heavens? (5) Whether He ascended 
above all spiritual creatures? (6) Of the effect of the 
Ascension. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT WAS FITTING FOR CHRIST TO ASCEND INTO 
HEAVEN ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it was not fitting for 
Christ to ascend into heaven. For the Philosopher says 
(De Calo ii.) that things which are in a state of perfection 
possess their good without movement. But Christ was in a 
state of perfection, since He is the Sovereign Good in respect 
of His Divine Nature, and sovereignly glorified in respect of 
His human nature. Consequently, He has His good without 
movement. But ascension is movement. Therefore it was 
not fitting for Christ to ascend. 

Obj. 2. Further, whatever is moved, is moved on account 
of something better. But it was no better thing for Christ 
to be in heaven than upon earth, because He gained nothing 
either in soul or in body by being in heaven. Therefore it 
seems that Christ should not have ascended into heaven. 

425 

va 

Q. 57, Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 426 

Obj. 3. Further, the Son of God took human flesh for our 
salvation. But it would have been more beneficial for — 
men if He had tarried always with us upon earth; thus He 
said to His disciples (Luke xvii. 22): The days will come 
when you shall desire to see one day of the Son of man ; and 
you shall not see it. Therefore it seems unfitting for Christ 
to have ascended into heaven. 

Obj. 4. Further, as Gregory says (Moral. xiv.), Christ’s 
body was in no way changed after the Resurrection. But 
He did not ascend into heaven immediately after rising 
again, for He said after the Resurrection (Jo. xx. 17): I 
am not yet ascended to My Father. Therefore it seems that 
neither should He have ascended after forty days. 

On the contrary, Are the words of our Lord (Jo. xx. 17): 
I gee to My Father and to your Father. 

answer that, The place ought to be in keeping with 
what is contained therein. Now by His Resurrection Christ 
entered upon an immortal and incorruptible life. But 
whereas our dwelling-place is one of generation and corrup- 
tion, the heavenly place is one of incorruption. And conse- 
quently it was not fitting that Christ should remain upon 
earth after the Resurrection; but it was fitting that He 
should ascend to heaven. 

Reply Obj. 1. That which is best and possesses its good 
without movement is God Himself, because He is utterly 
unchangeable, according to Mal. iii. 6: J am the Lord, and 
I change not. But every creature is changeable in some 
respect, as is evident from Augustine (Gen. ad lit. viii.). 
And since the nature assumed by the Son of God remained 
a creature, as is clear from what was said above (Q. IL., 
A. 7;Q. XVI., AA. 8, 10; Q. XX., A. 1), it is not unbecom- 
ing if some movement be attributed to it. 

Reply Obj. 2. By ascending into heaven Christ acquired 
no addition to His essential glory either in body or in soul: 
nevertheless He did acquire something as to the fittingness 
of place, which pertains to the well-being of glory: not 
that His body acquired anything from a heavenly body 
by way of perfection or preservation; but merely out of 

. 
427 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST Q. 57. Art.1 

a certain fittingness. Now this in a measure belonged to 
His glory; and He had a certain kind of joy from such 
fittingness, not indeed that He then began to derive joy 
from it when He ascended into heaven, but that He rejoiced 
thereat in a new way, as at a thing completed. Hence, on 
Ps. xv. 11: At Thy right hand are delights even unto the end, 
the gloss says: I shall delight in sitting nigh to Thee, when 
I shall be taken away from the sight of men. 

Reply Obj. 3. Although Christ’s bodily presence was with- 
drawn from the faithful by the Ascension, still the presence 
of His Godhead is ever with the faithful, as He Himself 
says (Matth. xxviii. 20): Behold, I am with you all days, even 
to the consummation of the world. For, by ascending into 
heaven He did not abandon those whom He adopted, as Pope 
Leo says (De Resurrec., Serm. ii.). But Christ’s Ascension 
into heaven, whereby He withdrew His bodily presence 
from us, was more profitable for us than His bodily presence 
would have been. 

First of all, in order to increase our faith, which is of 
things unseen. Hence our Lord said (Jo. xvi.) that the 
Holy Ghost shall come and convince the world... of 
justice, that is, of the justice of those that believe, as Augus- 
tine says (Tract. xcv. super Joan.): For even to put the 
faithful beside the unbeliever is to put the unbeliever to shame, 
wherefore he goes on to say (10): ‘ Because I go to the Father ; 
and you shall see Me no longer’ :—For ‘ blessed are they that see 
not, yet believe.’ Hence itis of our justice that the world 1s re- 
proved : because ‘ you will believe in Me whom you shall not see.’ 

Secondly, to uplift our hope: hence He says (Jo. xiv. 3): 
If I shall go, and prepare a place for you, I will come again, 
and will take you to Myself ; that where I am, you also may 
be. For by placing in heaven the human nature which He 
assumed, Christ gave us the hope of going thither; since 
wheresoever the body shall be, there shall the eagles also be 
gathered together, as is written in Matth. xxiv. 28. Hence 
it is written likewise (Mich. ii. 13): He shall go up that shall 
open the way before them. 

Thirdly, in order to direct the fervour of our charity to 

Q. 57. Art.1 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 428 

heavenly things. Hence the Apostle says (Col. iii. 1, 2): 
Seek the things that are above, where Christ is sitting at the 
right hand of God. Mind the things that are above, not the 
things that are upon the earth : for as is said (Matth. vi. 21): 
Where thy treasure is, there is thy heart also. And since the 
Holy Ghost is love drawing us up to heavenly things, there- 
fore our Lord said to His disciples (Jo. xvi. 7): It 1s expedtent 
to you that-I go; for if I go not, the Paraclete will not come 
to you; but if I go, I will send Him to you. On which words 
Augustine says (Tract. xciv. super Joan.): Ye cannot receive 
the Spirit, so long as ye persist in knowing Christ according 
to the flesh. But when Christ withdrew in body, not only the 
Holy Ghost, but both Father and Son were present with them 
spiritually. 

Reply Obj. 4. Although a heavenly place befitted Christ 
when He rose to immortal life, nevertheless He delayed the 
Ascension in order to confirm the truth of His Resurrection. 
Hence it is written (Acts 1. 3), that He showed Himself alive 
after His Passion, by many proofs, for forty days appearing 
to them: upon which the gloss says that because He was 
dead for forty hours, during forty days He established the fact 
of His being alive again. Or, the forty days may be under- 
stood as a figure of this world, wherein Christ dwells in His 
Church : inasmuch as man is made out of the four elements, 
and is cautioned not to transgress the Decalogue. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S ASCENSION INTO HEAVEN BELONGED TO 
HIM ACCORDING TO HIS DIVINE NATURE ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Ascension into 
heaven belonged to Him according to His Divine Nature. 
For, it is written (Ps. xlvi. 6): God is ascended with jubilee : 
and (Deut. xxxiii. 26): He that is mounted upon the heaven 
is thy helper. But these words were spoken of God even 
before Christ’s Incarnation. Therefore it belongs to Christ 
to ascend into heaven as God. 

429 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST Q. 57. Arr. 2 

Obj. 2. Further, it belongs to the same person to ascend 
into heaven as to descend from heaven, according to John 
il. 13: No man hath ascended into heaven, but He that de- 
scended from heaven: and Eph. iv. 10: He that descended. 
ts the same also that ascended. But Christ came down from 
heaven not as man, but as God: because previously His 
Nature in heaven was not human, but Divine. Therefore 
it seems that Christ ascended into heaven as God. 

Obj. 3. Further, by His Ascension Christ ascended to 
the Father. But it was not as man that He rose to equality 
with the Father; for in this respect He says: He is greater 
than I, as is said in John xiv. 28. Therefore it seems that 
Christ ascended as God. 

On the contrary, On Eph. iv. 10: That He ascended, what 
1s it, but because He also descended, a gloss says: It ts clear 
that He descended and ascended according to His humanity. 

I answer that, The expression according to can denote 
two things; the condition of the one who ascends, and the 
cause of his ascension. When taken to express the con- 
dition of the one ascending, the Ascension in no wise belongs 
to Christ according to the condition of His Divine Nature; 
both because there is nothing higher than the Divine Nature 
to which He can ascend; and because ascension is local 
motion, a thing not in keeping with the Divine Nature, 
which is immovable and outside all place. Yet the Ascen- 
sion is in keeping with Christ according to His human nature, 
which is limited by place, and can be the subject of motion. 
In this sense, then, we can say that Christ ascended into 
heaven as man, but not as God. 

But if the phrase according to denote the cause of the 
Ascension, since Christ ascended into heaven in virtue of 
His Godhead, and not in virtue of His human nature, then 
it must be said that Christ ascended into heaven not as 
man, but as God. Hence Augustine says in a sermon on 
the Ascension: Jt was our doing that the Son of man hung 
upon the cross ; but it was His own doing that He ascended. 

Reply Obj. 1. These utterances were spoken prophetically 
of God who was one day to become incarnate. Still it can 

Q. 57. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 430 

be said that although to ascend does not belong to the Divine 
Nature properly, yet it can metaphorically; as, for instance, 
it is said to ascend in the heart of man (cf. Ps. \xxxiii. 6), 
when his heart submits and humbles itself before God: and 
in the same way God is said to ascend metaphorically with 
regard to every creature, since He subjects it to Himself. 

Reply Obj. 2. He who ascended is the same as He who 
descended. For Augustine says (De Symb. iv.): Who is wt 
that descends ? The God-Man. Who is it that ascends ? 
The self-same God-Man. Nevertheless a twofold descent 
is attributed to Christ; one, whereby He is said to have 
descended from heaven, which is attributed to the God-Man 
according as He is God: for He is not to be understood as 
having descended by any local movement, but as having 
emptied Himself, since when He was in the form of God He 
took the form of a servant. For just as He is said to be 
emptied, not by losing His fulness, but because He took 
our littleness upon Himself, so likewise He is said to have 
descended from heaven, not that He deserted heaven, but 
because He assumed human nature in unity of person. 

And there is another descent whereby He descended into 
the lower regions of the earth, as is written Eph. iv. 9; and 
this is local descent: hence this belongs to Christ according 
to the condition of human nature. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ is said to ascend to the Father, 
inasmuch as He ascends to sit on the right hand of the 
Father; and this is befitting Christ in a measure according 
to His Divine Nature, and in a measure according to His 
human nature, as will be said later (Q. LVIIL., A. 3). 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST ASCENDED BY HIS OWN POWER ? 

We proceed thus to the Third Article :— — 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not ascend by 
His own power, because it is written (Mark xvi. 19) that 
the Lord Jesus, after He had spoken to them, was taken up to 
heaven ; and (Acts i. 9) that, while they looked on, He was 

a 

431 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST Q. 57. Art.3. 

raised up, and a cloud received Him out of their sight. But 
what is taken up, and lifted up, appears to be moved by 
another. Consequently, it was not by His own power, but 
by another’s that Christ was taken up into heaven. 

Obj. 2. Further, Christ’s was an earthly body, like to 
ours. But it is contrary to the nature of an earthly body to 
be borne upwards. Moreover, what is moved contrary to 
its nature is nowise moved by its own power. Therefore 
Christ did not ascend to heaven by His own power. 

067. 3. Further, Christ’s own power is Divine. But this 
motion does not seem to have been Divine, because, whereas 
the Divine power is infinite, such motion would be instan- 
taneous; consequently, He would not have been uplifted 
to heaven while the disciples looked on, as is stated in 
Acts i. g. Therefore, it seems that Christ did not ascend 
to heaven by His own power. 

On the contrary, It is written (Is. lxiii. 1): This beautiful 
one in his robe, walking in the greatness of his strength. Also 
Gregory says in a Homily on the Ascension (xxix.): It is 
to be noted that we read of Elias having ascended in a chariot, 
that it might be shown that one who was mere man needed 
another's help. But we do not read of our Saviour being lifted 
up either in a chariot or by angels, because He who had made 
all things was taken up above all things by His own power. 

I answer that, There is a twofold nature in Christ, to wit, 
the Divine and the human. Hence His own power can be 
accepted according to both. Likewise a twofold power can 
be accepted regarding His human nature: one is natural, 
flowing from the principles of nature; and it is quite evident 
that Christ did not ascend into heaven by such power as 
this. The other is the power of glory, which is in Christ’s 
human nature; and it was according to this that He ascended 
to heaven. 

Now there are some who endeavour to assign the cause 
of this power to the nature of the fifth essence. This, as 
they say, is light, which they make out to be of the com- 
position of the human body, and by which they contend 
that contrary elements are reconciled; so that in the state 

0.57. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 432 

of this mortality, elemental nature is predominant in human 
bodies: so that, according to the nature of this predominat- 
ing element the human body is borne downwards by its 
own power: but in the condition of glory the heavenly 
nature will predominate, by whose tendency and power 
Christ’s body and the bodies of the saints are lifted up to 
heaven. But we have already treated of this opinion in 
the First Part (0. LXXVI., A. 7), and shall deal with it 
more fully in treating of the general resurrection (Suppl., 
QoLXAXIV:, A. I): 

Setting this opinion aside, others assign as the cause of 
this power the glorified soul itself, from whose overflow 
the body will be glorified, as Augustine writes to Dioscorus 
(Ep. cxviii.). For the glorified body will be so submissive 
to the glorified soul, that, as Augustine says (De Cvv. 
Dei. xxii.), wheresoever the spirit listeth, thither the body will 
be on the instant ; nor will the spirit desire anything unbe- 
coming to the soul or the body. Now it is befitting the glori- 
fied and immortal body for it to be in a heavenly place, as 
stated above (A. 1). Consequently, Christ’s body ascended 
into heaven by the power of His soul willing it. But as 
the body is made glorious by participation with the soul, 
even so, as Augustine says (Tract. xxill. in Joan.), the soul 
is beatified by participating in God. Consequently, the 
Divine power is the first source of the ascent into heaven. 
Therefore Christ ascended into heaven by His own power, 
first of all by His Divine power, and secondly by the power 
of His glorified soul moving His body at will. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Christ is said to have risen by His own 
power, though He was raised to life by the power of the 
Father, since the Father’s power is the same as the Son’s; 
so also Christ ascended into heaven by His own power, and 
yet was raised up and taken up to heaven by the Father. 

Reply Obj. 2. This argument proves that Christ did not 
ascend into heaven by His own power, 1.e., that which is 
natural to human nature: yet He did ascend by His own 
power, 7.e., His Divine power, as well as by His own power, 
v.e., the power of His beatified soul. And although to 

433 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST Q.57. Arr.4 

mount upwards is contrary to the nature of a human body 
in its present condition, in which the body is not entirely 
dominated by the soul, still it will not be unnatural or forced 
in a glorified body, whose entire nature is utterly under the 
control of the spirit. 

Reply 08;. 3. Although the Divine power be infinite, and 
operate infinitely, so far as the worker is concerned, still 
the effect thereof is received in things according to their 
capacity, and as God disposes. Now a body is incapable 
of being moved locally in an instant, because it must be 
commensurate with space, according to the division of 
which time is reckoned, as is proved in Physics vi. Conse- 
quently, it is not necessary for a body moved by God to be 
moved instantaneously, but with such speed as God disposes. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 
WHETHER CHRIST ASCENDED ABOVE ALL THE HEAVENS ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not ascend 
above all the heavens, for it is written (Ps. x. 5): The Lord 
ts in His holy temple, the Lord’s throne 1s in heaven, But 
what is in heaven is not above heaven. Therefore Christ 
did not ascend above all the heavens. 

(Obj. 2.* Further, there is no place above the heavens, as is proved 

in De Celo i. But every body must occupy a place. Therefore 
Christ’s body did not ascend above all the heavens. ] 

0bj.3. Further, two bodies cannot occupy the same place. 
Since, then, there is no passing from place to place except 
through the middle space, it seems that Christ could not 
have ascended above all the heavens unless heaven were 
divided; which is impossible. 

Obj. 4. Further, it is narrated (Acts i. 9) that a cloud 
received Him out of their sight. But clouds cannot be up- 
lifted beyond heaven. Consequently, Christ did not ascend 
above all the heavens. 

* This objection with its solution is omitted in the Leonine 
edition as not being in the original manuscript. 

III. 2 28 

Q.57. Art.4 THE ‘“‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 434 

Obj. 5. Further, we believe that Christ will dwell for ever 
in the place whither He has ascended. But what is against 
nature cannot last for ever, because what is according to 
nature is more prevalent and of more frequent occurrence. 
Therefore, since it is contrary to nature for an earthly body 
to be above heaven, it seems that Christ’s body did not 
ascend above heaven. 

On the contrary, It is written (Eph. iv. 10): He ascended 
above all the heavens that He might fill all things. 

I answer that, The more fully anything corporeal shares in 
the Divine goodness, the higher its place in the corporeal 
order, which is order of place. Hence we see that the more 
formal bodies are naturally the higher, as is clear from the 
Philosopher (Phys. iv., and De Celo. ii.), since it is by its 
form that every body partakes of the Divine Essence, as is 
shown in Phys. i. But through glory the body derives a 
greater share in the Divine goodness than any other natural 
body does through its natural form; while among other 
glorious bodies it is manifest that Christ’s body shines with 
greater glory. Hence it was most fitting for it to be set 
above all bodies. Thus it is that on Eph. iv. 8: Ascending 
on high, the gloss says: in place and dignity. 

Reply Obj. 1. God’s seat is said to be in heaven, not as 
though heaven contained Him, but rather because it is 
contained by Him. Hence it is not necessary for any part 
of heaven to be higher, but for Him to be above all the 
heavens; according to Ps. vill. 2: For Thy magnificence is 
elevated above the heavens, O God! 

[Reply Obj. 2. A place implies the notion of containing; hence 
the first container has the formality of first place, and such is the 
first heaven. Therefore bodies need in themselves to be in a place, 
in so far as they are contained by a heavenly body. But glorified 
bodies, Christ’s especially, do not stand in need of being so con- 
tained, because they draw nothing from the heavenly bodies, but 
from God through the soul. So there is nothing to prevent Christ’s 
body from being beyond the containing radius of the heavenly 
bodies, and not in a containing place. Nor is there need for a 
vacuum to exist outside heaven, since there is no place there, nor 

is there any potentiality susceptive of a body, but the potentiality 
of reaching thither lies in Christ. So when Aristotle proves (De 

435 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST 0.57. Arr. 5 

Calo ii.) that there is no body beyond heaven, this must be under- 
stood of bodies which are in a state of pure nature, as is seen from 
the proofs. ] 

Reply Oj. 3. Although it is not of the nature of a body 
for it to be in the same place with another body, yet God 
can bring it about miraculously that a body be with another 
in the same place, as Christ did when He went forth from 
the Virgin’s sealed womb, also when He entered among 
the disciples through closed doors, as Gregory says (Hom. 
xxvi.). Therefore Christ’s body can be in the same place 
with another body, not through some inherent property in 
the body, but through the assistance and operation of the 
Divine power. 

Reply Obj. 4. That cloud afforded no support as a vehicle 
to the ascending Christ: but it appeared as a sign of the 
Godhead, just as God’s glory appeared to Israel in a cloud 
over the Tabernacle (Exod. xl. 32; Num. ix. 15). 

Reply Obj. 5. A glorified body has the power to be in 
heaven or above heaven; not from its natural principles, 
but from the beatified soul, from which it derives its glory: 
and just as the upward motion of a glorified body is not 
violent, so neither is its rest violent: consequently, there is 
nothing to prevent it from being everlasting. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S BODY ASCENDED ABOVE EVERY 
SPIRITUAL CREATURE ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s body did not 
ascend above every spiritual creature. For no fitting com- 
parison can be made between things which have no common 
ratio. But place is not predicated in the same ratio of 
bodies and of spiritual creatures, as is evident from what was 
said in the First Part (Q. VIII., A. 2 ad 1, 2; Q. LII., A. 1). 
Therefore it seems that Christ’s body cannot be said to have 
ascended above every spiritual creature. 

Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says (De Vera Relig. lv.) that 

Q.57. Art.5 THE ‘‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 436 

a spirit always takes precedence over a body. Bur the 
higher place is due to the higher things. Therefore it 
does not seem that Christ ascended above every spiritual 
creature. 

Obj. 3. Further, in every place a body exists, since there 
is no such thing as a vacuum in nature. Therefore if no 
body obtains a higher place than a spirit in the order of 
natural bodies, then there will be no place above every 
spiritual creature. Consequently, Christ’s body could not 
ascend above every spiritual creature. 

On the contrary, It is written (Eph. i. 21): God set Him 
above all Principality, and Power, and every name that 1s 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which 1s to 
come. 

I answer that, The more exalted place is due to the nobler 
subject, whether it be a place according to bodily contact, 
as regards bodies, or whether it be by way of spiritual con- 
tact, as regards spiritual substances; thus a heavenly place 
which is the highest of places is becomingly due to spiritual 
substances, since they are highest in the order of substances. 
But although Christ’s body is beneath spiritual substances, 
if we weigh the conditions of its corporeal nature, neverthe- 
less it surpasses all spiritual substances in dignity, when we 
call to mind its dignity of union whereby it is united person- 
ally with God. Consequently, owing to this very fitting- 
ness, a higher place is due to it above every spiritual creature. 
Hence Gregory says in a Homily on the Ascension (xxix. 
an Evang.) that He who had made all things, was by His own 
power raised up above all things. 

Reply Obj. 1. Although a place is differently attributed 
to corporeal and spiritual substances, still in either case 
this remains in common, that the higher place is assigned 
to the worthier. 

Reply Obj. 2. This argument holds good of Christ’s body 
according to the conditions of its corporeal nature, but not 
according to its formality of union. 

Reply Obj. 3. This comparison may be considered either 
on the part of the places; and thus there is no place so high 

437 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST Q. 57. Arr. 6 

as to exceed the dignity of a spiritual substance: in this 
sense the objection runs. Or it may be considered on the 
part of the dignity of the things to which a place is attri- 
buted: and in this way it is due to the body of Christ to be 
above spiritual creatures. 

SIXTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST’S ASCENSION IS THE CAUSE OF OUR 
SALVATION ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s Ascension is not 
the cause of our salvation. For, Christ was the cause of 
our salvation in so far as He merited it. But He merited 
nothing for us by His Ascension, because His Ascension 
belongs to the reward of His exaltation: and the same 
thing is not both merit and reward, just as neither are a 
road and its terminus the same. Therefore it seems that 
Christ’s Ascension is not the cause of our salvation. 

Obj. 2. Further, if Christ’s Ascension be the cause of our 
salvation, it seems that this is principally due to the fact 
that His Ascension is the cause of ours. But this was 
bestowed upon us by His Passion, for it is written (Heb. 
x. 19): We have (Vulg., Having) confidence in the entering 
into the holies by His blood. Therefore it seems that Christ’s 
Ascension was not the cause of our salvation. 

Obj. 3. Further, the salvation which Christ bestows is an 
everlasting one, according to Isa. li. 6: My salvation shall be 
for ever. But Christ did not ascend into heaven to remain 
there eternally; for it is written (Acts i. 11): He shall so come 
as you have seen Him going tnto heaven. Besides, we read 
of Him showing Himself to many holy people on earth after 
He went up to heaven; to Paul, for instance (Acts ix.). 
Consequently, it seems that Christ’s Ascension is not the 
cause of our salvation. 

On the contrary, He Himself said (Jo. xvi. 7): It ts ex- 
pedient to you that I go ; 1.e., that I should leave you and 
ascend into heaven. 

Q. 57. Art.6 THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 438 

I answer that, Christ’s Ascension is the cause of our salva- 
tion in two ways: first of all, on our part; secondly, on His. 

On our part, in so far as by the Ascension our souls are 
uplifted to Him; because, as stated above (A. I ad 3), His 
Ascension fosters, first, faith; secondly, hope; thirdly, 
charity. Fourthly, our reverence for Him is thereby in- 
creased, since we no longer deem Him an earthly man, but 
the God of heaven: thus the Apostle says (2 Cor. v. 16): 
If we have known Christ according to the flesh— that 1s, as 
mortal, whereby we reputed Him as a mere man,’ as the gloss 
interprets the words,—but now we know Him so no longer. 

On His part, in regard to those things which, in ascend- 
ing, He did for our salvation. First, He prepared the way 
for our ascent into heaven, according to His own saying 
(Jo. xiv. 2): I go to prepare a place for you, and the words of 
Micheas (ii. 13), He shall go up that shall open the way before 
them. For since He is our Head the members must follow 
whither the Head has gone: hence He said (Jo. xiv. 3): 
That where I am, you also may be. In sign whereof He took 
to heaven the souls of the saints delivered from hell, accord- 
ing to Ps. lxvii. 19 (cf. Eph. iv. 8): Ascending on high, He led 
captivity captive, because He took with Him to heaven those 
who had been held captives by the devil,—to heaven, as to 
a place strange to human nature; captives indeed of a happy 
taking, since they were acquired by His victory. 

Secondly, because as the high-priest under the Old Testa- 
ment entered the holy place to stand before God for the 
people, so also Christ entered heaven to make intercession 
for us, as is said in Heb. vii. 25. Because the very showing 
of Himself in the human nature which He took with Him 
to heaven is a pleading for us; so that for the very reason 
that God so exalted human nature in Christ, He may take 
pity on them for whom the Son of God took human nature. 
Thirdly, that being established in His heavenly seat as 
God and Lord, He might send down gifts upon men, accord- 
ing to Eph. iv. 10: He ascended above all the heavens, that He 
might fill all things, that is, with His gifts, according to the 
gloss. 

439 THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST Q. 57. Arr. 6 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s Ascension is the cause of our salva- 
tion by way not of merit, but of efficiency, as was stated 
above regarding His Resurrection (Q. LVI., A. 1 ad 3, 4). 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ’s Passion is the cause of our ascend- 
ing to heaven, properly speaking, by removing the hindrance 
which is sin, and also by way of merit: whereas Christ’s 
Ascension is the direct cause of our ascension, as by be- 
ginning it in Him who is our Head, with whom the members 
must be united. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ by once ascending into heaven 
acquired for Himself and for us in perpetuity the right and 
worthiness of a heavenly dwelling-place; which worthiness 
suffers in no way, if, from some special dispensation, He 
sometimes comes down in body to earth; either in order to 
show Himself to the whole world, as at the judgement; or 
else to show Himself particularly to some individual, ¢.g., 
in Paul’s case, as we read in Acts ix. And lest any man 
may think that Christ was not bodily present when this 
occurred, the contrary is shown from what the Apostle 
says in 1 Cor. xv. 8, to confirm faith in the Resurrection: 
Last of all He was seen also by me, as by one born out of due 
time: which vision would not confirm the truth of the 
Resurrection except he had beheld Christ’s very body. 

QUESTION LVIII. 

OF CHRIST’S SITTING AT THE RIGHT HAND OF THE 
FATHER. 

(In Four Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s sitting at the right hand 
of the Father, concerning which there are four points of 
inquiry: (1) Whether Christ is seated at the right hand of 
the Father? (2) Whether this belongs to Him according 
to the Divine Nature? (3) Whether it belongs to Him 
according to His human nature? (4) Whether it is some- 
thing proper to Christ ? 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT IS FITTING THAT CHRIST SHOULD SIT AT THE 
RIGHT HAND OF GOD THE FATHER ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :-— 

Objection 1. It would seem unfitting that Christ should 
sit at the right hand of God the Father. For right and left 
are differences of bodily position. But nothing corporeal 
can be applied to God, since God is a spirit, as we read in 
- Jo. iv. 24. Therefore it seems that Christ does not sit at 
the right hand of the Father. 

Obj. 2. Further, if anyone sits at another’s right hand, 
then the latter is seated on his left. Consequently, if Christ 
sits at the right hand of the Father, it follows that the 
Father is seated on the left of the Son; which is unseemly. 

Obj. 3. Further, sitting and standing savour of opposi- 
tion. But Stephen (Acts vii. 55) said: Behold, I see the 
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right 
hand of God. Therefore it seems that Christ does not sit 
at the right hand of the Father. 

440 

441 CHRIST AT THE RIGHT HAND Q.58. Art. 1 

On the contrary, It is written in the last chapter of Mark 
(xvi. 19): The Lord Jesus, after He had spoken to them, was 
taken up to heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God. 

I answer that, The word sitting may have a twofold mean- 
ing; namely, abiding as in Luke xxiv. 49: Sit (Douay,—Stay) 
you in the city: and royal or judiciary power, as in Prov. 
xx. 8: The king, that sitteth on the throne of judgement, scattereth 
away all evil with his look. Now in either sense it belongs 
to Christ to sit at the Father’s right hand. __ First of all 
inasmuch as He abides eternally unchangeable in the 
Father’s bliss, which is termed His right hand, according to 
Ps. xv. 11: At Thy right hand are delights even to the end. 
Hence Augustine says (De Symb. 1.): ‘ Sitteth at the right hand 
of the Father’: To sit means to dwell, just as we say of any 
man : ‘ He sat in that country for three years :’ Believe, then, 
that Christ dwells so at the right hand of the Father: for He 
ts happy, and the Father's right hand is the name for Hts 
bliss. Secondly, Christ is said to sit at the right hand of 
the Father inasmuch as He reigns together with the Father, 
and has judiciary power from Him; just as he who sits at 
the king’s right hand helps him in ruling and judging. 
Hence Augustine says (De Symb. ii.): By the expression 
‘right hand,’ understand the power which this Man, chosen of 
God, received, that He might come to judge, who before had 
come to be judged. 

Reply Obj. 1. As Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iv.): 
We do not speak of the Father's right hand as of a place, for 
how can a place be designated by His right hand, who Himself 
is beyond all place? Right and left belong to things definable 
by limit. But we style, as the Father’s right hand, the glory 
and honour of the Godhead. 

Reply Obj. 2. The argument holds good if sitting at the 
right hand be taken corporeally. Hence Augustine says 
(De Symb. i.): If we accept it in a carnal sense that Christ 
sits at the Father’s right hand, then the Father will be on the 
left. But there—that is, in eternal bliss, ## 7s all right hand, 
since no misery ts there. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Gregory says in a Homily on the Ascen- 

Q. 58. Axr.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 442 

sion (Hom. xxix. in Evang.), it is the judge’s place to sit, while 
to stand is the place of the combatant or helper. Consequently, 
Stephen in his toil of combat saw Him standing whom He had 
as his helper. But Mark describes Him as seated after the 
Ascension, because after the glory of His Ascension He will 
at the end be seen as judge. 

SECOND ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT BELONGS TO CHRIST AS GOD TO SIT AT THE 
RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it does not belong to Christ 
as God to sit at the right hand of the Father. For, as God, 
Christ is the Father’s right hand. But it does not appear 
to be the same thing to be the right hand of anyone and to 
sit on his right hand. Therefore, as God, Christ does not 
sit at the right hand of the Father. 

Obj. 2. Further, in the last chapter of Mark (xvi. 19) it 
is said that the Lord Jesus was taken up into heaven, and 
sitteth on the right hand of God. But it was not as God that 
Christ was taken up to heaven. Therefore neither does 
He, as God, sit at the right hand of God. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ as God is the equal of the Father 
and of the Holy Ghost. Consequently, if Christ sits as 
God at the right hand of the Father, with equal reason the 
Holy Ghost sits at the right hand of the Father and of the 
Son, and the Father Himself on the right hand of the Son; 
which no one is found to say. 

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iv.): 
that what we style as the Father's right hand, is the glory 
and honour of the Godhead, wherein the San of God existed 
before ages as God and as consubstantial with the Father. 

I answer that, As may be gathered from what has been 
said (A. 1) three things can be understood under the ex- 
pression right hand. First of all, as Damascene takes it, 
the glory of the Godhead : secondly, according to Augustine, 
the beatitude of the Father: thirdly, according to the same 

443 CHRIST AT THE RIGHT HAND Q.58. Arr. 3 

authority, judiciary power. Now as we observed (A. 1) 
sttting denotes either abiding, or royal or judiciary dignity. 
Hence, to sit on the right hand of the Father is nothing 
else than to share in the glory of the Godhead with the 
Father, and to possess beatitude and judiciary power, and 
that unchangeably and royally. But this belongs to the 
Son as God. Hence it is manifest that Christ as God sits 
at the right hand of the Father; yet so that this preposition 
‘at,’ which is a transitive one, implies merely personal 
distinction and order of origin, but not degree of nature or 
dignity, for there is no such thing in the Divine Persons, 
as was shown in the First Part (Q. XLII., AA. 3, 4). 

Reply Obj. 1. The Son of God is called the Father’s right 
hand by appropriation, just as He is called the Power of 
the Father (1 Cor. i. 24). But right hand of the Father, 
in its three meanings given above, is something common to 
the three Persons. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ as man is exalted to Divine honour ; 
and this is signified in the aforesaid sitting; nevertheless 
such honour belongs to Him as God, not through any as- 
sumption, but through His origin from eternity. 

Reply Obj. 3. In no way can it be said that the Father is 
seated at the right hand of the Son or of the Holy Ghost; 
because the Son and the Holy Ghost derive their origin 
from the Father, and not conversely. The Holy Ghost, 
however, can be said properly to sit at the right hand of the 
Father or of the Son, in the aforesaid sense, although by a 
kind of appropriation it is attributed to the Son, to whom 
equality is appropriated; thus Augustine says (De Doctr. 
Christ. i.) that in the Father there is unity, in the Son equality, 
in the Holy Ghost the connection of unity with equality. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 
WHETHER IT BELONGS TO CHRIST AS MAN TO SIT AT THE 
RIGHT HAND OF THE FATHER ? 
We proceed thus to the Third Article :-— 
Objection 1. It would seem that it does not belong to 
Christ as man to sit at the right hand of the Father, because, 

Q. 58. Art.3 THE “ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 444 

as Damascene says (De Fide Orthod. iv.): What we call the 
Father's right hand is the glory and honour of the Godhead. 
But the glory and honour of the Godhead do not belong 
to Christ as man. Consequently, it seems that Christ as 
man does not sit at the right hand of the Father. 

Obj. 2. Further, to sit on the ruler’s right hand seems to 
exclude subjection, because one so sitting seems in a measure 
to be reigning with him. But Christ as man is subject unto 
the Father, as is said in r Cor. xv. 28. Therefore it seems 
that Christ as man does not sit at the Father’s right hand. 

Obj. 3. Further, on Rom. viii. 34: Who ts at the right hand 
of God, the gloss adds: that is, equal to the Father in that 
honour, whereby God is the Father: or, on the right hand of 
the Father, that is, in the mightier gifts of God. And on 
Heb. i. 3: sttteth on the right hand of the majesty on high, the 
gloss adds, that 1s, in equality with the Father over all things, 
both tn place and dignity. But equality with God does not 
belong to Christ as man; for in this respect Christ Himself 
says (Jo. xiv. 28): The Father is greater than I. Conse- 
quently, it appears unseemly for Christ as man to sit on 
the Father’s right hand. 

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Symb. ii.): By the ex- 
pression ‘ right hand’ understand the power which this Man, 
chosen of God, received, that He might come as judge, who 
before had come to be judged. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), by the expression 
right hand is understood either the glory of His Godhead, 
or His eternal beatitude, or His judicial and royal power. 
Now this preposition at signifies a kind of approach to the 
right hand; thus denoting something in common, and yet 
with a distinction, as already observed (Jbid.). And this 
can be in three ways: first of all, by something common in 
nature, and a distinction in person; and thus Christ as the 
Son of God, sits at the right hand of the Father, because He 
has the same Nature as the Father: hence these things 
belong to the Son essentially, just as to the Father; and this 
is to be in equality with the Father. Secondly, according 
to the grace of union, which, on the contrary, implies dis- 

445 CHRIST AT THE RIGHT HAND 0.58. Arr. 3 

tinction of nature, and unity of person. According to this, 
Christ as man is the Son of God, and consequently sits at 
the Father’s right hand; yet so that the expression as does 
not denote condition of nature, but unity of suppositum, 
as explained above (Q. XVI., AA. Io, 11). Thirdly, the 
said approach can be understood according to habitual 
grace, which is more fully in Christ than in all other crea- 
tures, so much so that human nature in Christ is more 
blessed than all other creatures, and possesses over all 
other creatures royal and judiciary power. 

So, then, if as denote condition of nature, then Christ, 
as God, sits at the Father's right hand, that is, in equality with 
the Father; but as man, He sits at the right hand of the 
Father, that is, tn the Father's mightier gifts beyond all other 
creatures, that is to say, im greater beatitude, and exercising 
judiciary power. But if as denote unity of person, thus 
again as man, He sits at the Father’s right hand as to 
equality of honour, inasmuch as with the same honour we 
venerate the Son of God with His assumed nature, as was 
said above (Q. XXV., A. I). 

Reply Obj. 1. Christ’s humanity according to the condi- 
tions of His nature has not the glory or honour of the God- 
head, which it has nevertheless by reason of the Person with 
whom it is united. Hence Damascene adds in the passage 
quoted: In which, that is, in the glory of the Godhead, the 
Son of God existing before ages, as God and consubstantial 
with the Father, sits in His conglorified flesh ; for, under one 
adoration the one hypostasts, together with His flesh, 1s adored 
by every creature. 

Reply Obj. 2. Christ as man is subject to the Father, if 
as denote the condition of nature: in which respect it does 
not belong to Him as man to sit at the Father’s right hand, 
by reason of their mutual equality. But it does thus belong 
to Him to sit at the right hand of the Father, according 
as is thereby denoted the excellence of beatitude and His 
judiciary power over every creature. 

Reply Obj. 3. It does not belong to Christ’s human nature 
to be in equality with the Father, but only to the Person 

Q. 58. Art.4 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 446 

who assumed it; but it does belong even to the assumed 
human nature to share in God’s mightier gifts, in so far as 
it implies exaltation above other creatures. 

FOURTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER IT IS PROPER TO CHRIST TO SIT AT THE RIGHT 
HAND OF THE FATHER ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that it is not proper to Christ 
to sit at the right hand of the Father, because the Apostle 
says (Eph. ii. 4, 6): God . . . hath raised us up together, and 
hath made us sit together in the heavenly places through Christ 
Jesus. But to be raised up is not proper to Christ. There- 
fore for like reason neither is it proper to Him to sit om the 
right hand of God on high (Heb. 1. 3). 

Obj. 2. Further, as Augustine says (De Symb. 1.): For 
Christ to sit at the right hand of the Father, is to dwell in His 
beatitude. But many more share in this. Therefore it does 
not appear to be proper to Christ to sit at the right hand 
of the Father. 

Obj. 3. Further, Christ Himself says (Apoc. iii. 21): To 
him that shall overcome, I will give to sit with Me in My 
throne: as I also have overcome, and am set down with My 
Father in His throne. But it is by sitting on His Father’s 
throne that Christ is seated at His right hand. Therefore 
others who overcome likewise, sit at the Father’s right 
hand. 

Obj, 4. Further, the Lord says (Matth. xx. 23): To sit on 
My right or left hand, is not Mine to give to you, but to them 
for whom it is prepared by My Father. But no purpose 
would be served by saying this, unless it was prepared for 
some. Consequently, to sit at the right hand is not proper 
to Christ. 

On the contrary, It is written (Heb. i. 13): To which of the 
angels said He at any time: Sit thou on My right hand, 
t.e., ‘in My mightier gifts,’ or ‘ as my equal in the Godhead’ ?* 

* The comment is from the gloss of Peter Lombard. 

447 CHRIST AT THE RIGHT HAND Q.58. Arr. 4 

as if to answer: ‘To none.’ But angels are higher than other 
creatures. Therefore, much less does it belong to anyone 
save Christ to sit at the Father’s right hand. 

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3), Christ is said to sit 
at the Father’s right hand inasmuch as He is on equality 
with the Father in respect of His Divine Nature, while in 
respect of His humanity, He excels all creatures in the 
possession of Divine gifts. But each of these belongs ex- 
clusively to Christ. Consequently, it belongs to no one 
else, angel or man, but to Christ alone, to sit at the right 
hand of the Father. 

Reply Obj. 1. Since Christ is our Head, then what was 
bestowed on Christ is bestowed on us through Him. And 
on this account, since He is already raised up, the Apostle 
‘says that God has, so to speak, raised us up together with 
Him, still we ourselves are not raised up yet, but are to 
be raised up, according to Rom. viii. 11: He who raised up 
Jesus from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies : 
and after the same manner of speech the Apostle adds that 
He has made us to sit together with Him, in the heavenly 
places ; namely, for the very reason that Christ our Head 
sits there. 

Reply Obj. 2. Since the right hand is the Divine beatitude, 
then to sit on the right hand does not mean simply to be in 
beatitude, but to possess beatitude with a kind of domina- 
tive power, as a property and part of one’s nature. This 
belongs to Christ alone, and to no other creature. Yet it 
can be said that every saint in bliss is placed on God’s right 
hand; hence it is written (Matth. xxv. 33): He shall set the 
sheep on His right hand. 

Reply Obj. 3. By the throne is meant the judiciary power 
which Christ has from the Father: and in this sense He is 
said to sit in the Father’s throne. But other saints have it 
from Christ; and in this respect they are said to sit on Christ’s 
throne ; according to Matth. xix. 28: You also shall sit upon 
twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 

Reply Obj. 4. As Chrysostom says (Hom. Ixv. in Matth.), 
that place, to wit, sitting at the right hand, 7s closed not only 

Q. 58. Art.4. THE ‘SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 448 

to all men, but likewise to angels: for, Paul declares it to be 
the prerogative of Christ, saying : ‘ To which of the angels said 
He at any time: Sit on My right hand ?’ Our Lord therefore 
replied not as though some were going to sit there one day, but 
condescending to the supplication of the questioners ; since 
more than others they sought this one thing alone, to stand 
nigh to Him. Still it can be said that the sons of Zebedee 
sought for higher excellence in sharing His judiciary power; 
hence they did not ask to sit on the Father’s right hand or 
left, but on Christ’s. 

QUESTION LIX. 

OF CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER. 
(In Six Articles.) 

WE have now to consider Christ’s judiciary power. Under 
this head there are six points of inquiry: (1) Whether judi- 
Ciary power is to be attributed to Christ? (2) Whether 
it belongs to Him as man? (3) Whether He acquired it 
by merits? (4) Whether His judiciary power is universal 
with regard toallmen? (5) Whether besides the judgement 
that takes place now in time, we are to expect Him in the. 
future general judgement? (6) Whether His judiciary power 
extends likewise to the angels ? 

It will be more suitable to consider the execution of the 
Last Judgement when we treat of things pertaining to the 
end of the world.* For the present it will be enough to 
_ touch on those points that concern Christ’s dignity. 

First ARTICLE. 

WHETHER JUDICIARY POWER IS TO BE SPECIALLY ATTRIBUTED 
TO CHRIST ? 

We proceed thus to the First Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that judiciary power is not to 
be specially attributed to Christ. For judgement of others 
seems to belong to their lord; hence it is written (Rom. 
xiv. 4): Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant ? 
But, it belongs to the entire Trinity to be Lord over crea- 
tures. Therefore judiciary power ought not to be attributed 
specially to Christ. 

* See Supplement, QQ. LX XXVIII. seqq. 
TII. 2 449 29 

Q. 59. Art.r THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 450 

Obj. 2. Further, it is written (Dan. vii. 9): The Ancient of | 
days sat; and further on (verse 10), the judgement sat, and 
the books were opened. But the Ancient of days is under- 
stood to be the Father, because as Hilary says (De Trin. ii.): 
Eternity is in the Father. Consequently, judiciary power 
ought rather to be attributed to the Father than to Christ. 

Obj. 3. Further, it seems to belong to the same person 
to judge as it does to convince. But it belongs to the Holy 
Ghost to convince: for our Lord says (Jo. xvi. 8): And 
when He is come, i.e., the Holy Ghost, He will convince the 
world of sin, and of justice, and of judgement. Therefore 
judiciary power ought to be attributed to the Holy Ghost 
rather than to Christ. 

On the contrary, It is said of Christ (Acts x. 42): It 1s He 
who was appointed by God, to be judge of the living and of 
the dead, 

I answer that, Three things are required for passing 
judgement: first, the power of coercing subjects; hence it is 
written (Ecclus. vii. 6): Seek not to be made a judge unless 
thou have strength enough to extirpate imiquities. The second 
thing required is upright zeal, so as to pass judgement not 
out of hatred or malice, but from love of justice, according 
to Prov. iii. 12: For whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth: 
and as a father in the son He pleaseth Himself. Thirdly, 
wisdom is needed, upon which judgement is based, accord- 
ing to Ecclus. x. 1: A wise judge shall judge his people. The 
first two are conditions for judging; but on the third the 
very rule of judgement is based, because the standard of 
judgement is the law of wisdom or truth, according to which 
the judgement is passed. 

Now because the Son is Wisdom begotten, and Truth 
proceeding from the Father, and His perfect Image, conse- 
quently, judiciary power is properly attributed to the Son 
of God. Accordingly Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xxxi.): 
This ts that unchangeable Truth, which is rightly styled the 
law of all arts, and the art of the Almighty Craftsman. But 
even as we and all rational souls judge aright of the things 
beneath us, so does He who alone is Truth itself pass judgement 

451 CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER Q.59. Art. 

on us, when we cling to Him. But the Father judges Him 
not, for He is the Truth no less than Himself. Consequently, 
whatever the Father judges, He judges through It. Further on 
he concludes by saying: Therefore the Father judges no man, 
but has given all judgement to the Son. 

Reply Obj. 1. This argument proves that judiciary power 
is common to the entire Trinity, which is quite true: still 
by special appropriation such power is attributed to the 
Son, as stated above. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Trin. vi.), eternity 
is attributed to the Father, because He is the Principle, 
which is implied in the idea of eternity. And in the same 
place Augustine says that the Son is the art of the Father. 
So, then, judiciary authority is attributed to the Father, 
inasmuch as He is the Principle of the Son, but the very 
rule of judgement is attributed to the Son who is the art 
and wisdom of the Father, so that as the Father does all 
things through the Son, inasmuch as the Son is His art, 
so He judges all things through the Son, inasmuch as the 
Son is His wisdom and truth. And this is implied by 
Daniel, when he says in the first passage that the Ancient 
of days sat, and when he subsequently adds that the Son of 
Man came even to the Ancient of days, who gave Him power, 
and glory, and a kingdom: and thereby we are given to 
understand that the authority for judging lies with the 
Father, from whom the Son received the power to judge. 

Reply Obj. 3. As Augustine says (Tract. xcv. in Joan.): 
Christ said that the Holy Ghost shall convince the world of sin, 
as if to say, ‘ He shall pour out charity upon your hearts.’ 
For thus, when fear is driven away, you shall have freedom 
for convincing. Consequently, then, judgement is attributed 
to the Holy Ghost, not as regards the rule of judgement, 
but as regards man’s desire to judge others aright. 

‘ 

Q. 59. Art.2 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 452 

SECOND ARTICLE. 
WHETHER JUDICIARY POWER BELONGS TO CHRIST AS MAN ? 

We proceed thus to the Second Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that judiciary power does not 
belong to Christ as man. For Augustine says (De Vera 
Relig. xxxi.) that judgement is attributed to the Son inas- 
much as He is the law of the first truth. But this is Christ’s 
attribute as God. Consequently, judiciary power does not 
belong to Christ as man, but as God. 

Obj. 2. Further, it belongs to judiciary power to reward 
the good, just as to punish the wicked. But eternal beati- 
tude, which is the reward of good works, is bestowed by 
God alone: thus Augustine says (Tract. xxiii. super Joan.) 
that the soul 1s made blessed by participation of God, and not 
by participation of a holy soul. Therefore it seems that 
judiciary power does not belong to Christ as man, but as 

0bj. 3. Further, it belongs to Christ’s judiciary power to 
judge secrets of hearts, according to 1 Cor. iv. 5: Judge not 
before the time; until the Lord come, who both will bring to 
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest 
the counsels of the hearts. But this belongs exclusively to 
the Divine power, according to Jer. xvii. 9, 10: The 
heart of man is perverse and unsearchable, who can know 
at? I am the Lord who search the heart, and prove the reins : 
who give to every one according tohisway. Therefore judiciary 
power does not belong to Christ as man but as God. 

On the contrary, It is said (Jo. v. 27): He hath given Him 
power to do judgement, because He is the Son of man, 

I answer that, Chrysostom (Hom. xxxix. in Joan.) seems 
to think that judiciary power belongs to Christ not as man, 
but only as God. Accordingly he thus explains the passage 
just quoted from John: ‘ He gave Him power to do judgement, 
because He is the Son of man: wonder not at this.’ For He 
received gudiciary power, not because He is man; but because 
He is the Son of the ineffable God, therefore is He judge. But 

453 CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER Q. 59. Arr. 2 

since the expressions used were greater than those apper- 
taining to man, He said in explanation: ‘Wonder not at 
this, because He is the Son of man, for He ts likewise the 
Son of God.’ And he proves this by the effect of the Resur- 
rection: wherefore He adds: Because the hour cometh when 
the dead tn their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God. 

But it must be observed that although the primary 
authority of judging rests with God, nevertheless the power 
to judge is committed to men with regard to those subject 
to their jurisdiction. Hence it is written (Deut. i. 16): 
Judge that which is just ; and further on (verse 17): Because 
it 1s the judgement of God, that is to say, it is by His authority 
that you judge. Now it was said before (Q. VIII., AA. I, 4) 
that Christ even in His human nature is Head of the entire 
Church, and that God has put all things under His feet. 
Consequently, it belongs to Him, even according to His 
human nature, to exercise judiciary power. On this account 
it seems that the authority of Scripture quoted above must 
be interpreted thus:—He gave Him power to do judgement, 
because He is the Son of Man ; not on account of the condi- 
tion of His nature, for thus all men would have this kind 
of power, as Chrysostom objects (loc. cit.); but because this 
belongs to the grace of the Head, which Christ received in 
His human nature. 

Now judiciary power belongs to Christ in this way ac- 
cording to His human nature on three accounts. First, 
because of His likeness and kinship with men; for, as God 
works through intermediary causes, as being closer to the 
effects, so He judges men through the Man Christ, that 
His judgement may be sweeter tomen. Hence (Heb. iv. 15) 
the Apostle says: For we have not a high-priest, who cannot 
have compassion on our infirmities ; but one tempted in all 
things like as we are, without sin. Let us go therefore with 
confidence to the throne of His grace. Secondly, because at 
the last judgement, as Augustine says (Tvact. xix. im Joan.), 
there will be a resurrection of dead bodies, which God will raise 
up through the Son of Man; just as by the same Chnist He 
raises souls, inasmuch as He is the Son of God. Thirdly, 

Q.59. Art.3 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 454 

because, as Augustine observes (De Verb. Dom., Serm. 
cxxvii.): It was but right that those who were to be judged 
should see their judge. But those to be judged were the good 
and the bad. It follows that the form of a servant should be 
shown in the judgement to both good and wicked, while the 
form of God should be kept for the good alone. 

Reply Obj. 1. Judgement belongs to truth as its standard, 
while it belongs to the man imbued with truth, according 
as he is as it were one with truth, as a kind of law and living 
justice.* Hence Augustine quotes (ibid.) the saying of 
I Cor. ii. 15: The spiritual man judgeth all things. But beyond 
all creatures Christ’s soul was more closely united with 
truth, and more full of truth; according to Jo. i. 14: We 
saw Him... full of grace and truth. And according to 
this it belongs principally to the soul of Christ to judge all 
things. 

Reply Obj. 2. It belongs to God alone to bestow beatitude 
upon souls by a participation with Himself; but it is Christ’s 
prerogative to bring them to such beatitude, inasmuch as 
He is their Head and the author of their salvation, accord- 
ing to Heb. ii. 10: Who had brought many children into glory, 
to perfect the author of thetr salvation by His Passion. ; 

Reply Obj. 3. To know and judge the secrets of hearts, 
of itself belongs to God alone; but from the overflow of the 
Godhead into Christ’s soul it belongs to Him also to know 
and to judge the secrets of hearts, as we stated above (Q. X., | 
A. 2), when dealing with the knowledge of Christ. Hence 
it is written (Rom. ii. 16): In the day when God shall judge 
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. 

THIRD ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST ACQUIRED HIS JUDICIARY POWER BY HIS 
MERITS ? 
We proceed thus to the Third Article :— 
Objection 1. It would seem that Christ did not acquire His 
judiciary power by His merits. For judiciary power flows 
MOV GATISE WETAICL Ve 

455 CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER Q. 59. Arr.3 

from the royal dignity: according to Prov. xx. 8: The king 
that sitteth on the throne of judgement, scattereth away all evil 
with his look. But it was without merits that Christ ac- 
quired royal power, for it is His due as God’s Only-begotten 
Son: thus it is written (Luke i. 32): The Lord God shall give 
unto Him the throne of David His father, and He shall reign 
in the house of Jacob for ever. Therefore Christ did not 
obtain judiciary power by His merits. 

Obj. 2. Further, as stated above (A. 2), judiciary power 
is Christ’s due inasmuch as He is our Head. But the grace 
of headship does not belong to Christ by reason of merit, 
but follows the personal union of the Divine and human 
natures: according to Jo. i. 14, 16: We saw His glory... 
as of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth ; 
... and of His fulness we all have received : and this pertains 
to the notion of headship. Consequently, it seems that 
Christ did not have judiciary power from merits. 

Obj. 3. Further, the Apostle says (x Cor. ii. 15): The 
spiritual man juadgeth all things. But a man _ becomes 
spiritual through grace, which is not from merits; otherwise 
it 1s no more grace, as is said in Rom. xi. 6. Therefore it 
seems that judiciary power belongs neither to Christ nor to 
others from any merits, but from grace alone. 

On the contrary, It is written (Job xxxvi. 17): Thy cause 
hath been judged as that of the wicked, cause and judgement 
thou shalt recovery. And Augustine says (Sevm. cxxvii.): 
The Judge shall sit, who stood before a judge ; He shall con- 
demn the truly wicked, who Himself was falsely reputed 
wicked. 

I answer that, There is nothing to hinder one and the 
same thing from being due to some one from various causes: 
as the glory of the body in rising was due to Christ not only 
as befitting His Godhead and His soul’s glory, but like- 
wise from the merit of the lowliness of His Passion.* And 
in the same way it must be said that judiciary power belongs 
to the Man Christ on account of both His Divine personality, 
and the dignity of His headship, and the fulness of His 

* Cf. August., Tract. civ. im Joan. 

Q. 59. Art.4 THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 456 

habitual grace: and yet He obtained it from merit, so that, 
in accordance with the Divine justice, He should be judge 
who fought for God’s justice, and conquered, and was un- 
justly condemned. Hence He Himself says (Apoc. iii. 21): I 
have overcome and am set down in My Father's throne (Vulg., 
with My Father in His throne)., Now judiciary power 1s 
understood by throne, according to Ps. ix. 5: Thou hast sat 
on the throne, who judgest justice. 

Reply Obj. 1. This argument holds good of judiciary 
power according as it is due to Christ by reason of the union 
with the Word of God. 

Reply Obj. 2. This argument is based on the ground of 
His grace as Head. 

Reply Obj. 3. This argument holds good in regard to 
habitual grace, which perfects Christ’s soul. But although 
judiciary. power be Christ’s due in these ways, it is not 
hindered from being His due from merit. 

FouRTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER JUDICIARY POWER BELONGS TO CHRIST WITH 
RESPECT TO ALL HUMAN AFFAIRS ? 

We proceed thus to the Fourth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that judiciary power concerning 
all human affairs does not belong to Christ. For as we read 
in Luke xil. 13, 14: when one of the crowd said to Christ: 
Speak to my brother that he divide the inheritance with me; 
He said to him: Man, who hath appointed Me judge, or 
divider over you? Consequently, He does not exercise 
ae over all human affairs. 

Obj. 2. Further, no one exercises judgement except over 
his own thee But, according to Heb. ii. 8, we see not 
as yet all things subject to Christ. Therefore it seems that 
Christ has not judgement over all human affairs. 

Obj. 3. Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx.) that 
it is part of Divine judgement for the good to be afflicted 
sometimes in this world, and sometimes to prosper, and in 
hke manner the wicked. But the same was the case also 

457 CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER Q.509. Arr.4 

before the Incarnation. Consequently, not all God’s judge- 
ments regarding human affairs are included in Christ’s 
judiciary power. 

On the contrary, It is said (Jo. v. 22): The Father hath 
given all judgement to the Son. 

I answer that, If we speak of Christ according to His 
Divine Nature, it is evident that every judgement of the 
Father belongs to the Son; for, as the Father does all things 
through His Word, so He judges all things through His Word. 

But if we speak of Christ in His human nature, thus 
again is it evident that all things are subject to His judge- 
ment. This is made clear if we consider first of all the 
relationship subsisting between Christ’s soul and the Word 
of God; for, if the spiritual man judgeth all things, as is said 
in I Cor. ii. 15, inasmuch as his soul clings to the Word 
of God, how much more Christ’s soul, which is filled with 
the truth of the Word of God, passes judgement upon all © 
things. ‘ae 

Secondly, the same appears from the merit of His death; 
because, according to Rom. xiv. 9: To this end Christ died 
and rose again ; that He might be Lord both of the dead and 
of the living. And therefore He has judgement over all men; 
and on this account the Apostle adds (ibid. 10): We shall 
all stand before the judgement seat of Christ; and (Dan. vii. 14) 
it is written that He gave Him power, and glory, and a 
kingdom ; and all peoples, tribes, and tongues shall serve Him. 

' Thirdly, the same thing is evident from comparison of 
human affairs with che end of human salvation. For, to 
whomsoever the substance is entrusted, the accessory is 
likewise committed. Now all human affairs are ordered 
for the end of beatitude, which is everlasting salvation, to — 
which men are admitted, or from which they are excluded 
by Christ’s judgement, as is evident from Matth. xxv. 31, 40. 
Consequently, it is manifest that all human affairs are 
included in Christ’s judiciary power. 

Reply Obj. 1. As was said above (A. 3, Obj. 1), judiciary 
power goes with royal dignity. Now Christ, although 
established king by God, did not wish while living on earth 

Q. 59. Arr.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 458 

to govern temporarily an earthly kingdom; consequently 
He said (Jo. xviii. 36): My kingdom is not of this world. In 
like fashion He did not wish to exercise judiciary power 
over temporal concerns, since He came to raise men to 
Divine things. Hence Ambrose observes on this passage 
in Luke: It is well that He who came down with a Divine 
purpose should hold Himself aloof from temporal concerns ; 
nor does He deign to be a judge of quarrels and an arbiter of 
property, since He is judge of the quick and the dead, and the 
arbitrator of merits. 

Reply Obj. 2. All things are subject to Christ in respect 
of that power, which He received from the Father, over all 
things, according to Matth. xxviii. 18: All power is given to 
Me tn heaven and in earth. But as to the exercise of this 
power, all things are not yet subject to Him: this will come 
to pass in the future, when He shall fulfil His will regarding 
all things, by saving some and punishing others. 

Reply Obj. 3. Judgements of this kind were exercised by 
Christ before His Incarnation, inasmuch as He is the Word 
of God: and the soul united with Him personally became a 
partaker of this power by the Incarnation. 

FIFTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER AFTER THE JUDGEMENT THAT TAKES PLACE IN THE 
PRESENT TIME, THERE REMAINS YET ANOTHER GENERAL 
JUDGEMENT ? 

We proceed thus to the Fifth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that after the Judgement that 
takes place in the present time, there does not remain 
another General Judgement. For a judgement serves no 
purpose after the final allotment of rewards and punish- 
ments. But rewards and punishments are allotted in this 
present time: for our Lord said to the thief on the cross 
(Luke xxiii. 43): This day thou shalt be with Me in paradise : 
and (ibid. xvi. 22) it is said that the rich man died and was 
buried in hell. Therefore it is useless to look forward to a 
final Judgement. 

459 CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER 9.59. Arr. 5 

Obj. 2. Further, according to another (the Septuagint) 
version of Nahum i. 9, God shall not judge the same thing 
a second time. But in the present time God judges both 
temporal and spiritual matters. Therefore, it does not 
seem that another final Judgement is to be expected. 

Odj. 3. Further, reward and punishment correspond with 
merit and demerit. But merit and demerit bear relation 
to the body only in so far as it is the instrument of the soul. _ 
Therefore reward or punishment is not due to the body 
save as the soul’s instrument. Therefore no other Judge- 
ment is called for at the end (of the world) to requite man 
with reward or punishment in the body, besides that 
Judgement in which souls are now punished or rewarded. 

On the contrary, It is said in Jo. xii. 48: The word that I 
have spoken, the same shall judge you (Vulg., him) in the last 
day. Therefore there will be a Judgement at the last day 
besides that which takes place in the present time. 

I answer that, Judgement cannot be passed perfectly upon 
any changeable subject before its consummation: just as 
judgement cannot be given perfectly regarding the quality 
of any action before its completion in itself and in its re- 
sults: because many actions appear to be profitable, which 
in their effects prove to be hurtful. And in the same way 
perfect judgement cannot be passed upon any man before 
the close of his life, since he can be changed in many respects 
from good to evil, or conversely, or from good to better, or 
from evil to worse. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. ix. 27): 
It is appointed unto men once to die, and after this the Judge- 
ment. 

But it must be observed that although man’s temporal 
life in itself ends with death, still it continues dependent 
in a measure on what comes after it in the future. In one 
way, as it still lives on in men’s memories, in which some- 
times, contrary to the truth, good or evil reputations linger 
on. In another way in a man’s children, who are so to 
speak something of their parent, according to Ecclus. xxx. 4: 
His father is dead, and he is as tf he were not dead, for he 
hath left one behind him that 1s like himself. And yet many 

Q. 59. Art.5 THE “SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 460 

good men have wicked sons, and conversely. Thirdly, as 
to the result of his actions: just as from the deceit of Arius 
and other false leaders unbelief continues to flourish down 
to the close of the world - and even until then faith will 
continue to derive its progress from the preaching of the 
apostles: In a fourth way, as to the body, which is some- 
times buried with honour and sometimes left unburied, and 
finally falls to dust utterly. In a fifth way, as to the things 
upon which a man’s heart is set, such as temporal concerns, 
for example, some of which quickly lapse, he others 
endure longer. 

Now all these things are submitted to the verdict of the 
Divine Judgement; and consequently, a perfect and public 
Judgement cannot be made of all these things during the 
course of this present time. Wherefore, there must be a 
final Judgement at the last day, in which everything con- 
cerning every man in every respect shall be perfectly and 
publicly judged. 

Reply Obj. 1. Some men have held the opinion that the 
souls of the saints shall not be rewarded in heaven, nor the 
souls of the lost punished in hell, until the Judgement-day. 
That this is false appears from the testimony of the Apostle 
(2 Cor. v. 8), where he says: We are confident and have a 
good will to be absent rather from the body, and to be present 
with the Lord: that is, not to walk by faith but by sight, as 
appears from the context. But this 1s to see God in His 
Essence, wherein consists eternal life, as is clear from 
Jo. xvii. 3. Hence it is manifest that the souls separated 
from bodies are in eternal life. 

Consequently, it must be maintained that after death 
man enters into an unchangeable state as to all that con- 
cerns the soul: and therefore there is no need for postponing 
judgement as to the reward of the soul. But since there are 
some other things pertaining to a man which go on through 
the whole course of time, and which are not foreign to the 
Divine judgement, all these things must be brought to judge- 
ment at the end of time. Yor although in regard to such 
things a man neither merits nor demerits, still in a measure 

46x CHRIST'S JUDICIARY POWER Q. 50. Arr. 6 

they accompany his reward or punishment. Consequently, 
all these things must be weighed in the final judgement. 

Reply 0b]. 2. God shall not judge twice the same thing, 1.e., 
in the same respect; but it is not unseemly for God to judge 
‘twice according to different respects. 

Reply Obj. 3. Although the reward or punishment of the 
body depends upon the reward or punishment of the soul, 
nevertheless, since the soul is changeable only accidentally, 
on account of the body, once it is separated from the body 
it enters into an unchangeable condition, and receives its 
judgement. But the body remains subject to change down 
to the close of time: and therefore it must receive its reward 
or punishment then, in the last Judgement. 

SIXTH ARTICLE. 

WHETHER CHRIST'S JUDICIARY POWER EXTENDS TO THE 
ANGELS ? 

We proceed thus to the Sixth Article :— 

Objection 1. It would seem that Christ’s padre power 
does not extend to the angels, because the good and wicked 
angels alike were judged in the beginning of the world, 
when some fell through sin while others were confirmed in 
bliss. But those already judged have no need of being 
judged again. Therefore Christ’s judiciary power does not 
extend to the angels. 

Obj. 2. Further, the same person cannot be both judge 
and judged. But the angels will come to judge with 
Christ, according to Matth. xxv. 31: When the Son of Man 
shall come in His majesty, and all the angels with Him. 
Therefore it seems that the angels will not be judged by 
Christ. 

Obj. 3. Further, the angels are higher than other crea- 
tures. If Christ, then, be judge not only of men but like- 
wise of angels, then for the same reason He will be judge 
of all creatures; which seems to be false, since this belongs 
to God’s providence: hence it is written (Job xxxiv. 13): 
What other hath He appointed over the earth ? or whom hath 

Q. 59. Art.6 THE “ SUMMA THEOLOGICA ” 462 

He set over the world which He made? Therefore Christ is 
not the judge of the angels. 

On the contrary, The Apostle says (x Cor. vi. 3): Know 
you not that we shall judge angels ? But the saints judge only 
by Christ’s authority. Therefore, much more does Christ 
possess judiciary power over the angels. 

I answer that, The angels are subjects of Christ’s judiciary 
power, not only with regard to His Divine Nature, as He is 
the Word of God, but also with regard to His human nature. 
And this is evident from three considerations, First of 
all, from the closeness of His assumed nature to God; 
because, according to Heb. ii. 16: For nowhere doth He take 
hold of the angels, but of the seed of Abraham He taketh hold. 
Consequently, Christ’s soul is more filled with the truth of 
the Word of God than any angel: for which reason He also 
enlightens the angels, as Dionysius says (Cel. Hier. vii.), 
and so He has power to judge them. Secondly, because 
by the lowliness of His Passion, human nature in Christ 
merited to be exalted above the angels; so that, as is said 
in Phil. ii. 10: In the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of 
those that are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth. And 
therefore Christ has judiciary power even over the good 
and wicked angels: in token whereof it is said in the Apoca- 
lypse (vii. 11) that all the angels stood round about the throne. 
Thirdly, on account of what they do for men, of whom Christ 
is the Head in a special manner. Hence it is written 
(Heb. i. 14): They are (Vulg., Are they not) all ministering 
spirits, sent to minister for them, who shall receive the inheri- 
tance of salvation (?). But they are submitted to Christ’s 
judgement, first, as regards the dispensing of those things 
which are done through them; which dispensing is likewise 
done by the Man Christ, to whom the angels ministered, as 
related (Matth. iv. 11), and from whom the devils besought 
that they might be sent into the swine, according to Matth. 
villi. 31. Secondly, as to other accidental rewards of the 
good angels, such as the joy which they have at the salva- 
tion of men, according to Luke xv. 10: There shall be joy 
before the angels of God upon one sinner doing penance : and 

463 CHRIST’S JUDICIARY POWER Q. 59. Art. 6 

furthermore as to the accidental punishments of the devils 
wherewith they are either tormented here, or are shut up 
in hell; and this also belongs to the Man Christ: hence it 
is written (Mark i. 24) that the devil cried out: What have 
we to do with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? art Thou come to 
destroy us? Thirdly, as to the essential reward of the good 
angels, which is everlasting bliss; and as to the essential 
punishment of the wicked angels, which is everlasting 
damnation. But this was done by Christ from the be- 
ginning of the world, inasmuch as He is the Word of God. 

Reply Obj. 1. This argument considers judgement as to 
the essential reward and chief punishment. 

Reply Obj. 2. As Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xxxi.): 
Although the spiritual man judgeth all things, still he is judged 
by Truth Itself. Consequently, although the angels judge, 
as being spiritual creatures, still they are judged by Christ, 
‘inasmuch as He is the Truth. 

Reply Obj. 3. Christ judges not only the angels, but also 
the administration of all creatures. For if, as Augustine 
says (De Trin. iii.) the lower things are ruled by God through 
the higher, in a certain order, it must be said that all things 
are ruled by Christ’s soul, which is above every creature. 
Hence the Apostle says (Heb. ii. 5): For God hath not sub- 
jected unto angels the world to come,—‘ subject namely to 
Christ ’—of whom we speak (Douay,—whereof we speak).* 
Nor does it follow that God set another over the earth; 
since one and the same Person is God and Man, our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Let what has been said of the Mystery of His Incarnation 
suffice for the present. 

* The words in inverted commas are from a gloss. 

; / ¢ _ aa 
. a } ~ ' ° v , e 

1? ~ 4 o 5a" 
Nis ¥ as Printed in Great Britain by 
as," i : : 
ily iy Billing andgSons Ltd., Guildford and Esher 
a. *. . . 
. * ‘ : ’ 
’ 
. , Pm re ° sd * , . 7 . , 
vs Pe +. ii ° : 
. ¢ 4 . : sd 
” — > . . e 

: 7 ‘ , “ 
a Tm, P 
‘ 7 pee: % 
EW is’ pice | To 1, 
Rd 4 ae * ~ 
. : 
>. 
a Ls 
’ . ’ 
a ad . ~ ¢ ad ‘ 
ie ad « 
® . » ° - : 
’ ‘, : 

ESTE. 
Sens 
mS) 

SS 

sk = 
Ephrem nt 
a SR 

SN 
DSN 

Me ae. 2 
S